HUMAN ENERGY
by Albert Abrams, A.M., LL.D., M.D.
San Francisco: The Philopolis Press, 1914

Abrams' foundational statement of the electronic theory behind radionics
("Electronic Reactions of Abrams"). Public domain (published 1914;
author d. 1924).
Source: HathiTrust Public Domain Google-digitized scan (via mirror).

================================================================

Human energy.
                                                                                                                       Abrams, Albert, 1863-1924.
                                                                                                                       [San Francisco, Cal., 1914]


                                                                                                                                                     We have determined this work to be in the public domain,
                                                                                                                                                     meaning that it is not subject to copyright. Users are
                                                                                                                                                     free to copy, use, and redistribute the work in part or
                                                                                                                                                     in whole. It is possible that current copyright holders,
                                                                                                                                                     heirs or the estate of the authors of individual portions
                                                                                                                                                     of the work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert
                                                                                                                                                     copyrights over these portions. Depending on the nature
                                                                                                                                                     of subsequent use that is made, additional rights may
                                                                                                                                                     need to be obtained independently of anything we can
                                                                                                                                                     address. The digital images and OCR of this work were
                                                                                                                                                     on each page in the PageTurner). Google requests that
                                                                                                                                                     the images and OCR not be re-hosted, redistributed
                                                                                                                                                     or used commercially. The images are provided for
                                                                                                                                                     educational, scholarly, non-commercial purposes.


                                                                                                                                                                    BY

                                                                                                                       SAN FRANCISCO
                                                                                                                                       ALBERT ABRAMS, A.M., M.D.,
                                                                                                                                                                         HUMAN ENERGY
                                                                                                                                                LL.D.,
                                                                                                                                                INTRODUCTION

                                                                                                                          The author's new physico-diagnostic methods are not theories
                                                                                                                       but physico-clinical facts. They have been repeatedly corroborated
                                                                                                                       by necropsy, skiagraphy, at operations and by histological examina
                                                                                                                       tions.    The laws of physical science are universal and apply equally
                                                                                                                       to living organisms and so-called inanimate things.
                                                                                                                           This iatrophysical conception demonstrates    the trend of unifying
                                                                                                                       the various forms of force under one great principle.
                                                                                                                           The electronic theory demonstrates the electrical nature of matter.
                                                                                                                           Radio-activity is a universal property of matter.
                                                                                                                           In disease,   the rearrangement of the electrons   is associated with
                                                                                                                       the evolution of energy    which is either neutral or endowed      with a
                                                                                                                       definite polarity.
                                                                                                                          The author's stomach reflex is employed as a delicate physiological

                                                                                                                       test for the presence   of this energy.

                                                                                                                               PERCUSSION OF THE LOWER STOMACH-BORDER.

                                                                                                                           A correct interpretation of physico-diagnosis predicates an under
                                                                                                                       standing of the author's method of delimiting the lower border of the
                                                                                                                       stomach  in apposition with the abdominal parietes and this is only
                                                                                                                       possible with  the subject in the erect posture.
                                                                                                                          The principle involved in the elicitation of the stomach reflex of

                                                                                                                       Abrams is as follows:
                                                                                                                           In the norm, a tympanitic sound is elicited but if the tone of the
                                                                                                                       gastric musculature is augmented the walls of the organ become
                                                                                                                       tense, thus putting the air or gas in the stomach under increased ten
                                                                                                                       sion.  For the latter reason, we have the physical elements necessary
                                                                                                                       for the transition of a tympanitic to a dull sound.
                                                                                                                           Until a better acquaintance with this method is attained, a healthy
                                                                                                                       subject must be selected with moderately thin abdominal walls and
                                                                                                                       in whom a tympanitic sound is demonstrable by percussion over the
                                                                                                                       entire abdomen.
                                                                                                                           The stomach shows a varying state of tonicity; it may be normal
                                                                                                                       (ortho tonic), increased (hypertonic), diminished (hypotonic) or absent
                                                                                                                       (atonic).
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                       Introduction
                                                                                                                             For the foregoing reason, in executing
                                                                                                                                                                the electronic reactions an
                                                                                                                       individual with known stomach-tonicity may be employed as a test-
                                                                                                                       subject. In the latter instance, the energy is conveyed from the
                                                                                                                       patient by means of an insulated copper-cord to the stomach-region
                                                                                                                       of the subject.
                                                                                                                           For esthetic reasons, the subject may be screened from the patient.
                                                                                                                             The subject must stand' on a flooring of unvarnished wood.      Car
                                                                                                                       pet interposed between      the latter and the feet of the subject is not
                                                                                                                       objectionable.
                                                                                                                             To increase  the tone of the gastric musculature sufficient to elicit
                                                                                                                       dulness,    two simple maneuvers are available:
                                                                                                                             r.   While the patient or an assistant directs either pole of a bar-
                                                                                                                       magnet     at a distance of about 4 inches from the presumable location
                                                                                                                       of the lower stomach-border, light percussion      is executed from below
                                                                                                                       upward until dulness is elicited ; this is the lower border of the stomach
                                                                                                                       and its position should be marked with a dermograph.

                                                                                                                             2.   During the time energy is conveyed from the heart-region of
                                                                                                                       the subject to the stomach-region by means of an insulated cord of
                                                                                                                       copper as shown in Fig. 7, execute percussion      after the manner cited
                                                                                                                       in the first maneuver.
                                                                                                                          Finger-finger is preferable to instrumental percussion but those
                                                                                                                       unskilled in the former may avail themselves of the plexor and plexi-
                                                                                                                       meter as shown in Fig. 6, which have been specially devised by the
                                                                                                                       author to substitute maladroit percussion.
                                                                                                                          The lower border of the stomach having once been determined, one
                                                                                                                       may proceed with the electronic test. The stomach reflex is easily

                                                                                                                       exhausted and one must ascertain in the course of the examination
                                                                                                                       if it is still present by conveying energy from the heart or by the use
                                                                                                                       of the bar-magnet.                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                         ALBERT ABRAMS.
                                                                                                                       291
                                                                                                                              Geary Street,
                                                                                                                       San Francisco, Cal.,
                                                                                                                       January, 1914.
                                                                                                                                      HUMAN ENERGY*

                                                                                                                               IATROPHYSICAL           AND IATRO-CHEMICAL                  PERIODS
                                                                                                                                                          OF MEDICINE.

                                                                                                                           At one time in the history of medicine, the period of
                                                                                                                       medical mysticism, physics and chemistry were invoked to
                                                                                                                       explain the actions and functions of the body and to recon
                                                                                                                       cile the dogmas of physics and chemistry                            with empirical
                                                                                                                       methods in the treatment of disease.

                                                                                                                           The iatro-physiochemical                   doctrines     endowed with ex-
                                                                                                                       clusivism failed to survive the lapse of time.
                                                                                                                           Recent researches           which      I have made bearing on the
                                                                                                                       question of human energy seem to emphasize the importance
                                                                                                                       of the laws of physical science in the investigation of disease
                                                                                                                       and the physician is constrained to correlate his data with
                                                                                                                       this new knowledge.            »

                                                                                                                                              THE MODERN KNOWLEDGE.

                                                                                                                          The forces found in the living body correspond with
                                                                                                                       those which govern the inanimate world and the theory of

                                                                                                                       *Abstract of an address by Dr. Albert Abrams, of San Francisco, before "The
                                                                                                                           American Association for the Study of Spondylotherapy," at its meeting in
                                                                                                                           Chicago, Sept. 30, 1913, and repeated with demonstrations before the "Chicago
                                                                                                                           Hospital College of Medicine," Thursday evening, Oct. 2, 1913, to the medical
                                                                                                                           profession of Chicago.
                                                                                                                       A special work dealing more specifically with this subject will be published by the
                                                                                                                           author early in the year 1014.   Numbers in parentheses (not italicized) refer to
                                                                                                                           the pages in Spondylotherapy       where the subject has already been discussed.
                                                                                                                           When the numbers in parentheses   are italicized, they refer to the pages in Progressive
                                                                                                                           Spondylotherapy,   1913.

                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                       Progressive                   Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       vitalism           has been abandoned.  Physical science by
                                                                                                                       reason of the universality of its laws dominates practically
                                                                                                                       every phase of medical research.
                                                                                                                          The circulation of the blood is a matter of hydraulics;
                                                                                                                       the changes of gases in the lungs and tissues correspond to
                                                                                                                       the physical theory of gases and heat-regulation      conforms to
                                                                                                                       the physical theory of heat.
                                                                                                                          Aseptic     surgery and anesthesia are chemical contribu
                                                                                                                       tions to our storehouse of medical knowledge.           The "Cell
                                                                                                                       Theory" and "Cellular Pathology," embodied the conception
                                                                                                                       that the activities of an organism are the sum of the activ
                                                                                                                       ities of its component cells which were regarded as the most
                                                                                                                       elementary      form   of   organized   substances   incapable   of
                                                                                                                       further reduction other than by mechanic or chemic means.

                                                                                                                          "Cellular Pathology," does not emphasize in accordance
                                                                                                                       with the "Electronic Theory" (115) the ultimate atomic
                                                                                                                       divisibility of matter and I shall later exploit this theory to
                                                                                                                       suggest    the inauguration   of a new diagnosis and pathology
                                                                                                                       which     I shall respectively neologize as "Electron Diagnosis"
                                                                                                                       and "Electron Pathology."
                                                                                                                           The time is fast approaching when the activities of living
                                                                                                                       cells will find explanation on a physico-chemical basis and

                                                                                                                       when the biologist shall know the laws that govern cell-
                                                                                                                       growth with the accuracy of the scientist knowing his laws.
                                                                                                                       It will be then that prevention and cure will be questions of
                                                                                                                       scientific accuracy. As physicians we dare not stand aloof
                                                                                                                       from the progress made in science and segregate the .human
                                                                                                                       as something apart from the other entities of the physical
                                                                                                                       universe.  Our differentiation of matter is largely morpho
                                                                                                                       logic. Whether the object of our differentiation is a human
                                                                                                                       or a germ, we are only dealing with a congregation of vibrat
                                                                                                                       ing atoms which in their varied combinations         are the basic
                                                                                                                       constituents of all that exists.

                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                       The            Modern                        Knowledge
                                                                                                                          There     are    three physical       entities:
                                                                                                                          1.    Matter,
                                                                                                                          2.    Energy,
                                                                                                                          3.    Ether.
                                                                                                                          The electron or corpuscular theory which most fully accords
                                                                                                                       with modern investigations concerning the physical basis of
                                                                                                                       the material       universe conceives matter to be made up of
                                                                                                                       molecules ; molecules to be composed of atoms and atoms to
                                                                                                                       consist of electrons (116).  The electrons or corpuscles are
                                                                                                                       charges of electricity.   The atoms of matter are individ
                                                                                                                       ualized masses of positive electricity diffused uniformly over
                                                                                                                       the area of an atom, spherical in shape and one two-hundreth
                                                                                                                       millionth of an inch in diameter.
                                                                                                                           Throughout the spherical mass are some eight hundred

                                                                                                                       minute particles of negative electricity all alike flying vigor
                                                                                                                       ously about, each repelling every other particle yet all con
                                                                                                                       tained within their orbits by the mass of positive electricity
                                                                                                                       which constitutes only about one per cent, of the atom's mass.
                                                                                                                           The number of electrons in an atom are proportional to
                                                                                                                       the atomic weight of the element. When the crowding of the
                                                                                                                       electrons becomes excessive as in radium, thorium or uran
                                                                                                                       ium,    the atomsbecome radioactive owing to collisions

                                                                                                                       between the electrons, some of which are constantly shot
                                                                                                                       away (116). Radiation refers to a change in the velocity of
                                                                                                                       an electron which causes ripples in the surrounding ether.
                                                                                                                       Whenever the velocity of an electric charge is increased,
                                                                                                                       diminished or changed in direction, Roentgen fays, light and
                                                                                                                       all other radiations result.
                                                                                                                           As I shall show you, practically all atoms of matter are
                                                                                                                       radioactive, assuming that the streams of radiations also
                                                                                                                       consist of ethereal vibrations as well as flying particles.
                                                                                                                           The following data may be summarized concerning
                                                                                                                       electrons:

                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                       Progressive                   Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                           1. The electron is the smallest entity known to science
                                                                                                                       and is a thousand times smaller in mass than the smallest
                                                                                                                       atom.
                                                                                                                          2.      It is a sphere of positive electrification   enclosing a
                                                                                                                       number of negatively        electrified corpuscles which counter
                                                                                                                       balance the positive electricity of the enclosing sphere.
                                                                                                                           3. The electrons are characterized by the uniformity of
                                                                                                                       their vibrations.     This is demonstrated by the sharpness of
                                                                                                                       the lines of light making up the spectrum of an element.
                                                                                                                       These     lines originate   from   the vibrations of electrically
                                                                                                                       charged systems and         if the vibrations of different atoms
                                                                                                                       were     not attuned to each other, the spectral lines would be
                                                                                                                       blurred and diffused.
                                                                                                                          4.   Light and other radiations are dependent on dis

                                                                                                                       turbances in the surrounding ether (2op) caused by a change
                                                                                                                       in the motion of the corpuscles.
                                                                                                                           We refer to perpetual motion as impossible, yet the whole
                                                                                                                       universe is nought else. Matter is only an effect of a definite
                                                                                                                       kind of motion.
                                                                                                                           During the revolutions of the electrons, thousands of
                                                                                                                       millions of times per second, an electro-magnetic field of
                                                                                                                       energy is created but the rhythmic changes in the field of

                                                                                                                       energy thus transmitted by the ether have thus far eluded
                                                                                                                       all instruments for their detection and study.
                                                                                                                           Everything in nature is in a state of perpetual motion
                                                                                                                       and the latter is continually changing from one velocity to
                                                                                                                       another.
                                                                                                                          The power to change the state of motion of a body is
                                                                                                                       Energy.    The total energy contained in matter depends
                                                                                                                       on the extent to which it can be changed. Energy is the
                                                                                                                       universal commodity on which all life depends.
                                                                                                                          All forms of energy whether derived from heat, electricity,
                                                                                                                       magnetism or gravitation are interconvertible       and represent

                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                       Human Energy
                                                                                                                       practically different varieties of motion.      Energy, like matter
                                                                                                                       can neither be created nor destroyed.
                                                                                                                           The energy in all matter is enormous and it has been
                                                                                                                       estimated that one gram of hydrogen possesses sufficient
                                                                                                                       energy to raise one million tons through a height exceeding
                                                                                                                       three hundred feet.
                                                                                                                           Electrons are only electricity and nought else is in exis
                                                                                                                       tence but electrons.
                                                                                                                           In gases, electricity is conducted by free corpuscles flying
                                                                                                                       bullet-like and with velocities often approximating 100,000
                                                                                                                       miles per second.     In liquids, the conduction is only about
                                                                                                                       an inch an hour.
                                                                                                                          In metallic conduction, the atoms are relatively fixed and
                                                                                                                       their only power is that of vibration.          Certain corpuscular

                                                                                                                       aggregations will hold in an unstable condition a few more
                                                                                                                       corpuscles than exactly suffices to balance the surrounding
                                                                                                                       sphere of positive electricity.       The atom thus constituted
                                                                                                                       is negatively charged.    Others hold a few less corpuscles than
                                                                                                                       suffices to balance the positive electricity.       This leaves the
                                                                                                                       atom positively electrified.
                                                                                                                          If these two types of atoms are free to move and they
                                                                                                                       unite and neutralize     each   electrically,   we have chemical      -

                                                                                                                       union.
                                                                                                                                                HUMAN ENERGY.

                                                                                                                           The present age marvels at man's conquests of the forces
                                                                                                                       of nature. Yet, this age of energy can only be triumphant
                                                                                                                       when man can know and then direct and control the more
                                                                                                                       important forces within himself.
                                                                                                                           Epoch-making discoveries in science usually date from
                                                                                                                       the discovery of a sensitive mechanism which reveals some
                                                                                                                       phenomenon of the atomic world.
                                                                                                                          The radium emanation has been detected by the elec
                                                                                                                       troscope.
                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                       Progressive                  Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                           The latter is a million times more sensitive than a spec
                                                                                                                       troscope yet the latter will detect the millionth of a milli
                                                                                                                       gram of matter. The delicacy of Einthoven's string-galvan
                                                                                                                       ometer has established the principles of electro-cardiography.
                                                                                                                          The physiologic mechanism which I employ for detecting
                                                                                                                       human energy is the living stomach and which may be
                                                                                                                       designated as "gastrometer."
                                                                                                                          It is essentially a stomach reflex which I have discussed
                                                                                                                       at length (316, 321, 584, 123, 145, 146, 147, 153, 163). In
                                                                                                                       accepting the reaction of the stomach-musculature as the
                                                                                                                       basis for our varied deductions, we are employing bioplasmic
                                                                                                                       matter, the most primitive and sensitive substance for
                                                                                                                       exhibiting   the phenomenon        of          The pupillary
                                                                                                                                                               vitality.

                                                                                                                       response to light   is an energy-contraction not unlike that
                                                                                                                       under consideration.   A frog's muscle is now used for record
                                                                                                                       ing wireless messages (148).
                                                                                                                          I have referred to the sensitiveness of the electroscope.
                                                                                                                       The latter is less sensitive than the stomach reflex. The
                                                                                                                       stomach reflex will detect the rays emanating from radium
                                                                                                                       at a greater distance than will the electroscope.
                                                                                                                           Modifications in the tone of the stomach when the region

                                                                                                                       of the latter is exposed to the various forms of energy are
                                                                                                                       demonstrated by percussion and tracings (167, 169, 170) .
                                                                                                                          Percussion,    however,  is more easily executed. Much
                                                                                                                       difficulty will be encountered at first in eliciting the dulness
                                                                                                                       of the stomach.
                                                                                                                          It must be recalled that the stomach is immersed in an
                                                                                                                       atmosphere of tympany, therefore the percussion-blow must
                                                                                                                       be localized, otherwise the vibration of surrounding tissues
                                                                                                                       will mask the dull or tympanitically dull area of the lower
                                                                                                                       border of the stomach.
                                                                                                                          The best results are secured by finger-finger    percussion;

                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                       Human Energy
                                                                                                                       one finger acting as a pleximeter and the other finger as a
                                                                                                                       plexor.
                                                                                                                           After this manner one can appreciate the resistance of
                                                                                                                       tissues percussed (palpable percussion).
                                                                                                                           To localize the percussion-blow, the second finger (usually
                                                                                                                       employed) acting as a pleximeter must be held rigid with the
                                                                                                                       ungual phalanx slightly raised (Fig. i).

                                                                                                                            Fig. 1. —The upper figure represents the correct position of the finger when
                                                                                                                       used as a pleximeter.     The cross indicates the part of the digit to be struck by the
                                                                                                                       other finger acting as a plexor.     The lower figure indicates the incorrect position
                                                                                                                       of the finger in eliciting dulness of the stomach.

                                                                                                                           If the latter precaution             is not taken and the terminal
                                                                                                                       phalanx rests on the abdomen, the blow will be transmitted
                                                                                                                       to the contiguous area and the tympanitic tone elicited will
                                                                                                                       obscure the stomach-dulness.
                                                                                                                           When difficulty is encountered by the method of percus
                                                                                                                       sion indicated, one may employ the method already shown
                                                                                                                       (511) or one may use an ordinary glass rod which is held at
                                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                       Progressive                         Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       the same       angle     as   the finger and then percussed.                   For
                                                                                                                       those unskilled in finger-finger            the plexor and
                                                                                                                                                                    percussion,
                                                                                                                       pleximeter shown in Fig. 2 have been devised by the author.
                                                                                                                       Light blows with the plexor yield the best results — a sound
                                                                                                                       almost woody in character when the lower border of the
                                                                                                                       stomach is attained.

                                                                                                                                                         a

                                                                                                                            Fig. 2. — Plexor and pleximeter for the use of physicians unskilled in finger-
                                                                                                                       finger persussion.  The dark area in the pleximeter represents a small quantity of
                                                                                                                       wax. The latter eliminates all adventitious sounds likely to disturb the elicitation
                                                                                                                       of stomach-dulness.   A light blow yields the best results and when the lower border

                                                                                                                       of the stomach is attained, an unmistakable woody sound is audible.

                                                                                                                           It is best to first define the lower border of the liver
                                                                                                                       (Fig. 3) ; next define the lower border of the stomach by aid
                                                                                                                       of the conducting cord. Observe that when energy is con
                                                                                                                       ducted from the heart to the epigastric region the liver-
                                                                                                                       border may be found lower for reasons cited (750).
                                                                                                                           After the conveyance of an excess of energy which occurs
                                                                                                                       in disease, the lower border of the stomach is retracted (Fig. 3).
                                                                                                                           The dulness of the stomach may be accentuated by hav
                                                                                                                       ing the patient firmly fix with his hand the lumbar spines
                                                                                                                       to suppress their vibration (80).
                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                       Human Energy
                                                                                                                           The stomach reflex (gastrometer) is exceedingly sensitive
                                                                                                                       although the latter varies with the tone of the organism.
                                                                                                                       When its tone is impaired and its sensitiveness is in conse
                                                                                                                       quence diminished, I convey the energy from the individual
                                                                                                                       examined to the stomach-region of another individual, with
                                                                                                                       a stomach-tone of known sensitiveness.                            When the stomach
                                                                                                                       fails to respond promptly to the action of energy, it may be
                                                                                                                       made more sensitive by definite maneuvers which                                     I shall
                                                                                                                       demonstrate later.

                                                                                                                            Fig.   3. — Illustrating    method   of conveying   energy   from   the   heart   to   the
                                                                                                                       stomach-region.
                                                                                                                            Continuous line, lower border of stomach;           dotted   line, retracted   stomach-
                                                                                                                       border;   broken line, lower liver-border.

                                                                                                                            I have specified the energy of the human organism as
                                                                                                                       anthropodynamic           it is a specific electronic energy.
                                                                                                                                                       because
                                                                                                                       A nerve-impulse resulting from the action of a stimulus lib
                                                                                                                       erates energy stored within protoplasm.       Heretofore, the
                                                                                                                       only evidence of the liberation of energy was the electrical
                                                                                                                       change ; the wave of negativity.  This energy was supposed
                                                                                                                                                                      9
                                                                                                                       Progressive                        S p ondylotherapy

                                                                                                                       to be electrical but this is disproved by the measurement
                                                                                                                       of its velocity.
                                                                                                                            Atomic differentiation as I conceive

                                                                                                                                                                           it,
                                                                                                                                                                                      only       question

                                                                                                                                                                                 is

                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                       of vibration-frequencies          and each atom              endowed with

                                                                                                                                                                               is

                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                       specific rate of vibration.            Colors are the effect of particu
                                                                                                                       lar frequencies of vibration.
                                                                                                                           The stomach does not respond (as revealed by dulness)
                                                                                                                       to all degrees of vibration (206) . set in action at some dis

                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                       tance from this patient       tuning-fork with
                                                                                                                                                          a                vibration-

                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                       number of 256. Note that dulness of the stomach at once
                                                                                                                       ensues, but observe that the dulness       at once dissipated

                                                                                                                                                                          is
                                                                                                                       when the negative pole of              bar-magnet         held in proximity

                                                                                                                                                                            is
                                                                                                                                                          a

                                                                                                                       to the stomach, whereas the positive pole presented to the

                                                                                                                       organ maintains       the dulness.           In consequence of the fore
                                                                                                                       going we must conclude that the vibrations are positive.
                                                                                                                          The nerves of taste and smell must be endowed with
                                                                                                                       specific electrons which are only attuned to different vibra
                                                                                                                       tion-rates hence the differentiation             of taste and smell like
                                                                                                                       the differentiation    of color (20 j).
                                                                                                                            The energy evolved from the human                       as characteristic
                                                                                                                                                                               is

                                                                                                                       of the human as the energy evolved from the lower animals

                                                                                                                            distinctive   for the lower animals.
                                                                                                                       is

                                                                                                                            Furthermore,     one man differs from another man only in
                                                                                                                       the sense that his electrons show varying rates of vibration.
                                                                                                                       The diamond, lampblack and charcoal are all practically
                                                                                                                       identical in composition. Oil of roses and coal gas have the
                                                                                                                       identical composition              atoms of hydrogen and                  atoms of
                                                                                                                                                    (4

                                                                                                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                       carbon), yet the mephitic odor of the one and the delightful
                                                                                                                       odor of the other          merely       question of rate-vibration.
                                                                                                                                             is

                                                                                                                                                           a

                                                                                                                           Now the attunement of the organism shows           physio
                                                                                                                                                                                             a

                                                                                                                       logic rhythmicity at different periods of the day and further
                                                                                                                       more this attunement       modified by disease and tempera
                                                                                                                                                     is

                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                       Human Energy
                                                                                                                       ment.     These facts have been established by tests made with
                                                                                                                       Galton's whistle (Fig. 4).
                                                                                                                          You will observe that by modifying the tone of my voice,
                                                                                                                       I can elicit varying nuances of stomach-dulness. The re
                                                                                                                       sponse of the stomach is so sensitive that it faithfully
                                                                                                                       records the dots and dashes from an ordinary transmitter
                                                                                                                       operated at a considerable distance from the subject (Fig. 5).
                                                                                                                       The gastrograph {i6f) was employed for making the records.

                                                                                                                            Fig. 4. — Galton whistle. This consists of a steel tube in which air is caused to
                                                                                                                       vibrate.  The note produced by it becomes higher as its length is diminished and
                                                                                                                       ranges from 6,481 vibrations per second to the highest perceptible tone-limit.

                                                                                                                           In atomic differentiation           we must also take into consider
                                                                                                                       ation the Polarity of Energy.   The oils of orange and
                                                                                                                       cloves have the same chemical compositional 6 atoms of
                                                                                                                       hydrogen and 16 of carbon — yet each has its specific odor
                                                                                                                       and taste.       I
                                                                                                                                   now expose the oil of orange to the abdomen
                                                                                                                       approximating         the stomach and you note no change in the
                                                                                                                       percussion-sound         of the latter.
                                                                                                                           However,  if I carry out the same maneuver with oil of
                                                                                                                       cloves, the tympanitic sound of the stomach is at once con
                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                       Progressive                          Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       verted into dulness and furthermore                      the dulness is main
                                                                                                                       tained by the positive pole of a bar-magnet and is dissipated
                                                                                                                       by the negative pole, hence the polarity of the energy is
                                                                                                                       positive.*

                                                                                                                            Fig.   5. — Dots and dashes from a transmitter   recorded by the contractions   of

                                                                                                                       the human     stomach.

                                                                                                                                                ENERGEIAGENIC           CENTERS.

                                                                                                                           There are definite areas of the body which are constantly
                                                                                                                       discharging        energy and the energy thus discharged differs
                                                                                                                       in polarity in the two sexes.
                                                                                                                           Fig. 6 represents the centers of energy in a male and
                                                                                                                       Fig. 7 illustrates the centers in the opposite sex.
                                                                                                                           Both figures are marked by+ (positive), — (negative)

                                                                                                                       *Opposite poles of bar-magnets directed toward lae stomach dissipate the dulness
                                                                                                                           of the latter whereas like poles multiply the intensity of the dulness (/JJ, 154).

                                                                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                       Energeiagenic                                             C    e    n    t   e    r s
                                                                                                                       and O (neutral) signs, indicating the polarity of the energy
                                                                                                                       emanating from different regions of the body.
                                                                                                                          The discharge of energy with reference to the extremities
                                                                                                                       only occurs at the tips of the fingers and toes.

                                                                                                                       Fig. 6. — Normal energeiagenic centers        Fig.   7. — Normal energeiagenic centers
                                                                                                                                     in a male.                                     in a female.

                                                                                                                          Common to both sexes in the norm there is:
                                                                                                                          1.    A positive (+) discharge from the arteries.
                                                                                                                          2.    A negative ( — ) discharge from the veins.
                                                                                                                          3.    A neutral    (O) discharge from the 7 th cervical spine
                                                                                                                       and positive     discharge from the 1st lumbar spine.
                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                       Progressive                        Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                          4.      A negative discharge from the regions occupied by
                                                                                                                       the kidneys.
                                                                                                                          The epigastric area discharging neutral energy is limited
                                                                                                                       to the central line of the abdomen and extends upwards to a
                                                                                                                       distance of about        5   cm. above the navel.

                                                                                                                           Fig.   8. — Normal energeiagenic   centers in the back common to both sexes.

                                                                                                                          From any of the foregoing centers one may conduct the
                                                                                                                       energy by means of an ordinary flexible insulated cord
                                                                                                                       (approximately 80 cm. in length) of copper, or aluminum
                                                                                                                       wire.
                                                                                                                          Insulated aluminum wire is the most effective material
                                                                                                                       for conducting human energy.
                                                                                                                           The metal tips of the conducting wire in contact with the
                                                                                                                       fingers must be insulated.                 Placing one tip of the cord
                                                                                                                       (which must not be insulated) to any center of energy and
                                                                                                                       the other tip in contact with the stomach-region or several
                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                       Energeiagenic                                               C     e     n    t     e    r s
                                                                                                                       inches away               the energy conveyed               of sufficient potency),

                                                                                                                                           (if

                                                                                                                                                                              is
                                                                                                                       an immediate dulness of the stomach                              elicited and by aid

                                                                                                                                                                                   is
                                                                                                                       of the bar-magnet one may determine the polarity of the
                                                                                                                       energy during the flow of the latter.
                                                                                                                          It    wise to first determine the lower border of the
                                                                                                                                is

                                                                                                                       stomach by aid of the energy from the heart.                                This        done

                                                                                                                                                                                                          is
                                                                                                                       by fixing one end of the conducting wire to the heart-region
                                                                                                                       and the other end to the region of the stomach* (Fig. 3).
                                                                                                                           In        male and female subject, dulness of the stomach

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8. is
                                                                                                                                a

                                                                                                                       evoked from all areas of energy shown in Figs.                                         and

                                                                                                                                                                                                   6,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7,
                                                                                                                                       wish to direct your attention to                      new   Oculo-

                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                 I

                                                                                                                                Gastric    Reflex which likewise differs                    in the sexes.
                                                                                                                                Looking through     red medium, stomach-dulness in the
                                                                                                                                                      a

                                                                                                                                male   only elicited when the right eye thus employed,
                                                                                                                                      is

                                                                                                                                                                                   is
                                                                                                                                whereas in the female gazing            through red with the left
                                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                                eye produces       dulness.
                                                                                                                                     The influence of color on the tonicity of the organs
                                                                                                                                has been discussed        (ipp, 200).

                                                                                                                           One may measure the intensity of conveyed-energy by:
                                                                                                                           1. The intensity of stomach-dulness.
                                                                                                                           2. The distance which the tip of the cord approximating

                                                                                                                       the stomach-region will produce dulness      e., whether the
                                                                                                                                                                                         (i.

                                                                                                                       tip must be in immediate contact with the abdomen or sev
                                                                                                                       eral inches away).
                                                                                                                                 The duration of dulness.
                                                                                                                           3.

                                                                                                                           4.    The degree of stomach-retraction.
                                                                                                                            The last method of estimation the most convenient and
                                                                                                                                                                         is

                                                                                                                       reliable. Thus, one may gauge the energy of the heart, the
                                                                                                                       testicles, ovaries, etc. (166, 188).

                                                                                                                       *By interposing an insulating material between the floor and the feet, the trans
                                                                                                                           mitted energy     incapable of eliciting the stomach or any other visceral
                                                                                                                                             is

                                                                                                                           reflex.
                                                                                                                           In other words, the individual must be grounded              (earth-connection).

                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                       Progressive                       S p ondylotherapy

                                                                                                                          Another index of energy is the degree of descent of the
                                                                                                                       lower border of the lung (472) by conveying the energy to
                                                                                                                       the 7 th cervical spine.
                                                                                                                            The physician reasonably skilled in percussion may
                                                                                                                       utilize the heart or the lower border of the liver as indices of
                                                                                                                       conveyed energy (150, 184).
                                                                                                                          In this patient, by conducting the energy from his epigas
                                                                                                                       trium to his 7 th cervical spine by aid of insulated aluminum
                                                                                                                       wire, his pulse can be inhibited.

                                                                                                                             Fig. 9. — Calbrated tube of glass with connecting   cord for measuring   the
                                                                                                                       intensity of energy-discharge.

                                                                                                                          Another method, not mentioned, for measuring the in
                                                                                                                       tensity of energy is based on the principle that the further
                                                                                                                       away the tip of the end of the conducting cord is from the
                                                                                                                       source of energy eliciting stomach-dulness, the greater is the
                                                                                                                       energy-discharge.         For this purpose        I employ a calibrated
                                                                                                                       glass-tube (Fig. 9) through which the wire passes and which
                                                                                                                       is gradually withdrawn until the energy-discharge is no longer
                                                                                                                       able to produce stomach-dulness.Thus in the average male,
                                                                                                                       dulness of the stomach from energy derived from the left
                                                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                                                       Sympathetic                                    Irritation
                                                                                                                       psychomotor region is rarely elicited if the end of the con
                                                                                                                       ducting cord is further distant than one-quarter inch from the
                                                                                                                       region in question.

                                                                                                                                              SYMPATHETIC IRRITATION.

                                                                                                                          The epoch-making work achieved by Dr. E. H. Pratt,
                                                                                                                       with relation to the orificial reflexes prompted me to devise
                                                                                                                       some      diagnostic    method        whereby     one   could   recognize
                                                                                                                       sympathetic     irritation, provoked           by some anomaly of the
                                                                                                                       orifices (rectum, urethra).          In the norm, there is a discharge
                                                                                                                       of energy from         the   7   th cervical    and 1st lumbar    spines.
                                                                                                                       From the former situation the area discharging energy ex
                                                                                                                       tends on either side a distance of 3 cm. from the spinous
                                                                                                                       process; in the latter situation (1st lumbar spine), it extends

                                                                                                                       a distance of 2cm. from the spinous process on either side.
                                                                                                                          In sympathetic irritation from orificial or other lesions
                                                                                                                       implicating the sympathetic, a discharge of neutral energy
                                                                                                                       may be obtained in the entire region of the dorsal vertebrae
                                                                                                                       at a distance of 5.6 cm. on both sides from the spinous pro
                                                                                                                       cesses.    In other words, no energy-discharge is elicited until
                                                                                                                       the end of the wire attains a point 5.6 cm. distant from the
                                                                                                                       spinous processes       and this discharge is obtainable         equidis

                                                                                                                       tant from the latter throughout the dorsal region.

                                                                                                                                 DISCHARGE      OF ENERGY WITHOUT CONDUCTORS.

                                                                                                                           There are many individuals notably temperamental ones,
                                                                                                                       whose mere presence will evoke the stomach reflex.
                                                                                                                           Let such a one, if a male, point his left finger at the region
                                                                                                                       of the stomach of the subject and the stomach will imme
                                                                                                                       diately dull. A temperamental female will achieve the same
                                                                                                                       object with her extended right finger.
                                                                                                                           Let either one touch the 7th cervical spine (228, 469)
                                                                                                                       with either finger and after the lapse of several seconds there
                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                       Progressive                         Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       is decided retardation          of the pulse of the subject which in
                                                                                                                       some instances amounts to temporary     inhibition.
                                                                                                                           In executing this experiment a subject with a feeble pulse
                                                                                                                       should be selected.
                                                                                                                           The results of such an experiment are best determined by
                                                                                                                       sphygmography (Fig. 10).
                                                                                                                          I have already discussed psychic energy {190).

                                                                                                                            Fig. 10. — Illustrating the effect on the pulse before and during   the time an
                                                                                                                       index finger is placed at the 7th cervical spine.

                                                                                                                           The transmission of thought is only possible when one
                                                                                                                       side of the brain is put out of commission.   Several man

                                                                                                                       euvers have been suggested for this purpose (190, 192), but
                                                                                                                       the latest and simplest maneuver is to place the fingers of the
                                                                                                                       left hand on the left psychomotor region or the fingers of the
                                                                                                                       right hand on the right psychomotor region.
                                                                                                                           Individuals who show no spontaneous discharge of energy
                                                                                                                       may be made to discharge the latter by standing on an in
                                                                                                                       sulating substance (rubber, glass) or by placing on the head
                                                                                                                       any red material so as to include both psychomotor                         regions

                                                                                                                       (192).
                                                                                                                          Here, it may be mentioned parenthetically, if you desire
                                                                                                                       to prevent the escape of energy from a neurasthenic, you
                                                                                                                       may do so by a strip of yellow across the head so as to include
                                                                                                                       both psychomotor          regions.
                                                                                                                           This strip of yellow prevents the discharge of energy
                                                                                                                       from all of the energeiagenic centers and in no wise inter
                                                                                                                       feres with the reception of energy from the environment.
                                                                                                                           Do not subject this simple expedient to theoretic criti
                                                                                                                       cism until you have given it a trial.
                                                                                                                           Individuals who spontaneously discharge energy or those
                                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                       Discharge         of Energy           Without      Conductors

                                                                                                                       insulated after the manner cited may, by applying the finger
                                                                                                                       at different vertebral spines (where visceral reflexes (7) are
                                                                                                                       discharged) provoke the reflexes in question.
                                                                                                                           Here is a subject on whom this can be demonstrated.
                                                                                                                          You will observe that when this physician placed his
                                                                                                                       finger at the 7th cervical spine, he elicited the heart reflex of
                                                                                                                       contraction   (199).
                                                                                                                          I shall now ask him to place his finger at the 5 th dorsal
                                                                                                                       spine and you note that the stomach becomes tipped (demon
                                                                                                                       stration by percussion).
                                                                                                                          At the latter vertebral point you open the pylorus      (588,
                                                                                                                       82) and the stomach empties its, contents into the duodenum.
                                                                                                                          Dr. Patrick    O'Donnell, who has achieved fame as a
                                                                                                                       Roentgenologist, like many others doubted the correctness

                                                                                                                       of this observation but he has repeatedly demonstrated
                                                                                                                       by skiascopy and skiagraphy, the correctness of this clinco-
                                                                                                                       physiologic phenomenon. The latter will be demonstrated
                                                                                                                       by the fluoroscope (demonstration by Dr. O'Donnell).
                                                                                                                          The "Royal Touch" and the laying on of hands for the
                                                                                                                       cure of disease may be regarded as mythical by those who are
                                                                                                                       ignorant of the visceral reflexes and the potency of human
                                                                                                                       energy.

                                                                                                                           It is asserted that external applications     do no good for
                                                                                                                       the reason that there is no cutaneous absorption.
                                                                                                                          The latter plays only a minor role in the foregoing method;
                                                                                                                       it is chiefly a matter of eliciting   reflexes.
                                                                                                                          On this hand placed in front of the stomach-region,         I
                                                                                                                       shall rub an indifferent liniment. Observe as a result an
                                                                                                                       immediate elicitation of the stomach reflex.
                                                                                                                          By the latter maneuver, frictional energy was developed.
                                                                                                                           I constantly discharge a large amount of energy.
                                                                                                                          You know that the region for exciting the depressor nerve
                                                                                                                       is between the 3rd and 4th dorsal spines (472).

                                                                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                                       Progressive                     Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                           If my fingers are placed at the latter region for several
                                                                                                                       seconds,   the lower border of the lung will ascend (473).
                                                                                                                           You already know what can be done with a giant magnet
                                                                                                                       in visceral attraction and repulsion         {156, 184, 203) .
                                                                                                                           With this magnet, I cause the liver to descend.
                                                                                                                           If I now charge this liver with the positive energy of my
                                                                                                                       left hand and attempt to attract the lower border of the liver
                                                                                                                       with the positive pole of the magnet, there is a rise in lieu of
                                                                                                                       a descent of the liver on the principle that like charges repel.
                                                                                                                          There is a work by Buchanan on "Therapeutic Sarcog-
                                                                                                                       nomy," which is a marvelous treatise in the matter of de
                                                                                                                       ductive reasoning. For the latter reason, it can never gain
                                                                                                                       any scientific distinction.       Buchanan, however, subjectively
                                                                                                                       evolves many important truths concerning human energy

                                                                                                                       which he specifies as Nervaura. Thoughts are things. With
                                                                                                                       Dr. O'Donnell's aid       I shall show you that pschyic energy
                                                                                                                       concentrated by aid of a large lens on the 5 th dorsal spine
                                                                                                                       will cause the stomach "to tip and discharge its contents
                                                                                                                       (bismuth) into the duodenum.*

                                                                                                                                 Those of you who doubt the important rdle played
                                                                                                                              by color in physiology and pathology, give attention to
                                                                                                                              the oculo-gastric reflex (440) to • be observed in this

                                                                                                                              patient.
                                                                                                                                 The patient declares that any purple color creates
                                                                                                                              nausea.
                                                                                                                                  Observe   that when she gazes at purple, after a lapse
                                                                                                                              of several seconds, the stomach assumes a vertical posi
                                                                                                                              tion such as is noted in nausea (443).

                                                                                                                           All forms of energy are interconvertible             and there is a
                                                                                                                       constant circulation      of energy in nature.
                                                                                                                           Here is a subject who discharges no energy, yet if he takes

                                                                                                                       *One of the observers remarked that the appearance presented by the stomach
                                                                                                                           could be likened to the flow of water from an inverted pitcher.

                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                       Discharge           of Energy          W^ithout        Conductors

                                                                                                                       electrodes for several minutes in either hand from a moder
                                                                                                                       ately strong galvanic current and then directs his fingers at a
                                                                                                                       distance of many feet from another subject he can elicit in
                                                                                                                       the latter the stomach reflex.    This ability to discharge
                                                                                                                       energy will continue for several minutes. A like effect may
                                                                                                                       be noted with the energy from a magnet (148) or the energy
                                                                                                                       from an electric lamp.
                                                                                                                          Human energy passes out of the body in straight lines
                                                                                                                       and is partially deflected by a magnet.
                                                                                                                          It can be refracted by aid of a double convex lens.
                                                                                                                          If the hands are wet no energy is discharged and dry
                                                                                                                       hands discharge more energy than moist hands.
                                                                                                                              Similarly, less energy is discharged in humid than in dry
                                                                                                                       air.

                                                                                                                           One may charge a Leyden jar with human energy by
                                                                                                                       placing one hand on the outer coating of tinfoil and the
                                                                                                                       fingers of the other hand to the metal knob.           The jar thus
                                                                                                                       charged contains an energy which is neutral.
                                                                                                                              By attaching an insulated aluminum or copper wire to
                                                                                                                       the knob the energy may be conducted for hours from the
                                                                                                                       jar and the energy thus conducted may stop the pulse when
                                                                                                                       the end of the wire is applied at the 7th cervical spine or, if

                                                                                                                       conducted to the upper abdomen, it evokes the stomach
                                                                                                                       reflex. Touching the knob with the fingers discharges the
                                                                                                                       jar and no more energy can be conveyed from the latter.
                                                                                                                           The energy output of an individual is modified by many
                                                                                                                       factors.
                                                                                                                              Alcohol is one of the greatest depressors of the vagus.
                                                                                                                                                                 (p,

                                                                                                                              By aid of the spondylopressor            34, 51, 74)   you can
                                                                                                                       accurately gauge the depressing action of alcohol.
                                                                                                                          Note that before receiving an ordinary glass of whiskey,
                                                                                                                       the pulse   inhibited (by pressure at the th cervical spine)
                                                                                                                                    is

                                                                                                                                                                         7

                                                                                                                       at 3^ kilograms. Immediately after ingesting the whiskey,

                                                                                                                                                         21
                                                                                                                       Progressive                       Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       it takes 6 kilograms of pressure to inhibit the pulse but after
                                                                                                                       15 minutes, the pulse is inhibited with a pressure of 1
                                                                                                                       kilogram.
                                                                                                                           The effects       of   anesthetics      on   energy     may     easily    be
                                                                                                                       determined.
                                                                                                                          A few inhalations of chloroform or ether will inhibit the
                                                                                                                       output of energy but if to the ether or chloroform, oil of
                                                                                                                       orange is added,       I shall show you there is little or no effect
                                                                                                                       on the energy output.
                                                                                                                           To Dr. George Jarvis, credit must be accorded for having
                                                                                                                       solved the problem why oil of orange is beneficial as an
                                                                                                                       addition to ether in anesthesia (82).

                                                                                                                                               PHOTOGRAPHIC         ACTION.*

                                                                                                                           In studying the photochemistry of psychic energy it was
                                                                                                                       found to vary in different individuals.                In those who spon
                                                                                                                       taneously discharge large quantities of energy by placing a
                                                                                                                       very sensitive film (inclosed in a black envelope) and inter
                                                                                                                       posing a medium which resists the penetration of psychic
                                                                                                                       energy, one may practically always obtain an impression on
                                                                                                                       the film.     These impressions          I have neologized as psycho-

                                                                                                                       grams.    At the present time the impressions are so faint that
                                                                                                                       they cannot be illustrated in this work.                It is reasonable to
                                                                                                                       hope, however,         that further experimentation               will achieve
                                                                                                                       better results.
                                                                                                                          Time of exposure depends on the subject discharging
                                                                                                                       psychic energy. The most satisfactory time varies from 30
                                                                                                                       seconds to 5 minutes.

                                                                                                                       **My experiments do not refer to mentoids (thought forms or bodies). Yamaguchi
                                                                                                                           refers to a woman having the mental faculty of autohypnosis, who was re
                                                                                                                           quested to hypnotize herself and strongly suggest to herself a word spelled in
                                                                                                                           Japanese letters.  She did and remained hypnotized during one hour.     Sensi
                                                                                                                           tive dry plates held near her head, upon development, revealed the negative
                                                                                                                           of the word spelled in Japanese.

                                                                                                                                                              22
                                                                                                                       Photographic Action
                                                                                                                           The discharge may be augmented by placing a strip of
                                                                                                                       red material across the head and the action of the psychic
                                                                                                                       rays on the plate may be intensified by interposing between
                                                                                                                       the forehead and the plate a strip of aluminum.   The mater
                                                                                                                       ial for obstructing the rays may be a thin layer of shellac or
                                                                                                                       the insulating tape used by electricians.    The shellac may
                                                                                                                       be painted on the forehead or envelope (prior to the intro
                                                                                                                       duction of the film), and similar disposition may be made of
                                                                                                                       the tape.
                                                                                                                           I have endeavored to obtain similar pictures of the bones
                                                                                                                       of the hand.
                                                                                                                           The results thus far have not been satisfactory but there
                                                                                                                       is reason to believe that further efforts with new developers
                                                                                                                       may eventually be successful.

                                                                                                                                   The hand is placed on the film or plate and covered
                                                                                                                                with a sheet of aluminum.             The fingers of one hand
                                                                                                                                touch the center of a large lens (in focus) which is placed
                                                                                                                                directly over the object to be photographed. The time
                                                                                                                                of exposure depends on the individual discharging en
                                                                                                                                ergy and is usually about       5    minutes.   The quantity of
                                                                                                                                energy discharged may be augmented    by wearing a strip
                                                                                                                                of red across the head and insulating the feet by aid of

                                                                                                                                rubber, glass or shellac.

                                                                                                                           The Human Aura so adequately portrayed by Dr.
                                                                                                                       Walter J. Kilner in his work, "The Human Atmosphere,"
                                                                                                                       is evidently only a discharge of energy.*
                                                                                                                           My investigations show that the aura may be augmented
                                                                                                                       in area and density by concussion of the 7 th cervical spine
                                                                                                                       (164).

                                                                                                                       *In a letter received from Dr. Kilner, the latter makes the following observation;
                                                                                                                            "Your opinion that the aura is only energy emanating from the body corre
                                                                                                                           sponds entirely with mine, only  I  have expressed it in a different manner.     I
                                                                                                                           have tried to see it on the dead body but have always failed to do so."

                                                                                                                                                                23
                                                                                                                       Progressive                      Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                          The utilitarian of the future will not permit human
                                                                                                                       energy to go to waste.
                                                                                                                          Permit me to show you how it may now be utilized in
                                                                                                                       Topographic Percussion.
                                                                                                                           The heart and aorta discharge energy. By means of an .
                                                                                                                       insulated cord to the stomach-region, note that when I
                                                                                                                       approach the borders of the aorta and heart with the other
                                                                                                                       tip of the cord, an immediate dulness of the stomach ensues.
                                                                                                                           After this manner demarcation of the organs discharging
                                                                                                                       energy, notably, the right border of the heart, is compara
                                                                                                                       tively easy.
                                                                                                                                                 SEXUAL POLARITY.

                                                                                                                          The present tendency is to refef all phenomena to a

                                                                                                                       sexual basis and the odd and even numbers are regarded as
                                                                                                                       the mathematical        sexes.
                                                                                                                          Anatomy has heretofore been invoked to differentiate the
                                                                                                                       sexes.
                                                                                                                          If I appeal to the electronic theory, there can be no abso
                                                                                                                       lute differentiation.
                                                                                                                           Humans are mere aggregations of electrons and there
                                                                                                                       must be transitional forms of humans just as there are

                                                                                                                       transitional forms of metals and non-metals.
                                                                                                                           It has been suggested by Steenstrup, that sexual char
                                                                                                                       acters are present in every part of the body and that every
                                                                                                                       cell in the body has its definite sexual significance.
                                                                                                                           The electrons characterizing masculinity and femininity
                                                                                                                       are so grouped that definite areas in a woman provide a
                                                                                                                       sexual stimulus for the male and definite areas of the latter
                                                                                                                       for the female.
                                                                                                                            The law of sexual attraction, "that every male type has
                                                                                                                       its female counterpart with regard to sexual affinity" appears
                                                                                                                       to me to be based on the definite law that, "Like poles repel

                                                                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                                       Male         and       Female             Types     of      Polarity

                                                                                                                       and unlike attract."     Sexual attraction and repulsion must
                                                                                                                       obey this law.
                                                                                                                          Weininger,*     referring    to the fertilization of some sea
                                                                                                                       weeds,  speaks of the lines of force between the opposite
                                                                                                                       poles of magnets as no more natural than that which irre
                                                                                                                       sistibly attracts the spermatozoon and the egg-cell.
                                                                                                                           In the attraction between the inorganic substances,
                                                                                                                       strains are set up in the media between the poles, whereas in
                                                                                                                       the living matter the forces are confined to the organisms.
                                                                                                                          When the spermatozoa approach the egg-cells they over
                                                                                                                       come the force exercised by light, hence the chemotactic is
                                                                                                                       more potent than the phototactic force.
                                                                                                                          Sexual adjustment         cannot abrogate       the   laws   of   the

                                                                                                                       universe.
                                                                                                                          The adjustment of differences in potential in the sexual
                                                                                                                       sphere   are as inviolable     as when iron-sulphate      and caustic
                                                                                                                       potash are brought together; the S04 ions leave the iron to
                                                                                                                       combine with the potash.
                                                                                                                          Attention has already been directed to the differences of
                                                                                                                       polarity in the sexes.
                                                                                                                           We must first make clear what I have differentiated as
                                                                                                                       the Male and Female Types of Polarity.

                                                                                                                           First localize the Psychomotor Area (384).
                                                                                                                           If the subject (female) touches the left psychomotor
                                                                                                                       area with the tips of her fingers of her left hand (Fig. n),
                                                                                                                       the stomach reflex ensues and one may demonstrate dulness
                                                                                                                       of her stomach.    This is the female type of polarity.
                                                                                                                           The male type of polarity is the opposite of the female
                                                                                                                       type; dulness of the stomach only ensues when the tips of the
                                                                                                                       fingers of the right hand are placed on the left psychomotor
                                                                                                                       area (Fig. 12).

                                                                                                                                                    *Sex and character.

                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                       Progressive                        Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                                  A male facing a patient        (male or female) produces
                                                                                                                              stomach dulness   by        touching the left psychomotor
                                                                                                                             region with the fingers of his right hand.
                                                                                                                                 A female similarly located with reference                          to the
                                                                                                                             patient (male or female) can only produce like dulness
                                                                                                                             by touching the right psychomotor region with the
                                                                                                                             fingers of the right hand.

                                                                                                                        Fig. 11. — Illustrating the female type         Fig.   12. — Illustrating   the male type
                                                                                                                       of polarity. Only the tips of the fingers                     of polarity,
                                                                                                                       should touch the psychomotor area.

                                                                                                                          The female type of polarity characterizes the normal
                                                                                                                       sexual life.
                                                                                                                           At the menopause this type disappears, provided all sex
                                                                                                                       ual feeling has been lost. In two instances where the ovaries
                                                                                                                       had been removed, the male type of polarity was present
                                                                                                                       but the latter could be reversed to the female type when
                                                                                                                       ovarian extract was administered.
                                                                                                                          It would          that the sexual apparatus is merely a
                                                                                                                                          seem
                                                                                                                       vehicle for the elaboration of an internal secretion which by
                                                                                                                       its action on the electrons of the body endows them with a
                                                                                                                       distinctive polarity.
                                                                                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                                       Male          and      Female          Types          of     Polarity

                                                                                                                            There are typical and atypical men just as there are
                                                                                                                       typical and atypical women, and humans will eventually be
                                                                                                                       subjected to a biologico-physiological differentiation of posi
                                                                                                                       tive (+), negative ( — ■) or neutral (O) polarities.     Color
                                                                                                                       as   I conceive it represents different electrical charges (203).
                                                                                                                            In the case of woman whose ovaries were removed, her
                                                                                                                       male type of polarity could be changed to the female type
                                                                                                                       by placing a strip of yellow material over her right psycho
                                                                                                                       motor area.
                                                                                                                            Magnetic    attraction   or     repulsion    is    preceded    by
                                                                                                                       induction.
                                                                                                                          The latter refers to magnetization or electrification in a
                                                                                                                       body by the mere proximity of magnetized or electrified
                                                                                                                       bodies.

                                                                                                                           The induced magnetization or electrification is always of
                                                                                                                       opposite kind to that of the inducing pole or body on the
                                                                                                                       side nearest the latter and of the same kind on the farther
                                                                                                                       side.
                                                                                                                            I have on several occasions elicited the same type of
                                                                                                                       polarity in husband and wife. When alone each presented
                                                                                                                       the normal type of polarity. Together, when the attraction
                                                                                                                       of the wife was greater than that of the husband, the mere

                                                                                                                       propinquity of the latter caused in the wife a reversal of
                                                                                                                       polarity, i. e., a male type of polarity by induction. Simi
                                                                                                                       lar observations have been made on men who demonstrated
                                                                                                                       a preponderance     of affection for their wives.
                                                                                                                            Is affection only a question of polarity?
                                                                                                                            Can the sex problem        be    solved     by    the   foregoing
                                                                                                                       observations?
                                                                                                                            Can we predict sex by the type of polarity shown by the
                                                                                                                       pregnant woman?
                                                                                                                            These are the problems which we must investigate.
                                                                                                                            They await demonstration        by repeated observations.

                                                                                                                                                       27
                                                                                                                       Progressive                      S p ondylotherapy

                                                                                                                           Draw an imaginary transverse line from the anterior
                                                                                                                       superior spine of the ilium to the linea alba.     Midway
                                                                                                                       between this line on both sides an area (approximately 2
                                                                                                                       inches in circumference) is found which discharges positive
                                                                                                                       energy*. This area changes when the ovary is dislocated.
                                                                                                                       The total energy contained in matter depends on the ex
                                                                                                                       tent to which it can be changed. Here change predicates
                                                                                                                       functional capacity and if an ovary discharges no energy,
                                                                                                                       its incapacity may be functional or due to disease.
                                                                                                                           Is Homo-Sexuality (sexual inclination toward members
                                                                                                                       of the same sex) a mere question of polarity?
                                                                                                                           My limited observations incline toward                      the     latter
                                                                                                                       opinion.
                                                                                                                           Several homo-sexualists whom             I examined demonstrated

                                                                                                                       the female type of polarity.         In not one of these individuals
                                                                                                                       could    I change the polarity by administering               the different
                                                                                                                       extracts of the testicle.
                                                                                                                           If however yellow material            was placed over the right
                                                                                                                       psychomotor area or the latter was painted with some
                                                                                                                       yellow solution (gamboge), the polarity could be reversed
                                                                                                                       to the normal male type.
                                                                                                                           Up to the time of writing two homosexualists in whom

                                                                                                                       this maneuver was tried no change in the sexual feeling was
                                                                                                                       noted.
                                                                                                                           Sexual    differentiation      is never     absolute.      There     is a
                                                                                                                       permanent       bisexual     condition,      however        vestigial    and
                                                                                                                       rudimentary.
                                                                                                                           If I suggest to an individual in an hypnotic condition
                                                                                                                       that he is a woman and endowed with some of her attributes,
                                                                                                                       I can reverse his polarity to that of the female. I have

                                                                                                                       *Determined by dulness of the stomach when a connection is established between
                                                                                                                            this region and the epigastrium by aid of an insulated cord of copper.

                                                                                                                                                            28
                                                                                                                       H        o     m      o     -    S       exuality
                                                                                                                       frequently      reversed this polarity by suggestion even in the
                                                                                                                       non-hypnotic state.
                                                                                                                           If I approximate          plant to the epigastrium, a
                                                                                                                                                       a male
                                                                                                                       dulness of the stomach ensues and one can determine that
                                                                                                                       the energy discharged from the plant is negative.
                                                                                                                          Like experiments with female plants demonstrate a
                                                                                                                       positive discharge of energy.
                                                                                                                           If a strip of yellow is placed on the right side of the
                                                                                                                       plant, the polarity of a female plant is changed to that of a
                                                                                                                       male plant and a male plant to that of a female plant.    By
                                                                                                                       keeping the yellow strip on the right side of a male fern for
                                                                                                                       several weeks, it presented all the characteristics of a female
                                                                                                                       fern.
                                                                                                                           If one end of an insulated conducting cord is placed at

                                                                                                                       the meatus of the penis and the other metal end (insulated
                                                                                                                       except at the extreme tip) in proximity to the stomach ,the
                                                                                                                       latter becomes dull on percussion and there is a retraction
                                                                                                                       of the organ in proportion to the energy discharged from the
                                                                                                                       penis.
                                                                                                                           In individuals with strong sexual power, this retraction
                                                                                                                       was as much as 3 cm.
                                                                                                                           In cases       of Impotency the energy discharged                       is not

                                                                                                                       sufficient to elicit the stomach reflex.
                                                                                                                          From both testicles,            there is a discharge            of positive
                                                                                                                       energy.
                                                                                                                          If one of the testicles is made functionless in consequence
                                                                                                                       of previous disease         it yields no discharge of energy.
                                                                                                                          In the child before the advent                   of puberty no sexual
                                                                                                                       polarity by my method*                 can be demonstrated.

                                                                                                                               *Vide methods of determining   male and female types of polarity.

                                                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                                                       Progressive                 Sp o n dy I o t h e r a p y

                                                                                                                                  DIAGNOSIS    OF THE SEX OF THE FETUS.

                                                                                                                          This is one of the possibilities of the future based on the
                                                                                                                       determinationof the polarity of the subject.
                                                                                                                          The determination of fetal sex at one time advocated
                                                                                                                       has been abandoned as unreliable.
                                                                                                                          It was based on the supposition that a rate of 120 — 140
                                                                                                                       in the minute of the fetal heart-beat indicated the probabil
                                                                                                                       ity of a male fetus whereas a more rapid heart-beat was
                                                                                                                       indicative of a female child.        The variability in the fetal
                                                                                                                       heart-rate makes the foregoing untenable.
                                                                                                                           The discharge of energy from the tips of the fingers
                                                                                                                       varies in both sexes. In the male subject the fingers of the
                                                                                                                       right hand discharge negative energy whereas the left hand

                                                                                                                       discharges positive energy.
                                                                                                                          This is reversed in the normal female; fingers of right
                                                                                                                       hand, positive     energy; fingers of the left hand, negative
                                                                                                                       energy.
                                                                                                                          These types are reversed in left handed individuals.
                                                                                                                          These types are not demonstrable          in either sex before
                                                                                                                       puberty.
                                                                                                                          These   types     are usually maintained      in ambidextrous

                                                                                                                       individuals.
                                                                                                                           These types are usually lost at the menopause and in
                                                                                                                       elderly males.
                                                                                                                          In syphilitics,   no polarity after the method to be shown
                                                                                                                       can be demonstrated.
                                                                                                                          In the norm if a male extends the fingers of his left hand
                                                                                                                       directly on a line with the exposed      epigastrium   of another
                                                                                                                       individual (male or female) at a distance of one or more
                                                                                                                       feet, the stomach reflex (as elicited by dulness) may be
                                                                                                                       demonstrated (Fig. 13). This dulness is maintained only
                                                                                                                       during the time the fingers are extended.

                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                       Diagnosis              of       the       Sex         of       the       Fetus

                                                                                                                           The latter dulness can only be provoked by the female
                                                                                                                       when the fingers of the right hand are extended.
                                                                                                                           In   those incapable          of discharging         energy,      some     red
                                                                                                                       material    placed across the psychomotor                   areas (192)       will
                                                                                                                       excite the discharge.
                                                                                                                           In the predictionof sex, the pregnant woman extends
                                                                                                                       first one and then the other hand in the direction of the
                                                                                                                       exposed epigastrium           of another       individual in whom per
                                                                                                                       cussion is executed.

                                                                                                                           Fig. 13. — Illustrating the method of eliciting the stomach reflex by directing
                                                                                                                       the extended fingers in the direction of the epigastrium.

                                                                                                                           My      investigations       of this      method       are    limited     and
                                                                                                                       permit me to formulate only tentative conclusions:
                                                                                                                           1.     Prior to the 4th month, the pregnant woman shows
                                                                                                                       no polarity, i.      e.,   extension of either the right or the left
                                                                                                                       hand fails to elicit dulness of the stomach.
                                                                                                                           2.     After the 4th month, if the extended fingers of the
                                                                                                                       right hand        evoke     stomach-dulness           (normal      polarity),     a
                                                                                                                       female fetus may be diagnosticated.
                                                                                                                           3.     If after the same period only the extended fingers
                                                                                                                       of the left hand cause stomach-dulness,                    a male issue may
                                                                                                                       be predicted.
                                                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                       Progressive                                   Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                               4.    For a variable period after confinement, no polarity
                                                                                                                       can be demonstrated by the foregoing method.
                                                                                                                               The following incomplete record has been made by the
                                                                                                                       author :

                                                                                                                         DATE            DURATION OF                   PLACE          POLARITY    PREDICTION   RESULT
                                                                                                                                          PREGNANCY

                                                                                                                       Oct. 9,
                                                                                                                        1913         6 months                      Kansas  City       Female       Female
                                                                                                                       Mrs. T.                                      (Dr. Craig)

                                                                                                                       Oct. 9)
                                                                                                                        1913         6 months                      Kansas City        Male         Male
                                                                                                                       Mrs. C.                                      (Dr. Craig)

                                                                                                                       Oct. 9,
                                                                                                                        1913         3 months                      Kansas City        No
                                                                                                                       Mrs. V.                                                         polarity

                                                                                                                       Oct. 20,      7 months
                                                                                                                        1913           Patient yields              San Francisco      No
                                                                                                                       Mrs. L.        electronic    test   for      (Dr. G.)           polarity
                                                                                                                                         syphilis

                                                                                                                       Oct. 17,                                    San Francisco
                                                                                                                        1913         9 months                       (Patient of Dr.   Male        Male         Male
                                                                                                                       Mrs. E.                                        Koerber)

                                                                                                                       Oct. 20,                                   San Francisco
                                                                                                                        1913         9 months                     Mt. Zion Hos        Female      Female       Female
                                                                                                                       Mrs. G.                                       pital

                                                                                                                       Nov.     7,                                San Francisco
                                                                                                                        1913         9 months                     City & County       Female      Female       Female
                                                                                                                       Mrs. J.                                      Hospital

                                                                                                                       Nov.     7,                                San Francisco
                                                                                                                        1913         9 months                     City & County       Male        Male         Male
                                                                                                                       Mrs. S.                                      Hospital

                                                                                                                           Investigations                  should      be      instituted to determine                if
                                                                                                                       absence of polarity
                                                                                                                                                           (if

                                                                                                                                                                 previously present) may be employed
                                                                                                                       in the early diagnosis of pregnancy.

                                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                                                                       Determination of Sex
                                                                                                                                         DETERMINATION OF SEX.

                                                                                                                           The law governing the production of sex has been the
                                                                                                                       subject of much speculation. Hippocrates believed that the
                                                                                                                       right ovary produced boys and the left ovary, girls. In
                                                                                                                       accordance with the foregoing women who desired male
                                                                                                                       offspring should during coitus lie on the right side and vice
                                                                                                                       versa. The question of sex is dictated by two theories; the
                                                                                                                       one supposing that sex is determined before impregnation;
                                                                                                                       the other, that the embryo is possessed of the elements of
                                                                                                                       both sexes until either one acquires a dominant influence in
                                                                                                                       consequence of factors present during early pregnancy.
                                                                                                                       The latter theory has been evolved from a study of lower

                                                                                                                       animals and plants and is supported by the fact that the
                                                                                                                       elements of both sexes in the human embryo are apparently
                                                                                                                       present in equal force at the commencement of embryonal
                                                                                                                       life. Reference has already been made to the author's
                                                                                                                       experiments   concerning   the sexuality   of plants   and   it is
                                                                                                                       mere conjecture which prompts      him to suggest the possi
                                                                                                                       bility that wearing any material of yellow over the right
                                                                                                                       psychomotor area (which reverses polarity from the female

                                                                                                                       to the male type) soon after conception until the 4th month
                                                                                                                       may eventuate in a male issue.
                                                                                                                            In pregnancy before the third month, even though po
                                                                                                                       larity is absent, a male type of polarity may be demon
                                                                                                                       strated when yellow material is placed over the right
                                                                                                                       psychomotor   area.

                                                                                                                                                     33
                                                                                                                       Progressive                       S p ondylotherapy

                                                                                                                                        NEW CONCEPTS         IN DIAGNOSIS.
                                                                                                                       THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION              OF THE ELECTRONIC THEORY
                                                                                                                                     IN THE INTERPRETATION OF DISEASE.
                                                                                                                                              ELECTRONIC PATHOLOGY.

                                                                                                                             The creation of a modern pathology based on my in
                                                                                                                       vestigations respecting the recognition of energy and its
                                                                                                                       polarity evolved in different diseases seems apposite.               I
                                                                                                                       am also utilizing human energy in the treatment of various
                                                                                                                       diseases  with most encouraging results but several years
                                                                                                                       must elapse before my investigations concerning "Elec-
                                                                                                                       tronotherapy" can be published. Each atom of our or
                                                                                                                       ganism is endowed with a definite vibration-rate.
                                                                                                                          Just as there is a "Periodic Law" with reference to the

                                                                                                                       periodicity of the atoms of the elements so may we antici
                                                                                                                       pate a law with relation to morbid processes (500).   The
                                                                                                                       periodic     law            the relationship of atoms and
                                                                                                                                           emphasizes
                                                                                                                       periodicity of properties and shows that family relationships
                                                                                                                       of atoms is as assured as are the organisms of the biologist.
                                                                                                                       At present I am attempting to determine the vibration-rate
                                                                                                                       in different structures but cannot as yet present concrete
                                                                                                                       data.      We must at present content ourselves in determining

                                                                                                                       the     energy     evolved   in   a   quantitative    and   qualitative
                                                                                                                       direction.
                                                                                                                             The former is determined by the intensity of the stomach
                                                                                                                       reflex (retraction of the organ) plus the distance at which
                                                                                                                       it is discharged from the source of energy (conductor) and
                                                                                                                       the latter refers to the polarity of the energy.
                                                                                                                             In disease like in health, the discharged energy may be :
                                                                                                                             1.   Positive.
                                                                                                                             2.   Negative.
                                                                                                                             3.   Positive and negative.
                                                                                                                             4.   Neutral or isoelectronic.
                                                                                                                                                             34
                                                                                                                       Diagnosis             of     the       Sex      of        the      Fetus

                                                                                                                           All the forces in nature         are positive   and negative.
                                                                                                                          We do not know what positive electricity really is.
                                                                                                                          However, if you conduct the energy evolved from the
                                                                                                                       positive pole of a galvanic current by means of a single
                                                                                                                       cord to the stomach-region, a stomach reflex is evoked and
                                                                                                                       and it can be shown that the conveyed energy is actually
                                                                                                                       positive    in character.
                                                                                                                           By aid of the commutator, you can produce                    a negative
                                                                                                                       form of energy.
                                                                                                                           A unit of negative electricity in motion carries with it
                                                                                                                       some of the surrounding           ether.   It is this bound ether plus
                                                                                                                       the moving negative unit which we call mass.
                                                                                                                           As before remarked            the atom is a sphere of positive
                                                                                                                       electrification                                 electrified

                                                                                                                                           enclosing     negatively                     corpuscles
                                                                                                                       and the negative electricity of the corpuscles exactly bal
                                                                                                                       ances                electricity of the enclosing sphere.
                                                                                                                                  the positive
                                                                                                                           We are confronted with another problem, viz., the
                                                                                                                       arrangement of the corpuscles in the sphere.     The arrange
                                                                                                                       ment of the corpuscles in groups to form atoms confers on
                                                                                                                       the latter their specific attributes.
                                                                                                                           If, owing to      some      external   disturbance,    one    or more
                                                                                                                       corpuscles within the sphere is detached, then the atom

                                                                                                                       will assume a positive charge owing the loss of a negative
                                                                                                                       corpuscle.
                                                                                                                           The stability of an atom is dependent on the number
                                                                                                                       of corpuscles      it contains.
                                                                                                                           When       the stability of an atom becomes extreme the
                                                                                                                       corpuscles of the outer ring may lie on the surface of the
                                                                                                                       atom in which case it assumes a negative charge.
                                                                                                                           In other instances the atom becomes neither electro
                                                                                                                       positive nor electro-negative.
                                                                                                                           The configurations of the corpuscles in an atom depend
                                                                                                                       in general on the energy they contain.               If the corpuscles
                                                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                       Progressive                       Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       rotate with a velocity beyond a critical period, they slowly
                                                                                                                       but surely lose their energy and then there occurs a sudden
                                                                                                                       convulsion or explosion with the evolution            of a large quan
                                                                                                                       tity of kinetic energy.
                                                                                                                             When the crash comes,          this atomic cataclysm        results
                                                                                                                       in disintegration.
                                                                                                                             I fully realize that I have given you an incomplete pic
                                                                                                                       ture of intra-atomic energy and atomic disintegration.
                                                                                                                             My real object in exploitingthe electronic theory is to
                                                                                                                       account for the augmented energy and changes in the po
                                                                                                                       larity of the latter occuring in certain diseases.
                                                                                                                             The molecules of our body consist of more than a thou
                                                                                                                       sand atoms and the atoms themselves are grouped and re
                                                                                                                       grouped and then grouped again in such a way as to make

                                                                                                                       the    molecules     of   the     body    highly   mobile   and    quite
                                                                                                                       unstable.
                                                                                                                            The slightest external disturbance will change the sta
                                                                                                                       bility of the atom and it will assume a positive, neutral or
                                                                                                                       negative discharge of energy.
                                                                                                                             With the discovery of radium, a new property of matter
                                                                                                                       known      radioactivity was discovered.
                                                                                                                                 as                               It meant that
                                                                                                                       matter possessed the property of emitting rays.

                                                                                                                          Then followed a differentiation of the rays into alpha
                                                                                                                       (positively charged),      beta   (negatively   charged) and gamma
                                                                                                                       (neutral) rays.
                                                                                                                          My physiologic         reaction(stomach reflex), shows that
                                                                                                                       radioactivity      is not limited to radioactive elements but
                                                                                                                       that it is a universal property of matter.
                                                                                                                                                          NEOPLASMS.

                                                                                                                             My observations have this far been limited to the diag
                                                                                                                       nosis of carcinomata.
                                                                                                                             The method of procedure may be illustrated as follows
                                                                                                                       by citing two cases :
                                                                                                                                                            36
                                                                                                                       N             e       o        p         I         a         s           m         s

                                                                                                                           A patient has only                 recently        observed      a    vaginal
                                                                                                                       discharge.
                                                                                                                           One end of a conducting cord was fixed by the patient
                                                                                                                       in the region of the lower border of the stomach* which
                                                                                                                       was previously defined by percussion and its border marked
                                                                                                                       by a dermograph.
                                                                                                                           The other metallic end (which is insulated except at its
                                                                                                                       extremity which is brought into apposition with the skin)
                                                                                                                       was gradually passed over the abdomen until a site was
                                                                                                                       attained which yielded stomach-dulness.      The latter was
                                                                                                                       demonstrated         just above the symphysis pubis occupying
                                                                                                                       an area about the size of a dime.
                                                                                                                           The polarity of the energy-discharge was found to be
                                                                                                                       negativef.

                                                                                                                           Dr. C. G. Levison, made the gynecologic examination
                                                                                                                       and found a polypoid mass protruding from the cervix
                                                                                                                       uteri which on examination by the pathologist, Dr. Dannen-
                                                                                                                       baum was found to be a perithelioma.                       At the operation
                                                                                                                       (performed   by Dr. V. G. Vecki) the cervix was densely
                                                                                                                       infiltrated and indurated throughout its entirety. The
                                                                                                                       body of the uterus was not implicated.
                                                                                                                           A woman occasionally              passes    blood in the urine with

                                                                                                                       symptoms suggestive of vesical hematuria.
                                                                                                                           A negative discharge of energy may be led off at a point
                                                                                                                       to the left side one inch above the symphysi pubis as re
                                                                                                                       vealed by stomach-dulness plus retraction of the lower
                                                                                                                       border of the organ.             A cystoscopic examination by Dr.

                                                                                                                       This metallic   tip may be fixed to the skin by means of adhesive plaster.   The
                                                                                                                           patient   must stand on a flooring of wood or other non-insulated substance.
                                                                                                                       tThe polarity of energy {i $3, 154) may be determined by a bar-magnet. If dulness
                                                                                                                           of the stomach is elicited by conveyed energy from the morbid site, have an
                                                                                                                           assistant or the patient hold first one end marked N (positive) and then the
                                                                                                                           other end marked S (negative pole) in the direction of the stomach during
                                                                                                                           percussion.   If the dulness persists with the N pole and is dissipated by the S
                                                                                                                           pole, the energy conveyed is positive.     The opposite also holds good.

                                                                                                                                                               37
                                                                                                                       Progressive                           Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       V. G. Vecki, revealed a supposititious malignant growth at
                                                                                                                       the left ureteral opening.*
                                                                                                                             One could multiply such records in carcinoma and other
                                                                                                                       affections corroborated        by necropsy, skiagrams, operations
                                                                                                                       and    histologic       examinations. Thus Dr. Geo. O. Jarvis
                                                                                                                       writes     "diagnosticated          cancer of        the    uterus      which      was
                                                                                                                       confirmed at the operation.                  It gave little evidence of its
                                                                                                                       presence beyond            the electronic         reaction."
                                                                                                                            In the diagnosis           of visceral malignancy,               there are at
                                                                                                                       least eleven diagnostic              methods        ranging      from      the    anti-
                                                                                                                       trypsinic properties of the blood to the meiostagmin test.
                                                                                                                       It is not my purpose to deprecate these methods as imprac
                                                                                                                       ticable or unreliable but to emphasize the fact that the

                                                                                                                       methods aim at generalized in lieu of localized diagnoses.
                                                                                                                            My observations             on polarity        seem      to clarify several
                                                                                                                       problematic        questions       concerning       neoplasms.
                                                                                                                             "The vast assemblages of atoms comprising the heaviest
                                                                                                                       atoms are unstable.             As their kinetic energy decreases the
                                                                                                                       aggregation  explodes and the corpuscles rearrange them
                                                                                                                       selves with the evolution of energy and the projection of
                                                                                                                       some of the products of the rearrangement."                          The slightest

                                                                                                                       external disturbance will alter the stability of the atom.
                                                                                                                           In other words, irritation is the most frequent etiologic
                                                                                                                       factor in carcinoma.
                                                                                                                           At the period of life when neoplasms develop most fre
                                                                                                                       quently, one finds a decrease in the discharge of energy.
                                                                                                                          The polarity of the energy in cancer is negative.
                                                                                                                            It is a physiologic fact that every active or injured part
                                                                                                                       shows a negative             electrical     reaction       toward      every other
                                                                                                                       part which is at rest or inactive.

                                                                                                                       *Six weeks after transference of her own energy to the site of the lesion, a cystoscopic
                                                                                                                            examination by Dr. Vecki revealed the disappearance of the bladder-tumor.

                                                                                                                                                                  38
                                                                                                                       Neoplasms
                                                                                                                           If we apprehend malignancy from the viewpoint of the
                                                                                                                       physicist,   one must assumethat the discharged energy is
                                                                                                                       due to chemical dissociation of atoms into negative and
                                                                                                                       positive ions and electrons.
                                                                                                                          A tissue at rest is in a condition    of electric equilibrium
                                                                                                                       (isoelectric) .
                                                                                                                           If this equilibrium is disturbed by some traumatic       fac
                                                                                                                       tor, a difference of potential is established and the altered
                                                                                                                       tissue becomes electronically    negative to the normal.     The
                                                                                                                       sensitive living cells are at the mercy of their environment
                                                                                                                       and this refers in all cogency to changes in the constituent
                                                                                                                       elements of the fluids in which they are bathed.
                                                                                                                           The beneficent action of radium on new growths is not

                                                                                                                       explained.
                                                                                                                          The gamma or neutral rays are the most efficient in
                                                                                                                       reestablishing a normal cell-balance in carcinomata.
                                                                                                                           The beta rays (negative) stimulate cell-growth and have
                                                                                                                       been shown to augment the growth         of carcinomata.
                                                                                                                           From the data already presented it does not seem diffi
                                                                                                                       cult to explain the action of radium.
                                                                                                                           Cancer developing in people who live together (cancer
                                                                                                                       a deux) suggests   contagion.

                                                                                                                           Just as radium confers radioactivity on other substances,
                                                                                                                       so may a cancerous person       by induction alter the polarity
                                                                                                                       of another individual.
                                                                                                                           Thus, if the negative energy from a cancer is conveyed
                                                                                                                       to the stomach of a normal individual, the stomach-dulness
                                                                                                                       of the latter may persist for some time after the source of
                                                                                                                       energy is removed and it will be found to possess a negative
                                                                                                                       polarity.
                                                                                                                           In carcinomatosis (generalization of cancerous growths),
                                                                                                                       the arteries which   in the norm yield a positive          energy
                                                                                                                       demonstrate a negative energy.

                                                                                                                                                       39
                                                                                                                       Progressive                 Spondylotherapy

                                                                                                                                                   SUMMARY.
                                                                                                                           1.    The electronic diagnosis of cancer is an early sign.
                                                                                                                           Cancer in its early stage irrespective of its localization
                                                                                                                       is apparently an insignificant lesion (Bloodgood) , hence the
                                                                                                                       importance    of an early diagnosis.
                                                                                                                           The condition in question corresponds to what was once
                                                                                                                       called the pre-cancerous stage which is in reality cancer
                                                                                                                       without positive signs.
                                                                                                                           Morbid cell-activity may temporarily discharge a nega
                                                                                                                       tive energy as I have occasionally observed in gastric and
                                                                                                                       duodenal ulcer but this variety of energy ceases when the
                                                                                                                       condition  is improved.  The present morphologic concep
                                                                                                                       tion of a neoplasm is destined to be supplanted by an elec

                                                                                                                       tronic    conception   when energy-discharge     will signalize a
                                                                                                                       tendency toward the development of a neoplasm.
                                                                                                                           2.    The energy-discharge        in cancer is negative   and
                                                                                                                       provokes the stomach reflex of contraction.
                                                                                                                          The degree of malignancy may be gauged by the ampli
                                                                                                                       tude of retraction of the lower border of the stomach.
                                                                                                                           3. The electronic test localizes with exactitude the area
                                                                                                                       involved and metastases if present may be demonstrated.

                                                                                                                           4.    At the time of the operation, the electronic test may
                                                                                                                       be employed to indicate the extent of invasion and to show
                                                                                                                       that the involved tissues have been extirpated.
                                                                                                                           5.    It is best to employ another subject in executing
                                                                                                                       the test and to select    one in whom       the stomach reflex is
                                                                                                                       normal and not easily exhausted.
                                                                                                                          6.  In eliciting the electronic reaction proximity of the
                                                                                                                       subject to intense light must be avoided (127), light being
                                                                                                                       a form of energy is capable in itself of evoking the stomach
                                                                                                                       reflex.
                                                                                                                           7.    When pain is present a neutral energy may be elic
                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                       Summary
                                                                                                                       ited.  This reaction of real pain may be utilized in differen
                                                                                                                       tiating it from pseudo-pains in malingerers.
                                                                                                                           8.  In testing for normal or abnormal energy, the sub
                                                                                                                       ject must be grounded (either patient or subject on whom
                                                                                                                       the test is made). If the patient or the subject stands on
                                                                                                                       insulated material (porcelain, varnished floor, glass, etc.), no
                                                                                                                       stomach reflex is obtainable.  The latter is important when
                                                                                                                       the tests are executed in an operating room with a floor of
                                                                                                                       porcelain tiling.   In such instances the subject and patient
                                                                                                                       must be grounded by a single wire from the foot to a con
                                                                                                                       venient faucet or radiator.
                                                                                                                           9.     The presence   of fluid in the stomach or bladder
                                                                                                                       yields a neutral discharge of energy, hence these organs must
                                                                                                                       be empty before conclusions are formulated.

                                                                                                                           10. The process of elimination must be exercised in
                                                                                                                       every possible direction. Thus, a kidney which yields in
                                                                                                                       the norm a negative energy may simulate a neoplasm if
                                                                                                                       luxated.

                                                                                                                                     NORMAL   AND PATHOLOGICAL ENERGY.

                                                                                                                           In the employment of electronic diagnosis the following
                                                                                                                       facts will assist in the recognition of normal and abnormal

                                                                                                                       energy:
                                                                                                                           1. Normal energy may be determined by its polarity.
                                                                                                                          2.  A few whiffs of chloroform will at once dissipate
                                                                                                                       normal energy, i. e., it is insufficient in potential to evoke
                                                                                                                       the stomach reflex whereas no amount of chloroform          ap
                                                                                                                       pears to deprive abnormal energy of eliciting the same reflex.
                                                                                                                       Even under complete anesthesia the energy discharged from
                                                                                                                       neoplasms persists.
                                                                                                                          3.     To convey sufficient normal energy to elicit the
                                                                                                                       stomach reflex, the tip of the cord must be in contact or
                                                                                                                       not in excess of one inch from the part supplying the energy.
                                                                                                                                                       41
                                                                                                                       Progressive                    Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                          Morbid energy however may still be conducted even
                                                                                                                       though the metallic tip of the conductor is more than one
                                                                                                                       inch distant from the source of energy-supply.
                                                                                                                           4. When the stomach is the object of investigation
                                                                                                                       another subject should be selected for the elicitation of the
                                                                                                                       stomach reflex.

                                                                                                                                                      SYPHILIS.

                                                                                                                          Since the discovery of the spirocheta pallida, this organ
                                                                                                                       ism has been found in the brain of paretics and in the cord
                                                                                                                       in tabetics.     Many tests have been suggested for syphilis:
                                                                                                                           1.   Complement       fixation   or deviation   test of Wasser-
                                                                                                                       mann; 2. Noguchi or butyric acid reaction;               Cobra venom

                                                                                                                                                                           3.
                                                                                                                       hemolysin test.
                                                                                                                           4.   Control of the Wassermann by measuring the amino-
                                                                                                                       nitrogen of the blood-serum;
                                                                                                                           5.   Luetin reaction.
                                                                                                                           In the Noguchi-luetin reaction, the test is not appli
                                                                                                                       cable in the primary and secondary stage ; the chief response
                                                                                                                       is in the treated and late cases.
                                                                                                                           The Wassermann is not absolutely specific for syphilis

                                                                                                                       insomuch as it is not dependent on syphilitic antibodies in
                                                                                                                       the blood but upon admission to the latter of abnormal
                                                                                                                       products from morbid tissues.
                                                                                                                          The Wassermann          reaction has been found positive         in
                                                                                                                       scarlatina,    appendicitis,   cancer, typhoid, sepsis,      phthisis,
                                                                                                                       diabetes and other diseases.
                                                                                                                          The electronic reaction for syphilis        (congenital   and ac
                                                                                                                       quired), is as follows:
                                                                                                                          Energy conducted from the liver, spleen and vertebral
                                                                                                                       column (site selected, 7th dorsal spine), causes a stomach
                                                                                                                       reflex (ascertained by dulness) and the dulness is dissipated
                                                                                                                                                            42
                                                                                                                       Dementia Paralytica
                                                                                                                       by the + and — poles of a bar magnet; i. e., the energy is
                                                                                                                       neutral or isoelectronic.
                                                                                                                           Energy conveyed from the arteries, veins and heart is
                                                                                                                       also neutral but insomuch as this reaction is obtainable
                                                                                                                       in other diseases, the foregoing the reaction as first cited
                                                                                                                       should be accepted.
                                                                                                                           The exact site of the primary lesion may be also be as
                                                                                                                       certained by this method*.
                                                                                                                           Ascertaining        the site of the primary lesion is of value as
                                                                                                                       corroborative       evidence and may aid us in treatment.
                                                                                                                           Thus in a case seen in consultation with Dr. F. S. Hae-
                                                                                                                       berle (St. Louis), it was impossible to elicit the electronic
                                                                                                                       reaction after the primary site of inoculation was submitted
                                                                                                                       to several mercurial inunctions.

                                                                                                                          The reaction was obtainable in every case of syphilis
                                                                                                                       notwithstanding salvarsan, neosalvarsan, mercury and
                                                                                                                       various organic arsenic compounds had been employed.*
                                                                                                                          The electronic reaction was positive despite the fact that
                                                                                                                       in many cases the Wassermann and luetin reactions were
                                                                                                                       negative.
                                                                                                                                                DEMENTIA PARALYTICA.

                                                                                                                           Noguchi demonstrated the spirocheta pallida in the
                                                                                                                       stained specimens of the brain in general paralysis. Forster
                                                                                                                       and Tomasczewski, demonstrated living spirochetes in 8
                                                                                                                       out of 20 cases examined by aspiration                   of the cortical sub
                                                                                                                       stance.  The author has examined a large number of paretics
                                                                                                                       and ascertained the following invariable electronic reaction;
                                                                                                                       when a connection is made between either frontal eminence

                                                                                                                       This was demonstrated    to the eminent syphilologists, G. Frank Lydston of Chicago,
                                                                                                                           V. G. Vecki, of San Francisco, and many other physicians.
                                                                                                                       *In only five patients among many hundreds examined, a negative reaction was
                                                                                                                           obtainable.    Here, it is interesting to observe that in these patients anti-
                                                                                                                           syphilitic medication was executed at the time of the primary lesion and
                                                                                                                           maintained for periods varying from one to five years.

                                                                                                                                                               43
                                                                                                                       Progressive                          Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                       of the subject and the gastric area, dulness of the stomach
                                                                                                                       immediately        ensues     and the dulness is dissipated by both
                                                                                                                       poles of a bar magnet.       Aside from this neutral energy, one
                                                                                                                       may obtain         the same reaction from the liver, spleen and
                                                                                                                       spine.

                                                                                                                             Fig. 14. — Illustrating the cerebral sinuses and psychomotor area (4x6 cm. in
                                                                                                                       area) where energy is normally discharged.      The sinuses yield a negative discharge.
                                                                                                                       In the norm no discharge is obtainable from the mastoid, a fact of importance in
                                                                                                                       eliciting the reaction for pus.

                                                                                                                            In the norm and in syphilis (without cerebral involv-
                                                                                                                       ment), no energy sufficient to dull the stomach is obtain
                                                                                                                       able from       the frontal eminences.                In dementia precox, a
                                                                                                                       positive    energy is obtainable            from the frontal eminences.
                                                                                                                            Great care must be exercised in recognizing the many
                                                                                                                       areas on the head from            which energy is normally discharged
                                                                                                                       (Fig. 14).
                                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                                                                       Dementia Paralytica
                                                                                                                          Error may be eliminated by consulting page 41 of this
                                                                                                                       address and furthermore by recalling the fact that the
                                                                                                                       energy-discharge of other areas is positive or negative and
                                                                                                                       not neutral as in syphilis.
                                                                                                                          It is true however, that if the tip of the conductor        is
                                                                                                                       directly over an artery or vein, one may elicit the reaction
                                                                                                                       of a neutral energy (in syphilis) but if the frontal eminence
                                                                                                                       is alone selected,    errors of interpretation   may be avoided.
                                                                                                                          The syphilitic shows no polarity and it is impossible to
                                                                                                                       obtain sufficient energy to dull the stomach (as in the
                                                                                                                       norm) from the left psychomotor area in the male and from
                                                                                                                       the right psychomotor area in the female.
                                                                                                                          Many cases of insanity examined by me at the asylums
                                                                                                                       were found to be cases of brain-syphilis and this was notably

                                                                                                                       the case in patients diagnosticated as dementia precox.
                                                                                                                          The electronic test is destined to serve of great value in
                                                                                                                       the differentiation   of a host of mental maladies.
                                                                                                                          Already the serological diagnosis of syphilis bears re
                                                                                                                       sults in the passing of paresis.
                                                                                                                          The close relationship between syphilis and the latter
                                                                                                                       has always been recognized but with the distinction how
                                                                                                                       ever that paresis was a parasyphilitic affection due to the

                                                                                                                       indirect action of toxins whereas it is now known that the
                                                                                                                       treponema pallidum is directly concerned in its production.
                                                                                                                           The passing of parasyphilis emphasizes the fact that,
                                                                                                                       within a few weeks after the primary inoculation the spiro
                                                                                                                       chetes   invade   every   tissue of the body and to prevent
                                                                                                                       spirilloses of the nervous system heretofore designated as
                                                                                                                       parasyphilitic, energetic treatment must be commenced
                                                                                                                       at the time of the primary inoculation.
                                                                                                                           The foregoing suggest the value of the electronic reac
                                                                                                                       tion in the early diagnosis of syphilis.

                                                                                                                                                        45
                                                                                                                       Progressive                  Spondylotherapy
                                                                                                                                                 TUBERCULOSIS.

                                                                                                                          It is generally conceded that the tuberculin        reaction is
                                                                                                                       a phenomenon of sensitization.
                                                                                                                          There are many limitations to the tuberculin test which
                                                                                                                       time will not permit me to review.
                                                                                                                          The electronic reaction in tuberculosis yields a neutral
                                                                                                                       energy.
                                                                                                                           One may localize with absolute certainty the site of the
                                                                                                                       lesion and ascertain its area whether located in the lung,
                                                                                                                       larynx,   lymphatic gland, bone, joint or other structure.
                                                                                                                          Observe that the reaction is that of syphilis, but the
                                                                                                                       reaction cannot be obtained from the liver, spleen or spine
                                                                                                                       (provided   these structures    are not implicated    by tubercu

                                                                                                                       lous lesions).
                                                                                                                           It may be difficult for you to differentiate      between an
                                                                                                                       active and a healed tuberculous lesion.
                                                                                                                           In the latter, the reaction is only obtainable when the
                                                                                                                       tip of the cord is in immediate contact with the site of the
                                                                                                                       lesion, whereas in an active lesion, the reaction is obtain
                                                                                                                       able when the tip is held several inches away from the site
                                                                                                                       of the lesion.
                                                                                                                                                                        is in direct ratio

                                                                                                                           The potentiality of the energy-discharge
                                                                                                                       to the bacterial   or toxin content of the lesion.
                                                                                                                           When tuberculosis is generalized, the arteries and veins
                                                                                                                       yield a neutral energy.
                                                                                                                           Pus (streptococcic reaction) may be detected practi
                                                                                                                       cally anywhere in the organism and by the immediate dem
                                                                                                                       onstration of these foci of suppuration,      the so-called "cryp-
                                                                                                                       togenetic septicemia" is destined to be regarded as an avoid
                                                                                                                       able diagnostic error.

                                                                                                                                                        46
                                                                                                                       Electronic Reactions
                                                                                                                                          ELECTRONIC REACTIONS.

                                                                                                                          In the subjoined    table an attempt      has been made to
                                                                                                                       summarize    a   variety   of   affections   yielding    electronic
                                                                                                                       reactions.
                                                                                                                          In erysipelas and meningitis, further control-tests          are
                                                                                                                       necessary before   accepting the reactions as final. The
                                                                                                                       reactions in typhoid and malaria may be present for years
                                                                                                                       after recovery from the primary attack.
                                                                                                                          I must caution you against the error in diagnosis of
                                                                                                                       accepting as conclusive so-called pathognomonic         symptoms.
                                                                                                                          No physician can assume skill in diagnosis until he has
                                                                                                                       mastered the rules and principles      of logic.
                                                                                                                           By aid of these reactions one is not only able to make a

                                                                                                                       diagnosis but it will be possible as in pertussis to localize
                                                                                                                       the debatable site of infection.

                                                                                                                                                       47


                                                                                                                                               follows:
                                                                                                                                                                          POLARITY OF REACTIONS

                                                                                                                       should read positive. Neutral
                                                                                                                                                 Positive should read negative
                                                                                                                       negative reactions are correct.
                                                                                                                                     and negative
                                                                                                                                                                         should be reversed as

                                                                                                                                   and positive anrt

                          1


                                        DISEASE          stomach-reaction                    POSOIVE       POLE   OGATIVE        POLE   POLAROY       f            SOURCE      f EORGY
                                                                                                                                            EORGY

                              Tetanus                   Dulness       with     retrac        Dulness               Dulness              Negative          From     site of infection.
                                                           tion                                 dissipated           maintained

                               Meningococcic            Dulness       with     retrac        Dulness               Dulness              Positive    and   From     site of infection.
                                   Infection               tion                                maintained            maintained            negative

                              Gonococcic                Dulness       with     retrac        Dulness               Dulness              Positive    and   From     site of infection.
                                   Infection               tion                                maintained            maintained            negative

                              Acne      Bacillus        Dulness       with     retrac        Dulness               Dulness              Negative          From     papular      eruption.
                                                           tion                                 dissipated           maintained

                               Pfiomyelpis              Dulness                              Dulness               Dulness              Positive          From     the    spine.  (In the                norm,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a

                                                                                                                                                                   7

                                                                                               maintained             dissipated                            the      th   C. spine yields                 neu
                                                                                                                                                            tral     discharge         of      energy      and
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a

                                                                                                                                                            the    ist lumbar               spine,        posi
                                                                                                                                                            tive    discharge         of      energy).

                               Pfyarthrpis              Dulness                              Dulness               Dulness              Negative          From     affected     joints.
                                                                                                dissipated            persists

                              Gout                      Dulr.e;s                             Dulness               Dulness              Neutral           From     affected        joints     and    veins.
                                                                                                dissipated            dissipated

                              Friedreich's              Dulness                              Dulness               Dulness              Negative          From     the    spine.
                                   Ataxia                                                       dissipated           persists

                               Erysipeps                Dulness      with      retrac        Dulness               Dulness              Positive          From     site   of infection.

                                                                                        is
                                                           tion     and      latter             persists              dissipated
                                                           in      proportion           to
                                                           intensity         of infec
                                                           tion


                                           DISEASE          STOMACH-REACTION            POSOIVE    POLE    OGATIVE            POLE          POLAROY      f                   SOURCE          f ENERGY              "
                                                                                                                                               ENERGY

                               Osteoarthritis              Dulness    with   retrac     Dulness              Dulness                       Neutral               From          implicated               articulations
                                                              tion                         dissipated           dissipated                                          and      veins.

                               Keloid*                     Dulness    with   retrac     Dulness              Dulness                       Neutral               From        cicatricial          tissue.
                                                              tion                         dissipated           dissipated

                                Mapria                     Dulness                      Dulness              Dulness                        Negative             From        spleen.
                                                                                           dissipated           persists

                               Paretic       Dementia      Dulness                      Dulness              Dulness                       Neutral               From         either         frontal       eminence;
                                                                                           dissipated           dissipated                                          also          electronic            reaction    of
                                                                                                                                                                                     (q.

                                                                                                                                                                    syphilis               v.).

                               Dementia         Precox     Dulness                      Dulness             Dulness                        Positive              Frontal          eminences.
                                                                                         maintained             dissipated

                                EpilepsR                   Dulness                      Dulness              Dulness                       Neutral               Psychomotor               areas.
                                                                                           dissipated           dissipated

                               Influenza                                                                                                                         From                                 when

                                                .
                                                           Dulness                      Dulness             Dulness                        Neutral                          nostrils       and               infection
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a

                                                                                           dissipated           dissipated                                                 generalized,      neutral  energy
                                                                                                                                                                   is is

                                                                                                                                                                           obtained     from blood-vessels.

                                Scarptina                  Dulness                      Dulness             Dulness                         Negative             From        nostrils        (one end of insu
                                                                                           dissipated           persists                                            lated         tip held    within the naris).
                                                                                                                                                                    No        discharge            from      eruption.

                                LeprosR                    Dulness                      Dulness             Dulness                        Neutral               From       all    leprous        lesions.
                                    (All    varieties)                                     dissipated           dissipated
                                                                                                                                    a

                                                                                                                      it,

                               *This yields the same reaction as tuberculosis and suggests Da Costa's conception of         viz.,       growth resulting from the irritant action of the toxins of tubercle
                                    bacilli.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              /


                                                                                                                               •A
                                         DISEASE          STOMACH-REACTION                POSITIVE      POLE   OGATIVE      POLE    POLAROY    f                 SOURCE        f EORGY

                                                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                       EORGY

                                                                                          Dulness               Dulness             Neutral        From                              areas.

                                                                                                                                                   .
                             Tinea       Tonsurans       Dulness                                                                                                 implicated
                                                                                             dissipated            dissipated

                             DlABETESf                   Dulness     with   retrac        Dulness               Dulness             Neutral        From           liver.         Neutral          reaction
                                                            tion.     Latter         in      dissipated            dissipated                            from      heart,      arteries       and    veins.
                                                            proportion      to   se
                                                            verity   of affection

                             AnkRlostomiasis             Dulness                          Dulness               Dulness             Neutral        From          the       intestines,        notably        in
                                                                                             dissipated            dissipated                            abdominal             region        correspond
                                                                                                                                                         ing to        jejunum.

                             Amebiasis                   Dulness                          Dulness               Dulness             Neutral        Colon           and        from        liver      (when
                                                                                             dissipated            dissipated                            implicated).

                             Leukemia                    Dulness                          Dulness               Dulness             Positive       Spleen and from tissues                        involved
                                  {Lymphatic)                                                persists              dissipated                        in leukemic infiltration.

                             Pertussis                   Dulness                          Dulness               Dulness             Neutral            Larynx,         trachea        and      bronchus.
                                                                                             dissipated            dissipated                            Over     the latter         hold     end of cord
                                                                                                                                                                                         a

                                                                                                                                                          receiving  energy     distance   of
                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                            inch to avoid   normal    energy
                                                                                                                                                         from heart.

                              tAmong 30 diabetics examined, in two only was any reaction obtainable from the head of the pancreas which occupies the concavity of the duodenal loop.
                                                                                                                       Progressive                 Spondylotherapy

                                                                                                                                                     EPILEPSY.

                                                                                                                          All theories concerning the nature of epilepsy            are un
                                                                                                                       proved hypotheses.
                                                                                                                           The majority of writers concede that the paroxysms are
                                                                                                                       discharged from the cerebral cortex, notably the cortical
                                                                                                                       motor regions.
                                                                                                                          Before   presenting   my   conclusions      concerning    a large
                                                                                                                       number of epileptics whom     I examined, certain fundamental
                                                                                                                       facts must be reviewed.
                                                                                                                          We know that from the left psychomotor area in the
                                                                                                                       male and from the right psychomotor area in the female,
                                                                                                                       sufficient energy can be conveyed to the stomach to evoke

                                                                                                                       dulness of the latter.
                                                                                                                          We also know that when the end of the connecting wire
                                                                                                                       is distant beyond    % inch from the psychomotor            area,    the
                                                                                                                       energy is insufficient   to elicit stomach-dulness.
                                                                                                                          All epileptics discharge a neutral energy from both psycho
                                                                                                                       motor   areas   and this electronic reaction      is characteristic
                                                                                                                       of this affection.   My measurements show no increase in
                                                                                                                       the energy-discharge     either    from   the psychomotor           area
                                                                                                                       normally discharging   energy nor from the area which in

                                                                                                                       the norm discharges no energy. Before puberty where
                                                                                                                       polarity is not yet expressed, there is nevertheless a dis
                                                                                                                       charge from the right psychomotor          area in the male and
                                                                                                                       from the left psychomotor     area     in the female.

                                                                                                                                            DIAGNOSIS     OF DEATH.

                                                                                                                          The author in his "Transactions of the Antiseptic
                                                                                                                       Club," refers to the fact that it is unfortunate that the
                                                                                                                       generality of physicians neglected the important duty of
                                                                                                                       diagnosing death.
                                                                                                                                                         52
                                                                                                                       Diagnosis                           of Death
                                                                                                                          The application of one positive sign of death should be
                                                                                                                       made obligatory by law.    We now know that the living
                                                                                                                       body   constantly   discharges   energy   from   definite   areas,
                                                                                                                       notably the heart-region.
                                                                                                                          If sufficient energy cannot be conveyed from the latter
                                                                                                                       area to evoke stomach-dulness,     it is practically a certain
                                                                                                                       sign of death.
