The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin the Mage (S. L. MacGregor Mathers, 1898)
===================================================================================
The first English translation of the Abra-Melin grimoire, from the 1458 manuscript — the complete system of holy guardian angel magic. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1900 Watkins edition (3 parts).

The Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage 
Introduction and Book I 

This Adobe Acrobat edition contains the complete and unaltered text of the 

CORRESPONDING SECTIONS IN THE SECOND (19O0) EDITION PUBLISHED BY JOHN M. WaTKINS, 

London. 

Prepared and typeset by Benjamin Rowe, December 6, 1998. 

INTRODUCTION, 

BY 

S.L. MAC GREGOR MATHERS. 

* WING perhaps to the circumstance that the indispensable "Baedecker" 
) accords only a three or four line notice to the "Bibliotheque de I 'Arsenal " — 
but few English or American visitors to Paris are acquainted with its name, 
situation, or contents, though nearly all know at least by sight the "Bibliotheque 
Nationale " and the "Bibliotheque Mazarin ". 

This "Library of the Arsenal, " as it is now called, was founded as a private 
collection by Antoine Rene Voyer DArgenson, Marquis de Paulny; and was first 
opened to the public on the pth Floreal, in the fifth year of the French Republic 
(that is to say, on 28th April, 1797), or just a century ago. This Marquis de Paulny 
was born in the year 1722, died in 1787, and was successively Minister of War, and 
Ambassador to Switzerland, to Poland, and to the Venetian Republic. His later 
years were devoted to the formation of this Library, said to be one of the richest 
private collections known. Lt was acquired in 1785 by the Comte DArtois, and 
today belongs to the State. Lt is situated on the right bank of the Seine, in the Rue 
de Sully, near the river, and not far from the Place de la Bastille, and is known as 
the "Bibliotheque de I Arsenal". Ln round numbers it now possesses 700,000 printed 
books, and about 8000 manuscripts, many of them being of considerable value. 

Among the latter is this Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin, as delivered 
by Abraham the Jew unto his son Lamech; which L now give to the public in 
printed form for the first time. 

Many years ago L heard of the existence of this manuscript from a celebrated 
occultist, since dead; and more recently my attention was again called to it by my 
personal friend, the well-known French author, lecturer and poet, Jules Bois, whose 
attention has been for some time turned to occult subjects. My first-mentioned 
informant told me that it was known both to Bulwer Lytton and Eliphas Levi, that 
the former had based part of his description of the Sage Rosicrucian Mejnour on 
that of Abra-Melin, while the account of the so-called Observatory of Sir Philip 
Derval in the "Strange Story" was to an extent copied from and suggested by that of 
the Magical Oratory and Terrace, given in the Eleventh Chapter of the Second 
Book of this present work. Certainly also the manner of instruction applied by 
Mejnour in "Zanoni" to the Neophyte Glyndon, together with the test of leaving 
him alone in his abode to go on a short journey and then returning unexpectedly, is 
closely similar to that employed by Abra-Melin to Abraham, with this difference, 

Introduction 

that the latter successfully passed through that test, while Glyndon failed. It would 
also be especially such experiments as those described at length in the Third Book, 
which the author of the "Strange Story " had in view when he makes Sir Philip 
Derval in the MS. history of his life speak of certain books describing occult 
experiments, some of which he had tried and to his surprise found succeed. 

This rare and unique manuscript of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin, from 
which the present work is translated, is a French translation from the original 
Hebrew of Abraham the Jew. It is in the style of script usual at about the end of the 
seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth centuries, and is apparently by the 
same hand as another MS. of the Magic OfPicatrix also in the "Bibliotheque de 
lArsenal". I know of no other existing copy or replica of this Sacred Magic of 
Abra-Melin, not even in the British Museum, whose enormous collection of Occult 
Manuscripts I have very thoroughly studied. Neither have I ever heard by 
traditional report of the existence of any other copy. In giving it now to the Public, 
I feel, therefore, that I am conferring a real benefit upon English and especially 
American students of Occultism, by placing within their reach for the first time a 
Magical work of such importance from the Occult standpoint. 

The Manuscript is divided into three Books, each with its separate Title Page, 
surrounded by an ornamental border of simple design, in red and black ink, and 
which is evidently not intended to be symbolical in the slightest degree, but is 
simply the work of a conscientious caligraphist wishing to give an appearance of 
cleanness and completeness to the Title Page. 

The wording of each is the same: "Livre Premier (Second or Troisieme, as 
the case may be) de la Sacree Magie que Dieu donna a Moyse, Aaron, David, 
Salomon et a d'autres Saints Patriarches et Prophetes qui enseigne la vraye 
sapience Divine laissee par Abraham a Lamech son Fils traduite de l'hebreu 
1458 ". I give the translated title at the commencement of each of the Three Books. 

On the fly-leaf of the original MS. is the following note in the handwriting of 
the end of the eighteenth century: — 

"This Volume contains 3 Books, of which here is the first. — The Abraham and 
the Lamech, of whom there is here made question, were Jews of the fifteenth 
century, and it is well known that the Jews of that period possessing the Cabala of 
Solomon passed for being the best Sorcerers and Astrologers. " Then follows in 
another and recent hand:— 

Probably the same as Gio Peccatrix the Magician, the author of many Manuscripts on Magic. 
Since writing the above, I have heard casually that a copy of at least part, or perhaps of the whole, is 
said to exist in Holland. 

11 

Introduction 

"Volume composed of three parts— 
ist part 102 pages. 
2nd ip4 

3rd 117 

413 

June, 1883. 

The style of the French employed in the text of the MS. is somewhat vague and 
obscure, two qualities unhappily heightened by the almost entire absence of any 
attempt at punctuation, and the comparative rarity of paragraphic arrangement. 
Even the full stop at the close of a sentence is usually omitted, neither is the 
commencement of a fresh one marked by a capital letter. The following example is 
taken from near the end of the Third Book; "Cest pourquoy la premiere chose 
que tu dois faire principalement ates esprits familiers sera de leur commander 
de ne tedire jamais aucune chose deuxmemes que lorsque tu les interrogeras 
amoins queles fut pour tavertir des choses qui concerne ton utilite outon 
prejudice parceque situ ne leur limite pas leparler ils tediront tant etdesi 
grandes choses quils tofusquiront lentendement et tu ne scaurois aquoy 
tentenir desorte que dans la confusion des choses ils pourroient te faire 
prevariquer ettefaire tomber dans des erreurs irreparables ne te fais jamais prier 
en aucune chose ou tu pourras aider et seccourir tonprochain et nattends pas 
quil tele demande mais tache descavoir afond," etc. This extract may be said to 
give a fair idea of the average quality of the French. The style, however, of the First 
Book is much more colloquial than that of the Second and Third, it being 
especially addressed by Abraham to Lamech, his son, and the second person singular 
being employed throughout it. As some English readers may be ignorant of the fact, 
it is perhaps as well here to remark that in French "tu," thou, is only used between 
very intimate friends and relations, between husband and wife lovers, etc.; while 
"vous," you, is the more usual mode of address to the world in general. Again, in 
sacred books, in prayers, etc., "vous" is used, where we employ "thou" as having a 
more solemn sound than "tu". Hence the French verb "tutoyer," = "to be very 
familiar with, to be on extremely friendly terms with any one, and even to be 
insolently familiar". This First Book contains advice concerning Magic, and a 
description of Abraham s Travels and experiences, as well as a mention of the many 
marvellous works he had been able to accomplish by means of this system of Sacred 
Magic. The Second and Third Books (which really contain the Magic of 
Abra-Melin, and are practically based on the two MSS. entrusted by him to 
Abraham, the Jew, but with additional comments by the latter) differ in style from 

111 

Introduction 

the former, the phraseology is quaint and at times vague, and the second person 
plural, "vous," is employed for the most part instead of "tu". 

The work may then be thus roughly classified: 

First Book: = Advice and Autobiography; both addressed by the Author 

to his son Lamech. 
Second Book: = General and complete description of the means of 

obtaining the Magical Powers desired. 
Third Book: = The application of these Powers to produce an immense 

number of Magical results. 

Though the chapters of the Second and Third Books have special headings in 
the actual text, those of the First Book have none; wherefore in the "Table of 
Contents" I have supplemented this defect by a careful analysis of their subject 
matter. 

This system of Sacred Magic Abraham acknowledges to have received from the 
Mage Abra-Melin; and claims to have himself personally and actually wrought 
most of the wonderful effects described in the Third Book, and many others besides. 

Who then was this Abraham the Jew? It is possible, though there is no mention 
of this in the MS., that he was a descendant of that Abraham the Jew who wrote 
the celebrated Alchemical work on twenty-one pages of bark or papyrus, which 
came into the hands of Nicholas Flamel, and by whose study the latter is said 
eventually to have attained the possession of the "Stone of the Wise". The only 
remains of the Church of Saint Jacques de la Boucherie which exists at the present 
day, is the tower, which stands near the Place du Chatelet, about ten minutes' walk 
from the Bibliotheque de lArsenal; and there is yet a street near this tower which 
bears the title of "Rue Nicolas Flamel, " so that his memory still survives in Paris, 
together with that of the Church close to which he lived, and to which, after the 
attainment of the Philosopher's Stone, he and his wife Pernelle caused a handsome 
peristyle to be erected. 

From his own account, the author of the present work appears to have been 
born in A.D. 1362, and to have written this manuscript for his son, Lamech, in 
1458, being then in his ninety-sixth year. That is to say, that he was the 
contemporary both of Nicholas Flamel and Pernelle, and also of the mystical 
Christian Rosenkreutz, the founder of the celebrated Rosicrucian Order or 
Fraternity in Europe. Like the latter, he appears to have been very early seized with 
the desire of obtaining Magical Knowledge; like him and Flamel, he left his home 
and travelled in search of the Initiated Wisdom; like them both, he returned to 
become a worker of wonders. At this period, it was almost universally believed that 

iv 

Introduction 

the Secret Knowledge was only really obtainable by those who were willing to quit 
their home and their country to undergo dangers and hardships in its quest; and 
this idea even obtains to an extent in the present day. The life of the late Madame 
Blavatsky is an example in point. 

This period in which Abraham the Jew lived was one in which Magic was 
almost universally believed in, and in which its Professors were held in honour; 
Faust (who was probably also a contemporary of our author), Cornelius Agrippa, 
Sir Michael Scott, and many others I could name, are examples of this, not to 
mention the celebrated Dr. Dee in a later age. The history of this latter Sage, his 
association with Sir Edward Kelly, and the part he took in the European politics of 
his time are too well known to need description here. 

That Abraham the Jew was not one whit behind any of these Magicians in 
political influence, is evident to any one who peruses this work. He stands a dim 
and shadowy figure behind the tremendous complication of central European 
upheaval at that terrible and instructive epoch; as Adepts of his type always appear 
and always have appeared upon the theatre of history in great crises of nations. The 
age which could boast simultaneously three rival claimants to the direction of two 
of the greatest levers of the society of that era — the Papacy and the Germanic 
Empire — when the jealousies of rival Bishoprics, the overthrow of Dynasties, the 
Roman Church shaken to her foundations, sounded in Europe the tocsin of that 
fearful struggle which invariably precedes social reorganisation, that wild 
whirlwind of national convulsion which engulfs in its vortex the civilisation of a 
yesterday, but to prepare the reconstitution of a morrow. The enormous historical 
importance of such men as our Author is always underrated, generally doubted; 
notwithstanding that like the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's feast, their 
manifestation in the political and historical arena is like the warning of a Mene, 
Mene Tekel, Upharsin, to a foolish and undiscerning world. 

The full and true history of any Adept could only be written by himself, and 
even then, if brought before the eyes of the world at large, how many persons would 
lend credence to it? and even the short and incomplete statement of the notable 
events of our Authors life contained in the First Book, will be to most readers 
utterly incredible of belief. But what must strike all alike is the tremendous faith of 
the man himself, as witnessed by his many and dangerous journey ings for so many 
years through wild and savage regions and places difficult of access even in our own 
day with all the increased facilities of transit which we enjoy. This faith at length 
brought him its reward; though only at the moment when even he was becoming 
discouraged and sick at heart with disappointed hope. Like his great namesake, the 
forefather of the Hebrew race, he had not in vain left his home, his "Ur of the 
Chaldees, " that he might at length discover that Light of Initiated Wisdom, for 
which his soul had cried aloud within him for so many years. This culmination of 

Introduction 

his wanderings was his meeting with Abra-Melin, the Egyptian Mage. From him 
he received that system of Magical instruction and practice which forms the body of 
the Second and Third Books of this work. 

In the Manuscript original this name is spelt in several different ways, I have 
noted this in the text wherever it occurs. The variations are: Abra-Melin, 
Abramelin, Abramelim, and Abraha-Melin. From these I have selected the 
orthography Abra-Melin to place on the title page, and I have adhered to the same 
in this Introduction. 

As far as can be gathered from the text, the chief place of residence of Abraham 
the Jew after his travels was Wiirzburg, or, as it was called in the Middle Ages, 
"Herbipolis ". He appears to have married his cousin, and by her to have had two 
sons, the elder, named Joseph, whom he instructed in the Mysteries of the Holy 
Qabalah, and lamech, the younger, to whom he bequeaths this system of Sacred 
Magic as a legacy, and to whom the whole of the First Book is addressed. He speaks 
further of three daughters, to each of whom he gave 100,000 golden florins as a 
dowry. He expressly states that he obtained both his wife, and a treasure of 
3,000,000 golden florins, by means of some of the Magical Operations described in 
the Third Book. He further admits that his first inclination to Qabalistical and 
Magical studies was owing to certain instructions in the Secrets of the Qabalah, 
which he received when young from his father, Simon; so that after the death of the 
latter his most earnest desire was to travel in search of an Initiated Master. 

To the sincere and earnest student of Occultism this work cannot fail to be of 
value, whether as an encouragement to that most rare and necessary quality, 
unshaken faith; as an aid to his discrimination between true and false systems of 
Magic; or as presenting an assemblage of directions for the Production of Magical 
effects, which the Author of the book affirms to have tried with success. 

Especially valuable are the remarks of Abraham the Jew on the various 
Professors of the "Art which none may name" in the course of his wanderings and 
travels; the account of the many wonders he worked; and, above all, the careful 
classification of the Magical Experiments in the Third Book, together with his 
observations and advice thereon. 

Not least in interest are the many notable Persons of that age for or against 
whom he performed marvels: The Emperor Sigismund of Germany: Count Frederic 
the Quarreller: the Bishop of his city (probably either John I, who began the 
foundation of the Wiirzburg University in 1403 with the authorisation of Pope 
Boniface IX., or else Echter von Mespelbrunn, who completed the same noble 
work): the Count of Warwick: Henry VI of England: the rival Popes — John 
XXIII, Martin V, Gregory XII, and Benedict XIII: the Council of Constance: the 
Duke of Bavaria: Duke leopold of Saxony: the Greek Emperor, Constantine 

VI 

Introduction 

Palaeologos: and probably the Archbishop Albert of Magdeburg: and also some of 
the Hussite Leaders — a roll of names celebrated in the history of that stirring time. 

Considering the era in which our Author lived, and the nation to which he 
belonged, he appears to have been somewhat broad in his religious views; for not 
only does he insist that this Sacred system of Magic may be attained by any one, 
whether Jew, Christian, Mahometan, or Pagan, but he also continually warns 
Lamech against the error of changing the religion in which one has been brought 
up; and he alleges this circumstance as the reason of the occasional failures of the 
Magician Joseph of Paris (the only other person he mentions besides himself and 
Abra-Melin who was acquainted with this particular system of Magic), namely 
that having been brought up a Christian, he had renounced that faith and become 
a Jew. At first sight it does not seem clear from the Occult point of view what 
particular Occult disadvantage should be attached to such a line of action. But we 
must remember, that in his age, the conversion to another religion invariably 
meant an absolute, solemn and thorough renunciation and denial of any truth in 
the religion previously professed by the convert. Herein would be the danger, 
because whatever the errors, corruption, or mistakes in any particular form of 
religion, all are based on and descended from the acknowledgment of Supreme 
Divine Powers. Therefore to deny any religion (instead of only abjuring the 
mistaken or erroneous parts thereof) would be equivalent to denying formally and 
ceremonially the truths on which it was originally founded; so that whenever a 
person having once done this should begin to practise the Operations of the Sacred 
Magic, he would find himself compelled to affirm with his whole will-force those 
very formulas which he had at one time magically and ceremonially (though 
ignorantly) denied; and whenever he attempted to do this, the occult Law of 
Reaction would raise as a Ceremonial Obstacle against the effect which he should 
wish to produce, the memory of that Ceremonial Denial which his previous 
renunciation had firmly sealed in his atmosphere. And the force of this would be in 
exact proportion to the manner and degree in which he had renounced his former 
creed. For of all hindrances to Magical action, the very greatest and most fatal is 
unbelief, for it checks and stops the action of the Will. Even in the commonest 
natural operations we see this. No child could learn to walk, no student could 
assimilate the formulas of any science, were the impracticability and impossibility 
of so doing the first thing in his mind. Wherefore it is that all Adepts and Great 
Teachers of Religion and of Magic have invariably insisted on the necessity of faith. 

But though apparently more broad in view in admitting the excellence of 
every religion, unfortunately he shows the usual injustice to and jealousy of women 
which has distinguished men for so many ages, and which as far as L can see arises 
purely and simply from an innate consciousness that were women once admitted to 
compete with them on any plane without being handicapped as they have been for 

vii 

Introduction 

so many centuries, the former would speedily prove their superiority, as the 
Amazons of old did; which latter (as the writings even of their especial enemies, the 
Greeks, unwillingly admit) when overcome, were conquered by superior numbers, 
not by superior valour. However, Abraham the Jew grudgingly admits that the 
Sacred Magic may be attained by a virgin, while at the same time dissuading any 
one from teaching it to her! The numerous advanced female occult students of the 
present day are the best answer to this. 

But notwithstanding the forementioned shortcomings, his advice on the 
manner of using Magical Power, when acquired, to the honour of God, the welfare 
and relief of our neighbour, and for the benefit of the whole Animate Creation, is 
worthy of the highest respect; and no one can peruse it without feeling that his 
highest wish was to act up to his belief. 

His counsel, however, of a retired life after attaining Magical Power by his 
system (I do not speak of the retirement during the six months' preparation for the 
same) is not borne out by his own account of his life, wherein we find him so 
constantly involved in the contests and convulsions of the time. Also, however much 
the life of a hermit or anchorite may appear to be advocated, we rarely, if ever, find 
it followed by those Adepts whom I may perhaps call the initiated and 
wonderworking medium between the Great Concealed Adepts and the Outer 
World. An example of the former class we may find in our Author, an example of 
the latter in Abra-Melin. 

The particular scheme or system of Magic advocated in the present work is to 
an extent "sui generis," but to an extent only. It is rather the manner of its 
application which makes it unique. In Magic, that is to say, the Science of the 
Control of the Secret Forces of Nature, there have always been two great schools, the 
one great in Good, the other in Evil; the former the Magic of light, the latter that 
of Darkness; the former usually depending on the knowledge and invocation of the 
Angelic natures, the latter on the method of evocation of the Demonic races. 
Usually the former is termed White Magic, as opposed to the latter, or Black 
Magic. 

The invocation of Angelic Forces, then, is an idea common in works of Magic, 
as also are the Ceremonies of Pact with and submission to the Evil Spirits. The 
system, however, taught in the present work is based on the following conception: 
(oc) That the Good Spirits and Angelic Powers of light are superior in power to the 
Fallen Spirits of Darkness. (f5) That these latter as a punishment have been 
condemned to the service of the Initiates of the Magic of light. (This Idea is to be 
found also in the Koran or, as it is frequently and perhaps more correctly written, 
"Qur-an ".) (y) As a consequence of this doctrine, all ordinary material effects and 
phenomena are produced by the labour of the Evil Spirits under the command 

Vlll 

Introduction 

usually of the Good. (8) That consequently whenever the Evil Demons can escape 
from the control of the Good, there is no evil that they will not work by way of 
vengeance, (e) That therefore sooner than obey man, they will try to make him 
their servant, by inducing him to conclude Pacts and Agreements with them. (Q 
That to further this project, they will use every means that offers to obsess him. (if) 
That in order to become an Adept, therefore, and dominate them; the greatest 
possible firmness of will, parity of soul and intent, and power of self control is 
necessary. (0) That this is only to be attained by self-abnegation on every plane, (l) 
That man, therefore, is the middle nature, and natural controller of the middle 
nature between the Angels and the Demons, and that therefore to each man is 
attached naturally both a Guardian Angel and a Malevolent Demon, and also 
certain Spirits that may become Familiars, so that with him it rests to give the 
victory unto the which he will, (k) That, therefore, in order to control and make 
service of the Lower and Evil, the knowledge of the Higher and Good is requisite 
(ie., in the language of the Theosophy of the present day, the knowledge of the 
Higher Self). 

From this it results that the magnum opus propounded in this work is: by 
purity and self-denial to obtain the knowledge Of and conversation with one's 
Guardian Angel, so that thereby and thereafter we may obtain the right of using 
the Evil Spirits for our servants in all material matters. 

This, then, is the system of the Secret Magic of Abra-Melin, the Mage, as 
taught by his disciple Abraham the Jew; and elaborated down to the smallest 
points. 

Except in the professed Black Magic Grimoires, the necessity of the invocation 
of the Divine and Angelic Forces to control the Demons is invariably insisted upon 
in the operations of evocation described and taught in mediaeval Magical 
Manuscripts and published works. So that it is not so much, as I have before said, 
this circumstance, as the mode of its development by the Six Moons' preparation, 
which is unusual; while again, the thorough and complete classification of the 
Demons with their offices, and of the effects to be produced by their services, is not 
to be found elsewhere. 

Apart fiom the interest attaching to the description of his travels, the careful 
manner in which Abraham has made note of the various persons he had met 
professing to be in the possession of Magical powers, what they really could do and 
could not do, and the reasons of the success or failure of their experiments, has a 
particular value of its own. 

The idea of the employment of a Child as Clairvoyant in the invocation of the 
Guardian Angel is not unusual; for example, in the "Mendal, " a style of Oriental 
Divination familiar to all readers ofWilkie Collins' novel, "The Moonstone, " ink 

ix 

Introduction 

is poured into the palm of a Childs hand, who, after certain mystical words being 
recited by the Operator, beholds visions clairvoyantly therein. The celebrated 
evocation at which the great Mediaeval Sculptor, Benvenuto Cellini, is said to have 
assisted, also was in part worked by the aid of a Child as Seer. Cagliostro also is 
said to have availed himself of the services of Children in this particular. But for 
my part I cannot understand the imperative necessity of the employment of a Child 
in the Angelic evocation, if the Operator be pure in mind, and has developed the 
clairvoyant faculty which is latent in every human being, and which is based on 
the utilisation of the thoughtvision. This thought-vision is exercised almost 
unconsciously by everyone in thinking of either a place, person, or thing which they 
know well; immediately, coincident with the thought, the image springs before the 
mental sight; and it is hut the conscious and voluntary development of this which is 
the basis of what is commonly called clairvoyance. Among the Highlanders of 
Scotland, the faculty, as is well known, is of common manifestation; and the 
English it is usually spoken of as "by Second-Sight". 

Unfortunately, like far too many modern Occultists, Abraham the Jew shows a 
marked intolerance of Magical systems differing from his own; even the renowned 
name of Petrus di Abano is not sufficient to save the "Heptameron or Magical 
Elements" from condemnation in the concluding part of the Third Book. Works on 
Magic, Written Conjurations, Pentacles, Seals, and Symbols, the employment of 
Magical Circles, the use of any language but one's mother tongue, appear at first 
sight to be damned wholesale, though on a more careful examination of the text I 
think we shall find that it is rather their abuse through ignorance of their meaning 
which he intends to decry, than their intelligent and properly regulated use. 

It will be well here to carefully examine these points from the occult standpoint 
of an Initiate, and for the benefit of real students. 

Abraham in several places insists that the basis of this system of Sacred Magic 
is to be found in the Qabalah. Now, he expressly states that he has instructed his 
eldest son, Joseph, herein as being his right by primogeniture, even as he himself had 
received somewhat of Qabalistic instruction from his father, Simon. But this system 
of Magic he bequeaths to his younger son, Lamech, expressly as a species of 
recompense to him for not being taught the Qabalah, his status as a younger son 
being apparently a serious traditional disqualification. This being so, the reason is 
evident why he warns Lamech against the use of certain Seals, Pentacles, 
incomprehensible words, etc.; because most of these being based on the secrets of the 
Qabalah, their use by a person ignorant hereof might be excessively dangerous 
through the not only possible but Probable Perversion of the Secret Formulas 

See Appendix B. 
4 Born about 1250. 

Introduction 

therein contained. Any advanced student of Occultism who is conversant with 
Mediaeval works on Magic, whether MS. or printed, knows the enormous and 
incredible number of errors in the Sigils, Pentacles, and Hebrew or Chaldee 
Names, which have arisen from ignorant transcription and reproduction; this being 
carried to such an extent that in some cases the use of the distorted formulas given 
would actually have the effect of producing the very opposite result to that expected 
from them. (I have commented at length on this subject in my notes to the "Key of 
Solomon, " published by me a few years ago.) Wherefore Abraham the Jew it 
appears to me, in his anxiety to save his son from dangerous errors in Magical 
working has preferred to endeavour to fill him with contempt for any other systems 
and methods of operation than the one here laid down. For also besides the 
unintentional perversions of Magical Symbols I have above mentioned, there was 
further the circumstance not only possible but probable of the many Black Magic 
Grimoires falling into his hands, as they evidently had into Abraham 's, the Symbols 
in which are in many cases intentional perversions of Divine Names and Seals, so 
as to attract the Evil Spirits and repel the Good. 

For the Third Book of this work is crowded with Qabalistic Squares of Letters, 
which are simply so many Pentacles, and in which the Names employed are the 
very factors which make them of value. Among them we find a form of the 
celebrated Sator, Arepo, Tenet, Opera, Rotas, which is one of the Pentacles in the 
"Key of Solomon ". Abraham 's formula is slightly different: — 

s 

A 

L 

O 

M 

A 

R 

E 

P 

O 

L 

E 

M 

E 

L 

O 

P 

E 

R 

A 

M 

O 

L 

A 

S 

and is to be used for obtaining the love of a maiden. 

The Pentacle in my "Key of Solomon the King" is classed under Saturn, while 
the above is applied to the nature of Venus. I give the Hebrew form (see Appendix 
A, Table of Hebrew and Chaldee Letters) of Equivalents: 

XI 

Introduction 

Or in Latin Letters: 

Sh 

A 

T 

V 

R 

A 

R 

H 

P 

V 

T 

H 

N 

H 

T 

V 

P 

H 

R 

A 

R 

V 

T 

A 

Sh 

S 

A 

T 

O 

R 

A 

R 

E 

P 

O 

T 

E 

N 

E 

T 

O 

P 

E 

R 

A 

R 

O 

T 

A 

S 

Ln the "Key of Solomon " it is (as being a Pentacle) inscribed within a double 
circle, wherein is written the following versicle from Psalm Ixxii., v. 8 "His 
dominion shall be also from the one sea unto the other, and from the flood unto the 
world's end". Ln the Hebrew, this versicle consists of exactly twenty five letters, the 
number of the letters of the square. Lt will be at once noticed that both this form 
and that given by Abraham the Jew are perfect examples of double Acrostics, 
that is, that they read in every direction, whether horizontal or perpendicular, 
whether backwards or forwards. But the form given as a Pentacle in the "Key of 
Solomon the King" is there said to be of value in adversity, and for repressing the 
Pride of the Spirits. 

This example therefore shows clearly that it is not so much the use of Symbolic 
Pentacles that Abraham is opposed to, as their ignorant perversions and 
inappropriate use. 

Lt is also to be observed, that while many of the Symbolic Squares of Letters of 
the Third Book present the nature of the double Acrostic, there are also many which 
do not, and in the case of a great number the letters do not fill up the square 

xn 

Introduction 

entirely, but are arranged somewhat in the form of a gnomon, etc. Others again 
leave the centre part of the square blank. 

In Appendix C to the Introduction I will, for the sake of comparison, give 
some examples of Angelic invocation taken from other sources. 

Abraham the Jew repeatedly admits, as I have before urged, that this 
particular System of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin has its Basis in the Qabalah. 
It is well to examine what is here meant. The Qabalah itself is divided into many 
parts; the great bulk of it is of a mystic doctrinal nature, giving the inner Occult 
meaning of the Jewish Sacred Writings. Also it employs the numerical values of the 
Hebrew letters, to draw analogies between words, the total numerical value of 
whose letters is the same; this branch alone is a most complicated study, and it will 
be foreign to our purpose to go into it here; the more so as my work, the "Kabbalah 
Unveiled, " treats at length of all these points. The so-called Practical Qabalah is 
the application of the mystic teachings to the production of Magical effects. For the 
classification of Divine and Angelic Names; of Hosts and Orders of Angels, Spirits 
and Demons; of Particular Names of Archangels, Angels, Intelligences, and 
Demons, is to be found carried out even to minute detail in the Qabalah, so that 
the knowledge hereof can give a critical appreciation of the correspondences, 
sympathies, and antipathies obtaining in the Invisible World. Therefore what 
Abraham means is, that this system of Sacred Magic is thoroughly reliable, because 
correct in all its attributions, and that this being so, there is no chance of the 
Operator using Names and Formulas on wrong occasions and in error. 

But also it is notable that Abraham the Jew (probably again with the intent of 
confusing lamech as little as possible) speaks only of two great classes of Spirits: the 
Angels and the Devils; the former to control, the latter to be controlled; and leaves 
entirely out of consideration, or rather does not describe that vast race of beings, the 
Elemental Spirits, who in themselves comprise an infinitude of various divisions of 
classification, some of these being good, some evil, and a great proportion neither 
the one nor the other. Evidently, also, many of the results proposed to be attained in 
the Third Book, would imply the use of the Elemental Spirits rather than that of 
the Demons. No advanced Adept, such as Abraham evidently was, could possibly be 
ignorant of their existence, power, and value; and we are therefore forced to 
conclude either that he was unwilling to reveal this knowledge to lamech; or, 
which is infinitely more probable, that he feared to confuse him by the large 
amount of additional instruction which would be necessary to make him 
thoroughly understand their classification, nature, and offices. This latter line of 
action would be the less imperative, as the correctness of the symbols of the Third 
Book would minimise chances of error; and what Abraham is undertaking to teach 

See Appendix C, "Examples of Angelic Invocation" 

xiii 

Introduction 

Lamech, is how to arrive at practical Magical results; rather than the Secret 
Wisdom of the Qabalah. 

It is entirely beyond the scope of this Introduction for me to give here any 
lengthy dissertation on the natures, good or evil, of Spiritual beings. I will, 
therefore, only state briefly and concisely the principal differences between Angels, 
Elementals, and Devils. 

We may then conclude that Angels, though themselves divided into numerous 
orders and classes, possess generally the following characteristics: That they are 
entirely good in nature and operation, the conscient administrators of the Divine 
Will upon the plane of the material universe; that they are responsible, not 
irresponsible agents, and therefore capable of fall; and that they are independent of 
the currents of the infinite Secret Forces of Nature, and can therefore act beyond 
them, though their classification and qualities will cause them to be more 
sympathetic with certain among these forces than with the rest, and this in varying 
degree. Also that they are superior in power to Men, Spirits, Elementals, and 
Devils. 

The Elementals on the other hand, though consisting of an infinitude of 
classes, are the Forces of the Elements of Nature, the administrators of the currents 
thereof; and can therefore never act beyond and independently of their own 
particular currents. In a sense, therefore, they are irresponsible for the action of a 
current as a whole, though responsible for the part thereof in which they 
immediately act. Therefore also they are at the same time subject to the general 
current of the Force, wherein they live, move, and have their being; though superior 
to the immediate and particular part of it which they direct. Such races, superior to 
man in intuition, and magical powers; inferior to him in other ways; superior to 
him in their power in a particular current of an Element; inferior to him in only 
partaking of the nature of that one Element; are of necessity to be found constantly 
recurring in all the Mythologies of Antiquity. The Dwarfs and Elves of the 
Scandinavians; the Nymphs, Hamadryads, and Nature Spirits of the Greeks; the 
Fairies good and bad of the legends dear to our childish days the host of Mermaids, 
Satyrs, Fauns, Sylphs, and Fays; the Forces intended to be attracted and propitiated 
by the Fetishes of the Negro-Race; are for the most part no other thing than the 
ill-understood manifestations of this great class, the Elementals. Among these, some, 
as I have before observed, are good; such are the Salamanders, Undines, Sylphs, and 
Gnomes, of the Rosicrucian Philosophy; many are frightfully malignant, delighting 
in every kind of evil, and might easily be mistaken for Devils by the uninitiated, 
save that their power is less; a great proportion are neither good nor evil, 
irrationally working either; just as a monkey or a parrot might act; in fact such 
closely resemble animals in their nature, and especially combinations of animals, in 
which forms distorted and mingled, would lie their symbolic manifestation. 

xiv 

Introduction 

Another very large class, would not act irrationally in this manner; but with 
intent, only always following the predominant force either good or evil in their 
then entourage; a spirit of this kind, for example, attracted into an assembly of 
good persons would endeavour to excite their ideas towards good; attracted among 
evil-minded persons would incite them mentally to crime. Among how many 
criminals is not their only excuse that they "thought they kept hearing 
something telling them to commit the crime"! Yet these suggestions would not 
always arise from Elementals alone, but frequently from the depraved astral 
remnants of deceased evil persons. 

Devils, on the other hand, are far more powerful than Elementals, but their 
action for Evil is parallel to that of the Good Angels for Good; and their 
malignancy is far more terrible than that of the Evil Elementals, for not being, like 
them, subjected to the limits of a certain current, their sphere of operation extends 
over a far greater area; while the Evil they commit is never irrational or 
mechanical, but worked with full consciousness and intent. 

I do not agree entirely with the manner of behaviour, advised by Abraham 
towards the Spirits; on the contrary, the true Initiates have always maintained that 
the very greatest courtesy should be manifested by the Exorciser, and that it is only 
when they are obstinate and recalcitrant that severer measures should be resorted to; 
and that even with the Devils we should not reproach them for their condition; 
seeing that a contrary line of action is certain to lead the Magician into error. But, 
perhaps, Abraham has rather intended to warn Lamech against the danger of 
yielding to them in an Exorcism even in the slightest degree. 

The word "Demon " is evidently employed in this work almost as a synonym of 
Devil; but, as most educated people are aware, it is derived from the Greek 
"Daimon," which anciently simply meant any Spirit, good or bad. 

A work filled with suggestive Magical references is the well-known "Arabian 
Nights, " and it is interesting to notice the number of directions in the Third Book 
of this work for producing similar effects to those there celebrated. 

For example, the ninth chapter of the Third Book gives the symbols to be 
employed for changing human beings into animals, one of the commonest incidents 
in the "Arabian Nights, " as in the story of the "first old man and the hind, " that of 
the "three Calendars and the five ladies of Bagdad, " that of'Beder and Giauhare, " 
etc., etc.; as distinct from the voluntary transformation of the Magician into 
another form, as exemplified in the "story of the Second Calendar, " the symbols for 
which are given in the twenty-first chapter of our Third Book. 

Again these chapters will recall to many of my readers the extraordinary 
magical effects which Faust is said to have produced; who, by the way, as I have 
before remarked, was in all probability contemporary with Abraham the Jew. 

xv 

Introduction 

But the mode of their production as given in this work is not the Black Magic 
of Pact and Devil-worship, against which our Author so constantly inveighs, but 
instead a system of Qabalistic Magic, similar to that of the "Key of Solomon the 
King" and the "Clavicles of Rabbi Solomon, " though differing in the circumstance 
of the prior invocation of the Guardian Angel once for all, while in the works I 
have just mentioned the Angels are invoked in each Evocation by means of the 
Magical Circle. Such works as these, then, and their like, it could not be the 
intention of Abraham to decry, seeing that like his system they are founded on the 
Secret Knowledge of the Qabalah; as this in its turn was derived from that mighty 
scheme of Ancient Wisdom, the Initiated Magic of Egypt. For to any deep student 
at the same time of the Qabalah and of modern Egyptology, the root and origin of 
the former is evidently to be sought in that country of Mysteries, the home of the 
Gods whose symbols and classification formed so conspicuous a part of the Sacred 
Rites; and from which even to the present day, so many recipes of Magic have 
descended. For we must make a very careful distinction between the really Ancient 
Egyptian Magic, and the Arabian ideas and traditions prevailing in Egypt in 
recent times. I think it is the learned Lenormant who points out in his work on 
Chaldean Magic, that the great difference between this and the Egyptian was that 
the Magician of the former School indeed invoked the Spirits, but that the latter 
allied himself with and took upon himself the characters and names of the Gods to 
command the Spirits by, in his Exorcism; which latter mode of working would not 
only imply on his part a critical knowledge of the nature and power of the Gods; 
but also the affirmation of his reliance upon them, and his appeal to them for aid 
to control the forces evoked; in other words, the most profound system of White 
Magic which it is possible to conceive. 

The next point worthy of notice is what Abraham urges regarding the 
preferability of employing one 's mother tongue both in prayer and evocation; his 
chief reason being the absolute necessity of comprehending utterly and thoroughly 
with the whole soul and heart, that which the lips are formulating. While fully 
admitting the necessity of this, I yet wish to state some reasons in favour of the 
employment of a language other than one's own. Chief, and first, that it aids the 
mind to conceive the higher aspect of the Operation; when a different language and 
one looked upon as sacred is employed, and the phrases in which do not therefore 
suggest matters of ordinary life. Next, that Hebrew, Chaldee, Egyptian, Greek, 
Latin, etc., if properly pronounced are more sonorous in vibration than most 
modern languages, and from that circumstance can suggest greater solemnity. Also 
that the farther a Magical Operation is removed from the commonplace, the better. 
But I perfectly agree with Abraham, that it is before all things imperative that the 
Operator should thoroughly comprehend the import of his Prayer or Conjuration. 

xvi 

Introduction 

Furthermore the words in these ancient languages imply "formulas of 
correspondences" with more ease than those of the modern ones. 

Pentacles and Symbols are valuable as an equilibrated and fitting basis for the 
reception of Magical force; but unless the Operator can really attract that force to 
them, they are nothing but so many dead, and to him worthless, diagrams. But 
used by the Initiate who fully comprehends their meaning, they become to him a 
powerful protection and aid, seconding and focussing the workings of his Will. 

At the risk of repeating what I have elsewhere said, I must caution the Occult 
student against forming a mistaken judgment from what Abraham the Jew says 
regarding the use of Magic Circles and of Licensing the Spirits to Depart. It is true 
that in the Convocation of the Spirits as laid down by him, it is not necessary to 
form a Magic Circle for defence and protection; but why*. — Because the whole 
group of the Bedchamber, Oratory, and Terrace, are consecrated by the 
preparatory Ceremonies of the previous Six Moons; so that the whole place is 
protected, and the Magician is, as it were, residing constantly within a Magic 
Circle. Therefore also the Licensing to Depart may be to a great extent dispensed 
with because the Spirits cannot break into the consecrated limit of the periphery of 
the walls of the house. But let the worker of ordinary Evocations be assured that 
were this not so, and the Convocation was performed in an unconsecrated place, 
without any Magical Circle having been traced for defence, the invocation to 
visible appearance of such fearful Potencies as Amaymon, Egyn, and Beelzebub, 
would probably result in the death of the Exorcist on the spot; such death presenting 
the symptoms of one arising from Epilepsy, Apoplexy, or Strangulation, varying 
with the conditions obtaining at the time. Also the Circle having been once formed, 
let the Evocator guard carefully against either passing, or stooping, or leaning 
beyond, its limits during the progress of the Exorcism, before the license to depart 
has been given. Because that, even apart from other causes, the whole object and 
effect of the Circle working, is to create abnormal atmospheric conditions, by 
exciting a different status of force within the Circle to that which exists without it; 
so that even without any malignant occult action of the Spirits, the sudden and 
unprepared change of atmosphere will seriously affect the Exorciser in the intensely 
strained state of nervous tension he will then be in. Also the License to Depart 
should not be omitted, because the Evil Forces will be only too glad to revenge 
themselves on the Operator for having disturbed them, should he incautiously quit 
the Circle without having previously sent them away, and if necessary even forced 
them to go by contrary conjurations. 

I do not share Abraham s opinion as to the necessity of withholding the 
Operation of this Sacred Magic from a Prince or Potentate. Every great system of 
Occultism has its own Occult Guards, who will know how to avenge mistaken 
tampering therewith. 

xvii 

Introduction 

At the risk of repeating myself I will once more earnestly caution the Student 
against the dangerous automatic nature of certain of the Magical Squares of the 
Third Book; for, if left carelessly about, they are very liable to obsess sensitive 
persons, children, or even animals. 

Abrahams remarks concerning the errors of Astrology in the common sense, 
and of the attribution of the Planetary Hours are worthy of careful note. Yet I have 
found the ordinary attribution of the Planetary Hours effective to an extent. 

In all cases where there is anything difficult or obscure in the text, I have 
added copious explanatory notes; so many indeed as to form a species of 
commentary in parts. Especially have those on the Names of the Spirits cost me 
incredible labour, from the difficulty of identifying their root forms. The same may 
be said of those on the Symbols of the Third Book. 

Wherever I have employed parentheses in the actual text, they shew certain 
words or phrases supplied to make the meaning clearer. 

In conclusion I will only say that I have written this explanatory Introduction 
purely and solely as a help to genuine Occult students; and that for the opinion of 
the ordinary literary critic who neither understands nor believes in Occultism, I 
care nothing. 

87 Rue Mozart, Auteuil, Paris. 

XVlll 

Introduction 

Sound or Power 

Hebrew 

and 
Chaldee 
Letters 

Numerical 
Value* 

How expressed 
in this work by 
Roman letters 

Hebrew Name of Letter 

Signification of Name 

1 

a (soft breathing) 

it 

1 

A 

Aleph 

Ox, also Duke, or Leader 

2 

£, bh (v) 

2 

2 

B 

Beth 

House 

3 

g (hard), g/> 

i 

3 

G 

Gimel 

Camel 

4 

d, dh (flat */>) 

-i 

4 

D 

Daleth 

Door 

5 

/; (rough breathing) 

n 

5 

H 

He 

Window 

6 

V, U, 

i 

6 

V 

Vau 

Peg, Nail 

7 

z, dz 

t 

7 

z 

Zayin 

Weapon, Sword 

8 

ch (guttural) 

n 

8 

Ch 

Cheth 

Enclosure, Fence 

9 

t (strong) 

ta 

9 

T 

Teth 

Serpent 

10 

i, y (as in yes) 

* 

10 

I 

Yod 

Hand 

11 

k, kh 

2 Final = "| 

20 Final = 500 

K 

Kaph 

Palm of the Hand 

12 

I 

9 

30 

L 

Lamed 

Ox-Goad 

13 

m 

& Final = S 

40 Final = 600 

M 

Mem 

Water 

14 

n 

5 Final = } 

50 Final = 700 

N 

Nun 

Fish 

15 

s 

a 

60 

S 

Samekh 

Prop, Support 

16 

o, aa, ng (guttural) 

V 

70 

o 

Ayin 

Eye 

17 

p.ph 

S Final =f| 

80 Final = 800 

p 

Pe 

Mouth 

18 

ts, tz, j 

2 Final =f 

90 Final = 900 

Tz 

Tzaddi 

Fishing-hook 

19 

q, qh (guttural) 

P 

100 

Q 

Qoph 

Back of the head 

20 

r 

n 

200 

R 

Resh 

Head 

21 

sh, s 

& 

300 

Sh 

Shin 

Tooth 

22 

th, t 

n 

400 

Th 

Tau 

Sign of the Cross 

Thousands are denoted by a larger letter; thus an Aleph larger than the rest of the letters among which it is, signifies not 1, but 1000. 
The Finals are not always considered as bearing an increased numerical value. 

xix 

Introduction 

(APPENDIX B.) 

EMPLOYMENT OF A CHILD-CLAIRVOYANT BY CAGLIOSTRO. 

The well-known Joseph Balsamo, Count Cagliostro, is said to have been 
born at Palermo in 1743. On his trial at Rome in 1780, and at Zurich in 1791, 
he was accused of "having practised all kinds of impositions; of gold making, 
and of possessing the secret of prolonging life; of teaching Cabalistic Arts; of 
summoning and exorcising Spirits; of having actually foretold future things 
especially in small and secret assemblies, and chiefly by means of a little boy 
whom he took aside with him into a separate room, in order to fit him for 
divining". 

With regard to the manner in which he employed this Child-Clairvoyant, 
the documents of the trial give the following information:- "This Child had to 
kneel before a small table, on which a vessel of water and some lighted candles 
were placed. He then instructed the boy to look into the vessel of water, and so 
commenced his conjurations; he next laid his hand on the head of the Child, 
and in this position addressed a prayer to God for a successful issue of the 
experiment. The Child now became clairvoyant, and said at first that he saw 
something white; then that he saw visions, an Angel, etc." 

Again the documents say, "That he worked through the usual ceremonies, 
and that all was wonderfully corroborated through the appearance of the 
Angel". 

Cagliostro is also said at Milan to have availed himself of the services of 
an orphan maiden of marriageable age as clairvoyant. 

It will be remarked that this modus operandi differs strongly from that 
employed by the mesmerists and hypnotists of to-day with their clairvoyants. For 
here the whole force of the Operator was concentrated on a magical ritual of 
evocation, the hand being merely laid on the child's head to form a link; and it 
in no way appears that the child was reduced to the miserable condition of 
automatic trance now practised, and which a really advanced Occultist would 
be the first to condemn, as knowing its dangers. 

On the other hand, there seems to be a distinct similarity between 
Cagliostro's method, and the system of Oriental Divination called the Mendal, 
to which I have previously referred. 

xx 

Introduction 

(APPENDIX C.) 

EXAMPLES OF OTHER METHODS OF ANGELIC EVOCATION. 

For the benefit of the Occult Student I here give two other systems of 
Angelic Evocation. The first is taken from that part of the Book called 
"Barrett's Magus" (1801), which is entitled "the Key to Ceremonial Magic". 
The second is copied from my "Key of Solomon the King". 

From 

"The Perfection and Key of . . . Ceremonial Magic"; 

being the second part of the second Book of 

"The Magus or 

Celestial Intelligencer" 

by 
Francis Barrett, F.R.C. 

"The good Spirits may be invocated of us, or by us, divers ways, and they 
in sundry shapes and manners offer themselves to us, for they openly speak to 
those that watch, and do offer themselves to our sight, or do inform us by 
dreams and by oracle of those things which we have a great desire to know. 
Whoever therefore would call any good Spirit to speak or appear in sight, he 
must particularly observe two things; one whereof is about the disposition of 
the invocant, the other concerning those things which are outwardly to be 
adhibited to the invocation for the conformity of the Spirit to be called. 

"It is necessary therefore that the invocant religiously dispose himself for 
the space of many days to such a mystery, and to conserve himself during the 
time chaste, abstinent, and to abstract himself as much as he can from all 
manner of foreign and secular business; likewise he should observe fasting, as 
much as shall seem convenient to him, and let him daily, between sun rising 
and setting, being clothed in pure white linen, seven times call upon God, and 
make a deprecation unto the Angels to be called and invocated, according to 
the rule which we have before taught. Now the number of days of fasting and 
preparation is commonly one month, i.e., the time of a whole lunation. Now, 
in the Cabala, we generally prepare ourselves forty days before. 

"Now concerning the place, it must be chosen clean, pure, close, quiet, 
free from all manner of noise, and not subject to any stranger's sight. This 
place must first of all be exorcised and consecrated; and let there be a Table or 

' Published originally by Lackington & Allen, London, 1801; but reprinted and re-issued by Bernard 
Quaritch, Piccadilly, some years since. 

xxi 

Introduction 

Altar placed therein, covered with a clean white linen cloth, and set towards 
the east: and on each side thereof place two consecrated wax-lights burning, 
the flame thereof ought not to go out all these days. In the middle of the Altar 
let there be placed lamens, or the holy paper we have before described, covered 
with fine linen, which is not to be opened until the end of the days of 
consecration. You shall also have in readiness a precious perfume and a pure 
anointing oil. And let them both be kept consecrated. Then set a censer on the 
head of the Altar, wherein you shall kindle the holy fire, and make a precious 
perfume every day that you pray. 

"Now for your habit, you shall have a long garment of white linen, close 
before and behind, which may come down quite over the feet, and gird 
yourself about the loins with a girdle. You shall likewise have a veil made of 
pure white linen on which must be wrote in a gilt lamen, the name 
Tetragrammaton; all which things are to be consecrated and sanctified in order. 
But you must not go into this holy place till it be first washed and covered 
with a cloth new and clean, and then you may enter, but with your feet naked 
and bare; and when you enter therein you shall sprinkle with holy water, then 
make a perfume upon the altar; and then on your knees pray before the altar as 
we have directed. 

"Now when the time is expired, on the last day, you shall fast more 
strictly; and fasting on the day following, at the rising of the sun, enter the 
holy place, using the ceremonies before spoken of, first by sprinkling thyself, 
then, making, a perfume, you shall sign the cross with holy oil on the 
forehead, and anoint your eyes, using prayer in all these consecrations. Then 
open the lamen and pray before the Altar upon your knees; and then an 
invocation may be made as follows: 

AN INVOCATION OF THE GOOD SPIRITS. 

"In the Name of the Blessed and Holy Trinity, I do desire ye, strong and 
mighty Angels (here name the Spirit or Spirits you would have appear), that if it 
be the Divine Will of Him Who is called Tetragrammaton, etc., the Holy God, 
the Father, that ye take upon ye some shape as best becometh your celestial 
nature, and appear to us visibly here in this place, and answer our demands, in 
as far as we shall not transgress the bounds of the Divine mercy and goodness, 
by requesting unlawful knowledge; but that thou wilt graciously shew us what 
things are most profitable for us to know and do, to the glory and honour of 
His Divine Majesty Who liveth and reigneth world without end. Amen. 

"Lord, Thy Will be done on earth as it is in heaven - make clean our 
hearts within us, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from us. O Lord, by Thy Name 
we have called them, suffer them to administer unto us. 

xxn 

Introduction 

"And that all things may work together for Thy Honour and Glory to 
Whom with Thee, the Son and blessed Spirit, be ascribed all might, majesty, 
and dominion, world without end. Amen. 

"The Invocation being made, the Good Angels will appear unto you 
which you desire, which you shall entertain with a chaste communication, and 
licence them to depart. 

"Now the Lamen which is used to invoke any Good Spirit must be made 
after the following manner: either in metal conformable or in new wax mixed 
with convenient spices and colours; or it may be made with pure white paper 
with convenient colours, and the outward form of it may be either square, 
circular, or triangular, or of the like sort, according to the rule of the numbers; 
in which there must be written the Divine Names, as well general as special. 
And in the centre of the Lamen draw a hexagon or character of six corners; in 
the middle thereof write the Name and Character of the Star, or of the Spirit 
his Governor, to whom the Good Spirit that is to be called is subject. And 
about this Character let there be placed so many Characters of five corners, or 
pentacles, as the Spirits we would call together at once. But if we should call 
only one, nevertheless there must be made four pentagons, wherein the name 
of the Spirit or Spirits with their characters are to be written. Now this Lamen 
ought to be composed when the Moon is in her increase, on those days and 
hours which agree to the Spirit; and if we take a fortunate planet therewith, it 
will be the better for the producing the effect; which Table or Lamen being 
rightly made in the manner we have fully described, must be consecrated 
according to the rules above delivered. 

"And this is the way of making the general Table or Lamen for the 
invocating of all Spirits whatever; the form whereof you may see in plates of 
pentacles, seals, and lamens. 

"We will yet declare unto you another rite more easy to perform this 
thing: Let the Man who wishes to receive an oracle from a Spirit, be chaste, 
pure, and sanctified; then a place being chosen pure, clean, and covered 
everywhere with clean and white linen, on the Lord's-day in the new of the 
Moon, let him enter into that place clothed with white linen; let him exorcise 
the place, bless it, and make a circle therein with a consecrated coal; let there 
be written in the outer part of the Circle the Names of the Angels; in the inner 
part thereof write the Mighty Names of God; and let be placed within the 
Circle, at the Four Parts of the World, the vessels for the perfumes. Then 
being washed and fasting, let him enter the place, and pray towards the East 
this whole Psalm:- "Blessed are the undefiled in the way, etc.". Psalm cix. 

Probably an error for "hexagram" or "hexangle". 
Probably an error for "pentagrams," or "pentangles". 
Ie., The Cardinal Points, or Quarters. 

XX111 

Introduction 

Then make a fumigation, and deprecate the Angels by the said Divine Names, 
that they will appear unto you, and reveal or discover that which you so 
earnestly desire; and do this continually for six days washed, and fasting. On 
the seventh day being washed and fasting, enter the Circle, perfume it, and 
anoint thyself with holy oil upon the forehead, eyes, and in the palms of both 
hands, and upon the feet; then with bended knees, say the Psalm aforesaid, 
with Divine and Angelical Names. Which being said, arise, and walk round 
the Circle from East to West, until thou shalt be wearied with a giddiness of thy 
head and brain, then straightway fall down in the Circle, where thou mayest 
rest, and thou wilt be wrapped up in an ecstasy; and a Spirit will appear and 
inform thee of all things necessary to be known. We must observe also, that in 
the Circle there ought to be four holy candles burning at the Four Parts of the 
World, which ought not to want light for the space of a week. 

"And the manner of fasting is this: to abstain from all things having a life 
of sense, and from those which do proceed from them, let him drink only pure 
running water; neither is there any food or wine to be taken till the going 
down of the Sun. 

"Let the perfume and the holy anointing oil be made as is set forth in 
Exodus, and other holy books of the Bible. It is also to be observed, that as 
often as he enters the Circle he has upon his forehead a golden lamen, upon 
which must be written the Name Tetragrammaton, in the manner we have 
before mentioned." 

In "The Key of Solomon the King" (Book II. - Chapter XXI.) will be 
found other directions for invoking spirits as follows: 

"Make a small Book containing the Prayers for all the Operations, the 
Names of the Angels in the form of Litanies, their Seals and Characters; the 
which being done thou shalt consecrate the same unto God and unto the pure 
Spirits in the manner following: 

"Thou shalt set in the destined place a small table covered with a white 
cloth, whereon thou shalt lay the Book opened at the Great Pentacle which 
should be drawn on the first leaf of the said Book; and having kindled a lamp 
which should be suspended above the centre of the table, thou shalt surround 
the said table with a white curtain; clothe thyself in the proper vestments, 
and holding the Book open, repeat upon thy knees the following prayer with 
great humility: 

10 Published by G. Redway, London, 1889. 
So as to make a species of small tabernacle around the altar. 

xxiv 

Introduction 

THE PRAYER. 

"Adonai, Elohim, El, Eheieh Asher Eheieh, Prince of Princes, 
Existence of Existences, have mercy upon me, and cast Thine eyes upon Thy 
servant (N.) who invoketh Thee most devoutly, and supplicateth Thee by Thy 
Holy and tremendous Name, Tetragrammaton, to be propitious and to order 
Thine Angels and Spirits to come and take up their abode in this place; O ye 
Angels and Spirits of the Stars, O all ye Angels and Elementary Spirits, O all ye 
Spirits present before the Face of God, I the Minister and faithful Servant of 
the Most High conjure ye, let God Himself, the Existence of Existences, 
conjure ye to come and be present at this Operation; I the Servant of God, 
most humbly entreat ye. Amen. 

"After which thou shalt incense it with the incense proper to the Planet 
and the Day, and thou shalt replace the Book on the aforesaid table, taking 
heed that the Fire of the Lamp be kept up continually during the operation, 
and keeping the curtains closed. Repeat the same Ceremony for seven days, 
beginning with Saturday, and perfuming the Book each day with the Incense 
proper to the Planet ruling the day and hour, and taking heed that the Lamp 
shall burn both day and night; after the which thou shalt shut up the Book in 
a small Drawer under the table, made expressly for it, until thou shalt have 
occasion to use it; and every time that thou wishest to use it, clothe thyself 
with thy vestments, kindle the lamp, and repeat upon thy knees the aforesaid 
prayer, Adonai, Elohim, etc. 

"It is necessary also in the Consecration of the Book, to summon all the 
Angels whose Names are written therein in the form of Litanies, the which 
thou shalt do with devotion; and even if the Angels and Spirits appear not in 
the Consecration of the Book, be not thou astonished thereat, seeing that they 
are of a pure nature, and consequently have much difficulty in familiarising 
themselves with men who are inconstant and impure, but the Ceremonies and 
Characters being correctly carried out, devoutly, and with perseverance, they 
will be constrained to come, and it will at length happen that at thy first 
invocation thou wilt be able to see and communicate with them. But I advise 
thee to undertake nothing unclean or impure, for then thy importunity, far 
from attracting them will only serve to chase them from thee; and it will be 
thereafter exceedingly difficult for thee to attract them for use for pure ends." 

xxv 

THE FIRST BOOK 

OF THE 

HOLY MAGIC, 

WHICH GOD GAVE UNTO MOSES, AARON, DAVID, SOLOMON, AND OTHER 

SAINTS, PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS; WHICH TEACHETH 

THE TRUE DIVINE WISDOM. 

BEQUEATHED BY ABRAHAM UNTO LAME CH HIS SON. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBREW. 

1458. 

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HOLY MAGIC. 

JLTHOUGH this First Book serveth rather for prologue than for the 
factual rules to acquire this Divine and Sacred Magic; nevertheless, O! 
Tamech, my son, thou wilt therein find certain examples and other 
matters which will be none the less useful and profitable unto thee than the 
precepts and dogmas which I shall give thee in the Second and Third Books. 
Wherefore thou shalt not neglect the study of this First Book, which shall 
serve thee for an introduction unto the Veritable and Sacred Magic, and unto 
the practice of that which I, Abraham, the son of simon, have learned, in 
part from my father, and in part also from other Wise and faithful Men, and 
which I have found true and real, having submitted it unto proof and 
experiment. And having written this with mine own hand, I have placed it 
within this casket, and locked it up, as a most precious treasure; in order that 
when thou hast arrived at a proper age thou mayest be able to admire, to 
consider, and to enjoy the marvels of the Lord; as well as thine elder brother 
Joseph, who, as the first-born, hath received from me the Holy Tradition of 
the Qabalah. 

The Sacred Magic 

THE FIRST CHAPTER. 

}AMECH, if thou wishest to know the reason wherefore I give unto thee 
| this Book, it is that if thou considerest thy condition, which is that of 
i being a last-born Son, thou shah know wherefore it appertaineth unto 
thee; and I should commit a great error should I deprive thee of that grace 
which God hath given unto me with so much profusion and liberality. I will 
then make every effort to avoid and to fly prolixity of words in this First Book; 
having alone in view the ancientness of this Venerable and Indubitable 
Science. And seeing that Truth hath no need of enlightenment and of 
exposition, she being simple and right; be thou only obedient unto all that I 
shall say unto thee, contenting thyself with the simplicity thereof, be thou 
good and upright, and thou shah acquire more wealth than I could know how 
to promise unto thee. May the Only and Most Holy God grant unto all, the 
grace necessary to be able to comprehend and penetrate the high Mysteries of 
the Qabalah and of the Law; but they should content themselves with that 
which the Lord accordeth unto them; seeing that if against His Divine Will 
they wish to fly yet higher, even as did Lucifer, this will but procure for them a 
most shameful and fatal fall. Wherefore it is necessary to be extremely prudent, 
and to consider the Intention which I have had in describing this method of 
operation; because in consideration of thy great youth I attempt no other 
thing but to excite thee unto the research of this Sacred Magic. But the 
manner of acquiring the same will come later, in all its perfection, and in its 
proper time; for it will be taught thee by better Masters than I, that is to say, 
by those same Holy Angels of God. No man is born into the World a Master, 
and for that reason are we obliged to learn. He who applieth himself 
thereunto, and studieth, learneth; and a man can have no more shameful and 
evil title than that of being an Ignorant person. 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE SECOND CHAPTER. 

'HEREFORE do I confess, that I, even I also, am not born a Master; 
(neither have I invented this science of my own proper Genius; but I 
'have learned it from others in the manner which I will hereafter tell 
thee, and in truth. 

My father, Simon, shortly before his death, gave me certain signs and 
instructions concerning the way in which it is necessary to acquire the Holy 
Qabalah; but it is however true that he did not enter into the Holy Mystery by 
the true Path, and I could not know how to understand the same sufficiently 
and perfectly as Reason demanded. My father was always contented and 
satisfied with such a method of understanding the same, and he sought out no 
further the Veritable Science and Magical Art, which I undertake to teach thee 
and to expound unto thee. 

After his death, finding myself twenty years of age, I had a very great 
passion to understand the True Mysteries of the Lord; but of mine own 
strength I could not arrive at the end which I intended to attain. 

I learned that at Mayence there was a Rabbi who was a notable Sage, and 
the report went that he possessed in full the Divine Wisdom. The great desire 
which I had to study induced me to go to seek him in order to learn from him. 
But this man also bad not received from the Lord the Gift, and a perfect 
grace; because, although he forced himself to manifest unto me certain deep 
Mysteries of the Holy Qabalah, he by no means arrived at the goal; and in his 
Magic he did not in any way make use of the Wisdom of the Lord, but instead 
availed himself of certain arts and superstitions of infidel and idolatrous 
nations, in part derived from the Egyptians,' together with images of the 
Medes and of the Persians, with herbs of the Arabians, together with the power 
of the Stars and Constellations; and, finally, he had drawn from every people 
and nation, and even from the Christians, some diabolical Art. And in 
everything the Spirits blinded him to such an extent, even while obeying him 
in some ridiculous and inconsequent matter, that he actually believed that his 
blindness and error were the Veritable Magic, and he therefore pushed no 
further his research into the True and Sacred Magic. I also learned his 
extravagant experiments, and for ten years did I remain buried in so great an 
error, until that after the ten years I arrived in Egypt at the house of an Ancient 
Sage who was called Abramelim, who put me into the true Path as I will 
declare it unto thee hereafter, and be gave me better instruction and doctrine 
than all the others; but this particular grace was granted me by the Almighty 
Father of all Mercy, that is to say, Almighty God, who little by little 

The Sacred Magic 

illuminated mine understanding and opened mine eyes to see and admire, to 
contemplate, and search out His Divine Wisdom, in such a manner that it 
became possible unto me to further and further understand and comprehend 
the Sacred Mystery by which I entered into the knowledge of the Holy Angels, 
enjoying their sight and their sacred conversation, from whom at length I 
received afterwards the foundation of the Veritable Magic, and how to 
command and dominate the Evil Spirits. So that by way of conclusion unto 
this chapter I cannot say that I have otherwise received the True Instruction 
save from Abramelim and the True and Incorruptible Magic save from the 
Holy Angels of God. 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE THIRD CHAPTER. 

HAVE already said in the preceding chapter that shortly after the death of 
' my father, I attached myself unto the research of the True Wisdom, and of 
the Mystery of the Lord. Now in this chapter I will briefly mention the 
places and countries by which I have passed in order to endeavour to learn 
those things which are good. And I do this in order that it may serve thee for a 
rule and example not to waste thy youth in petty and useless pursuits, like 
little girls sitting round the fireplace. For there is nothing more deplorable and 
more unworthy in a man than to find himself ignorant in all circumstances. 
He who worketh and travelleth learneth much and he who knoweth not how 
to conduct and govern himself when far from his native land, will know still 
less in his own house how to do so. I dwelt then, after the death of my father, 
for four years with my brothers and sisters, andlstudied with care how to put 
to a profitable use what my father had left me after his death; and seeing that 
my means were insufficient to counterbalance the expenses which I was 
compelled to be at, after having set in order all my affairs and business as well 
as my strength permitted; I set out, and I went into Vormatia to Mayence, in 
order to find there a very aged Rabbi named Moses, in the hope that I had 
found in him that which I sought. As I have said in the preceding chapter, his 
Science had no foundation such as that of the True Divine Wisdom. I 
remained with him for four years, miserably wasting all that time there, and 
persuading myself that I had learned all that I wished to know, and I was only 
thinking of returning to my paternal home, when I casually met a young man 
of our sect, named Samuel, a native of Bohemia, whose manners and mode of 
life showed me that he wished to live, walk, and die in the Way of the Lord 
and in His Holy Law; and I contracted so strong a bond of friendship with 
him that I showed him all my feelings and intentions. As he had resolved to 
make a journey to Constantinople, in order to there join a brother of his 
father, and thence to pass into the Holy Land wherein our forefathers had 
dwelt, and from the which for our very great errors and misdeeds we had been 
chased and cast forth by God. He having so willed it, the moment that he 
had made me acquainted with his design, I felt an extraordinary desire to 
accompany him in his journey, and I believe that Almighty God wished by this 
means to awaken me, for I could take no rest until the moment that we 
mutually and reciprocally passed our word to each other and swore to make 
the voyage together. 

On the 13th day of February, in the year 1397, we commenced our 
journey, passing through Germany, Bohemia, Austria, and thence by Hungary 

The Sacred Magic 

and Greece unto Constantinople, where we remained two years, and I should 
never have quitted it, had not death taken Samuel from me at length through a 
sudden illness. Finding myself alone, a fresh desire for travel seized me, and so 
much was my heart given thereto, that I kept wandering from one place to 
another, until at length I arrived in Egypt, where constantly travelling for the 
space of four years in one direction and another, the more I practised the 
experiments of the magic of Rabbin Moses, the less did it please me. I pursued 
my voyage towards our ancient country, where I fixed my residence for a year, 
and neither saw nor heard of any other thing but misery, calamity, and 
unhappiness. After this period of time, I there found a Christian who also was 
travelling in order to find that which I was seeking also myself. Having made 
an agreement together, we resolved to go into the desert parts of Arabia for the 
search for that which we ardently desired; feeling sure that, as we had been 
told, there were in those places many just and very learned men, who dwelt 
there in order to be able to study without any hindrance, and to devote 
themselves unto that Art for which we ourselves were seeking; but as we there 
found nothing equivalent to the trouble we had taken, or which was worthy of 
our attention, there came into my head the extravagant idea to advance no 
farther, but to return to my own home. I communicated my intention to my 
companion, but he for his part wished to follow out his enterprise and seek his 
good fortune; so I prepared to return. 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE FOURTH CHAPTER 

|N my return journey I began to reflect on the time which I had lost in 
(travelling, and on the great expense which I had been at without any 
'return, and without having made any acquisition of that which I 
wished for and which had caused me to undertake the voyage. I had, however, 
taken the resolution of returning to my home on quitting Arabia Deserta by 
way of Palestine, and so into Egypt; and I was six months on the way. I at 
length arrived at a little town called Arachi, situated on the bank of the Nile, 
where I lodged with an old Jew named Aaron, where indeed I had already 
lodged before in my journey; and I communicated unto him my sentiments. 
He asked me how I had succeeded, and whether I had found that which I 
wished. I answered mournfully that I had done absolutely nothing, and I made 
him an exact recital of the labours and troubles which I had undergone, and 
my recital was accompanied by my tears which I could not help shedding in 
abundance, so that I attracted the compassion of the old man, and he began to 
try to comfort me by telling me that during my journey he had heard say that 
in a desert place not far from the aforesaid town of Arachi dwelt a very 
learned and pious man whose name was Abramelino, and he exhorted me 
that as I had already done so much, not to fail to visit him, that perhaps the 
Most Merciful God might regard me with pity, and grant me that which I 
righteously wished for, It seemed to me as though I was listening to a Voice, 
not human but celestial, and I felt a joy in mine heart such as I could not 
express; and I had neither rest nor intermission until Aaron found me a man 
who conducted me to the nearest route, by which walking upon fine sand 
during the space of three days and a half without seeing any human habitation 
I at length arrived at the foot of a hill of no great height, and which was 
entirely surrounded by trees. My Guide then said: - "In this small wood 
dwelleth the man whom you seek;" and having showed me the direction to 
take he wished to accompany me no further, and having taken his leave of me 
he returned home by the same route by which we had come, together with his 
mule which had served to carry our food. Finding myself in this situation I 
could think of no other thing to do than to submit myself to the help of the 
Divine Providence by invoking His very holy Name, Who then granted unto 
me His most holy Grace, for in turning my eyes in the aforementioned 
direction, I beheld coming towards me a venerable aged Man, who saluted me 
in the Chaldean language in a loving manner, inviting me to go with him into 
his habitation; the which courtesy I accepted with an extreme pleasure, 
realising in that moment how great is the Providence of the Lord. The good 

7 

The Sacred Magic 

old Man was very courteous to me and treated me very kindly and during an 
infinitude of days he never spake unto me of any other matter than of the Fear 
of God, exhorting me to lead ever a well-regulated life, and from time to time 
warned me of certain errors which man commits through human frailty, and, 
further, he made me understand that he detested the acquisition of riches and 
goods which we were constantly employed in gaining in our towns through so 
severe usury exacted from, and harm wrought to, our neighbour. He required 
from me a very solemn and precise promise to change my manner of life, and 
to live not according to our false dogmas, but in the Way and Law of the Lord. 
The which promise I having ever after inviolably observed, and being later on 
again among my relatives and other Jews, I passed among them for a wicked 
and foolish man; but I said in myself: "Let the Will of God be done, and let 
not respect of persons turn us aside from the right path, seeing that man is a 
deceiver". 

The aforesaid Abramelin, knowing the ardent desire which I had to 
learn, he gave me two manuscript books, very similar in form unto these 
which I now bequeath unto thee, O Lamech, my son; but very obscure: and he 
told me to copy them for myself with care, which I did, and carefully 
examined both the one and the other. And he asked me if I had any money, I 
answered unto him "Yes". He said unto me that he required ten golden florins, 
which he must himself, according to the order which the Lord had given unto 
him, distribute by way of alms among seventy-two poor persons, who were 
obliged to repeat certain Psalms; and having kept the feast of Saturday, which 
is the day of the Sabbath, he set out to go to Arachi, because it was requisite 
that he should himself distribute the money. And he ordered me to fast for 
three days, that is to say, the Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday following; 
contenting myself with only a single repast in the day, wherein was to be 
neither blood nor dead things; also he commanded me to make this 
commencement with exactness, and not to fail in the least thing, for in order 
to operate well it is very necessary to begin well, and he instructed me to 
repeat all the seven psalms of David one single time in these three days; and 
not to do or practise any servile operation. The day being come he set out, and 
took with him the money which I had given him. I faithfully obeyed him, 
executing from point to point that which he had ordered me to do. His return 
was fifteen days later, and being at last arrived he ordered me the day following 
(which was a Tuesday), before the rising of the Sun, to make with great 
humility and devotion a general confession of all my life unto the Lord, with a 
true and firm proposal and resolution to serve and fear Him otherwise than I 
had done in the past, and to wish to live and die in His most Holy Law, and in 
obedience unto Him. I performed my confession with all the attention and 

8 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

exactitude necessary. It lasted until the going down of the Sun; and the day 
following I presented myself unto Abramelin, who with a smiling 
countenance said unto me: "It is thus I would ever have you". He then 
conducted me into his own apartment where I took the two little manuscripts 
which I had copied; and he asked of me whether truly and without fear, I 
wished for the Divine Science and for the True Magic. I answered unto him 
that it was the only end and unique motive which had induced me to 
undertake a so long and troublesome voyage, with the view of receiving this 
special grace from the Lord. "And I," said Abramelin, "trusting in the mercy 
of the Lord, I grant and accord unto thee this Holy Science, which thou must 
acquire in the manner which is prescribed unto thee in the two little 
manuscript books, without omitting the least imaginable thing of their 
contents; and not in any way to gloss or comment upon that which may be or 
may not be, seeing that the Artist who hath made that work is the same God 
Who from Nothingness hath created all things. Thou shah in no way use this 
Sacred Science to offend the Great God, and to work ill unto thy neighbour; 
thou shalt communicate it unto no living person whom thou dost not 
thoroughly know by long practice and conversation, examining well whether 
such a person really intendeth to work for the Good or for the Evil. And if 
thou shalt wish to grant it unto him, thou shalt well observe and punctually, 
the same fashion and manner, which I have made use of with thee. And if thou 
doest otherwise, he who shall receive it shall draw no fruit therefrom. Keep 
thyself as thou wouldst from a Serpent from selling this Science, and from 
making merchandise of it; because the Grace of the Lord is given unto us free 
and gratis, and we ought in no wise to sell the same. This Veritable Science 
shall remain in thee and thy generation for the space of seventy-two years, 
and will not remain longer in our Sect. Let not thy curiosity push thee on to 
understand the cause of this, but figure to thyself that we are so good - that 
our Sect hath become insupportable not only to the whole human race, but 
even to God Himself !" I wished in receiving these two small manuscript 
books to throw myself on my knees before him, but he rebuked me, saying 
that we ought only to bend the knee before God. 

I avow that these two books were so exactly written, that thou, O 
Lamech my son, mayest see them after my death, and thou shalt thus 
recognise how much respect I have for thee. It is true that before my 
departure I well read and studied them, and when I found anything difficult or 
obscure I had recourse unto Abramelin, who with charity and patience 
explained it unto me. Being thoroughly instructed, I took leave of him, and 
having received his paternal blessing; a symbol which is not only in use among 
the Christians, but which was also the custom with our forefathers; I also 

The Sacred Magic 

departed, and I took the route to Constantinople, whither having arrived I fell 
sick, and my malady lasted for the space of two months; but the Lord in His 
Mercy delivered me therefrom, so that I soon regained my strength, and 
finding a vessel ready to depart for Venice I embarked thereon, and I arrived 
there, and having rested some days I set out to go unto Trieste, where having 
landed, I took the road through the country of Dalmatia, and arrived at length 
at my paternal home, where I lived among my relatives and my brothers. 

10 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. 

T is not sufficient to travel and journey abroad and see many lands, if one 
does not draw some useful experience therefrom. Wherefore, in order to 
' show unto thee a good example, I will in this chapter speak of the 
Mysteries of this Art which I discovered in one way and another while 
travelling in the world, and also of the measure and understanding of their 
various sciences; while, in the Sixth Chapter following, I will recount the 
things which I have learned and seen with some among them, and whether in 
actual practice I found them true or false. I have already before told you that 
my first Master had been the Rabbin Moses at Mayence, who was indeed a 
good man, but entirely ignorant of the True Mystery and of the Veritable 
Magic. He only devoted himself to certain superstitious secrets which he had 
collected from various infidels, and which were full of the nonsense and 
foolishness of Pagans and Idolaters; to such an extent that the Good Angels 
and Holy Spirits judged him unworthy of their visits and conversation; and 
the Evil Spirits mocked him to a ridiculous extent. At times, indeed, they 
spake to him voluntarily and by caprice, and obeyed him in matters vile, 
profane, and of no account, in order the better to entrap, deceive and hinder 
him from searching further for the true and certain Foundation of this Great 
Science. 

At Argentine I found a Christian called James, who was reputed as a 
learned and very skilful man; but his Art was the Art of the juggler, or Cup 
and Balls Player; and not that of the Magician. 

In the town of Prague I found a wicked man named Antony, aged 
twenty-five years, who in truth showed me wonderful and supernatural things, 
but may God preserve us from falling into so great an error, for the infamous 
wretch avowed to me that he had made a Pact with the Demon, and had given 
himself over to him in body and in soul, and that he had renounced God and 
all the Saints; while, on the other hand, the deceitful Leviathan had promised 
him forty years of life to do his pleasure. He made every effort, as he was 
obliged to by the Pact, to persuade me and drag me to the precipice of the 
same error and misery; but at first I kept myself apart from him, and at last I 
took flight. Unto this day do they sing in the streets of the terrible end which 
befel him, may the Lord God of His Mercy preserve us from such a 
misfortune. This should serve us as a mirror of warning to keep far from us all 
evil undertakings and pernicious curiosity. 

In Austria I found an infinitude, but all were either ignorant, or like 
unto the Bohemians. 

11 

The Sacred Magic 

In the Kingdom of Hungary I found but persons knowing neither God 
nor Devil, and who were worse than the beasts. 

In Greece I found many wise and prudent men, but, however, all of 
them were infidels, among whom there were three who principally dwelt in 
desert places, who showed unto me great things, such as how to raise tempests 
in a moment, how to make the Sun appear in the night, how to stop the 
course of rivers, and how to make night appear at mid-day, the whole by the 
power of their enchantments, and by applying superstitious ceremonies. 

Near Constantinople, in a place called Ephiha, there was a certain 
man, who, instead of Enchantments, made use of certain numbers which he 
wrote upon the earth; and by means of these he caused certain extravagant and 
terrifying visions to appear; but in all these Arts there was no practical use, but 
only the loss of soul and of body, because all these only worked by particular 
Pacts, which had no true foundation; also all these Arts demanded a very long 
space of time, and they were very false, and when these men were unsuccessful 
they had always ready a thousand lies and excuses. 

In the same City Of Constantinople I found two men of our Law, 
namely, Simon and the Rabbin Abrahame, whom we may class with Rabbin 
Moses Of Mayence. 

In Egypt the first time I found five persons who were esteemed and 
reputed as wise men, among whom were four, namely, Horay, Abimech, 
Alcaon, and Orilach, who performed their operations by the means of the 
course of the Stars and of the Constellations, adding many Diabolical 
Conjurations and impious and profane prayers, and performing the whole 
with great difficulty The fifth, named Abimelu, operated by the means and 
aid of Demons, to whom he prepared statues, and sacrificed, and thus they 
served him with their abominable arts. 

In Arabia they made use of plants, of herbs, and of stones as well precious 
as common. The Divine Mercy inspired me to return thence, and led me to 
Abramelin, who was he who declared unto me the Secret, and opened unto 
me the fountain and true source of the Sacred Mystery, and of the Veritable 
and Ancient Magic which God had given unto our forefathers. 

Also at Paris I found a wise man called Joseph, who, having denied the 
Christian faith, had made himself a Jew. This man truly practised Magic in the 
same manner as Abramelin, but he was very far from arriving at perfection 
therein; because God, Who is just, never granteth the perfect, veritable and 
fundamental treasure unto those who deny Him; notwithstanding that in the 
rest of their life they might be the most holy and perfect men in the world. I 
am astonished when I consider the blindness of many persons who let 
themselves be led by Evil Masters, who take pleasure in falsehood, and, we 

12 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

may rather say, in the Demon himself; giving themselves over unto Sorceries 
and Idolatries, one in one manner, another in another manner, with the result 
of losing their souls. But the Truth is so great, the Devil is so deceitful and 
malicious, and the World so frail and so infamous that I must admit that 
things cannot be otherwise. Let us then open our eyes, and follow that which I 
shall lay down in the following chapters; and let us not walk in another Path, 
whether of the Devil, or of men, or of Books which boast of their Magic; for 
in truth I declare unto thee that I had so great a quantity of such matters 
written out with so much Art, that had I not had these of Abramelin, I could 
herein have given thee those. However, it is true that just as there is only one 
God, that not one of these Books is worth an obolus. Yet with all this there 
are men so blind that they buy them at exorbitant prices, and they lose their 
money, their time, and their pains, and which is worse, very often their souls 
as well. 

13 

The Sacred Magic 

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. 

'HE Fear of the Lord is the True Wisdom, and he who hath it not can in 
)no way penetrate the True Secrets of Magic, and he but buildeth upon a 
'foundation of sand, and his building can in no way last. The Rabbin 
Moses persuaded me to be wise, while he himself, with words which neither 
he himself nor any other person understood, and with extravagant symbols 
made bells to sound, and while with execrable conjurations he made appear in 
glasses him who had committed a theft, and while he made a water causing an 
old man to appear young (and that only for the space of two hours and no 
longer). All the which things he indeed taught me, but the whole was but 
vanity, low curiosity, and a pure deception of the Demon, leading to no useful 
end imaginable, and tending to the loss of the Soul. And when I had the 
Veritable Knowledge of the Sacred Magic, I both forgot them, and banished 
them from mine heart. 

That impious Bohemian, with the aid and assistance of his Associate, 
performed astounding feats. He rendered himself invisible, he used to fly in 
the air, he used to enter through the keyholes into locked-up rooms, he knew 
our greatest secrets, and once he told me things which God alone could know. 
But his Art cost him too dear, for the Devil had made him swear in the Pact 
that he would use all his secrets to the dishonour of God, and to the prejudice 
of his neighbour. Ultimately his body was found dragged through the streets, 
and his head without any tongue therein, lying in a drain. And this was all the 
profit he drew from his Diabolical Science and Magic. 

In Austria I found an infinitude of Magicians who only occupied 
themselves in killing and maiming men, in putting discord among married 
people, in causing divorces, in tying witch-knots in osier or willow branches to 
stop the flow of milk in the breasts of nursing women, and similar infamies. 
But these miserable wretches had made a Pact with the Devil, and had become 
his slaves, having sworn unto him that they would work without cessation to 
destroy all living creatures. Some of these had two years (for their Pact) to run, 
some three, and after that time they underwent the same fate as the Bohemian. 

At Lintz I worked with a young woman, who one evening invited me to 
go with her, assuring me that without any risk she would conduct me to a 
place where I greatly desired to find myself. I allowed myself to be persuaded 
by her promises. She then gave unto me an unguent, with which I rubbed the 
principal pulses of my feet and hands; the which she did also; and at first it 
appeared to me that I was flying in the air in the place which I wished, and 
which I had in no way mentioned to her. 

14 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

I pass over in silence and out of respect, that which I saw, which was 
admirable, and appearing to myself to have remained there a long while, I felt 
as if I were just awakening from a profound sleep, and I had great pain in my 
head and deep melancholy. I turned round and saw that she was seated at my 
side. She began to recount to me what she had seen, but that which I had seen 
was entirely different. I was, however, much astonished, because it appeared to 
me as if I had been really and corporeally in the place, and there in reality to 
have seen that which had happened. However, I asked her one day to go alone 
to that same place, and to bring me back news of a friend whom I knew for 
certain was distant 200 leagues. She promised to do so in the space of an hour. 
She rubbed herself with the same unguent, and I was very expectant to see her 
fly away; but she fell to the ground and remained there about three hours as if 
she were dead, so that I began to think that she really was dead. At last she 
began to stir like a person who is waking, then she rose to an upr , ight 
position, and with much pleasure began to give me the account of her 
expedition, saying that she had been in the place where my friend was, and all 
that he was doing; the which was entirely contrary to his profession. Whence I 
concluded that what she had just told me was a simple dream, and that this 
unguent was a causer of a phantastic sleep; whereon she confessed to me that 
this unguent had been given to her by the Devil. 

All the Arts of the Greeks are Enchantments and Fascinations, and the 
Demons hold them enchained in these accursed arts so that the Foundation of 
the True Magic may be unknown to them which would render them more 
powerful than they; and I was the more confirmed in this opinion because 
their operations were of no practical use whatever, and caused injury unto him 
who put them into practice, as in fact many of them avowed plainly to me, 
when I had the True and Sacred Magic. There are also many operations which 
they say are handed down from the Ancient Sibyls. There is an Art called 
White and Black; 2 another Angelical, Teatim; in which I avow that I have 
seen orations so learned and beautiful, that had I not known the venom 
therein hidden, I would have given them herein. I say all this because it is very 
easy to him who is not constantly upon his guard to err. 

One old scribbler of symbols gave me many enchantments which only 
tended to work evil. He performed other operations by means of numbers, 
which were all odd, and of a triple proportion, in no way similar to the other, 
and for proof of this, he caused by such means in my presence a very fine tree 
which was near my house to fall to the ground, and all the leaves and fruits 
were consumed in a very short time. And he told me that in Numbers there 
was hidden a very Great Mystery, because that by the means of numbers one 
can perform all the operations for friendships, riches, honours, and all sorts of 

15 

The Sacred Magic 

things, good and evil; and he assured me that he had tried them, but that yet 
some that he knew to be very true had not yet succeeded with him. With 
regard to this particular, I found out the reason through the Wise Abramelin, 
who told me that this came and depended from a Divine Ministry, that is to 
say, from the Qabalah, and that without that, one could not succeed. All these 
things have I beheld, and many others, and those who possessed these secrets 
gave them to me out of friendship. I burned these recipes afterwards in the 
house of Abramelin, they being absolutely things very far removed from the 
Will of God, and contrary to the charity which we owe unto our neighbour. 
Every learned and prudent man may fall if he be not defended and guided by 
the Angel of the Lord, who aided me, and prevented me from falling into such 
a state of wretchedness, and who led me undeserving from the mire of 
darkness unto the Light of the Truth. I have known and felt the effects of the 
goodness of the Wise Abraha Melin, who of his own free will, and before I 
had asked him so to do, accepted me for his disciple. And before that I had 
declared my wish unto him he would accomplish and fulfil my desire; and all 
that I wished to obtain from him he knew before I could open my mouth. 
Also he recounted to me all that I had seen, done, and suffered from the time 
of my father's death down to this moment; and this in words obscure and as it 
were prophetic, which I did not then comprehend, but which I understood 
later. He told me many things touching my good fortune, but, which was the 
principal thing, he discovered to me the Source of the Veritable Qabalah, the 
which according to our custom, I have in turn communicated unto thine elder 
brother Joseph, after that he had fulfilled the requisite conditions without the 
accomplishment of which the Qabalah and this Sacred Magic cannot be 
exercised, and which I will recount in the two following books. Afterwards he 
did manifest unto me the Regimen of the Mystery of that Sacred Magic which 
was exercised and put into practice by our forefathers and progenitors, Noah, 
Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, and Solomon, among whom the last 
misused it, and he received the punishment thereof during his life. 

In the Second Book I will describe the whole faithfully and clearly, in 
order that if the Lord God should wish to dispose of me before that thou shalt 
have attained a competent age, thou shalt find these three small manuscript 
books as forming at the same time both an inestimable treasure and a faithful 
master and teacher; because there are very many secrets in the Symbols of the 
Third Book which I have seen made experiment of with mine own eyes by 
Abramelim, and to be perfectly true, and which afterwards I myself have 
performed. And after him I found no one who worked these things truly; and 
although Joseph at Paris walked in the same Path, nevertheless God, as a just 
judge, did not in any way wish to grant unto him the Sacred Magic in its 

16 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

entirety, because he had despised the Christian Law. For it is an indubitable 
and evident thing that he who is born Christian, Jew, Pagan, Turk, Infidel, or 
whatever religion it may be, can arrive at the perfection of this Work or Art 
and become a Master, but he who hath abandoned his natural Law, and 
embraced another religion opposed to his own, can never arrive at the summit 
of this Sacred Science. 

17 

The Sacred Magic 

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. 

OD, the Father of Mercy, having granted unto me the grace to return 
safe and sound into my country; I paid unto Him according to my 
■ small power, some little portion of that which I owed Him; thanking 
Him for so many benefits which I had received from Him, and in particular 
for the acquisition of the Qabalah which I had made at the house of 
Abramelim. It now only remained for me to reduce to Practice this Sacred 
Magic, but many things of importance and hindrances presented themselves; 
among the which my marriage was one of the greatest. I therefore judged it 
fitting to defer putting it in practice, and a principal obstacle was the 
inconvenience of the place in which I dwelt. I resolved to absent myself 
suddenly, and go away into the Hercynian Forests, and there remain during 
the time necessary for this operation, and lead a solitary life. It was not 
possible for me to do it sooner for many reasons and dangers of which latter I 
ran a risk in that place, besides which it would be necessary to leave my wife, 
who was young and now enceinte. Finally, I resolved to follow the example of 
Abramelin, and I divided my house into two parts; I took another house at 
rent, which I in part furnished, and I gave over to one of my uncles the care of 
providing the necessaries of life and the needs thereof. Meanwhile I with my 
wife and a servant remained in my own house, and I began to accustom myself 
to the solitary life, which it was to me extremely difficult to support, because 
of the melancholic humour which dominated me, and I lived thus till the 
season of Easter which I celebrated with all the family according to custom. 
Then first, on the following day, in the Name and to the honour of God 
Almighty the Creator of Heaven and of Earth, I commenced this holy 
operation, and I continued it for Six Moons without omitting the slightest 
detail, as thou wilt understand later. And the period of the Six Moons being 
expired, the Lord granted unto me His Grace by His Mercy; according to the 
promise made unto our forefathers, since while I was making my prayer unto 
Him He deigned to grant unto me the vision and apparition of His holy 
Angels, together with which I experienced so great joy, consolation and 
contentment of soul, that I could neither express it nor put it into writing. 
And during the three days, while I was enjoying this sweet and delightful 
presence with an indicible contentment, my holy Angel, whom God the Most 
Merciful had destined from my creation for my Guardian, spake unto me with 
the greatest goodness and affection; who not only manifested unto me the 
Veritable Magic, but even made easier for me the means of obtaining it. He 
confirmed as being true the Symbols of the Qabalah which I had received from 

18 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Abramelin; and he gave me the fundamental means by which I could have an 
infinitude of others in my operations according to my pleasure, assuring me 
that he would instruct me fully thereon. (These Symbols are all like those of 
the Third Book.) He gave me further very useful advice and admonition, such 
as an Angel could give; how I should govern myself the following days with the 
Evil Spirits so as to constrain them to obey me; the which I duly followed out 
fulfilling always from point to point his instructions very faithfully, and by the 
Grace of God I constrained them to obey me and to appear in the place 
destined for this operation; and they obligated themselves to obey me, and to 
be subject unto me. And since then even until now, without offending God 
and the Holy Angels I have held them in my power and command, always 
assisted by the power of God and of His Holy Angels. And this with so great a 
prosperity of our house, that I confess that I held myself back from the vast 
riches which I could have accumulated; although I possess enough to be 
counted among the number of the rich, as thou wilt know when thou shalt be 
more advanced in age. May the Grace of the Lord, and the defence and 
protection of His Holy Angels never then depart from me, Abraham, nor 
from my two sons Joseph and Lamech; nor from all those who by your means 
and by the Will of God, shall receive this operation! So be it! 

19 

The Sacred Magic 

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. 

-N order to show that Man ought to make use of the good things of the 
'Lord by applying them unto a good end, that is to say unto His honour 
'and glory both for his own use and that of his neighbour; I will describe in 
a few words in this present chapter many and the most considerable operations 
which I have carried out; and the which, with the aid of the All-Powerful Lord 
and of the Holy Angels, by the means of this Art I have easily conducted unto 
the desired end. And I write not this description in any way to vaunt myself, 
nor out of vain glory, the which would be a great sin against God, because it is 
He Who bath done the whole, and not I; but only do I write this that it may 
serve for instruction unto others, so that they may know wherein they ought 
to avail themselves of this Art, as also that they may use it to the honour of 
Him Who hath given this wisdom unto men, and glorify Him; and in order 
that each one may know how great and inexhaustible are the treasures of the 
Lord, and render unto Him particular thanks for so precious a gift. And 
especially (do I thank Him) for having granted unto me, who am but a little 
worm of Earth, through the means of Abramelin the power to give and 
communicate unto others this Sacred Science. After my death a book will be 
found, which I commenced to write at the time when I was beginning to put 
in practice this Art, which, reckoning the number of the years, was in 1409, 
until to-day on which I am arrived at the 96th year of mine age, with all 
honour and augmentation of fortune; and in this book can be read in detail 
even to the very least thing which I have done. But here, as I have aforesaid, I 
will describe only the most remarkable. 

Up till now I have healed of persons of all conditions, bewitched unto 
death, no less than 8413, and belonging unto all religions, without making an 
exception in any case. 

I gave unto mine Emperor Sigismond, a very clement Prince, a Familiar 
Spirit of the Second Hierarchy, even as he commanded me, and he availed 
himself of its services with prudence. He wished also to possess the secret of 
the whole operation, but as I was warned by the Lord that it was not His Will, 
he contented himself with what was permitted, not as Emperor, but as a 
private person; and I even by means of mine Art facilitated his marriage with 
his wife; and I caused him to overcome the great difficulties which opposed his 
marriage. 

I delivered also the Count Frederick 3 by the means of 2000 artificial 
cavalry (the which I by mine Art caused to appear according unto the tenor of 
the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Third Book here following), free out of the 

20 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

hands of the Duke Leopold of Saxonia; the which Count Frederick without 
me would have lost both his own life, and his estate as well (which latter 
would not have descended) unto his heirs. 

Unto the Bishop Of Our City also, I showed the betrayal of his 
government at Orembergh, one year before the same occurred; and I say no 
more concerning this because he is an Ecclesiastic passing over in silence all 
that I have further done to render unto him service. 

The Count Of Varvich 3 ' was delivered by me from prison in England 
the night before he was to have been beheaded. 

I aided the flight of the Duke, 37 and of his Pope John, 38 from the Council 
of Constance, who would otherwise have fallen into the hands of the enraged 
Emperor; and the latter having asked me to predict unto him which one of the 
two Popes, John XXIII. and Martin V., should gain in the end, my prophecy 
was verified; that fortune befalling which I had predicted unto him at 
Ratisbon. 

At the time when I was lodged at the house of the Duke Of Bavaria, 39 
my Lord, for matters of the greatest importance; the door of my room was 
forced, and I had the value of 83,000 Hungarian pieces stolen from me in 
jewels and money. As soon as I returned, the thief (although he was a Bishop !) 
was forced to himself bring it back to me in person and to return with his own 
hands to me the money, jewels, and account books, and to give me the 
principal reasons which had forced him to commit the theft, rather than any 
other person. 

Six months ago I did write unto the Grecian Emperor, ° and I warned 
him that the affairs of his Empire were in a very bad condition, and that his 
Empire itself was on the brink of ruin, unless he could appease the Anger of 
God. As there only remaineth unto me but a little while to live, those who 
remain after me will receive the news , of the result of this prophecy. 

The Operation of the thirteenth chapter of the Second Book, I have 
twice performed; once in the house of Savonia; and another time in the 
Marquisate Of Magdeburgh, and I was the cause that their estates were 
handed down unto their children. 

Now when once the faculty of being able to avail oneself of the Sacred 
Magic hath been obtained, it is permissible to demand from the Angel a sum 
of coined money proportionate unto thy birth, quality and capacity, the which 
without difficulty will be granted unto thee. Such money is taken from the 
Hidden Treasures. It is, however, necessary to note that in all Treasures one is 
allowed to take the fifth part, God permitting the same, although some 
braggart chatterers do say that there be an infinitude hereof which be 
destined and reserved unto Anti-Christ, I do not for a moment say that this 

21 

50 

The Sacred Magic 

may not be true; but undoubtedly from the same Treasures one may also take 
the fifth part. There are yet more which be destined unto others. Mine own 
particular treasure was assigned unto me at Herbipolis; and I performed the 
Operation of the eighth chapter ' of the Third Book; it was not in any way 
guarded, and was very ancient. It was of gold, which had never been struck 
into ingots; and which I afterwards caused to be beaten out and converted into 
its equivalent weight of golden florins, by the Spirits; the which was done in a 
few hours; (and I did this operation seeing that) mine own possessions were 
few and of little worth; and so poor was I that in order to marry a person who 
had a considerable dowry, I was forced to make use of mine Art, and I 
employed the Fourth Sign of the Third Book and the Third Sign of the 
nineteenth chapter; and I married my cousin with 40,000 golden florins as a 
dowry, the which sum served as a cover to my fortune. 

All the Signs which are in the Eighteenth Chapter have been made use 
of by me so many times that I could not count them. However, they are all 
given in the Book already mentioned. 

I made great and wonderful experiments with the Signs of the second 
and eighth chapters of the Third Book. The First Sign of the first chapter of 
the Third Book is the most perfect. 

It is necessary to be prompt and adroit in all these operations, seeing that 
in the things which belong unto God we can easily commit still greater errors 
than those into which Solomon fell. 

All these Signs have I worked with great case and pleasure, and with very 
great utility (unto myself and others). All these operations and others in 
infinite number have I performed by the Signs which be in the Third Book, 
and never have I failed in attaining mine end, I have always been obeyed (by 
the Spirits), and everything hath succeeded with me because I have myself 
obeyed the Commandments of God. Also I have from point to point followed 
out that which mine Angel hath counselled and prescribed unto me; following 
out also exactly that which Abra-Melin 53 had taught me, the which is the 
same that I shall write in the Two following Books, and which I shall 
exemplify and explain more clearly; because the instructions which I received, 
although in very obscure words and Hieroglyphics, have caused me to attain 
mine object, and have never permitted me to err and fall into pagan, strange, 
and superstitious idolatries; I being always kept in the Way of the Lord, Who 
is the True, the Only, the Infallible End, for arriving at the possession of this 
Sacred Magic. 

22 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE NINTH CHAPTER. 

'HE infamous Belial hath no other desire than that of obtaining the 
(power of hiding and obscuring the True Divine Wisdom, so that he 
'may have more means of blinding simple men and of leading them by 
the nose; so that they may always remain in their simplicity and in their error, 
and that they may not discover the Way which leadeth unto the True Wisdom; 
seeing that otherwise it is certain that both he and his Kingdom would remain 
bound and that he would lose the title which he giveth himself of "Prince of 
this World," having become the slave of man. This is wherefore he seeketh to 
annul and destroy utterly this Sacred Wisdom. I, however, do pray all and 
singular to be upon their guard, and in no way to despise the Way and 
Wisdom of the Lord, nor to allow themselves to be seduced by the Demon 
and his adherents; for he is a liar and will be so eternally; and may the Truth 
for ever flourish; for in following out and obeying with fidelity that which I 
have written in these Three Books, not only shall we arrive at the desired end, 
but we shall sensibly know and feel the Grace of the Lord, and the actual 
assistance of His Holy Angels, who take an incredible pleasure in seeing that 
they are obeyed and that you intend to follow out the Commandments of 
God, and that their instructions are observed. Such then are the particular 
points upon which I insist. 

This Wisdom hath its foundation in the High and Holy Qabalah which 
is not granted unto any other than unto the First-Born, even as God hath 
ordained, and as it was observed by our predecessors. Thence arose the 
difference, and the truck or exchange between Jacob and Esau; the 
primogeniture being the Qabalah, which is much nobler and greater than the 
Sacred Magic. And by the Qabalah we can arrive at the Sacred Magic, but by 
the latter we cannot have the Qabalah. Unto the Child of a Servant, or of an 
Adulterer, the Qabalah is not granted, but only unto a Legitimate Child; as 
occurred in the case of Isaac and Ishmael; but the Sacred Wisdom through 
the Mercy of God all can acquire, provided that they walk in the right Path; 
and each one should content himself with the Gift and Grace of the Lord. And 
this must not be done out of curiosity, and with extravagant and ridiculous 
scruples, wishing to know and understand more than is right; seeing that 
temerity is certainly punished by God, Who then permitteth him who is 
presumptuous not only to be turned aside out of the True Way by the Second 
Causes, but also the Demon hath power over him, and he ruineth and 
exterminateth him in such a manner, that we can only say that he himself is 
the sole cause of his own ruin and misery. It is certain that the Old Serpent 
will attempt to contaminate the present Book with his venom, and even to 

23 

The Sacred Magic 

destroy and lose it utterly, but O Lamech! as a faithful father I entreat thee by 
the True God Who hath created thee and all things, and I entreat every other 
person who by thy means shall receive this method of operating, not to be 
induced or persuaded to have any other sentiment or opinion, or to believe the 
contrary. Pray unto God and ask Him for His assistance, and place all thy 
confidence in Him alone. And although thou canst not have the 
understanding of the Qabalah, nevertheless the Holy Guardian Angels at the 
end of the Six Moons or Months will manifest unto thee that which is 
sufficient for the possession of this Sacred Magic. 

Wherefore all the Signs and Symbols given in the Third Book, are written 
with Letters of the Fourth Hierarchy; but the Mysterious Words wherein 
consisteth the Secret' have their origin in and are drawn from the Hebrew, 
Latin, Greek, Chaldean, Persian, and Arabian languages by a singular Mystery 
and according unto the Will of the Most Wise Architect and Fabricator of the 
Universe, Who alone dominateth and governeth it by His All-Power; all the 
Monarchies and Kingdoms of the World are submitted unto His Infinite 
Power, and unto this Sacred Magic and Divine Wisdom. 

24 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE TENTH CHAPTER. 

,T being understood that in this operation we have to do with a Great and 
'Powerful Enemy, whom through our own weakness and human strength or 
'science we cannot resist without particular aid and assistance from the Holy 
Angels, and from the Lord of the Good Spirits; it is necessary that each one 
should always have God before his eyes, and in no way offend Him. On the 
other hand, he must always be upon his guard, and abstain as from a mortal 
sin from flattering, obeying, regarding, or having respect to the Demon, and 
to his Viperine Race; neither must he submit himself unto him in the slightest 
thing, for that would be his ruin and the fatal loss of his soul. As it happened 
unto all the seed descended from Noah, Lot, Ishmael, and others who did 
possess the blessed land (before our forefathers) who inherited this Wisdom 
from father to son, from family to family; but in the course of time having lent 
an ear unto the Treacherous Enemy, they let themselves be turned away from 
the Veritable Path, and did lose the True Science which they had received from 
God by the means of their fathers, and gave themselves over unto Superstitious 
Sciences, and unto Diabolical Enchantments, and unto Abominable Idolatries, 
the which was the cause that thereafter God did chastise them, defy them, 
and chase them from their country; and did introduce in their stead our 
predecessors; from which same errors again later came the cause of our present 
misery and servitude, the which will last even unto the end of the world; since 
they in no way wished to know the Gift which God had given unto them, but 
instead abandoned it to embrace and follow the deceits of the Demon. 

This is wherefore each one should take care to submit himself unto him' 
neither by acts, nor by words, nor by thoughts, because he is so adroit and 
prompt that he can seize one unexpectedly; just as a Spider may take a Bird.' 
Let that miserable Bohemian and the others whom I have before mentioned, 
serve thee for an example to avoid (even as they did unto me). 

In the commencement of the Operation there appeareth a Man of 
Majestic Appearance, who with great affability doth promise unto thee 
marvellous things. Consider all this as pure vanity, for without the permission 
of God he can give nothing; but he will do it unto the damage and prejudice, 
ruin and eternal damnation of whomsoever putteth faith in him, and believeth 
in him; as we may see in the Holy Scripture in the matter Of Pharaoh and his 
adherents, the which despised the Veritable and certain Wisdom of Moses and 
Aaron, and were in the beginning backed up by the Devil who showed them 
by the means of Enchantments that he could both do and put in practice all 
the works of the aforesaid holy men, whence he ultimately did reduce them to 

25 

The Sacred Magic 

such a condition of obstinacy and blindness, that without perceiving their own 
error and the deceit of the Demon, they were cruelly chastised by God with 
divers plagues, and were at last all drowned in the Red Sea. This is wherefore 
in conclusion I say unto thee in few words, that we must rely upon God alone, 
and put all our confidence in Him. 

26 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 

OD be my witness that I have not learned this Science out of 
^curiosity, nor in order to avail myself of it for an evil purpose, but 
-rather to use it for the honour and glory of my, for mine own use, 
and for that of my neighbour; and I have never wished to employ it for vain 
and vile things, but I have always laboured with all my strength to aid all 
creatures, friends and enemies, faithful and unfaithful, as well the one as the 
other, with a perfect will and a good heart, and I have also made use of it for 
the animals. 

I have before cited certain examples in order to show unto thee that God 
Almighty doth not in any way grant the Art or the Science unto a person in 
order that he may use it for himself alone, but in order that he may provide for 
the needs of others, and of those who do not possess this Sacred Science. This 
is why I pray every one to follow mine example, and if he doeth otherwise the 
Malediction of the Lord will fall upon him, and as for myself I shall be 
excusable and innocent before God, and before all men. 

In the Third Book there will be found a very beautiful garden, the like of 
which assuredly no one hath ever made, and which no King nor Emperor hath 
ever possessed. He who shall wish to be as an industrious Bee therein, can 
there suck the honey which it containeth in abundance; but if he shall 
maliciously wish to transform himself into a Spider, he can also draw poison 
from thence. God, however, accordeth and giveth His Grace, not unto the 
Evil, but unto the Good; and if it seemeth unto thee that some chapters of the 
Third Book can be rather applied unto Evil and unto the hurt of our 
neighbour, than unto a useful end; each one shall know that I have so placed 
them, in order that we may understand that this Science can be applied alike 
for Evil or for Good, as I will show thee more fully in the other Books. We 
must then study to flee the Evil and to obtain all the Forces of Good. He who 
shall act thus all the days of his life shall have the succour and assistance of the 
faithful, benign and holy Angels; and he who shall use it for Evil shall be 
abandoned by the same Angels, and shall be in the power of the Treacherous 
Enemy, who never faileth to obey the commands of such an one to work Evil, 
in order to render him his slave. It is necessary to have as a general rule and 
maxim which never faileth, that whenever thou shalt see a man filled with an 
extraordinary desire to procure this operation for himself, if thou wishest to 
give it unto him, it is necessary to test his sincerity and his intentions, and 
delay him, according to the instructions which I give unto thee in these three 
Books. And if he seeketh to obtain it by indiscreet methods, and sayeth unto 

27 

The Sacred Magic 

thee that this operation may be true or not true, feigning doubts in order to 
compel thee to give it unto him, or that he maketh use of other stratagems, 
thou mayest then conclude that such a man walketh not in the Way of the 
Lord. If any person wisheth it in a way opposed to that which God employeth 
to grant it, this would be presumptuous. 

And if any person seeketh to obtain it not for himself, (but for either) a 
child or a relative, who is not such as he should be who receiveth so great a 
treasure; he who shall grant it unto him shall be culpable of a great evil, and 
shall himself lose the Grace and Wisdom of the Lord, and shall deprive his 
heirs of the same eternally. 

If a man of evil life, whom one shall feel by means of this Sacred Science 
will persist in his evil way of life, shall come unto thee to seek this Sacred 
Science, it is probable that such a man doth not desire to use it for good and in 
a right intention, but that having received it, he will use it for evil. I have also 
in such case myself, however, seen and felt that God, Who penetrateth the 
secret of our hearts, hath put by indirect means obstacles in the way of such an 
one's success, causing difficulties to arise of one kind and another. So that he 
who at the first wisheth to possess this Science in order to use it against his 
neighbour, and to commit all sorts of abominations, manifesteth himself as an 
unworthy person unto him who had resolved to give it unto him. 

Shun Commerce, and the converse of those who actually in the search for 
this Science shall do and say all things which tend to Evil; seeing that such 
men can become the Enchanters of the Devil. Thou shalt know the rest 
hereafter in the other Books. Here I am very prolix upon this point, and I am 
exaggerating much, because it is certain that once the Operation is given in 
due form, it is an Irrevocable Act. 

But if, on the other hand, after an exact examination and inquisition thou 
shalt find a person tranquil and sincere, thou must aid him, because God Who 
hath aided thee wisheth also to aid him; unto this end hath He put into thine 
hands this Sacred Science. 

Thou must make every effort to procure peace amongst those who are at 
discord, and sworn enemies among themselves; and it is imperative to do good 
unto every one, this being the sole and true means of rendering favourable 
unto thee, God, the Angels, and Men; and of making the Demon thy slave, 
and obedient in all and through all. And such an one shall pass the rest of his 
life with a good and right conscience, in honour and peace, with contentment, 
and useful unto all beings. I entreat those who shall be possessors of a so great 
treasure to employ it in the proper manner, and never to cast it before swine. 

Thou shalt use it for thyself, O Lamech, my son, but of the fruit which 
thou shalt draw therefrom, thou shalt make partakers those who have need, 

28 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

and the more thou shalt give, the more shall thy means increase. The same 
shall happen unto him to whom thou shalt give it. 

In these regions and countries we are slaves, and justly afflicted for our 
sins and those of our fathers; however, we ought to serve the Lord in the best 
manner which shall be possible unto us. 

And by such an one shall the Treasure be kept secret, and shall be given 
unto his heirs as far as he can, being ware of disinheriting them in order to give 
it unto others, and of causing it to fall into the hands of the Infidels, or of 
rendering the Wicked possessors thereof. 

29 

The Sacred Magic 

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. 

'INE intention was in no way to be so prolix in this First Book; but 
.what will not paternal love do? and the importance of the matter 
•permitteth it. 

Let each one who will carry out this glorious enterprise rest in peace and 
surety because in these Three Books is comprised all that can be necessary for 
this operation. For I have written it with much care, attention, and exactitude; 
so that there is no phrase which doth not give thee some instruction or advice. 
However, I pray such an one for the love of God, Who reigneth and will reign 
eternally, to commence no operation unless beforehand for the space of Six 
Months he hath read and re-read this Book with care and attention, 
considering all points in detail; for I am more than sure that he will not 
encounter any doubtful matter which he will not be able to solve himself, but 
further day by day will he assume unto himself a great and ardent desire, 
pleasure, and will, to undertake this so glorious operation; the which can be 
effected by any person of any religion soever, ' provided, however, that during 
the Six Moons he bath not committed any sin against the Law and 
Commandments of God. 

Now it remaineth unto me, O Lamech, my son, to show unto thee the 
marks of my extreme paternal tenderness, by giving thee two principal pieces 
of advice, by the means of which, and observing all the other particulars which 
I shall describe, thou (and any person unto whom thou shah accord this 
Sacred Science) mayest indubitably arrive at the perfection of this same 
Wisdom. It is necessary, however, to understand that many have undertaken 
this operation; and that some have obtained their wish; but that there are 
others who have not succeeded, and the reason of this bath been because their 
Good Angel hath not appeared unto them in the day of the Conjuration, their 
Angel being by its nature Amphiteron, because the Angelic nature differeth to 
so great an extent from that of men, that no understanding nor science could 
express or describe it, as regardeth that great purity wherewith they be 
invested. 

I do not wish that thou, Lamech, my son, and thy successor, and friends, 
should be deprived of a so great treasure. I in no way wish to abandon thee in 
so essential a matter. The other point is the Psalm which I will tell thee also; 
and though thou givest the operation unto another person, although he be a 
friend, thou shah in no wise communicate this unto him, because this Psalm is 
the preservative against all those to whom thou shalt have given the Holy 
Magic, should they wish to make use of it against thee; and thou shalt be able 

30 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

thyself to make excellent use of it against them. This was granted by the Lord 
unto David for his own preservation. 

For the first point: the day being come when it is necessary to perform the 
Orations, Prayers, and Convocations of thy Guardian Angel, thou shalt have a 
little Child of the age of six, seven, or eight years at the most, who shall be 
clothed in white, the which child thou shalt have washed from head to foot, 
and thou shalt place upon his forehead a veil of white silk very fine and 
transparent, which covereth the forehead even unto the eyes; and upon the veil 
it is necessary to write beforehand in gold with a brush a certain Sign made 
and marked in the manner and order as it will be shown in the Third Book; 
the which doth serve to conciliate and to give grace unto the mortal and 
human creature to behold the face of the Angel. He who operateth shall do the 
same thing, but upon a veil of black silk, and shall put it on in the same 
manner as the Child. After this thou shalt make the Child enter into the 
Oratory and thou shalt cause him to place the fire and the perfume in the 
censer, then he shall kneel before the Altar; and he who performeth the 
operation shall be at the door and prostrate upon the ground, making his 
Oration, and supplicating his Holy Angel that he will deign to appear and 
show himself unto this innocent being, giving unto him another Sign if it be 
necessary in order to see him himself on the two following days. 

It is requisite that he who shall operate shall take heed to in no wise 
regard the Altar, but having his face towards the ground let him continue his 
Orations, and as soon as the child shall have seen the Angel thou shalt 
command him to tell thee, and to look upon the Altar and take the lamen or 
plate of silver which thou shalt have placed there for this purpose, in order to 
bring it unto thee if it be necessary, and whatever other thing the Holy Angel 
shall have written thereon, wherewith thou oughtest to work on the two 
following days. The which being done he will disappear. Which being carefully 
done, the Child will tell thee (for this, it is necessary to have instructed him 
beforehand), and thou shalt command him to bring unto thee the little plate, 
by the which when thou hast received it thou shalt know what the Angel hath 
ordered thee to do. And thou shalt cause it to be replaced upon the Altar, and 
thou shalt quit the Oratory, thou shalt close it, and thou shalt in no wise enter 
therein during the first day, and thou shalt be able to send away the Child. 
And he who shall perform the Operation shall prepare himself during the rest 
of the day for the morrow following, to enjoy the admirable presence of the 
Holy Guardian Angel, in order to obtain the end so earnestly desired, and 
which shall not fail thee if thou followest the Path which He shall show unto 
thee. And these two Signs are the Key of the whole Operation. Unto the Glory 
of the Most Holy Name of God and of His Holy Angels! 

31 

The Sacred Magic 

END OF THE FIRST BOOK. 

32 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

FOOTNOTES TO BOOK ONE 

Des exemples et des circonstances. 

D 'acheminement. 

I consider this a truer orthography of the word than the usual rendering of "Cabala". 

This is identical with the oriental doctrine that Ignorance is itself evil and unhappiness. 

Yet the true Qabalah is undoubtedly derived from the Egyptian and Eastern Wisdom. 

I.e. from the Angels. 

This name is spelt "Abramelin" in some places and "Abramelim" in others. I have consequently 
carefully in all cases put the orthography as it there occurs in the MS. 

"Vormatie"; that is to say, the district under the government of the town of Worms called in Latin 
"Vormatia" anciently. 

In the previous chapter he says that he remained in this path of study for ten years. 

Ie., God. 

Samuel. 

Thus spelt here. 

Aaron the Jew. 

The Qabalistical reader will at once remark the symbolism of the numbers "ten" and "seventy-two" 
the first being the Number of the Sephiroth, and the second that of the Schemahamphorasch. But as 
many readers may be ignorant of the meaning and reference of these terms' I will briefly explain them. 
The Ten Sephiroth are the most abstract ideas and conceptions of the ten numbers of the ordinary 
Decimal Scale, and are employed in the Qabalah as an ideal means of explaining the different 
Emanations or Attributes of the Deity. It was thus that Pythagoras employed the abstract ideas of 
Numbers as a means of metaphysical instruction. The Schemahamphorasch or "Divided Name" is a 
Qabalistical method of investigating the natures of the Name of four letters I H V H (Jehovah), which 
is considered to contain all the Forces of Nature. There are in the Book of Exodus three verses in the 
fourteenth chapter, describing the pillars of fire and of cloud forming a defence unto the children of 
Israel against the Egyptians. Each of these three verses consists in the Hebrew of seventy-two letters, 
and by writing them in a certain manner one above another, seventy-two columns of three letters each 
are obtained; each column is then treated as a Name of Three Letters, and the explanation of these is 
sought for in certain verses of the Psalms which contain these Names; and these latter would be the 
verses of the Psalms alluded to in the text, which the seventy-two poor persons were told to recite. 

This would not necessarily exclude eggs or milk. 
17 So in the MS. 

Note again the number of seventy-two. 

This is evidently said ironically. 

He probably means the copies he himself had been ordered by Abramelin to make, and not the 
originals. 

"Et tu connoiteras la deference dontje me sers avec toy. " 

33 

The Sacred Magic 

Misteres, evidently a slip for Maistres, Masters. 

A coin of base money formerly in use, its value being about a halfpenny. 

I.e. Antony, of whom he makes mention in the preceding chapter. 

? the Book "Ambrosius". 
' Evidently the man mentioned in Chapter V., as living at Ephiha, near Constantinople. The word I 
have rendered by "scribbler of symbols" is grifas. 

So written here in the MS. 

Thus spelt here. 

Many Occultists will doubtless not be of this opinion. It is one thing to simply quit one debased and 
materialised form or sect of religion for another, which is perhaps little if any better; and quite another 
thing to seek out the true religion which is at the basis of all, and which could not be entirely true, 
were it not free from Sect. 

D'embrasser le parti d'Abramelin. 

Probably meaning "household". 

As this MS. bears the date of 1458, Abraham must have been born in 1362, and was consequently 
47 years old in 1409. 

Sigismond, Emperor of Germanywas born the 14th February, 1368, and died at ZnaTm on the 9th 
December, 1437. Son of the Emperor Charles IV. and of Anne of Silesia, he received an excellent 
education. At ten years of age his father gave him the Margravate of Brandenburg, and two years later 
he was betrothed to Mary, the daughter of Louis the Great of Hungary, whom he afterwards married. 
He was nominated by his father-in-law his successor on the throne of Poland. But the nobles preferred 
Ladislaus, the nephew of Casimir the Great. However, in 1386, he took possession of Hungary, 
repulsed the Poles, overcame the rebellious nobles; and then marched against the Wallachians and 
Turks, but he was beaten, and later, notwithstanding the help of France and England, he lost the 
Battle of Nicopolis in 1396, He escaped on board a vessel in the Black Sea, and for eighteen months 
was a fugitive from his Kingdom; and at the moment of his re-entering Hungary he was made 
prisoner by the discontented nobles, and shut up in the citadel of Ziklos. Escaping thence into 
Bohemia, he, however, reconquered his throne, and in 1410 was raised to the Empire by one party 
among the Electors, while Josse, Marquis of Moravia, and Wenceslaus were elected by other factions. 
A remarkable coincidence, seeing that at this moment when three Emperors possessed the Empire, the 
Papacy had also three Popes, viz.: John XXIII. (Balthazar Cossa), a Neapolitan; Gregory XII. (Ange 
Conrario), a Venetian; and Benedict XIII. (Pierre de Lune), a Spaniard. The death of Josse, and the 
resignation of Wenceslaus, left Sigismond sole master of the Empire. After having received the Silver 
Crown at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1414, he went to preside at the Council of Constance, where John Huss 
was condemned, notwithstanding the safe conduct which he had obtained from the Emperor. He 
endeavoured to end the differences between the Roman and Greek Churches, visited France and 
England under pretext of reconciling Charles VI. and Henry V, but, as some say, in order to form a 
league with the latter against France, so as to recover the ancient Kingdom of Aries. The death of his 
brother, Wenceslaus, in 1409, rendered him Master of Boheinia, at the moment when the revolt of the 
Hussites was at its height. He commenced a war of extermination against them, but was defeated by 
Ziska in 1420, and a war of fifteen years' duration ensued. In 1431 whilst he was being crowned King 

34 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

of Italy at Milan, his troops experienced such severe defeats that he was forced to concede 
advantageous terms to the rebels. But dissensions arose among them, and Sigismond profited by this 
to completely crush them at length and make Bohemia submit. He reigned twenty-seven years as 
Emperor of Germany, eighteen years as King of Bohemia, and fifty-one years as King of Hungary. His 
second wife, Barbe, has been called by some, the Messalina of Germany. 

Frederick I., surnamed the Quarreller, Duke and Elector of Saxony, was born at Altenburg in 1369, 
and died in 1428. He was son of the Landgrave and Margrave Frederick the Severe, and of Catherine, 
Countess of Hermeberg. At only four years of age, Frederick had been betrothed to Anne, daughter of 
the Emperor Charles IV., later on he had serious disputes concerning this matter with the Emperor 
Wenceslaus (the brother of Anne), who had disposed of her hand to another, but who ultimately 
consented, in 1397, to pay Frederick a considerable sum by way of damages. In 1388 he fought as ally 
of the Burgrave of Nuremberg in the war of the German towns; and gained his knightly spurs in 1391, 
in the war which he, in concert with the Teutonic Knights, waged against the Lithuanians. Next, he 
fought against Wenceslaus. He married Catherine of Brunswick in 1402, and after various wars and 
quarrels, the University of Leipzig was founded in 1409. The indefatigable activity which this Prince 
displayed from 1420 against the movements of the Hussites, who were directly menacing his 
possessions, pointed him out as a valuable auxiliary to the Emperor Sigismond, who was then in a very 
critical position. In order to assure himself definitely of the alliance of Frederick the Quarreller, the 
Emperor conferred upon him the Electorate and Duchy of Saxony; but the former could not long 
enjoy his new found dignities in peace, for the Emperor shifted the whole weight of the war with the 
Hussites on to his shoulders. As the other German Princes did not respond readily to the Elector's 
appeal, the latter had the misfortune to lose the greater part of his Army near Brux in 1425. But his 
wife, Catherine, summoned the whole of Catholic Germany to unite in a Crusade against the 
innovating Hussites; while 20,000 strange and foreign Warriors came unexpectedly to range 
themselves under the Standard of Frederick. It is to be noted that Abraham the Jew puts the Artificial 
Cavalry he supplied at 2000 (though this may easily be a slip for 20,000) and rumour would of course 
soon magnify the number. But the Elector was at length defeated at the disastrous battle of Aussig in 
1426, where the elite of the German Warriors fell. The following year again witnessed a fresh defeat of 
the Elector, and the chagrin which this excited, ultimately led to his death. He was succeeded by his 
son, Frederick II., called "the Good" born in 1411, who began to reign in 1428, and died in 1464 (see 
Diet. Larousse). 

The same ambiguity exists in the French as in the translation, as to whether it is Abraham or the 
Bishop who passes over the matter in silence. Etje n'en dis pas davantage acause quil est un eclesiastique 
passant sous silence ceque joy fait deplus pour luy rendre service. (I preserve the orthography of the French 
original.) 

By "Count of Varvich" Abraham evidently means "Count of Warwick" as throughout the MS. a "w" 
is never used, but always a "v", wherever the former occurs in a proper name. This Count of Warwick 
is probably Henri de Beauchamp, the brother-in-law of Warwick the "King-Maker" and son of that 
Richard de Beauchamp, so infamous for his instrumentality in bringing about the torture and burning 
of the heroic Joan of Arc. Henri de Beauchamp was at first deprived of his goods by Henry VI.; but in 

35 

The Sacred Magic 

1444 that Monarch created him Duke of Warwick, and later, King of the islands of Wight, Jersey, and 
Guernsey. He did not long survive to enjoy these honours {Diet. Larousse). 
37 Probably Albert V. of Austria. 

Pope John XXIII. (Balthazar Cossa), Pope from 1410 to 1415, was born at Naples. He had been a 
corsair in his youth, and at first, after his entry into holy orders, was only notable for his debauches, 
his exactions, and his violence. Pope Boniface IX. nevertheless appointed him Cardinal in 1402, and 
afterwards Legate of Bologna, where he is said to have given himself up to such excesses that Gregory 
XII. thought it necessary to excommunicate him. Notwithstanding this Cossa was elected to the 
Papacy at the time when the Church was shaken by internal dissension. He promised at first to 
renounce the Pontificate, if on their side Gregory XII. and Benedict XIII. would abandon their claims. 
However, he mounted the Papal Throne, and declared for the side of Louis d'Anjou in the war 
between the latter and Ladislaus regarding the Throne of Naples. At length, after the taking of Rome 
by Ladislaus, he was forced to implore the support of the Emperor Sigismond. The latter consented to 
grant him his protection, but on the sole condition of the convocation of the Council of Constance. 
After much hesitation, and after having taken every possible precaution to ensure his personal safety, 
John XXIII. consented to the assembling of the Council, which he opened 7th November, 1414. 
Being then summoned to lay aside the Papal Mitre, he judged it prudent to consent; but a few days 
later, he succeeded in escaping in disguise, during a tournament given by the Duke of Austria. He 
retired to Lauffembourg, and protested against the abdication, which he declared to have been 
obtained from him by force. The Council was for a moment struck with fear and consternation, but 
the firmness of the Emperor Sigismond, coupled with the effect of the declaration of J. Gerson that 
the General Councils had higher authority than the Papacy, prevailed. John XXIII. was summoned to 
appear before the Council, but refused; and soon after, being abandoned by the Duke of Austria, who 
was too weak to resist the power of the Emperor, he was arrested at Fribourg, and conducted to 
Rudolfcell. On the 29th May, 1415, this Pontiff was solemnly deposed by the Council of Constance as 
being given to simony, impudent, a secret poisoner, and a spendthrift of the wealth of the Church; and 
was imprisoned in the Castle of Heidelberg. At the end of four years he recovered his liberty, on 
payment of 30,000 golden crowns, and went to Rome, where he made his submission to Martin V., 
and was by him appointed Cardinal-Bishop of Frascati, and Senior of the Sacred College. He died a 
few months later at Florence, either of anxiety or by poison. 

Either Ernest or William I. of Bavaria. They were brothers, and reigned conjointly. From his calling 
the Duke of Bavaria, his Lord, it would appear that he was living under his dominion, but it is curious 
that up to this point Abraham has never mentioned the name of his own town. 

Constantine Palaeologos, who was the thirteenth and last Greek Emperor. He was killed, and 
Constantinople taken by the Turks under Mahomet II. The direct descendant of Constantine 
Palaeologos today, is the Princess Eugenie di Cristoforo-Palxologae-Nicephorae-Comnenae. 

A deux doigts de sa perte. 

This chapter is entitled "Concerning the Convocation of the Good Spirits". 

Thus in MS.-? Saxonia. 

Quelques hableurs. 

36 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Herbipolis is the Latin mediaeval name of the town of Wurtzbourg in Bavaria. It seems from this 
passage that it was probably the city of Abraham the Jew, and therefore the one intended a few 
paragraphs before where he speaks of the "Bishop of our town". Wurzbourg and the surrounding 
district formed a Bishopric, and in the time of Abraham it was the scene of constant struggles between 
the Bishop and his party, and the burghers. Later, formidable persecutions against the Jews took place 
there, and many edicts were promulgated against witchcraft. 

41 This is evidently an error for either the sixth, the sixteenth, or the twenty-eighth chapter; probably 
the latter. 

To make oneself loved by a relation. 

The Eighteenth Chapter is entitled: "How to heal divers maladies". 

I.e. the Third Book. 

The Second Chapter is entitled: "How to obtain information and be enlightened concerning every 
kind of proposition and all doubtful sciences". 

The Eighth Chapter is entitled: "How to excite Tempests". 

"To know all sorts of matters past and to come, which are, however, not opposed to God and to His 
Holy Will!" 

Thus spelt here. 

As I have pointed out in my "Kabbalah Unveiled," I consider this a truer orthography than 
"Cabala," or "Kabbalah". 

Troque ou change. 
" That is to say the True and Unwritten Qabalah, which is the Ancient Egyptian Magical Wisdom; 
and not later Hebrew perversions thereof. 

That is to say the Administrators of the First Cause, ie. the various Divine Powers, or Gods and 
Goddesses, who act more directly on matter. 

Abraham here alludes to the period of preparation required from the Neophyte, as described later. 

Regarding the Hierarchies, see end of Third Book. 

Thus in the Indian "Mantras" the force and mystery of the Words themselves is especially insisted 
on. 

Les deffits 

I.e., the Demon. 
'" There is a very large species of Spider, which can even capture and kill small birds, but it is only met 
with in tropical regions, especially in Central America and Martinique; the zoological name of this 
species is Hygak. 

Here a word is evidently omitted in the MS. by a slip. It should probably read "of my God". 

This is a very usual expression in Qabalistic Books to denote a valuable collection of Occult or 
Magical information. 

It is noticeable how constantly Abraham the Jew insists upon this point. 

This word in Greek would mean "exhausted in every way" or "hemmed in and hindered on every 
side". 

I.e., the Angels. 

The following instructions recall some of Cagliostro's methods of magical working. 

37 

The Sacred Magic 

70 Ie., the Child. 
Ie., the Operator. 
Ie., the lamen of silver, previously alluded to. 

38

THE SACRED MAGIC 

OF 

ABRAMELIN THE MAGE 
Book II 

Translated by 
S.L. Mac Gregor Mathers 

The Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage 
Book II 

This Adobe Acrobat edition contains the complete and unaltered text of the 
corresponding sections in the second (1900) edition published by John M. Watkins, 
London. 

Prepared and typeset by Benjamin Rowe, December 16, 1998. 

THE SECOND BOOK 

OF THE 

HOLY MAGIC, 

WHICH GOD GAVE UNTO MOSES, AARON, DAVID, SOLOMON, AND OTHER 

SAINTS, PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS; WHICH TEACHETH 

THE TRUE DIVINE WISDOM. 

BEQUEATHED BY ABRAHAM UNTO LAME CH HIS SON. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBREW. 

1458. 

41 

The Sacred Magic 

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SACRED MAGIC. 

Prologue. 

r. 

HE Wisdom of the Lord is an inexhaustible fountain, neither hath there 
ever been a man born who could penetrate its veritable origin and 
foundation. The Sages and Holy Fathers have drunk long draughts 
thereof, and have been fully satisfied therewith. But with all this, not one 
among them hath been able to comprehend or know the Radical Principles, 
because the Creator of all things reserveth that unto Himself; and, like a 
jealous God, He hath indeed wished that we should enjoy the fruit thereof, 
but He hath not wished to permit us to touch either the Tree or its Root. It is 
then not only proper, but further also we are compelled to conform ourselves 
unto the Will of the Lord, walking in that Path, by the which also our 
predecessors went, without seeking out through a vain curiosity how it is that 
God reigneth and governeth in His Divine Wisdom; because such would be a 
very great presumption and a bestial conceit. Let us then content ourselves 
with only knowing how many blessings He hath granted unto us Sinners, and 
what extent of power He hath given unto us mortals over all things, and in 
what way it is permitted unto us to use them. Let us then content ourselves 
with this, laying aside all other, curiosity, observing without any comment that 
which shall be set down in this Book with fidelity. And if ye do follow my 
advice, ye shall be infallibly comforted thereby. 

42 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE FIRST CHAPTER. 

WHAT AND HOW MANY BE THE FORMS OF VERITABLE MAGIC. 

)HOSO should wish to recount all the Arts and Operations which in 
.our times be reputed and preached abroad as Wisdom and Magical 
Secrets; he should as well undertake to count the waves and the 
sands of the Sea; seeing that the matter hath come to such a pass that every 
trick of a buffoon is believed to be Magic, that all the abominations of impious 
Enchanters, all Diabolical Illusions, all Pagan Idolatries, all Superstitions, 
Fascinations, Diabolical Pacts, and lastly all that the gross blindness of the 
World can touch with its bands and feet is reckoned as Wisdom and Magic! 
The Physician, the Astrologer, the Enchanter, the Sorceress, the Idolater, and 
the Sacrilegious, is called of the common People a Magician! Also he who 
draweth his Magic whether from the Sun, whether from the Moon, whether 
from the Evil Spirits, whether from Stones, Herbs, Animals, Brutes, or lastly 
from thousand divers sources, so that the Heaven itself is astonished thereat. 
There be certain who draw their Magic from Air, from Earth, from Fire, from 
Water, from Physiognomy, from the Hand, from Mirrors, from Glasses, from 
Birds, from Bread, from Wine, and even from the very excrements themselves; 
and yet, however, all this is reputed as Science! 

I exhort you, ye who read, to have the Fear of God, and to study Justice, 
because infallibly unto you shall be opened the Gate of the True Wisdom 
which God gave unto Noah and unto his descendants Japhet, Abraham, and 
Ishmael; and it was His Wisdom that delivered Lot from the burning of 
Sodom. Moses learned the same Wisdom in the desert, from the Burning 
Bush, and he taught it unto Aaron his brother. Joseph, Samuel, David, 
Solomon, Elijah, and the Apostles, and Saint John particularly (from whom 
we hold a most excellent book of Prophecy ) possessed it. Let every one then 
know that this, this which I teach, is that same Wisdom and Magic, and which 
is in this same Book, and independent of any other Science, or Wisdom, or 
Magic, soever. It is, however, certainly true that these miraculous operations 
have much in common with the Qabalah; it is also true that there be other 
Arts which have some stamp of Wisdom; the which alone would be nothing 
worth were they not mingled with the foundation of the Sacred Ministry, 
whence later arose the Mixed Qabalah. The Arts are principally twelve. Four in 
number, 3, 5, 7, 9, among the numbers in the Mixed Qabalah. The second is 
the most perfect one, the which operateth by Sign and Visions. Two of the 
even numbers, namely 6 and 2, which operate with the Stars and the Celestial 
Courses which we call Astronomy. Three consisteth in the Metals, and 2 in the 
Planets. As to all these Arts, the which be conjoined and mingled together 

43 

The Sacred Magic 

with the Sacred Qabalah; both he who maketh use of these same, either alone, 
or mingled with other things which be in no way from the Qabalah; and he 
who seeketh to exercise himself in performing operations with these Arts; is 
alike liable to be deceived by the Demon; seeing that of themselves they 
possess no other virtue than a natural property; and they can produce no other 
thing than probable effects, and they have absolutely no power in spiritual and 
supernatural things; but if, however, on certain occasions they cause you to 
behold any extraordinary effect, such is only produced by impious and 
diabolical Pacts and Conjurations, the which form of Science ought to be 
called Sorcery. 

Finally, let us conclude that from the Divine Mystery are derived these 
three kinds of Qabalah, viz.: the Mixed Qabalah, and the True Wisdom, and 
the (True) Magic. We will, therefore, show forth this last, and the manner of 
becoming its possessors in the Name of God and of His Celestial Court! 

44 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE SECOND CHAPTER. 

WHAT WE SHOULD CONSIDER BEFORE UNDERTAKING THIS 

OPERATION. 

)E have already said what is the Science which I am to teach you, 
.that is to say, that it is neither in any way human nor diabolical, but 
(that it is) the True and Divine Wisdom and Magic, which has been 
handed down by our predecessors unto their successors as a hereditary 
treasure. In like manner as I myself at present, so even should ye think, before 
entering into this matter, and before taking possession of so great a treasure, 
how much this Gift is sublime and precious, and how vile and base are ye 
yourselves who be about to receive it. This is wherefore I say unto ye that the 
beginning of this Wisdom is the Fear of God and of justice. These be the 
Tables of the Law, the Qabalah, and the Magic; they should serve unto ye for a 
rule. It is necessary that ye should begin to attach yourselves unto the very 
beginning, if ye truly do wish to have the Veritable Wisdom; and thus shall ye 
walk in the right Path, and be able to work; all the which is contained in this 
Book, and all the which is therein prescribed. For to undertake this Operation 
with the simple intention of using it unto dishonest, impious, and wicked 
ends, is neither just nor reasonable; for it is absolutely necessary to perform 
this Operation unto the praise, honour, and glory of God; unto the use, 
health, and well-being of your neighbour, whether friend or enemy; and 
generally for that of the whole earth. Furthermore, it is also necessary to take 
into consideration other matters, which though less important be still 
necessary; namely, whether ye be capable, not only of commencing, but also of 
carrying through the Operation unto its end; this being a necessary point to 
consider before coming unto a final determination upon the matter; because in 
this case we are not negotiating with men, but with God, by the 
intermediation of His Holy Angels, and with all Spirits, both good and evil. 

I am not here intending to play the Saint and Hypocrite, but it is 
necessary to have a true and loyal heart. Ye have here to do with the Lord, 
Who not only beholdeth the outer man, but Who also penetrateth the inmost 
recesses of the heart. But having taken a true, firm, and determined resolution, 
relying upon the Will of the Lord, ye shall arrive at your desired end, and shall 
encounter no difficulty. Often also man is changeable, and while beginning a 
thing well, finisheth it badly, being in no way firm and stable in resolution. 
Ponder the matter then well before commencing, and only begin this 
Operation with the firm intention of carrying it out unto the end, for no man 
can make a mock of the Lord with impunity. 

45 

The Sacred Magic 

Furthermore it is likewise necessary to think and consider whether your 
goods and revenue be sufficient for this matter; and, further, whether if your 
quality or estate be subject unto others, ye may have time and convenience to 
undertake it; also whether wife or children may hinder you herein; these being 
all matters worthy of observation, so as not to commence the matter blindly. 

The chief thing that ye should consider is whether ye be in good health, 
because the body being feeble and unhealthy, it is subject to divers infirmities, 
whence at length result impatience and want of power to operate and pursue 
the Operation; and a sick man can neither be clean and pure, nor enjoy 
solitude; and in such a case it is better to cease. 

Consider then the safety of your person, commencing this Operation in a 
place of safety, whence neither enemies nor any disgrace can drive you out 
before the end because ye must finish where ye begin. 

But the first part of this chapter is the most important, and see that ye 
keep well in mind the necessity of observing the same, because as regardeth the 
other disadvantages, they may perhaps be remedied. And be ye sure that God 
doth aid all those who put their confidence in Him and in His Wisdom, and 
such as wish to live rightly, making use with honour of the deceitful world, 
which ye shall hold in abomination, and see that ye make no account of its 
opinion when ye shall be arrived at the perfection of the work, and that ye 
shall be possessors of this Sacred Magic. 

46 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE THIRD CHAPTER. 

OF THE AGE AND QUALITY OF THE PERSON WHO WISHETH TO 
UNDERTAKE THIS OPERATION. 

-N order to describe the aforesaid and other considerations in the best 
'possible manner; I will here make a general recapitulation; mentioning also 
! first what may bring hindrance unto the matter. 

It is, then, necessary that such a man give himself up unto a tranquil life, 
and that his habits be temperate; that he should love retirement; that he 
should be given neither unto avarice nor usury (that he should be the 
legitimate child of his parents is a good thing, but not as necessary as for the 
Qabalah, unto which no man born of a clandestine marriage can attain); his 
age ought not to be less than twenty-five years nor more than fifty; he should 
have no hereditary disease, such as virulent leprosy; whether he be free or 
married importeth little; a valet, lackey, or other domestic servant, can with 
difficulty arrive at the end required, being bound unto others and not having 
the conveniences at disposal which are necessary, and which this Operation 
demandeth. Among women, there be only Virgins who are suitable; but I 
strongly advise that so important a matter should not be communicated to 
them, because of the accidents that they might cause by their curiosity and 
love of talk. 

47 

The Sacred Magic 
THE FOURTH CHAPTER. 

THAT THE GREATER NUMBER OF MAGICAL BOOKS ARE FALSE AND 

VAIN. 

JLL the Books which treat of Characters, Extravagant Figures, Circles, 
'Convocations, Conjurations, Invocations, and other like matters, even 
-although any one may see some effect thereby, should be rejected, being 
works full of Diabolical Inventions; and ye should know that the Demon 
maketh use of an infinitude of methods to entrap and deceive mankind. This I 
have myself proved, because when I have operated with the Veritable Wisdom, 
all the other enchantments which I had learned have ceased, and I could no 
longer operate with them, and I made a very careful trial of those which I had 
learned with the Rabbin Moses; the cause of which is that the deceit and 
fraud of the Demon can never appear where the Divine Wisdom is. 
Furthermore, the most certain mark of their falsity is the election of certain 
days; since there be those which God hath expressly commanded to sanctify, 
we can freely operate on all other days, and at all times. And whenever ye shall 
see tables which do mark the days and their differences, the Celestial Signs, 
and other like matters, pay no attention thereto, because herein is a very great 
sin hidden, and a deceit of the Demon; it being one of his many methods of 
endeavouring to confound the True Wisdom of the Lord with evil matters. 
Because this True Wisdom of the Lord can operate and perform its effects 
every day, and at any moment and second. The Gates of His Grace are daily 
open, He wisheth, and it is pleasing unto Him to aid us, as well on this day as 
on the morrow; and in no way could it be true that He desireth to be 
subjected to the day and hour which men would wish to prescribe for Him; 
seeing that He is the Master to elect such days as He Himself wisheth, and also 
may they be sanctified! Flee also all such Books as those whose Conjurations 
include extravagant, inexplicable, and unheard-of words, and which be 
impossible to understand, and which be truly the inventions of the Devil and 
of wicked men. 

It is well also to recall that which I have said in the First Book, viz., that in 
the greater part of their Conjurations there was not the slightest mention made 
of God Almighty, but only of Invocations of the Devil, together with very 
obscure Chaldean words. Surely it would be a rash thing of a man who should 
deal with God by the intermediary of His Holy Angels, to think that he ought 
to address Him in a jargon, neither knowing what he saith nor what he 
demandeth. Is it not an act of madness to wish to offend God and His Holy 
Angels! Let us then walk in the right way, let us speak before God with heart 
and mouth alike opened, in our own maternal language, since how can ye 

48 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

pretend to obtain any Grace from the Lord, if ye yourselves know not what ye 
ask? Yet, however, the number of those who lose themselves utterly in this 
vanity is infinite; many say that the Grecian language is more agreeable unto 
God, it may be true that it was perhaps at one time, but how many among us 
to-day understand it perfectly, this is the reason why it would be the most 
senseless thing to employ it. 

I repeat then:- Let each one speak his own language, because thus 
understanding what it is that ye are demanding of the Lord, ye will obtain all 
Grace. And if ye demand a thing which is unjust, it will be refused unto you, 
and ye will never obtain it. 

49 

The Sacred Magic 
THE FIFTH CHAPTER. 

THAT IN THIS OPERATION IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO REGARD THE 
TIME, NOR THE DAY, NOR THE HOURS. 

'HERE be no other days (to be observed) than those which God hath 
) ordained unto our Fathers, viz., All Saturdays, which be the days of the 
'Sabbath; Passover; and the of Tabernacles; of which the former is the 
Fifteenth Day of the First of our Months, and the latter (beginneth on) the 
Fifteenth Day of the Seventh Month. Now for this Operation, any person of 
whatever Law he may be, provided that he confesseth that there is One 
God, may observe these feasts. However, the true time of commencing this 
Operation is the first day after the Celebration of the Feasts of Easter, and this 
was ordained unto Noah, being the most convenient time, and the end falleth 
just at the (Feast of) Tabernacles. Our predecessors have thus observed it, and 
the Angel also hath approved it; and also it is more advisable to follow good 
counsel and example, than to be obstinate and follow one's own caprice; and 
also to treat the election of a particular day as a Pagan idea, paying no regard, 
whatever either to Time nor to the Elements; but only (having respect) unto 
Him Who granteth such a period. Thus then will we be found men in the 
fittest condition of Grace and reconciled with God, and purer than at another 
period; and this being an essential point ye ought well to consider the same. 

It is, however, quite true that the Elements and the Constellations do 
perform of themselves certain operations but this is to be understood of 
natural things, as it happeneth that one day is different unto another; but such 
a difference hath not operation in things Spiritual and Supernatural, being 
thus useless for (higher) Magical Operations. The Election of Days is still more 
useless, the Election of Hours and Minutes whereof the ignorant make so 
much, is further a very great error. 

Wherefore I have resolved to write this particular chapter, in order that 
this error might appear more plainly evident unto him who readeth it, and 
that he may draw profit therefrom so as to operate with judgment. 

50 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE SIXTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE PLANETARY HOURS AND OTHER ERRORS OF THE 

ASTROLOGERS. 

rT is true that the Wise in Astrology do write of the Stars and of their 
'movements, and that these attaining thereto do produce divers effects in 
! inferior and elemental things; and such are, as we have already said, natural 
operations of the Elements; but that they should have power over the Spirits, 
or force in all supernatural things, that is not, neither can ever be. But it will 
instead be found that by the permission of the Great God it is the Spirits who 
govern the firmament. What foolishness then would it be to implore the 
favour of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars, when the object would be to 
have converse with Angels and with Spirits. Would it not be an extravagant 
idea to demand from the wild beasts the permission to go hunting? But what 
else is it, when they have elected a certain day, when they have divided it up 
into many false divisions such as hours, minutes, etc. "Here," they say, "we 
have the Planetary Hours, and the Planet appropriate to each Hour." O what 
Planets! O what fine order! Tell me, I pray you, what advantage you get by this 
division. You will reply: "A very great one, because it shows us in all things, 
either good or bad fortune!" I tell you, and I repeat absolutely, that this is in 
no way true; that they produce thus a change of the time and of the Air, I in 
part concede; but do me the grace to tell me how ye do divide the Planetary 
Hours. I know that ye begin the first hour of the day with the Planet which 
itself giveth the name unto the day, as Sunday is ascribed to the Sun, Monday 
to the Moon, Tuesday to Mars, Wednesday to Mercury, Thursday to Jupiter, 
Friday to Venus, and Saturday to Saturn; then ye divide the length of the Day 
into twelve equal portions which ye call Hours, and to each Hour ye assign its 
planet; and ye do the same thing with the Night, according to whether the 
days be long or short. Thus do the Hours become long or short. As for 
example, suppose that on a Sunday the Sun riseth at 7 o'clock and setteth at 5 
o'clock in the evening, its course will be ten Hours, the which ye divide up 
into twelve equal parts, so that each Hour is of fifty minutes length. I say, 
therefore, that the first Planetary Hour is of the Sun, and is fifty minutes long; 
that the second is of Venus; the third of Mercury; and so on of the others; at 
last the eighth Hour returneth unto the Sun; the ninth unto Venus; the tenth 
unto Mercury; and so the Day finisheth. Then cometh the Night, which is 
longer, that is to say, fourteen Hours, and each Planetary Hour of this Night 
will be seventy minutes, and in order to continue the regular succession as we 
have begun, the first Hour of the Night will be of Jupiter; the second of Mars; 
the third of the Sun; and so on until Monday, whose first Hour will be 

51 

The Sacred Magic 

(according to this rule) of the Moon. Now tell me, I pray you, doth it always 
happen that when the Day of Monday commenceth, that is to say, when the 
Sun riseth in its horizon, that the Moon riseth also together with him, and that 
she setteth also together with him? They cannot answer this. Wherefore then 
do they apportion unto the second day of the week and unto its first hour the 
Moon? They can tell you no reason, except a likeness to the name (of the 
Day). 24 

O! how gross an error! Hear and tell me when it is that a Planet hath the 
greatest force in the Elements; whether when it is above or when it is below 
your Horizon or Hemisphere? We must however avow that it is more powerful 
when it is above, because being below it hath no power save according unto 
the Will of God. Why then, even further than this, should we attribute unto a 
Planet a Day and Hour, if during the whole period of such Day it appeareth 
not above the Horizon! 

Abramelin as a most excellent Master in natural things taught unto me 
a very different form of classification (which also well examine, and see 
whether it be not more surely founded than the aforesaid rule of the 
Astrologers), and made me to comprehend what should be the true Planetary 
Hours. When the Planet beginneth to appear upon the Horizon then doth its 
Day begin (whether it be Light or Dark, Black or White), and until it bath 
passed its elevation its Day lasteth until it riseth anew, and after that it hath 
set its Night endureth; so that as well in the Days of the Sun as in those of the 
Moon and of the others, the Days of all the Planets be mingled, only that one 
commenceth sooner than another, according to which nature they be mingled 
together in the Celestial Signs. Now it is requisite that I should tell unto you 
what be the Planetary Hours! Know then that each Planet hath only an hour 
during the which it is very powerful, being over you and above your head, that 
is to say when it is in the Meridian. Then, naturally, will sometimes arrive the 
Hours of two Planets together and beginning at the same moment; they then 
produce an effect according unto the nature, quality, and complexion of these 
stars. But all this only hath power in natural things. Here have I declared and 
proved unto you the errors of the (common) Astrologers; keep yourselves 
carefully from the insensate follies of their Days and Hours, because if ye make 
use of these as do the false Magicians and Enchanters, God will chastise you; 
and in order to chastise you will pay but little attention unto the awaiting of 
the Hour of Saturn or of Mars. 

I therefore now conclude this chapter, having sufficiently treated of the 
false and useless method employed by the Astrologers in the Election of Days 
and of Hours. 

52 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. 

REGARDING WHAT IT IS NECESSARY TO ACCOMPLISH DURING THE 
FIRST TWO MOONS OF THE BEGINNING OF THIS VERITABLE AND 

SACRED MAGIC. 

E who commenceth this Operation should consider with care that 
' which we have before said, and should pay attention unto that which 
.followeth; and the thing being of importance, I shall leave alone for the 
present all other considerations, so that we may begin with the Operation 
which we should perform on the first morning after the celebration of the 
Feast of Easter (or Passover). 

Firstly: Having carefully washed one's whole body and having put on 
fresh clothing: precisely a quarter of an hour before Sunrise ye shall enter into 
your Oratory, open the window, and place yourselves upon your knees before 
the Altar, turning your faces towards the window; and devoutly and with 
boldness ye shall invoke the Name of the Lord, thanking Him for all the grace 
which He hath given and granted unto you from your infancy until now; then 
with humility shall ye humble yourselves unto Him, and confess unto Hirn 
entirely all your sins; supplicating Him to be willing to pardon you and remit 
them. Ye shall also supplicate Him that in the time to come He may be willing 
and pleased to regard you with pity and grant you His grace and goodness to 
send unto you His Holy Angel, who shall serve unto you as a Guide, and lead 
you ever in His Holy Way and Will; so that ye fall not into sin through 
inadvertence, through ignorance, or through human frailty. 

In this manner shall ye commence your Oration, and continue thus every 
morning during the first two Moons or Months. 

Meseemeth here that now some may say: "Wherefore dost thou not write 
down the words or form of prayer the which I should employ, seeing that, as 
for me, I am neither sufficiently learned, nor devout, nor wise?" 

Know ye that although in the beginning your prayer be but feeble, it will 
suffice, provided that ye understand how to demand the Grace of the Lord 
with love and a true heart, whence it must be that such a prayer cometh forth. 
Also it serveth nothing to speak without devotion, without attention, and 
without intelligence; nor yet to pronounce it with the mouth alone, without a 
true intent; nor yet to read it as do the ignorant and the impious. But it is 
absolutely necessary that your prayer should issue from the midst of your 
heart, because simply setting down prayers in writing, the hearing of them will 
in no way explain unto you how really to pray. This is the reason that I have 
not wished to give unto you any special form of prayers and orations, so that 
ye yourselves may learn from and of yourselves how to pray, and how to invoke 
the Holy Name of God, our Lord; and for that reason I have not been willing 

53 

The Sacred Magic 

that ye should rely upon me in order to pray. Ye have the Holy and Sacred 
Scripture, the which is filled with very beautiful and potent prayers and actions 
of grace. Study then herein, and learn herefrom, and ye shall have no lack of 
instructions how to pray with fruit. And although in the commencement your 
prayer may be weak, it sufficeth that your heart be true and loyal towards God, 
Who little by little will kindle in you His Holy Spirit, Who will so teach you 
and enlighten your Spirit, that ye shall both know and have the power to pray. 

When ye shall have performed your orations, close the window, and go 
forth from the Oratory; so that no one may be able therein to enter; and ye 
shall not yourselves enter again until the evening when the Sun shall be set. 
Then shall ye enter therein afresh, and shall perform your prayers in the same 
manner as in the morning. 

For the rest, ye shall govern yourselves each day as I shall tell you in the 
following instructions. 

Concerning the Bed Chamber and the Oratory, and how they should be 
arranged, I will tell hereafter in the Eleventh Chapter. 28 

It is requisite that ye shall have a Bed Chamber near the Oratory or else 
your ordinary habitation, which it is necessary first to thoroughly clean out 
and perfume, and see that the Bed be both new and clean. Your whole 
attention must be given to purity in all things; because the Lord hath in 
abomination all that is impure. You shall sleep in this said Chamber, and you 
shall continue therein during the day, there transacting the matters which 
belong unto your business; and those which you can dispense with, leave 
alone. You may sleep with your Wife in the bed when she is pure and clean; 
but when she hath her monthly courses you shall not allow her to enter the 
bed, nor even the Chamber. Every Sabbatheve it is necessary to change the 
sheets of the bed, and all the linen. Every Saturday you shall perfume the 
Chamber. And ye shall not allow any dog, cat, or other animal to enter into 
nor dwell therein; so that they may in no way be able to render it unclean. As 
regardeth the matrimonial obligation, it is chastity, and the duty that of 
engendering children; but the whole should be done in the Fear of God, and, 
above all things, in such case see that your Wife be not impure. But during the 
following four Moons ye shall flee sexual intercourse as ye would the Plague. 
Even if ye have children, endeavour to send them away unto another place 
before (commencing the Operation), so that they may not be an hindrance 
from being about you; except the eldest-born of the family, and infants at the 
breast. 

As regardeth the regimen of your life and actions, ye shall have regard 
unto your status and condition. If you be your own Master, as far as lieth in 
your power, free yourself from all your business, and quit all mundane and 
vain company and conversation; leading a life tranquil, solitary and honest. If 
aforetime you have been a wicked, debauched, avaricious, luxurious and proud 

54 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

man, leave and flee from all these Vices. Consider that this was one of the 
principal reasons why Abraham, Moses, David, Elijah, John, and other holy 
men retired into desert places, until that they had acquired this Holy Science 
and Magic; because where there are many people, many scandals do arise; and 
where scandal is, Sin cometh; the which at length offendeth and driveth away 
the Angel of God, and the Way which leadeth unto Wisdom becometh closed 
unto ye. Fly as far as you can the conversation of men, and especially of such 
as in the past have been the companions of your debauches; or who have led 
you into sin. Ye shall therefore seek retirement as far as possible; until that ye 
shall have received that Grace of the Lord which ye ask. But a Domestic 
Servant who is compelled to serve a Master cannot well have these 
conveniences (for working and performing the Operation). 

Take well heed in treating of business, in selling or buying, that it shall be 
requisite that you never give way unto anger, but be modest and patient in 
your actions. 

You shall set apart two hours each day after having dined, during the 
which you shall read with care the Holy Scripture and other Holy Books, 
because they will teach you to be good at praying, and how to fear the Lord; 
and thus day by day shall ye better know your Creator. The other exercises 
which be free and permitted unto you, are hereafter set forth and principally in 
the Eleventh Chapter. 

As for eating, drinking and sleeping, such should be in moderation and 
never superfluous. It is especially necessary to shun drunkenness, and flee 
public dinners. Content yourself with eating at your own house, with your 
family, in the peace and quiet which God hath granted unto you. You should 
never sleep during the day, but you may in the morning, for after that you 
have performed your devotions you may if you wish again go to bed to rest 
yourself. And if it happeneth by chance that you do not rise sufficiently early, 
that is to say before sunrise, it doth not greatly matter (provided that it be not 
done of evil intent), and you shall perform your ordinary morning prayer; 
but you should not accustom yourself to be slothful, it being always better to 
pray unto God at an early hour. 

CONCERNING CLOTHING AND FAMILY. 

Your dress should be clean but moderate, and according to custom. Flee 
all vanity. You shall have two dresses, in order that you may be able to change 
them; and you shall change them the eve of each Sabbath, wearing the one one 
week, and the other the next brushing and perfuming them always 
beforehand. 

As for that which regardeth the family, the fewer in number, the better; 
also act so that the servants may be modest and tranquil. All these pieces of 
advice be principal points which it is well to observe. As for the rest, you have 

55 

The Sacred Magic 

only to keep before your eyes the Tables of the Law during all this time, and 
also afterwards; because these Tables should be the rule of your life. 

Let your hand be ever ready to give alms and other benefits to your 
neighbour; and let your heart be ever open unto the poor, whom God so 
loveth that one cannot express the same. 

And in the case that during this period you should be attacked by some 
illness, which would not permit you to go unto the Oratory, this need not 
oblige you to abandon your enterprise at once; but you should govern yourself 
to the best of your ability; and in such case you shall perform your orations in 
your bed, entreating God to restore you to health, so that you may be enabled 
to continue your undertaking, and make the sacrifices which be due, and so 
with the greater strength be able to work to obtain His Wisdom. 

And this is all that we should do and observe during these two Moons. 

56 

r. 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE TWO SECOND MOONS. 

HE two first Moons being finished; the two second Moons follow, 
during the which ye shall make your prayer, morning and evening at the 
hour accustomed; but before entering into the Oratory ye shall wash 
your hands and face thoroughly with pure water. And you shall prolong your 
prayer with the greatest possible affection, devotion and submission; humbly 
entreating the Lord God that He would deign to command His Holy Angels 
to lead you in the True Way, and Wisdom, and Knowledge, by studying the 
which assiduously in the Sacred Writings there will arise more and more 
(Wisdom) in your heart. 

The use of the rights of Marriage is permitted, but should scarcely if at all 
be made use of (during this period). 

You shall also wash your whole body every Sabbath Eve. 

As to what regardeth commerce and manner of living, I have already 
given unto you sufficient instruction. 

Only it is absolutely necessary to retire from the world and seek retreat; 
and ye shall lengthen your prayers to the utmost of your ability. 

As for eating, drinking and clothing, ye shall govern yourselves in exactly 
the same manner as in the two first Moons; except that ye shall fast (the 
Qabalistical fast) every Sabbath Eve. 

Note Well: The Sabbath is for the Jews, who are accustomed to observe 
the same every Saturday, but for Christians the Sabbath is the Sunday, and 
they ought to consider the Saturday as its Eve. 

57 

The Sacred Magic 
THE NINTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE TWO LAST MOONS WHICH MUST BE THUS 

COMMENCED. 

'ORNING and Noon ye shall wash your hands and your face on 
entering the Oratory; and firstly ye shall make Confession of all your 
•sins; after this, with a very ardent prayer, ye shall entreat the Lord to 
accord unto you this particular grace, which is, that you may enjoy and be able 
to endure the presence and conversation of His Holy Angels, and that He 
may deign by their intermission to grant unto you the Secret Wisdom, so that 
you may be able to have dominion over the Spirits and over all creatures. 

Ye shall do this same at midday before dining, and also in the evening; so 
that during these two last Moons ye shall perform the prayer three times a day, 
and during this time ye shall ever keep the Perfume upon the Altar. Also 
towards the end of your Oration, ye shall pray unto the Holy Angels, 
supplicating them to bear your sacrifice before the Face of God, in order to 
intercede for you, and that they shall assist you in all your operations during 
these two Moons. 

The man who is his own master shall leave all business alone, except 
works of charity towards his neighbour. You shall shun all society except that 
of your Wife and of your Servants. Ye shall employ the greatest part of your 
time in speaking of the Law of God, and in reading such works as treat wisely 
thereof; so that your eyes may be opened unto that which from past time even 
unto the present ye have not as yet seen, nor thought of, nor believed. 

Every Sabbath Eve shall ye fast, and wash your whole body, and change 
your garment. 

Furthermore, ye shall have a Vest and Tunic of linen, which ye shall put 
on every time that ye enter into the Oratory, before ye commence to put the 
Perfume in the Censer, as I shall tell ye more fully hereafter 

Also ye shall have a basket or other convenient vessel of copper filled with 
Charcoal to put inside the Censer when necessary, and which ye can take 
outside the Oratory, because the Censer itself should never be taken away from 
the place. Note well that after having performed your prayer, you ought to 
take it out of the Oratory, especially during the Two last Moons, and ye 
should inter it in a place which cannot well be made unclean, such as a garden. 

58 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE TENTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING WHAT THINGS A MAN MAY LEARN AND STUDY DURING 

THESE TWO MOONS. 

ALTHOUGH the best counsel which I can give is that a man should go 
'into retirement in some desert or solitude, until the time of the Six 
-Moons destined unto this Operation be fulfilled, and that he shall have 
obtained that which he wisheth; as the Ancients used to do; nevertheless now 
this is hardly possible; and we must accommodate ourselves unto the era (in 
which we live); and being unable to carry it out in one way, we should 
endeavour to do so in another; and attach ourselves only unto Divine Things. 

But there be certain who cannot even do this thoroughly, notwithstanding 
they may honestly wish the same; and this because of their divers employments 
and positions which will not permit them to act in accordance with their 
desires, so that they are compelled to carry on their worldly occupations. 

In order then that such may know what occupations and business they 
can follow out without prejudice to this Operation, I will here state the same 
in few words. 

We may then exercise the profession of Medicine, and all arts connected 
with the same; and we may perform all operations which tend unto charity 
and mercy towards our neighbour purely and simply. As for what concerneth 
the liberal arts ye may interest yourselves in Astronomy, etc., but flee all arts 
and operations which have the least tincture of Magic and Sorcery, seeing that 
we must not confound together God and Belial: God wisheth to be alone; 
unto Him pertain all honour and glory. All the above matters are however 
permitted during the two first and the two second Moons. 

You may walk in a garden for recreation; but you shall do no servile work; 
and amidst the flowers and the fruits you can also meditate upon the 
greatness of God. But during the two third and last Moons ye shall quit every 
other matter only permitting your recreation to consist in things Spiritual and 
Divine. If ye wish to be participators in the Conversation of the Angels, and in 
the Divine Wisdom, lay aside all indiscreet things, and regard it as a pleasure 
when ye can spare two or three hours to study the Holy Scripture, because 
hencefrom ye shall derive incredible profit; and even the less ye are learned, so 
much the more will ye become wise and clever. It sufficeth that in the 
performance of your Orisons ye shall not give way unto sleep, and that ye shall 
fail in nowise in this operation through negligence and voluntarily. 

59 

The Sacred Magic 

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 

38 

CONCERNING THE SELECTION OF THE PLACE. 

) E should make the Selection of the Place (for the Operation) before 
.commencing it, and prior to the celebration of the Passover, in order 
that we may decide upon the same without hindrance, and it is 
necessary that all things should be prepared. 

He who commenceth this Operation in solitude can elect a place 
according unto his pleasure; where there is a small wood, in the midst of which 
you shall make a small Altar, and you shall cover the same with a hut (or 
shelter) of fine branches, so that the rain may not fall thereon and extinguish 
the Lamp and the Censer. Around the Altar at the distance of seven paces you 
shall prepare a hedge of flowers, plants, and green shrubs, so that it may divide 
the entrance into two parts; that is to say, the Interior where the Altar and 
Tabernacle will be placed after the manner of a Temple; and the part Exterior, 
which with the rest of the place will be as a Portico thereunto. 

Now if you commence not this Operation in the Country, but perform it 
in a Town, or in some dwellingplace, I will show unto ye what shall be 

i . 40 

necessary herein. 

Ye shall choose an Apartment which hath a Window, joined unto the 
which shall be an uncovered Terrace (or Balcony), and a Lodge (or small room 
or hut) covered with a roof, but so that there may be on every side windows 
whence you may be able to see in every direction, and whence you may enter 
into the Oratory. In the which place the Evil Spirits shall be able to appear, 
since they cannot appear within the Oratory itself In the which place, beside 
the Oratory towards the quarter of the North, you shall have a rooted or 
covered Lodge, in the which and from whence one may be able to see the 
Oratory. I myself also had two large windows made in my Oratory, and at the 
time of the Convocation of the Spirits, I used to open them and remove both 
the shutters and the door, so that I could easily see on every side and constrain 
them to obey me. 

The Oratory should always be clear and clean swept, and the flooring 
should be of wood, of white pine; in fine, this place should be so well and 
carefully prepared, that one may judge it to be a place destined unto prayer. 

The Terrace and the contiguous Lodge where we are to invoke the Spirits 
we should cover with river sand to the depth of two fingers at the least. 

The Altar should be erected in the midst of the Oratory; and if any one 
maketh his Oratory in desert places, he should build it of stones which have 
never been worked or hewn, or even touched by the hammer. 

60 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

The Chamber should be boarded with pine wood, and a Lamp full of 
Oil Olive should be suspended therein, the which every time that ye shall have 
burned your perfume and finished your orison, ye shall extinguish. A 
handsome Censer of bronze, or of silver if one hath the means, must be placed 
upon the Altar, the which should in no wise be removed from its place until 
the Operation be finished, if one performeth it in a dwelling-house; for in the 
open country one cannot do this. Thus in this point as in all the others, we 
should rule and govern ourselves according unto the means at our disposal. 

The Altar, which should be made of wood, ought to be hollow within 
after the manner of a cupboard, wherein you shall keep all the necessary 
things, such as the two Robes, the Crown or Mitre, the Wand, the Holy Oils, 
the Girdle or Belt, the Perfume; and any other things which may be necessary. 

The second habiliments will be a Shirt or Tunic of linen, large and 
white, with well and properly made sleeves. The other Robe will be of 
Crimson or Scarlet Silk with Gold, and it should not be longer than just unto 
the knees, with sleeves of similar stuff. As for these vestments, there is no 
particular rule for them; nor any especial instructions to be followed; but the 
more resplendent, clean, and brilliant they are the better will it be. You shall 
also make a Girdle of Silk of the same colour as the Tunic, wherewithal you 
shall be girded. You shall have upon your head a beautiful Crown or woven 
Fillet of Silk and Gold. You shall prepare the Sacred Oil in this manner: Take 
of myrrh ' in tears, one part; of fine cinnamon, two parts; of galangal, half a 
part; and the half of the total weight of these drugs of the best oil olive. The 
which aromatics you shall mix together according unto the Art of the 
Apothecary, and shall make thereof a Balsam, the which you shall keep in a 
glass vial which you shall put within the cupboard (formed by the interior) of 
the Altar. The Perfume shall be made thus: Take of Incense in tears one part; 
of Stacte half a part; of Lign Aloes a quarter of a part; and not being able to 
get this wood you shall take that of cedar, or of rose, or of citron, or any other 
odoriferous wood. You shall reduce all these ingredients into a very fine 
powder, mix them well together and keep the same in a box or other 
convenient vessel. As you will consume a great deal of this perfume, it will be 
advisable to mix enough on the eve of the Sabbath to last the whole week. 

You shall also have a Wand of Almond-tree wood, smooth and straight, of 
the length of about from half an ell to six feet And ye shall keep the aforesaid 
things in good order in the cupboard of the Altar, ready for use in the proper 
time and place. 

Here followeth the manner of ordering oneself and of operating. 

61 

The Sacred Magic 
THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. 

HOW ONE SHOULD KEEP ONESELF IN ORDER TO CARRY OUT THIS 

OPERATION WELL. 

'HIS Operation being truly Divine, it is necessary once more to treat of 
)and distinguish the present Consecration into different periods of time. 
You shall then understand that during the two first and two second 
Moons, no other Consecration must be performed, than that of which we have 
already spoken in the Seventh and Eighth foregoing Chapters, unto the 
which I refer you, so as not to be too prolix. And I only say unto you, that 
during the course of the two first and two second Moons, every Saturday when 
ye perform the Orison, ye shall also burn the Perfume as well in the morning 
as in the evening; and in the two third and last Moons ye shall make the Prayer 
and the Perfume thrice daily. 

Now here hath the last part of the time arrived here therefore open ye 
your eyes and be attentive, and govern yourselves in everything and every place 
in the way which I have written unto you. Have confidence in God, because if 
even until then ye have faithfully observed mine instructions which I have 
given unto you, and if your Orisons shall have been made with a righteous 
heart and with devotion, there is no manner of doubt that all things will 
appear easy unto you, and your own spirit and your understanding will teach 
you the manner in which you should conduct yourself in all points; because 
your Guardian Angel is already about you, though Invisible, and conducteth 
and governeth your heart, so that you shall not err. The two Moons being 
finished, in the morning ye shall commence all that is commanded in the 
Ninth Chapter, 3 and further observe this present Chapter. 

When first ye shall enter into the Oratory, leave your shoes without, and 
having opened the window, ye shall place the lighted coals in the Censer 
which you shall have brought with you, you shall light the Lamp, and take 
from the Cupboard of the Altar your two Vestments, the Crown, the Girdle 
and the Wand, placing them upon the Altar. Then take the Sacred Oil in your 
left hand, cast some of the Perfume upon the Fire, and place yourself upon 
your knees, praying unto the Lord with fervour. 

THE ORISON. 

"O Lord God of Mercy; God, Patient, Most Benign and Liberal; Who 
grantest Thy Grace in a thousand ways, and unto a thousand generations; 
Who forgettest the iniquities, the sins, and the transgressions of men; in 
Whose Presence none is found innocent; Who visitest the transgressions of the 
father upon the children and nephews unto the third and fourth generation; I 

62 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

know my wretchedness, and that I am not worthy to appear before Thy 
Divine Majesty nor even to implore and beseech Thy Goodness and Mercy 
for the least Grace. But, O Lord of Lords, the Source of Thy Bounty is so 
great, that of Itself It calleth those who are ashamed by reason of their sins and 
dare not approach, and inviteth them to drink of Thy Grace. Wherefore, O 
Lord my God, have pity upon me, and take away from me all iniquity and 
malice; cleanse my soul from all the uncleanness of sin; renew within me my 
Spirit, and comfort it, so that it may become strong and able to comprehend 
the Mystery of Thy Grace, and the Treasures of Thy Divine Wisdom. Sanctify 
me also with the Oil of Thy Sanctification, wherewith Thou hast sanctified all 
Thy Prophets; and purify in me therewith all that appertaineth unto me, so 
that I may become worthy of the Conversation of Thy Holy Angels and of 
Thy Divine Wisdom, and grant unto me the Power which Thou hast given 
unto Thy Prophets over all the Evil Spirits. Amen. Amen." 

This is the Prayer which I myself made use of in my Consecration; the 
which I give not here to confine you (to a certain form), nor to oblige you to 
employ the same, nor to tell it you over as I would to a parrot whom I should 
wish to teach to talk; but only and solely to give unto you an idea of the 
manner in which we should pray. 

Having finished your Orison, rise from your knees, and anoint the 
centre of your forehead with a little of the Sacred Oil; after this dip your 
finger into the same Oil, and anoint therewith the four upper corners of the 
Altar. Touch also with this Holy Oil the Vestments, the Girdle, the Crown, 
and the Wand, on both sides. You shall also touch the Doors and the Windows 
of the Oratory. Then with your finger dipped in the Oil you shall write upon 
the four sides of the Altar these words, so that they may be perfectly clearly 
written on each side:- 

"In whatever place it may be wherein Commemoration of My Name shall 
be made, I will come unto you and I will bless you." 

This being done the Consecration is finished, and then ye shall put the 
White Tunic and all the other things into the Cupboard of the Altar. Then 
kneel down and make your ordinary prayer, as is laid down in the Third 
Chapter; and be well ware to take no consecrated thing out of the Oratory; 
and during the whole of the ensuing period ye shall enter the Oratory and 
celebrate the Office with naked feet. 

63 

The Sacred Magic 
THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE CONVOCATION OF THE GOOD SPIRITS. 

) E are now arrived at a point at which ye shall be able to see clearly, 
.having duly followed out and observed the instructions which I 
have given unto you, and having during all this time served God 
your Creator with a perfect heart. We are now arrived at the term, wherefore 
the following morning rise betimes, neither wash yourselves at all nor dress 
yourselves at all in your ordinary clothes; but take a Robe of Mourning; enter 
the Oratory with bare feet; go unto the side of the Censer, take the ashes 
therefrom and place them upon your head; light the Lamp; and put the hot 
coals into the Censer; and having opened the windows, return unto the door. 
There prostrate yourself with your face against the ground, and order the 
Child to put the Perfume upon the Censer, after which he is to place himself 
upon his knees before the Altar; following in all things and throughout the 
instructions which I have given unto you in the last chapter of the First Book, 
to which I am here referring.' Humiliate yourself before God and His 
Celestial Court, and commence your Prayer with fervour, for then it is that 
you will begin to enflame yourself in praying, and you will see appear an 
extraordinary and supernatural Splendour which will fill the whole apartment, 
and will surround you with an inexpressible odour, and this alone will console 
you and comfort your heart so that you shall call for ever happy the Day of the 
Lord. Also the Child will experience an admirable feeling of contentment in 
the presence of the Angel. And you shall continue always your Prayer 
redoubling your ardour and fervour, and shall pray the Holy Angel that he 
may deign to Sign, and write upon a small square plate of silver (which you 
shall have had made for this purpose and which you shall have placed upon 
the Altar) another Sign if you shall have need of it in order to see him; and 
everything which you are to do. As soon as the Angel shall have made the Sign 
by writing, and that he shall have written down some other counsel which may 
be necessary unto you, he will disappear, but the splendour will remain. The 
which the Child having observed, and made the sign thereof unto you, you 
shall command him to bring you quickly the little plate of silver, and that 
which you find written thereon you shall at once copy, and order the Child to 
replace it upon the Altar. Then you shall go forth from the Oratory and leave 
the Window open, and the Lamp alight, and during this whole day you shall 
not enter into the Oratory; but shall make preparation for the day following; 
and during the day you shall speak to none, nor make answer, even were it 
your own wife or children or servants; except to the Child whom you can send 
away. Also you shall beforehand have set your affairs in order, and so arranged 

64 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

them that no embarrassment may be caused you thereby which might distract 
your attention. In the evening when the Sun shall be set, you shall eat but 
soberly; and then you shall go to rest alone; and you shall live separated from 
your wife during these days. 

During Seven Days shall you perform the Ceremonies without failing 
therein in any way; namely the Day of the Consecration, the Three Days of 
the Convocation of the Good and Holy Spirits, and the Three other Days of 
the Convocation of the Evil Spirits. 

Now the second morning after, you are to be prepared to follow the 
counsel which the Angel will have given you. You will go early unto the 
Oratory, you will place the lighted charcoal and perfumes in the Censer, you 
are to relight the Lamp if it be (by that time) extinguished; and wearing the 
same Robe of Mourning as of the day before, prostrate with your face towards 
the ground, you shall humbly pray unto and supplicate the Lord that He may 
have pity on you, and that He may deign to fulfil your prayer; that He will 
grant unto you the vision of His Holy Angels, and that the Elect Spirits may 
deign to grant unto you their familiar converse. And thus shall ye pray unto 
the utmost degree that shall be possible unto you, and with the greatest fervour 
that you can bring into action from your heart, and this during the space of 
two or three hours. Then quit the Oratory, returning thither at midday for 
another hour, and equally again in the evening; then you shall eat after the 
manner aforesaid, and go to rest. Understand also that the odour and the 
splendour will in nowise quit the Oratory. 

The third day being now arrived, you shall act thus. The evening (before) 
you shall wash your whole body thoroughly; and in the morning, being 
dressed in your ordinary garments, you shall enter into the Oratory, but with 
naked feet. Having placed the Fire and the Perfumes in the Censer, and lighted 
the Lamp, you shall put on the White Vestment, and place yourself on your 
knees before the Altar, to render thanks to God for all His benefits, and firstly 
for having granted unto you a Treasure so great and so precious. You shall 
render thanks also unto the Holy Guardian Angels, praying unto them that 
henceforward they will have you in their care for the whole period of your life; 
also that he will never abandon you, that he will lead you in the Way of the 
Lord, and that he will watch carefully over you to assist you, and consent unto 
the present Operation of the Sacred Magic, so that you shall have such Force 
and Virtue that you may be able to constrain the Spirits accursed of God, unto 
the Honour of your Creator, and for your own good and that of your 
neighbour. 

And then shall you first be able to put to the test whether you shall have 
well employed the period of your Six Moons, and how well and worthily you 
shall have laboured in the quest of the Wisdom of the Lord; since you shall see 
your Guardian Angel appear unto you in unequalled beauty; who also will 

65 

The Sacred Magic 

converse with you, and speak in words so full of affection and of goodness, and 
with such sweetness, that no human tongue could express the same. He will 
animate you unto your great content in the fear of God, making you a recital 
of the blessings which you have received from God; and bringing unto your 
remembrance the sins by which you have offended Him during the whole 
period of your life, will instruct you and give unto you the manner in which 
you shall be able to appease Him by a pure, devout, and regulated life, and by 
honest and meritorious actions, and such things as God shall ordain unto you. 
After this he will show unto you the True Wisdom and Holy Magic, and also 
wherein you have erred in your Operation, and how thenceforward you should 
proceed in order to overcome the Evil Spirits, and finally arrive at your desired 
ends. He will promise never to abandon you, but to defend and assist you 
during the whole period of your life; on condition that you shall obey his 
commands, and that you shall not voluntarily offend your Creator. In one 
word, you shall be received by him with such affection that this description 
which I here give unto you shall appear a mere nothing in comparison. 

Now at this point I commence to restrict myself in my writing, seeing 
that by the Grace of the Lord I have submitted and consigned you unto a 
Master so great that he will never let you err. 

Observe that on the third day you should remain in familiar 
conversation' with your Guardian Angel. You should quit the Oratory for a 
short time in the afternoon, remaining without about an hour; then for the 
rest of the day you shall remain therein, receiving from the Holy Angel distinct 
and ample information regarding the Evil Spirits and the manner of bringing 
them into submission, carefully writing down and taking notes of all these 
matters. Now, the Sun being set, you shall perform the Evening Orison with 
the ordinary Perfume, giving thanks unto God in particular for the very great 
Grace that He hath granted unto you in that day, there also supplicating Him 
to be propitious unto you and to aid you during your whole life, so that you 
shall never be able to offend Him. You shall also render thanks unto your 
Guardian Angel and beseech him not to abandon you. The Prayer being 
finished you will see that the Splendour will disappear. Then shall you quit the 
Oratory, closing the door, but leaving the windows open and the Lamp alight. 
You shall return as on the preceding days unto your apartment where you shall 
modestly recreate yourself, and eat your necessary food, then you shall go to 
rest until the following morning. 

66 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE CONVOCATION OF THE SPIRITS. 64 

'HOUGH the following advice may be scarcely necessary for the most 
)part, since I have already explained unto you all things necessary to be 
'done; and also seeing that your Guardian Angel will have sufficiently 
instructed you in all that you should do; yet nevertheless I will here declare 
plainly certain matters unto you, with the idea rather of making the account of 
the Operation complete in this Book, and also to give you every opportunity 
of possessing the matter thoroughly through reading these things many times; 
so that having received the Vision of the Angel, you may find yourself 
thoroughly instructed in all the essential points. 

Having then reposed yourself during the night, you shall rise in the 
morning before dawn, and shall enter into the Oratory; and having placed the 
lighted Charcoal in the Censer, light the Lamp also. You shall then robe 
yourself, taking first the White Vestment, and over this you shall put on that , 
of Silk and Gold, then the Girdle, and upon your head you shall place the 
Crown, and you shall lay the Wand upon the Altar. Then, having put the 
Perfume in the Censer you shall fall upon your knees, and pray unto Almighty 
God to grant you the Grace to finish your Operation unto the Praise and 
Glory of His Holy Name, and for your own use and that of your neighbour. 
Also you shall supplicate your Guardian Angel to aid you, and to govern your 
heart with his counsel, and all your senses. After this you shall take the Wand 
in your right hand, and pray unto God to give unto this Wand as much virtue, 
force, and power as He gave unto those of Moses, of Aaron, of Elijah, and 
of the other Prophets whose number is infinite. 

Now place yourself beside the Altar looking towards the Door and the 
open Terrace; or if you be in the Country place yourself at the Western side, 
and commence by summoning the Chief Spirits and Princes. 

But your Angel will already have instructed you how to convoke them, 
and will have sufficiently impressed it on your heart. 

And as well in this as in the Orison, we should never proceed and act by 
the mouth only or by written Conjurations alone; but with a free heart and 
intrepid courage; because it is certain that there is more difficulty in convoking 
the Evil Spirits' than the Good, which latter usually appear more readily when 
they are first called if it be by persons of good intent; while the Evil Spirits flee 
as much as possible all occasion of submitting themselves to man. This is 
wherefore be who wisheth to constrain them should be upon his guard, and 
follow out faithfully from point to point the instructions which his Guardian 
Angel will have given him, and that he impresseth them well upon his memory 

67 

The Sacred Magic 

following them from point to point; seeing that while no Spirit Good or Evil 
can know the secrets of your heart before you yourself bring the same to light, 
unless God Who alone knoweth all things should manifest them; they (the 
Spirits) nevertheless can penetrate into and understand that which you are 
thinking by means of your actions and your words.' This is the reason why he 
who wisheth properly to convoke and conjure the Spirits, should first well 
consider the following Conjuration; and afterward perform it with feeling and 
freely by heart; and not by writing, because in using that composed by others, 
the Spirits thence judge that we ourselves are ignorant, and render themselves 
straightway more intractable and stubborn. The Evil Spirits be about you, 
though invisible, and they keenly examine whether he who conjureth them is 
courageous or timid, whether he is prudent, and whether he hath a true faith 
in God Who can perform all things with ease. We can constrain them (the 
Spirits), and force them to appear; but a few words ill pronounced by an 
ill-intentioned person only produce an effect against the person himself who 
ignorantly pronounceth them; and an individual of such a character should in 
no way undertake this Operation, for such would be the true way to make a 
mock of God and to tempt Him. 

OF THE CONJURATIONS. 

I have many times repeated unto you that the Fear of God is the principal 
subject of the instruction of your Guardian Angel, against which you should 
never commit any fault, even if it be but slight. 

Firstly: You should perform the Conjuration in your mother tongue, or 
in a language that you well understand, and conjure the Spirits by the 
authority of and their obedience to the Holy Patriarchs, rehearsing unto them 
examples of their ruin and fall, of the sentence which God hath pronounced 
against them, and of their obligation unto servitude; and how on one side and 
on another they have been vanquished by the Good Angels and by Wise Men; 
all which points you will have had plenty of opportunity to study in the Sacred 
Writings during the Six Moons (of preparation). Also you shall menace them, 
in case they are unwilling to obey, with calling unto your aid the Power of the 
Holy Angels over them. Your Guardian Angel will also have instructed you to 
perform this Convocation with modesty, and in no wise to be timid, but 
courageous, yet in moderation, however, without too overbearing hardiness 
and bravery. And in case of their being inclined to resist, and unwilling to obey 
you, you must not on that account give way to anger, because thus you will 
only do injury to yourself; and they will ask nothing better, it being exactly 
what they would be endeavouring to do; but (on the contrary) with an 
intrepid heart, and putting your whole trust in God, with a tranquil heart you 
shall exhort them to yield, letting them see that you have put all your 

68 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

confidence in the Living and Only God, reminding them how powerful and 
potent He is; thus, therefore, govern yourself, using prudence towards them. 

And communicate unto them also the Form in the which you wish them 
to appear; the which you can not determine, nor even themselves, but you 
ought the evening before to have demanded this from your Guardian Angel, 
who knoweth better than you your nature and constitution, and who 
understandeth the forms which can terrify you, and those of which you can 
support the sight. 

And you must not think that this can be done otherwise, as certain 
Accursed Persons write; that is to say, by means of Seals, and Conjurations, 
and Superstitious Figures, and Pentacles, and other Abominations, written by 
Diabolical Enchanters; for this would be the coin wherewith the Hideous 
Satan would buy you for his slave. 

But let your whole trust be in the Arm, the Power, and the Force of God 
Almighty; then shall you be in all safety, and the Guard of your Angel will 
defend you from all dangers. This is why you should have good courage, and 
have confidence that no adversity can happen unto you. Observing then the 
doctrine that your Angel will have given unto you, and persevering in placing 
all your trust in God, at length they will appear in the form commanded upon 
the Terrace, upon the sand; when, according to the advice and doctrine 
received from your Holy Angel, and as I will clearly teach you in the following 
Chapter, you shall propound your demand, and you shall receive from them 
their oath. 7 

The Spirits which we should convoke on the first day are the Four 
Superior Princes, whose Names will be written in the Nineteenth Chapter, 
and this is the Conjuration of the First Day. 

THE CONJURATION OF THE SECOND DAY. 

On the following day, having performed the ordinary Orison, and the 
aforesaid Ceremonies, you shall briefly repeat the aforesaid Conjuration unto 
the said Spirits, bringing to their remembrance their promises and Oaths made 
on the preceding day to send unto you the Eight Sub-Princes; and address the 
Conjuration unto all the Twelve together, and in a little while they will appear 
visibly, the Eight Sub-Princes in the form which hath been commanded them; 
and they will promise and swear unto you (allegiance), as will be more fully 
shown in the following Chapter. 

The Names of the Eight Sub-Princes are described hereafter in the 
Nineteenth 78 Chapter. 

THE CONJURATION OF THE THIRD DAY. 

The Conjuration of the Third Day is the same as that of the Second Day, 
seeing that we are then to remind the Eight Sub-Princes of their Promises and 

69 

The Sacred Magic 

Oaths (of Allegiance); and we are to call and convoke them with all their 
adherents, and then they do appear once more in visible forms, the whole 
particular cohorts of each will appear also invisibly, surrounding the Eight 
Sub-Princes. But while invoking God your Lord for strength and surety, and 
your Holy Angel for counsel and assistance, never forget what the latter will 
have taught you, for it is a necessary point. 

Here followeth the Fifteenth Chapter which teacheth what we should 
demand from the Spirits, who are divided into three classes. 

70 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING WHAT YOU SHOULD DEMAND OF THE SPIRITS WHO ARE 
DIVIDED INTO THREE DIFFERENT TROOPS AND CONVOKED ON THREE 

SEPARATE DAYS. 

HE Demands we should make to the Spirits are of three different kinds. 

THE FIRST DEMAND. 

The Demand of the First Day when the Four Superior Princes shall have 
visibly appeared, you shall make according unto the Order of the Angel: 

Firstly: The Proposition by what Virtue, Power and Authority you make 
your demands unto them; that is to say by the Virtue of God our Lord Who 
hath made them subject unto all His creatures, and brought them to your 
feet. 79 

Secondly: That your object is not at all a malign curiosity, but (one 
tending) unto the Honour and Glory of God, and to your own good and that 
of all the Human Race. That further, every time that you shall summon them, 
by whatever Sign or Word, and in whatever Time and Place, and for whatever 
occasion and service, they shall have to appear immediately without any delay, 
and obey your commands. And that in case they shall have some legitimate 
hindrance hereto, they are to send unto you some other Spirits assigning then 
and there such as shall be capable and potent to accomplish and obey your will 
and your demand in their place. And that they shall promise and swear to 
observe this by the most rigorous judgment of God, and by the most severe 
punishment and chastisement of the Holy Angels, inflicted upon them. And 
that they will consent to obey, and that the Four Sovereign Princes will name 
unto you the Eight Sub-Princes, whom they will send in their place to take the 
Oath as I have already said, to appear at once on the following morning when 
commanded by you; and that they will duly send the Eight Sub-Princes. 

For greater certainty, quit the Altar now, and go towards the Door which 
openeth on to the Terrace, advancing your right hand beyond. Make each 
one of them touch the Wand, and take the Oath upon that Wand. 

THE DEMAND OF THE SECOND DAY. 

The Eight Sub-Princes being invoked, you shall make unto them the 
same demand and the same admonition which you have (already) made unto 
the Four Sovereign Princes. And further you shall request from these four, that 
is to say, from Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon; that each of them 
shall assign and consign unto you your Familiar Spirit, which from the day of 
your birth they are compelled to give unto you. These will be given and 

71 

The Sacred Magic 

furnished unto you with their dependants and will afterwards obey you. It is 
for you to demand from these the other Spirits which you may wish to have; 
but seeing that they be infinite in number, and one more skilful in service than 
another, one for one matter, another for another; you shall make a selection of 
the Spirits whom you wish, and you shall put outside upon the Terrace a 
written list of their names for the Eight Sub-Princes (to see), and you shall 
require from these (latter) the Oath, as you did from the Four Superior 
Princes, that the following morning they shall have to appear before you 
together with all the Spirits whose names you shall have given in writing, and 
also your Familiar Spirits. 

THE DEMAND OF THE THIRD DAY. 

The Eight Sub-Princes having presented all the Spirits as you have 
directed them, you shall command that Astarot 2 with all his following shall 
appear visibly in the Form which the Angel shall have prescribed unto you; 
and immediately you shall see a Great Army, and all under the same Form. 
You shall propound unto them the same demand, which you have already 
made unto the Princes, and you shall cause them to take Oath to observe the 
same; that is to say, that every time that you shall call one of them by his 
name, that he shall at once appear in such Form and Place as shall please you, 
and that he shall punctually execute that which you shall have commanded 
him. All having sworn, you shall put outside the entry of the Door, all the 
Signs of the Third Book which belong unto Astarot, alone, and make him 
swear thereon, also ordaining unto them ' that in cases when it may not seem 
fit unto you to command them verbally, that as soon as you shall take one of 
these Signs in your hand and move it from its place that the Spirit marked in 
the Sign shall do and execute that which the Sign beareth, and that which your 
intimation joined thereto shall indicate; also that in the case that in the Sign 
none of them shall be specially named, that all in general shall be obliged 
promptly and readily to perform the Operation commanded; and that if also 
in the time to come, other (Signs or) Symbols be made by you which be not 
here included, that then also they (the Spirits under Astarot) shall be equally 
bound to observe and execute them also. And when the Oath hath been taken, 
cause the Prince in the Name of the rest to touch the Wand. 

After this, remove those Symbols from the Doorway; and call Magot, 
and after him Asmodee, and lastly Belzebud; and act with all these as you 
have done with Astarot; and all their Symbols having been sworn unto, put 
them aside in order in a certain place, so arranged that you can easily 
distinguish one from another, as regards the subject, operation, or effect, for 
which they have been made, and unto which they belong. 

This being done, you shall call Astarot and Asmodee together, with 
their common Servitors, and shall propound unto them their Symbols; and 

72 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

having made them swear in the forementioned manner, you shall call in 
similar fashion Asmodee and Magot, with their Servitors, and shall make 
them take oath upon their Signs in the aforesaid manner. 

And thus shall you observe this method with the Four other Sub-Princes; 
but first of all convoke them with their common Servitors, and make them 
swear upon the common Signs, then Amaimon and Ariton together, and 
finally each one apart, as in the first case. 

And when you have put back all the Symbols into their proper place, 
request from each of these last Four your Familiar Spirit, and make them 
repeat its Name, which you shall at once write down, together with the time 
during which they shall be obliged to serve you. Then you shall propound 
unto them the Signs of the Fifth Chapter of the Third Book; and shall make 
them not only swear upon these Symbols (collectively), but also each one 
(separately), that from this time forward he will observe duly and with 
diligence the six hours destined; and you shall cause them to promise to serve 
you with fidelity, performing all which they are obliged to do, and that you 
shall command their (services); and that they shall not in the slightest degree 
be false and lying as regardeth you; also, that if by chance you should assign 
over one of them unto another person, that he shall act as faithfully by him as 
by yourself; and, lastly, that they are to fulfil, perform, and execute, that which 
God for their Chastisement hath destined unto them for Sentence (of 
Judgment) . 

You shall then observe this form with all the Princes, and untihall the 
Symbols shall be sworn to, with the Four Familiar Spirits and the others 
dominating (them). 

73 

The Sacred Magic 
THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. 

CONCERNING THE SENDING THEM AWAY. 

•ONCERNING the sending away of the Spirits as well during the 
)Three Days, as hereafter: 

It is not necessary to observe many Ceremonies in order to send 
away the Spirits, because they themselves are only too glad to be far away 
from You. This is wherefore you need not otherwise license them to depart; 
that is to say that during the Three Days, having finished speaking with the 
Four Sovereign Princes, and afterwards with the Eight Sub-Princes, and 
received their Oath (of allegiance), you shall say unto them that for the present 
they can go unto their destined place; and that every time that they shall be 
summoned, let them remember their Oath made upon the Symbols. 

(And you shall send away) the Familiar Spirits and all other Spirits with 
the aforesaid words. 

It is true, however, that as regardeth the Familiar Spirits you shall tell 
them that at the time when they are on guard-duty they shall remain near you 
visible or invisible, in whatever form shall please you, in order to serve you 
during the destined Six Hours. 

74 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. 

WHAT WE SHOULD ANSWER UNTO THE INTERROGATIONS OF THE 
SPIRITS, AND HOW WE SHOULD RESIST THEIR DEMANDS. 

'HE Wicked Devil knoweth full well that you are in no way obliged 
)unto him, and that you have commenced this Operation under the 
'Grace and Mercy of God, and under the protection and defence of the 
Holy Angels; nevertheless, he will not fail to try his fortune, and he will seek to 
turn you aside from the Veritable Path; but be you constant and courageous, 
and swerve not in any way, either to the right hand or to the left. If he showeth 
himself proud with you, render unto him the like, and in your turn show him 
your pride. If he be humble, be in no wise too rude and severe toward him, 
but be moderate in all things. If he asketh you some matter, you shall make 
answer unto him according to the instruction which the Guardian Angel shall 
have given you; and understand that the Four Princes, more than all the rest, 
will powerfully tempt you, saying unto you "Who is he who hath given thee so 
great authority?" They will reproach you with your hardihood and 
presumption in summoning them, knowing how powerful they are, and 
contrariwise, how weak and sinful you yourself are. They will reproach you 
with your sins, and will especially seek to dispute with you concerning your 
religion and your faith in God: if you be a Jew they will tell you that your faith 
and your religion have been refuted by God Himself, and that you observe not 
the True Law as it should be (observed): also if you be a Pagan they will say, 
What hath God to do with you or His Creatures either, seeing that you know 
not God ? if you be a Christian they will say unto you, What business is it of 
yours to have to do with Hebrew Ceremonies which are tainted with idolatry, 
and the like ? But let none of this disquiet you in the least; answer them in few 
words, and laughingly, that it is none of their business to discuss these matters 
with you, and to deliver their opinions concerning them; and that although 
you may be a worthless wretch and a great sinner, you will yet hope that the 
True and Only God, Who hath created the Heaven and the Earth, and Who 
hath condemned them and brought them into submission under your feet, 
will forgive you your sins, both now and in future, whatever may be the 
religion which you profess. (Further that) you wish to know, understand, 
confess, and honour no other than the Great and Only God, the Lord of 
Light, by Whose Power, Virtue, and Authority you command them to obey 
you. 

When you shall have spoken unto them thus, then will they sing another 
song, telling you that if you wish them to serve and to be obedient unto you, 

75 

The Sacred Magic 

that you must first come to terms with them. Then shall you answer them on 
this wise: 

"God our Lord hath condemned and sentenced you to serve me, and I 
do not treat as an equal with those who are accustomed to obey". 

Then will they demand of you some sacrifice or courtesy if you wish to be 
served and obeyed promptly. You shall reply that sacrifice is not to be made 
unto them, but rather unto the only God. 

They will then entreat you not to hinder or bring to shame by means of 
this Wisdom any of their Devotees and Enchanters in their operations and 
enchantments. You shall then make answer that you are obliged to pursue the 
Enemies of God and the Lord, and to repress their malice, and also to save and 
defend your neighbour, and any who are offended and hurt by them. 

Then with much verbiage, and an infinitude of different ways will they 
make severe attacks upon you, and even the Familiar Spirits will rise up against 
you in their turn. These latter will demand and beseech of you that you will in 
no way give them over unto others (to serve them). Hold firm, however, and 
promise nothing either to one class (of Spirits) or another; but reply to them 
that every true and brave man is obliged to aid and serve his friends to the best 
of his ability, and with all his possessions, among the which they must 
assuredly also be comprised. 

When at length they see that they have lost all hope of making you 
prevaricate, and that they can obtain nothing notwithstanding all their 
requests; they will definitely surrender, and will ask nothing else of you unless 
it be that you shall not be too rude and insulting in commanding them. You 
shall make answer to this, that if they prove themselves to be obedient and 
prompt in serving you, that it may be that your Angel, by whose instruction 
and command you are governing yourself, may instruct you not to be so rigid 
and severe with them if they shall obey, and that in such case you will act as 
may be right. 

76 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. 

HOW HE WHO OPERATETH SHOULD BEHAVE AS REGARDETH THE 

SPIRITS. 

E have already seen how one should constrain the Spirits, and what 
one should ask of them; also how to dismiss them without hurt, and 
how we should make answer unto their demands and 

99 

presentments. 

All that I am about to say unto you now is superfluous, because it is 
certain that any one who shall have observed with a true heart and firm 
resolution the advice which I have given regarding the Six Moons, will be 
instructed with so much thoroughness and clearness by his Guardian Angel, 
that no doubtful point will present itself which he will not be able easily to 
clear up of himself. 

We have also already sufficiently shown how on every or any occasion, he 
who operateth should comport himself as regardeth the Spirits; that is to say as 
their Lord, and not as their Servitor. Yet in all matters there should be a 
reasonable mean, seeing that we are not treating with men, but with Spirits, of 
whom each one knoweth more than the whole Universe together. 

Now if you shall make some demand unto a Spirit, and he shall refuse to 
execute it; first well and carefully examine and consider whether it be in the 
power and nature of the Spirit to whom you make such demand, to fulfil the 
same. For one Spirit knoweth not all things, and that which appertaineth unto 
the one, another knoweth not. For this reason, see that ye well take heed 
before endeavouring to force them to perform a matter. Yet if, however, the 
Inferior Spirits be disobedient, you shall call their Superiors, and remind them 
of the oaths which they have taken unto you, and of the chastisement which 
awaiteth the breaking of such vows. 

And immediately, on beholding your steadfastness, they will obey you; 
but should they not, you ought then to invoke your Guardian Angel, whose 
chastisement they will quickly feel. 

Yet, notwithstanding, we should never employ harsh means, in order to 
have that which we can obtain by gentleness and courtesy. 

If during the Invocation they should appear with tumult and insolence, 
fear nothing; neither give way to anger; but appear to make no account 
thereof. Only show them the Consecrated Wand, and if they continue to make 
a disturbance, smite upon the Altar twice or thrice therewith, and all will be 
still. 

It should be noted, that after you shall have licensed them to depart, and 
they shall have disappeared, you shall take the Censer from the top of the 

77 

The Sacred Magic 

Altar, and having put perfume therein, take it out of the Oratory on to the 
Terrace whereon the Spirits shall have appeared, and you shall perfume the 
place all round; for otherwise the Spirits might work some evil unto persons 
entering by chance therein. 

Now should you be willing to content yourself with the Symbols which 
be in the Third Book here following; you shall the day after take away all the 
Sand from the Terrace and cast it into a secret place; but above all things take 
care not to throw it either into a river or into the navigable sea. 

But should you desire to procure for yourself various other Symbols and 
Secrets, leave the Sand and all things in place, as we shall also describe more 
particularly in the last chapter. 

Also, should you wish it, you can retain your arrangements in place, and 
keep the Apartment of the Oratory proper and clean, as well as the Altar; 
which latter you may place in a corner, should it incommode you in the centre 
of the room. For in this Apartment, if it be not contaminated nor profaned, 
you may every Saturday enjoy the presence of your Guardian Angel; the which 
is one of the most sublime things which you can desire in this Sacred Art. 

78 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER. 

A DESCRIPTIVE LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE SPIRITS WHOM WE MAY 
SUMMON TO OBTAIN THAT WHICH WE DESIRE. 

WILL here give a very exact description of many Spirits, the which (names) 
'either altogether or in part, or else as many of them as you may wish, you 
(should give written upon paper unto the Eight SubPrinces, on the Second 
Day of the Conjuration. Now all these (Spirits) be those who will appear on 
the Third Day, together with their Princes. And these (Spirits) be not vile, 
base, and common, but of rank, industrious, and very prompt unto an 
infinitude of things. Now their Names have been manifested and discovered by 
the Angels, and if you should wish for more the Angel will augment them for 
you as far as you shall wish; seeing that their number is infinite. 

The Four Princes and Superior Spirits be: 

LUCIFER. 

LEVIATAN. 

SATAN. 

BELIAL, 

The Eight Sub-Princes be: 

ASTAROT MAGOT ASMODEE. BELZEBUD. 

ORIENS. PAIMON. ARITON. AMAIMON. 

The Spirits common unto these Four Sub-Princes, namely: 

ORIENS. 

PAIMON. 

ARITON. 
be: 

Proxosos. 

AMAIMON 

HOSEN 

SARAPH. 

Habhi. 

ACUAR 

Tirana. 

Alluph. 

Nercamay. 

NlLEN. 

Morel. 

Trace 

Enaia. 

MULACH. 

Malutens. 

Iparkas. 

NUDITON. 

Melna. 

Melhaer 

Ruach. 

Apolhun. 

SCHABUACH. 

Mermo. 

Melamud. 

POTER 

SCHED. 

Ekdulon. 

Mantiens. 

Obedama. 

Sachiel. 

MOSCHEL. 

Pereuch. 

Deccal. 

ASPERIM. 

Katini. 

TORFORA. 

Bad ad. 

COELEN. 

Chuschi. 

Tasma. 

Pachid. 

Parek. 

Rachiar 

NOGAR 

Adon. 

Trapis. 

Nagid. 

Ethanim. 

Patid. 

Pareht. 

Emphastison. 

Paraseh. 

Gerevil. 

79 

The Sacred Magic 

Elmis. 

ASMIEL. 

Irminon. 

ASTUREL. 

NUTHON. 

LOMIOL. 

Imink. 

Plirok. 

Tagnon. 

Parmatus. 

Iaresin. 

GORILON. 

LlRION. 

Plegit. 

Ogilen. 

Tarados. 

LOSIMON. 

Ragaras. 

Igilon. 

GOSEGAS. 

ASTREGA. 

Parusur 

Igis. 

Aherom. 

Igarak. 

Geloma. 

KlLIK. 

Remoron. 

Ekalike. 

ISEKEL. 

Elzegan. 

Ipakol. 

Haril. 

Kadolon. 

lOGION. 

Zaragil. 

Irroron. 

Ilagas. 

Balalos. 

Oroia. 

Lagasuf. 

Alagas. 

Alp as. 

SOTERION. 

ROMAGES. 

Promakos. 

Metafel. 

Darascon 

Kelen. 

Erenutes. 

Najin. 

TULOT. 

Platien. 

Atloton. 

Afarorp. 

MORILEN. 

Ramaratz. 

NOGEN. 

MOLIN. 

(=111 

Spirits Servient.) 

These be the Spirits common unto 

ASTAROT and ASMODEE, viz. : 

Amaniel. 

Orinel. 

TlMIRA. 

Dramas. 

Amalin. 

KlRIK. 

BUBANA. 

Buk. 

Raner 

Semlin. 

Ambolin. 

Abutes. 

EXTERON, 

LABOUX. 

CORCARON. 

Ethan. 

Taret. 

Dablat. 

BURIUL. 10 ' 

Oman. 

Carasch. 

DlMURGOS. 

ROGGIOL. 

Loriol. 

ISIGI. 

TlORON. 

Darokin. 

HORANAR 

Abahin. 

GOLEG. 

GUAGAMON. 

Laginx. 

Etaliz. 

Agei. 

Lemel. 

Udaman. 

BlALOT. 

Gagalos. 

Ragalim. 

FlNAXOS. 

Akanef. 

Omages. 

Agrax. 

Sagares. 

Afray. 

Ugales. 

Hermiala. 

Haligax. 

GUGONLX. 

Opilm. 

Daguler 

Pachei. 

NlMALON. 

(= 53 Spirits Servient.) 

These be the 

Spirits common unto 

AMAIMON and ARITON, 
viz.: 

Hauges. 

Agibol. 

RlGOLEN. 

Grasemin 

Elafon. 

Trisaga. 

Gagalin. 

Cleraca. 

80 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Elaton. 

Pafesla. 

(=10 Spirits Servient.) 

These be the Spirits in common between 

ASMODEE and MAGOT, 

viz.: 

Toun. 

Magog. 

Diopos. 

DlSOLEL. 

BlRIEL. 

Sifon. 

Kele. 

Magiros. 

Sartabakim. 

Lundo. 

SOBE. 

Inokos. 

Mabakiel. 

Apot. 

Opun. 

(=15 Spirit' 

> Servient.) 

The following 

be those of 

ASTAROT 

viz 

Am an. 

Camal. 

Toxai. 

Kataron. 

Rax. 

GONOGIN. 

SCHELAGON. 

GlNAR 

ISIAMON. 

Bahal. 

Darek. 

ISCHIGAS. 

GOLEN. 

Gromenis. 

Rigios. 

NlMERIX. 

Herg. 

Argilon. 

Okiri. 

Fagani. 

Hipolos. 

Ileson. 

Camonix. 

Bafamal. 

Alan. 

Apormenos. 

Ombalat. 

QUARTAS. 

Ugirpen. 

Araex. 

Lepaca. 

KOLOFE. 

(= 32 Spirit: 

> Servient.) 

These be those 

of 

MAGOT and KORE, 

VIZ. 

Nacheran. 

Katolin. 

LUESAF. 

Masaub. 

Urigo. 

Faturab, 

FERSEBUS. 

Baruel. 

Ubarin. 

BUTARAB. 

ISCHIRON. 

Odax. 

ROLER 

Arotor 

Hemis. 

Arpiron. 

Arrabin. 

SUPIPAS. 

FORTESON. 

DULID. 

SORRIOLENEN. 

Megalak. 

Anagctos. 

SlKASTIN. 

Petunof 

Mantan. 

Meklboc. 

TlGRAFON 

Tagora. 

Debam. 

TlRAIM. 

Irix. 

Mad ail. 

Abagiron. 

Pandoli. 

Nenisem. 

COBEL. 

SOBEL. 

Laboneton. 

Arioth. 

81 

The Sacred Magic 

Marag. 

Kamusil. 

Kaitar 

SCHARAK. 

Maisadul. 

Agilas. 

KOLAM. 

KlLIGIL. 

CORODON. 

Hepogon. 

Daglas. 

Hagion. 

Egakireh. 

Paramo r 

Olisermon. 

RlMOG. 

HORMINOS. 

Hagog. 

Mimosa. 

Amchison 

Ilarax. 

Makalos. 

LOCATER 

COLVAM. 

Batternis 

(65 Spirits Servient.) 

Those of 

ASMODEE 
be: 

Onei. 

Ormion. 

Preches. 

Maggid. 

SCLAVAK. 

Mebbesser 

Bacaron. 

HOLBA. 

HlFARION. 

GlLARION. 

Eniuri. 

Abadir 

Sbarionat. 

Utifa. 

Omet. 

Sarra. 

(= 16, 

Spirit! 

j Servient.) 

These be those 

of 

BELZEBUD, 

viz 

Alcanor 

Amatia. 

BlLIFARES. 

Lamarion 

DlRALISEN. 

LlCANEN. 

DlMIRAG. 

Elponen. 

Ergamen. 

GOTIFAN. 

NlMORUP. 

Carelena. 

Lamalon. 

Igurim. 

Akium. 

DORAK. 

Tachan. 

Ikonok. 

Kemal. 

BlLICO. 

Tromes. 

Balfori. 

Arolen, 

LIROCHI. 

NOMINON. 

Iamai. 

Arogor 

HOLASTRI. 

Hacamuli. 

Samalo. 

Plison. 

Raderaf. 

BOROL. 

O I02 

SOROSMA. 

CORILON. 

Gramon. 

Magalast. 

Zagalo. 

Pellipis. 

Natalis. 

Namiros. 

Adirael. 

Kabada. 

Kipokis. 

Orgosil. 

Arcon. 

Ambolon. 

Lamolon. 

BlLIFOR 

(= 49 Spirit; 

5 Servient.) 

These be of 

ORIENS, viz.: 

Sarisel. 

Gasarons. 

SOROSMA. 103 

TURITEL. 

82 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Balaken. 

Gagison. 

Mafalac. 

Agab. 

(-1 

3 Spirits Servient.) 

These be of 

PAIMON, 

viz.: 

Aglafos. 

Agafali. 

DlSON. 

ACHANIEL. 

SUDORON. 

Kabersa. 

Ebaron. 

Zalanes. 

Ugola. 

Came. 

ROFFLES. 

Menolik. 

Tacaros. 

Astolit. 

RUKUM. 

(=1 

5 Spirits Servient.) 

These be of 

ARITON, 

viz.: 

Anader 

ElKOROK. 

SlBOLAS. 

Saris. 

Sekabin. 

Caromos. 

ROSARAN. 

Sapason. 

NOTISER 

Flaxon. 

Harombrub. 

Megalosin 

MlLIOM. 

Ilemlis. 

Galak. 

Androcos. 

Maranton. 

Caron. 

Reginon. 

Elerion. 

Sermeot. 

Irmenos. 

These be those of 

(= 22 Spirits Servient.) 

AMAIMON, VIZ. 

ROMEROC. 

Ramison 

Taralim. 

BURASEN. 

Illirikim. 

Labisi. 

Glesi. 

Vision. 

Dalep. 

Dresop. 

scrilis. buriol. 

Akesoli. Erekia. 

Akoros. Mames. 

Effrigis. Apelki. 

Hergotis. Nilima. 
(= 20 Spirits Servient.) 

UNDER WHAT RULERS. 
Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, Amaymon 
Ashtaroth and Asmodeus - 
Amaymon and Ariton- 
Asmodeus and Magoth- 
Ashtaroth 
Magoth and Kore 

TOTAL OF SPIRITS SERVIENT 
111 

53 
10 
15 

32 
65 

83 

The Sacred Magic 

Asmodeus 16 

Beelzebub 49 
Oriens 8 

Paymon 1 5 

Ariton 22 

Amaymon 20 

Total of Names of Servient Spirits 316 

Infinite be the Spirits which I could have here set down, but in order not 
to make any confusion, I have thought fit to put only those whom I have 
myself employed, and whom I have found good and faithful in all the 
Operations wherein I have availed myself of them. 

Also it is true that he who shall perform this Operation will be able 
thereafter, according to his need, to obtain (the names of) more. 

NOTES TO THE FOREGOING LISTS OF NAMES OF 

SPIRITS. 

BY 

S. L. MAC GREGOR-MATHERS. 

I have thought it advisable to give as far as possible some idea of the Significations of 
these names of Spirits, which are for the most part derived from the Hebrew or Chaldee, and 
also from Greek and Latin and Coptic, etc. 

THE CHIEF SPIRITS. 

Lucifer: From Latin, Lux, Light, and Few, to bear, - A Light Bearer. There is a name 
"Lucifuge" also employed occasionally, from Lux, Light, and Fugio, to fly from, - He who 
shuns the Light. 

Leviatan: From Hebrew, LVIThN (usually written Leviathan instead of Leviatan), - 
the Crooked or Piercing Serpent or Dragon. 

Satan: From Hebrew, ShTN, = an Adversary. 

Belial: From Hebrew, BLIOL, = a Wicked One. 

THE EIGHT SUB-PRINCES. 

Astarot: From Hebrew, OShThRVTh, = flocks, crowds or assemblies. Usually written 
"Ashtaroth". Also a name of the Goddess Astarte; Esther is derived from the same root. 

Magot: May be from Hebrew, MOVTh, = small stones or pebbles; or from MG, = a 
changing of camp or place; or from Greek, Magos, a magician. Usually written Maguth. 
Compare the French word "Magot," meaning "a sort of baboon," and also "a hideous 
dwarfish man"; this expression is often used in fairy-tales to denote a spiteful dwarf or elf. 
This Spirit has also been credited with presiding over hidden treasure. Larousse derives the 
name either from ancient French or German. 

84 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Asmodee: Usually written "Asmodeus," and sometimes "Chashmodai". Derived by 
some from the Hebrew word "Asamod," to destroy or exterminate; and by others from the 
Persian verb "Azmonden," = to tempt, to try or prove. Some Rabbins say that Asmodeus was 
the child of the incest of Tubal-Cain and his sister Naafrfah. Others say that he was the 
Demon of impurity. Others again relate that he was employed by Solomon in the building of 
the Temple at Jerusalem; that he then attempted to dethrone Solomon, to put himself in his 
place; but that the King vanquished him and the Angel Gabriel chased him into Egypt, and 
there bound him in a Grotto. The Rabbins say that when Asmodeus was working at the 
building of the Temple, he made use of no metal tool; but instead of a certain stone which 
cut ordinary stone as a diamond will glass. 

Belzebud: Also written frequently "Beelzebub", "Baalzebub", "Beelzebuth", and 
"Beelzeboul". From Hebrew, BOL, = Lord, and ZBVB,= Fly or Flies; Lord of Flies. Some 
derive the name from the Syriac "Beel d'Bobo," = Master of Calumny, or nearly the same 
signification as the Greek word Diabolos, whence are derived the modern French and 
English "Diable" and "Devil". 

Oriens: These four names of Oriens, Paimon, Ariton and Amaymon,are usually 
allotted to the Evil Kings of the four quarters of the World. Oriens, from Latin, Oriens, = 
rising or Eastern. This name is also written Uriens, from Latin, Uro, = to burn, or devour 
with flame. It is probably from Uriens that a mediaeval title of the Devil, viz., "Sir Urien", is 
derived. The Name is also sometimes written "Urieus," from Latin, "Urios", a title given to 
Jupiter as presiding over the Wind. Urieus is also derivable from the Greek Adj. "Eurus, 
Eureia, Euru, " meaning vast or extensive. By the Rabbins he is also called SMAL, Samael, 
which is derived from the Hebrew root SML, which means "a figure, image, or idol". It is a 
name given in the Qabalah to one of the Chief Evil Spirits. 

Paimon: Is also frequently written "Paymon", and sometimes "Paimonia". Probably 
from Hebrew, POMN, = a tinkling sound or small bell. This is again derived from the 
Hebrew root POM, = to agitate, impel, or strike forward. The word POMN is employed in 
Exodus 28, 34; 28, 33; and 39, 25. Paimon is also called by the Rabbins by the title of 
OZAZL, Azazel, which is a name used in Leviticus with reference to the Scape-Goat. Its 
derivation is from OZ, = a Goat; and AZL, = to go away. It has frequently been warmly 
discussed whether the word in question means simply the Scape-Goat, or whether it signifies 
a Demon to whom that animal was dedicated. But in Rabbinic Demonology it is always used 
to mean one of the Chief Demons. 

Ariton: It is also often called "Egyn," or "Egin". This name may be derived from the 
Hebrew root ORH, = to lay bare, to make naked. It may also be derived from the Greek 
word Arhreton, = secret, or mysterious, in any sense good or bad. Egin, may be derivable 
from Hebrew, OGN, = to delay, hinder, or retard. There may also be a connection with the 
Greek Aix, Aigos, = a Goat. This Spirit is also called by the Rabbins OZAL, Azael, from the 
root OZ, which means both a Goat, and also vigour, vehemence of force; thus having partly 
the same root as "Azazel". 

Amaimon: Also written frequently "Amaymon"; perhaps from the Greek word 
Maimon, present participle of Maimao; and A as an enforcing particle; hence Amaimon 
would mean "terrible violence and vehemence". This Spirit is also called by the Rabbins 
MHZAL, Mahazael, perhaps from the root MZ, = to consume, or devour. Amaymon is 
spoken of in the various mediaeval Magical works as being a very potent Spirit, and the use 
of a ring, with Magical characters to hold before the mouth while conversing with him, is 
recommended as a protection against his deadly, fiery, and poisonous breath. 

85 

The Sacred Magic 
THE SERVITORS OF ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON AND AMAYMON. 

Hosen: From Chaldaic, CHVSN, chosen, = Strong, Vigorous, Powerful. 

Saraph: From Hebrew, ShRP, = to burn, or devour with fire. 

Proxosos: Perhaps from Greek, Prox, Proxokos, = a Kid. 

Habhi: From Chaidee, ChBA, or Hebrew, ChBH, = Hidden. 

Acuar: From Hebrew, AKR, = a tiller of the earth. 

Tirana: Perhaps from Hebrew, ThRN, = the Mast of a Ship, also an Apple Tree. 

Alluph: From Hebrew, ALVP, = a Leader, a Duke; also a Bull, from his leading the 
herd. 

Nercamay: Perhaps from Hebrew, NOR, = a boy, and ChMH a companion. 

Nilen: Perhaps from Nilus, Latin, or Neilos, Greek, = the River Nile. 

Morel: Perhaps from Hebrew, MRH, = to rebel. 

Tract: From Greek, Trachus, etc., = harsh, rude. 

Enaia: Perhaps from Hebrew, ONIH, = Poor, afflicted. 

Mulach: Probably the same as "Moloch," from Hebrew,MLK, to rule. 

Malutens: Perhaps from Hebrew, MOL, = to lie, or deceive, or prevaricate. 

Iparkas: Probably from Greek, Hipparches, = a commander of cavalry, or leader of 
horse. 

Nuditon: Apparently from the Latin, Nuditas, = nakedness, derived in its turn from 
Nudatus. 

Melna: Perhaps from Hebrew, LN, to abide or rest. 

Melhaer: Perhaps from Hebrew, ML, to cut off, or divide, and ChR, whiteness, 
purity. 

Ruach: From Hebrew, RVCh = Spirit. 

Apolhun: From Greek, Apolluon, Apollyon, = the Destroyer. 

Schabuach: From Arabic = to calm or assuage. 

Mermo: From Coptic, Mer, Across, and Moou, Water, Across Water. 

Melamud: From Hebrew, MLMD, = stimulus to exertion. 

Poter: From Greek, Poter, = a drinking cup, or vase. 

Sched: From Hebrew, ShDD, the Hebrew name for a devastating demon. But the 
Hebrew root ShD implies the same idea as the English words "To Shed" ; and signifies a 
female breast. 

Ekdulon: Probably from Greek, Ekduo, = to despoil. 

Mantiens: From Latin, Mantiens, and Greek, Manteia, Prophesying, Divining. 

Obedama: From Hebrew,OBD, = a servant. AMA = mother. But AMH = a 
maid-servant, whence Obedama should signify a womanservant. 

Sachiel: Is a name frequently given in Magical works to an Angel of the Planet Jupiter. 
SKK = to cover or protect, but SChH = to trample down. 

Moschel: From Hebrew, MVSh, = to move oneself about. 

Pereuch: Perhaps from Greek, Per and Euche, = concerning prayer, or given unto 
prayer. 

Deccal: From Hebrew, DChL, = to fear. 

Asperim: Perhaps from Latin, "Aspera", = Rude, Rigorous, Perilous, Dangerous. 

Katini: From Hebrew, KThN, = a tunic, whence the Greek word CHITON. 

Torfora: From Hebrew, THOR,= a small knife, or lancet. 

Badad: From Hebrew, BDD, = solitary. 

86 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

I have thus far given the probable derivations at length; but I shall, for the sake of 
brevity, here continue them without giving their roots and remarks thereon: 
Coelen. Latin. Heavens. 
Chuschi. Hebrew. Silent. 
Tasma. Hebrew and Chaldaic. Weak. 
Pachid. Hebrew. Fear. 
Parek. Hebrew. Roughness, Savage. 
Rachiar. Greek. Sea breaking on rocks. 
Nogar. Hebrew. Flowing. 
Adon. Hebrew. Lord. 
Trapis. Greek. Turning. 
Nagid. Hebrew. A Leader. 
Ethanim. Hebrew. An Ass; a furnace. 
Patid. Hebrew. Topaz. 
Pareht. Hebrew. Fruit. 
Emphastison. Greek. Image, Representation. 
Paraseh. Chaldaic. Divided. 
Gerevil. Hebrew. Divining Lot, Sortilege. 
Elmis. Coptic. Flying. 
Asmiel. Hebrew. Storing up. 
Irminon. Greek. Supporting. 
Asturel. Hebrew. Bearing authority. 
Nuthon. Perhaps Coptic, Godlike; or Greek, piercing. 
Lomiol. Perhaps Hebrew. Binding, Bitter. 
Imink. Perhaps Coptic. Devouring. 
Plirok. Perhaps Coptic. Burning up. 
Tagnon. Perhaps Greek. Heating. 
Parmatus. Greek and Latin. Shield-bearing. 
Iaresin. Hebrew. Possessing. 

Gorilon. Coptic. Axe; Cleaving either to, or asunder; Bones. 
Lirion. Greek. A lily. 
Plegit. Perhaps Greek. Smiting, Smitten. 
Ogilen. Hebrew. Round, Wheel. 

87 

The Sacred Magic 
THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER, 

HOW THE OPERATIONS SHOULD BE PERFORMED. 

'HE aforesaid Operation being finished, it is necessary, in order to 
(render this instruction complete, to say how we should manage the 
'Operations which he who operateth wisheth to put into practice. 
Firstly, then, having come unto the end, and having obtained all that is 
necessary; you cannot sufficiently praise and honour God, and His Most Holy 
Name, even although you had a thousand tongues; neither also can you 
sufficiently magnify and thank your Holy Angel Guardian as he meriteth. 
However, you ought to render thanks proportionate to your estate and to the 
Great Treasure which you have received. It is necessary also that you should 
fully understand how you ought to enjoy these immense riches, so that they 
may not be in your hands unfruitful, or even harmful. Because this Art is like a 
Sword in your hand, capable of serving for all kinds of evil and for hurt unto 
your neighbour. But in putting it into practice for that sole end for which it 
bath been made, namely for vanquishing therewith the Demon and Enemies, 
then shall you be making a good use hereof. I wish also further to give you 
some instruction upon certain necessary and principal points. 

The Operation of the Spirits being finished, you shall continue a whole 
week to praise God; and as regardeth yourself personally, you shall do no 
servile work during the Seven Days, neither shall you make any Convocation 
of the Spirits in general, nor of the Familiars; and afterwards, when the Seven 
Days be passed, you shall commence to exercise your power, as shall be 
hereafter said: 

(1) Take heed before all things to perform no Magical Operation soever, 
or Invocations of the Spirits on the Sabbath Day, during the whole period of 
your life, seeing that that day is consecrated unto God, and is the day on 
which you should repose and sanctify yourself, and you should solemnise it by 
prayers. 

(2) Keep yourself as you would from the Eternal Fire, from manifesting 
unto any living being that which your Guardian Angel shall have confided 
unto you; excepting unto him who hath given unto you the Operation, unto 
whom you have as it were a greater obligation than unto your own father. 

(3) As far as lieth in your power take heed in no way to make use of this 
Art against your neighbour; except for a just Vengeance; although I counsel 

88 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

you even in this particular to imitate God, who pardoneth even you yourself, 
and there is not in the world a more meritorious action than to pardon. 

(4) In the case of your Angel dissuading you from some Operation, and 
forbidding you to do the same, keep well from becoming obstinate therein, for 
you would in such a case ever repent it. 

(5) Fly all kinds of (Evil) Science, Magic, and Enchantments, because they 
be all Diabolical Inventions; also put no trust in books which teach them, 
though in appearance they may seem reliable to you, for these be nets which 
the perfidious Belial stretcheth out to take you. 

(6) In conversing with Spirits Good or Evil, never employ words which 
you do not understand, because even so will you have shame and hurt. 

(7) You shall never demand of your Guardian Angel any Symbol 
wherewith to operate for an Evil end, seeing that you would grieve him. You 
will find only too many persons who will beseech you to do thus; see that you 
do it not! 

(8) Accustom yourself as much as possible to purity of body and 
cleanliness of raiment, seeing that this is very necessary; for the Spirits, both 
Good and Evil alike, love purity. 

(9) As far as possible shun the employment of your Wisdom for others in 
evil things; but first well consider him to whom you would render a service; 
because it often happeneth, that in doing service unto another one worketh 
evil for oneself. 

(10) In no way attempt to procure the Operation of the Holy Angels 
unless you have extreme need thereof, seeing that these Holy Angels be so far 
above you that it is useless for you to wish to compare yourself unto Them, 
you being nothing in comparison of Them Who are the Angels of God. 

(11) If the Operations can be performed by the Familiar Spirits, it is not 
necessary to employ others therein. 

(12) Though it should be an easy matter for you to employ your Familiars 
to annoy your neighbour, seek to abstain therefrom, unless it were to repress 
the insolence of such as might attempt aught against you personally. Never 
keep the Familiar Spirits in idleness, and should you wish to give one over 
unto any person, see that such person be distinguished and meritorious, for 

89 

The Sacred Magic 

they love not to serve those of base and common condition. But should such 
person unto whom you give them have made some express Pact (with Spirits) 
in such case the Familiar Spirits will fly in haste to serve him. 

(13) These three Books of this present Operation ought to be read and 
re-read an infinitude of times; so that in the space of Six Months before 
commencing, he who operateth should be fully instructed and informed 
therein; and if he be not a Jew, he should further be conversant with many of 
the customs and ceremonies which this Operation demandeth, so as to 
become accustomed unto that retirement which is so necessary and useful. 

(14) Should he who performeth this Operation during the Six Months or 
Moons commit voluntarily any mortal sin prohibited by the Tables of the Law, 
be certain that he will never receive this Wisdom. 

(15) Sleep in the day-time is entirely forbidden, unless absolutely 
requisite, owing to some infirmity, or to old age, or to debility of constitution; 
for God is always willing to employ mercy towards mankind, because of 
their infirmities. 

(16) If you have not the fixed intention of continuing the Operation, I 
counsel you on no account to commence it; because the Lord doth not care to 
be mocked, and He chastiseth with corporal maladies those who make a mock 
of Him. Howbeit, he who is hindered from continuing through some 
unforeseen accident, sinneth in no way. 

(17) It is impossible for him who hath passed fifty years of age to 
undertake this Operation. Thus also was it the custom in the true and ancient 
Jewish Law concerning the Priesthood. Also, he should not be less than 
twenty-five years of age. 

(18) You shall not permit the Familiar Spirits to familiarise themselves too 
much with you, through your disputing and arguing with them; because they 
will propound so many affairs and things at once as to confound and trouble 
the mind. 

(19) With the Familiar Spirits you should not make use of the Symbols of 
the Third Book, unless it be those of the Fifth Chapter thereof; 10 but if you 
desire anything, command them aloud to perform it. Never commence many 
Operations at once and in the same time, but when you have finished one 
then begin another, until you are perfect in the practice; for an Apprentice 
Artist doth not become a Master suddenly, but little by little. 

90 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

(20) Without reasons of the very last importance, the Four Princes or 
the Eight Sub-Princes should never be summoned, because we must make a 
great distinction between these and the others (who are inferior to them). 

(21) In operating, as rarely as possible insist upon the Spirits appearing 
visibly; and thus you will work all the better, for it should suffice you for 
them to say and do what you wish. 

(22) All Prayers, Orations, Invocations, and Conjurations, and in fact 
everything you have to say, should be pronounced aloud and clearly, without 
however shouting like a madman, but speaking clearly and naturally, and 
pronouncing distinctly. 

(23) During the Six Moons, you shall sweep the Oratory every Sabbath 
Eve, and keep it strictly clean, for it is a place dedicated unto the Holy and 
Pure Angels. 

(24) Take heed that you commence no Operation at night if it be 
important, unless the need be very pressing. 

(25) Your only object during your whole life should be to shun as far as 
possible an ill-regulated life, and especially the vices of debauchery, gluttony, 
and drunkenness. 

(26) Having completed the Operation, and being now the Possessor of 
the True Wisdom, you shall fast three days before commencing to put it in 
practice. 

(27) Every year you should make a commemoration of the Signal benefit 
which the Lord hath conferred upon you; at such time feasting, praying, and 
honouring your Guardian Angel that day with your whole strength. 

(28) During the Three Days on which you constrain the Spirits you shall 
fast, for this is essential, so that when you are working you may find yourself 
freer and more tranquil both in body and mind. 

(29) Note that the fasts are to be understood as commencing always from 
the first nocturnal Star, and not otherwise. 

(30) Keep as an indubitable precept never to give this Operation unto a 
Monarch, because Solomon was the first who abused it; and if you should do 
the contrary, both you and your successors would alike lose the Grace hereof. 

91 

The Sacred Magic 

With regard to this command, I myself having been sought by the Emperor 
Sigismond, gave him willingly the best Familiar Spirit which I had; but I 
steadily refused to give him the Operation; and it should not be given unto 
Emperors, Kings, or other Sovereigns. 

(31) You may assuredly give, but it is not permissible to sell, this 
(Operation), for this would be to abuse the Grace of the Lord who hath given 
it unto you, and should you act contrariwise unto this, you would lose its 
control. 

(32) Should you perform this Operation in a town, you should take a 
house which is not at all overlooked by any one; seeing that in this present 
day Curiosity is so strong that you ought to be upon your guard; and there 
ought to be a garden (adjoining the house) wherein you can take exercise. 

(33) Take well heed during the Six Moons or Months to lose no blood 
from your body, except that which the expulsive Virtue in you may expel 
naturally of its own accord. 

(34) Finally, during that whole time, you shall touch no dead body of any 
description soever. 

(35) You shall eat during this whole period neither the flesh nor the blood 
of any dead animal; and this you shall do for a certain particular reason. 

(36) You shall bind by an Oath him unto whom you shall give this 
Operation, neither to give nor sell it unto any avowed Atheist or Blasphemer 
of God. 

(37) You shall fast for three days before giving the Operation unto any; 
and he who shall receive it shall do likewise; and he also shall hand over unto 
you at the same time the sum of Ten Golden Florins, or their value, the which 
you should with your own hand distribute unto poor persons whom you shall 
charge to repeat the Psalms, Miserere Met Deus, etc., "Have mercy upon me, O 
God"; and the De Profundis, etc., "Out of the Depths". 

(38) It will be a good thing, and one which will facilitate the Operation, 
for you to repeat all the Psalms of David, seeing that they contain great power 
and virtue; and to say them at least twice in the week. 

Also you shall shun gaming as you would the plague; because it ever is an 
occasion of Blasphemy. Also during this time prayer, and the study of the 
Sacred Books, should take the place of gaming with you. 

92 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

All this advice, and much more which you would be certain to receive 
from your Angel Guardian, I have here set down, so that by observing the 
same perfectly, without failing in the slightest particular, you shall at the end of 
the Operation find the value thereof. I am now, therefore, about to give you 
distinct and sufficient information how to employ the Symbols, and how to 
proceed if you wish to acquire others. 

You are then to understand that once he who operateth hath the power, it 
is not necessary (in all cases) to use written Symbols, but it may suffice to 
name aloud the Name of the Spirit, and the, form in which you wish him to 
appear visibly; because once they have taken Oath, this sufficeth. These 
Symbols, then, be made for you to avail yourself of them when you be in the 
company of other persons; also you must have them upon you, so that in 
touching or handling them simply, they may represent your wish. Immediately 
then he unto whom the Symbol appertaineth will serve you punctually; but 
if you should desire something special which is in no way connected with or 
named in the Symbol, it will be necessary to signify the same at least by 
showing your desire by two or three words. And here it is well to observe, that 
if you use prudence, you can often reason with those persons who be with you 
in such a manner that the Spirits, having however been beforehand invoked by 
you, will understand what they are to do; but it is necessary to discover your 
intent unto them by words. For they be of such great intelligence, that from a 
single word or a single motive, they can draw the construction of the whole 
matter; and although they cannot penetrate into the inmost parts of the 
human mind, yet nevertheless by their astuteness and subtlety they be so 
adroit that they comprehend by perceptible signs the wish of the person in 
question. 

But when it is a grave and important matter, you should retire into a 
secret place apart, provided it be appropriate, for any place is good to invoke 
the Spirits proper unto the Operation. There give them their commission 
regarding that which you wish them to perform, the which they will either 
execute then or in the days following. But always give them the signal by word 
of mouth, or in any other manner that may be pleasing unto you, whenever 
you wish them to begin to operate. Thus did Abramelin in Egypt, Joseph in 
Paris, and as for myself, I have always acted in the same manner. I have also 
made myself a very great man, and especially one who hath been of service 
unto Princes and great Lords. 

I will hereafter tell clearly what Operations belong unto this or unto that 
Spirit, and how it is necessary to act. 

Now will I teach you how all those (Symbols) which be in this Book, as 
well as those which you will (hereafter) receive from the Spirits (themselves), 
ought to be written down and acquired. For the number of Operations is 
infinite, and it would be an impossibility to set them all down in this work. If 

93 

The Sacred Magic 

therefore you should wish to perform certain fresh Operations by the use of a 
Symbol not set down in any way in the Third Book [I am speaking of good 
and permissible Operations], you shall make the demand thereof from your 
Guardian Angel in this manner: 

Fast the day before, and on the following morning you, being well 
washed, shall enter into the Oratory, put on the White Tunic, illumine the 
Lamp, and put the Perfume in the Censer. Then lay the Lamen of Silver upon 
the Altar, whereof the two Angles shall be touched with the Holy Anointing 
Oil; fall upon your knees and make your Orison unto the Lord, rendering 
unto Him grace for the benefits which you have received in general. 

Then shall you supplicate Him to be willing to send unto you your Holy 
Angel, that he may instruct you in your ignorance, and that he may deign to 
grant your demand. After this, invoke your Holy Guardian Angel, and pray 
him to favour you with his vision, and to instruct you how you should design 
and prepare the Symbol of the Operation desired. Also you shall remain in 
prayer until you shall see appear in the room the Splendour of your Angel. 
Then wait to see if he shall expound or command anything touching the form 
of the Symbol demanded. And when you have finished your supplication, arise 
and go to the Plate of Silver, whereon you shall find written as it were in drops 
of dew, like a sweat exuding therefrom, the Symbol as you ought to make it, 
together with the Name of the Spirit who should serve you for this Operation, 
or else that of his Prince. And without touching or moving the Lamen, copy at 
once the Symbol just as it appeareth, and leave the Plate of Metal upon the 
Altar until the even; at the which time, after having made your ordinary 
Orison, and returned your thanks, you shall put it away in a piece of clean silk. 

The most convenient Day for procuring these Symbols is the Sabbath; 
because by such an Operation, we do not in any way violate (its sanctity), 
neither do we injure the same at all. Also we can prepare all things necessary 
the day before. But if the Angel should not appear, and should not in any way 
manifest unto you the Symbol, then may you be certain that the pretended 
Operation, although it may appear good in your eyes, is not so considered by 
God and by your Guardian Angel and in such case you shall change your 
demands. 

Now, as regardeth the Symbols for Evil Operations, these shall you obtain 
more easily; seeing that after (putting on) the Perfume, there is nothing else to 
do but to make your Orisons. Then being clad in your White Tunic, you shall 
put on over it the Silken Vestment and the Girdle, and after that the Crown, 
taking the Wand in your hand, and placing yourself at the side of the Altar 
towards the Terrace. Then, holding the Wand, conjure in the same manner as 
you did on the Second Day. And when the Spirits shall have appeared, you 
shall command them in no way to quit the place, until they shall have 
manifested unto you the Symbol of the Operation which you desire, together 

94 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

with the Names of the Spirits capable of putting the same into execution, 
together with their Symbols. And then you shall see the Prince unto whom the 
Operation appertaineth avow, write, and sign upon the Sand the Symbol, 
together with the Name of the Spirit who is to serve for this Operation. Then 
shall you take the Surety and Oath of the Prince upon the Symbol, and also of 
his Ministers, as you will have previously done in accordance with the 
(directions given in the) Fourteenth Chapter. And should several Symbols be 
given, make them take Oath upon them all. This being done, you can dismiss 
them in the manner we have already described, taking heed before this to copy 
the Symbols which they shall have traced upon the Sand, because in departing 
they will destroy the same. And when they have gone, take the Censer and 
perfume the place, as before said. 

I do not however write this, so that you may hereby, as well as by the use 
of certain of the Symbols described in the Third Book, work Evil; I have in no 
way written them down for such an end; but only that you may understand 
the full Perfection of this Art, and what we can herewith perform. For the Evil 
Spirits be exceeding prompt and exceeding obedient in the working of Evil; it 
is to be wished that they were as much so for the Good. However, take heed 
that you be upon your guard. 

And remember, that as there is a God to write these aforesaid Symbols, 
there is no particular preparation necessary of Pens, of Ink, and of Paper; nor 
yet of elections of particular Days, nor other things to be observed, which the 
False Magicians and Enchanters of the Devil would have you believe. It 
sufficeth that the Symbols should be clearly written with any kind of Ink and 
Pen, provided that we may easily discern unto what Operation each Sign 
appertaineth, the which also you can easily do by means of a properly arranged 
and drawn up Register of them. But the greatest part of the Symbols of the 
Third Book I counsel you to make before commencing the Operation, 
keeping them until that time in the interior of the Altar. And after that the 
Spirits shall have taken Oath thereupon, you shall carefully keep (the Symbols) 
in a safe place, where they can neither be seen nor touched by any other 
person, because thus great harm might befal such person. 

Now will we declare unto you what Symbols be manifested by the Good 
Angels and what by the Evil, and unto what Prince each Operation is subject, 
and lastly, what should be observed as regardeth each Symbol. 

95 

BY WHOM THE SYMBOLS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE THIRD BOOK BE 

MANIFESTED."' 

The Symbols of the Chapters of the Third Book, which be manifested 
only by the Angels, or by the Guardian Angel, be these, namely: 

Chapter I. (To know all manner of things Past and Future, which be not 
however directly opposed to God, and to His Most Holy Will.) 

Chapter III. (To cause any Spirit to appear, and take any form, such as of 
man, animal, bird, etc.) 

Chapter IV. (For divers Visions.) 

Chapter V (How we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free in 
whatsoever form.) 

Chapter VI. (To cause Mines to be pointed out, and to help forward all 
kinds of work connected therewith.) 

Chapter VII. (To cause the Spirits to perform with facility and 
promptitude all necessary chemical labours and Operations, as regardeth 
Metals especially.) 

Chapter X. (To hinder any Necromantic or Magical Operations from 
taking effect, except those of the Qabalab, or of this Sacred Magic.) 

Chapter XI. (To cause all kinds of Books to be brought to one, and 
whether lost or stolen.) 

Chapter XVI. (To find and take possession of all kinds of Treasures, 
provided that they be not at all magically guarded.) 

Chapter XVIII. (To heal divers Maladies.) 

Chapter XXV (To walk upon, and operate under, Water.) 

Chapter XXVIII. (To have as much gold and silver as one may wish, both 
to provide for one's necessities, and to live in opulence.) 

The following (Symbols) be manifested in part by the Angels and in part 
by the Evil Spirits, which is why we must not avail ourselves hereof without 
the permission of the Holy Angel. They are those of: 

Chapter II. (To obtain information concerning, and to be enlightened 
upon, all sorts of Propositions, and all doubtful Sciences.) 

Chapter VIII. (To excite Tempests.) 

Chapter XII. (To know the Secrets of any person.) 

Chapter XIII. (To cause a Dead Body to revive, and perform all the 
functions which a Living Person would do, and this during a space of Seven 
Years by means of the Spirits.) 

Chapter XIV (The Twelve Symbols for the Twelve Hours of the Day and 
of the Night, to render oneself Invisible unto every person.) 

96 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Chapter XV. (For the Spirits to bring us anything we may wish to eat or 

to drink, and even all (kinds of food) that we can imagine.) 
Chapter XVII. (To fly in the Air, and travel any whither.) 
Chapter XIX. (For every description of Affection and Love.) 
Chapter XX. (To excite every description of Hatred and Enmity, 

Discords, Quarrels, Contentions, Combats, Battles, Loss, and Damage.) 
Chapter XXIV (To discover any Theft that hath occurred.) 
Chapter XXVI. (To open every kind of Lock without a Key, and without 

making any noise.) 

Chapter XXIX. (To cause Armed Men to appear.) 

The following (Symbols) be only manifested by the Evil Spirits, namely: 

Chapter IX. (To transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals, 
etc.) 

Chapter XXI. (To transform oneself, and take different Faces and Forms.) 

Chapter XXII. (This Chapter is only for Evil, for with the Symbols herein 
we can cast Spells, and work every kind of Evil; we should not avail ourselves 
hereof.) 

Chapter XXIII. (To demolish Buildings and Strongholds.) 

Chapter XXVII. (To cause Visions to appear.) 

Chapter XXX. (To cause Comedies, Operas, and every kind of Music and 
Dances to appear.) 

UNTO WHAT PRINCE THE OPERATIONS OF EACH CHAPTER ARE 

122 

SUBMITTED. 

Astarot and Asmodee do together execute the Symbols and Operations 
of: 

Chapter VI. (To cause Mines to be pointed out, and to help forward all 
kinds of work connected therewith.) 

Chapter VII. (To cause the Spirits to perform with facility and 
promptitude all necessary Chemical labours and operations, as regardeth 
Metals especially.) 

Chapter IX. (To transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals, 
etc.) 

Asmodee, and Magot together do execute the Operations of: 
Chapter XV (For the Spirits to bring us anything we may wish to eat or 
to drink, and even all (kinds of food) that we can imagine.) 

97 

The Sacred Magic 

Astarot and Ariton both do execute the following Chapter by their 
Ministers, yet not together, but each separately: 

Chapter XVI. (To find and take possession of all kinds of Treasures, 
provided that they be not at all magically guarded.) 

Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon will execute by means of the 
Ministering Spirits common unto them, the following, namely: 

Chapter I. (To know all manner of things Past and Future, which be not 
however directly opposed to God, and to His Most Holy Will.) 

Chapter II. (To obtain information concerning, and to be enlightened 
upon all sorts of Propositions, and all doubtful Sciences.) 

Chapter III. (To cause any Spirit to appear, and take any form, such as of 
Man, Animal, Bird, etc.) 

Chapter IV. (For divers Visions.) 

Chapters V (How we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free, in 
whatsoever form.) 

Chapter XIII. (To cause a Dead Body to revive, and perform all the 
functions which a Living Person would do, and this during a space of Seven 
Years, by means of the Spirits.) 

Chapter XVII. (To fly in the Air, and travel any whither.) 

Chapter XXVII. (To cause Visions to appear.) 

Chapter XXIX. (To cause Armed Men to appear.) 

Amaimon and Ariton together perform: 

Chapter XXVI. (To open every kind of Lock without Key, and without 
making any noise.) 

Oriens alone performeth: 

Chapter XXVIII. (To have as much Gold and Silver as one may wish, 
both to provide for one's necessities, and to live in Opulence.) 

Paimon (alone) performeth: 

Chapter XXIX. (To cause Armed Men to appear.) (It is to be noted that 
this chapter has already been classed under those performed by Oriens, 
Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon, together.) 

Ariton performeth: 

Chapter XXIV (To discover any Theft that hath occurred.) 

Amaimon (performeth): 

Chapter XVIII. (To heal divers Maladies.) 

98 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

Astarot (performeth) : 

Chapter VIII. (To excite Tempests.) 

Chapter XXIII. (To demolish Buildings and Strongholds.) 

Magot (performeth): 123 

Chapter X. (To hinder any Necromantic or Magical Operations from 

taking effect, except those of the Qabalah, or of this Sacred Magic.) 

Chapter XI. (To cause all kinds of Books to be brought to one, and 

whether lost or stolen.) 

Chapter XXI. (To transform oneself, and take different Faces and Forms.) 

Chapter XXIV. (To discover any Theft that hath occurred.) 

Chapter XXX. (To cause Comedies, Operas, and every kind of Music and 

Dances to appear.) 

Asmodee (performeth): 

Chapter XII. (To know the Secrets of any person.) 

Belzebud (performeth): 

Chapter IX. (To transform Animals into Meti, and Men into Animals, 
etc.) 

Chapter XX. (To excite every description of Hatred and Enmity, 
Discords, Quarrels, Contentions, Combats, Battles, Loss, and Damage.) 

Chapter XXII. (This Chapter is only for Evil, for with the Symbols herein 
we can cast Spells, and work every kind of Evil; we should not avail ourselves 
hereof.) 

The Operations of the following Chapters can also (to a great extent) be 
administered by the Familiar Spirits, namely: 

Chapter II. (Scientific Information.) 

Chapter IV (Visions.) 

Chapter XII. (Secrets of other persons.) 

Chapter XVIII. (Healing of Maladies.) 

Chapter XIX. (Affection and Love.) 

Chapter XXIII. (Demolishing Buildings.) 

Chapter XXIV (Discovery of Theft.) 

Chapter XXVII. (Causing Visions to appear.) 

Chapter XXVIII . (Obtaining Money.) 

Chapter XXX. (Visions of Operas, Comedies, etc.) 

If at the beginning they excuse themselves from the performance, there is 
probably some hindering cause, and in this case you should make use of other 
Spirits; but otherwise they must obey you in and throughout everything that 
you shall command them. 

99 

The Sacred Magic 

instructions and explanations concerning what points we 

should particularly observe with regard to each chapter 

of the third book, and especially chapters i, ii., iv., vi., vii., 

x., xxiii., xxv., xxvu., xxix., xxx. 124 

Chapter I. (To know all manner of things Past and Future, which be not 
however directly opposed to God, and to His Most Holy Will.) 

First take the Symbol in your hand, place it (upon the top of your head) 
under your hat, and either you will be secretly warned by the Spirit, or he will 
execute that which you have the intention of commanding him to do. 

(This next instruction is given in the MS. as relating to Chapter II., but it 
evidently is more appropriate to:-) 

Chapter III. (To cause any Spirit to appear, and take any form, such as of 
Man, Animal, Bird, etc.) 

Take in your hand the Symbol, and name the Spirit, who will appear in 
the form commanded. 

(The next following information evidently has reference to the Symbols of 
the Fifth Chapter, but there is no number subjoined as in the other cases in the 
original MS. 

Chapter V. (How we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free, in 
whatsoever form.) 

We must understand that every man may have Four Familiar or Domestic 
Spirits, and no more. These Spirits can serve you in many ways, and they are 
granted unto you by the Sub-Princes. 

The First hath his period of power from Sunrise until Noon. 

The Second, from Noon until the Setting of the Sun. 

The Third, from the Setting of the Sun until Midnight. 

And the Fourth, from Midnight even unto the Sunrising of the following 
Day. 

He who possesseth them is free to avail himself of their services under 
whatever form may be pleasing unto him. 

Of this kind of Spirits there is an infinite number, who at the time of their 
fall were condemned to serve man; and to each man there be four of them 
destined; and each one is obliged to serve during a period of Six Hours, and in 
the case of your giving one over unto some other person, you can no longer 
avail yourself of his services, but in order to replace him during his time of 
service, you may call upon some other Spirit. And should you wish to send 
away one of the said Spirits before the Six Hours during which he is on Guard 
be expired, it sufficeth for you to make him some sign that he can go, and at 
once he will obey. But when the Six Hours of their Guard be expired, the 

100 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

aforesaid Spirits will depart of their own accord without demanding your 
permission, and the next in rotation will successively take the place (of his 
predecessor). But if you have given one away (unto another person), you will 
employ one of the common kind in his place. 

Chapter VIII. (To excite Tempests.) 

If you should wish to excite Tempests, give the Signal above your head 
(and touch the Symbol on the top); and when you wish to make them cease, 
you shall touch it on the underneath side. 

Chapter IX. (To transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals, 
etc.) 

Let the being, whether Man or Animal, see the Symbol, and then touch 
them suddenly with it, when they will appear transformed; but this will be 
only a species of Fascination. When you wish to make it cease, you shall put 
the Symbol upon the head (of the being) and strike it with the Wand, and the 
Spirit will then restore matters to their former condition. 

Chapter XI. (To cause all kinds of Books to be brought to one, and 
whether lost or stolen.) 

Our predecessors, from the commencement of the World, have written 
many and divers excellent Books of the Qabalah, whose value surpasseth that 
of all the riches of the World. These Books have been for the most part lost by 
the Providence or Command of God, who hath not been willing that His 
High Mysteries should be made public by such means; seeing that hereby 
through such Books the Worthy and Unworthy can equally arrive at the 
enjoyment and possession of the Secret things of the Lord. Some also have 
been burned in fires, or swept away by the Waters, and other similar accidents 
(have occurred) through the Evil Spirits, who are jealous of Man's possessing 
such great treasures, and of being obliged to obey him. But this Third Part (of 
this Book), that is to say the Sacred Magic, is that which hath not been entirely 
lost, but the greater part hath been hidden and built up within a wall, and this 
hath happened by order of the Good Spirits, who have not permitted this Art 
to altogether perish, being willing that he who should (desire the same) should 
employ honourable means to obtain the same from the True and only God, 
and not from that Perfidious One and Deceiver, the Devil, and his following. 

This Operation being completed in the proper manner, you will be able 
to see and to read these Books; but it is not permitted unto you to copy them, 
nor to keep them in your memory more than once. As for myself, I have made 
every effort to copy them, but as fast as I wrote, the writing used to disappear 
from the page; whence you may conclude that the Lord knowing our nature, 
which is inclined unto Evil, doth not wish that such great Treasures should be 

101 

The Sacred Magic 

employed to serve unto that end, and unto the destruction of the Human 
Race. 

Chapter XII. (To know the Secrets of any person.) 

For this Operation it sufficeth to touch the Symbol, for at once the Spirit 
doth whisper the reply in your ear; but should you comprehend by such a 
means anything vile, whatever it may be, as you love the Grace of the Lord, see 
that you keep yourself from making manifest that which (you have obtained 
by the use of) the Symbol, seeing that by so doing you might work harm unto 
your neighbour. Every time that you touch the Symbol you should mention by 
name the person whose Secrets you desire to know. 

Chapter XIII. (To cause a dead body to revive, and perform all the 
functions which a living person would do, and this during a space of Seven 
Years, by means of the Spirits.) 

I can in truth both say and affirm that a man who hath just died is 
divided into Three Parts, viz.: Body, Soul, and Spirit. The Body returneth 
unto the Earth, the Soul unto God or unto the Devil, and the Spirit hath its 
period determined by its Creator, that is to say, the Sacred Number of Seven 
Years, during the which it is permitted to wander hither and thither in any 
direction; at length it taketh its decision, and goeth straightway unto the 
place whence it came forth (at the beginning). To change the condition of the 
Soul is impossible, but the Grace of the Lord, for many causes and reasons 
which it is not here permitted unto me to make manifest, hath been willing to 
permit that, with the aid of the Spirits, we may force the Spirit to return and 
to conjoin itself again with the Body, so that for the space of Seven Years it can 
operate any matter. And although this Spirit and the Body joined together can 
perform all the functions and exercises which they used to execute when the 
Body, the Soul and the Spirit were together, yet is it only an imperfect Body, 
being in this case without the Soul. 

This Operation is, however, one of the greatest, and one which we should 
only perform in extraordinarily important cases; seeing that in order to 
accomplish it the Chief Spirits have to operate. 

Nothing else is necessary than to be attentive to the moment when the 
Man is just dead, and then to place the Symbol upon him towards the Four 
Quarters of the World; and at once he will lift himself up and begin to move 
himself He should then be dressed; and a Symbol similar to that which hath 
been placed upon him should be sewn into his garment. Know also that when 
the Seven Years be expired, the Spirit which was conjoined with the Body will 
at once depart, and that we cannot further prolong the period of the aforesaid 
Seven Years. I made proof of this Operation in the Morea for the Duke of 
Saxonia, who had only children who were minors, and the eldest was between 

102 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

twelve and thirteen years of age, unfit for the government and management of 
his estate, the which his own relatives would have seized upon and 
appropriated unto themselves; and by this means I provided (against the 
contingency), and prevented that estate from falling into other hands. 

Chapter XIV. (The Twelve Symbols for the Twelve Hours of the Day and 
of the Night, to render oneself Invisible unto every person.) 

To render oneself invisible is a very easy matter, but it is not altogether 
permissible, because that by such a means we can annoy our neighbour in his 
(daily) life, for we can easily employ the same for producing various effects, 
and we can also work an infinitude of evils (herewith). But, honestly speaking, 
we must not do the latter, such being expressly forbidden by God. This is 
wherefore I entreat you to avail yourself hereof always for a good and never for 
an evil end! You have in this Chapter Twelve Symbols, for Twelve different 
Spirits submitted unto Prince Magot, who are all of the same force. You 
should put the Symbol (upon the top of your head) under the hat or bonnet, 
and then you will become invisible; while on taking it away, you will appear 
visible again. 

Chapter XV. (For the Spirits to bring us anything we may wish to eat or 
to drink, and even all kinds of food that we can imagine.) 

As for this Symbol, and all like ones appertaining unto this Chapter, 
when you shall wish to make use of them, you shall put them between two 
plates, dishes, or jugs, closed together, on the outside of a window, and before 
a quarter of an hour shall have passed, you will, find and will have that which 
you have demanded. But you must clearly understand that with such kind of 
viands you cannot nourish men for more than two days only; for this food, 
although it be appreciable by the eyes and by the mouth, doth not long 
nourish the body, which hath soon hunger again, seeing that this (food) giveth 
no strength to the stomach. Know also that none of these (viands) can remain 
visible for more than twenty-four hours, the which period being passed, fresh 
ones will be requisite. 

Chapter XVI. (To find and take possession of all kinds of Treasures, 
provided that they be not at all magically guarded.) 

Should you wish to discover or to take possession of Treasure, you must 
select the Symbol which you wish, whether it be of a common or of a 
particular Operation, and the Spirit will at once show it unto you, of 
whatsoever kind, or after whatsoever fashion, it may be. Then shall you place 
the Symbol which is referable unto it thereon, and it will no longer be possible 
for it to disappear into the ground, nor for it to be carried away. Furthermore, 

103 

The Sacred Magic 

the Spirits destined unto the Guard of this Treasure will flee, and you can then 
dispose of it as you wish, and take it away. 

Chapter XVII. (To fly in the Air and travel anywhere.) 

Name the place whitherunto you wish to travel, and place the Symbol 
upon your head, under the bonnet or the hat; but take well heed lest the 
Symbol fall from off you through negligence or want of caution. Do not 
journey at night-time unless necessity or some pressing reason thereto 
compelleth you, but select the day-time, and that serene and calm. 

Chapter XVIII. (To heal divers Maladies.) 

Undo the bandages of the sick person, and clean them, and having 
applied the unguent and the compresses, put them again upon the sick 
person;and place the Symbol upon them, and leave it thus for about a 
quarter of an hour, then take it away and keep it (for use on another occasion) . 
But if it be an internal malady, you shall place the Symbol upon the bare head 
of the patient. These Symbols may be seen and examined without any danger, 
howbeit it is always better that they should neither be seen nor handled by any 
other person than yourself. 

Chapter XIX. (For every description of Affection and Love.) 

And 

Chapter XX. (To excite every description of Hatred and Enmity, 
Discords, Quarrels, Contentions, Combats, Battles, Loss, and Damage.) 

On request, and by the intermediary of the Spirits, we can obtain love, 
goodwill, and the favour of Princes and Sovereigns, on this wise: Name aloud 
the person or persons by whom you wish to be loved, and move the Symbol 
answering to the class under which they fall; because if you be operating for 
yourself in matters falling under the heads of love, friendship, etc., you should 
absolutely name aloud the person, and move the Symbol. But if you name or 
operate for two other persons, whether it be for love or for hatred, you should 
expressly name both, and move the Symbols answering to the classes under 
which they fall. Also, if it be possible, you can touch them with the Symbol, 
whether it be general or particular. Under this heading are included all classes 
of goodwill, among the which the most difficult by far is to make yourself 
beloved by religious persons. 

Chapter XXI. (To transform oneself, and take different Faces and Forms.) 

In this Transmutation, which is rather a Fascination, the method of 

operating is as follows: Take the Symbol in your left hand, and with it stroke 

your face. Now were it some (ordinary) Necromancer who was transformed by 

the working of some Diabolical Art, he would soon be discovered (by you). It 

104 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

is certain, however, that if he who operateth be instructed in the True and 
Sacred Magic, like yourself, that he could produce no effect upon you; 
because against the Grace of the Lord, by whomsoever received, no Operation 
can take effect, whether for Good or for Evil; but should such be Diabolical 
Operations by express pacts and similar Sorceries, it is certain that you would 
soon bring them to shame. 

Chapter XXII. (This Chapter is only for Evil, for with the Symbols herein 
we can cast Spells, and work every kind of Evil; we should not avail ourselves 
hereof.) 

All these Symbols are to be either buried in the ground, or placed under 
doors, steps, or buried under paths and other places by which people do pass, 
or whereon they lean; in this latter case it is sufficient merely to touch (such 
places) with the Symbol. It must be here remarked that we can work much evil 
against our enemies, and if you know for a certain fact that they are 
attempting your life, there is no imaginable sin in availing yourself of (these 
Symbols for protection). But should you do this to please some friend, you 
would not escape easily with impunity from (the disapproval of) your 
Guardian Angel. Use then this Knowledge as a Sword against your Enemies, 
but never against your neighbour, which would be without any result but that 
of bringing hurt to yourself. 

Chapter XXVI. (To open every kind of Lock, without Key, and without 
making any noise.) 

Should you wish to open anything locked, such as ordinary Locks 
(Bolts), Padlocks, Coffers, Cupboards, Boxes, and Doors, you shall touch 
them with the side of the Symbol which is written upon, and immediately 
they will open without any noise, without being in any way damaged, and 
without exciting any suspicion of their having been broken open. When you 
wish to again close them, you shall touch them with the back of the Symbol, 
that is to say, with the part thereof not written upon, and at once they will 
refasten of their own accord. And in no way should this Operation be 
employed in Churches, or for the committing of Murder. Also (remember) 
that this Operation can be used for all manner of wicked ends; wherefore we 
should obtain (permission) first from our Guardian Angel, so as not to irritate 
him, and abuse the Grace of God, which we have received. Neither should this 
(Operation) be employed to aid in the commission of Rapes and Violation of 
Women; but only for (laudable) effects, and other (permissible) ends. 

The Child of whose services you avail yourself for the conclusion of this 
Operation should not be more than Seven Years of age; it should be able to 
speak clearly, it should be active, and should comprehend what you teach it to 

105 

The Sacred Magic 

do, in order to serve you. And fear not that this Child may be able to reveal 
and tell unto others anything of what he doeth; also he will not in the least 
remember that which he shall have done, and you can make trial thereof 
yourself by interrogating him after the seven days be past, and you will find 
that he will be able to tell you nothing of that which hath passed; the which is 
a very remarkable thing. 

When you shall have thoroughly decided to give this present Operation 
unto any, and which should only be given as a free gift, as I have already said; 
remember to make such person give you Seven Florins, the which you shall 
distribute unto Seven poor persons with your own hand, and such poor 
persons must genuinely be in want. Them shall you straitly charge, to repeat 
for Seven days the Seven penitential Psalms, or the Pater and Ave seven times a 
day, praying unto the Lord for the person who hath given (the florins) unto 
you to distribute unto them, that He would deign to come unto his assistance, 
and to grant unto him for ever such strength that he may never transgress His 
Holy Commandments. 

While in the performance of the Operation, be certain that each person 
(undertaking the same) is subject unto very great temptations to prevarication, 
and in particular unto great disquietudes of mind, to force the abandonment 
of the Operation. For the Mortal Enemy of Man is grieved that he should 
make the acquisition of this Sacred Science, the which also he receiveth from 
God Himself, Who hath by this means closed the way against the Demon, this 
being the only object and end of this Sacred Science. For the Enchantments 
whereof the Evil Enchanters and Sorcerers make employ, are in no way 
wrought by the true method, and they only have power to execute their end in 
proportion to the Tributes, Sacrifices, and Pacts, rendered in return, which 
latter evidently bring about the loss of the Soul, and very frequently that of the 
Body as well. 

Consider that it is the pride of (the Demon) which hath chased him out 
of Heaven, and think what a heartbreaking thing it is for him to see a Man, 
made of vile earth, command him who is a Spirit, and who was created noble, 
and an Angel (as well); and also that it is necessary that he should submit 
himself unto Man, and obey him, not of his own free will, but by force, and 
by a power of command which God hath given unto Man, to whom he is 
forced to humiliate himself, and to obey, he, who had the greatest difficulty in 
submitting himself unto his Creator. And yet, notwithstanding all this, he is 
obliged by his most profound humiliation, and by his most severe suffering, to 
submit himself unto Man, for whom further is destined that Heaven which he 
himself hath lost for an Eternity. 

Wherefore you should continue the Operation, and have recourse unto 
the Lord, and in no way be troubled, for you shall vanquish every difficulty, 
seeing that the Lord never faileth those who put all their confidence in Him. 

106 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

You may only give this Sacred Operation unto two persons; and in the 
case of your giving it unto a third, it would hold good for him, but you 
yourself would be for ever deprived of it. I beseech you in grace to well open 
your eyes, and thoroughly examine him unto whom you shall give so great a 
Treasure, so that he be not one who will make use of the same to make a mock 
of God, which is a sin so great, that we Jews are a living proof thereof. For 
since our predecessors began to make use of this Sacred Magic for Evil, God 
hath granted it unto so few among us, that in my whole lifetime, ourselves 
included, we be but the number of Seven persons who by the Grace of God 
possess the same. 

When the Child shall warn you that your Guardian Angel hath appeared, 
then shall you, without moving from your place, repeat in a low voice Psalm 
CXXXVII., which beginneth: "Confitebor Tibi Domine, in toto corde meo, " I 
will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, with mine whole heart," etc. And, on the 
contrary, when you shall convoke for the first time the Four Chief Spirits, you 
shall say Psalm XC: "Qui habitat in adjutorio Altissimi, " Whoso dwelleth in 
the defence of the Most High," etc.; and this not in a low voice as in the 
preceding case, but (aloud) as you usually speak, and standing where you 
happen to be. 

Chapter XXVIII. (To have as much Gold and Silver as one may wish, 
both to provide for one's necessities, and to live in opulence.) 

And whereas I have allowed the Twenty-eighth Chapter to pass without 
notice, I now refer hereto. Place the Symbol of the Money you require in your 
purse, let it remain there for a short time, then put your right hand in your 
purse, and you will there find Seven pieces of the class of Money which you 
have intended to obtain. But take heed to perform this Operation only thrice 
in the day. And the pieces of Money whereof you have no longer need will 
disappear at once. This is why when you have need of small change you should 
take heed at the same time not to ask for large pieces. I could have here set 
down other values and Symbols, but I have only given those which I have 
found the most necessary for a beginner, and partly also to avoid confusing 
you. And also it is not right that I who am only a mortal man should give 
further instructions hereon unto you who are about to have an Angel for 
Master and for Guide. 

We have already said that providing he recogniseth a God, any Man, of 
any Religion soever, may arrive at the possession of this Veritable Wisdom and 
Magic, if he employ right and proper ways and means. Now I say further that 
unto whatever Law he who operateth may pertain, he can observe the feasts, 
etc., thereof, provided that they hinder not the Operation, with a firm and 
true conviction that he shall have from his Angel greater lights as to the points 

107 

The Sacred Magic 

wherein he may be liable to err. Wherefore you shall be ready and willing to 
correct your faults, obedient in all things, and on all occasions, unto his 
precepts. And you should observe exactly and inviolably from point to point, 
everything touching the regimen of life, the practice, and other counsels given 
in this Book. 

As we have already said, if by chance some slight indisposition should 
overtake you after the commencement of the Operation, you shall observe that 
hereinbefore laid down; but should the illness become very much worse, so 
that remedies become necessary unto the health of the body, and that you have 
to undergo blood-letting; then do not harden yourself against the Will of the 
Lord, but having made a brief prayer, thank Him for having visited you in this 
manner. And having made use of remedies which oblige you to leave off the 
Operation already begun, so as not to become as it were your own murderer, 
and notwithstanding that it grieveth you to the heart to be forced so to do, yet 
nevertheless conform yourself unto His Holy Will. And when you shall have 
regained your accustomed health, in His own good time shall you return unto 
the Operation, feeling sure that He will grant you His aid. Such a forced 
desistance doth not hinder you from awaiting a fitting time, when you may 
recommence; seeing that such interruption is not in any way voluntary, but 
forced by necessity. Whereas, had this interruption occurred through pure 
caprice, you ought never to think further of (recommencing), because we must 
not make a Mock of God. 

There be two kinds of sins which are infinitely displeasing unto God. One 
is Ingratitude, and the other Incredulity. I say this cursorily, because the Devil 
will not fail to insinuate a thousand ideas into your head (such as) that this 
Operation may perhaps be (a real thing) and perhaps not; that the symbols are 
badly drawn, etc., so as to make you comment upon the subject. This is why 
you must have Faith, and that you must believe. Neither should you dispute 
concerning that which you understand not; remember that God out of 
nothingness hath created all things, and that all things have their being in Him 
watch, work, and you will see. 

In the Name of the Most Holy Adonai, the True and Only God, we have 
finished this Book in the best order and with the best instruction which has 
been possible to me. Know also that it is only in God that you will find the 
sole and certain Way to arrive at the True Wisdom and Magic, but yet also by 
following out that which I have written down in this Book with such 
exactitude. Still, however, when you shall have put anything into practice, you 
shall manifestly know how great and immeasurable hath been my paternal 
affection; and in truth I dare to say that I have done for love of you what no 
one in our times hath undertaken, and in especial in that I have declared unto 
you the two Symbols, that of the Child, and your own particular one, 
without the which I swear unto you by the True God that out of an hundred 

108 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

persons who might undertake this Operation, there would be only two or 
three who would actually attain unto it. I have, however, removed most of the 
difficulties, (therefore) be now tranquil, and despise not my counsel. 

It need not appear strange unto you that this Book is not at all like unto 
so many others which I have, and which are composed in a lofty and subtle 
style; because I have composed this (work) expressly in order to spare you so 
much labour, and to enlighten therein the difficulties which you might 
(otherwise) have encountered in order to comprehend its meaning. And so 
that it might not be at all necessary for it to pass into other hands (than your 
own), in making this Book I have in no way availed myself of eloquent but 
peculiar expressions, which those who write such works usually make use of 
and even then not without mystifications. But I have employed a certain 
manner of arrangement, making a mixture of the subject matter, and 
dispersing it here and there in the Chapters so that you may be forced to read 
and re-read the Book many times, and also the better so to do, to transcribe 
and imprint it in your memory. Render then your thanks unto the Lord God 
Almighty, and never forget my faithful advice, even unto the day of your 
death. Thus will the Divine Wisdom and Magic be your wealth, and never can 
you find a greater Treasure in the World. Obey promptly him who teacheth 
you that which he hath learned by his own experience; and I pray and conjure 
you by that God Who is my God, to observe summarily and inviolably the 
three following heads which should serve you as guides and limitations until 
you shall pass the gulf of this Miserable World: 

(1) Let God, His Word, all His Commandments, and the Counsel of your 
Angel, never depart from your heart and from your mind! 

(2) Be the declared enemy of all the Evil Spirits, their Vassals, and 
Adherents, during the whole period of your life. Dominate them, and regard 
them as your Servitors. If they make propositions to you, demanding from 
you pacts, or sacrifices, or obedience, or servitude, refuse them with disdain 
and menaces. 

(3) It is more than evident that God can know the heart of men, the 
which none else can do. You should therefore force yourself to test severely for 
some time him to whom you intend to give this (knowledge). You shall closely 
note his method of life and habits; you shall discuss the subject with him, 
seeking to discover in the clearest way and as far as possible, whether he would 
use it for Good or for Evil. Also in giving this Operation you shall fast, eating 
only once a day, and he who shall receive it shall do the same; see also what we 
have said in the Third Chapter, and elsewhere. It is also true that one who 
would suffer much in health by fasting in such a manner, may if absolutely 
necessary supplement the same by paying one or several persons to fast in his 
stead and to intercede for him. (The whole object and end of) this should be 
both to give and receive this operation unto the Glory of the Great God, and 

109 

The Sacred Magic 

unto one's own good and that of one's neighbour, whether friend or enemy, 
and unto that of all things created. 

The Ten Florins of Gold shall be distributed by your own hands when 
you shall have received the money, unto Seventy-two poor persons who know 
the Psalms, as mentioned in a preceding Chapter; and see also that you fail not 
in this, for it is an essential point. 

Furthermore you shall demand from him to whom you shall give the 
Operation, some pleasurable gratification which is in harmony with the 
Operation, at your choice. But see that you demand not money, for for this 
you would be deprived entirely of the Holy Wisdom. 

Every time that you shall desire to make a fresh command, you shall 
thrice repeat the Psalm XC, "Qui habitat in adjutorium Altissimi, " etc., 
"Whoso dwelleth in the aid of the Most High," etc., because this Psalm 
possesseth so great a virtue that you will be astonished when you comprehend 
it. 

If you know that you, as a man, have offended your Creator, in anything 
regarding the Tables of the Law; perform no operation until after having made 
a general confession of your sins unto God; the which you shall observe unto 
the day of your death. By thus acting the Mercy of the Lord will never depart 
from you. 

Unto the which Lord be Praise, and Glory, and Honour, for the Gifts 
which He hath granted unto us. 

So be it! 

END OF THE SECOND BOOK 

110 

Of Abramelin the Mage 
FOOTNOTES TO THE SECOND BOOK 

The style of the writing here is much more quaint and obscure than that of the First Book; and is 
evidently the translation of Abraham the Jew from a more ancient writer. 

I.e., the Revelation, or Apocalypse. 

This whole passage about the signification of these numbers is very obscurely worded in the original. 
I take the meaning to be the following: The Arts or methods of Magical working are twelve, if we class 
them under the twelve Signs of the Zodiac. The second number mentioned above, 5, is perfect 
because of its analogy with the Pentagram that potent Symbol of the Spirit and the Four Elements; 6 is 
the number of the Planets (as known to the Ancients, without the recently discovered Herschel and 
Neptune). As the Chaldean Oracles of Zoroaster say: " He made them Six, and for the Seventh, He 
cast into the midst thereof the Fire of the Sun". 2 operates in the Stars and Planets as representing their 
Good or Evil influence in the Heavens, in other words their dual nature. 3 consists in the Metals 
because, the ancient Alchemists considered their bases to be found in the three principles which they 
called Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt; but by which they did not mean the substance which we know 
under these names. 

Ie., "probable" as opposed to "certain". 

Ie., professing Magicians. 
' In the original MS.: "Nous avons deja dit quelle est la science que je dots vous enseigner cest adire quelle 
nest point humaine, " etc. 

Ibid. 

In the original: " Comme je suis apresent vous devez done penser avant que d'entrer dans ce bal," etc. 

Ie., he who intends to undertake the Operation. 
I doubt this assertion very much. 

Here comes another touch of prejudice. In the present day many of the profoundest students of the 
Qabalah are women, both married and single. 

It is necessary that the reader should not misunderstand this passage. What are meant are those 
Black Magic works containing garbled and perverted words and characters; and which teach nothing 
but hurtful and selfish practices; the great point in which is generally the forming of a Pact with an 
Evil Spirit. Because true Characters represent the Formulas of the Currents of the Hidden Forces of 
Nature and true Ceremonies are the Keys of bringing the same into action. 

It seems again to me here that Abraham the Jew stretches the matter too far. it is perfectly and 
utterly true without doubt that Angelic Magic is higher than that form of Talismanic Magic which has 
its basis in the Astrological positions of the Heavenly Bodies; and can therefore do more, and be also 
independent of Astrological considerations, because the matter is relegated to a higher plane than this' 
and one wherein the laws of Physical Nature do not obtain. But certainly when working with the rays 
of the Sun, we shall more easily find his occult force of heat attainable when he himself is producing 
that effect upon the earth, i.e., when he is in the Sign of the Lion; while when he is in that of the Bull' 
his force will be rather that of Germination, etc., when in the Northern Hemisphere. And the same 
with the other Planets. Also if working by the Indian Tatwas, we shall find it necessary to consider the 
position of the Moon, the time in the day, and the course of the Tatwa in the period of five Gharis. Of 

111 

The Sacred Magic 

course Abraham could not make the experiments of Rabbin Moses succeed if he substituted the laws 
of another plane for their own. 

So it would be if he applied it to the Angelic working; but equally it would be an error which, 
though not so great, would still entail failure, to apply laws exclusively of the Angelic plane to those 
experiments which would mainly depend on the physical rays of the Planets; though undoubtedly the 
Angels of a Planet govern its rays. But the Angels of Mars do not govern the rays of Jupiter, nor those 
of the latter the rays of Mars. 

The Grimoires of Black Magic would usually come under this head. But, nevertheless, the 
extravagant words therein will be usually found to be corruptions and perversions of Hebrew, Chaldee, 
and Egyptian titles of Gods and Angels. But it is undoubtedly evil to use caricatures of Holy Names; 
and these for evil purposes also. Yet it is written in the Oracles of Zoroaster: "Change not barbarous 
Names of Evocation, for they are Names Divine, having in the Sacred Rites a Power Ineffable!" 

Yet, notwithstanding, it is well in a Sacred Magical Operation to employ a language which does not 
to our minds convey so much the commonplace ideas of everyday life, so as the better to exalt our 
thoughts. But, as Abraham says, we should before all things understand what we are repeating. 

The Passover is about the Vernal Equinox and nearly corresponds to our Easter; it begins on the 
15 th or 16th of the Jewish First Month= Nisan or Abib. The Feast of Tabernacles begins about the 
middle of their Seventh Month= Tisri. 

Ie., religious denomination. 

It is immaterial whether the religious conception be Theistic or Pantheistic. 

The Initiates of the True Rosicrucian Wisdom, know that there is a certain force in the observance 
of the Equinoxes. 

Abraham evidently means his Guardian Angel. 

Here Abraham admits to an extent what I have urged in my previous notes. 

I.e., the Astrologers to whom Abraham refers in the first sentence of the chapter. 

I.e., the Moon and Monday; Sun and Sunday; Mars and Tuesday (Tuisco is a name of Mars); Venus 
and Friday (Freya's day, after Freya, the Scandinavian Goddess), etc. 

"Etjusqua ceguil tremonte son jour dure jusqua cequil se leve derechef." 
' This is the initiated Rosicrucian teaching, which is very different to that of the outer and uninitiated 
World. 

This is the great point to be studied in all Magical Operations soever, and unless the whole heart and 
soul and faith go with the ceremony, there can be no reliable result produced. 

The title of the Eleventh Chapter of the Second Book is: "Concerning the Selection of the Place". 

Meaning in the case where the Aspirant unto the Sacred Magic is a Servant actually then serving a 
Master. 

The object of most of these instructions is of course to keep the Astral Sphere of the Aspirant free 
from evil influences, and accustom him to pure and holy thoughts and to the exercise of Will power 
and Self-control. The student of the Indian Tatwas will know the value of active meditation at Sunrise 
because that moment is the AkAsic commencement of the Tatwic course in the day, and of the power 
of the Swara. 

I.e., the Christians. 

112 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

This probably means in the bed-chamber before entering the Oratory. 

Que vous puissiezjouir et resister a-la presense, etc. 

I.e., independent. 

I.e, the ashes of the charcoal and incense. 
' In the text evidently by a slip the word grandeur is repeated la grandeur la grandeur de Dieu. 

"Laissez apart touttes les choses curieuses. " 

This chapter is previously referred to in the Seventh Chapter in speaking of the Bed-chamber and 
the Oratory. 

"L 'avenue"; the modern sense of this word is, of course, a road or path bordered by trees. 

Compare the following description with that of Sir Philip Derval's so-called Observatory, in the 
Strange Story, by Bulwer Lytton. 

I.e., the Terrace or Balcony. 

I.e., the Spirits. 
43 I.e., the Altar. 

He here evidently means the Oratory, and not the Bedchamber described in Chapter VII. 

The Rosicrucian Initiate will note the description of these vestments. 

"Mirrhe en larmes " 

? Galanca, or galanga, an Indian root, used for medicinal purposes. See description of Holy 
Anointing Oil and Perfume in Exodus xxx. 

Olibanum. 

Or storax. 

A "brasse" 'is a fathom; but here perhaps implies rather an arm's length: "Lune brasse enveron ou demi 
aulne". 

I.e., in the hollow interior of the Altar. 

Which give the instructions for these periods. 

Concerning the two last Moons. 

It will be remarked how this point is insisted on. 

"Which," apparently, should refer to the coals, and not to the censer. 
' Preferably I should advise upon the Western side of the Altar, and facing therefore the East; also I 
would have the cupboard opening upon the Western side, for certain mystical reasons. 

The place of the third eye in the Indian figures of Gods. 

This is apparently a slip for "the Seventh Chapter"; as the Third Chapter is only a short one 
regarding those who are fitted to undertake the Operation. 

See Book I., Chapter XII. 

Because previously when he has mentioned a foregoing chapter, it has been one of those in this 
Second Book to which he has referred. 

If the Operator himself has developed the clairvoyant faculty; which the training he has subjected 
himself to for six months ought to have greatly aided, and be pure in mind, I can see no necessity for 
the employment of a Child as Seer. 

I.e., your special and particular Guardian Angel. 

"En la familiarite et conversation « 

113 

The Sacred Magic 

I.e., those of a material force; many being evil, some few inclined to good, most of a mixed nature 
somewhat good yet the evil predominating in their dispositions. 

I.e., this Second Book of the three constituting the treatise. 
66 I.e. the Red Robe, or Mantle. 

"Ou si vous estez en Campagne mettes vous ducoste, du ponant. "This word "ponant" is almost obsolete 
in modern French, being only employed in a nautical sense, and even then but rarely. It implies the 
"West", or rather the part of the "Ocean towards the West". Even in the middle ages this expression 
was not in wide use. The Occult student will remark here the idea of "turning to the East to pray, and 
to the West to invoke". But usually in Magic it is advisable to turn towards the quarter sympathetic in 
nature with that of the Spirit you wish to summon. 

That is if you convoke them to serve you. But all mediaeval tradition implies that they are ready 
enough to come if you are an evil-minded person wishing to make a pact with them to obtain magical 
force, i.e. a Goetic Magician as opposed to an Initiate Adept. 

This is why in religious and magical writings such stress is laid on the importance of controlling the 
thoughts; which are as it were our prototypical speech and action in all matters of importance. Modern 
thought-reading would alone suggest this to persons unskilled in Occultism. 

"Les Esprits jugent parla denostre ignoranse et serendent plus reveches et ostinez. " The Initiate knows the 
value of an Invocation written by himself, in harmony with and expressing exactly his will and idea. 
But this does not deny the utility of many of the Conjurations handed down by tradition. 

Yet the advantage of its being in a language which you do not immediately associate with the things 
of every-day life is great, provided always that you understand the words and repeat them and pronounce 
them correctly. 

This recalls the phrase so frequent in Conjurations, in which the Spirits are commanded to appear 
"in human form without any deformity or tortuosity". 

Because some of the Demonic forms are so terrible that the shock of their sight might cause a person 
of a nervous temperament to lose his reason. 

I must again repeat that it is only evil and perverted symbols which come under this denunciation of 
Abraham the Jew; for nearly all Pentacles and Seals are the Symbols and Sigils of Divine and Angelic 
Names. 

I.e., of allegiance to you. 
' The four Superior Spirits and Princes are: Lucifer, Leviathan, Satan, and Belial. 

The Eight Sub-Princes are: Astaroth, Magoth, Asmodeus, Beelzebuth; Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, and 
Amaymon. 

By a very evident slip, "Chapitre IX." is written in the MS. instead of XIX. 

"Qui les asoumis atouttes ses Creatures et avos pieds. " 

This whole paragraph is difficult of clear translation by literal rendering, so I give the MS. text: 
"Secondement que vostre fin nest point curiosite maligne mais alhonneur et gloire de Dieu et alutilite 
propre et acelle de tout le genre humain et Pourtant toutte ces Jois que vous les appellerez avec quelquesoit 
signe ou parole etenquelquesoit temps et Lieu etpourquelle soit occasion etservile dabort sans aucunement 
retarder ayent a aparoitre etobeissent avos commandemens etaucas quils eussent un empechemen Legitime 
quils ayent avous envoyer dautres esprits enles nommant presentement ceux quiseront capable etpuissan 

114 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

pourobeir etaccomplir vostre volonte et vostre demande en leur place etquils vous promeltent et Jurent 
dobserver cela par le tresrigoureux Jugement de Dieu etpar latres grande peine et chatiment dessts anges sur 
eux ils consentiront dobeir et Les 4 princes souverains vous nommeront les 8 sousprinces quils vous enveront 
enleurplase aleurfaire preter le serment comme Jelay deja dit deparoitre dabort, " etc. The writer of this 
manuscript never uses the slightest punctuation, and paragraphs are infrequent. 

I.e., beyond the Door, but being careful not to go out on to the Terrace yourself. 
82 Written "Atarot" by a slip in the MS. 

I.e., upon the sand on the Terrace. 

Again erroneously "Atarot". 

I.e., unto the subservient Spirits of Astaroth. 
' I.e., whether Verbal, or Mental, or by Gesture. 

Again note that the whole of the operations of this Magic of Abra-Melin and of Abraham the Jew 
depends on these Symbols.so that it is not the true and sacred pentacles and symbols which he 
condemns; but erroneous and corrupted ones made use of ignorantly. 

If I.e., in those which the Operator has written down from the Third Book, and placed at the entry 
of the Door for Astaroth to take oath upon. 

I.e., Servitors belonging equally to these two Sub-Princes together. 

I.e., Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon. Ariton is often called Egin or Egyn in other works on 
Magic. 

I.e., following the order of the classification in the Nineteenth Chapter of this Second Book. 

I.e., Oriens, Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon; one Spirit from each for a Familiar. 

Entitled: "How one may retain the Familiar Spirits, bound or free, in whatsoever form". 

I.e., so that each of the four Familiars shall serve a fourth part of the twenty-four hours of the day, 
that is six hours. 

However in all Magical Works great stress is laid on the importance of licensing a Spirit invoked in 
the Operation to depart, and if he be unwilling, of even compelling him against his will to return to 
his place. It must be remembered here, in this Operation of Abraham the Jew, that not only his 
Oratory but his Bed-chamber also is kept pure and consecrated, and therefore it would be next to 
impossible for an Evil Spirit to break through to attack him. But in all Magical Evocations by the 
Circle.the Magician should never quit the same, without having licensed and even forced the Evil 
Spirits to depart; as cases are on record of the Operator experiencing sudden death. I myself was 
present on an occasion when in the Evocation by the Circle, the Magician incautiously having stooped 
forward and outward just over the limit of the Circle, received a shock like that from a powerful 
electric battery, which nearly threw him down, struck the Magical Sword from his hand, and sent him 
staggering back to the centre of the Circle. Compare also with this incident Allan Fenwick's experience 
in the Strange Story, when his hand accidentally went beyond the limits of the Circle when he was 
replenishing the Lamps during the Evocation. 

Viz.: Lucifer, Leviathan, Satan, and Belial. 

I.e., the Demons and Evil Spirits generally. 

The Demons generally. 

in the original: "demandes etapparitions ". 

115 

The Sacred Magic 

Let me here once again insist on the absolute necessity in Occult working of being courteous, even to 
the Evil Spirits; for the Operator who is insolent and overbearing will speedily lay himself open to 
obsession by a Spirit of like nature, the which will bring about his ultimate downfall, 

A similar name, "Buriol", is given under the Spirits subservient to Amaymon. 

See same Name under Oriens. 

See same Name under Belzebud. 

In MS., "User d'humanite". 

Entitled: "How we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free, in whatsoever form". 

Viz.: Lucifer, Leviathan, Satan, and Belial. 

Viz.: Ashtaroth, Maguth, Asmodeus, and Beelzebub; Oriens, Paymon, Ariton or Egyn, and 
Amaymon. 

For not only does constraining them to visible appearance require reiterated conjurations, but also 
they must be in some way provided with the necessary elements wherefrom to build up a body to 
manifest in. 

In the Original: "Sanspourtant crier comme unfou ". 

I have by this phrase translated the expression in the Original: Le vice de crapule. 

This also seems like mere prejudice on the part of Abraham. 

Remember that "this present day" means of course the period when Abraham was writing this 
work, ie., 1458. In this particular of curiosity the world has doubtless changed little since. 

Probably implying that the Evil Spirits could easily obsess such animal, so as to act upon the 
Operator through whatever he might eat of it. 

In the Original MS.: "Vousjuirez lejeu comme la peste parcequil occasionne toujours du blaspheme 
outreque dans ce temps la leveritable jeu est loraison et la lecture des livres sacrez . By "jeu," here is 
evidently meant gaming or gambling, and not simple recreation and amusement, which latter would 
be almost a necessity during this period, to prevent the brain giving way from the intense nervous 
strain. 

I.e., those of the Third Book. 

I have here interpolated "in all cases", as otherwise this passage would clash with remarks elsewhere. 

I.e., the Spirits, who have sworn allegiance to the Operator at his convocations of them. 

I.e., that Spirit. 

This Parenthesis is Abraham's. 

I.e., of this Second Book. The Chapter is entitled: "Concerning the Convocation of the Spirits". 

I have thought it advisable to add here the headings of these chapters at length. 

Here again I am giving the headings of the Chapters of the Third Book at length; as by so doing 
they form a species of Key to the character, nature and offices of the Prince who governs their 
Operations. 

In addition to the chapters here given, Magoth is said to rule the operations of Chapter XIV. 
(Invisibility), in the special instructions of Abraham, the Jew, concerning that chapter. 

Notwithstanding these Numbers are here given, it will be found that the Instructions do not 
include all these Chapters, and, on the contrary, give information concerning some of those not here 
specially mentioned. 

116 

Of Abramelin the Mage 

It is of course evident that the number Four of the Familiar Spirits = one for each of the Four 
Elements of which Man is composed, ruled by the Holy Name of Four Letters, IHVH, 
Tetragrammaton . 

I.e., the Evil. 

"Se resout", in the MS. "Resoudre," like our word "resolve," also may imply to reduce to its chemical 
constituents. These three parts of the person, which Abraham calls Body, Soul, and Spirit, are 
designated in the Qabalah by the respective terms of "Nephesch", i.e., the animal part; "Neschamah", 
or the Soul, that is to say, the Higher Aspirations, and "Ruach," ie., the Mind or Spirit. But besides 
these, the Qabalists also recognise certain higher principles, of which Abraham the Jew does not here 
speak, nor yet of the faculty of reincarnation of those principles. Reincarnation is a subject much 
treated of by the Oriental Sacred writings, and was undoubtedly a fundamental doctrine of the 
Ancient Egyptian Magic, from which, be it well remembered, the Hebrew Qabalah has been derived. 
The Esoteric Buddhists divide the personality into Seven Principles, instead of the Three given above. 

I.e., The Four Cardinal Points, 

the bandages. 

In the Original MS., "despersonnes religieuses" . This expression would include monks, nuns, and also 
people bigoted in religion. 

I.e., such Evil Magician. 

"Serrures," which implies bolts as well as locks. 

I.e., Religious denomination. 

Here Abraham the Jew is evidently especially addressing himself to his son Lamech. 

These two Symbols are probably those which are placed at the extreme end of the Third Book, ie., 
the Magical Squares with the Names Adam and Uriel returned therein, and of which the Squares of 
numbers above are evidently intended for the reverse sides; Adam being applied to the Child, and 
Uriel to the Guardian Angel of Lamech. 

' Again let the practical Occultist remember that this counsel applies principally to Adepts; for the 
ordinary man can not command the Demons' seeing that he has not yet learned to understand and 
control even all his thoughts; and the Adept can only command such beings through the knowledge of 
his Higher Self, and of his Guardian Angel. 

I.e. of the Second Book. 

I think this system of substitution should be very rarely actised. He must be a very spiritless person 
who would be dissuaded by the prospect of fasting for a day or two. 

Before alluded to in several places. 

This would apparently apply to a command given to the Demons, and not to an Aspirant for the 
Sacred Wisdom. 

117

THE SACRED MAGIC 

OF 

ABRAMELIN THE MAGE 

Book III 

Translated by 
S.L. Mac Gregor Mathers 

The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage: Book Three 
Translated by S.L. MacGregor Mathers 

This Adobe Acrobat edition contains the complete and unaltered text 
and illustrations of the corresponding sections in the second (1900) 

EDITION PUBLISHED BY JOHN M. WaTKINS, LONDON. 

Prepared and typeset by Benjamin Rowe, April 27, 1999. 
Text set in Adobe Garamond. 
Illustrations set in Book Antiqua. 

THE THIRD BOOK 

OF THE 

HOLY MAGIC, 

WHICH GOD GAVE UNTO MOSES, AARON, DAVID, SOLOMON, AND OTHER 

SAINTS, PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS; WHICH TEACHETH 

THE TRUE DIVINE WISDOM. 

BEQUEATHED BY ABRAHAM UNTO LAMECH HIS SON. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBREW. 
1458. 

120 

The Sacred Magick 

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE SACRED MAGIC. 

(The Prologue.) 

E who shall have faithfully observed that which hath been taught unto 
'him, and shall have with a good will obeyed the Commandments of 
'God, let him, I say, be certain that this Veritable and Loyal Wisdom 
shall be accorded unto him; and also that the Perfidious BELIAL can do no 
otherwise than become his slave, together with all his Pestiferous Generation. 

However I pray the True God who governeth, ruleth over, and main- 
taineth all that He hath created; that thou, O Lamech, my son, or whomsoever 
he may be unto whom thou shalt have granted this Sacred Operation, mayest 
work it out, having always before thee the Fear of God, and in no way use it for 
Evil, because God the Eternal hath wished herein to leave us our free will, but 
woe unto him who shall abuse His Divine Grace. Yet I say not but that if an 
enemy should attempt thy life, that it is permissible unto thee if necessary to 
destroy him; but in any other case lay not thine hand unto the sword, but use 
gentler methods. Be kind and affable unto every one. One may also serve a 
friend without harm unto oneself. 

David and King Solomon could have destroyed their enemies in an 
instant, but they did not so; in imitation of God Himself who chastiseth not 
unless He is outraged. 

If thou shalt perfectly observe these rules, all the following Symbols and an 
infinitude of others will be granted unto thee by thy Holy Guardian Angel; 
thou thus living for the Honour and Glory of the True and only God, for thine 
own good, and that of thy neighbour. 

Let the Fear of God be ever before the eyes and the heart of him who shall 
possess this Divine Wisdom and Sacred Magic. 

121 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE FIRST CHAPTER. 

O know all manner of things Past and Future, which be not however 
directly opposed to God, and to His Most Holy Will. 

(i) To know all things Past and Future in general. 

(2) To know things appertaining unto the Future. 

(3) To know things appertaining unto the Future. 

(4) Things to happen in War. 

(5) Things past and forgotten. 

(6) Tribulations to come. 

(7) Things propitious to come. 

(8) Things past regarding Enemies. 

(9) To know the Signs of Tempests. 

(10) To know the Secrets of War. 

(11) To know true and false Friends. 

(1) 

(2) 

M 

I 

L 

O 

N 

I 

R 

A 

G 

O 

L 

A 

M 

A 

L 

O 

G 

A 

R 

I 

N 

O 

L 

I 

M 

T 

H 

I 

R 

A 

M 

A 

H 

I 

G 

A 

N 

A 

M 

I 

G 

O 

G 

A 

N 

A 

R 

A 

G 

I 

G 

A 

R 

A 

N 

A 

G 

O 

G 

I 

M 

A 

N 

A 

G 

I 

H 

A 

M 

A 

R 

I 

H 

T 

(3) 

D 

O 

R 

E 

H 

O 

R 

I 

R 

E 

R 

I 

N 

I 

R 

E 

R 

I 

R 

O 

H 

E 

R 

O 

D 

(4) 

N 

A 

B 

H 

I 

A 

D 

A 

I 

H 

B 

A 

K 

A 

B 

H 

I 

A 

D 

A 

I 

H 

B 

A 

N 

122 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

(6) 

N 

V 

D 

E 

T 

O 

N 

V 

s 

I 

L 

A 

R 

O 

D 

I 

R 

E 

M 

A 

T 

E 

L 

E 

M 

E 

L 

E 

T 

A 

M 

R 

R 

I 

D 

O 

R 

A 

L 

I 

S 

V 

N 

O 

T 

E 

D 

V 

N 

S 

A 

R 

A 

P 

I 

A 

R 

A 

I 

R 

P 

R 

A 

K 

K 

I 

A 

A 

I 

K 

K 

A 

R 

P 

R 

I 

A 

R 

A 

I 

P 

A 

R 

A 

S 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

M 

A 

L 

A 

C 

H 

K 

O 

S 

E 

M 

R 

O 

T 

H 

E 

R 

A 

M 

A 

N 

E 

C 

O 

B 

o 

D 

E 

O 

R 

O 

R 

I 

E 

L 

A 

N 

A 

N 

A 

S 

O 

F 

O 

S 

T 

O 

A 

R 

A 

H 

A 

N 

A 

N 

A 

L 

E 

D 

O 

B 

o 

H 

A 

R 

A 

O 

T 

C 

E 

N 

A 

M 

A 

M 

E 

s 

O 

K 

E 

I 

R 

O 

R 

O 

H 

C 

A 

L 

A 

M 

R 

E 

H 

T 

O 

R 

(10) 

(11) 

M 

E 

L 

A 

B 

B 

E 

D 

E 

L 

I 

N 

A 

L 

S 

E 

L 

I 

N 

A 

K 

I 

L 

B 

A 

N 

A 

K 

A 

K 

A 

B 

B 

A 

K 

A 

K 

A 

N 

A 

B 

L 

I 

K 

A 

N 

I 

L 

E 

S 

L 

A 

N 

I 

L 

E 

D 

E 

B 

B 

A 

L 

E 

M 

M 

E 

B 

H 

A 

E 

R 

E 

L 

I 

A 

I 

L 

E 

B 

I 

K 

O 

S 

I 

A 

H 

A 

O 

R 

o 

A 

H 

A 

I 

S 

O 

K 

I 

B 

E 

L 

I 

A 

I 

L 

E 

R 

E 

A 

H 

B 

E 

M 

123 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

Notes To The Chapters Of Magical Symbols, 

By 
S. L. Macgregor-mathers. 

The following Notes to these Chapters I have classed under various heads for 
greater convenience of reference, thinking that besides the explanations of most 
of the Magical Names employed in the Symbols, it would also be of assistance 
to the Occult student to be able to see at a glance briefly stated at the end of 
each Chapter, the substance of the information especially referring thereto, 
given by Abraham the Jew in other parts of the work, notably towards the end 
of the Second Book: 

Under (a) therefore I have stated by what Powers the Symbols of each par- 
ticular Chapter are manifested. 

Under (b) the Names of the Sub-Princes of the Evil Spirits who are the 
especial overseers of the execution of the effect desired. 

Under (c) whether the Operations of the Chapter in question can be to an 
extent performed by the "Familiar Spirits," or not. 

Under (d) an abridgment of any especial instructions given by Abraham in 
other parts of the work. 

Under (e) I have given the meanings of most of the Names employed in 
the Squares, as far as possible, and also any additional remarks which seemed 
necessary. 

These Magical Symbols of this Third Book consist solely of Squares of Let- 
ters, which may be roughly divided into four distinct classes. 

(i) Those in which the whole of the Square is occupied by Letters. In this 
form the double Acrostic arrangement is especially marked; though in some few 
cases it is slightly varied by the introduction of a different name. 

(2) Those in which part of the Square is left vacant, the Letters being 
arranged in the form of what is called in Geometry, a Gnomon. 

(3) Those in which the central part of the Square is left vacant, the Letters 
forming a border round the void part. 

(4) Those of more irregular disposition, and in which in some instances 
single Letters are placed separately in the vacant part of the Square. 

It will be remarked that in nearly all cases these Names arranged in the 
Squares represent generally the effect to be produced, or in other words are sim- 
ply the Hebrew or other appellations of the result to which the Square is to be 
applied. At the beginning of each Chapter is placed a numbered list of the 
effects to be obtained by the use of each Symbol there given. Then follow the 
Squares themselves. 

124 

The Sacred Magick 

In the Original MS. these Squares have been also numbered to correspond 
with the list at the beginning of each Chapter, but from the evident difference 
in the ink this has been done later, though the handwriting is the same. I think 
also that in several cases the numbers to the Squares have been misplaced; and 
though usually the natural Sequence of i, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 is adhered to, yet occa- 
sionally they are in a more irregular order, as in the 5th Chapter, for example, 
where they run thus: 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 

The Squares in the Original MS. are all of the same size, subdivided 
according to the exigences of the case, though convenience of printing has pre- 
vented this equality of size being adhered to in the present work. In most 
instances the Gnomons and Borders are ruled off from the vacant part, but this 
rule is not adhered to in all cases in the Original MS. The Letters in the Squares 
are Roman Capitals. In some few instances two letters are placed in the same 
small Square, or subdivision, of the larger Square. 

Notes To Chapter I. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by means of their Common Ministers. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) Take the Symbol in your hand, place it under your hat or cap, upon the 
top of your head, and you will be secretly answered by the Spirit who will exe- 
cute that which you wish. (This mode of operation will evidently be applicable 
to many of the Chapters.) 

(e) No. 1 is a Square of 25 Squares, and is a complete specimen of double 
Acrostic arrangement. MILON, though Greek-sounding, has here hardly a 
meaning if derived from either MILOS, a fruit or other tree; or from 
MEILON, a precious thing, or article of value. It seems rather derived from the 
Hebrew MLVN = a diversity of things, or matters. IRAGO is perhaps from 
Greek EIRA a question, or inquiry, and AGO to conduct or decide. Hebrew 
RGO = to disrupt or analyse. LAMAL, probably from Chaldaic MLA = full- 
ness, entirety. OGARI from Hebrew OGR = a swallow or swiftly-flying thing. 
NOLIM from Hebrew, NOLIM = hidden or covered things. Whence we may 
extract the following as the formula of this Square: "Various questions fully 
examined and analysed, and that quickly, and even things carefully hidden and 
concealed". This rule we can apply to discover the formulas of other Squares. 

125 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 2 is a Square of 49 Squares, and is also a complete Specimen of double 
Acrostic. THIRAMA from Chaldee TIRM = strongly defended places, or Cita- 
dels. HIGANAM from Hebrew or Chaldee GNN or GNM = to defend. 
IGOGANA, perhaps from Hebrew GG = a roof or covering or protection from 
above. RAGIGAR, perhaps from Chaldaic ROO (it must be remembered that, 
though I here transliterate the letter Ayin by O, it has really the power of a GH 
as well; it is a sound difficult of comprehension by a non-Orientalist) = to break 
up, or breach. ANAGOGI probably from Greek ANAGOGE the act of raising 
or elevating. MANAGIH from Hebrew MNO to restrain; stop, put a barrier 
to, or contain by a barrier. AMARIHT from Hebrew AMRTH = Word or 
Speech. The whole idea of this Formula seems to be the making forcible way 
into a defended place or matter. 

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares, and again a perfect form of double Acros- 
tic. DOREH, from DVR Hebrew = a habitation. ORIRE perhaps from Latin 
ORIOR = to riser or be born. RINIR perhaps from Hebrew NIR = to renew. 
ERIRO perhaps from ARR to curse. HEROD from Hebrew ChRD = shaking, 
trembling. 

No. 4 is a Square of 25 Squares, and again a perfect double Acrostic. 
NABHI from Hebrew NBA = to prophesy. ADAIH perhaps from Heb. DIH = 
a bird of omen. BAKAB from Heb. KAB = in trouble. HIADA from Hebrew 
IDH = sent forward, or thrown. IHBAN from IHB Hebrew = to give or bring. 
Hence the formula would be somewhat "To prophesy by omens the troubles to 
come"; the which is much more applicable to No. 6, "The Tribulations to 
come"; than to No. 4, which is for "The Things to happen in War". 

No. 5 is a double Acrostic of 49 Squares. NVDETON from Hebrew ND = 
to remove, and ATHN = strongly. VSILARO from Hebrew BSHL = to ripen, 
and Chaldaic ARO = the Earth. DIREMAT from Hebrew DR = to encompass 
or include, and MT = things forgotten or slipped aside. ELEMELE from 
Hebrew ALIM and ALH = God of the Mighty Ones. TAMERID from Hebrew 
THMR = straight like a palm-tree, and ID = put forward. ORALISV = from 
Hebrew = ORL = superfluous, and ISh = the substance. NOTEDVN, from 
NTH = to stretch out and DN = to contend or rule. 

No. 6 is a double Acrostic of 36 Squares. SARAPI from Hebrew ShRP = to 
burn. ARAIRP from Hebrew AR = a river, and RPH = to abate or slacken. 
RAKKIA from Hebrew RKK = to become faint, to become softened. AIKKAR 
from Hebrew OKR = to trouble or disturb. PRIARA from PRR = to shatter or 
break up. IPARAS from Hebrew PRS = to break in pieces, to divide, or part in 
sunder. This will give a formula of trouble. 

126 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 7 is a double Acrosdc of 36 Squares. MALACH from Hebrew MLCh 
= Salt; also that which is easily dissolved; to dissolve. AMANEC from MNK = a 
chain, or from AMN - stability. LANANA from LNN = to lodge, or take up 
one's abode. ANANAL from AN = labour, and NLH, to complete or finish. 
CENAMA perhaps from QNM = odoriferous. HCALAM perhaps from HCL = 
spacious (as a palace). 

No. 8 is a double Acrostic of 25 Squares. KOSEM, from Hebrew QSM = 
to divine or prognosticate. OBODE, from Hebrew OBD = a servant. SOFOS 
from Greek SOPHOS = wise, learned, skilful. EDOBO, perhaps from DB = to 
murmur. MESOK from Hebrew MSK = to mingle or intermix. 

No. 9 is a double Acrostic of 36 Squares. ROTHER is perhaps from RTT, 
Trembling, Dread; and HRR to conceive or bring forth. ORORIE from 
Hebrew OROR = laying bare, disclosing. TOARAH from Hebrew THVRH = 
Law, Reason, or Order. HARAOTfrom Hebrew HRH to bring forth, or from 
CHRTH = To inscribe or mark down. REHTOR from RTT and ThVR = rea- 
son for dread.The whole formula will represent the disclosing of the reasons for 
dreading any terrible effect. 

No. 10 is another double Acrostic of 64 Squares, and No. 11 one of 49 
Squares. I have here given a sufficiently careful analysis of the meanings of the 
combinations formed by the letters in the preceding Squares to give the Reader 
a general idea of the formulas involved. To avoid an undue extension of these 
notes, I shall not usually analyse every name contained in each Square, but shall 
confine myself in most cases to giving sufficient indications of the meanings of 
the principal words or words only, which are therein employed. The Reader 
must remember also that in such an Acrostic arrangement of the letters of 
words, half of those therein contained will simply be inversions of the principal 
word or words therein contained. For example, in No. 11, REAHBEM is of 
course MEBHAER written backwards. ELIAILE reads the same way backwards 
or forwards, and so does HAOROAH; and BIKOSIA written backwards gives 
AISOKIB. Yet undoubtedly some of these words are to an extent translatable 
also, and in this case will be found to have a bearing on the subject-matter of 
the Square. Hebrew especially is a language in which this method will be found 
to work with a readiness unattainable in ordinary European languages, from the 
fact that its Alphabet may be said to be entirely Consonantal in character, even 
such letters as Aleph, Vau, and Yod, being rather respectively, a drawing in of 
the breath than the letter A; V rather than U. and Y rather than I. Also in com- 
mon with all really ancient languages the system of Verbal Roots from which all 
the words of the language are derived, has this effect, viz., that the majority of 
combinations of two or three letters will be found to be a Verbal Root, bearing 

127 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

a definite meaning. Besides all this, in the Qabalah each letter of the Hebrew 
Alphabet is treated as having a complete sphere of hieroglyphic meanings of its 
own; whence the most important ancient Hebrew Names and Words can be 
treated by the Qabalistic Initiate as in fact so many formulas of Spiritual force, i 
have been thus lengthy in explanation in order that the Reader may have some 
idea of the reason of the construction and use of these Magic Squares. 

128 

The Sacred Magick 

THE SECOND CHAPTER. 

O obtain information concerning, and to be enlightened upon all sorts 
of propositions and all doubtful Sciences. 

(i) 

(2) All three generally for the above effect. 
(3) 

(1) 

(2) 

A 

L 

L 

U 

P 

L 

E 

I 

R 

U 

L 

I 

G 

I 

L 

U 

R 

I 

E 

L 

P 

U 

L 

L 

A 

M 

E 

L 

A 

M 

M 

E 

D 

E 

R 

I 

F 

O 

I 

S 

E 

L 

I 

S 

I 

L 

L 

I 

M 

A 

F 

I 

R 

E 

L 

O 

M 

M 

O 

L 

E 

R 

I 

F 

A 

M 

I 

L 

L 

I 

S 

I 

L 

E 

S 

I 

O 

F 

I 

R 

E 

D 

E 

M 

M 

A 

L 

E 

M 

(3) 

E 

K 

D 

I 

L 

U 

N 

K 

L 

I 

S 

A 

T 

U 

D 

I 

N 

A 

N 

A 

L 

I 

S 

A 

G 

A 

S 

I 

L 

A 

N 

A 

N 

I 

D 

U 

T 

A 

S 

I 

L 

K 

N 

U 

L 

I 

D 

K 

E 

129 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

Notes To Chapter II. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested partly by the Angels, and 
partly by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by the means of their common Ministers. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent execute the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) Take the Symbol in your hand, and name what information you 
require. (In the Second Book, the remarks given concerning this Chapter are 
evidently far more applicable to the Third Chapter, and I have therefore given 
them there instead of here.) 

(e) No. i is an Acrostic of 25 Squares. ALLUP from Hebrew ALUP = a 
Doctor, Teacher, Leader, ie., a person who at the same time leads and instructs 
his following. Hence also this word means a Bull as the Leader of the herd. 
URIEL, Hebrew AURIEL = Light of God, is the well-known name of one of 
the Archangels. Pulla in Latin means both a fowl, and also light friable earth; 
but is probably here derivable rather from the Hebrew PLH, meaning to clas- 
sify or arrange. 

No. 2 is an Acrostic of 64 Squares. MELAMMED is evidently from 
Hebrew MLMD = a stimulus or spur to exertion. 

No. 3 is an Acrostic of 49 Squares. EKDILUN may be from the Greek 
Ekdeilon, which means, "not afraid of; from ek- in composition, and deilon, 
frightened, cowardly. 

130 

The Sacred Magick 

THE THIRD CHAPTER. 

O cause any Spirit to appear, and take any form, such as of Man, Ani- 
mal, Bird, etc. 

(i) It will appear in the form of a Serpent. 

(2) To make them appear in the shape of any Animal. 

(3) In Human form. 

(4) In the form of a Bird. 

(1) 

(2) 

u 

R 

I 

E 

L 

R 

A 

M 

I 

E 

I 

M 

I 

M 

I 

E 

I 

M 

A 

R 

L 

E 

I 

R 

U 

L 

U 

C 

I 

F 

E 

R 

U 

N 

A 

N 

I 

M 

E 

c 

A 

T 

O 

N 

I 

F 

I 

N 

O 

N 

O 

N 

I 

F 

I 

N 

O 

T 

A 

C 

E 

M 

I 

N 

A 

N 

u 

R 

E 

F 

I 

C 

U 

L 

(3) 

(4) 

L 

E 

V 

I 

A 

T 

A 

N 

E 

R 

M 

O 

G 

A 

S 

A 

V 

M 

I 

R 

T 

E 

A 

T 

I 

O 

R 

A 

N 

T 

G 

A 

A 

G 

T 

N 

A 

R 

O 

I 

T 

A 

E 

T 

R 

I 

M 

V 

A 

S 

A 

G 

O 

M 

R 

E 

N 

A 

T 

A 

I 

V 

E 

L 

S 

A 

T 

A 

N 

A 

D 

A 

M 

A 

T 

A 

B 

A 

T 

A 

M 

A 

D 

A 

N 

A 

T 

A 

S 

131 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

Notes To Chapter III. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the ,Angel or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the .opera- 
tions hereof by means of their common Ministers. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits do not execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

(d) Take the Symbol in the hand, and name the Spirit desired, who will 
appear in the form commanded. 

(e) It will be noticed at once that of the four Symbols of this Chapter, the 
first has the name of the Archangel Uriel, and the three others those of three of 
the Chief Princes of the Demons, viz. Lucifer, Leviathan, and Satan. 

No i is an Acrostic of 25 Squares. URIEL from Hebrew AURIEL = Light 
of God. RAMIE from Hebrew RMIH = Deceit. IMIMI is either from IMM = 
the Sea, or great waters, or from IMIM = Mules. EIMAR is probably from 
AMR or IMR = To speak. LEIRU is the reverse of URIEL, ie., Uriel written 
backwards. This formula seems to show that the Symbol should be numbered 2 
instead of 1. 

No. 2 is an Acrostic of 49 Squares. LUCIFER from Lucifer (Latin) = Light 
bearer. This Square should probably be numbered 3. 

No. 3 is an Acrostic of 64 Squares. LEVIATAN from Hebrew = the pierc- 
ing or twisting Serpent. This Square should probably be numbered 1. 

No. 4 is an Acrostic of 25 Squares. SATAN from Hebrew ShTN = an Ad- 
versary. ADAMA from Hebrew ADMH = reddish earth. 

132 

The Sacred Magick 

THE FOURTH CHAPTER. 

H OR divers Visions. 

(1) For Mirrors of Glass and Crystal. 

(2) In Caverns and Subterranean Places. 

(3) In the Air. 

(4) In Rings and Circlets. 

(5) In Wax. 

(6) In Fire. 

(7) In the Moon. 

(8) In the Water. 

(9) In the Hand. 

(1) 

(2) 

G 

I 

L 

I 

O 

N 

I 

N 

E 

T 

H 

A 

N 

I 

M 

I 

T 

L 

H 

I 

A 

O 

N 

N 

I 

I 

N 

M 

(3) 

(4) 

A 

P 

P 

A 

R 

E 

T 

P 
P 
A 
R 
E 
T 

B 

E 

D 

S 

E 

R 

E 

L 

I 

E 

L 

E 

D 

I 

A 

P 

I 

S 

S 

E 

P 

P 

E 

D 

E 

L 

I 

E 

L 

E 

R 

E 

S 

D 

E 

B 

133 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(5) 

(6) 

N 

E 

G 

O 

T 

E 

R 

A 

S 

O 

G 

A 

R 

A 

G 

O 

M 

A 

R 

E 

T 

O 

G 

E 

N 

(7) 

G 

O 

H 

E 

N 

O 

R 

A 

R 

E 

H 

A 

S 

A 

H 

E 

R 

A 

R 

O 

N 

E 

H 

O 

G 

N 

A 

S 

I 

A 

P 

I 

S 

S 

I 

p 

A 

I 

S 

A 

N 

(8) 

A 

D 

M 

O 

N 

D 
M 
O 

N 

(9) 

L 

E 

L 

E 

H 

E 
L 
E 
H 

Notes To Chapter IV. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ORIENS, PAIMON'ARITON, AMAYMON execute the Operations 
hereof by means of their Common Ministers. 

(c) The Operations of this Chapter can also be to an extent performed by 
the Familiar Spirits. 

(d) No especial instructions are given regarding this Chapter in the Second 
Book. 

(e) No. i is a Gnomonic Square of 15 Squares taken from a Square of 64 
Squares. GILIONIN = Chaldaic GLIVNIM = Mirrors. 

134 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 2 is a Gnomonic Square of 13 Squares out of a Square of 49 Squares. 
ETHANIM = ATHVNIM, Heb. = Vaults, Ovens. 

No. 3 is a Gnomonic Square of 13 Squares out of a Square of 49 Squares. 
APPARET, Latin = Let it appear. 

No. 4 is a Square of 36 Squares. BEDSER Hebrew BTzR a Gold Orna- 
ment. ELIELE = ALI ALI Hebrew, Towards me. SEPPED Hebrew SPD = He 
struck. RES DEB = perhaps Hebrew, RSh DB head or chief point of a dis- 
course. 

No. 5 is a Square of 25 Squares. NEGOT = perhaps Heb. NHG, He leads. 
ERASO = probably Greek, sec. pers. sing, from Eromai for Eiromai, to demand 
or interrogate. GARAG = perhaps from Heb. GRO, to diminish. OMARE, 
perhaps Greek, an Assembly or Synthesis. TOGEN = perhaps from Greek Toge, 
Why or Wherefore when used in an adverbial sense. 

No. 6 is a Square of 16 Squares. NASI = Hebrew NSI = My Banner or 
Symbol. APIS = the Egyptian sacred bull. SIPA perhaps from SPH = Hebrew to 
consume. ISAN = perhaps from Heb. IShN = To sleep. 

No. 7 is a Square of 25 Squares. GOHEN should perhaps be COHEN = a 
Jewish priest. ORARE, Latin = to pray. HASAH, Heb. HSH = to keep silence. 
ERARO perhaps from Heb. ARR to curse. NEHOG = perhaps Heb. NHG = 
to lead. 

No. 8 is a Gnomonic Square of 9 Squares Out of 25 Squares. ADMON - 
perhaps from Heb. DMO = Tears but also Liquids or fluids. 

No. 9 is a Gnomonic Square of 9 Squares out of 25 Squares. LELEH = 
Hebrew LILH = Night, Darkness. 

135 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. 

OW we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free in whatsoever 
form. 

(i) In the form of a Lion. 

(2) In the form of a Page. 

(3) In the form of a Flower. 

(4) In the form of a Horseman. 

(5) In the form of an Eagle. 

(6) In the form of a Dog. 

(7) In the form of a Bear. 

(8) In the form of a Soldier. 

(9) In the form of an Old Man. 

(10) In the form of a Moor, 
(if) In the form of a Serpent. 
(12) In the form of an Ape, 

(1) 

(2) 

A 

N 

A 

K 

I 

M 

N 
A 
K 
I 
M 

C 

E 

P 

H 

I 

R 

E 
P 
H 

I 
R 

(3) 

(4) 

I 

K 

E 

T 

I 

S 

I 

K 
E 
T 

I 
S 

P 

A 

R 

A 

S 

A 
R 

A 
S 

136 

The Sacred Magick 

_E 
JR 

_A_ 

_C 

H 

(5) 

R 

A 

£ 

A_ 
H 

A C A H 

(7) 

E R A C H 

H C A R E 

(9) 

H 
~C_ 

A_ 
R_ 
E_ 
P 

N 

E 

S 

E 

R 

^ 

E 

L 

E 

H 

E 

S 

E 

P 

E 

S 

3 

E 

H 

E 

L 

E 

R 

E 

S 

E 

N 

*J 

(6) 

c 

u 

s 

I 

s 

u 
s 
I 
s 

(8) 

R 

I 

S 

I 

R 

I 

S 

E 

R 

I 

S 

E 

K 

E 

S 

I 

R 

E 

P 

I 

R 

I 

S 

I 

R 

(10) 

p 

E 

T 

H 

E 

N 

E 
T 
H 
E 

N 

(11) 

K 

A 

L 

E 

F 

A 

R 

A 

R 

E 

L 

A 

M 

A 

L 

E 

R 

A 

R 

A 

F 

E 

L 

A 

K 

(12) 

K 

O 

B 

H 

A 

O 
B 
H 

A 

137 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

Notes To Chapter V. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by means of their Common Ministers. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can hardly be said so much of themselves to be 
able to execute the Operations of this Chapter, as under the rule of the afore- 
mentioned Spirits. 

(d) Each person can have four Familiar Spirits and no more: the first work- 
ing from Sunrise to Midday; the second from Midday till Sunset; the third 
from Sunset to Midnight; and the fourth from Midnight till Sunrise. Such Spir- 
its may also be loaned to friends, in which case you can avail yourself of another 
ordinary Spirit in place. 

(e) The Square numbered i is not however placed first in Order in the 
MS., but fifth. It is a Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
ANAKIM = Hebrew ONQIM = Giants; the root ONQ also = a necklace or 
torque. This word "Anakim" hardly appears to have any reference to the form 
of a lion. 

No. 2 is a Gnomon of 11 Squares again, taken from a Square of 36 Squares, 
and is in the MS. placed sixth in order. CEPHIR in Hebrew means KPIR a 
young Lion; and this Square should probably therefore be numbered 1. 

No. 3 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares; and in 
the MS. occupies the first place in order. Oiketis, Greek, means a maid-servant 
or feminine page. This Square therefore should probably be numbered 2. 

No. 4 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
PARAS = Hebrew PRSh, a horse, or horseman, while PRS = an ossifrage, a bird 
of the hawk or eagle kind. This Square is apparently correctly numbered, 
though in the MS. it is in the second place. No. 5 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares 
taken from a Square of 25 Squares. RACAH is apparently from the Hebrew 
RQH meaning vain, empty; and does not seem to have any particular reference 
to any of the forms mentioned for the Symbols. 

No. 6 is again a Gnomon of 9 Squares, taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
It is placed fourth in order in the MS. CUSIS may be from the dative plural of 
the Greek word KUON = a dog, but in Hebrew it would mean numbering, 
computing. 

No. 7 is a border of 24 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. PERA- 
CHI, perhaps from PRK, Savagery. DB is a Bear in Hebrew. 

138 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 8 is a Square of 25 Squares. RISIR, perhaps from Latin "RISOR," a 
mocker or jester. ISERI, perhaps from Hebrew or Chaldaic Root, ISR, to pun- 
ish or whip. SEKES, perhaps from SCHSH = reborn by hope. 

No. 9 is again a Square of 25 Squares. NESER = Hebrew, NShR, an Eagle; 
which seems to shew that this Square should be numbered 5. ELEHE is proba- 
bly ALHI, Hebrew = My God. SEPES ? ShPS = the hair on the lip, the mous- 
tache. RESEN = RSN Heb., = a bridle or bit. 

No. 10 is a Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
PETHEN = Hebrew, PThN, an Asp or venomous Serpent, whence this Square 
should probably be numbered 11. 

No. 11 is a Square of 25 Squares. KALEF = KLP, Hebrew, a hammer. 
ARARE from Hebrew ARR to curse, cursed. LAMAL perhaps means "in 
speaking" from MLL, Hebrew, to speak. 

No. 12 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
KOBHA = perhaps Hebrew KBH = to extinguish. 

139 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. 

O cause Mines to be pointed out, and to help forward all kinds of work 
connected therewith. 

(i) To prevent Caves from falling in. 

(2) To shew a Gold Mine. 

(3) To cause work to be done in Mines. 

(4) To make work done in inaccessible places. 

(5) To make them tunnel Mountains. 

(6) To cause all water to be withdrawn from the Mines. 

(7) To make the Spirits bring Timber. 

(8) To make them found and purge Metals and separate Gold and 
Silver. 

(1) 

(2) 

T 

E 

L 

A 

A 

H 

E 
L 

A 
A 

A 

L 

A 
A 

H 

A 

A 

L 

E 

T 

A 

L 

c 

A 

B 

R 

U 

s 

I 

L 
C 

A 
B 
R 

U 
S 

S 

u 

R 
B 
A 
C 
L 

I 

S 

u 

R 

B 

A 

C 

L 

A 

(3) 

(4) 

c 

A 

D 

S 

A 

R 

A 
D 

S 

A 

A 
S 
D 
A 

R 

A 

S 

D 

A 

C 

P 

E 

L 

A 

G 

I 

M 

E 

R 

E 

N 

O 

S 

I 

L 

E 

R 

E 

M 

O 

G 

A 

N 

E 

M 

A 

L 

A 

G 

O 

M 

A 

R 

E 

L 

I 

S 

O 

L 

E 

I 

E 

M 

I 

G 

A 

L 

E 

P 

140 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

(6) 

K 

I 

L 

O 

I 

N 

I 

S 

E 

R 

P 

I 

L 

E 

N 

I 

R 

O 

O 

R 

I 

N 

E 

L 

I 

P 

R 

E 

S 

I 

N 

I 

O 

L 

I 

K 

(7) 

K 

I 

T 

T 

I 

K 

I 

S 

I 

A 

D 

I 

T 

I 

N 

N 

A 

T 

T 

A 

N 

N 

I 

T 

I 

D 

A 

I 

S 

I 

K 

I 

T 

T 

I 

K 

N 

A 

K 

A 

B 

A 
K 
A 
B 

(8) 

M 

A 

R 

A 

K 

A 
R 
A 
K 

Notes To Chapter VI. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ASTAROTH and ASMODEUS execute together the Operations of 
this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given regarding this Chapter in the Second 
Book. 

(e) No. i is a border of 20 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
TELAAH = perhaps from THVLOH, = a Worm which pierces holes in the 
ground. 

No. 2 is a border of 32 Squares taken from a Square of 81 Squares.- ALCA- 
BRUSI may mean "supported by planks or props, or beams". If so, probably 
this Square should be numbered 1. 

No. 3 is a border of 20 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. CAD- 
SAR perhaps from QTzR = to shorten or abbreviate a matter or work. 

141 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 4 is a Square of 49 Squares. PELAGIM, Hebrew PLGIM Divisions, 
strata, etc. 

No. 5 is a Square of 36 Squares. KILOIN = Hebrew QLOIM, Excavations. 

No. 6 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
NAKAB - Hebrew, NQB = Piercing. Perforation. 

No. 7 is a Square of 36 Squares. KITTIK may mean = "To arrange in a 
store-place". TINNAT recalls a name used on some of the Gnostic Magical 
Gems. TANNIT is the name of a Tyrian goddess. 

No. 8 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares out of a Square of 25 Squares. MARAK, 
from Hebrew MRQ = To cleanse, purge, or refine. 

142 

The Sacred Magick 

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. 

O cause the Spirits to perform with facility and promptitude all neces- 
sary Chemical labours and Operations, as regardeth Metals especially. 

(i) To make all Metals. 

(2) To make them perform the Operations. 

(3) To make them teach Chemistry. 

(1) 

(2) 

M 

E 

T 

A 

L 

O 

E 
T 
A 
L 
O 

T 

A 

B 

B 

A 

T 

A 

R 

U 

U 

C 

A 

B 

U 

I 

R 

u 

B 

B 

U 

R 

I 

u 

B 

A 

c 

U 

U 

R 

A 

T 

A 

B 

B 

A 

T 

(3) 

I 

P 

O 

M 

A 

N 

O 

p 

A 

M 

E 

R 

A 

M 

M 

A 

L 

O 

M 

I 

M 

E 

L 

A 

C 

A 

H 

A 

R 

O 

C 

U 

M 

I 

N 

A 

M 

A 

M 

O 

N 

O 

M 

I 

H 

I 

N 

I 

Notes To Chapter VII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels, or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ASHTAROTH and ASMODEUS together execute the Operations of 
this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given regarding this Chapter in the Second 
Book. 

(e) No. 1 is a Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
METALO from Greek metallon = in metal, mineral, or mining work. 

143 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 2 is a Square of 36 Squares. TABBAT, Chaldaic THIBVTH = Heads 
or Sections of classification of operations. ARUUCA perhaps from ARUQ, 
adhering to. 

No. 3 is a Square of 49 Squares. IPOMANO, probably from Greek hip- 
pomanes an ingredient used in philtres, etc., perhaps put here for chemical 
drugs in general. 

144 

The Sacred Magick 

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. 

O excite Tempests. 

(1) To cause Hail. 

(2) To cause Snow. 

(3) To cause Rain. 

(4) To cause Thunder. 

(1) 

c 

A 

N 

A 

M 

A 

L 

A 

M 

A 

D 

A 

M 

A 

N 

A 

D 

A 

D 

A 

M 

A 

D 

A 

N 

A 

D 

A 

M 

A 

D 

A 

D 

A 

N 

A 

M 

A 

D 

A 

M 

A 

L 

A 

M 

A 

N 

A 

C 

(2) 

T 

A 

K 

A 

T 

A 
K 
A 

A 
K 

A 

T 

A 

K 

A 

T 

(3) 

s 

A 

G 

R 

I 

R 

A 
G 
R 

I 
R 

(4) 

H 

A 

M 

A 

G 

A 

B 

A 

L 

A 

M 

A 

H 

A 

M 

A 

L 

A 

B 

A 

G 

A 

M 

A 

H 

Notes To Chapter VIII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested partly by the Angels and 
partly by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ASHTAROTH executes the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

(d) To excite a Tempest, give the Signal above you, and touch the Symbol 
on the top. To make it cease, touch it underneath. 

(e) No. 1 is a Square of 49 Squares. CANAMAL = Hebrew CilNML, ie., 
Hailstones of great size. 

145 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 2 is a border of 16 taken from a Square of 25 Squares. TAKAT, TKO, 
Hebrew, has the sense of "immersed in, overflowed by". 

No. 3. A Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
SAGRIR, Hebrew SGRIR, "a most vehement rain and tempest". 

No. 4. A Square of 25 Squares. HAMAG, perhaps from Hebrew, MOK, 
"to compress, or crush, or press". 

146 

The Sacred Magick 

THE NINTH CHAPTER. 

O transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals; etc. 
(i) To transform Men into Asses. 

(2) Into Stags or Deer. 

(3) Into Elephants. 

(4) Into Wild Boars. 

(5) Into Dogs. 

(6) Into Wolves. 

(7) Animals into Stones. 

(1) 

I 

E 

M 

I 

M 

E 

I 

E 

R 

I 

O 

N 

T 

E 

M 

I 

R 

T 

I 

N 

M 

I 

O 

T 

I 

T 

O 

I 

M 

N 

I 

T 

R 

I 

M 

E 

T 

N 

O 

I 

R 

E 

I 

E 

M 

I 

M 

E 

I 

(3) 

c 

H 

A 

D 

S 

I 

R 

H 

A 
D 

S 

I 

I 

S 

D 

A 

H 

R 

I 

S 

D 

A 

H 

C 

(5) 

B 

D 

A 

K 

K 

A 

L 

T 

E 

P 

H 

A 

P 

I 

E 

R 

I 

P 

L 

I 

L 

M 

O 

R 

E 

T 

E 

M 

U 

M 

E 

T 

E 

R 

O 

M 

L 

I 

L 

P 

I 

E 

R 

I 

P 

A 

H 

P 

E 

T 

L 

A 

K 

(2) 

A 

I 

A 

C 

I 

L 

A 

I 

S 

I 

O 

R 

E 

L 

A 

I 

E 

R 

I 

R 

A 

C 

O 

R 

I 

L 

O 

N 

I 

R 

I 

L 

E 

I 

A 

L 

R 

R 

O 

I 

S 

I 

A 

L 

A 

N 

A 

I 

A 

(4) 

D 

A 

R 

A 

M 

A 

SI 

K 

A 

147 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(6) 

(7) 

D 

I 

S 

E 

E 

B 

E 

H 

I 

S 

A 

R 

T 

R 

I 

E 

S 

A 

R 

G 

E 

I 

R 

B 

E 

R 

B 

O 

N 

E 

T 

E 

E 

T 

O 

N 

O 

G 

R 

E 

B 

A 

R 

O 

B 

R 

A 

S 

E 

R 

A 

T 

R 

A 

S 

I 

H 

E 

B 

E 

E 

S 

I 

D 

I 

S 

I 

c 

H 

A 

D 

A 

M 

I 

O 

N 

S 

E 

R 

R 

A 

R 

E 

P 

I 

N 

T 

O 

I 

R 

A 

A 

S 

I 

M 

E 

L 

E 

I 

s 

c 

R 

A 

T 

I 

B 

A 

R 

I 

N 

S 

I 

H 

A 

S 

I 

N 

A 

S 

U 

O 

T 

I 

R 

A 

R 

I 

B 

A 

T 

I 

N 

T 

I 

R 

A 

D 

E 

M 

A 

S 

I 

c 

O 

A 

N 

O 

C 

A 

P 

E 

R 

U 

N 

o 

I 

B 

E 

M 

I 

M 

I 

L 

I 

o 

T 

A 

B 

U 

L 

E 

L 

I 

N 

E 

N 

T 

I 

N 

E 

L 

E 

L 

A 

O 

T 

I 

S 

I 

R 

O 

M 

E 

L 

I 

R 

N 

O 

S 

I 

R 

A 

C 

I 

L 

A 

R 

I 

Notes To Chapter IX. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are only manifested by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ASHTAROTH and Asmomus together execute the Signs and Opera- 
tions of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

(d) Let the being, whether man or animal, see the Symbol, and then touch 
them suddenly with it; when they will appear transformed; but this is only a 
kind of fascination. When you wish to make it cease, place the Symbol upon 
the head and strike it sharply with the Wand, and the Spirit will make things 
resume their ordinary condition. 

(e) No. i is a Square of 49 Squares. IEMIMEI is evidently from Hebrew 
IMIM = Mules. A very perfect Acrostic. 

No. 2 is a Square of 49 Squares also. AIACILA, Hebrew AILH = a deer. 

No. 3 is a border of 24 taken from a Square of 49 Squares. CHADSIR; 
Hebrew KZR = Fierce, Savage. ChTzR - Perhaps, "the tusk of an Elephant". 
But CHZIZ = a wild boar, whence this Square should perhaps be numbered 4. 

No. 4 consists of 24 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares; two letters, 
SI, are allotted to one Square. BEDASEK is perhaps from BD, a limb, and SK, 
covered or protected, as with a strong skin. It may thus stand for the Elephant 
as having powerful and thickskinned limbs. If so, this Square should be num- 
bered 3. 

148 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 5 is a Square of 49 Squares. KALTEPH. The Hebrew word for Dog is 
KLB. This Square it will be noted is not a perfect Acrostic. 

No. 6 is a Square of 64 Squares. DISEEBEH is probably from ZABH - a 
wolf. This Square also is not at all perfect as an Acrostic. 

No. 7 is a Square of 144 Squares. ISICHADAMION, probably from 
DMIVN = Similitude of; and SIG, Scoria or Lava, or SQ, stone; root of SQL, 
to stone. 

149 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TENTH CHAPTER. 

O hinder any Necromantic or Magical Operations from taking effect, 
except those of the Qabalab and of this Sacred Magic. 

(i) To undo any Magic soever. 

(2) To heal the bewitched. 

(3) To make Magical Storms cease. 

(4) To discover any Magic. 

(5) To hinder Sorcerers from Operating. 

(1) 

(2) 

c 

O 

D 

S 

E 

LI 

M 

H 
A 
B 
I 

O 

M 

O 

C 

(3) 

p 

A 

R 

A 

D 

I 

L 

O 

N 

A 

R 

I 

N 

O 

M 

I 

S 

O 

R 

I 

L 

O 

R 

A 

E 

I 

K 

A 

N 

O 

T 

A 

L 

A 

M 

I 

D 

O 

R 

A 

F 

A 

C 

O 

L 

I 

M 

A 

L 

A 

T 

O 

N 

A 

L 

I 

E 

A 

C 

O 

R 

I 

T 

O 

S 

I 

M 

O 

N 

I 

R 

A 

N 

O 

K 

I 

L 

A 

T 

A 

N 

L 

A 

C 

H 

A 

T 

A 
C 
H 
A 

A 
H 
C 

A 

T 

A 

H 

C 

A 

L 

(4) 

H 

O 

R 

A 

H 

O 

S 

O 

M 

A 

R 

O 

T 

O 

R 

A 

M 

O 

S 

O 

H 

A 

R 

O 

H 

(5) 

M 

A 

c 

A 

N 

E 

H 

A 

R 

L 

U 

S 

E 

D 

I 

R 

U 

c 

u 

N 

A 

L 

U 

H 

u 

L 

A 

S 

E 

R 

U 

R 

O 

C 

U 

N 

E 

L 

I 

R 

A 

L 

U 

S 

A 

D 

A 

M 

150 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter X. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels, or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) MAGOTH executes the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the operations of this Chapter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given concerning this Chapter. 

(e) No. i consists of 17 Squares containing 18 letters (LI of "Codselim" 
occupying 1 Square) taken from a Square of 49 Squares. CODSELIM and 
COHABIM may be from KSILIM, the foolish ones, and KABIM, the mourn- 
ing ones (Hebrew) . 

No. 2. A border of 20 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. 
LACHAT, perhaps from Hebrew LCHSH = to enchant. 

No. 3. A Square of 81 Squares. PARADILON, probably from Greek para, 
against, and deilon, perverse, or miserable, or unfortunate. 

No. 4. A Square of 25 Squares. HORAH, from Hebrew ChRH, To be 
enraged; Or HRH, to conceive, or bring forth. 

No. 5. A Square of 49 Squares. MACANEH from Hebrew MCHNH, a 
fortification, castle, or defence. MADASUL, from MATzL, about me, before 
me, at my side. 

151 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. 

O cause all kinds of Books to be brought to one, and whether lost or 
stolen. 

(i) For Books of Astrology. 

(2) For Books of Magic. 

(3) For Books of Chemistry. 

(1) 

(2) 

c 

O 

L 

I 

D 

A 

C 

L 

A 

C 

A 

I 

C 

A 

R 

(3) 

s 

E 

A 

R 

A 

H 

E 

L 

L 

O 

P 

A 

A 

L 

A 

T 

I 

M 

R 

O 

T 

A 

R 

A 

A 

P 

I 

R 

A 

C 

H 

A 

M 

A 

C 

s 

K 

E 

H 

A 

H 

E 

K 

E 
H 
A 
H 
E 
K 

Notes To Chapter XL 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels, or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) MAGOTH alone executes the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

(d) Many ancient Books of Magic, etc., have been lost or destroyed, in 
some cases by the wish of the Good Spirits, in others by the machinations of 
the Evil Spirits. By these Symbols you can have many supposed extinct works 
brought to you, Abraham states; but adds that he could never copy them, 
because the writing disappeared as fast as he wrote it; notwithstanding this he 
was permitted to read some of them. 

152 

The Sacred Magick 

(e) No. i is a Square of 16 Squares. COLI, probably from Hebrew KLI, 
meaning the whole, in the sense of the whole Universe. 

No. 2 is a Square of 36 Squares. SEARAH, perhaps from Hebrew SORH, a 
whirlwind; or perhaps from SHORH = terrible, and is also used to express a 
Kid, or a species of shaggy Satyr-like Demon, from the word being used to 
signify hair. 

No. 3 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. 
KEHAHEK is probably from Hebrew KHCh, meaning to conceal, obscure, or 
shut up. 

153 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. 

O know the Secrets of any person. 

(1) To know the Secret of Letters. 

(2) To know the Secret of Words. 

(3) To know Secret Operations. 

(4) For the Military Counsels of a Captain. 

(5) To know the Secrets of Love. 

(6) To know what riches a person possesseth. 

(7) To know the Secret of all Arts. 

(1) 

(2) 

M 

E 

G 

I 

L 

L 

A 

E 
G 

I 

L 
L 

A 

M 

S 

I 

M 

B 

A 

S 

I 

I 

M 

A 

R 

C 

A 

R 

A 

B 

A 

S 

I 

(3) 

(4) 

M 

A 

A 

B 

H 

A 

D 

M 

I 

L 

C 

H 

A 

M 

A 

H 

A 
A 
B 
H 

A 
D 

I 

L 
C 
H 

A 

D 

I 

R 

A 

C 

H 

I 

M 

A 
H 

I 

E 

L 

I 

M 

154 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

(6) 

c 

E 

D 

I 

D 

A 

H 

E 
D 

I 

D 

E 

R 

A 

R 

I 

D 

A 

H 

A 

D 

I 

D 

E 

C 

A 

S 

A 

M 

I 

M 

S 

A 

M 

A 

P 

I 

D 

E 

I 
M 

(7) 

M 

E 

L 

A 

B 

A 

H 

E 
L 

A 
B 
A 
H 

Notes To Chapter XII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ASMODEUS alone executes the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent execute the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) Touch the Symbol and name aloud the person whose Secret you desire 
to know' and the Spirit will whisper the answer into your ear. 

(e) No. i consists of 14 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. MEGILLA, 
from Hebrew MGLH = to reveal or disclose. 

No. 2 consists of 19 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. MAR- 
CARA, perhaps from KRH to appear; Hebrew SIMBASI, perhaps from BASH, 
evil, and ZMH, thought. 

No. 3 consists of a Gnomon of 13 from a Square of 49 Squares. MAAB- 
HAD, from Hebrew MOBD = a deed or act. 

155 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 4 consists of 29 Squares from a Square of 81 Squares. MILCHAMAH, 
from Hebrew MLCHMH = War. ADIRACHI from DRK (Hebrew) = Way, 
Plan, Idea. ELIM (Heb.) = Mighty Ones. 

No. 5 consists of 25 taken from a Square of 49 Squares. CEDIDAH is 
either from KDID = a Spark, or from DID, the root of the words; love, 
delights, breasts. DERARID from Hebrew DRR = liberty. HADIDEC from 
DDIK = thy loves or delights. 

No. 6 consists of 16 from a Square of 36 Squares. ASAMIN from Hebrew 
ASMIM = treasure houses, garners.- MAPIDE perhaps from PID = oppression, 
misfortune. 

No. 7. A Gnomon of 13 from a Square of 49 Squares. MELABAH from 
MLABH = Art or Science. 

156 

The Sacred Magick 

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. 

O cause a Dead Body to revive, and perform all the functions which a 
living person would do, and this during a space of Seven Years, by 
means of the Spirits. 

(i) From the Rising of the Sun until Mid-Day. 

(2) From Mid-Day until the Setting of the Sun. 

(3) From the Setting of the Sun until Mid-Night. 

(4) From Mid-Night until the Rising of the Sun. 

(1) 

(2) 

E 

Z 

E 

C 

H 

I 

E 

L 

Z 

E 

O 

F 

R 

A 

S 

E 

E 

O 

R 

I 

A 

L 

A 

I 

C 

F 

I 

R 

T 

A 

R 

H 

H 

R 

A 

T 

R 

I 

F 

C 

I 

A 

L 

A 

I 

R 

O 

E 

E 

S 

A 

R 

F 

O 

E 

Z 

L 

E 

I 

H 

C 

E 

Z 

E 

A 

M 

I 

G 

D 

E 

Lo 

M 

O 

R 

B 

R 

I 

Eo 

I 

R 

I 

D 

E 

R 

Do 

G 

B 

D 

O 

D 

B 

Go 

D 

R 

E 

D 

I 

R 

lo 

E 

I 

R 

B 

R 

O 

MO 

L 

E 

D 

G 

I 

M 

Ao 

(3) 

I 

O 

S 

u 

A 

R 

I 

L 

U 

s 

I 

s 

I 

S 

u 

L 

I 

R 

O 

A 

U 

s 

O 

I 

(4) 

p 

E 

G 

E 

R 

E 

T 

I 

A 

E 

G 

I 

S 

I 

G 

E 

A 

I 

T 

E 

R 

E 

G 

E 

P 

Notes To Chapter XIII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels and 
in part by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON, execute by means 
of their Servitors the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

157 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(d) In several places Abraham warns the reader that this is the most diffi- 
cult Operation of any, because for it to be brought about, the concurrence of all 
the Chief Spirits must be obtained. Watch for the moment when the person 
dies, and then at once place upon his body towards the 4 cardinal points the 
Symbol required. Similar Symbols are to be sewn into the garments he wears. 
Abraham moreover adds that by this means, one can however only prolong the 
life for 7 years, and no more. 

(e) No. 1 is a Square of 64 Squares. EZECHIEL is from Hebrew 
ICHZQAL, the well-known name of the Prophet, derived from ChZQ, to 
bind. 

No. 2 is a Square of 49 Squares, it will be noticed that a small "o" is placed 
at the end of each word in the last square towards the right hand. AMIGDEL is 
from MGDL, a strong tower. 

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares. IOSUA, the well-known Hebrew name, 
signifies "he shall save". 

No. 4 is also a Square of 25 Squares. PEGER is from PGR = a dead inactive 
carcase whether of man or of beast. 

158 

The Sacred Magick 

THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER. 

HE Twelve Symbols for the Twelve Hours of the Day and of the Night, 
to render oneself Invisible unto every person. 

(1) 

(2) 

A 

L 

A 

M 

A 

L 

A 

L 

A 

M 

A 

T 

A 

T 

A 

N 

A 
L 

A 

T 

S 

A 

P 

H 

A 

H 

S 
A 
P 

H 

I 

T 

N 

E 

R 

A 

A 

N 

A 

O 

R 

I 

S 

H 

(3) 

c 

A 

S 

A 

H 

A 

D 

o 

D 

A 

S 

O 

M 

O 

S 

A 

D 

O 

P 

A 

H 

A 

s 

A 

C 

(4) 

A 

L 

A 

T 

A 

H 

L 

A 

R 

O 

G 

A 

T 

T 
A 
H 

(6) 

(5) 

c 

O 

D 

E 

R 

o 

D 
E 
R 

S 

I 

M 

L 

A 

H 

I 

M 
L 

A 

S 

I 

I 

R 

I 

H 

S 

159 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(7) 

c 

E 

H 

A 

H 

E 
H 

A 
H 

(8) 

A 

N 

A 

N 

A 

N 
A 
N 
A 

(9) 

T 

A 

M 

A 

N 

A 

P 

A 

T 

E 

M 
A 

D 
E 

N 

E 

D 

A 

C 

(10) 

B 

E 

R 

o 

M 

I 

N 

E 
R 
O 
M 

I 

N 

(11) 

T 

A 

L 

A 

C 

A 

A 

L 

L 

A 

A 

C 

A 

L 

A 

T 

(12) 

A 

L 

A 

M 

P 

I 

S 

L 

A 
M 
P 

I 

S 

I 

L 

S 

Notes To Chapter XIV. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter be manifested in part by the Evil Spirits, 
and in part by the Good Angels. 

(b) MAGOT is said to rule the Operations of this Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits do not execute the Operations of this Chapter. 

160 

The Sacred Magick 

(d) To render oneself invisible is said by Abraham to be a very easy matter. 
This Chapter contains Twelve Symbols for Twelve different Spirits submitted 
unto the Prince MAGOT, who are all of the same force. Place the Symbol upon 
the top of your head (under your head covering) and then you will become 
invisible, while on taking it away you will appear visible again. 

(e) No. i is a Square of 49 Squares, whence 19 Squares are taken which are 
arranged somewhat in the form of a capital F. ALAMALA is probably from the 
Greek, ALE wandering, and MELAS = black, darkness; i.e., wandering dark- 
ness. 

No. 2 consists of 25 Squares arranged somewhat in an F form, and taken 
from the Square of 49 Squares. TSAPHAH is from TzPH = a covering or 
shroud. 

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares. CASAH implies "formed by coagulation". 

No. 4 consists of 16 Squares in an F form, taken from a Square of 36 
Squares. ALATAH signifies "adhering closely". 

No. 5 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
CODER = Darkness and Obscurity. 

No. 6 consists of 17 Squares, somewhat irregularly disposed, taken from a 
Square of 36 Squares. SIMLAH = "involved, to clothe or surround on all sides". 

No. 7 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
CEHAH = Restriction, and compression. 

No. 8 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
ANANA is a word expressing earnest desire for some then defect to be supplied. 

No. 9 consists of 19 taken from a Square of 25 Squares. TAMAN "to hide 
or conceal," and recalls the Biblical name of Teman. NED AC means "accumu- 
lated darkness". 

No. 10 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. BER- 
OMIN signifies "coverings or shrouds of concealment". 

No. 11 is a border of 16 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. TALAC signi- 
fies "thy mists". 

No. 12 consists of 16 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. ALAMPIS 
is the Greek adjective alampes, meaning "without the light of the Sun". ISIL is 
Hebrew and means "he will dissolve". 

It will be remarked that all these names distinctly express some idea relat- 
ing to Invisibility. 

161 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. 

H OR the Spirits to bring us anything we may wish to eat or to drink, and 
even all (kinds of food) that we can imagine. 

(i) For them to bring us Bread. 

(2) Meat. 

(3) Wine of all kinds. 

(4) Fish. 

(5) Cheese. 

(1) 

I 

A 

I 

I 

N 

A 
I 
I 

N 

(21 

B 

A 

S 

A 

R 

A 
S 
A 

R 

B 

(3) 

L 

E 

C 

H 

E 

M 

E 

C 

N 

O 

H 

A 

H 

H 
E 

M 

E 

C 

H 

E 

L 

(4) 

D 

A 

C 

A 

D 

A 

R 

A 

F 

A 

C 

A 

M 

A 

C 

A 

F 

A 

R 

A 

D 

A 

C 

A 

D 

(5) 

L 

E 

B 

H 

I 

N 

A 

H 

A 

N 

I 

H 

B 

A 

E 
L 

H 

A 

162 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XV. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in Part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ASMODEE and MAGOT together execute the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(C) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) As for these Symbols and all like ones appertaining unto this Chapter, 
when you shall wish to make use of them, you shall put them between two 
plates, dishes, or jugs, closed together on the outside of a window; and before a 
quarter of an hour shall have passed you will find and will have that which you 
have demanded; but you must clearly understand that with such kinds of 
viands you cannot nourish men for more than two days. For this food although 
it be appreciable by the eyes, and by the mouth, doth not long nourish the 
body, which hath soon hunger again, seeing that this food gives no strength to 
the stomach. Know also that none of these viands can remain visible for more 
than 24 hours, the which period being passed, fresh ones will be requisite. 

(e) This Chapter naturally brings to one's mind the descriptions of the 
Magic feasts in the "Arabian Nights" and elsewhere. 

No. 1 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. IAIIN 
means "Let there be wine". Evidently therefore this Square should be numbered 
3, instead of 1. 

No. 2 consists of 10 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. BASAR 
means "flesh". 

No. 3 consists of 21 Squares in the form of the Roman Capital Letter E, 
taken from a Square of 36 Squares. LECHEM means "bread," CNOHAH 
implies "corn", and MECHEL means "a cake". Therefore this should evidently 
he numbered 1, instead of 3. MECHEL also means "a window". 

No. 4 is a Square of 25 Squares. DACAD should be spelt with a G instead 
of a C; the meaning is "bring forth fish". CAMAC means "meal, or flour". 
AFARA may be from the Greek adverb aphar = "straightway or forthwith" but 
if taken as a Hebrew root may mean "bring forth fruit". 

No. 5 is a Gnomon of 15 Squares and 3 other supplementary ones taken 
from a Square of 64 Squares. LEBHINAH is from LBA = "milk," and INH "to 
squeeze". 

163 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. 

O find and take possession of all kinds of Treasures, provided that they 
be not at all (Magically) guarded. 

(i) For Treasure of Silver (or Silver Money). 

(2) For Gold Money. 

(3) For a great Treasure. 

(4) For a small Treasure. 

(5) For an unguarded Treasure. 

(6) For Copper Money. 

(7) For Gold in Ingots. 

(8) For Silver in Ingots. 

(9) For jewels. 

(10) For Ancient Medals (and Coins). 

(11) For a Treasure hidden by a particular Person. 

(12) For Pearls. 

(13) For Diamonds. 

(14) For Rubies. 

(15) For Balassius Rubies. 

(16) For Emeralds. 

(17) For worked Gold. 

(18) For Silver Plate. 

(19) For Statues. 

(20) For Specimens of Ancient Art. 

(1) 

(2) 

T 

I 

P 

H 

A 

R 

A 

H 

I 

P 
H 

A 
R 

A 

I 

H 

I 

T 

C 

E 

S 

E 

P 

E 
S 
E 
P 

164 

The Sacred Magick 

(3) 

(4) 

s 

E 

G 

I 

L 

A 

H 

E 

R 

A 

L 

I 

P 

A 

G 

I 

L 

E 

N 

L 

I 

L 
A 
H 

N 

E 

C 

O 

T 

E 
C 
O 

T 

N 

(5) 

M 

A 

G 

O 

T 

A 

R 

A 

T 

O 

G 

A 

L 

A 

G 

O 

T 

A 

R 

A 

T 

O 

G 

A 

M 

(6) 

A 

G 

I 

L 

N 

I 

L 

I 

A 
K 

(7) 

c 

O 

s 

E 

N 

o 

s 

E 

N 

M 

o 

T 

S 

A 

R 

T 

S 
A 
R 

(9) 

B 

E 

L 

I 

A 

L 

E 

B 

O 

R 

U 

A 

L 

O 

V 

A 

R 

I 

I 

R 

A 

V 

O 

L 

A 

V 

R 

O 

B 

E 

L 

A 

I 

L 

E 

B 

(10) 

O 

R 

I 

o 

N 

R 

A 

V 

R 

O 

I 

V 

A 

V 

I 

O 

R 

V 

A 

R 

N 

O 

I 

R 

O 

165 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(U) 

K 

E 

R 

M 

A 

E 
R 
M 

A 

K 

(12) 

I 

A 

N 

A 

A 

M 

E 

N 

N 

E 

M 

A 

A 

N 

A 

I 

(13) 

B 

I 

C 

E 

L 

O 

N 

I 

R 

O 

L 

A 

T 

O 

C 

O 

R 

A 

M 

A 

L 

E 

L 

A 

M 

A 

L 

E 

L 

A 

M 

A 

R 

O 

C 

O 

T 

A 

L 

O 

R 

I 

N 

O 

L 

E 

C 

I 

B 

(14) 

S 

E 

G 

O 

R 

E 

G 

O 

E 

R 

B 

S 

(15) 

H 

E 

T 

I 

S 

E 

R 

E 
T 

I 
S 

E 

G 

I 

N 

E 

S 

E 

R 

(16) 

A 

S 

T 

A 

R 

O 

T 

S 

A 

L 

I 

S 

T 

O 

T 

L 

A 

N 

B 

S 

R 

A 

I 

N 

O 

N 

I 

A 

R 

S 

B 

N 

A 

L 

T 

O 

T 

S 

I 

L 

A 

S 

T 

O 

R 

A 

T 

S 

A 

(17) 

K 

O 

N 

E 

H 

O 

N 
E 

H 

K 

c 

A_ 

H 

J_ 

L 

(18) 

A 

H I L 

166 

The Sacred Magick 

(19) 

(20) 

A 

R 

I 

T 

O 

N 

R 

O 

C 

A 

R 

O 

I 

C 

L 

O 

A 

T 

T 

A 

O 

L 

O 

R 

O 

R 

A 

C 

O 

R 

N 

O 

T 

I 

R 

A 

O 

R 

I 

M 

E 

L 

R 

E 

M 

O 

R 

E 

I 

M 

O 

N 

O 

N 

N 

O 

N 

O 

M 

I 

E 

R 

O 

M 

E 

R 

L 

E 

I 

N 

R 

O 

Notes To Chapter XVI. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ASTAROT and ARITON both execute the Operations hereof by their 
Ministers, yet not together, but each separately. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) Select the Symbol of the Treasure desired, and the Spirit will then shew 
it to you. Then place the Symbol at once upon the Treasure, and it will no 
longer be possible for it to disappear into the ground, nor for it to be carried 
away. Furthermore any Spirits which may be guarding it will thus be put to 
flight, and you can then dispose of the Treasure as you wish. 

(e) No. i is a species of border of 28 Squares of which 18 are occupied by 
letters, taken from a Square of 64 Squares. TIPHARAH means "Glory, beauty, 
a shining thing". ITI is the Chaldaic for "is, are". 

No. 2 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
CESEP means "Silver". This Square should therefore probably be numbered 1, 
or 8, or 18. 

No. 3 consists of 24 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. SEGILAH 
means "Treasure". 

No. 4 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25. NECOT means probably 
stamped money. 

No. 5 is a Square of 25 Squares. MAGOT is the name of one of the Sub- 
Princes. 

No. 6 is a Gnomon of 10 from a Square of 16 Squares. AGIL may mean "a 
heap", but also "a globular drop of dew". 

No. 7 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
COSEN perhaps means "a golden cup". 

No. 8 is a Gnomon also of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
OTSAR means "restraint". 

167 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 9 is a Square of 36 Squares. BELIAL is the name of one of the four 
great chiefs of the Evil Spirits. 

No. 10 is a Square of 25 Squares. ORION, the celebrated mythological 
name of the Greek hunter, and of the constellation, is perhaps used here as the 
name of a Spirit. 

No. 11 is a border of 10 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. KERM 
A means either "a cutting off or else "a superinducing". 

No. 12 is a Square of 16 Squares. 

No. 13 is a Square of 49 Squares. BICELON is perhaps from IHLM = Dia- 
monds. The root IChL means "abiding strength and hardness". 

No. 14 is a border of 12 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. SEGOR 
means respectively "to break forth" and "to shut in", according as the root 
begins with S or Sh. 

No. 15 consists of 20 Squares from a Square of 49. 

No. 16 is a Square of 49 Squares. ASTAROT is one of the 8 Sub-Princes of 
the Evil Spirits. 

No. 17 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. KONEH means 
"possessions". 

No. 18 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
CAHIL means "gathered together". 

No. 19 is a Square of 36 Squares. ARITON is one of the 8 Sub-Princes of 
the Evil Spirits. 

No. 20 is a Square of 36 Squares. ORIMEL is evidently here used as the 
name of a Spirit. OIRIN is a Chaldaic word meaning Angelic Watchers over 
the Kingdoms of the Earth. ORION may also come from this word. 

168 

The Sacred Magick 

THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. 

O fly in the Air and travel any whither, 
(i) In a black Cloud. 

(2) in a white Cloud. 

(3) In the form of an Eagle. 

(5)*In the form of a Crow (or Raven). 

(4) In the form of a Vulture. 
(6) In the form of a Crane. 

(1) 

T 

A 

S 

M 

A 

A 

G 

E 

I 

M 

S 

E 

V 

E 

S 

M 

I 

E 

G 

A 

A 

M 

S 

A 

T 

(3) 

H 

O 

L 

O 

P 

O 

P 

O 

L 

O 

L 

O 

B 

O 

L 

O 

L 

O 

P 

O 

P 

O 

L 

O 

H 

(5) 

R 

O 

L 

O 

R 

O 

B 

U 

F 

O 

L 

U 

A 

U 

L 

O 

F 

U 

B 

O 

R 

O 

L 

O 

R 

(2) 

A 

N 

A 

N 

N 
A 

N 

A 

{' 

I) 

O 

D 

A 

C 

D 

A 

R 

A 

A 

R 

A 

D 

C 

A 

D 

O 

(6) 

N 

A 

T 

S 

A 

A 

R 

O 

I 

S 

T 

O 

L 

O 

T 

S 

I 

O 

R 

A 

A 

S 

T 

A 

N 

Notes To Chapter XVII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAIMON execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by means of their common Ministers. 

169 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) Name the place aloud to which you wish to travel, and place the Sym- 
bol upon your head under the bonnet or the hat; but take well heed that it does 
not fall from you, which would be very dangerous. Do not as a rule travel by 
night; and select a calm and serene day for the Operation. 

(e) No. i is a Square of 25 Squares. TASMA implies protection. TRMS is 
the Hebrew word used in the verse, "Thou shalt go upon the Lion and the 
Adder". 

No. 2 consists of 8 Squares taken from a Square of 16. ANAN means "great 
labour". 

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares. HOLOP means "to travel". 

No. 4 is a Square of 16 Squares. ODAC means "to pass on from one place 
to another". 

No. 5 is a Square of 25 Squares. ROLOR is perhaps from ROL "to move 
hurriedly". 

No. 6 is a Square of 25 Squares. NATSA means "to flee or fly quickly". 

170 

The Sacred Magick 

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. 

O heal divers Maladies. 

(i) To heal Leprosy. 

(2) For chapped hands, etc. 

(3) For old Ulcers. 

(4) For pestilential diseases. 

(5) For inveterate Paralysis. 

(6) For Malignant Fevers. 

(7) For bodily pains. 

(8) For Sea Sickness. 

(9) For Vertigo (and Giddiness). 

(IO) For the "Miserere" (a most violent and dangerous kind of colic), 

accompanied by dreadful vomiting. 

(il)For Dropsy. 

(l2)For all kinds of Wounds. 

(1) 

T 

S 

A 

R 

A 

A 

T 

S 

I 

R 

A 

P 

L 

A 

A 
R 

A 

A 

T 

G 

(2) 

B 

U 

A 

H 

(3) 

(4) 

M 

E 

T 

S 

O 

R 

A 

H 

E 

L 

M 

I 

N 

I 

M 

A 

T 

M 

A 

R 

O 

M 

I 

R 

S 

I 

R 

G 

I 

O 

N 

O 

O 

N 

O 

I 

G 

R 

I 

S 

R 

I 

M 

O 

R 

A 

N 

T 

A 

M 

I 

N 

I 

M 

L 

E 

H 

A 

R 

O 

S 

T 

E 

M 

R 

E 

C 

H 

E 

M 

E 

R 

H 

A 

S 

E 

C 

H 

A 

I 

A 

H 

H 

A 

I 

A 

H 

C 

E 

S 

A 

H 

R 

E 

M 

E 

H 

C 

E 

R 

171 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(5) 

R 

O 

K 

E 

A 

O 

G 

I 

R 

E 

K 

I 

L 

I 

K 

E 

R 

I 

G 

O 

A 

E 

K 

O 

R 

(6) 

B 

E 

T 

E 

M 

E 

M 

E 

R 

E 

T 

E 

N 

E 

T 

E 

R 

E 

M 

E 

M 

E 

T 

E 

B 

(7) 

(8) 

B 

E 

B 

H 

E 

R 

E 

R 

A 

O 

S 

E 

B 

A 

R 

I 

o 

H 

H 

O 

I 

R 

A 

B 

E 

s 

O 

A 

R 

E 

R 

E 

H 

B 

E 

D 

E 

L 

E 

O 

S 

L 

A 

B 

I 

o 

E 

B 

I 

B 

E 

O 

I 

B 

A 

L 

S 

O 

E 

L 

E 

(9) 

K 

A 

D 

A 

K 

A 

T 

A 

R 

A 

K 

A 

D 

A 

D 

A 

R 

E 

M 

A 

K 

A 

K 

E 

S 

E 

K 

A 

K 

A 

M 

E 

R 

A 

D 

A 

D 

A 

K 

A 

R 

A 

T 

A 

K 

A 

D 

A 

K 

(10) 

R 

o 

G 

A 

M 

O 

S 

O 

R 

I 

K 

A 

M 

o 

G 

I 

R 

O 

R 

A 

M 

A 

K 

O 

R 

O 

K 

A 

M 

A 

R 

O 

R 

I 

K 

O 

M 

A 

K 

I 

R 

O 

S 

O 

M 

A 

G 

O 

R 

(11) 

S 

I 

T 

U 

R 

I 

R 

A 

P 

E 

T 

A 

R 

A 

G 

U 

P 

A 

L 

A 

R 

E 

G 

A 

N 

(12) 

H 

A 

p 

P 

I 

R 

A 

M 

A 

O 

S 

I 

P 

A 

R 

A 

o 

P 

P 

O 

A 

R 

A 

P 

I 

s 

O 

A 

M 

A 

R 

I 

P 

P 

A 

H 

172 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XVIII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) AMAIMON performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) The bandages of the sick person having been undone and cleaned, and 
the unguent, the compresses, and the bandages having been replaced, put the 
Symbol upon them and leave it for about a quarter of an hour, then take it 
away, and keep it for use upon another occasion. But if it be an internal malady, 
you must place the Symbol (the written part downwards) upon the bare head of 
the patient. 

These Symbols may be seen and examined without any danger, yet it is 
always better that they should neither be seen nor handled by any other person 
than yourself. 

(e) No. i consists of 20 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. TSA 
RAAT = "a stroke or plague; the leprosy". 

No. 2 consists of 4 Squares from a Square of 16. BUAH signifies "to clear 
away". 

No. 3, a Square of 64 Squares. METSORAH signifies "flowing sores or 
ulcers". 

No. 4 is a Square of 36 Squares. RECHEM means "closely seizing". 

No. 5 is a Square of 25 Squares. ROKEA signifies general evil. 

No. 6 is a Square of 25 Squares. BETEM = "the internal parts". 

No. 7 is a Square of 36 Squares- BEBHER = "in purifying or cleansing". 

No. 8 is a Square of 25 Squares,- ELEOS, the Greek word Hals = "the Sea 
from its saltness". Elos means "calm still water". 

No. 9 is a Square of 49 Squares. KADAICAT means "vertigo, turning of 
the head". 

No. 10 is a Square of 49 Squares. ROGAMOS from Latin Rogamus, "we 

Pray "' 

No. 11 is a Square of 25 Squares. SITUR means "secret". 

No. 12 is a Square of 36 Squares. HAPPIR means "to shatter or break". 

173 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER. 

^ OR every description of Affection and Love. 

i) To be beloved by one's Wife (or Husband). 

2) For some especial Love. 

3) To he beloved by a Relation. 

4) For a Maiden in particular. 

5) To acquire the affection of a judge. 

6) To make oneself beloved by a Married person. 

7) To make oneself beloved by a Widow. 

8) By a girl already promised in Marriage. 

9) By a Maiden in general. 

10) By some especial Prince. 

11) By some especial King. 

12) To obtain the friendship of some particular person. 

13) To have that of a Great Man. 

14) To be beloved by a Woman. 

15) To make oneself beloved by Ecclesiastics. 

16) To make oneself beloved by a Master. 

17) To make oneself beloved by a Mistress. 

18) To make oneself beloved by Infidels. 

19) By the Pope, by an Emperor, or by Kings. 

20) For Adulteries in general. 

(1) 

D 

O 

D 

I 

M 

O 
D 

I 
M 

(2) 

R 

A 

I 

A 

H 

A 

I 

G 

O 

G 

I 

A 

H 

A 

I 

A 

H 

(4) 

(3) 

M 

O 

D 

A 

H 

O 

K 

O 

R 

A 

D 
A 
H 

S 

I 

C 

O 

F 

E 

T 

I 

c 

E 

N 

A 

L 

I 

F 

R 

A 

M 

A 

R 

O 

F 
E 
T 

174 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

(6) 

A 

L 

M 

A 

N 

A 

H 

L 

M 

A 

R 

E 

A 

A 

L 

B 

E 

H 

A 

N 

A 

R 

E 

H 

A 

I 

L 

H 

A 

C 

A 

L 

L 

A 

H 

A 

L 

O 

R 

A 

I 

L 

L 

A 

G 

O 

U 

P 

A 

H 

A 

L 

L 

A 

C 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

E 

L 

E 

M 

N 

A 

Q 

I 

D 

S 

A 

L 

O 

M 

L 
E 
M 

A 

Q 

o 

R 

I 

A 

R 

E 

P 

O 

Q 

O 

R 

O 

Q 

L 

E 

M 

E 

L 

I 

R 

O 

Q 

A 

O 

P 

E 

R 

A 

D 

I 

Q 

A 

N 

M 

O 

L 

A 

S 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

D 

E 

B 

A 

M 

A 

H 

H 

B 

I 

A 

L 

D 

A 

H 

E 

R 

E 

R 

A 

E 

A 

A 

Q 

O 

R 

I 

A 

B 

E 

R 

E 

B 

L 

O 

Q 

I 

R 

E 

A 

R 

E 

R 

E 

B 

R 

D 

R 

I 

I 

D 

E 

M 

A 

B 

E 

D 

A 

I 

R 

D 

R 

O 

H 

A 

F 

E 

O 

N 

(13) 

B 

E 

T 

U 

L 

A 

H 

E 
T 

U 

L 

O 

S 

A 

N 

I 

T 

A 
H 

(14) 

I 

E 

D 

I 

D 

A 

H 

E 

D 

I 

L 

O 

Q 

A 

H 

I 

D 

O 

Q 

A 

R 

C 

A 

A 
H 

175 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(15) 

s 

A 

Q 

A 

L 

A 

Q 

Q 

A 

L 

Q 

S 

(16) 

Q 

E 

B 

H 

I 

R 

E 

R 

A 

I 

S 

A 

B 

A 

Q 

O 

L 

I 

H 

I 

o 

L 

I 

A 

I 

S 

L 

I 

A 

C 

R 

A 

I 

A 

C 

A 

(17) 

E 

F 

E 

H 

A 

F 

E 

G 

H 

A 

L 

Q 

A 

S 

(18) 

T 

A 

A 

F 

A 

H 

A 
A 
F 
A 
H 

(19) 

S 

A 

R 

A 

H 

A 
R 
A 
H 

(20) 

C 

A 

T 

A 

N 

A 
T 

A 

N 

Notes To Chapter XIX. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) Probably BELZEBUD performs this Operation; as those of the Twen- 
tieth Chapter are submitted to him; and these two Chapters are classed together 
by Abraham the Jew in his special instructions, the one being the exact reverse 
of the other. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) Name aloud the person or persons by whom you wish to be loved, and 
move the Symbol under whose class they come. But if it be not for yourself that 
you are operating, but for two or more other persons, whether for love or for 

176 

The Sacred Magick 

hatred, you should still name such persons aloud, and move the Symbols of the 
class or classes under which they come. Also, if possible, it is a good thing to 
touch them with the Symbol, on the bare skin, if you can. Under this heading 
are included all classes of good-will and affection, among the which Abraham 
says that the most difficult thing is to make oneself or others beloved by reli- 
gious persons. 

(e) No. i is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25. DODIM 
means " loves' pleasures". 

No. 2 consists of 17 Squares arranged like a capital letter E taken from a 
Square of 25 Squares. RAIAH means "a female companion". 

No. 3 consists of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. MODAH = 
"Adorned as for a bridal". 

No. 4 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49. 

No. 5 consists of 29 Squares taken from 49. ALMANAH = "A virgin"; 
hence evidently this should be numbered 4 and not 5, while probably No. 4 
should be here placed. 

No. 6 consists of 26 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. CALLAH 
means "a married woman, but especially a bride". 

No. 7. A Gnomon of 7 from a Square of 16. ELEM means "a widow". 

No. 8. A Square of 25 Squares. NAQID = "Remote offspring". 

No. 9. This has a strong likeness to the well-known SATOR, AREPO, 
TENET, OPERA, ROTAS. It is a Square of 25 Squares. SALOM = "Peace". 
AREPO = "he distils". LEMEL = "unto fulness". OPERA, "upon the dry 
ground". MOLAS = "in quick motion," or perhaps better "stirring it up into 
quickness, i.e., life". The former sentence is capable of a rather free Latin trans- 
lation, thus: 

SATOR = The Creator. 

AREPO = Slow-moving. 

TENET = Maintains. 

OPERA = his creations. 

ROTAS = As vortices. 

No. 10 is a Square of 25 Squares. DEB AM signifies "influential persons". 

No. 11. A Square of 8 Squares from a Square of 16. AHHB signifies "to 
love". BEAR signifies in Hebrew "to waste or consume". 

No. 12. A Square of 36 Squares. IALDAH signifies "a girl". 

No. 13 consists of 19 Squares arranged like the capital letter F, and taken 
from a Square of 49 Squares. BETULAH = a virgin. 

177 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 14 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49. IEDIDAH is from a 
Hebrew Root, signifying objects of Love. DILOQAH means "to eagerly pur- 
sue, or to burn as with a fever". DOQARCA = "pierced". 

No. 15. 12 Squares from a Square of 25. SAQAL means "a wise person". 

No. 16. A Square of 36 Squares. QEBHIR = "a protector". 

No. 17. 14 Squares from a Square of 25. EFEHA means "passionate". 

No. 18. A Gnomon of 11 from a Square of 36. TAAFAH = "to join together, 
to connect". 

No. 19 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from one of 25 Squares. SARAH means 
"powerful, high in authority". 

No. 20 is also a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. 
CATAN = "to adhere closely". 

178 

The Sacred Magick 

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER. 

O excite every Description of Hatred and Enmity, Discords, Quarrels, 
Contentions, Combats, Battles, Loss, and Damage. 
(i) To excite Quarrels and Fights. 

(2) For Enmity in general. 

(3) For Enmities of Kings and of the Great. 

(4) For particular Enmities. 

(5) For Enmities among Women. 

(6) To cause a General War. 

(7) To render any one unfortunate in Combat. 

(8) To put Discord in an Army. 

(9) For a particular Discord. 

(10) To sow Discord among Ecclesiastics, 
(il) For every description of Vengeance. 
(12) To cause Battles, Losses, etc. 

(1) 

K 

A 

N 

N 

A 

A 

Q 

A 

I 

N 

A 

T 

A 

N 

I 

A 

Q 

A 

A 

(2) 

s 

E 

L 

A 

K 

E 
L 

A 

I 

A 

R 

E 

K 

(3) 

R 

O 

Q 

E 

N 

O 

Q 

O 

I 

O 

R 

E 

N 

E 

Q 

O 

R 

(4) 

(5) 

A 

T 

L 

I 

T 

1 

S 

T 

L 

O 

Q 

O 

S 

A 

T 

I 

T 

A 

S 

O 

Q 

O 

L 

I 
S 

O 

T 

S 

A 

M 

A 

H 

T 

S 
A 

M 

A 

K 

A 

R 

O 

S 

A 
H 

179 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(6) 

s 

I 

N 

A 

H 

I 

R 

A 

T 

A 

N 

A 

X 

I 

R 

O 

H 

A 

R 

O 

Q 

(8) 

A_ 
T_ 

A_ 

N 

(7) 

A T A N 

L 

o 

F 

I 

T 

O 

S 

O 
F 

I 

K 

O 

N 

O 

K 

I 

T 
O 

S 

(9) 

G 

I 

B 

O 

R 

I 

B 

I 

L 

E 

T 

O 
R 

(10) 

N 

O 

K 

A 

M 

O 

R 

O 

T 

A 

K 

O 

B 

A 

K 

A 

T 

A 

M 

O 

M 

A 

K 

A 

M 

(11) 

K 

E 

L 

I 

M 

E 

Q 

I 

S 

A 

L 

I 

V 

o 

K 

I 

S 

O 

G 

A 

M 

A 

K 

A 

M 

(12) 

K 

E 

R 

A 

B 

A 

H 

E 

M 

I 

R 

U 

T 

A 

R 

A 

R 

O 

Q 

o 

R 

A 

B 
A 
H 

Notes To Chapter XX. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) BELZEBUD performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this chapter. 

(d) See instructions for Chapter XIX., which serve equally for that, and the 
present Operation. 

(e) No. i consists of 19 Squares irregularly arranged, and taken from a 
Square of 25 Squares. KANNA means "jealous". 

180 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 2 consists of 13 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. SELAK = "to cast 
down or prostrate". 

No. 3 consists of 18 Squares from a Square of 25. ROQEN implies "persons 
in power". 

No. 4 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49. ATLITIS is a corruption 
of the Greek adjective atletos, "insufferable, not to be borne". 

No. 5 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 49. OTSAMAH = "bodily 
strength". 

No. 6 consists of 21 from a Square of 25. SINAH = "Hatred". 

No. 7 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 25. SATAN is the Name 
of one of the Chief Evil Spirits and has been elsewhere explained. 

No. 8 consists of 19 Squares in the form of a capital F, taken from a Square 
of 49 Squares. LOFITOS is evidently from the Greek lophesis, meaning "rest, 
cessation from action (ie. in this case military action)". 

No. 9 consists of 13 Squares arranged in the form of an F, and taken from a 
Square of 25 Squares. GIBOR = "strength, might, severity". 

No. 10 is a Square of 25 Squares. NOKAM, "vengeance". 

No. 11 is also a Square of 25 Squares. KELIM = "for all kinds of things". 

No. 12 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 49. KERABAH, "assault, 
attack". 

181 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-FIRST CHAPTER. 

O transform oneself, and take different Faces and Forms, 
(i) To appear old. 

(2) To take on the appearance of an Old Woman. 

(3) To appear young. 

(4) To transform oneself into a Girl. 

(5) To appear like a young Child. 

(1) 

z 

A 

K 

E 

N 

A 

Q 

I 

K 

O 

L 

A 

N 

E 

Q 

N 

(2) 

D 

I 

S 

K 

E 

N 

A 

H 

I 

S 

E 

K 

E 

N 

A 

H 

Q 

(3) 

D 

I 

S 

A 

K 

A 

N 

I 

R 

O 

Q 

S 

Q 

A 

Q 

K 

U 

Q 

A 

N 

(4) 

I 

O 

N 

E 

K 

N 
E 
K 

Q 

(5) 

B 

A 

C 

U 

R 

A 

Q 

C 

O 

R 

E 

C 

Q 

A 

A 

B 

182 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XXI. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) MAGOT performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 

ter. 

(d) This is rather a fascination than anything else. Take the Symbol desired 
in your left hand and stroke the face therewith. Abraham further observes that 
such an Operation performed by an ordinary Magician would be easily seen 
through by the possessor of the Sacred Magic; while on the contrary this latter 
would be safe from detection by ordinary Sorcerers. 

(e) The Student will note in these Squares the marked position of the Let- 
ter Q, as in many other cases where the effect aimed at seems to be rather a 
deception of the senses of others. 

No. i consists of 16 Squares from a Square of 25. ZAKEN means "old". 

No. 2 is a Gnomon of 16 Squares with the Letter Q added, from a Square 
of 72 Squares. DISKENAH = "in the likeness of an old woman". It is to be 
remarked that this Square is rather oblong, 8 Squares long by 9 deep. 

No. 3 consists of 20 Squares from a Square of 40. DISAKAN means "to 
cover up or hide", but were it DISAKAR it would mean "as if one young". 

No. 4 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. IONEK means 
"thy dove". 

No. 5 consists of 16 Squares from a Square of 25. BACUR = "firstborn". 

183 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-SECOND CHAPTER. 

HIS Chapter is only for Evil, for with the Symbols herein we can cast 
Spells, and work every kind of Evil; we should not avail ourselves hereof. 

(i) To cast Spells upon Men. 

(2) To bewitch Beasts. 

(3) To cast a Spell upon the Liver. 

(4) This Symbol should never be made use of. 

(5) To cast a Spell upon the Heart. 

(6) Upon the Head and other parts of the Body. 

(1) 

Q 

E 

L 

A 

D 

I 

M 

E 

Q 

L 

A 

A 

D 

I 

Q 

M 

(2) 

B 

E 

H 

E 

M 

O 

T 

E 
H 
E 

Q 

O 

E 

N 

Q 

M 

O 

T 

(3) 

M 

E 

B 

A 

s 

I 

M 

E 

Q 

B 

A 

Q 

Q 

S 

I 

M 

Q 

(4) 

c 

A 

S 

E 

D 

A 

Z 

O 

T 

E 

B 

O 

R 

O 

S 

E 

T 

O 

S 

A 

D 

E 

B 

A 

C 

184 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

(6) 

L 

E 

B 

H 

A 

H 

E 

M 

A 

U 

S 

A 

B 
H 

A 
H 

Q 

A 

R 

A 

Q 

A 

K 

A 

R 

Q 

A 

Q 

A 

K 

Q 

Q 

ter. 

Notes To Chapter XXII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) BELZEBUD performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 

(d) Abraham warns strongly against use being made of this Operation. The 
Symbols should be either buried or concealed in places where the persons we 
wish to harm are likely to pass by; or, if possible, we can touch them with the 
Symbol. 

(e) No. i consists of 17 from a Square of 49 Squares. QELADIM means 
"those who creep in insidiously". 

No. 2 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. BEHEMOT = 
"Beasts". 

No. 3 consists of 18 Squares from a Square of 49. MEBASIM = "those that 
stamp down violently". 

No. 4 is a Square of 25 Squares. CASED, Hebrew (if used in a bad sense) 
"overflowing of unrestrained lust". 

AZOTE, Hebrew "enduring". 

BOROS, = Greek "Devouring, gluttonous". 

ETOSA, = Greek "idle, useless". 

DEBAC, = Hebrew = "to overtake and stick close". 

No. 5 consists of 14 Squares from a Square of 36. LEBHAH implies, 
"Agony at the heart". 

No. 6 consists of 17 Squares. QARAQAK, "thy baldness," also "thy rending 
asunder". 

185 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-THIRD CHAPTER. 

O demolish Buildings and Strongholds. 

(i) To make a House fall to the ground. 

(2) To destroy a Town. 

(3) To demolish Strongholds. 

(4) To ruin possessions (and Estates). 

(1) 

N 

A 

V 

E 

H 

A 

Q 

V 

Q 

E 
H 

D 

(2) 

Q 

A 

Q 

A 

H 

A 

Q 

Q 

A 
H 

Q 

Q 

(3) 

(4) 

c 

O 

M 

A 

H 

O 

N 

M 

A 

Q 

Q 

H 

O 

N 

B 

I 

N 

I 

A 

M 

I 

N 

U 

U 

S 

I 

N 
I 

A 
M 

Notes To Chapter XXIII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested by the Evil Spirits only. 

(b) ASTAROT performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given regarding this Chapter by Abraham 
the Jew. 

(e) No. 1 consists of 12 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. NAVEH 
means "a house or habitation". 

186 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 2 consists of 12 Squares from a Square of 25. QAQAH "to make void 
or empty". 

No. 3 consists of 15 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. COMAHON 
means "a stronghold". 

No. 4 consists of a Gnomon of 16 Squares from a Square of 36 Squares, 
BINIAM means "in affliction". 

187 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER. 

O discover any Thefts that hath occurred. 
(i) jewels stolen. 

(2) Money. 

(3) Worked Gold. 

(4) Silver Workmanship. 

(5) Effects, such as Furniture. 

(6) Horses, and other Animals. 

(1) 

K 

I 

X 

A 

L 

I 

S 

I 

R 

I 

N 

E 

Q 

I 

X 

A 

L 

M 

I 

Q 

S 

K 

(2) 

Q 

E 

N 

E 

B 

A 

H 

E 

Q 

N 

Q 

B 

A 

H 

Q 

(3) 

Q 

E 

D 

E 

S 

E 

L 

A 

N 

E 
D 

E 

M 

A 

Q 

A 

Q 

A 

L 

A 

S 

E 

N 

A 

Q 

I 

R 

I 

Q 

A 

L 

A 

N 

Q 

N 

(4) 

T 

A 

L 

A 

H 

A 

N 

I 

M 

A 

L 

A 
H 

188 

The Sacred Magick 

(5) 

c 

A 

R 

A 

C 

A 

R 

I 

O 

A 

R 

I 

R 

I 

R 

A 

O 

I 

R 

A 

C 

A 

R 

A 

C 

(6) 

M 

O 

R 

E 

H 

O 

R 

O 

S 

O 

R 

E 

I 

H 

Notes To Chapter XXIV. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ARITON performs the Operations hereof; and MAGOT also; but sep- 
arately. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given by Abraham regarding this Chapter. 

(e) No. i consists of 22 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. The 
meaning of KIXALIS is not apparent. 

No. 2 consists of 16 Squares from a Square of 49. QENEBAH probably 
conveys the idea of gain or possession. 

No. 3 consists of 35 Squares from a Square of 81 Squares. QEDESELAN 
may signify things of value set apart. 

No. 6 (the succession of numbers here is irregular) consists of 14 Squares 
from a Square of 25 Squares. MOREH means "to rebel against, to disobey". 

No. 5 consists of a Square of 25 Squares. CARAC means "to involve or 
wrap up," also "garments, etc.". 

No. 4 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
TALAH means "a young lamb," or "kid," according to whether its root termi- 
nates with Aleph or He. 

189 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-FIFTH CHAPTER. 

O walk upon, and operate under, Water. 

(i) To swim for 24 hours without becoming wearied. 

(2) To remain under Water for 2 hours. 

(3) To rest upon the Water for 24 hours. 

(1) 

N 

A 

H 

A 

R 

I 

A 

M 

A 

A 

Q 

H 

E 

A 

Q 

R 

I 

A 
M 

A 

Q 

Q 

A 

(2) 

B 

U 

R 

N 

A 

H 

E 

U 

U 

L 

O 

R 

I 

P 

T 

E 

R 

O 

M 

I 

L 

A 

P 

H 

N 

R 

I 

T 

I 

L 

I 

A 

A 

I 

L 

I 

T 

I 

R 

N 

H 

P 

A 

L 

I 

M 

O 

R 

E 

T 

P 

I 

R 

O 

L 

U 

U 

E 

H 

A 

N 

R 

U 

B 

(3) 

M 

A 

I 

A 

M 

A 
I 

A 
M 

Notes To Chapter XXV. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angel, or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) Abraham does not state to what Prince this Operation is submitted. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given by Abraham regarding this Chapter. 

190 

The Sacred Magick 

(e) No. i consists of 23 Squares taken from a Square of 81 Squares. NAHA- 
RIAMA means "a river of waters". 

No. 2 is a Square of 64 Squares. 

No. 3 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. MAIAM = 
"Abundant waters such as the sea". 

191 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-SIXTH CHAPTER. 

O open every Kind of Lock, without a Key, and without making any 
noise. 

(i) To open Doors. 

(2) To open Padlocks. 

(3) To open Larders (or Charnel-Houses). 

(4) To open Strong-boxes (or Caskets). 

(5) To open Prisons. 

(1) 

A G U B 

O R 

D 

O 

R 

A_ 
T_ 

o_ 

K 

(2) 

A 

K 

T O K 

Q 

U 

R 

B 

A_ 
R_ 

I 

A 

C_ 

A 

(3) 

A R I 

A 

Q 

C A 

Q 

_E_ 

Q 
o_ 

R 

(4) 

E Q O R 

Q 

(5) 

Q 

s 

L 

O 

H 

A 

R 

A 

H 

S 

O 
H 
A 
R 
A 
H 
O 
S 

Q 

Q 

Q 

A 

Q 

L 

O 

s 

192 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XXVI. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) AMAIMON and ARITON together perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) Touch the lock you wish to open with the side of the Symbol which is 
written upon, and it will immediately open without noise or injury. When you 
wish to reclose it touch it with the side of the Symbol not written upon, and it 
will refasten and shew no trace of having been opened. 

(e) No. i consists of 14 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. SAGUB 
signifies "exalted" or "lifted up" (as an ancient portcullis might be). 

No. 2 consists of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. RATOK 
means "a confining chain wreathed or fastened round anything". 

No. 3 consists of 15 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. BARIACA 
= "a place for food to be put". 

No. 4 consists of 13 Squares from a Square of 25. SEQOR may mean either 
"to satisfy" or "to deal falsely," according as it is spelt with Q or K. 

No. 5 consists of 25 Squares from a Square of 81. 

193 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER. 

O cause Visions to appear. 

(i) To make trellis-work to be seen. 

(2) A Superb Palace. 

(3) Flowering Meadows. 

(4) Lakes and Rivers. 

(5) Vines with their Grapes. 

(6) Great Fires. 

(7) Divers Mountains. 

(8) Bridges and Rivers. 

(9) Woods and various Kinds of Trees. 

(10) Cranes. 
(il) Giants. 

(12) Peacocks. 

(13) Gardens. 

(14) Wild Boars. 

(15) Unicorns. 

(16) Beautiful Country. 

(17) A fruit Garden (or Orchard). 

(18) A Garden with all kinds of Flowers. 

(19) To cause Snow to appear. 

(20) Different kinds of Wild Animals. 

(21) Towns and Castles. 

(22) Various flowers. 

(23) Fountains and clear Springs (of Water). 

(24) Lions. 

(25) Singing Birds. 

(26) Horses. 

(27) Eagles. 

(28) Buffaloes. 

(29) Dragons. 

(30) Hawks and Falcons. 

(31) Foxes. 

(32) Hares. 

(33) Dogs. 

(34) Gryphons. 

(35) Stags. 

194 

The Sacred Magick 

(1) 

s 

E 

L 

A 

C 

E 
L 

A 

R 

I 

N 

E 

C 

(2) 

H 

E 

S 

E 

B 

E 

Q 

A 

L 

S 

E 

G 

B 

(3) 

A 

O D 

O 

N I A 

O 

Q 

D 

E 

O 

q| 

[Q O 

N 

I 

\s\ 

A 

(4) 

(5) 

A 

T 

S 

A 

R 

A 

H 

T 

O 

A 

L 

I 

S 

A 

S 

A 

D 

O 

R 

I 

R 

A 

L 

O 

T 

O 

L 

A 

R 

I 

R 

O 

D 

A 

S 

A 

S 

I 

L 

A 

O 

T 

H 

A 

R 

A 

S 

T 

A 

(6) 

S 

E 

L 

E 

G 

E 
L 

Q 

E 

Q 

A 

Q 

E 

G 

E 

L 

E 

S 

(7) 

S 

O 

R 

E 

K 

o 

R 
E 
K 

Q 

A 

G 

A 

M 

A 

G 

A 

G 

A 

A 

M 

A 

G 

A 

A 

(8) 

A 

K 

R 

O 

P 

O 

L 

I 

S 

K 

R 

O 

Q 

P 

O 

Q 

L 

I 

S 

195 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(9) 

c 

A 

I 

o 

T 

A 
I 

O 
T 

Q 

(10) 

I 

A 

Q 

E B 

A 

Q 

Q 

E 

B 

Q 

(11) 

M 

E 

L 

U 

N 

A 

C 

E 
L 

Q 

U 

Q 

N 
A 
C 

G 

E 

(12) 

P 

E 

R 

A 

C 

E 

Q 

R 

A 

Q 

C 

(13) 

K 

I 

K 

A 

I 

O 

N 

I 

O 

K 

A 

I 

O 

N 

(14) 

o 

L 

E 

L 

A 

H 

L 
E 
L 
A 
H 

(lb) 

D 

O 

B 

E 

RAH 

O 

R 

A 

B 

E 

R 
A 
H 

(16) 

M 

A 

K 

O 

R 

A 
K 
O 
R 

(17) 

M 

I 

G 

I 

R 

A 

s 

I 

G 

I 

R 

Q 

A 

M 

I 

L 

E 

S 

I 

S 

Q 

196 

The Sacred Magick 

(18) 

E 

S 

A 

H 

E 

L 

S 
A 
H 
E 
L 

B 

(19) 

A 

R 

I 

E 

H 

R 

I 

E 
H 

(20) 

L 

I 

M 

I 

K 

O 

s 

I 

M 

I 

Q 

c 

K 

O 

S 

o 

K 

I 

M 

(21) 

s 

A 

S 

A 

S 

A 

R 

I 

s 

I 

Q 

A 

S 

;22) 

K 

I 

K 

I 

M 

I 

s 

I 
K 

Q 

I 

Q 

M 

I 

T 

Q 

S 

Q 

(23) 

N 

E 

S 

I 

K 

E 

R 

E 

Q 

S 

I 

Q 

K 

E 

R 

(24) 

D 

O 

B 

I 

H 

O 
B 

I 
H 

(2b) 

F 

u 

F 

A 

L 

O 

S 

U 

F 

A 

L 

O 

Q 

S 

(26) 

P 

A 

R 

A 

H 

A 
R 

A 
H 

197 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

(27) 

G 

A 

D 

E 

S 

I 

R 

A 

D 

E 

Q 

S 

I 

Q 

R 

(28) 

F 

A 

N 

I 

N 

A 

N 

Q 

I 

N 

(29) 

R 

E 

E 

M 

E 

E 

Z 

M 

(30) 

(31) 

(32) 

A 

I 

I 

A 

H 

S 

U 

H 

A 

L 

G 

I 

R 

I 

P 

E 

S 

I 

U 

S 

E 

A 

U 
H 
A 
L 

I 
R 

Q 

I 

A 

H 

Q 

I 

Q 

Q 

P 
E 

S 

Q 

G 

(33) 

A 

R 

N 

E 

P 

R 

N 

Q 

E 

P 

(34) 

A 

I 

I 

A 

L 

I 
I 

A 
L 

(35) 

K 

E 

L 

E 

F 

E 
L 

Q 

Q 

E 

Q 

F 

198 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XXVII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are only manifested by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAIMON, execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by the means of their common Ministers. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given by Abraham regarding this Chapter. 

(e) No. i consists of 13 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. SELAC 
means "to cast down," "to cut down or fell" (as trees). Perhaps thus signifying 
the cut wood with which a trellis is made. 

No. 2 consists of 13 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. HESEB may 
mean the environs of a place. 

No. 3 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. AODONIA, 
from Hebrew root ODN "Eden, a delightful place, etc.". 

No. 4 is a Square of 49 Squares. ATSARAH = either "a store-house or trea- 
sury" or "to flow," according to its derivation. 

No. 7 (the order of the numbering of the Squares is here changed) consists 
of 10 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. SOREK means "to wind 
about". 

No. 8 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 81 Squares. AKROPOLIS is a 
Greek word signifying "citadel". 

No. 6 consists of 18 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. SELEG = 
"Snow," whence perhaps this should be numbered 19 instead of 6. 

No. 5 consists of 15 Squares from a Square of 49. AGAMAGA = "pools of 
water" whence this should probably be numbered 4 instead of 5. 

No. 9 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. CAIOT is proba- 
bly from CHAIOTH = "Living creatures". It may also mean a covert, where liv- 
ing creatures abide. Perhaps it should be numbered 20. 

No. 10 consists of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. IAQEB 
probably means a bird of the crane species. 

No. 11 consists of 17 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. MELU- 
NAC = "Thy dwelling-place," and perhaps this should be numbered 21. 

No. 12 consists of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. PERAC 
may mean "flowering gardens". Perhaps this should be numbered 13. 

No. 15 consists of 16 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. 

No. 14 is a Gnomon of 11 Squares from a Square of 36 Squares. OLELAH 
may mean "horned animals" or "tusked animals". 

No. 13 consists of 14 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. 
KIKAION = "a place where gourds grow". 

199 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

No. 16 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. 
MAKOR = "places digged". 

No. 17 consists of 21 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. MIGIRAS 
= "a place where productive plants grow". 

No. 18 consists of 12 Squares from a Square of 36 Squares. ESAHEL = 
rich . 

No. 19 should probably be numbered 24. It is a Gnomon of 9 from a 
Square of 25 Squares. ARIEH = "a lion". 

No. 20 consists of 19 from a Square of 49 Squares. LIMIKOS = "savage 
(animals)". 

No. 21 consists of 13 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. SASAS probably 
means "Horses," and this Square should probably be numbered 26 instead of 
21. 

No. 22 consists of 18 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. KIKIMIS 
= "thistles" and also "some kinds of flowers". 

No. 23 consists of 15 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. NESIKER signi- 
fies fluids of various kinds. 

No. 24 consists of 9 Squares from a Square of 25. DOBIH = "a bear," and 
should evidently be otherwise numbered. 

No. 25 consists of 14 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. 

No. 26 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. PARA H = 
"a heifer", but also "fruit, produce". 

No. 27 consists of 15 Squares from a Square of 49. 

No. 28 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25. FANIN is probably from 
BN, and meaning "Towns and Villages," whence this should probably be num- 
bered 21. 

No. 29 consists of 8 Squares from a Square of 16. REEM "Unicorns", and 
also beasts of the beeve kind, Buffaloes, etc. Perhaps this Square answers for 15 
as well. 

No. 30 consists of a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares. 
AIIAH = rapacious birds. 

No. 31 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25. SUHAL means "a black- 
ish lion," whence this Square should be numbered 24 probably. 

No. 32 consists of 18 Squares from a Square of 49. GIRIPES may mean 
"small beasts that run swiftly". 

No. 33 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25. ARNEP should probably 
be ARNEB. It means "a Hare," whence this Square should perhaps be num- 
bered 32. 

200 

The Sacred Magick 

No. 34 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from a Square of 2 5. AIIAL probably 
means "wild goats". 

No. 35 consists of 12 Squares from 25. KELEF = "a Dog," whence this 
Square should probably be numbered 33. 

201 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER. 

O have as much Gold and Silver as one may wish, both to provide for 
one's necessities, and to live in opulence. 
(i) To have coined Gold. 

(2) To have coined Silver. 

(3) To have Silver in small coins. 

(4) To have small change in Copper (or Bronze). 

(1) 

s 

E 

Q 

O 

R 

E 

Q 

A 

M 

O 

Q 
O 
R 

S 

Q 

Q 

Q 

(2) 

K 

E 

S 

E 

R 

E 
S 
E 
R 

K 

(3) 

p 

E 

S 

E 

P 

E 

Q 

S 

O 

R 

O 

S 

E 

M 

O 

Q 

P 

E 

S 

(4) 

M 

A 

T 

B 

A 

A 
T 
B 

A 

Notes To Chapter XXVIII. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or by 
the Guardian Angel. 

(b) ORIENS alone performs this Operation. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

(d) Place the Symbol of the Money you require in your purse, let it remain 
there for a short time, then put your right hand into your purse, and you will 
there find seven pieces of the class of money you have wished for. This Opera- 
tion should not be performed more than three times in the day. The pieces of 
money you do not use will disappear, which is why you should not ask for sev- 

202 

The Sacred Magick 

eral kinds of money at the same time. And if you spend it, both you and those 
into whose hands it passes will find it genuine. 

In another place Abraham says, that once only in your life you may ask 
your Guardian Angel for a large sum of money sufficient to represent a fortune; 
and that he himself had done so and obtained his request. 

(e) No. i consists of 17 from a Square of 25 Squares. SEQOR perhaps here 
means money. 

No. 2 consists of 10 Squares from a Square of 25. KESER may mean "a col- 
lection or heap". 

No. 3 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 25. PESEP should be proba- 
bly BESPR = "much, many". 

No. 4 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares from 25. MATBA probably means "let it 
be forthcoming, bring forth". 

203 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE TWENTY-NINTH CHAPTER. 

O cause Armed Men to appear. 

(i) To cause an Army to appear. 

(2) Armed Men for one's defence, 

(3) To cause a Siege to appear. 

(1) 

(2) 

M 

A 

C 

A 

N 

E 

H 

M 

A 

H 

A 

R 

A 

c 

A 

H 

A 

A 

C 

H 

A 

A 

N 

R 

E 

A 

Q 

H 

C 

A 

Q 

H 

(3) 

M 

E 

T 

I 

s 

u 

R 

A 

H 

E 

Q 

T 

I 

Q 

S 

U 

Q 

R 

A 

Q 

H 

204 

The Sacred Magick 

Notes To Chapter XXIX. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested in part by the Angels, and 
in part also by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAIMON, execute the Opera- 
tions hereof by the means of their common Ministers. PAIMON also performs 
this Operation alone. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this Chap- 
ter. 

(d) No especial instructions are given by Abraham regarding this Chapter, 
by which Abraham says (in the First Book) that he himself had caused armed 
men to appear. 

(e) No. i is a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. 
MACANEH = "an encampment". 

No. 2 consists of 19 Squares from a Square of 81. MAHARACAH perhaps 
means "an ambuscade". 

No. 3 consists of 21 Squares from a Square of 81 Squares. 

205 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER. 

O cause Comedies, Operas, and every kind of Music and Dances to 
appear. 

(i) To cause all kinds of Music to be heard. 

(2) Music and extravagant Balls. 

(3) For all kinds of Instruments to be played. 

(4) For Comedies, Farces and Operas. 

(1) 

N 

A 

G 

1 

N 

A 

H 

A 
G 

M 

G 

I 

N 

Q 

G 

A 

H 

Q 

(2) 

M 

E 

K 

O 

L 

A 

H 

E 
K 
O 
L 
A 
H 

(3) 

(4) 

N 

I 

G 

I 

G 

I 

N 

I 
G 

I 
G 

I 

N 

End of the 

M 

A 

C 

A 

S 

E 

F 

E 

F 

A 

R 

U 

S 

E 

C 

A 

L 

A 

S 

Symbols* 

E 

F 

* In the Original MS. these words "Fin des Signes" are written in this man- 
ner across and within the two last Squares. 

Notes To Chapter XXX. 

(a) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Evil Spirits. 

(b) MAGOT performs the Operations hereof. 

(c) The Familiar Spirits can to an extent perform the Operations of this 
Chapter. 

206 

The Sacred Magick 

(d) No especial instructions are given by Abraham regarding this Chapter. 

(e) No. i consists of 18 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. NAGINAH = 
a stringed instrument". 

No. 2 consists of a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. 
MEKOLAH = "Singing". 

No. 3 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. NIGIGIN = 
"musical instruments," probably. 

No. 4 consists of 21 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares. MECASEF 
means "enchantment". 

This finishes the list of Symbols set down by Abraham the Jew, the which I 
have given in their entirety; but I must of my own initiative warn any who may 
endeavour to use these Signs, that unless animated by the purest and best 
motives they will find them react terribly against them; and that, if the prelimi- 
nary period of Six Months' preparation advocated by Abra-Melin be not 
observed, the Symbols will be practically worthless in their hands; for, as will be 
observed, the Names in the Squares for the most part are simply the statement 
of the ends desired to be accomplished thereby. 

Finally, I will quote the following passage from the "Key of Solomon the 
King" - 

"ACCURSED BE HE WHO TAKETH THE NAME OF GOD IN 
VAIN! ACCURSED BE HE WHO USETH THIS KNOWLEDGE UNTO 
AN EVIL END. BE HE ACCURSED IN THIS WORLD AND IN THE 
WORLD TO COME. AMEN. BE HE ACCURSED IN THE NAME 
WHICH HE HATH BLASPHEMED!" 

207 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

ESSENTIAL REMARKS UPON THE FOREGOING SYMBOLS. 

It is certain that among all the Symbols which I have hereinbefore written 
down there be many which one can employ for evil (purposes); and I avow that 
(at first) I intended not to give them here at all; but thereafter I did make reflec- 
tion in myself that I was working no evil; for often the secret judgments of God 
permit disgrace, hindrances, infirmities, and other vexing accidents to happen 
unto Mortals, either to awake them from the lethargy wherein they be sunk so 
that they recognise not their Creator, or else to give them an opportunity by 
their afflictions of increasing their merit. And although God can in no way do 
evil, but always good, nevertheless we cannot deny that occasionally He permit- 
teth the Secondary Causes to act. Now the Executioners and Executors of the 
Divine justice be the Evil Spirits. Whence I conclude that although it may be in 
no sense advisable to work Operations for Evil, yet that there may arise, how- 
ever, certain cases which do admit of and permit the same; as (for example) 
when it is necessary to save and defend one's own life, or to avert some great 
scandal or evil, or to prevent offensive acts which might be done against one- 
self, or to displease God and hurt one's neighbour, as well as in just Wars, and 
other like cases. Yet it is always best in such instances to govern yourself accord- 
ing to the counsel of your Holy Guardian Angel. I have also written these for 
the reason that God hath given unto Man free Will both in merit and demerit; 
for, further, having finished the Operation, if thou shouldest wish (which I pray 
God not to permit) l to operate for Evil and to abuse the Grace which God hath 
granted thee, the Spirits would be only too ready to give and manifest unto thee 
the Symbols, and will grant willingly unto thee all that thou shalt demand of 
them. Concerning this matter I repeat unto thee, Fear the Lord, love Him, and 
respect His Commandments with a good heart, and thou shalt live happy and 
contented upon Earth. 

If thou considerest maturely what be the essential points of this Operation, 
thou shalt find that the first point is to make a firm, veritable, and real resolu- 
tion to live in a truly edifying condition of modesty, and in retirement, as far as 
it shall be possible for thee so to do. For Solitude is the source of many bless- 
ings, such as, to give oneself up to prayer, and unto the contemplation of things 
Divine; to flee evil conversations and occasions of sin; to live in oneself; and to 
accustom oneself to continuing a life of such regularity. For if one were to go to 
present oneself before a King, what would one not do to appear before him 
with splendour and magnificence; and what diligence and care would not one 

1. In the Original "Qua Diem neplaise." The Parenthesis is put by Abraham the Jew. 

208 

The Sacred Magick 

put in practice to prepare oneself hereunto. Now we must understand that the 
enjoyment and vision of the Angels of the Lord be infinitely above the Princes 
of Earth, who in fact are but a vanity a shadow, and vile dust of Earth. Now if 
to please these Mortal Princes one would almost commit idolatries; what ought 
one not to do to appear before the Holy Angels of God who represent the 
Grandeur of the Majesty of God. Let each one hold for a thing, sure and certain 
that the 

Grace which the Lord granteth unto us in giving us this Sacred Science by 
the means and intermediation of His Holy Angels is so great that none can fitly 
express it. 

It is certain that having obtained this Sacred Wisdom thou mayest dispose 
of it and communicate it unto three friends; but thou must not exceed this 
Sacred Number of the Ternary, for in such case thou wouldest be altogether 
deprived of it. One of the most meritorious deeds in the sight of the Lord, is to 
share with one's neighbour the goods which God hath given unto us; yet must 
we take note of that which God commanded unto Moses, when He ordered 
him to give the Operation unto Aaron his brother, namely that he should 
receive as the Symbol of an Offering Ten Golden Florins, the which he should 
distribute unto Seventy-Two poor persons with his own hands, obliging them 
to repeat the Psalms which I have already mentioned in the Second Book, and 
which should be of the number of SeventyTwo. For if he who receiveth this 
Operation should not perform this Alms, the Operation would be void of value 
for him. Thou, not yet having the Authority to give it, without having received 
the Ten Golden Florins, thou must act like Moses, unto whom the Lord 
granted it on this condition, for him to give it unto his brother Aaron. 

I have also described the precautions which we must take before granting 
this Sacred Science unto any; and I repeat here that at least Six Months should 
transpire during which we should frequently test, and seek by conversations to 
sound, the inclinations of him unto whom we may be willing to give it; so as to 
know whether he be a reliable person, and also the object for which he deman- 
deth and is anxious to obtain this Science. Now shouldest thou perceive that 
such an one is light and inconstant, and that he hath only vague ideas, and hab- 
its and manners which be not good, then shalt thou temporise with him for a 
time, so as to bring up causes, occasions, or pretexts, so as not to give it unto 
him, even shouldest thou already have promised it to him. For it is better to 
undergo the displeasure of a Mortal Man than that of an Eternal God, from 
Whom thou hast received so great a Grace. I have, however, myself made trial 
hereof, for to my great wonderment (once upon a time) when I was thinking 
that I was putting it to good use in giving it unto a certain person for whom I 

209 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

had great respect; God Himself intervened and did not permit my intention to 
be carried out, for that person began of his own accord to wonder whether the 
matter were true or no, and he doubted it much, believing that it was a fable, 
and did not have an entire faith therein; and he made me comprehend by his 
discourse that he was not such an one as I had thought. Furthermore it hap- 
pened that he fell dangerously ill, and I in my turn was reprimanded by my 
Angel who blamed me for the choice I had made. The whole machinery of the 
Universe is maintained by Faith; and he who believeth not, suffereth the chas- 
tisement of his perfidy both in this World and in the next. I could here say 
much more relating to our own selves, but as thou wilt have to pass under the 
influence 2 of thy Holy Guardian Angel, thou wilt be sufficiently instructed in 
his own good time, and by himself, concerning these matters which be both 
delicate and to be jealously guarded. 3 

The Evil Spirit is so subtle, so keen, and so cunning, that that which he 
cannot obtain at the time of the Conjuration, he will seek to have on other 
occasions in offering thee his services. This is why the very first action to take 
especially with thy Familiar Spirits, should be to command them, never to say 
anything unto thee of themselves, but only to speak when thou shalt interro- 
gate them, unless it were to warn thee of matters which concern either thine 
advantage or thine hurt. For if thou dost not limit their liberty of speech they 
will tell thee so many and so important things, that they will completely over- 
cloud 4 thine understanding, and thou wilt not know what to believe, so that in 
the confusion of ideas they could make thee prevaricate, and perhaps fall into 
irretrievable error. Never make thyself to be greatly entreated in any matter 
wherein thou canst aid and succour thy neighbour, and do not wait until he 
demandeth assistance from thee, but seek to know to the full his need even 
though it be concealed, and give him prompt aid. Also trouble not thyself as to 
whether he be Turk, Pagan, or Idolater, but do good unto all those who believe 
in a God. Be especially charitable towards those who are in extreme want, pris- 
oners, or sick, and let thine heart be touched, and succour them generously; for 
God taketh pleasure in beholding the poor succoured. 

In the Twenty- Eighth Chapter where it is treated of the way to have Silver 
and Gold sufficient to supply one's needs on occasion; thou must know that 

2. In the Original "Passerpar les mains de"; = "pass through the hands of but this 
translation would sound somewhat undignified. 

3. In the Original "Qui sont jalouses et delicate? 

4. In the Original "Quils tofusqueront Lentendement" literally, "they will obfuscate 
thine understanding". 

210 

The Sacred Magick 

the quantity of Gold or of Silver of which thou hast then actually need, will be 
at once brought unto thee, and thou canst use it for this occasion only. And if 
thou usest it not within the twenty-four hours, this sum will disappear and 
thou wilt no longer be able to avail thyself of it, Think not, however, that this 
Gold is but a phantasy, for if thou effectually expendest it, and dost not endeav- 
our to hoard the same, he who shall receive it from thine hands can enjoy the 
same and expend it according unto his desire, and the money will be real both 
for him and for others. 

For once only mayest thou demand of thine Holy Angel the amount of 
Gold and of Silver which thou shalt judge suitable unto thine estate and condi- 
tions. My possessions were few, and I demanded of mine Angel Three Thou- 
sand Thousand Golden Florins, 5 and they were granted unto me. Later I made 
such good use of the Sacred Science, and I understood so well how to augment 
my goods, that at the present time, after having married three Daughters unto 
each of whom I gave a hundred thousand (golden florins), as thou wilt see by 
the testament which I have made, I am leaving in current money more than a 
Million Golden Florins, besides a large quantity of very valuable furniture. Had 
I been of noble birth I might have demanded much more and have profited 
less. When any one demanded of me : "Eh ! How have you managed to gain so 
much?" I would reply thereto that it is a fine thing to know by certain Knowl- 
edge how much such or such a thing is worth here, and how much it is worth 
elsewhere, that this year, wheat, barley, and other crops, will be cheap in Italy, 
and dear in France, etc., etc.; and that commerce well managed, enricheth any 
one. 

As for what concerneth the manner of treating and commanding the Spir- 
its, it is an easy thing unto whomsoever walketh by the proper paths; and it is a 
very difficult thing for whomsoever through ignorance submitteth himself unto 
them. I have heard say that there be some men who pass for being famous 
herein, such as a certain blind man D'acali, a certain Bearli, a Peter 
D'Abano, 6 and many others. Ah! how many of them do but deceive them- 
selves! I do not say that these men did not perform extraordinary things; but it 
is necessary to note their manner of working, for their Science is imperfect, and 
their Authority proceedeth not from God by the intermediation of His Holy 
Angels, but proceedeth directly from express Pacts made with the Devil, 7 and 
(acteth) by means of Consecrated Books full of thousands of Diabolical Conju- 

5. In the Original: "3000 mil florins dor". 

6. Yet Peter of Abano or Apona is always considered to have been a great and power- 
ful Magician. 

211 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

rations and impious Exorcisms; in one word things which be contrary unto the 
Commandments of God and the peace of men. And with all this their Opera- 
tions be destined for certain times and hours, and finally the Demon carrieth 
away with him their miserable Souls, which thing arriveth only too often. And 
yet it is the Science of these persons which causeth them to pass for famous 
Wise Men. 

In the First Book I have made mention of those whom I had encountered 
in my journeyings in Europe. The true Commandment is that which depen- 
deth from God, and in which there is no dependence placed on any Spirit 
imaginable, for in employing them, if you make unto them the least submis- 
sion, the slightest prayer, or honour, you are rendering yourselves their slaves, 
and they are in no way submitted unto you. The Spirits have so great knowl- 
edge that they comprehend very well by our actions what dispositions we have, 
and understand our inclinations, so that from the very beginning they prepare 
the way to make us to fail. If they know that a man is inclined unto Vanity and 
Pride, they will humiliate themselves before him, and push that humility unto 
excess, and even unto idolatry, and this man will glory herein and become 
intoxicated with conceit, and the matter will not end without his commanding 
them some pernicious thing of such a nature that ultimately thence from will 
be derived that sin which will make the Man the Slave of the Demon. Another 
man will be easily accessible to Avarice, and then if he take not heed the Malig- 
nant Spirits will propose unto him thousands of ways of accumulating wealth, 
and of rendering himself rich by indirect and unjust ways and means, whence 
total restitution is afterwards difficult and even impossible, so that he who is in 
such case findeth himself ever the Slave of the Spirits. Another will be a man of 
Letters; the Spirits will inspire him with presumption, and he will then believe 
himself to be wiser even than the Prophets, furthermore they will endeavour to 
lead him astray in subtle points in matters appertaining unto God, and will 
make (that man) fall into a thousand errors, the which afterwards when he 
wisheth to support he will very frequently deny God, and His high Mysteries. 
The causes and matters whereof (the Spirits) will make use to cause a man to 
waver are infinite, especially when the man attempteth to make them submit to 
his commands, and this is why it is most necessary to be upon one's guard and 
to distrust oneself, The true Commandment will be that which will be given 
when he who commandeth shall have maturely reflected and considered who 
he is in himself, and who he is who should serve and obey him. And if a Mortal 

7. 1 cannot possibly see that the well-known "Heptameron" or "Magical Elements" of 
Peter of Abano in any way counsels Pacts, or deserves the above severe speeches of 
Abraham the Jew. 

212 

The Sacred Magick 

Man not having on his side the support of the Power and Will of the Lord shall 
have sufficient force to command the Spirits and to constrain them to obey 
him; (they, namely) who have the same virtue and power, which God hath 
granted unto them, they having lost nothing hereof; and they also being Spirits 
from God and herein differing from thee who art drawn from the mire, as Gold 
is from Lead; and that their sin is notorious, for the which they were chased 
from Heaven; figure also unto thyself, that a Spirit which of his own nature is 
all vanity, would not be likely to submit himself unto thee without a superior 
force (compelling him), neither would he wish to obey thee nor to serve thee. 8 
He who shall reflect and reason upon these particulars will know that all things 
come unto us from God, and that it is He Who wisheth and commandeth that 
the Evil Spirits should be submitted unto us. If then all things depend from the 
Lord, upon whom wilt thou, o Man, base thyself so as to be capable of thyself 
(alone) to dominate the Spirits ? It is certain that such an enterprise cannot suc- 
ceed without the loss of thine own soul. Then it is by the virtue of that God 
Who hath submitted them under thy feet, that thou shalt command them, as 
will be precisely ordained unto thee by thy Holy Angel. "Donee ponam inimi- 
cos tuos scabellum Pedum tuorum." "Until I shall make thy foes thy footstool." 
Also do not familiarise thyself with them; for they be not little pet dogs. Adopt 
a serious tone and an air of authority, make them obey thee, and be well ware of 
accepting the least offer which they shall make unto thee of themselves; and 
treat them as their Master, also without occasion thou shalt never molest them, 
and order them to execute thy commands from point to point without adding 
or diminishing in any way imaginable. And when thou canst employ Inferior 
Spirits (in a matter), thou shalt in no way make thy requests unto the Superiors. 
Also seeing that all have not the same powers, thou shalt take heed not to com- 
mand unto one (Spirit) a thing appertaining unto (the office of) another; and 
because it would be impossible for me to here write down in full the quality, 
virtue, and office of each Spirit, thou shouldest search this out for thyself and 
sharpen thy faculties; and in the first demand which thou shalt make unto the 
Four Spirits (who are) the Supreme Princes, and unto the Eight Sub-Princes; 
thou shalt demand the most skilful of the Spirits, of whom thou shalt make a 
register for convenience of the practice which I describe unto thee in this Third 
Book where also thou wilt find the Symbols of many Spirits. But seeing that the 
subjects of various erring humours (of mind) and other occasions which arise 
daily be diverse, each man will procure for himself those (Spirits) which be of 

8. This whole sentence is most confusedly worded in the Original, and I have endeav- 
oured to render it as literally as circumstances would allow. 

213 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

his nature and genius and fit for that wherein thou wouldest employ them. And 
when thou shah find an extreme resistance unto operating, on the part of any 
Spirit, after that thou shalt have given him the necessary instructions, and that 
he cannot execute that which thou hast commanded him; in such case thou 
shalt convoke the Superior Spirits and demand of them others which may be 
better capable of serving thee in thy need. And in all cases thou shalt avail thy- 
self of the power and command of thy Holy Angel. Keep ever continually 
before thine eyes the Fear of God; and seek to obey His Commandments, and 
those of thy Holy Angel, ever retain in thine heart his holy instructions; never 
submit thyself unto the Evil Spirits in the slightest degree even should it seem 
to be to thine own advantage and unto that of thy neighbour (so to do). For the 
rest, be certain that they will obey thee so perfectly and really, that there will be 
no operation however great or difficult it may be, that thou shalt not bring 
unto a glorious termination, the which I myself also have done. As regardeth 
the service which thou shouldest render unto thy neighbour in his necessities, 
thou shouldest perform it with zeal, and in no sense wait for him to ask it of 
thee, and seek also to comprehend his needs unto the uttermost, so as to be able 
to take sound action (therein). Thou shalt take heed to succour the infirm and 
the sick and to work for their healing; and see that thou dost not good works to 
attract praises and to make thyself talked of in the world. Also thou mayest 
make semblance of performing (thy cures) by prayers, or by ordinary remedies, 
or by (the recital of) some psalm, or by other like means. 

Thou shouldest be especially circumspect not to discover the like matters 
unto reigning Princes; and in this particular thou shalt do nothing without con- 
sulting thy Good Angel; for there is a certain generation which is never con- 
tented, and besides that which ariseth from simple curiosity, these Princes 
regard such (action) as a duty and obligation. Also it is a certain fact that he 
who possesseth this Sacred Magic, hath no need whatever of them. Further they 
are naturally inclined to ask of thee always things prejudicial, the which if 
granted by thee would offend the Lord, and if not they become your declared 
enemies. Now my opinion (is that it) would be always (preferable) to render 
them what services you can from a distance. 

There is nothing which is so pleasing unto the Angels as to demand knowl- 
edge from them, and for my part I think there is no greater pleasure than that 
of becoming wise when one learneth from such masters. 

214 

The Sacred Magick 

I both have exhorted, and do exhort unto a solitary life, 9 which is the 
source of all good; it is true that it is difficult to accustom oneself thereunto; 
but once thou shalt have obtained the Sacred Science and Magic the love for 
retirement will come unto thee of thine own accord, and thou wilt voluntarily 
shun the commerce with and conversation of men; for the pleasure and con- 
tentment thou wilt enjoy when thou shalt be the possessor of this Science will 
be so great that thou wilt despise all amusements, excursions, riches, and every 
other thing however attractive such may be. 

For once only will it be permissible to obtain property and goods propor- 
tionate unto thy degree and estate; the which afterwards are to be used by 
spending them liberally for thine own needs and those of thy neighbour, shar- 
ing with him in his necessity the good things which God shall have given (unto 
thee); for he who should employ these for evil ends shall render himself incapa- 
ble of obtaining from God any other grace and benefit. 

The Child which one should choose for greater surety and success in (the 
acquisition of) this Sacred Science should be born of a legitimate marriage, and 
its father and mother should be also legitimate. It should be from six to seven 
years of age, vivacious, and witty; it should have a clear speech and pronounce 
well. Thou shalt prepare it some time before commencing the Operation and 
have it ready when the time requireth. I myself am of opinion that there should 
be two (children) in case of any accident which might happen, through sick- 
ness, or death, or other like (hindrance). Thou shalt gain it over to thee by giv- 
ing it puerile things to amuse it, and have it ready when necessary, but in no 
way tell it anything of what it is to serve for, so that if it be questioned by its 
parents it can tell them nothing. And if it be a well-behaved Child, it is all the 
better. We may be certain that by this means we can arrive at the possession of 
the Sacred Science; for where he who operateth faileth, the innocence of the 
Child supplieth (that which is wanting); and the Holy Angels are much pleased 
with its purity. We should not admit women into this Operation. 10 

All the clothes and other things which have been used during the period of 
the Six Moons, you should preserve, if you intend to continue in the same 
house wherein thou hast performed the Operation, because they be always 
good. But if thou dost not intend to use them more, nor yet the Oratory, thou 
shalt burn them all, and bury the ashes in a secret place. 

9. Yet apparently Abraham himself led anything but a retired life, being mixed up in 
most of the leading political events of his time. 

10. Abraham here means apparently, not to use a woman in place of the child. 

215 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

It is now necessary to give unto thee a little light, and declare unto thee the 
quality and value of the Spirits, and in what thou canst exactly employ them 
with surety of success. Thou must however take note that each Spirit hath a 
great quantity of Inferior Spirits which be submitted unto him. Also I wish to 
say that as regardeth things base, vile, and of little importance the Superior 
Spirit will not execute them, but will cause them to be executed by his Inferiors 
with all punctuality. And this mattereth not unto him who operateth provided 
that his commands be fulfilled, and that he be punctually obeyed. 

THE ORDER OF THE FIRST HIERARCHY. 
(Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones. 11 ) 

The Spirits of the Seraphim serve to make thee respected and loved for 
works of Charity, for that which regardeth honours and other similar things. In 
matters of great importance they themselves act; but for matters base and car- 
nal, it is their subjects who do serve and operate. 

THE ORDER OF THE SECOND HIERARCHY. 
Dominions, Virtues, And Powers. 

The property of the Dominions is to dominate; to procure liberty; to vanquish 
enemies; to give authority over Princes, and over all kinds of persons, even 
Ecclesiastics. 

The Virtues are proper to give strength and force in all matters whether 
of War or Peace; and in all Operations concerning the health of men, and in all 
maladies for which the fatal hour hath not yet been written. 

The Powers have the dominion over all the Inferior Spirits; and this is 
why they can serve in all things in general, good or evil, and they are devoted 
unto all things in general, good or evil; and they be straight and right in execu- 
tion, very punctual, very prompt, and exact in their Operations. 

THE ORDER OF THE THIRD HIERARCHY. 
Princes, Archangels, And Angels. 

The Princes comprise Spirits capable of giving Treasures and Riches, and they 
or their dependants serve in all the Operations, being a mass composed of dif- 
ferent Orders, and they are sufficiently truthful. 

1 1 . These and the following Titles of the Hierarchies are usually ascribed to the Good 
Angels; but sometimes are also employed to designate grades of the Evil and Fallen 
Angels as well. 

216 

The Sacred Magick 

The Archangels be proper to reveal all Occult matters, and all kinds of 
secret things, such as obscure points in Theology and the Law. They serve with 
great diligence. 

The Angels in general do operate each one according unto his quality. 
There be an infinite number of them. They command the Four Princes and the 
Eight Sub-Princes in all kinds of Operations. These latter 12 having taken their 
oath, observe that which they have promised, provided that the Operation one 
demandeth of them be in their power. 

To cause the Spirit to re-enter a dead body is a very great and difficult 
Operation, because in order to accomplish it the Four Sovereign Princes 13 have 
to operate. Also it is necessary to take great care, and to pay heed unto this 
warning, namely that we should not commence this Operation until the sick 
person is really at the point of death, so that his life is absolutely despaired of. It 
should be so timed as to take place a little while before the sick person giveth up 
the ghost; and thou shah carry out all that we have said hereon in the Second 
Book. But on no account should we perform this Operation to divert ourselves, 
nor for every class of person; but only on occasions of the very utmost and most 
absolute necessity. This Operation I myself have performed but twice in my 
life, namely once for the Duke of Saxonia, and on another occasion in the case 
of a lady whom the Emperor Sigismond loved passionately. 

The Familiar Spirits are very prompt, and they are able to execute in 
most minute detail all matters of a mechanical nature,, with the which therefore 
it is well to occupy them; as in historical painting; in making statues; clocks; 
weapons; and other like matters; also in chemistry; and in causing them to 
carry out commercial and business transactions under the form of other per- 
sons; in making them transport merchandise and other goods from one place to 
another; also to employ them in causing quarrels, fights, homicides, and all 
kinds of evils, and malefic acts; also to convey letters and messages of all kinds 
from one country to another; to deliver prisoners; and in a thousand other ways 
which I have frequently experimented. 

These Spirits should be treated according to their quality, and a distinction 
should be made between a great Spirit and one of a vile or insignificant nature, 
but thou shouldest nevertheless alway conserve over them that domination 
which is proper unto him who operateth. In speaking unto them thou shalt 
give them no title; but shalt address them sometimes as "you," sometimes as 

12. Meaning apparently the Four Princes and Eight Sub-Princes of the Demons, 
before so often alluded to. 

13. Viz.: LUCIFER, LEVIATHAN, SATAN, and BELIAL. 

217 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

"thou"; and thou shalt never seek out expressions to please them, and thou shalt 
always have with them a proud and imperious air. 14 

There be certain little terrestrial Spirits that are simply detestable; Sorcerers 
and Necromantic Magicians generally avail themselves of their services, for they 
operate only for evil, and in wicked and pernicious things, and they be of no 
use soever. He who operateth could, should he so wish, have a million such, but 
the Sacred Science which worketh otherwise than Necromancy in no way per- 
mitteth you to employ such as be not constrained by an Oath to obey you. 

All that hath hitherto been said and laid down should suffice, and it is 
in no wise to be doubted that he who executeth all these matters from point to 
point, and who shall have the right intention to use this Sacred Science unto 
the honour and glory of God Almighty for his own good, and for that of his 
neighbour, shall arrive with ease at the possession thereof; and even matters the 
most difficult shall appear easy unto him. But Human Nature is so depraved 
and corrupted, and so different from that which the Lord hath created, that few 
persons, if any, do walk in the right way; and it is so easy to prevaricate, and so 
difficult not to fail in an Operation which demandeth the whole (soul of a) 
man in (its) entirety. And in order not to intimidate in any way him who shall 
resolve to undertake this Operation, I am about here to set down in writing the 
difficulties, temptations, and hindrances which will be caused him by his own 
relatives; and all this will be occasioned by the Evil Spirits so as to avoid having 
to submit themselves, and humiliate themselves, and subject themselves unto 
Man, their greatest enemy, seeing that they behold him in powerful condition 
arriving at the enjoyment of that Eternal Glory which they themselves have 
foolishly lost; and their rage is so great and their grief so poignant, that -there is 
in the world no evil which they be not ready to work, if God were to permit 
them, they being always attracted by the idea of the destruction of the Human 
Race. Therefore is it necessary to take courage and make a constant resolution 
to resist in all things with intrepidity, and to earnestly desire to obtain from 
God so great a Grace in despite of men and of the Demon. Also beforehand 
thou shouldest arrange thine affairs in such wise that they can in no way hinder 
thee, nor bring thee any disquietude in the period of the Six Moons, during 
which time there will occur the greatest possible attempts at assault and damage 
unto thee which the keen and subtle Enemy will bring to bear upon thee. He 
will cause thee to come in contact with evil books, and wicked persons, who by 
Diabolic methods and tricks will seek to turn thee aside from this enterprise, 

14. In spite of what Abraham here says, I must reiterate, that the greatest courtesy 
should always be used towards Spirits' otherwise the Operator will speedily be led 
into error. 

218 

The Sacred Magick 

even though it be already commenced, by bringing before thee matters which 
in appearance will seem of the greatest importance, but which really be only 
built up on false (and evil) foundations. To such annoying accidents thou 
shouldest steadily oppose thyself, by following out carefully the ample instruc- 
tions which I have given thee, thus banishing them from thee with calmness 
and tranquillity so as to give no chance to the Enemy of exercising his fraudu- 
lent tricks to interrupt thee. 

Thy relations also, astonished at thy manner of life and thy retirement, will 
make every effort to attempt to find out the reasons thereof. It will be necessary 
to satisfy them by words full of affection, and to make them think that time 
which engendereth change, also causeth men who are not altogether ignorant 
persons to resolve at times to live by themselves. This bath been the cause why 
so great a number of good and learned men have retired into desert places, so 
that being separated from their own relatives and from the world they might 
live tranquilly in prayer and orisons to render themselves more worthy to 
obtain through the Grace of the Lord a Gift so great and so perfect. 

I Further approve of thy possessing a Bible in the vulgar language, and also 
the Psalms of David, for thine own use. Some person may here reply: "I under- 
stand the Latin, and I have no need of the common language". I answer him 
that when we pray we ought not in any way to embarrass the Mind by having 
to interpret the Psalms; for at such a moment we should be as much united as 
possible to God; and even the Psalms being in the vulgar tongue when one 
readeth them they imprint themselves better on the memory; and this is the 
true manner of particular prayer, if the person praying be illiterate, for in saying 
the Psalms in Latin he would not know what he was asking of God. 

In these Three Books we shall not find the slightest thing which hath not a 
true and necessary foundation. And we should take the greatest care, and keep 
ourselves as we would from a deadly poison, from commencing this Operation 
at all, if we have not made a firm resolution to carry it through unto the end. 
Because (in the contrary case) some notable evil would befall him who had 
(carelessly) commenced the Operation, and who would then only too well 
comprehend that we may not make a mock of the Lord. Should it happen that 
God by His Will and Commandment should visit thee and afflict thee with 
some malady which should render thee incapable of finishing the Operation 
according unto thy wish, thou having already commenced it; then shouldest 
thou like an obedient servant submit thyself humbly unto His Holy Will and 
Commandment, reserving His Grace unto the time pleasing unto His Divine 

219 

Of Abramelin The Mage 

Majesty to grant it thee. And thou shalt cease from thine Operation, so as to 
finish it on another more favourable occasion, and meanwhile thou shalt devote 
thyself unto the cure of thy body. And such a case ought in no way to afflict 
thee, for the Secrets of God are impenetrable, and He performeth, permitteth, 
and operateth all things for the best and for our good, although it may be not 
understanded of us. 

Hereinafter Will I set down the Key of this Operation, which is the only 
thing which facilitateth this Operation to enjoy the Vision of the Holy Angels, 
by placing the Symbols 15 given hereafter upon the brow of the Child and of 
him who performeth the Operation, as I have said in the First Book, to which 
one can easily refer. 

I will say even as much as this, that out of an hundred scarcely five or six 
persons can attain unto the possession of this Sacred Magic without this Key; 
for reasons which one can in no way disclose. 

Also we should repeat the Psalm VI. "Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas me," 
etc. ("O Lord, afflict me not in Thine Anger"). 

There is nothing in the World which we should so much desire as a true Sci- 
ence, neither is there any more difficult to obtain than this one, because often 
one dieth before attaining unto it in its entirety. 

This is the true and only Way of this Sacred Science and Magic which the 
Lord hath granted unto us by His pure mercy; and is that which in Six Months 
maketh us attain unto the most high and Occult gifts of the Lord which we can 
think of. 

This is the True Science which comprehendeth all other Sciences once one 
is in possession thereof 

Oh! how many books be read among us which seem wonderful! 

It is not fitting for me even to reveal a part of this Science and its proper- 
ties; and to appropriate unto myself that which appertaineth unto a person of a 
great mind and so far above me. 16 In teaching it even, I have far exceeded that 
which I should have done, in having given unto thee the two last Symbols, but 
what will not paternal love and affection do? Endeavour only to obey me and to 
follow out my precepts from point to point, according to the manner in which 
I have given them unto thee in writing; keeping alway the Fear of God before 

15. See the Squares with the Names of Adam and URIEL given at the end of the 
work. 

16. This whole passage is awkwardly and obscurely worded in the French. By the 
"person of great mind," I suppose that Abraham intends to designate Abra-Melin. 

220 

The Sacred Magick 

thine eyes. Also forget not the slightest thing which I have said unto thee in 
these Three Books, for with the help of God Who ruleth and governeth all 
things, and reigneth gloriously in Heaven and upon Earth, and Whose Divine 
justice shineth in Hell; if thou hast recourse unto Him and puttest all thy con- 
fidence in His Divine Mercy, thou shah obtain this Holy Science and Magic 
whose power is inexpressible. Then, o my Son! and Whosoever may attain 
thereunto; remember to praise and glorify the Lord, and to pray unto Him that 
He may be willing to deign and accord unto me His Holy Glory, the place of 
veritable rest, whereof to me while yet in this Valley of Misery He hath granted 
a large share through His Goodness and Mercy; and I pray the Lord also that 
He may be willing to grant it unto thee also with His Holy Benediction, and 
unto all those who by thy means will arrive at the possession of this Sacred 
Magic, and who will use it according unto His Holy Will. 

May God deign, say I, to grant unto such all temporal goods, and a good 
Death in His Holy Kingdom! 

SO MAY IT BE! 

12 

13 

4 

6 

148 

13 

9 

148 

12 

6 

4 

148 

8 

148 

33 

16 

23 

148 

9 

15 

148 

27 

4 

21 

31 

U 

R 

I 

E 

L 

R 

I 

L 

U 

E 

I 

L 

I 

L 

I 

E 

U 

L 

I 

R 

L 

E 

I 

R 

U 

20 

1 

24 

3 

1 

20 

13 

24 

37 

15 

20 

1 

26 

40 

63 

48 

A 

D 

A 

M 

D 

A 

R 

A 

A 

R 

A 

D 

M 

A 

D 

A 

H 

O 

M 

O 

END 

Note. The above set of four Squares evidently represent the Symbols already referred 
to in the Second Book (Chap, xx.), and in the concluding pages of this Third Book; as 
being those to be placed on the head of the Operator and of the Child during the 
Angelic Invocation. The Name URIEL for the former, the Name ADAM for the lat- 
ter. But evidently, also, the Squares of numbers above are intended as the reverse sides 
of the two lower ones. The Latin word HOMO is the translation of ADAM in the 
sense of Man. The Squares of numbers are not of the ordinary magical class. 

221