Selections from the Tatler, Spectator and Guardian (Joseph Addison and Richard Steele, 1885)
============================================================================================
A complete published selection of the Tatler, Spectator and Guardian papers — Addison and Steele's creation of modern English prose. Public domain. Internet Archive (1885 Clarendon selection).

(PF PPRRSRAL OSE REESE ROP ACSERROAAS


THE “


; ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY
‘ TOWN HALL, BOMBAY-1.


3


Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 05 October, 2018


PREFATORY NOTE.


AIMING chiefly at conciseness in the- Introduction whict
follows, I have not always recapitulated those statements o
my predecessors for which 1 have substituted what seem te
me to be more accurate.versions of the facts. Sufficien
references to my authorities will, however, be found in thi
foot notes. Upon certain aspects of Stecle’s relations witl
Swift and Addison I have refrained from touching, because, ir
the first place, the discussion is not essential to the brie
memoir here intended ; and secondly, because I hope to ente
upon it more fully hereafter. Meanwhile, by careful consulta
tion of the newspapers of the day agg other contemporan
records, I have endeavoured to make the “Chronology &

Life’ as rigorously ex@gs as possible.

Although the field Ve is not restricted to the Spectator
but includes the Zatler and Guardian, it will doubtless b
observed that the number of papers in this volume is smalle
than the number of those which Mr. Arnold, in his excellen
Selections from Addison, has borrowed from the Spectator alonc
Notwithstanding the admitted inequality of Steele's work, i
would be unjust to attribute this entirely to the inferiority of th:
material. The truth is, that the evidence for Addison’s author
ship js far hetter than that for Stecle’s, and many papers ant
‘tetters, which in all probability were written by the latter, can
Hit, in the absence of direct proof to that feels be authori
tatively assigned to him.

In the Notes’ I have freely made use of the igbours of the
earlier annotators, as well as of’ such modern memoirs anc
books of reference as bear upon the age of Anne. But


vi PREFATORY NOTE.


am in justice to mysclf bound to say that at least three-
fourths of the illustrations and explanations here given will not
be found in any previous edition of the Essayists; and 1 take
pleasure in adding that I am indebted for several ‘valuable
suggestions to two enthusiastic students of Steele, Colonel F.
Grant, and Mr. Edward Solly, F. R. S.

A. D.


» 69
» JO
” 71
» 72


” 73
n 74+
aR 75
» 76
OFT
» 7


.z) 79
» 80
» 81
» 82


” 84
» 85
» 86
» 8%
» 88
» 89
” 9°
» gl
” g2
» 93
» OF
» 95
» 96
» OF
» $698
» 99
” 100
» IOI


CONTENTS.


On Levity

On Scandal

On Defamation 2

On Conversational Talent

On Prolixity .

On Story-Telling

On Button Holding

Inquisitive Men

On Bodily Wit

Affectation of Faults

On Frolics

On Duelling . : : .
Fashionable Hours . wy Kes
Plainness in Dress .

On Exercise

Scolds

Loss of Beauty

Great Expectations

On Growing Old
Indiscretions in Education
A Stage Coach Journey . :
The Battle of Eyes 2 og
A Fine Lady at Church .
Fashionable Visiting

A Fashionable Toyman -

A Fine Lady's Advertisement
Trivial Pastimes


Vv ‘


/ § 4. CHARACTER SKETCHES.


Paulo and Avaro

A Rake and a Coquette .
Trippet and Spindle :
Jack and Gatty Gainly - ,


Laertes andIms . . . ‘ ‘
The Liar : . ;
A Dévote and a Modern Youth -
Sippet, Trap, and Stint . —. i 7
Fidelia . : A ‘


§ 5. TALES AND INCIDENTS,


Valentine and Unnion
The Cornish Lovers


No, 102°
» «103
$3 104
2 «6105


» «It
» IT2
» 113
» ‘ig


1 120
» «+121
1 «122
” 123
” 124
» =125
» 126
sy 127
» «128
» «129
3? 1390
» 31
ny = 132


CONTENTS,


Clarinda and Chloé
Murder of Mrs. Eustace
Inkle and Yarico .
Brunetta and Phillis


II.—THEATRICAL.


Pleasures of Playgoing . -
Masquerades and Puppet Shows
The ‘Scornful Lady’.

The ‘ Distrest Mother’ .

The ‘Self-Tormentor’ .

On Certain Actors

Death of Betterton

Death of Estcourt

Peer the Property Man .


IV.—MISCELLANEOUS.


Raphael’s Cartoons. ‘
From Richmond to London .
Humours of Bath . :

On Dancing, and Don Saltero’s
On the Indian Kings

A Trial of Skill Se gare
On a Letter from Serjeant Hall.
On Flogging at Schools

An Editor’s Troubles

A Poetical Stock-in-Trade .

On Singularity,

Alethes and Verisimilis

Vision of Parnassus
Life of a Greek Poet
On Trade . :
On the Lottery .
The Story of Selkirk
Prince Eugene :
Demolition of Dunkirk


“Fy


PAGE
332
335
339
343


346
349
353
356
359
363
365
368


372


377
380
384
388
393
396
400
404
407
4il
414
417
"422
427
430
434
438
441
444


449


50L


INTRODUCTION.


Ir, after the fashion of the orthodox Eighteenth-Century
Essay, it were necessary to prefix a Latin motto to the bio-
graphy of Steele, that chosen would probably be Ovid’s


—Video meliora proboque:
Deteriora sequor.


But this has the -manifest drawback of most generalizations :

it is far too sweeping. No man is wholly and habitually such
‘a vile antithesis.’ That Steele had his faults can scarcely be
contested, Jt is impossible to hide them, for they lie open to
every student of his life; and it is useless to deny ‘them, for he
owns to them himself. His easy, genial nature led him con-
tinually into convivial excesses: his sanguine and impulsive
temperament into endless pecuniary embarrassments. A very
indulgent apologist might, perhaps attempt to show that his
errors were but the exaggeration of virtues: that his prodigality
was the outcome of his generosity, and his good-fellowship a
larger disclosure of his humanity. Without any such sophis-
tication, it may fairly be affirmed that his defects were not the
‘disguise of graver vices, and that he was neither a debauchee
nor a hypocrite. And if we turn from his shortcomings to
his good qualities, our task is easy. He was a well-meaning
and noble-minded man, who, whatever his own frailties, was sin-
cerely and strenuously on the side of honesty against dupli-
city,—of good against evil. He had a real love and reverence
for virtue, said Pope to Spence. Throughout the whole course
of his literary life he raised his voice unceasingly in condem-
nation of the fashionable insincerities of his day, and advocated
in their stead practical religion, domestic morality, personal
purity. Having a colleague of superlative acquirements, and
more equable, because Jess emotional, genius, his claims have


xii INTRODUCTION.


been somewhat underrated ; and he has paid the penalty of
that inexorable literary law, which, when two persons are of
nearly equal eminence, selects the higher and neglects his
fellow. ~No one would attempt to maintain that Addison was
not the superior of Steele in those qualities which go to the
making of masterpieces. But it may justly be contended that
Steele has been unfairly depressed ; and that, despite many
enthusiastic advocates, he has not yet entirely recovered from
the gratuitous disparagement of Lord Macaulay. In M. Taine’s
brilliant panorama of English literature he is barely distinguish-
able; in the useful gallery of the ‘ Men of Letters’ series he has
no monumental niche. Without retracing the old path of in-
vidious comparison, there is therefore sufficient reason why the
facts of his life should once more be recalled in a selection
from his writings ampler than any which has hitherto been
attempted.


Richard Steele was born in Dublin, and was baptised at
St. Bridget’s Church in that town, on the 12th of March, 1672’,
His father, who died when he was ‘not quite Five Years of
Age?,’ is stated to have been a lawyer. His mother was Irish. :

“Her son describes her as ‘a very beautiful Woman, of a noble
Spirit ;’? but little definite is known of her beyond what he
has thus recorded. In November, 1684, being then between
twelve and thirteen, he was nominated to the Charterhouse
by one of the governors, James Butler, first duke of Ormond.
Here he made the acquaintance of Addison, who, having been
born in May, 1672, was about six weeks his junior. At this
time the head-master of the Charterhouse was Dr. Thomas
Walker’, to whom reference is made in No. 488 of the SAec-
fator. It is probable that Steele passed through the school


1 Le.1673. Charterhouse Registers ; Epistolary Correspondence of
Sir Richard Steele, 1809, i, vii. Steele’s letters, now in: the British
Museum, to which they were presented by John Nichols, were first
printed in 1787 in two small octavo volumes. The references in this
sketch are to the enlarged edition afterwards issued in 1809.

2 Tatler, No. 181.

3 According to Mr. Forster, Dr. Ellis, to whom as ‘his Ever-Hon-
our’d Tutor,’ Steele afterwards referred in the Preface to the Christian
Hero, was head-master at the Charterhouse. This is a mistake, as Dr.
Ellis's name does not occur in the list of masters at that school. He
was, in fact, Steele’s tutor at Oxford. In the Dyce Library at South


INTRODUCTION. xiii


With fair credit. From an entry in the books he was ‘elected
to the University’ on November 1, 1689. In March, 1690, he
matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford. His name stood at the
head of the postmasters (Jortionzst@) of Merton in August
1691 ; but his university career-does not seem to have been
eventful, although he obtained the reputatton of a scholar. He
maintained his school attachment to Addison, then a demy at
Magdalen ; and there are traces of his visits to the Lichfield
deanery of Addison’s father, one of whose letters, commending
the friendship between the young men, was a cherjshed pos-
session with Steele in after days. He left college without
taking a degree; and, in a fit of mastial-enthusiasm, entered
the army as a cadet, or gentleman-volunteer ; thereby losing
(he tells us) ‘the succession to a very good estate in the
county of Wexford in Ireland?,’ presumably from the uncle
Gascoigne, to whom, in one of his letters, he acknowledges
himself indebted for ‘a liberal education®’ There is some
uncertainty as to, the regiment in which he first served. In
the -paper containing the above quotation as to his expect-
ations, he speaks of himself as donning ‘broad-sword, jack-
boots and shoulder-belt, under the command of the un-
fortunate Duke of Ormond’ (i.e. the first duke’s grandson,


Kensington there is a copy of the second edition of the Christian Hero,
presented to Ellis by the author, with this inscription :—


To
My Lov'd Tutour Dr. Ellis
With secret impulse thus do streams return
To that Capacious Ocean whence they're born:
Oh Would but Fortune come w'h bounty franght
Proportion’d to y° mind w* thou hast taught !
Till then let these unpolish’d leaves impart
The Humble Offering of a Gratefull Heart.
RicH?, STEELE,


1 Preface to the Drummer, 1722. Cf. also Tatler, No. 235, for a
charming sketch of the elder Addison, apparently from the pen of
Steele. See page 163 in this volume.

"3 Theatre, No. xi. ;

5 Epist. Corr. 1809, i, 205. Henry Gascoigne was Secretary and
confidential agent to the first and second Dukes of Ormond. In the
-Appendix to the Seventh Report of the Hist. Manuscripts Commission
1879; PP- 753-4 (Ormonde MSS.), are several interesting letters from
Steele to his uncle and aunt, in one of which he says, speaking of the
former—‘ to his goodnesse I humbly acknowledge my being.’


xiv INTRODUCTION.


who was attainted in 1715); and from his reference to his
horse, it is clear that he was a trooper. While in this capacity,
he wrote and published anonymously a poem on Queen Mary’s
funeral (March 5, 1695)'. This he dedicated to John, Lord Cutts,
who had recently been made Colonel of the Coldstream, or
Second Regiment of Foot-Guards. Cutts, though Swift dubbed
him ‘the vainest old fool alive,’ was nevertheless an accom-
plished man, and a soldier of reckless bravery. He took Steele
into his household; and there is evidence in the Marl-
borough MSS. that, in 1696 and 1697, the quondam trooper was
acting as his agent or secretary. Later he gave his protégé
a standard in his own regiment; and finally obtained for him
the rank of Captain in Lord Lucas’s fusileers. So far, the
infirmity which Steele pleads—‘of preferring the state of his
mind to that of his fortune *”—had not materially impeded his
progress.

Already, at Oxford, he had made his first essays in literature,
having composed an entire comedy. This, the very name of
which has perished, he seems to have destroyed in deference
to the candid criticisms of a friend, Mr. Parker of Merton.
But his real literary beginning is the little treatise known
commonly as the Christian Hero, although it would be better
understood if its second title, Az Axgument proving that
no Principles but those of Religion are sufficient to make a
great Man, were also remembered. Steele’s own account
of this book is to the effect that, finding the military life
‘exposed to much Irregularity,’ he wrote it ‘with a design
principally to fix upon his own Mind a strong Impression of

. Virtue and Religion, in opposition to a stronger Propensity
towards unwarrantable Pleasures*.’ This frank and perfectly


1 The Procession. ‘By a Gentleman of the Army,’ 1695. It was
afterwards published in Steele’s Poetical Miscellanies of 1714. An
account of the rare first edition, by Mr. Edward Solly, appeared in Motes
and Queries for March 7, 1885. There is a copy in the Forster Library
at South Kensington. ; ;

2 Theatre,No. xi. It may here be noted that, though Steele .dis-
tinctly says he was an ‘ Ensign of the Guards,’ his name does not occur
in the roll of the regiment given in MacKinnon’s Origin and Services of
the Coldstream Guards, 1833, ii. 458 ef seg. *

3 Mr. Steeles Apology for Himself and his Writings, 1714, p. 80.
It is an instance of the growth of scandal in memoir-making that the
writer of Steele’s life in the Biographia Britgnnica, 1763, vi. (Pt. 1),


INTRODUCTION. XV


characteristic admission of fallibility has generally been held
to amount to a confession of more than ordinary turpitude ;
but beyond the fact that the author, like most of his contem-
poraries, was easily led away by the pleasures of the table,
there is no good evidence that he led a life of exceptional
dissipation. Having—as he says—composed the Christian
ffero ‘for his own private Use,’ Steele was induced, in April
1701, to publish it for the benefit of his fellow-soldiers, with
a result which may perhaps be anticipated, to wit, ‘that from
being thought no undelightful Companion, he was soon reckoned
a disagreeable Fellow'.’ But however it may have prospered
with the military gentlemen of the Tower Guard, where it
was composed, the Chrz'stian Hero must have succeeded with
the public at large, since, a few months later (July 19, 1701), it
passed into a second and enlarged edition. The book itself
is an orderly little treatise enough, illustrating Heroism, in
its author’s own words, ‘by a view of some Eminent Heathen
(e.g. Caesar, Brutus), by a distant Admiration of the Life of
‘oux Blessed Saviour, and a near examination of that of his
Apostle St. Paul?’ This is the matter of the first three
chapters; the fourth proceeds to show that the common
motives of human action are ‘best us’d and improv’d, when
Joyn’d with Religion,” and winds up with an ingenious and
not impolitic parallek between Lewis the XIVth and William
the Deliverer. The manner of the book is far from being that
of the contemporary devotional manual, and the style, ripened
and developed, becomes the style of the Sectator, with one of
the essays in which a part of it, indeed, was afterwards in-
corporated‘. Nor are indications wanting of those sudden
felicities of expression, peculiar to Steele, while in one pas-
sage that ‘reasonable service’ of woman, which distinguishes
Pp. 3823, giving this passage as his authority, paraphrases it, thus :—
‘He spared not to indulge his genius in the wildest excesses, prosti-
tuting the exquisite charms of his conversation-talents to give his
pleasures a daintier and more poignant relish.’

1 Apology, 1714, P. 80. *

According to Gildon (Comparison between the Two Stages, 1702),

this was only ‘a Trick of the Booksellers’ to get rid of the first im-
ression—a suggestion ‘to which the date of the 3rd edition, 1710, lends
a certain colour,

8 Christian Hero, 1701, p. 78.

4 See Spectator, No. 356.


XVI INTRODUCTION.


him from most of the writers of his day, is plainly fore.
shadowed. It is ‘from want of Wit and Invention in out
Modern Gallants (he says) that the Beautiful Sex is so ab-
surdly and vitiously entertain’d by ’em: For there is [that ?]
in their tender Frame, native Simplicity, groundless Fear, and
little unaccountable contradictions, upon which there might be
Expostulations. to divert a good and Intelligent young Woman,
as well as the fulsome raptures, guilty impressions, senseless
deifications, and pretended Deaths that are every day offer’d
her!’ Nevertheless, it is easy to comprehend that, in King
William’s guard-room, where soldiers of the Havelock and
Hedley Vicars type were rarer than they are in the barracks
of to-day, the unwonted apparition of Steele’s lay-sermon
must have been sufficiently incongruous ; and that, despite its
sincerity, it exposed its author to the inconveniences he de-
scribes. ‘Every Body he knew,’ he says, ‘measured the least
Levity in his Words and Actions with the Character of a
Christian Heroe?,”’ This was no doubt inevitable ; but from
his adding that ‘one or two of his Acquaintance thought fil
to misuse him, and try their Valour upon him,’ it has been
conjectured that more serious consequences followed, and that
he was invited to defend his opinions with his sword. It may
be, indeed, that his sole duel—the date of which is nowhere
given—belongs to this period. This occurrence, the authority
for which is Dr. Thomas Amory’, is described as follows
Steele, while still a soldier, was consulted by a young com.
rade as to a challenge he was about to send, and by timely
counsel prevented him from sending it. Evil disposed friends
afterwards so prejudiced the young man against his Mentor’:
advice that he challenged Steele himself, who was then re.
covering from a fever. Having endeavoured by raillery anc
every indirect expedient to avert a meeting, Steele ultimately
yielded, counting upon his skill to disarm his opponent with.
out hurting him. Unfortunately after parrying his thrusts foi
some time, he had the ill-luck to run him through the body.
wounding him dangerously, but not mortally. Thus, apparently
was laid the foundation of that steadfast and unflinching op-
1 Christian Hero, 1701, p. 71.


2 Apology, 1714, p. 80. — oe 8 [bid., p. 80.
* Nichols’s Zat/er, 1797, i, p. 215, and zdid., 186, i, p. 267.


INTRODUCTION. xvii


position to so-called ‘affairs of honour,’ which is a distinguishing
trait in Steele’s literary character.

The Christian Hero had, however, one result, of more mo-
ment to letters than its irreverent reception by the author's
unsympathetic comrades. Being ‘slighted,’ he says, instead of
‘encouraged, for his Declarations as to Religion’... Sit was
now incumbent upon him to enliven his Character, for which
Reason he writ the Comedy called Zhe Funeral, in which (tho’
full of Incidents that move Laughter) Virtue and Vice appear
just as they ought to do! This play, the full title of which is
the Funeral, or, Grief a-la-Mode, was produced at Drury Lane
late in 1701, the principal parts being taken by Wilks, Cibber,
and Mrs. Verbruggen; and, though dated 1702, it was published
in the same year with a preface containing a fine compliment
to Lord Somers. The satire, as may be guessed from the name,
is chiefly levelled against the lawyers and undertakers, the
latter being admirably caricatured in. Mr. Sable, whose well-
known speech, when sorting his mutes, has won the warm
approval both of Thackeray and Sidney Smith :-—


. +.» Well come you that are to be Moumers in this House put on your
sad Looks, and walk by Me that I may sort you: Ha you! a little more
upon the Dismal; (forming their Countenances— this Fellow has a
good mortal Look—place him near the Corps: That Wanscot Face
must be o'top of the Stairs, that Fellow’s almost in a Fright (that looks
as if he were full of some strange misery) at the Entrance of the Hall—
So~but I'll fix you all myself——Lets have no Laughing now on any pro-
vocation : [sakes faces} Look Yonder that Hale Well-looking Puppy !
You ungrateful Scoundrel ; Did I not pity you, take you out of a Great
Man’s Service, and shew you the Pleasure of receiving Wages? Did
I not give you Ten, then Fifteen, now Twenty shillings a Week, to
be Sorrowful? and the more I give you, I think, the Glader you are ??


Scarcely less happy is the dialogue with his clerk of that
‘last great prophet of tautology,’ Mr. Puzzle, in which, like
Fielding afterwards in the Champion, Steele ridicules the longe
ambages of the Law. These subordinate characters are more
amusing than the heroes and heroines of the piece or even
Lady Brumpton herself, whom Mr. Forster praiges so highly.
But the central idea—that of a nobleman supposed to be dead,
who becomes, as it were, a spectator at his own obsequies, despite
its inconsistencies, was fairly new; the action is varied and


1 Apologys 1714, p, 80. 2 The Funeral, 1702, Act i, P- 4.
b


XViii INTRODUCTION.


sprightly; and aided by a friendly c/ague of Fusileers and Cold-
streams, the Fuseral was a success. Moreover, its author tells
us, ‘with some Particulars enlarged upon to his Advantage?’
(by which we are perhaps to understand that timely reference to
his Majesty in the Christian Hero), it obtained for him the
notice of William the Third, in whose ‘last Table-Book’ the
name of Richard Steele was noted for promotion.

The death of the king on March 8, 1702, put an end to all
these projects of advancement; and a period of two years
elapsed before Steele again tempted fate as a dramatist.
Strangely enough, his next effort was much more what one
might have expected from the author of the Christian Hero
than was the Fumeral. The Funeral, though unobjectionable
enough in its author’s day, was nevertheless far from deserving
the reproachful title of ‘homily in dialogue,’ hastily given by
Hazlitt to all Steele’s comedies, and, it may be added, ap-
plied, with greater reason, to the first essays of sentimental
comedy in France,—the drames serieux of La Chaussée. Still
its tone was infinitely more ‘cleanly and beneficial’ than that of
the Restoration Comedy, which, only a few years earlier, Jeremy
Collier had so unanswerably assailed. Steele’s second play,
however, was a deliberate attempt to put Collier’s precepts into
practice ; and ‘to write a Comedy in the Severity he required 2.”
The Lying Lovers or, the Ladies Friendship, as he christened
the new piece, was based upon the Menteur of Corneille, whose
Geronte and Dorante its Old and Young Bookwit reproduce ’®.
Several of its scenes are lively and animated; and’ there are
passages in Steele’s best manner. Here, for instance, is an
early example of that pretty caressing flattery of the ‘beautiful
Sex,’ which, to the contempt of Swift, formed so large and so
popular an element in the subsequent ‘lucubrations’ of Mr.
Isaac Bickerstaff of the Tatler -—

Young Bookwit. No Faith, the New Exchange has taken up all my
Curiosity. *

Old Bookwit. Oh! but, Son, you must not go.to Places to stare at
Women. Did you buy any thing?

Y. Book. Some Bawbles.— But my Choice was so distracted among
the pretty Merchants and their Dealers, I knew not where to run first.—


1 Apology, 1714, p. 81. 9 Tbid., 1714, p. 84.-
3 The serious or ‘sentimental’ portion of Steele’s comedy is not, how-
ever, to be found in his French model.


INTRODUCTION. xix


One little lisping Rogue, Ribbandths, Gloveths, Tippeths.—Sir, cries
another, will you buy a fine Sword-knot ; then a third, pretty Voice and
Curtsie,—Does not your Lady want Hoods, Scarfs, fine green silk
Stockins—I went by as if I had been in a Seraglio, a living Gallery of
Beauties,—staring from side to side, I bowing, they laughing,—so
made my Escape, and brought your Son and Heir safe to you, through
all these Darts and Glances.—To which indeed my Breast is not im-
pregnable ’.

The New Exchange, so often referred to by the Restoration
dramatists, must have been a favourite haunt with Captain
Steele of Lucas’s, who reverts to it on several occasions in the
Tatler and Spectator. But despite its praiseworthy motive, and
some earnest passages (blank verse!) in which, like his fellow-
sentimentalist Sedaine*, Steele attacks duelling, the Lying
Lover found little favour with its audience. The unwonted, and
not very workmanlike, mingling of the serious with the comic
is almost enough to account for this, though Steele may perhaps
be forgiven for telling the House of Commons, years afterwards,
that his play was ‘damn’d for its Piety’ There was another
reason, however, which also had its influence: it was inferior
to its predecessor.

The Lying Lover was produced at Drury Lane in December
1703. In his next comedy, which appeared in April, 1705,
Steele troubled himself less with a weighty purpose, although he
still courageously claims in his Preface to have avoided ‘every
thing that might look Ill-natur’d, Immoral, or prejudicial to
what the Better Part of Mankind hold Sacred and Honourable.’
The leading incident of The Tender Husband, that of a lover
who disguises himself as a painter, is obviously borrowed from
the Sicilien ; ou, L'Amour Peintre, of Moliére, a piece to which
Beaumarchais is also believed to have been indebted in the
Sarbier de Séville, Compared with the Funeral, the Tender
4fusband lacks freshness and originality; but it is a distinct .
improvement upon the Lyzag Lover; and some at least of
its personages have exercised a long influencé in literature.
There is a country squire, who in a measure foreshadows
the Tory Foxhunter of Addison and the Squire Western
of Fielding, while his booby son, ‘who boggles a little


1 The Lying Lover, 1704, Act ii, p. 26.
% In the Phtlosophe sans le savoir, 1765, the first title of which was
Le Duel. 3 Apology, 1714, Pp» 48. .
b2


xX INTRODUCTION,


at Marrying his Own Cousin’? is more,than a mere suggestion
of Goldsmith’s Tony Lumpkin. But the clearest anticipation
of a well-known character is that of the romance-reading Miss
Biddy, who objects to any thing so ordinary as going out
at a door to be married instead of out of a window, and sighs
for the ‘decoration of Disguise, Serenade and Adventure?’
like the veriest Lydia Languish. Biddy Tipkin was played by
Mrs. Oldfield, then in the first blossom of her ‘sweet-and-
twenty,’ and she was supported by Wilks, Norris, and the
author’s friend, Dick Estcourt, whose death afterwards gave rise
to one of Steele’s most eloquent papers in the Spectator’, The
play had a moderate success, being acted but seven times.
Addison, who had now returned from Italy, and written the
Campaign, contributed a rather colourless prologue ; and there
were also, according to Steele, ‘many applauded Stroaks’ in. the
piece itself from the same already eminent hand‘. The dedica-
tion, addressed to Addison, contains a pleasant testimony to his
friendship with the author,—‘I look (says Steele) upon my
Intimacy with You as one of the most valuable Enjoyments of
my Life. At the same time I hope I make the Town no ill
Compliment for their kind Acceptance of this Comedy, in ac-
knowledging that it has so far rais’d my Opinion of it, as to make
me think it no improper Memorial of an Inviolable Friendship,’

According to the Muses’ Mercury for January, 1707, Steele
must have been meditating a fresh piece towards the close
of 1706. But from one reason or another, its completion
appears to have been deferred until he became absorbed
with other things; and more than seventeen years slipped
away before he followed up the Tender Husband by another
play®. At this time he had not left the army®, Indeed, if the

1 The Tender Husband, 1705, Act i, p. 13.

4 The Tender Husband, Act iv, p. 46. Dennis, in his Characters and
Conduct of Sir John Edgar (Letter i, January, 1720) accuses Steele of
taking Biddy Tipkin from the Précceuses Ridicules of Moliére.

* Spectator, No. 468. : * Spectator, No. 555.

5 Tlitherto his silence has generally been attributed to the failure
of The Lying Lover. This, however, was based on an error in the
sequence of the plays. Zhe Lying Lover was the second, not the third,
of Steele’s comedies. Cf. Ward’s English Dramatic Literature, 1875, ii.
602-6; and Steele's Plays, by G. A. Aitken, Atheneum, Sept. 20, 1884.

* Marlborough MSS, (Hist. Manuscripts Commission, Eighth Report,
App., 1881, p. 23).


INTRODUCTION. XX1


sneers of Dennis, at a later date, as to his ‘wemty years blood-
less service’, contain any particle of truth, it must be assumed
that he long continued to retain his commission, although he
took no part in Marlborough’s famous campaigns. But his
position as a dramatist and literary man was fully recog-
nised, At Will’s in Russell Street, where, vice Dryden de-
ceased, Congreve now reigned as ‘arbiter of literary disputes,’
Captain Steele, of Lucas’s Fusileers, was hail-fellow-well-
met with the best contemporary Augustan wits; he was a
member of the famous Kit-Cat Club in Shire Lane; and
everywhere, with that keen eye for human nature, which is his
dominant characteristic, he was accumulating the material
upon which he afterwards drew so largely as an essayist.
Meanwhile his prospects, clouded by the death of William
the Third, seem to have brightened gradually with the as-
cendancy of Marlborough and Godolphin. In May, 1707, he
was appointed Gazetteer. ‘His next Appearance as a Writer’
—says he, speaking of himself—‘was in the Quality of the
lowest Minister of State, to wit, in the Office of Gazetteer: where
he worked faithfully according to Order, withoyt ever erring
against the Rule observed by all Ministries, to keep that Paper
very innocent and very insipid.’ ‘It is believed,’-—he adds— it
was to the Reproaches he heard every Gazette Day against the
Writer of it, that the Defendant [i. e. Steele] owes the Fortitude
‘of being remarkably negligent of what People say, which he
does not deserve?’ His salary as Gazetteer was ‘ 300/. a-year,
paying a tax of 452.;’ and he was also made one of the
gentlemen-waiters to Queen Anne’s consort, Prince George of
Denmark, the annual income of which office was £100, ‘not
subject to taxes.’ .

This very precise information is derived from a letter written
in the following September to the mother of a.lady who shortly
afterwards became Mrs, Steele. She was not Steele’s first wife.
At some earlier date which has eluded his biographers, he
had been married to a West Indian planter’s sister, who had
died, Jeaving him an estate in Barbadoes, which was let for


a Characters and Conduct of Sir John Edgar, etc., Letter iv. Theatre,
1791, 1. 435, 443. ; :

? Apology, 1714, p.81. This passage is confirmed by a letter to ‘My
Lord the Secretary,’ in the Marlborough MSS,


XxXil INTRODUCTION.


4850 per annum’. Her successor, to whom in September,
1707, he was paying his addresses, was 4 Miss, or in the fashion‘
of those days, Mistress Mary Scurlock, daughter of Jonathan
Scurlock, deceased, of Llangunnor in Carmarthen. She, too,
possessed a smalJl fortune, in which, however, her mother
had a life interest. Moreover, she was a beauty. ‘Steele
married her, it is supposed, on the 9th; and, as marriages go,
this was a happy one. Of the lady’s character nothing definite
can be guessed, beyond the fact that she was somewhat ez/-
geante (as beauties are apt to be), and apparently combined the
irreconcileable qualities of thrift and extravagance. Few of her
letters have been preserved ; but there is little doubt that she
was sincerely attached to her husband, while there is no doubt
that he was devoted to her. This may be read in every one of
the four hundred and odd thoroughly characteristic epistles,
which she so carefully preserved, and most of which the
antiquary John Nichols gave to the world in 1787, without
suppression of a single line*, It has sometimes been forgotten
that this famous correspondence was never intended for publica-
tion. On th¢ contrary, it was the express wish of the writer
that his letters should be shown to no one living. ‘Let us be
contented,’ he says, ‘with one another’s thoughts upon our words
and actions, without the intervention of other people, who can-
not judge of so delicate a circumstance as the commerce
between man and wife.’ It has been forgotten, also, that
they were entirely intimate and familiar communications, which
cannot fairly be tried by any test applied to more guarded
effusions. ‘As Keys do open Chests, so Letters open Breasts,’
says the old adage ; and if it be true of any written utterances it
is certainly true of these. They comé to us exactly as they
slipped from the hasty and impetuous pen of Steele ; and they
have every mark of the moment—seldom more than a moment
—in which they were penned. They were thrown off at all
times, in all places ; and they record faithfully all his fugitive
hopes, regrets, yearnings, failings and feelings. They treat of
all themes, from Prince George’s death and the most pious
aspirations to the despatch of a ‘bottle of tent,’ or the safe
conduct of a parcel of walnuts. It would be easy to describe


1 Epist. Corr. of Sir R. Steele, 1809, i, p. 112,
2 Epist. Corr., 1809, i, v, vi. 3 [bid. i. 117,


INTRODUCTION. Xxili


them at length; but a few examples chosen without much
selection, will give a better idea of their general character than.
any summary, however detailed and explicit.
Aug. 30, 1707
MADAM

I begg pardon that my paper is not guilt but I am fore'd
to write from a Collee-house where I am attending about businesse.
There is a dirty croud of Busy faces all around me talking politicks and
managing stocks while all my Ambition, all my wealth is Love! Love,
which animates my Heart, sweetens my Humour, enlarges my Soul, and
affects every Action of my Life. ’Tis to my Lovely Charmer I owe that
many Noble Ideas are continually affixed to my words and Actions; it
is the naturall effect of that generous passion to create some similitude
in the Admirer of the object admir'd. Thus, my Dear, am I every day
to improve from so sweet a Companion. Look up, my Fair One, to that
Heav'n which made thee such, and join with me to implore its influence
on our tender innocent hours, and beseech the Author of Love, to blesse
the Rights He has ordain’d, and mingle with our happinesse a just sense of
our transient Condition, and a resignation to His will, which only can
regulate our minds to a steddy endeavour to please each other. I am for
ever Y° Faithful Ser"',

R: Sreeve!.


Sepbr. 1gt, 1707.
Sat JAMEs’s COFFEE-HOUSE.
Mapa
It is the hardest thing in the World to be in Love, and yet
attend businesse. As for me, all that speake to me find me out, and I
must Lock myself up, or other people will do it for me.
A gentleman ask’d me this morming what news from Lisbon, and
I answer’d she’s exquisitly handsome. Another desir'd to know when I
had been last at Hampton-Court, I reply’d twill be on Tuesday come
Se‘nnight?, Prethee Allow me at least to kisse your hand before that day,
that my mind may be in some composure. Oh Love
A thousand Torments dwell about thee,
Yet who would Live to Live without thee ?
Methinks I could write a volume to you, but all the Language on earth
Would fail in saying how much, and with what disinterested passion,
am Ever Y*,
RicuH?, STEELE,


1 This and the following letter were afterwards published in Spectator,
No. 142. The original MSS. at the British Museum show the altera-
tions which Steele made to adapt them for the press. The word ‘guilt '
(line 1, letter 1) was first altered to ‘ guilded,’ then struck out and ‘finer’
substituted. In letter 2, ‘ Windsor’ was put instead of *‘ Hampton Court,’
which might have betrayed the writer. These two letters are here re-
produced trom the MS. as originally written. Another of Steele's letters
was printed in Zatler, No. 35.

4 His marriage.


XXIV INTRODUCTION.


The above letters were pre-nuptial; the next were written
after marriage.
TENNIS-CourT COFFEE-HOUSE.
May 5, 1708.
Dear WIFE,

I hope I have done this day what will be pleasing to you ;
in the mean time shall lie this night at a barber's, one Leg, over-against
the Devil tavern at Charing Cross. I shall be able to confront the fools
who wish me uneasy, and shall have the satisfaction to see thee chearful
and at ease.

If the printer's boy be at home, send him hither; and let Mrs. Todd
send by the boy my night-gown, slippers, and clean-linen. You shail


hear from me early in the morning.
Ricu. STEELE.


LorpD SUNDERLAND’s OFFICE
May 19, 1708, 11 o'clock.
DEAR PRUE,

I desire of you to get the coach and yourself ready as
soon as you can conveniently, and call for me here, from whence we will
ga and spend some time together in the fresh air in free conference. Let
my best periwig be put in the coach-box, and my new shoes, for it is
a comfort to be well-dressed in agreeable company. You are vital life to
your obliged, affectionate husband, and humble servant


RicH. STEELE.


; Aug, 12, 1708


MADAM, ‘ ;
I have your letter, wherein you let me know, that the little


dispute we have had is far from being a trouble to you; nevertheless, I
assure you, any disturbance between us is the greatest affliction to me
imaginable. You talk of the judgement of the world; I shall never
govern my actions by it, but by the rules of morality and right reason,
I love you better than the light of my eyes, or the life blood in my heart ;
but, when I have let you know that, you are also to understand, that
neither my sight shall be so far inchanted, or my affection so much master
of me, as to make me forget our common interest. To attend my busi-
ness as I onght, and improve my fortune, it is necessary that my time and
my will should be under no direction but my own. Pray give my most
humble service to Mrs, Binns. I write all this, rather to explain my own
thoughts to you than answer your letter distinctly, I inclose it to you,
that, upon second thoughts, you may see the disrespectful manner in
which you treat your affectionate, faithful husband,

‘ Ricu. STEELE.


INTRODUCTION. XXV


Sept. 20. 1708
Dear PRUE,

If a servant I sent last night got to Hampton-court, you
received 29 walnuts and a letter from me. I enclose the Gazette; and
am, with all my soul,

Your passionate lover, and faithful husband,

RicH._ STEELE.


Since I writ the above, I have found half an hundred more walnuts,
which I send herewith. My service to Binns,


Monnay, 7 AT NIGHT
Sept. 27, 1708.
Dear PRUE,

You see that you are obeyed in everything, and that J write
over-night for the day following, I shall now in earnest, by Mr, Clay’s
good conduct, manage my business with that method as shall make me
easy. The news, J am told, you had last night, of the taking of Lille,
does not prove true ; but I hope we shall have it soon. I shall send by
to-morrow’s coach.

I am, dear Prue, a little in drink, but at all times your faithful husband,
. Ricu, STEELE.


HALF-HOUR AFTER TEN
* Sept. 28, 1708,
DEAR PRUE,
It being three hours since I writ to you, I send this to assure
you I am now going very soberly to bed, and that you shall be the last
thing in my thoughts to-night, as well as the first to-morrow moming.


am, with the utmost fondness,
Your faithful, husband,
Ric. STEELE.


Such are the majority of the letters in this memorable series,
Surely one of the most unsophisticated exhibitions in literature.

e know of nothing which can be compared to it except Swift's
Journal to Stella, and Swift’s journal was composed under
Testrictions as regards his correspondents, which were quite
unknown to Steele. As the record runs on, there are signs of
the amantium tre and the vedintegratio amoris, of haste and
worry, of debt and difficulty; but to the end the kind and
Steadfast heart of Steele beats out undaunted ; and to the end
his wife is his ‘capricious Beauty,’ his ‘absolute Governess,’ his
‘dear, dearest Prue.’ ‘I wish you would learn of Mr. Steele to
write to your Wife,’ says clever Lady Mary Wortley Montagu to


xXxvi INTRODUCTION.


her husband. In the eighteenth century such a sequence of mis-
sives from a lover to his mistress would be exceptional : from a
husband to his wife they are almost unique. Those to whom
their often domestic details seem trivial or ridiculous will do
well to remember in what period they were written, and their
unfeigned candour and absolute purity of tone will more than
excuse their minor blemishes.

Lovable as he was, it would be disingenuous, ds well as idle,
to attempt to show that Steele was a prudent man, still less
‘that he was exempt from the error of his age, indicated in one
of the foregoing quotations. His genial, gregarious nature
made him an easy prey to the opportunities of conviviality,
while he was too quick-feeling and impulsive for any thing like
thought for the morrow. Hence, throughout his whole lifetime,
he was scarcely ever free from money difficulties. When he
married he had probably over-estimated his means, and he
began his married life upon his fictitious, and not his actual
income. Anxious to do honour to his wife’s expectations, he
took a town house in Bury Street, St. James’s, to which he
afterwards (1708) added a little cottage at Hampton Wick,
christened unambitiously, from its proximity to the palace, by
the name of ‘The Hovel.’ Here he was the near. neighbour of.
Lord Halifax, another arrangement which was but ill calculated
to promote economy. Then ‘dearest Prue’ must have her
coach and two, sometimes four, as well as a little saddle-
horse, which occasionally eats off its ‘head in town. To meet
all this prodigality, he has to borrow £1000 of Addison, which
he repays. But further borrowings follow, which drag on in a
most discreditable manner for years to come. Towards the
close of 1708, he is seriously embarrassed, his wife’s confine-
ment is approaching, an execution for rent is put into the
Bury Street house, and he has a difficulty in getting bail. He
has been trying for the post of Gentleman Usher of the Privy
Chamber, worth £200 a year, with £100 perquisites; and a
letter of three days later records the death of Prince George of
Denmark, by which he loses his place, though in common
with all the -Prince’s attendants, he gets a bounty of £100
per annum. In December he has great hopes,—all hopes were
great with sanguine Steele,—of succeeding, so he tells his wife,
to ‘her rival Addison,’ who is vacating his office of Under


INTRODUCTION. XXVii


Secretary for that of Secretary of State to the Lord-Lieutenant
of Ireland, Lord Wharton. The result of this expectation is
thus stated in the recently published ‘Wentworth Papers’
‘ Mr. Addisson’—says gossipping and incoherent Peter Went-
worth—‘is certain of going over Secretary to Lord Wharton,
and Mr. Steel put in for his place, but Lord Sunderland has
put him off with a promise to get him the next place he shall
ask that may be keep (szc) with his Gazette. I hear it is one
of the Scotch members that is to come into Mr. Addisson
place, but J don’t know his name yet.’ This is confirmed by
another of Steele’s letters in which it is stated that the for-
tunate candidate was a North Briton (Mr. R. Pringle). And
So time wears away, until we come to the first great enterprise
of Steele’s life, the establishment of the eighteenth-century
periodical essay.

The letter to which we last referred is dated January 20,
1709. On the 12th of April following, Steele issued, without
much warning, the first number of the Zaé/er, a name, he tells
us, not without some suspicion of irony, invented in honour of
the fair sex. Its supposed author was ‘ Isaac Bickerstaff, the
pseudonym already employed by Swift in those fortunate
Predictions for the Year 1708, by which he had overwhelmed
poor Partridge, the starmonger, with such inextinguishable
laughter. In external appearance the new venture was
homely enough ; and not entirely free from the imputations
of ‘Tobacco Paper’ and ‘Scurvy Letter ’,’ cast upon it later by
an outraged correspondent. The days of publication were Tues-
day, Thursday, and Saturday, being those on which the post
left London ; and the price, after the first four numbers, which
Were given away grafis, was a penny. For country subscribers
there was, subsequently to No. 26, a special issue with a blank
half-sheet for transmission by post, which cost a half-penny
more. According to No. 1, to which and many succeeding
Numbers, was prefixed the well-worn Quicguid agunt homines,
it professed to embrace ‘Accounts of Gallantry, Pleasure, and
Entertainment,’ ‘under the article of White’s Chocolate House,’
poetry under that of Will’s, learning under the Grecian, foreign
and domestic news (in which the author counted largely upon


1 Letters of Peter Wentworth. . Went, Papers, 1883, p. 68.
* See Dedication to Vol. i, 1710. 3” Zatler, No, 160,


xXVil INTRODUCTION.


his position as Gazetteer) under St. James’s Coffee-House, and
whatsoever remained from ‘my own Apartment. He was
assisted in his records by an ubiquitous familiar named
Pacolet, who makes his first appearance in No. 13. With
the progress of the paper its scope widened; and in the
Dedication of vol. i. to Arthur Maynwaring, its projector was
able to claim for it a more elevated mission than that of merely
retailing the gossip of the Town, namely, ‘to expose the false
Arts of Life, to pull off the disguises of Cunning, Vanity and
Affectation, and to recommend a general Simplicity in our
Dress, our Discourse, and our Behaviour.’

' At the time these words were written, Addison had played
but a small part in the fortunes of the Tatler, When the first
number appeared he was starting for Ireland ; and it does not
seem that he had even been consulted by his tend as to the
new project, though it is probable that Swift, whose pseudonym
it borrowed, had some inkling of the undertaking. But, in a
reference to the beauty of the Vergilian epithet in No. 6, Addi-
son recognised a remark of his own ; and he shortly afterwards
offered his services to Steele. His earliest known contribution
is part of No. 18, wherein the distress of the News Writers at
the prospect of peace is ironically treated; and:thenceforth his
assistance was regularly given, first in the form of notes and
suggestions, afterwards in such finished papers as the Political
Upholsterer, No. 155, Tom Folio, No. 158, the Adventures of a
Shilling, No. 249, Frozen Voices, No. 254, andso on. Gradually
the news element began to fade out of the paper, and the essay
to take its place. Then, in January 1711, with No. 271, the
Tatler ceased as suddenly as it began,—the colourable reason
being that the public had penetrated the editor’s disguise, and
that the object of the work was wholly lost by ‘his [Steele's]
being so long understood as the Author.’ ‘ The general Purpose
of the Whole,’ he says, ‘has been to recommend Truth, Inno-
cence, Honour, and Virtue, as the chief Ornaments of Life; but
I considered, that Severity of Manners was absolutely necessary
to him who would censure others; and for that Reason, and that
only, chose to talk in a Mask. I shall not carry my Humility
so far as to call myself a vicious Man, but at the same Time
must confess, my Life is at best but pardonable: And with no
greater Character than this, a Man would make an indifferent


INTRODUCTION, XXiX


Progress in attacking prevailing and fashionable Vices, which
Mr. Bickerstaff has done with a Freedom of Spirit, that would
have lost both its Beauty and Efficacy, had it been pretended to
by Mr. Steele '.

This, if it signifies anything at all, must be taken to imply that
some of Steele’s contemporaries, as in the case of the Christian
Hero, had been too narrowly contrasting ‘ the least Levity in
his Words and Actions’ with the admirable precepts of the
Shire Lane philosopher. But other and more urgent motives
for the cessation of Mr. Bickerstaff’s Lucubrations have been
suggested. After the accession of the Tories in August, 1710,
Steele lost his post as Gazetteer, and it became more difficult to
continue the paper on the old lines when the sources of privi-
leged information were sealed. Then again Addison had re-
turned from his Irish Secretaryship; and his assistance, already
so valuable in developing its social and literary side, was more
intimately available. In these circumstances, it would be better
to begin afresh with a new venture, in which the new character-
istics would be retained, while the old ones were wholly aban-
doned. There was already, the printer reported, material for
four volumes ; and Steele took leave of his subscribers. In his
general preface to the collected edition, he inserted an oft-
quoted compliment to his friend and ally. ‘I have only one Gen-
tleman, who will be nameless, to thank for any frequent Assist-
ance to me, which indeed it would have been barbarous in him to
have denied to one with whom he has lived in an Intimacy from
Childhood, considering the great Ease with which he is able to
dispatch the most entertaining pieces of this Nature. This good
Office he performed with such Force of Genius, Humour, Wit,
and learning, that I fared like a distressed Prince, who calls in a
Powerful Neighbour to his aid; I was undone by my Auxiliary ;
When I had once called him in, I could not subsist without De-
Pendance on him?*,

In this passage Steele gives an example of that generous
Self-suppression, to which Fielding refers in his Journey from
this World to the Next. There can be no doubt of the fine
Qualities of Addison’s contributions, and of the material aid
which they afforded to Steele in determining his original design.


1 Tatler, Ne. 271. 2 Preface to Vol. iv, 1711.


XXX INTRODUCTION.


But his own part in the enterprise was by no means contemp-
tible. In the first place, he had invented it, for it is idle, as
some would, to transfer the credit of this to Swift, merely
because he had contrived the lay-figure of Bickerstaff. Nor is
it necessary, except as an exercise in ingenuity, to connect it
very closely with the somewhat similar productions of Defoe.
Secondly, by far the larger proportion of papers are Steele’s
own; and, in nearly every case, the new departure, the fresh ex-
tension, comes from him. Often Addison’s most brilliant efforts
are built upon a chance hint thrown off at random by Stcele’s
hurrying pen. In this conjunction, in short, Steele seems to
have been the originating and Addison the elaborating intellect.
What Steele with his keen sympathy and ‘ veined humanity’
found in ‘ conversation ’—to use the eighteenth-century term for
‘commerce with the world—the delicate lapidary skill of his
more placid and introspective companion turned in the study
into those gems of graceful irony, which, if only by reason of
their style and polish, must outlive more ambitious performances.
They are faultless in their art, and in this way achieve an ex-
cellence which was beyond the range of Steele’s quicker and
more impulsive nature. But for words which the heart finds
when the head is seeking ; for phrases glowing with the white
heat of a generous emotion; for sentences which throb and
tingle with manly pity or .courageous indignation, we must go
to the essays of Steele.

Nothing so clearly illustrates the relations of the two writers
as the conception and progress of the Club, to whose members
we are introduced in No, 2 of the new paper, which, a few
weeks later, took the place of the concluded Zatler. In No. 1,
Addison, embodying some of his own characteristics, had care-
fully delineated the portrait of the taciturn and contemplative
‘looker-on,’ from whom the journal borrowed its name. In the
essay that followed, Steele threw off his sketch of that famous
friendly gathering, which, to most people, is the most memorable
thing in the Spectator. The foremost of the group is Sir Roger
de Coverley. Tickell, Addison’s protégé and biographer, says
that these two papers were ‘ projected [by Addison] in concert
with Steele’ This may be true; but it is also probable that
each writer took to himself those parts of the scheme which he
held to be most peculiarly his own. The picture of Mr, Spec-


INTRODUCTION. XXXi


tator is just such a finished study as might have originated with
the creator of Tom Folio or Ned Softly in the Za¢/er, while the
‘conversation-piece’ of the Club is equally characteristic of the
broader and hastier hand which drew Sir Jeoffrey Notch and
the little knot of notables, who assembled nightly at the
Trumpet!. But Addison saw in Steele’s kit-cat of Sir Roger the
occasion for a full-length after his own heart. The plan of
the periodical permitted either writer to exhibit any of the
members of the society; and Addison was thus enabled to
build upon Steele’s foundation that inimitable reproduction of
the Tory country-gentleman of his day which ranks beside the
best creations of the school of fiction which it preceded and
anticipated. Will Honeycomb, Captain Sentry, Sir Andrew
Freeport, the Templar, the Clergyman, all Steele’s other concep-
tions pale before this’ central figure; and Steele’s best social
Papers, and Addison’s best literary criticisms, would have had
far less currency if Sir Roger de Coverley had never existed.
The first number of the SZecfator was issued on March J,
1711. Until December 6, 1712, it was continued daily with in-
creased success, and an indomitable vitality which survived even
the baleful Stamp Act of August in that year. While the JZed-
leys and Flying Posts of Grub Street sank under the deadly
half-penny tax to rise no more, the little leaflet of Addison and
Steele audaciously doubled its price (a penny) and yet retained
\ts readers. Towards the close of its career the sale must have
teached 10,000 copies, and we have Steele’s own authority? for
Saying that in volume form it acquired a further circulation of
Sooo. Of the two colleagues, Addison was, in this instance, the
larger contributor. Out of a total of 555, his papers numbered
274 to Steele’s 236, leaving only 45 for Budgell, Hughes, and
(with exception of Pope) the other comparatively undistinguished
Occasional assistants. As in the concluding Zaf/er, Steele does
Not omit, when winding up its successor, to make admiring
reference to his still anonymous auxiliary. ‘I am, indeed, much
more proud of his long-continued Friendship, than I should
be of the Fame of being thought the Author of any Writings
which he himself is capable of producing. I remember when
I finished the Tender Husband, 1 told him there was nothing


1 See Tatler, No. 132. 3 Spectator, No. 555.


xxxil INTRODUCTION.


I so ardently wished, as’ that we might some time or other
publish a Work written by us both, which should bear the
Name of the Monument in Memory of our Friendship?)

Why the Sfectator was thus brought to an end in the full
tide of its success is difficult to understand ; and it is nowhere
very satisfactorily explained. Weariness of the scheme may
have had something to do with it ; and it is also not unlikely
that, in the high-running strife of Whig and Tory, Steele’s eager
spirit of partisanship, never entirely held in check by the reti-
cences of the social essay, was beginning to disquiet him, as it
had already done in the Zad¢ler. During the ‘progress of the
Sfectator, his patriotism had broken out in a little pamphlet
called Zhe Englishman's Thanks to the Duke of Marlborough,
occasioned by the disgrace in December, 1711, of that great
Captain? ; and, even in the pages of the Sfectator itself, there
had been indications of his inability to maintain the ‘exact
Neutrality,’ announced at the outset of the paper*. ‘He has
been mighty impertinent of late,’ says Swift, writing to Stella in
July, 1712. ‘I believe he will very soon lose his employment.’
Nevertheless, in the Gzardian, with which, on the 12th of March,
1713, he again appeared as a periodical essayist, introducing a
fresh plan and a new set of characters, he continues to make
profession of abstinence from political questions. While declar-
ing himself, as regards the government of the church, a Tory,
and with respect to the State, a Whig, Mr. Nestor Ironside goes
on to say :—‘I am past all the regards of this life, and have
nothing to manage with any person or party ; but to deliver
myself as becomes an old man, with one foot in the grave,

‘and one who thinks he is passing to eternity*’ ‘Matters of
state’ were, however, too strong for Richard Steele. He was
an ardent adherent of King William and the Revolution. The
air was charged with faction, and rife with rumours of Jacobite
plots against the Hanoverian succession. Thus it came about
that the Guardian, beginning brilliantly with a staff which, in
addition to Addison, included Berkeley and Pope, soon deviated


1 Spectator, No, 555.

4 This event, on Swift’s side, prompted the rancorous Fadle of Midas,
February 14, 1712.

* V. Spectator, No. 1. Cf. also Spectator, No. 262.

* Guardian, No.1.


INTRODUCTION. xxxili
into controversy. The first manifestation of this was an in-
dignant defence, in No. 41, of Lady Charlotte Finch, afterwards
Duchess of Somerset, who, because her father, the Earl of Not-
tingham, had become obnoxious to the Tory party, was herself
assailed, incidentally, by the Tory Examiner. ‘No sooner was,
Dismal [her father] among the Whigs,’ said the writer, ‘and
confirm’d past retrieving, but Lady Char—te is taken knotting!
in} Saint James’s Chapel, during Divine Service, in the imme-
dite presence both of God and Her Majesty, who were affronted
together, that the Family might appear to be entirely come over.’
Steele rightly considered this to be a wholly unwarrantable
attack, for political purposes, upon an unoffending young lady,
and he expostulated with considerable warmth. The Examiner
replied feebly by counter-charges against the personalities of the
Tatler; and in May Steele vindicated himself over his own
signature?, A month later his irrepressible enthusiasm broke
into open warfare with the Ministers, He threw up his Com-
Inissionership of Stamps in a letter to the Lord Treasurer of
Juhe 4, resigned his pension as Prince George’s gentleman in
waiting, and shortly afterwards attacked the Government upon
the burning question of the demolition of the Dunkirk fortifica-
tions. This, which had been stipulated in the Treaty of
Utrecht, was now, if certain ugly rumours could be credited, to
be} tacitly set aside. Steele’s watchful patriotism took fire.
‘The British nation’—he wrote imperatively in No. 128 of the
Guardian—‘ expects the demolition of Dunkirk” To .this
Sutspoken declaration the Zxamzner replied by charging him
With ingratitude and disloyalty. Steele thereupon followed up
the controversy with a pamphlet called Zhe Importance of Dun-
irk consider d, etc., addressed to the Bailiff of Stockbridge, for
WHich borough he had just been returned to the House of

Ommons*, Meanwhile, upon some ill-explained disagreement


.., This was a fashionable occupation ‘under Anne. Cf. Addison in
SStctator, No. 536; and Dorset’s poem on Knotting.

1 VY, Examiner, May %, and Guardian, May 12 (No. 53).

4 The Importance of Dunkirk consider’d, etc., was published Sep-
tember 22,1713. On October 31 Swift answered it by a bitter and
Vindictive pamphlet, entitled Zhe Jonfortance of the Guardian consider'd,
tn which the note of personal animosity is plainly audible. It is im-
Possible, in our brief space, to enter upon the tangled tale of Swift's
(uayrel with Steele at this period. Political differences had already for.


Cc


XXXIV INTRODUCTION.


with his publisher Tonson, the Guardian was abruptly dis-
continued, and immediately succeeded by the Englishman, ‘a
sequel,’ designed to give greater latitude to his political con-
victions. With the same object, he published, in January 1714,
along pamphlet called the Cv7szs, in which, largely aided by Mr.
William Moore of the Temple (who probably supplied the first
draft), and fortified by the encouraging criticisms of Addison,
Hoadly, and others, he reviewed the whole question of the
Hanoverian succession. The Cyis/s was widely circulated ;
its immediate result being that Steele had no Sooner taken
his seat as member for Stockbridge than he was accused of
uttering seditious publications, and, in brief space, called upon
for his defence. Though taken to some extent by surprise, he
made this with great dexterity, and unsuspected powers of
oratory, speaking—says the old author of the Reign of Queen
Anne—‘ for near Three -Hours... with such a Temper,'Mo-
desty, Unconcern, easy and manly Eloquence, as gave entire
Satisfaction to all, who were not inveterately prepossess’d
against him.’ Addison sat near him to prompt him as occasion
required,-while Walpole (afterwards Sir Robert), General Stan-
hope, and other leading Whigs addressed the House in his
favour. Young Lord Finch, too, Lady Charlotte’s brother, who,
like Steele himself, was a new member, also rose in defence of
his sister’s champion. Overcome by timidity, however, he
presently sat down exclaiming, ‘It is strange I cannot speak
for this man, though I could willingly fight for him.’ Those in


some time past estranged them. Swift, nevertheless, seems to have
endeavoured to help Steele with those in power, and he thought him
ungrateful. Steele, on the other hand, fancied, rightly or wrongly, that
he detected Swift's influence, if not his pen, in the xamener’s attacks on
Lord Nottingham and himself; and his replies, based on this conjecture,
stung Swift to the quick. When later Steele's Cvis¢s came out, Swift re-
lied to that also in the Publick Spirit of the Whigs, etc. (February, 1714) ;
and it is now practically admitted that he inspired, if he did not actually
write, a particularly personal Character of Richard St—le, Esq., by Toby,
Abel's kinsman (i.e. Abel Roper of the Tory Postboy), usually fathered
upon an obscure William Wagstaffe. Swift carried far more guns than
Steele in this kind of conflict, and his method is more noisome and
deadly ; but any one who will take the trouble to read the whole of these
pamphlets to-day will rapidly be convinced that if Swift had the ad-
vantage in irony and logic, he cannot compete with Steele in straight-
forwardness or magnanimity.


INTRODUCTION. XXXV


his immediate neighbourhood caught up the muttered words ;
they were quickly repeated; and the ready outburst of en-
couraging applause brought the neophyte again on his feet,
when, it is recorded, he made an effective speech. But neither
Lord Finch’s maiden rhetoric, nor Steele’s more powerful
advocates, could save him from what, with pardonable energy,
he terms ‘the arbitrary Use of Numbers,’ and the ‘insolent
and unmanly Sanction of a Majority? On the 18th of March,
1714, he was expelled the House. In an AZology for Himself
and his Writings, published in the following October, from
which we have already made several quotations, he gives an
account of this episode in his career, which is well worth con-
Sulting. His reputation in another way has overshadowed his
Political pamphlets; but the extreme hostility which they
aroused in his opponents is a certain testimony to their con-
lemporary import.
He was not of a'nature to be long cast down by his misfor-
tune; and turned anew to literature. A month before his
expulsion, he had closed the Zxglishman, and almost imme-
diately afterwards began the Lover, which was more in the
Sfectator manner, In No. 11 of this, issued but two days after
his senatorial disgrace, he printed a whimsical account of it, in
“which Harley (the Lord Treasurer) figured as ‘Sir Anthony
Crabtree,’ and Foley, the Auditor, who had impeached him, as
“Brickdust” The Lover, however, in the turn things had taken,
Offered too little opportunity for the more exciting topics, that,
for the moment, engaged his attention. Before it was discon-
tinued, he started, in direct opposition to the Tory Examiner,
another and more distinctly political paper, the Reader, From
No. 6 of this, it appears that he contemplated undertaking that
*nterprise, which afterwards drifted from Glover to Mallet, and
Was ultimately performed, only in this century, by Archdeacon
Coxe, the story of Marlborough’s campaigns. He had also
Published, during the progress of the Exgléshman, a volume of
Poetical Miscellanies, which included an elaborate dedication
to Congreve, and was enriched by contributions from Pope and
Gay. To this succeeded a treatise on the Romzzsh Ecclestas-
tical History. of late Years, a Letter on the Bill for preventing
the growth of Schism, and a further pamphlet on the Dunkirk
question, The last literary effort with which he was con-
c2


XXXVI INTRODUCTION.


nected in 1714, if the AZology be excepteu, was tne iunrce
mysterious volumes known as Zhe Ladies Library, to which in
all probability he did little more than supply the Preface,
Dedications, and a few editorial touches. The first of the dedi-
cations is addressed to the Countess of Burlington ; and the
second to the Mrs. Catharine Bovey, whom a rather futile tradi-
tion has associated with Sir Roger de Coverley’s ‘ perverse
widow’ The third, couched in an admirable strain of loyal
and affectionate eulogy, is to Steele’s own wife, who, surrounded
by her family, may be supposed to be depicted in Du Guernier’s
frontispiece. It would be unjust not to give an extract from it,
if only to show that in an age of adulatory addresses, there
exists at least one which is neither venal nor feigned :

It is impossible for me to look back on many Evils and Pains which I
have suffered since we came together, without a Pleasure which is not to
be expressed, from the Proofs I have had in those Circumstances
of Your unwearied Goodness. -How often'has Your Tenderness re-
moved Pain from my sick Head? How often Anguish from my afflicted
Heart? With how skilful Patience have I known You comply with the
vain Projects which Pain has suggested, to have an aking Limb removed
by Journeying from one side of a Room to another; how often, the next
Instant travelled the same Ground again, without telling Your Patient it
was to no Purpose to change his Situation? If there are such Beings as
Guardian Angels, thus are they employed ; I will no more believe one of
them more Good, in its Inclinations, than I can conceive it more charming
in its Form than my Wife.

But I offend, and forget that what I say to You is to appear in Pub-
lick : You are so great a Lover of Home, that I know it will-be irksome
to You to go into the World even in an Applause. I will end this with-
out so much as mentioning Your Little Flock, or your own amiable
Figure at the Head of it: That I think them preferable to ail other
Children, I know is the Effect of Passion and Instinct; that I believe
You the best of Wives, I know proceeds from Experience and Reason *,


There is little that is hopeless or broken in these graceful
and tender words. The fact is, that before Zhe Ladies Library
was published, the tide had again turned for Steele. In
August Queen Anne died; and with the landing of her
successor at Greenwich, honours began incontinently to rain
upon the courageous champion of the Protestant succession.
He was made a deputy lieutenant of the county of Middlesex,
Surveyor of the Royal Stables at Hampton Court, and (like


l J", Spectator, No.113.
2 The Ladies Library, 1714, iii. - ‘


INTRODUCTION. XXXVI


Fielding after him) a justice of peace. Another and more
lucrative office also fell to his lot. With Queen Anne’s death,
the license of Drury Lane also expired; and the managers,
enlisting Steele’s services to obtain its renewal, invited him to
join them, and supervise the theatre at a salary of £700 a
year. By a subsequent arrangement, under which the license
gave place to a patent, this sum was further increased to
Zlo000. In Cibber’s Apology, the story of this transaction is
related at length, and, mcidentally, it affords an illustration of
the estimation in which Steele’s powers as a dramatic critic
were held by the players. ‘We knew,’ says Cibber, ‘the
Obligations the Stage had to his Writings ; there being scarce
a Comedian of Merit, in our whole Company, whom his Zatlers
had not made better, by his publick Recommendation of them.
And many Days had our House been particularly fill’d by the
Influence and Credit of his Pen.’ Steele, Cibber continues,
was so highly pleased with the offer, ‘that had we been all
his own sons, no unexpected Act of filial Duty could have more
endear’d us to him!’

The patent for Drury Lane was received from the Lord
Chancellor on the 19th January, 1715. The next day Steele
set out for Boroughbridge in Yorkshire, for which place he was
Shortly afterwards elected member. In April of the same
year, he drew up, for the Lord-Lieutenant of Middlesex, an
address to King George, upon presentation of which he was
knighted. On the 28th May following, being his Majesty’s
birthday, the new knight celebrated that event by an enter-
tainment in his house in Villiers Street, York Buildings, Strand,
at which there were more than two hundred guests. Tickell
Wrote a prologue, spoken by Miss Younger ; and there was an
&pilogue, attributed to Addison, pleasantly rallying the foibles
Of the good-natured host. After touching upon some early and
frustrate enquiries for the philosopher’s stone, which, it appears,
had been one of the genuine enterprises of the pseudo-Bicker-
Staff, it proceeds thus :—

That Project sunk, you saw him entertain
A notion more chimerical and vain,


To give chaste Morals to ungovern’d youth,
To Gamesters honesty, to Statesmen truth ;


* Cibber’s AZology, 1740, pp. 289-90.


XXXViil INTRODUCTION,


To make you virtuous all; 2 thought more bold,
Than that of changing Dross and Lead to Gold.
But now to greater actions he aspir'd,

For still his Country’s good our Champion fir'd ;
In Treaties vers’d, in Politicks grown wise,

He look’d on DUNKIRK with suspicious eyes ;

Into her dark foundations boldly dug,

And overthrew in fight the fam’d StruR Tuccue',
Still on his wide unwearied view extends,

Which I may tell, since none are here but Friends ;
In a few months he is not without hope,

But ’tis a secret[,] to convert the Pope.

Of this, however, he'll inform you better

Soon as his Holiness receives his Letter *.


The last lines, says Nichols, refer to a dedication, ostensibly
by Steele, but in reality by Hoadly, prefixed to An Account of
the State of the Roman Catholick Religion throughout the World,
atranslation from the Italian of Urbano Cerri, which Sir Richard
reprinted in 1715. The above epilogue was entrustéd to Wilks,
and the little shafts of Mtire it contained lost none of their
point under that admirable actor’s delivery. From the account
which Steele himself gives of this event, it seems that it was
intended as the prelude to another of his multifarious projects
—the Censorium, a name borrowed from the room in Villiers
Street where it was to be held, and which, so far as it is
intelligible, was to consist of a kind of periodical conwersazione
for both sexes, enlivened by Music, acting, and recitations*,


' Mons. Tugghe was the Deputy of the Magistrates of Dunkirk. .
(See Notes to No. 133 in this volume.) ,

* Town-Talk, No, 4.

3 Town-Talk, No 4. It is with reference to the Censorium (the
theatre, not the entertainment named after it) that Drake tells the
following anecdote :+‘Sir Richard had constructed a very elegant
theatre in his house for the recitation of select passages from favourite
authors, and wishing to ascertain whether it was as well calculated
to gratify the ear as the eye, desired the carpenter, who had completed
the work, to ascend a pulpit placed at one end of the building and
speak a few sentences. ‘The carpenter obeyed, but when mounted
found himself utterly at a loss for the matter of his harangue. Sir
Richard begged he would pronounce whatever first came into his head.
Thus encouraged, the new-made orator began, and looking steadily
at the knight, in a voice like thunder, exclaimed, “Sir Richard Steele,
here has I, and these here men, been doing your work for three months,
and never seen the colour of your money. When are you to pay us?
I cannot pay my journeymen without money, and money I must have.”


INTRODUCTION. XXXIX


Amid all these distractions, Steele continued to occupy
himself with literature; and in July 1715, began a second
volume of the Znglishinan. To this succeeded Yown-Zalk,
the Zea-Tadble, and Chit-Chat; none of which extended beyond
a few numbers. In 1716, after the suppression of the northern
rebellion, he was made a Commissioner for the forfeited
Estates, and spent some time in Scotland. Returning again
in 1718, he obtained a patent for the Fish-Pool, a plan, fully
described in a pamphlet of that year, for bringing salmon alive
from Ireland in a well-boat. But the fish battered themselves
to pieces e# roufe; and despite much ingenuity of detail, the
scheme proved abortive. In December, 1718, Lady Steele
died; and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Early in the
following year Steele’s political sympathies involved him in a
paper war with his life-long friend, Addison. Lord Sunderland
had proposed a measure limiting the number of peers, one
result of which would have been the practical exclusion of the
Commons from the honours of the Upper House. Steele,
although the measure originated with his own party, felt this
keenly, and immediately started the P/ebecan to denounce the
Bill. Addison replied to the Plebezan in the Old Whigs and
this dellum plusguam civile, as Johnson calls it, was continued,
with increasing acrimony, through two or three numbers. As
far as dignity is concerned, Steele has certainly the best of
the quarrel, since to his opponent’s oblique personalities
about Grub Street pamphleteers and ‘stagnated Pools,’ he
simply rejoins by a complimentary quotation from Addi-
son’s Cazo'. Still, upon different grounds, his own conduct
of the controversy was by no means irreproachable ; and, in
both cases, it is difficult not to echo the wish that faction
Could have found less illustrious advocates. The worst result
was that the breach thus made seems never to have been
tepaired ; and a few months later, reconciliation was rendered


Sir Richard replied, that he was in raptures with the eloquence, but
Y no means admired the subject.’ Zssays, ed. 1814, i. 179~80.

‘ The alleged reference to Steele as ‘ Little Dickey,’ exposed and ex-
Ploded by Lord Macaulay, could hardly, as that writer says, have been
Misunderstood by any one who had actually consulted the text. The
mistake originated in a blunder of the Biographia Britannica, per-
petuated by Johnson, who had not seen the O/d Whig, which was first
reprinted by Nichols, some years after Johnson’s death. . :


xt INTRODUCTION.


impossible by Addison’s death. Other troubles, besides
estrangement from his old friend, also crowded upon Steele
at this time. ‘ Owing to his opposition to the Peerage Bill,
which was dropped, his patent for Drury Lane was revoked
by the Duke of Newcastle, then Lord Chamberlain, at ruinous
pecuniary loss to an already embarrassed man. In anticipation
of this blow, as well as to vindicate himself and his brother-
managers, and defend the stage generally, he established the
Theatre, by ‘Sir John Edgar,’ a bi-weekly paper, which
brought upon him, among other things, a ferocious and
probably hireling attack from the wolfish old critic, John
Dennis, a man whom he had formerly befriended. His reply
to this unexpected onslaught is a mixture of satire, dignity,
good-humour, and raillery, some of which last must have been
rather over his adversary’s head. But, besides a few useful
biographical particulars, already drawn upon in this sketch,
it contains a memorable passage respecting his friendship
with Addison, In Cibber’s dedication to Steele of the tragedy
of Xzmenes, he had inserted an absurdly adulatory passage, the
effect of which was to liken Steele to an eagle, and Addison
to a wren carried upon his back. Dennis charged Steele with
tacit complicity in this piece of bad taste. After admitting
that, on the contrary, it had ‘given him pain, Steele, in his
character of Edgar, comments as follows :—‘It could not be
imagined, that, to diminish a worthy man, as soon as he was
no more to be seen, could add to him who had always raised,
and almost worshipped him, when living. There never was
a more strict friendship than between those Gentlemen ; nor
had they ever any difference but what proceeded from their
different way of pursuing the same thing. The one with
patience, foresight, and temperate address, always waited
and stemmed the torrent; while the other often plunged
himself into it, and was as often taken out by the temper
of him who stood weeping on the brink for his safety, whom
he could not ‘dissuade from leaping into it. Thus these two
men lived for some years last past, shunning each other, but
still preserving the most passionate concern for their mutual
welfare. But when they met, they were as unreserved as boys,
and talked of the greatest affairs, upon which they saw where
they differed, without pressing (what they knew impossible)


INTRODUCTION. xii


to convert each other.’ Towards the close of the same paper
he again refers, with a touch of self-reproachful sadness to
Addison and to his wife, now both dead and gone :—‘ There
is not now in his [Steele’s] sight that excellent man, whom
Heaven made his friend and superior, to be, at a certain place,
in pain for what he should say or do. I will go on in his
further encouragement ; the best Woman that ever Man had,
cannot now lament and pine at his neglect of himself.’ The
Theatre, from No. 12 of which these passages are taken, came
to an end in April, 1720, The only other works which Steele
produced in the same year were Zhe Crists of Property and
A Nation a Family, two pamphlets in which he warmly com-
bated the South Sea Mania.

His changing fortunes turned once more in 1721. Walpole,
his ancient ally, became Chancellor of the Exchequer ; and he
was speedily re-instated as Governor of the Royal Company
of Comedians. The same year was distinguished by his
publication of a second edition of Addison’s Drummer, with
a prefatory letter or dedication to Congreve, commenting
upon certain aspersions made by Tickell in the recently
published edition of Addison’s works. This letter, which is
most interesting, throws considerable light upon Addison's
part in Steele’s literary ventures ; and proves clearly (if proof
were needed) that Steele, at least, cherished no angry memories
of the great writer whom he names his ‘Dear and Honoured
Friend.’ The next year (1722) witnessed the production at
Drury Lane of his best comedy, the Conscious Lovers, con-
Cerning which Ficlding’s Parson Adams affirms that it ranks
With Cafo as the only play fit for a Christian to see, adding
‘hat it contains ‘some things almost solemn enough for a
Sermon.’ Notwithstanding this dubious recommendation, the
Conscious Lovers succeeded in escaping being ‘damn’d? (like
the Lying Lover) ‘for its Piety,’ and proved so much of a hit
that the King, to whom it was dedicated, sent the author £500.

ts groundwork is supplied by the Ad7za of Terence ; and its
Condemnation of duelling would, according to the Biographia
Dramatica, have constituted the final word on that text, ‘had
not the subject been since more amply and completely treated
by the admirable author of Sir Charles Grandison, in the
affair between that truly accomplished gentleman and Sir


xlii INTRODUCTION.


Hargrave Pollexfen.’ That Richardson, who built Lovelace
out of Rowe’s Lothario, may have been indebted to the Bevil
and Myrtle of the Conscious Lovers, does not appear to have
occurred to Mr. Isaac Reed or his predecessor,

After his last comedy, little remains to be told of Steele.
He began two others—the School of Action and the Gentle-
man, but did not finish them. Fragments of both were
published by Nichols in 1809, with the 2nd edition of the
correspondence. Money difficulties, the accumulation of a
life-time of improvidence and prodigality, appear to have
thickened upon him in his later days, and he sold his share
in the theatre. Then came an unhappy lawsuit with the
managers, which he lost. In 1724, in pursuance of art honour-
able arrangement for doing justice to his creditors’, he quitted
London, lived some time at Hereford, and finally retired to his
wife’s Welsh estate?, He died at Carmarthen on September 1,
1729, aged fifty-eight ; and was buried in St. Peter’s Church,
where a mural tablet was first erected to him as late as 1876,
by a gentleman who then owned part of his old property. There
is also an earlier tablet to him at Llangunnor. Not long before
his death he had a paralytic seizure ; but he retained his kind


_ heart to the last. The latest account of him which is preserved


4 Swift, with strange cruelty to the memory of the dead man who had
been his friend, represents this as an ignoble flight. Steele—he says in
some verses printed in 1730—

‘From Perils of a hundred Jayls
Withdrew to starve, and dye in Wales.’

It is instructive to contrast this with the generosity with which Steele, in
his defence before the House, spoke of the living Author of the Jmfort-
ance of the Guardian consider'd, and the Publick Spirit of the Whigs.
After quoting a laudatory notice from the Tatler of a book by Swift, he
continues :—‘ The Gentleman I here intended was Dr. Swift; this kind
of Man I thought him at that time: We have not met of late, but I hope
he deserves this Character still.’ Again (speaking in No. 57 of the
Englishman of Toby's Character of Richard St—Ile, Esq.) he says,
‘I think I know the Author of this, and to shew him I know no
Revenge but in the Method of heaping Coals on his Head by Benefits,
I forbear giving him what he deserves; for no other Reason, but that
I know his Sensibility of Reproach is such, as that he would be unable
to bear Life it self under half the ill Language he has given me.’
There is every reason to believe that he rightly estimated Swift's

nature. .

2 There is a view of the house at Llangunnor in the Gentleman's
Magazine for 1797, p.457. It was then occupied as a farm.


INTRODUCTION. xiii


shows him watching the country-folk at their sports from his
invalid’s chair on a summer evening, and writing an order
upon his agent for a prize of a new gown to the best dancer?,
Of his four children, only two survived him. His eldest
daughter, Elizabeth, born in 1709, married a Welsh judge,
afterwards the third Lord Trevor of Bromham. Richard, the
second child, died in 1716; and Eugene, the third, to whom
there are some references in the Theatre and Town-Talk, in
1723. Mary, the youngest, was carried off by consumption in
the .year following her father’s death.

There are several portraits of Sir Richard Steele. To three
of these he himself makes reference in his reply to one of
Dennis’s papers, which contains a vulgar caricature of him in
the Rowlandson or Bunbury manner,—‘a caricature,’ says Mr.
Thackeray, who quotes it, ‘which has a dreadful resemblance
to the original.” This, it may be submitted, is true of all cari-
catures of any ability. Dennis, here and elsewhere, laid stress
upon his short face, his black peruke, and his dusky countenance.
The short face Sir Richard could scarcely have contested, as
he pleads guilty to it in the Sfectator*. But the black wig,
it appears in this instance, was brown; and he evades the
‘dusky countenance.’ He was, in fact, what in those days,
Was called ‘a black man’;’ and he goes on to say, with
Tespect to this ‘insinuation against his beauty,’ that he has
ordered new editions of his face after Kneller, Thornhill, and
Richardson to disabuse mankind in this particular*.’ The first,.
he says, has painted him ‘resolute,’ the second ‘thoughtful,’
and the third ‘indolent.’ All these pictures, we believe, are -
Still in existence. The Kneller was painted for the Kit-Cat
Club in 1714, and is engraved by Faber and Houbraken. A

eautiful little copy of it by Vertue generally forms the frontis-
Diece to the collected plays. It exhibits Steele, apparently, in
the voluminous ‘full-bottomed dress periwig,’ in which he rode
<broad or penned homilies against luxury and extravagance %,
he Thornhill at Cobham Hall—the ‘thoughtful’ one—depicts
im jin the disarray of a dressing gown and tasselled cap;


; Victor's Original Letters, Dramatic Pieces, and Poems, 1776, i. 330.
, Sfectator, Nos, 17 and 19. 3 Spectator, No. 262.
Theatre, No. 11, 5 Drake’s Essays, ed. 1814, i. 179,


xliv INTRODUCTION.


and is the original of the circular print engraved by Basire,
which figures in so many of Nichols’s publications, When
this was painted he was 46 (1717). The third portrait, by
Jonathan Richardson, is now in the National Portrait Gallery.
This, an unusually fine specimen of the painter’s work, gives
us the Steele of 1712, the Steele of the Stecfator. He is
here shewn as a portly, good-humoured man ‘of a ruddy
countenance,’ with broad dark eyebrows, very bright dark
brown eyes, and a mass of-curling brown hair that conceals
his ears. He wears a collarless coat, and a plain cravat.
Nichols mentions another portrait by Michael Dahl, taken
when he was Commissioner in Scotland. There is also a
second reputed Kneller at Stationers’ Hall. Dennis, it may
be added, seems to have regarded Sir Richard’s reply to his
personal remarks, as proof positive of his vanity. But Dennis
did not understand raillery, and Steele was not vain of his
appearance. ‘My Person,’ he says in his charming paper on
Estcourt, ‘is very little of my Care; and it is indifferent to
me what is said of my Shape, my Air, my Manner, my Speech,
or my Address.’ .... ‘I am arrived at the Happiness of
thinking nothing a Diminution to me, but what argues a
Depravity of my Will.’

Of his work it may be said generally that his essays alone
survive. Upon the strength of his slender contribution to the
Poetical Miscellanies, and a few occasional verses, it would be
-impossible to set up a claim for him as a poet, to which
dignity, indeed, he never pretended}. His political pamphlets
served the purposes of the hour; and, except to the minute
student of parliamentary history or the all-sifting biographer,
are now unreadable. His plays again, to-day, are but faintly
vital. They were not brilliant successes in his life-time ; and
they have never passed into the repertory of the stage. The
fact that their author so willingly leaned upon the plot of a
predecessor indicates his weak point—the lack of that stage-
craft which seems to be still one of the rarest gifts of English-
men. Another difficulty with which he struggled unsuccess-
fully was his laudable desire to conciliate the pulpit and the
stage. Whether this can or should be done, and whether


1 Rundle’s Anticipation of the Posthumous Character of Sir R. Steele,
Epist. Corr. 1809, ii, p. 690.


INTRODUCTION. © xlv


Steele’s attempts to do it are chargeable with the blame of
initiating the pestilent Sentimental Drama of subsequent years,
“the mawkish drab of spurious breed’? who, in Garrick’s
words, was to supplant the Comic Muse,—are questions which
fit is needless to discuss here. It is sufficient to note that in
teele’s case the fusion was not satisfactorily effected. In the
nee too, it may be admitted with Chalmers, that he is
‘sometimes tedious.” ‘He wants the quick repartee of Con-
Lewes and, though possessed of humour, falls into the style
vather of an essay than a drama.’ Still it was impossible that
so lively a humourist and so penetrating an observer could
fail entirely. As we have already pointed out, his comedies
contain many original sketches of character, some of which
have furnished hints to later hands, while there are episodes
in all of them which, it is safe to say, nobody but Mr. Bicker-
staff could have written. Take, for example, this thoroughly
ighteenth-century idyll from the Consctous Lovers, in which
he actors are’ Tom the man and Phillis the maid. (Phillis,
it may be observed parenthetically, was later one of the famous
sharacters of the famous Mrs. Margaret Woffington. One
an imagine with what arch vivacity she would have invested
he part of the coquettish window-cleaner.)


Tom.... Ab! too well I remember when, and how, and on what
Jccasion I was first surpriz’d. Jt was on the first of Apri/, one
housand seven hundred and fifteen, I came into Mr. Sealand’s Service ;

was then a Hobble-de-Hoy, and you a pretty little tight Girl, a
avourite Handmaid of the: Housekeeper—At that Time, we neither
pf us knew what was in us: I remember, I was order’d to get out
f the Window, one pair of Stairs, to rub the Sashes clean,—the
erson employ'd, on the innerside, was your Charming self, whom’

had never seen before. :

Phil. I think, I remember the silly Accident : What made ye, you Oaf,
eady to fall down into the Street ?

Tom. You know not, I warrant you—You could not guess what
urpriz’d me. You took no Delight, when you immediately grew wan-
On, in your Conquest, and put your Lips close, and breath’d upon the
Glass, and when my Lips approach’d, a dirty Cloth you rubbed against
™y Face, and hid your beauteous Form; when I again drew near, you
Shit, and rubb’d and smil'd at my Undoing.

Phil. What silly Thonghts you Men have!
Jom. We were Pyramus and Thisbe—but ten times harder was my
Ate; Pyramus could peep only through a Wall, I saw her, saw my


? Prologue to She Stoops to Conquer, 1773+


F;


xIvi INTRODUCTION,


Thisbe in all her Beauty, but as much kept from her as if a hundred
Walls between, for there was more, there was her Will against me—
Would she but yet relent !—Oh, Phillis! Phillis! shorten my Torment,
and declare you pity me.

Philp 1 believe, it’s very sufferable ; the Pain is not so exquisite, but


that fou may bear it, a little longer.
WA a prose-writer Steele does not rank with the great
masters of English style. He claimed, indeed, in his
capacity as a Tatler, to use “common speech,’ to be even

‘incorrect’? if need be, and, it may be added, he sometimes
abused this license. Writing hastily and under pressure, his
language is frequently involved and careless; ‘and it is _only
when he is strongly stirred by his subject that he attains to real
elevation and dignity of diction. His eloquence is wholly of
the } heart ; and there is little or nothing of epigram in his ex-
pression. Now and then, the warmth of his feeling reaches
its flashing point; and the result is some supremcly happy
phrase, such as the well-known ‘To Jove her is a liberal Educa-
tion,’ which he applies to Lady Elizabeth Hastings*. AS
“might be expected from his emotional nature, his pathetic side
is especially strong ; but it is strong with all the defects of that
nature,—that is to say, it is rather poignant and intense than
fine or suggestive. He is not in the least ashamed of‘his tears,
and when, with Master Stephen, he mounts his stool to be melan-
choly, he is for no half-measures in grief. He delights .in
highly-strained situations, which he breaks off abruptly at
the chica miGirent, like the story of Clarinda and Chloe in
Zailer, No. 94. Sometimes, as in the case of the bride-
groom who shoots his bride by accident‘, he heightens the
tragedy by a playful prelude. » He is at his best when he is
depending wholly upon his personal. memories, ; as in the familiar
paper upon his father’s death (Tatler, No. 181). The character
of his humour, too, is also strongly influenced by his personal
aiferentia. It has little of practised art or perceptive delicacy ;
but it is uniformly kindly, genial, indulge Fe recognising always
that to ‘step aside is human.’ "An objeq is never so ludicrous
but he has somewhere some subordinate stroke to show that
though he is laughing, there is nothing sardonic in his mirth.

Se, .
1 The Conscious Lovers, 1723, Act. iii, pp. 4° 41. Cf. Guardian,


No. 87, for the first sketch of this scene. :
2 Tatler, No. 5. 8 Zutler, No. 49- * Tatler, No. 82.


INTRODUCTION. xlvii


Nay, he has so much compassion for the frailties of his fellow
creatures, that he often seems to be satirising himself more
than others, and smiling—a little ruefully perhaps—at his own
weaknesses rather than at theirs. His humour, in short, has
the prevailing characteristics of his genius; it is spontaneous
and genuine; but often negligent and ill-considered in its
expression. Still it is so cheerful and good-natured, so frank
and manly and generous, that one is often tempted to echc
the declaration of Leigh Hunt—‘I prefer open-hearted. Steele
with all his faults to Addison with. all his_essays.’

“In the selections from Steele which follow, no minute o1
scientific classification has been attempted. They have been
made from the Za¢ler and Guardian as well as the Spectator,
because to select papers from the Sfectator alone not only
places Steele at a disadvantage as compared with Addison, but
would not give a just idea of his achievements as an essayist.
From his minor works very little has been taken, chiefly for
the reason that, when not variations on his earlier utterances,
they are generally political or controversial. The first section
is made up of the ‘Moral E: Essays,’ which, until they succumbed
to the imitators of Johison, formed sé frequent a feature of
eighteenth-century literature. In Steele’s hands they are in
their earliest and best stage. They suited his inclinations and
habits of composition, which made it easier for him to depend
upon his feelings and quick-kindled sympathies than to spend
time in the evolution of character, and the refinements of
artistic construction ; they suited also his sincere desire,—for,
whatever his errors, it was a sincere desire,—to_promote-the
teformation of manners. In the second section come the ‘ Social
Essays,’ which include character-sketches, and descriptions of
tanners, fashions, and follies. Sometimes it happens that the
Moral and social elements are combined in-one paper: in this
Sase it is classed according to the predominant note. But the
Yortatory and didactic play so large a part in Steele’s perform-
‘@nces that many of the ‘Social’ papers might fairly be described
@s ‘Moral, and can only be said to differ because they are less
Obviously | and exclusively absorbed by the moral purpose.
The third section’ contains the ‘Theatrical’ papers, a small
group, but easily detached from the rest; and the fourth is
Composed of those of a Miscellaneous or ‘general’ character.


xlviii INTRODUCTION.


Into this last division fall naturally all those papers which can-
not conveniently be ranked under the remaining heads ; and it
also comprehends a few examples which have been preserved
more for their biographical or antiquarian interest than their
literary excellence. The paper on Dunkirk fortifications is an
instance of the former kind; that on the Humours of Bath of
the latter. Few of the letters have been reprinted because if is
impossible, in many cases, to decide positively whether they
are by Steele or his contributors! The same difficulty has
sometimes prevented the insertion of otherwise meritorious
essays, whose authorship is mixed or doubtful.

What Professor Jebb calls ‘the unpopular and much-sus-
pected office of expurgator’ has been very sparingly exer-
cised. As a general rule, omission has been preferred to
mutilation, and excised passages are usually indicated by
marks. In the case of the Zatler, where the majority of the
papers treat of several separate subjects, one of these has
sometimes been taken without reference to the rest. But this
can scarcely be considered in the light of a suppression.


1 Cf. Spectator, No. 542.


CHRONOLOGY OF STEELE’S LIFE.


.167}. March. Bom in Dublin, and baptised at St. Bridget’s Church,

March 12.

[1672. May 1. Addison born.]

1684. November 17. Nominated to Charterhouse by the first Duke of
Ormond.

{1688. July ar. Death of the first Duke of Ormond.)

16go. March 13. Matriculates at Christ Church, Oxford.

1691. August 27. Postmaster at Merton College.

169-. Enters the army as a Cadet under the second Duke of Ormond.

1695. March. Publishes ‘The Procession,’ 2 poem on the funeral of
Queen Mary, who died December 28, 1694, buried tach 5,


16
169-. Besse Secretary to John Lord Cutts; and Ensign in the ‘Cold-
stream Guards.
1700.’ Is Captain in Lord Lucas’s Fusileers.
tyot. April 17. Publishes the ‘Christian Hero.’
July 19. Second Edition.
December 20. Publishes the ‘Funeral; or, Grief @-/a-Mode,’ a
Comedy, acted at Drury Lane, same year.
{t702, March 8. Death of William III.
April 14. Gildon’s ‘ Comparison between the Two Stages ' pub-
lished.}
‘204. January 26, Publishes the ‘Lying Lover; or, the Ladies’ Friend-
ship,’ a Comedy, produced at Drury Lane, December 2, 1703.
"Yor, May 9. Publishes the ‘Tender Husband; or, the Accomplished
Fools,’ a Comedy, produced at Drury Lane, April 23, same
year.
"295, May. Appointed Gazetteer, and Gentleman - Waiter to Prince
George of Denmark.
September. Publishes a ‘Prologue to the University of Oxford.’
September. Marries Miss Mary Scurlock.
October. Loses his post of Gentleman-Waiter by the death of
Prince George, October 28.
1799- April xa, ‘Tatler’ begun,
1710. May ([?]. Made Commissioner of Stamps.
October. Loses his appointment as Gazetteer.
* Ode to the Duke of Marlborough.’
d


1708,


]


171,


17124,


1714.


CHRONOLOGY OF STEELE’S LIFE.


January 2. ‘Tatler’ finished.

March 1. ‘Spectator’ begun.

[December 30. Marlborough deprived of all his offices.]

January 4. Publishes ‘The Englishman’s Thanks to the Duke of
Marlborough.’

[August 1. Stamp Act (10 Anne, Cap. 19) comes into force.]}

December 6. ‘Spectator’ (vol. vii) finished.


3. March 5. ‘Letter to Sir Miles Wharton concerning Occasional


Peers.’

March 12. ‘ Guardian’ begun.

June 4. Letter to the Earl of Oxford resigning Commissionership
of Stamps.

August 7, Publishes ‘Guardian No. 128’ on the Demolition of
Dunkirk fortifications.

August. Elected M.P. for Stockbridge, Hants.

September 22. Publishes ‘Importance of Dunkirk consider'd,’ etc.

October 1. ‘ Guardian’ finished.

October 6. ‘ Englishman’ begun.

{October 31. Swift's ‘ Importance of the ‘‘ Guardian” consider’d’
published,

November 12. ‘Character of Richard St—le, Esq.’ published.]

December 29-31. ‘ Poetical Miscellanies’ published.

(January 5-7. Swift’s ‘ Paraphrase of Horace ii, 1° published.]

January 19. ‘Crisis’ published.

February 15. ‘ Englishman’ finished.

February 25. ‘Lover’ began.

(February ‘26. Swift's ‘ Publick Spirit of the Whigs’ published.]

March 18. Expelled the House of Commons,

April 22. ‘Reader’ begun.

May. Proposes to write the ‘ History of the War in Flanders’
(‘ Reader’ No. 6).

May 10. ‘Reader’ finished.

May 25. ‘Romish Ecclesiastical History of late Years’ pub-
lished.

May 27. ‘ Lover’ finished.

June 3. ‘Letter toa Member of Parliament concerning, the Bill
for preventing the Growth of Schism’ published.

July 2. ‘ French Faith represented in the Present State of Dunkirk’
published.

(August 1. Queen Anne dies.

September 18. George I lands at Greenwich. ]

October [?]. Appointed Surveyor of the Royal Stables at Hampton
Court, J.P., and Deputy Lieutenant of the County of Middlesex.


1715.


1720.


Var,


Maa.


1723,
1725,


1729,


CHRONOLOGY OF STEELE’S LIFE. li


October 9. Publishes ‘ The Ladies Library.’

October 18. Supervisor of the Theatre Royal.

October 22. Publishes ‘Mr. Steele’s Apology for Himself and
his Writings. ;

January 19. Patentee of Drury Lane.

February. Elected M.P. for Boroughbridge, Yorkshire.

April 8. Knighted by George I..

May 13. ‘Account of the State of the Roman-Catholick Religion
throughout the World’ published.

May 28. Banquet at the Censorium.

July x1. Second volume of ‘Englishman’ begun; finished
November 21,

December 17. ‘Town Talk’ begun,


. February 6. ‘Tea-Table’ begun.


March 6. ‘ Chit-Chat’ begun.

[March 21. Addison’s ‘Drummer’ published; produced at Drury
Lane, March 10.)

June 7. Appointed Commissioner for Forfeited Estates in Scotland.


. Jane 10, Obtains Patent for ‘Fish Pool.’


December 26. Death of Lady Steele.


. March 14. ‘Plebeian’ begun.


[June 17. Death of Addison.]

December 7. ‘ Letter to the Earl of Oxford concerning the Bill of
Peerage.’

December 1g. ‘ Spinster’ published.

January 2. “Theatre” begun.

January 23. License for Drury Lane revoked.

February 1, Publishes “The Crisis of Property.’

February 27. Publishes ‘ A Nation a Family,’ sequel to the above.

May 18. License for Drury Lane restored.

{October 3. Addison's works published by Tickell.]

December 23. Publishes Addison’s ‘Drummer,’ 2nd edition, with
prefatory letter to Congreve.

March. Elected M.P. for Wendover, Bucks.

December 1, Publishes the ‘ Conscious: Lovers,’ a Comedy, pro-
gluced at Drury Lane, November 7, 1722.

September. Leaves London for Bath.

[‘Letters sent to the Tatler and Spectator’ published by Charles
Lillie.]

Living at Hereford.

September 1. Dies et Carmarthen, and is buried on the 4th in
St. Peter’s Church.


I.


MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


YNo.1. On Charity,


A
Difficile est’ plurimum virtutem revereri qui semper secunda fortuna
sit usus.—-TULL. ad Herennium.


INSOLENCE is the crime of all others which every man is apt
to rail at ; and yet there is one respect in which almost all men
living are guilty of it, and that is in the case oflaying a greater
value upon the gifts of fortune than we ought. It is here in
England come into our very language, as a propriety of distinc-
tion, to say, when we would speak of persons.to their advantage,
‘They are people of condition.’ There is no doubt but the
proper use of riches implies, that a man should exert all the
good qualities imaginable ; and if we mean by a man of condi-
tion or quality, one who, according to the wealth he is master
of, shows himself just, beneficent, and charitable, that term
ought very deservedly to be had in the highést venérationj but
When wealth is used only as it is the support of pomp and
luxury, to be rich is very far from being a recommendation to

onour and respect. It is indeed the greatest insolence imagin-
able, in a creature who would feel the extremes of thirst and
hunger, if he did not prevent® his appetites, before they call
Upon him, to be so forgetful of the common necessity of human
nature,‘as never to cast an eye upon the poor and needy. The
fellow who escaped from a ship which struck upon a rock inthe
west, and joined with the country people to destroy his brother
sailors, and make her a.wreck, was thought a most execrable
creature ; but does not every man who enjoys the possession of
what he naturally wants, and is unmindful of the unsupplied dis-
tress of other men, betray the same temper of mind? When a

B


2 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


man looks about him, and, with regard to riches and poverty,
beholds some drawn,in pomp and equipage, and they, and their
very servants, with an air of scorn and triumph, overlooking
.the multitude that pass by them; and in the same street a
creature of the same make, crying out, in the name of all that
is good and sacred, to behold his misery, and give him some
supply against hunger and nakedness; who would believe these
two beings were of the same species? But so it is, that the
consideration of fortune has taken up all our minds, and as I
10 have often complained; poverty and riches stand in our imagina-
tions in the places of guilt andi id ‘innocence, But in all,seasons
there will be some instances of persons who have souls too large
to be.taken with popular prejudices, and, while the rest-of man-
kind are contending for superiority in power and wealth, have
their thoughts bent upon the necessities of those below iene
The charity schools, which have been erected of late years, are
the greatest instances of public spirit the age has produced.
But, indeed, when we consider how long this sort of beneficence
has been on foot, it is rather from the good management of
20 those institutions, than from the number or value of the bene-
factions to them, that they make so great a figure. One would
think it impossible that in the space of fourteen years there
should not have been five thousand pounds bestowed in gifts
this way, nor sixteen hundred children, including males and
females, put“out to methods of industry. It is not allowed me
‘to speak of luxury and folly with the severe spirit ‘they desérve;
. any lady in a hooped petticoat, if she give the price of one half
yard of the silk towards clothing, feeding, and instructing an
3 innocent helpless creature of her own sex, in one of these schools,
’ The consciousness of such an action will give her features a
nobler life on this illustrious day ®, than all the jewels that can
hang in her hair, or can be clustered in her bosom. It would
be uncourtly to speak in harsher words to the fair, but to men
one may take a little more freedom. It is monstrous how a
man can live with so little reflection, as to fancy he is not ina
condition very unjust and disproportioned to the rest of man-
kind, while he enjoys wealth, and exerts no benevolence or
bounty to others, As for this particular occasion of these
4° schools, there cannot any offer more worthy a generous mind,


ON CHARITY. 3


Would you do a handsome thing without return? do it for an
infant that is not sensible of the obligation. Would you do it
for public good? do it for one who will be an honest artificer.
Would you do it for the sake of heaven? give it to one who
Shall be instructed in the worship of him for whose sake you
gave it. It is, methinks, a most laudable institution this, if it
were of no other expectation than that of producing a race of
good and useful servants, who will have more than a liberal, a
teligious education. What would not a man do in common
to prudence, to lay out in purchase of one about him, who would
add to all his orders he gave, the weight of the commandments,
to enforce an obedience to them ? for one who would consider his
master as his father, his friend, and benefactor, upon the«easy
terms, and in expectation of‘no other return, but moderate wages
and gentle usage? It is the common vice of children, to run too
much among’ the servants ; from such as are educated in these
Places they would see nothing. but lowliness in the servant,
which would not be disingenuous in the child, All the ill offices
and defamatory whispers; which take their birth from domestics,
0 would be prevented, if this charity could be made universal:
and a good man might havea knowledge of the whole life of the
persons he’ designs to take into his house for his own service,
or that of his family or children, long before they were admitted.
This would create endearing dependencies ; and the obligation
would have a paternal air in the master, who would be relieved
from much care and anxiety from the gratitude and diligence of
an humble friend, attending him as his servant. I fall into this
discourse from a letter sent to me, to give me notice that fifty,
> boys would be clothed, and take their seats (at the charge of
° some generous benefactors) i in St. tt. Brige’s church 3, on Sunday
next. I wish I could promise tO inyself any thing which my
correspondent seems to expect from a publication of it in this
Paper; for there can be nothing added to what so many excel-
lent and learned men have said on this occasion, But that’
there may be something here which would move a generous
mind, like that of him who writ to me, I shall transcribe an
handsome paragraph of Dr. Snape’s™ sermon on these charities,
which my correspondent" enclosed with his letter.
‘The wise Providence has amply compensated the disad-
40 vantages of the poor ‘and indigent, in wanting many of the
B2


4 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


conveniences of this life, by a more abundant provision for their
happiness in the next. Had they been higher born, or more
richly endowed, they would have wanted this manner of educa-
tion, of which those only enjoy the benefit, who are low enough
to submit to it; where they have such advantages without
money, and without price, as the rich cannot purchase with it-
The learning which is given, is generally more edifying to
them, than that which is sold to others. Thus do they become
exalted in goodness, by being depressed in fortune, and their


10 poverty is, in reality, their preferment.’


20


30


Spectator, No. 294.] {February 6, 1712.


No. 2. Ox Benevolence.


Consuetudinem benignitatis largitioni munerum longe antepono. Hee
est gravium hominum atque magnorum; illa quasi assentatorum
‘populi, multitudinis levitatem voluptate quasi titillantium.—TuLL,


‘When we consider the offices of human life, there is, me-
thinks, something in what we ordinarily call generosity, which,
when carefully examined, seems to flow rather from a loose and
unguarded temper than an 1 honest and liberal mind. For this
reason, it is absolutely necessary that all liberality should have
for its basis and: support, fre frugality. By this means the bene-
ficent spirit works in a man from the convictions of reason,
not from the impulses of passion. The generous man in the
ordinary acceptation, without respect of the demands of his
own family, will soon find upon the foot of his account, that he
has sacrificed to fools, knaves, flatterers, or the deservedly un-
happy, all the opportunities of affording any future assistance
where it ought to be. Let him therefore reflect, that if to
bestow be in itself-Jaudable, should not a man take care to
secure an ability to do things praiseworthy as long as he lives ?
Or could there be a more cruel piece of raillery upon a man
who should have reduced his fortune below the capacity of
acting according to his natural temper, than to say of him,
‘That gentleman was generous?’ My beloved author®™ there-
fore has, in the sentence on the top of my paper, turned his eye


ON BENEVOLENCE, 5


with a certain satiety from beholding the addresses to the
people by largesses and other entertainments, which he asserts
to be in general vicious, and are always to be regulated accord-
ing to the circumstances of time and a man’s own fortune. A
constant benignity in commerce with the rest of the world,
which ought to run through all a man’s actions, has effects
more ‘useful to those whom you oblige, and less ostentatious
in yourself. He turns his recommendation of this virtue in
commercial life: and, according to him, a citizen who is frank
10in his kindnesses, and abhors severity in his demands; he
who, in buying, selling, lending, doing acts of good neighbour-
hood, is just and easy; he who appears naturally averse to
disputes, and above the sense of little sufferings ; bears a nobler
Character, and does much more good to mankind than any
Other man’s fortune, without commerce, can possibly support.
For the citizen, above all other men, has opportunities of
arriving at ‘that highest fruit of wealth, to be liberal without
the least expense of a man’s own fortune.’ It is not to be
denied but such a practice is liable to hazard; but this there-
0 fore adds to the obligation, that, among traders, he who
obliges is as much concerned to keep the favour a secret as
he who receives it. The unhappy distinctions among us in
England are so great, that to celebrate the intercourse of com-
Mercial friendship (with which I am daily made acquainted)
Would be to raise the virtuous man so many enemies of the
Contrary party. I am obliged to conceal all I know of ‘Tom the
ounteous,’ who lends at the ordinary interest, to give men of
less fortune opportunities of making greater advantages. He
Conceals, under a rough air and distant behaviour, a bleeding
3° Compassion and womanish tenderness. This is governed by
the most exact circumspection, that there is no industry want-
ing in the person whom he is to serve, and that he is guilty of
no improper expenses. This I know of Tom; but who dare say

it of so known a Tory? The same care I was forced to use
some time ago, in the report of another’s virtue, and said fifty
instead of a hundred, because the man I pointed at was
a Whig. Actions of this kind are popular, without being
invidious : for every man of ordinary circumstances looks upon
aman who has this known benignity in his nature as a person
49 ready to be his friend upon such terms as he ought to expect


6 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


it; and the wealthy, who may envy such a character, can do no
injury to its interests, but by the imitation of it, in which the
good citizens will rejoice to be rivalled. I know not how to
form to myself a greater idea of human life, than in what is the
practice of some wealthy men whom I could name, that make
no step to the improvement of their own fortunes, wherein they
do not also advance those of other men, who would languish in
poverty without that munificence. Ina nation where there are
so many public funds to be supported, I know not whether
to he can be called a good subject who does not embark some
part of his fortune with the state, to whose vigilance he owes
the security of the whole. This certainly is an immediate
way of laying an obligation upon* many, and extending his
benignity the furthest a man can possibly who is not engaged
in commerce. But he who trades, besides giving the state some
part of this sort of credit he gives his banker, may, in all the
occurrences of his life, have his eye upon removing want from
the door of the industrious, and defending the unhappy up-
right man from bankruptcy. Without this benignity, pride or
20 vengeance will precipitate a man to choose the receipt of half
his demands from one whom he has undone, rather than the
whole from one to whom he has shown mercy. .This benignity
is essential to the character of a fair trader, and any man who
designs to enjoy his wealth with honour and self-satisfaction :
nay, it would not be hard to maintain, that the practice of
supporting good and industrious men, would catry a man
further even to his profit than indulging the propensity of
serving and obliging the fortunate. My author argues on this
subject, in order to incline men’s minds to those who want
30 them most, after this manner : ‘We must always consider the
nature of things, and- govern ourselves accordingly. The
wealthy man, when.he has.repaid you, is upon a-balance.with ”
you ; but the person whom you 4 favoured with a loan, if he be
a good man, will think himself in ‘your debt after he has paid
you. The wealthy and the conspicuous are not obliged by the
benefits you do them; they think they conferred a benefit
when they received one. Your good offices are always sus-
pected, and it is with them the same thing to expect their
favour as to receive it. But the man below you, who knows,
40 in the good you have done him, you respected himself more


ON GENEROSITY. 7


than his circumstances, does not act like an obliged man only
to him from whom he has received a benefit, but also to all who
are capable of doing him one. And whatever little office he
can do for you, he is so far from magnifyifg it, that he will
labour to extenuate it in all his actions and expressions. -More-
aver the regard to what you do to a great man at best is taken
notice of no further than by himself or his family; but what
you do to a man of an humble fortune (provided always that he
is a good and a modest man) raises the affections towar& you

19 of all men of that character (of which there are many) in the
whole city.’

There is nothing gains a reputation to a preacher so much
as his own practice ; I am therefore casting about what act of
benignity is in the power of a Spectator. Alas! that lies but
in a very narrow compass: and I think the most immediately
under my patronage are either players, or such whose circum-
stances bear an affinity with theirs. All, therefore, 1 am able
to do at this time of this kind, is to tell the town, that on Friday
the 11th of this instant, April, there will be performed, in York-

*Q buildings 3, a concert of vocal and instrumental music, for the
benefit of Mr. Edward Keen, the father of twenty children; and
that this day the haughty George Powell™ hopes all the good-
natured part of the town will favour him, whom they applauded
in Alexander} Timon, Lear, and Orestes, with their company
this night, when he hazards all his heroic glory for their appro-
bation in the humbler condition of honest Jack Falstaff.


Spectator, No. 346.] - [April 7, 1712.


No. 3. On Generosity.


Toc maxime officii est, ut chee Sag maxime opis indigeat, ita ei potis-
Simum opitulari—TuLt. Off. i. 16


There are none who deserve superiority over others in the
esteem of mankind, who do not make it their endeavour to
be beneficial to society; and who upon all occasions which

30 their circumstances of life can administer, do not take a
certain unfeigned pleasure in conferring benefits of one kind
or other. Those whose great talents and high birth have


8 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


placed them in conspicuous stations of life are indispensably
obliged to exert some noble inclinations for the service of
the world, or else such advantages become misfortunes, and
shade and privacy are a more eligible portion. Where oppor-
tunities and inclinations are given to the same person, we
sometimes see sublime instances of virtue, which so dazzle our
imaginations, that we look with scorn on all which in lower
scenes of life we may ourselves be able to practise. But this
is a®vicious way of thinking; and it bears some spice of
10 romantic madness, for a man to imagine that he must grow
ambitious, or seek adventures, to be able to do great actions.
It is in every man’s power in the world who is above mere
poverty, not only to do things worthy, but heroic. The great
foundation of civil virtue is self-denial; and there iS no one
“above the nacessitiés of life, but has opportunities of exercising
that noble quality, and doing as much as his circumstances
will bear for the ease and convenience of other men ; and he
who does more than.ordibary men. practise upon such occasions
as occur in his life, deserves the value of his friends, as il if he
20 had done enterpriseS”which are usually attended with the
highest _ glory: “Men of public spirit differ rather in their
circumstances than their virtue; and the man, who does all
he can, in a low station, is more a hero than he who omits
any worthy action he is able to accomplish in a great one.
It is not many years ago since Lapirius, in wrong of his elder
brother, came to,a great estate by gift of his father, by reason
of the dissolute behaviour of the first-born. Shame ‘and con-
trition reformed the life of the disinherited youth, and he
became as remarkable for his good qualities as formerly for
30 his errors. Lapirius, who observed his brother’s amendment,
sent him on a new-year’s day in the morning the following
letter ;
‘HONOURED BROTHER,

‘I enclose to you the deeds whereby my father gave me
this house and land. Had he lived till now, he would not
have bestowed it in that manner; he took it from the man
you were, and I restore it to the man you are,

‘I am, Sir, your affectionate Brother,
and humble Servant,
40 ‘Pp, T?


ON GENEROSITY. 9


As great and -exalted spirits undertake the pursuit of
hazardous actions for the good’ of ‘othérs, atthe same time
gratifying their passion for glory ; so do worthy minds in the
domestic way of life deny themselves many advantages, to
Satisfy a generous benevolence, which they bear to their friends
oppressed with distresses and calamities. Such natures one
may call stores of Providence, which are actuated by a secret
Celestial influence to undervalue the ordinary gratifications of
wealth, to give comfort to a heart loaded with affliction, to $ave


log falling fai family, to preserve a branch of trade in their neigh-


. bourhood, and give work to the industrious, preserve the portion


of the helpless infant, and raise the head of the mourning
father. People whose hearts are wholly bent towards pleasure,
or intent upon gain, never hear of the noble occurrences
among men of, industry and humanity. It would look like a
city romance®, to tell them of the generous merchant, who the
Other day sent this billet to an eminent trader, under difficulties
to support himself, in whose fall many hundreds besides him-
Self had perished ; but because I think there is more spirit


20 and true gallantry in it than i in. any letter I have ever read


from Strephon to Phillis, I shall insert it even in the mer-
Cantile honest style in which it was sent :


‘SIR,

‘T have heard of the casualties which have involved you
in extreme distress at this time; and knowing you to be
a man of great good-nature, industry, and probity, have
tesolved to stand by you. Be of good cheer; the bearer
brings with him five thousand pounds, and has my order
to answer your drawing as much more on my account. I
3° did this in haste, for fear I should come too late for your
Telief ; but you may value yourself with me to the sum of
fifty thoasand pounds; for I can very cheerfully run the
hazard of being so much less rich than I am now, to save
an honest man whom I love.

‘Your Friend and Servant,


‘wW. S
I think there is somewhere in Montaigne mention made of


a family-book, wherein all the occurrences that happened
from one generation of that house to another were recorded.


10


26


30


fe) MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


Were there such a method in’ the families which are con-
cerned in this generosity, it would be a hard task for the
greatest in Europe to give in their own, an instance of a
benefit better placed, or conferred with a more graceful air.
It has been heretofore urged how barbarous and inhuman is
any unjust step made to the disadvantage of a trader; and
by how much such an act towards him is detestable, by so
much an act of kindness towards him is laudable. I remember
to have heard a bencher of the: Temple tell a story of a
tradition in their house, where they had formerly a custom
of choosing kings™ for such a season, and allowing him his
expenses at the charge of the society. One of our kings,
said my friend, carried his royal inclination a little too far,
and there was a committee ordered to look into the Manage-
ment of his treasury. Among other things it, appeared, that
his majesty walking incog, in the cloister, had overheard a
poor man say to another, ‘Such a small sum would make
me the happiest man in the world.’ The king, out of his
royal compassion, privately inquired into his character, and
finding him a proper object.of charity, sent him the money.
When the coinmittee read the report, the house passed his
accounts with a plaudite without further examination, upon
the recital of this article in them:

For making a man happy #10 0 O


“Spectator, No. 248.] [December 14, 1711.


No. 4. On Praise. |
Latus sum laudari a te laudato viro—TUuULL.


He is a very unhappy man who sets his heart upon iti
admired by the : multitude, or affects a general and undistin-
guishing applause among men. What pious men call the tes-
timony of a good conscience, should be the measure of our
ambition in this kind ; that is to say, a man of spirit should
contemn the praise of the ignorant, and like being applauded
for nothing but what he knows in his own heart he deserves.
Besides which, the character of the person who commends you


ON PRAISE. il


is to be considered, before you set a value upon his esteem.
The praise of an ignorant man is only good-will, and you should
receive his kindness as he is a good neighbour in society, and
not as a good judge of your actions in point of fame and repu-
tation. The satirist ® said very well of popular praise and accla-
mations, ‘Give the tinkers and cobblers their presents again,
and learn to live of yourself.’ It is an argument of a loose and
ungoverned mind to be affected with the promiscuous approba-
tion-of the generality of mankind ; and a man of virtue should
1o bé too delicate for so coarse an appetite of fame. Men of
honour should endeavour only to please the worthy, and the
man of merit should desire to be tried only by his peers. I
thought it a noble sentiment which I heard yesterday uttered
in conversation: ‘I know,’ said a gentleman, ‘a way to be
greater than any man. If he has worth in him, I can rejoice
in his superiority to me; and that satisfaction is a greater act
of the soul in me, than any in him which can possibly appear
to me.’ This thought could proceed but from a candid and
generous spirit; and the approbation of such minds is what may
20 be esteemed true praise: for with the common rate of men
there is nothing commendable but what they themselves ‘may
hope to be partakers of, and arrive -at ; but the motive truly
glorious is, when the mind is set rather to do things laudable,
than to purchase reputation. Where there is that sincerity as
the foundation of a good name, the kind opinion of virtuous
men will be an unsought, but a necessary consequence. The
Lacedzemonians®, though a plain people, and no pretenders to
Politeness, had a certain delicacy in their sense of glory, and
sacrificed to the Muses when they entered upon any great
° enterprise. They would have the commemoration of their
actions be transmitted by the purest and most untainted memo-
Nalists. The din which attends victories and public triumphs,
is by far less eligible than the recital of the actions of great men
by honest and wise historians. Itis a frivolous pleasure to, be
the admiration of gaping crowds ; but to have the approbation
of a good man in the cool reflections of his closet, is.a gratifica-
tion worthy an heroic spirit. The applause of the crowd makes
the head giddy, but the attestation of a reasonable man makes
the heart glad. ;
49 What makes the love of popular or general praise still more


12 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


ridiculous, is, that it is usually given for circumstances which
are foreign to the persons admired. Thus they are the ordinary
attendants on power and riches, which may be taken out of
one man’s hands, and put into another's. The application only,
and not the possession, makes those outward things honourable.
The vulgar and men of sense agree in admiring men for having
what they themselves would rather be possessed of; the wise
man applauds him whom he thinks most virtuous, the rest of
the world him who is most wealthy.

10 When aman is in this way of thinking, I do not know what
can occur to one more monstrous, than to see persons of in-
genuity address their services and performances to men no
way addicted to liberal arts. In these cases, the praise on one
hand, and the patronage on the other, are equally the objects
of ridicule , Dedications to ignorant men are as absurd as any
of the speeches of Bulfinch? in the Droll™, Such an address
one is apt to translate into other words ; and when the different
parties are thoroughly considered, the panegyric generally
implies no more than if the author should say to the patron;

20 ‘My very good lord, you and I can never understand one an-
other ; therefore I humbly desire we may be intimate friends
for the future.’

The rich may as well ask to borrow of the poor, as the man
of virtue or merit hope for addition to his character from any
but such as himself. He that commends another engages so
much of his own reputation as he gives to that person com-
mended ; and he that has nothing laudable in himself is not of
ability to be such,a surety. The wise Phocion” was so sensible
how dangerous it was to be touched with what the multitude

30 approved, that upon a general acclamation made when he was
making an oration, he turned to an intelligent friend who stood
near him, and asked in a surprised manner, * What slip have |
made ??

I shall conclude this paper with a billet which has fallen into
my hands, and was written to a lady from a gentleman whom
she had highly commended. The author of it had formerly
been her lover. When all possibility of commerce between
them on the subject of love was cut off, she spoke so hand-
somely of him, as to give occasion to this letter,


ON PRAISE WITH RESERVATION. 13


* MADAM,

‘I should be insensible to a stupidity, if 1 could forbear
making you my acknowledgments for your late mention of me
with so much applause. It is, J think, your fate to give me new
sentiments: as you formerly inspired me with the true sense of
love, so do you now with the true sense of glory. As desire
had the least part in the passion I heretofore professed towards
you, so has vanity no share in the glory to which you have now
raised me. Innocence, knowledge, beauty, virtue, sincegity,

10 and discretion, are the constant ornaments of her who has said
this of me. Fame is a babbler,’but I have arrived at the
highest glory in this world, the commendation of the most de-
serving person in it.’


Spectator, No. 188.] [October 5, r711,


No.5. On Praise with Reservation.


Falsus honor juvat, et mendax infamia terret
Quem nisi mendosum et mendacem ?—— :
Hor. Ep. i. 16, 39-


I know no manner of speaking so offensive as that of giving
Praise, and closing it with an exception ; which proceeds (where
Men do not do it to introduce malice, and make calumny more
®ffectual) from the common error of considering man as a
Perfect creature. But, if we rightly examine things, we shall
find that there is a sort of economy in providence, that one

*0 shall excel where another is defective, i in order to make men
More useful to each other, and mix them in society. This man
having this talent, and that man another, is as necessary in
Conversation, as one professing one trade, and another another,
is beneficial in commerce. The happiest climate does not
Produce all things ; and it was so ordered, that one part of
the earth should want the product of another, for uniting man-
kind i in a general correspondence and good understanding. It
is, therefore, want of good sense as well as good nature, to say
Simplicius has a better judgment, but not so much wit as


14 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


Latius; for that thesé have not each other’s capacities is
no more a diminution to either than if you should say,
Simplicius is not Latius, or Latius not Simplicius. The
heathen world had so little notion that perfection was to be
expected amongst men, that among them any one quality or
endowment in an heroic degree made a god. ,Hercules had
strength ; but it was never objected to him that he wanted wit.
Apollo presided over wit, and it was never asked whether he
had, strength. We hear no exceptions against the beauty of
10 Minerva, or the wisdom of Venus. These wise heathens were
glad to immortalize any one serviceable gift, and overlook all
imperfections in the person who had it. But with us it is far
otherwise, for we reject many eminent virtues, if they are ac-
companied with one apparent weakness. | The reflecting after
this manner made me account'for thé strange delight men take
in reading lampoons and scandal, with which the age abounds,
and of which I receive frequent complaints. Upon mature
consideration, I find it is principally for this reason, that the
worst of mankind, the libellers, receive so much encourage-
zo ment in the world. The low race of men take a secret
pleasure in finding an eminent character levelled to their
condition by a report of its defects; and keep themselves in
countenance, though they are excelled in a thousand virtues,
if they believe they have in common with a great person any:
one fault. The libeller falls in with this humour, and gratifies
this baseness of temper, which is naturally an enemy to extra-
ordinary merit. It is from this, that libel and satire are
promiscuously joined together in the notions of the vulgar,
though the satirist and libeller differ as much as the magis-
30 trate and the murderer. In the consideration of human life,
the satirist never falls upon persons who are not glaringly
faulty, and the libeller on none but who are conspicuously
commendable, Were I to expose any vice in a good or
great man, it should certainly be by correcting it in some
one where that crime was the most’ distinguishing part of
the character; as pages are chastized for the admonition of
princes", When it is performed otherwise, the vicious are
kept in credit, by placing men of merit in the same accusation.
But all the pasquils®, lampoons, and libels we meet with now-a-
40 days are a sort of playing with the four-and-twenty letters, and


ON PRAISE WITH RESERVA TION, 15


thro, ing them into names and characters, without sense, truth,

or wit, In this case, Iam in great perplexity to know whom

they mean, and should be in distress for those they abuse, if I

did ngt see their judgment and ingenuity in those they com-

mend, This is the true way of examining a libel; and when

lien consider, that no one man living thinks the better of their
heroes and patrons for the panegyric given them, none can
think \themseélves lessened by their invective. The hero or
patron in a libel is but a scavenger to carry off the dirt, apd
10 by th@t-very employment. is the filthiest creature in the street.

.Dedidations and panegyrics are frequently ridiculous, let them

he addressed where they will; but at‘the front, or in the

body fof a libel, to commend a ian, is saying to the persons

Appleuded, ‘My Lord, or Sir, I have pulled down all men that

‘he rbst of the world think great and honourable, and here is

‘clear stage ; you may, as you please, be valiant or wise ; you

may choose to be on the military or civiblist ; for there is no
Sne brave who commands, or just who has power. You may
; Tule he world now it is empty, which exploded you when it
® was full: I have knocked out the brains of all whom mankind
thought good for any thing; and I doubt not but you will
rewadd that invention, which found out the only expedient’ to
‘nuke your lordship, or your worship, of any consideration.’

Had I the honour to be in a libel, and had escaped the
4pprobation of the author, I should look upon it exactly in this
Manner, But though it is a thing thus perfectly indifferent
“ho is exalted or debased in such performances, yet it is not
£9 with relation to the authors of them ; therefore, I shall, for
30 ne good of my country, hereafter take upon me to punish
Shiga! wretches. What is already passed may die away ac-
Sordidg to its nature, and continue in its present oblivion ;

Nt, for the future, I shall take notice of such enemies to

°nogr and virtue, and preserve them to immortal infamy.
be if names shall give fresh offence many ages hence, and
& Igtested a thousand years after the commission of their

th "Md. Jt shall not avail, that these children of infamy publish

“eit works under feigned names, or under none at all; for I

tn perfectly well acquainted with the styles of all my
404, °ntemporaries, that I shall not fail of doing them justice,

their proper names, and at their full length. Let those


16 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


miscreants, therefore, enjoy their present act of oblivion, and
take care how they offend hereafter. .
But, to avert our eyes from such objects, it is, methinks, but re-
quisite to settle our opinion in the case of praise and blame: and
I believe, the only true way to cure that sensibility of reproach,
which is a common weakness with the most virtuous men, is to
fix their regard firmly upon only what is strictly true, in relation
to their advantage, as well as diminution. For, if I am pleased
with commendation which I do not deserve, I shall, from the
ro same temper, be concerned at scandal I do not deserve. But
he that can think of false applause with as much contempt, as
false detraction, will, certainly be prepared for all adventures,
and will become all occasions. ‘ Undeserved praise can please
only those who want merit, and undeserved reproach frighten
only those who want sincerity’ I have thought of this with sb
much attention, that I fancy there can be no other method in
nature found for the cure of that delicacy which gives good
men pain under calumny, but placing satisfaction no whee
but in a just sense of their own integrity, without regard to
20 the’ opinion of others. If we have not such a foundation bs
this, there is no help against scandal but being in obscurity,
which to noble minds is not being at all. The truth of it’ is,
this love of praise dwells most in great and heroic spirits ; and
those who best deserve it have generally the most exquisite
relish of it. Methinks I see the renowned Alexander, after a
painful and laborious march, amidst the heats of a parched soil
and a burning climate, sitting over the head of a fountain, and,
after a draught of water, pronounce that memorable sayihg,
‘Oh! Athenians! How much do I suffer that you may speak
30 well of me!’ The Athenians were at that time the learned of
the world, and their libels against Alexander were written,!as
he was a professed enemy of their state. But how somes
would such invectives have appeared in Macedonians !
As love of reputation is a darling passion in great men,\so
the defence of them in this particular is the business of every
man of honour and honesty. We should run on suchan occasion,
as if a public building was on fire, to their relief; and all who
spread or publish such detestable pieces as traduce their merit,
should be used like incendiaries. It is the common cause «
40 our country to support the reputation of those who preserve


ON ENVY, 17


against invaders ; and every man is attacked in the person of
that neighbour who deserves well of him.


Tatler, No. 92.] [November 10, 1709.


No. 6. On Envy.


‘Di bene fecerunt, inopis me, auodque pusilli
Finxerunt animi, raro et perpauca loquentis.
Hor. Sat. i. 4. 17.


Observing one person behold another, who was an utter
Stranger to him, with a’ cast pf his eye, which methought ex-
pressed an emotion of heart very different from what could be
raised by an object so agreeable as the gentleman he looked
at, I began ‘to corisider,» not without some secret sorrow, the
condition of an envious man. Some have fancied that envy has
a certain magical force in it, and that the eyes of the envious

10 Have, by their fascination, blasted the enjoyments of the happy.
Sir Francis Bacon® says, some have been so curious as to re-
mark the times and seasons when the stroke of an envious eye
is most effectually pernicious, and have observed that it has
been when the person envied has been in any circumstance of
glory and triumph. At such a time the mind of the prosperous
Man goes, as it weré, abroad, among things without him, and is
More exposed to the malignity. But I shall not dwell upon
Speculations so abstracted as this, or repeat the many excellent
things which one,might collect out of authors upon this miser-

20 able affection ; but keeping in the road of common life, consider
the envious man with relation to 0 these. three heads, his pains,
his reliefs, and his happiness.

The envious man is in pain upon all occasions which ought
to give him pleasure. The relish of his life is inverted; and
the objects which administer the highest satisfaction to those
,who are exempt from this passion, give the quickest pangs to
persons who are subject to it. All the perfections of their fellow-
creatures are odious. Youth, beauty, valour, and wisdom, are
provocations of their displeasure. What a wretched and apos-

30 tate state is this: to be offended with excellence, and to hate a
man because we approve him! The condition of the envious

c


10


20


30


4c


18 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


man is the most emphatically miserable ; he is not only in-
capable of rejoicing in another’s merit or success, but lives in a
world wherein all mankind are in a plot against his quiet, by
studying their own happiness and advantage. Will Prosper is
an honest tale-bearer ; he makes it his business to join in con-
versation with envious men. He points to such a handsome
young fellow, and whispers that he is secretly married to a
great fortune. When they doubt, he adds circumstances to
prove it ; and never fails to aggravate their distress by assur-
ing them, that, to his knowledge, he has an uncle will leave
him some thousands. Will has many arts of this kind to tor-
ture this sort of temper, and delights in it. When he finds them”
change colour, and say faintly they wish suchea piece of news is
truie, he has the malice to speak some good or other of every
man of their acquaintance.

The reliefs of the envious man, are those little blemishes and
imperfections that discover themselves in an illustrious cha-
ractef. It is matter of great consolation to an eiivious person,
wirefi a man of known honour does a thing unworthy of himself ;
or when any action which was well executed, upon better infor-
mation appears so altered in its circumstances, that the fame of
it is divided among many, instead of being attributed to one.
This is a secret satisfaction to these malignants; for the person
whom they before could not but admire, they fancy is nearer their
own condition as soon as his merit is shared among others. I
remember some years ago, there came out an excellent poem
without the name of the author. The little wits, who were in-
capable of writing it, began to pull in pieces the supposed
writer. When that would not do, they took great pains’ to
suppress the opinion that it was his. That again failed. The
next refuge was, to say it was overlooked by one man, and
many pages wholly written by another. An honest fellow, who
sat amongst a cluster of them in debate on this subject, cried
out, ‘ Gentlemen, if you are sure none of you yourselves had a
hand in it, you are but where you were, whoever writ it.’ But
the most usual succour to the envious, in cases of nameless
merit in this kind, is to keep the property, if possible, unfixed,
and by that means to hinder the reputation of it from falling
upon any particular person. You see an envious man clear up
his countenance, if, in the relation of any man’s great happiness


ON FLATTERY. 19


in one point, you mention his uneasiness in another. When he
hears such a one is very rich, he turns pale, but recovers when
you add that he has many children. In a word, the only sure
Way to an envious man’s favour is not to deserve it.

But if we consider the envious man in delight, it is like
reading of the seat of a giant iii Fomiance ; thé magnificence of
his house consists in the many limbs of men whom he has slain.
If any who promised th ‘themselves success in any uncommon
undertaking miscarry in in the e attempt, or he that aimed at what

10 would have been useful and laudable, meets with contempt and
derision, the envious man, under the colour of hating v vain-glory,
can smile with an inward wantonness of heart at the ill effect it
may have upon ‘an honest ambition for the “future.

Having thoroughly considered the nature of this passion, I
have made it my study how to avoid the envy that may accrue
to me from these my speculations ; 3; and if I am not mistaken in
myself, I think I have a genius to escape it. oe hearing i in
apprehended the envy that would spring from. that applause ;

20 and therefore gave a description of my face” the next day; being
resolved, as I grow in réputation for wit, to resign my preten-
sions to beauty. This, I hope, may give some ease to those un-
happy gentlemen who do me the honour to torment themselves
Upon the account of this my paper. As their case is very
deplorable, and deserves compassion, I shall sometimes be dull
in pity to them, and will, from time to time, administer consola-
tions to them by farther discoveries of my person. In the
meanwhile, if any one says the Spectator has wit, it may be
Some relief to them to think that he does not show it in com-

30 pany. And if any one praises his morality, they may comfort

_ themselves by considering that his face is none of the longest,


Spectator, No. 19.] _ ,. [March 22, 1711,


No.7. On Flattery; Character of an agreeable Companion.
Si dixeris zestuo, sudat——JUV. Sat. iii, 103.


An old acquaintance, who met ‘me this morning, seemed
overjoyed to see me, and told me I looked as well as he had
C2


10


20


30


40


20 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


known me do these forty years: ‘but,’ continued he, ‘not quite
the man you were, when we visited together at Lady Brightly’s.
Oh! Isaac, those days are over. Do you think there are any


‘such fine creatures now living, as we then conversed with?’


He went on with a thousand incoherent circumstances, which,
in his imagination, must needs please me; but they had quite
the contrary effect. The flattery with which he began, in
telling me how well I wore, was not disagreeable ; but his
indiscreet mention of a set of acquaintance we had out-lived,
recalled ten thousand things to my memory, which made me
reflect upon my present condition with regret. Had he indeed
been so kind as, after a long absence, to felicitate, me upon an
indolent and easy old age; and mentioned how much he and
I had to thank for, who at our time of day could walk firmly,
eat heartily, and converse cheerfully, he had kept up my plea-
sure in myself. But of all mankind, there are none so shocking
as these injudicious civil people. They ordinarily begin upon
something that they know must be a satisfaction ; but then, for
fear of the imputation of flattery, they follow it with the last
thing in the world of which you would be reminded. It, is this
that perplexes civil persons. The reason that there is such
a general outcry among us against flatterers is, that there are
so very few good ones. It is the nicest art in this life, and is a
part of eloquence which does not want the preparation that is
necessary to all other parts of it, that your audience should
be your well-wishers ; for praise from‘an enemy is the most
pleasing of all commendations,

It is generally to be observed, that the person most agreeable
to a man for a constancy is he that has no shining qualities, but
is a certain degree above great imperfections ; whom he can
live with as his inferior, and who will either overlook, or not
observe his little defects. Such an easy companion as this
either now and then throws out a little flattery, or lets a man
silently flatter himself in his superiority to him. If you take
notice, there is hardly a rich man in the world, who has not
such a led friend" of small consideration, who is a darling for his
insignificancy. It is a great ease to have one in our own shape
a species below us, and who, without being listed in our service,
is by nature of our retinue. These dependants are of excellent
use on a rainy day, or when a man has not a mind to dress ; or


ON FLATTERY. 21


to exclude solitude, when one has neither a mind to that or to
company, There are of this good-natured order, who are so
kind as to divide themselves, and do these good offices to
many. Five or six of them visit a whole quarter of the town,
and exclude the spleen, without fees, from the families they
frequent. If they do not prescribe physic, they can be com-
pany when you take it. Very great benefactors to the rich, or
those whom they call people at their ease, are your persons of
no consequence. I have known some of them, by the help of
10a little cunning, make delicious flatterers. They know the
course of the town, and the general characters of persons ; by
this means they will sometimes tell the most agreeable false-
hoods imaginable. They will acquaint you, that such a one of
a quite contrary party said, ‘That though you were engaged in
different interests, yet he had the greatest respect for your
good sense and address.’ When one of these has a little
cunning, he passes his time in the utmost satisfaction to him-
self and his friends ; for his position is never to report or speak.
a displeasing thing to his friend. As for letting him go on in
20 an error, he knows, advice against them is the office of persons
of greater talents and less discretion.
The Latin word for a flatterer, assentator, implies no more:
than a person that barely consents ; and indeed such a one, if
a man were able to purchase ormaintain him, cannot be bought
too dear. Such a one never contradicts you; but gains upon
you, not by a fulsome way of commending you in broad terms,
but liking whatever you propose or utter; at the same time, is
ready to beg your pardon, and gainsay you, if you chance to
speak ill of yourself. An old lady is very seldom without
3° such a companion as this, who can recite the names of all
her lovers, and the matches refused by her in the days
when she minded such vanities, as she is pleased to call
them; though she so much approves the mention of them.
sIt is to be noted, that a woman’s flatterer is generally elder
than herself; her years serving at once to recommend her
patroness’s age, and to add weight to her complaisance in all
other particulars.
We gentlemen of small fortunes are extremely necessitous
in this particular, I have indeed one who smokes with me
40 often ; but his parts are so low, that all the incense he does me


1o


20


30


40


22 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


is to fill his pipe with-me, and to be out at just as many whiffs
as I take. This is all the praise or assent that he is capable
of; yet there are more hours when I would rather be in his
company than in that of the brightest man I know. It would
be a hard matter to give an account of this inclination to be
flattered ; but if we go to the bottom of it, we shall find, that
the pleasure in it is something like that of receiving money
which we lay out. Every man thinks he has an estate of
reputation, and is glad to see one that will bring any of it
home to him. It is no matter how dirty a bag it is conveyed
to him in, or by how clownish a messenger, so the money be
good. All that we want, to be pleased with flattery, is to be-
lieve that the man is sincere who gives it us. It is by this one
accident, that absurd creatures often outrun the most skilful in
this art. Their want of ability is-here.an advantage ; and their
bluntness, as it is the seeming effect of sincerity, is the best
cover to artifice. .

Terence introduces a flatterer talking to a coxcomb, whom
he cheats out of a livelihood ; and a third person on the stage
makes on him this pleasant remark, ‘ This fellow has an art of
making fools madmen.’ The love of flattery is, indeed, some-
times the weakness of a great mind; but you see it also in
persons, who otherwise discover no manner of relish of any
thing above mere sensuality. These latter it sometimes im-
proves ; but always debases the former. A fool is in himself
the object of pity, until he is flattered. By the force of that, his
stupidity is raised into affectation, and he becomes of dignity
enough to be ridiculous. I remember a droll", that upon one’s
saying, ‘ The times are so ticklish, that there must great care be
taken what one says in conversation ;’? answered with an air of
surliness and honesty, ‘If people will be free, let them be so in
the manner that I am, who never abuse a man but to his face.’
He had no reputation for saying dangerous truths ; therefore
when it was repeated, ‘You abuse a man but to his face?’
‘Yes,’ says he, ‘I flatter him.’

It is indeed the greatest of injuries to flatter any but the
unhappy, or such as are displeased with themselves for some
infirmity. In this latter case we have a member of our club,
who, when Sir Jeffery® falls asleep, wakens him with snoring.
This makes Sir Jeffery hold up for some moments the longer,


ON PRIDE, AS AFFECTING THE REASON. 23


to see there are men younger than himself among us, who are
more lethargic than he is.

When flattery is practised upon any other consideration, it is
the most abject thing in nature; nay, I cannot think of any
character below the flatterer, except he that envies him. You
meet with fellows prepared to be as mean as possible in their
condescensions and expressions; but they want persons and
talents to rise up to such a baseness. As a coxcomb is a fool
of parts, so is a flatterer a knave of parts.

10 =6The best of this order, that I know, is one who disguises it
under a spirit of contradiction or reproof. He told an arrant
driveller the other day, that he did not care for being in com-
pany with him, because he heard he turned his absent friends into
ridicule. And upon Lady Autumn’s disputing with him about
something that happened at the Revolution, he replied with
a very angry tone, ‘ Pray, madam, give me leave to know more
of a thing in which I was actually concerned, than you who
were then in your nurse’s arms,’


Tatler, No. 208.] [August 8, 1710.


No. 8. Ox Pride, as affecting the Reason.


Nimirum insanus paucis videatur, eo quod
Maxima pars hominum morbo jactatur eodem.
Hor. Sat. ii, 3. 120,


There is no affection of the mind so much blended in human

20 nature, and wrought into our very constitution, as pride. It
appears under a multitude of disguises, and breaks out in ten
thousand different symptoms. Every one feels it in himself,
and yet wonders to see it in his neighbour. I must confess, 1
met with an instance of it the other day, where I should very
little have expected it. Who would believe the proud person I
am going to speak of is a cobbler upon Ludgate-hill? This
artist being naturally a lover of respect, and considering that
his circumstances are such that no man living will give it him,
has contrived the figure of a beau, in wood ; who stands before
30 him in a bending posture, with his hat under his left arm, and


24 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


his right hand extended in such a manner as to hold a thread,
a piece of wax, or an awl, according to the particular service
in which his master thinks fit to employ him. When I saw
him, he held a candle in this obsequious posture. I was very
well pleased with the cobbler’s invention, that had so in-
geniously contrived an inferior, and stood a little while con-
templating this inverted idolatry, wherein the image did
homage to the man. When we meet with such a fantastic
vanity in one of this order, it is no wonder if we may trace it
10 through all degrees above it, and particularly through all the
steps of greatness. We easily see the absurdity of pride when
it enters into the heart of a cobbler; though in reality it is
altogether as ridiculous and unreasonable, wherever it takes
possession of a human creature. There is no temptation to
it from the reflection upon our being in general, or upon any
comparative perfection, whereby one man may excel another.
The greater a man’s knowledge is, the greater motive he may
seem to have for pride; but in the same proportion as the one
rises, the other sinks, it being the chief office of wisdom to dis-
20 cover to us our weaknesses and imperfections. ,

As folly is the foundation of pride, the natural superstructure
of it is madness. If there was an occasion for the experiment,
I would not question to make a proud man a lunatic in three
weeks’ time ; provided I had it in my power to ripen his frenzy
with proper applications. It is an admirable reflection® in
Terence, where it is said of a parasite, Hic homines ex stultis
Jatt insanos. ‘This fellow,’ says he,, ‘has an art of converting
fools into madmen.’ When I was in France, the region of
complaisance and vanity, I have often observed, that a great

30 man who has entered a levee of flatterers. humble and tem-
perate, has grown so insensibly heated by the court which
was paid him on all sides, that he has been. quite distracted
before he could get into his ’coach.

If we consult the collegiates of Moor-fields, we shall find
most of them are beholden to their pride for their introduction
into that magnificent palace®. I had, some years ago, the
curiosity to enquire into the particular circumstances of these
whimsical freeholders ; and learned from their own mouths the
condition and character of each of them. Indeed, I found

4° that all I spoke to were persons of quality. There were at


ON PRIDE, AS AFFECTING THE REASON, 25


that time five duchesses, three earls, two heathen gods, an
emperor, and a prophet. There were also a great number of
such as were locked up from their estates, and others who
concealed their titles. A leather-seller of Taunton whispered
me in the ear, that he was ‘the duke of Monmouth ;’ but
begged me not to betray him, At a little distance from him
sat a tailor’s wife, who asked me, as I went, if I had seen the
sword-bearer: upon which I presumed to ask her, whg she
was ? and was answered, ‘my lady mayoress,’

10 I was very sensibly touched with compassion towards these
miserable people; and, indeed, extremely mortified to see
human nature capable of being thus disfigured. However, I
reaped this benefit from it, that I was resolved to guard myself
against a passion which makes, such havoc in the brain, tand
produces so much disorder in the imagination. For this reason
T have endeavoured to keep down the secret swellings of re-
sentment, and stifle the very first suggestions of self-esteem ;
to establish my mind in tranquillity, and over-value nothing in
my own or in another’s possession. .

20 For the benefit of such wlhrose heads are a little turned,
though not to so great a degree as to qualify them for the
Place of which I have been now speaking, I shall assign one
of the sides of the college which I am erecting, for the cure of
this dangerous distemper.

The most remarkable of the persons, whose disturbance
arises from pride, and whom I shall use all possible diligence
to cure, are such as are hidden in the appearance of quite
contrary habits and dispositions. Among such, I shall, in
the first place, take care of one who is under the most subtle

30 species of pride that I have observed in my whole experience.

This patient is a person for whom J have a great-respect, as
being an old courtier, and a friend of mine in my youth. The
man has but a bare sulpistence, just enough to pay his reckoning
with us at the ‘Trumpet’™: but, by having spent the beginning
of his life in the hearing of great men and persons of power, he
is always promising to do good offices to introduce every man
he converses with into the world ; will desire one of ten times
his substance to let him see him sometimes, and hints to him,
that he does not forget him. He answers to matters of no

40 consequence with great circumspection ; but, however, main-


190


20


30


26 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


tains a general civility in his words and actions, and an insolent
benevolence to all whom he has to do with. This he practises
with a grave tone and air; and though I am his senior by
twelve years, and richer by forty pounds per annum, he had
yesterday the impudence to commend me to my face, and tell
me, ‘he should be always ready to encourage me.’ In a word,
he is a very insignificant fellow, but exceeding gracious. _The
best return I can make him for his favours is, to carry him
myself to Bedlam, and see him well taken care of.

The next person I shall provide for is of a quite contrary
character, that has in him all the stiffness and insolence of
quality, without a grain of sense or good-nature, to make it
either respected or beloved. His pride has infected every
muscle of his face; and yet, after all his endeavours to
show mankind that he contemns them, he is only neglected
by all that see him, as not of consequence enough to be
hated.

For the cure of this particular sort of madness, it will be
necessary to break through all forms with him, and familiarize
his carriage by the use of a good cudgel. It may likewise be
of great benefit to make him jump over a stick half a dozen
times every morning.

A third, whom I have in my eye, is a young fellow, whose
lunacy is such that he boasts of nothing but what he ought to
be ashamed of. He.... talks publickly of having committed
crimes which he ought to be hanged for by the laws of his
country.

There are several others whose brains are hurt with pride,
and whom I may hereafter attempt to recover; but shall
conclude my present list with an old woman, who is just
dropping into her grave, that talks of nothing but her birth.
Though she has not a tooth in her head, she expects to be
valued for. the blood in her veins ; which she fancies is much
better than that which glows in the cheeks of Belinda® and sets
half the town on fire,


Tatler, No. 127.) ° [January 31, 1710.


Io


20


30


ON ANGER, 27


No.9, On Anger.


Animum rege, qui nisi paret
Imperat. . Hor. Ep. i. 2. 62.


It is a very common expression, that such a one is very.good-
Natured, but very passionate. The expression, indeed, is very
good-natured, to allow passionate people so much quarter: but
I think a passionate man deserves the least indulgence imagin-
able. It is said, it is soon over; that is, all the mischief he
does is quickly dispatched, which, I think, is no great recom-
mendation to favour. I have known one of these good-natured
passionate men say in a mixed company, even to his own wife
or child, such things as the most inveterate enemy of his family
would not have spoken, even in imagination. It is certain that
quick sensibility is inseparable from .a ready understanding ;
but why should not that good understanding call to itself all its
force on such occasions, to master that sudden inclination to
anger? One of the greatest souls® now in the world is the most
subject by nature to anger, and yet so famous, from a conquest
of himself this way that he is the known example when you
talk of temper and command of a man’s self. To contain, the
Spirit of anger, is the worthiest discipline we can put ourselves
to. When a man has made any progress this way, a frivolous
fellow in a passion is to him as contemptible as a froward child.
It ought to be the study of every man for his own quiet and
peace. When he stands combustible and ready to flame upon
every thing that touches him, life is as uneasy to himself as it is
to all about him. Syncropius leads, of all men living, the most
ridiculous life; he is ever offending and begging pardon. If
his man enters the room without what he was sent for—‘ That
blockhead,’ begins he—‘ Gentlemen, I ask your pardon,, but
servants now-a-days’—, The wrong plates are laid, they are
thrown into the middle of the room ; his wife stands by in pain
for him, which he sees in her face, and answers as if he had
heard all she was thinking:—‘ Why? what the devil! Why
don’t you take care to give orders in these things?’ His
friends sit down to a tasteless plenty of every thing, every
minute expecting new insults from his impertinent passions,


Io


20


30


40


28 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


In a word, to eat with, or visit Syncropius, is no other than
going to see him exercise his family, exercise their patience,
and his own anger. :

It is monstrous that the shame and confusion in which this
good-natured angry man must needs behold his friends, while
he thus lays about him, does not give him so much reflection,
as to create an amendment. This is the most scandalous
disuse of reason imaginable: all the harmless part of him is
no more than that of a bull-dog, they are tame no longer than
they are not offended. One of these good-natured angry men


‘shall, in an instant, assemble together so many allusions to


secret circumstances, as are enough to dissolvé the peace of all
the families and friends he is acquainted with in a quarter of an
hour, and yet the next moment be the best-natured man in the
whole world. If you would see passion in its purity, without
mixture of reason, behold it represented in a mad hero, drawn
by a mad poet. Nat. Lee™ makes his Alexander say thus:— -


Away! begone! and give a whirlwind room,

Or I will blow you up like dust! Avaunt!

Madness but meanly represents my toil.

Eternal discord !

Fury! revenge! disdain and indignation !

Tear my swoll’n breast, make way for fire and tempest.
My brain is burst, debate and reason quench’d;

The storm is up, and my hot bleeding heart

Splits with the rack; while passions, like the wind,
Rise up to heav'n, and put out all the stars,


Every passionate fellow in town talks half the day-with as
little consistency, and threatens things as much out of his
power.

The next disagreeable person to the outrageous gentleman, is
one of a much lower order of anger, and he is what we com-
monly call a peevish fellow. A peevish fellow is one who has
some reason in himself for being out of humour, or has a
natural incapacity for delight, and therefore disturbs all who
are happier than himself with pishes and pshaws, or other well-
bred interjections, at every thing that is said or done in his
presence. There should be physic mixed in the food of all
which these fellows eat in good company. This degree of
anger passes, forsooth, for a delicacy of judgment, that will not
admit of being easily pleased ; but none above the character of


to


20


ON ANGER, 29


wearing a peevish man’s livery ought to bear with his ill
manners. All things among men of sense and condition should
pass the censure, and have the protection, of the eye of reason.

No man ought to be tolerated in an habitual humour, whim,
or particularity of behaviour, by any who do not wait upon him
for bread. Next to the peevish fellow is the snarler. This
gentleman deals mightily in what we call the irony; and as
those sort of people exert themselves most against those below
them, you see their humour best in their talk to their servants.
‘This is so like you; You are a fine fellow; Thou art the
quickest head-piece ;? and the like. One would think the
hectoring, the storming, the sullen, and all the different species
and subordinations of the angry should be cured, by knowing
they live only as pardoned men; and how pitiful is the condi-
tion of being only suffered! But I am interrupted by the
pleasantest scene of anger and the disappointment of it that
T have ever known, which happened while I was yet writing,
and I overheard as I sat in the back-room at a French book-
seller’s, There came into the shop a very learned man with an
erect solemn air; and though a person of great parts other-
wise, slow in understanding any thing which makes against
himself. The composure of the faulty man, and the whimsical
perplexity of him that’ was justly angry, is perfectly new.
After turning over many volumes, said the seller to the buyer,
‘Sir, you know I have long asked you to. send me back the
first volume of French sermons I formerly lent you.’—*‘ Sir,’
said the chapman®, ‘I have often looked for it, but cannot
find it; it is certainly lost, and I know not to whom J lent it, it
is so many years ago.’—‘ Then, Sir, here is the other volume ;


30 T'll send you home that, and please to pay for both.”—‘ My


friend,’ replied he, ‘canst thou be so senseless as not to know
that one volume is as imperfect in my library as in your
shop?’ Yes, Sir, but it is you have lost the first volume;
and, to be short, I will be paid.’—‘ Sir,’ answered the chapman,
‘you are a young man, your book is lost; and learn by this
little loss to bear much greater adversities, which you must
expect to meet with.’—‘ Yes, Sir, but I'll bear when I must, but
I have not lost now, for I say you have it, and shall pay me.’—
‘Friend, you grow warm; T tell you the book is lost; and I


40 foresee, in the course even of a prosperous life, that you will


30 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


meet afflictions to make you mad, if you cannot bear this trifle.
—‘ Sir, there is in this case no need of bearing, for you have
the book.’—‘ I say, Sir, I have not the book. But your passion
will not let you hear enough to be informed that I have it not.
Lear resignation of yourself to the distresses of this life : nay,
do not fret and fume ; it is my duty to tell you, that you are of
an impatient spirit, and an impatient spirit is never without
woe.’—‘ Was ever any thing like this ?’—‘ Yes, Sir, there have
been many things like this. The loss is but a trifle; but your

10 temper is wanton, and incapable of the least pain; therefore
let me advise you, be patient, the book is lost, but do not you
for that reason lose yourself.’


Spectator, No. 438.) [July 23, 1712.


No. 10. On Bravery.


Like leaves on trees the race of man is found.
Pore’s Homer’s //iad, Bk. 6.


There is no sort of people whose conversation is so pleasant
as that of military men, who derive their courage and mag-
nanimity from thought and reflection, The many adventures
which attend their way of life makes their conversation so
full of incidents, and gives them so frank an air in speaking
of what they have been witnesses of, that no company.can be
more amiable than that of men of sense who are soldiers.

ao There is a certain irregular way in their narrations or dis-
course, which has something more warm and pleasing than
we meet with among men who are used to adjust and
methodize their thoughts.

I was this evening walking in the fields with my friend
Captain Sentry®, and I could not, from the many relations
which I drew him into of what passed when he was in the
service, forbear expressing my wonder, that the fear of death,
which we, the rest of mankind, arm ourselves against with
so much contemplation, reason, and philosophy, should appear

30 so little in camps, that common men march into open breaches,
meet opposite battalions, not only without reluctance, but with


ON BRAVERY. 31


alacrity. My friend answered what I said in the following
manner: ‘What you wonder at may very naturally be the
subject of admiration to all who-are not conversant in camps;
but when a man-has spent some time in that way of life, he
observes a certain mechanic courage which the ordinary race
of men become masters of from acting always in a crowd.
They see indeed many drop, but then they see many more
alive ; they observe themselves escape very narrowly, and
they do not know why they should not again. Besides which
to general way of loose thinking, they usually spend the other
part of their time in pleasures upon which their minds are
so entirely bent, that short labours or dangers are but a cheap
purchase of jollity, triumph, victory, fresh quarters, new scenes,
and uncommon adventures. Such are the thoughts of the
executive part of an army, and indeed of the gross of mankind
in general ; but none of these men of mechanical courage have
ever made any great figure in the profession of arms. Those
who are formed for command, are such as have reasoned
themselves, out of a consideration of greater good than length
20 of days, into such a negligence of their being, as to make it
their first position, that it is one day to be resigned ;—and
Since it is, in the prosecution of worthy actions and service
of mankind they can put it to habitual hazard. The event
of our designs, say they, as it relates to others, is uncertain ;
but as it relates to ourselves it must be prosperous, while we
are in the pursuit of our duty, and within the terms upon
which Providence has ensured our happiness, whether we die
or live. All that nature has prescribed must be good; and
as death is natural to us, it is absurdity to fear it. Fear loses
30 its purpose when we are sure it cannot preserve us, and we
should draw resolution to meet it from the impossibility to
escape it. Without a resignation to the necessity of dying,
there can be no capacity in man to attempt any thing that is
glorious : but when they have once attained to that perfection,
the pleasures of a life spent in martial adventures are as great
as any of which the human mind is capable. The force of
reason gives a certain beauty, mixed with the conscience of well-
doing and thirst of glory to all which before was terrible and
ghastly to the imagination. Add to this, that the fellowship
40 of danger, the common godd of mankind, the general cause,


32 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


10


20


30


40


and the manifest virtue you may observe in so many men,
who made no figure until that day, are so many incentives
to destroy the little ‘consideration of their own persons. Such
are the heroic part of soldiers, who are qualified for leaders.
As to the rest whom I before spoke of, I know not how it
is, but they arrive at a certain habit of being void of thought,
insomuch that on occasion of the most imminent danger they
are still in the same indifference. Nay I remember an
instance of a gay Frenchman®, who was led on in battle by
a superior officer (whose conduct it was his custom to speak
of always with contempt and raillery), and in the beginning
of the action received* a wound he was sensible was mortal ;

his reflection on this occasion was, “I wish I could’live another
hour, to see how this blundering coxcomb will get clear of this
business,”

‘I remember two young fellows who rid in the same
squadron of a troop of horse, who were ever together ; they
ate, they drank, they intrigued ; in a word, all their passions
and affections seemed to tend the same way, and they
appeared serviceable to each other in them. We were in
the dusk of the evening to march over a river, and the troop
these gentlemen belonged to were to be transported in a
ferry-boat, as fast as they could. One of the friends was now


in the boat, while the other was drawn up-with others by the


water-side, waiting the return of the boat. A disorder hap-
pened in the passage by an unruly horse; and a gentleman
who had the rein of ‘his horse negligently under his arm, was
forced into the water by his horse’s jumping over. The friend
on the shore cried out, “ Who is that is drowned, trow?”2 He
was immediately answered, “Your friend Harry Thompson.”
He very gravely replied, “ Ay, he had a mad horse.” This
short epitaph from such a familiar, without more words, gave
me, at that time under twenty, a very moderate opinion of
the friendship of companions. Thus is affection and every
other motive of life in the generality rooted out by the present
busy scene about them; they lament no man whose capacity
can be supplied by another ; and where men converse without
delicacy, the next man you meet will serve as well as he whom
you have lived with half your life. To such the devastation
of countries, the misery of inhabitants, the cries of the pillaged,


lo


ON COURAGE AND MAGNANIMITY. 33


and the silent sorrow of the great unfortunate, are ordinary:
objects ; their minds are bent upon the little gratifications of
their own senses and appetites, forgetful of compassion, in-
sensible of glory, avoiding only shame; their whole hearts
taken up' with the trivial hope of meeting and being merry.
These are the people who make up the gross of the soldiery.
But the fine gentleman" in that band of men is such a one
as I have now in my eye, who is foremost in all danger to
which he is ordered. His officers are his friends and com-
panions, as they are men of honour and gentlemen; the
private men his brethren, as they are of his species. He is
beloved of all that behold him. They wish him in danger as
he views their ranks, that they may have occasions to save
him at their own hazard. Mutual love is the order of the
files where he commands; every man afraid for himself and
his neighbour, not lest their commander should punish them,
but lest he should be offended. Such is his regiment who
knows mankind, and feels their distresses so far as to prevent
them. Just in distributing what is their due, he would think


20 himself below their tailor to wear a snip of their clothes in


lace upon his own ; and below the most rapacious agent should
he enjoy a farthing above his own pay. Go on, brave man!
immortal glory is thy fortune, and immortal happiness thy
reward,’


Spectator, No. 152.] [August 24, 1711.


No. 11. On Courage and Magnanimity.


Ea animi elatio quae cernitur in periculis, si justitia vacat pugnatque
Pro suis commodis, in vitio est —TULL.


Captain Sentry was last night,at the club, and produced:a
letter from Ipswich, which his correspondent desired him to
communicate to his friend the Spectator. It contained an
account of an engagement between a French privateer, com-
manded by one Dominick Pottiere, and a little vessel of that


30 place laden with corn, the master whereof, as I remember,


was one Goodwin. The Englishman defended himself with
D


10


20


40


34 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


incredible bravery, and beat off the French, after having been
boarded three or four times. The enemy still came on with
greater fury, and hoped by his number of men to carry the prize;
till at last the Englishman, finding himself sink apace, and
ready to perish, struck; but the effect which this singular
gallantry had upon the captain of the privateer was no other
than an unmanly desire of vengeance for the loss he had sus-
tained in his several attacks. He told the Ipswich man ina
speaking-trumpet, that he would not take him aboard, and
that he stayed to see him sink. The Englishman at the same
time observed a disorder in the vessel, which he rightly judged
to proceed from the disdain which the ship’s crew had of their
captain’s inhumanity. With this hope he went into his boat,
and approached the enemy. He was taken in by the sailors in
spite of their commander: but, though they received him
against his corgmand, they treated him, when he was in the
ship, in the manner he directed. Pottiere caused his men to
hold Goodwin, while he beat him with a stick, till he fainted
with loss of blood and rage of heart ; after which he ordered
him into irons, without allowing him any food, but such as one
or two of the men stole to him under peril of the like usage:
and having kept him several days overwhelmed with the misery
of stench, hunger, and soreness, he brought him into Calais.
The governor of the place was soon acquainted with all that
had passed, dismissed Pottiere from his charge with ignominy,
and gave Goodwin all the relief which a man of honour would
bestow upon an énemy barbarously treated, to recover the im-
putation of cruelty upon his prince and country. 7

When Mr. Sentry had read his letter, full of many other cir-
cumstances which aggravate the barbarity, he fell into a sort of
criticism upon magnanimity and courage, and argued that they
were inseparable ; and that courage, without regard to justice
and humanity, was no other than the fierceness of a wild beast.
‘A good and truly bold spirit,’ continued he, ‘is ever actuated
by reason, and a sense of honour and duty. The affectation of
such a spirit exerts itself in an impudent aspect, an overbearing
confidence, and a certain negligence of giving offence. This is
visible in all the cocking youths you see about this town, who
are noisy in assemblies, unawed by the presence of wise and
virtuous men; in a word, insensible of all the honours and


ON COURAGE AND MAGNANIMITY, 35


decencies of human life. A shameless fellow takes advantage of
merit clothed with modesty and magnanimity, and, in the eyes
of little people, appears sprightly and agreeable: while the man
of resolution and true gallantry is overlooked and disregarded,
if not despised. There is a propriety in all things; and I
believe what you scholars call just and sublime, in opposition to
turgid and bombast expression, may give you an idea of what I
mean, when I say modesty is the certain indication of a great
spirit, and-impudence the affectation of it. He that writes with

10 judgment, and never rises into improper warmths, manifests the
true force of genius ; in like manner, he who is quiet and equal
in all his behaviour, is supported in that deportment by what we
may call true courage. Alas! it is not so easy a thing to be a
brave man as the unthinking part of mankind imagine. To
dare, is not all that there is in it. The privateer we were just
now talking of had boldness enough to attack his enemy, but
not greatness of mind enough to admire the same quality
exerted by that enemy in defending himself, Thus his base
and little mind was wholly taken up in the sordid regard to the

20 prize of which he failed, and the damage done to his own vessel;
and therefore he used an honest man, who defended his own
from him, in the manner as he would a thief that should rob
him.

‘ He was equally disappointed, and had not spirit enough to
consider, that one case would be laudable, and the other
criminal. Malice, rancour, hatred, vengeance, are what tear the
breasts of mean men in fight; but fame, glory, conquests,
desires of opportunities to pardon and oblige their opposers, are
what glow in the minds of the gallant.’ The captain ended his

3° discourse with a specimen of his book-learning ; and gave us
to understand that he had read a French author on the subject
of justness in point of gallantry. ‘I love,’ said Mr. Sentry, ‘a
critic who mixes the rules of life with annotations upon writers.
My author®,’ added he, ‘in his discourse upon epic poetry, takes
occasion to speak of the same quality of courage drawn in the
two different characters of Turnus and Aineas. He makes
courage the chief and greatest ornament of Turnus; but in
4Eneas there are many others which outshine it ; amongst the
rest, that of piety. Turnus is, therefore, all along painted by the

4° poet full of ostentation, his language haughty and vain-glorious, °

D2


36 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


as placing his honour in the manifestation of his valour: AZneas
speaks little, is slow to action, and shows only a sort of defen-
sive courage. If equipage and address make Turnus appear
more courageous than AEneas, conduct and success prove Acneas
more valiant than Turnus.’


Spectator, No. 350.] [April 11, 1712.


No.12. On the Portable Quality of Good Humour; Characters
of Harry Tersett and Rebecca Quickly, of Varilas.


Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus amico.—Honr. Sat. i. 5. 44.1


A man advanced in years that thinks fit to look back upon
his former life, and call that only life which was passed with
satisfaction and enjoyment, excluding all parts which were not
pleasant to him, will find himself very young, if not in his in-


x0 fancy. Sickness, il!-humour and idleness will have robbed him


20


of a great share of that space we ordinarily call our life, It is
therefore the duty of every man that would be true to himself,
to obtain, if possible, a disposition to be pleased, and place
himself in a constant aptitude for the satisfactions of his being.
Instead of this, you hardly see a man who is not uneasy in pro-
portion to his advancement in the arts of life. An affected
delicacy is the common improvement we meet with in those
who pretend to be refined above others.’ They do not aim at
true pleasures themselves, but turn their thoughts upon observ-
ing the false pleasures of other men. Such people are vale-
tudinarians in society, and they should no more come into
company than a sick man should come into the air. If a man
is too weak to bear what is a refreshment to men in health, he
must still keep his chamber. When any one in Sir Roger's’
company complains he is out of order, he immediately calls for
some posset-drink for him ; for which reason that sort of people
who are ever bewailing their constitution in other places, are
the cheerfullest imaginable when he is present.

It is a wonderful thing that so many, and they not reckoned


30 absurd, shall entertain those with whom they converse, by
“giving them the history of their pains and aches, and imagine .°


ON THE PORTABLE QUALITY, ETC. 37


such narrations their quota of the conversation. This is of all
other the meanest help to discourse, and a man must not think
at all, or think himself very insignificant, when he finds an
account of his head-ache answered by another’s asking what
news in the last mail? Mutual good humour is a dress we
ought to appear in whenever we meet, and we should make no
nention of what concerns ourselves, without it be of matters
wherein our friends ought to rejoice; but indeed there are
crowds of people who put themselves in no method of pleasing
10 themselves or others ; such are those whom we usually call in-
dolent persons. Indolence is, m€thinks, an intermediate state
between pleasure and pain, and very much unbecoming any part
of our life after we are out of the nurse’s arms. Such an aver-
sion to labour creates a constant weariness, and one would
think should make existence itself a burden. The indolent
man descends from the dignity of his nature, and makes that
being which was rational merely vegetative. His life consists
only in the mere increase and decay of a body, which, with
relation to the rest of the world, might as well have been unin-
20 formed, as the habitation of a reasonable mind.
Of this kind is the life of that extraordinary couple, Harry
Tersett and his lady. Harry was, in the days of his celibacy,
one of those pert creatures who have much vivacity and little
understanding ; Mrs. Rebecca Quickly, whom he married, had
all that the fire of youth and a lively manner could do towards
making an agreeable woman. These two people of'seeming
merit fell into each other’s arms ; and, passion being sated, and
no reason or good sense in either to succeed it, their life is now
at a Stand; their meals are insipid and their time tedious ; their
30 fortune has placed them above care, and their loss ‘of taste
reduced them below diversion. ‘When we talk of these as
instances of inexistence, we do not mean, that in order to live,
it is necessary we should be always in jovial crews, or crowned
with chaplets of roses, as the merry fellows among the ancients
are described; but it is intended, by considering these con-
traries to pleasure, indolence, and too much delicacy, to show
that it is prudence to preserve a, disposition in ourselves to
receive a certain delight in all we hear and see.

This portable quality of good humour seasons all the parts
40 and occurrences we meet with in 5uch a manner, that there are


Io


20


30


38 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


no moments lost; but they all pass with so much satisfaction,
that the -heaviest of loads (when it is a load,) that of time, is
never felt by us. Varilas has this quality to the highest perfec-
tion, and communicates it wherever he appears. The sad, the
merry, the severe, the melancholy, show a new cheerfulness
when he comes amongst them. At the same time no one can
repeat any thing that Varilas has ever said that deserves repeti-
tion ; but the man has that innate goodness of temper, that he
is welcome to every body, because every man chinks he is so'
to him. He does not seem to contribute any thing to the
mirth of the company; and yet upon reflection you find it all
happened by his being there. I thought it was whimsically
said of a gentleman, that if Varilas had wit, it would be the best
wit in the world. It is certain, when a well-corrected lively
imagination and good-breeding are added to a sweet disposi-
tion, they qualify it to be one of the greatest blessings as well
as pleasures of life.

Men would come into company with ten times the pleasure
they do, if they were sure of hearing nothing which should shock
them, as well as expected what would please them. When we
know every person that is spoken of is represented by one who
has no ill-will, and every thing that is mentioned described by
one that is apt to set it in the best light, the entertainment must
be delicate, because the cook has nothing brought to his hand
but what is the most excellent in its kind. Beautiful pictures
are the entertainments of pure minds, and deformities of the
corrupted. It isa degree towards the life of angels, when we
enjoy conversation wherein there is nothing presentéd but in
its excellence ; and a degree towards that of demons, wherein
nothing is shown but in its degeneracy,


Spectator, No. 100.] . [June 25, 1711,


No.18. On Being Agrecable in Company.


Cum tristibus severe, cam remissis jucunde, cum senibus graviter,
cum juventute comiter vivere—TUuLL.


The piece of Latin on the head of this paper is part of a
character extremely vicious, but I have set down no more than


ON BEING AGREEABLE IN COMPANY. 39


may fall in with the rules of justice and honour. Cicero spoke
it of Catiline, who, he said, ‘lived with the sad severely, with
the cheerful agreeably, with the old gravely, with the young
pleasantly ;? he added, ‘with the wicked boldly, with the
wanton lasciviously.’ The two last instances of his com:_
“ plaisance I forbear to consider, having it in my thoughts at
Present Only to speak of obsequious behaviour as it sits upon
a companion. in pleasure, not a man of design and intrigue.
To vary with every h humour i in { this n manner cannot be agreeable,

To except it comes from a man’s own temper and natural com-
plexion ; to do it out of an ambition to excel that way, is the
most fruitless and unbecoming prostitution imaginable. To
put on an artful part to obtain no other end but an unjust
praise from the undiscerning, is of all endeavours the most
despicable. A man must be sincerely pleased to become
pleasure, or not to interrupt that of others; for this reason it
is a most calamitous circumstance, that many people who want
to be alone, or should be so, will come into conversation. It
is certain that all men, who are the least given to reflection,

20 are seized with an inclination that way: when, perhaps, they
had rather be inclined to company ; but indeed they had better
go home and be tired with themselves, than force themselves
upon others to recover their good humour. In all this, the
case of communicating to a friend a sad thought or difficulty,
in order to relieve a heavy heart, stands excepted ; but what is
here meant is, that a man should always go with inclination to
the turn of the company he is going into, or not pretend to be
of the party. It is certainly a yery happy temper to be able to
live with ; all kinds of dispositions, because it argues a mind

3° that lies open to receive what is “pleasing to- others, and not
obstinately bent on any particularity of his own.

This is it which makes me pleased with the character of my
good acquaintance Acasto. You meet him at the tables and
conversations of the wise, the impertinent, the grave, the frolic,
and the witty; and yet his own character has nothing in it
that can make him particularly agreeable to any one sect of
men; but Acasto has natural good sense, good nature, and
discretion, so that every man enjoys himself in his company ;
and though Acasto contributes nothing to the entertainment,

40 he never was at a place where he was not welcome a second


40 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


time. Without the subordinate good qualities of Acasto, a
man of wit and learning would be painful to the generality
of mankind, instead of being pleasing. Witty men are apt
to imagine they are agreeable as such, and by *that means
‘grow the worst companions imaginable ; ; they deride the
absent or rally the preSeiit in_a wrong manner, not knowing
that if you pIRGE oF tickle ‘a man till Te is tineasy’ in his seat,
or ungracefully distinguished from the rest of the company,
you equally hurt him,

10 I was going to say, the true art of being agreeable in
company (but there can be no such thing as art in it) is to
appear W well pleased with those you are engaged, with, and
rather to to seem well entertained, than to bring entertainment
toOthers. A man thus disposed is not indeed what ‘we
ordinarily call a good companion, but essentially is such, and
in all the parts of his conversation has something friendly | in
his behaviour, which ' conciliates men’s minds more than the
highest sallits of wit or starts of humour can possibly do. The
feebleness of agein a man of this turn has something which

20 should be treated with respect even in a man no otherwise
venerable. The forwardness of youth, when it proceeds from
alacrity and not insolence, has also its allowances, The
companion who is formed, for such by nature, gives to every
character of life its due regards, and is ready to-.account for
their imperfections, and receive their accomplishments as if
they were his own. It must appear that you receive law from,
and not give it to, your company, to make you agreeable.

I remember Tully, speaking, I think, of Antony, says, that,
in eo facelia erant, gue nulla arte tradi possunt; ‘He hada

30 witty mirth, which could be acquired by no art.’ This quality
must be of the kind of which I am now speaking ; for all sorts
of behaviour which depend upon observation and knowledge
of life are to be acquired ; but that which no one can describe,
and is apparently the act of nature, must be every where pre-
valent, because every thjng it meets is a fit occasion to exert
it; for he who follows naire can never be improper 0 or un-
sseasonaple.

“How unaccountable then must their behaviour be, who,
without any manner af consideration of what the company

40 they have just now entered are upon, give themselves the air


ON SOLITUDE; CHARACTER OF IRUS., 4t


of a messenger, and make as distinct relations of the occur-
rences they last met with, as ‘if they had been dispatched from
those they talk to, to be punctually exact in a report .of those
circumstances! It is unpardonable to those who are met to.
enjoy one another that a fresh man shall pop in, and give us
only the last part of his own life, and put a stop to ours during
the history. If such a man comes from ’Change, whether you
will or not, you must hear how the stocks go: and, though you
are ever so intently employed on a graver subject, a young

10 fellow of the other end of the town will take his place and tell
you, Mrs, Such-a-one is charmingly handsome, because he just
now saw her. But I think I need not dwell on this subject,
since I have acknowledged there can be no rules made for
excelling this way; and precepts of this kind fare like rules
for writing poetry, which, it is said, may have prevented ill
Poets, but never made good ones,


Spectator, No. 386.] [May 23, 1712.


No, 14. On Solitude; Character of Irus.


Secretum iter, et fallentis semita vitze.
Hor. Ep. i. 18. 103.


It has been from age to age an affectation to love the pleasure
of of ‘solitude, among those who cannot possibly be supposed
qualified for passing life in that manner. This people have

20 taken up from reading the many agreeable things which have
been written on that subject, for which we are beholden to ex-
cellent persons who delighted in being retired, and abstracted
from the pleasures that enchant the generality of the world.
This way of life is recommended indeed with great beauty, and
in such a manner as disposes the reader for the time toa pleasing
forgetfulness, or negligence of the particular hurry of life in
which he is engaged,” together with a longing: for that state
which he is charmed with in description. But when we con-
Sider the world itself, and how few there are capable of a

3° religious, learned, or philosophic solitude, we shall be apt to
changé~a regard to that sort of solitude, for being a little


10


20


30


42 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


singular in enjoying time after the way a man himself likes best
in the world, without going so far as wholly to withdraw from it.
I have often observed, there is not a man breathing who does
not differ from all other men as much in the sentiments of his
mind as the features of his face. The felicity is, when any one
is so happy as to find out and follow what is the proper bent of
his genius, and turn all his endeavours to exert himself accord-
ing as that prompts him. Instead of this, which is an innocent
method of enjoying a man’s self, and turning out-of the general
tracks ‘wherein you have crowds of rivals, thére are those who
pursue their own way out of a sourness and spirit of contradic-
tion. These men do every thing which they are able to support,
as if guilt and impunity could not go together. They choose a
thing only because another dislikes it ; and affect forsooth an
inviolable constancy in matters of no manner of moment. Thus
sometimes an old fellow shall wear this or that sort of cut in his
clothes with great integrity, while all the rest of the world are
degenerated into buttons, pockets, and loops unknown to their
ancestors, As insignificant as even this is, if it were searched
to the bottom, you perhaps would find it not sincere, but that
he is in the fashion in his heart, and holds out from mere ob-
stinacy. But I am running from my intended purpose, which
was to celebrate a certain particular manner of passing away
life, and is a contradiction to no man, but a resolution to contract
none of the exorbitant desires by which others are enslaved.
The best way of separating a man’s self from the world, is to
give up the desire of being known to it. After a man has pre-
served his innocénce, and performed all duties incumbent-upon
him, his time spent his own way is what makes his life differ
from that of a slave.. If _they who affect show and pomp knew
how many of their spectators derided their trivial taste, they :
would be very much less elated, and have an inclination to


-eXamin€ the merit of all they have to do with: they wouldSoon


40


find out that there are many who make a figure below what
their fortune or merit entitles them to, out of mere choice, and
an elegant desire of ease and disencumbrance. It would look
like romance to tell you in this age, of an old man who is con-
tented to pass for a humourist, and one who does not understand
the figure he ought to make in the world, while he lives in a
lodging of ten shillings a week with only one servant ; while he


ON SOLITUDE; CHARACTER OF IRUS. 43


dresses himself according to the season in cloth or in stuff, and
has no one necessary attention.to any thing but the bell which
calls to prayers twice a-day: I say it would look like a fable to
report that this gentleman gives away all which is the overplus
of a great fortune by secret methods to other men. If he has
not the pomp of a numerous train, and of professors of service
to him, he has every day he lives the conscience that the widow,

‘ the fatherless, the mourner, and the stranger, bless his unseen
hand in their prayers. This humourist gives up all the compli-

To ments which people of his own condition could make him, for
the pleasure of helping the afflicted, supplying the needy, and
befriending the neglected. This humourist keeps to himself
much more than he wants, and gives a vast refuse of his
superfiuities to purchase heaven, and by freeing others from
the temptations of worldly want, to carry a retinue with him
thither.

Of all men who affect living in a particular way, next to this
admirable character, I am the most enamoured of Irus, whose
condition will not admit of such largesses, and who perhaps

‘20 would not be capable of making them if it were. Irus, though
he is now turned of fifty, has not appeared in the world in his
rea] character since five-and-twenty, at which age he ran out a
small patrimony, and spent some time after with rakés who had
lived upon him. A course of ten years time passed in all the
‘little alleys, by-paths, and sometimes open taverns and streets
of this town, gave Irus a perfect skill in judging of the inclina-
tions of mankind, and acting accordingly. He He seriously c con-
sidered he was Poor, and the general horror which most men

have.of all who are in that condition. Irus judged very rightly,

30 that while he could keep his poverty a secret, he should not feel
the weight of it ; he improved this thought into an affectation
of closeness and covetousness., Upon this one principle he
resolved to govern his future life ; and in the thirty-sixth year
of his age he repaired to Long-lane®, and looked upon several
dresses which hung there deserted by their first masters, and
exposed to the purchase of the best bidder. At this place he
exchanged his gay shabbiness of clothes fit for a much younger
man, to warm ones that would be decent for a much older one.
Irus came out thoroughly equipped from head to foot, with a

40 little oaken cane, in the form of a substantial man that did not


44 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


mind his dress, turned of fifty. He had at this time fifty pounds
in ready money; and in this habit, with this fortune, he took
Ris present lodging in St. John-street 9, at the mansion-house of
a tailor’s widow, who washes, and can clear-starch his bands.
From that time to this he has kept the main stock, without
alteration under or. over to the value of five pounds. He left
off all his old acquaintance to-a man, and all his arts of life,
except the play of back-gammon, upon which he has more than
bore his charges.” Irus has, ever since he came into this neigh-

10 bourhood, given all the intimations he skilfully could of being a
close _hunks worth money: nobody comes to visit him, he re-
ceives no ‘Jetters, and tells his money ‘morning and evening.
He has from the public papers a knowledge of what generally
passes, shuns all discourses of money, but shrugs his shoalders
when you.talk of securities ; he denies his being rich, with the
air which all do who are vain of being so. He is the oracle
of a-neighbourihg justice of peace, who meets him at the
coffee-house ; the hopes that what he has must come to some-
body, and that he has no heirs, have that effect wherever he is

zo known, that ‘he every day has three or four invitations to dine
at different places, which he generally takes care to choose. in
such a manner as not to seem inclined to the richer man. All
the young*men respect him, and say he is just the same man
he was when they were boys. He uses no. artifice in the
world, but makes use of men’s designs upon him to get a main-
tenance out of them, This he carries on by a certain peevish-
ness (which he acts very well) that no one would believe coyld
possibly enter into the head of 4 poor fellow. His mien, his
dress, his carriage, and his language, are such, that you would

30 be at a loss to guess whether in the active part of his life he
had been a sensible citizen, or scholar that knew the world.
These are the great circutiistances in the life of Irus, and thus
does he pass away his days a stranger to mankind ; and at his
death, the worst that will be said of him will be, that he got by
every man who had expectations from him more than he had to
leave him.

I have an inclination to print the following letters ; for that I
have heard the author of them® has somewhere or ‘other seen
me, and by an excellent faculty in mimicry my correspondents

40 tell me he can assume my air, and give my taciturnity a slyness


ON SOLITUDE; CHARACTER OF IRUS. 45


which diverts more than anything I could say if I were present.
Thus I am glad my silence is atoned for to the good company
in town. He has carried his skill in imitation so far as to have
forged a letter from my friend:'Sir Roger™ inuch a manner, that
any one but I, who am thoroughly acquainted with him, would
have taken it for genuine.


“MR. SPECTATOR,

‘Having observed in Lilly’s grammar how sweetly Bacchus
and Apollo run in a verse; I have (to preserve the amity between
10 them) called in Bacchus to the aid of my profession of the
theatre. So that while some people of quality are bespeaking
plays of me to be actéd on such a day, and others, hogsheads
for their houses against such a time} I am wholly employed in
the agreeable service of wit and wine. Sir, I have sent you Sir
Roger de Coverley’s letter to me, which pray comply with in
favour of the Bumper tavern. Be kind, for you know a player's

utmost pride is the approbation of the Spectator.

‘Iam your admirer, though unknown,
‘RICHARD Estcourt.’


20 *To Mr. Estcourt,
At his house in Covent-Garden, ,
* Coverley, December the 18th, 1711.
‘OLD COMICAL ONE,

‘The hogsheads of neat port came safe, and have gotten thee
g0od reputation in these parts; and I am glad to hear, that a
fellow who has been laying out his money ever since he was
born for the mere pleasure of wine, has bethought himself of
joining profit and pleasure together. Our sexton (poor man)
having received strength from thy wine since his fit of the gout,

30 is hugely taken with it: he says it is given by nature for the use
of families, and that no steward’s table can be without it ; that
it strengthens digestion, excludes surfeits, fevers, and physic ;
whi@h green wines of any kind can’t do. Pray get a pure snug
room ; and I hope next term to help fill your Bumper with our
people of the club; but you must have no bells stirring when
the Spectator comes #1 forebore ringing to dinner while he was
down with me in the country. Thank you for the little hams
and Portugal onions; pray keep some always by you. You
know my supper is only good Cheshire cheese, best mustard,


190


20


30


46 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


a golden pippin, attended with a pipe of John Sly’s best®, Sir
Harry has stolen all your songs, and tells the story of the 5th of
November to perfection,
‘Yours to serve you,
‘ROGER DE COVERLEY.
‘We have lost old John since you were here.’


Spectator, No..264,] [Tanuary 2, 1712.


Wo.15. On the Abuse of the Understanding; the Athenians
and Lacedemonians compared.


Credebant hoc grande nefas, et morte pianaum,
Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat,
Juv. Sat. xiii. 54.


I know no evil under the sun so great as the abuse of the
understanding, and yet there is no one vice more common.
It has diffused itself through both sexes, and all qualities of
mankind, and there is hardly that person to be found, who is
not more concerned for ‘the reputation of wit and sense, than
honesty and virtue. But this unhappy affectation of being wise
rather than honest, witty than good-natured, is the source of
most of the ill habits of life. Such false impressions are owing
to the abandoned writings of men of wit, and the awkward
imitation of the rest of mankind,

For this reason Sir Roger was saying last night, that he was
of opinion none but men of fine parts deserved to be hanged.
The reflections of such men are so delicate upon all occurrences
which they are concerned in, that they should be exposed to
more than ordinary infamy and punishment, for offending
against such quick admonitions as their own souls give them,
and blunting the fine edge of their minds in such a manner,
that they are no more shocked at vice and folly than mam of
slower capacities. There is no greater monster in being, than
a very ill man of great parts. He lives like a man in a palsy,
with one side of him dead. While perhaps he enjoys the satis-
faction of luxury, of wealth, of ambition, he has lost the taste of
good-will, of friendship, of innocence. Scarecrow, the beggar
in Lincoln’s-inn-fields, who disabled himself in his right leg, .


ON THE ABUSE OF THE UNDERSTANDING. 47


and asks alms all day to get himself a warm supper at night,
is not half so despicable a wretch as such a man of sense.
The beggar has no relish above sensations ; he finds rest more ,
agreeable than motion ; and while he has a warm fire and his
doxy, never reflects that he deserves to be whipped. Every
man who terminates his satisfactions and enjoyments within
the supply of his own necessities and passions is, says Sir
Roger, in my eye, as poor a rogue as Scarecrow. ‘ But, con-
tinued he, ‘for the loss of public and private virtue, we are
10 beholden to your men of parts forsooth; it is with them no
matter what is done, so it be done with an air. But to me,
who am so whimsical in a corrupt age as to act according to
nature and reason, a selfish man, in the most shining circum-
Stance and equipage, appears in the same condition with the
fellow above-mentioned, but more contemptible in proportion
to what more he robs the public of, and enjoys above him. I
lay it down therefore for a rule, that the whole man is to move
together; that every action.of any importance is to have a
Prospect of public good’: and that the general tendency of our
20 indifferent actions ought to be agreeable to the dictates of
reason, of religion, of good-breeding; without this, a man, as I
have before hinted, is hopping instead of walking, he is not in
his entire and proper motion”
While the honest knight was thus bewildering himself in
good starts, | looked attentively upon him, which made him,
I thought, collect*his mind a little. ‘What I aim at,’ says he,
‘is to represent, that I am of opinion, to polish our under-
Standings, and neglect our manners, is of all things the most
inexcusable. Reason should govern passion, but instead of
3° that, you see, it is. often subservient to it; and as unaccount-
able as one would think it, a wise man.is not always a good
man.’ This degeneracy is not only the guilt of particular per-
sons, but also at some times of a whole people ; and perhaps
it may appear upon examination, that the most polite ages are
the least virtuous. This may be attributed to the folly of
admitting wit and learning as merit in themselves, without con-
sidering the application of them. By this means it becomes a
rule, not so much to regard what we do, as how we do it. But
this false beauty will not pass upon men of honest minds, and
4° true taste. Sir Richard Blackmore says”, with as much good


pce)


2


fe)


30


48 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


sense as virtue, ‘It is a mighty dishonour and shame to employ
excellent faculties and abundance of wit, to humour and please
men in their vices and follies. The great enemy of mankind,
notwithstanding his wit and angelic faculties, is the most odious
being in the whole creation.’ He goes on soon after to say, very
generously, that he undertook the writing of his poem ‘to rescue
the Muses out of the hands of ravishers, to restore them to
their, sweet and chaste mansions, and to engage them in an
employment suitable to their dignity.’ This certainly ought to
be the purpose of every man who appears in public, and who-
ever does not proceed upon that foundation, injures his country
as far as he succeeds in his studies. When modesty ceases to
be the chief ornament of one sex, and integrity of the other,
society is upon a wrong basis, and we shall be ever after with-
out rules to guide our judgment in what is really becoming and
ornamental. Nature and reason direct one thing, passion and
humour another. To follow the dictates of the two latter, is
going into a road that is both endless and intricate; when we
pursue the other, our passage is delightful, and what we aim at
easily attainable.

I do not doubt but England is at present as polite a nation as
any in the world ; but any man who thinks, can easily see, that
the affectation of being gay and in fashion, has very near eaten
up our good sense, and our religion. Is there any thing so just,
as that mode and gallantry should be built upon exerting our-
selves in what is proper and agreeable to the institutions of
justice and piety among us? And yet is there any thing more
common, than ithat we run in perfect contradiction to them?
All which is supported by no other pretension, than that it is
done with what we call a good grace.

Nothing ought to be held laudable or becoming, but what
nature itself should prompt us to think so. Respect to all
kind of superiors is founded, methinks, upon instinct ; and yet
what is so ridiculous as age? I make this abrupt transition to


_ the mention of this vice more than any other, in order to intro-


duce a little story, which I think a pretty instance, that the most
polite age is in danger of being the most vicious.

‘It happened at Athens, during a public representation of
some play exhibited in honour of the commonwealth, that an


40 old gentleman came too late for a place suitable to his age and


ON THE USELESSNESS OF RETROSPECT. 49


quality. Many of the young gentlemen, who observed the diffi-
culty and confusion he was in, made signs to him that they
would accommodate him if he came where they sat. The good
man bustled through the crowd accordingly ; but when he came
to the seats to which he was invited, the jest was to sit close
and expose him, as he stood out of countenance, to the whole
audience. The frolic went round all the Athenian benches. But
on those occasions there were also particular places assigned
for foreigners. When the good man skulked towards the boxes

to appointed for the Lacedemonians, that honest people, more
virtuous than polite, rose up all to a man, and with the greatest
respect received him among them. The Athenians being sud-
denly touched with a sense of the Spartan virtue and their own
degeneracy, gave a thunder of applause; and the old man cried
out, “The Athenians understand what is good, but the Lacede-
monians practise it”?


Spectator, No. 6:] . [March 7, 1711.


No. 18. On the Uselessness of Retrospect.


Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agendum.
Lucan, ii. 57.


There is a fault, which, though common, wants a name. It
is the very contrary to procrastination, As we lose the present
hour by delaying from day to day to execute what we ought to

20'do immediately, so most of us take occasion to sit still and
throw away the time in our possession by retrospect on what
is past, imagining we have already acquitted ourselves, and
established our characters in the sight of mankind. But when
we thus put a value upon ourselves for what we have already
done, any further than to explain ourselves in order to assist
our future conduct, that will give us an over-weening opinion
of our merit, to the prejudice of our present industry. The
great rule, methinks, should be, to manage the instant in
which we stand, with fortitude, equanimity, and moderation,
30 according to men’s respective circumstances. If our past
actions reproach us, they cannot be atoned for by our own
severe reflections so effectually as by a contrary behaviour,
E


50 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


If they are praiseworthy, the memory of them is of no use
but to act suitably to them. Thus a good present behaviour
is an implicit repentance for any miscarriage in what is past ;
but present slackness will not make up for past activity. Time
has swallowed up all that we contemporaries did yesterday as
irrevocably as it has the actions of the antediluvians. But we
are again awake, and what shall we do to-day—to-day, which
passes while we are yet speaking? Shall we remember the
folly of last night, or resolve upon the exercise of virtue to-
zo morrow? Last night is certainly gone, and to-morrow may
never arrive. This instant make use of. Can you oblige any
man of honour and virtue? Do it immediately. Can ‘you
visit a sick friend? Will it revive him to see you enter, and
suspend your own ease and pleasure to comfort his weakness,
and hear the impertinencies of a wretch in pain? Do not stay
to take coach, but be gone. Your mistress will bring sorrow,
and your bottle madness. Go to neither Such virtues
and diversions as these are mentioned because they occur to
all men. But every man is sufficiently convinced, that to
zo suspend the use of the present moment, and resolve better
for the future only, is an unpardonable folly. What I attempted
to consider, was the mischief of setting such a value upon what
is past, as to think we have done enough. Let a man ‘have
filled all the offices of life with the highest dignity till yester-
day, and begin to live only to himself to-day, he must expect
he will, in the effects upon his reputation, be considered as the
man who died yesterday. The man who distinguishes himself
from the rest, stands in a press of people: those before him
intercept his progress ; and those behind him, if he does not
30 urge on, will tread him down. Czsar%, of whom it was said that
he thought nothing done while there was left any thing for him
to do, went on in performing the greatest exploits, without as-
suming to himself a privilege of taking rest upon the foundation
of the merit of his former actions. It was the manner of
that glorious captain to write down what scenes he passed
through ; but it was rather to keep his affairs in method, and
capable of a clear review in case they should be examined by
others, than that he built a renown upon any thing that was
past. I shall produce two fragments of his, to demonstrate
4° that it was his rule of life to support himself rather by what he


ON THE USELESSNESS OF RETROSPECT. 5!


should perform, than what he had done already. In the tablet
which he wore about him the same year in which he obtained
the battle of Pharsalia, there were found these loose notes for
his own conduct. It is supposed, by the circumstances they
alluded to, that they might be set down the evening of the
same night.

‘My part is now but begun, and my glory must be sustained
by the use I make of this victory ; otherwise my loss will be
greater than that of Pompey. Our personal reputation will

10 rise or fall as we bear our respective fortunes. All my private
enemies among the prisoners shall be spared. I will. forget
this; in order to obtain such another day. Trebutius is
ashamed to see me} I will go to his tent, and be reconciled
in private. Give all the men of honour, who take part with
me, the terms I offered before the battle. Let them owe this
to their friends who have been long in my interests. Power is
weakened by the full use of it, but extended by moderation.
Galbinius is proud, and will be servile in his present fortune :
let him wait. Send for Stertinius: he is modest, and his virtue

20 is worth gaining. I have cooled my heart with reflection, and
am fit to rejoice with the army to-morrow. He is.a popular
general, who can expose himself like a private man during a
battle ; but he is more popular who can rejoice but like a
private man after a victory.’ :

What is particularly proper for the example of all who
Pretend to industry in the pursuit of honour and virtue, is,
that this hero was more than ordinarily solicitous about his
reputation, when a common mind would have thought itself
in security, and given itself a loose to joy and triumph. But

3° though this is a very great instance df his temper, I must
confess I am more taken with his reflections when he retired
to his closet in some disturbance upon the repeated ill omens
of Calphurnia’s dream, the night before his death. The literal
translation of that fragment shall conclude this paper,

‘Be it sothen. If 1am to die to-morrow, that is what I am
to do to-morrow. It will not be then, because I am willing it
should be then ; nor shall I escape it, because I am unwilling.
It is in the gods when, but in myself how, I shall die. If Cal-
phurnia’s dreams are fumes of indigestion, how shall I. behold

4° the day after to-morrow! If they are from the gods, their

E2


10


20


30


52 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


admonition is not to prepare me to escape from their decree,
but to meet it. I have lived a fulness of days and of glory:
what is there that Czesar has not done with as much honour as
ancient heroes ?>—Casar has not yet died! Czsar is prepared
to die.’


Spectator, No. 374.] [May 9, 1712.


No. 17. On Debt.


Caput domina venale sub hasta.
Juv. Sat. iii. 33.


Passing under Ludgate® the other day, I heard a voice bawl-
ing for charity, which I thought I had somewhere heard before.
Coming near to the grate, the prisoner called me by my name,
and desired I would throw something into the box; I was out


‘of countenance for ‘him, and did as he bid me, by putting in


half-a-crown. I went away, reflecting upon the strange con-
stitution of some men, and how meanly they behave themselves
in all sorts of conditions. The person who begged of me is
now, as I take it, fifty: I was well acquainted with him till about
the age of twenty-five ; at which time a good estate fell to him
by the death of a relation. Upon coming to this unexpected
good fortune, he ran into all the extravagances imaginable ;
was frequently in drunken disputes, broke drawers’ heads,
talked and swore loud, was unmannerly to those above him, and
insolent to those below him. I could not but remark, that it
was the same baseness of spirit which worked in his behaviour
in both fortunes > the ‘same little mind was insolent in riches,
and shameless in poverty. This accident made me muse upon
the circumstance of being in debt in general, and solve in my
mind what tempers were most apt to fall into this error of life,
as well as the misfortune it must needs be to languish under
such pressures. As for myself, my natural aversion to that
sort of conversation which makes a figure with the generality of
mankind, exempts me from any temptations to expense ; and
all my business lies within a very narrow compass, which is
only to give an honest man who takes care of my estate, proper
vouchers for his quarterly payments to me, and observe what


ON DEBT, 53


linen my laundress brings and takes away with her once a
week. My steward brings his receipt ready for my signing ;
and I have a pretty implement with the respective names of
shirts, cravats, handkerchiefs, and stockings, with proper num-
bers, to know how to reckon with my laundress. This being
almost all the business I have in the world for the care of my
own affairs, I am at full leisure to observe upon what others do,
with relation to their equipage and economy.
When I walk the street and ébserve the hurry about me in
To this town,
Where, with like haste, through diff’rent ways they run;
Some to undo, and some to be undone!
I say, when I behold this vast variety of persons and humours,
with the pains they both take for the accomplishment of the
ends mentioned in the above verses of Denham, [I cannot
much wonder at the endeavour after gain, but am extremely
astonished that men can be so insensible of the danger of
running into debt. One would think it impossible a man
who is given to contract debts should know, that his creditor
20 has, from that moment in which he transgresses payment,
so much as that demand comes to, in his debtor’s honour,
liberty, and fortune. One would think he did not know that
his creditor can say the worst thing imaginable of him, to wit,
‘That he is unjust,’ without defamation; and can seize his
person, without being guilty of an assault. Yet such is the
loose and abandoned turn of some men’s minds, that they can live
under these constant apprehensions, and still go on to increase
the cause of them. Can there be ‘a more low and servile con-
dition, than to be ashamed or afraid to see any one man breath-
30ing? Yet he that is much in debt, ist in that condition with
relation to twenty different people. There are indeed circum-
Stances wherein men of honest natures may become liable to
debts, by some unadvised behaviour in any great point of their
life, or mortgaging a man’s honesty as a security for that of
another, and the like ; but these instances are so particular and
circumstantiated, that they cannot come within general consi-
derations. For one such case as one of these, there are ten
where a man, to keep up a farce of retinue and grandeur within
his own house, shall shrink at the expectation of surly demands
40 at his doors. The debtor is the creditor’s criminal ; and all the


10


20


30


40


54 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


officers of power and state, whom we behold make so great a
figure, are no other than so many persons in authority to make
good his charge against him. Human society depends upon his
having the vengeance law allots him; and the debtor owes his
liberty to his neighbour, as much as the murderer does his life
to his prince.

Our gentry are, generally speaking, in debt; and many
families have put it into a kind of method of being so from
generation to generation. The father mortgages when his son
is very young ; and the boy is to marry, as soon as he is at age,
to redeem it and find portions for his sisters. This, forsooth,
is no great inconvenience to him; for he may keep a public
table, or feed dogs, like a worthy English gentleman, till he has
out-run half his estate, and leave the same encumbrance upon
his first-born, and so on; till one man of more vigour than
ordinary goes quite through the estate, or some man of sense
comes into it, and scorns to have an estate in partnership, that
is to say, liable to the demand or insult of any man living.
There is my friend Sir Andrew, though for many years a great
and general trader, was never the defendant in a law suit, in all
the perplexity of business, and the iniquity of mankind at pre-
sent; no one had any colour for the least complaint against
his dealings with him. This is certainly as uncommon, and in
its proportion as laudable in a citizen, as it is in a general
never to have suffered a disadvantage in fight. How different
from this gentleman is Jack Tryepenny®, who has been an
old acquaintance of Sir Andrew and myself from boys, but
could never learn our caution. Jack has an unresisting good
nature, which makes him incapable of having 4 property in
any thing. His fortune, his reputation, his time, and his capa-
city, are at any man’s service that comes first. When he
was at school he was whipped thrice a week for faults he took
upon him to excuse others ; since he came into the business of
the world, he has been arrested twice or thrice a-year for debts’
he had nothing to do with, but as surety for others;...’ Jack
had a good estate left him, which came to nothing; because he
believed all who pretended to demands upon it. This easiness
and credulity destroy all the other merit he has; and he has
all his life been a sacrifice to others, without ever receiving
thanks, or doing one good action.


To


29


30


ON THE CONDITION OF BANKRUPTCY 55


I will end this ‘discourse with a speech which I heard Jack
make to one of his creditors (of whom he deserved gentler
usage) after lying a whole night in custody at his suit.

‘Sir, your ingratitude for the many kindnesses I have done
you, shall not make me unthankful for the good you have done
me, in letting me see there is such a man as you in the world.
I am obliged to you for the diffidence I shall have all the rest
of my life: I shall hereafter trust no man so far as to be in his
debt.’


Spectator, No. 82.] [June 4, 1711.


No. 18. On the Condition of Bankruptcy.


De quo libelli in celeberrimis locis proponuntur, huic ne perire quidem
tacite conceditur.—TULL.


Otway, in his tragedy of Venice Preserved, has described the
misery of a man whose effects are in the hands of the law, with
Sreat spirit. The bitterness of being the scorn and laughter of
base minds, the anguish of being insulted by men hardened
beyond the sense of shame or pity, and the injury of a man’s
fortune being wasted, under pretence of justice, are excellently
Aggravated in'the following speech of Pierre to Jaffier :


I pass’d this very moment by thy doors,

And found them guarded by a troop of villains ;
The sons of public rapine were destroying.
They told me, by the sentence of the law,

They had commission to seize all thy fortune:
Nay more, Priuli’s cruel hand had signed it.
Here stood a ruffian with a horrid face,

Lording it o’er a pile of massy plate,

Tumbled into a heap for public sale.

There was another making villanous jests

At thy undoing. He had ta’en possession

Of all thy ancient most domestic ornaments;
Rich hangings intermix'd and wrought with gold;
The very bed, which on thy wedding night
Receiv’d thee to the arms of Belvidera,

The scene of all thy joys, was violated

By the coarse hands of filthy dungeon villains,
And thrown amongst the common lumber.


10


20


40


56 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


Nothing indeed can be more unhappy than the condition of
bankruptcy. The calamity which happens to us by ill fortune,
or by the injury of others, has in it some consolation ; but what
arises from our own misbehaviour, or error, is the state of the
most exquisite sorrow. When a man Considers not only an
ample fortune, but even the very necessaries of life, his pretence
to food itself, at the mercy of his creditors, he cannot but look
upon himself in the state of the dead, with his case thus much
worse, that the last office is performed by his adversarics instead
of his friends. From this hour the cruel4vorld does not only
take possession of his whole fortune, but even of every thing else
which had no relation to it. All his indifferent actions have
new interpretations put upon them; and those whom he has
favoured in his former life, discharge themselves of their obli-
gations to him, by joining in the reproaches of his enemies. It
is almost incredible that it should be so; but it is too often seen
that there is a pride mixed with the impatience of the creditor;
and there are who would rather recover their own by the downfall
of a prosperous man, than be discharged to the common satis~
faction of themselves and their creditors. The wretched man,
who was lately master of abundance, is now under the direction
of others ; and the wisdom, economy, good sense, and skill in
human life before, by reason of his present misfortune, are of no
use to him in the disposition of anything. The incapacity ofan
infant or a lunatic is designed for his provision and accommoda-
tion ; but that of a bankrupt, without any mitigation in respect
of the accidents by which it arrived, is calculated for his utter
ruin, except there be a remainder ample enough, after the dis-
charge of his creditors, to bear also the expense of rewarding
those by whose means the effect of all this labour was trans-
ferred from him. This man is to look on and see others giving
directions upon what terms and conditions his goods are'to be
purchased ; and all this usually done, not with an air of trustees
to dispose of his effects, but destroyers to divide and tear them
to pieces.

There is something sacred in misery to great and good minds;
for this reason all wise lawgivers have been extremely tender
how they let loose even the man who has right on his side, to
act with any mixture of resentment against the defendant.
Virtuous and modest men, though they be used with some


ON THE CONDITION OF BANKRUPTCY. 57


artifice, and have it in their power to avenge themselves, are
slow in the application of that power, and are ever constrained
to go into rigorous measures. They are careful to demonstrate
themselves not only persons injured, but also that to bear it
longer would be a means to make the offender injure others
before they proceed. Such men clap their hands upon their
hearts, and consider what it is to have at their mercy the life of
a citizen. Such would have it to say to their own souls, if
possible, that they were merciful when they could have de-

10 stroyed, rather than when it was in their power to have spared
aman, they destroyed. This is a due to the common calamity
of human life, due in some measure to our very enemies. They
who scruple doing the least injury, are cautious of exacting the
utmost justice.

Let any one who is conversant in the variety of human life
reflect upon it, and he will find the man who wants mercy has
a taste of no enjoyment of any kind. There is a natural dis-
relish of every thing which is good in his very nature, and he is
born an enemy to the world. He is ever extremely partial to

20 himself in all his actions, and has no sense of iniquity but from
the punishment which shall attend it. The law of the land is
his gospel, and all his cases of conscience are determined by
his attorney. Such men know not what it is to gladden the
heart of a miserable man; that riches are the instruments of
serving the purposes of heaven or hell, according to the dispo-
Sition of the possessor. The wealthy can torment or gratify all
who are in their power, and choose to do one or other, as they
are affected with love, or hatred to mankind. As for such who
are insensible of the concerns of others, but merely as they

30 affect themselves, these men are to be valued only: for their
mortality, and as we hope better things from their heirs. I
could not but read with great delight a letter from an eminent
Citizen, who has failed, to one who was intimate with him in his
better fortune, and able by his countenance to retrieve his lost
condition.

‘SIR,

‘It is in vain to multiply words and make apologies for what
is never to be defended by the best advocate in the world, the
guilt of being unfortunate. All that a man in my condition can

40 do or say, will be received with prejudice by the generality of


to


20


3°


58 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


mankind, but I hope not with you: you have been a great in-
strument in helping me to get what I have lost ; and I know
(for that reason, as well as kindness to me) you cannot but be
in pain to see me undone. To show you I am not a man
incapable of bearing calamity, I will, though a poor man, lay
aside the distinction between us, and talk with the frankness we
did when we were nearer to an equality; as all I do will be
received with prejudice, all you do will be looked upon with
partiality. What I desire of you is, that you, who are courted
by all, would smile upon me, who am shunned by all. Let that
grace and favour which your fortune throws upon you, be’
turned to make up the coldness and indifference that is used
towards me. All good and generou$ men will have.an eye of
kindness for me for my own sake, and the rest of the world will
regard me for yours. There is a happy contagion in riches, as
well as a destructive one in poverty: the rich can make rich
without parting with any of their store ; and the conversation
of the poor makes men poor, though they borrow nothing of
them. How this is to be accounted for I know not; but men’s
estimation follows. us according to the company we keep. If
you are what you were to me, you can go a great way towards
my recovery; if you are not, my good fortune, if ever it returns,
will return by slower approaches.
‘Tam, Sir,
* Your affectionate Friend
and humble Servant.’


This was answered with a condescension that did not, by long
impertinent professions of kindness, insult his distress, but was
as follows:


‘DEAR TOM,

‘TI am very glad to hear that you have heart enough to begin
the world a second time. I assure you, 1 do not think your
numerous family at all diminished (in the gifts of nature, for
which I have ever so much admired them) by what has so
lately happened to you. I shall not only countenance your
affairs with my appearance for you, but shall accommodate you
with a considerable sum at common interest for three years.
You know I could make more of it; but I have so great a love
for you, that I can waive opportunities of gain to help you ; for


ON THE JUST DISTRIBUTION OF FAVOURS, 59.


I do not care whether they say of me after I am dead, that I
had a hundred or fifty thousand pounds more than I wanted
when I was living.

© Your obliged humble Servant.’


Spectator, No. 456.] [August 13, 1712.


No.19. Ox the Fust Distribution of Favours,


Obrés tore yarcdhrns -yépaw.
MENANDER,


A favour well bestowed is almost as great an honour to
him who confers it as to him who receives it. What indeed
makes for the superior reputation of the patron in this case
is, that he is always surrounded with specious pretences
of unworthy candidates, and is often alone in the kind in-

10 clination he has towards the well-deserving. Justice is the
first quality in the man who is in a post of direction; and
I remember to have heard an old gentleman talk of the civil
wars, and in his relation give an account of a general officer,
who with this one quality, without any shining endowments,
became so popularly beloved and honoured, that all decisions
between man and man were laid before him by the parties
concerned, in a private way; and they would lay by their
animosities implicitly, if*he bid them be friends, or submit
themselves in the wrong without reluctance, if he said it,
20 without waiting the judgment of courts-martial. His manner
was to keep the dates of all commissions in his closet, and
wholly dismiss from the service such who were deficient in
their duty; and after that took care to prefer according to
the order of battle. His familiars were his entire friends,
and could have no interested views in courting his acquaint-
ance ; for his affection was no step to their preferment, though
it was to their reputation. By this means, a kind aspect, a
salutation, a smile, and giving out his hand, had the weight
of what is esteemed by vulgar minds more substantial. His
30 business was very short, and he who had nothing to do but
justice, was never affronted with a request of a familiar daily


60 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


visitant for what was due to a brave man ata distance. Ex-
traordinary merit he used to recommend to the king for some
distinction at home ; till the order of battle made way for his
rising in the troops. Add to this, that he had an excellent
manner of getting rid of such who he observed were good at
a halt, as his phrase was. Under this description he compre-
hended all those who were contented to live without reproach,
and had no promptitude in their minds towards glory, These
fellows were also recommended to the king, and taken off of
1o the general’s hands into posts wherein diligence and common
honesty were all that were necessary. This general had no
weak part in his line, but every man had as much care upon
him, and as much honour to lose as himself. Every officer
could answer for what passed where he was ; and the general’s
presence was never necessary anywhere, but where he. had
placed himself at the first disposition, except that accident
happened from extraordinary efforts of the enemy which he
could not foresee; but it was remarkable that it never fell
out from failure in his own troops. It must be confesSed the
20 world is just so much out of order, as an unworthy person
‘ possesses what should be in the direction of him who has
better pretensions to it. yO
_ Instead of such a conduct as this old fellow used to describe
in his general, all the evils which have ever happened among
mankind have arose from the wanton disposition of the favours
ofthe powerful. It is generally all that men of modesty. and
virtue can do, to fall in with séme Whimsical turn in a great
man, to make way for things of real and absolute service. In
the time of Don Sebastian of Portugal, or some time since,
30 the first minister Would let nothing come near him but what
bore the most profound face of wisdom and gravity. ° They
carried it so far, that, for the greater show of their profound
knowledge, a pair of spectacles tied on their noses, with a
black riband round their heads, was what completed the dress
of those who made their court at his levee, and none with
naked noses were admitted to his presence. A blunt honest
fellow, who had a command in the train of artillery, had
attempted to make an impression upon the porter, day after
day in vain, until at length he made his appearance in 4
40 very thoughtful dark suit of clothes, and two pairs of spectacles


ON THE UST DISTRIBUTION OF FAvouRS. 61


on at once. He was conducted from room to room, with great
deference, to the minister ; and, carrying on the farce of the
place, he told his excellency that he had pretended in this
manner to be wiser than he really was, but with no ill in-
tention ; but he was honest Such-a-one of the train, and he
came to tell him that they wanted wheelbarrows and pickaxes.
The thing happened not to displease, the great man was seen to
smile, and the successful officer was reconducted with the same
profound ceremony out of the house.

to -When Leo X. reigned pope of Rome, his holiness, though
a man of sense, and of an excellent taste of letters, of all things
affected fools, buffoons, humourists, and coxcombs. Whether
it were from vanity, and that he enjoyed no talents in other
men but what were inferior to him, or whatever it was, he
carried it so far, that his whole delight was in finding out
new fools, and, as our phrase is, playing them off, and making
them show themselves to advantage. A priest” of his former
acquaintance suffered a great many disappointments in at-
tempting to find access to him in a regular character, until

20 at last in despair he retired from Rome, and returned in an
equipage so very fantastical, both as to the dress of himself
and servants, that the whole court were in an emulation who
should first introduce him to his holiness. What added to
the expectation his holiness had of the pleasure he should
have in his follies, was, that this fellow, in a dress the most
exquisitely ridiculous, desired he might speak to him alone,
for he had matters of the highest importance, upon Which he
wanted a conference. Nothing could be denied to a coxcomb
of so great hope; but when they were apart, the impostor

30 revealeel himself, and spoke as follows :—

‘Do not be surprised, most holy father, at seeing, instead
of a coxcomb to laugh at, your old friend, who has taken this
way of access to admonish you of your own folly. Can any
thing show your holiness how unworthily you treat mankind,
more than my being put upon this difficulty to speak with
you?: It is a degree of folly to delight to see it in others,
and it is the greatest insolence imaginable to rejoice in the
disgrace of human nature. It is a criminal humility in a
person of your holiness’s understanding, to believe you can-

40 not excel but in the conversation of half-wits, humourists,


10


20


62 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


coxcombs, and buffoons. If your holiness has a mind to be
diverted like a rational man, you have a great opportunity
for it, in disrobing all the impertinents you have favoured of
all their riches and trappings at once, and bestowing them
on the humble, the virtuous, and the meek. If your holiness
is not concerned for the sake of virtue and religion, be pleased
to reflect, that for the sake of your own safety, it is not proper
to be so very much in jest. When the pope is thus merry,
the people will in time begin to think many things, which,
they have hitherto beheld with great veneration, are in them-
selves objects of scorn and derision. If they once get a trick
of knowing how to laugh, your holiness’s saying:this sentence
in one night-cap, and the other with the other, the change of
your slippers, bringing you your staff in the midst of a prayer,
then stripping you of one vest, and clapping on a second
during divine service, will be found out to have nothing in it.
Consider, Sir, that at this rate a head will be reckoned never
the wiser for being bald; and the ignorant will be apt to say,
that going barefoot does not at all help on in the way to
heaven.’ The red cap and the cowl will fall under the same
contempt ; and the vulgar will tell us to our faces, that we
shall have no authority over them but from the force of our
arguments, and the sanctity of our lives.’


Spectator, No. 497.] [September 30, 1712.


No. 20. On Satire.


Quis iniquze
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se ?
Juv. Sat. i. 30.


It was with very great displeasure I heard this day a man
say of a companion of his, with an air of approbation, ‘You
know Tom never fails of saying a spiteful thing. He has a
great deal of wit, but satire is his particular talent. Did you
mind how he put the young fellow out of countenance that
pretended to talk to him?’ Such impertinent applauses, which


30 one meets with every day, put me upon considering, what true


raillery and satire were in themselves; and this, methought,


ON SATIRE. 63


occurred to me from reflection upon the great and excellent
persons that were admired for talents this way. When I had
run over several such in my thoughts, I concluded, however
unaccountable the assertion might appear at first sight, that
good-nature was an essential quality in a satirist, and that
all the sentiments which are beautiful in this way of writing,
must proceed from that quality in the author. Good nature
produces a disdain of all baseness, vice, and folly; which
prompts them to express themselves with smartness against

10 the errors of men, without: bitterness towards their persons.
This quality keeps the mind in equanimity, and never lets an
offence unseasonably throw a man out of his character. When
Virgil said, ‘he that did not hate Bavius might love Mevius,’
he was in perfect good humour ; and was not so much moved
at their absurdities, as passionately to call them sots, or block-
heads in a direct invective, but laughed at them with a delicacy
of scorn, without any mixture of anger.


The best good man with the worst-natur’d muse,


was the character ® among us of a gentleman as famous for his
20 humanity as his wit.

The ordinary subjects for satire are such as incite the
greatest indignation in the best tempers, and consequently
men of such a make are the best qualified for speaking of the
offences in human life. These men can behold vice and folly,
when they injure persons to whom they are wholly unacquainted,
with the same severity as others resent the ills they do to them-
Selves. A good-natured man cannot see an overbearing fellow
put a bashful man of merit out of countenance, or out-strip him
Mm the pursuit of any advantage, but he is on fire to succour the

3° oppressed, to produce the merit of the one, and confront the
impudence of the other.

The men of the greatest character in this kind were Horace
and Juvenal. There is not, that I remember, one ill-natured
expression in all their writings, nor one sentence of ‘severity,
which does not apparently proceed from the contrary dis-
position. Whoever reads them, will, 1 believe, be of this
mind ; and if they were read with this view, it might possibly
Persuade our young fellows, that they may be very witty men
without speaking ill of any but those who deserve it. But, in


10


20


30a


64 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


the perusal of these writers, it may not be unnecessary to
consider, that they lived in very different times. Horace was
intimate with a prince of the greatest goodness and humanity
imaginable, and his court was formed after his example : there-
fore the faults that poet falls upon were little inconsistencies
in behaviour, false pretences to politeness, or impertinent
affectations of what men were not fit for. Vices of a coarser
sort could not come under his consideration, or enter the
palace of Augustus. Juvenal, on the other hand, lived under
Domitian, in whose reign every thing that was great and noble
was banished the habitations of the men in power. Therefore
he attacks vice as it passes by in triumph, not as it breaks into
conversation. The fall of empire, contempt of glory, and a
general degeneracy of manners, are before his eyes in all his
writings. ‘In the days of Augustus, to have talked like Juvenal
had been madness; or in those of Domitian, like Horace.
Morality and virtue are every where recommended in Horace,
as became a man in a polite court, from the beauty, the pro-
priety, the convenience of pursuing them. Vice and corruption
are attacked by Juvenal in a style which denotes, he fears he
shall not be heard without he calls to them .in their own
language, with a barefaced mention of the villanies and ob-
scenities of his contemporaries.

This accidental talk of these two great men carries me from
my design, which was to tell some coxcombs that run about
this town with the name of smart satirical ‘fellows, that they are
by no means qualified for the characters they pretend to, of
being severe upon other men; for they want good-nature.
There is no foundation in them for arriving at what they aim

t; and they may as well pretend to flatter as rally agreeably,
without being good-natured.

There is a certain impartiality necessary to make what 4
man says bear any weight with those he speaks to. This
quality, with respect to men’s errors and vices, is never sect
but in good-natured men. They have ever-such a frankness
of mind, and benevolence to all men, that they cannot receive
impressions of unkindness without mature deliberation; and
writing or speaking ill of a man upon personal considerations;
is so irreparable and mean an injury, that no one possessed of


40 this quality is capable of doing it: but in all ages there have


190


ON SATIRE. 65


been interpreters to authors when living, of the same genius
with the commentators into whose hands they fall when dead.
I dare say it is impossible for any man of more wit than one
of these to take any of the four-and-twenty letters, and form
out of them a name to describe the character of a vicious man
with greater life, but one of these would immediately cry, ‘ Mr.
Such-a-one is meant in that place.’ But the truth of it is, satirists
describe the age, and backbiters assign their descriptions to
private men.

In all terms of reproof, when the sentence appears to arise
from personal hatred or passion, it is not then made the cause
of mankind, but a misunderstanding between two persons. For
this reason the representations of a good-natured man bear a
pleasantry in them, which shows there is no malignity at heart,
and by consequence they are attended to by his hearers or
teaders, because they are unprejudiced. This deference is only
what is due to him; for no- man thoroughly nettled can say a
thing general enough, to pass off with the air of an opinion
declared, and not a passion gratified. I remember a humorous


20 fellow at Oxford, when he heard any one had spoken ill of him,


used to say, ‘I will not take my revenge of him until I have
forgiven him.” What he meant by this was, that he would not
enter upon this subject until it was grown as indifferent to him
as any other: and I have by this rule, seen him more than
Once triumph over his adversary with an inimitable spirit and
humour ; for he came to the assault against a man full of sore
places and he himself invulnerable.

There is no possibility of succeeding in a satirical way of
writing or speaking, except a man throws himself quite out of


3° the question. It is great vanity to think any one will attend to


a thing, because it is your quarrel. You must make your satire
the concern of society in general if you would have it regarded.
When it is so, the good-nature of a man of wit will prompt him
to many brisk and disdainful sentiments and replies, to which
all the malice irf the world will not be able to repartee.


Tatler, No. 242.] [October 26, 1719-


lo


20


66 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


No. 21, On Raillery.


H«xe scripsi non otii abundantia, sed amoris erga te.
TULL. Epist.


I do not know any thing which gives greater disturbance to
conversation, than the false notion some people have of raillery.
It ought, certainly, to be the first point to be aimed at in
society, to gain the good-will of those with whom you converse :
the way to that is, to show you are well inclined towards them.
What then can be more absurd than to set up for being ex-
tremely sharp and biting, as the term is, in'your expressions
to your familiars? A man who has no good quality but
courage, is in a very ill way towards making an agreeable
figure in the world, because that which: he has superior to
other people cannot be exerted without raising himself an
enemy. Your gentleman of a satirical vein is in the like con-
dition, To say a thing which perplexes the heart of him you
speak to, or brings blushes into his face, isa degree of murder;
and ‘it is, I think, an unpardonable offence to show a man you
do not care whether he is pleased or displeased, But will
you not then take a jest?—Yes: but pray let it be a jest. It
is no jest to put me, who am so unhappy as to have an utter
aversion to speaking to more than one man at a time, under
a necessity to explain myself in much company, and reducing
me to shame and derision, except I perform what my infirmity
of silence disables me to do.

Callisthenes has great wit, accompanied with that quality
without which a man can have no wit at all—a sound judgment.
This gentleman rallies the best of any man I know; for he forms
his ridicule upon a circumstance which you are in your heart
not unwilling to grant him; to wit, that you are guilty of an
excess in something which is in itself laudable. He very well
understands what you would be, and need$ not fear your


30 anger for declaring you are a little too much that thing. The


generous will bear being reproached as lavish, and the valiant
as rash, without being provoked to resentment against their
monitor. What has been said to be a mark of a good writer
will fall in with the character of a good companion, The


ON RAILLERY. 67


good writer makes his reader better pleased with himself, and
the agreeable man makes his friends enjoy themselves, rather
than him, while he is in their company. Callisthenes does
this with inimitable pleasantry. He whispered a friend the
other day, so as to be overheard by a young officer who gave
symptoms of cocking upon the company, ‘That gentleman
has very much of the air of a general officer.’ The youth
immediately put on a composed behaviour, and behaved him-
self suitably to the conceptions he believed the company had

loof him. It is to be allowed" that Callisthenes will make a
“man run into impertinent relations to his own advantage, and
express the satisfaction he has in his own dear self, till he is
very ridiculous ; but in this case the man is made a fool by
his own consent, and not exposed as such whether he will or
no. I take it, therefore, that, to make raillery agreeable, a man
must either not know he is rallied, or think never the worse of
himself if he sees he is.

Acetus is of a quite contrary genius, and is more generally

admired than Callisthenes, but not with justice. Acetus has

20 no regard to the modesty or weakness of the person he rallies ;
but if his quality or humility gives him any superiority to the
man he would fall upon, he has no mercy in making the onset.
He can be pleased to see his best friend out of countenance,
while the laugh is loud in his own applause. His raillery
always puts the company into little divisions and separate
interests, while that of Callisthenes cements it, and ‘makes
€very man not only better pleased with himself, but also with
all the rest in the conversation.

To rally well, it is absolutely necessary that kindness must
3° run through all you say; and you must ever preserve the.
character of a friend to support your pretensions to be free with
aman. Acetus ought to be banished human society, because
he raises his mirth upon giving pain to the person upon whom
he is pleasant. Nothing but the malevolence which is too
general towards those who excel could make his company
tolerated; but they with whom he converses are sure to see
Some man sacrificed wherever he is admitted; and all the
credit he has for wit, is owing to the gratification it gives to-
Other men’s ill-nature.

Minutius has a wit that conciliates a man’s love, at the same.
F2


490


10


20


49


6% MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


time that it is exerted against his faults. He has an art of
keeping the person he rallies in countenance, by insinuating
that he himself is guilty of the same imperfection. This he
does with so much address, that he seems rather to bewail him-
self, than fall upon his friend.

It is really monstrous to see how unaccountably it prevails
among men to take the liberty of displeasing each other. One
would think sometimes that the contention is who shall be
most disagreeable. Allusions to past follies, hints which revive
what a man has a mind to forget for ever, and descrves that
all the rest of the world should, are commonly brought forth
even in company of men of distinction. They do not thrust
with the skill of fencers, but cut up with the barbarity of
butchers. It is, methinks, below the character of men of
humanity and good-manners to be capable of mirth while
there is any of the company in pain and disorder. They who
have the true taste of conversation, enjoy themselves in a
communication of each other’s excellencies, and not in a
triumph over their imperfections. Fortius would have been
reckoned a wit, if there had never been a fool in the world;
he wants not foils to be a beauty, but has that natural pleasure
in observing perfection in others, that his own faults are over-
looked out of gratitude by all his acquaintance.

After these several characters of men who succeed or fail
in raillery, it may not be amiss to reflect a little further what
one takes to be the most agreeable kind of it; and that to
me appears when the satire is directed against vice, with an
air of contempt of the fault, but no ill-will to the criminal.
Mr. Congreve’s Doris” is a master-piece in this kind, It is
the character of a woman utterly abandoned; but her im-
pudence, by the finest piece of raillery, is‘ made only gene-
rosity:—


Peculiar therefore is her way;
Whether by nature taught,

T shall -not undertake to say,
Or.by experience bought ;


But who o’er-night obtain’d her grace,
“She can next day disown,

And stare upon the strange man’s face,
As one she ne'er had known.


ON DEFERENCE TO PUBLIC OPINION. oF


So well she can the truth disguise,
Such artful wonder frame,

The lover or distrusts his eyes,
Or thinks ‘twas all a dream.


Some censure this as lewd and low,
Who are to bounty blind;

For to forget what we bestow
Bespeaks a noble mind.


Spectator, No. 422.] [July 4, 1712


" No. 22. On Deference to Public Opinion.


Secretosque pios, his dantem jura Catonem,
Vire, /En. viii. 670.


It is an argument of a clear and worthy spirit in a man to be

To able to disengage himself from the opinions of others, so far as
not to let the deference due to the sense of mankind ensnare
him to act against the dictates of his own reason. But the
generality of the world are so far from walking by any such
maxim, that it is almost a standing rule to do as others do, or
be ridiculous. Ihave heard my old friend, Mr. Hart®, speak it as
an observation among the players, ‘that it is impossible to act
with grace, except the actor has forgot that he is before an
audience.’ Until he is arrived at that, his motion, his air, his
every step and gesture, have something in them which discovers
20 he is under a restraint, for fear of being ill received; or if he
considers himself as in the presence of those who approve his
behaviour, you see an affectation of that pleasure run through
his whole carriage. It is as common in, life, as upon the stage,
to behold a man in the most indifferent action betray a sense he
has of doing what he is about gracefully. Some have such an
immoderate relish for applause, that they.expect it for things,
which in themselves are so frivolous, that it is impossible, with-
out this affectation, to make them appear worthy either of
blame or praise, There is Will Glare, so passionately intent
39 UPON being admired, that when you see him in public places,
every muscle of his face discovers his thoughts are fixed upon
the consideration ‘of what figure he makes, He will often fall


FO MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


into a musing posture, to attract observation; and is then
obtruding himself upon the company, when he pretends to be
withdrawn from it. Such little arts are the certain and infal-
lible ‘tokens of a superficial mind, as the avoiding observation is
the sign of a great and sublime one. It is therefore extremely
difficult for a man to judge even of his own actions, without
forming to himself an idea of what he should act, were it in his
power to execute all his desires without the observation of the
rest of the world. There is an allegorical fable in Plato, which


ro seems to admonish us, that we are very little acquainted with


20


30


ourselves, while we kriow our actions are to pass the censures of
others; but, had we the power to accomplish all our wishes
unobserved, we should then easily inform ourselves how far we
are possessed of real and intrinsic virtue. The fable I was
going to mention is that of Gyges, who is said to have had an
enchanted ring, which had in it a miraculous quality, making
him who wore it visible or invisible, as he turned it to or from
his body. The use Gyges made of his occasional invisibility
was, by the advantage of it, to violate a queen, and murder
a king. Tully® takes notice of this allegory, and says very
handsomely, ‘that a man of honour who had such a ring would
act just in the same manner as he would without it’ It is
indeed no small pitch of virtue, under the temptation of im-
punity, and the hopes of accomplishing all a man desires, not
to transgress the rules of justice and virtue; but this is rather
not being an ill man, than being positively a good one; and it
seems wonderful, that so great a soul as that of Tully should
not form to himself a thousand worthy actions, which a virtuous
mind would be prompted to by the possession of such a secret.
There are certainly some part of mankind who are guardian-
beings to the other. Sallust could say of Cato, ‘That he had
rather be, than appear, good,’ but, indeed, this eulogium rose
no higher than, as I just now hinted, to an inoffensiveness,
rather than an active virtue. Had it occurred to the noble
orator to represent, in his language, the glorious pleasures of
a man secretly employed in beneficence and generosity, it
would certainly have made a more charming page than any he
has left behind him. How might a man, furnished with Gyges’s
secret, employ it in bringing together distant friends; laying


40 Snares for creating good-will in the room of groundless hatred ;


ON TRUE DISTINCTION. 71


in removing the pangs of an unjust jealousy, the shyness of an
imperfect reconciliation, and the tremor of an awful love! Such
a one could give confidence to bashful merit, and confusion to
overbearing impudence.
Certain it is, that secret kindnesses done to mankind are as
“beautiful as secret injuries are detestable. To be invisibly
good, is as godlike, as to be invisibly ill, diabolical. As degene-
rate as we are apt to say the age we live in is, there are still
amongst us men of illustrious minds, who enjoy all the pleasures
10 of good actions, except that of being commended for them.
There happens, among other very worthy instances of a public
Spirit, one which I am obliged to discover, because I know not
otherwise how to obey the commands of the benefactor. A
citizen of London has given directions to Mr. Rayner, the
writing-master of St. Paul’s-school, to egucate at his charge
ten boys, who shall be nominated by me, in writing and ac-
counts, until they shall be fit for any trade ; I desire, therefore,
such as know any proper objects for receiving this bounty, to
give notice thereof to Mr. Morphew®2, or Mr. Lillie? ; and they
20 shall, if properly qualified, have instructions accordingly.
Actions of this kind have in them something so transcendent,
that it is an injury to applaud them, and a diminution of that
merit which consists in shunning our approbation, We shall
therefore leave them to enjoy that glorious obscurity; and
Silently admire their virtue who can contemn the most delicious
of human pleasures, that of receiving due praise. Such celes-
tial dispositions very justly suspend the discovery of their
benefactions, until they come where their actions cannot be
misinterpreted, and receive their first congratulations in the
3° company of angels.
Tatler, No, 138,] [February 24, 1710,


No. 23. On True Distinction.


Quid oportet
Nos facere, a vulgo longe lateque remotos?
: Hor, Sat. i. 6. 17.


It is, as far as it relates to our present being, the great end
of education to raise ourselves above the vulgar; but what is


‘10


20


30


7% MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


intended by the vulgar, is not, methinks, enough understood. In
me, indeed, that woyd rajses a quite different idea from what it
usually does in others; but perhaps that proceeds from my
being old, and beginning to want the relish of such satisfactions
as are the ordinary entertainment of men. However, such as
my opinion is in this case, I will speak it ; because it is possible
that turn of thought may be received by others, who may reap
as much satisfaction from it as I do myself.

It is to me a very great meanness, and something much below
a philosopher, which is what I mean by a gentleman, to rank a
man among the vulgar for the condition of life he is in, and not
according to his behaviour, his thoughts, and sentiments, in that
condition®. For if a man be loaded with riches and honours, and
in that state of life has thoughts and inclinations below the
meanest artificer ; is pot such an artificer, who, within his power,
is good to his friends, moderate in his demands for his labour,
and cheerful in his occupation, very much superior to him who
lives for no other end but to serve himself, and assumes a prefer-
ence in all his words and actions to those who act their part
with much more grace than himself? Epictetus has made use
of the similitude of a stage-play to human life with much spirit.
‘It is not,’ says he, ‘to be considered among the actors, who is
prince, or who is beggar, but who acts prince or beggar best,’
The circumstance of life should not be that which gives us
place, but our behaviour in that circumstance is what should be
our solid distinction. Thus a wise man should think no man
above him or below him, any further than it regards the outward
order or discipline of the world: for, if we conceive too great an
idea of the eminence of our superiors, or subordination of our
inferiors, it will have an ill effect upon our behaviour to both. He
who thinks no man above him but for his virtue, none below
him but for his vice, can never be obsequious or assuming in a
wrong place ; but will frequently emulate men in rank below him,
and pity those above him.

This sense of mankind is so far from a levelling principle, that
it only sets us upon a true basis of distinction, and doubles the
merit of such as become their condition. A man in power, who
can, without the ordinary prepossessions which stop the.way to
the true knowledge and service of mankind, overlook the little


40 distinctions of fortune, raise obscure merit, and discountenance


ON VIRTUOUS INDEPENDENCE, 93


successful indesert®, has, in the minds of knowing men, the figure
of an angel rather than a man ; and is.above the rest of men in
the highest character he can be, even that of their benefactor.
Tuming my thoughts, as I was taking my pipe this evening,
after this manner, it was no small delight to me to receive advice
from Felicia, that Eboracensis® was appointed a governor of
one of their plantations. As I ama great lover of mankind, I
took part in the happiness of that people who were to be governed
by one of so great humanity, justice, and honour. Eboracensis


10 has read all the schemes which writers have formed of govern-


ment and order, and has been long conversant with men who
have the reins in their hands; so that he can very well distin-
guish between chimerical and practical politics. It is a great
blessing, when men have to deal with such different characters
in the same species as those of freemen and slaves, that they
who command have a just sense of human nature itself, by
which they can temper the haughtiness of the master, and soften
the servitude of the slave—‘ Hz tibi erunt artes.’ This is the
notion with which those of the plantation receive Eboracensis :


20 and as I have cast his nativity, I find there will bea record made


30


of this person’s administration ; and on that part of the shore
from whence he embarks to return from his government, there
will be a monument, with these words: ‘ Here the people wept,
and took leave of Eboracensis, the first governor our mother
Felicia sent, who, during his command here, believed himself
her subject,’


Tatler, No. 69.] [September 16, 1709.


No. 24. On Virtuous Independence.


Quisnam igitur liber? Sapiens, sibique imperiosus ;
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, nec vincula terrent ;
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, et in seipso totus teres atque rotundus,
Externi ne quid valeat per leve morari;
In quem manca ruit semper fortuna.

Hor, Sat. ii. 7. 83.


It is necessary to an easy and happy life, to possess our
Minds in such a manner as to be always well satisfied with


20


44 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


our own reflections, The way to this state is to measure our
actions by our own opinion, and not by that of the rest of the
world. The sense of other men ought to prevail over us in
things of less consideration, but not in concerns where truth
and honour are engaged. When we look into the bottom of
things, what at first appears a paradox is a plain truth ; and
those professions, which, for want of being duly weighed, seem
to proceed from a sort of romantic philosophy, and ignorance
of the world, after a little reflection, are so reasonable, that it
is direct madness to walk by any other rules. Thus to con-
tradict our desires, and to conquer the impulses of our
ambition, if they do not fall in with what we in our inward
sentiments approve, is so much our interest, and so absolutely
necessary to our real happiness, that to contemn all the wealth
and power in the world, where they stand in competition with
a man’s honour, is rather good sense than greatness of mind.
Did we consider that the mind of a man is the man himself,
we should think it the most unnatural sort of self-murder to
sacrifice the sentiment of the soul to gratify the appetites of
the body. Bless us! is it possible, that when the necessities
of life are supplied, a man would flatter to be rich, or cir-
cumvent to be powerful! When we meet a poor wretch, urged
with hunger and cold, asking an alms, we are apt to think this


“a state we could rather starve than submit to: but yet how


30


40


much more despicable is his condition, who is above necessity,
and yet shall resign his reason and his integrity to purchase
superfluities! Both these are abject and common beggars ;
but sure it is less despicable to beg a supply to a man’s hunger
than his vanity. But custom and general.prepossessions have
so far prevailed over an unthinking world, that those neces-
sitous creatures, who cannot relish life without applause,
attendance, and equipage, are so far from making a con-
temptible figure, that distressed virtue is less esteemed than
successful vice. But if a man’s appeal, in cases that regard
his honour, were made to his own soul, there would be 4
basis and standing rule for our conduct, and we should always
endeavour rather to be, than appear honourable. Mr. Collier”
in his ‘ Essay on Fortitude,’ has treated this subject with great
wit and magnanimity. ‘What,’ says he, ‘can be more honour-
able than to have courage enough to execute the commands of


ON VIRTUOUS INDEPENDENCE. 75


reason and conscience ; to maintain the dignity of our nature,
and the station assigned us? to be proof against poverty, pain,
and death itself? I mean so far as not to do any thing that is
scandalous or sinful to avoid them. To stand adversity under
all shapes with decency and resolution! To do this, is to be
great above title and fortune. This argues the soul of a
heavenly extraction, and is worthy the offspring of the Deity.’

What a generous ambition has this man pointed to us?
When men have settled in themselves a conviction, by such

lo noble precepts, that there is nothing honourable which is not
accompanied with innocence; nothing mean but what has
guilt in it: I say, when they have attained thus much, though
poverty, pain, and death, may still retain their terrors, yet
Tiches, pleasures, and honours, will easily lose their charms,
if they stand between us and our integrity.

What is here said with allusion to fortune and fame, may as
justly be applied to wit and beauty; for these latter are as
adventitious as the other, andas little concern the essence of the
soul, They are all laudable in the man who possesses them,

20 only for the just application of them. A bright imagination,
while it is subservient:to an honest and noble soul, is a faculty
which makes a man justly admired by mankind, and furnishes
him with reflections upon his own actions, which add delicates®
to the feast of a good conscience: but when wit descends to
wait upon sensual pleasures, or promote the base purposes of
ambition, it is then to be contemned in proportion to its ex-
Cellence. If a man will not resolve to place the foundation
of his happiness in his own mind, life is a bewildered and
unhappy state, incapable of rest or tranquillity. For to such a

39 one, the general applause of valour, wit, nay of honesty itself,
can give him but a very feeblé comfort ; since it is capable of
being interrupted by any one who wants either understanding
or good-nature to see or acknowledge such excellencies. ‘This
tule is so necessary, that one may very safely say, it is im-
possible to know any true relish of our being without it. Look
about you in common life among the ordinary race of mankind,
and you will find merit in every kind is allowed only to those
who are in particular districts or sets of company ; but, since
Men can have little pleasure in these faculties which deno-

40 minate them persons of distinction, let them give up such an


76 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


empty pursuit, and think nothing essential to happiness but
what is in their own power; the capacity of reflecting with
pleasure on their own actions, however they are interpreted.

It is so evident a truth, that it is only in our own bosoms
we are to search for any thing to make us happy, that it is,
methinks, a disgrace to our nature to talk of taking our
measures from thence only, as a matter of fortitude. When
all is well there, the vicissitudes and distinctions of life are
the mere scenes of a drama; and he will never act his part

ro well, who has his thoughts more fixed upon the applause of the
audience than the design of his part. :

The life-of a man who acts with a steady integrity, without
valuing the interpretation of his actions, has but one uniform
‘regular path to move in, where he cannot meet oppositiori, or
fear ambuscade. On the other side, the Jeast deviation from
the rules of honour introduces a train of numberless evils, and
involves him in inexplicable mazes. He that has entered into
guilt has bid adieu to rest ; and every criminal has his share of
the misery expressed so emphatically in the tragedian ®,


20 Macbeth shall sleep no more !


It was with detestation of any other grandeur but the calm
command of his own passions, that the excellent Mr. Cowley”
cries out with so much justice :


If e’er ambition did my fancy cheat

With any thought so mean as to be ‘great,
Continue, heaven, still from me to remove
The humble blessings of that life I love!


Tatler, No. 251.] [November 15, 1710.


No. 25, On Ambition; Heroism in Private Life.


Hic est ;
Est Ulubris, animus si te non deficit sequus.
Hor. Ep. 1. xi. ver. ult.


This afternoon I went to visit a gentleman of my acquaintance
at Mile-End; and passing through Stepney church-yard, I
30 could not forbear entertaining myself with the inscriptions on


ON AMBITION; HEROISM IN PRIVATE LIFE. 77


the tombs and graves. Among others, I observed one with this
notable memorial :


‘Here lies the body of T. B.’


This fantastical desire of being remembered only by the two
first letters of a name, led me into the contemplation of the
vanity and imperfect attainments of ambition in general. When
I run back in my imagination all the men whom I have ever
known and conversed with in my whole life, there are but very
few who have not used their faculties in the pursuit of what it is

lo impossible to acquire ; or left the possession of what they might
have been, at their setting out, masters, to search for it where
it was out of their reach. In this thought it was not possible to
forget the instance of Pyrrhus", who proposing to himself in
discourse with a philosopher, one, and another, and another
conquest, was asked, what he would do after all that? ‘ Then,’
says the king, ‘we will make merry.’ He was well answered,
‘What hinders your doing that in the condition you are already?”
The restless desire of exerting themselves above the common
level of mankind is not to be resisted in some tempers ; and

20 minds of this make may be observed in every condition of life,
Where such men do not make to themselves, or meet with em-
ployment, the soil of their constitution runs into tares and weeds.
An old friend of mine, who lost a major’s post forty years ago,
and quitted, has ever since studied maps, encampments, retreats,
and countermarches ; with no other design but to feed his spleen
and ill-humour, and furnish himself with matter for arguing
against all the successful actions of others. He that, at his first
Setting out in the world, was the gayest man in our regiment;
ventured his life with alacrity, and enjoyed it with satisfaction ;

30 encouraged men below him, and was courted by men above him,
has been ever since the most froward creature breathing. His
warm complexion spends itself now only in a general spirit of
contradiction: for which he watches all occasions, and is in his
conversation stilf upon sentry, treats all men like enemies, with
every other impertinence of a speculative warrior.

He that observes in himself this natural inquietude, should
take all imaginable ‘care to put his mind in some method of
gratification ; or he will soon find himself grow into the condi-
tion of this disappointed major. Instead of courting proper


78 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


occasions to rise above others, he will be ever studious of pulling
others down to him: it being the common refuge of disappointed
ambition, to ease themselves by detraction. It would be no
great argument against ambition, that there are such mortal
things in the disappointment of it ; but it certainly is a forcible
exception, that there can be no solid happiness in the success of
it. If we value popular praise, it is in the power of the meanest
of the people to disturb us by calumny. If the fame of being
happy, we cannot look into a village, but we see crowds in actual

10 possession of what we seek only the appearance. To this may
be added, that there is I know not what malignity in the minds
of ordinary men, to oppose you in what they see you fond of;
and it is a certain exception against a man’s receiving applauge,
that he visibly courts it. However, this is not only the passion
of great and undertaking spirits ; but you see it in the lives of
such as, one would believe, were far enough removed from the
ways of ambition. The rural esquires of this nation even eat
and drink out of vanity. A vain-glorious fox-hunter shall enter-

tain half a county, for the ostentation of his beef and beer, with-

20 out the least affection for any of the crowd about him. He
feeds them, because he thinks it a superiority over them that he
does so; and they devour him, because they know he treats
them out of insolence. This indeed is ambition in grotesque ;
but may figure to us the condition of politer. men, whose only
pursuit is glory. When the superior acts out of a principle of
vanity, the dependant will be sure to allow it him ; because he
knows it destructive of the very applause which is courted by
the man who favours him, and consequently makes him nearer
himself.

30 But as every man living has more or less of this incentive,
which makes men impatient of an inactive condition, and urges
men to attempt what may tend to their reputation, it is abso-
lutely necessary they should form to themselves an ambition,
which is in every man’s power to gratify. This ambition would
be independent, and would consist only in atting what, to a
man’s own mind, appears most great and laudable. It is a pur-
suit in the power of every man, and is only a regular prosecu-
tion of what he himself approves. It is what can be interrupted
by no outward accidents; for no man can be robbed of his good

40 intention. One of our society‘of the Trumpet ® therefore started


ON WISHING ONESELF YOUNGER. 79


last night a notion, which I thought had reason in it. ‘It is,
methinks,’ said he, ‘an unreasonable thing, that heroic virtue
should, as it seems to be at present, be confined to a certain
order of men, and be attainable by none but those whom fortune
has elevated to the most conspicuous stations. I would have
every thing to be esteemed as heroic, which is great and un-
common in the circumstances of the man who performs it.’
Thus there would be no virtue in human life, which every one
ofthe species would not have a pretence to arrive at, and an

to ardency to exert. Since fortune is not in our power, let us be as
little as possible in hers. Why should it be necessary that a
man should be rich, to be generous? If we measured by the
quality and not tlie quantity of things, the particulars which
accompany an action is what should denominate it mean or
great. The highest station of human life is to be attained by
each man that pretends to it: for every man can be as valiant,
as generous, as wise, and as merciful, as the faculties and oppor-
tunities which he has from heaven and fortune will permit. He
that can say to himself, ‘I do as much good, and amas virtuous

20 as my most earnest endeavours will allow me,’ whatever is his
station in the world, is to see himself possessed of the highest
honour. If ambition is not thus turned, it is no other than a
continual succession ‘of anxiety and vexation. But when it has
this cast, it invigorates the mind ; and the consciousness of its
Own worth is a reward, which is not in the power of envy, re-
proach, or detraction, to take from it. Thus the seat of solid
honour is in a man’s own bosom ; and no one can want support
who is in possession of an honest conscience, but he who would
suffer the reproaches of it for other greatness.


Tatler, No. 202.] [July 25, 1710.


No. 26. On wishing oneself younger.


Habet natura ut aliarum omnium rerum sic vivendi modum; senectus
autem peractio xtatis est tanquam fabule. Cujus defatigationem
fugere debemus, praesertim adjuncta satietate-—TULL. De Senect.


30 Of all the impertinent wishes which we hear expressed in
Conversation, there is not one more unworthy a gentleman or


80 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


a man of liberal education, than that of wishing one’s self
younger. I have observed this wish is usually made upon
sight of some object which gives the idea of a past action,
that it is no dishonour to us that we cannot now repeat ; or
else on what was in itself shameful when we performed it. It
is a certain sign of a foolish or a dissolute mind if we want
our youth again only for the strength of bones and sinews
which we once were masters of. It is (as my author® has it)
as absurd in an old man to wish for the strength of youth,
10 as it would be in a young man to wish for the strength of a
bull or a horse. These wishes are both equally out of nature,
which should direct in all things that are not contradictory to
justice, law, and reason. But though every old man has been
young, and every young one hopes to be old, there seems.to be
a most unnatural misunderstanding between those two stages
of life. This unhappy want of commerce arises from the
insolent arrogance or exultation in youth, and the irrational
despondence or self-pity in age. A young man whose passion
and ambition is to be good and wise, and an old one who has
20 no inclination to be lewd or debauched, are quite unconcerned
in this speculation ; but the cocking young fellow who treads
upon the toes of his elders, and the old fool who envies the
saucy pride he sees in him, are the objects of our present
contempt and derision. Contempt and derision are harsh
words ; but in what manner can one give advice to a youth
in the pursuit and possession of sensual pleasures, or afford
pity to an old man in the impotence and desire of enjoying
them? When young men in public places betray in their
deportment an abandoned resignation to their appetites, they
30 give to sober minds a prospect of a despicable age, which,
if not interrupted by death in the midst of their follies, must
certainly come. When an old man bewails the loss of such
gratifications which are past, he discovers a monstrous incli-
nation to that which it is not in the course of Providence to
recall, The state of an old man, who is dissatisfied merely
for his being such, is the most out of all measures of reason
and good sense of any being w¢ have any account of from
the highest angel to the lowest worm. How miserable is
the contemplation to consider an old man (while all created
40 beings, besides himself and devils, are following the order of


ON WISHING ONESELF YOUNGER, 81


Providence) fretting at the course of things, and being almost
the sole malecontent in the creation. But let us a little reflect
upon what he has lost by the number of years. The passions
which he had in youth are not to be obeyed as they were then,
but reason is more powerful now without the disturbance of
them. An old gentleman the other day in discourse with a
friend of his (reflecting upon some adventures they had in
youth together) cried out, ‘Oh Jack, those were happy days !’
‘That is true,’ replied his friend, ‘but methinks we go about

'O our business more quietly than we did then. One would
think it should be no small satisfaction to have gone so far
in our journey that the heat of the day is over with us,
When life itself is a fever, as it-is in licentious youth, the
Pleasures of it are no other than the dreams of a man in
that distemper ; and it is as absurd to wish the return of that
Season of life, as for a man in health to be sorry for the loss
of gilded palaces, fairy walks, and flowery pastures, with which
he remembers he was entertained in the troubled slumbers of a
fit of sickness.

20 As to all the rational and worthy pleasures of our being—
thegconscience of a good fame, the contemplation of another
life, the respect and commerce of honest men, our capacities
for such enjoyments are enlarged by years. While health
endures, the ‘latter part of life, in the eye of reason, is
Certainly the more eligible. Thesmemory of a well-spent
youth gives a peaceable, unmixed, and elegant pleasure to
the mind; and to‘such who are so unfortunate as not to
be able to look back on youth with satisfaction, they may
give themselves no little consolation that they are under no

3° temptation to repeat their follies, and that they at present

despise them. It was prettily said, ‘He ae would be long
an old man, must begin early to be one. It is too late to
resign’ a thing after a man is robbed of it; therefore it-is
necessary that before the arrival of age we bid adieu to the

Pursuits of youth, otherwise sensual habits will live in our

imaginations, when our limbs cannot be subservient to them.

The poor fellow who lost his.arm last siege, will tell you, he

feels the fingers that are buried in Flandérs ache every cold

Morning at Chelsea. ,

The fond humour of appearing in the gay and fashionable
G


490


10


20


82 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


world, and being applauded for trivial excellences, is what
makes youth have age in contempt, and makes age resign
with so ill a grace the qualifications of youth; but this in
both sexes is inverting all things, and turning the natural
course of our minds, which should build their approbations
and dislikes upon what nature and reason dictate, into chimera
and confusion.

Age in a virtuous person, of either sex, carries in it an
authority which makes it preferable to all the pleasures of
youth. If to be:saluted, attended, and consulted with defer-
ence, are instances of pleasure, they are such as never fail a
virtuous old age. In the enumeration of the imperfections
and advantages of the younger and latér years of man, they
are so near in their condition, that, methinks, it should be
incredible we see so little commerce of kindness between them.
If we consider youth and age with Tully, regarding the affinity
to death, youth has many more chances to be near it than age:
what youth can say more than an old man, ‘he shall live until
night?’ Youth catches distempers more easily, its sickness
is more violent, and its recovery. more doubtful. The youth
indeed hopes for many more days, so cannot the old man.
The youth’s hopes are ill-grounded ; for what is more foolish
than to place any confidence upon an uncertainty? But the
old man has not room so much as for hope ; he is still happier
than the youth; he has already enjoyed what the other does


_but hope for. One wishes to live long, the other has lived


30


long. But, alas! is there any thing in human life, the duration
of which can be called long? There is nothing which must
end, to be valued for its continuance.- If hours, days, months, .
and years pass away, it is no matter what hour, what day, what
month, or what year we die. The applause of a good actor
is due to him at whatever scene of the play he makes his exz?.
It-is thus in the life of a man of sense ; a short life is sufficient
to manifest, himself a man’ of honour and virtue; when he
ceases to be such he has lived too long ; and while he is such,
it is of no consequence to him how long he shall be so, pro-
vided he is so to his life’s end.


Spectator, No. 153.) {August 25, 1711


ON THE CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH, ETC. 83


No.27. On the Contemplation of Death ; Soliloquy by a’ Dying
Friend.


Quis desiderio sit pudor, aut modus
Tam cari capitis?—Hor. Od. i. 24. 1.


There is a sort of delight, which is alternately mixed with
terror and sorrow, in the contemplation of death. The soul
has its curiosity more than ordinarily awakened, when it turns
its thoughts upon the conduct of such who have behaved
themselves with an equal, a resigned, a cheerful, a generous, or
heroic temper in that extremity. We are affected with these
respective manners of behaviour, as we secretly believe the
part of the dying person imitated by ourselves, or such as we
imagine ourselves, more particularly capable of. Men of ex-

10 alted minds march before us like princes, and are to the
ordinary race of mankind rather subjects of their admiration
than example. However, there are no ideas strike more forci-
bly upon our imaginations, than those which are raised from
reflections upon the exits of great and excellent men. Innocent
men who have suffered as criminals, though they were benefac-,
tors to human society, seem to be persons of-the highest
distinction, among the vastly greater number of human
race, the dead, When the iniquity of 'the times brought
Socrates ‘to his execution, how great and wonderful is it to

20 behold him, unsupported by any thing but the testimony of
his own conscience and conjectures of hereafter, receive the
Poison with an air of mirth and good-humour, and, as if
going on an agreeable journey, bespeak some deity to make
it fortunate !

When Phocion’s good actions had met with the like reward
from his country, and he was led, to death with many other
of his friends, they bewailing their fate, he walking composedly
towards the place of his execution, how gracefully.does he sup-
Port his illustrious character to the very last instant! One

39 of the rabble spitting at him as he passed, with his usual
authority he called to know if no one was ready to teach this
fellow how to behave himself. When a poor-spirited creature
that died at the same:time’ for his crimes, bemoaned himself

G2


84 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


unmanfully, he rebuked him with this question, ‘Is it no con-
solation to such a man as thou art to die with Phocion?’ At
the instant when he was to die, they asked what commands he
had for his son: he answered, ‘To forget this injury of the
Athenians.’ Niocles, his friend, under the same sentence,
desired he might drink the potion before him: Phocion said,
“because he never had denied him any thing, he would not even
this, the most difficult request he had ever made.’

These instances” were very noble and great, and the reflec--

10 tions of those sublime spirits had made death to them what it is
really intended to be by the Author of nature, a relief from
a various being, ever subject to sorrows and difficulties.

Epaminondas, the Theban general, having , received in fight
a mortal stab with a sword, which was left in his body, lay in
that posture till he had intelligence that his troops had obtained
the victory, and then permitted it to be drawn out, at which
instant he expressed himself in this manner: ‘This is not the
end of my life, my fellow-soldiers ; it is now your Epaminondas
is born, who dies in so much glory.’

29 It were an endless labour to collect the accounts, with which
all ages have filled the world, of noble and heroic minds that
have resigned this being, as if the termination of life were but

“an ordinary occurrence of it.

This common-place way of thinking I fell into from-an awk-
ward endeavour to throw off a real and fresh affliction, by
turning over books in a melancholy mood ; but it is not easy
to remove griefs which touch the heart, by applying remedies
which only entertain the imaginatiom As therefore this paper
is to consist of any thing which concerns human life, I cannot

30 help letting the present subject regard what has been the last
object of my eyes, though an entertainment of sorrow.

I went this evening to visit a friend™, with a design to rally
him, upon a story I had heard of his intending to steal a mar-
riage without the privity of us his intimate friends and acquaint-
ance. I came into his apartment with that intimacy which I
-have done for very many years, and walked directly into his
bed-chamber, where I found my friend in the agonies of death—
What could Ido? The innocent mirth in my thoughts struck
upon me like the most flagitious wickedness : I in vain called

40 upon him; he was senseless, and too far spent to have the least


ON THE CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH, ETC. 85


knowledge of my sorrow, or any pain in himself. Give me
leave then to transcribe my soliloquy, as I stood by his mother,
dumb with the weight of grief for a son who was her honour
and her comfort, and never till that hour since his birth had
been a moment’s sorrow to her.

‘How surprising is the change! From the possession of
vigorous life and strength, to be reduced in a few hours to this
fatal extremity! Those lips which look so pale and livid, within,
these few days gave delight to all who heard their utterance ; it

10 was the business, the purpose of his being, next to obeying Him
to whom he is going, to please and instruct, and that for no
other end but to please and instruct. Kindness was the motive
of his actions, and with all the capacity requisite for making
a figure in a contentious world, moderation, good-nature, affa-
bility, temperance, and chastity, were the arts of his excellent
life-—There as -he lies in helpless agony, no wise man who
knew him so well as I, but would resign all the world can
bestow to be so near the end of such a life. Why does my
heart so little obey my reason as to lament thee, thou excellent

20 man?—Heaven receive him or restore him!—Thy beloved

* mother, thy obliged friends, thy helpless servants, stand around
thee without distinction. How much wouldst thou, hadst thou
thy senses, say to each of ts!

‘But now that good heart bursts, and he is at rest.—With
that breath expired a soul who never indulged a passion unfit
for the place he is gone to, Where are now thy plans of jus-
tice, of truth, of honour? * Of what use the volumes thou hast
Collated, the arguments thou hast invented, the examples thou
hast followed? Poor were the expectations of the studious, the

3° modest, and the good, if the reward of their labours were only
to be expected from man. No, my friend; thy intended plead-

‘ ings, thy intended good offices: to thy friends, thy intended
Services to thy country, are already performed (as to thy con-
cern in them) in His sight, before whom the past, present, and
future, appear at one view. While others with their talents
were tormented with ambition, with vain glory, with envy, with
emulation—how well didst thou turn thy mind to its own im-
provement in things out of the power of fortune : in probity, in
integrity, in the, practice and study of justice! How silent thy

49 passage, how private thy journey, how glorious thy end!


ro


20


30


8&6 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


“Many have I known more famous, some more knowing, not
one so innocent.”’


Spectator, No. 133.] {August 2, 1711.


No. 28. On the Reading of the Common Prayer.


Pronunciatio est vocis et vultus et gestus moderatio cum venustate.
TULL.


Mr. SPECTATOR,

‘The well reading of the Common Prayer is of so great im-
portance, and so much neglected, that I: take the liberty to
offer to your consideration some particulars on that subject.
And what more worthy your observation than this? A'thing
so public, and of so high consequence. It is indeed wonderful,
that the frequent exercise of it should not make the performers
of that duty more expert in it. This inability, as I conceive,
proceeds from the little care ‘that is taken of their reading while
boys, and at school, where, when they have got into Latin,
they are looked upon as above English, the reading of which
is wholly neglected, or at least read to very little purpose,
without any due observations made to them of the proper
accent and manner of reading; by this means they have ac-
quired such ill habits as will not easily be ‘removed. The
only way that I know of to remedy this, is to propose some
person of great ability that way as a pattern for them; ex-
ample being most effectual to convince the learned, as well
as instruct the ignorant. ’

‘You must know, Sir, I have been a constant frequenter
of the service of the church of England for above these four
years last past, and unfil Sunday was sevennight never dis-
covered, to so great a degree, the excellency of the Common
Prayer. When, being at St. James’s Garlick-Hill™ church, I
heard the service read so distinctly, so emphatically, and so
fervently, that it was next to an impossibility to be inatten-
tive. My eyes and my thoughts could not wander as usual, but
were confinéd to my prayers. I then considered I addressed
myself to the Almighty, and not to a beautiful face, And when
I reflected on my former performances of that duty, I found I


ON THE READING OF THE COMMON PRAYER. 87


had run it over as a matter of form, in comparison to the
manner in which I then discharged it. My mind was really
affected, and fervent wishes accompanied my words. The Con-
fession was read with such resigned humility, the Absolution
with such a comfortable authority, the Thanksgivings with such
a religious joy, as made me feel those affections of the mind in
a manner I never did before. To remedy therefore the griev-
ance above complained of, I humbly propose, that this excellent
reader, upon the next and every annual assembly of the clergy
to of Sion-college®, and all other conventions, should read prayers
before them. For then those that are afraid of stretching their
mouths, and spoiling their soft voice, will learn to read with
clearness, loudness, and strength. Others that affect a rakish,
negligent air, by,folding their arms, and lolling on their books,
will be taught a decent behaviour, and comely erection of body.’
Those that read so fast as if impatient of their work, may learn
to speak deliberately. There is another sort of persons, whom
I call Pindaric readers, as being confined to no set measure :
these pronounce five or six words with great deliberation, and
20 the five or six subsequent ones with as great celerity ; the first
part of a sentence with a very exalted voice, and the latter part
with a submissive one: sometimes again, with one sort of a
tone, and immediately after with a very different one. These
gentlemen will learn of my admired reader an -evenness of
Voice and delivery; and all who are innocent of these affecta-
tions, but read with such an indifferency as if they did not
understand the language, may then be informed of the art of
reading movingly and fervently, how to place the emphasis and
Rive the proper accent to each word, and how to vary the voice
30 according to the nature of the sentence. There is certainly a
very great difference between the reading a prayer anda gazette,
which I beg of you to inform a set of®readers, who affect, for-
Sooth, a certain gentleman-like familiarity of tone, and mend
the language as they go on, crying, instead of ‘pardoneth and
absolveth,’ ‘pardons and absolves.’ These are often pretty
Classical scholars, and would think it an unpardonable sin to
read Virgil or Martial with,so little taste as they do divine
Service.
‘ This indifferency seems to me to arise from the endeavour of
40 avoiding the imputation of cant, and the false notion of it. It


10


20


30


40


88 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


will be proper, therefore, to trace the original and signification
of this word. ‘Cant®’ is, by some people, derived from one
Andrew Cant, who, they say, was a Presbyterian minister in
some illiterate part of Scotland, who by exercise and use had
obtained the faculty, alias gift, of talking in the pulpit in such
a dialect, that it is said he was understood by none but his
own congregation, and not by allof them. Since Master Cant’s
time, it has been understood in a larger sense, and signifies all
sudden exclamations, whinings, unusual tones, and in fine all
praying and preaching, like the unlearned of the Presbyterians.
But I hope a proper elevation of voice, a due emphasis and
accent, are not to come within this description. So that our
readers may still be as unlike the Presbyterians as they please.
The dissenters (I mean such as I have heard) do indeed elevate
their voices, but it is with sudden jumps from the lower to the
higher part of them$ and that with so little sense or skill, that
their elevation and cadence i is bawling and muttering. They
make use of an emphasis, but so improperly, that it is often
placed on some very insignificant particle, as upon ‘if’ or
‘and.’ Now, if these improprieties have so great an effect on
the people as we ‘see they have, how great an influence would
the service of our church, containing the best prayers that ever
were composed, and that in terms most affecting, most humble,
and most expressive of our wants, arid dependence on the object
of our worship, disposed in most proper order, and void of all
confusion ; what influence, I say, would these prayers have, were
they delivered with a due emphasis, and apposite rising and
variation of , voice, the sentence concluded with a gentle
cadence, and, in a word, with such an accent and turn of speech
as is peculiar to prayer?

‘ As the matter of worship is now managed, in dissenting con-
gregations, you find irsifnificant words and phrases raised by
a lively vehemence; in our own churches, the most exalted
sense depreciated, by a dispassionate indolence, I remember
to have heard Dr. S——e™ say in his pulpit, of the Common
Prayer, that, at least, it was as perfect as any thing of human
institution. Ifthe gentlemen who,err in this kind would please
to recollect the many pleasantries they have read upon those
who recite good things with an ill grace,,they would go on to
think, that what in that case is only ridiculous, in themselves is


ON BEHAVIOUR AT CHURCH. 89


impious. But leaving this to their own reflections, I shall con-
clude this trouble with what Czesar said upon the irregularity
of tone in one who read before him, “ Do you read or sing? If
you sing, you sing very ill™.”

‘ Your most humble servant.’


Spectator, Ng. 147.] [August 18, 1711.


‘No. 29. On Behaviour at Church.


Inter scabiem tantam et contagia,
Hor. Ep. i. 12. 14.


_ There is not any where, I believe, so much talk about religion,
as among us in England ; nor do I think it possible for the wit
of man to devise forms of address to the Almighty, in more
ardent and forcible terms than are every where to be found in

10 our book of common prayer; and yet I have heard it read
with such a negligence, affectation, and impatience, that the
efficacy of it has been apparently lost to all the congregation.

For my part, I make no scruple to own it, that I go sometimes
to a particular place in the city, far distant'from my own
home, to hear a gentleman, whose manner I admire, read the
liturgy. Iam persuaded devotion is the greatest pleasure of
his soul, and there is none hears him read without the utmost
reverence, J have seen the young people, who have been
interchanging glances of* passion to each other’s person,

20 checked into an attention to the service at the interruption
which the authority of his yoice has given them. But the

Other morning I happened to rise earlier than ordinary, and
thought I could not pass my time better, than to go upon
the admonition of the morning bell, th the church prayers at
six of the clock. I was there the first of any in the con-
gregation, and had the opportunity, however I made use of
it, to look back on all my life, and contemplate the blessing
and advantage of such stated early hours for offering ourselves
to our Creator, and prepossessing ourselves with the love of Him,

30and the hopes we have from Him, against the snares of
business and pleasure in the ensuing day. But whether it
be that people think fit to indulge their own ease in some


10


20


30


40


go MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,
e


secret, pleasing fault, or whatever it was, there was none at
the confession but a set of poor scrubs of us®, who could sin
only in our wills, whose persons could be no temptation to
one another, and might have, without interruption from any
body else, humble, lowly hearts, in frightful looks and dirty
dresses, at our leisure. When we poor souls gad presented
ourselves with a contrition suitable to our worthlessness, some
pretty young ladies in mobs, popped in here and there about
the church, clattering the pew-door after them, and squatting
{nto a whisper behind their fans. Among others, one of lady
Lizard’s ® daughters, and her hopeful maid, nade their entrance:
the young lady did not omit the ardent form behind the fan,
while the maid immediately gaped round her to look for some
other devout person, whom I saw at a distance very well
dressed ; his air and habit a little military, but in the pert-
ness, not the true possession, of the martial character. This
jackanapes was fixed at the end of a pew, with the utmost
impudence, declaring, by a fixed eye on that seat (where our
beauty was placed), the object of his devotion. This obscene
sight gave me all the indignation imaginable, and I could
attend to nothing but the reflection, that the greatest affronts
imaginable are such as no one can take notice of. Before |
was out of such vexatious inadvertencies to the business of
the place, there was a great deal of good company now come
in. There was a good number of very jaunty slatterns, who
gave us to understand, that it is neither dress nor art to which
they were beholden for the town’s admiration. Besides these,
there were also by this time arrived two or three sets of
whisperers, who carry on most, of their calumnies by what
they entertain one another with in that place, and we were
now altogether very good company. There were indeed a
few, in whose looks there appeared a heavenly joy and glad-
ness upon the entrance of a new day, as if they had gone to
sleep with expectation of it. For the shke of these it is worth
while that the church keeps up such early matins throughout
the cities of London and Westminster; but the generality of
those who observe that hour, perform it with so tasteless a
behaviour, that it appears a task rather than a voluntary act.
But of all the world, those familiar ducks who are, as it were,
at home at the church, and by frequently meeting there throw


ON BEHAVIOUR AT CHURCH. g!


the time of prayer very negligently into their common life,
and make their coming together in that place as ordinary as
any other action, and do not turn their conversation upon any
improvements suitable to the true design of that house, but
On trifles below even their worldly concerns and characters.
These are lite groups of acquaintance dispersed in all parts
of the town, who are, forsooth, the only people of unspotted
characters, and throw all the spots that stick on those of other
people. Malice is the ordinary vice of those who live in the

to mode of religion, without the spirit of it. The pleasurable
world are hurried by their passions above the consideration
of what others think of them, into a pursuit of irregular en-
joyments ; while these, who forbear the gratifications of flesh
and blood, without having won over the spirit to the interests
of virtue, are implacable in defamations on the errors of such
who offend without respect to fame. But the consideration
of persons whom one cannot but take notice of, when one sees
them in that place, has drawn me out of my intended talk,
which was to bewail that people do not know the pleasure

20 of early hours, and of dedicating their first moments of the
day, with joy and singleness of heart, to their Creator. Expe-
rience would convince us, that the earlier we left our beds, the
Seldomer should we be confined to them.

One great good which would also accrue from this, were it
become a fashion, would be, that it is possible our chief divines
would condescend to pray themselves, or at least those whom
they substitute would be better supplied, than to be forced to
appear at those oraisons® in a garb and attire which makes
them appear mortified with worldly want, and not abstracted

3° from the world by the contempt of it. How is it possible for
a’gentleman, under the income of fifty pounds a year”, to be
attentive to sublime things? He must rise and dress like a
labourer for sordid hire, instead of approaching his place of
Service with the utmost pleasure and satisfaction, that now
he is going to be mouth of a crowd of people who have laid
aside all the distinctions of this contemptible being, to beseech
a protection under its manifold pains and disadvantages, or
a release from it, by his favour who sent them into it. He
would, with decent superiority, look upon himself as orator
4° before the throne of grace, for a crowd, who hang upon his


92 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


words, while he asks for them all that is necessary in a
transitory life ; from the assurance that a good behaviour, for
a few moments in it, will purchase endless joy and happy
immortality.

But who can place himself in this view, who, though not
pinched with want, is distracted with care from the fear of
it? No; a man, in the least degree below the spirit of a saint
or a martyr, will loll, huddle over his duty, look confused, or
assume a resolution in his behaviour which will be quite as

ro ungraceful, except he is supported above the necessities of life.

‘Power and commandment to his minister to declare and
pronounce to his people,’ is mentioned with a very unguarded
air, when the speaker is known in his own private condition
to be almost an object of their pity, and charity. This last
circumstance, with many others here loosely suggested, are
the occasion that one knows not how to recommend, to such
as have not already a fixed sense of devotion, the pleasure of
passing the earliest hours of the day in a public congregation.
But were this morning solemnity.as much in vogue, even as

20 it is now at more advanced hours of the day, it would
necessarily have so good an effect upon us, as to make us
more disengaged and cheerful in conversation, and less artful
‘and insincere in business. The world would be quite another
place than it is now, the rest of the day ; and every face would
have an alacrity in it, wliich can be borrowed from no other
reflections, but those which give us the assured protection of
Omnipotence.


Guardian, No. 65.] [May 26, 1713.


No. 30. On the Uses of Sunday, and Devotion.


Nequeo monstrare, et sentio tantum.
Juv. Sat. vii. 56.


If there were no other consequences of it, but barely that
human creatures on this day assemble themselves before their
30 Creator, without regard to their usual employments, their minds
at leisure from the cares of this life, and their bodies adorned
with the best attire they can bestow on them ; I say, were this


ON THE USES OF SUNDAY, AND DEVOTION, 93


Mere outward celebration of a sabbath all that is expected from
men, even that were a laudable distinction, and a purpose
worthy the human nature. But when there is added to it the
sublime pleasure of devotion, our being is exalted above itself;
and he who spends a seventh day in the contemplation of the
next life, will not easily fall into the corruptions of this in the
other six. They, who never admit thoughts of this kind into
their imaginations, lose higher and sweeter satisfactions than
can be raised by any other entertainment. The most illiterate
to man who is touched with devotion, and uses frequent exercises
of it, contracts a certain greatness of mind, mingled with a
noble simplicity, that raises him above those of the same con-
dition ; and there is an indelible mark of goodness in those
who sincerely possess it. It is hardly possible it should be
Otherwise ; for the fervours of a pious mind will naturally
Contract such an earnestness and attention towards a better
being, as will make the ordinary passages of life go off with a
‘becoming indifference. By this a man in the lowest condition
will not appear mean, or, in the most splendid fortune, in-
20 solent.

As to all the intricacies and vicissitudes, under which meh are
ordinarily entangled with the utmost sorrow and passion, one
Who is devoted to heaven, when he falls into such difficulties, is
led by a clue through a labyrinth. As to this world, he does
hot pretend to skill in the mazes of it; but fixes his thoughts
upon one certainty, that he shall soon be out of it. And we
may ask very boldly, what can be a more sure consolation than
to have a hope in death? When men are arrived at thinking of
their very dissolution with pleasure, how few things are there

30 that can be terrible to them! Certainly, nothing can be dreadful
to such spirits, but what would make death terrible to them,
. falsehood towards man, or impiéty towards heaven. To such
as these, as there are certainly many such, the gratifications of
innocent pleasures are doubled, even with reflections upon their
imperfection. The disappointments which naturally attend the
gteat promises we make ourselves in expected enjoyments,
Strike no damp upon such men, but only quicken their hopes
of soon knowing joys which are too pure to admit of allay or
Satiety.
4° It is thought, among the politer sort of mankind, an imper-


94 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


fection to want a relish of any of those'things which refine our
lives. This is the foundation of the acceptance which eloquence,
music, and poetry make in the world; and I know not why
devotion, considered merely as an exaltation of our happiness,
should not at least be so far regarded as to be considered. It
is possible the very enquiry would lead men into such thoughts
and gratifications as they did not expect to meet with in this
place. Many a good acquaintance has been lost from a general
prepossession in his disfavour, and a severe aspect has often
1o hid under it a very agreeable companion.

There are no distinguishing qualities among men to which
there are not false pretenders; but though none is more
pretended to than that of devotion, there are perhaps fewer
successful impostors ‘in this kind than any other. There is
something so natively great and good in a person that is truly
devout, that an awkward man may as well pretend to be
genteel, as a hypocrite to-be pious. The constraint in words
and actions is gqually visible in both cases ; and any thing set:
up in their room.does but remove the endeavourers farther off

20 from their pretensions. But, however the sense of true piety
is abated, there is no other motive of action that can carry us
through all the vicissitudes of life with alacrity and resolution.
But piety, like philosophy, when it is superficial, does but make
men appear the worse for it; and a principle that is but half
received does but distract, instead of guiding our behaviour.
When I reflect upon the unequal conduct of Lotius, I see
many things that run directly counter to his interest; therefore
I cannot attribute his labours for the public good to ambition.
When I consider his disregard to his fortune I cannot esteem

30 him covetous. How then can IJ reconcile his neglect of himself,
and his zeal for others?, I have long suspected him to be a
‘little pious:’ but no man ‘ever hid his vice with greater
caution than he does his virtue. It was the praise of a great
Roman, ‘that he had rather be, than appear good.’ But sucb
is the weakness of Lotius, that I dare say, he had rather be
esteemed irreligious than devout. By I know not what im-
patience of raillery, he is wonderfully fearful of being thought
too great a believer. A hundred little devices are made use 0
to hide a time of private devotion ; and he will allow you any

40 suspicion of his being ill employed, so you do not tax him with


ON THE USES OF SUNDAY, AND DEVOTION. 95


being well. But alas! how mean is such a behaviour? To
boast of virtue, is 2 most ridiculous way of disappointing the
merit of it, but not so pitiful as that of being ashamed of it.
How unhappy is the wretch, who makes the most absolute and
independent motive of action the cause of perplexity and in-
constancy! How different a figure does Czlicolo® make with
all who know him! His great and superior mind, frequently
exalted by the raptures of heavenly meditation, is to all his
friends of the same use, qs if an angel were to appear at the

10 decision of their disputes. They very well understand, he is
as much disinterested and unbiassed as such a being. He
considers all applications made ‘to him, as those addresses
will affect his own application to heaven. All his determi-
nations are delivered with a beautiful humility; and he
Pronounces his decisions with the air of one who is more
frequently a supplicant than a judge.

Thus humble, and thus great, is the man who is moved by
Piety, and exalted by devotion. But behold this recommended
by the masterly hand of a great divine® I have heretofore made

eee bold with,

‘It is such a pleasure as can never cloy or overwork the
Mind ; a delight that grows and improves under thought and
reflection ; and while it exercises, does also endear itself to the
mind. All pleasures that affect the body must needs weary,
because they transport ; and ali transportatioy is a violence ;
and no violence can be lasting ; but determines upon the falling
Of the spirits, which are not able to keep up that height of
motion that the pleasure of the senses raises them to. And
therefore how inevitably does an immoderate laughter end in

30 a sigh, which is only nature’s recovering itself after a force done
to it; but the religious pleasure of a well-disposed mind moves
gently, and therefore constantly. It does not affect by rapture
and ecstasy, but is like the pleasure of health, greater and
stronger than those that call up the senses with grosser and
more affecting impressions. No man’s body is as strong as
his appetites ; but Heaven has corrected the boundlessness of
his voluptuous desires by stinting his strength, and contracting
his capacities——The pleasure of the religious man is an easy
and a portable pleasure, such a one as he carries about in his

*© bosom, without alarming either the eye or the envy of the


Io


20


96 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


world. A man putting all his pleasures into this one, is like
a traveller putting all his goods into one jewel ; the value is the
same, and the convenience greater.’


Tatler, No. 211.] [August 15, 1710.


No. 31. On Old and New Freethinkers; Anecdote of a French
Officer.


Quod si in hoc erro, ulod animos hominum immortales esse credan},
libenter erro; nec mihi huncerrorem, quo delector, dum vivo, extorquert
volo; sin mortuus, ut quidam minuti philosophi censent, nihil sentiam;
non vereor, ne hunc errorem meym mortui philosophi irrideant.

TuLL. De Senect. cap. ult.


Several letters, which I have lately received,, give me in-
formation, that some well-disposed persons have taken offencé
at my using the word Free-thinker as-a term of reproach. To
set, therefore, this matter in a’ clear light, I nmst declare, that
no one can have a greater veneration that myself: ‘for the Free-
thinkers of antiquity ;‘who acted the same part in. those times;
as the great men of the reformation did ‘in several nations of
Europe, by exerting themselves against the idolatry and super-
stition of the times in which they lived. It was by this noble
impulse that Socrates and his disciples, as well as all the
philosophers of note in Greece, and Cicero, Seneca, with all the
learned men of Rome, endeavoured to enlighten their contem-
poraries amidst the darkness and ignorance in which the world
was then sunk and buried.

The great points which these free-thinkers endeavoured to
establish and inculcate into the minds of meh, were, the forma-
tion of the universe, the superintendency of providence, the
perfection of the Divine Nature, the immortality of the soul,
and the future state of rewards and punishments. They all
complied with the religion of their country, as much as possible,
in such particulars as did not contradict and pervert thes¢
great and fundamental doctrines of mankind. On the contrary;
the persons who now set up for free-thinkers, are such as en-
deavour, by a little trash of words and sophistry, to weaken and
destroy those very principles, for the vindication of which, free-
dom of thought at first became laudable and heroic. These apo-


ON OLD AND NEW FREETHINEERS, ETC. 97


States from reason and good sense, can look at the glorious frame
of nature, without paying an adoration to Him that raised it;
can consider the great revolutions in the universe, without lifting
up their minds to that superior power which hath the direction
of it; can presume to censure the Deity in his ways towards
men ; can level mankind with the beasts that perish ; can extin-
guish in their own minds all the pleasing hopes of a future
state, and lull themselves into a stupid security against the
terrors of it. If one were to take the word priestcraft out of
1o the mouths of. these shallow monsters, they would be imme-
diately struck dumb. It is by the help of this single term that
they endeavour to disappoint the good works of the most
learned and venerable order of-men, and harden the hearts of
the ignorant against the véry light of nature, and the common-
received notions of mankind. We ought not to treat such
tiscréants as these upon the foot of fair disputants; but to
Pour out contempt upon them, and speak of them with scorn
and infamy, as the pests of society, the revilers of human
nature, and the ‘blasphemers of a Being, whom a good man
20 would rather die than hear dishonoured.. Cicero%, after having
mentioned the great heroes of knowledge that recommended
this divine doctrine of the. immortality of the soul, calls those
small pretenders to wisdom, who declared against it, certain
minute philosophers, using a diminutive even of the word ‘little,’
ta express the despicable opinion he had of them. The con-
tempt he throws’ upon them in another passage is yet more
remarkable ; where, to show the mean thoughts he entertains
of them, he declares ‘he would rather be in the wrong with
Plato, than in the right with such company®.’ There is, indeed,
3° nothing in the world so ridiculous as one of these grave philo-
sophical free-thinkers, that hath neither passions nor appetites
to gratify, no heats of blood, nor vigour of constitution, that can
turn his systems of infidelity to his advantage, or raise pleasures
out of them which are inconsistent with the belief of a here-
after. One that.has neither wit, gallantry, mirth, or youth, to
indulge by these notions, but only a poor, joyless, uncomfortable
vanity of distinguishing himself from the rest of mankind, is
rather to be regarded as a mischievous lunatic, than a mistaken
philosopher. A chaste infidel, a speculative libertine, is an
49 animal that I should not believe to be in nature, did I not
H


10


20


39


98 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


sometimes meet with this species of men, that plead for the indul-
gence of their passions in the midst of a severe studious life, and
talk against the immortality of the soul over a dish of coffee.

I would fair? ask a minute philosopher, what good he pro-
poses to mankind by the publishing of his doctrines? Will
they make a man a better citizen, or father of a family; :a more
endearing husband, friend, or son? will they enlarge his public
or private virtues, or correct any of his frailties or vices? Wha
is there either joyful or glorious in such opinions? do they
either refresh or enlarge our thoughts? do they contribute tc
the ‘happiness, or raise the dignity, of human nature? The
only good that I have ever heard pretended to, is, that they
banish terrors, and set the mind at ease. But whose terrors dc
they banish? It is certain, if there were any strength in theit
arguments, they would give great disturbance to minds that are
influenced by virtue, honour, and morality, and take from us
the only cotnforts and supports of affliction, sickness, and old
age. The minds, therefore, which they set at ease, are only
those of impenitent criminals and malefactors, and which, tc
the good of mankind, should be in perpetual terror and alarm.

I must confess, nothing is more usual than for a free-thinker,
in proportion as the insolence of scepticism is abated in him
by years and knowledge, or humbled and beaten down by
sorrow or sickness, to reconcile himself to the general concep-
tions of reasonable creatures; so that we frequently see the
apostates turning from their revolt towards the end of their
lives, and employing the refuse of their parts in promoting
those truths which they had before endeavoured to invalidate.

The history of a gentleman in France is very well known,
who was so zealous a promoter of infidelity, that he had got
together a select company of disciples, and travelled into all
parts of the kingdom to make converts. In the midst of his
fantastical success he fell sick, and was reclaimed to such a sense
of his condition, that after he had passed some time in great
agonies and horrors of mind, he begged those who had the care
of burying him, to dress his body in the habit of a capuchin,
that the devil might not run away with it; and, to do further
justice upon himself, desired them to tie a halter about his
neck, as a mark of that ignominious punishment, which, in his


4° own thoughts, he had so justly deserved.


ON OLD AND NEW FREETHINKERS, ETC. 99


1 would not have persecution so far disgraced, as to wish
these vermin might be animadverted on by any Iegal penalties ;
though I think it would be highly reasonable, that those few of
them who die in the professions of thcir infidelity, should have
such tokens of infamyefixed upon them, as might distinguish
those bodies which are given up by the owners to oblivion and
putrefaction, from those which rest in hope, and shall rise in
glory. But at the same time that I am against doing them the
honour of the notice of our laws, which ought not to suppose

to there are such criminals in being, I have often wondered, how
they can be tolerated in any mixed conversations, while they
are venting these absurd opinions; and should think, that if, on
any such occasions, half a dozen of the most robust Christians
in the company would lead one of those gentlemen to a pump,
or convey him into a blanket, they would do very good service
both to church and state. I do not know how the laws stand
in this particular; but I hope, whatever knocks, bangs, or
thumps, might be given with such an honest intention, would
not be construed as a breach of the peace. I dare say, they

20 would not be returned by the person who receives them ; for
whatever these fools may say in the vanity of their hearts, they
are too wise to risk their lives upon the uncertainty of their
Opinions. ;

When I was a young mar about this town, I frequented the
ordinary of the Black-horse in Holborn, where the person that
usually presided at the table was a rough old-fashioned gentle-
man, who, according to the customs of those times, had beeg
the major and preacher of a regiment. It happened one day
that a noisy young officer, bred in France, was venting some

3° new-fangled notions, and speaking, in the gaiety of his humour,
against the dispensations of Providence. The major, at first,
only desired him to talk more respectfully of one for whom all
the company had an honour; but, finding him run on in his
extravagance, began to reprimand him after a more serious
manner. ‘ Young man,’ said he, ‘do not abuse your Benefactor
whilst you are eating his bread. Consider whose air vou
breathe, whose presence you are in, and who it is that gave
you the power of that very speech which you make use of to his
dishonour.’ The young fellow, who thought to turn matters
49 into a jest, asked him ‘if he was going to preach?’ but at the


H2


Io


p tele) MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


same time desired him, ‘to take care what he said when he
spoke to a man of honour” ‘A man of honour!’ says the
major; ‘thou art an infidel and a blasphemer, and I shall use
thee as such.’ In short, the quarrel ran so high, that the major
was desired to walk out. Upon their coming into the garden,
the old fellow advised his antagonist to consider the place into
which one pass might drive him; but, finding him grow upon
him to a degree of scurrility, as believing the advice proceeded
from fear ; ‘Sirrah,’ says he, ‘if a thunderbolt does not strike
thee dead before I come at thee, I shall not fail to chastise
thee for thy profaneness to thy Maker, and thy sauciness to his
servant.’ Upon this he drew his sword, and cried out with’
a loud voice, ‘The sword of the Lord and of Gideon!’ which
so terrified his antagonist, that he jas immediately disarmed,
and thrown upon his knees. In this posture he, begged his


. life; but the major refused to grant it, before he had asked


20


30


pardon for his offence in a short extemporary prayer, which the
old gentleman dictated to him upon the spot, and which his
proselyte repeated after him in the presence of the whole
ordinary, that were now gathered about him in the garden.


Tatler, No. 135.] [February 17, 1710.


No. 32. .On the Power of Women.


Si sapis,
Neque preeterquam quas ipse amor molestias
Habet addas; et illas quas habet, recte feras.
TER, Eun. act i. sc. 1.


’


I was the other day driving in a hack® through Gerrard-street,
when my eye was immediately catched with the prettiest object
imaginable—the face of a very fair girl, between thirteen and
fourteen, fixed at the chin to a painted sash, and made part of
the landscape. It seemed admirably done, and, upon throwing
myself eagerly out of the coach to look at it, jt laughed, and
‘flung from the window. This amiable figure dwelt upon me;
and I was considering the vanity of the girl, and her pleasant
coquetry in acting a picture until she was taken notice of, and
raised the admiration of her beholders. This little circumstance


ON THE POWER OF WOMEN. IOI


made me run into reflections upon the force of beauty, and the
wonderful influence the female sex has upon the other part of
the species. Our hearts are seized with their enchantments,
and there are few of us, but brutal men, who by that hardness
lose the chief pleasure in them, can resist their insinuations,
though never so much against our own interest and opinion. It
is common with women to destroy the good effects a man’s
following his own way and inclination might have upon his
honour and fortune, by interposing their power over him in

to matters’ wherein they cannot influence him, but to his loss and
disparagement. I do not know therefore a task so difficult in
human life, as to be proof against the importunities of a woman
aman loves. There is certainly no armour against tears, sullen
looks, or at best constrained familiarities, in her whom you
usually meet with transport and alacrity. Sir Walter Raleigh»
was quoted in a letter (of a very ingenious correspondent of
mine) upon this subject. That author, who had lived in courts,
camps, travelled through many countries, and seen many men
under several climates, and of as various complexions, speaks of

20 our impotence to resist the wiles of women in very severe terms.
His words are as follows :—

‘What means did the devil find out, or what instruments did
his own subtlety present him, as fittest and aptest to work his
mischief by ? Even the unquiet vanity of the woman; so as by
Adam’s hearkening to the voice of his wife, contrary. to the ex-
press commandment of the living God, mankind by that her in-
Cantation® became the subject of labour, sorrow, and death ; the
Woman being given to man for a comforter and companion, but
hot for a counsellor. It is also to be noted by whom the woman

30 was tempted : even by the most ugly and unworthy of all beasts,
into whom the devil entered and persuaded. Secondly, What
was the motive of her disobedience? Even a desire to know
what was most unfitting her knowledge ; an affection which has
ever since remained in all the posterity of her sex. Thirdly,
What was it that moved the man to yield to her persuasions ?
Even the same cause which hath moved all men since to the
like consent ; namely, an unwillingness to grieve her, or make
her sad, lest she should pine, and be overcome with sorrow.
But if Adam, in the state of perfection, and Solomon, the son

40 of David, God’s chosen servant, and himself a man endued


10


20


30


40


102 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


with the greatest wisdom, did both of them disobey their
Creator by the persuasion, and for the love they bare to a
woman, it is not so wonderful as lamentable, that other men in
succeeding ages have been allured to so many inconvenient and
wicked practices by the persuasions of their wives, or other
beloved darlings, who cover over and shadow many malicious
purposes with a counterfeit passion of dissimulate sorrow and
unquietness.’

The motions of the minds of lovers are no where so well
described as in the works of skilful writers for the stage. The
scene between Fulvia and Curius, in the second act of Jon-
son’s Cataline, is an excellent picture of the power of a lady
over her gallant. The wench plays with his affections: and as
a man, of all places of the world, wishes to make a good figure
with his mistress, upon her upbraiding him with want of spirit,
he alludes to enterprises which he cannot reveal ‘but with the
hazard of his life. When he is worked thus far, with a little
flattery of her opinion of his gallantry, and desire to know more
of it out of her overflowing fondness to him, he brags to her
until his life is in her disposal.

When a man is thus liable to be vanquished by the charms
of her he loves, the safest way is to determine what is proper to
be done; but to avoid all expostulation with her before he
executes what he has resolved. Women are ever too hard for
us upon a treaty; and one must consider how senseless a thing
it is to argue with one whose looks and gestures are more pre-
valent with you, than your reason and arguments can be with
her. It is a most miserable slavery to submit to what you dis-
approve, and give up a truth for no other reason, but that you
had not fortitude to support you in asserting it. A man has
enough to do to conquer his own unreasonable wishes and
desires; but he does that in vain, if he has those of another to
gratify. Let his pride be in his wife and family, let him give
them all the conveniences of life in such a manner as if he were
proud of them ; but let it be his own innocent pride, and not their
exorbitant desires, which are indulged by him. In this case
all the little arts imaginable are used to soften a man’s heart,
and raise his passion above his understanding. But in all con-
cessions of this kind, a man should consider whether the present
he makes flows from his own love, or the importunity of his


ON MATRIMONY. 103


beloved. If from the latter, he is her slave ; if from the former,
her friend. We laugh it off, and do not weigh this subjection to
women with that seriousness which so important a circumstance
deserves. Why was courage given to man, if his wife’s fears are
to frustrate it? When this is once indulged, you are no longer
her guardian and protector, as you were designed by nature ;
but, in compliance to her weaknesses, you have disabled yourself
from avoiding the misfortunes into which they will lead you
both, and you are to see the hour in which you are to be

'o reproached by herself for that very complaisance to her. It is
indeed the most difficult mastery over ourselves we can possibly
attain, to resist the grief of her who charms us; but let the
heart ache, be the anguish never so quick and painful, it is what
must be suffered and passed through, if you think to live like a
Sentleman, or be conscious to yourself that you are a man of
honesty. The old argument, that ‘you do not love me if you
deny me this,’ which first was used to obtain a trifle, by habitual
Success will oblige the unhappy man who gives way to it to re-
Sign the cause even of his country and his honour®.


Spectator, No. 510.) [October 15, 17132.


No. 38, On Matrimony,


Dare jura maritis—Hor. Ars Poet. 398.
"8 Many are the epistles I every day receive from husbands who
Complain of vanity, pride, but, above all, ill-nature in their wives.
I cannot tell how it is, but I think I see in all their letters that
the cause of their uneasiness is in themselves ; and indeed I
have hardly ever observed the married condition unhappy, but
from want of judgment or temper in the man, The truth is, we
generally make love in a style and with sentiments very unfit for
ordinary life : they are half theatrical, half romantic. By this
means, we raise our imaginations to what is not to be expected
in human life ; and because we did not beforehand think of the
jo creature ‘we are enamoured of, as subject to dishumour®, age,
Sickness, impatience, or sullenness, but altogether considered
her as the object of joy ; human nature itself is often imputed to
heras her particular imperfection, or defect.


104 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


I take it to be a rule, proper to be observed in all occurrences
of life, but more especially in the domestic, or matrimonial part
of it, to preserve always a disposition to be pleased. , This
cannot be supported but by considering things in their right
light, and as Nature has formed them, and not as our own
fancies or appetites would have them. He then who took a
young lady to his bed, with no other consideration than the ex-
pectation of scenes of dalliance, and thought of her (as I said
before) only as she was to administer to the gratification of

ro desire ; as that desire flags, will, without her fault, think her
charms and her merit abated: from hence must follow indiffer-
ence, dislike, peevishness, and rage. But the man who brings
his reason to support his passion, and beholds what he loves, as
liable to all the calamities of human life both in body and mind,
and even at the best what must bring upon him new cares and
new relations; such a lover, I say, will form himself accordingly,
and adapt his mind to the nature of his circumstances. This
latter person will be prepared to be a father, a friend, an advo-
cate, a steward for people yet unborn, and has proper affections
20 teady for every incident in the marriage state. Such a man can
hear the cries of children with pity instead of anger ; and, when
they run over his head, he is not disturbed at their noise, but is
glad of their mirth and health. Tom Trusty has told me; that
he thinks it doubles his attention to the most intricate affair he
is about, to hear his children, for whom all his cares are applied,
make a noise in the next room: on the other side, Will Sparkish
cannot put on his perriwig, or adjust his cravat at the glass, for
the noise of those damned nurses and squalling brats; and
then ends with a gallant reflection upon the comforts of matri-
30 mony, runs’ out of the hearing, and drives to the chocolate-house-

According as the husband has disposed in_himself, every
circumstance in his life is to give him torment or pleasure-
When the affection is well placed, and is supported by the con-
siderations of duty, honour, and friendship, which are in the
highest degree engaged in this alliance, there can nothing rise
in the common course of life, or from the blows or favours of
fortune, in which a man will not find matters of some delight
unknown to a single condition.

He that sincerely loves his wife and family, and studies to

40 improve that affection in himself, conceives pleasure from the


ON MATRIMONY. 105


most indifferent things; while the married man, who has not
bid adieu to the fashions and false gallantries of the town, is
perplexed with every thing around him. In both these cases
men cannot, indeed, make a sillier figure, than in repeating
such pleasures and pains to the rest of the world : but I speak
of them only, as they sit upon those who are involved in them.
As I visit all sorts of people, I cannot indeed but smile, when
the good lady tells her husband -what extraordinary things the
child spoke since he went out. No longer than yesterday I was

10 prevailed with to go home with a fond husband ; and his wife
told him, that his son, of his own head, when the clock in the
parlour struck two, said papa would come home to dinner
presently. While the father has him ina rapture in his arms,
and is drowning him with kisses, the wife tells me he is but just
four years old. Then they both struggle for him, and bring
him up to me, and repeat his observation of two o’clock. Iwas
called upon, by looks upon the child, and then at me, to say
Something : and I told the father that this remark of the infant
of his coming home, and joining the time with it, was a certain

20 indication that he would be a great historian and chronologer.
They are neither of them fools, yet received my compliment
with great acknowledgment of my prescience. I fared very
well at dinner, and heard many other notable sayings of their
heir, which would have given very little entertainment to one
less turned to reflection than I was: but it was a pleasing specu-
lation to remark on the happiness of a life, in which things of
no moment give occasion of hope, self-satisfaction, and triumph.
On the other hand, I have known an ill-natured coxcomb, who
has hardly improved in any thing but bulk, for want of this

30 disposition, silence the whole family as a set of silly women and
children, for recounting things which were really above his own
Capacity.

‘When I say all this, I cannot deny but there are perverse
jJades that fall to men’s lots, with whom it requires more than
common proficiency in philosophy to be able ta live. When
these are joined to men of warm spirits, without temper or
learning, they are frequently corrected with stripes ; but one of
our famous lawyers® is of opinion, that this ought to be used
sparingly ; as I remember, those are his very words ; but as it

40 is proper to draw some spiritual use out of all afflictions, |


1o


20


30


40


106 MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS,


should rather recommend to those who are visited with women
of spirit, to form themselves for the world by patience at home.
Socrates, who is by all accounts the undoubted head of the sect
of the hen-pecked, owned and acknowledged that he owed great
part of his virtue to the exercise which his useful wife constantly
gave it. There are several good instructions may be drawn from
his wise answers to the people of less fortitude than himself on
her subject. A friend, with indignation, asked how so good a
man could live with so violent a creature? He observed to
him, that they who learn to keep a good seat on horseback,
mount the least manageable they can get ; and, when they have
mastered them, they are sure never to be discomposed on the
backs of steeds less restive®. At sevéral times, to different
persons, on the same subject he has said, ‘ My dear friend, you
are beholden to Xantippe, that I bear so well your flying out in
a dispute.’ To another, ‘My hen clacks very much, but she
brings me chickens, They that live in a trading street are not
disturbed at the passage of carts.’ I would have, if possible, a
wise man be contented with his lot, even with a shrew ; -for,
though he cannot make her better, he may, you see, make him-
self better by her means.

But, instead of pursuing my design of displaying conjugal love
in its natural beauties and attractions, I am got into tales to the
disadvantage of that state of life. I must say, therefore, that J
am verily persuaded, that whatever is delightful in human life 18
to be enjoyed in greater perfection in the married than in the
single condition. He that has this passion in perfection, i?
occasions of joy, can say to himself, besides his own satisfaction,
“How happy will this: make my wife and children!’ Upo?
occurrences, of distress or danger, can comfort himself, ‘ But all


‘this while my wife and children are safe.’ There is something


in it, that doubles satisfactions, because others’ participate them;
and dispels afflictions because others are exempt from them. All
who are married without this relish of their circumstance are in
either a tasteless indolence and negligence which is hardly to be
attained, or else live in the hourly repetition of sharp answers,
eager upbraidings, and distracting reproaches. In a word, the
married state, with and without the affection suitable to it, is the
completest image of heaven and hell we are capable of receiving
in this life.
Spectator, No. 479.] [September 9, 1712.


II.


SOCIAL PAPERS.
§ 1. THE SPECTATOR CLUB.


No. 34. On the Members of the Spectator Club.


Ast alii sex
Et plures, uno conclamant ore.—Jvuv. Sat. vii. 167.


The first of our society is a gentleman of Worcestershire,
of ancient descent, a baronet, his name Sir Roger de Cover-
leys, His great-grandfather was inventor of that famous
country-dance® which is called after him. All who know
that shire are very well acquainted with the parts and merits
of Sir Roger. He is a gentleman that is very singular
in his behaviour, but his singularities proceed from his good
Sense, and are contradictions to the manners of the world only
as he thinks the world is in the wrong. However, this humour

© creates him no enemies, for he does nothing with sourness
°r obstinacy ; and his being unconfined to modes and forms
Makes him but the readier and more capable to please and
blige all who know him. When he is in town, he lives in
Soho-square®. It is said, he keeps himself a bachelor by
Teason he was crossed in love by a perverse beautiful widow®
Of the next county to him. Before this disappointment, Sir
oger was what you calla fine gentleman, had often supped with

my Lord Rochester? and Sir George Etheredge®, fought a dvel

,, UPon his first coming to town, and kicked bully Dawson® in
4 public coffee-house for calling him youngster, But being
ll-used by the above-mentioned widow, he was very serious
for a year and a-half; and though, his temper being naturally
Jovial, he at last got over it, he grew careless of himself, and


108 SOCIAL PAPERS.


‘never dressed afterward. He continues to wear a coat and
doublet of the same cut that were in fashion at the time of
his repulse, which, in his merry humours, he tells us, has
been in and out twelve times since he first wore it......
He is now in his fifty-sixth year, cheerful, gay, and hearty;
keeps a good house both in town and country ; a gréat lover
of mankind ; but there is such a mirthful cast in his behaviour,
that he is rather beloved than esteemed.

His tenants grow rich, his servants look satisnea, all the

10 young women profess love to him, and the young men are glad
of his company. When he comes into a house he calls the
servants by their names, and talks all the way up stairs to 8
visit. I must not omit, that Sir Roger is a justice of the
quorum ; that he fills the chair at a quarter-session. with great
abilities, and three months ago gained pniversal applause, by
explaining a passage in the game act.

The gentleman next in esteem and authority among us is
another bachelor, who is a member of the Inner Temple, 6
man of great probity, wit, and understanding; but he ha

20 chosen his place of residence rather, to obey the direction
of an old humoursome father, than in pursuit of his ow?
inclinations. He was placed there to study the laws of thé
land, and is the most learned of any of the house in those of
the stage. Aristotle and Longinus are much better understood
by him than Littleton or Coke". The father sends up every
post questions relating to marriage-articles, leases, and tenure9
in the neighbourhood; all which questions he agrees with a?
attorney to answer and take care of in the lump. He is
studying the passions themselves when he should be inquiring

30 into the debates among men which arise from them. Hé
knows the argument of each of the orations of Demosthene®
and Tully, but not one case in the reports of our own courts
No one ever took him for a fool; but none, except his intimaté
friends, know he has a great deal of wit.. This turn make®
him at once both disinterested and agreeable: as few of hié
thoughts are drawn from business, they are most of them fit
for conversation. His taste of books is a little too just fot
the age he lives in; he has read all, but approves of very
few. His familiarity with the customs, mapners, actions, an!

40 writings of the ancients, makes him a very delicate observe!


ON THE MEMBERS OF THE SPECTATOR CLUB. 109


of what occurs to him in the present world. He is an excellent
critic, and the time of the play is his hour of business ; exactly
at five he passes through New-Inn, crosses through Russell-
court, and takes a turn at Wills till the play begins ; he has
his shoes rubbed and his perriwig powdered at the barber’s
as you go into the Rose®, It is for the good of the audience
when he is at a play, for the actors have an ambition to
please him.
The person of next consideration is Sir Andrew Freeport,
10a merchant of great eminence in the city of London; a person
of indefatigable industry, strong reason, and great experience.
His notions of trade are noble and generous, and (as every rich
man has usually some sly way of jesting, which would make
no great figure were he not a rich man) he calls the sea the
British Common. He is acquainted with commerce in all its
parts, and will tell you that it is a stupid and barbarous way
to extend dominion by arms: for true power is to be got by
arts and industry. He will often argue, that if this part of
our trade were well cultivated, we should gain from one nation ;
*0 and if another, from another. I have heard him prove, that
diligence makes more lasting acquisitions than valour, and that
sloth has ruined more nations than the sword. He abounds in
Several frugal maxims, amongst which the greatest favourite is,
‘A penny saved is a penny got.’ A general trader of good
Sense is pleasanter company than a general scholar; and Sir
Andrew having a natural unaffected eloquence, the perspicuity
Of his discourse gives the same pleasure that wit would in
another man. He has made his fortunes himself; and says
that England may be richer than other kingdoms, by as
3° plain methods as he himself is richer than other men ; though
&t the same time I can say this of him, that there is not a
Point in the compass, but blows home a ship in which he is
an owner. .
Next to Sir Andrew in the club-room sits Captain Sentry»,
& gentleman of great courage, good understanding, but invin-
Cible modesty. He is one of those that deserve very well,
but are very awkward at putting their talents within the obser-
Vation of such as should take notice of them. He was some
years a captain, and behaved himself with great gallantry in
4 several engagements and at several sieges ; but having a small


10


20


30


1190 SOCIAL PAPERS.


estate of his own, and being next heir to Sir Roger, he has
quitted a way of life in which no man can rise suitably to his
merit, who is not something of a courtier as well as a soldier.
I have heard him often lament, that in a profession where
merit is placed in so conspicuous a view, impudence should
get the better of modesty. When he had talked to this pur
pose, I never heard him make a sour expression, but frankly
confess that he left the world, because he was not fit for it. A
strict honesty, and an even regular behaviour, are in them-
selves obstacles to him that must press through crowds, wh?
endeavour at the same end with himself, the favour of a com:
mander. He will, however, in his way of talk excuse generals
for not disposing according to men’s desert, or inquiring intO
it ; for, says he, that great man who has a mind to help me
has as many to break through to come at me, as I have to com¢
at him: therefore he will conclude, that the man who would
make a figure, especially in a military way, must get over all
false modesty, and assist his patron against the importunity
of other pretenders, by a proper assurance in his own vindi
cation. He says it is a civil cowalice'to be backward i?
asserting what you ought to expect, as it is a military fear t°
be slow in attacking when it is your duty. With this candov!
does the gentleman speak of himself and others. The sam¢
frankness runs through all his conversation. The military
part of his life has furnished him with many adventures, i*
the relation of which he is very agreeable to the company’
for he is never over-bearing, though accustomed to comman
men in the utmost degree below him ; nor ever too obsequious:
from a habit of obeying men highly above him.

But that our society may not appear a set of humourists,
unacquainted with the gallantries and pleasures of the age
we have amongst us the gallant Will Honeycomb®, a gentle’
man who, according to his years, should be in the decline of
his life, but having been very careful of his person, and alway
had a very easy fortune, time has made but~very little impres’
sion, either by wrinkles on his forehead, or traces on his brain
His person is well turned, and of a good height. He is very
ready at that sort of discourse with which men usually entertai?
women. He has all his life dressed very well, and remembers


40 habits as others do men. He can smile when one speaks 10


ON THE MEMBERS OF THE SPECTATOR CLUB, II11


him, and laughs easily. He knows the history of every mode,
and can inform you from which of the French king’s wenches
our wives and daughters had this manner of curling their hair,
that way of placing their hoods ;... and whose vanity to shew
her foot made that part of the dress so short in sucha year. Ina
word, all his conversation and knowledge has been in the female
tien As other men of his age will take notice to you what
ch a minister said upon such an occasion, he will tell you,
when the Duke of Monmouth danced at court, such a woman
'was then smitten—another was taken with him at the head
$f his troop in the Park. In all these important relations,
he has ever about the same time received a kind glance, or a
blow of a fan from some celebrated beauty, mother of the
resent Lord Such a-one.... This way of talking of his very
such enlivens the conversation among us of a more sedate
turn; and I find there is not one of the company, but myself,
Who rarely speak at all, but speaks of him as of that sort of
Man, who is usually called a well-bred fine gentleman. To
9 nclude his character, where women are not concerned, he is
» ‘honest worthy man.
I cannot tell whether I am to account him whom I am next
speak of, as one of our company; for he visits us but
dom ; but when he does, it adds to every man else a new
‘Yoyment of himself. He is ‘a clergyman, a very philosophic
an, of general learning, great sanctity of life, and the most
act good breeding. He has the misfortune to be of a very
leak constitution, and consequently, cannot accept of such
tes and business as preferments in his function would oblige
io {£0 ¢ he is therefore among divines what a chamber-counsel-
t is among lawyers. The probity of his mind, and the
‘ttegrity of his life, create him followers, as being eloquent or
ud advances others. He seldom introduces the subject he
‘feaks upon ; but we are so far gone in years, that he observes,
‘hen he is among us, an earnestness to have him fall on some
vine topic, which he always treats with much authority, as
%8e who has no interest in this world, as one who is hastening
the object of all his wishes, and conceives hope from his
Cays and infirmities. These are my ordinary companions.


bectator, No. 2.] [March 2, 1711.


Tk2 SOCIAL PAPERS.


No. 35. Character of Mr. Spectator.


Egregti mortalem altique silentii!
Hor. Sat. ii. 6. 58.


An author, when he first appears in the world, is very apt to
believe it has nothing to think of but his performances. With a
good share of this vanity in my heart, I:‘made it my business
these three days to listen_after my.own fame; and as I have
sometimes met with circumstances which did not displease me,
I have been encountered by others which gave me much morti-
fication. It is incredible to think how empty I have in this
time observed some part of the species to be, what mere blanks
they are when they first come abroad in the morning, how

10 utterly they are at a stand until they are set a-going by some
paragraph in a newspaper.

Such persons are very acceptable to a young author, for they
desire no more in any thing but to be new, to be agreeable. if
I found consolation among such, I was as much disquieted by
the incapacity of others. These are mortals who have a certain

“\curiosity without power of reflection, and perused my papers
‘like spectators rather than readers. But there is so little plea-
sure in inquiries that so nearly concern ourselves {it being the
worst way in the world to fame, to be too anxious about it) that

zo upon the whole I resolved for the future to go on in my ordinary
way; and without too much fear or hope about the business of
reputation, to be very careful of the design of my actions, but
very negligent of the consequences of them.

It is an endless and frivolous pursuit to act by any other rule
than the care of satisfying our own minds in what we do. Oné
would think a silent man, who concerned himself with no oné
breathing, should be very little liable to misinterpretations }
and yet I remember I was once taken up for a Jesuit, for n? .
other reason but my profound taciturnity. It is from this mis-

30 fortune, that, to be out of harm’s way, I have ever since affected
crowds. He who comes into assemblies only to gratify hiS
curiosity, and not to make a figure, enjoys the pleasures of re-
tirement in a more exquisite degree than he possibly could ip
his closet : the lover, the‘ambitious, and the miser, are followed


CHARACTER OF MR, SPECTATOR, 113


thither by a worse crowd than any they can withdraw from. To

be exempt from the passions with which others are tormented,

‘is the only pleasing solitude. I_can very justly say with the

‘ancient sage, ‘I am never less z alone 1 than when alone.’

As I am insignificant to the company in public places, and as
it is visible I do not come thither as most do, to show myself,

I gratify the vanity of all who pretend to make an appearance,

and have often as kind looks from well-dressed gentlemen and

ladies, as a poet would bestow upon one of his audience. There
10 are so many gratifications attend this publicsort of obscurity,
that some little distastes I daily receive have lost their anguish;
and I did, the other day, without the least displeasure, overhear
one say of me, ‘that strange fellow ;’ and another answer, ‘I
have known the fellow’s face these twelve years, and so must
you; but I believe you are the first ever asked who he was.’
There are, I must confess, many to whom my person is as well
known as that of their nearest relations, who give themselves no
farther trouble about calling me by my name or quality, but
Speak of me very currently by Mr. What-d’ye-call-him.

To make up for these trivial disadvantages, I have the high
Satisfaction of beholding all nature with an unprejuticed eye ;
and having nothing to do with men’s passions or interests, I can,
with the greater Sagacity, consider their talents, manners, fail-
ings, and merits.

It is remarkable, that those who want any one sense, possess
the others with greater force and vivacity. Thus my want of, or
tather resignation of speech, gives me the advantages ofa dumb
man... I have, methinks, a more than ordinary penetration in
seeing ; and flatter myself that I have looked into the highest
30° and lowest of mankind, and make shrewd guesses, without

being admitted to their conversation, at the inmost thoughts

and reflections of all whom.I behold. It is from hence that
good or ill fortune has no manner of force towards affecting my
judgment. I see men flourishing in courts, and languishing i in
jails, without “being prejudiced, from their circumstances, to
théir favour or disadvantage ; but from their inward manner of
bearing their condition, often pity the prosperous, and admire
the unhappy.
Those who converse with the dumb, know from the turn of
4° their eyes, and the changes of their countenance, their senti-


20


10


114 SOCIAL PAPERS,


ments of the objects before them. I have indulged my silence
to such an extravagance, that the few who are intimate with me
answer my smiles with concurrent sentences, and argue to the
very point I shaked_my head at, without my speaking. Will
Honeycomb was very entertaining the other night at a play, to
a gentleman who sat on his right hand, while I was at his left.
The gentleman believed Will was talking to himself, when upon
my looking with great approbation at a young. thing in a box-
before us, he said, ‘1 arn quite of another’ opinion. She has, |
will allow, a very pleasing aspect, but, methinks, that simplicity
in her countenance is rather childish than innocent? When J
observed her a second time, he said, “I grant her dress is very
becoming, but perhaps the merit of that choice is owing to her
mother ; for though,’ continued he, ‘I allow a beauty to be as


“much to be commended for the elegance of her dress, as a wit


20


3°


40


for that of his language, yet if she has stolen the colour of her
ribands from another, or had advice about her trimmings,
I shall not allow her the praise of dress, any more than L
would call a plagiary an author.’ When I threw my eye towards
the next woman to her, Will il spoke what I looked, according to
is romantic imagination, in the following manner :
5 ‘Behold, you who dare, that charming virgin ; behold the
‘beauty of her person chastised by the innocence of her thoughts.
Chastity, good-nature, and affability, are the graces that play in
her countenance ; she knows she is handsome, but she knows
she is good. Conscious beauty adorned with conscious virtue !
What a spirit is there in those eyes! What a bloom in that per-
son! Howis the whole woman expressed in her appearance! Her
air has the beauty of motion, and her look the force of language.’

It was prudence to turn away my eyes from this object, and
therefore I turned them to the thoughtless creatures who make
up the lump of that sex, and move a knowing eye no more than
the portraiture of insignificant people by ordinary painters, which
are but pictures of pictures.

Thus the working of my own mind is the general entertain-
ment of ny life: I never enter into the commerce of discourse
with any but my particular friends, and not in public even with
them. Such a habit has perhaps raised in me uncommon re-
flections ; but this effect I cannot communicate but by my
writings, As my pleasures are almost wholly confined to those


CHARACTER OF MR. SPECTATOR. IT5


of the sight, I take it for a peculiar happiness that I have always
had an easy and familiar admittance to the fair sex. If never
Praised or flattered, I never belied or contradicted them. As
these compose half the world, and are, by the just complaisance
and gallantry of our nation, the more powerful part of our
people, I shall dedicate a considerable share of these my specu-
lations to their service, and shall lead the young through all the
becoming duties of virginity, marriage, and widowhood. When
it is a woman’s day, in my works, { shail endeavour at a Je
10 and 2 air suitable to their understanding. ‘When I say this, I
must be understood to mean, that I shall not lower but exalt the
subjects I treat-upon, Discourse for their entertainment is not
to be debased, but refined. A man may appear learned without
talking sentences, as in his ordinary gesture he discovers he can
dance, though he does not cut capers. Ina word, I shall take
it for the greatest glory of my work, if among reasonable women
this paper may furnish tea-table talk". In order to it, I shall
treat on matters which relate to females, as they are concerned
to approach or fly from the other sex, or as they are tied to
20 them by blood, interest, or affection. Upon this occasion I
think it but reasonable to declare, that whatever skill I may
have in speculation, I shall never betray what the eyes of lovers
Say to each other in my presence. At the same time I shall
not think myself obliged by this promise to conceal any false
protestations which I observe made by glances in public as-
Semblies ; but endeavour to make both sexes appear in their
conduct what they are in their hearts. By this means, love,
during the time of my speculations, shall be carried on with the
same sincerity as any other affair of less consideration. As this
30 is the greatest concern, men shall be from henceforth liable to
the greatest reproach for misbehaviour in it. . Falsehood in love
Shall hereafter bear a blacker.aspect than infidelity in friendship,
or villainy in business. For this great and good end, all
breaches against that noble passion, the cement of society, shall
be severely examined. But this, and all other matters loosely
hinted at now, and in my former papers, shall have their proper
place in my following discourses. The present writing is only
to admonish the world, that they shall not find me an idle but a
busy Spectator. .
Spectator, No. 4.] [March 5, 1711
12


116 SOCIAL PAPERS,


Wo. 36. On Sir Roger de Coverley's Servants.


fEsopo ingentem statuam posuere Attici,

Servumque collocarunt seterna in basi,

Patere honoris scirent ut cunctis viam.
Puapr. Epilog. 1. 2.


The reception, manner of attendance/ undisturbed freedom
and quiet, which I meet with here in the country, has confirmed
me in the opinion I always had, that the general corruption of
manners in servants is owing to the conduct of masters. The
aspect t of « every one in the family carries so much satisfaction,
that it appears he knows the happy lot which has befallen him
in being a member'of it. There is one particular which I have
seldom seen but at Sir Roger’s ; it is usual in all other places,
that servants fly from the parts of the house through which their

10 master is passing ; on the contrary, ] here_they industriously
place themselves in his way ; and it is on both sides, as it were,
understood as a visit, When the servants appear without calling.
This — proceeds from the humane and equal temper of the
man of the house, who also perfectly well knows how to en-
joy a great estaté with such economy.as ever to be much,
beforehand. This makes his own mind untroubled, and con-
sequently unapt to vent peevish expressions, or give passionate
or inconsistent orders to those about him, Thus respect
and love go together; and a certain cheerfulness in perform-

zo ance of their duty is the particular distinction of the lower
part of this family. When a servant is called before his
master, he does not come with an expectation to hear him-
self rated for some trivial fault, threatened to be stripped,
or used with any other unbecoming language, which mean
masters often give to worthy servants ; but it is often to know,
what road he took that he came so readily back according
to order : whether he passed by such a ground ; if the old
man who rents it is in good health ; or whether he gave Sif
|Roger’s love to him, or the like.

30 A man who preserves a respect founded on his benevo-
lence to his dependants, lives rather like a prince than 4
master in his family: his orders are received as favours rather


ON SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY’S SERVANTS. 147


than duties ; and the distinction of approaching him is part
of the reward for executing what is commanded by him.

There is another circumstance in which my friend excels in
his management, which is the manner of rewarding his ser-
ants. He has ever been of opinion, that giving his cast
Clothes to be worn by valets has a very ill effect upon little
minds, and creates a silly sense of equality between the parties,
in persons affected only with outward things. I have heard
him often pleasant on this occasion, and describe a young

10 gentleman abusing his man in that coat, which a month or two
before was the most pleasing distinction he was conscious. of
in himself. He would tum his discourse still more pleasantly
upon the ladies’ bounties of this kind; and I have heard
him say he knew a fine woman, who distributed rewards and
punishments in giving becoming or unbecoming dresses to
her maids.*

But my good friend is above these little instances of good-
will, in bestowing only trifles on his servants: a good servant
to him is sure of having it in his choice very soon of being no

20 Servant at all. As I before observed, he is so good a husband»,
and knows so thoroughly that the skill of the purse is the car-
dinal virtue of this life ; I say he knows so well that frugality is
the support of generosity, that he can often spare a large fine
when a tenement falls, and give that settlement to a good
Servant who has a mind to go into the world, or make a stranger
Pay the fine to that servant for his more comfortable main-
tenance, if he stays in his service.

A man of honour and generosity considers it would be miser-
able to himself to have no will but that of another, though it

30 Were of the best person breathing, and, for that reason, goes on
as fast as he is able to put his servants into independent liveli-
hoods. The greatest part of Sir Roger’s estate is tenanted by
Rersons who have served himself or his ancestors. It was to me
extremely pleasant to observe the visitants from Several parts to
Welcome his arrival into the country; and all the difference that
I could take notice of between the late servants who came to see
him, and those who stayed in the family was, that these latter
were looked upon as finer gentlemen and better courtiers.

This manumission and placing them in a way of _livelihood,

401 look upon as only what is due to a good servant; which


118 SOCIAL PAPERS,


encouragement will make his successor be as diligent, as humble,
and‘ ‘as ready as he was. There is something wonderful in the
narrowness of those minds which can be pleased, and be barren
of bounty to those who please them.

One might, on this occasion, recount the sense that great per-
sons in all ages have had of the merit of their dependants, and
the heroic services which men have done their masters in the
_extremity of their fortunes, and shown to their undone patrons
that fortune was all the difference between them; but as I de-

10 sign this my speculation only as a gentle admonition to thankless
masters, I shall not go out of the occurrences of common life,
but assert it as a general observation, that I never saw, but in
Sir Roger’s family and one or two more, good servants treated
as they ought to be. Sir Roger’s kindness extends to theif
children’s children ; and this very morning he sent his coach-
man’s grandson to prentice. I shall conclude this paper with an
account of a picture in his gallery, where there are many which
will deserve my future observation.

At the very upper end of this handsome structure I saw the

20 portraiture of two young men standing in a river, the one
naked, the other in a livery. The person supported seemed
half dead, but still so much alive as to show in his face ex-
quisite joy and love towards the other. I thought the fainting
figure resembled my friend Sir Roger; and looking at the
butler who stood by me, for an account of it, he informed me
that the person in the livery was a servant of Sir Roger’s, who
stood on the shore while his masteravas swimming, and observ-
ing him taken with some sudden illness and sink under water,
jumped in and saved him. He told me Sir Roger took off the

30 dress he was in as soon as he came home, and by a great
bounty at that time, followed by his favour ever since, had made
him master of that pretty seat which we saw at a distance as
we came to this house. I remembered, indeed, Sir Roger said,
there lived a very worthy gentleman, to whom he was highly
obliged, without mentioning any thing farther. Upon my looking
a little dissatisfied at some part of the picture, my attendant
informed me that it was against Sir Roger’s will, and at the
earnest request of the gentleman himself, that he was drawn in
the habit in which he had saved his master.

Spectator, No. 107.] [July 3, 1711.


SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY’S PORTRAIT GALLERY. IIg


No. 37. On Sir Roger de Coverley’s Portrait Gallery.


 Abnormis sapiens—Honr. Sat. ii. 2. 3.


‘


I was this morning walking in the gallery, when Sir Roger
entered at the end opposite to me, and advancing towards
me, said he was glad to meet me among his relations the De
Coverleys, and hoped I liked the conversation of so much good
company, who were as silent as myself. I knew he alluded to
the pictures, and as he is a gentleman who does not a little
value himself upon his ancient descent, I expected he would
give me some account df them. We were now arrived at the
upper end. of the gallery, when the knight faced towards one

'O of the pictures, and, as we stood before it, he entered into the
matter after his blunt way of saying.things.as they occur to his
imagination, without regular introduction, or care to preserve
the appearance of chain of thought. 7

~ It is,’ said he, ‘worth while to consider the force of dress ;
and how the persons of one age differ from those of another,
merely by that only. One may observe also, that the general
fashion of one age has been followed by one particular set of
People in another, and by them preserved from one generation

: toanother. Thus the vast jetting® coat and small bonnet, which

°was the habit in Henry the Seventh’s time, is kept on in the
Yeomen of the guard; ‘not without a good and politic view,
because they look a foot taller, and a foot and a half broader—
besides that the cap leaves the face expanded, and consequently
more terrible and fitter to stand at the entrance of palaces.

This predecessor of ours, you see, is dressed after this manner,
and his cheeks would be no larger than mine were he in a hat
as Iam. He was the last man that won @ prize in the Tilt
yard (which is now a common street before Whitehall), You
See the broken lance that lies there by his right foot. He

3° shivered that lance of his adversary all to pieces ; and bearing
himself, look you, Sir, in this manner, at the same time he came
within the target of the gentleman who rode against him, and
taking him with incredible force before him on the pummel of
his saddle, he in that manner rid the tournament over, with an
air that shewed he did it rather to perform the rules of the lists,


120 SOCIAL PAPERS,


than expose his enemy: however, it appeared he knew how
to make use of a victory, and with a gentle trot he marched up
to a gallery where their mistress sat (for they were rivals), and
let him down with laudable courtesy and pardonable insolence.
I do not know but it might be exactly where, the coffee-house®
is now.

‘You are to know this my ancestor was not only of a military
genius, but fit also for the arts of peace, for he played on the

‘ bass-viol as well as any gentleman at court ; you see where his
10 viol hangs by his basket-hilt sword. The action at the Tilt-
yard, you may be sure, won the fair lady, who was a maid’ of
honour and the greatest beauty of her time; here she stands,
the next picture. You see, Sir, my $reat great great grand-
mother has on the new-fashioned petticoat, except that the
modern is gathered at the waist ; my grandmother appears ® as
if she stood in a large drum, whereas the ladies now walk as if
they were in a go-cart. For all this lady was bred at court, she
became an excellent country-wife; she brought ten children,
and when I show you the library, you shall see in her own hand
20 (allowing for the difference of the language) the best receipt now
in England both for a hasty-pudding and a white-pot®.

‘If you please to fall back a little, because it is necessary to
look at the three next pictures at one view; these are three
sisters. She on the right hand who is so very beautiful, died a
maid; the next to her, still handsomer, had the same fate,
against her will; this homely thing in the middle had both
their portions added to her own, and was stolen by a neigh-
bouring gentleman, a man of stratagem and resolution ; for he
poisoned three mastiffs to come at her, and knocked down two

30 deer-stealers in carrying her off. Misfortunes happen in all
families. The theft of this romp, and so much money, was
no great matter td our estate. But the next’ heir that possessed
it was this soft gentleman whom you see there. Observe the
small buttons, the little boots, the laces, the slashes about his
clothes, and above all the posture he is drawn in (which to be
sure was his own choosing): you see he sits with one hand on
a desk, writing, and looking as it were another way, like an
easy writer, or a sonnetteer. He was one of those that had too
much wit to know how to live in the world ; he was a man of no

40 justice, but great good manners; he ruined every body that had


SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY’S PORTRAIT GALLERY, 121


any thing to do with him, but never said a rude thing in his life ;
the rflost indolent person in the world, he would sign a deed that
passed away half his estate with his gloves on, but would not
put on his hat before a lady if it were to save his country. He
is said to be the first that made love by squeezing the hand.
He left the estate with ten thousand pounds debt upon it ; but,
‘however, by all hands I have been informed, that he was every
way the finest gentleman in the world. That debt lay heavy
on our house for one generation, but it was retrieved by a gift
10 from that honest man you see there, a citizen of our name, but
nothing at all akin to us. I know Sir Andrew Freeport has
said behind my back, that this man was descended from one of
the ten children of the maid of honour I showed you above :
but it was never made out. We winked at the thing indeed,
because money was wanting at that time.’
Here I saw my friend a little embarrassed, and turned my
face to the next portraiture.
Sir Roger went on with his account of the gallery in the
following manner: ‘This man (pointing to him I looked at) I
20 take to be the honour of our house, Sir Humphry de Coverley ;
he was in his dealings as punctual as a tradesman, and as
Senerous as a gentleman. He would have thought himself as
much undone by breaking his word, as if it were to be followed
by bankruptcy. He served his country as knight of the shfre
to his dying day. He found it no easy matter to maintain an
integrity in his words and actions, even in things that regarded
the offices which were incumbent upon him, in the care of his
own affairs and relations of life, and therefore dreaded (though
he had great talents) to go into employments of state, where he
30 must be exposed to the snares of ambition. Innocence of life,
and great ability, were the distinguishing parts of his character ;
the latter, he had often observed, had led to the destruction of
the former, and he used frequently to lament that great and
good had not the same signification. He was an excellent
husbandman®, but had resolved not to exceed such a degree of
wealth ; all above it he bestowed in secret bounties many years
after the sum he aimed at for his own use was attained. Yet
he did not slacken his industry, but to a decent old age spent
the life and fortune which were superfluous to himself, in the
49 service of his friends and neighbours.’


10


20


30


122 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Here we were called to dinner, and Sir Roger ended the
discourse of this gentleman, by telling me, as we followed
the servant, that this his ancestor was a brave man, and
narrowly escaped being killed in the civil wars; ‘for,’ said
he, ‘he was sent out of the field upon a private message, the
day before the battle of Worcester.’ The whim of narrowly
escaping by having been within a day of danger, with othet
matters above-mentioned, mixed with good sense, left me at
a loss whether I was more delighted with my friend’s wisdom
or simplicity.


Spectator, No. 109.] [July 5, 1731.


No. 38. On the Perverse Widow and Sir Rogers Disappoint
ment in Love.


Herent infixi pectore vultus.—ViRc. /En. iv. 4.


In my first description of the company in which I pass
most of my time, it may be remembered, that I mentioned 4
great affliction which my friend Sir Roger had met with in hi?
youth ; which was no less than a disappointment in love. I!
happened this evening, that we fell into a very pleasing walk al
a distance from his house. As soon as we came into it, ‘It is)
quoth the good old man, looking round him with a smile, ‘ very
hard, that any part of my land should be settled upon one wh?
has used me so ill as the perverse widow” did ; and yet I am
sure I could not see a sprig of any bough of this whole walk 0
trees, but I should reflect upon her and her severity. She ha’
certainly the finest hand of any woman in the world. You aré
to know, this was the place wherein I used to muse upon her!
and by that custom I can never come into it but the samé
tender sentiments revive in my mind, as if] had actually walke
with that beautiful creature under these shades. I have bee?
fool enough to carve her name on the bark of several of thes’
trees; so unhappy is the condition of men in love, to attemp
the removing of their passion by the methods which serve onlY
to imprint it deeper. She has certainly the finest hand of anY
woman in the world,’


ON THE PERVERSE WIDOW, ETC. 123


Here followed a profound silence; and I was not displeased
to observe my friend falling so naturally into a discourse which
I had ever before taken notice he industriously avoided. After
a very long pause, he entered upon an account of this great
circumstance in his life, with an air which I thought raised my
idea of him above what I had ever had before ; and gave me
the picture of that cheerful mind of his, before it received that
stroke which has ever since affected his words and actions. But
he went on as follows :—~
10 «T came to my estate in my twenty-second year, and resolved
to follow the steps of the most worthy of my ancestors who
have inhabited this spot of earth before me, in all the methods
of hospitality and good neighbourhood, for the sake of my fame ;
and in country sports and recreations, for the sake of my health.
In my twenty-third year I was obliged to serve as sheriff of the
county ; and in my servants, officers, and whole equipage, in-
dulged the pleasure of a young man (who did not think ill of
his own person) in taking that public occasion of showing my
_ figure and behaviour to advantage. You may easily imagine to
*0 yourself what appearance I, made, who am pretty tall, ride well,
- and was very well dressed, at the head of a whole county,
with music before me, a feather in my hat, and my horse well
bitted. I can assure you I was not a little pleased with the kind
looks and glances I had from all the balconies and windows as
I rode to the hall where the assizes were held. But, when
I came there, a beautiful creature in a widow’s habit sat in court
to hear the event of a cause concerning her dower. This com-
manding creature (who was born for the destruction of all who
behold her) put on such a resignation in her countenance, and
3° bore the whispers of all around the court with such a pretty un-
€asiness, I warrant you, and then recovered herself from one
eye to another, until she was perfectly confused by meeting
Something so wistful in all she encountered, that at last, with a
Murrain to her, she cast her bewitching eye upon me. I no
Sooner met it but I bowed like a great surprised booby ; and
knowing her cause to be the first which came on, I cried, like
& captivated calf as.I was, “Make way for the defendant’s
Witnesses.” This sudden partiality made all the county
Immediately see the sheriff also was become a slave to the
19 fine widow. During the time her cause was upon trial, she


124 SOCIAL PAPERS.


behaved herself, I warrant you, with such a deep attention to
her business, took opportunities to have little billets handed to
her counsel, then would be in such a pretty confusion, occa-
sioned, you must know, by «acting before so much company,
that not only I but the whole court was prejudiced in her
favour ; and all that the next heir to her husband had to urge
was thought so groundless and frivolous, that when it came to
her counsel to reply, there was not half so much said as every
one besides in the court thought he could have urged to her
ag advantage. You must understand, Sir, this perverse woman is
one of those unaccountable creatures that secretly rejoice in the
admiration of men, but indulge themselves in no farther conse’
quences. ‘Hence it is that she has ever had a train of admirers;
and she removes from her slaves in town to those in the coun’
try, according to the seasons of the year. She is a reading
lady, and far gone in the pleasures of friendship. She is always
accompanied by a confidante, who is witness to her daily pro-
testations against our sex, and consequently a bar to her first
steps towards love, upon the strength of her own, maxims and
20 declarations,

‘ However, I must need say, this accomplished mistress of
mine has distinguished me above the rest, and has been know?
to declare Sir Roger de Coverley was the tamest and most
humane of all the brutes in the country. I was told she said
so by one who thought he rallied me ;_ but upon the strength of
this slender encouragement of being thought least detestable, J
made new liveries, new-paired my coach-horses, sent them all to
town to be bitted, and taught to throw their legs well, and mové
all together, before I pretended to cross the country, and wait

30 upon her. As soon as I thought my retinue suitable to thé
character of my fortune and youth, I set out from hence t0
make my addresses. The particular skill of this lady has evef
been to inflame your wishes, and yet command respect. T?O
make her mistress of this art, she has a greater share of know-
ledge, wit, and good sense than is usual even among men of
merit. Then she is beautiful beyond the race of women. If
you will not let her-go on with a certain artifice with her eyes)
and the skill of beauty, she will arm herself with her real
charms, and strike you with admiration instead of desire, It

4ois certain that if you were to behold the whole woman, there


ON THE PERVERSE WIDOW, ETC. I25


is that dignity in her aspect, that composure in her motion, that
complacency in her manner, that if her form makes you hope,
her merit makes you fear. But then again, she is such a
desperate scholar, that no cougjry gentleman can approach
her without being a jest. As I was going to tell you, when
I came to her house I was admitted to her presence with great
Civility ; at the same time she placed herself to be first seen
by me in such an attitude, as I think you call the posture of a
Picture, that she discovered new charms, and I at last came
10 towards her with such an awe as made me speechless. This she
ho sooner observed but she made her advantage of it, and
began a discourse to me concerning love and honour, as they
both are followed by pretenders, and the real votaries to them.
When she discussed these points in a discourse which, I verily
believe, was as learned as the best philosopher in Europe could
possibly make, she asked me whether she was so happy as to fall
in with my sentiments on these important particulars. Her
confidante sat by her, and on‘my being in the last confusion and
Silence, this malicious aid of her’s turning to her, says, ‘I am
20 very glad to observe Sir Roger pauses upon this subject, and
seems resolved to deliver all his sentiments upon the matter
when he pleases to speak.’ They both kept their countenances,
and after -I had sat half an hour meditating how to behave
before such profound casuists, I rose up and took my leave.
Chance has since that time thrown me very often in her way, and
she as often has directed a discourse to me which I do not
understand. This barbarity has kept me ever at a distance
from the most beautiful object my eyes ever beheld. It is thus
also she deals with all mankind, and you must make love to her
4© as you would conquer the sphinx, by posing her. But were she
like other women, and that there were any talking to her, how
constant must the pleasure of that man be, who could converse
with a creature—But, after all, you mdy be sure her heart
is fixed on some one or other: and yet I have been credibly
informed—but who can believe half that is said !—After she had
done speaking to me, she put her hand to her bosom, and ad-
justed her tucker ; 3 then she cast her eyes a little down, upon my
beholding her too earnestly. They say she sings excellently:
her voice in her ordinary speech has something in it inexpres-
40 sibly sweet. You must know I dined with her at a public table


126 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the day after I first saw her, and she helped me to some tansy"
in the eye of all the gentlemen in the country. She has certainly
the finest hand of any woman in the world. I can assure you,
Sir, were you to behold her, yo would bé in the same condition;
for as her speech is music, her form is angelic. But I find I grow
irregular while I am talking of her; but indeed it would be
stupidity to be unconcerned at such perfection. Oh, the ex-
cellent creature! she is as inimitable to all women, as she is
inaccessible to all men.’

10 I found my friend begin to rave, and insensibly led him
towards the house, that we might be joined by some other com-
pany; and am convinced that the widow is the secret cause of
all that inconsistency which appears in some part of my friend's
discourse; though he has so much command of himself as not
directly to mention her, yet according to that of Martial™ which
one knows not how to render into English, dum tacet hanc logut-
tur. shall end this paper with that whole epigram, which ,e-
presents with much humour my honest friend’s condition :—

Quicquid agit Rufus, nihil est, nisi Neevia Rufo,

20 Si gaudet, si flet, si tacet, hanc loquitur:

Ccenat, propinat, poscit, negat, annuit, una est
Nevia: si non sit Nzevia, mutus erit.


Scriberet hesterna patri cum luce salutem,
Nevia lux, inquit,* Nevia numen, ave.


Let Rufus weep, rejoice, stand, sit, or walk,

Still he can nothing but of Nevia talk;

Let him eat, drink, ask questions, or dispute,

Still he must speak of Nzvia, or be mute.

He writ to his father, ending with this line—
30 I am, my lovely Neevia, ever thine.


Spectator, No. 113.] [July 10, 1714.


No. 38, Zhe Huntsman in Love.


Heeret lateri lethalis arundo.—ViRe¢. /En. iv. 73.


This agreeable seat is surrounded with so many pleasing
walks, which are struck out of a wood, in the midst of which
the house stands, that one can hardly ever be weary of rambling
from one labyrinth of delight to andther. To one used to livé


THE HUNTSMAN IN LOVE, 127


in a city, the charms of the country are so,exquisite that the
mind is lost in a certain transport which raises us above
ordinary life, and is yet not strong enough to be inconsistent
with tranquillity. Thisestate of mind was I in—ravished with
the murmur of waters, the whisper of breezes, the singing of
birds ; and whether I looked up to the heavens, down on the
earth, or turned to the prospects around me, still struck with
new sense of pleasure ;—when I found by the voice of my
friend, who walked by me, that we had insensibly strolled into

lo the grove sacred to the widow®. ‘This woman,’ says he, “is of
all others the most unintelligible : she either designs to marry,
or she does not. What is the most perplexing of all is, that she
doth not either say to her lovers she has any resolution against
that condition of life in general, or that she banishes them ;
but, conscious of her own merit, she permits their addresses,
without fear of any ill consequence, or want of respect, from
their rage or-despair. She has that in her aspect against
which it is impossible to offend. A man whose thoughts are
constantly bent upon so agreeable an object, must be excused

20 if the ordinary occurrences in conversation are below his atten-
tion. I call her indeed perverse, but, alas! why do I call her
8o?-because her superior merit is such, that I cannot ap-
proach her without. awe—that my heart is checked by too
much esteem: I am angry that her charms are not more
accessible—that I am more inclined to worship than salute
her. How often have I wished her unhappy, that I might
have an opportunity of serving her! and how often troubled in
that very imagination at giving her the pain of being obliged !
Well, I have led a miserable life in secret upon her account ;

30 but fancy she would have condescended to have some regard
for me, if it had not been for that watchful animal her con-
fidante.

‘Of all persons under the sun’ (continued he, calling me by
my name), ‘be sure to set a mark upon confidantes: they are of
all people the most impertinent. What is most pleasant to
Observe in them is, that they assume to themselves the merit of
Persons whom they have in their custody. Orestilla is a great
fortune, and in wonderful danger of surprises, therefore full of
Suspicions of the least indifferent thing, particularly careful of

4° new acquaintance, and of growing too familiar with the old,


128 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Themista, her favourite woman, is every whit as careful of
whom she speaks to, and what she says. Let the ward be
a beauty, her confidante shall treat you with an air of dis-
tance; let her be a fortune, and she assumes the suspicious
behaviour of her friend and patroness. Thus it is that very
many of our unmarried women of distinction are to all intents
and purposes married, except the consideration of different
sexes. They are directly under the conduct of their whisperer;
and think they are in a state of freedom, while they can prate
10 with one of these attendants of all men in general, and still
avoid the man they most like. You do not see one heiress
in a hundred whose fate does not turn upon this circumstance
of choosing a confidante. Thus it is that the lady is addressed
to, presented, and flattered, only by proxy, in her woman. In
my case, how is it possible that ——’ Sir Roger was proceed-
‘ing in his harangue, when we heard the voice of one speaking
very importunately, and repeating these words, ‘What,, not
one smile?’ We followed the sound till we came to a closé
thicket, on the ether side of which we saw a young womat
20 sitting as it were in a personated sullenness just over a trans’
parent fountain®. Opposite ,to her stood, Mr. William, Sif
Roger’s master of the game. The knight whispered me, ‘ Hist
these are lovers.’ The huntsman looking earnestly at thé
shadow of the young maiden in the stream—‘Oh thou dest
picture, if thou couldest remain there in the absence of that
fair creature whom you represent in the water, how willingly
could I stand here satisfied for ever, without troubling my deaf
Betty herself with any mention of her unfortunate Willian’s
whom she is angry with! But alas! when she pleases to bé
30 gone, thou wilt also vanish—yet ‘let me talk to thee while thot
dost stay. Tell my dearest Betty thou dost not more depend
upon her than does her William ; her absence will make away
with me as well as thee. If she offers to remove thee, I will
jump into these waves to lay hold on thee—herself, her owt
dear person, I must never embrace again. Still do you heaf
me without one smile—It is too much to bear.’ He had n?
sooner spoken these words, but he made an offer of throwing
himself into the water: at which his mistress started up, and
at the next instant he jumped across the fountain, and met hef
40 in an embrace. She, half recovering from her fright, said if


THE HUNTSMAN IN LOVE. 129


the most charming voice imaginable, and with a tone of com-
plaint, ‘I thought how well you. would drown yourself. No,
no, you will not drown yourself till you have taken your leave
of Susan Holiday.’ The huntsman, with a tenderness that
spoke the most passionate love, and with his cheek close to
“hers, whispered the softest vows of fidelity in her ear, and
cried, ‘Do not, my dear, believe a word Kate Willow says ;
she is spiteful, and makes stories, because she loves to hear me
talk to herself for your sake’? ‘Look you there,’ quoth Sir
1o Roger, ‘do you see there, all mischief comes from confidantes !
But let us not interrupt them ; the maid is Konest, and the man
dares not be otherwise, for he knows I loved her father: I will
interpose in this matter, and hasten the wedding. Kate Willow
is a witty mischievous wench in the neighbourhood, who was
a beauty; and makes me hope J shall see the perverse widow
in her condition, She was so flippant in her answers to all
the honest fellows that came near her, and so very vain of her
beauty, that she has valued herself upon ber charms till they
have ceased. She therefore now makes it-her business to pre-
20 vent other young-women from being more discreet than she
was herself: however, the saucy thing said the other day well
enough, “Sir Roger and I must make a match, for we are both
despised by those we loved.” The hussy has a great deal of
Power wherever she comes, and has her share of cunning,
‘However, when I reflect upon this woman, I do not know
whether in the main I am the worse for having loved her:
whenever she is recalled to my imagination, my youth returns,
and I feel a forgotten warmth in my veins. This affliction in
My life has streaked all my conduct with a softness, of which I
3° should otherwise have been incapable. It is owing, perhaps, to
this dear image in my heart that I am apt to relent, that I
easily forgive, and that many desirable things are grown into
my temper, which I should not have arrived at by better
motives than the thought of being one day hers. I am pretty
well satisfied such a passion as I have had is never well cured ;
and between you and me, I am often apt to imagine it has had
some whimsical effect upon my brain: for I frequently find, that
in my most serious discourse I let fall some comical familiarity
of speech or odd phrase that makes the company laugh. How-
'© ever, I cannot but allow she is a most excellent woman. When
K


130 SOCIAL PAPERS.


she is in the country, I warrant she does not run into dairies,
but reads upon the nature of plants; but has a glass hive, and
comes into the garden out of books to see them work, and
observe the policies of their commonwealth. She understands
every thing. I would give ten pounds to hear her argue with
my friend Sir Andrew Freeport about trade. No, no, for all
she looks so innocent as it were, take my’word for it she ts no
fool.’


Spectator, No, 118.] (July 16, 1731.


No. 40.° A Letter jrom Captain Sentry.


Nunquam ita quisquam bene subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quin res, ztas, usus semper aliquid apportet novi,
Aliquid moneat: ut illa, quze te scire credas, nescias ;
Et, quee tibi putaris prima, in experiendo ut repudies,
Ter. Adelph. act v. sc. 4.


There are, I think, sentiments in the following letter from my

1o friend Captain Sentry, which discover a rational and equal

frame of mind, as well prepared for an advantageous as an
unfortunate change of condition :-—


‘ Coverley-Hall, Nov. 15,
‘Sir, Worcestershire.


‘Iam come to the succession of the estate of my honoured
kinsman, Sir Roger de Coverley; and I assure you I find it
no easy task to keep up the figure of master of the fortune:
which was so handsomely enjoyed by that honest plain man-
I cannot (with respect to the great obligations I have, be it

20 spoken) reflect upon his character, but I am confirmed in the
truth which I have, I think, heard spoken at the club; to wit,
that a man of a warm and well-disposed heart, with a very
small capacity, is highly superior in human society to him who
with the greatest talents, is cold and languid in his affections:
But alas! why do I make a difficulty in speaking of my worthy
ancestor’s failings? His little absurdities and incapacity for
the conversation of the politest men are dead with him, and
his greater qualities are even now useful to him. J know not
whether by naming those disabilities I do not enhancé his


4 LETTER FROM CAPTAIN SENTRY. 131


Merit, since he has left behind him a reputation in his country,
which would be worth the pains of the wisest man’s whole life
to arrive at. By the way, I must observe to you, that many
of your readers have mistook that passage in your writings ®
wherein Sir Roger is reported to have inquired into the private
character of the young woman at the tavern. I know you men-
tioned that circumstance as an instance of the simplicity and
innocence of his mind, which made him imagine it a very easy
thing to reclaim one of those criminals. ... The less discerning
10 of your readers cannot enter into that delicacy of description
in the character: but indeed my chief business at this time is
to represent to you my present state of mind, and the satis-
faction I promise to myself in the possession of my new fortune.
I have continued all Sir Roger’s servants, except such as it was
a relief to dismiss into little beings within my manor. Those
who are in a list of the good knight’s own hand to be taken
care of by me, I have quartered upon such as have taken new
leases of me, and added so many advantages during the lives
of the persons_so quartered, that it is the interest of those
20 whom they are joined with to cherish and befriend them upon
all occasions. I find a considerable sum of ready money, which
1 am laying out among my dependants at the common interest,
but with a design to lend it according to their merit, rather
than according to their ability. I shall lay a tax upon such
as I have highly obliged, to become security to me for such of
their own poor youth, whether male or female, as want help
towards getting into some being in the world, I hope I shall
be able to manage my affairs so as to improve my fortune
every year by doing acts of kindness. I will lend my money
3° to the use of none but indigent men, secured by such as have
ceased to be indigent by the favour of my family or myself,
What makes this the more practicable is, that if they will do
any one good with my money, they are welcome to it upon
their own security: and I make no exception against it, because
the persons who enter into the obligations do it for their own
family. I have laid out four thousand pounds this way, and it
's not to be imagined what a crowd of people are obliged by it.
In cases where Sir Roger has recommended, I have Ient money
to put out children, with a clause which makes void the obli-
4° gation in case the infant dies before he is out of his apprentice-
K 2


10


40


132 SOCIAL PAPERS.


ship ; by which means the: kindred and masters are extremely
careful of breeding him td industry, that he may repay it
himself by his labour, in three years’ journey-work after his
time is out, for the use of his securities. Opportunities of this
kind are all that have occurred since I came to my estate: but
I assure you I will preserve a constant disposition to catch at
all the occasions I can to promote the good and happiness of
my neighbourhood.

‘But give me leave to lay before you a little establishment
which has grown out of my past life, that I doubt not will
administer great satisfaction to me in that part of it, whatever
that is, which is to come.

‘There is a prejudice in favour of the way of life to which a
man has been educated, which I know not whether it would
not be faulty to overcome. It is like a partiality to the interest
of one’s own country before that of any other nation. It is
from a habit of thinking, grown upon me from my youth spent
in arms, that I have ever held gentlemen, who have preserved
modesty, good-nature, justice, and humanity, in.a soldier’s life,
to be the most valuable and worthy persons of the human race-
To pass through imminent dangers, suffer painful watchings,
frightful alarms, and laborious marches, for the greater part
of a man’s time, and pass the rest in sobriety conformable to
the rules of the most virtuous civil life, is a merit too great to
deserve thé treatment it usually meets with among the other


‘part of the world. But I assure you, Sir, were-there not very


many who have this worth, we could never have seen thé
glorious events which we have in our days. I need not say
more to illustrate the. character of a soldier than to tell you hé
is the very contrary to him you observe loud, saucy, and over’
bearing, in a red coat about town. But I was going to tell you
that, in honour of the profession of arms, I have set apart 3
certain sum of money for a table for such gentlemen as havé
served their country in the army, and will please from time to
time to sojourn all, or any part of the year, at Coverley. Such
of them as will do me that honour shall find horses, servants;
and all things necessary for their accommodation and enjoy’
ment of all the conveniences of life in a pleasant various
country. If Colonel Camperfeldt® be in town, and his abilities
are not employed another way in the service, there is no mat


MR. BICKERSTAFF VISITS 4 FRIEND. 133


would be more welcome here. That gentleman’s thorough
knowledge in his profession, together with the simplicity of
his manners and goodness of his heart, would induce others
like him to honour my abode; and I should be glad my ac-
quaintance would take themselves to be invited or not, as their
characters have an affinity to his.

‘I would have all my friends know, that they need not fear
(though I am become a country gentleman) I will trespass
against their temperance and sobriety. No, Sir, I shall retain

10 so much of the good sentiments for the conduct of life, which
we cultivated in each other at our club, as to contemn all
inordinate pleasures ; but particularly remember, with our be-
loved Tully, that the delight in food consists in desire, not
satiety. They who most passionately pursue pleasure sel-
domest arrive at it. Now 1 am writing to a philosopher I can-
not forbear mentioning the satisfaction I took in the passage ]
tead yesterday in the same Tully. A nobleman of Athens”
made a compliment to Plato the morning after he had supped
at his house: “Your entertainments do not only please when

20 you give them, but also the day after.”

‘I am, my worthy Friend,
‘Your most obedient humble Servant,
“WILLIAM SENTRY,’


Spectator, No. 544.] [November 24, 1712.


§ 2. DOMESTIC PAPERS.


No 41, wr. Bickerstaff visits a friend.


Interea dulces pendent circum oscula nati,
Casta pudicitiam servat domus.


Vir. Georg. ii. 523.


There are several persons who have many pleasures and en-
tertainments i in their possession, which they do not enjoy. It
is, therefore, a kind and good office to acquaint them with their
own happiness, and turn their attention to such instances of


Io


20


40


134 SOCIAL PAPERS.


their good fortune as they are apt to overlook. Persons in the
married state often want such a monitor; and pine away their
days, by looking upon the same condition in anguish and
murmur, which carries with it in the opinion of others a com-
plication of all the pleasures of life, and a retreat from its
inquietudes.

I am led into this thought by a visit I made an old friend,
who was formerly my school-fellow", He,came to town last
week with his family for the winter, and yesterday morning
sent me word his wife expected me to dinner. I am, as it
were, at home at that house, and every member of it knows me
for their well-wisher. I cannot indeed express the pleasure it
is, to be met by the children with so much joy as I am when |
go thither. The boys and girls strive who shall come first,
when they think it is I that am knocking at the door; and that
child which loses the race to me runs back again to tell the
father it is Mr. Bickerstaff. This day I was led in by a pretty
girl, that we all thought must have forgot me; for the family
has been out of town these two years. Her knowing me again
was a mighty subject with us, and took up our discourse at the
first entrance. After which, they began to rally me upon a


‘thousand little stories they ‘heard in the country, about my


marriage to one of my neighbour’s daughters. Upon which
the gentleman, ‘my friend, said, ‘N ay, if Mr. Bickerstaff marries
a child of any of his old companions, I hope mine shall have
the preference ; there is Mrs. Mary is now sixteen®, and would
make him as fine a widow as the best of them. But I know
him too well; he is so enamoured with the very memory of
those who flourished in our youth, that he will not so much a$
look upon the modern beauties. I remember, old gentleman;
how often you went home in a day to refresh your countenancé
and dress when Teraminta reigned in your heart. As we came
up in the coach, I repeated to my wife some of your verses o?
her’ With such reflections on little passages which happened
long ago, we passed our time, during a cheerful and elegant
meal. After dinner, his lady left the room, as did also thé
children. As soon as we were alone, he took me by the hand;
‘Well, my good friend,’ says he, ‘I am heartily glad to seé
thee; I was afraid you would never have seen all the company
that dined with you to-day again. Do not you think the "good


MR. BICKERSTAFF VISITS A FRIEND. 135


woman of the house a little altered since you followed her from
the play-house, to find out who she was, for me?’ I perceived a
tear fall down his cheek as he spoke, which moved me not a
little. But, to turn the discourse, I said, ‘She is not indeed
quite that creature she was, when she returned me the letter J
carried from you ; and told me, “she hoped, as ] was a gentle-
‘man, I would be employed no more to trouble her, who had
never offended me; but would be so much the gentleman’s
friend, as to dissuade him from a pursuit, which he could never
to succeed in.” You may remember, I thought her in earnest ;
and you were forced to employ your cousin Will, who made his
sister get acquainted with her, for you. You cannot expect
her to be for ever fifteen.’ ‘Fifteen!’ replied my good friend :
‘Ah! you little understand, you that have lived a bachelor, how
great, how exquisite a pleasure there is, in being really beloved!
It is impossible, that the most beauteous face in nature should
taise in me such pleasing ideas, as when I look upon that
excellent woman, That fading in her countenance is chiefly
caused by her watching with me, in my fever. This was fol-
20 lowed by a fit of sickness, which had like to have carried her
off last winter. I tell you sincerely, I have so many obligations
to her, that I cannot, with any sort of moderation, think of her
present state of health. But as to what you say of fifteen, she
gives me every day pleasures beyond what I ever knew in
the possession of her beauty, when I was in the vigour of
youth. Every moment of her life brings me fresh instances of
her complacency to my inclinations, and her prudence in re-
gard to my fortune. Her face is to me much more beautiful
than when I first saw it; there is no decay in any feature,
30 which I cannot trace, from the very instant it was occasioned
by some anxious concern for my welfare and interests. Thus,
at the same time, methinks, the love I conceived towards her
for what she was, is heightened by my gratitude for what she
is. The love of a wife is as much above the idle passion com-
monly called by that name, as the loud laughter of buffoons is
inferior to the elegant mirth of gentlemen. Oh! she is an
inestimable jewel. In her examination of her household affairs,
she shows a certain fearfulness to find a fault, which makes her
servants obey her like children ; and the meanest we have has
40 an ingenuous shame for an offence, not always to be seen in


Io


20


30


4°


136 SOCIAL PAPERS,


children in other families. I speak freely to you, my old
friend ; ever since her sickness, things that gave me the quickest
joy before, turn now to a certain anxiety. As the children play
in the next room, I know the poor things by their steps, and
am considering what they must do, should they lose their
mother in their tender years. The pleasure I-used to take in
telling my boy stories of battles, and asking my girl questions
about the disposal of her baby, and the gossiping of it, is turned
into inward reflection and melancholy,’

He would have gone on in this tender way, when the good lady
entered, and with an inexpressible sweetness in her countenance
told us, ‘she had been searching her closet for something very
good, to treat such an old friend as I was.’ Her husband’s
eyes sparkled with ‘pleasure at, the cheerfulness of her coun-
tenance; and I saw all his fears vanish in an instant. The
lady observing something in our looks which showed we had
been more serious than ordinary, and seeing her husband
receive her with great concern under a forced cheerfulness,
immediately guessed at what we had been talking of; and
applying herself to me, said, with a smile, ‘ Mr. Bickerstaff, do
not believe a word of what he tells you, I shall still live to have
you for my second, as I have often promised you, unless he
takes more care of himself than he has done since his coming
to town, You must know, he tells me that he finds London is
a much more healthy place than the country; for he sees
several of his old acquaintance and school-fellows are heré
young fellows with fair full-bottomed periwigs. © I could scarcé
keep him in this morning from going out open-breasted®.’ My
friend, who is always extremely delighted with her agreeable
humour, made her sit down with us. She did it with that easi-
ness which is peculiar to women of sense; and to keep up the
good humour she had brought in with her, turned her raillery
upon me. ‘Mr. Bickerstaff, you remember you followed mé
one night from the play-house ; suppose you should carry mé
thither to-morrow night, and lead me into the front box®.’ This
put us into.a long field of discourse about the beauties, wh?
were mothers to the present, and shined in the boxes twenty
years ago. I told her, ‘I was glad she had transferred so many
of her charms, and I did not question but her eldest daughter
was within half-a-year of being a toast.’


MR, BICKERSTAFF VISITS A FRIEND, 137


We were pleasing ourselves with this fantastical preferment
of the young lady, when on a sudden we were alarmed with the
noise of a drum, and immediately entered my little godson to
give me a point of war. His mother, between laughing and
chiding, would have put him out of the room; but I would not
part with him so. I found, upon conversation with him, though
he was a little noisy in his mirth, that the child had excellent
parts, and was a great master of all the learning on the other
side eight years old. I perceived him a very great historian in

10 /Esop’s Fables: but he frankly declared to me his mind, ‘that
he did not delight in that learning, because he did not believe
they were true; for which reason I found he had very much
tumed his studies, for about a twelvemonth past, into the lives
and adventures of Don Belianis of Greece, Guy of Warwick,
the Seven Champions, and other historians of that age™. |
could not but observe the satisfaction the father took in the
forwardness of his son ; and that these diversions might turn to
some profit, I found the boy had made remarks, which might be .
of service to him during the course of his whole life. He would

20 tell you the mismanagements of John Hickerthrift, find fault
with the passionate temper in Bevis of Southampton, and loved
Saint George for being the champion of England; and by this
means had his thoughts insensibly moulded into the notions of
discretion, virtue, and honour. I was extolling his accomplish-
Ments, when the mother told me, ‘ that the little girl who led me
in this morning was in her way a better scholar than he. Betty,’
Said she, ‘ deals chiefly in fairies and sprights ; and sometimes
in a winter-night will terrify the maids with her accounts, until
they are afraid to go up to bed.’

30 sat with them until it was very late, sometimes in merry,
sometimes in serious discourse, with this particular pleasure,
which gives the only true relish to all conversation, a sense that
every one of us liked each other. I went home, considering the
different conditions of a married life and that of a bachelor ;
and I must confess it struck me with a secret concern, to reflect,
that whenever I go off I shall leave no traces behind me. In
this pensive mood I returned to my family ; that is to say, to my
maid, my dog, and my cat, who only can be the better or worse
for what happens to me.

Tatler, No. 95.] [November 17, 1709.


Io


20


30


138 SOCIAL PAPERS.


No. 42. Mr. Bickerstaf{ visits a Friend (continued).


Ut in vita, sic in studiis, pulcherrimum et humanissimum existimo,
severitatem comitatemque miscere, ne illa in tristitiam, hxc in petu-
lantiam procedat.—Pun. Epist.


I was walking about my chamber this rhorning in a very gay
humour, when I sawa coach stop at my door, and a youth about
fifteen alighting out of it, whom I perceived to be the eldest
son of my bosom friend that I gave some account of in my
paper of the seventeenth of the last month. I felt a sensible
pleasure rising in me at the sight of him, my acquaintance
having begun with his father when he was just such a stripling,
and about that very age. When he came up to me, he took me
by the hand, and burst out in tears. I was extremely moved;
and immediately said, ‘Child, how does your father do?’ He
began to reply, ‘My mother——’ But could not go on for weep-
ing. I went down with him into the coach, and gathered out
of him, ‘that his mother was then dying, and that, while the
holy man was doing the last offices to her, he had taken that
time to come and call me to his father,.who, he said, would,
certainly break his heart, if I did not goand comforthim.’? The
child's discretion in coming to me of his own head, and the
tenderness he showed for his parents, would have quite over-
powered me, had I not resolved to fortify myself for the season-
able performances of those duties which I owed to my friend.
As we were going, I could not but reflect upon the character o'
that excellent woman, and the greatness of his grief for the los$
of one who has ever been the support to him under all othef
afflictions. How, thought I, will he be able to bear the hour of
her death, that could not, when I was lately with him, speak of
a sickness, which was then past, without sorrow! We were now
got pretty far into Westminster, and arrived at my friend’s
house. At the door of it I met Favonius®, not without a secret
satisfaction to find he had been there. I had formerly con-
versed with him at this house; and as he abounds with that
sort of virtue and knowledge which makes religion beautiful,
and never leads the conversation into the violence and rage of
party-disputes, I listened to him with great pleasure. Ouf


MR, BICKERSTAFF VISITS A FRIEND. 139


discourse chanced to be upon the subject of death, which he
treated with such a strength of reason, and greatness of soul,
that, instead of being terrible, it appeared to a mind rightly
cultivated, altogether to be contemned, or rather to be desired.
As I met him at the door, I saw in his face a certain glowing
of grief and humanity, heightened with an air of fortitude and
resolution, which, as I afterwards found, had such an irresistible
force, as to suspend the pains of the dying, and the lamentation
of the nearest friends who attended her. I went up directly to
to the room where she lay, and. was met at the entrance by my
friend, who, notwithstanding his thoughts had been composed
a little before, at the sight of me turned away his face and
wept. The little family of children renewed the expressions of
their sorrow according to their several ages and degrees of
understanding. The eldest daughter was in tears, busied in
attendance upon her mother ; others were kneeling about the
bed side ; and what troubled me most was, to see a little boy,
who was too young to know the reason, weeping only because
his sisters did. The only one in the room who seemed resigned
20 and comforted was the dying person. At my approach to the
bed side, she told me, with a low broken voice, ‘ This is kindly
done—take care of your friend—do not go from him!’ She
had before taken leave of her husband and children, in a
manner proper for so solemn a parting, and, with a gracefulness
Peculiar to a woman of her character. My heart was torn in
Pieces, to see the husband on one side suppressing and keeping
down the swellings of his grief, for fear of disturbing her in her
last moments ; and the wife, even at that time, concealing the
pains she endured, for fear of increasing his affliction. She kept
3° her eyes upon him for some moments after she grew speechless,
and soon after closed them for ever. In the moment of her
departure, my friend, who had thus far commanded himself,
fave a deep groan, and fell into a swoon by her bed side, The
distraction of the children, who thought’ they saw both their
Parents expiring together, and now lying dead before them,
would have melted the hardest heart ; but they soon perceived
their father recover, whom I helped to remove into another
room, with a resolution to accompany him until the first pangs
of his affliction were abated. I knewconsolation would now be
40 impertinent ; and therefore contented myself to sit by him, and


140 SOCIAL PAPERS,


condole with him in silence. For I shall here use the method
of an ancient author2, who, in one of his epistles, relating the
virtues and death of Macrinus’s wife, expresses himself thus :
‘I shall suspend my advice to this best of friends, until he
is made capable of receiving it by those three great remedies—
Necessitas ipsa, dies longa, et satietas doloris—the necessity of
submission, length of time, and satiety of grief.’

In the mean time, I cannot but consider, with much com-
miseration, the nielaneholy state of one who has had such a


10 part of himself torn from him, and which he misses in every


20


40


circumstance of life. His condition is like that of one who has
lately lost his right arm, and is every moment offering to help
himself with it. He does not appear to himself the same person
in his house, at his table, in company, or in retirement ; and
loses the relish of all the pleasures and diversions that were
before entertaining to him by her participation of them. The
most agreeable objects recall the sorrow for her with whom he
used to enjoy them. This additional satisfaction, from the
taste of pleasures in the society of one we love, is admirably
described in Milton, who represents Eve, though in Paradise
itself, no further pleased with the beautiful objects around her;
than as she sees them in company with Adam, in that passage”
so inexpressibly charming:

With thee conversing, I forget all time ;

All seasons, and their change ; all please alike.

Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet

With charm of earliest birds; pleasant the sun,

When first on this delightful land he spreads

‘His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flower

Glist’ring with dew ; fragrant the fertile earth

After soft showers ; ‘and sweet the coming on

Of grateful evening mild ; the silent night,

With this her solemn bird, and this fair moon,

And these the gems of heaven, her starry train.

But neither breath of morn when she ascends

With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun

On this delightful land ; ‘nor herb, fruit, flower,

Glist’ring with dew ; nor fragrance after showers ;

Nor grateful evening mild; nor silent night,

With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon,

Or glittering star-light, without thee is sweet.


The variety of images in this passage is infinitely pleasing;
and the recapitulation of each particular image, with a little


ON RECOLLECTIONS OF CHILDHOOD, ETC, I4T


varying of the expression, makes one of the finest turns of
words that I have ever seen; which I rather mention, because
Mr, Dryden has said, in his preface to Juvenal, that he could
meet with no turn of words in Milton,

It may be further observed, that though the sweetness of these
verses has something in it of a pastoral, yet it excels the
Ordinary kind, as much as the scene of it is above an ordinary
field or meadow. I might here, since I am accidentally led into
this subject, show several passages in Milton that have as

'0 excellent turns of this nature as any of our English poets what-
soever 3 but shall only mention that which follows, in which he
describes the fallen angels engaged in the intricate disputes of
predestination, free-will, and fore-knowledge ; and, to humour
the perplexity, makes a kind of labyrinth in the very words that
describe it.


Others apart sat on a hill retir'd,

In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high

Of Providence; fore-knowledge, will, and fate,

Fix'd fate, free-will, fore-knowledge absolute,
£0 And found no end, in wand’ring mazes lost.


Tatler, No. 114.] [December 31, 1709.


No. 48, On Recollections of Childhood; ‘Death of Parents;
first Love,


Dies, ni fallor, adest, quem semper acerbum,
Semper honoratum, sic dii voluistis, habebo.
Vira, AEn. v. 49.


There are those among mankind, who can enjoy no relish of
their being, except the world is made acquainted with all that
relates to them, and think every thing lost that passes unob-
served ; but others find a solid delight in stealing by the crowd,
and modelling their life after such a manner, as is as much
above the approbation as the practice of the vulgar. Life being
too short to give instances great enough of true friendship or
good will, some sages have thought it pious to preserve a cer-
tain reverence for the manes of their deceased friends ; and

30 have withdrawn themselves from the rest of the world at certain


10


20


3°


142 SOCIAL PAPERS,


seasons, to commemorate in tneir own thoughts such of their
acquaintance who have gone before them out of this life. And
indeed, when we are advanced in years, there is not a more
pleasing entertainment, than to recollect in a gloomy moment
the many we have parted with, that have been dear and agree-
able to us, and to cast a melancholy thought or two after those,
with whom, perhaps, we have indulged ourselves in whole nights
of mirth and jollity. With such inclinations in my heart I went
to my closet yesterday in the evening, and resolved to be sorrow-
ful ; upon which occasion I could not but look with disdain
upon myself, that though all the reasons which I had to lament
the loss of many of my friends are now as forcible as at the
moment of their departure, yet did not my heart swell with the
same sorrow which J felt at the time; but I could, without
tears, reflect upon many pleasing adventures I have ‘had with
some, who have long been blended with common earth. Though
it is by the benefit of nature, that length of time thus blots out
the violence of afflictions ; yet, with tempers too much given to
pleasure, it is almost necessary to revive the old places of grief
in our memory ; and ponder step by step on past life, to lead
the mind into that sobriety of thought which poises the heart,
and makes it beat with due time, without being quickened with
desire, or retarded with despair, from its proper and equal
motion. When we wind up a clock that is out of order, to make
it go well for the future, we do not immediately set the hand to
the present instant, but we make it strike the round of all its
hours, before it can recover the regularity of its time. Such,
thought I, shall be my method this evening ; and since it is
that day of the year which I dedicate to the memory of such i?
another life as I much delighted in when living, an hour or two
shall be sacred to sorrow and their memory, while I run over all
the melancholy circumstances of this kind which have occurred
to me in my whole life.

The first sense of sorrow I ever knew was upon the death of
my father, at which time I was not quite five years of age ; but
was rather amazed at what all the house meant, than possessed
with a real understanding why nobody was willing to play with
me. I remember I went into the room where his body lay, an¢
my mother sat weeping alone by it. I had my battledore in my


40 hand, and fell a beating the coffin, and calling Papa ; for, I


ON RECOLLECTIONS OF CHILDHOOD, ETC, 143


know not how, I had some slight idea that he was locked up
there. My mother catched me in her arms, and, transported
beyond all patience of the silent grief she was before in, she
almost smothered me in her embraces ; and told me in a flood
of tears, ‘Papa could not hear me, and would play with me no
more, for they were going to put him under ground, whence he
could never come to us again.” She was a very beautiful woman,
of a noble spirit, and there was a dignity in her grief amidst all
the wildness of her transport ; which, methought, struck me

to with an instinct of sorrow, that, before I was sensible of what it
was to grieve, seized my very soul, and has made pity the weak-
ness of my heart ever since. The mind in infancy is, methinks,
like the body in embryo ; and receives impressions so forcible,
that they are as hard to be removed by reason, as any mark
with which a child is born is to be taken away by any future
application. Hence it is, that good-nature in me is no merit ;
but having been so frequently overwhelmed with her tears be-
fore I knew the cause of any affliction, or could draw defences
from my own judgment, I imbibed commiseration, remorse, and

20 an unmanly gentleness of mind, which has since insnared me
into ten thousand calamities ; and from whence I can reap no
advantage, except it be, that, in such a humour as I am now in, I
can the better indulge myself in the softnesses of humanity, and
enjoy that sweet anxiety which arises from the memory of past
afflictions.

We, that are very old, are better able to remember things
which befell us in our distant youth, than the passages of later
days. For this reason it is, that the companions of my strong
and vigorous years present themselves more immadiately to me

3° in this office of sorrow. Untimely and unhappy deaths are what
we are most apt to lament; so little are we able to make it
indifferent when a thing happens, though we know it must
happen. Thus we groan under life, and béwail those who are
relieved from it. Every object that returns to our imagination
raises different passions, according to the circumstance of their
departure. Who can have lived in an army, and in a serious
hour reflect upon the many gay and agreeable men that might
long have flourished in the arts of peace, and not join with the
imprecations of the fatherless and widow on the tyrant to whose
4° ambition they fell sacrifices? But gallant men, who are cut off


Io


20


30


144 SOCIAL PAPERS.


by the sword, move rather our veneration than our pity ; and
we gather relief enough from their own contempt of death, to
make that no evil, which was approached with so much cheer-
fulness, and attended with so much honour. But when we turn
our thoughts from the great parts of life on such occasions, and
instead of lamenting those who stood ready to give death to
those from whom they had the fortune to receive it; I say;
when we let our thoughts wander from such noble objects, and
consider the havock which is made among the tender and the
innocent, pity enters with an unmixed softness, and possesses
all our souls at once. :

Here (were there words to express such sentiments with
proper tenderness) I should record the beauty, innocence, and
untimely death, of the first object" my eyes ever beheld with
love. The beauteous virgin! how ignorantly did She charm,
how carelessly excel? Oh death! thou hast right to the bold;
to the ambitious, to the high, and to the haughty; but why this
cruelty to the humble, to the meek, to the undiscerning, to thé
thoughtless ? Nor age, nor business, nor distress, can eras¢
the dear image from my imagination. In the same week, I saw
her dressed for a ball, and in a shroud, How ill did the habit
of death become the pretty trifler? I still behold the smiling
earth——A large train of disasters were coming on to my
memory, when my servant knocked at my closet-door, and
interrupted me with a letter, attended with a hamper of wine
of the same sort with that which is to be put to sale on Thurs’
day next, at Garraway’s coffee-house®. Upon the receipt of it, !
sent for three of my friends. We are so intimate, that we ca?
be company in whatever state of mind we meet, and can enter’
tain each other without expecting always to rejoice. The winé
we found to be generous and warming, but with such a heat a5
moved us rather to be cheerful than frolicksome. It revived
the spirits, without firing the blood. We commended it until
two of the clock this morning ; and having to-day met a little
before dinner, we found, that though we drank two bottles 4
man, we had much more reason to recollect than forget wha!
had passed the night before.


Tatler, No. 181.] [June 6, 1719.


TO THOSE ABOUT TO MARRY. 145


No. 44 To those about to Marry; Wedding of Jenny Distaf.


Felices ter, et amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula; nec malis
Divulsus querimoniis,
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
Hor. Od, i. 13. 17


My sister Jenny’s lover, the honest Tranquillus, for that shall
be his name, has been impatient with me to despatch the
hecessary direction for his marriage; that while I am taken
up with imaginary schemes, as he calls them, he might not
burn with real desire, and the torture of expectation. When I
had reprimanded him for the ardour wherein he expressed him-
self, which’ I thought had-not enough of that veneration with
which the marriage-bed is to be ascended, I told him, ‘the day
of his nuptials should be on the Saturday following, which was

‘© the eighth instant.’ On the seventh in the evening, poor Jenny
came into my chamber, and, having her heart full of the great
change of life from a virgin condition to that of a wife, she long
sat silent. I saw she expected me to entertain her on this
important subject, which was too delicate a circumstance for
herself to touch upon ; whereupon I relieved her modesty in
the following manner: ‘Sister, said I, ‘you are now going
from me: and be contented, that you leave the company of
a talkative old man, for that of a sober young one: but take
this along with you, that there is no mean in the state you are

*0 entering into, but you are to be exquisitely happy or miserable,
and your fortune in this way of life will be wholly of your own
making. In all the marriages I have ever seen, most of which
have been unhappy ones, the great cause of evil has proceeded
from slight occasions; and I take it to_be the first maxim
in a married condition, that you are to be above trifles, When
two persons have so good an opinion of each other as to come
together for life, they will not differ in matters of importance,
because they think of each other with respect, in regard to all
things of consideration that may affect them, and are prepared

40 for mutual assistance and relief in such occurrences ; but for
less occasions, they have formed no résolutions, but leave their
minds unprepared,

‘This, dear Jenny, is the reason that the quarrel, between Sir

L


146 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Harry Willit aryfd his lady, which began about her squirrel, is
irreconcilable’ Sir Harry was reading a grave author; she
runs into his study, and in a playing humour, claps the squirrel
upon the folio: he threw the animal-in a rage upon the floor;
she snatches it up again, calls Sir Harry a sour pedant, without
good nature or good manners. This cast him into such a rage;
that he threw down the table before him, kicked the book
round the room ; then recollected himself : ‘Lord, madam,
said he, ‘ why did you run into such expressions? I was,’ said

10 he, ‘in the highest delight with that author, when you clapped
your squirrel upon my book ;’ and, smiling, added upon recol-
lection, ‘I have a great respect for your favourite, and pray let
us all be friends.’ My lady was so far from accepting this
apology, that she immediately conceived a resolution to keep
him under for ever: and with a serious air replied, ‘ There is
no regard to be had to what a man says, who can fall into so
indecent a rage, and such an abject submission, in the samé
moment, for which I absolutely despise you.’ Upon which shé
rushed out of the room. Sir Harry staid some minutes behind;

20 to think and command himself; after which he followed he
into her bed-chamber, where she was prostrate upon the bed)
tearing her hair, and naming twenty coxcombs who would havé
-used her otherwise. This provoked him to so high a degree
that he forbore nothing but beating her ; and all the servants if
their family were at their several stations listening, whilst th?
best man and woman, the best master and mistress, defame
each other in a way that is not to be repeated even at Billings
“gate. You know this ended in an immediate separation ; sh?
longs to return home, but knows nét ‘how to do it: he invite?

30 her home every day. Her husband requires no submissio?
of her; but she thinks her very return will argue she is t?
blame, which she is resolved to be for ever, rather than ac
knowledge it. Thus, dear Jenny, my great advice to you is
be guarded against giving or receiving little provocations
Great matters of offence I have no reason to fear either from
you or your husband.’

After this, we turned our discourse into a more gay style, and
parted: but before we did so, I made her resign her snuff-box”
for ever, and half drown herself with washing away the stench

40 of the musty™


TO THOSE ABOUT TO MARRY. 147


But the wedding morning arrived, and our family being very
humerous, there was no avoiding the inconvenience of making
the ceremony and festival more public, than the modern way
of celebrating them makes me approve of. The bride next
morning came out of her chamber, dressed with all the art and
care that Mrs. Toilet, the tire-woman, could bestow on her.
She was on her wedding-day threé-and-twenty; her person is
far from what we call a regular beauty; but a certain sweetness
in her countenance, an ease in her shape and motion, with an


10 unaffected modesty in her looks, had attractions beyond what


symmetry and exactness can inspire, without the addition of
these endowments. When her lover entered the room, her
features flushed with shame and joy; and the ingenious man-
her, so full of passion and of awe, with which Tranquillus
approached to salute her, gave me good omens of his future
behaviour towards her. The wedding was wholly under my
Care. After the ceremony at church, I was resolved to enter-
tain the company with a dinner suitable to the occasion, and
pitched upon the Apollo at the Old-Devil at Temple-bar, as_a_


0 place sacred to mirth tempered with discretion, where Ben


Jonson and his sons used to make their liberal meetings. Here
the chief of the Staffian tace“appedred ; and as soon as the
company were come into that ample room, Lepidus Wagstaff
began to make me‘compliments for choosing that place, and
fell into a discourse upon the subject of pleasure and entertain-
Ment, drawn from the rules of Ben’s club®, which are in gold
letters over the chimney. Lepidus has a way very uncommon,
and speaks on subjects on which any man else would certainly
Offend, with great dexterity. He gave us a large account of the


30 public meetings of all the well-turned minds who had passed


to


through this life in ages past, and closed his pleasing narrative
with a discourse on marriage, and a repetition of the following
Verses out of Milton® :—


Hail, wedded love! mysterious law! true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety

In Paradise, of all things common else.

By thee adulterous lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range ; by thee
Founded.in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities

Of father, son, and brother, first were known .


L2


148 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets

Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present or past, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs ; here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings:
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared, ,
‘Casual fruition; nor in court amours,

Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,

ro Or serenade, which the starved lover sings
: To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.


In these verses, all the images that ¢an come into a young
woman’s head on such an occasion are raised ; but that in s0


chaste and elegant a manner, that the bride thanked him fof
his agreeable talk, and we sat down-to dinner....


Tatler, No. 79.] [October 11, 1709.


‘No. 45. A Matrimonial Quarrel; Character of Tim Dappet


My brother Tranquillus, who is a man of business, came t?
me this morning into my study, and after very many civil ex’
- pressions in return for what. good offices I had done hin, tol
me ‘he desired to carry his wife, my sister, that very mornin
20 to his own house.’ I readily told him, ‘I would wait upon his
without asking why he was so impatient to rob us of his go
company. He went out of my chamber, and I thought seemé
to have a little heaviness upon him, which gave me some di*
quiet. Soon after, my sister came to me, with a very matro™
like air, and most sedate satisfaction in her looks, which spok?
her very much at ease ; but the traces of her countenance seem?¢
to discover that she had been lately in a passion, and that a!
‘of content to flow from a certain triumph upon some advantag®
obtained. She no sooner sat down by me, but I perceived sh
39 was one of those ladies who begin to be managers within the
time of their being brides. Without letting her speak, which J
saw she had a mighty inclination to-do, I said, ‘Here has bee®
your husband, who tells me he has a mind to go home this ve
morning, and I have consented to it.’ ‘It is well,’ said she, ‘£0
you must know—’ ‘Nay, Jenny,’ said I, ‘I beg your pardo™


A MATRIMONIAL QUARREL, 149


for it is you must know—You are to understand, that now is the
time to fix or alienate your husband’s heart for ever ; and I fear
you have been a little indiscreet in your expressions or behaviour
towards him, even here in my house. ‘ There has,’ says she,
‘been some words: but I will be judged by you if he was not
in the wrong: nay, I need not be judged by any body, for he
gave it up himself, and said not a word when he saw me grow
passionate, but, “ Madam, you are perfectly in the right of it :”
as you shall judge— ‘Nay, madam,’ said I, ‘I am judge

° already, and tell you, that you are perfectly in the wrong of it;
for if it was a matter of importance, I know he has better sense
than you ; if a trifle, you know what I told you on your wedding-
day, that you were to be above little provocations.’ She knows
very well I can be sour upon occasion, therefore gave me leave
to go on,

‘Sister, said I, ‘I will not enter into the dispute between you,
which I find his prudence put an end to before it came to ex-
tremity ; but charge you to have a care of the first quarrel, as
you tender your happiness®; for then it is that the mind will

'© reflect harshly upon every circumstance that has ever passed
between you. If such an accident is ever to happen, which
! hope never will, be sure to keep to the circumstance before
you ; make no allusions to what is passed, or conclusions referring
to what is to come: do not show a hoard of matter for dissen-
sion in your breast ; but, if it is necessary, lay before him the
thing as you understand it, candidly, without being ashamed of
acknowledging an error, or proud of being in the right. If
a young couple be not careful in this point, they will get into a
habit of wrangling : and when to displease. is thought of no
'© consequence, to please is always of as little moment. There is
a play, Jenny, I have formerly been at when I was a student :
we got into a dark corner with a porringer of brandy, and threw
taisins into it, then set it on fire. My chamber-fellow and
I diverted ourselves with the sport of venturing our fingers for
the raisins ; and the wantonness of the thing was, to see each
other look like a demon, as we burnt ourselves, and snatched
out the fruit. This fantastical mirth was called snap-dragon.
You May go into many a family, where you see the man and
wife at this sport: every word at their table alludes to some
° passage between themselves ; and you see by the palencss and


150 SOCIAL PAPERS.


emotion in their countenances, that it is for your sake, and not
their own, that they forbear playing out the whole game of
burning each other’s fingers. In this case, the whole purpose of
life is inverted, and the ambition turns upon a certain conten-
tion, who shall contradict best, and not upon an inclination
to excel in kindness and good offices. Therefore, dear Jenny,
remember me, and avoid snap-dragon,’

‘I thank you, brother,’ said she, ‘ but you do not know how he
loves me; I find I can do anything with him.’—‘ If you can so,
1o why should you desire to do any thing, but please him? but

I have a word or two more before you go out of the room ; fof

I see you do not like the subject I am upon: let nothing pro-

voke you to fall upon an imperfection he cannot help ; 3 for, if he

has a resenting spirit, he will think your aversion as immove-
able as the imperfection with which you upbraid him. But
above .all, dear Jenny, be careful of one thing, and you will
be’ something more than woman; that is, a levity you aré
almost all guilty of, which is, to take a pleasure in your powef
to give pain. It is even in a mistress an argument of meanness
20 of spirit, but in a wife it is injustice and ingratitude. Wher

a sensible man once observes this in a woman, he must havé

a very great or very little spirit, to overlook it. A woman ought

therefore, to consider very often, how few men there are who

will regard a meditated offence as a weakness of temper.’

I was going on in my confabulation, when Tranquillus en<
tered. She cast all her eyes upon him with much shame and
confusion, mixed with great complacency and love, and went up
to him. He took her in his arms, and looked so many soft
things at one glance, that I could see he was glad I had beet

30 talking to her, sorry she had been troubled, and angry at him
self that he could not disguise the concérn he was in an houf
before. After which, he says to me, with an air awkward
enough, but methought not unbecoming—‘I have altered my
mind, brother ; we will live upon you a day or two longer.’

I replied, ‘That is what I have been persuading Jenny to ask

of you, but she is resolved never to contradict your inclination, |

and refused me.’

We were going on in that way which one hardly knows, how
to express ; as when two people mean the same thing in a nicé

40 case, but come at it by talking as distantly from it as they can;


To


A MATRIMONIAL QUARREL, 15!


when very opportunely came in upon us an honest inconsider-
able fellow, Tim Dapper, a gentleman well known to us both.
Tim is one of those who are very necessary, by being very in-
considerable. Tim dropped in at an incident, when we knew
not how to fall into either a grave or a merry way. My sister
took this occasion to make off, and Dapper gave us an account
of all the company he had been in to-day, who was, and who
was not at home, where he visited. This Tim is the head of a
species ; he is a little out of his element in this town ; but he is
a relation of Tranquillus, and his neighbour in the country,
which is the true place of residence for this species. The habit
of a Dapper, when he is at home, is a light broad cloth, with
calamanco® or red waistcoat and breeches; and it is remarkable,
that their wigs seldom hide the collar of their coats. They
have always a peculiar spring in their arms, a wriggle in their
bodies, and a trip in their gait. All which motions they express
at once in their drinking, bowing, or saluting ladies ; for a dis-
tant imitation of a forward fop, and a resolution to overtop him
in his way, are the distinguishing marks of a Dapper. These


20 under-characters of men, are parts of the sociable world by no


30


means to be neglected: they are like pegs in a building ; they
make no figure in it, but hold the structure together, and are as
absolutely necessary as the pillars and columns. I am sure we
found it so this morning ; for Tranquillus and I should, perhaps,
have looked cold at each other the whole day, but Dapper fell
in with his brisk way, shook us both by the hand, rallied the
bride, mistook the acceptance he met with amongst us for ex-
traordinary perfection in himself, and heartily pleased, and was
pleased, all the while he staid. His company left us all in good
humour, and we were not such fools as to let it sink, before we
confirmed it by great cheerfulness and openness in our carriage
the whole evening.


Tatler, No, 85.] {October 24, 1709.


10


20


30


152 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Wo. 46. On Conjugal Happiness; and some old Love Letters.


Garrit aniles
Ex re fabellas, Hor. ii. Sat. vi. 77.


My brother Tranquillus being gone out of town for some
days, my sister Jenny sent me word she would come and dine
with me, and therefore desired me to have no other company:
I took care accordingly, and was not a little pleased to see her
enter the room with a decent and matron-like behaviour, which
I thought very much became her. I saw she had a great deal
to’say to me, and easily discovered in her eyes, and the air of
her countenance, that she had abundance $f satisfaction in her
heart, which she longed to communicate. However, I was re-
solved to let her break into her discourse her own way, and
reduced her to a thousand little devices and intimations to bring
me to the mention of her husband. But, finding I was resolved
not to name him, she began of her own accord. ‘ My husband,’
said she, ‘gives his humble service to you,’ to which I only
answered, ‘I hope he is well ;’ and, without waiting for a reply;
fell into other subjects. She at last was out of all patience, and
said, with a smile and manner that I thought had more beauty
and spirit than I had ever observed before in her, ‘I did not
think, brother, you had been so ill-natured. You have seen;
ever since I came in, that I had a mind to talk of my husband;
and you will not be so kind as to give me an occasion—‘!
did not know,’ said I, ‘but it might be a disagreeable subject t0
you. You do not take me for so old-fashioned a fellow as t?
think of entertaining a young lady with the discourse of het
husband. I know nothing is more acceptable than to speak o
one who is to be so, but to speak of one who is so! indeed,
Jenny, I am a better bred man than you think me.’ Sh¢
showed a little dislike at my raillery; and, by her bridling
up, I perceived she expected to be treated hereafter not a$
Jenny Distaff, but Mrs. Tranquillus. I was very well pleased
with this change in her humour; and, upon talking with he
on several subjects, I could not but fancy that I saw a great
deal of her husband’s way and manner in her remarks, het
phrases, the tone of her voice, and the very air of her coun


ON CONJUGAL HAPPINESS. 153


tenance. This gave me an unspeakable satisfaction, not only
because I had found her a husband from whom she could learn
many things that were laudable, but also because I looked upon
her imitation of him as an infallible sign that she entirely loved
him. This is an observation that I never knew fail, though I
do not remember that any other has made it. The natural
shyness of her sex hindered her from telling me the greatness
of her own passion; but I easily collected it from the repre-
sentation she gave me of his. ‘I have every thing,’ says she,
20 fin Tranquillus, that I can wish for; and enjoy in him, what
indeed you have told me were to be met with in a good
husband, the fondness of a lover, the tenderness of a parent,
and the intimacy of a friend.’ It transported me to see her
eyes swimming in tears of affection when she spoke. ‘And is
there not, dear sister,’ said I, ‘more pleasure in the possession
of such a man, than in all the little impertinencies of balls,
assemblies, and equipage, which it cost me so much pains to
make you contemn?’ She answered, smiling, ‘Tranquillus has
made me a sincere convert in a few weeks, though J am afraid
20 you could not have done it in your whole life. To tell you
truly, I have only one fear hanging upon me, which is apt'to
Rive me trouble in the midst of all my satisfactions: I am
afraid, you must know, that I shall not always make the same
amiable appearance in his eye that I do at present. You know,
brother Bickerstaff, that you have the reputation of a conjurer®;
and, if you have any one secret in your art to make your sister
always beautiful, I should be happier than if I were mistress of all
the worlds you have shown me in a starry night——’ ‘Jenny,’
Said I, ‘without having recourse to magic, I shall give you one
30 plain rule, that will not fail of making you always amiable to a
man who has so great a passion for you, and is of so equal and
reasonable a temper as Tranquillus. Endeavour to please, and
you must please ; be always in the same disposition as you are
when you ask for this secret, and you may take my word, you
will never want it, An inviolable fidelity, good humour, and
complacency of temper, out-live all the charms of a fine face,
and make the decays of it invisible.’
We discoursed very long upon this head, which was equally
agreeable to us both; for, I must confess, as I tenderly love
40 her, I take as much pleasure in giving her instructions for her


10


20


30


40


154 SOCIAL PAPERS.


welfare, as she herself does in receiving them. I proceeded,
therefore, to inculcate these sentiments, by relating a very
particular passage that happened within my own knowledge.

There were several of us making merry at a friend’s house in
a country village, when the sexton of the parish church entered
the room in a sort of surprise, and told us, ‘that as he was
digging a grave in the chancel, a little blow of his pick-axe
opened a decayed coffin, in which there were several written
papers.’ Our curiosity was immediately raised, so that we
went to the place where the sexton had been at work, and
found a great concourse of people about the grave. Among
the rest, there was an old woman, who told us, the person
buried there was a lady” whose name I do not think fit to
mention, though there is nothing in the story but what tends
very much to her honour. This lady lived several years an
exemplary pattern of conjugal love, and, dying soon after hef
husband, who every way answered her character in virtue and
affection, made it her death-bed request, ‘that all the letters
which she had received from him, both before and after her
marriage, should be buried in the coffin with her’ These, !
found upon examination, were the papers before us. Several
of them had suffered so much by time, that I could only pick
out a few words; as “my soul! lilies! roses! dearest angel !”
and the like. One of them, which was legible throughout, ra?
thus.

‘MADAM,

‘If you would know the greatness of my love, consider that
of your dwn beauty. That blooming céuntenance, that snowy
bosom, that graceful person, return every moment to my imagin’
ation; the brightness of your eyes hath hindered me from
closing mine since I last saw you. You may still add to yout
beauties by a smile. A frown will make me the most wretched
of men, as I am the most passionate of lovers.’

It filled the whole company with a deep melancholy, f°
compare the description of the letter with the person that oc’
casioned it, who was now reduced to a few crumbling bone%
and a little mouldering heap of earth. With much ado
deciphered another letter, which began with, ‘My dear, dea*
wife. This gave me a curiosity to see how the style of on®
written in marriage differed from one written in courtship. T°


MR. BICKERSTAFF’S THREE NEPHEWS. 155


my surprise, I found the fondness rather augmented than
lessened, though the panegyric turned upon a different ac-
complishment. The words were as follow:

‘Before this short absence from you, I did not know that I
loved you so much as I really do; though, at the same time,
I thought I loved you as much as possible. I am under great.
apprehension, lest you should have any uneasiness whilst I am
defrauded of my share in it, and cannot think of tasting any
Pleasures that you do not partake with me. Pray, my dear,

10 be careful of your health, if for no other reason, but because
you know I could not outlive you. It is natural in absence to
make professions of an inviolable constancy ; but towards so
much merit, it is scarce a virtue, especially when it is but a
bare return to that of which you have given me such continued
Proofs ever since our first acquaintance. I am, &c.’

It happened that the daughter of these two excellent persons
was by when I was reading this letter. At the sight of the
coffin, in which was the body of her mother, near that of her
father, she melted into a flood of tears. As I had heard a

20 great character of her virtue, and observed in her this instance
of filial piety, I could not resist my natural inclination of giving
advice to young people, and therefore addressed myself to her.
‘Young lady,’ said I, ‘you see how short is the possession of
that beauty, in which nature has been so liberal to you. You
find the melancholy sight before you is a contradiction to the
first letter that you heard on that subject ; whereas, you may
observe, the second letter, which celebrates your mother’s con-
Stancy, is itself, being*found in this place, an argument of it.
But, madam, I ought to caution you, not to think the bodies

3° that lie before you your father and your mother. Know, their
constancy is rewarded by a nobler union than by this mingling
of their ashes, in a state where there is no danger or possibility
of a second separation.’
Tatler, No. 104.] (December 8, 1709.


No. 47, Mr. Bickerstaff’s three nephews ; Character of Will
Courtly.


The vigilance, the anxiety, the tenderness, which I have for
the good people of England, I am persuaded, will in time be


10


20


30


156 SOCIAL PAPERS.


much commended; but I doubt whether they will be ever
rewarded. However, I must go on cheerfully in my work of
reformation: that being my great design, I am studious to
prevent my labour’s increasing upon me, therefore am par-
ticularly observant of the temper and inclinations of childhood
and youth, that we may not give vice and folly supplies from
the growing generation. It is hardly to be imagined how use-
ful this study is, and what great evils or benefits arise from
putting us in our tender years to what we are fit and unfit:
therefore, on Tuesday last (with a design to sound their in-
clinations) I took three lads, who are under my guardianship,
a-rambling in a hackney-coach, to show them the town; as
the lions, the tombs, Bedlam», and the other places which are
entertainments to raw minds, because they strike forcibly on
the fancy. The boys are brothers, one of sixteen, the other of
fourteen, the other of twelve. The first was his father’s darling,
the second his mother’s, and the third mine, who am their
uncle. Mr. William is a lad of true genius; but, being at the
upper end of a great school, and having all the boys below him,
his arrogance is insupportable. If I begin to show a little of
my Latin, he immediately interrupts: ‘Uncle, under favour;
that which you say, is not understood in that manner.’ ‘Brother,’
says my boy Jack, ‘you do not show your manners much in con-
tradicting my uncle Isaac !’ ‘ You queer cur,’ says Mr. Williams
“do you think my uncle takes any notice of such a dull rogue a9
you are?’ Mr. William goes on, ‘He is the most stupid of all
my mother’s children: he knows nothing of his book: whet
he should mind that, he is hiding .or hoarding his taws and
marbles, or laying up farthings. His way of thinking is, four’
and-twenty farthings make sixpence, and two sixpences 2
shilling ; two shillings and sixpence half-a-crown, and tw?
half~crowns five shillings, So within these two months thé
close hunks has scraped up twenty shillings, and we will make
him spend it all before he comes home.’ Jack immediately claps
his hands into both pockets, and turns as pale as ashes, Theré
is nothing touches a parent (and such I am to Jack) so nearly
as a provident conduct. This lad has in him the true temper
for a good husband, a kind father, and an honest executor. All
the great people you see make considerable figures on the


4° exchange, in court, and sometimes in senates, are such as in


MR. BICKERSTAFF’S THREE NEPHEWS. 157


reality have no greater faculty than what may be called human
instinct, which is a natural tendency to their own preservation,
and that of their friends, without being capable of striking out
the road for adventurers. There is Sir William Scrip was of
this sort of capacity from his childhood; he has bought the
country round him, and makes a bargain better than Sir Harry
Wildfire, with all his wit and humour. Sir Harry never wants
money but he comes to Scrip, laughs at him half an hour, and
then gives bond for the other thousand. The close men are
10 incapable of placing merit any where but in their pence, and
therefore gain it; while others, who have larger capacities, are
diverted from the pursuit by enjoyments which can be sup-
ported only by that cash which they despise ; and, therefore,
are in the end slaves to their inferiors both in fortune and
understanding. I once heard a man of excellent sense observe,
that more affairs in the world failed by being in the hands of
men of too large capacities for their business, than by being in
the conduct of such as wanted abilities to execute them. Jack,
therefore, being of a plodding make, shall be a citizen: and I
20 design him to be the refuge of the family in their distress, as
well as their jest in prosperity. His brother Will shall go to
Oxford with. all speed, where, if he does not arrive at being a
man of sense, he will soon be informed wherein he is a cox-
comb, There is in that place such a true spirit of raillery and
humour, that if they cannot make you, a wise man, they will
certainly let you know you are a fool; which is all my cousin
wants, to cease to be so. Thus, having taken these two out of
the way, I have leisure to look at my third lad. I observe in
the young rogue a natural subtilty of mind, which discovers
30 itself rather in forbearing to declare his thoughts on any occa-
sion, than in any visible way of exerting himself in discourse.
For which reason I will place him, where, if he commits no
faults, he may go farther than those in other stations, though
they excel in virtues. The boy is well-fashioned, and will
easily fall into a graceful manner; wherefore, I have a design
to make him a page to a great lady of my acquaintance; by
which means he will be well skilled in the common modes of
life, and make a greater progress in the world by that know-
ledge, than with the greatest qualities without it. A good mien
#0 in a court, will carry a man greater lengths than a good under-


158 SOCIAL PAPERS.


standing in any other place. We see a world of pains taken,
and the best years of life spent in collecting a set of thoughts
in a college for the conduct of life, and, after all, the man so
qualified shall hesitate in’a speech to a good suit of clothes,
and want common sense before an agreeable woman. Hence
it is, that wisdom, valour, justice, and learning, cannot keep
a man in countenance that is possessed with these excellencied,
if he wants that inferior art of life and behaviour, called good-
breeding. A man endowed with great perfections, without

10 this, is like one who has his pockets ‘full of gold, but always
wants change for his ordinary occasions.

Will Courtly is a living instance of this truth, and has had
the same education which I am giving my nephew. He never
spoke a thing but what was said before, and yet can conversé
with the wittiest men without being ridiculous. Among the
learned, he does not appear ignorant; nor with the wise,
indiscreet. Living in conversation from his infancy, makes
him no ‘where at a loss; and a long familiarity with the per-
sons of men, is, in a manner, of the same service to him, as if

20 he knew their arts. As ceremony is the invention of wise men
to keep fools at a distance, so good-breeding is an expedient
to make fools and wise men equals.


Tatler, No. 30.] [June 16, 1709.


No. 48. Myr. Bickerstaff entertains his, three nephews and 4
young lady,


Having yesterday morning received a paper of Latin verses;
written with very much elegance in honour of these my papers;
and being informed at the same time, that they were composed by
a youth under age, I read them with much delight, as an instancé
of his improvement. There is not a greater pleasure to old age,
than seeing young people entertain themselves in such a mar
mer as that we can partake of their enjoyments, On such

30 occasions we flatter ourselves, that we are not quite laid aside
in the world ; but that we are either used with gratitude for
what we were, or honoured for what we are. A well-inclined
young man, and whose good-breeding is founded upon th¢


MR. BICKERSTAFF ENTERTAINS HIS NEPHEWS, ETC, 159


principles of nature and virtue, must needs take delight in
being agreeable to his elders, as we are truly delighted when
we, are not the jest of them. When I say this, I must confess I
cannot but think it a very lamentable thing, that there should
be a necessity for making that a rule of life, which should be,
methinks, a mere instinct of nature. If reflection upon a man
in poverty, whom we once knew in riches, is an argument of
commiseration with generous minds ; sure old age, which is a
decay from that vigour which the young possess, and must

10 certainly, if not prevented against their will, arrive at, should
be more forcibly the object of that reverence which honest
spirits are inclined to, from a sense of being themselves liable
to what they observe has already overtaken others,

My three nephews, whom, in June last was twelvemonth, I
disposed of according to their several capacities and inclina-
tions; the first to the university, the second to a merchant, and
the third to a woman of quality as her page, by my invitation
dined with me to-day. It is my custom often, when I have a
mind to give myself a more than ordinary cheerfulness, to invite

20a certain young gentlewoman of our neighbourhood to make
one of the company. She did me that favour this day. The
Presence of a beautiful woman of honour, to minds which are
hot trivially disposed, displays an alacrity which is not to be
communicated by any other object. It was not unpleasant to
me, to look into her thoughts of the company she was in, She
smiled at the party of pleasure I had thought of for her, which
was composed of an old man and three boys. My scholar, my
Citizen, and myself, were very soon neglected ; and the young
courtier, by the bow he made to her at her entrance, engaged
30 her observation without a rival. J observed the Oxonian not a
little discomposed at this preference, while the trader kept his
eye upon his uncle. My nephew Will hadea thousand secret
resolutions to break in upon the discourse of his younger brother,
who gave my fair companion a full account of the fashion; and
what was reckoned most becoming to this complexion, and what
sort of habit appeared best upon the other shape. He proceeded
to acquaint her, who of quality was well or sick within the bills
of mortality, and named very familiarly all his lady’s acquaint-
ance, not forgetting her very words when he spoke of their
4° characters. Besides all this, he had a road of flattery; and


ro


20


30


40


160 SOCIAL PAPERS.


upon her enquiring, what sort of woman lady Lovely was in her
person, ‘ Really, madam,’ says the Jackanapes, ‘she is exactly
of your height and shape ; but, as you are fair, she is a brown
woman.’ There was no enduring that this fop should outshine
us all at this unmerciful rate ; therefore I thought fit to talk to
my young scffolar concerning his studies ; and, because I would
throw his learning into present service, I desired him to repeat
to me the translation he had made of some tender verses in
Theocritus. He did so, with an air of elegance peculiar to the
college to which I sent him. I made some exceptions to the
turn of the phrases ; which he defended with much modesty, a5
believing in that place the matter was rather to consult the soft-
ness of a swain’s passion, than the strength of his expressions.
It soon appeared that Will had out-stripped his brother in the
opinion of our young lady. A little poetry to one ‘who is bred 4
scholar, has the same effect that a good carriage of his perso?
has on one who is to live in courts. The favour of women is s0
natural a passion, that I envied both the boys their success i?
the approbation of my guest; and I thought the only perso?
invulnerable was my young trader. During the whole meal, }
could observe in the children a mutual contempt and scorn 0
each other, arising from their different way of life and educa’
tion, and took that occasion to advertise them of such growing
distastes ; which might mislead them in their future life, and
disappoint their friends, as well as themselves, of the advan’
tages, which might be expected from the diversity of their pro’
fessions and interests. t
- The prejudices, which are growing up between these brother?
from the different ways of education, are what create the most
fatal misunderstandings in life. But all distinctions of disparage’
ment, merely (rom our circumstances, are such as will not bea
the examination of reason. The courtier, the trader, and thé
scholar, should all have an equal pretension to the denomina’
tion of a gentleman. That tradesman, who deals with me in %
commodity which I do not understand, with uprightness, ha
much more right to that character, than the courtier that give?
me false hopes, or the scholar who laughs at my ignorance.
The appellation of gentleman is never to be affixed to a man’
circumstances, but to his behaviour in them. For this reason
shall ever, as far as I am able, give my nephews such impres’


ON PARENTAL PARTIALITY, 161


sions as shall make them value themselves rather as they are
useful to others, than as they are conscious of merit in them-
selves, There are no qualities for which we ought to pretend
to the esteem of others, but such as render us serviceable to
them: for ‘free men have no superiors but benefactors... .’


Tatler, No. 207.] [August 5, 1710.


No. 49. On Parental Partiality.


Scit Genius, natale comes qui temperat astrum.
: Hor. Ep. ii. 2. 187.


Among those inclinations which are common to all men,
there is none more unaccountable than that unequal love
by which parents distinguish their children from each other.
Sometimes vanity and self-love appear to have a share towards

‘o this effect; and in other instances I have been apt to attribute
it to mere instinct ; but, however that is, we frequéntly see the
child, that has been beholden to neither of these impulses in his
Parents, in spite of being neglected, snubbed, and thwarted at
home, acquire a behaviour which makes him as agreeable to all
the rest of the world, as that of every one else of their family is
to each other. I fell into this way of thinking from an inti-
macy which I have with a very good house in our neighbour-
hood, where there are three daughters of a very different
character and genius. The eldest has a great deal of wit ©

20 and cunning ; the second has good sense, but no artifice ; the

* third has much vivacity, but little understanding. The first is
a fine, but scornful woman; the second is not charming, but
very winning; the third is no way commendable, but very
desirable. The father of these young creatures was ever a
8reat pretender to wit, the mother a woman of as much
Coquetry. This turn in the parents has biassed their affections
towards their children. The old man supposes the eldest of
his own genius ; and the mother looks upon the youngest as
herself renewed. By this means, all the lovers who approach

30 the house are discarded by the father for not observing Mrs.
Mary’s wit and beauty®; and by the mather, for being blind to

M


10


20


40


162 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the mien and air of Mrs. Biddy. Come never so many pre-
tenders, they are not suspected to have the least thought of
Mrs. Betty, the middle daughter. Betty, therefore, is mortified
into a woman of a great deal of merit, and knows she must
depend on that for her advancement. The middlemost is thus
the favourite of all her acquaintance, as well as mine ; while
the other two carry a certain insolence about them in all con-
versations, and expect the partiality which they meet with at
home to attend them wherever they appear. So little do parents
understand that they are, of all people, the least judges of their
children’s merit, that what they reckon such is seldom any


thing else but a repetition of their own faults and infirmities.


There is, methinks, some excuse for being particular, when
one of the offspring has any defect in nature. In this case, the
child, if we may so speak, is so much longer the child of its
parents, and calls for the continuance of their care and indul-
gence from the slowness of its capacity, or the weakness of its
body. But there is no enduring to see men enamoured only at
the sight of their own impertinencies repeated, and to observe;
as we may sometimes, that they have a secret dislike’ of theif
children for a degeneracy from their very crimes. Gommend
me to Lady Goodly; she is equal to all her own children, but
prefers them to those of all the world beside. My ‘lady is 2
perfect hen in the care of her brood ; she fights and squabbles
with all that appear where they come, but is wholly unbiassed
in dispensing her favours among them. It is no small pain$
she is at to defame all the young women in her neighbourhood;
by visits, whispers, intimations, and hearsays; all which shé
ends with thanking heaven, ‘that no one living is so blessed
with such obedient and well-inclined children as_ herself.
Perhaps,’ she says, ‘Betty cannot dance like Mrs. Frontinets
and it is no great matter whether she does or not; but shé
comes into a room with a good grace; though she says it that
should not, she looks like a gentlewoman. Then, if Mrs
Rebecca is not so talkative as the mighty wit Mrs. Clapper, yet
she is discreet, she knows better what she says when she does
speak. If her wit be slow, her tongue never runs before it.’
This kind parent lifts up her eyes and hands in congratulation
of her own good fortune, and is maliciously thankful that none
of her girls are like any of her neighbours ; but this preference


ON PARENTAL PARTIALITY., 163


of her own to all others is grounded upon an impulse of nature;
while those, who like one before another of their own are so
unpardonably unjust, that it could hardly be equalled in. the
children, though they preferred all the rest of the world to such
parents. It is no unpleasant entertainment to see a ball at
a dancing-school, and observe the joy of relations when the
young ones, for whom they are concerned, are in motion.
You need not be told whom the dancers belong to. At their
first appearance, the passions of their parents are in their faces,

10 and there is always a nod of approbation stolen at a good step
or a graceful turn.

I remember, among all my acquaintance, but one man!
whom I have thought to live with his children with equanimity
and a good gracé. He had three sons and one daughter, whom
he bred with all the care imaginable in a liberal and ingenuous
way. -I have often heard him say, ‘he had the weakness tc
love one much better than the other, but that he took as much
pains to correct that as any other criminal passion that coulc
arise in his mind.’ His method was, to make it the only pre-

20 tension iff his children to his favour, to be kind to each other ;
and he .waquld tell them, ‘that he who was the best brother, he
would reckon the best son.’ This turned their thoughts into an
emulatidn for the superiority in kind and tender affection
towardd each other. The boys behaved themselves very early
with a manly friendship ; and their sister, instead of the gross
familiarities, and impertinent freedoms in behaviour usual in
Other houses, was always treated by them with as much com-
Plaisance as any other young lady of their acquaintance. It
was an unspeakable pleasure to visit, or sit at a meal, in that

® family. 1 have often seen the old man’s heart flow at his eyes
with joy, upon occasions which would appear indifferent to
Such as were strangers to the turn of his mind; but a very
Slight accident, wherein he saw his children’s good-will to one
another, created in him ‘the god-like pleasure of loving them
because they loved each other. This great command of him-
Self, in hiding his first impulse to partiality, at last improved to
a.steady justice towards them ; and that, which at first was but
‘an expedient to correct his weakness, was afterwards the mea-

Sure of his virtue.

The truth of it is, those parents who are interested in the
M2


4o


ro


20


3°


164 SOCIAL PAPERS.


care of one child more than that of another, no longer deserve
the name of parents, but are, in effect, as childish as their
children, in having such unreasonable and ungoverned inclina-
tions. A father of this sort has degraded himself into one of
his own offspring ; for none but a child would take part in the
passions of children.


Tatler, No. 235.] {October 10, 1710.


No. 50. Ox the Relations of Parents and Children; Lette!
Jvom a Mother to her Son.


Gratulor quod eum quem necesse erat diligere, qualiscunque esset,
talem habemus ut libenter quoque diligamus.—TREBONIUS apud TuLl-


‘MR. SPECTATOR,


‘I am' the happy father of a very towardly son, in whom J
do not only see my life, but also my manner of life, renewed:
It would be extremely beneficial to society, if you would fre
quently resume subjects which serve to bind these sort °
relations faster, and endear the ties of blood with those 0
good-will, protection, observance, indulgence, and veneration
I would, methinks, have this done after an uncommon method:
and do not think any one, who is not capable of writing a goo
play, fits-to undertake a work wherein there will necessarily
occur so many secret instincts, and biasses of human naturé
which would pass unobserved by common eyes. I thank
Heaven I have no outrageous offence against my own excel’
lent parents to answer for; but when I am now and then alone:
and look back upon my past life, from my earliest infancy t?
this time, there are many faults which I committed that did
not appear to me, even until 1 myself became a father. I had
not until then a notion. of the yearnings of heart, which 2
man has when he sees his child do a laudable thing, or the
sudden damp which seizes him when he fears he will act some’
thing unworthy. It is not to be imagined what a remors¢
touched me for a long train of childish negligences of my
mother, when ] saw my wife the other day look out of thé
window, and turn as pale as ashes upon seeing my youngef
boy sliding upon the ice. These slight intimations will give


ON THE RELATIONS OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN. 165


you to understand, that there are numberless little crimes
which children take no notice of while they are doing, which,
upon reflection, when they shall themselves become fathers,
they will look upon with the utmost sorrow and contrition,
that they did not regard before those whom they offended were
to be no more seen. How many thousand things do I re-
member which would have highly pleased my father, and I
omitted for no other reason, but that I thought what he
proposed the effect of humour and old age, which I am now
10 convinced had reason and good sense in it. JI cannot now go
into the parlour to him, and make his heart glad with an
account of a matter which was of no consequence, but that J
told it, and acted in it. The good man and woman are
long since in their graves, who used to sit and plot the welfare
of us their children, while, perhaps, we were sometimes laugh-
ing at the old folks, at another end of the house. The truth of
it is, were we merely to follow nature in these great duties of
life, though we have a strong instinct towards the performing
of them, we should be on both sides very deficient. ‘ Age is so
20 unwelcome to the generality of mankind, and growth. towards
manhood so desirable to all, that resignation to decay is too
difficult a task in the father ; and deference, amidst the impulse
of gay desires, appears unreasonable to the son. There are so
few who can grow old with a good grace, and yet fewer who can
come slow enough into the world, that a father, were he to be
actuated by his desires, and a son, were he to consult himself
Only, could neither of them behave himself as he ought to the
Other. But when reason interposes against instinct, where it
would carry either out of the interests of the other, there arises
3 that happiest intercourse of good offices between those dearest
relations of human life. The father, according to the oppor-
tunities which are offered to him, is throwing down blessings on
the son, and the son endeavouring to appear the worthy off-
Spring of such a father. It is after this manner that Camillus
and his first-born dwell together. Camillus enjoys a pleasing
and indolent old age, in which passion is subdued, and reason
exalted, He waits the day of his dissolution with a resignation
mixed with delight; and the son fears the accession of his
father’s fortune with diffidence, lest he should not enjoy or
49 become it as well as his predecessor. -Add to this, that the


190


20


40


166 SOCIAL PAPERS.


father knows he leaves a friend to the children of his friends,
an easy landlord to his tenants, and an agreeable companion te
his acquaintance. He believes his son’s behaviour will make
him frequently remembered, but never wanted. This com-
merce is so well cemented, that without the pomp of saying,
“Son, be a friend to such-a-one when I am gone,” Camillus
knows being in his favour is direction enough to the grateful
youth who is to succeed him, without the admonition of his
mentioning it, These gentlemen are honoured in all their
neighbourhood, and the same effect which the court has on the
manners of a kingdom, their characters have on all who live
within the influence of them.

‘My son and I are not of fortune to communicate our good
actions or intentions to so many as these gentlemen do ; but !
will be bold to say, my son has, by the applause and approba-
tion which his behaviour towards me has gained him, occasioned
that many an old man besides myself has rejoiced. Othef
men’s children follow the example of mine, and I have the
inexpressible happiness of overhearing our neighbours, as wé
ride by,-point to their children, and say, with a voice of joy)
“ There they go.”

‘You cannot, Mr. Spectator, pass your time better than if
insinuating the delights which those relations, well regarded:
bestow upon each other. Ordinary passages ‘are no longe!
such, bit mutual love gives an importance to the most indif-
ferent things, and a merit to actions the most insignificant:
When we look round the world, and observe the many mis’
understandings which are created by the malice and insinuatio?
of the meanest servants between people thus related, how
necessary will it appear that it were inculcated, that men would
be upon their guard to support a constancy of affection, and
that grounded upon the principles of reason, not ‘the impulse®
of instinct.

*It is from the common prejudices which men receive from
their parents, that hatreds are kept alive from one generation
to another; and when men act by instinct, hatred will descend
when good offices are forgotten. For the degeneracy of humat
life is such, that our anger is more easily transferred to ouf
children, than our love. Love always gives something to thé
object it delights in, and anger spoils the person against who™


ON THE RELATIONS OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN, 167


it is moved of something laudable in him ; from this degeneracy,
therefore, and a sort of self-love, we are more prone to take up
the ill-will of our parents, than to follow them in their friend-
ships.

‘One would think there should need no more to make men
keep up this sort of relation with the utmost sanctity, than to
examine their own hearts. If every father remembered his own
thoughts and inclinations when he was a son, and every son
remembered what he expected from his father, when he himself

10 was in a state of dependance, this one reflection would preserve
men from being dissolute or rigid in these several capacities.
The power and subjection between them, when broken, make
them more emphatically tyrants and rebels against each other,
with greater cruelty of heart, than the disruption of states
and empires can possibly produce. I shall end this appli-
Cation to you with two letters, which passed between a mother
and son very lately, and are as follows :


‘DEAR FRANK,

‘If the pleasures, which I have the,grief to hear you pursue
2° in town, do not take up all your time, do not deny your mother
so much of it as to read seriously this letter. You said before
Mr. Letacre, that an old woman might live very well in the
Country upon half my jointure, and that your father was a fond
fool to give me a rent charge of eight hundred a-year to the
prejudice of his son. What Letacre said to you upon that
occasion, you ought to have borne with more decency, as he
was your father’s well-beloved servant, than to have called him
country-put. In the first place, Frank, I must tell you, I will
have my rent duly paid, for I will make up to your sisters for
° the partiality I was guilty of, in making your father ‘do so much
as he has done for you. I may, it seems, live upon half my
jointure ! I lived upon much less, Frank, when I carried you
from place to place in these arms, and could neither eat, dress,
or mind any thing for feeding and tending you a weakly child,
and shedding tears when the convulsions you were then troubled
with returned upon you. By my care you outgrew them, to
throw away the vigour of your youth, and deny your mother
what is not yours to detain. Both your sisters are crying to
see the pagsion which I smother; but if you please to go on


168 SOCIAL PAPERS,


thus like a gentleman of the town, and forget all regards to
yourself and family, I shall immediately enter upon your estate
for the arrear due to me, and, without one tear more, contemn
you for forgetting the fondness of your mother, as much as you
have the example of your father. O Frank, do I live to omit
writing myself,
‘Your affectionate Mother,
‘A. T?
*MADaM,

10 ©‘I will come down to-morrow and pay the money on my
knees. Pray write so no more. I will take care you never
shall, for I will be for ever hereafter,

‘Your most dutiful Son,
°F. T.
‘J will bring down new heads” for my sisters. Pray let all be
forgotten.’—T.


Spectator, No. 263.] [January 1, 1712.


§ 3. MANNERS AND FASHIONS.
No. 51. Zhe Trumpet Club.


Habeo senectuti magnam gratiam, que mihi sermonis aviditate™
auxit, potionis et cibi sustulit—-TULL, pz SENECT..


After having applied my mind with more than ordinary atter-
tion to my studies, it is my usual custom to,elax and unbend
it in the conversation of such as are rather easy than shining

20 companions. This I find particularly necessary for me before
I retire to rest, in order to draw my slumbers upon me by
degrees, and fall asleep insensibly. This is the particular use /
make of a, set of heavy honest men, with whom I have passed
many hours with much indolence, though not with great pleasure:
Their conversation is a kind of preparative for sleep: it take$
the mind down from its abstractions, leads it into the familiat
traces of thought, and lulls it into that state of tranquillity, which
is the condition of a thinking man, when he is but half awake-


THE TRUMPET CLUB. 169


After this, my reader will not be surprised to hear the accaunt
which I am about to give of a club of my own contemporaries,
among whom I pass two or three hours every evening. This I
look upon as taking my first nap before I go to bed. The truth
of it is, I should think myself unjust to posterity, as well as to
the society at the ZrzmzZet™, of which I am a member, did not
Tin some part of my writings give an account of the persons
among whom I have passed almost a sixth part of my time for
these last forty years. Our club consisted originally of fifteen ;
‘o but, partly by the severity of the law in arbitrary times, and
partly by the natural effects of old. age, we are at present
reduced to a third part of that number; in which, however, we
have this consolation, that the best company is said to consist
of five persons. I must confess, besides the aforementioned
benefit which I meet with in the conversation of this select
society, I am not the less pleased with the company, in that I
find myself the greatest wit among them, and am heard as their
oracle in all points of learning and difficulty.
" Sir Jeoffery Notch, who is the oldest of the club, has been in
20 possession of the right-hand chair time out of mind, and is the
only man among us that has the liberty of stirring the fire. This,
our foreman, is a gentleman of an ancient family, that came to
&@ great estate some years before he had discretion, and run it
cut in hounds, horses, and cock-fighting ; for which reason he
looks upon himself as an honest, worthy gentleman, who has
had misfortunes in the world, and calls every thriving man a
Pitiful upstart.

Major Matchlock is the next senior, who served in the last

Civil wars, and has all the battles by heart. He does not think

40 any action in Europe worth talking of since the fight of Marston
Moor® ; and every night tells us of his having been knocked off
his horse at the rising of the London apprentices” ; for which
he is in great esteem among us.

Honest old Dick Reptile is the third of our society. He isa
80od-natured indolent man, who speaks little himself, but laughs
at our jokes ; and brings his young nephew along with him, a
Youth of eighteen years old, to show him good company, and
8lve him a taste of the world. This young fellow sits generally

ee ao but whenever he opens his mouth, or laughs at any

Ing that passes, he is constantly told by his uncle, after a


°o


I


20


40


170 SOCIAL PAPERS.


jocular manner, ‘ Ay, ay, Jack, you young men think us fools;
but we old men know you are ®.’

The greatest wit of our company, next to myself, is a bencher
of the neighbouring inn, who in his youth frequented the ardi-
naries about Charing-cross, and pretends to have been intimate
with Jack Ogle®, He has about ten distichs of Hudibras without
book, and never leaves the club until he has applied them all.
If any modern wit be mentioned, or any town-frolic spoken of,
he shakes his head at the dulness of the present age, and tells us
a story of Jack Ogle.

For my own part, I am esteemed among them, because they
see I am something respected by others; though at the same
time I understand by their behaviour, that I am considered by
them as a man of a great deal of learning, but no knowledge of
the world; insomuch, that the major sometimes, in the height of
his military pride, calls me the Philosopher: and sir Jeoffery, no
longer ago than last night, upon a dispute what day of the month
it was then in Holland, pulled his pipe out of his mouth, and
cried, ‘ What does the scholar say to it?’

Our club meets precisely at six’ o’clock in the evening ; but J
did not come last evening until half an hour after seven, bY
which means I escaped the battle of Naseby®, which the majof
usually begins at about three quarters after six: I found also
that my good friend the bencher had already spent three of hi
distichs ; and only waited an opportunity to hear a sermof
spoken of, that he might introduce the couplet where ‘a stick
rhymes to ‘ecclesiastic®.’? At my entrance into the room, they
were naming a red petticoat and a cloak, by which I found that
the bencher had been diverting them with a story of Jack Oglé

I had no sooner taken my seat, but sir Jeoffery, to show bié
good-will towards me, gave me a pipe of his own tobacco, an
stirred up the fire. I look upon it as a point of morality, to bé
obliged by those who endeavour to oblige me ; and therefore
in requital for his kindness, and to set the conversation a-going)
I took the best occasion I could to put him upon telling us thé
story‘of old Gauntlett, which he always does with very parti’
cular concern. He traced up his descent on both sides fo!
several generations, describing his diet and manner of life, with
his several battles, and particularly that in which he fell, This
Gauntlett was a game cock, upon whose head the knight, in his


THE TRUMPET CLUB. 17


youth, had won five hundred pounds, and lost two thousand.
This naturally set the major upon the account of Edge-hill
fight ®, and ended in a duel of Jack Ogle’s.

Old Reptile was extremely attentive to all that was said,
though it was the same he had heard every night for these
twenty years, and, upon all occasions, winked upon his nephew
to mind what passed.

This may suffice to give the world a taste of our innocent
conversation, which we spun out until about ten of the clock,

10 when my maid came with a lantern” to light me home. I could
not but reflect with myself, as I was going out, upon the talkative
humour of old men, and the little figure which that part of life
makes in one who cannot employ his natural propensity in dis-

. Courses which would make him venerable. I must own, it makes
me very melancholy in company, when I hear a young man begin
a story ; and have often observed, that one of a quarter of an
hour long in a man of five-and-twenty, gathers circumstances
every time he tells it, until it grows into a long Canterbury tale
of two hours by that time he is threescore.

20 The only way of avoiding such a trifling and frivolous old age

‘is, to lay up in our way to it such stores of knowledge and
observation, as may make us useful and agreeable in our declin-
ing years. The mind of man in a long life will become a maga-
zine of wisdom or folly, and will consequently discharge itself in
something impertinent or improving. For which reason, as
there is nothing more ridiculous than an old trifling story-teller,
so there is nothing more venerable, than one who has turned his
experience to the entertainment and advantage of mankind.

In short, we, who are in the last stage of life, and are apt to

30 indulge ourselves in talk, ought to consider, if what we speak be
worth being heard, and endeavour to make our discourse like
that of Nestor, which Homer compares to the flowing of honey
for its sweetness.

I am afraid I shall be thought guilty of this excess I am
Speaking of, when I cannot conclude without observing, that
Milton certainly thought of this passage in Homer, when, in his
description of an eloquent spirit, he says,

His tongue dropped manna.


Tatler, No. 132.] [February 11 1710.


Io


20


30


172 SOCIAL PAPERS,


No, 52. On Personal Defects ; Proposals for an Ugly Club,
Tetrum ante omnia vultum.—Jvv. x. I9r.


Since our persons are not of our own making, when they are
such as appear defective or uncomely, it is, methinks, an honest
and laudable fortitude to dare to be ugly ; at least to keep our-
selves froth being abashed with a consciousness of imperfections
which we cannot help, and in which there is no guilt. I would
not defend a haggard beau for passing away much time at
a glass, and giving softness and languishing graces to deformity:
all I contend is, that we ought to be contented with our coun-
tenance and shape, so far, as never to give ourselves an uneasy
reflection on that sybject. It is to the ordinary people who are
not accustomed to make very proper remarks on any occasion,
matter of great jest, if a man enters with a prominent pair of
shoulders into an assembly, or is distinguished by an expansion
of mouth, or obliquity of aspect. It is happy for a man that
has any of these oddnesses about him, if he can be as merry
upon himself, as others are apt to be upon that occasion. When
he can possess himself with such a cheerfulnéss, women and
children, who are at first frighted at him, will afterwards be
as much pleased with him. As it is barbarous in others’ to
rally him for natural defects, it is extremely agreeable when he
can jest upon himself for them.

Madam Maintenon’s first husband ® was a hero in this kind;
and has drawn many pleasantries from the irregularity of his
shape, which he describes as very much resembling the letter Z+
He diverts himself likewise by representing to his reader thé
make of an engine and pully, with which he used to take off his
hat. When there happens to be any thing ridiculous in a visage,
and the owner thinks it an aspect of dignity, he must be of very
great quality to be exempt from raillery. The best expedient,
therefore, is to be pleasant upon himself. Prince Harry and
Falstaff, in Shakspeare, have carried the ridicule upon fat and
lean as far as it will go. Falstaff is humorously called wool-
sack, bedpresser, and hill of flesh; Harry, a starveling, an
elves-skin, a sheath, a bow-case, and a tuck". There is, in
several incidents of the conversation between them, the jest still
kept up upon the person. Great tenderness and sensibility in


ON PERSONAL DEFECTS, 173


this point is one of the greatest weaknesses of self-love. For my
own part, lam a little unhappy in the mould of my face®, which
is not quite so long as it is broad. Whether this might not
partly arise from my opening my mouth much seldomer than
other people, and by consequence not so much lengthening the
fibres of my visage, I am not at leisure to determine. However
it be, I have been often put out of countenance by the shortness
of my face, and was formerly at great pains in concealing it by
wearing a periwig with a high fore-top, and letting my beard

10 grow. But now I have thoroughly got over this delicacy, and
could be contented with a much shorter, provided it might
qualify me for a member of the merry club, which the following
letter gives me an account of. I have received it from Oxford,
and as it abounds with the spirit of mirth and good humour,
which is natural to that place, I shall set it down word for word
as it came to me.


‘Most PROFOUND SIR,


‘ Having been very well entertained, in the last of your specu-
20 lations that I have yet seen, by your specimen upon clubs,
which I therefore hope you will continue, I shall take the liberty
to furnish you with a brief account of such a one as, perhaps,
you have not seen in your travels, unless it was your fortune to
touch upon some of the woody parts of the African continent,
in your journey to or from Grand Cairo®. There have arose in
this university (long since you left us without saying any thing)
Several of these inferior hebdomadal societies, as the Punning
Club, the Witty club, and amongst the rest, the Handsome club ;
as a burlesque upon which, a certain merry species, that seem
30 to have come into the world in masquerade, for some years last
past have associated themselves together, and assumed the
name of the Ugly club. This ill-favoured fraternity consists of
a president and twelve fellows ; the choice of which is not con-
fined by patent to any particular foundation (as St. John’s men
would have the world believe, and have therefore erected a
Separate society within themselves), but liberty is left to elect
from any school in Great Britain, provided the candidates be
within the rules of the club, as set forth in a table, entitled, The
Act of Deformity : a clause or two of which I shall transmit to


you,


174 SOCIAL PAPERS.


“1. That no person whatsoever shall be admitted without a
visible queerity 2 in his aspect, or peculiar cast of countenance ;
of which the president and officers for the time being are to
determine, and the president to have the casting voice.

‘2, That a singular‘regard be had upon examination, to the
gibbosity® of the gentlemen that offer themselves as founder’s
kinsmen ; or to the obliquity of their figure, -in what sort
soever.

‘3. That if the quantity of any man’s nose be eminently

ro miscalculated, whether as to length or breadth, hé shall have a
just pretence to be elected.

‘Lastly, That if there shall be two or more competitors for
the same vacancy, ceéerts paribus, he that has the thickest skin
to have the preference.

‘Every fresh member, upon his first night, is to entertain the
company with a dish of cad-fish, anda speech in praise.of AZsop",
whose portraiture they have in full proportion, or rather dis-
proportion, over the chimney ; and their design is, as soon aS
their funds are sufficient, to purchase the heads of Thersites ",

20 Duns Scotus 2, Scarron, Hudibras™, and the old gentleman in
Oldham °, with all the celebrated ill faces of antiquity, as furni-
ture for the club-room.

‘As they have always been professed admirers of the other
sex, so they unanimously declare that they will give all possible
encouragement to such as will take the benefit of the statute,
though none yet have appeared to do it.

‘The worthy president, who is their most devoted champion,
has lately shown me two copies of verses, composed by a gentle-

man of his society ; the first, a congratulatory ode, inscribed to

30 Mrs. Touchwood, upon the loss of her two fore teeth ; the other;
a@ panegyric upon Mrs. Andiron’s left shoulder. Mrs. Vizard
(he says), since the small pox, has grown tolerably ugly, and 4
top toast in, the club; but I never heard him so lavish of his
fine things, as upon old Nell Trott, who“continually officiates at
their table ;; her he even adores and extols as the very counter
part of Mother Shipton® ; in short, Nell (says he) is one of the
extraordinary works of nature ; but as for complexion, shape;
and features, so valued by others, they are all mere outside and
symmetry, which is his aversion. Give me leave to add, that
40 the president is a facetious pleasant gentleman, and never more


ON THE MOHOCK CLUB. 175


so, than when he has got (as he calls them) his dear mummers
about him; and he often protests it does him good to meet a
fellow with a right genuine grimace in his air (which is so agree-
able in the generality of the French nation) ; and, as an instance
of his sincerity in this particular, he gave me a sight of a list in
his pocket book of all this class, who for these five years have
fallen under his observation, with himself at the head of them,
and in the rear (as one of a promising and improving aspect),
‘Sir, your obliged and humble servant,
19 ‘ALEXANDER CARBUNCLE,’
‘Oxford, March 12, 1711.’ ;


Spectator, No.17,] [March 20, 1711.


No. 53. On the Mohock-Club; Letter from Mrs. Margaret
Clark. i


O curve in terris animee, et ccelestium inanes |
Pers. Sat. ii, 61.


‘MR. SPECTATOR,


‘The materials you have collecced towards a general history

of clubs, make so bright a part of your speculations, that I
think it is but a justice we all owe the learned world, to furnish
you with such assistance as may promote that useful work.
For this reason I could not forbear communicating to you
Some imperfect information of a set of men (if you will allow
them a place in that species of being) who have lately erected
20 themselves into a nocturnal fraternity, under the title of the
Mohock-club®, a name borrowed it seems from a sort of canni-
bals in India, who subsist by plundering and devouring all
the nations about them. The president is styled “Emperor of
the Mohocks ;” and his arms are a Turkish crescent, which his
imperial majesty bears at’ pr&sent in a very extraordinary man-
her engraved upon his forehead. Agreeable to their name, the
avowed design of their institution is mischief; and upon this
foundation all their rules and orders are framed. An out-
Yageous ambition of doing all possible hurt to their fellow-
'o creatures, is the great cement of their assembly, and the only
qualification required in the members. In order to exert this


Io


20


30


40


176 SOCIAL PAPERS,


principle in its full strength and perfection, they take care to
drink themselves to a pitch, that is, beyond the possibility of
attending to any motions of reason or humanity; then make 3
general sally, and attack all that are so unfortunate as to walk
the streets through which they patrol. Some are knocked
down, others stabbed, others cut and carbonadoed®, To put
the watch to a total rout, and mortify some of those inoffensive
militia, is reckoned a coug d’état. The particular talents by
which these misanthropes are distinguished from one another,
consist in the various kinds of barbarities which they execute
upon their prisoners. Some are celebrated for a happy dex-
terity in tipping the lion upon them; which is performed by
squeezing the nose flat to the face, and boring out the eyes
with their fingers.- Others are called the dancing-masters, and
teach their scholars to cut capers ; by running swords through
their legs ; a new invention, whether originally French I cannot
tell. A third sort are the tumblers", whose office it is to set women
on their heads. But these I forbear to mention, because they
cannot but be very shocking to the reader as tell as the Spec-
tator. In this manner they carry on a war against mankind j
and by the standing maxims of their policy, are to enter into
no alliances but one, and that is offensive and defensive with
all bawdy-houses in general, of which they have declared them~
selves protectors and guarantees.’

* I must own, Sir, these are only broken, incoherent memoirs
of this wonderful society ; but they are the best I have been yet
able to procure: for, being but of late established, it is not ripe
for a just history; and, to be serious, the chief design of this
trouble is to, hinder it from ever being so. You have been
pleased, out of a concern for the good of your countrymen, to
act, under the character of Spectator, not only- the part of
a looker-on, but an observer of their actions; and whenever
such enormities as this infest the town, we immediately fly to
you for redress. I have reason t& believe, that some thought-
less youngsters, out of a false notion of bravery, and an immo-
derate fondness to be distinguished for fellows of fire, are
insensibly hurried into this senseless, scandalous project. Such
will probably stand corrected by your reproofs, especially if you
inform them, that it is not courage for half a score of fellows,
mad with wine and lust, to set upon two or three soberer than


ON THE MOHOCK CLUB. 177


themselves ; and that the manners of Indian savages are not
becoming accomplishments to an English fine gentleman,
Such of them as have been bullies and scowerers® of a long
standing, and are grown veterans in this kind of service, are, I
fear, too hardened to receive any impressions from your admo-
nitions. But I beg you would recommend to their perusal
your ninth Speculation. They may there be taught to take
warning from the club of Duellists ; and be put in mind, that
the common fate of those men of honour, was to be hanged.
10 : ‘I am, Sir,
‘Your most humble Servant,
° PHILANTHROPOS,
*March Io, 1712.’


The following letter is of a quite contrary nature ; but I add

. it here, that the reader may observe, at the same view, how

amiable ignorance may be, when it is shown in its simplicities ;

and how detestable in barbarities. It is written by an honest

Countryman to his mistress, and came to the hands of a lady

of good sense, wrapped about a thread-paper%, who has long
20 kept it by her as an image of artléss love.


‘Zo her Ivery much respect, Mrs. Margaret Clark,


‘Lovely, and O that I could write loving Mrs. Margaret
Clark, I pray you Ie¢ affection excuse presumption. Having
been so happy as to enjoy the sight of your sweet countenance
and comely body, sometimes when I had occasion to buy
treacle or liquorish powder at the apothecary’s shop, I am so
enamoured with you, that I can no more keep close my flaming
desire to become your servant. And “I am the more bold
now to write to your sweet self, because I am now my own

30 man, and may match where I please; for my father is taken
away; and now I am come to.my living, which is ten yard
land® and a house ; and there is never a yard land in our field,
but is as well worth ten pounds a year as a thief is worth
a halter, and all my brothers and sisters are provided for:
besides, I have good household stuff, though I say it, both
brass and pewter”, linens and woollens; and though my home
be thatched, yet, if you and I match, it shall go hard but I will
have one half of it slated. If you think well of this motion, I

N


10


20


30


178 SOCIAL PAPERS.


will wait upon you as soon as my new clothes are made, and
hay-harvest is in. I could, though I say it, have good® [matches
in our town ; but my mother (God’s peace be with her) charged
me upon her death-bed to marry a gentlewoman, one who had
been well trained up in sewing and cookery. I do not think
but that if you and I can agree to marry, and lay our means
together, I shall be made grand jury-man e’er two or three
years come about, and that will be a great credit to us. If I
could have got a messenger for sixpence, I would have sent
one on purpose, and some trifle or other for a token of my
love ; but I hope there is nothing lost for that neither. So
hoping you will take this letter in good part, and answer it
with what care and speed you can,
*T rest and remain,
‘Yours, if my own,
‘Mr. GABRIEL BULLOCK,,
‘now my father is dead..

‘Swepston, Leicestershire.

“When the coal carts come, I shall send oftener ; and may
come in one of them myself.’}


Spectator, No. 324] [March 27, 1712.


No. 54. On Coffee Houses; Succession of Visitors; Character
of Eubulus.


Hominem pagina nostra sapit—MART.


It is very natural for a man who is not turned for mirthfu!
meetings of men, or assemblies of the fair sex, to delight it
that sort of conversation which we find in coffee-houses. Heré
aman of my temper is in his element; for if he cannot talk;
he can still be more agreeable to his company, as well a5
pleased in himself, in being only a hearer. It is a secret
known but to few, yet of no small use in the conduct of life,
that when you fall into a man’s conversation, the first thing
you should consider is, whether he has‘a great inclination t0
hear you, or that you should hear him. The latter is the moré


ON COFFEE HOUSES. 179


general desire, and I know very able flatterers that never speak
a word in praise of the persons from whom they obtain daily
favours, but still practise a skilful attention to whatever is
uttered by those with whom they converse. We are very
curious to observe the behaviour of great men and their
clients; but the same passions and interests move men in
lower spheres; and I (that have nothing else to do but make
observations) see in every parish, street, lane, and alley, of this
populous city, a little potentate that has his court and his

10 flatterers, who lay snares for his affection and favour by the
Same arts that are practised upon men in higher stations.

In the place I most usually frequent, men differ rather in the
time of day in. which they make a figure, than in any real
@reatness above one another. I, who am at the coffee-house
at six in the morning, know that my friend Beaver, the haber-
dasher ®, has a levee of more undissembled friends and admirers
than most of the courtiers or generals of Great Britain. Every
man about him has, perhaps, a newspaper in his hand; but
hone can pretend to guess what step will be taken in any one

20 court of Europe, till Mr. Beaver has thrown down his pipe, and
declares what measures the allies must enter into upon this
hew posture of affairs. Our coffee-ltouse is near one of the
inns of court, and Beaver has the audience and admiration of
his neighbours from six till within a quarter of eight, at which
time he is interrupted by the students of the house ; some of
whom are ready dressed for' Westminster at eight in a morning,
With faces as busy as if they wete retained in every cause there;
and others come in their night-gowns” to saunter away their
time, as if they never designed to go thither. Ido not know

3° that I meet in any of my walks, objects which move both my
spleen and laughter so effectually, as those young fellows at the
Grecian, Squire’s, Serle’s 2, and all other coffee-houses adjacent
to the law, who rise early "for no other purpose but to publish
their laziness. One would think these young virtuosos take a
gay cap and slippers, with a scarf and party-coloured gown,
to be ensigns of dignity; for the vain things approach each
other with an air, which shews they regard one another for
their vestments. I have observed, that the superiority among
these proceeds from ad opinion of gallantry and fashion. The
'© gentleman in the strawberry sash, who presides so much over


N 2


180 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the rest, has, it seems, subscribed to every opera this last
winter, and is supposed to receive favours from one of the
actresses.

When the day grows too busy for these gentlemen to enjoy
any longer the pleasures of their dishabille with any manner
of confidence, they give place to men who have business or
good sense in their faces, and come to the coffee-house either
to transact affairs, or enjoy conversation. The persons to
whose behaviour and discourse I have most regard, are such

yoas are between these two sorts of men; such as have not
spirits too active to be happy and well pleased in a private
condition, nor complexions too warm to make them neglect
the duties and relations of life. Of these sort of men consist
the worthier part of mankind ; of these are all good fathers,
generous brothers, friends, and faithful subjects. Their enter-
tainments are derived rather from reason than imagination ;
which is the cause that there is no impatience or instability in
their speech or action. You see in their countenances they aré
at home, and in quiet possession of their present instant as it

20 passes, without desiring to quicken it by gratifying any passion,
or prosecuting any new design. These are the men forme
for society, and those little communities which we express by
the word neighbourhoods.

The coffee-huuse is the place of rendezvous to all that live
near it, who are thus turned to relish calm and ordinary life-
Eubulus presides over the middle hours of the day, when this
assembly of men meet together. He enjoys'a great fortune
handsomely, without launching into expense ; and exerts many
noble and useful qualities, without appearing in any public

3o employment. ‘His wisdom and knowledge are; serviceable to
all that think fit to make use of them; and he does the office
of a counsel, a judge, an executor, and a friend, to all his
acquaintance, not only without the profits which attend such
offices, but also without the deference and homage which are
usually paid to them. The giving of thanks is displeasing to
him. The greatest gratitude you can shew him is, to let him
see that you are a befter man for his services; and that you
are so ready to oblige others, as he is to oblige you.

In the private exigencies of his friends, he lends at legal

40 value considerable sums which he might highly increase bY


ON DON QUIXOTE, ETC. 181


rolling in the public stocks. He does not consider in whose
hands his money will improve most, but where it will do most
good.

Eubulus has so great an authority in his little diurnal au-
dience, that when he shakes his head at any piece of public
news, they all of them appear dejected ; and on the contrary,
go home to their dinners with a good stomach and cheerful
aspect when Eubulus seems to intimate that things go well®.
Nay, their veneration towards him is so great, that when they

to are in other company they speak and act after him; are wise
in his sentences, and are no sooner sat down at their own
tables, but they hope or fear, rejoice or despond, as they saw
him do at the coffee-house. In a word, every man is Eubulus
as soon as his back is turned.

Having here given an account of the several reigns that
succeed each other from day-break till dinner-time, I shall
mention the monarchs of the afternoon on another occasion,
and shut up the whole series of them with the history of Tom
the Tyrant"; who, as the first minister of the coffee-house,

20 takes the government upon him between the hours of eleven
and twelve at night, and gives his orders in the most arbitrary
manner to the servants below him, as to the disposition of
liquors, coal, and cinders.


Spectator, No. 49.] [April 26, 1711.


No. 55. On Don Quixote, and a Coffee-House Politician.


When we look into the delightful history of the most ingenious
Don Quixote of the Mancha, and consider the exercises and
Manner of life of that renowned gentleman, we cannot but ad-
Mire the exquisite genius and discerning spirit of Michael
Cervantes ; who has not only painted his adventurer with great
Mastery in the conspicuous parts of his story, which relate to

3© love and honour ; but also intimated in his ordinary life, in his
economy and furniture, the infallible symptoms he gave of his
Rrowing frenzy, before he declared himself a Knight Errant.
His hall was furnished with old lances, halberds, and morions ;
his food, lentils ; his dress, amorous. He slept moderately, rose


182 SOCIAL PAPERS,


early, and spent his time in hunting. When by watchfulness
and exercise he was thus qualified for the hardships of his in-
tended peregrinations, he had nothing more to do but to fall hard
to study ; and before he should apply himself to the practical
. part, get into the methods of making love and war by reading
books of knighthood. As for raising tender passions in him,
Cervantes reports™, that he was wonderfully delighted with 2
smooth intricate sentence; and when they listened at his study-
door, they could frequently hear him read loud, ‘ The reason of

10 the unreasonableness, which against my reason is wrought, doth
so weaken my reason, as with all reason I do justly complain of
your beauty. Again, he would pause until he came to another
charming sentence, and, with the most pleasing accent imagin-
able, be loud at a new paragraph: ‘ The high heavens, which
with your divinity, do fortify you divinely with the stars, make
you deserveress of the deserts that your greatness deserves.’
‘With these and other such passages, says my author, the poof
gentleman grew distracted, and was breaking his brains day and
night to understand and unravel their sense.

20 As much as the case of this distempered knight is received by
all the readers of his history as the most incurable and ridiculous
of all frenzies ; it is very certain, we have crowds among us far
gone in as visible a madness as his, though they are not observed
to be in that condition. As great and useful discoveries aré
sometimes made by accidental and small beginnings, I came to
the knowledge of the most epidemic ill of this sort, by falling
into a coffee-house, where I saw my friend the upholsterer®, whos¢
crack" towards politics I have heretofore mentioned. This touch
in the brain of the British subject, is as certainly owing to the

30 reading newspapers, as that of the Spanish worthy above’
mentioned to the reading works of chivalry. My contem-
poraries, the novelists", have, for the better spinning out para-
graphs, and working down to the end of their columns, a most
happy art in saying and unsaying, giving hints of intelligence,

_ and interpretations of indifferent actions, to the great disturbance
of the brains of ordinary readers. This way of going on in the
words, and making no progress in the sense, is more particu-
larly the excellency of my most ingenious and renowned fellow-
labourer, the Post-man; and it is to this talent in him that J

40 impute the loss of my upholsterer’s intellects. That unfortunate


ON DON QUIXOTE, ETC. 183


tradesman has, for years past, been the chief orator in ragged
assemblies, and the reader in alley coffee-houses. He was
yesterday surrounded by an audience of that sort, among whom
I sat unobserved, through the favour of a cloud of tobacco, and
saw him with the Post-man in his hand, and all the other papers
safe under his elbow. He was intermixing remarks, and reading
the Paris article of May the thirtieth, which says, ‘That it is
given out that an express arrived this day with advice, that the
armies were so near in the plain of Lens, that they cannonaded

to each other.’ ‘Ay, ay, here we shall have sport.’ ‘ And that it
was highly probable the next express would bring us an account
of an engagement.’ ‘They are welcome as soon as they please.’
‘ Though some others say that the same will be put off until the
second or third of June, because the marshal Villars expects
some further reinforcements from Germany, and other parts,
before that time. ‘What does he put it off for? Does he think
our horse is not marching up at the same time? But let us see
what he says further” ‘They hope that Monsieur Albergotti ®,
being encouraged by the presence of so great an army, will make

20 an extraordinary defence.’ ‘Why then, I find, Albergotti is one
of those that love to have a great many on their side. Nay, I
Say that for this paper, he makes the most natural inferences of
any of them all.’ ‘ The elector of Bavaria, being uneasy to be
without any command, has desired leave to come to court, to
communicate a certain project to his majesty-——Whatever it
be, it is said, that prince is suddenly expected ; and then we
Shall have a more certain account of his project, if this report
has any foundation.’ ‘Nay, this paper never imposes upon us ;
he goes upon sure grounds; for he will not be positive the

3° elector has a project, or that he will come, or if he does come at
all; for he doubts, you see, whether the report has any founda-
tion.’

What makes this the more lamentable is, that this way of
writing falls in with the imaginations of the cooler and duller
part of her majesty’s subjects. The being kept up with one line
Contradicting another ; and the whole, after many sentences of
Conjecture, vanishing in a doubt whether there is any thing at
all in what the person has been reading, puts an ordinary head
into a vertigo, which his natural dulness would have secured

40 him from, Next to the labours of.the Post-man, the upholsterer


10


20


30


184 SOCIAL PAPERS.


took from under his elbow honest Ichabod Dawks’s Letter®, and
there, among other speculations, the historian takes upon him
to say, ‘ That it is discoursed that there will be a battle in Flan-
ders before the armies separate, and many will have it to be
to-morrow, the great battle of Ramillies being fought on a Whit-
sunday®.’ A gentleman, who was a wag in this company, laughed
at the expression, and said, ‘By Mr. Dawks’s favour, I warrant
you, if we meet them on Whitsunday or Monday we shall not
stand upon the day with them, whether it be before or after the
holidays.’ An admirer of this gentleman stood up, and told a
neighbour at a distant table the conceit ; at which indeed we
were all very merry. These reflections, in the writers of the
transactions of the times, seize the noddles of such as were not
born to have thoughts of their own, and consequently lay a
weight upon every thing which they read in print. But Mr.
Dawks concluded his paper with a courteous sentence, which was
very well taken and applauded by the whole company.: ‘We
wish,’ says he, ‘all our customers a merry Whitsuntide and many
of them.’ Honest Ichabod is as extraordinary a man as any of
our fraternity, and as particular, His style is a dialect between
the familiarity of talking and writing, and his letter such as you
cannot distinguish whether print or manuscript », which gives uS
a refreshment of the idea from what has been told us from the
press by others, This wishing a good Tide had its effect upom
us, and he was commended for his salutation, as showing a5
well the capacity of a bell-man as a historian. My distempered
old acquaintance read, in the next place, the account of the
affairs abroad in the Courant: but the matter was told so dis-
tinctly, that these wanderers thought there was no news in it;
this paper differing from the rest, as a history from a romance:
The tautology, the contradiction, the doubts, and wants of con”
firmations, are what keep up imaginary entertainments in empty
heads and produce neglect of their own affairs, poverty, and
bankruptcy, in many of the shop-statesmen; but turn the
imaginations of those of a little higher orb into deliriums of dis”
satisfaction, which is seen in a continual fret upon all that touches


, their brains, but more particularly upon any advantage obtained


40


by their country, where they are considered as lunatics, and
therefore tolerated in their ravings. ?
What I am now warning the people of is, that the newspapers


ON DON QUIXOTE, ETC. 185


of this island are as pernicious to weak heads in England, as
ever books of chivalry to Spain; and therefore shall do all that
in me lies, with the utmost care and vigilance imaginable, to
prevent these growing evils. A flaming instance of this malady
appeared in my old acquaintance at this time, who, after he had
done reading all his papers, ended with a thoughtful air, ‘If
we should have a peace, we should then know for certain whether
it was the king of Sweden that lately came to Dunkirk?’ I
whispered him, and desired him to step aside a little with me.
10 When I had opportunity, I decoyed him into a coach, in order
for his more easy conveyance to Moor-fields. The man went
very quietly with me; and by that time he had brought the
Swede from the defeat by the czar to the Boristhenes, we were
passing by Will’s coffee-house, where the man of the house
beckoned to us. We made a full stop, and could hear from
above a very loud swearing, with some expressions towards
treason, that the subject in France was as free as in England,
His distemper would not let him reflect, that his own discourse
was argument of the contrary. They told him, one would speak
20 with him below. He came immediately to our coach-side. I
whispered him, ‘that I had an order to carry him to the Bastile.’
He immediately obeyed with great resignation : for to this sort
of lunatic, whose brain is touched for the French, the name of
a gaol in that kingdom has a more agreeable sound, than that
of a paternal seat in this their own country. It happened a little
unluckily bringing these lunatics together, for they immediately
fell into a debate concerning the greatness of their respective
monarchs ; one for the king of Sweden, the other for the grand
monargue of France. This gentleman from Will’s is now next
3° door to the upholsterer, safe in his apartment in my Bedlam,
with proper medicaments, and the Mercure Gallant to soothe
his imagination that he is actually in France. If therefore he
should escape to Covent-garden again, all persons are desired
to lay hold of him and deliver him to Mr. Morphew, my over-
seer. At the same time, I desire all true sitbjects to forbear
discourse with him, any otherwise than, when he begins to fight
a battle for France, to say, ‘ Sir, I hope to see you in England.’


Tatler, No, 178.] [May 30, 1710.
Je eS


10


20


186 SOCIAL PAPERS.


No. 56. On the Misbehaviour of Servants.


Quid domini facient, audent cum talia fures ?
Vire. Ecl. iii. 16.


‘May 30,°1711.
“MR. SPECTATOR,

‘I have no small value for your endeavours to lay before
the world what may escape their observation, and yet highly
conduces to their service. You have, I think, succeeded very
well on many subjects ; and seem to have been conversant in
very different scenes of life. But in the considerations of man-
kind, as a Spectator, you should not omit circumstances which
relate to the inferior part of the world, any more than those
which concern the greater. There is one thing in particular,
which I wonder you have not touched upon—and that is the
géneral corruption of manners in the Servants of Great Britain.
I am a man that have travelled and seen many nations, but
have for seven years last past resided constantly in London of
within twenty miles of it. In this time I have contracted 3
numerous acquaintance among the best sort of people, and
have hardly found one of them happy in their servants. This
is matter of great astonishment to foreigners, and all such
as have visited foreign countries ; especially since we cannot
but observe, that there is no part of the world where servants
have those privileges and advantages as in England. They
have no where else such plentiful diet, large wages, or indulgent
liberty. There is no place where they labour less, and yet
where they are so little respectful, more wasteful, more negli-
gent, or where they so frequently change their masters, J?
this I attribute, in a great measure, the frequent robberies an
losses which we suffer on the high road and in our own houses
That indeed which gives me the present thought of the kind is
that a careless groom of mine has spoiled me the prettiest pad
in the world with only riding him ten miles; and I assure yous
if I were to make a register of all the horses I have know?
thus abused by the negligence of servants, the number would
mount a regiment. I wish you would give us your observa-


ON THE MISBEHAVIOUR OF SERVANTS. 187


tions, that we may know how to treat these rogues, or that we
masters may enter into measures to reform them. Pray giye
us a speculation in general about servants, and you make me
‘Yours,
‘ PHILO-BRITANNICUS.


*P.S, Pray do not omit the mention of grooms in particular.’


This’ honest gentleman, who is so desirous that I should
Write a satire upon grooms, has a great deal of reason for his
resentment ; and I know no evil which touches all mankind so

10 much as this of the misbehaviour of servants.

The complaint of this letter runs wholly upon men-servants ;
and I can attribute the licentiousness which has at present
prevailed among them, to nothing but what a hundred before
me have ascribed it to, the custom of giving board-wages.
This one instance of false economy is sufficient to debauch
the whole nation of servants, and makes them as it were but
for some part of their time in that quality. They are either
attending in places Where they meet and run into clubs, or else,
if they wait at taverns, they eat after their masters, and reserve

0 their wages for other occasions. From hence it arises, that
they are but in a lower degree what their masters themselves
are ; and usually affect an imitation of their manners: and you
have in liveries, beaux, fops, and coxcombs, in as high perfec-
tion as among people that keep equipages. It is a common
humour among the retinue of people of quality, when they are
in their revels—that is, when they are out of their masters’
Sight—to assume in a humorous way the names and titles
of those whose liveries they wear. By which means, characters
and distinctions become so familiar to them, that it is to this,

30 among other causes, one may impute a certain insolence among
our servants, that they take no notice of any gentleman, though
they know him ever so well, except he is an acquaintance of
their master.

My obscurity and taciturnity leave me at liberty, without
Scandal, to dine, if I think fit, at a common ordinary, in the
meanest as well as the most sumptuous house of entertain-
ment. Falling in the other day at a victualling-house near the
house of peers, I heard the maid come down and tell the land-
lady at the bar, that my lord bishop swore he would throw her


188 SOCIAL PAPERS.


out at window, if she did not bring yp more mild beer, and
that my lord duke would have a double mug of purl. My
surprise was increased, in hearing loud and rustic™ voices speak
and answer to each other upon the public affairs, by the names of
the most illustrious of our nobility; till of a sudden one came
running in, and cried-the house was rising. Down came all the
company together, and away! The alehouse was immediately
filled with clamour, and scoring one mug to the marquis of
such a place, oil and vinegar to such an earl, three quarts to

10 my new lord for wetting his title, and so forth. It is a thing
too notorious to mention the crowd of servants, and their
insolence, near the courts of justice, and the stairs towards
the supreme assembly, where there is a universal mockery of
all order, such riotous clamour and licentious confusion, that
one would think the whole nation lived in jest, and that there
were no such thing as rule and distinction among us.

The next place of resort, wherein the servile world ‘are let
loose, is at the entrance of Hyde-park, while the gentry are at
the Ring®. Hither people bring their lackeys out of state, and

20 here it is that all they say at their tables, and act in their
houses, is communicated to the whole town. There are men
of wit in all conditions of life ; and mixing with these people at
their diversions, I have heard coquettes and prudes as well
rallied, and insolence and pride exposed (allowing for theif
want of education) with as much humour and good sense, as
in the politest companies. It is a general observation, that all
dependants run in some measure into the manners and be-
haviour of those whom they serve. You shall frequently meet
with lovers and men of intrigue among the lackeys as well a5

30 at White’s® or in the side-boxes®. I remember once some years
ago an instance of this kind. A footman to a captain of thé
guards used frequently, when his master was out of the way, (2
carry on amours and make assignations in his master’s clothes
The fellow had a very good person, and there were very ‘many
women who think no further than the outside of a gentleman:
besides which, he was almost as learned a man as the colonel
himself: I say, thus qualified, the fellow could scrawl d¢//ets-
doux so well, and furnish a conversation on common topics;
that he had, as they call it, a great deal of good business on hiS

4ohands, It happened one day that, coming down a tavert


ON MASTERS AND MISTRESSES. 189


Stairs, in his master’s fine guard-coat, with a well-dressed
woman masked, he met the colonel coming up with other
company ; but with a ready assurance he quitted his lady, came
up to him, and said, ‘Sir, 1 know you have too much respect
for yourself to cane me in this honourable habit. But you see
there is a lady in the case®, and I hope on that score also you will
put off your anger till I have told you all another time.’ After
a little pause the colonel cleared up his countenance, and with
an air of familiarity whispered his man apart. ‘Sirrah, bring

10 the lady with you to ask pardon for you:’ then aloud, ‘Look
to it, Will, I’ never forgive you else.’ The fellow went back
to his mistress, and telling her, with a loud voice and an oath,
That was the honestest fellow in the world, conveyed her to
a hackney-coach.

But the many irregularities committed by servants in the
places above-mentioned, as well as in the theatres, of which
Masters are generally the occasions, are too various not to need
being resumed on another occasion,


Spectator, No. 88.] [June 15, 1711.


No. 57. On Masters and Mistresses, Letters from Ralph Valet
and Patience Giddy.


At hee etiam servis sempet libera fuerunt, timerent, gauderent, dole-
Tent, suo potius quam alterius arbitrio—TUuLL. Epist.


It is no small concern to me, that I find so many complaints

° from the part of mankind whose portion it is to live in servitude,
that those whom they depend upon will not allow them to be
even as happy as their condition will admit of. There are, as
these unhappy correspondents inform me, masters who are
Offended at a cheerful countenance, and think a servant is
broke loose from them, if he does not preserve the utmost
awe in their presence. There is one who says, if he looks
Satisfied his master asks him, ‘What makes him so pert this
Morning?’ if a little sour, ‘Hark ye sirrah, are not you paid
your wages?? The poor creatures live in the most extreme
30 misery together; the master knows not how to preserve respect,


Io


°20


30


190 SOCIAL PAPERS.


nor the servant how to give it. It scems this person is of so
sullen a nature that he knows but little satisfaction in the midst
of a plentiful fortune, and secretly frets to sce any appearance
of content .in one that lives upon the hundredth part of his
income, who is unhappy in the possession of the whole.
Uneasy persons, who cannot possess their own minds, vent
their spleen upon all who depend upon them; which, I think,
is expressed in a lively manner in the following letters :-—


‘SIR, August 2, 1711.

‘I have read your Spectator” of the third of the last month
and wish I had the happiness of being preferred to serve so
good a master as Sir Roger. The character of my master is
the very reverse of that good and gentle knight’s. All his
directions are given, and his mind revealed by way of con-
traries: as when any thing is to be remembered, with a peculiaf
cast of face he cries, “ Be sure to forget now.” If I am to make
haste back, “Do not come these two hours; be sure to call
by the way upon some of your companions.” Then another
excellent way of his is, if he sets me any thing to do, which hé
knows must necessarily take up half a day, he calls ten times
in a quarter of an hour to know whether I have done yet:
This is his manner; and the same perverseness runs through
all his actions, according as the circumstances vary. Besides
all this, he is so suspicious, that he submits himself to the
drudgery of a spy. He is as unhappy himself as he makes
his servants; he is constantly watching us, and we differ no
more in pleasure and liberty than as a gaoler and a prisoner:
He lays traps for faults ; and no sooner makes a discovery, but
falls into such language, as ] am more ashamed of for coming
from him, than for being directed to me. This, Sir, is a short
sketch of a master I have served upwards of nine years ; and
though I have never wronged him, I confess my despair 0
pleasing him has very much abated my endeavour to do it
If you will give me leave to steal a sentence out of my master’s
Clarendon, I shall tell you my case in a word, “being used
worse than I deserved, I cared less to deserve well than I had
done ®.” :

‘I am, Sir, your humble servant,


“RALPH VALET.’


ON MASTERS AND MISTRESSES, IgI


‘DEAR MR, SPECTER,


‘lam the next thing to a lady’s woman, and am under both
my lady and her woman. I am so used by them both, that I
should be very glad to see them in the Specter. My lady
herself is of no mind in the world, and for that reason her
woman is of twenty minds in a moment, My lady is one that
never knows what to do with herself; she pulls on and puts off
every thing she wears twenty times before she resolves upon
it for that day. I stand at one end of the room, and reach

10 things to her woman. When my lady asks for a thing, I hear,
and-have half brought it, when the woman meets me in the
middle of the room to receive it, and at that instant she says,-
“No, she will not have it.” Then I go back, and her woman
comes up to her, and by this time she will have that and two
or three things more in an instant. The woman and I run to
each other; I am loaded and delivering the things to her, when
my lady says she wants none of all these things, and we are
the dullest creatures in the world, and she the unhappiest
woman living, for she shall not be drest in any time. Thus

20 we stand, not knowing what to do, when our good lady, with
all the patience in the world, tells us as plain as she can speak,
that she will have temper because we have no manner of un-
derstanding ; and begins again to dress, and see if we can find
out, of ourselves, what we are to do. When she is dressed she
8oes to dinner, and after she has disliked every thing there,
She calls for her coach, then commands it in again, and then
she will not go out at all, and then will go, too, and orders the
chariot. Now, good Mr. Specter, I desire you would, in the
behalf of all who serve froward ladies, give out in your paper,

30 that nothing can be done without allowing time for it, and that
one cannot be back again with what one was sent for, if one is
called back before one can go a step for that they want. And
if you please, let them know that all mistresses are as like as
all servants.

‘IT am your loving-friend,


‘ PATIENCE Gippy.’
These are great calamities; but I met the other day in the


Five fields®, towards Chelsea, a pleasanter tyrant than either
Of the above represented. A fat fellow was puffing on in his


192 SOCIAL PAPERS,


open waistcoat; a boy of fourteen in a livery, carrying after
him his cloak, upper coat, hat, wig, and sword. The poor lad
was ready to sink with the weight, and could not keep up with
his master, whdé turned back every half furlong, and wondered
what made the lazy young dog lag behind.

There is something very unaccountable, that people cannot
put themselves in the condition of the persons below them,
when they consider the commands they, give. But there is
nothing more common, than to see a fellow (who if he were

xo reduced to it, would not be hired by any man living) lament
that he is troubled with the most worthless dogs in nature.

It would, perhaps, be running too far out of common life to
urge, that he who is not master of himself and his ows
passions, cannot be a proper master of another. Equanimity
in a man’s own words and actions, will easily diffuse itself
through his whole family. Pamphilio has the happiest house-
hold of any man I know, and that proceeds from the humané
regard he has to them in their private persons, as well as i?
respect that they are his servants. If there be any occasion

, 20 wherein they may in themselves be supposed to be unfit to
attend their master’s concerns by reason of any attention t0
their own, he is so good as to place himself in their condition.
I thought it very becoming in him, when at dinner the othef
day, he made an apology for want of more attendants. Hé
said, ‘One of my footmen is gone to the wedding of his sister
and the other-I do not expect to wait, because his father died
but two days ago.’ ;


Spectator, No. 137.] [August 7, 1711.


No. 58. On Testinonials and Recommendatory Epistles.


Qualem commendes, etiam atque etiam aspice, ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem.—Honr, Ep. i. 18, 76.


It is no unpleasant matter of speculation to consider thé
recommendatory epistles that pass round this town from hand
30 to hand, and the abuse people put upon one another in that
kind, It is indeed come to that pass, that, instead of being the


ON TESTIMONIALS, ETC. 193


testimony of merit in the person recommended, the true read-
ing of a letter of this sort is, ‘The bearer hereof is so uneasy to
me, that it will be an act of charity in you to take him off my
hands; whether you prefer him or not, it is all one; for I have
no manner of kindness for him, or obligation to him or his;
and do what you please as to that.’ As negligent as men are
in this respect, a point of honour is concerned in it; and there
is nothing a man should be more ashamed of, than passing a
worthless creature into the service or interests of a man who
1o has never injured you.’ The women indeed are a little too keen
in their resentments to trespass often this way: but you shall
sometimes know, that the mistress and the maid shall quarrel,
and give each other very free language, and at last the lady
Shall be pacified to turn her out of doors, and give her a very
good word to any body else. Hence it is that you see, in a
year and a half’s time, the same face a domestic in all parts
of the town. Good-breeding and good-nature lead people in a
great measure to this injustice: when suitors of no consider-
ation will have confidence enough to press upon their superiors,
20 those in power are tender of speaking the exceptions they have
against them, and are mortgaged into promises out of their
impatience of i importunity. In this latter case, it would be a
very useful inquiry to know the history of recommendations.
There are, you must know, certain abettors of this way of
torment, who make it a profession to manage the affairs of
candidates. These gentlemen let out their impudence to their
clients, and supply any defective recommendation, by inform-
ing how such and such a man is to be attacked. They will tell
you, get the least scrap from Mr. Such-a-one, and leave the
3© rest to them. When one of these undertakers has your busi-
hess in hand, you may be sick, absent in town or country, and
the patron shall be worried, or you prevail. I remember to
have been shown a gentleman some years ago, who punished a
whole people for their facility in giving their credentials, This
person had belonged to a regiment which did duty in the West
Indies, and, by the mortality of the place, happened to be com-
manding-officer i in the colony. He oppressed his subjects with
great frankness, till he became sensible that he was heartily
hated by every man under his command. When he had carried
1 his point to be thus detestable, in a pretended fit of dishumour,
Oo


194 SOCIAL PAPERS,


and feigned uneasiness of living where he found he was so
universally unacceptable, he communicated to the chief inhabit-
ants a design he had to return for England, provided they
would give him ample testimonials of their approbation. The
planters came into it to a man, and, in proportion to his de-
serving the quite contrary, the words justice, generosity, and
courage, were inserted in his commission, not omitting the
general good-liking of people of all conditions in the colony-
The gentleman returns for England, and within a few months
10 after came back to them their governor, on the strength of theif
own testimonials. .

Such a rebuke as this cannot indeed happen to easy recom-
menders, in the ordinary course of things, from one hand to
another; but how would a man bear to have it said to him:
‘The person I took into confidence on the credit you gave him,
has proved false, unjust, and has not answered any way the
character you gave me of him ??

I*cannot but conceive very good hopes of that rake Jack
Toper of the Temple, for an honest scrupulousness in this point

20 A friend of his meeting with a servant that had formerly lived
with Jack, and having a mind to take him, sent to him to know
what faults the fellow had, since he could not please such 4
careless fellow as he was. His answer was as follows :— °

‘SIR,

“Thomas that lived with me was turned away because he
was too good for me. You know I live in taverns; he is an
orderly sober rascal, and thinks much to sleep in an entry until
two in the morning. He told me one day, when he was dress’
ing me, that he wondered I was not dead before now, since I

30 went to dinner in the evening, and went to supper at two in the
morning. We were coming down Essex-street one night a little
flustered, and I was giving him the word to alarm the watch;
he had the impudence to tell me it was against the law. You
that are married, and live one day after another the same way,
and so on the whole week, I dare say will like him, and he will
be glad to have his meat in due season. The fellow is certainly
very honest. My service to your lady. Yours,

‘J.T’
Now this was very fair dealing. Jack knew very well, that


ON TESTIMONIALS, ETC. 195


though the love of order made a man very awkward in his
equipage, it was a valuable quality among the queer people who
live by rule; and had too much good sense and good-nature to
let the fellow starve, because he was not fit to attend his
vivacities.

I shall end this discourse with a letter of recommendation
from Horace to Claudius Nero. You will see in that letter a
slowness to ask a favour, a strong reason for being unable to
deny his good word any longer, and that it is a service to the

10 person to whom he recommends, to comply with what is asked :
all which are necessary circumstances, both in justice and good-
breeding, if a man would ask so as to have reason to complain
of a denial; and indeed a man should not in strictness ask
otherwise. In hopes:the authority of Horace, who perfectly
understood how to live with great men, may have a good effect
towards amending this facility in people of condition, and the
confidence of those who apply to them without merit, I have
translated the epistle.


‘To CLAuDIUS NERO.
20 ‘SIR,

‘Septimius, who waits upon you with this, is’ very well
acquainted with the place you are pleased to allow me in your
friendship. For when he beseeches me to recommend him to
your notice, in such a manner as to be received by you, wha
are delicate in the choice of your friends and domestics, he
knows our intimacy, and understands my ability to serve him
better than I do myself. I have defended myself against his
ambition to be yours, as long as I possibly could; but fearing
the imputation of hiding my power in, you out of mean and

30 selfish considerations, I am at last prevailed upon to give you
this trouble. -Thus to avoid the appearance of a greater fault, I
have put on this confidence. If you can forgive this transgres-
sion of modesty in behalf of a friend, receive this gentleman
into your interests and friendship, and take it from me that he
is an honest and a brave man.”


Spectator, No. 493.] [September 25, 1712+


02


Io


196 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Wo. 59. On Improper Modes of Address ; Character of Tom
Courtly.


Gaudent preenomine molles
Auricule, : Hor. Sat. ii. 5. 32.


Many are the inconveniences which happen from the im-
proper manner of address in common speech, between persons
of the same or of different quality. Among these errors, there
is none greater than that of the impertinent use of Title, and a
paraphrastical way of saying, You. I had the curiosity the
other day to follow a crowd of people near Billingsgate, who
were conducting a passionate woman that sold fish to a magis-
trate, in order to explain some words, which were ill taken by
one of her own quality and profession in the public market.
When she came to make her defence, she was so full of, ‘ His
Worship,’ and of, ‘If it should please his Honour,’ that we
could, for some time, hardly hear any other apology she made -
for, herself, than that of atoning for the ill language she had
been accused of towards her neighbour, by the great civilities
she paid to her judge. But this extravagance in her sense of
doing honour was no more to be wondered at, than that her
many rings on each finger were worn as instances of finery and
dress. The vulgar may thus heap and huddle terms of respect,
and nothing better be expected from them; but for people of


20 rank to repeat appellatives insignificantly, is a folly not to be


endured, neither with regard to our time, or our understanding.
It is below the dignity of speech to extend it with more words
or phrases than are necessary to explain ourselves with ele-
gance: and it is, methinks, an instance of ignorance, if not of
servitude, to be redundant in such expressions.

I waited upon a man of quality some mornings ago. He
happened to be dressing; and his shoe-maker fitting him, told
him, ‘that if his Lordship would please to tread hard, or that if
his Lordship would stamp a little, his Lordship would find his


30 Lordship’s shoe will sit as easy as any piece of work his Lord-


ship should see in England.’ As soon as my lord was dressed,
a gentleman approached him with a very good air, and told
him, ‘he had an affair which had long depended in the lower


ON IMPROPER MODES OF ADDRESS, 197


courts ; which, through the inadvertency of his ancestors on the
one side, and the ill arts of their adversaries on the other, could
not possibly be settled according to the rules of the lower
courts ; that, therefore, he designed to bring his cause before
the House of Lords next session, where he should be glad if his
Lordship should happen to be present ; for he doubted not but
his cause would be approved by all men of justice and honour.’
In, this place the word Lordship was gracefully inserted ; be-
cause it was applied to him in that circumstance wherein his

10 quality was the occasion of the discourse, and wherein it was
most useful to the one, and most honourable to the other.

This way is so far from being disrespectful to the honour of
nobles, that it is an expedient for using them with greater
deference. I would not put Lordship to a man’s hat, gloves,
wig, or cane; but to desire his Lordship’s favour, his Lordship’s
judgment, or his Lordship’s patronage, is a manner of speak-
ing, which expresses an alliance between his quality and his
merit, It is this knowledge, which distinguished the discourse
of the shoe-maker from that of the gentleman. The highest

20 point of good-breeding, if any one can hit it, is to show a very
nice regard to your own dignity, and, with that in your heart,
express your value for the man above you.

But the silly humour to the contrary has so much prevailed,
that the slavish addition of title enervates discourse, and renders
the application of it almost ridiculous. We writers of diurnals
are nearer in our style to that of common talk than any other
writers, by which means we use words of respect sometimes
very unfortunately. The Postman, who is one of the most cele-
brated of our fraternity, fell into this misfortune yesterday in

30 his paragraph from Berlin of the twenty-sixth of July. ‘Count
Wartembourg,’ says he, ‘ great chamberlain, and chief minister
of this court, who on Monday last accompanied the king of
Prussia to Oranienburg, was taken so very ill, that on Wednes-
day his life was despaired of ; and we had a report, that his
Excellency was dead.’

I humbly presume that it flattens the narration, to say his
Excellency in a case which is common to all men ; except you
would infer what is not to be inferred, to wit, that the author
designed to say, ‘all wherein he excelled others was departed

40 from him.’


Io


20


30


198 SOCIAL PAPERS,


Were distinctions used according to the rules of reason and
sense, those additions to men’s names would be, as they were
first intended, significant of their worth, and not their persons ;
so that in some cases it might be proper to say, ‘The man is
dead ; but his Excellency will never die.’ It is, methinks, very
unjust to laugh at a Quaker, because he has taken up a resolu-
tion to treat you with a word, the most expressive of com-


.plaisance that can be thought of and with-an air of good-nature


and charity calls you Friend. I say, it is very unjust to rally
him for this term to a stranger, when you yourself, in all your
phrases of distinction, confound phrases of honour into no use
at all. ;

Tom Courtly, who is the pink of courtesy, is an instance of
how little moment an undistinguishing application of sounds of
honour are to those who understand themselves. Tom never
fails of paying his obeisance to every man he sees, who has
title or office to make him conspicuous ; but his deference is
wholly given to outward considerations. 1, who knew him, can
tell him within half an acre, how much land one man has more
than another by Tom’s bow to him. Title is all he knows of
honour, and civility of friendship: for this reason, because he
cares for no man living, he is reltgiously strict in performing,
what he calls, his respects to you. To this end he is very
learned in pedigree ; and will abate something in the ceremony
of his. approaches to a man, if he is in any doubt about the
bearing of his coat of arms. What is the most pleasant of all
his character is, that he acts with a sort of integrity in these
impertinences ; and though he would not do any solid kindness,
he is wonderfully just and careful not to wrong his quality. But
as integrity is very scarce in the world, I cannot forbear having
respect for the impertinent : it is some virtue to be bound by
any thing. Tom and I are upon very good terms, for the
respect he has for the house of Bickerstaff. Though one can-
not but laugh at his serious consideration of things so little
essential, one must have a value even for a frivolous good
conscience.


Tatler, No. 204] [July 29, 1710.


ON OUTWARD CIVILITIES AND SALUTATIONS. 199


No. 60. On Outward Civilities and Salutations.
Quod decet honestum est, et quod Honestum est decet.—TULL.


There are some things which cannot come under certain
tules, but which one would think could not need them. Of
this kind are outward civilities and salutations". These one
would imagine might be regulated by every man’s common
sense, without the help of an instructor: but that which we
call common sense suffers under that word: for it sometimes
implies no more than that faculty which is common to all
men, but sometimes signifies right reason, and what all men
should consent to. In this latter acceptation of the phrase, it

10 is no great wonder people err so much against it, since it is
not every one who is possessed of it, and there are fewer, who
against common rules and fashions, dare obey its dictates. As
to salutations, which I was about to talk of, I observe, as I
Stroll about town, there are great enormities committed with
regard to this particular. You shall sometimes see a man
begin the offer of a salutation, and observe a forbidding air, or
escaping eye, in the person he is going to salute, and stop short
in the poll of his neck. This in the person who believed he
Could do it with a good grace, and was refused the opportunity,

*0 is justly resented with a coldness the whole ensuing season.
Your great beauties, people in much favour, or by any means
or for any purpose overflattered, are apt to practise this, which
one may call the preventing aspect, and throw their attention
another way, lest they should confer a bow or a courtesy upon
@ person who might not appear to deserve that dignity. Others
you shall find so obsequious, and so very courteous, as there is
no escaping their favours of this kind. Of this sort may be
a man who is in the fifth or sixth degree of favour with a.
minister. This good creature is resolved to show the world,

3° that great honours cannot at all change his manners; he is the
same civil person he ever was ; he will venture his neck to bow
out of a coach in full speed, at once to show he is full of busi-
hess, and yet not so taken up as to forget his old friend. With
a man who is not so well formed for courtship and elegant


10


20


jo


40


200 SOCIAL PAPERS,


behaviour, such a gentleman as this seldom finds his account
in the return of his compliments ; but he will still go on, for he
is in his own way, and must not omit; let the neglect fall on
your side, or where it will, his business is still to be well-bred
to the end. I think I have read, in one of our English come-
dies, a description of a fellow that affected knowing every
body, and for want of judgment in time and place, would bow
and smile in the face of a judge sitting in the court, would sit
in an opposite gallery and smile in the minister’s face as he
came up into’ the pulpit, and nod as if he alluded to some
familiarities between them in another place. But now I happen
to speak of salutations at church, I must take notice that seve-
ral of my correspondents have importuned me ‘to consider that
subject, and settle the point of decorum in that particular.

I do not pretend to be the best courtier in the world, but
I have often on public occasions thought it a very great
absurdity in the company (during the royal presence) to ex-
change salutations from all parts of the room, when certainly
common sense should suggest, that all regards at that time
should be engaged, and cannot be diverted to any other object,
without disrespect to the sovereign. ,But as to the complaint
of my correspondents, it is not to be imagined what offence
some of them take at the custom of saluting in places of wor-
ship. 1 have a very angry letter from a lady, who-tells me of
one of her acquaintance, who, out of mere pride and a pretence
to be rude, takes upon her to return no civilities done to her in
the time of divine service, and is the most religious woman, for
no other reason but to appear a woman of the best quality
in the church. This absurd custom had better be abolished
than retained; if it were but to prevent evils of no higher
a nature than this is; but I am informed of objections much
more considerable. A dissenter of rank and distinction was
lately prevailed upon by a friend of his to come to one of the
greatest congregations of the church of England about town.
After the service was over, he declared he was very well satis-
fied with the little ceremony which was used towards God
Almighty; but at the same time he feared he should not be
able to go through those required towards one another: as to
this point he was in a state of despair, and feared he was not
well-bred enough to be a convert. There have been many


ON FINE GENTLEMEN, TRUE AND FALSE, 201


scandals of this kind given to our Protestant dissenters, from
the outward pomp and respect we take to ourselves in our
religious assemblies. A Quaker who came one day into a
church, fixed his eye upon an old lady with a carpet larger
than that from the pulpit before her, expecting when she would
hold forth, An anabaptist who designs to come over himself,
and all his family, within a few months, is sensible they want
breeding enough for our congregations, and has sent his two
eldest daughters to learn to dance, that they may not mis-

to behave themselves at church. It is worth considering whether,
in regard to awkward people with scrupulous consciences, a
good Christian of the best air in the world ought not rather to
deny herself the opportunity of showing so many graces, than
keep a bashful proselyte without the pale of the church.


Spectator, No. 259.] [December 27, 1711.


No. 61. On Fine Gentlemen, true and false,


Mores multorum vidit. ,
Hor. Ars Poet. 1 2.


It is a most vexatious thing to an old man, who endeavours to
Square his notions by reason, and to talk from reflection and ex-
Perience, to fall in with a circle of young ladies at their afternoon
tea-table. This happened very lately to be my fate: The con-
Versation, for the first half-hour, was so very rambling, that it is

20 hard to say what was talked of, or who spoke least to the purpose.
The various motions of the fan, the tossings of the head, inter-
mixed with all the pretty kinds of laughter, made up the greatest
part of the discourse. At Jast, this modish way of shining, and
being witty, settled into something like conversation, and the
talk ran upon ‘fine gentlemen.’ From the several characters
that were given, and the exceptions that were made, as this or
that gentleman happened to be named, J found that a lady is
hot difficult to be pleased, and that the town swarm with fine
gentlemen. A nimble pair of heels, a smooth complexion, a full-

3© bottom wig, a laced shirt, an embroidered suit, a pair of fringed


10


20


30


40


202 SOCIAL PAPERS.


gloves, a hat and feather ; any one or more of these and the like ac-
complishments ennobles a man, and raises him above the vulgar,
ina female imagination. On the contrary, a modest serious be-
haviour, a plain dress, a thick pair of shoes, a leathern belt, a
waistcoat not lined with silk, and such like imperfections,
degrade a man, and are so many. blots in his escutcheon, [I
could not forbear smiling at one of the prettiest and liveliest of
this gay assembly, who excepted to the gentility of sir William
Hearty, because he wore a frieze coat, and breakfasted upon.
toast and ale. I pretended to admire the fineness of her taste ;
and to strike in with her in ridiculing those awkward healthy
gentlemen, that seem to make nourishment the chief end of
eating. I gave her an account of an honest ‘Yorkshire gentle-
man, who (when I was a traveller) used to invite his acquaint-
ance at Paris to break their fast with him upon cold roast beef
and mum®, There was, I remember, a little French marquis,
who was often pleased to rally him unmercifully upon beef and
pudding, of which our countryman would despatch a pound or
two with great alacrity, while this antagonist was piddling at a
mushroom®, or the haunch of a frog. I could perceive the lady
was pleased with what I said, and we parted very good friends,
by virtue of a maxim I always observe, Never to contradict or
reason with a sprightly female. I went home, however, full of
a great many serious reflections upon what had. passed, and
though, in complaisance, I disguised my sentiments, to keep up
the good humour of my fair companions, and to avoid being
looked upon as a testy old fellow, yet out of the good-will I bear
to the sex, and to prevent for the future their being imposed
upon by counterfeits, I shall give them the distinguishing marks
of ‘a true fine gentleman.’

When a good artist would express any remarkable character
in sculpture, he endeavours to work up his figure into all the per-
fections his imagination can form ; and to imitate not so much
what is, as what may or ought to be. I shall follow their ex-
ample, in the idea J am going to trace out of a fine gentleman,
by assembling together such qualifications as seem requisite to
make the character complete. In order to this I shall premise
in general, that by a fine gentleman I mean a man completely
qualified as well for the service and good, as for the ornament
and delight of society. When I consider the frame of mind


ON FINE GENTLEMEN, TRUE AND FALSE, 203


peculiar to a gentleman, I suppose it graced with all the dignity
and elevation of spirit that human nature is capable of. To this
I would have joined a clear understanding, a reason free from
prejudice, a steady judgment, and an extensive knowledge.
When I think of the heart of a gentleman, I imagine it firm and
intrepid, void of all inordinate passions, and full of tenderness,
compassion, and benevolence. When I view the fine gentleman
with. regard to his manners, methinks I see him modest without
bashfulness, frank and affable without impertinence, obliging and
10 complaisant without servility, cheerful and in good humour
without noise. These amiable qualities are not easily obtained;
neither are there many men that have a genius to excel this way.
A finished gentleman is perhaps the most uncommon of all the
great charactersin life, Besides thenatural endowments with which
this distinguished man is to be born, he must run through along
Series of education. Before he makes his appearance and shines
in the world, he must be principled in religion, instructed in all
the moral virtues, and led through the whole course of the polite
arts and sciences. He should be no stranger to courts and to
20 camps ; he must travel to open his mind, to enlarge his views,
to learn the policies and interests of foreign states, as well as to
fashion and polish himself, and to get clear of national prejudices,
of which every country has its share. To all these more essen-
tial improvements, he must not forget to add the fashionable
Omaments of life, such as are the languages and the bodily
exercises most in vogue ; neither would I have him think even
dress itself beneath his notice.
It is no very uncommon thing in the world to meet with men
of probity ; there are likewise a great many men of honour to be
30 found. Men of courage, men of sense, and men of letters are
frequent ; but a true fine gentleman is what one seldom sees.
He is properly a compound of the various good qualities that
embellish mankind. As the great poet animates all the different
Parts of learning by the force of his genius, and irradiates all
the compass of his knowledge by the lustre and brightness of
his imagination ; so all the great and solid perfections of life
appear in the finished gentleman, with a beautiful gloss and
varnish ; every thing he says or does is accompanied with a
manner, or rather a charm, that draws the admiration and good-
40 will of every beholder.


204 SOCIAL PAPERS.


ADVERTISEMENT,
For the benefit of my female readers.

N.B. The gilt chariot, the diamond ring, the gold snuff-box,
and brocade sword-knot, are no essential parts of a fine gentle-
man ; but may be used by him, provided he casts his eye upon
them but once a day.


Guardian, No. 34.] [April 20, 1713.


No. 62. On Fine Gentlemen; Vocifer; Character of Ignotus.


Omnis Aristippum decuit color, et status, et res.
Hor. Ep.i. 17, 23.


It was with some mortification that I suffered the raillery of
a fine lady of my acquaintance, for calling, in one of my papers,
Dorimant® a clown. She was so unmerciful as to take ad-
10 vantage of my invincible taciturnity, and on that occasion with
great freedom to consider the air, the height, the face, the
gesture of him, who could pretend to judge so arrogantly of
gallantry. She is full of motion, jaunty and lively in her im-
pertinence, and one of those that commonly pass, among the
ignorant, for persons who have a great deal of humour, She
had the play of Sir Fopling in her hand, and after she had said
it was happy for her there was not so charming a creature aS
Dorimant now living, she began with a theatrical air and tone
of voice to read, by way of triumph over me, some of his
speeches. ‘Tis she! that lovely air, that easy shape, those
wanton eyes, and all those melting charms about ’her mouth,
which Medley spoke of; I’ll follow the lottery, and put in for
a prize with my friend Bellair.’
In love the victors from the vanquish’d fly;
They -fly that wound, and they pursue that die!
Then turning over the leaves, she reads alternately, and
speaks :
And you and Loveit to her cost shall find
I fathom all the depths of woman-kind.
30 Oh the fine gentleman! But here, continues she, is the
passage I admire most, where he begins to teaze Loveit, and


ON FINE GENTLEMEN, ETC. 205


mimic Sir Fopling. Ob, the pretty satire, in his resolving to
be a coxcomb to please, since noise and nonsense have such
powerful charms.


J, that I may successful prove,
Transform myself to what you love.


Then how like a man of the town, so wild and gay is that!


The wise will find a diffrence in our fate,
You wed a woman, I a good estate.

It would have been a very wild endeavour for a man of my
to temper to offer any opposition to so nimble a speaker as my
fair enemy is ; but her discourse gave me very many reflections
when I had left her company. Among others, I could not but
consider with some attention, the false impressions the gene-
tality (the fair sex more especially) have of what should be
intended, when they say a ‘fine gentleman ;’ and could not
help revolving that subject in my thoughts, and setting, as it

were, an idea of that character in my own imagination,
No man ought to have the esteem of the rest of the world,
for any actions which are disagreeable to those maxims which
20 prevail as the standards of behaviour in the country wherein he
lives. What is opposite to the eternal rules of reason and good
Sense must be excluded from any place in the carriage of a
well-bred man. I did not, I confess, explain myself enough on
this subject, when I called Dorimant a clown, and made it an
instance of it, that he called the orange wench Double Tripe: I
Should have shewn, that humanity obliges a gentleman to give
no part of human kind reproach, for what they, whom they
teproach, may possibly have in common with the most virtuous
and worthy amongst us. When a gentleman speaks coarsely,
30 he has dressed himself clean to no purpose. The clothing of
our minds certainly ought to be regarded before that of our
bodies. To betray in a man’s talk a corrupted imagination, is
a much greater offence against the conversation of gentlemen
than any negligence of dress imaginable. But this sense of the
matter is so far from being received among people even of
Condition, that Vocifer passes for a fine gentleman. He is
loud, haughty, gentle, soft, and obsequious by turns, just as
a little understanding and great impudence prompt him at the
Present moment. He passes among the silly part of our women


10


206 SOCIAL PAPERS.


for a man of wit, because he is generally in doubt. He contra-
dicts with a shrug, and confutes with a certain sufficiency, in
professing such and such a thing is above his capacity. What
makes his character the pleasanter is, that he is a professed
deluder of women; and because the empty coxcomb has no
regard to any thing that is of itself sacred and inviolable, I have
heard an unmarried lady of fortune say, it is pity so fine
a gentleman as Vocifer is so great an atheist. The crowds of
such inconsiderable creatures, that infest all places of assem-
bling, every reader will have in his eye from his own observa-
tion ; but would it not be worth considering what sort of figure


‘a man who formed himself upon those principles among us


which are agreeable to the dictates of honour and religion would
make in the familiar and ordinary occurrences of life ? .

I hardly have observed any one fill his several duties of life
better than Ignotus. All the under parts of his behaviour, and
such as are exposed to common observation, have their rise in
him from great and noble motives. A firm and unshaken ex-
pectation of another life makes him become this; humanity


zo and good-nature, fortified by the sense of virtue, have the same


30


effect upon him as the neglect of all goodness has upon many
others. Being firmly established in all matters of importance,
that certain inattention which makes men’s actions look easy,
appears in him with greater beauty: by a thorough contempt
of little excellences, he is perfectly master of them. This
temper of mind leaves him under no necessity of studying his,
air, and he has this peculiar distinction, that his negligence is
unaffected.

- He that can work himself into a pleasure in considéring this
being as an uncertain one, and think to reap an advantage by
its discontinuance, is in a fair way of doing all things with
a graceful unconcern, and a gentleman-like ease. Such a one
does not behold his life as a short transient perplexing state,
made up of trifling pleasures and great anxieties ; but sees it
in quite another light: his griefs are momentary and his joys
immortal. Reflection upon death is not a gloomy and sad
thought of resigning every thing that he delights in, but it is
a short night followed by an endless day. What I would here


. contend for is, that the more virtuous the man is, the nearer he


40


will naturally be to the character of genteel and agreeable, A


ON DECAYED MEN OF PLEASURE, ETC. 207


man whose fortune is plentiful, shows an ease in his coun-
tenance, and confidence in his behaviour, which he that is
under wants and difficulties cannot assume. It is thus with
the state of the mind; he that governs his thoughts with thé
everlasting rules of reason and sense, must have something so
inexpressibly graceful in his words and actions, that every cir-
cumstance must become him. The change of persons or
things around him does not at all alter his situation, but he
looks disinterested in the occurrences with which others ‘are

10 distracted, because the greatest purpose of his life is to main-
tain an indifference both to it and all its enjoyments. In a
word, to be a fine gentleman is to be a generous and a brave
man. What can make a man so much in constant good
humour, and shine, as we call it, than to be supported by what
Can never fail him, and to believe that whatever happens to
him was the best thing that could possibly befal him, or else
he on whom it depends would not have permitted it to have
befallen him at all!


Spectator, No. 75.] [May 26, 1711.


No. 68. On Decayed Men of Pleasure; and other Corréespon-
dence.


Singula de nobis anni predantur euntes,—Hor. Ep, ii. 2. 55.


‘MR. SPECTATOR,

‘I am now in the sixty-fifth year of my age, and having been
the greater part of my days a man of pleasure, the decay of my
faculties is a stagnation of my life. But how is it, Sir, that my
appetites are increased upon me with the loss of power to
gratify them? I write this like a criminal, to warn people to
enter upon what reformation they please to make in themselves
in their youth, and not expect they shall be capable of it from
a fond opinion some have often in their mouths, that if we do
not leave our desires, they will leave us. It is far otherwise ;
I am now as vain in my dress, and as flippant, if I see a pretty
woman, as when in my youth I stood upon a bench ia the pit
to survey the whole circle of beauties. The folly is so extrava-


20


10


20


30


40


208 SOCIAL PAPERS.


gant with me, and I went on with so little check of my desires
or resignation of them, that I can assure you, I very often,
merely to entertain my own thoughts, sit with my spectacles on,
writing love-letters to the beauties that have been long since in
their graves. This is to warm my heart with the faint memory
of delights which were once agreeable to me: but how much
happier would my life have been now, if I could have looked
back on any worthy action done for my country? if J had laid
out that which I profused ® in luxury and wantonness, in acts of
generosity or charity? I have lived a bachelor to this day;
and instead of a numerous offspring, with which in the regular
ways of life I might possibly have delighted myself, I have only
to amuse myself with the repetition of old stories and intrigues
which no one will believe I ever was concerned in. I do not
know whether you have ever treated of it or not ; but you can-
not fall on a better subject, than that of the art of growing old.
In such a lecture you must propose, that no one set his heart
upon what is transient : the beauty grows wrinkled while we are
yet gazing at her. The witty man sinks into a humourist im-
perceptibly, for want of reflecting that all things around him are
in a flux, and continually changing: thus he is in the space of
ten or fifteen years surrounded by a new set of people, whose
manners are as natural to themas his delights, method of think-
ing, and mode of living, were formerly to him and his friends.
But the mischief is, he looks upon the same kind of error which
he himself was guilty of with an eye of scorn, and with that sort
of ill-will which men entertain against each other for different
opinions. Thus a crazy constitution and an uneasy mind is
fretted with vexatious passions for young men’s doing foolishly
what it is folly to do at all. Dear Sir, this is my present state
of mind ; I hate those I should laugh at, and envy those I con-
temn. The time of youth and vigorous manhood, passed the
way in which I have disposed of it, is attended with these con-
sequences ; but to those who live and pass away life as they
ought, all parts of it are equally pleasant ; only the memory of
good and worthy actions is a feast which must give a quicker
relish to the soul than ever it could possibly taste in the highest
enjoyments or jollities of youth. As for me, if I sit down in
my great chair and begin to ponder, the vagaries of a child
are not more ridiculous than the circumstances which are heaped


ON DECAYED MEN OF PLEASURE, ETC, 209


up in my memory ; fine gowns, country dances, ends of tunes,
interrupted conversations, and midnight quarrels, are what must
necessarily compose my soliloquy. I beg of you to print this,
that some ladies of my acquaintance, and my years, may be
persuaded to wear warm night-caps this cold season ; and that
my old friend Jack Tawdry may buy him a cane, and not creep
with the air of a strut. I must add to all this, that if it were not
for one pleasure, which I thought a very mean one until of very
late years, I should have no one great satisfaction left ; but if I
1° live to the tenth of March, 1714, and all my securities are good,
I Shall be worth fifty thousand pounds,
‘T am, Sir,
‘Your most humble Servant,
‘Jack AFTERDAY.’


‘Mr. SPECTATOR,


You will infinitely oblige a distressed lover, if you will insert
in your very next paper the following letter to my mistress.
You must know, I am not a person apt to despair, but she has
§ot an odd humour of stopping short unaccountably, and as she

*0 herself told a confidante of hers, she has cold’ fits. These fits
Shall last her a month or six weeks together ; and as she falls
into them without provocation, so it is to be hoped she will
return from them without the merit of new services. But life
and love will not admit of such intervals, therefore pray let her
be admonished as follows :


‘MADAM,


*T love you and I honour you: therefore pray do not tell me of
waiting until decencies, until forms, until humours, are consulted
and gratified. If you have that happy constitution as to be in-

30 dolent for ten weeks together, you should consider that all that
while I burn in impatiences and fevers ; but still you say it will
be time enough, though I and you too grow older while we are
yet talking". Which do you think the most reasonable, that you
should alter a state of indifference for happiness, and that to
oblige me-: or I live in torment, and that to lay no manner of
obligation on you?) While I indulge your insensibility I am
doing nothing; if you favour my passion, you are bestowing

P


210 SOCIAL PAPERS.


bright desires, gay hopes, generous cares, noble resolutions, and


transporting raptures upon,
‘Madam,


* Your most devoted humble Servant.’


“Mr. SPECTATOR, |
* Here is a gentlewoman lodges in the same house with me,
that I never did any injury to in my whole life; and she is
always railing at me to those that she knows will tell me of it.
Do not you think she is in love with me? or would you have me


10 break my mihd yet, or not?
‘Your Servant,


‘T. B?
“MR. SPECTATOR,

‘I ama footman in a great family, and am in love with the
house-maid. We were all at hot-cockles™ last night in the hall
these holidays ; when I lay down and was blinded, she pulled
off her shoe, and hit me with the heel such a rap, as almost
broke my head to pieces. Pray, Sir, was this love or
spite ?’—T.

Spectator, No. 260.] [December 28, 1711.


No. 64. On Levity,; Letters of Lydia and Mary Home.
Zepvds Eps dperfs, 6 Se xumpidos &xos dpérrct,


20 When I consider the false impressions which are received by
the generality of the world, I am troubled at none more than a
certain levity of thought, which many young-women, of quality
have entertained, to the hazard < of their characters, and_the
certain i misfortune ne, oftheir lives: The first of the following
letters may best represent the faults I would now point at ; aind
the answer to it, the temper of mind in a contrary character,


‘My Dear HARRIOT,
‘If thou art she, but oh how fallen, how changed, what ap
apostate ! how lost to all that is gay and agreeable! To_ be
married I find is to be buried alive ; I cannot conceive it more


Tee ee eek


ON LEVITY, ETC. 211


dismal to be shut up in a vault to converse with the shades of
my ancestors, than to be carried down to an old manor-house
in the country, and confined to the conversation of a sober
husband, and an awkward chamber-maid. For variety I sup-
pose you may entertain yourself with madam in her grogram
gown, the spouse of your parish vicar, who has by this time, I
am sure, well furnished you with receipts for making salves and
possets, distilling cordial waters, making syrups, and applying
1 poultices.
to‘ Blest solitude! I wish thee joy, my dear, of thy loved retire-
ment, which indeed you would persuade me is very agreeable,
and different enough from what I have here described ; but,
child, I am afraid thy brains are a little disordered with ro-
‘mances and novels. After six months’ marriage to hear thee
talk of love, and paint the country scenes so softly, is a little
extravagant; one would think you lived the lives of sylvan
deities, or roved among. the walks of paradise, like the first
happy pair. But pray thee leave these whimsies, and come to
town in order to Tivé and talk like other mortals. However, as
20 Pam extremely interested in your reputation, I would willingly
give you a little good advice at your first appearance under the
character of a married woman. It is a little insolent in me,
perhaps, to advise a matron; but I am so afraid you will make
so silly a figure as a fond wife, that I cannot help warning you
not to appear in any public places with your husband, and never
to’saunter about St. James’s-park together: if you presume to
enter the Ring at Hyde-park® together, you are ruined for ever :
Nor must you take the least notice of one another, at the play-
house, or opera, unless you would be laughed at for a very
3° loving couple, most happily paired in the yoke of wedlock. I
would recommend the example of an acquaintance of ours to
your imitation ; she is the most negligent and fashionable wife


AN TN cae oe


absence, and takes care he shall.never be the subject of any

discourse that she has a share in. I hope you Will propose this

lady as a pattern, though I am very much afraid you will be so

silly as to think Portia, etc. Sabine and Roman wives, much

4° brighter examples. I wish it may never come into your head to
P2


10


20


30


212 SOCIAL PAPERS.


imitate those antiquated creatures so far as to come into public
in the habit, as well as air, of a Roman matron. You make
already the entertainment at Mrs. Modish’s tea-table: she says,
she always thoyght you a discreet person, and qualified to
manage a family with admirable prudence; she dies to see
what demure and serious airs wedlock has given you, but she
says, she shall never forgive your choice of so gallant a man as
Bellamour, to transform him into a mere sober husband ; it was
unpardonable. You see, my dear, we all envy your happiness,


and n6 person more than
‘Your humble Servant,


‘’ Lypia.’


‘Be not in pain, good madam, for my appearance in town ; I
shall frequent no public places, or make any visits where the
character of a modest wife is ridiculous. As for your wild
raillery on matrimony, it is all hypocrisy ; you, and all the
handsome young women of your acquaintancé, show yourselves
to no other purpose, than’to gain a conquest over some man of
worth, in order to bestow your charms and fortune on him.
There is no indecency in the confession ; the design is modest
and honourable, and all your affectation canndt disguise it.

‘I am married, and have no other concern but to please the
man I love; he is the end of every care I have; if I dress, it is
for him ; if I read a poem, or a play, it is to qualify myself for


.2 conversation agreeable to his taste; he is almost the end of


my devotions ; half my prayers are for his Happiness. T love
to talk of him, and never hear him named but with pleasure
and emotion. I,am your friend, and wish you happiness, but
am sorry to see, by the air of your letter, that there are a set of
women who are got into the common- place raillery of every
thing that is sober, decent, atid proper: matrimony and the
clergy are the topics of people of little wit and no understand-
ing. I own to you, I have learned of the vicar’s wife all you
tax me with. She is a discreet, ingenious, pleasant, pious
woman ; I wish she had the handling of you and Mrs. Modish ;
you would find,*if you were too free with her, she would soon
make you as charming as ever you were ; she would make you
blush as much as if you never had been fine ladies. The vicar;
madam, is so kind as to visit my husband, and his agreeable


ON SCANDAL AND DETRACTION. 213:


conversation has brought him to enjoy many sober happy hours
when even I am shut out, and my dear master is entertained
only with his own thoughts. These things, dear madam, will
be lasting satisfactions, when the fine ladies, and the coxcombs,
by whom they form themselves, are irreparably ridiculous,
ridiculous in old age.
‘Iam Madam,
‘Your most humble Servant,
‘MARY HOME,’
To ‘DEAR MR. SPECTATOR,

‘You have no goodness in the world, and are not in earnest
in any thing you say that is serious, if you do not send me a
plain answer to this. I happened some days past to be at the
play, where, during the time of the performance, I could not
keep my eyes off from a beautiful young creature who sat just
before me, and who, I have been since informed, has no fortune,
It would utterly ruin my reputation for discretion to marry such
@ one, and by what I can learn she has a character of great
modesty. ... My mind has ever since been so wholly bent on

0 her, that I am mpuch in danger of doing something very ex-
travagant, without your speedy advice to,
‘Sir,
‘Your most humble Servant.’

I am sorry I cannot answer this impatient gentlenian, but by

another question.


‘DEAR CORRESPONDENT,
“Would you marry to please other people, or yourself?’
Spectator, No. 254.] [December 21, 1711.


No. 65. On Scandal and Detraction.
Invidiam placare paras, virtute relicta?—Honr, Sat. ii. 3. 13.


‘Mr. SPECTATOR,


‘I have not seen you lately at any of the places where I visit,
30so that I am afraid you are wholly unacquainted with what


190


20


30


214 SOCIAL PAPERS,


passes among my part of the world, who are, though I say it,
without controversy, the most accomplished and best bred of
the town. Give me leave to tell you, that I am-extremely dis-
fomposed when I hear scandal, and am an utter enemy to all
poanner o of detraction, and think it the greatest meanness that
people of “distinction can be guilty of. However, it is hardly
possible to come into company where you do not find them
pulling one another to pieces, and that from no other provoca-
tion but that of hearing any one commended. Merit, both as
to wit and beauty, is betome no other than the possession of
a few trifling people’s favour, which you cannot possibly arrive
at, if you have really any thing in you that is deserving. What
they would bring to pass is, to make all good and evil consist in
report, and with whispers, calumnies, and impertinencies, to
have the conduct of those reports. By this: means, innocents
are blasted upon their first appearance in town; and there is
nothing more required to make a young woman the object of
envy-and hatred, than to deserve love and admiration. This
abominable endeavour to suppress or lessen every thing that is
praiseworthy is as frequent among the men as the women. If f
can remember what passed at a visit last night, it will serve as
an instance that the sexes are equally inclined to defamation,
with equal malice, with equal impotence. Jack Triplett came into
my Lady Airy’s about eight of the clock. You know the manner
we sit at a visit, and I need not describe the circle; but Mr.
Triplett came in, introduced by two tapers supported by a
spruce servant, whose hair is under a cap till my lady’s candles
are all lighted up, and the hour of ceremony begins ; I say Jack
Triplett came in,,and singing (for he is really good company)
“Every feature, charming creature ’——he went on, “ It is a most
unreasonable thing, that people cannot go peaceably to see
their friends, but these murderers are let loose. Such a shape!
such an air! what a glance was that as her chariot passed by
mine !”—My lady herself interrupted him; “ Pray, who is this
fine thing ?”—“I warrant,” says.another, “’tis the creature I
was telling your ladyship of just now.”—“ You were telling
of?” says Jack; “I wisb I had been so happy as to have come
in and heard you; for I have not words to say what she is
but if an agreeable height, a modest air, a virgin shame, and


40 impatience of being beheld amidst a blaze of ten thousand


ON SCANDAL AND DETRACTION. 215


charms” ‘The whole room flew out: * Oh, Mr. Trip-
lett!”’——-When Mrs. Lofty, a known prude, ‘said she knew
whom the gentleman meant; but she was indeed, as he
civilly represented her, impatient of being beheld~——Then
turning to the lady next to her——“‘The most unbred
creature you ever saw!” Another pursued the discourse :
“As unbred, madam, as you may think her, she is ex-
tremely belied if she is the novice she appears; she was last
week at a ball till two in the morning; Mr. Triplett knows


© whether he was the happy man that took care of her home;


30 it


but "~——This was followed by some particular exception that
each woman in the room made to some peculiar grace or,
advantage ; so that Mr. Triplett was beaten from one limb and
feature to another, till he was forced to resign the whole woman.
In the end, I took notice Triplett recorded all this malice in his
heart; and saw in his countenance, and a certain waggish
Shrug, that he designed to repeat the conversation : I therefore
let the discourse die, and soon after took an occasion to recom-
» mend a certain gentleman of my acquaintance for a person of
° singular modesty, courage, integrity, and withal as a man of an
entertaining conversation, to which advantages he had a shape
and manner peculiarly graceful. Mr. Triplett, who is a woman’s
man, seemed to hear me with patience enough commend the
qualities of his mind. He never heard indeed but that he was
avery henest man, and no fool; but for a fine gentleman, he
Must ask pardon. Upon no other foundation than this, Mr.
Triplett took occasion to give the gentleman’s pedigree, by
what methods some part of the estate was acquired, how much
it was beholden to a marriage for the present circumstances of

: after all, he could see nothing but a common man in his
on his breeding, or understanding.

‘Thus, Mr. Spectator, this impertinent humour of diminishing
very one who is produced in conversation to their advantage,
Tuns through the world; and I am, I confess, so fearful of the
force of ill tongues, that I have begged of all those who are my
weH-wishers never to commend me, for it will but bring my
frailties into examination; and I had rather be unobserved,
than conspicuous for disputed perfections. I am confident a
thousand young people, who would have been ornaments to


49 society, have, from fear of scandal, never dared to exert


216 SOCIAL PAPERS.


themselves in the polite arts oflife. Their lives have passed away
in an odious rusticity, in spite of great advantages of person,
genius, and fortune. There is a vicious terror of being blamed
in some well-inclined people, and a wicked pleasure in sup-
pressing them in others; both which I recommend to your
spectatorial wisdom, to animadvert upon; and if you can be
successful in it, I need not say how much you will deserve of
the town ; but new toasts will owe to you their beauty, and new
wits their fame.


10 ‘Tam, Sir,
‘Your mast obedient humble Servant,
‘Mary,’
Spectator, No. 348.] [April 9, 1712.


No. 66. On Defamation.


Quantum a rerum turpitudine abes, tantum te a verborum libertate
sejungas.— TULL.


It is a certain sign of an ill heart to be inclined to defamation.
They who are harmless and innocent can have no gratification
that way; but it ever arises from a neglect of what is laudable
in a man’s self, and an impatience of seeing it in-another. Else
why should virtue provoke? Why should beauty displease in
such a degree, that a man given to scandal never lets the men-
tion of either pass by him, without offering something to the

20 diminution of it? A lady the other day at a visit, being attacked
somewhat rudely by one whose own character has been very
roughly treated, answered a great deal of heat and intemperance
very calmly, ‘Good madam, spare me, who am none of your
match ; I speak ill of nobody, and it is a new thing to me to be
spoken ill of. Little minds think fame consists in the numbef
of votes they have on their side among the multitude, whereas
it is really the inseparable follower of good and worthy actions.
Fame is as natural a follower of merit, as a-shadow is of a body.
It is true, when crowds press upon you, this shadow cannot be

30 seén ; but when they sevarate from around vou. it will again


ON DEFAMATION, 217


appear. The lazy, the idle, and the froward, are the persons
who are most pleased with the little tales which pass.about the
town to the disadvantage of the rest of the world. Were it not
for the pleasure of speaking ill, there are numbers of people who
are too lazy to go out of their own houses, and too ill-natured to
open their lips in conversation. It was not a little diverting the
other day to observe a lady reading a post letter, and at these
words, ‘ After all her airs, he has heard some story or other, and
the match is broke off ;’ give orders in the midst of her reading

to Put to the horses.’ That a young woman of merit has missed
an advantageous settlement was news not to be delayed, lest
somebody else should have given her malicious acquaintance
that satisfaction before her. The unwillingness to receive good
tidings is a quality as inseparable from a scandal-bearer, as the
readiness to divulge bad. But alas! how, wretchedly low and
contemptible is that state of mind, that cannot be pleased but by
what is the subject of lamentation, This temper has ever been,
in the highest degree, odious to gallant spirits. The Persian
Soldier, who was heard reviling Alexander the Great, was well

70 admonished by his officer, ‘Sir, you are paid to fight against
Alexander, and not to rail at him.’

Cicero, in one of his pleadings", defending his client from
Seneral scandal, says very handsomely, and with much reason,
‘There are many who have particular engagements to the
Prosecutor ; there are many who are known to have ill-will to
him for whom I appear; there are many who are naturally ad-
dicted to defamation, and envious of any good to any man who
May have contributed to spread reports of this kind: for nothing
Is so swift as scandal, nothing is more easily sent abroad, nothing

3° received with more welcome, nothing diffuses itself so univer-
sally. I shall not desire that if any report to our disadvantage
has any ground for it, you would overlook or extenuate it: but
if there be any thing advanced, without a person who can say
whence he had it, or which is attested by one who forgot who
told him it, or who had it from one of so little consideration
that he did not then think it worth his notice, all such testi-
monies as these, I know, you will think too slight to have any
credit against the innocence and honour of your fellow-citizen.’
When an ill report is traced, it very often vanishes among such
40 as the orator has here recited, And how despicable a creature


p Xe)


20


30


218 SOCIAL PAPERS,


must that be who is in pain for what passes among so frivolous
a people! There is a town in Warwickshire, of good note, and
formerly pretty famous for much animosity and dissension, the
chief families of which have now turned all their whispers, back-
bitings, envies, and private malices, into mirth and entertain-
ment, by means of a peevish old gentlewoman, known by the
title of the Lady Bluemantle. This heroine had, for many
years together, outdone the whole sisterhood of gossips in in-
vention, quick utterance, and unprovoked malice. This good
body is of a lasting constitution, though extremely decayed in
her eyes, and decrepit in her feet. The two circumstances of
being always at home from her lameness, and very attentive
from her blindness, make her lodgings the receptacle of all that
passes in town, good or bad ; but for the latter she seems to
have the better memory. There is another thing to be noted of
her, which is, that, as it is usual with old people, she has a
livelier memory of things which passed when she was very
young than of late years. Add to all this, that she does not
only not love anybody, but she hates every body. The statue
in Rome® does not serve to vent malice half so well as this old
lady does to disappoint it. She does not knw the author of
any thing that is told her, but can readily repeat the matter itself ;
therefore, though she exposes all the whole town, she offends no
one body in it. She is so exquisitely restless and peevish, that
she quarrels with all about her, and sometimes in a freak will
instantly change her habitation. To indulge this humour, she is
led about the grounds belonging to the same house she is in;
and the persons to whom she is to remove, being in the plot, are
ready to receive her at her own chamberagain. At stated times’
the gentlewoman at whose-house she supposes she is at the time;
is sent for to quarrel with, according to her common custom.
When they have a mind to drive the jest, she is immediately
urged to that degree, that she will board in a family with which
she has never yet been ; and away she will go this instant, and
tell them all that the rest have been saying of them. By this
means, she has been an inhabitant of every house in the place;
without stirring from the same habitation : and the many stories
which every body furnishes her with, to favour that deceit, make
her the general intelligencer of the town of all that can be said


40 by one woman against another. Thus groundless stories die


ON ELOQUENCE, ETC. 219


away, and sometimes truths are smothered under the general
word, when they have a mind to discountenance a thing, ‘Oh!
this is in my Lady Bluemantle’s Memoirs.’

Whoever receives impressions to the disadvantage of others,
without examination, is to be had in no other credit for intelli-
gence than this good Lady Bluemantle, who is subjected to have
her ears imposed upon for want of other helps to better informa-
tion. Add to this, that other scandal-bearers suspend the use
of these faculties which she has lost, rather than apply them to

odo justice to their neighbours : and I think, for the service of my
fair’ readers, to acquaint them, that there is a voluntary Lady
Bluemantle at every visit in town.


Spectator, No. 427.] [July to, 1712.


No. 67. On Eloquence; Talents for Conversation; Urbanus
and Umbratilis; Pedantry.


Quid voveat dulci nutricula majus alumno,
Quam sapere, et fari possit que sentiat?
Hor. Ep. i. 4. 8.


Tt is no easy matter, when people are advancing in any thing,

to prevent their going too fast for want of patience. This
appens in nothing more frequently than in the prosecution of
Studies, Hence it is, that we meet crowds who attempt to be
tloqnent before they can speak. They affect the flowers of
thetoric before they understand the parts of speech. In the
; Ordinary conversation of this town, there are so many who can,
as they call it, talk well, that there is not one in twenty that
talks to be understood. This proceeds from an ambition to
€xcel, or, as the term is, to shine in company. The matter is
Rot to make themselves understood, but admired. They come
together with a certain emulation, rather than benevolence.
When you fall among such companions, the safe way is to give
Yourself up, and let the orators declaim for your esteem, and
trouble yourself no further. It is said, that a pget must be
born so; but I think it may be much better said of an orator,
especially when we talk of our town poets and orators: but the


220 SOCIAL PAPERS,


town poets are full of rules and laws; the town orators go
through thick and thin, and are, forsooth, persons of such
eminent natural parts, and knowledge of the world, that they
despise all men as unexperienced scholastics, who wait for an
occasion before they speak, or who speak no more than is
necessary. They had half persuaded me to go to the tavern
the other night, but that a gentleman whispered me, ‘ Pr’ythee,
Isaac, go with us; there is Tom Varnish ‘will be there, and he
is a fellow that talks as well as any man in England.’

10 =I must confess, when a man expresses himself well upon any
occasion, and his falling into an account of any subject arise‘
from a desire to oblige the company, or from fulness of the
circumstance itself, so that his speaking of it at large is occa:
sioned only by the openness of a companion’; I say, in such ¢
case as this, it is not only pardonable, but agreeable, when é
man takes the discourse to himself; but when you see a fellow
watch for opportunities for being copious, it is excessively
troublesome, A man that stammers, if he has understanding,
is to be attended to with patience and good-nature ; but he

20 that speaks more than he needs, has no right to such an in-
dulgence. The man who has a defect in his speech takes pains
to come to you, while a man of weak capacity, with fluency o
speech, triumphs in outrunning you. The stammerer strives to
be fit for your company; the loquacious man endeavours t0
show you, you are not fit for his.

With thoughts of this kind do I always enter into that man’s
company who is recommended as a person that talks well ; but
if I were to choose the people with whom I would spend my
hours of conversation, they should be certainly such as laboured

30 no farther than to make themselves readily and clearly appre’
hended, and would have patience and curiosity to understand
me. To have’ good sense, and ability to express it, are the
most essential and necessary qualities in companions. Wher
thoughts rise in us fit to utter, among familiar friends theré
needs but very little care in clothing them.

Urbanus is, I take it, a man one might live with whole years;
and enjoy all the freedom and improvement imaginable, and
yet be insepsible of a contradiction to you in all the mistakes
you can be guilty of. His great goodwill to his friends, ha

40 produced in him such a general deference in his discourse, that


ON ELOQUENCE, ETC. 221


if he differs from you in his sense of any thing, he introduces
his own thoughts by some agreeable circumlocution ; or, ‘he
has often observed such and such a circumstance that made
him of another opinion.’ ‘Again, where another would be apt
to say, ‘this I am confident of, I may pretend to judge of this
Matter as well as any body ;? Urbanus says, ‘I am verily per-
‘suaded ; I believe one may conclude.’ In a word, there is no
man more clear in his thoughts and expressions than he is, or
Speaks with greater diffidence.. You shall hardly find one man
‘of any consideration, but you shall observe one of less con-
Sequence form himself after him. This happens to Urbanus ;
but the man who steals from him almost every sentiment he
Utters in a whole week, disguises the theft by carrying it with a
Quite different air. Umbratilis knows Urbanus’s doubtful way
of speaking proceeds from good-nature and good-breeding, and
hot from uncertainty in his opinions. Umbratilis, therefore,
has no more to do but repeat the thoughts of Urbanus in a
Positive manner, and appear to the undiscerning a wiser man
; than the person from whom he borrows: but those who know
°him, can see the servant in his master’s habit ; and the more
he struts, the less do his clothes appear his own.

In conversation, the medium is neither to affect silence or
eloquence ; not to value our approbation, and to endeavour to
excel us who are of your company, are equal injuries. The
8reat enemies therefore to good company, and those who
transgress most against the laws of equality, which is the life
of it, are, the clown, the wit, and the pedant. A clown, when he
has sense, is conscious of his want of education, and with an awk-
ward bluntness, hopes to keep himself in countenance by over-

3° throwing the use of all polite behaviour. He takes advantage of
the restraint good-breeding lays upon others not to offend him, to
trespass against them, and is under the man’s own shelter
while he intrudes upon him. The fellows of this class are very
frequent in the repetition of the words rough and manly. When
these people happen to be by their fortunes of the rank of
gentlemen, they defend their other absurdities by an imper-
tinent courage ; and, to help out the defect of their behaviour,
add their being dangerous to their being disagreeable. This
Zentleman (though he displeases, professes to do so; and
‘9 knowing that, dares still go on to-do so) is not so painful


10


20


30


222 SOCIAL PAPERS.


a companion, as he who will please you against your will, and
resolves to be a wit.

This man, upon all occasions, and whoever he falls in com-
pany with, talks in the same circle, and in the same round of
chat which he has learned at one of the tables of this coffce-
house. As poetry is in itself an elevation above ordinary and
common sentiments; so there is no fop so very near a mad-
man in indifferent company as a poetical one. He is not
apprehensive that the generality of the world are intent upon
the business of their own fortune and profession, and have as
little capacity as curiosity to enter into matters of ornament of
speculation. I remember at a full table in the city, one of these
ubiquitary ® wits was entertaining the company with a soliloquy,
for so I call it when a man talks to those who do not under-
stand him, concerning wit and humour. An honest gentieman
who sat next to me, and was worth half a plumb», stared at
him, and observing there was some sense, as he thought, mixed
with his impertinence, whispered me, ‘Take my word for it,
this fellow is more knave than fool.’ This was all my good
friend’s applause of the wittiest man of talk that I was evet
present at, which wanted nothing to make it excellent, but that
there was no occasion for it.

The pedant is so obvious to ridicule, that it would be to be
one to offer to explain him. He is a gentleman so well known,
that there is none but those of his own class who do not laugh
at and avoid him.. Pedantry proceeds from much reading and
little understanding. A pedant among men of learning and
sense, is like an ignorant servant giving an account of a polite
conversation, You may-find he has brought with him more
than could have entered into his head without being there, but
still that he is not a bit wiser than if he had not been there at
all.

Tatler, No. 244.] : [October 31, 1710.


No. 68. On Prolixity.
Favete linguis.—Hor. Od. iii. 2. 2.


Boccalini™, in his ‘Parnassus,’ indicts a laconic writer for
speaking that in three words which he might have said in two,


sous


ON PROLIXITY, 223


and sentences him for his punishment to read over all the works
of Guicciardinit. This Guicciardini is so very prolix and cir-
cumstantial in his writings, that I remember our countryman,
doctor Donne®, speaking of that majestic and concise manner in
which Moses has described the creation of the world, adds,
‘that if such an author as Guicciardini were to have written on
such a subject, the world itself would not have been able to have
contained the books that gave the history of its creation.’
I look upon a tedious talker, or what is generally known by
tothe name of a story-teller, to be much more insufferable than
even a prolix writer. An author may be tossed out of your
hand, and thrown aside when he grows dull and tiresome; but
such liberties are so far from being allowed towards your orators
in common conversation, that I have known a challenge sent a
person for going out of the room abruptly, and leaving a man
of honour in the midst of a dissertation. This evil is at present
So very common and epidemical, that there is scarce a coffee-
house in town that has not some speakers belonging to it, who
utter their political essays, and draw parallels out of Baker’s
20 ‘Chronicle”’ to almost every part of her majesty’s reign. It was
Said of two ancient authors, who had very different beauties in
their style, ‘that if you took a word from one of them, you only
Spoiled his eloquence ; but if you took a word from the other,
you spoiled his sense.’ I have often applied the first part of
this criticism to several of these coffee-house speakers whom I
have at present in my thoughts, though the character that is
given to the last of those authors, is what I would recommend to
the imitation of my loving countrymen. But it is not only
public places of resort, but private clubs and conversations over
30a bottle, that are infested with this loquacious kind of animal,
especially with that species which I comprehend under the name
of a story-teller. I would earnestly desire these gentlemen to
consider, that no point of wit or mirth at the end of a story can
atone for the half hour that has been lost before they come at it.
I would likewise lay it home to their serious consideration,
whether they think that every man in the company has not
a right to speak as well as themselves? and whether they do not
think they are invading another man’s property, when they en-
gross the time which should be divided equally among the
4° company to their own private use?


224 SOCIAL PAPERS,


What makes this evil the much greater in conversation is, that
these humdrum companions seldom endeavour to wind up their
Narrations-into a point of mirth or instruction, which might make
some amends for the tediousness of them ; but think they have
a right to tell any thing that has happened within their memory.
They look upon matter of fact to be a sufficient foundation for
a story, and give us a long account of things, not because they
are entertaining or surprising, but because they are true.

My ingenious kinsman, Mr. Humphry Wagstaff®, used to say,
‘the life of man is too short for a story-teller.’

Methusalem might be half an hour in telling what o’clock it
was ; but as for us postdiluvians, we ought to do every thing in
haste ; and in our speeches, as well as actions, remember that
our time is short. A man that talks fora quarter of an hour to-
gether in company, if I meet him frequently, takes up a great
part of my span. A quarter of an hour may be reckoned the
eight-and-fortieth part of a day, a day the three hundred and
sixtieth part of a year, and a year the threescore and tenth part
of life. By this moral arithmetic, supposing a man to be in the
20 talking world one third part of the day, whoever gives another

a quarter of an hour’s hearing, makes him a sacrifice of more
than the four hundred thousandth part of his conversable life.

I would establish but one great general rule to be observed
in all conversation, which is this, ‘that men should not talk to
please themselves, but those that hear them.’ This would make
them consider, whether what they speak be worth hearing ;
whether there be either wit or sense in what they are about to
say; and, whether it be adapted to the time when, the place
where, and the person to whom, it is spoken.

30 ~©6F or the utter extirpation of these orators and story-tellers,
which I look upon as very great pests of society, I have invented
a watch which divides the minute into twelve parts, after the
same manner that the ordinary watches are divided into hours:
and will endeavour to get a patent, which shall oblige every
club or company to provide themselves with one of thes¢
watches, that shall lie upon the table, as an hour-glass is ofte?
placed near the pulpit", to measure out the length of a dis-
course. ;

I shall be willing to allow a man one round of my watch, that

40 is, a whole minute, to speak in; but if he exceeds that time, it


I


3°


ON STORY TELLING. 225


shall be lawful for any of the company to look upon the watch,
or to call him down to order.

Provided, however, that if any one can make it appear he is
turned of threescore, he may take two, or, if he pleases, three
rounds of the watch without giving offence.: Provided, also,
that this rule be not construed to extend to the fair sex, who
shall still be at liberty to talk by the ordinary watch that is now
in use. I would likewise earnestly recommend this little auto-
maton, which may be easily carried in the pockct without any

"9 incumbrance, to all such as are troubled with this infirmity of
Speech, that upon pulling out their watches, they may have
frequent occasion to consider what they are doing, and by that
means cut the thread of the story short, and hurry to a conclu-
sion. I shall only add, that this watch, with a paper of direc-
tions how to use it, is sold at Charles Lillie’s.

I am afraid a Tatler will be thought a very improper paper to
censure this humour of being talkative ; but 1 would have my
teaders know that there is a great difference between /a/t/e and
loguacity, as | shall show at large in a following lucubration ;
it being my design to throw away a candle upon that subject,
in order to explain the whole art of tattling in all its branches
and subdivisions.


TL atler, No. 264.] [December 16} 1710.


No. 69. On Story Telling.


Non missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris, hirudo.
Hor, Ars Poet. v. ult.


Tom Lizard told us a story the other day, of some persons
which our family know very well, with so much humour and.
life, that it caused a great deal of mirth at the tea-table. His
brother Will, the Templar, was highly delighted with it, and
the next day being with some of his inns-of-court acquaintance,
tesalved (whether out of the benevolence, or the pride of his
heart, I will not determine) to entertain them with what he called
‘a pleasant humour enough.’ I was in great pain for him when
I heard him begin, and was not at all surprised to find the


Q


30


226 SOCIAL PAPERS,


company very little moved by it. Will blushed, looked round
the room, and with a forced laugh, ‘ Faith, gentlemen,’ said he,
“I do not know what makes you look so grave, it was an ad-
mirable story when I heard it.’

When I came home I fell into a profound contemplation upon
story-telling, and as f have nothing so,much at heart as the
‘good of my country, I.resolved to lay down some precautions
upon this subject.

I have often thought that a, story-teller is. born, as well as a

10 poet, It is, I think, certain, that sme meh have such a pecu-
liar cast of mind, that they see things i in another light, than men
of grave dispositions. Men of a lively imagination, and a
mirthful temper, will represent things to their hearers in the
same, manner as they themselves were affected with them ; and
whereas serious spirits might perhaps have been ‘disgusted at
the sight-of some odd occurrences in life; yet the very samc
occurrences shall please them in a well-told story where the
disagreeable parts of the images are’conccalcd, : .4 those only
which are pleasing exhibitgd to the fancy. Stor y-telling is

20 therefore not an art, but what we call a ‘knaci:,” it doth not
so much subsist upon wit as upon waa te and 1 vill add, that
it is not perfect without proper gesticulations of the body, which
naturally attend suoh merry emotions of the mind. I know
very well, that a certain gravity of countenance sets some
stories off to advantage, where the hearer is to be su: pused in
the end; but this is by no means a eneral rule ; for it is fre-

“quently convenient to aid and assist by cheerful looks, and
whimsical agitations. I ‘will go ye fr, and affirm that
the success of a story very often depends» upop the make of the

30 body, and formation of the features, Sf him who relates it. 1
have been of this opinion ever since [ §ritirised upon the chin of
Dick Dewlap. *I very often had the preakness to reping at the
prosperity of his conceits, which mad him pass for avwit with
the widow at the coffee-house, and thg ordinary mechanics that
frequent it ; not could I myself ooh laughing, at them most
heartily, though upon examination I t feiss most of them very
flat and insipid. I found after some pea that the morit of hue
wit was founded upon the cera 5 fa fat paune Ky nd the
tossing up of a pair of rosy jowls. w Dick had a tit of sick:

4e ness, which robbed him of his fat and his fame at once ; and it


ON STORY TELLING. 227


was full three months before he regained his reputation, which
rose in proportion to his floridity. He is now very jolly and
ingenious, and hath a good constitution for wit.

Those, who are thus adorned with the gifts of nature, are apt
to shew their parts with too much ostentation : I would there-
fore advise all the professors of this art never to tell stories but
as they seem to grow out Of the subject-matter of the conversa-
tion, or as they serve to illustrate, or enliven it. Stories, that


‘are very common, are generally irksome ; but may be aptly in-


to


troduced, provided they be only hinted at, and mentioned by
way of allusion. Those, that are ‘altogether nea, should “never
be ushered in, without a Short and pertinent character of the
chief persons-concerned; Because, by that means, you make
the company acquainted ‘with them; and it is a certain rule,
that slight and trivial .accounts of those -who:are familiar to
us administer more mirth, than. the brightest points of wit in
unknown characters.’ A little circumstance, in the complexion
or dress of the man you are talking of, sets his image before the
hearer, if it be chosen aptly for the story. Thus, I remember


20 Tom Lizard, after having made his sisters merry with an


30


490


account of a formal ‘old man’s way of complimenting, owned
very frankly, that his story would not have been worth one
farthing, if he had made the hat of him‘whom he represented
one inch narrower. Besides the marking distinct characters,
and selecting pertinent circumstances, it is likewise necessary
to leave off in time, and end smartly. So that there is a kind
of drama in the forming of a story, and the manner of conduct-
ing and pointing it, is the same.as in an epigram. It is a
miserable thing, after one hath raised the expectation of the
company by humourous characters, and a pretty coriceit, to
pursue the matter too far. There is no retreating, and how
Poor is it for a story teller to end his relation by saying, ‘that’s
ali?

, As the choosing of pertinent circumstances is the life of a
Story, and that wherein humour principally consists; so the
Collectors of impertinent particulars are the very bane and
Opiates of conversation. Old men are great transgressors this
way. Poor Ned Poppy,—he’s gone—was a very honest man,
but was so excessively tedious over his pipe, that he was not to
be endured. He knew so exactly what they had for dinner,


Q2


10


20


30


40


228 SOCIAL PAPERS.


when such a thing happened ; in what ditch his bay stone-horse
had his sprain at that time, and how his man John,—no ! it was
William, started a hare in the common-field ; that he never got
to the end of his tale. Then he was extremely particular in
marriages and inter-marriages, and cousins twice or thrice
removed ; and whether such a thing happened at the latter
end of July, or the beginning of August. He had a marvellous
tendency likewise to digressions ; insomuch that if a consider-
able person was mentioned in his story, he would straightway
launch out into an episode on him; and again, if in that per-
son’s story he had occasion to remember a third man, he broke
off, and gave us his history, and soon. He always put me in
mind of what Sir William Temple informs us of the tale-tellers
in the north of Ireland, who are hired to tell stories of giants
and enchanters to lull people asleep", These historians are
obliged, by their bargain, to go on without stopping; so that
after the patient hath by this benefit enjoyed a long nap, he is
sure to find the operator proceeding in his work. Ned pro-
cured the like effect in me the last time I was with him. As he
was in the third hour of his story, and very thankful that his
memory did not fail him, I fairly nodded in the elbow chair.
He was much affronted at this, till I told him, ‘ Old friend, you
have your infirmity, and I have mine.’

But of all evils in story-telling, the humour of telling tales
one after another, in great numbers, is the least supportable.
Sir Harry Pandolf and his son gave my lady Lizard great
offence in this particular. Sir Harry hath what they call a
string of stories, which he tells over every Christmas. When
our family visits there, we are constantly, after supper, enter:
tained with the Glastonbury Thorn®. When we have wondered
at that a little, ‘Ay, but, father,’ saith the son, ‘let us have the
spirit in the wood.’ After that hath been laughed at, ‘Ay, but,
father,’ cries the booby again, ‘tell us how you served the
robber” ‘Alack-a-day, said Sir Harry, with a smile, and
rubbing his forehead, ‘I have almost forgot that: but it is 4
pleasant conceit, to be sure.’ Accordingly he tells that and
twenty more in the same independent order; and without thé
least variation, at this day, as he hath done, to my knowledge;
ever since the revolution. I must not forget a very odd con‘
pliment that Sir Harry always makes my lady when he dine$


ON BUTTON HOLDING, ETC. 22y


here. After dinner he strokes his belly, and says with a
feigned concern in his countenance, ‘ Madam, I have lost by you
to-day.’ ‘How so, Sir Harry,’ replies my lady. ‘ Madam,’ says he,
‘I have lost an excellent stomach. At this, his son and heir
laughs immoderatcly, and winks upon Mrs. Annabella. This is
the thirty-third time that Sir Harry hath been thus arch, and I
can bear it no longer.
As the telling of stories is a great help and life to conversa-
tion, I always encourage them, if they are pertinent and inno-
10 cent ; in opposition to those gloomy mortals, who disdain every
thing but matter of fact. Those grave fellows are my aversion,
who sift every thing with the utmost nicety, and find the
malignity of a lie in a piece of humour, pushed a little beyond
exact truth. I likewise have a poor opinion of those, who have
got a trick of keeping a steady countenance, that cock their
hats, and look glum when a pleasant thing is said, and ask,
‘Well! and what then?’ Men of wit and parts should treat one
another with benevolence ; and I will lay it down as a maxim,
that if you seem to have a good opinion of another man’s wit,
*° he will allow you to have judgment.


Guardian, No. 42.] [April 29, 1713.


No.70. On Button Holding and other Arts of Oratory.


Non missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris, hirudo.
Hor. Ars Poet. ver. ult.


‘To the Honoured Nestor Ironside, Esq.


‘Middle Temple, June 12,
‘SIR,
‘Presuming you may sometimes condescend to take cog-
nizance of small enormities, I here lay one before you, which I
Proceed to without farther apology, as‘ well knowing the best
Compliment to a man of business is to come to the point.
‘There is a silly habit among many of our minor orators, who
display their eloquence in the several coffee-houses of this fair
3° city, to the no small annoyance of considerable numbers of her


230- SOCIAL PAPERS,


majesty’s spruce and loving subjects, and that is a humour they
have got of twisting off your buttons. These ingenious gentle-
men are not able to advance three words until they have got
fast hold of one of your buttons ; but as soon as they have pro-
cured such an excellent handle for discourse, they will indeed
proceed with great elocution. I know not how well some may
have escaped, but for my part I have often met with them to
my cost; having I believe within these three years last past
been argued out of several dozens ; insomuch that I have for
some time ordered my tailor to bring. me home with every suit
a dozen at least of spare ones, to supply the place of such
as from time to time are detached as a help to discourse, by the
vehement gentlemen before-mentioned. This way of holding
a man in discourse is much practised m the coffee-houses
within the city, and does not indeed so much prevail at the
politer end of the town, It is likewise more: frequently made
use of among the small politicians, than any other body of men;
I am therefore something cautious of entering into a contro-
versy with this species of statesmen, especially the younger
fry; for if you offer in the least to dissent from any thing that
one of these advances, he immediately steps up to you, takes
bold of one of your buttons, and indeed will soon convince you
of the strength of his argumentation. I remember, upon the
news of Dunkirk’s being delivered into our hands, a brisk little
fellow, a politician and an able engineer, had got into the middle
of Batson’s coffee-house®, and was fortifying Graveling for the
service of the most Christian king, with all imaginable expedi-
tion. The work was carried on with such success, that -in less
than a quarter of an hour’s time, he had made it almost impreg-
nable, and in the opinion of several worthy citizens who had
gathered round him, full as strong both by sea and land as Dun-
kirk ever could pretend to be. I happened, however, unadvisedly
to attack some of his outworks ; upon which, to show his great
skill likewise in the offensive part, he immediately made an
assault upon one of my buttons, and carried it in less than two
minutes, notwithstanding I made as handsome a defence a$
was possible. He had likewise invested a second, and would
certainly have been master of that too in a very little time, had
not he been diverted from this enterprise by the arrival of


4° a courier, who brought advice that his presence was absolutely


ON BUTTON HOLDING, ETC. 231


necessary in the disposal of a beaver®, upon which he raised
the siege, and indeed retired with some precipitation. In the
coffee-houses here about the Temple, you may harangue even
among our dabblers in politics for about two buttons a day, and
many times for less. I had yesterday the good fortune to
teceive very considerable additions to my knowledge in state
affairs, and I find this morning, that it has not stood me in
above a button. In most of the eminent coffee-houses at the
other end of the town, for example, to go no farther than Will’s


'o in Covent-garden 4, the company is so refined, that you may hear


and be heard, and not be a button the worse for it. Besides
the gentlemen before-mentioned, there are others who are no'
less active in their harangues, but with gentle services rather
than robberies. These, while they are improving your’ under-
Standing, are at the same time setting off your person; they
will new-plait and adjust your neckcloth.

‘But though I can bear with this kind of orator, who is so
humble as to aim at the good-will of his hearer by being his
valet de chambre, I must rebel against another sort of them.


*0 There are some, sir, that do not stick to take a man by the


collar when they have a mind to persuade him. It is your
business, 1 humbly presume, Mr. Ironside, to interpose that a
man is not brought over to his opponent by force of arms. It
were requisite therefore that you should name a certain interval,
which ought to be preserved between the speaker and him to
whom he speaks. For sure no man has a right, because I am
not of his opinion, to take any of my clothes from me, or dress
me according to his own liking. I assure you the most becom-
ing thing to me in the world is, in a campaign periwig ™, to wear
one side before and the other cast upon the collateral shoulder.
But there is a friend of mine who never talks to me but he
throws that which I wear forward, upon my shoulder, so that
in restoring it to its place I lose two or three hairs out of the
lock upon my buttons; though I never touched him in my
whole life, and have been acquainted with him these ten years.
I have seen my eager friend in danger sometimes of a quarrel
by this ill custom, for there are more young gentlemen who can
feel, than can understand, It would be therefore a good office
to my good friend if you advised him not to collar any man but


40 one who knows what he means, and give it him as a standing


232 SOCIAL PAPERS,


precaution in conversation, that none but a very good friend
will give him the liberty of being seen, felt, heard, and under-


stood all at once. .
‘I am Sir,


‘Your most humble servant,
‘JOHANNES MISOCHIROSOPHUS,


*P.S. I have a sister who saves herself from being handled by
one of these manual rhetoricians by giving him her fan to play
with ; but I appeal to you in the behalf of us poor helpless

Io men.’
‘June 15, 1713.

‘I am of opinion, that no orator or speaker in public or
private has any right to meddle with any body’s clothes but
his own. I indulge men in the liberty of playing with their
own hats, fumbling in their own pockets, settling their own ,
periwigs, tossing or twisting their heads, and al! other gesticula-
tions which may contribute to their elocution ; but pronounce it
an infringement of the English liberty, for a man to keep his
neighbour’s person in custody in order to force a hearing ; and

20 farther declare, that all assent given by an auditor under ‘such
constraint, is of itself void and of no effect.
‘ NESTOR IRONSIDE,’


Guardian, No. 84.] {June 17, 1713.


No. 71. On Inquisitive Men.


Percunctatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem, est.
Hor. Ep, i. 18. 69.


There is a creature who has all the organs of speech, a toler-
ably good capacity for conceiving what is said to it, together
with a pretty proper behaviour in all the occurrences of com-
mon life; but naturally very vacant of thought in itself, and
therefore forced to apply itself to foreign assistances. Of this
make is that man who is very inquisitive. You may often ob-
serve, that though he speaks as good sense as any man upon any

30 thing with which he is well acquainted, he cannot trust to the


ON INQUISITIVE MEN, 233


range of his own fancy to entertain himself upon that founda-
tion, but goes on still to new inquiries. Thus, though you
know he is fit for the most polite conversation, you shall see
him very well contented to sit by a jockey, giving an account of
the many revolutions in his horse’s health, what potion he made
him take, how that agreed with him, how afterwards he came to
his stomach and his exercise, or any the like impertinence; and
be as well pleased as if you talked to him on the most important
truths. This humour is far from making a man unhappy,
‘othough it may subject him to raillery; for he generally falls in
with a person who seems to be born for him, which is your
talkative fellow. It is so ordered, that there is a secret bent, as
natural as the meeting of different sexes, in these two charac-
ters, to supply each other’s wants. I had the honour the other
day to sit in a public room, and saw an inquisitive man look
with an air of satisfaction upon the approach of one of these
talkers. The man of ready utterance sat down by him, and
tubbing his head, leaning on his arm, and making an uneasy
countenance, he began: ‘ There is no manner of news to-day.
*0 I cannot tell what is the matter with me, but I slept very ill Jast
hight ; whether I caught cold or no, I know not, but I fancy I
do not wear shoes thick enough for the weather, and I have
Coughed all this week. It must be so, for the custom of wash-
ing my head winter and summer with cold water, prevents any
Injury from the season entering that way ; so it must come in at
My feet; but I take no notice of it: as it comes so it goes.
Most of our evils proceed from too much tenderness ; and our
faces are naturally as little able to resist the cold as other parts.
: The Indian answered very well to an European, who asked
‘© him how he could go naked ; “J am all face.”’
_ I observed this discourse was as welcome to my general
inquirer as any other of more consequence could have been ;
but somebody calling our talker to another part of the room,
the inquirer told the next man who sat by him, that Mr. Such-
a-one, who was just gone from him, used to wash his head in
Cold water every morning; and so repeated almost verbatim.
all that had been said to him. The truth is, the inquisitive are
the funnels of conversation ; they do not take in any thing for
their own use, but merely to pass it to another. They are the
1v channels through which all the good and evil that is spoken in


10


20


40


234 SOCIAL PAPERS,


town are conveyed. Such as are offended at them, or think
they suffer by their behaviour, may themselves mend that in-
convenience ; for they are not a malicious people, and if you
will supply them, you may contradict any thing they have said
before by their own mouths. A further account of a thing is one
of the gratefullest goods that can arrive to them; and it is
seldom that they are more particular than to say, ‘The town
will have it, or I have it from a good hand ;’ so that there is
room for the town to know the matter more particularly, and for
a better hand to contradict what was said by a good one.

I have not known this humour more ridiculous than in a
father, who has been earnestly solicitous to have an account
how his son has’ passed his leisure hours; if it be in a way
thoroughly insignificant, there cannot be a greater joy than an
inquirer discovers in seeing him follow so hopefully his own
steps. But this humour among men is most pleasant when they
are saying something which is not wholly proper for a third
person to hear, and yet is in itself indifferent. The other day
there came in a well-dressed young fellow, and two gentleme!
of this species immediately fell a whispering his pedigree.
could overhear by breaks, ‘ She was his aunt ;’ then an answer:
‘Aye, she was, of the mother’s side ;’ then again, in a little
lower voice, ‘His father wore generally a darker wig ;’ answer:
‘Not much, but this gentleman wears higher heels to hié
shoes.’

As the inquisitive, in my opinion, are such merely from 4
vacancy in their own imaginations, there is: nothing, methinks:
so dangerous as to communicate secrets to them ; for the samé
temper of inquiry makes ‘them as impertinently communica’
tive; but no man, though he converses with them, need
put himself in their power, for they will be contented with mat’
ters of less moment. as well. When there is fuel enough, n?
matter what it is———-Thus the ends of sentences in the news
papers, as ‘This wants confirmation,’—‘ This occasions many
speculations,’ and ‘ Time will discover the event,’ are read by
them, and considered not as mere expletives.

One may see now and then this humour accompanied wit!
an insatiable desire of knowing what passes without turning il
to any use in the world but merely their own entertainment:
A mind which is gratified this way is adapted to humour and


ON INQUISITIVE MEN. 235


pleasantry, and formed for an unconcerned character in the
world; and, like myself, to be a mere Spectator. This cu-
rlosity, without malice or self-interest, lays up in the imagina-
tion a magazine of circumstances which cannot but entertain
when they are produced in conversation. If one were to know,
from the man of the first quality to the meanest servant, the
different intrigues, sentiments, pleasures, and interests of man-
kind, would it not be the most pleasing entertainment imagin-
able to enjoy so constant a farce, as the observing mankind
'0 much more different from themselves in their secret thoughts
and public actions, than in their nightcaps and long periwigs ?.


‘Mr. SPECTATOR,


“Plutarch” tells us, that Caius Gracchus, the Roman, was
frequently hurried by his passions into so loud and tumultuous
a way of Speaking, and so strained his voice, as not to be able
to proceed. To remedy this excess, he had an ingenious ser-
vant, by name Licinius, always attending him with a pitch-pipe,
or instrument to regulate the voice ; who, whenever he heard
his master begin to be high, immediately touched a soft

*? note, at which, ’tis said, Caius would presently abate and grow
calin.

‘Upon recollecting this story, I have frequently wondered
that this useful instrument should have been so long discon-
tinued ; especially since we find that this good office of Licinius
has preserved his memory for many hundred years, which,
methinks, should have encouraged some one to have revived
it, if not for the public good, yet for his own credit. It may be
objected, that our loud talkers are so fond of their own noise,
that they would not take it well to be checked by their servants.

ut granting this to be true, surely any of their hearers have
4 very good title to play a soft note in their own defence. To
be short, no Licinius appearing, and the noise increasing, I was
tesolved to give this late long vacation to the good of my
Country; and I have at length, by the assistance of an ingenious
artist (who works for the Royal Society), almost completed my
design, and shall be ready in a short time to furnish the public
with what number of these instruments they please, either to
lodge at coffee-houses, or carry for their own private use. In
the mean time I shall pay that respect to several gentlemen,


10


236 SOCIAL PAPERS.


who I know will be in danger of offending against this instru-
ment, to give them notice of it by private letters, in which I
shall only write, ‘get a Licinius.’

‘I should now trouble you no longer, but that I must not con-
clude without desiring you to accept one of these pipes, which
shall be left for you with Buckley®; and which I hope will be
serviceable to you, since as you are silent yourself, you are most
open to the insults of the noisy.

‘I am, Sir, &c.,
‘W. B?

‘I had almost forgot to inform you, that as an improvement
in this instrument, there will be a particular note, which I shall
call a hush-note ; and this is to be made use of against a long
story, swearing, obsceneness, and the like.’


Spectator, No. 228.] [November 21, 1711.


No. 72. Ona Scene of Bodily Wit.


lam got hither safe®, but never spent time with so little satis-
faction as this evening ; for you must know, I was five hours
with three Merry, and two Honest, Fellows. The former sang
catches ; and the latter even died with laughing at the noise
they made. ‘Well,’ says Tom Bellfrey, ‘you scholars, Mr. ,
Bickerstaff, are the worst company in the, world.’—‘ Ay,’ says
his opposite, ‘you are dull to-night ; pr’ythee be merry.’ With
that I huzzaed, and took a jump cross the table, then came
clever upon my legs, and fell a-langhing. ‘Let Mr. Bickerstaff
alone,’ says one of the Honest Fellows ; ‘when he is in a good
humour, he, is as good company as any man in England.” He
had no sooner spoke, but I snatched his hat off his head, and
clapped it upon my own, and burst out a-laughing again ; upon
which we all fell a-laughing for half an hour. One of the
honest fellows got behind me in the interim, and hit me a
sound slap on the back ; upon which he got the laugh out of
my hands; and it was such a twang on my shoulders, that J
confess he was much merrier than I. I was half angry; but
resolved to keep up the good humour of the company; and


ON A SCENE OF BODILY WIT. 237


after hollowing as loud as I could possibly, I drank off a bum-
per of claret, that made me stare again. ‘ Nay,’ says one of the
honest fellows, ‘ Mr, Isaac is in the right, there is no conversa-
tion in this ; what signifies jumping, or hitting one another on
the back? let us drink about.’ We did so from seven of the
clock until eleven ; and now I am come hither, and, after the
manner of the wise Pythagoras, begin to reflect upon the
passages of the day. I remember nothing but that I am
bruised to death; and as it is my way to write down all the
1° good things I have heard in the last conversation, to furnish
my paper, I can from this only tell you my sufferings and my
angs. .

I named Pythagoras just now; and I protest to you, as
he believed men after death entered into other species, I am
now and then tempted to think other animals enter into men,
and could name several on two legs, that never discover any
sentiments above what is common with the species of a lower
kind ; as we see in these bodily wits with whom I was to night,
whose parts consist in strength and activity; but their boister-

20 ous mirth gives me great impatience for the return of such
happiness as I enjoyed in a conversation last week. Among
others in that company we had Florio, who never interrupted
any man living when he was speaking; or ever ceased to
Speak, but others lamented that he had done. His discourse
ever arises from the fulness of the matter before him, and not
from ostentation or triumph of his understanding ; for though
he seldom delivers what he need fear being repeated, he speaks
Without having that end in view; and his forbearance of
Calumny or bitterness is owing rather to his good-nature than

3° his discretion ; for which reason he is esteemed a gentleman
Perfectly qualified for conversation, in whom a general good-
will to mankind takes off the necessity of caution and cir-
Cumspection.

We had at the same time that evening the best sort of com-
panion that can be, a good-natured old man. This person, in
the company of young men, meets with veneration for his
benevolence ; and is not only valued for the good qualities
of which he is master, but reaps an acceptance from the pardon
he gives to other men’s faults : and the ingenuous sort of men

4° with whom he converses, have so just a regard for him, that he


238 SOCIAL PAPERS.


rather is an example, than a check, to their behaviour. For
this reason, as Senecio never pretends to be a man of pleasure
before youth, so young men never set up for wisdom before
Senecio ; so that you never meet, where he is, those monsters
of conversation, who are grave or gay above their years. He
never converses but with followers of nature and good sense,
where all that is uttered is only the effect of a communicable
temper, and not of emulation to excel their companions ; all
desire of superiority being a contradiction to that spirit which
10 makes a just conversation, the very essence of which is mutual
good-will. Hence it is, that I take it for a rule, that the natu-
ral, and not the acquired man, is the companion. Learning,
wit, gallantry, and good breeding, are all but subordinate quali-
ties in society, and are of no value, but as they are subservient
to benevolence, and tend to a certain manner of being or ap-
pearing equal to the rest of the company; for conversation is
composed of an assembly of men, as they are men, and not as
they are distinguished by fortune : therefore he who brings'his
quality with him into conversation, should always pay the
20 reckoning ; for he came to receive homage, and not to meet
his friends. But the din about my ears from the clamour of
the people I was with this evening, has carried me beyond my
intended purpose, which was to explain upon the order of
metry fellows; but I think I may pronounce of them, as ]
heard good Senecio, with a spice of the wit of the last age, say,
viz. ‘That a merry fellow is the saddest fellow in the world.’


Tatler, No. 45.] [July 22, 1709.


No. 73. On the Affectation of Faults and Imperfections ;
Exploit of the Nickers.


As bad as the world is, I find by very strict observation upon
virtue and vice, that if men appeared no worse than they really
are, I should have less work than at present I am obliged to

30 undertake for their reformation. They have generally taken
up a kind of inverted ambition, and affect even faults and
imperfections of which they are innocent, The other day in @


ON THE AFFECTATION OF FAULTS, ETC. 239


coffee-house 1 stood by a young heir, with a fresh, sanguine,
and healthy look, who entertained us with an account of his
diet-drink ; though, to my knowledge, he is as sound as any
of his tenants. . .

This worthy youth put me into reflections upon that subject ;
and I observed the fantastical humour to be so general, that
there is hardly a man who is not more or less tainted with it.
The first of this order of men are the valetudinarians, who are
never in health ; but complain of want of stomach or rest every

to day until noon, and then devour all which comes before them.
Lady Dainty” is convinced, that it is necessary for a gentle-
worhan to be out of order; and, to preserve that character, she
dines every day in her closet at twelve, that she may become
her table at two, and be unable to eat in public. About five
years ago, I remember, it was the fashion to be short-sighted.
A man would not own an acquaintance until he had first ex-
amined him with his glass. At a lady’s entrance into the
pPlay-house, you might see tubes immediately levelled at her
from every quarter of the pit and side-boxes®, However, that
mode of infirmity is out, and the age has recovered its sight:
but the blind seemed to be succeeded by the lame, and a jaunty
limp is the present beauty. I think I have formerly observed,
a cane is part of the dress of a prig, and always worn upon a
button, for fear he should be thought to have an occasion for it,
or be esteemed really, and not genteelly a cripple. I have con-
sidered, but could never find out the bottom of this vanity. I
indeed have heard of a Gascon general, who, by the lucly
grazing of a bullet on the roll of his stocking, took occasion to
halt all his life after. But as for our peaceable cripples, I know
ho foundation for their behaviour, without it may be supposed
that, in this warlike age, some think a cane the next honour
to a wooden leg. This sort of affectation I have known run
from one limb or member to another. Before the limpers came
in, I remember a race of lispers, fine persons, who took an
aversion: to particular letters in our language. Some never
attered the letter H ; and others had as mortal an aversion to
3. Others have had their fashionable defect in their ears, and
would make you repeat all you said twice over. I know an
incient friend of mine, whose table is every day surrounded
vith flatterers, that makes use of this, sometimes as a piece of


t


240 SOCIAL PAPERS.


grandeur, and at others as an art, to make them repeat their
commendations. Such affectations have been indeed in the
world in ancient times; but they fell into them out of politic
ends, Alexander the Great had a wry neck, which made it the
fashion in his court to carry their heads on one side when they
came into the presence. One who thought to outshine the
whole court, carried his head so over complaisantly, that this
martial prince gave him so great a box on the ear, as set all the
heads of the court upright. é

10 This humour takes place in our minds as well as bodies. I
know at this time a young gentleman, who talks atheistically all
day in coffee-houses, and in his degrees of understanding scts
up for a free-thinker; though it can be proved upon him, he
says his prayers every morning and evening. But this class of
modern wits I shall reserve for a chapter by itself.

Of the like turn are all your marriage-haters, who rail at the
noose, at the words, ‘for ever and aye,’ and at the same time
are secretly pining for some young thing or other that makes
their hearts ache by her refusal. ° The next to these are such as

20 pretend to govern their wiyes, and boast how ill they use them,
when, at the same time, go to their houses and you shall see
them step as if they feared making a noise, and are as fond as an
alderman. Ido not know but sometimes these pretences may
arise from a desire to conceal a contrary defect than that they
set up for. I remember, when I was a young fellow, we had 4
companion of a very fearful complexion, who, when we sat in to
drink, would desire us to take his sword from him when he
grew fuddled, for it was his misfortune to be quarrelsome.

There are many, many of these evils, which demand my

39 observation ; but because I have of late been thought somewhat
too satirical, I shall give them warning, and declare to the
whole world, that they are not true, but false hypocrites ; and
make it out that they are good men in their hearts. The motive
of this monstrous affectation, in the above-mentioned and the
like particulars, I take to proceed from that noble thirst of fame
and reputation which is planted in the hearts of all men. As
this produces elegant writings and gallant actions in men of
great abilities, it also brings forth spurious productions in men
who are not capable of distinguishing themselves by things

40 which are really praise-worthy. As the desire of fame in men


oN FROLICS, ETC. 24t


of true wit and gallantry shows itself in proper instances, the
same desire in men who have the ambition without proper
faculties, runs wild and discovers itself in a thousand extrava-
gancies, by which they would signalize themselves from others,
and gain a set of admirers. When I was a middle-aged man,
there were many societies of ambitious young men in England,
who, in their pursuits after fame, were every night employed in
roasting porters, smoking cobblers, knocking down watchmen,
overturning constables, breaking windows, blackening sign-

10 posts, and the like immortal enterprises, that dispersed their
reputation throughout the whole kingdom. One could hardly
find a knocker at a door in a whole street after a midnight
expedition of these beaux esprits. I was lately very much
surprised by an account of my maid, who entered my bed-
chamber 'this morning in a very great fright, and told me, she
was afraid my parlour was haunted; for that she had found
several panes of my windows broken, and the floor strewed
with half-pence™. I have not yet a full light into this new way,
but am apt to think, that it is a generous piece of wit that some

0 of my contemporaries make use of, to break windows, and leave
Money to pay for them.


Tatler, No. 77.) ; [October 5, 1709.


No.'74. On Frolics, with a Digression upon Estcourt.
Desipere in loco.— Hor. Od. iv. 12. 1 ult.


Charles Lillie attended me the other day, and made me
a present of a large sheet of paper”, on which is delineated a
Pavement in Mosaic work, lately discovered at Stunsfield near
Woodstock. A person who has so much the gift of speech as
Mr. Lillie, and can carry on a discourse without a reply, had
Sreat opportunity on’ that occasion to expatiate upon so fine
a piece of antiquity. Among other things, I remember he gave
me his opinion, which he drew from the ornaments of the work,

3° that this was the floor of a room dedicated to Mirth and Con-
cord, Viewing this work, nade my fancy run over the many
R


24% SOCIAL PAPERS,


gay expressions I had read in ancient authors, which contained
invitations to lay aside care and anxiety, and give a loose to
that pleasing forgetfulness wherein men put off their characters
of business, and enjoy their very selves. These hours were
usually passed in rooms adorned for that purpose, and set out
in such a manner, as the objects all around the company glad-
dened their hearts; which, joined in the cheerful looks of
well-chosen and agreeable friends, gave new vigour to the airy,
produced the latent fire of the modest, and gave grace to the
10 Slow humour of the reserved. A judicious mixture of such
company, crowned with chaplets of flowers, and the whole
apartment glittering with gay lights, cheered with a profusion
of roses, artificial falls of water, and intervals of soft notes to
songs of love and wine, suspended the cares of human life, and
made a festival of mutual kindness. Such parties of pleasure
as these, and the reports of the agreeable passages in their
jollities, have in all ages awakened the dull part of mankind to
pretend to mirth and good humour, without capacity for such
entertainments ; for, if I may be allowed to say so, there are a
2o’hundred men fit for any employment, to one who is capable of
passing a night in company of the first taste, without shocking
any member of the society, overrating his own part of the con-
versation, but equally receiving and contributing to the pleasure
of the whole company. When one considers such collections of
companions in past times, and such as one might name in the
present age, with how much spleen must a man needs reflect
upon the awkward gaiety of those who affect the frolic with an
ill grace! I havea letter from a correspondent of, mine, who
desires me to admonish all loud, mischievous, airy, dull com-
3o panions, that they are mistaken in what they call a frolic.
Irregularity in itself is not what creates pleasure and mirth;
but to see a man, who knows what rule and decency are;
descend from them agreeably in our company, is what deno-
minates him a pleasant companion. Instead of that, you find
many whose mirth consists only in doing things which do not
become them, with a secret consciousness that all the world
knows they know better: to this is always added something
mischievous to themselves or others, I have heard of some
very merry fellows among whom the frolic was started, and
40 passed by a great majority, that every man should immediately


ON FROLICS, ETC. 243


draw a tooth; after which they have gone in a body and
smoked a cobbler. The same company, at another night, has
each man burned his cravat; and one perhaps, whose estate
would bear it, has thrown a long wig and laced hat into the
same fire". Thus they have jested themselves stark-naked, and
tun into the streets and frightened women very successfully.
There is no inhabitant of any standing in Covent-garden, but
can tell you a hundred good humours, where people have come
off with a little bloodshed, and yet scoured all the witty hours
10 of the night. I know a gentleman that has several wounds in
the head by watch-poles, and has been thrice run through the
body to carry on a good jest. He is very old for a man of so
much good humour ; but to this day he is seldom metry but he
has occasion to be valiant at the same time. But, by the favour
of these gentlemen, I'am humbly of opinion, that a man may be
a very witty man, and never offend one statute of this kingdom,
not excepting even that of stabbing.
The writers of plays have what they call unity of time and
place, to give a justness to their representation ; and it would
20 not be amiss if all who pretend to be companions would confine
their actions to the place of meeting; for a frolic carried further
may be better performed by other animals than men. _ It is not
to rid much ground, or do much mischief, that should de-
nominate a pleasant fellow, but that is truly frolic which is the
Play of the mind, and consists of various and unforced sallies of
imagination. Festivity of spirit is a very uncommon talent,
and must proceed from an assemblage of agreeable qualities in
the same person. There are some few whom I think peculiarly
happy in it ; but it is a talent one cannot name in a man, espe-
3° cially when one considers, that it is never very graceful but
where it is regarded by him who possesses it in the second
place. The best man that I know of for heightening the revel
gaiety of a company is Estcourt, whose jovial humour diffuses
itself from the highest person at an entertainment to the meanest
waiter. Merry tales, accompanied with apt gestures and lively
Tepresentations of circumstances and persons, beguile the
Sravest mind into a consent to be as humourous as himself.
Add to this, that when a man is in his good graces, he has
, Amimicry that does not debase the person he represents ; but
40 which, taking from the gravity of the character, adds to the
R2


To


20


30


244 SOCIAL PAPERS.


agreeableness of it. This pleasant fellow gives one some idea
of the ancient pantomime, who is said to have given the au-
dience in dumb-show, an exact idea of any character or passion,
or an intelligible relation of any public occurrence, with no other
expression than that of his looks and gestures. If all who have
been obliged to these talents in Estcourt® will be at Love jor
Love to-morrow night, they will but pay him what they owe
him, at so easy a rate as being present at a play which nobody
would omit seeing, that had, or had not, ever seen it before.


Spectator, No. 358.] [April 21, 1712.


No. 75. On Duelling.


Quicquid agunt homines—
nostri est farrago libelli—Juv. Sat. i. 85, 86.

A letter from a young lady, written in the most passionate
terms, wherein she laments the misfortune of a gentleman, her
lover, who was lately wounded in a duel 4, has turned my thoughts
to that subject, and inclined me to examine into the causes
which precipitate men into so fatal a folly. And as it has been
proposed to treat of subjects of gallantry in the article from
hence, and no one point in nature is more ptoper to be con-
sidered by the company who frequent this place than that of
duels, it is worth our consideration to examine into this chime-
rical groundless humour, and to lay every other thought aside;
until we have stripped it of all its false pretences to credit and
reputation amongst men,

But I must confess, when I consider what I am going about,
and run over in my imagination all the endless crowd of men of
honour who will be offended at such a discourse ; 1 am under-
taking, methinks, a work worthy an invulnerable hero in
romance, rather than a private gentleman with a single rapier ‘
but as I am pretty well acquainted by great opportunities with
the nature of man, and know of a truth that all men fight against
their will, the danger vanishes, and resolution rises upon this
subject. For this reason, I shall talk very freely on a custom
which all men wish exploded, though no man has couragé
enough to resist it. .


ON DUELLING. 245


But there is one unintelligible word, which I fear will ex-
tremely perplex my dissertation, and I confess to you I find
very hard to explain, which is the term ‘satisfaction’ An
honest country gentleman had the misfortune to fall into com-
pany with two or three modern men of honour, where he
happened to be very ill treated; and one of the company, being
conscious of his offence, sends a note to him in the morning,
and tells him, he was ready to give him se//sfaction. ‘ This is
fine doing,’ says the plain fellow ; ‘last night he sent me away

10 cursedly out of humour, and this moming he fancies it would be
a satisfaction to be run through the body !’

As the matter at present stands, it is not to do handsome
actions denominates a man of honour ; it is enough if he dares
to defend ill ones. Thus you often see a common sharper in
competition with a gentleman of the first rank; though all
mankind is convinced, that a fighting gamester is only a pick-
pocket with the courage of a highwayman. One cannot with
any patience reflect on the unaccountable jumble of persons and
things in this town and nation, which occasions very frequently,

20 that a brave man falls by a hand below that of a common hang-
man, and yet his executioner escapes the clutches of the hang-
man for doing it. I shall therefore hereafter consider, how the
bravest men in other ages and nations have behaved themselves
upon such incidents as we decide by combat; and show, from
their practice, that this resentment neither has its foundation
from true reason or solid fame; but is an imposture, made of
Cowardice, falsehood, and want of understanding. For this
work, a good history of quarrels would be very edifying to the
public, and I apply myself to the town for particulars and

3° circumstances within their knowledge, which may serve to.
embellish the dissertation with proper cuts. Most of the
quarrels I have ever known, have proceeded from some valiant
coxcomb’s persisting in the wrong, to defend some prevailing
folly, and preserve himself from the ipgcaodness of owning
a mistake.

By this means it is called ‘ giving a man satisfaction,’ to urge
your offence against him with your sword... If the contra-
diction in the very terms of one of our challenges were as well
explained and turned into downright English, would it not run

40 after this manner ?


246 SOCIAL PAPERS.


‘Sir,

* Your extraordinary behaviour last night, and the liberty you
were pleased to take with me, makes me this morning give you
this, to tell you, because you are an ill-bred puppy, I will meet
you in Hyde-park an hour hence ; and because you want both
breeding and humanity, I desire you would come with a pistol
in your hand, on horseback, and endeavour to shoot me through
the head, to teach you more manners. _If you fail of doing me
this pleasure, I shall say, you are a rascal, on every post in

10 town : and s0, sir, if you will not injure me more, I shall never
forgive what you have done already. Pray, sir, do not fail of
getting every thing ready; and you will infinitely oblige, sir,
your most obedient humble servant, &c.’


Tatler, No. 25]. [June 6, 1709.


No. 76. On Fashionable Hours.
Minim4 contentos nocte Britannos.—Juv. Sat. ii. 161.


An old friend of mine being lately come to town, I went to

see him on Tuesday last about eight o’clock in the evening,

’ with a design to sit with him an hour or two, and talk over old
stories ; but, upon enquiry after him, I found he was gone to
bed. The next morning, as soon as I was up and dressed, and
had despatched a little business, I came again to my friend’s

20 house about eleven o’clock, with a design to renew my visit;
but, upon asking for him, his servant told me he was just sat
down to dinner. In short, I found that my old-fashioned friend
religiously adhered to the example of his forefathers, and
observed the same hours that had been kept in the family ever.
since the Conquest.

It is very plain, that the night was much longer formerly in
this island than it is at present. By the night, I mean that
portion of time which nature has thrown into darkness, and
which the wisdom of mankind had formerly dedicated to rest

30 and silence. This used to begin at eight o’clock in the evening;
and conclude at six in the morning. The curfew, or eight


ON FASHIONABLE HOURS. 247


o’clock bell, was the signal throughout the nation for putting out
their candles and going to-bed.

Our grandmothers, though they were wont to sit up the last
in the family, were all of them fast asleep at the same hours that
their daughters are busy at crimp and basset2. Modern states-
men are concerting schemes, and engaged in the depth of
politics, at the time when their forefathers were laid down
quietly to rest, and had nothing in their heads but dreams. As
we have thus thrown business and pleasure into the hours of

10 rest, and by that means made the natural night but half as long
as it should be, we are forced to piece it out with a great part
of the morning ; so that near two thirds of the nation lie fast
asleep for several hours in broad day light. This irregularity
is grown so very fashionable at present, that there is scarce a
lady of quality in Great Britain that ever saw thesun rise. And,
if the humour increases in proportion to what it has done of late
years, it is not impossible but our children may hear the bell-
man ® going about the streets at nine o’clock in the morning, and
the watch making their rounds until eleven. This unaccount-

20 able disposition in mankind to continue awake in the night, and
sleep in the sunshine, has made me enquire, whether the same
change of inclination has happened to any other animals? For
this reason, I desired a friend of mine in the country to let me
know, whether the lark rises as early as he did formerly; and
whether the cock begins to crow at his usual hour. My friend
answered me, ‘that his poultry are as regular as ever, and that
all the birds and beasts of his neighbourhood keep the same
hours that they have observed in the memory of man ; and the
same which, in ‘all probability, they have kept-for these five

30 thousand years.’

If you would see the innovations that have been made among
us in this particular, you may only look into the hours of collegés,
where they still dine at eleven, and sup at six, which were
doubtless the hours of the whole nation at the time when those
places were founded. But at present, the courts of justice are
Scarce opened in Westminster-hall at the time when William
Rufus used to go to dinner in it. All business is driven for-
ward. The land-marks of our fathers, if I may so call them, are
removed, and planted further up into the day ; insomuch, that

40 | am afraid our clergy will be obliged,.if they expect full con-


248 SOCIAL PAPERS,


gregations, not to look any more upon ten o’clock in the morn-
ing as a canonical hour. In my own memory 2, the dinner has
crept by degrees from twelve o’clock to three, and where it will
fix nobody knows.

I have sometimes thouzhe to draw up a memorial in the
behalf of Supper against Dinner, setting forth, that the said
Dinner has made several encroachments upon the said Supper,
and entered very far upon his frontiers; that he has banished
him out of several families, and in all has driven him from his

1o head quarters, and forced him to make his retreat into the hours
of midnight ; and, in short, that he is now in danger of being
entirely confounded and lost in a breakfast. Those who have
read Lucian, and seen the complaints of the letter, 7 against S,
upon account of many injuries and usurpations of the same
nature, will not, I believe, think such a memorial forced and
unnatural. If dinner has been thus postponed, or, if you please,
kept back from time to time, you may be sure that it has been
in compliance with the other business of the day, and that
supper has still observed a proportionable distance. There is a

20 venerable proverb, which we have all of us heard in our infancy,
of ‘putting the children to-bed, and laying the goose to the
fire” This was one of the jocular sayings of our forefathers,
but may be properly used in the literal sense at present. Who
would not wonder at this perverted relish of those who are
reckoned the most polite part of mankind, that prefer sea-coals
and candles to the sun, and exchange so many cheerful morning
hours, for the pleasures of midnight revels and debauches ? If
a man was only to consult his health, he would choose to live
his whole time, if possible, in daylight ; ; and to retire out of the

30 world into silence and sleep, while the raw damps and unwhole-
some vapours fly abroad, without a sun to disperse, moderate;
or control them. For my own part, I value an hour in the
morning as much as ‘common libertines do an hour at midnight.
When I find myself awakened into being, and perceive my life
renewed within me, and at the same time see the whole face of
nature recovered out of the dark uncomfortable state in which
it lay for several hours, my heart overflows with such secret
sentiments of joy and gratitude, as are a kind of implicit praise
to the great Author of Nature. The mind, in these early sea-

4o sons of the day, is so refreshed in all its faculties, and borne up


Yo


20


30


4o


ON FASHIONABLE HOURS. 249


with such new supplies of animal spirits, that she finds herself
in a state of youth, especially when she is entertained with the
breath of flowers, the melody of birds, the dews that hang upon
the plants, and all those other sweets of nature that are peculiar
to the morning. ‘

It is impossible for a man to have this relish of being, this
exquisite taste of life, who does not come into the world before
it fS in all its noise and hurry ; who loses the rising of the sun,
the still hours of the day, and, immediately upon his first getting
up, plunges himself into the ordinary cares or follies of the
world.

I shall conclude this paper with Milton’s inimitable descrip-
tion™ of Adam’s awakening his Eve in Paradise, which indeed
would have been a place as little delightful as a barren heath or
desert to those who slept in it. The fondness of the posture in
which Adam is represented, and the softness of his whisper, are
passages in this divine poem that are above all commendation,
and rather to be admired than praised.


Now Morn her rosy steps in th’ eastern clime '
Advancing, sow’d the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam wak’d, so custom'd; for his sleep
Was airy light from pure digestion bred,

And temperate vapours bland, which th’ only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora’s fan,

Lightly dispers’d, and the shrill matin song

Of birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwaken’d Eve,

With tresses discompos’d, and glowing cheek,

As throngh unquiet rest. He on his side
Leaning half-rais’d. with looks of cordial love,
Hung over her enamour’d, and beheld

Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,

Shot forth peculiar graces, Then with voice
Mild as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,

Her hand soft touching, whisper thus: Awake
My fairest, my espous’d, my latest found,
Heaven’s last best gift, my ever-new delight,
Awake; the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended plants, how blows the citron grove,
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the bee

Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.

Such whispering wak’d her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.


250 SOCIAL PAPERS.


O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My glory, my perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and mom retum’d


Tatler, No. 263.] [December 14, 1710.


No. #7. On the Effects of Public Mourning; Plainness in
Dress.


Ni vis boni
In ipsa inesset forma, hec formam extinguerent.—TER.


When artists would expose their diamonds to an advantage,
they usually set them to show in little cases of black velvet.
By this means the jewels appear in' their true and genuine
lustre, while there is no colour that can infect their brightness,
or give a false cast to the water. When I was at the opera the
other night, the assembly of ladies in mourning ® made me con-

1o sider them in the same kind of view. A dress wherein there is
so little variety shows the face in all its natural charms, and
makes one differ from another only as it is more or less beauti-
ful. Painters are ever careful of offending against a rule which
is so essential in all just representations. The chief figure must
have the strongest point of light, and not be injured by any gay
colourings that may draw away the attention to any less consider’
able part of the picture. The present fashion obliges every body
to be dressed with propriety, and makes the ladies’ faces the
principal objects of sight. Every beautiful person shines out in

20 all the excellence with which nature has adorned her; gaudy
ribbons and glaring colours being now out of use, the sex has
no opportunity given them to disfigure themselves, which they
seldom fail to do whenever it lies in their power. When 2.
woman comes to her glass, she does not employ her time it
making herself look more advantageously what she really is;
but endeavours to be as much another creature as she possi-
bly can. Whether this happens because they stay so long, and
attend their work so diligently, that they forget the faces an
persons which they first sat down with, or, whatever it is, they

30 seldom rise from the toilet the same women they appeared whet


ON THE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC MOURNING, ETC. 251


they began to dress. What jewel can the charming Cleora
place in her ears that can please her beholders so much as her
eyes? The cluster of diamonds upon the breast can add no
beauty to the fair chest of ivory which supports it. It may
indeed tempt a man to steal a woman, but never to love her.
Let Thalestris change herself into a motley party-coloured
animal: the pearl necklace, the flowered stomacher, the arti-
ficial nosegay, and shaded furbelow, may be of use to attract the
eye of the beholder, and turn it from the imperfections of her

1o features and shape. But if ladies will take my word for it (and
as they dress to please men, they ought to consult our fancy
rather than their own in this particular,) I can assure them,
there is nothing touches our imagination so much as a beau-
tiful woman in a plain dress. There might be more agree-
able ornaments found in our own manufacture, than any that
rise out of the looms of Persia.

This, I know, is a very harsh doctrine to womankind, who
are carried away with every thing that is showy, and with what
delights the eye, more than any other species of living creatures

20 whatsoever. Were the minds of the sex laid open, we should
find the chief idea in one to be a tippet, in another a muff, ina
third a fan, and in a fourth a farthingale. The memory of an
old visiting lady is so filled with gloves, silks, and ribbons,
that I can look upon it as nothing else but a toy-shop. A
matron of my acquaintance, complaining of her daughter’s
vanity, was observing, that she had all of a sudden held up her
head higher than ordinary, and taken an air that showed a
secret satisfaction in herself, mixed with a scorn of others.
‘I did not know,’ says my friend, ‘what to make of the carriage

“30 of this fantastical girl, until I was informed by her eldest sister,
that she had a pair of striped garters on,’ This odd turn of
mind often makes the sex unhappy, and disposes them to be
Struck with every thing that makes a show, however trifling and
superficial.

Many a lady has fetched a sigh at the toss of a wig, and been
tuined by the tapping of a snuff-box. It is impossible to
describe all the execution that was done by the shoulder-knot2,
while that fashion prevailed, or to reckon up all the virgins
that have fallen a sacrifice to a pair of fringed gloves™. A

40 sincere heart has not made half so many conquests as an open


Io


20


30


252 SOCIAL PAPERS.


waistcoat®; and I should be glad to see an able head make so
good a figure in 2 woman’s company as a pair of red heels.
A Grecian hero, when he was asked whether he could play
upon the lute, thought he had made a very good reply, when he
answered, ‘No; but I can make a great city of a little one.’
Notwithstanding his boasted wisdom, I appeal to the heart of
any toast in town, whether she would not think the lutenist
preferable to the statesman? I do not speak this out of any
aversion that I have to the sex; on the contrary, I have always
had a tenderness for them ; but, I must confess, it troubles me
very much, to see the generality of them place their affections
on improper objects, and give up all the pleasures of life for
gewgaws and trifles.

Mrs. Margery Bickerstaff, my great aunt, had a thousand
pounds to her portion, which our family was desirous of keep-
ing among themselves, and therefore used all possible means to
turn off her thoughts from marriage. The method they took
was, in any time of danger, to throw a new gown or petticoat in
her way. When she was about twenty-five years of age, she
fell in love with a man of an agreeable temper and equal for-
tune, and would certainly have married him, had: not my grand-
father, sir Jacob, dressed her up in‘a suit of flowered satin;
upon which she set so immoderate a value upon herself, that the
lover was contemned and discarded. In the fortieth year of hef
age, she was again smitten; but very luckily transferred hef
passion to a tippet, which was presented to her by another
relation who was in the plot. This, with a white sarsenet hood,
kept her safe in the family until fifty. About sixty, which gene-
rally produces a kind of latter spring in amorous constitutions;
my aunt Margery had again a colt’s tooth” in her head; and
would certainly have eloped from the mansion-house, had not
her brother Simon, who was a wise man and a scholar, advised
to dress her in cherry-coloured ribbons, which was the only,
expedient that could have been found out by the wit of man to
preserve the thousand pounds in our family, part of ‘which J
enjoy at this time. ,

This discourse puts me in mind of a humourist mentioned by
Horace, called Eutrapelus ¥, who, when he designed to do a man
a mischief, made him a present of a gay suit ; and brings to my


40 memory another passage of the same author, when he describes


ON EXERCISE. 253


the most ornamental dress that a woman can appear in, with
two words, simplex munditiis, which I have quoted for the
benefit of my female readers.


Tatler, No. 151.] [March 28, 1710.


No. 78. On Exercise.


Media sese tulit obvia silva
Virginis os habitumque gerens.—VIRG. /En. i. 314.


It may perhaps appear ridiculous, but I must confess, this
last summer, as I was riding in Enfield-chase®, I met a young
lady whom I could hardly get out of my head, and for ought I
know, my heart, ever since. She was mounted on a pad, with
a very well-fancied furniture. She se¢ her horse with a very
graceful air ; and, when I saluted her with my hat, she bowed

1° to me so obligingly that whether it was her civility or beauty
that touched me so much, I know not; but I am sure I shall
never forget her. She dwells in my imagination in a figuré so
Tauch to her advantage, that if I were to draw a picture of
youth, health, beauty, or modesty, I should represent any, or all
of them, in the person of that young woman,

I do not find that there are any descriptions in the ancient
Poets so beautiful as those they draw of nymphs in their pasto-
tal dresses and exercises. Virgil gives Venus the habit of a
Spartan huntress when she is to put Aineas in his way, and

*° relieve his cares with the most agreeable object imaginable.
Diana and her train are always described as inhabitants of the
woods, and followers of the chase. To be well diverted, is the

. Safest guard to innocence; and, methinks, it should’ be one of
the first things to be regarded among people of condition, to find
out proper amusements for young ladies. I cannot but think
this of riding might easily be revived among them, when they
consider how much it must contribute to their beauty. This
would lay up the best portion they could bring into a family, a
good stock of health, to transmit to their posterity. Such a
30 charming bloom as this gives the countenance, is very much


254 SOCIAL PAPERS,


preferable to the real or affected feebleness or softness, which
appear in the faces of our modern beauties.

The comedy, called, Zhe Ladies Cure®, represents the affecta-
tion of wan looks and languid glances to a very entertaining
extravagance. There is, as the lady in the play complains,
something so robust in perfect health, that it is with her a point
of breeding and delicacy to appear in public with a sickly air.
But the natural gaiety and spirit which shine in the complexion
of such as form to themselves a sort of diverting industry, by

1o,choosing recreations that are exercises, surpass all the false
ornaments and graces that can be put on by applying the whole
dispensary of a toilet. A healthy body, and a cheerful mind, ,
give charms as irresistible as inimitable. The beauteous
Dyctinna, who came to town last week, has, from the constant
prospect in a delicious country, and the moderate exercise and
journeys in the visits she made round it, contracted a certain
life in her countenance, which will in vain employ both the
painters and the poets to represent. The becoming negligence
in her dress, the severe sweetness of her looks, and a certain

20 innocent boldness in all her behaviour, are the effect of the
active recreations I am talking of.

But instead of such, or any other as innocent, and pleasing
method of passing away their time with alacrity, we have many
in town who spend their hours in an indolent state of body and
mind, without either recreations or reflections. I am apt to
believe there are some parents imagine their daughters will be
accomplished enough, if nothing interrupts their growth, or their
shape. According to this method of education, I could name
you twenty families, where all the girls hear of, in this life, is,

30 that it is time to rise and come to dinner, as if they were so
insignificant as to be wholly provided for when they are fed and
clothed.

It is with great indignation that I see such crowds of the
female world lost to human society, and condemned to a lazi-
ness, which makes life pass away with less relish than in the
hardest ‘labour. Palestris, in her drawing-room, is supported
by spirits to keep off the returns of spleen and melancholy;
before she can get over half of the day for want of something to
do, while the wench in the kitchen sings and scours from morn


40 ing to night.


ON EXERCISE, 255


The next disagreeable thing to a lazy lady, is a very busy
one. A man of business in good company, who gives an
account of his abilities and despatches, is hardly more insup-
portable than her they call a notable woman, and a manager.
Lady Good-day, where I visited the other day, at a very polite
Circle, entertained a great lady with a recipe for a poultice, and
gave us to understand, that she had done extraordinary cures
Since she was last in town. It seems a countryman had
wounded himself with his scythe as he was mowing ; and we

19 were obliged to hear of her charity, her medicine, and her
humility, in the harshest tone and coarsest language imagin-
able.

What I would request in all this prattle is, that our females
would either let us have their persons, or their minds, in such
perfection as nature designed them.

The way to this is, that those who are in the quality of
gentlewomen, should propose to themselves some suitable
Method of passing away their time. This would furnish them
with reflections and sentiments proper for the companions of

20 reasonable men, and prevent the unnatural marriages which
happen every day between the most accomplished women and °
the veriest oafs, the worthiest men and the most insignificant
females. Were the general turn of women’s education of
another kind than it is at present, we should want one another
for more reasons than we do as the world now goes. The com-
mon design of parents, is to get their girls off as well as they
can; and they make no conscience of putting into our hands a
bargain for our whole life, which will make our hearts ache
every day of it. I shall, therefore, take this matter into serious

30 consideration, and will propose, forthe better improvement of
the fair sex, a Female Library®. This collection of books shall
consist of such authors as do not corrupt while they divert, but
shall tend more immediately to improve them as they are
women, They shall be such as shall not hurt a feature by the
austerity of their reflections, nor cause one impertinent glance
by the wantonness of them. They shall all tend to advance the
value of their innocence as virgins, improve their understanding
as wives, and regulate their tenderness as parents. It has been
very often said in these lucubrations, ‘that the ideas which

40 most frequently pass through our imaginations, leave traces of


10


20


3°,


256 SOCIAL PAPERS.


themselves in our countenances.’ There shall bea strict regard
had to this in my Female Library, which shall be furnished
with nothing that shall give supplies to ostentation or imperti-
nence ; but the whole shall be so digested for the use of my
students, that they shall not go out of character in their
enquiries, but their knowledge appear only a cultivated
innocence,


Tatler, No, 248.] [November 9, 1710.


Wo. 79. On Scolds, and a Passage in ‘ Paradise Lost,


Atque deos atque astra vocat crudelia mater.
"VirG. Ecl. v. 23.


As I was passing by a neighbour's house this morning, I over-
heard the wife of the family speaking things to her husband
which gave me much disturbance, and put me in mind of a
character which I wonder I have so long omitted, and that is,
an outrageous species of the fair sex which is distinguished by
the term Scolds. The generality of women are by nature loqua-
cious ; therefore mere volubility of speech is not to be imputed
to them, but should-be considered with pleasure when it is used
to express such passions as tend to sweeten or adorn conversa~
tion: but when through rage, females are vehement in their
eloquence, nothing in the world has so ill an effect upon the
features ; for, by the force of it, I have seen the most amiable
become the most deformed ; and she that appeared one of the
graces, immediately turned into one of' the furies. I humbly
conceive, the great cause of this evil may proceed from a false
notion the ladies have of, what we call, a modest woman. They
have too narrow a conception of this lovely character; and
believe they have not at all forfeited their pretentions to it, pro-
vided they have no imputations on their chastity. But, alas!
the young fellows know they pick out better women in the side-
boxes ", than many of those who pass upon the world and them-
selves for modest.

Modesty never rages, never murmurs, never pouts ; when it
is ill-treated, it pines, it beseeches, it languishes. The neigh-


Bi)


20


30


40


ON SCOLDS, ETC. 257


bour I mention is one of your common modest women, that is
to say, those who are ordinarily reckoned such. Her husband
knows every pain in life with her but jealousy. Now, because
she is clear in this particular, the man cannot say his soul is
his own, but she cries: ‘No modest woman is respected now-
a-days.’? What adds to the comedy in this case is, that it is very
ordinary with this’sort of women to talk in the language of dis-
tress; they will complain of the forlorn wretchedness of their
condition, and then the poor helpless creatures shall throw the
next thing they can lay their hands on at the person who offends
them. Our neighbour was only saying to his wife, ‘she went a
little too fine,’ when she immediately pulled his periwig off, and
stamping it under her feet, wrung her hands and said: ‘ Never
modest woman was so used.’ These ladies of irresistible mo-
desty are those who make virtue unamiable ; not that they can
be said to be virtuous, but as they live without scandal; and
being under the common denomination of being such, men fear
to meet their faults in those who are as agreeable as they are
innocent.

I take the Bully among men, and the Scold among women,
to draw the foundation of their actions from the same defect in
the mind. A Bully thinks honour consists wholly in being
brave ; and therefore has regard to no one rule of life if he pre-
serves himself from the accusation of cowardice. The froward
woman knows chastity to be the first merit in a woman; and
therefore, since no one can call her one ugly name, she calls all
mankind all the rest.

These ladies, where their companions are so imprudent as to
take their speeches for any other than exercises of their own
lungs and their husbands’ patience, gain by the force of being
resisted, and flame with open fury, which is no way to be op-
posed but by being neglected ; though at the same time human
frailty makes it very hard, to relish the philosophy of contemning
even frivolous reproach. There is a very pretty instance of
this infirmity in the man of the best sense that ever was, no less
@ person than Adam himself. According to Milton’s description
of the first couple, as soon as they had fallen, and the turbulent
passions of anger, hatred, and jealousy, first entered their
breasts ; Adam grew moody, and talked to his wife, as you
may find it in the three hundred and fifty-ninth page, and

Ss


258 SOCIAL PAPERS.


ninth book of Paradise Lost, in the octavo edition, which, out of
heroics, and put into domestic style, would run thus :

‘ Madam, if my advices had been of any authority with you, |
when that strange desire of gadding possessed you this morning,
we had still been happy ; but your cursed vanity and opinion
of your own conduct, which is certainly very wavering when it
seeks occasions of being proved, has ruined both yourself and
me, who trusted you.’

Eve had no fan in her hand to ruffle, or tucker® to pull down ;

1o but with a reproachful air she answered :

‘Sir, do you impute that to my desire of gadding, which
might have happened to yourself, with all your wisdom and
gravity? The serpent spoke so excellently, and with so
good a grace, that——Besides, what harm had I ever done him,
that he should design me any? Was IJ to have been always
at your side, I might as well have continued there, and been but
your rib still: but if I was so weak a creature as you thought
me, why did you not interpose your sage authority more abso-
lutely? You denied me going as faintly, as you say I resisted

zo the serpent. Had not you been too easy, neither you nor I had
now transgressed.’ Adam replied, ‘ Why, Eve, hast thou the
impudence to upbraid me a8 the Cause of thy transgression for
my indulgence to thee? Thus will it ever be with him who
trusts too much to woman. At the same time that she refuses
to be governed, if she suffers by her obstinacy, she will accuse
the man that shall leave her to herself.’


Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning ;
And of their vain contest appear’d no end.


30 ~©6This, to the modern, will appear but a very faint piece of con-
jugal enmity : but you are to consider, that they were but just
begun to be angry, and they wanted new words for expressing
their new passions.... The passionate and familiar terms, with
which the same case repeated: daily for so many thousand years
has furnished the present generation, were not then in use ; but
the foundation of debate has ever been the same, a contention
about their metit and wisdom. Our general mother was 2
beauty; and ‘hearing there was another now in the world, could
not forbear, as Adam tells her, showing herself, though to the


ON THE LOSS OF BEAUTY, ETC. 259


devil, by whom the same vanity made her liable to be be-
trayed.

I cannot, with all the help of science and astrology, find any
other remedy for this evil, but what was the medicine in this
first quarrel, which was, as appears in the next book, that they
were convinced of their being both weak, but the one weaker
than the other. :

If it were possible that the beauteous could but rage a little
before a glass, and see their pretty countenances grow wild, it
is not to be doubted but it would have a very good effect : but
that would require temper ; for lady Firebrand, upon observing
her features swell when her maid vexed her the other day,
stamped her dressing-glass under her fees. In this case, when
one of this temper is moved, she is like a witch in an operation®,
and makes all things turn round with her. The very fabric is in
a vertigo when she begins to charm. In an instant, whatever
was the occasion that moved her blood, she has such intoler-
able servants, Betty is so awkward, Tom cannot carry a mes-
sage, and her husband has so little respect for her, that she,
?© poor woman, is weary of this life, and was born to be unhappy.


Desunt multa,


yo


ADVERTISEMENT.
The season now coming on in which the town will begin to
fill, Mr. Bickerstaff gives notice, That from the first of October
next he will be much wittier than he has hitherto been.


Taller, No. 217.] [August 29, 1710.


No. 80. On the Loss of Beauty; Case of Parthenissa; Letters
of Corinna and Amilcar.


Que forma, ut se tibi semper
Imputet ? Juv. Sat. vi. 177.


‘Mr. SPECTATOR,

‘I write this to communicate to you a misfortune which fre-
quently happens, and therefore deserves a consolatory discourse
on the subject. I was within this half-year in the possession of

; - S2


260 SOCIAL PAPERS.


as much beauty and as many lovers as any young lady in Eng-
land. But my admirers have left me, and I cannot complain of
their behaviour. I have within that time had the small-pox®:
and this face, which (according to many amorous epistles which
I have by me) was the seat of all that is beautiful in woman, is
now disfigured with scars. It goes to the very soul of me to
speak what I really think of my face; and though I think I-did
not over-rate my beauty while I had it, it has extremely ad-
vaneéed in its value with me, now it is lost. There is one cir-
TO cumstance which makes my case very particular; the ugliest
fellow that ever pretended to me, was and is most in my favoyr,
and he treats me at present the most unreasonably. If you
could make him retum an obligation which he owes me, in
liking a person that is not amiable;—But there is, I fear, no
possibility of making passion move by the rules of reason and
gratitude. But say what you can to one who has survived her-
self, and knows not how to act in a new being. My lovers are
at the feet of my rivals, my rivals are every day bewailing me,
and I cannot enjoy what I am, by reason of the distracting
20 reflection upon what I was. Consider the woman I was did not
die of old age, but I was taken off in the prime of youth, and
according to the course of nature may have forty years after-life -
to come. I have nothing of myself left which I like, but that


‘IT am, Sir, your most humble Servant,
‘ PARTHENISSA.’


When Lewis of France had lost the battle of Ramillies, the
addresses to him at that time were full of his fortitude, and they
turned his misfortune to his glory; in that, during his prosperity,
he could never have manifested his heroic constancy under dis-

30 tresses, and so the world had lost the most eminent part of his
character. Parthenissa’s condition gives her the same opportu-
nity: and to resign conquests is a task as difficult in a beauty as
ahero, In the very entrance upon this work she must bur all
her love-letters ; or since she is so candid as not to call her
lovers, who follow her no longer, unfaithful, it would be a very
good beginning of a new life from that of a beauty, to send them
back to those who writ them, with this honest inscription,
‘ Articles of a Marriage Treaty broken off by the Small-Pox.’ I
have known but one instance where a matter of this kind went


Io


20


ON THE LOSS OF BEAUTY, ETC. 261


on after a like misfortune, where the lady, who was a woman of
spirit, writ this billet to her lover :—


‘Sir,
“If you flattered me before I had this terrible malady, pray
come and see me now: but if you sincerely liked me, stay


away, for 1 am not the same
; ‘CORINNA,’


The lover thought there was something so sprightly in her

behaviour, that he answered :
* MADAM,

‘I am not obliged, since you are not the same woman, to let
you know whether I flattered you or not’; but I assure you I do
not, when I tell you J now like you above all your sex, and hope
you will bear what may befal me when we are both one, as well
as you do what happens to yourself. now you are single ; there-
fore I am ready to take such a spirit for my companion as soon


as you please.
ry ‘ AMILCAR,’


If Parthenissa can now possess her own mind and think as
little of her beauty as she ought to have done when she had it,
there will be no great diminution of her charms; and if she
was formerly affected too much with them, an ‘easy behaviour
will more than make up for the loss of them. Take the whole
sex together, and you find those who have the strongest pos-
session of men’s hearts are not eminent for their beauty. You
see it often happen that those who engage’ men to the greatest
violence, are such as those who are strangers to them would
take to be remarkably defective for that end. The fondest
lover I know, said to me one day in a crowd of women at an
entertainment of music, ‘You have often heard me talk of my
beloved; that woman there,’ continued he, smiling, when he
had fixed my eye, ‘is her very picture.’ The lady he showed
me was by much’the least remarkable for beauty of any in the
whole assembly; but having my curiosity extremely raised,
I could not keep my eyes off her. Her eyes at last met mine,
and with a sudden surprise she looked round her to see who near
her was remarkably handsome that I was gazing at. This little
act explained the secret, She did not understand herself for


To


20


40


262 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the object of love, and therefore she was so. The lover is a
very honest plain man; and what charmed him was a person
that goes along with him in the cares and joys of life, not taken
up with Qerself, but sincerely attentive, with a ready and cheer-
ful mind, to accompany him in either.

I can tell Parthenissa for her comfort, that the beauties,
generally speaking, are the most impertipent and disagreeable
of women. An apparent desire of admiration, a reflection upon
their own merit, and a precise behaviour in their general con-
duct, are almost inseparable accidents in beauties. All you
obtain of them, is granted to importunity and solicitation for
what did not deserve so much of your time, and you recover
from the possession of it as out of a dream.

You are ashamed of the vagaries of fancy which so strangely
misled you, and your admiration of a beauty, merely as such,
is inconsistent with a tolerable reflection upon yourself. The
cheerful good-humoured creatures, into whose heads it never
entered that they could make any.man unhappy, are the persons
formed for making men happy. There is Miss Liddy can dance
a jig, raise paste, write a good hand, keep an account, give
a reasonable answer, and do as she is bid; while her eldest
sister, Madam Martha, is out of humour, has the spleen, learns
by reports of people of higher quality new ways of being uneasy
and displeased’; and this happens for no reason in the world,
but that poor Liddy knows she has no such thing as a certain
negligence ‘that is so becoming’; that there is not I know not
what in her air; and that if she talks like a fool, there is no one
will say, ‘Well! I know not what it is, but every thing pleases
when she speaks it.’ :

Ask any of the husbands of your great beauties, and they will
tell you that they ‘hate their wives nine hours of every day they
pass together. There is such a particularity for ever affected
by them that they are encumbered with their charms in all they
say or do. They pray at public devotions as they are beauties.
They converse on ordinary occasions as they are beauties. Ask
Belinda what it is o’clock, and she is at a stand whether so
great a beauty should answer you. Ina word, I think, instead
of offering to administer consolation to Parthenissa, I should
congratulate her metamorphosis ; and however she thinks she
was not the least insolent in the prosperity of her charms, she


ON GREAT EXPECTATIONS, ETC, 263


was enough so to find ‘she may make herself a much more
agreeable creature in her present adversity. The endeavour to
please is highly promoted by a consciousness that the approba-
tion of the person you would be agreeable to, is a favour you' do
not deserve; for in this case assurance of success is*the most
certain way to disappointment. Good-nature will always supply
the absence of beauty, but beauty cannot long supply the ab-
sence of good-nature™ . .


Spectator, No. 306.] [February 20, 1712.


No. 81. On Great Expectations ; Letter from Jenny Simper.
Spes incerta futurii—Virc. En. viii. 580.


It is a lamentable thing that every man is full of complaints,

To and constantly uttering sentences against the fickleness of
fortune, when people generally -bring upon themselves all the
calamities they fall into, and are constantly heaping up matter
for their own sorrow and disappointment. That which pro-
duces the greatest part of the delusions of mankind, is a false
hope which people indulge with so sanguine a flattery to them-
Selves, that their hearts are bent upon fantastical advantages
which they have no reason to believe should ever have arrived

to them. By this urijust measure of calculating their happiness,
they often mourn with real affliction for imaginary losses.
20 When I am talking of this unhappy way of accounting for our-
selves, I cannot but reflect upon a particular set of people, who

in their own favour, resolve every thing that is possible into
what is probable, and then reckon on that probability as on
what must certainly happen. Will Hongycomb, upon my
observing his looking on a lady with some particular attention,
gave me an account of the great distresses which had laid
waste that her very fine face, and had given an air of melancholy

to avery agreeable person. That lady and a couple of sisters of
hers, were, said Will, fourteen years ago, the greatest fortunes
30 about town ; but without having any loss, by bad tenants, by


264 SOCIAL PAPERS.


bad securities, or any damage by sea or land, are reduced to
very narrow circumstances. They were at that time the most
inaccessible haughty beauties in town; and their pretensions to
take upon them at that unmerciful rate, were raised upon the
following scheme, according to which all their lovers were
answered.

* Our father is a youngish man, but then our mother is some-
what older, and not likely to have any children: his estate
being 800/. per annum, at twenty years’ purchase, is worth

10 16,0007, Our uncle, who is above fifty, has 400/. per annunt,
which, at the aforesaid rate, is 8,o00/. There is a widow aunt,
who has 10,000/. at her own disposal, left by her husband, and
an old maiden aunt, who has 6,000/. Then our father’s mother
has 900/. Jer annum, which is worth 18,000/. and 1,000/, each
of us has of her own, which cannot be taken from us. These
summed up together stand thus :— ,


‘Father's ...........605 - 800......... 16,000
Unicle’s.......00.00005 wee 4OO.....06. 8,000

000
Aunt’s ee pees seeses 16,000


20 Grandmother’s .........9O0...+..... 18,000
OWN 1,000 ACN ....sereesservesseres 3,000


Total ... 61,000


This equally divided between us three amounts to 20,000/. each :
an allowance being given for an enlargement upon common
fame, we may lawfully pass for 30,000/. fortunes.’

In prospect of this, and the knowledge of their own personal
merit, every one was contemptible in their eyes, and they
refused those offers which had been frequently made them.
But mark the end. The mother dies, the father is married

30 again and has a son; on him was entailed the father’s, uncle’s,
and grandmother's,estate. This cut off 42,000/, The maiden
aunt married a tall:Irishman, and with her went the 6,o004
The widow died, and left but enough to pay her debts and bury
her ; so that there remained for these three girls but their own
1,000/. They had by this time passed their prime, and got on
the wrong side of thirty ; and must pass the remainder of their
days, upbraiding mankind that they mind nothing but money;


ON GREAT EXPECTATIONS, ETC. 265


and bewailing that virtue, sense,and modesty, are had at
present in no manner of estimation.

I mention this case of ladies before any other, because it is
the most irreparable ; for though youth is the time lessscapable
of reflection, it is in that sex the only season in which they can
advance their fortunes. But if we turn our thoughts to the men,


We see such crowds of unhappy from no other reason than an ill-


grounded hope, that it is hard to say which they rather deserve,
our pity or contempt. It is not unpleasant to see a fellow, after


10 having grown old in attendance, and after having passed half a


life in servitude, call himself the unhappiest of all men, and pre-
tend to be disappointed, beCause a courtier broke his word. He
that promises himself any thing but what may naturally arise


- from his own property or labour, and goes beyond the desire of


20


30


possessing above two parts in three even of that, lays up for
himself an increasing heap of afflictions and disappointments.
There are but two means in the world of gaining by other
men, and these are by being either agreeable, or considerable.
The generality of mankind do all things for their own sakes;
and when you hope any thing from persons above you, if you
cannot say, ‘I can be thus agreeable, or thus serviceable,’ it
is ridiculous to pretend to the dignity of being unfortunate when
they leave you ; you were injudicious in hoping for any other
than to be neglected for such as can come within these descrip-
tions of being capable to please or serve your patron, when his
humour or interests call for their capacity either way.

It would not methinks be a useless comparison between the
condition of a man who shuns all the pleasures of life, and of
one who makes it his business to pursue them. Hope in the
recluse makes his austerities comfortable, while the luxurious
man gains nothing but uneasiness from his enjoyments. What
is the difference in happiness of him who is macerated by
abstinence, and his who is surfeited with excess? He who
resigns the world has no temptation to envy, hatred, malice,
anger, but is in constant possession of a serene mind ; he who
follows the pleasures of it, which are ‘in their very nature dis-
appointing, is in constant search of care, solicitude, remorse; and
confusion.


266 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Jan. the 14th, 1712.
‘MR. SPECTATOR,

‘Iam a young woman,-and have my fortune to make, for
which reason I come constantly to church to hear divine ser-
vice, and make conquests :. but one great hindrance in this my
design is, that our clerk who was once a gardener, has this
Christmas so overdecked the church with greens, that he has
quite spoiled my prospect ; insomuch that I have scarce seen
the young baronet I dress at these three weeks, though we have

‘to both been very constant at our devotions, and do not sit above
three pews off. The church, as it is now equipped, looks more
like a green-house than a place of worship. The middle aisle is
a very pretty shady walk, and the pews look like so many
arbours on each side of it. The pulpit itself has such clusters
of ivy, holly, and rosemary, about it, that a light fellow in our
pew took occasion to say, that the congregation heard the word
out of a bush, like Moses. Sir Anthony Love’s pew in par-
ticular is so well hedged, that all my batteries have no effect.
I am obliged to shoot at random among the boughs, without

20 taking any manner of aim. Mr. Spectator, unless you will give
orders for removing these greens, I shall grow a very awkward
creature at church, and soon have little else to do there but to
say my prayers. ‘I am in haste, dear Sir, your most obedient
Servant, ma

‘JENNY SIMPER.’


Spectator, No. 282.] [January 23, 1712.


No. 82. On the Art of Growing Old.


Rideat, et pulset lasciva decentius cetas.
Hor. Ep. ii. 2. ult.


It would be a good appendix to ‘ The Art of Living and Dying,’
if any one would write ‘The Art of Growing Old,’ and teach men
to resign their pretensions to the pleasures and gallantries of
youth, in proportion to the alteration they find in themselves

30 by the approach of age and infirmities. The infirmities of
this stage of life would be much fewer, if we did not affect those


ON THE ART OF GROWING OLD. 267


which attend the more vigorous and active part of our days ;
but instead of studying to be wiser, or being contented with our
present follies, the ambiti6n of many of us is also to be the
Same sort of fools we formerly have been. I have often
argued, as I am a professed lover of women, that our sex
grows old with a much worse grace than the other does; and
have ever been of opinion, that there are more well-pleased old
women, than old men. I thought it a good reason for this, that
the ambition of the fair sex being confined to advantageous
10 marriages, or shining in the eyes of men, their parts were over
sooner, and consequently the errors in the performances of
them. The conversation of this evening has not convinced me
of the contrary; for one or two fop-women shall not make a
balance for the crowds of coxcombs among ourselves, diversified
according to the different pursuits of pleasure and business.
Returning home this evening a little before my usual hour,
IT scarce had seated myself in my easy chair, stirred the fire,
and stroked my cat, but I heard somebody come rumbling up
stairs. I saw my door opened, and a human figure advancing
20 towards me, so fantastically put together, that it was some
minutes before I discovered it to be my old and intimate friend,
Sam Trusty". Immediately I rose up, and placed him in my
own seat; a compliment I pay to few. The first thing he
uttered was, ‘Isaac, fetch me a cup of your cherry-brandy
before you offer to ask any question.’ He drank a lusty
draught, sat silent for some time, and at last broke out ; ‘1, am
come,’ quoth he, ‘to insult thee for an old fantastic dotard, as
thou art, in ever defending the women. I have this evening
visited two widows, who are now in that state I have often
30 heard you call an “after-life’’™; I suppose you mean by it, an
existence which grows out of past entertainments, and is an
untimely delight in the satisfactions which they once set their
Hearts upon too much to be ever able to relinquish. Have but
patience,’ continued he, ‘until I give you,a succinct account of
my ladies, and of this night's adventure. They are much of
an age, but very different in their characters. The one of.them,
with all the advances which years have made upon her, goes
on in a certain romantic road of love and friendship which she
fell into in her teens ; the other has transferred the amorous
4° passions of her first years to the love of cronies, pets, and


To


40


268 SOCIAL PAPERS,


favourites, with which she is always surrounded; but the genius
of each of them will best appear by the account of what hap-
pened to me at their houses. About five this afternoon, being
tired with study, the weather inviting, and time lying a little
upon my hands, I resolved, at the instigation of my evil genius,
to visit them ; their husbands having been our contemporaries.
This I thought I could do without much trouble ; for both live
in the very next street. I went first to my lady Camomile;
and the butler, who had lived long in the family, and seen me
often in his master’s time, ushered me very civilly into the
parlour, and told me though my lady had given strict orders to
be denied, he was sure I might be admitted, and bid the black
boy” acquaint his lady that I was come to wait upon her. In the
window lay two letters, one broke open, the other fresh sealed
with a wafer: the first directed to the divine Cosmelia, the
second to the charming Lucinda; but both, by the indented
characters, appeared to have been writ by very unsteady hands.
Such uncommon addresses increased my curiosity, and put mé
upon asking my old friend the butler, if he knew who those
persons were? “ Very well,” says he, “ that is from Mrs. Furbish to
my lady, an old school-fellow and great crony of her ladyship’s;
and this the answer.” I enquired in what.county she lived.
‘Ohdear !” says he, “but just by,in the neighbourhood. Why;
she was here all this morning”, and that letter came and was
answered within these two hours. They have taken an odd
fancy, you must know, to call one another hard names ; but, fof
all that, they love one another hugely.’? By this time the boy
returned with his lady’s humble service to me, desiring I would
excuse her; for she could not possibly see me, nor any body
else, for it was opera-night.

‘Methinks,’ says I, ‘such innocent folly as two old women’s
courtship to each other, should rather make you merry than pu!
you out of humour, ‘Peace, good Isaac,’ says he, ‘no intef’
ruption, I beseech you, I got soon to Mrs. Feeble’s; she that
was formerly Betty Frisk ; you must needs remember her}
Tom Feeble of Brazen Nose fell in love with her for her finé
dancing. Well, Mrs. Ursula, without further ceremony, carrie$
me directly up to her mistress’s chamber, where I found hef
environed by four of the most mischievous animals that cat
ever infest a family ; an old shock dog with one eye, a monkey


ON THE ART OF GROWING OLD. 269


chained to one side of the chimney, a great grey squirrel to the
other, and a parrot waddling in the middle of the room. How-
ever, for a while, all was in a profound tranquillity. Upon the
mantle-tree, for I am a pretty curious observer, stood a pot of
lambetive electuary", witha stick of liquorice, and near it a phial
of rose-water, and powder of tutty. Upon the table lay a pipe
filled with betony and colt’s-foot®, a roll of wax-candle, a silver
spitting-pot, and a Seville orange. The lady was placed in a,
large wicker chair, and her feet wrapped up in flannel, sup-
10 ported by cushions ; and in this attitude, would you believe it,
Isaac, she was reading a romance with spectacles on. The
first compliments over, as she was industriously endeavouring
to enter upon conversation, a violent fit of coughing seized her.
Thig awaked Shock, and in a-trice the whole room was in an
uproar ; for the dog barked, the squirrel squealed, the monkey
chattered, the parrot screamed, and Ursula, to appease them,
was more clamorous than all the rest. You, Isaac, who know
how any harsh noise affects my head, may guess what I suffered
from the hideous din of these discordant sounds. At length all
© was appeased, and quiet restored : a chair was drawn for me,
where I was no sooner seated, but the parrot fixed his horny
beak, as sharp as a pair of sheers, in one of my heels, just above .
the shoe. I sprung from the place with an unusual agility, and
so, being within the monkey’s reach, he snatches off my new
bob-wig, and throws it upon two apples that were roasting by a
Sullen sea-coal fire.* I was nimble enough to save it from any
further damage than singeing the fore-top. 1 put it on; and
composing myself as well as I could, I drew my chair towards
the other side of the chimney. The good lady, as soon as she
30 had recovered breath, employed it in making a thousand apolo-
gies, and, with great eloquence, and a numerous train of words,
lamented my misfortune. In the middle of her harangue, I felt
something scratching near my knee, and feeling what it should
be, found the squirrel had got into my coat pocket. As I en-
deavoured to remove him from his burrow, he made his teeth
meet through the fleshy part of my fore finger. This gave me
an inexpressible pain. The Hungary water™ was immediately
brought to bathe it, and gold-beaters’ skin applied to stop the
blood. The lady renewed her excuses ; but being now out of
40 all patience, I abruptly took my leave, and hobbling down stairs


to


270 SOCIAL PAPERS.


with heedless haste, I set my foot full in a pail of water, and
down we came to the bottom together.” Here my friend con-
cluded his narrative, and, with a composed countenance, I
began to make him compliments of condolence ; but he started
from his chair, and said, ‘Isaac, you may spare your speeches,
I expect no reply. When I told you this, I knew you would
laugh at me; but the next woman that makes me ridiculous
shall be a young one.’


Taller, No. 266.] [December 21, 1710.


Wo. 83. On Jndiscretions in Education ; Character of Horace.


. Sapientia prima ;
Stultitia caruisse. Hor. Ep. i. 1. 41.


When I first began to learn to push”, this last winter, my
master had a great deal of work upon his hands to make mé
unlearn the postures and motions which I had got, by having in


. My younger years practised back-sword, with a little eye to the


20


single faichion. Knock down, was the word in the civil wars ;
and we generally added to this skill the knowledge of the Cor-
nish hug, as well as the grapple, to play with hand and foot.
By this means, I was for defending my head when the French
gentleman was making a full pass at my bosom; insomuch,
that he told me I was fairly killed seven times in one morning;
without having done my master any other mischief than oné
knock on the pate, This was a great misfortune to me; and I
believe I may say, without vanity, I'am the first who ever pushed
so erroneously, and yet conquered the prejudice of education so
well, as to make my passes so clear, and recover hand and foot


‘ with that agility as I do at this day. The truth of it is, the first:


rudiments of education are given very indiscreetly by most
parents, as much with relation to the more important concerns
of the mind, as in the gestures of the body. Whatever children
are designed for, and whatever prospects the fortune or interest
of their parents may give them in their future lives, they are all


30 promiscuously instructed the same way ; and Horace and Virgil


ON INDISCRETIONS IN EDUCATION, ETC. 2713


must be thumbed by a boy, as well before he goes to an appren-
ticeship, ag to the university. This ridiculous way of treating
the under-aged of this island has very often raised both my
spleen and mirth, but I think never both at once so much as
to-day. A good mother of our neighbourhood made me a visit
with her son and heir; a lad somewhat above five feet, and
wants but little of the height and strength of a good musketeer
in any regiment in the service. Her business was to desire I
would examine him ; for he was far gone in a book, the first
10 letters of which she often saw in my papers. The youth pro-
duced it, and I found it was my friend Horace. It was very
€asy to turn to the place the boy was learning in, which was the
fifth ode of the first book, to Pyrrha. I read it over aloud, as
well because I am always delighted when I turn to the beautiful
parts of that author, as also to gain time for considering a little
how to keep up the mother’s pleasure in her child, which I
thought barbarity to interrupt. In the first place I asked.him,
‘Who this same Pyrrha was?’ He answered very readily,
‘She was the wife of Pyrrhus, one of Alexander’s captains. I
3° lifted up my hands. The mother curtsies—‘ Nay,’ says she,
‘I knew you would stand in admiration—I assure you,’ con-
tinued she, ‘for all he’ looks so tall, he is but very young. Pray .
ask him some more ; never spare him.’ With that I took the
liberty to ask him, ‘ what was the character of this gentlewoman??
He read the three first verses ;
Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosa
Perfusus liquidis urget odoribus
Grato, Pyrrha, sub antro?
And very gravely told me, she lived at the sign of Zhe Rose,
3°in acellar. I took care to be very much astonished at the
lad’s improvements ; but withal advised her, as soon as possible,
to take him from school, for he could learn no more there.
This very silly dialogue was a lively image of the impertinent
method used in breeding boys without genius or spirit to the
reading things for which their heads were never framed. But
this is the natural effect of a certain vanity in the minds of
parents ; who are wonderfully delighted with the thought of
breeding their children to accomplishments, which they believe
nothing, but want of the same care in their own fathers, pre-
40 vented them from being masters of. Thus it is, that the part of


10


2


°


30


40


27% SOCIAL PAPERS.


life most fit for improvement is generally employed in a method
against the bent of nature; and a lad of such parts as are fit
for an occupation, where there can be no calls out of the
beaten path, is two or three years of his time wholly taken up
in knowing, how well Ovid’s mistress became such a dress ; how
such a nymph for her cruelty was changed into such an animal ;
and how it is made generous in AEneas to put Turnus to death:
gallantries that can no more come within the occurrences of
the lives of ordinary men, than they can be relished by their
imaginations. However, still the humour goes on from one
generation to another; and the pastry-cook here in the lane,
the other night, told me, ‘he would not yet take away his son
from his learning ; but has résolved, as soon as he had a little
smattering in the Greek, to put him apprentice toa soap-boiler.’
These wrong beginnings determine our success in the world :
and when our thoughts are originally falsely biassed, their
agility and force do but carry us the further out of our way, in
proportion to our speed. But we are half way our journey,
when we have got into the right road. If all our days were
usefully employed, and we did not set out impertinently, we
should not have so many grotesque professors in all the arts of
life ; but every man would be in a proper and becoming method
of distinguishing or entertaining himself, suitably to what nature
designed him. As they go on now, our parents do not only
force us upon what is against our talents, but our teachers are
also as injudicious in what they put us to learn. I have hardly
ever since suffered so much by the charms of any beauty, as J
did before I had a sense of passion, for not apprehending that
the smile of Lalage was what pleased Horace ; and I verily
believe, the stripes I suffered about Digzto male pertinaci has
given me that irreconcileable aversion, which I shall carry to
my grave, against coquettes.

As for the elegant writer of whom I am talking, his excellences
are to be observed as they relate to the different concerns of his
life; and he is always to be looked upon as a lover, a courtier,
oraman of wit. His admirable Odes have numberless instances
of his merit in each of these characters. His Epistles and
Satires are full of proper notices for the conduct of life in a
court ; and what we call good-breeding, is most agreeably inter-
mixed with his morality. His addresses to the persons who


A STAGE COACH JOURNEY, ETC, 273


favoured him, are so inimitably engaging, that Augustus com-
plained of him for so seldom writing to him, and asked him,
‘whether he was afraid posterity should read their names
together?’ Now, for the generality of men to spend much
time in such writings is as pleasant a folly as any he ridicules.
Whatever the crowd of scholars may pretend, if their way of
life, or their own imaginations, do not lead them to a taste of
him, they may read, nay write, fifty volumes upon him, and be
just as they were when they began. I remember to have heard

to a great painter say, ‘ There are certain faces for certain painters,
as well as certain subjects for certain poets.’ This is as true in
the choice of studies ; and no one will ever relish an author
thoroughly well, who would not have been fit company for that
author, had they lived at the same time. All others are
mechanics in learning, and take the sentiments of writers like
waiting-servants, who repért what passed at their master’s
table ; but debase every thought and expression, for want of
the air with which they were uttered.


Tatler, No. 173.] [May 18, 1710.


No, 84. A Stage Coach Journey; Dialogue of the Captain
and Ephraim the Quaker.


Qui aut tempus quid postulet non videt, aut plura loquitur, aut se
Ostentat, aut eorum quibuscum est rationem non habet, is ineptus esse
dicitur,—TULL,

Having notified to my good friend Sir Roger that I should

20 set out for London the next day, his horses were ready at the
appointed hour in the evening ; and, attended by one of his
grooms, J arrived at the county-town at twilight, in order to be
ready for the stage-coach the day following. As soon as we
arrived at the inn, the servant who waited upon me inquired of
the chamberlain in my hearing what company he had for the
coach? The fellow answered, ‘Mrs. Betty Arable, the great
fortune, and the widow her mother ; a recruiting officer (who
took a place because they were to go); young "Squire Quickset,
her cousin (that her mother wished her to be married to) ;

30 Ephraim the Quaker, her guardian ; and a gentleman that had.

T


10


20


3°


4o


274 SOCIAL PAPERS.


studied himself dumb from Sir Roger de Coverley’s.’ I ob-
served by what he said of myself, that according to his office
he dealt much in intelligence ; and doubted not but there was
some foundation for his reports of the rest of the company, as
well as for the whimsical account he gave of me. The next
morning at day-break we were all called ; and I, who know my
own natural shyness, and endeavour to be as little liable to be
disputed with as possible, dressed immediately, that I might
make no one wait. The first preparation for our setting out
was, that the captain’s half-pike was placed near the coachman,


and a drum behind the coach. In the mean time the drummer,


the captain’s equipage™, was very loud, ‘that none of the
captain’s things should be placed so as to be spoiled’; upon
which his cloak-bag was fixed in the seat of the coach ; and the
captain himself, according to a frequent, though invidious
behaviour of military men, ordered his man to look sharp,
that none but one of the ladies should have the place he had
taken fronting the coach-box.

We were in some little time fixed in our seats, and sat with
that dislike which people not too good-natured usually conceive
of each other at first sight. The coach jumbled us insensibly
into some sort of familiarity : and we had not moved above two
miles, when the widow asked the captain what success he had
in his recruiting? The officer, with a frankness he believed
very graceful, told her ‘that indeed he had but very little luck,
and had suffered much by desertion, therefore should be glad
to end his warfare in the service of her or her fair daughter.
In a word,’ continued he, ‘I am a soldier, and to be plain is
my character: you see me, Madam, young, sound, and impu-
dent ; take me yourself, widow, or give me to her, I will be
wholly at your disposal. I am a soldier of fortune, ha!’—This
was followed by a vain laugh of his own, and a deep silence of
all the rest of the company. I had nothing left for it but to
fall fast asleep, which I did with all speed. ‘Come, said he,
‘resolve upon it, we will make a wedding at the next town: we
will awake this pleasant companion who is fallen asleep, to
be the brideman ; and,’ giving the Quaker a clap on the
knee, he concluded, ‘this sly saint, who, ll warrant, under-
stands what’s what as well as you or I, widow, shall give
the bride as father’ The Quaker, who happened to be a map


A STAGE COACH JOURNEY, ETC, 275


of smartness, answered, ‘Friend, I take it in good part that
thou hast given me the authority of a father over this comely’
and virtuous child ; and I must assure thee, that if I have the
giving her, I shall not bestow her on thee. Thy mirth, friend,
savoureth of folly ; thou art a person of a light mind ; thy drum
is a type of thee—it soundeth because it is empty. Verily, it is
not from thy fulness, but thy emptiness, that thou hast spoken
this day. Friend, friend, we have hired this coach in partner-
ship with thee, to carry us to the great city; we cannot go any
10 other way. This worthy mother must hear thee if thou wilt
needs utter thy follies ; we cannot help it, friend, I say : if thou
wilt, we must hear thee; but if thou wert a man of under-
Standing, thou wouldst not take advantage of thy courageous
countenance to abash us children of peace.—Thou art, thou
sayest, a soldier ; give quarter to us, who cannot resist thee.
Why didst thou fleer at our friend, who feigned himself asleep ?
He said nothing ; but how dost thou know what he containeth?
If thou speakest improper things in the hearing of this virtuous
young virgin, consider it as an outrage against a distressed
20 person that cannot get from thee; to speak indiscreetly what
we are obliged to hear, by being hasped up with thee in this
public vehicle, is in some degree assaulting on the high road.’
Here Ephraim paused, and the captain with a happy and
Uncommon impudence (which can be convicted and’ support
itself at the same time) cries, ‘Faith, friend, I thank thee, I
Should’ have been a little impertinent if thou hadst not repri-
Manded me. Come, thou art, I see, a smoky old fellow, and I
will be very orderly the ensuing part of my journey. I was
Soing to give myself airs, but, ladies, I beg pardon.’
3° The captain was so little out of humour, and our company
was so far from being soured by this little ruffle, that Ephraim
and he took a particular delight in being agreeable to each
other for the future; and assumed their different provinces
in the conduct of the company. Our reckonings, apartments,
and accommodation fell under Ephraim; and the captain
looked to all disputes on the road, as the good behaviour of
our coachman, and the right we had of taking place, as going
to London, of all vehicles coming from thence. The occur-
rences we met with were ordinary, and very little happened
40 which could entertain by the relation of them: but when I
T 2


246 SOCIAL PAPERS,


considered the company we were in, I took it for no small good-
fortune, that the whole journey was not spent in impertinences,
which to one part of us might be an entertainment, to the other
a suffering. What therefore Ephraim said when we were
almost arrived at London, had to me an air not only of good
understanding, but good breeding. Upon the young lady’s ex-
pressing her satisfaction in the journey, and declaring how
delightful it had been to her, Ephraim declared himself as
follows : ‘ There is no ordinary part of human life which

1o expresseth so much a good mind, and a right inward man, as
his behaviour upon meeting with strangers, especially such as
may seem the most unsuitable companions to him: such a man
when he falleth in the way with persons of simplicity and
innocence, however knowing he may be ‘in the ways of men,
will not vaunt himself thereof, but will the rather hide his
superiority to them, that he may not be painful unto them. My
good friend,’ continued he, turning to the officer, ‘thee and I
are to part by and by, and peradventure we may never meet
again; but be advised by a plain man: modes and apparel are

20 but trifles to the real man, therefore do not think such a man as
thyself terrible for thy garb, nor such a one as me contemptible
for mine. When two such as thee and I meet, with affections
as we ought to have towards each other, thou shouldst rejoice
to see my peaceable demeanour, and I should be glad to see
thy strength and ability to protect me in it.’


Spectator, No. 132.] [August 1, 1711.


No. 85. On the Battle of Eyes.
Habet et sua castra Cupido.—Ovip.


It. has been always my opinion, that a man in love should
address himself to his mistress with passion and sincerity; and
that if this method fails, it is in vain for him to ‘have recourse
to artifice or dissimulation, in which he will always find himself

30 worsted, unless he be a much better proficient in the art than
any man I have yet been acquainted with.


ON THE BATTLE OF EVES. 277


The following letter is a very natural exemplification of what
I have here advanced. I have called it the battle of Eyes, as
it brought to my mind several combats of the same nature,
which I have formerly had with Mrs. Ann Page.


‘SWEET MR, MYRTLE,

‘T have for some time been sorely smitten by Mrs. Lucy 2, who
is a maiden lady in the twenty-eighth year of her age, She
has so much of the coquette in her, that it supplies the place of
youth, and still keeps up the girl in her aspect and behaviour.

1o She has found out the art of making me believe that I have the
first place in her affection, and yet so puzzles me by a double
tongue, and an ambiguous look, that about once a fortnight
I fancy I have quite lost her. I was the other night at the
opera, where seeing a place in the second row of the Queen’s
box kept by Mrs. Lucy’s livery®, I placed my self in the pit
directly over-against her footman, being determined to ogle
her most passionately all that evening, I had not taken my
Stand there above a quarter of an hour, when enter Mrs, Lucy.
At her first coming in I expected she would have cast her eye

20 upon her humble servant; but, instead of that, after having
dropped curtsy after curtsy to her friends in the boxes, she
began to deal her salutes about the pit in the same liberal
manner. Although I stood in the full point of view, and, as
I thought, made a better figure than any body about me, she
Slid her eye over me, curtsied to the right and to the left, and
would not see me for the space of three minutes, I fretted
inwardly to find myself thus openly affronted on every side, and
was resolved to let her know my resentments by the first oppor-
tunity, This happened soon after ; for Mrs. Lucy looking upon

30 me, as tho’ she had but just discovered me, she begun to sink |
in the first offer to a curtsy ; upon which, instead of making her
any return, I cocked my nose, and stared at the Upper Gallery;
and immediately after raising myself on tiptoe, stretched out
my neck, and bowed to a lady who sate just behind her. I
found, by my coquette’s behaviour, that she was not.a little
nettled at this my civility, which passed over her head. She
looked as pale as ashes, fell a talking with one that sat next
her, and broke out into several forced smiles and fits of
laughter, which I dare say there was no manner of occasion


To


20


30


4°


248 SOCIAL PAPERS.


for. Being resolved to push my success, I cast my eye through
the whole circle of beauties, and made my bow to every one
that I knew, and to several whom I never saw before in my
life. Things were thus come to an open rupture, when the
curtain rising, I was forced to face about. I had not sat down
long, but my heart relented, and gave me several girds and
twitches for the barbarous treatment which I had shewn to
Mrs. Lucy. I longed to see the Act ended, and to make
reparation for what I had done. At the first rising of the au-
dience, between the Acts, our eyes met ; but as mine begun to
offer a parley, the hard-hearted slut conveyed her self behind
an old lady in such a manner, that she was concealed from me
for several moments. This gave me new matter of indignation,
and I begun to fancy I had lost her for ever. While I was in
this perplexity of thought, Mrs. Lucy lifted herself up from
behind the lady who shadowed her, and peeped at me over her
right shoulder: nay, madam, thinks I to myself, if those are
your tricks, I will give you as good as you bring ; upon which
I withdrew, in a great passion, behind a tall broad shouldered
fellow, who was very luckily placed before me. I here lay
Incog. for at least three seconds; snug was the word®; but
being very uneasy in that situation, I again emerged into ope?
candle-light, when looking for Mrs. Lucy, I could see nothing
but the old woman, who screened her for the remaining part of
the interlude. I was then forced to sit down to the second Act;
being very much agitated and tormented in mind. I was
terribly afraid that she had discovered my uneasiness, as well
knowing, that if she caught me at such an advantage, she would
use me like a dog", For this reason I was resolved to play thé
indifferent upon her at my next standing up. The second Act,
therefore, was no sooner finished, but I fastened my eye upor
a young woman who sat at the further end of the boxes, whis-
pering at the same time, to one who was near me, with an aif
of pleasure and admiration. I gazed upon her a long times
when stealing a glance at Mrs. Lucy, with a design to see how
she took it, I found her face was turned another way, and that
she was examining, from head to foot, a young well-dressed
rascal who stood behind her. This cut me to the quick, and
notwithstanding I tossed back my wig, rapped my snuff box;
displayed my handkerchief, and at last cracked a jest with a


ON THE BATTLE OF EYES. 279


orange wench® to attract her eye, she persisted in her con-
founded ogle, till Mrs. Robinson came upon the stage to my
relief. I now sat down sufficiently mortified, and determined,
at the end of the Opera, to make my submission in the most
humble manner. Accordingly, rising up, I put on a sneaking
penitential look, but, to my unspeakable confusion, found her
back turned upon me.
‘J had now nothing left for it but to make amends for all by
handing her to her chair. I bustled through the crowd, and
1o got to her box-door as soon as possible, when, to my utter con-
fusion, the young puppy, I have been telling you of before,
bolted out upon me with Mrs. Lucy in his hand. I could not
have started back with greater precipitation if I had met a
ghost. The malicious gipsy took no notice of me, but turning
aside her head said something to her dog of a gentleman usher,
with a smile that went to my heart.’ I could not sleep all night
for it, and the next morning wrote the following letter to her.


“MADAM,

‘“T protest I meant nothing by what passed last night, and

20 beg you will put the most candid interpretation upon my looks
and actions ; for however my eyes may wander, there is none
but Mrs. Lucy who has the entire possession of my heart.

‘“T am, Madam,
‘“ With a passion that is not to be expressed either by
looks, words or actions,
‘Your most unalienable,
and most humble servant,
‘TOM WHIFFLE.”

‘And now, Sir, what do you think was her answer? Why, to

3° give you a true notion of her, and that you may guess at all her
cursed tricks by this one—Here it is.

‘“Mr. WHIFFLE,

‘“T am very much surprised to hear you talk of anything
that passed between us last night, when to the best of my
remembrance I have not seen you these three days.

: ¢¢ Your servant,

coop, T.”?
March 115 1714+
Lover, No. 7.] [


10


20


280 SOCIAL PAPERS.


No. 86. Ona Fine Lady at Church.


Deleo omnes dehinc ex animo mulieres.
Ter. Eun. Act ii. Se. 3, 4.


‘Mr. SPECTATOR,


“You have often mentioned with great vehemence and in-
dignation the misbehaviour of people at church"; but I am at
present to talk to you on that subject, and complain to you of
one, whom at the same time I know not what to accuse of,
except it be looking too well there, and diverting the eyes of
the congregation to that one object. However, I have this to
say, that she might have stayed at her own parish, and not
come to perplex those who are otherwise intent upon their
duty.

‘Last Sunday was sevennight I went into a church not far
from London-bridge ; but I wish I had been contented to go to
my own parish, I am sure it had been better for me; I say I
went to church thither, and got into a pew very near the pulpit.
I had hardly been accommodated with a seat, before there
entered into the aisle a young lady in the very bloom of youth
and beauty, and dressed in the most elegant manner imaginable.
Her form was such that it engaged the eyes of the whole con-
gregation in an instant, and mine among the rest. Though we
were all thus fixed upon her, she was not in the least out of
countenance, or under the least disorder, though unattended by
any one, and not seeming to know particularly where to placé
herself. However, she had not in the least a confident aspect,
but moved on with the most graceful modesty, every one making
way until she came to a seat just over against that in which
I was placed. The deputy of the ward sat in that pew, and she
stood opposite to him, and at a glance into the seat, though shé
did not appear the least acquainted with the gentleman, was let
in, with a confusion that spoke much admiration at the novelty


30 of the thing. The service immediately began, and she com-


posed herself for it with an air of so much goodness and sweet~
ness, that the confession which she uttered, so as to be heard
where I sat, appeared an act of humiliation more than she had
occasion for. The truth is, her beauty had something s°


ON A FINE LADY AT CHURCH. a8


innocent, and yet so sublime, that we all gazed upon her like a
phantom. None of the pictures which we behold of the best
Italian painters have anything like the spirit which appeared in
her countenance, at the different sentiments expressed in the
several parts of Divine service. That gratitude and joy at
a thanksgiving, that lowliness and sorrow at the prayers for the,
sick and distressed, that triumph at the passages which gave
instances of the Divine mercy, which appeared respectively in
her aspect, will be in my memory to my Iast hour. I protest
Io to you, Sir, she suspended the devotion of every one around
her ; and the ease she did everything with soon dispersed the
charlish dislike and hesitation in approving what is excellent,
too frequent among us, to a general attention and entertainment
in observing her behaviour. All the while that we were gazing
at her, she took notice of no object about her, but had an art of
seeming awkwardly attentive, whatever else her eyes were
accidentally thrown upon. One thing indeed was particular,
she stood the whole service, and never kneeled or sat : I do not
question but that was to show herself with the greater advantage,
20and set forth to better grace her hands and arms, lifted up
with the most ardent devotion ; and her bosom, the fairest that
ever was seen, bare to observation ; while she, you must think,
knew nothing of the concern she gave others, any other than
as an example of devotion, that threw herself out, without re-
gard to dress or garment, all contrition, and loose of all worldly
regards, in ecstasy of devotion. Well; now the organ was
to play a voluntary, and she was so skilful in music, and so
touched with it, that she kept time not only with some motion
of her head, but, also with a different air in her countenance.
30 When the music was strong and bold, she looked exalted, but
serious ; when lively and airy, she was smiling and gracious ;
when the notes were more soft and languishing, she was kind
and full of pity. When she had now made it visible to the
whole congregation, by her motion and ear, that she could
dance, and she wanted now only to inform us that she could
sing too ; when the psalm was given out, her voice was distin-
guished above all the rest, or rather people did not exert their
own, in order to hear her, Never was any heard so sweet and
so strong. The organist observed it, and he thought fit to play
4° to her only, and she swelled every note, when she found she


Io


20


30


40


282 SOCIAL PAPERS.


had thrown us all out, and had the last verse to herself in such
a manner as the whole congregation was intent upon her, in
the same manner as we see in the cathedrals they are on the
person who sings alone the anthem. Well; it came at last to
the sermon, and our young lady would not lose her part in
that neither ; for she fixed her eye upon the preacher, and as
he said anything she approved, with one of Charles Mather’s
fine tablets® she set down the sentence, at once showing her
fine hand, the gold pen, her readiness in writing, and her judg-
ment in choosing what to write. To sum up what I intend
by this long and particular account, I mean to appeal to you,
whether it is reasonable that such a creature as this shall come
from a jaunty part of the town, and give herself such violent
airs, to the disturbance of an innocent and inoffensive con-
gregation, with her sublimities. The fact, I assure you, was aS
I have related: but I had like to have forgot another very con-
siderable particular. As soon as church: was done, she inr
mediately stepped out of her pew, and fell into the finest, pitty-
pat air, forsooth, wonderfully out of countenance, tossing hef
head up and down, as she swam along the body of the church.
I, with several others of the inhabitants, followed her out, and
saw her hold up her fan to a hackney-coach at a distance, wh
immediately came up to her, and she whipped into it with
great nimbleness, pulled the door witha bowing mien, as if shé
had been used to a better glass. She said aloud, ‘ You know
where to go,’ and drove off. By this time the best of the con
gregation was at the church-door, and I could hear some says
‘A very fine lady ;” others, “ I’ll warrant you,.she is no bettet
than she should be;” and one very wise old lady said, “ shé
ought to have been taken up.” Mr. Spectator, 1 think this
matter lies wholly before you: for the offence does not com®
under any law, though it is apparent this creature came amoné
us only to give herself airs, and enjoy her full swing in being
admired. I desire you will print this, that she may be confine

to her own parish ; for I can assure you there is no attending
anything else in a place where she is a novelty. She has bee?
talked of among us ever since under the name of the ‘ Phantom‘
but I would advise her to come no more ; for there is so strong
a party made by the women against her, that she must expect
they will not be excelled a second time in so outrageous 4


ON FASHIONABLE VISITING. 283


manner, without doing her some insult. Young women, who
assume after this rate, and affect exposing themselves to view
in congregations at the other end of the town, are not so mis-
chievous, because they are rivalled by more of the same
ambition, who will not let the rest of the company be particular ;
but in the name of the whole congregation where I was, I desire
you to keep these agreeable disturbances out of the city, where
sobriety of manners is still preserved, and all glaring and
ostentatious behaviour, even in things laudable, discounte-
1onanced. I wish you may never see the Phantom, and am,
° * Sir, your most humble Servant,
‘RALPH WONDER.


Spectator, No.503.] {October 7, 1712,


No. 87. On Fashionable Visiting.
Perditur hzec inter misero lux.—Honr. Sat. ii. 6. 59.


There has not some years been such a tumult in our neigh-
bourhood as this evening about six. At the lower end of the
Jane the word was given, that there was a great funeral coming
by. The next moment came forward, and in a very hasty,
instead of a solemn manner, a long train of lights, when at last
a footman, in very high youth and health, with all his force, ran
through the whole art of beating the door of the house next to

20 me, and ended his rattle with the true finishing rap. This did
not only bring one to the door at which he knocked, but to that
of every one in the lane in an instant. Among the rest, my
country maid took the alarm, and immediately running to me,
told me, ‘ there was a fine, fine lady, who had three men with
burial torches making way before her, carried by two men upon
poles, with looking-glasses on each side of her, and one glass
also before, she herself appearing the prettiest that ever was.’
The girl was going on in her story, when the lady was come to
my door in her chair, having mistaken the house. As soon as

30 she entered I saw she was Mr. Isaac’s scholar®, by her speak-


p fe)


20


30


40


284 SOCIAL PAPERS.


ing air, and the becoming stop she made when she began her
apology. ‘ You will be surprised, sir,’ said she, ‘that I take this
liberty, who am utterly a stranger to you ; besides that it may
be thought an indecorum that J visit a man.’ She made here a
pretty hesitation, and held her fan to her face; then, as if
recovering her resolution, she proceeded—‘ But I think you
have said, that men of your age are of no sex ; therefore, I may
be as free with you as one of my own.’ The lady did me the
honour to consult me on some particular matters, which I am
not at liberty to report. But, before she took her leave, she
produced a long list of names, which she looked upon, to know
whither she was to go next. I must confess, I could hardly
forbear discovering to hey, immediately, that I secretly laughed
at the fantastical regularity she observed in throwing away her
time ; but I seemed to indulge her in it, out of a curiosity to
hear her own sense of her way of life. ‘Mr. Bickerstaff, said
she, ‘you cannot imagine how much you are obliged to me, in
staying thus long with you, having so many visits to make ; .and,
indeed, if I had not hopes that a third part of those I am going
to will be abroad, I should be unable to despatch them this
evening.—‘ Madam,’ said I, ‘are you in all this haste and per-
plexity, and only going to such as you have not a mind to see?’
—‘Yes, sir, said she, ‘I have several now with whom I keep 2
constant correspondence, and return visit for visit punctually
every week, and yet we have not seen each other since last
November was twelvemonth,’

She went on with a very good air, and fixing her eyes on het
list, told me, ‘she was obliged to ride about three miles and 4
half before she arrived at her own house.’ I asked ‘after what
manner this list was taken, whether the persons writ their name
to her, and desired that favour, or how she knew she was not
cheated in her muster-roll ??—‘ The method we take,’ says she:
‘is, that the porter or servant who comes to the door, writes
down all the names who come to see us, and all such are entitled
to a return of their visit.’—‘ But,’ said I, ‘madam, I presumé
those who are searching for each other, and know one anothef
by messages, may be understood as candidates only for each
other’s favour; and that, after so many how-dees™, you
proceed to visit or not, as you like the run of each other’s rep¥”
tation or fortune.’—‘ You understand it aright,’ said she; ‘a?


ON FASHIONABLE VISITING. 285


we become friends, as soon as we are convinced that our dislike
to each other may be of any consequence: for, to tell you
truly,’ said she, ‘for it is in vain to. hide any thing from a man
of your penetration, general visits are not made out of good-will,
but for fear of ill-will, Punctuality in this case is often a suspi-
cious circumstance ; and there is ncthing so common as to have
a lady say, “I hope she has heard nothing of what I said of
her, that she grows so great with me!” But, indeed, my porter
is so dull and negligent, that I fear he has not put down half

to the people*I owe visits to.’—‘ Madam,’ said I, ‘methinks it
would be very proper if your gentleman-usher or groom of the
chamber were always to keep an account, by way of debtor and
creditor. I know a city lady who uses that method, which I
think very laudable ; for though you may possibly, at the court
end of the town, receive at the door, and light up better than
within Temple-bar, yet I must do that justice to my friends, the
ladies within the walls, to own, that they are much more exact
in their correspondence. The lady I was going to mention as
an example has always the second apprentice out of the count-

20 ing-house for her own use on her visiting-day, and he sets down
very methodically all the visits which are made her. I remem-
ber very well, that on the first of January last, when she made
up her account for the year 1708, it stood thus :


‘Mrs. Courtwood— Debtor. Per Contra—Creditor.
To seventeen hundred 1704 By eleven hundred and
‘and four visits received. nine paid. 1109
Due to balance 595
1704


‘This gentlewoman is a woman of great economy, and was
30 not afraid to go to the bottom of her affairs ; and, therefore,
ordered her apprentice to give her credit for my lady Easy’s
impertinent visits upon wrong days, and deduct only twelve per
cent. He had orders also to subtract one and a half from the
whole of such as she had denied herself to before she kept a
day ; and after taking those proper articles of credit on her
side, she was in arrear but five hundred. She ordered het
husband to buy in a couple of fresh coach-horses ; and with no
other loss than the death of two footmen, and a church-yard
cough brought uponl her coachman, she was clear in the world


Io


20


3°


40


286 SOCIAL PAPERS.


on the tenth of February last, and keeps so before-hand, that
she pays every body their own, and yet makes daily new acquaint-
ances.’

I know not whether this agreeable visitant was fired with the
example of the lady I told her of, but she immediately vanished
out of my sight, it being, it seems, as necessary a point of good-
breeding, to go off as if you stole something out of the house,
as it is to enter as if you came to fire it. I do not know one
thing that contributes so much to the lessening the esteem men
of sense have to the fair sex, as this article of visits.” A young
lady cannot be married, but all impertinents in town must be
beating the tattoo from one quarter of the town to the other,
to show they know what passes. Ifa man of honour should
once in ‘an age marry a woman of merit for her intrinsic value,
the envious things are all in motion in an instant to make it
known to the sisterhood as an indiscretion, and publish to the
town how many pounds he might have had to have been
troubled with one of them. After they are tired with that, the
next thing is, to make their compliments to the married couple
and their relations. They are equally busy at a funeral, and
the death of a person of quality is always attended with the
murder of several sets of coach-horses and chairmen. In botb
cases, the visitants are wholly unaffected, either with joy of
sorrow ; for which reason, ‘their congratulations and condolences
are equally words of course ; and one would be thought wonder-
fully ill-bred, that should build upon such expressions as
encouragements to expect from them any instance of friendship-

Thus are the true causes of living, and the solid pleasures in:
life, lost in show, imposture, and impertinence. As for my
part, I think most of the misfortunes in families arise from thé
trifling way the women have in spending their time, and grati-
fying only their eyes and ears, instead of their reason and
understanding.

A fine young woman, bred under a visiting mother, knows all
that is possible for her to be acquainted with by report, and see
the virtuous and the vicious used so indifferently, that the fears
she is born with are abated, and desires indulged, in proportion
to her love of that light and trifling conversation. I know I
talk like an old man ; but I must go on to say, that I think the
general reception of mixed company, and the pretty fellows that


ON POLITICAL ANXIETY. 287


are admitted at those assemblies, give a young woman so false
an idea of life, that she is generally bred up with a scorn of that
sort of merit in a man, which only can make her happy in
Marriage ; and the wretch, to whose lot she falls, very often
receives in his arms a coquette, with the refuse of a heart long
before given away to a coxcomb., .


Tatler, No. 109.] [December 20, 1709.


No. 88. On Political Anxiety, and a Puff of @ Fashionable
Toyman.,


All persons who employ themselves in public, are still inter-
Tupted in the course of their affairs ; and, it seems, the admired
cavalier Nicolini? himself is commanded by the ladies, who at

10 present employ their time with great assiduity in the care of the
nation, to put off his day until he shall receive their commands,
and notice that they are at leisure for diversions. In the mean
time it is not to be expressed, how many cold chickens the fair-
ones have eaten since this day sevennight for the good of their
country. This great occasion® has given birth to many dis-
Ccoveries of high moment for the conduct of life. There is a
toast of my acquaintance who told me, ‘she had now found out,
that it was day before nine® in the morning ;’ and I am very
confident, if the affair hold many days longer, the ancient hours

"20 of eating will be revived among us, many having by it been
made acquainted with the luxury of hunger and thirst.

There appears, methinks, something very venerable in all
assemblies: and I must confess, I envied all who had youth
and health enough to make their appearance there, that they
had the happiness of being a whole day in the best company in
the world. During the adjournments of that awful court, a
neighbour of mine was telling me, that it gave him a notion
of the ancient grandeur of the English hospitality, to see
Westminster-Hall a dining-room”. There is a cheerfulness in

30 Such repasts, which is very delightful to tempers which are so
happy as to be clear of spleen and vapour ; for, to the jovial, to
See others pleased is the greatest of all pleasures.


288 SOCIAL PAPERS.


But, since age and infirmities forbid my appearance at such
public places, the next happiness is to make the best use of
privacy, and acquit myself of the demands of my correspon-
dents. The following letter is what has given me no small
inquietude, it being an accusation of partiality, and disregard
to merit, in the person of a virtuoso, who-is the most eloquent
of all men upon small occasions, and is the more to be admired
for his prodigious fertility of invention, which never appears but
upon subjects which others would have thought barren. But

zo in consideration of his uncommon talents, I am contented to let
him be the hero of my next two days, by inserting his friend's
recommendation of him at large.
‘Nando’s2, Feb. 28, 1709.
‘DEAR COUSIN,

‘I am just come out of the country, and upon perusing your
late lucubrations, I find Charles Lillie to be the darling of your
affections ; that you have given him a place, and taken no
small pains to establish him in the world; and, at the same
.time, have passed by his name-sake® at this end of the town, a3

20 if he was a citizen defunct, and one of no use in a common-
wealth. I must own, his circumstances are so good, and s0
well known, that he does not stand in need of having his fame
publistied to the world ; but, being of an ambitious spirit, and
an aspiring soul, he would be rather proud of the honour, than
desirous of the profit, which might result from your recom-
mendation. He is a person of a particular genius, the first
that brought toys in fashion, and baubles to perfection. He is
admirably well versed in screws, springs, and hinges, and
deeply read in knives, combs, or scissors, buttons, or buckles.

30 He is a perfect master of words, which, uttered with a smooth
voluble tongue, flow into a most persuasive eloquence ; 3 inso-
much, that I have known a gentleman of distinction find several
ingenious faults with a toy of his, and show his utmost dislike
to it, as being either useless or ill-contrived ; but when the
orator, behind the counter, had harangued upon it for an houf
and a half, displayed its hidden beauties, and revealed its
secret perfections, he has wondered how he had been able to
spend so great a part of his life without so important a utensil.
I will not pretend to furnish out an inventory of all the valuable
40 commodities that are to be found at his shop.


ON POLITICAL ANXIETY. 289


‘I shall content myself with giving an account of what I
think most curious. Imprimis, his pocket-books are very neat
and well contrived, not for keeping bank-bills, or goldsmiths
notes, I confess; but they are admirable for registering the
lodgings of Madonas, and for preserving letters from ladies of
quality. His whips and spurs are so nice, that they will make
one that buys them ride a fox-hunting, though before he hated
noise and early rising, and was afraid of breaking his neck.
His seals are curiously fancied, and exquisitely well cut, and of

10 great use to encourage young gentlemen to write a good hand.
Ned Puzzle-post has been ill used by his writing-master, and
writ a*sort of a Chinese, or downright Scrawlian ; however,
upon his buying a seal of my friend, he is so much improved
by continual writing, that it is believed in a short time one
may be able to read his letters, and find out his meaning,
without guessing. His pistols and fusees are so very good,
that they are fit to be laid up among the finest china.
Then his tweezer-cases are incomparable: you shall have
one not much bigger than your finger, with seventeen

20 several instruments in.it, all necessary every hour of the
day, during the whole course of a man’s life. But if this
virtuoso excels in one thing more than another, it is in canes.
He has spent his most select hours in the knowledge of
them; and is arrived at that perfection, that he is able to
hold forth upon canes longer than upon any one subject in
the world. Indeed, his canes are so finely clouded, and so
well made up, either with gold or amber heads, that I am
of the opinion itis impossible for a gentleman to walk, talk,
Sit, or. stand, as he should do, without one of them. He knows

30 the value of a cane, by knowing the walue of the buyer's estate.
Sir Timothy Shallow has two thousand pounds per annum, and
Tom Empty, one. They both at several times bought a cane |
of Charles : sir Timothy’s cost ten guineas, and Tom Empty's
five. Upon comparing them, they were perfectly alike. Sir
Timothy, surprised there should be no difference in the
canes, and so much in the price, comes to Charles : “ Charles,”
says he, “you have sold me a cane here for ten pieces, and the
very same to Tom Empty for five.” “Sir Timothy,” says
Charles, “I am concerned that you, whom I took to under-

49 stand canes better than any baronet in town, should be so

U


10


20


30


290 SOCIAL PAPERS,


overseen?!” “Why, sir Timothy, your’s is a true Jambee, and
esquire Empty’s only a plain Dragon®.”

‘This virtuoso has a parcel of Jambees now growing in the
East-Indies, where he keeps a man on purpose to look after
them, which will be the finest that ever landed in Great-Britain,
and will be fit to cut about two years hence. Any gentleman
may subscribe for as many as he pleases. Subscriptions will
be taken in at his shop at ten guineas each joint. They that
subscribe for six shall have a Dragon gratis. This is all I
have to say at present concerning Charles’s curiosities ; and
hope it may be sufficient to prevail with you to take him into
your consideration, which if you comply with, you will oblige

‘Your humble servant.’

N.B. Whereas there came out, last term, several gold snuff-
boxes, and others : this is to give notice, that Charles will put
out a new edition on Saturday next, which will be the only one
in fashion until after Easter. The gentleman that gave fifty’
pounds for the box set with diamonds, may show it until Sun-
day night, provided he goes to church ; but not after that time;
there beimg one to be published on Monday, which will cost
fourscore guineas.


Tatler, No. 142.] [March 7, 1709.


No. 89. 4 Fine Lady's Advertisement; Letter from Pontpey.


The lady hereafter-mentioned, having come to me in very
great haste, and paid me much above the usual fee, as a cunning’
man 3, to find her stolen goods, and also having approved my
late discourse of advertisements, obliged me to draw up this
and insert it in the body of my paper.


ADVERTISEMENT.

Whereas Bridget Howd’ee®, late servant to the Lady Far’
dingale, a short, thick, lively, hard-favoured wench.of about
twenty-nine years of age, her eyes small and bleared, and nosé
very broad at bottom, and turning up at the end, her mouth
wide, and lips of an unusual thickness, two teeth out before, thé
rest black and uneven, the tip of her left ear being of a mouse


A FINE LADY’S ADVERTISEMENT. 291


colour, her voice loud and shrill, quick of speech, and something
of a Welsh accent, withdrew herself on Wednesday last from
her ladyship’s dwelling-house, and, with the help of her con-
sorts, ‘carried off the following goods of her said lady; viz.
a thick wadded callico wrapper, a musk-coloured velvet mantle
lined with squirrel skins, eight night-shifts, four pair of silk
stockings curiously darned, six pair of laced shoes, new and
old, with the heels of half two inches higher than their fellows ;
a quilted petticoat of the largest size, and one of canvas with
10 whale-bone hoops ; three pair of stays, bolstered below the left
shoulder, two pair of hips of the newest fashion, six round-
about aprons with pockets, and four striped muslin night-rails
very little frayed; a silver pot for coffee or chocolate, the lid
much bruised ; a broad brimmed flat silver plate for sugar with
Rhenish wine ; a silver ladle for plumb-porridge; a silver
cheeSe-toaster with three tongues, an ebony handle, and silver-
ing at the end ; a silver posnet to butter eggs ; one caudle and
two cordial-water cups, two cocoa-cups, and an ostrich’s egg,
with rims and feet of silver, a marrow-spoon with a scoop at the
20 other end, a silver orange-strainer, eight sweet-meat spoons
made with forks at the end, an agate-handle knife and fork in a
Sheath, a silver tongue-scraper, a silver tobacco-box, with a tulip
graved on the top ; and a bible bound in shagreen,with gilt leaves
and clasps, never opened but once. Also a small cabinej, with
six drawers inlaid with red tortoise-shell, and brass gilt orna-
ments at the four corners, in which were two leather forehead-
Cloths ®, three pair of oiled dog-skin gloves, seven cakes of
Superfine Spanish wool, half-a-dozen of Portugal dishes, and
@ quire of paper from thence ; two pair of bran-new plumpers,
30 four black-lead combs, three pair of fashionable eye-brows, two
sets of ivory teeth, little the worse for wearing, and one pair of ,
box for common use ; Adam and Eve in bugle work, without
fig leaves, upon canvas, curiously wrought with her ladyship’s
own hand; several filjigrane curiosities ; a crotchet of one
hundred and twenty-two diamonds, set strong and deep in
silver, with a rump-jewel after the same fashion ; bracelets of
braided hair, pomander and seed-pearl; a large old purple
velvet purse, embroidered, and shutting with a spring, con-
taining two pictures in miniature, the features visible ; a broad
4° thick gold ring with a hand-in-hand engraved upon it, and
U2


292 SOCIAL PAPERS.


within this Posey ‘While life does last, I’ll hold thee fast ;’
another set round with small rubies. and sparks, six wanting ;
another of Turkey stone, cracked through the middle; an
Elizabeth and four Jacobus’s, one guinea, the first of the
coin, an angel with a hole bored through, a broken half of

a Spanish piece of gold, a crown-piece with the breeches ®,
an old nine-pence bent both ways by Lilly the almanack
maker, for luck at langteraloo®, and twelve of the sheélls
called blackmoor’s teeth; one small; amber box with ‘apo-
10 plectic balsam, and one silver gilt of a-larger size for cashu and
carraway comfits, to be taken at long sermons, the lid enamelled,
representing a cupid fishing for hearts, with a piece of gold on
his hook ; over his head this rhyme 2, ‘ Only with gold, you me
shall hold.’ In the lower drawer was a large new gold repeating
watch made by a Frenchman ; a gold chain, and all the proper
appurtenances hung upon steel swivels, to wit, lockets with the
hair of dead and living lovers, seals with arms, emblems, and
devices cut in. cornelian, agate, and onyx, with cupids, hearts,
darts, altars, flames, rocks, Pickaxes, roses, thorns, and sun-

' 20 flowers ; as also variety of ingenious French mottos ; together?
with gold etuys for quills, scissors, needles, thimbles, and 4
sponge dipped in Hungary water, left but the night before by 4
young lady going upona frolic incog. There was alsoa bundle
of letters, dated between the years one thousand six hundred
and seventy, and one thousand six hundred: and eighty-two,
most of them signed Philander, the‘rest Strephon, Amyntas;
Corydon, and Adonis; together with a collection of receipts
to make pastes for the hands, pomatums, lip-salves, white-pots,
beautifying, creams, water of talc, frog spawn a and decoc-

30 tions for clearing the complexion.

Whoever can discover the aforesaid goods, so that they may
be had again, shall have fifty guineas for the whole, or pro-
portionably for any part.

N.B. Her ladyship is pleased to promise ten pounds for th¢
pacquet of letters over and above, or five for Philander’s only;
being her first love. ‘My lady bestows those of Strephon t2
the finder, being so written, that they may serve to any woman!
who reads them,’

P.S. As Iam a patron of persons who have no other friend

40 to apply to, I cannot suppress the following complaint:


ON TRIVIAL PASTIMES, ETC. 293


‘SIR,

‘I am a blackmoor boy, and have, by my lady’s order, been
christened by the chaplain. The good man has gone further
with me, and told me a great deal of good news; as, that I am
as good as my lady herself; as I am a Christian, and many
other things : but for all this, the parrot, who came over with
me from our country, is as much esteemed by her as I am.
Besides this, the shock-dog has a collar that cost almost as
much as mine, I desire also to know, whether now I am a

10 Christian, I am obliged to dress like a Turk, and wear a
turban.
‘Tl am, Sir,
‘Your most humble servant,
‘POMPEY.’


Tatler, No, 245.] [November 2, 1710.


No, 90. Ox trivial Pastimes, capping Verses, Punning,
Biting.


Lepus tute es, et pulpamentum queeris.
Ter. Eun. act. iii. se. 1.


It is a great convenience to those who want wit to furnish out

a conversation, that there is something or other in all companies
where it is wanted substituted in its stead, which, according to
their taste, does the business as well. Of this nature is the
agreeable pastime in country halls of cross-purposes, questions
20 and commands», and the like. A little superior to these are
those who can play at crambo, or cap verses. Then above
them are such as can make verses, that is, rhyme ; and among
those who have the Latin tongue, such as used to make what
they call golden verses. Commend me also to those who have
not brains epough for any of these exercises, and yet do not give
up their pretensions to mirth, These can slap.you on the back
unawares, laugh loud, ask you how you do with a twang on
your shoulders, say you are dull to-day, and laugh a voluntary
to put you in humour ; not to mention the laborious way among


294 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the minor poets, of making things come into such and such a
shape, as that of an egg, a hand, an axe, or anything that
nobody had ever thought on before, for that purpose, or which
would have cost a great deal of pains to accomplish, if they did.
But all these methods, though they are mechanical, and may
_be arrived at with the smallest capacity, do not serve an honest
gentleman who wants wit for his ordinary occasions ; therefore
it is absolutely necessary that the poor in imagination should
have something which may be serviceable to them at all hours
ro upon all common occurrences. That which we call punning is
therefore greatly affected by men of small intellects. These
men need not be concerned with you for the whole sentence ;
but if they can say a quaint thing, or bring in a word which
sounds like any one word you have spoken to them, they can
turn the discourse, or distract you so that you cannot go on,
and by consequence, if they cannot be as witty as you are, they
can hinder your being any wittier than they are. Thus, if you
talk of a candle, he ‘can deal’ with you ; and if you ask him to
help you to some bread, a punster should think himself very
20 ‘ill-bred’ if he did not ; and if he is not as ‘ well-bred’ as your’
self, he hopes for ‘ grains’ of allowance. Ifyou do not understand
that last fancy, you must recollect that bread is made of grain ;
and so they go oh for ever, without possibility of being exhausted.
There are another kind of people of small faculties, who
supply want of wit with want of breeding ; and because women?
are both by nature and education more offended at any thing
which is immodest than we men are, these are ever harping
upon things they ought not allude to, and deal mightily in
double meanings. Every one’s own observation will suggest
30 instances enough of this kind without my mentioning any ; fof
your double meaners are dispersed up and down through all
parts of the town or city where there are any tp offend, in ordet
to set off themselves. These men are mighty loud laughers,
and held very pretty gentlemen with the sillier and unbred part
of womankind. But, above all already mentioned, or any who
ever were, or ever can be in the world, the happiest and surest
to be pleasant, are a sort of people whom we have not indeed
Jately heard much of, and those are your ‘biters.’
A biter is one who tells you a thing you have no reason to
40 disbelieve in itself, and perhaps has given you, before he bit


ON TRIVIAL PASTIMES, ETC. 295


you, no reason to disbelieve it for his saying it ; and, if you give
him credit, laughs in your face, and triumphs that he has
deceived you. In a word,a biter is one who thinks you a fool,
because you do not think him a knave. This description of
him one may insist upon to be a just one; for what else
but a degree of knavery is it, to depend upon deceit for what
you, gain of another, be it in point of wit, or interest, or any
thing else ?
. This way of wit is called ‘biting,’ by a metaphor taken from
to beasts of prey, which devour harmless and unarmed animals,
and look upon them as their food wherever they meet them.
The sharpers about town very ingeniously understood them-
selves to be to the undesigning part of mankind what foxes are
to Jambs, and therefore used the word biting, to express any
exploit wherein they had over-reached any innocent and inad-
vertent man of his purse. These rascals of late years have been
the gallants of the town, and carried it with a fashionable
haughty air, to the discouragement of modesty, and all honest
arts. Shallow fops, who are governed by the eye, and admire
20 every thing that struts in vogue, took up from the sharpers the
phrase of biting, and used it upon all occasions, either to dis-
own any nonsensical stuff they should talk themselves, or evade
the force of what was reasonably said by others. Thus, when
one of these cunning creatures was entered into a debate with
you, whether it was practicable in the present state of affairs to
accomplish such a proposition, and you thought he had let fall
what destroyed his side of the question, as soon as you looked
with an earnestness ready to lay hold of it, he immediately
cried, ‘ Bite,’ and you were immediately to acknowledge all that
30 part was in jest. They carry this to all the extravagance
imaginable ; and if one of these witlings knows any particulars
which may give authority to what he says, he is.still the more
ingenious if he imposes upon your credulity. I remember a
remarkable instance of this kind. There came up a shrewd
young fellow to a plain young man, his countryman, and. taking
him aside with a grave concerned countenance, goes on at this
rate: ‘I see you here, and have you heard nothing out of York-
shire ?—~You look so surprised you could not have heard of it—
and yet the particulars are such that it cannot be false: I am
40 sorry Lam got into. it so far that I now must tell you; but I


296 SOCIAL PAPERS.


know not but it may be for your service to know. On Tuesday
last, just after dinner—you know his manner is to smoke—
opening his box, your father fell down dead in an apoplexy.’
The youth showed the filial sorrow which he ought—Upon
which the witty man cried, ‘ Bite ; there was nothing in all this.’
To put-an end to this silly, pernicious, frivolous way at once,
I will give the reader one late instance of a bite, which no biter
for the future will ever be able to equal, though I heartily wish
him the same occasion. It is a superstition with some surgeons
10 who beg the bodies of condemned malefactors, to go to the gaol,
and bargain for the carcase with the criminal himself. A good
honest fellow did so last sessions, and was admitted to the con-
demned men on the morning wherein they died. The surgeon
communicated his business, and fell into discourse with a little
fellow, who refused twelve shillings, and insisted upon fifteen for
his body. The fellow who killed the officer of Newgate, very
forwardly, and like a man who was willing to deal, told him,
‘Look you, Mr. Surgeon, that little dry fellow, who has been
half starved all his life, and is now half dead with fear, cannot
zo answer your purpose. I have ever lived high and freely, my
veins are full, J have not pined in imprisonment; you see my
crest swells to your knife; and after Jack Catch” has done, upon
my honour you will find me as sound as ever a bullock in any
of the markets. Come, for twenty shillings I am your man.’
Says the surgeon, ‘ Done, there is a guinea.’ This witty rogue
took the money, and as soon as he had it in his fist, cries, ‘ Bite},
I am to be hanged in chains.’


Spectator, No, 504.] [October 8, 1712.


§ 4. CHARACTER SKETCHES.


No. 91. On Giving Advice; Characters of Paulo and Avara.


Among the many employments I am necessarily put upon by

my friends, that of giving advice is the most unwelcome to me
30 and, indeed Damforéed"fo ‘use a little art in the manner ; fof
some people will ask counsel of you, when they have already


ON GIVING ADVICE, ETC. 297


acted what they tell you is still under deliberation. I had
almost lost a very good friend the other day, who came to
know ‘how I liked his design to marry such a lady?’ I an-
swered, ‘By no means; and I must be positive against it, for
very solid reasons, which are not proper to communicate.’
‘Not proper to communicate!’ said he, with a grave air,
‘I will know the bottom of this.’ I saw him moved, and knew
from thence he was already determined ; therefore evaded it
by saying, ‘ To tell you the truth, dear Frank, of all the women

10 living I would have her myself.’ ‘Isaac,’ said he, ‘thou art
too late, for we have been both one these two months.’

I learned this caution by a gentleman’s consulting me for-
merly about his son. He railed at his extravagance, and
told,me, ‘in a very little time he would beggar him by the
exorbitant bills which came from Oxford every quarter. ?

Make the rogue 1e bite upon the bridie, said 1; ‘pay none’ of
his bills, it will but encourage him to further trespasses,’ He
looked plaguy sour at me. His son soon after sent up a paper
of verses, forsooth, in print on the last public occasion ; upon

20 which, he is convinced the boy has parts, and a lad of spirit is
not to be too much cramped in his maintenance, lest he take
ill courses. Neither father nor son can ever since endure the
sight of me.

These sort of people ask opinions only out of the fullness of
their heart on the subject of their perplexity, and not from a
desire of information.

There is nothing so easy as to find out which opinion the
man in doubt has a mind to; therefore the sure way is, to tell
him that is certainly to be chosen. Then you are to be very

3° clear and positive; leave no handle for scruple. ‘Bless me!
Sir, there is no room for a question!’ This rivets you into his
heart ; for you at once applaud his wisdom, and gratify his in-
Clination, However, I had too. much bowels to be insincere to
aman who Canie “yesterday to know of me, with which of two
eminent men in the city he should place his son? their names
are Paulo and Avaro. This gave mé much debate with myself,
because not only the fortune. of the youth, but his virtue also
dependeth upon this choice. The men are equally wealthy;
but they differ in the use and application of their riches, which

4° you immediately see upon entering their ¢ doors.


fe)


20


30


298 SOCIAL PAPERS,


The habitation of Paulo has at once the air of a nobleman
and a merchant. You see the servants act with affection to
their faster, and satisfaction in themselves: the master meets
you with an open countenance, full of benevolence and integ-
rity:, your business is despatched with that confidence and
welcome which always accompany honest minds :_his table is
the_| image of plenty and generosity, supported by justice and
frugality. “After we had dined here, our affair was to visit
Avara@: out comes an awkward fellow, with a careful counte-
nance ; ‘Sir, would you speak with my master? may I crave
your name?’ After the first preamble, he leads us into 3
noble solitude, a great house that seemed uninhabited ; but
from the end of the spacious hall moves towards us Avaro;
with a suspicious aspect av if We Wad believed us thieves; and;
as for my part, I approached Him as if I knew him a cut-purse-
We fell into discourse of his noble dwelling, and fhe great


‘estate all the world knew he had to enjoy in it: and I, to


plague him, began to commend Paulo’s way of living. ‘ Paulo,
answered Avaro, ‘is a very good mai? , who havé
smaller estates, must. cut our coat according to our cloth.’
‘Nay,’ says I, ‘every man knows his own circumstances best 5
you are in the right, if you have not wherewithal.” He looked
very sour; for it is, you must know, the utmost vanity of 4
mean-spirited rich man to be contradicted when he calls him’
self poor. But I resolved to vex him, by consenting to all be
said; the main design of which was, that he would have v9
find out, he was one of the wealthiest men. in London, and
lived like a beggar. We left him, and took a turn on the
Exchange. My friend was. ravished with Avaro: ‘this,’ said
he, ‘is certainly a2 sure man.’. I contradicted him with much
warmth, and summed up their different characters as well as }
eould. ‘This Paulo,’ said J, ‘grows wealthy by being a com-


loses. In a word; Paulo is a citizen, and Avaro a cit’ I con-
vinced my friend, and carried the young gentleman the next
day to Paulo, where he will learn the way both to gain and
enjoy a good fortune. And though I cannot say I have, by


40 keeping him from Avaro, saved him from the gallows, I havé


THE CHARACTERS OF A RAKE AND A COQUETTE, 299


prevented his deserving it every day he lives: for with Paulo he
will be an honest man, without being so for fear of the law; as
with Avaro he would have been a villain within the protection
of it.


Tatler, No. 25.] [June 6, 1709.


No. 92. The Characters of a Rake and a Coquette.


Pacolet being gone a-strolling among the men of the sword,
in order to-find out the secret causes of the frequent disputes we
meet with, and furnish me with materials for my treatise on
duelling : I have room left to go on in my information to my
Country readers, whereby they -may understand the bright

1o people whose memoirs I have taken upon me to write. But in
My discourse of the twenty-eighth of the last month, I omitted to
Mention the most st agreeable of all bad characters, and that is, a
Rake®,

A Rake is a man always to be pitied ; and if he lives, is one
day « certainly reclaimed ; for his f faults proceed not from choice
or inclination, but from strong p passions and appetites, which
are in youth | too violent for the curb of reason, good sense, good
manners, and good-nature : all which he must have by nature
and education, before he can be allowed to be, or to have been

20 of this order. He is a poor unwieldy wretch that commits
faults out of the redundance of his good qualities. His pity and
compassion make him sometimes a bubble” to all his fellows,
let them be never so much below him in understanding. His
desires run away with him through the strength and force of a
lively imagination, which hurries him on to unlawful pleasures,
before reason has power to come in to,his rescue. Thus, with
all the good intentions in the world to amendment, this creature
sins on against heaven, himself, his friends,and his country, who
all call for a better use of his talents. There is not a being
under the sun.so miserable as this: he goes on in a pursuit he
himself disapproves, and has no enjoyment but what is followed
by remorse; no relief from remorse, but the repetition of his

‘crime. It is possible I may talk of this person with too much


10


300 SOCIAL PAPERS,


indulgence ; ; but I must repeat it, that I think this a character
which is the most the object of ‘pity of any in the world. The
man in the pangs of the stone, gout, of any acute distemper, is
not in so deplorable a condition, in the eye of right sense, as he
that errs and repents, and repents and errs on. The fellow with
broken_limbs_justly deserves your alms for his impotent con’
dition ; but he that cannot use his own reason is in a much
worse statey for you see him in miserable circumstances, with
his remedy at the same time in his own possession, if he would,
or could use it. This is the cause that, of all ill characters, the


‘Rake has the best quarter in the world; for when he is him’


self, and unruffled with intemperance, you see his natural facul-
ties exert themselves, and attract an eye of favour towards his
infirmities,

But'if we look round us here, how many dull rogues are theré:
that would fain be what this poor man hates himself for? Al
the noise towards six in the evening is caused by his mimics
and imitators. How ought men of sense to be careful of theif
actions, if it were merely from the indignation of seeing them


20 selves ill-drawn by such little pretenders! Not to say he that


leads is guilty of all the actions of his followers ; and a Raké
has imitators whom you would never expect should prove s
Second-hand vice, sure, of all is the most nauseous. There 3§
hardly a folly more absurd, or which seems less to be accounted
for (though it is what we see every day,) than that grave and
honest natures give into this way, and at the same time hav®
good sense, if they thought fit to use it ; but the fatality (unde!
which most men labour) of desiring to be what they are not
makes them go out of a method in which they might be received


30 with applause, and would certainly excel, into one, wherein they


will all their lives have the air of strangers to what. they
aim.at.

For this reason, I have not lamented the metamorphosis of
any one I know'so muchas of Nobilis, whowas born with sweet”
ness_of temper, just apprehension, and every thing else that
might make him a man fit for his order. But instead of thé
pursuit of sober studies and applications, in which he would
certainly be capable of making a considerable figure in thé
noblest assembly of men in the world ; I say, in.spite of that


40 good nature, which is his proper bent, he will say ill-natured.


THE CHARACTERS OF A RAKE AND A COQUETTE, 301


things, aloud, put such as he was, and still should be, out of
‘countenance, and drown all the natural good in him, to receive
an artificial ill character, in which he will never succeed ; for
Nobilis is no Rake. He may guzzle as much wine as he pleases ;
... but he may as well drink water-gruel, and go twice a-day
to church, for it will never do. I pronounce it again, Nobilis
is no Rake. To be of that order, he must be vicious against
his will, and not so by study or application. All ‘Pretty
Fellows’ are also excluded to a man, as well as all inamoratoes,

10 or persons of the epicene gender, who gaze at one another in
the presence of ladies. This class, of which I am giving you
an account, is pretended to also by men of strong abilities in
drinking ; though they are such whom the liquor, not the con-
versation, keeps together. But blockheads may roar, fight,
and stab, and be never the nearer; their labour is also lost ;
they want sense : they are no Rakes,

As a Rake among men is the man who lives in the constant
abuse of his reason, so a Coquette among women is one who
lives i in continual misapplication ¢ of her“beauty. The chief of

20 allWhoim Ihave the honour to be acquainted with, is pretty
Mrs. Toss: she is ever in practice of something which dis-
figures her, and takes from her charms, though all she does
tends to a contrary effect. She has naturally a very agreeable
voice and utterance, which she has changed the prettiest
lisp imaginable. She sees what she has a mind to see at half
a ‘Tiiledistance ; but poring with her eyes half shut at every one
she passes by, she believes much more becoming. The Cupid
on her fan and she have their eyes full on each other, all the
time in which they are not both in motion. Whenever her eye

30 is turned from that dear object, you may have a glance, and
your bow, if she is in humour, returned as civilly as you make
it; but that must not be in the presence of a man of greater
quality : for Mrs, Toss i is so thoroughly well-bredy that the chief
Person present ‘has all her regards. And she who giggles at
divine service, and laughs at her very mother, can compose
herself at the approach of a man of a good estate.


Tatler, No. 27.] [June 9, 1709-


302 SOCIAL PAPERS.


No. 93. Character of Sir Taffety Trippet; a Cure for the
Spleen.


My friend sir Thomas has communicated to me his letters
from Epsom of the twenty-fifth instant, which give, in general,
a very good account of the present posture of affairs in that
place; but that the tranquillity and correspondence® of the
company begins to be interrupted by the arrival of sir Taffety
Trippet®, 2 fortune-hunter, whose follies are too gross to givt
diversion; and whose vanity is too stupid to let him be sensible
athe ic a public offence. If people will indulge a splenetic
humour, it is impossible to be at ease, when such creatures a5

1o are the scandal of our species set up for gallantry and adven-
tures. It will be much more easy, therefore, to laugh sir Taffety
into reason, than convert him from his foppery by any serious
contempt. I knew a gentleman that made it a maxim to open
his doors, and ever run into the way of bullies, to avoid theif
insolence. The rule will hold as well with coxcombs : they aré
never mortified, but when they see you receive and despisé
them ; otherwise they rest assured, that it is your ignorance
makes them out ef your good graces; or, that it is only want
of admittance prevents their being amiable where they are

2o shunned and avoided. But sir Taffety is a fop of so sanguine
a complexion, that I fear it. will be very hard for the fair-one he
‘at présérif pursues to get rid of the chace, without being s0
tired, as, for her own ease, to fall into the mouth of the mongrel
she runs from. But the history of sir Taffety is as pleasant a5
his character. °

It happened that, when he first set up fora fortune-hunters
he chose Tunbridge for the scene_of action, where were at that
time two sisters upon the same design. The knight believed. of
course the el elder must be the better prize; and consequently

30 makes all his sail that way. People that want sense do alway$
in an egregious mannér want modesty, which made our her?
triumph in making his amour as public as was possible. Thé
adored lady was no less vain of his public addresses, A®
attorney with one cause is not half so restless as a woman with
one lover, Wherever they met, they talked to each other aloud,


CHARACTER OF SIR TAFFETY TRIPPET, ETC. 303


chose each other partner at balls, saluted at the most con-
spicuous parts of the service of the church, and practised, in
honour of each other, all the remarkable particularities which
are usual for persons who admire one another, and are con-
temptible to the rest of the world. These two lovers seemed as
much made for each other as Adam and Eve, and all pro-
nounced it a match of nature’s own making; but the night before
the ntiptials, so universally approved, the younger sister, envious
of the good fortune even of her sister, who had been present at

10 most of their interviews, and had an equal taste for the charms
of a fop, as there are a set of women made for.that order of
men ; the younger, I say, unable to see so rich a prize pass by
her, discovered to sir Taffety, that a coquet air, much tongue,
and three suits, was all the portion of his mistress. His love
vanished that moment, himself and equipage the next morning.
IC is uncertain where the lover has been ever since engaged ;
but certain it is, he has not appeared in his character as a
follower of love and fortune until he arrived at Epsom, where
there is at present a young lady‘of youth, beauty, and fortune,

20 who has alarmed all the vain and the impertinent to infest that
quarter, At the head of this assembly, sir Taffety shines in the
brightest manner, with all the accomplishments which usually
ensnare the heart of a woman ; with this particular merit, which
Often is of great service, that he is laughed at for her sake. The
friends of the fair one are in much pain for the sufferings she
goes through from the perseverance of this hero; but they may
bémuch more so from the danger of his succeeding, toward
which they give a helping hand, if they dissuade her with bitter-
hess ; for there is a fantastical generosity in the sex to approve

3° creatures of the least merit imaginable, when they see the imper-
fections of their admirers are become marks of derision for their
sakes; and there is nothing so frequent, as that he, who was
contemptible to a woman in her own judgment, has won her by
being too violently opposed by others.

In the several capacities I bear of astrologer, civilian, and
Physician, I have with great application studied the public
€molument ; to this end serve all my lucubrations, speculations,
and whatever other labours I undertake, whether nocturnal or
diurnal, On this motive am I induced to publish a never-failing

4° medicine for the soleen : my experience in this distemper came


304 SOCIAL PAPERS.


from a very remarkable cure on my ever worthy friend Tom
Spindle, who, through excessive gaiety, had exhausted that
natural stock of wit and spirits he had long been blessed with:
he was sunk and flattened to the lowest: degree imaginable,
sitting whole hours over the ‘Book of Martyrs’ and ‘ Pilgrim’s
Progress ;’ his other contemplations never rising higher than
the regularity of his pulse. In this condition I found him,
accompanied by the learned Dr. Drachm, and a good old
nurse. Drachm had prescribed magazines of herbs, and mines
1o of steel. I soon discovered the malady, and descanted of
the nature of it, until I convinced both the patient and his
abe that’ the spleen is not to be cured by medicine bul
-by poetry. Apollo, the author of physic, shone with diffusive
‘Tays, the best of poets as well as of physicians ; and it is in thi
double capacity that I have made my way; and have found
sweet, easy,,flowing-numbers,are oft superior ‘to our noblest
medicines. When the spirits are low, and nature sunk, thé
muse, with sprightly and harmonious notes, gives an unexpected
turn with a grain of poetry; which I prepare without the ust
20 of mercury. I have done wonders in this kind ; for or_the splec!
slike the Tarantula, the effects of whose stalleneae | poison are
to be prevented by no other remedy but the charms of music : fol
‘you are to understand, that’as some noxious animals cart}
antidotes for their own poisons, so there is something equally
unaccountable in poetry ; for though it is sometimes a disease
it is to be cured only by itself. Now, I knowing Tom Spindle’
constitution, and that he is not only a pretty gentleman, but als?
a pretty poet, found the true cause of his distemper was a violen!
grief, that moved his affections too strongly: for, during thé
30 late treaty of peace, he had writ a most excellent poem on tha!
subject ; and when he wanted but two lines in the last stant
for finishing the whole piece, there comes news that the French
tyrant would not sign. Spindle in a few days took his bed, and
had lain there still, had not I been sent for. 1 immediately tol4
him, there was great probability the French would’ now sue t@
us for peace, I saw immediately a new life in his eyes, and
knew that nothing could help him forward so well, as hearin$
verses which he would believe worse than his own. I read hit
therefore, the Brussels Postscript: after which I recited, som
40 heroic lines of my own, which operated so strongly on the ty”


ON ESTEEM, ETC. 305


panum of his ear, that I doubt not but I have kept’ out all other
sounds for a fortnight; and have reason to hope, we shall see
him abroad the day before his poem. . . .


Tatler, No, 47.] [July 28, 1709.


No. 94. Ox Esteem; Characters of Jack and Gatty Gainly,
of Flavia and Lucite


Metiri se quemque suo modulo ac pede verum est.
Hor. Ep. i. 7. ver. ult.


The general purposes of men in the conduct of their lives,
I mean with relation to this life only, end in gaining either the
affection or the esteem of those with whom they converse.
Esteem makes a man powerful in business, and affection de-
sirable ‘iif conversation ; which is certainly the reason that very
agreeable men fail of their point in the world, and those who are
to by no means such, arrive at it with much ease. If it be visible
in a man’s carriage that he has a strong passion to please, no
One is much ata foss how to keep measures with him ; because
there is always a balance in people’s hands to make up with him,
by giving him what he still wants in exchange for what you
think fit to deny him. Such a person asks with diffidence, and
ever leaves room for denial by that softness of his complexion.
At the same time he himself is capable of denying nothing, even
what he is not able to perform. The other sort of man who
courts esteem, having a quite different view, has as different a
20 behaviour ; and acts as much by the dictates of his reason as
the other does by the impulse of his inclination. You must pay
for every thing you have of him. He considers mankind as a
people in commerce, and never gives out of himself what he is
sure will not come in with interest from another. All his words
and actions tend to the advancement of his reputation and of his
fortune, towards which he makes hourly progress, because he,
lavishes no part of his good-will upon such as do not make some
advances to merit it. The man who Values affection, sometimes
becomes popular; he.who aims at esteem, seldom fails of

30 growing rich.
Thus far we have looked at these different men, as pefsons

X


10


20


30


306 SOCIAL PAPERS,


who endeavoured to be valued and beloved from design or am-
bition ; but they appear quite in another figure, when you ob-
serve the men who are agreeable and venerable from the force
of their natural inclinations. We affect the company of him
who has least regard of himself in his carriage, who throws him-
self into unguarded gaiety, voluntary mirth, and general good
humour ; who has nothing in his head but the present hour,
and seems to have all his interest and passions gratified, if every
man else in the room is as unconcerned as himself. This man
usually has no quality or character among his companions ; let
him be born of whom he will, have what great qualities he
please; let him be capable of assuming for a moment what
figure he pleases, he still dwells in the imagination of all who
know him but as Jack such-a-one. This makes Jack brighten up
the room_wherever he_enters, and change the.severity of the
company into that gaiety and good humour, into which his con-
versation generally leads them. It is not unpleasant ta observe
even this sort of creature go out of his character, to check him-
self sometimes for his familiarities, and pretend so awkwardly at
procuring to himself more esteem than he finds he meets witb.
I was the other day walking with Jack Gainly towards Lincoln’s
inn-walks : we met a fellow who is a lower officer where Jack
is in the direction. Jack cries to him, ‘So, how is it, Mr. at
He answers, ‘Mr. Gainly, I am glad to see you well. ; This ex’
pression of equality gave my friend a pang, which appeared ia
the flush of his countenance. ‘Pr’ythee Jack,’ says I, ‘do not be
angry at the man; for do what you will, the man can only lové
you ; be contented with the image the man has of thee; for if
thou aimest at any other, it must be hatred or contempt.’ I went
on, and told him, ‘Look you, Jack, I have heard thee sometimes
talk like an oracle for half an hour, with the sentiments of a Ro-
man, the closeness of a schoolman, and the integrity of a divine;
hut then Jack, while I admired thee, it was upon topics which
did not concern thyself ; and where the greatness of the subject,
added to thy being personally unconcerned in it, created all that
was great in thy discourse.’ I did not mind his being a littlé
out of humour; but comforted him, by giving him several in-
stances of men of our acquaintance, who had no one quality i?
any eminence, that were much more esteemed than he was with


4o yery many: ‘but the thing is, if your character is to give pleasures


ON RSTEEM, ETC. 307


men will consider you only in that light, and not in those acts
which turn to esteem and veneration.’

When I think of Jack Gainly, I cannot but reflect also upon
his sister Gatty. She is young, witty, pleasant, innocent. This
is her natural character ; but when she observes any one admired
for what they. calla fine woman, she is all the next day womanly,
prudent, observing, and virtuous. She is every moment asked
in her prudential behaviour, whether she is not well? Upon
Which she as often answers ina fret, ‘Do people think one must

10 be always romping, always a Jackpudding?’ I never fail to
enquire of her, if my lady such-a-one, that awful beauty, was not
at the play last night? She knows the connection between that
question and her change of humour, and says, ‘ It would be very
well if some people would examine into themselves, as much as
they do into others. Or, ‘ Sure, there is nothing in the world so
ridiculous as an amorous old man.’ *

As I was saying, there is a class which every man is in by his
post in nature, from which it is impossible for him to withdraw
to another, and become it. Therefore it is necessary that each

20 should be contented with it, and not endeavour at any progress
out of that tract. “To follow nature is the only agreeable course,
which is what I would fain inculcate to those jarring companions,
Flavia and Lucia. They are mother and daughter. Flavia,
who is the mamma, has all the charms and desires of youth still
about her, and is not much turned of thirty. Lucia is blooming
and amorous, and but a little above fifteen. The mother looks
very much younger than she is, the girl very much older. If it
were possible to fix the girl to her sick bed, and preserve the
Portion, the use of which the mother partakes, the good widow

30 Flavia would certainly do it. But for fear of Lucia’s escape, the
mother is forced to be constantly attended with a rival that ex-
plains her age, and draws off the eyes of her admirers. The
jest is, they can never be together in strangers’ company, but
Lucy is eternally reprimanded for something very particular in
her behaviour ; for which she has the malice to say, ‘she hopes
She shall always obey her parents.’ She carried her passion of
jealousy to that height the-other day, that, coming suddenly into
the room, and surprising colonel Lofty speaking rapture on one
knee to her mother, she clapped down by him, and asked her

40 blessing.


x2


308 SOCIAL PAPERS.


I do not know whether it is so proper to tell family occur-
rences of this nature; but we every day see the same thing
happen in public conversation of the world. Men cannot be
contented with what is laudable, but they must have all that is
laudable. This affectation is what decoys the familiar man into
pretences to take state upon him, and the contrary character to
the folly of aiming at being winning and complaisant. But in
these cases ‘men may easily lay aside what they are, but can
never arrive at what they are not. .

10 As to the pursuits after affection and esteem, the fair sex are
happy in this particular, that with them ‘the one is much more
nearly related to the other than in men. The love of a woman
is inseparable from some esteem of her ; and as she is naturally
the object of affection, the woman who has your esteem has
also some degree of yourlove. A man that dotes on a woman
for lfer beauty, will whisper his friend, ‘ that creature has a great
deal of wit when you are well acquainted with her.’ And if
you examine the. bottom of your esteem for a woman, you will
find you have a greater opinion of her beauty than any body else.

20 As to us men, I design to pass most of my time with the facetious
Harry Bickerstaff; but William Bickerstaff, the most prudent
man of our family, shall be my executor.


Tatler, No. 206,] [August 3, 1710.


No. 95. , On Economy in our Affairs» Characters of Laertes
and TIrus.


Paupertatis pudor et fuga.— Hor. Ep. i. 18. 24.


Economy in our affairs has the same effect upon our fortunes
which good-breeding has upon our conversation. There is 2
pretending behaviour in both cases, which instead of making
men esteemed, renders them both miserable and contemptible.
We had yesterday, at Sir Roger’s, a set of country gentlemen
who dined with him: and after dinner the glass was taken, by
those who pleased, pretty plentifully. Among others I observed

30 2 person of a tolerable good aspect, who seemed to be more


ON ECONOMY IN OUR AFFAIRS, ETC, 309


greedy of liquor than any of the company, and yet methought
he did not taste it with delight. As he grew warm, he was
suspicious of every thing that was said, and as he advanced to-
wards being fuddled, his humour grew worse. At the same time
his bitterness’ Seemed to be rather an inward dissatisfaction in
his own mind, than any dislike he had taken to the company.
Upon hearing his name, I knew him to be a gentleman of a
considerable fortune in this county, but greatly i in debt. What
gives “the unhappy man ‘this’ peevishness of spirit is, that his

to estate is dipped”, and is eating out with usury; and yet he has
fot the heart to sell any part of it. His proud stomach, at the
cost of restless nights, constant inquietudes, danger of ations,
and a thousand nameless inconveniencies, preserves this canker
in his fortune, rather than it shall be said he is a man of fewer
hundreds a year than he has been commonly reputed. Thus
he endures the torment of poverty, to avoid the name of heing
less rich. If you go to his house, you see great plenty; but
served in a manner that shows it is all unnatural, and that the
master’s mind is not at home. There is a certain waste and

20 carelessness in the air of every thing, and the whole appears
but a covered indigence, a magnificent poverty. That neatness
and cheerfulness which attend the table of him who lives within
compass, is wanting, and exchanged for a libertine way of ser-
Vice in all about him.

This gentlemian’s conduct, though a very common way of
management, is as ridiculous as that officer’s would be, who had
but few men under his command, and should take the charge of
an extent of country rather than of a small pass. To pay for,
personate, and keep in a man’s hands, a greater estate than he

30 really has, is of all others the most unpardonable vanity, and
must in the end reduce the man who is guilty of it to dishonour,
Yet if we look round us in any county of Great Britain, we
‘shall see many in this fatal error; if that may be called by so
soft a name, which proceeds from a false shame of appearing
what they really are, when the contrary behaviour would in a
short time advance them to the condition which they pretend to.

Laertes has fifteen hundred pounds a year; which is mort-
gaged for six thousand pounds,; but it is impossible to convince
him, that if he sold as much as would pay off that debt, .he

40 would save four shillings in thé pound®, which he gives for the


310 SOCIAL PAPERS.


vanity of being the reputed master of it. Yet if Laertes did this,
he would perhaps be easier in his own fortune; but then Irus,
a fellow of yesterday, who has but twelve hundred a year, would

“be his equal. Rather than this should be, Laertes goes on to
bring well-born beggars into the world, and every twelvemonth
charges his estate with at least one year’s rent more by the birth
of a child. .

Laertes and Irus are neighbours, whose way of living are an

abomination to each other. Irus is moved by the fear of poverty,
10 and Laertes by the shame of it. Though the motive of action is
of so near affinity in both, and may be resolved into this, ‘that
to each of them poverty is the greatest of all evils,’ yet are their
manners very widely different. Shame of poverty makes Laertes
launch into unnecessary equipage, vain expense, and lavish
‘entertainments. Fear of poverty makes Irus allow himself only
plain necessaries, appear without a servant, sell his own corn,
attend his labourers, and be himself a labourer. Shame of
poverty makes Laertes go every day a step nearer to it; and
fear of poverty stirs up Irus to make every day some farther
20 progress from it.

These different motives produce the excesses which men are
guilty of in the negligence of and provision for themselves.
Usury, stock-jobbing, extortion, and oppression, have their seed
in the dread of want; and vanity, riot, and prodigality, from the
shame of it ; but both these excesses are infinitely below the
pursuit of a reasonable creature. After we have taken care to
command so much as is necessary for maintaining ourselves in
the order of men suitable to our character, the care of super-
fluities is‘'a vice no less extravagant than the neglect of

30 necessaries would have been before.

Certain it is, that they are both out of nature, when she is
followed with reason and good sense. It is from this reflection
:that I always read Mr. Cowley with the greatest pleasure. His
magnanimity is as much above that of other considerable men,

as his understanding ; and it is a true distinguishing spirit in
the elegant author ® who published his works, to dwell so much
upon the temper of his mind and the moderation of his desires-
By this means he has rendered his friend as amiable as famous-
That state of life which bears the face of poverty with Mr.
4o Cowley’s great vulgar®, is admirably described ; and it is no


THE CHARACTER OF A CONSTITUTIONAL LIAR, 311


small satisfaction to those of the same turn of desire, that he
produces the authority of the wisestymen of the best age of, the
world, to strengthen his opinion of the ordinary pursuits of
mankind.

It would methinks be no ill maxim of life, if, according to
that ancestor of Sir Roger® whom I lately mentioned, every man
would point to himself what sum he would resolve not to exceed.
He might by this means cheat himself into a tranquillity on this
side of that expectation, or convert what he should get above it

1o to nobler uses than his own pleasures or necessities. This
temper of mind- would exempt a man from an ignorant envy of
restless men above him, and a more inexcusable contempt of
happy men below him. This would be sailing by some com-
pass, living with some design ; but to be eternally bewildered
in prospects of future gain, and putting on unnecessary armour
against improbable blows of fortune, is a mechanic being which
has not good sense for its direction, but is carried on by a sort
of acquired instinct towards things below our consideration, and
unworthy our esteem. It is possible that the tranquillity I now

20 enjoy at Sir Roger’s may have created in me this way of think-
ing, which is so abstracted from the common relish of the
world ; but as I am now in a pleasing arbour surrounded with

‘a beautiful landscape, I find no inclination so strong as to con-
tinue in these mansions so remote from the ostentatious scenes
of life; and am at this present writing philosopher enough to
conclude with Mr. Cowley®,
If e’er ambition did my fancy cheat
With any wish so’ mean as to be great:


Continue, Heav’n, still from me to remove
30 The humble blessings of that life I love.


Spectator, No. 114.] [July 11, 171%.


No, 96. The Character of a Constitutional Liar.
Parthis mendacior.—Honr. Ep. ii. 1. 112,


According to the request. of this strange fellow 3, I shall print
the following letter :—
‘Mr. SPECTATOR,
‘I shall without any manner of preface or apology acquaint


10


20


30


312 SOCIAL PAPERS.


you, that I am, and ever have been, from my youth upward, one
of the greatest liars this island has produced. I have read
‘all the moralists upon the subject, but could never find any effect
their discourses had upon me, but to add to my misfortune hy
new thoughts and ideas, and making me more ready in my
language, and capable of sometimes mixing seeming truths with
my improbabilities. With this strong passion towards falsehood
in this kind, there does not’ live an honester man, or a sincerer
friend ; but’ my imagination runs away with me; and whatever
is aarted, I have such a scene of adventures appears in an in-
stant before me, that I cannot help uttering them, though, to my
immediate confusion, I canfot but know I am liable to be de-
tected by the first man I meet.

‘Upon occasion of the mention of the battle of Pultowa®, I
could not forbear giving an account of a kinsman of mine, a young
merchant who was bred at Moscow, that had too much mettle
to attend books of entries and accounts, when there was so active
a scene in the country where he resided, and followed the Czar
as a volunteer. This warm youth (born at the instant the thing
was spoken of) was the man who unhorsed the Swedish gene-
ral ; he was the occasion that the Muscovites kept their fire in
so soldier-like a manner, and brought up those troops which
were covered from the enemy at the beginning of the day;
besides this, he had at last the good fortune to be the man who
took Count Piper®, With all this fire I knew my cousin to be
the civilest creature in the world. He never made any im-
perjinent show of his valour, and then he had an excellent
genius for the world in every other kind. I had letters from
him (here I, felt in my pockets) that exactly spoke the Czar’s
character, which I knew perfectly well; and I could not forbear
concluding, that I lay with his imperial majesty, twice or thrice
a week all the while he lodged at Deptford®. What is worse than
all this, it is impossible to speak to me but you give me some
occasion of coming out with one lie or other, that has neither
wit, humour, prospect of interest, or any other motive that |
can think of in nature. The other day, when one was commend-
ing an eminent and learned divine, what occasion in the world
had I to say, § Methinks he would look more venerable if he
were not so fair a man?’ I remember the company smiled.


40 I have seen the gentleman since, and he is coal black. I have


THE CHARACTER OF A CONSTITUTIONAL LIAR. 313


intimations every day in my life that nobody believes me, yet I
am never the better. I was saying sqmething the other day to
an old friend at Will’s coffee-house, and he made me no manner
of answer ; but told me that an acquaintance of Tully the orator
having two or three times together said to him, without receiv-
ing any answer, ‘that upon his honour he was but that very
month forty years of age,’ Tully answered, ‘Surely. you think
me the most incredulous man in the world, if I do not believe
what you have told me every day these ten years.” The mis-
10 chief of it is, I find myself wonderfully inclined to have been
present at every occurrence that is spoken of before me ; this
had led me into many inconveniencies, but indeed they have been
the fewer, because I am no ill-natured man, and never speak
things to any man’s disadvantage. I never directly defame, but
I do what is as bad in the consequence, for I have often made a
man say such and such a lively expression, who was born a mere
elder brother. When one has said in my hearing, ‘such a one
is no wiser than he should be,’ I immediately have replied, ‘Now
faith, I cannot see that ; he said a very good thing to my lord
20 such-a-one, upon such an occasion,’ and the like. Such an
honest dolt as this has been watched in every expression he
uttered, upon my recommendation of him, and consequently
been subject to the more ridicule. I once endeavoured to cure
myself of this impertinent quality, and resolved to hold my
tongue for seven days together; I did so; but then I had so
many winks and unnecessary distortions of my face upon what
any body else said, that I found I only forbore the expression,
and that I still lied in my heart to every man I met with, You
are to know one thing (which I believe you will say is a pity,
30 considering the use I should have made of it), I never travelled
in my life; but J do not know whether I could have-spoken of
any foreign country with more familiarity than I do at present,
in company who are strangers to me. I have cursed the
inns in Germany ; commended the freedom of conversation in
France ; and though I was never out of this dear town, and
fifty miles about it, have been three nights together dogged
by bravoes, for an intrigue with a cardinal’s mistress at Rome.
“It were endless to give you particulars of this kind; but I
can assure you, Mr. Spectator, there are about twenty or thirty
40 of us in this town—TI mean by this town the cities of London


314 SOCIAL PAPERS.


and Westminster—I say there are in town a sufficient number
of us to make a society among ourselves ; and since we-cannot
be believed any longer, I beg of you to print this my letter, that
-we may meet together, and be under such regulation as there
may be no occasion for belief er confidence among us. If you
think fit, we might-be called ‘ the historians »,’ for liar is become
avery harsh word. And that a member of the society may not
hereafter be ill received by the rest of the world, I desire you
would explain a little this sort of men, and not let us historians
to be ranked, as we are in the imaginations of ordinary people,
among common liars, makebates 4, impostors and incendiaries.
For your instruction herein, you are to know than an historian
in conversation is only a person of so pregnant a fancy, that he
cannot be contented with ordinary occurrences. I know a man
of quality of our order, who is of the wrong side of forty-three,
and has been of that age, according to Tully’s jest, for some
years since, whose vein is upon the romantic. Give him the
least occasion, and he will tell you something so very particular
that happened in such a year, and in such company, where by
20 the bye was present such a one, who was afterward made such
athing. Out of all these circumstances, in the best language in
the world, he will join together with such probable incidents an
account that shows a person of the deepest penetration, the
honestest mind, and withal something so humble when he
speaks of himself, that you would admire. Dear Sir, why
should this be lying? there is nothing so instructive. He hag
withal the gravest aspect—something so very venerable and
great! Another of these historians is a young man‘ whom we
would take in, though he extremely wants parts : as people send
30 children (before they can learn anything) to school, to keep them
out of hasm’s way. He tells things which have nothing at all
in them, and can neither please nor displease, but merely také
up your time to no manner of purpose, no manner of delight +
but he is good-natured, and does it because he loves to be say-
ing something to you, and entertain you.
‘I could name you a soldier that hath done very great thingS
without slaughter ; he is’ prodigiously dull and slow of heads
. but what he can say is for ever false, so that we must hav
him. ; .
40 ‘Give me leave to tell you of one more, who is a lover ; he '


ON THE DEVOTE, ETC. 315


the most afflicted creature in the world lest what happened
between him and a great beauty should ever be known. Yet
again he comforts himself, ‘Hang. the jade her woman. If
money can keep the slut trusty, I will do it, though I mortgage
every acre ; Antony and Cleopatra for that ; All for Love and
the World well Lost»

‘Then, Sir, there is my little merchant, honest Indigo of the
*Change, there is my man for loss and gain ; there is tare and
tret, there is lying all round the globe ; he has such a prodigious

10 intelligence, be knows all the French are doing, or what we
intend or ought to intend, and has it from such hands. But
alas, whither am I running! while I complain, while I re-
monstrate to you, even all this is a lie, and there is not one
such person of quality, lover, soldier, or merchant, as I have
now described in the whole world, that I know of. But I will
catch myself once in my life, and in spite of nature speak one
truth, to wit, that I am,

‘Your humble servant,’ &c.


Spectator, No. 136.] {August 6, 1711.


No. 97. Ox the Dévote, and the Modern Youth.


Cum magnis virtutibus affers
Grande supercilium.—Juv. Sat. vi. 168.


‘MR. SPECTATOR,

“You have in some of your discourses described most sorts of
20 women in their distinct and proper classes, as the ape, the
coquette, and many others; but I think you have never yet
said any thing of a devotee. A devotee is one of these who
disparage religion by their indiscreet and unseasonable intro-
duction of the mention of virtue on all occasions. She pro-
fesses she is what nobody ought to doubt she is ; and betrays
the labour she is put to, to be what she ought to be with
cheerfulness and alacrity. She lives in the world, and denies
herself none of the diversions of it, with a constant declaration
how insipid all things in it are to her. She is never herself but


316 SOCIAL PAPERS.


at church; there she displays her virtue, and is so fervent in
her devotions, that I have frequently seen her pray herself out
of breath. While other young ladies in the house are dancing,
or playing at questions and commands, she reads aloud in her
closet. She says, all love is ridiculous, except it be celestial ;
but she-speaks of the passion of one mortal to another with too
much bitterness for one that had no jealousy mixed with her
contempt of it. If at any time she sees a man warm in his
addresses to his mistress, she will lift up her eyes to heaven,
zo and cry, “‘ What nonsense is that fool talking! Will the bell
never ring for prayers?” We have an eminent lady of this
stamp in our country, who pretends to amusements very much
above the rest of her sex. She never carries a white shockdog
with bells under her arm, nor a squirrel or dormouse in her
pocket, but always an abridged piece of morality, to steal out
when she is sure of being observed. When she went to the
famous ass-race (which I must confess was but an odd diversion
to be encouraged by people of rank and figure), it was not, like
other ladies, to hear those poor animals bray, nor to see fellows
20 run naked, or to hear country ’squires in bob-wigs and white
girdles make love at the side of a coach, and cry, “ Madam,
this is dainty weather.” Thus she describes the diversion;
for she went only to pray heartily that nobody might be hurt in
the crowd, and to see if the poor fellow’s face, which was distorted
with grinning, might any way be brought to itself again. She
never chats over her tea, but covers her face, and is supposed
in an ejaculation before she tastes a sup. This ostentatious
behaviour is such an offence to true sanctity, that it disparages
it, and makes virtue not only unamiable, but also ridiculous.
30 The sacred writings are full of reflections which abhor this kind
of conduct ; and a devotee is so far from promoting goodness,
that she deters others by her example. Folly and vanity in one
of these Jadies is like vice in a clergyman: it does not only
debase him, but makes the inconsiderate part of the world

think the worse of religion.

‘I am, Sir, your humble Servant,
‘ HOTSPUR.’
* MR. SPECTATOR,

‘Xenophon, in his short account of the Spartan common-
4o.wealth, speaking of the behaviour of their young men in the


ON THE DEVOTE, ETC. 317


streets, says, “ There was so much modesty in their looks, that
you might as soon have turned the eyes of a marble statue
upon you as theirs; and that in all their behaviour they were
more modest than a bride when put to bed upon her wedding-
night.” This virtue, which is always sub-joined to magnanimity,
had such an influence upon their courage, that in battle an
enemy could not look them in the face, and they durst not but
die for their country.
“Whenever I walk into the streets of London and West-
to minster, the countenances of all the young fellows that pass
by me make me wish myself in Sparta: I meet with such
blustering airs, big looks, and bold fronts, that, to a superficial
observer, would bespeak a courage above those Grecians. I
am arrived to that perfection in speculation, that I understand
the language of the eyes, which would be a great misfortune to
me had I not corrected the testiness of old age by philosophy.
There is scarce a man in a red coat, who does not tell me, with
a full stare, he is a bold man: J] see several swear inwardly at
mey without any offence of mine, but the oddness of my person :
20 I meet contempt in every street, expressed in different manners
by the scornful look, the elevated eyebrow, and the swelling
nostrils of the proud and prosperous. The ’prentice speaks his
disrespect by an extended finget, and the porter by stealing out
his tongue. Ifa country gentleman appears a little curious in
observing the edifices, signs, clocks, coaches, and dials, it is not
to be imagined how the polite rabble of this town, who are
acquainted with these objects, ridicule his rusticity. I have
known a fellow with a burden on-his head steal a hand down
from his load, and slily twirl the cock of a ’squire’s hat behind
30 him: while the offended person is swearing, or out of counte-
nance, all the wag-wits in the highway are grinning #h applause
of the ingenious rogue that gave him the tip, and'the folly of
him who had not eyes all round his head to prevent receiving
it. These things arise from a general affectation of smartness,
wit, and courage. Wycherley® somewhere rallies the preten-
sions this way, by making a fellow say, “Red breeches are a
certain sign of valour ;” and Otway® makes a man, to boast
his agility, trip up a beggar on crutches. From such hints I beg
a speculation gn this subject: in the mean time I shall do all
40 in the power of a weak ‘old fellow in my own defence ; for as


318 SOCIAL PAPERS.


Diogenes, being in quest of an honest man, sought for him
when it was broad day-light with a lantern and candle, so J
intend for the future to walk the streets with a dark lantern,
which has a convex crystal in it ; and if any man stares at me,
I give fair warning that I will direct the light full into his eyes.
Thus, despairing to find men modest, I hope by this means to
evade their impudence.
*I am, Sir, your most humble’ Servant,
‘ SOPHROSUNIUS.,’


Spectator, No. 354,] [April 16, 1712.


No. 98. On Promise Breakers; Character of Jack Sippet,
Will Trap and Fack Stint.


Feedius hoc aliquid quandoque andebis. —Juv. Sat. ii. 82.


10 The first steps towards ill are very carefully to be avoided,
for men insensibly go on when they are once enfered, and do
not keep up a lively abhorrence of the least unworthiness.
There is a certain frivolous falsehood that people indulge them-
selves in, ‘which ought to be had in greater detestation than it
commonly meets with, What I mean is a neglect of. Promises
-made on small and _indifferent t_occasions, “such as parties es of
pleasure, entertainments, and sometimes meetings out of curi-
osity, in men of like faculties, to be in each other’s company.
There are tnany causes to which one may assign this light

20 infidelity. Jack Sippet never keeps the hour he has appointed
to come to a-friend’s to dinner; but he is an insignificant
fellow, who does it out of vanity. He could’ never, he knows,
make any figure in company, but by giving a little disturbance
‘at his entry, and therefore takes care to drop in when he thinks
you are just seated, He takes his place after having. discom-
posed every body, and desires there may be no ceremony i
then does t he begin to call himself the saddest fellow, in_dis-
appointing so many places as he was invited to elsewhere. ‘jt
is thé fop’s varity to name houses of better ,cheer, and to

30 acquaint you that he chose yours out of ten dinners which he


ON PROMISE BREAKERS, ETC. 319


was obliged to be at that day. The last time J had the fortune
to eat with him, he was imagining how very fat he should have
been, had he eaten all he had ever been invited to. But it is
impertinent to dwell upon the manners of such a wretch as
obliges all whom he disappoints, though his circumstances con-
strain them to be civil to him, But there are those that every
one would be glad to see, who fall into the same detestable
habit. It is a merciless thing that any one can be at ease, and
suppose a set of people, who have a kindness for him, at that
to moment waiting out of respect to him, and refusing to taste
their food or conversation with the utmost impatience. One of
these promisers sometimes shall make his excuses for not
coming at all, so late that half the company have only to
lament that they have neglected matters of moment to meet
“him whom they find a trifler. They immediately repent of the
value they had for him; and such treatment repeated, makes
company never depend upon his promises any more; so that
he often comes at the middle of a meal, where he is secretly
slighted by the persons with whom he eats, and cursed by the
20 servants, whose dinner is delayed by his prolonging their
master’s entertainment. It is wonderful that men guilty this
way could never have observed, that the whiling time, .the
gathering together, and waiting a little before dinner, is the
most awkwardly passed away of any part in the four-and-twenty
hours. If they did think at all, they would reflect upon their
guilt, in lengthening such a suspension of agreeable life. The
constant offending this way has in a degree an effect upon the
honesty of his mind who is guilty of it, as common swearing is
a kind of habitual perjury. It makes the soul unattentive to
30 what an oath is, even while it utters it at the lips. Phocion
beholding a wordy orator, while he was making a magnificent
speech to the people, full of vain promises ; ‘ Methinks,’ said
he, ‘I am now fixing my eyes upon a cypress tree; it has all
the pomp and beauty imaginable in its branches, leaves, and
height: but, alas! it bears no fruit?

Though the expectation which is raised by impertinent
promisers is thus barren, their confidence, even after failures,
is so great, that they subsist by still promising on. I have
heretofore discqursed of the insignificant liar, the boaster, and

4° the castle-builder, and treated them as no ill-designing men


10


20


30


320 SOCIAL PAPERS.


(though they are to be placed among the frivolously false ones),
but persons who fall into that way purely to recommend them-
selves by their vivacities; but indeed I cannot let heedless
promisers, though in the most minute circumstances, pass with
so slight a censure. If a man should take a resolution to pay
only sums above a hundred pounds, and yet contract with
different people debts of five and ten, how long can we suppose
he will keep his credit ? This man will as long support his good
name in business, as he will in conversation, who without
difficulty makes assignations which he is indifferent whether he
keeps or not.

I am the more severe upon this vice, because I have been so
unfortunate as to be a very great criminal myself. Sir Andrew
F Freeport, and ,all other my friends who are scrupulous to
promises of the meanest consideration imaginable, from a habit
of virtue that way, have often upbraided me with it. I take
shame upon myself for this crime, and more particularly for the
greatest I ever committed of the sort, that when as agreeable 2
company of gentlemen and ladies as ever were got together;
and I forsooth, Mr. Spectator, to be of the party with women of
merit, like a booby as I was, mistook the time of meeting, and
came the night following. I wish every fool who is negligent
in this kind may have as great a loss as I had in this; for the
same company will never meet more, but are dispersed int?
various parts of the world, and I am left under the compunctio#
that I deserve, in so many different places to be called a trifler.

This fault is sometimes to be accounted for, when desirablé
people are fearful of appearing precise and reserved by denials 5
but tHey will find the apprehension of that imputation wil)
betray them into a childish impotence of mind, and make the
promise all who are so kind to ask it of them. This leads such


‘ soft creatures into the misfortune of seeming to return overture9


40


of good- -will with ingratitude. The first steps in the breach of
a man’s integrity are much more important than men aré
aware of. The man who scruples breaking his word in little
things, would not suffer in his own conscience so great pain for
failures of consequence, as he who thinks every little offence
against truth and justice a disparagement. We should not
make any thing we ourselves disapprove habitual to us, if we
would be sure of our integrity.


ON PROMISE BREAKERS, ETC, 321


I remember a falsehood of the trivial sort, though not in
relation to assignations, that exposed a man to a very uneasy
adventure. Will Trap and Jack Stint were chamber-fellows.in
the Inner Témple about twenty-five years ago. They one night
sat in the’ pit together at a comedy, where they both obscived
and liked the same young woman in the boxes. Their kindness
for her entered both hearts deeper than they imagined. Stint
had a good faculty at writing letters of love, and made his
address privately that way; while Trap proceeded in the

to ordinary course, by money and her waiting-maid. The lady
gave them both encouragement, receiving Trap into the utmost
favour, and answering at the same time Stint’s letters, and giving
him appointments at third places, Trap began to suspect the
epistolary correspondence of his friend, and discovered also that
Stint opened all his letters which came to their common lodg-
ings, in order to form his own assignations. After much
anxiety and restlessness, Trap came to a resolution, which he
thought would break off their commerce with one another
without any hazardous explanation. He therefore writ a letter

0 in a feigned hand to Mr. Trap at his chambers iri the Temple.
Stint, according to custom, seized and opened it, and was not a
little surprised to find the inside directed to himself, when with
Sreat perturbation of spirit he read as follows :—


‘MR. STINT‘,


‘You have gained a slight satisfaction at the expense of
doing a very heinous crime. At the price of a faithful friend
you have obtained an inconstant mistress. I rejoice jn this
expedient I have thought of to break my mind to you, and tell
you you are a base fellow, by a means which does not expose

30 you to the affront except you deserve it. I know, Sir, as
Criminal as you are, you have still shame enough to avenge
yourself against the hardiness of any one that should publicly
tell you of it. I, therefore, who had received so many secret
hurts from you, shall take satisfaction with safety to myself. I
call you base, and you must bear it, or acknowledge it; I
triumph over you that you cannot come at me; nor do I think
it dishonourable to come in armour to assault him, who was in
ambuscade when he wounded me.

‘What need more be said to convince you of being guilty of

xX


322 SOCIAL PAPERS.


the basest practice imaginable, than that it is such as has made
you liable to be treated after this manner, while you yourself
cannot in your own conscience but allow the justice of the
upbraidings of
‘ Your injured Friend,
‘RALPH TRAP,’


Spectator, No. 448.] [August'4, 1712,


No. 99. On the Character of Fidelia; Letter from Scabbard
Rusty.


Tibi scriptus, matrona, libellus—Marr. iii. 68,


When Lreflect.upon my labours for the public, I cannot but
observe, that part of the species, of which I profess myself 2
friend and guardian, is sometimes treated with severity ; that is:

ro theré are in my writings | many descriptions given of ill persons,
and’ fot yet any direct encomiurn madé"6n’those who are good-
“When.I was convinced of this error, I could not but immediately
call to mind several of the fair sex of my acquaintance, whosé
characters deserve to be transmitted to posterity in writings
which will long outlive mine. But I do not think that a reaso?
why I should not give them their place in my diurnal as long a5
it will last. For the service therefore of my female readers, !
shall single out some characters of maids, wives, and widows:
which deserve the imitation of thé sex. She who shall lead

zo this small illustrious number of heroines shall bé the amiablé
Fi ;
Before I enter upon the particular parts of her character, it iS
necessary to preface, that she is the only child of a decrepit
father, whose life is bound_up in hers. This gentleman has
used Fidelia from her cradle with all the tenderness imaginable;
and has viewed her growing perfections with the partiality of 4
parent, that soon thought her accomplished above the children
of all other men, but never thought she was come to the utmost
improvement of which she herself was capable. This fondness

30 has had very happy effects upon his own happiness ; for she


ON THE CHARACTER OF FIDELIA, ETC, 323


reads, she dances, she sings, uses her spinet and lute to the
utmost perfection ; and the Jady’s use of all these excellences is
to divert the old man inh ‘his easy chair, when he js out of the
pangs of. a chronical distemper. Fidelia is now in the twenty-
third year of her age; but the application of many lovers, her
vigorous time of life, her quick sense of all that is truly gallant
and elegant in the enjoyment of a plentiful fortune, are not able
to draw her from the side of her good old father. Certain it is,
that there is no kind of affection so pure and angelic as that

10 of a fathey to a daughter. He beholds her both with and’with-
out regard to her sex. *In love to our wives there is desire, to
our sons there is ambition ; but in that to our daughters there
is something which there. are no words to express. Her life is
designed wholly domestic, and she is so ready a friend and
companion, that every thing that passes about a man is ac-
companied with the idea of her presence. Her sex also is
naturally so much exposed to hazard, both as to fortune and in-
nocence, that there is perhaps a new cause of fondness arising’
from that consideration also. None but fathers can have a

20 true sense of these sort of pleasures and sensations ; but my
familiarity with the father of Fidelia makes me let drop the
words which I have heard him speak, and observe upon his
tenderness towards her.

Fidelia, on her part, as 1 was going to say, as accomplished
as she is, with all her beauty, wit, air, and mien, employs
her whole time in care and attendance upon her father. How
have I been charmed to see one of tl the most beauteous women
the age has produced, on, her - knees, helping g on an old m man’s
shipper !~Her filial regard to him is what she makes her

30 diversion, her business, and her glory. When she was asked
by a friend of her deceased mother, to admit of the court-
Ship of her son, she answered, that she had a great respect
and gratitude to her for the overture in behalf of one so near
‘to her, but that during her father’s life she would admit into
her heart no value for any thing that should interfere with
her endeavour to make his remains of life as happy and easy
as could be expected in his circumstances. The lady ad-
monished her of the prime of life with a smile; which Fidelia
answered with a frankness that always attends unfeigned

40 virtue: ‘It is true, Madam, there are to be sure very great

Y 2


324 SOCIAL PAPERS,


satisfactions to be expected in the commerce of a man of
honour, whom one tenderly loves; but I find so much satis-
faction in the reflection how much I mitigate a good man’s
pains, whose welfare depends upon my assiduity about him,
that I willingly exclude the loose gratifications of passion for
the solid reflections of duty. I know not whether any man’s
wife would be allowed, and (what I still more fear) I know
not whether I, a wife, should be willing to be as officious as
I am at present about my parent.’ The happy father has

ro her declaration that she will not marry during his life, and
the pleasure of seeing that resolution not uneasy to her.
Were one to paint filial affection, in its utmost beauty, he
could not have a more lively idea of it than in beholding
Fidelia serving her father at his hours of rising, meals, and
rest.

When the general crowd of female youth are consulting theif
glasses, preparing for balls, assemblies, or plays; for a young
lady who could be regarded among the foremost in those places;
either for her person, wit, fortune, or conversation, and yet con-

20 temn all these entertainments, to sweeten the heavy hours of 2
decrepid' parent, is a resignation truly heroic. Fidelia performs
the duty of a nurse_ with all the beauty of a.bride ; nor does she
negléct her person, because of her attendance on him, when he
is too ill to receive company, to whom she may make an ap-
pearance.

Fidelia, who gives him up her youth, does not think it any
great sacrifice to add to it the spoiling of her dress. Her care
and exactness in her habit convince her father of the alacrity of
her mind ; and she has of all women the best foundation for

30 affecting the praise of a seeming negligence. What adds to the
entertainment of the good old man is, that Fidelia, where merit |
and fortune cannot be overlooked by epistolary lovers, reads
over the accounts of her conquests, plays on her spinet the
gayest airs (and, while she is doing so, you would think hef
formed only for gallantry) to intimate to him the pleasures she
despises for his sake.

Those who think themselves the patterns of good-breeding
and gallantry would be astonished to hear that, in those inter-
vals when the old gentleman is at ease, and can bear company,

40 there are at his house, in the most regular order, assemblies of


THE STORY OF VALENTINE AND UNNION, 325


people of the highest merit ; where there is conversation with-
out mention of the faults of the absent, benevolence between
men and women without passion, and the highest subjects of
morality treated of as natural and accidental discourse ; all
which is owing to the genius of Fidelia, who at once makes her
father’s way to another world easy, and herself capable of.
being an honour to his name in this.
‘MR. SPECTATOR,
‘I was the other day at the Bear-garden, in hopes to have
to seen your short face; but not being so fortunate, I must tell
you by way of letter, that there is a mystery among the gladia-
tors which has escaped your spectatorial penetration. For, being
in a box at an alehouse near that renowned seat of honour above.
mentioned, I overheard two masters of the science agreeing to
quarrel on the next opportunity. This was to happen in the com-
pany of a set of the fraternity of basket-hilts, who were to meet
that evening. When this was settled, one asked the other,
‘Will you give cuts or receive?’ The other answered, ‘ Re-
Ceive.” It was replied, ‘Are you a passionate man?’ ‘No,
20 provided you cut no more, nor no deeper than we agree. I
thought it my duty to acquaint you with this, that the people
may not pay their money for fighting, and be cheated.
© Your humble Servant,
‘SCABBARD RUSTY.’


Spectator, No. 449.] {August 5, 1712.


§ 5. TALES AND INCIDENTS. °
No. 100. Zhe Story of Valentine and Onnion,


The nature of my miscellaneous work is such, that J shall
always take the liberty to tell for news, such things (let them
have happened never so much before the time of writing) as
have escaped public notice, or have been misrepresented to the
world; provided that I am still within rules, and trespass not

30 as a Tatler, any farther than in an incorrectness of style, and
writing in an air of common speech. Thus, if any thing that is


10


20


30


40


326 SOCIAL PAPERS.


said, even of old Anchises or /Eneas, be set by me in a different
light than has hitherto been hit upon, in order to inspire the
love and admiration of worthy actions, you will, gentle reader, I
hope, accept of it for intelligence you had not before. But I am
going upon a narrative, the matter of which, I know to be true:
it is not only doing justice to the deceased merit of such persons
as, had they lived, would not have had it in their power to
thank me, but also an instance of the greatness of spirit in the
lowest of her majesty’s subjects. Take is as follows :

At the siege of Namur by the allies, there were in the ranks
of the company commanded by captain Pincent, in colonel!
Frederick Hamilton’s regiment, one Unnion, a corporal, and
one Valentine, a private sentinel; there happened between,
these two men a dispute about a matter of love, which, upon
some aggravations, grew to an irreconcileable hatred. Unnion,
being the officer of Valentine, took all opportunities even to
strike his rival, and profess the spite and revenge which moved
him to it. The sentinel bore it without resistance; but fre-
quently said, he would die to be revenged of that tyrant. They
had spent whole months thus, one injuring, the other com-
plaining ; when, in the midst of this rage towards each other,
they were commanded upon the attack of the castle, where
the corporal received a shot in the thigh, and fell; the French
pressing on, and he expecting to be trampled to death, called
out to his enemy, ‘Ah, Valentine! can you leave me here?’
Valentine immediately ran back, and in the midst of a thick
fire of the French, took the corporal upon his back, and
brought him through all that danger, as far as the abbey of
Salsine, where a cannon ball took off his head: his body fell
under his enemy whom he was carrying off. Unnion im-
mediately forgot his wound, rose up, tearing his hair, and then
threw himself upon the bleeding carcass, crying, ‘Ah, Valentine!
was it for me, who have so barbarously used thee, that thou
hast died? I will not live after thee.’ He was not, by any
means, to be forced from the body, but was removed with it
bleeding in his arms, and attended with tears by all their
comrades who knew their enmity. When he was brought to
a tent, his wounds were dressed by force; but the next day;
still calling upon Valentine, and lamenting his cruelties to him,
he died in the pangs of remorse and despair.


THE STORY OF VALENTINE AND UNNION, 327


It may. be a question among men of noble sentiments,
whether of these unfortunate persons had the greater soul ;
he that was so generous as to venture his life for his enemy, or
he who could not survive the man that died, in laying upon
him such an obligation?

When we see spirits like these in-a people, to what heights
may we not suppose their glory may rise? but (as it is ex-
cellently observed by Sallust) it is not only to the general
bent of a nation that great revolutions are owing, but to the

10 extraordinary genios® that lead them. On which occasion, he
proceeds to,say, that the Roman greatness was neither to be
attributed to their superior policy, for in that the Carthaginians
excelled; nor to their valour, for in that the French were
preferable ; but to particular men, who were born for the good
of their country, and formed for great attempts. This he says,
to introduce the characters of Caesar and Cato. It would be
entering into too weighty a discourse for this place, if I at-
tempted to shew, that our nation has produced as great and
able men for public affairs as ahy other. But, I believe, the

20 reader outruns me, and fixes his imagination upon the Duke
of Marlborough. It is, methinks, a pleasing reflection, to
consider the dispensations of Providence in the fortune of this
illustrious man, who, in the space of forty years, has passed

“through all the gradations of human life, until he has ascended
to the character of a prince, and become the scourge of a tyrant,
who sat on one of the greatest thrones of Europe, before the
man who was to have the greatest part in his downfall, had
made one step into the world. But such elevations are the
natural consequences of an exact prudence, a calm courage, a

30 well-governed temper, a patient ambition, and an affable
behaviour. These arts, as they were the steps to his greatness,
so they are the pillars of it now it is raised. To this, her
glorious son, Great Britain is indebted for the happy conduct
of her arms, in whom she can boast, that she has produced a
man formed by nature to lead a nation of heroes,


Tatler, No. 5.] [April 20, 1709.


10


20


390


328 SOCIAL PAPERS,


No. 101. Zhe Story of the Cornish Lovers; of a Lover who
hills his Miestress.


Ubi idem et maximus et honestissimus amor est, aliquando prestat
morte jungi, quam vita distrahi.—WaL., MAX.


After the mind has been employed on contemplations suit-
able to its greatness, it is unnatural to run into sudden mirth or
levity ; but we must let the soul subside, as it rose, by proper de-
grees. My late considerations of the ancient heroes impressed
a certain gravity upon my mind, which is much above the
little gratification received from starts of humour and fancy, and
threw me into a pleasing sadness. In this state of thought ]
have been Jooking at the fire, and in a pensive manner reflecting
upon the great misfortunes and calamities incident to human
life ; among which there are none that touch so sensibly as those
which befall persons who eminently love, and meet with fatal in-
terruptions of their happiness when they least expect it. The
piety of children to parents, and the affection of parents to their
children, are the effects of instinct ; but the affection between
lovers and friends is founded on feadon and choice, which has
always made me think the sorrows of the latter much more to
be pitied than those of the former. The contemplation of dis-
tresses of this sort softens the mind of man, and makes the
heart better. It extinguishes the seeds of envy and ill-will
towards mankind, corrects the pride of prosperity, and beats
down all that fierceness and insolence which are apt to get into
the minds of the daring and fortunate.

For this reason the wise Athenians, in their theatrical per-
formances, laid before the eyes of the people the greatest afflic-
tions which could befall human life, and insensibly polished their
tempers by such representations. Among the moderns, indeed,
there has arisen a chimerical method of disposing the fortune
of the persons represented, according to what they call poetical
justice ; and letting none be unhappy but those who deserve
it. In such cases, an intelligent spectator, if he is concerned,
knows he ought not to be so ; and can learn nothing from such
a tenderness, but that he is a weak creature, whose passions
cannot follow the dictates of his understanding. It is very


THE STORY OF THE CORNISH LOVERS, ETC. 329


natural, when one is got into such a way of thinking, to recollect
those examples of ‘sorrow which have made the strongest im-
pression upon our imaginations. An instance or two of such
you will give me leave to communicate.

-A young gentleman and lady of ancient and honourable
houses in Cornwall had, from their childhood, entertained for
each other a generous and noble passion, which had been long
opposed by their friends, by reason of the inequality of their
fortunes ; but their constancy to each other, and obedience to

10 those on whom they depended, wrought so much upon their
relations, that these celebrated lovers were at length joined in
marriage. Soon after their nuptials, the bridegroom was obliged
to go into a foreign country, to take care of a considerable for-
tune, which was left him by a relation, and came very oppor-
tunely to improve their moderate circumstances. They received
the congratulations of all the country on this occasion; and I
remember it was a common sentence in every one’s mouth, * You
see how faithful love is rewarded.’ ;

He took this agreeable voyage, and sent home every post

20 fresh accounts of his success in his affairs abroad ; but at last,
though he designed to return with the next ship, he lamented, in
his letters, that ‘business would detain him some time longer
from home,’ because he would give himself the pleasure of an
unexpected afrival. :

The young lady, after the heat of the day, walked every
evening on the sea-shore, near which she lived, with a familiar
friend, her husband’s kinswoman ; and diverted herself with
what objects they met there, or upon discourses of the future
methods of life, in the happy change of their circumstances.

30 They stood one evening on the shore together in a perfect tran-
quillity, observing the setting of the sun, the calm face of the
deep, and the silent ‘heaving of the waves, which gently rolled
towards them, and'broke at their feet; when at a distance her
kinswoman saw something float on the waters, which she fancied
was a chest ; and with a smile told her, ‘she saw it first, and
if it came ashore full of jewels, she had a right toit.” They both
fixed their eyes upon it, and entertained themselves with the
subject of the wreck, the cousin still asserting her right; but
promising, ‘if it was a prize, to give her a very rich coral for

40 the child of which she was then big, provided she might be god-


330 SOCIAL PAPERS.


mother.” Their mirth soon abated, when they observed, upon
the nearer approach, that it was a human body. The young
lady, who had a heart naturally filled with pity and compassion ,
made many melancholy reflections on the occasion. ‘Who
knows,’ said she, ‘ but this man may be the only hope and heir
of a wealthy houses the darling of indulgent parents, who are
now in impertinent mirth, and pleasing themselves with the
thoughts of offering him a bride they have got ready for him?
or, may he not be the master of a family that wholly depended


zo upon his life? There may, for aught we know, be half a dozen


20


30


fatherless children, and a tender wife, now exposed to poverty
by his death. What pleasure might he have promised himself
in the different welcome he was to have from her and them!
But let us go away ; it is a dreadful sight! The best office we
can do, is to take care that the poor man, whoever he is, may be
decently .buried.’ She turned away, when a wave threw the
carcass on the shore. The kinswoman inimediately shrieked
out, ‘Oh my cousin !’ and fell upon the ground. The unhappy
wife went to help her friend, when she saw her own husband at
her feet, and dropped in a swoon upon the body. An old
woman, who had been the gentleman’s nurse, came out about
this time to call the ladies in to supper, and found her child, as
she always called him, dead on the shore, her mistress and
kinswoman both lying dead by him. Her loud Jamentations,
and calling her young master to life, soon awaked the friend
from her trance ; but the wife was gone for ever.

When the family and neighbourhood got together round the
bodies, no one asked any question, but the objects before them
told the story.

Incidents of this nature are the more moving when they are
drawn by persons concerned in the catastrophe, notwithstand-
ing they are often oppressed beyond the power of giving
them in a distinct light, except we gather their sorrow from
their inability to speak it.

I have two original letters, written both on ‘the same day;
which ate to me exquisite in their different kinds. The occasion
was this :—A gentleman who had courted a most agreeable
young woman, and won her heart, obtained also the consent of
her father, to whom she was an only child. The old man had


40 a fancy that they should be married in the same church where


THE STORY OF THE CORNISH LOVERS, ETC. 331


he himself was, in a village in Westmoreland, and made them
set out while he was laid up with the gout at London. The
bridegroom took only his man, the bride her maid: they had
the most agreeable journey imaginable.to the place of mar-
riage ; from whence the bridegroom writ the following letter to
his wife’s father. :
. ‘March 18, 1672.
*Sir, .
‘After a very pleasant journey hither, we are preparing for
to the happy hour in which I am to be your son. _I assure you the
bride carries it, in the eye of the vicar who married you, much
beyond her mother ; though he says, your open sleeves, panta-
loons, and shoulder-knot, made a much better show than the
finical dress I am in. However, I am contented to be the second
fine man this village ever saw, and shall make it very merry
before night, because I shall write myself from thence,
“¢Your most dutiful son,
‘T. DY
‘The bride gives her duty, and is as handsome as an angel.
?0~—I am the happiest man breathing,’


The villagers were assembling about the church, and the
happy couple took a walk in a private garden. The bridegroom’s
man knew his master would leave the place on a sudden after
the wedding, and, seeing him draw his pistols the night before,
took this opportunity to go into his chamber and charge ehem.
Upon their return from the garden, they went into that room;
and, after a little fond raillery on the subject of their courtship,
the lover took up a pistol, which he knew he had unloaded the
hight before, and, presenting it to her, said, with the most grace-

30 ful air, whilst she looked pleased at his agreeable flattery ;
‘ Now, madam, repent ofall those cruelties you have been guilty
of to me ; consider, before you die, how often you have made a
Poor wretch freeze under your casement"; you shall die, you
tyrant, you shall die, with all those instruments of death and
destruction about you, with that enchanting smile, those killing
ringlets of your hair ’— Give fire!’ said she, laughing. He did
so ; and shot her dead. Who can speak his condition? but he
bore it so patiently as to call up his man, The poor wretch
entered, and his master locked the door upon him. ‘ Will,


332 SOCIAL PAPERS,


said he, ‘did you charge these pistols?’ He answered, ‘Yes.
Upon which he shot him dead with that remaining. After
this, amidst a thousand broken sobs, piercing groans, and
distracted motions, he writ the following letter to the father
of his dead mistress.


SIR,
‘I, who two hours ago told you truly I was the happiest


man alive, am now the most miserable. Your daughter lies
dead at my feet, killed by my hand, through a mistake of


ro my man’s charging my pistols unknown to me. Him have I


20


30


murdered for it. Such is my wedding day. I will immedi-
ately follow my wife to her grave ; but, before I throw myself
upon my sword, I command my distraction sq far as to ex-
plain my story to you. I fear my heart will not keep to-
gether until I have stabbed it. Poor, good old man!——
Remember, he that killed your, daughter died for it. In the
article of death, I give you my thanks, and pray for you,
though I dare not for myself. If it be possible, do not
curse me.’


Tatler, No. 82.] [October 18, 1709.


No.102. Zhe Story of Clarinda and Chloe.
Si-non errasset, tecerat ille minus.—Marv. i, 22.


That which we call gallantry to women seems ‘to be the
heroic virtue of private persons ; and there never breathed one
man, who did not, in that part of his days wherein he was
recommending himself to his mistress, do something beyond
his ordinary course of life. As this has a very great effect even
upon the most slow and common men; so, upon such as it
finds qualified with virtue and merit, it shines out in proportion-
able degrees of excellence. It gives new grace to the most
eminent accomplishments ; and he, who of himself has either
wit, wisdom, or valour, exerts each of these noble endowments,
when he becomes a lover, with a certain beauty of action above
what was ever observed in him before ; and all who are without


THE STORY OF CLARINDA AND CHLOE. 333


any one of these qualities are to be looked upon as the rabble
of mankind.

I was talking after this manner in a corner of this place™ with
an old acquaintance, who taking me by the hand, said, ‘Mr.
Bickerstaff, your discourse recalls to my mind a story, which
I have longed to tell you ever since I read that article wherein
you desire your friends to give you accounts of obscure merit.’
The story I had of him is literally true, and well known to be so
in the country wherein the circumstances were transacted. He

Io acquainted me with the names of the persons concerned, which
I shall change into feigned ones ; there being a respect due to
their families that are still in being, as well as that the names
themselves would not be so familiar to an English ear. The
adventure really happened in Denmark; and if I can re-
member all the passages, I doubt not but it will be as moving to
my readers as it was to me.

Clarinda and Chloe, two very fine women, were bred up as
sisters in the family of Romeo, who was the father of Chloe,
and the guardian of Clarinda. Philander, a young gentleman

20 of a good person, and charming conversation, being a friend of
old Romeo, frequented his house, and by that means was much
in conversation with the young ladies, though still in the
presence of the father and the guardian. The ladies both
entertained a secret passion for him, and could see well enough,
notwithstanding the -delight which he really took in Romeo’s
Conversation, that there was something more in his heart, which
made him so assiduous a visitant. Each of them thought her-
Self the happy woman ; but the person beloved was Chloe. It
happened that both of them were at a play in a carnival evening,

30 when it is the fashion there, as well as in most countries of
Europe, both for men and women to appear in masks and dis-
guises. It was on that memorable night, in the year 1679,
when the play-house by some unhappy accident was set on
fire. Philander, in the first hurry of the disaster, immediately
ran where his treasure was ; burst open the door of the box,
snatched the lady up in his arms; and, with unspeakable reso-
lution and good fortune, carried her off safe. He was no
sooner out of the crowd, but he set her down; and, grasping
her in his arms, with all the raptures of a deserving lover,

40 ‘How happy am I,’ says he, ‘in an opportunity to tell you I


334 SOCIAL PAPERS.


love you more tnan ali tnings, ana of snowing you tne sincenty
of my passion at the very first declaration of it!’ ‘My dear;
dear Philander,’ says the lady, pulling off her mask, ‘this is not
a time for art ; you are much dearer to me than the life you
have preserved ; and the joy of my present deliverance does
not transport me so much as thé passion which occasioned it.’
Who can tell the grief, the astonishment, the terror, that
appeared in the face of Philander, when he saw the person he
spoke to was Clarinda! After a snort pause, ‘ Madam,’ says he,

1o with the looks of a dead man, ‘we aré both mistaken ;’ and
immediately flew away, without hearing the distressed Clarinda,
who had just strength enotigh to cry out, ‘Cruel Philander!
why did you not leave me in the theatre?? Crowds of people
immediately gathered about her, and, after having brought her
to herself, conveyed her to the house of the good old unhappy
Romeo. Philander was now pressing against a whole tide of
people at the doors of the theatre, And striving to enter with
more earnestness than any there endeavoured to get out. He
did it at last, and with much difficulty forced his way to the

20 box where his beloved Chloe stood, expecting her fate amidst
this scene of terror and distraction. She revived at the sight
of Philander, who fell about her neck with a tenderness not to
be expressed ; and, amidst a thousand sobs and sighs, told her
his love, and his dreadful mistake. The stage was now in
flames, and the whole house full of smoke: the entrance was
quite barred up with heaps of people, who had fallen upon one
another as they endeavoured to get out. Swords were drawn,
shrieks heard on all sides; and, in short, no possibility of an
escape for Philander himself, had he been capable of making it

-30 without his Chloe. But his mind was above such a thought,
and wholly employed in weeping, condoling, and comforting.
He catches her in his arms. The fire surrounds them, while—
I cannot go on—

Were I an infidel, misfortunes ike this would convince me
that there must be a hereafter: for who can believe that so
much virtue could meet with so great distress without a follow-
ing reward? As for my part, I am so old-fashioned, as firmly
to believe, that all who perish in such generous enterprises aré
relieved from the further exercise of life; and Providence,

40 which sees their virtue consummate and manifest, takes them to


ON THE EVILS OF PASSION, ETC. 335


an immediate reward, in a being more suitable to the grandeur
of their spirits. What else can wipe away our tears, when we |
contemplate such undeserved, such irreparable distresses? It
was a sublime thought ® in some of the heathens of old ;
Quee gratia currum
Armorumque fpit vivis, que cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellnre repostos.,


,That is, in other words, ‘The same employments and inélina-
tions which were the entertainment of virtuous men upon earth
1o make up their happiness in Elysium,


Tatler, No. 94.] [November 15, 1709,


No. 108, On the Evils of Passion; Murder of Mrs. Eustace.


Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
Cautum est in boras.—Hor. Od. ii. 13. 13.

When a man is in a serious mood, and ponders upon his
©wn make, with a retrospect to the actions of his life, and the
many fatal miscarriages in it, which he owes to ungoverned
passions, he is then apt to say to himself, that experience has
Suarded him against such errors for the future: but nature
Often recurs in spite of his best resolutions ; and it is to the
very end of our days a struggle between our reason and our
temper, which shall have the empire over us. However, this is
very much to be helped by circumspection, and a constant

20 alarm against the first onsets of passion. As this is, in general,
a necessary care to make a man’s life easy and agreeable to
himself ; so it is more particularly the duty of such as are
engaged in friendship, and nearer commerce with others,
Those who have their joys, have also their griefs in pro-
Portion ; and none can extremely exalt or depress friends, but
friends. The harsh things which come from the rest of the
world are received and repulsed with that spirit, which every
honest man bears for his own vindication ; but unkindness, in
words or actions, among friends, affects us at the first instant

30 in the inmost recesses of our souls. Indifferent people, if I


To


20


30


40


336 SOCIAL PAPERS,


may so say, can wound us only in heterogeneous parts, maim
us in our legs or arms; but the friend can make no pass but at
the heart itself. On the other side, the most impotent assistance,
the mere well-wishes of a friend, gives a man constancy and
courage against the most prevailing force of his enemies, It is
here only a man enjoys and suffers to the quick. For this
reason, the most gentle behaviour“is absolutely necessary to
maintain friendship in any degree above the common level of
acquaintance, But there is a relation of life much more near
than the most ‘strict"and sacred friendship,.that is to say,
marriage. This union is of too close and delicate a nature to
be easily conceived by those who do not know that condition
by experience. Here a man should, if: possible, soften his
passions ; if not for his own ease, in compliance to a creature
formed with a mind of a quite different make from his own. I
am sure, I do not mean it an injury to women, when I, say
there is a sort of sex in souls. I am tender of offending them,
and know it is hard not to do it on this subject ; but I must go
on to say, that the soul of a man, and that of a woman, are
made very, unlike, according to the employments for which
they are designed. The ladies will please to observe, I say;
our minds have different, not superior, qualities to theirs. The
virtues have respectively a masculine and a feminine cast-
What we call in men wisdom, is in women prudence. It is 4
partiality to call one greater thay the other. A prudent woman
is in the same class of honour as a wise man, and the scandals
in the way of both are equally dangerous. But to make this
state any thing but a burden, and not hang a weight upon our
very beings, it is proper each of the couple should frequently
remember, that thére are many things which grow out of their
very natures that are pardonable, nay, becoming, when con-
sidered as such, but, without that reflection, must. give the
quickest pain and vexation. To manage well a great family,
is as worthy an instance of capacity, as to execute a’ great
employment: and for the generality, as women perform the
considerable part of their duties, as well as men do theirs ; so
in their common behaviour, females of ordinary genius are not
more trivial than the common rate of men ; and, in my opinion,
the playing of a fan is every whit as good an entertainment as
the beating of a snuff-box.


ON THE EVILS OF PASSION, ETC. 337


But, however I have rambled in this libertine manner of
writing by way of Essay, I now sat down with an intention to


- represent to my readers how pernicious, how sudden, and how


fatal surprises of passion are to the mind of man; and that in
the more intimate commerces of life they are more liable to


. arise, even in our most sedate and indolent hours. Occur-


rences of this kind have had very terrible effects ; and when
Ope reflects upon them, .wé cannot but ‘tremble to consider,
what we are capable of being wrought up to, against all the


Sots : Khe
ties of nature, Jove, honour, reason, and religion, though the


20


30


man who breaks through them all, had, an hour before he did
So, a lively and virtuous sense’of their dictates. When un-
happy catastrophes make-up part of the histery of princes and
Persons who act-in high: spheres, or are represented in the
moving language and well-wrought scenes of tragedians, they
do not fail of striking us with terror ;-but then they affect us
Only in a transient manner, and pass through our imaginations
as incidents in which our fortunes are too humble to be con-
cerned, or which writers form for the ostentation of their own
force ; or, at most, as things fit rather to exercise the powers of
our minds, than to create new habits in them. Instead of such
high passages, I was thinking it would be of great use, if any
body could hit it, to lay before the world sych adventures as
befall persons. not exalte@ above the common level. This,
methought, would: better prevail upon the ordinary race of
men; who are so prepossessed with’ outward appearances, that
they mistake fortune for nature, and believe nothing can relate
to them, that does not happen to such as live and look like
themselves, ’

The unhappy end of a gentleman, whose'story an acquaint-
ance of mine was just now telling me, would be very proper
for this end, if it could be related with all the circumstances as
I heard it this evening; for it touched me so much, that I
cannot forbear entering upon it.

‘Mr. Eustace®, a young gentleman of a good estate near


‘Dublin in Ireland®, married a lady of youth, beauty, and


modesty, and lived with her, in general, with much ease and
tranquillity ; but was in his secret temper impatient of rebuke.
She was apt to fall into little sallies of passion ; yet as suddenly


4° recalled by her own reflection on her fault, and the consideration


Z


338 SOCIAL PAPERS,
of her husband’s temper. It happened, as he, his wife, and her
sister, were at supper together about two months ago, that, in
the midst of a careless and familiar conversation, the sisters
fell into a little warmth and contradiction. He, who was one of
that sort of men who are never unconcerned at what passes
before them, fell into an outrageous passion on the side of the.
sister. The person about whom they disputed was so near,
that they were under no restraint from running into vain
repetitions of past heats: on which occasion all the aggra-
10 vations of anger and distaste boiled up, and were repeated with
the bitterness of exasperated lovers, The wife, observing her
husband extremely moved, began to turn it off, and rally him
for interposing between two people, who from their infancy had
been angry and pleased with each other every half hour. , But it
descended deeper into his thoughts, and they broke up with a
sullen silence. The wife immediately retired to her chamber,
whither her husband soon after followed. When they were in
bed, he soon dissembled a sleep; and.she, pleased that his”
thoughts were composed, fell into-a real one. Their apartment
20 was very distant from the rest of their family, in a lonely country-
house. He now saw his opportunity, and, with a dagger he had
brought to bed with him, stabbed his wife in the side. She
awaked in the highest terror ; but immediately imagining it was
a blow designed for her husband by ruffians,, began to grasp
him, and strove to awake and rouse him to defend himself. He
still pretended himself sleeping, and gave her a second wound.
‘She now drew open the curtain, and, by the help of moon-
light, saw his hand lifted up to stab her. The horror disarmed
her from further struggling; and he, enraged anew at being
30 discovered, fixed his poniard in her‘bosom. As soon as he
believed he had despatched her, he attempted to escape out of
the window: but she, still alive, called to him not to hurt
himself; for she might live. He was so stung with the in-
supportable reflection upon her goodness, and his own villany;
that he jumped to the bed, and wounded her all over with as
much rage as if every blow was provoked by new aggravations-
In this fury of mind he fled away. His wife had still strength
to go to her sister’s apartment, and give an account of this
wonderful tragedy ; but died the next day. Some weeks after,
4oan officer of justice, in attempting to seize the criminal, fired


CHARACTER OF ARIETTA, ETC, 339


upon him, as did the criminal upon the officer. Both their
balls took place", and both immediately expired,


Tatler, No. 172.] {May 16, 1710.


No. 104. Character of Arietta; Invectives against Women;
Story of Inkle and Yarigo.


Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas.—Juv. Sat. ii. 63.


Arietta is visited by all persons of both sexes, who haye any
Pretence to wit and gallantry, She is in that time of life which
is neither affected with the follies of youth, nor infirmities of
age ; and her conversation is so mixed with gaiety and.pru-
dence, that she is agreeable both to the young and the old.
Her behaviour is very frank, without being in the least blame-
able: and as she is out of the track of any amorous or

'o ambitious pursuits of her own, her visitants entertain her with
accounts of themselves very freely, whether they concern their
passions or their interests. I made her a visit this afternoon,
having been formerly introduced to the honour of her acquaint-
ance by my friend Will Honeycomb, who has prevailed upon
her to admit me.sometimes into her assembly, as a civil in-
Offensive man. I found her accompanied with one person only,
a@ common-place talker, who, upon my entrance, arose, and
after a very slight civility sat down again; then, turning to
Arietta, pursued his discourse, which I found was upon the old

*© topic of constancy in love. He went on with great facility in
repeating what he talks every day of his life; and with the .
ornaments of insignificant laughs and gestures, enforced his
arguments by quotations out of plays and songs, which allude
to the perjuries of the fair, and the general levity of women.
Methought he strove to shine more than ordinarily in his
talkative way, that he might insult my silence, and distinguish
himself before a woman of Arietta’s taste and understanding.
She had often an inclination to interrupt him, but could find
no opportunity, till the larum ceased of itself, which it did not

39 till he had repeated and murdered the celebrated story of the
Ephesian Matron,

Z2


340 SOCIAL PAPERS,


Arietta seemed to regard this piece of raiJlery as an outrage
done to‘her sex; as indeed I have always observed that women,
whether out of a nicer regard to their honour, or what other
reason I cannot tell, are more sensibly touched with those
general aspersions which are cast upon thcir sex, than men are
by what is said of theirs.

When she had a little recovered herself from the serious
anger she was in, she replied in the following manner :

‘Sir, when I consider how perfectly new all you have said on

10 this subject is, and‘that the story you have given us is not quite
two thousand years old, I cannot but think it a piece of pre-
sumption to dispute it with you; but your quotations put me in
mind of the fable of the lion and the man. The man walking
with that noble animal, showed him, in thé ostentation of
human superiority, a sign of a man killing a lion. Upon which,
the lion said very justly, “ We lions are none of us painters, else
we could show a hundred men killed by lions for one lion killed
by a man.” You men are writers, and can represent us women
as unbecoming as you please in your works, while we are

20 unable to return the injury. You have twice or thrice observed
in your discourse, that hypocrisy is the very foundation of our
education; and that an ability to dissemble our affections is 3
professed part of our breeding. These and such other reflec-
tions are sprinkled up and down the writings of all ages, by
authors, who leave behind them memorials of their resentment
against the scorn of particular women, in invectives against the
whole sex. Such a writer, I doubt not, was the celebrated
Petronius, who invented the pleasant aggravations of the frailty
of the Ephesian lady; but when we consider: this question

30 between the sexes, which has been either a point of dispute of
raillery ever since there were men and women, let us take facts
from plain people, and from such as have not either ambition
or capacity to embellish their narrations with any beauties
of imagination. I was the other day amusing myself with
Ligon’s Account of Barbadoes®; and, in. answer to your well-
wrought tale, I will: give you, (as it dwells upon my memory)
out of that honest traveller, in his fifty-fifth page, the history of
Inkle and Yarico,

**Mr, Thomas Inkle®, of London, aged twenty years, em-

40 barked in the Downs, on the good ship called the Achilles,


CHARACTER OF ARIETTA, ETC. 341


bound for the West Indies, on the 16th of June, 1647, in order
to improve his fortune by trade and merchandize. Our adven-
turer was the third son of an eminent citizen, who had taken
particular care to instil into his mind an early love of gain, by
making him a perfect master of numbers, and consequently
giving him a quick view of loss and advantage, and preventing
the natural impulses of his passions, by prepossession towards
his interests. With a mind thus turned, young Inkle had a
person every way agreeable, a ruddy vigour in his countenance,
to strength in his limbs, with ringlets of fair hair loosely flowing on
his shoulders. It happened, in the course of the voyage, that
the Achilles, in some distress, put into a creek on the main of
America, in search of provisions, The youth, who is the hero
of my story, among others went on shore on this occasion.
From their first landing they were observed by a party of
Indians, who hid themselves in the woods for that purpose. The
English unadvisedly marched a great distance from the shore
into the country, and were intercepted by the natives, who slew
the greatest number of them. Our adventurer escaped among
20 others, by flying into a forest. Upon-his coming into a remote
and pathless part of the wood, he threw himself, tired and
breathless, on a little hillock, when an Indian maid rushed from
a thicket behind him. After the first surprise they appeared
mutually agreeable to each other. If the European was highly
charmed with the limbs, features, and wild graces of the naked
American; the American was no less taken with the dress,
complexion, and shape of an European, covered from head to
foot. The Indian grew immediately enamoured of him, and
consequently solicitous for his preservation. She therefore con-
30 veyed him to a cave, where she gave him a delicious repast of
fruits, and led him to a stream to slake his thirst. In the midst
of these good offices, she would sometimes play with his hair,
and delight in the opposition of its colour to that of her fingers :
then open his bosom, then laugh at him for covering it, She
wag, it seems, a person of distinction, for she every day came to
him in a different dress, of the most beautiful shells, bugles,
and bredes®, She likewise brought him a great many spoils,
which her other lovers had presented to her, so that his cave
was richly adorned with all the spotted skins of beasts, and
40 most party-coloured feathers of fowls, which that world afforded.


342 SOCIAL PAPERS.


To make his confinement more tolerable, she would carry him
in the dusk of the evening, or by the favour of moonlight, to
unfrequented groves and ‘solitudes, and show him where to lie
down in safety, and sleep amidst the falls of waters and melody
of nightingales. Her part was to watch and hold him awake in
her arms, for fear of her countrymen, and wake him on occa-
sions to consult his safety. In this manner did the lovers pass
away their time, till they had learned a language of their own,
in which the voyager communicated to his mistress how happy


19 he should be to have ‘her in his country, where she should be


20


30


clothed in such silks as his waistcoat was made of, and be
carried in houses drawn by horses, without being exposed! to
wind or weather. All this he promised her the enjoyment of,
without such fears and alarms as they were there tormented
with. In this tender correspondence these lovers lived for
several months, when Yarico, instructed by her lover, discovered
a vessel on the coast, to which she made signals; and in the
night, with the utmost joy and satisfaction, accompanied him to
a ship’s crew of his countrymen bound to Barbadoes. When a
vessel from the main arrives in that island, it seems the planters
come down to the shore, where there is an immediate market of
the Ividians and other slaves, as with us of horses and oxen,

““To be short, Mr. Thomas Inkle, now coming into English
territories; began seriously to reflect upon his loss of time, and
to weigh ‘with himself how many day’s interest of his money he
had lost during his stay with Yarico. This thought made the
young man very pensive, and careful what account he should be
able to give his friends of his voyage. Upon which consider-
ation, the prudent and frugal young man sold Yarico to a
Barbadian merchant ; notwithstanding that the poor girl, to
incline him to commiserate her condition, told him that she
was with child by him: but he only made use of that informa-
tion, to rise in his demands upon the purchaser.”’

I was so touched with this story (which I think should be
always a counterpart to the Ephesian Matron) that I left the
room with tears in my eyes, which a woman of Arietta’s good
sense did, I am sure, take for greater applause than any com-
pliments I could make her.


Spectator, No. 11.] [March 13, 1711.


THE STORY OF BRUNEITA AND PHILLIS. 343


No. 105. The Story of Brunctta and Phillts.


Ccelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currant.
Hor. Ep. i. 11. 27.


In the year 1688, and on the same day of that year, were
born in Cheapside, London, two females of exquisite feature
and shape; the one we shall call Brunetta, the other Phillis.
A close intimacy between their parents made each of them
the first acquaintance the other knew, in the world. They
played, dressed babies, acted visitings, learned to dance and
make curtsies, together. They were inseparable companions
in all the little entertainments their tender years were capable
of ; which innocent happiness continued until the beginning

10 of their fifteenth year, when it happened that Mrs. Phillis had a
head-dress on, which became her so very well, that instead
of being beheld any more with pleasure for their amity to
each other, the eyes of the neighbourhood were turned to re-
mark them with comparison of their beauty. They now no longer
enjoyed the ease of mind and pleasing indolence in which
they were formerly happy, but all their words and actions
were misinterpreted by each other, and every excellence in
their speech and behaviour was looked upon as an act of
emulation to surpass the other. These beginnings of disincli-

?0 nation soon improved into a formality of behaviour, a general
coldness, and by natural steps into an irreconcilable hatred.

* These two rivals for the reputation of beauty, were, in
their stature, countenance, and mien, s0 very much alike, that
if you-were speaking of them in their absence, the words in
which you described the one must give you an idea of the
other. They were hardly distinguishable, you would think,
when they were apart, though extremely different when to:
Zether. What made their enmity the more entertaining to
all the rest of their sex was, that in detraction from each;
3° neither could fall upor any terms which did not hit herself
as much as her adversary. Their nights grew restless with
Meditation of new dresses to-outvie each other,’ and inventing
New devices to recal admirers, who observed the charms of
the one rather than those of the other, on the last meeting.


10


20


30


40


344 SOCIAL PAPERS,


Their colours failed at each. other’s appearance, flushed with
pleasure at the report of a disadvantage, and their countenances
withered upon instances of applause. The decencies to which
women are obliged, made these virgins stifle their resentment
so far as not to break into open violences, while they equally
suffered the torments of a regulated anger. Their mothers, as
it is usual, engaged in the quarrel, and supported the several
pretensions of their daughters with all that ill-chosen sort of
expense which is common with people of plentiful fortunes
arid mean taste. The girls-preceded their parents like queens
of May, in all the gaudy colours imaginable, on every Sun-
day to church, and were exposed to the examination of the
audience for superiority of beauty.

During this constant struggle it happened, that Phillis one
day at public prayers smote the heart of a gay West Indian,
who appeared in all the colours which can affect an eye that
could not distinguish between being fine and tawdry. This
American, in a Summer-island™ suit, was too shining and
too gay to be resisted. by Phillis, and,too intent upon her
charms to be diverted by any of the laboured attractions of
Brunetta. Soon after, Brunetta had the mortification to see
her rival disposed of in a wealthy marriage, while she was
only addressed to in a manner that shewed she was the ad-
miration of all men, but the choice of none. Phillis was
carried to-the habitation of her spouse in Barbadoes. Bru-
netta had the ill-nature to inquire for her by every oppor-.
tunity, and had the misfortune to hear of her being attended
by numerous slaves, fanned into slumbers by successive bands
of them, and carried from place to place in all the pomp of
barbarous magnificence. Brunetta could not endure these re-
peated advices, but employed all her arts and charms in
laying baits for any of condition of the same island, out of
a mere ambition to confront her once more before she died.
She at last succeeded in her design, and was taken to wife
by a gentleman whose estate was contiguous to that of her
enemy's husband, It would be endless to enumerate the many
occasions on which these irreconcilable beauties laboured to
excel each other ; but in process of time it happened. that a ship
put into the island consigned to a friend of Phillis, who had
directions to give her the refusal of all goods for apparel, before


THE STORY OF BRUNETTA AND PHILLIS. 345


Brunetta could be alarmed of their arrival. He did so, and
Phillis was dressed in a few days in a brocade more gorgeous
and costly than had ever before appeared in that latitude. Bru-
netta languished at the sight, and could by no means come up
to the bravery” of her antagonist. She communicated her an-
guish of mind to a faithful friend, who, by an interest in the
wife of Phillis’s merchant, procured a remnant of the same silk
for Brunetta. Phillis took pains to appear in all public places
where she was sure to meet Brunetta ; Brunetta was now pre-

Yo pared for the insult, and came ¢o a public ball in a plain black
silk mantua¥, attended by a beautiful negro girl in a petticoat of
the same brocade® with which Phillis was attired. This drew
the attention of the whole company, upon which the unbappy
Phillis swooned away, and was immediately conveyed to ‘her
house. As soon as she came to herself, she fled from her hus-
band's house, went on board a ship in the road, and is now
landed in inconsolable despair at Plymouth...


Spectator, No. 80.] [June 1, 1711.


III.
THEATRICAL PAPERS.


No. 106. Ox the Pleasures of Playgoing; Wilks.and Cibber;
anew Play and an old One.


Spectaret populum ludis attentius ipsis—Hor. Ep. il. 1. 197.


The town grows so very empty, that the greater number of
my gay characters are fled out of my sight into the country.
My beaux are now shepherds, and my belles wood-nymphs.
They are lolling over rivulets, and covered with shades, while
we who remain in town, hurry through the dust about imperti-
nencies without knowing the happiness of leisufe and retirement.
To add to this calamity, even the actors are going to desert us
for a season, and we shall not shortly have so much as a
landscape or a forest scene to refresh ourselves ‘with in the

ro midst of our fatigues. This may not, perhaps, be so sensible
a loss to any other as to me; for I confess it is one of my
greatest delights to sit unobserved and unknown in the gallery,
and entertain myself either with what is personated on the stage,
or observe what appearances present themselves in the audience-
If there were no other good consequences in a playhouse, than
that so many persons of different ranks and conditions are
placed there in their most pleasing aspects, that prospect only
would be very far from being below the pleasures of a wise man.
There is not one person you can see, in whom, if you look with
zo0.an inclination to be pleased, you may not behold something
worthy or agreeable. Our thoughts are in our features; and
the visage of those in whom love, rage, anger, jealousy, or envy;
have their frequent mansions, carries the traces of those passions
wherever the amorous, the choleric, the jealous, or the envious,
are pleased to make their appearance. However, the assembly


ON THE PLEASURES OF PLAYGOING, ETC. 347


at a play is usually made up of such as have a sense of some
elegance in pleasure; by which means the audience is generally
composed of those who have gentle affections, or at least of such,
as at that time, are in the best humour you can ever find them.
This has insensibly a good effect upon our spirits; and the
musical airs which are played to us, put the whole company
into a participation of the same pleasure, and by consequence, for
that time, equal in humour, in fortune, and in quality. Thus
far we gain only by coming into an audience ; but if we find,

toadded to this, the beauties of proper action, the force of
eloquence, and the gaiety of well-placed lights and scenes, it
is being happy, and seeing others happy, for two hours: a
duration of bliss not at all to be slighted by so short-lived a
Creature as man. Why then should not the duty of the player
be had in much more esteem than it is at present? If the merit
of a performance is to be valued according to the talents which
are necessary to it, the qualifications of a player should raise
him much above the arts and ways of life which we call _
mercenary or mechanic. When we look round a full house,

20 and behold so few that can, though they set themselves out to
show as much as the persons on the stage do, come up to what
they would appear even in dumb show; how much does the
actor deserve our approbation, who adds to the advantage of
looks and motions, the tone of voice, the dignity, the humility,
the sorrow, and the triumph, suitable to the character he
Personates ?

It may possibly be imagined by severe men, that I am too
frequent in the mention of the theatrical representations ; but
who is not excessive in the discourse of what he extremely likes ?

30 Eugenio can lead you to a gallery of fine pictures, which col-
lection he is always increasing: Crassus, through woods and
forests, to which he designs to add the neighbouring counties,
These are great and noble instantes of their magnificence.
The players are my pictures, and their scenes my territories.
By communicating the pleasure I take in them, it may in some
Measure add to men’s gratification this way; as viewing the
Choice and wealth of Eugenio and Crassus augments the
enjoyments of those whom they entertain, with a prospect of
Such possessions as would not otherwise fall within the reach of


40 their fortunes.


Io


20


30


40


348 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


It is a very good office one man does another, when he tells
him the manner of his being pleased ; and I have often thought,
that a comment upon the capacities of the players would very
much improve the delight that way, and impart it to’ those who
otherwise have no sense of it.

The first of the present stage are Wilks and Cibber, perfect
actors in their different kinds. Wilks has a singular talent in
representing the graces of nature; Cibber the deformity in the
affectation of them. Were Ia writer of plays, I should never
employ either of them in parts which had not their bent this
way. This is seen in, the inimitable strain and run of good
humour which is kept up in the character of Wildair®, and in
the ‘nice and delicate abuse of understanding in that of Sir
Novelty", Cibber, in another light, hits exquisitely the flat
civility of an affected gentleman-usher, and Wilks the easy
frankness of a gentleman.

If you would observe the force of the same capacities in
higher life, can any thing be more ingenuous than the behaviour
of prince Harry, when his father checks him? any thing more
exasperating than that of Richard, when he insults his superiors?
To beseech gracefully, to approach respectfully, to pity, to mourn,
to love, are the places wherein Wilks may be made to shine
with the utmost beauty. To rally pleasantly, to scorn artfully,
to flatter, to ridicule, and to neglect, are what Cibber would
perform with no less excellence.

When actors are considered with a view to their talents, it is
not only the pleasure of that hour of action, which the spectators
gain from their performance ; but the opposition of right and
wrong on the stage, would have its force in the assistance of our
judgments on other occasions. I have at present under my
tutelage a young poet™, who, I design, shall entertain the town
the ensuing winter. And as he does me the honour tp let me
see his comedy as he writes it, I shall endeavour to make the
parts fit the geniuses of the several actors, as exactly as their
habits can their bodies. And because the two I have mentioned
are to perform the principal parts, I have prevailed with the
house to let the ‘Careless Husband®’ be acted on Tuesday
next, that my young author may have a view of the play, which
is acted to perfection, both by them and all concerned in it;
as being born within the walls of the theatre, and written with


10


A LETTER FROM THE LION AT THE HAYMARKET. 349


an exact knowledge of the abilities of the performers. Mr.
Wilks will do his best in this play, because it is for his own
benefit; and Mr. Cibber, because he writ it. Besides which,
all the great beauties we have left in town, or within call of it,
will be present, because it is the last play this season. This
opportunity will, I hope, inflame my pupil with such generous
notions, from seeing so fair an assembly as will be then present,
that his play may be composed of sentiments and characters
proper to be presented to such an audience. His drama at
present has only the outlines drawn. There are, IJ find, to be
in it all the reverend offices ‘of life (such as regard to parents,
husbands, and honourable lovers) preserved with the utmost
Care; and, at the same time, that agreeableness of behaviour,
with the intermixture of pleasing passions which arise from
innocence and virtue, interspersed in such a manner, as that
to be charming and agreeable, shall appear the natural con-
sequence of being virtuous. This great end is one of those I
propose to do in my censorship ; but if I find a thin house on an
9 Occasion when such a work is to be promoted, my pupil shall
°return to his commons at Oxford, and Shire-lane and the
theatres be no longer correspondents.


Tatler, No. 182.1 [June 8, 1710.


No, 107. A Letter from the lion at the Haymarket Powell's
Puppel-Show,; Masquerades; Powells Puppet-Show again,


Teque his, infelix, exue monstris.—Ovip, Met. iv. 599.


I was reflecting this morning upon the spirit and humour of
the public diversions five-and-twenty years ago, and those of
the present time ; and lamented to myself, that though in those
days, they neglected their morality, they kept up their good sense ;
but that the beau monde, at present, is only grown more childish,
not more innocent, than the former. While I was in this train
of thought, an odd fellow, whose face I have often seen at the
playhouse, gave me the following letter with these words: ‘ Sir,


10


20


350 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


the Lion” presents his humble service to you, and desired me to
give this into your own hands.’


‘From my Den in the Haymarket, March 15.
‘SiR,

“I have read all your papers, and have stifled my resentment
against your reflections upon operas, until that of this day,
wherein you plainly insinuate, that Signior Grimaldi and myself
have a correspondence more friendly than is consistent with the
valour of his character, or the fierceness of mine. I desire you
would, for your own sake, forbear such intimations for the
future ; and must say it is a great piece of ill-nature in you, to
show so great an esteem for a foreigner, and to discourage a
Lion that is your own countryman.

‘I take notice of your fable of the lion and man®, but am so
equally concerned in that matter, that I shall not be offended to
which soever of the animals the superiority is given. You have
misrepresented me, in saying that I am a country gentleman,
who act only for my diversion; whereas, had I still the same
woods to range in which I once had when I was a fox-hunter,
I should not resign my manhood fora maintenance; and assure
you, as low as my circumstances are at present, I am so much
a man of honour, that I would scorn to be any beast for bread,
but a lion. :

‘Yours, &c.’

I had no sooner ended this, than one of my landlady’s
children brought me in several others, with some of which I
shall make up my present paper, they all having a tendency-to
the same subject, viz. the elegance of our present diversions.


‘ Covent-garden, March 13.
* SIR,

‘I have been for twenty years under-sexton of this parish of
St. Paul’s, Covent-garden, and have not missed tolling in to
prayers six times in all those years ; which office I have per-
formed to my great satisfaction, until this fortnight last past,
during which time I find my congregation take the warning of
my bell, morning and evening, to go to a puppet-show set forth
by one Powell", under the Piazzas. By this means I have not
only lost my two customers, whom I used to place for sixpencé
a-piece over against Mrs. Rachael Eyebright, but Mrs. Rachael


4 LETTER FROM THE LION AT THE HAYMARKET, 351


herself is gone thither also. There now appear among us none
but a few ordinary people, who come to church only to say their
prayers, so that I have no work worth speaking of but on Sun-
days. I have placed my son at the Piazzas, to acquaint the
ladies that the bell rings: for church, and that it stands on the
other side of the garden ! but they only laugh at the child.
‘TI desire you would lay this before all the whole world, that
I may not be made such a tool for the future, and that Punchi-
nello may choose hours less canonical. As things are now, Mr.
10 Powell has a full congregation, while we have a very thin house;
which if you can remedy, you will very much oblige,


* Sir, yours, &c.’

The following epistle I find is from the undertaker of the
Masquerade”;

‘SIR,

‘I have observed the rules of my masque ‘so carefully (in not
inquiring into persons) that I cannot tell whether you were one
of the company or not, last Tuesday ; but if you were not, and
Still design to come, I desire you would, for your own entertain-

29 ment, please to admonish the town, that all persons indifferently
are not fit for this sort of diversion. I could wish, Sir, you
Could make them understand that it is a kind of acting to go in
Masquerade, and a man should be able to say or do things
proper for the dress in which he appears. We have now and
then rakes in the habit of Roman senators, and grave politicians
in the dress of rakes. The misfortune of the thing is, that
People dress themselves in what they have a mind to be, and
hot what they are fit for. There is not a girl in the town, but
let her have her will in going to a masque, and she shall dress as

30a shepherdess. But let me beg of them to read the Arcadia,
or some other good romance, before they appear in any such
Character at my house. The last day we presented, every body
was so rashly habited, that when they came to speak to each
Other, a nymph with a crook had not a word to say but in the
Pert style of the pit; and a man in the habit of a philosopher
was speechless, till an occasion offered of expressing himself in
the refuse of the tiring rooms. We had a judge that danced a
Minuet with a quaker for his partner, while half-a-dozen harle-
quins stood by as spectators; a Turk drank me off two bottles


352 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


of wine, and a Jew eat me up half a ham of bacon. If I can
bring my design to bear, and make the maskers preserve their
characters in my assemblies, I hope you will allow there is a
foundation laid for more elegant and improving gallantries than
any the town at present affords, and consequently, that you will
give your approbation to the endeavours of, Sir,


‘Your most obedient humble servant.


I am very glad the following epistle obliges me to mention
Mr. Powell a second time in the same paper ; for indeed there

zo cannot be too great encouragement given to his skill in motions®,
provided he is under proper restrictions.
‘SIR,

‘ The opera at the Haymarket, and that under the little Piazza
in Covent-garden, being at present the two leading diversions
of the town, and Mr, Powell professing in his advertisements t0
set up Whittington and his Cat" against Rinaldo and Armida”
my curiosity led me the beginning ef last week to view both
these performances, and make my observations upon them.

‘First, therefore, I cannot but observe that Mr. Powell wisely

20 forbearing to give his company a bill of fare before-hand, every
scene is new and unexpected ; whereas it is certain, that the
undertakers of the Haymarket, having raised too great an ex’
pectation in their printed opera, very much disappoint theif
audience on the stage.

‘The King of Jerusalem is obliged to come from the city on
foot, instead of being drawn in a triumphant chariot by white
horses, as my opera-book had promised me; and thus while J
expected Armida’s dragons should rush forward- towards
Argantes, I found the hero was obliged to go to Armida, and

30 hand her out of her coach. We had also but a very short ailow-
ance of thunder and lightning ; though I cannot in this place
omit doing justice to the boy who had the direction of the two
painted dragons, and made them spit fire and smoke. He
flashed out his rosin in such just proportions, and in such due
time, that I could not forbear conceiving hopes of his being oné
day a most excellent player. I saw, indeed, but two thing
wanting to render his whole action complete, I mean the keep-
ing his head a little lower, and hiding his candle.

“I observe that Mr. Powell and the undertakers had both


1


30


ON THE SCORNFUL LADY, ETC. 353


the same thought, and I think much about the same time,
of introducing animals oh their several stages though indeed,
with very different success. The sparrows and chaffinches
at the Haymarket fly as yet very irregularly over the stage;
and instead of perching on the trees, and performing their
parts, these young actors either get into the galleries, or put
out the candles ; whereas Mr. Powell has so well disciplined
his pig, that in the first scene he and Punch dance a minuet
together. I am informed, however, that Mr. Powell resolves to

® excel his adversaries in their own way ; and introduces larks in
his next opera of Susannah, or Innocence Betrayed, which will
be exhibited next week, with a pair of new Eldérs.

‘The moral of Mr. Powell’s drama is violated, I confess, by
Punch’s national reflections on the French, and King Harry’s
aying his leg upon the Queen’s lap, in too ludicrous a manner,
before so great an assembly.

‘As to the mechanism and scenery, every thing, indeed, was
uniform, and of a piece,*and the scenes were managed very
dexterously ; which calls on me to take notice, that at the Hay-

?0 market, the undertakers forgetting to change their 'side-scenes,
we were presented with the prospect of the ocean in the midst
of a delightful grove ; and though the gentlemen on the stage
had very much contributed to the beauty of the grove, by walk-
ing up and down between the trees, I must own I was not a
little astonished to see a well-dressed young fellow in a full
bottomed wig, appeat in the midst of the sea, and without any
visible concern taking snuff.

‘I shall only observe one thing farther ...; as the wit in
both pieces is equal, I must prefer the. performance of Mr.
° Powell, because it is in our own language.:.

‘Iam, &c.’


Spectator, No. 14] ; [March 16, 1781,


No, 108. On the Scornful Lady ; seharacter of Sir Roger the
Chaplain.
- Discit enim citius, meminitque libentius illud,
Quod quis deridet, quam quod probat.
Hor. Ep. ii. 1. 262.
Ido not know that I have been in greater delight for these
Many years, than in beholding the boxes at the play the last
Aa


354 THEATRICAL PAPERS,
time The Scornful Lady® was acted. So great an assembly of
ladies placed in gradual rows in al] the ornaments of jewels,
silks, and colours, gave,so lively and gay an impression to the
heart, that methought the season of the year was vanished ;
and J did not think it an ill expression of a young fellow who,
stood near me, that called the boxes those ‘ beds of tulips.’ It
was a pretty variation of the prospect, when any one of those
fine ladies rose up and did honour? to herself and friend at a
distance, by curtseying ; and gave opportunity to that friend to

xo show her charms to the same advantage in returning the salu-
tation, Here that action is as proper. and graceful, as it is at
church unbecoming and impertinent. By the way I must take
the liberty to observe that I did not see any one wha is usually
so, full of civilities at church, offer at any such indecorum during
any part of the action of the play. Such beautiful prospects
gladden our minds, and when considered in general, give inno-
cent and pleasing ideas. He that dwells upon any one abject
of beauty, may fix his imagination to his disquiet ; but the con-
templation of a whole assembly together is a defence against the

20 encroachment of desire. At least to me, who have taken pains
to look at beauty abstracted from the consideration of its being
the object of desire; at power, only as it sits upon another,
without any hopes of partaking any share of it ; at wisdom and
capacity, without any pretensions to rival or envy its acquisi-
tions. I say to me, who am really free from forming any hopes
by beholding the persons of beautiful women, or warming
myself into ambition from the successes ‘of ‘other men, this
world is not only a mere scene, but a very pleasant one. Did
mankind but know the freedom which there is in keeping thus

3° aloof from the world, I should have more imitators, than the
powerfullest man in the nation has followers. To be no man’s
rival in love, or competitor in business, is a character which, if
it does not recommend you as it ought to benevolence among
those whom you live with, yet has it certainly this effect, that
you do not stand so much in need of their approbation, as you
would if you aimed at it more, in setting your heart on the same
things which the generality doat on. By this means, and with
this easy philosophy, I am never less at a play than when I am
at the theatre; but indeed I am seldom so well pleased with

4° action as in that place ; for mast men follow nature no longer


Io


ON THE SCORNFUL LADY, ETC. 355


than while they are in their night-gowns ", and all the busy part
of the day are in characters which they neither become, nor act
in with pleasure to themselves or their beholders. But to
return to my ladies: I was very well pleased to see so great a
crowd of them assembled at a play, wherein the heroine, as the
phrase is, is so just a picture of the vanity of the sex in torment-
ing their admirers. The lady who pines for the man whom she
treats with so much impertinence and inconstancy, is drawn
with much art and humour. Her resolutions to be extremely
civil, but her vanity rising just at the instant she resolved to
express herself kindly, are described as by one who had studied
the sex. But when my admiration is fixed upon this excellent
character, and two or three others in the play, I must confess I
was moved with the utmost indignation, at the trivial, senseless,
and unnatural representation of the chaplain. It is possible
there may be a pedant in holy orders, and we have seen one or
two of them in the world: but such a driveller as Sir Roger”,
so bereft of all manner of ‘pride, which is the’ characteristic of
a pedant, is what one would not believe would come into the


20 head of the same man who drew the rest of the play. The


30


49


meeting between Welford and him shows a wretch without any
notion of the dignity of his function ; and it is out of all common
sense that he should give an account of himself ‘as one sent
four or five miles in a morning, on foot, for eggs.’ It is not to
be denied, but this part, and that of the maid whom he makes
love to, are excellently well performed; but a thing which is
blameable in itself, grows still more so by the success in the
execution of it. It is so mean a thing to gratify a loose age
with a scandalous representation of what is reputable among
men, not to say what is sacred, that no beauty, no excellence in
an author ought to atone for it; nay, such excellence is an
aggravation of his guilt, and an argument that he errs against
the conviction of his é6wn understanding and conscience. Wit
Should be tried by this rule, and an audience should rise against
such a scene as throws down the reputation of any thing, which
the consideration of religion or decency should preserve from
contempt. But all this evil arises from this one corruption of
mind, that makes men resent offences against their virtue, less
than those against their understanding. An author shall write
as if he thought there was not one man of honour or woman of
Aa 2


350 THEATRICAL PAPERS,


chastity in the house, and come off with applause : for an insult
upon all the ten commandments with the little critics is not so
bad as the breach of an unity of time and place. Half wits do
not apprehend the miseries that must necessarily flow from
degeneracy of manners; nor do they know that ordet is the
support of society. Sir Roger and his mistress are monsters of
the poet’s own forming ; the sentiments in both of them are such
as do nat arise in fools of their education. We all know that a
silly scholar, instead of being below every one he meet with, is
10 apt to be exalted above the rank of such as are really his
superiors: his arrogance is always founded upon particular
notions of distinction in his own head, accompanied with a
pedantic scorn of all fortune and pre-eminence, when compared
with his knowledge and learning. This very one character of
Sir Roger, as silly as it really is, has done more towards the
disparagement of holy orders ®, and consequently of virtue itself,
than all the wit of that author, or any other, could make up for
in the conduct of the longest life after it. I do not pretend, in
saying this, to give myself airs of more virtue than my neigh-
20 hours, but assert it from the principles by which mankind must
always be governed. Sallies of imagination are to be overlooked,
when they are committed out of warmth in the recommendation
of what is praiseworthy ; but a deliberate advancing of vice,
with all the wit in the world, is as ill an action as any that comes
before the magistrate, and ought to be received as such by the
people.
Spectator, No. 270.] [January 9, 1712.


No. 109. The Distrest Mother ; Will Honeycomb on Stage-
craft; Letters from George Powell and Sophia.


Projicit ampullas et sesquipedalia verba.
Hor. Ars Poet. ver. 97


The players, who know I am very much their friend, take all
opportunities to express a gratitude to me for being so. They
could not have a better occasion of obliging me, than one which


THE DISTREST MOTHER. 357


they lately took hold of. They desired my friend Will Honey-
comb to bring me to the reading of a new tragedy ; it is called
The Distrest Mother®, I must confess, though some days
are past since I enjoyed that entertainment, the passions of
the several characters dwell strongly upon my imagination ;
and I congratulate the age, that they are at last to see truth
and human life represented in the incidents which concern
heroes and heroines. The style of the play is such as becomes
those of the first education, and the sentiments worthy those


lo of the highest figure. It was a most exquisite pleasure to me,


to observe real tears drop from the eyes of those who had long
made it their profession to dissemble affliction ; and the player
who read frequently throw down the book, until he had given
vent to the "humanity which rose in him at some irresistible
touches of the imagined sorrow. We have seldom had any
female distress on the’ stage, which did not, upon cool examina-
tion, appear to flow from the weakness rather than the mis-
fortune of the person represented : but in this tragedy you are
not entertained with the ungoverned passions of such as are


20 enamoured of each other, merely as they are men and women,


3


re}


but their regards are founded upon high conceptions of each
other’s virtue and merit ; and the character which gives name
to the play, is one who has behaved herself with heroic virtue
in the most important circumstances of a female life, those of a
wife, a widow, and a mother. If there be those whose minds
have been too attentive upon the affairs of life, to have any
notion of the passion of love im such extremes as are. known
only to particular tempers, yet in the above-mentioned con-
siderations, the sorrow of the heroine will move even the
generality of mankind. Domestic virtues concern all the world,
and there is no one living who is not interested that Andro-
mache should be an inimitable character. The generous
affection to the memory of her deceased husband, that tender
care for her son, which is ever heightened with the considera-
tion of his father, and these regards preserved in spite of being
tempted with the possession of the highest greatness, are what
cannot but be venerable even to such an audience as at present
frequents the English theatre. My friend Will Honeycomb
commended several tender things that were said, and told me


40 they were very genteel ; but whispered me, that he feared the


Jo


20


30


358 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


piece was not busy enough for the present taste. To supply
this, he recommended to the players to be very careful in their
scenes ; and, above all things, that every part should be per-
fectly new dressed. I was very glad to find that they did not
neglect my friend’s admonition, because there are a great many
in this class of criticism who may be gained by it; but indeed
the truth is, that as to the work itself, it is every where Nature.
The persons are of the highest quality in life, even that of
princes ; but their quality is not represented by the poet, with
directions that guards and waiters should follow them in every
scene, but their grandeur appears in greatness of sentiment,
flowing from minds worthy their condition. To make a cha-
racter truly great, this author understands, that it should have
its foundation in superior thoughts and maxims of conduct.
It is very certain, that many an hortest woman would make no
difficulty, though she had been the wife of Hector, for the sake
of a kingdom, to marry the enemy of her husband’s family and
country ; and indeed who can deny but she might be still an
honest woman, but no heroine? That may be defensible, nay
laudable, in one character, which would be in the highest
degree exceptionable in another. When Cato Uticensis killed
himself, Cottius, a Roman of ordinary quality and character, did
the same thing ; upon which one said, smiling, ‘ Cottius might
have lived, though Czsar has seized the Roman liberty.’ Cot-
tius’s condition might have been the same, let things at the
upper end of the world pass as they would. What is further
very extraordinary in this work, is, that the persons are all of
them laudable, and their misfortunes arise rather from un-
guarded virtue, than propensity to vice. The town has an
opportunity of doing itself justice in supporting the representa-
tions of passion, sorrow, indignation, even despair itself, within
the rules of decency, honour, and good-breeding ; and since
there is none can flatter himself his life will be-always fortunate,
they may here see sorrow, as they would wish to bear it when-
ever it arrives,


“MR. SPECTATOR,


‘1 am appointed to act a part in the new tragedy called
The Distrest Mother. it is the celebrated grief of Orestes
which I am to personate ; but I shall not act it as I ought, for I


ON THE SELF-TORMENTOR OF TERENCE, ETC. 359


shall feel it too intimately to be able to utter it. J was last
night repeating a paragraph to myself, which I took to be an
expression of rage, and in the middle of the sentence there was
a stroke of self-pity which quite unmanned me. Be pleased,
Sir, to print this letter, that when I am oppressed in this
manner at such an interval, a certain part of the audience may
not think I am out; and I hope, with this allowance, to do it
with satisfaction.
. ‘I am, Sir,

Io ‘Your most humble Servant,

‘GEORGE POWELL2,’
“MR. SPECTATOR,

‘As I was walking the other day in the Park, I saw a gentle-
man with a very short face"; I desire to know whether it was
you. Pray inform me as soon as you can, lest I become the
most heroic Hecatissa’s rival.

‘Your humble Servant to command,
‘SOPHIA,’
‘DEAR MADAM,
20 * It is not me you are in love with, for I was very ill, and kept
my chamber all that day.
“Your most humble Servant,
‘THE SPECTATOR.’


Spectator, No. 290.] {February t, 1712.


No. 110. Ox the Self- Tormentor of Terence, and Dogeett's
Country Wake.


Melius, pejus, prosit, obsit, nil vident, nisi quod Inhet.
Ter. Heaut. Act iv. Sc. 1.


When men read, they taste the matter with which they are
entertained, according as their own respective studies and in-
clinations have prepared them, and make their reflections
accordingly. Some, perusing Roman writers, would find in
them, whatever the subject of the discourses were, parts which


& Ke)


20


4°


360 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


implied the grandeur of that people in their warfare, or their
politics. As for my part, who am a mere Spectator, I drew
this morning conclusions of their eminence in what I think
great, to wit, in having worthy sentiments, from the reading
a comedy of Terence. The play was the Self-Zormentor®. It
is from the beginning to the end a perfect picture of human
life, but I did not observe in the whole one passage that could
raise a laugh. How well disposed must that people be, who
could be entertained with satisfaction by so sober and polite
mirth! In the first scene of the comedy, when one of the old
men accuses the other of impertinence for interposing in his
affairs, he answers, ‘I am a man, and cannot help feeling any
sorrow that can arrive at man,’ It is said this sentence was
received with a universal applause. There cannot be a greater
argument of the general good understanding of a people, than a
sudden consent to give their approbation of a sentiment which
has no emotion in it. If it were spoken with never so great
skill in the actor, the manner of uttering that sentence could
have nothing in it which could strike any but people of the
sreatest humanity, nay people elegant and skilful in observations
upon it. It is possible he might have laid his hand on his
breast, and, with a winning insinuation in his countenance, ex-
pressed to his neighbour that he was a man who made his
case his own; yet I will engage a player in Covent-garden
might hit such an attitude a thousand times before he would
have been regarded. I have heard that a minister of state in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth had all manner of books and
ballads brought to him of what kind soever, and took great
notice how much they took with the people™ ; upon which he
would, and certainly might, very well judge of their present
dispositions, and the most proper way of applying them accord-
ing to his own purposes. What passes on the stage, and the
reception it meets with from the audience, is a very useful
instruction of this kind. According to what you may observe
there on our stage, you see them often moved so directly against
all common sense and humanity, that you would be apt to pro-
nounce us a nation of savages. It cannot be called a mistake
of what is pleasant, but the very contrary to it is what most
assuredly takes with them. The other night an old woman
carried off with a pain in her side, with all the distortions and


ON THE SELF-TORMENTOR OF TERENCE, ETC. 36 I


anguish of countenance which is natural to one in that condi-
tion, was laughed and clapped off the stage. Terence’s
comedy, which I am speaking of, is indeed written as if he
hoped to please none but such as had as good a taste as him-
self. I could not but reflect upon the natural description of the
innocent young woman” made by the servant to his master.
‘When I came to the house,’ said he, ‘an old woman opened
the door, and I followed her in, because I could, by entering
upon them unawares, better observe what was your mistress’s

to ordinary manner of spending her time, the only way of judg-
ing any one’s inclinations and genius. I found her at her
needle in a sort of second mourning, which she wore for an
aunt she had lately lost. She had nothing on but what showed
She dressed only for herself. Her hair hung negligently about
her shoulders. She had none of the arts with which others
used to set themselves off, but had that negligence of person
which is remarkable in those who are careful of their minds,
Tign she had a maid who was at work near her that was a
slattern, because her mistress was careless ; which I take to be

°° another argument of your security in her; for the go-betweens
of women of intrigue are rewarded too well to be dirty. When
you were named, and I told her you desired to see her, she
threw down her work for joy, covered her face, and decently
hid her tears,’ He must be a very good actor, and draw at-
tention rather from his own character than the words of the
author, that could gain it among us for this speech, though so
full of nature and good sense. .

The intolerable folly and confidence of players putting in

words of their own, does in a great measure feed the absurd

30 taste of the audience. But however that is, it is‘ordinary for
a cluster of coxcombs to take up the house to themselves, and
equally insult both the actors and the company. These savages,
who want all manner of regard and deference to the rest of
mankind, come only to show themselves to us, without any other
purpose than to let us know they: despise us.

The gross of an audience is composed of two sorts of people,
those who know no pleasure but of the body, and those who
improve or command corporeal pleasures, by the addition of
fine sentiments of the mind. At present:the intelligent part of

40 the company are wholly subdued by the insurrections of those


10


20


30


362 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


who know no satisfactions but what they have in common with
all other animals. ....

I would not be understood in this talk to argue that nothing is
tolerable on the stage but what has an immediate tendency to
the promotion of virtue. On the contrary, I can allow, provided
there is nothing against the interests of virtue, and is not offen-
sive to good manners, that things of an indifferent nature may
be represented. For this reason I have no exception to the
well-drawn rusticities in the Country Wake ; and there is some-
thing so miraculously pleasant in Dogget’s acting the awkward
‘triumph and comic sorrow of Hob in different circumstances,
that IJ shall not be able to stay away whenever it is acted. All
that vexes me is, that the gallantry of taking the cudgels for
Gloucestershire, with the pride of heart in tucking himself up,
and taking aim at his adversary, as well as the other’s protesta-
tion in the humanity of low romance, that he could not promise
the squire to break Hob’s head, but he would, if he could, do it
in love ; then flourish and begin: I say what vexes me is, gat
such excellent touches as these, as well as the ’squire’s being
out of all patience at Hob’s success, and venturing himself into
the crowd, are circumstances hardly taken notice of, and the
height of the jest is only in the very point that heads are broken.
I am confident were there a scene written, wherein Penkethman®
should break his leg by wrestling with Bullock2, and Dicky”
come in to set it, without one word said but what should be
according to the exact rules of surgery in making this extension,
and binding up the leg, the whole house should be in a roar of
applause at the dissembled anguish of the patient, the help
given by him who threw him down, and the handy address
and arch looks’ of the surgeon. To enumerate the entrance
of ghosts, the embattling of armies, the noise of heroes in love,
with a thousand other enormities, would be to transgress the
bounds of this paper, for which reason it is possible they may
have hereafter distinct discourses ; not forgetting any of the
audience who shall set up for actors, and interrupt the play on
the stage; and players who shall prefer the applause of fools,
to that of the reasonable part of the company.


Spectator, No. 502.) {October 6, 1712.


ALL THE WORLD A STAGE, ETC, 363


No.l... <All the World a Stage’; Wilks, Cibber, Penketh-
man, Mrs. Bicknell,


Totus mundus agit histrionem.


Many of my fair readers, as well as very gay and well-received
persons of the other sex, are extremely perplexed at the Latin
sentences at the head of my speculations. I do not know
whether I ought not to indulge them with translations of each
of them: however, I Mave to-day taken down from the top of
the stage in Drury-lane a bit of Latin which often stands in their
view, and signifies, that ‘ The whole world acts the player.’ It
is certain that if we look all round us, and behold the different
employments of mankind, you hardly see one who is not, as the

to player is, in an assumed character. The lawyer who is vehe-
ment and loud in the cause wherein he knows he has not the
truth of the question on his side, is a player as to the personated
part, but incomparably meaner than he as to the prostitution of
himself for hire: because the pleader’s falsehood introduces
injustice ; the player feigns for no other end’ but to divert or
instruct you. The divine, whose passions transport him to say
any thing with any view but promoting the interests of true
piety and religion, is a player with a still greater imputation of
guilt, in proportion to his depreciating a character more sacred.
20 Consider all the different pursuits and employments of men,
and you will find half their actions tend to nothing else but
disguise and imposture ; and all that is done which proceeds
not from a man’s very self, is the action of a player. For this
reason-it is that I make so frequent mention of the stage. It
is with me a matter of the highest consideration, what parts are
well or ill performed, what passions or sentiments are indulged
or cultivated, and consequently what manners and customs are
transfused from the stage to the world, which reciprocally
imitate each other. As the writers of epic poems introduce
3© shadowy persons, and represent vices and virtues under the
characters of men and women ; so I, who am a Spectator in the
world, may perhaps sometimes make use of the names of the
actdrs on the stage, to represent or admonish those who transact
affairs in the world, When I am commending Wilks" for


I


2


3


4°


°


°


fo)


364 THEATRICAL PAPERS,


representing the tenderness of a husband and a father in Afac-
beth, the contrition of a reformed prodigal in Harry the Fourth,
the winning emptiness of a young man of good-nature® and
wealth in Zhe Trip to the Jubilee, the officiousness of an artful
servant” in the Fox ; when thus I celebrate Wilks, I talk to all
the world who are engaged in any of those circumstances. If
I were to speak of merit neglected, misapplied, or misunder-
stood, might not I say Estcourt™ has a great capacity? But it
is not the interest of others who bear a figure on the stage, that
his talents were understood ; it is their business to impose upon
him what cannot become him, or keep out of his hands any
thing in which he would shine. Were one to raise a suspicion
of himself in a man who passes upon the world for a fine thing,
in order to alarm him, one might say, If Lord Foppington® was
not on the stage (Cibber acts the false pretensions to a genteel
behaviour so very justly), he would have in the generality of
mankind more that would admire than deride him. When we
come to characters directly comical, it is not to be imagined
what effect a well-regulated stage would have upon men’s man-
ners. The craft of a usurer, the absurdity of a rich fool, the
awkward roughness of a fellow of half courage, the ungraceful
mirth of a creature of, half wit, might for ever be put out of
countenance by proper parts for Dogget™, Johfson®, by acting
Corbacchio the other night, must have given all who saw him,
a thorough detestation of aged avarice. The petulancy of a
peevish old fellow, who loves and hates he knows not why, is
very excellently performed by the ingenious Mr. William Pen-
kethman in the /of’s Fortune™ ; where, in the character of Don
Choleric Snap Shorto de Testy, he answers no questions but to
those whom he likes, and wants no account of any thing from
those he approves. Mr. Penkethman is also master of as many
faces in the dumb scene as can be expected from a man in the
circumstances of being ready to perish out of fear and hunger.
He wonders throughout the whole scene very masterly, without
neglecting his victuals. If it be, as I have heard it sometimes
mentioned, a great qualification for the world to follow business
and pleasure too, what is it in the ingenious Mr. Penkethman to
represent a sense of pleasure and pain at the same time—as you
may see him do this evening?

As it is certain that a stage ought to be wholly suppressed, or


ON THE FUNERAL OF BETTERTON, 365


judicjously encouraged, while there is one in the nation, men
turned for regular pleasure cannot employ their thoughts more
usefully, for the diversion of mankind, than by convincing them
that it is in themselves to raise this entertainment to the greatest
height. It would be a great improvement, as well as embellish-
ment to the theatre, if dancing were more regarded, and taught
to all the actors. One who has the advantage of such an agree-
able girlish person as Mrs. Bicknell®, joined with her capacity of
imitation, could in proper gesture and motion represent all the

To decent characters of female life. An amiable modesty in one
aspect of a dancer, and assumed confidence in another, a sud-
den joy in another, a falling-off with an impatience of being
beheld, a return towards the audience with an unsteady resolu-
tion to approach them, and a well-acted solicitude to please,
would revive in the company all the fine touches of mind raised
in observing all the objects of affection or passion they had
before beheld. Such elegant entertainments as these would
polish the town into judgment in their gratifications; and
delicacy in pleasure is the first step people of condition take in

© reformation from vice. Mrs. Bicknell has the only capacity for
this sort of dancing of any on the stage; and I dare say all who
see her performance to-morrow night, when sure the romp will
do her best for her own benefit, will be of my mind.


Spectator, No. 370.] [May 5, 1712.


No.112. On the funeral of Betterton, his Acting of Shakespeare;
his Widow.


Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam que sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Hor. Ars. Poet. 180.


Having received notice, that the famous actor, Mr. Betterton®,
Was to be interred this evening in the cloisters near Westmin-
Ster-abbey, I was resolved to walk thither ; and see the last office
doné to a man whom I had always very much admired, and
from whose action IL had received more strong impressions of .


366 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


what is great and noble in human nature, than from the argu-
ments of the most solid philosophers, or the descriptions of the
most charming poets I hadeverread. As the rude and untaught
multitude are no way wrought upon more effectually, than by
seeing public punishments and executions ; so men of letters
and education fgel their humanity most forcibly exercised,
when they attend the obsequies of men who had arrived
at any perfection jin liberal accomplishments. Theatrical
action is to be esteemed as such,-except it be objected that we
zo Cannot call that an art which cannot be attained by art. Voice,
Stature, motion, and other gifts, must be very bountifully
bestowed by nature, or labour and industry will but push the
unhappy endeavourer in that way the further off his wishes.
Such an actor as Mr. Betterton ought to be recorded with
the same respect as Roscius among the Romans. The greatest
orator has thought fit to quote his judgment, and celebrate his
life. Roscius was the example to all that would form themselves
into proper and winning behaviour. His action was so well
adapted to the sentiments he expressed, that the youth of Rome
20 thought they wanted only to be virtuous, to be as graceful in
their appearance as Roscius. The imagination took a lovely
impression of what was great and good ; and they, who never
thought of setting up for the art of imitation, became themselves
inimitable characters. , :
There fs no human invention so aptly calculated for the form-
ing a free-born people as that of a theatre. Tully reports, that
the celebrated player of whom I am speaking, used frequently
to say, ‘ The perfection of an actor is only to become what he is
doing.’ Young men, who are too unattentive to receive lectures,
30 are irresistibly taken with performances. Hence it is, that I
extremely lament the little relish the gentry of this nation have,
at present, for the just and noble representations in some of our
tragedies, . The operas, which are of late introduced, can leave
no trace behind them that can be of service beyond the present
moment. To sing and to dance, are accomplishments very
few have any thoughts of practising ; but to speak justly, and
move gracefully, is what every man thinks he does perform, or
wishes he did.
I have hardly a notion, that any performer of antiquity could
40 surpass the action of Mr, Betterton in any of the occasions in


ON THE FUNERAL OF BETTERTON. 367


which he has appeared on our stage. The wonderful agony
which he appeared in, when he examined the circumstance of
the handkerchief in Othello; the mixture of love that intruded
upon his mind, upon the innocent answers Desdemona makes,
betrayed in his gesture such a variety and vicissitude of pas-
sions, as would admonish a man to be afraid of his own heart ;
and perfectly convince him, that it is to stab it, to admit that
worst of daggers, jealousy. Whoever reads in his closet this
admirable scene, will find that he cannot, except he has as


1o warm an imagination as Shakspeare himself, find any but dry,


2


3


©


o


incoherent, and broken sentences: but a reader that has seen
Betterton act it, observes, there could not be a word added ; that
longer speeches had been unnatural, nay, impossible, in Othello’s
circumstances. The charming passage in the same tragedy,
where he tells the manner of winning the affection of his mis-
tress, was urged with so moving and graceful] an energy, that,
while I walked in the cloisters, I thought of him with the same
concern as if I waited for the remains of a person who had in
real life done all that ] had seen him represent. The gloom of
the place, and faint lights before the ceremony appeared, con-
tributed to the melancholy disposition I was in ; and I began
to be extremely afflicted, that Brutus and Cassius had any
difference ; that Hotspur’s gallantry was so unfortunate ; and
that the mirth And good humour of Falstaff could not exempt
him from the grave. Nay, this occasion, in me who look upon
the distinctions amongst men to be merely scenical, raised
reflections upon the emptiness of all human perfection and
greatness in general; and I could not but regret, that the
sacred heads’ which lie buried in the neighbourhood of this
\ittle portion of earth, in which my poor old friend is deposited,
are returned to dust as well as he, and that there is no difference
in the grave between the imaginary and the real monarch.
This made me say of human life itself, with Macbeth’


To-morrow, to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in a stealing pace from day to day
To the last moment of recorded time!“
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools

To their eternal night! Out, out, short candle,
life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more.


368 THEATRICAL PAPERS,


The mention I have here made of Mr. Betterton, for whom I
had, as long as I have known any thing, a very great esteem
and gratitude for the pleasure he gave me, can do him no good ;
but it may possibly be of service to the unhappy woman” he
has left behind him, to have it known, that this great tragedian
was never in a scene half so moving, as the circumstances of
his affairs created at his departure. His wife, after a cohabita-
tion of forty years in the strictest amity, has long pined away
with a sense of his decay, as well in his person as his little for-

ro tune ; and, in proportion to that, she has herself decayed both
in her ‘health and reason. Her husband’s death, added to her
age and infirmities, would certainly have determined her life,
but that the greatness of her distress has been her relief, by a
present deprivation of her-senses. This absence of reason is
her best defence against age, sorrow, poverty, and sickness, I
dwell upon this account so distinctly, in obedience to a certain
great spirit®, who hides her name, and has by letter applied to
me to recommend to her some object of compassion, from whom
she may be concealed.

zo = This, I think, is a proper occasion for exerting such heroic
generosity ; and as there is an ingenuous shame in those who
have known better fortune, to be reduced to receive obligations,
as well as a becoming pain in the truly generous to receive
thanks ; in this case both those delicacies are*preserved ; for
the person obliged is as incapable of knowing her benefactress,
as her benefactress is unwilling to be known by her.


Tatler, No. 167.] [May 4, 1710.


No.lis. On the death of Estcourt; his Powers of Mimicry;
his Merits as a Man.


Erat homo ingeniosus, acutus, acer, et qui plurimum et salis haberet
et fellis, nec candoris minus.—PLIN. Epist.


My papet is, in a kind; a letter of news, but it regards rather
what passes in the world of conversation than that of business.
I am very sorry that 1 have at present a circumstance before me,


ON THE DEATH OF ESTCOURT, ETC. 369


which is of very great importance to all wlio havea relish for
gaiety, wit, mirth, or humour; I mean the death of poor Dick
Estcourt™. I have been obliged to him for so many hours of jollity,
that it is but a small recompense, though all I can give him, to.
pass a moment or two in sadness for the loss of so agreeable a
man. Poor Estcourt! the last time I saw him, we were plotting
to show the town his great capacity for acting in its full light, by
introducing him as dictating to a set of young players, in what
manner to speak this sentence, and utter the other passion.
to He had so exquisite a discerning of what was defective in any
object before hini, that in an instant he could show you the ridi-
culous side of what would pass for beautiful and just, even to
men of no ill judgment, before he had pointed at the failure. He
was fio less skilful in the knowledge of beauty; and I dare say,
there is no one who knew him well, but can repeat more well-
turned compliments, as well as smart repartees of Mr.’ Est-
court’s, than of any other man in Englarid. This was easily to
be observed in his iriimitable faculty of telling a story, in which
he would throw in natural and unexpected incidents to make
© his court to one part, and rally the other part of the company.
Then he would vary the usage he gave them, according as he
saw them bear kind ot sharp language. He had the knack to
taise up a pensive teniper, and mortify an impertinently gay
one, with the most agreeable skill imaginable. There are a
thousand things which crowd into my memory, which rhake me
too much concerned to tell on about him. Hamlet holding up
the skull which the gravedigger threw to him, with an account
that it was the head of the king’s jester, falls into very pleasing
reflections, and cries out to his companion, ‘Alas, poor Yorick !
3° | knew him, Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most exquisite
fancy ; he hath borne me on his back a thousand times: and
now how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises at it.
Here hung those lips that I] have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your songs? your
flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table on a roar?
Rot one now to mock your ow? grinning? quite chap-fallen ?
Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell het, let her paint
an inch thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh
at that?’ °
It is an insolence natural to the wealthy, to affix, as much ay
. Bb d


49


370 ‘ THEATRICAL PAPERS,


in them lies, the character of a man to his circumstances.
Thus it is ordinary with them to praise faintly the good quali-
ties of those below them, and say, It is very extraordinary in
such a man as he is, or the like, when they are forced to
acknowledge the value of him whose lowness upbraids their
exaltation. It is to this humour only, that it is to be ascribed,
that a quick wit in conversation, a nice judgment upon any
emergency that could arise, and a most blameless inoffensive
behaviour, could not raise this man above being received only

zo upon the foot of contributing to mirth and diversion. But he
was as easy under that condition, as a man of so excellent
talents was capable ; and since they would have it, that to divert
was his business, he did it with all the seeming alacrity imagin-
able, though it stung him to the heart that it was his business.
Men of sense, who could taste his excellences, were well satis-
fied to let him lead the way in conversation, and play after his
own manner; but fools, who provoked him to mimicry, found
he had the indignation to let it be at their expense who called
for it, and he would show the form of conceited heavy. fellows

20as jests to the company at their own request, in revenge fox
interrupting him from being a companion to put on the characte1
of a jester. ,

What was peculiarly excellent ® in this memorable companion
was, that in the accounts he gave of persons and sentiments, he
did not only hit the figure of their faces, and manner of their
gestures, but he would in his narrations fall into their very way
of thinking, and this when he recounted passages wherein men
of the best wit were concerned, as well as such wherein were
represented men of the lowest rank of understanding. It is

30 certainly as great an instance of self-love to a weakness, to be
impatient of being mimicked, as any can be imagined, There
were none but the vain; the formal, the proud, or those who
were incapable of amending their faults, that dreaded him; to
others he was in the highest degree pleasing ; and I do not
know any satisfaction of any indifferent kind I ever tasted sc
much, as having got over an impatience of my seeing myself in
the air he could put me when I have displeased him. It is
indeed to his exquisite talent this way, more than any philo-
sophy I could read on the subject, that my person is very little

40 of my care, and it is indifferent to me what is said of my shape,


ON THE DEATH OF ESTCOURT, ETC. 371


my air, my manner, my speech, or my address. It is to poor
Estcourt I chiefly owe that I am arrived at the happiness of
thinking. nothing a diminution to me, but what argues a de-
Pravity of my will.

It has as much surprised me as any thing in nature, to have it
frequently said, that he was not a good player: but that must
be owing to a partiality for former actors in the parts in which
he succeeded them, and judging by comparison of what was
liked before, rather than by the nature of the thing. Whena

Toman of his wit and smartness could put on an utter absence of
common sense in his face, as he did in the character of Bullfinch
in the Northern Lass®, and an air of insipid cunning and
vivacity in the character of Pounce in the Zender Husband”, it
is folly to dispute his capacity and success, as he was an actor.

Poor Estcourt ! let the vain and proud be at rest, thou wilt no
more disturb their admiration of their dear selves ; and thou art
no longer to drudge in raising the mirth of stupids, who know
hothing of thy merit, for thy maintenance. ;

It is natural for the generality of mankind to run into reflec-

© tions upon our mortality, when disturbers of the world are laid
at rest, but to take no notice when they who can please and
divert are pulled from us. But for my part, I cannot but think
the loss of such talents, as the man of whom I am speaking
was master of, a more melancholy instance of mortality than
the dissolution of persons of never so high characters in the
world, whose pretensions were that they were noisy and mis-
Chievous.

But I must grow more succinct, and, as a Spectatar, give an
account of this extraordinary man, who, in his way, never had

30 an equal in any age before him, or in that wherein he lived. I
Speak of him as a companion, and a man qualified for conversa-
tion. His fortune exposed him to an obsequiousness towards
the worst sort of company, but his excellent qualities rendered
him capable of making the best figure in the most refined. I
have been present with him among men of the most delicate
taste a whole night, and have known him (for he saw it was
desired) keep the discourse to himself the most part of it, and
Maintain his good-humour with a countenance, in a language so
delightful, without offence to any person or thing upon earth;

10 still preserving the distance his circumstances obliged him to ;

Bba2


10


20


372 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


I say, I have seen him do all this in such a charming manner,
that I am sure none of those I hint at will read this without
giving him some sorrow for their abundant mirth, and one gush
of tears for so many bursts of laughter. I wish it were any
honour to the pleasant creature’s memory, that my eyes are too
much suffused to let me go on— ‘


Spectator, No. 468.] [August 27, 1712.


No. 114. On the death of Peer, the Property Man; Revival
of the ‘ Plotting Sisters?


Cedat uti conviva satur—Honr. Sat. i. 1. 119.


Though men see every day people go to their long home,
who are younger than themselves, they are not so apt to be
alarmed at that, as at the decease of those who have lived longer
in their sight. They miss their acquaintance, and are sur-
prised at the loss of an habitual object. This gave me so’ much
concern for the death of Mr. William Peer of the theatre-royal,
who was an actor at the Restoration, and took his theatrical
degree with Betterton, Kynaston, and Harris. Though his
station was humble, he performed it well; and the common
comparison with the stage and human life, which has been so
often made, may well be brought out upon this occasion. It is
no matter, say the moralists, whether you act a prince or a
beggar, the business is to do your part well. Mr. William Peer
distinguished himself particularly in two characters, which no
man ever could touch but himself ; one of them was.the speaker
of the prologue to the play, which is contrived in the tragedy of
Hamlet, to awake the consciences of the guilty princes. Mr.
William Peer spoke that preface to the play with such an air,
as represented that he was‘an actor, and with such an inferior
manner as only acting an actor, as made the others on the stage
appear real great persons, and not representatives. This was a
nicety in acting that none but the most subtle player could so
much as conceive. I remember his speaking these words, in


ON THE DEATH OF PEER, ETC. 373


which there is no great matter but in the right adjustment of
the air of the speaker, with universal applause :


For us and for our tragedy,
Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently.


Hamlet says very archly upon the pronouncing of it, ‘Is this a
prologue, or a posy of a ring™?’ However, the speaking of it
got Mr. Peer more reputation, than those who speak the length
of a puritan’s sermon every night will ever attain to. Besides

10 this, Mr. Peer got a great fame on another little occasion. He
played the apothecary in Caius Marius», as it is called by Otway ;
but Romeo and Juliet, as originally in Shakspeare ; it wil! be
necessary to recite more out of the play than he spoke, to have
a right conception of what Peer did in it. Marius, weary of
life, recollects means to be rid of it after this manner ;


I do remember an apothecary

That dwelt about this rendezvous of death!
Meagre and very rueful were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.


20 When this spectre of poverty appeared, Marius addresses him
thus::
I see thon art very poor,
Thou may’st do any thing, here’s fifty drachmas,
Get me a draught of what will soonest free
A wretch from all his cares.


When the apothecary objects that it is unlawful, Marius urges,


Art thou so base and full of wretchedness

Yet fear’st to die! Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression stareth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hang on thy back;

The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s laws;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.


30


Without all this quotation the reader could not have a just
idea of the visage and manner which Peer assumed, when in
the most lamentable tone imaginable he consents ; and deliver-
ing the poison, like a man reduced to the drinking it himself, if
he did not vend it, says to Marius,


My poverty, but not my will, consents;
to Take this and drink it off, the work is done.


10


20


30


374 THEATRICAL PAPERS.


It was an odd excellence, and a very particular circumstance
this of Peer’s, that his whole action of life depended upon speak-
ing five lines better than any man else in the world. But this
eminence lying in so narrow a compass, the governors of the
theatre observing his talents to lie in a certain knowledge of
propriety, and his personadmitting him to shine only in the two
above parts, his sphere of action was enlarged by the addition
of the post of property-man. This officer has always ready, in
a place appointed for him behind the prompter, all such tools
and implements as are necessary in the play, and.it is his busi-
ness never to want billet-doux, poison, false money, thunder-
bolts, daggers, scrolls of parchment, wine, pomatum, truncheons,
and wooden legs, ready at the call of the said prompter, accord-
ing as his respective utensils were necessary for promoting what
was to pass on the stage. The addition-of this office, so
important to the conduct of the whole affair of the stage, and
the good economy observed" by their, present managers in
punctual payments, made Mr. Peer’s subsistence very comfort-
able. But it frequently happens, that men lose their virtue in
prosperity, who were shiningcharacters in the contrary condition.
Good fortune indeed had no effect on the mind, but very much
on the body of Mr. Peer. For in the seventieth year of his age
he grew fat, which rendered his figure unfit for the utterance of
the five lines above-mentioned. He had now unfortunately lost
the wan distress necessary for the countenance of the apothecary,
and was too jolly to speak the prologue with the proper humility".
It is thought this calamity went too near him. It did not a
little contribute to the shortening his days ; and, as there is no
state of real happiness in this life, Mr. Peer was undone by his
success, and lost all by arriving at what is the end of all other
men’s ‘pursuits, his ease.

I could not forbear enquiring into the effects Mr. Peer left
behind him, but find there is no demand due to him from the


‘house, but the following bill ;


LS a

’ For hire of six case of pistols - - - - -0 4 0

“A drum for Mrs, Bignall in the Pilgrim™® - - - 0 4 4

A truss of straw for the madmen - te - - oo 8
Pomatum and vermilion to grease the face of the

stuttering cook - - = + > = - oo 8


lo


20


30


ON THE DEATH OF PEER, ETC. 375
5S.

For boarding a setting dog two days to follow Mr.
Johnson in Epsom Wells"  - - - - - 0 o 6
For blood in Macbeth - - - - + -+- 00 3
Raisins and almonds for a witch’s banquet - - 0 o 8


This contemporary of mine, whom I have often rallied for the
narrow compass of his singular perfections, is now at peace, and
wants no durther assistance from any man; but men of exten-
Sive genius, now living, still depend upon the good offices of
the town.

I am therefore to remind my reader, that ori this day, being
the fifteenth of June, the Plotting Sisters® is to be acted for the
benefit of the author, my old frierid Mr. D’Urfey. This comedy
was honoured with the presence of king Charles the Second
three of its first five nights.

My friend has in this work shown himself a master, and made
not only the characters of the play, but also the ftirniture of the
house contribute to the main design. He has made excellent
use of a table with a carpet, and the key of a closet. With
these two implements, which would, perhaps, have been over-
looked by an ordinary writer, he contrives the most natural
perplexities (allowing only the use of these household goods in
poetry) that ever were represented on a stage. He has also
made good advantage of the knowledge of the stage itself; for
in the nick of being surprised, the lovers are let down and
escape at a trap-door. In a word, any who have the curiosity
to observe what pleased in the last generation, and does not
go to a comedy with a resolution to be grave, will find this
evening ample food for mirth. Johnson, who understands what
he does as well as any man, exposes the impertinence of an old
fellow, who has lost his senses, still pursuing pleasures, with
great mastery. The ingenious Mr, Pinkethman is a bashful
rake, and is sheepish without having modesty with great success.
Mr. Bullock succeeds Nokes in the part of Bubble, and in my
Opinion is not much below him: for he does excellently that
Sort of folly we call absurdity, which is the very contrary of wit,
but, next to that; is of all things the properest to excite mirth.
What is foolish is the object of pity ; but absurdity often pro-
ceeds from an opinion of sufficiency, and consequently is an


376 THEATRICAL PAPERS. °


a
honest occasion for laughter. These characters ‘in this play
cannot choose but make it a very pleasant entertainment, and
the decorations of singing and dancing will more than repay the
good-nature of those who make an honest man a visit of two
merry hours to make his following year unpainful.


Guardian, No, 82,] [June 15, 1713-


Ig


20


IV
MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


No. 115. On Raphael's Cartoons at Hampton-Court.
Mutum est pictura poema.


I have very often lamented, and hinted my sorrow in several
Speculations, that the art of painting is made so little use of to
the improvement of our manners. When we consider that it
Places the action of the person represented in the most agree-
able aspect imaginable, that it does not only express the
passion or concern as it’ sits upon him who is drawn, but has
under those features the height of the painter’s imagination,
what strong images of virtue and humanity might we not
expect would be instilled into the mind from the labours of
the pencil? This is a poetry which would be understood with
much less capacity, and less expense of time, than what is
taught by writing ; but the use of it is generally perverted, and
that admirable skill prostituted to the basest and most un-
worthy ends. Who is the better man for beholding the most
beautiful Venus, the best wrought Bacchanal, the images of
sleeping Cupids, languishing Nymphs, or any of the repre-
sentations of gods, goddesses, demi-gods, satyrs, Polyphemes,
sphynxes, or fauns? But if the virtues and vices, which are
sometimes pretended to be represented tinder such draughts,
were given us by the painter in the characters of real life, and
the persons of men and women whose actions have rendered
them laudable or infamous ; we should not see a good history-
piece without receiving an instructive lecture. There needs no
other proof of this truth, than the testimony of every reasonable
Creature who has seen the cartoons” in her majesty’s gallery at
Hampton-court. These are representations of no less actions
than those of our blessed Saviour and his apostles. As I now


10


20


30


378 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


sit and recollect the warm images which the admirable Raphael
has raised, it is impossible, even from the faint traces in one’s
memory of what one has not seen these two years, to be
unmoved at the horror and reverence which. appear in the
whole assembly when the mercenary man fell down dead ;
at the amazement,of the man born blind, when he first re-
ceives sight; or at the graceless indignation of the sorcerer,
when he is struck blind. The lame, when they first find
strength in their feet, stand doubtful of their new vigour.
The heavenly apostles appear acting these great things with
a deep sense of the infirmities which they relieve, but no value
of themselves who administer to their weakness. They know
themselves to be but instruments; and the generous distress
they are painted in when divine honours are offered to them, is
a representation in the most exquisite degree of the beauty
of holiness, When St. Paul is preaching to the Athenians,
with what wonderful art are almost all the different tempers of
mankind represented in that elegant audience? You see one
credulous of all that is said; another wrapped up in deep
suspense ; another saying, there is some reason in what he
says; another angry that the apostle destroys a favourite
opinion which he is unwilling to give up; another wholly con-
vinced, and holding out his hands in rapture ; while the gene-
rality attend, and wait for the opinion of those who are of
leading characters in the assembly. I will not pretend so much
as to mention that chart” on which is drawn the appearance of
our blessed Lord after his resurrection. Present authority, late
sufferings, humility, and majesty, despotic command, and divine
love, are at once seated in his celestial aspect. The figures of
the eleven apostles are all in the same passion of admiration,
but discover it differently according to their characters. Peter
receives his master’s orders on his knees with an admiration
mixed with a more particular attention: the two next with -
a more open ecstacy, though still constrained by an awe of
the Divine presence. The beloved disciple, whom I take to
-be the right of the two first figures, has in his countenance
wonder drowned in love: and the last personage, whose back
is towards the spectator, and his side towards the presence, one
would fancy to be St. Thomas, as abashed by the conscience of


40 his former diffidence, which perplexed concern it is possible


to


29


30


ON RAPHAEL'S CARTOONS AT .HAMPTON-COURT. 379


Raphael thought too hard a task to draw, but by this acknow-
ledgment of the difficulty to describe it.

The whole work is an exercise of the highest piety in the
painter ; and all the touches of a religious mind are expressed
in a manner much more forcible than can possibly be performed
by: the most moving eloquence. These invaluable pieces are
very justly in the hands of the greatest and most pious sove-
reign in the world ; and cannot be the frequent object of every
one at their own leisure: but as an engraver is to the painter’
what a printer is to the author, it is worthy her majesty’s name
that she has encouraged that noble artist Monsieur Dorigny 2, to
publish these works of Raphael. We have of this gentleman
a piece of the Transfiguration, which, 1 think, is held a work
second to none in the world.

Methinks it would be ridiculous in our people of condition,
after their large bounties to foreigners of no name or merit,
should they overlook this occasion of having, for a trifling sub-
Scription, a work which it is impossible for a man of sense to
behold, without being warmed with the noblest sentiments that
can be inspired by love, admiration, compassion, contempt of
this world, and expectation of a better.

It is certainly the greatest honour we can do our country, to
distinguish strangers of merit who apply to us with modesty
and diffidence, which generally accompanies merit. No oppor-
tunity of this kind ought to be neglected, and a modest beha-
viour should alarm us to examine whether we do not lose
Something excellent under that disadvantage in the possessor
of that quality. My skill in paintings, where one is not directed
by the passion of the picture, is so inconsiderable, that I am in
very great perplexity when I offer to speak of any performances
of painters of landscapes, buildings, or single figures. This
makes me at a loss how to mention the pieces which Mr. Boul
exposes to sale by auction on Wednesday next in Chandos-
Street : but having heard him commended by those who have
bought of him heretofore, for great integrity in his dealing, and
Overheard him himself (though a laudable painter) say, nothing
of his own was fit to come into the room with those he had to
Sell, I feared I should lose an occasion of serving a man of
worth, in omitting to speak of his auction.

Spectator, No. 226.] [November 19, 1711,


20


3 80 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


No. 116. A Ramble from Richmond to London.


Sine me, vacivum tempus ne quod dem mibi
Laboris.—Ter. Heaut. Act. i. Se. 1.


It is an inexpressible pleasure to know a little of the world,
and be of no character or significancy in it.

To be ever unconcerned, and ever looking on new objects
with an endless curiosity, is a delight known only to those who
are turned for speculation : nay, they who enjoy it must value
things only as they are the objects of speculation; without
drawing any worldly advantage to themselves from them, but
just as they are what contribute to their amusement, or the im-
pravement of the mind. I lay one night last week at Richmond ;
and being restless, not out of dissatisfaction, but a certain busy
inclination one sometimes has, I rose at four in the morning,
and took boat for London, with a resolution to rove by boat and
coach for the next four-and-twenty hours, till the many different
objects I must needs meet with should tire my imagination, and
give me an inclination to a repose more profound than I was at
that time capable of. I beg people’s pardon for an:odd huthour
I am guilty of, and was often that day, which is saluting any
person whom I like, whether I know him or not. This is a par-
ticularity would be tolerated in me, if they considered that, the
greatest pleasure I know I receive at my eyes, and that I am
obliged to an agreeable person for coming abroad into my view,
as another is for a visit of conversation at their own houses.

The hours of the day and night are taken up.in the cities of
London and Westminster, by people as different from each
other as those who are born in different centuries. Men of
six o’clock give way to those of nine, they of nine to the genera-
tion of twelve ; and they of twelve disappear, and make room
for the fashionable world, who have made two o’clock the noon
of the day.

When we first put off from shore, we soon fell in with a fleet
of gardenets, bound for the several market ports of London ;
and it was the most pleasing scene imaginable to see the cheer-
fulness with which those industrious people plied their way to 3
certain sale of their goods, The banks on each side are as well


A RAMBLE FROM RICHMOND TO LONDON. 381


peopled, and beautified with as agreeable plantations, as any
spot on the earth ; but the Thames itself, loaded with the pro-
duct of each shore, added very much to the landscape. It was
very easy to observe by their sailing, and the countenances of
the ruddy virgins, who were supercargoes, the parts of the town
to which they were bound. There was an air in the purveyors
for Covent-garden, who frequently converse with morning rakes,
very unlike the seeming sobriety of those bound for Stocks-
market »,
to Nothing remarkable happened in our voyage ; but I landed
with ten sail of apricot-boats, at Strand-bridge®, after having
put in at Nine-Elms, and taken in melons, consigned by Mr.
Cuffe, of that place, to Sarah Sewell and Company, at their stall
in Covent-garden. We arrived at Strand-bridge at six of the
clock, and were unloading ; when the hackney-coachmen of
the foregoing night took their leave of each other at the Dark-
house 4, to go to bed before the day was too far spent. Chimney-
sweepers passed by us as we made up to the market, and some
raillery happeried between one of the fruit-wenches and those
20 black men about the Devil and Eve, with allusion to their
several professions. I could not believe any place more enter-
taining ‘than Covent-garden ; where 1 strelled from one fruit-
shop to another, with crowds of agreeablé young women®
around me, who were purchasing fruit for their respective
families. It was almost eight of the clock before I could leave
that variety of objects. I took coach and followed a young
lady, who tripped into another just before me, attended by her
maid. I saw immediately she was of ‘the family of the Vainloves.
There are a set of these, who, of all things, affect the play of
3° Blindman’s-buff, and leading men into love for they know not
whom, who are fled they know not where. This:sort of woman
is usually a jaunty slattern ; she hangs’on her clothes, plays her
head, varies her posture, and changes place incessantly, and all
with an appearance of striving at the same time to hide herself,
and }yet give you to understand she is in humour to laugh at
you. You must have often seen-the coaghmen make signs with
their fingers, as they drive by tach other, to intimate how much
they have got that day. They can carry on that language to
give intelligence where they are driving, In-.an instant my
*° coachman took the wink to pursue; and the lady’s driver gave


do


20


382 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


the hint that he was going through Long-acre towards St.
James’s ; while he whipped up James-street", we drove for
King-street, to save the pass at St. Martin’s-lane. The coach-
men took care to meet, jostle, and threaten each other for way,
and be entangled at the end of Newport-street and Long-acre.
The fright, you must believe, brought down the lady’s coach-
door, and obliged her, with her mask off, to inquire into the
bustle,—when she sees the man she would avoid. The tackle
of the coach-window is so bad she cannot draw it up again, and
she drives on sometimes wholly discovered, and sometimes half
escaped, according to the accident of carriages in her way.
One of these ladies keeps her seat in a hackney-coach, as well
as the best rider does on a managed horse. The laced shoe on
her left foot, with a careless gesture, just appearing on, the
opposite cushion, held her both firm, and in a proper attitude to
receive the next jolt.

As she was an excellent coach-woman, many were the glances
at each other which we had for an hour and a half, in all parts
of the town, by the skill of our drivers ; til) at last my lady was
conveniently lost, with notice from her coachman to ours to
make off, and he should hear where she went. This chase was
now at an end: and the fellow who drove her came to us, and
discovered that he was ordered to come again in an hour, for
that she was a silk-worm®. I was surprised with this phrase,
but found it was a, cant among the hackney fraternity for their


. best customers, women who ramble twice or thrice a week -from


30


40


shop to shop, to turn over all the goods in town without buying
any thing. The silk-worms are, it seems, indulged by the
tradesmen; for, though they never buy, they are ever talking of
new silks, laces, and ribbons, and serve the owners in getting
them customers, as their common dunners do in making them pay.

The day of people of fashion began now to break, and carts


and hacks were mingled with equipages of show and vanity ;


when I resolved'to walk it, out of cheapness ; but my unhappy
curiosity is such, that I find it always my interest to take coach ;
for some odd adventure among beggars, ballad-singers, or the
like, detains and throws me intoexpense. It happened so im-
mediately : for at the corner of Warwick-street, as I was
listening to a new ballad, a ragged rascal, a beggar who knew
me, came up to me, and began to turn the eyes of the good


I


o


A RAMBLE FROM RICHMOND TO LONDON. 383°


company upon me, by telling me he was extremely poor, and
should die iy the street for want of drink, except I immediately
would have the charity to give him six-pence to go into the next
ale~house and save his life. He urged, with a melancholy face,
that all his family had died of thirst. All the mob have humour,
and two or three began to take the jest; by which Mr. Sturdy
carried his point, and let me sneak off toa coach. As I drove
along, it was a pleasing reflection to see the world so prettily
checkered since I left Richmond, and the scene still filling with
children of a new hour, This satisfaction increased as I moved
towards the city ; and gay signs, well-disposed streets, magni-
ficent public structures, and wealthy shops adorned with con-
tented faces, made the joy still rising till we came into the
centre of the city, and centre of the world of*trade, the Exchange
of London. As other men in the crowds about me were pleased
with their hopes and bargains, I found my account in observing
them, in attention to their several interests. 1, indeed, looked
upon myself as the richest man that walked the Exchange that
day ; for my benevolence made me share the gains of every


20 bargain that was made. It was not the least of my satisfaction


3


°


in my survey, to go up stairs", and pass the shops of agreeable
females ; to observe so many pretty hands busy in the folding
of ribbons, and the utmost eagerness of agreeable faces in the
Sale of patches, pins, and wires, on, each side of the counters,
Was an amusement in which I could longer have indulged my-
Self, had not the dear creatures called to me, to ask what I
Wanted, when I could not answer,. only ‘To look at you. I
Went to one of the windows which opened to the, area: below,
Where all the several voices lost their distinction, and rose up
in a confused humming ;.which created in me a reflection that
Could not come into the mind of any but of one a little too
Studious ; for I said to myself with a kind of pun in thought,
“What nonsense is all the hurry of this world to those who are
above it?’ In these, or not much wiser thoughts, I had like to
have lost my place at the chop- house, where every man,
according to the natural‘ bashfulness or sullenness of our nation,
Cats in a public room a mess of broth, or chop of meat, in dumb
Silence, as if they had no pretence to speak to each other on
the foot of being men, except they were of each other's
acquaintance,


384 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


I went afterward to Robin’s 4, and saw people, who had dined
with me at the five-penny ordinary just before, give bills for the
value of large estates ; and could not but behold with great
pleasure, property lodged in, and transferred in a moment from,
such as would never be masters of Ralf as much as is seemingly ,
in them, and given from them, every day they live. But before
five in the afternoon I left the city, came to my common scene
of Covent-garden, and passed the evening at Will’s® in at-

‘tending the discourses of several sets of people, who relieved
1o each other within my hearing on the subjects of cards, dice,
love, learning, and politics. The last subject kept me till I
heard the streets in the possession of the bellman, who had now
the world to himself, and cried, ‘ Past two o’clock.’ This roused
me from my seat ; and I went to my lodgings, led by a light,
whom I put into the discourse of his private economy, and made
him give me an account of the charge, hazard, profit, and loss,
of a family that deperided upon a link, with a design to end my
trivial day with the generosity of six-pence, instead of a third
part of that sum, When I came to my chambers, I writ down
20 these minutes ; but was at a loss what instruction I should pro-
pose to my reader from the enumeration of so many insignifi-
cant matters and occurrertces ; and I thought it of great use, if
they could leatn with me to keep their minds open to gratifica~
tion, and ready to receive it from any thing it meets with. This
one circumstance will make every face you see give you the
satisfaction you now take in beholding that of a friend; will
make every object a pleasing one; will make all the good
which arrives to any man, an increase of happiness to yourself.


Spectator, No: 454.] [August 11, 1712.


No. 117. On the Humour's of the Bath.


4 :
Salve Peonie largitor nobilis unde,
Salve Dardanii gloria magna soli!
Publica morborum requies, commune medentum
Auxilium, presens numen, inempta salus.—CLAUD.


In public assemblies there are generally some envious splenetic
30 people, who having no merit to procure respect, are ever finding


To


20


3


oO


ON THE HUMOURS OF THE BATH. 385


fault with those who distinguish themselves. This happéns
more frequently at those places, where this season of the year
calls persons of both sexes together for their health. I have
had reams of letters from Bath, Epsom, Tunbridge, and St.
Wenifred’s wall 7 ; wherein I could observe that a concern for
horfour and virtue, proceeded from the want of health, beauty,
or fine petticoats. A lady who subscribes herself Eadosia,
writes a bitter invective against Chloe, the celebrated dancer ;
but I have learned, that she herself is lame of the rheumatism.
Another, who hath been a prude even since she had the small-
pox, is very bitter against the coquettes and their indecent airs ;
and a sharp wit hath sent me a keen epigram against the
gamesters ; but I took notice, that it was not written upon gilt
paper.

Having had several strange pieces of intelligence from the
Bath ; as, that more constitutions were weakened there than
repaired ; that,the physicians were not more busy in destroying
old bodies, than the young fellows in producing new ones;
with several other common-place strokes of raillery ; I resolved
to look,upon the company there, as I returned lately out of the
country®. It was a great jest'to see such a grave ancient person
as I am, in an embroidered cap and brocade night-gown. But,
besides the necessity of complying with the custom, by these
means I passed undiscovered, and had a pleasure I much covet,
of being alone ina crowd. It was no little ‘satisfaction to me,
to view the mixed mass of all ages and dignities upon a level,
bartaking of the same benefits of nature, and mingling in the
Same diversions. I sometimes entertained myself by observing
what a large quantity of ground was hid under spreading petti-
Coats ; and what little patches of earth were covered by creatures
With wigs and hats, in comparison to those spaces that were
distinguished by flounces, fringes, and furbelows. From the
earth my fancy was diverted to the water, where the distinctions
of sex and condition aré concealed; and where the mixture of
men and women hath given occasion to some persons of light
imaginations, to compare the Bath to the fountain of Salmacis,
which had the virtue of joining the two sexes into one person ;
or to the stream wherein Diana washed herself when she
bestowed horns on Actzon ; but by one of a serious turn, these


4© healthful springs may rather be likened to the Stygian waters,


cc


19


20


30


4°


386 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.

which made the body invulnerable; or to the river of Lethe.
one draught ‘of which washed away all pain and anguish in a
moment.

As I have taken upon me a name which ought to abound in
humanity, I shall make it my business, in this paper, to cool
and assuage those malignant humours of scandal which run
throughout the body of men and women there assembled ; and
after the manner of those famous waters, I will endeavour to wipe
away all foul aspersions, to restore bloom and vigour to decayed
reputations, and set injured characters upon their legs again.
I shall herein regulate myself by the example of that good man,
who used to talk with charity of the greatest villains ; nor was
ever heard to speak with. rigour of any one, until he affirmed
with severity that Nero was a wag. ‘

Having thus prepared thee, gentle reader, I shall not scruple
to entertain thee with a panegyric upon the gamesters. I have
indeed spoken incautiously heretofore of that-class of men™; but
I should forfeit all titles to modesty, should I any longer oppose
the common sense of the nobility and gentry of the kingdom.
Were we to treat all those with contempt, who are the favourites
of blind chance, few levees would be crowded. It is not the
height of sphere in which a man moves, but the manner in
which he acts, that makes him truly valuable. When therefore
I see a gentleman lose his money with serenity, I recognise in
him all the great qualities of a philosopher.

If he storms, and invokes the gods, I lament that he is not
placed at the head of a regiment. The great gravity of the
countenances round Harrison’s table", puts me in mind of a
council board ; and the indefatigable application of the several.
combatants furnishes me with an unanswerable reply to those
gloomy mortals, who censure this as an idle life. In short, I
cannot see any reason why gentlemen should be hindered from
raising a fortune by those means, which at the same time enlarge
their minds. Nor shall I speak dishonourably of some little
artifice and finesse used upon these occasions ; since the world
is sO just to any man who is become a possessor of wealth, as
not to respect him the less, for the methods he took to come
by it.

Upon considerations like these, the ladies share in these
diversions. I must own, that I receive great pleasure in seeing


ON THE HUMOURS OF THE BATH. 387


my pretty countrywomen engaged in an amusement which puts

them upon producing so many virtues. Hereby they acquire

such a boldness, as raises them near the lordly creature man.

Here they are taught such contempt of wealth, as may dilate

their minds, and prevent many curtain lectures. Their natural

tenderness is a weakness here easily unlearned ; and I find my
soul exalted, when I see a lady sacrifice the fortune of her
children with as little concern as a Spartan or a Roman dame.

In such a place as the Bath I niight urge, that the casting of a
10 die is indeed the properest exercise for a fair creatare to assist
the waters ; not to mention the opportunity it gives to display
the well-turned arm, and to scatter to advantage the rays of the
diamond. But I am satisfied, that the gamester ladies have
surmounted the littlé vanities of showing their beauty, which
they so far neglect, as to throw their features into violent distor-
tions, and wear away their lilies and roses in tedious watching,
and restless lucubrations. I should rather observe that their
chief passion is an emulation of manhood; which I am the
more inclined to believe, because, in spite of all slanders, their
confidence*in their virtue keeps them up all night, with the
most dangerous creatures of our sex, It is tome an undoubted
argument of their ease of conscience, that they go directly from
Church to the gaming-table ; and so highly reverence play, as to
make it a great part of their exercise on Sundays.

The water poets are an innocent tribe, and deserve all the
€ncouragement I can give them. It would be barbarous to
treat those authors with bitterness, who never write out of the
Season, and whose works are useful with the waters. +I made it
My care therefore to sweeten some sour critics who were sharp
° upon a few sonnets, which, to speak in the language of the Bath,

were mere alkalies. I took particular notice of a lenitive

electuary, which was wrapped up in some of these gentle com-

Positions ; and am persuaded that the pretty one who took it,

was as much relieved by,the cover as the medicine. There are

a hundred general topics put into metre every year, viz. ‘The

lover is inflamed in the water; or, he finds his death where he

Sought his cure; or, the nymph feels her own pain, without

regarding her lover’s torment.’ These being for ever repeated,

have at present a very good effect ; and a physician assures me,
‘© that laudanum is almost out of doors at the Bath.
cc2


2


o


388 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


Thy physicians here are very numerous, but very good-
natured. To these charitable gentlemen I owe, that I was
cured, in a week’s time, of more distempers than I eyer had in
my life. They had almost killed me with their humanity. A
learned fellow-lodger prescribed me a little something, at my
first coming, to keep up my spirits; and the next morning I
was so much enlivened by another, as to have an order to bleed
for my fever. I was proffered a cure for the scurvy by a third,
and had a recipe for the dropsy gratis before night. In vain

1o'did I modestly decline these favours ; for I was awakened early
in the morning by an apothecary, who brought me a dose from
one of my well-wishers. I paid him, but withal told him severely,
that I never took physic. .My landlord hereupon took me for
an Italian merchant that suspected poison ; but the apothecary,
with more sagacity, guessed that I was certainly a physician
myself.

The oppression of civilities which I underwent from the sage
gentlemen of the faculty, frightened me from making such in-
quiries into the nature of these springs, as-would haye furnished

20 out a nobler entertainment upon the Bath, than the loose hints
I have now thrown together. Every man who hath received
any benefit there, ought, in proportion to his abilities, to improve,
adorn, or recommend it. <A prince should found hospitals, the
noble and rich may diffuse their ample charities, Mr. Tompion®
gave a clock to‘ the Bath; and I, Nestor Ironside, have
dedicated a Guardian. :


Guardian, No. 174.} [September 30, 1713.


No.118. On a Contest in Dancing, and Don Saltero’s.


Suemaid agunt homines .
- nostri est farrago libelli.
Juv. Sat. i. 85, 86.


Having taken upon me to cure all the distempers which
proceed from affections of the mind, I have laboured, since
I_ first kept this public stage, to do all the good I could, and


ON A CONTEST IN DANCING, ETC. 389


have perfected many cures at my own lodgings; carefully
avoiding the common method of mountebanks, to do their
most eminent operations in the sight of the people; but must
be so just to my patients as to declare, they have testified under
their hands, their sense of my poor abilities, and the good I
have done them, which I publish for the benefit of the world,
and not out of any thoughts of private advantage.
I have cured fine Mrs. Spy of a great imperfection in her
eyes, which made her eternally rolling them from one coxcomb
lo to another in public places, in so languishing a manner, that it
at once lessened her own power, and her beholders’ vanity.
Twenty drops of my ink, placed in certain letters on which
She attentively looked for half an hour, have restored her to the
true use of her sight; which is, to guide and not mislead us.
Ever since she took the liquor, which I call “ Bickerstaff’s
_ circumspection-water,” she looks right forward, and can bear
being looked at for half a day without returning one glance.
This water has a peculiar virtue in it, which makes it the only
true cosmetic or beauty-wash in the world: the nature of it is
such, that ‘if you go to a glass with a design to admire your face,
it immediately changes it into downright deformity. If you
consult it only to look with a better countenance upon your
friends, it immediately gives an alacrity to the visagé, and new
grace to the whole person. There is, indeed, a great deal
owing to the constitution of the person to whom it is applied :
it is in vain to give it when the patient is in the rage of the
distemper ; a bride in her first month, a lady soon after her
husband’s being knighted, or any person of either sex, who has
lately obtained any new good fortune or preferment, must be
3° prepared some time before they use it. It has an effect upon
Others, as well as the patient, when it is taken in due form.
Lady Petulant has by the use of it cured her husband of
Jealousy, and Lady Gad her whole neighbourhood of detraction.
The fame of these things, added to my being an old fellow,
Makes me extremely acceptable to the fair sex, You-would
hardly bélieve me, when I tell you there is not a man in town
so much their delight as myself. They make no more of visit-
ing me, than going to madam Depingle’s ; there were two of
. them, namely, Damia and Clidamira, (I assuré you women of
f0 distinction) who came to see me this morning in their way to


2


°o


10


20


39


4°


390 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


prayers ; and being in a very diverting humour (as innocence
always makes people cheerful,) they would needs have me,
accérding to the distinction of Pretty and Very Pretty Fellows,
inform them if 1 thought either of them had a title to the Very,
Pretty among those of their own sex; and if I did, which was
the more deserving of the two ?

To put them to the trial, ‘Look ye,’ said I, ‘I must not
rashly give my judgment in matters of this importance; pray
let me see you dance, I play upon the kit.’ They immediately
fell back to the lower end of the room (you may be sure they
curtsied low enough to me) and began. Never were two in
the world so equally matched, and both scholars to my name-
sake Isaac*%. Never was man in so dangerous a condition as
myself, when they began to expand their charms. ‘Oh! ladies,
ladies,’ cried I, ‘not half that air, you will fire the house.’
Both smiled ; for, by the bye, there is no carrying a metaphor
too far,when a lady’s charms are spoken of. Somebody, 1
think, has called a fine woman dancing, ‘a brandished torch
of beauty.’ These rivals moved with such an agreeable free-
dom, that you would believe their gesture was the necessary
effect of the music, and not the product of skill and practice.
Now Clidamira came on with a crowd of graces, and demanded
my judgment with so sweet an air—and she had no sooner car-
ried it, but Damia made her utterly forgot, by a gentle sinking,
and a rigadoon step®. The contest held a full half-hour ; and,
I protest, I saw no manner of difference in their perfections,
until they came up together, and expected sentence. ‘ Look ye,
ladies,’ said I, ‘I see no difference in the least in your perform-
ance ; but you, Clidamira, seem to be so well satisfied that
I shall determine for you, that I must give it to Damia, who
stands with so much diffidence and fear, after showing an equal
merit to what she pretends to. Therefore, Clidamira, you are
a pretty ; but, Damia, you are a very pretty lady: for,’ said I,
‘beauty loses its force, if not accompanied with modesty. She
that has an humble opinion of herself, will have every body's
applause, because she does not expect it; while the vain crea-
ture loses approbation through too great a sense of deserv-
ing it.’

Being of a very spare and hective® constitution, I am forced
to make frequent journeys of a mile or two for fresh air;


ON A CONTEST IN DANCING, ETC. 391


and indeed by this last, which was no farther than the village of
Chelsea, I am farther convinced of the necessity of travelling ‘to
know the world ; for, as it is usual with young voyagers, as soon
as they land upon a shore, to begin their accounts of the nature
of the people, their soil, their government, their inclinations,
and their passions ; so really I fancied I could give you an
immediate description of this village, from the five fields® where
the robbers lie in wait, to the coffee-house where the Literati
sit in council. A great ancestor of ours by the mother's side,
to Mr. Justice Overdo® (whose history is written by Ben Jonson),
met with more enormities by walking incognito than he was
capable of correcting ; and found great mortifications in observ-
ing also persons of eminence, whom he before knew nothing of.
Thus it fared with me, even in a place so near the town as this.
When I came into the coffee-house®, I had not time to salute the
company, before my eye was diverted by ten thousand gim-
Cracks round the room, and on the ceiling. When my first
astonishment was over, comes to me a sage of a thin and
Meagre countenance; which aspect made me doubt, whether
20 reading or fretting had made it so philosophic: but I very soon
Perceived him to be of that:sect which the ancients call Gingi-
Viste ; in our language, tooth-drawers. I immediately had a
respect for the man ; for these practical philosophers go upon
a rational hypothesis, not to cure, but take away the part
affected. My love of mankind made me very benevolent to
Mr. Salter; for such is the name of this eminent barber and
antiquary. Men are usually, but unjustly distinguished rather
by their fortunes than their talents, otherwise, this personage
would make a great figure in that class of men which I dis-
3° tinguish under the title of Odd Fellows. . But it is the misfor-
tune of persons of great genius to have their faculties dissipated
by attention to too many things at once. Mr. Salter is an
instance of this: if he would wholly give himself up to the
String, instead of playing twenty beginnings to tunes, he might,
before he dies, play Roger de Caubly™ quite out. I heard him
go through his whole round, and indeed I think he does play
the merry ‘Christ Church Bells®’ pretty justly ; but he con-
fessed to me, he did that rather to show he was orthodox, than
that he valued himself upon the music itself. Or, if he did
+9 proceed in his anatomy, why might he not hope in time to cut


392 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


off legs, as well as draw teeth? The particularity of this man
put me into a deep thought, whence it should proceed, that of
all the lower order, barbers should go further in hitting the
ridiculous than any other set of men. Watermen brawl, cob-
blers sing: but why must a barber be for ever a politician,
a musician, an anatomist, a poet, and a physician? The learned
Vossius™ says his barber used to comb his head in Iambics.
And indeed, in all ages, one of this useful profession, this order
of cosmetic philosophers, has been celebrated by the most
xo eminent hands. You see the barber in Don Quixote is one of
the principal characters in the history ; which gave.me satisfac-
tion in the doubt, why Don Saltero writ his name with a
Spanish termination": for he is descended in a right line, not
from John Tradescant®, as he himself asserts, but from that
memorable companion of the knight of Mancha. And I hereby
certify all the worthy citizens who travel to see his rarities, that
his double-barrelled pistols, targets, coats of mail, his Sclopeta
and sword of Toledo, were left to his ancestor by the said Don
Quixote, and by the said ancestor to all his progeny down to
20 Don Saltero. Though I go thus far in favour of Don Saltero’s
great merit, 1 cannot allow a liberty he takes of imposing
several names (without my licence) on the collections he has
made, to the abuse of the good people of England; one of
which is particularly calculated to deceive religious persons, to
the great scandal of the well-disposed, and may introduce
heterodox opinions. He shows you a straw-hat, which.I know
to be made by Madge Peskad, within three miles of Bedford ;
and tells you, ‘It is Pontius Pilate’s wife’s chambermaid’s
sister’s hat.’ To my knowledge of this very hat it may be
30 added, that the covering of straw was never used among the
Jews, since it was demanded of them to make bricks without it.
Therefore this is really nothing but, under the specious pretence
of learning and antiquities, to impose upon the world. There
are other things which I cannot tolerate among his rarities: as,
the china figure of a lady in the glass-case ; the Italian engine
for the imprisonment of those who go abroad with it: both
which I hereby order to be taken down, or else he may expect
to have his letters patent for making punch superseded, be
debarred wearing his muff? next winter, or ever coming to
4° London without his wife*. It may perhaps be thought, I have


ON THE INDIAN KINGS. 393


dwelt too long upon the affairs of this operator; but I desire
the reader to remember, that it is my way to consider men as
they stand in merit, and not according to their fortune or
figure ; and if he is in a coffee-house at.the reading hereof, let
him look round, and he will find, there may be more characters
drawn in this account than that of Don Saltero ; for half the
politicians about him, he may observe, are by their place in
nature, of the class of tooth-drawers.


Tatler, No. 34.] [June 28, 1709.


No. 119. On the Indian Kings.


Alter rixatur de lana szpe caprina,
Propugnat nugis armatus—Hor. Ep. i. 18. 15.


It hath happened to be for some days the deliberation at the
‘9 learnedest board in this house, whence honour and title had its
first original. Timoleon, who is very particular in his opinion,
but is thought particular for no other cause but that he acts
against depraved custom by the rules of nature and reason, in
avery handsome discourse gave the company to understand,
that in those ages which first degenerated from the simplicity of
life and natural justice, the wise among them thought it neces-
Sary to inspire men with the love of virtue, by giving those who
adhered to the interests of innocence and truth some distin-
guishing name to raise them above the common level of man-
kind. This way of fixing appellatioris of credit upon eminent
Merit, was what gave being to titles and terms of honour,
‘Such a name,’ continued he, ‘without the qualities + which
Should give a man pretence to be exalted above others, does
but turn him to jest and ridicule. Should one see another
cudgelled, or scurvily treated, do you think a man so used would
take it kindly to be called Hector or Alexander? Every thing
Tust bear a proportion with the outward value that is set upon
it; or, instead of being long had in veneration, that very term of
esteem will become a word of reproach” When Timoleon had


10


30


394 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


done speaking, Urbanus pursued the same purpose, by giving
an account of the manner in which the Indian kings", who were
lately in Great Britain, did honour to the person where they
lodged. ‘They were placed,’ said he, ‘in a handsome apart-
ment at an upholsterer’s in King-street, Covent-garden®. The
man of the house, it seems, had been very observant of them,
and ready in their service. These just and generous princes,
who act according to the dictates of natural justice, thought it
proper to confer some dignity upon their landlord before they
left his house. One of them had been sick during his resi-
dence there, and having never before been in a bed, had a very
great veneration for him who made that engine of repose, so
useful and so necessary in his distress. It was consulted among
the four princes, by what name to dignify his great merit and
services. The emperor of the Mohocks and the other three
kings stood up, and in that posture recounted the civilities they
had received ; and particularly repeated the care which was
taken of their sick brother. This, in their imagination, who are
used to know the injuries of weather, and the vicissitudes of
cold and heat, gave them very great impressions of a skilful up-
holsterer, whose furniture was so well contrived for their protec-
tion on such occasions. It is with these less instructed, I will
not say less knowing people, the manner of doing honour, to
impose some name significant of the qualities of the person
they distinguish, and the good offices received from him. It
was therefore resolved to call their landlord Cadarogue, which
is the name of the strongest fort in their part of the world.
When they had agreed upon the name, they sent for their land-
lord ; and as he entered into their presence, the emperor of the
Mohocks, taking him by the hand, called him Cadarogue. After.
which the other three princes repeated the same word and
ceremony.’

Timoleon appeared much satisfied with this account; and,
having a philosophic turn, began to argue against the modes
and manners of those nations which we esteem polite, and ¢0
express himself with disdain at our usual method of calling such
as are Strangers to our innovations barbarous. ‘I have,’ says
he,-‘so great a difference for the distinction given by these
princes, that Cadarogue shall be my upholsterer——.’ He was


4o going on; but the intended discourse was interrupted by


ON THE INDIAN KINGS. 395


Minucio, who sat near him, a small philosopher, who is also
somewhat of a politician; one of those who sets up for know-
ledge by doubting, and has no other way of making himself
considerable, but by contradicting all he hears said. He has,
besides much doubt and spirit of contradiction, a constant
suspicion as to state affairs. This accomplished gentleman,
with a very awful brow, and a countenance full of weight, told
Timoleon, ‘that it was a great misfortune men of letters seldom
looked into the bottom of things. Will any man,’ continued he,

'o © persuade me, that this was not, from the beginning to the end,
a concerted affair? Who can convince the world, that four
kings shall come over here, and lie at the two Crowns and
Cushion», and one of them fall sick, and the place be called King-
Street, and all this by mere accident? No, no. To a man of
very small penetration it appears, that Zze Yee Neen Ho Gu
ow®, emperor of the Mohocks, was prepared for this adventure
beforehand. I do not care to contradict any gentleman in his
discourse ; but I must say, however Sa Ga Yeath Rua Geth
Ton and E Tow Oh Koam might be surprised in this matter ;

20 Nevertheless, lo Nec Yeth Taw No Row knew it before he
Set foot ‘on the English shore.

Timoleon looked stedfastly at him for some time; then
Shaked his head, paid for his tea, and marched off. Several
Others, who sat round him, were in their turns attacked by this
Teady disputant. A gentleman, who was at some distance,
happened in discourse to say it was four miles to Hammer-
Smith. ‘I must beg your pardon,’ says Minucio; ‘when we
Say a place is so far off, we do not mean exactly from the very
Spot of earth we are in, but from the town where we are ; so

3 that you must begin your account from the end of Piccadilly ;
and if you do so, I will lay any man ten to one, it is not above
three good miles off” Another, about Minucio’s level of under-
Standing, began to take him up in this important argument ;
and maintained, that, considering the way from Pimlico at the
end of St. James’s-park, and the crossing from Chelsea by
Earl’s-court, he would stand to it that it was full four miles.
But Minucio replied with great vehemence, and seemed so much
to have the better of the dispute, that his adversary quitted the
field, as well as the other. I sat until I saw the table almost all

40 vanished ; when, for want of discourse, Minucio asked me,


I


°


20


396 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


‘ How I did?’ to which I answered, ‘ Very well.’ ‘That is very:
much,’ said he ; ‘I assure you, you look paler than ordinary.’
Nay, thought J, if he will not allow me to know whether I am
well or not, there is no staying for me neither. Upon which I
took my leave, pondering, as I went home, at this strange
poverty of imagination, which makes men run into the fault of
giving contradiction. They want in their minds entertainment
for themselves or their company, and therefore build all they
speak upon what is started by others; and since they cannot im-
prove that foundation, they strive to destroy it. The only way of
dealing with these people is to answer in monosyllables, or by
way of question, When one of them tells you a thing that he
thinks extraordinary, I go no farther than, ‘Say you so, Sir?
Indeed! Heyday!’ or, ‘Is it come to that?’ These little
rules, which appear but silly in the repetition, have brought me
with. great tranquillity to this age. And I have made it an
observation, that as assent is more agreeable than flattery, so
contradiction is more odious than calumny. .


Tatler, No. 171.] [May 13, 1710.


No. 120. On a Trial of Skill at Hockley-in-the-Hole.


Verso pollice vulgi
Quemlibet occidunt populariter.
Juv. Sat. iii. 36.


Being a person of insatiable curiosity, I could not forbear
going on Wednesday last to a place of no small renown for the
gallantry of the lower order of Britons, namely, to the Bear-
garden, at Hockley-in-the-Hole™: where (as a whitish-brown
paper, put into my hands in the street, informed me) there was
to be a trial of skill exhibited between two- masters of the
noble science of defence, at two of the clock precisely. I
was not a little charmed with the solemnity of the challenge,
which ran thus :

“TI, James Miller, serjeant (lately come from the frontiers of
Portugal) master of the noble science of defence, hearing in


ON A TRIAL OF. SKILL AT HOCKLEY-IN-THE-HOLE, 397


most places where I have been of the great fame of Timothy
Buck, of London, master of the said science, do invite
him to meet me and exercise at the several weapons, follow-
ing, viz.


‘ Backsword, Single falchion,
‘Sword and dagger, Case of falchions,
‘Sword and buckler, Quarter staff.’


If the generous ardour in James Miller to dispute the reputa-
tion of Timothy Buck had something resembling the old heroes
10 of romance, Timothy Buck returned answer in the same paper
with the like spirit, adding a little indignation at being chal-
lenged, and seeming to.condescend to fight James Miller, not in
regard to Miller himself, but in that, as the fame went out, he
had fought Parkes of Coventry. The acceptance of the combat
ran in these words :

‘I, Timothy Buck, of Clare-market, master of the noble science
of defence, hearing he did fight Mr. Parkes® of Coventry, will
not fail (God willing) to meet this fair inviter at the time and
place appointed, desiring a clear stage and no favour.—Vivat

20 Regind, 7

I shall not here look back on the spectacles of the Greeks
and Romans of this kind, but must believe this custom took its
tise from the ages of knight-errantry ; from those who loved
One woman so well, that they hated all men and women else ;
from those who would fight you, whether you were or were not
of their mind ; from those who demanded the combat of their _
contemporaries, both for admiring their mistress or discommend-
ing her. I cannot therefore but lament, that the terrible part of
the ancient fight is preserved, when the amorous side of it is

30 forgotten. We have retained the barbarity, but lost the
gallantry of the old combatants. I could wish, methinks, these
gentlemen had consulted me in the promulgation of the conflict.
t was obliged by a fair young maid, whom I understood to be
Called Elizabeth Preston ®, daughter of the keeper of the garden,
with a glass of water; who I imagined might have been, for
form’s sake, the general representative of the lady fought for,
and from her beauty the proper Amaryllis on these occasions.
It would have run better in the challenge, ‘1, James Miller,
Serjeant, who have travelled parts abroad, and came last from


: cs)


20


398 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


the frontiers of Portugal, for the love of Elizabeth Preston, do
assert that the said Elizabeth is the fairest of women.’ Then
the answer ; ‘1, Timothy Buck, who have stayed in Great
Britain during all the war in foreign parts, for the sake of
Susannah Page, do deny that Elizabeth Preston is so fair as
the said Susannah Page. Let Susannah Page look on, and 1
desire of James Miller no favour.’

This would give the battle quite another turn ; and a proper
station for the ladies, whose complexion was disputed by the
sword, would animate the disputants with a more gallant incen-
tive than the expectation of money from the spectators ; though
I would not have that neglected, but thrown to that fair one
whose lover was approved by the donor..

Yet, considering the thing wants such amendments, it was
carried with great order. James Miller came on first, preceded
by two disabled drummers, to show, I suppose, that the prospect
of maimed bodies did not in the least deter him. There as-
cended with the daring Miller a gentleman, whose name I could
not learn, with a dogged air, as unsatisfied that he was not
principal. This son of anger lowered at the whole assembly,
and, weighing himself as he marched around from side to side,
with a stiff knee and shoulder, he gave intimations of the purpose
he smothered till he saw the issue of this encounter. Miller
had a blue ribbon tied round the sword arm; which ornament
I conceive to be the remain of that custom of wearing a mis-
tress’s favour on such occasions of old.

Miller is a man of six foot eight inches in height, of a kind
but bold aspect, well-fashioned, and ready of his limbs, and
such a readiness as spoke his ease in them was obtained from a
habit of motion in military exercise.

The expectation of the spectators was now almost at its
height ; and the crowd pressing in, several active persons
thought they were placed rather according to their fortune than
their merit, and took it in their heads to prefer themselves
from the open area or pit tothe galleries. This dispute between
desert and property brought many to the ground, ‘and raised
others in proportion to the highest seats by turns, for the
space of ten minutes, till Timothy Buck came on, and the whole
assembly, giving up their disputes, turned their eyes upon the


40 champions. Then it was that every man’s affection turned to


ON A TRIAL OF SKILL AT HOCKLEY-IN-THE HOLE. 399


one or the other irresistibly. A judicious gentleman neat me
said, ‘I could, methinks, be Miller’s second, but I had rather
have Buck for mine.’ Miller had an audacious look that took
the eye ; Buck a perfect composure, that engaged the judgment.
Buck came on in a plain coat, and kept all his air till the instant
of engaging ; at which time he undressed to his shirt, his arm
adorned with a bandage of red ribbon. No one can describe the
sudden concern in the whole assembly ; the most tumultuous
crowd in nature was as still and as much engaged as if all thcir
to lives depended on the first blow. The combatants met in the
middle of the stage, and shaking hands, as removing all malice,
they retired with much grace to the extremities of it; from
whence they immediately faced about, and approached each
Other, Miller with a heart full of resolution, Buck with a watchful
untroubled countenance : Buck regarding principally his own
defence, Miller chiefly thoughtful of annoying his opponent.
It is not easy to describe the many escapes and imperceptible
defences between two men of quick eyes and ready limbs ; but
Miller’s heat laid him open to the rebuke of the calm Buck, by
?©a large cut on the forehead. Much effusion of blood covered
his eyes in a moment, and the huzzas of the crowd undoubtedly
quickened the anguish. The assembly was divided into parties
upon their different ways of fighting ; while a poor nymph in
One of the galleries apparently suffered for Miller, and burst
into a flood of tears. As soon as his wound was wrapped up, he
Came on again with a little rage, which still disabled him
further. But what brave man can be wounded into more caution
and patience? The next was a warm eager onset, which ended
in a decisive stroke on the left leg of Miller. The lady in the
30 Rallery, during this second strife, covered her face, and for my
part, I could not keep my thoughts from being mostly employed
on the consideration of her unhappy circumstance that moment,
hearing the clash of swords, and apprehending life or victory
concerned her lover in every blow, but not daring to satisfy
herself on whom they fell. TRe wound was exposed to the
view of all who could delight in it, and sewed up on the stage.
The surly second of Millér declared at this time that he would
that day fortnight fight Mr. Buck at the same weapons, de-
claring himself the master of the renowned Gorman ; but Buck
denied him the honour of that courageous disciple, and, assert-


400 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


ing that he himself had taught that champion, accepted the
challenge.

There is something in nature very unaccountable on such
occasions, when we see the people take a certain painful grati-
fication in beholding these encounters. Is it cruelty that ad-
ministers this sort of delight? or is it a pleasure that is taken
in the exercise of pity? It was, methought, pretty remarkable
that the business of the day being a trial of skill, the popularity
did not run so high as one would have expected on the side of

ro Buck. Is it that people’s passions have their rise in self-love,
and thought themselves (in spite of all the courage they had)
liable to the fate of Miller, but could not so easily think them-
selves qualified like Buck?

Tully speaks® of this custom with less horror than one
would expect, though he confesses it was much abused in his
time, and seems directly to approve of it under its first regu-
lations, when criminals only fought before the people. ‘Cru- |
dele Gladiatorum spectaculum et inhumanum nonnullis vidert
solet; et haud scio annon ita sit ut nunc fit ; chm verd sontes

20 ferro depugnabant, auribus fortasse multa, oculis quidem nulla,
poterat esse fortior contra dolorem et mortem disciplina.
‘The shows of gladiators may be thought barbarous and in-
human, and I know but it is so as it is now practised; but
in those times when only criminals were combatants, the ear
perhaps might receive many better instructions, but it is im-
possible that any thing which affects our eyes caelees ‘fortify
us So well against pain and death’


Spectator, No. 436.] [July 21, 1712.


No. 121. On a Letter from Serjeant Hall of the Foot-
Guards.


There is nothing which I contemplate with greater pleasure
than the dignity of human nature, which often shows itself in al}
30 conditions of life. For, notwithstanding the degeneracy and
meanness that is crept into it, there are a thousand occasions in


ON A LETTER FROM SERJEANT HALL, ETC. 401


which it breaks through its original corruption, and shows what

it once was, and what it will be hereafter. I consider the soul

of man as the ruin of a glorious pile of building ; where, amidst
great heaps of rubbish, you meet with noble fragments of sculp-
ture, broken pillars and obelisks, and a magnificence in con-
fusion. Virtue and wisdom are continually employed in clearing

e ruins, removing these disorderly heaps, recovering the noble
pieces that lie buried under them, and adjusting them as well as

possible according to their ancient symmetry and beauty. A
'o happy education, conversation with the finest spirits, looking
abroad into the works of nature, and observations upon man-
kind, are the great assistances to this necessary and glorious
work. But even among those who have never had the happiness
of any of these advantages, there are sometimes such exertions
.of the greatness that is natural to the mind of man, as show
Capacities and abilities, which only want these accidental helps
to fetch them out, and show them in a proper light. A plebeian
soul is still the ruin of this glorious edifice, though encumbered
with all its rubbish. This reflection rose in me from a letter
which my servant dropped as he was dressing me, and which
he told me was communicated to him, as he is an acquaintance
of some of the persons mentioned in it. The epistle is from one
Serjeant Hall of the foot-guards. It is directed: ‘To serjeant
Cabe, in the Coldstream regiment of foot-guards 9, at the Red-
Lettice®, in the Butcher-row®, near Temple-bar.’

I was so pleased with several touches:in it, that I could not
forbear showing it to a cluster of critics, who, instead of con- |
Sidering it in the light I have done, examined it by the rules of
€pistolary writing. For as these gentlemen are seldom men of
28 any great genius, they work altogether by mechanical rules, and

are able to discover no beauties that are not pointed out by

Bouhours and Rapin®. The letter is as follows :

‘From the camp before Mons,
September 26,


2


°o


* COMRADE,

‘I received yours, and am glad yourself and your wife are in
§00d health, with all the rest of my friends. Our battalion
Suffered more than I could wish in the action®,, But who can
Withstand fate? Poor Richard Stephenson had his fate with
& great many more. He'was killed dead before we entered

nd


402 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


the trenches. We had above two hundred of our battalion
killed and wounded. We lost ten serjeants, six are as followeth:
Jennings, Castles, Roach, Sherring, Meyrick, and my son Smith.
The rest are not your acquaintance. I have received a very
bad shot in my head myself, but I am in hopes, and please God,
I shall recover. I continue in the field, and lie at my colonel’s
quarters. Arthur is very well; but I can give you no account
of Elms; he was in the hospital before 1 came into the field.
I will not pretend to give you any account of the battle, knowing
1o you have a better in the prints. Pray, give my service to
Mrs, Cook and her daughter, to Mr. Stoffet and his wife, and
to Mr. Lyver and Thomas Hogsdon, and to Mr. Ragdell, and to
all my friends and acquaintance in general who do ask after me.
My love to Mrs, Stephenson. I am sorry for the sending such
ill news. Her husband was gathering a little money together
to send to his wife, and put it into my hands. I have seven
shillings and three pence, which I shall take care to send her.
Wishing your wife a safe delivery, and both of you all happiness,
rest ‘
20 ‘Your assured friend and comrade,
_{ JOHN HALL.


‘We had but an indifferent breakfast ; but the mounseers
never had such a dinner in all their lives.

‘My kind love to my comrade Hinton, and Mrs. Morgan, and
to John Brown and his wife. I sent two shillings, and Stephenson
sixpence, to drink with you at Mr. Cook’s; but 1 have heard
nothing from him, It was by Mr. Edgar. , .

* Corporal Hartwell desires to be remembered to you, and
desires you to enquire of Edgar, what is become of his wife

30 Pegg ; and when you write, to send word in your letter what
trade she drives.

‘We have here very bad weather, which I doubt will be a
hinderance to the siege"; but I am in hopes we shall be
masters of the town in a little time, and then, I believe, we
shall go to garrison.’


I saw the critics prepared to nibble at my letter; therefore
examined it myself, partly in their way, and partly my own.
This is, said I, truly a letter, and an honest representation of
that cheerful heart which accompanies the poor soldier in his


ON A LETTER FROM SER}EANT HALL, ETC. 403


warfare. Is not there in this all the topic of submitting to
our destiny as well discussed as if a greater man had been
Placed, like Brutus, in his tent at midnight, reflecting on all the
Occurrences of past life, and saying fine things on Being itself?
What serjeant Hall knows of the matter is, that he wishes there
had not been so many killed ; and he had himself a very bad
shot in the head, and should recover if it pleased God. But be
that as it will, he takes care, like a man of honour as he certainly
is, to let the widow Stevenson know, that he has seven and

19 threepence for her, and that, if he lives, he is sure he shall go
into garrison at last. J doubt not but all the good company at
the Red-Lettice drank his health with as much real esteem as we
do of any of our friends. All that I am concerned for is, that
Mrs. Peggy Hartwell may be offended at showing this letter,
because her conduct in Mr. Hartwell’s absence is a little enquired
into. But I could not sink that circumstance, because you critics
would have lost one of the parts which I doubt not but you have
much to say upon, whether the familiar way is well hit in this

: Style or not? As for myself, I take a very particular satisfac-

°tion in seeing any letter that is fit only for those to read
who are concermed in it, but especially on such a subject.

If we consider the heap of an army, utterly out of all prospect
of rising and preferment, as they certainly are, and such great
things executed by them, it is hard to account for the motive of
their gallantry. But to me, who was a cadet at the battle of
Coldstream® in Scotland, when Monk charged at the head
of the regiment, now called Coldstream, from the victory of
that day ; I remember it as well as if it were yesterday, I stood
On the left of old West, who I believe is now at Chelsea ; I say,

3% to me, who know very well this part of mankind, I take the
gallantry of private soldiers to proceed from the same, if not from
a nobler impulse than that of gentlemen and officers. They have
the same taste of being acceptable to their friends, and go
through the difficulties of that profession by the same irre-
Sistible charm of fellowship, and the communication of joys
and sorrows, which quickens the ‘relish of pleasure, and abates
the anguish of pain. Add to this, that they have the same
tegard to fame, though they do not expect so great a share
as men above them hope for; but I will engage serjeant Hall
8 Would die ten thousand deaths, rather than a word should be
pd2


404 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


spoken at the Red-Lettice, or any part of the Butcher-row, in
prejudice to his courage or honesty. If you will have my
opinion, then, of the serjeant’s letter, I pronounce the style
to be mixed, but truly epistolary ; the sentiment relating to his
own wound is in the sublime ; the postscript of Pegg Hartwell,
in the gay; and the whole, the picture of the bravest sort of
men, that is to say, a man of! great courage ahd small hopes.


’ Tatler, No. 87.} [October 29, 1709.


No. 122. On Flogging at Schools.


Genius, natale comes qui temiperat astrum,
Nature Deus humane mortalis in unum
Quodque caput.—Hor. Ep. ii. 2. 187.


I am’very much at a loss to express by any word that occur3
to me in our language, that which is understood by zwdo/es in
10 Latin. The natural disposition to any particular art, science,
profession, or trade, is very much to be consulted in the care of
youth, and studied by men for their own conduct when they
form to themselves any scheme of life. It is wonderfully hard,
indeed, ‘for a man to judge of his own capacity impartially.
That may look great to me which may appear little to another ;
and I may be carried by fondness towards myself so far, as to
attempt things too high for my talents and accomplishments.
But it is not, methinks, so very difficult a matter to make 2
judgment of the abilities of others, especially of those who are
20 in their infancy. My common-place book directs me on this
occasion to mention the dawning of greatness in Alexander,
who being asked in his youth to contend for a prize in the
Olympic games, answered he would, if he had kings to run
against him. Cassius, who was one of the conspirators against
Czesar, gave as great a proof of his temper, when in his child-
hood he struck a play-fellow, the Son of Sylla, for saying his
father was master of the Roman people. Scipio is reported to
have answered, when some flatterers at supper were asking him
what the Romans should do for a general after his death, ‘ Take


ON FLOGGING AT SCHOOLS. 405


Marius. Marius was then a very boy, and had given no
instances of his valour; but it was visible to Scipio, from the
manners of the youth, that he had a soul formed for the attempt
and execution of great undertakings. I must confess I have very
often, with much sorrow, bewailed the misfortune of the children
of Great Britain, when I consider the ignorance and undiscerning
of the generality of schoolmasters. The boasted liberty we talk
of, is but a mean reward for the long servitude, the many heart-
aches and terrors, to which our childhood is exposed in going

10 through a grammar-school. Many of these stupid tyrants
exercise their cruelty without any manner of distinction of the
capacities of children, or the intention of parents in their behalf.
There are many excellent tempers which are worthy to be
nourished and cultivated with all possible diligence and care,
that were never designed to be acquainted with Aristotle, Tully,
or Virgil; and there are as many who have capacities for
understanding every word those great persons have writ, and
yet were not born to have, any relish of their writings. For
want of this common and obvious discerning in those who have

20 the care of youth, we have so many hundred unaccountable
Creatures every age whipped up into great scholars, that are for
ever near a right understanding and will never arrive at it.
These are the scandal of letters, and these are generally the
men who are to teach others. The sense of shame and honour
is enough to keep ‘the world itself in order without corporal
Punishment, much more to train the minds of uncorrupted and
innocent children. It happens, I doubt not, more than once in
a year, that a lad is chastised for a blockhead, when it is good
apprehension that makes him incapable of knowing what his

30 teacher means. A brisk imagination very often may suggest
an error, which a lad could not have fallen into, if he had
been as heavy in conjecturing as his master in explaining.
But there is no mercy even towards a wrong interpretation
of his meaning ; the sufferings of the scholar’s body are to
tectify the mistakes of his mind. ‘'

Iam confident that no boy, who will not be allured to letters
without blows, will ever be brought to any thing with them. A
great or good mind must necessarily be the worse for such
indignities ; and it is a sad change, to lose of its virtue for the

49 improvement of its knowledge. No one who has gone through


10


20


30


40


406 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


what they call a great school, but must remember to have seen
children of excellent and ingenuous natures (as has afterwards
appeared in their manhood): I say no man has passed through
this way of education but must have seen an ingenuous creature,
expiring with shame—with pale looks, beseeching sorrow, and
silent tears, throw up its honest eyes, and kneel on its tender
knees to an inexorable blockhead to be forgiven the false
quantity of a word in making a Latin verse. The child is
punished, and the next day he commits a like crime, and so a
third with the same consequence. 1 would fain ask any
reasonable man, whether this lad, in the simplicity of his
native innocence, full of shame, and capable of.any impression
from that grace of soul, was not fitter for any purpose in this
life, than after that spark of virtue is extinguished in him,
though he is able to write twenty verses in an evening?

Seneca says, after his exalted way of talking, ‘As the im-
mortal gods never learnt any virtue, though they are endued
with all that is good; so there are some men who have so
natural a propensity to what they should follow, that they learn
it almost as soon as they hear it.’ Plants and vegetables are
cultivated into the production of finer fruits than they would
yield without that care ; and yet we cannot entertain hopes of
producing a tender conscious spirit into acts of virtue, without
the same methods as are used to cut timber, or give new shape
to a piece of stone.

It is wholly to this dreadful practice, that we may attribute a
certain hardiness and ferocity which some men, though liberally
educated, carry about them in all their behaviour. To be bred
like a gentleman, and punished like a malefactor, must, as we
see it does, produce that illiberal sauciness which we see some-
times in men of letters.

The Spartan boy who suffered the fox (which he had stolen
and hid under his coat) to eat into his bowels, I dare say had
not half the wit or petulance which we learn at great schools
among us; but the glorious sense of honour, or rather fear of
shame, which he demonstrated in that action, was worth all the
learning in the world without it.

It is, methinks, a very melancholy consideration, that 2
little negligence can spoil us, but great industry is necessary
to improve us; the most excellent natures are soon depreciated,


AN EDITOR’S TROUBLES, ETC. 407


but evil tempers are long before they are exalted into good
habits. To help this by punishments, is the same thing as
killing a man to cure him of a distemper ; when he comes to
suffer punishment in that one circumstance, he is brought below
the existence of a rational creature, and is in the state of a
brute that moves only by the admonition of stripes, But since
this custom of educating by the lash is suffered by the gentry of
Great Britain, I would prevail only that honest heavy lads may
be dismissed from slavery sooner than they are at present, and
1o not whipped on to their fourteenth or fifteenth year, whether
they expect any progress from them or not. Let the child's
capacity be forthwith examined, and he sent to some mechanic
way of life, without respect to his birth, if nature designed him
for nothing higher: let him go before he has innocently suffered,
and is debased into a dereliction of mind for being what it is no
guilt to be, a plain man. I would not here be supposed to have
said, that our learned men of either robe who have been whipped
at school, are not still men of noble and liberal minds; but I
am sure they would have been much more so than they are,
0 had they never suffered that infamy®....


Spectator, No. 157.] [August 30, 1711.


No. 123. An Editor's Troubles; Anecdote of an old Soldier.


Qui promittit cives, urbem sibi cure,
Imperium fore et Italiam, delubra Deorum,
Quo patre sit natus, num ignota matre inhonestus,
Omnes mortales curare et queerere cogit. °
Hor. Sat. i. 6. 34.


I have lately been looking over the many packets of letters
which I have received from all quarters of Great Britain, as well
as from foreign countries, since my entering upon the office of
Censor; and indeed am very much surprised to see so great a
humber of them, and pleased to think that I have so far increased

. the revepue of the post-office. As this collection will grow daily,
I have digested it into several bundles, and made proper in-


Io


20


40


408 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


dorsements on each particular letter ; it being my design, when
I lay down the work that I am now engaged in, to erect a
paper-office ®, and give it to the public.

I could not*but make several observations upon reading over
the letters of my correspondents. As, first of all, on the different
tastes that reign in the different parts of thiscity. I find by the
approbations which are given me, that I am seldom famous on
the same days on both sides of Temple-bar; and that when 1
am in the greatest repute within the liberties, ] dwindle at the
court-end of the town. Sometimes I sink in both these places
at the same time ; but, for my comfort, my name hath then been
up in the districts of Wapping and Rotherhithe. Some of my
correspondents desire me to be always serious, and others to be
always merry. Some of them entreat me to go to bed and fall
into a dream, and like me better when I am asleep than when I
am awake : others advise me to sit all night upon the stars,and
be more frequent in my astrological observations ; for that a
vision is not properly a lucubration. Some of my readers thank
me for filling my paper with the flowers of antiquity, others
desire news from Flanders. Some approve my criticisms on the
dead, and others my censures on the living. For this reason, |
once resolved, in the new edition of my works, to range my
several papers under distinct heads, according as'their principal
design was to benefit and instruct the different capacities of my
readers ; and to follow the example of some very great authors,
by writing at the head of each discourse, Ad Aulam, Ad Acade-
miam, Ad Populum, Ad Clerum.

There is no particular in which my correspondents of all ages,
conditions,.sexes, and complexions, universally agree, except
only in their thirst after scandal. It is impossible to conceive,
how many have recommended their neighbours to.me upon this
account, or how unmercifully I have been abused by several
unknown hands, for not publishing the secret histories. . . that
I have received from almost every street in town.

It would indeed be very dangerous for me to read over the
many praises and eulogiums, which come post to me from al!
the corners of the nation, were they not mixed with many
checks, reprimands, scurrilities, and reproaches ; which several
of my good-natured countrymen cannot forbear senging me,
though it often costs them twopence or a groat before they can


AN EDITOR'S TROUBLES, ETC. 409


convey them to my hands: so that sometimes when I am put
into the best humour in the world, after having read a panegyric
upon my performances, and looked upon myself as a benefactor
to the British nation, the next letter, perhaps, I open, begins
with, ‘ You old doting scoundrel !——Are not you a sad dog?
——Sirrah, you deserve to have your nose slit ;? and the like
ingenious conceits. These little mortifications are necessary to
suppress that pride and vanity which naturally arise in the mind
of a received author, and enable me to bear the reputation
10 which my courteous readers bestow upon me, without becoming
a coxcomb by it. It was for the same reason, that when a
Roman general entered the city in the pomp of a triumph, the
commonwealth allowed of several little drawbacks to his reputa-
tion, by conniving at such of the rabble as repeated libels and
lampoons upon him within his hearing; and by that means
engaged his thoughts upon his weakness and imperfections, as
well as on the merits that advanced him to so great honours.
The conqueror, however, was not the less esteemed for being
a man in some particulars, because he appeared as a god in
20 others.

There is another circumstance in which my countrymen have
dealt very perversely with me; and that is, in searching not
only into my life, but also into the lives of my ancestors. If
there has been a blot in my family for these ten, generations, it
hath been discovered by some or other of my correspondents.
In short, I find the ancient family of the Bickerstaffs has
Suffered very much through the malice aud prejudice of my
enemies. Some of them twit me in the teeth with the conduct
of my aunt Margery". Nay, there are some who have been so

49 disingenuous, as to throw Maud the milkmaid ® into my dish,
notwithstanding I myself was the first who discovered that
‘alliance. I reap however many benefits from the malice of
these enemies, as they let me see my own faults, and give me a
view of myself in the worst light ; as they hinder me from being
blown up by flattery and self-conceit ; as they make me keep a
watchful eye over my own actions ; and at the same time make
me cautious how I talk of others, and particularly of my friends
and relations, or value myself upon the antiquity of my family.

But the most formidable part of my correspondents are those,

40 whose letters are filled with threats and menaces. I have been


1o


20


30.


410 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


treated so often after this manner, that, not thinking it sufficient
to fence well ®, in which I am now arrived at the utmost perfec-
tion, and carry pistols about me, which I have always tucked
within my girdle ; I several months since made my will, settled
my estate, and took leave of my friends, looking upon myself as
no better than a dead man. Nay, I went so far as to write a
long letter to the most intimate acquaintance I have in the
world,-under the character of a departed person, giving him an
account of what brought me to that untimely end, and of the
fortitude with which I met it. This letter being too long for the
present paper, I intend to print it by itself very suddenly; and,
at the same time, I must confess I took my hint.of it from the
behaviour of an old soldier in the civil wars, who was corporal
of a company in a regiment of foot, about the same time that |
myself was a cadet ™ in the king's army.

This gentleman was taken by the enemy ; and the two parties
were upon such terms at that time, that we did not treat each
other as prisoners of war, but as traitors and rebels. The poor
corporal, being condemned to die, wrote a letter to his wife
when under sentence of execution. He writ on the Thursday,
and was to be executed on the Friday: but, considering that
the letter would not come to his wife’s hands until Saturday, the
day after execution, and being at that time more scrupulous
than ordinary in speaking exact truth, he formed his letter
rather according to the posture of his affairs when she should
read it, than as they stood when he sent it : though, it must be
confessed, there is a certain perplexity in the style of it, which
the reader will easily pardon, considering his circumstances.

‘DEAR WIFE,


‘Hoping you are in good health, as I am at this present
writing ; this is to let you know, that yesterday, between the
hours of eleven and twelve, I was hanged, drawn, and quartered.
I died very penitently, and every body thought my case very
hard. Remember me kindly to my poor fatherless children.

‘Yours until death,
‘Ww. BY

It so happened, that this honest fellow was relieved bya party
of his friends, and had the satisfaction to see all the rebels
hanged who had been his enemies. I must not omit a circum-


ON A POETICAL STOCK IN TRADE. 411i


stance which exposed him to raillery his whole life after. Before
the arrival of the next post, that would have set all things clear,
his wife was married to a second husband, who lived in the
peaceable possession of her; and the corporal, who was a man
of plain understanding, did not care to stir in the matter, as
knowing that she had the news of his death under his own hand,
Which she might have produced upon occasion.


Tatler, No. 164,] [April 27, 1710.


No. 124. On a Poetical Stock in Trade.
Invenias disjecti membra poetse.—Honr. Sat. i. 4. 62.


I was this evening sitting at the side-table and reading one

of my own papers with great satisfaction, not knowing that I
1o was observed by any in the room. I had not long enjoyed this
Secret pleasure of an author, when a gentleman®, some of whose
works I have been highly entertained with, accosted me after
the following manner. ‘Mr. Bickerstaff, you know I have for
Some years devoted myself wholly to the muses, and, perhaps,
you will be surprised when I tell you I am resolved to take up,
and apply myself to business. I shall therefore beg you will
Stand my friend, and recommend a éustomer to me for several
Goods that I have now upon my hands.’—‘I desired him to let
Me have a particular, and I would do my utmost to serve him.’
°0-—<T have first of all,’ says he, ‘the progress of an amour
digested into sonnets, beginning with a poem to the unknown
fair, and ending with an epithalamium. I have celebrated in it
her cruelty, her pity, her face, her shape, her wit, her good
humour, her dancing, her singing’—I could not forbear inter-
Tupting him ; ‘This is a most accomplished lady, said I; ‘but
has she really, with all these perfections, a fine voice ?’—‘ Pugh,’
Says he, ‘you do not believe there is such a person in nature.
This was only my employment in solitude last summer, when I
had neither friends nor books to divert me.’—‘I was going,’
3 said I, ‘to ask her name, but I find it is only an imaginary


412 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


mistress.’—‘ That’s true,’ replied my friend, ‘but her name is
Flavia. I have,’ continued he, ‘in the second place, a collection
of lampoons, calculated either for the Bath, Tunbridge, or any
place where they drink waters, with blank spaces for the names
of such person or persons as may _be inserted in them on
occasion. Thus much I have told only of what I have by me
proceeding from love and malice. I have also at this time the
sketch of a heroic poem upon the next peace; several, indeed,
of the verses are either too long or too short, it being a rough
ro draught of my thoughts upon that subject.’ I thereupon told
him, ‘ That, as it was, it might probably pass for a very good
Pindaric, and I believe I knew one who would be willing to
deal with him for it upon that foot®’ ‘I must tell you also,’ said
he, ‘I have made a dedication to it, which is about four sides
close written, that may serve any one that is tall, and under-
stands Latin. I have further about fifty similes, that were
never yet applied, besides three-and-twenty descriptions of
the sun rising, that might be of great use to an epic poet.
These are my more bulky commodities; besides which, |
20 have several small wares that I would part with at easy rates;
as, observations upon life, and moral sentences, reduced into
several couplets, very proper to close up acts of plays, and may
be easily introduced by two or three lines of prose, either in
tragedy or comedy. If I could find a purchaser curious in
Latin poetry, I could accommodate him with two dozen of
epigrams, which, by reason of a few false quantities, should
come for little, or nothing”
I heard the gentleman with much attention, and asked him,
Whether he would break bulk, and sell his goods by retail, or
30 designed they should all go in a lump?’ He told me, ‘That
he should be very loath to part them, unless it was to oblige
a man of quality, or any person for whom I had a particular
friendship.’—‘ My reason for asking,’ said I, ‘is, only because
I know a young gentleman who intends to appear next spring
in a new jingling chariot, with the figures of the nine muses on
each side of it; and, I believe, would be glad to come into the
world in verse.’ We could not go on in our treaty, by reason
of two or three critics that joined us. They had been talking,
it seems, of the two letters which were found in the coffin, and
4° mentioned in one of my late lucubrations", and came with a .


lo


29


30


40


ON A POETICAL STOCK IN TRADE. 413


request to me, that I would communicate any others of them,
that were legible. One of the gentlemen was pleased to say
‘that it was a very proper instance of a widow’s constancy ;’ and
said, ‘he wished I had subjoined, as a foil to it, the following
passage in Hamlet.’ The young prince was not yet acquainted
with all the guilt of his mother, but turns his thoughts on her
sudden forgetfulness of his father, and the indecency of her
hasty marriage :
That it should come to this!

But two months dead! nay, not so much, not two!

So excellent a king! that was, to this,

Hyperion to a satyr: so loving to my mother:

That he might not let e’en the winds of heaven

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!

Must I remember? Why she would hang on him,

As if inctease of appetite had grown

By what it fed on: and yet within a month!

Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is Woman!

A little month! or ere those shoes were old,

With which she followed my poor father’s body,

Like Niobe,-all tears, why she, even she,

O heaven! a brute, that wants discourse of reason,

Would have moumed longer—married with mine uncle!

My father’s brother! but no more like my father,

Than I to Hercules. Within a month!

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

Had left the flushing in her gauled eyes,

She married—O most wicked speed, to post

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

It is not, nor it cannot come to, good.

But, break, my heart; for I mast hold my tongue!


The several emotions of mind, and breaks of passion, in this
Speech, are admirable. He has touched every circumstance
that aggravated the fact, and seemed capable of hurrying the:
thoughts of a son into‘distraction, His father’s tenderness for
his mother, expressed in so delicate a particular: his mother’s
fondness for his father, no less exquisitely described: the great
and amiable figure of his dead parent drawn by a true filial
Piety : his disdain of so unworthy a successor to his bed ; but,
above all, the shortness of the time between his father’s death
and his mother’s second marriage, brought together with so
Much disorder, make up.as noble a part as any in that
Celebrated tragedy. The circumstance of time, I never could
enough admire. The widowhood had lasted two months. This


414 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


is his first reflection ; but, as his indignation rises, he sinks to
scarce two months: afterwards, into a month; and at last
into a little month: but all this so naturally, that the reader
accompanies him in the violence of his passion, and finds the
time lessen insensibly, according to the different workings of
his disdain. I have not mentioned the incest of her marriage,
which is so obvious a provocation ; but cannot forbear taking
notice, that when his fury is at its height, he cries, ‘ Frailty, thy
name is Woman!’ as railing at the sex in general, rather than

10 giving himself leave to think his mother worse than others—
Desiderantur mutta.


Tatler, No. 106.] [December 12, 1709.


No. 125. On Singularity: proposals for a receptacle for per-
sons out of their wits.


Quem mala stultitia, et queecunque inscitia veri
Cecum agit: insanum Chrysippi porticus, et: grex
Autumat; hzec populos, hec magnos formula reges,
Excepto sapiente, tenet.—Honr. Sat. ii. 3. 43.,


There is a sect of ancient philosophers, who, I think, have
left more volumes behind them, and those better written, than
any other of the fraternities in philosophy. It was a maxim of
this sect, that all those who do not live up to the principles of
reason and virtue are madmen. Every one who governs him-
self by these rules, is allowed the title of wise, and reputed to
be in his senses: and every one, in proportion as he deviates
from them, is pronounced frantic and distracted. Cicero

a> having chosen this maxim for his theme, takes occasion to
argue from it very agreeably with Clodius, his implacable
adversary, who had procured his banishment. ‘A city,’ says
he, ‘is an assembly distinguished into bodies of men, who are
in possession of their respective rights and privileges, cast
under proper subordinations, and in all its parts obedient: to the
rules of law and equity.’ He then represents the government
from whence he was banished, at a time when the consul,
senate, and laws had lost their authority, as a commonwealth


q


2


3


ON SINGULARITY, ETC. 415
of lunatics. For this reason, he regards his expulsion from
Rome, as a man would, being turned out of Bedlam, if the
inhabitants of it should drive him out of their walls as a person
unfit for their community. We are, therefore, to look upon
every man’s brain to be touched, however he may appear in the
general conduct of his life, if he has an unjustifiable singularity
in’any part of his conversation or behaviour, or if he swerves
from right reason, however common his kind of madness may
be, we shall not excuse him for its being epidemical ; it being

© our present design to clap up all such as have the marks of
madness upon them, who are now permitted to go about the
streets for no other reason but because they do no mischief in
their fits. Abundance of imaginary great men are put in straw
to bring them to a right sense of themselves. And is it not
altogether as reasonable, that an insignificant man, who has an
immoderate opinion of his merits, and a quite different notion
of his own abilities from what the rest of the world entertain,
Should have the same care taken of him as a beggar who
fancies himself a duke or a prince? Or why should a man,
who starves in the midst of plenty, be trusted with himself,
more than he who fancies he is an emperor in the midst of
boverty? I have several women of quality in my thoughts, who
Set so exorbitant a value upon themselves, that I have often
most heartily pitied them, and wished them for their recovery
Under the same discipline with the pewterer’s wife. I find, by
Several hints in ancient authors, that when the Romans were in
the height of power and luxury, they assigned out of their vast
dominions an island called Anticyra®, as an habitation for mad-
Men. This was the Bedlam of the Roman empire, whither all
Persons who had lost their wits used to resort from all parts of
the world in quest of them. Several of the Roman emperors
were advised to repair to this island ; but most of them, instead
Of listening to such sober counsels, gave way to their distrac-
tion, until the people knocked them on the head as despairing
of their cure. In short, it was as usual for men of distempered
brains to take a voyage to Anticyra in those days, as it is in
ours for persons who have a disorder in their lungs to go to
Montpelier ®. :
The prodigious crops of hellebore? with which this whole
island abounded, did not only furnish them with incomparable


o


oe


416 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


tea, snuff, and Hungary-water"; but impregnated the air of the
country with such sober and salutiferous steams, as very much
comforted the heads, and refreshed the senses of all that
breathed in it. A discarded statesman, that, at his first
landing appeared stark-staring mad, would become calm in
a week’s time ; and, upon his return home, live easy and satis-
fied in his retirement. A moping lover would grow a pleasant
fellow by that time he had rid thrice about the island; and
a hair-brained rake, after a short stay in the country, go home
10 again a composed, grave, worthy gentleman.

I have premised these particulars before I enter on the main
design of.this paper, because 1 would not be thought altogether
notional in what I have to say, and pass only for a projector
in morality. I could quote Horace, and Seneca, and some
other ancient writers of good repute, upon the same occasion ;
and. make out by their testimony, that our streets are filled
with distracted persons; that our shops and taverns, private
and public houses, swarm with them ; and that jt is very hard
to make up a tolerable assembly without a majority of them.

20 But what I have already said is, I hope, sufficient to justify the
ensuing project, which I shall therefore give some account of
without any further preface.

1. It is humbly proposed, that a proper receptacle, or habita-
tion, be forthwith erected for all such persons as, upon due trial
and examination, shall appear to be out of their wits.

2. That, to serve the present exigency, the college in Moor-
fields® be very much extended at both ends; and-that it be
converted into a square, by adding three other sides to it.

3. That nobody be admitted into these three additional sides,

30 but such whose frenzy can lay no claim to an apartment in that
row of building which is already erected.

4. That the architect, physician, apothecary, surgeon, keepers,
nurses, and porters, be all and each of them cracked ; provided
that their frenzy does not lie in the profession or employment
to which they shall severally and respectively be assigned,

N.B. It is thought fit to give the foregoing notice, that none
may present himself here for any post of honour or profit, who
is not duly qualified. ;

5. That over all the gates of the additional buildings, there be

40 figures placed in the same manner.as over the entrance of the


ON ALETHES AND VERISIMILIS, ETC. 417


edifice already erected"; provided they represent such dis-
tractions only as are proper for those additional buildings ; as
of an envious man gnawing his own flesh; a gamester pulling
himself by the ears, and knocking his head against a marble
pillar; a covetous man warming himself oyer a heap of gold ;.
a coward flying from his own shadow, and the like.

“Having laid down this general scheme of my design, I do
hereby invite all persons who are willing to encourage so
public-spirited a project, to bring in their contributions as soon

lo as possible ; and to apprehend forthwith any politician whom
they shall catch raving in a coffee-house, or any free-thinker
whom they shall find publishing his deliriums, or any other
person who shall give the like manifest signs of a crazed
imagination: and I do at the same time give this public notice
to all the madmen about this great city, that they may return
to their senses with all imaginable expedition, lest, if they should
come into:my-hands, I should put them into a regimen which
‘they should not like: for if I find any one of them persist in his
frantic behaviour, I will make him in a month’s time as famous

*0 as ever Oliver’s porter was.


Tatler, No. 125.] , [January 26, 1710,


No. 126. On Alethes and Verisimilis, or the shades of Con-
sctence and Honour.


.  Virtutem verba putant, ut
Lucam ligna.—Honr. Ep. i. 6. 31.


This day I obliged Pacolet to entertain me with matters
which regarded persons of his own character and occupation.
We chose to take our walk on Tower-hill, and as we were
Coming from thence, in order to stroll as far as Garraway’s®, I
Observed two men, who had but just landed, coming from the
water-side. I thought there was something uncommon in their
tien and aspect ; but though they seemed by their visage to be
telated, yet there was a warmth in their manner, as if they
differed very much in their sentiments of the subject on which

Ee


418 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


they were talking. One of them seemed to have a natural
confidence mixed with an ingenuous freedom, in his gesture ;
his dress very plain, but very graceful and becoming; the
other, in the midst of an overbearing carriage, betrayed, by
frequently looking round him, a suspicion that he was not
enough regarded by those he met, or that he feared they would
make some attack upon him. This person was much taller
than his companion, and added to that height the advantage
of a feather in his hat, and heels to his shoes so monstrously

10 high, that he had three or four times fallen down, had he not
been supported by his friend. They made a full stop as they
came within a few yards of the place where we stood. The
plain gentleman bowed to Pacolet; the other looked upon
him with some displeasure: upon which I asked him who they
both were? when he thus informed me of their persons and
circumstances:

‘You may remember, Isaac, that I have often told you, there
are beings of a superior rank to mankind ; who frequently visit
the habitations of men, in order to call them from some wrong

20 pursuits in which they are actually engaged, or divert them
from methods which will lead them into errors for the future.
He that will carefully reflect upon the occurrences of his life,
will find he has been sometimes extricated out of difficulties,
and received favours where he could never have expected such
benefits ; as well as met with cross events from some unseen
hand, which has disappointed his best laid designs. Suth
accidents arrive from the interventions of aerial beings, as they
are benevolent or hurtful to the nature of man; and attend his
steps in the tracks of ambition, of business, and of pleasure.

30 Before I ever appeared to you in the manner I do now, I have
frequently followed you in your evening-walks ; and have often,
by throwing some accident in your way, as the passing by of
a funeral, or the appearance of some other solemn object, given
your imagination a new turn, and changed a night you have
destined to mirth and jollity, into an exercise of study and
contemplation. I was the old soldier who met you last
summer in Chelsea-fields, and pretended that I had broken
my wooden-leg, and could not get’ home; but I snapped it
short off, on purpose that you might fall into the reflections

40 you did on that subject, and take me into your hack. If you


ON ALETHES AND VERISIMILIS, ETC. 419


temember, you made yourself very merry on that fracture, and
asked me whether I thought I should next winter feel cold in
the toes of that leg? as is usually observed, that those who
lose limbs are sensible of pains in the extreme parts, even after
those limbs are cut off. .

To be short: those two persons whom you see yonder are
such as I am; they are not real men, but are mere shades and
figures, one is named Alethes, the other Verisimilis. Their
office is to be the guardians and representatives of conscience

'o and honour. They are now going to visit the several parts of
the town, to see how their interests in the world decay or
flourish, and to purge themselves from the many false impu-
tations they daily meet with in the commerce and conversation
of men. You observed Verisimilis frowned when he first saw
me. What he is provoked at is, that I told him one day,
though he strutted and dressed with so much ostentation, if
he kept himself within his own bounds, he was but a lackey,
and wore only that gentleman’s livery whom he is now with.
‘This frets him to the heart; for you must know, he has

70 pretended a long time to set up for himself, and gets among
a crowd of the more unthinking part of mankind, who take him
for a person of the first quality ; though his introduction into
the world was wholly owing to his present companion.

This encounter was very agreeable to me, and I was resolved
to dog them, and desired Pacolet to accompany me. I soon
Perceived what he told me in the gesture of the persons ; for,
when they looked at each other in discourse, the well-dressed
Man suddenly cast down his eyes, and discovered that the
Other had a painful superiority over him. After some further

30 discourse, they took leave. The plain gentleman went down
towards Thames-street, in order to be present, at least, at the
vaths taken at the custom-house ; and the other made directly
for the heart of the city. It is incredible how great a change
there immediately appeared in the man of honour, when he got
tid of his uneasy companion: he adjusted the cock of his hat
anew, settled his sword-knot, and had an appearance that
attracted a sudden inclination for him and his interests in all
who beheld him. ‘For my.part,’ said I to Pacolet, ‘I cannot
but think you are mistaken in calling this person of the lower

4° quality ; for he looks much more like a gentleman than the
Ee2


10


420 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


other. Do not you observe all eyes are upon him, as he
advances? how each sex gazes at his stature, aspect, address
and motion?’ Pacolet only smiled and shaked his head; as
leaving me to be convinced by my own further observation.
We kept on our way after him until we came to Exchange-
alley, where the plain gentleman again came up to the other;
and they stood together after the manner of eminent merchants,
as if ready to receive application ; but I could observe no man
talk to either of them. The one was laughed at as a fop; and
I heard many whispers against the other, as a whimsical sort of
a fellow, and a great enemy to trade. They crossed Cornhill
together, and came into the full Exchange, where some bowed,
and gave themselves airs in being known to so fine a man as
Verisimilis, who, they said, had great interest in all prince’s
courts ; and the other was taken notice of by several, as one
they had seen somewhere long before. One more particularly
said, he had formerly been a man of consideration in the
world ; but was so unlucky, that they who dealt with him, by
some strange infatuation or other, had a way of cutting off their
own bills, and were prodigiously slow in improving their stock.
But as much as I was curious to observe the reception thesé
gentlemen met with upon the Exchange, I could not help being?
interrupted by one that came up towards us, to whom every
body made their compliments. He was of the common height,
and in his dress there seemed to be great care to appear no
way particular, except in a certain exact and feat® manner of
behaviour and circumspection. He was wonderfully careful
that his shoes and clothes should be without the least speck
upon them; and seemed to think, that on such an accident
depended his very life and fortune. There was hardly a man
on the Exchange who had not a note upon him; and each
seemed very well satisfied that their money lay in his hands,
without demanding payment. I asked Pacolet, what great
merchant that was, who was so-universally addressed to, yet
made too familiar an appearance to command that extra-
ordinary deference? Pacolet answered, ‘This person is the
demon or genius of credit; his name is Umbra. If you
observe, he follows Alethes and Verisimilis at a distance ; and
indeed has no foundation for the figure he makes in the world,


49 but that he is thought to keep their cash ; though, at the same


ON ALETHES AND VERISIMILIS, ETC. 421


time, none who trust him would trust the others for a groat.’
As the company rolled about, the three spectres were jumbled
into one place: when they were sa, and all thought there was
an alliance between them, they immediately drew upon them
the business of the whole Exchange. But ‘their affairs soon in-
creased to such an unwieldy bulk, that Alethes took his leave,
‘and said, ‘he would not engage further than he had an im-
mediate fund to answer. Verisimilis pretended, ‘that though
he had revenues large enough to go on his own bottom, yet it
'o was below one of his family to condescend to trade in his own
name; therefore he also retired.’ I was extremely troubled to
see the glorious mart of London left with no other guardian but
him of credit. But Pacolet told me, ‘that traders had nothing
to do with the honour or conscience of their correspondents,
provided they supported a general behaviour in the world,
which could not hurt their credit or their purses: for,’ said
he, ‘you may, in this one tract of building of London and
Westminster see the imaginary motives on which the greatest
affairs move, as well as in rambling over the face of the earth.
*0 For though Alethes is the real governor, as well as legislator of
mankind, he has very little, business but to make up quarrels ;
and is only a general referee, to whom every man pretends to
appeal, but is satisfied with his determinations no further than
they promote his own interest. Hence it is, that the soldier
and the courtier model their actions according to Verisimilis’s
manner, and the merchant according to that of Umbra. Among
these men, honour and credit are not valuable possessions in
themselves, or pursued out of a principle of justice ; but merely
as they are serviceable to ambition and to commerce. But the
3° world will never be in any manner of order or tranquillity, until
men are firmly convinced that conscience, honour, and credit,
are all in one interest ; and that,-without the concurrence of
the former, the latter are but impositions upon ourselves and
Others ... Were men so enlightened and studious of their own
good, as to act by the dictates of their reason and reflection,
and not the opinion of others, conscience would be the steady
ruler of human life ; and the words truth, law, reason, equity,
and religion, would be but synonymous terms for that only
guide which makes us pass our days in our own favour and
40 approbation.’


Tatler, No. 48.] [July 39, 1709.


20


30


422 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


No. 127. The Vision of Parnassus.


Me Parnassi deserta per ardua dulcis
Raptat amor: juvat ire jugis, qua nulla priorum
Castalium molli divertitur orbitaclivo.

Vira. Georg. iii. 291.


* Mr. SPECTATOR,

‘I came home a little later than usual the other night ; and,
not finding myself inclined to sleep, I took up Virgil to divert
me until I should be more disposed to rest. He is the author
whom I always choose on such occasions; no one writing in
so divine, so harmonious, nor so equal a strain, which leaves
the mind composed and softened into an agreeable melancholy :
the temper in which, of all others, I choose to close the day.
The passages I turned to were those beautiful raptures in his
Georgics, where he professes himself entirely given up to the
Muses, and smit with the love of poetry, passionately wishing
to be transported to the cool shades and retirements of the
mountain Hemus. I closed the book and went to bed. What
I had just before been reading made so strong an impression
on my mind, that fancy seemed almost to fulfil to me the wish
of Virgil, in presenting to me the following vision :—

‘Methought I was on a sudden placed in the plains of
Beeotia, where at the end of the horizon I saw the mountain
Parnassus rising before me. The prospect was of so large
an extent, that I had long wandered about to find a path which
should directly lead me to it, had I not seen at some distance
a grove of trees, which, in a plain that had nothing else remark-
able enough in it to fix my sight, immediately determined me
to go thither. When I arrived at it, I found it parted out into
@ great number of walks and alleys, which often widened into
beautiful openings, as circles or ovals, set round with yews and
cypresses, with niches, grottos, and caves, placed on the sides,
encompassed with ivy. There was no sound to be heard in the
whole place, but only that of a gentle breeze passing over the
leaves of the forest ; everything beside was buried in a profound
silence. J was captivated with the beauty and retirement of
the place, and never so much, before that hour, was pleased


THE VISION OF PARNASSUS, 423


with the enjoyment of myself. I indulged the humour, and
suffered myself to wander without choice or design. At
length, at the end of a range of trees, I saw three figures
seated on a bank of moss, with a silent brook creeping at their
feet. J adored them as the tutelary divinities of the place, and
stood still to take a particular view of each of them. The
middiemost, whose name was Solitude, sat with her arms
across each other, and seemed rather pensive, and wholly
taken up with her own thoughts, than any ways grieved or dis-


'0 pleased. The only companions which she admitted into that


retirement were, the goddess Silence, who sat on her right
hand with her finger on her mouth, and on her left Contem-
plation, with her eyes fixed upon the heavens. Before her
lay a celestial globe, with several schemes of mathematical
theorems, She prevented my speech with the greatest affa-
bility in the world. “ Fear not,” said she, “I know your request
before you speak it, you would be led to the mountain of the
Muses ; the only way to it lies through this place, and no one
is so often employed in conducting persons thither as myself.”


© When she had thus spoken, she arose from her seat, and I


30


40


immediately placed myself under her direction; but whilst I
passed through the grove I could not help inquiring of her who
were the persons admitted into that sweet retirement. “Surely,”
said I, “there can nothing enter here but virtue and virtuous
thoughts ; the whole wood seems designed for the reception
and reward of such persons as have spent their lives according
to the dictates of their conscience, and the commands of the
gods.” “ You imagine right,” said she: “assure yourself this
place was at first designed for no other: such it continued to be
in the reign of Saturn, when none entered here but holy priests,
deliverers of their country from oppression and tyranny, who
reposed themselves here after their labours, and those whom the
Study and love of wisdom had fitted for divine conversation.
But now it is become no less dangerous than it was before
desirable : vice has learned so to mimic virtue, that it often
Creeps in hither under its disguise. See there; just before
you, Revenge stalking by, habited in the robe of Honour.
Observe not far from him Ambition standing alone; if you
ask him his name, he will tell you it is Emulation, or Glory,
But the most frequent intruder we have is Lust, who succeeds


10


20


30


40


424 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


now the deity to whom in better days this grove was entirely
devoted. Virtuous Love, with Hymen and the Graces attend-
ing him, once reigned over this happy place; a whole train
of virtues waited on him, and no dishonourable thought durst
presume for admittance. But now, how is the whole prospect
changed! and how seldom renewed by some few who dare
despise sordid wealth, and imagine themselves fit companions
for so charming a divinity.”

‘The goddess had no sooner said thus, but we were arrived
at the utmost boundaries of the wood, which lay contiguous to
a plain that ended at the foot of the mountain. Here I kept
close to my guide, being solicited by several phantoms, who
assured me they would show me a nearer way to the mguntain
of the Muses. Among the rest, Vanity was extremely importu-
nate, having deluded infinite numbers, whom I saw wandering
at the foot of the hill. I turned away from this despicable
troop with disdain ; and, addressing myself to my guide, told
her that, as I had some hopes I should be able to reach up part
of the ascent, so I despaired of having strength enough to attain
the plain on the top. But, being informed by her that it was
impossible to stand upon the sides, and that if I did not pro-
ceed onwards I should irrevocably fall down to the lowest
verge, I resolved to hazard any labour and hardship in the
attempt : so great a desire had I of enjoying the satisfaction I
hoped to meet with at the end of my enterprise.

‘There were two paths, which led up by different ways to the
summit of the mountain: the one was guarded by the genius
which presides over the moment of our. births. He had it in
charge to examine the several pretensions of those who desired
to pass that way, but to admit none excepting those only on
whom Melpomene had looked with a propitious eye at the hour
of their nativity. The other way was guarded by diligence, to
whom many of those persons applied who had met with a
denial the other way ; but he was so tedious in granting their
request, and indeed after admittance the way was so very intri-
cate and laborious, that many, after they had made some
progress, chose rather to return back than proceed, and very
few persisted so long as to arrive at the end they proposed.
Besides these two paths, which at length severally led to the top
of the mountain, there was a third made up of these two, which


THE VISION OF PARNASSUS. 425


a little after the entrance joined in one. This carried those
happy few, whose good fortune it was to find it, directly to the
throne of Apollo. I do not know whether I should even now
have had the resolution to have demanded entrance at either of
these doors, had I not seen a peasant-like man (followed by
a numerous and lovely train of youth of both sexes) insist upon
entrance for all whom he led up. He put me in mind of the
country-clown® who is painted in the map for leading Prince
Eugene over the Alps. He had a bundle of papers in his hand;
'0 and, producing several, which he said were given to him by
hands which he knew Apollo would allow as passes; among
which, methought I saw some of my own writing; the whole
assembly was admitted, and gave by their presence a new
beauty. and pleasure to these happy mansions. I found the
man did not pretend to enter himself, but served as a kind of
forester in the lawns, to direct passengers, who, by their own
Merit, or instructions he procured for them, had virtue enough
to travel that way. I looked very attentively upon this kind
homely benefactor ; and, forgive me, Mr. Spectator, if I own to
*2 you I took him for yourself. We were no sooner entered, but
We were sprinkled three times with the water of the fountain
Aganippe, which had power to deliver us from all harms, but
Only envy, which reached even to the end of our journey.
We had not proceeded far in the middle path, when we
arrived at the summit of the hill, where ‘there immediately ap-
Peared to us two figures, which extremely engaged my atten-
tion: the one was a young nymph in the prime of her youth
and beauty; she had wings on her shoulders and feet, and was
able to transport herself to the most distant regions in the
30 smallest space of time. She was continually varying her dress,
Sometimes into the most natural and becoming habits in the
World, and at others into the most wild and freakish garb that
Can be imagined. There stood by her a man full-aged and of
freat gravity, who corrected her inconsistencies by showing
them in this mirror, and still flung her affected and unbecoming
Omaments down the mountain, which fell in the plain below,
and were gathered up and worn with great satisfaction by
those that inhabited it. The name of the nymph was Fancy,
the daughter of Liberty, the most beautiful of all the mountain
49 nymphs : the other was Judgment, the offspring of Time, and


426 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


the only child he acknowledged to be his. A youth, who sat
upon a throne just between them, was their genuine offspring :
his name was Wit, and his seat was composed of the works of
the most celebrated authors. I could not but see with a secret
joy, that, though the Greeks and Romans made the majority,
yet our own countrymen were the next both in number and
dignity. I was now at liberty to take a full prospect of that
delightful region, I was inspired with new vigour and life, and
saw everything in nobler and more pleasing view than before :
10 | breathed a purer ether in a sky which was a continual azure,
gilded with perpetual sunshine. The two summits of the moun-
tain rose on each side, and formed in the midst a most delicious
vale, the habitation of the Muses, and of such as had composed
works worthy of immortality. Apollo was seated upon a throne
of gold, and for a canopy an aged laurel spread its boughs and
its shade over his head. His bow and quiver lay at his feet.
He held his harp in his hand, whilst the Muses round about
him celebrated with hymns his victory over the serpent Python,
and sometimes sang in softer notes the loves of Leucothoe and
20 Daphnis. Homer, Virgil, and Milton, were seated the next
to them. Behind were a great number of others ;. among
whom I was surprised to see some in the habit of Laplanders®,
who, notwithstanding the uncouthness of their dress, had lately
obtained a place upon the mountain. I saw Pindar walking all
alone, no one daring to accost him, until Cowley” joined himself
to him ; but growing weary of one who almost walked him out
of breath, he left him for Horace and Anacreon, with whom he
seemed infinitely delighted. °
‘A little further 1 saw another group of figures: I made up
30 to them, and found it was Socrates dictating to Xenophon, and
the spirit of Plato ; but most of all, Muszeus had the greatest
audience about him. I was at too great a distance to hear what
he said, or to discover the faces of his hearers ; only I thought I
now perceived Virgil, who had joined them, and stood in a pos-
ture full of admiration at the harmony of his words.

‘Lastly, at the very brink of the hill, I saw Boccalini sending
dispatches to the world below of what happened upon Par-
nassus ; but I perceived he did it without leave of the Muses,
and by stealth, and was unwilling to have them revised by

40 Apollo, I could now, from this height and serene sky, behold


ON WIT; WITH THE LIFE OF A GREEK POET. 427


the infinite cares and anxieties with which mortals below sought
out their way through the maze of life. I saw the path of
Virtue lie straight before them, whilst Interest, or some mali-,
cious demon, still hurried them out of the way. I was at once
touched with pleasure at my own happiness, and compassion at
the sight of their inextricable errors. Here the two contending
passions rose so high, that they were inconsistent with the
sweet repose I enjoyed ; and, awaking with a sudden start, the
only consolation I could admit of for my loss, was the hopes
'o that this relation of my dream will not displease you.’


Spectator, No, 514.] [October 20, 1712,


No. 128. On Wit; with the Life of a Greek Poet.


Frange, miser, calamos, vigilataque pralia dele,
Qui facis in parva sublimia carmina cella,
Ut dignus venias hederis, et imagine macra.
Juv. Sat, vii. 27.


‘Wit,’ saith the bishop of Rochester® in his elegant sermon
Against the scorner, ‘as it implies a certain uncommon reach
and vivacity of thought, is an excellent talent, very fit to be
employed in the search of truth, and very capable of assisting us
to discern and embrace it.’ I shall take leave to carry this’
Observation farther into common life, and remark, that it is
a faculty, when properly directed, very fit to recommend young
Persons to the favour of such patrons as are generously studious
to promote the interest of politeness, and the honour of their

*0 Country. 1 am therefore much grieved to hear the frequent
Complaints of some rising authors whom I have taken under my
Suardianship. Since my circumstances will not allow me to
Rive them due encouragement, I must take upon me the person
of a philosopher, and make them a present of my advice. I
would not have any poet whatsoever, who is not born to five
hundred a year, deliver himself up to wit, but as it is sub-
Servient to the improvement of his fortune. This talent is
useful in all professions, and should be considered not as a


428 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


wife, but as an attendant. Let them take an old man’s word ;
the desire of fame grows languid in a few years, and thoughts
of ease and convenience erase the fairy images of glory and
honour. Even those who have succeeded both in fame and
fortune, look back on the petty trifles of their youth with some
regret, when their minds are turned to more exalted and useful
speculations. This is admirably expressed in the following
lines, by an author® whom I have formerly done justice to on
the account of his pastoral poems.
10 In search of Wisdom, far from Wit I fly;

Wit is a harlot beauteous to the eye,

In whose bewitching arms our early time

We waste, and vigour of our youthful prime.

But when Reflection comes with riper years,

And Manhood with a thoughtful brow appears;

We cast the mistress off to take a wife,

And, wed to Wisdom, lead a happy life.

A passage which happened to me some years ago confirmed

several maxims of frugality in my mind. A woollen-draper® of

20 my acquaintance, remarkable for his learning and good-nature,
pulled out his pocket-book, wherein he showed me at the one
end several well-chosen mottos, and several patterns of cloth
at the other.—I, like a well-bred man, praised both sorts of
goods; whereupon he tore out the mottos, and generously
gave them to me: but, with great prudence, put up the patterns
in his pocket again.

I am sensible that any accounts of my own secret history can
‘have but little weight with young men of sanguine expectations.
I shall therefore take this opportunity to present my wards -

30 with the history of an ancient Greek poet, which was sent me
from the library of Fez, and is to be found there in the end ofa
very ancient manuscript of Homer's works, which was brought
by the barbarians from Constantinople. The name of the poet
is torn out, nor have the critics yet determined it. I have faith-
fully translated part of it, and desire that it may be diligently
perused by all men who design to live by their wits.

‘I was born® at the foot of a certain mountain in Greece
called Parnassus, where the country is remarkably delicious.
My mother, while she was with child of me, longed for laurel

40 leaves ; and as I lay in my cradle, a swarm of bees™ settled
about my mouth, without doing me any injury. These were


ON WIT, WITH THE LIFE 0F A CREEK POET, 429


looked upon as presages of my being a great man ; and the

early promises I gave of a quick wit, and lively fancy, confirmed

the high opinion my friends had conceived of me. It would
be an idle tale to relate the trifling adventures of my youth,
until I arrived at my twentieth year. It was then that the love

I bore to a beautiful young virgin, with whom I had innocently

and familiarly conversed from my childhood, became the public

talk of our village. I was so taken up with my passion, that I

entirely neglected all other affairs : and though the daughter of
‘© Machaon® the physician, and a rich heiress, the daughter of a
famous Grecian orator, were offered me in marriage, I peremp-
torily refused both the matches, and rashly vowed to live and
die with the lovely Polyhymnia. In vain did my parents
remonstrate to me, that the tradition of her being descended
from the gods was too poor a portion for one of my narrow
fortunes ; that except her fine green-house and garden, she had
not one foot of land ; and though she should gain the law-suit
about the summit of Parnassus, (which yet had many pretenders
to it) that the air was so bleak there, and the ground so barren,
that it would certainly starve the possessor. I fear my obstinacy
in this particular broke my mother’s heart, who died a short
time after, and was soon followed by my father.

‘I now found myself at liberty, and notwithstanding the
Opposition of a great many rivals, I won and enjoyed Poly-
hymnia. Our amour was known to the whole country, and all
Who saw, extolled the beauty of my mistress, and pronounced
me happy in the possession of so many charms. We lived in
8reat splendour and gayety, I being persuaded that high living
was necessary to keep up my reputation, and the beauty of my
mistress ; from whom I had daily expectations given me of a
Post in the government, or some lavish present from the great
men of our commonwealth. I was so proud of my partner, that
I was perpetually bringing company to see her, and was a little
tiresome to my acquaintance, by talking continually of her
Several beauties. She herself had a most exalted conceit of her
charms, and often invited the ladies to ask their opinions of her
dress ; which if they disapproved in any particular, she called
them a pack of envious insipid things, and ridiculed them in all
companies. She had a delicate set of teeth, which appeared
4° most to advantage when she was angry ; and therefore she was


Q


o


30


430 MISCELLANEOUS PAFERS,


very often in a passion. By this imprudent behaviour, when we
had run out of our money, we had no living soul to befriend us ;
and every body cried out, it was a judgment upon me for being
a slave to such a proud minx, such a conceited hussy.

‘TI loved her passionately, and exclaimed against a blind and
injudicious world. Besides I had several children by her, and
was likely still to have more ; for I always thought the youngest
the most beautiful. I must not forget that a certain great lord
offered me a considerable sum in my necessity, to have the

ro reputation of fathering one of them; but I rejected his offer
with disdain. In order to support her family and vanities, she
carried me to Athens ; where she put me upon a hundred pranks
to get money. Sometimes she drest me in an antique robe, and
placed a diadem on my head, and made me gather a mob
about me by talking in a blustering tone, and unintelligible
language. Sometimes she made me foam at the mouth, roll my
eyes, invoke the gods, and act a sort of madness which the
‘Athenians call the Pindarism. At another time she put a sheep-
hook into my hand, and drove me round my garret, calling it

20 the plains of Arcadia. When these projects failed, she gave
out, with good success, that I was an old astrologer ?; after that,
a dumb man®; and last of all she made me pass for 2 lion,

‘It may seem strange, that after so tedious a slavery, I should
ever get my freedom. But so it happened, that during the three
last transformations, I grew acquainted with the lady Sophia,
whose superior charms cooled my passion for Polyhymnia ;
insomuch that some envious dull fellows gave it out, my mistress
had jilted and left me. But the slanders of my enemies were
silenced by my public espousal of Sophia ; who, with a greatness

30 of soul, void of all jealousy, hath taken Polyhymnia for her
woman, and is dressed by her every day,’
Guardian, No, 141.] [August 22, 1713.


No. 129. 4 Discourse on Trade.


Hee memini, et victum frustra contendere Thyrsim.
Vire. Ecl, vii. 69.


There is scarce any thing more common than animosities be-
tween parties that cannot subsist but by their agreement : this


A DISCOURSE ON TRADE, 431


was well represented in the sedition of the members of the
human body in the old Roman fable. It iS often the case
of lesser confederate states against a superior power, which
are hardly held together though their unanimity is necessary
for their common safety; and this is always the case of the
landed and trading interests of Great Britain: the trader is fed
by the product of the land, and the landed man cannot be
clothed but by the skill of the trader; and yet those interests
are ever jarring.

We had last winter an instance of this at our club, in Sir
Roger de Coverley and Sir Andrew Freeport, between whom
there is generally a constant, though friendly, opposition of
opinions: It happened that one of the company, in an his-
torical discourse, was observing that Carthaginian faith® was
a proverbial phrase to intimate breach of leagues. Sir Roger
said it could hardly be otherwise : that the Carthaginians were
the greatest traders in the world ; and as gain is the chief end
of such a people, they never pursue any other; the means to it
are never regarded: they will, if it comes easily, get money
honestly ; but if not, they will not scruple to attain it by fraud,
or cozenage.: and indeed, what is the whole business of the
trader’s account, but to overreach him who trusts to his
memory? But were that not so, what can’ there great and
noble be expected from him whose attention is for ever fixed
upon balancing his books, and watching over his expenses?
And at best, let frugality and parsimony be the virtues of the
merchant, how much is his punctual dealing below a gentle-
man’s charity to the poor, or hospitality among his neighbours !

Captain Sentry observed Sir Andrew very diligent in hearing
Sir Roger, and had a mind to tum the discourse, by taking
notice—in general, from the highest to the lowest parts of
human society, there was a secret, though unjust way, among
men, of indulging the seeds of ill-nature and envy, by com-
paring their own state of life to that of another, and grudging
the approach of their neighbour to their own happiness ; and,
on the other side, he, who is less at his ease, repines at the
other, who he thinks has unjustly the advantage over him.
Thus the civil and military lists look upon each other with
much ill-nature; the soldier repines at the courtier’s power,
and the courtier rallies the soldiers honour; or, to come to


432 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


lower instances, the private men in the horse and foot of an
army, the’ carmen’and coachmen in the city streets, mutually
look upon each other with ill-will, when they are in competition
for quarters, or the way in their respective motions.

‘It is very well, good captain,’ interrupted Sir Andrew: ‘you
may attempt to turn the discourse if you think fit; but I must
however have a word or two with Sir Roger, who, I see, thinks
he has paid me off, and been very severe upon the merchant?®.
I shall not,’ continued he, ‘at this time remind Sir Roger of the

10 great and noble monuments of charity and public spirit, which
have been erected by merchants since the reformation, but at
present content myself with what he allows us, parsimony and
frugality. If it were consistent with the quality of so ancient a
baronet as Sir Roger, to keep an account, or measure things by
the most infallible way, that of numbers, he would prefer our
parsimony to his hospitality. If to drink so many hogsheads is
to be hospitable, we do not contend for the fame of that virtue :
but it would be worth while to consider, whether so many arti-
ficers at work ten days together by my appointment, or so

20 many peasants made merry on Sir Roger's charge, are the men
more obliged? I believe the families of the artificers will thank
me more than the household of the peasants shall Sir Roger.
Sir Roger gives to his men, but I place mine above the neces-
sity or obligation of my bounty. I am in very little pain for the
Roman proverb upon the Carthaginian traders ; the Romans
were their professed enemies ; I am only sorry no Carthaginian
histories have come to our hands; we might have been taught
perhaps by them some proverbs against the Roman generosity,
in fighting for, and bestowing, other people’s goods. But since

30 Sir Roger has taken occasion, from an old proverb, to be out of
humour with merchants, it should be no offence to offer one not
quite so old in their defence. When a man happens to break
in Holland, they say of him that “he has not kept true ac-
counts.” This phrase, perhaps, among us would appear a soft
or humorous way of speaking, but with that exact nation it
bears the highest reproach. For a man to be mistaken in the
calculation of his expense, in his ability to answer future de-
mands, or to be impertinently sanguine in putting his credit to
too good adventure, are all instances of as much infamy, as with

4° gayer nations to be failing in courage, or common honesty.


A DISCOURSE ON TRADE. 433


‘Numbers are so much the measure of évery thing that is
valuable, that it is not possible to demonstrate the success of
any action, or the prudence of any undertaking without them.
1 say this in answer to what Sir Roger is pleased to say, “that
little that is truly noble can be expected from one who is ever
poring on his cash-book, or balancing his accounts.” When I
have my returns from abroad, I can tell to a shilling, by the
help of numbers, the profit or loss by my adventure ; but I
Ought also to be able to show that I had reason for making it,

10 either from my own experience, or that of other people, or from
a reasonable presumption that my returns will be sufficient to
answer my expense and hazard; and this is never to be done
‘without the skill of numbers. For instance, if I am to trade to
Turkey, I ought beforehand to know the demand of our manu-
factures there, as well as of their silks, in England, and the
Customary prices that are given for both in each country. I
ought to have a clear knowledge of these matters beforehand,
that I may presume upon sufficient returns to answer the charge
of the cargo I have fitted out, the freight and assurance out and

0 home, the customs to the queen, and the interest of my' own
Money, and besides all these expenses a reasonable profit to
myself. Now what is there of scandal in this skill? _ What has
the merchant done, that he should be so little in the good
8races of Sir Roger? He throws down no man’s enclosures,
and tramples upon no man’s corn; he takes nothing from the
industrious labourer ; he pays the poor man for his work; he
tommunicates his profit with mankind ; by the preparation of
his cargo, and the manufacture of his returns, he furnishes em-
ployment and subsistence to greater numbers than the richest

#8 nobleman ; and even the nobleman is obliged to him for finding
out foreign markets for the produce of his estate, and for making
a great addition to his rents ; and yet it is certain that none of
all these things could be done by him without the exercise of
his skill in numbers.

‘This is the economy of the merchant ; and the conduct of
the gentleman must be the same, unless, by scorning to be the
Steward, he resolves the steward shall be the gentleman. The
fentleman, no more than the merchant, is able, without the
help of numbers, to account for the success of any action, or
the prudence of any adventure. If, for instance, the chase is


rf


434 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


his whole adventure, his only returns must be the stag’s horns
in the great hall, and the fox’s nose upon the stable-door.
Without doubt Sir Roger knows the full value of these returns;
and if beforehand he had computed the charges of the chase, a
gentleman of his discretion would certainly have hanged up all
his dogs; he would never have brought back so many fine
horses to the kennel ; he would never have gone so often, like
a blast, over fields of corn. If such too had been the conduct of
all his ancestors, he might truly have boasted at this day, that
10 the antiquity of his family had never been sullied by a trade;
a merchant ® had never been permitted with ‘his whole estate
to purchase room for his picture in the gallery of the Coverleys,
or to claim his descent from the maid of honour. But it is
very happy for Sir Roger that the merchant paid so dear fof
his ambition. It is the misfortune of many other gentlemen te
turn out of the seats of their ancestors, to make way for such
new masters as have been more exact in their accounts than
themselves ; and certainly he deserves the estate a great deal
better’ who has got it by his industry, than he who has lost
20 it by his negligence.’
Spectator, No. 174.] [September 19, 1711,)#


No. 130. On the Lottery.


Ex humili magna ad fastigia rerum
Extollit, quoties voluit fortuna jocari. —.
Juv. Sat. iii. 39.


I went on Saturday last to make a visit in the city; and a%
I passed through Cheapside, I saw crowds of people turning
down towards the Bank, and struggling who should first get
their money into the new-erected lottery". It gave me a great
notion of the credit of our present government and administra’
tion, to find people press as eagerly to pay money as they would
to receive it ; and, at the same time, a due respect for that body
of men who have found out so pleasing an expedient for carry”
ing on the common cause, that they have turned a tax into #


ON THE LOTTERY. 435


diversion. The cheerfulness of spirit, and the hopes of success,
which this project has occasioned in this great city, lightens
the burden of the war, and put me in mind of some games,
which, they say, were invented by wise men, who were lovers of
their country, to make their fellow-citizens undergo the tedious-
ness and fatigues of a long siege. I think there is a kind of
homage due to Fortune, if I may call it so; and that I should
be wanting to myself, if I did not lay in my pretences to her
favour, and pay my compliments to her by recommending a


10 ticket to her disposal. For this reason, upon my return to my


lodgings, I sold off a couple of globes and a telescope, which, with
the cash J had by me, raised the sum that was requisite for that
purpose. I find by my calculations, that it is but an hundred
and fifty thousand™ to one against my being worth a thousand
pouhds per annum for thirty-two years ; and if any plumb® in
the city will lay me an hundred and fifty thousand pounds to
twenty shillings, which is an even bet, that I am not this for-
tunate man, I will take the wager, and shall look upon him as a
man of singular courage and fair dealing ; having given orders


*©to Mr. Morphew® to subscribe such a policy in my behalf, if


3


any person accepts of the offer. I must confess, I have had
Sich private intimations from the twinkling of a certain star in
Syme of my astronomical observations, that I should be unwilling
ty take fifty pounds a year for my chance, unless it were to
Solige a particular friend. My chief business-at present is to
Prepare my mind for this change of fortune: for as Seneca, who
Was a greater moralist, and a much richer man than I shall be
With this addition to my present income, says—‘A/unera ista
fortuna putatis ? Insidie@ sunt? ‘What we look upon as gifts
and presents of Fortune, are traps and snares which she lays
for the unwary.’ I am arming myself against her favours with
all my philosophy ; and that I may not lose myself in such a
tedundance of unnecessary and superfluous wealth, 1 have de-
termined to settle an annual pension out of it upon a family
of Palatines, and by that means give these unhappy strangers
a taste of British property. At the same time, as I have an
excellent servant-maid, whose diligence in attending me has
increased in proportion to my infirmities, I shall settle upon her
the revenue arising out of the ten pounds, and amounting to


1° fourteen shillings per annum ; with which she may retire into


Ffa2-


436 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


Wales, where she was born a gentlewoman, and pass the re
maining part of her days in a condition suitable to her birth anc
quality. It was impossible for me to make an inspection intc
my own fortune on this occasion, without seeing, at the same
time, the fate of others who are embarked in the same adver
ture. And indeed it was a great pleasure to me to observe, tha
the war, which generally impoverishes those who furnish ov!
the expense of it, will by this means give estates to some, with
out making others the poorer for it. I have lately seen severa
to in liveries, who will give as good of their own very suddenly
and took a particular satisfaction in the sight of a young countr)
wench, whom I this morning passed by as she was whirling he!
mop®, with her petticoats tucked up very agreeably, who, if theré
is any truth in my art, is within ten months” of being the hand
somest great fortune in town. I must confess, I was so struct
with the foresight of what she is to be, that I treated her accord
ingly, and said to her—‘ Pray, young lady, permit me to pas!
by.’ I would for this reason advise all masters and mistresse'
to carry it with great moderation and condescension toward!
20 their servants until next Michaelmas, lest the superiority at tha!
time should be inverted. I must likewise admonish all
brethren and fellow-adventurers to fill their minds with pr
arguments for their support and consolation in case of ill sus
cess, It so happens in this particular, that though the gaine!
will have no reason to rejoice, the losers will have no reason!
complain. I remember, the day after the thousand pound pd
was drawn in the penny lottery", I went to visit a splen
acquaintance of mine, who was under much dejection, ap’
seemed to me to have suffered some great disappointmed!
30 Upon enquiry, I found he had put two-pence for himself an¢
his son into the lottery, and that neither of them had drawn tht
thousand pound. Hereupon this unlucky person took occasiot
to enumerate the misfortunes of his life, and concluded witl
telling me that he never was successful in any of his undef
takings. I was forced to comfort him with the common reflec
tion upon such occasions, that men of the greatest merit aré
not always men of the greatest success, and that persons of -hi
eharacter must not expect to be as happy as fools. I shall pro
ceed in the like manner with my rivals and competitors for thi
40 thousand pounds a year, which we are now in pursuit of; ant


ON THE LOTTERY. 437


that I may give general content to’ the whole body of candi-
dates, I shall allow all that draw prizes to be fortunate, and all
that miss them to be wise.

I must not here omit to acknowledge that ] have received
several letters upon this subject, but find one common error
running through them all, which is, that the writers of them
believe their fate in these cases depends upon the astrologer,
and not upon the stars ; as in the following letter from one who,
I fear, flatters himself with hopes of success, which are altogether

1o groundless, since he does not seem to me so great a fool as he
takes himself to.be.


‘Sir,

‘Coming to town, and finding my friend Mr. Partridge
dead and buried, and you the only conjurer in repute, J am
under a necessity of applying myself to you for a favour, which,
nevertheless, 1 confess it would better become a friend to ask,
than one who is, as I am, altogether a stranger to you; but
poverty, you know, is impudent ; and as that gives me the occa-
Sion, so that alone could give me the confidence to be thus

20 unfortunate.

‘I am, Sir, very poor, and very desirous to be otherwise: ]
have got ten pounds, which I design to venture in the lottery
how on foot. What I desire of you is, that by your art, you will
choose such a ticket for me as shall arise® a benefit sufficient to
maintain me. I must beg leave to inform you, that I am good
for nothing, and must therefore insist upon a larger lot than
would satisfy those who are .capable, by their own abilities, of
adding something to what you should assign them; whereas I
must expect an absclute independent maintenance, because, as

30 I said, I can do nothing. It is possible, after this free confession
of mine, you may think I do not deserve to be rich ; but I hope
you will likewise observe, I can ill afford to be poor. My own
opinion is, that I am well qualified for an estate, and have a
Sood title to luck in a lottery ; but I resign myself wholly to
your mercy, not without hopes that you will consider, the less I
deserve, the greater the generosity in you. If you reject me, I
have agreed with an acquaintance of mine to bury me for my
ten pounds. I once more recommend myself to your favour,
and bid you adieu !’


438° MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


1 cannot forbear publishing another letter which I have re-
ceived, because it redounds to my own credit, as well as to that


of a very honest footman.
Jan. 23, 1710,


‘Mr. BICKERSTAFF,

‘{ am bound in justice to acquaint you, that I put an ad-
vertisement into your last paper about a watch that was lost,
and was brought to me on the very day your paper came out, by
a footman ; who told me, that he would have brought it if he

zo had not read your discourse on that day against avarice ; but
that since he had read it, he scorned to take.a reward for doing
what in justice he ought to do.
‘I am, Sir, your most humble Servant,
‘JOHN HAMMOND.’


Tatler, No. 124.] [January 24, 1710.


Wo.181. Zhe Story of Alexander Selkirk.
Talia monstrabat, relegens errata retrorsum.—VIRG. /En. iii, 690)


Under the title of this paper, I do not think it foreign to m
design, to speak of a man® born in Her Majesty’s dominions,
and relate an adventure in his life so uncommon, that itg iy
doubtful whether the like has happened to any of human rp.
The person I speak of is Alexander Selkirk, whose name

20 familiar to men of curiosity, from the fame of his having lived
four years and four months alone in the island of Juan Fer-
nandez. I had the pleasure frequently to converse with the man
soon after, his arrival in England, in the year 1711. It was
vaatter of great curiosity to hear him, as he is a man of good
sense, give an account of the different revolutions in his own
mind in that long solitude. When we consider how painful
absence from company for the space of but one evening is to
the generality of mankind, we may have a sense how painful
this necessary and constant solitude was to a man bred a sailor,

30 and ever accustomed to enjoy and suffer, eat, drink, and sleep,


THE STORY OF .ALEXANDER SELKIRKE. 439


and perform all offices of life, in fellowship and company. He
was put ashore from a leaky vessel, with the captain of which
he had had an irreconcileable difference ; and he chose rather
to take his fate in this place, than in a crazy vessel, under a
disagreeable commander. His portion were a sea-chest, his
wearing clothes and bedding, a firelock; a pound of gunpowder,
a large quantity of bullets, a flint and steel, a few pounds of ,
tobacco, an hatchet, a knife, a kettle, a bible, and other books
of devotion, together with pieces that concerned navigation,
To and his mathematical instruments. Resentment against his
officer, who had ill-used him, made him look forward on this
change of life, as the more eligible one, till the instant in which
he saw the vessel put off; at which moment, his heart yearned
within him, and melted at the parting with his comrades and all
human society at once. He had in provisions for the susten-
ance of life but the quantity of two meals, the island abounding
only with wild goats, cats and rats. He judged it most probable
that he should find more immediate and easy relief, by finding
shell-fish on the shore, than seeking game with his gun. He
°° accordingly found great quantities of turtles, whose flesh is
extremely delicious, and of which he frequently ate very plenti-
fully on his first arrival, till it grew disagreeable to his stomach,
xcept in jellies. The necessities of hunger and thirst, were his
8reatest diversions from the reflection on his lonely condition.
When those appetites were satisfied, the desire of society was
as strong a call upon him, and he appeared to himself least
Necessitous when he wanted everything ; for the supports of
his body were easily attained, but the eager longings for seeing
again the face of man during the interval of craving bodily
ie Appetites, were hardly supportable. He grew dejected, languid,
and melancholy, scarce able to refrain from doing himself
violence, till by degrees, by the force of reason, and frequent
Treading of the Scriptures, and turning his thoughts upon the
Study of navigation, after the space of eighteen months, he grev.'
thoroughly reconciled to his condition. When he-had made
this conquest, the vigour of his health, disengagement from the
world, a constant, cheerful, serene sky, and a temperate air,
made his life one continual feast, and his being much more |
joyful than it had before been irksome. He now taking delight
4o in everything, made the hut in which he lay, by ornaments


10


20


30


440 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


which he cut down from a spacious wood, on the side of which
it was situated, the most delicjous bower, fanned with continual
breezes, and gentle aspirations of wind, that made his repose
after the chase equal to the most sensual pleasures.

I forgot to observe, that during the time of his dissatisfaction,
monsters of the deep, which frequently lay on the shore, added
to the terrors of his solitude ; the dreadful howlings and voices
seemed too terrible to be made for the human ears ; but upon
the recovery of his temper, he could with pleasure not only
hear their voices, but approach the monsters themselves with
great intrepidity. He speaks of sea-lions, whose jaws and tails
were capable of seizing or breaking the limbs of a man, if he
approached them : but at that time his spirits and life were so
high, and he could act so regularly and unconcerned, that
merely from ‘being unruffled in himself, he killed them with the
greatest ease imaginable: for observing, that though their jaws
and tails were so terrible, yet the animals being mighty slow in
working themselves round, he had nothing to do but place him-
self exactly opposite to their middle, and as close to them as
possible, he dispatched them with his hatchet at will.

The precautions which he took against want, in case of sick-
ness, was to lame kids when very young, so as that they might
recover their health, but never be capable of speed. These he
had in great numbers about his hut ; and when he was himself
in full vigour, he could take at full speed the swiftest goat’
running up a promontory, and never failed of catching tha
but on a descent.

His habitation was extremely pester’d with rats, which gnawed
his clothes and feet when sleeping. To defend him against
them, he fed and tamed numbers of young kitlings™, who lay
about ‘his bed, and preserved him from the enemy. When his
clothes ® were quite worn out, he dried and tacked together the
skins of goats, with which he clothed himself, and was enured
to pass through woods, bushes, and brambles with as much
carelessness and precipitance as any other animal. It happened,
once to him, that running on the summit of a hill, he made 4
stretch to seize a goat, with which under him, he fell down
a precipice, and lay helpless for the space of three days, the
length of which time he measured by the moon’s growth since


40 his last observation. This manner of life grew so’ exquisitely


ON THE CHARACTER OF PRINCE EUGENE. 441


pleasant, that he never had a moment heavy upon his hands ;
his nights were untrotbled, and his days joyous, from the
practice of temperance and exercise. It was his manner to
use stated hours and places for exercises of devotion, which
he performed aloud, in order to keep up the faculties of
speech, and to utter himself with greater energy.

When | first saw him, I thought, if I had not been let into
his character and story, | could have discerned that he had
been much separated from company, from his aspect and

10 gesture ; there was a strong but cheerful seriousness in his look,
anda certain disregard to the ordinary things about him, as if
he had been sunk in thought. When the ship which brought
him off the island came in, he received them with the greatest
indifference, with relation to the prospect of going off with them,

_ but with great satisfaction in an opportunity to refresh and help
them. The man frequently bewailed his return to the world,
which could not, he said, with all its enjoyments, restore him to

_the tranquillity of his solitude. Though I had frequently con-
Versed with him, after a few months absence he met me in the

© street, and though he spoke to me, I’could not recollect that I
had seen him ; familiar converse in this town had taken off the
loneliness of his aspect, and quite altered the air of his face.

This plain man’s story is a memorable example, that he is
happiest who confines his wants to natural necessities ; and
he that goes further in his desires, increases his wants in
Proportion to his acquisitions ; or to use his own expression,
‘I am now worth £800, but shall never be so happy, as when I
Was not worth a farthing.’


Englishman, No, 26.] [December 3, 1713.


No. 182. On the Character of Prince Eugene.


Quis novus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes ?
Quem sese ore ferens! quam forti pectore et armis!
VirG. Ain, iv. 10.


,. I take it to be the highest instance of a noble mind, to bear
°° Sreat qualities without discovering in a man’s behaviour any


442 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


consciousness that he is superior to the rest of the world. Or,
to say it otherwise, it is the duty of a great person so to demean
himself, as that whatever endowments he may have, he may
appear to value himself upon no qualities but such as any man
may arrive at. He ought to think no man valuable but for his
public spirit, justice, and integrity: and all other endowments
to be esteemed only as they contribute to the exerting those
virtues. Such a man, if he is wise or valiant, knows it is of no
consideration to other men that he is so, but as he employs

ro those high talents for their use and service. He who affects the
applauses and addresses of a multitude, or assumes to himself
a pre-eminence upon any other consideration, must soon turn
admiration into contempt. It is certain that there can be no
merit in any man who is not conscious of it ; but the sense that
it is valuable only according to the application of it, makes that
superiority amiable, which would otherwise be invidious. In
this light it is considered as a thing in which every man bears 8
share. It annexes the ideas of dignity, power, and fame, in an
agreeable and familiar manner, to him who is possessor of

20 and all men who are strangers to him are naturally incited to
indulge a curiosity inbeholding the person, behaviour, features
and shape of him in whose character, perhaps, each man had
formed something in common with himself.

Whether such, or any other, are the causes, all men have 4
yearning curiosity to behold a man of heroic worth ; and I havé
had many letters from all parts of this kingdom, that request !
would give them an exact account of the stature, the mien, thé
aspect of the prince™ who lately visited England, and has doné
such wonders for the liberty of Europe. It would puzzle thé

30 most curious to, form to himself the sort of than my several
correspondents expect to hear of by the action mentioned, whe?
they desire a description of him. There is always something
that concerns themselves, and growing out of their own circum’
stances, in all their inquiries, A friend of mine in Wales
beseeches me to be very exact in my account of that wonderful
man, who had marched an army and all its baggage over thé
Alps; and, if possible, to learn whether the peasant who showed
him the way, and is drawn in the map, be yet living. A gentle-
man from the university, who is deeply intent on the study of

40 humanity, desires me to be as particular, if I had opportunity;


ON THE CHARACTER OF PRINCE EUGENE. 443


in observing the whole interview between his highness and our
late general. Thus do men’s fancies work according to their
several educations and circumstances ; but all pay a respect,
mixed with admiration, to this illustrious character. I have
waited for his arrival in Holland, before I would let my
correspondents know that I have not been so uncurious a
Spectator as not to have seen Prince Eugene. It would be
very difficult, as I said just now, to answer every expectation of
those who have written to me on that head ; nor is it possible
'© for me to find words to let one know what an artful glance
there is in his countenance who surprised Cremona” ; how
daring he appears who forced the trenches of Turin"; but in
general I can say that he who beholds him will easily expect
frgm him any thing that is to be imagined, or executed, by the
wit or force of man. The prince is of that stature® which
makes a man most easily become all parts of exercise; has
height to be graceful on occasions of state and ceremony, and
no less adapted for agility and dispatch: his aspect is erect
and composed; his eye lively and thoughtful, yet rather
*2 vigilant than sparkling; his action and address the most
easy imaginable, and his behaviour in an assembly®™ peculiarly
fraceful in a certain art of mixing insensibly with the rest, and
becoming one of the company, instead of receiving the court-
ship of it. The shape of his person, and composure of his
limbs, are remarkably exact and beautiful. There is in his
looks something sublime, which does not seem to arise from
his quality or character, but the innate disposition of his mind.
It is apparent that he suffers the presence of much company,
instead of taking delight in it; and he appeared in public, while
30 with us, rather to return good-will, or satisfy curiosity, than to
gratify any taste he himself had of being popular. As his
thoughts are never tumultuous in danger, they are as little
discomposed on occasions of pomp and magnificence. A great
Soul is affected, in either case, no further than in considering
the properest methods to extricate itself from them. If this
hero has the strong incentives to uncommon enterprises that
were remarkable in Alexander, he prosecutés and enjoys the .
fame of them with the justness, propriety, and good sense of
Cesar. It is easy to observe in him a mind as capable of being
4° entertained with contemplation as enterprise ; a mind ready for


444 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


great exploits, but not impatient for occasions to exert itself.
The prince has wisdom, and valour in as high perfection as
man can enjoy it ; which noble faculties, in conjunction, banish
all vain-glory, ostentation, ambition, and all other vices which
might intrude upon his mind, to make it unequal. These habits
and qualities of soul and body, render this personage so extra-
ordinary, that he appears to have nothing in him but what
every man should have in him, the exertion of his very self,
abstracted from the circumstances in which fortune has placed
1o him. Thus, were you to see Prince Eugene, and were told
he was a private gentleman, you would say he is a man of
modesty and merit. Should you be told that was Prince
Eugene, he would be diminished no otherwise, than that part
of your distant admiration would turn into a familiar good-will.
This I thought fit to entertain my reader with, concerning a
hero who never was equalled but by one man™; over whom
also he has this advantage, that he has had an opportunity to
manifest an esteem for him in his adversity.


Spectator, No. 340.] [March 31, 1712.


No. 183. On the Demolition of Dunkirk.


Delenda est Carthago.


It is usually thought, with great justice, a very impertinent

20 thing in a private man to intermeddle in matters which regard
the state. But the memorial which is mentioned in the follow
ing letter is so daring, and so apparently designed for the most
traitorous purpose imaginable, than I do not care what mis-
interpretation I suffer, when I expose it to the resentment of all
men who value their country, or have any regard for the honour;
safety, or glory of their queen. It is certain there is not muclt
danger in delaying the demolition of Dunkirk during the life
_of his present most Christian majesty, who is renowned fot
the most inviolable regard to ‘treaties ; but that pious prince i5
30 aged, and in case of his decease, now the power of France and
Spain is in the same family, it is possible an ambitious suc-


ON THE DEMOLITION OF DUNKIRK. 445


cessor (or his ministry in a king’s minority) might dispute his
being bound by the act of his predecessor in so weighty a par-
ticular.


‘MR. IRONSIDE,


‘You employ your important moments, methinks, a little too
frivolously, when you consider so often little circumstances of
dress and behaviour, and never make mention of matters
wherein you and all your fellow-subjects in general are con-
cerned. I give you now an opportunity, not only of manifest-

to ing. your loyalty to your queen, but your affection to your
country, if you treat an insolence done to them both with the
disdain it deserves. The inclosed printed paper in French and
English has been handed about the town, and given gratis to
passengers in the streets at noon-day. : You see the title of it is,
“A most humble address, or memorial, presented to her majesty
the queen of Great Britain, by the deputy of the magistrates of
Dunkirk.” The nauseous memorialist, with the most fulsome
flattery, tells the queen of her thunder, and of wisdom and
clemency adored by all the earth; at the same time that he

20 attempts to undermine her power, and escape her wisdom, by
beseeching her to do an act which will give a well-grounded
Jealousy to her people. What the sycophant desires is, That
the mole and dikes of Dunkirk may be spared ; and it seems
the sieur Tugghe ', for so the petitioner is called, was thunder-
Struck by the denunciation (which he says) “the lord viscount
Bolingbroke made to him,” that her majesty did not think to
make any alteration in the dreadful sentence she had pro-
nounced against the town. Mr. Ironside, I think you would do
an act worthy your general humanity, if you would put the

30 sieur Tugghe right in this matter ; and let him know, that her
Majesty has pronounced no sentence against the town, but his
most Christian majesty has agreed that the town and harbour
Shall be demolished. ;

‘That the British nation expect the immediate demolition
of it,

‘That the very common people know, that within three
Months after the signing of the peace, the works towards the
Sea, were to be demolished ; and, within three months ® after it,
the works towards the land.


10


20


30


49


446 MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


‘That the said peace was signed the last of March, O. S.

‘That the parliament has been told from the queen, that the
equivalent for it is in the hands of the French king.

” That the sieur Tugghe has the impudence to ask the queen
to remit the most material part of the articles of peace between
hher majesty and his master.

‘ That the British nation received more damage in their trade
from the port of Dunkirk, than from almost all the ports of
France, either in the ocean, or in the Mediterranean.

‘That fleets of above thirty sail have come together out of
Dunkirk, during the late war, and taken ships of war as well as
merchantmen. , A

‘That the pretender sailed from thence to Scotland; and
that it is the only port the French have until you come to
Brest, for the whole length of St. George’s channel, where any
‘considerable naval armament can be made.

‘That destroying the fortifications of Dunkirk is an inconsi-
derable advantage to England, in comparison to the advantage
of destroying the mole, dikes, and harbour ; it being the naval
force from thence which only can hurt the British nation.

‘That the British nation expect the immediate demolition of
Dunkirk.

‘That the Dutch, who suffered equally with us from those of
Dunkirk, were probably induced to sign the treaty with France
from this consideration, That the town and harbour of Dunkirk
should be destroyed.

‘That the situation of Dunkirk is such, as that it may always
keep runners to observe all ships sailing on the Thames and
Medway. ;

‘That all the suggestions which the sieur Tugghe brings
concerning the Dutch, are false and scandalous.

‘That whether it may be advantapeous to the trade of Hol-
land or not, that Dunkirk should be demolished ; it is neces-
sary for the safety, honour, and liberty of England, that it
should be so. :

‘That when Dunkirk is demolished, the power of France, on
that side, should it ever be turned against us, will be removed
several hundred miles further off of Great Britain than it is
at present.

‘That after the demolition, there can be no considerable pre-


ON THE DEMOLITION OF DUNKIRK. 447


paration made at sea by the French on all the channel, but at
Brest ; and that Great Britain being an island, which cannot be
attacked but by a naval power, we may esteem France effectu-
ally removed, by the demolition, from Great Britain, as far as
the distance from Dunkirk to Brest.

‘Pray, Mr. Ironside, repeat this last particular, and put it in
a different letter, Zhat the demolition of Dunkirk will remove
France many hundred miles further off from us; and then
repeat again, That the British nation expects the demolition

10 of Dunkirk.
* ‘J demand of you, as you, love and honour your queen and
country, that you insert this letter, or speak to this purpose,
your own way ; for in this all parties must agree, that however
bound in friendship one nation is with another, it is but prudent
.that in case of a rupture, they should be, if possible, upon equal
terms,

‘Be honest, old Nestor, and say all this; for whatever half-
witted hot whigs may think, we all value our estates and liber-
ties, and every true man. of each party must think himself

0 concerned that Dunkirk should be demolished.

‘It lies upon all who have the honour to be in the ministry
to hasten this matter, and not, let the credulity of an honest
brave people be thus infamously abused in our open streets.

‘I cannot go on for indignation; but pray God that our
Mercy to France may not expose us to the mercy of France.

‘Your humble servant,


‘ENGLISH ToRY®,’
Guardian, No. 128.] [August 7, 1713.


Lion’s HEAD AT BuTTON’s COFFEE House.
(See Note to p. 430, l. 22.)


NOTES.


I.


MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


P. 1, 1.14. prevent=to anticipate. ‘It is no Grace to a Judge...
to prevent Information, by Questions though Pertinent.’ (Bacon,
Essays, 1625; No. lvi.) Cf. also Psa/ms, cxix. 148.

P. 2, 1. 32. rhés dllustrious day. This paper is dated February 6th,
which was Queen Anne's birthday.

P, 3,1. 30. St. Bride’s church. St. Bride’s, or St. Bridget’s, Fleet
Street. In the parish of St. Bride’s is a Charity School for 50 Boys
and 50 Girls, who are clothed, taught and placed apprentices by the
voluntary subscriptions of the inhabitants, and by a Collection at the
Church Door once a year. Steele’s paper was doubtless in aid of this
collection. At this date the school seems to have been for boys only ;
the girls’ school was added afterwards. (See Spectator, No. 380.)

1, 37. Dr. Snafe. Dr. Andrew Snape, d. 1742, was one of
Hoadly’s adversaries in the Bangorian Controversy. His sermons were
published in 1745.

P. 4, \. 29. my beloved author, Cicero, a motto from whom heads
the paper.

P. 7, 1. 20. York-buildings was the general name for the streets and
houses erected upon the site of old York House, when it was pulled
down in 1672, Steele himself lived in Villiers Street, York Buildings,
from 1721 to 1724; and here he built his ‘Censorium.’ (See /#tvo-
duction, Pp. xxxvii.)

1. 22. George Powell (see note to p. 359, 1. 11) acted the part of
Falstaff (Henry ZV, Pt. 1) at his benefit, April 7,1712. From Chet-
wood’s History of the Stage, it appears that he modelled himself upon
Betterton, mimicking not only his merits as an actor, but, less judiciously,
his infirmities as a man.

P.9, 1. 16. @ city romance. The ‘eminent trader’ here intended was
a Mr. John Moreton ; the ‘ generous merchant’ Sir William Scawen. In
Spectator, No. 546 (Nov. 26, 1712) Steele makes further reference to
this incident. ‘It wasno small Pleasure to me . . . to remark, as I passed
by Cornhill, that the Shop of that worthy, honest, tho’ lately unfortunate
Citizen Mr. John Aforeton, so well known in the Linnen Trade, is fitting
Up anew,’


G§&


450 Z. MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


P. 10,1. 5. ft has been heretofore urged. In the Spectator, No. 218
not included in this volume.

lL. 11. @ custom of choosing kings. The person referred to is
Richard Nash, afterwards Master of the Ceremonies at Bath. He was
a Member of the Middle Temple in the reign of William the Third.
Goldsmith retells this story upon the authority of the Spectator, in his
Life of Richard Nash, of Bath, Esq. 1762, p. 14.

P. 11, L. 5. the Satirist. The quotation is from the 4th Satire of
Persius, ll. 51-2 :— .
‘Tollat sua munera cerdo:
Tecum habita.’

1. 27. the Lacedemonians. ‘For this cause therefore in all theif
warres, when they should geue battell, the King dyd first sacrifice to the
Muses, to put his souldiers in minde (as it should seeme) of the discipline &
wisdome of the Muses that they had bene brought vp in, to the end than
when his souldiers were in the most extreme daunger, the Muses should
present them selues before the souldiers eyes, to pricke them forward to
doe some noble actes of worthy memorie.’ (North’s Plutarch, 1579, p. 59-)

P. 12, 1. 15. the objects of ridicule. See Guardian, No. 4, which is
an admirable paper on fulsome dedications, ascribed to Pope.

1.16. Bulfinch. A character in Brome’s Northern Lasse, 1633-
(Cf. Spectator, No. 468, p. 368 in this volume.)

Drolf. A Droll or Drollery was a dramatic piece made up of
scenes from different plays, and acted chiefly at booths by strolling com-
panies, It is said to have been invented by,an actor named Cox. Cf.
Swift, On Poetry, 1733 *— :

; ‘Some as justly Fame extols
For lofty Lines in Smithfield Drols?

1. 28. Phocion. ‘Another time he chaunced to say his opinio®
before all the people, the which they all praised and approued: but he
saw they were so sodeinly become of his minde, he turned backe to his
friendes and asked them: alas, hath not some evill thing slipped my
mouth unwares.’ (North’s Plutarch, 1579, p. 800.)

P. 14, 1. 37. as pages, etc. The royal children, at one time, were
punished by proxy. Bumet (History of his Own Time, ed. 1823, i. 103)
gives an account of one Mr. Murray, of the bed-chamber, who had bee?
whipping-boy to King Charles I. See also Spectator, No. 313, fot
Budgell’s pretty story of the Westminster Scholar who was flogged bY
Dr. Busby in the place of his friend.

1. 39. pasguils=pasquinades, from Pasquin (v. Note to p. 218:
1. 20.) ‘ He never valued any fasquzls that were dropped up and dow?
to think them worthy of his revenge.’ (Howell, in Johnson, where
Steele’s sentence is also quoted.) Cf. also Swift to Sheridan :—~

‘Tom, for a goose you keep but base quills,
They're fit for nothing else but pasguids.’


NOTES, P. 10, L. 5—P. 28, L. 17. 451


P, 16,1. 15. Undeserved praise, etc. This is a translation of the
motto from Horace which heads the paper.

P.17, 1 11. Six Francis Bacon. See Bacon’s Essays, No. ix, ‘Of
Envy,’ par, 1. .

P, 1951. 20. @ description of my face. Cf. Spectator, No. 17, p- 173
of this volume, Hl. 2-11.

P. 20, 1. 36. a lad friend, i.e. a parasite, a hanger-on, Thackeray
gives the title of ‘led captain’ to Lord Steyne’s toady and trencher-man
Mr. Wagg. (Vanity Fair, 1847, ch. li.)

P. 22, 1. 20. this pleasant remark, See the Eunuchus of Terence,
Act ii, Sc, 2, 1. 23:—* Mie homines prorsus ex stultis insanos facit:
Steele also uses this quotation in Zat/er, No. 127, p. 24 in this volume,

1, 28. @ droll. (See note to p.12,1.16.) Here the word means
a jester, a funny fellow. Cf. Prior’s Democritus and Heraclitus:— ~
‘Democritus, dear Drol//, revisit Earth,
And with our Follies glut Thy heighten’d Mirth.’
L. 39. Six Jeffery. Sir Jeffery or Jeoffery Notch of the ‘ Trumpet
Club.’ See p. 169 of this volume.

P, 24, 1. 25. an admirable reflection, See note to p. 22, 1. 20.

1, 36. that magnificent palace. Bedlam, it must be remembeied,
Was one of the sights of London in the last century. See Zatler, No.
30, p. 156, 1.13 in this volume. Cf, also Hogarth’s Rakes Progress,
1735, PL viii, and World, 1753, No. 23.

P. 25, 1. 34. che Trumpet. See note to p. 169, 1. 6.

P. 26, 1. 34. Belinda. The lady here intended is supposed to have

n Mary-Ann, daughter of the Prussian Ambassador, Ezekiel, Baron

Of Spanheim, She was a Kit-Cat toast for whom Halifax wrote verses ;
and ‘as beautiful as Madam Spanheim’ seems to have been a proverbial
€xpression. On April 21, 1710, shortly after the date of this paper, she
Was married to Francis de la Rochefoucauld, Marquis de Montandre,
then a Lieut.-General in the English Army, Her father died in
November of the same year; and Queen Anne, who greatly esteemed
im, was ‘generously pleas’d to honour his Memory, by giving to his
Only Daughter (the Marchioness of Aonfandre) the sum of one thousand
Guineas, the usual Present of this Court to Ambassadors Extraordinary,
When they take their Leaves.’ (Boyer’s Reign of Queen Anne, in the
Annual List of the Deaths of Eminent Persons.)

P, 27, 1.414. One of the greatest souls. John, Lord Somers (1650-
1716). Swift, who dedicated: the Zale of a Tud to him, specially refers
to ‘his evenness of temper.’ Addison published a panegyric of him in
No, 39 of the Free-Holder, ‘published on the Day of his Interment’
(May 4, 1716).

P. 28, 17. Mat Lee. Lee (1650-1690) was four years in Bedlam.
The quotation is from Act iii, Se, 1 of The Rival Queens ; or, the


Death of Alexander the Great, 1677.
Gg 2


452 I. MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


P. 29, 1. 27. chapman here=customer. Cf. Swift, Directions to Ser-
vants, 1746, p. 4:—‘ Your Father sent a Cow to you to sell, and you
could not get a Chapman till Nine at Night.’

P. 30, 1. 25. Captain Sentry. See Spectator, No. 2, p. tog in this
volume.

P. 32, 1.9. a gay Frenchman. The Chevalier de Flourilles, who was
killed at the battle of Senelf in 1674. The anecdote is told in the
Memoirs of Condé.

1. 29. trow?, a corruption of ‘think you?’— believe you?’
(Singer), Cf. Cymbeline, Act. i, Sc: 6:—‘ What is the matter, ¢row?’

P. 33, 1.7. the fine gentleman. This and the ensuing character has
been supposed to indicate Lieutenant-General Cornelius Wood ‘an ex-
cellent. Officer of Horse, and a very just and charitable Man.’ He died
in May, 1712, aged 74. Prior refers to him and Lord Cutts in the
Letter to Monsieur Boileau Despreaux ; Occasion’d by the Victory al
Blenheim, 1704 :—

‘CuTTs is in Meeter something harsh to read:

Place me the valiant GourAM! in his stead:

Let the Intention make the Number good:

Let generous SYLviuS speak for honest Woop.’
See also Zatler, No, 144.

P. 35, 1. 34. Aly author. See Bossu, Traité du Poéme Epigque, Ed.
1708, liv. iv.

P. 43, 1. 34. Long-Jane. Long Lane, West Smithfield, was a place of
note for second-hand clothes. Cf. Congreve, Way of the World, 1700,
Act iii, Sc. 5, where Lady Wishfort says—‘I hope to see him hung witb.
Tatters, like a Long-lane Penthouse ;” and Tom Brown's Amusements
of London, 1700, p. 37—‘I .. . was mortally frighted in my Passage
through Barbican and Long-Lane, by the Impudent Ragsellers, in thos¢
Scandalous Climates, who laid hold of my Arm to ask me, What I
lack'd,

P. 44, L. 3. St. John-street, i.e. St. John’s Street, Clerkenwell,

1, 4. bands, or band. A neckcloth. ‘The next that mounted the
Stage was an Undey-Citizen of the Bath, a Person remarkable among the
inferior People of that Place for his.great Wisdom and his Broad Band.
(Spectator, No. 179.) Later’ in the century the term was restricted to
the neckcloth worn by students in colleges, lawyers, and clergymen.

1. 38, the author of them. For account of Estcourt the player;
see Spectator, No. 468, p.. 368, in this volume and notes. On January
I, 1712, he opened the Bumper Tavern in James Street, Covent Garden,
having duly advertised his intention to do so in Nos. 260 and 261 of the
Spectator. Steele’s Coverley letter is a kindly puff of his friend's enter’
prize.


1 He was created Baron Cutts of Gowran, in Ireland, Dec. 6, 1690.


NOTES. P. 29, L. 27-—P. 54, L. 26. 453


P, 45,1. 4. Sir Roger. Sce Spectator, No. 2, p. 107 in this volume,
and notes.

P, 46, 1. 1. John Sly’s best. John Sly, mentioned in note to p. 169,
1.6, also sold tobacco. In Spectator, No. 526, he is styled ‘ Haberdasher
of Hats and Tobacconist.’

P. 47,1. 40. Sir Richard Blackmore says, etc. These passages,
which are not textual, are from the Preface to Prince Arthur, an Heroick
Poem in tén Books, 1695. Blackmore (1630-1729), a voluminous
writer, author of several epics, had been physician to William the Third,
by whom he was knighted. He was a Whig and a pious well-meaning
man; but a poet invita Afinerva, In the above Preface he had antici-
pated Jeremy Collier in attacking the stage; and in his Satyr agatust
Wit, 1700, he carried the war into Will’s Coffee-House itself. The
whole hive rose at him in a series of Commendatory Verses; and
Captain Steele, taking up the cudgels for the absent Addison, was
among the assailants. In the preface to the collection is an oft-repeated
gibe against Blackmore’s fruitless Auency. ‘When he is in his Coach

. he is still list’ning to the Chimes to put his Ear in tune, and stum-
bles upon a Distich every Kennel he is jolted over.’ Dryden, whom he
had impugned among the rest, uses the same idea in the Prologue to
The Pilgrim, 1700,—

‘At leisure Hours, in Epique Song he deals,
Writes to the rumbling of bis Coaches Wheels.’
At the date of the present Spectator, however, these quarrels, at least as
far as Addison and Steele were concerned, were of the past, and Addison
a Blackmore's Creation, 1712, a laudatory paragraph in Spectator,

0. 339,

P. 50, 1. 30. Cesar, etc. See Lucan, Pharsalia, ii. 657.

P. 52,1. 6. Ledeate was used as a prison for such debtors as were
freemen of the city of London, clergymen or attorneys. Jn 1762, when
it was pulled down, the inmates were removed to the London Work-
house in Bishopsgate Street. It was the duty of some of the prisoners
mm tum to stand at the window-grating, shaking a box, and crying
‘Remember the poor Debtors.’

os 53, 1. 15. verses of Denham. The couplet is from Cooper's Hill,
1642.

P. 54, 1. 19. Sir Andrew Freeport, the merchant of the ‘Spectator
Club’ (cf, Spectator, No. 2, p. 109 in this volume).

1.26, Jack Truepenny. In ‘Jack Truepenny,’ Steele, to some
extent, intended to describe himself, if we may believe a note in the
early editions, ascribed to Dr. John Hoadly, the son of Sir Richard's
friend, the Bishop of Bangor. ‘The author fell here under his own
censure, but on a much reduced income, he retired first to Hertfordshire
(| Hereford], and afterwards to Carmarthen in Wales, from a principle of
doing justice to his creditors,’ (See Introduction, p. xlii.)


454 I, MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


P. 61,117. A priest. This story is founded upon a note in Bayle’s
account of Leo X.

P. 63, 1. 19. the character. Rochester said this of Lord Buckhurst,
afterwards Earl of Dorset. In the epitaph on Caleb Whitefoord, which
was added to the 5th edition of Goldsmith’s Retalzation, 1774, pp. 19"
22, it is misquoted as the final line :-—

‘This debt to thy mem'ry I cannot refuse,
“Thou best humour'd man with the worst humour’? muse,

P. 67, 1. 10. Zt zs to be allowed, etc. This almost reads as if Callis-
thenes were modelled on Addison. Cf. ‘Ned Softly,’ Zatler, No. 163:
and Swift’s Character of Mrs. Johnson (Stella), ‘She was never positive
in arguing; and she usually treated those who were so, in a mannef
which well enough gratified that unhappy disposition; yet in such 4
sort as made it very contemptible, and at the same time did some hust
to the owners. Whether this proceeded from her easiness in general, of
from her indifference to persons, or from ‘her despair of mending them,
or from the same practice which she much liked in Mr. Addison
I cannot determine; but when she saw any of the company very war®
in a wrong opinion, she was more inclined to confirm them in it tha?
oppose them.’ Cf, also Macaulay, Essays, 1860, ii. 337, and Pope’s ex
aggeration of the same characteristic (Prologue to the Sattres, \\,201-2):—~

‘Damn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,
And without sneering, teach the rest to sneer.’

P. 68, 1. 29. Mr. Congreve's Doris. See the entire poem in Con:
gteve’s Works, 1710, iii. 992-5. Steele extravagantly praised these verses:
In his Dedication to Congreve of the Poetical Afiscellanies, 1714 (seé
Introduction, p. xxxv), he refers to ‘Your inimitable Doris, whicb
excels, for Politeness, fine Raillery, dnd courtly Satyr, any Thing wé
can meet with in any Language.’

P. 69, 1.15. Mr. Hart. Hart was a distinguished tragic actor, and
says Cibber (Agology, 1740, p. §5) ‘famous for Othello.’ He is ofte?
mentioned in Pepys, He was the lover of Nell Gwyn, and one of the
many favourites of Lady Castlemaine.

P. 70, 1. 20. Telly. See Cicero, De Officits, iii. 9.

P. 71,1.14, Mr. Rayner. In Tatler, No. 185, original folio, i
advertised the following :—' The Paul’s Scholars Copy-Book, contain-
ing the Round and Round-Text Hands, with Alphabets at large of the
Greek ond Hebrew, and Joyning Pieces of each, Embellished witb
proper Ornaments of Command of Hand. By J. Rayner, at the Hand
and Pen in St. Paul’s Churchyard, London . .. Price 1s.’

1. 19. Mr. Morphew. John Morphew, near Stationer’s Hall, who
sold the Zatler, and received advertisements.
Mr. Lillie. Charles Lillie, a perfumer at the corner of Beaufort


cy


1 The italics are the editor's.


NOTES. P. 61, L. 17—P. 87, L. 10. 455


Buildings, Strand. {He was also an agent for the sale of the
paper.

P. 72, 1.9. J¢ # fo me, etc, Cf. Thackeray’s Book of Snobs, 1848,
passim.

1. 22. lt ts not, etc. See the Encheiridion, Sect. xvii.

P. 73, 1. x. dndesert, want of merit. ‘This’ says Johnson ‘is a useful
word, but not much received,’ and he gives an example of its use by
Addison. Steele had already employed it in the Lying Lover, 1704,
Act ii, where Lovemore says :—

*Of you I am not jealons;
Tis my own tudesert that gives me fears.’

1. 6. Zbdoracensis. This was Robert Hunter, appointed Governor
of New York in 1709. He died Governor of Jamaica in 1734.

P. 74, 1. 37. Afr. Collier, i. e.. Jeremy Collier, the Nonjuror, Part IV
of whose Essays tepon Several Moral Subjects, containing at pp. 205-36
this one ‘ Of Fortitude,’ was published in 1709. Oy

P. 75, 1. 23. delicates, dainties. Cf. Shakespeare, 3 Henry VI, Act ii,

C5
‘—the shepherd’s homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
His wanted sleep under a fresh tree’s shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince’s delicates.’

P. 76, 1. 19. ¢ragedian, here a tragic author. Jobnson gives the
following example from Stillingfleet :—‘ Many of the poets themselves
had much nobler conceptions of the Deity, than to imagine him to have
anything corporeal, as in these verses out of the eminent tragedian.’

1, 22. Mr. Cowley, The quotation is from Zssay No. VI, Of
Greatness.

P. 77, 1. 13. Pyrrius. The philosopher was Cineas the orator. See
North’s Plutarch, 1579, pp 434-5.

P. 78,1. 40. the Trumpet. See note to p. 169, 1. 6.

P. 80, 1. 8. my author. Cicero, a motto from whose De Senectute is
Prefixed to the paper.

P, 84, l. 9. These instances. See North’s Pletarch, 1579, p. 813.

1, 32. a2 friend. Stephen Clay, a young barrister of the Inner
Temple. He is referred to several times in Steele's Correspondence ;
and Nichols prints two of his poems from the Afuses Mercury, 1707,
which show him to have been an easy versifier.

P. 86, 1. 26. St. James's Garlick-Hill, ox Garlickhithe, is near Thames
Street in Vintry-Ward. It was bumt in the Great Fire of London, and
tebuilt in 1676-83. The reader referred to was the Rev. Philip Stubbs,
rector of the parish, who afterwards became Archdeacon of St. Alban’s,

P, 87, l. 10, Ston-College, London Wall. It was founded in 1623 for
the use of the Clergy in and about London.


456 I, MORAL AND DIDACTIC PAPERS.


P. 88, 1. 2. ‘Cant.’ Steele’s derivation is doubtful. Cant seems
more probably to come from canfare. ‘This word “ canting,” seems to
be derived from the Latine verbe caz/o, which signifies in English to
sing, or to make a sound with wordes, that is to say, to speake, And
very aptly may canting take his derivation from singing, because
canting is a kind of musicke, and he.that can cant best is the best
musician. (English Villanies, 1683.)

1. 35. Dr S. ¢. Probably Dr. George Smalridge, the
*Favonius’ of Zatlr, No. 114. He ultimately became’ Bishop of
Bristol. Macaulay calls him the ‘humane and accomplished Smal-
ridge.” There is an excellent print of him by Vertue after Knellet
(1724).

P. 89, 1. 4. ‘Do you read, etc. ‘Si legis, cantas, si cantas, malt
cantas, ,

1. 16. @ gentleman, etc. Probably the Rev. Philip Stubbs, referred
to in Note to p. 86, 1. 26.

P. 90, 1.2. @ set of poor scrubs of us. Cf. Lady Mary Wortley
Montagu’s Six Town Eclogues, 1747; The Toilette, p. 28 :—

‘What shall I do to spend the hateful day?
At chapel shall I wear the morn away?
Who there appears at these unmodish hours,
But ancient matrons with their frizled tours,
And grey religious maids?’
and St. James's Coffee-House, p. 9:—
‘St. James's bell had toll’d some wretches in,
(As tatter'd riding-hoods alone could sin).
Cf. also Hogarth’s Four Times of the Day, 1738, Morning.

1. 8. mobs. The mob was a loose undress, sometimes a hocd.
Cf, Addison’s ‘Fine Lady’s Diary’ (Spectator, No. 323) * Went in out
Mobbs to the Dumb Man [Duncan Campbell]. ‘Mobs’ were in vogue
long after the date of this paper. They are referred to as late as 1773
or 4 in those dancing couplets which Goldsmith wrote to pretty Mrs-
Bunbury at Barton :— .

‘Both are plac’d at the bar, with all proper decorum,

With bunches of fennell, and nosegays before ’em;

Both cover their faces with mods and all that,

But the judge bids them, angrily, take off their hat.’
(Hanmer Correspondence, 1838, p. 3832.)

1,11. lady Lizard’s daughters. Lady Lizard and her daughters are
described in Guardian, Nos. 2 and 5, not here reprinted.

P. 1, 1. 28. ovazsons=orisons. ‘They were commonly called, the
judgments of God, and performed with solemn oraisons and other
ceremonies. (Temple’s Works, 1770, iii. 167.) Dryden also writes
it in this way.

1, 31. ffty pounds a year, The condition of the inferior clergy


Nores, P. 88, L, 2—P. 106, L. 13. 457


in the eighteenth century appears to have been deplorable. Queen
Anne’s Bounty should have helped them; but although the Act was
passed in 1704, the fund, owing to the operation of one of the clauses,
was not administered until 1714, and even then, if one may judge by
Contemporary literature, it does not seem to have reached the really
necessitous. Parson Adams in Joseph Andrews has but twenty-three
Pounds a year; the Vicar of Wakefield but thirty-five in the first
instance, in the second but fifteen; and the clergyman of the Deserted
Village forty,—the actual sum received by Goldsmith’s brother Henry °
(see Dedication to Traveller, 1764). Cf. also a letter in the Gentleman's
Magazine for November, 1763, in which the writer, contending that
the clergy should at least have a competence, modestly fixes it at eighty
pounds per annum.

P, 95, 1. 6. Celicolo is supposed to have been John Hughes, a worthy
and pious man, the friend of Addison, Steele and Pope. He was a
contributor to the Za¢ler and Spectator, and also (anonymously) to the
Poetical Miscellanies of 1714. ‘To this,’ says Carruthers, ‘ Hughes, the
author of the Siege of Damascus, . . sent several pieces, but finding,
before publication, that Pope’s Wife of Bath and some other pieces,
which were inconsistent with his ideas of decency and decorum, had
been admitted, he immediately withdrew most of his own, and allowed
Only two small poems, and those without his name, to appear’ (Life of
Pope, 1858, p. 109). Hughes died in February 1720, just after the
Successful production of the above-named tragedy; and Steele wrote a
kindly paper about him in the Z/eatre (No. 15).

1. 19. @ great divine, Dr. Robert South (1613-1716).

P. 97,1. 20. Cécero. See Tusc. Quest. i. 17.

1. 29. ‘he would rather be, etc. ‘Errare, mehercule, malo cum
Platone... quam cum istis vera sentire! (lbid.)

P, t00, 1, 21. @ hack, i.e. a hackney-coach. Cf. Pope, Dunciad,
N, 23 0-—-

‘From drawing-rooms, from colleges, from garrets,
On horse, on foot, in hacks, and gilded chariots.’

P, 101, 1.15. Sir Walter Raleigh. See, for the ensuing quotation,
History of the World, 1614, Bk. i, Ch. 4, Sect. 4.

1, 27. her incantation, charms, enchantments. Johnson gives this
passage from Raleigh as one of his examples of the word.

P, 103, 1. 19. As country and his honour. It would be easy to
illustrate this paper from Steele’s correspondence, and it is probable
that much of it reproduces difficulties he had experienced in his own
domestic life. (See troduction, pp. xxii-xxvi.)

P, 10g, 1. 38. one of our famous lawyers. Henry de Bracton, De
Legibus et Consuctudinibus Anglia, Bk, i, Chap. 10,

P. 106, L. 13, 4 friend with indignation, etc. See Xenophon’s Symt-


Losium,


45 8 II. SOCIAL PAPERS.


II.


SOCIAL PAPERS,


P. 107, 1. 3. Sir Rogér de Coverley. The original of Sir Roger is
supposed to have been Sir John Pakington, a Tory knight of Worcester:
* But no importance can be attached to identifications of this kind, unles*
very well supported; and it is well to remember Fielding’s words oP
this head in Joseph Andrews (bk. iii, chap. 1). ‘To prevent, therefore,
any such malicious applications, I declare here, once for all, I describé
not men, but manners; not an individual, but a species. "Perhaps it
will be answered, Are not the characters then taken‘ from life? To
which I answer in the affirmative; nay, I believe I might aver that
I have writ little more than I have seen.’

L. 4. that famous country-dance. This, according to Chappell
(Popular Music of the Olden Time), was named after a knight who
lived under Richard I. In Ashton’s Social Life in the Reign of Queen
Anne, 1882, ii. 268-9, where the music is given, there is a curious
extract from an old tract of 1648 against one Sir Hugh Caulverley, Knight,
which contains perhaps the earliest reference to the tune. On p. 5 the
writer says:—‘I purposely to vex Sir Hugh, and his Champion Dod,
sent for a fidler, and during the time my fellow Coursers were drinking
a Cup of Ale, we having run our Match, I and my Fidler, rid up to
Sayton, and from one end of the town to the other, I made the Fidler
play a tune called Roger of Caulverley: This Idid to shew, that I did
not fear to be disarmed by them, and they may thank themselves for it,
for if they had not first endeavoured to mischief me, I should not trouble
myself to have vext them.”

1, 14. Soho-sguare. The ‘genteel’ square of Soho was built is
1681, and in Sir Roger’s day was still practically a new neighbourhood,
though the name dated as far back as 1632, and perhaps earlier, ‘So-ho’
or ‘So-how ’—says Cunningham— was an old cry in hunting when thé
hare was found. (Handbook of London, 1850, 456.)

1.15. @ perverse beautiful widow. This lady, like Sir Roger
has been identified with a real personage,—a Mrs. Catharine Bovey, to
whom the second volume of the Ladies Library (see Introduckon,
Pp. xxxvi) is dedicated. She died in 1726, aged 57. There is a splendid
monument to her in Westminster Abbey, erected by her executrix and
confidante, Mrs. Mary Pope. (See also Spectator, No. 118.)

1, 18. Rochester, John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester (1648-80), the
profligate friend of Charles II.

Etheredge, the author of the comedies of the Comical Revenge,
1664, She Would if She Could, 1668, and the Man of Afode, 1676


NOTES. P. 107, L. 3-—-P. 115, L. 17. 459


(criticised by Steele in Spectator, No. 65), was born about 1635. The
date of his death is unknown. Much hitherto unpublished information
Tespecting him is contained in Gosse’s Seventeenth Century Studies,
1883, pp. 233-65.

1. 19. bully Dawson was a noted sharper and swash-buckler of
White Friars and its vicinity, who is supposed to have sat for
‘Captain Hackum’ in Shadwell’s Sgzire of Alsatia, 1688. He is one
ofthe correspondents in Tom Brown’s Letters from the Dead to the
Living. ;

P. 108, 1. 25. Aristotle and Longinus, etc. Longinus wrote ‘On the
Sublime ;’ Coke (the Chief Justice) commented Littleton’s Zenseres.

P. 109, 1.6. Mew Inn, etc. Mew-Jnn, was in Wych Street, Drury
Lane; Russell Court leads from Drury Lane to Brydges Street ; Will's
Coffee-House and the Rose were both in Russell Street, Covent Garden.

‘Suppose me dead; and then suppose
A Club assembled at the Rose:
Where, from discourse of this and that,
I grow the Subject of their Chat.’
(Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift, Written by Himself: Nov. 1731.)

1. 34. Captain Sentry is thought to have been intended for
Colonel Magnus Camperfeld or Kempenfeldt, whose son, the Admiral,
went down in the Royal George, August 29, 1782. Like Steele,
Camperfeld entered the army as a volunteer; like Steele, too, he served
in the Coldstream Guards, becoming Ensign in 1689, and Lieutenant in
1693. In May 1702 he was promoted to a company in the Fourth
Foot, and must have afterwards become Colonel, by which title Steele,
who had probably served under him, refers to him in Spectator, No.
544, p. 132 in this volume.

P. rro, 1. 32. Will Honeycomb, again, has his reputed prototype in
Pope's friend, Cleland. But there were more Clelands than one; and
Carruthers, who has carefully gone into the question (Life of Pope, 1858,
Pp. 261-3), seems unable to decide that either had any strong resemblance
to the Spectator’s fine gentleman. Steele, however, certainly knew a
Cleland; for he refers to him in a letter to his wife dated September 8,
1714 (Zfist, Corr. 1809, p. 358). ;

. P. 11a, 1. a8. @ Jesuit. Speaking, with generous enthusiasm, of the

Many masterly strokes’ which Steele added to the Spectator portraits,
My. Forster especially selects this one :—‘In the whole range of Addi-
Son’s wit, is there anything more perfect than Steele's making the
Spectator remember that he was once taken up for a Jesuit, for no other
Teason than his profound taciturnity?’ (Historical and Biographical
Essays, 1858, ii. 188.)

P, 115, 1. 17. tea-table talk, Steele brought out a paper called the
Tea-Table in 1716. It only reached three Nos. (Drake’s Essays,


i, 127).


460 ZI, SOCIAL PAPERS.


P. 117, 1. 20. a@ Ausband, i.e. an economist. Cf. the extract from

Swift in note to p. 269, 1. 26.
~ P. 119, 1. 19. jetting =jutting, projecting.

P. 120, 1. 5. the coffee-house. In Fisher's Ground Plan of Whitehall,
the Tilt yard is shewn facing the Banqueting House, and extending to
the right (towards Charing Cross). Jenny Mann’s ‘Tilt Yard Coffee-
house,’ to which Sir Roger refers, is said to have stood on the site at
present occupied by the Paymaster General’s Office, and still existed
in 1819. It is the scene of Somervile’s fable of the /ucurious Bencher.
Now (1885) the Paymaster General’s itself is to be pulled down, and
in a brief space of time, fresh structures will again arise upon the spot
where the Knight's ancestor manipulated his adversary with suck
‘laudable Courtesy and pardonable Insolence.’

1.15. my grandmother appears, Planché, in his History of British
Costume, 1874 (3rd edition), p. 351, “has the following remarks on
this and the preceding passage :—‘In Sir Roger de Coverley’s picture
gallery, his great-great-grandmother is said to have on ‘the mew-
fashioned petticoat, except that the modern is gathered at the waist.”
The old lady was evidently in the wheel fardingale, which projected all
round, for the Knight adds—*“ My grandmother appears as if she stood
in a large drum, whereas the ladies now walk as if they were in 4
go-cart ;” the whalebone petticoat, on its first introduction, presenting
a triangular rather than a hooped appearance. In the month of July jn
that year (i.e. 1711] we find it was swollen out to an enormous size, sO
that what the ladies had lost in height they made up in breadth; and
a correspondent; speaking of the unfashionable country ladies at sixty
miles’ distance from London, says they can absolutely walk in theif
hooped petticoats without inconvenience.’

lar. @ white. pot, according to Halliwell, is a dish made of
cream, sugar, rice, cinnamon, etc., formerly much eaten in Devonshire.
Gay, who came from that county, thus refers to it in the Shepherd: s
Week, 1714:-— |

‘ Pudding our Parson eats, the Squire loves Hare,
But White-Zot thick is my Buxoma’s Fare.’
(Monday ; or, the Squabble.)

P. 121, 1. 35. av excellent husbandman. See note to p. 117, 1. 20.

P. 122, 1, 19. the perverse widow. See note to p. 107, I. 15.

P. 126, 1.1. some tansy. A tansy was a popular seventeenth century
dish, for which Halliwell gives a long receipt from the Zree Gentle
woman's Delight, 1676.

1,15. that of Martial. Ep. 69, Bk. i.

P. 127, 1. 10. the widow. See note to p. 107, 1. 15.

P. 128, 1.21. We followed the sound, etc. A little water-colour sketch
by Mr. Thackeray of this scene was not long since in the market. It is
now in the possession of Sir Henry Thompson.


NOTES. P. 117, L. 20-—P. 136, L. 8. 461%


P. 131, 1. 4. that passage in your writings. The reference is to No.
410, supposed to be by Tickell, in which certain liberties were taken
with the character of Sir Roger de Coverley. It has been thought that
Addison’s killing of the Knight was brought about by Tickell’s indis-
cretion; but there is an interval of four months between No. 410 and the
paper by Addison which announces Sir Roger’s death.

; P. 132, 1.39. Colonel Camperfeldt. Kempenfelt. See note to p. 109,
- 34-

P. 133.117. A nobleman of Athens. See Tusc. Quast. v. 35.

P. 134, L 8. Z am led, etc. Of this paper Mr. Forster says ;—‘ In
connexion with it, too, it is to be remembered that at this time [1709],
as Mr. Macaulay observes in his Essay, no such thing as the English
Novel existed. De Foe was as yet only an eager politician, Richardson
an industrious compositor, Fielding a mjschievous school-boy [as a
matter of fact he was two years old—Ed.}, and Smollett and Goldsmith
were not born. For your circulating libraries (the first of which had
been established some six years before, to the horror of sellers of books,
and the ruin of its ingenious inventor) there was nothing livelier, in that
direction, than the interminable Grand Cyrus of Madame de Scuderi, or
the long-winded Cassandra and Pharamond of the lord of La Cal-
prenéde, which Steele Jaughed at so heartily in his Zeader Husband.
(Historical and Biographical Essays: Steele, 1858, ii. 138.)

1. 26. Afrs. Mary is now sixteen. ‘Miss,’ in Queen Anne's day,
not used of girls under ten, was a term of reproach, all young
narried women being described as ‘ Mistress’ or ‘Madam.’ Steele's
s to his wife before marriage, with one exception, are all addressed
y Mrs. Scurlock.’ Cf. Swift,—Mrs. Dingley and Mrs. Johnson in the
nrnal to Stella—and Spectator passim, But perhaps the best example
is in Cibber’s Lady's Last Stake, 1707, where there is a ‘ Mrs. Conquest ’
and a ‘Miss Notable.’ Both are unmarried ;. but the former is a woman,
the latter a girl.

P, 136, 1. 8. her baby, i.e, her doll. In the Wentworth Pagers, 1883,
P. 451, under date of 1721, there is a letter from Lady Anne Wentworth,
a child of eight, to her father, in which, speaking of a younger sister,
She says ‘Lady Hariote desires you to bring her a Baby.’ Cf. also
Spectator, No. 478 :—‘ These [Boxes] are to have Folding-Deors, which
being open’d, you are to behold a Bady-dress'd out in some Fashion
which has flourish’d, and standing upon a Pedestal, where the Time of
its Reign is mark’d down.’ The best dolls, according to Mr. Henry
Morley (Memoirs of Bartholomew Fair, 1859, p. 333). were the so-called
Bartholomew Babies, which * were ‘elegantly dressed and carefully
packed in boxes’; and he gives the following quotation from Poor
Robin’s Almanac for 1695 :—‘It also tells farmers what manner of
wife they shall choose; not one trickt up with ribbens and knots like


a Bartholomew dady.


462 WI. SOCIAL PAPERS,


P. 136, 1. 28. open-breasted, i.e. in affectation of youth. Cf. 7atler,
No. 246 :—‘ There is a fat Fellow, whom I have long remarked wearing
his Breast open in the midst of Winter, out of an Affectation of Youth.
I have therefore sent him just now the following Letter in my Physical
Capacity:

Sir,

From the 20th instant to the First of AZay next, both Days
inclusive, I beg of you to button your Wastcoat from your Collar to
your Wastband. Iam

Your most humble servant
Isaac BickerstTaFF, Philomath,”’

This practice is also referred to in Charles Lillie’s Letters sent to the
Tatler and Spectator, 1725, i. 210-11, as ‘the unaccountable custom
that for some time has prevajled among, our fashionable gentlemen, of
coming abroad in this cold unseasonable weather [the letter is dated
Jan. 21, 1712] with their breasts and bodies almost quite naked, by
which means they have procured such terrible coughs, that’s both
uneasy to themselves, and most troublesome to all their neighbours, in
the church, in the playhouse and at the opera: yesterday, where I was
hearing a sermon, the parson’s voice was drowned through their exces-
sive coughing, and so in Drury-lane, last week the actors were very much
disturbed, and in the Hay-market, the musick was quite lost, through
the loud bellowing of these bare-bodied beaux.’ The writer in this case
however, attributes ‘open breasts’ to the desire for exhibiting a fi
shirt.

1. 35. the front-box. See note to p. 188, 1. 30.

P. 137, 1.4. @ point of war. In Shakespeare and the Elizabet
this signifies a strain of martial music :—

‘Turning your books to greaves, your ink to blood,
Your pens to lances; and your tongue divine
To a loud trumpet, and @ fornt of war?’
(2 Henry IV, Act iv, Se. 1.)
The term, however, was still current in Steele’s day, as appears from
the following extract, given in Mackinnon’s History of the Cc'dstreant
Guards, 1833, ti. 332:—° 1717.—A party of drummers of the Guards
were committed to the Marshalsea for beating @ poizt of war before the
*Earl of Wexford’s house on his acquittal of charges brought against
him.—Coldstream Orderly-Room.’

1.14. Don Belianis, etc. Accounts of most of these nursery
worthies will be found in Mr. John Ashton’s Chap-books of the Eigh-
teenth Century, 1882. ‘John Hickerthrift or Hickathrift is generally
styled ‘Thomas’ in the ‘Pleasant and Delightful Histories’? which
record his adventures. But Sterne also calls him ‘Jack’ in 7réstram
Shandy, vol, i, chap. xiv. His tomb is still shewn in Tilney Churchyard,
Norfolk.


NOTES. P, 136, L. 28—P. 144, L. 27. 463


P. 138, 1. 31. Favonius was Dr. Smalridge (‘ Preface’ to vol. iv. of
‘Tatler of 1710). See note to p. 88, 1. 35.

P. 140, l. 2. an ancient author. The quotation is from Pliny.

1.8. Jn the mean time, etc. The latter part of ‘this paper is
said to have been written by Addison. ‘It would seem,’ says Mr.
Forster, ‘as though Steele himself felt unable to proceed, and his friend
had taken the pen from his trembling hand’ (Historical and Biographi-
cal Essays: Steele, 1858, ii. 141).

1, 22. in that passage. Paradise Lost, Bk. iv, 1. 639 ef seg.

P. r4t, 1. 4. Al. Dryden has said. The reference is to Dryden’s Dis-
course on Satire, 1693. ‘Then I consulted a Greater Genius. .. . I mean
Milton, But as he endeavours every where to express Homer, whose Age
had not arriv'd to that fineness, I found in him a true sublimity, lofty
thoughts, which were cloath’d with admirable Grecisms, and ancient
words, which he had been digging from the Mines of Chaucer, and of
Spencer, and which, with all their rusticity, had somewhat of Venerable
in them. But I found not there neither that for which I look’d [i.e.
“ beautiful turns ”}.’

1.1%. that which follows. Paradise Lost, Bk. ii, 1. 557 et seq.

P, 142, 1. 33. Zhe death of my father, See Introduction, p. xii.

P. 143, 1.12. my heart ever since. Comparing the treatment of

«Death by Swift, Addison and Steele, Mr. Thackeray selects this passage
for its characteristic contrast to Addison's ‘ lonely serenity’ and Swift’s
‘1, age indignation’ :—‘The third, whose theme is Death, too, and
W »,,Wwill speak his word of moral as Heaven teaches him, leads you up

fto Ne father's coffin, and shews you his beautiful mother weeping, and
¢iimt .f an unconscious little boy wondering at her side. His own

‘eatural tears flow as he takes your hand, and confidingly asks for your
synpathy ; ‘See how good and innocent and beautiful women are,” he
Say¢: “how tender little children! Let us love these and one another,

hrother—God knows we have need of love and pardon !”’ (Zhe English

Humourists of the Eighteenth Century: Steele, 1864, pp. 158-9.)

vf 44, 1.14. the first object, There is a superficial resemblance
between Steele’s words respecting his first love and a stanza of Prior's
Garknd: -

‘ At Dawn poor STELLA danc’d and sung ;
The am’rous Youth around Her bow’d:
At Night her fatal knell was rung;

wel I saw and kiss’d her in her Shrowd.’

: ht Garland is not in Prior's Poems on Several Occasions, 1709; but it

pits at p. 91 of the fo/io of 1718. It is therefore just possible that
“ lines may have been suggested by Steele’s paper.
i. 27, Garraway’s coffee-house, ‘where merchants most did con-

BreBate, was in Exchange Alley, Cornhill; and in the original /oéio
Sug of this 7a/ler, there is a long advertisement of the coming sale of


464 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


‘46 Hogsheads and One half of extraordinary French Claret,’ for which
Steele’s concluding paragraph is no doubt a puff collateral.

P. 146, 1. 38. resign her snuff-box. Ladies took snuff habitually in
Queen Anne’s reign. (Cf. Zatler, Nos. 35 and 140, and Spectator, No.
344.) Sometimes they carried a rasp and roll of tobacco, and made it
themselves. Thus Swift (Journal to Stella, Nov. 3, 1711) refers to a
‘ fine snuff-rasp of ivory’ and ‘a large roll of tobacco’ which have been
given to him for Mrs. Dingley, by Mrs. St. John. And, if we may
believe Defoe, the maids were not behind their mistresses. Writing of
servants, he says:—‘In short, plain Country Joan is now turn’d into 4
fine London Madam, can drink Tea, take Svzf7, and carry herself as high
as the best.’ (EZvery-Body's Business is No-Body’s Business, 1725. )

1. 40? musty, a cheap kind of snuff, also mentioned in Zatler,
No. 27. It derived its name from the fact that a large quantity of
musty snuff was captured with the Spanish Fleet at Vigo in 1702, and
musty-flavoured snuff, or ‘musty,’ accordingly became the fashion for
many succeeding years. Charles Lillie (British Perfumer, 1822) dates
the rise of snuff-taking in England from this time.

P. 147... 19. che Apollo. This was the great room of the Devil
Tavern, Temple Bar. Cf. Shadwell’s Bury Fair, 1680, quoted by
Cunningham in his Londo, 1850, p. 154:—

* Oldwit. 1 myself, simple as I stand here, was a wit in the last age.
I was created Ben Jonson’s:son in the Apollo.

1. 26. the rules of Ben's Club. Ben Jonson’s Leges Convivates,
which are printed in his works, Cunningham saw them in 1845 at
Messrs. Child’s Banking House. They were engraved in gold leters
upon board. ,

1. 33. verses out of Milton. See Milton’s Paradise Lost, Bk. in’
Il. 750-770. : '

P. 149, 1, 19. tender your happiness, value, esteem your happiness,
Cf. ShekeeratS Henry VIII, Act ii, sc. 4:—~

‘I must tell you,
You ¢ender more your person's honour, than
Your high profession spiritual.’

P. 151, 1,13. calamanco, or calimanco. This, according to the
Draper's Dictionary, is ‘a woollen material made plain, striped,
checked, or figured, and glazed in finishing.’ It was at one time ‘ much
used, particularly i in the last century.’ Tatler, No. 96, speaking of ‘ a
Rural Squire’ says that he ‘had a Red Coat, flung open tg shew a gay
Calamanco Wastcoat.’

P. 153, 1. 25. @ conjurer. Mr. Bickers it will be remembered,
was an astrologer and ‘cunning man.’

P. 154, 1. 13. @ lady. The lady referred to is said to have been the
widow of Sir Thomas Chichely, one of King William’s Admirals.

P. 156,1. 13. Bedlam. See note to p. 24,1, 36.


NOTES. P: 144, L. 27—P. 170, L. 22. 465
P. 161, 1. 34. Afys. Alary’s wit and beauty. See note to p. 134,
L. 26.


P. 363, 1. 12. but one man. This is supposed to be a portrait of
Addison’s father,—the dean of Lichfield. (See Jretvoduction, p. xiii.)

P. 168, 1. 15.. Heads =head-dresses. ‘When we say of 2 Woman,
she has a fine, a long, or a good Acad, we speak only in relation to her
Commode.’ (Sfecfator, No. 265.) The ‘commode,’ or fontange, here
referred to, was a structure of wire used for raising up the cap and hair.
(See Spectator, No. 98.) °

P, 169,1.,6. Zhe Trumpet. This was a public-house in Shire or
Sheer Lane, by Temple Bar, upon the site of the New Law Courts, and
till existed as the Duke of York in Leigh Hunt's time (v. The Town,
1848, i. 148). It was at one of the Whig Meetings at the Trompet, in
1718, that John Sly (see note to p. 46, 1. 1) came into the room on his
knees to drink to the ‘immortal memory’ of King William, it being
the fourth of November, his Majesty's birthday. Steele, whose duty on
the same occasion was to toast Addison up to conversation-pitch,
appears to have succumbed in the attempt. Next day his contrition
took the form of an apologetic couplet, which he sent to the Bishop of
Bangor (Dr. Hoadly) who had been present,—

‘ Virtue with so much ease on Bangor sits,
All faults he pardons, though he none commits,’
(Nichols’s Correspondence of Steele, 1809, ii. 508, note.)

1. 31. che fight of Marston Moor took place on June 2, 1644.

_ 132. the London apprentices. On July+14, 1647, the London
prerttices presented a petition, signed by 10,000 of their number; and
on the 26th they forced their way into the House, menacing until votes
had ‘been passed in accordance with their demands. :

P.170, 1.2. ‘dy, ay, Jack,’ etc. This must have been a currente
colloquialism, for Swift weaves it into his Genteel Conversation, 1738,
P. 96:—‘ Za. Smart. I’m told he said a very good thing to Dick; said
he, You think us old Fellows are Fools; but we old Fellows know
young Fellows are Fools.’ Defoe, in his Life of Duncan Campbell,
1720, has the same sentiment, ‘ writ large’ :—‘ Accordingly, I wrote
down to him these Words, and left him in a seeming Passion. I am
Very well asstired, young Man, you think me, that am Old,.to bea Fool;
but 7} that am O/d, absolutely dow you, who are a young Fellow, to be
a downright Fool,

1.6. Jack Ogle was a noted gambler and duellist. On one
Occasion having lost ‘his ‘ martial cloak’ at play, he came to muster in
his landlady’s red petticoat, The Duke of Monmouth, who was in the
Secret, ordered the troop to cloak. ‘Gentlemen,’ bawled the unabashed
Ogle, ‘if I can’t cloak, I can petticoat with the best of you!’ This was
the Bencher’s story referred to at ll, 28-9.

1, a3, the battle of Naseby was fought on Jyne 14, 1645-

Hh


466 “IT, SOCIAL PAPERS.


P. 170, 1. 27. the couplet, ete. Cf. Hudibras, Pt, I, Cantoi, 1. 11 -—
‘And Pulpit, Drum Ecclesiastick,
Was best with Fist, instead of a Stick.’

P. 171, 1. 3. Edge-hill fight. The battle of Edgehill was fought on
Sunday, October 23, 1642.

lL. 10. my maid came with a lanterré, In 1710, it must be remembered,
London was but dimly lit by occasional oil-lamps. For some of its
many perils to ‘strayed revellers’ and belated pedestrians see Gay’s
Trivia, Bk. iii, 1. 335 et seg.

P. 172, 1. 23. Aladam Maintenon’s first*husband. Paul Scarron
(1610-60), the author of the Roman Comique, etc.

1, 35. @ tuck, a rapier. ‘Dismount thy tuck’ (Zwel/th Night, Act
iii, Sc. 4).

P. 173, 1. 3. the mould of my face. Cf. Spectator, No. 19, p. 19 in
this volume, 1. 20. , .

1. 25. Grand Catro. Cf. Spectator, No. 1:—‘I made a Voyage
to Grand Cairo,-on purpose to take the Measure of a Pyramid.’

P. 174, 1. 2. gueerity=oddity. Latham gives this ‘passage as his
example. The word was probably coined by Steele..

* 1.6. gibbosity = convexity, protuberance (Worctster).

1.16. Zsop. FEsop is described, in his Life by Planudes, as
‘the most deformed of all men of his age, for he had a pointed
head, flat nostrils, a short neck, thick lips, was black, pot-bellied,
bow-legged and hump-backed3 3 perhaps even uglier than Homer's
Thersites.’ e

1.19. Zhersites is depicted i in the 2nd Book of the J/iad. Phe’
version being at this date non-existent, we take Chapman's :—

‘But he the filthiest fellow was of all that had deserts

In Troy’s brave siege;, he was squint-eyed, and lame of either foot: -

So crook-back’d, that he had no breast ; sharp-headed, where did shoot

(Here and there spersed) thin mossy hair.’

1, 20. Duns Scotus. The personal ugliness of Duns Scotus is,
tradition.

Scarrgn, Hudibras. For Scarron v. supra. For Butler’s her?
see Hudibras, Pt. I, Canto i, Il. 240 ef seg. which are too discursive
for reproduction.

1. a1. the old gentleman in Oldham. Loyola. See Oldham’s Satyrs
upon the Jesuits, 1679, iii.

1. 36. Afother Shipton. A Yorkshire prophetess, who is said to
have been born about.1488, and died in 1561. Her predictions were
published in 1641 in a 4to tract entitled Zhe Prepheste of Mother Shipton
in the yaigne.of Henry the eighth. Foretelling the death of Cardinal
Wolsey, the lord Percy, and others, as also what should happen it,
insuing times. London: Printed for Richard Lownds, at his shop
adjoyning to Ludgate, 1641. They are familar in chap-book form.


NOTES. P. 170, L. 27-~P.177, L- 24. 467


P. 175, 1. 239 the Afohock-club, The Mohocks, or Mohawks, are
frequently referred to in early eighteenth-century literature. :
‘Who has not trembled at the J/okock’s name?’
sings Gay (77ivia, 1716, Bk. iii,.1. 326); and Swift writes ‘Did I tell
" you of a race of rakes, called the A/ohocks, that play the devil about this
town every night, slit people’s noses and beat them, etc.?’ Again, ‘Our
Afohocks go on still, and cut people’s faces every. night. ’Faith, they
Shan’t cut mine: I like it better as it is. The dbgs will cost me at least
a crown a week in chairs. I believe the souls of your houghers of cattle
have got into them, and now they don’t distinguish between a cow and
a Christian.’ (Journal to Stella, Forster's corrected text, March 8 and
26,1712.) ‘Here is nothing talked about but men that goes in partys
about the street «ind cuts peaple with swords or knives’—says Lady
Strafford under date of March 11—‘and they chill themselves by som
hard name that I can nethere speak nor spell.” Lady. Wentworth, three
days later, is more explicit,—‘I am very much frighted with the fyer,
but much more with a gang of Devils that call themselves A/ohocks ;_
they put an old woman into a hogshead, and rooled her down a hill,
ethey cut of soms nosis, others hands, and severel barbarass tricks,
without any provocation. They are said to be young gentlemen, they
never take any mony from any; insteed of setting fifty pound upon the
head of a highwayman, sure they would doe much better to sett a
‘hundred upon thear heads” (IVentworth Papers, 1883, 277-8.) *Cf.
also Spectator, No, 347.

P. 176, 1.6. Carbanadoed=slashed across for broiling on the coals.
Cf. Cortolanus, Act iv, Sc. 5:—‘ He was too hard for him directly, to
Say, the truth on’t: before Corioli, he scotch’d him and. notch’d him like
a carbonado, j

1.17. the tumblers. Cf. Lady Wentworth’s letter above, and Gay,
Trivia, 1716, Bk. iii, Il. 329-34:—
‘I pass their desp’rate deeds, and mischiefs done
Wheie from Svow-hzll black steepy torrents run;
How matrons, hoop’d within the hogshead’s womb,
Were tumbled furious thence, the rolling tomb
O’er the stones thunders, bounds from side to side.
So Regulus to save his country dy’? + .,
See also Spectator, No, 382, as to a fourth sort—the ‘ Sweaters,’

P.177, 1. 3- Scowerers. Another’species of the midnight ruffian under
Anne, Cf Gay, Trivia, 1716, Bk. iii, 1, 325 :—

‘Who has not Heard the Scowrer’s midnight fame?’

' L319. Zhread-paper,'a paper to hold lengths of silk or thread. ‘I
have had Two or Three Quarrels.with my Wife’s Woman for putting
Thread ia your Paper, ¢nd had like to have turned away my Butler
for setting up Candles in it.’ (Zasier (vol. v.), 712, P. 200.)

1. 23. Alrs. Margaret Clark, See note to p. 134: 1. 26.
‘Hha


468 II, SOCIAL PAPERS,


P.177, 1. 32. den yard land. A yard land (virgata terrae), in some
counties contains 20, in some 24, and in others 30 acres of land.

1. 36. brass and pewter. Common earthenware was rare in the
eighteenth century, all plates, basins, flagons, .etc., being of ‘ brass
and pewter.’ Cf. an interesting article on ‘Mrs. Harris's Household
Book’ in the Saturday Review for January 21, 1882.

P. 178, 1.2. good— After ‘good,’ the original Spectator goes on :—
‘The rest is torn off; and Posterity must be contented to know, that
Mrs. Alargaret Clark was very pretty, but are left in the dark as to the
Name of her Lover.’ In @ later No. (328 in the original issue, but
afterwards suppressed in the reprint) the conclusion of the letter is
given, as it is added in Italics between brackets at p. 178 of this volume.
Mrs. Clark did not marry Mr. Bullock; but (says traditioh) bestowed
her hand on one Cole? a Northampton attomey.

P. 179, 1. 16. Beaver the haberdasher. See note to p. 231, |. 4.

1. 28. night-gowns = morning or dressing-gowns. ‘You must
know that lam in my xight-gown every moming between six and seven.’
(Swift, Journal to Stella, Nov. 11,1710). From the numerous advertise-
ments in the ater (original foo) these articles of costume must have
been frequently magnificent enough to justify the ‘strawberry sash
mentioned at |. 40.

1. 32. Grecian, Squire's, Serle’s. These coffee-houses were all near
the Inns of Court,—Serle’s by Lincoln’s Inn, Squire’s by Grays Inn, and
the Grecian by the Temple.

P. 181, 1.8. Budbulus has so great an authority, etc. Can this passage
have suggested Goldsmith’s—

‘Full well they laugh’d with counterfeited glee

At all his jokes, for many a joke had he;

-Full well the busy whisper, circling round,

Convey’d the dismal tidings when he frown’d’?
Deserted Village, 1770, Wl. 201~4.

1.19. Zom the Tyrant. The waiter at White's, ‘also nicknamed
Sir Thomas. See Zatler, Nos. 16, 26 and 36.

P. 182, l. 7. Cervantes reports. See Don Quixote, chap. 1 (Duffield’s
translation, 1881, i). The phrases quoted are ‘gomposed by the famous
Feliciano de Sylva.’ «

1. 27. the upholsterer, i.e. the political upholsterer of’ Addison’s
Tatler, No. 155, whose prototype is supposed to have been Thomas
Are, father of Arne the musician and Mrs. Cibber, the tragic actress.
See also Tatler, No. 171, p. 393 in this volume,

1, 28. crack, craze. Cf. also Spectator; No. 251 (by Addison),
where it is used to signify a crazy person :—‘I cannot get the Parliament
to listen to me, who look upon me, forsooth, asa Crack, and aProjector.

1. 32. novelists. *‘ Newsmongers or Intelligencers’ (Bailéy’s Dic-
tionary).


NOTES. P.177, L. 32—P. 188, L. 30. 469


P, 183, 1. 18. Avbergotté held Douai for Lewis XIV in 1710. |

P. 184. lL 1. JSchabod Dawks Letter. This, like Dyer’s, was a
news-letter with a blank page for correspondence. Edmund Smith,
author -of Phaedra and Hippolitus, 1707, put ‘them both into Latin
verse :—

‘Scribe securus quid agit Senatus,

Quid caput stertit grave Lambethanum,

Quid comes Guildford, quid habent novorum
Dawksque Dyerque.’

1.6. Ramillies, etc. The battle of Ramillies was fought on Whit-
sunday, May 12, 1706. :

1, 22. whether print or manuscript. The news-letters were
printed so as to imitate MS.

P. 187, 1. 10, Qu the AMisbehaviour of Servants. This paper is sup-
posed to have afforded the first hint foc Townley’s farce of High Life
below Stairs, 1759.

P. 188, 1. 3. vzstic, here ‘inelegant,’ or ‘impolite,’ rather than ‘rural’
or ‘countrified.” ‘An inelegant clown cannot learn fine language or a
courtly behaviour, when his res¢#ck airs have grown up with him till the
age of forty.’ (Watts in Latham’s Johmsox.)

1.19. she Ring in Hyde Park was a favourite eighteenth-cen-

‘tury ride and promenade. While the quality took the air in their
chariots, their footmen waited at the gate, and amused themselves with
wrestling and other diversions. In McCarthy’s History of the Four
Georges, 1884, i. 102, is the following passage in point, which has a
curious similarity to this paper of Steele’s:—‘The writer of the
“Patriot” of Thursday, August f9, 1714, satirises misplaced ambition
by “A discourse which I overheard not many evenings ago as I went
with a frien? of mine into Hyde Park. We found, gs usual, a great
number of gentlemen’s servants at the park gate, and my friend, being
unacquainted with the saucy, custom of those fellows to usurp their
masters’ titles, was very much surprised to hear a lusty Togue tell one
of his companions who enquired after his fellow-servant that his Grace
had his head broken by the cook-maid for making a sop in the pan.”
Presently after another assured the company of the illness of my lord
bishop. ‘(The information had doubtless continued had not a fellow
in a blue livery alarmed the rest with the news that Sir Edward and the
marquis were at fisticuffs about a game at chuck, and that the brigadier
had challenged the major-general to a bout at cudgels.¥’

1, 30. White's Chocolate House’ in St. James's Street, a noted
haunt of fashionable gamblers, was first established in 1698. Under
Anne it stood five doors from the bottom of the west side of the street,
ascending from the palace. It was burnt down in April 5733. (See
Hogarth’s Rake’s Progress, Pt. iv.)

Side-boxes. In the early eighteenth-century theatre, the gentlemen


470 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


sat in the side-, the ladies in the front-boxes. Cf. the Rafe of the Lock,
v. I4i—
- ‘Why round our coaches croud the white glov'd Beaux,

Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows?’

and Six Town Eclogues, 1747,—the Toilette, p. “28
‘Nor shall séde-doxes watch my wand’ring eyes,

And, as they catch the glance, in rows arise

With humble bows,’ ‘
Also Spectator, No. 311:—* Suffenus has comb'd and powder'd at the
Ladies for thirty Years together, and taken his Stand in a Stde-dox,
*till he has grown wrinkled under their Eyes;’ and the bill of Mortality
in Spectator, No. 877:—‘IV. W. killed by an unknown Hand, that was
playing, with the Glove off, upon the Side of the front Box in Drury-
lane.’ But even in Steele’s day the rule must have’ had its exceptions :—
‘Pray, Mr. Meverout, What Lady was that you were talking with in the
Side Box last Tuesday?’ (Swift’s Polite Conversation, 1738, p. 22.)
Later in the century the distinction seems to have been disregarded, for
Goldsmith, Good-Natured Man, Act i, puts Miss Biddy Bundle ‘in the
frorit of a side-box’; and Johnson and his party occupied the ‘front
row of a front-box’ at Covent Garden, when they went to the fyst night
of She Stoops to Conquer (Forster's Goldsmith, Bk. iv, ch. xv).

P. 189, 1. 6. @ lady in the case. ‘Cf. Gay’s Hare and Many
Fricends:— :
‘ And when a lady’s in the case,

You know all other things give place.’
P. 190, l. 10. your Spectator, No. 107. See p. 116 of this volume.
L. 37. Clarendon, etc. This reference escapes the editor.

P. tot, 1. 36. che Five fields. The five Fields are-now covered by
Eaton and Belgrave Squares. Cf. Tatler, No. 84, p. 391 if this volume.

P. 195, 1. 18. the epistle. This is a paraphrase of Horace, £/. i, 9,
in the form of a letter of recommendation. + Steele was fond Of this
method of modernising. In the Christian Hero he treats St. Paul's
letter about Onesimus in the same way.

P. 199, 1. 3. céwilities and salutations. See Spectator, No. 454, p. 380,
1. 16, of this volume.

P, 202, 1. 16. A/um, a thick strong ale, brewed from wheat, and said
to have been introduced into this country from Brunswick by General
Monk, the name coming from one Christian Mumme, its inventor. Cf.
the Reader, No. 8,—' The Blood of a Claret-Drinker grows Vinegar,
that of your Port-man Afum. Cf, albo Pope, Dunciad, ii. 385 :—

‘The clam’rous crowd is hush’d with mugs of Afum,
From Mr. Gladstone’s speech on the Budget in 1881, it appears that
mum was still mentioned in Tariffs, although, according to the
speaker, none of the Revenue Department could ‘throw the smallest
light upon the meaning of the term.’ Yet, as a correspondent to Motes


NOTES, P. 188, L. 30—P. 22%, 4. 1v. 471


and Queries gleefully pointed out, an explanation Jay all the while in
Johnson, from whom one of the foregoing quotations i#derivad.

P. 202, 1. 20. piddling at a mushroom. ‘To piddie’—according to
Johnson—is ‘to pick at table; to feed squeamishly and without appe-
tite. Cf. Pope, Satire ii, 1. 137:—

‘Content with little, I can piddJe here ,
On brocoli and mutton, round the year.’

P. 204, 1.9. Dorimant. This and the following references are to
characters in Etheredge’ 's Man of Mode ; or, Sir Fopling Flutter, which
Steele had criticised in Spectator, No. 65, not htre Teprinted.

P. 208, 1.9. profused=lavished, squandered. Latham’s Johnson gives
this passage for its example, and says the use of it is rare.

P, 209, 1. 33. though Land you too grow older, etc. Hor. Odi. 11. 7:—

‘Dum loquimur, fugerit invida
Actas.’
P. 210, 1.15. hot cockles, Wot Cockles is a game in which one
player covers his eyes, and guesses who strikes him.
‘As at Hot-Cockles once I laid me down,
And felt the weighty Hand of many a Clown;
Buxoma gave a gentle Tap, and I
Quick rose, and read soft Mischief in her Eye.
e (Gay’s Shephera’s Week, 1714, p. 9.)

P. ars, 1.6. madam in her grogram gown. This isa veuotstion from
Swift's Baucis and Philemon, 1708 :—

‘Her petticoat, transformed apace,
Became black satin flounc’d with lace.
Plain Goody would no longer down ; |
*Twas Afadam, tn her grogram gown.

Johnson gives grogramasa ‘stuff woven with large woof andaroughipile.’
In this material Will Honeycomb’s country wife captivated here future hus-
band (Spectator, N 0.630). It istalso alleged that the beverage ‘ grog’ de-
tives its name from it—Admirgl Vernon, who first issued this mixture to his
crew, being known as‘ Old Grog’ from his partiality to grogram breeches.

1. 27. the Ring at Hyde Park. See note to p. 188, 1, 19.

P, 217, L. 22. i one of his pleadings, i.e. in his defence of the edile
Cnzeus Plancius, who was accused of bribery.

P. 218, 1. 20. Zhe statue in Rome, The reference is to the satirical
placards placed on the broken statue, which went by the name of Pas-
quin, a Roman cobbler of the 16th century, noted for his caustic satire.

P, 222, 1, 13. wbiguztarf =existing everywhere. ‘ For wealth and an
ubiquitary commerce, none can exceed her’ (Howell in Johnson).

1. 16. a plumb, i.e. £100,000. Cf. Prologue in Arthur Mayn-
waring’s Life, 1715, P. 72 <—
‘Where Sober Cit to bite his Bubbles comes,
And gets by Paper and false News, his Pezembs,


472 ‘II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


P, 222, 1.33. Boccalinz, i.e. the satirist Trajan Boccalini (1554-1613),

author of¢RagPegli di Parnasso (News from Parnassus); Carey's

,translation of which, John Hughes, one of the contributors to the Sfec-
‘ator, had recently revised and reprinted (1706).

P. 223, 1.2. Guicciardint. Francesco Guicciardini (1482-1540), au-
thor of a lengthy history of Italy, 1561, ete. Cf. Macaulay :—* There
was, it is said, a criminal in Italy, who was suffered to make his choice
between Guicciardini and the galleys. He chose the history. But the
war with Pisa was too much for him. He changed his mind and went

"back to'the oar.’ (Egsaps: Burleigh and his Times, 1832.)

1. 4. doctor Donne. See Donne’s Sermons, ii. 239.

1, 29. Baker's Chronicle, i.e. Chronicle of the Kings of Eng-
land, etc., 1641. It lay in the hall-window at Sir Roger de Coverley’s
(Spectator, No. 269).

P. 224, 1.9. Humphry Wagstaff. Swift is supposed to be here re-
ferred to. In Tatler, No. 9, his Description of Morning’ is printed as
by Mr. Humphrey Wagstaff.

1. 37. Hour-glass... near. the pulpit. These are even now
occasionally to be: seen in country churches, though they ceased to be
generally used after the Restoration. Cf. Gay’s Shepherd's Week, 1714,
P. 49:

‘After the good Man warn’d us from his Teft,
That None could tell whose Turn would be the next;
He said, that Heav’n would take her Soul no doubt,
And spoke the Hour-glass in her Praise—quite out.’
Cf. also Hogarth’s Sveeping Congregation, 1736.

P, 228, 1.15. Str William Temple, etc. The passage referred to is
in the essay Of Poetry (Works, 1770, iii. 418-9). Speaking of these
tale-tellers, he says:—‘ A- vety gallant gentleman of the north of Eng-
land has told me of his own experience, that in his wolf-hunting there,
when he used to be abroad in the mountains three or four days together,
and lay very ill a-nights, so as he could not well sleep, they would
bring him one of these tale-tellers, that when he lay down would begin
a story of a king, or a‘giant, a dwarf and a damsel, and such rambling
stuff, and continue it all night long in such an even tone, that you
heard it going on whenever you waked; and he believed nothing
any Physicians give could have so good and so innocent effect to’make
men sleep in any pains or distempers of bedy or mind.’ This recalls
Scott’s old lady who used to have Str Charles Grandison read to her
because, if she chanced to doze, she was sure when she awoke to find
them still ‘conversing in the cedar-parlour.’ (Lives of the Novelists,—
Richardson.)

1. 30. the Cniaibey Thorn. Cf. The Trumpet Club, p. 168.

_ Perhaps Goldsmith was thinking of Sir Harry's story when he wrote of
Mr. Hardcastle’s ‘Grouse in the Gun Room,’ that honest Diggory


NOTES. P. 222, L. 33—P. 243, L. 5. 473


and the rest had laughed at ‘these twenty years.” See She Stoops to
Conquer, 1773, Act ii.

P. 230, 1. 26. Batson’s coffee-house was in the city ‘over against the
Royal Exchange.’ It was a favourite haunt of Sir Richard Blackmore.
(See note to p. 47, 1. 40.)

P. 231,11. @ beaver. A real person was here referred to, Mr. James
Heywood, a wholesale linen-draper on Fish-Street Hill. He was the
author of a letter signed ‘ James Easy,’ in No. 268 of the Spectafor, and
a volume of ‘Letters and Poems.’ He died in 1776, aged go.

* 10. Will's in Covent Garden. See note to p. 384, 1. 8.

1. 29, @ campaign periwig. The campaign periwig was an im-
portation -from France. It was very full, curled, and eighteen inches
in length in the front, with drop locks, The position of these last must
have been a matter of sqme importance, for Gay, writing from Herren-
hausen in August 1714 to Swift, enumerates among the arts of diplo-
macy, ‘bowing profoundly, speaking deliberately, and wearing both
sides of his long periwig before.’

P, 235, 1.13. Plutarch. See the lives of the Gracchi.

P. 236, 1.6. Buckley. Samuel Buckley, the publisher of the Spectator.
His shop was ‘at the Dolphin in Little Britain.’

1.15. Lam got hither safe, i.e. to his own apartment, from which
this part of Za¢ler, No. 45 is dated.

P, 239, L 11. Lady Daindy. Agvaletudinaridn in Cibber’s Dowdle
Gallant ; or, the Sick Lady's Cure, 1707.

1, 19. side-boxes, See note to p. 188, 1. 30.

P. 241, 1.18. floor strewed with half-pence. This was the work of
the Nickers. Cf. Gay, 7rivia, 1716, Bk. iii, ll. 323-4 :—

‘His scatter’d pence the flying Nicker flings,
And with the copper show’r the casement rings.’

1, 23. & darge sheet of paper. Vertue engraved this plate, which
represented the famous Stonesfield mosaic, and was thus advertised in the
Spectator :—* Whereas about nine Weeks since there was accidentally
discovered by an Husbandman at Stimsfield near Woodstock in Oxford-
shire, (a large Pavement of rich Mosaick Work of the Ancient Romans,
which is adorn’d with several Figures alluding to Mirth and Concord, in
particular that of Bacchus seated on a Panther.) This is to give Notice,
that an exact Delineation of the same is Engraven and Imprinted on &
large Elephant Sheet of Paper; which are to be Sold at Mr, Charles
Lillie’s, Perfumer, at the corner of Beaufort Buildings in the Strand at
1s, N.B, There are to be had at the same place at one Guinea each on
a superfine Atlas Paper, some painted with the same variety of Colours
that the said Pavement is beautified with; this Piece of Antiquity is
esteemed by the Learned to be the most considerable ever found in
Britain.’ ;

P. 243, 1. 5. and one, etc. The story is told of Six Charles Sedley.


474 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


P. 244, L 2. the ancient pantomime=pantomimist. Cf, Hudrbras,
Pt. iii, Canto 2, 1. 1287 :—

‘Not that I think those Pantomones,
Who vary Action, with the Times,
Are less ingenious in their Art,
Than those who dully act one "Part!

1. 6. Zstcourt. See notes to p. 44, 1. 38, and p. 3790, 1. 23.
In accordance with this notification, Estcourt played Sir Sampson
Legend in Congreve’s Lovg for Love at his benefit, Drury Lane, April
22, 1712.

1.12. @duel, This was the first of the series of papers written by
Steele on this subject; the others are Zaé/ers, Nos. 26, 28, 29, 31, 38
and 39.

P. 247, 1. 5. crimp and basset. These were games of cards. Basset,
which resembled phartoh, has been celebrated by Pope in a special
poem, the Basset Table, first published in the Zown Eclogues of
1716.

, 1, 18. the bellman, i.e. the night-watchman or crier of Old
London who, according to Stow, at every lane’s end, and at the ward's
end, gave warning of fire and candle, and to help the poor, and to pray
for the dead. Herrick has celebrated him in what are vertainly not
bellman’s verses :—

* Along the dark, and silent night,
With my Lantern, and my Light,
And the trinkling of my Bell,

Thus I walk, and this I tell:
Death: and dreadfulnesse call on
To the gen’rall Session ;

To whose dismall Barre, we there

. All accompts must come to cleere:
Scores of sins w’ave made here many,"
Wip't out few, (God knowes) if any.
Rise, ye Debters, then, and fall
To make paiment, while I call.
Ponder this, when J am gone;

.By the ‘clock ’tis almost Oxe.’

P. 248, 1.2. Zs my own memory, etc. In Steele’s day the’ middle
classes dined at two; but four, or later, was the fashionable hour. Cf.
Swift s Journal of a Modern Lady, 1728 :—

‘This business of importance o’er,

And madam almost dress’d by four;
The footman, in his usual phrase,
Comes up with “Madam, dinner stays.””
P, 249, 1. 13- Milton’s inimitable description, Paradise Lost, Bk. v,


1. 1 et seq.


NOTES. P. 244, L. 2—P. 260, L. 3.- 475


P. 250, 1.9. ladies in mourning, i.e. for Louis of Bourbon, son of
the dauphin, whodied March 3, 1710. :

P. 251, 1. 37. shoulder-knot, or aiguillette. This was a knot of
ribbon or lace introduced from France, temp. Charles If, It was wom
at first by gentlemen; now it is confined to servants. ‘ Let us, there-
fore, allow them [the French] the reputation of the shoulder-knot’
(Harris, Bishop of Llandaff, 1715, quoted in Planché's Costze). .

L. 39. fringed gloves, i.e. edged with silver or dther fringe. Cf.
Spectator, No. 30.

P. 252, Lr. a open waistcoat. Seé note to p. 136, 1. 28.

1. 30. @ colt’s tooth=a love of youthful pleasure (Johnson). Cf.
Shakespeare, Henry VIII, i. 3:—

‘ Well said, lord Sands, -
Your colt’s tooth is not cast yet ;’

and Fielding, Covent-Garden Journal, No. 57: ‘A grave Gentleman,
as he appears by his Stile, reproves me very sharply. He tells me
“That grey Hairs look odious on a green Head, that a Colt’s Tooth is
detestable in a Mouth, which hath no other,” with other sarcasms of
the'like Kind which I shall not repeat.’ :

1. 38. Eutrapelus. Cf. Horace, Ep. i. 18, 1. 31.

P, 253, 1. §. Evfield-chase. The young lady whom Steele met in
Enfield Chase is traditionally supposed to have been the beautiful and
unfortunate Elizabeth Malyn, whose third husband was Charles, eighth
Lord Cathcart. ,Her fourth was Colonel Hugh Macguire, who kept
her in confinement for more than twenty years at Tempo in Enniskillen.
Her romantic story is excellently told in a little privately printed
pamphlet, entitled Zewin-Water ; or, the Story of Lady Cathcart, by
Mr, Edward Ford, of Old Park, Enfield.

P. 254, 1. 3. Zhe Ladies’ Cure, i. e—the Double Gallant ; or, the
Sick Lady's Cure, 1707, a comedy by €olley Cibber.

P, 255, L. 31. & Female Library, Steele eventually prefaced and
edited three volumes in 1714 under the title of The Ladies Library®
(See Litroduction, p. xxxvi.) :

P. 256, 1. 28. Szwe-boxes, i.e. at the play. See note to p. 188, 1. 30.

P. 258, 1. 9. ¢acker. ‘There is a certain Female Ornament hy some
called a Zucker, and by others the Neck-piece, being a slip of fine
Linnen or Muslin that used to run in a small kind of ruffle round the
uppermost Verge of the Women’s Stays, and by that means covered a
great part of the Shoulders and Bosom.’ (Guardian, No. 100.) Later
this ‘decus et tutamen of the fentale neck” began to be discarded,
much to Mr. Nestor Ironside’s disgust. (Cf. Guardian, Nos, 100, 109.)

P. 259, 1. 14. 22 an operation = working a spell.

P, 260, 1. 3. the small fox. It was not until 1721 that Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu introduced inoculation into England ; andits ravages
previous to that date were terrible.


476 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


P. 263, 1. 8. the absence of good nature. Perhaps Goldsmith was
thinking of this paper when he wrote the little tale in verse called The
Double Transformation, 1765, the heroine of which is reformed by an
attack of small-pox:—

“No more presuming on her sway,
She learns good nature every day:
Serenely gay, and strict in -duty
Jack finds his wife—a perfect beauty.’

P. 267, 1. 22, Sam Trusty. The original of this character is sup-
posed to have been a Mr. Jabez Hughes, brother of John Hughes ¢see
note to p. 95, 1.6). (See Zarler, No. 72, ed. 1797, note, ad fine.)

1. 30. after-life. See p. 260, 1, 23. °

P, 268, 1. 13. the black doy. This fashionable appendage, so often
advertised in the last century as ‘lost, stolea, or strayed,’ would require
a chapter rather than a note. Steele prints a letter from a typical
Pompey in Zatler, No. 245, the generosity of which is thoroughly
characteristic (wide p. 293 in this volume). It is perhaps equally

_ characteristic that the following announcement appearsin Zarler, No.

132 (original folto);—‘ A Black Indian Boy, 12 years of Age, fit to
wait on a Gentleman, to be disposed of at Denis’s Coffee-house jn
Finch-Lane near the Royal Exchange.’

1, 24. She was here all this morning, etc. Cf. Walpole to Miss
Berry, Aug. 19, 1795, ‘I put myself in mind of a scene in one of Lord
Lansdown’s plays, where*two ladies being on the stage and one going
off, the other says, “She is, gone! well, I must go and write to
her. 297

P. 269, 1. 5. lambative electuary, i.e. a medicine taken by licking.
The word ‘electuary’ is common in the quack notices of the eighteenth
century, Cf. Tatler, No. 224 (by Addison):—*If a Man... wants
new Sermons, Zlectuaries, Asses Milk, or any Thing elsé, either for

qhis Body or his Mind, this is the Place [i. e. among the advertisements]
to look for them in.’

1, 7. betony and coltsfoot.” According to Miller's Herbal, 1722,
P. 445, colt’s fodt, ‘ cut small, is smoaked among Tobacco for Coughs,
and other Affections of the Lungs,’ and, by the same authority, betony
is said to be used in like manner as a remedy for ‘the Head-ach, Vertigo;
and Sore Eyes’ (p. 86).

#1. 26. sea-coal fire, ‘Had not my Dog the Steward run away as
he did, without making.up his Accounts, I had still been immersed
in Sin and Sea-Coal’ says Will Honeycomb in Spectator, No. 530. All
coal at this time was sea-borne, and high in price. Cf. Swift's Journal.
to Stella, Nov. 9, 1711:-—‘I begin to have fires now, when the momings
are cold: I have got some loose bricks at the back of my grate, for
good husbandry.’ Elsewhere he grumbles at the expence. But this
could hardly have been excessive to modern eyes :—' Pah, (he says) I


NOTES. P, 263, L. 8—P. 279, L. 1. 477


have fires like lightning ; they cost me twelvepence a week, beside small
coal !’

1. 37. Hungary water, the Aqua Regine Hungaria of the chemists.
This was a highly popular scent, the name of-which constantly recurs in
the literature of the century. Swift used it for his rheumatism (Journal
to Stella, March 29, 1712). The ingredients of the best, as given in
Charles Lillie’s British Perfumer, 1822, are Spirits of Wine, Rosemary
in bloom, Lavender Flowers and Oil of Rosemary.

P. 270, 1. 9. fo push, to make a thrust, to fence.
‘None shall dare
With shicttned Sword to stab in closer War, ...
Nor push with biting Point.’
(Dryden, Palamon and Arcite, 1700, ll. 1784-7.)
Cf. Tatler, Nos. 98 and 164, p. 410, in this volume.
P. 274, 1, 12. Equipage, retinue or following. Cf. Pope, Rape of the
Lock, 1714, i. 45 :— :
‘Think What an equipage thou hast in Air,
And view with scorn two Pages and a Chair.’
Here it is but one man, and the term is used semi-ironically.
P, 277, 1.6. Afrs. Lucy. See note'to p. 134, 1. 26.

lrg. Als. Lucy's hivery. Tt was an eighteenth-century custom for
persons of quality to send their footmen to keep their places at the
theatre, ‘The theatre should be.esteemed the centre of politeness and
good manners ; yet numbers of them [i.e. footmen] every evening are
lolling over the boxes while they keep places for their masters, with
their hats on.” (Weekly Register, March 25, 1732.) Cf. also Field-
ing :— ‘ ,

‘Wife ... What do they do at your what d’ye call-’ems, your Plays?

Ti awry. Why, ifthey can, they take a Stage-Box, where they let the
Footman sit the two first Acts to shew his Livery; then they come in to
shew themselves, spread their’Fans upon the Spikes, make Curt’sies to
their acquaintance, and then talk and laugh as loud as they are able.’
(Miss Lucy in Town, a Farce, 1742, pp. 6-7.)

P. 278, 1. 21. sxug was the word. Cf. Pope, Imitations of ees:
Ep. 1, fl. 146-7 :—

‘ Away, away! take all your scaffolds down,
For Suug’s the word: My dear! we'll live in Town.’

1. 29. use me like a dog. This must have been a popular ex-
pression, for Swift says—‘I have been five times with the duke of
Ormond about & perfect trifle, and he forgets it. I used him like a dog
this morning for it. ( Journal to Stella, January 21,1712.) Cf. also
the Prologue to Addison’s Drummer, 1716 :—

‘But, if you’re rough, and use him like a Dog,
+ Depend upon it—He'll remain Incog
“P. 279,1.17. orange wench. The orange girls continually passed to


478 ‘II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


and fro in the audience. Cf. Spectator, No. 141,—‘ By such repre-
sentations, a Poet sacrifices the best Part of his Audience to the worst ;
and, as one would think, neglects the Boxes to write to the Orange-
Wenches.

P. 280, 1. 3. misbehaviour of people at church. In this respect the
nineteenth ceatury seems to have an advantage over the eighteenth,
when a church was to many but a fashionable meeting-place. In St.
James’s Chapel the ogling and sighing rose at one time to such a
height that Bishop Burnet petitioned the Princess Anne to be allowed
to raise the pews. ‘I confess—says Lady Mary Wortley Montagu—I
remember to have dressed for St. James’s chapel with the same thoughts
your daughters will have at the opera .. . and the peepers behind a fan,
who divided their glances between their lovers and their prayer-book,
were not at all modester than those that now laugh aloud in publie
walks? (Letter to Countess of Bute, Jan. 1,1755, Works 1861, ii. 270.)

P. 282, 1.8. Charles Mathers fine tablets. Charles Mather was a
noted toyman in Fleet Street, ‘next door to Nandoe’s Coffee House,
over against Chancery Lane.’ Cf. Swift's Sid Hamet’s Rod, 1710 :—

‘No hobby horse, , with gorgeous top,
The dearest in Charles Mather's shop,
Or glittering tinsel of May-fair
Could with the rod of Sid compare ;’s
and Pope’s Basset Table, 1716 :—
‘Behold’ this Aguipage, by Matliers wrought,
With Fifty Guineas (a great Pen’worth') bought’ .
Cf. also Tatler, No 142, p. 287, in this volume; No. 113, where he is
referred to as “Charles Bubbleboy,’ and Sfectator, No. 328.

P. 283, 1. 30. Afr. Lsaac’s scholar: Isaac was a famous dancing-
master. Steele calls him ‘my name-sake Isaac” in Zatler, No. 34,
p- 399, in this volume. There is a mezzotint of him by S. White after
L, Goupy, under which are the lines :—

‘And Jsaac's Rigadoon shall live as long
As Raphael’s painting, or as Virgil’s song.’

P. 284, 1. 38. Aozw-dees? ise. How-do-ye’s? Part of the eighteenth-
century servant’s duty was to carry this question ceaselessly to all his
or her master’s or mistress’s friends. Cf. Swift, Journal to Stella,
May to, 1712:—‘I have been retuming the visits of those that sent
howdees in my sickness ;’ and Verses on His Own Death, 1'73t:—

*When daily Howd’y’s come of Course,
And Servants answer ‘‘ worse and worse!”’

P. 284, 1: 9. Micolint. Nicolino Grimaldi, or ‘Nicolini,’ came to
London in 1708, and in the Zatler of January 3, 1710 (No. 115),
Steele gives a highly favourable account of his powers. He had not


2 A great bargain,


NOTES, P. 279; L. I—P. 292, L. 1. 479


only a good voice, but, as Addison also admits, he was @ good actor as
well; and Cibber thought ‘that:no Singer, since his Time, had so
justly and gracefully acquitted himself, in whatever Character he
appear'd, as Nicolini’ (An Apology for the Life of Mr. Colley Cibber,
Comedian, 1740, p. 225.) There is a further reference to him in No.
405 of the Spectator.

P. 287,115. Zhis great occasion, i.e. the trial of Dr. Henry Sache-
verell, for his sermons of Zhe Perils of False Brethren and The
Communication of Sin, which were impeached as contrary to Revolu-
tion principles. It began on February 27, 1710, and lasted until
March 23.

1. 18. day before nine. *Secheverell,’ says Lady Wentworth under
date of March 6, 1710, ‘will make all the Ladys turn good huswivs,
they goe att seven every mornin’ (Hentworth Papers, 1883, p. 113.)

1, 29. Westminster-Hall a dining room, i.e. during luncheon-hour.

P. 288, 1, 13. Wando's, a coffee-house in Fleet street, at the corner of
Inner Temple Gate. (See note to p. 282, 1.8.) ‘ A Stage Coach sets out
exactly at Six from Wando's Coffee-house to Mr. 77froe’s Dancing-School,
and returns at Eleven every Evening, for 16d.’ (Zatler, No. 180.)

1.19, his namesake. Charles Mather, se note to p. 282, 1.8,

P. 290, 1. 1..s0 overseen ! i.e. mistaken, deceived. (Halliwell)

1, 2. a plain Dragon. A dragon is a small Malacca cane, so called
from its blood-red colour. It comes from Penang, Singapore, and
other islands in the straits of Malacca. A Jambee, on the contrary,
is a knotty bamboo of a pale brown hue. As an article of commerce it
is now extinct. The ‘clouded cane’ of Sir Plume was a large Malacca
artificially coloured.

1. 24, Crenning-man. Mr. Bickerstaff—it will be remembered—was

‘an astrologer. .

1. 28. Howd’ce. See note to p. 284, 1. 38.

P, 291, 1. 27. two leather forehead cloths, etc. Into these armentaria
of the middle-age toilet it does not become an aniotator to pry too
closely. The cloths and gloves were to soften the skin and remove
wrinkles; the Spanish wool and Portugal dishes for ‘ complexions’ ;
the plumpers for the cheeks. The blask-lead combs were for darkening
the hair; the fashionable eyebrows explain themselves. By ivory and
box teeth, tooth-combs are probably intended.

P. 292, 1. 1. and within this poesy. A motto, of ‘posy,’ was often
inscribed upon rings, lockets, and even humbler pledges of affection.
Cf. Gay, Zo a Young Lady, with some Lampreys :—

‘Some by a snip of woven hair,
In posied lockets bribe the fair ;’
and ‘The Shepherd's Week, 1714 (Tuesday ; or the Ditty, \\. 97-102) : —
‘If thou forget’st, I wot, I can repeat,
My Memory can tell the Verse so sweet.


480 I], SOCIAL PAPERS.


As this ts grau'd upon this Kuife of thine,.

So ts thy. Image on this Heart of mine.

“But Woe is me! Such Presents luckless prove,

For Knives, they tell me, adways sever Love!”
See also Chambers’s Book of Days, i. 221-2, article on the Wedding
‘Ring, for references in Shakespeare and elsewhere to this old custom,
which still survived in Walpole’s time. The same paper also contains
some cuts of rings with clasped hands.

P. 292, 1. 6. A crown-picce with the breeches. The two ‘shields on
Cromwell’s shilling- were held to resemble trunk hose. Cf. the Adven-
tures of a Shilling in Tatler, No. 249 (by Addison) :—‘I had been
happier in my Retirement than I thought, having probably by that
Means escaped wearing a monstrous Pair of Breeches.’

1. 8. Langteraloo. Lanterloo, lantrillou, or lanctreloo, a game in
which the knave of clubs is the highest card. ‘Twice or Thrice a
Week (merely for Amusement) she would pass the Evening at Lang-
teraloo. (Tatler (vol. v.) 1712, p. 15.) See also Spectator, No, 245.

1. 13. this rhyme. Another posy. See above, note tol.r °

P. 293, 1. 2. @ d/ackmoor boy. See note to p. 268, 1.°13.

1, 20.. Questions aitl Commands was a favourite eighteenth-
century game. Cf. Spectator, No. 245, Lover, No. 13, and Goldsmith’s
Vicar of Wakefield, 1766, ch. xi,—‘ Hot cockles succeeded next, gues-
tions and commands followed ‘that, and Tast of all, they sat down to
hunt the slipper.’

P. 294, 1. 2. a shape. Cf. Puttenham, Arte of English Poesie, 1589,
“ib. ii, ‘Of Proportion Poetical,’ for some of these eccentricities, Ben
Jonson satirises the bards of his day who could fashion ‘a pair of
scissors and a comb in verse’; and it seems that Gabriel Harvey of the
English hexameter did actually achieve a pair of gloves and a pair
of spectacles. Butler, too, in his ‘Characters’ refers to one Benlowes,
who soaring from mere altars and pyramids 4 la Herbert, had
rhymed ‘a Gridiron, and a Frying pan’... ‘that, ‘beside the Like-
ness in Shape, the very Tone and Sound of the Words did _per-
fectly represent the Noise, that is made by those Utensils.’ (Genuine
Remains, 1759, ii. 120.) See also Spectator, No. 58, by Addison, on
‘False Wit.’

1.39. A diter. A ‘bite,’ in eighteenth-century parlance, was
manifestly the ‘séll’ of to-day. Cf. Swift (Letter to a Friend of
Mrs. Johnson (Rev. Wm. Tisdall], Dec. 16, 1703):—* I'll teach you a
way to outwit Mrs. Johnson: it is a new-fashioned way of being witty,
and they call it a d¢fe. You must ask a bantering question, or tell
some-——lye in a serious manner, and then she will answer or speak as if
you were in earnest: then cry you, Madam, there’s a bite. I-would not
have you undervalue this, for it is the constant amusement in court,
and everywhere else among the great people ;, and I let you know it,


NOTES. P, 292, L. I—P. 312, L. 32. 481


in order to have it obtain among you, and teach you a new refinement.’
Rowe wrote a Comedy called Zhe Biter, 1705.

P. 296, 1. 22. Jack Catch=Jack Ketch.

P, 297, 1. 16. dite upon the bridle, i.e. restrain him, hold him in.

P. 299, 1.13. @ Rake. Steele, no doubt, in writing some of this
paper; recalled certain infirmities of his own. But, though he defines his
rake as a person ‘ vicious against his will,’ it is scarcely likely that, as
some commentators infer, he intended the whole picture to be regarded
as a faithful portrait of himself.

1. 22. @ bubble, i.e. a dupe. ‘The Quack found him a Buddle
to his Mind, one that had Wit and was sanguine enough to cheat
himself’ (Mew Atalantts, 6th edn., 1720, i. 206.)

P. 302, 1. 4. correspondence, i.e. intercourse.

1.6. Sir Taffely Trippet. The person here depicted is said to have
been Henry Cromwell, the poet, who died in 1728, and is satirised
under other names in the Zaéler.

P, 304, lL. 39. The Brussels Postscript. Some verses, under this title,
are printed in the preceding 7at/er, No. 46.

P, 309, 1. 10. dipped=mortgaged. Cf. Dryden’s Persius, 1693, Sat.
vi, IL. 159-60 :—

‘Put out the Principal, in trusty hands:
Live of the Use; and never a7 thy Lands.’

1. 40, four shillings in the pound. I.e, the amount of the Land-
Tax, °

P. 310, 1. 36. the elegant author. Dr. Thomas Sprat, Bishop of
Rochester (1636-1713). See his Account of the Life and Writings of
My. Abraham Cowley, prefixed to Cowley’s works. He was his
literary Executor:

l. 40. great vulgar. See Cowley’s Paraphrase of Horace, iii. 1,
beginning

‘Hence, ye Profane; I hate ye all;
Both the Great Vulgar, and the Small,’
which concludes his Essay (No. vi.) Of Greatness,

P. 311, 1. 6. chat ancestor of Sir Roger. See p. 141, 1. 35.

1, 26. with Afr. Cowley. These are the last four lines of a sextain
in the same essay.

1. 27. this strange fellow. Cf. the character of ‘Young Bookwit'
in Steele’s Lying Lever, 1704, This again is based upon Dorante in
Le Menteur of Comeille,

P. 312, 1. 14. the battle of Pultowa, in which Charles XII of Sweden
was defeated by Peter the Great, was fought July 8, 1709.

1, 25. Count Piper was Charles's Prime Minister.

1. 32. at Deptford. The Czar was at Deptford in the Spring
of 1698. He hired John Evelyn’s house at Sayes Court, and stayed
there three months, doing damage to the extent of £150, according to

I1


482 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


‘Wren’s estimate. Evelyn's servant wrote to him: ‘ There is a house full
of people, and right nasty.’ (Evelyn’s Diary, 1698.)

P. 314, 1. 6. ‘the historians.’ Cf. Thackeray—‘I ... sayto the Muse
of History, “O venerable daughter of Mnemosyne, I doubt every single
statement you ever made since your ladyship was a Muse,”’ etc. (Auglish
Humourists of the Eighteenth Century: Steele, 1864, p. 113.)

1. 11. make-bates, breeders of quarrels. ‘It is often seen that
makebates are the occasion of estates being given away, and so posterity
suffer.” (Charles Lillie’s Letters sent to the Tatler and Spectator,
1725, i. 8.) 7

P. 315, 1.6. A for Love, etc. These are the titles of Dryden's
imitation, 1678, of Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra.

P. 316, 1. 4. Questions and Commands, see note to p. 293, |. 20.

1. 39. Xenophon. The reference is to Xenophon Ov the Polity
of Lacedemon.

P. 317, 1. 35. Wycherley. See Zhe Plain Dealer, 1677, Act ii,
Se, r:—

‘Freeman. How, his courage, Mr. Novel?

Novel. Why, for, Example, by red Breeches, tuck’d-up hair or
Peruke, a greasy broad Belt, and now-a-days a short Sword.

1. 37. Otway. See Friendship in Fashion, 1678, Act iii, Se. 1:—

‘ Malagene. I show'd my parts I think; for I tript-up both his
wooden Legs, and walk’t off gravely about my business.’

* P. 327, 1. 10. gerzos, Johnson defines this as ‘a man of a particular
turn of mind,’ and derives it from the Italian, giving another passage
rom the Zaéler as his example. Perhaps this is one of the words referred
to by the spurious Tatler (No. 272), when it compliments Steele upon
his ‘wonderful Dexterity in coyning Phrases and adapting Words to
Things.’
P. 331, 1. 33. freeze under your casement. Cfh Hor. Od, iii. 10, 2:—
‘me tamen asperas ;
Porrectum ante fores, objicere incolis
i Plorares Aquilonibus.’
Cf. also Milton, Paradise Lost, iv. 769-70, quoted by Steele in Zarler
79, ang perhaps in his mind :—
‘Or serenate, which the starv’d lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.’

P. 333, 1. 32. J¢ was on that memorable night, etc. In 1689 (April
29), the opera house at Copenhagen was burt, and many persons lost
their lives. (See Lord Molesworth’s Account of Denmark in 1692, etc.,
ath ed. 1378.)

P. 335, L 4. @ sublime thought. The quotation is from Vergil’s
Eneid, vi. Il, 653-5.

P, 337, 1. 35. 44. Eustace. The following extract from the British
Mercury, 1710, with respect to this tragic story is given in the earlier


.


NOTES. P. 312, L. 32—P. 340, L. 39. 483


editions. ‘Last Sunday, Mr. Francis Eustace committed a most bar-
barous murder on the body of his wife, by giving her seven or eight
stabs with his sword, of which she died instantly. He jumped out of the
window, and, falling on a palisado pale, tore his legs and thighs in such
a manner that he was forced to have them dressed by the surgeon, who
is since sent to Newgate for letting him escape, and a proclamation is
issued out for apprehending him.’ Steele’s account relates the sequel.

1, 36. Dublin in Ircland. This expression is said to have been
highly obnoxious to Swift.

P. 339, 1. 2. Both their balls took place =i. e. took effect.

1. 31. the Ephesian Matron, Told by Petronius in the Satyricon.
It is also found in Apuleius, and elsewhere. La Fontaine re-casts it in
his Condes, liv. v. 6; and it was translated from him by Lloyd’s friend,
Charles Denis, in the St. James's Magazine for November, 1762.

P. 340, 1. 13. fable of the lion and the man. ‘This is referred to in
Shaftesbury’s Characteristicks, ed. 1738, ii, 188, but the source is not
given.

lL. 35. Account of Barbadoes. The full title of Ligon’s book is
A True & Exact History of the Island of Barbadoes, 1673. Steele's
story is elaborated from the following passage at p. §5:—‘ This Zadian
dwelling neer the Sea-coast, upon the Main, an Zzg/ish ship put in to
a Bay, and sent some of her men a shoar, to try what victualls or water
they could find, for in some distresse they were: But the Judians
perceiving them to go up so far into the country, as they were sure they
could not make a safe retreat, intercepted them in their return, and fell
upon them, chasing them into a Wood, and being dispersed there, some
were taken, and some kill’d: but a young man amongst them stragling
from the rest, was met by this J#dza2 Maid, who upon the first sight fell
in love with him, and hid him close from her Countrymen (the Judians)
in a cave, and there fed him, till they could safely go down to the shoar,
where the ship lay at anchor, expecting the return of their friends. But
at last, seeing them upon the shoar, sent the long-Boat for them, took
them aboard, and brought them away. But the youth, when he came
ashoar in the Bardadoes, forgot the kindness of the poor maid, that had
ventured her life for his safety, and sold her for a slave, who was as free
born as he: And so poor Yarico for her love, lost her liberty.’ Steele, it
may be remembered, inherited an estate in Barbadoes from his first wife.

1. 39. Ar. Thomas Inkle. Ligon does not give the name of his
hero—if hero he can be called. Steele probably took it from z#kle
akind of tape. Cf. Swift, Polite Conversation, 1738, p. 105 :—

‘Why she and you were as great as two Jnk/e-weavers’ ;
and Gay, Shepherd's Week, 1714, p. 37 --

“I twitch'd his dangling Garter from his Knee;
He wist not when the hempen String I drew
Now mine I quickly doff of Jwk/e Blue,


1i2


484 II, SOCIAL PAPERS.


Inkle was one of the articles which Mr. Gladstone classed with Mum
(v. note to p. 202, 1. 167) in his speech on the Budget in 1881 as among
the undiscoverables. Yet, like Mum, it was in Johnson; and the word
is used by Shakespeare, and Beaumont and Fletcher. Anstey's Z/ection
Ball, 1776, is a series of letters in verse from ‘Mr. Inkle, a Freeman of
Bath’ to his wife at Gloucester; and there is an Alderman Inkle in
Foote’s Lame Lover, 1770. .

P. 341, 1. 36. Bugles, beads. Cf. Tatler, No. 245, p. 291, 1. 32, in
this volume ; and Walpole, Corr. by Cunningham, ix. 294. ‘ When I
was very young, and in the height of the opposition to my father, my
mother wanted a large parcel of dug/es; for what use I forget.’

1, 37. Bredes, i.e. braids. It is also used by Addison in this sense,
and indeed by such later writers as Keats and Tennyson.

P. 343, 1.6. Babies. See note to p. 136, 1. 8.

P. 344, 1.18. @ Summer-tsland suit, The Bermudas are also called
the Summer Islands. But probably Steele only intends a synonym for
West Indian, as Brunetta’s admirer is a Barbadian.

P. 345, 1. 5. Bravery, magnificence. .

1,11. @ black silk mantua. Mantua= Manto, Manteau, according
to Bailey, ‘a loose gown wom by women instead of a’ strait-bodied
coat. Cf. Pope, Rafe of the Lock, iv. 8 :—

‘Not Cynthia when her manteaz’s pinn’d awry,
E’er felt such rage, resentment, and despair
As thou, sad Virgin! for thy ravish’d Hair;
and Guardian, No, 118:—‘ Being by Profession a A/antua-maker, who
am employed by the most fashionable Ladies about Town, Iam admitted
to them at all Hours.’ The word is connected with one of Swift's hap-
piest jez de mots—the best pun that ever was made, Scott calls it.
‘Being in a company (says Dr. Delany), where a lady whisking about
her long train (long trains were then in fashion) swept down a fine
fiddle and broke it; Swirt cried out, Mantua ve misera nimium
vicina Cremona. (Observations on Lord Ossory's ‘ Remarks, ete. 1754)
pp. 212-3.) Gay refers to the long trains of the manteaus, 7rivia,
i, LOQ-11 :—
, ‘But since in braided gold her foot is bound,
And a long trailing #anteau sweeps the ground,
Her shoe disdains the street.’

lia. Jn @ petticoat of the same brocade. Mr, H. B, Wheatley,
in his delightful Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in, 1880, pp-
204-5, Suggests that Steele may have borrowed this idea from the course
taken by Lewis XIV, when Charles I, in order to abolish French’
fashions, invented the so-called ‘ Persian habit.’ Pepys thus refers to
the circumstance :—Mr. Batelier ‘tells me the newes how the King of
France hath, in defiance to the King of England, caused all his footmen
to be put into vests, and that the noblemen of France will do the like;


NOTES. P. 340, L. 39—P. 350, 1.37. 485


which, if true, is the greatest indignity ever done by one Prince to
another. .. . This makes me mighty merry, it being an ingenious kind of
affront; but yet it makes me angry, to see that the King of England is
become so little as to have the affront offered him.’ (Diary, Nov. 22,
1666.)


II.


THEATRICAL PAPERS.


P. 348, lL. 12. WWildair, i.e. Sic Harry Wildair in Farquhar's Cozstant
Couple, 1700. Wildair was Wilks's great part, and later Peg Woffing-
ton’s.

1,14, Sir Novelty, i.e. Sir Novelty Fashion, in Love's Last Shift,
1696. This was Cibber’s first play, and Sir Novelty was the charac-
ter by which he made his reputation. See Cibber’s Afology, 1740,
pp. 123-4.

1 31. @ young poct. This is conjectured to have been Leonard
Welsted, who, many years after, printed a comedy, thonght to be the
one here referred to, under the title of Zhe Dissembled Wanton ; or, My
Son, get Money, 1726, Pope put him in the Duseciad, ii. 207-10, and
iii, 169-92; while Swift refers to him in the lines On Poetry: a Rhapsody,
17331 Ul. 392-5 :—

‘For Instance: When you rashly think,
No Rhymer can like }Velsted sink.
His Merits ballanc’d you shall find,
That Fetding leaves him far behind.’
The poet afterwards substituted ‘the laureate’ (i.e. Cibber) for Fielding.

1, 37. the Careless Husband, 1705, by Cibber. Wilks took the
part of Sir Charles Easy; Cibber, Lord Foppington; and Mrs. Old-
field, Lady Betty Modish, a character to some extent modelled upon
herself. ‘There are many Sentiments (says Cibber) in the Character of
Lady Betty Alodish, that I may almost say, were originally her (Mrs.
Oldfield’s] own, or only dress'd with a little more Care, than when they
negligently fell, from her lively Humour, ...’ (Afology, 1740, p 177.)

P. 350, L. 1. ¢e Lion, Cf. Addison’s Spectator, No. 13, 4 propos of
the opera of Aydasfes, in which the hero (the singer Nicolini) strangles
a lion,

L34. Your fable of the lion and the man. Cf. Steele’s paper on
Inkle and Yarico, p. 340, I. 14 of this volume.

1, 37. One Powell. When in London Powell’s Puppet Show was.
exhibited in that part (at present non-existent) of the Little Piazza,
Covent Garden, which adjoined what is now Tavistock Row. St.
Paul's would thus be ‘on the other side of the Garden.’ In the season the


486 III, THEATRICAL PAPERS.


show removed to Bath. Powell was a dwarf, and made a fortune by
his entertainments. ‘Mr. Powell ’-—says Defoe—‘ by Subseriptions and
full Houses, has gathered such Wealth us is ten times sufficient to buy
all the Poets in England.’ (Groans of Great Britain, 1713, quoted in
Ashton’s Social Life in the Reign of Queen Anne.)

P. 351, 1. 14. the undertaker of the masquerade. This presumably
was intended for the notorious Heidegger, a Swiss adventurer of sur-
prising ugliness, who made a large fortune by Masquerades and Operas.
Hogarth satirised him jn the plates known as the Zaste of the Town,
1724, and the Large Masquerade Ticket, 1727.

1. 30. the Arcadia, i.e. the Countess of Pembroke’s Arcadia, 1590,
by Sir Philip Sidney.

P. 352, 1. 10. motions is the old word for puppet-shows. Cf. Shake-
speare, Winter's Tale, Act. iv. Sc. 2:—‘ Then he compassed a motion
of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker’s wife within a mile where my
land and living lies.’ The word is also used by Ben Jonson, who gives
the title of another of these plays at full:—‘ Cokes. A motion! what's
that? [Reads.] The ancient modern history of Hero and Leander,
otherwise called the Touchstone of true Love, with as true a trial of
Sriendship between Damon and Pythias, two faithful friends o the
Bankside.—Pretty, i'faith, what’s the meaning on’t? is’t an interlude,
or what is't?’ (Bartholomew Fair, Act. vy. Sc. 3.) ,

1.16. Whittington and his Cat. Defoe gives the following
curious advertisement of this puppet-play :—‘I was the other Day at a
Coffee-House when the following Advertisement was thrown in.—<A/
Punch’s Theatre in the Little Piazza, Covent Garden, this present
Evening will be performed an Entertainment, called, The History of
Sir Richard Whittington, showing his Rise from a Scullion to be Lord-
Mayor of London, with the Comical Humours of Old Madge, the jolly
Chamber-maid, and the Representation of the Sea, and the Court of
Great Britain, concluding with the Court of Aldermen, and Whittington
Lord Mayor, honoured with the Presence of K. Hen. VILL. and his
Queen Anna Bullen, with other diverting Decorations proper to the
Play, beginning at 6 o'clock. Note. No money to be returned after the
Lintertainment is begun. Boxes, as. Pit, 1s. Vivat Regina.’ (Groans
of Great Britain,'1713, quoted in Morley’s Spectator.)

16. Rinaldo and Armida. An opera by Handel, -1711. See
Spectator, No, 5 (by Addison).

P. 354, 1. 1. The Scornful Lady, 1616, was a Comedy by Beaumont
and Fletcher. The heroine in Steele’s day was acted by Mrs, Oldfield.
A ‘scornful lady,’ it should be added, in eighteenth-century parlance =
a coquette.

1. 8. rose up and did honour =assurgere alicui. By his use of this
idiom in his maiden speech in the House .in 1714, Steele gave great
offence to the Tories.


NOTES. P. 350, L. 37—P. 362, L. 24. 487


P. 355, 1. 1. night-gowns. See note to p. 179, 1. 28.

1.17. Sir Roger. Sir Roger was acted by Colley Cibber; Wel-
ford by Barton Booth. ‘Sir’ was the old prefix to the christian
names of the clergy. (Cf ‘Sir Topas, the curate,’ in Zwwel/th Night,
Act iv, Se. 2.)

P. 356, 1. 16. the disparagement of holy orders. Steele was a staunch
and zealous defender of the clergy. Cf. his Apology for Himself and
Writings, 1714, 39 et seq.

P. 357, 1.3. Zhe Distrest Afother was a dull version by Ambrose
Philips of Racine's Andromague, It was industriously puffed by doth
Steele and Addison (cf. Spectator, No. 335, where Sir Roger de Coverley
goes to see it); and it was first acted on March 17, 1712. The part of
Andromache was taken by Mrs, Oldfield. Addison and Budgell wrote
the Epilogue; Steele the Prologue, in which a recent writer in /Vofes
and Queries for August 16, 1884, has discovered a kind of anticipation
of a well-known couplet in Johnson’s Vanity of Human Wishes :—

“Tis nothing when a fancy’d Scene’s in view,
To skip from Covent Garden to Peru

P. 359, l. 11. George Powell, the real or supposed writer of this
letter, must not, be confused with the cripple of the puppet shows.
(See note to P. 7, 1. 22 of this volume.) He was a good actor but
intemperate. His last important part was that of Portius in Addison’s
Cato, 1713. Hediedin 1714. (Cf. Spectator, No. 40.)

L 14, @ very short face. See note to p. 173, L. 3.

P. 360, 1.5. Zhe Self Tormentor, i.e. Heautontimorumenos.

1.13. Jama man. Homo stm: humani nihil a me alienum puto
(Act. i, Se. 1, 1, 25).

1, 29. took with the people. Cf. the well-worn saying of Andrew
Fletcher of Saltoun:—‘I knew a very wise man that believed, that if
a Man were permitted to make all the ballads, he need not care who
should make the laws, of a nation.’

P. 361, 1.6. the natural description of an innocent young woman.
See Aleautontimorumenos, Act ii, Sc. 3, upon which this is based.

P. 362, 1. 9. the Country Wake. This comedy, first printed in 1715,
was by Doggett himself. (See note to p. 364, 1. 23.) It had just been
acted (September 23) at Drury Lane. Hippisley afterwards turned it
into a ballad-opera, called Flora ; or, Hob in the Well, 1730.

1, 23. Penkethman, See note to p. 364, 1. 28.

1. 24. Bullock, i.e. William Bullock. He was a good comedian;
and had a booth at Bartholomew Fair with Cibber. He acted Sir
Harry Gubbin in Steele's Zender Husband, and Charcoal in The Lying
Lover. See also Spectator, Nos. 36 and 44.

Dicky, This was Henry Norris (1665-1734) the ‘little Dicky’
or ‘ Jubilee Dicky,’ whose nickname gave rise to the blunder referred
to in the Jutroduction, p.xxxix, He was an actor of diminutive stature.


‘488 III, THEATRICAL PAPERS.


He acted Mrs. Fardingale in Steele’s Funeral, and Mr. Tipkin in the
Tender Husband.

P. 363, 1. 34. Wilks. Robert Wilks (1670-1732) the best stage-gentle-
man of his age. ‘To beseech gracefully, to approach respectfully, to
pity, to moum, to love, are the places wherein Wilks may be said to
shine with the utmost beauty.’ (Tatler, No. 182, by Steele, p. 348,
\. 21 e¢ seg. of this volume.)

P. 364, 1. 3. @ young man of good nature. Sir Harry Wildair, in
Farguhar’s Constant Couple; or, a Trip to the Jubilee, 1700.

1. 5. av artful servant, Mosca, in Ben Jonson’s Volpone ; or, the
Fox, 1605.

1.8. Estcourt. See notes to p. 44, 1. 38; p. 369, 1. 3; and p. 370,
1, 23.

1. 14. Lord Foppington. In the Careless Husband, 1705, by Colley
Cibber himself. It was his best part. ‘His Lord Foppington was
considered for many years as a model for dress, and that hauteur and
nonchalance which distinguished the superior coxcombs of that day.’
(Percy Anecdotes.)

1. 23. Dogget. Thomas Doggett (d. 1721), He was an excel-
lent actor, and joint- partner in Drury Lane Theatre with Wilks and
Cibber abuve named. He it was who bequeathed the Coat and badge
still rowed for annually by the Thames Watermen. One of his best
parts was Ben in Congreve’s Love for Love. (See Tatler, Nos. 120, and
193.)

Johnson. Benjamin Johnson (1665-1742). He was excellent in
his namesake's plays, e.g. as Corbacchio in Volpone ; or,.the Fox.

1. 28. the Fop’s Fortune, 1701, was by Cibber. William Penketh-
man’s benefit, took place on the 5th May, 1712, the date of this: paper,
He spoke ‘a New Epilogue, riding on an Ass.’

P. 365, 1.8. Avrs. Bicknell, May 6th, 1712, was Mrs, Bicknell’s
benefit. Zhe Constant Con (see note to p. 364, 1. 3) was acted, in
which she danced.

1, 24. che famous actor, Mr. Betterton. Thomas Betterton died
on the 28th April, and was buried on the 2nd of May, 1710, in
the East Cloister of Westminster Abbey, under a stone now without
inscription. Steele’s admirable account of him may be compared with
the equally enthusiastic pages which Cibber devotes to him at pp. 59-71
of the Apology, 1740. Cf. also Tatler, No. 1, 71, and 157.” Betterton
was painted ‘by Kneller, and there is a copy by Pope of Kneller’s
portrait at Lord Mansfield’s (Caenwood).

P, 366, 1. §. public... executions, Fielding, who was a magistrate,
did not agree with Steele. (v. Lvcrease of Robbers, 1751.)

P. 367, 1. 33. Macbeth. See Act v, Se. 5.

P. 368, 1. 4. the unhappy woman.  Betterton’s widow, who had
been a Mrs, Mary Saunderson. Pepys saw her in 1664, as Ianthe in


NOTES. P. 362, L. 24—P. 373, L. 7. 489


Davenant’s Sieve of Rhodes, and praises her beautiful voice. She
married Betterton in 1662, when about twenty-five, and must have been
a charming actress to the last, ‘Time, says Cibber, ‘could not impair
her Skill, tho’ he had brought her Person to decay. She was. . the
Admiration of all true Judges of Nature, and Lovers of Shakespear, in
whose Plays she chiefly excell’d, and without a Rival.... She was a
Woman of an unblemish’d, and sober Life. ..' (4 fology, 1740, p. 96.)

1.17. @ certain great spirit. It is thought that Lady Elizabeth
Hastings, to whom Steele paid a memorable compliment in Zaéler,
No. 49 (see Jutroduction, p. xlvi) is here referred to. It is certain,
however, that Queen Anne herself befriended Mrs. Betterton after
her husband’s death. ‘She. .had the Honour to teach Queen Azz,
when Princess, the Part of Semandra in ALithridates, which she
acted at Court in King Charles's Time. After the Death of Js.
Betterton, her Husband, that Princess, when Queen, order’d’ her a
Pension for Life, but she liv’d not to receive more than the first half
Year of it.’ (Cibber’s Apology, 1740, 96.) Mrs. Betterton died in
April, 1712, and was buried, like her husband, in the East Cloister of
Westminster Abbey.

P. 369, |. 3, the death of poor Dick Estcourt, Estcourt was buried
in the South Aisle of St. Paul’s Covent Garden on the day this paper
was issued (August 27, 1712).

1. 39. Alas, poor Vorick, etc. Hamlet, Act vy, Sc. 1.

P. 370, 1. 23. What was peculiarly excellent, etc. Cibber confirms
Steele’s words as to Estcourt’s imitative powers. ‘This Man was so
amazing and extraordinary a Mimick, that no Man or Woman, from
the Coquette to the Privy-Counsellor, ever mov’d or spoke before him,
but he could carry their Voice, Look, Mien, and Motion, instantly into
another Company: I have heard him make long Harangues, and form
various Arguments, even in the manner of thinking, of an eminent
Pleader at the Bar, with every the least Article and Singularity of his
Utterance so perfectly imitated, that he was the very alter zpse, scarce to
be distinguish’d from his Original.” (Cibber’s Apology, 1740, p. 69.)
Yet Cibber goes on to say that these qualities deserted him upon the
stage; and that he was on the whole ‘a languid, unaffecting Actor.’
There are other references to Estcourt in Nos, 264, 358, and 370 of the
Spectator. He acted as Providore of the Beef Steak Club; and wore a
golden gridiron as his badge of office. He also wrote a comedy, the
Fair Example, 1706, and an interlude, Pruned/a, burlesquing the
Italian Opera.

P. 371, 1. 12. the Northern Lass, 1632, was by Richard Brome, Ben
Jonson’s servant.

1.13. the ender Husband, 1705, was by Steele himself. See
Introduction, p. xix.
P. 373, 1. 7. @ posy ofa ring. See note to p. 292, 1. 1.


490 IV. MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


P. 373, L. 11. Caius Marius, 1680. This was Otway’s version of
Romeo and Juliet, ,

P. 374, 1. 26. He had now, etc. Cf. Mr. Sable’s address to his mutes
in Steele’s Funeral, 1702. (See Jutroduction, p. xvii.)

1. 37. the Pilgrim. Mrs. Bicknell as Juletta in Vanbrugh’s revival
(1700) of Beaumont and Fletcher's Pilgrim played a drum.

P. 375, 1. 2. Epsom Wells, by T. Shadwell, 1673. Johnson (see
note to p. 364, 1. 23) took the part of Clodpate, a country Justice and
sportsman, who comes on with a dog in Act ITI.

lax. the Plotting Sisters, i.e. The Fond Husband ; or, the Plotting
Sisters, 1676.


IV.


MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


P. 377, 1. 25. the cartoons, Part of Raphael's Cartoons, originally
prepared for the tapestries of the Sistine Chapel, are now at the South
Kensington Museum, to which place they were transferred on loan from
Hampton Court in April, 1865. They were originally bought, about
1630, in Flanders by Rubens, ‘ sagno pretio, for Charles I. They are
seven in number, three of the original ten having been lost :—

1, The Miraculous Draught of Fishes.

2. Christ’s Charge to Peter.

3. Peter and John healing the Sick at the Beautiful Gate of the

Temple.

4. The Death of Ananias.

5. Elymas the Sorcerer struck with blindness.

6. The Sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas at Lystra.

7. Paul preaching at Athens.

Steele, who lived at Hampton, was doubtless well acquainted. with the
cartoons,

P. 378, 1, 26. Chart=cartoon (carta, Low L.).

P. 379, L431.’ Monsieur, Dorigny. Nicholas Dorigny (1658-1746).
He came to London in 1711. He had then engraved, among lesser
works, Raphael’s 7ransfiguration and Crucifixion, “He finished the
cartoons in 1719, and was knighted in 1720 by George I, to whom he
presented a set.

P, 381, l. 9. Stocks Afarket. The old Stocks Market stood om the
site of the present Mansion House. A view of it by Joseph Nichols
shewing the statue of Charles II trampling upon Oliver Cromwell, was
engraved in 1738. Fielding couples it with Covent Garden in one of
his burlesques :—


NOTES. P. 373, L. 1I—P. 385, L. 21. 491


‘Oh! my Kissinda! Oh! how sweet art thou?
Not Covent-Garden nor Stocks-Market knows
A. flower like thee,’ etc.

lai. Strand Bridge was at the foot of Strand Lane, between
King’s College and Surrey Street.

1.17. Dark-house: There was a ‘Dark House’ at Billingsgate,
mentioned in Hogarth’s Five Days Peregrination; but it can scarcely
be the onc here referred to.

], 23. agreeable young women. Steele's frank admiration for female
beauty is a noteworthy feature in his papers. Cf. Sfectator, No.
510, p. 100, of this volume, and also the episode of the beautiful Amazon
of Enfield Chase in Zasler, No. 248, p. 253.

P. 382, 1. a. James Street is James Street, Covent Garden, tuming
out of the Great Piazza.

1. 24. @ stlk-worm. Swift had sung in the City Shower (Tatler,
No. 238) the damsels who

‘Pretend to cheapen Goods, but nothing buy.’
Cowper, however, more specifically describes the ‘Silkworm’ of Steele's
Voyage ott tl vous plaira:—

‘Miss, the mercer’s plague, from shop to shop

Wandering, and littering with unfolded silks

The polished counter, and approving none,

Or promising with smiles to call again!’ (TZask, Bk. vi.)

P. 383, 1. 21. 40 go up stairs. Cf. the passage from Steele’s Lying
Lover quoted at pp. xviii-xix. of the Jztroduction to this volume.

P, 384, 1.1. Rodin’s was a coffee-house in Exchange Alley. Swift
wrote some of the Journal to Stella from this place.

1,8. Will’s was the oldest of the three great coffee-houses in
Russell-Street, Covent Garden, the others being Tom’s and Button’s.
Dryden reigned there until his death in 1700: in Steele's day the king
was Congreve. ‘Mr. Bickerstaff,’ it will be remembered, dated his
account of poetry ‘from Will's,’

P. 385, 1. 5. St. Wentfred’s Well is at Holywell in Flintshire, and
was famous for its healing powers. ‘Last Year a Papist (or to please
Mr. Examiner, a Roman Catholick) published the Life of St. Wene-
Jrede, for the Use of those devout Pilgrims who go in great Numbers to
offer up their Prayers to her at her Well.” (Guardian, No. 90.) One
of these, in 1688, was James II, who for his pains received the shift worn
by his great-grandmother at her execution.

1, 21. as J returned lately out of the country. Steele here probably
refers to his electioneering travels. This paper is dated September 30,
1713, and in the previous month he had been elected M.P. for
Stockbridge. From the 4th to the 2and of September he wrote
nothing in the Guardian, his place being supplied by Addison and
Eusden,


492 IV. MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


P. 386, 1.17. that class of men, Vide the Tatler, passim.

1, 28. Harrison's table, The Harrison referred to .is probably
Thomas Harrison, who in 1708, by Beau Nash’s direction, built the
Assembly Rooms on the Walks at Bath. In one of the Godolphin
MSS., dated May 30, 1713, occurs the following :—‘ She has twice
honour’d Punch’s Theater wt» her Presence; and sometimes sits in
Harrison's Room on y° Ball Nights.’

P. 388, 1. 24. Zompion. Thomas Tompion was the Dent or Bennett
of the eighteenth century. His shdp was at the comer of Water Lane in
Fleet Street. ‘A watch maker may say, the watch I have made
for you, is as good as 7ompion, or Quare, or any other man could have
made.’ (Ireland’s Hogarth Illustrated, iii. (1798) p. 48.) Cf. also
Bramston’s Art of Politicks :-— A

‘Think we that modern Words eternal are?

Toupet, and Tompion, Cosins, and Colmar

Hereafter will be call’d, by some plain Man,

A Wig, a Watch, 1 Pair of Stays, « Fan?
Dickens mentions the clock at Bath, to which Steele refers. ‘The
great pump-room is a spacious saloon, ornamented with Corinthian
pillars, and a music gallery, and a Zompion clock, etc. (Pickwick
Papers, 1837, xxxvi.) There is a portrait of Tompion by Kneller,
engraved by J. Smith. He died Nov. 20, 1713, at. 75 ; and was buried
in the middle aisle of Westminster Abbey.

P. 390, 1.13. my namesake Isaac. See note to p, 283, 1. 30.

1. 25. a rigadoon step, The rigadoon was a dance for two per-
sons. Cf, Guardian, No. 154, ‘This so enlivened me, that I led
him by the Hand into the next Room, where we danced a Rigadoon
together,’

P. 391, 1. 7. the five fields. See note to p. 191, 1. 36. |

1.10. Afr, Justice Overdo, i.e. in Bartholomew Fair, 1614.

1.15. che coffee-house, i.e, the noted Don Saltero’s. Jobn Salter
was a barber and coffee-house keeper in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. He
had been a servant of Sir Hans Sloane, who imbued him with a love
of curiosities and started him with a few trifles, which ultimately grew
into a nondescript and highly popular museum, more miscellaneous
than that of Grose as sung by Burns, His first Catalogne, 1729, con-
tained 249 articles, which in 1741 had increased to 420. _Some of these
were genuing; but such as ‘Robinson Crusoe’s shirt,’ the ‘Queen of
Sheba’s Fan,’ * Queen Elizabeth’s Stirrup,’ have a more than apocryphal
sound. Salter’s collection, much reduced, was sold in 1799 for about
£50.

1, 34. up ¢o the string. Salter played on the violin; but attained
to no particular proficiency.

1.35. Roger de Caubly, i.e. Roger de Coverley. See note to
p. 107, 1. 3.


NOTES., P. 386, L. 17-—B, 397, L. 17. 493


1. 37. merry ‘ Christ Church Bells. A catch composed by Henry
Aldrich, Dean of Christ Church, at which College, it will be remem-
bered, Steele‘had matriculated.

P. 392, 1.7. the learned Vossius. In his De Poematum cant, et
wirtbus Rythmi, Oxon. 1673, p. 62. In the passage here referred to,
Vossius says he had ‘met, more than once, with barbers, who combed his
hair in-iambics, dactyls, trochees, anapesti, etc. (Note to 7atler, ed.
1797+)

1.13. @ Spanish termination. The‘o’ is said to have been added
to Salter’s name by Admiral Munden, who had served much on the
coasts of the Peninsula, and gave the barber many of his curiosities,
including the relics of a Spanish Saint.

1,34. Zradescant collected the curiosities which formed the Ash-
molean Museum at Oxford.

1.39. Ais muff. Don Saltero, like the ‘Political Upholsterer’
of Zatlers Nos. 155 and 160, wore an old grey muff, by which be was
well known. .

1, 40. without his wife. His wife was a scold, from whom her
husband was only too willing to escape.

P. 394, lL. 2. the Indian kings. These were four Iroquois who came
to London in 1710, to assure themselves that the subjects of Queen Anne
were not mere vassals of France, a fiction instilled into their ‘ untutored
minds’ by the Jesuits. They returned to Boston in July. Addison,
upon hints of Swift, afterwards made them the subject of Sfectator
No. 50.

‘L 5. av upholsterer’s in King Street, Covent Garden. See note to
p. 182, l. 27 in this volume.

P. 395, 1. 13. the two Crowns and Cushion. This was the sign of
Ame’s shop.

1.16. Zee Yee, etc. In the danals of Queen Anne the names are
given as follows :—Tee Yee Neen Ho Ga Prow, and Sa Ga Yean Qua
Prah Ton of the Maqua's; Elow Oh Kaom, and Oh Nee Yeath Ton
No Frow, of the River Sachem, and the Ganajohbore Sachem.

P. 396, |. 22. Hockley-in-the-Hole, near Clerkenwell Green, was famous
for its dog-fights, and its trials of skill generally. Cf. Gay's 7wo
Mastiffs :-—

‘Both Hockley-Hole and Mary-bone
The combats of my dog have known.’

1, 28. J, James Miller, etc. Serjeant Miller subsequently became
a captain, and fought in the ’45 under the Duke of Cumberland.

P. 397, 1. 17. Parkes should be Sparkes, who was buried at Coventry
under the following epitaph :—‘ To the memory of Mr. John Sparkes, a
native of this city: he was a man of a mild disposition, a gladiator by
profession, who, after having fought 350 battles in the principal paris
of Europe with honour and applause, at length quitted the stage,


494 Iv. MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


sheathed his sword, and, with Christian resignation, submitted to the
grand victor in the 52nd year of his age. Anno salutis humane,
1733.

P. 397, 1. 34. Elizabeth Preston, Miss, or more properly, Mistress
Elizabeth Preston, wasa real personage. Her father, and his father before
him, were kcepers or marshals of the Hockley Bear Garden. (Cun-
ningham’s London, 1850, 229.)

P. 400,114, Tully speaks, etc. use. Quest. lib. ii. De'Tolerando
Dolore. Cicero seems to have been Steele’s favourite author.

P. 401, 1. 24. Coldstream regiment of foot-guards, This had been
Steele’s own regiment. See Jntroduction, p. xiv.

Ll. 25. Red-Lettice, i.e. Red-Lattice. In the Merry Wives of
Windsor, Act ii, Sc. 2, Falstaff speaks of ‘red-lattice phrases,’ i.e. ale-
house expressions; and a note in Staunton’s Shakespeare, 1864, ii. 114,
says ‘ Ale-houses, in old times, were distinguished by red-lattices, as
dairies have since been by greez ones.

Butcher Row, between Holywell Street and Ship Yard in the
Strand, was pulled down in 1813. Clifton’s in Butcher Row was
a haunt of Johnson; and it was from the Bear and Harrow there that
Nat. Lee was returning when he met with his death in Clare Market.

1. 32. Bowhours and Rapin. Dominic Bouhours, 1628-1702, and
Nicolas Rapin, 1535-1608, both French critics.

1, 38. the action, The battle of Malplaquet was fought September
11,1709. ‘The Allies lost 18,000 men; the French 15,000.

P. 402, 1. 33. the stege, i.e. the siege of Mons, which was taken
October 21, 1709.

P, 403, 1, 26. Coldstream. Steele is here speaking dramatically as
Isaac Bickerstoff, who had been a soldier. He himself was not bom
when Monk raised the Coldstream regiment, though he had entered the
army as a cadet.

P. 407, L. 20. that infamy, This paper, written in days when all
boys—in Gay’s phrase—were

‘Lash’d into Latin by the tingling rod,’
is a noble example of Steele's superiority to the brutality of his age.
Other distinguished eighteenth-century authorities, however, held a less
humane opinion. Johnson, who had himself been a schoolmaster, said
‘ There is now less flogging in our great schools than formerly, but then
less is leamed there; so that what the boys get at one end they lose at
the other.’ (Napier’s Boswell, 1884, ii. 369.) He attributed his own
knowledge of the classics to the persistent punishment of his Lichfield
schoolmaster, Mr, Hunter; and, says Boswell, ‘upon all occasions,
expressed his approbation of enforcing instruction by means of the rod:
“I would rather,’ said he, ‘ have the rod to be the general terror of all, to
make them learn, than tell a child if you do thus or thus, you will be
more esteemed than your brothers and sisters. The rod produces an


NOTES, P. 397, L. 17—P. 415, L. 39. 495


effect which terminates in itself. A child is afraid of being whipped,
and gets his task, and there’s an end on’t; whereas, by exciting emula-
tion and comparisons of superiority, you lay the foundation of lasting
mischief; you make brothers and sisters hate each other!’ (/ézW. i. 19.)

P. 408, 1. 3. @ paper office. In 1725, a number of original letters
not printed in the Tatler and Spectator were published by Charles
Lillie with Steele’s permission, in two 8vo volumes.

l. 9. the Liberties, i.e. of London and Westminster.

P. 409, lL. 29. my aunt Margery. See Tatler, No. 151, printed at
p- 250 of this volume.

1. 30. Afaud the milkmaid, The reference is to Zatler, No. 75,
not printed in this selection, where a certain Sir Walter Bickerstaff
is related to have married a milkmaid.

P. 410, l. 2. fo fence well. See Tatler, No. 98 (in part by Addison),
for an account of Mr. Bickerstaff’s course of self-instruction in fencing.

1.15. acadet. See Introduction, p. xiii, and Tatler, No. 87, p- 403
in this volume :—‘ But to me, who was a cadet, etc.” It may fairly
be assumed that, in these references, Stcele is recalling his own entry
into military life.

P. 411, 1, 11. @ gentleman. Perhaps Peter Anthony Motteux (1660-
1718), the translator of Don Quixote, is here intended.

P. 412, 1.13. a very good Pindaric,etc. Cf. Tatler, No. 47, p. 304 in
this volume, for the case of Tom Spindle and his frustrate poem on the
peace.

1. 40. my late lucubrations. See Tatler, No. 104, p. 154 in this
volume.

P. 414, 1.19. Cicero. See Tusce. Disp. iii, iv.

P. 415, 1. 28. an tsland called Anticyra, Cf. Burton’s Anatomie of
Melancholy, 1628, p. 18 (Democritus to the Reader), ‘Who labours
not of this disease [Melancholy]? Give me but a little leaue and you
shall see by what testimonies, confessions, arguments, I will euince it,
that most men are mad, that they had as much need to go a pilgrimage
to the Anticyre (as in Strabo’s time they did) as in our dayes they run
to Compostella, our Lady of Sichim, or Lauretta, to seeke for helpe;
that it is like to bee as prosperous a voyage as that of Gutana, and
there is much more need of He//ebor than of Tobacco,

1. 38. Montpelier had at one time a great reputation as a resort
for consumptive people. .

1. 39. Aedlebore. See note to p. 415, 1.28, above. ‘ Black Helle-
bore was a Plant of great Use among the Antients, and particularly
for Melancholy and Madness, being accounted good to purge black
Choler and Humors arising thence, and to purify the Blood.’ (Miller’s
Herbal, 1722, p. 227.) To be ‘beyond the power of Hellebore’ was
to be incurably insane. Cf. Browne, Religio Medici, 1682, Pt. ii, s. 13,

For to me, avarice seems not so much a vice, as a deplorable piece of


496 IV. MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.


madness; to conceive ourselves pipkins, or be perswaded that we are
dead, is not so ridiculous, nor so. many degrees beyond the power of
Hellebore, as this.’

P. 416, L 1. Hungary Water. See note to p. 269, 1. 37.

1. 27. the college in Moorfields, i.e. Bedlam.

P. 417, 1.1. figures... already erected, i.e. Caius Gabriel Cibber’s
statues of Raving and Melancholy Madness. Cf. Pope, Dusciad, Bk. i,
ll. 31-32 :-— ;

‘ Where o’er the gates, by his fam’d father's hand,

Great Cibber’s brazen, brainless brothers stand ;—
the reference being, of course, to Gabriel’s son, Colley Cibber. Pope
errs in calling them ‘brazen’: they were of Portland stone.

1. 20. Oliver's porter. One of Cibber’s figures is said to represent
Oliver Cromwell’s tall porter, then confined in the hospital. There
is a print of him in Lauron’s London Cries, 1711. In Bedlam he
was allowed the use of his library, which included a large Bible given
him by Nell Gwyn. (See also Za¢ler, No. 51.)

1, 24. Garraway’s. See note to p. 144, 1, 28.

P. 420, 1. 26. exact and feat, i.e. nice and adroit.

P. 425, 1. 8. the country clown. See p. 442, ll. 37-8 in this volume.

P. 426, 1. 22. Laplanders. See the Lapland odes in Spectator, Nos.
366 and 406.

1. 25. Cowley. Cf. Cowley’s Pindarigue Odes, Written in Imita-
tion of the Style and Manner of the Odes of Pindar, to which Pope
refers (Jmitations of Horace, Ep. i, Bk. ii, 1. 77.)

‘Forget his Epic, nay Pindaric Art; )
But still I love the language of his heart.’

P. 427, 1. 11. the Bishop of Rochester, Dr. Atterbury (1662-1732).

P. 428, 1.8. az author. The lines are from Ambrose Philips’s Ox
Wit and Wisdom, a fragment.

l.19. A woollen-draper. It is suggested that this was a certain
Will. Pate, celebrated for his wit and leaming. Cf. Journad to Stella,
1710, Sept. 17,—‘ To-day I dined six miles out of town, with HW2//.
Pate the learned woollen-draper.’

1. 37. J was born, Steele here allegorises his own life,

1.40. 4A swarm of bees. Cf. the anonymous epigram on
Menander :-—

‘The bees themselves on thy lips honey dropped,
Thence, when the Muses’ flowers their zeal had cropped;
The Graces, too, Menander, made thee know
Of bright dramatic wit a happy flow.’
(Neaves’s Greek Anthology, 1874, Pp. 131.)

P. 429, 1. 10. the daughter of Machaon, etc. ‘This,’ says Chalmers,
‘seems to indicate that he [Steele] was early in life urged to embrace
the profession of physic, or follow the study of the law.’


NOTES. P. 415, L. 39—P. 435, L. 14. 497


P, 430, 1. 21. ave old astrologer. Mr. Isaac Bickerstaff of the 7atler
was an astrologer. a.

1, 22. @ dumb man; i.e? the Spectator. ‘Thus my Want of, or
rather Resignation of Speech, gives me all the Advantages of a dumb
Man. (Spectator, No. 4, p. 113, 1. 26, in this volume.)

@ lion. The lion is the Lion's Head Letter-box on the Venetian
pattern, set up in July, 1713, at Button’s Coffee House to receive con-
tributions to the Guardian (v. Nos. 98 and 114). From Button’s it
passed to the Shakespeare Head Tavem, and thence to the Bedford,
where it served for Hill's Zusfector. It is now in the possession of the
Duke of Bedford at Woburn Abbey. Under it are the lines :—~

‘Servantur Magnis Isti Cervicibus Ungues ;
Non Nisi Delecté Pascitur Ie Ferd.’
; (Martial, Bk. i, Ep. 23 and 61.)
A sketch of this grotesque relic from the Zuglish Tilustrated Magasine
for September, 1884, is to be found at p. 448 of this volume.

P. 431, 1. 2.°the oft Roman fable. See the fable of the Belly and
the Members in Coriolanus, Act i, Sc. 1, where Shakespeare relates it
after North’s P/ufarch. It is a fine instance of his transmuting power.

1,14. Carthaginian faith. ‘ Punica fides.

P. 432, 1. 8. very severe upon the Merchant. Cf. the Conscious
Lovers, act iv, sc. 2:—‘ Sir, as much a Cit as you take me for—I know
the Town and the World—and give me leave to say that we Merchants
gre a Species of Gentry, that have grown into the ‘World this last
Gentury, and are as honourable, and almost as useful, as you landed
Folks, that have always thought yourselves so much above us; for your
trading, forsooth! is extended no farther, than a Load of Hay, or a fat
Ox.—You are pleasant People, indeed ; because you are generally bred

p to be lazy, therefore I warrant you, Industry is dishonourable.’

P. 434,111. a@ merchant. Cf. Spectator, No. 109, p. 121, of this volume.

l. a4. The new-erected lottery, i.e. the first state lottery of 1710.
See also Tatler, Nos. 170 and 203.

P. 435, 14. a hundred and fifty thousand, etc. This will be best

plained by an extract from Ashton’s Social Life in the Reign of Queen
Lyne, 1882, i. 114:—‘ There were 150,000 tickets at £10 each, making
£1,500,000, the principal of which was to be sunk, and g per cent. to

allowed on it for 32 years. Three thousand seven hundred and fifty
tickets were prizes from £1000 to £§ per annum ; the rest were blanks—
a{proportion of thirty-nine to one prize, but, as a consolation, each blank
was entitled to fourteen shillings per annum during the thirty-two years.”
The following passages from the Wentworth Papers, 1883, pp. 127,
129, refer to the drawing of this lottery in the ensuing July and August:
—TI hear the Million Lottry, is drawing and thear is a prise of 400 £
a year drawn, and Col. St. Pear has gott 5 (sc) a year; it will be hard
fate if you miss a pryse that put soe much in, I long tel its all drawn;


Kk


498 IV, MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS,


they say it will be six weeks drawing (August I, 1710).’ Again, ‘The
Million Lottry is drawing, and som very ordenary creeture has gott
400 £ a year” (August 4, 1710.) It was still proceeding in Sep-
tember :—‘ [Sep.] 15 [1710]. To-day Mr. Addisox, Colonel Freind
and I went to see the million lottery drawn at Guildhall. The jacka-
napes of blue-coat boys gave themselves such airs in pulling out the
tickets, and shewed white hands open-to the company to let us see
there was no cheat.’ (Journal to Stella.) There is an old print of
1710 which exhibits the blue-coat boys, who drew the tickets, at their
work, (See also 7atler, Nos. 170 and 203.)

P. 435, L. 15. @ plumb. See note to p. 222, J. 16,

l.20. Mr. Morphew. See note to p. 71, 1. 19.

P. 436, 1. 13. whirling her mop. CE. Swift's City Shower, in Tatler,
No, 238 :— .

‘Such is that sprinkling which some careless Quean
Flirts on you from her Mop, but not so clean:
You fly, invoke the Gods, then, turning, stop
To rail; she, singing, still whirls on her Mop.’

l.x1. te months, i.e. the drawing’ of the lottery.

lL. 27. the penny-lottery. This was one of the many private enter-
prises of this kind. Chalmers quotes the title of a pamphlet which
refers to an earlier penny-lottery:— Ze Wheel of Fortune ; or, Nothing
Jor a Penny. Being remarks on the drawing of the Penny-Lottery at
the Theatre-Royal tn Dorset-Garden ... Written by aperson who was
cursed mad that he had not the thousand pounds lot, 4to: 1698.

P. 437, 1.13. Partridge. Partridge, of course, was still alive at this
date. (See Lntroduction, p. xxvii.) He died m 1714.

1, 24, shall arise, i.e. produce, create, givé rise to.

P. 438, 1.16. @ man, This paper, it is said, contains the germ of
Robinson Crusoe, the first part of which was published by ‘William
Taylor, ‘at the Sk7p in Pater-Noster-Row, on the 25th of April, 1719,
Defoe, like Steele, may have seen and conversed with Selkirk; but it is
not impossible that Steele’s account first attracted him to the subject.

P. 440, 1. 30. Az¢dings, kittens. Herrick uses the word as an adjective.

‘His Aetiing eyes begin to runne

Quite through the table, where he spies
The hornes of paperie butterflies,

Of which he eates.’—Oderon’s Feast.

L 32. his clothes. Cf. Robinson Crusoe, 1719, p. 159, and pp, 176-7.

P. 442, 1. 28. she prince. This was Eugene of Savoy, who visited
London in 1712 to endeavour to induce the court to continue the war.
In Spectator No. 269, Sir Roger de Coverley comes to town to see him.
At the date of this paper (March 31, 1712), he had returned to the
Continent, covered with honours. He is supposed to have been
godfather to Steele’s son Eugene, who was born March 4, 1712, But


NOTES. P. 435, L. 14—P. 447, L. 27. 499


Lady Steele, in her autograph note about her children (Steele's Efist.
Cort. 1809, ii. 506), says nothing of this. As a matter of fact the
christening did not take place until April 2.

P. 443, L. 11, surprised Cremona. In 1702, when Villeroi was taken
prisoner,

l12, forced the trenches of Turin. On the 7th of September,
1706, Prince Eugene relieved Turin, which had been besieged for four
months by the French, totally defeating the enemy, more than 6000 of
whom (not including officers) were made prisoners, ‘besides a great
many Standards, Colours, Kettle Drums,’ etc.

1.15. of that stature. Swift, who disapproved the Prince’s mission,
is scarcely as complimentary as Steele :—‘ I saw Prince Eugene to-day at
Court: I don’t think him an ugly fated fellow, but well enough, and
a good shape.’ (Journal to Stella, January 13, 1712.) Later he changes
his opinion :—‘ I saw Prince Zzgene at court to-day very plain. He is
plaguy yellow,’ and literally ugly besides,’ (/éid., February 10, 1712.)

lat. Ats behaviour in an assembly. Bumet, who met Eugene
frequently at Leicester House, confirms this when he says,—‘' He
descends to an easy equality'with those with whom he converses;
and seems to assume nothing to himself, while he reasons with others.’
(History of his Own Time, ed. 1823, vi. 89 )

P. 444, 1. 16. never equalled but by one man, Marlborough, who had
been dismissed from all employments in December, 1711, upon a charge
of peculation, .On the qth of January, 1712, Steele had published a
pamphlet on the subject entitled, Zhe Englishman's Thanks to the
Duke of Marlborough.

1,27. the demolition of Dunkirk. This is the paper in which, ‘to
use Johnson’s phrase, Steele’s ‘wit at once blazed into faction. (See
Introduction, p. xxxiii, e¢ seq.)

1, 31. France and Spain, The Treaty of Utrecht, 1713, recog-
nised Philip, Duke of Anjou, grandson of his ‘most Christian Majesty,’
Lewis XIV, as King of Spain:

P. 445, 1.15. A most humble address, etc. The address or memorial
in question is printed in full at pp. 4-14 of Steele's subsequent
pamphlet Zhe Importance of Dunkirk Consider'd: in Defence of the
Guardian of August the 7th, 1713.

1, 24. Zugghe. The Sieur Tugghe was the Deputy of the Magis-
trates of Dunkirk, from whom the above address emanated.

1, 38. Three months should be ‘two.’ Steele corrected this himself
in a second letter, signed ‘ English Tory,’ printed in Guardian, No. 181.

P. 447, 1. 27. ‘Bnglish Tory’ ‘My Indignation at this Usage of my
Queen and Country, prompted me to write a Letter to Nestor Jronside,
Esq., which I subscribed Znglish Tory” (mportance of Dunkirk
considered, etc., 1713) p. 15-) Cf also Guardian, No, 168.


Kka2


INDEX TO THE NOTES.


Addison, Dean, 465.
Addison, Joseph, 454-
fEsop, 460.
After-life, 476.
Albergotti, 469.
Anticyra, 495.
Apollo, the, 464.
Arcadta, the, 486.
Arise, to, 498.
Aristotle, 459-

Arne, Thomas, 468.
Atterbury, Dr., 496.


Babies, 461.

Baker's Chronicle, 472+
Bands, 452. ‘
Bartbadoes, Ligon s, 483.
Bartholomew babies, 461-
Basset, 474.

Ratson’s coffee-house, 473.
Beaver, Mr., 468.
Bedlam, 451, 464.
Betianis, Don, 462.
Belinda, 451.

Bellman, the, 474.


Belly and the Members, the, 497.


Betony, 476.:

Betterton, Mrs., 488-
Betterton, Thomas, 488.
Bicknell, Mrs., 458.

Bite, a, 480,

Black-boy, 476.
Blackmore, Sir Richard, 453-
Bocealini, Trajan, 472.
Bossu, 452. '
Bouhonrs, Dominic, 494.
Bovey, Mrs. Catharine, 458-
Bracton, Henry de, 457-
Bravery, 484.

Brussels Postscript, 481.
Bubble, a, 481. .
Bubbleboy, Charles, 478-
Buckley, Mr., 473.

Bugles, 484.

Bulfinch, 450.


Bullock, William, 487-
Bumper Tavern, 452-
Butcher Row, 494-


Cadet, a, 495-

Czelicolo, 457-

Cesar, 453.

Cains Marius, 49°.
Calamanco, 464.
Camperfeld, Colonel, 459-
Canes, 479.

Cant, 456.

Carbonado, 467.

Careless Husband, 485+
Cartoons of Raphael, 499-
Catch, Jack, 481.
Cathcart, Lady, 475-
Caubly, Roger de, 492-
Censorium, the, 449.
Chapman, 453.
Christ-Church Bells, 493-
Church, Behaviour in, 478-
Clark, Mrs, Margaret, 468
Clay, Stephen, 435.
Cleland, Colonel, 459-
Clergy, condition of the, 456.,
Coldstream regiment, 494-
Collier, Jeremy, 455.
Coltsfoot, 476.

Colt's tooth, a, 475.
Commode, 465.

Conjurer, 464.
Correspondence, 481.
Country clown, the, 496.
Country Wake, 487.
Coverley, Sir Roger de, 458.
Cowley, 455» 451.

Crack, 468.

Cremona, 499-

Crimp, 474.

Cromwell, Henry, 481.
Cromwell's porter, 496.
Crown piece with breeches, 480.
Cunning man, 479+

Cutts, Lord, 452-


502


Dainty, Lady, 473-
Dark-house, 491.
Dawks’ Letter, 469-
Dawson, Bully, 459-
Dedications, 450.
Delicates, 455.
Denham, 453-
Dicky, little, 487-
Dinner-hour, 474.
Dip, to, 481.
Distrest Mother, 487-
Doggett, Thomas, 488.
Donne, Dr., 472.
Dorigny, Nicholas, 49°-
Dorimant, 471.
Doris, Congreve's, 454-
Dorset, ‘Earl of, 454-
Dragon cane, 479-
Droll (1), 45°-
Droll (2), 45!-

welling, 474-
Dunkirk, Bi otition of, 499.


Eboracensis, 455-

Edge Hill, 466.

Electuary, 476.
Encheividion of Epictetus, 455-
Enfield Chase, 475-
Ephesian Matron, 483.
Epsom Wells, 490.
Equipage, 477-

Estcourt, 452, 474, 489-
Etheredge, Sir George, 458.
Eubulus, 468.

Eugene, Prince, 498.
Eustace, Mr., 482.
Eutrapelus, 475.


Farthingale, the wheel, 400.
Fashion, Sir Novelty, 485-
Favonius, 463.’
Flogging in schools, 494-
Flourilles, Chevalier de, 45?-
Fond Husband, 490.
Footmen, 477. ;
Foppington, Lord, 488.
Fop's Fortune, 488.
Freeport, Sir Andrew, 453-
Front-box, 462, 470.


Garraway’s Coffee-house, 493.


INDEX TO THE NOTES.


Genios, 482.

Gibbosity, 466.

Gloves, Fringed, 475.
Grecian Coffee-house, 468.
Grogram, 471.

Guicciardini, Francesco, 472.


Hack, 457.

Harrison’s at Bath, 492.
Hart, Mr., 454.

Hastings, Lady Elizabeth, 489.
Heads, 465.

Heidegger, 486.
Hellebore, 495-

Heywood, Mr. James, 473.
Hickathrift, John, 462.
Hockley-in-the-Hole, 493.
Honeycomb, Will, 459.
Hoop-petticoat, 460.

Hot Cockles, 471, 480.
Hour-glass, 472.
Howdees, 478.

Hughes, Jobn, 457.
Hungary-water, 477.
Husband, 460.
Husbandman, 460.


Incantation, 457.
Indesert, 455.

Indian Kings, 493.
Inkle, 483. :
Inkle, Mr. Thomas, 483.
Isaac, Mr., 478.


Jambee cane, 479.

James Street, 491.

Jetting, 460.

Johnson, Benjamin, 488.

Kempenfeldt, Colonel Magnus,
459-

Kitlings, 498.

Lacedsemonians, 450,

Ladies’ Cure, 475. :

Ladies’ Library, 458, 475.

Land Tax, 481.

Langteraloo, 480.

Lapland odes, 496.

Led-friend, 451-

Lee, Nat, 451.

Leges Conwivales, 464.

Liberties, the, 459-

Lillie, Mr., 454-


INDEX TO THE NOTES. 503


Lion’s Head letter-box, 448, 497-
Lion and Man, fable of, 483.
Lizard, Lady, 459.

Longinus, 459.

Long-lane, 452.

Lottery, the, 497-

Loyola, 466.

Ludgate prison, 453.


Makebates, 482.
Malplaquet, 494.
Manns, Jenny, 460.
Mantua, 484.
Marlborough, 499.
Marston Moor, 465-
Mary, Mrs., 461.
Masquerade, 486.
Mather, Charles, 478.
Merchants, 497:

Miller, James, 493-
Mistress, 461.

Mobs, 456.

Mohocks, 467.

Mons, Siege of, 49+
Montpelier, 495:
Moorfields, 490.
Moreton, Mr. John, 449-
Morphew, Mr., 454
Motions, 486.

Muffs, 493. :
Motteux, Peter Anthony, 495-
Mum, 470. |

Murray, Mr., 459-
Musty (snuff), 464.


Nando’s Coffee-house, 479-
Naseby, 465.

Nash, Richard, 450.
New Inn, 459.
News-letters, 469.
Nickers, 473.

Nicolini, 478-
Night-gowns, 468.
Norris, Henry, 487.
Northern Lass, 489.
Notch, Sir Jeoffery, 451-
Novelists, 468.


Ogle, Jack, 465.
Open-breasts, 462.
Operation, 475.
Oraisons, 456.


Orange-wench, 477:
Otway, 482.
Overdo, Mr. Justice, 49?-


Pantomimes, 474.
Pasquils, 450.

Pasquin, 471.

Pate, Will, 496.
Penkethman, William, 488.
Periwig, Campaign, 473-
Persian habit, 484.
Persius, 450.

Peter the Great, 481,
Pewter, 468.

Phocion, 450.

Piddle, to, 471.

Pilgrim, the, 490.

Piper, Count, 481.

Place, to take, 483-
Plotting Sisters, 499
Plumb, a, 471.

Point of war, 462.
Portugal dishes, 479-
Posy, 479.

Powell, George, 449; 487:
Powell, Robert, 485.
Preston, Elizabeth, 49+-
Prevent, to, 449.

Profuse, to, 471.

Pultowa, 481.
Puppet-shows, 486.

Push, to, 477.

Pyrrhus, 455.

Queerity, 466.

Questions and commands, 480,
Rake, a, 481.

Raleigh, Sir Walter, 457.
Ramillies, 469.

Rapin, Nicolas, 494-
Rayner, Mr., 454:
Red-Lattice, 494.
Rigadoon, 492.

Rinaldo and Armida, 486,
Ring, the, 469.

Robin’s Coffee-house, 491.
Robinson Crusoe, 498.
Rochester, Lord, 458.
Roger, Sir, 487.

Rose Tavern, the, 459-
Russell Court, 459-
Rustic, 469.


5O4 INDEX TO


Sacheverell, 479.
Saltero’s, Don, 492.
Satyr against Wit, 453-
Scarron, Paul, 466.
Scawen, Sir William, 449.
Scornful Lady, 486.
Scotus, Duns, 466.
Scowerers, 467.
Sea-coal, 476.
Self-Tormentor, 487.
Seikirk, Alexander, 498- °
Sentry, Captain, 452, 459-
Serle’s Coffee-house, 463.
Shape (in verse), 480.
Shipton, Mother, 466.
Shoulder-knot, 475-
Side-box, 469.
Silk-worms, 49I.
Sion College, 455-
Sly, John, 453» 45:
Small-pox, 475-
Smalridge, Dr. George, 450.
Snape, Dr., 449:
Snuff-taking, 464.
Soho-square, 458.
Somers, John Lord, 451.
South, Dr., 457-
Spanheim, Mademoiselle, 451-
Spanish wool, 479-
Sparkes, John, 493.
Sprat, Dr. Thomas, 481.
Squire’s Coffee-house, 468.
St. Bride’s Church, 449. .
St. James’s, Garlick Hill, 455-
St. James’s Coffee-house, 456.
St. John Street, 452-
St. Wenifred’s Well, 491-
Stella (Mrs. Johnson), 454
Stocks Market, 49°-
Stonesfield Mosaic, 473-
Strand Bridge, 491-
Summer-islands, 484.


Tale-tellers, 472-


Tansy, 460.
Tea- Table, 459-


Tender, to. 4 +


THE NOTES.


Tender Husband, 489.

Terence, 451.

Thersites, 466.

Threadpaper, 467.

Tilt-yard Coffee-house, 460.

Tippet, Sir Taffety, 481.

Tom the Tyrant, 468.

Tompion, Thomas, 492.

Town Eclogues (Lady Montagu’s),
456.

Tradescant, 493-

Tragedian, 455-

Trow, 452.

Truepenny, Jack, 453-_

Trumpet, the, 451) 455-

Trusty, Sam, 476.

Tuck, a, 466.

Tucker, a, 475+

Tugghe, Mons., 499-

Tumblers, the, 467-

Turin, relief of, 499-


Ubiquitary, 471.
Upholsterer, 468.


Villiers Street, 449-
Vossius, 493.


Wagstaff, Humphry, 472-
Welsted, Leonard, 485.
Whipping-boys, 450.
Whitefoord, Caleb, 454-
White-pot, a, 460.

White’s Chocolate-house, 469.
Whittington and his Cat, 486.
Widow, the perverse, 460.
Wildair, Sir Harty, 485.
Wilks, Robert,'488.

Will’s Coffee-house, 459.
Wood, Lt.-Gen. Cornelius, 452.
Wycherley, 482.


Xenophon, 482, -
Xenophon’s Symposium, 457.


Yard Iand, 468.
York Buildings, 449-


THE END.


August, 1885.


BOOKS


PRINTED AT


The Clarendon Press, Oxford,


AND PUBLISHED FOR THB UNIVERSITY BY


HENRY FROWDE,
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AMEN CORNER, LONDON.


LEXICONS, GRAMMARS, &o,


A Greek-English Lexicon, by Henry George Liddell,
D.D., and Robert Scott, D.D. Seventh Edition. 1883. 4to, cloth, 12. 167,
A Greek-English Lexicon, abridged from the above,

chiefly for the use of Schools, 1883. square remo. cloth, 75. 6d.


Graccas Grammaticae Rudiments in usum Scholarum.
Auctore Carolo Wordsworth,D.C.L, Nineteenth Edition, 1882, 12mo, cloth, 44


A Latin Dictionary, founded on Andrews’ Edition of
Freund’s Latin Dictionary, Revised, enlarged, and in great part re-written,
by Charlton T. Lewis, Ph.D., and Charles Short, LL.D. gto. cloth, 2/. 55.

A. Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language, ar-
ranged with reference to the Classical Tanguages of Europe, for the use of
English Students. By Monier Williams, M.A. Fourth Edition. 8v0, cloth, 155.

An Icelandic-English Dictionary, based on the MS.
collections of the late R. Cleasby, Enlarged and completed by G, Vigfusson.
ato. cloth, 34. 75.

An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, based on the MS, collections
of the late Joseph Bosworth, D.D. Edited and enlarged by Professor T. N.
Toller, M.A., Owens College, Manchester. Parts I and II, each 15s. Zo de
completed tn four Parts. .

An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language,
arranged on an Historical basis. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. Second Edition,
Ato. cloth, af, 4s.

A Supplement to the First Edition of the above,
ato. 2s. 62,

A Concise Etymological Dictionary of the English
Language. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d,

A New English Dictionary, on Historical Principles,
founded mainly on the materials collected by the Philological Society, Edited
by James A. H, Murray, I LL.D., President of the Philological Socks 3 with

cho


the assistance of many lars and men of Science, Part —, ~
xvi, 352). Imperial gto. 225. 6a, sia: BA ANT ER


(1)


a i pr i


2 Books lately printed at the


GREEK CLASSICS.


Aeschylus: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione Guil.
Dindorfil Second Edztion, 1851. Bvo. cloth, 5s. 6d.


Sophocles: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione et cum
commentarils Guil, Dindorfii. Third Edition, 2 vols. fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1h, 88.
Each Play separately, /:s9, 25. 6d.
The Text alone, printed on writing paper, with large
margin, royal r6mo. cloth, 8¢.
The Text alone, square 16mo. cloth, 3s. 6d.
Each Play separately, /4m, 6d. (See also page 11.)
Sophocles: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, cum Annotatt. Guil.
Diadorfil, Tomi II, 1849. 8vo. cloth, ros.
The Text, Vol I. 5s. 6¢. The Notes, Vol. IE. 4s, 6d.
Euripides: Tragoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione Guil.
Dindorfil, Tomi lI. 1834. 8vo. cloth, ros.
Aristophanes: Comoediae et Fragmenta, ex recensione
Gull. Dindorfii, Tomi II. 1835. 8vo. cloth, x15.
Aristoteles; ex recensione Immanuelis Bekkeri. Accedunt
Indices Sylburgiant. Tom! XI. 1837. 8vo, cloth, 24. 105. :

The volumes may be had separately (except Vol. IX.), 5s. 6d, each.
Aristotelis Ethica Nicomachea, ex recensione Immanuelis
*  Bekkeri. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.

Demosthenes: ex recensione Guil. Dindorfii, Tomi IV.
3846. 8vo. cloth, xf. xs.
Homerus: Ilias, ex rec. Guil. Dindorfii. 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.


Homerus: Odysseas, ex rec. Guil. Dindorfii, 1855. 8vo.
cloth, 55. 6d-


Plato: The Apology, with a revised Text and English


Pores ond | and a Digest of Platonic Idioms, by James Riddell, M.A. 1878, 8¥0.
es


Plato: Philebus, with a revised Text and English Notes,
by Edward Poste, M.A. 1860. 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d.

Plato: Sophistes and Politicus, with a revised Text and
English Notes, by L. Campbell, M.A. 1867. 8vo. cloth, 183.

Plato: Theaetetus, with a revised Text and English Notes,
by L, Campbell. M.A, Second Edition. 8v0. cloth, 10s.


Plato: The Dialogues, translated into English, with Ana-
lyses and Introductions. By B.Jowett,M.A. 4 sew Sastion tn sive volumes.
1875. Medium 8vo. cloth, 3f. 105.


Plato: The Republic, translated into English; with an
‘Analysis and Introduction. By B. Jowett, M.A. Medium 8vo, cloth, 121. 6d.


Thucydides: translated into English, with Introduction,
Marginal Analysis, Notes and Indices. By the same. ¢@ vols. 1881. Medium
Bvo. cloth, 12,125, +


rr SL Sy


Clarendon Press, Oxford. 3


THH HOLY SCRIPTURES.


The Holy Bible in the Earliest English Versions, made from
the Latin Vulgate by John Wycliffe and his followers: edited by the Rey. J.
Forshall and Slr F. Madden: 4 vols. 1850. royal gto. cloth, 34. 35.

Also reprinted from the above, with Introduction and Glossary
by W. W. Sxgat, M.A.

(1) The New Testament in English, according to the Ver-
slon by John Wycliffe, about A.D. 1380, and Revised by John Purvey, about
A.D. 1388, 3879. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 6s.


(2) The Book of Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
and Solomon's Song, according to the Version by John Wycliffe. Revised by
John Purvey. Extra fcap, 8vo. cloth, 35. 62.

The Holy Bible: an exact reprint, page for page, of the
Authorized Version published in the year 1621, Demy 4to. Aal/ bound, té, 15.


Novum Testamentum Graece. Edidit Carolus Lloyd,
S.T.P.R., necnon Episcopus Oxoniensis, z8mo, cloth, 35.


The same on writing paper, small 4to. cloth, ros. 6d.


Novum Testamentum Graece juxta Exemplar Millianum,
z8mo. cloth, 23. 6d.


The same on writing paper, small 4to. cloth, gs.


The Greek Testament, with the Readings adopted by the
Revisers of the Authorised Version :—
(x) Pica type. Second Edition, with Marginal References, Demy 8vo,
cloth, 105. 6a.
{2) Long Primer type. Feap. 8vo. cloth, 45. 6a.
{3} The same, on writing paper, with wide margin, c/oth, 151.


Evangelia Sacra Graece. fcap. 8vo. limp, 1s. 6d.
Vetus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta Interpretum


secundum exemplar Vaticanum Romae editum, Accedit potior varietas Codicis
Alexandrink £aitio Avera, Tomilll, 1875. x8mo, cloth, 18s.


The Oxford Bible for Teachers, containing supplementary
HELPS TO THE STUDY OF THE BIBLE, including suminaries of the several
Books, with copious explanatory notes; and Tables illustrative of Scripture
History and the characteristics of Bible Lands with a complete Index of

. Subjects, a Concordance, a Dictionary of Proper Names, and a series of
Maps. Prices in various sizes and bindings from gs. to 2k. ss.


Helps to the Study of the Bible, taken from the OXFORD
BIBLE FOR TEACHERS, comprising summaries of the several Books with
copious explanatory Notes and Tables illustrative of Scripture History and the
characteristics of Bible Lands; with a complete Index of Subjects, a Con-
cordance, a Dictionary of Proper Names, and a series of Maps, Crown 8vo,
cloth, 35. 6d,, 16m0. cloth, xs.


TD


4 Clarendon Press, Oxford.


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, &c.


Baedae Historia Ecclesiastica. Edited, with English
Notes, by G. H. Moberly, M.A. Crown 8vo0. cloth, 10s. 6a,


Chapters of Early English Church History. By William
Bright, D.D. 8vo. cloth, x25,

Eusebius’ Ecclesiastical History, according to the Text of
Burton, Withan Introduction by William Bright, D.D, Crown 8vo. cloth, 85. 6d.


Socrates’ Ecclesiastical History, according to the Text of
Hussey. With an Introduction by William Bright, D.D. Crown 8vo, cloth,
95. 62,


ENGLISH THEOLOGY.
Butler’s Analogy, with an Index. 8vo. cloth, 53. 6d.
Butler’s Sermons, 8vo. cloth, 5s. 6d.


Hooker’s Works, with his Life by Walton, arranged by
John Keble, M.A. Sixth Edstton, 3 vols. 1874. Svo. cloth, 18, 115. 62.


Hooker’s Works; the text as arranged by John Keble, M.A,
a vols, 1875. 8v0. cloth, 115. Fi

Pearson’s Exposition of the Creed. Revised and corrected
by E. Burton, D.D. Sixth Edition, 1877. 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.


Waterland’s Review of the Doctrine of the Eucharist, with
a Preface by the late Bishop of London, Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d,


ENGLISH HISTORY.


A History of England. Principally in the Seventeenth
Century, By Leopold Von Ranke. 6 vols. 8vo, cloth, 3/4. 35.


Clarendon’s (Edw. Earl of) History of the Rebellion and
Civil Wars in England. ‘To which are subjoined the Notes of Bishop Wars
burton, 7 vols, 1849. medium 8vo. cloth, 24. 10s,


Clarendon’s (Edw. Earl of) History of the: Rebellion and
Civil Wars in England. 7 vols. 2839. :8mo. cloth, x4 22.


Freeman’s (E. A.) History of the Norman Conquest of
England: its Causes and Results, Jn Six Volumes. 8vo, cloth, sh 9s. 6d.


Vol. I, and If. together, TArrd Edition, 1877, xh 165.
Vol. Ill. Second Fdition, 1874. x4. 18,

VoL IV. Second Edition, 1875. 2. 15.

Vol, V. 1876, xd. 15,

Vol. VI. Index, 1879 xos. 6a.


Rogers’s History of Agriculture and Prices in England, 4-D.


1259-1793 Vols. I. and II. (1259—1400). 8vo. cloth, of a8.
Sole 111, and IV. (x40r-1582). 8v0, cloth, 22, 108,


ee oe gs ee


Glarenkon Press Serses.


I. ENGLISH.


A First Reading Book. By Marie Ejichens of Berlin ; and
edited by Anne J, Clough. Ext. fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 4a.

Oxford Reading Book, Part I. For Little Children.
Ext. fcap. 8vo. stifcovers, 6a.

Oxford Reading Book, Part II. For Junior Classes,
Ext. feap, 8vo. stif? covers, 6a.

An Elementary English Grammar and Exercise Book,
By O. W. Tancock, M.A, Second Edition. Ext. fcap, 8vo. 15. 6d.

An English Grammar and Reading Book, for Lower
Forms in Classical Schools. By the same Author. Fourth Edition, Ext. fcap.
8vo. cloth, 35. 6a. .

Typical Selections from the best English Writers, with
Introductory Notices. In Two Volumes. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3%. 6d. each,

The Philology of the English Tongue. By J. Earle,
M.A., formerly Fetlow of Ortel College, and Professor of Anglo-Saxon, Oxford.
Third Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 75. 6d.

A. Book for Beginners in Anglosaxon. By John Earle,
M.A. Third Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6d,

An Anglo-Saxon Primer, with Grammar, Notes, and Glos-
sary. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Second Edition, Extra fcap, 8vo. cloth, as. 6a,


An Anglo-Saxon Reader, in Prose and Verse, with Gram-
matical Introduction, Notes, and Glossary. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Fourth
Edition. Extra fcap. Svo. cloth, Bs. 6a.

First Middle English Primer; with Grammar and Glos-
Sary. By Henry Sweet, M.A. Extra fcap, 8vo,. cloth, as.

The Ormulum; with the Notes and Glossary of Dr.R.M,
White. Edited by R. Holt, M.A. 9 vols. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, ars.


Specimens. of Early English. A New and Revised Edi-
tion. With Introduction, Notes, and Glossarial Index, By R. Moi ~D.
and W.W.Skeat. MA. y ELD
Parti, From Old English Homilies to King Horn (A.D. 1180 to A.D. 1300).
, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, gs.
Part If, From Robert of Gloucester to Gower (A.D, 1298 to A.D. 1993). Extra
fcap. 8vo. cloth, 75. 6d.


Specimens of English Literature, from the ‘ Ploughmans
Crede' to the ‘Shepheardes Calender’ (A.D. 1394 to A.D. 1579). With Intros
duction, Notes, andGlossarial Index. By W. W. Skeat, M.A. Third Edition,
Ext. fcap. 8yo, cloth, 7s. 6a.


The Vision of William concerning Piers the Plowman,
py Wiliam Langtand. Edited, with Notes, by W. W. Skeat, M.A, Third
Edition. Ext. fcap, 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d,

Chaucer. The Prioresses Tale; Sire Thopas; The


Monkes Tale; The Clerkes Tale; The Squieres Tale, &c. Edited by W. W.
Skeat, M.A. Second Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo, eloth, 4s. 6d.


eee


6 Clarendon Press Series.


Chaucer. The Tale of the Man of Lawe; The Par-
doneres Tale; The Second Nonnes Tale; The Chanouns Yemannes Tale.
By the same, Editor. Second Edition, , Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s, 6d.


The Tale of Gamelyn. Edited, with Notes and a Glos-
sarial Index, by W..W. Skeat, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff coters, 1s. 6d.


Old English Drama, Marlowe’s Tragical History of Doctor
Faustus, and Greene's Honourable History of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay.
Edited by A. W. Ward, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 55. 6a.


Marlowe. Edward II. With -Notes, &c. By O. W.
Tancock, M.A., Head Master of Norwich School. Extra fcap. 8vo. cfoth, 35.

Shakespeare. Hamlet. Edited by W. G. Clark, M.A., and
W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Extrafcap. 8vo, stif covers, 25.


Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. Aldis Wright,
M.A, Extra fcap. 8vo. stp covers.


The Tempest, rs. King Lear, rs.
As You Like It, zs. a ‘A Midsummer Se Dream, 15. 62,
ulius Carsar, 25. Coriolanus, 2s.


ichard the Third, 2s. 6d. Henry the Fifth, 2s.
(For other Plays, see p. 7.)


Milton. Areopagitica. With Introduction and Notes. By
J. W. Hales,M.A. TZkird Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. .
Milton. Samson Agonistes. Edited with: Introduction
and Notes by John Churton Collins. Extra (cap. 8vo, sticovers, 1s.‘
Bunyan. Holy War. Edited by E. Venables, M.A. In

the Press, (See also p. 7.)


Addison. Selections from Papers in the Spectator. With
Notes, By T. Arnold, M.A., University College. Extra tcap. 8vo. cloth, 45. 6d.


Burke. Four Letters on the Proposals for Peace with
the Regicide Directory of France. Edited, with Introduction
and Notes, by E, J. Payne, M.A, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, ss. See also page 7.

Also the following in paper covers,

Goldsmith. Deserted Village. ad.


Gray. Selected Poems, Edited by Edmund Gosse, Clark


Lecturee in Enghsh Literature at the University of Cambridge, xtra fcap,
Bvo0, stitf covers, 15. 6d, ; bound in while parchment, 3.


Gray. Elegy, and Ode on Eton College. ad.

Johnson. Vanity of Human Wishes. With Notes by E, J,
Payne, M.A. 4d,

Keats. Hyperion, Book I, With Notes by W.T.Amold, 4@

Milton. ' With Notes by R. C. Browne, M.A,


Lycidas, 3d. L’Allegro, 34. Ii Pensergso, 4a.
Comus, ‘6d. Samson Agonistes, 6a. 3


Parnell. The Hermit. 2d.


Scott. Lay of the Last Minstrel, Introduction and Canto I.
With Notes by W, Minto, M.A. 64.


a er a Nn RT TT


oe


Clarendon Press Series. q


4 SERIES OF ENGLISH CLASSICS


Designed to meet the wants of Students in English Literature; by the
late J. S. Brewer, M.A., Professor of English Literature at King’s
College, London.


1. Chaucer, The Prologue to the Canterbury Tales; The
Knightes Tale; The Nonne Prestes Tale. Edited by R. Morris, LL.D.
Fifty first Thousand, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d. See also p. 6.

a. Spenser’s Faery Queene. BooksIandII, By G. W.
Kitchin, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6a. each.


3. Hooker. Ecclesiastical Polity, Book I. Edited by R. W.
Church, M.A., Dean of St, Paul's, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.
4. Shakespeare. Select Plays. Edited by W. G. Clark,
M.A., and W, Aldis Wright, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. rtf covers.
I. The Merchant of Venice. xs. Il. Richard the Second, 1s. 6d,
IlI, Macbeth, xs. 6d, (For other Plays, see p. 6.)
6- Bacon.
1, Advancement of Learning. Edited by W. Aldis Wright, M.A, Second
Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 62.
IX, The Essays. With Introduction aod atee Preparing,
6. Milton. Poems. Edited by R. C. Browne, M.A. In
Two Volumes, Fourts Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo, cloth, 6s. 6a.


Sold separately, Vol. I. 4s., Vol. 11. 3s.


y» Dryden. Stanzas on the Death of Oliver Cromwell ;
Astraea Redux; Annus Mirabilis; Absalom and Jciitoptel 3 Religio Laici ;
The Hind and the Panther. Edited by W. D. Christie, N .A., Trinity College,
Cambridge. Second Edition. Extra icap. 8vo, cloth, 33. 6d.

8. Bunyan. The Pilgrim’s Progress, Grace Abounding, and
A Relation of his Imprisonment. Edited, with Biographical Introduction and
Notes, by E. Venables, M.A., Precentor of Lincoln, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 54.

g. Pope. With Introduction and Notes. By Mark Pattison,
B.D., Rector of Lincoln College, Oxford.

I, Essay on Man. Sixth Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. stiff covers, 1s. 6a,
II, Satires and Epistles. Second Sdition., Extra feap. 8vo. stif’covers, 24.

10, Johnson. Select Works. Lives of Dryden and Pope,
and Rasselas. Edited by Alfred Milnes, B.A. (Lond), late Scholar of Lincola
College, Oxford. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

11. Burke, Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by E. J.
Payne, M.A., Fellow of University College, Oxford.

1. Thoughts on the Present Discontents; the Two Speeches on America, |
etc, Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 45. 6a.

Il. Reflections on the French Revolution, Second Hadstion, Extra fcap,
Bvo. cloth, ss. See also p, 6,

12, Cowper. Edited, with Life, Introductions, and Notes,
by H. T. Griffith, B.A., formerly Scholar of Pembroke College, Oxford,

1, The Didactic Poems of 1782, with Selections from the Minor Pieces,
A.D. 1779-1783. Ext. fcap. 8vo,. cloth, 35.


1%, The Task, with Tirocinium, and Selections from the Minor Poems,
A.D. 1784-1799, Ext, fcap. 8v0. cloths, 35.


i a a a a er rn


8 Clarendon Press. Sertes. -


Il. LATIN.


Rudimenta* Latina; comprising Accidence, and Exercises
of a very Elementary Character, for the use of Beginners By John Barrow
Allen, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25. Gust Published.

An Elementary Latin Grammer. By the same Author.

* Third Bdition. Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. ; .

A First Latin Exercise Book. By the same Author,
Fourth Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2. 6a.

A. Second Latin Exercise Book. By the same Author,
Extra fcap, 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d,

Exercises in Latin Prose Composition. By G.G, Ramsay,
M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. 45. 6d.

Reddenda Minora, or Easy Passages, Latin and Greek, for


Unseen Translation. For the use of Lower Forms. Composed and selected
by C.S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 12. 6a.


Anglice Reddendsa, or Easy Extracts, Latin and Greek,
for Unseen Translation. By C. S. Jerram, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6a.


Passages for Translation into. Latin. Selected by
J. ¥. Sargent, M.A. Sixth Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25. 6d.


First Latin Beader. By T. J. Nunns, M.A. Third
Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25.


Caesar. The Commentaries (for Schools). With Notes

and Maps, &c. By C. E. Moberly, M.A., Assistant Master in Rugby School.
The Gallic War. Second Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 45. 6d.
The Civil Var, Extra fcap.8vo. cloth, 35, 6d.
The Civil War. Book. Second Edttion, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s,

Cicero. Selection of interesting and descriptive passages.
With Notes. By Henry Walford, M.A. In Three Parts. Thtrd Edition,
Ext, feap. 8v0. cloth, 4s. 6d. Bach Part separately, tn limp cloth, ts. 62.

Cicero. Select Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By the
late C. E. Prichard, M.A., and E, R. Bernard, M.A. Extra fcap.8vo. céoth, 35.

Cicero. Select Orations (for Schools), With Notes. By
J. R. King, M.A. Second Edition, Ext. feap.8vo. cloth, as. 6d.

Cornelius Nepos. With Notes, by Oscar Browning, M.A.
Second Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s, 6d.

Livy. Selections (for Schools), With Notes and Maps,
By H. Lee Warner, M.A, in Three Parts, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 1s. 6d, each,

Livy. ‘Books V—VII. By A. R. Cluer, B.A. Extra feap.
8vo. cloth, 45. 6d. “

Ovid. Selections for the use of Schools. With Introduc-
tions and Notes, etc. By W. Ramsay,M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A.
Second Edition, Ext. fcap, 8v0. cloth, 5s. 6d.

Pliny. Select Letters (for Schools). With Notes. By the
Jate C. E. Prichard, M.A., and HE, R. Bernard, M.A. Second Aditton. Extra
feap. 8yo0. cloth, 3s. '


Clarendon Press Series. 9


Catulli Veronensis Liber. Iterum recognovit, apparatum
criticum prolegomena appendices addidit, Robinson Ellis, A.M. 8vo, céoth, 16s,

Catullus. A Commentary on Catujus. By Robinson
Ellis, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, 165. .

Catulli Veronensis Carmina Selecta, secundum recog-
nitionem Robinson Ellis, A.M. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, gs. 6a.

Cicero de Oratore. With Introduction and Notes. By
A. S. Wilkins, M.A., Professor of Latin, Owens College, Manchester.

Book I. Demy 8vo. cloth, 6s. Book II. Demy 8vo.clorA, 5s.


Cicero’s Philippic Orations. With Notes. By J. R. King,
M.A. Second Edttion. Demy 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d,

Cicero. Select Letters. With Introductions, Notes, and
Appendices. By Albert Watson, M.A. 7Atrd Edition. Demy 8vo. cloth, 185.

Cicero. Select Letters (Text), By the same Editor.
Second Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s.

Cicero pro Cluentio. ‘With Introduction and Notes. By
W. Ramsay, M.A. Edited by G. G. Ramsay, M.A., Professor of Humanity,
Glasgow, Second Edition, xt. feap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 6a.

Livy, Book I. By J. R. Seeley, M.A., Regius Professor
of Modern History, Cambridge. Second dition. Demy 8vo, cloth, 65.

Horace. With Introductions and Notes. By Edward C.
Wickham, M.A,, Head Master of Wellington College.

Vol. I. The Odes, Carmen Seculare, and Epodes. Extra fcap. 8vo0. cloth, 5s. 6a.

Persius, The Satires. With a Translation and Com-
mentary, By John Conington, M.A. Edited by H. Nettleship, M.A. Second
Eaition, 8vo. cloth, 78.6a,

Plautus. Trinummus. With Introductions and Notes.


For the use of Higher Forms. By C. E. Frecman, M.A., and A. Sloman, M.A.
Extra (cap. 8vo. cloth, 35.


Sallust. With Introduction and Notes, By W. W. Capes,
M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6a. *

Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin. With Intro-
duction and Notes, By John Wordsworth, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, 185,

Tacitus. The Annals, I-VI. With Introduction and Notes.
By H, Furneaux, M.A. 8vo. cloth, 185.

Tacitus. The Annals, J-IV. For the use of Schools and
Junior Students. By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo, ss,

Virgil. With Introduction and Notes. By T. L, Papillon,
M.A. avols. Crown 8vo. loth, ros. 6d.

The Text may be had separately, ¢/oth, 45. 62.

A Manual of Comparative’ Philology, as applied to the
Illustration of Greek and Latin Inflections, By T. L. Papillon, M.A. Zhird
Edition, Revised and Corrected, Crown 8vo, cloth, 63.

The Roman Poets of the Augustan Age. Virgil, By
William Young Sellar, M.A, New Edstion. 1883. Crown 8vo, 9s.

The Roman Poets of the Republic. By the same
Author, Extra fcap. 8vo, cloth, 145.


10 Clarendon Press Series.


IIt. GREEK.


A Greek Primer. By the Right Rev. Charles Wordsworth,
D.C.L., Bishop of St. MAdrews. Seventh Rartion. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 13.6d,

Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective. By W. Veitch.
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6a.

The Elements of Greek Accentuation (for Schools).
By H. W. Chandler, M.A, Ext. feap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 62.

First Greek Reader. By W.G.Rushbrooke,M.L. Second
Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25. 6a,

Becond Greek Reader. By A.J.M.Bell, M.A. Extra
{cap. Bvo, cloth, 35. 6d.

Fourth Greek Reader; being Specimens of Groek
Dialects. By W. W. Merry, M.A. Ext. fcap. 8v0. cloth, 4s. 6d. 5

Fifth Greek Reader, Part I, Selections from Greek Epic
and Dramatic Poetry. By E, Abbott, M.A, Ext. fcap. 8vo.cloth, 4s, 6d.

The Golden Treasury of Ancient Greek Peetry; with Intro-
ductory Notices and Notes. By R.S. Wright,M.A. Ext. feap. 8vo, cloth, 8s. 6a,

A Golden Treasury of Greek Prose. By R. S. Wright,
MLA., and J, Z. L. Shadwell, M.A. Ext.fcap. 8vo, cloth, 4s. 6d.

Aeschylus. Prometheus Bound (for Schools). With Notes.
By A. O. Prickard, M.A. Second Edition, Ext. fcap. 8v0. cloth, 2s. :

Aeschylus, Agamemnon. With Introduction and Notes.
By Arthur Sidgwick, M.A. Second Edition, Ext. fcap, 8vo. cloth, 34.

Aeschylus. Choephoroi. With Introduction and Notes.
By Arthur Sidgwick, M A, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35.

Aristophanes. In Single Plays, edited with English Notes,
Introductions, &c. By W.W. Merry, M.A. Extra fcap, 8vo,

The Clouds. Second Edition, 2s, The Acharnians, as, , The Frogs, 2s.

Cebetis Tabula. With Introduction and Notes by C.S.
Jerram, M.A. Ext. fcap, 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d.

Euripides. Alcestis (for Schools). By C.S. Jerram, M.A.
Ext. feap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6d, 7

Euripides. _Helena. Edited with Introduction, Notes, and
Critical Appendix. By the same Editor. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35.

Buripides. Iphigenia in Tauris. By C. S, Jerram, M.A.
Fust ready.

Herodotus. Selections. With Introduction, Notes, and
Map. By W. W. Merry, M.A. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25. 64.

Homer, Odyssey, Books I-XII (for Schools). By W. W.
Merry, M.A. Twenty-Seventh Thousand, Ext. fcap. Bv0. cloth, 4s. 6a»
Homer. Odyssey, Books XIII-XXIV (for Schools). By

the same Editor, Second Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth.ss,

Homer. Diad. BookI (forSchools). By D.B.Monro,M.A.,
Provost of Oriel College. Oxford. Second Fattion. Ext. feap.8vo. cloth, 25. |
Homer. Iliad. BooksI-XII. With an Introduction, a Brief

Homeric Grammar, and Notes. By D.B. Monro, M.A. Extra fcap. 8v0. c/oth, 6s.
Homer. Iliad. Books VI and XXI. With: Introduction
and Notes. By Herbert Hailstone, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo. c/oth, rs, 6d. each,


hee oe ope eR he ee ee
Clarendon Pres Series. It


Lucian. Vera Historia (for Schools). By C. S. Jerram,
M.A. Second Edition, Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 15. 6a.

Plato. Selections from the Dialogues [jncluding the whole
of the Apology and Crifo.] With Introduction and Notes by J. Purves, M.A.
Extra fcap. 8vo0. cloth, 65. 6a.

Sophocles. In Single Plays, with English Notes, &e. By
Lewis Campbell, M.A., and Evelyn Abbott, M.A. Extra fcap. 8vo,

Ocdipus Rex. Philoctetes. New and Revised Edition, as. each,
Oedipus Coloneus, Antigone, 15. 94. each,
Ajax, Electra, Trachiniae, 2s. each,


Sophocles. Oedipus Rex: Dindorf’s Text, with Notes by
the present Bishop of St. David's. Extra fcap. 8vo. c/oth, 15, 6d,

Theocritus (for Schools). With Notes. ‘By H. Kynaston
(late Snow), M.A. Third Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 62,

Xenophon. Easy Selections (for Junior Classes). With a
Vocabulary, Notes, and Map. By J. S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., and C. S. Jerram,
M.A, Third Edition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 38. 6a.

Xenophon. Selections (for Schools). With Notes and


Maps. By J.S. Phillpotts, B.C.L., Head Master of Bedford School. Fourth
Edition, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 62,


Xenophon. Anabasis, Book JI, With Notes and Map.
By C, S, Jerram, M.A. Ext. fcap. 8vo, cloth, as.


Xenophon. Cyropaedia. Books IV, V. With Introduction
and Notes. By C. Bigg, D.D. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6d,


Demosthenes and Aeschines. The Orations on the
Crown, With Introductory Essays and Notes. By G. A. Simcox, M.A,, and
W. H, Simcox, M.A, Demy 8vo. céoth, 195. . ,

Homer. Odyssey, Books I-XII. Edited with English


Notes, Appendices, &c. By W. W. Merry, M.A, and the late James Riddell,
M.A. Deny 8vo. cloth, 16s.


A Grammar of the Homeric Dialect. By D. B. Monro,
. M.A, Demy 8vo. cloth, ros, 62.
Sophocles. With English Notes and Introductions, ‘By
Lewis Campbell, M.A. In Two Volumes, 8vo. each 165.


Vol. I. Oedipus Tyrannus, Otdipus Coloneus, Antigone. Second Edttion,
Vol. If. Ajax. Electra. Trachiniae. Philoctetes. Fragments,


Sophocles. The Text of the Seven Plays. By the same
Editor, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d. ‘
A Manual of Greek Historical Inscriptions. By E. L.
Hicks, M.A, Demy 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.
IV. FRENCH.


An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, with


a Preface’on the Principles of French Etymology. By A. Brachet, Translated
by G. W. Kitchin, M.A. TAtrd Eattion. Crown 8vo. cloth, 75. 6a.


Brachet’s Historical Grammar of the French Language.
Translated by G.W. Kitchin, M.A. Fifth Edstion, Ext.fcap.8vo, cloth, 35. 6a.


A Short History of French Literature. By George
Saintsbury. Crown 8vo, efoth, ros. 64.


ie


12 Clarendon Press Sertes.


Specimens of French Literature, from Villon to Hugo,
Selected and arranged by George Saintsbury. Crown 8vo, cloth, 9s.

A Primer of Frénch Literature. By George Sgintsbury.
Second Edition, withindex. Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25.

Corneille’s Horace. Edited, with Introduction and Notes,
by George Saintsbury. Ext. feap. 8vo, cloth, 25.62.

Moliére’s Les Précieuses Ridicules. Edited with Intro-

| duction and Notes. By Andrew Lang, M.A. Ext fcap. 8vo, 15. 6¢.

Beaumarchais’ Le Barbier de Séville. Edited with Intro-
duction and Notes. By Austin Dobson. Ext. fcap, &vo, as. 6a.

Alfred de Musset’s On ne badine pas avec Amour, and


Fantasio. Edited with Introduction and Notes by Walter Herrics Pollock.
Ext. feap. 8vo. cloth, 25.


L’floquence de la Chaire et dele Tribune Frangaises,
Edited by Paul Bloutt, B.A. Vol. 1. Sacred Oratory. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 25.60.

French Classics, Edited by Gustave Masson, B.A. Univ. Gallic.

Extra feap. 8vo. cloth, 2s. 6a. each,

Corneille’s Cinna, and Moliére’s Les Femmes Savantes.

Racine’s Andromaque, and Corneille’s Le Menteur. With
Louis Racine’s Life of his Father.

Moliére’s Les Fourberies de Scapin, and Racine’s Athalie.
With Voltaire’s Life of Molidre. ‘ .

Regnard’s Le Joueur, and Brueys and Palaprat’s Le
Grondeur.

A Soiection of Tales by Modern Writers. Second Edition.


Selections from the Correspondence of Madame de Sévigné
and her chicf Contemporaries, Intended more especially for Girls’ Schools.
By the same Editor. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. .


Louis XIV and his Contemporaries; as described in
Extracts from the best Memoirs of the Seventeenth Century. With Notes,
Genealogical Tables, etc. By the same Editor. Extra fcap, 8vo. cloth, 23.625 ,


V. GERMAN.
German Classics, Edited by C. A. Bucnnem, Phil. Doc., Professor
in King’s College, London.
Goethe’s Egmont. With a Life of Goethe, &c. Third
Edition, Ext, fcap. 8v0. cloth, 35. . 7
Schiller’s Wilhelm Tell.. With a Life of Schiller; an histo-


rical and critical Introduction, Arguments, and & complete Commentary
and Map. Stcth Bastion, Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s. 6d.


—— School Edition, WithMap. Extra fcap, 8vo, as.
Lessing’s Minna von Barnhelm. A Comedy, With a Life


of Lessing, Critical Analysis, Complete Commentary, &c. Fourth Edition.
Extra fcap. 8vo. cloth, 35. 6d.


Schiller’s Historische Skizzen: Egmonts Leben und Tod,
and Selagerung von Antwerpen. Second Sdition. Ext. fcap. 8vo. cloth, as. 6a.

Goethe's Iphigenie auf Tauris. A Drama. With a Critical
Introduction and Notes, Second Edition, Ext.fcap. 8vo. cloth, 3s.


pe


eee
Clarendon Press Series. 13


Lessing’s Nathan der Weise. With Introduction, Notes, ete.
Extra feap Bvo. cloth, 45. 6d, e

Hoine’s Prosa, being Selections from his Prose Works.
} hited with Bnglnvh Notes, fa bat fosp. Bvay of, a1. 6d.

Modern German Reader, A Graduated Collection of Prose
Extrarts (rom Mao lern German Writer =


Part l With Enylet Note ja Gramma lL Appendix, and a complete Voca-
bulary. ZAard falstrors, Extra icip, avy. cloch, as. ok


Lance’s German Course.


The Germans at Home; a Practical Introduction to


Gernnn Conversation, with an Appendix cont. ining the Essentials of Germ
Granimar, Second Faitiwn. tvo.cleté, 2s. 6a,


Tho German Manual; a German Grammar, 2 Reading
Book, and 3 Handbook of German Conversation. 8vo0. cloth, 75. 6a

A Grammar of the German Language. Syo. cloth,’35, 62.

German Composition; a Theoretical and Practical Guide
to the Art of Translating Enylish Prose into German, 6vv. ciedit, 45. Ok,


Lessing’s Laockoon. With Introduction, English Notes, &c.
By A. Hamann, Phil. Doc., M.A. Ext. feap, fvo. cloth, 42. 6d,

Wilholm Tell. By Schiller. Translated into English Verse
by Edwaritfassic, M.A. Ext. frap. 8v0, cloth, ss.


VI. MATHEMATICS, &o,


Figurozs mado Easy: a first Arithmetic Book, (Intro-
ductory 9 ‘She Scholar's Arithmetic’) By Lewis Hailey M.A., formerly
Fellow u da uty Coll se, Camel fe. Crown Svo. cloth, 6a.

Answers to the Examples in Figures made Hasy.
By tha came Authot, Crown avo, cloth, 1s.

The Scholar’s Arithmetio, By thesame Author. Crown
Bro 11/8, 45. 68.

Tho Scholar’s Algebra, Bythe same Author. Crown 8yo.
ch th, ay 6d,

Book-kooping. By R. G. C. Hamilton and John Ball.
New and enlarged Cadition, Ext. feap. Svo. imp cloth, 28.

Acoustics. By W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S., Savilian Pro»
fe eorof Astronomy, Oxford. Crown 8vo0., cloth, 95.60.

A Tr atiso on Electricity and Magnetism. By J. Clak
M. 41, MLA, E.R S. A New Edition, edited by W.D. Niven, M.A. 3 wel
Den 1 cloth, vd, 4. 68.

An Elementary Treatise on Electricity. By James Clerk
Maxwell, M.A, Edited by Willlam Garnett, M.A. Demy 8vo, cécta, 74, 6a,

A Treatise on Statics. By GM. Minchin,M.A. Zhird


Edition, VOL A, Hguthsdrium of Coplanar Forces. Demy 8v0, cloth. gs, Fust
Published,


Uniplanar Kinematics of Solids and Fluids. By G. M.
Minchin, M.A., Crown 8¥0, céoth, 75, 6d.


Geodesy. By Colonel Alexander Ross Clarke, R.E. Demy


Bro. cloth, 128. 62, =


en i ke a ee ge


r4 Clarendon Press Series.


' VII. PHYSICAL SCIENCE,


A Handbook of Descriptive Astronomy. By G, F.
Ciambers, P.RAS. Fares Edttion, Demyuvo cf tA, 24.

Chemistry for Students. By A. W. Wiiliamson, Phil,
Dre, FS. Pafs ref Cheiristry, Untvers'ty © eye, London, 4 recy
fdstion, with Sols, 273 Lxt. (cap. 8v0. clot, Us. de,

A Treatise on Hoat, with numerous Woodcuts and Din-


rar Ly Palfour Stesart, LL.D. F.R.S.. Prof sor cf Ply.ics, Owens
Cull re Manche ter Fourth Aaiton. Usxt. flap. Uv0, cloth, ys. 6d.


Lossons.on Thormodynamics, Dy R. E, Baynes, M.A.
Crowa Gin. casts, 15 Ed.

Forms of Animal Life. By G. Rolleston, M.D., F.R.S.,
Linacre Professor uf Physlolugy, Oxtord, af New .'euron mn the Press.

Exercises in Practical Chomistry. Vol. I. Elementary
Exenises, By A.4; Vernan Harcourt, M.A.,and HG. Malan, MA. Zarra
Edition, Revised ty H. G, Malan, ALA. Crown 8vo, cork, os.

Tables of Qualitutive Analysis. Arringed by H. G.
Madan, M.A, Laur (2 460. st7courrs, 45. Of,

Gcology of Oxford and the Valley of the Thames,
By Jolin Phillips, M.A., F.R.S., Professorof Geeton ,Oxfurd tye, clo ay th. as


Crystallography. By M. H. N. Stury-Maskelyne, M.A.,
Professor of Mineralogy, Oxford, Jn the Press,


VIII. HISTORY.


A Constitutional HistoryofEngiand. By W.Stubbs,D.D.,
Kari Bishop of Chester. Lidvary Hdision, Thr stly demy Qc! 4,
20. Br.
Also in Three Vulumnes, Crown Bvo., fricersr, eh.


Belect Charters and other Illustra li 13 of En‘lish


Constitutional History from the Earliest Times tic relztn of buw 5) J,
By the same Author. Fourth Edition: Crown 0 u's, 85. 6d.


A Short History of the Normen Conyuest. By E. A.
Freeman, M.A. Serond Edition, Isxti “ap, bey. Co fA, os, 6d

Genealogical Tables illustrat ve of Modern History..
By H. B. George, M.A. Second Edn Eevised and Kadarged, Smiill gta
cloth, 124.

A History of France, down to the y 'r 1793. With
tiumerous Mar*, Plans, and Tables. By G. W. » D.U., Dein of
Winchester, In 3 vols. Crown 8vo, clots:, price IL ch,

Bolectiows from the Despatchos, Tren!! ¢, and othor


Lapers at the Marquess Wellesley, K.G. during MSG  tameus of India,
Edited by &. J. Oven, M.A, Sve. clotA, 14, 45.


Selections from the Wellington Despatches. By the
sme Editor, eyo, cloth, 24s,


A Hiatory of the United States of America, By E. J.
Payne, M.A, Fellow of University Colicge, ord. Jn the Press,


A Manual of Ancient History. By George Rawlinson,
M A., Camden Professog of Ancient History, Oxford, Demy 8vo, cloth, r4s,


HNN


00098077


Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 05 October, 2018
