The Neurotic Constitution (Alfred Adler (Bernard Glueck and John E. Lind, trans.), 1917)
==========================================================
Individual psychology's founding text: inferiority, compensation, and fictional goals. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (dli.ernet.214523).

THE  NEUROTIC
CONSTITUTION

Outlines  of  a  Comparative  Individualistic
Psychology  and  Psychotherapy


«v

DR  AH'RED  ADLER


AUTHORrZED  BNf.I.JSH  TRANSLATION  RY

BERNARD  (JLUKCK,  M.D.

Dim'ffjr  <if  chc  Clinii.  Sinn  Sing  Primii

ANt*

JOHN  K,  IJNi),  MAh

Senior  Avu'^utu  PhfMiiin,  S.ttnc  Klis'.Abcch^  llmpital  ;
Aim  iatc*  Psyvliiatrinf»  Wa^htngcon  A^flnm
f{D!i|nul;  atut  InitruilMf  in  l^yyhijtCfy,
Cknrgr;n|^y^i^|#|l  College

.\00’I0!:!L'3J.  30  HjiyiSi!!

;IO


\KU  \(»K(s

Mt  il  FAT,  VAHO  AND  t ’« >-\I  I'ANV


1  6o.i


EeptinUd  (by  arrangement)  f^m.
ike  American  Edition  of  igry


PRK1*^(:E


After  1  li;ul  iiiacie  the  atteiupi  to  investigate  in  the  Stmiie
von  the^  structure  and  tectonic

ill  organs  in  assataation  with  thrir  gonetic  basis,  their  functional
cajiahilily  and  destiny,  I  prorf  rd<  d,  supporting  myself  upon
already  available*  data  as  we*ll  .  s  tipon  my  own  experience,  to
apply  the'  same  methiK!  in  the^  ^tm!y  of  psychopathology.  In
lilt*  htiak  before  us  arc*  tnnhrec**’*!  Ilia  most  important  results  of
Illy  fcMiiparalivr,  individua!«fts  .elinhjoic  studies  of  the  neuroses.

As  was  the  ease*  in  the*  tla^ury  of  somatic  inferiority,  an
riiijiirii*  basis  is  made  ma-  »n  in  etmiparative  inclividual-
|it.yi‘liiilegy  b»r  tiu*  {.nirposc*  of  r  lablishing  a  tictivc*  standard  of
liciniialify  ifi  order  to  cmabh*  »»h.  !*♦  mc'-asure  and  compare  with
d  grades  of  deviatiim  f'rtun  n  In  ludh  of  these*  scientific
rmiravors,  the*  coiiijiarativc*  m.ilaMi  of  study  reckons  with  the
tJfigin  of  j)henoii}c*na,  disnuss<''  :uhh  camsideration  tin*  prc*sent
aiit!  sec'ks  to  tHitlinc*  from  iIimh  lie*  future.  This  method  <*f
apiifiiach  leads  us  tt»  view  tin  i"Mmpuision  of  c'volution  and  the
|ialluilo|pc*al  elaboration  as  tlc'  o  »dt  of  a  ronfliet  w'hieh  lireaks
forlh  in  the  organit'  sphere  tor  purpose  of  attaining  eejui”
poi^e,  fum1.itmal  c'ajiabilily  a.u!  .  d;.iptation  .  the  same  struggle
III  the*  psychic  sphere  is  undei  uu  command  of  a  fulitious  idea
cif  |iersoriality  whose  infliieiu'c  tiimomites  the  development  of  the
riniroth*  eharaeter  and  symp^*et»  '.  If  in  the  organic  sphere,
*’  ihr  itidividna!  develops  into  mdt  mass  in  which  all  of  the
iiidividiial  parts  i-oai|ieratr  common  goal*'  (Virchow),

if  the*  various  abililit's  and  t«  mh  neies  of  the*  individual  tend
toward  a  fiiirposefiiliv  difectcsl,  uoit-p«*rsonality,  then  w*e  may
upon  every  single  maniresistinn  of  life*  as  if  in  its  past,
|irrseftt  and  future  there  are  ecuO.itned  traces  of  a  dominating,,
guiding  idea.

I


PREFACE


vi

In  this  w3.y  it  hns  nppGsrcd  to  the  Euthor  of  this  book,  tliEt
the  most  minute  trait  of  psychic  life  is  permeated  by  a  purpose-
force.  Comparative,  individualistic  psychology  sees  in  every
psychic  event  the  impress,  so  to  speak,  or  symbol  of  a  uniformly
directed  plan  of  life  which  only  comes  more  clearly  to  light  in
the  neuroses  and  psychoses.

The  result  of  such  an  investigation  of  the  neurotic  character
should  furnish  proof  of  the  value  and  utility  of  our  method  of
comparative,  individualistic  psychology  in  the  problems  of
mental  life.

The  Author.


Vienna,  1912.


INl'RODUCTION


Omnia  ex  opinione  suspensa  sunt :  non  ambitio  tantum  ad
illam  respicit  et  luxuria  et  avarida.  Ad  opinionem  dolemus.
Tam  miser  est  quisque  quam  oredidit.’*

Seneca,  Epist.,  78,  13.

The  study  of  the  neurotic  character  is  an  essential  part  of
neuro-psychology.  Like  all  other  psychic  phenomena  it  can
only  be  understood  when  taken  in  connection  with  the  entire
psychic  lif<u  A  cursory  knowledge  of  the  neuroses  sufEces  to
enable  one  to  discover  that  which  is  peculiarly  characteristic  in
them  and  all  writers  who  have  studied  the  problem  of  nervous¬
ness  havt'  laid  particular  stress  upon  certain  peculiar  traits  of
character.  The  opinion  was  a  general  one  that  the  neurotic
shows  a  series  of  sharply  emphasized  traits  of  character  which
exceed  the  normal  staiulard.  The  marked  sensitiveness,  the
irritable  del)ility,  live  suggestibility,  the  egotism,  the  penchant
for  the  fantastic,  the  estrangement  from  reality,  but  also  more
special  traits  such  as  tyranny,  malevolence,  a  self-sacrificing
virtue,  ctK|uelry,  anxitdy  and  alisent-miruledness  are  met  with  in
the  majority  of  case  histories  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  detail
all  writers  who  have  thoroughly  studied  the  subject  in  order  to
endorse  their  contributions.  Of  the  more  recent  ones,  Janet,
who  has  carried  on  the  traditions  of  the  famous  French  school
and  who  ha.s  brought  to  light  some  very  important  and  ingenious
analyse.s,  must  he  especially  mentioned.  His  emphasis  of  the
neuruticbs  **  sentiment  crincompletude  ”  particularly,  is  so
wholly  in  harmony  with  the  results  offered  by  me  that  I  am
justified  in  seeing  in  my  work  an  extension  of  this  most
important  fundamental  fact  of  the  mental  life  of  the  neurotii'.

No  matter  where  one  begins  with  the  analysis  of  psychogenic
disorders,  one^  and  the  same  phenomemon  forces  itself  upon


INTRODUCTION


;  attention  after  the  briefest  observation,  namely,  that  the
e  picture  of  the  neurosis  as  well  as  all  its  symptoms  are
meed  by,  nay,  even  wholly  provoked  by  an  imaginary
ious  goal.  This  final  purpose  has  a  creative,  directive
adjustive  power.  The  potency  of  this  ‘‘goal  idea*’  is
lied  to  us  by  the  trend  and  evaluation  of  the  pathological
omena  and  should  one  attempt  to  dispense  with  this
nption  there  remains  nothing  but  a  confusing  mass  of
Ises,  trends,  components,  debilities  and  anomalies  which
nade  the  obscurity  of  the  neurosis  impenetrable  to  some,
j  others  have  undertaken  bold  exploratory  journeys  into
ield.

mre  Janet  has  certainly  recognized  this  relationship  as  is
n  in  his  classical  descriptions  of  the  Hysterical  Psyche  ;
(transL  by  Dr  Max  Kahane),  but  he  avoided  a  detailed
iption.  He  expressly  maintains,  I  have  until  now  only
ibed  general  and  simple  traits  of  character  which  by  means
eir  association  and  under  the  influence  of  definite  extran-
circumstances  may  produce  all  kinds  of  curious  behavior
:onduct.”  It  is  entirely  out  of  place  here  to  enter  into  a
led  discussion  of  Janet’s  description  for  this  treatise  would
resemble  more  a  moral  romance  than  a  clinical  study,
ig  adhered  to  this  attitude  even  up  to  his  latest  contri-
as  on  the  subject,  Janet,  notwithstanding  his  keen  insight
the  relationship  between  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses
noral  philosophy,  never  entered  the  road  to  synthesis,
remained  for  Joseph  Breuer,  a  man  w'ell  versed  in  current
an  philosophy,  to  discover  the  gem  which  lay  in  his  path,
irected  his  attention  to  the  meaning  of  the  symptoms  and
took  to  ascertain  the  source  and  purpose  of  the  same  from
lily  one  who  could  give  them — from  the  patient.  In  so
;  the  author  founded  a  method  which  seeks  to  explain
dual  psychological  phenomena  historically  and  genetically
the  assistance  of  a  preliminary  hypothesis,  i.e.,  that  of  the
minism  of  psychic  phenomena.  The  manner  in  which  this


method  has
Freud  with  1
with  connec
met  with  be
purpose  of
making  clea
fruitful  and
mental  view
progress  in
objection  is
motive  forc^
contrary  it  i
normal  psyc
of  a  “  final  ]
and  power  i
so  that  the
the  acquisiti
speak,  w^hiL
of  value.

The  neun
the  heightei
simplest  for
culine  prote
to  be  a  com
claiming  hi
The  libido,
versions  an
principle,  n<
to  power  ’  ’
which  agair
the  older  w
originates  i
feebleness  (

A  second
view  of  the


INTRODUCTION


IX


lod  has  been  extended  and  improved  upon  by  Sigmund
id  with  the  host  of  problems  and  attempted  solutions  there-
connected  belongs  to  contemporaneous  history  and  has
with  both  recognition  and  contradiction.  Less  for  the
>ose  of  following  a  critical  bent  than  for  the  purpose  of
ing  clear  my  own  position  I  beg  leave  to  separate  from  the
ful  and  valuable  contributions  of  Freud  three  of  his  funda-
tal  views  as  erroneous  inasmuch  as  they  threaten  to  impede
Tess  in  the  understanding  of  the  neuroses.  The  first
ction  is  directed  against  the  view  that  the  libido  is  the
ve  force  behind  the  phenomena  of  the  neurosis.  On  the
rary  it  is  the  neurosis  which  shows  more  clearly  than  does
lal  psychic  conduct  how  by  means  of  this  neurotic  positing
“final  purpose/’  the  apperception  of  pleasure,  its  selection
power  are  all  driven  in  the  direction  of  this  final  purpose
hat  the  neurotic  can  really  only  follow  the  allurement  of
acquisition  of  pleasure  with  his  healthy  psychic  force,  so  to
k,  while  for  the  neurotic  portion  only  “higher”  goals  are
alue.

he  neurotic  goal  (Zwecksetzung)  has  revealed  itself  to  us  in
heightened  ego-consciousness  (Personlichkeitsgefuhl)  whose
Jest  formula  is  to  be  recognized  in  an  exaggerated  “  mas-
le  protest”  (Mannlicher  Protest).  This  formula:  “I  wish
s  a  complete  man”  is  the  guiding  fiction  in  every  neurosis,
[ling  higher  reality  values  than  even  the  normal  p.syche.
libido,  the  sex-impulses  and  the  tendencies  to  sexual  per-
ions  arrange  themselves  in  accordance  with  this  guiding
:iple,  no  matter  whence  they  originate.  Nietzsche’s  “Will
ower  ”  and  “Will  to  seem”  embrace  many  of  our  views,
:h  again  resemble  in  some  respects  the  views  of  F6re  and
Dlder  writers,  according  to  whom  the  sensation  of  pleasure
nates  in  a  feeling  of  power,  that  of  pain  in  a  feeling  of
leness  (Ohnmacht).

second  objection  is  directed  against  Freud’s  fundamental
of  the  sexual  etiology  of  the  neuroses,  a  view  which  Pierre


X  INTRODUCTION

Janet  approached  very  closely  when  he  asked,  Is  sexual  feel¬
ing  then  the  center  around  which  all  other  psychological
syntheses  are  built  up?’*  The  applicability  of  the  sexual
picture  deceives  the  normal  person  and  especially  the  neurotic.
But  it  must  not  deceive  the  psychologist.  The  sexual  content
in  the  neurotic  phenomenon  originates  primarily  in  the
imaginary  antithesis:  Masculine-feminine’’  and  is  evolved
through  a  change  of  form  of  the  “masculine  protest.”  The
sexual  trend  in  the  fantasy  and  life  of  the  neurotic  follows  the
direction  of  the  “  masculine  goal,  and  is  really  not  a  trend,
but  a  compulsion.  The  whole  picture  of  the  sexual  neurosis  is
nothing  more  than  a  portrait  depicting  the  distance  which  the
patient  is  removed  from  the  imaginary  masculine  goal  and  the
manner  in  which  he  seeks  to  bridge  it.  It  is  strange  that
Freud,  a  skillful  connoisseur  of  the  symbolic  in  life,  was  not  able
to  discover  the  symbolic  in  “  sexual  apperception,”  to  recognize
the  sexual  as  a  jargon,  a  modus  dicendi.  But  we  can  under¬
stand  this  when  we  take  into  consideration  the  more  extensive
basic  error,  i.c.,  the  assumption  that  the  neurotic  is  under  the
influence  of  infantile  wishes,  which  come  to  life  nightly  (Dream
theory)  as  well  as  in  connection  with  certain  occasions  in  life.
In  reality  these  infantile  wishes  already  stand  under  the  com¬
pulsion  of  the  imaginary  goal  and  themselves  usually  bear  the
character  of  a  guiding  thought  suitably  arrayed,  and  adapt
themselves  to  symbolic  expression  purely  for  reasons  of  thought
economy.  A  sickly  girl  who  during  her  entire  childhood  in  her
consciousness  of  an  unusual  insecurity  leans  upon  her  father  and
in  so  doing  strives  to  become  superior  to  her  mother,  may
comprehend  this  psychic  constellation  In  the  form  of  an  incest,
as  if  she  wished  to  be  the  wife  of  her  father.  Thereby  the  goal
is  both  attained  and  effective ;  her  insecurity  is  only  abolished
when  she  is  with  her  father.  Her  developed  psycho-motor
intelligence,  her  unconsciously  active  memory  combats  all  feel¬
ings  of  uncertainty  with  the  same  aggression,  with  the  adequate
expedient,  to  take  refuge  in  the  father  as  if  she  were  his  wife.


INTRODUCTION


XI


Fhere  she  finds  that  heightened  ego-consciousness  which  she
has  set  for  her  goal,  which  she  has  borrowed  from  the  masculine
ideal  of  childhood,  from  the  over-compensation  of  her  feeling
of  inferiority.  If  she  recoils  from  a  proffer  of  love  or  marriage,
threatening  her  as  they  do  with  a  fresh  lowering  of  her  ego-
coiiseiousness,  she  acts  symbolically,  and  all  her  defensive
resources  and  her  predispositions  become  arrayed  against  a
female  destiny  and  make  her  seek  security  where  she  has  always
found  it,  with  her  father.  She  utilizes  an  expedient,  behaves
in  accordance  with  a  senseless  fiction,  but  is  nevertheless  certain
of  attaining  her  goal.  The  greater  her  feeling  of  uncertainty,
the  more  firmly  this  girl  clings  to  her  fiction,  endeavors  to  take
it  c|iiite'  literally  and  since  human  thinking  favors  symbolic
abstraction  the  patient  with  a  little  effort  (and  also  the  analyst)
Is  successful  in  the  longing  of  neurotics,  namely,  to  find
serurity,  to  gain  a  foothold  in  the  symbolic  picture  of  incestuous
emotion.

Freud  was  obliged  to  see  in  this  purposeful  manifestation  a
reMnimaticm  of  infantile  wishes  because  according  to  him  the
latter  are  to  be  looketl  upon  as  motive  forces.  We  recognize
in  this  infantile  nuKle  of  procedure,  in  the  extensive  use  of
safety-devices  (Hilfsconstructionen),  in  which  light  the  neurotic
fii  lion  is  to  he  regarded,  in  the  many-sided  motor  preparedness
whic  h  reacdies  into  the  remote  past,  in  the  strong  tendency  to
abHtraction  and  symbolization,  the  most  useful  expedient  of  the
neiirolii^  who  strive^s  toward  security,  toward  a  maximation  of
hi*“  r|;o,  toward  the  masculine  protest.

If  mv  attach  to  these  critical  remarks  the  question  of  how  the
neurotic  plienomena  come  into  being,  why  the  patient  wills  to
lie  a  man  and  constantly  seeks  to  adduce  proof  thereof,  whence
lie  lias  the  stronger  necessity  for  ego-consciousness,  why  he
makcK  siicdi  strong  endeavors  to  gain  security,  in  short,  if  we
inc|iiirf*  into  the  final  reasons  for  these  devices  of  the  neurotic
psyrhe,  we  may  conjecture  that  which  is  revealed  by  every
analysis,  namely,  that  at  the  onset  of  the  development  of  a


introduction

.eorosis  there  stands  threateningly  the  feeling  of  uncertainty
“riority  and  demands  insistently  a  guiding,  assi^ng  and
tranqmliring  positing  of  a  gold  in  order  to  render  hfe  bearable^
Among  these  are  especiaUy  prominent  safety  devices  and
fictions  in  thought,  action  and  volition.

It  is  clear  that  this  sort  of  psyche,  directed  as  it  is  with
especial  force  toward  a  heightening  of  the  ego,  will,  aside  from
specific  neurotic  symptoms,  make  itself  conspicuous  in  somety
because  of  its  evident  inability  to  adapt  itself.  The  conscious¬
ness  of  the  weak  point  dominates  the  neurotic  to  such  a  degree
that  often  without  knowing  it  he  begins  to  construct  with  all
his  might  the  protecting  superstructure.  (, Along  with  this  his
sensitiveness  becomes  more  acute,  he  learns  to  pay  attention  to
relationships  which  still  escape  others,  he  exaggerates  his
cautiousness,  begins  to  anticipate  all  sorts  of  disagreeable  con¬
sequences  in  starting  out  to  do  something  or  in  experiencing
an  injury,  he  endeavors  to  hear  further  and  to  see  further,
belittles  himself,  becomes  insatiable,  economical,  constantly
strives  to  extend  the  boundaries  of  his  influence  and  power  over
space  and  time  and  at  the  same  time  loses  that  peace  of  mind
and  freedom  from  prejudice  which  above  all  guarantee  mental
health.  His  mistrust  of  himself  and  others,  his  envy  and
maliciousness,  become  gradually  more  pronounced,  aggressive
and  cruel  tendencies  which  are  to  secure  for  him  supremacy
over  his  environment,  gain  the  upper  hand,  or  he  endeavors  to
captivate  and  conquer  others  by  means  of  greater  obedience,
submission  and  humility  which  not  infrequently  degenerate  into
masochistic  traits ;  thus  both  heightened  activity  as  well  as
increased  passivity  are  expedients  ushered  in  by  the  fictitious
goal  of  an  increased  power,  of  a  desire  to  be  above,  of  the
masculine  protest.


Thus  we  have  arrived  at  those  psychic  phenomena,  at  the
neurotic  character,  the  discussion  of  which  forms  the  content
of  this  book.  None  of  the  neurotic’s  traits  of  character  are
essentially  new.  He  shows  no  single  trait  which  cannot  like-


INTRODUCTION


xiii

wise  be  demonstrated  in  the  healthy  individual,  although  at
times  it  becomes  understandable  for  the  physician  as  well  as
the  patient  only  through  analysis.  It  is  uninterruptedly
sensitized,  thrust  forward  like  an  outpost,  and  represents
the  sounding  of  the  environment  and  the  future.  The  know-
ledge  of  these  psychic  dexterities,  w^hich  protrude  far  and  wide,
like  sensitive'  antenna',  first  makes  possible  the  understanding
of  the'  ncmrotic’s  struggle  with  his  fate,  of  his  stimulated
aggressive  tendency,  his  unrest  and  impatience.  For  these
antenmat'  test  al!  the  phenomena  of  the  environment  and  examine
ia'mstantly  for  their  advantages  and  disadvantages  with
retgnrd  to  the  assumed  goal.  They  create  the  keen  sense  for
estirnatt'  and  compari.son,  awaken,  by  means  of  the  attention
ac'tive  in  them,  fear,  hope,  doubt,  expectations  of  all  sorts  and
seek  to  ensure  the'  psyche  against  surprise  and  against  a  lower¬
ing  of  thf'  ego-consriousnes.s.  They  put  forth  the  most  acces-
Slide  nudor  dexteritit's,  ever  mobile,  ever  ready  to  prevent  a
df';.p’:uiaticm  of  the  person.  The  forces  of  internal  and  external
t'XpfTiema'  are  activt*  in  them,  they  are  filled  with  memory-rests
of  ff'ar  -  inspiring  as  well  as  consoling  experiences,  the  reminis-
of  whicdi  they  have  changed  into  dexterities.  Cate¬
gorical  imperativi's  of  the'  second  rank,  they  do  not  serve  to
liring  ahotit  their  own  existence,  but  in  the  last  analysis  cause
ail  rlrvation  of  tlu'  ego-cons('iousness  and  they  attempt  this  by
making  possihk'  the  discovery  in  the  unrest  and  uncertainty  of
life,  of  guiding  principles,  by  facilitating  the  differentiation
ladv/f  iut  right  and  wrong,  up  and  down,  right  and  left.  The
ari  eufuattal  traits  of  character  are  to  be  found  already  in  the
rifuirotie  diHjHisition  wher*'  they  give  rise  to  peculiarities  and
pfu of  (Huuluct.  These  liecome  still  more  pronounced
whfii  aftcT  a  more  severe  attack  or  after  the  emergence  of  a
roiitrailic  tion  in  the  masculine  protest,  the  craving  for  security
(Siidieriiugstenderiz)  asserts  itself  and  simultaneously  calls  forth
syfiiptcmis  as  new,  efft'ctive  expedients.  They  are  largely  con¬
st  niitt'd  after  models  and  patterns  and  have  for  their  object


XIV


INTRODUCTION


the  initiation  in  every  new  situation  of  the  strugg
preservation  of  the  ego  and  victory  for  it.  In  the
lies  the  reason  for  the  exaggerated  affectivity  ai
threshold  of  stimulation  in  contrast  with  normal
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  neurotic  character,  to
out  of  material  already  at  hand,  out  of  psychic  in
metamorphosing  experiences  of  the  somatic  functioi
All  these  psychic  dexterities,  standing  as  they  c
contact  with  the  outside  world,  become  neurotic  on
inner  want  accentuates  the  craving  for  security  wh
more  effectively  constructs  and  mobilizes  the  traits
only  when  the  fictitious  object  of  life  operates  more  c
and  strengthens  those  secondary  guiding  principlef
in  accord  with  the  traits  of  character.  It  is  the
hypostatization  of  the  character  sets  in,  its  transfer]
a  means  to  a  goal  leads  to  an  independence  of  exis
sort  of  deification  lends  to  it  unchangeability  and  et
The  neurotic  character  is  thus  incapable  of  adjust
reality  because  it  is  always  striving  toward  an  impc
It  is  a  product  and  instrument  of  a  cautious  -pi
strengthens  its  guiding  principle  for  the  purpose
itself  of  a  feeling  of  inferiority,  an  attempt  whicl
to  be  wrecked  as  a  consequence  of  inner  contradi(
barriers  of  civilization  or  on  the  rights  of  others,
to  the  groping  gestures,  pose  in  facing  the  rear,  t
attitude  in  the  act  of  aggression,  like  mimicry  a
expression  and  instrument  of  motility,  so  the  traits
especially  the  neurotic  ones,  serve  as  a  psychic  me;
of  expression  for  the  purpose  of  entering  into  an  .
life,  for  the  purpose  of  assuming  an  attitude,  of  ga
point  in  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  for  the  purpose  of  i
security-giving  goal,  the  feeling  of  superiority.

Thus  we  have  unmasked  the  neurotic  character  a
of  an  imaginary  goal  and  have  established  its  dep€
a  final  purpose.  It  has  not  sprung  up  independent


INTRODUCTION


XV


^ort  of  biological  or  constitutional  primitive  force,  but  has
deceived  direction  and  motivation  from  the  compensatory  super¬
structure  and  the  schematic  guiding  principle.  Its  emergence
^ook  place  under  the  pressure  of  uncertainty,  its  tendency  to
personify  itself  is  the  doubtful  success  of  the  craving  for
Security.  This  course  of  the  neurotic  character  has  received
through  the  positing  of  a  final  purpose  its  destination  which  is
%e  masculine  main  principle  and  thus  every  neurotic  tendency
betrays  to  us  by  its  direction  that  it  is  impregnated  with  the
tnasculine  protest  which  seeks  to  make  of  it  an  unfailing
instrument  for  the  purpose  of  excluding  from  experience  every
permanent  degradation.

In  the  practical  part  of  this  book  will  be  shown  by  means
t^f  a  series  of  cases  how  the  “neurotic  scheme*’  calls  forth
Special  psycho-pathological  constellations,  namely,  through  the
Apperception  of  experiences  by  means  of  the  neurotic  character.


B


iNTRODlICTION


Since  the  inception  of  the  psychoanalytic  movement  its
students  have  shown  a  remarkable  activity  in  applying  the
principles  of  interpretation  originally  enunciated  by  Freud  over
a  wide  field  of  human  endeavor,  and  thus  not  only  have  the
neurotic  and  the  psychotic  come  under  the  critical  survey  of
the  analyst,  hut  the  whole  course  of  cultural  development  has
been  subjected  to  inquiry  along  these  lines.  In  addition  to
this  growth  in  the  exieni  of  the  movement  it  has  manifested
what  seems  to  rue  to  he  a  very  healthy  tendency,  namely,  it
has  shown  an  iiuiiiiatiun  to  put  forth  suggestions  as  to  new
iiiethculs  approach  to  the  problems,  represented  here  and
tlu^re  by  groups  of  wtirk<*rs  who  have  tended  to  depart  more  or
less  frcun  tin*  original  formulations  as  laid  down  l)y  Freud.  One
of  tht‘  most  stimulating  and  valualde  points  of  view  which  have
been  develcqual  in  this  way  is  0  at  of  Alfred  Adler,  of  Vienna,
a  translatiori  of  whose  work  on  the  characteristics  of  the  neurotic
ehararder  is  offered  in  the  following  pages.

The!  distinctive  feature  of  Adlet^x  approach  to  the  problem
of  the  neurotic  cdiaracder  traits  is  that  it  approaches  from  the
organic  ratluT  than  from  the*  functional  side  and  in  this  way,  I
think,  affords  a  vcTy  valuable*  viewpoint  because  it  tends  to
bring  together  the  organicist  and  the  functionalist,  who  have
been  too  long  ♦  eparabai  by  the  misconception  of  irreconcilable
differences  lietween  mind  and  body.  No  small  part  of  the
opposition  to  the  whole  psycdiologleal  movement,  as  repre¬
sented  in  psyehoanalysis,  has  come  from  the  inability  of  the
iftan  who  has  been  brought  up  to  look  at  things  from  the  point
of  vi«*w  of  the  internist  to  be  able  to  ac'cept  many  of  the  clinical
oliservations  wliiidi  W€*re  and  which  tended  to  show  the

xvii


INTRODUCTION


xviii

development  of  clearly  organic  disorders  as  a  resnlt  of  a
turbance  in  the  psyche.  Adler* s  approach  to  the  psychoanalytic
problems  is  admirably  calculated  to  break  down  such  prejudic:^^ '

In  this  book,  however,  the  working  out  of  the  significai^^c
of  the  various  neurotic  character  traits  has  been  by  ringing
changes  on  the  basic  formulation  of  what  Adler  calls
masculine  protest.  It  is  as  if  the  neurotic  said  to  himself,
wish  to  be  a  complete  man.’*  This  protest  arises  on  the
of  a  feeling  of  inferiority  and  an  effort  upon  the  part  of
neurotic  to  correct  this  feeling,  which  he  does  by  so  orderi^)^
his  life,  so  regulating  his  every  act  that  he  may  find  that  secxijri'fcy'
of  which  the  feeling  of  inferiority  has  robbed  him.  This  is
fictitious  goal  of  the  neurotic  and  the  fundamental  and  ultiin.3-t:c?^
cause  of  his  symptoms  when  he  is  no  longer  able  to  succeeidl#
when  failure  threatens  in  his  efforts  to  deal  with  reality.

For  Adler  the  neurosis  or  the  psychosis  is  comparable  to
work  of  art,  but  has  been  built  up  in  response  to  a  fictitiotts^
goal  which  collects  and  unites  into  a  group  those  psychic^
elements  of  which  it  can  make  use,  collecting  only  those
promise  results  in  the  effort  at  the  attainment  of  security.  Thcs;
attempt  to  attain  to  the  maximation  of  his  ego  fails  because*?-
directed  along  a  false  path.  The  neurosis  or  psychosis  is  thoxTe:-
fore  a  constructive  creation,  a  compensation  product,  whioh^
however,  fails  because  of  its  false  direction.

All  this  is  very  psychological  and  does  not  bear  out  what:  1
have  said  about  it  to  the  effect  that  Adler's  approach  is  firorw
the  organic  side.  This  particular  book,  however,  stresses
psychological  formula.  In  his  earlier  work  on  organ  inferiority*
the  organic  basis  of  this  psychological  formulation  is  founded .
The  feeling  of  inferiority,  which  underlies  the  jnasculine  j>ro-“
test,  has  its  raison  d'etre  in  an  inferior  organ.  ^

In  this  work  he  has  gone  to  considerable  extent  in  working
over  the  psychological  characteristics  of  persons  who  have  Iund
demonstrably  inferior  organs,  either  clinically  evident  or
showing  up  at  autopsy.  From  this  work  he  believes  he


INTRODUCTION


XIX


been  able  to  show  that  the  predominant  traits  of  character  are
the  result  of  an  effort  on  the  part  of  the  individual  to  overcome
a  feeling  of  inferiority  resulting  from  an  inferior  organ.  Many
t^xamples  might  be  given,  and  in  fact  they  come  within  the  ken
of  every  one,  which  demonstrate  the  validity  of  this  point  of
view,  A  classical  example  i.s  that  of  Demosthenes,  a  stam¬
merer,  who  became  the  greatest  orator  of  Greece,  Adler
believes  that  defects  of  this  sort  nucleate,  so  to  say,  the  feeling
of  inferiority  and  force  the  individual  to  make  supreme  efforts
to  overcome  his  particular  defect  and  in  this  way,  as  a  result
of  these  efforts,  the  inferior  organ,  by  the  development  of  a
highly  cl i Keren tiatc'd  nervous  superstructure,  may  actually
become  super-normal,  a  result  which  we  are  familiar  with,  for
example,  in  the  rem«irkal)le  facility  with  which  blind  people
gain  information  through  their  supersensitiml  touch  organs.
In  idher  words,  to  use  the  language  of  current  psychoanalysis,
the*  organ  inferiority  is  the  basic  factor  of  what  the  Freudians
t€*fe*r  to  as  the  conflict.

'rhes<*  two  works  of  AcIUt's,  tlu^refore,  give  the  organic  basis
and  the  psychologital  elaboration  of  his  opinions.  The  neurotic
<-onstitution  fcninds  in  an  inferior  organ,  the  inferior  organ  pro-
dut-es  a  feeling  of  inferiority,  the  feeling  of  inferiority — the
niasmiline  pr«>test  •  bertunes  the  fictitious  goal  of  the  neurotic,
whose  Kymptonis  rc^snlt  from  an  effort  to  mould  reality  along
this  fake  pathway.

To  those  who  follow  AdlcT  through  the  various  ramifications
of  Ills  hypothesis,  who  read  sympathetically  his  numerous  case
reports  which  he  offers  to  sulistantiate  his  views,  there  can  be
no  doubt  but  that  the  angle  friun  wliich  he  looks  at  the  problem
of  thf*  rieiirosc||^and  the  psychoses  leds  us  see  new  aspects  of
these*  phemimena  whitb  are  exceedingly  helpful  to  us  in  our
f'ffort  to  grasp  their^«-anings.  It  will  also  be  perfectly  evident
that  the*  helpfiilnesf™  the  Adler  theories  is  in  the  orientation
which  iht^  p}iysi<*ian  gets  towards  the  problem  pre^sented  by  the
fiatierit,  whether  he  approach  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  the


XX


INTRODUCTION


internist  or  of  the  psychologist.  Adler's  theories  are  admirably
calculated  to  help  the  internist  to  grasp  the  possibilities  of
organ  inferiority  as  they  may  affect  the  psyche  and  to  help  the
psychoanalyst  to  grasp  the  origin  and  meanings  of  the  neurosis
as  he  sees  it  at  the  psychological  level  and  perhaps  to  see  more
clearly  upon  what  his  limitations  are  based.  In  any  event  the
two  groups  of  physicians,  heretofore  separated  all  too  far,  both
in  theory  and  practice,  may  find  in  Adler's  views  a  common
ground  upon  which  to  meet.

William  A.  White.

Saint  Elizabeth's  Hospital,

Washington,  D.C.


iHIArWR


CONTENTS


fkOM

Preface  . .  «


THEORETICAL  PART

Introduction . vii

I  The  Origin  and  Development  of  the  Feeling  of

Inferiority  and  the  Consequences  Thereof  .  i

II  Psychic  Compensation  and  its  Synthesis  .  ,  .  i8

III  The  Accentuated  Fiction  as  the  Guiding  Idea  in  the

Neurosis  ...  . 26


I>RA(TICAL  PART

I  Avarice,  Suspiciousness,  Envy,  Cruelty,  The  dero¬
gatory  critique  of  the  neurotic,  neurotic  apper¬
ception,  sauiile  ntuiroses,  changes  in  the  form  and
intensity  of  the  faction.  Somatic  jargon  (organ-
jargon)  . 61

n  The  neurotic  extension  of  limits  through  asceticism,
love,  desire  to  travel,  crime.  Simulation  and
neurosis.  Feeling  of  inferiority  of  the  female
sex.  Purpose  of  an  ideal.  Doubt  as  an
expression  of  psychic  hermaphroditism.  Mas¬
turbation  and  neurosis.  The  incest-complex  as
a  symbol  of  craving  for  dominancy.  The  nature
of  the  delirium.  (Delirium  used  in  the  sense  of
the  French  une  delire).  . 100

III  Ncnirotic  principles  :  sympathy,  coquetry,  narcis-
cisrii ,  Psych ic  hermaphroditism ,  Hallucinatory
security,  Virtue,  conscience,  pedantry,  fanatic
attachment  to  truth  . 118


XXI


XXll


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  PAGE

IV  The  derogatory  tendency  to  disparage  others ;
Obstinacy  and  wildness  ;  The  sexual  relations  of
neurotics  as  a  means  of  comparison ;  Symbolic
emasculation ;  Feeling  of  being  belittled ;
Equality  to  man  as  a  life-plan ;  Simulation  and
neurosis  ;  Substitute  for  masculinity ;  Impatience  ;
Discontent ;  Inaccessibility . 134

V  Cruelty.  Conscience.  Perversion  and  neurosis  155

VI  The  antithesis  above-beneath,  Choice  of  a  pro¬
fession,  Somnambulism,  Antithesis  in  thought,
Elevation  of  the  personality  through  the  dis¬
paragement  of  others,  Jealousy,  Neurotic  auxili¬
aries,  Authoritativeness,  Thinking  in  antithesis
and  the  masculine  protest.  Dilatory  attitude  and
marriage,  The  tendency  upward  as  a  symbol  of
life,  Compulsion  to  masturbation,  The  neurotic
striving  for  knowledge  . 160

VII  Punctuality,  The  will  to  be  first.  Homosexuality
and  perversion  as  a  symbol,  Modesty  and
exhibitionism.  Constancy  and  inconstancy.

Jealousy  .  .  . . 173

VIII  Fear  of  the  partner ;  The  ideal  in  the  neurosis  ;

Insomnia  and  compulsion  to  sleep ;  Neurotic
comparison  of  man  and  woman  ;  Forms  of  the
fear  of  the  wife  184

IX  Self-reproaches,  self-torture.  Contrition  and

asceticism.  Flagellation,  Neuroses  in  children  ,*
Suicide  and  suicidal  ideas  . 198

X  The  neurotic's  esprit  de  famille.  Refractoriness
and  obedience,  Silence  and  loquaciousness,  The
tendency  to  contrariness  210

Conclusion  . 214

Author's  Contributions  referred  to  in  this  book  216


THE

NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

CHAPTER  I

THE  OHU;iN  AND  i>KVELOPMENT  OF  THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY
AND  THE  CONSKOUKNCKS  THEREOF

The  facts  ^established  through  rny  study  of  somatic  inferiority
(vide  Stuilie,  l.c.)  concerned  themselves  with  the  causes,  the
behaviour,  the  manifestations  and  altered  mode  of  activity  of
iiifcricHily  developed  organs  and  has  led  me  to  assume  the  idea
of  **  c’om|HU'isation  through  the  central  nervous  system  with
which  were.'  linked  certain  discussions  of  the  subject  of

lluTr  c  ame  to  light  a  remarkable  relationship  between  somatic
inb'fiftrily  and  psychic  ovcTconipensatiun,  so  that  I  gained  a
fiiiKlanirnta!  viewpoint,  namely,  that  the  realization  of  somatic
iiib'riority  by  thv  indivhlual  hecmiies  for  him  a  permanent
impelling  fona*  for  the  tleveloptneid  of  his  psyc'he.

Physiologically  there  results  front  tin's  a  reenforcernent  of  the
iit'rve  trac'ts,  l)uth  tjuantitatively  and  cjiialitatively,  whe^reby  a
comaitiiilant  original  inferiority  of  these  tracts  is  enabled  to  reveal
in  a  ciunposite  picture  its  tectonii'  and  functional  pcandiaritics.

ilie  psyc'hic  phase  of  this  compnisation  and  overcompensation
<%i!i  itfiiy  bo  discUised  by  nusins  td  psycliologic  iuvt'stigation  and
analysi'j.

As  I  have  given  a  dedailed  description  of  organ-inferiority  as
the  ctiokigy  of  the  neuroses  in  my  former  contributions,
e*»|ieiii!iy  in  the  **  Studie/’  in  the  **  Aggressionstrieb,’'  hi
**  P:.vchi^'.tdicn  ! lennaphroditismus/*  in  the  **  NeiirotLschen
“  and  in  tlie  **  Psychischen  Behandlung  der
Tngriiiinii::';ficiiralgi<n'*  I  may  in  (he  present  description  confine
myself  to  fbo-a*  points  which  promise  a  further  elucidation  of  the
re!a(iotc..hi|i  bet  wcmi  somalir-inferiority  and  psychic
ctimpeiisafifiii  ;iiid  which  are  of  Importance  in  the  study  of  the
fif-arolic'  character,

Stm-]ifi:iri7.ing,  !  lay  sfress  on  the  fact  that  organ-inferiority,  as
dr%4-!  ibftl  by  me,  irndude's  the  in<‘omp!eteness  in  such  organs,  the
frrptiriifly  <lemonstra!ile  arr#csts  of  development  or  functional
niatnfdw*  file  fiimtional  failure  in  tiie  postfetal  period  and  the


I


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


2

fetal  character  of  organs  and  systems  of  organs  ;  on  the
hand  the  accentuation  of  their  developmental  tendency  in
presence  of  compensatory  and  coordinating  forces  and
frequent  bringing  about  of  increased  functional  activity.  05^^^
may  easily  detect  in  every  instance  from  observation  of  the
and  from  the  anamneses  of  the  adult  that  the  possessior*-

definitely  inferior  organs  is  reflected  upon  the  psyche _ an<i

such  a  way  as  to  lower  the  self-esteem,  to  raise  the  child’s
logical  uncertainty ;  but  it  is  just  out  of  this  lowered  self~est^^^*
•that  there  arises  the  struggle  for  self-assertion  which  assut^^^
forms  much  more  intense  than  one  would  expect.  As
compensated  inferior  organ  gains  in  the  scope  of  activity  fc>oth
qualitatively  and  quantitatively  and  acquires  protective
from  itself  as  well  as  from  the  entire  organism,  the  predispo^^*^"^*
child  in  his  sense  of  inferiority  selects  out  of  his  psychic  resout^^'^*^
expedients  for  the  raising  of  his  own  value  whch  are  frequex^^^y
striking  in  nature  and  arnong  which  may  be  noted  as  occupy'5^^
the  most  prominent  places  those  of  a  neurotic  and  psychotic*
character.

Ideas  concerning  innate  inferiority,  predisposition,
constitutional  weakness  may  be  found  even  in  the  very  heginxii^^^t-  *
of  scientific  medicine.  In  leaving  out  of  discussion  here
noteworthy  contributions,  although  they  frequently  contax  ^
fundamental  viewpoints,  we  do ‘so  solely  because  the  relationship  i|  *
between  organic  and  psychic  disease  states,  albeit  dwelt  *

was  never  explained.  In  this  class  belong  all  viewpoints
pathology  which  are  founded  upon  a  general  assumption.
degeneracy.  Stiller’s  theory  of  the  asthenic  habitus
considerably  further  and  almost  attempts  to  establish  etiolo^i<"^xl
relationships,  Anton’s  compensation  theory  confines  itself  nil
too  closely  to  correlation  systems  within  the  eternal  nervott  ^s
system;  nevertheless,  he,  as  well  as  his  talented  pupil,  C3tt*p
Gross,  have  made  noteworthy  attempts  to  bring  about  on
basis  a  clearer  understanding  of  certain  psychotic  .

Bouchard’s  bradytrophy,  the  exudative  diathesis  described  Ipy
Ponflick,  Escherlch,  Czerny,  More  and  Strumpel,  and  interpre^^t  t***  !
by  them  as  a  disease-producing  diathesis,  Comby's  infami  ilt^
arthritism,  Kreibirh’s  angio-neurotic  diathesis,  Heubii
lymphati.sm,  Poltauf’s  status  thymico-lymphaticus,  Eschericrli
spasmophilia  and  Iless-Eppinger’s  vagotonia  are  succcH^ftil
attempts  of  recent  decades  to  describe  disease  states  associnff^c  I
with  congenital  inferiority.

All  of  them  refer  to  heredity  and  infantile  characteristics.  *

although  the  vague  and  inconstant  limits  of  the  predisposition^  :
in  question  are  emphasized  by  the  authors  themselves,  t  ti#*
impression  i.s  not  to  be  ignored  that  certain  conspicuous


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY


3


have  been  isolated  which  in  the  course  of  time  will  be  brought
within  one  large  group,  namely,  that  of  the  minus-variants.  Of
extreme  iniportance  for  the  understanding  of  congenital  inferiority
and  {predisposition  to  disease,  are  the  researches  into  the  glands
of  internal  secretion  in  which  morphologic  as  well  as  functional
deviations  have  lieen  discovered,  e.g.,  the  thyroids,  the  para-
tiiyrtpids,  ^  the  sex  glands,  the  chromaffin  system  and  the
hy{>c>{)hysis.  Considere<i  from  the  standpoint  of  their  organ-
ifderitpritit\s  the  orientation  of  the  composite  picture  becomes
easier  and  the  relationship  to  compensation  and  correlation  in
the  ecxiuoniy  of  the  entire  l)ody  becomes  clearer.  Among  the
remaining  investigators  who  took  ns  the  basis  for  their  views
Hill  a  jirinuiin-m<pvens,but  a  combined  influence  of  various  organ-
iIlft*riorith^s  and  nuittial  interaction  of  the  same,  Martins,  above
all,  must  lie  numtiuneil.  In  my  contribution  on  “  The  Inferiority
iif  Cirgaris  (1907),  the  idea  of  the  coordination  of  the  coexisting
ifibndtirities  likewise  appears  prominently.  The  fact  is  not  to
be  liglitly  evaluated  that  the  sinuiltaneously  existing  organ-in-
frriuritiecs  stand  in  ndatitin  to  iine  another  as  if  united  hv  a  secret
bond.

Bartel  likewis?"  has  extendinl  his  theori<*s  concerning  the
status  thyinicodymphaticus,  w'hich  represents  a  considerable
uivam*e  in  science,  to  such  limits  as  to  invade  the  boundaries  of
the  sysletns  of  other  authors.  Kyrle,  too,  supporting  himself  by
fhe  newly  disciivered  {lathoiogical  findings,  reached  quite
iudf*pend«mtly  conclusions  idtmtical  with  mine,  namely,  that  the
e'in'lnliiiat ion  <»f  the*  inf«*riority  of  the  sexual  apparatus  with  other
organ  inferitirities,  tliougii  frecjuently  only  slightly  developed,  is
nevertlu*l€*s.s  so  often  finmd  to  exist  that  I  must  maintain  that
ttieia*  exist  no  organduffTittrilies  without  an  accompanying  defect
in  the  sexual  apparatus..

Because  of  Siune  futtire  considerations  I  must  alst)  mention
certain  of  the  vienvs  of  Freinl  w'ho  assumes  a  sexual  constitution
as  the*  basis  <if  the  neuroses  and  psytdioses,  under  w'hich  term  he
iirider;4ancls  a  c|ualitatively  ami  quantitatively  varying  arrange¬
ment  <tf  partial  sex  im{mlses.  This  assumption  simply  corresponds
lo  a  ptmtulate  atlvanced  by  him  for  his  other  views.  The
development  of  pervcTse  inclinations  and  their  unsuccessful
repression  into  the  unconscious  furnishes,  according  to  him,  the
pic/furr  of  the  iieuro.sis,  and  in  itself  forms  the  primary  cause  for
the  tiriirotic  |isy<4e.  We  shall  from  our  considerations  that
perversion  so  far  as  it  r«Mches  develtipment  in  the  neurosis  and
psychosis  is  not  drjiend«nit  upon  a  connate  impulse,  hut  that  it
arisfs  from  the  striving  towsards  a  fictitious  goal  in  connection
willi  which  the  repression  takes  place  as  a  hy-pro<luct  under  the
pressure  of  the  self-coiiHi'iousness.


4


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

That  which,  however,  is  to  be  taken  cognizance  of
in  an  originally  abnormal  sexual  conduct,  namely,  the  great^^
lesser  sensitiveness,  the  heightened  or  lowered  reflex
the  functional  valency  as  well  as  the  compensatory  psychic
structure  indicates  directly  as  I  have  shown  in  my  ‘  ‘  Studio  ^  ^  ^
congenital  defect  of  the  sexual  organ.

Concerning  the  nature  of  the  predisposition  to
dependent  upon  organ-inferiority  there  exists  a  unanimity'
opinion.  The  standpoint  assumed  by  me  (“  Studie  ”
emphasizes  more  strongly  than  does  that  of  other  authors,
assurance  of  an  adjustment  through  compensation.  With-
release  from  the  maternal  organism  there  begins  for  these
organs  or  systems  of  organs  the  struggle  with  the  outside  wo^rlcl  *
which  must  of  necessity  ensue  and  which  is  initiated  with
vehemence  than  in  the  more  normally  developed  appar^-*^^^  *
This  struggle  is  accompanied  by  greater  mortality  and  morbi<3.^^y
rates.  This  fetal  character,  however,  at  the  same  time  furniishi^*^
the  increased  possibility  for  compensation  and  o'V'C^T*-
compensation,  increases  tfie  adaptability  to  ordinary  and
ordinary  resistances  and  assures  the  attainment  of  new
higher  forms,  new  and  higher  accomplishments.

Thus  the  inferior  organs  furnish  the  inexhaustible
by  means  of  which  the  organism  continuously  seeks  to  reaol^
better  accord  with  the  altered  conditions  of  life  throxi^^l^
adaptation,  repudiation,  and  improvement.  Its  hypervalenoy
deeply  rooted  in  the  compulsion  of  a  constant  training,  in
variability  and  greater  tendency  to  growth,  frequently  associ3.t  ^-*<1
with  inferior  organs,  and  in  the  more  facile  evolution  of
appertaining  nervous  and  psychic  complexes,  on  account  of  tlic"*
introspection  and  concentration  bestowed  on  them.  The  evil of
constitutional  inferiority  manifest  themselves  in  the  most  va-irf€*cl
diseases  and  predispositions  to  disease.

At  times  various  somatic  or  mental  disabilities  develop,  att
other  times  an  over-irritability  of  the  nerve  tracts,  then
clumsines.s  of  manner,  ungamliness,  precocity.  A  host  of  cHilcl  -
hood  defects  cooperate  with  the  predisposition  to  disease  and
form  a  close  union,  as  I  have  shown,  wdth  the  organic  or
functional  inferiority.  Strabismus,  anomalies  of  refraction  of
the  visual  apparatus  or  photophobia  with  its  train  of  symptoms; ,
deafmutism,  stuttering  and  other  defects  of  speech,  difficulty  of
hearing,  the  organic  and  psychic  defects  which  go  with  adenoid
vegetations,  the  complete  aprosexia,  the  frequent  affections  of
the  sensory  organs,  of  the  respiratory  and  digestive  tra.ot5; »
striking  ugliness  and  deformities,  peripheral  stigmatai  of
degeneration  and  naevi  which  may  indicate  more  profound  orgr^^y^
inferiorities  (Adler,  Schmidt),  Hydrocephalus,  rickot-^.


5


TH!i  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY

anomalies  of  stature  as  scoliosis,  round  shoulders,  genu  varus
or  valgus,  pes  varus  or  valgus,  a  protracted  incontinence  of

faeces  and  urine,  nialformations  of  the  genitals,  results  of  small
arteries  (Virchow)  and  the  numerous  consequences  of  defects  of
the  internal  secretory  glands  as  described  by  Wagner  v.
Yauregg,  Frank!  v.  Hochwert,  Chvostek,  Bartel,  Escherich,
Pineles  and  others,  all  of  which  reveal  in  their  great  abundance,
in  the  variety  of  their  combinations,  the  large  sphere  of  disease
manifestations  as  disclosed  to  the  physician  through  an  under-
standing^of  orgaminferiority.  It  was  especially  pediatrists  and
pathologists  who  first  noted  these  relationships.  But  the  concept
of  degeneracy  has  likewise  become  of  increasing  importance  to
neurology  and  psychiatry.  The  line,  of  advance  stretchf\s  all  the
way  from  Morel’s  theory  of  the  stigmata  of  degeneration  to  the
cxHLsideration^  of  nervoiLs  diseases  from  the  standpoint  of  an
inferior  constitution.  We  need  only  (x>nsuler  the  statistical  study
of^^Thicunich-Birks  and  Potpeschnigg’s  contributions  (cited  by
(Jolt)  conctTning  the  fate  of  children  wdu>  were  treatc^d  in  the
first  and  second  yiMrs  of  their  livt‘s  for  tetanoid  convulsions.  Of
tliest*  <*fultlrert  only  a  small  number  Imcame  entirely  well.  In  most
imtamass  tluTe  were'  found  later  (hdinite  signs  of  somatic  and
ps)H'hi<*  infrrii^rity,  psyrliopathit'  and  muiropathic  characteristics.
As  mvh,  thesi*  authors  numlicm  infantilism,  .squints,  difficulty  of
hearing,  speet*li  defials,  feehU^-mindedness,  disturbances  of
sleejg  pavcjr  noeturniis,  siunnamliulism,  enuresis,  exaggerated
reflt^x«‘s,  paroxysms  of  rage,  truancy,  timidity,  pathological
lying  and  halutual  fugues.

Cidtt  as  well  as  othtu*  autlums  rtsac'hed  the  conclusion  that  in
spasmophilic*  iduldrcui  tfitTt*  exists  a  predisposition  to  severe
ritnirofic*  and  psyc'hopathit:  statcen  Cxerny  and  others  maintain
that  a  similar  relaticuiship  may  In*  found  in  children  suffering
from  gastro-intestinal  disorders.

Bartel  w;ih  able  to  dlsetwer  among  suicides  a  considerable
prepondi*ranre  <if  the  status  thyink-olymphaticus,  especially  a
liypopl:e;ia  tff  tlie  sexual  ijrgans.  The  existence*  of  somatic
inff‘riority  amtmg  juvenile  smcmles  was  shown  by  nu%  Netslihky
and  cjfhers.  Frankl  v.  Hotdm'crt  descrihe<!  states  of  excitement,
irritability  and  liallueinatory  tamfusion,  in  tetany.  French  writers
(ritrd  from  I^fatiiidler)  astTibe  to  the  torpid  habitus  of  children,
fiioroseness,  indolence,  sleepiiiess,  distractibility,  stupidity  and
plilegmatism,  to  the  erotistic  type,  rc'^silessness,  liveliness,
irrilaltilif  y,  preeoeity,  moodiness,  affeetivity,  unsoiialiility,
|ierii!iarity  of  disposition  and  one^sitletl  developnsent.  Pfaundler
etii|iliasi/.rs  tin*  liarassing,  tormenting  and  painful  influences  to
mhkh  defective  rhildrefi  are  sutijed  a's  a  result  of  skjn  eruptions,
colic,  ilisliirliaiiers  of  sleep  and  functional  anomalies,  C;zeniiy,


6


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


who  called  attention  to  the  relationship  between  intestinal
disturbances  of  children  and  neuroses,  emphasizes  especially  the
importance  of  psychotherapy  in  children  who  became  neurotic  in
the  course  of  constitutional  diseases.  Only  recently  Hamburger
has  thrown  light  upon  the  nature  of  the  ambitions  in  neurotic
children,  while  Stransky  showed  the  relation  between  myopathy
and  psychic  manifestations.

These  brief  references  give  us  an  insight  into  the  attempts  of
the  present  day  scientific  trends  to  emphasize  and  maintain  the
relation  between  psychic  anomalies  in  childhood  and
constitutional  inferiority.  The  first  comprehensive  fundamental
views  concerning  this  relation  were  published  by  me  in  the

Stiidie,*'  wherein  I  showed  how  the  inferior  organ  constantly
endeavors  to  make  a  very  special  demand  upon  the  interest  and
attention.  I  was  able  to  prove  in  this  and  other  contributions  to
what  extent  inferiority  of  an  organ  constantly  shows  its  influence
on  the  psyche  in  action,  in  thought,  in  dreams,  in  the  choice  of
a  vocation  and  in  artistic  inclinations  and  capabilities.""

The  existence  of  an  inferior  organ  demands  a  kind  of  training
on  the  part  of  the  appertaining  nerve  tracts  and  on  the  part  of
the  psychic  superstructure  which  would  render  the  latter  active
in  a  compensatory  manner  when  a  possibility  for  compensation
exists.  In  such  an  event,  however,  we  must  likewise  find  a
reenforcement  in  the  psychic  superstructure  of  certain  allied
points  of  contact  which  the  inferior  organ  has  with  the  outside
world.

To  the  originally  inferior  organ  of  vision  corresponds  a
reenforced  visual  psyche ;  a  defective  digestive  apparatus  will
be  accompanied  by  a  greater  psychic  capability  in  all  nutritional
directions,  as  gourmondism,  acquisitiveness,  and  w’^here  it
concerns  money  equivalents,-  stinginess  and  greed,  will  be
manifested  to  an  extraordinary  degree.

The  ability  of  the  compensating  nervous  system  will  manifest
itself  through  qualified  reflexes  (Adler)  and  conditioned  reflexes
(Bickel)  by  means  of  sensitive  reactions  and  exaggerated
sensitiveness.  The  compensating  psychic  superstructure  will
bring  about  an  accentuated  manifestation  of  the  psychic
phenomena  of  presentiments  and  forethoughts  and  their  effective
factors  such  as  memory,  intuition,  introspection,  analysis,
attention,  hypersensitiveness,  in  brief,  of  all  the  fortifying
psychic  forces.  To  these  reassuring  forces  belong  also  the
fixation  and  accentuation  of  those  traits  which  form  useful

^  See  also  Adler,  “  The  Theory  of  Organ-inferiority  and  Its  Significance  foi
Philosophy  and  Psychology.”  Address  in  the  Philosophic  Society  of  the  Vienna
University,  1908,  and  J.  Iteich,  '‘Art  and  the  Eye,”  Oesterreichis'che  Bnndschan,
1908.


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY


7


guiding  principles  in  the  chaos  of  life,  thus  diminishing  the
feeling  of  uncertainty.

The  neurotic  individual  is  derived  from  this  sphere  of
uncertainty  and  in  his  childhood  is  under  the  pressure  of  his
constitutional  inferiority.  In  most  cases  this  may  be  easily
detected.  In  otlier  cas<‘s  the  patient  behaves  as  if  he  were
inferior.  In  all  cases,  however,  his  striving  and  thinking  are
built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  feelingof  inferiority.  This  feeling
must  always  be  understood  in  a  relative  sense,  as  the  outgrowth
of  the  iiidividuars  relation  to  his  environment  or  to  his  strivings.
He  has  constantly  been  drawing  comparisons  between  himself
and  others,  at  first  with  his  father,  as  the  strongest  in  the  family,
sometimes  with  Ids  mother,  his  brothers  and  sisters,  later  with
every  person  with  whom  he  c'onies  into  contact.  Upon  closer
analysis,  one  finds  that  every  chiltl,  especially  the  one  less
favored  liy  nature,  has  made  a  careful  estimate  of  his  own  value.
Idle?  c'oiistitutionally  inhnior  child,  the  unattractive  child,  the
child  toii  strictly  reared,  the  pampered  child,  all  of  whom  we
may  align  as  being  predisposed  to  the  development  of  a  neurosis,
seek  more  diligtmtly  than  cities  tlu*  normal  child  to  avoid  the  evils
of  tludr  c'xistenctc  lliey  soon  long  to  banish  into  a  distant
future  the  fate'  which  confronts  them.  In  order  to  bring  this
abtiiif,  he,  the  thdVcIive  tduld,  requires  an  expedient  which
e!iablt‘s  him  to  kwp  liefon*  his  vyvs  a  fixed  picture  in  the
vit'issitudes  of  life  and  the  mveauiainty  of  his  existenet\  He  turns
to  the  cainstruction  of  this  expedient.  He  sums  up  in  his  self-
estimation  ail  evils,  cxinsiders  himstdf  incompetent,  inferior,
degraded,  insecnircs  And  in  order  to  find  a  guiding  nrincijilc  he
tikes  as  a  second  fixed  point  his  father  or  mother  wlio  endowed
him  witli  all  tiu'  attributes;  of  life.

And  in  adjusting  this  guiding  principle  to  his  tliinking  and
acting,  in  his  eruhsavors  to  raise  himself  to  the  level  of  his  (all-
powerfui)  father,* even  to  the  point  of  surpassing  the  latter,  he
has  cjiiitf*  rennoved  himself  with  one  mighty  hound  from  reality
and  is  stispiniilecHn  the  finishes  of  a  ficdion.

Similar  observations  may  also  he  made  in  a  lesser  degree
among  normal  children.  They  too  desire  to  be  great,  to^be
strong,  to  rule  as  the  father,  and  arc*  guided  liy  this  ohj<‘ctive.
'Tlit^ir  cotidnei,,  their  |>sycdnra!  and  physical  attitude  is  constantly
diredc-d  fow^ards  this  goal,  so  that  one  may  almost  detc'ct  a  true
ifiiitation,  :m  iderilic'al  psychic  |p'*dure.

Isxainple  becomes  the  guide  to  the  **  masculine  **  goal,  so  long
as  the  iiiasmiliiiity  is  not  <lciuhted.  Should  the  uUm  of  ''  the
rn;e:c*u!ine  goal  become  imaccentahle  to  girls,  then  there  takes
plaia*  a  c*harige  of  form  of  this  masculine  guiding  principle.
Gfir  am  scarcely  evaluate  this  phenomenon  m  a  more  correct


8


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


way  than  by  assuming  that  the  necessary  denial  of

f ratification  of  certain  organic  functions  forces  the  child  froitx  thi¬
rst  hour  of  his  extrauterine  life  into  assuming  a
attitude  towards  his  environment.  From  this  result  tensionL^

accentuations  of  certain  organically  acquired  abilities- _ c'

guerre  \ — as  I  have  described  them  in  my  Studie
Aggressionstrieb."  ""

In  the  temporary  denials  and  discomforts  which  the  first
of  childhood  bring  with  them,  one  must  seek  the  impulse  icyX'
development  of  a  host  of  common  traits  of  character.  AboV'^
the  child  learns,  in  his  weakness  and  helplessness,  in  his  ^

and  manifold  shortcomings  to  value  an  expedient  which  *

him  of  the  help  and  support  of  his  relatives  and  guarantees  *

concern.  In  his  negativistic  behavior,  in  his  obstinacy
refractoriness,  he  often  finds  a  gratification  of  his  conscious 2:^^
of  his  own  powers,  thus  ridding  himself  of  the  painful  realiss^^  ii  »«t
of  his  inferiority.  Both  mainsprings  of  the  child’s  *

obstinacy  and  obedience  (Adler,  Trotz  and  GehorssLUi


guarantee  to  him  an  accentuation  of  his  feeling  of  ego-consoi^>5^*^*

ness  and  assist  him  in  groping  his  way  towards  the

goal  or,  as  we  wished  to  adduce  before,  towards  the  equivalout:

this.  The  awakening  self-consciousness  is  always

suppressed  in  constitutionally  inferior  children,  their

is  lowered  because  their  capacity  for  gratification  is  much

limited.


Let  us  consider  the  numerous  restrictions,  the  cours;e:ii>
treatment  and  the  sufferings  of  children  ill  with  gastro-inte^^t  it
derangements  ;  the  effeminacy  and  fastidiousness  seen  in  l
anasmic,  weakly  children  suffering  from  respiratory  disoircl^^r  ^  .
the  itching  and  tortures  of  those  afflicted  with  prurigo  andl  ot
exanthemata  ;  the  many  degrading  defects  of  childhood  ;  the;
of  contamination  on  the  part  of  the  parents  of  such  chilclr^^m
which  often  leads,  as  do  the  frequent  difficulties  in  their  bx*iri|:‘^  i  f%i:
up — in  their  school  progress  as  well  as  the  stubbornness  of
children— to  an  isolation  and  misunderstanding  on  the  j>ai.irt  ttf
their  comrades  and  within  the  family  circle.  In  the  same  mtuuftr^r
the  self-consciousness  is  injured  by  rachitic  clumssixit*.:  t,
congenital  obesity  and  the  lesser  grades  of  mental  backwair<ini€*^*i”i
The  child  usually  explains  his  difficulty  by  the  assumption  of  a
neglect,  a  slight  by  the  parents,  especially  as  it  occurs  in
children  or  in  the  youngest,  occasionally  even  in  the  first:  T:>c»rt%
This  hostile  aggression,  reenforced  and  accentuated  iii
constitutionally  inferior  children,  becomes  confluent  vvitli  li  i  ^
effort  to  become  as  great  and  strong  as  the  strongest  and  tlxr  ti . :  t
forward  activities  which  He  at  the  bottom  of  the  infnfit  iir


^  AdJer,  **I)er  Aggressionstrieb  im  Leben  umi  in  der  Neurose/'  1.  c*.


9


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERlbRITY

ambition.  All  later  trains  of  thought  and  activiti^yofYhe  n^jrptic
are  constructed  similarly  with  his  childhood  iifish  pl^tasy.'l^^

“  recurrence  of  the  identical  (Nietzsche)  is  ilow;here*'  ^  well
illustrated  as  in  the  neurotic.  His  feeling  of  infetiorrity  ’in/):he
prestntce  of  men  and  things,  his  uncertainty  in  the  tyAtld
him  to  an  accentnatiou  of  his  guiding  principles.  T6*'tlj^se  he*
clings  throughout  life  in  order  to  orient  himself  in  existenct|  V'by  'A!'.
means  of  his  beliefs  and  superstitions,  in  order  to  overcome"hfs
feeling  of  inferiority,  in  order  to  re.scue  his  sense  of  ego-
i  onsciousness,  in  order  to  possess  a  subterfuge  to  avoid  a  much-
dreaded  dt‘gradation.  Never  has  he  succeeded  so  well  in  this  as
during  his  (diiklhood.  His  guiding  fiction  which  makes  him
behavt‘  as  if  he  surpassecl  all  others  may  therefore  also  bring
about  a  form  of  conducf  identical  with  that  of  the  child.

In  such  manner  then  tlu*  infantile  gratifications  become  criteria
and  thus  strengthen  the  guiding  principle.  It  would  be  amiss  to
assume  that  only  the  neurotic  exhibits  such  “guiding  principles/'

The  healtliy  ititiividual  would  also  have  to  do  without  orientation
in  the  world  if  he  did  not  arrange  the  cosmic  picture  and  his
exfierieuce  according  to  some  imaginary  fiction.  In  hours  of
uncfTtainty  these  fud i<m.s  come  to  the  fore  more  distinctly  and
becanae  tlu*  im|aTativt‘  intbuuu'es  dominating  beliefs,  ideals  and
free  will  ;  moreover  (hey  also  act  secTetly  in  the  unconscious  like
a!i  ntluT  psytdiii'  mt‘c*hanisms  whose  vtu’bal  image  they  represent
in  iiueudous  thought.  Logically  cun?‘.ider<Hl  they  are  to  be
reganUnl  as  abstra<'tions,  as  simpliheatluns,  whii'h  liave  for  their
ob]<s1  tht*  S(dutitm  of  lif<*’s  tUffuadtuss  in  a  manner  analogous  to
that  rtsiuiresl  lor  the  simjdest  exptTiences.  I'he  original  type
of  thes<*  simjdc'st  experieiu'f'S,  tht»  nu^shwork  of  apperceptive^
memory,  we  ftuind  in  studying  th<*  child's  efforts  to  solve  his
diOiculties.  In  drtsims  this  form  of  apperception  is  still  more
oiivums  :  wv  ^diall  camsitler  this  subject  later.

llie  mnirotic*  carrif*s  his  hading  of  inferiority  constantly  with
him.  Ilimce  his  method  of  thinking  liy  analogy  Is  morr^  strongly
and  clearly  developed.

“  inisoiieisrn  “  (Lornbroso),  his  fear  of  the  ru‘W,  of
deedfaems  am!  tests,  whildi  is  usually  present,  originates  from  the
lac'k  of  analogy  for  these  new  <anHlitions.  He  has  chained  himself
m  striuigly  to  guiding  principles,  taken  them  so  literally  and
sought  hi  resalize  them  only,  that  umamscioiisly  he  has  bf*come
iiicafiablc*  uf  |irc.eeeding  fretdy  and  without  prejudice  to  ^the
sohitlfiri  cif  rf*a!  problems.  Even  the  nemessary  limitations
iffirmsed  by  reality,  where  matters  clash  for  want  of  room,  do
riiit  impel  Itim  to  reject  bis  fiction  because  he  is  forced  to  suspend
it,  hut  onlv  to  alfm:'  it,  Still  more  consequentially  the  psychotic
palicaif  strivr's  to  bring  about  a  realization  of  his  fiction.  The

c


10  THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

neurotic  in  real  life  flounders  in  his  self-created  guiding  principle
and  thus  arrives  at  a  splitting  of  the  personality  in  seeking  to  do
justice  to  both  the  real  and  the  imaginary  requirements.  The
form  and  content  of  the  neurotic  “  guiding  principle  ”  originate
from  the  impressions  of  the  child  who  feels  himself  neglected.
These  impressions,  which  of  necessity  develop  out  of  an  original
sense  of  inferiority,  call  forth  an  aggressive  attitude  in  life,  the
object  of  which  is  the  overcoming  of  the  uncertainty.  In  this
attitude  of  aggression  all  those  efforts  of  the  child  which  tend
toward  an  elevation  of  his  feeling  of  ego-consciousness  find  their
place,  successful  efforts  which  prompt  a  repetition,  unsuccessful
ones  which  serve  as  mementoes  for  those  goal-preparing
tendencies  developed  out  of  a  conspicuous  organic  disease  and
which  express  themselves  in  a  mass  of  psychic  predispositions,
as  well  as  those  observed  in  others.  All  the  phenomena  of  the
neuroses  originate  from  these  predisposing  means  which  tend
toward  the  attainment  of  the  final  object,  masculinity.  They  are
mental  predispositions  always  ready  to  initiate  the  struggle  for
ego-consciousness,  they  obey  the  command  of  the  guiding
principle  which  seeks  to  realize  itself  through  the  channels  of
reactions  lying  ready  at  hand  in  childhood.  In  the  developed
neuroses  the  fiction  stimulates  all  these  predispositions  where¬
upon  they  comport  themselves  as  independent  final  purposes.
Anxiety,  which  formerly  sought  to  furnish  assurance  against
being  alone,  against  underestimation,  against  the  feeling  of
insignificance,  is  hypostasized ;  the  compulsion,  originally  in  the
sense  of  the  fiction  to  preserve  a  manly  behavior,  becomes
independent ;  in  fainting,  in  paralysis,  in  the  hysterical  pains  and
functional  disturbances,  the  pseudo-masochistic  method  of  the
patient  is  symbolically  represented,  in  which  he  seeks  to  attract
attention  or  to  avoid  a  decision  which  is  feared.  The  important
role  played  by  the  neurotic  uncertainty,  as  I  have  recognized  and
described  it,  leads  to  that  sort  of  strengthening  of  the  predis¬
position  and  its  consequences  which  makes  the  originally
unimportant  phenomena  of  a  functional  nature  assume  the  most
astonishing  exaggeration  as  soon  as  the  inner  exigency  demands

V

"'The  gaze  of  the  neurotic,  on  account  of  this  feeling  of
uncertainty,  is  directed  far  into  the  future.  All  present  existence
is  to  him  only  a  preparation.  Moreover  this  circumstance  is
largely  responsible  for  encouraging  his  dreaming  proclivities  and
estranging  him  from  the  world  of  reality.  aI  with  religious
persons  his  kingdom  IS  not  of  this  world  and  like  them  he
cannot  free  himself  from  his  self-created  deity,  the  exaltation  of

f  general  traits  of  character  of

necessity  develop  m  an  individual  thus  turned  away  from  reality


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY  ii

First  of  all  nuist  be  mentioned  the  deep  reverence  in  which  are
held  the  expedients  which  subserve  the  fiction.  An  individual  of
this  tvpe  will  as  a  rule  manifest  a  carefully  adjusted  mock’:  of
behavior,  exactness  and  pedantry,  first  of  all,  in  order  not  to
increase  tlu^  great  difticulties  of  life  and  secondly  and  principally,
in  order  to  ilistinguish  himself  from  others  in  dress,  in  work,  in
nii^rals,  and  thus  acquire  for  himstdf  a  feeling  of  superiority.  'This
exaggerated  trait  of  character  usually  serves  also  to  bring  him
face  to  face  with  the  (uiemy,  to  furnish  the  opportunity  tor  a
maturing  of  such  situations  as  will  bring  him  into  conflict  with
his  envininment  so  that  lu‘  iinds  occasion  for  giving  vent  to
rcproaclic*s.  At  tlie^sanie  time  these  constant  reproaches  serve
to  keep  alive  his  feeling,  !us  attention,  to  the  fact  that  people  are
neglecting  hiin,  that  tlu^y  are  not  taking  him  into  account.  This
trait  may  be  found  e*ven  in  the  childhood  of  certain  neurotics
m-here  it  serves  tlu^  purpose'  of  putting  some  one  at  their  service,
say  die  mothc'r.  who  must  take  care  of  their  clothes  every
evc'nifig  for  a  eiuisiderahle  length  of  time  in  a  definitely  prescriheH
liiamif'r.  In  a  similarly  remarkable'  maniu*r,  anxiety  and  timidity
gain  c'xpression  and  1  must  adhe're'  to  the  opinion,  in  spite  of  all
otlier  aftenipts  at  explanation,  that  the  psychic  plu'nomcna  of
anxiety  originate  from  an  hallucinatory  excitation  of  a  pre-
dis|njsition  wliicdi  in  rhildlioiui  developed  autoiuatically  from
Mfiall  beginnings  as  soon  as  a  fjodily  injury  was  llireatt'iu'd,  and
which  in  lafc'r  life*,  csspcaially  in  the'  ncnirostss,  Is  eeinditionexl  by
ihv  final  goal,  naim/ly,  to  c'scMpc*  a  Uwv<*ring  of  e'go-const'ionsness
and  ti*  niahe*  oms^a'lf  of  .sfTvi<*e  to  (dhc'rs.  It  is  e'asy  to  uruk'rstand
how  all  v;ish«phantasies  may  attain  an  c'normous  (U'grt'e,  just  as
atlainno'iit  senchmi  bring:,  with  it  satisfaction,  tbu*  may  assume
wathouf  fear  ot  c-onlraclie  tion  that  a  neurotic  wislu's  to  liav**
evf'rytiiing. ’*  I'his  dc'sire*  eoiiicades  with  his  “  guiding  fic'tion
to  hf'coiiie  pcdeiit.  If  he*  tlraws  bac*k  in  horror  In'k^rc*  unde*r-
takings  wdfudi  promise'  advantage*,  as  hi'  irsually  doc'S  bedore
i’riiiie'S  ami  immoral  acts,  if  is  beeMUse  he*  e'nte'rtains  fears  for  the*
safety  of  his  egu-eHmseaciUsiu'ss.  For  this  re*ason  he*  re'coUs  in
horror  from  lying,  Init  in  oreler  to  proee'enl  with  e'e'rtainly  and  in
order  to  prese'rve*  ste'adfastru'ss  he  may  harbor  the  thought  that
he*  is  t'apablc*  tif  grt'at  c'vils  and  crime's.  That  this  obHtina.tf*
|iiirsiiit  of  the  fnlion  implii's  a  sot'ial  injury  is  obvious.

The  c'|ufis.in  of  iif'iiroties,  thc'ir  e'livy,  tlieir  grt'cd.  frexpumtly
ync'tirisf  ions,  tlie*ir  te*nd<*nc'y  to  undervalue*  nie*n  and  things,
ciriginate  in  tlieir  feeling  of  uma-rtainty  and  se*rvc'  the*  purpose  of
assiiriiig  fhrm,  tif  guhliiig  them  and  <»f  .spurring  themi  on.  As
they  are  efiveltiped  in  phantasy  and  live'  in  the*  future,  thc'ir
|irr«ieiiipation  is  not  to  be*  womk're'ti  at.  Thv  variability  of
temper  depends  on  the  play  of  the  phantasy  which  at  oiu'  time*


12


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

awakens  painful  memories,  at  another  fills  with  the  enthusiasm  ot
an  expected  triumph,  analogous  to  the  vacillations  and  doubts  of
the  neurotic.  In  the  same  way  special  traits  of  character  which
are  not  foreign  to  the  normal  psyche  appear  to  be  directed  by  the
hypnotizing  goal  and  strengthened  in  this  direction.  Sexual
precocity  and  falling  in  love  are  forms  of  expression  for  the
heightened  tendency  to  captivate.  Masturbation,  impotence  and
perverse  excitements  lie  in  the  direction  of  the  guiding  line  of
fear  of  a  partner  and  fear  of  separation,  along  with  which  sadism
represents  the  desire  to  play  the  “  wild  man  ”  in  order  to  over¬
come  the  feeling  of  inferiority.  As  the  driving  force  and  goal  of
the  neurosis  developing  out  of  a  constitutional  inferiority,  we
have  up  to  this  point  regarded  the  accentuation  of  ego-conscious¬
ness  which  constantly  strives  for  expression  with  especial  force.
In  doing  so  we  have  not  ignored  the  fact  that  this  is  only  a  mode
of  expression  of  a  striving  and  yearning  whose  beginnings  are
deeply  rooted  in  human  nature.  The  form  of  expression  itself
and  the  accentuation  of  this  guiding  thought,  which  may  also  be
expressed  by  Nietzsche’s  ''  will  to  power,”  teaches  us  that  there
is  an  especial  compensatory  force  at  play,  whose  object  it  is  to
put  an  end  to  the  inner  uncertainty.  By  means  of  an  unyielding
formula,  which  usually  presses  to  the  surface  of  consciousness,,
the  neurotic  seeks  to  obtain  the  fulcrum  whereby  to  lift  the
world  off  its  hinges.  It  matters  but  little  how  much  of  this  driving
force  becomes  consciously  known  to  the  neurotic.  The  mechanism
itself  he  never  understands,  neither  is  he  able  to  explain  and
break  down  unaided  his  mode  of  apperception  by  means  of
analogy  and  the  conduct  resulting  therefrom.  This  can  only
succeed  by  means  of  an  analytic  process  which  permits  us  to
divine  and  understand  his  infantile  analogy  by  means  of
abstraction,  reduction  and  simplification.  In  this  way  one  finds
regularly  apparent  that  the  neurotic  always  apperceives  after
the  analogy  of  a  contrast,  indeed,  that  usually  he  only  recognizes
and  gives  value  to  relations  of  contrast.  This  primitive  mode  of
orientation  in  life  which  corresponds  to  the  antithesis  as  set
forth  in  the  categories  of  Aristotle  and  to  opposites  in  the
Pythagorean  table  originates  also  in  the  feeling  of  uncertainty
and  illustrates  a  simple  device  of  logic.  W^hat  I  have  described
as  polar,  hermaphroditic  opposites,  Lombroso  as  bipolar,
Bleuler  as  ambivalent,  leads  to  this  same  method  of  apperception
which  works  according  to  the  principal  of  opposites.  One  should
not  fall  into  the  common  error  of  regarding  this  as  an  essence  of
things,  but  must  recognize  in  it  the  primitive  method  oi
procedure  which  measures  a  thing,  a  force,  or  an  event,  bv  an
opposite  which  is  fitted  to  it.

The  further  the  analysis  proceeds  the  more  distinct  appears


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY


IS


one  of  these  opposites,  the  original  form  of  which  we  have
established  as  the  feeling  of  inferiority  and  the  maximation  of
the  ego-consciousness,  xlns  only  agrees  with  the  primitive
efiovts  of  the  child  to  orient  himself  in  the  worltl  and  to  obtain
certainty  when  tangible  antitheses  an^  enc'ouutered.  Among
tlu^se  I  have  regularly  hmnd  the  following  :  (i).  Above  -  l>eneath.
(2).  M  asculine— feminine.  C)ne  furthermore  always  finds  an
arrangement  of  memories,  feelings  and  actions  according  to  this
type  of  antitheses  in  tlu^  sense  the'  patient  takes  tluun  (not  always
in  the  generally  accepted  sense),  i.t\,  inferinr-^heneath,

feminine ;  powtn'fiil' . above,  masculine.  I'his  grouping  is

important  hsr  it  rendcTs  possible,  because  it  can  he  conserved  or
falsified  at  will,  ftu*  distortion  of  tlu*  cosmic  picture,  whertdiy  the
nc’urotic  can  always  liold  fast  to  his  standpoint,  namely,  that  of
a  neglected  person,  by  rearrang«‘ment,  l>y  aecentuation  or  by
arbitrary  changes.  It  lies  in  the  naturt*  of  things  that  in  this
process  his  constitutional  inftn'iority  comes  tti  his  assistance  as
well  as  his  constantly  incTcasing  aggressive*  environnumt  which
is  continually  set  intt>  activity  by  the  neurotic  conduct  of  the.
patient.,

At  times  tin*  lunirotic  is  nut  fully  conscious  of  his  supposed  or
rt%i!  defeat.  Il  is  then  always  found  that  it  is  his  prim*  which
prevents  him  from  recognizing  it.  Nevertheless  lu*  acts  as  if  he
ti.ul  ai'jpreciated  the  now  degradatitm  amt  the  ridtllt*  of  a  m^rvons
attack  is  often  only  stdved  wfien  this  fact  is  undcrstiHul.  The
levfdatitm  of  such  repressed  feelings  is  not  of  much  therapeutic
value,  at  least,  it  can  only  he  of  value  vvlum  by  noains  of  it  the
cimnertiori  with  the  infantile  nna'lianisru  whieh  is  responsible  for
the*  predisposition  tu  the  attack  Inaannes  ap|Kirent  to  the  patient.
At  times  tnere  results  even  a  seeming  rekipsi*  whieh  may  lie
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  patient  directs  his  preilispositions
against  the  physician  because  the  latter  has  injureal  his  ftrdings
cif  personal  Wiirlh,

There  still  remains  ti)  be  answered  <ine  irnpi^rtaiit  i.}y«*stion.
Chi  wdial  dcn*s  the  patient  base  his  feeling  of  inferiority?
Iiiasittiirli  a.s  the  patient  is  i»rily  aide  to  detect  the  iHissihility  of
rrlalhmship  between  tlisease  predispositions  and  those  organ-
iiiff*rioritic.H  wlii<-!i  hu’ca*  themselves  upon  his  attention  he  is
ccinstaiitly  in  the  path  of  coiijeciure.  He  will  for  example  not
seek  the  reason  ft>r  his  inferiorities  in  the  disturbam'es  of  the
secretions  of  tin*  glands,  but  win  blame  in  a  general  wav  Ids
masikiiefis,  his  stimled  growdli,  his  sham  education,  the  small  size
cir  amiiiialies  of  Im  genital.s,  lm*k  of  complete  virility,  his
effrmiruii'y,  flu*  feminine  trait:s  of  a  physical  or  psyedde  nature,
hi.s  parents,  his  hiwedity  ;  at  times  only  lack  of  love,  had  training,
c!r{irivatiy!i  in  cliildhcww!,  etc.  And  what  about  his  neurosis,  the


14


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


neurosis  in  the  sense  we  understand  it?  We  shall  find  that  the
accentuation  of  his  predispositions  on  an  analogic,  childish  basis,
that  his  symbolized  thoughts,  his  preparations  for  feelings,  and
results  used  by  him  as  means  of  expression  will  spring  into  action
as  soon  as  the  patient  fears  or  experiences  a  set-back.  Being
from  a  certain  situation,  so  to  speak,  inoculated  with  the  feelings
of  inferiority,  he  exhibits  an  anaphylactic  reaction  against
depreciation  of  his  ego-consciousness  and  finds  in  irresolution,
in  vacillation,  in  doubt  and  in  skepticism,  as  w^ell  as  in  the
breaking  out  of  a  neurosis  or  a  psychosis,  a  refuge  and  security
against  the  greatest  evil  that  could  befall  him,  namely,  the
conjuring  up  of  a  distinct  realization  of  his  inferiority.  In  line
with  this  the  typical  causes  of  the  onset  of  a  neurosis  and
psychosis  are  easy  to  divine  and  to  prove  :

1.  The  desire  for  knowledge  of  sex  differences,  the  uncertainty
concerning  his  own  sexual  role,  may  be  looked  upon  as  causes
of  the  arousing  of  the  feeling  of  inferiority.  Likewise  the
realization  and  grouping  of  traits  believed  to  be  feminine,  the
vacillating,  doubting,  hermaphrodistic  apperception  and
hermaphrodistic  predisposition.  Predisposition  to  and  psychic
gestures  of  the  feminine  role  always  entail  greater  passivity,
anxious  anticipation,  etc,,  but  call  forth  the  masculine  protest,
stronger  emotivity.  (Heymanns)

2.  Onset  of  menstruation.

3.  Epoch  of  menstrual  activity.

4.  Epoch  of  sexual  activity.

5.  The  stage"  of  fitness  for  marriage.

6.  Pregnancy.

7.  Puerperium.

8.  Climacteric,  reduction  of  potency.

9.  Examinations,  choice  of  profession.

10.  Danger  of  death.


All  these  epochs  call  forth  heightening  of  or  changes  in  the
preparatory  attitude  toward  life.  The  bond  common  to  them  all
which  holds  them  together  is  the  expectation  of  new'  events
which  imply  for  the  neurotic  new  struggles,  new  dangers  of  a  set¬
back.  He  proceeds  therefore  immediately  to  intensive  protective
measures,  the  most  extreme  of  which  is  suicide.  Outbreaks  of
neuroses  and  psychoses  represent  accentuations  of  his  neurotic
preparedness,^  predispositions  in  which  are  always  found
prominent  traits  of  character,  calculated  to  guarantee  this  sort  of
security,  such  as  exaggeration  of  hypersensitiveness,  greater
carefulness,  irntability,  pedantry,  obstinacy,  stinginess,  dis-
content  impatience,  and  many  others.  As  these  traits  are  easily

especially  suitable  for  determining  the
existence  of  a  psychogenic  disorder.  ^


I-

!

I


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY


^5


We  arrived  at  the  cundusion  in  the  foregoing  that  it  is  the
feeling  of  uncertainty  which  forces  the  neurotic  to  a  stronger
attachment  to  fictions,  guiding  principles,  ideals,  dogmas.  These
guiding  principles  float  before  the  normal  person  also.  But  to  him
they  are  a  figure  of  speech,  a  device  for  distinguishing  above  from
below,  left  froiti  right,  right  from  wrong,  and  he  is  not  so  involved
in  prejudice  that  when  called  upon  to  make  a  decision  he  cannot
free  himself  from  the  abstract  and  reckon  with  reality.  Just  as
little^  do  ttie  phenoimma  of  life  resolvt*  themselves  for  him  into
stried  antitheses,  hut  on  the  contrary  he  i.s  striving  constantly  to
keep  his  thoughts  and  art  ions  <!etached  from  this  unreal  principle
and  to  taring  ’  them  into  harmony  with  reality.  That  he  uses
artifices  at  all  as  a  means  to  an  emti  arises  from  the  usefulness  of
the  fiction  in  easting  up  acrounts  of  life.  The  neurotic,
fum^ever,  like  tht'  child  devtnd  of  contact  with  life  and  like  the
prifiiitivt*  understanding  of  early  man  catches  at  the  straw  of  his
fictian.  hypcistasi‘/cs  it.  arbitrarily  a.serif>es  to  it  a  real  value  and
.settle K  to  rea!ii;e  it  in  the  world.  For  this  the  fiction  is  unfitted,
still  iin»rc  unfitted  whem,  as  in  the  psyeho.ses,  it  is  elevated  to  a
tlogma  anthropom<tr|)hosed.  The  symbol  as  a  modus
dk*endi  ”  dominates  our  spt^eeh  ami  thought,  'fhe  neurotic  takes
it  Iit«Tally  and  in  the  psycimsis  thc^  reali'/ation  i.s  attempted.  In
my  cumtrihutitms  the  tlumry  of  the  neuroses  this  point  is
cam.stantly  emphasi-ml  iind  maintained.  A  fortunate  circumstance
iinule*  me  acquaint***!  with  Vaitiingerls  ingtmious  **  Philosophy
oi  Jhe  ’  As  If  *  **  (Berlin,  uiii),  a  work  In  which  I  found  the
trains  «>f  thoiiidit  •aiggf*stcd  to  me  by  the*  nenirosis  set  forth  as
valid  for  general  Muentitie'  thenight.

After  v%e  have  f-dalili  lie*!  that  the  iietiti*ms  guiding  goal  of  the
fieuretic  c*msid*i  td  an  unlimited  heighteming  of  the  ego-
ceuise'iiuenesN  whi*'fi  *lf*teriorates  into  t!ie  will  to  seem
|Nifd.7.sche)  we  may  pr*mred  to  a  e'*msideraticm  of  the*  abstract
cori<'*rpt.i<m  cd  fhe%e  problems  cd  life.  Inasrmndi  a.s  in  semking  the?
^rx  tliffrrtmliafimi  the  rdle  of  the  male  is  given  a  dendded
|ireTf*rencf\  the  ftirmal  edianges  agr<*f*ing  with  the  antithesis,
itiiin-^wonian.  Iiegln  at  an  early  p«*riod  and  for  the  nenirotic  arises
the  formula  **  I  mu^t  aei  as  though  I  w<*re  a  <*omplete*  man  (or
would  lietHune  iiiie)/*  'ffte*  feeling  of  inferiority  an<l  its  can.se-
fiectuiie  i*lentifie<|  with  tin*  feeding  of  effenninae*)",  the
<  oiin}iensattiry  pressure  in  the  psychic*  superstructure  impeds
toward  tihtaining  a  guaraiilee  tnat  the  manly  rdle  will  be
l'»resrrved  and  the  meaning  of  the  neurt»sis  assumes  t!m  form  of
ilir  antithetical  fiimlaiiienlal  tlnmglit,  1  am  a  woman  and  mull
liC  a  man/*

This  guittiiig  final  piirpose  supplies  the  psyeduc  ge*sture.s  and
jiredispositif.ins  rieressary  far  lids  thought*  Imt  is  expressed  Hko


i6


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


■wise  in  the  attftndes  of  the  body  and  in  mimicry.  And  with
prepared  gestures,  of  which  the  neurotic  traits  of  character
to  be  considered  a  heralding,  the  neurotic  confronts  persons
life,  anxiously  and  with  strained  attention  asking  if  he  will
himself  a  man.  Sham  combats  play  a  great  r61e  ;  they  are  begT*^^^
so  that  the  neurotic  may  exercise  himself,  that  he  may
experience  from  other  or  similar  conditions,  so  that  he
become  more  cautious,  and  in  order  to  obtain  proof  from  exainj>^^"‘
that  he  dare  not  venture  upon  the  main  battle.  How  much  in  ^
he  rearranges,  exaggerates,  depreciates,  which  is  possible
him  from  a  certain  arbitrariness  (Meyerhoff),  how  he  fals^^If
classifies  and  how  he  seeks  to  put  his  fiction  on  firm  foundatio*^
demand  a  separate  consideration,  such  as  I  have  tentative  I V*
furnished  in  the  preliminary  work  for  this  book.  That  in
masculine  protest,  however,  there  lies  for  the  neurotic  the
fundamentally  compensating  '‘will  to  power’*  which  may  chaxx^^*
the  value  of  feelings  and  even  transform  pleasure  into  paio.
proved  by  the  frequent  cases  where  the  direct  effort  to  act  like^
man  meets  with  obstacles  and  avails  itself  of  a  circuitous  route  ,  i
which  event  the  r61e  of  the  woman  is  overvalued,  passive
are  strengthened,  masochistic,  and  in  men,  passive  homosexixX'^^J
traits  emerge,  by  means  of  which  the  patient  hopes  to  gain  powc'^s"'
over  men  and  women  :  in  short,  the  masculine  protest  makes
of  the  feminine  r61e  in  order  to  attain  its  purpose.

That  this  device  is  likewise  dictated  by  the  “  will  to  pow^ex'
is  proved  by  the  further  neurotic  traits  which  strive  for  mast<^ ry
and  superiority  in  the  most  extreme  form.  This  apperception  »
however,  brings  the  sexual  jargon  into  the  neurosis  which
be  regarded  as  symbolic  and  requires  interpretation.

Side  fay  side  with  or  dominating  it  is  found  in  neurotics  tlxc^
method  of  apperception  which  arranges  perception  according-  t  ^  *
the  spatial  antithesis,  above-beneath.  Also,  for  this  primiti’V'c**
attempt  at  orientation,  which  the  neurotic  emphasizes  y

strongly,  one  finds  analogies  in  primitive  people.  Howevoi'  *
while  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  masculine  principle  i  ^
identified  with  perfection,  .we  are  forced  to  guesses  in  regard  >
the  valuation  of  “above”  as  the  equal  of  the  principle.  A  certrxii*
probability  seems  to  give  color  to  the  opinion  that  the  valuta*
and  significance  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body  in  comparison  w-itln
the  feet  furnishes  the  explanation.  Still  more  important  it  seerxi>%
to  me  that  the  valuation  of  the  word  above  and  its  covaluatioti
with  perfection  originates  in  the  longing  of  man  to  lift  himse^IC,
to  fly,  to  do  that  which  is  impossible  for  man.  The  universa  l
flying  dreams  and  the  efforts  of  man  in  the  same  direction  se€^t^%
to  confirm  this  opinion.  That  in  the  congressus  sexualis


THE  FEELING  OF  INFERIORITY


17


**  above  is  confluent  with  the  masculine  principle  does  not
seem  without  significance^.

The  rt‘enforcement  of  thc^  fiction  in  the"  neurosis  causers  a
concentration  of  the  attention  on  those  points  o(  view  regarded
by  the  neurutii'  as  important.  Tlu^efrom  results  the  narrowing
of  the  field  of  visiois  and  tlu"  psycliic  |)re"paration  as  motor  ana
psychic  predispositions.  Simultaneously,  tlie  more  accentuated
neurotic  character  conu\s  intt)  force,  which  maintains  the
assurance  of  the  fiction,  conies  in  touch  with  inimical  forces  and^
spreading  itself  out  far  over  flu*  iHunuIaries  of  personality,  into
the  realms  id  spaia,"  and  time,  furnishes,  in  the  form  of  a
secondary  guicfing  line,  an  impetus  to  the  wilt  to  {Kiwer.  The
neurotic  attack,  finally,  tike  the  strifi"  fiir  power,  has  for  its
purpose  the  jirotection  id  the  ego^consciousness  from
degradation.

Therefore  from  constitiitiimal  inferiority  there"  arises  a  feeling
of  inferiority  which  ilemamls  a  taunpensation  in  the  sense  of  a
maximation  of  the  egoaamsciousness.  Friuu  this  circumstance
the  fiction  which  serves  as  a  tinal  purpose  ai'cjiures  an  astonishing
iiifliieru'e  and  draws  all  the  psycduc*  forct*s  in  its  dirtadion.  Itself
an  outgrowth  cd  the  striving  fur  smairity,  it  organizes  psychic
preparatory  measures  hw  the  purpose  of  guaranteeing  security,
among  w‘hich  the  neumlii*  character  as  well  as  the  functional
nensrosi»q  are  noticeable  as  prominent  d«*viees.

'fhe  guiding  fitdiun  has  a  simple,  infantile  scheme,  and
infUsrru'es  the  ap}irrce|itiuri  and  the  nie<*hanism  of  memory.


CHAPTER  II


PSYCHIC  COMPENSATION  AND  ITS  SYNTHESIS

Our  examination  of  the  facts  has  led  us  to  understand  how
of  the  absolute  inferiority  of  the  child  (especially  the
constitutionally  burdened),  there  is  evolved  a  kind  of  sel^
estimation  which  calls  forth  a' feeling  of  inferiority.

Analogously  to  the  So?  ttou  <t^5)  the  child  seeks  to  gain  ^
standpoint  which  will  enable  him  to  get  a  perspective  in  th-^
problems  of  life.  From  this  point  of  .departure,  which  is  taken  3.^
a  fixed  pole  in  the  flux  of  phenomena,  the  child  psyche  projects?
its  thoughts  towards  the  goal  which  it  longs  to  reach.  Thes^
thoughts,  too,  are  apprehended  as  fixed  points  by  the  abstract:
conceptions  of  human  understanding  and  are  then  concretely
interpreted.  The  aim  to  be  great,  to  be  strong,  to  be  a  man,  to-
be  above  is  symboli2ed  in  the  person  of  the  father,  th.^:^
mother,  the  teacher,  the  coachman,  the  locomotive  engineear ,
etc.,  and  the  conduct,  the  attitude,  the  imitative  gestures,  tho
play  of  children  and  their  wishes,  the  day  dreams  and  favorito
stories,  ideas  about  their  future  vocation  show  us  that  ttLO-
compensatory  tendency  is  at  work  and  is  making  preparation  iS
for  the  future  role.  The  feeling  which  the  individual  has  of  hi^
own  inferiority,  incompetency,  the  realization  of  his  smallness ,
of  his  weakness,  of  his  uncertainty,  thus  becomes  an  appropriate
working  basis  which,  because  of  the  intrinsically  associated
feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain,  furnishes  the  inner  impulse  to
advance  towards  an  imaginary  goal.  The  scheme  of  which  thie
child  avails  himself  in  order  to  enable  him  to  act  and  orient
himself  is  one  common  to  and  in  accordance  with  the  tendency
of  the  human  understanding  to  reduce  that  which  is  chaotic,  fluid
and  intangible  in  life  to  measurable  entities  by  means  of  ttio
assumption  of  fictions.  We  proceed  in  the  same  way  when  wo
divide  the  globe  by  means  of  meridianal  and  parallel  lines,  for**
thus  only  do  we  preserve  fixed  points  which  we  can  place  i  Td:
relation  with  each  other.  In  all  similar  attempts  (and  the  huma-xi
psyche  is  full  of  them)  it  is  the  question  of  an  introduction  of  ain
unreal  and  abstract  scheme  into  actual  life,  and  I  consider  tho
presentation  of  this  conception  as  I  have  gathered  it  from  ttio
psychological  observation  of  neuroses  and  psychoses  and  whicti ,
according  to  the  proofs  furnished  by  Vaihinger,  manifests  itself
in  all  scientific  concepts,  to  be  the  main  object  of  this  book.  NTo
matter  from  what  angle  we  observe  the  psychic  development  o  f


PSYCHIC  COMPENSATION  19.

a  normal  or  neurotic  person  lu*  is  always  found  ensnared  in  the
meshes  of  his  particular  fiction  ;  a  fiction  from  which  the  neuujtic
is  unable  to  find  his  way  l>ack  to  reality  and  in  winch  he  bcdieves
while  the  normal  pcTSiui  utilizers  it  for  the  purpose  oi  reacliing  a
definite  goal.  However,  that  wiiich  gives  such  irresistible
impulse  to  the  utilization  of  this  scluane  is  always  the  unc«Ttainty
in  ehildluH'H!,  the  great  distance  which  s<'parates  the  i'hilti  fnnii
the  potency  of  man,  from  the  iUstinctiims  and  privilegtss  td  man
hood,  forc'bodings  and  knowdedge^  td  wliii-h  the  clnltl  posSf\sse'’.
And  in  regartl  to  this  point  I  beg  leave  tit  supitlenumf  thesr^
statements  tif  the  learned  writc‘r,  Vaihinger,  namely,  that  the
thing  which  impels  us  all  and  t*s{>e<aally  tlu*  neurotit^  ami  tin*
child  tit  ahaiidcin  dirnl  path  iif  iiultii’tion  and  deiiuctiiin  and
to  use  such  clcndctei  as  tlie  ;a  hematie  fietion  iirigimites  in
feeding  ctf  uncertainty  aiut  is  the  craving  btr  siHuirity,  the*  final
fiiirpose  of  whicdi  is  to  esssipe  fr<»m  the  feeling  of  infeadority  in
ordc^r  tit  asctaul  to-  thr  full  height  «d  th<*  egtV'eomadousmsss,  tt.>
rom|j!eti*  manliiies,s,  tt»  attain  the  iileal  of  being  **  aliove/'  The
grf*a.ter  tho  tiislaufr  Pi  this  itlcsil,  thr  more  distinctly  the  guiding
fiction  assorts.  so  that  the  trriing  td  being  **  iimlrT  **  may

im  just  as  mmdi  4  tleturniining  fat'lt>r  as  the  deilii'atum  of  the
father  and  nu-itlier  wdio  are  the  ideals  tif  :ar<mgt!i.

\Vv  thus  s-rf*  exertions  put  forth  far  iifwauul  tluea*  which  we
would  expeii  in  the  most  violent  bodily  perfiirmancass  whitdi
might  arise  from  imaimis,  tir  in  the  stro«gr.st  desire  for
gratification  ot'  utgaiiii'  longim.-;  (Soot lie  amon|»  otlu^rs  al-'-:o
rrfcTs  to  tlu^‘-;  fact  that  wlulr  pfU'Cf’ptiou  is  comuu'teil  with  the
practical  Matisfmlioii  nf  nere-.sitirs.  yet  mau  esarries  mx  a  life
beytuul  this  in  feiding  and  iiuagiimtiom  In  tliis  llrcnight  the
iannpulsion  ti»  the  edevation  of  the  egM  eom-.i  iousness  is  aptly
expresses!,  as  wad!  ,c.  in  a  p-4'-.s4ge  (Haairriug,  in  out*  id  Ctoefhe*s
trtft*rs  to  I,avater  in  which  lie  savs,  *'  I’his  longing  to  eltwale  as
high  a.s  possible  the  apex  of  the  pvrainid  i»f  my  i*xis|eiuse,  the
b.ea*  of  wbicli  is  pin  #st  in  mv  po^.M-saon,  outwedgbs  all  cd'o*  ami
is  scsirt'fdv  a  iiumieitl  absent  from  tfiougfd/*

It  csifi  readily  he  iiiidristood  lunv  sueh  a  tense  psyclde  situation
■  and  everv  artist,  rverv  genitis.  tights  the  same  battle  againsi
file  feeding^  of  utu'ertaiutv  ;  with  him,  luovever,  it  is  the  valuable
riiltiiral  niediuin  of  his  art  wdilch  is  rafiable  of  reiddorring  and
hriiigiiig  til  light  a  luof  of  traits  of  cbarm'ter  wdiitdi  firlp  to
coustrtiif  thr  ririirose-i.  Tluc.,  tir-d  of  alb  ambititm.  110"^  is  thr-
sirorigesf  of  the  sriaiiiftarv  guiding  principles  wliiidi  strive
tcms'irds  the  imagitiary  gtial  And  it  generates  a  mirnber  of
psyriiic  preclt'^.|msifiiins  wlio-a*  purpose  it  is  to  secure  to  the
ririiriitic  sitperioritv  in  all  situations  of  life,  but  whicli  iui  the  other
hand  makes  !iis  aggressiveness,  hi-,  affeclivitv,  appear  t*t  be  tri  a
*-dalr  td  Ciifirdafil  irritalioic  ‘flitis  the  neurotic  indivitiii.t!  serins


20


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


always  to  be  proud,  dogmatic,  envious  and  miserly,  seeks
to  make  an  impression,  wishes  to  be  first,  but  always  treml
the  result  and  gladly  postpones  decisions.  Hence  the  hes;
cautious  behavior  of  neurotics,  their  mistrust,  vacillatio
doubt.  As  if  for  practice  in  the  sense  of  a  preliminary  j
he  carries  on  these  psychic  preparations  in  small  things  ii
to  attain  to  fixed  points  and  safeguarding  directing  princij
greater  aims  which  hold  him  under  their  charm.  This  is  a
meaning  of  Freud's  displacement  mechanism,  i,e,,  the  pa
impelled  by  his  craving  for  security  to  collect
experimentally,  in  corpore  vili,  which  justifies  and  will  cc
to  justify  his  entire  psychic  attitude.  As  a  rule  the  result  is
the  thought,  **  I  must  be  cautious,  if  I  wish  to  attain  my
And  not  infrequently  the  patient  commits  auda
reckless  acts  in  order  to  assure  himself  through  an  emph
the  lesson  of  his  recklessness  the  attainment  of  his  main
namely,  the  masculine  ideal.  Often  hallucinations  and  c
assume  with  neurotics  and  psychotics  the  function  of
warning  voices  and  depict  how  it  has  already  been  once  I
how  it  has  been  with  others,  or  how  the  thing  might  tur
in  order  to  hold  the  patient  to  the  guiding  principle  in  wh
finds  security.

*At  other  times  the  strongly  emphasized  traits  of  eagern<
strife,  obstinacy  and  activity,  which  are  to  **  elevate  "  the
of  the  pyramid  as  far  as  possible  are  strongly  accentuai
pedantry  which  strives  to  keep  them  from  changing
direction.  That  the  eagerness  for  knowledge,  as  a  r
promoter  towards  attaining  the  high  goal,  is  greatly  overstr
is  not  astonishing.  With  equal  distinctness  impatience,  f
being  too  late,  fear  of  attaining  nothing,  manifest  themsel
a  particularly  strong  impulse  to  neglect  no  means,  to  do
too  much  than  not  enough  toward.s  the  attainment  of  the
These  traits  always  lie  wnthin  the  field  of  the  developed  nei
■where  the  feeling  of  craving  for  .security  "  obtrudes  itself
and  drives  to  the  dangerous  expedients  by  means  of  whic
feeling  of  inferiority  is  rendered  more  profound,  and  the  p
acts  as  if  he  were  restrained,  cut  off  from  success  and  w
hope,  or  he  plunges  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  into  pasi
displays  effeminate  traits,  conducts  himself  m  a  masochis
perverse  manner  and  finally  greatly  reduces  his  sphere  of  ac
so  that  it  is  more  shaken  and  more  .strongly  dominated
symptoms  of  the  disease.  In  a  similar  manner  arises  the  arr
ment  of  indolence,  laziness,  fatigue,  impotence  of  every
which  furnish  a  pretext  to  escape  from  decisions  which
affect  the  pride  of  the  neurotic,  an  excuse  for  withdrawing
study,  from  a  vocation,  from  marriage.  At  times  this  dev


PSYCHIC  COMPENSATION


ar

mental  phase  terminates  in  suicide  which  is  then  always  felt  as  a
successful  rt-^mge  on  fate  or  on  his  relatives.

Consciousness  of  guilt  also  asserts  itself.  Here  we  find  one  of
the  most  difficult  points  in  the  analysis  of  neuroses  and  psychoses.
Consciousness  of  guilt,  and  conscience  are  fictitious  guiding
principles  of  caution,  like  religiosity  and  suh.serve  the  craving  for
security.^  Tlunr  objecd  is  prevent  a  h»wering  of  the  ego-
consciousness  wluui  the  irritated  aggre.ssiveness  impels
immoderately  to  selfish  <1<hhIs,  In  the  consciousness  of  guilt  tlie
glance  is  directed  hackwanls,  conscience  operates  through  fore¬
sight,  The  lovc’*  id  trntlu  ttHi,  is  sustainecf  hy  the  i'ravlng  for
security  and  hcdongs  really  within  tlu'  spliere  of  our  personal
ideal,  while  the  neurotic  lie  rt^presents  a  feeble  attempt  to
j.irese*rve  appi%iraiu.'es  arul  tti  effect  compensation.

All  these  attempts  ttiwards  elevation,  efforts  of  the  wall  to
power/'  must  naturally  be  ymii’TstiKHl  as  a  form  of  the  striving
tow%‘irils  masculinity  and  bermne  identified  with  the  masculine
protc^st,  hci’aiHe  this  rrpri'smvts  a  hunlarneiital  form  of  the
psyc!ii<*a!  impulse  tti  bec*omf«  of  value,  in  ac'cordance  with  which
all  rxptudences,  perfa^ption-.  aiul  dirccitons  id  will  are  grouped.
Ap}ierceptii)n  Is  guidial  in  ai*i‘oriiance  with  this  most  significant
srheine*,  namely,  tin*  goal,  espei'iaUy  in  neurotics,  is  the  erection
of  the  niast'uline  protest  against  an  effeminate  selbestimation.
Thus  are  guided  also  attnition,  foresight,  diuibt,  as  well  as  all
traits  of  cliaracfer  am!  otlier  p,sy<*hi<*  am!  physical  iiu'linatUms,
but  in  the*  highest  <!egrre  amt  ;da»ve  all  tin*  evaluation  td  all
experimrees  in  line  with  this  tnasi*ulinr  |*oal,  sti  that  all  these*
phmiiunema  I'ontain  a  ilynamic  whitdi  is  betrayed  to  th<^
ex{H*ri«uu“e<!,  and  wduidi  temb»  from  that  wdiith  is  below  to  that
%vhii"h  hi  abtnaa  from  that  wdiieh  is  ffuninine  to  tluit  which  is
niascailii'iic  dlie  erealion  of  all  tlo’sr  lines  ed  forc'e,  the  fixatitu^
of  this  remote  goal,  the  rmphasis  and  otaatsional  protection  of
inferitm  idfemimib'*  traits  tin*  jitir{Hisf«  id  comlating  them  more
forcibly  by  the  masiailiiie  prote^l  takes  place  !iy  means^  of  ^the
*  anu^  bif  'ltu’  which  alMi  erraled,  the  r»rg.inie  t'onipi^nsatiiui,  i.i*.,
the  tendency  towanls  aiijtistiitenl  liyi’onstant  attempt  to  supplant
an  iiiJnriiHis,  ifdrrii*r  pcrbifniaitee  by  an  iruTease  cd  effort  and
whic-h  in  t!te  fisvchir  sphere  finds  eic|mcssion  in^  the  c*raving  for
seriirity  wdiirti  takes  as  a  guiding  line  («ltrec1rix)  the  w*ill  to
power,  to  be  manlv,  in  «uaier  to  oMagte  the  fetding  of  uncertaintv,
llir  grtsitcsf  diflieulty  wdiicdi  stands  in  the  way  <d  an  under-
standinix  *d  tlic  nriirteas  arisrs  frtun  the  striking^  protf*cfi<m
aflor«led  tlie^^-e  inferior,  effeminate  traits  and  tludr  acknow¬
ledgment  by  the  palietifs.  ffere  belong  all  the  phenomena  cd  the
disease  ipmrrally,  but  abac  fhr  passive,  niasochislii'  jrails,  the
rffrioinate  charaiicristit'^'s,  thr  jceadve  homosrxualitv,  impedence,
*  .'ft'  I*'  O'U  I  i*'!  U  l<  I’lN  .  UHlj


22


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


suggestibility,  accessibility  to  and  inclination  for  hypnosis,
finally,  the  apparent  surrender  to  effeminacy  and  to  effemi^^ -
behavior.  The  final  object,  however,  always  remains  the
the  domination  over  others  which  is  felt  and  appreciated  ^

masculine  triumph.  Neither  are  the  above  descxrit>^
compensatory  features  ever  absent  in  the  makeup  of
patients,  as  they  might  be  expected  to  be  in  individuals
assume  as  a  ground  for  action  a  feeling  of  inadequacy  and
then  strive  to  secure  by  every  possible  means  a  substitutes
their  shortcomings,  to  supply  that  which  they  feel  to  be
in  their  exaggerated  ego-consciousness.  And  also  in  the
situation  the  sexual  element  as  a  symbol  asserts  itself,  inasixitj-ol^
as  such  patients  frequently  form  their  apperceptions
accordance  with  a  scheme  in  which  their  genital  organs
regarded  as  if  they  were  effeminized,  restricted,  castrated ,  nnd
as  if  they  were  therefore  constantly  forced  to  seek  a  substitu-t:^
One  form  of  this  substitution  they  find  in  the  depreciation  3.nci
emasculation  of  all  other  persons.  From  this  tendency^
deprive  others  of  worth  originates  the  considerable  reenforcerm.^n't
of  certain  traits  of  character,  which  set  forth  further  inclinati^^^^
and  which  have  the  quality  of  injuring  others,  as  sadism,
contentiousness,  intolerance,  envy,  etc.  Active  homosexun-liby ,
also,  as  well  as  perversions  which  degrade  the  partner,  3.1s o
Lustmord,  arise  from  the  neurotic  tendency  to  depreciate,  ^
tendency  which  can  hardly  be  pictured  too  strongly.  They
represent  a  rationalization  of  the  symbolism  of  subjection  in.
with  the  concept  which  asserts  the  sexual  dominance  of  the
male.’*  In  short,  the  neurotic  may  also  elevate  the  feeling"  of
his  own  worth  by  degrading  others.

We  have  mentioned  above  the  protection  of  the  effeminafe^
traits  in  the  neurosis  for  the  purpose  of  better  carrying  on  flao
combat,  for  the  purpose  of  a  better  surveillance  over  self.  TTlaeso
accentuations  along  with  the  distinct  tendency  to  give  prefer"^ nco
to  the  will  to  masculinity  create  the  appearance  of  a  rent  in  fho
psyche  of  the  neurotic  which  is  familiar  to  writers  as  donblo
personality,  dissociation,  and  which  is  frequently  seen  iiv  flxo
changing  humors  of  neurotics,  but  also  in  the  succession  of
depression  and  mania,  of  ideas  of  persecution  and  grandenx*  in
the  psychoses.  I  have  always  found  as  an  internal  conneofing
bond  in  these  antithetical  conditions  the  tendency  to  maxixnafei
the  ego-consciousness,  whereby  the  inferior  situation  is
-associated  with  a  degradation,  but  is  circumscribed  and  arrangodl
as  a  ground  for  operation.  It  is  then  that  the  masculine  pirotosi:
asserts  itself,  which  is  often  carried  to  the  length  of  asserting  3.
resemblance  to  God  or  an  intimate  connection  with  Him.  Fox*

the  splitting  of  consciousness  **  the  severely  schematic  stndl
very  abstract  process  of  apperception  is  also  responsible,  a  f  oirm


PSYCHIC  COMPENSATION


23


of  apperception  which  groups  the  internal  and  external
experiences  ^according  to  a  scheme  which  has  the  form  of  an
absolute  antithesis,  something  like  the  debits  and  credits  in
book-keeping,  where  there  are  no  transitions  possible,  lids  fault
of  the  neurotic  mode  of  thinking,  which  is  identit'al  with  a  too
far-fetched  al)stractioii,  is  likewise  caused  by  his  craving  for
security,  a  tendency  which  requires  for  the  purpose  of  making
decisions,  for  anticipations  and  actions,  sharply  defined  guiding
lines,  idols,  false  <leities  in  which  the  neurotic  l>elieves.  In  this
way  he  liecornes  estranged  from  concrete  reality.  For  to  find
onels  liearingsjn  the  world  of  reality  an  elasticity  of  the  psyche
and  not  a  rigitlity  is  rei|uireti,  a  utilisation  of  ahstractum,  but
not  an  adoration,  an  idolizing  of  the  same  as  the  final  purpose  of
existence.

Acrorcliiigly  we  shall  find  in  the  mental  life  of  the  neurotic,
jUst  as  is  the  case  in  primitive  poetry,  in  mythology,  in  legends,
ill  cosmogony,  in  theogony  anu  in  tlie  lu^ginnings  of  philosophy
a  luosl  pronounccHl  tendem.*y  to  give  a  symbolic  stylt*  to  himself,
his  c^xperiences  and  to  perstms  almuf  him.  Tims  naturally  the
phenomena  which  tUi  not  lulong  together  must  he  sharply
separated  from  ea«’h  oilier  by  an  abstracting  tictitui.  Hie  impiuse
to  this  expenlient  arises  from  the  Itmging  bn*  an  orientation  and
has  its  nnds  in  tin*  nenrotii**s  i*raving  ft^r  setairity.  This  impulse
is  often  so  intense  that  it  demands  the*  splitting  of  unity,  of  thc:^
category,  of  the  unity  tif  the  ego  intc»  two  or  more  of  its
antitlirtical  parts.

From  the  above  desi'ribed  se!fa*stimation  of  the  tduiib  who  is
iruluc'cd  hv  inb'riority  of  c-oUNlllufitin  ami  tin*  evils  arisini^'  there¬
from  to  strive  aftcu*  sjiecial  seiuirities,  up  to  the  eauuphlf*  develop¬
ment  id  the  nc’uridic  tecdirdque  of  thinking  ami  ifs  c  isidjuvant
lilies,  of  the  neurotii^  cdiaracter,  .1  host  id  psyiduc  jdirmunena
make  their  appearam'c*  wdiich  acetirding  fti  Karl  (irini-d  may  hr*
regardeti  as  a  training,  aca't»riiiiig  to  mir  intrrprf*talion  as  a
preparation  ft»T  ihv  imaginary  goal.  llu*v  are  manif<*sted  at  an
e.irfv  age,  are  imlicatml  eviui  in  early  infantry  ami  are  ciuistantly
at  I  Ilf*  fonmialitni  td  the  influences  <d  const  huis  amt  unronsciotis
«‘diicsttiou.  llie  whole  tlevrl«ipment  <d  the  child  slnuvs  that  it
|;niceeds  in  the  diretdion  <d  an  i<ira,  wltich  naturally  takes  a
priiitifive  form  ami  quite  regularly  ^amks  camcrefe  embodiinerit
in  the  hirni  rd  :i  person,  Ihnler  this  cfuiipnlsitm.  the  psychic
fiirctiaiiisni  of  which  is  for  the  micd  part  unfamsciom;  ami  only
p.irtlv  riifisrioiis,  the  psyche  in  the  fjrtire-:s  fd  formatitm  comes
tti  more  tlisliiirl  expression,  amt  t!ie  mental  as  wid!  as  the
plivsifsil  life  of  a  human  being  taken  at  arty  given  point  td  its
devrlo|imerif  is  to  lie  imderst*mfl  as  the  ansiver  whic'li  that:
iritlividiial  gives  to  the  tjiiesfitm  of  life.

*  ICarl  drt*?4,  ,  fUt'*  jiff  Tiai'Stv


24


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


This  answer,  in  reality  the  manner  in  which  life  is
is  according  to  all  the  knowledge  thereof  furnished  by
to  be  considered  as  identical  with  the  effort  to  put  an
uncertainty,  to  the  chaos  which  jirevails  in  impressio^^^
feelings,  with  the  effort  to  obtain  a  firm  hold  in  order  to
the  difficulties  of  life.  Reflection,  observation,  thought  fore¬

thought,  attention,  calculation  and  valuation  are  all
forth  by  this  craving  for  security.  And  inasmuch  as  the
of  one’s  own  inferiority  is  taken  as  an  abstract  stand^^^
inequality  among  human  beings,  the  greater,  the  strong'^^  anci
his  measure  are  taken  for  the  fictitious  goal  so  that  it
guarantee  against  this  uncertainty  and  fright.  Thus  it  is
soul  of  the  child  constructs  a  guiding  line  w^hich  impels
an  elevation  of  the  ego-consciousness  in  order  to  escape  frotii
uncertainty,  the  influence  of  which  is  still  stronger  in
who  have  felt  their  inferiority  more  keenly.  Mythograph^^^  *
human  race,  poets,  philosophers,  founders  of  religion^  liavr
taken  the  material  from  their  contemporaneous  periods
transformation  of  the  guiding  lines  so  that  immortality,  'virlut**
piety,  riches,  knowledge,  social  consciousness  of  the
classes  or  self-perfection  were  available  as  goals  and  were  ijit  i
according  to  the  receptive  peculiarities  of  the  individu3.1  wltri
longed  for  perfection.  At  this  point  the  living  energies  o  f  th**
child  become  transferred  into  tne  self-created  sphere  of  his
subjective  world  which  henceforth  as  a  guiding  fiction  transrx^  tilrs,
falsifies  and  changes  the  values  of  all  feelings  and  .

pleasures  and  pains,  even  the  struggle  for  self-preservation .  hir
his  benefit,  in  order  to  attain  the  goal;  a  transformation  wliic'lt
utilizes  all  the  experiences  of  the  neurotic  in  such  a  way  ns
bring  about  preparations  which  will  ensure  the  triumph  .

These  preparatory  acts  with  their  tendency  to  change  »

may  be  most  clearly  observed  in  the  play  of  nervous
in  their  deliberations  over  the  choice  of  a  future  vocation  ^  anti
their  physical  and  psychical  attitudes.  These  phenomena  will  br
further  discussed  in  connection  with  the  dominating  cravirxfj  b»r
security  which  controls  them.  Concerning  the  nervous
it  may  be  stated  that  as  a  rule  it  is  noticeable  at  an  eairly
that  it  takes  the  form  of  a  pantomimic  representation ?«4tiinr
trait  of  character,  either  as  an  anxious,  waiting,  distirnf^JlfuL
uncertain,  cautious,  bashful  attitude  or  as  a  hostile,  ot>s*fcif%;itc’4
self-certain,  self-complacent,  forward  attitude.  Blusl“xin|^^  ifi
noticeable  or  the  glance  is  peculiarly  fixed,  cast  down  or  hostile.
It  is  easy  to  correlate  one  of  these  attitudes  or  gestures ,  ^  a

mimic  trait,  with  the  prototype.  In  nervous  children  imit  jiticiii
of  the  male  principle,  the.  father,  is  often  found  ;  the  motlnc^’r  ciit  lv
becomes  a  model  for  imitation  after  a  formal  change  in  tfir
guiding  principle  has  taken  place,  or  when  from  the  beg:ifiniri|»


PSYCHIC  COMPENSATION


as


the  moral  superiority  of  the  mother  is  heyoml  cjuestion.  Usually
these  phenomena  are  insignificant  and  such  as  are  not  as  a  rule
subjected  to  the  observation  of  the  physician.  Crossing  the  legs,
the  arms,  a  peculiar  manner  of  gait,  preference  for  certain  foods,
borrowing  of  certain  traits  of  cuarac'ter,  etc.,  or  in  the  presence
of  more  strongly  emphasized  obstinacy  opposite  forms  of
expression.  The  retained  bad  hal)its  of  childhood,  such  as
eneurc^sis,  biting  the  nails,  sucking,  stuttering,  winking  tlu^  eyes,
masturbation,  etc.,  can  always  he  trace<l  to  these  beginnings  of
obstinacy.  They  are  the  expedients  of  tlie  weak  to  diminish  the
pathos  of  the  distance  and  thereby  <lo  away  w'ith  the  feeling  of
inferiority,  and  strive  in  the  last  analysis  to  a  transformation  of
authority  and  at  the  same  time  to  gain  an  excuse  for  avoiding  a
dc^cision,  for  postponing  it.

All  considerable  phenomena  of  this  sort  are  themselves
neurotic  traits  of  character  or  show  that  they  are  permeated  by
the  ntmrotic  character  and  like  5t  itself  are  a  form  of  expression
of  the  craving  for  security,  fireparatory  processes  and  preliminary

firovisions  of  the  compensatory  force  which  i.s  producei!  by  the
eeling  of  inferiority.


CHAPTER  III


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION  AS  THE  GUIDING  IDEA  IN
THE  NEUROSIS

The  most  important  task  of  thinking  is  to  anticipate  actio  ^
events;  to  seize  upon  an  objective  and  ways  and  means
influence  them  as  far  as  possible.  By  means  of  this  proce^^^
forethought,  our  influence  over  space  and  time  is  assured
certain  degree.  Accordingly  our  psyche  is  first  of  all  an
of  aggression  born  out  of  the  distress  of  the  too
limitation  which  from  the  first  renders  difficult  the  gratific:^^^^^^*^
of  natural  appetites.  This  organically  determined
gratification  of  appetites  will  only  endure  so  long  as  the
means  are  at  hand  for  its  stabilization;  for  rendering  it
against  the  strongest  attacks.  Toward  the  end  of  the  nur^diig
period,  when  the  child  acquires  ability  to  carry  out  indepeii^l^'^^C
purposeful  actions  which  are  not  merely  directed  toward
gratification  of  appetite,  when  he  takes  his  place  in  the
and  begins  to  adapt  himself  to  his  environment,  he
possesses  abilities,  psychic  gestures  and  preparations.
this  his  conduct  has  acquired  a  certain  uniformity  and  is  ti»

be  on  the  road  toward  acquiring  his  place  in  the  world.  Sti*di  a
uniformity  of  conduct  can  only  be  comprehended  by  the
assumption  that  the  child  has  discovered  some  specific  ii^ed
point  outside  of  his  own  personality  towards  which  he  st’f  ives
with  his  developmental  energies.  The  child  must,  therT^fiue,
have  constructed  for  himself  a  guiding  principle,  a  guiding  nr*
obviously  in  the  hope  of  thins  orienting  himself  in  the  be  d
possible  manner  in  his  environment  and  of  obtaining  gratifies  tt ion
of  his  necessities  of  avoiding  pain  and  of  obtaining  plea tire,*
From  this  guiding  ideal  arises  the  very  beginning  of  the  oHIld*:;
craving  for  tenderness,  that  quality  which  (Paulsen)  orifginalb/
determines  the  tractability  of  the  child.  Soon  ther.e  b<*c"iiine
associated  with  this  fir.st  quality,  efforts  to  gain  the  praise*  lir!|»
and  love  of  the  parents,  stirrings  of  independence,  of  obsti  nitty
and  of  opposition.  The  child  has  found  a  meaning  in  life

towards  which  he  strives  and  whose  still  indi.^tlnct  outline:*  lie  i;
forming,  and  starting  from  which  he  derives  that  quality  of
prevision  which  is  calculated  to  direct  and  give  worth  tc»  hi .
actions  and  impulse.s.  It  is  the  child's  helplessness,  clum!-;i  rir..i
and  uncertainty  which  n(‘cessitatcs  the  establishment  of  the

^  Ad!(‘r,  “  Trotz  tni<!  Gfdioniumlreit.”

26


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


37


tentative  tests  of  possibility,  the  acquisition  of  experience,  the
creation  of  memories  for  the  purpose  of  constructing  a  bridge
leading  to  that  future  where  there  are  to  be  found  greatness,
power  and  satisfaction  of  all  sorts.  The  construction  of  this
bridge  is  the  most  important  work  the  child  is  called  upon  to
perform  because  without  it  he  would  iiud  himself  in  the  midst  of
the  inpouring  impressions  without  onUn\  without  counsel,  with¬
out  guide.  It  is  scarcely  possilile  to  d<dine  the  limits  of  this  first
sta<iium,  of  this  awakening  sulqective  world,  to  describe  it  in
morels.  But  it  may,  howt‘ver,  be  said  that  the  guiding  nuHlel  of
tiie  rliikl  must  be  so  i'unstriu1t‘d  as  if  It  were  able  to  bring  to  the
child  grtMter  certainty  and  orientation  by  influencing  the  dirci'tioti
of  his  will

But  Ih‘  can  only  ol)tain  scemrity  by  striving  towards  a  fixed

fudnt  where  he  sees  himself  greater  aiul  stronger,  where  he  finds
lifiiself  rid  td  the  !ielp!essru\ss  of  infancy,  llie  symbolic  and
Icigiral  nature  of  our  proce^ss  of  thinking  permits  the  construction
of  this  future*  cliaugcal  pcTsonality  in  the  image  of  the  father,  tin*
mother,,  of  an  elder  brother  or  s.istt*r,  i>r  t<‘aclier  or  some
prof«*!-;sioii:il  man,  or  hern,  or  animal,  or  tiod.  'The  cpialities  of
greatness,  p.uvver,  knowhslgi*  and  ability  an*  fcsiturtss  ctuumon
fi*  al!  llic*sc*  gnitling  images  and  iluis  they  are  ont*  and  all  symliols
fiir  imaginative  ab:-;f ractions.  And  tluis  like  itlcds  madt*  of  clay
|!k‘V  rt'ceive  from  tiu*  iiiiagjimtion  uf  niau,  fona*  aitil  life,  ami
re.n  t  iijKm  the  jrsvtiie  whit'h  lia-’  ereated  them.

llu^  artifice  «ii'  tliiiiking  usnihl  have  the  stamp  of  paranoia  and
id  denrienfia  prccsix  <‘iuulif iom-:,  wlfiudi  create  for  thcanselves
hos-tile  Cur  the  purpusr  u!  ■■ectiring  egtet'ons.thou:mess,  wtwe

aut  the  t'hild  abf#*  .it  all  fime-,  fu  lrf*e  hinc'elt  Imm  tile*  bonds  td  his
liition,  In  elinuimte  Ins  projcailuns  (Kant)  froni  his  csilculations,
and  !«i  make  mo*  milv  of  fhi*  impigtr:  which  is  giv(*n  him  by  this
loiidini^’  line.  Hi:-;  Hiii'c*jlaiiit v  is  ‘adfiKmud  to  make  him  s«d  up  a
fafi!;ed'ic*  goal  fin*  the  pin  pee-, e  cd  oiieutatiou  in  flu*  world,  !mt  it
is  not  i»rrat  to  make  him  ihqmive  reality  td  its  valm*  ami  to
.IS*. erf  dtMgguaticallv  the  reality  td  tins  guttling'  rnotltd,  as  is  tin*
isisf*  ill  flu*  psyelicees,  ( hu*  luir.t,  howtwt*r,  call  attention  to  the
■siriiikirily,  the  ciiofificance  td  this  imct*rtainly  and  tin*  tbnfice  of
a  fiction  in  inu'Mial  per^^mi*;,  rieurofies  am!  the  inrsane,

llie  part  cd  }.iro</ess  wliiclt  is  (*ommon  to  all  humanity,
eorm.il  and  ahmirimd,  is  that  tiie  apfiertafiving  tm^rnorv  is  undt*r
ifie  ewav  of  the  guiding  fiuiiom  It  is  be<*aust*  td  this  tiuua*
e«i’4-''  wififiti  cawtsiiii  fimits  hi  all  mankiml  a  unihuiiiilv  concerm
iiig  a  rr»riCf*pfioiK  'rhrcM’d  in  its  imag^'nlit'aiice  asu!

}irl|i!e’.'aieS';  will  taifivlanf Iv  ‘frive  tci  enlarge  Iti*^  fiedtl  td  poWt*r
a, III!  will  lisirk  fh's  held  off  ;dt#*r  tin*  p.atftu'u  td  tlial  which  seems
tfi  the  greafi-.f  strength.  Am!  mav  it  lieeonies  evidtmf  in

the  ctiiirsr  id  psychic*  tlevtdopimmt  that  that  which  rvas  at  flr'4


aS


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


only  an  imaginary  expedient,  important  only  in  its  relations,  only
a  means  for  gaining  ground  to  stand  upon,  for  finding  one’s
bearings,  for  gaining  a  foothold,  has  become  a  goal  in  itself,
obviously  because  the  child  can  only  in  this  way  obtain  self-
assurance  in  acting  and  not  directly  through  the  gratification  of
desires.'

Thus  the  effective  point  is  found  outside  the  corporeal  sphere
according  to  which  the  psyche  adjusts  itself,  a  point  which  forms
the  centre  of  gravity  of  human  thought,  feeling  and  volition.  And
the  mechanism  of  apperceiving  memory^  with  its  host  of
experiences,  transforms  itself  from  ^  an  objectively  operating
system  into  a  subjectively  active,  fictitiously  modified  scheme  of
an  imagined  future  personality.  It  becomes  the  task  of  this
scheme  to  bring  about  such  connections  with  the  outside  world
as  will  serve  to  maximate  his  feeling  of  ego-consciousness,  such
associations  as  will  hint  at  the  preparing  activities  and  thought
indicators  and  bring  these  in  contact  with  the  already  existing
state  of  preparedness.  One  is  here  reminded  of  the  apt
expression  of  Charcot  who  has  emphasized  for  science  that  ' '  one
only  discovers  that  which  one  knows,’'  an  observation  which
when  directed  to  practical  experience  tends  to  show  that  our
whole  sphere  of  perception  is  limited  by  a  number  of  pre¬
determined  psychical  mechanisms  and  predispositions  as  Kant’s
theory^  of  a  priori  ”  forms  of  perception  teaches  us.  In  a
similar  manner  our  actions  are  determined  by  the  content  of
experiences,  which  are  given  birth  to  and  are  determined  by  the
guiding  fiction.  Even  our  judgments  concerning  the  value  of
things  are  determined  according  to  the  standard  of  the  imaginary
goal,  not  according  to  ‘Veal”  feelings  or  pleasurable  sensations.


And  conduct  follow’'s  as  James  expresses  it  in  consequence  of
a  sort  of  approbation — depends  as  it  were  on  a  fiat,  command  or
acquiescence.  The  guiding  fiction  is  therefore  first  of  all  the
expedient,  the  device  by  means  of  which  the  child  seeks  to  free
himself  from  his  feeling  of  inferiority.  It  initiates  compensation
and  stands  at  the  service  of  the  craving  for  security.  The  greater
the  feeling  of  inferiority,  the  more  imperative  and  stronger  will
be  the  necessity  for  a  steadying,  guiding  principle  and  indeed  the
more  distinctly  it  manifests  itself,  and  like  compensation  in  the
organic  sphere,  the  effectiveness  of  psychic  compensation  is
linked  with  a  functional  increase  and  brings  about  novel  and
many-sided  manifestations  in  the  mental  life.  One  of  the  forms
of  expression  of  this  compensatory  mechanism,  intended  to  assure


^  As  may  be  seen  from  Karl  Groos’  “  Plav  of  Animals  ”  the  iniaerstaiulinff
IS  likewise  based  upon  the  fact  that  we  see  if  act  as
though  it  were  following  the  direction  of  a  fictitious  guiding  line.

attention  here  to  Bergson’s  funaamental  teachings,  without
being  able  to  give  room  here  for  bis  important  view-poinfea.


THE  ACCENTUATED  EIC^llDN  39

the  seri^c  of  egu-ccnisciou.sness  Is  exemplitietl  hy  the  neurosis  and
psychosis.

The  cunstitiitbiially  inferinr  child  with  his  luist  uf  dis¬
advantages  and  uncertainties  will  tauistruct  hi.s  goal  in  a  more
tlefinite  and  cknircn:*  manner,  will  eutUne  more  distinctly  the
guiding j.)rinidjde  anti  will  adhere  to  it  more  anxiously  or
oogouitically.  In  fact  the  principal  impression  which  one  gains
from  the  ohservatiori  id  a  neurtdically  tlLspttsetl  tdiikl  is  usually
that  thr*  rhilcHs  guidanl  in  thf‘  cluiicc  cif  a  wca|>t>n  hy  his  somatic
inferiority  which  he  iitili^res  in  his  dealings  with  his  relatives  or
w*hich  he  einplutsi'/es  in  his  oiistinaey.

Often  his  illness  is  iHirrowtsI  from  his  environment  either  by
simulation  or  exaggeratitm  td  actual  ailments,  all  this  in-order  to
strengthen  his  ptisititm.  ShtHild  sutdi  means  not  have  the  desired
effect  iipoii  lii-s  environment,  the  t'hild  eruksivors  to  rid  himself  of
his  nniiplaiiits  through  the  exercise  of  superior  efforts,  as  result
Ilf  which  thfu'f’  devfdiip  mil  infret|uent ly  c|naliiied  ami  artistic
performaiu’cs  in  the  event  of  the  experiencing  td  an  over**
rtunpensalion  on  ihe  part  cd  the  functional  anomalies  of  tlie  eye,
ear,  speech  or  inmaailafure.  Assoeiated  wdth  tliis  are  also  stirrings
of  imieprmtenca^  Dr  llie  remeitv  i**  ■•amght.  on  thr  other  hand,  in
a  greater  dependence,  ffir  fhc  attainment  td'  which,  anxiety,  a
holding  of  imagiutu  aiicr ,  wisikm-ss,  awk  watdiir..**,  imstpacilv,
smjse  id  guilt  am!  rriiiorse  snvr  as  striUighokls.  llu:*  same
temtefu*y  may  hn*  \vt*u  in  t!ir  adhmimt'r  to  thr  had  habits  td
cddldliotnl  in  the  retmlasn  #*|  :i  p'.ys  ldo  infant iU-aii  in  -.ii  far  as
this  is  nut  exclusively  or  parfialH  the  result  <d'  tihstinacy,  iif  the
infantile  negativism.

A  ntnnher  id  the  I'oiiijdainis  <4  p- ychopatbit*  tbiltlren  are  of  a
siihjcs'tive  natiiff",  .ind  corrrs|nmd  to  a  coni{i!ete  or  jiartial  error
id  jmfgment  as  it.  takes  place  in  the  effort  tif  rliiklren  to  find  a
reason  for  their  feeling  of  inferiority  amt  to  <‘orn{U'rheml  it.
Freipienfly  these  logical  interpretations  are  already  iulrrmixed
with  the  ciun|feii’'»atifig  ainfdtion  or  wnth  the  chikl’s  aggressive*
ri#‘'Ss  towards  its  jrarenfs.  llie  fatdf  lie.s  with  my  parents,  with
fiiy  lot.  her'aiist^  rni  the  yoiiiigt*^,t ,  bn  ause  I  wa,s  born  too  late,
beraiisr  I  am  a  rimleifdla.,  Iirr'aiise  Tm  perhap.s  not  the  idnld  of
these  parrnl-a  of  this  fallirr,  of  this  molher,  becawsr  I  arii  too
siiiatl,  loo  wmik.  iiavc'  fuu  :aiiall  a  head,  am  too  honirly,  tierause
I  liaVe  an  iiiipediiiieiil  of  .-^peri  h,  a  defret  of  hearing,  am  cross-
rvt'il,  iiear''Si|t|i|eib  brcaiiM"  1  have  imperfect  genitals,  liecaaiise
Fm  md  manly.  Iircaic,r  I  am  a  girl,  bnaiiise  I*m  tiad  by  iiatiirr.
dull  ami  awkwniiai,  hecatisr  I  h.ivr  ma.sturbateit,  becaiise  rrii  ftiri
sens  mills,  foo  ts,t¥rOiiic,  and  mitiiiallv  perverted,  hetaiuse  I  sitbffiil
easily,  am  too  i;!e|irfidriit  sold  obrv,  breause  I  cry  ea*dlv,  am  easily
affrrlecb  lircanse  I  ain  a  cTitiiina!,  a  tliief,  an  intanuiiary.  and
roiikl  miinier  somo  our.  Mv  am*estry,  my  ediicxitbiu


30


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


circumcision  are  to  blame,  because  I  have  too  long  a  nos^t

much  hair,  too  little  hair,  because  I  am  a  cripple/'

similarly  sound  the  child's  attempts  to  unburden  himself  by  *

ing  fate  just  as  in  the  Greek  fate  tragedies,  these  are  atten^P^"^

to  preserve  the  ego-consciousness  and  hold  others

for  his  inferiority.  These  attempts  are  regularly  met  with

psychic  treatment  of  the  neuroses  and  they  can  always  be

back  to  the  relationship  between  an  existing  feeling  of

and  an  assumed  ideal.  The  signilicance  and  value  of

thought  processes  wdiich  are  as  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  netJLro^^*'

are  noted  also  in  the  uses  to  which  they  are  put  by  himself »  i

for  the  stimulation  of  his  efforts  in  the  direction  of  his

(grandiose  ideas)  and  second,  the  utilization  of  them  as  a

and  excuse  when  forced  to  a  decision  which  threatens  a

of  the  ego-consciousness  (depreciatory  ideas).  The

applicability  and  application  naturally  occupies  the

in  the  neuroses  because  the  goal  towmrd  which  the

strives  is  set  too  high  to  be  reached  in  a  direct  line.

utilization  of  this  ideal  is  only  rendered  possible  by  an

of  aggression  or  in  blaming  fate  as  well  as  heredity.  By  ncn

of  this  the  neurotic  gain.s  a  permanent  base  of  operation  on

strength  of  which  he  unfolds,  thrusts  forward  and  ■'

certain  traits  of  character  which  serve  the  same  hostile

such  as  obstinacy,  a  donunating,  grumbling  nature,  ped^-xx'x  t  r>  ,

because  thcndsy  ht'  always  succecnls  in  gaining  mastery  ovc.tr

environment  principally  by  calling  attention  to  his  terril^A*"

suffering.  All  of  these  traits  ami  predispositions  assoc-i« 1 1

with  bad  habits  retained  from  childhood  which  have

markedly  exaggerated,  as  well  as  with  disease  symptoms  «*»f  a

self-created  and  self-modeled  nature  stand  in  the  closest

relation,  are  inseparable  one  from  another  and  show

dependence  on  a  factor  outside  their  own  sphere,  i,e.,  t  iit*v

depend  upon  the  guiding  iiction  which  has  evolved  from  tiir

craving  for  security  or  from  the  longing  for  the  maximatioii  «st

the  ego-consciousness.  In  the  imaginary  basis  of  this

of  inferiority  which  because  of  the  craving  for  security  is  al  w  ;iy  .

thought  of  in  an  exaggerated  manner  and  felt  too  keenly,  I  srr

the  chief  therapeutic  hope.  The  question  wdiether  the

of  uncertainty  is  conscious  or  unconscious  is  of  secoiicI;iry

importance.  At  times  pride  carries  thing.s  so  far  that  *  ^rn c^mtTfeOry

gives  way"  (Nietzsche).  Naturally  the  above  cl€seirit'tf"i!

connection  is  not  realized  by  the  patient.  It  is  for  this

that  he  remains  the  plaything  of  his  emotions  and  affects  titilil

such  time  as  the  mechanism  becomes  revealed  to  him  anci  -.t-i

to  rights,  until  such  time  as  the  predispositions  and  netircif  i*

plan  of  life  are  shattered  ;  a  plaything  of  emotions  and  !•;

the  interaction  of  which  becomes  further  complicated  becamsc’*


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


3^

a  constant  admixture  of  traits  of  character  intended  to  negate  his
sense  of  inferiority,  surh^as  pride,  envy,  gretnl,  cruelty,  courage,
revcngefulness,  irritability,  etc.,  trait.s  of  character  which  are
constantly  lacing  excited  through  his  craving  for  security.

The  tendency  to  exaggerate  atul  emphasise  existing  defects
plays  an  important  nMe  in  the  psychok>gy  of  the  neuroses.  An
appearanct*:  of  w<Mkm\s.s,  suffc^ring,  incapacity  and  iiselessnes.s
results  from  this  manner  of  |wt^senting  actual  defects  l>ecause
the  neurotic  is  compelltal  by  tne  nu.Hdianism  w!\ich  controls  him
to  conduct  himself  unwaveringly  a  manner  as  to  feel

as  though  he  wcrc^  sit'k,  as  though  lie  were  efTeminate,  inferior,
neglected,  injiirtal,  sexually  ovt»r-excited,  impotent  or  pervertc*ci.
The  cautious  appricitdi  to  prohl<uns  of  liie  which  constantly
accompanies  these  impulses,  the  exaggerated  striving  upwards,
the  desire  to  play  the  rdle  td  man  in  some  way  or  other,  to  be
superior  to  ev«u'ybodv  elst*,  the  neuridit'ks  stronghold  with  its
firime  objind  of  aviutling  deei^unis  and  stdbacks  and  thus  to
c^*-c.i|K'  a  lowering  ef  eg^ti-const'iousness,  all  of  tins  reveals
to  us  the  true  .state  of  affair  namely,  that  the  low  selbestimation
of  the  runindie  is  in  itself  ati  exp«‘di<mt  liy  means  of  which  he
strives  the  nu^re  powerfully  to  attain  that  guiditig  gi)al  which
wii!  tiring  aliout  a  luaxiriuition  of  lu:s  egict/onsciousness.  He  may
liimself  ai'rru’iliiig  ftie  mcit(»i  **  half  and  half/’  he
liiav  cede  ('eilain  ‘.irongjndtis  in  the  i'onttad,  !»ut  lu*  d<H*s  so
s»delv^  in  tirtlfU'  fo  fortifv  }iiiu\:e!f  agaiicd  an  itltirnatc  feeling  of
itiferiiU'ify  and  in  order  fo  \h*  the  better  atde  to  utilize  others
i«  his  ‘service.

Tlie  sexual  feature  of  tlie  p-.vrhrdogy  of  tin*  neuroses  which
FrrufI  bmks  upofi  a.^:  a  cartlirial  p<»int:  is  in  this  wi*a*  explained
as  the*  effect  of  a  firlion,  llouf*  is  no  tibjective  stafuiarc!  of  the
“*  rddilu/*  Till'  ex’altatioii  and  diminution  of  the  ^:a!^r  is  always
in  ac’ccmd  with  the  imaginary  goal.  \lt  is  istsy  for  the  nenrotir
to  ronvinre  himself  that  he  is  the  subjecd  of  a  high  sexual
lerisieii  bv  nirans  of  a  more  or  less  purposeful  arrangement,
am!  es|irna!!v  !'»v  mran*;  of  a  laMuentration  td  flu*  attention  in
fl-i  dlrr‘rtioii  the  moment  In*  begins  fii  seek  proed  of  how  murh
iriiurv  Sf‘xualitv  works  to  his  feeling  of  setairily  ami  Imw  mut'h
Idr;  rgpr-r*onsciotis|iess  i*".  ihreafriifH!  fr«uti  this  ^;ource.|  The
wraikcuiifig  of  litiidimnis  iinjuilses  even  to  the  point  of  psyehic
i!ii|iotema*  is  to  be  regarded  as  |)ur|He'.efu!  eheeks  on  aggression,
;e'  dj-atrders  of  tialiiiii!  pia'dispteaf ions,  as  a  (*onstrurfitm  (d  an
'“as  iF*  for  the  purpose  td  assuring  himsedf  against  marriage,
;i|S'iiiist  a  swerving  from  the  gmi!,  ag'aimd  a  tlegratlalion  at  the
^hambs  id  the  sexual  partfie*r,  against  poverty  nr  eulpability.
iRepressed  or  I’oiisf'ious  perverse  temleneies,  as  well  as  the
Uorfipulsion  to  rtiastiirl'Uifion  are  always  looked  upon  as  didcnirs,
re:  syrttbols  of  an  imaginary  plan  cd  life  whose  purpose  is  selU


32


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


assurancel  They  are  called  into  being  by  the  guiding

soon  as  the  feeling  of  inferiority  finds  expression  tb.^

of  the  sexual  partner  as  happens  regularly  whero  'fcHc*re

exist  sexual  anomalies.  The  fiction  may  then  also  repr^^^

incentive  to  perversion  into  the  subconscious  or  make  fe*ar

of  the  partner  unrecognizable  to  consciousness  so  that  i't

becomes  apparent  from  a  survey  of  the  whole  situation-

resorts  to  the  first  alternative  when  it  depends  on  pride

fulfillment  of  its  purpose,  to  the  latter  when  it  makes  a

of  the  defect  and  seeks  the  degradation  of  the

Incestuous  tenclences  too,  to  which  Freud  ascribes

important  r61e  in  the  production  of  neuroses  and

reveal  themselves  in  the  psychology  of  the  neuros^^  ^

purposeful  edifices  and  symbols,  which  derive  their

harmless  material  out  of  childhood  life  with  its  prep3.3r^^^^**y

processes.  A  proper  insight  for  instance  into  the

complex  **  sshows  us  that  it  is  nothing  more  nor  less  ^

figurative,  sexually  clothed  conception  of  what  const:5tt.it

masculine  self-consciousness,  superiority  over  woman,

the  same  time  betrays  the  cause  which  leads  to  this

namely  as  if  the  mother  were  the  only  one  that  one  crotthi

subjugate,  on  whom  one  could  depend  or  as  though  sexual  cl<*^‘**'**

(already  in  childhood)  were  to  be  carried  through  in  spitc'^

everything  and  always  by  a  struggle  with  stronger  forces  (t  hr

father,  dragons,  danger  of  death).  As  may  he  inferred

this  interpretation,  close  inquiry  into  the  sexual  neuroses

leads  to  tne  discovery  of  a  guiding  fiction  wdiich  reveals

a  sexual  form  or  can  be  revealed  by  therapeutists,  as  well  bt

the  laying  bare  of  a  mode  of  apperception  evolved  accord.in|Jr

a  sexual  scheme  in  consequence  of  which  the  neurotic  and  oftf*n

also  the  normal  person  attempt  to  apprehend  and  under5;t;cr nd

the  world  and  all  its  phenomena  in  sexual  terms,  in  a

picture  as  it  were.  Our  further  investigations  reveal  tha.t:

sexual  scheme  which  is  often  carried  out  in  speech,  in  axx^toum ,

and  manners,  is  only  a  variation  of  that  all-embracing

of  more  fundamental  origin,  i.e,,  the  antithetical  modc^  **t

apperception  as  ''  male-female  iip-down/'  *  The  lsit«rr

psychic  perverse  tendencies  derive  their  material  and

from  the  harmless  bodily  sensations  and  misjudgments  c»l

childhood  which  when  occasion  arises  are  given  an  es:sctr-i

ordinarily  high  value  or  some  chance  pleasurable  sensation^?

perceived  as  analogues  of  sexual  sensations.  The  psychLolo^i^it

**866  tha  dream  of  Ti{>pia.H,  Horodotns  VT.,  107;  “  he  dmmtf.  that  m  *#*

ftloepmg  with  liis  mother.”  Thin  lie  dreamed  aa  he  was  about  to
maternal  eity,  m  be  had  alr<‘ady  done  once  hc^fore  aa  the  companion  €  I  .  j
father.  Thun  the  CKdipus  complex  m  the  Hvmhol  of  the  deairo  to
With  theBomanatoo  Bei8<*hlaf  ('Hcxual  eonf^resa)  ayrnhoIiKed  conqueftt,  vic^tc^r  %
Compare  tin*  {ioiibl<<  td  the  word  **  Huhigere.”


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


33

must  not  assunu*  the  .same  pinnt  of  view,  must  iu»t  maintain  surfi
a  mode  of  apperception  as  valid,  not  .suf.stitute  real  sexual
components  for  a  iiotion  as  the  patient  dot's.  Ilis  task  on  the
contrary  consists  in  revealing  to  the  patient  tlu'  sn|)erti(  iality  of
his  attempts  at  orientatiutj,  to  tear  it  apart  as  a  mere  product  of
the  iniaginatitni,  and  to  weaken  tin'  feeling  of  inferiority  which
drives  the  patient  in  a  convulsive  manner  towards  these  guiding
principles  which  would_  necessitate  the  carrying  out  of  the
rna.sculine  protest  ”  in  a  circuitous  manner.

.\pperceiving  memory  which  influener's  <iur  cosmic  picture*  ti>
>aich  a  great  extent  works  also  with  a  lietion  as  it  wr're,  with  a
sclu'matic  lietion,  in  aeeordaiu'e  with  which  we  choose  and  model
our  perceptions,  our  experit'tices,  as  well  as  the  training  of  our
eonnate  ternlencies  and  capacities  until  tlu'V  are*  changed  into
the  appropriate'^  psye'hieal  atnl  teehtdeal  skilfultn  and
j}rep:ir«nln€*^4.s,  Ilie  rnadus  oneratuii  of  om  corn^cious  and
iirictiiLscitniK  ineriiory  and  its  itulividualr/ation  almy  the  persona!
ideai^anc!  its  standards.  Frcun  this  we  are  able  to  detluee  that  as
a  guiding  lietitm  its  purpose  is  tt»  eiinfrout  tlie  problems  of  life
so  soon  as  thi*  feeling  of  hiferiority  and  nneertaitity  iinpels
toward^ euinpensptiiui.  This  fixed  gui<ltng  ptnnt  of  our  effiirts,
whii'h  in  no  st^nsc^  possesses  reality,  is  abstdiifidy  iliHusive  ftir
the  I'lsyc'hic.'  de  ‘Vfdiipinent,  tor  it  <*naldes  us  to  niakt*  steps  in  the
t  haos  of  die  world,  as  does  fhr  eluld  whim  learning  tij  walk  anti
kf-epirig  in  his  f^ye  a  goal  wiiieli  he  strivtss  to  reat'k  Far  more
unwaveringly,  tlu'  iiourotir  keops  Iieftin*  his  ryr  his  tlud,  his
idol,  his’  i(!eat  of  |.K*rsona!ity  aiul  elings  ia  his  guiding  priruaple,
losing  sigfit  in  the*  meanwfale  of  reality,  v\hereas  tin*  ruirtnal
ptrsoii  is  alwiiys  ready  to  <l}spensr  with  this  erutdi,  thir.  aid,
and  rrekmi  unfiarnperr<!  with  reality,  fdn  tliis  instanee,  the
fieiirotir  rrsmubles  a  prrsiui  \v!u»  Itioks  up  to  Ciod,  ca>ini»ends
liineadf  til  the  Ia*rd  ami  then  a,m!  fheri*  awaits  ereduloiedy  for
his  giiidarua^  ;  lu*  is  naiknl  to  the  eross  i»f  Ids  fitlioii.  The
ncirnial  iiiiiixddiial  too  may  aiitl  di*es  tuamte  his  flritys  frel?>
<lr;iwfi  upward  but  never  Iosr*i  sight  of  reality,  amt  always  fakes
i!  irilfi  aec'oiiiif  as  soon  as  !u‘  is  ealha!  upon  to  a-d.  Aei’ordingly
the  iieiifotie  lives  umler  the  Iiypnotii^  intlurnee  of  an  imaginary
j I  lari  of  life,

Thai  this  iftiagiuary  mark  of  the  piTsimal  idea!  sifnafiai  as  it
fs  firyorHl  s|.iaer  and  time  is  never  \vifhout  et'frd,  may  be  serf!
friirii  the  trernls  of  the  attention  ;  interests  and  teiidriii*ies  of
tlirsr  imiividtials,  wdiieli  always  lead  U*  jioinl^.  t»f  view*  of  an  «i
friiiri  iialiirr,  I'lic'-  «*x«iui*ate  purposefulness  of  anr  pHVeliir
pnif'es’se and  the  prefI!‘i|Hisifi<ni  tletermined  tfi<*rebv  in
rr  ifioreihle  for  llie  fart  that  our  aedtom*  have  definite  beginnings
and  teradiialitiing  tliaf,  a-;  Ziehen  efuph;ea*/e‘g  voiiuitary  and
invi  a.arJ.fs  aefhois  ar«"  rfirisfantly  aimed  at  attaining  a  drlinife


34


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


result,  that  we  must  assume  with  Pawlow  a  decided
in  the  {unctioninig  of  the  organs.  All  these  phenomena
convincing  that  philosophers  and  psychologists  have  froJa^
earliest  times  taken  as  a  teleologic  dogma  everything
premeditatively  attempted  an  orientation  according
assumed  fixed  point  as  the  goal.

The  concept  of  natural  selection  is  entirely  too  inadeq'i-i^^
explain  results  which  are  able  to  take  on  new  and
forms  as  occasion  demands.  Experience  compels  us  to
all  these  phenomena  as  dependent  upon  an  unconsciously
fiction,  the  faint  consciou.s  irradiations  of  which  furnish  us
according  to  which  in  the  last  analysis  our  apperception
our  experiences  and  activitie,s  is  shaped.  It  is  less
prove  the  details  of  this  guiding  fiction,  than  the  fiction,
than  the  fictitious  goal  itself.  P.sychological  research  has
attention  to  various  such  goals.  For  our  purpose  it  will
to  consider  critically  just  two  of  the,se.  Most  authorities  oon
themselves  with  the  view  that  all  human  activity,  all  voliti«
dominated  by  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain.  Upon  sup^^rf
consideration  these  authors  seem  to  be  correct  in
assumptions,  because  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  human  psydacs  *
tend  to  seek  pleasure  and  avoid  pain.  Rut  the  foundation  of
theory  is  unstable.iThere  is  no  standard  for  feelings  of  plori-  *^
indeed  no  standard  for  feeling  at  all.  There  exists  furthc^rii
no  perception,  no  action,  the  effect  of  which  may  not  "vni
accordance^  with  place  and  time,  under  some  circum^stit.  -
causing  pleasure;  under  others  pain.  And  even  the  print-
sensations  resulting  from  .satisfaction  of  organic  desire-s;  i
their  gradations  and  vary  with  the  degree  of  satiability
accordance  with  cultural  guiding  principles,  so  thrit
,satisfac'tion  in  itself  to  serve  as  the  goal,  it  requires  er:?ctr
denial,  and  abstinence.  Now  granting  that  satisfaction
actually  been  attained,  does  the  p.syche  really  lose  its  direct  '■
principle?  The  psyche’s  iron  necessity  for  orientation
securitv  rcqiiire.s  for  their  establishment  and  their  funcrtioi
more  stable  .standpoint  than  the  vacillating  and  unoor
principle  of  gratification  of  desire,  and  a  more  stable  poi  ti
view  tlmn  the  object  of  attaining  gratification.  The  imposs^il  «
of  orienting  one’s  self  and  one’s  actions  according  to
goal  forces  even  the  child  to  abandon  efforts  in  this  clirc^c'f
Finally  it  is  a  misuse  of  an  abstraction  to  single  out
emphasize  by  means  of  a  petitio  priucipii,  out  of  the  x/nr
complex  psychic  activities,  the  quest  of  pleasure,  as  the  mn
force,  after  every  isolated  impulse  has  already  been  expla.in#*
as  pleasure  .seeking,  as  libidinou.s.  Shiller  with  a  keenne  :
vision  trained  in  the  school  of  Kant  saw  much  further
made  a  place  in  the  coming  “  philo.sophy  ”  for  the  cliirc**


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


3S

influence  nf  earthly  events,  aiul  even  went  so  far  as  to  consider
it  ^{philosophy)  dependent  on  hunger  and  love/’

To  ascribe,  Ivowever,  the  whole  directing  force  to  sexuality
as  Freud  dovs,  or  what  is  for  him  the  same  thing,  to  the  libido,
to  ascribe^  this  wlH>le  influence  to  nothing  hut  love'  is  a  violation
of  Itigical  thinking  itself,  a  fiction  of  a  l>ad  stnl,  which  when
accepted  as  a  iU>grtui  must  It'atl  to  grtMt  contradictions  and
confusion  concepts  be(.*ause  it  t'untrasts  altogether  too  much
with  reality.

The  di:eipprcival  of  tli«'  principle  o{  selFpreservatiori  ”  is
more  difllcult,  especially  as  that  principle  is  supptu‘ted  tm  the
one  hand  by  arguments  of  a  teleological  significance,  on  the
other  ham!  by  th<‘  import  Darwir/s  theory  of  natural  selection.
But  w«'  see  constantly  that  we  undertake!  courses  of  action
cofitrary  lo  the*  priiu‘iples  of  selFpreservation  or  to  the
presfTvatiim  of  the  spevies,  yes,  tliat  a  ct^rtain  arbitrariness
(h rc's-MevcThuf)  permits  us,  in  rt*gar<l  to  s<dFpreservation  as
u el!  as  in  rrgard  to  pleastin\  to  raise  or  lower  our  valuations,
that  wiMiiten  wluilty  lose  sight  ol  stdf^presc'rvation  wlien  pleasuri^
or  pain  emter  iiitt»  the'  tpiestion,  aiul  tliat  on  tlu'  other  hand  we
often  .‘.acriiii'c*  phstsirn'  when  an  injury  i.s  threatmunl  to  the  ego.
In  what  manner  do  tiiesc*  two  inotmtives  which  are  taulainly  not
without  influfuu'i*,  rang,e  thrmsflves  niuhu*  the  main  guiiling
|'irii!i*ip!i*  wfdrh  inijuds  to  the  edevatimi  of  tlu'  ^*gO'-conscioUMiess  r*
IFr  two  jminls  nf  virw  I'orrf'sjHuid  to  two  typc‘s  of  imlivitluals
(ftj  which  it  is  pir-.sihlf*  to  adil  still  other^/)  one  tif  wlddi  i.s
abk'  tii  d.ispeii'.f'  with  plr;eairo  in  Ids  ego  com:ciousne‘i::,  \vini<"
thf*  other  place*’,  fir‘4  imptu'tance  on  flu*  keeling  of  lift*,  on  the*
feeling  uf  immortal  it  vs  ilu*reforf*,  tlnuc*  ari'-.e  nutditknl  mmles
of'  i-H.n'ceiition  wliicfi  priuiiu'c*  antithe-a*.:  in  tlumcld  in  the  .sense
of  **  plf*a*4irf*  pain  t»r  life  tleath/’  Hie  former  are

‘iiiatdf^  til  t!«*jirive  pltsasuro  of  vaJm*.  the*  latter  life.  In  fht*  sense
<if  |irot'rralitm  wiucdi  is  again  tliotight  t>f  in  the  maniuT  of  tlie-
anti! iietica.,1  sohmio  maiedomak*/’  tlu’Si*  two  types  approach

rarii  other  am!  seek  c'xprossitm  in  tin*  direction  of  tlie  rnasciiline
jiroff*st,  As  far  as  neurotic's  are  caunaumed  the  om*  type^  has
alwavs  souglit  to  i^ompensatr  the  painful  feeling  of  his  somatic
inferiority,  tiif*  otluu’  type*  lias  grown  up  in  the*  fesar  of  death,
of  dying  f*;trly.  Thf’ir  view*  of  thca  world  furnishers  fluun  tuily
fisigiiicnts,  tlirir  soul  is  partiallv  t'olorddind,  luit,  ntdavilhstanding
often  imu’e  kfcorieaglitesl  than  the  Daltonists  in  tlieuV  under«
sfatidirig  tif  tailor,

We  dose  this  cTiticaal  oliservation  with  a  rt*ferener*  the
aleudiife  principle  of  the  will  to  power  *’  a  guiding  flc'tiou
%tliidi  sets  in  more  forcildv  and  earlier,  and  is  pretapitaled  and
fiialiired,  in  |iro|Kirtion  to  the  proininema*  assumed  bv  the
rtinsrknisness  of  inferiority  in  the  physically  inferior  child.  The


.36


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


ideal  of  personal  importance  as  a  point  toward  whicli  all

are  directed  is  created  by  the  craving  for  security  and

as  imaginary  qualities  all  the  powers  and  natural  gifts  of

the  child  believes  himself  deprived.  This  action  nt'iore

exaggerated  than  under  normal  conditions,  molds  the

the  traits  of  character  and  predispositions  in  its  own

The  neurotic  apperception  proceeds  according  to  a

scheme  containing  sharply  opposed  antitheses,  and  the

of  the  impressions  and  emotions  takes  place  accordl^^S

correspondingly  false  and  imaginary  values.

It  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  neurotic  fiction,  of  the
idea  of  personal  worth,  to  reveal  itself  under  two  forms »  5^0fti€*-

times  as  an  “  abstract  mechanism  "  sometimes  as  a
picture,  or  as  a  phantasy,  as  an  idea.  In  the  first
connection  of  what  is  symbolic  in  the  representation  the

compensated  feeling  of  inferiority  should  not  be  lost
and  in  the  second  case  one  must  above  all  take  into  ^

the  decisive  share  in  the  process  taken  by  the  psychic
which  impels  upwards.^’  ""  In  the  analysis  of  a
disease  so  long  as  the  guiding  tendency  upwards  **
reveal  itself,  the  nature  of  the  disease  remains  hidden  to
no  matter  how  valuable  the  insights  of  the  psycho-therrrp<*'^itist.s
have  been,  so  long  as  the  secondary  guiding  prineij^T^^  ^
attaining  pleasure,  of  affectivity  (Bleuler)  and  those  %vliirh
originate  as  re.sult  of  physical  inferiority  (Adler)  are  not
back  to  the  ideal  of  personality— our  understanding
imperfect,  there  is  still  unfortunately  lacking  the  psiyc"hi«*
bond/'  It  is  also  not  astonishing  that  in  different  cases
characteristics  are  given  to  this  ideal  of  personality  and
various  characteri.stics  at  one  and  the  same  time  as  ;irr*

derived  from  various  sorts  of  organ  defects,  usually  from  ^c^vr*r;il
at  the  same  time.  A  preliminary,  decidedly  incomplete
which  would  correspond  more  to  the  abstract  psyche  "  of  file
neurotic  than  to  that  of  the  normal  individual  would  luer
following  :


M'jf  tlic  Liter  auth<»r8  Iiav(?  emphfisisted  thk  point  % '  i  *  %%'■  ^  I

muf^i  ofippcially  nH*ntk>n  H.  SillKTijr.


THE  ACCKXTUATEL)  FICTION


37


In  this  outline  the  most  varied  cuinljinations  nmst  be  imagined,
if  it  is  to  serve  its  purpose  as  a  model  for  the  purpose  of
superficial  orientation.  Instead  (d*  discussing  these  combinations
and  the  nuiltitudiiuHis  components  we  will  discuss  some
distinguishing  phenomena  winch  schuu  important  for  the  under¬
standing  of  the  mniroses  aiul  th<^  neurotic  character.

Each  of  the  abstract  guiding  lines  of  the  neurosis  and  of  its
underlying  psyiddu'  mechani>m  may  become  accessible  to
consciousness  by  means  of  a  menu)ry -picture  or  may  be  rendered
accessilde  to  it.  Tliis  picture  may  originate,  from  the  remnants
of  a  childhood  t^xperieiua*.  or  it  is  a  product  of  phantasy,  a
species  of  the  craving  for  scaairity.  It  may  rt‘present  a  symbol,
a  trade-mark  as  it  were,  hu*  a  certain  mode  of  reaction,  now
and  then  rcMcdiing  dt'vtdopmeni  ur  being  reformed  only  at  a  later
periotl  idden  w!um  tlu^  neurosis  is  already  fully  developed.  Being
olwimisly  the  edliad  of  a  sort  of  et'onomy  of  thought,  which  is
furnished  liy  the  |)riru*i|de  of  least  resistance  (Avenarius),  it  is
never  o(  ct)nseijuence  as  far  as  its  content  is  concerned,  but
only  as  an  alcstract  s<*lu‘me  or  as  the  remnant  of  a  psychic
expericmce  in  which  tin*  will  to  power  once  filled  its  destiny.
This  schematic  fuditm,  no  matter  how  concretely  it  may  manifest
itself,  is  never  to  b«‘  understooil  otherwist^  than  in  an  allegorical
sense.  In  it  is  reflectt‘d  an  actual  constituent  part  of  experience
together  %vith  a  moral  Indh  of  which  are  retained  l)y
memory  in  tht*  inter«*st  of  the  s(df-assurance  that  is  aimed  at,
eitluT  as  a  nuunentu,  to  ad!u‘r<'  more  tenaciously  to  the  guiding
print'iple  or  as  a  fore'  jndgment  not  to  abandon  it.  None  of  these
memory  pictur<*s  has  wet  had  pathogenic  significance,  like  a
psychic  trauma  for  instance,  ana  it  is  only  when  the  neurosis
supervemns,  when  the  feeling  of  degradation  of  the  ego-
consdousm*ss  Imads  to  the  ma.sculine  protest  and  liecause  of  this
to  a  closer  attachiiumt  to  the  already  long  established
compimsatory  guiding  principles  are  these  memory  pictures
hiinteil  imi  from  material  belonging  to  a  remote  past  and  come
to  light  becamse  of  their  usefulness,  partly  in  order  to  make
possible  the  neurotic's  conduct  and  partly  to  give  it^  meaning.
Ifer<‘  btdong  above  all  jiain,  anxiedy  and  affect  predispositions
whiidi  are  based  upon  such  reminiscences  which  may  become
actualiy.fnl  in  an  hallmunatc^ry  manner,  and  which  may  be  likened
t(^  visual  and  auditory  hallucinations.  Naturally  those
remintstamres  will  l>e  typical  which  stand  in  the  closest  possible
relation  to  tlu-^  guiding  principle  liecause  they  represent  ^or
simulate  for  the  neurotic,  clinging  as  he  does  to  the  guiding
priri<*iplf%  botli  the  greatcT  and'  smaller  detours  of  which  he  has
to  lumsidf  in  ordvr  to  elevate  his  ego  consciousness.  The-

cdiaracteristir  of  the  neurotic  psyche  is  ^  only  its  tenacious
ar!hf'*rrtK’i'‘  to  the  guiding  principle.  It  is  the  contradictions


38


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


with  reality,  the  conflicts  which  arise  from  them  and  the
to  acquire  social  importance  and  power,  which  bring  ^

symptoms.  This  is  even  more  obvious  in  such  psychoses
the  guiding  principle  appears  most  subtly.  Misinterpret^-'bi^'
of  reality  are  undertaken,  and  demonstrations  result,  mere
so  to  speak,  for  the  sake  of  proof.!  In  both  instances,  the
behaves  as  though  he  had  the  goal  constantly  before  his
In  the  case  of  the  neuroses  he  exaggerates  and  combats  the  r**
obstacles  to  the  maximation  of  his  ego-consciousness  or  sec
to  avoid  them  by  the  construction  of  excuses.  The  psyol*!^^
individual  clinging  as  he  does  to  his  idea  {fixe  iiUe)
ignore  reality  or  to  transform  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  ma-k:^
correspond  with  his  unreal  standpoint.  I  Freud,  who  has  <3.^^
so  much  toward  the  discovery  of  symbolism  in  the  neurosiJS
psychosis,  has  called  attention  to  the  galaxy  of  syrxxko
Unfortunately  he  has  carried  his  investigations  only  to  the
of  discovering  the  actual  or  possible  sexual  formulae  in  the
symbols,  and  has  not  pursued  their  further  elucidation  into  t
dynamic  eventuality  of  the  masculine  protest,  of  str'i'V^i
“  upward.’*  Thus  it  happened  that  for  him  the  meaning  o£  £
neurosis  became  exhausted  in  the  conversion  of  libidinous  stii'x*^
whereas,  in  reality  that  which  lies  behind  the  symbolism^
the  appearance  of  or  the  actual  impulsion  toward  a  maxim3.ti
of  the  masculine  ego-consciousness.

We  have  described  the  guiding  ideal  of  the  ego  as  a  liotic
thus  denying  its  reality,  but  'we  must  nevertheless  assert  th
although  unreal  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  piroo^
of  life,  and  for  the  psychic  development.  Vaihinger  in  1

Philosophy  of  As  If  ”  has  given  a  brilliant  elucidation  of  t  l
apparent  contradiction,  and  recognized  the  fiction  a.ss
opposition  to  reality  but  as  indispensable  for  the  develop
of  science.  Reference  to  this  singular  relationship  irx  t

psychology  of  the  neuroses  was  first  made  by  me  and  I  w
considerably  assisted  and  confirmed  in  my  view  by  VaihingfC*"!
work.  I  am  thus  in  a  po.sition  to  say  something  concerning-  t
fiction  of  ego-consciousness,  and  to  throw  some  light  otl
significance  as  well  as  on  its  mode  of  appearance  in  the  psyoli
It  is  first  of  all  an  abstraction  and  must  in  itself  be  regarded  cl
the  indication  of  an  anticipation.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  f'
marshall’s  staff®  in  the  wallet  of  the  insignificant  soldier,
may  be  looked  upon  as  **  payment  on  account  ”  demande^ci  1

*  For  the  benefit  of  psycholopsts  of  a  keener  imipfht,  I  note  here  i

prevalence  of  example's  which  have  been  taken  from  military  life  havt-'j  1%*'
chosen  by  me  with  an  espeeial  object  in  view.  In  military'  training  thJ  Btn^rt  %
point  and  fictive  purpose  are  broiififht  into  closer  relation,  can  be  more  l

noted,  and  every  moveinont  of  the  training  rsoldier  becomt^s  a  dexterity  wlij
has  for  its  purpose  the  transformation  of  a  primary  feeling  of  weakness  iitt*
feeling  of  superiority.


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


39


the  primitive  feeling  of  uncertainty.  The  construction  of  the
fiction  takes  place  by  setting  aside  disquieting  inferiorities  and
burdensome  realities  in  the  idea,  as  always  happens  when  the
psyche  seeks  certainty  and  escape  from  its  restraint.  The  painful
uncertainty  is  reduced  to  its  lowest  possible,  allieit  apparently
casual  amount,  and  this  is  transformed  into  its  vt‘ry  antithesis
which  is  in  turn  made  into  the  ti<’tiv<‘  goal  of  every  wish-phantasy
and  desire.  It  is  then  that  this  gc>al  may  be  matte  concnde  for
the  sake  of  becoming  self-evident.  For  instance,  the  restriction
of  food  in  childhood  is  felt  as  an  abstract  nothing/*  as  want,
in  contrast  to  this  feeling  the  chiUl  comes  to  kmg  for  **  all/*  for
superfluity  until  it  lirings  this  goal  much  nesirer  to  the  under¬
standing  in  the  person  of  the  fatlier,  in  the  foriu  of  a  trailitionally
ridi  person,  of  a  mighty  Kaiser.  The  more  intensely  the
deprivation  was  felt  tlie  more  forcible  is  this  imaginary  al>stract
ideal  construrted  and  starting  thertdriun  begins  the  formation
and  dassilit'afitm  of  the  given  psychical  fon^es  to  preparatory
attitudes,  {acilitie.s  and  traits  of  charadtu'.  Tln^  individual  then
carries  these  traits  of  c’haracdc'r  dtunaiultnl  by  the  fulive  goal  just
as  the  mask  of  the  ancient  ador  pt'rsima*--  was  rt'a|uired  to
fit  to  the  denouement  td  ihv  tragedy.  Should  tliert'  stir  in  a  hoy
doubt  concerning  his  manliness,  as  happens  in  ctmslitutionally
inferior  children,  feeling  as  they  dt»  tt»  l»e  kimlred  (o  girls,  he
chtHises  a  gtial  of  siudi  a  nature  as  will  <dve  lum  mastery  over
women  (usually  also  over  all  men).  Iluauigb  this  his  attitude
toward  wonum  is  determiruHi  at  an  early  age.  He  will  comitantly
show  a  tendency  to  liring  alnnit  his  superiority  over  women,
will  undervalue^  and  dc*gradt‘  tlu‘  fcuuiuiin*  sex,  will  figuratively
speaking'  -raise  tlie  hatui  against  his  mother,  whicdt  in
neurotically  dispoKod  childrcm  oftem  finds  expression  in  a  gestmc
or  in  their  psychic  attitude,  and  will  in  a  playful  manner  take
his  model  from  tht^  mother  in  onler  to  test  iiimself  in  the*  manly
rMc*  hedore  it.  line  dewedopinenf  of  this  sort  of  infantile*  attitude
of  reaclimsss  wlieri^  a  rigid  |)«*dantic^  lu*havior  hecornt*s  manifest,
where  the  child's  i^xcitfsl  <losire  for  mastery  seeks  a  camfirmation,
and  an  assurance  <if  his  mni-consciousness,  similar  ta  tin*  one
he  has  cxperieiiccHl  from  his  mother,  that  is,  conditions  in  whidi
he  is  able  in  the  same  manner  to  satisfy  his  craving  for  stmurify
is  already  to  he  looked  upon  as  a  neurotic  trait.  If  is  <m!y  to
this  neurotic  fixity  of  the  uncertainty  that  Nicd/sche's  assertion
is  applicable,  namely  that  *\  every  one  earrit*s  within  him  a
portrait  of  womankinci  which  he*  has  ilerivcal  fiaun  lu!:  mtdher|
and  w4irh  makes  him  liomir  woman  d<*spi*:e  lu*r  or  fuitculain  a
total  indifltua^nt'r*  toward  her/’  Ycd  we*  nm.st  ctuiceah*  that  t!ier;c
individuals  are  in  the  majority.  Among  them  art*  many  wdiO'
were*  disdained  liy  their  mother,  since  which  time  fhty  fear  a


40


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


like  setback  from  every  woman,  or  demand  from  her  an  extra¬
ordinary  measure  of  surrender.

In  the  life  and  development  of  man  there  is  nothing  that  sets
to  work  with  greater  secrecy  than  the  construction  of  the  ideal
of  personality.  If  we  inquire  into  the  cause  of  this  secrecy,,
it  seems  that  the  most  important  basis  lies  in  the  combative,
not  to  say  hostile  character  of  this  fiction.  It  has  originated
through  a  constant  measuring  and  weighing  of  the  advantages
of  others  and  must  therefore  bring  about,  according  to  the
principle  of  antithesis  which  lies  at  the  root  of  this  process,  the
injury  to  others.  The  psychological  analysis  of  the  neurotic
shows  always  the  presence  of  the  tendency  to  depreciation,  which
is  summarily  directed  toward  every  one.  The  combative
tendencies  '  become  regularly  manifest  in  greed,  in  envy,  in.
longing  for  superiority.  But  the  fiction  of  gaining  the  mastery
over  others  can  only  be  used,  be  taken  into  account  if  it  does
not  disturb  the  combination  of  relations  from  the  beginning.
And  therefore,  this  fiction  must  early  become  unrecognizable,
must  assume  a  disguise,  or  it  destroys  itself.  This  disguise
takes  place  by  the  positing  of  an  anti-fiction,  which  first  of  all
directs  visible  conduct,  and  under  the  stress  of  which  reality  is
approached,  and  the  recognition  of  its  effective  forces  is
accomplished.  This  contrary  fiction,  always  of  the  nature  of
current,  corrective  instances,  brings  about  the  formal  change  ol
the  guiding  fiction  by  pressing  its  own  claim  to  consideration,
by  presenting  for  recognition  social  and  ethical  demands  at  theii
true  value  and  thus  assuring  the  reasonableness  of  thinking  and
acting.  It  is  the  security  coefficient  of  fhe  guiding  line  to  powei
and  the  harmony  of  the  two  fictions,  their  mutual  compatibilit)
which  is  the  sign  of  mental  health.  In  the  contrary  fiction  arc
active  experience  and  education,  social  and  cultural  formulas,
and  the  traditions  of  society.  In  times  of  good  humor,  oi
security,  of  normal  conditions,  of  peace,  this  is  the  prevailing
form,  which  causes  a  restraint  of  the  combative  predispositionf
and  effects  an  adaptation  of  the  traits  of  character  to  the
environment.  Should  the  insecurity  increase  and  the  conscious¬
ness  of  inferiority  emerge,  then  the  contrary-fiction  is  deprivec
of  value  because  of  an  increasing  abstraction  from  reality,  the
dexterities  become  mobilized,  the  nervous  dogmatic  characte]
asserts  itself  and  with  it  the  exaggerated  sense  of  ego-ideal.  I
is  one  of  the  triumphs  of  human  wit  to  put  through  the  guiding
fiction  by  adapting  it  to^  the  antifiction,  to  shine  througl
modesty,  to  conquer  by  humility  and  submissiveness,  to  humiliab
others  by  one’s  virtues,  to  attack  others  by  one’s  own  passivity
to  cause  pain  to  others  by  one’s  own  suffering,  to  strive  to  attaii
the  goal  of  manly  force  by  effeminate  means,  to  make  onesel
"  S.  “  Der  Aggreesionstrieb  im  LeW  rmd  in  h^r  Nenrose.”


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


41


small  in  order  to  appear  great.  Of  sudi  sort,  however,  are  often
the  expedients  of  neurotics.

Concerning  the  significance  of  the  most  primitive  perception
and  emotion  as  an  abstraction  I  need  waste  no  words.  Just  as
abstract  is  the  positing  of  an  imaginary  guiding  point  and  of
this  life  plan  whicli  is  now  spun  out  Ijetween  these  two  points.
With  refm-cmee  to  the  neurotit'  psyche  we  have  repeatedly
empliasi'/ed  that  it  is  the  greater  insecurity  which  alone  tends
to  withdraw  the  guiding  point  still  further  from  reality,  to  set
it  higher.  In  addition  to  this  the  inferior  sense  organs  yield
ciualitatively  aiui  tiuantitatively  changed  sensations,  and  the
i^rgans  of  extaaition  a  changed  technitpie  usually  in  the  sense  of
greater  limitation,  so  that'tlu'  selCc’steem,  the  ideal  guiding
representation,  tlu.‘  representation  of  the  world  and  the  life  plan
must  be  forineil  difTerently  from  normal  representations  of  this
sort,  in  that  they  are  more  abstract,  less  in  conformity  with
rcxility.  In  this  process  it  is  true  the  compensation  and  over-
c-ompensation  may  sometirma^  bring  the  conct*ption  of  the  world
and  the  line  of  reality  nearer  together  as  in  the  great
perfonuanci's  of  five  mnirotic  psyche.  The  overtense  personal
ideal,  howevt*r,  which  actiuires  absolute  rigidity,  which  a.ssumes
nearly  an  identity  with  (rod.  often  lends  to  the  nature  and
behavior  of  the  neurotit'  and  psycluitic  a  pronounced  hypomanic
character,  if  the  preparations  therefore,  the  feeding  of
insignificance,  the  itleas  of  jUTsetmtion  did  not  cmmtt*ract  this
charactiT  by  tnuising  a  sort  of  imuT  ct‘rtainty  without  whitdi  the
jKKsiting  till*  gt)al  would  tie  impossible,  by  c/ausing  a  feeling
of  predestinatitm.  In  the  phases  of  greatcT  insecurity  this
dmrarttTistic  is  consiilerabfy  stronger  and  its  significance  as
antiedpation  of  the  guiding  fiction,  as  payment  on  account
heccmies  distinctly  obvious.

(lustave  Fnyytag  in  his  ‘'Reminiscences  of  my  Life^*'  describes
the  tisefulnt'ss  <if  (he  compensatory  pt^rformanta*  in  the  following

ir.ariiier  :

“  But  too  the  buirs^-eye-shot  on  the  target  15  <iifilcult  to  me.
For  at  ()<ds  I  hrul  noticed  during  tlu^  instructiun  that  I  was  very
near  sighted.  When  i  eomplained  of  thi.s  <!uring  the  vaeation
to  my  father,  he  advised  me  to  make*  rny  way  through  the  worhi
.without  glasses  ;m<l  told  me  a  story  illustrating  (he  helplessness
of  a  tlieologist  who  Imd  made  him  get  up  tml  of  Ihh!  one  morning
t<i  hunt  his  spertaclc*^  so  that  lu^  could  find  his  trousers.  I
followe<l  this  advice  and  have  atanistomed  myself  to  the  use*  of
spfs-faries  only  at  the  theatre  and  in  looking  at  pictures,  f
sought  to  overcfuiK*  the  disadvantages  under  which  I  laluired  in
soedefy  from  this  defect  and  cwerlooked  nnicli  unsii5;pect<»dly
which  wouI«l  have  disgustetl  a  .sharper  observer,  I  was  often
ohiigr*tl  to  forego  the  enjoyment  of  flowers,  In^auty  in  dress,  of


42


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


remarkable  countenances  and  beauty  in  women  from  which
derived  pleasure.  But  as  the  same  adjusted  itself  adroitly  to  tli-ss
defect  of  sense,  there  was  soon  developed  in  me  a  good
standing  of  those  expressions  of  life  which  came  within  my
of  vision  and  a  quick  divination  of  much  which  was  not  c:!^’'*****
to  me  ;  the  smaller  number  of  the  perceptions  permitted
elaborate  those  which  were  perceived  wuth  greater  ease
perhaps  more  profoundly.  At  any  rate  the  loss  was  greater  tl^****J
the  gain.  But  my  father  was  thus  far  right,  my  eyes
unchanged  throughout  my  entire  life  their  keenness  of
at  close  distances.’*

If  one  imagines  the  development  of  a  visual  phantasy  o£
sort  which  constantly  draws  away  from  reality  goaded  by
pressure  of  the  craving  for  security,  there  results  for  the
purpose  of  obtaining  security  as  in  the  above  cited  example-*
ability  to  produce  visual  hallucinations  which  can  manifest
even  outside  of  dream  state.s,  for  the  purpose  of  presei^timf^
warnings  to  preserve  personal  security  and  encour3.^bi|*:
consolations.  The  abstractions  and  also  the  anticipations
even  gone  farther  and  may  lead  to  the  well  known  remar
pathological  expressions  of  the  ''  telepaths  **  or
natures.  The  disquieting  consciousness  of  inferiority
terrible  incentive  to  thi.s  reaching  out  beyond  the  limits  of
possibilities  here  as  in  other  instances,  and  this  consciotrsr*^tcr
finding  refuge  in  weakness  ascribes  to  others  a  greater
of  vision,  as  though  they  could  see  what  was  hidden,  coul<l  i
the  thoughts.  The  child  in  his  craving  for  security  witb  bti  »
natural  secrecy  may  early  incline  to  just  this  point  in  orcltT  tea
gain  security,  and  act  under  the  imaginary  aswsumption  that  ot
can  **  see  into  his  heart,”  can  divine  his  most  hidden  thovii^b ts*,
an  a.ssumption  which  often  makes  its  appearance  as  an  expcul
in  the  neurosis  and  psychosis  and  has  the  same  value  a.«  ttit*
exaggerated  feeling  of  guilt,  perhaps,  and  neurotic  consciemt  ioii’S  •
ness,  and  whose  purpose  is  to  avoid  a  degradation  of  self--est«-"«*rft*
shame,  punishment,  mockery,  humiliation,  the  femininer
death.

The  increased  capacity  of  the  neurotic  for  abstraction H  for
anticipations  is  not  only  at  the  root  of  his  hallucinatory  charxi«  f*r .
of  his  fantasies  and  his  dreams  but  also  of  the  over-exertiiir  ri


organ  functioning  of  which  he  makes  use  in  purposeful  effort  ;  ;i  ;
preparations  for  the  combat.  Thus  the  neurotic  mako^^  fttr
himself  a  place  by  more  abstract  prevision  and  premedit;:if  ion.
and  constructs  thereof,  that  neurotic  foresight  which  is  reg^nlnrly
present  in  this  disease,  by  means  of  which  the  patient  holcb;  f  hi*
possibilities  of  experience  constantly  before  him
dogmatically  and  in  sharply  antithetical  groups  according'  ft#  fhi"
.Scheme  ”  Triumph- — Defeat.”  Or  he  places  his  enviroitnimi^


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


43


pder  km  by  heightening  the  seiusihilitv  of  his  organs  (which
is  the  first  step  towards  hallucinations)  snowing  hyperscuisihility
to^  smells,  sounds,  touch,  temperature,  tast<‘s  and  pains,  and
this  brings  his  umliTtakiiigs  <'onstantly  into  harmony  with  his
imaginary  raascidine  guiding  prineiple.  Foolishness  and
superstitious  convii-tions  of  a  hopeless  tlesfiny,  tlie  firm  seated
belief  in  one’s  iuvn  ill  lnc‘k  serve*  same  purpose  of  satisfying
the  craving'  for  scaairity  by  constructing  tin*  proof  that  c'aution
is  necessary.  The  haiiutdnatory  awaktming  of  anxiety  works
in  the  same  direction,  of  which  the  n<‘urotic  makes  e'xtensivc
use.

That  the  traits  of  character  as  well  as  the  emotional  pre-
clispositioiis  serve  the  guiding  iiiiitm,  it  is  the  purpose  of  this
book  to  proven  to  the  iullc'st  degre*r.  I'he  guiding  line  of  the
neurotic  leading  in  a,  directly  pi*rpendicular  lim*  ujiwards  demands
peeuliar  ex|Ha.Uents  and  forms  <»f  life  which  are  inc!ud<Hl  umler
the  little  miifonii  c*onrt*pt  id’  the  neuridie  svinpliuns.  Now  one
finds  sahdy-<h*vici*s  at  renudi*  plai'es,  prohibitory  arrangements,
protective  caimhats,  for  flu*  purp<u.e  <d  as.-airiiig  success  to  the
centra!  inii|Hi!s«\  the  will  piaviu’,  tlien  again  tluae  are,  and
these  are  tdten  diiliiadt  to  nud<*i'stand,  eireuitmis  ways
comparahk*  to  se*rr«d  patlis,  taken  so  as  nrd.  to  k)se  the  guiiling
line  when  the  diretl  wav  to  the  ma  a-uline  trimufih  is  barred.
Often  a  change  id  uervmis  phruionuma  is  ohstTVi'd  which
resemhli*s  tenfativt*  experiment:;,  until  tlu*  nmri*  sevi*r<?  symptom
guar;mfees  a  concerdam'e  with  the  guiiling  id<*a.

I  tielirwt*'  too  that  1  havt*  prt*stmtefl  in  tin*  j»rest*iit  work  the^se
symptoms  ami  tfuur  p.^Vilueg^ene-as  i'olau'ently  and  tij  a  sufticient
extent.  Hu*y  all  r(*:i  im  d<-\fe!'it  v  ai*qiureil  by  long-  praedica*  and

□)aratiim  vvlmsi'  liypc‘rv.ile?H-y  is  siipportetl  through  the
ium  of  anti  is  bmncled  en  flie  titm*ss  far  the  ixunhat
preserve  the  i<hMl  self  t^sfei-m.  llie  preparatii^ns  tliernselves
coftimenre  in  f!u‘  hf*giiinifi|»  tif  the  m*une;is,  accompany  the
<lrve!«|iriieiit  of  tin*  idra  personal  worth  am!  are  atlapled  to
it.  I'hry  :irr  ting'd  ebsarlv  rf^engniras!  iii  the  n‘miiiiscf*m'*es  of
chilclhiiiK!  whiidi  have  been  preramteii  in  the  oft  leturriing  dreams,
in  the  tniriiie,  flu*  liabitiis,  in  flie  play  of  <'hi!dren.  in  tlieir
phantasies,  riUH*efriiiig  future  ViMsitions,  conef*rriIng  the  future.

It  lies  in  the  nature*  flie  fiio  e*!evated  guiding  idea  that  it
slicHild  estrange  fhe  per*uui  w‘ho  enferf.-iim  it,  tliat  is  tin*  neurofir,
from  realify.  Net  irifrer|!u*nf!v  fbi-;  cunditiou  maniftrsts  itself  in
a  feeling  of  sfraiifo*rK**:s  “  wdiifls  i  :  'sssain  over^esfiruntrr!  and
lived  with  a  viewv  to  a  eeiiaiii  effe*  f,  ;.r,,  ff»  n*cnmmrrii!  a  eaut ituis
retreat  in  an  in*:ecurf*  ‘dfuatitm,  Apparc*ntly  opjueaia*  to  this
**  li:ick  **  an  iiniiisftfif*d  ff‘c*!!ug  of  camfidence  in  a  situation,  the
feeling  of  deja  -vti  **'  *:ofmdirties  be<*omes  manifest,  often  in
the  form  of  a  ciinrealed  aimhigy  for  the  purpo-''e  of  wanting  or


44


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


encouraging.*  In  neurotic  students  I  have  sometimes
that,  led  by  the  feeling  of  their  predestination,  scholars
sought  a  hearing  on  subjects  with  which  they  were  *\vh6lly  I

unfamiliar  with  the  result  of  total  failure.  Such  expex'xcsnces  ,

may  cause  the  neurotic  to  be  suspicious  of  his  emphasized
of  “  self-confidence  w’hich  may  emerge,  as  though  he  f

a  bad  after-taste.  The  security  through  the  exaggerated  idea
of  self-esteem  and  the  adherence  to  it  determines  oftc^rx  |

feeling  of  or  even  a  real  condition  of  estrangement  frorxx  the  |

world,  which  indeed  is  usually  exaggerated  with  a  clctinite  ^

purpose.  Fear  for  everything  now,  ponderousness,  awk^vvard-  ;

ness,  bashfulness,  then  accompany  the  neurotic  who  rxvoidH
reality  and  reveals  his  efforts  to  reinterpret,  reconstrtx<^^  f

remodel  it.  This  deficiency  also  seeks  its  compensation  in

less  severe  cases  finds  it  in  the  antifiction  leading  to  iroality*
which  again  in  an  abstract,  usually  urgent  form  seeks  to  ov*»r
estimate  the  significance  of  the  reality  from  exaggerato<l  fc*ar  *  ,
of  it  in  order  to  raise  up  preparations  against  error  and  :it

all  times.  The  vacillation  between  the  ideal  and  retil

manifests  itself  in  an  extreme  way  in  the  neurotic  psJjycrlit*,  in  ^

which  the  passion  for  doubting  assumes  the  form  of  a  pa.r'adigni  ,

for  the  real  ''  truth/'  as  the  final  goal  of  power  whiob  t}i«*  |

neurotic  is  to  attain.  Or  the  outer  forms  are  pedantically  htdil  t

to  and  over-estimated  as  is  a  fetish,  and  as  thougjH  they
guaranteed  security.  The  following  senlenctj  from  I  Icdndhs  r
letters  *  seems  to  me  to  indicate  this  feature.  j

“  One  can  never  pay  sufficient  honor  to  the  outer  whicdi  |

in  youth  are  so  thoughtlessly  ridiculed,  for  they  are  tlic^  only  ^

lines  which  assist  in  making  dedsion.s  in  the  restlessly  clxan|diig  '

world  without  law  or  order  " —  In  .small  things  as  in  thi  -

craving  for  security  is  ahvay.s  manifested  and  humanity  isx  always
seeking  it  by  analogies,  and  by  abstract  dogmatic  method  !

The  frequency  of  sexual  guiding  lines  in  the  neur*ose'S  is
explained  in  unprejudiced  analyses  upon  the  following  gr'otind  ;  *

1.  Rccause  they  furnish  a  suitable  form  of  expressioo  for  the  *

masculine  protest,  *

2.  Because  it  lies  within  the  option  of  the  patient  to  ff*cl  ^

them  as  real.  ^

Therefore,  the  adaptation  of  the  sexual  imaginary  gtiiclin|y  linr
depends  also  on  its  value  in  procuring  security  for  the  f€:*cdirig  of
self-esteem,  on  its  significance  as  an  abstraction  and  qtiality  of
exciting  hallucinations,  and  on  its  quality  of  easily  recc^iviiig  a  i'
concrete  form  and  because  it  admits  of  anticipations.

^  Tlie  of  Htningonefis  an^l  the  of  familinrifcy  in

are  analo^oiiB  to  tho  of  warning?  and  oxborfation  of  an  nnu»r  m

the  (]n*am,  the  halhicination  and  the  attitude  in  the  paychoHia.

W.  Wemer,  from  Hebel’H  youth,  Oi^terreidua<ihe  Kundncliau  ,  I  Cl  1 1


THE  ACCENTUATED  FICTION


45


According  to  this  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the  neurotic
^  a  peculiar  instance  of  the  mechanism  of  security.  It  makes
ise,  as  does  thinking  and  speech,  of  the  primitive  recollections
educed  to  the  smallest  dynamic  measure  to  which  he  is  drawn
y  means  of  tht‘  alkstracting  power  of  the  craving  for  security,
ts  function  and  office  is  to  (’■alculate  the  way  to  the  desired
leights  by  use  of  analogy  from  experiences  which  have  their
)la€e  in  childhood  in  emphasizing  set-backs  that  have  been
^ndured  or  comforting  memories  of  evils  that  have  b(‘en  over-
‘ome.

The  hallucinatory  power  represents  a  completed  preparation
iccomplished  by  the  overstrained  craving  for  security,  and  takes
ts  material,  as  <loc’S  also  the  function  of  thought  and  pre-
iieditation  from  the  (Mst-iron  element  of  the  neurotically  directed
iiemory.  That  wiiich  is  called  re^gression  in  dream  and  in
tallucinations  by  other  writ«n%s  is  the  every-day  process  of
-hought  w^iicli  gropes  hack  to  expcn’Ience,  and  can  only  refer  to
he  materia!  of  t!ie  tlreams  and  liallucinations,  but  never  to  their
Iviiamics.

'The  psychic  dynamic  cd  an  hallin'ination  consist  tluTcfore  in
:liis,  that  in  a  siiuatinu  id’  imtaalainiy,  a  guiding  line  is  sought
^vith  might  ami  is  fiypostasizcii  by  means  (»f  an  abstraction,  per
inaliigium  witli  tlie  evaluatiiin  of  t‘\pcrienc(%  by  means  of
mliiapatiun  and  by  nusiiis  id  a  fi<1itious  rendition  of  something
Uisely  related  fi*  a  stmsiiry  {Hnaa'plion.  'This  latter  ability  as
:he  mast  efft^etivi-  immris  id  exprt‘Ssion  may,  by  reason  of  the
mti  fuditm  which  ituTimvs  tt)  r<*ality,  b<‘  f(‘it  as  in  conscious
»p|)iisilion  Ut  laxility  as  in  drc*amr ,  or  in  tlnr  cTaving  for  security
lissolvcni  tlu“  anti  fnliim  am!  pormits  the  hallucination  to  be  felt
IS  naaL

JiKll  deiiiHHl  oiviliyuitiim  as  llu*  incnsi.scd  effort  of  man
iiidiar  caTtain  c  ircmnstaiu*t*s  and  with  special  intensity  to  secure
Ids  pt*rson  and  life  against  liostih*  ptnvers  cd  nature  as  well  as
frtmi  the*  autagimism  id  his  felltnv  num,  to  satisfy  his  needs
joth  ri*al  ami  iitcml  in  a  grc%at<*r  nustsure  and  to  bring  his  nature
Srxitiiout  olistai'ii*  to  diwadi^pimnit/'

‘rii<*  mnirotic  individual  imlils  tin*  guiding  line  much  more
iinistaiitly  in  view,  but  may  aeiordiugly  net*d  to  bring  to
t”Xiir<‘ssiun  schmnatically  ami  dogmatically  the  guiding  line
whidi  lead.-;  io  the*  franscemltmtal  t»r  the  anti-liction  whicT  tends
to  i’ultiirt*,  flu*  latter  in  the  sens«*  (d  a  mmrotit*  circuitous  way,
ill  which,  for  i*xainple,  lu*  semus  to  submit  to  an  extremu*  degree
Icr-  the  antagimiMii  i>f  his  ftdluw  men  *'  for  the  purpose  of
tritirn{ddng  over  themi.

llie  evolution  of  the  effort  to  liring  his  nature  to  the  fullest
devtdapmenf,  to  attain  the  pinnacle  td  that  winch  the  neurotic
imiividual  may  call  his  culture  leads  us  back  again  to  the  already


THE  NEUROTIC'  CONSTITUTION


46

mentioned  preparatian^;  so  important^from  a  psycliologica}  point
of  view,  to  the  tentative  tflurls  which  are  >up{io.seci  to  be
introduced  by  the  original  conj'ciousness  of  inferiority.

All  the  imperfect  organ>  in  a  state  of  intantiic*  dtwelopment
strive  with  ail  their  connate  capacities  ant!  possibilities  of
development  to  form  purposeful,  so  to  speak,  intelligent
preparatory  arrangemumts.  In  the  tdtorts  the*  Ciiii-.tilutionaily
inferior  organs  with  thtar  nurtierous  abortive  perlormances
arises,  as  a  coiistHjiumce  of  the  gr«Mt#‘r  temsitm  in  the  presence^
of  the  requirements  of  the  external  world,  tlii^  irnpressiun  of
uncertainty,  the  self-esteem  ot  llu^  <‘hild  brings  farrvarci  a
permanent  conscious!u»ss  of  ittferiinaly.  'riue;  it  happens  that
already  in  early  c'hildluHKl  the  mastery  oi  the  %ituation  arcortiirig
to  an  example  taken  as  a  model  or  to  tlominate  the  situntion
even  far  beyond  the  powen*  indirateti  in  the  nuniel  is  lakmi  as  the
guiding  motive  and  a  periimnent  impulse  td  will  i%  foumieil  whirli
hands  over  tlu*  periuanent  guid.uu'e  to  a  dirreliiig  it!ra  *  *'  the
will  to  power.'*  d'he  I'lositing  of  a  goal  in  the  neerttiir  ^diararter
is  a  phase  of  the  same  temdenrv.  'This  goal  nnirspoitds
ironsciously  or  unconsciously  to  the  ft>rmula  :  *'  !  nmst  act  in

such  away  that  in  the  tuul  I  bei-orne  the  master  oi  fhe^  satiiation.  *‘
Long  continuation  of  the  c  hihi  in  th.c’  pha-.e  of  cima'ioiifairss  o|'
inferiority  leads  to  a  heigliteiiing  and  sirf'iopheiung  of  the
intensity  of  that  huTiuda,  so  that  Ihom  t!ie  utm  uai  intfuirafy  ed'
all  efforts,  tin*  preparafiU'v  artion-.  and  fha*  prodispn-.ilioii-i/the
traits  t'if  eliaraeier  of  any  peuirHi  id  dfw «.■!■. qoitral  mav  he  inferred
as  original  i‘(uiseiiun;nf*ss  nf  inleiiuritv.  A1  in  ene,.ui!i  falling
below  the  normal  rdamlartl  tiie  tentative  rffMrt--  .oe  iminifeHttnC
which  produce  pnqiaratitms  and  expedients  in  wulljng,  seeing,
eating,  hearing.  Exm*r  einplia^a/es  tint  fjir-.e  tentative  efforts
are  like  those  which  pretaa!**  the  g^a^p3ng  id  t!ie  stnincl
combinati<ins  when  tldltiren  are  learning  tir  speak  Much  iiH»re
convulsive  in  form  are  t!ie  preliminary  pre*  e%se->  in  the  defi^rttvr
organ,  whose  preparalitav',  and  metlnnh:  «d'  fumikuntig  in
favorable  examjdt*-:  td‘  ov«‘r-riiinpensation.  are  in  bright,  light
artistic  perhuiiiaiices  and  y>erfertitni,  but  wddi  idten  as  in  tlir
neurosis  beesanm*'  t>f  tin*  close  guard  kept  and  the  cai.iliiinsfiriK.
rarrdy  attain  full  drvelitpir.cmf.  llir  ihild  seek-:  lo  Irani  tiis
faults  in  the  way  oflrreii  liiin  by  the  rraving  for  *,rrurily,  and  seeks
to  remedy  them  or  to  gain  :ntvanlage  from  thmii  in  using'  thrrii
an  expeoient.  As  he  doe-’,  mil  know  the  real  rra’-aui  for  his
inferiority,  often  from  pride  flues  not  wi-di  to  know  thriig  he  i,.
iMsily  misled  to  rca-'rilie  tfifui!  fti  externa!  rra*aifis,  lu  blafiie  ibc*
**  spits  of  olijrrts  or  trsuallv.  Id‘»  relative*:,  and  as-urnrs  ilirn
an  aggressive,  hostile  atfifudr  to  tlir  real  u}-ijrrti%'e  work!
Usually  lie  retaifis  a  forrtmriiiig,  a  presentiinrnt'  td  illdiirk  m
m  abstract  reminder  of  his  feeiings  of  iftfortorilv,  mbich  lie  is


THE  ACXl’XTUATED  FltTlDN


47


likely  to  exaggerate,  efteii  lievt'lopa  tu  a  f<*eling  af  guilt,  if
eirciim.staiiee:4  admit  af  this,  in  urder  U%  unfold  his  pre-vision,
his  forcssigid  with  rc^tsun.  The  neurotie  endcsivors  are
above  all  dlrwinl  toward--:  enlarging  and  stnairing  the  boundaries
of  seif^eN'tc'fnii  by  4‘tm>fa!it!y  e'.;tinsati!ig  anul  tcasting  the  powders
in  tin*  iiiUu'iiltirs  cd  the  tdjjeelive  wuiiti.

To  ovcn’o’Xertioii  in  this  cftoit  aniv  be  tracasl  many  of  t!u*  traits
of  the  neurotie  ■  ids  ineiination  U)  play  with  tire,  ti^  niak«*
daiigeroiis  ^-dtuati^uis  .md  hunt  for  thmin  his  phsisurt*  in  thi
griirsoiiie  ami  thi'^  diabuueal  (Mirledi.  dlw  iiudiiiatiou  to  erimte
like  the  sadistic*  ineliu.d ion  lir*--,  in  the  maseuliiu'  ipdding
liiit  is  often  neulra!is«-i!  the'  iHinii.idietury  idea  wtdelr  develop',
and  is  intire  utten  t'Kagioasaf'd  in  luemory,  with  the  purpose  oi
wariiiiig  frotn  e\i-i.  nf ion.

NervoiiMie'.s.  by  fiifietaau'r,  ^ntihh^es  organic*  defeetiveiiess.
the  iiifaiililr  deim  fhe  -.rn  .0  of  i!!  health  in  generah  on  the  one
haiitl  for  the  [n.ir|»oM'  of  seeuriiir^  ihv  ego-a*cmseiinisne.ss  against
file  retjidreiiienr.  of  parrnla!  aalhtiritv,  iraially  by  means  of  n
stiifd -Joiai  levolf,  »'in  flu*  other  hantl  lot  the  purpersf'  of  j'U*slpanin|.^j
i«V  a  ’•oil  Ml  aittfui.il  ob-4i  iirtion  dc-ei'-iuns  and  ecdlisions  wldeh
niivdif  bt'  dan  fn  fhr  !n.e;*  uline  Iirtion,  that  is  to  say,  the

irliinpii'diiisy.  el  1011.103  jNe.iliioi,  of  ad\a.jit;4;r  in  order  to  retain
iiioff*  ii!ip> a  I  at!  tror-  .,  hnlrrd  tin-  neui'otit*  individual  often
f-ek  .  iiuiiMi  d-eff'at-..  rven  tlirm  alntuf  artibidallv,  or

'i'.sainr'.  d*.t|tS/ei *.a}-\  oiifhnd.,  ,  ui  oi'drt  fht'i'eby  to  jlisfify  his
lioiif tifir  ai4  .  ♦  jutioii  In  tirmotirallv  retained  rldhllmo-d

defesf-.  4  -.[in  hi  irlrsi  lonn**  -  .  and  a^.gpessioii  against  the

fathei  aiifi  footliei  luav  i»e  rvpoi  frd

Tims  a  « pill  ,o|  V  '.tnvm,;  toHaid  tii#'  undrrstaiiding  of
obji'i'live  dillieiill  i?- rli>u!.  hi  iOf‘|Si*nn-  ihrm,  |o  gain  the
line.trrv,  U*  itnnba!  tfinn.  umli-rv ahiatiun  am!  deju'cndatiori  ot
life  arid  its  jov-.  *0'  fliv.ht  from  them  1  haiaeleri/t'  a  phase  of  the
iieiirceas  Along  wath  thi,  fhr  fa»  t  verv  frcnjiifiifly  tamirM  to
light  lhal  fin-  |iatiriit  i.-.  vriv  enthie.ia  .tie  for  fifty  fttr  work,  for
Itivr  afic!  matiiagr,  Inif  fihilMun  .dlv,  whdr  seerefly  hr  bars  the
aeee';:.  to  fiiriii  llirouidi  tlir  nrto*-  'd  .,  ifi  order  to  make  sure  of  Ids
dtUiiiiiafioii  in  t!ir  more  lindfed  tu'Id  of  tin*  faitdty  with  the
faltirr  and  inottirf,

lids  tnif ttsirifly  ilirrefrd  anxi«ms  amt  rantitnui  glanee  of  the
fieiirotie  wideli  is  inlntded  fo  preserve  the  ipdding  fir'tlon  1%
regularly  at  tMimfianiril  bv  a  srlf-observatioii  ol  a  fdglier
irilriisifv,  Srunrf iitie-.  in  a  ■alnation  of  psv'rlde  urnerlaiiity  the
prrstiiiilird,  deifiri!  giddiieg  idea  i*.  met  with  as  a  ?-.ec’oml  self,
an  inner  voii  r  like  fho  I  hrmon  of  Sorraten  mddeh  warriK,
rriroiiragrs.  |iiiids!irs,  aei  iisrs.  And  that  wfiieti  the  iieiirasllieiiifs
and  liv|ii:.ir}|ofi-f!riars  relate  to  m  eoneerning  the  fminrief  in  wldrfi
tlief  iiiwartlly  ragay  fenv  krrfdv  they  exanu’ne  and  foliciw  every


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


48

act  of  their  lives  is  true  of  neurotics  generally,  llic  self-
observation  may  lead  to  a  limitation  of  the  tield  of  c.ombat^
through  it  it  utilizes  expressions  of  fear  of  sickness,  by  means  of
which  the  neurotic  ind'ividual  is  always  in  a  position  to  heat  a
retreat  for  the  sake  of  security.  It  must  he  thought  of  as
effective,  when  the  primitive  expedients  for  gaining  security,
such  as  anxiety,  shame,  bashfulness,  or  the  murc^  tamipU^x  t)ne.s,
as  modesty,  conscientiousness,  nervous  attai*ks,  acconmany  the
presentiment  of  a  defeat,  in  order  not  to  allow  the  scdf-esleem
to  sink  b.elow  the  required  level.  Self-ub.servatitm  and  self¬
esteem  always  excited  and  reenforced  hy  the  guiding  ficiion  so
that  a  base  of  operation  is  offered  and  the  aggrt*ssicins  inlrotluced
produce  immediately  the  neurotic,  dogmatic  traits  of  t‘harar!t*r.
of  envy,  greed,  tyranny,  etc.  T!ie  exagip^rated  introspection
plays  a  constant  rdle  in  the  rontimuuis  measuring  and  wnasstling
of  the  neurotic  individual  to  test  his  own  wtuili  against  that  of
others,  it  gives  hints  to  premeditation  ami  phantasy  am!  annoum  i*s
its  presence  when  the  patient  avoids  making  a  dtn  ision  tir  when
for  the  same  purpose  he  gives  himstdf  up  permanentlv  to  doubt.

That  all  these  introspections  t)riginat<'  trruu  the  fr*r!ing  of
insufficiency  and  are  influenced  l>y  it  is  junI  as  ra'iy  ftt  under'
stand,  as  that  they  finally  n%ach  tin*  goal  bi  uhtch  tliey  in  reality
tend,  i.e.,  caution.  Thus  introsiualiun  is  at  once  iu^^ltalinn.
egotism,  megalomania,  doulit,  selbd(qu'e<*iatiu*y  p  ivcluvsi  g  .md
stands  in  connection  with  all  otlun*  plnuunnena  whii  h  are  t  .iu  ;ed
by  the  consciousness  of  inferioritv.  It  y.evvc>  rsprt'iallv  for  thf^
reenforcement  and  testing  o(  th<‘  ma  amlino  of

characteristics  such  as  camrage.  pride,  amldtion,  ett%,  as  well
as  the  purpose  of  increasing  all  those  temh-m  ie ,  wlu»Ne  at  iue  h
security,  such  as  ec'onornv,  exactness,  indm.trv,  rleaidiness  It
influences  the  attention  aiu!  serves  aha>  tii  dominate  it,  so  that
it  occupies  a  prominent  position  in  that  mesh  of  trait  .  who  a*
object  it  is  to  gain  security.  The  rexsults,  however,  at  which  it
arrives  are  purposely  falsified.  It  wamld  la*  verv  erroiieinis  to
regard  it  as  liliidinons  or  as  plea^;ure  produeing.  !ls  fiinrtion
is  rather  to  group  all  the  impn‘ssionN  tff  the  tibhnlivr  world  am!
to  bring  them  under  a  single  test,  in  such  a  wav,  so  to  spralo
that  the  primary  uncertainty  of  tlu*  imliviilua!  sha!!  be  a‘  atred
from  being  unma.sked  by  a  mafheinatica!  or  st  gisHta!  guarantee
according  to  the  standard  of  probalulity,  i.c.,  tlial  l!ir  iudiviiliial
shall  escape  a  defeat.  I  first  ralleul  attcmtioii  to  the  ilvtiamir  of
the  neurosis  in  the  Neurotic  Disposition  **  and  the  olijrct  of
the  present  work  is  to  present  it  in  a  more  profimiid  aiid
extended  form.^  The  purpo.scful  ami  profound  intro  :peefitiiu
therefore,  is  in  line  w’ith  the  neunuas.  oviui  tlnuigti  tti
philosophy,  psychology  and  in  scirkmnvlodre  if  lia--.  prodiicoii
excellent  fruit.  It  is  the'  private  philosuphy  o!  the  fifniivitii*


11I:E  AiVliKTVXVEl)  FlclltiX


49

wfikli  fails  til  !it|  tlir  mark  tif  rtMlilys  am!  v\hvvr.r  ia^rriiribl^

by  mialysis,  has  its  aiiahigy  in  the*  “  kimw  thysrlf  “  tif  the
siiblimr  jiliilteaijitirrs.  1%^  laritely  ineurrii‘i!»lr  drliriimi  oi  the
briiiitiifiit  aiu!  piueata.'.tit'  iutrn^prtlitim  whit'h  is  sti
nimli  fMMrr  ai  a  t.ysivnuitiird  ilhisitm  witli^hr

cibirrl  t9'  asMirin-.^  -rtl  e-.lrrm,  learhrs  u:.  in  uiiilemtaiitl  the
deliriiitii  til  the  !iiU'oN|un'iiim  4*1  tin"  iieuretir,
lliy  iinirijiica:.  striving  im  -.reiiritv.  his  very  slrunghiiiih  ■eaii
ihm'fSijrr  oiilv  hr  iifiiirr.NtMUil  uiien  the  urigitiah  tsmtnirv  hieler
of  Ills  Iiiirrrfsiiiitir  .  e,  likrur.r  f.ilm  mtii’fam.siileraf Sun ,  fiath
are  Ihr  rr-eali  uf  an  afitifhrfit  ailv  v.uitijHsi  jiuigmeiit  wiueh  has
Ciiliie  tfi  tit'i-oMid  my  the  reetivtir  iilral.’whiili  tiirnishrs

til  tlu<  jih!i;mriil  faasrt!  .iih|*ifivr  values.  Hie  Inditig  tif

**  sri'iirilv  aiat  it  *  tijipti-afe  |iM!e  ni  **  iuseeurity  4rrati|»etl
acTiiftiing  fi»  ihr  aiitilhrsi’.  n*  ’‘frrlifig  inlrnerily"  aiui
kira!"  air  like  fhr-.r  laltri  a  tntiliims  |iair  uf  vahicss.  a  psyrhie
ftiriiiafiim  U'liiih  \*ailiuu;ri  savs  that  the  real  in  thrill  is
iiftilieialiy  |s!4»'#*i|  flieio',  th.i!  takf'ii  ttigt'llim'’  have

lliry  ii5r„ifiii{g^  .tiai  valiirj  lal;r»i  ‘.inai'v,  hirarver,  tfiev  IfMi!  Iliftiypli

their  t  .nlMinn.  fa  nntv.m  .r  i  amt  ilhisitinary

jirehlrip  .  "  Im  the  .inalya-.  at  ji  .v*  hanem, »%»-.,  if  ahvav  .  heermitss
ahvimis  Ilaii  fM-  anfifhr.r.  ir-.*svr-.  it-. alt  in  aMiutiame  with
the  alily  Tf*.>!  aUtltllr'a-.  e|  '  iM.Ul  Vaiiuali/’  %ti  that  tile
friditia,  a!  iriirt  iaf  it  V  .  tue  ratamf  v,  h**/.  rtltauinaev,  falls

«ifi  lifsa  ‘.a!r  M*  f  fh»’  ,'un 3fhr  a-.  j»|  fral.iinlv,  ‘’ypei  itjrity%

■,e!l  r>frrfli,  e.3  n ,  aa  ,  »».?5  fli.a  the  itvi'iamir^  uf  the

rirtiritsi”;  ran  liir|r-|i  |r  !  ir-aelra!  land  r.  nlinii  -.n  tirulerdanid
by  the  yritmla  hr.  a.  tea*  ,  a'  if-,  it  i  .uliAtinH  y|H»n  his  ps^rlie)  as  if
the  p.ifimt!  eeJir.l  u*  *  han-r  lean  a  waijeiii  in  a  iiiam  llu.s
flirt  !  yirlih.  ill  it  -  aia-J  la-;!i|v  j  Ml^acsf  ihr  jii«  fina*  *4  that

fllliill  f  !iaVr  *  ailed  tda'  ir  .r:,*  iihta*  |irat*  ' t  "  *

I  hr  ■■..!! rfe^pli  »if  tlir  inaidv  rlrinriil  ill  t!u  idea  <4  miltliral
|ierlrrfaai  as  well  as  itt*er  pariitiiLuH'  in  fhr  artlfa  ial  guiding
lillr'*s  af  a  .  %%  r  life!  it  111  the  ed'-ht's  ami  fums,  iheiights

and  frrhne/'  rf  mih  in  thrlr  ,iliiiitdr  imeaid  the  Mltferlive

Ill  tlirii  iiirjiaraiietis  Imi'  life,  in  evriv  tfail  t»!  rharai'ler,
ifi  rvrrv  jdivsi*  .d  .itid  jr'.<v«  !'{|i  a!  gf'stnfr.  whirh  idves  the  iiti|nihve
tti  tlir  igiu. !td  nM*¥rmrnl  amt  diints  ffie  litir  id  life  iijiivarfl,
{irrriiifs  iis  to  diviie-  that  tn  Hie  la-ainintig  td  jr.vt'hi*  at  drvelrije
iiiriit  a  tirlii  jr-fis  s  til  sitiji  m.iitlv  w.rs  feh^  am!  that  the

erigirsa!  f.rrding  el  inlnierifv  irali/ed  hr  file  isifislittitiririally
tirfrt  livr  rfelii  wa*-  estimated  as  iririiniiir  iii  r'iinfermify  with
this^  an! itiirsi'',  X*-*  fnatirr  %%h4t  was  at  the  bniiidatitifi  td  the

fei'liiig  tif  ififriiMiitVi  wljre  tlif*  ’iruiig  nriiiMtir  /.Ifimglndd  is
iilff titiiit  rd  tliriiiiali  the  ‘.rflife;.;  tip  <d  the  masiailine  firtiriii,  the
Stt|i|ifisri!  IsrJs  el  flir  fliild|sh  nftsrrf ailitv  atld  llte  fifu  ert.tilify
ilself  fsill  !i?if|rr  tf'ir  |»hrfiuHirtt a  wdiii.  }|  a.re  tefisidrrrd  as


50


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


effeminate  as  a  consequence  of  the  neurotic,  antitluiical
grouping.  The  feeling  of  insignilicance,  of  weakness,  of  anxiety
and  helplessness,  of  ill  health,  of  <lt‘iiciency,  of  pain,  etc,,
produces  in  the  neurotic  actions  of  such  a  nature  tliat  he  seems
to  be  compelled  to  set  up  a  defenee  against  eitemiuacy,  that  is
to  say,  to  be  obliged  to  act  in  a  maiiK  and  Iurct4‘ul  inaniier.  In
the  same  manner  this  answer  follows,  the  aiicvi-possihilitit's  of
the  masculine  protest  react  against  t*very  dt‘gradatitm,  against
the  feeling  of  uncertainty,  of  being  injured,  oi  inferiority,  and
the  neurotic  individual  draws  euiistantiy  tdh'ctive  guiding  lines
for  his  volition,  action  and  thoughts  in  the  iorm  traits  of
character  in  the  broad  chaotic  held  of  his  stud,  in  oriit^r  not  to
miss  the  way  to  the  heights,  in  order  to  inakf*  Ids  scH  urily
complete.  Usually  the  traits  of  chara<‘ter  tend  in  a  direet  line
of  the  masculine  ideal  in  both  the  male  and  tlu*  feinaie  patients,
but  the  neurotic  circuitous  ways,  att.u'k.s  ami  predispositions  to
attack  especially  following  the  decisive'  dohsit  wliose  analysis
and  arrangements  in  the  tmsiunhle  revt‘als  tiu‘  .saint*  tendt*nt  y  to
the  heightening  of  lh<*  inasculiru?  (‘givaaMisehnisness,  manifest
themselves  as  in  accordance  with  the  alun’e  ipvc*n  t  x|»o  ations,
even  though  from  an  outsidt*  vimv  and  supt-rlieially  ionf.idertai
they  may  appear  to  he  linddity,  anxiety,  cd'ieiinnai  v,  and  mav
be  regarded  as  High!  tir  retreat  from  the  wtuitl.  llu*  .sample
question  concerning  tlu*  stability  (»f  tin*  far  left  hrd  oxpedicmf  in
the  form  of  a  neurotic  syinphun  <*nable :  us  fu  laidrf  4:im!  th.if
in  these  latter  cases  it  is  lud  l>eraiise  a  deei.sion  ha  .  i  »rrn  reached,
but  because  tin*  originally  constiuet(*d  imaginary  laasenUne  |»ual
is  effective  now  as  it  was  btdon*  ami  that  .i  mltura!  adaplalion.
peace  and  contentment,  cannot  he  maintained.  l*rt  an  .e  tin'  goal
is  set  too  liigh.

Through  ce*rlain  unct‘rfaint!f\s  <if  tbr  rhild  ttunaaning  hi*
own  sex-r61e  the*  mascailim*  tdemt‘nf  in  tin*  guiding  tlrtiun  i.
considerably  reenforcml,  in  faut  one  ulnrrvo .  tlVif  t  Idldrm
retain  a  remarkabk*  intvrvy.t  Uft  diffrrenet*^  of  M-xtiatifv  in  a
hidden  form.  ^  The  similarity  i)f  «ire  in  eldhlron  in  tbo
years,  the  feminim^  fixaturc^s  in  small Imys,  and  inastadiiie  in  |pr!s.
certain  threats  of  tin*  parents  as  boy  will  ehango  IdnV^rlt
into  a  girl  ''  reproaches  to  the  boy  that  he  is  like  nAdrl  to  a
girl  that  she  is  like  a  boy,  may  .stilf  ineroaa'  fldn  um  rftntnfv.  as
•long  as  the  differences  in  the  gerdfal  orryans  are  unknm.vn,  lint
even  where  there  is  the  fullo^d  ex|)!anat mn.  dotila  :rwakr-a
through  anomalies  of  t!ie  gerdtrd  organs  in  erronomn;  iud^:oiir!tf ..
which  may  be  retained  and  emergf*  ronstaritly  in  latrr  hiV**  in  tlir
antitlietical  picture  of  Triasc*uline»fernininr^  "  tba!  me
original  .stat<*ment  that  the  donl.t  of  hi ;  owii  sex-rdlr  i  .  ,».!  fhr

“  pM’cf.ir  ITrrri;’u4fnHfiHrH  i;*  i  M-  •■■■,  if.  •’  i  I  n-.-

later  pnb]ieatit>nH.


lilt*:  A<  il^xrvxviil^  Fit  I'ihN  31

foiiiidaliini  tit  thf**  iinirrjtu-  ilinilif  nrt**!  ;  r-\lr'n-4'‘ii  in  Mur

fiimlHiii,  I  f-,  thv  iiruut-.is  Ib'lii-.  !<*  lii.-.  *4

iiiiiibl  III  till’  4.'.  A  .i,;,4Ui  t  ti;.

tirc'r:44lv  ul  ilr»\iiiriu  y,  ui  mdri  loir.irt.ti  Inr  ”  Fr -,441114:,
.iHitiiii*-'.

I1ir  t!if*  ium'I t.iiiil v  4'.  in  Ihr  %Mr  !i*r  mme

Itrgrill  hrr'Uliirs  llir  fiioil  4lltl  Irulaitvr  j»l  r|nn  41 4  .ilf4n^

thr  !li;ist'iili!ir  lAlr  Ilitl'.  ilir  14144144!  pit  t til tlir

lll.isriliilir  i\}ii«U  ha-,  a  -  atfti  !t4tr  llir  tUir  111  vvlisiii.

if  r\i-4%  al!  i  in  iltti-.l.in*  r  ■;  thr  1  v  iiiu.i

iita.'-H.’iilirir  in,  4-.  i'»  Ihr  fa.-.r  r;ul**  ami  \%hn

f‘,:ti'lv  hr-i  ofiir  mmuAu  ,  Im  grrvra!,  -.rf,  in  all  h%

tlf*l,lfiitir‘  hn%%r%in\  |,i  l*i-uli!  lip

ftirri'tiv  1114'. »  lllillt"  tl  -nl  ,  i»!  I  Itaiat  trt  .uni

llir  furr^ *i|  l!ir  L  tu  li;/*  ul  llir  ifuil  I.  llir

|irriii*!  i'»f  |f  .yAii*  lirrin .tpiu'i iihli -III  m?  |}ir  1.  lull  lU'Uirmlly

h.i>  Inn'll  inipitflninr  hv  IV*.  .i»U  ajpl

tiiV’>r!f.  liial.  llu-',  ■.I.mIhuu  With  in.  -.Inrsu,  rtilruviU".  ui  llir
lirrt'tiull  mI  llsr  ^uuliuv  luir  n  ni  thr  |Ur4lr’4

''■igllitUPlfi*  r  t»»t  l!ir  lr-vr!»  »juun’<!  m|  iI--’  nrruM.i,  *A  llh  it'-
rimiilrl  ui.ililv  f;*nl  niil  il  ,  r^^rAirnt  .  Un  y  unuiy  W  .r*

IrflHlIi'.liutrl  l-l.r  |»V  In*  4  fhr  Ir.  V-'  InutrUf  n'%i  ,

I  trifflir  |jt<  \i'.  lutnn'i!  l-c*  hr*  ,»  ’I”’  fn\rf  .nul  t  *  u'ji- 4 ■  r  *u  »il

lialni'r  ulirn  !ir  •..li'.  u-  W’llhs-lfr  M»-' ? -4  ?'t  '  %  t

llirlll,  *’  !u  4  n.  j!  irnf.un  U .  ll'-.l  li*r\  rryifs

lU  pay  4ttri|fi»«n  f**  thr  *!Ui  ru-  n  ■.  in  ih-  .*f  thru

4lil!  lilrir  I'Lun-- I’umU^Ii  Ihn  W  !u’  h  *  flir-.r

‘.n/rrl'i  fMtf!l  vr-tv  rfH-li--n  III  thru  l.nluir.  ni

it  W4S  With  U'llirlin  m  ftp  .  hr  V..  .  iinur  *-ur!  .lll-f

Irs*;  t|Utrt  tluui  l«rfnf«u  tlnnyaf  hr  h.-.sl  Iruri-l  -.aurlhui*  ainl

jir;4  flHln  !|ll\  lln.d  l.r-  irn'W

III  U  I  iillf'  tilir!-.  thr  III'.!  ^  i|  ll||i  |!ir\|iri|r||*r

urnl  it’,  i!r|i|  r  rmr  tmu  4l|i»i|i  ih»'  |ru*hr  alt  ru-UliirU-.  .ifiurU’t

«if  riirir»*4li  mill  rrjitfri-^  hn  nnl  Hi  Mflrj  In  fitpl,

lirirtif 4f pri  ill  |i!r  ip4iv^t}i  thr,  thr  «  !uhi  »  njur

ruiflrr  thr  rifluru*  r  mI  tirr  -^uiilu-r;  Hnr  |jn.|srl%  lutii  |i>  ,tt‘!

4*i  tini|lgli  hr  llU'l'.t  ri,  i  ihifjr  .^-lirniil  |jr  Iv4|?|irfi  |«.*  filir?

iillt  llir  MijiriiiHitv  iif  tlir  in.Hilv  |HUiMjlr  in  tnir  -ah  llir

riistiifig  lfl*»flrl  l‘i#n  *i||ir -i  in .1 -a  tl! llir ,  r';|irM4itv  1  4  ItUiti,  lir  fiittirl
apjlfUir-  ItJ  iuill  In  hr  llir  prf-nHi  with

ill  thr  f  »rir  «if  li|f|r  ilrh*  jirrnhar  frails  uf  iluii.n-  lri  iiltirli
lirtflltir  r*;jirf  l.illt  |iri*lii?.iirnf  Ui  fh.r  iirntirU--.  lr\rlM|i  wlint  llir^
Iti  }itf!i|  f.i'.l  !fi  t||r»  liuS'4  tllitir  lillr.  ritr  frrhfli^  iif

!i;i¥ifi4  riilTrrr*!  ,.tti  inhifi*  luu^  fii^t  huh-  It  %vright  with  tlirfti  4-
frir  fiiiyr  mitti  rfiiiriilrr  thriiu.rlvr'.  {ritr'ilu,  -’n*  llrat  llirv  |n?,|  all


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


their  interest  into  collecting  proof  of  their  injury  and  Iniikling  up
their  aggression  against  their  environment.

Imaginary  pictures  of  castration,  of  man  changcnl  to  woman,
woman  to  man,  of  masculine  forms  of  life,  emerge  in  the  analysis
•as  indicators  of  the  neurotic  psyche,  point  in  thc^  i  iMving  for
equality  with  man  and  permit  the  masculine  iulion  to  rcTiuerge
constantly  in  the  later  changes  of  form  of  the  guiding  line.  Tlu/se
neurotics  regularly  assume  an  attitude  toward  life*  as  tlumgli  they
had  suffered  an  injury,  or  as  though  tht‘y  were  constantly  SiS*king
with  the  greatest  caution,  to  avoid  a  loss.

E.  H.  Meyer  says  in  the  “*  Indo-Ciermanii*  Myths  (1.  S.  iC>),
‘‘  According  to  the  Atharva  Veda  the  (laiulliarvs  (ptuillir
Dasmons)  consume  the  testicles  of  hoys  and  thus  Iraiisfurin  the
hoys  into  girls.”  The  ideas  of  many  neurotics  in  i  hililhooct
seem  to  have  assumed  this  and  .*^imilar  forms  concerning  the
origination  of  the  two  sexes,  as  if  from  tlumghts  coiHiTning  ;i
degradation  which  has  been  suflVreil  and  wfiich  assumes  the
form  of  a  sexual  transformation  wuth  the  wcunan.  llie  imniediatf*
psychical  result  is  then  as  a  rule  nmre*  acute  aggres  dun  against
the  parents,  to  whom  is  ascribed  the  hiarne  for  this  shorfi  oming.

Flies,  Halban,  Weininger,  and  hehu‘e  theun,  aimmg  titliers,
Schopenhauer  and  KratTt-Ebing,  fournh^d  the  psychic
hermaphroditism  on  the  pre.sence  of  a  hypothetical  male  ami
female  substance  in  the  individual,  thu*  t'ornaqO  Mijiposf-;  un!v
the  antithesis  in  the  valuation  of  male  and  female  as  it  actually
exists,  takes  into  account  tlu*  univ<*rsalitv  at  the  antitlietitsii
figurative  apperception-scheuH*  ”  maleTemale  ”  and  detiuce :
from  the  pressure  of  the  neurotiisally  rc'enf<ir<*ed  and  lieiglilened
egotistic  ideal  the  masculine  fa<*tor  which  is  so  easily  ilc  i  over-
able.^  The  latter  <‘onditions  also  the  emphasis  nl  the  feeling  of
inferiority  of  the  individual  by  t'omprehcuuiing  it  in  a  picture
which  belongs  to  the  feminine  role*  in  iirder  to  reai  t  against  it
with  the  character  traits,  the  impulses,  ami  prepai  ifiuns  tif  the
masculine  protest.  The  iinding.s  published  bv  me  have  been
taken  up  in  a  series  of  the  latest  works  frmu  the  Fmiiiiaii  schiHil,
A  further  pursuant'e  of  the  matter  leads  irrevof-ably  to  a
realization  of  the  nnlenal)leness  of  the  lihtdo»the*ory,  to  a  doing
awMy  with  the  sexual  etiology  a,nd  to  an  undrrstanditig  of  the
neurotic  sexual  conduct  as  a  fiction.

If  the  masculine  protest  has  thus  bnaune  ilrar  fu  n*.  ati
expedient  of  the  psyciie  by  means  of  wiiich  it  attains  full  ^^.rriiritv,
■and  strives  to  bring  itself  in  conformity  witli  the  giiiding  egotisll’
idea,^  it  still  remains  to  present  to  view  the  formal  rhaiigr  of  this
guiding  line  as  it  takes  place  every  time  rontradirtiom;  brrome
apparent  in  it  and  the  purpos«‘  t»f  neiirotit'  effurts  t«i  niaintain
snperionty  is  ieopardized.  This  is  the  case  iv!u*n  reaiitv  threaten
•the  egotistic  ideal  with  degradation.  The  neurotic  in  thi h  <-4se


THE  AC*C’EXTl^.VrKI)  FICTION


will  cling  more  tvmuimtAy  Ut  hi:  hIi-*  t\um  ihv  imniKil
The  iiiiirc'  ilet^jily,^  lunvin-er,  luy  htH*(nne>  rniUin|^ltnf  iii  ttie
rrassiirjiig  rieiiri»-.i:a  Ihr  rnurr  likely  ht%  being  as^isten!  liy
meiiiorir>  .iii*!^  warning:-;,  fa  anfieijMte  an  irtjnry,  to  cHmstriict
new  nriiri^ii”  ein  nifcnis  wav;.  !u  ap{»ly  further  nt'nratir  I'xpcnliriit^
for  ,srriiiilv  wliit  h  Imt  a  prableiii  uruler  t’iueatjeration  conlaiii
fieitiu'm  a  fi.it  tun  a  tiegafiun.  t»r  nunr  likely  both  at  onee.

I!i-s  |e;yijur  heriii.iplinHtifie  eliarailer  wilt  also  riia!iile-<t  itsrll
llir  rireiifU'Oaiu'r  that  he  %-iekls,  litaauTies  sufniiissivf%
effriiiiiiafr,  whili^  his  flinrt'.  at  t!ie  same  fituf*  reveal  a  |ire:':.siire
ttnvanls  a  renilriii  v  In  t!isuiiuatf\  tinvanl  luaniinesfi,  with  the
fesii!l  that  hr  iiiakf'N  tie  puygress,  bei'ause  for  every  ?4e|i  lie  tabai
itirwMi'i!  Ilf'  takf’-,  utie  I »a?  k  vv at  ti ,  auil  stuueliliies  tH'iui  f^^|irc*,?;sr* ,
this  |irnreiliife  in  jiaiif. uiiiiur  In  the  same  way  the  fear  el
blafiie,  i4  |Hiui''iiiiie!il ,  u!  -.haiiie,  in  ^luili  of  being  ’’  rlawai  **  may
alter  his  strava'i^Hurwat*!  manly  trails.  l*he  ratiistriirtioii  of  the
iieiiri^tie  lerliiig%  ni  yatill,  of  tauii^enifal  rritniiia!  inst.irictst  cif
rtuigtuies of  i'ftirltvs  am!  in;uii%iu  bear  fear  i!t:s|iiriftg  .^igns  in
the  same  wavs  a-,  lar  frrlifi--.  of  Isisfifulnrss.  didhir.v^

anil  la/aiie  . ,  when  ihf-.e  Liitri  ate  fu-iaighf  nf‘iirt'>tit'a!ly  tii
e'^jiressinii,  ‘Ttir  Isel.  iiilr.o.  f.ible  rhlht.  file  years  of  wild  rials,
and  rrrfsifi  hniw,  mI  j..'.vO:o  .r-..  It r.jttrntly  f!ie  fore^sfage  of  flie
* hh'vrh <jied  U'.  iIo'  ma-auliur  jirr»|es!  in  a  high,

ret-tifitiiMS'  dr vrli <pnir|j|  liiri!  pro f. uaiiafiee';  are  proibirer!

tiirerllv  bv  itie  ■j.iia/’  mC  !i»r'  protr:a  whif  h  lias  becoriiif*

•Ifl  rud  in  it  .rl!  ,i*id  %v!o..  h  irpir-.eiit,  nludlv  alld  eillirrdy  the
rerfilofretl  |.aiiiti,ng  lit  fiou

Otif  tllr- '!  rf  J.  ,d  pi  r '.irmf  at  I'f.u  iO  ?jir  ue^nstfie  pSVcIie  %VOutd  bc

iiii'iimplrfr,  ii  it  ilid  a!'.-^  rfifrO'  epun  flo-  '.ubjrrt  (d  the  nature
am!  sigiiilfi  .01*  r  of  dieam-.  I  *  .m  in  this  plure  advance  no  well

folilidmi  thr»4v  of  dtr.me,.  I,  , -v  oolht^W;  a  emii|»!ete  uiir.

Hut  for  vaf'iMi?'.  ir.r..#'j  .  I  4f*i  fo  It  s <mniunie;ite  all  the

cibservalions  smd  tiridlngs  wliiili  have  rrmlerr*i  possiftte  the
sfiiflv  of  lirraiii*::  iit  pf.i«!o  .d  pst!  of  fhr  work.

!*  fsnid  s  mtri'piri.  iti-oi  d»r.ur-i  a  .  prr!i.i|i-.  |hr  •|p"ratrs|  ‘ifeji
ili  advaiirr-  e  lii*  li  fr.ri  br-r-n  fff.idr  in  oar  tifolersf .ifid!iio  of  f}|e
|isvcTid-^»»..y  iif  tlir  .A?id  vrt  {  ismuo!  regard  it  nn  the

final  sfrp  i#i  i,iir  k nowlrd rd  dir^.on-:  In  the  rmir-.e  of  an
fili*:erV::tf i'mii  of  drr.irtr.  r"*frfidiiia  ovrr  fiufii*  vrai".  of  hrallliv  and
iirihralftiv  prrsoie:  I  fisvr  .ofo.  r-.l  ,i?  flo-  follow itii-*  re*;!i!t  *

t  ^  I  h:r  d?rMfH  1-,  0  rrdiri  tioli  ii|  |j'.vr'hic  attitmles

afid  4tr%  for  tlir  iinesf the  i  haraefin’istie  ntafiner  ifi

ivliirli  tlir  dir.itiirf  faltrs  fds  .eiifudr  in  reean!  fo  a  rertain
proldrfu  ^  ft  Miifn  ide-.,  thrrrfoffa  wil!l  the  hirtu  of  ihr  fictitious
iniidifig  bn.r\  virlds  ofilv  rlft-irfs  tif  prefnerlilatiorg  tentative
|ire|c:if4ti*i!is  Ilf  .:iii  altiluile  atid  ran  therefore  l.ir

to  nrr4l  Mlivant.ige  ft»r  do*  |-Hr.r|-cr.n  rtf  nfit!f*rst*ifitliiig


54  THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITimoX

these  individual  preparations,  predispositions,  and  the  guiding
fiction  itself.

2.  In  the  same  way  there  comes  to  light  in  the  <iream,  in  a
more  or  less  abstract  manner,  the  dreamer's  attitudt*  towards  the
world  about  him  as  well  as  his  traits  of  character  and  their
neurotic  abnormalities.  The  abstraction  in  dr<  am-tliought  is
necessitated  by  the  craving  for  security,  which  sca‘ks  ti»  solve  a
problem  by  simplifying  it  and  l)y  referring  it  U)  a  Itss^  ct»mp!«‘tf*
infantile  stage.  This  it  accomplishes  in  a  manrun*  which  is  true
of  thinking  generally,  except  that  it  is  more  prohnind.  It  inakf' .
use  too  of  memory,  and  in  a  figurative  analogical  manner,
through  the  hallucinatory  awaikening  of  memories  of  a  fear-
inspiring  or  energy-exciting  sort.  ^  The  extdusion  of  if*ality  by
sleep  favors  the  alistract  thinking  in  <lrt*ams»  as  corrertiim  is

a  great  part  prevented  by  the  insensibility  i>f  the  sense  organs.
To  this  circumstance  as  well  as  to  the*  aiJSc'iicc'  td  a  eiuiseiaus
positing  of  purpose  in  dream  thought  is  due  tlu*^  iiu*ompre»
hensibility  of  the  contents  of  dreams,  whieli  <mly  receive  meanini;
when  taken  as  .symbols  of  life',  as  an  ''  as  if  "  for  whii"h  tire
interpretation  has  to  supply  the  real  aggressitui.

3.  These  facts  which  still  remain  to  provtsl  as  well  a ;  the
form  of  expression  of  the  dream  in  an  as  it  "  !l  sreinet!  ti»
me  as  if  **)  reveal  to  us  the  nature*  of  tin*  dr?*am  as  a  fadtir  in
which  those  tentative  efforts  and  fa.sks  l»ecoine  inanifi'st  hv  which
caution  seeks  to  gain  the  mastery  of  a  situatitm  in  the  future.
In  the  dreams  of  neurotic  persons  it  is  possible,  therpfme,  to
observe  more  distinctly  than  in  idluT.s  tin*  neundic  metliotls  <il
apperception  which  work  according  to  the  jjrinciple  of  an
antithesis,  the  empha.sixed  fe^eling  of  inferiority  and  the  guiding
•egotistic  idea,  or  to  divine  them  in  comu*c*tion  with  the  mental
life  of  these  persons.

4.  The  tendency  of  the  nenrotically  rermforred  guiding  idea
will  be  revealed  regularly  in  the  dreams  of  a  neurtitic*  persiug
usually  in  the  form  of  a  striving  to  attain  a  pud! ion  "  above  "
or  the  masculine  protest.  The  feminine  or  under  "  base  of
operation  is  always  indiratcxl.

5.  Repeated  dreams  of  the  same  c-ontemt  and  <!rearns  of
childhood  reveal  the  fictitious  guiding  line  most  disfintl!y.
Because  they  construct  tliemselve.s  upon  a  {‘ompleted  sdiernr  o!'
one  that  is  in  a  condition  to  he  used  which  is  erertetl  and  ii  .tainett
by  the  neurotic  final  purpose.  The  various  flrearns  af  a  night
indicate  this  attempt  at  various  solutions  and  are  a  cliararferistic
of  the  feeling  of  extreme  unrcTtainty.  Tfir  srecalh-d  rmisor
dreams  by  means  of  which  is  acccmiplished  a  rruicralmenl  or

G.  Chr.  liichtwhiTC  alrfinK*  If  .i-C'l

dreamji,  tiirir  ebanicter  coii!d  h**  riiiwl  fruiii  'n^mrr  tr  *

‘i'act).


niK  VVXiKl)  invvux


55

ilis'iftiisiiiif  III  hy  rrvral.s  iCsrli  the

craviiii;  ter  ..a'lnily  ttliu'ii  na  thr  hn  mal  i-haiigr  «f  tlir

fictitni  ifi  the  nruu^.i-.  .is  \u*iUr^  in  tlw  tlrtMiii,  am!  serk:rtii  aviiitl
by  a  iireiiitini-.  %%4V  a  in  the  tua^ruiine  iniiilimr  linr,

ilfher  tiistigtiralieiis  arr  intiriruf  in  thr  imtiivr  e»l'  the  ^ \ni»rt*
ahsirart  iirraiii  tliiiiki!i|;  4n«l  in  4%  4  uif-ra  la^timlinn.

Cl.  llif'  jfiti  of  .iimloin^-  in  ilifMins

;irr  railialiini^  tHinv.  ami  etintriil:-.  uf  ilvnaiiur  aftVHi:

rrihiftiri,  cniiriit-4  their  le^imr-.,  mi  fii  Nfifmk.  1‘!h‘v  are  :i

jlj^yr'liir  *4t|irr-ifriir|iiir  tivrr  4  i'lnttpreini^r  firtwc^ni  4  psyt^hie
sitii*tfi«ni  .iiiti  4  liinsrih  t4'4i4lh'  lahntiril,  sinifiistirally  a|i|i!irf!
spiivriiir  wliir'li  fiiir’4  Mijiplv  ihr  fr-.oimure  rri-|nirril  by  tlir  itlra.

Tlir  fiiltilliiiriil  ef  ini.ifitilr  wi-.lir:,  hi  tlrramH  af.srriril  hf
Frrtiil  is  siihani  tiy  fitr  Irr44r«lifi|t  i|  4*4  flie  citrrt  tif

pmiieflil.it itni  In  attain  whrrrhy  inriiiorirs  priHipnl

tit|:p:‘l,!irr  with  4  virw  t»i  ,1  «  rrlaiii  rifrrt  ;irr  takrii  ns  }iel|js  in  tiif*
fiiriii  nf  4  frnvehis  rii|ir«iiriil  wtlirh  nlso  iliifiiimites  ;itl

ioipi  4!  tlimliii,;.  44*1  m  !ui  !i  V.  n»st  tlir  libitlJiiiue,  i»|’  ^isli

iif  r'hili!!i«*e*l ,

Ute  tJ'ilv  ih  Ifr't  r  *||  f”  hrt%trr*t\  f|:r  !-:r  Ul »  j  Atul  iliU'liuditV  wifh
}f*'»  ilrr.iiii";  ami  it-,  lirln-anfr:  i'.  !!sr  hrii^pifriiri!  Irtnlmi-v  l.n4ninlil
t^y  t}^r  i  rr'lilnf  rT^  iMtl-nn  t»'*  I  hiJtrJ-.r*  fhr/*;?’*  fiirlftfirirs
h,ivr  lier*n  itiaiir*  rflri  Ii%t,  m  *i}iorf  fhr  iirufetir  |irr^'.|iriiive.-'  ■
thr  nrm'iAh"  ttuf  ^niljVr  from  irisiini ■.rriier  hr  inakr'S  fiirni,
If  pnitil  *4  ri,iHi|f4f .Ifni  abMifnfrly  fiei'r‘.’.4rv  one  ft,ir
of .in*!  iri'f.itnlv  Hi  .oli  <n,  brioinr-n  oiii-r  fi\r4.  4  |nni'it
whit'lt  in  to  thr  if^r-^orr  with  whirh  thr  frrtJnp  lif

infrriinilv  wriehs  tipof;  t}ir  i  hibb  this  |*inn|  finis!  fur  thr  almvr
givrfl  rraraifoa  Iruni  fhr  Iirrmatv  **t  fnakifiiy  i4sni|s4ristH'nn  nful
on  arrminl  «if  fiir  winrh  t.ikr  plaer  in  |■•hihl}laml,

hrroitie  ‘.talilr,.  |i V|»0',t4r4/r4  .i!i4  an  tiolv,  :ii  «!iviflfH  On

thr  olir  Ii:hi4  ofr  thr  rraf  .itnl  .o-tieifir*!  tif  fhr  MibjrfI  :

ori  the  othrr  air  f!ir  laifr orfi^atorv  rrHttlt  of  fhr  frrlinf!  of

tlifrriorif V4  th«^  ftrifv,  tlir  oojfjifie  i4r4  .tjifirrtriVril  in  flir  fiirrti
III  4  nrrM'»ii  III  4fi  rvrilf  llii-s  lattrf  isiral  fioin!  ri|irr:itrs  ncm*
4s  fhinipli  .ill  ilirn  lif|o  foft  r-.  ^%‘rfr  fi.ififatiir*!  in  i|,  'finis  firs!
arises  ffi'ifii  4tl  ,  Iititnlivr  lifr  that  whirh  Wr  t  a!!  !ifr.

thr  |i-4*i  tir

Isvnv  ‘4r|i  thr  t  liih!  t-ibr*,  ifsrlf  arr^it'ilinv;  to  this

anit  is  ill  fnrii  ilirr?  Iri  liv  it  Therr  is  4.  i  ofif f rnitiiis

wriflilfi.n  pfrpm'iifn^n ,  foinialion  t4  in'riii-ifiosif  ions  anil

ifiraMirifn^  »ni  tlir  ntral  wfiirfi  lirinns  tlir  rhihf  for%%'4r4  in  his
flrvrltipitirtif  fir  lilfiisrlf  with  fnrti  m  well  :vi  %vitli

ivofitrrn  wlirfrbv  t|ir  brlwrrn  flir  ■:r^rs  ftif  ni-:lir*i  4

atftl  f St rs  4  fj-4i  hi*  .of f y ■.Iftiritl  in  ;irrMr#|,i||rr»  o,  ith  4
in  j  rrrf.oii  s'rii*r  in  4  ho-filr^  rv.rJi^r  *brrr'ttH!i  in  tiir
fll.f  tatbiir  btir  In  l!ir  tn'onoti-rsilH^  rii-Hto-.rii  i  Inlib  file


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


compensatory  craving  for  security  heightened  by  the  feeling  of
uncertainty  is  responsible,  through  the  over-stiinulatitm  of
attention  in  this  direction  fur  the  abstract,  iH*urotieally
reenforced  directing  lines  to  the  high-tluwn  goal  ui  tlu*  masculine
protest.  And  the  more  sharply  defined  uiulcrstanding  cd  the
contrast  of  the  sexes  produces  t‘arlier  and  nuu’c  jirofoumlly  the
preparatory  attitudes  toward  the  opposite  sex.  tiu‘  luore  so
wdien,  as  is  the  case  with  neurotic's,  the  exclu.avt'ly  masculine
appraisal  of  the  ideal  reflects  upon  his  it'tding  id  inieriority
causing  it  to  appear  feminine.

The  nature  of  home  training  carfics  with  it  the  lacsult  that  in
his  first  attempts  at  formulating  an  Ideal  of  perstuiality,  the  child
pictures  to  himself  traits  belonging  to  tin*  most  im|Hirtant
member  of  the  family,  usually  the  fat!u*r.  Neurotically  disposed
children  who  in  contrasting  themscdves  with  tlie  father
experience  an  accentuation  of  their  feeling  of  iiUeriurity,
immediately  hit  upon  preparatory  expedionts  am!  coiistriui
devices  for  coniliat  as  thougfi  they  wen*  uidigcd  tn  dmnonstrafe
their  superiority  to  the  father,  in  thoso  pn^paratory  efforts  is
contained  also  the  attitude  to  the  oppositf*  sex.  in  so  far  as  the
intellect  of  the  child  does  not  make  a  inistakt  in  regan!  to  his
own  sexual  role,  and  many  of  his  predisjjosititms  which  are  to
come  into  effectiveness  lattT  in  life  art*  It'ntafivrlv  pr.u1.ieed  in
a  playful  manner  upon  mtuuht^rs  of  tin*  familv  of  tlie  opptisife
sex,  in  the  waking  state  or  in  hallm  inations,  or  in  \\h:  <ire;im:  ,

That  along  with  this  tiie  moflu*r  servt*‘i  in  a  <  f*iiain  sen  t*  as
a  model  for  the  boy  has  hmg  liec'n  known  and  ha :  bm*n
mentioned  by  Nietz.srlu*.  Tin*  boundarv  if-.elf  whicli  tlie  ehild
sets  for  himself  is  also  a  mattt'r  of  <*xpt‘rimeid  for  Idm.  His
wishes  are,  if  he  bt*  neiirotieallv  di*:pt.*:et!,  bmmdless.
Discontented  heeaust*  of  tlu^  too  grtnit  <!i  lam  o  tn  hi-,  egoti  lie
ideal,  he  even  goes  so  far  as  to  <*ntertain  st'xual  wislu":  in  reigard
to  the  mother,  a  proof  of  how  houmllt‘ss  is  tin*  **  will  to  prover.'*
A  fixation  of  a  sexual  rt*Iation,  lunve'ver.  imea  iiavt*  o!h«*r
grounds  than  chance  wishts  in  the  tiehi  of  boundless  aspirafiomc
The  desire  of  the  lioy  exttmds  to  otlu‘r  femah*  |?erstm  i  with
whom  he  is  brought  into  contact.  Thr  picture  if  then  again
similar  to  that  of  possession  to  wish  to  po  aa'  .s  tin*  mother  **
becomes  a  sign  of  his  di.a-onfent,  a  symbol  of  his  lummlless
aspirations,  of  his  obstinacy  and  his  fear  of  idher  ivofiieii,  Now
in  later  jife  a  fixation  on  the  mother  froni  similar
constellations  may  result,  not  howfwer,  beeausr  the  wish  was
heretofore  libidinous.  For  it  is  a  inaffeT  of  imlifferencr  of  whal
nature^ the  real  relation  to  liie  mother  was  the  psvi-he  ef  the
neurotic  will  always  utilize  it  in  seme  way  for  the  puriKts'e  rtf
furnishing  him  security.

The  motive  of  the  discontent  interests  us  here  all.  ft


"rilK  M’VKSri^XVKl)  FU/TinN


57


ti'om  tin*  trrliiig  nl  luuing  .'.ult'ri'cn!  an  injury  uiid  it  h
iiliviiiiir:  tiinl  fit«’  t'luitt  WAtir.  luliiihurnt  lA  vwty  iit  Im

*'  griHviiii;  il|n'*  tt»  thv  p  *>a'lHtuigy  t’i  liir  aa  if

he  riuiv  in  -  fiiir  iioiu  t!ir^  df ’•<*h’jutirut  mi  hi.  hail,

tec'lh,  hi-'  lie-  r\|.u-i ints  t  %%tlh  h\-.  M'tvrH

III  give'  him  thn  ilujur'. -nm  ih-tl  a  flung  inn.v  agaui.  llir

tiicith-ninlivf'  |*l4V-.  4  lirqurnt  Hi  thi'  thr.im-.  aiSil  }i!i4iil4''4r.n

with  gii'h*  in  Mihrr  riinhif  flunn  U*  %  liUi.;  fi*  thrir  htijii*  of
hetouitiiii;  4  main  wnlh  l^^y.  givr  ti4>jtr  to  Ihrii  longing  lor  a
more’  t  oiti|iirlo  nuifihoosi.  If  a  iMiUh  i:*  juihrs!,  a  niiik  tooth,  a
iirw,  i*iir  I'oiiti  -.  riu*  |»ii!!uh,;  oe4  tO  trrth,  ihrirliirr,

r4i!iiiiiii/-ra  iti  Uif*  4!tr..i!ii  tin*  ur4i  fo  hia  oinr  4  man

Neiifolio  iinm  vvoinm  air  inl!  *4  ihr  Iroling  itf  tir4vit|o

:4iflt'n"i*«i  411  initirv  anil  win»lf'  hlf'  n.  *.|>rnl  in  llie  rlfiirl  *it

rnlargltl'^  tin-u  o|'  uulumi  r  In  oltirr  alf.lill

iiifjc'rt!,  Ill  t»rilrr  rirti  to  a.-.tiiur  ihrir  allstuifo  tni^ani  till*
rlforl,  thry  *if'r  ohii.n'-i!  to  ‘arop  up  ^■oll■.Litl!lv  thrii  tli'.i  oiilrtil,
SCI  that  thov  V. ill  fill- 1  iioitii  i--*:  1!  aiu!  |4'*ui!  of  thrii  iirglrf'l

ill  every  aitiialioii  r\4nui'uiit;  il,  10  .u  i- .otginv;-  li  ot  .ithilrarily
ehailrpino  it,  Iml  krrpng/  in  iuui*l  ilw  iHiUion.  inuihne,

giial.  With  gio.il  frgpal.u44,  1  :^r:i:A  in  *!u'rii  fl,r  a|iprr*'rptio|l
arenthiflp  to  fhr  ■.!  h. ■■O. :  ■*  "  malr  hnioor  ''  l>v  inrj.lt’.'

tif  wilil  !l  thrv  -.raLAt  .Oi4  A.r.  -U’^O  hi  thro  r^prtnUnr'..  l‘hi**
,sf*hf‘llir  ai'i  'Ohng''  i'r, •  r  '.0  >  U;  h  f ■ '  .oou..,/"  fin*  rirnnie

I".  irJniliv  »nc4a,oo-'i  :  .0  ..0444,4..  ,4  |||^.  I:4i|,»r

:ifu!  ni4'-»  ulrnr-  /-rnit-oi  t  If  •  .  a  Si  *•••  .j  root  ?  »  h.o.ii

tlisiiivi'iy  that  4  loan  ,r-!i  lOrUc  af  p..o,o,  *4  tj|f-  |j|i4y

wiiifh  hy  li.itiiir  .nr’  nit*noo  ,  v/li.-.r-  itahihtv  ■, ojnr |na,ir%  takr-i

tin*  l!iat4*tr'|  o|  |i‘ir.r4il  -rn-.ala^Jr,  I  h.aVr  rlr"anhril  llli’i

|illfniO!|ir?ii>]5  itI  llo'  ”  M»ihr  mf  /^.l’inun  4r-f  r I  t

1 1^07 .  Wini  ninl  flrtion  ainl  irfrj  tlonn  thr  1  oinprro^atary
;iiljin;tfitrnf  v-hn  h  }i,.o.  1  o?i;r'  pl.iv  huiiiig  f!ir  im!ivit!n.,i!*,;i

rxprtirni  r  in  l*i".  loi  r  ■■•i  ?. -.Irfu  r*  whrtr’  ihr  iirgaiia  nr

|;iar|;«  of  nl'vpilia  llt  t|l|rat|ou  V. '^'ir  t‘'.riia*  lltrar  ♦  » 4up«''ti'....ltof  y ,

ntnv  higljrl  valltrh  |5mi!io|o,  o!  a.n  s^’lrUMl'  Otpaft  H'ilrtiot  afirr

tfiry  il.ili  ;'4llfrir4  all  Uiptfy  in  llirn  4'i»  r|i4,oo  v  afr  I'roiliv  in

4  orrlaill  pfofortivr  ah  orU  nir-nt  allivaii.h?  fir4nrn,llv

|}|rv  ihi  fiot  p!u\f*  of  worlli  Iir< -in-.r,  tn.oarvrf  ^  tliril"  tr»  .}i IIS- |iir
tl.’i  c  !ff*rot|ir  r  !i  f  fio  loiioyr  lirrp-,  pj.tr  Voth  tfir  liraflv

inirfll#ll  tU'ipifl,  ftm  jiaVilno  pfiron  »nir  *?  .1  1'^  uHifitrh  ii|||i  fftrar*
offpilt  ;  4tr  .trilufs  ^  *tn4  ^hnn.ifr  fnna  mniu.-ilitv  i*.  lljr

siiflie  :t!}irif  inot^  noiniifr  Va-siatom  h  i-o-?!  upon  '..oinatir'  iisfrriritjtv


of

h

!  !

'1.0,*’*  "41*

A:rn

Ih

r  !

r%u'

lindUufi  of

va^i  ifinn,

fr!

oiriiiml  ,

.iliif  k

IrHi

nr

>  of

an

fir  oaf  1  **

1  !

TIar,

H,

O'i  ■  »  f  4*1

‘  i  f

f.

t-.  0-»  !

fn  rS  •%  4;.  1

..|  a,

'  4  '  3  rtii  -  %-ij.

m  <

a)i!.  I|

f.',

r  f..

‘  0  -1  0-,.-

■■■•*

•t.-t  ':^rU  a.'5

llr  1

.a,<  ;  4  ;i

fa  .to

*0  i

,  4.->  -  .v”

.tj.  i

-  1-.

i  v

a?  -4i.r'  ‘f|.  »a

f  1  If

I'f,  4

4  to

.lr%  r

>  '  *  'O

*d-  4'.

ft  ■■%

»t't5  ^|.|snarj

IM.-:--

i.  a,  %  '".'.-‘•'im

«  fr

n  1

1  s,  ’/

1  -

\  #  1  ‘  4r-.3  7i^v  i

i  1  a  I’

>-‘ti  h ,

fi

Al  >.

1

I


58


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


In  this  way,  for  instance,  the  sense  of  taste  has  evolved  as  a
security-serving  apparatus,  in  the  lealni  of  the  nutritive  organ
but  along  with  this  also  the  pleasure^  sense  apparatus  which
must  now  guarantee  the  continuance  of  nutrititm  as  well  as  the
proper  choice  of  food.

The  variation  from  the  type  i.s  brought  about  hj  the
“  compensation  tendency  which  is  already  intrt>duced  m  the
germ  plasm.

The  environment  (in  a  broader  sen.se  the  milieu)  dominates
the  **germ  plasm  and  in  this  manruT  is  explaiiUHl  the  prompt
uniformity  of  reaction,  viz.,  inferiority  plus  iaunpensatory
security,'’  through  a  change  in  the  conditions  of  life  in  the
broadest  sense,  tliat  is  to  say,  all  particular  nHutilu^rs  of  a  single
species  vary  in  the  same  way  vvhtui  the  same  clmnge  in  thVir
mode  of  life  takes  place.  In  regard  to  lunnan  society  one  must
keep  constantly  in  mind,  more  so  than  in  tlie  animal  and
vegetable  kingdonis~that  t!u‘  demands  on  tin*  single  irulivitlual
vary  to  a  considerable  degree  one  frtnn  the  other,  both
quantitatively  and  qualitativ^dy,  so  that  tluur  smuatit*  inh'riorities
and  the  compensatory  a<ljtistnients  rtaadting  thercUroiii  differ
very  widely.  And  their  variations  would  be  **.till  more  striking
were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  t!u*  human  psyt'lu*  has  tlirust  itsfdf
into  the  circle  of  correlations  ami  conqumsations  with  such
preponderance  as  the  principal  organ  oi  adjusfive  stwurity.**
Now  the  standard  tendencii's  to  stamritv  are  tm  longtu*  variatiims
in  the  organs  themselves,  but  psychic  ptaadiaritir* -a  Tlu^re'
always  continues  to  (^xlst  a  conrif*ction  wtiich  can  be  sutrHioiitly
proved,  and  we  are  able  to  infer  from  sotuatic'  variatitms  stigmata
and  signs  of  degeneration  of  the*  sarneg  that  tluua*  lia  *.  taken
place  an  increase<l  coiiipcmsatory  adjustment  of  tlic*  brain  and
more  accentuated  tendenct<\s  to  ol^fain  scaairitv.  llie  natura*
and  tendeiK'y  of  all  psyehic  procf^sses  are  full  cd  tlie  efforts  of
precaution  and  defensive'  preparations  ft»r  gaining  superiority
so  that  one  cannot  avoid  comdusitm  tliaf  what  wc*  term  sotd,
spirit,  reason  and  understanding  are  for  us  abstrarf itnis  of  those
effective  guiding  lines,  to  which  hiutian  beings  reach  cnif  tieyond
the  sphere  of  bodily  sensations,  striving  to  cjverstep  their
limitations  in  order  to  gain  the  mastery  of  a  p«irfion  of  the  world
and  to  secure  themselves  against  threatened  dangers.  The
imperfection  of  the  independently  acting  cjrgan  is  thiir:  magically

Thn  p.‘?ychic  adjuHtiiH'ui  uf  nrm  with  .ifia

istics  bo  vsry  ftu*  :Miiu-.,!ivv  v'irnUum  m

that  cliildnnn  runiroficM,  md  wm  it’wlf  ttuh-r  fhm  ilw

purpose  of  by  wav  i>f  twiiftart-asM  .'w  iwiwhK  ,  n*  Irvil  <*f

character,  a  type  (,f  fircffurctlocH:!  hv  mi-.'irri  of  a  an

aa  IB  the  <?apA  for  In  fln>  d^-dcrunp  of  to  um-tu*  nifioh-^.

m  lablos  ^id  parahlrs  Swyalso  ErckriiJifuiH  flueriiu’,  th**  lb*.

lioetno  a  Remccko  Fox,  pairdiii”’  and  csinciktnrivi.


11IE  Avvmrvxrm  fh;tiun


clemtrc!  to  ihut  .mirilv  whuh  i*.  Inrnriir.l  h%
ant!

In  itir  »ifiilii»t!  ihr  tiiiutuni  prtU^ttn^-A  m  nim  I  -  |}ir

iiflc!rrst::ui4ilU;  inri!  hv  a  !inrlv  4si]tr.tr4  * niiir.il

apparat’I'*-.  I'l^r  Inir  ■,*  rro  rO  thr  lir,  --Mpr  i !:  n  a.E  *  <*r

is  hr4Uii;;ii?  \ t,  tor  hi/JiU*  ■<'*4!  r*!  *

tlSlro  Wilii'll  lr..to|i-r’;  *  attir  t...  a'.  aJ  r  -..‘fn»vt.  l  .  '/arJ


ill  iiiaa  1*0  thr*

iriilrl

Hut  it  io  tiir

■aiur

thr

!  tk-

lilV  !*v  tiunv  !o;

i‘'I%  ,■

a.H  !>y  I'luOa’  ir‘-

:  a4  /•

Ati4  flio  .  !t

M  pr

?:{ir4livr

4ir!  ,.I !

ITiittiit"  0'^  4  *■'/;

41  1  ’  i

wliirli  hrtr.iV'.

•  i  ! !  41

f'lf  thr  rati'.roU

K  :  1  i

for  lllf*  ;4'r-„.4r

f  ‘  n

iiirijihrasj'r  m:  t

4  f *  MS'

*1  fllMir  1'4.4'i  t:i

o.,  ■•*-

liiV'.io^noaiu

i  -  4

|4‘jH'r  .r!i!r»i  in

UU-'*  !i

fr.i  4

fullipir  ,|Ul,  .r:.i

•  .  ♦  -  4

riftrit  ..r  '  -ai  jfr

4  :

If^rKi!  -  Aif  ul  111!

;i!llii-ii-r4r-.A

..|)4  r

IK  wantiin-t  hi

!Ur  p,

Iinthr-Ua,  i%r

l!>-  'i

rif;H,;ip*ralhai,

•J  i.

aloiiij  wUli  1!

r’ir>  ?

Iim.tj:i,,i|j|-i!l  flir

friiUr’

,A!*4l!.;  ♦oil!'?,  ll

'  A  >  "  ^

tlii4  i‘<  iio|  inrvrn\%'i\

filll  t!ir  rv4

,  flir

iTtP'lr  ufi  Air  •

!f4i  t,  40-«4hr  ia

luea

tiavirp  s??Hr?a'4

1  a  1

rnri';fiiti4*4444\

|,M-

r»':|ir4jrpt  :  1

J'.r  ,a.

itilKl!  hu  ll!i!r'  ,

\%  1  ^  ^

rriilila  Afhnt-,  i\

!  -U

-  Iff  !l  1.  hollh  r !|  i

4l4r

alu  '.tk  a  •


a  «a5ifUn;4r%  r*rj|al¥

.i.-~  iut.itr  ?  :  ■  4“  Oi'-"  . f" t  %  a '  u *•!  *.'f

4:! 'OSrnlt.ifrJ  a-,  aril

r  p-aa  h-

iry^AtA  o,,-,  ■, alt  Ml

.|a-^  i.il  |4| V4a>pu*fii¥  .Ui*!
!i  »4  Morals,  A-,  4  !:  I  .vM-

a  <1**4^!  i  iu'»  I',  ao-.o  Isum
!  *  Ur  ^  O'  r  >  r  <  -  O’  t  a  -.ir  m  Iran .


"  .'4  !S  r  !!r  %  .
a  !  r  at  ?'*
4i


to  111!  IlfnlilrfiJ  .  rf
I  f|r|ifiv4ti»oi  «tf  4  <U"a*  .4<'


".r  4  •.«**.  in  fi


6o


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITLITIUX


emotions  and  actions  than  we  ivould  ex{)ect.  Their  sense  turns
to  the  kitchen,  their  play  anci  the  infantile  choice  of  vocation
turn  on  the  phantasy  of  procuring  nutrition,  to  lie  ca>ok  or
candy-maker.  The  importance  of  mom'y  as  a  means  to  power
dawns  upon  them  earlier  aiui  more  fort  ihly,  as  wt*!!  as  the  sense
of  greed  and  economy.  Stereotypies  aiuj  piHiantries  in  eating
are  often  revealed,  courses  of  action  aiH'oriling  to  a  principle
such  as  the  best  is  to  he  put  into  the  mouth  or^  hist,  the
impatient  preferring  the  first  prattuas  Iht*  caiitimis  and
avaricious  the  latter.  Idiosyncrasies  against  taniain  foods,
refusal  of  food,  hasty  swallowing,  art*  t>ften  adhma^d  fii  a-;  traits
of  obstinacy  and  show  the  appIIt:ation  of  tht*  pridihua  tif  imtrifitm
as  an  aggression  against  the  parents,  Aside  fr*un  ihc*  iirganic
diseases  of  later  life  which  go  witii  an  infcuitn"  alimentary
apparatus,  and  among  which  I  have  iunpttasi/.rd  nlwr  the
stomach,  appendicitis,  cancer,  diabtdes,  liver  and  |Oii!  td.ifltlcr
disease,  there  is  inaiiifc‘strf!  in  thv  nrurtPOH  n  sfiauiger
participation  and  fretpient  employmmt  uf  imuiirma!  di-durbanres
of  the  digestive  tract.  It-;  lntimat<’  r«datiim  tn  flo*  p-;vt"hf^  i:^
reflected  m  many  lunnadit'  anti  psvchutir  !:yinptiims.  I  l.rlieve
I  am  on  the  track  of  a  spcadal  cxpealirnt  of  thi ;  wittunif

being  able  to  pres<mt  (‘orndmcNi*  fact-.  A  ntmdicr  mnirotit*

symptoms,  such  as  erythro|)litdd:i,  neuradiv  <d»-.fipatii*ii  and  ndir*,
asthma,  prol)a!)!y  also  vertir/c  Viuidting,  hr,  and

migraine  stand  in  sume  s<wt  nl  ndathm,  widrli  ,f.  vet  rnd
entirely  clear  tome,  witii  a  vtdmd^rv  but  un«  nm.ritmsly
cooperating  activity  of  amis^confr:uliiU!  {“  t-nonn  *’  uf  fhr  rfhrr
authors)  (spasms  of  signmid  firxure.  Ib»!'/knerht ,  SiiU'.er)  and
that  of  abdominal  pressure,  ••vndirlu-  art-,  whieh  are
accomplished  through  the  tlominatum  of  ihr  rerdifon-ed  tirfiori.

Acquisitivenes.s  and  greed  fur  gtdii  and  pHwrr  I  found
strikingly  in  the  hin’ground  and  ;e'-  es';rnti;d  factors  the
egotistic  ideal  of  these  individuah:.


PRAc'I'KWL  PAJrr


t'iiAri''Kk  1

AV-lRfcl',:.  SI  SlltltirSNKSS.  RNVV,  i'knaJ’V.  THK  I  iHKtHSWORV
I',  iiF  I'lii-:  NKi  Kurii-,  Arri-Hi-KrTitm,

si-sai,!-:  iiiAMiFs  in  hik  ruRM  am*  inthnsity  of

illF  SOMA  I  U'  |\Ki;<JN  (ilRtiAN”jAHC.HlN|

I  wish  spi.Mk  uf  thusr  traits  ta'  rharactcT  which  may
hr*  lifninitiNfralini  with  a  rrilaiii  ia*i»iilarity  tn  all  ncurtitirs,  and
mliirli  I'rstrli  rx|ii lu  thr  }>atif*rif\s  striving  with  great
,  diiftilv  ut*tiiUm'4y,  runsrinu-iiy  ur  niictHisciuusly,
liy  iii«Mtis  ul  jHir|vi»;:ivr  thinking^  am!  acting,  ur  flirnugl'i  an
fs-.jirsia!  atf an'as'nst'iil  u!  %vin|ihaus,  t^uvaidr.  grisatcr  jH)sscssi«in,
fiHvatik.  a  liri,;iA*'!nag  m!  hi  >  |anvrr  and  ud1n«‘tuaN  ftnvards  a
df*gr.itLi! SI  .t!af  Liig  uf  uthsr*-:.  All  tiirst*  furnC'i  iif  selR

intr'rf*".!.  air  ar**-,!  'Uiif'i!  inund  Is  * •ur^aj-.t .  and  if  is  rmly  after  a
lirtifi  iii’-ia/a!  fiia!  tss-  thr  inU’litv  prspurnirraiU'r  af

tiiiv‘,,r  rv.i'.aai':  f^V  .d  whi«  li  thr  palimt  d^^Crdvrs  himsclt

and  111’-  c*lU‘ iioiii'iic*!it  !  ir  rant  al*ai  srirnar,

Whilr  jikiviiig,  lui  ifraafa"f\  |!ir  rdis  <d  anscilishness*  one
lifuh*  .asiiti  am!  again  in  liin  altatk';,  in  ids  nrurn’ds,  moreover
ill  the  rm!  rr'ailf-  laiinrd  l»v  ?nr*an  *  f»i  tlu'  !attf‘r,  fi'iat  rxaggerated
ragfi' of  will!  h  \\r  spidviai  in  fhr*  hegiiitdng  :■■■—

I|r  thin-  aiiiii‘.r':  fhr  imprr',  .am  nf  a  drnddr.rga,  tif  iine  ^a^f^ering
frtnii  a  *.|difliiig  td  rntia  hni'.nr's*,  anil  wdirrras  a  firti!ii)iis  grwl
|)rriiiit*‘  idni  f«s  i4>*rf\r  ':rr'rrtlv  nri^fr  rifgdlv  tfiati  decs  the
normal  prrani  liir  •tliriiir  aiarirr,  rnvv,  tirsiir  for  Miastcry,
nialirr,  di*.|Hifaf lon-.fir*:*;,  afnl  dr’  iif*'’  ti»  plrasr  (taK|nrtry).  he  ifi
riarrifirlied  in  ffir  ujirn  (|irrha|r%  at'-o  on  aeeonrif  of  his  dr:a*re  to
plrase'i  fo  jikiv  the  rA!r  *4  the  lienefarfer  and  pafrtin,  of  the
pai  if’er  afsd,  i}fi'-r!!i*',h  ‘.aiiif  tlia!  rids  jdav  is  usually  with-

out  ili'.a'drun*,  tr'adf'':,  soinrwhaf  like  (iregor  W'erles’  truth---'
in  l!»sei|Y,  W'ilf!  !>u»k/’  ( hte  raniitd  estimate

strmigjv  eriiHiaii  tlse  iinir  4i%  *s  iisirda  fti  dr^are  possession  of
rvrrvtiiffig ,  Ids  fti  wd'.h  t*»  l*e  the  tir*1  one  earifiot

he  iivrr  sf :itrf!  rvrii  f!iiai|di  fh,r  ofivions  fraifs  of  idmrarter
fiirriisli  fhr  ftue.f  enfit radisforv  jd*  tore.  What  reallv  drives  the
|i;tiie!if  fiiiwnrd  is  fhr  oveiweerdug  desire  for  absolute  power:
and  iiiasitiiirli  as  his.  ego  rimsr’ionsness  fakes  offener*  a,t  many  of
ills  uirmp:  ■  ilia  aiiiir}i  as,  the  power  of  others?  way  prevent  liin

c»i


62  THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

triumph,  he  conceals  the  hindering  traits  of  c'hanidt^r  from
himself  and  others,  and  having  full  insight  into  his  hostile
impulses  and  their  unpopularity,  he  allows  iiimself  to  he  guided
in  the  open  in  his  conscious  activities  by  the  iiUsil  virtue.
Notwithstanding  this,  however,  his  heightened  aggressive
tendency  betrays  itself—naniely  in  the  dreams  in  inieoiitrolled
acts,  in  his  attitude,  mimicry  ami  gt‘sture  am!  in  tlmt  psydiir
being  Geschehen  the  expressjoa  for  whidi  is  tlie  neurosis.

Concerning  the  question  of  transmissilulity  iif  sueli
characteristics,  yes,  also  their  antagonistie  arratigfunent,  tluTe
as  a  rule  develops  that  they  have  hven  cu’(i!iired  as  siHanulary
guiding  principles  after  the  pattern  oi  tlu'  fatluu*,  the  mother,
or  representative  persons  ami  are  in  ntnvi  a-  infifailtsi,  Hn*
neurotic  psyche  fuuls  it  in  its  (uvn  t»r  in  Mune  repre^mfative
material,  for  the  purpose  of  whidi  the*  chnilde*  plav  '*  the
cleft  consciousnt‘ss  uf  society—  is  in  luanv  csist' ft  is

then,  however,  the  device  of  tin*  neurcisis,  to  tHuieral  and  diaieg*
those  hostile  aggressive  traits  which  are  frrquruifh  umaiitrthio
for  the  fictitious  purpose  of  obtaining  a  htncjitfuiin'*  of  tin*
ego-con.sciousness— ami  to  obtain  tiie  latter  g<cil  tliron,;h  a  iianr*
intensive  utili'/ation  of  artificer;  -iditm  !>y  nuMns  of  CiUitrasting
characteristics  and  neurotic  syniptoui^,  '  i  hir  ir.tdilv  l^rroini  s
convinced  that  the  genero<ity\)f  sucli  fiatiimts  ot»«’V,:  tin*  r.amo
goal  of  the  will  t(i  p()W(‘r  "  wliidi  tin*  patic*nt  r.frivfv:  to
approach  also  through  flit*  !ndit!itc*ning,  of  hi;  aggre.dvf*
tendency,  his  avarice  and  tliriftiness.

One  of  my  patients  who  came  uml«*r  tJiv  id».rrva!itm  on
account  of  stammering  and  depros  -ivr  ;itates,  pi*rmiU«nl  ta
appear  in  his  environmmt  a  dctoftiiin  cmly  of  hi  ;  g,eiieio  .ifv,
One  day  he  itiade  a  voluntary  to  rt  eniain  in  4tltifv,

and  told  me  this  story  with  an  apparentlv  diroiflv  a  .iM'iafrti
statement  that  he  fedt  unusually  depresNod  thaf  dav.  Along
with  this  his  .staniinering  likevvist*  befsimr  mtirr*  pronoum  rrl
The  exaggerated  state  of  Ids  neurted--^  shnwod  il-.rlf  to  a
result  of  his  generosity  as  n*sult  of  whirh  In*  fnd  ,  hinisrlf
degraded  and  one  js  justiftiHl  in  rx|HHling  a  rovrlaflmi  of  the
real  working  of  this  individual  in  furthrr  ads,  Ihouvlif';  aiul
dreams  as  running  with  the  dovfdopifig  neurotic  ';vmpfotiis
not  because  he  has  rc*presst*d  Ids  avariciou';fir’'‘;%  or
corresponding^  sexual  imfudse-^-  imt  hevnxeie  hr  has  lirvialrd
too  far  from  his  goal— nanu*Iy,  to  increase  Ids  ptissessions,  fie
must  therefore  rio  something  wfdi*h  will  bring  1dm  bark  ft»  it.
He  tells  me  further,  It  was  a!rea<ly  far  after  the  diiuit*r  hour,

I  felt  very  hungry,  and  fessides  a  friend  awaitcil  mr  in  a
restaurant  where  we  were  to  dine  together.  I  had  fit  walk
therefore  the  (longri  distancf*  fo  that  place.  Mv  friern!  still
waited.  After  dinner  I  felt  somewhat  better/*  '  11iis  iiirans


AVARICl^  SrSPlclOUSNESS.  ENVY,  KT(\


63

that  hv  bf'gaii  a!  oiirr  to  a‘;airi  anti  nuxdv  thv  journey  on

ftiiit,  lutlwilhsl.ifulin;.;  tlo|)r€\^siiin  autl  rtnalt'zvtnis.

liic*itlt*iitallv.  Ilf*  WON  ah!o  to  lot  tho  frioutl  wait,  wlut*h  is  with
iiiaiiv-  iK'Hiaii thi*  i'Miu*eai<H!  ino<!r  of  asserting*-  tlioir  (irMiro

for  iiia!iina!U"v.

l‘hr  vt'i’v  lit '4  rnaruovital ittn,  af'tit»us  ajul  tairiiiiHUUt*ations  of
tiu*  jKifiriti  in  fho  inf'-rma.*  t>l  tlit*  ph%‘'->H*ian,  trc‘t|in'nt!y  tHnitaiii
Iht*  iiiii.n!  iiiipoilaii!  la  thv  tii;a’a'a»  infa'hani^rii  anti  charartrr
itr\ r'i-iijiiiicaiL  1,.  :'-h  fu-rausc*  fhr  patiiait  \s  as  yvi  nett  in

iif  |•ali^^tnl  aif^a  in  fhr  [ifr-rnta*  of  thr  ph v*-aoian..  A,s
l!a*  .ihiHf"  quHtf'-!  iMtn  nt  in!ra4ut‘f4  hini'a*!!'  in  tnr,  lu*  toltl  me
rasiailly,  tiial  hi.  Lifiu!’  ua-^  fetf  wfl!  to  i!o,  am!  that  he  wa:?
uiuAU*  In  iinilvo  %.uniiHn--.  Un‘  iho  treatment,  After  a

ii-rtaifi  tifiHn  !!irir  i  uih^  of  luno.-atv  to  li|.^ht  that  in*  itercnvtnl
iiif*  in  flu  .  ill  oi4u.'r  to  olaain  a  smaller  <*!iarge.  He

j.’iiiwrit  iiiiirsell  io  I -c'  .iv.u'iiiMii  .u-.o  ui  many  ollttn*  re.s|iect?>,
!'ii!  at  tJif*  ■..iini'  fimo  }ie-  omlf-aviafs!  to  lUna'ive  i)iith  hiiiisi^lf
am!  ,  !!!  tlu .  iraHai  Hoth  ot  ihf'Nf'  trait-i  wt*re  afr;u

hv  the  l-iihrr,  Jinl  nnr  |,aUfait  was  laiioht  ntinginess
liv  tiir  Liiter  with  '.Ijri  ial  ‘.lir.-.,  I!r  was  often  tolii  nuiney
is  might,  |t»r  inr»io-v  rin  lim;;  fan  h**  had.**  I'lins  it  eoiiUI

iiiif  he*  avoiiics!  ih.ri  ot;r  p4f!*'-ite  %\\in  wsf'.  ah'f’atlv  in  rhilclhenHl
\riv  ainhsliMii,  .iisl  t  V  i  siusir.ii,  havin'/^  ialt'r  lalh'n  inhs  an
uiuertaili  'aftiaiioii  ami  hidimin,*  that  hf*  tvaild  not  r'cMeh  the
liateriia!  sisndaiti,  iinoir^A,  liioot  tnr.wr-,  took  redtigi*  um!f*r  tin*
|j!’fss:.lilr  id  lii  ,  ai.shilsou-.to-  ..  iii  ilje  drvief’  tii  eonvitiee  the
hither  i4'  hi',  nltf'f  ise!|th" '.'.I'.e  .  ,  .uni  of  tin*  tither  failmes  of  his’
I'ilni  at  tonal  |iiaii-..  hv  irl.ufung^  thi's  t  hihthood  <lt*fei4,
Nfamiiierin;'.  Throindi  hi-.  ■  taimneting,  he  s|ioile}l  lus  fallirrhs
j»lav  saiM*  he  'Wsi-.  noi  ahlr  !o  hr  tile  rate,  i>r«/:utsr  he
war;  !iof  ahh*  fo  sni|i4‘.''.  the  keif‘i,

C  hir  t  liUurrn  howr-ver,  agree-,  witli  tln»sr  eltihlren  rvho  see  in
the  aiii:es.:ii'0  of  lot  time  lt;*e  ro.nl  to  jiower.  Similarly  hal  itn,
tlii-;  *’  waH  to  jsow rf  "  a/.-amn-'f!  tin-  enternal  fman  of  ‘'tingiiies^
ami  avariie  in  .»»  far  ,0  hr-  fiaffn-r  devebrjosi  tlu'sc*  teiidf^neies.
It  wa-.  oi}lv  t|tr  i  on! f'.'idif  f ion  h-rtwren  a  vnlgar  aval iejotisness
and  the  f”go  idf-al  whali  foreof!  him  a  eottt'f'aiMient.  of  flte
illi|iidse  fo  a.v..i|aie  |i?  iiiesir.  ni  whit'h  fte  wished  fo  doiitiiiate
}iis  hifliet,  am!  i«iri  ed  him  ft*  fin*  .nhstiftilitm  <d  file  stammering.
In  t!ie  finiiou  ?  oim  m*  *4  far  Jiiaiv'Y.  the  origin  ul  Ids  de-.iia*  for
|iii%'S«’'*n:i‘ofi  fnadriii  !fr  '.nffeiTd  fitaniinallv  lonsfantlv

ill  lii'.  iidnin  v  l'rof!'i  •.foiiuiilt  and  iiite-.timd  ili-,t»rder*;.  whitdi  wtre
tfo'  f*\|irr  .'‘iiofi  of  a  lirf r-dil .ov  inferiority  of  the  gas! ro-intestifial
flail.  Ill  tlir  f.itoiha,  -.f’mMtJj  am!  inte'-dinal  tilsorders  idayed
all  iiti|;ioi1,iftl  |h!r  The  |iatirnt  trealled  very  tti'sliiirfly  !uiw
in*  iu'iit  to  r!ris\  lom'^rlf  a{i|ieti/iflg  foml  ill  spite  of

iitifigrr  aiit!  tifsirr,  r%'!irfra*-i  his  parents  ami  lirnlher-r-i  ami  !driter?i


64


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUllON


consumed  them  with  pleasure.  Whenever  he  could  he  gathered
foods,  bonbons  and  fruits  to  be  feasted  upon  later.  In  this
tendency  to  gather,  we  already  see  the  influence  of  the
developing  craving  for  security,  which  is  eunshintly  rndcMvoring
to  adjust  in  some  way  or  other  the  feeling  of  degradation.

How  far,  however,  this  may  reach  may  he  shown  by  a
constructed  example  which  I  am  able  to  verify  with  analogies
from  our  case.  The  eagerness  for  powtT,^  and  throiigii  it  for
possession,  may  be  stirred  up  by  the  feeling  of  iidVriority  to
such  a  point  that  one  fnids  it  at  phases  of  the  psyclnc  develop¬
ment  when  one  would  least  expect  it.

A  small  patient  of  this  sort  will  at  first,  it  is  true,  only  t!e?dre
to  have  the  apple  w'hich  is  forbidden  him,  in  seeing  his  father
and  brother  eating  the  same.  Envy  will  l>egin  b>  .stir  itscdf,  and
after  a  brief  period  such  a  ciiild  may  Inave  reactuMl  fin*  stagr
in  his  deliberatene.ss  and  contcmplatum  whcm  out  of  tin*  striving
for  equality  he  will  attemj)!  to  prevent  «»tln‘rs  from  having
anything  before  he  has  it.  It  will  soon  havt*  rc*;n;hed  so  far  in
the  elaboration  of  this  albeit  only  .^lightly  important  idtsi,  a:  to
have  at  his  disposal  all  sorts  of  preparations  and  facilities,  it
will,  especially  in  the  presciu  e  of  an  uriginaliy  inferii»r  muscular
system,  train  itself  for  the  whole  year  by  cdimbing  .ind  junqnng
in  order  to  be  able  to  clind^  a  tree  as  a  ntnster  in  thf*  fall.  1‘he
human  psyche  is  not  able  to  acccnmf  always  for  ti<  titivais  gicds.
and  thus  the  child  may  apparently  frf*e  himself  from  his  lacd.
employ  his  dexterity  in  sports  atul  gymnastics,  in  tin*  sea  vie  r  of
other  tendencies,  which  serve  iii  a  different  manner  id  .  capo
consciousness  soni(*what  like  our  modern  States  <*innbti  I  our
war  preparations  without  even  knowing  the  future  enemy.

The  father  of  our  patient  may  have  easilv  bf*en  taken  by  the
boy  as  an  incidental  i'xarnph*  berama*  he  t*xc'r!led  Ids
environment  in  greatness,  powt'r,  wcsalth  am!  sin  ial  sf.imling,
If  the  boy  is  to  emerge  out  of  his  irwuairitv  Into  wld«  h  In*  has
been  plunged  by  his  <'onstiturionaI  inferiewity  he  mu  a  arrange
his  preparations  for  life  in  accordance  with  a  .et  imiiit  of  \it*w
as  after  a  plan  (blue  print).  A  marked  exhibition  o'(  the  guiding
principle  toward  the  paternal  ideal  (Vaterifleall  is  in  il  .elf  <juilr
a  neurotic  trait,  becau.se  in  it  we!  may  f*omfwe!iem!  flu*  cfitire
misery  of  the  child  who  endeavors  to  emerge  front  his  iiueciirity.
The  craving  for  security  (SiduTungstendeir/d  of  t!ir  iifnirod:-!
leads  the  patient  in  this  way  out  of  the  sphere  of  his  own  power
and  forces  him  into  a  path  which  leads  aw'av  from  lasditv,  first
because  he  takes  for  his  objesd  his  fc-tiori  to  be  ecjiial  to  his
father  or  even  to  excel  him  and  is  therefore  forced  to  forituilafr,
arrange  ^  and  influence  his  apperreption  nf  life  ntiiirr  its
compulsion,  and  second  fierause  oru*  can  never  Mua-tuu!  ifi
carrying  out  such  a  fiction  in  real  life  **xc^*pf  in  a  psychosis ,


AVARIC/E,  srSPiriOESNESS,  ENVY,  EIXA


^^5

•  In  this  thrrr  cit’vrlujis  in  tlu^  psy^Rr  uf  the  clulil  an

intensive  searching,  weighing,  ami  nu^asuring  feiulency  of
which  I  sluill  have*  tti  say  Sinnething  mure.  That  whiili  is
aceordifig  to  inv  f^xjitTiriu'c  primarity  respunsihlf  fur  the  loo
rigiti  a>siiii!|itioii  of  tin*  paternal  guiding  principles,  may  he
clisccivcTn!  ill  .111  iiivestigatitiii  inio  the  seKual  rules.  The
neitrolii'iilly  pr«Hiispu%fd  child,  ur  as  I  may  say,  the  child
laliiiriitg  iiiider  llir  pn-.-'aiH^  uf  a  feeling  uf  inferiority,  desires
to  hiHsifiie  4  iiiati,  a*'-:  suuti  as  liie  neurosis  develops,  he  a  man.
In  hiitli  iii‘4afii  es  hi"  *'4ii  mdv  iamdtu'i  hiiir*a‘!f  in  sut'h  a  manner
as  if  lit'  \vrfe  a  mail  tir  ^liall  tuH'ome  une.  The  exaggerated
casiving  fur  stHiirilv  thive.  a!“vu  in  tfiis  instanee  tin*  attitude  of
the  t!rvr!opiria,  iieniagii'  intu  the  halt  id'  tite  fletiun,  so  that  in
soiiif*  iiedam  f*'-  enm  eiiiir.eimi^  aimulation  may  come  into  play,
and  a  gir!  fur  iii-aattre  in  «*fdei'  to  escape  a  fe«*ling  of  inferiority
liiav  in  the  !'<egi!ui!in-,;  hmiciw  in  eunseiou-,  imilalioii  masetdine
g«*sliires  of  her  f.tllier.,  'There  i-.  no  reason  for  the  assumption
that  hetsiriM*  of  fhi'-  •J‘e  imi.’d  !h*  in  Ima*  uadi  her  fafhru'S  l*he
mere  io-'er>valu.iliun  of  the  ma’.eulifo*  piim'i|d«'  suflices  for  this,
may  iu*Vfnihr'lr".%  aI  he  islrn  a‘‘  inlatuatioii  hy  the  girl

Inu'seif  Wf’l!  a%  l»v  hei  mviiiam  red,  .••hould’ the  preparations
fiir  file  irjiitr  idKivtiiTv  demand  a  hiutiu''  o!  luvr  or  a  marriage,
hi  otir  iM-e  !:ie  ,, jtidjii,;.*  line  tfo*  *i.Mn]an-  dofv  f'goddea!,
ti'aiedtu fited  it'-rll  llo'MU-di  a  »  h,m-'e  ot  f«am  #ujtl  lamteid  into  a
U'avill|;  to  r\ei-l  file  lathei  ill  Ursdth,  eslefun,  ami  along  with
fhi*s  in  iioiidiise',  'I  hr  iiiijuirv  into  hi*,  tovn  sf'xnal  idle,  seta,  in
inlemavfiv  and  fvpii  .dlv  as  -.I'xua!  i  wherehy  the

patient  in  hi-*  tt*rljng  id’  inlrriio if v,  appercrives  fite  smallness
of  lii'S  iid'.Jdii^*  r;eiida!  .  a*,  lumpaird  rvdli  tiir-  largeness  of  the
paternal  one'.,  a,*,  a  hdfer  •.#•!  leu!..,  a%  a  watt!  itf  imisetiliiiity.
tiis  atiihilion  widt  h  -.liall  rjethlf*  him  lise  tnd  «d  his

stale  «if  iiifrrisU  il V ,  »  on^i'irlled  iiiin  lu  a  lieightr iiillg  of  llis  s:e||Se
Ilf  shame,  in  order  1 1.01.1  he^  gefolaY'.  nia»-'  md  he  ^.een  in  tlit^  event
4if  an  f^xpttsmr  fhi  t  a  .r  hr  i-.  roidel  To  this  iimv  hr  mitlfnl  that
lie  was  of  jrwidi  dr''. <  rut  He  had  hraia!  rertain  Iliflig.s  alnUit
rtri'Uim  ami  ihr  id^mi  liiat  he  was  (Va'rkdr/.t)

lirdittiril  ffir  !!!■'■•  masenline  prtdf*sf  drove

fiiiii  tt»  a  i!r ej  .idatiofi  of  wuman.  a.*;  it  hr  !ia»l  to  gave  inaicif  in
tii'*  V  III  fid’;  .md  r-.uoe  into  llir  fineit  aht.unifialde

rr!,ilititis||i|i  with  }|i’  niothri'.

i!ilt  alsii  willi  tr'.prif  to  Id',  frfher,  who' e  prrfrr«‘nre  for
idrii'-.el!  lie  ipiitird  tliron-di  d.iiduttud ii'  atljustliirnl,  lie  harltorecl
ho^|^|r  tliulg'j.ll  ■;  wiorh  hr»  alisr  esprriallv  proildlient  wllrfl  f!ie
f.ltlier  Ci%‘rr  r|iipli.ra/rd  hi-,  uWfi  MineriiU'itV  to  ihi  W‘!d«dl  tie  hall
a  Iiiaricrs!  ititiiieilioti  III  Ihi-.  Hiao%  of  ferdings  the  !talirflt
'%ritig|it  iirirfitat'ofc  .Old  hamd  iudv  in  the  thought  ft*  hrcmiie
Mifierit'ir  to  Ids  f.iflier,  to  hmanr  titure  manly  tfiaii  he..


66


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


He  had,  too,  as  often  happens  in  such  cases,  uride
attempts  at  enlarging  his  genitals  or  bringing  abotit  er<
This  route,  which  leads  to  sexual  precocity  and  ro^-sturt
was  soon  abandoned  by  him,  because  his  father  wa.rne
against  it  on  numerous  occasions.  Thus  there  rem2Line<
substitution  for  his  masculine  protest,  only  efforts  to  b
richer,  more  honored  and  wiser  than  his  father,  and  to  d<
his  environment.

His  father  placed  great  hopes  in  the  patient's  ora
talents,  which  had  shown  themselves  already  in  childhoo
not  allow  himself  to  be  deceived  by  the  inild  stamrner
the  boy,  and  hoped  he  would  make  a  law  career.  In  this  r
the  patient  was  able  to  strike  at  the  father's  most  vuln
point,  and  thus  he  sank  into  a  more  pronounced  stammei
neurotic  manifestation  of  the  insurance  against  the  supe
of  the  father,  a  manifestation  whose  inception  was  given  1:
a  stammering  home  teacher.  In  the  course  of  time,  this  syr
gained  many  other  uses,  for  example,  the  one  that  throu
stammering  he  always  gained  time  in  which  to  weig'
words,  to  avoid  demands  of  the  family,  to  utilize  the  coni
of  others  as  well  as  that  prejudice  because  of  which ,  onb
was  expected  of  him,  which  he  then  managed  to  fulfil  '
It  is  interesting  that  his  quite  apparent  stammering  vs
obstacle  to  his  courtship,  that  it  even  expedited  matters,
which  becomes  quite  comprehensible  from  our  stand
according  to  which  we  assume  the  existence  of  a  quite  pre
type  of  girl  which  cannot  omit  from  the  conditions  of  the:
that  the  man  of  their  choice  must  be  beneath  them,  so  tha
may  with  certainty  rule  over  him.  Especially  hostile  fe
against  his  parents,  brothers  and  sisters  and  the  servai
put  a  stop  to,  through  the  development  of  a  new  g
principle  which  was  to  make  of  him  a  benevolent  man.
new  evolution  took  place  under  a  nightly  confession  tl
which  he  reproached  himself  for  his  wickedness  and  arr
qualms  of  conscience.  His  growing  knowledge  thus  sJ
him  the  way,  through  a  cultural  subterfuge  to  a  heighten
his  ego-consciousness.

The  want  of  a  direct  aggressiveness  showed  itself  in  th<
and  phantasies,  albeit  also  in  his  good  progress  at  school,  s
he  was  victorious  over  all  his  classmates.  A  growing  ter
towards  sarcasm  and  exasperation  of  others  was  at  this  tir
only  manifest  expression  of  his  former  often  violent  a.ggr<
ness  which  gained  for  him  the  nickname  of  “blood-leech.*
combative  attitude  played  an  important  role  in  the
of  Judaism,  which  was  reflected  in  an  act  of  compulsion
age  of  twelve.  Whenever  he  entered  a  swimming  pool  h
to  cover  his  genitals  with  his  hands  and  immediately  sub:


AVARiii*:,  srsinriorsNKss.  knaa\  etc*.


t>7


his  hv:id  iiiithT  the  wa/trr.  wlwrv  hr  krpt  it  until  he  romilct!
so  that  iir  ollrli  r.iliir  to  ihr  surtax T  gas|iiti^;  hir  air  :iiu\
exhaiLsIrti.  Mlir  rrvtMlril  the  mental  rimtrnf  tti  he  a

striving  o(  hi-:  jiluinla’a*  li>  hring  ahimt  an  etjuality  oi  gniiialia
The  forty-aiinth  year  : aeian^diug  fu  the  rhi  jewi-.h  laiv;.,  with
which  hf*  had  lieeiifiie  aeijiiaiiifri!  rduu'tiy  hrirr?\  tlu*  Vi-ar  o(  the
jiibiirc\  ill  whitii  all  aetcN  wne  aiaiin  m  air  rtjual.  Ide.i-.  uf  {hi*;
Siift,  and  tlir  sinitiif.iiifenis  euiu'r.iimrnt  ul"  tlu*  geiiifaSia  *:huwr»i
the  wav  In  the  inirriuaiation.  cine  mav  almost  ilraw  tii«’
cmiclitsiofi  that  a!  In-.  -4.0011101  iiii;  \\a  .  intemleji  to  m.ike  hini
with  a  ''.tijini^eu! v  ol  fa-*  l-ittoa,  ot  all  jjerijdr,  iiueanneh  e* .
his  shitic'f  iiig  W'a  .  .ill  t4i  44elr'  flirira  a  ,  eviai  paiiiliil  to  llirite

Hia  avatier,  lits  v! ai-iiic--,  wefo  aei  . »iditu*lv  .u'livr  in  fiir
dirreliioi,  n.tfiirlv,  lu  elear  flu*  tirid  ot  sti|jrrit.4ilirs  tif
iilhers,  to  iii-airf*  luiu  .ooui'.t  inrflirr  df'^oaidalion  aiu!  hrlitliirig
ftiroiigli  povertv,  tlni".  hr  w.r*  <  oij;,prl!rd  mailo^dlv  to  ev|iafiil
tlu’*:r  'UH'ofidaiv  ilifri'iiuns  an»l  to  fotfnutalr  am!  evalu.ifr  |h%
t*xprrif*lit  rs  .M  t'ou!i!i;,»  tsj  tluan  iu  ofdrv  lt»  rrarii  the  hriglitr|iiii|,»
of  hi^  rj^o  1  o?i ,,  ;mu-, nr lu".  ma--Mt!inr  |srofr’4,  ft  onlv
lirutrr  siuli  whrir  l!us''te;di  vrvrlation  id’  llu'-.r  li  ait-*

of  char. ii  f#*t  .i  !»jvvr!!lig  of  hi  .  r-M?  Iineht  411  -e  fliai  fr-  .Itppie  .  ,rd
their  apjiatnd  setivitv.

It  were  .i!i  af>'.uiilifv  to  writ  to  4  in

a  riirdico  |ra4  iioloi-ai  4I  ijUr-Jjie;,  fo  »  onsniri  pro|iIf"  hki*  t!;e
above  4-.  inuudlv  infeiiu:  I  ho'-r  *.*  !io  hoe  jn  im  liiuJiia'i  in  fhr*

ilirei'titiii  I  v.  e.h  to  iriiund  mI  tljr*'  vra  v  •duan*;,  roja|jrir.4lii!f  v
traits  of  lis.ll.efr?,  of  4  W'oltliV  fU'.toira  tnv  f  }u*  rr-.l  }  W•i^|l  tiJ
rrmiml  Ifinri  of  l\oi.  hrUrn  aiild*-.  ua-.r  ‘  faiirmr  vi/  :  I  liavr

never  if|Vf*‘4i|,rifr-4  ihr  -.Iiiil  »4  a  wiel.rd  man.  loil  t  oner  Itreaifir
ae«:|tuiiri|rit  with  ilir  '.on!  of  4  oam  I  wj.%  -.h*tfkr4

In  aiiollirf  i  .I’oa  fitr  Ii.itnir  t-a'  !lir  jvarn  r'  'Jiowrd  ilvrlf  mil,
a.-:  a  -..ifrlv  lirvi*  !■'  fof  flu*  «  ♦  atJ  pers  ■  at  iojt  of  a  frrlilig  of
clegradaf iufo  btif  at^ovi"  „dl  a*,  .u?  .ufhnr  tft  flir  »a'*thr

rr:iviii|,^  fur  *:mtrilv.  A  fofte  hve  vr*i?  *4fl  jialirnl  wdso  *ai{’frrrit
tfirotigiiiiiil  life  Ifiifii  |r.\*  liu  if4|aitfau  V..  and  W-e.  jutrairtl  lav
silieitial  itieav,  *:f'iowri!  ,111  r'.prtaally  nuahnl  Irndriier  {o  degfaitr
others .

Wr  know  this-  frail  of  ihaiaitrr  from  the  de-a-’ripfinn  of  ihr
previous  rasr  wlirre  it  -.rtxrd  a-.  4  a!*wav-^  ihsra  fu  do  awaty
c'im**s  oivii  irrliiig  til  iidVriofil V  Whtli  thi-.  fendefu'V  fhrre  1.
imtially  a^soi  iatrf}  r^aggrrafrit  tiu'4rn*;t  am!  rnvv.  mdiiAi  bavt*
:fir  tiirif  ubirrl  a":  iiriira.f it  ■  p-.v*  Id*''  de^lefitir-v  ttie  fal-aliralitiij
I'f  the  arar«il  am!  of  r^i^rtirine-.  :\  tefidefu  V,  too.  fa

raiise  iiflier-'*  buitllv  .ilii!  |e.v«''hi«  pain,  waU  lileud'r  kmwv  lurw  l«i
assert  it-irlf  in  an  a.i'r'Tiifiiaied  in.tiutrr  The  ali-frauf,  |niiding

poifit  lif  xlr%x  Ilf  t!ir  |i,if.iefi!,  to  4'**.nre  td'i  dufiiinatana  po-.lfpirt,,
hi  hr  abiitm,  :ip|irafeii  fs^  t^r  Mliviott'dv  thi ratrtirih  nfid  eufiitir|lr»|


68


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


a  streno-thening  of  fictitious  guiding  principles.  Reminiscences
ouc  of  Ms  infantile  period  were  utilized  in  the  neurosis,  as  result
of  which  he  came  near  being  the  victim  of  a  homosexualist.  He
was  raised  as  an  only  boy  among  his  sisters,  a  situation  which,
according  to  my  experience,  frequently  narrows  the  understand¬
ing  of  one’s  own  sexual  role.

Of  importance  was  his  attitude  toward  his  father,  because  it
likewise  drove  him  to  strengthened  security  devices.  The  father,
namely,  was  brutal,  egotistical,  tyrannical,  so  that  it  was  difficult
for  the  boy  to  assert  his  own  value  in  his  presence.  Several
love  adventures  had  thrown  the  father  into  quite  difficult
situations  which  our  patient  utilized  as  mementoes  in  his
developed  psychosis.  This  mistrust  was  directed  against  all
women.  Throughout  life  he  remained  ready  to  make  sacrifices
for  his  sisters,  but  he  had  already  apperceived  this  fact  with  an
unusual  amount  of  feeling,  and  readily  developed  from  this  trains
of  thought  which  were  to  show  how  readily  he  gave  in  to
women.  Incidentally,  he  was  able  to  advance  quite  considerably
in  this  direction  in  order  to  be  able  to  emphasize  sharply  this
impression  for  himself.  It  was  then  that  he  was  prepared  to
withdraw  himself  from  women.

He  transformed  into  a  sexual  image,  feelings  of  inferiority
which  were  present  in  his  childhood.  The  reason  for  his  unmanly
bearing — for  the  homosexualist  wanted  to  take  him  for  a  girl —
he  sought  for  and  found  in  an  incidental  Cryptorchism  caused  by
a  patent  canal.  At  the  age  of  eight  he  watched  a  boy  in  the
act  of  masturbation.  Hie  puer  ei  semen  efacularit  in  os — which
he  looked  upon  as  a  further  sign  of  his  feminine  role.  So  long
as  he  took  his  father  as  his  guiding  principle,  he  exhibited  the
ordinary  dexterities  intended  to  make  him  equal  to  his  father.
He  secretly  consumed  his  father’s  whiskey,  endeavored  to  bring
his  mother  over  to  his  side,  and  already  early  in  life  had  chosen
his  father’s  trade,  by  means  of  which  he  was  also  able  to  satisfy
his  sadistic  tendencies  which  were  excited  by  his  feeling  of
inferiority  and  his  striving  towmrd  the  paternal  guiding  line — to
choose  the  trade  of  a  butcher.  He  was  also  fond  of  bringing  his
vulgar  tendencies  into  execution  upon  girls  and  women — ^he  was
in  the  habit  of  biting  them,  beating  them,  and  took  part  one
time  in  a  sexual  assault,  when  he  carried  out  coitus  per  anum  in
order  to  avoid  a  possibility  of  alimony.  His  experience,  however,
which  showed  him  in  the  complete  brutal  character  of  his  father,
drove  him,  because  of  the  threatening  of  a  lawsuit,  and  the
degradation  associated  with  it,  to  a  neurotic  subterfuge.  He
utilized  his  already  accentuated  mistrust  in  women  for  the
purpose  of  torturing  them  with  fits  of  jealousy,  of  bringing  them
entirely  under  his  influence  and  to  insure  in  this  manner  the
appearance  of  dominancy.


AVARIC1*;,  SUSinciiU-ISNESS.  ENVY,  ETC.  69

His  fr.rstn'  uiu!  tin*  a.-^siH'iatrtl  iuiputtnu*v  served

his  need  for  security  in  the  s.une  manner  as  ilia  his  animosity
towards  woiium.  He  siunved  |n’elcrcnce  fur  tht^  seduction  of
marrict!  wtuiieii  in  order  to  tlunn  disapjKiintnumts  through

his  impoti'iu'y ,  at  ilw  s»imo  tiiiu\  !unvever,  to  gain  in  a  sportive
iiiamier  a  suhstaiitiat iuii  4,4  Ids  ludicd’  that  all  women  were  bad.
Also  in  his  i'onipiiis.ury  ideas  tlii.,  lemlency  to  eause  pain
manifcrded  1  luis  rvon  ilmiag  his  treatment  he

experieiHaal  siiiltleii  iiiipul-dmis  lo  bite  and  bmit  a  language
teachi'r  while  taking  a  irs-.on  Iroiu  her.  because  ht*  devtdojnni
ideas  that  sht*  had  a  lovm'  wh^m  :  \u^  preterred  to  the  patl«mt.
This  sadistic  rr.iction  to  a  feeling  oi  suburdinacw%  as  a  masculine
priilest  .iia.iiir"4  a  t'rrling^  «.!|'  btdiig  unmaulv.  titemdnafe,  Inul  its
origin  in  cldldluHsl  aiui  runs  Ihtsuigh  Ids  esitire  neuriisds.  !t  was
not  ilitliriih  to  jnsnag  that  his  impotem'y  similarly  obeyetl  the
goal  tti  find  a  ineaivs  whereby  to  c'-asipe  the  call  of  Una%  t!ie
subinaiinaf ioii  tii  a  wilr,  a  teutif'uc'V.  hnuawei,  which  found  its
caniliniiat  i»m  i?i  a  hut  her  degradafittn  id’  wonunn

A‘‘-  lie’  *..ov  on  jUn.|uH‘t  i»i  ihueiriating  Ids  leacdier,  he
iinmrdia.1r!v  hei,  br-eac.  .e  hv  knew  that  ^lH■  wa'*.  tiepeiulmil
iifioii  ipvta:;’  hd!i  levs.ios  flrforo,  lanvevf’r,  Imviiig  <lom' fids  hr*
uitflcu toislv  4  tnlii  a!  r  a iiir/u inn  m!  ihr  r.Kprn.Nr  < d'  taldng  lesfaats,
fi'Hliiti  them  beyoiiil  Id',  mr'air-.  wliit  h  t  ouh!  be  rea^Uly  .:ieen  ti*  be*
a  false  imrjHrdve  wilmit-nei  of  the  vmv  wrll-toaht  imlividtuil.  In
the  same  maiiijri  tje  itijih-  if.e  of  the  oiH'asitmally  reeurriiig
rendidsi  r!t>  r‘s  id'  im  rsfiiuir;  thiMights.  in  tirder  tii  bei’cam*
ajiprehefr':ivrtv  *  ium.  td  !d  ■  uiffTiority,  of  Ids  criminal
terid«*neie-»  a*-  'ouii  ;c-;  wanurti  f  .our  inti>  |dav.  Urns  hi*
f*sta!dis!ied  Id".  Ii4".e  i»f  epec,a'M!\,  la;  inraijs  mI  wldt'll  he  lliusi
insure  idm-sdf  .»-;dii‘.f  tfir  iiardnini-  gem/ler,  as  a  lawsuit  td  wdiieh
he  seemrd  to  be  a^'■l.^'ed  nf  la  .tin/  '.upeihuaty  thr<nig}u.inf  life.

111!'  r-.sr!irr  u!  Id-',  c  om|ai!'do!i  tiivvar<b;  an  iuMirancr  ay, aim;!
ivoiiieri  lay  ia  flir  frai  that  Itr  itd,dit  rxprrirnee  in  marriage  or
love  disappcdnfmeri!  wi*dt  h  he-  ndajo  atfrilnite  to  his  uninanlifiess,
Iriasmnrli  a*i  he  sought  id*'.  irtiaUr  goal  in  tlie  pri»of  of  Ids  inight
fie  ivas  britim!  to  bn  ome  n^*  lined  fowaus!  caution  and  neuitrtic
saihterfiiges,  In  thi-.  p.dietO  a.lsii  tlo-rr  were  |iresent  iMflv
gasIfO'iiitesfiiKi!  di-4nrb.im  r am!  as  a  peripheral  sign  td
itifrrifiritv  the  fatal  iiigidfial  lierida  In  his  sort  of  lovt^uiefivifv.
exaggeratet!  avarii  Irnf  iiM-lf  .e.  tlie  mod  useful  meaiw.  ftu'  an
i!isiiraiit;r  afeiiiist  a  too  far  rractufut  snrrentter,  In  cusler,  lunv-
fwrr,  fliaf  this  avarit  r  fiiav  be  of  use,  it  must  rmbrace  the  wtiole
s|i!if'rr  of  Id'*-;  lib**’:  rrl.i! itiie,,  and  mm:!  I^e  tunnipresrul.  It  rtuc'-f
ill  tiii'ii  be  ';!||ipof Ini.  it  mii'd  br  a-.sisted  }iV  all  -stul*'.  of  bv^raif-’
Tfds  Iritik  {dare  .me or**  o-t!irr  tldum.  in  the  arrangement  of
cairnpiilstirv  ideas  Wlimrvrr  }ir  used  an  aufomcdtilr,  the  fhotielit
that  a  coHisiiifi  might  take  |dace  <‘ame  to  hr;  ndnfb.  A  ftirfliri


70


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


analysis  of  this  compulsory  idea  revealed  that  he  was  farthest
away  from  a  belief  in  such  an  eventuality,  but  that  always
avoided  all  expensive  means  of  travel.  Yes,  even  whtm  he  used
the  tram  cars  for  an  extended  trip,  the  thought  occurred  to  him,
upon  reaching  the  point  whert^  the  cheap  fart'  terniinatcH!  and  the
more  expensive  one  began,  that  a  collision  nught  take*  place,
or  that  the  bridge  which  had  to  be  crusstHi  niighl  collajise,  so
that  he  would  always  pay  the  (dieaper  fare,  a  iVw  pennies
and  cover  the  rest  of  the  distance  on  foot.  lie  was  on  the  road
where  he  felt  bitterly  every  expenditure.

Thus  it  also  came  to  pass  that  he  sought  to  tlegrade  man,  in
order  to  gain  a  uniformity  of  behavior.  This  alrt'ady  betMme
distinctly  manifest  in  the  hunt  after  rnarrit'd  women,  am!  the
dismay  and  disappointment  of  the  seducetl  women  as  well  as  tiu'
abusive  language  which  he  used  towanl  thmn  afterwards  plf'ased
him  no  less  than  the  satisfaction  of  once  again  having  sficnvn
himself  to  be  the  strongt'r.  This  was  in  line  with  the  ctmttmf  of
his  life,  with  the  change  of  form  in  whicli  his  <wiginal  tirfimi
to  be  the  manliest  came  closest  to  realisation.

Only  the  fear  of  women  which  svnchnmouslv  with  the
realization  of  his  own  femininity  originally  led  him  his
exaggerated  masculine  protest,  found  itself  again  in  the  miduly
accentuated  insurance  against  the  diunination  i\(  woimm  and
allowed  him  to  strengthen  bt'yond  measure  like  a  ^.atefV'dam
his  mistrust  and  avaric<\  ludh  of  whit'h  offered  good  argument-:.
Swept  away  by  this  craving  for  security,  he  furtluTmorc'  attai  luni
to  it  his  p.sychic  irnpoltmcy,  with  which  he  lun-anie  acquainted
(luring  his  first  att(*mpts  at  <‘oitus.  A  servant  girl  whom  he
WMiitecI  to  seduce  as  a  young.stcu*,  (dlered  resi stama*  ami  escaiped
him  by  ti^^htening  her  limbs.  !!e  was  at  tliat  time  inexptu  ienred
and  considenal  hims<df  impotent.  Later,  as  lie  btaaime  more
experienced  in  these  rnattm'S,  he  fidt  his  ine?ip«'ri<UHa*  in  raudi  a
way,  as  if  women  were  an  insoluble  puz/de  to  him.  In  the
original  impotency,  howrwer,  as  wtdl  as  in  his  helple^sm-ss  in
the  presence  of  woman,  he*  found  tiu*  neurttfie  ^alh^erfllg^-;  by
means  of  which  to  esaipe  a  depreciatory  defeat,  a  decision
adverse  to  hi.s  ma.sculinity.  The  comparing  cd  liimself  with  tilhrr
men  set  in  v<:.'hemenlly  now.  Ib'  wtudd  surprise'  himsrdf  hr
instance,  when  sittini’i’  at  the  talde  in  cornpanv,  in  a  psychic
situation,  where  before  any  one  event  had  spcdcen  a  wortl,  he  was
already  planning  a  repartee*,  a!r(*a(!y  figuring  how  hr  mighl
prove  the  speakcT  wrong,  no  matter  wlndher  he  was  sjteakiiig*of
a  book  or  a  theatrical  performancfu  or  soc-iety  or  p!acf%  ‘im
derogatory  criticism  alway.s  push(*d  itself  to  the  fnmt  in  almost
pronounced  form.  ^And  so  it  was  fti  he  expected  that  after  a  brief
introductory  period  his  traif.s  of  mistrust,  avarice,  and
depreciation  of  others  would  become  evident  every  time  hr  under-


71


AVARirH,  SRSrillORSNESS.  ENVY,  ETC.

%vent  mvdk^il  aftt*n  tjuilr  ;irtful!y  linked  inu^  with  the

other.  This  plieriiiiiieiiciiu  iu.it  at  all  in  tlie  Ereudian  sense  of  a
transference,  tint  hrcaiise  liis  lixtHl  psyclfu*  gesture,  his

attituiie  of  attaek,  his  tcuuicuicy  to  tlegradt^  othc-rs,  aetually  <lid,
and  upon  cdtiser  acijiiaiiilaiier,  was  iddiged  to  vmnc  to  the  surface!
To  this  wa.'i  addrd  aiiollier  aci-cuituating  iiuunent.  His  idiject
when  s<‘ekiiig  the  adviee  olCi  phvstcian.  could  mit  liave  been
sinijdy  to  liecotiie  rut  of  his  iiiiptitfutcv,  because  in  such  an  event
he  w'tHiUl  have  he^ui  cast  into  tin*  thaos  of  his  apjirtdu'nsions.
lie  was  finich  more  aiixioti.s  to  luui  proof  of  his  imairahility,  or
to  find  a  iiiraiis  of  ridtling  himself  nt  his  impt.itmu*y  without  the
fear  of  a  deiral.  In  order  tf*  bring  about  the  first,  a  ih^|)reciation
of  the  |ihy.sit'iaii*s  ^abililv  was  a  pteliimnary  camditioii.  The
proper  iiieafi-*  of  rtibbtig  tiiiiisidi'  oi’  his  impotenc-y,  however,  he
cxuiid  only  tiiid  alter  following  up  hy  hsir  of  %Vfirueii  Iti  its  souree,
to  the  feeliiig  of  his  iitiiiianliiiess.  in  whteh  his  feeling  of
iriftu’iority  becaiiie  I'oiurf^tr.  t  iti«'  id’  Ins  dreams  wlueh  ocinirred
at  flu*  jierittd  p:rcrditig  the  Irr eaiiiatiim  ef  tlie  treafuumt  sliowed
this  statr*  of  alt.ur'-  i.r*i'y  distimias

I  must  first  of  ,ill  tiiirflv  state  that  I  malo*  use  id  eertain
iiiiportaiif  parf%  of  ttir  ih-eiirt  h'leud  teelmiijur  i.d  drcMru  infer-
pretation,  bit!  flial  I  see  in  the  litr.im  au  abstracting,  simplifying
endeavor  ti»  tsnd.  bv  iiomus  uf  a  prrmeditatiHU  a,ml  testing  (if
diflic'ii!li«"s  r'aiiird  on  m  at  rord.jner  with  tin*  jtafitudhs  own
peculiar  st  limm*  a  {noirrlive  wsiv  fsir  the  egi'oeoiiscitmsiuUnS
out  of  a  sitnafiiUi  wluili  fhrrateii'.  a  tlrfraf,

(.hu*  %vi!!  llirrrfufr  alwjv.  di-s'»n<*r  in  the  dream,  that

sigiiifieafit  M'lit-iiir  of  i!i««  aiibthetirsd  mode*  of  apptaa  option  :
^'  maseiiliue  fetniniiie/*  **al'»ovr  br*neatld‘  a.s  existing  iiriginally
in  evervliodv,  !a0  r-.jiria.illv  fe.elrd  os  the  nr-iirotic.  'Idu*  various
rmtioiis  and  re*  i4!r«  lions  wduh-h  c«ntie  trt  tfir  'airfar**  in  tin*  dream,
rriMsf  be*  broiCjdif  wittdii  t!u'--  *:t  hrour  brftur  tlirv  can  l^e  of  anv
aid  in  flit*  iiitetitretafioti  of  ;4.nie,  wdioso  o!iif*ci  it  is  not  or  at
least  not  prifo  ipallv  the  biltslmmil  stf  infantile  wi^hi*-'.  hut  ratluT
to  ataaiinpasiv  flac-.r’'  hitioibictMtv  mtlravors,  tt»  bring  about  a
balanra*  in  faviir  of  ih.r  rgo  con  4  isca-air*.’,-,  through  balancing'  tlu^
paficuiCs  lirbit  crrdif  artoamf  in  a  priadiarlv  neurotic  manner.
Ilis  drtsiiit  mvis  as  ■

I  dealt  ill  smiiid  band  |OHi*is  in  Vienna,  *w  in  flermany,  or
in  France,  1  liad  t*t  biiv.  ho%vever,  new  gntids  ami  wash  them*
because  this  avoid'd  llirn  hr  ihr.iprr.  l‘hrn  they  rvcua’  aipiin  <dcl
(seroiicid'iartf!)  pootfs  ''

The  new  gtiods  if!r:uit  new  potent  genifsJia  in  ctmfrasf  to  the
(semricldianfll  t.-ld  poods/*  fii-.  impotesicv  winch  a*’,  yet
nrdirifly  had  rtired,  flerr  the  itira  of  a  tunv  life,  of  a  possibilify  of
attaining  pcilrnry.  shines  tbroimh  The  wasrds,  **  because  they
wiJiilfl  tit*  rliraper  **  iairrerijiond  In  fhr  previously  cdiirldated


73


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


ideas,  his  fear  of  money  expenditures  in  case  he  does  not
become  potent.  This  idea,  however,  can  only  hv  accepted  under
one  condition,  to  wit— if  the  patient  is  saturatcHl  with  the
conviction  that  he  is  boundless  in  his  love-impulse,  that  knows
no  limits  and  senselessly  hunts  after  women.  I'his  i‘i»nvictiiui
he  purposely  takes  for  himself  out  of  his  childluHui  rc*mi!nsca‘nci\s,
out  of  his  period  of  puberty  and  adolescence,  in  <loing  so  he
also  assists  in  the  shaping  of  his  infantile  inct^st-stirrings  should
these  serve  his  purpose  in  a  form,  as  if  he  had  Ciuaded  his
mother  or  sisters  with  a  sexual  object.  This  means  that  he
works,  with  a  fiction  which  aro.se  from  tlie  assumed  goat,  thnuigh
gaining  security  for  himself,  similarly  as  Sophocles  developed
and  shaped  the  (Edipus  legend  in  order  to  stalnlr/e  th<*  ^  holy
commands  of  the  gods.  Our  patitmt  bec*une  a  witling  victim  of
his  limited  understanding  of  <lia!t‘ctic  and  td’  the  anfithefiral
manner  of  primitive  thinking.  The  gtiiding  idea  of  his  ego-idea!
**  I  must  not  covet  blood  re!ation.‘^/*  enduaces  dia!f‘i1itvdly  the
antithetical  thought  of  an  incestuous  piss  ability,  tnasiniu’h  as
the  neurotic  desires  to  insure  Ifmisc*!!,  lu*  eliugs  to  tin*:  antilh«*tii  ;d
thought,  plays  with  it,  eanphasixes  it  am!  ut ih'/es  if  in  the  neurosis
in  the  same  way  as  all  other  fraY;htenim,'  rcuniniscc-ncrs  w*hi<*h
appear  to  him  to  be  useful  for  his  siumrity.  In  the  life  rd  our
patient,  and  in  the  lives  of  all  neundu* s,  tluo’e  are  very  many
more  expcTiences,  which  mipdd  have  been  aide  to  can  rv  with  tlieni
the  conviction  that  they  were  fret*  fnmi  inr«“4unus  Ntimidi,  that
they  were  .always  especially  (tanperate,  eartdul  ant!  tirmnanis.

Ina.smuch,  however,  as  he  d<*sires  to  rt*as  :ur?»  hiimadf,  his
neurotic  and  falsifying  mode  of  apperceplitm  pusli  these  traits
of  character  purposely  asidre  He  hm  luanv  mort*  ini|}ressions
to  that  efTeu:t,  that  he  dot*s  not  covc-t  his  motlier  arttl  sister,  but
he  is,  how'ever,  unable  to  utili;o*  them  in  tiie  servic  e  <d  his
craving  for  security.  Thus  tlH*r<*  remains  for  tluuu  iudy  a
memory  rest  of  a  playful  pre|uiratory  vemture,  atu!  lo  calise  this
may  serve  as  a  warning  to  him,  he  makes  of  if  a  bm;d»e:ir.  with
which  to  frighten  himself.  Exactly  in  the  *-cirne  maniif^r,  develop
neurotic  anxiety,  fear  of  places,  hepoehtafuiriasis,  pe-:simism  aiul
constant  doubting,  inasmuch  as  these  patients  tmly  av;iil  them¬
selves  of  those  impressions  and  experi(*nces  whieli  ^.erve  fli,e
purpose  of  bringing  aliout  security,  which  strenglhne;  thrir
affective  state  while  they  depreciate  all  others  espenaitv
of  an  antithetierd  nature.  The  soplust^s  ability  **  in  uiram-^ipie
partem  dicere*'  of  ewerything  is  also  jKvssr-v'Unl  f^v  t!ie  nriirotir
as  well  as  by  the  psychotic,  and  thev  xitWhr  it  as  thev  need  it

The  thoroughly  polished,  purposefully  strengthenetl  dexterities
of  neurotics,  and  the  neurotic  traits  of  character  wtiicfi  ge  ivitti
them  are  impossible  for  the  fact  that  every  new  sitiiafieri  tirinys
about  havoc.  (Lombrosrds  misoneismus.)  More  than  anytiiiiig


AVARICE,  SlvSinciOl;SXKSS,  KNvY.  irrc.


73


else,  our  patient  feared  the,  to  him  unknown,  situation  of  sexual
gratification  and  successful  coitus,  liecause  in  presentiments  of
this  situatiim,  he  gave  himself  ftir  reasons  of  safety  the  rdle  of
the  inulerlying  (uiiterliegenden).  Xow  this  ftaar,  which  is
appereeived  as  a  !<Mr  id'  iiujiotcmey,  furnishes  a  further  stnairity
against  the  possihility  of  being  restraimaf  restricted  in  freedom
or  deceived  by  his  wife,  against  a  possibility  of  not  l)eing  eijual
to  her,  against  a  rob*  whii'h  is  tmntrary  to  his  masculine  ideal,
and  which  he  thenadbre  evaluates  as  eflVminate.

Out  of  the  harmless,  uiutjuitous  traits  <d'  selfishness,  avarice
and  stinginess.  In*  puts  tt^g«dher  a  far-reaehing,  apparently
iminiiient,  but  in  rt'alitv  tietitit>us  guiding  prim'iple  of  'hivarieed'
ht‘c\‘iiise*  the  retrmfiuii  id  this  appears  to  him  to  be  lost.  ShouU!
he  laHaifue  funhnveii,  as  was  the  rase  in  the  dream  with  that
which  he  had  thrsiret!  alrcsieiy  in  {duldhuod,  namely^  nc*w  genitals,
a  !if*altliy  ptdmH*y,  then  he  nuisl  defend  himself  against  it.  He
takt's  htdil  thru  of  a  intsuis,  with  whiidi  he  has  tieen  long
ai'ifiiaintri!,  which  l:as  uftea  iif'rm  highly  rec'ommeruled  to  him,
whicli  after  all  rnfrrblr-i  his  erriiiitns  iusttsu!  td  .stiarngthening
them,-  he  turns  to  r'idtl  wa'dies,  1‘his  according  to  Ins
experieners,  inadeijuatf*  rrmrsiv,  he  tnmsiilors  er|ual  to  mv
trcsitnumt.  llif  rvtnvdv  *.h;dl  lusng  alunit  the  iippomte  to  what
it  is  aimed  to  dtn  and  thi%  idivsician  shall  have  just  as  little
sui'eess  as  the  former  onr'’S  Unis  the  dream  shows  him  tlu*  way
out  of  the  situatiim,  it  tfdl  •  him  Innv  to  safe-oianl  hiimadf  against
the  treatiiumf  ami  thm;  the  opjirr  haml  td’  the  physician,
**  llien  they  are  srrs uubh..im.|  ipitH!*;  again.’*

In  other  tsises  tif  ji%ve!iii'  impotmuy  a  eur«*  readily  results,
and  as  wr  know,  as  rrsutt  o|  t!ie  mo'4  tiiverse  kinds  of  remedies.
Often  it  Vinu'vtm  rituirofis'  jiatiimts  who  by  the  tfiert*  f;ud  of
gifmg  to  roieadt  a  |ihvsiciau  give  one  to  und«‘rstaml  that  they
would  be  imsliiied  tii  ipve  up  form  of  security.,  hi  that  case
all  manner  <d  medicalittn.  cold  douches,  rletirieitv,  hydrothera|jy.
and  es|}ei'ia!!v  every  h^rm  of  suggestion,  even  the  one  resulting
triiiu  ait  im'oiiiplfdr  aiialysi’-;  are  td  \aiue,  oeeasioualty  tim
autliorilativf*  coirunami  of  the  iihysinan  suf'iir-r-,  to  l>ring  alnml
drftiiife  tauisftjiuuices,  fit  T.everr  ea'-.f*s,  it  i’.  uc'cessary  tt'>  bring
aboiif  a  traii'diirmaliijfi  id  the  al!  too  a!»sorbing,  eoiu-entrated
psyrlie  llfrou  idiM  of  ’srimrify,

Agf*  tiftfui  iiitrii-*e!y  sfiiimtafes  envy  and  avarice.  f^syeho-
logically  this  is  ito!  difficult  to  understand.  No  rnatti'f  how
lieaiillfutty  jiorfs  and  |i!ul«!so|ihers  endeavor  to  |ni1ure  aipg  it
is  nrverthfdrss  only  given  tit  the  select  souls,  to  maintain  their
efjuililiriiiin,  ivlim  they  looming  up  in  the  fiistanee  the  gate
wtiirh  leads  to  death. '  Then  again  the  <leniah  and  resfrielioris,
which  the  seiiturii  naturally  carries  with  it.  and  the  peri'eptilile
<!ciftiifiariry  of  the  yoiifigfT  folks,  td  «ine*s  tiwu  relations,  which

c;


74


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


often  furnish  the  occasion,  quite  innocently— ur  appartuitly  so—
for  a  degradation  of  old  people—^v ill  almost  always  lead  to  a
depression  of  the  ego-consciousness.  1  lu‘  sunshiny  preparechiess
as  it  is  refreshingly  expressed  in  (ioethc*’s  "  hatiuu"  lime  **
is  a  quite  unattainable  illusion  for  most  peciple,  and  fortunate^
indeed  may  be  considered  those  who  survivt‘  their  tH‘st  time  of
life  without  a  severe  depression  of  the  spirits.

According  to  our  thesis,  it  must  naturally  follow  that  the  period
of  aging — brings  forth  similarly  to  a  severe^  s«dhack,  a  feeling  of
inferiority.  Especially  affected  by  this  will  he  all  tluise  w!uj  are
neurotically  predisposed.  At  times  it  is  age,  in  ^ViUiien,  the
climacteric,  feelings  of  insufilciency  of  a  psycdiic*  or  phvsi<\*d
nature,  indications  of  impotency,  a  breaking  up  of  the*  family,
marriage  of  a  son  or  daughter,  as  well  as  tlnanricd  !«)sses,  the
loss  of  a  position  or  post  of  honor  which  first  eause*s  the  break-
down.  In  most  instances  one  may  already  find  in  the*  pr«‘vitnis
history  indications  of  actual  attacks  of  a  lumreiril*  <*harai*te*r.

Age  with  its  losses  has  the  same  effect  as  otheT  de^gradations
of  the  ego-consciousness.  The  aggressive*  femdemeyv  ntlu*r

means  wdiereby  an  adjustnierd  may  be*  lirtHigld  af'tnif,  either
means  which  unfortimatedy  are  not  <*a.sily  to  be*  had  in  these
cases.  Renunciation  would  come*  esisieuy  if  ahm*’  with  tin*  sinking
of  bodily  and  mental  penveT  tluTe*  uamld  also  take*  pL'ie*e  a
narrowing  of  the  emotional  life.  This  sehiorn  happf*n?:,  am!  in
order  to  iind  a  substitute*  feir  the*  loss.-,  the*  ag,pa*ssive*  t(*ndenry
which  has  been  stirnulatea!  liy  the*  inse*eurity  agaiti  whip*:  iiji  all
stimuli  of  desire.  The  univ«*rsal  decree  freeiuenhv  ':tands  al!  too
firm  against  all  these  emdcMvors.  llu*  bfsiriug,  th<*  life,  the
desires,  the  dress,  the*  work  and  aea-oniplislime'fU  :  of  aging  peo|ile
are  sulqect  to  critic'isrn  in  a  gre*at  meastire.  dltoso  wlio  are
predispose*cl  to  a  neurosis  will  r<*atiily  take  this  rritiei<m  as  a
barricade*-— and  will  aln*ady  shrink  from  tlmsf*  sitnatimi :  whitdi
still  offer  possibility  of  gratiruMiion.  Siu  h  an  intiividimi  will
force  himsedf  into  .subrmV^a'on,  will  ward  to  annihilatf*  hv‘  fiadings
and  derires,  without  beirig  able*  to  *-et  hineadf  to  riejit:;  witli  them.
Yes,  still  more  intense!;/  will  these  llan*  up  when'a  renuiiriation
without  adju.striHmt  is  demandi^d.

Thus  it  happens  that  fire  adivt*  hostilr  trsits  of  ehararter
develop,^ that  e:*nvy,  ilbavill,  avarica*,  tin*  <Tavin|;  for  tiimuiiaiirv,
sadistic  impulses  of  all  sorts,  expeu'ienee*  aei'e-fittiaf ioir;,  .“iml
never  satisiied,  bring  aliouf  a  rc*st!{»’H*-:ues';  whiih  !iiirf’'riiift ingiy
strives  for  remiediers,  sulrfifutions,  sr«-urities,  W’hn'o  voii  are
not— there  is  happiness  liee;ms<'  fhf*  rt.*a!  posit itm  of  aging
people  is  seriously  <!nelar5g<Tf*fl  in  oiir  stat#*  eif  imeaimeli

as  it  is  the  productive  value,  whh-h  is  almost  exehisivf*lv  the  test
of  the  worth  of  the  personality.  The  m'undiebs  ‘mstfuianee  (llrml)
on  the  other  hand  is  the  appearanc*e  of  po w€‘r,  pr#*stige,  even


AVAHlfE,  .Sl'Sl’lflOUSNES.S,  ENVY,  ETC.  75

Kuicido  h,l^;  alrr.idy  wttie  within  our  experionct*  as  the  last
expre.ssion  of  ma.seuline  prot<\st.

The  advent  of  senility  has  ev<‘n  a  stronger  effeet  upon  w..men
than  upon  tnen.  Ev<-n  the  signiiieance  of  the  <-limaeteiic  is
usually  phanf.isti.-.iliy  exa!;gerated.  Youth  ami  heautv  meant
power  for  worn. u!,  and  nune  so  tiian  for  man.  !f<T  eharm.s  were
all!.-  to  ;:iye  her  dotninaiu  v.  vi.-turies  am!  triumphs,  tor  which
the  neurotie  orce<!iness  i-on  a.oitlv  longs.

.'V.'.e  to  them  is  like  a  sf.iin.  !fe  i.ie-:  (heir  value  .-  ink.s  more
decidedly  fh.in  is  tlo-  c.ee  uilh  the  a.;ine  juan,  am!  as  far  a.s  it
concerns  aging  woman,  pia-vailoig  p- \a  liology  may  he  designated
point  hhuik  :<s  .'n-tminy  hostile.

I  hi",  tlephaalce  fe.jtsae  h.ts  it  :  utigin  ill  }h,.  wcdl  known
tendenev  ot  ni.in  to  de|u»  i  i.it**  wonmn.  .oupled  with  the  p.syehic
tlefeat  which  ihev  exie-rif-m  e  fiot-i  <,ur  stuaa!  lihg  a  netirotie
[^errn,  whi*  h  inanite  as  it  a  ii,  inspl  n  ahiy  ,uul  im-radie.ihly  even
into  the  ip'ave,  t  i>ns<  joii  !v  or  unctima  iou' iv.  often  unavouiahlv
irony  the  n..5ur>-  of  thii-.;-;,  fids  dems-atory'  tendency  has  its
tijin ion  ■  e!io,  i  upon  the  isae  .  iionau'  "i  ot  tlu*s<‘  ae'itig
.vonii'ii.  who  ijifi'  .11  !’.  ive  .1  i.c  hi  !o  live.  (  hiltlrt'n'.s  Iov<*  and
■espect  tor  flu-  ,i  a-d  .i  .  aid::  .ind  cu-idijn-,  !>oint  :  of  view  in  tnan'.s
'elation*:  w-iii  hi-:  trilow  laen.  t-ur'i  h  onlv  the  very  minutest

■elirf  ;ind  t  .in  ii.-v.-r  •  a'ii.-e  !..  tlie  >'tinitil:ite<i  .lerires  of

leopit*  V,  lio  f  |aOAfj  .  ,u<-  w.eiia  '  it  i-  t}u-!j  ill, if  the  neurotic
■eiif  set  :  in  !.■:  (ho  pinpo-,.-  of  •  fre-ij  tfiriiin:'  the  guiding
irinciple,  ■'  (  OS  dr-joil'.rii  i  h.ii!  to,,  Hpj,.  oiil  of  lif,-  'f  shall

e.di/e  ntith'ij;i  iiiote,  '  oj;e  ;e  .11!  illy  lu-ar':  in  the  c'onijdaints

if  .i;dng  ni-urot'i  ,,  (nd  tiiev  .n  i  rutu  ilf'  this  inamu-r  id  viewing
ife  to  such  an  i-xte-il ,  that  tlirv  -ai  .(ii(  loi;  ,!v  ,tnd  lii-.f nist fiillv  sink
iito  .1  jepu!  ive  0,  0!  10.  the  like  o!  whir!)  thcv  h.i<i  iievef  before
'ipcrieiiced  so  vi’.li!!';  I  hroU;di  tin  howr-ver,  the  vacillations

!^'t  !  ff't  ■»  i  .1

Atl  ;is  !lAis:,'h  '>Arir  lu  jiffabi  worfli/'

|>prti‘ciiii;Tt«'“lv  :i  i^mviv  t'nic.tiu*  fr<i  prinf“i|il<'%  aficl

with  tiii-:  *iir*  firtHul’c**;  ttf  avarirt"

sort*  aa'iiff’,  fill’-  !ivjrii  nnss.  laiviiajs,  dnsii!fs^*oriti|,^  iriifnilar-;  ocifiif*
to  tSif-  ft jf ,  .ilusrr;!.  hinvovcT,  rc‘atraitu’ti  hy  tfio
V  I* ptitu”ip\v^i  In  aorotalaiita*  witli

Istcti  fhrcr  |i;ifiritts  ‘.Isrifik  wifii  apprrhriscititi  frtnii  rvrry  t!t**iirr‘
rid  liO||iiiriiii;:o  !  Iiiis  fhr^ro  Itr*  iifuui*;f;tkably  iindrr  oovria
‘paraiod  wifli  difficiilta/  coiricitao  iircs,  thfr-tr'*  inspul*a»M

Idrh  lacfitjjdv  d!',' fitai.  htipaf imscr .  tui-.f ns*.;! .  anti

d!strrrii|ifrdiv  f,,  fh,.  nisattairird  am!  ttfp^n

‘Litf.linatilf* .  Iti  fla*  l.i'if  tu  flsr'*  Mir'c'cca  f}f  whir'h  flit"

4r!cf*d  adapt iiliilif V  cif  l||r  “.viisladc  oorstslhisfoa  Jp  a  wav,

if  fiuf!if*riiifiri‘^  .ii'io  flit'  fai  f  llrat  a  liroiif  iif  a  lacl:  rtf
itllifiraf If i|s  i^i  roraidv  fo  hr  Ijai!  ftv  r%*rrv  otjr,  t!  fhcnadru'r


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITITION


76

happens,  that  all  desire  becomes  sexualiml.  It  is  readily
understood  that  these  people  apperceiye  on  a  sexual  basis.  But
one  must  avoid  taking  this  sexual  fiction,  this,  so  ^to  spt'ak,
fnoius  dicendi,''  or  as  I  have  called  it.  the  sexual  jari^on,  for
an  original  experience.  In  the  theoretical  part  I  luive^  discusscil
the  reasons  for  the  marked  prominence  of  the  st^xual  guiding
principle  in  neurotics,  first,  because  it,  like  all  other  guiding
principles  is  consideral)ly  accentuatetl  in  the  neurutic,  and  so  t«>
speak,  felt  as  real  instead  of  what  it  was  inteiuied  lav  nanudy,
as  a  protective  guiding  line— and  second,  because  it  (tlie  sexual
guiding  principle)  leads  in  the  direction  of  the  imistniliiu*  protest.

Thus  it  happens  that  every  desire  ot  tiu^  aging  ntnircdic
woman  may  be  referred  not  only  by  lu^rself,  but  witli  a  little
effort  by  the  physician  to  a  sexual  anahigy.  Likewise,  that  the
physician  may  he  able  to  fill  the  neurotic's  want  of  a  pndertive
analogy,  by  means  of  a  premature  (dlering  of  a  sexual  gtu<!tng
principle  in  the  sen.se  of  the  orthodox  Fremiian  schooL  may
unquestionably  be  inferred  from  thv  fimc^going  i'onsitb'rabdnis.

There  is  no  gain  so  long  as  one  does  not  ^iuc^^fnl  in  ritlding
the  patient  of  his  fiction,  which  bectutuss  possilde  when  he
becomes  more  (amtain  of  himself,  am!  is  a!dt*  tn  rr«“ogid#a"  his
pre.sumal)ly  libidinous  impulse  as  a  falsifying  tulitui.

Such  a  fiction  for  instance  is  the  so-called  riimai  teri<‘  of  the
male,  of  former  authors,  described  Ijv  Freud  and  Kurt  Mendel.
The  climacteric  of  woman  has  its  psyrhic’  tdTeii  irresjuadive  of
the  metabolic  phenomena,  liecausc  of  the  ludehtening  o*f  the
feeling  of  inferiority,  (’oiu'omitant  disturbam'es  of  nudalndi-an
are  only  able  to  change  or  intensify  the  neurotic's  asprct,  the*
moment  it  makers  itself  specilically  felt  through  an  intmi  .tfh  ation
of  the  insecurity.  Basedow’s  neurt^sis  in  tdinuu  teric  voiinen
furnishe.s  an  example  of  such  a  mixes!  ami  infemsitifs!  fucture,
The  neurosis  of  the  climactiTic  in  man.  is  likeivi  only  intiiretdlv
influenced  by  atrophy  of  the  genitals,  may,  !nnvevc*r,  fxperionce
an  intensification  through  the  aggravating  absfrartiou.  '*  I  am
no  longer  a  man— I  am  a  woman."  Inasmueh.  as  t!io  rtueaailifie
guiding  principle  becomes  intensified  ami  hypostasi/m!  thr«nt«h
carefulness  and  appropriatt*  .stimuli  as  a  result  cd  thi*;  ideohyde
standpoint  those  wonderful  manifestations  of  flie  Johanni  4rirh
take  place,  the  frequent  fHanirrence  of  which  in  wonum  Karin
Michaelis  has  aply  explained  in  her  "  Dangennis  Age."

Only  that  the  sexual  guiding  primdple  is  not  the  ex«"!indve  or
even  mo.st  essential  one  as  it  is  attenqged  tn  infer  frum  a  fdologie
point  of  view,  l)ut  must  ho  lookrs!  upt»n  as  a  f*»rm  of  expre'.'diiri
similar  to  other  forms  of  desire  if  one  to  f;!4-r’  du*  facts  ‘.:ouarr!v,

The  climacteric  neurosis  shows  us  actanatinglv  mdv  ;i  dt!'fc*refit
phase  of  the  neurosis  caused  liy  the  masculim*  iirolr-d,  a?id
the  traits  of  character  demonstrable  in  it  rescmldc  the


77


avarice.  SllSPlllorSNKSS,  ENVY,  ETC.

airratly  faniHiar  tu  ii,s,  I  have  never  seen  a  case
where  the*  iieiirii>is  lirraine  first  ?uanileste<l  at  tlie  eliiaacterium.
And  it  til  hr  expri'leHl  aia'e^uling  tu  tmr  thesis  that  the
**  elimael^’fie  “  iieiireNis  had  already  slunvn  its  face  in  former
days^  at  tiiiies.  in  a  luild  manner,  eHju-cially  when  favorable
circumsta,!u*es  or  eiiltiiral  activity  were  ahh*  to  lessen  the  attack
thnnigh  a  jiartia!  grafitii'alitiu  oi  ti»e  t'raving  ftir  peuver.  Mostly
one  tiiHis  a  i:radiia!lv  progressive  intt‘nsiiieation  and  spreading
of  the  iic’iiriaii'  ?.viiiphmis  tif  some  years*  duration,  which  an
antecedently  fiecessilatril  intensification  td  the  craving  for
stH'iirily  |ierfidts  of  delect An  example  of  this  would  be  the
transforiiiatitui  of  lieat!.u/lie  and  ticcasiunal  migraine  into  a
trifacial  iicnir.ilgia.  the  intensiticatitin  of  a  neurotic

caiitioiisric-cs  iiilo  .mxlriv  arn!  tietvisitmally  through  the
discounting  iif  anticipated  disaster,  into  nudancholy.  For
these  t!ii«a'  .:4e}t">  id  protection  one  must  tamsult  the  schema
routaiiif^d  in  the  fiu^oretic'a!  part,

;  fill"  ifc.tatier%  as  if  I  may  lose  ruy  money,  I  may

be  btuie.itic

AnxIKIN'  .  .1^  H  !  'Jial!  lose  my  money.  !  shall  lu*  lieueafh.

tn  other'  vctiich;,  I  hr  '.frougr-r  fin*  leeling  of  inferiority,  the
iiujfe*  ititrir*'alird  the  !u  fioit  oei  oisies  jml  the  more*  (‘loscly  it
apprt>aclie"«  a  do;;iaa.  iluMiridi  an  im  reasjug  abstraction  from
rtvilify.  .\iid  the  paueiif  apponvimates  and  handles  rverytiiing
which  brings  him  nrairf  to  hi-,  ipddirig  principlm  Reality  is
along  wifli  this  drpm  *.ated  in  v.umm*.  de‘*ree:;,  atul  the  eorrtH'tivc
fimtevs  lirtoine  liUiir  and  fiiorf'  in;aR-tiuate.

One  iifU  ifi!fri|ur of  H"‘  m'I'*-.  ea-’es  m  wdiiili  t!ier«*  eorue  to  light
neurotic  pliemaiirfra  in  the  pathogenic  pmaotO  already  known
to  IIS  soiiirlhifij*  cm  the  enter  id  .m  *^\jH-rimeid,  Ivisclt  ami  others
have  isdlri!  alfrntion  fi»  thi--  anamne.tic  data  of  mnirotic
csnnplaiiit s  foiinri!  at  llir  nn-.rf  of  |iuberty.  Mtu’e  frequently  one
fimls  in  the  afumtiecis  iil-uiefie  rntdindna  imuisfrualia,  or  neuroses
before  riiftnaiig  the  tnarriage  ,'>f4n\  in  the  I'luerpe’^ium,  or  even
c*i»ntiruiou*dy .

AffeT  tlie-,€^  rcac'.,;drrafion*;,  wr  ‘-hall  liavf’  to  let  the  various
guiding  prim  iph*".  ribi'‘d.  la;  lei  cotirdinat«*  tlicu'Usedves  with
t!ic'  priiiir  gaiidiiig  piiiieip!#e  Hie  netifosis  of  aged  people^  js
only  a  dilterfUil  pluc'e,  :in  oila,p!ivr  psvi'hie  rajperstrtieturei  lunlt
lip  upon  the  orir  rdniirutarv  dire*  five  prineinh^  I  wish  to  !h*  a
man,  Anri  this  diretiive  jirinetfdr,  whicdi  fms  lieen  enitrightly
c'ondeit'nifn!  to  c{estriicttoin  avails  iterSf  of  all  manner  of  disguise,
wifiioiit  ever  finding  n  catc'daetorv  oms  brequently  ^the
ii'iif'iressiori  they  ma.kr  is  one  «if  great  helpte^a-mess  of  resignation,
as  thcnigh  the  palient  ivarilrd  to  sav  he  knew  not  how^  to  ^go
about  the  tlitri|e  !rt  .dl  flirir  plans  daubl.  is  prinnirunit-- varillalitm


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


78

never  leaves  them,  along  with  tliis.  howcn'or,  otie*
exaggerated  explanations  as  if  the  patients  riutviuee

themselves  that  they  are  too  old.  or  that  tluw  are  stii!  young.
The  tendency  is  toward  the  gaining  tif  pmver,  iniluenrt*,  worth
But  the  ieeling,  that  they  want  the  unatfainaldan  ntnc*r  leaves
them.  In  the  dreams  one  regularly  fimls  tlu*  endeaviU'  to  assist
the  masculine  protest  towards  expression,  to  young,  to  obtain
sexual  gratification,  to  show  itself  in  a  tuuU*  state,  always,  how¬
ever,  albeit  at  times  well  masked,  the  desiro  to  !u*  a  iiKni.  AImi
the  traits  of  character,  the  secondary  guiding  printdidr  :.
the  influence  of  the  craving  for  security.

Pedantry,  avarice,  envy,  craving  for  dominanay,  and  the  desirr
to  be  popular,  manifest  themselves  often  in  this  tiisguiseHi
manner.  Anxiety  is  frequently  fouruU  it  sf^oius,  as  jiroof  that
they  cannot  he  alone.  And  in  consuiiunatinig  tfif  rifiirutic
symptoms  force  the  entire  Jioustdudd  umlor  the  rrginu*  of  the
patient.  Often  the  attempt  is  made  in  a  more  ctr  b’s  -  fimfirmis
concealed  manner  to  realir.e  a  <'f'rtain  wish,  as  ilsuiah  in  that
event  the  masciiliru'  protest  wsto  assured.

Frequently  this  wisli  manih‘sts  itsfdf  in  a.  dt-ari*  lur
or  to  move  to  a  largt:  (*ity.  or  to  humiliate*  the  ..m  h't  flit

daughters-in-law  as  if  tranquillity  miglit  hr  hnprd  Si.  in  tlmt
event.

Difficulties  in  taking  food,  or  in  omjitvin  *  thi*  bnwc*!«..  i%f
fragmentary  manife.stations  o!  inoiginarv  p!«s  u:neit^:  .-lul  thild-
births  are  not  rare.  Along  with  tiii';  i\ir%  briu;;  infu  u;e
forgetfulness, ^  tremnlou.sness.  hert^  and  tinet*  .nn  oi'cmsional
traumatic  incident,  all  fur  flie  purpiisetd  hrimgain  the  aftmitiou
of  them.selves  and  others  iluir  grouing  ludph-.on*

Complaints  constantly  r(*cur,  every  unpleasant  im  idmit  staves
a  special  significan(’<%  and  tluur  tlunights  are  eun sfantly
toward  an  approaching  evil.  Thv  flemonstrativt*  emplued'/ing  ot
their  suffering  and  thtdr  iu'sitating  atUtuda*  ‘  erve  <in  fhe^  Hur
hand  to  throttle  their  social  einde.  uhih^  on  the  othn  hand  it  i;
useful  for  the  initiation  of  their  withdrau.al  fnun  sia  irtv  in  the
event  of  a  painful  anticipation  o!  a  -adliach.  hoingirallv  thi ;
complaint  may  al.sf)  be  looktHl  upan  as  a  form  tjf  fhf*  revuh,  of
the  masculine  prottssf  against  a  feeling  <»1  iiiferiiirlf v.  if
intended  to  soften  and  weaken  those  ahtiuf’  them.

Treatment  nuvts  with  c'onsiderable  diirn  uities.  iniv  tnnrh  as
the  attainment  of  independence  is  nuudi  mort*  fliflirtiit  in  ativanced
ap,  and  promising  predictions  ranimt  he  so  phmsililv  made,  A*
ahvays  is  the  case,  th<»  pfTSorirUity  t)f  tiii*  p-:)a  iiiiflirrapruf i .!  u:-;.
well  as  any  actual  or  possilde  surcf‘sses  of  his  are  ufili'/iMl  to  ‘ipiir
on  envy,  and  thus  it  frequently  happens  that  improvements  ^.ervf*
to  give  rise  to  relapses.  Fhfui,  intt,  the  readilv  attainable
authority  over  them  serves  to  disturh  thi^  ei|u;!ihrimii  of  these


AVARICE*  SUSI^IClDtESNESS,  ENVY*  ETC.


79


patients,  inasmueh  as  iievcT  in  their  litV  wotv  they  at^le  to  adjust
themselves  reatlily  or  what  is  more,  suhonUnatt'  tluaiiselves.  As
a  last  refiig’e  in  sevin-e  eases,  tlu-  self«sarriii<a.^  of  tlu^  physician
following  a  thorough  analysis  reanuunumds  itself,  so  that  one  is
obliged  io  own  up  to  an  apjKirtmi  failure  of  his  part  of  the
Irtsitment,  and  off«T  tlie  laurels  s<une  other  therapeutic
iiirtliiHl.  In  twii  i»f  lily  ease's,  this  expetlient  justitiec]  itself  :  in
the  one  ease:  the*  patient,  a  female,  was  eurtal  through  the  metlium
of  eorrespomlenee  by  a  ibisnian  eountry  pliysieian’;  in  the  other,
a  ease  of  trifai*iai  neuralgia  id  liing  stamling  whii'h  I  had  I>een
treating  for  lwi»  yi'a.rs  with  varying  sneeersu  retHivcu’ed  following
siiggtssfions  givcm  against  me  in  tlie  ^vakel'ul  state.  In  most  of
thi*se  eases,  <a.msiderahle  impriivement,  remissions,  or  even
eoriipkde  fsa’ovcu'ies  set  in  id  their  tnvn  aeeor<l  following  the
terriiinatiim  td  the  treatnumt

Cbie  td'  niy  patients,  a  tifty^six-vear^old  lady,  !iad  been
siifiVring  for  eiglitf'rn  yicirs  frtim  anxiety  states,  di'/ziness,
nausea,  a!Hloiiuri:i!  pains  anti  sc'verf'  oltslipation.  A  emisideralde
portiim  of  this  pt'i'itni  wa.s  spiuit  iudlier  in  bixl  (tr  lying  itn  a  sofa,
e.sjM'eialiy  during  tin*  last  rigji!  vistrs,  wfien  stweix*  pains  in  the
baek  and  limbs  adib’d  t<s  her  e'lunplainfs.  I'hr  paficmt  Iia<!  been
|ir«ndons!v  a  robii;*;t  woman,  lait  at  tlu*  age  t»f  t*ig;liieen  had
ajiparentlv  saitfeifnl  for  month-*  from  joint  rlienmatism.

Her  i^reNent  eoiidifitm  apprsufa!  to  !u*  psv<diogenetie  in  nature,
iiiasmut'fi  as  there  w.e,  an  ab-a  ma-  of  etirresiHnuling  (arganie
ehanges,  anil  the  |.iri4aa"tivr  traits  td  <dmr:Hdt*r  ‘  iliseovered  by
m«*  were  easily  <Inmonst,ra!4e.

l*he  advice  cd  a  liy^fertniomy  tiy  a  prtnninent  gyneetdogist
lie*raiise  id  stune  |irrimefri!ie  ailhe*  i«ms  I  diti  md  take  into
ac'emint  siiua*  I  have  learned  tmder-ifaml  frtHn  edher  eases,  the
etioltigie  si|piiliisiiice  id  ■^alr}!  maiming  pmetnlnres  in  tin*  neuroses
ilillueiH'irig  as  tlif'V  do  the  iisyi'he  imlireclly.

C  1iangf*s,  rnanifestat  ions  id  arrests  td  clevelopmrnt,
deformities  ami  diseast*  of  tin*  genitah’.  are  fr<Hjnently  found  in
neiiroties,  A.  llos-a  errfainly  is  correet  in  rm|)hasi7a'ng  this
relationship  as  I  had  alrradv  done  before  in  mv  **  Studie
(ifitr;).  This  relafiorisliip,  however,  lies  either  in  the  mljustment
of  a  speeial  fetdiiig'  of  inferioritv  whiHi  in  the  presence  of  a
ntnirofit*  jiredisporataon  gives  occasion  for  the  devedopment  of
a  riciirosiK  or  because  flit*  iieurtrsia*,  drvtdtiprd  as  resadl,  of  other
causes,  rrcjiiires  a  protective  a!lmdf»n  to  an  organic  cdiange,  in
order  to  start  upon  the  rrsid  the  fixed  goal  of  the  masculine
protest,

^  U'lii*  f|il|rrr-?il|'il  Ui  f.afi.  ii'  fif  ilsnibt,  (hily


So  THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

Sexual  inferiority  becomes^  so  to  speak%  t!ie  vc*hicie  which
especially  forces  itself  upon  one\s  attention  when  slight  changes
or  even  wholly  imagined  fictitious  ones  sucli  a,s  a  supi'iosed  loss
of  the  clitoris,  enlargement  of  the  labia-majt>r;u  ruoisteniiig  of
the  apertures,  telling  evidences  of  masturliatiun  or  anomalies  of
the  hairy  growth,  phimoses,  paraurethral  passages  and
asymmetric  posture  of  the  penis  or  testicles,  or  crypU^rclustu  are
taken  as  an  occasion  for  a  symbol  of  the  feeling  of  inferiority.

This  patient’s  disease  began  during  a  game  of  tennis.  One
year  before  this  one  of  her  daughters  ilied,  and  hvr  htishaiui,  a
areat  lover  of  children,  wished  to  have  more  children.  1’he
patient  who  from  her  earliest  childhood  had  hewailcii  her  lot*
and  wished  to  be  a  man,  was  not  at  all  iurlined  to  gratify  this
wish  of  her  husband.  The  pain  which  was  probably  caused  by
a  twist  gave  her  new  food  for  this  iiulisfimdly  conscious
resistance,  since  that  time  .she  could  nut  staiul  any  prt‘ss«re  on
the  abdomen,  her  alKlomen  became  for  lu‘r  a  tlainty  part  and  by
means  of  a  further  bringing  into  use  of  insinnrua  ami  nausea,  the
latter  as  a  memento  of  pregnancy,  nHc  bru’.tgjit  mattr'rs  to  a
point  where  the  husband,  upon  the  mlvice  of  phy^^aciaiis,
abandoned  sexual  concourse  with  her,  and  u.mhI  a  separate  lied-
room.

Already  her  recital  witli  r<‘fertmce  to  tlie  rheumalisui  was
characteristic.  Slu^  blamed  her  dccui  nud her  tm  everything.
The  latter,  she  complained,  forceil  her  to  wa^b  aiiil  iruii  in  the
paternal  home,  always  slightest  her  lHdor«‘  tin*  td!u*r  Nisiers,  and
even  in  later  years  she  was  treattsl  in  tin*  rmniv  h;ird  lunirted
manner.  This  woman’s  grtvdime-s  lu’inighl  iun*  iiito  stune
difficulties.  But  her  tnuildes,  however,  she  .ittiibuhs!  to  her
father,  so  that  the  latt<T  also  received  his  .bart*  of  the  blame,

Such  reproache.s  against  the  ir,ircnt:i  regularlv  draw  attfoditni
according  to  my  experieiu'e  to  amdlier  kiml  of  reproach  whitdi
the  child  is  secretly  making  against  tile  parent-;,  wlmn  it  finds
itself  incomplete,  or  what’s  rmu-e,  mmianly.  Such  rt^pniaches
become  abstract  later  cm,  as  I  have  shown  it  U\  \tv  liktwvise  true
of  the  feeling  of  guilt,  and  in  later  lib*  sfU’Ve  rite  pnrpn%c%  su  to
speak,  of  shells  to  he  filled  u}>  with  clifferent  ifaitml,  lluis  it
later  on  sounds  as  if  the  parents  werc^  not  alTf'clitniaff*  «minigh*
or  that  they  pampered  the  child,  or  that  CNperiallv  diiriiig  the
masturbation  period  they  did  not  supervise  ftim  *.iifn«'ierif  ly.  In
short,  we  ob.scrve  in  these  formulations  of  an  attitmlr  towards
the  parents  and  later  on  towards  the  wtirhi,  b-irm.al  changes  such
as  are  in  line  with  guiding  prirudples  whitdi  are  to  serve  a
practical  purpose,  and  we  fre«juently  ^t*r  a  different  iniise  cut
according  to  the  pattern  of  tlie  actual  situatian.  It  is  then
necessary  to  retrac'e  the  steps  roverful  by  the  format  tdiaitge.
Here  the  analytical  method  makes  use*  of  the  medium  of  rrcliictiori,


AVARICE,  SCSPICIOUSNESS,  ENVY,  ETC\  8i


of  simplificatiiiii  (Skdrsiiw)  of  abstraction.  AliUig  with  the
formal  change  accentuations  or  attenuations  of  tlie  giiitling  tiction
play  an  iniportant  role.  Tlu^  more  insecure  tlie  patient  feels
himself,  the  nwrv  he  is  driven  by  an  muasnscions  teiuicmcy
towariis  an  intcuisification  of  liis  guttling  print'iple,  to  make
himself  tleperitlent  upiui  it.  I  reatlily  follow  here  the  worthy
views  of  Vaihinger,  who  maintains  for  the  history  of  ideas,  that
historically  considf*rcHl  they  show  a  ttmdency  to  grow  from  a
iietitm  (an  m;real  hut  |iraetieally  useful  safetynieviee)  to
hypotheses  aiui  later  to  dogmas.  I'his  change  of  intensity
charac'teri'/es  in  a  general  way  irulivitlual  psyeludogy,  thc^
thinking  id*  tin*  norma!  imlividual  (tietion  as  an  expixlient)  of  the
iieiirotie  (att«uiipl  to  reati’^.e  tlie  tiction)  and  of  the  insane
(incoiiiphde  bill  piiUectivt'  anthropomorplusm  and  iTalixation  of
the  ticliiiii  :  dogmatizaf ion).

Tin*  stroiigor  inner  iH'ed  seeks  adjustm«*nt  thrfuigli  an  inten-
-aticsition  oi  the  a:.-a,iring  guiding'  pritu*iph*s.  Wc*  shall  thertdore
rf*gtilariy  finii  ef[iii\airnts  of  the  neurt»ties*  aru!  psyehotit*s'
guiding  prim'ipl«*'»  anti  rliarai  trn;4ii*s  in  the  normal  indiviclual,
which  in  the  lall«*r  may  beeome  curreetmi  in  nr<!er  that  they  may
be  aide  tti  approjeli  reality  without  nmtratlietiuu.  If  we  were
tO’ reduef-’  flu*  inaiiitesl  guiding  principle-:  t»f  tliis  patient,  ami  free
tliem  of  tile  v.iriuie.  ehanges  of  form  and  intensity  whi<*h  they
liave  underg.oitun  -iii  that  we  may  take-  them  in  the  in'iginal,  rmt
in  the  form  devidopf’d  LiffU  tui,  it  wmild  lasni,  1  am  a  woman
Mai  want  to  !»e  a.  man."  'The  muanal  individual,  too,  adjusts
himself  thiaaiglnsu!  ho*  in  at  rortlanee  with  this  htrinula.  It  aids
liim  in  attaching  liimM-lf  to  our  masenlinr  rulture,  yes,  it  furnishes
tin*  latUu'  with  a  steady  impetus  towar<ls  maseuli'/.ation
(Vermannliehinig).  fhit  lane*  if  plays  a  role  similar  to  the
lldfsliiiit*  in  a  vvtmivtiW  csinsfrutimn.  St#  stton  as  tlie  olijeet,  a
higher  irianlv  fiivcMii  is  alfaineif.  if  is  h#sf  from  t'tinsidenition
(Vailiiftger).  Conoeniing  the  mvth,  a.  guiding  primaple  o!  the
raer,  Xiet’/selu*  iammifs  its  f ransformatitui  into  the  fairy  tab*  and
demands  a  transforrnaf ion  info  the  manlv  (Mannlichf*).  dlie
ntnirtdic*  einplneaia-s  fhi’:  fietion,  fakes  it  altttgethrr  too  literally,
and  c'-rideavors  to  l»ring  atmnf  its  renli/atimn

ills  tdijeef  is  imt  the  rlovetailing,  the  adjustment  of  his
itiasruline  prestige,  but  to  give  it  value,  whieh  is  mostly  unattain*-
alile  in  its  oversf rained  form  or  because  of  intrinsic*  eontradidions
in  the  mma'iiline  I'lrotest,  or  is  hindered  in  its  attainment  lan'ause
of  the  fear  of  a  thresifeming  defeat,  the  patient  still  rcunairdng
ignorant  of  the  ^agniticam’e  and  ‘ssape*  of  Ids  largely  uneonseious
fiction,  lint  his  more  iriten-e  feeling  td  imeculaintv  and  inferiority
also  hinders  liim  in  the  prttper  estimation  of  his  fniion,  llie
insane  man  coiifliii'ts  litim.cdf  as  if  his  tietiem  were  a  reality.  H'e
acts  iirider  the  rmeg  intense  iirgeney  and  dedivers’  himself  unto


82


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTiTUTlON


his  self-created  deity,  which  he^  appcrceives  a.s  real.  In  a  similar
manner  he  simultaneously  feels  hiinsel!  he  woraan  and
superman,  the  latter  as  a  re^action  of  tlu^  <‘xar;e;erateil  naisi'uline
protest.  The  splitting  of  the  persunalitv  eurrespoiuls  to  the
psychic  hermaphroditism,  the  turrnal  change  htnng  iiianifold
one,  manife.sts  itself  for  the  instant  in  the  tannin  nation  id’  ideas
of  persecution  and  grandeur,  id'  dt^pre-nsion  nml  mania,  whereas
fixation  as  self-protection,  is  made  faidlo  thrcmgh  a  ladative
insufficiency  or  absolute  weakneNS  cd’  the'  eorreetive  paths.  If
one  were  to  remove  from  Fnnurs  «‘(|natiim  of  iiementia
(‘Tearbook,”  Rleuler-Freud,  ituO  Iht*  intriHluccnl  sexuali-/.atitm,
if  one  were  to  shorten  it  on  !H>th  sides  i)f  the  ruiperfluous  Hlntlo
factor,  our  much  more  profound  formula  id’  tin*  i  hii*  iirrma-
phroditism  with  the  masculim*  prote'st  ^omf^s  ta  tht*  surface,
against  which,  missing  entirely  its  trm*  :d};nitiearu'e,  Freud
ar|;ues  in  his  work.

fo  come  back  to  the  ease  histiwy,  it  still  rennains  to  i>e
mentioned  that  our  patiemt  in  her  feeling  t>f  instiHicienry  linniglit
forth  various  forms  of  the  masculine  prtde*-!.  ’'rhus  s.hc*  was
unable  to  bring  herself  ia  remain  tuh'raut  uf  mends  aei-omphsli*
ments.  In  this  regard,  she  i‘ou!d  he  quite  crifitsil,  e?pfeial!v
when  some  one  trietl  to  ovi'restimate  him-:e!f.  In  these  eases  it
not  infrequently  happtms  iluit  phyNiidam;  witii  a  -ctmtiilenl
demeanor,  whidi  a|.?pears  to  b<*  an  f‘’.‘-.entiai  ^eine  in  thr'
treatment  of  disease,  are  antag<uu;uai  liv  thf*  patimU  v  itii  neurotic
impetuoiLsness  and  with  tlu*  sarm'  intMUs.  In  this  en  an  .lu*  was.
aside  from  this,  naturally  guided  by  a  stirt  ef  in.timt  uhiidi
forbade  her  to  adopt  tln^  physician's  imdrm  1  iurj  :,  uuf  id  re  |H*ct
to  the  purpose  of  her  <iisease.  itut  at  timr- .  matter  ,  leachec!
a  point  whc‘re  a  harmless  gain  of  infiuerns'  nvm  her  !*c  the
physician  was  re.sponded  to  by  \amiiting  and  nan  fm,  in  oumuTtUm
with  which  the  patient  mwdr  missed’ a  iltam  e  rail  atterifiari
to  the  unsuccessful  effort  of  the'  j^hysieian.  t  bie  uefst  md  lose
one’s  tranquillity ^on  aecounf  of  this  sort  td  maiiifesfatiiug  one
must  rather  see  in  theun  a  jiart  of  t!ie  ent-iri*  whole,  a  forma!
change  of  the  original  envy  of  man  and  latfU’  of  evrrv  one  betif'vei!
to  be  superior.

Along  with  this  tjur  patii'ul  mad«'  extmedve  iisr  td  certain
privileges  given  her  by  h<T  illness.  First  td  al!  die  w,h  aide
to  witlKlraw  herself  as  nuu'di  as  she  wished  te  fiaun  thr*  *;ocial
duties  imposed  upon  her  liy  the  rAle  <.d  housewife  am!  iinportant
personage  of  a  provincial  city.

Tis  true  she  received  visiters,  to  wheni  she  efunphiinef!  of
her  sufferings,  I)iit^only  except  tonally  retururf!  a  cm!!,  thus
assuring  herself  as  k  the  case  regularly  with  neurtitics,  of  a
favored  and  privileged  position.  Along  with  this  it  possitde
to  avoid  comparisons  and  musterings,  in  one  *-ieiise  als<i  trials,


AVARICE.  SllSl^iClUUSNKSS,  ENVY,  ETC.


S3

occasions  for  which  sinTd  activities  furnish  as  a  rule.  Of  iate
yctirs  she  has  betui  Irightenetl  by  the  itlea  that  she  was

being  rubbeii  as  a  rc‘su!t  ui'  lun*  gianving  age,  of  the  possibilities
of  wielding  influeiit‘e  tnau’  nuun  A  lady  friend  demonstrated
to  her  vtu’v  intimaltdy  innv  ridiculously  society  looks  upon
youthful  ctJiuliu't  in  an  ajpng  woinain  'Ihus  she  tlecided  l>y  her
way  of  dressing  to  lay  s|u‘cial  emphasis  lu‘r  age.  hut  at  the
same  tinu'  t!u'  bitter  thought  t'rowdtHl  itself  to  t!u^  .surface  of
her  ta>n.sriousnf'S:‘  that  luiui  ^f  her  age  ar-e  In*  no  means  pushed
into  the  comer.

At  all  times  she  iclt  bitterly  the  fact  that  she  lund  to  spend  her
life  in  a  provincial  iity,  liistiiuiivcly  she'  strove'  in  many;  way?;
for  a  removal  to  Vit'uaa.  fiouever,  \\\i>  was  nut  to  he  attained
in  an  oiirii  bailie  witli  her  huslumd,  who  was  many  years  her
seiuor»  iH'caiise  lu*  disarmed  lu'r  with  his  inexhaustible  affection
and  his  cniiipliance  in  all  *dhcr  matters.  She'  quarrt'llei!  most
biUuily  aith  1st  l.rutlier  amt  affected  an  unbelievablt'  aUKitUy
a!  muciim,,  tlii  ..  lu'uthc’r  ifi  lliis  small  town.  VVlien  tins  did  nai
siiflic'e  !i»  briiii;  alum!  her  idqect,  she  devrlt‘ped  a  most  ob.stdnate
insemmia,  as  the  iiur;t  inipcTtafit  cause  of  which  .she  Idamt'd  the
nightly  rattling  of  wa^gnis  before  the  wimhnvs  of  Iht’  bedriHUU.
Thus  she' brougfit  abimf.  a  tcfupfu'arv  irmova!  to  Vimma,  acquired
a  home  in  the  nfdghbourluHHi  i4  her  iiaughler,  t!ie  Insivenlv
pearefuinrssmd  wlut'h  site  consfanflv  omphasi/ed.  and  where  she*
likewise  regaimni  lier  slee|i.

tvver  ha!  dau-JiteT-  had  livod  in  Vienna,  tin*  stnali  fn’r*

\iiicial  cit^''  It.ei  !»<■».  tuiif'  pr o^.T'e'.-.ively  nnua*  i>l>!ioxio!ls  to  hrfS
The  analy.T.  !^''V»Mh*tl  in  a,ici»rdance  with  the  either  ilirtHlivr
pr!^Hdpil*^  ilmi  ;dir  infeii’odv  ertviei!  hf'r  dauglitor'.s  presligr
with  wliicli  tlieo’  ua-.  atoi  a%*:ticiatf*tl  an  aristiuTa! it*  |n'edic‘ate.

She,  toil,  rvantf'd  to  live  in  Vienna,  ami  would  liave  luaiught
this  about  hmg  ago,  had  md  a  nerv  danger  threatemed  her  in
Vienna,  liamrly,  hi  have  in  mwr  her  dauglder’s  istpenses  with
her  own  means,

Thf*  rivalry  with  this  Virnnest'  daugider  was  wholly  c'ontaine«!
in  her  iinctuiscious,  and  c'orres|Hinded  wdth  an  infantile  gniding
limg  the  wish  to  surpass  her  pampered  tdder  master,  lids  guiding
prirudple,  too.  was  fouml  to  hn  an  equivalent  td  the  Inisic  i>iH%
which  Kirove  torvard  the  aflainitient  of  greater  worth,  as  if  site
were  a  man.

On  accoiitil  of  the  heavy  expenditures  which  her  neadenfe  in
Vienna  tfiipnsetl  tipoii  her  there  amse  a  <*ontradi<iion  in  her
rnasniline  priifest.  llu*  mnirotir  with  his  torturing  feeling  of
inadecjiiacy  tines  not  allow  anytldng  to  he  taken  fnnn  him  without
suffering  for  it.

He  apprehends  a  further  belittling  (Verkur^ramg)  as  a  lowering
of  his  ego-eonscdoiisriess  and  along  with  his  guiding  principle  in


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


^{4

such  a  way  as  if  this  were  a  castratien,  an  effe*nHnizat!i-in,  a  sexual
assault  aUimes  also  in  the  image  uf  a  pregnancy  or  liirth/

In  our  case  the  analogous  sens«itions  of  pregnancy  came  I
especially  to  the  surface,  nausea,  alukuninal  cramps  and  fixed  j
ideas  of  an  existing  pregnancy  nuule  t!u‘inselv<*s  felt,  pains  in  j
the  limbs  represented  a  phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  wliercxis  an
•obstinate  obstipation  s'yrnbolized  in  part  a  vaginismus  in  the  anal
language,  in  part  attenijding  to  prcvcmt  c‘xpenditures
•symbolically,  and  thirdly  attempted  to  exprt‘ss  tlu^  impossibility  \
of  an  independent  conduct.  I

A  more  profound  iind<‘rstanding  of  tin-  nuule  of  expression  of
ihe  neurosis  appears  to  me  to  bt»  impossible*  witlunit  the  I

knowledge  of  the  “  organ-jargon  ”  discHJVi're*eI  Ijv  me\  Folklore  ^
takes  cognizance  of  this  in  the*  c‘xp^t•s^iun  popular  spea‘c!i  and
■custom.  Freud  niisunderstooii  this  jargon,  am!  lias  created  out
of  its  constructions  the  rnainslay  ed'  his  liI»it!o"’tlstH*ry,  riamcdy  the
theory  of  the  erogenous  zones.  Kspt'ci.ally  !:is  \vork  <m  llie  anal  '
character  and  analerufic  is  full  tif  a  straima!  ami  ove*rworke‘d  1

phantasy.  The  point  of  outs<*t  is  tin*  r<*lative*  inff^imuaty  ed  ta*rt.iin  ’

organs,  the  attitude  of  the  i*nviromm‘ni  tow.irds  tlie  i

manife.stations  of  these*  (»rgans  as  \vt*i!  as  tin*  mass-  :

impressions  of  the  two  upon  tlte  son!  t»f  thr  child.

Neurotically  predispiustsi  rhiltlr<*n  will  fm!«*4Vi>nr  to  a  .-.iK'iate  *

with  suital)le  manifestations  of  thrir  organ-inforituitv  f*-.pet'ia!!v
with  defects  of  t'hildhocsd,  tlu^.e  traits  charatlrr  which  |

have  their  origin  in  tlunr  pndc^iing  t*i;o-fHUi:':uou>.nes^,
such  as  olistinacy,  gn*ater  need  of  ahrotion,  osagieU'atf'd
cleanliness,  pedantry,  anxiuusnes<,  ambition,  onvv,  revrnge-
fulness,  etc.,  in  ordtw  to  gain  an  t*spc*riaity  f'lb*ctive  j
representation.  One  of  rny  psvchr^grnic  c^pilrptios  utilized  fiw
the  purpose  of  strengthening  his  niaM  uline  protc*-.,!  .such  a  !

device,  an  interlacing,  so  to  speak,  inasmm  !t  as  he  matiaged  to  1

have  most  of  his  attacks  prc*c<‘df*d  by  an  attat*k  of  obsfipaiitm  in  '

order  to  arouse  anxious  foreiuniings  in  hi  .  relit ;vt\s  and  IIuin  bring  1

himself  to  their  notice  in  the  event  of  a  degratiafion.

Obstinacy  and  infantile  m*gaftvism  may  alreadv  be  well
developed  towards  the  c*nd  of  the  nur-mia  periml.  If  is  the
association  of  these  anornali(.*H  of  nrinatitm,  defeeation,  ami  eating,
which  gives  rise  to  the  heiglifened  reastmirig.**  The  rhiW  '
who  abstains  from  emptying  his  bowels  derives  hi-s  pleasurable
sen?ation.s  not  from  an  irritatit»n  of  tlie  rei*tiim,  but'  from  the  j
satisfaction  of  his  obstinacy  \vhit*h  avails  itself  of  this  iinaesthetic

^ThuB  it  in  that  t}i«^  thtiueht  |44»>*  nuf  miliH,  but

depuiuk  m  anah»jL?mi«  gyiubfilH,  wb<o*«  njrrov

the  |»rr'f»arr»li5'f*Ha  **f  fbtf  1*|  itt”  fill ti*r,

corruHpomlH  tc)  flia  cuhlirn*  **  Thn  i|.«<  nvr»k»l.

IhtMoiub^y  are  fi«  a  fb-vir#?  jri  fit*'  it-rvie#*  .t  i\w  ...  ?m  i%|ip-|f  tli«  '

»i%T>-i{l(‘al  ef  the  nenrotk

The  w/.ruan  an  a  SphijiN,  fhf  ma?«  jih  a  (


AVARICE,  SUSiHClDCSNKSS,  ENVY,  ETC.  85

aeans,  !)ut  nuiy.  liuwrv«’i.  attribute^  a  ph'asure-quality  to  rcnlal
ensations  fur  yuars,  u{»  tu-  thr  tif  lu-^  ul^stitiary.

The  mother  of  a  nearly  tui^year-etti  girl  who  was  stil!  suffering
rom  bed-wrttiiig  tulti  me  that  .*4u'  hatl  tiaajiiently  ubservtnl  that
rhen  awakeiuni  trum  her  rdec’p  her  iTiltl  wuuUl  afteiul  {.iropet  iy
0  the  emptying  tU'  the  luaihleta  pi'i»viiling  she  was  still  In  a  haU-
vakefui  state  tuily,  but  SiHimu"  ilid  slic*  beeome  fully  awal.e
han  she  rcduscsl  to  f!i»  :ae  ll  tlie  ehiltl  heeamc*  hilly  awake
owanls  tlu*  eiu!  oi  the  m'lnatiun.  u|')set  the*  urinal  aiul  iTita!

.  lung  time  out  of  rage  at  bcuug  tlurn  taktui  unawares  :  if,  on  iho
itluT  haiul,  she  still  i'ontinued  hall  a-dec'p  she  turneti  over  aiui
rent  fast  asleep.  ‘Thus  wi'  may  hm!  m  every  c*ase  tlial  fVum  the
•ery  earliest  ptuami  u|  exi^Umu  e  the  egtioamstauusness  uf  th«*
:hilii  timis  itstdf  in  a  maiiite-4  ami  latent  i'untrast  with  its
mviTonmvnt,  that  if  aN-auiU':.  a  most  promumeeil  atlitmli^  oi
mstihty  ami  bc‘!Hgrrcuu-y  unfit  it  tuiallv  brings  alunit  a  unifurm
erniiiiatiim  td'  all  tht*M*  arte.ressivi*  stimuli,  until  it  tamstrurt'i
hese  intii  the  maseulim.'  protfd  wluah  it  brings  in  i^ppusitirui
0  the*  stlimili  of  friidriHe.-.,  .tunudinaev,  ami  ueakmsss,  as  wadi
.s  tu  t!ie  niani!e".ta.tioii-..  uf  iiilnmu itv,  all  ol  whieh  it  (a'^lleetively
ipjiereeives  and  etunliai-'.  a  -  ’-ympfoim.  tU  irminliuty.  ih\h  that
it  tinu^s  an  iiiteilaeiug  and  intertwining  takes  platan  wlnue  the
naseuline  prtde-'d  lav.  are-.-*  uptm  lemiulne  svmptums  in  unler
o  utiii'/a*  them  a-:  a  lagTear,  or  whert*  lie  edtst inatelv  retains
miiinint'*  syniptiim-'.  and  this  make*'.  p(j'.silde  the  iievelopment  of
serrnaphrodislii'  etursf  i m  tion*.  whieh  liki'Wtse  exert  thfdr  influema:
n  tin*  iiirf’tliiui  of  tlir  ma*.eulifir  piotf'.t.  Ibu'  example,  tears,
niiis{iositiu!i*,.  :amul4tious  and  exagygeratiuns  of  ehihilumd
hdeets.  dlie  ovrrai'eeiit iiatfsi  ipiidinit  prineiple,  namely,  !
vish  tu  b«’  a  man/'  enlist thm  within  its  ranks  all  utili'/able
ludily  symptone.,  parfir'iiLirlv  those  m'mifestatiuns  td  inferiority
ifmn  whieh  tin*  affentiun  of  the  patient  as  well  as  that  tif  the
*nviruiimcmt  is  espfn’ially  diieitrd,

Thus  it  liappens  ifial  the  m.tsr'uiim*  protest  makes  use  of  a
somatic*  languay/'*  ’*  fi»r  tlu-  pnrpo-;e  of  gainitg,^  escpressiun,  A
icmutiful  example,  one  w!ii*li  trecfuentiv  retmr-,  in  rieurutie
dianfa.sif*s,  is  that  lasmarelo  da  VimTs  tlnldhucnl  pliantasy  :
*A  vulture  rt^pfsitrdiy  'Jiovfsl  if’,  tail  into  his  nunith/’  I1\is
ihantasy  earries  t!ie  afti’.t's  pswliic*  csmstellation  to  a  most
namrate  abstraclion,  Mniith  phanta'des  are  re|udarly  relalei!  lu
manifestations  of  iidrriority  in  tin*  c  hild's  gastrodnlesliiial  trarl,
aHiiiardi/s  im  lifiatioiis  to  a  seiema*  c»f  nutrition  were  must  liktdy
lie  fruits  id  tlu'  atteiition  diris-ted  in  tlH*^.e  tdiannels.

*rhe  tail  of  the  vulture  is  a  fdialtic'  symlnd.  A  summing  up
lifsse  f-ivti  fremis  brings  forth  the  t'harmiiuastir  basie  idea,  '*  !
vil!  experience*  flir  lot  of  the  rvimian/*  fin!  this  rigid  aelhrrem"e
ai  a  symtiulic*  guiding  prineiide  alreadv  draws  our  atfruifioii  tu
;he  fact,  that  tlirse  ainl  similir  tremls  of  thought  do  mst


S6


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


a  psychic  settlement  but  serve,  umler  the  pressurf^  t^f  our
masculine  culture,  for  a  heightened  impetus  in  the  opposite
direction,  must  lead  to  an  over  eenipensatiuii  toward  the
masculine  side,  where  they  evolve  the  niaseulitu'  guiding  principle
the  more  distinctly,  “  thereforc‘  I  must  net  in  sueli  a  manner  as
if  I  were  a  complete  man.”

That  these  two  guiding  |)rineiples  eontrmiiet  iuu‘  ain^tlu^r,  asitle
from  the  fact  that  each  individually  is  a  eontradietion  to  reality,
in  so  far  as  they  are  taken  literally  and  not  a-  siuntihing  useful
and  corrigible,  I  have  already  set  fi^rth  in  my  etmlritmtion  on
the  ”  Psychic  hermaphroditism  in  life  ami  in  the  neurosis  ”
(”  Fortschritte  der  Medi/in,”  Leip'-^ig.

This  contradiction  is  relleettnl  in  doubt,  iii  indeei';ion,  and  in
fear  of  making  tleeisions,  tin*  aiialysis  <d  whiidi  reveals  nnua'  or
less  the  fact  that  there  existtal  in  f'arly  elsihihootl  .tn  uneculainty
as  to  the  future  sexual  role,  in  the  psyehie  -su[)erst  met  lire  of
which  all  later  sensations,  feelings  and  stiimiH  were  griuiped  in
a  certain  sense  as  douldfu!,  ”  1  don't  kmnv  whether  !  am  a  man
ora  wmman  ”  (see  **  Predisptvsitions  ti>  Neurosis,”  Year  Hook,
Bleuler-Freucl,  1909).

Our  patient  expressed  in  flie  anal  kinguage  that  she  had
closed  up  an  opening.  A  <HsfinetIy  iounnuu*  thought.  One
may  picture  to  himself  a  gTiurp  of  merj  and  ssonivn  tlrrsstal  in
womenks  clothes  gathered  in  a  room  into  which  a  mouse  was
suddenly  let  loose.  The  wonum  will  at  onco  betray  fheur  sex
in  that  they  will  draw  their  floth<*s  around  tlunr  legs,  as  if  they
tried  to  prevent  the  mouse  from  ontriiug.  In  the  ‘  .one  nianner,
the  feminine  frightrming  guiding  primufdr  i-;  lK'tj.»vrd  In*  a  fear
of  holes,  of  !)eing  bitten,  staldnai,  ith»as  of  pfrraa  ution  by  men,
by  bulls,  the  position  of  the*  hark,  the  being  tn  flu*  ri|^ht,

backwards,  to  be  pressed  upon,  to  fall,  otca,  a  guiding  principle
which  is  readily  reacted  on  with  an  insuring  anxictvd

Okstipation  as  a  neundit*  symjitom  tako-;  its  tu’igiri  in  a
hereditary  defect  of  tiie  intf‘^’.tim*s,  wloVE  Icsuls  to  a  neurotic
closure  of  the  sphincter  thnnigh  idea%  concmauitg  anal  birth  and
sexual  relation.  As  a  matter  of  fact  this  patir.nt  suf’b'rcd  in  lifT
childhood  from  intestinal  cafarrli  and  ticcasiona!  intefitimi!
incontinence,  later  fnun  «5ii'-:fipati(jn  and  a  retdo-vagina!  bstula.

That  the  closure  of  the  rune;  was  imder  iht*  tloruinalion  of  a
guiding  idea  of  closing  of  cavities  is  likewise  -iron  from  the  fact
that  the  patient  suffercal  for  a  ('onsiderabh*  length  of  time
following  her  marriage  from  vaginismus.  Tlw  «ilistip:iti.ni  of
this  aging  woman  expre.sses  in  a  dual  way  the  same  desire  as
did  her  erstwhile  vaginismus,  namely,  ”  I  don't  ivant  to  lie  a
woman,  I  want  to  he  a  man.”

At  this  point  I  must  for  praetical.  as  well  as  for  theoretical

•'*  Tht*  surrif*  rnfif'inilfiir*  in  fit*-  t.*  Ov.OMi-i,

pnfmuiH,  Viiiiiriimnui.  -amsn,  cif  ihv  uu-\  a  u-u;,  nf  runh,


AVARICE,  SCSPICiOUSNESS,  ENVY,  ETC.  87

■easons  gt)  ccHisitlca'alily  lu^Vinui  flu*  .siH>|U‘  tif  a  rharacter

lelineation,  as  oiic^  is  tcir  that  matter  osualiy  <‘onipt‘!i<.ni  to  take
nto  account  the  psyelu^  as  a  wluilt*  in  c.*very  ciiseussion  of  psyclni"-
ogical  cjiiestions.  llceades  this  so  niinuttdy  analyzeal  case
urnislies  a  clearer  insight  than  it  is  possiblt*  to  gain  in  othe'r
aSiV"’,  es|u*cially  \vhcrc%  because  of  a  ilcpeuidciU't*  upon  the
liysii.‘ia!i  er  iijnni  extraiieims  cireimistam-teg  a  cure  or
liscontinuance  t^t  the  treatin«*iit  taktes  placa*  heftua*  th<"  scheme,
iccorcliiig  to  which  flu*  patiemt  Inult  Iiis  psyelucsis,  becomes
:onip!etc'Iy  revcMled.  Tliic>  !  will  attempt  to  sc*t  hu1.h  in  this
asta  this  scinane,  bv  .irranging  actsirdiug  to  this  analytically
[isclostal  schvmv  all  !i«t  symptom,;,  the*  sentinels  i>j>posife  the
suter  work!,  and  show  tin*  iNVutlietic  relatiiinship  td  Iht*  traits  of
liaracter  with  it.

Aca'iirdiiig  this  scheiiu*  (p.  184-01  tin*  patient  arranged  alt
ler  t'5C|if’r!e!H"«’s.  and  wlierrver  ihev  lifted  at  all,  oecasiori  bir
I'hich  is  amply  furnished  in  the*  life  of  c*very  individual  by  his
yriihcdic  as  w<d!  as  purposive  appriaTpliims,  she  r<%‘u1:t‘d  to  them
dtii  tin'  ajipropri.ilc*  diN^M  :*'  ifs.tnife'U  Uions.  'The  protective
rails  oi  charactiu’  uru'o  ptcJtrii  Ui  the  tore,  like*  <nitpo‘4s,  wc*re
ver  ready  lor  dfdme.fa  am!  esphiiiifsi  sioiatiims  in  aci'(U'’dance
. ith  puidJnp  lluHiyiif'C  and  whenever  the  oceasloti  arose,
orruwtH.1  Mipjioi!  tiann  the  sum  tcUa!  id’  the  ap|n*opriafe
ymptenns.  HfU'  maiiilf-aation-;  of  imiepcuiilencf-  wana*  consider-
Idy  interfi'U'cd  with  liy  tlu'  info!Iie*'n!  .nel  tcualer  attitude  of  luu*
usbariiil  and  by  cejtain  l.=fuievuhait  spuding  principles  id  tlie
'afienf,  1  lius  if  hap|'»eiir‘d  timt  the  lia'.ic  sfheme,  ‘*rru  ottly  a
aiman/*  iltu'ived  jfs  inllurma*  frttm  intentionally  retained
inpressiiins  id  the  feniiniiio  oT-,  in  cofuns  litui  with  wdiii’h  tiu*
nconsiitnis  nirM'haidsin  of  ifie  maseulim*  ypiiding  tluiuglits
.irnisheil  the  protecting  infunenfie  'fhe  hiudtiiy  woman  is
haracterized  by  a  more  samsciou;  attitmle  ttovard  tlu*  fenuntm*
filf*  by  a  purptjsivf*  di»vetail!np^  arid  »orreciivf*  appiamimaticm  cd
:ie  srriem<*  to  reality,  llie  ps\tii‘»sis  produiaal  an  actauitauition
f  tin*  imaginary  i'S'lirmr*  un'  priUeefive  purpiises,  and  an
Ka.irrioilile  aftifiuh*  within  this  si  heme  ;  sni.  h  a  patient  wall
oriduct  herself  as  if  :Ju*  really  W'err  pregnant.  In  all  three  casr**;
fii*  ficiioii  id  prepiiancv  and  f!n*  giasater  eiri’h*  tif  its
ianifesttititms,  a  svinbol  iif  flu*  inferior  h'lmnine  ifdi%  a  tarn-
incsirig  fm|n’rss!trii  tor  the  frehng  o|  dograelatiiin,  but  at  thi’saua*
me  looked  iipiiii  foaii  the  .•4andp*jin!  of  the  ma-scailim'  |u'oir*st,  an
rtifice  for  the  purpose"  td  avoiding  further  riegrailation,  as  was
hown  afitwe.*

®  tr3ifof»'rfij;eH-n  *{  fti«'  fr*-;  •■-•uliisr  fy’U--?!  fiis:4V‘  O’JM'h  r»  vvliyr*^

yfyr  C'i  UirtThf-n  erc’S-siCss'v,  I**'  .HOn-sni  U>r,

nyrli  rii'.i*  s  <4  a  v^'fv  ly’Oyrr  rwa.  *{*n<’  s'iV  :i  luihv

f|p*fi  ‘r*.?!|Ly|v  fh»’

rri%%’fil  ..iirli  un  4rE  mrfit .


88


THE  NEUROTIC  CuNbl  ITUl  lUN


SC  HI*:  ME


Fear  of  society-


Compulsive  bi ashing
Fear  of  being  alone.
Palpitation  of  the  heart*
Fear  of  falling,  diz’/inesH
when  in  high  places*


SYMPTOMS

/The  leaning  from  the
I  femiium’

»  r6h\  the  umseultne
I  ptiHesl.


j  PruOrti^m  againaf
I  conn  mg.


Prtjfeetive  ilei?rriiifHC

jUilHi*»|uinifc

pri5ie:’it  ? .


fWhttlmg  of  man.

Ba'ihftiItteiW  Ilifimlityb
Viria«ii?i  iimraUty.
Ih’i'Ufe  to  iUimnmte
Witli

iubi4«'«|tietil  proleil  i .


Feeling  of  pressure  in
the  srmnueh.  (('iecum.|
Frigidity.  Overacuity
of  hearing^  of  hmo
band’s  snoring,
■Vaginismus,  presgiiti'
sensatiouH  over  the
lireasts.


Protect  It  la  agamgt
j  CiiiilM,


Wtllfulnri.i.
t  •it  ncicy .


Inability  to  stand  any
kind  of  pressure,  tlie
struggle  against  the
corset.

A  feeling  of  being  drawn
to  the  right  and  dow  n*
ward  (towunls  tin*
feminine  side).

Koises  in  the  ears.  (Th«'
noise  of  the  moving
sea,  which  swells  and
falls.)


Protecii^ju

e<nlU4.


Abdominal  painn.
BhortncHS  of  breath.
Palpitation  of  tin?  Imart.
Kaim(*a.

Vomiting.

Compulsory  ideas  of
pregnancy.

Fatigue.

Craving  for  certain
foods.


against

pregiiaiiey.


I  »e.iputaiiMn;in-/*w,

the  bnibaijtl.


?-v.ma»jc  t>vcr>

If v|H'<ide4ulreonil|y  to

p;in!prr


Abdominal  cramps.  i

Difficult  evaeufttkm  •

the  Imwels,  fdgnifyirig  Proteeti^.n  against
difficult  laliotir.  *  ,  partunlitut.

Ocxiasional  |>olyuria.  (Ftsi-  j
ing  of  the  w’liters.)


AVAKll'K,  .StJSl’IClUl'.SNKSS,  ENVY,  ETC.  89


Obji^ctitHi  l.uiiK  uii

kni,

Fuiii  in  I  A

IVrult'iicy  to  |»r«i-
long  iiiVitfulc-oy .  I


tic'itiu  t,  f  w  i’Tiafftii  )\
i.i  llmTiii’U'  I  ,u;iun,0

gbi.'I'lfl  ;  I  IMOTln-lMy:'


iA*rm  I -I'  notion  i»f  ;i,
oinnpltw  t\jH‘  for  flic
|»tirju>,sr  Ilf  tioing
HVViiy  with  I  he
inh-nuTity  ;uu!

ticgnnhit  ion.


WniluicH.i  ill  h nil's  f*"
mtiuiun:  t'iif  t4'
mid  iihiiHiii,

Stilggt'Wtg  CAll  ,

limy  fiiliguiinlo)  lu
wiilking.


A  ..it

.Mioti'ilic’  lM't»n%'iOur

tmviird,‘i  ohihlrni.
Ihipnl  f.itHHun;:,  “iring
i«»l  uii|nificfsr»'  sn  Ihr
riirn  of  rluhlrcfi.
[nwimiiiik-.

FiiiirkittrAi  in  104!?

(if  rlt'iinhlii' ii,
t  ivrr-;ir}iton*“vi  of  hrM
ing  III  ingitt.
hight  fdcrUHA., .


A  mrnu'nf-o  of

lo'illilii:-;  the  "hliii

brd.


ho,!'-  -o  .fi
Agmir'it
fU;i!er{t;i!
tintiei


AviU'H'ig  thrift  UUC-E4,
(oivy,  tioriirt*  ti»  ilc.nn"
in.a»%  imtiiitH'nro.

iVnr  of  iUfituiuig-
toothing,  of  00m*
|*}ottng  utiilang,  nil
^ortT  4if  I'Xofttotw,
II -i  if  fho  4iittiui«.*<'
townrii  n|Uiiity

tvitii  tniifi  worti  to

!o‘  diinmirtltinl  in
4i»v  |io;col»lo  Wii)  .


A  tirrMiii  whirh  tutik  piaro  tinvarda  tfu'  t'ntl  uf  tUv  tnMfinent
5th()vv.s  US  thr*  'un^p'rja!  guiitiug  thought  of  tho  patient  in
c’onrira'tin'U  with  hrr  adthi!  inner  tHnsflitlg,  She  ilrtsameti  :
As  if  slif  ON  a  hi-n^h  ifi  it  p4ik  Htuir  iltv  rv\iilrniu*

fh‘r  HI  iinH  ':Ttuik .  Slw*  uuirr  tut  hpr  ht*itd  ftm

caps,  Twti  iitfi:  apf-*uuh  h*'J  luun  iudihul  hrr  t$nd  toir  of

ihtiii  ifirr  one  n/  iiu'  tup-,  futni  hrr  htuhl,  Slu*  hahl  id

llir  ipri  tind  hrlJ  Iwr  srkth^  fhr  onv  disnpptuitr.d  tinj

ihrt'uifnnl  /o  wporl  /aa  to  ilw  fmfii  c.  poor,  (uidlv  dofhtd

finiman  passtu!  In*  iUtd  iidd  lu-r  t)hii  ihr  p/n'l'%  name  tiniv  Velirku.
i4l  this  point  \hr  irmt  Uu  hrr  oiotlirr  in  ordrr  fit  nunphiiti,  II or
oudlu‘r  ptiiu’  hr-r  a  lut^krl  fut!  ttf  rpip.  and  snid  fhrvrosf  ^  iinldro'..
Shr  took  of  ihr  opp-:  in  hrr  hand  and  saw  that  iJirv

wrrr  i^niivd'

Tlir  sittuififoi  on  the  :  her  fatiipie  ami  t!te  bathing  cajn

referrec!  tn  a  livttnipalhir  treatfurrit  whirh  Aw  had  undertaken
efipmaalty  f«ir  file  rnnuval  id  an  iieauania  |jrinr  to  tanning  under
iny  rare,  C  hi  the  day  j.»reer-ditoa  tlie  drearu  A\r  reprirnantltal  her
fiaughter  fieeau'^e  tlir  latter  need  her  bath  linen  for  !H*r  own  use  ;
slit*  also  peciecset!  twe  battiiitg  t'aps,  as  the  tlreaii},
whieli  thr^  dauidtfer  likewisr  often  used,  Velirfca  h

II


go


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


a  Slavic  word  signifying  big.  The  daughter  had  a
Slavic  Adelspraedikat/’  The  poorly-dressed  woman  is  a
noblewoman  by  the  name  of  Grandvenire.  Opposed  to  the  two
is  she,  the  plebeian,  degraded  one.  She  was  dissatisfied  because
her  husband  was  not  knighted,  but  on  account  of  her  pride  she
did  not  acknowledge  this  envy.  She  was  afraid  that  her  daughter
might  be  able  to  take  everything  away  from  her.  She  had  two
daughters,  one  died,  disappeared.  She  often  complained  to  me
that  her  daughter  cost  her  much  money.  She  has  already  given
her  all  her  jewelry.  From  her  very  childhood  she  has  always
been  degraded  before  others.  Even  her  mother  always  humbled
her  and  demanded  payment  from  her  for  every  little  thing  after
the  patient  had  become  married.  She,  on  the  other  hand,
supplied  her  daughter  regularly  with  eggs,  venison,  milk,  butter,
etc.,  and  still  she  needed  so  much  money.  Before  she  left  for
Vienna  she  forgot  to  settle  a  debt  of  5  guldens.  The  day  previous
she  wrote  to  her  husband  that  he  should  pay  this  at  once.  In
fact  she  always  had  to  pay  at  once  for  everything  she  bought. ‘

The  mother  treated  her  badly.  In  the  dream  she  recalled  a
forgotten  obligation.  She  always  saved  at  her  expense.  In  the
dream  she  received  from  her  mother  the  masculine  attribute
(testicles)  which  the  mother  kept  from  her  at  the  time  of  birth.
We  see  again  how  out  of  the  feeling  of  femininity  (degradation)
the  masculine  protest  is  in  the  dream  directed  against  further
insults.  This  dream  shows  us  the  attempt  of  the  patient  to  evade
in  her  thoughts  further  degradation  and  to  accuse  her  daughter
that  like  her  mother  she  kept  everything  from  her.

Similarly,  this  lust  to  possess  everything  is  found  in  the
following  case  history  which  shows  still  more  clearly  than  the
preceding  case  how  the  patient  on  account  of  his  pride  seeks  to
remove  this  lust  from  his  field  of  vision,  to  repress  it.  We  shall
see  how  a  decided  change  takes  place  through  the  revelation  of
this  repression  and  through  the  elucidation  of  the  CEdipus
complex.  In  the  same  manner  it  appears  from  all  these  cases
that  this  lust  to  have  everything  pursues  the  most  senseless
goals.  Such  patients  have  eyes  for  everything  which  others  in
their  circle  possess  in  so  far  as  they  are  excluded  from  the
possession  of  the  same.  They  may  possess  more  than  the  others
and  yet  th.ey  will  envy  them.  They  may  gain  everything  which
they  formerly  begrudged  others  and  will  then  unceremoniously
set  it  aside  in  order  to  furnish  new  goals  for  their  desires  and
possessions.  And  their  lust  for  possession  ever  remains  attached

*  The  fear  to  become  humiliated  through  further  expenses  is  closely
allied  to  the  utilization  of  the  character-type  of  greed  and  parsimony.  These
maternal,  and  according  to  her  way  of  looking,  feminine  traits,  she  avoided
through  a  compnlsion  to  pay  beforehand  and  showed  herself  to  he  superior  to
her  mother  through  her  liberality.


AVARICE,  SUSFICIiH'SNESS.  ENVY,  ETC.  91

to  tho.sc  goals  whii'b  liioy  h.ivr  not  attainoil.  It  is  rcatiily  uiulor-
stood  that  they  arc'  iiica|i.u*itated  for  h^vr  ami  friendship.  Oftt'n
they  aeciuire  a  geiu'ial  aliility  to  iiiisrrpreseut  and  set  mit  to
captivate  stiiiLs  liei'aiisf*  others  a.Lsi»  dominate.  I'hey  constantly
fear  de*gradatioii  and  ahvays  stn'k  to  assure  themselves  long
befurehand,  llic'  love  csl  ihc'  parcmts  enjoyed  by  the  laaitliery
their  jewelry,  the  marriage*  ut  a  bnuiier  or  tO  a  a  bot^k,

an  aecoriip!ishiiit‘iit  of  an  accjiiauiianct'  tu’  wvn  of  a  total  strangc*r,
fill  them  with  rage.®

The  superiiuity  of  anotlier,  a  sueeessfully  [>assed  r'xamination,
possession  tir  worth  cd  briifhers  and  si-4rrs  tlirow  them  into
excitemeiits*  I'ama*  them  lusidar'he,  insofunia  and  mtire
pronounced  iirurolit;  symptoms.  dlu'ir  constant  fear  not  to
become  esjiiai  of  an  old«‘r  or  yotingc'r  t»fother  may  render  them
unfit  for  work.  It  is  then  tliat  they  attempt  to  avoid  all  decisions
and  tests*  it  is  then  fiiaf  thev  reai  li  tlu*  stage  of  loss  or  initiative,
approach  often  in  any  pos-abh'  ivay  tin*  withdrawal  frtnii  life  and
siippcsrt  theni.^^'lvrs  ill  flit*  iiieanwhilr  on  their  ad  ime  created
symptoms  among  which  thne  eame  te  my  altrntioii  frca|m*ntiy
compulsory  bin-. lung,  migraine,  all  ».ort'^  of  fn-ad.iches,  palpitation
of  the  heart,  stufleriiigs  agor.ipfn^bia  and  i-!aii%.fri»pliobia,  tremor,
slee|,iiness,  deprc'S'-ion,  wt'akne^’.  of  memory,  exta'ssive  thirst
and  p.syc!u^]o'nic  rpile|rny.

I  have  r.''<perial!v  einpha'T.ed  aimve  thr*  caM'*  of  tin*  v«nmger
Isrother  because*  I  mc*|  with  him  o!tene*.t  and  bee.iusi*  hr*  is  numt
:ij>t  to  be  driven  tu  rivah  v.'  i  a  r  I-  rmt  an  f’Xifptiom  Cine

;dso  find’:  in  fids  roh*  ohier  siblings  at  <mly  t'ld!dri*n,  naturally
girls,  llie  rivalry  may  also  Ur  diret  tetl  ptirnarily  agaimd:
the  father  or  mother  in  wdmse  picture  the  clesired  superiority
Ippears  to  In*  i*onerefe!y  reprrs’riited.  !t  is  then  that  the  t  Etiipus-
aimph'X  develops  out  of  the  longing^  of  the  prrdis|nr;ed  child,  as
1  guiding  model,  a  guitling  lidiofi  to  gain  satisfacfiim  for  his
■Taving,  and  this  takes  place  at  a  fime  when  si'xual  craving  is
dill  out  of  the  c|iirstioiu  but  it  is  al-a*  tin*  tle.sjre  to  ptr-isess  a
‘icTsofi  or  an  cilijetl  whirli  brliuig  .  ht  amahet.,  .\  bf*!irf  in

:irfHlc*stinatitm  ami  ide.f.  of  i«b‘iitiheation  witfi  <io<i  freijuenfly
ievfdop  as  manifVstation-.;  of  the  ma  .eubuf*  pnge-;f ,  Klejitomania
s  frfS|tnmtly  rf*vea!ed  in  the  anamneses;  of  these  patients.  At
ifiH*s  the*  pafieiif  i?;  iiiHsm’smius  of  his  guiding  primaide.
Iccsisionally  he  is  seen  at  work  trying,  cmu'eal  this  guiding
>rincip!f*  and  to  make  if  luirreogni/aliir  tinsatgli  a  mardfeslation
d  o|i|io!;ed  ff*ridericirs  s.m  h  as.  Hberalitv.

* ''rimii  nn  >;!?!  If-a.-l  fl;*-  ajO'.'lMi.ii.rsil

Ut'UTtmi-i  ifj  f|ji’  'S  ttlirn  flifi  l-.i.Or'if  :.\U‘  Ur-tirMUrtilfy  »{j

%im  tlt«*  lii'fif  IU.4V'  ifiUsi'Oi-OMft  Ilf

arrififiif.

I>V|’-.r|.li||f.  ’*  |Cy,-n«.4r:K„'V


92


THE  NEUROTir  CONSTITUTION


The  wish,  which  for  instance,  draws  him  to  his  mother,
changes  nothing  after  it  has  become  (*onscimis  in  the  disease-
picture,  no  matter  how  frankly  sexual  it  may  he  shown  to  he.  It
is  only  after  the  patient  understands  and  controls  his  desire  for
the  unattainable,  for  that  which  in  the'  nature  of  things  belongs
to  another,  that  recovery  may  take  place.

The  boundless  pride  whi<‘h  oiu'  tletcnis  in  smne  of  these  cases
does  not  readily  permit  the  patient  to  gain  insight  iidn  Ids  envy
and  jealousy-  "The  tenderu-y  to  belitth*  others  is,  on  the  other
hand,  quite  markedly  developed  and  readily  comes  to  the  surface.
Malice,  revengefulness,  desire  for  intrigut'  (arul  in  those*  of  lower
intelligence),  more  crudely  aggrt'ssive  ttmdencic's,  even  sadistic
and  murder-instincts  reveal  thernsfdves  as  atieinpts  to  insure
oneself  against  a  degradation  in  this  external  rivalry.  The  fear
of  the  consequences,  such  as  a  lively  concawn  about  thi'  needs  of
relatives,  the  picturing  to  oneself  ni  punislmients,  arrest  and
misery  are  appertaining  assurances  against  the*  rhul  lit  teats  of  the
masculine  protest.  Even  epihqttir  .st'izures  may  servt*  as  s«*rurity
devices,  thus,  for  instances  as  in  our  casr,  w!ter«'  a  psveho-
epileptic  insult  associated  itself  with  patricidal  am!  fratrichlal
dream-stirrings.

It  is  possible  that  thr*  of  a  **  sriutnsi  luvt'  ”  regularly

plays  a  rfile  in  these  cases,  and  brings  about  tlu*  imtst  intense
hate  against  the  unattained  person.  tnay  jtistly

whether  love  in  a  normal  persort  is  capablr  tg  sm  h  a  trans-
formation.  It  r<Mjuires  tlu*  smn-ttdal  of  p<avor-instiuii  <  ,  the  over¬
heated  egO“Consciousn(‘SS  of  these  indivhiuals  ht  dc*  ire  tt>  bring
about  the  spiritual  possessiem  of  another  per  am  against  that
person's  will.  Inasmuch  as  the  m  urtUic  <le*ares  fe  po  '  a*s!;  everj^-
thing,  he  is  blind  to  all  natural  re-Uridions,  and  experiimees  m
the  scorn  of  his  love  a  tlirust  at  his  mo-.t  srm.itivo  prineijile.  Now
he  turns  to  revenge^  :  Achriunifd  amt'cho.

When  one  is  in  dould  as  to  which  of  two  prr  :nns  flu*  patient
has  selected  for  his  afft.*ctitms,  whether  the  lather  or  mother,  it
is  safe  to  assume  that  it  is  the  <jpposite  the  ouo  the  patient
mentions.  It  would  be  too  ()ainfi!l,  a  ru!o.  to  arknuwlod|te
scorned  love.  An  exact  srdufitiu  seems  to  me  ta  la*  furinshrd  by
the  following  simple  experiment  :

One  places  the  jjatient  exadly  between  the  two  persons  in
question,  a,n<l  soent  one  ot)-a*rvf*“';  tliat  hr  h:e%  mttved  nearer  trie
preferred  one.

Thus  I  was  al)le  to  dis<*over  in  flu*  ease  which  !  arn  about  to
discuss  in  detail  that  the  patient  rhinved  defuderl  preffTcnre  for
his  mother,  though  when  he*  was  alone  he  always  gave  priderence
to  his  father.  He  not  infrequently  scedded  Ids  fiiotlier,  and  not
a  day  passed  but  what  they  <iiiarrellrcl.


I


93


srSFliliirsXESS.  envy,  eit,

A  ccniain  ni4iiift'>tatiuii  wliiah  %mi  irr([Uf'ntly  ul»serv«\a  in  the
neurixses  was  likewise  prtsscnu,  here,  aiui  in  an  I'specblly
aecentiuiteci  form,  riaiuely,  tlie  stroni,^  einpluisis  ut  a  jH'dantic
character  trait,  whieh.  mit  tmlike  ilu^  **  crack  leginumt  *'  in
wartime,  tixik  uvrv  the  task  uf  ctmiirn;  in  Unnli  with  t!ie  <meoiy.
The  enemy  was  first  td  a!!  ihc'  inudn'r,  ami  tlu*  ilaily  luiUles
regularly  ilf‘ve!ii|HHi  btHsnrNr  tbr*  latter  was  uuable‘  u?  do  iuli
justice  to  tlu^  patient’s  pcslantic  iinnatids  in  eafiiig,  in  dressing*
in  the  preparatiioi  id’  Ids  hatli  or  TchI.  <)nr  patient  thus  gaineil
II  base  id'  ope'isitiini  fntm  uddi'h  funanated  thi*  variuii.s  .siildrr-
iiiges  by  iiumiis  cii’  which  hi*  funlravorcil  U%  place  his  tiudher,  after
all,  completely  at  his  sc-rvit'e.  In  this  is  seen  again  a  nearcitic
trait  of  character  a,s  a  iiewdi’e,  by  means  td  which  the  jiatimil  seeks
to  be  true  to  his  inner  fielion,  ta  deminatf'  his  mother  in  the  same
mannt‘r  as  hv  Indieved  to  have  otiserved  his  fathf^r  dominate  her.
'*  And  shoidd  von  hie  unwillinc^,  Tl!  use  force,**  Idiis  train  of
diuiight  gained  stability  from  tin*  patient  in  his  ymuth,  and  thus
:ie  at  once  a'^-aiirird  liHcard-,  hi*,  niotlna  an  aitiltule  o|  ndstrn.st,
mristantly  iJii  the  a!«nd  hir  srdbacks,  for  the  praderritig  of  others,
:iil!  of  tense  energy  ami  gltjoiiiy  rtjieefatiim  whidher  lie  will  yet
aicceed  in  gaining,  lii'f  foi  Iiiiioadf.  Not  le'tam'.e  he  rtsdty  !ove<l
:ier,  or  really  <iesiretl  to  pusM'*  :s  her.  but  itf'can-.e  his  dr-. ire  l4ir
:)(»s.session  of  her  wsis  ‘.indlar  to  iIh'  d^'-.irr  whidi  }■*<'  hail  for  many
dher  things,  jrwi'liv,  boniMiH'.,  wdiich  hr  valiu'd  md  at  all  highly,
rut  left  lying  in  a  drawn,  torgoffni.  once  he  ctmh!  cal!  tlinn  his
wvu,  i  liU'i  tile  pu-.*.r  ■, -at »n  of  flir  ms  aim'  \va  .  not  an  nni  in  il-adf,
dsdtssire  was  not  at  all  a  libidiiiosp;  iu  -.exinil  onr\  but  the  nnittna’
md  his  distama’  from  tier  brrainr  a  symlnd  for  him,  an  e;4iinatr
i{  his  c.nvn  inlf’fiiU'ity .  And  firtan-a’  hr  appnciivcai  the  costfiic:
riefurr,  ewn'y  ni'w  acijiiaiiifarice,  rv*-rv  i elation  to  tin*  opposite
iex  with  file  ^:alnf*  frait-*  of  i  harm  ter,  -aispit  itmsly,  full  id
.ensitivnie. :.,s,  witli  a  similar  rxpis  lalion  *d  a  di,sappointmrnt,  ail
aiccesH  fled  from  him,  all  safisl.n  lion  in  hie  vvas  lost  it*  Idm.^  He
lacl  eyes  only  for  everything  vUdrh  spt^ke  against  him,  against
Its  suf'ceas,  and  wdiatrver  lie  did  attain  lost  all  charm  for  idm,
!(*  settled  the  protdem  id  his  llfr  witfi  the  arranimmrnf  fd  his
leairosis.  He  considriesi  himself  detnarnt  by  a  whole  hd"  and
Inbuieficimicy  was  represriilrd  in  the  symbolic  loss  of  the  mother.

Hues  one  caipjiosr  that  fids  p>itirnt  who  had  been  suffering
rom  a?ixtely-st,itr.s,  ndgisdiie  and  lirpressions,  eould  have  been
"iirfsl  if  Ids  imither  were  retuineti  to  Idin  Such  an  attemjif.
voiild  jiavr  been  friiiflrss  at  the  liftse  the  patient  came  to  the
ihysiciajL  Even  the  riio'd  r'oiii|diant  mother  and  many  of  them
.re  lastingly  estranged  froin  their  sons-  eould  not  have  shown
hat  mermure  of  patieriee  and  saenhee  which  the  patient
eiiiariiled  in  Ids  lioiinclless  riiisfriisl  and  desire  for  doiidnanrv.

•  he  past,  arid  the  flioiighf  of  former  privations,  were  ever  risnly


94


THE  NEUROTIC'  CONSTITUTION


to  furnish  motives  for  new  outbreaks  and  t»{iprc\ssions.  It  is
possible  that  the  attempt  at  cure  niight^  have  beaut  a  successful
one  in  the  patient’s  childhood,  a  pedagogic  solution  of  this  special
neurotic  problem  in  a  gradual  itrientation  ami  itidt‘peiulence  of
the  child,  and  an  appropriate  tramjuili/ang  of  t!u‘  titild  Ciutcerning
his  future.  It  is  the  unceriainiy  which  mars  tho  t»ut!tK»k  for  the
future  in  these  children,  an  ttnetutainty  whose*  organie'  and
psychic  roots  we  already  kno^v.  In  our  case*  it  was  the  fact  that
the  patient,  already  as  a  chiUl,  e'ven  during  the*  siuEling  period
showed  a  tendency  to  heettme  easily  frighteuienl  :oul  p:nticky.
This  fright  of  suckhngS'-whidi  is  free}Uently  taktut  a  ;  neuvousne4s
—is  obviously  an  organic  inheritance*  and  is  asscu-iatmb  aeaswding
to  my  observations,  with  an  hereditary  sensitivcn«‘ss.  infeTieirity
of  the  auditory  apparatus,  set  that  children  alreuuly  beeamie
panicky  in  the  presence  of  noises  and  ttuu*s  to  which  other
children  pay  no  uruLsual  attention.  Vvoin  our  staiulpoint  this
striking  tendency  to  fright  signifies  a  sign  td  an  hereditary,
auditory  oversensitiveness,  a  manifestation  uf  a  somatic
inferiority  of  the  familiar  ear  dist‘ast*s,  but  likt*wisf*  Ciurcsptmds
to  a  heightened  refinement  of  hmring  in  the  musii*al  sernsr,  Tlie
fact  that  our  patient  suffered  at  the  of  h  years  from  a
protracted  rnulnle  ear  diseast*  vvhit'h  uei'rssitatcd  panu  rntesis  of
the  ear  drum,  is  in  acciird  with  tnir  virw’.  « tmtauaiing  somatic
inferiority;  similarly,  his  dev«dr>pme*nt  <d  an  rKrcdlettt  musical
ear  and  of  a  strikingly  rfdlned  stmsitiviuu*  i :  in  liraring  which
especially  qualified  him  for  eavesdropping,  'fhis;  stunatic  refine¬
ment  brings  with  it  that  tin*  child  is  drivmi  tu  a  devrdopment  of
a  tendency  towards  a  lurking  curiosity,  rven  thuugli  hv  may  feel
more  marlced  uncertainties  from  <dher  causes,  llit*  roots  of  this
uncertainty  from  whicdi  h<*  eruieavors  t<i  e styipe  by  UHsms  of  his
curiosity,  laid  in  the  jiatient’s  weaker  intelhn  t,  c'omj^ared  with
an  older  brother  —wlm  as  it  often  lia{>pens  the  tb*triment  of
bringing  up-  -made  of  the  patient  t!ie  plaything  td  his  railleries
and  often  made  a  fool  of  him.

The  patient  also  recalled  that  he  hml  suffered  from  that  form
of  cryptorchisrn  in  which  a  testich*  occasionally  di^appe;irs  into
the  abdominal  cavity  thnnigli  the  patent  canal.  This  fad,  that
is,  the  better  sexual  diwelopment  of  his  brother,  liie  earlier
maturity  of  the  latter,  brought  to  his  mind  eptib*  earlv  the  thought
that  he  was  perhaps  a  girl  after  all.  Up  to  the  fourth  year  of  his
life  he  was  dressed  in  girils  clothes,  and  during  this  juudiid  he
developed  the  fear  that  In*  nevrr  perhaps  wmiltl  reach  tin*  mature
state  of  his  father  or  his  edder  lirothtT,  that  is,  never  become  a
complete  man.  'Fhe  marked  development  tif  his  breasts  hmt
considerable  weight  to  his  uncertainty.  That  hr*  iun*onstimis!y
gave  considerable  thought  to  the  question  of  flie  fliflerenre  of
the  sexes,  one  may  glean  from  an  occurreni-e  which  rcniaiiied


95


AVARK'K,  SI 'SN'KSS.  ENVT/  -{CTC.

fixed  in  his  nieinury,  because  at  t!u'  tinu‘  he  tidd  'it  every  €)j}e
laughed  at  him.  On<*  ilay  whilf*  in  a  public  park  he*  .wa4ch^/%
girl  urinate  anti  upon  reaching  luune  relateti  funv  lie  h:u!  ^een
bov  urinate  from  behind/

I'hLs  eariy  period  in  his  life  was  id  inarketl  signHieanc't^  'in
shaping  hi.^  altitiuU*  ttnvartls  his  family  ami  in  a  broader  senate
to  tlie  worhi  at  large.  He  saw  himself  belitthal^  and  his  feeling'"^
of  inferiority  fouiul  no  atljtistment  in  the  family.  His  etwetmis-'
ness,  his  craving  to  betaime  the  c'cjual  td'  his  brtvther,  of  his  father,
of  anyone  whtnn  he  considfuasl  sfnmg.  able,  powerful,  gainetl  in
intensity  and  direcfetl  him  upon  paths  in  wlmli  he  came  intti
serious  eonflicts  witli  his  parents..  He  became  a  batl,  tmrnanagt*'
ah!t'  cliild,  which  matle  a  tendf‘r  attitmie  ttf  Ids  parents  towartls
him  still  rrun’e  ditlieult.  His  desires  assumed  measuredess
proportions,  hr  began  to  immre  himself  against  even*y  setback
suspiciously  ami  ^vith  a  growing  cinder,  and  this  at  a  time  wdten
his  maturing  griiitalia,  fus  strikingly  hairy  Inidy,  !us  improve*!
insight  int*^  matters  sexua!.  shoiihl  liav**  ha*l  their  trampnli'/ang
effeet  upiui  him.  lint  by  this  tim*'  his  position  in  the  family
herame  .sur*h  an  unfavorable  tmv,  owing  to  the  tbnadopinent  of  his
■'traits  of  cliaratlcua  wliiHi  likewise  unfave*rably  intlmuu’ed  his
seh<K>!  WiU'k,  that  with  lii.s  «n*er-^':.'.rnsitive  natur**  h<‘  Imd  gooc!
reas<m  to  feed  hirieadf  sliidifetl  and  ludittletl,  11ms  he  wms  no
longer  able  to  find  the  road  t*i  normality,  llmf  log  howev*T,
continued  to  apjKTtadvc  f!d».  shgtd  in  the  mantier  td  an  aria!«?gy
with  the  feminine  rdte*  -became  altasnty  evuienf  frtun  the  fir.st
dream  which  he  recite*!  *!uring  the  treatment.  The  dremn  was
**  I  felt  as  if  1  were  wtinas  ane^  an  a/o*  nursin^i  ehilJ/*

His  brother  often  ralle*!  him  an  ape  bf*rausr  *d  hi">  excessive
hairy  growth,  whiili  he  nevcrthelrs ,  c*Khibitc*d  with  pritle.  lire
ape,  whiili  i,s  nursing  the  child,  a  fmiiale  ape,  is  he  himself  -  that
is,  he  sees  himself,  he  feels  himself  in  a  feminine  rdte,  along  W'^ith
whiHi  the  nursing  is  to  be  ismsidere*!  a  gyneromastia  (*'  (Jyna*
kiunastif*  *')  whiHi  caatne  up  dining  the  dream  analysis,  ll'iis
is  the  fcuiiinim*  prini'iple  emphasi‘/e*l  by  me  for  all  dreams--
against  wliicli  tlu’  str**s:ang  <d  the  t*xt'essive  hairy  growth  In  to
be  imderstoiHf  as  pointing  in  the  diretdlon  of  the  mascailine
protest,  lluis  the'  patimt  enters  up*m  the  treatment  with  the
disdosiire  that  he  feels  himself  belittle*!  am!  piTuiits  us  t*>
divine  from  the  rdmit'e  td  I'iis  figure  *d  speech,  that  he  evaluates
this  irderioritv  as  feminine,

I  wish  to  firaw  attention,  in  this  eonmaiitm,  to  the  fart  tlmt
the  ilreamer  rdteri  vIu'u^svh  pictures  and  ft*rms  td  exprcssiiui  wddeh

*  "i'ltr  tilii'rf  Ijuiif  V  mI  f||r  rAlr* .  Ii?<  f  hfOirfi  t^r

yr.ifff,,  nhiVi'!  i»f  tlir  |*,:u-’N  hi  ih*'*  tls'VfhtntijfHl  »*f  n*’’itrM|h'

HlHfc’h  ci  IisCh' Hfi  ;i?!  it  -omI  hiri#'- i.f  HI  tlif

clfiiiiiiiaiii* V,  P  r»  i*fjH  *4  !iC->  iicosv  ar*'  br-vunuifty  t,»*

'll  idi  liir  i;ii  lliri  |rt»iHf ,


THE  NEURcrnc  i‘i)xsTrrrTic>N


96

show  a  simultaneous  coloring  of  fenunine  aml^  masculine  traits*
Here  it  was  an  ape,  whose  nursing  was  a  ftuninine  i'haracteristic,
while  the  hairy  growth  is  to  be  apperceiyetl  as  a  masculine
characteristic.  Such  forms  of  exprc^ssiun  which  1  have*  recognized
as  belonging  to  the  psychic  hermaphroditism  may  he  referred  to
two  simplifying  circumstances.  First,  thev  ctUTesjumd  to  the
infantile  indefmiteness  of  sex-cognition.  Second,  luTaiise  the
element  of  time,  as  in  other  cases,  the  eUnnent  of  space,  is  during
the  marked  abstraction  of  the  dream  state  wholly  or  almost
wholly  eliminated,  so  that  his  thoughts  whii*h  may  he  separated
spatially  or  temporally,  become  united  in  one  case  tlu'  thoughts
were  I  fee!  myself  a  woman  ami  wish  to  he  a  man.**  Stel:el,
in  his  further  elaboration  of  my  conception  of  psycliic  herma¬
phroditism,  assumes  a  doul)le  sexual  nu%aning  tor  dream

symbol,  which  I  think  is  a  certain  exaggeration,  nevertheless  he
comes  closer  to  truth  than  does  Freud  who  denies  tlu^  regular
manifestation  in  tlie  dream  of  psycluc  hcTinapliroditism  and  the
masculine  protest.

The  distinctne.ss  with  which  this  first  dresun  id  <mt  patient
points  to  his  feeling  of  inferiority,  st)  to  spcsik,  in  \hv  form  of  a
reaction  to  the  i>eginning  of  flu*  treatment,  is  naturally  also  to
be  understood  as  an  omen  for  tiie  hmudit  td  the  |diysieian  >

My  disease  has  its  origin  in  rny  feeling  td‘  inferiority/*  **  My
disease,'*  fainting  attacks  and  business  im.jp;uatv  an^  setnirity
devices  against  a  defeat  in  the  fifth  art,  ‘*  t  ant  impottmt  and
inefficient  as  a  child  ami  long  for  lovta  ape  hive*,  as  1  set*  it  in
the  dream."  We  fill  out  :  -  impotent  for  reason,  in  order  to  he
pampered  like  a  child,  wliiclt  he  sticceeiis  in  attaining  more
readily  after  hi.s  attacks  ;  and  inefficient,  in  «»rder  that  he  may
always  be  supplied  witii  mainfemanee,  in  onler  that  it  mav  not
be  forgotten  that  he  must  he  made  secure  hu’  life  thnmgh  affection
and  legacy.  His  marked  tendemey  to  he  frighttnuai  by  sudden
noise.s,  his  hyneracusis  was  asnecially  fitted  tti  ah!  him  in  gaining
his  point.  Tne  finale  wliich  ne  set  lu'fore  him,  a  d#*sired  over-
comperisation  for  a  h*eling  of  inferitirity,  <auisistc*d  in  not  more
nor  less  than  the  desire  io  gain  tht‘  love*  of  his  parents,  rspeeially
that  difficult  of  attainment,  mot!ier*s  love*.  Thus  he  utilizes,
with  the  object  of  influencing  his  mtjther's  heart,  the  already-
mentioned  experiences,  suc'h  as  }iet*oming  frightened  upon  fmar-
ing  a  shot,  as  he  often  manifested  upon  ht*aring  the  bring  at  a
military  funeral,  upon  hearing  the  puffing  and  shrill  whistling  of
a  locomotive,  and  during  a  sudden  assault  by  his  brother  or
playmates.  The  finale  which  constantly  .stamls  fieforr  his  eyes,
drew  upon  itself  a  fixation  of  this  hyperacusis.  which  dtiiiiinated
him  up  to  the  present.  This  purpo.seful  hyper:a*nsitiveness
serves,  as  do  similar  phenomena  in  hysteria,  to  show  us  that  the
patient's  imrertainty  fonass  him  t<i  ^Irefeh  ;i%


AVARICE.  Sr^SPUlOlASNKSS,  ENVY.  ICFC


far  as  possible*,  as  he  is  actually  cloiug  with  uvc*r-tense  traits  of
character.  Aside  from  this  his  teiulency  to  fear  prcsssetl  upon
his  masculine  tVc*Iing  anti  gave  him  the  sense  of  feminine*  stinudi.
He  endeavored,  thered’ore,  to  firing  forth  in  all  other  relatit>iis,
roiirage  and  fearless  I'lcdiaviur.  in  uhiiii  he*  ttu»  •' uei'rc*d«*ti .

The  laying  liare  of  his  ilesire  for  t!ie  lovt*  of  the  inottuT  brought
forth  no  particular  result.  His  attacks  oeeurred  at  about  the
same  intervals,  but  iitiw  he  luui  tliem  in  bet!,  in  oril(*r  In  pri.'»tc*rt
himself  in  this  way  from  flu*  possibit*  inroatls  t»t‘  tire  treatnuuit*
which,  at  thi^’  stage,  was  eneountering  more  diflieulty  in
endeavoring  iiiuaiver  the  clauses  id  his  attacks,.  IVior  to  this
the*  att:u4s  iH'ciiria'd  alw.iVN  ‘hi  lion  witli  f*vpf*riencc'-.  rvluch

threatened  him  with  a  radduick,  but  mnv  I  was  coinpelled  to
reconstruct  these  rxperit.*ma’S  fiaun  his  thoughts  and  dreams.
Naturally  the  patient  m;ule  a  virtue  i>f  this  necessity,  and  spoke
of  this  change  as  an  impriivement  tUie  to  niy  treatment,  thus
expecting  to  gain  in  this  way  my  sympathy,  an  «‘xperience  which
he  always  appert'eived  as  a  ferling^  of  pnwer.  To  this  cravi-ng
after  this  fetding  i»f  penvf'r  hr*  ow«*,s  fus  su<*i‘css  in  passing  as  a
^•ery  socialdraml  ph\i',aiil  felhnv  in  hi.s  interis-mrsc-  witli  strangers.

It  mav  !»*  .Au]  tfmt  br^r.m  .r*  at  mv  diffrUent  «  <«tlr'f*ptlon
id  these  niattc*!''.,  llir*  CEdi|H,i!-,  f'lsinph’V  nut  ruim*  vufv  t  Irarly
to  the  surfai*e,  herr*,  a!  airy  rate*  not  so  iieativ  a.-^  Freiul  has
[temoilst rated,  lit!  ^  'I’o  llii  -  I  wunld  hau*  !«>  ubjrct

energtd  ii*ally.  It  was  tlii’i  isea-*  pari  it  ularlv,  .m.  %o  few  <d  tluun

i!o,  whi»'h  brufs/j!t  Cu  vu'w  ? u;,'.odif*  .  :  mI  r« junua*,  tfir*

striving  for  the  mother  in  a  sexual  manner,  anrl  the  patient
at  no  time  hesitated  to  eld»«»fale  the  fr<H[Ui*ntly  muamcealed
C'Kdipus  drmaiii'’.  as  prrHjf  of  his  st*xuai  striving  after  ins  mother.

He  nad  many  :aii'!i  dMstnt'.  !fr  drc-ainud  ;  I  fv  ‘^r-jlknu*
a  ladv  frt^rd  aur  riOi Jc;!CiMi ,  tec-  doa-/.''

Tlu'^*  latlv  rryiresentetl  ids  mother,  as  the  varitnts  detailM
showed,  llic*  '**aref*l  fs'lerred  lo  pr o-alnuion,  ‘1‘he  ”  rende'i^--
votis ''  «}ii  flu*  if. Its!  a  memurv-jriiinaiit  fruiii  his

waking  life  ;int!  rebuis-d  to  a  cjC  who  irlu-.nl  him  anotlier
ir;eetiiig,  tiiiC'.  by  luU'  refii^a!  ’.hosdaftm,*  hi  mother,  Ib*  was
unable  til  wirhi  aiiv  infliumrr*  over  ‘di!-.  am!  was  fhu acioi’ding
to  Ids  own  under  tafidiiig,  diivni  fo  t!tf*  tiiaw  tdim*  lei-ling  of
power  and  in  id.  prufe'4  dr*r^raded  to  flu*  lovel  ol  a  |u'o%tlfute
riis  ffsotlier  S',  wri!  the  rdf!,  ;ind  hir  that  matfrn  aU  %vomrii,  whom

lu*  iiatiindiv  fearf*i!.

Just  as  cdearly  the  <  Hdipusu'omplrx  eame  to  light  in  other
dreams,  where  tmi  the  sexual,  as  a  jargon,  a.s  a  nmde  of  spf*ech,
was  only  retaigni^ec!  after  a  pf*netration  into  Ihi*  p.sychic
cc)nstt*ilatioii,  dims  hr  dreamed  /di*  af  a  ".'I’ue/li  /aisle

madt  tif  lirem*  riHU'J ,  ,'I  ;*ol  hriiu*:.  ler  a  hu  iU'  ee’.  e/

The  table  rrridmird  him  of  a  subterranean  c'ellar  at  Xtiremtirrg*


g8  THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION

where  he  went  to  attend  a  scientitie  gathering  which  led  him
to  the  German  museum.  His  thoughts  <lrifted  in  the  same
general  direction  of  Germanism  in  connection  witli  the  large
vessel  of  beer.  It  is  quite  comprehensible  that  this  unusuaUy
musical  patient  should  in  the  analysis  vome  up<m  \\“agner‘s
**  Meistersinger/’  As  he  mentioned  this  he  be*gan  to  search
fora  scene  in  Wagner's  opt^ras,  wherein  some  one  take.s  a  drink.
At  first  he  thought  of  Tiistan,  then  of  Siegfried's  arrival  at
Gunter’s  palace.  ”  In  lioth  scenes  the  hero  <irink.s  a  love  potion.
Thus  our  patient  apptTcr‘ives  his  enigmati(*al  attractirm  for  his
mother  as  something  provoked  by  tlu^  mother’s  magical  powers.
At  last  he  thought  of  Siegmum!  to  whtnn  his  sister  Sieglinde
compassionately  gives  a  horn  of  meal.

Thus  the  dream  reads  -llie  voita*  of  blood  (relatitm)  hath
spoken,  the  mother  compa.ssionately  takes  hhi  |)art.  he  is  the
hero,  who  is  the  man  (father)  of  his  wife.  An  ince.stiious
prospect,  as  in  Wagner,  t!ie  patient,  as  if  intiixicated,  longs
after  his  mother.

The  psychic  situation  of  the  patient  had  t^xperienced  an
**  effcmini'zation.”  His  okler  tirother  ha<l  rettirned  fr«iin  a  journey
and  was  welcomed  at  home  %vith  much  love.  Hcnv  different
were  matters  upon  his  <mm  return  fnnu  his  travels  in  Germany.
The  thought,  I  am  belittled,  hecamf*  accentuated  through  the
reception  accorded  his  brother,  ami  in  the  dream  he  seeks  to
save  himself  through  a  masculine  guiding  line.  It  was  an  attempt
which  was  Ixuind  to  fail.  The  same  night  he  hatl  a  seizure.

The  .seizure  had  for  its  purpose  the  direcitiin  of  the  mt>t!ier’s
tenderness  towards  the  patient.  This  was  ijuite  successful
with  the  father.  But  even  the  mother  would  forget  his  jealous,
frequently  vulgar  outbreaks  of  temper,  as  soon  as  he  lay
unconscious,  and  for  a  time  would  sit  tut  his  bet!.  Hms  ht‘  s.ilisfies
his  wish,  his  wish  to  possess  tweryflting.  like  tin*  linttber.  likt*
the  father.  The  change  of  form  of  hts  original  firtitm,  namely
—I  have  imperfect  genitalia.  I  shall  not  be  a  tauiiplete  man  »«
had  reached  the  thought,  I  too  wi.sh  to  possess  mv  mother  as  my
father  and  brother  possesis  her.  In  oroer  to  comport  liimself  in
this  matter  with  the  appropriate  amount  of  energy,  it  renjuired  a
deeply-felt  conviction  of  his  longing  for  his  mother,  which  he
proceeded  to  cnMte.

The  most  e.ssential  reason  for  his  ardent  attitude  towards  his
mother  was  revealed  in  the  further  analysis,  whiHi  revealed  as
the  decisive  point  hi.s  feeling  of  uncertainty.  As  the  mother
isolated  herself  more  and  tmm*  from  hiui  during  his  childhood,
he  developed  the  idea,  as  is  tlie  case  not  infrequrntty  with  such
children,  that  he  did  not  belong  to  his  family.  The  fairy  tales
of  Snow  White  ”  and  Clnderedla  frequently  furnish  these
children  wdth  leading  thoughts.  When  his  brother  was  ill  once


AVAR1(‘E,  snSPlClOl^SNESS,  ENVY.  ETC.


m

he  mother  tliil  nut  IcMvr  him  fur  a  stH'mu!.  Aftrr  that  thr
patient  was  unintrrrupteclly  stimulates!  in  trsi,  bv  means  tif  liis
severe  sei/.urc's,  tlu^  family,  es|usi‘atly  the*  am!  see  if  the

'voice  of  hloml  “  waniltl  speak,  lliest'  tests  iu*  i'arrieti  out  with
i  genuine  mmrotii^  irisat ialulity,  ami  thus  \vv  see  alstj  in  this  ease
:hat  the  <K(li|ni,S“<-i>iiiplex.  is  of  tiu‘  nature  uf  an  t*.speeial!y
arrangeil  tictiun,  ittui;as,l  as  a  uumus  tif  expressituj  fur  the
nasculine  pruUssI  agaiii'.t  a  let*ling  uf  musulaintv  atul  interimit v.
md  depemlent  umui  f.h«^  neunjtie  craving  tur  .security,  t!u‘  ttesire
:o  posse^ss  everytliing.

The  iiiiKT  contrmliiiitm  wdiich  frcsjmmtly  cutnes  intt>  being  in
:his  form  cif  rnasciiiine  jirotf’st.  the*  tmtral  Cimtlrinnatton  of  a
mndiict  eorressponding  tu  the  lueac  lh«utght  **  to  possess  every-
hing,**  Init  alsti  thi*  greater  ina-hl  ifilu  tln^  impossibility  of
dtainmerit  tir  the  tear  uf  a  thsidim  whitdi  uuiv  assail  the  patient
dten  netaersilale  a  com|'iruiinsf\  llus  may  l^rst  be  rxjiresstal  by
he  wtirds  ha!!  aiul  hall/*  !  !i«'  patimit  sa*eks  a  way  out  o4  this
[ilemma  and  thus  rcsiehes  the  point,  tif  ''divide  ei  impera/'  At
imes  this  .suiution  is  tfumldfu  uf  the  ptecsihihtv  of  a

jratifiratitui  td  the  dt^sire  hm  dcuiunant'v.

At  times  tliis  leads  to  a  markrtl  eultural  luit  ahai  utopian
levelopmeiit  of  ieidin*;  of  fs|ii..ditv  .ou!  lo\e  for  juslitae


(liAPTBR  II


THE  NEUROTIC  EXTENSION  OE  TIMU'S  lHKOU(;il  ASCKITCTSM.
LOVE,  DESIRE  70  TRAVEL,  CRIME.  SIMULATION  AND
NEUROSIS.  FEELING  OF  INFERIORMY  OF  IHE  FEMAIJC  SEX.
PURPOSE  OF  AN  IDEAL.  DOUHI'  AS  AN  KXI-'HESSION  OF

PSYCHIC  HERM  AfilROOiriSM.  M AS  IT  TOiATiON  AND  NEUROSIS.
THE  INCEST-COMIT.EX  AS  V  SYMIUiL  OV  CRAVUNC,  FOR
Di)?!!NANCV.  I'llK  OF  ITIE  DEITRIUM.  inrlirhini

u^'eij  in  the  .stnisi*  ul  the  h'rc'iu'h  :  l‘NE  OFLIRIL)

A  CONSIDERATION  ivhieh  sluHilil  align  itSfU  lit*rr  ciii.leavors
to  show  how  the  cuiupensating  guiding  itltM,  **  to  possess
everything  may  dewiate  from  its  straight  course  in  order  to
stinuilate  in  a  rimndalHiiil  way  t»r  hy  nu-aii^  t»l  au  :uli!ica\
accomplishments  of  a  strangely  neurotic.  <‘riminal,  hut  also  of  a
creative  kind,  in  order  to  reai  h  its  ultimate'  gotnl  eventually  and
bring  about  in  some  way  a  maxiiuatiun  of  the*  <'gO“Cunscitnssness
or  at  least— and  to  this  extent  the  neuri.eds  reiimins  prtnhulive— -
to  prevent  a  degradation.

The  parsimony,  penury  ami  a<:ceti<'ism  id  i*eitain  neurotics
already  shows  us  such  a  diTiUir  upon  which  tlu*  patient  permits
himself  to  be  driven  as  if  he  wero  aide  to  avaiid  tlanger  only  in
this  way.  iJe  tlien  behaves  strierJy  acr'Mrdiug  tt»  guiding

ideas,  believes  in  them  and  ai*ceutuati*s  his  ahiiormal  Iming  in
moments  of  tsspecia!  uncertainty  to  tin*  point  of  a  psychoas.  In
melancholic  states  when  novertv  jihantasics  preilorninate,  as  well
as  in  hypochondriacs,  tne  patient  in  utaler  to  avoid  the  real
danger,  anticipates  tin*  feared  state,  endeavors  rrali’/e  a
fiction,  emphasises  hLs  feeling  of  inferiority  itnd  ut ilis^es  his
disea.se  for  the  safeguarding  of  his  t*go-aH»nsciousness.  i‘ases
exhibiting  the  lying-mania,  fetiehisrn,  neurotic*  mania  fc»r  gather¬
ing  up  things  and  kleptomania,  also  iUustrate  this  craving  to
pos.sess  everytlung.  Another  evident  trait  exists,  namely,  to
break  through  tin*  boundarirs  laid  down  by  rt*a!ity  in  tin*  direction
of  a  fictitious  guiding  principle,  in  order  to  escape  a  feeling  of
degradation.  Apperrepticui  always  (‘one*H  to  light  acc-nrding  to
the  rigidly  formal  antithesis  of  **manly-woman!y‘'  and  frrqaentlv
leads  the  patient  to  undertake  accentuations  by  means  of  which
it  may  be  proved  that  he  is  a  man.  .Sexual  symbolism  lends
itself  very  well  as  a  means  of  expressitm  for  this  purpose,  the
solution  of  which  is  at  times  furni.shed  by  the  exaggerated
.masculine  trend  through  peculiar  deti>urs.  Here  belongs  the


ASCKTU'ISM  Lt)VK.  KTi


liU


neurotic'  lying,  hraggariii-uii,  a-*  uc'll  atttunpt-;  to  olay  uitli  tirf^
and  love  and  thins  cxtcuid  as  far  as  possible  the  establislied  iiinits.
Less  harmful  mauifestations  are  patiiido,M<”al  uaiuirt iu-a .  tia*
expression  of  wliieh  is  to  be  st'on  in  tin*  ruuuing  away,  in  the
fugues  of  neurotic  ant!  j.isycliutir  Mibj<*rts.  As  a  rult*  tlmre  exists
in  the  guiding  pit*tiir«*  of  these  neundics  an  ide‘al  of  persmialify,
the  a|K*x  <»l  whii'h  it  is  attmuptesi  to  reach  thrimgh  imitation  cu;
Dbstinate,  negativistic  behavior.  Vhv  sanu*  trend,  namely,  to
extend  rnasciiliite  cognition,  to  its  very  limits,  is  at  the  bottom
also  of  the  constant  tendency  to  read  alunit,  listen  to,  see  and
commit  acts  id  a  disgusting  nature.

The  more*  proiitnmced  this  striving  for  worthless  possession
the  more  normal  tendencies  and  values  art*  falsified,  sirnilarfy  ti>
the  manner  in  wliieh  love  for  tuilmv  is  only  a  deception,  liiil
'xliibitcai  in  an  exaggeralesl  maniuus  %%\\vn  a  touri-.f  wants  to
have  every  pc*ak  noted  upon  his  imnmtain  staff.

The  I.eporelist  show:-,  us  this  -desita*  witli  rtderema*  to  love,
ind  the  Messaiiiia  i-;  to  be  c'oiimared  with  1  n.jn  juan,  a  nyunphi-s*
amnhu'  wlio  always  irn.igim-;  hrr-.r!f  unsatiated  and  fielittka!
:)e?caii.se  in  this  neurotic  luiaii  ismI  nos-a!ulif!es  for  gralitiiSifictn
ire  unattaiiialde.  !  he  ff'ttrring  ami  df^ejadation  of  the  partner
ire  of  course  takcui  info  csm-aderalion  in  this  relation.

‘*Ihsir  soul,  wlu'it  place  ran  vcci  think  nf  wlirre  1  fiavr  not
:)et*n  ?  Imiuermann*  Munrhaur.en  answ-ers  to  the  tpiestiim,
whether  lu*  knew  a  ceil.dii  distant  p!a»  i-  Hie  teal  salndatlion
n  active  |»aii}r.,  ridinve  dilvine,.  latino,’  and  aviatloti  uriginalr”
Tom  the  desire  for  possesdon,  for  com|urst.  For  fliis  reason
.*very  cldld  aspires  to  be  a  coachman,  a  i'onductor,  a  hjcoinotivr
nigineiT  or  an  aviator,  but  to  no  less  an  extent  hr  wishes*  to  lie
“inpcu’or  or  teaclmr  in  urdio  !«»  rnmin.oid  hi-;  couipanicur.  and  to
mui  a  visible  expression  for  his  raiperioritv,  or  a  plivsicaan  in
:)rcler  to  cauiqiier  death  and  to  extend  the  Hmits  of  life,  or  a
general  in  -order  to  lead  an  arinv  m'  an  adntir.d  in  onirr  to
'omniaiid  the  sea.  iae-s.  thefts  and  other  t  rimes  coniinitted  by
"hildrrm  are  manifest Iv  attempts  to  extend  the  limits  of  poivei
n  this  wsiy.  For  the  most  jiart  these  attempts  assume  no  mor-r
'eal  form  tJian  tlmt  of  d.ay  drfsem  .  «a’  jihaut-adr';  An  im|tiir\
ristituted  by  me  in  a  idrls*  high  sehool  -shenved  that  alt  of  the
:wenly4ive  girls  rmneinberef!  having  eommittrd  trivial  theft*-;,

‘  wmi  able*  to  iiiehide  even  the  teacher.  <.ht  closer  rxamtnaf ion
die  motive  for  this  .sttiving  for  attainment  is  the  intolerable
diniiilus  arising  from  t-lie  eldhrs  feeling  uf  inferiority.  Fhaa’pierillv
;lie  rliilci  under  llii*.  pressure  i-;  euiious,  ea‘p*r  to  learn,  seeks  to
“ecogni?.t»  Ids  faults  and  to  make  for  himself  a  place  for  unfolding
lix  personality.  Ilefeet-;.  ndsfortutie'..  the  feeling  of  iincrrlaiiitv
Hid  iiiferioritv  often  force'  a  strong  development  of  the  higlirr
isyrliir  faculties,  aiialogtius  fo  the  rcutipensatorv  '■:frf*-ss  in  flir


102


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITI -TIUN


•organic  compensatory  tendency.  Jatgeir  says  in  Ibsen's
'‘Pretender  to  the  Crown/*  1  received  the  gift  of  pain
became  a  skald.’*  It  is  easy  to  prove  in  a  number  of  cases  that
a  particularly  strong  feeling  of  iideriority  sets  ^  into  activity  the
impulse  to  investigation,  or  that  the  **  vocation  **  to  the  life  of  an
artist  which  later  presents  the  example  of  a  hannoniinis  accord
of  art  and  life  **  began  with  a  crude  dissonance  “  (B.  latimann,
Clara  Schumann).

Another  way  in  which  children  often  show  themselves
superior  to  their  parents  has  been  descritied^  by  rue  in  the
“  Psychic  Treatment  of  I'rigeminal  Neuralgia/J  This  may
consist  in  the  folUnving  :  From  memory  of  earlier  defects  in
imitation  of  others,  a  "state  of  apparent  stupidity,  blindness,
deafness,  limping,  stuttering,  enuresis,  untidiness,  awkwardness,
lack  of  appetite,  nausea,  etc.,  is  retalnril.  *riu‘  {>syche  gradually
forms  out  of  these  already  prepared  psychic'  halnts  which  the
child  holds  fast  to  as  a  protest  ^against  tin*  feelirig^  of  being
neglected,  psychic  aptitudes  which  in  the*  mniricas  following  a
given  direction,  constitute'  a  symptcun  picture  which  may  be
stated  as  follows  :  Act  as  if  you  wert'  obligc'd  tn  shift  for  your¬
self  by  means  of  one  of  these'  faults,  id  th«‘se  dcdicicmcicvs,  to  gain
through  it  a  feeling  of  superiority,  llie  dittc'refit'c  ljetwc*en  this
and  malingering  often  cousi"4.';  only  in  this,  that  in  ewery  case  it
is  not  always  rcdleetitni  wiiicT  tirst  calls  up  tlu'  plnmomenon,  but
that  the  already  c'xisting  preparedness  for  the  symptom  becomes
embodied  in  the*  web  and  wcjof  id  imunorv  as  an  insuring  agemt
against  the  hmr  of  !»eing  urulcT'e-stimated  or  m*|,d«HlcHl,  just  as
the  tc'chnicMl  skill  in  the  fingeu’s  td  a  virtiucai  h  always  ready  to
rfsspond  in  the  proper  rc'aclicm  tij  anv  demand,  llie  whole  army
of  neurotic  symptoms,  blushing,  lu'adaHu',  migraimg  fainting,
pains,  tremor,  ch*j)rt*ssion,  c*xaltation,  etc.,  may  be  traced  to
the.se  ready-far-u.se  psychic  attitmles.  due  td  the  facts  which,
■thanks  to  my  nndluid  cd  viewing  the  subject,  !  %vasable  to  explain,
concerns  the  less  w«dl  kntiwn  feeling  td  infiuattrily  common  to
all  girls  and  women  wdiicli  is  ilue  ttt  \\ivlr  feminine  rdle  in
contrast  to  the  masculine.  Tlunr  soul  life  is  thereby  so  altered
that  they  constantly  hi^trav  traits  of  the  **  masculine  |.irofest  **
and  in  truth,  usually  in  a  circuitous  form,  in  apparently  feminine
inferior  traits  such  as  art*  <Iescrihed  in  the  previou-dv  taftsl  group.
Education  as  well  as  the  necessary  preparatitms  for  the  future
force  them  to  bring  their  superif^rity  to  expression,  their
“  masculine  protest  *’  in  insidious  wsiys,  mostly  having  the
character  of  resignati'fm.  The  features  «d  **  Emotion  **
(Ileyman’s)  are  always  siifficjently  distinct,  greed  for  power,
envy,  desire  to  please,  inrrmatifin  to  cruelty  are  so  apparent  that
they  may  be  regarded  a-*;  compensatory  ma'’-:cit!irie  trails*  as
directed  towards  a  masctiline  goal.  Fhirkes  Weber  (Lanrrii  U)ti)


AStliTIClSM.  LOVK,  KT{\


1 03

has,  following  me,  discoveretl  the  ieiuulation  of  hyslerira!
phenomena  in  this  sort  of  provision  against  uiuler-estimatioru

i^^reparedness  for  crime  is  also  to  Ije  regardtal  as  an  outcoiue
of  the  rnasculitie  protest  in  persons  whose  eompensatcn’v  ideal
necessitates  a  tirtitioiis  guitling  line  which  <leniautis  that  tke  life,
health,  and  possessions  of  his  fellow  man  shmihl  hr  strippeni  of
worth.  In  cascss  of  extrenu^  uncertainty  where'  the  deprivations,
under-estimations,  threaten  loss  of  the  fecditig  t.if  i'giiH'ouscicnis-
ness  as  w^ell  as  where  there  is  straineil  efhirt  U\  rcaich  the  top/'
to  secure  supremacy,  such  pers<nei  (whost*  fetding  of  irdVriority
has  sought  compensation  in  emotional  prepareiliusss,  in  «\ssential
pursuit  of  tlu'  guiding  line,  l)y  processes  of  ahstrailion  from
reality)  will  sc‘ek  hi  i'hrne  nearer  U)  their  idesd  hy  a  rrime.  I),
A.  Jassny  has  givtm  an  rxcellent  analysis  of  this  metlianism
which  is  itiaiiifested  most  tdearly  in  cmotiotial  c'rinns,  hahitual
crimes  and  crimes  of  negligrnce  in  women,  in  CJrtiss*  Arciuv.  f,
Kriminaianthropologie,  uiu  <

Thr  iniporhuice  ijf  the  relations  of  love  in  human  life

has  as  a  rc'su!!  tlsit  ihr  nruoUir  ytwd  to  p4)ssess  everything
ent«*rs  rogidarly  intn  tin'  rohtfiun.s  of  man  ami  wiff\  and  tliere
develops  a  tlislurliing  temirnny  by  intr<HUu-in;;  an  inclinaticut  ti»
disregard  reality  and  r..niiiiig  tlir  mtdertakiig*  iif  mihu'pri'a’s  with
a  vimv  tci  thr  ma'^iiiiatitm  of  tho  fooling  of  por-amal  worth.  It
lies  in  Iht'  naturt*  id  a  inmriitic  hi  wish  tii  iliminlsh  the  letding  id
infi‘riority  hy  Ciiiislaiit  pitnifs  id  his  stijmriority.  Fisr  this  rmtson,
tin*  pe/rson  Itiveil  is  fort'od  to  '  aoritiia*  his  perstnialil v,  to  I'xist
entirely  through  the  nrtu’otii*  win*  makfss  this  fleinand,  to  becimu'
a  means  ftm  augmeiiting  the  fooling  til  porsema!  wortli  of  tin*
neuriitie.  A  ynmt!  I'lftHd  id  a  roal  Icive  witlumt  neurt*lii''  tentieuicy
woulil  lie  that  ihi*  person  lovoti  was  encouragetl  to  jU’mau've
his  or  her  |.>ersonal  worth  or  when  this  personal  worth  vwn
receiveti  supfiort.  Sm'h  fsrs'os  an*  rans  In  the  relatiim  id  the
sextss  fhert*  arisa's  nearly  always  an  obstinate  am!  selfish  feafiire,
a  triuhmc'y  to  put  to  tost,  toward-,  raispiiaon  whic'h  rcmsfaritly
disturbs  the  {loaecd’u!  marifa!  rebtitins.  Arbitrary  dmnands  are
the  ordc‘r  of  the  day.  hbir  situation  explains  tin*  otlnu,  so  that
the  gist  of  the  situation  v:m  ahvay!.  be  easily  is'eogni^aal.  It  is  as
if  iKith  parties  were  confronted  by  an  enigma  whirdi  they
endeavor  to  solve  hy  evi'ry  possible  mestns.  AnaHsas  always
reveals  a  lear  cd  the  sexual  partner  resu!tin|t  from  a  feeling  of
inferiority  and  thereby  striving  finvard  superiorify.

We  have  already  bof-omr  argnainteil  tij  s<une  extent  with  thc^
strivings  by  cirenifoiis  ways  wlierc^  there  is  an  ma'enttiated  feeling
of  inferiority  in  coiifaenita!  dofofiivc’s  Idiis  striving  roMilts  in  a
niimlH'r  td  iifUtrottraUv  artpiirrd  adaptation-,  ami  cmiain  trait-,  of
character  as^aifiio  iirorninfuiro,  sti  that  the  individual  rernaiits  in
close  fmirh  with  tho  onriiiy,  Perhaps  the  really  mo-l:  important


104


THE  NEURirnt;  vos^nrvTios


features  are  distrust  and  jealousy,  with  which  desire  for  nuistery
and  disputatiousness  are  concurrent.  According  to  the  previous
history  of  the  patient  and  to  the  previous  available  |>rartiees  as
well  as  the  neurosis  which  he  can  apply  to  his  purpose,  the  one
feature  or  the  other  declares  itself  with  more  or  less  distinctness.
They  all  stand  under  the  pressure  of  the  tictitious  final  purpose
and  break  forth  when  reduction  of  tin*  f<*eling  of  persona!  worth
is  threatened,  or  show  that  they  are  still  clttH-tivc*  whfui  pride
repre.sses  them  into  tiie  unc’onsidous.  In  nil  tlurse  iiulividuak
have  at  their  disposal  the  neurotie  adaptations,  whicli  lu.iw  in  the
form  of  depression,  again  as  anxietv  at  be*ing  left  ahme,  as  fear
of  places,  as  insomnia,  and  in  a  hundred  atid  one  otliru*  symptoms
by  means  of  which  they  sec*k  U>  force  tlu*  cjpptment  "  to  lay
down  his  arms.  The  strangest  moral  princ'i{)li\s  have*  the  same
value  as,  for  instance,  coquetry  and  adultery  as  a  revenge  when
the  feeling  of  fieing  tnuhu''-cvstimatt»d  demands  tho  reinstatement
in  equality  or  the  gaining  of  the  upper  hand  at  the  other  party.
The  husband  expresses  prott'sting  r<*vtnigt*fu!nes,s  whc*rc*  there  is
a  lack  of  the  feeling  of  supt*ritn’itv  bv  plaving  ttu*  wild  man,  in
side  leaps,  in  rejection,  sometime^  however,  in  impotence,  in
remarkalile  protection  of  the  <-hiIdren  or  doubts  about  their
legitimacy,  :fr<H|uent!y  in  shunning  dcniu'sticity,  in  incnsised
alcoholism  or  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure.  Tin*  purpose  of  this
line  of  conduct  is  usually  so  obvious  that  it  is  generally  under¬
stood.  For  it  only  then  reaches  its  goal  when  tht*  wife  feels
herself  tlu*ref)y  de^gradcsl.  llw  frt*<ju<*nt  deliriuru  of  jealousy  of
alcoholics  is  not  based  on  the  resulting  impotence,  but  ah  oludism,
impotence  and  the  incr<*ased  jeaUnisy  .as  a  trait  of  c  luiracter  are
neurotic  forms  of  expression  of  those  predisposed  ami  whose
feeling  of  inferiority  experieiu*es  an  aggravation.  lake  all  other
neurotics  such  an  individual  suffers  from  thi*  neuridic  apper¬
ception,  by  means  of  whiHi  he  measures  the  distance  of  reality
from  an  ideal  wddeh  has  been  strengthened  in  the  dirmlion  of
his  tf*ndc*nry.  It  is,  one  of  tlie  UHs.f  idtoetive  attitudes

of  neurotii*  individiml;  to  iiiea.%are  fsi/li'j- aer.ve  so  to  ■••prs.ik,
real  human  beings  by  an  idesd,  .so  tliat  their  value*  may  be*  reduced
to  anv  desired  extent.  The  reveng<*fu!nr*.ss  of  fin*  rejeiied  wife
manifests  it.self  preferaldy  in  thost*  nenrotic"  symptoms  in  which
frigidity  plays  the  princiiml  rfile.  The  pnrpo!;e  nf  this  is  to
contest  with  the  hushant},  the*  male  h^rce,  show  him,  even
where  there  is  perfect  ac<*ord,  limits  of  his  power  and  thus  to
secure  a  considerable  superiority.

That  this  powerful  construction  thf*  result  cif  an  original
feeling  of  d<*fine!K‘y  wlut'h  demands  conifirie^atirm  liertirties
appjjxent  from  more  thorough  analysis.  Ordinarily  the*  apper¬
ception  of  an  under-estimafion  of  an  artalogoun  fear  or  of  a  wish
of  this  n«ati!re  takes  place  after  the  picture  of  the  antithesis  of


ASCETICISM,  lA  AlC  i.s

man —woman/’  in  arcordarua*  with  which  i\w  maxiiiiatiori  of
the  e|[0-can.scitnisiux^ass  is  irlt  aiu]  valiicij  as  *'  masciilino, ‘ *  the
lowering  as  “  fmiinine/’  C  h*  insttsui  of  tlu'  irrling  of  lining
jiuler-cstiniattni,  in  a  phaiitaM'  or  dreaniiit'  a fa.^.ttatiuu  C^aisiiiiiuo
a  loss  of  tin*  penis  ari.-a’S  as  a  svrnlniL  Very  tdt«'n  liu*  mastailinn
guiding  line  which  lunl  airtsuly  idayts!  an  important  role  in  the
previous  liistory  pcnitgrates  into  t!u*  neurosis  as  an  essemtial  or
accessory  eoinpomiit  atid  ac«  entuafe  ;  thf'  inaniv  trail--  as  mhhi  a  .
ihe  ega-consciiuisness  cvniers  info  thi'  tjUf’sCion,  a  eirtiniislaiu'e
ft'hich  as  a  rnk‘  is  i.m’v  striking  in  women.

Aside  from  the  pi edi%po'utum  to  jeakni-.v  a  large  mimlHU’  of
Dther  syiiiptonis  are  manifested  in  tertiaie  neuri^ties,  wdiirh
ariginale  from  tlu“  adhereiu'e  to  the  maseiiHne  guiding  line.
These  sympUmis  u,'aia!!y  liave  leffneiier-  to  love  or  In  the  srxii-a!
relation  and  claim  may  he  madr  ft*  many  t/aiears  as  their
bimdatiom  insteatl  of  the  tmly  right  one,  tltr^  tiesire  to  hr  a  iitam
which  as  far  as  I'Hissildc*  sradis  rrali.mtion.  'Thi.s  inchnafion  to
love  and  **  fnanage  ’*  then  <'ontinnrs  thrunghonf  the  emfite  lilr-
.ir  this  form  o!  thr  m.e.cniiim  ipiidong  linr^  dfn-rlop--  in  cjlvancod
^ears  an  imna  comiadu  liiOe  a  h',o  m  lua  hoiit^;  aldr'  |m  h,jhi  liir-
lushand,  tonchfs-.  the  t'im'a'ion-,ne%,s  and  4am'e!;  tamstanlly
/arying  iicniridir,  erotic  di’-.fm!'an«  r  ..  'ITr  variations  air
lependent  on  tlir  f.a  f  tim!  thc'  to-w  liin*,  tu  uin  a.

rusliand,  in  c»rdrr  tlieirlsv  rlrvato  flir  lerlim,;  <»f  per-.umii
worth,  <“0|l!ains  -within  i!  rll  a  muti.nln  fitm  .  fha*  lawei*in-*  ol  l!jr
reeling  of  pcusam.ilifv  !»y  a--  arm  mg-  thr  frmininr  rAIe,  in  •iiie!i
Mses  idten  the  mnnola  w  ffUs  iS  HuirM-.iiai  awakens  am!
:"xtends  to  the  most  banal  relit it.»ns  »4  life,  until  tin-  real  *atuation
s  undc’fstoiJtl  tu  dfjjend  upon  |!ie  hrunap!n?Mi.oie'  attihi 't*  iti  lilt-
aibjeef  from  wdsirh  tin*  impiilir  id  indei  i  .ion  and  tiouhf  lake-,  if  --
icniree.  Every  deri-don  caj!-;  up  an  anfithefirsl  reaili«.a!  in  itnr*
)ppo,sing  f'onst'i«nisne-S‘i  whi*  li  is  then  lr!f  and  valued  after  the
mtifhesis  of  man  wo-maii  "  -o  that  tin*  pafimf  eitfirT
unuiltarieouslv  or  in  iiimiefUafe  -aaptriiee  plays  a  ietninine  am!
Ten  a  masculiiif*  role,  llie  folhewing  fa-'.e  tnay  he  ctursitJered
IS  a  visihli*  examjde  tif  .smdi  a  condition  ;

A  gir!  30  years  of  ae,e,  wdio  eafiird  her  livifig  l-jy  tea«'idrec
vifiiplailied  of  timsisiiif's*;,  coii'.fanl  dtnilil.  iie.mtod>i  am!  thoii|dit'-:
jf  siiiride.  Sirire  the  death  id  flie  father  she  had  taken  cara*  of
he  whole  family,  tlms  taking  the  place  of  the  man,  the  provdilrr,
md  in  her  pfiaiifaHie-i  and  tlrrafici  is  a  hrast  of  hurdeii,  a  hor  >r
ihat  must  ffsaw  all  t!ie  load  "die  work-,  until  -.fo-  C  echaii  tf*-*
md  saerifit'es  rvei  vlhinp  fo  l-trr  hrotliei  auil  t.i  hef  ■  ’-.U—  A-,  io

'lack  as  she  «sifl  mfieiiifirr.  ‘die  h;r»  ahvavs  wished  slir  had  l>er!i
I  finan.  As  a  rldld,  she  hatl  sfmdv  Inwdsh  traits'  ami  at  tg  yvAt'.
d  age  was  for  a  ta»v  at  hafhing  places.


,!


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTmrnON


106

Von  Neusser  has  called  attention  to  these  l»odily  traits  of  the
opposite  sex  where  constitutional  anomaly  coultl  be*  shown  in  his
work  on  the  status  thymicolymphaticus*  Also  in  riiy  work  on
neurology,  I  have  emphasized  the  tindifig  of  bodily  traits  of  the
opposite  sex  and  could  prove  concerning  them  that  they  are  often
made  use  of  by  neurotics,  eitlier  for  ^  giving  prominence  to  the
inferiority  in  cases  where  the  femininity  is  acctmluated  or  for
expressing  the  iiuiscuHne  protest/*  I'he  prt‘viuus  i>bservations
of  Flies  who  as  well  as  Halvan  directed  my  atttmtion  to  this  field,
do  not  take  into  consideration  the  psychic  mechanisms  as  I
understand  them.

In  one  variety,  this  female  patient  ren'caled  the*  masculine
protest  on  the  very  first  day  oy^  refusing  sharply,  gratuitous
treatment.  She  would  receive  no  gifts,  she  repeat«»ti  emphatically
several  times  in  succession  and  she  Mibsfn|Uf'ntly  «*xplained  to  me
in  the  manner  with  ivhich  I  ^vas  already  atajuaiiifed  that  it  was
unmanly  to  rt'ceive  gifts,  Therefort*  she  had  always  refused
them.  C")n  the  other  hand,  slu*  herself  gave  willingly,  something
she  often  praeti<aHl  in  tlie  family  in  her  r/lr  cd  father.

From  her  history,  I  c*|nphasize  one  inciilent  as  id  im|Kwt:ance.
An  unde  had  atttunpted  to  viidate  her  in  her  eiolitli  ytMis  In  her
terror,  she  had  remained  passive,  but  had  mner  numtioned  the
attack.  After  her  neurosis  had  imule  stuue  progress,  she  had
forced  henself  \a  ihv  iilea  tiiat  as  a  i*hihi  ;'.he  was  already  a  sinful
creature  and  ca{)a!>le  of  yielding  to  any  one.  and  tliai  she  had
always  remained  the  samf\  I'lius  we  have  tlie  apjdicatiou  of  a
souvenir  for  the  purpose  of  re-assurarn'e  wifii  which  we  arc
already  aetjuainttsi,  fur  flu*  ctnirse  uf  this  train  of  tlunight  was  that
up  to  her  thirtietli  year  of  life  she  had  yieldcnl  tn  all  men.

From  her  tenth  yc,*ar  to  the  twenty  ■tit’fli  v<Mr  she  ass<»rttHi  that
she  had  practicecl  masturbation  exi'essively.  She  dewetoped
therefrom  a  strong  feeling  of  guilt,  augmented  tiie  conviction  of
her  sinfulness,  ami  arrivcal  at  tlu*  tsnnclusicm  that  she  had
rendered  herself  eternally  unwi*rthy  tr>  f*nter  into  rnatrimony.
This  conviction  was  bound  to  have  an  «*xtensive  influence  on  her
attitude  toward  men.

The  usual  rdle  masturbation  in  neuroses  is  as  follows,  that
in  conseqmmc’e  thereof,  a  sensation  of  a  feehug  of  guilt
arises,  but  at  the  same  time  from  the  possibility  «lis|K*nsing
with  a  partner,  the  feeling  of  security  irotit  being  iiiufer  the
influence  of  a  partner.  The  analogy  wuth  those  rases  where  the
same  security  is  sought  by  r.trengtliening  the  defects  of  childhood,
enuresis,  stuttering  or  other  neurotic  symptoms  is  obvious.  The
original  feeling  of  inferiority  remains  behiml  as  an  echo,  fdl^
itself  with  phantasies  of  feminine  <lefnaenn’es  and  feelings  of
guilt  and  forces  the  imlividiia!  to  strive  for  the  manly  guiciing
point.  The  conduct  of  our  female  patient  is  ronslriitieil  aetcord-


ASCETICISM.  LOVE.  ETC.


107

ing  to  the  giuding  line  which  iiuiy  he  expressed  in  the  words.  I
wish  to  he  a  man/'

A  few  years  agti.  a  com|nitsory  ulen  tiu^k  hold  of  her  which
clearly  reflects  our  idtM  of  the  neurosis.  'rb«'  patirmt  htdieved
that  she  hail  lost  through  iiiasturhatiun  a  part  of  the  genital  rcgiini
w'hich  extcuided  forward  ;md  which  act'ording  to  her  dest*ription
seenied  to  her  to  hc^  a  penis.  N’ow  siu*  liad  hcHsinu*  wholly  niitit
for  marringe.  because  she  could  md  live  through  it  if  her  htisliarid
should  hear  of  her  sins,  lire  security  seems  tit  he  thus  entirely
assured  and  it  is  easy  to  understami  lunv  she  brings  Iter  tictitiiuis
masculine  guiding  principle  as  an  hksil  in  eontrast  with  her  real
femininity.  erii|diasi2es  the  LiftfU’  ami  feels  inftwitu’,  yet  by  this
very  exfiedient  seeks  exempt  her*-elf  fnun  a  femiiiine  rdle  in
reality.

Ifut  ewen  this  as.siirancr,  however  strong  it  might  seem,  heeame
in  time  insuflicient  to  satisfy  the  itieal  tif  perstmal  value  td  our
patient.  f.lc*r  iVinalc*  frirm!:*  dr.auifs!  her  in  utaler  to  marry,  and
wlien  finally  her  y«amgcr  sister  married,  hc-r  guitling  line  became
rm  longer  lenaldc'  because*  hf*r  .nnbifiun  strovr  alr.o  hir  **  mastery
over  men.*'  SIu'  dmided  arbiiraiiiy,  as  nervtu.is  girls  %vith
extreme  imh*cisiun  tisuallv  do.  to  taki'  (he  fu'r.t  best.  She  went
tes  a  ma.scjUcUMiif*  wiau'e  bmaim*  acqnaintcsl  with  a  wairthv
man  who  wislusl  fo  iii.irrv  biu'  altm-  a  slnut  aci|u.dntam'*f\  iHiring
atrip  she*  yielded  to  him  bfs,-an-.f*,  a-'.  'Jie  n.dd,  'lu*  b-arrd  tliat  bv
■contact  he  ndidit  bectuae  awstre  of  t!ie  <leffsi  i*f  her  genital
organs  and  leave  her  di'-grace<i  .md  she  would  rather  have’  any¬
thing  else*  liafjpen  to  fins  V\*hen  l.iter  tin  man  in  a  fimmdly  wav
in.sisted  on  her  trdliiig  him  if  he  v-ne  her  first  lover  and  w‘hv  she
had  hcsaiiur  st»  cuhl  “Jir  threw  him  iiverbnard  with  the  iintruthfui
cXjdaiiation  that  Ja*  liad  ii,i«i  iflatious  with  oilier  mne  Tfin’t^«
upon  the  man  laa^kf*  uli  fhr  affaii

It  is  easy  to  imavdne  whaf  mov  folhovcsl.  Tfie  patient  wdio
was  already  cuii-  tan! Iv  gneving  over  aiadher  hM-;s  than  that  of  lirr
masculinity,  beheld  her-.idf  t!i waited  ami  deprived  of  her  mnv
inasculim*  triinnpii.  She  let-^aliet!  her  lie  whicli,  as  she  sought  to
explain  to  rite  !;itrr.  s'lir-  had  tuld  in  order  to  puni'.fi  tiu'  man  for
having  cmnnuered  hf^r,  in  tirder  fo  deprive  him  of  worth.  She
expiainefl  to  him  thi*  lari-.,  but  In*-  w-itJidrrnv  entirely,  for  the  most
part  from  fesar  of  further  di';tords  in  a  marriage  witli  this  neurotic
girl.  Tliereupofi  onr  patieiil  became  passinnatelv  in  love  wifti
hint,  rtinde  a  god  of  him,  p.c  -.rd  '.Ireph-.s  nights  in  llioughts  of
him,  and  took  an  ciatli  to  itave  him  e>r  mi  other  husband,  for  this
one  Wats  in  all  luiiiiari  probabilifv  lost  to  her.  lluis  by  means  of
various  exjirdieiifs  of  tier  nniro-l,  ‘.he  had  returnrfi  to  her  ori|dnaI
gtiiding  !irif%  am!  hm!  gained  a  fictilious  ideal  and  up  to  the  time
of  her  trealrneriC  had  Mii-s-eeded  in  avoiding  the  feminine  rd!-r.


•A

'1


THE  XEUROTK^  EoNSl'ITUTIdX


io8

In  psychotherapeutic  treatment,  special  attention  should  be
given  to  prevent  this  Idindiy  workiu^g  icuuli.mcy  tu  dcprt'ciation  of
the  patient  from  making  tne  physician  himself  a  victim,  as  the
condition  of  disease  is  regularly  uscfl  as  a  mcaie-  uf  depriving  the
psychotherapeiitist  of  his  u'ortln  'riu'  patient  mav  dti  this  hy
following  the  ordinary  direxiion  which  his  disea^a.*  takcss  only  with
a  sharper  tone,  because  lu^  strengthens  the  symptoms,  or
originates  new  ones,  and  tries  to  supply  teusa^  relations,
frequently  also  situations  of  love  and  friendship,  but  always  with
the  intention  (whidi  is  the  result  of  his  mnirotic^  trnulency,  of
the  masculine'^  protest)  of  becoming  master  td  thf‘  phvsieian,  of
giving  him  a  setback,  of  making  him  play  a  'Teminine‘*  part,  of
annihilating  his  worth,  The  tactical  ami  pedagt^git*  exptniients  to
which  one  is  oldigesl  to  rtsiul  h\  aVilrt  to  WfMkrn  druggie
of  the  patient  against  physicuan.  in  tu’dtT  in  rentier  if:  compre**
hensible  and  in  order  to  dcunonstratc*  ifi  tins  wa.v  the  neurotic
conduct  or  attitude  of  the  patient  in  life  gmierally.  hfx’orne  an
important  factor  in  the  therapeusis.  The  ■dlent  prtdi^sf  of  the
neurotic  should  not  however  \)v  UfuhTvalurd.  and  one  shiuild  he
on  the  lookout  for  it  it)  the  very  em!  of  the  trcMfriumt,  laying
special  stn^^ss  uptui  it  tt^uard-;  it  :  Ifuaintf.i! inn,  U  ■■.hotdd  he
viewed  with  quitd,.  romposurr*.  as  tlm  matter^rd-fact

aggressiveness  td  the  patient  and  as  havin*;  thr‘  sann*  value  as  has
the  neurosis,  inasmuch  :e‘  it  furnishe.  the  umfrotit^  prfslisptrsitions
and  traits.  Fr<mcTs  hyptalmsi-:  td  tram  fonotr't*  will  rcuVrred
to  again  later.  It  is  nothing  mnrr  than  an  exp^alient  of  the
patient  who  seeks  to  red*  the  phvfvirian  ef  Mtptmierifv.  ih^/r/ada
and  others  have  descriln-d  tlie  circuittnm  ways  in  whieh  the
neurotic  patiemt  set'ks  fc>  df^priv?'  plo;  diTtns  <d  flndr  value.  It  is
always  the  masculine  guiding  lim*  wliirh  is  m-vealrd,  the  purpose
of  which  is  to  assure  t!u*  patient*-;  superiority,  most  usual

manner  ed  enhamanr';  hi>  tt'udtUHw  tn  aggre^'-’uom  the*  mmndir
finds  1)V  holding  fast  to  svmpfoms,  l»tnu  a*  in  fhemsolves
presaui't  a  phase  of  his  agire^’-^dve  teridrnrv.

An  extract  from  a  historv  of  a  patient  ;,slunl!y  Imforr  the  end  of
her  treatmfmt  nw’eals  (in  t!ie  fimm  rd  :m  unfriemllv  impulse)  this
effort  to  <leprive  the  jihysieian  of  value  as  a  |>syt'’hie  prfxlisptvutiori
of  her  **  masculine  prtdest.**  I'he  patient  was  placed  under
treatment  Imcaiise  of  an  anxiety  and  tvas  rrving  emf  at  night.  She
was  a  virgin,  36  years  of  age*.  I  will  ftegin  the  drsiTiptioii  of  this
neurotic  picture  with  the  following  dream  :

I  tMS  lybiff  a!  vaur  fevt  and  rrarJu’J  v<^--vuu!  i;.r'  lutnd

trying^  to  gni.Kp  youf  clfdhfK  '’idiudi  ^.’11*  Vex  I'utde  a

lasciinous  gpsiurt,  wherrupOH  I  said  hn/rsdedv,  ^  Ven  arc  llirc
710  bottom  thiiii  thf  oihfy  fhoni*  e?r  rf>i»g ihv'^  ‘a'lfk  d

nod/*


ASt'ETillSM.  ETt*.


KH]

Tho;-;e  wIkk  iiiet'rprtiatiiHi  tsf  tlreaiiLs,  place

the  sexual  wish- iiuifivr  in  Ihr  ftna-grimml,  will  tint  hr  at  a  loss
for  an  inti*rprc*!;Uitni  ;  the  rrqtujianeiits  for  a  sexual  liasis  for  the
drc'aiu  wtTc*  lullv  'UppHtsl.  I'hr  rfHiihri’nirnts  I'cmid  dlsu  bt'
complied  wifli,  as  ihi*  jhitirnl  had  alrraiiy  tlon<x  liy  tuangirig
forward  a  rcnninisctuict*  Imu  ciuhlle'HH!,  wlum  she  sidicited  her
father  in  a  simihir  iii.iiiner  ;  Iut  acunOic  tcmdcmey  to  attain
stH’iirily  li.id  iiidcasd  i'ai'«iiil!y  rolhaifvi  .ill  .uiiuouuorv  e^X[Ha'it‘fU*t*.s\
in  tinicT  to  use*  the*  mail  in  an  anapiivlactit*  '*  ina.mu*r  against
repetititios.  iiuicrih  oin^  could  easily  get  the  ass-eiit  nt"  the  patient
ti^  ascr!bt‘  to  r«.*j>resst‘d  ijupiilsev;  lO  tne  will  the  eme!g<mce  of
souvenirs  of  like  teruhmey  ami  the  pres<mt  experiences.  For  her
rinirotic  psyidie  eec*  :  r-aje^^h  c'xaggerations  as  r«%'il  rrinembraiices
and  inakess  tlituii  her  basis  iif  operation,  wfiiidi  she  docss  by  aflirm-
ing  her  conviction  at  infrriuiitv,  uf  Iier  lauh,  ai  lu*r  sin.  of  her
ttH>  feiiiiiiiiir  natuit\  in  older  Im  dfiruiti  uilii  gr«  aler  v«‘liciiH‘m'c*
tier  suj/H.’TiiUilv.  Iim  lujidiiif's-.  ami  b»  increase  her  h^fesight.
This  iiicrcstf.ed  m.ioaibne’  jno|f*-,t,  hiovever,  wluidi  lias  its  source
in  flu*  dcieefive  pea *yicctive  of  the*  patietif  ivho  is  overfearful,  can
not  !)uf  iiaturally  imiase.e  the  mniio  ;is.  Idu*  drstrucfitui  of  this
false*  pc*! -.{Hsiive  iotiiidation  of  tlu'  iHnirofic'  ap{»«U’»

ccjiticui),  and  tiif*  daiiifuiiig  up  of  the  tidit ions  influx  in  the
dins-iion  i»f  Ihr  maM'ubiio  pr»>tr'.!,  and  finally  a  ripjit  under-
stamiing  cu'  flu*  *■  uju-r:.! if itar.  l.dth  in  an  abstract  guiding  line  and
fin*  ,!  jHit  hco:  S'.,  tU  lii*'  .^e  fl’e  wh:»!l  liMsi  bf‘  fo

remove  mmroras.

^  Our  patient  had  bcgpni  a  liai*.»m  with  a  nuirrits!  man  almut  the*
tinu*'  of  this  dia'aiii.  \\  liefi  In*  prc*-.  a-d  hiiinaaf  upon  her  aiifl
invited  her  tea  Ids  lioii-e*  duriny.  his  wife's  alisenca  at  a  watering
pL'Utg  slie  was  troulded  with'' all  s-uUs  of  scruples,  wiiich  I
Ktrengthciiml  con-aderably .  Nevortheiess,  she  jurdibeal  the
rc‘la,ti<m  aiid^  *  jdavrd  with  tin*  hia*  "  fierama-  '^hr  said  tlu*
im|iatic!it  writiiing  t»!  tfie  man  amtr-o»!  hoc  In,  idrniallv,  !if*r  wav
of^regarding  thr  subject  w:i'-  an  inimical  aO  directed  against  her
reiafives  mid  against  me  her  immitor,  Her  own  iinder»damling
Ccnilct  Ilf*  inf f ■  rpia*t rs  1  ,r.  a  ose-otjsldr  exsif.iv  fliit  fhe  pftnncura
hiufeary  of  the  palienf,  and  hm'  i  ouducf,  during  her  iHm^ss  wdiirli
Listed  tweiitv  veais,  ara!  her  trealinenf,  sliowa*d  [dairdv

that  ,slie  was  sfrcui|,,jly  under  the  influema*  of  the  rnascmline
prcifesf,  and  fiiat  she  ctHild  liavi*  dfunandrrl  the  subjtigation  of
the  irian,  litil  fli.il  :  !io  neast  havr  rrfu:>ed  fo  play  a  bmd'nirie  rblt*
(she  suffered  from  niixiefy  states  and  civiug-  tmf  in  terror  al
night).  Thf*  cmitral  {loint  of  lier  jcsvc  hfc  attitude  ctucasfed  in
fear  of  the  man  to  wdioni  she  l»elievr<l  "-.he  was  m»t  ecjual,  a  ftuir
which  she  sought  in  i,sim|ien-.afr  by  her  torn  masi;"uline  Itraring
arifl  by  the  urae'r  t-j  bastion  of  luric

Afler  this  ififorrnatiori  coricerniiig  tfir  patient,  we  ctmld  venture


no


THE  NEUROTIC  CUNSllTUllON


to  interpret  the  tlreanu  She  exaggerateti  iu*r  phy^ictil  dependence
on  me  and  gave  this  conviction  form  Ijy  clothing  it  In  a  dream
image  which  is  admirably  suited  for  this  purpusc*  **  As  though
I  lay  at  your  feet/’  This  being  **  ludow  “  was  taken  as  a  basis
of  operation  and  we  could  rightly  vtpvci  that  manly  impetus
would  follow  the  construetioit  ot  a  hiiitious  feminine  rdle.  She
reached  upwards  with  the  hands.  The  cuntaminal  iun  c'ontained
my  deprivation  of  masculinity,  i  wore  a  silk  dress.  The  same
psychic  mechanism  hovers  in  the  remaining  part  of  the  dretam.
I  had  admonished  the  patient  "iu  the  tlream  I  made  a  lascivious

festure  of  which  the  .seducer  hat!  been  gt^ilty.  that  is  ta  say  that
am  on  the  same  level,  I  also  am  not  betted  than  the  other
men.”  Besides  this  tcJ  tmrry  out  thv  iilea  fmi!n-r.  I  was  silent
and  showed  assent  !)y  a  ge>ture  in  the  tlream.  l.‘!u*  ojjposite
thought  that  I  could  be  helttu*  is  insupportaldc  to  the  patient;
from  it,  which  gives  me  a  sort  of  superituaty,  tn'igitiaft^s  the
preventative  dream  !ii1,ion  ismsirucfed  altm’  tlir  neurotic
perspective.  The  patient  only  felt  secure  whm  all  turn  were  alike
bad.  Then  .she  is  following  lu-r  old  guitiitik:  Hue  and  feels
superior.  Her  superiority  is  reflected  by  hm*  Yangliing  in  the
dream  as  well  as  by  my  silence.

The  circumstanta*  that  slu*  began  tbi*  fir*.!  dangrrMO-,  liasion
with  a  married  man  is  worthy  td' aftetiti  hi,  In  all  'dmilar  cases,
such  a  relation  may  l^e  rei*iioni7.<«,l  rtfort  tu  ofrtain  security

from  marriage,  usuallv  al^o  fVom  .sexu a!  iclation  lltr  masculine


guiding  line  is  preserved.  Imt  reality  a  ‘.mt  :  itself  lyy  feminine
excitements  and  emotitms.  Ii  I ,  a  ;  I  bavr  tri^jnenth  pnintcal  imi,
a  masculine  protest  made  witii  feminin-  mean-,  which  recalls  to
nK‘  tin*  fad  of  psycdiic  hfoanaphroiHtism.  frircdlv.  fucc  the
superiority  over  thehnvful  wih^  a-e;mls  it-.fdf  in  tlie  tlure^-comered


arrangement,  something  wliich  in  ail  analug^ou  .  t-a-a- .  ■  J  ffiigthens
to  an  unusual  degree  the  niotive*  ftmee.

Jf  w'e  now  proceed  as  it  wi*re  fu  a  comparative  psy«  ludogy  and
wish  to  bring  to  conscious  ex|)ressiori  the  rompcuicnf  |i.!t  t’dof  the
foundation  of  the  apperception  of  this  patimt  and  put  tlie  tpiestion
before  us,  whence  these  psydne  prrjiaratiun,.  which  lead  U)  the
attempt  of  unmanning  tlie  man  by  leminim*  means  in  order  to
enhance  thereby  h<T  fetdirig  nf  Wi»rth  in  a  ma-a'iiline  direction  and
to  surpass  a  wennru/s,  tin*  answer  is  ;  Eotm  Iun  reiaiirm  to  her
father  and  mrdher.  Inhere  she  derived  the  preparalion  to
approach  the  father  wdth  love  and  rsteern  as  a  gtiiding  ideal,
learned  to  master  him  and  hmi  thus  slnnvn  h«*rself  superitm  to  the
mother.  If  one  ab.stracts  the  rnasnilirm  jmotest  of  the  neurotic
child  and  if  one  apperreives  these  conditions  (as  neurotic's  often
do)  in  a  sexual  schiune  the  incest  complex  ’  ’  remains,  One  can
now,  as  I  have  shown  in  former  %vorks,  take  out  the  incest
complex  again  what  the  masculine  guiding  line  has  placffi  in  it,


ASCETICISM,  LOVE.  KT(.\


1 1 1

namely,  the  assurance  feeling  uf  ptTsunal  worth  under  the

title  of  an  amative  coiuliiioiu  In  tin*  literature  on  psyOiu-analysis,
the  assertion  emerges  constantly  that  the  libido  of  the  neurotic
is  fixed  on  the*  fatluu’  i)r  iui  tln^  mother,  cm  which  account  he  seeks
similar  amative  conditions  which  are  in  reality  that  which  was
loved  in  th<‘  parents,  Tlie  will  to  power  and  to  secmi
constitutes  the  only  amative*  romlitiem  and  this  guiding  point  the
neurotic  seeks  with  all  c*aution.  Imt  invariably,  with  all  his
practiced  preventive  jircTautiom-.  wtiieh  have  cuaginated  frenn  and
have  exclusivi*  value  from  t!ie  caaving  for  scnnirity  and  wlueh
resist  any  ciiange.  Tlu'  signiticam'r  <%{  ilw  amative  feeling  is  no
other  than  the  assurance  of  the*  ego-c*onsriintsne*ss,  and  with  this
the  exclusive  influence^  of  the*  same  furthcT  betrays  that  the  motive
force  therct  is  to  iie  found  in  the  maseuline  prette'st  which  has
already  camstrurteai  flu*  inc‘est  ctiustedlation.  Where,  as  in  many
cases,  the  attachmemt  to  one  cd'  the*  parents  is  clearly  obvious,  it
is  confraeded  witli  a  purposed  arranged  in  order  to  e*s«”ape
derisions  cauu*rrning  othf*r  partne'rs,  to  escape  marriage.  Then
usually  the'  neur«*!ii“  has  tlt'stroycnl  the  teiuieru'V  to  love  and
marriage*  as  int'cmsisteml  witli  tho  masruHne  final  purpose,  or  has
not  developed  it,

The*  iuiginal  of  the  f!ire*r  <  <u‘uc*rc*d  sifuatlon/*  the  iru‘e*st
situation,  resolve’s  itself  on  Cosrr  f'xaiuination  into  an  affair
raus«*d  lyv  tin*  nif'gsditinaiiia  of  tlir*  rjiiid  vvlu*  alresidv  rc*Vf’als  ail
tht*  cliarartcu’is! ii'-.  tif  iim*  predisposed  to  n<*uro.sis,  i.c.,  emvy,
ohstinacy.  insafialdtuo-. pii't-tn  itv.  Without  the  soxnal  appetite
really  taking  part  tlic*reiii,  ttajught  :  ami  rrth*efitue.  uf  the  cLild
may  coiuc*  to  light  whit  h  are  lalrT  valued  ami  represented  as
sexual  wluni  ttie*  m*uridii*  tfuulfmcv  tit  gain  stnairltv  seeks  to  make
sut'h  a  c*onm*ciion.  *’  I  was  already  as  a  child,  so  bc*viind  Itounds,
so  culpalde,  my  *a»xua!  apprtile  \v;v':  *a»  strong.  !  have  mrh  a
criminal  tc*nd<‘tu'y,  I  am  su  mueh  the  slave  «d  love,*’  t!if*se  are  the
echoes  in  tlie  S4iul  tif  tlie  adult  ncnirotic.  '*  llierf*forc  I  must  t»e
cMn*fu!.'*  llic*  impulse  tu  !io!d  certain  appropriate*  mf*iuorir*‘-.
to  falsifitsafions  of  memtiry,  fo  exaggerating  trac'es  of  memories
arises  from  a  fear  cd  a  defeat  in  life.  And  where  the  sexual
a{jpetite  has  resdiy  been  revealed,  wdtere  the  j-fossibilit. v  td  ima^sf
really  existed,  the  memory  is  preserved  as  an  adritoniti^ry  sign.
Ttiaf  wh|fdi  diverts  the  rieiirotii  psvclie  is  not  memory  or
Tcnunisceftee,  hut  the  fn-fititnis  final  purpose  which  ha*;  derived
profitable'*  situations  therc*frorii..  If  is  nearly  the  same  if  these
reminijaanices  have  been  iepre».;srd  by  the  r'otrsevous  ego,  thrust
bark  into  the  uncofraioir-:.  The  nrurotie  t'haratler  and  tlie  {g.her

E!hir  gestures  with  their  unconscious  mechanism  are  none  the
opposed  to  disposition  in  proper  ewder  in  realitv..

*  III  It  sih  Oie  ilir  fluak^


1  13


THE  NEHRirriH  CUXSIU'ETIDN


Thus  it  was  in  the  case  of  our  fc'inah*  She  related^

for  example,  that  she  always  wisinai  to  win^  the  fatiier  to  her  side
and  that  she  accuinplisiied  lliis  by  t'aniully  tailini.*  in  with  his
train  of  thought  and  liLs  wishes.  It  was  luU  diilieult  to  leave*  her
mother.  From  the  age^  of  faurttam,  began  ft*  refuse  to  kiss
him  because  she  began  to  Itad  a  pt‘*‘u!iar  ertdie'  emotion.  In
explanation  of  thi,s»  1  might  atltl  that  flu*  patitml  Ih'id  from  her
twelfth  year  manifested  uimiistakal^le*  of  a  iieiir«ssis.  Her

situation  at  that  time  pernuts  us  to  umit'rslaiu!  the  significance
of  this  attempt  at  staairity-  thouigh  l!u’  i’onstrucf itm  of  erotic
preparations.  She  had  aUvviy.s  bwn  an  unruly,  lundsh  creature
who  had  already  levirncd  to  f«-el  t!ie  fiua'e  of  the  sc'xual  appetite
and  for  some  tinu*  hail  aireatiy  prailices!  r’lastiirbat ion.  Ahout,
this  time  also,  men  iu-^gan  to  make  advance's  to  lun*  which  she
reacted  with  extreme  anxi<*ty.  Her  craving  tor  security  had
progressed  .so  far  that  the  patient  liad  strengllumetl  the  anxiety
preparedness  which  lia<!  hwn  cimstruc!(*d  iu.it  of  real  emotions
of  anxiety  which  she  tiad  tniginally  and  now  ^he*  was  able,
whenever  slu'  ftsireda  ilefeat  iTitln*  .‘•■■nisf'  iC  In-itig  to  pi:iv

a  feminine  rdle,  any  possilile  c-ause  oi  which  *die  was  on  the  alert
to  anticipate,  to  devclt^p  in  a  hallucin.itorv  manner,  a  condition
of  anxiety,  so  to  speak,  to  di.Nrount  it,  suidi  a-,  would  c«»rre«
spondee!  for  example  lo  th<*  eventuality  id  pregnancy.  This
anticipation  and  hallueinattu’v  awakening  oi  ‘-emiations  which
correspond  to  a  fear  of  ilehsit  wliielt  migjit  ari‘-.e  in  tlir  future  are
the  w'ork  of  the  pn^ventive  <'raviin‘;  bn-  se(U!r!tv  and  con':fitute,  as
I  have  already  emphasized/  the  es^asitial  p.irf  <d  !ivp»H-!mudria,
of  phobia  and  of  muiH'rous  umra  .fhenie' ,md  liv-anit  al  sviufUjUiro
I  will  only  state  briefly  here  that  the  essential  part  of  a  psychosis,
too,  depend.s  upon  a  .similar  <iugniatieaufii  ipattu  v  reiwirscnitation
of  a  fear  or  a  wish,  winch  the  f'raviny,  for  security  tdfVrs  for  the
better  testimony  in  a  phasr*  of  grfunt  insoi/urilv,  in  strong
dependence  on  the  iictitituis  guiding  line  for  the  ronscu’vation  of
the  ego-consciousn<*ss.  When  tnir  patient  foresaw  a  loss  of
prestige  and  provid<‘f!  against  it  by  a  ^'iniditi^ui  i»f  auxirly  in  a
nallucinatciry  manner  she  fedt  most  ses'iiro  against  it.  At  times,
the  hallucinatory  emotion  iieeeled  a  fiirtlier  streutgthoning.  then
the  patient  arrived  at  fin*  mnnpulstiry  ide.t  that  slu^  had  killed
a  newborn  child,  In  the  anaiy^uT  this  idea  in  rrgartl  to  the  man,
at  times  a  pLice  anxiety,  was  .shemm  to  be  cioirieefrd  wdth  an
admonition  of  her  motherb*.  This  signifies  that  the  patient
rescued  from  her  memories  i.wen  the  words  of  her  rnoflirr  whom
she  constantly  fought  aipiinst,  in  m  far  as  thesi*  words  were
adapted  to  her  tendency  to  seek  security.*

“  “  8ipliilic1i!|'ih**hia.*’  kc.  <st.

^Alcm^  with  thin  tlwi  ftlumkl  lu-  :o  uck  |-‘f

thn'*ats.


ASilVric/iSM.  LCJVK.  KT<’  iij

Aniuii;^  tlic^so  |ii«‘par.tUiry  laahlitiMn':  an  wwa  .-i'-  a:  t
favored  greatly  thv  hardy  i'mt-  tiiu'tUm  uf  larp.iiat'Ma*.  fur

secoritv.  idiu.-  id"  hc*r  r’iniaiiir,  gave  lihlh  Im  a  i  h*ild:  laii  id'  Wfallet/k,
a  fact  wiliidu  hi  a  iaiuily  I»!  I  c*'.pf*rtahlr  liudila-*  I  ‘a  .  .  I'fagdf,
caused  the  grealc^st  rxcitcaueiit,  e'-»|u*eialiy  a*;  flie  ••caituan'  ‘‘huuk
the  dust  ul  the*  [daia*  h'niu  ll^^  li-ii.  C  htf  '.tataliilg

for  tlie  devriujuiu'Ut  ul  lhh>  girl  ii:.  Im  imdc*r.*.taud  why

this  evc‘ill  liiu-4  have  .a  ei’ln  af  i’*!  the  ui  fiir  iieari.  ?'a  .

and  !unv  it  eaiee  that  the  uaadr  ig  the  iiiuduT  Itt  whiiiii  :.}u"
ordinarily  siunvea!  litlh’  attcaiiiuii  wr^tv  given  sueli  ini|n*i laiii'e.
The  patient  was  fnnii  her  eMriy  i-lnldluHn!  wihl  aiuf  iHiyish  atiil  ul
^Teat  streiigdu  prc’ferris!  }Hiy%‘  ganit'a  and  avuitlrd  rvrry
feininint*  cniufiuii.  ShfMsin  '-dil!  innetnhrr  with  wliat  veheinriu'i*
she  rtdiisfs!  in  [d.iy  with  dulls  ur  lu  engage*  in  lu^rddinvurh  l’1ie
personality  of  the  lather  |ire|Hnitie*'ated  uver  that  t»f  the  iiirdlier
to  a  reiriarkahlf^  iir\U'rr* .  An  ininenrifsi  aanf  whu  !i%*rd  wdlli  the
family  of  utir  paticnif  tuuk  |i!f*a  an'»-*  tn  het  in.e».  ulinr  rtianiirrs,
bad  a  heardlike  *;"j'uwf!i  id  h.dn  .--nd  a  nuu.fniin«‘  vuier*,  Ibi  this
drong  and  i’urr-d.oitlv  ir^\uiu\,\  i..ir-!riiav  v.s-.  .r.'.«H'iatri!  *inu4liei

’Venit  of  !afei  lunniriHe  an!  '.♦lei!?  iutei.ltr’d  !!ie  !i»-«  e':-..u  v
"esonaiua*  to  ihe^  deininalinr'  Iff-ndf'ia  v  m|  fhr*  paf’rnt  li«  wd-di  fu

[jec'onu*  a  ruan  S!ie  i rntHSishri »  d  -i!  fiei  ffllsss.  ‘vs  ludai',

^vith  W'ls<ifll  ‘  !if*  ll.id  !ullv»'  |:*ee|j  a n  lal*  *!  a  p  .rtulM  henna''
[diriulife'  was  e  haiiig-el  inh*  .<  i.ian  llir  .r  san!  ■  iirular
aunriumieatitns’'  fur  rtaiiijde.  the  ■  pn  ij!  in|rrr*4  fur  iic'nna-
ahrcH-iitisin,  arr*  siiltu  irni  .u»  sliding  **♦  mv  e\|}rnenef*  fur  the

preliminary  as:.tnnpiiiUi  tlnif  path-aif-.  su'  thi-.  ''.sul  wi-Ji  tsi  tlivr’d

:heniSfdves  u!  the  appeanun  r  ut  lefnininitv,  and  wi'di  tu
:nas('o!ine  eharaefr*ristii  a  flnundi  they  fullv  hf*lir-vrd  in  ?!ie
possihilily  iif  a  llletalnu|'|ihu•a^  and  that  they  invaiiahlv  make  an
ittempt  to  pU:Ji  fiirustrai  Ift  the  manlv  ndf*  v;lh«  !i  i-.  s  ho  idered
sy  them  fn  lie  the  fiiidirr.  Aniuiig  attempt’.  «  hafi-n"  fate

:wo  interirst  us  |Ktrtieu!ar!y  the  iunnalnm  ul  the  neuissfie
:"ii:iraefer  and  tfir  iieorMlie  piep/uafein.  ui  llir  fMiia  ffie
KHiroses  and  tlunr  svinptnitis.

As  a  trail  uf  ehaiaefer  ivldeh  i .  nut  i.ire  witfi  wwh  patieiif-g  I
Tiay  eitt*  f!te  fendrnev  tu  r%lur\v  indunlne-.''.,  and  ilalrrd  in
diildhueai  or  in  iater  vear-..  in  tirrsuie..  in  ph.uda’.v  ur  in  netiiutie
iftat'k'H  duriig;  width  !!ie\  feat  tin’  liMin  fhr-  Ih^U'  a'-.;

hough  thev  Wtstfhi  divest  tiirne  elvf' ;  Mt  the  m»side*.!v  wddt  il  tliry
*c*gar«!  as  fmdfdnre  a-.  fht?it-di  tie*-  u  i-jasl  t.*  makr-  .»  isuadr'  id
irtitioiis  large  iiias«  nliiie  'gridfal  urgaie.  and  thus-  lirlilth^  utlirrs
i  may  fw'  seen  fruiii  fhe-Ne  ea-‘.f’‘:  h-wv  t>ne  piuveisieni,  that  uf
‘xhihitiunisfii,  doe-s  nut  urtpie.dr*  frum  a.  *  unrndfa!  *.:rvind
ainstif lltiun,  hill  that  flu*  ?ie|if»»’'.is  W'ldth  seeks  tf>  ^renie  fhr  rg«i-
•OnKC*i()ti‘-airss  V'  ifiiprdh-'d  |u  •  np|'tre-*,  thr  feelii||^  td  js-si it V,

,0  OVer*''uea''  :;f  !?er',ui*r'  fhe  fe*’n*  s  S}*.  th.  •  ■■a;*”!v  df  ,  ’  f,»  I?-’  :i


THE  XEURuTR;  C’UNSTnTllUN


114

complete  man,  to  he  of  great  account,  hiul.s  expression.  The
sexual  jargon  is  there—iri  merely  a  form  of  expressitm  an  as-
if of  the’st^Klml  i*ontenl  of  tin*  tlnm^ht  or  v%-anl,  only  a  symbol
of  the  scheme  of  life.  Also  the  jcminine,  c'xaggerated  modesty
of  such  patients  is  an  experlicnt  in  the  iuipusite  clirectian  for  the
purpose  of  deceiving  concerfiing  the  lack  of  masculinity/  The
absence  of  modesty  in  studi  ^  taises  answ«*rs  hir  the  desired
masculinity,  is  tin*  masculine  {irottst,  ami  more  marked
immodesty  points  invariablv  to  cUsquieting  dreams  or  thoughts
concerning  curtailed  genital  organs  and  hence  reUsise.s  feelings
of  protest  of  a  masculine  n:itur«*  whitdi  consitlerahly  strengthen
the  line  of  ambition,  of  the  <lesirt'  iu  lie  first,  Itt  possess  every¬
thing,  of  olistinac'v.  In  thr  furtlier  develtjpnumt  of  the*  neurosis
the  desire  for  mastery  and  lor  nmqmvd  a--  well  as  tlu*  ttnulency
to  deprive  cdluTs  of  worth  may  assiwt  itsolf  in  tlie  form  of
castratiim  phantasies  ami  thoir  rationalisation  (Jones).  The
inclination  to  disarm  the  {lartner,  to  ianistantly  feel  tin*  assurance
of  superiority  %vhicli  riapilarlv  constitutes  the  content  of
exhihitionism  are  often  nu't  with.  At  times,  flu*  lat*k  of  msitneHs
and  indecency  in  girls  mav  he  interpreted  as  a  tra«*e  of  the
desire  for  masculinity.

All  of  these  frails  of  eliarartcT  althongji  tlon*  at  timrs  seemed
contradictory  were*  all  active  in  oiu*  (tir<*  ’ti‘m  tiovard  the  fictitious
final  gtial  in  this  patit*ut.  It  wms  not  dillicuU  tt»  discs oaw  a  period
of  uncertainty  in  her  isirlv  Huldhoud  as  preliminary  tt)  her
affectation  of  masculine  traits,  where*  she,  hmsuise  of  lack  of
insight,  rnislec!  hy  hovish  traits  and  her  <*ornpensatory  amlntion,
cherished  the*  hope*  of  niefamcirplujsing  Ivera*!!  at  some  future
time  into  a  man.  This  final  purpeea*  of  drveloping  from  a
hermaphroditic  condition  to  a  maU*  is  oasv  to  perceive  if  her
boyish  characteristics  are*  un<'l<*rsfofid  as  pre|iaralions  for  her
fictitious  tinal  goal.  Here  also  hehmec*  uer  irn  liriation  to  put
on  boys'  c!othe*s,  a  phemmienon  wlutii  a-:  with  I lirschfeld’H

Transvertiter  "  flows  from  the  psvi'hit*  dynamic-  just  ele^a'rihed.
Her  ideal  was  particularly  distinct  in  the  phantasies  atul  day
dreams  cd  hc*r  childliiHMl.  Influenced  hv  fairv  storie-;  anrl  myths
('*  Dwarf  Nose,"  "Thousand  ami  Hnr  Nights,"  etc.)  she
imagined  th<*  most  vari<ni  changes  went  on  in  her,  sometimes
believed  herself  changed  inttJ  a  Nhx  or  mermaid',  in  which  form  a
fish  tail  terminati'd  the  low*er  parts  of  the  hotiv,  which  is
indicative  of  the  pendiar  seiisin  At  this  time  a  distinct  neurotic
symptom  set  in,  in  this  mnnecfiim  :  siie  could  md  wall:  a!  times,
as  if,  instead  of  legs,  she  had  a  fish  tail.  Also  a  shoe*  feticliism
in  thi.s  connection  showed  the  masculine  temiency  and  developed
in  the  form  that  she  insisted  on  wamring  large  shoes,  we  might
say  masculine  shoes,  because  her  feet  hurt.  From  Ovid's

AdU'f  =■  ■■  Th#'  lioaiisrlf  m  .  rtf.


ASi'E'nCLSM,  Li^VK.  KIT,


1 15

Metanu>rpliu>i.s  whifh  in  hrr  rag«*  fur  rratiing  Nuv»n  fell  infti  !irr
hands,  she  hurruwrd  another  tieliun  wiiieh  rturrgtni  tiuriii|^  hrr
treatment  in  her  dreams ;  she  imagined  ,‘.|ie  hat!  lirni
metamorphusetl  in  surd  a  way  that  the  iuwer  pai!  til  her  iHidy
became  a  firmly  routed  trunk.  In  this  am!  in  'oiiiiLH  -<iie

gave  to  herst‘H'*lhe  answer  to  llu^  i{m"4iim  tsou'enuin.;  hn  .mints*
sexual  rdte.

We  shall  nut  ht‘  surprised  to  timl  that  in  thi'.  and  *;im{1sr  cnsrs.
the  attitiiiir  ttwvartis  wtuiiaii  use*  al-.o  inlhieiued  hv  itie  ii!4v4  iiiiiie
final  goal.  In  the*  preparatituis  lor  the  future  the  amative  ainl
sexual  relations  must  have  had  a  plaee  and  thereh^re  we  soon
find  our  patient  assui!.uiie  the  itiea!  masculine  role  of  |iroteiiiir
to  a  younger  and  weaker  sister.  h‘urt!irrim»re.  there  were
sadistic  acts  towanis  litl!e  girl,  and  r.ervants,  \mt  also  Imvanls
little,  girlish  hoys,  lluis  we  tiiul  in  the  tnaseuline  guidiiii^  line
of  the  patient  an  intermixture  of  stH’ondarv'  fr^ltures.  auxiliary
traits  id  homosexuaiity’  and  masisiltor  saifsau.  whica*  arrange¬
ment  re*-adt«at  front  the*  cofisli tu  liMn  ot  tlie  masiatline
pretlisposiliiins  ami  which  is  the  only  ptis'dfde  stih.4iliilr  if
iiiaseuline  sexuality  Wf‘re  selrtird  hv  her  nrtirotic  a|nirrcrjitioti
from  the  imprc'ssiiuis  4»f  lifr.  As  will  he  'Jiown,  hotli  ol  lltesr
perversions  are  <-!r4aiiloU"i  wav.;  and  e\prdient*s  ?ircoiiilary
guiding  lines  wliich  inaiw  out  td  tho  e\aca,;ef afe*!  masculine
protest,  llu*  i|ur‘.!iori  coiuauauno,  a  nOi  .tilutional  Itmdrts.oy  to
perv«u'’sii,ins  is  wliotlv  irta-lmant.  hei  ou'-.r  tlie  mnno  .i'.;  %rektng
assurance  ami  tdoosing  it-.,  matrna!  in  .t»u!tormilv  rvifii  this
ttuidiuicv  can  I'a'.IfU  up*m  ihr*  im^-a  iMMihr  toKtlJ^uc;,  lem!  !»»
them  proportions  and  value  which  mav  lo-fome  ifumeasuraldr  in
SC.1  far  as  tin*  neuiosis  regutr-es  this  !.>y  exaigo^^uting  tlinn  ami
lemling  them  high  values

One  tlav  *v'*  the  |.Kitirnt,  lunv  fourteen  vojr  .  of  age,  wms
areosted  hv  a  man  iui  the  vlair-.  who  matte  atlv ancr-*.  to  her,  an
insane  idea  developed,  on  fid**  ff.»und.ition  w!d*li  is  ra-w‘  to  see
through.  She  imagiiirf!  hri'-adf  for  Uianv  months  the  itmiaierer
<d  tloiiiesfic  fau'vaiit*.  (Hugo  S«  liriik)  and  thus  tw  meair-..  of
extreme  ahstrartions  w'hicli  wrir  in!r*»i|mrd  for  the  piiipt-He  of
security,  she  etIVcteil  an  in!e.tlii  ing  i-d  her  masculiiir,  her  hruim-
sexual  am!  hrr  saili^tic  tic! ion,  wddle  she  lirought  them  to  fiiorr
distind  expression  and  at  the  same  time  lodd  herself  in.
antiripatkm  cd  an  event  whiidi  she  feared  ,  These  three  i-unditions,
mere  ahstraetioris  from  realitv,  sfrengthming  of  giddiin:  iim'*s
leading  to  mann.i!iid(v  .am!  Ujovartl-..  and  not icip.it  itoi  nf
directing  ideal  mostiv  in  a  disiptised  form,  are  the  ft}ndamrfit:i!
eornponents  cd  the  psycliofic  t  onsfrm  tion.  'Hie  isMr  id  imligrinnis

Mi4t  lO"!  rfn|ili;,*  m/rti  llsr  ^  .-j..  ,  n  .v

iwinlUlw  l*t!r  ai  |!f»’  r?''!  .*  O-  :  ■  Itsf,

Vl'TIlC  t*'«i  iii'r  n  »,--f  fljr  m;  •  i--!-#  C  '4


THE  NEiiRcrnc'  EUNST!  rriiic;


1  It)

and  exogenous  poisons  consist>  in  many  eases  in  tlie  circumstance
that  these  call  up  a  feeling  lunghteaei!  insemirity  which  can
also  result  from  psychic  experiences.  I^ut  tht^  lunindic  tendency
toward  Si‘ciirit,y,  whirls  is  stremutlienf’*!  iis  i'a'a's  uf  iiu'reased
uncertainty,  is  ahvay.s  t!u‘  (dtective  c.iust*  til  the  psychotic
coiistruciioii.  It  then  ilraws  more  ftireihly  iiiln  its  po\v«n’::  the
neurotic  method  of  apperception  and  thus  causes  a  “  barring  oi  ”
(absperrun^),  Tlie  nsc‘  of  female*  doine-.tic .  servants  in  the
psychic  construction  of  our  patient  brings  to  cxfiression  the
tendency  to  ilepreciafitui  of  fi*ma!cs.  In  lier  insane  NV^tein  anxiety
is  strongly  manifested  ami  is  di.'tinctly  rcmugni/abl?*  as  a  means
to  obtain  security  against  the  male  arid  thus  ctnirdinaleil  to  the
piirpt)se  of  htu*  insanity,  ctm.litutin-  a  -r.'itud  expu*  ‘ie*r

aggravated  mastmliiu*  piadest.*

A  furthe?r  perversion  of  our  natimt  t>f  which  j4ie  was  dimly
conscious  consisltaj  In  a  fellatio  phantasy.  'ilie  realities
i’onnccted  therewii!!  and  whicli  bnind  a|i|di<Mtioa  in  the
neurotic  tendcuu'v  of  h.er  phantasy  were  well  kiunvn  to  the
patient.  She  had  a.Kvavs  be*en  vf‘ry  dainty  ami  as  a  t'hild  had
always  been  a  slave  to  flu’s  trunlency.  Ixvm  lo<dav  this  ch.iracler-
istic  often  asserts  itself.  Ibit  it  happeiiet!  noi  iiifrei|uenf!y  that
she  took  loathsome*  tliimss  inti^  lier  roMutb  witlumt  disgn^'4.  In
her  avoidance  of  tlie  fruniniiu*  rule  fhl"-.  patient  frietl,  liecause
parturition  seemed  fti  !nn‘  imaeeeptalde  am!  especially  feminine,
to  imagine  this  |?«TVfTse  situafittn  tcunpeusirilv  iKsssilde.  The
suggestion  origiuatCil  from  a  ctaivrr:-.at ion  wbieb  'Jir  had  iwer-
heard.  This  perversimi  wa-**.  assertf*d  of  a  female*  neigliluir  living
independently  and  in  }>!easanf  relations.  Early  forced  awMV
from  the  partner,  s!ie  neverthedexv;  Honghf  tti  keep  in  touch  wUn
reality  and  found  in  the  a%'oid:in<"<“  of  labor,  suppmiet}  by  her
exaggerated  leaning  to  disgusting  pr<aasiurf*s  the  way  tt>  this,
perverse  phantasy.  fh,it  lier  rmr'-cuiine  pri»t?’-.t  i^pposed  even  this.
Her  crying  out  at  night  ^vas  a-;  a  rule  ovim  dream  situations  nf
this  sort,  arranged  fenlativelv,  and  with  this  masrailine  protest,
she  answered  to  the  femininely  perverse  roh*  which  she  imputed
to  herstdf.

The  psychic  attitiule  cjf  flu*  p.ifietit  rle^aTibed  at  the  beginning
shows  the  essential  differemao  At  least  a  part  of  ht»r  fear  of  the.
man  and  of  tlu*  mnscailint*  prote^-f  was  present  wliich  after  a
short  tinu*  ma<le  ri^om  for  a  normal  attituoe.  Whnt  <'oiild  make
one  apprehensive  w;is  the*  di?*pasition  to  a  tlifbnudt,  socially
inferior  situation  which  could  only  be  rdiviatefi  by  furtlier  inroads.

*  TIh*  a<Tfntnftti^'rs  <f»f  iSf  !»?>#•  in  fh--*  unirMO*-  wfie

in»‘c*uri^  i-H  fcT  !hr»  fat-t  ihuf  h*-  te  'ifrr.mfrr  fnr

the  pjirprH<‘  of  pirtiric  fVH'univ  AieuH^  whrff.  iiorith*'r  rotor!-;
hyfwhciridrije.m  whi're  mnoftw'r  <'iru*l»^vn  r;ti3t;*.rt  fiiCjirrit  h  ».*1  fhr"

;3»riyirfy  lustl  fhe  flrliefieri  when*  ft.T  vsrlri  snt.rrfJgv  roof  u-'Cr  sliil

HHn:(*3(  jg,  Thie«  itlsn  iji  |»!art'  <*f  MeiOm?.  hullMriieiUr-rr-i,  ttoU  fr;sr*i.


Ahi'iiTH- !Cir


Could  there,  howrviT*  he  rKpetlml  a  tuiu  U^v-^^--  i .•  a!^'-

solution  of  the  prohiem  of  ihh  patient  who  ha-,  dr-,  dn-ei  ..oid  mh- •
has  been  robhtHl  of  all  stnial  eiuisoaiioio.  lo  the  liur.itio'i

of  the  neurosis,  and  is  i!er,li!u!e  *

With  all  tlu^  soliility  ami  id>atiinH-v  wlnei^  Auip  ta  nnu^itu

symptoms  and  the  iitnio^fie  rharaeter  thri'e  t-.  tadrn  a
ableness  and  imstahilily  mdueli  h.as  atUsH  fed,  ilu'  aftrnti.oi  *d'  m,my
writers.  Tht*-  eliaraeter  i»f  iSifo ieioit  air-.N,  id  nui -tt.iiii! v  *o
temper,  of  siiggesfiiiiHtv  and  uf  rae.^  rprihiatv  in  intlarfor  tlaiirl,
StrumpelL  Raiiriann  aiitl  o!hrr">l  wroto,d%^'  iornt  a*.  *oi

important  sign  of  a  {vsvidiH-mit*  aftr*1itu!.  Mut  aflrtirion  irittif.
however,  lie  rallei!  fit  the  fart  that  in  p-.vehir  phrnoinrmi  wiiuie
as  we  have  shown,  onlv  pir.and  nimis,  inojlr*.  of  r-t|irr‘iaoii  MUi
purposeful  ilis|Hisilions,  vaiiahihiv  tiiti-if  oflrn  hr  prr’.rfvrd
among  the  other  rlisrai-frid%fie--..  hri-att-.r  it  mav  aisn  ii««.  tif  as  an
auxiliary  line  niul  serve  the  t’u'fdhni .  final  lai.d,  the  inaviinatitt||  of
the  egioeonseifnisne':'-:,  Ilu-  neufMlir  '.rlfwalualiivn  %%dl  at  afU'
rate  take  those  variafioit^;  a-,  a  pidn!  <4  ilepaftiur  for  a  wav  of
thinking,  will  f’\a,/;.,'or4!.r  the  juda^iio-tii  *.>!  weaker.;  '

strerigthetiing  the  -.;i.ii»,;r‘.!i!jt!iiv,  v*.dl  -aippoit  if  wii!t  1^4

neurOKes  for  the  IllO'.t  pai!  fal  .e!v  r-aiinalrd  in  radri  fn  gaol  m
a  ntHirOsis  a  .strensddo'nrd  iinpefts.  A-.  tlo-  r-e.r

teaches  for  ex,tmjd.e,  A  ;horf  tinm  ag«n  a  Virioir-.r  p}iv^a*'i,4i*
brought  forrvard  in  a  puldie  srvdon  rr.oa|ilr'.  *4'  iisskog.^-  w-akot  ;

suggestions  whirll  Jinlern!  'an  vrr.-!|r^4  •■♦ah  ,rr!.,tMi  Ivd*.  on  a  frw
evenings.  Wheti  the  ladv  .  f"ipr%  fed  f'-r  *awa  hr-r''.r!i

again  for  a  tieitiOt!  •■■!  r.'lf  iof]  I  »tl  .l  '.nb-.rrruaO.  d^r  ,tr  .piOidr^^

with  an  hysferit'a!  alta«"k  oi  -.•sh  e. .O’trr  t!?. .4!  C^ir  Piiilir:
demonstrations  were  hu'lddd^at  hv  fie*  poii,  r  V.t  ir.v«  ho

therapevitie  Irtsitnuaif ,  our  ?on.f  nir|t,ord  ha  fh-

circumstariee  that  fhr-  Jnf nedm  *4  tlo*  |».if<ro.!  into  fhr

experinient  heiidifrar-,  the  mas*  nliiu-  profr'-.t  jtiJ.  far*  d.i.po'a*oei
to  attacks  and  is  above  a.!l  forerd  to  |e'r\ref  tlo-.  t^.r-  i*^;rfv

improveitiersf  in  fhr  coiiditio!i  h.  fell  ilir  pjiient  .r.  »  oir?p*d-
and  ronqiiesl  and  a  reLip-.e  niirn  f.adi»w%  ffom  iv-i  tAhn  ir.r-o!i
than  that  an  iri'tprovrlio'n!  ha*!  pfeerded  llo-  ainbn  .Urtit

traits  of  nriirotic's  and  pivi  hoti*'  patienf',  arr.ineed  .hi  saaltsig
a  polar  jjriliriple  I  rdrfdr  f  I  sar  »>ai  f;o*t.r*d  .edo  •

splitting  of  tfie  nnirotic  |isvfd?e  am!  id.iev  mshedvrU'  thr  idr.il  oi
personal  worth  rrassiifnl  fw  Itvfmt-.^-oioldlitv  am!  iar.i*  l


CHAPTER  in


neurotic  principles  :  SYMPATHY,  <*Oijl*ErRY.  NARCTSSISM.
PSYCHIC  HERMAITIRiHUTISM,  HAIJ.rCINA  IT^V  SECURITY,
VIRTUE.  CONSCIKNCH,  PKnANTRY,  EANATU'  AlTAi'TIMENT  TO
TRUTH

In  our  preceding  ol)servations  we  were  able  t<?  ftdkiw  the  varioiB
attempts,  preparations  and  dispositiuns  of  a  patient  wliirli  were
conditioned  by  the  setting  in  of  the  rnasctdiiie  leiuiency.  The
resulting  fear  of  the  man  was  so  great  that  wery  amative  rcdalion
was  prevented  until  treatment  made  it  possible.  In  very  many
cases  the  masculine  protest  manifests  it^adf  in  an  apparently
opposite  direction.  Tht*  patients  constantly  Ijcgin  new  relations
which,  however,  easily  languish  anti  art*  menat'et!  bv  peculiar
turns  of  fortune.  On  tlu*  tdluT  haml,  thev  arc*  capalife  tif  con¬
tracting  marriage  one  tsr  mor«*  tinurs  am!  also  of  ilisstdving  the
marriage  again.  Very  i)ft<*ii  tht*  dta*pt'st  passituis  of  leve  are
shown  which  are  strong  enough  to  tivercome  all  ob*Tac!f*s  and  are
usually  only  augmentt‘d  l^y  t!nun,  llu*  sarm*  pbeimmena  are
ob.served  in  male  neunitics.  IJ{um  clctsrr  ol»servaiioii  tlii*  ivell
known  trait.s  of  the  m*urotii‘  *aibject  art*  again  bniitd  |  first  of  all
the  desire  for  mastery)  wldcU  make  ica*  of  the  rrlati*>n<^:  rd  bfe  as
a  vehicle  for  reali'/ing  themselves  dermueTrablv  in  the  sarm*
manner  as  do  his  oIIht  chara(1t*ri*''tics.  I'ht*  desirr  tii  possess
everything  finds  exjiression  in  sucfi  a  way  that  all  men,  at  time.s,
all  human  lieings,  btH’oim,*  ;m  object  h»r  ctnupiesl  ami  in  pursuing
this  abj<*rt,  casepuTry,  ficcc::%ity  for  temlerm*s:s,  am!  diMamtenl
with  the  lot  assigned  liy  fattu  play  an  impiwtanl  part.  Idte
prefermice  for  diflirultieN  is  often  remarkable,  ih  little  girl  pre¬
fers  only  !>ig  men,  or  love*  first  detiares  itself  when  the  parents
forbid  it,  while  the  attainable*  is  treated  with  (jpeii  diselasn,  In
the  conversation  and  dedilmratiem  c»f  sueli  girls  the  Hiiiiting  word
emerges  constantly,  Tliey  wish  <mly  a  rultureef,  tmlv  a  broad,
only  a  masculine  man,  only  a  platonic  love,  nnlv  a  rmirriage  with**
out  children,  only  a  husband  mdm  will  permit  their  mil  ire  liherly,
etc.  The  tendency  toward  dctratlion  is  often  so  nbviiiiis  in  this
process  that  hardly  a  man  reunains  who  wrnild  fit  the  rcc|ttire*«
ments.  <  Usually  they  have  a  rfimpleted,  often  «ncainse*ioiis  uleal,
in  whom  are  mingled  tin*  features  of  the  fatiier,  the  lirother,  an
imaginary  personage,  or  a  literary  or  hisltiriral  (‘haraclf*r.  l‘he
more  we  become  accjuairited  with  these  ideals,  Ihf*  more  are  we
convinced  that  they  are  advanced  m  a  betilitius  standard  in  order
to  detract  from  reality  !>y  comparison  with  thtuiu  llto  psyrliic

tiH


neurotic:  principles


119

tendency  with  the  accompany features  of  an  **  unwomanly
nature,  which  frequcmlly  give\s  rise  to  sexual  liberty,  unfaithful¬
ness  and  imchastity,  reveals  cdwiously  a  striving  after  the
masculine  itleal.  Analysis  often  shows  tiriginal  organic
inferiority,  an  exaggerateni  feeling  of  inferiority/ a  remarkable
original  highcu*  estimation  of  the  male  which  follows  on  the  heels
of  dtdraction  as  a  means  td  assurance.  Otlier  assurances
strengthen  the  opinion  w«'  liave  formed.  Such  ideas  as,  all  men
are  rough,  tyrannical,  have  a  ba<l  odor,  are  infected,  etc.,  reveal
the  infliiencc*  u{hui  appcTccqdion  of  this  trend.  In  male  neurotics
are  obfitTvet!  ideas  of  a  suspicious  nature  which  make  the
accusation  that  all  wonuui  are  sinful,  unstable,  frivolous,
psyeholcigically  weak-mimled,  abandoned  unrestrainedly  to  their
sexuality.

Our  IfMchers,  pliiliv;ophers  and  pocds,  who  form  the^  ideal  of
our  lifiitu  the  SetTti  Km{)eror  (**  lieimiehen  Kaiser*’)  (Simmel),
are  also  not  infrequcuitly  under  the  sway  of  the  same  fictions.
The  neurotic  is  therefore  liketv  in  sei7.e  upon  thern  in  order  to
gain  a  firm  guiding  line  in  the  unrc--4  <d  life.  For  the  above
ncnirotit*  Irnthuu'V,  Si  hopenhauer,  Strindlierg,  Moebius,  and
Wtnnitiger,  be', ides  iho  ndigious  teaeliers  and  fathers  of  the
chiinb,  have  produced  the  most  phasing  vlnt  h^.  The  niallem
miiHfii'iirtupH  .iiid  the  tiisgrare  of  the  Imrning  of  witidies  followed
thf*  lf*arnrd  disputes  of  thi*  c!f'ri<*s  uvct  the  questioti  whether
woman  ha"»  a  soul,  whether  ;4ie  i.s  a  hiunan  bfdng.  The
reasrairing  schematic'  licfiens  id  mmrotic*  girls  are  derived  from  a
rhiliiisli  vhnv  t»f  thf*  woritt.  hnsuise  art  is  still,  nearly  exadusively,
niaseuline  territory  and  the  appi-rception  tdftTs  a  material  less
,siiit«al  Its  it,  and  iherefure  these  tictitujs  td  neurotic  girls  are
iifiMight  into  harmofiv  with  r«sdity  with  greater  diflicultv.

Wliere  reality,  however,  is  able  fo  inHiienei*  the  nennitic  fiction
id  the  girl  it  usually  causes  traits  of  charatler  and  tendencies
which  rtwauil  edearlv  ernnigh  the  masculine  inelinatitm  to  conquer
man,  or  whtua*  there*  is'  the  striinge^st  temlfUU'v  to  gain  security—'
in  a  }ioiiniSf*xnal  wav  to  caunpier  wtunan,  but  whii'h  make  tliese
neurotic's  nevertheless  *>eek,  as  a  lover  or  as  a  husluand,  the  man
tti  witiifii  they  tienv  value*  am!  rvhu  is  only  fitted  in  a  small  dc*gree
for  c'onfTict,  Tlie  expres'/um  cd  syrupathv  <‘an  in  smdi  rases
*dteii  disguise  the  state  of  affairs,  ami  love  is  then  free  if  tho
man  is  jiowcrlcss,  efiff*f*hlef!,  a  c-rippIe,  ageti.  In  phantasies,
itrearns  and  hallnrinaf  ions  in  wlucli  the  man  is  cast  rat  eql  or
<*liaiiged  info  a  woman,  or  corpse,  is  **  below,**  and  especially
in  the  fentleuc'v  to  ->vf*  the  man  witlnuit  weapons,  small,  aliased  ;

revealed  the  faiitipii!*afm  of  the  mascnilirie  guiding  fiction  and
finds  in  riecTojihilia  it-*  liiidie*-;!  expression,*  AmdruT  road,  as

^  JO  ■’mm*''  nifturmr  qlic  rclHti"fsr.ln|>  Uctwci'ii

41  fO'r  ■  ^^*401110  iind  mcruntulin-


120


THE  NEURUTIC  Cl.lNSl'rriTIOX


we  have  already  stated,  leads  over  the  lino  of^  the  desire  to
possess  everything,  towards  neurotie  ecKjuetry.  lln*  niaseuline
protest  is  therein  revealed,  hrst  in  the  tfunleney  to  tauripcaisate
a  feeling  of  inferiority,  of  detioiejiey  apjuTeeived  thriuigh  ths,*
picture  of  the  lost  masculine  mtunher  hy  means  of  domhuilion  of
many  or  of  all  num.  Secondly,  hy  the  refusal  td’  a  feminim»  role
in  vsexual  redations,  in  marriage.  In  place  cd  tins  despisinl
rflle.  expedients  are  resorted  to  whiclt  are  ilietated  !w  the  manlv
guiding  line,,  siidi  as  sexual  anesthesia  and  perversiims  id’  ai!
sorts,  among  which  the  sadistic  pre'dominatt^s.  Bloch  has
emphasized  in  a  line  manner  tiie  dt'sire  for  t!i»rninatit)il  hy  tlu*

coquette  when  he  says:  ('*  Beitrage  ^  zur  Afiologit^  der
Psychopathia  sex/’  1903)  Coquetry*  whWh  may  be  didincal  a>
the  effort  of  women  to  attaeii  num  to  thmn,  make-;  ^ use.  to  a
consideral)le  extent,  of  purely  .sexual  means  in  attain  its  ohject,
and  is,  in  this  respect,  an  efllux  of  tin-  true  gyiit*cokralir
instinct,”  We  ('an  cuily  atld  that  the-sr  ”  gynecukratic
instincts”  are  constructed  according  to  tin*  pidurr*  td  the  rresem-
blance  to  men  and  thus  prove  ihemscdvc*s  to  hv  tlrptuident  on  a
masculine  ideal,  altliough  in  the  attainnnnit  tht*retd  ftunininr
means  are  resorted  to  as  expedients  hreama,'  thev  are  tin'  only
ones  at  hand.  Tin*  alieittatn  :nul  iritere.'d  of  these  neurolicss
(among  wdmrn  the  rtiascuHne  rininriiv ^  art*  rmiiarkahle,  Ins'ause
they  .set‘k  to  carry  through  thf*ir  triumph  vahnsl  as  ruaaailinf’  hy
feminine  numns)  is  direded  toward;';  making,  an  impr«*Nsiou  and
to  force  (dhers  into  their  s^Tvitan  A  re'iutt  of  Ihi^:  trait  nl
character  is  timt  tin*  runirtitic  stremdliening  ai  thesi*  .^aa'ondary
guiding  lines  leads  to  toaTf'stirnafitut  ef  self  and  there-''
fore  also  to  (*xaggt*rati(m  of  the  df’sire  hir  mastery,  ol
pride,  and  ol  the  lendeiu'y  to  detract  from  the  worth  id'  oile''
Hence  we  need  not  he  surfuased  tli.d  the  ohierl  of  the’  «iesirc\  a:,
a  rule,  appcaars  hr*  overvalma!  through  thr*  nareis'afuii  (Xaecdci*)
of  the  patient.  This  uverestimation  i-  rather  an  a  prion
condition  in  tin*  ronstnidion  of  the  relation  and  in  it  is  reflerta!
the  exaggerated  ego  cd  tin*  hunale  patient/

In  the  psychaiherapeutit'  lrt*atment  these  rase-,  iirodure
especially  the  apptMrarice  of  ”  being  in  love  with  the  pliysieian/*
It  may,  however,  lie  easily  sf*en  that  this  ’‘transfer  of  love”
corresponds  to  mit*  of  the  nmnerons  preparatituis  for  rorifliei
used  for  ov(*rcondng  the  ohslarlo,  and  thus  to  gel  flto  heller  ol
the  superiority  of  the  man,  of  tin*  rnasetdine  phvraeian  .  and  it
may  be  easily  seen  tluit  the  feeling  of  defirlenrv  wliieh  tsi!!  -;  fiifl!i
this  peculiar  obsc'ure  fortn  of  the  masndine  protend  spriiur:-.  froiii
their  femininity  which  they  fee!  as  inferioritv.  in  no  ease,
however,  no  matter  how  far  the  neiirotii*  may  carry  rotjiirfrv,

^  Thfi  ift  umiov  t.\  -U'  ihs^t  r^v^-fv

I'H/w  UHli'avoyrii.


NEUROTIC  1T^1NCII>LES


I2I


does  it  re'arh  far  enaui^h  to  include  subjection  to  man.
Sooner  later  the  nmn  is  ihrtnitened  with  def<Mt  wdiich  carries
with  it  loss  tif  dii^'nitv.  aiul  in  fact,  always  when  the  neurotic
patient  fetds  the  situaiitm  to  he  too  feminine.  This  moment
may  arrive  at  diftVnmt  stages,  Imt  it  is  as  a  rule,  contact,  a  kiss,
exfHH'tation  td'  sexual  relations,  fear  of  pregnancy  or  of  childbirth
which  releases  heightentHi  ttmdtuu^  to  gaiti  reassurance  and
causes  the  outlireak  of  that  which  i.s  ordinarily  termed  a  neurosis
or  psvadursis.  I  hen  the  stronger  ahstraetioti  of  rtsality  comes
into  its  right,  tlu*  tictiiuis  assert  themselves  with  greater
distinctness,  tlu^  teiuiency  tu  detract  from  the  value  of  the  man
leads  to  aciions  ami  deeds  which  apparently  have  lost  all  mean¬
ing,  am!  t!u*  iiiinu'c'a!  disptedtions  of  the  aggressiveness,  and  with
tlies€*  the*  mairiitii'  traits  of  {‘luiracter  come  to  light.

Every  neurotic  |msst*ssf‘S  to  some  degree  this  coquetry  which
has  its  origin  in  narci.-^sism.  lltey  originate  indeed  from  his
liy|Hrslasr/ed  iiloa  rif  personal  valm%  arc  hnnuled  like  this  upon
an  original  tiling  af  inferiuritv,  I’he  fact  that  neurotics,
especially  the  'speries  just  tlescribtnl,  hml  it  so  hard  to  separate
thcmselvf"';  friun  |'iersons  ur  things  is  in  harmony  with  this.
The  parfiny  frtiin  a  perstin,  secuningly  not  in  close  relations  %vith
the  neurotic,  to  say  mdhing  of  a  seemingly  lt>ved  person,  is
capable  id  priHlticing  the  most  severe  neurotic  symptoms,
nenralgh'  attacks,  ilepressitui,  he>;  sh'ep,  attacks  of  weeping,
etc.  On  the  idher  hand,  thoMts  of  desertion  or  separation  are
not  rare,  am!  are  used  to  tu  ing  h»rth  proof  of  the  influence  over
the  person  tlueatcuunl  dliat  the  rnaseuline  protest  is  dominant
in  this  ctiqurtry  is  piaived  friuu  various  plnmomena.  The‘  strong
«iisim*linatirm  for  a  ih^lim/tly  feminine  rAle*  has  already  lieen
rin{dmsi/,rd  ;  it  is  capable  in  these  eases  of  railing  forth  a
rrinarkaide  pirfnr#\  the  ajqiearafice  of  a  double  life--si  splitting
of  tauisciiiiisiif^ -;s.  on  anddvalence  (Hlmiler).  Analysis  constantly
fiirnishe*-2  greater  protif  hu"  the  striving  toward  masculinity,
Dreams,  phaiiOeaes,  hallnrinat ions,  onset  of  psychosis  show  in
a  most  iiistinct  manner  the  -‘Iriving  to  become  a  man,  or  one  of
the  etjuivalrfils,  as  fear  of  a  fettiinine  lot.  The  strong  tendency
fowaartl  drfraitiim  uf  men  originates  fiauu  the  <dhirt  to  attain  an
equal  value  with  t}rf*  male  and  gives  rise  in  sexual  events  to  the
fiiasculine  rAlr,  wtuch  is  revealed  in  frigidity,  in  desire  to  be
first  ami  in  llima*  perversitms  which  force  the  man  to  take  a
slavish  and  tirlsisiitg  position.

Dftrn  the  onset  cd  tlir  neurosis  rnav  l»e  assumed  to  have  sed  in
when  ^alt*h  symptoms  as  fear  of  a  dreision,  <d  a  test,  of  marriage*,
jiiitilic:  apfUMrariee,  of  place  {!dat/,angst).  require  ineditsal  treat-
irient,  These  aiixietirs  arise  at  the  emerging  of  a  contradiction
in  the  riiastailiite  protest,  if  in  pursuing  the  same*  a  st*t"hack,  a
feriiiriiiif*  lot,  a  defeat  is  Ihrrateneil  and  lienee  the  forced
adiiiissittii  Ilf  fern  ini  riily.

K


122


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


This  was  the  case  with  one  of  my  patients  who,  several  years
ago,  just  before  her  tirst^  public  appearance,  liecame  ill  with
piano-player's  cramp.  This  neurtisis  furnisheti  a  good  excuse
for  escaping  from  a  dreaded  failure.  The  iduser  exaininatian
into  the  conditions  of  this  illness  showed  a  neuristic  illusion  in
which  the  patient  at  the  sight  of  notes  was  remindcal  of  male
genital  organs.  The  first  explanation  to  suggest  itself  was  that
of  an  exaggerated  or  repressed  sexuality  whose  refleciitm  in  the
piano-player's  cramp  wa.s  to  be  sought  in  the  reprc*s,sian  of  the
inclination  to  masturliation.  The  result  furnishei!  an  entirely
different  explanation.  The  triumph  btdore  the  public  was
supposed  to  signify  an  eciuality  with  the  man,  masculinity.  This
fiction  was  in  contradiction  \vith  reality,  with  her  ferniiuiuty,  so
that  a  public  appearance  erpialietl  a  final  ba!ani*iiig  of  the  "facts
(many  talented  girls  and  women  are  wrc*eke*d  for  the*  same
reason).  The  sense  of  reMlity  of  the  patienit  fdaea^d  instead  of
the  facts,  would  not  admit  tliis  condition  of  things,  ami  wheut
arranged  liy  a  symbolic  interpre*tatit)n  <d’  flu-  lieads  of  the  notes,
works  a  fictitious  abstraction  which  recalhal  the  femininity  ami
became  a  regressive  signal.  The*  eamtradietitm  in  the*  masemline
protei.st  of  this  [latient  is  manifestexl,  as  is  nearlv  alwavs  the  esise
in  the  neurosis,  in  the*  unreali/.ability  of  flu-  fiilion  jU'4  when,
before  the  decision,  the^  pos^dbili^y  of  a  lailurf*  t*^|imate*<i  as
‘'feminine"  in  diaraeleu*  eme*rgcd  a  e-ommon  phe*iu>menon
which  needs  no  e^xplanatiem.  Now  ilie*  trait  ;  td  anxieiy,  iif  sky*
ness,  of  stage-fright  are  slreuigtheuual,  and  tlo’V  cdtlier  themselves
furnish  excuses  or  prt*{Ktratiems  and  prf*»iispusitiims  (in  (uir  taese
pajns  and  inalulity  to  move*  the*  hamls)  and  divert  the  attention
from  the  menace*  t(»  the*  mastailim*  pre)tf's!.  litil  in  Ihi’:  «"ase  also
the  force  of  tlie  maseailiue*  prtJtest  is  a-aimeJung,  it  firms  a
preparedneass  for  e*onllirt  in  the  <lir<*<li<in  t4  the  ma  .niHm*  prei*
test  evem  out  of  the*  i!lne*ss  in  whidi  IIh*  patient  t4ke*s  refuge*.
This  girl  had  entt*re*el  ujnm  the*  <‘aret*r  of  a  virtmeu*  against  her
will,  forced  thereto  liy  her  unyieleling  motlu-r,  ‘Hie  wret'king  of
he^r  mother's  ambitious  plans  memnt  for  tin*  elaiighter  a  vielory
which  recoinpenseal  he‘r  in  part,  'fhat  w'hii-h  her  eib'.tinae’y,  her
masculine  tende*n<‘y  was  ru»l  al4e  tei  ata-ompli'di.  was  sueeessful
through  her  illne*ss  as  soon  is  notr''<4.e*rn';  esdlf**!  ti|i  Iti  her  the
menacing  souvenir  "  Viui  are  a  woman*  take  care,  do  not  allow
yourself  to  he  fore'ed  to  a  ff*ini!iine  obe*dient  rob*  by  your  mother
•—conquer  her."  A  further  eonstriuiion,  an  excuse  ^vhirh
yielder!  a  foundation  for  the  attitude  toward  her  mother,  lay  in
the  heightened  feeling  fhat  her  younger  si;.trr  wsis  given
preference.  This  train  of  thought,  as  well  as  her  fdlorts  to  gain
exclusive  control  over  every  one,  hf*r  motlier,  a!!  the  mt*fiifirrs
of  the  family,  all  human  beings  in  the  environrnrnt,  even  of  a
dog,  was  reflected  in  the  heightened  rliaraclerist’ies  of  her
coquetry  and  found  exprcKsion,  for  example,  in  one  id  her  laleat


NEUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


123


clnMFtis  riiiuiiiiing  the  physieiaii.  The  dream  was  as  follows:

f  Nil  yiui  and  ask  if  you  like  all  the  paiienis  as  well

as  ViHi  like  uu"  ^  I’oii  answered,  '  Yes,  all,  and  my  four  children^
toed  Ai!  si  enee  you  changed  into  a  woman  and  went  to  sleep,
A  weiiiiu:  wa:-  locking  ai  ihe  black  notes.’*

llie  amative*  disposition  of  this  patient  could  endure  no  rival.
She  fiiatie  use  oi  the  cc'rtainty  of  her  conquest  in  order  to
support  iHU*  terliie^'  ed  st‘curity.  I'he  physician  who  gave  her  to
«!idi‘r*4.aru!  that  he*  trcMtca!  all  [latieujts  with  the*  same  interest,
and  who  lovca!  liis  idiildrem  In'side's.  lu'comt's  forthwith  the  point
of  attack  id*  her  striving  (or  doitiination,  as  was  formerly  the
moflitT,  tht*  man  whom  sht*  marrit*<h  as  were  all  persons  in  her
efivirimiiient .  diniiestu*  Nc^rvaitls,  trades«peopk%  teachers,  etc.
Her  self  cf'iitered  nature*  diti  not  need  to  tramsfer,’*'  as  she
cariif*  to  file  trfVif!iK*nt  witli  rigid  predispositions  and  put  them
ill  jihiy  trum  ihc'  Isr^t  nuuiH*nt  of  her  meeting  with  t!ie  pnpician.
Oiilv  the  !U‘w  •dliialiou  was  surrounded  with  <lif1irulties  and
oh'-'lai'le*;  wlurli  preventc‘t!  tite  will  to  <iomination  through  love
frtun  fidlv  <h-vfTqiing.  Naturally  my  wife*  was  left  out  of  the
dream.  !si.4.  thi-.  uadssiun  is  tin*  iainu*r  sttun*  td  the  situation  ;
my  wiif*  iiei'nnftdv  set  a-dtie.  Vp  tti  tliis  |aunt  the  feminine
means  extend  amt  e'h.usn  1f’ri/.e  ihe  feminine  line  to  which  the
paiiciil  liuids.  Now  fin*  nut-s'uhne  protcxsl  c*me{sn‘s  more
distinct !v.  I  lifs'emt*  iiiiniana»*d.  i!h*  rt*assnring'  illusion  of  tlie
paUeiit,  namelvs  ihr  noicss  a-,  a  props'tiug  symhol  of  the  male
gf'iiitals,  a’.-.r!l  rigjo.  She.  lier^elf,  ‘'takes  care/‘  secures
m*r*-.e!f  in  mder  !u»t  tu  sink  in  ln*r  ft*eling  r>f  masculine*  t*go-
i'oiisriousiie;,  fo  Mitlef'  mid<*lrat.

lli.it  I  gM  to  :'lrc"ji  in  the  lii'eam,  a'.. vigils  to  me  a  j)l;u*e  similar
to  that  rvhiili  lin  hii'.hatid  oec'upie-;.  i*he  patient  feels  it  as  a
great  neglerf  tlatf  lief  hmTand.  an  ov(*rworkc*d  manufacturer,
oUon  goes  to  ‘Irrp  ijfdoir  -.,hr  titles.  The  unmanning  of  the
hiis!i:irif!  in  the  .lU-.wer  thende,  a-:  well  as  a  fu’olonged  insomnia
whose  eori-.f III*  t !ve  ■ac.nificame  ut-i  in  tin*  fact  that  it  permits
the  patirnt  lu  «;.'.|*r*ra!e  against  in-r  hushand.  Ntnv  she  eould
relume  him  hi'-  rirjit  a-,  a  hin-Tami  and  turned  him,  at  hrst  in  the
iidddir  of  the  iii-dif,  ialrf  perniancuit Iv.  out  o{  Iier  liedroom  ;
twasaiisr  hr  ”  siioied  and  di-.tnrhed  her  .ai  miuTd*  Our  jiatient
wssiihi  liavf*  e.cilv  found  amuher  aretimeiif  if  this  one

hail  not  picMmtrd  ilseif,  and  it  wouM  he  erroneous  to
exehifir  tile  nenrofh*  i'ufi'-anKliou  as  a  fuiuse  l'>eeause  in
this  rse;r  ihe  nr-iirotie  !m|ipeued  f»e  rigid.  In  order
prove  ilail  -.he  i-  sTdi!  the  patient  will  tdten  argue
aptiv;  flu*  nmirotic  '-tigma  in  fat1  nuud-sts  in  the  ten-

clriicv  to  rrmlrr  file  ‘.ti|icriorii v  vi'-dhh*  hv  all  possilalt*  means.

I df i|doir‘;  iiararudsi  fc<r  f^xnni|dr  revrsals  tliis  lutalianism  to  us
mdfli*  greater  dr.irnr',^:,  Pavsidc’S  t!ic  muirosis  of  our  palimjt
enfitiriiirs  ill  its  rsoiisf niciion  oi  assuranre^a  To  her  insomnia


124


THE  NEUROTIC'  CONSTITUTION


is  added,  in  order  to  place  this  on  a  firmer  basis,  a  sensitiveness
of  hearing,  whose  mechanism  consists  In  an  uvt'rt'harging  of  the
attention  for  the  purpose  of  serving  the  neurotic  teiuienc'y,  so
that  we  were  also  able  to  say.  by  this  overcharging,  the  patient
is  awakened  by  the  slightest  noise  as^soon  as  siie  falls  asleep.
Thus  she  can.  still  awake  when  morning  comes,  sleep  far  into
the  day  and  thus  avoid  the  feminine  tasks  of  the  household,  in
the  same  manner  as  she  had  escaped  the  nuither’s  thunination  by
stage  fright  and  cramps  in  the  tingc^rs.  An  auditorv
hallucination,  a  sawing  noise,  constitutes  a  final  security  whicfi
may  be  pursued  analytically  in  two  <iirections.  llie  one  inter*
pretation  is  furnished  by  a  warning  souvenir,  %vhit'h  at  the  same
time  is  an  incentive  to  her  cociuetry*— once,  when  eight  years  old,
she  overheard  an  intimate  scene  at  her  marrieti  sister's,  she  felt
shut  out,  neg!ected~she  gave  a  similar  value  to  her  hushancrs
indifference when  he  fell  asleep  befi>re  she  diil,  in  order  to
be  able  to  take  a  sharply  aggressive*  attitmie  toward  him.  A
second  interpretation  led  in  another  direct ‘um,  Tlu*  noise
recalled  the  sawing  off  of  a  stem  and  symlHdd'/.eii,  ;u-oustirally/
the  imnianning,  the  detraction  from  tin*  wt>rth  id  the  man.  As
is  also  so  frequently  the  case  this  symptmu  proved  to  be  (just  as
I  have  maintained  of  the  dream,  of  svmjjlonec  and  of  the
neurosis)  a  representative  instance  i>f  ilie  asi-teision  from  the
feminine  to  the  masculine!  line,  as  a  ma:‘cuHue  prr^fest  a.ciiust  a
situation  usually  piawimisly  fell  as  ieiuinine,  again  t  an
anticipated  feeling  of  defeat  and  as  a  symhul  of  tiie  life  ;adieme
of  this  neurotic  pati(*nt.

This,  and  similar  rases,  expiaimsl  to  me  in  what  manner
suggestibility  heK:arne  an  auxifiarv  of  the  temienev  to  attain
security,  either  because  therefrom  the  patient;  gaiiifn!  in  small
things  the  conviction  of  her  weakness  in  ortler  to  i-irtivitie  iirr*^elf
with  proper  protection  at  critical  times,  or  heranse  the  patient
yields  with  surprising  olialnlity  in  orth^r  to  gain  as^amdanev  <n-er
the  other  person/  Tlie  more  tiirert  efforts  of  her  tnidencv  lo
domination  stan<l  .so  sharply  in  conirasi  with  thi'^  virlding  that
when  only  superfit^ially  o{vserve<i  tlie  phenmnenon  rr  ,tnnhlf' .  :i
splitting  of  consciousness.  In  the  same  manner,  vanitv,  firi*!e.
and  self-admiration  will  guide  the  patient  in  manv  r  ice-,  tta  the
same  goal  rvhilc*  she  at  times,  tamdiicts  her-ielf  with  rntHleslv,
simplicity,  ami  carelessness,  using  these  r|naiitie-".  as  e!i,perliefi!s.
Usually  externals  and  attitudes  are  carefully  slutlied.  Very
often  fetichisrn  is  manifested,  wlmse  e-isentia!  and  rtmstrtifiive

M)ni*  in  ri‘tnindr»<!  hi-rr  t4  nf  elh-h  ’■a*-  lr.ev.-'

Kpokt*n.  Thu.i  tin*  wonb,  *'  iM'hrill  *'  fttirt  “  i,:-  ’4 iim  A-m

i^orially  in  ttipir  wh.-lj  u-  n  li  jii  .  tetw

through  tho  ttyo,  jit  lusriUii^r,  fhrniigh  tin*  #s‘ir-
y*Tho  Isittor  mfchiuibrii  www  to  N*  nt  fb*

%vhib  l>oth  fittitocii‘8  umy  bt  lulccn  tlio  iUnirturo  uf  nui-rn'lumi,  Htill  Iwic-r.
pErnuloraa-wK-hisui.


XKUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


125


foundation  rc‘p^^^cllts  rffurt.s  to  prove^  equality  with  men  in
ways,  hence  to  c'onq^ensate  for  a  feeling  of  deficiency.
Litc*ratiire  furnishes  us  with  re|)resentalions  i>f  all  these  efforts  m
a  im^st  rcUiiual  finiii  in  tlu*  memoirs  of  Basehkirzewa  and  Helen
Rakowi/a.  Aiialystas  of  a  seric‘s  of  eas<\s  \vht*re  the  memories  of
these  reiinirkalite  imjua^ssitms  from  cliildhood  had  been  pre.served
nic^rt*  viviiliy  than  usual  furnisheHl  me  with  interesting
veriticatiiUis  at  a  tiriu^  whcm  I  was  already  far  advanced  in  my
€‘X|iositiiUi  of  the  doubts  about  the  future  sexual  rdle  on  the  part
cif  the*  fieiirot  }c  child  aiul  the  maseuline^  prote.st  which  necessarily
'"‘prings  t!if*refru!ii,  Soim*  remembered  very  di.stinetly  having
been  in  doubt  up  fi»  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  year  whether  they
wf*re  mak'  or  k'luaJe,  It  may  not  be  a  matter  of  chance  that
wt^rr  male  patients,  At  tinu‘s  the  doulit  emerged  whether
they  ivrre  not  hermaphrodites,  so  that  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  in  tdher  casf^s  where  tlie  tlunight  of  hermaphrodites  was
distinctly  am!  import unately  present  In  the  memory  of  the  patient
and  was  spcuitaiieously  brought  forward,  it  is  the  last  impression
of  a  tliHibt  alnnit  the  patient k;  own  sex.  Ami  in  literature,  too,

I  have  frrt|uently  run  across  this  significant  trat'e  in  the  histories
of  mnindic-;  ami  psyehotics  wilhitut  the  significance  of  this  doubt
rrimaoiung  the  sexual  role  btnng  i*k*ar  to  tlie  wriitw.s.  Meschede
dt‘scrihrd  an  intrr<‘sting  c-ase  of  tpieslion-etunmilsion  (Frage^-
wsiiig),  and  Frrmi  one  id'  timnentia  after  Schreberks  liiography.

I  tiisrrgaril  whetlifT  t^r  md  this  interest  of  the'  patient

was  f'xplained  by  illustrations,  or  placards,  in  the  lexii’on,  by
readings,  by  speefaides.  by  tHTurrences.  as  well  as  the  scientific
intf rprc'lation  wdiicli  srernrd  to  concentrate  it.s  attention  to  the
male  periods,  the  male  tdimailerit*,  to  the  examination  of  the
male  or  female  share  in  the  imlividual,  c*tc.  For  me,  the

permanent  impression  whiidi  asserUxl  itself  in  an  obvious

emphasis  of  die  relation  and  the  reciproexd  relation  of  the
anfithrsis  male  denude,  was  the  important  factor.

In  recent  vrar.  since  I  have  hit  upon  tliese  fundamental
phf‘fiomrna  oi  flu*  firiirosis,  I  liave  often  asked  myself  if  I,  too,
in  the  rocfsc’  of  rny  devfdoprnent  from  tddldhood  was  not

florniriatf'd  bv  a  '•  bidiar  tdiuibf  mdivitlisfanding  tlie  fac't  that  the
id’  !ir!nm}ihr«.»f!itism  only  attracted  me  at  a  very  jate
peritHl  ami  from  i!ir  stamJpoint  of  a  matic,  am!  hence  in  a
srroiiciary  mamior.  Also  my  rejeetion  of  the  biological
tirrfii'i|:ifirodit i-Jii  .c-.  a  cause  rd  the  neiirosi.s  (Mies)  t  wxnild  use
as  an  argiimrfit  :i|r;dnst  mvh  dcmlds  in  my  earjy  youth,  if  I  were
!io|  familiar  wdth  the  fart  that  often  the  negafitm  is  the  asserUon
of  an  old  interest  wddcli  has  becamte  unetmscdtnis.  lint  my ^  view
of  life  sliiiw‘s  me  that  I  must  h:ivr  became  master  of  old  childish
contrary  Icmdinicies,  without  the  exaggerated  masruline  protest
fuiviiig  fic^cn  flrvtdiipeil.  Because  I  have  in  life,  as  well  as  ip
♦-cirficdc  after  a  first  aledfaet  valuation  of  the  masculine  principle


126


THE  NEUROTK'  CONSTITITIOX


over  the  feminine,  rejected  tlie  ih]od  of  ar;^nnm*nts  prove  the
original  deficiencies^  of  women,  witli  pertinent  cahumv^s.

I  believe,  however,  concerniiig  the  foniuT  tTitio’^  of  the

masculine  protest,”  from  the  manner  in  whieh,  they  have
undertaken  the  contest,  and  from  their  srut>horn  failure*  fn  under¬
stand  it,  that  the  exaggerated^  savagenes'i  uf  their  attack  in  a
strictly  scientific  question  is  retVrahle  nearlv^a-"  a-;  is  their

fear  of  the  concept  “  hermaphrotUtism  ”  to  a  childhood
impression  which  alanuingly  pn'senteul  to  tluun  an  aiaa^mtuated
effeminaev  or  hermaphreHlitisno  with  which,  however*  it  is  not
my  intention  to  eleter  anyone  from  a  SiUeuititir  criticism.

Besides,  there  is  no  hettt^r  w,iy  of  judging  th*'  r«>;iction  of  the
neurotic  psyche  than  from  the  answers  in  ipiesti-m^  showing
estimation  <d‘  the  opposite  sex.  It  w^ill  lunaune  appartml  that
every  stronger  denial  of  the  etpiality  ot  tlu*  f*very

detraction  or  overvaluation  of  tiu'  opptcat«*  sex  i:»  invariably
connected  with  a  neurotii'  di.-^position  and  mnirolic  traits.  llu’V
are  all  dependtmt  on  the  neurotii*  temletu'v  to  ehtain  iccurity,
and  all  manifest  distinc't  trat*«'s  cd  tlu‘  masculine  prMfr*',t  ami  are
evidence  tif  tlu*  t‘ssmitial,  nuwe  ahstraii  .idlieretus-  t*'*  a  giu«!ing
fiction.  Thev  are  mumind  all,  expediemts  n\  !?innan  thought  ti»
enhance  the  ft*eliug  of  personal  wortii.

It  follows  from  tlu‘  exptisition  of  mv  p.vclndo-v  of  the
neuroses  that  childrem  with  malt*  :is  v«dl  .c  tluor^  with  ftuualf*
tendencies,  look  forward  with  fear  to  the  lot  «u  a  wouian,  t«i  he
sulijcrt  to  a  man,  to  In*  dejirlveti  of  virginity,  injured,  to  lie
obliged  to  bear  children,  tit  {day  a  sulntrdinatf'  rbm  in  life,  hi
obey,  to  he  backwaird  in  knowletige,  in  skill,  in  sirmu'th,  wistiong
to  be  weak,  to  have  perimis,  to  bf*i'omi»  a  sa«  riflcr*  to  husband
and  children,  in  liecomi*  at  last  an  tdtl  atid  neglected  woman.
How  this  fear  of  the  futuia*  give^;  risi*  \n  eguiaic  trails  «d
character  has  been  dest“ri!a*d  above.  I  have  dcMU'ibed  a  typical
case  of  a  little  girl  in  the  Uisp^Kitiim  7.nv  Xfuirosi-**  (t.e/K

I  am  able  to  show*  in  tfie  ease  n{  a  jiatieni  %uffering  fnim  a
gastric  neurosis  a  line  of  t'omlucf  whicii  l  i  regularly  ub-:erved  in
the  psychie  developnimu  of  neurritie  jiafienlN.  '  TIfe.  is  the
anticipation  in  thought  and  emotion  of  all  disailvantages  w'hich
could  he  expected  to  orc'ur.  Thi'^  tendenev  is  olnerved  in  early
childhood  when,  wdiere  tlu*re  is  organic*  inferiiuitv  and  the  evil-;
arising  therefrom,  it  is  of  exres-^ive  gnnvth.  Very  often  this
feelings  occurs  at  the  time  inimf*diately  preceding  the  falling
asleep,  and  it  is  then  n<d  remarkalde  tint  a  dream  ticiiori  spurs
further  this  effort  of  anticipation  in  a  form  to  esanse  fear,  On!v
the  dream,  in  resernhlamse  to  the  liallurinalion,  brings  wut!i  if  a
condition  of  feeling,  of  emotion,  whiidi  has  tlir  s!g?iitic*anr'e  as
anticipation  of  emotion,  paralltd  to  antit'ipation  in  thuugitl.  in  a
waking  condition.  The  hallurinatory  exeiialnlilv  is.  .c-.  I  have
already  ernphasiml  in  the  '*  Studie^lber  MtmlwfTtigkeil  von


NEUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


.•..127

Organ/'  an  vxttnided  capacity  of  the  brain  which  is  overstrained
in  cornpensatary  directions,  serves  the  neurotic  tendency  to  gain  ’
security  aiul  owes  its  rt‘presentative  faculty  in  consciousness' to
the  nieniory  whicfi  folltm^s  a  certain  tendency  to  the  ■  neurotic,
cautious  apptTcc‘|)tiiHi.  1  ht*  c'hildish  undeveloped  psyche  show's
at  most,  traces  of  iendtuicit^s  toward  hallucinatory  feelings  wduch
are  to  hv  uruierstiUHl  as  tlie  tietitious  prepanitions  for  a  goal,  as
anticipation  in  lime  of  uncertainty.

Thus  laughing  in  sha'p,  or  pleasant  sensations  in  the
anticipatory  ijuest  ol  organic  satislaction,  or  of  security.  The
hallucinattu*}*  exiitettumi  in  tlu*  neuroses  and  psychoses  always,
a!ui  without  except  ion,  servers  the  guiding  lietion  of  the  hleal  of
jierstinality.  I'he  signiiicanee  of  the  hallucinations  of  pain  and
anxiedy  tor  the  tiidion  td’  nervous  diseases  should  also  he  taken
into  account.  A  further  examination  of  the  mechanism  of  the
hallucituiliun  Ituichf's  us  unet|uivucally  that  it  is  composed  oi
teiideiicii^s  la  abstract  ion  anti  to  antitupation,  and  that  it  gains
sign.iiit*ancf*  as  a  streuigthenetl  fitdion  or  as  a  warning  souvenir,
bfHsius<^  it  atd  i  as  a  Sjjur  tti  t!u»  assurance  of  the  feeling  of
perstuia!  wtjrth.  I'hat  they  are  t*oitnect<Hl  with  traces  of
imnnory  has  iu>  rs-a*ntial  sign!iii*auce,  llie  psyche  works  with¬
out  except itui  witli  the  ciUitent  of  <'onsciousness  and  with
sensations  tfiat  are  given  tty  experience  and  originate  in  the
CiifjHU'a!  subdrattnic  .signitic'auce  of  tin*  psyt'he,  and

especially  of  ilte  mnnad it*  psycht*,  lies  in  the  sjvecial  choice  of
these  memory  tracf's  and  ifi  tlieir  eonmsditm  with  the  neurotic
aj){ier<*eptiMn  winch  gives  tlimn  their  treml.  Therefore  the
nervtiusly  f’xaltetl  tendency  to  gain  s<*curity  makes  use  of  a
specially  dc^veltgusl  fmudion  td  prevision,  of  hallucination,  in
wd/ch  aledra»l!y  and  imaginativedy  a  st'cne  unrolls,  an
anticipated  liriuHteiiHUit.  a  fures«*en  finaU*,  w'ith  tsigerness,  so
that  the  hallucinated  imlividuat  Iniilds  the  bridges  to  it,  they
have  an  ailiminitury  <|uality  warning  thiun  to  tdioost*  another  way.
i  lalUicinations  as  wadi  as  dreams  are,  like  tither  tentatives  of  the
psydie,  tltte(i  for  finding  the  wav  wduch  leads  to  the  rnaximation
i*r  presc^rvatifui  cd  the  egroctuea-jousness.  In  it  are  reflected  the
failiis,  the  hope-,  ijr  the  fears  cd  the  patient.

Idle  atuive  [l■atie^lt  was  on  tlie  eve  of  marriage  when  her
gaslrit^  netirirnis  begam  Site  sulTere<l  from  pains  in  the  region  of
the  stcuti.'K'h,  belching,  vomiting,  lr»ss  of  appetite  and  (d)stipation,
(due  evening,  sluirtly  ludiirr  going  to  sleep  she  heard  the  word
Eskadambra distirnlly,  '  Tite  formation  of  apparently
rneaniriglfcv^  Wiirds  are  /dten  among  the  performances  of
neurotics.  I'sindlv  tliev  prtjve  to  be  put  t()getm*r  according  to
a  plan,  just  as  chihiren  invamt  laiiguages  hy  means  of  whicdii  they
attain  a  feeling  of  superi<jrit\e  Ptister  was  able  to  make  inter-
prelaticiUH  id  the  wa>r«l  pic'ttires  %vhich  originated  from  fascination
in  the  casr:'4  of  those  having  the  **gift  of  tongues."


128


THE  NEUROTIC  (X)NSTITUTION


In  a  previous  chapter  1  have  given  a  solution  of  an
hallucinatory  **  sawing^*  in  the  ears,  in  two  t»tluT  eases  I  joimcl
the  roaring  serving  as  an  atlinonitory  nuuiiorv  of  tlu^  of

the  sea  and  its  dangers  as  a  sense-picture  of  lif<%  just  as  Huiner
compares  the  ayopa  to  the  roaring  sea."

In  paranoia  and  dementia  pra'cax  the  etnotions  IcNtcling  to  the
masculine  protest  disguise  themselves  in  the^  fonn  id  hallucina¬
tions  and  assure  the  psyrhodc  scheme  thnuigh  their  acoustic  or
visual  complement.  Likewise  ('oncerning  a!>twe  nu*ntionecl
rounding  off  of  a  psychic  move"  into  a  lialliicination  <4'  hearing,
we  may  assume  that  a  strong  inner  necessity  has  led  to  a  greater
tension  of  the  tendency  to  gain  staairity,  h^r  which  the  word
**  eskadambra/'  though  witliout  value  or  significance  for  the
patient,  can  represent  a  signal  tjr  sign.*  One  is  jnstilied  in
thinking,  however,  that  a  thorough  understanding  of  this  word
would  show  a  meaning  which  would  reveal  tt»  ns  the  mental
condition  of  this  girl.  As  a  rule  it  is  easy  to  obtain  an  niuler-
standing  of  hallucinations  td  this  sort,  at  least  not  more  diHindt
than  for  short  fragments  of  rlreams.  Asked  eonceuiiing  the
impression  of  the  new-wonl  format icm.  the  patient  an^wc^red,
she  recalled  *\alhanihra hv  this  word.  For  tius  rTe  had
evidently  alway.s  had  a  great  interest :  once  it  shtod  prmidtv.  imt
it  wa.s  now  fallen  into  tlecay.  a  ruin,  “rhe  beginning  of  the  word
'*Esk’'  wa.s  to  be  found  in  the  wtu<!  *Mvddnug*’  in
**  E(tru)skan too,  these  letters  are  hnimb  The  race  of

Baskes  occurred  also  to  her  .  in  this  word  the  greater  part
of  appears.  The  p.atient  thus  indicates  the  wav  she

has  followed  m  the  constrmlion  of  the  new  wau’cl.  sire  has  joined
a  fragment  of  the  names  of  ancient  tribes  and  the  name  cd  a
ruined  city.  Finally  the  won!  *La!haridira '*  liad  hu’  her  also
only  the  significance  of  a  fragment,  and  hence  we  iirr  juslitifa!
in  assuming  the  thought  of  fwing  broken,  madf*  ^anall,  made
short,  wouicl  emerge  m  the  interpretatitm  cd  the  liatlncdnalion.
The  letters  skad  ’*  lH*h>ng,  as  the  patient  easitv  di-a/overed.
to  the  word  **kaskade.*'  She  saio  she  was  certain  of  this
because  she  had  used  the  expression  **  ganxe  kaskadrn**  in
connection  with  the  period,  the  menstrual  period  just  passefl,

When  it  is  taken  into  consideration  that  this  patient  ivas  about
to  be  married,  the  ronnertion  cd  this  corisiriHiitm  cd  new  ^vnrds
with  the  psychic  condition  ran  be  umlerstiKHl  withoiil  anyttdng
further.  Tnat  she  is  disinclined  to  marry  one  can  sn*  from  her

^Ort  ariotWr  <K*na(«km  f  f?asri4  tli**  *'h»«  t.-*  r*’  Iti**

tones  of  tflpgrsph  wires.  Thr.4r  remtriat-*l  h-’ro  m  rl;.»|.C

Itmdck’I  whdre  akirif  lift  <at4ai  rriibr.>ri4l  it?#'  tcffria  On-  f*  I*  ./rstia?,  «ali  hr  i

Bopos  for  t!if  futorci*

^  An  one  hw  ki  ftsfuiine  also  0'.#  rj.i-h  0=  *

of  tn  the-  i  fiin-.f  n.msj.


NEUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


129

neurosis,  which  fornu-d  a  ready  obstacle.'  In  the  hallucination
there  is  a  disconnected  sketch  of  the  following  train  of  thought ;
the  glory  of  niy  virginity  will  be  destroyed — I  shall  bear  a  new
race-  1  .<hall  he  fitrcetl  to  sacritic-e  whole  ca.scades  of  blood.  When
I  had  lirought  the  interpretation  up  to  this  point,  the  patient
helpeil  me  further  by  relating  that  when  she  was  eight  years  old
she  had  heard  that  a  woman  of  her  actiuaintance  had  died  from
loss  of  blood  at  the  birth  of  a  ehild.  Since  then  she  had  always
been  afraid  of  chihlbirth.  \\''hat  now  is  the  meaning  of  this
hallucination.-*  (‘an  it  be  delined,  even  remotely,  by  the  word
■'  wish-fulfillment".^  'I'he  meaning  of  this  neiv  formation  of
words  is  the  antii'ipatorv  int<-rpretation  in  the  direction  of  a
danger  to  lie  feared,  of  being  humiliated,  or  the  fear  of  becoming
a  ruin,  as  she  hail  often  calh*<l  her  mother,  of  dying  like  the
woman  she  remembered  in  her  childhood.  Thi.s  feeling  against
female  functions  (aiul  the  patient  iiuh‘<*d  strove  also  consciously
against  marriage!  i.s  of  oUler  date,  originated  in  early  childhood,
and  was  at  that  time  embodied  in  the  wi.sh  to  he  ahead,  healthy,
strong  like  her  father.  It  became  then  a  fictitious  guiding  line
and  was  filled  with  a  logical  content,  which  was  grouped  about
a  masculine  itieal  of  personality,  ami  was  filled  also  with  a  fear
in  the  same  direction  against  a  ferniiune  role.  Now  1  was  able
also  tt»  make  rlear  to  t!i<-  patient  the  meaning  of  h<T  stomach
neurosi.s.  It  was  a  hallm  inatory  excitement  which  reflected  the
hardships  of  pregnane  v,  warning  the  pafient  to  avoid  the  same,
[n  the  waking  ( oiiditio!),  in  the  <lream  ami  in  hallueinations  and  in
th<‘  neurosis  thof  was  a  h.irmony  of  the.  tendency  towards
security-  do  not  be  a  woman,  <io  not  submit,  be  a  man!

'Fh.i.s  girl  manifested  in  her  (h-meanor  rough,  resolute  traits,
and  could  get  along  with  no  <'me.  Her  ambition  flamed  blazingly
ami  made  her  intolerant.  Site  required  unconditional  .submission
from  her  fiance  whom  she  treated  very  liadly  and  with  whom  .she
often  dissolveil  all  relatitms.  (tnce,  howc-ver,  when  he  turned
hit;  attention  tt.  aimther  girl,  she  offered  everything  in  order  to
hold  him.  One  of  the  dav  dreams  of  her  childhood  eonsisted_  in
the  phanta.sy  that  the  whole  human  race  was  going  to  destruction
and  that  she  alone  wtmid  remain,  an  analogy  with  the  myth  of
the  fioocl  in  which  the  ego  <  eutri(',  inimical  nature  of  the  patient
is  clearly  ntaiiifested.

In  the  cases  of  many  pati<-nt‘;  who  show  .signs  of  the  tendency
to  "  have  everything  "  as  in  the  case  of  the  girl  just  described,
traits  of  character  of  an  opp(*site  nature  are  found.  They  are
oft<*n  of  such  impiirf  unate  honorableness,  modesty  and  contented-

A**  Mtitt'f? I  f !»*♦  iiUf  it’iput iuii  < »l  uiio

<if  fll#*'  Iwals-sj!  -i  iMf  tbi*  loft  tif  U  foT

>  f  u  Utr  rMi»fn*ry  nf  Htir.h,

ffir  Lsg  ''  I  |jii<  h**  utftrfH'il ij-l’ft'iivH  pruvu  tht‘rnHr}v(‘H  to  lu^


130


THE  NEUROTIC'  CONSTITUTION


ness  that  the  peculiar  accentuation  of  thtj>v  ijualities  awakens  the
suspicion  of  a  special  arrangement.  Their  c«:msrienre  always
makes  itself  heard  and  their  feeling^  t>f  being  at  fault  is  always
ready  to  react  on  the  slightest  iuTasion,*

The  solution  of  this  enigma  whidi  lias  nir/.dfnl  huinanity  far  a
long  time,  is  furnished  by  an  uiulenstauifing  oi  tlir  t*rav!ng  for
security  which  breaks  through  the  direct  aggressivi*  guiding
line,  and  which  puts  an  end  to  grennl  and  imnioderatitin  as  soon
as  the  egoistic  ideal  is  threateiuHl  'by  them,  (‘oiisrience  then  mii-
stitutes,  'so  to  speak,  an  intermediate  guiding  fiction,  as  itoes  also
its  anticipatory  exaltation,  the  al^stract  selTaiaaisation  of  giiihs
These  are  instances  in  which  all  atiions  planned  and  anticipatory
preparations  are  changed  arouiul  in  smdi  a  way  that  they  are
not  injurious,  that  they  permit  the  feeling  of  personal  worth  to
be  preserved.  We  penreivt'  on  this  jioinf  ihf^  iipposition  in  the
original  heeling  of  inferiority  as  a  compmisation  for  the  feeling
of  uncertainty  which  lias  i*ome  to  moral  expression.  Nb>w  the
neurotic  can  i‘X<'lude  a  number  t>f  possiialilit-s  wfiicli  tanild
degrade  liirn.  In  other  relatituis,  also',  llu'  efleci  of  the  craving
for  security  is  recogni*/.ablt\  in  rmu'als,  in  religion,  in  super¬
stition,  in  stirrings  of  con.scieiu'e  and  in  thc^  fetding  of  guilt.
They  all  form  themselves  inti>  rigitl  fiU'mui;r  am!  |irim‘i|>!rs  such
as  the  uncertain  neurotii*  hn-es,  And  lie  ran  prt*pare  himselt
by  practict^  in  small  things,  test  Ids  imiral  strriigth  tui  mere
nothings  am!  espeidally  priacipii-.  o/ofa  f  secure^  liiniself  frtun
a  moral  fall  which  lie  exaggerates  in  anliiapatiiui  fn*  ferliiig  the
moral  defeat  lieforriiamL  Tins  last  hamu’iuatorv  expetlieiit
resemliles  the  stanirity  through  netirtstic  anxirtv.  ami  imlen!
conscientiousiu^ss,  selUaiH'usation,  and  anxirtv  ol'feii  cumplernent
eaich  other,  or  alternate  with  eai'li  cjther,  in  the  nrtiiosic  The
knowledge  of  this  fact  is  of  great  imptirtanct*  in  the  p'4ycho-
therapeutist  for  the  understanding  of  the  crmneclioii  between
masturbation  and  neur<isi.s  and  from  %vhitdi  mav  be  t  oitipretumtlefl
the  significance  as  a  securitv  of  tfie  fetding  of  si*!f •acrnsatiofi
constriu’ted  from  the  fact  of  onanir.m,  If  thii  fcf'ling  of  guilt
is  brought  into  jumlion  with  tlie  ma-durbation  ft»r  the  purpose  of
working  as  a  braki*  against  tin*  furcj*  of  srxualitw  both
constitute,  later,  a  base  of  operatitui  from  whit'h  the  iirilient
augments  his  neurotic  disposition  in  order  to  |o,i.ird  ags'dnst  a
reduction  of  Ids  nilr,  with  the

assistanct^  of  antic!pat«ut  results,  us  impnlriice,  t.ibf*s,  paralysis,
loss^of  memor>— are  usmi  as  an  ex«-use  in  order  to  avoid  iiiakiiig
decisions,  and  always  also  fiir  deepening  the  fear  of  the  sexual
partner.  I  have  often  dt*srrihefl  famneflioris  of  this  sort  in  this
and  in  previruis  w'orks.  In  the  neurtisis.  iionorablmess  arnl  rof'i"
srientiousni‘ss  bordfT  on  pedantrv.  therefore  vz-r  slml!  fiot  be

"  Acll«*r,  "  n»-urr  fiHt'h#*  I  s-e »,ir


i  r  ,  .iti-l  I"',  .fOtvai-.””,  I


^  NEUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


^3^'

surprised  to  find  how  often  these  qualities  draw  their  real  value
frorii  tlie  fact  that  thereby  the  neurotic  is  placed  in  a  position  to-
lunuiliate  others,  to  come  into  conflict  with  them,  to  raise  him¬
self  above  others  and  press  them  into  his  service.  It  is  just  the
neurotic  whose  temiency  to  dominate  contains  the  scheme  *‘to
possess  everything and  who  not  rarely  preserves  memories  of
sins,  wdio  will  usually  take  (\ire  not  to  betray  a  secret  w'hich
would  certainly  result  in  his  humiliation.  He  will  rather  seek
to^  jireservt^  appeararua\s  even  with  great  pains  and  anxiety
will  Idush  anxiously  wlum  lifts  his  own  pocketliook  from  tiie
floiW.  and  will  avoid  being  alone  in  a  strange  room  in  order  not
to  fall  undtT  suspieitm  of  theft,  if  something  should  be  missed.
In  like  maimer  I  found  an  obstinate  wish  to  pay  in  advance,  to
owe*  nothing,  in  patients  to  whom  every  expenditure  seemed  a
rediietion  of  their  ego-eouseiousuess.  'Fhey  preferred  under-*
gtniig  an  f‘vil  and  making  an  end  of  it  to  enduring  one  wdthout
end,  iiut  had  at  tlie  sanu^  time*  a  hading  of  superiority  in  doing
thi over  the  tun*  who  the*  money.

In  the  >anu*  manmn'  the*  fanatic  aelheu’ence  to  truth  in  many
rienirotics  prnv«*s  itsedf  to  be*,  as  a  rule*,  a  r(*aetiou  of  the  weaker
against  tin*  supt*rit»r  |)ower  (in  this  (’onneeiion  the  original
pietun*  of  the  same*  may  ealh*d,  the*  enjant  ierrible*').

I  lesirmal  from  tin*  |U’<‘vious  lustory  of  a  catatonic  that  he  was
e»pj)re\sseal  ami  huniiliate*el  by  Ids  wife*,  ( )m*  night  lie  broke  out
in  soIks  ami  told  lH*r  that  he*  had  el<Ha*iv(*d  lu*r  by  an  affair  with
a  servant  girl.  His  maseulim*  prot<*st  made*  use  of  this  expetliemt,
adulteu’y,  in  ordt*r  to  (  (umeet  with  it  an  tjpe'u  ('onfe*ssion.  Again,
in  the  feiriu  of  the*  neureilie-  eonjumdion  with  which  we  an*  alreaeiy
aeeiuainted,  it  lH*rame  appare*ut  that  the*  wife  not  onlv  had  the
stronger  will,  Init  had,  alseu  tin*  eommaml  of  tin*  purse*.  The"
patient,  !dm>.e*!f  a  vve*ak  man,  %vas  eibliged  to  live*  upon  lier
nuiuf’y,  whic'li  tin*  wife*  atul  lu‘r  family  made  the*  source*  of
nmcli  implc*asautm*ss.  tluiugh  tlicy  had  known  all  aliout  it  before*
hand.  In  tu’de-r  te>  protesd  ldmse*lf  from  tin*  supe*riorily  of  his
wife  and  net  te  sulmdt  <*ntir(*ly  to  her  influence,  In*,  alrernly
e‘ngag«*el  in  eunflied  ove*r  tin*  male*  domination,  arrived  at
an  arrang<*nn*nt  t»f  a  psyedue*  imj>ote*ne<*.  'lln*  wife*,  on  the  other
hami,  tivtu'cann*  this  inipott*nce*  ami  humiliate*d  tin*  huslmmi
openly,  llis  flirtation  witli  the*  nurse*  girl  was  the  h(*ginning  of
Ids  rt‘Ve*nge*.  lids  could  only  In*  effendivt*  in  a  way  to  elt*vat«*
fdin  if  he  <amfes?a*el  ids  aelntt«*ry  in  a  manly  way:  t!n.*rf*fore*  he
!i:iil  reeaiurse  to  tlte  love*  of  trutli*  which  hael  alre*ady  se*rve*fl  him
as  a  ve‘ldclr  for  all  sorts  e>f  rascality.  I’he  fad,  that  In*  confessf*d
his  fault  with  fears  was  in  kee*ping  with  his  rtiwardice  before  a
derision,  hut  mi  the  either  haml,  made*  it  e*asit*r  for  him  to  <*e>nv
rrmrdt'ate  the  painful  inte*liige*nce*  to  his  wife.  Tin*  further
cmirse  lurried  out  against  the  masculine*  triumph  of  the^psyclde*
herriiaphroehte  ;  tin*  wife  went  further  in  lun*  aggre‘seam  anci


THE  NEUROTIC  Ci>XSll'rUTION


-complained  to  her  relative's,  wiio  in  turn  reproaehetl  him  in  the
most  severe  manner.  Now  he  fcdl  into  an  tipalhy  with  an
augmented  craving  for  security,  wished  ItJ  niulo  his  transgression
as  it  had  not  assisted  him  to  thv  mastniliiu*  triumplt  arul  found  the
solution  in  a  fiction  a  purifying  miracle  which  (lod  had
wrought  in  him.  He  was  apin  lui  the  heights,  Ifis  pre¬
destination  phantasy  broke  out,  lie  stooil  in  cumniunieation  with
God,  received  orders  and  coinmands  from  Him,  and  built  up  a
psychotic  system  in  which  lie  wamleretl  tni  the  earth  as  a  prophet.
The  rnastnrbation,  too,  which  he*  praclict*d  e^pmUy.  he  designated
as  a  miracle,  in  order  tlius  to  twape  the  feeding  of  iuiniiliation.
Stereotypies  were  manib^-sttHl,  anunig  t^the*r  ways,  by  an
■occasional  upright  position  of  the*  IhmIv  and  liy  hohliiig  the  head
high,  a  motion  which  I  was  aiile  tt»  int«u‘pre|  as  svinlH'dir.  as  a
phantasy  of  the  ert‘Ction  of  t!u^  male  tirgaie  ^

“To  tell  somt‘  one*  a  bitter  truth  ■*’  I1ds  e\pros*o'on  con¬
tains  the  kerned  for  the  emnprehension  of  tisf*  ca-^r  just  t!c*scribefi
The  neurotic  oftem  makes  use  the  trutii  in  ord«n‘  to  cause  jiain
to  others.  One  m^ver  hrars  agief’alde  triith-'^  fritiii  neurotic
patients  without  a  reaction  imnu'tlialfdy  beciuniiig  visi!de%
usually  in  the  form  td  an  aggravation  id  tho  suffering.  Tci  every
■emotion  of  love,  which  is  reganleii  as  femininr.  as  a  subrii!s’sion»
there  folkwvsan  funotion  of  Lite,  as  masruHne  priitest,  the  latter
in  the  garmtmts  td  truth  honor  ludght  !  A!%ii  in  this  case  of
dementia  pnecox  we  fimi  ri  stage  where  th«*  <!otibt  tif  the  nrurotir
concerning  his  own  mascuHnity  is  bri<!gei!  over  bv  means  of
x*xpedicnts  and  In*  a  tiglifening  of  the  guiding  I'ulion  where  the
compensatorv  craving  for  -seinirity  gives  thr  irii|nds'e  to  take  a
guiding  symbol  VfTbjiIly  and  lo  eonstruct  the  ti**tion  (.cs  if  the*
neurotic  were  a  tfsicher.  the  KmperiU',  Saviiw).  tHher  traits,
■such  as  moodim*ss  ami  nnstn'iahility,  are  likewise  to  be
recogniml  as  neiiriitie  anficipatorv  preparations,  as  always  lilted
to  annihilate  the  suprudorily  id  othiws  and  to  jwrvent  tdirm  from
carrying  out  their  will.

The  neurolH'  individual  is  the  fvpieal  kiil-jov  and  peare
destroyer.  He  is  misled  by  his  megaliauaniac  idea!  in  tamdilions
of  greatest  uncertaiufv  and  is  ahvav-'  busv  trying  to  hvposlasize
and  dedfy  his  own  guiding  iiiitc  ami  to  cros'.  ihco.e  «d  Mtlirrs'.  These
traits  are  also  rapabb*  of  a  more  f-xtendrd  apidicatifni.  The
neurotic  regards  liis  iiiabilitv  to  got  along  wdfri  others,  his  dis¬
turbing  attacks,  as  proofs  tlial  others  wi^.h  lo  injure  him,  and
erects,  as  a  proteefimi,  the  wall  rd  his  prineiplrs  within  which
his  spirit  of  mastery  is  able  to  flevrlop.  Here  emerge
tendencies  such  as  the  desire  to  he  ahuifc  ■‘■.ornelimr'S  the  ilesin?
to  be  Iniried  ;  nr  pictures,  such  as  ladng  buried  alive  or  coiic'iMled
in  the  mother's  body  (Gniner),  At  firues  f  have  ffisrovered  as
a  fulfillment  of  this  wish  lo  clorninate  m  ’:o!ittidr.  the  liafiil  of
remaining  a  long  time  on  the  *a.c»o!.  Whidlv  Ifi  itie  same


NEUROTIC  PRINCIPLES


33*'


direction,  i.r,,  of  gaining  the  upper  hand,  the  neurotic  carries
out  his  exaggerattal  yielding  and  adaptability,  but  the  patient
is  in  this  always  on  the  watch,  altiioiigh  he  tries,  too,  in  this  way
to  captivate  those  who  ar<'  stronger,  to  deviate  toward  the  more
manly  line  and  to  enjoy  Ids  open  triumph.

Thc^  inclination  to  daintiness  furnishes  the  neurotic  with  the-
same  readiness  for  t'onflict.  liy  this  means  he  can  decry  every¬
thing,  secure  himself  against  decisions  and  lay  claim  to  his  pre¬
rogative  He  will  he  finicky  in  such  instances  as  harmonize
best  witlt  his  tendeiu:ies  and  where  he  can  gain  the  most
advantagie?.  In  eating,  in  tlie  choice  of  friends,  in  amorous
relaticHis,  he  secaires  to  hims<df  thereliy  a  troublesome-
superitmitw  Every  one  is  obliged  to  make  allowances  for  him
bec-aiLs«‘  ne  is  sick,  ntmvous.  This  trait  of  character
rises  to  great  perfonnanc(\s  as  soon  as  the  fear  of  the  sexual
partner,  of  marriage,  makes  usc‘  of  it.  No  girl,  no  man,  then
armnmts  to  anything,  and  a  twisted  ideal  furnishes  the  neurotic
with  a  point  of  suppiu'i  for  the  disparagement  of  every  one.  At
other  times  and  in  otlu'r  rtdations,  this  trait  manifests  itself  as
an  arrangenumt,  as  the  fore.sight  of  an  individual  who  has  not  as
yet  conquereti  the  wtsik  jxdnt  of  his  feeling  of  inferiority.  He
<sin  also  h<*  imHh^rate  when  tlu*  wind  blows  from  the  north*
when  his  v%dU  to  powtn*  la^quires  it,  Oiu^  of  the  universal
methods  of  ([uiiding  rhudr«m  wlien  they  show  discontent  is  by
comforting  ihmn  with  a  {jrosjieet  of  tlu‘  future,  when  they  will
he  l)ig,  grown  up.  One  often  hears  children  themselves  say,

Whe*n  I  am  grown  up,  I  will.  .  llu'  problem  of  growth

engages  the  attentitm  <if  <’hil(iren  to  an  extraordinary  extent  and
in  the  ccuirsc*  of  thoir  drvehq>itH‘nt  they  are  c'onstantly  reminded
of  it.  It  is  thus  in  regard  to  the*  size  of  his  hotly,  the  growth  of
his  hair,  tif  tho  tt*eth,  aiid  as  stion  as  he  eomtrs  to  sptHadations
concerning  tlie  sexual  tu'gans  by  tin*  growth  of  tin'  pubes  and  the
genital  tu’gans.  dlie  outrauce  t)f  tht*  child  upon  his  masculine
rtlle,  of  widt  h  wt*  have*  ofttm  *poken,  retpiires  a  distinct  large¬
ness  of  the  perstiu  of  the  iinlivitlual  ami  oi  the  parts  of  his  body.
WluTe  this  is  dt*niefl  him  and  hen*  w<*  encounter  again  the
basis  of  somatic  inferitnaty,  especially  fhe  causal  rickets  (thymus
ariom.ali<*s  anomalies  of  tin*  thyroid,  of  the  sperm  glands,
hvpofihysis,  etru  --  the  <*liild  has  rerours<*  on  account  of  its  desire
ftm  mastailim*  value  fti  tin*  positing  of  the  masculine*  protest,
llien  it  aca|u!res  tin*  heightened  impulse  to  covetousness,^ envy, ^
l^raggiiig,  greer!,  activity,  togethf*r  wu’th  the  acute  feeling  of
canitrast  and  begins  to  meMsure  himself  eonstantly  w^ith  others,
esfieriatlv  with  tlie  pf*rsons  i\f  inqiortanet*  in  his  environment,
and  finally  witlt  the  heroes  from  tal<*s  and  stories.  Thus  tht*
ioftiviclua!  comes  to  a  wislifu!  conteinplation  of  tin*  future  and  the-
phantasy  incited  by  the  craving  for  security  fills  all  wishes.


t


i'HAi^^^rER  !V


THE  DEROGATORY  TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS;  OBSTINACY
AND  WILDNESS;  THE  SEXUAL  REI.ATIONS  OF  NKUROTICS  AS
A  MEANS  OF  COMPARLSCiN  ;  SYMBOLll*  EMASCTT.ATION  ;  FEEL¬
ING  OF  BEING  BELITTLED  ;  K^HCVLITY  TO  MAN  AS  A  l.ilTGPLAN  ;
SIMULATION  AND  NEUROSIS;  SUBSTI IT/TE  F<)R  MASCULINITY  ;
IMPATIENCE;  DISCONTENT;  INACCESSIBILI TV

The  compulsive  craving  of  tlu*  lilt  his  rgoistic  ideal

with  the  overvalued  masculine  traits  impels  him,  «\spedally
because  of  the  obstacles  of  reality,  to  a  change  in  llte  fitrmiila  of
his  guiding  line,  so  that  he  attempts  to  attain  the  goal  which  he
values  as  equal  to  the  iiiascailine  goal  by  means  of  circmitous
paths.  What  drives  him  to  ;i  psyt"hiKsis  is  ids  longing  ta  realize
an  unattainable  ideal.  Should  he  suILt  a  th-ttMt  in  the  main  line
of  his  rnasculine  protest,  should  he  even  antifd{#ate  such  a
defeat,  he  seeks  a  substitute  whiidi  lie  ffun|Hirarily  tamsiders  as  of
equal  value  thriuigh  an  «irrangeni«.mt  td  inteiirdliril  reassuring
expedients.  At  this  point  there  br‘gin:i  as  a  rule  that  process  of
psychic  transfiirruation  wliirh  wa*  drs.ignate  as  nrurusis,  in  so  far
as  the  guiding  fictiiin  dors  !u»t  lead  t*.*  a  violation  of  reality,  the
patient  onlj  keeling  it  as  a  disturbing  rlrmrnt.  is  the  case  in
neurasthenia,  hypocdiondriasis,  anxirty  and  iaimpulaiUi  neuroses
and  in  hy.steria  In  tin*  psycho-ds  tin*  guiding  tiiasi'uline  hction
appCfirs  disguistal  in  picliircs  and  svmh<ds  of  infantile  origin.
The  patient  then  condiuTs  him‘‘e!f  m*  longer  as  if  hr  wished  to
be  masculine,  above,  and  as  if  he  *.ought  to  attain  this  end  by
every  possible  means,  but  through  the  medium  of  anticipation
as  though  he  alrea<lv  hafl  attained  all  the-e  eiul-.  ami  only
indiratr^s  at  first,  incicfentalty  and  in  the  manner  id  a  foundation
(depression,  persecufory  and  Nelf-aiaa,r-satorv  irieas,  ideas  of
poverty),  that  he  is  underneath,  unmanlv,  feminine.

For  the  sake  of  clirifv,  I  wall  now  pcticeerl  |o  the  description
of  some  neurotic  character  traits  which  tend  in  a  *!irert  line  to  the
■masculine  egoistic  idea!,  or  are  so  closely  rtmnerfrd  therewith
that  they  force  themsfdves  upon  tin-  undtu^sfanding  as  only  slight
deviations  of  the  masculine  protect.  They  havr  itrrn  generally
regarded  as  active,  masculine  traits  and  the  neurotic  ran  finis
appeal  to  this  general  opinion  in  wht<di  there  agrremrrit.  But
we  have  already  endeavored  to  show  in  previous  chapters  that
in  the  construction  of  masculine  traits  the  rhoire  id  the  firtitifiiis
goaj  is  dependent  upon  and  guided  rmlv  \vifhin  cirrainiscrtlied
limits  by  the  conscious  understanding  of  the  nmrotir  nr  even  of

Lk


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  135

the  critical  observer.  He  also  makes  use  of  such  guiding  lines
which  to  general  logic  do  not  always  seem  masculine,  or  at  least
only  in  part  so,  such  for  example  as  coquetry,  deception,  etc.
As  the  direct  traits  of  character  in  line  with  the  mavsculine  protest
may  be  emphasized,  the  frequently  displayed  tendency  to  be  a
man  through  and  through,  courageous,  ready  for  attack,  open,
hard-hearted,  cruel,  to  excel  everyone  in  strength,  influence,
power,  wisdom,  etc.  When  the  fundamental  feeling  of  inferiority
demands  stronger  reassuring  compensations — because  of  an
expected  defeat  or  the  suspicion  of  one,  this  compensation  ensues
by  a  strengthening  of  tlie  readiness  for  conflict  which  now  strives
toward  the  masculine  feeling  of  superiority,  often  by  circuitous
and  more  abstract  ways,  revealing  simultaneous  and  often  con¬
tradictory  traits—after  tlie  manner  of  tricks  and  artifices.  It  is
then  that  the  neurotic  may  manifest  pliancy  instead  of  obstinacy,
or  side  by  side  with  it,  or  as  the  occasion  may  require  it,  traits
of  exorbitant  arri^gama*  and  modesty,  roughness  and  mildness,
courage  and  cowar<lice,  lust  for  power  and  submissiveness,
masculinity  and  femininity,  all  of  which  are  used  to  gain  security
fnnn  d<*feat  or  in  ordt*r  to  prTinit  him  by  circuitous  ways  to
enhance  his  own  egtiistic  ideal  or  disparage  that  of  others.  That
it  is  possilde  to  compuT  by  weakness,  submissivencss  and
modt’sly  is  slunvn  in  the  <*xamp!e  of  women  and  by  many
<*xarnp!es  in  the  history  of  the  Wi>r!d,

The  dominaney  of  llu*  self  ertsited  deities,  of  the  guiding  fiction
is  always  easily  illsf-eruible  and  is  revealt^d  in  tlie  psychosis  with
unmistakable  clarity.  1  will  endesivor  to  show  by  means  of  a
<lream  id  a  ia-ycmr-old  girl  who  was  suffering  from  enuresis
iiueturna  and  in  the  daytime  from  fr<‘<iuent  outlireaks  of  rage
ami  ill-humor,  who  could  g<*t  along  with  no  one  Init  me,  and  who
often  had  suiiadal  idtsis.  that  all  of  th<*s<‘  phenomena,  together
with  other  traits  of  lust  for  power,  of  obstinacy  or  of  anxiety
wcu’i"  iindtn”  the  guidariet*  of  the  masculine  prot<\st,  and  that  this
protest  was  depimdent  in  turn  iqjon  a  c<mstitutional  inferiority
iif  the  urinary  organ,  which  in  eomliination  with  ugliness  and
memfal  retardation  gave-  the*  impulse  to  the  compensatory
<*xhihiti(m  of  an  exaggerated  masculine  guiding  line.  In  order
to  make  the  cast*  brief  and  comprehensible,  1  pn‘face  the  rtunark
that  the  pafitmt  liatl  a{inlied  the  realities  of  her  childhood  to  a
reassuring  neurosis,  had  constructed  the  enuresis  as  an  ever-
rcMcly  expedient  and  always  had  recourse  to  this  symptom  when
her  egoistic  feeling  suffen*d  a  humiliation.  In  this  case,  too,
fhert*  was  manifested  the  colosfsal  powi*r  of  the*  tendency  to  dis¬
paragement  in  the  arrangenK*nt  ofdhe  reizures  which  drove  ^the
mother  to  a  ptiwerless  tiespair,  while  at  the  same  time  the  patient
disparaged  her  mother  in  the  usual  form  of  an  allusion  liy  excusing


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSllTCTION


136

herself  from  all  fault  and  throwing  the  blame  on  another.  The
following  dream  show's  tins  in  a  spcanally  clear  manner.

''My  moiher  shimed  my  fntmd  thv  oorox  of  the  bed.

ICe  began  to  quarrel,  I  say  the  eon  r  ts  your^  av.d  in  cr^

bitterly,  !  lueake  jUnuled  in  tears/'

A  short  time  before  she  r<‘lateii  to  me  that  slir  ofttii  awoke
weeping  from  sleep  without  knowing  the  cause  of  her  wrepin:^^.
From  the  connection  of  tlie  genesis  iU’  the  disease  which  was
apparent  even  at  that  time,  tin*  weeping  wa-:  of  ^ignit'u'ancr  in
relation  to  the  mother^  it  representen.1  one  %.d  the  most  usual
childish  procedures  for  diminishing  tlii'  mother's  superiority.
After  the  communication  of  the  dream  she  refuarketb  *’  You  will
certainly  believe  that  Vi.ni  are  right  in  your  iuntiion  concerning
my  weeping/*  One  fiears  siudi  remarks  iluring  a  psycho¬
therapeutic  treatment  as  a  regular  thing,  ami  mnslYml  overlook
the  conceided  criticism  therein  as  a  dt'vic'e  of  thr  tenileney  to
disparage,  which  is  dirertml  against  everylHuly.  lln*  riioclerate
expression  of  the  same  on  this  oecxeaon  led  me  to  suspect  that
the  cure  of  the  runirosis  was  in  prt^gress,  as  the  mort*  lively
reactions  were  absent.  Fiwmerly  umler  .similar  eirr’umsfaiices
she  would  have  asserttal  sharply  and  passionately  that  f  was
wrong,  or  she  Wiudd  have  omitted  ti*  mention  or  wmdd  have
forgotten  those  dreams  whiiT  etudirmeff  my  view.  .1  \va.s  further
confirmed  in  my  assumption  tty  the  information  that  the  patient
after  tlie  <irt‘am  imnunliatelv  tt»ok  tit!  thr  .lightly  .oilrtl  bed
linen  and  waslied  it  in  secret  \vhii*h  was  nevi^r  the  rase  before
because  the  sight  of  the  soiha!  linen  was  intended  ft,ir  her  mother.

B'or  the*  explanation  of  the  dream  sfie  related  the  hdlowing.
She  was  firmly  convinced  that  her  motlirr  tohl  al!  her  ;ut,|uaint-
ances  about  her  enuresis.  All  her  relative',  r.eertied  tri  kmnv  of
her  weakness.  Once  an  uncle,  obviously  in  ordiw  le  romfort
her,  had  inh^rmed  lier  tliat  Indh  he  ami  another  brother  had  for
a  long  time  been  in  the  habit  td  wetting  llie  lied,  In  her  tireams
she  reproached  her  rnothcT.  t^dling  her.  “  7'/:,*  leeakness  ik  in
your  family,  you  are  to  blame  if  I  mh!  /Ii-  fhr  muIci/  rover
is  yours/'

She  related  further  that  in  rhangini!  ^he  fdten  lof'»k  a  bed-slip
instead  ol  a  rover;  fire  one  w'as  rlt>sed.  the  other  tjjien  ;  adiling,
**  And  it  is  easy  to  mistake  them  in  the  closet

behind  this  thought  lies  the  problem  of  npen  aiu!  s!iii|  which
is  clearly  recogniy.able  as  an  f*xpression  for  the  opiiositeneis  of
the  sexes.  She  Idarnes  her  mother  for  the  tliseasr,  fitit  at  the
same  time  casts,  so  to  spesak,  a  furtive  glance  af  its  soiirre  amifl
spring,  that  is,  the^  femiruiiity  for  wdiidt  she  blames  her  mother
and  betrays  to  us  in  the  niasetiline  prcrlest  #if  her  dreanH  how
slightly  she  estimates  the  differeni'e  befw*een  ftiafi  and  wruiiaii,
SimfLirly  George  Sand  declared  that  thcwe  was  only  orir  sex,  The


137


‘ENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.

ng  and  weeping  is  the  most  important  attitude  of  her
on  against  her  mother  whose  superiority  she  tried  to
in  this  way  as  well  as  by  her  adherence  to  the  enuresis,
t  that  at  the  present  time  she  operates  against  men  by
ritic  device  and  thereby  avoids  marriage  and  “  the
of  man,”  is  a  natural  result  to  be  inferred  from  other
Lives  of  her  neurotic  psyche.

lample  of  the  t'hange  of  formula  of  the  guiding  masculine
A-hich  originally  was  1  will  be  a  man,’*  in  the  above
d  stage  of  the  treatment  was,  I  will  be  superior  to  my
like  a  man,”  and  later  on  was  expressed  in  the  words,
luiridliate  my  motlu*r  by  feminine  means.”  In  a  dream,
e,  in  a  tentative,  anticipatory  test,  this  guiding  line  as
^  inaintaiiual  it  to  he  comes  to  stronger  expression.  The
•4  as  follt>ws  :

•  in  ti  Imrnifig  bed.  All  weep  about  me,  I  laugh  aloud,''
cnssioit  of  friH*  love  had  preceded  the  dream.  The
lies!,  according  to  tin*  patitmPs  interpretation  represented
:  jilrasiirc*.  W'v  triinslate  according  to  our  understanding
ream.  ”  How  would  it  he  if  I  should  embrace  free  love?
y  iiii^ther  wouhl  ho  hnnuHated  but  I  would  laugh  at  her,
i«*  sujun'ior  to  her.”  Attention  must  also  be  called  to
'es!4un  ”  burning/*  which  arises  so  frequently  in  psychic
titms  vvhiidi  spring  from  tlie  urinary  functions  in  antithesis
r  (enuresis).’

aughing  in  this  dresam  is  equivahmt  to  the  weeping  in
:  dream,  Both  show  the  aggnsssive  tendency  which
e  mother's  defeat.  In  this  <*ase,  too,  the  imtenability  of
mptiou  o(  a  splitting  of  personality  is  nuidily  perceivable,
•rroueous  wmdd  be  the  assumption  of  a  real  .sexual  wish,
urns  would  only  serve  tfie  |iurpo,se  of  the  patient  if  the
were*  std  bat'k  and  she*  could  play  the  part  of  man  in
:o  her.

piiding  fiction  of  the  esjuality  to  man  comes  to  expression
\vay  f»r  other  in  all  women  and  girls.  As  I  was  able  to
i  tfir*  h>ri*going  ease,  it  is  the  change  _  of  formula
aled  by  reality  whicE  tli,sgui.ses  the  masctiline  protest,
t  is  essential  in  tin*  analysis  of  neurotic  bunale  ])alients
ver  at  wlnit  point  they  protest  against  their  femininity,
lint  can  alwavs  he  found,  for  tlie  pres.sure  toward  the
tiofi  of  the  ego-ronsc*imisness  necessitates  the  construrtion
ssuriiig  guiding  lim*  whi<'*h  is  erected  as  an  antithesis  to
ea  feminine,”  (hdtural  or  unculliiral  ideas  of

lation.  of  rriititancy  dlreeied  against  men  and  their

'f,  Sf.titlie.'*  I  r,*  Afiflwduni.  Frmifi  hm  alri‘atlv  Uurlu'd  u|kw
.»fifiltt|i  Miwai  fire  ami  water  in  dn^ain,  and  the  allt**r<>ncal

lirtfi  rtfi


I,


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


138

privileges  are  usually  fourul  in  lu^rnial  wonien  arul  girls.  They
seek  to  diminish  the  distance  as  nuich  as  jmssibU*  in  dress,
attitude,  customs,  laws,  views  of  life,  iiiasciilitie  protest

of  neurotics  is  exaggerated  in  ail  thes<‘  ilircaiimis.  In  dress
glaring  but  at  the  same  time  mannish  fa^hiijns  are  aflc*eteHl,  as
the  lengthening  of  single  parts  td  dre*ss  aiu!  tlir  wearing  of  strong
high  shoes.  Or  they  avoid  ail  fashions  in  drt^ss  which  arc
distinctly  feminine.  Often  there  is  a  livedy  tight  against  the
corset,  a  fight  directed  against  the  tanilificintmt,  Init  which  can
also  serve  other  purpiises  anti  is  tdten  brought  inlti  {day  to  avoid
seeing  company  and  is  most  usually  tiireaitai  against  th<*  luisbantl.
The  attitude  and  halnts  of  neundic  women  art'  oftem  so  masculine
that  it  is  noticiMldt'  from  the  first  moment.  C'rossc'd  !«*gs  and
arms,  and  at  times  only  iiuiicatiims  which  btdray  this  tt'iulency,
as  well  as  the  tendency  to  take*  the'  !t*ft  side*  as  a  man  ehit*s  or
to  allow  lU)  one*  tei  stand  in  front  eif  the*m,  etc.,  as  in  the  iire*;un.
In  the  neurotic’s  vieuv  ed  life  tlu'  usual  itlea!  eiver-esfimafion  of
the  masculine  qiiaaties  is  eompt'nsattHl  fur  in  a  pTaeiic’ai  manner
by  the  iHsparage'numt  of  nu'U,  In  .sf-xual  relatiuiis  aiia-ahe*sia  is
the  rule.  Masculine  variants,  ov  tliu.'.c*  which  disparage*  man  are
given  prederence*.

The  mmrotii'  psyedie*  of  mun  uffrrs  the*  *'.4me  cliaracfe*risfirs.
It  derives  its  arttfua-s  fnan  an  imaginary  e  unsr'iousnuss  <d
fi'mininity  in  tirder  to  arrive'  at  a  fueling,  tjf  i^unqilfie  manliness.
One  of  my  jiatients  whu  was  suite!  in, »■  lunn  a-dliina  m*rvti>aim
prtasenied  a  ve^ry  idear  exatuple  of  thir»  tlvnamifs  lie  had  tieeii
a  weak  child  and  had  ruifferetl  from  t!u*  e’xud.ttivt'  diathesis,  a
relation  to  whiedi  Sfruiuptdl  has  ealh’d  atb*ntitui  flis  tstrly
catarrh  pennittcal  him  alresariy  in  chileifiood  tc-  prr'‘c:  hi-;  mother
into  his  service*,  Siu*  te^uk  him  fu  loag  ewred  for  him  in  her
bedroom  anti  yit*!<ie*d  to  all  !us  wUdit-;.  Ht'  was  e;tr!y  placed
under  the  care*  of  a  striet  governess  of  wluuii  he  r'uiiii!  md  get  the*
hedter,  nedwithstanding  his  rage  and  ititrae  t4bi!it v.  lb*  fedt  weak
before  her  and  tlms  lu'canie  actpiainted  wdfli  *  hi!di-ii  drreptitms
by  means  of  wdiirh  he  was  abb*  tt»  estvipe  tfu*  governess,  that  is,
he  simulabal  and  exaggt‘rat<*d  tin*  tsilarrhal  affeititui  by  an
arrangement  td  tamglung  am!  exedfafion  td  fhe  hruiiehial  liities
and  larynx  and  by  asfhrnatic  pht*muurna  whitdi  he  pruiliirm.1  after
the  manner  of  straining  at  difllcult  deff'catiun,  bv  friedon  of  the
abdomen  and  closing  of  the  atuea  He  souti  h-arned  to  know  that
these*  phi'namena  gainee!  him  a  place  in  ids  motfi#u'*s  rtHim,  and
in  the  course  ed  years  prcHlue'ed  an  a-.thrnatir  device  wfiir'h  he
set  iine’emseiously  into  activity  whene'ver  he  ffdl  raimpelled
on  account  of  his  oveTtensr  fulitions  ipd*!irig  e^sd  tu  risr  to  the
position  of  flie  lord  of  the  house,  anel  itiMdetifaJIv,  of  the
governess.  He  soon  gainc'd  the  victory  so  th;if  the  gfivrrness  wais
forbidden  to  treat  him  severely  or  to  beat  hirii.


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  139

We  see  how  his  egotistic  ideal  had  at  its  disposal  from  now
on  a  neurotic  weapon  which  placed  him  in  a  position  to  escape  a
defeat  or  to  prevent  the  eme^rgence  of  the  feeling  of  his  original
inferiority  in  a  circuitous  way,  that  is,  no  longer  by  obstinacy,
rage,  couragt%  manliness,  hut  that  he  sought  to  get  ahead  by  a
sort  of  treadiery,  ^craft,  unmanly  conduct,  cowardice,  a  leaning
on  the  nu)ther.  This  subterfuge,  hypostasized  and  elaborated
to  an  unconsciously  working  mechanism,  furnished  him  the
necessary  security  for  his  whole  life.  His  neurotic  symptom
whi<‘h  was  constantly  defended  and  laid  cl^im  to  by  further
auxiliary  lines  of  his  trait  of  character,  i.e.,  “to  possess  every¬
thing  “  by  hi.s  lust  fur  powtT,  hy  his  obstinacy  and  diwsputatious-
ness,  and  at  the  sanu*  time  by  his  cowardice,  fear  of  new
undertakings,  h*ar  of  rntui  and  women  and  l)y  the  tendency  to
disjiaragtuiuml  wliich  always  t‘voIvt\s  from  these  traits  and  which
nlayetl  such  an  important  vu\v  in  his  aggressive  device^s  furnished
liim  a  new  organ,  a  means  of  making  himself  important  in  a
s[]t*cial  way,  to  duruinat^*  ht;*.  world,  inasmuch  as  he  could  always
deiiiaml  the  pr<>tretitin  (d  his  mother.  lie  felt  safer  with  his
iiuitiier  than  with  his  wife,  and  thus  he  was  driven  l)y  necessity
in  fall  in  iovt^  witli  hi.s  nudlnu",  a  lov(^  w’hich  upon  closer  analysis
jirmaHi  in  Ih*  a  ,sort  «)f  tyranny.  Ih't'gnruH'y  jdiantasies  rtdlecied  for
him  the  iVedings  ol  humiliation  eonnetded  with  a  hnninine  role
and  alttunaled  witli  thoughb;  about  eastratum  and  with  phantasies
about  lunng  a  woman.  11  is  impuha*  to  masturbation  revealed  the
attempt  to  rman<  ip;ito  Iiiinscdf  vietori<iusly  from  wonnm,  to  avoid
a  defeat,  ttM  ondurt  hiimudf  in  a  manly  fashion,  and  was  t'ontinued
in  similrirly  directtnl  phantasic's  of  greatnesss,  both  of  which  were
forms  <)f  c^xprt*Nsiciii  t»f  Ids  maseuline  prot<‘st.  The  imagined
sinallnc'ss  of  his  genital  <irgans,  a  tliought  which  made  a  marked
impies:dc»n  tipon  !dm,  tuTVisi  him  as  a  iigure  and  perceptional
form  hm  Ids  infericuaty  ami  huninint*  nature.  From  his  t'hildhood
he  sought  ffj  attributf"  all  Ids  iitismH*t\ssful  efforts  and  cUdemts  to
his  .small  |K‘nis,  appercadvod  and  grouj)e<l  his  experiences  in  this
dirediuri  ami  according  relattal  anfithetic'al  forms  of  apper-
reptioii  of  Mardy-womanly.“  The  small  perns  represented  to
him  the  figurative  marginal  Cinue\)i  between  masculinity^  and
femininity  and  was  manifc'stly  (xinstnicted  as  was  the  attitude
of  the  paficiit  on  the  idea  uf  n  tairporal  and  psytdric  henna-
phrotlitisfii  and  its  Iragt'cly.  It  is  no  wonder  that  m  the  psycho¬
analysis  of  these  c'a.ses  witli  the  male-hunale  manner  of
.ippt*rc'eption  wldc'h  ludonip;  to  tin*  foundatitni  of  the  ncnirotic
psyches  one  hits  only  upon  sexual  relations,  1  hey  are  all  to  be
tinclersfood  as  a  modus  diorndi,  as  a  jargon,  and  figurative-
modes  of  expraoedion  and  are*  te^  be  re*solve*d  into  forms,  wherehy
strt*ngth,  vieteirv,  friurnph  come  to  e‘xpre*ssicm  in  male  se*xual
syrnliols,  defeat  *'in  female-  and  the  neurotic  artifices  in  both


140


THE  NEUROTIC  Ci^NSTITUTInN


together,  usually  also  in  a  perverso  ur  hermaphrinlilie  synibolism*

It  was  easy  to  detect  in  our  paticuit  that  besitlt^s  the  sexual
mode  of  expression  he  had  amdher  fashion ^  id' ^apperception
based  upon  the  antithetical  formula  of  inspiratioii-expiratba
which  had  been  set  in  operation  by  the*  inferiority  of  his
respiratory  organ  inclusive  of  the  nose.  Eveii  the  spe‘t*ch  used
for  our  mutual  understanding  likewise  made  use  of  sui‘h  formute
and  a  sigh  of  relief  from  an  oppressed  breast  lamlt!  very  well
be  clothed  in  the  figure  of  having ^air  again/*  l‘he  patient
was  also  al)le  to  n^present,  in  pantuinime  torm.  memories  of  his
boyhood  race,  a  wilt!  race  to  get  to  first  place,  the  tb'sire  to  be
the  first  at  the  goal  by  means  breathless  efforts.  In  a  dream
during  the  latter  part  of  the  trtsdment  he  made  U‘*e  of  his  ability
to  whistle  (which  is  Ui  bc'  ufubTstood  bgiiralivrly)  in  order  to
accentuate  his  manliness  by  respiration,  l‘he  clrf*am  was  as
follows  :

It  seemed  ie  me  ihai  four  people  ?c«nc  :eliisi!ing.  i  remark
that  I  can  da  it  just  us  'Tell  a-,  llicy/'

A  short  time  lucftire  he  had  begun  a  relatiioi  with  the  gi^verness
in  the  family  of  his  married  brother  and  Imd  a.:-kfal  her  the
que.stion  if  his  brother  id’tfm  vis!t<*d  his  wife  at  night.  The  girl
answered  in  the  negative.  Being  aldt*  !»»  udu-dlr  ii  the  ideal  of
all  small  bovs  and  stone  girls  make  tdbut;.  tu  .napuie  this  manly
attitude.  In  his  dreasu  iu*  matte  a  tentative  ct^mpari^«nl  to  see
if  he  w'as  the  tHpial  of  his  nimle  rel.ativea  and  thus  a.n  ivetl  frtuii  this
line,  wliich  originattsi  in  his  feeling  td  effetiiinatws  to  the
masculine  pridi'st.  lie  i-;  the  e{|ual  id  all  fteur.

In  this  case*  too  I  hnim!  mv  obsfa'v.iti*m  eentirmefl  that  the
neurotic  feeds  his  Sf*xu:d  libido^  ami  manifests  the  -.Name  only  in
accordance  witii  the'*  manner  and  degree  that  is  rfHjiured  by  his
fictive  goal  so  that  everv  psvidudogieal  opiniun  wlui'h  perceives
in  the  libido  a  constituti«ma!lv  a«sjuirrr|  faettir,  in  its  alterations
and  hwtunes  the  <‘ssema^  of  the  netaro^is,  bei'urto's  untenable,  It
is  especially  easy  to  arrange  sexual  oxcitatiofis  and  then*  are
always  in  some  way  subordinated  to  ihr  maa'ulinr  protest.  The
indentifusitiim  of  fiiasrulinitv  with  '‘.exnalilv  takr:.  p!a«'e  in  the
neurosis  hv  means  of  abstraction.  synibo!i/,ation  and  a  figurative
somatic-jargon,  ami  it  is  this  false  artiftee  td  fhr  nrurofic  whitdi
fdl.s  fiis  thiiught  eonterit  wdth  sexual  |-:*ieture‘a

The  coritentiousnise;  and  hidden  qneriilotisfie%s  wdiirh  stand  in
the  closest  relation  to  the  temienrv  to  di^^paragement  present
difficult  tactical  and  pedagtegir  problems  to  thr  psvcholhffa*
peutist.  They  Indray  in  every  ease  the  weak  pidnl,  the  feiding
of  inferiority  of  the  patient  wffiirh  firives  him  to  rompeiisation.
It  is  easy  to  uncover  this  neiimtir  aggrr’i'.ivrnrss  by  ;i  very  simple
mode  of  approach.  Ia*t  it  he  imagined  flial  the  neiirolir  feels
that  he*  has  entirely  lost  his  masriiHnitv  and  feels  himself


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  141

humiliated  and  now  let  it  be  noted  through  what  artifice  he  seeks
to  carry  out  the  completion  of  his  character  or  his  over-
compensation.  One  will  then  fmd  a  number  of  preparatory
devices,  characteristics,  syndromes  and  symptoms  which  have  for
their  aim  the  representation  of  an  ideal  organ,  but  one  must
however  l>e  prepared  to  view  this  as  a  riddle,  which  requires
solution.  For  mis  ideal  organ,”  namely^ — -the  neurosis  or
psychosis~is  of  masculine  origin  and  has  for  its  purpose  the
prevention  of  a  lowering  of  the  patient’s  ego-consciousness,  and
to  bring  him  closer  to  his  masculine  goal.  Cruel  reality,  how’^ever,
impedt^s  the  development  of  this  fiction  to  such  an  extent  that
the  most  peculiar  circuitous  ways  must  be  resorted  to  so  that
partial  and  appartuit  results  are  striven  after  without  bringing
the  patient  nt‘arer  to  his  goal.  Without  the  help  of  the
psychothtTaipeutist  who  in  rare  cases  may  prove  to  be  a  substitute
lor  the  fortunes  of  life,  this  ”  will  to  seem  ”  becomes  more  and
mort*  actamtuattHl  in  case  of  failure,  and  constantly  strengthens
the  abstract,  main  line  of  the  old  guiding  fiction.  One  of  the
principal  circuitous  ways  along  which  this  ideal  organ— i.e.,  the
masculine  protest, -works,  is  the  tendency  to  disparagement.
Unit  is  tlie  reason  that  It  has  been  mtmlioned  so  often  because
it  attracts  tlu^  attention  of  the  physician  and  is  an  expression
of  the  strength  o(  tlie  neurotit'  inqmlse.  It  likewise  furnishes
an  ever-present  ptiini  of  emitaet  by  means  of  which  it  may  be
ptjssibh'  to  instil  stune  insight  intt)  the  patient  and  it  is  at  the
Indtorn  of  jihenonnma  wliieh  Freud  has  described  as

rc'sistance  aiul  has  falsely  vit'wed  as  the  result  of  repressed
sexual  exeitatitms.  With  this  tendency  the  neurotic  comes  to  the
pljysit  ian  am!  he  t'arritss  it  with  him,  as  does  also  the  normal
peistm,  whtm  lu*  rc*tunis  home.  Only  that  then  his  increased
insight  staruis  as  a  guard,  warning  him  against  giving  expression
to  this  temlenev  and  thus  the  patitmt  is  forced  to  show  his  desire
to  lie  ”  first  ”  in  other  ways.

Ont'  should  nevtu*  lu*sita"te  to  guard  all  expressions  of  doubt,
of  critique,  <if  iorgc^fulness,  of  tardiness,  all  demands  of  the
patient,  relapses  aftcT  improvements,  continued  silence,  as  well
as  adluTern'C  to  sympttims  as  effective  means  of  the,  tendency
toward  disparagmnent  directed  against  the  psyc'hotherapeutist.
One  will  rarely  err  in  proceeding  thus  and  usually  be  justified
in  this  opinion  bv  the  i'ompurison  of  coincident  phenomena  of
a  similar  trend,  ’The  expressions  of  these  tendencies  are  often
<»f  the  most  sifidle  nature.  Shall  1  add  that  ilu*  most  e^xtensive
experience  an<!  knowledge  in  regard  to  this  tfuidency  ^  to
disfuirage  ”  is  barely  snfliedent  to  prevent  being  taken  by  surprise,
and  that  a  great  deal  of  tact,  renouncement  of  authority,  and
even  friendlinessa  watchful  interest  and  the  consciousness  of
tiring  in  the*  presence  of  a  sick  person  with  whom  it  is  out  of


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


142

place  to  engage  in  strife  are  indispensable  to  good  resii^^

I  found  it  necessary  once  to  explain  to  a  stuttering'
the  position  of  the  larynx,  by  means  of  a  drawing.
taking  the  drawing  home  with  him  as  he  had  intended  ^
to  give  it  further  consideration,  he  left  it  with  me  on
The  next  day  he  was  a  quarter  of  an  hour  late,  first  wex^^
toilet,  related  something  of  another  patient  who  had  cot^^
of  me,  and  after  some  silence  related  a  dream  whichi
follows  :

"'It  seemed  to  me  that  I  had  been  looking  at  a  dra'W^^
cylinder  extended  out  from  a  circle;  it  did  not  run
sideways/"

The  interpretation  showed  that  this  dream  had  ref^i^**
the  drawing  of  the  larynx  on  which  the  larynx  was  drawn  *
downwards.  The  patient  argued  with  me  in  the  dlx""*
though  he  would  say  How  would  it  be  if  my  physioii*:
wrong?  and  thus  revealed  to  me  his  distrustful  attitn^
fear  of  being  deceived  and  at  the  same  time  the  ten  <3^
disparagement  directed  against  me,  which  had  been  rev^*"
the  subconscious  measures  of  the  forgetfulness,  the  do  I*
recital  of  the  complaint,  the  silence,  and  finally  by  the  '
endeavor  in  the  dream  to  put  me  in  the  wrong.  One
expect  that  the  patient  applies  his  stuttering  for  tho
purpose  against  me  and  will  continue  thus  to  use  it.  I
of  many  contradictions  he  forced  me  into  the  role  of  a.
teacher  w^hom  he  often  corrected,  so  that  he  could  con  t
use  against  me  his  former  artifices."*  This  w^as  revealedl
remarks  concerning  his  dreams  and  further  from  the  fcX
his  disease  was  assumed  and  adhered  to  in  order  to  d.^*
father  and  gain  superiority  over  him.

A  female  patient  who  was  assigned  to  me  for  txr€*
because  of  depression,  suicidal  Weas,  weeping  fits  and
Neigungen  was  sent  by  me  after  a  brief  course  of  tire***
because  of  the  suspicion  of  a  genital  affection,  to  a  gyne'C
who  removed  a  large  myoma  and  prognosticated  a  cuirt*
neurosis  from  the  operation.  After  the  operation  the?
journeyed  to  her  home  and  from  there  wrote  me  tti
gynecologist  was  right  in  his  prognosis.  Of  course
it  was  to  be  expected  that  the  operation  succeeded  bette  i
case  of  a  countess  upon  whom  the  same  surgeon  had  opi
and  of  whom  she  had  read  in  the  papers,  than  it  had  in  Hr
Soon  afterwards  she  visited  me,  argued  against  ono
contributions  which  she  had  in  some  way  procured,  decl^x
extreme  interest  in  my  method  of  treatment,  said  her  00
was  the  same  as  before  the  operation  and  vanished.

^  An  artifice  wHch  had  for  its  purpose  a  tendencioiis,  derogator^^*  *
expression.


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  143

portion  of  her  history  which  she  communicated  to  me  during
the  treatment  it  became  apparent  among  other  things  that  she
lived  at  sword’s-point  with  her  whole  environment,  that  she
dominated  her  luishand  entirely,  that  she  hated  the  village  and
played  the  man  psychically  and  sexually  to  one  of  her  friends.
Her  fear  of  the  blessing  of  children  was  astounding,  sexual
relations  unbearable  because  her  husband  seemed  too  heavy.
When  the  latter  visited  her  once  during  the  treatment,  she  had
the  day  l)eftu'e  Ids  visit  the  following  dream  :

It  seemed  to  me  Ihut  the  whole  room  was  enveloped  by  fire.
She  gave  the  information  spontaneously  that  this  was  a  typical
drc*ain,  and  that  it  always  returned  at  the  time  of  her  menstrual
period.  This  time  it  occurred  a  long  time  before  her  period.  The
dreunj  could  be  easily  ret'ognixed  a.s  an  attempt  to  use  a  feminine
situatiim,  nuuistruation,  for  the  purpose  of  the  masculine  protest
-  that  is  to  avoid  sexual  relations.  A  deeper  penetration  into
the  nu^aidng  wbit'h  would  certainly  have  revealed  an  enuresis  in
childhood  (nre-myuma,  .see  Stiulie,”  Appendix)  was  prevented
by  the  interruption  of  the  treatment.  1  received  another  letter
which  <*outained  tlu*  assurance  that  the  patient  from  now  on
would  try  to  find  p<^ace  in  luT  environment  in  my  sense  of  the
word,  i  think  tiiat  this  must  have  been  still  difficult  for  her.

()l)stinacy,  wildness  and  unrulinc‘ss  may  in  the  same  way  serve
as  the  proof  whitdi  female  patients  seek  in  order  to  show  how
little  tliey  an^  fittcal  hm  the  feminine  rAle.  These  preparations
bc'gin  already  in  tin*  (Mrliest  childhood  and  lead  gradually  to
physical  and  [jsychic  aptitud(‘s  in  gestures,  facial  expression,
emotional  prenlisptndtions  and  mimicry,  while  the  character
<levelops  in  tlu*  dirtalion  of  the  ideal  guiding  line  and  cautiously
intraHiuces  tlie  patients’  attitude  of  life.  In  many  case.s  these
characteristics  are  manihssted  in  a  direct  manner  and  serve  with¬
out  deviatiem  for  the  <'xpres.si(>n  of  the  masculine  protest.  Or
tluTc  takes  place  a  change  of  formula  in  the  guiding  fiction,
either  because  of  the  <unerg<mce  of  contradictions  in  the  guiding
line,  in  the  event  of  a  real  or  threatened  defeat,  or  because  of
something  that  usually  eoineides  therewith,  namedy,  an  obstacle
<if  reality  wliich  is  <»stimated  as  imsurmoimtable.  Under  the
ccmstruction  td  a  seeurity-giving  anxiety  or  feeling  of  guilt,  or
sei’urity-giving  antithetical  traits  (dissociation  of  other  writers),
the  fleviations  in  nenrotic  circuitous  ways  follow.  But  the
prcfiaratorv  devitass  persist.  It  is  only  that  the  neurotic  cautious-
n<‘.sH  Introfluces  the  devia  —  i  these  new  forms  of  security,
anxiety,  feeling  of  guilt,  sei7.ure\s,  when  the  patient  would  other¬
wise  have  ha<l  to  answer  with  the  originally  developed  emotions
such  as,  anger,  rage,  aggression.  Frequently  there  come  to  light
purposefully  grotiped  memory  pictures  of  a  certain  ''boundless-
nessd*  thoughts,  memorie.s,  illusions  as  though  one  were


144


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSllTUTION


boundlessly  desirous,  sensuous,  dtunoniac,  criminal,  are
manifested,  at  times  obviously  arranged  oversights  and  accidents
which  are  nothing  else  than  atirnunitions  to  fu*  cautious.  Or  the
sudden  termination  of  the  direct  masculine  aggressiveness  takes
place  always  just  before  a  deOsion,  ^a  peculiarity  which
characterizes  many  neurotic  love  affairs.  Tin*  ibniation  in  such
cases  from  the  direct  guiding  line  may  folliiw  in  a  |>erverse
manner  under  the  intlucmce  of  the  craving  for  semirity,  or  the
guiding  line  leads  him  to  seek  the  protefiiim  of  the  father,
mother,  God,  alcoholism  or  an  idea.  Atttaupts  to  reach  the  top
through  feminine  means,  or  It)  surpass  at  least,  all  wonum,  leads
to  excessive  cleanliness,  to  tlu*  **  cleaning  nuuiia/*  to  a
masochistic  subjectiem  or  coi|U<*trv,  to  a  dcj.ire  to  pltsisi*  and  in
female  patients  to  a  constant  fretting,  AUmg  with  this  there  will
always  be  found  chararler-traits  amt  telbtalr  traces  which  betray
that  the  masculine  fiction  is  alb’fHnverfn!  and  seeks  to  arrive  at
its  purpose  by  thf*se  circuitous  ways.  I'ho  o?^ta*ssive  eroticism
in  many  of  these  cases  is  nut  to  be  under-dtjod  as  real,  that  is  to
say,  as  deptuitling  upon  a  constituthmal  basis,  but  shows  itself
to  he  associatt'd  with  the  tictitui,  am!  in  be  due  in  an
uninterrupted  atftmtivoness  which  has  taken  an  erotic  direction.
The  same  is  true  of  perversums  aiuf  an  apparent !v  weakened
libido,  which  are  Cim>lrut1etl  frtnii  neurotic  stibterfuges,  All
sexual  relations  in  the  neurosis  are  mdv  a  simile.

The  fear  of  the*  superituafy  of  t!u’  male  am!  thr  depreedatory
struggle  directed  against  it  is  often  clothr«l,  as  re»^ult  id  the
neurotic  antithetical  piU'^.pertive,  in  pliant, eaes  of  rma’aailation
which  have  for  their  obj«si  the  deprivation  M  the  mah*  of  wawth.
In  the  dreams  of  the^ie  butiale  neurotii^  patient--  this  comes
clearly  to  light  and  can  be  rea^litv  pioved  In'  coexistent
derogatory  temlemdes.  One  of  these  dreams  is  hrre  givrm.  The
patient  came  uncler  rny  isire  shortiv  after  she  hat!  umlergtnie  an
operation  for  a  flstiiia,  because  r»f  a  eornpul'.orv  thought  and
excitement.  The  compulsory  tlmught  ran,  '*  I  shall  never  lie
able  to  attain  anythirup*'  At  tuir  very  fir:-a  meeting  she
expressed  the  thought  whether  I  waiuhl  be  able*  to  attain  any¬
thing.  The  same  liiu*  eif  elisparageiiient  illufidnalrd  her  dream.
She  dreamed,  rriVd  oaf  in  oiv  Jnsim,  Marie,  flic

fistula  is  thm:  I’he  snrgeMo  had  prtuiii'.fat  her

compltde  rec'overy  and  ke|i|  his  word,  lie  is  iindrr  fddigations
to  her  in  many  ^vays  and  did  not  wish  to  take  a  fee,  llie  patient
became  very  excited  over  this  ami  regarfird  it  as  an  liiimiliatiori.
For  some  time  after  she  tortured  herself  with  plans  for  paying
the  debt.  Her  servant  wms  called  Marie,  am!  she  h;t«l  never
spoken  to  her  about  the  operation.  If  there  shouh!  take  jdace  a
new  breaking  out  of  the  fistula  her  first  trip  woidil  be  to  the
surgeon  to  whom  she  m'cnilcl  express  her  opinion  Marie,  a


TCNDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  145

female  servant,  becomes  the  surgeon.  The  patient  imagines  the
circumstances  demanded  by  her  masculine  egoistic  feding,  the
surgeon  has  operated  poorly,  has  not  k^t  his  promise,  is  a
woman  and  a  servant  at  the  same  time  Tnis  expresses  the  way
in  which  she  could  attain  everything  if  she  were  only  a  man.

When  one  examines  the  published  analyses  of  no  matter  what
psychological  school  the  mechanism  of  the  neurotic  masculine
protest  will  always  be  found  therein.  I  shall  again  emphasize
this  in  connection  with  the  analysis  of  a  case  of  migraine.

Thc!  patient  related  immediately  from  the  reminiscences  of
her  childhood  that  she  had  constantly  lived  in  conflict  with  her
elder  l^rothers  l)ecause  they  wished  to  dominate  her.  This  sort
of  reminiscences  led,  as  soon  as  they  were  voluntarily  related,
to  a  hid(lt‘n  against  male  domination,  and  one  will  never

be  deceivinl  in  the  assumption  that  other  character-traits  also
point  tt)  this  strife  to  hecouie  e<iual  to  the  male.  Uninfluenced,
our  [jafifuif  continued  to  r<‘late  that  .she  played  almost  exclusively
with  lK>ys  and  was  tresatetl  by  them  as  one  of  their  kind.  This
method  oi  expression  betrayetl  very  clearly  the  high  estimation
in  w'hich  the*  malv  svx  was  ludd,  which  brought  this  girl  nearer
to  htT  father-  something  which  may  easily  be  interpreted  as
sexual  lt)ve  for  the  father  atul  as  the  incest  complex.'"

Th<"  dt*V(do[nnc*nt  of  our  pati<‘nt  took  tlu‘  same  course.  She
took  luT  fatluT  wholly  as  lu*r  ideal ;  (‘.specially  a.s  .she  once  caught
her  motluT  in  a  lie  sh<‘  was  anxious  to  imitate  her  father's
example^  id  truthfulness  and  punctuality.*'  She  remembered  also
that  h(*r  father  Imd  oftem  regrettcxl  that  .she  wa.s  not  a  boy,  and
that  it  was  his  wish  that  sfie  should  study.  In  this  situation  an
egoistic  hading  was  naturally  dfwelopecl  in  which  ambitious
effort.s  (‘ould  rud  he‘  alise*nt.  On  the'  other  hand  he^r  bashfulness
wliich  wr(*ck(‘d  many  of  hvr  principles  was  vexy  noticeable  to
hersedf  and  otluu's.  Tins  l)ashfulm‘ss  is  found  with  extraordinary
frec|uenry  in  the  histories  of  neurotics.  It  is  identical  with  the
hading  of  uncertainty,  as  socm  as  this  is  man i hasted  in  relations
with  oth(n’'s,  Ibushing,  .stuttc^ring,  downcast  looks,  avoidance  of
the  srudedy  of  adults,  (‘xeit<nnent  ludore  examinations  and  stage
frigid  (dten  acconijxany  the  attempts  at  approaelxes  to  other
peojde  or  at  tlu‘  <‘sfablishment  of  relations  with  them.  Analysis
shows  lliat  th<»  hurling  of  inh^riority  is  thc^  source  of  this  sort  of
unc-ertalnty,  usually  accompanied  by  a  strong  feeling  of  shame.
n*he  feeding  of  inferiority  is  (‘onditioned  by  somatic  inferiority
which  makes  itself  hdt  psychitsilly,  by  faults  of  childhood  and
strong  p';yduc  pnsssure  on  the  part  of  parents  and  relatives,
and  fikillv  hy  real  or  imagined  femininity  which  develops  early

*  Whaf  miiharn  t^rni  idfutifiratioii,  in  alwayn  h)  ba

i5|*i»si  it«  tls«‘  jmMyricfJtiun  c»f  a.  modal  fttr  purpaHr*  of  a  hciriiteniiig  of

t  br  I  ’ |.f  1 1  -  r i»  M  J'ir  i  N  u  ?i  f  I  f  m.f .


Tf-IE  NEUROTIC  i‘UNSTri‘UTiUN


145

in  strong  contrast  to  a  male  inembcr  iA  thv  family  (father  01
brother).  The  analogy  accortling  to  which  the  must  diverse
emotions  of  being  beiitticHi.  of  humiliatitun  of  inferiority  are
apperceived  by  the  child  is  then  usually  the*  anahigy  of  **  the
smallness  of  the  penis/*  which  is  It)  be  uiuic’rstiHai  symlHilically.
and  thoughts  of  castration  develop,  of  a  feminine  laMe  in  sexual
relations,  of  conception  and  {megnam*y  or  td  perscunitioii.  of
being  stabbed  or  wounded,  of  falHng  and  being  “  licmealh.**  All
these  tictions  are  revealed  in  <lay-tlreams,  halkicinaticins*
dreams,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  wludly  supptantetl  li.y  the  iiction
of  the  masculine  protest  arul  express  a  feeling  tif  being  helittled,
which  breaks  forth  in  the  thought,  *'  I  am  a  wutnari/*  against
which  the  egoistic  feeling  presses  forwaril  and  the  masimline
protest  struggles.

Of  our  patient  we  hear  that  she  had  some  kfunch'-ilgr  of  sexual
relations  at  a  time  when  kam  lai-k  of  experieiu'e  she  was  unable
to  take  into  account  its  results  and  purptitses.  In  such  i%ises  we
may  always  expect  to  find  liashfulneNS,  shanu*  ami  tioiibl,  ami  in
later  ycuirs  fear  of  tc^sts  ;iiul  il«H'isiuns  in  rverv  tiuaii,  traits  of
character  whicii  restdve  themselves  .uialyticsdlv  info  the  idea
that  others  might  he  able  to  tlist'over  on  the  prison  ni  the  patiriit
genital  ilefects'or  omissliUis.  dlie  <'har.icie! s  which  di-pliV
an  effort  to  attain  etpiality  with  the  male  ’-^rx  are  usually
manifested  at  an  ts'irly  age.  ami  this  efbul  tHsaiiiies  the
foregroumi,  white  in  many  cases  beeause  «if  a  tlu'/r  of  hopelesS'^
ness  '*  the  innate*  cuhiring  of  flu*  iimision  k  affei.  !rd.  lierause
thi^  direct  rmitf*  to  mascuHiuty  is  cliv.ed  or  serms  to  hr  so,
circuitous  and  deviating  ways  are  siutghf  rmt.  iht  cmr  of  these
circuitous  ways  lies  the  socially  valualde  efbul  of  woman  toward
emancipation,  on  anofht*r,  the  private  rxprr^dori  of  the
masculine  protest,  the  neurosis  of  woman,  the  com.trm1lon  of  the
ideal  male  organ.

It  wsas  easy  to  see  in  flu*  ea  :e  of  this  patient  that  iti  her  child¬
hood  she  had  sought  to  attain  the  domination  *d  rnati,  of  her
brothers  and  her  father,  as  she  apparejillv  had  made  verv  short
w*ork  of  her  mother.  Her  father  fell  entirely  under  her  authority.
After  a  little  experienc*e  the  conclusion  is  easily  sirrived  at
concerning  the  direction  of  her  nrurotir  symptoms,  that  her
headache  and  migraine  represent  *anre  her  marriage  a  means  for
gaining  the  mastiTV  ov«*r  lier  husband.  And  in  this  iiiasterv  she
sought  a  subslitute  for  her  masculine  ptiwrr  wliirh  she  brlieved
she  had  lost.

I  know  the  objection  which  might  he  raised  at  this  point  How
shall  the  severe  suffering  of  a  neurosis,  the  Irfrible  pain  of
trigeminal  neuralgia,  insomnia,  unronscioiisness,  paralvsis,
migraine  all  be  thremm  into  the  bargain  merely  as  a  means  tfi  an
end,  because  of  the  failure  to  attain  equality  with  fiiaii  ?  I  have


147


tendb:nc:y  to  disparage  others,  etc.

myself  struggled  against  this  conviction  which  thrust  itself  upon
me.  Is  the  case  very  much  clifTerent  when  human  beings  endure
all  sorts  of  hardships  for  a  whole  life  time  in  order  to  attain
some  other  worthless  bubble  ?  Furthermore,  as  I  have  already
shown,  on  these  neurotic  circuitous  paths  to  masculinity  are  found
also  crime,  prostitution,  the  psychosis,  suicide.  This  in  addition
to  the  mystery  wliich  shrouds  human  psychic  mechanisms  may  be
cited  in  support  of  my  understanding  of  the  matter.  The  psychic
therapy  of  tlie  neuroses  is  certainly  based  upon  an
understanding  of  the  exaggerated  valuation  of  the  male
destiny.  And  i  draw  from  this  objection  the  advantage-
in  regard  to  my  patitmts  inasmuch  as  I  endeavor  to  show  them
how  they,  placed  before  a  <du)ice  between  a  natural  role  in  the
neurotic  masculine  goal,  clu)u.se  the  greater  of  the  two  evils.

From  the  previous  iustory  of  our  patient  the  further  facts  may
be  i'mphasized  that  she  .‘iKvays  had  a  disinclination  to  play  with
dolls,  furthermore  that  until  her  marriage  she  took  the  greatest
pkMKure  in  gymnasti(\s  and  sports.  That  these  efforts,  too.
served  as  a  substitute  for  mnsctdinlty  is  manifested  more  from
their  etunuHiityn  with  nilwt  inasculitie  traits  than  from  their  own
nature,  nuwe  es{HHaaUy  from  a  sort  of  importunity  with  which
the*  patient  spoke  of  them.  Slie  was  also  passionately  fond  of
extensive  touring,  of  which  inclination  since  the  birth  of  her
c'hikl,  whom  slie  %vislied  and  expe<1e<l  to  be  male,  only  the  desire
to  make  (Ha-asiona!  jourm^ys  reunained.

The  error  must  be  avoi<led,  however,  of  assuming  that  the
traits  of  char;u't«'r  liere  d<N<‘rilyed  and  em])hasi7.ed  by  tne  patient
herself  fornual  iadateil  islaiul.s  in  the  extensive  soul-life  of  a
woman.  On  the  contrary,  it  ntUvSt  be  assumed  that  these-
mas<niline  traits  came  to  expression  under  the  pressure  of  a
dominating  tendency,  had  their  tyrigin  in  a  distinct  life-plan  and
became  conspicauius  plumomena  only  because  they  had  the  power
tcy  do  so,  while  all  around  tlies<‘  phenomena  there  existed  an
indistinct,  only  ota/asionally  manifested  masculine  craving  which
was  principally  oiampital  with  tlie  prevention  and  transformation
of  feminitu^  eumdiims  until  such  time  as  it  shall  have  reached  an
indepmulent  existence.  In  this  conflict  of  masculine  against
feminine  e*motionH  the  egoistic  feeling  is  thrown  entirely  on  the
side  of  rnasciilinity  and  makes  use  even  of  persistently  emerging
feminine  emotions,  among  others  also  of  the  female  sexual
appetite  in  order  to  collert  them  as  humiliating  and  dangerous,*^
to  group  them*  to  exaggerate,  to  emphasize  them  and  at  the
same  time  to  surrrytmd  them  with  sentinels  so  that  they  may  he
rol'died  of  th<*ir  influence.  These  ^sentinels,  ^securities,  usually
extend  bevond  the  sphere  of  feminine  emotions.  One  always

Tlii't  in  iilwnv«  fU*nvr>d  from  ft.  purpo'^ofnl

fill*'  ftfift  iiUjH'i,  dftalh,  run  ov#'r,  or  Btraufxlcd.


148


THE  NELIRini(‘  cX)NSTrri/TlilN


finds  that  these  reassurances  arul  protective  ii«‘vices,  among
which  should  be  placed  our  symptoms  ut  disease,  do  not  stop  at
the  mere  fulfillment  of  their  tlestiny,  that  is,  the  avoidance  of
defeat,  but  that  they  permeate  tliese  patients  with  a  sort  of
cautiousness  which  finally  renders  them  untit  fur  anything.  It  is
only  then  that  the  primary  insecurity  whit'h  may  be  likened  to
a  fear  of  a  feminine  rdle  is  at  an  emb  but  by  this  time  it  has
permeated  the  entire  liff*-rrlalion  td  the  indivitlisal  and  forces
him  outside  the  realm  of  all  social  rrlatiinrship.  We  find  all  our
patients  in  tlia  midst  cd’  this  rcireat  am!  their  syiujitoms  are  for
them  assurances  that  they  will  not  be  foreed  back  inli»  the  tumult
of  life.  From  this  tluTC  tlenadt^ps  a  jumridic  |nctiire  which  often
reveals  a  reversion  to  simpler,  more  childdiKe  relations,  either
because  these  are  de-velopeti  after  maturity,  i»r  for  the  reason  that
maturity  was  generally  iinpetied.  l‘hus  many  ai1  as  thcnigh  they
were  in  the  nursery.  Family  relatiiUis  beemne  aci*entiiated  to  an
extraordinary  degrc*e,  i^r  instcsnl  of  t-Iiiliiish  love  {or  the  jiarents
the  old  ehiklLsh  ohsiinatn*  deveUip^;  and  both  latlurs  are  used
as  guiding  symbols,  as  tlituiyji  the  patient  MiUghi  to  disiaiver  in
all  persons  the  fathfu*  or  nunlier.  \tOwifh%lamliiH,:  the  fact  that
he  comes  in  conflict  with  reality  on  account  of  tln.s  fiction,  the
patitait  holtis  fast  to  it  l>eiMUse  In*  hnimi  Nccutitv  in  tlie  relations
existing  in  the  nursery.  Kipling  relate:,  of  a  person  Iviiig  in  the
death  struggle,  whom  he  ijb-o’rvef!  until  the  expec-led  cry  for  the
mother  <*am<*  from  his  liji"..  (ine  has  tmlv  tti  listim  to  the  street-
Arabs,  who,  when  h;iril  presv.fi|.  inmietliately  icy  out  for  their
mother,  in  tinier  tt>  compreluoui  this  hmepng  tor  seionify,  Tim
same  longing  for  setmrity  lias  crept  infit  the  w*tr“-.hi|tping^  of  the
Mother  of  (kith  In  girls,  the  hmging  ft»r  setairilv  is  as  a  rule
in  more  pronounced  ana!i*gy  to  the  relatitm  to  the  father.  The
utfTine  phantasy  **  wliirh  is  placed  in  the  foregrtnind  by  (1.
‘(Iruner  I  have  alstj  found  employed  bv  neurotit's  only  when  they
wish  to  express  that  |>eat'‘e  can  be  {ontul  iuily  w'itli  the  mother,
or  when  thi*y  have  fhoiighls  of  stiic'idfc  that  is.  the  wi-di  to  return
to  the  same  state  in  wdiicdi  fliev  were  before  Inrth.  (llie  herma¬
phroditic  progression  !s*ukward,)

Our  patient,  too,  as  Oiild  and  girl  sought  this  leaning  on  her
father  who  spoiha!  her  not  a  little,  llie  mother,  as  is  often  the
case,  was  more  altrart<s|  fti  her  hriitlirrs.  lids  trait  also  showi
itself  to  he  conditioned  by  the  exaggerafet!  esfimaf ion  of  the
ma.sculine  principle,  which  the  father,  being  a  man,  v/oiiltt  more
readily  renounce  in  her  favor,  tbir  patient  s^Hin  notirrd  that  her
father's  rare  for  her  iniTcased  wltenever  she  was  i!!.  Thus
came  to  have  a  special  preference  for  being  sick,  wtdeh  profiired
for  h€*r  further  petting,  love,  and  sw^ertmrats.  She  riiiist  have
regarded  as  the  most  appropriate  siibstitute  for  that  rtianlineii
which  she  believed  to  tie  losf  to  her.  that  ronililion  of  sickness


149


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS.  ETC.

which  gained  for  her  the  command  of  the  whole  house,  the
gratification  of  all  her  wishes  and  permitted  her  to  escape  all
unpleasant  encounters  in  school  and  society.  Yes,  it  meant  for
her  the  highest  attainable  potency,  her  feeling  of  security,  as.
soon  as  her  father  believed  that  she  was  ill.  And  she  sometimes
pretended  to  be  ill,  that  is,  she  simulated  or  exaggerated.

This  fact  of  simulation  in  childhood  is  often  found  in  the
anamneses  of  neurotics.  I  have  called  attention  to  this
phenomenon  in  the  Psychischen  l^ehandlung  der  Trigeminus
Neuralgic,"  and  have  mentioned  that  children  often  pretend  to
be  deaf,  blind,  dumb,  etc.  E.  Jones  mentions  this  fact  in  his

Ilamletstudie,  *’  and  calls  attention  to  the  resemblance  of
Ilamletls  pretense  to  that  of  children.  There  are  many  historical
examples  such  as  Saul,  Claudius  and  others,  and  they  show*  us  the
problem  in  its  purc^  eulture.  The  accompanying  thought  is
always  htiw  can  1  secure  myself  from  a  danger,  liow  can  I
avoiit  a  defeat  ?  It  is  clear  that  the  neurotic  who
app<T('eives  aca'ording  to  the  analogy  man-woman  perceive.s
in  the  domination  of  a  position  a  masculine  equivalent,  a
sulKstitute  and  prot(‘ction  for  the  threatened  lo.ss  of  manliness.
And  the  technioue  of  simulation  consists  in  the  fact  that  the
individual  stds  lorth  a  fiction  and  acts  in  accordance  therewith
as  tlunigh  he  ha<l  tlu^  def<‘ct  which  would  require  such  action,
whllf*  Ite  knows  and  maintains  that  he  has  no  such  defect.  We
maintain  that  the  psy<‘hically  comlitioned  neurotic  symptom
arts<^s  in  the  same  way  only  with  this  difference  that  the  fiction
is  not  recogni'/asl  as  a  ii(*tion,  hut  is  held  a.s  true.'^

As  is  fretpumlly  tlu*  (‘ase,  can  obtain  the  best  insight  into
this  condition  not  frtun  a  neurotic'  .symptom,  but  from  a  borderline
case.  We  mean  the  psychology  of  .sympathy.  We  are  in  a
position  to  fend  the  suffering  oi  another  person  a.s  if  it  affected
our  <jwn  ('orpcmal  splu^re.  Yes,  we  can  even  feel  the  suffering  of
aiudluu’  in  anticipation  ludore  it.s  occurrence.  Well  known
examples  of  this  are  the  anxious  feeling.s  which  many  persons
experiemee  when  tliey  s«*e  oth(u*s,  servant  girls,  roof  workers  or
cirrus  actors  in  dan^pTous  situations,  or  even  when  they  only
tliink  of  such  situations.  These  symptoms  are  usually  felt  by
those  wdio  suffer  from  dizzine'ss  when  in  high  places  and  they  act
wlien  others  are  in  danger  exactly  as  though  they  themselves
stood  at  a  wimlow  or  on  a  rock.  They  withdraw  under  the  feeling
of  anxifd:y,  placing  a  safe  <listanre  betweem  themselves  and  the
usually  not  tlangeroiis  position,  in  .short,  they  have  a  feeling  akin
to  tliat  whicdi  tliey  would  have  were  they  themselve.s  in  a
dangerous  position.  Here  the  exaggerated  cautiousn(\ss  becomes'
apparent  which  in  neurotics  i.s  so  strong  that  they  will  not  cross

^  fliecirr  tie'll  I  frirl,  C’lmptiir  TIT,.  The*  am*iitunW  fich’nn.'’


150


THE  NEUROTIC  (T.)NSTIl'UTlON


bridge  for  fear  that  they  might  fall  into  the  water  or  throw
themselves  into  it.  I  have  found  similar  meduuusms  of  cautious¬
ness  in  all  cases  of  fear  of  places  and  they  reveal  to  us  that  we
.have  a  patient  who  wishes  to  avidd  dtHUsions,  win)  fears  whether
he  is  ei|ual  to  a  certain  situation,  usually  the  sexual  partner.  In
all  other  phobias,  too,  as  1  have  shown  in  iny  dioscription  of
syphilidophobia,  (Zeitschr.  f.  Ilsych.,  Bd.  I,  Heft  q,  iqu),  this
“sympathy**  in  a  situation  which  has  not  as  yet  been  realized,
but  which  may  be  €‘xpecttHl  with  probability,  const. ittiles  the
characteristic  symptom  (Li|jps).  It  revexils  itself  as  a  very
ellicient  tool  of  the  craving  for  security,  takes  the  place  in  many
cases  of  a  morality  which  is  not  invimible  in  character.  Careful
examination  of  this  characterdrait  reveals  that  it  has  its
foumiation  in  that  sort  of  fecding^participation  for  purposes  of
security,  which  is  clearly  scd  forth  in  KanCs  calegoritxal
imperatives  for  the  expr«‘Ssion  of  tlje  whole  charac'ler,  when  this
philosopher  wishes  each  single  iiulivitlual  to  bt*  inllueni'cd  in  his
action  by  a  p<ntit  of  vic*w  which  permits  of  bring  regariled  av  if
it  were  elevateil  to  a  universal  maxim.'*

Factions,  maxims,  gui«iiug  {principles  then  simiLir  to  the
rcsissuring  fictions  of  the  sinmlitor  hnan  par!  of  f!ie  mental
character ' of  all  {lersons,  especially  of  neurotically  inclined
children.  And  redmas!  to  their  nucleus  a!!  td  these  formnl;e  are
as  follows  :  Act  as  tliough  you  were  a  c'omplete  man,  or  wished
to  he  one.  The  content  of  this  proceilure  wliicii  usually  turns
out  to  be  in  the*  nature  td  a  substitute  is  determined  lirforehand
by  the  experience  of  the  ciiild  arul  t)V  the  Npecial  tvfpe  of  somatic
inferiority  from  which  he  suffer.s,  but  is  subject  to  special
alterations  whicii  must  be  regartied  as  formal  changes  arising
horn  special  circumstaiu’cs  ctinnectetl  with  experiences  ttJ  wliicli
he  gives  neurotic  valuations.

Somatic  inferiority  determines  through  the  accom|ianying
psychic  phenomena  of  re|nignan<*e  the  direetii»n  of  the  ideas  of
pleasure  and  thus  <*ondurfs  the  compensatory  procc'ca^s  into  the
psychic  regions.  Here,  foti,  w'e  lirhult!  f!ie  craving  for  sreurity
at  work  and  usually  in  .siirh  a  purposrful  niaiiiier  that  it  works
caiefUcients  which  offer  security  and  thus  gives  rise  to  an  over-
compensation.’  In  the  chwelopmenl.  for  instam*e  of  the*  stuttering
Demosthenes  to  the  greatest  orator  of  Cirrecaq  of  Clara
Schumann  (who  was  deafl  to  an  a<'cairii|di:shed  niirsicaaii,  of  Itif!
near-sighted  (}.  Freitag,  of  many  poets  ;itid  painters  with
anomalies  of  the  eye  to  visually  talented  persons,  and  of  tho
numerous  physicians  with  anornaties  of  hearing,  w”e  |iert‘eive  the
result  of  toe  craving  for  sectirily.  We  likewise  see  the  re.sislt
in  every  weak  child  who  wishes  to  he  a  hero,  in  the  rhifiisy  child

*  Viiihiiigi*r,  **  I'lii**  hi  If*'

’  4.  '*  hrt  iftr  ca,  isafj


TENDENCY  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  151

with  thyroid  affection  who  wishes  to  b.e  an  athletic  racer  and  later
in  life  always  tries  to  be  the  first.

But  the  direction  of  the  craving  for  security  in  order  to  have
its  objective  point  must  depend  upon  an  example.  And  here  the
man  offers  more  attraction  to  the  egoistic  feeling  of  childhood
than  does  the  wonmn.  Indeed  it  seems  that  a  female  example
can  only  be  imitated  after  an  initiatory  conflict  and  only  when
this  feminine  example  permits  the  attainment  of  mastery  along
the  lines  of  least  resistance.

I  his  was  the  case  with  o\ir  patient  as  it  often  is  with  cases
of  migraine.^  Numerous  writers  have  emphasized  the  circum¬
stance  that  it  is  so  often  possible  to  trace  the  inheritance  of
inigraine  from  the  mother.  We  must  give  up  the  idea  of  the
inheritance  of  migraine  in  the  same  manner  as  we  were  obliged
to  abandon  the  view  of  its  organic  etiology.  I  have  already
explained  the  tmhire  of  this  <mcstion‘‘  in  the  case  of  a  sevens
year-old  girl,  and  had  liefore  that  be<*n  convinced  that  a  feeling
of  uncertainty  and  humiliation  precedes  the  attack  of  migraine,
and  that  the  attacks  serve  to  {)lare  the  whole  household  at  the
service  of  tin*  suffertT,  for  which  reason  the  example  of  the
mother  is  imitated.  Tlu^  husband,  tlu^  father,  other  relatives
suffer  no  lt‘.ss  from  th<‘  atta<*k  than  does  the  patient.  Thus
migraine  is  to  be  phuanl  in  tlu*  series  of  neurotic  affections
whi(‘h  serve  to  stanire  the  mastcu'v  in  the'  household  and  in  the
family.  Tiiat  this  tyranny  has  a  masenilim^  significance  and  can
\iv  rc'duced  to  tlu'  wish  to  1)('  a  man  luH'omes  obvious  from  further
analysis.  But  a  bried  consideration  of  the  migraine  which  occurs
at  the  time  of  nnm.struation  tesiches  us  to  understand  in  this
rase  also  the  elissatisfaediun  witli  the'  fmninine  role.  I  have  in
various  instances  l(*;irn<‘d  it)  re<*ognize  this  connection  with
epilc'psy,  sciatica,  trigeminal  runiralgia.  I  have  proved  that
these  latter  <‘<mditions  in  ttie  ca.ses  mentioruKl  by  me  were
psychogenii*  in  nature  and  originated  whenever  stronger
securities  were'  demanded.

The  only  sphi*ri'  of  inflinmce  whicli  rtnnained  for  our  patient
was  liiT  tyranny  ov<*r  h<T  fatluT,  over  whom  she  had  complete
power,  and  this  did  not  entindy  satisfy  hi'r  lust  for  power.
Hence,  a  **still,  still  more'"  <!i‘rlanal  itsidf,  as  Is  often  the  case' in
neurotir*  affeeticms,  ancl  .slu*  sought  a  more  obvious  grasp  of  the
subpigatiim  of  the  fathcT.  Her  mother  suffered  from  migraine
and  the  time  of  tuT  attacks  was,  as  is  u.sual  with  patients
siifTi*ring  from  migraine,  a  time  of  absolute  power.  Therefore
our  patient  also  win)  eomfjndiendiHl  the  value  of  the  disease
[ir('t«‘fided  to  la*  suffering  from  it/  And  our  patient  succeeded
*  *"  JfUirhiiHi  Blt*u}<T“Fn‘ud,  BKIB,

^  I n  »iy  wtjfk  tin  *' 1’hi*  T  havi*  jilmuly

wliiif  inriff!  tir-n*.  tttiU  nn  tjriuinul  ♦ioriiiOic.Jnff’riority  cU'Ov-

tiw  iif  ij.  iiyrri|»nmi.  fii  th#'  yuMirmin  tju*  nu-cliuniHru  lu'f’omru  t!ia


153


THE  NEUROTIC  (\>NSTlTCTIi)N


in  doing  what  aboriginal  man  succc^ctlod  in  doing  when  he  made
himself  gods  who  tilled  him  with  terror,  in  creating  for  lierscli
the  migraine.  Tins  “  as  it  "  creation,  this  fiction  becamt!
substantially  imiependent.  so  that  the  pain  and  suffering  could
awaken  whenever  the  patient  needeil  them.  The  dramatic
performance  became  su  sutHa\ssful  tiiat  tlu*  patient,  because  of
its  value  in  the  direction  i%(  her  tendeiu*ic‘s,  no  longer  saw
through  the  iictiom  lnd€‘ed  she  wvni  l^v  means  of  the  same  a
superiority  ovct  and  security  against  tlie  husbaiul  jint  as  she  had
prevrously  done  in  regartl  to  ht*r  father  wdien  s!ie  made  use  of
this  weapon  to  attain  smairity.  Sfie  strove  to  attain  a  masculine
part  in  the  marriage  relation,  <!ir«H*ting  all  her  activilia:
towards  gaining  the  mastery  over  her  husband,  lint  as  there
always  remained  an  **arul  yet'*  it  was  iUHa\ssary  to  obtain  still
further  substitutes  as  evithnu'es  of  piiwer.  And  the  most
important  of  these  substitute  formations  was  the  rt^soliition  not
to  nave  any  more  tdiildrem  It  ha«l  become  a  general  principle
in  the  household  of  this  patient  as  in  many  otliers  (one  of  which
I  dt\scribed  in  the  Mannliche  Kinstellimg  Weifdkher
Neurotiker,*'  ZeitsHi.,  f.  Ifsychoanalvse.  fleft  4.  that  i

woman  who  suffered  ftiun  .such  lusnlaches  shouhl  have  no  more
chihlren.  Insiuiuiia.  impossibility  of  e.^ung  tti  steep  again  after
having  fieen  disturlanl,  refermu^es  to  tlie  difllcidties  iamrerning
the  place  of  re^dde^ua^  variiuts  rirotetlive  arratigefnents  and  the
spoiling  of  tin*  only  chile!  ctunpletrtl  the  setairity.

That  thesf*  pitrm,mu'na  are  merely  a  new  view  of  the  old  wish
for  mastadinitv  is  proved  bv  !im*  first  dream.

**  I  tiNis  ai  llic  dc/‘ol  *:tnik  mv  nmliicr.  11 V  ^rtsht\l  to  pisif  niy
father  trim  teas  ill.  /  vms  afraid  ef  ini-.sin^  the  Ira  in.  Then
suddenly  my  father  appeared.  Then  !  -c-.i'.  at  a  reaieh  make/s
and  wanied  |o  Imv  a  'sut^\lituie  far  the  ene  I  had  ie\i/‘

She  felt  sujn*rior  hor  mother  wtir»  was  greatly  respected  by
her,  ami  also  to  lir^r  father  win*  humored  loT  ‘dightest  wish*
Sick  niisans  weak,  llie  father  liad  dital  a  siiort  time  previously.
Shortly  after  his  death  she  had  one  of  her  dreailful  attacks  of
migraine.  In  the  ilream  he  came  tti  life  again  and  his  person
signified  ft»r  her  a  maximating  td  her  r|ni.^-coma'‘tonsfirss.  She
h«a<l  always  hem  iriijiatient,  afraid  of  being  hilr.  Her  brother
came  iadort*  sht*  ili^l  and  Imeame  a  man.  She  felt  spurred  08
to  hasten  {a  man  dot*s  it  with  one  faminb  a  %vf»man  with  t
hundred),  in  order  tti  arrive  at  tho  *:nmmit  of  her  rgo-ronscions**
ness.  T!ie  day  beh'ire  fhi'  dream  -.he  was  hastening  to  a  concert
and  was  held  Icick  In*  her  nuilher,  Watrneri  are  often  late  and  iht
did  not  wish  to  follow  their  eicample.

Reality  reniindfa!  her  rieverthele^:s  that  she  was  a  woman  like
her  mother.  The  thought  lies  in  the  picture  of  beifig  together
with  her  mother  at  the  dc^pftt.  Her  aggressive  affert  which  is


TENDENC'Y  TO  DISPARAGE  OTHERS,  ETC.  153

identical  with  tht^  masculine  protest  is  directed  against  her
husband,  against  her  father,  lu  the  further  analysis  of  the
dream  the  disparaging  thoughts  oorue  to  light,  such  as  that  the
wife  is  stronger,  more  vigorous  and  healthier  than  the  man.
Tlien  as  a  further  incentive  to  coullict,  the  father  (the  man)
suddenly  emerges.  This  simile  is  taken  from  swimming  and
signifies  in  tlie  luairotic  perspective  the  being  above  ''  in
opposition  to  laang  **  lumeath.*'  While  the  patient  was  afraid
of  missing  tlu‘  train,  of  being  left  behind  in  comparison  with
another,  that  is  to  say  in  comparison  with  the  man,  which  can

be  su|)})lie<I  from  the  connc^ciiim .  to  submit  to  him,  wshe  notices

as  her  t^xp<u‘i<‘nta‘  iiu'r<‘ases  that  the  man  is  first,  is  above.  The
application  of  a  jutdiire,  of  an  abstract  idea  in  space  for  the
purpose*  of  illustrating  the  hading  of  being  belittled  is  often
found  in  tin*  neurosis,  (Se<‘  Syphiliclophobia,  1.  c.)  because  it  is
adapted  pre*pare  the  disposition  to  conflict  in  the  most
extensive*  manner  by  moans  of  the  fictitious,  abstract  antitheses
nothing  or  all."  In  tlu*  same  manner  th<*  artifice  is  made  use
of  in  painting,  of  re|jn*seriting  tin*  powe*r  of  woman  and  the  fear
slu‘  inspir<*s  by  giving  her  a  high<*r  position  in  space.  In
religious  and  cosmoUigi^'a!  phantasit*s  this  representation  of
.snp<*riority  is  tin*  tdevation  of  flu*  position  assigned.  That  in
Iter  dnsim  tin*  patic'nt  emnn*  through  the  spatially  antithetical
scluune  aecording  to  the  analogy  af  man-woman,"  is  indicated
in  the  p<isiti(m  of  tin*  pafieml  lieside  lu‘r  niotluT,  that  is,  with
h<T  nujtlier.

lluu’.  the  first  tlroam  wiii<  h  tin*  patient  ha^l  during  the  course
of  the  treatment  !u*g,ins  with  ('tmsi<!erations  of  masculine  and
feminine  rdl<*s.  Oru*  .*;luiu!<!  n<‘ver  neghvt  to  take  into  consider¬
ation  unpn*judicially  (In*  possibility  of  tin*  c*ontinuation  of  the
dream  ami  io  awniit  ami  fu)mpar<*  m*w  ronfirmaiory  data,  even
tluHu^li  tin*  psyt'ho  therapeutist  may  have*  the  rno.st  firm
('onvJidions  (’om*erning  the*  significanre  of  the  problem  for  the
fH*iirosis.  Tin*  further  <*xplanati<m  of  the  patient  was  in  regard
to  a  w'atch  <*hain  whi<*h  hml  lu'ort  lost  through  the  fault  of  her
hmdciml.  S!n*  c'anmd  rernemluT  having  lost  a  w%atch.  fnterro-
gatfsl  <*oma*rning  tin*  ^’.igfufu*anta*  in  the  dream  of  the  watch
which  was  sii!wtitul<*d  for  tin*  cliain,  the  patiemt  answered  with
ronsidoraldf*  affc*(d  but  t*vasivelv,  that  it  was  not  the  loss  of  the
(diain  but  <if  a  cdiarin  attached  to  it  that  disturlwl  her.  In
short  the  watch  hanging  to  a  ladv’s  chain  is  identical  with  the
lost  watch  charm  hn*  wlftch  the  patient  grieves  and  for  which
she  sca*ks  a  substitute.

Tin*  dream  began  with  a  symboUc  contrast  represented  in
space  of  an  inferior  femininitv  wWh  a  superior  masculinity  and
ends  with  the  logicnlly  following  conclusion  of  the  strivin|y  for
a  substitute*  for  the  lost  ma.scuHnity.  In  this  fictitious  guiding

M


^54


fHE  Nf?UR01ir  CDNSTlTUTIilN


lint  thus  cominictiHl  the  character,  the'  af!‘ei*t  reaction,  the
predispositions  and  neurotic  symptoms  must  he  represented,  the
correctness  of  which  assumption  the  result  id  the  case  substan¬
tiated.  The  character-traits  of  impatience,  disciuitent,  obstinacy
and  reticence  proved  thereft>re  to  be,  as  tliii  all  ihv  rest,  auxiliai^
lines  which  stood  in  a  dependent  relatitm  to  tiu‘  guiding  fiction,
that  of  attaining  a  masculine  edevation.


Cl . lAFTKR  V


CRUELTY,  CONSCIKNCK.  PERVERSION  AND  NEUROSIS

The  discovery  of  traits  cd  a  cruel  nature  in  very  earliest
childluKui  is  unusually  frecjueat  in  the  course  of  an  analysis  of
neiiros<‘s  and  psychoses.  It  would  l)e  wrong  to  apply  our  moral
standards  to  the  first  two  years  of  life,  and  to  regard  the
:u*livitit\s  t)f  such  childrtui,  who  in  reality  are  still  incapable  of
either  good  or  evil,  as  sadistic  or  brutal  as  it  often  happens  when
pari'iiis  or  guardians  rcdate  tlu*  histories  of  psychopaths.  For  these
manifestations  become  psychic,  or  in  our  sense  neurotic  only
when  they  liegin  to  iivrvv  a  dfdiniti'  end  and  are  constructed  as  an
abstraction  which  has  scune  future  tendenc'y  in  vic'W.*  The  fact
that  they  arc’*  always  crtsited  out  of  possibilities  and  capabilities
of  experitmce  not  justify  assumption  of  a  constitutional
factor.  As  a  nialitu”  of  fact  one  only  finds  the  character-trait  of
cruelty  as  a  <  <?ia]H*nsatorv  psyehit'  construction  in  those  children
who,  ajiart  k<nn  this,  are  furcfs!  by  their  feeling  td  inferiority  to
an  early  and  hasty  tlcvt'lopment  of  tlu‘ir  idntl  of  personality,
llu^  :n*companying  traits  of  obstinacy,  rage,  ,sexual  precocity,
ambition,  tmvy,  greed,  maFua*  and  d<‘lig.ht  in  doing  harm  as  they
are  regularly  <n*ok(si  !>y  tlu*  guiding  fi(*tiou,  and  whieli  the  strife
and  emotional  pre<l!sp()sitions  ludp  tti  form  and  mobili'/e,  furnish
the  higlily  eoltjreti  ka!e*idoscopit*  picture  of  the  refractory  child.
The  lust  f<u*  pow<*r  td  such  children  is  regularly  manifested  in
tin*  family  life  ami  play,  but  most  <d  all  in  their  bearing,  attitude
and  glance.  In  tlie  play  and  early  tht>ught.s  eoneerning  the
rhoi<*e  (d  a  vocation,  the  temlrm’y  to  (Tiudty  is  often  !>etrayed  in
a  veiled  mauiu'r  and  them  r<*gard  as  ideal  typ<‘S,  the

hangman,  tlie  !nit<*her,  the  poFnaunan.  the  grave  diggtT,  the
savage  or  c*oacliman,  *Mier:uea*  they  can  whip  the  horses/'  or
tlu^  tcsicher,  **  because  they  can  whip  the  children,"  the
fdiysi<dan  "  be(\'ms(»  they  <nit/'  or  the  soldier,  "because  they
shoot/'  the  jtidge,  etc/  dlif*  spirit  of  inve.stigalion  is  also  often
associated  with  this,  and  tin*  tttrturing  of  animals  ancl  children,
sp<*cu!;itions  and  phantasit's  camcerning  possible  misfortunes,
<dten  of  those  which  niii»ht  ludall  near  relative.s,  an  interest  in
funerals  and  cditircli  yard's  ;m<l  in  Imrrihh*  .sadistic  stories,  are
be*  gun.

*  Hri*  Wnmitr  V.  JiMto-r,  UnujktmfW

Wirm.f  iilifi,  HIIU  ’

*  Adlt'r,  Aci'O'CiuiiiHfnch/*  1,  c.


THE  mivmrnc  coNSTrnniciN


156

The  first  piirpase  af  Ihest.^  e3caj4^4erateil  it^nileiveit^s  ii\  cruelty,
IS  to  prevent  the  eiiiergerice  arnt  the  btHanuing  c*tlcii'ive  of  the
ever  prc'sent  possibility  oi  weakness;  and  f>ily,  because  these
stand  in  opposition  to  the  laasciiline  guitling  Hue.  The  general
spreading  of  this  craving  to  be  manly  which  is  thought  to  lead
to  superiority  over  others*  is  nowhere  so  clearly  shown  as  in  the
disinterested  pleasure  in  injuries.  In  neun^tics  this  may
especially  strongly  emphasi'/tnl  and  may  fie  ulili‘/tai  in  the  most
unreasonalik'  manner  for  the  purpose  of  exalting  the  ego-
consciousness.  La  Kiichefuurauld  expresses  this  in  his  cjiiaint
manner  as  folhnvs,  **l.diere  is  something  in  tlit*  misftirtunes  of
our  friends  which  is  not  ijuile  displeasing/*

I  lusird  a  patient  laitgli  alomi  when  told  of  the  Messina  e»arlh-
cjuake.  He  suftcreil  from  severe  masiirhisfic”  attacks.  (.'om-
pulsory  laughter  often  ptcssessed  this  patiriit  wlirn  he  was  in
the  presence  of  a  superior  person,  his  tearher  for  instance,  or
someone  wdui  ha«i  some  <‘laim  of  autfmrifv  tjver  him.  One
finds  in  .such  fKifiruits  a  strong  incbustion  to  dominatt*  over  or
tt^rnumt  others,  at  time's  satbstic  pli.-nfasir*;,  ttnfil  nne  disrovers
that  flu*  <auupulsion  tr?  laiiglilfW.  flu*  luU  for  power  and  the
sadism  art»  eriaietl  tnau'  the  wf*ak  point  of  the  feuding  of
inferiority,  in  order  to  i'ompfms.it?*  bu  it  f*vrom:inia,  the
<Udight  in  tlredir:inds  ami  tlu*  almo-.f  irred'.tildc  i-tuiipulsiori  to
think  of  firig  (ir  tis  t-rv  out  **  tire  *'  in  the  theatre  or  r'lmrch  seem
to  he  rfderaltle,  :i{‘cor4iing  to  < mtain  of  my  limlinjp;.  to  defects
of  the  stmsifive  Idadtier  or  eves  uvf*rsen'’itivf*  to  light,  or  at
any  rate  to  fircparalimr:  Lu'  the  comijen-sititm  of  tfu^sc  defects.
But  this  guifling  line  of  inascuhne  eruelly  h  llurafened  with
great  danger  and  actident  in  a  soeirty  wdiere  therr  exist  ethical
nnperaliv«*s,  it  v;m,  therefore,  be  tody  billowed  in  a  disguised
form.  Hsuallv  orn*  ’'■ees  deviafitois  and  rirtatifous  paths  in
folhnving  widch  the  s;uli'.fir  trait  ^u'ems  wludlv  or  ifi  part.  lost.
In  this  wav  tlm  mmisUir  sm--eerri";  in  gaining  *ai|irrior}ty  over  the
weak,  or  he  tifierafes  on  this  n#nv  line  so  skillfull v  as  to  manage
to  set  up  an  aggrrs-don  wdiiidi  enables  lum  to  dorninafe  and
torturt‘  otiifus.  In  flie  mimindsion  neuro.ses  one  friHjuerilly  finds
that  lhe?'e  patient::  liavr*  abanfltuied  their  satre;fic  ttuiding  line
and  have  turntni  to  fu’iuinef*  am!  reassuring  meastires,  which
have  the  s.arin'  compulsory  charaeter  and  are  rml  less  tippressive
for  the  mivinumienf  fhan  were  the  previous  rm  olio  mil  predis¬
positions  of  the  patient,  and  hence  are  fitted  in  the  same
manner  as  fwiiiie  rfiararfr’rislic's  to  render  obvious  the  superiority
of  the  neurtitic.  In  f!ie  major  aftatks  cd  so-cst!Ied  affective
epilepsy,  of  hysteria,  of  Irigmuina!  neuralgia,  of  rnigraiiie,  etc.,
the  masculine  lust  for  power  turns  in  ftie  direct  ion  of  the
neurotic  reacrmf.v,s  for  a  paroxysm/*  hut  the  lirtfilessness  of
the  environment  and  its  suffering  is  not  less  but  rather  greater
than  in  the  rages  and  enmity  which  were  active  ways  of  the


CRUELTY,  CONSCIENCE,  ETC.


157


neurotic.  An  inclination  for  antivivisectionism,  vegetarianism,
prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals,  charity,  often  distinguishes
these  connoisseurs  of  the  sufferings  of  others,  they  cannot  endure
to  see  a  goose  bleed,  but  clap  tneir  hands  gleemlly  when  their
opponent  leaves  the  Exchange  a  bankrupt.  Their  inclination
to  sectarianism  forms  an  inimical  antisocial  trait,  as  does  their
severe  criticism  of  tlu'  valuation  of  others  which  they  exhibit
before  they  even  form  aa  opinion  of  their  own.  Tolerance  is
unknown  to  tliem,  unless  they  cry  out  for  it  for  themselves.

if  I  sketch  hen*  traits  which  are  to  be  encountered  on  all  sides,
they  are  iievcuiludc^ss  traits  of  a  very  prevalent  neuroticism  and
signs  of  a  <l<‘eply  grounded  uncertainty.  They  are  by  no  means
inherent  in  human  natun%  but  are  rather  unsuccessful  forms  of
the  masculine^  protest  whitdi  failed  to  bring  a.ssurance  to  the  ego-
conseioiisness.  Should  failure^  re.sult  in  following  the  main
guiding  line,  neurotic  c'irruiious  ways  are  entered  upon  and  the
''outbreak*'  of  the  neurosis  or  psychosis  follows  as  a  result  of
a  change  of  form  and  accentuation  of  the  guiding  fiction.

I  must  als<i  ditaigree  with  the  theory  of  congcuiital  criminality
of  children  and  eriininals  promulgated  by  IvOinbroso  and  Ferrari,
ns  well  as  with  Stcktdhs  theory  of  the  univer.sa!  criminality  of
iieuroti<au  (Agi»rei;sionstrit‘h,  1.  <t.).  I'hey  are  nothing  but
form  ;  <it  the  aggressive  impulse  luTonut  accentuated  through
the*  fmditu*  of  inferioritv.  atui  which  mak<\s  use^  of  the  masculine
guiding  line.  I'he  t raiisfi^rrnaf ion  into  a  clearly  obvious  neurosis
follows  the  a!)aud<innu*nt  of  this  ?;traightforward  aggression.
Where’  the  fear  <if  a  <iecisi<m  Is  alr  ent,  an  early  result  of  the
security-giviiig  neurtjsis,  am!  wlu’re  there  develops  a  strong
tendency  di’prive  citliers  of  life,  honor  and  property,
criminality  is  the  result.*

In  tlie  tlev«dop«’d  neuro.sis,  on  the  other  hand,  one  finds
nsemory  tram’s  of  <’nie!tv,  criminality  as  well  as  those  of  scxualitw
fuirjiasa’fullv  c’xagg,er:if<al,  falsely  grouped  and  retained.
Through  thr  intaglnini^  of  an  a<’<a’ntuated  ('on’-aacnce  and
rxai»ig’ra!ed  feeling,  id'  guilt,  the  masculine  protest  is  diverted
friim*'t!H’  straight  pnih  of  aggre.ssitui  and  lK*c*orn<ss‘  inclined
towards  routes  ol  sadtheartc'diiess.  It  is  only  in  the  affect  wliich
oca  asionallv  <  ‘)mes  tii*  the  ,*;urfare,  in  the  analysis  of  the  seizures,
in  the  traits  of  cliaracic’r  which  become  rnanife.st  now  and  then
as  is  the  c;e;f*  frerjiiently  at  tlie  onset  of  a  p.sychosis  and  the
nature  of  the  fuia!  of  "tht*  netirotic  subterfuges  and  traits  of
characfc’r  wlijeh  have  hvvmtH*  divertc’d  from  tlu^  straight  course,
in  t!u'  fact  that  a  tvraimv  is  «‘rec'ted  in  :’.pit<’  <»f  a!!  defeats,  in  the
torture  id  idius''-:  tlirmigli  srlf- torture,  and  fiuallv  in  the’  inter¬
mixture  ef  t-merging  original  and  elirect  traits  of

aggressiiui,  that  ofu*  diseansu's  tfie  fact  that  the*  old  over-dense

’  "  Invm  Wrih  siti  Airh.  f.  Kriniinul' |«ych.,

iiHf,  if.  m


THE  NKUROTK^  CONSl'lTUTION


158

goal  still  exists  and  that  a  change  in  ^the  form  of  the  fiction  ha
only  diverted  the  direction  of  tlie  original  tendency  into  other
often  apparently  opposite  channels.

Thus  it  happens  that  following  a  decidedly  aggressive  period
the  greedy*  brutal  or  violeiit  traits  of  the  psychopath,  ii
anticipation  of  a  defeat  or  after  such  has  a<*ttia!ly  l^eei
experienced,  may  lie*  made  to  approadi  more  closely  or  even  toe
eagerly  general  moral  ideals,  through  the  construction  of  i
fictitious  factor,  **  conscience/*  in  the  same  manner  as  the  patt
of  egocentric  evil  ilesire  was  entercni  upon  froiii  a  feeling  0
inferiority.  **llien  I  am  destim'd  to  he  bad/*  in  this  and
similar  ways  the  tictitious  life-plan  of  many  rieiindics  is  uncore
sciously  forinetl,  until  a  gtaiu*e  into  the  aoyss  tears  the  giddj
subject  from  !us  perilous  jiosition  and  forces  hiin  to  1

stronger  security  tkin  is  ac.iiiallv  rmeded.  C'oriscifUice  devidop^
out  of  the  simpler  forms  of  prevision  and  rvahiation  under
the  pressure  of  the  craving  for  security.  Is  rndenved  with  the
attrimites  of  power  am!  raised  to  a  divinity,  so  that  the  individiial
may  construed  his  ideal  wiilumi  obrection  frmn  any  side,  so  that
he  may  be  able  better  ta  <irient  himself  in  the  unc‘rrtaiiity  of
events  and  have  his  choice  in  attacks  and  inellun!-;  rd  combat  to
which  his  will  to  jauver  guhles  him.

But  the  neurotic  brings  afunit  a  tion  of  hi :  traits  of

character  rvc'^n  the  sole  piirpost*  of  being  enabled  to  iruliate
the  struggle  to  betted  advanlagic  Such  i*.  the  «Mse  w'hen  he
ascribes  to  the  sexual  partner  of  whom  he  %tantl;-;  in  fear,  traits
of  an  egotistua  tTuel  and  deeeptive  nature.  He  then  likely
to  hunt  out  and  exaggerate  from  his  m<uiiorii*s  ^iful  emotions,
those  wfiieh  confirm  ms  own  t'haracter  as  affeilionattx  mild  and
open.  For  the  purptKe  of  pniving  thr^a*  t'haraclerislies,  he  will
Often  act  as  though  his  virlii«*s  Inul  the  reality  of  innate  and  in-
destrurill)le  t|ua!ities .

One  important  cpie-dion  mmd  sHll  be  touched  upom  Nearly
all  of  our  rieundir  paficuits  rtnne  to  us  in  the  **  sladium  of  virtue,*'
after  having  exjtenencfa!  a  deffstl,  and  we  must  therefore  expect
to  discover  tlonr  masculine  protest  li-is  in  direct  traits  of
character  am!  emotiona!  predispositions  than  in  neurotic
circuitous  ways,  arrenfiiated  smairitv  devit'es.  which  may  be
detected  only  tvilh  difliridtv  through  the  analvsis  of  their  clreains
and  symptoms.  One  will  discover  that  the  infantile,  fietive
guiding  line  has  only  lieroriie  nuire  effective,  and  in  so  far  as
it  concerns  the  castes  just  spoken  of,  that  tlirir  nnirolic  syniptcMiis
lead  to  a  more  intense  dt^gradation  id  others  than  did  their
original  rriielty  and  desire  U>  torturt'.  For  all  tfiese  guiding
lines  are  tensely  stretrlied  between  the  insi'riirity  of  the  coii-
stitutiomillv  or  siilifeclively  defective  iridividua!  amt  his  iinatlaiii-
able  egteideal  Hnwever  far  bai'k  into  rliilcihocut  sadiifE,
perversions  of  various  sorts,  sexiialdibido,  in  slicirl  the  roasculim^


CRUELTY,  CONSCIENCE,  ETC.


159


protest  may  extend,  they  are  always  constructed  according  to  a
life-plan  and  reveal  their  dependence  thereon.  The  liberation
of  the  sadism  from  the  neurotic  predisposition,  and  in  the  sense
of  Freud,  from  the  unconscious  and  from  repression,  is  to  be
likened  to  a  carrying  back  of  the  neurosis  to  an  earlier  stadium,
to  a  time  before  the  defeat.  Freud's  scientific  work,  important
and  full  of  results  as  it  was  for  the  understanding  of  the
neurosis,  did  not  give  a  correct  picture  of  the  neurotic  psyche.
The  neurotic  predispositions  of  heightened  affectivity,  the
exaggerated  aggressiveness,  the  hypersensibility,  and  the  direct,
coni[{Hmsatory  charactt^r-peculiarities  require  a  liberation  from
their  overttuise  state  ;  as  do  also  the  inclinations  to  neurotic
perversions  which  ar<'  oftem  constructed  at  a  very  early  age,  and
whicdi  are  to  come  to  the  aid  of  the  general  fear  of  decisions
through  a  camjirornise  formation.  For  this  reason  the  effort
should  be  mmh  to  conquer  this  feeling  of  inferiority  and  the
teiuhmcy  to  disparage  which  results  therefrom,  these  two
important  poles  of  ewery  neurotic  state,  by  means  of  insight  and
contemplation  on  th<^  part  of  tlie  patient,  for  they  lilce  their
si'Xiial  analogi<\s  (sadism,  masochism,  fetichisrn,  homosexuality,
incest“"phantasies,  apparent  heighbming  or  weakening  of  tne
sexual  imjmlsa^),  already  firm  tne  foundation  of  the  neurosis.


('ilAf^TKR  Vi


Till*:  ANTH1IESIS  AHi'iVK-BENF.AMI,  CHOICK  OV  \  1‘UClFESSICiK,
SOMNAMBI'LISM,  ANI'IIIIKSIS  IN  'UiUl'Cair.  ia.KVAl*iaN  OF
TIIK  FKESONAi.ri  V  TIIFOlKai  IHK  DISIMRAi'iKMFNT  OF
tUllHRS,  jEA!..OrSV,  NFl^HOTU*  AO  XII.IARIFS.  AOTIitll.
ITATiVIE  THIXKiN^,  IN  AN  11  rilESKS  AN|i  IIIK  NIASiAnJNK  IW)-
TEST,  DILATORY  Art!lTT»K  AND  MAHIOAtO'L  rilK  TENDENCY
rCWARD  AS  A  SVMIIDI.  OF  LIFE,  COMPtfI,SlDN  til  NIASTlfR-
BATiON.  TIIK  MKERiUTl*  SI'KIVTNi;  FOR  KNt nVLEDi;E

The  Ahstractioii  uf  thf'  '*  ahovr4irnr;itli/*  tihviciitsly

plays  an  extrvnivly  rule  in  tlie  rivi!i/.atiun  uf  nuiiikifKi,

ami  is  probably  ciUOirilct!  with  the  bt^giimiiig  oi  the  upright
carriage  luniian  laniikpi.  A-:  <‘verv  eliild  rrprals  this  priu  ess  In
the  omrst*  of  his  tieveii^iouriil  uhcm  he  .oises  Itisiii  the  Hour  and
as  training  also  ftsirhes  him  a  iUsgii-4  tor  rliiiging  tr^  the  fhior
and  rreejdrig  it  iVoiii  hygimie  reasun\,  fur  being  ’Tluwid*  ;
this  higliin-  -iiev^dupnnnn  In  ehihihuud  n«a%’  euntrilnste  nut  ;i  little
to  the  teridem^y  to  valm*  ‘bifd*  inure  higidv  ;  a  eertaiii  is

toln*foniui  in  tiuM'undml  id  ?ana!l  i'luliir<ni  who  tlirtov  themselves
on  tlu‘  floor  angrily  am!  thus  try  tii  make  theinscdves  dirty  in
ordiT  til  attrail  tlie  .iltentiim  id  tlieir  parents,  but  briray  thereby
that  the*  idea  id  tieiny^-  «hjwn  *’  as  a  tnliun  uf  what  h>  hnlddilerL
lirly,  sinful,  is  «ieveliijiini;  in  tln*ne  In  tins  jrsve!ii«^  geNlure  of
small  (diildreii  may  alst*  la*  fietret«*d  the  imuiel  tor  strongly
develojHsI  latcT  iimiriTie  traits.

Furth<‘r  notioii-N  may  be*  gathertal  frmn  the  impri-'^siiins  of
heaviidy  htHhes,  a;  may  be  sr^un  Innn  a  {e,Vi'hidi»|*ieal  iinder-
standirig  of  tlm  vsriims  rellgiims  and  tsf  iavi!i/.ati*m.  The
abijrigina!  r;u'r-g  like  the  ehih!.  regardet!  the  sun.  the  tiay,  joy,
<devatii»!L  bednu  **  up/*  ;is  re‘Sf*ndding  v,ivh  ottuT  ami  frequently
associated  *'  lieing  iiinvu  wlt!i  sin,  rleath,  dirt,  sic'kness  and
night.

Idle  antit!i«*-i^  id  **  urr-diovn  i-:  rnT  less  flistiiiel  than  in
aneient  reHuion%.;,  From  a  Wiirk  l»v  !\.  lln  i^reiiss  on  **  Die
Feiic*rgbtter  a!-.*  Ausgane/sjmnkt  7um  VerslJitidriiss  der
Mexiisiniscdieii  Relifjoii/*  Mitteiluniouj  der  AntlirojHdogiselien
Ciesellsehaft  in  Wieti,  D|o;'D  we  are  able  to  infer  the  ileeply
molts!  eharaider  td  this  antithesis  and  tin*  .eaundaf ivm  of  **  up-
down/'  The  tirr^  Igid  is  also  the  god  td  the  dead  who  live  with
him  at  the  {da*'r  of  deseimt.

Dvertiirnisi  ve’-seis,  people  ^vho  fell,  were  regarded  as

ttvi


ANTIlllETlCAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


i6i

presentations  of  “  iipHk^wns/’  that  is  to  say  of  falling  into  the
realm  oi  the  dcud,  aiui  thuiiglits  of  preservation  and  destructive
activities  \xvvc  given  this  form  of  spatial  antithesis.*

Further,  sensations  and  impressions  from  childhood  tend  to
give  form  to  the  spatial  notion  of  **  up-down  **  and  to  define
the  contrast  men^  siiarply.  Failing,  falling  down,  is  painful,
blamabie,  dishoimrahle,  at  times,  punishable.  Not  rarely  it  is
the  rt‘;  ult  of  inattc‘ntieu,  laek  of  foresight,  and  the  ehikl  may
therefore  assiiiut*  thesc^  sensory  traces  as  an  admonition,  so  that
being  **cIown"  may  he  f<‘lt  as  a  foradul  expression  for  **  fallen/*
for  inattention,  for  unskillfulness,  for  dehait,  not  without  releasing
or  at  least  stimulating  t!ie  prote.st  which  is  directed  against  the
approaching  keeling  id  inku'iority.  In  this  category  oi  **  down-
up,**  one  of  whicli  c.iniud  be  thought  of  without  the  other,  is
further  found  intiuiuiiigled  trains  of  thought  (in  both  neurotics
and  normal  persons),  whieh  c‘xpress  the  antitnese\s  of  conquest
and  didv.ii,  trimupli  and  ink-riurity.  In  individual  <*ase‘s,  upon
analysis,  niemciry  t rates  tunerge  of  ritliug,  swimming,  Hying,
nunmtaiii  elimlnng,  climliing  up  aiul  of  climbing  staircases,  thcs
antitln‘st*s  of  wldeh  rt'veal  thonnadvtss  as  carrying  a  rider,  incubus,
sinking  in  wattu',  falling  <Unvn,  tumbling  (town,  a  clu*ck  in  an
upwani  or  ibiward  nHJvoment.  'I'ht*  nmre  abstract  and  figurative
tilt*  nieiiitiry  is*  in  tirtmms,  in  hallucinations,  in  separate  muirotic
synijiftmis,  tlie  imua*  piU<a*ptible  are  the  transitions  wliich  show  a
st‘xiial  iat*ttu'.  In  this  t mmectitin  tiu‘  maseulint*  principle  is  only
rf*pri‘,seutt.‘ti  by  tin*  feeling  grt»att*r  ptover,  as  iKung  **  up/"
and  tiu*  kuniiam*  by  tin*  letding  of  being  tlown/*  It  is  ea.sy
to  svv  tliat  ..eufliinr»  and  its  results  suppt.n1  this  valuation.

In  the  ganirs  of  tdiiklrm  whieli  are  preparatory  for  the  conflicts
of  lift*  (Karl  Gishv;)  this  striving  **  upwartis*’  i*:  rc'gularly  found.
Also  in  the  iluHight.s  tjf  chiklreii  ctnu’erning  a  vocation.  In  the
pnigress  t)f  tin*  psycdur  tieveloprnent  reality  is  M*vn  wairking  as
a  brak<\  stj  that  the*  abstraetitm  ’*  upws'irds  **  has  a  tmideney  to
assunit*  a  t'onc'reto  form  in  ..iunts  V(*ry  aUrn  in  this  eonnertion
<%'iution  in  tin*  kirm  tif  fear  td  being  in  elevattal  positions  is  at
wtirk  am!  eh:ingc*s  tlie  wish  to  be  a  rtad  maker  into  that  of  lieing
a  master  builtier,  make.s*  of  tin*  aviattir  a  ImikhT  of  Hying
machines,  changes  flit*  wi:-;h  of  the  little*  girl  to  Im  like*  lier  father
into  the*  mort*  attainable  wish  tif  In'ing  able  to  command  like  her
mother.

I'lie  striving  tor  ras'urity  and  the  masculine  protest  make  the
grtsitesf  iKissilile  if,r  cd  the  resulting  guiding  limss  of  the  **  will
to  lit*  t]p/‘  Under  tl'ie  lo'c^'isiirf*  (»f  tin*  tidion  the  neurotic  is
soiiiefimes  forcetl  to  ilecisjtins,  to  t*i}nfli<1  and  strikg  to  passionate
hasfi\  Moiiictime::  to  eauti<ius,  hesitating,  doubting,  bediavior.
ll'His  he  is  |i!a.eeci  in  a  position  to  makt*  an  estimate  of  his  worth  in

^  I  aii»  rifir  i-.illy  if3t|rlifinl  Ui  Praf.  fU'  C  OgjirislirUfi  for  nn|.H»'rt;oit
hmtifrtt’jil  in-a.!!  f*'.f  tny  r!:


i62


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTlTUTiiM


life  and  that  through  instances  which  escape  the  notice  of  others.
He  must  scent  out,  hold  fast,  exaggerate  i>r  arrange  ^situations
which  seem  to  us  of  very  little  value.  Let  us  follow  this  conduct
in  detail.

A  girl,  25  years  old,  came  to  us  with  corn{daints  of  frequent
headache,  emotional  attacks,  disinclination  lor  life  and  work.
Traces  of  rickets  were  perceptible.  I'he  history  of  childhood
revealed  an  extreme  feeling  ot  inferiority  which  was  kept  at  a
strained  tension  iK'‘cause  of  the  mother‘s  preference^  for  a
younger  brother  and  because  of  his  intellectual  superiority.  The
most  cherished  wish  of  tliis  patient  liati  always  betui  to  lie  big,
very  wise,  and  a  man.  She  took  the  pre|mralory  altitudes  for
the  attainment  of  this  masculim*  eg<.^ 'eonsciousness  as  far  as  was
pos.^^ible  from  her  fatluT.  Wlum  this  was  not  jiossihk*  tor  her,
a  small,  stupid  girl,  she  had  seennas!  the  imaginary  ego-
consciousness  through  emotiiinal  expedi«*nts  of  rage  amt  ang€*r
against  her  relatives  and  <\spe<’ialiv  In  td»stinacv  linvartt  per
mother,  in  the  .s'iniidatiun  of  stupitlity,  (if  awkwarttness  and  sick*
ness,  and  finally  in  tlu^  arrangement  tif  i.r/ines!:.  I  omit  bore  the
lines  constructed  !»y  her  of  manliness,  of  malit'e,  of  t»bslinary,
and  refrain  also  from  analv'/ing  her  overwc*rning  ambition,  her
inclination  to  lying  and  ostentation,  and  will  cmittmt  myself  with
showing  how  al!  these  habits  are  comluned  in  the  impu!*.r  to  he
**up'’  and  serve  the  temirnov  to  dr|ireciale  tilhers.  l**or  this
purpose  I  will  refer  to  (me  of  her  drtvams.  which  contains  a
modest  referenee  to  tlu^  p-yychc»higy  oi  Siunnarnbulism .  The
dream  is  as  follows  :

/  hecanu^  a  slccpmil/^'io'  iuu!  ilintlh'd  an  fo  l/i*'  liriid

everybody

The  patient  had  heard  sleepwalkers  spoken  of  a  few  days
previous  to  this  dream.  In  her  attempt  at  explanation  of  this
dream  a  series  of  ambiii<ms  thoughts  emerged  mddeh  fakes  the
form  among  others  <if  a  sexual  picture  of  thnuinafion  over  her
future  huslcincl,  She  remembered  dreams  earlier  limes  which
represented  her  ns  riiling  on  a  man,  on  a  Inu'sed  I  have  never
treated  a  real  sleeqnvalker,  but  one  finds  this  rieurot.ir  svrnptoin
sometimes  indi<%ifed  in  onsets,  ft  is  matiife?:fetl  as  is  the  clrrain
of  living,  of  climbing  stairs,  etc,,  as  a  rlynamh  ex|mes',:ion  of  the

will  to  be  up  ’*  in  the  sense  of  the  manly  aggression.,  fn  a
patient  who  showed  strong  masoehisfic  traits,  I  once  tliscfivrreci
strenuous  attempts  to  renrh  the  efdlin|.^  of  the  rcioin  bv  piitfiiig
his  legs  out  on  the  wall  during  the  night,.  The  interprefatiofi
showe<!  that  the  patient  rf'seued  fiimsetf  frmn  a  real  f^r  an
imagined  situation  which  was  regarded  as  feminine  by  fiiriiiiig

^  Winwm  ridifi:*  eri  »  firtn  4®  eir

I  wiiih  to  full  iittofilion  tis  finr-o.  f*«rrf,  nfifl  In

ti^Il  of  th«  irtHiiy  prints  wlsirli  AI*’X4fi4rr‘si  rtUinv  rm  Ari’itoll#


ANTrrtlETICAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


163


arouiul  to  the  luascuiine  protest  and  at  the  same  time  gave
expression  to  this  symbolic  modus  dkendi  through  his  striving

upwards.

Hie  second  ^thought  of  the  dream,  “  1  climbed  on  to  the  heads
of  t'vcTyhody,  ’  nw'eals  the  same  meaning.  The  patient  makes
list*  of  a  ftifm  of  speech  to  express  that  she  is  superior  to .
all  otiicrs.  Her  striving  upwards  is  only  to  be  understood
dialectic'aily  in  an  antithesis,  for  the  tnoughts  of  insecure
neurotics  generally  move  in  strongly  antithetical  directions,  in
an  **  tntlier-air/'  in  an  alistractiou  understood  according  to  the
scluuiK*  of  ihv  oppositt*s,  masculine-feminine.  The  innumerable
iiiiddlr  ways  aie  md  t'lucsen  luTause  the  two  neurotic  poles,  the
feeding  of  iiileriurit: v  on  tht^  one  liand  and  the  overtense  ego-
coiiM*ititisness  tm  the  other  only  permit  the  antithetical  values  to
rt^acdi  con  scions  ness/*

I  !if*  train  id  tdiougiil.  ol  this  drtvim  permits  us  to  divine  the
rieiirotir  pnalisposit ions  of  the  patient.  In  reality  her  masculine
profe-d,  her  iiudination  to^ belittle  others,  her  ambition,  her
.sensitiveness,  ileHance,  unyicdilingness,  obstinacy,  is  sufficiently
reuuirkahle.  Tlu^  psychic  significance  of  her  headache  is
revealed  in  this  <tr<*am.  Previous  analysis  showed  in  fact  that
the  Kyfn|d<vm  always  ma<!i*  its  appearance  when  there  was  a
feeding  of  tlefeat,  of  belittleiucmt,  of  emasculation—to  speak  in
till’  word*;  of  the  driMin,  when  one  mounted  her  head.”  In  the
plia  :rs  cif  tlir  iuMdai  he,  tliercfon*,  through  the  construction  of
tlir  ie  i^xpedients  id  pain  ”  with  consequent  hallucinations  of
pain  sfii-  strovi"  to  dmninalt*  all  persons,  e.specially  her  mother,
and  was  able  to  erihama*  fier  ego»consdousness  tnereby  in  the
same  manner  as  she  was  able  to  do  it  through  defiance,  la?:iness,
aiiil  idistinai  v,  only  to  a  groater  degree,  in  short,  had  thus
mounlrtf  cm  the  heads  of  others.

Ill  cliildren  the  tcmdcmi’y  to  bt*  up  is  unmistakable  and  coincides
with  the  wish  to  be  l>ig.  fhey  wish  to  be  lifted  up  and  like  to
rdimb  cm  sofas,  tables,  boxevs,  and  usually  connect  with  this
striving  the  idea  of  showdne  themselves  unconquerably
courageous,  matily.  How  closelv  bordering  on  this  is  the;
tendericv  to  depreciate  others  is  .shown  hy  their  ioy  when  they
siicretNi  ill  being  *iiig'ger”  than  grown  people.  The  heightening
of  the  aggressive  tenclenry  is  manifested  in  children  who  show
fietirotir*  Wraploms  at  an  early  age  hy  this  exhibition.  Thus  it
“’iifiirtifiies  liappens  thait  children  in  thc^  consulting  room  of  the


III.*  '*  Mr  |sV|.r|  f!:}.;

|/  .tr|  ir-l  .'ftr  il.  r.f  tlllK  Iw

III  *irf  **  f.

114.  njd  iifjil  iitiOr:?  u*  stti4y,  “TficynMil

Sii4l.i|irt.r.f%  tV'Oty  uf  ihfiJC'lit  whic’h


triju'inmly  hf^f^nnirujH  in  philimaphy  hri.v«'

:irififhrtu*kl  nunlt*  (4  thinldnrt  we  havc^  already


'  fUwliinhtt*  dor  Kahlprinr.ipiyn
arid  philoH.  Rritilc.
nw)t  of  *  luitiUioBiH  '
only  ahm>hiU*H.


tlic


1 64


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSIMTUIION


physician  constantly  climb  on  t:ibk‘s  nnd  benches  anil  lliiis  reveal
their  contempt.

The  danger  of  falling,  of  accidents  in  striving  upwartls  as  well
as  the  customary  training  to  cowardict*,  turce  the*  inaitirity  of
children  to  a  change  of  form  of  the  guiding  line,  or  Im  lunirotiCi
circuitous  ways,  wiuTeiw  the  fear  of  clevatial  jiositioiis  and
heights  opposes  itself  as  an  admonition  uMially  in  a  syiiibtdiral
form  to  umk^rtakings  and  ventures  cd"  all  sorts,  and  thus  iHaaiiiies
the  foundation  of  a  prc‘tlispusition  whiiE  has  the*  ap|i«siraiic:e  of
a  neurotic  check  on  aggrt‘ssit>n.  At  times  the  desire  to  be  up
is  transposed  for  the  most  part  to  a  Icfidency  to  ib^preciate
others.  The  tendency  of  those  stihering  from  ilrnumfia  pr:eeax
to  change  the  furniture  stamls  regularlv  m  stich  close  conneciion
with  the  depreciatimi  of  Itu^  surroundings  that  the  siispirion  is
justified,  that  tliis  is  one  of  the  tictitiou-;.  abstract,  cirruitcius
rvays  !>y  whicli  the  psychotic  <'nhanr«‘s  his  ego-cttnscioiisfi€*ss.
In  a  transft*rret!  form  this  placing  of  ofln-rs  in  an  inferior
position  i.s  expn‘ssed  in  the  tendency  to  caliiinnvs  espet'ially,
however,  in  neurotic  jealousy  and  drliiitHn  uf  jraiiHiny,  I
discovered  further  an  iutiu'csflng  sort  t»f  dcriigathin  in  nervous
subjects  in  their  ('are,  tiodr  s.nxious  bcliavnsr,  in  their  fears  for
the  fate  of  other  peopks  lliev  act  as  if  other*'*  wme  iiic.ipahle
of  caring  for  tlieneudve::  without  linnr  help.  Thev  air*  crot  laiitly
giving  advic'e,  wisli  to  do  ('verything^  t}trne.elves,  are  always
hading  new  dangers  and  are  mwau'  <aiiih-nted  until  olhm's'  eunfidr
themselves  entirely  to  tlieir  care.  Neurotic  parents  are  thus  the
eaust'  of  much  liann,  and  In  !in*e  .ua!  jn.uriav/r  mm  li  friction  is
catjsed  in  this  maniuT.  (hu^  of  inv  patiimt^,  wln^  was  ram  over
twice*  in  his  ibiidlKHid,  associ.ited  hi’':  feehnr^cd  iriiureti  pf^r^uinality
with  this  rmmuirv  and  whiUJevtu*  he  tiiC'iMsl  the  street  with
another  person  he  !eti  that  por^on  au'^doindy  over  by  the  arm  as
though  without  his  Indp  hi-;  <■  ompanicc!  cicild  not  have  cTcissed.
Many  pi'rsams  arc*  filled  with  fear'-  when  llohr  reialivt**;  travel
by  rail,  go  sw'irnniing  or  caiioidnia  i{tvv  iheir  nurstss  lainsfant
instructions  and  continue  their  ttuubmev  to  ticpifua.itimi  in
e*jcaggcrated  critiidsms  and  enrrodiotis.  In  ^  liools  and  in  ofli'(*es
this  nagging  digircciation  i*;  a! wavs  foiitu!  in  fienrofic’  teachers
and  superiors.  In  the  practical  ttf  psvchntherapv  if  i-:  one  of  the
main  rct|tiir(uii«*nts  to  ahwiafe  predisperdtions  tin-,  '■■•or!,  even
when  the  pafieiit  |?rovoke'S  ihefu.  lid.  reipiirofncnf  often
amounts  to  a  rcniinriation  of  aufhurit%u  Everv  one  wlio  has
heroine  acc|ii:iinfed  \vifh  tfo*  hypersen-'-'afivenes'S  id  netirofir
subifcts  knows  with  what  vli^dif  they  fee!  thrw-  t*lvr":  to  lie

undervalued.  Om*  of  mv  patients  who  ruffore«!  friuti  hv'''’.tero*
epilepsy  ami  always  ('onduefed  htnt^adf  as  if  he  wi'dicnl  to  .place
himself  in  an  erilirelv  ^'iilK^rdinafe  position  fell  on  cuie  oc-casion
unconscious  h<di.ire*  my  door.  !ri  such  *h-irclf!«’?if*d*  thr*  ff*nr!.rnry


ANllllI'ETlCAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


165

to  uiuiervaluatian  is  clearly  recognizable.  While  still  in  a
contused  coiKiition  he  addressed  me  as  Teacher,’*  and
staniiiuTed  that  he  would  bring  a  note.  After  the  attack  he  told
me  tluit  he  had  ciuuo  unwillingly  on  that  occasion.  The  analysis
slioweil  that  he  hatl  come  to  regard  me  as  a  teacher  in  order
to  idjfain  tlu'  distance  necessary  tor  the  conflict,  in  order  to  be
able  to  act  as  though  he  were  obliged  to  come  to  the  school
and  to  ludng  a  written  excuse  for  his  absence.  After  he  had
placctl  himself  as  far  as  his  hidings  were  concerned  in  this
.situatiiin  of  inferiority  he  could  allow  the  compensatory
i*xpcalieiits  derived  ther^dVom  to  come  into  play  in  order  to  belittle
me.

i\  c,ir!  20  Vi'ars  oltl  suffered  from  the  compulsory  idea  that
she  i’oiild  lud  riile  in  a  street»car  because  when  she  got  in  the
tlimight  always  emerged  that  a  man  might  get  out  at  the  same
fimt*  aiul  fall  umler  the  w!u*els.  Analysis  showed  that  this
coiii[mLsiiry  neurosis  repres<.aded  the  masculine  protest  of  the
patient  in  ihe  tigurt^  of  Innug  ”  ahovt‘  *’  corresponding  with  which
till*  man  must  hv  uiuha*/'  dt‘prived  of  value,  and  should  bear
the*  injuries  which  lu*  imposes  on  women.  In  addition  the
f'Ka):gt*ratt‘d  .striving  ftu'  sei'urity  constructc<l  the  protection  of
anxiety  wdiicli  was  intiuided  to  satisfy  further  the  fear  of  the
make  h*vtni  llnai  when  her  superiority  wuis  assured  she  could
not  brings  linseif  to  dts  ide  tm  marriage,  for  her  future  husband
would  havt'  a  hard  time  witli  licr  from  this  point  of  view  one
is  able  to  mitba*. stand  the  tjften  inetuapreliensildc  striving  of  many
neuiidii'  girls  and  women  to  «*xac(  from  their  partners  the
greatest  sacrifu  ami  put  them  to  the  most  severe  tests,  in  so
far  as  thvy  liopt*  ft»  attain  thereby  an  <uihancement  of  their  ego-
eunsi  iomaiess  to  point  of  an  apiiearanee  of  manliness.

‘rhinkiug  in  crude  antitliesc's  is  tlnwfore  in  itself  a  sign  of
um  ertaiiitv  and  adheres  to  tin*  sole  genuine  antithesis,  that
licdwecm  male  and  (tanale.  In  this  a  judgment  of  worthy  is
already  givcii,  whiidi  infuses  itsedf  unnoticed  in  every  “antithesis'*
{lucdl^Hnsiusi*  this  antithesis  is  always  made  in  the  figure  of  a
disscHiion  (d  thc^  luninafihrodit ic  form  into  a  mah^  and  female
half.  Idato  has.  porhaps  c*x[>ress(Hl  this  idea  most  purely.  And
luifimn  pen*eption  wa*»  tuiabk*  until  the  time  of  Kant  to
di-.eiifartgk^  itself  from  this  self-made  fiction.  But  the
mniroticailv  dispo5;ed  cdiild  adhews  to  the  oppositeness  of  the
sf^xes  and  to  the  higher  valuation  of  the  male  principle  therewith
eoimecfed  in  order' to  ceasape  from  imccTtainly  and  in  order  to
tiini  a  ipudini'-'  line*  for  Ife-*  idea  of  egoi.stic  worth.  Thus  it
happens  that  tid'''  funding  fiction  contains  a  m«)nly  aspect,  and
tliat  in  ah  tltf‘  experiences  ami  strivings  of  neurotic  individuals
the  fiim'miliiie  prolied  is  revealed  as  the  ordering  principle  and
motive  forrr.  'file  antifliesis  of  the  sexe.s  is  admirably  expressed
ill  the  aliiive  idvcm  symbol  of  the  .spatial  opposites  of  “up-down.  *


id6  THE  NEUROTIC'  OONSTiTUTU^N

And  thus  it  becomes  comprehensible  that  in  t^^ery  one  of  oiir
psychological  analyses  this  <‘xpression  of  a  sharji  antithetical
schema  must  somelHiw  or  other  come  u»  ligiit.  it  is  stil!  an  open
question  whctiier  rcenforcements  of  antitiu'sis  have  l.ieen

acquired  from  the  events  of  earlv  *uu!  the  rcvNiiltifig

impressions,  from  tiu*  ul^sc  rvations  tif  si'xual  relations  in  human
beings  and  animals,  or  whetluT  the  etinscitui<nes>  oi  the  higher
position  of  the  male  iuis  been  tlxtHi  by  the  norma!  sityalioiis  of
sexual  relations.

The  **  will  to  he'  ahtivr  '*  of  the*  nemaetic  wmmm  is  produced
by  her  manly  guuiing  idem  and  r<*pn‘sents  an  attempt  Co  ielentify
herself  with  the  man,  llu'  importuruty  amt  righiity  with  which
this  takes  place  even  in  ntmix^tic,  circtiittnis  waivs  lestitirs  to  the
original  uncertainty  and  ftvir  of  bchiig  **  beUnv,**  iiiidrrvalyed,
female.  Thus  the  transcendental  egtHStie  itiea  attains  its
powerful  dominaney  bc'eause  it  promises  eiimpriisatioii,  the
overcoming  of  the  bvlirig  id'  inferitnity.  in  tin*  tipposifi'  ilirretion.
Every  gesture  then  says,  !  will  he  above,  1  will  hr  a  man
because  I  am  afraid  as  a  woman  of  being  opprf^ssed  and
misused/'  Amhitiim  and  envy  arc*  herel)y  strengtheoseil  and  an
immmally  lively  fnistnist  is  aw.ikeuis!  against  every  ptvaabiHly  of
helittlernent.  \Vlo*re  thrre  is  trad  midm'v. dilation,  |nnvf‘vrr,  the
masculint'  prides!  Ihc-hes  iortfi  .md  Irad'-.  from  sT-dit  afui  often
from  no  cause  to  tlu*  well  krunvn,  tmple;e.ant  frietions  td  the
neurotic  individual  with  his  fUivijauunent,  in  wldcli  the  principle
weapons  of  attack  uses!  to  eiintinn  the  h^^ding  of  pf»wer  are
disputatiuusne-s-*,  !i»ve*  for  justicfu  <ihstinatr  adheienc'r  to  i»pinion
and  trust  in  pcuudration.  And  in  this  tsmnrtlion  the  tendency
to  lotik  lume'ath  will  never  (jc  alrsrnt,  rsjieciaily  in  times
of  uncawtainty,  the  acute  pi'ri'ejditm  affftmts,  negirtds,  imdtw*
valuations,  and  further  tlian  this  arrangements  nf  depression,
anxiety,  remorse,  heling  uf  guilt  and  pangs  of  conscimire.
Stronger  memsures  for  setiirify  are  afipHod  and  new  iirurofie
symptoms  and  drwiations  are  <'om;f nuded,  fhr*  nmirofir  frails  of
characifT  become  more*  tieepiv  ‘'.rmted  am!  imwr  abstract  and
the  fullv  clevtdopexi  picture  of  the  neiirtrsis  arises/  l*hiis  the
*  Wliilt*  urif}i5*f  il‘$«  I  ai-ir:»vr*rra  m  Affo-U  IU-r.frr*H  ifs-er.O

FiVJU'rifjHfUt .»?•  #  \rr!}»-f-?,  rH .'.fia'-! ■  nf  0?,-  H'C?'  ar^vrjC^'4  e*  fiir

filrtvi*'*.?  hi  Itr  ;a*ovr<  ttrl?  1»  .'tiim  I

fo  r  #  irir  *Aif!  Onvi

«*f  .'til  wi*  ihn  tve-

>4t4Wid|M!i!it.  all  Um  TMiwrrfiil  .4  f-40;t*r,  ihi*'  of  inft'fusfdy

of  iltf‘  iiloiii''  with  lh»’  rotfi|-.*-rr4ot»-»ry  os-vu-iiltfi*''  Uls*-  ^s’*'**** Of '^0400

of  if  ill*-  Will  in  ih*"  ft*r  04tf^^ttlf^

«% h»U4  ,  f|ir  » 'US.S4rf40-<i  4i-,ofsikr!»4'  lo  lh*«  r  sir'  t*l

thn’44f.O0Jitt!f  i|f'‘fr:C.  ,  Ulir  forlifoi  r,f  -nr- If  ■f«4iir- ri«'|i  ^

arid  rttOilUflMorf  44  4  r- vr-n-frf-s}  •soOilHliUo?!  of  f.ltf  nf  IliO

Btafo,  Till-  IfOII  rsf  :t  ffW»||i  Iklisl  0»r  r 4 tr'if  rsf  titr'  frillllt.

of  a  eoirtt-nUfio  iir.iU-nt,,  mi»|  wHli  th%-^  fr|w*'.a*ifl

arr»i.Of|<*nN‘til  <»f  101  ouif-fto^riiO’d  *i.ll  of  whirh  ri  ¥#-rv

and  ob'vjfMiii.  it  4!*‘»irri|Jtiori  of  ihr  or-urofir  rtohiorfio.fr  who'li  miuiolrt  oii*-  of
dfienptmm  ^rii!  whirft  rruiMrrrt  mi  ftirlh^r  r!t4roiali*»ri.


ANllTilETICAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


167

revolt  lor  iiitaining  a  heightened  ego-consciousness  is  fairly
contrived,  the  introduction  thereof  is  formed  by  the  disease  itself
and  by  tlu^  prciiispositions  to  disease  which  in  some  way  or
other  arc  made  use  of  as  means  for  attaining  power  in  the
environment.

A  patient,  2i  years  old,  came  luuler  treatment  because  of
extreme  dcpre.ssion,  loss  of  sleep  and  compulsory  thoughts.  It
was  asccTtaiiical  that  sht‘  had  always  had  neurotic  traits  of
character.  The  c-ompuistiry  neurosis  broke  out  as  her  relations
with  a  man  whom  s!u*  wanted  to  marry  became  serious.  The
typical  pathogenic  situation  brings  the  neurotic  to  light,

and  while  the  patient  was  making  iier  preparations  for  marriage,
and  ditl  imt  hesitate  with  the  aliirmative  answer,  she  arranged
for  the  iieurttsis  and  exmdueted  lierself  as  if  she  did  not  wish  to
marry.  In  all  these  very  numerous  cases  the  next  step  is  a
condition  whl(‘h  th«‘rtdore  takes  the  form,  If  I  were  well,  if
1  should  tivertxmu*  my  present  condition,"  etc.  (in  men,  often  :

If  I  were  ptitcmf  "),  "  1  would  marry."  By  this  condition,
mhich  is  txiuivalent  to  a  vacillation,  a  doubt,  to  a  special  attitude
of  tile  p,itient  esc;i[>es  all  responsibility,  has  drawn  the

holt  in  seervt  until  sumedhing  furtluT  happems,  but  may  act  as
if  lie  uislnx:  to  upon  the  (Itsor.  Th(‘  traits  of  mistrust,  of
di.spntatiousness,  of  tyranny,  and  of  wi.shing  to  be  "above"  are
<‘le*:triy  rt‘ve;ded  in  th«*  analysis,  and  tme  can  ea.sily  comprehend
that  the*  fear  td  net  bring  equal  to  the  partmu*,  the  menace  of
ft'cling  another  superior  in  love  or  marriage  neeessitates  the
sci  ret  retreat  and  mnstnuds  the  mnirotic  .symptom.  Not  rarely
<mr  tiials  a  piirpiiseful  valuatltm  of  the  person's  own  sexuality
from  whieh  without  proof  or  with  tlie  assistanc'e  of  memories
which  ewenyone  has  at  c'ommand,  or  by  cwoking  unconscious
falsitications  the  iniprc  s.sion  is  sought  that  it  is  too  little  or  too
great  to  pcaanit  a  marriage*  to  bc'  vcmturcxl  on.

The  furtlH*!  c  tinimimic  aticm  of  the*  patient  c‘xplained  that  she
cjuild  inuTutake  noihini/,  bexaiusc*  whenev<*r  she  Ix^gan  anything
thf*  thoii|*h!  vmef^ed  that  it  was  usedess  because  every  one  must
dice  As  one*  sc*es/a  nonsemacal  thought,  which  at  the  same  time
has  sense,  but  above  all  brings  time  and  development  to  a  stand¬
still  and  rt*ndc*rs  the  emtranre  of  the  patient  upon  marriage
iiupos'.iblf*.  In  accord, incc*  with  this  the  ('onvietion  that  the
jK'itienf  only  came  to  t!ie  physician  because  she  was  forced  to,
tlial  sfie  had  no  hope  o!  cure*  and  only  de.sired  proof  of  her
inmirafiility  hdlowed  as  a  mutter  of  course.  One  of  her  dreams
.shfiwrxi  riiitch  of  this  constellation.  It  was  as  follows  :

"  /!  phyKidan  eame  to  me,  who  said  I  shoMld  jump  and  smg
■when  thoughts  of  death  came  to  me.  then  the  thoughts  would
■mnisk  Then  a  child  (hesitatingly),  a  large  one  was  hroughL^
It  was  fhen  medidne  so  that  it  should  hecome  qmet  and  sleep/'


m  THE  NEUROTiC'  CHNSllTrilUN

The  pliysiciaii  in  the  tlrearn  had  once  treated  iu^r  as  a  Hiiki
when  she  liatl  scarlet  fever.  In  the  dream  he  tist^s  ihc^  words
which  she  during  her  present  illness  ha<l  ctmsianliy  litairtl  Irom
her  relatives  and  from  physicians.  He  giv«*s  !ut  advice^  of  a  kind
which  amounts  to  nothing.  These  thouglits  are  aiiued  ai  me  and
express  the  conviction  that  all  my  ineasiires  will  lio  iiseUess,  Of
course  this  dream  wais  drc^anunl  during  a  night  when  she  slept—
for  the  first  time  after  a  peritul  of  insomnia.  As  the  patient,
howfwer,  saw  in  this  fad  a  parti.il  suc<a*ss  td  the  treat nuuit  she
realized  with  strong  aggression  my  nnaisures  too  wert*  useless.
The  hesitation  in  cuuphasicing  the  '’largeness**  of  the  child  shows
on  what  the^  tlauiglits  cd  tlie  dreanuu’  are  dwelling,  oii  a  small,
a  newborn  ehihl.  The  exprt'ssion,  du!d  is  brtmght“  (Hii|i|ity  :
into  the  Wiuid)»  is  takfui  fnun  tin*  ithm  of  giving  birth  and
coincides  with  this  in  the  tmtlined  r(*presfmtatirm  iif  the  dremm.
The  puwdt‘r  which  is  giveti  to  the  cliihl  is  the  slc'eping  pcmaler
of  the  patient  in  a  hirmer  trcrntmenf,  an  itidicatitm  imit  pains
also  }H‘lung  to  the  patients  to  giving  birtls.  In  tUlier  wonls  the
patient  here  expresst*s  :  !  i*amu>t  >Jet*p  becatr^e  I  flunk  of  giving
l)irth  with  its  pains,  (living  birth,  jiains,  dving,  in  these  she
sees  her  fate  and  hence  she  tliinks  of  dving  in  order  tii  avoid
giving  birth.

The  exagg^Tattsi  sfamriiv  against  r!nhllnrt!i  i^'  a  rhaiige  of
form  and  intimsitv  id  Su^r  mastmline  prote.-^,  In  order  tii  Msaire
herst»lf  against  the  fentinirie  role  she  enters  uptm  the  neurotic
deviation,  fixes  her  thought  ignm  an  aidii’ipatcU’v  tmnb*iu*y  on
childliirtli  and  death  as  adnionitiims  und  prefer;-:  to-  become  a
child,  to  take  a  ptnv<if*r  ratlier  fhati  tii  lie  mired  psyeho-
therapeufi<*allv.  Because*  her  eure  signifio  ;  her  herself

into  tlu'  feminine  rAle.  Mow  ilu’  tamflict  is  turnet}  mnii'  ataitely
against  the  physitaan  wIuj  tvishes  to  t*ure  her  insoiticis^  She
must  remain  .superior  to  him,  mu-d  permit  him  to  talk  absurdities
and  dietati*  to  him,  that  la*  -dundd  trisit  lior  witli  fotnlirine-*’.;  as
she  hail  been  trivded  when  a  child.  The  iaunpiil- mi  v  neurosis
rc'presentf:  her  rea^r^airinr*;'  |)hi!osophy  td  the  vanitv  of  evf'rything
under  tin*  sun.

In  our  sort  of  iieurofisyehcdfigy  iine  always  gains  tfu-  impression
that  fin*  visible  neurtdic*  conduct  is  directed  str.iii-ht  to  the  final
purpcrag  ft*  flu*  fiiiititms  goal,  as  if  i-nu*  were  examinirit^^  tuie  of
the  intermediary  |'si<1iires  in  a  rtnematograpluc  film.  The
problem  (‘(insists  in  recognizing  tiiis  comluti,  fbat  is,  the
symptfuns,  pri'disposititmc,  and  traits  of  (harm  ter,  and  to  learn
to  roniprehend  fluur  object.  In  everv  neurotii*  atfitudr  the
beginning  and  final  purjima*  i*:  rtmeealed  in  its  signifiranred

*  |ieif!v  f'riifC.i’i'ii.'rn  (fir  112^3#%  r-f  fsfsv  Otiw

who  prifWi'SiirH  utiflirti^nf  ana  t..*  u?  gnvi'liti*

phcrK>!iif*nars  thi^  foiiit,  prr.H**i3t,  ^mtl  fyf.ur*\  l»m  ihr'  tCi.U**  '  Tluw


ANTITHETICAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


169

These  facts  furiii  the  foundation  of  every  individualistic  psycho¬
logical  lucthoci  and  coinciile  with  our  other  findings.  Therefore
in  the  analysis  of  a  symptom  or  of  a  dream  the  feeling  of
efftaninacy,  of  inferiority,  of  luhng  down/’  and  the  masculine
protest,  tlie  iictitiuus  manly  goal,  the  feeling  of  being  above,”
will  always  he  foumi  indicated,  in  the  form  of  an  upwardly
direOeii^  psychic  attitude,  in  a  hermaphroditic  picture  which  is
appcuTtdved  in  a  strongly  antithetical  manner,  in  neurotic,
circuifoiis  ways*  whii’h  as  sudi  characterize  the  tendency  to  meet
ohstaides  with  expcilieuts,  or  when  analyzed  reveal  at  one  time
tlu'  tendency  upwarils,  at  anotlier  the  tendency  downwards  in  the
altc^nit  ii>ns  and  lau'illations  of  the  psychic  phenomena.
FrtHjuemtly  this  ”  wall  tu  he  up  ”  is  expressed  in  a  strongly
figurative^  manner,  esiK*ei:illy  in  dreams,  but  also  in  symptoms,
and  takes  tht"  syinhoiic  form  of  a  race,  of  soaring,  of  climbing
rncniiitairis,  of  emerging  from  water,  etc.,  while  the  ”down'^
is  represeiitt'd  by  falling,  in  siuirt  liy  a  motion  downwards.  Just
as  frecjiiently  the  figurt^  er  the  fact  of  the  sexual  act  is
symbolically  em|doyed  tor  t!ie  same  expression.  I  will  here
give  an  account  <d  the  dreams  of  a  patient  who  had  fears  for
his  future  as  a  man  on  ataaiunt  of  his  weakne.ss  and  noticeably
efbuninate  camduct.  In  a  dream  of  his  early  childhood  which  for
a  long  time  lillrtt  him  with  fimrs  he  saw  himself  pursued  by  a
hull,  A:;  a  farmer’s  son  he  understood  at  that  early  age  that  the
male  pursuer  rf»|jresented  a  race  for  a  cow,  tLat  is,  for  the
patiemt  himself.  W!u*n  lu*  was  to  enter  school  he  directed  his
steps  straight  te  the  girls’  sdmol  and  had  to  be  taken  to  the
boys’  Sidiool  liy  force.  He  unconsciously  regarded  his  life  as  a
rai't*,  for  whitli  he*  e*tmstantly  found  preparations.  When  he
was  (anirting  a  girl  his  frieml  cut  him  out.  When  he  contem-
platexl  marriage,  lie  became  afraid  of  the  superiority  of  his  wife,
le!l  into  the*  liahii  td  eannpulsory  masturbation,  suffered  from
fre<jiient  pollutiiuis,  and  h‘ll  victim  to  a  tremor,  which  hindered
his  work  and  atlvancemmit  in  ofliiau  Naturally  he  set  up  the
caindition  that  he  wouhl  only  marry  when  he*  was  cured, ^  a
tlnmgfit  whicli  sremcil  to  wise  and  justified,  but  which
permitted  the  patient  to  operate  secretly  against  his  marriage
as  behind  a  veil  because  he  feared  therefrom  a  reduction  of  his
ego-consciousness.  The  tremor  n*presented  to  him  the  pre-
monitiofiK  of  a  paralysis  which  he  feared  on  account  of  his
excessive  iiiasturiiatiom  After  he  had  secured  himself  in  this
mariner  he  still  felt  tlie  need  of  confirmation  of  his  incurability
and  wemt  weeping  to  physitdans.  (hit  conversation  revealed  to
me  the  picture  of  a  restless,  ambitious  individual  who  wished

♦•‘frry  liltrtjnfijmifw  wtu\  #w»*rv  trsiit.  of  charaeter,  ^  Birniluirly  to  tbo

iiifrriitr  iwfositu*  oriiiut.  ei  bo  bwkoi  an  iv  aymt>ol  of  life*  m  an  attempt

III  i&ii  tipf'oiittarir’y  of  lln’  tfiiiiiouiuu*  pffiitOit.


N


170


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSIITUTION


constantly  to  detract  from  otliers,  hut  who  recailcnl  in  fear  from
a  sexious  decision.  Amorous  relations  were  also  with  him
principally  a  means  of  assuring  himself  of  his  su{H"rior  manliness*
No  matter  how  eagerly  he  courted  a  girl,  the  inornent  she  met
his  addresses,  she  lost  all  charm  for  him.  Besides  as  soon  as
he  approached  an  engagement  he  entered  into  other  relations
without  prospect,  or  gave  them  a  prospectless  form  ami  thus  ran
after  his  rejections  in  order  to  he  able  through  tha  feeling  of
his  lack  of  influence  even  vis-a-vis  his  future  bride,  to  he  able
to  regard  himself  as  inferior.  From  this  he  constantly  regained
the  impulse  to  work  secretly  against  the  apparently  desired
marriage.  One  of  his  dreams  is  as  folkovs  :

**  I  was  with  my  old  friend  and  was  speaking  zeiih  him  about
a  mutual  friend.  He  said,  *  what  use  is  his  money  io  him,  he
has  learned  nothing?  *

The  old  friend,  who  had  exit  our  patitmt  out  in  tlie  i’ourtship
of  a  girl,  had  failexl  in  the  l'«‘c!mical  s<*hool  and  hail  given  up
study.  The  patient  was  suptu*ior  io  him  for  he  had  finished  the
course.  He  emfiracetl  the  sublime  primajde,  **  Kiuiwledge  h
more  than  money,”  especially  as  this  |>rtdession  starved  hh
fiction  to  he  ‘’above”  am!  iHuiiforlfd  him,  'Fhe  nnitual
acquaintance  is  piai'cd  luxe  insteail  of  the  rii*h  girl  who  w;o
courted  by  lioth.  The  contest  begins  anew,  (hir  {Kitient  h
declared  victor  by  his  rival.

A  .second  dream  which  oixairred  the  same  night  makes  tin;*
dearer.  The  patient  dreanual  :

As  if  I  had  caused  ike  fall  of  a  gid  of  lower  slanding  an(
had  dishonored  her/'

I'he  fiction  of  this  dream  says  a  shade  nmre  rhsarly  that  he  h
”  above.”  The  girl  who  was  formerly  courleil  is  thus  in  tlu
sense  of  the  patient  brought  down,  made  pcHjr,  and  recognixe?
him  a.s  her  master.

I  will  here  briefly  mention  that  the  ocTurrem'e  of  severs
dreams  in  a  night  signifii^s  that  various  attempts  at  preliminar)
arrangements  of  tentative  solutions  u{  a  priddem  are  undertaken
It  becorne.s  regularly  apparent  that  a  single  way  is  nt)!  sufiicaem
for  the  giiiding,  egoistic  iclea  of  caution,  a  fail  which  is  easil)
comprehendi*d  in  the  case  of  runirijtics.  The  drtsam  then,  nmle)
the  influence  of  the  more  intensive  craving  for  .sec!urity  became?
more  abstract,  more  figurative,  and  one  thus  obtains  in  inter
preting  all  the  dreams  of  a  night  several  jisychir  attifmles,  fron
the  comparison  of  which  the  ilynamii"  of  t^e  mnmmhi  becomte
much  clearer.  In  the  above  cited  caese  the  rival  surrenders  aiu
the  wealth  of  the  girl--'her  power— -is  deprived  of  worth  fo:
him.  The  second  dream  deprives  the  girl  also  of  power  am
places  her  in  the  position  a  woman  that  is  ” under*  occupies
and  this  is  done  in  the  most  far-fetched  and  abstract  manner


ANTITtlETICAL  MODE  OF  THINKING


171

so  that  nothing  personal  is  left  to  the  girl  under  consideration
except  her  suhc^rdinate  position.  The  patient  also  expresses
the  thought  that  only  an  uneducated  girl  from  the  country
will  serve  his  purpi^se,  as  he  can  always  remain  her  master.  The
girl  wduiin  he  wisht\s  to  make  his  wife  frightens  him  because  of
her  intcdligence.*  This  is  the  tendency  of  many  neurotics,  which
causes  thtuu  always  to  chouse  below  their  social  level,  and  thus
thoughts  am!  facts  come  to  pass  such  as  choosing  a  prostitute
or  a  little  girl  fiir  Itive  and  marriage,  necrophilic  tendencies,  etc.
In  all  similar  cases  the  tend<mcy  to  detract  from  the  partner  is
perc'cptihle,  which  seeks  to  degrade  the  wufe  by  the  construction
of  niislrust,  jealousy,  tyranny,  ethical  principles  and  require¬
ments.

A  fiirthf*r  idea  shown  in  a  dream  represents  a  race  graphically  :

''  !  wds  ridini^  in  a  raihiuiy  car  and  looked  out  of  the  window
to  see  if  Ike  Joif  was  still  runnini^  with  the  train.  /  thought  that
he  had  run  hiniself  to  death,  had  fallen  under  the  wheeb,  I
felt  sorry  for  him.  Then  the  idea  struck  me  that  1  had  another
dog,  htii  a  I'lumsy  one.**

lie  had  tdfrn  ridden  bicycle*  races  with  his  old  friend  and
rival  and  was  maially  left  heliind.  Now  as  his  friend  occupies
a  pijsititni  socially  infcri<m  to  him,  his  friend  “  can  run  after
him,'*  as  om*  says  in  Vienna  ivhen  a  person  gives  himself  airs,
llu*  mcdarnorplursis  intti  a  dog  is  a  pnuluct  of  the  tendency  to
derogatitm  ami  is  (juite  frequently  rmd  with.  In  a  case  of
iiernenfia  pr«H‘ox  1  observed  that  the  patient  gave  all  dogs  the
names  wtumm  of  irnpcjrtama*.  Tin*  d<»g  also  represented  his
futurf*  liritle  wht»  also  hrantght  his  suneriority  into  question.  Her
death,  nu^reover,  would  frt*e  him  ol  his  fear,  just  as  he  would
alsii  he*  free  if  slu*  slumhl  listen  to  another  suitor,  as  his  suspicion
often  wfiis|iered  him  was  t!ie  case.  If  she  should  fall  under
the  wheels/’  ”  If  this  slmuld  occur,  it  would  cause  him  sorrow.'’
In  the  dream  he  rtqo'irds  tliis  an  having  already  happened  and
anticipates  hl<  sormwe  The  <-lumsy  dog  ”  is  a  girl  who  about
this  time  had  tlisgusted  him  by  meeting  his  advances  and  for
wlicifii  he  lUJ  longer  cared,

fits  dislike’  for  thcjse  above  him  is  boundless  and  deep-seated.

Clue  night  hr  <!ri*amed  :

**  (lur  singing  society  gave  a  concert,  The  director's  place

was  einplvd*

Tht*  ‘aicietv  to  whi<h  he  I'lehmged  was  on  one  occasion  obliged
to  sing  without  a  director  he<*;uise  the  latter  had  m.issed  the;
train,  *  11ie  situation  appeared  to  him  lietter  than  any  other.

We  need  no  director/'  he  thought.  This  is  his  usual  attitude
in  all  situations  in  which  he  liirnself  is  not  the  director.

*  Awillirr  drrfifii  llir  itiuw  uifda  may  dmdt  with  thr  viola! ion  of


172


THIS  NEUROTIC  CONST  IT  IJllON


The  impulse  to  masturbation  in  male  neurotics  corresponds  in
female  neurotics  to  the  tendency  to  avoid  a  decision  and  thereby
to  remain  up.”  In  the  masturl>atiun  phantasies  of  girls  the
woman  is  often  found  to  take  the  role  of  a  man.  Also  the
position  which  is  taken  therein  is  at  times  that  of  the  man.  In
men  masturbation  serves,  tirst,  as  proof  that  one  can  live  alone,
second,  as  a  protection  against  and  hindrance  tii  seKual  relations
which  on  account  of  tlu‘  superiority  of  the  wife  arc^  tVared  ami
hence  arises  from  the  craving  fm‘  security.  If  the  situation
necessitates  stronger  stn-urities,  itnpoteiu'c  or  the  developc^d
neurosis  makes  its  appeararua\  not  as  a  coti-a‘i{ueiice  of
renunciation  of  masturbation,  hut  as  a  reenhirced  srt'urity.  The
masturbation  pluintasies  in  neurotics  liave  ofhm  a  masorhistic
or  sadistic  feature,  aci’tiriling  ti^  the  {dtase  of  tiie  nia?»cii!ine
protest  which  they  aim  ti»  represent.

Among  the  |>re|aratory  ;uiiens  and  mmrntie  expedients  which
are  intemled  to  serve  to  sf*ciire  Uie  position  of  being  ”  up.”
curiosity,  impulse  to  invesfigatitm,  tin*  t!e:sire  to  set'  everything,
the  ”  vcjyeur  ”  impulse  menlioiUHl  by  -writers  ormi|'iies  a
prominent  platau  These  impulses  are  always  a  priHif  of  a
primary  uncertainty  fur  the  ciunpensatiun  whitdi  the  guiding
lines  of  invest igatirm  are  brinud^t  in.  l‘hey  serve  esptaially  in
developed  neuroses  ser'ondarily  the  purpo:;f»s  id  ililattiriness  to
avoid  a  plan  anti  a  dtHiston  ami  are  in  life,  esj-ieeially  in  the
erotic,  very  often  changefl  from  a  means  to  an  end  on  wltieh  al!
the  psychic  activities  are  haseti.  Investigatic-m,  the  search  for
truth,  the  wisli  to  understand  evt*rything.  t!ie  well  krttiwn  neurotic
thoroughne.ss,  these  are  then  the  traits  which  the  ego-conscious¬
ness  erects  and  must  elevate  or  protect.


CHAPTER  VII


I'NCTP'Al.flV.  THE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST,  HOMOSEXfALITY  AND

rEHVERSlON  AS  A  SYMBOL,  MODESTY  AND  EXHIBITIONISM,

I'ONsrANi'V  AND  INCONSTANCY,  JEALOUSY

k.  plu^iuiiiuTitui  cijttni  noted  In  mnirotics  is  their  attitude
owartLs  i|iit*stion  of  punctuality.  In  accordance  with  our
luiiysis  i)f  ncairoUc  prclantry  tlu‘  expectation  is  justified  that  a
:irgr  iimiilicr  ^iif  punctual  iudivkluals  will  be  found  among
iriirutic^a  I  his  is  in  fact  the  case.  But  it  is  easy  to  perceive
h.it  tlit*se  patients  fday  with  tlie  thuught,  how  would  it  be  if  they
hoitlii  h.'t  others  wait^  a  train  of  thought  which  indicates  their
i|i|3tisitiiiii  in  others.  There  always  remains  in  this  attitude  of
Himliiality  so  much  of  aggression  that  these  patients  exact  the
[rrafrsi  punctuality  from  evt^ryhocly  without  exception  and  in
ini‘>ri.|iiriicc  ar<‘  often  in  a  pcisition  to  put  their  expedients  and
iriirofic  pr<‘parciirioss  to  ;ittacks  into  operation  at  the  tardiness
if  others.  Ill  othcT  cases  it  is  found  that  pride  compels  them
o  conic  late  regularly,  atui  wlum  others  are  obliged  to  wait  and
.  liood  of  excuses  is  offertsl,  this  is  felt  a.s  an  enhanceunent.  of
he  ego  con:  ciousness.  This  tardiness  is  well  fitted  to  form  a
ubstitute  for  the  fear  of  de‘cisions.  I'he  social  fitness  is  greatly
iietiareii  am!  prtdessiona!  duties  as  well  as  relations  wdth  iriends
itul  loved  ones  are  soon  <*liminated.  Admonitions  arc  entirely
ruitless,  herau  .e  the*  obstinate"  attitude  is  only  confirmed  by
he!u.  The*  nmirofit*  is  able-  to  masteT  the  situation  by  his  eternal
ardiricss  :uid  thus  jilace  btdorc  his  relatives  an  insoluble  problem.
!lif*  (dioiic  td  this  lim"  <d  character  often  follows  in  conformity
vith  an  anaiogy  :  *’  as  f  <*am(^  into  the  world  too  late  among
iiv  brother*;  and  sisters,**  **  because  I  did  not  arrive  later  like
fiv  yoimgrr  brothiT  or  sister.*'  It  may  be  seen  from  this  how,
»v  Iliis  neurotic  arrangement— -the"  fending  of  inferiority  and  the
irder  id  liirfh  id  tin"  hrotheTs  and  sisteTs*— a  broad  and  permanent
Ki-m  of  oficrafion  for  the  battle"  for  superiority  is  gained,
’h'lfirrifs  wdio  always  exune"  too  esirly  show  also  at  other  times
hr  trait  id  impatieure.  Through  a  feeling  of  inferiority  they
ire  roiislantly  in  fimr  of  other  losses  and  reassure  themselves
IV  liidieving'  in  their  "  unlucky  star."  In  cases  of  these
inirctlirs.  tmi.  the  elder  brother  is  often  found  as  an  opponent
vith  whom  tliey  arr*  engagixl.  as  it  were,  in  a  race,  an  analogical
irtioiL  blit  by'rm  manner  of  means  the  casual  factor  of  their
Xyiflduct.


173


174


THE  NEUROTIC*  UONSTITUTION


Fictivc  rights  of  primogeniture  litvome  often  for  youngei
children  the  impetus  fur  the  tuihaneement  of  tlie  egoistic  idea»
and  in  my  experience^  secorui  and  later  children  show  greater
tendency  to  neuroses  and  psyehicst^s,  and  certainly  show  greater
ambition/  In  their  neurotic  comluct  the  figurative  anabgy  of
the  story  of  Jacob  and  Esau  comes  to  light,  |iroving  that  the
wish  to  be  first  is  at  tlie  foundation  of  the  situation.  Their
preparations  and  predispositions  will  always  have  as  object  to
ptTmit  no  one  to  tiave  merit,  to  transfortu  rv«*ry  relation  iiy
means  of  lovt^  arul  hate  so  find  their  superiiirity  shall  become
apparent.  The  tendtaicy  to  t!orogatit>n  exceeds  all  bounds.
*Ihe  individual  of  this  type  tit>es  not  h<*sitate  at  harming  himself
if  he  can  only  harm  others  at  the-  same*  time.  In  the  formal
chatige  of  the  giiidiug  lint‘  a  view  ,*uudi  as  C'.esar  timk  is  often
arrived  at,  “  licdter  first  in  a  villagt'  than  sremul  in  Rtnne/*
better  to  play  tlie  Iratling  rdh^  witli  th«'  mother  or  tal!i«‘r  than
to  draw  an  unknown  lotttn*y  tii'kot  in  marriage,  ete.  Hatred  is
freqiumtly  felt  for  supewiors,  ttsieher-.  and  physltians.  Tht*v  are
usually  kilbjoys  in  social  gatluning;,  soon  as  tlieir  superuwity
is  not  recogniztnl,  and  they  often  break  off  everv  ridatirm  i^f
friendship  and  low  afltu*  a  short  time,  if  the  oUnu’  pajlif--:
these  relationslups  do  not  ai*kiunvledgt*  tlnunsrlve  .  infer ir»r.  Very
often  their  eontiuet  is  hrm-;c|ue  and  inimical  from  tlie  Ntart,  iHH*ausc
they  are  alnuidy  at  strife  behu'e  the  other  pt*r;.<»n  NU-;pet'|s  it.
They  cannot  endure  tt%  have  any  om*  stand  or  walk  behu'e  them,
and  avtnc!  wwy  selund  exaininatitm,  biaaiuse  the  sn|Huaorifv  of
the  perstm  eoiuiurting  tin*  examination  is  unmidiirabie  to  them.
Tliat  all  these*  phenomena  tumllv  la*  ddreelrd  atpiinst  the

family  eiivironnHUit .  ami  take  the  form  of  the  view  that  t!ie
familv  must  cart*  for  the  patient  is  a  further  sti’p  towards  the
proof  of  the  signifu'anef*  ami  importance  of  tlie  egoistic*  idea  for
the  patient.  At  times  flit*y  operate  with  tht*ir  ni'uroses  as  others
carry  on  fortune  hunting.’

Frcijuently  the  wish  tfj  be  first,  with  the*  tvife,  is  liidden  in  the
neurotic  efforts  of  a  male  patient  and  he  hunt-  through  her
previous  lift*  with  jealousv  ami  ,suspieion  and  canrlanflv  bt*lieves
fdrnsc*lf  dc»reived,  or  he  <*ager!v  keeps  w*afc*h  lest  hi-:  wife  shcndct
prefer  anothc*r,  the  fear  of  the  wife  as  the  expre-ision  i»f  the
feeling  of  incrrmplete  manliness.  The  neurotic  imly  wants
certainty  in  rc*gani  to  tins  point  ami  eveti  got*s  %u  far  as  to  put
the  wife  to  all  sorts  of  tests.  In  the  burning  jeal«aisy  wdiich  from
this  point  on  possesses  the  neurotte  the  c*xpedierits  liv  w*hiefi  the
wife  h  degraded  follow  of  thenradvt*s  and  the  eipdslii*  feeling  of
the  jealous  neurotic  is  thereby  so  greatlv  elevated  that  he  is
often  not  in  a  condition  to  separate  from  the  justly  or  unjustly

*  Ctmeparf^  Tli»»  tif  t\h*  Via;?*-**"  fif-alf-'f/'  M.

Itriiili.'irtit ,  Mtififi-h  On  .


PUNCTUALITY,  THE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST


175


reused  person.  This  latter  fact  which  is  often  met  with  is  wholly
epcfulent  on  the  masculine  guiding  idea  of  the  patient.  He
uinot  endure  the  thought  that  one  could  abandon  him  and
x'onstrurts  the  facts  in  such  a  way  that  he  is  hindered,  by  love,
y  pity,  by  fcnir  of  misfortune  which  might  come  to  wife  or
:iiildren  from  taking  the  iinal  step.

Pcuhaps  the  striving  to  be  first,  to  be  master  of  all,  is
aindi acted  on  a  feeling  of  inferiority  based  with  justification
r  without  it  mi  srnrdlness  of  stature  or  of  the  genital  organs.  In
u*  dc’veloped  neurosis  the  patient  through  the  arrangement  of  a
eurutic  symptom  fails  at  a  distance  from  the  opportunity  in
fliicli  he  was  to  have*  given  proof.  As  a  frequent  symptom  of
lis  sort  I  was  able  to  oliserve  compulsory  blushing.

In  a  less  market!  dt*grce  the  tendency  to  be  first  is  a  universal
uiiian  characteristic  and  concomitant  therewith  is  regularly
mild  an  inclination^  to  conflict  in  all  human  beings.  The
tuiipetilive  raw  hc‘gins  even  in  earliest  childhood  and  creates
:s  jisychit*  organs  and  reassuring  traits  of  character.  Thus  one
ften  fintls  in  ehildrtui  the  trait  of  character  that  they  wish  to
V  the*  first  to  vat  or  drink  or  tliat  they  like  to  run  ahead  in  order
a  re;u*h  a  jdace*  1  adore  tdhers.  Not  rartdy  at  five  years  of  age
hey  c’arry  on  tlie  plav  of  trying  to  outrun  every  wagon  and  many
iuld's  gariu*s  owe  tludr  origin  to  the  idea  of  competitive  races,
fany  pmstms  prf*st'rv«*  tliis  inclination  throughout  their  entire
tfe  in  t!ie  form  <jf  an  umamscious  g(‘sture,  always  wish  to  walk
t  the*  ht*ad  in  a  (Hunpany  or  hasten  their  steps  when  any  one
tteiupts  tti  pass  fhtun  on  tin*  streed.  In  a  transfe^rred  sense  this
fuideney  makc*s  ifstdf  imtic(\able  by  the  fact  that  those  who
H»‘o;oss  it  are  given  to  hero-worship  whereby  the  more  profound
mee  launes  tcj  light  of  being  himself,  also  Heros,  Achilles,
Uexandc*r,  Hannibal,  Ua*sar,  r?apoleon  or  Archimedes,  and  thus
lefraving  at  the  same  time  the  guiding  fiction  and  the  original
eeliiig  of  inferiority.  The  likeru‘ss  to  God  also  reveals  itself
is  ail  artive  fiction  and  is  manifested  at  times  in  fairy  tales,  in
ihaiitasy,  and  in  the  psycdiost's.  We  have  emphasised  that  in
his  stafe  of  the  predispositions  and  traits  of  character  all  bonds
if  friendship  and  love  are  threatened  and  when  the  stronger
mcertainty  ref|iiires  it.  forces  the  patient  into  doubt,  makes
lifii  rfq>r#4eiit  scarecrows  or  i<leal  forms  by  means  of  which  he
secures  himself  p^Tmanently  from  reality.  A  caricature  of
’‘msar,  hv.  now  seeks  his  mother,  the  small  city,  the  ^lower
•edations,  wanders  at  times  restlessly  from  one  place  of  residence
;o  another  as  if  the  <'xternal  relations  were  the  cause  of  his^
lissatisfartion.  In  this  developed  neurosis  the  sexual  appetite
s  frequently  directed  to  children,  persons  of  low^station,  maids  ;
lomosexuality,  perverse  inclinations  or  inclinations  to  mastur-
;iation  are  constructed  and  adhered  to  because  the  patient  hopes


176


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


thus  more  easily  to  master  the  situation.  For  tlu!  fear  of  a
woman  hinders  a  natural  sexual  relation  to  such  an  extent  that
the  neurotic  in  order  to  avi>id  the  defeat  of  which  he  stands  in
fear,  arrives  at  the  expeiiient  of  i'jaculatio  prevox,  of  pallutioiis,
.and  of  impotence.

‘■’The  circumstances  are  similar  in  neurotic  women  of  this  type^
in  whom  frequently  rivalry  in  society  with  friends  in  the  large
city,  with  sisters,  with  a  (laughter  ami  a  daughter  in-law’  is
secretly  brewing,  aiul  force.s  to  neurotic*  securities  and  this  causes
illness.  In  male  neurotics  the  social  position  leads  to  the
development  of  a  neurosis  as  soon  as  precedeiu'e  in  society,  in
science  or  in  amusement  is  calletl  Into  tiuestion  and  contested.
Where  the  feeling  of  inferiority  of  tin*  younger  child  forms  the
fictitious  guiding  ideal  ataairiling  to  the  pattern  of  the  tirsl  born
or  the  earliest  horn  the  most  varied  lea!  and  ap|>arent  ad%Mntages
incite  the  desire  and  envy  of  tin*  ytnmger  ehild.  Nearly  always
teachers  will  nuticr*  traits  such  as  envy  of  tlie  sir.c*  of  the*  older
briither,  of  his  growth  of  hair,  of  the  sire*  of  his  genital  organs.
That  firtitimis  valuers  are  tlu*rettJ  given  1  was  ai>le*  to  infew  from,
the  psychotheu’aptHitie  treatment  td  two  brothers,  of  whom  esu'*h
had  envied  the  other  in  childhood  on  atH'onal  of  the*  developinent
of  the  genital  tirgans.  In  the  same  marinca^  the  rr-al  prefc^renee
for  the  ultitT  Iwother  m  such  as  arises  naturally  frtun  the  situation
becomes  tlie  point  of  attat*k.  Idie  fati  that  he*  is  taken  tti  the*
theatre  and  on  journeys,  that  he  has  more*  (experience  in  the
sexual  problem,  is  sexually  ac'tive,  that  he  is  preferred  by  girls
and  by  the  servants  may  fill  the  ytHirnc^er  «‘hi!d,  wlon'e  tluwe  is  a
ft?eling  of  inferirwity,  with  the  iimst  profound  bitterness.  For
this  melancholy,  at  limes  a  hopeless  emotiima!  Cirndition,  arose
at  a  very  early  age  in  our  patif’Ul  and  attained  an  ineredibla
degree.  At  tinuss  there*  seems  110  prospect  <»f  vielory  in  the
competition.  His  manly  fendenev  turns  around  toward  the
pseudomasochistic  side  ^  and  seeks  mnv  to  attain  the  manly  goal
by  emphasizing  the  heelings  id  siekn<*sn  and  weakness,  l^y  yielding
and  submitting  to  an  extreme  degree  in  the  hopv  id  thus  winning
the  protection  of  parents  and  tinea*  willt  more  strength  and  to
gain  in  this  manner  the  dc*sireil  security  in  life.  1  have  seen
cases  where  protracted  catarrh  in  childhotKl  (CV.erriy*s  exudative
diathesis)  was  sustained  by  a  cornhinatiim  cd  the  ciearing  of  the
throat  and  panting  and  hal  to  snec**/.ing  tits  and  asthma  (see
Strumpellks  Asthmadheory)  and  in  camnertion  wdth  which  at  the
same  time  fictions  of  pregnanc*y  and  crastratiori  and  exaggerated
anal  sensitiveness  effectetl  a  homosexual  factor  which  was  to  be
understood  symbolically.  In  one  of  these  cases  the  fietitioui

®  Amirdirte  to  #«tr  .nnU  tii¥fn';ntin  a

SI  Mjirilml.  F«r  »jw  ** 'fh**  0.^vrhsf'  «*!'  il

Ntamfgiii/*  I.  c,


PUNCTUALITY,  THE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST


177


OTinine  presentation  went  so  far  that  the  patient  came  to  identify
imself  with  his  younger  sister  by  a  change  of  form  of.,  the
uiding  line.  And  as  me  mother  showed  a  noticeable  inclination
iways  to  be  late,  he  took  this  fact  and  the  wish  that  he  had
keen  born  later  in  place  of  his  younger  sister  as  a  guiding  motive
Iways  to  arrive  late  wherever  he  went,  even  when  he  came  to  me
or  treatment,  a  phenomenon  which  did  not  vanish  when  it  was
evealed,  but  only^  after  a  cure  had  been  eiffected.  In  these
eminine  presentations  the  masculine  protest  is  striven  after  by
.  circuitous  route,  by  following  the  feminine  guiding  line  and  is
egularly  accompanied  by  day  dreams,  sensitiveness,  disputatious-
u\ss,  discontent,  and  is  also  as  a  rule  forced  into  side  paths  by
ear  of  tests,  of  decisions,  of  the  sexual  partner,  so  that  perverse
endencies,  onanism  and  pollutions  are  frequently  found.  The
nitial  phenomena  of  inferiority  of  organs  may  disappear  or  only
emain  as  a  trace.  Smallness  and  anomalies  of  the  exterior
genital  organs  may  sometimes  be  discovered,  but  as  a  rule  only
"eveal  themselves  psyrhii'ally  in  the  fear  of  not  being  able  to
iominatt^  the  sexual  partner.  This  emotional  condition  often
cads  to  jealousy,  tendency  to  torment  and  sadistic  inclinations,
ly  which  it  is  sought  to  establish  the  proof  of  potency  and  of
>eung  lovetl.

Often  the  pride  of  the  patient  is  so  great  that  he  is  himself
lot  cons<’ious  of  Ins  jealousy.  According  to  our  experience  the
;olution  of  this  psychic  (‘onstellation  is  that  the  masculine  protest
n  adtiition  to  other  cdfects  has  also  the  effect  of  repressing
eaknisy  in  order  to  prevent  a  diminution  of  personal  worth.  The
amsequence  of  this  repr<\ssion  is  not  great,  at  most  that  the
>atient  finds  himself  in  arnluguous  situations.  Generally  he  acts
IS  if  he  were  jealous  and  ofttm  so  plainly  that  every  one  else
^xctq)t  the  patiemt  knows  it.  At  times,  however,^  the  jealousy
s  masked  by  depression,  headache,  refuge  in  solitude,  etc.

I  will  giv<*  yet  another  dream  of  a  patient  who  came  under
riy  treatment  because  of  chqiression  and  anxiety  in  society,
>ea'ansc*  in  the  partial  interpretations  undertaken  by  the  patient
:liis  dream  reveals  many  ot  the  points  just  described  of  the
:*omf)etitian  of  a  neurotic  with  his  older  brother :

It  termed  to  me  that  I  had  made  a  het  7viih  iny  brother
foseph  to  heat  him.  ia  a  certam  place  which  was  not  distinguish’-
ilile  in  the  dream.

I  saw  nivsetf  now  suddenly  in  a  little  three-wheeled  automo¬
bile  on  the  hmd,  and  tried  to  direct  the  automobile  as  well  as
possible  hv  means  of  a  small  apparatus  similar  to  a  key  which  I
was  only  able  to  fake  between  the  thumb  cuid  index  finger.  I
rode  7H*ry  inseeureh  and  felt  uncomfortable*  I  got  into  by-paths
on  which  I  could  go  no  farther.  The  people  whom  I  met  were
asionishfd  and  laughed.  I  taas  forced  to  take  the  auto  on  my


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


178

back  and  turn  back  io  ike  raaJ,  There  I  rode  farther  in  the
same  manner.

**  Suddenly  I  saw  myself  with  my  three-wheeled  vehkle  in  the
room  of  an  inn  7ohich  was  well  known  to  me  and  was  siluaied  on
a  nuniniiiin  near  my  native  place.  I  now  shoved  my  atdomohik
into  a  corner  and  troubled  myself  no  more  about  it.  My  brother
had  arrived  before  me  at  the  same  inn  and  alongside  him  there
was  sitting  a  well-known  family  who  were  deeply  in  debt,  con¬
sisting  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M—and  their  two  daughters.  My
brother  and  I  paid  no  attention  io  them.  l^hen  Mr.  M
came  to  our  table,  spoke  to  us.  and  finally  we  went  to  their  table
which,  however,  was  unpleasant  to  me.

**The  thought  of  a  bet  ctuue  up  in  the  course  of  a  conversaimn
with  my  brother.  He  advised  me  not  to  bind  myself  at  an  early
age  to  the  flighty  girl  that  I  teished  io  marry  and  told  me  freon
his  own  experiences  what  ill  results  this  can  have  io  a  man
striving  for  success.  I  comprehended  fhii  and  promised  act
according  to  his  advice.  He  took  Utile  stock  of  such  promises.
Thai  incited  me  io  a  bet .  In  early  before  I  knew  what  tav
buried  in  the  depths  of  his  fuituu:  he  seemed  to  be  a  model  to  me
and  I  strove  to  bec.ome  like  him  in  character .  mode  of  Ihimghf,
and  bearing.  Now  I  see,  that  /  must  not  eopy  him  in  many
things,  if  !  do  not  wish  io  foUoi:v  in  his  footsteps.

**  It  h  io  rratii  ime*c  (Irslinatitiii  with  an  aiittinu»!'>i!i*

tlian  on  foul.  'Ilti-;  autu,  luiwawa^r,  the

wife,  it)  whum  I  iiatl  tin]  iny:a4f.  A  three-wfjet^Unl  autu  is  le?is
perftH*!  than  a  futir»wTet*it‘(i  ntiv,  the  funiu’r  lat^ks  suniethiug.
Thus  it  is  with  a  womaii.  Man  is  purfet't.  Fur  that  rea^aln  tlie
antithesis,  the*  small  hauilh*.  In  iny  earlir^f  Vimth  I  was
constantly  set*king  after  Siunetlung  in  girls.  llifTe  was  sorM*
thing  I  eouhi  not  mnlcTsfantl  aljuut  them.  Fre<j«f*nflv  wr
walked  under  a  hridge  and  yet  we  diti  not  kmwv  wfiat  we
expetitsl  to  see  through  thu  rrat-ks  al»)ve.  At  that  liriif*  I  was
perhaps  live  years  cild-  -  I  had  nut  the  slightest  idea  of  sexual!
proeiaiures  {*  iineertaiuly  and  had  also  ecunu  ujM»n  no  senna!
ahiUTation.  I  can,  hows’ver,  say  that  even  at  that  time  Komrihing
drew  me  to  girls,  *  the  small  handh*  cm  flu*  anted  indieated  at  the
same*  time*  t'h;tt  1  po:sst*ssed  a  too  small  penis  or  none  at  all,  foT
which  rcMson  the  girl  la*  f-mperiur  to  me,

I  csiiiie  into  hy-paths  with  my  ear,  that  is,  throngli  the
woman,  through  wfiicdi  I  camld  nut  pas%  and  which  lirought  me
no  nearer  to  thi*  goal  whicdi  I  wisluni  to  attain,  that  is,  no  nearer
to  the  summit  of  my  f*fforts.

took  the  c\ir  on  my  bark-  tin*  woman  was  thus  more
than  civ-er  aliove  me.

The  inn  in  which  I  finally  found  mvself  with  my  brother
stood  on  the  top  of  a  mountain*  this  signified  my  bufiiing  desire


PUKCTUAI.ITY,  TIIE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST


179


r  success  in  life,  as  I  had  expected  it  of  my  brother.

That  I  rtict  witli  a  family  which  was  deeply  in  debt  indicates
at  I  had  ofttm  had  c^xaggerated  thoughts  concerning  the  cost
a  wife  to  her  husluind  and  that  the  wife  is  too  often  the  cause
rurming  into  debt.

It  is  cU*ar  to  rue  also  that  trains  of  thought  on  masturbation
y-paths,  being  in  debt)  run  through  the  dream,  as  well  as  the
Lsc!  connetdion  id  masturbation  and  the  stunting  of  the  genitals,
lu^  latter  I  ascribe'  to  my  uncertainty  in  regard  to  my  bride.
Ithout  kiuoving  it  I  hit  upon  all  sorts  of  expedients  for  getting
;1  of  her  (in  the  curncT).  My  condition  of  depression  serves
c'  same  {nir|H>se,  in  be  lihc'rated  from  my  wife,  to  prove  my
ip<‘fit»rity  in  lifee**

In  our  physiognomic  oi  the  soul  we  understand  the  theory  of
larat  lf'r  fci  be  tins,  we  have  already  frequently  spoken  of  those
iviiuis  am.!  tlc'ep-scMled  wants  wliich  seek  to  support  and
axinialf'  the  egtecimsciinisness  as  an  obtrusive  proof  of’
aiiliiuNs,  as  if  there  wvtn  a  eonstant  fear  of  becoming  de-
asaai/*  af  ihc  revelatTm  t)f  a  feminine^  rd!e.  Thus  the
caggeratei!  miulesty  of  m.'iuy  neuroties,  who  can  visit  no  public
diet,  who  sidfrr  friuu  inhiliitiim  of  the  flow  of  urine  in  the
re  .encf*  u(  tdhers,  who  witlulraw  from  femah'  society  on  account
'  bluNhing  nr  anxiety  ajul  palpitation  of  the  heart,  reveals  to  us
ic  strained  umniy  ambilitng  whieh  supports  itself  against  the
rijdnal  feeling  td  inferiority,  llu'  masetiline  protest  of  these
atiemt?;,  iuseiuire  to  ihn  cnn\  fona^s  tliem  to  this  arrangement
lujsr  Inumdarita;  pass  over  into  those  of  bashfiilness  and
wkwarduf'ss  :  or  tliere  is  a  tameortlanee  of  these  an<l  other  traits
hit'h  may  cm  tucasion  .supplant  each  other.  Often  in  neurotic
ensons  of  btdh  se'xc’s  out*  tmds  an  inalddity  to  go  to  the  toilet  in
ises  tif  great  nf'C't-:sity  Indore  tdluTs.  The  greater  modesty  of
mimm.  espiaiallv  td  lumrcdic  w^unen,  in  all  relations  of  life
ii|;inatrs  fnim  the  fc*ar  wlueli  i^:  implanted  in  them  from  earliest
hihiluHui  that  attentirm  might  be  <lire<ded  to  their  sex.  I  have
ften  convinced  myself  that  the'  pcTf(u*mances  of  girls  and  women
iffer  roitsicleraldy  frtun  this  mon*  or  less  unconscious  impression,
ideed  that  the  {irogress  in  tlu*  mental  development— just  as  is
[le  case  in  male  patiemts,  who  feel  unmanly— the  formation  of
ticial  and  professional  relations  and  relations  of  love  are
:iirmsliately '  chetdied  as  soon  as  the  patient  comes  into  a
‘  fmnirtine^**  or  subc^rdinate  rftle  or  presupposes  this  expectation
■i  td hers.

This  facd  is  in  no  manner  affected  when  expressed  or
epressrd  sexual  stimuli  eoiru^  to  light  a.s  the  apparent  source  of
he  cdieckH  of  aggres5don.  They  are  similarly  arranged,  have
he  purpose  of  enktruung  the  fear  cW  the  partner  and  of  permitting-
he  retreat  decoded  upon  In  the  plan  of  life  to  be  entered  upon


THE  NEUROTIC'  (H)NSTrrUTION


a8o

'With  certainty,  are  there  aku  acts  of  ft^resighl.  llie  iieuratic
had  already  in  childhood  laid  the  foundation  of  this  foresight
and  in  it  is  reflected  the  feeling  of  shame  as  the  guiding  line
of  reassuring  modesty  and  the  prudery  of  civilization.  The
previous  history  of  the  patient  reveals  the  exaggc^rated  modesty
and  this  is  true  at  times  td  tliose  who  in  other  respeiis  slum^  a
boyish  nature,  and  the  nnxlvty  of  nervous  chiltlrtm  on  being
exposed  may  be  oliserved  in  their  conduct.  d'hey  exclude
everyone  from  the  room  and  will  lock  the  tlcmrs  when  tfu^v  are
going  to  undress.  This  conduct  is  alst^  often  tiliserved  in  bc^ys
who  have  grown  up  among  girls.  The  masculine  prob\st  of  the
latter  is  expr«\ssed  in  these  cases  in  the  tlenigation  of  the  hoy,
either  purposely  or  untlunkirigly.  until  he  goes  so  far  as  to  liide
his  sex.  For  tl'U'  <levelopnu*nt  of  the  neuro.ses  this  expedicmt
of  rowardii'e  has  an  imfavtirable  signiticance.  If  is  cHpial  to
later  ('astratitm  tlunights  and  wishes  Iti  ihv  neurotic,  wishes  to  be
a  woman,  as  schui  as  the  fear  <»!  tin*  wife  setuns  actual,  or  as
SiHMx  us  he  wishtcs  to  escafie  a  chHasitui.  And  it  arises  never™
tlieless  originally  frtjm  the  c-umpulsion  of  an  exaggt*rated
masculine  protest,  wlii(d'i  is  easily  p<Tcf‘ptible  from  the
accompanying,  td'tni  cmitinuing  traits  of  i^haracter,  such  as
tyranny,  Inirning  ainlufitin,  the  dt^sirt^  to  liavr  <w'erything,  to  lie
■first  everywher<* ;  from  the  cunotional  predispositions  tt»  ragr*  and
anger  and  finally  from  tin*  tendency  t<»  tlerogate  and  to  too  great
foresight.

If  therefore  neurotic  modesty  shiuild  be  camsideretl  equal  to
tlu'!:  secret  attempt  to  play  the  man,  tliis  'hsuean'tiusness  or  rdle"'
(droo.s)  is  more  elearl?  manifested  in  the*  apparently  antithetical
trait  of  rharacder  of  shamelessmss.,  In  rtsdity  this  latter  line
prove*;  to  be  a  reeuftircemmit  and  contimiathm  of  the  former,  as
an  obtrusive  remindiT  to  tiu’  f*nvir<inment  tliat  tuie  is  a  ftiarv.
The  guiding  idea,  wtuHi  <‘auses  the  predispieat i«ui  in,  or  habit
of  exhibitkmistk’  gesture:;,  hence  often  insulting  tadless
obtrusion  in  respect  the  fU'ivirniunent.  bi^travs  in  detail  the
strong  mascadine  factor.  Thus  it  is.  whim  in  nervous  boys  and
men  Sf^xual  exhilntionism  lireaks  thr«nigh  or  is  expressed
haintually  in  certain  faults  of  toilette.  In  all  similar  cases  one
finds  thf*  belief  in  the  }'iowf*r  of  the  pliallus  cofistructfsi  as  in  the
anthjue  religious  cults  as  conseitneness  of  pfiwi^r.  Narrassistic
traits  are  also  rtcgul’arly  interrninglcf!  so  that  in  these  csises  the
attitude  of  roiKiiiesl.  acsauiipanied  liv  cot|uetry,  by  the  inability
to  beliernt  in  a  rebr-aal,  attracts  the  attention.  In  shameless  girls
the  trait  is  even  more  nofireable  because  if  is  unusual.  In
conversation,  in  flress,  in  behavior,  at  times  only  in  small  things,
at  ti'mes  obscurely  or  in  roprology  they  demcmsf  rale  tlieir  irialiilily
to  adapt  themselves  to  or  to  satisfy  theriisetvf-s  with  Ihefr
feminine  rdle.  The  basis  of  operation  lor  both  sexes  In


PUNCTUALITY,  THE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST  i8r

nanifcstcd  then  in  such  a  way  that  each  demands  from  the  other
ecognition  or  an  extreme  submission.  In  the  analysis  of  such
jciuotic  girls,  at  times  only  in  their  dreams  and  symptoms  is
observed  the  childish  expectation  of  a  metamorphosis  into  a  male
md  in  other  cases  always  as  an  attempted  substitute  for  the  will
a  power,  the  wish  to  he  above.  If  two  persons  of  this  sort
neet,  the  result  is  not  rarely  that  the  reenforced  masculine
ruitling  line  of  the  one  affects  the  other  preliminarily  as  a  sort
if  miracle',  a  talisman,  liecause  in  her  guiding  ideal  the  belief  in
he  miracuUnLsness  and  wonder  working  power  of  manliness  is
tlso  t*ontaint‘d.  I  ims  there  is  often  for  both  what  seems  a  chance
ulfilling  of  destiny,  hut  which  is  really  brought  about  by  the
>o\vt‘r  of  their  idea  of  personality.  One  often  finds  immodest
aindurt  in  nenirotic  girls  a.s  an  anticipation  of  their  fictitious
‘Xpert, ition  ;  tlu*y  coiuhu't  themselves  as  if  they  were  really  a
loy  or  a  man,  exjiose  themsc‘lv(\s  naked  or  live  out  in  neurotic
ym|)tonis,  dreams  and  phantasies,  their  masculine  reincarnation.
Ifttm  in  sindi  patients  t!ie  attempt  is  observed  to  ascribe  the
Tiiraculous  power  of  tlie  phallus  by  means  of  an  alteration  of
orm  of  tht‘  fuiion  otluT  parts  of  the  bo<ly,  for  example  to  the
laiuis,  fc‘«‘t,  hrcMsts,  which  thus  altered  into  male  members  are
;akt*n  into  esjun  ial  favtir  as  fetirhe.s  arul  enjoy  a  NarcissusTorm
-vorship,  as  often  also  llie  genital  organs  or  the  whole  body.  This
VfieluMti  is  rusirly  always  transft'rred  to  the  articles  of  clothing
md  <*onstitiites  a  larg<‘  jiart  of  the  charm  of  fa.shion,  from  which
rve  therefore'  must  assume  that  this,  like  the  fetichism  itself,
ijust  Ih‘  regartie<l  as.  a  substitute  of  manliness  with  its  larger
sphere  of  usefidiu‘ss,  winch  has  lieen  lost  but  which  is  always  to
')e  sought.

lake  immodesty  tht*  (l(*ep».sented  neurotic  infidelity  of  many
^ick  patiemts  is  an  imitation  of  the*  exaggerated,  apperceived
rnasculim^  image.  It  indicatt's  to  us  one  of  the  ways  which  the
masculiiu'  goal  is  forced  to  take.  It  is,  like  many  of  the  neurotic
Irait.s  of  character,  often  only  i(h*al,  a  maker  of  humor  or  of  the
view  of  life  (Man^ranowsky)  or  extends  only  to  the  boundary
irvherc*  the  rcsility  of  the  female  rAle  begins.  Much  oftener  the
virtue  of  fidedity  is  (diosen  as  the  means  of  security  in  the  fear  of
the*  man.  Phantasies  of  infulelity,  at  times  to  the  degree  of
hallucinations  or  dreams,  often  .result  where  there  is  real  or
imagined  stibje<ditm  exacted  by  the  husband.  Phantasies  of
proslitutitm  indic'ate  in  these  cases  the  neurotic,  exaggerated
aerspertive  e<mc‘erning  t!ie  power  of  the  sexual  appetite  and  serve-
the  same  purpose  of  gaining  security.  In  general  in  patients  who
are  prone  to  speak  of  their  sexuality  the  suspicion  is  justified
that  they  paint  their  bugbear  with  great  exaggeration.  ^  The*
reality  is  always  in  their  favor.  In  girls  often  tne  holy  conviction
of  their  inficlcdlty  occupies  the  foreground  entirely.  It  may  be


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUITON


1 8a

therefrom  inferred  that  for  them  even  a  single  man  would  l>e  too
much  and  that  they  wish  to  protect  theneselves  from  kwe  and
especially  from  inarriagt*  :  tor  wdiere  does  my  passion  drive

me?  The  real  infidelity  of  many  persons*  totu  holh  men  and
W'omen*  is  the  result  of  the  fear  of  the*  partner  of  whose
superiority  they  are  afraid.  The  understantling  of  the
accompanying  symptoms,  fear  of  solitude,  fe*ir  of  places,  fear
of  society,  etc,,  unsocial  conduct,  fixation  of  fatdts  of  childhood
and  derogation  of  the  oppvcsite  sex  are  other  signs  by  which  the
masculine  purpose  of  these  traits  of  character  is  revealed.  Often
despised  love  gives  rise  to  a  feeling  <d'  a  reductitm  of  the  egoistic
sense  to  such  a  degree  that  hate,  indifference  or  inhdelity  are
the  forms  wliiclii  the  masculine  protest  assumes.

In  this  place  a  fern'  cduc^atiimal  iibservations  may  be  added,
which  I  was  in  a  position  to  make  in  regartl  to  neurotics  suffering
from  jealousy.  They  all  luivi*  reference  to  the  searrli  for  proofs
of  the  influenct*  of  the  individual  <)ver  tlu*  partner  and  every
situation  which  is  «*ven  half-way  fitted  fur  this  {nirpiise  is  made
use  of.  'Fhe  insatiableness  with  which  the  iieuriitic  tests  his
partner  is  an  imlic*ation  of  the  want  of  selbcoiditlence,  of  his  lack
of  selbe\steem,  of  his  uncc*rtainty,  so  that  it  is  l■‘;isy  to  be  seen
how  his  jealous  efforts  serve  bring  him  imu’e  irdti  notita*,  to
attract  nune  attention  to  himself  ami  thus  to  secure  his  self*
esteem.  The  o!tl  finding  of  bidng  <iisr«*gank*t!  am!  neglected  is
seen  to  he  revivisi  upiui  the  slightest  occasion  ti)getlier  with  the
childish  attitude  of  wishing  to  have  everything,  to  tddain  a
proof  of  sujirriiirity  froni  the  partner.  A  glance,  a  Wiird  in
<x)mpany,  an  ackrujwledgment  of  a  favtir.  a  show  of  sympathy
for  a  picturi*,  kir  an  author,  for  a  ri'lativc*,  even  a  proteiiive
attitutfe  towards  servants  may  In*  taken  as  the  i'aiisr  of  the
operation.  In  severe  <%‘ises  the  imjjrr.ssion  is  liistinctly  give*n  that
the  jealous  int!ivi<lua!  cannot  ri*st  because  he  has  no  ciuitidence
in  peaceful  hap{>iiu*ss  on  acaanint  of  his  ntisfortune.  N<iw  the
neurosis  devetiips  in  whii'h  tin*  effort  is  matle  to  hrml  thi*  partner
by  an  arrangejinmt  of  attacks,  io  arouse  the  sympathy  of  the
partner,  or  tin*  attack  is  iritimdeil  as  a  punishnu^nt.  Headaches,
weeping  fits,  cimciitiinis  of  weakness,  paralysis,  attacks  of
anxiety  and  ck*prrsfaari,  silence,  et(\,  have  the  sann*  value  m
abancloment  to  alcoliolism,  rnasturhation,  perversion  and
lewdness.  The  limrs  of  distrust  and  doubt  -  idferi  about  the
legitimafy  of  the  cdiildreri  -become  more  pronnum-ed,  outbreaks
of  wrath  and  scolding,  mi?::trust  of  the  entire*  opposite  sex  are
regular  phenomena  and  reveal  the  other  side  of  jealousy  as*  a
preparation  for  the  der<ig:ition  of  the  other.  ttften  pride
prevents  consciousness  of  jcsalousy  ;  the  romluct  is  th«»  same,  The
situation  is  not  rarely  made  worse  by  the  edreurnstance  that  the
other  party  meets  the  helplessness  of  the  Jealous  perion  willi  «fi


PUNCTUALITY,  THE  WILL  TO  BE  FIRST  183

nconscious  satisfaction,  thereby  giving  foundation  to  his  feeling
{  superiority  and  does  not  therefore  find  the  right  tone,  the
roper  attitude  to  hold  the  jealousy  at  least  within  limits,
ealomsy  of  children  often  leads  to  grave  faults  of  education.  The
elief  in  miracles  as  a  threat  to  the  sexual  organs  through  births
r  aging  nearly  always  causes  jealous  excitement  to  be  more
trongly  manifested  in  neurotically  disposed  persons.


CHAI'^TKR  VIll


FEAR  OF  THE  FAKTNKR  ;  THE  lUEXL  IN  THE  NEI:HUSIS  ;  INSOMNIA  f
AND  COMPULSION  TO  SLEEP  ;  NEUROTiC  COMPARISON  OF  MAN  f
ANr»  WOMAN  ;  FORMS  iU**  THE  FEAR  OF  THE  WIFE  ?

In  this  strivio|4  uf  tiu*  ncun^tit*  hsr  the  attainment  o{  the  ■

masculine  guitling  gnal,  am*  never  misses  the*  fai't,  as  has  already
been  tunphasizeti,  that  the  fear  id  a  tiei-isiim  residve's  itself  into  I

a  fear  oi  the  o|ip<Lsite  sc‘x»  that  touchstone  id’  the  imtividuars  |

own  power,  tiu^  ftiHlllt'f  id  tlu*  guiding  itlea.  One  tituls  in  the  J

family  life  of  hoys  anti  girls,  in  their  play  ami  phantasy,  in  their  |

assortmeiif  cd  experiences  id  all  kinds,  in  their  tiay  dreams  and  I

poems  ami  in  their  living  out  td  acluai  experient'es  preparatbns  j

for  the  struggh*  ftir  suprenuu^  stJ  early,  with  such  aliuntlance  and  j

such  unity  cd  purpose^  that  in  at  riving  at  puberty  seiTire  deter-  j

minants  for  love  and  marriage  already  c*xist  ami  by  these  alone  i

the  choici*  ami  dirtuTitm  td'  tlndr  endicism  is  defined  within  t

narrow  limits.  lad  us  ismsitler  mnv  tif  wliat  nature  these  '

detiTminants  of  love  ol-»jtH*ts  may  be  in  m*uridii"s.  Arutmg  these
shouh!  iu'*  mentiom.*d  tyranny,  hy-pfU’setrativetiess,  ambit ton»  i
discontent  ami  all  the  {uimapal  nentrotit'  t-har,uderdraits  already
destTibed,  the  semirity-giving  devices  of  mi’drtist,  caution,  |

jealousy  ami  derogatory  t<n'u!iuu‘y  whii'h  is  evc^rywhere  s«*eking  j
faults,  the  ncmridic  digrt*ssioxis  and  Mildi’rfuges  whitdi  are  at  first  !
directed  against  members  td  their  own  family,  ami  wlut*h  are  j
intemlfsl,  w‘ith  this  as  a  Ijasis.  to  prtivt*  their  tnvn  Mi|u*riority  or
to  facilitate  the  escape  of  the  superiority  of  edhers.  1  he  neurotic
device  has  its  part  in  fins  and  demands  for  love  souie  quality
which  is  diflic'uit  of  attainment  or  fuitirelv  out  of  reach,  or  that
the  sc*xua!  partner  **  ?dial!  supply  that  wducli  is  lacking  (Plato  >•

and  many  modern  si'xologists),  which  is  paramount  to  saying  that
the*  partner  must  fulh!  or  represent  the  **  ego -ideal which  the
other  party  to  the  ronlrart  has  constnudcnl  as  a  compensation.  1
The  normal  child,  tcan  experts  from  his  future,  ami  especially
from  the  one  chosen  in  love  the  fulfillment  <d  his  iileals.  But  in  |

due  rmirse  of  time,  af!t*r  he  has  peimitted  hineadf  to  lie  driven  |

hy  his  iiieal  **  as  a  mi^ans  to  an  end  he  is  able  to  detach  |

himself  from  if,  desromi  to  reality  and  reckon  with  the  demands
of  reality.  Not  so  with  the  neurtdir.  He  is  unaltle  to  change  his
neurotic  perspectives  through  his  own  power,  he  cannot  diispense  f
with  his  principles  which  have  by  now  become  fixed  and  rigid,  ,
he  has  no  longer  control  over  his  traits  of  character.  Chained

i»4


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.  185

his  idea  ”  lie  brings  his  old  prejudices  into  his  love-relations
kI  l)ehaves  as  thougdi  they  ought  to  procure  for  him  not  reality
it  the  security  of  his  “  idea,’^  the  triumph  of  his  strained
aculine  protest.  And  soon  disillusion  makes  its  appearance,
or  it  is  introductHl  by  the  neurotic  himself  as  a  protective
easure,  as  a  setairity ^against  the  prospective,  derogatory  effect
'  his  iietive  finale.  The  disillusionment  furnishes  the  adequate
isis  for  a  continuance  of  the  strife  against  the  partner,  for  a
‘Cognition  of  every  opportunity  for  the  degradation  of  the  latter,
or  these  were,  after  all,  the  most  immediate  goals  of  the  old
re  pa  ra  t  o  ry  training.

Imconscdtmsly,  the  fear  of  the  sexual  partner  hovers  in  the  soul
:  the  growing  lunirotic  as  tliough  he  anticipated  in  the  approach
;  that  twaml  tlie  end  of  his  masculine  fiction  and  with  it  the
uiihilation  td  his  ego-consciousness,  of  his  guiding  star,  of  his
H'lirity  in  tht*  chaos  of  lift?.  He  creates  for  himself  ideals  in
aler  \i)  cltlratd  from  reality.  He  screws  his  t^go-consciousness,
in  a  narcissistic  manner,  as  high  as  possible  in  order  to
;akt^  evt‘ry  pariutT  appear  small  l)y  (a)ntrast.  He  surrounds
imstdf  with  a  wall  of  tlie  most  crass  egotism  in  order  to  furnish
u*  proof  (jf  his  unfit nt\ss  to  Inm.self  and  others.  He  arranges
I  a  mnnadit'  mannt’r  doubt,  uncertainty,  awkwardness,  adheres
I  o!t!  faults  tjf  eliiltlhood  and  eonstructs  new  deficiencies  in  order
I  kt‘t‘p  himself  at  a  distancta  He  invents'  weaknesses,  sub-
tissivtmess,  rnasocliislit'  impulses  in  order  to  alarm  himself.  The
tnv<‘r  of  instim't  becomes  fur  him  an  **  overvalued  idea

^Vernickt‘),  htH'aust*  hv  fetds  its  need  and  apperceives  his  sexual
essirt?  a.s  llu?  superiority  of  tht‘  opposite  sex.  The  neurotic  is
u*apablt‘  of  lovt*,  not  Ixmaust*  ht‘  has  repressed  his  sexuality,
Lit  fu'caust'  his  rigid  predispositions  in  the  direction
[  his  fiction,  in  tlu*  line  towards  power.  The  neurotic
iricaturc's  of  Don  Juan  and  Mtassalina  are,  notwithstanding
leir  sexuality,  mnirtdic.  Those  who  become  inverts  and
erve^ts  have  alr<Mdy  escaped  the  threatening  cliffs  and  seek
en(a*f(»rth  It)  make  a  virtue  of  necessity.  And  where  thoughts
f  iiu'est  apparently  effect  a  check  on  the  erotic  life,  it  can  be
:ic)wn  tliat  U>  the  neurotic,  who  ('onstantly  fears  a  decision,  this
‘presents  a  s<‘curc‘  refuge,  that  is,  the  secure  way  to  the  mother
r  fatluT  rltdhed  in  a  si^xual  simile.

The  flight  from  ihv  partner,  especially  the  flight  from  the
dfe,  suecetHls  lieiter  in  those  neurotics  who  have  early
iirec‘ec!ed  in  firulirig  their  way  to  a  profession  or  who  have  turned
>  an  artistic'  voc'ation.  It  is  true  that  should  they  be  threatened
nth  a  fc'minine  rale,  with  defeat,  the  fear  of  a  decision,  of  their
Itiire,  of  life,  of  death  may  overtake  them  in  the  midst  of  their
ibors.  Fre<|uently,  however,  some  sort  of  tranquirr/ing
iTiinafimi  furnish<‘s  the  ncmrotic  the  means  securing  his  ego-


i86


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


consciousness,  or  his  talents,  in  effecting  a  forma!  change  in  his  I
fiction,  furnish  him  the  o|>partunity  to  contest  fur  the  palm  of  f
masculinity  in  art.  It  is  then  nut  rare  that  the  motive  and  i
content  of  his  artistic  crcatiiuts  reflect  that  which  has  driven  him
into  the  security-giving  sphere  of  art,  namely,  tlie  power  of
woman  and  his  tear  of  tin*  wife.  I

The  wonderfully  effeclivt*  Oiarm  which  many  myths,  many  i'
creations  of  art  and  philosophy  possess  ftw  us,  is  In  line  with  this  ;  :

the  fault  of  the  wtunan.  the*  banal  cherediev:  la  femme/*  in  all
evils.  The  thought  is  exprevssea!  in  a  bi/.arrc*  manner  by  [
Raudelaire.  I  <*an  fr^rm  fui  itb*a  tff  a  beautiful  Wi>nian  without  it  !
the  same  time  imagining  misfortune  eonnected  with  hf*r;**  i
!iiythically  and  sutdirmdy,  in  llu*  sttiry  of  Eve,  fratars  of  ivhich  I.
have*  fu*ver  Ihh*!!  missing  fn)m  poetry.  1lie  Iliad**  is  built
upon  this  foundation,  as  wed!  as  the  **  lliousand  am!  One
Nights/’  ami  if  om*  examiticvs  nmre  closedv,  evr*ry  greMl  and
small  artistic  cresitiem.  What  is  its  leading  llunight  f  Ntdhing  |
less  than  to  win  a  stamipoiiit  in  the  uniaulaiaties  eif  life*,  in  the  i
conflict  witli  love*,  in  the  fear  ed  wouian.  !

Womarj  as  a  sphvnx,  as  a  tlfuium.  a*-;  ,i  vampire*,  as  a  witch,  ?■
as  a  maii-murthaing  liorreir,  as  benrlafiri*^/'.,  in  all  these  pieittres  !
is  redieOcsl  the*  srxua!  impiil-ie  whii'h  Itas  boiuiue  tn'or-exidteHl  by
the*  masrulim*  protest  aiid  whie'h  has  its  counteu'part  in  the
cariiSiture*  t*f  woiuam  iti  tin*  ob-stauH'  «>utpounng,%  |sdl,  in  |
aneedides  ami  d«‘*uaitinv*.  eomparisun-s  In  tlu*  '-atno  manmn*  !
the*  mntrofic.  pliili:.titH*  male*- tsar. ciomme-.'.  anti  the  elesire  for  j
.sape*rioTity  Iti  flora*  lirm  tsmvit  ! ion-;  wlutii  wsnilel  eleny  i

woman  r*tjiial  rigid  raunet imt’s  I'Von  llu*  right  tti  rxisivnco.  ,
Arttdher  turn  wiilrh  nruisdit'  trains  of  f.hiiug/it  may  take  in
*a*eking  se*ruritv  ffitm  Wiumin  leads  as  a  mitmsd  <  on'a*t|tirnre  away
frt'ua  r«*ality  a.nd  lib*.  !ii  lim*  with  thi-;  Sfliopf'iiloumr  was  led
to  a  df*iiial  of  life,  tlie  pia*senf,  ai!  tinie.  (11m  preparatiims  for
this  attitude  ori;idiiafe*d  in  his  unfiiendly  affitmtf^  ttjwaisis  his
mother.)  ’!Vfany  patimif-:  flee*  in  a,  ''MiuewdnU  !e'<s  tsmsi;.feftt  and
mefhcHlitsa!  manner  in  I  heir  fear  *4  woman,  but  they  ct  instantly  ,
hanker  afte*r  the*  fulli!!meid  of  t!if*ir  in  phajilasie^s  arul  /

drf*aiiis  whieE  t!u*y  wa*avi*  alnuit  flu*  future*,  Isvm'v  neurotic*  shows  ^
this  trait,  washes  fo  illtiminate  and  iiiVf'stigate*  the  future*  in  order  ij
to  sreurr  hiinstdf  in  good  time.  Hoi  tsmlious  ami  atixiotm  li
<-*xpe*c‘fatioii  gives  the*  fiiiiflamrntal  teuie  fo  futeirr  events*,  gniV,
soiiifire,  fill!  of  da!i.*o*r.  For  they  rfinst  :‘;ee’m  fhu.  to  him  in  ordf*r  I
to  be*  effective  as  ima*rilives.  Now  he  is  aide  to  keep  the  greatest
dangcT  in  siijlil.  drai%*  flu*  !ine">  nf  his  clmracdef drails  and  jire-  I
disposifioiis  to  the*  liiierio'.s  of  a  hair  iri  easier  to  semire  hirnself  i
achs|iiaf ely.  Ntnv  lie  belifn*es  to  have  di'‘eovered  tlm  rci:i<!  to  hi*i  !
goal,  am!  instt*ad  of  amliition,  longing  after  vieftiry  and  triumph,  |
honor,  elevation,  |K:nvf*r  and  admiration,  he  ailuw's  }iis  ^'yiiipbrnis  I


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.  187

>  become  effective.  He  experiences  under  the  compulsion  of
is  guiding  principle,  as  a  prophetic  gift,  what  sober  individuals
jcpcrience  through  their  foresight  and  estimation  of  reality.  But
■ith  neurotic  strivings  of  anticipatory  thinking,'’  attention
pproacht‘s  problems  and  arranges  them  in  accordance  with  the
eurotic’s  antithetical  mode  of  apperception,  which  values  a
efeat  as  death,  as  inferiority,  as  effeminacy,  and  victory  as  im-
lortality,  higlier  values,  masculine  triumph,  while  the  hundreds
f  otlu‘r  possibiHlies  of  life  arc  annihilated  by  withdrawing  them
mm  att<mtion.  In  the  same  manner  the  way  is  entered  upon
the  anticipation  of  future  triumph  and  terror  as  well  as  an
allucinatory  reinforcement  for  the  sake  of  security.  The
.sycluKSt\s  show  this  trend  in  a  pure*  manner,  melancholia  and
lania  as  anticipations  of  the  pure  antithesis  above-beneath,”
tunentia  prauatx,  paranoia  and  cyclothyemia  as  a  mixture,
llie  rtH’iignitioij  and  construction  of  traits  of  character  now
diiHv  i*ssc‘nt ially  in  strict  conformity  with  the  goal-idea.  The
<a*tmtuatiun  of  tin*  traits  greed  and  economy  is  intended  to
rev<‘ut  tiu*  ;i!»jt‘ctness  at  poverty,  p<*daniry,  to  assure  against
i!!icu!tie,s,  ciliieal  traits  i>f  <*haraet<‘r,  again.st  shame,  and  all  of
liese  against  rtdations  of  !ov(*  and  marriage,  against  a  subjection
a  tlu*  part  run',  and  at  the*  •;anu‘  time  furnish  the  possibility  of  an
tiaok  upon  tin*  jtartner,  an  rwv  ready  excuse  for  his  own
t'I?reciation  of  otluu’s.  Hie  di'viee  of  the  “principle  of  cxclu-
ion/’  is  heltl  in  the'  higlusst  esteem,  becomes  a  religious  or  pro-
rrlnal  principle  of  lihg  of  tin*  higlie.st  wisdom.  The  uncertain-
es  of  onr  .siurial  svstein,  tdhieal  points  of  view  and  the  diffi-
iilties  attendant  uimn  the  rearing  of  children,  furnish  a  welcome
xru  e  ftir  the  ciinstriKi ion  of  the  boundaries  of  a  natural  and
seamabh*  attitude  towanls  lib*  as  narrowly  as  possible,  while
H*  obseurity  and  insolubility  of  the  problems  of  heredity  are
i‘.f«niod  in  a  :  imilar  mamuT  in  order  to  justify  an  unwedded
ft*,  Manv  take*  refuip*  in  ndigion,  surrender  their  present  life,
xrit<'  tlicdr  moral  and  ascetit'  instincts  in  order  to  become  par-
d^ers  in  Uu-  happiness,  in  the  triumph  in  the  ^Mieyond.”  An
sisKiial  role  is  arranio'd  and  ev(‘rything  b(*comes  a  me^ans  for
u*  attaiiiiiioiit  td  t!u*  lieighltmed  (‘go-consciousness  which  is
:‘ndf*r(*cl  pos!;!!  dr  by  thr  lumrotic  p(‘rsp(Ttive  of  life  and  its
X|)(’rif*m  e* At  !inH*M  ,s(‘(’urity  is  attaincal  through  a  want  of
di'dartion  in  *<*xnal  relations,  through  a  heightening  of  the
isiilmdnniiHiif  t.o  a  inarkod  d(‘gr«»e,  a  devir<^  to  which  the
afitmf  filainlv  h-rids  his  as:aslaiu‘e.

it  is  oidv  allot !u*r  plia-r  of  f^n*  fear  of  tlu‘  partner  when  the
iatunit  Itrings  his  |W(*d!sposil!ons  into  play  against  the
isvcliotlnnapriitist .  Iljr  mairotic  f(‘malc‘  patient  cmnliats  the
laii  in  thr  p'hv-A'ian  at  tin*  same  time,  and  seeks  to  escape  his
lasnilirH*  iiifbasnca*  whicT  slu*  appen'eivtss  as  most  terrify-


i88


THE  XKHRiJTlC'  (‘tiXSlTTE^flON


ing*  looking  at  it  .she  dc)o>  from  a  sexual  peint.  t>f  vitnv.  The
male  neurotic  secrt'lly  set‘k^  muU’rnune  the  iiitiuerua*  t)f  the  j
psychothenipeuiis^t,  which  influcnti'c*  he  appeictuves  as  sexual  i
superiority,  anti  both  comiuct  tluunselvrs  liuring  Ihi'  CiUirst*  of
the  treatment  as  they  h:ul  always  conthuttni  thcunsrlves  when-  1
ever  conipelled  to  i‘dkv  an  adive  part  in  life,  tu"  wheafVtw  con-
fronted  hj  a  diHUsioii.  |

At  times  patients  art'  hmnd  w-hose  flight  frum  Wimian  is  ifito  ’
thc^  past.  It  is  then  that  tht'ir  intt'rest  for  antuiiiities.  heraldry,
dead  languages,  t*tc.,  lietaniies  very  aeiiltn  ;i!id  tliey  often  lie-
come  quite  skiilfti!  in  this  dircTtion.  This  skill  is  alisent  in  ^

those  patients  who  insteail  turn  their  attention  Ui  grave  yards,  '

death-notices  and  funerals.  I

I  h:m:*  alreoflv  meiilit>net'i  tlmt  the  '’motive  uf  the  fear  of
woman'’  is  the*  ^Urimgest  incentive  to  art  and  plianta'.y,  Hermit  :
me  to  cpiote  an  ahstract  from  (ifillpaf/ei '  an!’.»hiu::qsipin*,  which  j
illuminates  much  of  our  thesis.

”  Like  evt'ry  wrlhmadt'  man  !  felt  mvsrlf  aiii !>y  the
beautiful  half  td  mankind,  I  wa-c  iua%'evri.  !,>r  little  i
satisfied  with  niy:>ell  to  hehevr'  my.adi  cap^iblf'  o|  making  deep  !
impressions  in  a  short  iiriie.  t ‘fudd  it  ha\e  been  \hr  fim-

ceptiim  td  tiu'  jioet  i,ir  of  p^Jiirv,  w,.e;  it  the  reverse  ul’  my
nature*  which  wlum  it  diU's  not  repel,  aUisuls,  bn  aii'.e  af  the
S|.nnt  of  coiilradiiliun  f  I  w-ouh!  tuni  ruvselt  tieejdy  entangled
while  I  still  liehevr'd  my  self  io  be  enly  at  the  Or-.f  advance!-:.  This  ;
promised  botli  |di*asiirf'  and  rmin  Ofsir  at  liand,  ihourjh  mostly  j
the  latter,  lircause  my  real  ellorts  had  ahvay-i  tu'eii  to  |ifest*rvf*  1
myself  in  that  traiujuil  state  whieh  would  not  remlrr  t.Utlieult,  m  |
even  entirely  prevent  the  approardi  id  rny  real  ginhlrns,  art/’  ;

When  both,  artist  ami  neurotic,  regard  the  alfratiioii  of
woman  as  menacing,  .as  daitgeri.ius,  as  a  i"oinpiiision  t.m  acr'yiml
of  the  uncertainly^  ni  llieir  Iriumidi,  when  h<^!h  regard  ainormis  j
emotions  as  a  subjeetitin,  if  is  tmiv  in  t  oubnanitv  ^vith  flit*  fuiuki-
mentii!  disposition  that  arumate:  l>oth.  Hy  v.hith  I  do  not  at:  |
all  intend  to  <imiy  the  reaiUir-.  t,d  tht-e^  re!.at tuii-s..  An  |
examination  of  love,  be  it  rvf*r  so  sr^ber,  reveals  a  miilu.d  mlapbo  |
tion,  a  siiiqeclion  of  our  will.  IT  put  forth,  !un\evei,  :spec'ia!  {
efforts  to  unearth  these,  |o  think  of  them  as  sumoflntig  sigiiifiraiit  ^
and  to  renounce,  for  this  reason,  the  plrasuraldo  yieliliim  tliefC'
to,  reweab;  uiie(|«ivoc%a!ly  an  unrrmijurrable  msEung  fiW  srlT
assertion  on  the  part  of  the  pi'?-:nn  in  «|iiestiiir!,  wliicfi  ive  have  |
frequently  showui  ti»  be  the  neuiotic's  overroinprtc-..-illon  for  iiis
neurotic  feeling  id  inferiority.  The  guiding  go,a!  forldds  the  i
formation  cd  fitting  predispositions,  or  presents  |}i»uii  otilv  in  the
formgjf  an  uiifiieastirabie  masocliislic  exaggeration  whieli  is  in  ;
turn  itsedf  used  as  a  proleclivt'  nnutsnrr-,.


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.


189

At  times  this  craving  for  self-assertion  seeks  other  channels  as
>on  as  it  feels  its  own  libidinous  tension  as  the  superior  power
:  the  partner.  Wishes  and  efforts  then  emerge  to  escape  this
3wer  throught  satiety,  through  orgies.  Even  castration  wishes
id  intents,  and  similarly  ascetic  and  repentant  practices  make
leir  appearance,  such  as  flagellation,  etc.,  incited  by  the
^conquerable  craving  for  security,  all  in  order  to  win  peace
om  the  demon,  love.  Active,  constantly  recurring  perversions,
specially  masochistic  manifestations,  can  be  explained  in  no
ther  way.  They  are  an  expression  of  the  necessity  of  con-
ncing  one’s-self  in  detail  of  the  sinister  strength  of  the  partner,
i  order  to  be  able  to  construct  out  of  this  conviction  of  the
rength  of  the  other  and  of  one’s  own  weakness  an  admonishing
igbear.  The  real  result  of  this,  the  neurotic’s  rectification  of
3undaries,  is  a  strong  deviation  from  the  normal  path,  which
ath  he  fears  most  of  all.  The  self-degradation  thus  arranged
Dw  furnishes  a  stronger  stimulus  for  the  masculine  protest  and
ihances  it  in  line  with  the  goal-idea.  ‘‘It  must  be  night,
here  Friedland’s  stars  shine.”  Now,  after  these  detours,  his
forts  are  again  directed  along  the  paths  of  his  neurotic  goal,
veal  sadistic  admixtures  and  a  strong  purification  fanaticism  in
ise  facts  or  fancies  of  a  coprophilic  nature  play  a  role.  Or  the
itient  contents  himself  to  create  an  appearance  of  justification
r  his  neurotic  detours  by  means  of  a  struggle  against  the  judg-
ent  of  others,  against  the  law,  or  often  by  having  recourse  to
1  unheard  of  logic,  and  in  this  way  seeks  again  to  prove  his
iperiority.  Thus  it  is  in  the  arguments  of  inverts  who  in  the
ime  manner  owe  their  neurotic  deviation  from  normality  to
leir  fear  of  the  opposite  sex.

The  prestige  which  it  is  sought  to  maintain,  the  masculine
rotest  IS  always  shoved  into  the  foreground,  until  the  enlighten-
g  analysis  arrives  at  that  point  where  in  the  memories  of  man
e  neurotically  grouped  thoughts  come  to  light,  i,e.,  that  it  is
s  inferiority,  his  underdeveloped  genitalia  which  will  hinder
im  from  obtaining  victory  over  woman ;  in  the  memories  of
male  patients  this  place  is  occupied  by  the  feeling  of  inferiority,
/  the  neurotic  terror  of  the  feminine  r61e.  Along  with  these
^discovered  trains  of  thought,  which  have  their  origin  in  the
irliest  years  of  childhood,  one  detects  megalomanic  ideas  often
i  the  shape  of  narcissism  and  exhibitionism.  They  are  to  be
iadily  understood  as  preparatory  attempts  at  compensation  for
e  feeling  of  inferiority,  such  as  are  produced  by  the  compulsion
F  the  guiding  fiction,  as  secondary  neurotic  formations  which
ly,  ”  I  want  to  be  a  complete  man.”  The  change  of  formula
hich  this  thought  experiences  in  girls  into  the  ideal,  ”I  will
mel  all  women  ”  has  already  been  mentioned.

I  am  able  to  present  some  of  these  relationships  in  the  case  of
e  following  female  patient.  A  19-year-old  girl  came  under  my


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITl^TION


I  go

rarc^  for  depres^^ion,  ?^uioula!  aioas,  insonuua  and  iiirap:uitv  for  f
work.  She  had  heconu*  am  artist  in  iinUn'  liavr  a  prufrssiun*
With  the  exia’ptiini  oi  indit'aliiins  of  lierc’ditarv  fithmiilosis  and  I
myopia  there  were  no  <iisi*uveratde  bodily  symptimis.  The  i
ndatives  described  htT  as  foniuady  an  td»stinatr  Oiiit!  who  left
home  hecatise  she  wished  la  In*  selKsuppiuliiu^.  ilvv  mother  |
and  her  onlv  oldtT  hndlier  dif*«i  t»f  tub«*rcu!«cd-a  f

I

The  romnienrcmieiit  the  treatment  was  xvrv  diilieult  |
because  the  patient  sat  hefiwc^  me  stn^wiie;  iutiitlerfmoe  and  i

answered  none  of  rny  tjuestions,  Cbdv  at  times  dii!  *die  <*x|iress  ^

herself  with  a  negative  gesture,  or  answeretf  %vith  **  No/^  i

I  began  to  work  cautiinisly,  t  exphunci!  to  luo'  that  Iut  ifw
difference*  is  identica!  with  luw  general  ilt*rc*gatory  leui!eiu"V,  the  f
same  being  true  of  h«*r  conlintu’d  silence  m  mv  pic*sr!ief\  her  |

negativisng  her  Ntn**  all  of  \v!dc!i  are  part  of  this  derogatory  |

te!Hk*nry  now  cliretied  against  uw.  I  then  endfstvor  to  show  ;

her  that  ht*r  <*ontluri  iiidii'ate-;  ht*r  di-asutUoit  wdtfi  her  ffuididiif^  ^

rdlc*  against  wldidi  seid^  .  |e  '.ri-ure  hm  .elt  \n  this  inaiiiirr.

She  answers  me  constantly  with  Ntg*'  which  I  di'*r«*gard  hh
something  to  be  expetled  and  witich  is  «liierted  agaiii-,!  nun  the  ^
male,  *ami  {woceed.  flf*r  dr’pre  :sii.m  begati  dearin-/,  fier  sojunm
at  a  iudhing  resort.  !  now  maintain  %\hU  ^r-rlainiv  that  sonu*«
thing  must  havt*  happencft  there  whi<  h  had  rehst^asl  this  ‘‘Nig''
tliat  is  tii  say,  something  whicii  \\;h\  bru-ajurlv  bronglii  tt.i  her
attention  hi*r  fetninine  role,  ddierrupint  slu*  udatrai  tliat  more  j

than  a  year  ago  she  hatl  been  at  amdhet  re-a»rt  wlnna*  she  made  j

the  ac*t|uaiiitanee  cd  a  young  man,  who  wa-.  agrerablr*  to  her,  |

ami  that  tt*nd«*rrit*;ss  am!  kissi^s  had  hdhnvfnl,  ibu*  evfuiing  the  •»

young  man  hat!  fallen  UjJtm  lH*r  a-:  tlunigh  lie  wau’e  irc.aiu^'and  f

tried  to  apjwtiacdi  her  in  atj  imiei  etit  tuanner,  Whereiipmi  she  :

immetiiafely  left^  the  phu'c.  t  e;d!  her  attenlimt  to  the  f;ml  that  ;

she  tore  fiersetf  away  at  the  moment  wheti  tfu-  voimg  man  !

wished  definilcdy  ttj  foTia*  tu-r  by  his  f»ehavio!{r  inlu  a  ferniriinn
rdle^  and  atlded  the  r«*mark  that  slu'  must  havi*  inidrigoue  a
similar  r*xperiema*  during  Ifit^  pri'sent  simunrr.  Site  iliereupon  *

rtdatial  to  mi*  that  a  guest  at  the  resort,  v. hnse  aci|uaintance  i

she  hacl  made  a  rdntrt  time  prevituisly,  had  conductr-d  himstdf  i

towards  Jier  in  the  samt*  manner  as  the  af<»rr  inrnliorird  yotinu  I

man.  She  left  tin*  niace  jmd  as  she  had  dom*  ftn*  previous  year.

Fhe  **rc*ttirn  of  the  idenliisd  iSiHtv.thv)  hsub:  to  the  tudief  i

that  the  patient  must  liavt*  liarf  her  pari  in  ifm  pbtv  'diu"t*  both
tinn*-:  sin*  Indjusl  !icr>;r!t  ijiu  td  the  situation  by  a  tiei.irsitic’
arrangeriif*rif  so  as  to  brf*ak  oft  at  the  samr’  momefit.  In  tins  /
connectiiin  tlie  patient  ftirrii'Nlied  valuable  support  in  tdn*  ';|ate-
merit  that  tin*  kisses  f‘’Xiiianged  had  not  irfitaled  hi’t,  I  shriwetf
her  that  she  armiiescini  as  long  as  the  feminine  rdle  flid  not  niter
the  c|!ie.stiom  I  explained  in  her  that  her  initial  cmiragf*  wsis  the


i


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.  igr

iiasniliiie  idea  of  conquest  in  harmony  with  her  masculine  aim.
\t  tills  stagi'  her  insomnia  vanished.  She  communicated  this
■emarkahh^  improvement  in  her  condition  with  the  detracting-
-emark,  that  now  slie  would  like  to  sleep  day  and  night.  Those
vlio,  like  luyself,  havt^  learned  to  recaignize  the  tense  aggressive-
less  ui  |)atiimts  during  the  progress  of  a  p.sychotherapeutic  course
if  tr(;atnu‘nt.  an  aggressivtnuass  which  is  directed  against  all
m|UTiors,  in  tins  instance  against  the  masculine  physician,  and
who  have  thus  shar|u‘ned  tluur  penTeption  for  the  maimer  in
which  lunuadics  t'xprt^ss  tluunstdves,  will  not  misunderstand  the
.‘xprc'ssion  of  our  patient.  'Vhc  expression  shows  distinctly  that
d\v  lias  dt‘tei1t*d  the  r<\sult  of  the  treatment,  but  that  she  takes
the  trouble  to  dc'traid  with  a  light  touch  from  this  result  and
[lenee  friUii  nu\  Slu^  insinuatingly  calls  my  attention  to  the
faii  that  one  inu!  has  only  hmm  nqilaced  by  another.

More  idieady  qm-.tioma!  t!u*  patient  staltul  that  during  her  four
we«*ks  (d  insomnia  *  lie  had  eonstantty  thought  iluring  her  wake¬
ful  flight':  how  worthless  life  was.  Wv.  understand  that  she  did
not  merely  tliink  of  it,  but  had  workta]  at  it.  Now  when  the
male  vnvtnv  in  t!ie  form  of  the  physician,  whom  she  subjects  to
the  sairn^  vain.it ion  as  man  generally,  confronts  her  and  lays  bare
lier  (-raving  for  !;ecnritv  and  tlius  undermines  her  effort  to  gain
s<aauity  bv  uhmu  ;  «d  lau*  wakcfnlmrss,  sln^  trit\s,  when  forced  to
sleep,  to  ludittle  liiiu  In*  a  :.au'ting  a  superfluity  of  slta^p.

Neurotii-  insomnia  is  a  symbolic  attempt  to  (‘seape  from  the
tlrfmiscdm.  ness  of  sleep  ami  to  k<*ep  in  mind  the  securities
against  iHunsitli,  nmlerneath.  I'luMlreamis  another  form  of  this
etloif,  equal  to  a  i  (nnpromis«\  inasmiK’h  as  it  covers  as  in  sleep,
the  defenselrssiif*',s  and  eonsis|U(uit  feiding  of  infiwinrity  by  the
masculine  jUide  ;t.  I'he  dream,  aca'ording  to  my  observation,
aUvavs  drivt*:'  towards  saH'urity  and  has  lluToforc  the  function  of
foretlioiudd .  'That  this  is  ata'omplished  through  the  medium
of  facts  Irom  t^xperimna*  is  easily  eiimprehensilile,  and  thus  it  is
Ilia!  in  tin'  dnsim  eontmit  and  dream  thoughts  tlu'  defeat.s  which
one  ha%  <’>;pericnct‘d  conn'  in  ligjd.  a  (*ireumsianc‘e  which  has  led
Freud  to  thc^  formation  of  bis  heurisiically  valualile  but  other-
wisr  itiqierfeii.  and  ofie-sid(*d  tl'umry  of  dreams.

After  a  prolonged  lussitafion  and  after  having  her  attention
eallcsl  to  the  negaUve  signibtsuu  t'  of  her  he.sitatlon,  the  patient
brouglit  a  fenv  davs  later  the  following  dream  :  I  was  in  front
(if  ilu*  \SiiiHlHtff  *  (Vienna's  great  insane  asylum).  I  hurry
past,  II, V  /  see  a  dark  fertn  within/*

In  order  tti  avahd  ail  artiiiiaal  influencing  of  the  patient,
es|KHial!y  in  the  interpretation  of  the  dream,  I  avoid  all
rxjdanaticiiis  of  my  dream  theory  and  only  refer  to  the  fact  that
the  dream  rouses  trains  of  thought.s  which  betray  again  how  the
|iatirnt  tries  to  svenre.  herself  agminst  sleep  which  is  felt  by  her


THE  NEURUTiC  CUNSTITUTIHN


i93

to  be  a  defenseless  condition,  arid  which  recalls  to  her  her
defenselessness  in  regards  to  life.  In  cases  such  as  tht?  mm  Just
given,  who  iviiere  the  wish  alnn'e  all  is  to  tli-H'Usr.  tin'  frar  of  the
feminine  role,  1  indicate  that  -.Icep  may  be  udl  as  a  leriiiiiine
situation.

The  figure  of  speech,  '*  lying  in  the  anas  ol  Morpheus/’  the
frequent  sensation  of  being  paralysed*  of  being  crusiieci,  the
analysis  of  nightmares,  etc.,  and  th«‘  feminine  trends  wdiich  I  am
able  III  discover  in  all  clreariis,  tr<*nds  out  of  whiHi  the  dream
raises  itself  to  the  masculine  protest,  and  rvherc.^  fiirtheriiiore  the
advent  of  sleep-lariishing  consciousness  awsikems  an  individual
iliouglit-association  suggesting  a  teminine  stluatitiii,  prove  with
certainty  the  fact  that  evc*ry  dream  must  reveal  a  {irogression
from  femininity  to  rriascailinity,  lliat  nut  every  dream  is  of  stirli
a  nature  a.s  to  convince  the  beginner  of  the  icirrectness  of  my
conception,  I  have  alrtsuly  emphasis, ed.  This  arises  from  the  fact
thfit  ill  a  sketch,  and  we  must  regard  itir  dream  as  siirli,  the
sense  and  meaning  td'  mrr«^  traces  tif  ideas  mied  be  ferreted  out
and  rornpletial,  a  thing  ivhieh  is  never  tliiticull  for  the
experiencetl,  I  teach  the  patient  tlia!  he  niu*a  re|pird  the  tlreaiii
as  he  woulii  the  sketch  of  a  luiiiiting,  the  details  ii|  which  he  is
obliged  to  til!  in  according  to  his  tnqiressiom:.

After  this  exjdanatiun  the  iid'elligenl  patienl  priicreiltHi
imassistet!,  **  Steinhoff  misins  insane,  ‘rius  juuiit  induvitrs  that
I  am  on  the  verge  of  insanity.  But  I  tmsten  awsivs  'riirn  wdiat
you  always  tell  me  ocaairs  to  me,  I  am  running  awmy  from  my
lerninine  rd!e,  Hence  becoming  insane  aiul  the  feminine
rcMe  are  tlie  same  thing.**  t  now  !rat!  her  on  fo  rmieavor  to  furi’e
a  meaning  into  the  dream,  am!  for  this  fmrpo-:-.e  make  use  of  the

iKitient’s  spirit  of  rivalry  w‘hii*li  is  known  to  infa  in  order  to  excite
ler  zeal  when  diflirulties  prr^sent  thrmse!v«*s  by  saying,  But
one  certainly  ought  U.i  lie  able  to  imdrrslaiid  something  under
that  idea/*

I'katient :  Pei  haps  that  if  woiih!  be  insane  fo  play  a  femifiine

Tide  ?  ' '

I  :  '*  That  \vmilti  lie  an  answer  to  a  ijueslitm.  What  then  miBt
the  Cjiiestion  have  been  ?  **

Patient  :  **  Yon  ttdd  me  yiederday,  I  should  not.  hr  afraid  of

my  feminine  rdle/’

I  :  **  Therefore  an  answer  <lirertecl  agairBi  me,  in  line  wstfi

cnir  r-onvarsaticHis,  a  conflict  against  the  man.  And  Ihr  black
figure  ?  ’*

Patient :  **  Perhaps  death  ?  **

I  :  **  Try  now  to  fit  death  into  the  Kiluation/*

This  was  difficult  for  the  patient,  althougli  it  in  wholly  dear
that  she  lias  taken  the  fear  of  death  m  a  figure  for  her  flight
from  the  feminine  rdle,  in  order  fo  pre.«ent  ’it  in  a  ^iifliciently


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.


193


trang  niaiuu'r,  Tlie  connection  of  sexuality  and  death  is  oftfen
|Hiken  of  in  pliilosophy  and  poetry.  The  analysis  of  neurotics
ften  imllcatt"  tins  connection  in  the  sense  of  an  affect-
.ccentuating  “  conditional  proposition.'*

The  sense  of  the  <lreani  is  now  shown  to  be  an  expedient
lirected  against  thc‘  physician,  which  with  our  knowledge  of  the
uitient's  phantasy-life  should  l>e  made  to  read  :  “It  would  be

risane  io  submit  to  a  man, . cqua!  to  death.**  But  according  to

icr  estimation,  s!u‘  had  already  submitted  by  the  fact  that  she
,ad  since'  llu*  h«'giuning  of  the  treatment.  This  dream

hm‘eforc*  rtwadts  against  slt'ep,  and  her  d<‘rogatory  remark  that
hi*  wouiil  now  like*  to  sleep  day  and  night,  is  in  line  with  this.
riKT«‘fore  the  rieiirtdie  predispositions  ot  this  patient  against  the
)ossi!iility  of  a  man  winning  influence  over  her  is  laid  bare,  and
t  is  showm  that  the  patient  aeded  and  dreamed  as  though  she
vrre  conscious  <4'  her  guiding  purposed

This  t'ssc'iitiid  pretlisposilion,  her  tendency  to  detract,  her
miging  ftu”  vifdory  over  men  an<l  her  neurotic  craving  for
<*curifv,  wliii*li  stands  menacing  in  th<'  liackground  with  the
crrcir  e4  deatli  and  insanity,  hml  also  caused  the  development
I?  t!u*  iirurosis  as  a  strengthened  security.  Through  it  the
lafient  is  unfittf*«l  for  lite.  I'lie  m*nrotic  apperception,  whicR
‘onjurc^s  up  a  i'onnectitm  between  low,  insanity  and  death  has
iuurthing  of  the  riu)*  of  poetry.  How  lirmly  fixed  this  is  in  the
hough! s  td  the  jsiticut  i:i  shown  in  lu‘r  first  a(‘count  :  the  young
nan  Inul  fall<*n  uprui  hrr  as  thcuigh  he  were*  insane.

It  is  td’tcm  loanu’d  frtcn  the  anamne.s<*s  of  male  neurotics  that
hf-y  luid  be<m  under  the  influence  of  a  strong  woman,  mother,
faifu'f.  sisfe-r,  wlm  thendon*,  inst<'ad  of  their  feminine  r61e  or
n  acldition  therf'lt*,  plaved  a  masculine  one,  were  above,  and  to
vliom  tlio  env!romm*nt  did  not  deny  recognition,  sometimes  even
lisapprohafiem,  slunving  fluit  t!H7\verc  really  regarded  as  men.
Ffiis  fiivumstama*  also  ciftf*n  teruls  to  strengthen  tlie  uncertainty
if  fho  mmrofi(.*aliv  di-ptisc*d  child,  who  trie.s  to  arrive  at  a
Hinviction  of  Ids  inanliness  hy  understanding  the  sexual
liftcrmicf-n  Iv;fKH*ially  when  one  endeavors  to  gain  security
’hr*'iiig!i  knowhsifp'  a  certain  ^a*x  inepHsitiveness  forces  him  to
■orisfantlv  seek  visual  (amflrmation  of  his  .sexual  superiority,  a
icrnssitv  of  obfaiiiing  <h*finite  knowledge  and  full  comprehension
if  tbf  ffUiKiie  origans  which  approaches  the  masculine  guiding  line
mere  lUMfly,  iii  |'jro|iortion  as  it  is  created  out  of  preparations
For  the  fuftirf*.

f!i«.*  pafholordcal  uncertainty  adheres  to  the  neurotic  as  a
['ifriext  and  tauifirmat i<m  of  his  fear  of  woman  even  after  he^  is
:fiarric‘<i,  so  fiiat  the  <*x|iression  is  often  heard,  that  the  feminine

*  |arli:fril  nihiititm  pn  pti#'  pmir  <4  Knia.  “My  lif^

.%  tfrrs‘rs.}fs"»,  no/  Uo-iaiiinv  t*i  my  thinkinu  fkf*  rojilrnl  rtf  kniAvlodias


^94


THE  NEUROTIC  (‘ONSTITiaiON


sexual  ap|KiKitiis,  the  ciinditien  uf  %'trginify.  Ic^giliiiiar?  af
chiltirem,  fatherhootl.  is  a  mystery  just  as  a  wtiiiiaii  herself  is.
Along  with  this  cltssire^  to  ijhtain  sati-^faetiiui  thriuigh  visual
pereepliuit  tif  the  feniale  organs,  there  is  at  times  asHMeiateul  in
neiirotically  tlisi'a's-asl  cEihlren  a  id  .sinister  lerling  ‘Luiger,
as  though  oliseure  thoughts  anuse  in  the  mimt  of  the  hov,  lhal  hii
future  life,  his  victory  or  defeat  were  dependent  upon  the  soliiliiin
he  has  re;uii«*ci  coiu'eriiing  the  sexual  question.  It  !•;  in  the
nature  of  things,  that  frequently  the  opporfunify  for  lids  sort
of  visual  confirmation  is  cudy  otlered  whrii  tin-  woman  iHaaipies
a  position  alcove  the  Imv.  Even  this  :.nial!  ciimnn-.lafiee  forrus,  as
I  have*  repeatedly  statfni,  a  tieamativc*  represmlatiori  of  the
feminine  superitnify  in  the  phantasy  tif  itu-  fieuiinic  iiuli vidua!
%vho  stands  in  fear  of  woman,  Cangliofer  and  Stendhal  give
actanints  in  the  hist^uv  td  their  chiltfhood  id  these  terrifyiiig
experienct^s  whii'h,  it  is  Ihought.  left  behind  perfiiarirnl  tisu'es,
Tlie  fcTror  wsis  in  itself  alnsidv  a  serurilv  of  tin’  snjiirrd  fiiasciiliiie
and  the  exidine,  Manie  rfuiuiinr'd  as  an  admoidlion.  to
i'e  undeo-tood  !iiq,irativelv,  of  caution  in  regard  to  ivoriien,
Frei|uenf!v  tin*  dero*»atory  tfuulene'v  ^f‘|s  in  a!  the  poinf  wlit'fe
tire  suj>eriin'it V  id  woman  asNimu's  a  thrr*atrudno  aspnl  ain!  Iradn
to  a  comparison  t»f  male  and  female  atlvaiitayo'-,  and
disadvantagt's.  lln*  ale.traet  and  tigmativr  repreamtsifion  of
tin*  inferioritv  of  waunan,  in  dreams,  jdiantasies,  wif  and  si  irine,
frequentlv  r«*soifs  to  tin*  rirode  of  expre'Catm  of  a  !o';f  membiT,
of  .^aipernumerarv  cavities,  (hie  of  mv  patient-;  wlio  M.iflrrrf!
from  vertigo  had  a  flream  one  time  hdlowing  an  umraiaHv  '.tormy
scene  with  Ids  wife  whicdi  summarily  and  essenfiallv  brought
about  a  degradation  of  Ids  dominening  wife

Thr  pit'iurr  of  a  hirfh  trunk  one  pndif  llicre

Wits,  ii  hranrh  ifiih  a  round  swnllinip  7*hcre  a  funi  fdUrn

off  aiul  I  Ihiii  ihi;  impir  -.Aaui  uv  ihnuph  ihi-,  rea;  a  Iruiiab*  ifendal
ergfia,'*

f  havf*  alrendv  discussed  sinsfi  dreams,  as  have  others  also.
To  me  saic'h  dreams  represent  tiguralively  the  citirsfioti
rom*ernirig  the  diffrreiires  of  sex.  which  is  amwvrrrd  after  the
manner  of  cdiihlrefi  flial  flir  girl  is  a  l*oy  w\m  has  been  deprived
of  the  male  nrgam  The  alntve  dfesirn  tils  into  the  psychic
sitiinfion  td  the  dreamer,  inasmuch  as  if.  reveals  the  tluuighC  t
am  a  man  who  has  fieen  ileprived  td  manliness,  who  is  weak  and
ill,  who  is  in  danger  rd  being  umler,  td  fading  briirat!i/*  Now
he  h;m  fire  fsisis  of  oprralitm.  he  belndits  his  presfigr  liirfdfiishnl
and  takes  lirtnith.  for  the  efbjrt  again  ft)  regain  power.  The
m«isciiline  protest  now  sets  in  in  wstking  hours  as  lyranrif,  out*'
break?;  cd  rage  and  art?;  rd  intidelify,

It  might  h'C  Tnenfioned  in  fids  eonnerlirm  that  one  oflrn  hears
from  neurotics  that  in  moments  of  per*;ana!  danger  nr  wlirn  tliey


195


11  iE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.

thicMtc'iuHl  tlu'‘y  perceive  <3.  shortening  or

ul  the  p^rnitals,  at  times  also  a  feeling  of  pain  which
hn’t'ilily  ifnjH'l*.  tliem  tu  a  itTmination  of  the  situation."  These
piumiuiifma  frtniiieiitly  accompany  states  of  anxiety  in  high
places  u-hrrt'^  there  is  fear  of  failing.  The  shortening  of  the
geiiiti!**.  ill  Jiu'  hath  lu^irly  always  causes  a  reaction  in  the
mnirutie  imiivtilr.iL  I  Iv  ieels  out  of  sorts  and  at  times  experiences
prrfisiirr  in  file  heat  I.

I  have  alreativ  eiuphasi'^etl  that  homosexuality  as  a  tendency
and  hehavier  is  tlie  rc'sulf  ai  tlu'  ft‘ar  ol  the  opposite  sex.  In
addilieai  it  iii.iy  l>e  hrielly  mentiomal  that  the  over-valuation  of
the  heiiui-a’Kua!  jiartiier  serves  also  to  raise  the  neurotic  invert
ill  his  nwii  esliiiuititm.  In  mmroses  homosexuality  even  when
cstrrird  iiittj  {nsit  fiie  is  always  hnind  to  he  a  .symbol  by  means  of
it  is  -Mme.ht  ti>  ulaee  the  indivhluar.s  own  superiority
hevoiitl  t|iir‘.tion.  Ifus  mechanism  is  similar  to  that  of  a.
re!i|,„;ieiis  I'l-.VihHf.is  in  wiiicli  the  nearness  of  God  has  the  signi-
liissncr'  nf  an  fdevatitm.

Um*  0!  thf'  irains  which  tin*  fi*ar  of  woman  is  especially  likely
tu  talu^  i’:  ■::-.v|*!u!i»p!inhia,  I'lu*  train  of  thought  of  such  phobists
(Adler,  •.y|diiin!M|iiu4tia,  !.  <\)  is  u.stially  the  fallowing:  They
(car  ih.if  they  w'lil  nijf  \u'  aide’  ta  play  a  <lominating  part  in  regard
to  wttman  tirisiiisf*  <4  smne  fending  of  inferiority,  for  which  they;
have  le.iily  all  -MtC:  at  fnnndat at  times  without  conscious
mufivaiitin,  In  thi'-  inaiuier,  fniluvving  the  increasing  trend  to
heliftle  wuiiKOi,  llirv  anivf’  at  ’'ajsjdeieiM  trains  of  thought  which
atf'  fu  ,\e«  nrc”  flifun  against  *'.cxnal  rfdatitms.  Sometimes  woman  is
a  riddle,  smortina' .  a  4'rimina!  being,  always  thinking  of  adorn-
no'iif  ami  rx|irn  e  and  riexually  insatiable.  The  suspicions
cuie.lanflv  aii‘>r  that  a  girl  i’i  tudy  hunting  for  support,  is  bent  on
captufing  the  man.  is  la'aflv  and  cunning  and  always  bent  on
rvi!,  l‘hr-.e  trail! ;  td  lliought  are  universal  ami  are  found  at  all
prriuti  ,  td  ld".liuv.  T'liry  enierge  in  the  most  sublime  and  the
luwert  ereafions  uf  art,  have  it  {dat'c  in  the  thoughts  and  efforts
Ilf  f!ir  and  create  in  man  and  in  .society  a  constant

jirfnh’.pM'.ilitin  whit'll  deveh^ps  suspicious  and  (Mutious  traits,  in
order  to  a!wav‘-‘  keep  in  ttmch  with  the  (memy  and  to  be  in  good
lime  for  the  drhmse  against  knavish  attacks.  It  is  an^error  to
tldiik  that  it  i*.  only  the  man  who  harbor.s  distrust  of  hi.s  sexual
icirtrier.  The  Mtnir  trait  is  fouml  alst>  in  the  woman,  often  less
diafifiii  in  character,  when  fictions  of  her  own  strength  put  a
chn  lc  let  the  dmilft  ef  her  own  value,  but  flashing  tip  rnosfc
%tr»ifigiv,  when  tlie  feeling  of  degradation  becomes  overpowering.

In  the  disputes  <*f  {dons  savants  of  the  middle  ages,  questions

*  At  fr^liny  rff  ta  thi'  aheimnf^rn  to  the  oryaRfc

‘ifiii  flir  I'MfilM,?*  rri/eai  ■  er  nuly  th«*Ho  itt  timc‘rt  pnllutioiiB  takd'

..Ml  rr:irf,nr  ttl  muMfufju#!  goal.


THE  NEUROTIC  CUNSTITUl^^ION


196

arose  as  to  whether  waniari  had  a  soul,  wdirther  she  w.is  a  hufiiaii
being,  and  the  general  prevalc'iiee  of  siriiilar  thoughts  is  reflecleci
in  the  insane  burning  of  witches  in  the  renttirirs  I'olitncing  |ti
which  gO'Vernnient,  church  and  the  hlindetl  {Hi|nd4i*e  lent  a  hand.
This  detraction  from  women  in  hate*  as  well  as  in  love  which
recurs  constantly  in  iliristian,  Jewish  and  Motiamiiiedaii  rrligiims
usages,  break  out  irresistibly  in  the  timorous,  uiirrrlaiii  fiian
aiifl  so  coiiipletely  fills  the  w'orld  of  tlunigjit  of  the  finirolic,  lliat
the  most  accentuated  trait  of  eharatier  in  the  nriirc'Jlii*  psyche  is
found  to  be  the  tendrncy  to  tietrat't  from  the  sexual  |i:irtiirr.
Thus  the  outposts  which  t>ffer  security  to  the  r|;0‘'j.‘ii!isiu«iisiiess
iMS'tuiie  estabiished  and  the  peiiiliar  plav  of  the  neurotic  traits
of  character  begins.  Continutms  testing,  feeling,  atteiiipis  to
siihjiigalt!,  fo  find  fault  with  and  to  degrade  the  {laririer  set  in,
always  favored  by  Iht*  fad  that  aftenlitui  and  inlrresl  is  clirrrteii
to  a  single  purpose,  to  keep  in  touch  with  the  rnemv  and  lii
prevent  a  surprise.  As  long  thr  tendeucv  to  drtra«iiofi  wilti
its  outward  t*spre:ssioris,  ilisfrust.  ftsir,  jealtni.%v.  tyranriv  exists
ther<*  is  no  of  a  iuire^  of  the*  neurolic.  A"*  %ve  have  seen

wuirthy  creations  of  art  and  literature  wdiich  have  rrcinveci
reccnpdtiori  on  all  siiies  owe  tlieir  tuigin  to  this  femtrncy,  From
thr*  “  lorastrata  fothe  kreir/el  w'ritets  *'  leath".  thr  same  path
as  from  the  CitU'go  Medusa  to  flit*  Syphilis  i>oi,  which  aroM'  brfote
the  vyes  of  Lenans  or  (laiigliofer.  The  guiding  liiir  whirli
prevails  ill  Trd'.foi''-  Krt'Ut/er  Sonata  .ind  %vhit  h  Nitivrs  after  flii-
degradation  of  woman  ^vas  |ierci‘ptibie  even  in  his  hoyhoiod  when
he  rlioved  his  fiit'urr  hriilt*  out.  id  the  wlmlmv  An  old  gtiitiing
liiii"  which  is  revtniled  in  the  mvth  of  the  pfUson-.gir!  *  of  anlii|iiitv,
in  the  middle  ages  and  in  the  hrgiimifig  tif  mmlrrii  timr-s  in  the
fear  of  witches,  cirmems,  vanipiren  and  sprites  lias  miilergofie  a
■tharige  of  form  and  has  betaune  tfir  Nyp!u!t»ph.o!iia  of  lo-^day.
lA^ggio  rcdatcH  oi  a  man  wlni  bait  violale«i  a  girl  The  girl
changed  into  a  devil  and  vanished  with  a  stench,

All  these  trains  of  tfumglil  returning  in  the  sairir  inatiiier  a?i
they  do  in  the  dream  am!  in  the  psyche  of  the  iirurtilii*,  reveal
the  cautious  man,  doubtful  of  his  manliness,  who  series  to  sertire
himself  from  real  life  iiisf  .as  rimch  by  the  , selling  uti  of  scarerriwvH
as  by  the  fear  fn*  hits  of  this  life  itself,  |■iecal|sr  of  the  veneration
of  :in  ideal

The  bantering  note  in  stirh  an  attitude  towafi.|  woitian  is  of
little  significance  in  so  far  as  our  view  is  cfuicrrfird.  It  shows
rnorfDVff  an  effort  to  he  guilty  of  no  exaggrralitiii,  to  firr.srrve
deronim  and  to  save  one’s  self  from  ridi«-ii!r  bv  a  spirit  of  ivil,
The  rase  is  similar  to  that  of  Gogol  wdneir  strong  c'lsiving  for
security  is  percepfiblr  in  rvery  vein  of  his  piiefrv,  In  his

’  Williiaifi  llfrt/.,  *'  Tlir'^  <.'f  Mil*

Aklia*»i!r*  ii#-r  Wi«?ii*rrfir^'siffrfi,  mV?.


%h.h  j|  IviVPf


197


THE  FEAR  OF  THE  PARTNER,  ETC.

Jahrmarkt  vm\  Sorotschinsk  *  he  makes  a  character  say,
ill  heaven,  why  dost  thou  punish  us  poor  sinners  so?'
;rhere  is  already  so  nuich  trouble,  why  didst  thou  also  send
wtnuen  into  the  world  r"  “  In  the  Dead  Souls”  of  this  great
|HHd.  wlif^  was  mairotic  during  his  entire  life,  suffered  from
roni{ndsi)ry  inastiirbation  and  died  in  a  mad  house,  he  makes  his
lu‘ro  redifud  on  seeing  a  young  girl  :

**  A  superb  little  woman!  The  best  about  her  is  that  she
serins  to  liavc^  just  <aime  out  of  a  boarding  school  or  institute  and
as  yet  lisi':  none  of  tho:a*  spei-ial  fetninme  traits  that  disfigure
the  whole  sex.  She  is  still  a  pure  child,  everything  about  her
i*.  slfaiglilforwsirit  aiul  simple  ;  she  sptxiks  from  he^r  heart  and
liiiglis  when  slit*  feels  like  it.  All  possibilities  lie  in  her  nature  ;
sli€*  fiiay  heriuno  a  supetT  creature  hut  she  may  become  a  stunted
litdiig  and  tlmt  w'il!  prcdialdy  be  the  result  when  the  aunts  and
rriaiiiiiias  srt  Ihemselves  to  edurate  her.  They  will  stuff  her  so-
fiill  td  theii'  wornait's  nonsense  in  a  year  that  her  own  father-
wiiiild  no  Itmgrr  reeogirr/,e  her.  She  will  acquire  a  pompous  and
atlfn  tf'd  imturra  will  turn  and  move  and  courtesy  according  to-
rnlf^'i  Irariif'd  bv  hear!*  rack  lier  brains  over  the  questions,  what
tif  •  av,  liow  murh  to  say,  and  with  whom  to  speak,  and  how  she
shall  look  .if  her  tsiv.ilier,  et(\,  she  will  constantly  be  in  the
griMtr'-:i  anxiedv  lf‘sl  she  may  have  spoken  some  superfluous
word.  ;irifl  fiiiallv  w-i!!  no  longer  know  what  she  ought  to  do  and
wi!!  go  w:indr*ring^  fltronidi  life,  a  great  lie.  Fie!  the  devil! —
Fi»r  the  rrst  t  would  like  to  know,  of  wdiat  sort  she  isT*


*  Fr-iii  f'i  r.in**  lit  MihwhtMU  Hrinharclt,  1912.


(liAI^THR  IX


SELF-REPROACHES.  SKLF-TORl'i'RK.  i'UNrklTUsN  ANO  ASCKTICISM,
FLAGELLATIilN.  NKCKiLSES  IN  t‘iHLOREN  ;  SCiCIIlK  AMtl
SCICIDAL  IIHvAS

Under  the  forms  of  ih«*  i!c*uri^tie  litirs  of  Oi»iu!iirl  lor  llir  piirjitise
of  seoiiring  thc‘  iniiscailinf*  pristesf.  Irriuls  uf  srll'^^o^rc-rotiuii,  .self-
rcprtKiclL  se!f4iirture  ami  Niiiiaile  appear  m  iiiarkrd  aia-'eiitiialioii.
Oiir  a:slonisliitic*nf  Iose:S  in  furor  as  as  %ve  M-r  that  tlir  wtiotr
arrangement  tif  the*  lunirosis  fit!Un\>  the  trail  tif  ‘.otf  .lurtiirr,  llial
the  neurosis  is  a  srlfOinliiririg  exjieiliml  whose  |iiir|Hra^  it  h  to
imhancT  the  feeling  of  |i<‘r-ioii4!  rstreiii.  In  f.ul,  the  first  stirriii||s
of  the  :iggr«‘ssive  IrnctfUiev  whieh  hi  flimiei!  against  ifie
iricIivichiarK  iiWfi  pf'r..stm,  origiimte  in  the  cliilil  itum\i  satnation
ill  miiii'h  t!u*  cliild  tliriuigfi  tlcMtli,  sliaire  aiid  a!!  mhIs

of  roiisfruiieil  tltiieieiu'ies  «erks  to  prej^an*  p.un  lor  the  jiannil’*
or  tO'  ke^ep  hiiiisrif  ill  tlunr  mini!.  Hu'-  Ir.u!  aliradv  rlia,iai'ff‘ri/rs
tile  mniri^lieallv  clispie.ri!  i'‘!ahi  who  has  ftaniet!  r\pei!iriits  unf  uf
the  reminisimnres  of  the  |iheiionuma  t»f  siimatii"'  mferioritv  aiiit
out  of  flieir  rig^niticauirf*  for  the  masimatoui  oi  thr-  iSiii-a  ioti^ '
ness,  for  the  piu}iO'a‘of  inrrea-aug  the  temhuii*"  ami  interest  of
the  [lartuils,  llir  ihwelopri!  mairivsis  fatih!'.  nii  tlu-sr  r\pei!ienf r
and  infrodiiees  thidr  arfivitv  ihiiaigii  a  reinfori  emnit  of  the
fietion,  as  soon  as  thi-;  is  da-mafi.h/d  h\  the  glowing  tt'rling  of
irrseriirity.  It  is  wtdl  ktnnvn  how  -itrong  e\»o  rih.iiions  lake  a
harul  in  this.  Iitnv  the  hailiieinatorv  «,  haOH  ter,  the  anti*  ipatory
forre  of  the  iirurotie  a.ssists  in  fids  aad  fi.‘e,v  thr  sifioitiofi  of  the
aft,«''k  and  tlir*  dislurhara  i^-s  of  health  with  the  rrsiiltanl
donu!uin«-y  over  fin’  eiivironfnmt  fakes  plitfs  Pai .ulo'^itsd  as
it  may  seem  at  first  idam  t*  the  neiueUir  is  oidv  at  |ieai  e  when
In*  has  an  aftaek  hehirid  him.  lane!  has  aireadv  esdlrd  atteiilioii
to  tliirs  fact  ;  I  ran  onlv  add  a-,  the  h.i-.is  h^r  d  that  it  !•;  Iirtsiiise
he  has  then  gained  the  '.enirifv  of  hi*.  *a!|irriorily.  if  ordv  for  a
sliort  time.

Tile  frail  of  cdiaracier  of  wd-diing  ft.*  e^r-e!  a!!  tether  ..  is  alsn
rofifaiiied  in  fhe  fr«e!ir!o  fo  ^’diirh  the  n.re:is4ii-  eon-.faiitiv  gives
exprt'ssiiiru  that  hr  e^iads  a!!  others  in  pain.,  lie  uses  this
roiivirtioii  }ier*:iiisr  it  fiirni^.lirs  him  wdth  a  basis  ttf  ii|irr,.4lifui  fof
[fading  hifiise!!  in  oppusibmi  toothfi-;,  fur  .^voiding  a  drei-don  nr
for  making  an  aff.ii'k.  line;  if  hapfims  also  that  attirlc*.,  jiaitis,
fm  :i  disrasf*  are  rvi-hrst  for,  wlom  the  siluafioii  drinaiid’.;  it,
Soiiirdimes  the  wish  alone  serves  the  |nirpte...e  of  an  aflat  k,  wfieii


SELF4^EPR0ACHES,  SELF-TORTURE,  ETC.  199

as  a  reminder  it  already  terrUies  the  environment.  For  the
patient  s  tiwn  psyche  it  is  at  tinu‘s  sufficient,  as  a  female  patient
once  told  me,  if  a  phantasy  is  formed  as  result  of  which  the
neurtitif  suffers  pain  through ^ the  acts  of  another.  This  brings
aiuHit  the  teeliiig^id’  suppression  or  mistreatment,  awakens  the
craving  for^senirity  ami  introduces  the  masculine  protest.

dlie  jagiiitle.im'f^  of  the  feeling  of  guilt,  of  the  conscience  and
self»repriia«*lu's  as  iorins  of  stanirity-giving  fictions  has  already
tieeii  tleserilied.  Nut  rarely  one  finds  in  the  psychology  of
riiastiirliatitiri  an  admixture^cif  frails  of  atonement  and  of  a  desire
to  harm,  tin.'  hitter  to  be  likental  to  an  obstinate  revolt  against
the  parents, ^the  former  as  a  elieap  pretext  or  sanctimonious  act.

Tilt*  injuring  tif  others  through  atonement  is  one  of  the  most
siititlr  expedients  of  the*  neurtitic,  for  example  when  he  launches
fufth  ill  SfdfH'urses,  Idtvts  of  suicide  oiten  reveal  the  same
nircdiaiiiNni,  wlurli  is  eU*arly  seen  in  joint  suicides.  When  one
of  my  patients  \va^*  trc'attnl  by  amdluT  physician  with  cold  douches
ftir  iinpolffiee,  he  expressiat  tiu*  wish  “  that  the  physician  might
tear,  injure  his  gimitals.*'  When  two  years  before  he  had  suffered
great  lussrs  in  !nisiar;;:s  ht*  wished  to  commit  suicide,  although  he
was  nti!!  a  rit“h  man.  I'hc  motive  force  of  these  execrations
tv.  Siiyloih)  i .  nmirotii*  avarice.  'Flu*  analysis  offers  a  complete
fwpiariation.  hi  tualer  tti  pndtHl  himself  from  expenses  for  girls
hr  t^Kecrates  liimseif  also  when  he  is  obliged  to  pay  physicians'
trr^,  This  i'.  cmiaitily  act  ompanietl  by  a  half  conscious  feeling
tlial  Ids  wi’.lirs  nrrd  nut  br  alisolutfdy  fulfilled.  lie  execrates
rsprtiallv  hi-  Irvffv,  for  this  is  the  meaning  of  his  self-
rrjuaiailn-;  and  execrations,  whmi  he  has  paid  a  large  account
fji  ought  fit  pay  orifc  'Fhen  every  small  expense  disturbs  him.

Hr  fr.ir-,  thr  ilianii  t»f  sexuality.  Even  his  own  sister  he  would
like  to  throw  info  nd’dbrtiine,  or  his  sister’s  <iaughter,  both  of
whtiin  livrd  with  him.  At  tin*  same  time  he  must:  have  estimated
rxrcratiilfis  a*;  of  very  littlr  imptirtanr'e  or  perhaps  even
ncprrtrtl  lilt*  opposiltc  'Fids  is  slmwn  by  the  great  number  of  his
iiicM-mrcs  for  sm-urity,  among  whit'h  tin*  selbexecrations  only
jdayetl  an  imagidlicaiit  part.  He  stxnjres  himself  to  a  much
giratrr  extent  through  l!ir  arrangc‘ment  of  impotence.  Self-
ilrtfaclifUi  ami  self  ■  torture  our  pati«*nt  constructed  in  the  same
foaiiiin  as  hypochondria,  in  onl(*r  to  hold  before  his  eyes  the
frr!ifi|^^  of  Ids  own  inferiority,  to  feel  himself  too  weak,  too  small,
fott  itfiwiirliiy.  They  appear  as  himlrances  and  in  this  way  take
Ilir  plar'e  of'ilotibts.'  Neurotic  girls  who  fear  the  man,  who  do
no!  %vT4i  to  ptav  a  frmirdne  rAle,  worry  constantly  over  their
f r-iiwfli  hair,  tlirdr  birth  marks  and  fear  their  children  might  be
^drrdlarlv  ileforiiied.  In  many  c*ases  they  were  homely  children
or  wt*rr  sTehled  for  a  fireferrml  brotluT  when  they  were  small
girls.  In  tme  of  rriv  female  patients  with  a  compulsion  neurosis,


mo


THE  NEUROllC  CONSTlTUllilN


her  coiii|:iiiIsijry  tiunight  rcviMittHl  as  belief  in  an  i^nLirgetnefit:
of  the  pores  of  her  skin,  to  be  uruIcTsti-nnl  syiii!ioiti”*i!!y  as  a
st^ciirity  against  the  feminine  riMe.  Anothrr  ttn'in  uf  sf‘lt4intiire
is  manifestcHl  in  the  teiuleiii*y  to  aftmemenls.  They  iiiay  be
recognizetl  as  siiiiple  era\*ings  h^r  Net/urity  when  it  is  fakim  iitlti
consiiif ration  that  these  patients  seek  jie.t  as  little  as  those  with
the  allieil  heeling  of  reniorse  tor  the  pa^t.  |i>  ehange  m  better
tilings  in  the  future,

The  syitiptoni  e!e»ir!y  aims  at  the  future,  ami  this  ji,e.|  as  iiiijrh
when  it  reveals  ils«*lf  as  of  personal  emotion  in  indivitiiuil  toriii  aiitl
eandiict  as  when  it  is  revealed  sot  ially  in  religiiuts  prrhn’inanees.
As  in  all  lornns  af  eravirig  for  seetirily,  in  this  ease  too,  it  nril:
at  all  c*Xidiifitnl  llial  recently  experieiu'ril  rvil  thinighl--;  am!  arts
come  to  ligitt.  Its  piirpost*  is  It^  binsune  efieetivr  as  a  reslfaiiiing
admoiiititui  and  to  serve  as  p-rotd  iif  fh*^  WiU'thv  iistenlioiis  of  the
one  eoneerned.  No!  last  td  all  in  this  srlf- iiisprt  tiiin  is  t!te
impulse  to  afoneiiieni  and  the  emphasis  of  inm’f  good  qiialilies
wherein  tiu'  ronlrast  other  petJple  is  always  thoiighi  of,  so
nuich  so,  that  the  tendimey  to  attmeinen!  and  mnoisr  at  liiiies
betrays  a  strongly  antaginnslio,  inlraetaltlr.  iniinii'a!  note,.  The
<*pidrmii*  cTarac'ttU'  tif  atls  4,if  altmemfott  i'.  ^earerlv  ever  wiffit,iut
this  pomp,  prsiple  vif*  with  eat'h  iHher  in  frying  out,  werping',
in  Sfuf-torliire  and  eontrition.

The  pieadtniily  therefore  id  gaining  a  feeling  of  Miprri«in‘ily  hv
means  of  fasting  and  praying,  wearing  oi  ■•.aHoloth  and  adies,
edr.,  will  have  a  rharni  h»r  weak  souls  as  stum  as  Ihev  have  the
indination  to  appear  pitms  and  youtd.  religions  ami  siiblimr,  And
aKceliri.sm  wall  lea«l  lo  an  tdevaHon  when  it  is  frit,  as  a  triumplu
in  my  sense,  as  a  ma-aailinc’  proteHl,  lliat  in  all  this  itirrr  is
only  an  arhitrarv  vahiafion,  iti  wfdrh  frnjurufly  the  I'oiitrast  to
otherwise  superior  pec^ple  i,s  taken  as  the  point  of  denari ure,  is
revealed  in  the  counterparts  n,»  the  Clod-fraring  type,  in  aihrisis*
militant  freelhiiikers  and  u-omHAisls  uh.o  nwk  lo  drfitonstrale
their  siiperit^rity  in  the  same  manner  as  the  formrr .  larhlriibrrg*^
expression  Is  to  lie  undimstood  in  this  setisr  when  hr  remarks,
how  rare  are  tlie  people  who  live  up  to  the  prinriidrs  of  their
redigioru  and  how  iiuiiierotis  fho’ir  wdit>  fight  ff»r  thrin.  The
conversion  from  rnitilarit  freethinking  lo  ortiuKh*xv  is  nrit  rare
as  is  also  not  rare  the  conversion  from  Kpiciiriaiiiim  lo
Ascetieisrri.

Along  with  this  craving  for  srrurity  iiy  means  nl  atonrrnriit  the
masniline  profe^st  p!ay,s  a  rdle  as  a  ipiidr  which  sliritiltl  nril  be
uridereslimated.  But  one  finisl  still  keep  in  sight  the  builtiing
material,  the  possibilities  dcirmant  in  the  psyelie,  of  whirli  it
makes  use  in  order  to  reach  expression,  There  is  no  doubt  that
rdong  %vif!i  this,  arts  am,!  tlioiights  of  se!f-.’Sub|erliori  rortie  tfi  light,
that  is,  itiasochisfif^  elriiieiifs,  which  arrording  t«i  «iir  way  of


SELF-REPROACHES,  SELF-TORTURE,  ETC.  201

looking  at  the  subject  are  estimated  as  feminine  elements  of  the
masculine  psyche.  How  incompatible  these  are  with  the
consciousness  of  mankind  and  the  fact  that  they  constantly
demand  a  change  of  direction  in  the  masculine  protest,  that
therefore,  they  are  pseudo-masochistic  phenomena,  is  seen  from
the  fact  that  this  subjection  is  connected  with  a  soaring,  an
elevation.  The  lines  of  force  also  in  this  case  were  from  below
upwards  because  the  person  who  has  made  atonement  feels  him¬
self  elevated  or  cleansed,  he  speaks  with  his  God,  he  comes  nearer
to  him  than  others,  than  at  other  times,  and  ''  joy  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  awaits  him/’

One  of  my  patients  * 'punished  herself”  after  the  death  of  her
mother,  72  years  of  age,  with  whom  she  had  always  lived  at
strife  and  to  whom  she  would  have  been  justified  in  making
reproaches,  by  deep  feelings  of  remorse  because  of  her
indifference  for  her  mother,  and  by  sleeplessness.  Her  feelings
of  remorse  had  the  character  of  compulsory  thoughts  and
compulsory  acts.  The  analysis  showed  that  she  wished  to  prove
her  normal  superiority  over  a  sister.  The  sister  was  married,
while  our  patient  was  tempted  to  enter  into  a  liaison  with  a
married  man  which  experience  she  felt  as  a  degradation.  She
was,  therefore,  according  to  her  own  opinion  degraded  in  contrast
to  her  sister.  On  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  her  mother  the
masculine  protest  gave  rise  to  a  situation  which  again  brought
her  uppermost,  namely,  her  stronger  grief  for  the  sad  event.

In  the  history  of  civilization  as  in  the  neurosis,  the  tendency  to
atonement  not  rarely  degenerates  in  scourging,  flagellation,  etc.
From  the  confessions  of  Rousseau  and  from  private  communi¬
cations  of  healthy  as  well  as  neurotic  individuals,  and  furthermore
from  good  observations  of  the  behavior  of  children,  as  for  example
B.  Asnaurow’s,  we  know  that  in  certain  individuals  blows  are
capable  of  arousing  sexual  excitations.  This  is  the  real,
somatically  perceptible  moment  which  exists  in  the  makeup  of
these  individuals  and  which  determines  th.e  choice  of^a  particular
form  of  atonement.  Patients  have  told  me  that  in  their  childhood
they  experienced  pleasure  from  blows  on  their  buttocks,  though
it  was  terrible  to  them  to  be  beaten.  In  the  later  life  of  these
neurotics  flagellation  analogously  with  masturbation  and  all  other
forms  of  perversions  is  the  visible  expression  of  the  fear  of  the
opposite  partner.  I  am  indebted  to  a  patient  for  the  following
communication.  She  had  come  under  my  care  for  severe
migraine.  Several  years  before  the  onset  of  the  treatment  she
was  subject  to  day-phantasies  in  which  she  saw  herself  detected
in  an  act  of  infidelity  and  punished  by  a  man  to  whom  she  thought
herself  married  but  who  did  not  resemble  her  real  husband.  As
a  sequel  to  this  phantasy  there  followed  a  severe  self-scourging


THE  NEURirnc  CONSTITUTION


until  she  fell  exIuuisletL  This  fkigrllalian  aliiui!  intense

sexual  emotions.  The  analysis  reveahal  that  this  wmuMi  lialetl
her  husband,  a  neurotic  haired,  and  in  this  hafrrd  wuidil  have
readily  comoiitted  an  act  of  intHielity  in  orde-r  to  huiiiiliafr  liifii
thereby.  Noiv  siit^  lias  gotten  to  be  too  oUl  lu  tie  vi  any  worth  in
sex  matters*  \vliilt*  in  former  years  slu*  was  liiiuirmt  liy  tlici
masniline  protest.  ¥ot  a  slmrt  time  before  she  tluniglit  of
flagellation,  she  played  with  phantasies  of  intidrlily,  hiil  mil
without  securing  luTself  against  a  realisation.  ITr  ilrlectitiii  by
the  husbarub  the  Ihtgeilalion  and  rtm‘a*i|ueiil  aiiltoertilic
gratiiicatiom  all  of  this  had  its  origin  in  the  anlinpafoiy  rravirig
for  security  and  is  Imt  a  play  p!taiila.'.y  wlorli  riiijilia'd*!rs  in
an  espec*ially  strong  manner  the  fear  id  the  moii.  The  siibstitiiliitn
of  her  luisliand  bv  anot!if*r  is  the  result  of  hri  ilrfijgatiiry  Iriidriicy
and  etjiiivalrni  to  her  wishes  oi  infnkdity,  htt  hii'-.l>a!ii!  is  to  lie
hiiiiiiliatrd,  another  wtiidd  bi^  prrSrrred  in  hi'»  '.trad.  ^
she  disavows  this  plausible  assumptinii  flirinigh  an  at  !  ^4  intnirlity
to  this  other  one.  !li  the  eoiiise  U|  vear^  %he  gave  Uji  this
flagellatitiii.  llie  derogatory  (eiideiii  y,  Irnwrir!,  i-.  dfrei'trd
more  vrliiuneiilly  against  her  hti'-*.band  as  well  as  agaiii-a  all  man-
kind,  She  dmelopi’d  migraine  .e*  a*^  '-lo'  fr-ami  tlial  she

was  liisiiig  hidti  of  her  domifiming  r*ar*  t.<vr!  anviae^-  !!rr
disease  surceedtal  bio  in  maiding^  hm  to  wilhdeiw-  ?'oniplrlrIy
from  society.  Wlthiii  her  lamily*  ue!r  '-hr  absofnir  niistrrss
;is  a  rc^sull.  of  her  ilhie-.s.  She  .an  » ordod  ,;dM.i  m  *!rv;tadiiig  in  a
large  measure  her  various  family  phyaeiaiis,  inasnmi  h  as  her
migraine  remaineti  u!dm|iroved  m  ".jnie  oi  all  iheii  frralment.
Even  nH>rphIne  failed  in  its  effrcl.  and  I  migid  rrroiiiiiimit  that
a  perverse  reaction  to  this  rrmeilv  ifi  anv  i-asr  should  re«:'rivr
special  atteiitiofi.  I  inentJofi  incidenfailv,  a  -  a  ^.uj'i|dfniieid  to  the
lermimition  of  tin*  Ireatisnmf,  that  she  aisopLe  rdl  larail  ole-.t.u  h's
in  the  way  of  my  hirrii  of  therapv  and  for  a  hm,.;  timr  'aniidit  to
expose  me  by  retaining  Imr  pain  even  whrn  Mpndy  llallrriitg
me,  Ihitients  reeiwer  as  soon  as  thry  undreaand  ihal  this  niotivr
of  adhering  to  their  disease  is  for  the  purpose  of  huniilialiiig  the
|iliysic*i.ari.

incidtmtally,  I  wa!!  refer  to  the  fai-l  that  aieoifling  to  iiiy
experience,  religioiis  irisafiity/*  phantasie-*  and  lodlurinalloim
of  Clod,  heaven  and  the  saint.s,  .as  we|!  as  the  ferliiig  of  liritig
rriisTfd  are  to  be  uiiderstoofl  as  infantdr  turgalomanii  ideas  of
ihcsr*  patients’  aiit!  as  an  #'X|iressi4.oi  of  their  tVrling  of  :at|irrifirity
<iver  their  environnienl.  T!im-e  i.  ofirn  eonner-lrd  w^itli  a
hostile  feeling  ag.iifisl  the  environment  a.a  i-i  the  t  ase  wtirii  a
catatonic  perriiifs  himself  bi  he  rrimmanded  tw  CJod  to  |d%‘r  liis
attfuidarit  a  box  on  the  ear  or  to  overlurn  a  bn!  or  a  latde,  or
w'hcm  he  tries  fci  rompel  his  T’wish  relatives  lo  '‘■tiliftiil  im
baptism,  llie  soaring  in  mafiiat's,  thr*  drmoiit.d  ,pamiio“:r  idrv.i'1


siai-i<!>;!i<i)A(;iiEs,  self-torture,  etc.  203

arc*  jKirallrl  iihnionirria  anil  indicate  the  buried  feeling  of
hiiiiiiHatiini  whu'a  drinaiui:'.  ever-ctnupensation  in  the  psychosis.'

hi  pratiiia^  pliy.sitiaiis.^  often  come  across  children  who
aygravale  ‘a;iii|ifunc:  am!  siriuilate  in  order  to  escape  oppression
a!  ihe  li.iihto  Hi  hitdr  parents,  flow  closely  these  phenomena
liurha-r  un  iinla.it!ifu!ness  without  entirely  coinciding  with  it  is
Mat  ■a}i}Kirrnl.,  ^  Remarkalhe,  however,  is  the  concomitant
nia!i!trv<fafiii!i  i4  signs  tif  somatic  inferiority,  as  well  as  the
iirnirutic  character-development,  and  hence  the
lanirihir  t!i,;|Hvh!!ca?.  As  examples,  three  cases  of  observations
44  nciirHfii'  «*hiuireii  are  given,

A  -.rveii  \r4r":  eld  girl  eanif'  under  my  care  for  periodical
.ift.il  k-»  tu.  igehrie  pain  ami  riamam.  We  hnirul  a  frail,  poorly
drvr.!H|H4,i  I  !;:!d  who  suffered  from  struma  cy-stica,  adenoids  and
mtliiggal  Her  voita*  had  a  hoarst'  intonation.  Upon

imiuivv  lirr  statri!  that  tin*  child  often  suffered  from

.  ,c  !a,i->i!;ilr'  .iccrifiipanieti  by  a  cough,  which  were  unusually

|i.; <■!.  .11  tf'd,  nrll  as  ffoui  jiretractcal  attacks  of  dyspepsia.  Her
pfr.r'ut  MUMjCainf  had  exisifs!  alnnit  a  half  ycmr,  without  any
drs!},  rrffaidr  «a;sinic  atfrcliiuo  Ahmg  with  this  her  appetite
.tad  liHurl  f’lim  tirui-.  jriuaim*d  normal.  The  gn.stric  pains  had
dr \ .rdiipri!  Mucr  tlo*  v\M  bt'gau  aftemtling  school.  Her  progress
ill  Mhmi!  was  an  excrllt-nt  nnt\  but  the  ttsicher  had  repeatedly
rtprc’r.rd  wntulrf  uvrr  fhr  strikiurf  aiulfit iousness  of  the  child,
Sho  was  vrrv  afivc'  abiiuf  admtmitions  am!  fcdi  herself  slighted
I’m  4  si:der  who  wsr  ihire  am!  our  half  years  her  junior.  What
r'*pr*ria!!v  attrai'frd  hrr  niother*?^  attention  was  a  definite
Iriiidhniifu.f  of  t!it*  clitoris,  <nie  of  tlie  genital  anomalies,  the
imj'iirfam'r  <4  whitdi  as  :i  sign  td  infericjrity  I  have  already
tuuph:rd/rd  hrir,  am!  whii'h  was  later  on  discovered  l>y  Bartel
.Old  Kvrlr  r!u|i|iasi*/ed  bv  them  as  very  (‘haracterislic.  Her
-.k!!i  wars  rvnywdirre  hvfsersemative,  and  the  tickling  reflex
no! irtssblv  .im'rfituatrd.  file  c!ii!d  frecjnenfly  asked  to  Vie  tickled.
'Tfir  I'hiUrs  anxiousfirss  eicrredefi  the  normal.  The  irregularity
’4  file  itici“.uo’s  is  til  be  luokrd  upon  as  a  further  indication  of  a
Miifi.it ii-  infr-riorit v‘,  'wViich  |Kurits  to  a  defect  of  the  gastro-
ififrstifial  trail.,  llir  |iharviigea!  reflex  was  definitely  exaggerated.

gains  the  inipre-saon  from  this  ensemble  of  |)henomena,
fli.if  t}ir  rrflrx  rofivifv  of  the  aliriientarv  canal  was  likewise
rxaitgrratrd.  Asi  a  iiiattfT  of  fart  the  chihf  had  vomited  frequently
ilnriiig  the  fir%l  flifrr  years  of  her  life.  The  frequent  dyspeptic
.iHifli, s  li}{'.rw*isr  indirafi'  an  inferioritv  of  the  gastro-intestinal
flail.  Along  mdtli  this  ^!ir  Iku!  sufh-rrd  for  alnnit  a  year  from

*  fa-f.-,,  i"  li.f.tls.-aSrhw-fjtlbnia  tl«'f  P.irrtnf>iud’  Wifn

i.,r|  tars*  4vi.n  Srrif  »M  lir'irfjSt’  ill  u  fnuvs!i<*i?»a  murnu'r

II  r  d mI’  Oi- d,^^,..d..a.j5r  |.rutr‘i!  20^!  id  iIm’  fnf  mTurity  in  tlw


THE  NEUROTIC*  ('ONSTOTiTION


204

ecieina  of  the  liullorks,~tt  the  terminatiort  of  the  inferior
alimentary  canaK  with  itching  which  laslnt  for  tan"’rr*il  immltm
and  which  was  cured  by  the  faitiily  iihy^ieiaii  by  iiiraiis  of
suggestion  and  with  the  assistance  iif  a  nriilral  sah”e.

The  |Kiirifiil  pn^ssiirc^  in  the  stomach  priivetl  fn  be  a  |isyrhic
reflex  which  set  in  whenever  the  child  irarrd  4  hiiiiiihaliciri  at
schcMj!  or  at  honic*.'

The  iiiirpose  (4’  this  reflex  wdnch  had  fteeii  i^unstriictcd  011  the
basis  of  stiiiialir  iidVriorily  lay  in  the  rflart  li*  avukl  |M.iiiishiiieiit
and  to  direct  the  attentimi  of  the  somewhat  harsh  nu^her  who
preferred  the  younger  girl.  Alter  the  inner  prriepfirm  of  ihig
fieightenetl  reflex  ai*tiviH%  iheie  wse*  obvjinisly  lixalioii  anti
aggravation  as  sihiu  as  the  chiht  sought  a  guiding  idea  wdiiclt  she
coulfl  use  fur  tin*  purpiisr  uf  maximaling  lin  rgua'iuiscioiisfiesj.
On  arruiiiit  uf  the  brevity  uf  the  Ireafinriit  I  w^i*.  able  tit  diaaiver
no  SjitiritanecHis  ex|irrc^iiiir.  t»f  truer  »  uf  idea-,  i  utu  rriiine  a  fiiliire
gravuiity,  its  the  anticijiatfnl  «!e;-ainy  f»f  a  Irmiiune  lulr.  The
attacks  vanished  after  a  shtjrl  timr.  after  1  juul  rxjilainird  the
connecliuri  tu  ihv  cliilil,  A  dream  after  tuie  u|  these  allarks
points  in  the  above*  tlesiTil'ied  direcliun.  ^dJr  dr^Mtnrd  ;

My  /riruif  tra**  hefotr,  'Vht’ii  n*r  plavej  tiofls  icu  h
Her  friemi  was  a  invirttrd  rnsi!  u%  the  ^  huol  rtieJlnis  uftefi
residUab  wdlhmil  bhwvs  liiwvever.  vShr  lived  tm  the  fluur  above
and  they  ativays  played  in  fhe  apartnirnt  *4  ihr  paliriit  Hul  the
form  01  c*x|ire,s?atjn  in  the  drfs:ou  sfir  irdatrd  w.e-,  'adlieirfitly
remarkablfc  Wlten  I  asked  lhi‘»  intrdiii;rn!  iduld  if  our  waaild  say
her  friend  was  fiehnv  **  whrm  the  person  wlju  relatrii  the  story
was  playing  wdlh  her,  sin*  t'urreclet!  hersrdf  immediately*  and
said  ‘‘  stu*  W'S.is  witli  inr/’  Ihit  wt  v%'it!  a-saimr  tluii  the  fijriii  of
expreKsi<:)n  is  right  and  the  a«*<'rni  is  un  the  *d-irhnv/*  Iheii
heliind  this  is  rmicealed  the  tfunight  that  the  uval  wsa-*  under  llir
ariihtlicniH  pafirnl  as  in  a  t'tutllicl.  "Thr  friend  was  below  **
then  means  **  I  was  abo%*e/‘  a  r-oiurpliun  4s  fe%uti  of  wliirfi  wr
are  aide  to  define  the  slandpoin!  *4  the  pafirnf.  The  '4tieid*
also  poifils  in  the  saiiir  dirrefjon  If  ♦ot!v  has  mr.ifdiig  wdirii  wr
nsstime  that  there  is  an  interval  between  the  two  drratti  pictiifri*
such  as  perhaps  :  *'  I  imisl  first  l*e  '.iiperiuf  to  mv  frirnd*  tlirn

I  rvill  play  with  her.*'

The  history  wliiidi  preceded  the  allark  which  folkiwfft
furnished  a  ronfirmatiofi  of  our  conrepfion  1‘lie  ^atne  of  the  two
girls  w:cs.  ns  a  rule  jdaying  ‘’father  and  mtiltier'*  or  ‘‘playing
cloctor/*  In  the  first  game  there  wa*i  a  f|uarrrl  between  the  two

^  II,  |  t,  *'>f  ^  h.\^^  a|fri4y

i|Hik<*n  ft'r*jU*'fal|'  ill  ihli  H|-otan|Ss  jfffiC

Aiyi’irtllflH:  til  IliV  rjr.fu'r|asMt$  Wr-  iifr  jO';  %  'I'4l4i.

i:.|  trl^rt  irrUAl.iley  r.f  iiifrrv-^4  tnirlhimtl

C"  Hrtli»xr  'C


SELF4<EPRi)ACHES,  vSEI.F«TORTURE,  ETC.  205

girls  as  lu  wluiiii  sluniUl  he  '^falher”  until  the  father  finally  took
a  haOi!  ami  rriircsiehcHl  the  |iatient  that  her  companion  was  €iilways
more  yielthiig  than  ,stic\  which  was  tlu'  truth.  The  friend  there-
upim  rri'chved  flu*  part  id*  fatIuT.  When  the  family  shortly
afferward*^  :aMted  t!iemsr!vc*s  at  the  table,  the  child  was  seized
with  an  attack.  She  ate  ludlung  and  was  put  to  lied  and  in  fact
ill  her  parc‘iits‘  rt'ieiii,  where  at  other  times  lier  other  rival  slept,
her  little  si>.|rr.  llie  drcMin  lunv  expre.sses  a  continuation  of  the
saiiic  tendency  wlmdi  was  starved  by  the  attack  and  furnishes  us
a  hint  canicerniiH,;  the  patient's  equal  valuation  of  her  desire  for
niasciiliiiit V  ami  lu*r  ciavin|»  tti  assert  her  worth.  I'he  repre-
sriitalioii  ot  the  fefiiiniiu*  jsart  as  that  tif  tin*  subordinate  or  the
rifle  who  is  hrnratii  in  the  wurtl.  uiuh^rd*  strengthens  this
vifwv  grealiv,  bill  md  wdlhcnit  giving  rise  to  the  suspicion  that
the  |ialiriif  know  .  Ilir  position  tluring  ctiitus,  She  slept  liefore
flif'  arrival  *d''  her  votiiigrr  sister  iu  her  partmts’  room  and  even
later  %vhriiever  she  was  ill,  Hii-;  .suspitaon  expressed  in  the
presmicr  td  l!ie  mother  remained  uiuaintradiidtal,  but  liad  as
rrsiill  lliat  tit'dli  the  idiildfrii  were  kept  permanently  out  of  the
parents*  roiini,  llnl  lieie  we  see  again  how  the  character-traits
i4  tills  child  wrfr  ;u  five  in  the  direction  of  the  mastniline  protest,
fum  tionating  as  disianllv  placrd  tmtposts  whose  obj<‘ct  it  wa.s
to  -.ri'iirr  Iiri  at  a  di-aaiu  e  ag.iiied  every  analogy*  every  symbolic
rxjserirn*  in-  of  a  female  de  stiny,  ilegradation,  rninimr/ing  of
the  r|»'o  i'Mtis*  toiisfjr-.s,  and  furthermore,  to  protect  her  from  all
ftitnre  niisforlunr.

A  ■.imilar  atleetion  well  kmovn  to  physii’ians  is  the  school-
naie.ea  ami  nausea  .1!  tattle  or  slutilly  after  eating  which  resembles
the  above  dra  rittrrt  disease  in  its  psychic  comdiUitkm  in  that  it
represents  an  tnicsuea'iiUis  eipedimd  or  <me  which  ha.s  btu'ome
iirn'oiiruTsiis  f»ti  the  piii|Hisr  id*  avot^ling  a  thr<%atened  humiliation
ami  for  the  purpose  of  as*;rrfing  one’s  «nvri  worth.

A  i:\  years  ohi  lioy  haii  slmwn  for  the  past  three  years  a
refiiarkaldr  indolriice,  w!u«  h  preventful  hts  progress  at  school,
riot witlrstandirig  tiis  indisputable  intelHgeru'rc  hor  several
riiontbs  past  lir^hml  bmi  manifesting  ;ysort  of  lamenting  habitus
wliiclt  would  e^speriallv  r’oine  fti  light  whenever  he  was
adittoiiislirnl  for  .mv  l  ansr  whatever,  ftis  fatiier  and  mother  had
|iro!iably  always  bmi  a  little  too  harsh  with  him,  but  as  far  asj
roiitil  oldaiii  inforriialitifi  their  admonitions  tmly  referred  tojiis
sliiwfir*:s  in  eating  and  tlressing  and  to  his  enagerness  for  reading.
Lately  things  liatrcome  to  mvh  a  pass  that  the  boy  liegan  to  cry
wliriiever  lie  was  rrmimbsl  of  anything  or  wlnm  anyone  hurried
him.  't  hf  n-.itU  nf  thi-;  forHlitiuii  was  .a  mort*  cautimis  attitude
ur»  tSvf  par!  «.f  tlu'  parrnt::.  tlumgh  th«*y  thought  th<7  could  not
di*.p«-n!:f‘  with  admottitiuns  entirely  on  account  of  the  sluggish-
nr*i*;  of  the  hoy,


2o6  the  neurotic  CONSTITUTION

An  inquiry  concerning  his  last  fit  of  weeping  showed
had  been  admonished  to  hurry  to  school,  after  he  had  b  .|i
striving  for  half  an  hour  before  the  glass  to  brush  his  stubl^  |P
hair  smooth.  The  analysis  showed  that  he  saw  himself  ne;^-/
difficulty  and  wished  to  secure  himself  against
humiliations  by  careful  measures.  He  reproached  hiif
severely  with  childish  sex  indiscretions  which  he  had  commi^^r
in  company  with  other  boys  and  girls.  Above  all  he  fe*^
discovery  by  his  parents  and  this  fear  reached  an  extraordi^^'fi
degree  when  one  night  during  a  somnambulistic  experienci^  «lf
entered  the  servant’s  room  and  to  his  great  surprise  found
self  in  the  morning  in  the  cook’s  empty  bed.  This  sleep-wall^
was,  as  in  all  other  cases  which  I  have  been  able  to  penetf  "*  ,
the  result  of  the  masculine  protest  against  the  feelin|f
humiliation.  The  day  before  he  was  transferred  from  the  ||
mediary  to  the  elementary  school  because  of  poor  progress.  *
impression  which  this  scene  made  upon  him  was  so  great,
fear  that  he  might  betray  during  his  somnambulistic  experien*
the  secrets  between  him  and  his  friends,  because  like  all
somnambulists  he  talked  in  his  sleep,  was  so  terrifying  that  it
him  to  very  strong  measures  of  security.  The  thoughts  were
in  regard  to  his  erections  which  he  sought  to  conceal  caref^*^
from  his  parents.  This  he  accomplished  by  a  downward  strok
of  his  erected  penis  with  his  hand.  By  this  time  the  craving
security  had  taken  possession  of  him  to  such  an  extent  that
treated  the  hair  which  stubbornly  persisted  in  standing  up
it  were  a  sexual  organ,  as  in  fact  the  craving  for  security  alw-*- ■'
reaches  beyond  what  is  absolutely  necessary.  In  this  cast*
see  the  modest  beginning  of  a  compulsory  act  whose  mechan*  ‘
regularly  consists  in  a  representation  of  the  masculine  prcd*^"
or  in  the  craving  for  security  directed  towards  it.  The
becomes  the  content  and  motive  force  of  the  compulsion  neurt^
when  the  masculine  protest  goes  too  far  and  is  threatened  to  ( *
into  femininity  through  inner  contradictions,  because  lb,
consequences  would  be  a  punishment,  a  degradation  *
embarrassment.  It  is  then  that  the  safety  device  itself  seem  *
be  the  more  masculine,  although  the  alluring  feeling  of  triiiiti:>
may  not  be  produced.  Under  certain  circumstances  however  t}i
same  results  may  be  attained  by  a  fighting  against  desire  in
form,  so  that  a  powerful  asceticism  is  valued  as  a  triumph.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  ascetic  leanings  as  varieties  of  self  tort  it  rr
found  a  place  in  this  boy’s  craving  for  security,  and  tlij
disinclination  to  eat  had  for  its  object  analogously  to  abstineiit
the  checking  of  his  outcropping  sexual  instincts.  The  boy  wh.
apart  from  this,  was  weak,  became  so  reduced  that  the
were  obliged  to  interfere.  Thus  they  came  upon  his  craving  .
security  which  he  had  gratified  with  so  much  difficulty.  Then  ||^


SEI.F4iEr'1<t,lACiIES,  HELF^TORTURE,  ETC.  207

f.iiiiiliurity  with  thr  ^ittacks  of  the  paretiis  led  to
:ie*riirity  rriiiir  as  a  result  id'  whieh  his  value  again

hri'aiiie  rtiltalitTiI.

His  e.igrriifvss  lo  rtM-d  alsti  iiriginateil  from  his  craving  for
SiH'tirilv,  i  lie  iiisfi'urity  %vhi<  h  hat!  sei/<al  him  at  imherty
coiiiprllril  him  to  I'lUidtui,  iirdruilion  and  a  reassuniig  fear
of  disra-i'  in  ihi’*  enc,'vchijia'<lia.  Hr  was  inereditily  well  read  on
the  |iio|i!riiis  ill  <|iir*4itui .  i  dn'r-*  fairlv  iui  the  way  to  se«*k  security
ill  hiHiks.  hr  ovrrtlid  the  thing  hrcausr  the  eltler  brothers  and
sisters  whtusi  hr  f'limLitcst  were  rrmarkatik'  readi^rs,  also  because
hr  acleti  agaimd  hi--  |iarrnls,  lu-%  iippressors  in  doing  this;  and
lliirdly  bee. Oise  he  wa;.  able  to  satisfy  his  original  rnasculine
ill  this  wav  ami  follow  thr  heroes  td  his  books  in  danger

ami  e’oiiflirt,  wfiiili  wsis  slunvii  by  his  choice  of  reading  matt€?r-- . .

hr  jjrrff'i'ied  Kai!  May,

l1ir  third  isc.r  war.  lhal  ed’  an  eleven  years  old  boy  who  suffered
from  a  ji'.vriys'allv  ilrfet  fidned  pudraded  pertussis  and  wdm  at
that  fiiiir  -sfill  Mitfrrrd  froiii  enuresis,  He  was  an  intractable
child  wdvM  wlsiied  fn  .alfath  his  father  to  himself  while  he  tried
to  avoid  !u'-  '.trji  III* alter  as  a  t'nir!  pcrsetnilor.  The  receptive
dispo'*;ilii»ii  ut  Ihf  f',.ohrr  wa%  m.ifuiVstrd  in  his  extreme  solicitude
tltirir;g  ati  u-ks  ‘O  wliHi-^piug  tiuigii  Cine  morning  as  the  luothe^r
again  tepioai  hrd  tl-'.r  !»mv  brtsiUsr  hr  hatl  wet  his  bed,  lie  jUmpeil
laugbiiiglv  out  «a  lird  and  Ian  about  the  rtmm  undressed  until
the  soli  rlloH'.  la  !h  rt  witli  an  indignant  remark  Ui  the  mother
carried  tho  leraflilrss  bov  ba»  k  Ui  beil,  A  severe  hi  of  ctuighing
whii  li  rr\riab!rd  whuoping  eoiigh,  from  which  he  had  just
rrMiveieil,  r lo', rd  tlii'**  -a  rnr  and  caii'^rfl  a  <juafrel  t'lelween  the
nurrird  toujde  Ulim  the  bov  ag^atn  rvent  to  bed  in  the  evening,
hr  s|ifang  up  in  an  r%i  tied  iiianiirr  and  galliiped  back  and  birth
so  that  lie  again  brisiiisr  breathless,  llte  meaning  of  the  attack
was  piiifr  obvitois  llir  bt*v  wished  in  again  provoke  reproaches
agaiftsl  the  step  iiiHflirr  and  to  draw^  the  fatorr  to  his  side,  A
?.uggr'j!vr  trr;ift!ieiif  and  an  r\p!anation  id  the  ptirpotie  of  tin*
ailaek  biHicght  a  I  rs'-iafioti  of  sarnr.  but  the  pertuR^i*^  slid

dragged  Mil  fut  Iralf  a  Vc’af  lofif.^er

Afi.tlogtuis  triei  hatiisfiei  air  at  thr  foundation  of  the  idea  of
faiiride,  dlie  deed  itself  is  teiuaHy  wrecked  iui  the  kntiwledge
of  the  ttifirr  I  roitradirfioits-  of  this  form  of  the  masculine  proIcKt.
'riir  |isYr'liii'  timiig'e  results  frmo  thr  thought  of  death,  of  mm*
r’^isfetirr,  llir  hurualialing  feeling  of  lieing  about  to  lieromr  dtBt,
of  wliidiv  !*>siiig  t»iir*s  prrsiiualitv,  Wlmre  there  are  cdieck^  of
.a  rr|igi*ais  uAlufr,  thrv  are  merely  the  husks,  a  recoil  as  though
this  4<  tiofi  tf«i  wrff  ,%  piinishrivenf ,  Handel,  up  to  our  time  the
rriofirl  tif  a  firrsofi  who  iloubts  of  his  maiilinrnu,  of  the  |isychie
tieriiiaftlirridilr ,  roiisriiuedv  repfe'’'.ents  tc»  himself  in

rrassiiriiig  forrtfoiiight  the  limitalions  of  hi’^  maniy  protest,  who


THE  NEUROTIC  CONNTITlllciN


joS

rebels  against  !iis  feiriiiiiiir  line*  aiul  not  en-atliiig  ibe

dialectical  change  to  llir  umily  line,  pri^eiis  himself  from
suicide  by  conjuring  ii|i  tlir  dreams.  “  iVi  slerp.  prri'tiaiice  to
dream*  ay  there  Is  ttic*  rub.  for  in  that  sleep  of  tlralli  %%tiat  tlrraitis
may  came,  when  we  have  siuiftlrd  oil  this  inorla!  coil,**  !«  the
graveyard  scene  a  real  horror  was  snamfr‘4rd  brcaiise  Yorirkls
skull  was  of  no  more  value*  than  the  others’,

I  have  for  sofii«*  time  defended  the  view  that  snii  idr  is  une  of
the  strorigi'^st  forms  of  iiiascailinr  protest  anti  rrpreseiits  a  smirily
from  hiiiiiiliation  by  wilhdrawat,  l*hr  cases  act^essible  la  me  of
attempts  at  suicide  have  always  revealed  the  liriiftitic  striicliirc
in  their  psyche.  Signs  id’  stmiatic  infmorily,  frrlings  of
iincerlaifity  and  infrrinrily  from  chihlhood.  a  p-^ycdiic  ?4riiiiiire
rvhich  is  felt  to  tie  etlemiiiaie,  ami  the  ovrrlnise  ituisciiline
prcitrsi  answering  to  this  feeling  of  rfieminacv  were  iiiaiiilVstetl
in  the  same  manner  as  in  every  nriirtdii*.  A  nearer  or  rtiorr
remotr  «*xa!ii{i!e  slnovs  the  trend,  llie  mo*4  pmvrrfnl  psyrtiir
hold  tiriginafes  frciiii  the  tlioiights  of  death  in  cliiltthood  %%tiich
prodiua’  a  I'onslant  predisposition  to  Miifide  bv  shaping  Itie
psychic  pliysiogiiiuiiy  iiiider  the  inflnener  ii|  the  ripdiair  idea,
In  the  previous  hisltiry  of  wotdil-be  ^aiicidr%  the  ^..inir  trridriicies
are  found  of  Irving  to  allain  intlurm-e  by  ilfiirv,.  bv  4ttetii|iliiig
or  by  liw'idling  on  the  ihoughts  of  tlealh,  dieaainiig  «d  itir
mourning  of  relatives,  to  olitain  satiTactiMn  iti  a  siltialimi  tif
hurnilialitm  or  wdirn  flierr  are  feelings  *4  de-.pi-a-d  Ito'e.  And  the
idea  becomes  deed  in  a  similar  situation  of  flm  irdn^tism  of  the
feeling  of  srlf'-estrein,  as  soon  a.s  this  hi%s  lead-,  to  a  strong
reduction  of  the  worth  of  life  and  is  able  to  «aiise  the  dialrclic;'il
idiange  of  the  masculine  idea  of  suicide  to  be  #ivrilotiked  in  the
ease  of  a  rrctml  tiumiliafion,  Unrs  we  must  concede  that  those
w^riter^s  are  rorrrri  who  see  in  snicade  a  j-irocrss  alhetl  to  the
insane  roristrurlions.  My  studies  4ml  tloe-e  of  Harters  oii  the
inferiority  of  organ,  «*specialty  the  infer iority  of  the  se^iiat
appanitus,  are  in  harmony  %%a!!lthis.

In  the  neuroses  the  |irobabi!itv  of  a  1 '^rrerfion  is  strMfiger,  if
it  thmi  not  always  prevent  suicide.  |i  %eriie,  that  fhr  ptsdumitj
corisideraticm  of  the  prtddein  of  suicide  which  with  the  nnirolir
miually  for  years  is  in  itself  a  sign  amt  at  the  sarrie  tlmr  a

contribiitorj  cause  of  the  rorrecti*in.  Ami  in  fart  the  dents  and
thoughts  of  neiirotirs  are  full  of  ihoughts  of  tfeath.  Here  is  lhe
dream  ^of  a  neiirofic  who  was  under  tresamrnt  on  arcriiiiit  of
stutteripg  and  psyrhir  inipolenre.  during  a  iiigtil  after  tie  had
waited  in  vain  for  a  letter  from  his  bride  :  *

**  I  tlumiihi  I  was  Ifv  ahoiif  Iht  r^ffm

anti  ffnthifird  ihrm-^the^  il<  thmtfh  Ifcrv  lecrr  01  dr fair,*'
Hie  patient  rrmembered  having  often  had  llnntidtfi  in  rhilii-'
hood  that  he  writilr!  like  to  die  because  his  parents  preferred  his*


SELF4<!*;PEOA<:iIKS.  SIiLFTURTt4^E.  ETC.  J09.

younger  lirnllirr.  Hr  IkhI  nlwavH  been  |ier.srrutrt!  hy  the
thcnight  llnit  tirraiiM*  of  tiyilr»H''rlr  aiul  tircatnsr  tif  of

the  genital  tirgainH  lir  mats  iiifrriiir  amt  woiilil  havr  no  cliiltlren.
Lit€*r  li«'  Itiiiiigtil  to  {irotrrt  liinir-irlf  by  huiniHation  of  %¥oirtrn
am!  grt^at  ili^'ilrusl  of  Itiriii  to  urtitrot  hinna*lf  against  Ilirm  and
uiihaiipifirss  in  iiiairiagr*.  In  rralilv  hr  frit  Um  weak  and  was
afraiil  of  woinrii.  Just,  as  hr  frarrd  this  tr:%l  in  inarriagt*  hr
avniilrtl  all  lirtisioRs  through  a  I'arbir  whirh  hat!  hrronir  motor.
His  iiiiiMitrfU'r  srt  in  wlirti  hr  rrorivcal  a  favt^rahh*  answer  from
his  liriclr,  as  an  rxrtisr*  an  r%|»ri!irnt  ta  jiost{:Hinr  rnarriagr.  In
the  drrann  the  Ihmtght  that  his  hridr  might  prrfrr  another  m
refltadrii  With  this  was  I'orifinird  an  attrm|.it  at  a  solution  by
iiiraris  of  wliirb  hr  roiiht  ilivrr!  hrr  wludr  love  to  himsrlf»  in
mliii'li*  a*,  ill  fhr  arfaiiarfiinil  <4  hi-  !rti|iotrmas  the  |Hissibi!ily  of
fiiarriagr  was  rliiniiialrti,


i‘IiAPn‘R  X


THE  mvuinic*$  immi  hk  rxmiih,  uhi^uw li mists x  xsu  amm-

IE^4i*K,  kSU  Tiini'ACItU'SESS.  ||l|s  IKMPE^i/V  fil

comuxmmss.

In  this  i'!ia|it«’r  !  ^%'ill  riTrr  U»  .uu»lhrr  Nrrir.^  tH  ra4r4f!*'i  Ir4il‘'.
c!Ls|iIayi*t!  liy  iiriirulic^,  >nt\%  as  arr  t>ilrn  iutiiut  in  i!ir  Ititrgraiiiiil
of  |j»4yrtiiiaii;ilytit*  «4i,:Hrrv4tunv:'.  uhrrr  lliry  itirirly  influrnrr  llir
external  iiirtiirr  of  ihi^  nriiri».:4^a  'Thry  fiirrrly  4. ’.!■;!  ifi
cc>fi?itrik*liin»  tlio  iifHiroiir  iiitln-iiinalily,  hul  jiE4  tm  tbi**.
iii;iy  IfTitl  to  the  -prci.il  a  iniitiriiLir  iliin  11011.  or  may

|irtiviikt*  a  drtuiitr  fato  in  itir  rtmlliot  %%iih  itir  riivifoiniirnt
lhii4  il  fiiav  }nijs|ieri  llial  ihr  nrtirotif* Jr  may

hr  revtMlrtl  in  4li  «’:-.pr-ri4liV  i»h!in'.|%r  Ui4nU*^*l ,  lluU  i.pn'ir  j;.  al
iitvrsligatii«ri4  may  hi!  a  jKirl  kA  Ifir  nriu*.if4»'''.  itnnkiiia.  vJinli
coiu'inds  riiuro  i!rr|i!y  scMlnt  offrn  ol  ihr  imltiir  of  an

llfijiislitiahlr  priitr  of  aiirr  ,frv,  *alurh  I  -  Him  iifih.rrj  44  4  •.!r  iviii|.»
aypiiliHt  Ihr  sorhil  iih!ii;:Unm4  wiiirU  yyi  with  %r\n.4!  rrhiliuii'.  anil
iiiiirriag'r,  siinihirty  a'i.  tlir  hunlini,;  «ail  of  hrtrJnlv  nl  4i4r4--r  i**
utili'/rri.  rr.rtiiv  Miri  mh.  4a  arfatua-iiiml  of

rxlrniir  aflcHliiiti  for  irifain  fnr'inhrr''i  of  thr  faimly,  m  !i>r  f-hr
<mtirr  hiri'iiiy.  llh^s  affrrlimi  asunToHr.  frmn  flir  at

the^  saiiir  i^iiitlinyt  thiiim  with  its  inlrrim!  ruutunli*  tioii  ii|a,in
"whirh  Ihr  fr;tr  of  driiHiiiiii  amt  of  Ihr  ^irxiu!  |rirlnrf  rr^t'. ,  Thi^i
rxprclirrif  thru  *irrvr?i  Ihr  |nir}iu:.r  nf  ypiinin^:^  iii.r.trry  ovrr  ttir
family  rirclr,  for  wtiirh  jn^r}al^r  tlir  farmlv  hma!  n  fahrri  ;ii
soriitdhin*;^'  Imly.  In  iiriirutio'.  i!ir  himh  with  ihr  himilv  l«n’«!rr'’*
tm  thr  iHpril  Jr  famdlf,  as  ntnm  as  thr  rra^nfig  far  "irriirily
inakr?^  ih;r!f  frit  niorr  r.lnitiidy  and  rrt|tdrri  |jra«|  tlmi  d  k
im|MiS^tih!r  to  tir|iriK!  rvrn  i»ti  h!md  rrlalium-.  Mi-4filttr«{iy  as
an  lidding  lirir  ami  I’rfunr  in  -^adtlndr  nrr  thru  nut  rnrr

cicTiirrrnrrs  and  are  phiiidy  rrvrnird  in  thr  ii-^vrlifru-.

Tlir  fmt'mnlifialiori  nf  itir  rharartrrdraiN  to  thr  firlian

may  hr  srrn  rK|irri;il!y  rlrarly  in  Ihr  anti  tlir  timl  traiti  »d
fthtivimmewA  and  idirdimrrH  wliirh  *nni;ly  nr  iiilrrtiiitiiflrd  in
varyini^  drgrrr*^;  c'firilritnilr  niiirh  t«  Ihr  rrihiring  nf  Itir  nrtirtitir
|i.^vrhi\  Irrdiglit  into  thr  rmr»lrnc1km  of  |}-ir*4r  rhararfrr  IrailrE
whirti  have  brrn  ;ifr;tra<‘trd  from  nmiral.  arttiai  of

thr  prerntnirofir  prri«ii.|  and  havr  then  tirrn  tiriirolirallv  fftmptd

*  htlirf,  C|rli*:«r$4ri.  I  r


riiE  Nia:Kii'ric’‘s  Ksmrv  dk  famillk


Ji  I


I!ltl  %iil!*ri!  n%r|  Ililii  linr;-.  IrMihrr,  us  IIUU  li  ruiirrri'iiflg

hr  rsii,;ai,  lur  iiiruiiuii;  uiiii  jniijH»-'*r  af  4  gurn  uluiruclrr.

I'iir  iillM  ul  ,4  i. iUlglll  i-U  “  tluiKutrih*  i‘.  iinlt'IUlbir
irtail^r  llir  ir.ti  Ut|  thr*  iMtut.itmn  iil  |l>yt'!ut

1141. rlri  ,4iri  I%!i-.4fr%ri  |^.4i!  !.hr|r»4  iiuiV  h?*  i  ^uu^ruituh  i'*  Uiri.i-

'I|M|  III-  uUitiriit.  r  ul  liir  ^^U;^hn|;  uUm  until  this

iilcM  V'>  s4l I  Irsth  t fit 44  tuiun* .  .ifu!  rflH'iiifUirr  air  uilly
tlllludf"'-  tthult  ir%r,i\  1^*  Us  ihr  juuip  Haiti  tin*  Ulli'riLllU  |Uis|
JllM  llir  Uiltifr,  a  -  4ir  uil  itfluu  <  haUU  fri'-Uuiits.

I'unul.U  .1'.  all  ..ttfuiiuir  r4  f.!ir  frai  *4  tiri'isnina  r,  oftru

,irt. 4»iii|Mi.ui‘4  ill  iir?4ii>!i»  .  I«v  tU^'  tiMit  t>l  uiu  t.uuiiuiiiii4ilhlily .

i  !ir:.r  tirviir-.  ^%i»|k  III  ihr  in.llUlri  lU  au  |^^i!4ln»ll  whit’h  iuis  fur
ith  |r|i|nr.r  tlir  ttjtir  It  a!  thr  r‘ il V UiUUlirllt  tif  itir

if  irut  .ii  t  ■riu'*  ^  »tn  n  lia  j»rt  usts  ia  ‘htrnur  suinriillir?*
haiA  ills  l»st  :lv  .ita!  4r!r^;4!oiV  Ir-ailrurV'  uhat  iii  tlir  ti^lc  uf

i<»V.  hr  .un.iuy^r.  llu.4‘U.h  tu-'.  %llrfU'r  4inl  U|ip4rrlll  tfuril
,»!  i'lr-i  .  tnr  that  iir  i.  ihr  ri|U4i  u|  ulhri-'a  «'s|irf*it4lly’

v/lim  thr-.r  4lr  :ii  f  lrr  lu 4 jrU  it '■/ ,  Atui  that  hr  |s  rstirriullv  illlflt  fur
hi  hiT"  u|>  4in!  4.  ^  rul uut tjir  4lililli«*sis  ul

fhr  a4':*%r,  iMis  1  luur  a!  Uinrs  iliM'Uvrir4  |!ir  |irii0l

tlir  I.  rtn I  i»  rj  f’ua!  fhr  ifijli v ulnal  i4iuu*t  Irrjs  ,i  srurrl*
.■Xir -U  u f!r?i4ihrn  i\  faiitul  in  fhr  huiih
n!l|*4nr|}f  rhrhi  l!;U;v  UrtutHU'.  Isavr  ui  inirrrilht  I  n^

.  |"hr  !,  *  ■.  --fi’-n  m-ur  -srasar.  itttiu  thr  i  IM  UtnslUlirr

tha!  !ir  luli  r\ri\  iriuaik  a  ur  a  ’‘Hut’*  ui  UU

Ihi  thr  8  !'  Jt  V

A  If, ill  r|  f  , i,sln*h  iJir  tn\TS  lUilt  It  iU  its

drfiJiifrur- «.•,  ...1.;;:!  .uar,  %%\iu  h  ’  s  jitrsrn!  Ulul  V.'hir'lu

ttUH'liirf  ii.i!h  s  r  1 ;  ,M  f  -  ,1  i!ir ,  an*!  nry'.if  u  Isia,  lu  thr

sf I.UfJr,  r  i|Ur',  o!  ?lrr  nt.raUhnr  jifiitrst,  is  fllT

V  li»  «!r”.ur  !  ■.  t  rirl»^!iuiu^  itillririit  u|  tiU'linl  a|s.i1ll|tt.

'{'tus  f:4i!  IS  !.‘un4  in  llu*  *  *Ur  |»ras4t*U  V  rfnuts  4s  U*r|l  ill  ifir

sfl'iVlUjj,''  .illrj  !!riif»*tu  r  %|>r*!j^''Ut  ;f  rlisis  itl  itir  ilj  :.jtlll4t  lulls -

lirss  .unl  )ti  thr  lu ifr !■  M.^;4!rU' V  Iriitlrfiry  Uiut  jiussrsars  all

ftnuttr^r.  4p|»lr  .hrlsfv  l-u  thr  t  uifh  t!ir  mvirnninml .

it  Js  tlir  4  »*U:nlri:|tJ:i!  *,4  t:h-  I’lraiurullv  ulisrlVTil  r'U|l  srl'Vut  ivt\

lU'  iLr  nrm^^r  .uri  hkr  it  |irriults  him  Its  i:unliritt
h?  hufst  n»f  riir  stri%Hu.^  ftu'  t huiigr  aint  rr-vnlutiiin

i  ftinful  4^  f!:r  r  M-f  *f|  liir  laast  nhnr  |itf4rsh  whni  iht^  hitirr  is
i  Mti  4^  *  *•! JJI  4tihilirsis  rssrfiliut  uf  all

•rfiiuunr  *h.hr,  f4  Ti  -.iih  Im  hr  %%^v.U  r^rrvfhifig  4iftrrrlit/'

r|i|j*44Jnrs  I',  I*  ‘  ht  .  Ill  Ihr  I’fsiU  lit  »ir|-  Kafikaltir .  Ill  4fT'’‘iS,

ni  uah.  attsfii  ala!  f!i».ivrft»rtit ,  safivrihiug  t»i.*4rfr  is
m,r4lrih  Usuallv  s-iliir  |irrtr%l  i  l|ir  i*f  ItiV  |nilirfits  tifirri

intnr.!  Ifrf  <.rli  aiaiiful  ifi  s!rr|i  in  su*  !i  a  W4V  that  whrn  '-In-  4w*»kt*

shr  I  ii^isrh  Iv'ifuf  iti  thr  #t|*|'Hisilr  tlirrititiii,  !«  wakiil;^!

}.  ..M'.u.h?  f.M  fur^i  rvrrvihin,^  u,jrut!r  *U\%%v.  Unr  uf


21-2


THE  NEUROTIC  CONSTITUTION


her  hivcirite  phnisr.s  was,  '*  iUi  thr  eanlrary/*  a**  411
to  the  cipiiiiiiii  of  others,  The  wish  to  he  ahuvr,  to  riilr,  lii  w’ear
the  fKifits  is  often  ftiiiiul  ti»  hr  rxprrj*^rtl  in  |j4firfil:4  p(  i|ii!4  surf
in  an  e^xtrnortlinariiy  dear  manner.  In  thr  {e'‘U-!ii»lhrra|iinilic
treatnirni  this  trait  is  maihfesleil  fri»iu  hri^iiuung  lo  riiiC  as  h

the  case  w' it !i  riei#4iivism  in  calaftnties,  may  he  almay-'*  aiifitiiialrtl

anti  extemls  In  iht^  iiurst  trivial  thiin^s.  Very  i^l'trn  Ihr-a*  rinirotir
teotleiicirs  to  coiitr-iriiiess  are  maiiife.^^teil  in  the  of  a  iiiilitin

tliiit  the  pliysiciaii  I'oiiUl  coinr  tii  the  paliefil,  m-it  the  iialiriit
the  physician.  Preilictioiis  f.hinili!  as  a  ni!e  hr  avoiifnl  in  the
treatraeiit  of  iiriiriitics,  htit  ivhere  thrre  is  a  slroiii^  frmlrtiry  to
liirii  things  artiiirii-l  the  |ihvsidaii  wall  atwavshr  |nii  iti  the  wron^.

The  effort  is  roiistantH**  m-Hie  u»  make  iijmhmm  :  ri|ftt4efl;
Itt^cire-lirhiiHi,  hecaii^r  thr  iphttusi:  tirtion  tlrmainls  %yiii!iolirii!ly
the  tiiriiitig  aronin!,  llial  is,  the  ^"hangiin;  ftiim  frmiriiiir  la
riiascidinrf  Wnrtis  amt  writing  are  liirneit  ariHitiil  ffiiirfcir
m^ritingh  moralitv,  srxiuil  ctmthn’t*  dreams  ate  liiriirtl  iiilri
rtpf.it,isites  and  folhov  in  rrvrr^.r  *:rt|urtu'r  and  Siiisietimrs  play^
fiilhc  hill  ;it  otiirr  times  ofirm.ivrlv.  thuughjs  are  tnriirr!  around,
The  f‘xpf*dienl  W'hich  is  to  preserve  a  nuc**  iilifie  line  of  coniliirt
ai'Ciirdinglv  ‘.ofiirlhing  of  the  iiafnre  i4  fiirv.

The  ;i}.^p!irafion  of  this  ’*  Un  the  ermfraty  "  (Uisrgekrliril  in
superslition*  |ierlia|is  for  the  ptirpieir  *if  che.iling  fair  hy
expeitifig  tilt*  opposite  of  whal  one  wicdd  Hke,  i’.  a  itninmt  lisiit
in  lieiliotics,  reveals  thrii  1  ofnplel,e  in".rtunfv,  lake',  iis  har'k  til
the  lietirtdir  canfiinisnrss  and  permit**  the  reeogniiitin  of  thr
trememhnis  signiliranee  and  wine  st  ripe  whieh  tliix  attains  in  thr
psyehe  of  thr  iiriir«*tie/

Ahtnif  this  niiilriis  of  r.itilioiisnr.NS  m.iv  he  grouped,  according
til  the  riartiinis  of  the  guiding  idea!,  flails  td  tiiifhfiiliirss  or
iifitrnlhfyhirss  as  the  jiarfitadar  situation  mav  drituiiu!.  They
always  express  fhr  striving  after  full  masridifiilv.  faimrtifiirH
dirertly.  af  otfirr  times  fiy  drenilotis  wmys.  Closelv  related  to
these  are  traib^  of  ilrreplioit  and  frankness,  the  first  rhararter-
oriiprnitirigoslear!?  in  a  feeling  of  infrrioritv*  of  hring  iiiider,
A  sfrcnig  aiitirip.itriry  craving  for  secyrilv  is  revealed  hv  the  traits
of  hypersensitivamr-.s  to  pain  and  suffering  wlddi  keeps  the
imliviflintl  ive!!  ;is  the  envirofiinmt  rriidiiilrd  that  hr  ran  niily
rhcHise  tliose  Hitii;ili«ms  in  life  wdsirh  i*an  he  nithired  williniit  pain.
It  got*s  witlifiiit  saving  that  the  antici|i:ili*»ii  of  Lihor  psiiris  nfteii
riilrrs  into  llir  rtiiis|rii«iiori  of  this  gtiiding  line,  I1ir  iiriirotirhs
pheiiiiriiena  rif  tloiiiif,  of  varillation  am!  id  hirk  of  drrisitiri  wtiirli
have  lieen  sci  fmiiifiitlv  rfiiphasi;red  in  this  h*»ok  aro  related  to
raufimisriess.  Ttiev  alwavs  set  in  %vhen  rr-ditv  infhierires  the
giihlino  firfifin  in  Kurli  a  iiiaiiiirr  fhal  rnnfradirlions  rtiitslaiitly
•emerge  in  the  lalfrr.  %vlirn  llie  danger  td  a  defrat.  of  ;i  of


TliE  NKUROTIC^S  ESinilT  DE  FAMILLE  aij

presHgr,  k  tlirratf'iirt!  hy  reality.  There  are  then,  generally
speaking,  thrc^r  %Yays  tiprn  in  Hit*  neurotic,  which  depend  upon
tlir  5lreiigtli  of  the  tiililiinit.  guiding  goal,  so  that  the  developed
iunir«si."4  aLSMuiirs  .in  in  ia)rrespun<Ience  wnth  one  of  these.

The  tir%l  way  i'*  by  tixiiig  the  iUnilg  a!ul  vacillation  as  a  basis  of
ojirratioii.  as  is  nuist  trri|Uf'nt!y  found  in  neurasthenics  and
psyrtuislhriiitss,  the  lriit!rnt;y  to  tlouid.  llie  second  way  leads  to
tlir  jisvi'liosis  by  ineaiis  of  wluch  uiuier  the  construction  of  a
frclitig  of  truth/  the  tictiun  is  hypcrstasiml,  dedtied.  The  third
way  leatls  In  a  furinal  change  of  the  fiction  undtw  an  arrangement
of  aiixirtv,  weakness.  |iain,  etcs,  in  short  to  a  neurotic,  circuitous
wav  ill  YYtiiili  friiiiiiiiir  means  are  employed  to  attain  the  purposes,
tif  the  inasciilifir  protest.


r4ilr4  l»|  N.  Wimlmi,


A|>prtiaclit»d  ihm  thawght


CONCLUSION


Our  study  has  shown  that  man’s  character-traits  and  their
principal  function  in  the  life  of  the  individual  are  manifested  as
expedients,  in  the  nature  of  guiding  lines  for  the  thinking,
feeling,  willing,  and  acting  of  the  human  psyche,  and  that  they
.are  brought  into  stronger  relief  so  soon  as  the  individual  strives
to  escape  from  the  phase  of  uncertainty  to  the  fulfillment  of  his
fictitious  guiding  idea.  The  material  for  the  construction  of  the
character-traits  is  contained  in  the  psychic  totality  and  congenital
differences  vanish  before  the  uniform  effect  of  the  guiding  fiction.
Goal  and  direction,  the  fictitious  purpose  of  the  traits  of  character
may  be  best  recognized  in  the  original,  direct,  aggressive  lines.
Want  and  difficulties  of  life  lead  to  alterations  of  character,  so
that  only  such  constructions  find  favor  as  stand  in  harmony  with
the  individual’s  ego-idea.  In  this  manner  an^  formed  the  more
cautious,  the  more  hesitating  character-traits  which  show  a
deviation  from  the  direct  line,  but  examination  of  which  reveals
their  dependence  upon  the  guiding  fiction.

The  neuroses  and  psychoses  are  attempts  at  compensation,
constructive  creations  of  the  psyche  which  result’ from  the
accentuated  and  too  highly  placed  guiding  ideal  of  the  inferi<ir
child.  The  uncertainty  of  these  children  in  regard  to  their  future
and  their  success  in  life  forces  them  to  stronger  efforts  and
reassurances  in  their  fictitious  life  plan.  The  more  fixed  and
rigid  their  guiding  picture,  their  individual  categorical  imperative,
the  more  dogmatically  they  draw  the  guiding  lines  of  their  lives.
The  more  cautiously  they  proceed  in  this,  the  further  thejr  weaver
these  threads  of  thought  beyond  their  own  person  out  into  the
future  and  organize  on  their  peripheral  ends  where  contact  with
the  external  world  is  to  take  place,  those  traits  of  character  which
are  required  to  serve  as  outposts  for  their  psychic  predispositions.
With  its  extraordinary  sensitiveness  the  neurotic  trait  of
character  fastens  itself  to  reality  in  order  to  change  it  according
to  the  egoistic  ideal,  or  in  order  to  subject  it  to  the  same.  Should
defeat  threaten,  the  neurotic  predispositions  and  symptoms  come
into  force.

The  slight  significance  of  the  congenital  substratum  as  far  as
the  formation  of  character  is  concerned  arises  also  from  the  fact
that  the  guiding  fiction  only  collects  and  unites  into  a  group  those
psychic  elements  of  which  it  can  make  use.  It  only  collects  those
laculties  and  memories  in  which  results  are  promised  for  th<*
attainment  of  the  final  goal.  In  the  neurotic  reformation  of  the

214


,4  0<i  fnlKl  thdo  ^  hiii  ^  0^


CONCLUSION


215


4^syche  the  guiding  fiction  has  absolute  dominion  and  makes  use
experience  according  to  its  own  bent,  as  if  the  psyche  were
^  motionless,  concrete  mass.  It  is  only  when  the  neurotic
t^erspective  becomes  effective,  when  the  neurotic  character  and
J>redispositions  are  fully  developed  and  the  way  to  the  guiding
^oal  is  assured  that  we  recognize  the  individual  as  neurotic.  It
is  then  that  the  neurotic  psyche  teaches  us  more  clearly  than
‘'ioes  the  normal  that,  “Through  the  great  being  which
^Tirrounds  and  penetrates  us,  there  is  a  great  bcxoming  which
-strives  toward  a  completed  being.**  ^  (Durch  das  grosse  Sein,
<3.a.s  uns  umgibt  und  weit  in  uns  hineinreicht,  zieht  sich  ein
,§rosses  Werden,  das  dem  vollendeten  Sein  zustrebt.)  Thus  we
find  that  “  character,’*  which  has  found  its  utility  through  the
guiding  ideal  is  something  like  an  intelligent  pattern  (intelligente
^chablone)  which  is  made  use  of  by  the  craving  for  security  as
‘Well  as  by  the  affect  and  disease  predispositions.  It  is  the  task
of  comparative  individualistic  psychology  to  comprehend  the
ineaning  of  these  models,  as  Breuer  has  begun  to  understand
■^liem  in  their  genetic,  and  in  our  sense,  analogical  construction,
"to  regard  them  as  a  symbol  of  a  life  plan,  as  a  simile.  For
through  the  analysis  of  character  by  means  of  which  the  line
■which  ever  soars  toward  the  guiding  ideal  may  always  be
followed,  we  find  compressed  in  one  point  the  past,  present,
fxiture,  and  the  desired  goal.

One  will  always  find  that  neurotics  cling  tenaciously  to  their
x-^sassuring  ideals.  The  defense  of  them  becomes  accentuated
because  the  patient  in  abandoning  his  ideal  as  well  as  by  a  change
in  direction  of  his  life  plan  brought  about  by  another  anxiously
sinticipates  a  defeat,  a  subordination,  an  emasculation.  The  next
step  in  the  therapeutic  procedure  wdll,  according  to  this,  have
to  be  the  removal  of  this  strongly  antithetical  attitude,  the
resistance  of  the  patient  to  the  physician,  and  its  revelation  as  a
form  of  the  old  neurotic  ideal,  as  the  exaggerated  masculine
■protest.

Thus  as  a  final  word  and  as  an  explanation  of  our  standpoint
"we  may  sum  up  as  follows  :  Inferior  organs  and  neurotic
phenomena  are  symbols  of  formative  forces  which  strive  to
realize  a  self-constructed  life  plan  by  means  of  intense  efforts
stud  expedients.


AUTHORS*  CONTRIBUTIONS  REFERRED  TO
IN  THIS  BOOK


Studie  uber  Minderwertigkeit  von  Organen.  Urban  u-
Schwarzenberg.  Wien  n.  Berlin,  1907.

Uber  neurotische  Disposition.  Jahrbuch,  Bleuler-Freud,.

1909.

Der  Aggressionstrieb  im  Leben  und  in  der  Neurose.
Fortschritte  der  Medizin.  Leipzig,  1908.

Die  Bedeutung  der  Organminderwertigkeitslehre  fxir  Philo-
Sophie  und  Psychologie.  Vortrag  in  der  Gesellschaft  fiir
Philosophie  an  der  Universitat  in  Wien,  1908.

Myelodysplasie  oder  Organminderwertigkeit  ?  Wiener  med-
Wochenschrift,  1909.

Der  psychische  Hermaphroditismus  im  Leben  und  in  der
Neurose.  Fortschr.  d.  Medizin,  1910.  Leipzig.

Trotz  und  Gehorsam.  Monatschefte  fiir  Padagogik.  Wien,

1910.

Die  psyche  Behandlung  der  Trigeminusneuralgie.  Zentralblatt
fiir  Psychoanalyse.  Wiesbaden.  Bergman,  1910.

Einerlogener  Traum,  Zentralblatt  fur  Psychoanalyse.  Wies¬
baden.  Bergman,  1910.

Uber  mannliche  Einstellung  bei  weiblichen  Neurotikern.
Zentralblatt  fur  Psychoanalyse.  Wiesbaden.  Bergman,  1910.

Beitrag  zur  Lehre  vom  Widerstand.  Zentralblatt  fiir  Psycho¬
analyse.  Wiesbaden.  Bergman,  1910.

Syphilidophobie.  Zentralblatt  fur  Psychoanalyse.  Wiesbaden.
Bergman,  1910.

Zur  Determination  des  Charakters.  Vortrag,  gehalten  in  der
Gesellschaft  fur  Psychologie  an  der  Universitat  in  Wien,  1909.


THE  END.


immx


.1  '  *it  i  i  -i'

I  '  ;  I  1  -  .-4  3  f

I  V,  L  *  * ,  4

^  ,  i  i  «  .  3.  ■•  ,  ,

,|!-fr,  •  i  1

-t  _  :♦

l.M  ■  -.i.  ■  • .  >  ’  , .  :  i  •■  •■  1  :

U  '  ^'‘’'  ^  *l

\.-  }  <•*-.!;

A  1  .• :  ,  I  *'  ;

1’,^;  ’♦.,  'A,  I

I  j  !  A  41  IV.,  in

l*V

,  /  &  '  ^  V  /

J:  >  ■  '  •  ^  ?-  VV*:  ..::3

!»i  •?1  J

V.  rv  *,

»i*.,  .V.  '  ,  n:

^  v..*;  :  >./  ;  ^  •  I ;  M  r.„

,\  i  J  I,  i  i  •.  ;  ‘Z  i,  vi^

I  '!  'I  ,'.  !■■  '  .  ?  '  .  ,  t  ■■  i  -,'  ,  'J  • ..'

•  .  ,  :  ,  '
i  »  ;

:  ::,  !  v;

|.j<.  !*'/;  :,'/  !  ■■;

■■■■'•» ..K .3  i  -Jf  ■.!,«  *'.■•.  I  !  4  ,’

r  ^  *i

«  4i' t ,  J.  i

f y'

At’** , .  *  "

r.V’  I  "  1-*  I  j-j -n;

%*  !!,  T’  .  t.  '  .  l‘.

\$y.iit.%  I VI

I  ':*2:  ’itt  ■>

V'  /'  - «  5  :■  *

4  f  ‘r  ,  ^:. !  ,  1 '!.-l

%  ’( *  -  ?  ri  t ,  ^  '

i-w  4  W  a'/  * '  .  8  s  I  '^V  ■'.;

V:,f

t  r.  A~'-
f  H  s '  ?  V  '  -  •*"  f'  %  1

in«'v  r  i.

f '  ^  t  * «  '!  '

I  •  \

'  ;■*  ’■

V,  4,.,.,

H  V.  V  ,  ^

|V-\r‘  ^


5  't*|u0|iii;,*h  ^  ti

i  iHiui.^:  itt  in^iU.  VV

;  ;it'i

I  lUrtxjUf,  V.K  V*,  Ml,  II?,  yt

f  !Mt*j4iJ«4  3^  |lAi

■

,  tihi4iui3^,  ai.  yy  nw.  Hs,  II!,,  11^
^  |iMI,  |:tl

;  iifeasi,

I  Ife-t.4vli.4i4,  "J

*  iif

■'  |lyr.%i#if,  %iti  ,  'll

:  ?i

;  lii


* ,  ill

144

V-air^J-g,  r»'/

i  44TI,  m,  III.  1^4,  |i|5,  |l¥l,

itit't.  ijA  ijii,  Lii,  i:a,  inv.  Hv

lu.  txU.  i«U,  II?.  401.

Mm

■I  1^1,  |ti*|

^  liO

t  ^n*’. ’.»i,’4,  131

^  4  Jl,  ??,  i4H.  $^,  *314

«  *f  ',1^

*  li  Ait  alls,,

1  -a

I  ,  Hi

<'!«-»!•.  I

v.  II,  ?4

t!l?4||4;ai|SV*t#».  1.  'iJ***

Iki

*A-l54tn.  4

1 1?  -•  i;  Si  A  ^  ^  4)1 ,  A  l5  ?A»lt  ‘  #  i|||«tif  f .  4

|..^lrlO.'*,  M-’

-  ^hnmgh  rriflttl

I,  H

*  |i|t,  I  HI
Irta,  1^1

I  ,i-.  II  »,  ist.  18H.  I««5

in  i‘*ii

i'  E*.  r»il

Hi

-.'■At#’:,  ?y|

t  .-.  ,  I,  It  .  *!ll

*  I--* ■*,.{•■ -i'’ r-rituc*®  "4*'H  ,  I IH  ||#i

I  **  f  ;i?  5,rM

*»s.  IPI

f  -‘S^ ,  t ,

a


*»7


218

I^^l.  II  "a

^U,  i'K  I***^’*

(‘ii\^‘i-j\i,in-' %  |aa

t*r  tvm.’  i>n  »  - .

i;.  «’l,  *  *,  U  a  I‘-'-..l.

li';!,  I  a  %  1  "'-a

I’nirar.  IM'^  li^a.  |;.;

I  ’r;l;‘}u-='.  fU .  til
c'ra«-li>.  ::| .  -.a,  »'l,  l.v’=  I.'*/

t 'r*;i»t>*!'t‘'lir' 5‘5 .  I'.i,

C 'v.*l  -?ll5 ’l-.i  I.’/

>  ,1,  I

p.iru'i!!,,  'Xi
rj»‘af •iiaiii'ttii,  4

iMalh,  ilasi/-!’  »>l,  II

I’lj

put

fl^i.T.'srr  .6i*v  ,  4 '.I

ixl'i,  vtl,  I'i
llrlirii.jjj!,  |i4i

I  Vtij^-*4,!j  I  |}frri-.*i,,  I’Ji,  in.  In,'.

mi

I  ^«'  lf,.ii  «  S-'  ,  lull

i  -u. ,  ,}t  m

'’.ni

-M,  \n.  i;r  i  a:

r.'M-.,  ‘ai,  im

I'lr  !:n;.;'Aa!\tS  ,  I'U  ,  ?ft,  HU,  full,  I 'll  .

tin  I  a,  t’a,  |>^

-  yf

|'*r'.i|f#i  t«j  .HV

I^srfi.i-ar,  lU
1 1>»“i|rr  il 5r 'i ,  ?  '!,
f '<  I f5U5!i,  -''t  :.«■•'>  If'. -til*  I ‘1

I-’  i>t  I.

l:il.  ITI,  I'U

I  lin!*'' »  ®  flrr

!'l| fMl  I','!*!

aT  |f,?^  I7’i\  ■’!  I

I  j*''!?!  V  ,  5

HU


i<-sri

■r,  fi'H

?!3--  1if.

frifir-.uu-r.  It!

!)■.,(.  .

1

,  1  4

im

-f  ,  1  r

,frll,  IX',  !!•,=»

f‘^r«*?i?i
i  ‘ifr'iu

M  H
,  I,!.  ^

:  i  ’  a  1

iir:

fT .  %

.  H  a

a  7  '  ■'’'t  ■‘'i

Xi\

>  1-4  _

I'M  1

r-.:,  r:.  a  i.|

1  1  ’

irl

111  r

*  H' a  H'

IVI,

,  la,

IHI,

HM,  H-t.  H-i

f  ..f

4  fU  ? ,'

Ar  Is:

Hia  r/n

.|h*.

'  1 7»1

!  J '  's  *'  r

ii:i

ru',  !

'  !.f  |»Vj

*.f  ri!|??*/,  il';!

$mml,  TH


INDEX

K  ,  yi

K-.v  au-inva  *-%
i'!ii  r’l;, ■  y,  t  ’< .  J|  ,  .a-
5  ,4'  .'-.'.I  U,  la,

al,  .H,  av^,  a...  i.i,\

u*  1  ;.,i,  i  ,  'i  I  i

i 4,'vi;  .ill  >  1'^ ■  5 ,  a  ^  I
li a:; ’^1,  *.u  ii'i
1'.-
n:..

K;.3vv,  V  at  I  y  »>l .  a
IJ:I.  l:n,  lat

l''.y <lr|.  1  >  ,  al,  Ira’*

-a

|j  ■»  i  ,  l^a

|slVrh*-.5W1,  II

I  1 ! |f i 5 5,1^,’''’ r ,  j
I  !r  ■'v,!n-»aJ5 ,  *j

I-  va:f'.-tai  u;*  #ai
•■■h ,  *>

Hu  ui

i”.  -5  -i-'  :5  3  ,  1"^  ,

la  a uia :•  -■».

I*;  -5  ,S.;;U  :  5,a  •■:  -J  ,  11

i'.  f  >;a-;  :;  tusau  Hi,  ^  '4  t

la-i

'lit:'*;-.  1^1

4'.  i’4.1  i,av«  aij.  '.,r^  a  1  1.

H?;!

I’Hi '  ■  ?. -i  3 ,  J'-i,  a  ■"'I
l'':at;4u«.  ;!?y  ''li
a.i.  I  a

a  aj

.u,  !  a.  'Jll

-la

>4  I  a  aa  \m

,n  pU-.n^  I'.l,  Vr:
f.n  ririaHt  y  ,  It
.  i  -3>.^u/a'v ,  4.y  vn


-f  s.  .'

-^i.H  t  j

uf  ‘fr.

ir*u  la

^Hrh:  .;•

iff

'If

^  H.  1'.?  r-  t-a

l-l.  ^

■  V  l-M  H-i

HH.

J  l?4,  H"^

ii «« ,

!*a

t  a, a  !

ta-?r.  ii:

r^vftti,  I*?

Ha,  I'ii
Hit

iH!


;i!

li#

-a  '
nn


III


!*■*'«  au'l

14,

a,  IM

f  I


IJ  ^"V
i  ^  ■#  >


•",  I  rt#%


INDEX


220


Leonardo  da  Vinci,  85
Leporelist,  101
Lewdness,  182
Libido,  31
Lichtenberg,  54,  200
Limping,  102
Lingua  scrotallis,  59
Lipps,  150
Litzmann,  102
Liveliness,  5

Lombroso,  9,  12,  72,  157
Love,  100,  103
Lying,  pathological,  5

—  mania,  100

—  cases,  107

Lymphatism,  Heubner’s,  2

Malice,  92,  155
Malthieu,  Dr,,  58
Mannliche  Einstellung  'Weiblicher
Neurotikes,  152
Marczinowsky,  181
Marriage,  14,  20
Martins,  3
Masculine  goal,  7

—  protest,  49,  51,  53,  78.  85,  88,
102,  105,  108,  118,  141,  160,  169,
176,  179,  185,  189

Masochism,  20,  124,  159,  172,  185

—  cases,  156,  162
Masturbation,  12,  25, 100,  107,  130,

160,  172,  182

-cases,  106,  112,  132,  139,  169,
176,  178

Megalomania,  48
Meister,  51
Melancholy,  77,  187
Mendel,  76
Menstruation,  14
Meschede,  125
Meyer,  E.  H.,  52
Meyerhof,  16,  35
Michaelifl,  76
Michel,  47

Migraine,  60,  77,  91,  102,  146,
151,  156

—  cases,  93,  201
Minus-variants,  2
Misoneism,  Lombroso ’s,  9,  72
Mistrust,  171

Modesty,  48,  113,  124,  135,  173,
179,  180
Moebius,  119
Moll,  115
Moodiness,  5
Morel,  5
Moro,  2
Moroseness,  5
Morphine,  failure  of,  202
Mother  fixation,  56
Myopathy,  6
Myths,  charm  of,  186


Naecke,  120
Naevi,  4

Narcissism,  118,  121,  180,  185,  189
I  Nausea,  88,  102
1  —  cases,  79
i  —  school,  205
1  Necrophilia,  119
Negativism,  infantile,  84
Neologisms,  cases,  127
Netslitzky,  5
Neuralgia,  156

—  cases,  147

Neurotischen  Disposition,  1,  151
Neusaer,  von,  106
Nietzsche,  ix.,  9,  12,  15  ,  30,  39,
56,  81

No,  the  neurotic,  167
Nymphomania,  101

Obedience,  210

Obstinacy,  20,  30  ,  88,  111,  134,  143

—  cases,  135,  163
Obstipation,  see  Constipation
Oedipus  complex,  32,  72,  90,  91,  97
Onanism,  see  Masturbation
Openbeim,  161
Organ-inferiority,  4
Organ-jargon,  see  Somatic  jargon
Overcompensation,  psychic,  1,  6
Ovid,  114

Palpitation  of  heart,  88,  91,  179
Paralysis,  146,  182
Paranoia,  127,  187

—  litigious  123
Parsimony,  100
Passivity,  20,  21
Patricide,  166
Paulsen,  26
Pavor  nocturnus,  5
Pawlow,  34
Pedantry,  30,  78,  118
Penury,  100

Personlichkeitsgefuhl,  see  Ego-
oonsciousness
Pertussis,  cases,  207
Perverse  sexuality,  12
Perversion,  155,  158,  173,  177,  182,
189

Pessimism,  72
Pfaundler,  5
Phantasy,  see  Fantasy
Phantom  pregnancy,  87
Philosophy  of  the  As  If,  Vaihinger,
15

Phlegmatism,  5
Phobias,  see  Fear
Photophobia,  4
Pineles,  5
Plato,  165,  184
Pliancy,  134
Poggio,  196


INDEX


221


Pollution,  169,  176,  177,  196

Poltauf,  2

Polyuria,  88

Ponflick,  2

Porta,  57

Potpeschnigg,  6

Practical  Part,  61

Precocity,  4,  6,  111

—  sexual,  12
Preface,  Author’s,  v.

Pregnancy,  14

—  phantom,  87

—  compulsory  ideas ,  88
Preparation,  psychic,  20,  24,  4546,

56

Preuss,  K*  Th.,  160
Pride,  31,  48,  177,  182
Profession,  choice  of,  160
Prostitution,  147

—  phantasies,  181
Protection,  against  coitus,  88

—  against  courting,  88

' —  against  maternal  duties,  89

—  against  parturition,  88

—  against  pregnancy,  88

—  against  puerperium,  89
Pseudomasochism,  124,  176
Psychic  hermaphrodism  in  life  and

the  neuroses,  50,  86
Psychischen  Behandlung  des  Tri¬
geminus  Neuralgic,  1,  102,  149,
176

Psychischen  Hermaphroditismus,  1
Puerperium,  14
Punctuality,  173
Pyromania,  156
Pythagoras,  12

QuerulousneBS,  140

Eage,  paroxysms  of,  5
Baimann,  117
Eakowiza,  Helen,  125
Eecurrence  of  the  identical,
Nietzsche,  9

Beflexes,  exaggerated,  5

—  conditioned,  6
Befraction,  anomalies  of,  4
Befractoriness,  210
Eeich,  J.,  160
Beligiosity,  21,  202
Bemorse,  166
Bestlessness,  5

Beturn  of  the  identical,  Nietzsche,
190

Bevengefulness,  31,  92
Bickets,  4,  133,  162
Bochefoucauld,  67,  166
Boughness,  68-69,  129
Bound  shoulders,  5
Sadism,  12,  22,  69,  89,  92,  115,
166,  169,  172


f  Safety-device®,  xii.,  43,  58
i  Sand,  George,  136
I  Scheme,  neurotic,  88
I  Schmidt,  4,  69
i  Schopenhauer,  52,  119,  186
j  Schreber,  case  of,  126
i  Schrenck-Notzing,  119
'  Schumann,  Clara,  102,  160
;  Scoliosis,  5
i  Self-accusation,  130,  198
j  Self-confidence,  44
Self-preservation,  35
I  Self-reproach,  166
I  Self-torture,  198
!  Senile  neuroses,  61,  74
I  Sensitiveness,  177
1  — cases,  183

I  Sentiment  d’incompldtude,  of  Janet,
]  vii.

!  Sexual  guiding  lines,  44
j  Sexual  perversions,  68,  115,  121
j  —  inferiority,  79
j  —  precocity,  12
I  —  activity,  14
I  —  anomalies,  13,  31
I  Sexuality  and  death,  193
j  —  as  a  jargon,  32,  75,  97,  114,
140,  161,  169,  177
Shame,  48

Shamelessness,  180,  see  also  Exhi¬
bitionism
Shiller,  34

Sicherungetendenz,  see  Craving  for
security
Silberer,  36
Silence,  182,  210
Simmel,  119
Simplicity,  124
Simulation,  100,  134
Singer,  60

Siphilidophobia,  112,  150,  153,  196,
212

Sleep,  disturbances  of,  5
Sleepiness,  5,  91
Socrates,  47

.  Somatic  inferiority,  1,  198
I  Somatic  jargon,  61,  84,  85,  124
Somnambulism,  5,  160
Spasmophilia,  Escherich,  2
Spasms,  sphincters,  86
— vocal  cords,  86
Speech-defect,  4,  5
Sperm  glands,  anomalies  of,  133
Splitting  of  consciousness,  61,  124
Squints,  5
Staggering  gait,  89
Stammering,  cases,  62
Stature,  anomalies  of,  4
Status  thymico-lymphaticus,  106
—  in  suicide,  5;  Poltauf,  2;  Bartel,

3

Stekel,  96,  157


333


INDEX


191

ri 1-4  »!"‘l
S:5r.^;i4r'-. »,  I*

4,  lh»

4;^*;  ■,»,  J,  1 1  r .  i.*  =  ,  1  ••

Sil|44^  il"''*'!'  M  r  »4tt  ■5'i' %-.'.'t

in  ,  1.  *4  I.
h]  U^  i::,  Vu.  Il.i

4  4

4s,i-;Srtr4ii^,  I*  ‘Jt\  i>|,  llv^

li'J

,«Vr.i|r4^,  IJ^',  H*|

’(Jfi

sIi4Ij4i4  4*#

,  «J,  U»

S,ual.‘n  U.  11*^,  I  ^  '4*:

I V iu|-l44Si ’usf  ^

■'  |{.|l/r.nili>,  a

hj'%,  |4/»,

t1|

!'■*)’•  »?i  in  i^ium;.*.  I  ,  !**»,

m

,  ||ii^  llli
lii

14u«|j«il|iy .  I;f
Vrl^Mtunl  i'wa

r«!:..*4l  I

rhuiv.i.‘U

flur;-'.*,  «■  i  .V;i4jfr-^  ni
1.4'.f4*Jgi:«'r  a  ^  M.I
"“ri-Utitlfl  iiti

Tll)^44

5

'riipittlt^.y,  5
"t’M!l»?,.J‘|  ,  |*#a
Tiiw-*5||  fj'i

fmmt,  1^41 4

'1''f^‘til5  iwi4  llift|i«>f ftifst ,  '4  'JS,

i«,  1^*,  in,  |4i

I's-Wf  I i *!■“*'  '-  1 1' ,  l-i)

*ii,  iij:i


Vn  f#4i  tr.  fill  tit-m ,  I  ti
I  I

I  -..i  ‘  1 4;,

I  ;i4^at‘44.'4:.5y,  ;»

V  3n^; .  4;al;4  14,  •  .  ■  ;

\  -.-’V.;*.  ,  ,  •■,  J

h  .  i  ^  1  ,5^  !  .  ||  t

^  4*  i

4  4.-n

i  9  ,  j:  .« ,r '  ,

\  ■r  r,  Ji : }  j,  V,; ;  3  as  ^  1  ,*  ^

^  \  *>t

-^4*.- a,  |#|

li-.-a,  1 /^*iu.4#4-.»  4i.

%-«r;  ,  !i

-  s  f,v'  -  ■'■a ; ,  ^' ,  .1 9 ,  C*  4

V  -^5  |«^

^*’^#‘51,  IT’J


V,  4.ar.  J4'*,T-r,4  ,

V»  s,  -  .  i.  -  *■',  ,.  .144  ,  I  ■  4
4 i  -'J  a:-,’

V,  ft  UV

Jl  :  8 ,  i  U

Vj  »  in

.-/-a-a  '  4 1


1  1 1,

■n  t ; ;  •  4  ^

1  ■

^  V.

44  -Iviaife,

f>l

V.

.,1  s.:s.

!i;i

'

4.

I:i4,  ti\

1  w,

as  In

‘‘'H-'f-.n.ialsC  ,  |;^4

1  ^V:

sll  ?5.f

‘Af  .

:.5a.4sn.  1^!,  m

*Val  |w:*t».3r':‘_  ^»:ar.  s:  ;.  ^  1,:^  if,


,  Ja,  '  |4.  j  «VI.  U  I .  la’ai

V'.;’  t-  I.n.  lit

’’A  Ua

I  V4fi?e^^.  1

I  ^'  ■  :a*-  .'fl?  h-  "Pt
I

j  '/.m-kmiht  ^


