The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology (Alfred Adler (P. Radin, trans.), 1924)
==========================================================
Adler's mature system: birth order, social interest, and the style of life. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_KV-144-070).

eS


ener states


Sra
ee


tf
4


sess


CR
West Sussex Health
Libraries
Dunhill Library
St Richard's Hospital
Spitalfield Lane
Chichester PO196SE


This book is to be returned on or before
the last date stamped below.


Kee 6 [s [ toug
Chichester Health Libraries


COPY NUMBER 9092191


cRIMMIIMlMtt|


Py el


a


i


International Library of Psychology
Philosophy and Scientific Method


The Practice and Theory of
Individual Psychology


International Library of Psychology, Philosophy
and Scientific Method


GENERAL EpiTor: C. K. OcpeEn, M.A.
(Magdalene College, Cambridge)


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED


PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES ‘ ; z : . by G. E. Moore, Litt.D.
THE MISUSE OF MIND . 3 by KARIN STEPHEN
Prefatory Note by Henvi Bergson ag
CONFLICT AND DREAM . 3 by W. H. R. RIVERS, F.
PSYCHOLOGY AND POLITICS . : - . by W. H. R. RIVERS, F.R.S.
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS . . by L. WITTGENSTEIN
Introduction by Bertrand Russell
THE MEASUREMENT OF EMOTION : : . by W. WHATELY SMITH
PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES . A : ; : Y C. G. Jone, M.D., LL.D.
SCIENTIFIC METHOD : 6 c : ; ; by A. D. RITCHIE
SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT . : . by C. D. BRoaD, Litt.D.
THE MEANING OF MEANING. : ‘by C. K. OGDEN and I. A. RICHARDS
CHARACTER AND THE UNCONSCIOUS . : . by J. H. VAN DER HOOP
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING 7 : : . by EUGENIO RIGNANO
CHANCE, LOVE AND LOGIC . : : ‘ : ; . by C. S. PEIRCE
SPECULATIONS . ; F ; ; é . by T. E. HULME
THE NATURE OF LAUGHTER A : : : F by J. C. GREGORY
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY ‘ : 5 : : ; by ALFRED ADLER
IN PREPARATION
THE ANALYSIS OF MATTER . 4 : . by BERTRAND RUSSELL, F.R.S.
PSYCHOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY . : : by W. H. R. RIVERS, F.R.S.
MATHEMATICS FOR PHILOSOPHERS , § . oy G. HOHARDY, RRS:
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MYTHS 3 : by G. ELLIoT SMITH, F.R.S.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS . 5 by E. VON HARTMANN


Introduction by Professor G. Elliot Smith
THEORY OF MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS by F. G. CROOKSHANK, M.D., F.R.C.P.


PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY . by WILLIAM Brown, M.D., D.Sc.
EMOTION AND INSANITY : : by S. THALBITZER
Introduction by Professor HL. Hoffding
TELEPATHY AND CLAIRVOYANCE . . by R. TISCHNER
Introduction by E. a Dingwall
SUPERNORMAL PHYSICAL PHENOMENA a : . by E. J. DINGWALL
THE LAWS OF FEELING : 3 5 . by F. PAULHAN
PSYCHOLOGY OF A MUSICAL PRODIGY — : : ; 5 by G. REVESZ
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MusICc : : : . . by EDWARD J. DENT
THE THEORY OF HEARING . : 3 : . by H. HARTRIDGE, D.Sc.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF MUSIC ; - 6y Riv POLE Ras:
Edited by Edward J. Dent and H. Hartridge
THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAW , ‘ ‘ : . by A. L. GOODHART
THE MENTALITY OF APES . : ‘ : : : . by W. KOHLER
MENTAL DEVELOPMENT i ; : é 9 i ° by K. KOFFKA
A History oF ETHICS . : ; : é : . by M. GINSBERG
PHYSIQUE AND CHARACTER . 0 : : ; by ERNST KRETSCHMER
COLOUR-HARMONY . F , ; by JAMES Woop
DEVELOPMENT OF CHINESE THOUGHT ; : . by LIANG CHE-CHIAO
THE HISTORY OF MATERIALISM . : : ‘ ; . by F. A, LANGE
PSYCHE ” é : : : é ‘ , .by E. ROHDE
THE PRIMITIVE MIND : A i ‘ , . Oy P. RapDIN, Ph.D.
PSYCHOLOGY OF PRIMITIVE PEOPLES 5 h . by B. MALINOWSKI, D.Sc.
LANGUAGE AS SYMBOL AND AS EXPRESSION a ‘ : . by E. SAPIR
PSYCHOLOGY OF RELIGIOUS MYSTICISM ; ' . 6y J. H. Leupa


PSYCHOLOGY OF TIME . éy M. STURT


STATISTICAL METHOD IN ECONOMICS — » by P. SARGANT FLORENCE
SCOPE AND VALUE.OF ECONOMIC THEORY . 4 by BARBARA WOOTTON
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY : : . by CHARLES Fox
THE PRINCIPLES OF CRITICISM by I. A, RICHARDS
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ‘As IF? by H. VAIHINGER


‘The Practice and Theory
of Individual Psychology


By
ALFRED ADLER


(VIENNA)


Translated by
P. RADIN, Ph.D.


Associate Professor of Anthropology at California University


LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. LTD.
NEW YORK: HARCOURT, BRACE & COMPANY, INC.
1924


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
THE EDINBURGH YRESS, 9 AND 11 YOUNG STREET, EDINBURGH


EREPACE LO THE ENGLISH
TRANSLATION


INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY is now a definite science with a
limited subject-matter, and no compromise can be ad-
mitted. This intransigence arises not from the attitude
or intention of its founder but from the inexorable logic
of a treatment of phenomena as mutually related. We
shall never agree to change the fundamentals of human
psychology which it has established and to adopt others
in their stead. And we shall also never be under the
necessity of undertaking a special enquiry into sexual
factors long after the other aspects of psychic life have
been investigated. Individual psychology covers the
whole range of psychology in one survey, and as a
result it is able to mirror the indivisible unity of the
personality.

We entertain the highest respect and admiration for
our predecessors and regard our own achievements only
as the development into a science of their brilliant intui-
tions. At the same time we may modestly lay claim to
the formulation of fundamental principles which have
hitherto never found expression in psychological literature.

This by no means implies that we do not envisage the
further progress of our science. We are concerned at
present to establish convincing proofs of the unity of the
personality on evidence which will leave no room for
doubt. We also succeed more quickly in tracing the
strangest aberrations of the human mind to the sense of
some personal peculiarity which gives rise to a failure to
cope with reality. The Unconscious of the text-books, in
which current attempts to elucidate its meaning have
already distinguished several levels, each able to serve as

Vv


INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


an asylum ignorantiae, resolves itself for us chiefly into
the patient’s failure to understand his impulses in relation
to his social environment. In consonance with our
earliest conclusions, dreams are seen with increasing
clearness to be a preparation for confronting some problem
which has presented itself, in accordance with the desire
for superiority, and by means of an analogy. As one of
the most important safeguards we have the elimination of
the customary modes of life, whereby neurotic or perverse
behaviour is rendered possible. This shows the worth-
lessness of pleasure and pain as causes and justification for
unsocial behaviour. They can always be modified and
take the form of further safeguards when once a wrong
course is to be adopted. The effects of suggestion and
auto-suggestion are revealed ever more clearly as partial
phenomena which can never be rationally explained
except in relation to a total setting.

Our contention, too, that all forms of neurosis and
developmental failure are expressions of inferiority and
disappointment rests on a firm basis. And if success in
treating these maladies—even in their gravest forms—is
a criterion, then its practical application has shown that
Individual psychology comes well out of the test. To
encourage the student I would further add that we
Individual psychologists are in a position, if a proper
procedure is observed, to get a clear conception of the
fundamental psychic error of the patient at the first con-
sultation. And the way to a cure is thus opened.


ALFRED ADLER.


VIENNA, 237d Qctobey 1923.


vi


CHAPTER


i


Il.


AMEE


CONTENTS


INDIVIDUAL - PSYCHOLOGY, ITS ASSUMPTIONS
AND ITS RESULTS


PSYCHICAL HERMAPHRODISM AND THE MASCU-
LINE PROTEST—THE CARDINAL PROBLEM
oF NERVOUS DISEASES


NEw LEADING PRINCIPLES FOR THE PRACTICE
OF INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF
NEUROSES


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE THEORY OF HALLU-
CINATION


. THE StTuDY OF CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND


NEUROSIS


. THE PsycuHic TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL


NEURALGIA


. THE PROBLEM OF DISTANCE


. THE MASCULINE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE


NEUROTICS


THE CONCEPT OF RESISTANCE DURING TREAT-
MENT


. SYPHILOPHOBIA
. Nervous INSOMNIA


. INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCLUSIONS ON


SLEEP DISTURBANCES


. HOMO-SEXUALITY


, COMPULSION NEUROSIS


Vii


PAGE


16


23


32


Ge


59


197


CHAPTER


XVI.


XVII.
XVIII.
XIX.


XX,


XXI.
XXII.


XXII.
XXIV.
XXYV.
XXVI.
XXVII.


XXVIII.


INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ON THE FUNCTION OF THE COMPULSION-
CONCEPTION AS A MEANS OF INTENSIFYING
THE INDIVIDUALITY-FEELING .


NEUROTIC HUNGER-STRIKE
DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION


ON THE ROLE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS IN
NEUROSIS


LirE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY IN NEUROSIS
AND PsycHOSIS


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL REMARKS ON
ALFRED BERGER’sS Hofrat Eysenhardt


DOSTOEVSKY

NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES
MYELODYSPLASIA (ORGAN INFERIORITY)
INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL EDUCATION


THE INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITU-
TION


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN


INDEX 5 A J : a *


viii


PAGE


208
212


214


227


235
246


263
280
291
307
317


327
339
351


THE PRACTICE AND THEORY OF
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


I


Individual Psychology, its Assumptions and its Results
(1914)


A suRvEY of the views and theories of most
psychologists indicates a peculiar limitation both in
the nature of their field of investigation and in their
methods of inquiry. They act as if experience and
knowledge of mankind were, with conscious intent,
to be excluded from our investigations and all value
and importance denied to artistic and creative vision
as well as to intuition itself. While the experimental
psychologists collect and devise phenomena in order to
determine types of reaction—that is, are concerned
with the physiology of the psychical life properly
speaking — other psychologists arrange all forms of
expression and manifestations in old customary, or at
best slightly altered, systems. By this procedure they
naturally rediscover the interdependence and con-
nection in individual expressions, implied from the very
beginning in their schematic attitude toward the psyche.

Either the foregoing method is employed or an
attempt is made by means of small, if possible measur-
able individual phenomena of a physiological nature,
to construct psychical states and thought by means
of an equation. The fact that all subjective thinking
and subjective immersion on the part of the investigator
are excluded—although in reality they dominate the
very nature of these connections—is from this view-
point regarded as an advantage.

The method employed, and the very importance it
seems to possess as a preparation for the human mind,
reminds us of the type of natural science completely

; A


2 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


antiquated to-day, with its rigid systems, replaced
everywhere now by views that attempt to grasp living
phenomena and their variations as connected wholes,
biologically, philosophically, and psychologically. This
is also the purpose of that movement in psychology
that I have called ‘‘ comparative inatvidual-psychology”’.
By starting with the assumption of the uwnzty of the
individual, an attempt is made to obtain a picture of this
unified personality regarded as a variant of individual
life-manifestations and forms of expression. The indi-
vidual traits are then compared with one another,
brought into a common plane, and finally fused together to
form a composite portrait that is, in turn, individualized.’

It may have been noticed that this method of looking
upon man’s psychic life is by no means either unusual
or even particularly daring. This type of approach is
particularly noticeable in the study of child-psychology,
in spite of other lines of inquiry also used there.
It is the essence and the nature above all of the
work of the artist, be he painter, sculptor, musician,
or particularly poet, so to present the minute traits of
his creations that the observer is able to obtain from
them the general principles of personality. He is thus
in a position to reconstruct those very things that the
artist when thinking of his jiza/e had previously
hidden therein. Since life in any given society, life
without any of the preconceptions of science, has always
been under the ban of the question ‘‘ whither ?”, we are
warranted in definitely stating that, scientific views to
the contrary notwithstanding, no man has ever made
a judgment about an event without endeavouring to
strain toward the point which seems to bind together
all the psychic manifestations of an individual ; even to
an zmagined goal if necessary.

When I hurry home, I am certain to exhibit to any
observer the carriage, expression, the gait, and the
gestures that are to be expected of a person returning
home. My reflexes indeed might be different from those
anticipated, the causes might vary. The essential
point to be grasped psychologically and the one which
interests us exclusively and practically and psycho-
logically more than all others, zs the path followed.


* William Stern has come to the same conclusions starting from a different
method of approach.


PRACTICE AND THEORY 3


Let me observe that if I know the goal of a person
I know in a general way what will happen. I am in
a position to bring into their proper order each of the
successive movements made, to view them in their
connections, to correct them and to make, where
necessary, the required adaptations for my approximate
psychological knowledge of these associations. If I
am acquainted only with the causes, know only the
reflexes, the reaction-times, the ability to repeat and
such facts, I am aware of nothing that actually takes
place in the soul of the man.

We must remember that the person under observa-
tion would not know what to do with himself were he
not orientated toward some goal. As long as we are
not acquainted with the objective which determines
his ‘‘life-line”, the whole system of his recognized
reflexes, together with all their causal conditions, can
give us no certainty as to his next series of movements.
They might be brought into harmony with practically
any psychic resultant. This deficiency is most clearly
felt in association-tests. I would never expect a man
suffering from some great disappointment to associate
‘‘tree” with ‘‘rope”. The moment | knew his objective,
however, namely suicide, then I might very well expect
that particular sequence of thoughts—expect it with such
certainty that I would remove knives, poison, and
weapons from his immediate vicinity.

If we look at the matter more closely, we shall find
the following law holding in the development of all
psychic happenings: we cannot think, feel, wll, or act
wrthout the perception of some goal. For all the causalities
in the world would not suffice to conquer the chaos of
the future nor obviate the planlessness to which we
would be bound to fall a victim. All activity would
persist in the stage of uncontrolled gropings; the
economy visible in our psychic life unattained; we
should be unintegrated and in every aspect of our
physiognomy, in every personal touch, similar to
organisms of the rank of the amoeba. te

No one will deny that by assuming an objective for
our psychic life we accommodate ourselves better to
reality. This can be easily demonstrated. For its truth
in individual examples, where phenomena are torn from
their proper connections, no doubt exists. Only watch,


4 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


from this point of view, the attempts at walking made
by a small child or a woman recovering from a confine-
ment. Naturally he who approaches this whole matter
without any theory is likely to find its deeper significance
escape him. Yet it is a fact that before the first step
has been taken the objective of the person’s movement
has already been determined.

In the same way it can be demonstrated that all
psychic activities are given a direction by means of a
previously determined goal. All the temporary and
partially visible objectives, after the short period of
psychic development of childhood, are under the
domination of an imagined terminal goal, of a final
point felt and conceived of as definitely fixed. In other
words the psychic life of man is made to fit into the fifth
act like a character drawn by a good dramatist.

The conclusion thus to be drawn from the unbiased
study of any personality viewed from the standpoint of
individual-psychology leads us to the following im-
portant proposition : every psychic phenomenon, uf it ts to
give us any understanding of a person, can only be grasped
and understood if regarded as a preparation for some goal.

To what an extent this conception promotes our
psychological understanding, is clearly apparent as
soon as we become aware of the mu/ltzeplicety of meaning
of those psychical processes that have been torn from their
proper context. Take for example the case of a man
with a ‘‘bad memory”. Assume that he is quite
conscious of this fact and that an examination discloses
an inferior capacity for the repetition of meaningless
syllables. According to present usage in psychology,
which we might more properly call an abuse, we would
have to make the following inference: the man is
suffering, from hereditary or pathological causes, from
a deficient capacity for repetition. Incidentally, let me
add, that in this type of investigation we generally find
the inference already stated in different words in the
premises. In this case e.g. we have the following pro-
position: if a man has a bad memory, or if he only
remembers a few words—then he has an inferior capacity
for repetition.

The procedure in individual - psychology is com-
pletely different. After excluding the possibility of all
organic causes, we would ask ourselves what is the


PRACTICE AND THEORY 5


objective of this weakness of memory? This we could
only determine if we were in possession of an intimate
knowledge of the whole individual, so that an under-
standing of one part becomes possible only after we
have understood the whole. And we should probably
find the following to hold true in a large number of
cases: this man is attempting to prove to himself and
to others that for certain reasons of a fundamental nature,
that are either not to be named or have remained un-
conscious, but which can most effectively be represented
by poorness of memory, he must not permit himself to
perform some particular act or to come to a given
decision (change of profession, studies, examination,
marriage). We should then have unmasked this weak-
ness of memory as tendencious and could understand
its importance as a weapon against a contemplated
undertaking. In every test of ability to repeat we should
then expect to find the deficiency due to the secret life-
plan of an individual. The question then to be asked
is how such deficiencies or evils arise. They may be
simply ‘‘arranged”’ by purposely underlining general
physiological weaknesses and interpreting them as
personal sufferings. Others may succeed either by sub-
jective absorption into an abnormal condition or by
pre-occupation with dangerous pessimistic anticipations,
in so weakening their faith in their own capacities,
that their strength, attention or will-power are only
partially at their disposal.

A similar observation may be made in the case of
affects. To give one more example, take the case of
a woman subject to outbreaks of anxiety recurring at
certain intervals. As long as nothing of greater signifi-
cance than this was discernible, the assumption of some
hereditary degeneration, some disease of the vaso-motor
system, of the vagus nerve, etc., sufficed. It is also
possible that we might have regarded ourselves as
having arrived at a fuller understanding of the case,
if we had discovered in the previous history of the
patient, some frightful experience, or traumatic con-
dition and attributed the disease to it. Assoon, however,
as we examined the personality of this individual and
inquired into her directive-lines we discovered an excess
of will-to-power, with which anxiety as a weapon of
aggression had associated itself, an anxiety which was to


6 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


become operative as soon as the force of the will-power
had abated and the desired resonance was absent, a
situation occurring, for example, when the patient’s
husband left the house without her consent.

Our science demands a markedly individualizing
procedure and is consequently not much given to
generalizations. For general guidance I would like to
propound the following rule: as soon as the goal of a
psychic movement or its life-plan has been recognized, then
we are to assume that all the movements of tts constituent
parts will coincide with both the goal and the life-plan.

This formulation, with some minor provisos, is to
be maintained in the widest sense. It retains its value
even if inverted: the properly understood part-movements
must when combined, give the picture of an integrated life-
plan and final goal. Consequently we insist that, without
worrying about the sendencies, milieu and experiences, all
psychical powers are under the control of a directive
idea and all expressions of emotion, feeling, thinking,
willing, acting, dreaming as well as psycho-pathological
phenomena, are permeated by one unified life-plan.
Let me, by a slight suggestion, prove and yet soften
down these heretical propositions: more important than
tendencies, objective experience and milieu is the sub-
jective evaluation, an evaluation which stands furthermore
in a certain, often strange, relation to realities. Out of
this evaluation however, which generally results in the
development of a permanent mood of ¢he nature of a feel-
ing of inferiority there arises, depending upon the uncon-
scious technique of our thought-apparatus, an imagined
goal, an attempt at a planned final compensation and a
life-plan.

I have so far spoken a good deal of men who have
‘‘grasped the situation”. My discussion has been as
irritating as that of the theorists of the ‘‘ psychology of
understanding” or of the psychology of personality,
who always break off just when they are about to show us
what exactly it is they have understood, as for instance,
Jaspers. The danger of discussing briefly this aspect
of our investigations namely, the results of individual-
psychology, is sufficiently great. To do so we should be
compelled to force the dynamics of life into static words
and pictures, overlook differences in order to obtain
unified formulas, and have, in short, in our description


PRACTICE AND THEORY 7


to make that very mistake that in practice is strictly pro-
hibited : of approaching the psychic life of the individual
with a dry formula, as the Freudian school attempt.

This then being my assumption, I shall in the follow-
ing present to you the most important results of our
study of psychic life. Let me emphasize the fact that
the dynamics of psychic life that I am about to describe
hold equally for healthy and diseased. What dis-
tinguishes the nervous from the healthy individual is
the stronger safeguarding tendency with which the
former’s life-plan is filled. With regard to the
‘‘positing of a goal” and the life-plan adjusted to
it there are no fundamental differences.

I shall consequently speak of a general goal of man.
A thorough-going study has taught us that we can
best understand the manifold and diverse movements
of the psyche as soon as our most general pre-supposttion,
that the psyche has as its objective the goal of superiority,
is recognized. Great thinkers have given expression to
much of this; in part everyone knows it, but in the
main it is hidden in mysterious darkness and comes
definitely to the front only in insanity or in ecstatic
conditions. Whether a person desires to be an artist,
the first in his profession, or a tyrant in his home, to
hold converse with God or humiliate other people;
whether he regards his suffering as the most important
thing in the world to which everyone must show
obeisance, whether he is chasing after unattainable
ideals or old deities, over-stepping all limits and norms,
at every part of his way he is guided and spurred on
by his longing for superiority, the thought of his
godlikeness, the belief in his special magical power.
In his love he desires to experience his power over his
partner. In his purely optional choice of profession the
goal floating before his mind manifests itself in all sorts
of exaggerated anticipations and fears, and thirsting
for revenge, he experiences in suicide a triumph over
all obstacles. In order to gain control over an object
or over a person, he is capable of proceeding along a
straight line, bravely, proudly, overbearing, obstinate,
cruel; or he may on the other hand prefer, forced by
experience, to resort to by-paths and circuitous routes, to
gain his victory by obedience, submission, mildness and
modesty. Nor have traits of character an independent


8 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


existence, for they are also adjusted to the individual
life-plan, really representing the most important pre-
parations for conflict possessed by the latter. |

This goal of complete superiority, with its strange
appearance at times, does not come from the world
of reality. Inherently we must place it under ‘‘ fictions
and ‘‘imaginations”. Of these Vaihinger (Zhe Phzl-
osophy of ‘As If’) rightly says that their importance lies
in the fact that whereas in themselves without meaning,
they nevertheless possess in practice the greatest im-
portance. For our case this coincides to such an extent
that we may say that this fiction of a goal of supertority
so ridiculous from the view-point of reality, has become the
principal conditioning factor of our life as hitherto known.
It is this that teaches us to differentiate, gives us poise
and security, moulds and guides our deeds and activities
and forces our spirit to look ahead and to perfect itself.
There is of course also an obverse side, for ¢hzs goal
entroduces into our life a hostile and fighting tendency,
robs us of the simplicity of our feelings and is always
the cause for an estrangement from reality since it puts
near to our hearts the idea of attempting to over-power
reality. Whoever takes this goal of godlikeness seriously
or literally, will soon be compelled to flee from real life
and compromise, by seeking a life within life ; if fortunate
in art, but more generally in pietism, neurosis or crime.*

I cannot give you particulars here. A clear indica-
tion of this super-mundane goal is to be found in every
individual. Sometimes this is to be gathered from a
man’s carriage, sometimes it is disclosed only in his
demands and expectations. Occasionally one comes
upon its track in obscure memories, phantasies and
dreams. If purposely sought it is rarely obtained.
However, every bodily or mental attitude indicates clearly
its origin in a striving for power and carries within
itself the ideal of a kind of perfection and infallibility.
In those cases that lie on the confines of neurosis there
is always to be discovered a reinforced pitting of oneself
against the environment, against the dead or heroes of
the past.

A test of the correctness of our interpretation can
be easily made. If everyone possesses within himself
an ideal of superiority, such as we find to an exaggerated

1 Cf. also ‘* The Problem of Distance”, in this volume.


PRACTICE AND “THEORY 9


degree among the nervous, then we ought to encounter
phenomena whose purpose is the oppression, the mini-
mizing and undervaluation of others. Traits of char-
acter such as intolerance, dogmatism, envy, pleasure
at the misfortune of others, conceit, boastfulness, mis-
trust, avarice,—in short all those attitudes that are the
substitutes for a struggle, force their way through
to a far greater extent, in fact, than self-preservation
demands.

Similarly, either simultaneously or interchangingly,
depending upon the zeal and the self-confidence with
which the final goal is sought, we see emerging indica-
tions of pride, emulation, courage, the attitudes of saving,
bestowing and directing. A psychological investigation
demands so much objectivity that a moral evaluation
will not disturb the survey. In fact the different levels
of character-traits actually neutralize our good-will and
our disapproval. Finally we must remember that these
hostile traits, particularly in the case of the nervous,
are often so concealed that their possessor is justifiably
astonished and irritated when attention is drawn to them.
For example, the elder of two children can create quite
an uncomfortable situation in trying to arrogate to him-
self through defiance and obstinacy, all authority in the
family. The younger child pursues a wiser course,
poses as a model of obedience and succeeds in this
manner in becoming the idol of the family and in having
all wishes gratified. As ambition spurs him on, all
willingness to obey becomes destroyed and pathological-
compulsion phenomena develop, by means of which every
parental order is nullified even when the parents notice
that the child is making efforts to remain obedient.
Thus we have an act of obedience immediately nullified
by means of a compulsion-thought. We get an idea
of the circuitous path taken here in order to arrive at
the same objective as that of the other child.

The whole weight of the personal striving for power
and superiority passes, at a very early age in the case of
the child, into the form and the content of its striving,
its thought being able to absorb for the time being only
so much as the eternal, real and physiologically rooted
communtty-feeling permits. Out ofthe latter are developed
tenderness, love of neighbour, friendship and love, the
desire for power unfolding itself in a veiled manner and


Be) INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


seeking secretly to push its way along the path of group
consciousness.

At this place let me go out of my way to endorse an
old fundamental conception of all who know human
nature. Every marked attitude of a man can be traced
back to an origin in childhood. In the nursery are
formed and prepared all of man’s future attitudes.
Fundamental changes are produced only by means of
an exceedingly high degree of introspection or among
neurotics by means of the physician’s individual psycho-
logical analysis.

Let me, on the basis of another case, one which
must have happened innumerable times, discuss in even
greater detail the positing of goals by nervous people.
A remarkably gifted man who by his amiability and
refined behaviour had gained the love of a girl of high
character, became engaged to her. He then forced
upon her his ideal of education which made severe
demands upon her. For a time she endured these
unbearable orders but finally put an end to all further
ordeals by breaking off relations. The man then broke
down and became a prey to nervous attacks. The
individual-psychological examination of the case showed
that the superiority-goal in the case of this patient—as
his domineering demands upon his bride indicated—
had long ago pushed from his mind all thought of
marriage, and that his object really was to secretly work
toward a break, secretly because he did not feel himself
equal to the open struggle in which he imagined marriage
to consist. TZhzs disbelief in himself itself dated from his
earliest childhood, to a time during which he, an only
son, lived with an early widowed mother somewhat cut off
from the world. During this period, spent in continuous
family quarrels he had received the ineradicable im-
pression, one he had never openly admitted to himself,
that he was not sufficiently virile, and would never be
able to cope with a woman. These psychical attitudes
are comparable to a permanent inferiority-feeling and it
is easily understood how they had decisively interfered
in his life and compelled him to obtain prestige along
other lines than those obtainable through the fulfilment
of the demands of reality.

It is clear that the patient attained just what his con-
cealed preparations for bachelordom aimed at, and what


PRACTICE AND THEORY II


his fear of a life-partner, with the quarrels and restless
relationship this implied, had awakened in him. Nor can
it be denied that he took the same attitude toward both
his bride and his mother, namely the wish to conquer.
This attitude induced by a longing for victory has been
magnificently misinterpreted by the Freudian school as
the permanently incestuous condition of being enamoured
of the mother. Asa matter of fact this reinforced child-
hood-feeling of inferiority occasioned by the patient’s
painful relation to his mother, spurred this man on to
prevent any struggle in later life with a wife by providing
himself with all kinds of safeguards. Whatever it is
we understand by love, in this particular case it is
simply @ means to an end and that end is the final
securing of a triumph over some suitable woman.
Here we have the reason for the continual tests and
orders and for the cancelling of the engagement. This
solution had not just ‘‘happened”, but had on the
contrary been artistically prepared and arranged with
the old weapons of experience employed previously in
the case of his mother. A defeat in marriage was out
of the question because marriage was prevented.
Although we consequently realize nothing puzzling
in the behaviour of this man and should recognize in his
domineering attitude simply aggression posing as love,
some words of explanation are necessary to clear up
the less intelligible nervous break-down. We are here
entering upon the real domain of the psychology of
neuroses. As in the nursery so here our patient has
been worsted by awoman. ‘The neurotic individual is
led in such cases to strengthen his protections and to
retire to a fairly great distance from danger.* Our
patient is utilizing his break-down in order to feed an
evil reminiscence, to bring up the question of guilt
again, to solve it in an unfavourable sense for the
woman, so that in future he may either proceed with
even greater caution or take final leave of love and
matrimony! This man is thirty years old now. Let
us assume that he is going to carry his pain along with
him for another ten or twenty years and that he is going
to mourn for his lost ideal for the same length of time.
He has thereby protected himself against every love-
affair and permanently saved himself from new defeat.


1 Cf. ‘* The Problem of Distance” in this volume.


12 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


He interprets his nervous break-down by means of
old, now strengthened, weapons of experience, just as
he had as a child refused to eat, sleep or to do anything
and played the rdle of a dying person. His fortunes
ebb and hus beloved carries all the stigma, he himself
rises superior to her in both culture and character,
and lo and behold: he has attained that for which he
longed, for he is the superior person, becomes the better
man and his partner like all girls is the guilty one.
Girls cannot cope with the man in him. In this manner
he has consummated what as a child he had already
felt, the duty of demonstrating his superiority over the
female sex.

We can now understand that this nervous reaction
can never be sufficiently definite or adequate. He zs
to wander through the world as a living reproach against
women.*

Were he aware of his secret plans he would realize
how ill-natured and evil-intentioned all his actions have
been. However he would, in that case, not succeed
in attaining his object of elevating himself above women.
He would see himself just as we see him, falsifying the
weights and how everything he has done has only led
to a goal previously set. His success could not be
described as due to ‘‘fate” nor assuredly would it
represent any increased prestige. But his goal, his life-
plan and his life-falsehood demand this prestige! In
consequence it so ‘‘happens” that the /fe-plan remains
in the unconscious, so that the patient may believe that
an implacable fate and not a long prepared and long
meditated plan for which he alone is responsible, is at
work.

I cannot go into a detailed description of what I
call the ‘‘distance” that the neurotic individual places
between himself and the final issue, which in this case
is marriage. The discussion of the manner in which he
accomplishes it I must also postpone to my chapter
on nervous ‘‘arrangements”. I should like to point
out here however that the ‘‘distance” expresses itself
clearly in the ‘‘hesitating attitudes,” the principles, the
point of view and the life-falsehood. In its evolution
neurosis and psychosis play leading réles. The appro-


_ 2 The paranoidal trait is recognizable. Cf. ‘* Life-lie and Responsibility
in Neurosis and Psychosis”’, in this volume.


PRACTICE AND THEORY 13


priation for this purpose of perversions and every type
of impotence arising from the latter is quite frequent.
Such a man concludes his account and reconciles him-
self with life by constructing one or a number of ‘‘if-
clauses”. ‘‘If conditions had been different. . . .”

The importance of the educational questions that
arise and upon which our school lays the greatest stress
(Hezlen und Bilden, Munich, 1913) follows from what
has been discussed.

From the method of presentation of the present work
it is to be inferred that as in the case of a psycho-
therapeutic cure, our analysis proceeds backwards ;
examining first the superiority-goal, explaining by means
of it the type of conflzct-attztude adopted particularly by
nervous patients and only then attempting to investigate
the sources of the vital psychic mechanism. One of
the bases of the psychical dynamics we have already
mentioned, the presumably unavoidable artistic trait of
the psychical apparatus which, by means of the artéstzc
artifice of the creation of a fiction and the setting of a goal, ad-
justs itself to and extends itself into the world of possible
reality. I shall now proceed to explain briefly how the
goal of godlikeness transforms the relation of the indi-
vidual to his environment into hostility and how the
struggle drives an individual towards a goal either
along a direct path such as aggressiveness or along by-
ways suggested by precaution. If we trace the history
of this aggressive attitude back to childhood we always
come upon the outstanding fact that zhroughout the whole
period of development, the child possesses a feeling of
infertority tn tts relations both to parents and the world at
large. Because of the immaturity of his organs, his
uncertainty and lack of independence, because of his
need for dependence upon stronger natures and his
frequent and painful feeling of subordination to others,
a sensation of inadequacy develops that betrays itself
throughout life. This feeling of inferiority is the cause
of his continual restlessness as a child, his craving for
action, his playing of réles, the pitting of his strength
against that of others, his anticipatory pictures of the
future and his physical as well as mental preparations.
The whole potential educability of the child depends


1 The “struggle for existence”, the ‘‘ struggle of all against all ”, etc., are
merely other perspectives of the same kind.


14 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


upon this feeling of insufficiency. In this way the
future becomes transformed into the land that will bring
him compensations. His conflict- attitude is again
reflected in his feeling of inferiority ; and only conflict
does he regard as a compensation which will do away
permanently with his present inadequate condition and
will enable him to picture himself as elevated above
others. Thus the child arrives at the positing of a
goal, an imagined goal of superiority, whereby his
poverty is transformed into wealth, his subordination
into domination, his suffering into happiness and
pleasure, his ignorance into omniscience and his
incapacity into artistic creation. The longer and
more definitely the child feels his insecurity, the more
he suffers either from physical or marked mental weak-
ness, the more he is aware of life’s neglect, the higher
will this goal be placed and the more faithfully will it
be adhered to. He who wishes to recognize the nature
of this goal, should watch a child at play, at optionally
selected occupations or when phantasying about his
future profession. The apparent change in these pheno-
mena is purely external for in every new goal the child
imagines a predetermined triumph. A variant of this
weaving of plans, one frequently found among weakly
aggressive children, among girls and sickly individuals,
might be mentioned here. ‘This consists of so misusing
their frailties that they compel others to become sub-
ordinate tothem. They will later on pursue the same
method until their life-plan and life-falsehood have been
clearly unmasked.

The attentive observer will find the nature of the
compensatory dynamics presenting a quite extraordinary
aspect as soon as he permits the sexual réle to be
relegated to one of minor importance and realizes that
it is the former that is impelling the individual toward
superhuman goals. In our present civilization both the
girl and the youth will feel themselves forced to extra-
ordinary exertions and manoeuvres. A large number
of these are admittedly of a distinctively progressive
nature. To preserve this progressive nature but to
ferret out those by-paths that lead us astray and cause
illness, to make these harmless, that is our object and
one that takes us far beyond the limits of medical art.
It is to this aspect of our subject that society, child-


PRACTICE AND THEORY 15


education and folk-education may look for germs of a
far-reaching kind. For the aim of this point-of-view
7s to gain a reinforced sense of reality, the development
of a feeling of responsibility and a substitution for latent
hatred of a feeling of mutual goodwill, all of which
can bé gained only by the conscious evolution of a feeling
Jor the common weal and the consctous destruction of the
well-to-power.

He who is looking for the power-phantasies of the
child will find them drawn with a master hand by
Dostoevsky in his novel entitled A Raw Youth.
I found them blatantly apparent in one of my patients.
In the dreams and thoughts of this individual the follow-
ing wish recurred repeatedly : others should die so that
he might have enough room in which to live, others
should suffer privations so that he might obtain more
favourable opportunities. This attitude reminds one of
the inconsiderateness and heartlessness of many men
who trace all evil back to the fact that there are already
too many people in the world; impulses that have
unquestionably made the world-war more palatable.
The feeling of certainty, in fictions of this kind, has
been taken over in the above-mentioned case from the
basic facts of capitalistic trade, where admittedly, the
better the condition of one individual the worse that
of another. ‘‘] want to be a grave-digger”, said a
four-year-old boy to me; ‘‘I want to be the person
who digs graves for others”.


II


Psychical Hermaphrodism and the Masculine Protest—
The Cardinal Problem of Nervous Diseases


(1912)


A TREMENDOUS step in the direction of progress was
taken when, in our doctrines concerning nervous diseases,
that view-point came to the front which regarded all
nervous disturbances as due to changes in the psyche,
these to be treated by influences brought to bear upon
the psyche itself. The issue was brought to a definite
focus by the interposition of competent scientists like
Struempel, Moebius and others. We must likewise add
the experiences of the French in the domain of hypnotic
experiment and hypnotic therapeutics, which proved the
transformability of nervous symptoms and the possi-
bility of influencing them by an approach through the
psyche. In spite of the progress made, however, cures
remained uncertain so that even well-known scientists,
uninfluenced by theoretical considerations, continued to
treat neurasthenia, hysteria, compulsion- and anxiety-
neuroses by means of the old medicines and by the
application of electricity and hydrotherapy. All that was
gained by our increased knowledge consisted for many
years in a heaping up of catch-words supposed to
unlock and exhaust the meaning and the nature of com-
plicated neurotic mechanisms. For some the key lay in
‘‘irritable weakness”, for others, in ‘‘ suggestibility ”,
‘‘shock”, ‘‘hereditary stigma”, ‘‘degeneration”’, ‘‘patho-
logical reaction”, ‘‘lability of psychical equilibrium”,
and other conceptions of the same type which were
supposed to constitute the secret of nervous diseases.
The gain that accrued to the patient was in the main
merely an arid suggestion-therapy, fruitless attempts to
dislodge from the patient’s mind the idea of disease
and the even more fruitless attempt to keep psychical


injuries permanently away. Yet this therapeutic pro-
16


PSYCHICAL HERMAPHRODISM £7


cedure did frequently develop into a useful “traitement
moral”, whenever the patient happened to be under the
care of physicians with a knowledge of the world or
gifted with intuition. Among laymen, however, there
grew up a prejudice against this treatment, augmented
by premature conclusions and the observation that
accidental neuroses were increasing rapidly, thus giving
the impression that the nervous individual was suffer-
ing from ‘‘auto-suggestions” and guilty of conscious
exaggerations, as if it were possible for him by strengthen-
ing his energy, to overcome the symptoms of his illness.

Eventually Josef Breuer hit upon the idea of question-
ing the patient, first in the case of hysterical paralysis,
concerning the meaning and development of his own
disease. He, and Freud, used this method without any
preconceptions and confirmed the outstanding presence
of memory-lacunae preventing both the patient and the
physician from obtaining a real insight into the causes
and the history of the disease. The attempts to formulate
inferences with regard to the forgotten material from
the knowledge of the psyche, the pathological traits of
character, the phantasies and the dream-life of the patient,
were successful and led to the creation of the psycho-
analytical method and view-point. Thanks to this method
Freud was able to trace back to earliest childhood the
roots of nervous diseases and to disclose a number of
psychical phenomena, such as repression and transfer-
ence. During treatment, formerly unconscious stirrings
and desires of the patient were repeatedly brought to
the surface by different investigators who, in identical
ways and for the most manifold forms of nervousness,
made use of the psycho-analytic method, frequently
working quite independently of one another. Freud
himself looked for the cause of nervous disease in the
transformations and the specific constitution of the sexual
instinct, a theory that has been frequently attacked and
one which is not inseparably connected with the psycho-
logical method.

As the basic principle for the practice of the
individuai-psychological method 1 would like to emphasize
the following: the retracing of all the nervous symptoms
occurring in an individual case back to their ‘‘ lowest
common denominator”. That this reduction, made with
the aid of the patient is correct, is proved by the fact

B


18 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


that the psychical picture gained in each case coincides
with a real psychical situation that can be traced back to
the patient’s earliest childhood. In other words the
psychic foundations of neurotic disease and its symptoms
have been taken over unchanged from childhood. Upon
this foundation, however, has been erected in the course of
years, a widely ramifying super-structure, the individual
neurosis, which is not amenable to treatment unless the
basis itself is changed. Into this superstructure have been
absorbed all the developmental tendencies, character-
traits and personal experiences. Among these I would
particularly like to emphasize the mood-residues which
go back to a single or a repeated failure along the main
line of human endeavour. This is the actual cause for
the appearance of the neurotic disease. From that
moment on, all the thoughts of the patient are centred
upon the idea of making good his failure, of running
greedily after useless triumphs and above all, of protect-
ing himself against new failures and the trials of fortune.
His manifesting neurosis, assuming the nature of a
means of support, makes this possible. Nervous anxiety,
pains, paralyses and nervous doubts prevent him from
participating actively in life. In exchange the nervous
compulsion bestows upon him, in his compulsion-
thinking and his compulsion-acting, the semblance of
his lost activity, giving him thus as his excuse for
remaining passive, a legitimate disease.

I found myself compelled in the exercise of the
individual - psychological method, to break up still
further this infantile situation of pretending to be ill.
In so doing I came upon sources arising out of the
injurious influences of family life. Beyond that how-
ever a Cause cropped up that helped in part to form this
detrimental milieu, namely the familial organic constitu-
tion. Regularly and inexorably was it forced upon
my attention that the possession of inherited inferior
organs, organic systems and glands with internal
secretions, created a situation, in the early stages of
a child’s development, whereby a normal Jeeling of weak-
ness and helplessness had been enormously intensified and
had grown into a deeply-felt sense of inferiority. On account
of the delayed and defective as well as inadequate


1S. Adler, Studie tiber Minderwertigheit der Organe (1907), and its
continuation : Adler, ‘‘ Ueber neurotisch Disposition ”, in Helen und Bilden.


PSYCHICAL HERMAPHRODISM 19


constitution of organic inferiority, conditions of the
following nature were initially visible: weakness, sickli-
ness, awkwardness, ugliness, (often caused by external
degenerative symptoms), clumsiness and a large number
of infantile defects, such as twitching of the eyes, cross-
eyedness, left-handedness, deaf-and-dumbness, stuttering,
speech defects, vomiting, bed-wetting and stool-anomalies
for which the child was frequently subjected to humilia-
tion, or made the object of ridicule, for which he was
often punished and which rendered him socially unfit.
The infantile psychic picture often shows striking intensi-
fication of traits otherwise normal, such as infantile
helplessness, the need for cuddling, for tenderness ;
and these then develop into anxiety, fear of being alone,
timidity, shyness, fear of strangers and unknown people,
hyper-sensitiveness to pain, prudishness, permanent
fear of punishment and fear of the consequences of every
act—in short into characteristics that impart uxm7stakable
Jemtnine trazts to the boy.

It is not long before this feeling of being pushed aside
comes to the front, markedly so in those children dis-
posed to neurosis. Together with it there develops a
hyper-sensitiveness which repeatedly disturbs the peaceful
and even flow of the psyche. Children of this type
desire to possess, eat, hear, see and know everything.
They wish to surpass all others and accomplish every-
thing alone. Their phantasy plays with all kinds of
ideas of greatness. They wish to save other people,
picture themselves as heroes, believe in an aristocratic
origin and regard themselves as persecuted and hard-
pressed, like Cinderella. The basis for a burning,
insatiable ambition whose frustration can be foretold
with certainty, has been laid. It is at this time that the
evil instincts also develop and become strengthened.
Avarice and envy grow to boundless limits decause the
child 7s not able to wait for the gratification of his wishes.
Greedily and restlessly he chases after every triumph,
becomes unteachable, irascible, despotic toward younger
people, lies to his elders and watches everyone with
tenacious mistrust. It is clear to what an extent a good
teacher can improve such a developing egoism and a
bad teacher aggravate it. Under favourable circum-
stances an unquenchable thirst for knowledge may arise
or that hot-house growth, the precocious child. Under


20 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


unfavourable conditions there grow up either criminal
tendencies or the picture of an exhausted man trying
to cover up his flight from the demands of life by a
prepared neurosis.

The following is the final conclusion to be drawn
from direct observations of the child’s life: The infantile
traits of submissiveness, lack of independence and
obedience, in short, the passivity of the child are very
soon and, in the case of individuals with neurotic dis-
position very abruptly, displaced by hidden traits of
defiance and rebellion, z.e. by signs of resentment. An
accurate insight discloses a mixture of passive and active
characteristics although there 1s always present likewise a
tendency for a girlish kind of obedtence to change into a
boyish kind of defiance. There are indeed sufficient
reasons for coming to the belief that these traits of
defiance are to be interpreted as a reaction, a protest
against the synchronous stirrings of obedience or
against an enforced submission ; that furthermore their
purpose consists in obtaining for the child a more
speedy gratification of his instincts, importance, atten-
tion and privileges. When the child has reached this
fatal point in his development he feels himself threatened
by an enforced submission and consequently obstructs
all the arrangements of its everyday life—eating, drink-
ing, falling asleep, washing, stool and urinary functions.
The demands of the community-feeling are strangled.
The craving for power expresses itself, in the main, in
an arid inadequate sham-fight and an imaginary prestige.

Another, perhaps the most dangerous type of neuroti-
cally-disposed child, exhibits these contrasting tendencies
of submissiveness and active protest wrought together
into a closer union resembling that subsisting between
means andend. Thesechildren have apparently guessed
at a little of the dialectic of life and wzsh to gratify their
unlimited desires by the most complete kind of submission
(masochism). They are just the people who can least
stand undervaluation, lack of success, compulsion,
waiting, the delay in victory and they, just as those
with different dispositions, are thoroughly frightened
by actions, decisions, anything strange or new. The
develop an alibi for the fatal weakness of which they are
conscious, in order thereafter to avoid the demands of
the community and to isolate themselves.


PSYCHICAL HERMAPHRODISM 21


This apparent double-life, which in the case of
normal children remains within definite limits, and
which enters into the formation of the character of
mature individuals, does not permit the nervous person a
single-minded pursuit of his goal and checks him in his
decisions by means of constructions of his own making,
anxtety and doubt.

Other types take refuge from anxiety and doubt
in a compulsion and unceasingly continue their pursuit
of success. They are always suspecting attacks, belittle-
ment, injustice; trying desperately to play the réle
of a saviour and hero, not infrequently exerting their
powers upon unsuitable objects. (Don Quixotism.)
Insatiable and lusting after the semblance of power,
they demand proofs of love without ever feeling
satisfied. (Don Juan, Messalina.) They never attain
to any harmony in their strivings, for the twofold
nature of their being, the apparent double-life of the
neurotic (‘* double vie”, ‘‘dissociation”’, ‘‘split-personality”’,
of many authors), ts definitely grounded in the fact that the
psyche partakes of both feminine and masculine traits.
Loth appear to strive for unity but purposely fail in
their synthesis in order to rescue the personality from
colliding with reality. It is at this point that individual-
psychology can intervene to some purpose, and by
means of an intensified introspection and an extension
of consciousness, secure the domination of the intellect
over divergent and hitherto unconscious stirrings.

The deep-rooted feeling that permeates the folk-
soul and which has always awakened the interest of
poets and thinkers, that evaluation and symbolizing of
types of phenomena as ‘‘ masculine” and “‘ feminine”’,*
although seemingly arbitrary and yet coinciding with our
social life, impresses itself early upon the infant mind.
Thus the child, with occasional variations, regards the
following as masculine: strength, greatness, riches,
knowledge, victory, coarseness, cruelty, violence and
activity as such, their opposites being feminine.

The normal craving of the child for nestling, the
exaggerated submissiveness of the neurotically-disposed
individual, the feeling of weakness, of inferiority pro-


1 We have but to call to mind such proverbs as: ‘‘A man’s word is his
bond”, expressions of poets (Schiller’s ‘‘ Dignity of Man”—“‘Frailty, thy
name is woman !”) or gifted writers like Moebius, Flies, Weininger, etc.


22 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


tected by hyper-sensitiveness, the realization of actual
futility, the sense of being permanently pushed aside
and of being at a disadvantage, all these are gathered
together into a feeling of femininity. On the contrary,
active strivings, both in the case of a girl as of a
boy, the pursuit of self-gratification, the stirring up
of instincts and passions are thrown challengingly
forward as a masculine protest. On the basis of a
false evaluation, but one which is extensively nourished
by our social life, there thus develops a@ psychical herma-
phrodism of the child, logically” dependent upon its tnward
opposition. From within ttself is then unfolded that
Srequently unconscious urge toward a reinforced masculine
protest which ts to represent the solution for the disharmony.

The unavoidable acquaintance with the sexual pro-
blem intensifies, first and foremost, the masculine
protest, feeds the disharmonic complex with sexual
phantasies and sexual stirrings, leads to early sexual
maturity and may, through mistakes, be the occasion
for all perversions. If the rdle of sex either remains
or is kept unclear to the child, the psychical herma-
phrodism is deepened, thereby increasing the inward
psychical tension.’

The natural uncertainty, the vacillation and doubt,
become fixed and reinforcements are carried to both
poles of the hermaphrodite nature. The difficulty of
mastering this increased split in consciousness, is thus
tremendously augmented and this mastery is only
attained by the manoeuvre of resorting to nervous
symptoms, by psychic retreat and by isolation. The
energy and effort of will of the physician, the patient,
and the educator, founder on this problem. It is only
the individual-psychological method that can then
throw light upon these phenomena of the unconscious
and that can attempt to correct a false development.


’ 1 Adler, ‘Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben u. in der


ee ae: in Hetlen und Bilden, and Problem der Homosexualitat, 2nd
edition.


III


New Leading Principles for the Practice of
Individual-Psychology


(1913)


I. EvERY neurosis can be understood as an attempt
to free oneself from a feeling of inferiority in order to
gain a feeling of superiority.


II. The path of the neurosis does not lead in the
direction of social functioning, nor does it aim at
solving given life-problems but finds an outlet for
itself in the small family circle, thus achieving the
isolation of the patient.


III. The larger unit of the social group is either
completely or very extensively pushed aside by a
mechanism consisting of hyper-sensitiveness and in-
tolerance. Only a small group is left over for the
manoeuvres aiming at the various types of superiority
to expend themselves upon. At the same time pro-
tection and the withdrawal from the demands of the
community and the decisions of life are made possible.


IV. Thus estranged from reality, the neurotic man
lives a life of imagination and phantasy and employs
a number of devices for enabling him to side-step the
demands of reality and for reaching out toward an
ideal situation which would free him from any service
for the community and absolve him from responsibility.


V. These exemptions and the privileges of illness
and suffering give him a substitute for his original
hazardous goal of superiority.


VI. Thus the neurosis and the psyche represent
an attempt to free oneself from all the constraints of
the community by establishing a counter-compulsion.
This latter is so constituted that it effectively faces the


peculiar nature of the surroundings and their demands.
23


24 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Both of these convincing inferences can be drawn from
the manner in which this counter-compulsion manifests
itself and from the neuroses selected.


VII. The counter-compulsion takes on the nature
of a revolt, gathers its material either from favourable
affective experiences or from observations. It permits
thoughts and affects to become preoccupied either with
the above-mentioned stirrings or with unimportant
details, as long as they at least serve the purpose of
directing the eye and the attention of the patient away
from his life-problems. In this manner, depending
upon the needs of the situation, he prepares anxiety-
and compulsion-situations, sleeplessness, swooning,
perversions, hallucinations, slightly pathological affects,
neurasthenic and hypochondriacal complexes and psy-
chotic pictures of his actual condition, all of which are
to serve him as excuses.


VIII. Even logic falls under the domination of the
counter-compulsion. As in psychosis this process may
go as far as the actual nullification of logic.


IX. Logic, the will to live, love, human sympathy,
co-operation and language, all arise out of the needs of
human communal life. Against the latter are directed
automatically all the plans of the neurotic individual
striving for isolation and lusting for power.


X. To cure a neurosis and a psychosis it is necessary
to change completely the whole up-bringing of the
patient and turn him definitely and unconditionally
back upon human society.


XI. All the volition and all the strivings of the
neurotic are dictated by his prestige-seeking policy,
which is continually looking for excuses which will
enable him to leave the problems of life unsolved. He
consequently automatically turns against allowing any
community-feeling to develop.


XII. If therefore we may regard the demand for
a complete and unified understanding of man and
for a comprehension of his (undivided) individuality as
justified—a view to which we are forced both by the
nature of reason and the individual - psychological


|


PRACTICE OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 25


knowledge of the urge toward an integration of the
personality—then the method of comparison, the main
tool of our method, enables us to arrive at some con-
ception of the power-lines along which an individual
Strives to attain superiority. The following will serve
as the two contrasting-poles for comparison :


1. Our own attitude in a situation similar to that of
a patient hard-pressed bysome demand. Insuch
a case it is essential for the practitioner to possess,
in a considerable degree, the gift of putting himself
in the other person's place.


2. The patient’s attitudes and anomalies dating from
early childhood. These can always be shown
as dominated by the relation of the child to
his environment, by his erroneous and in the
main generalized evaluation (of himself), by his
obstinate and deep-rooted feeling of inferiority
and by his striving after power.


3. Other types of individuals, particularly those
specifically neurotic. In these cases we shall
come upon the patent discovery that what one
type attains by means of neurasthenic troubles,
another endeavours to obtain by means of fear,
hysteria, neurotic-compulsion or _ psychosis.
Traits of character, affects, principles and nervous
symptoms, pointing toward the same goal and,
when torn from their context, frequently giving
a contrary significance, all these serve as a
protection against the shock caused by the
demands of the community.


4. Those very demands of the community which the
nervous individual, in varying degrees, side-
steps, such as co-operation, fellow-feeling, love,
social adaptation and the responsibilities of the
community.


By means of this individual-psychological investiga-
tion we realize that the neurotic individual, far more
than the ordinary normal man, arranges his psychic-life
in accordance with the desire for power over his fellow-
men. His longing for superiority enables him con-
tinually and extensively to reject all outside compulsion,


26 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the demands made upon him by others and the responsi-
bilities imposed by Society. The realization of this
basic fact in the psychic-life of the neurotic, so lightens
the task of obtaining an insight into psychic inter-
connections that it is bound to become the most
useful working - hypothesis in the investigation and
curing of neurotic diseases, until a more profound
understanding of the individual enables us to dis-
entangle and grasp in their full significance, the real
factors involved in each case.


What irritates the healthy man in this type of
argument and the conclusions drawn therefrom, is the
suggestion that an imagined goal constructed by
an emotionally-conditioned superiority, can possess
greater force than rational deliberation. But we find
this inversion of an ideal frequently enough both in the
life of healthy individuals as in that of whole nations.
War, political abuses, crimes, suicide, ascetic penances,
provide us with similar surprises. A good many of
our sufferings and tortures we ourselves originate and
take upon ourselves under the influence of some idea.

That a cat should catch mice, that without ever
having been taught to do so, should be prepared for
it even in the first days of its existence, is no more
remarkable than that the neurotic individual, accord-
ing to his nature and destiny, his position and his
self-evaluation, should evade and find unbearable
every form of compulsion ; that he should secretly or
openly, consciously or unconsciously look for excuses
to free himself, frequently originating them himself.

The reason for the intolerance of the neurotics toward
the constraints of society, as the history of their child-
hood shows, is to be sought in the continuous conflict-
attitude that has been practised for many years against
the environment. This is forced upon the child, with-
out there being any real justification for its expressing
itself in just such a reaction, by the bodily or psychically
conditioned position it occupies and from which the
child receives either lasting or intensified feelings of
inferiority. The object of the conflict-attitude is the
conquest of power and importance, an ideal of superiority
constructed with an infant’s incapacity and over-evalua-
tion and the fulfilment of which presents compensations


PRACTICE OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 27


and super-compensations of a most general kind, in the
pursuit of which there always occurs a victory over the
constraints of society and over the will of the environ-
ment. As soon as this conflict has taken on more acute
forms it evolves, from within itself, an antagonism
against compulsions of all kinds, whether they be
education, reality, common interest, external force,
personal weakness, as well as all the compulsions pre-
sented by such factors as work, cleanliness, acceptance
of nourishment, normal urination and defecation, sleep,
treatment of disease, love, tenderness, friendship, loneli-
ness and its opposite, sociability. In toto we get the
picture of a man who does not want to play the game,
a dog in the manger. Where antagonism is directed
against the awakening of feelings of love and comrade-
ship there arises a fear of love and marriage that
can assume many and manifold degrees and forms.
At this place let me call attention to a number of
forms of compulsion hardly perceptible to the normal
individual, which are nevertheless almost regularly
prevented from developing by the appearance of a
nervous or psychotic condition. These compulsions
are:—to recognize this compulsion, to be attentive, to
subordinate oneself, to tell the truth, to study or to pass
examinations, to be punctual, to entrust oneself to a
person, a carriage, the railroad; to confide the house-
hold, business, children, spouse, or oneself to other
people; to become a landlord or adopt a profession ; to
marry, to acknowledge the correctness of the other man’s
view, to be grateful, to bring children into the world,
to play a proper sexual rdle or recognize proper love-
responsibilities ; to rise in the morning, to sleep at
night, to recognize the equal rights and equality of
others, the rights of women, to keep a measure in every-
thing, be loyal, etc. All these idiosyncrasies may be
conscious or unconscious but they are never grasped by
the patient in all their bearings.


This examination teaches us two things:


1. The concept of compulsion in the neurotic has
been tremendously enlarged and embraces relationships,
even if only from a logical point of view, that a normal
individual does not include under the category of
compulsion.


28 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


2. The antagonism is no final-phenomena but extends
further. It has a continuation and is followed by a
state of fermentation. It signifies at all times a conflict-
attitude and shows us as though at an apparent resting
point, the striving of the neurotic to triumph over others,
the striving for a directed violent twisting of the logical
inferences drawn from human communal life. ‘‘Non me
rebus, sed mihi res subigere conor”. In this passage
taken from a letter of Horace to Maecenas, the former
shows in what this infuriated lust for importance ends:
in a headache and sleeplessness.


A patient, thirty-five years old; complained to me that
he had for a number of years been suffering from sleep-
lessness, from brooding and masturbation-compulsions.
The latter symptom was particularly significant, for the
patient was married, the father of two children and on
excellent marital relations with his wife. Among other
torturing phenomena he spoke of a kind of ‘‘rubber-
fetichism”. From time to time, in any exciting situation,
the word ‘‘rubber ”’ forced itself to his lips.

The results of an extensive individual-psychological
examination lead to the following facts: starting from
a period in childhood characterized by marked depres-
sion, at a time when the patient used to wet his bed and
was regarded as a stupid child because of his clumsi-
ness, he had developed along the guzding-line of ambition
to such an extent that the latter had grown into a
megalomania. The pressure of his environment, which
actually did exist in a very high degree, brought close
to him the picture of a definitely inimical external world
and invested him with a permanently pessimistic out-
look upon life. In such a mood he felt all the demands
of the external world as unbearable compulsions and
retorted by wetting his bed and by clumsiness, until he
met a teacher in whom, for the first time in his life, he
came into contact with the counterpart of a good fellow-
man. He then began to mitigate his defiance and rage
at the demands of others and his conflict-attitude toward
the community, to the extent of it becoming possible
for him to stop wetting his bed, of developing into a
‘‘ gifted” student and to work for the highest of ideals
in life. His hostility against the compulsion of others
he solved, in the manner of a poet and philosopher, by


PRACTICE OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 29


a flight into the transcendental. He developed an
emotionally-steeped idea as if he were the only living
being in existence, and that everything else, particularly
human beings, were merely appearances. The relation-
ship with the ideas of Schopenhauer, Fichte, Kant is
not to be dismissed. The deeper purpose, however, lay
in his robbing existence of value in order to obtain a
feeling of security, and escape ‘‘ the scorn and question-
ings of ourtimes”. All of this was to have been accom-
plished by magzc, comparable to that which unreliant
children use when they wish to deprive facts of their
power. In this way the rudder - erasure became the
symbol and sign of his power, because to the child, as
the destroyer of the visible, the rubber appeared like
a possibility fulfilled. The whole situation called for
over-evaluation and generalization, and thus the word
and concept ‘‘rubber” became the conquering watch-
word, whenever school, the parental household and later
on man or woman, wife or child, presented any difficulties
or threatened him with coercion.

So, in a well-nigh poetical manner, he arrived at
the goal of the isolated hero, fulfilled his striving after
power and renounced society. His steadily improving
position in the world prevented him, however, from
entirely pushing aside the actual and ever - present
communal feelings. Little was consequently lost of the
love and the logic that binds us all together, and so he was
spared the fate of developing @ paranoic disease. He
went only as far as a compulsion-neurosis.
> His love was not based upon pure communal feeling.
In fact it came under the attraction of the main line of
his striving after power. Since the concept and the
feeling ‘‘power” were united with the magic word
‘¢rubber”’, he sought and found a catchword that would
free him from his sexuality in the picture of a rudver-
girdle. Not a woman but a rubber girdle, in other
words, not a personal but an impersonal object in-
fluenced him. And thus while making his power-
intoxication and his derogatory attitude toward women
secure, he became a fetichist, for these traits are found
regularly as the starting point of fetichism. Had the
belief in his own virility been slighter we would have
seen suggestions of homo-sexuality, paedophily, geron-
tophily, necrophily and similar traits appear.


30 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


His masturbation-compulsion had the same basic
character. It likewise served to enable him to escape
from the compulsion of love, from the ‘‘ magic” of
women.

The sleeplessness was directly caused by his brood-
ing-compulsion, the latter struggling against the con-
straint of sleep. An unquenchable ambition compelled
him to spend the night solving the problems of the day.
Has he not like another Alexander accomplished so little
as yet? This sleeplessness had however another side to
it. It weakened his energy and his power of action ;
became the justification for his disease. What he had so
far accomplished had been done so to speak with one
hand, had been done despite his sleeplessness. What
might he not have done had he been able tosleep! But
he was not able to sleep and in this way, by means of
this nocturnal brooding-compulsion, he obtained an alibi.
Thus he rescued his uniqueness and his god-likeness.
All blame for any deficiency could now no more be attri-
buted to his character but to the puzzling and fatal cir-
cumstance of his not having been able to sleep. Thus
his invalid state had become a disagreeable accident, and
for its continuation not he but the insufficient knowledge
of the physicians, was responsible. If he is not able to
prove his greatness, it will be the concern of the
physicians todo so. As can be seen it was of no small
importance to him to remain an invalid and he was not
going to make the task of the physicians easy.

It is interesting to see how he solves the problem of
life and death in order to save his god-likeness. He
still has the feeling that his mother, who has been dead
for twelve years, is alive. But there is a marked un-
certainty about this assumption, manifesting itself more
strongly than that tender feeling which so frequently
appears shortly after the death of a near relative. This
doubt concerning his wild assumption does not at all
emanate from cold logic. It is to be explained through
the insight given by individual-psychology. If every-
thing is but appearance then his mother has not died.
If she is alive, however, then the idea of his being unique
falls to the ground. He has no more solved this
problem than philosophy has the idea of the universe
aS an appearance. He answers the compulsion and
mischief of death with a doubt.


PRACTICE OF INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY 31


The interconnection of all the manifestations of his
disease he regards as a justification for securing all his
privileges as against his wife, his relatives and his
inferiors. His high opinion of himself can never come
to harm, for taking his sufferings into consideration, he
is always greater than he appears to be and he can
always evade difficult undertakings by pointing to his
disease. But he can also act differently. Toward his
superiors he can be the most conscientious, the most
industrious and the most obedient official and enjoy
their complete approbation although secretly always
aspiring to surpass them.

This over-intense striving after the sensation of power
had made him ill. His emotional and sensational life,
his initiative and his capacity for work, even his power of
reasoning, fell under the self-imposed compulsion of his
lust for omnipotence, so that his feelings for humanity
and with it love, friendship and adjustment to society,
all disappeared. A cure could only have been attained
by dismantling his whole prestige-mechanism and by
inducing the development of a feeling for society.


IV


Individual-Psychological Treatment of Neuroses
(1913)
INTRODUCTION


To treat the extensive field of psycho-therapy concisely
at a time when the discussions concerning the value of
its principles are still so rife, is a fairly hazardous enter-
prise. Permit me consequently to refer to the basis for
my views given in the material containing my experi-
ences, that has been at the disposal of the public since 1907.
In 1907 I proved in my book on Organ Inferiority
(Vienna) that the inherited constitutional anomalies are
not to be regarded as manifesting themselves merely
in degenerative processes, but as causing the appear-
ance likewise of compensatory and hyper-compensatory
activities and significant correlation-phenomena to which
the reinforced psychic activity essentially contributed.
This compensatory psychic exertion in order to conquer
the psychic tensions, frequently strikes out along new
and different lines. To the observer this compensatory
activity appears to be of a well-tested nature, thus ful-
filling its purpose of covering up some imagined de-
ficiency in a most wonderful manner. The most widely
distributed method adopted by the feeling of inferiority,
appearing during childhood, to prevent its being un-
masked, is the creation of a compensatory psychic
superstructure, ¢he neurotic modus vivendi. This seeks
to regain, by means of fully tested preparations and
defences, a point of vantage and superiority in life.
Any departure from the normal can subsequently be
explained either by a greater ambition or by a more
marked degree of precaution. All the devices and
arrangements, including therein the neurotic character,
traits and symptoms, derive their value from previous


attempts, experiences, identifications and imitations that
32


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 33


are not entirely unknown even to a healthy individual.
The language they speak, rightly understood, makes it
evident that an individual is here struggling for recogni-
tion, actually attempting to force it; that he is aspiring
ceaselessly to a godlike domination over his environment
from out the region of his insecurity and his sense of
inferiority.

Placing on one side this,the root of neurotic behaviour,
we find the latter to consist of a variegated assortment
of incitements and potentialities for incitement, which do
not represent ¢he cause, but rather the consequences of
the neurosis. Ina short treatise: ‘‘ Aggressionsbetrieb
im Leben u. in der Neurose” (Hezlen und Bilden, 1914), I
have tried to present this frequently intensified ‘‘ affective
activity’ and to show how, in order either to achieve
some purpose or escape some danger, it is often con-
verted into an apparent ‘‘aggression-check”. What
is customarily known as ‘‘disposition to neurosis”
(neurotic disposition) is a real neurosis already, the more
suitable neurotic symptoms appearing more definitely
and as proofs of disease, only on those actual occa-
sions when an znward need demands the calling forth of
strengthened devices. This demonstration of illness and
the ‘‘ arrangements” associated with it, are specifically
needed for the following purposes:


1. To serve as excuses if life denies the longed-for
triumphs.

2. So that all dectstons may be postponed.

3. To permit those goals already attained to appear
in an intenser light, since they have been gained
in spite of suffering. These and other devices
clearly exhibit the striving of the neurotic for
the semblance of things.


The inference to be drawn is in each case simple.
The neurotic in order to ensure success for his actions,
in all of which he has been guided by an imagined goal,
keeps to lines of direction typical for him and which he
actually follows literally and unwaveringly. In this
manner, by means of definite and adapted traits of
character, tested affect-preparations, and a neurotic per-
spective of the past, present and future, the neurotic
personality gains its fixed form. The urge to ensure
security for this superiority operates with such strength

Cc


34 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


that every psychic phenomenon, when analysed from
the comparative psychological view, discloses super-
ficially the similar characteristic, namely, to free itself
from a feeling of weakness that it may reach the summit
of its ambition ; to lift itself from ‘‘ below” to ‘‘above”
and by the use of devices not always easily intelligible,
become completely supreme. In order that by planning,
thinking and a grasp of the world, he may be able to
obtain a pedantic kind of order and security, the neurotic
resorts to every rule and helping-formula he knows, the
most important of which correspond to the primitive
antitheticscheme. He consequently attaches importance
only to affect-values that correspond to an upper and
lower and attempts—as far as 1 can make out—to re-
late these to the contrast between ‘‘ masculine” and
‘‘feminine” that appears so real to him. Through
falsification of conscious and unconscious judgments,
there is thus given, as if by means of some psychic
accumulator, an occasion for affect-disturbances and these
latter are in turn adapted to the personal life-line of the
patient. Those traits of his psyche felt as ‘‘ feminine”,
é.g. pasSive attitude, obedience, softness, cowardice,
memory of defeat, ignorance, lack of capacity, tender-
ness, he attempts to push with an exaggerated orientation
towards the ‘‘ masculine,” thus developing hatred, de-
fiance, cruelty, egoism. He seeks triumph in every
human relation. He may, however, on the contrary
markedly emphasize his weakness and, in this way,
force upon others the burden of serving him. This
procedure increases the patient’s precautions and
prevision enormously and leads to planned evasions
of impending decisions. Where the patient believes
it incumbent upon him in life to bring evidence of
*“masculine excellences”’, for instance, in struggles of
every nature, in professions, in love, or in those cases
where he fears he may become ‘‘ effeminate” through
defeat, (and this applies also to the masculine sex), he
will even, when far removed, try to approach the problem
circuitously. We shall then always succeed in finding
a life-line, deviating from the direct path, which, on
account of fear of mistakes and defeat, is searching for
safe side-paths. The falsification of his sexual réle
results, in consequence of which the neurotic seems to
exhibit a tendency toward ‘‘ psychical hermaphrodism”,


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 35


which he actually believes himself to possess. Viewed
from this side the neurosis might easily be suspected
of having a sexual causation. In reality, however, the
same struggle takes place within the sexual domain
that we have found within our entire psychic life; the
original inferiority-feeling forces itself forward along
by-paths (in sexual life along the road of masturbation,
homosexuality, fetichism, algolagny, over-evaluation of
sexuality, etc.), so as not to lose its orientation toward
the goal of superiority. The schematic formula, ‘I
wish to be a complete man”’, then serves as the abstract
and concretistic goal of the neurotic. It isa compensat-
ing termination for the basic feeling of an inferiority
interpreted as feminine. The scheme that has been
apperceived in this manner and upon which the indi-
vidual has proceeded, is antithetic throughout and it has,
in conscious falsification, been interpreted as containing
within itself ‘ostz/e elements. We can consequently
always recognize as the unconscious premises of the
neurotic goal-striving, the following two facts :


1. Human relations in all circumstances represent a
struggle.

2. The feminine sex ts inferior and by tts reaction serves
as the measure of masculine strength.


These two unconscious presuppositions that both
masculine and feminine patients reveal in equal degree,
are at the bottom of the distortion and poisoning of
all human relationships, of the appearance of affect-
disturbances and strengthenings, and the occurrence of
permanent dissatisfaction instead of frankness. Dissatis-
faction generally becomes lightened after intensification
of the symptoms and after a successful demonstration of
the existence of a disease. The symptom ts a substetute,
in a way, for the neurotic lust for superiority wath ats
associated affect. In the patient’s emotional life it leads
more certainly to a sham-victory over the environment
than would be true in the case of a straight-forward
battle, a definite trait of character, or resistance. For me
the understanding of the symptom-language has become the
main condition for the success of the psycho- therapeutic cure.

Since the purpose of the neurosis is to help an
individual in the securing of the end-goal of superiority
and since the feeling of inferiority apparently, excludes


36 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the possibility of direct aggression, circuitous routes
which possess vaguely active, sometimes masochistic
and always self-torturing characteristics, are preferred.
Generally we encounter a mixture of psychic stirrings
and disease-ssymptoms making their appearance either
synchronously during the same period of illness, or
following one another. When torn from their context
in the disease-mechanism, they at times give the im-
pression of being contradictory or of indicating a split
in personality. The context shows that the patient
can draw from two contradictory lines to reach his zdeal
situation of tmagined superiority, just as he actually,
with the same object in view, will argue correctly or
incorrectly, and judge and feel quite independently of
his goal. We must, on all occasions, expect the neurotic
to possess those view-points, sensations, memories,
affects, character-traits and symptoms that are to be
presupposed in him by reason of his recognized life-line
and goal.

Thus the neurotic in order to conquer along the line
of obedience, submissiveness, ‘‘ hysterical impression-
ability”, in order to chain other people down through
his weakness, fear, passivity, need for tenderness—has
at his hand all kinds of reminders, of fear-inspiring
pictures of horror, affect-preparations and identifications
with properly adapted feelings and character-traits, in
the same way that a neurotic, subject to compulsions,
possesses definite principles, laws and_ prohibitions
supposed to apply to himself only, but which in reality
invest his sense of personality with a god-like power.
As a goal we always find the acquisition of some ideal
‘‘income”’ for which the patient battles with the means
his immediate experiences have shown to be the most
suitable, just as tenaciously as a neurotic suffering from
compulsion of meeting with accident, struggles for his
material ‘‘income”. The same holds true in those
cases where active affects like rage, anger and jealousy
make the path to pre-eminence secure. These latter are
frequently represented by attacks of pain, fainting-spells
or epileptic seizures. (Cf. ‘‘Trotz und Gehorsam ” in
Heilen und Bilden.) All neurotic symptoms have
as their object the task of ensuring the safety of the
patient’s feeling of personality and the life-line with
which he has identified himself. In order to prove his


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 37


ability to cope with life, all the ‘‘arrangements” and
neurotic symptoms necessary for the patient come into
existence, as an aid in necessity, as an unduly developed
coefficient-of-security against the dangers he anticipates
and toward whose prevention he has been unceasingly
working when, under the influence of his inferiority feel-
ing, he has been constructing his plans for the future.


The “ Arrangement” of the Neurosis


The feeling of inferiority, afterwards purposely
adhered to and emphasized, developing from the
impressions of reality, incites the patient continuously
in his childhood, to fix some goal for his striving, a goal
extending beyond human limits, one which approaches
a deification and which coerces an individual to march
along lines rigidly determined. The neurotic system,
the life-plan of the nervous man, lies between these two
points—his feeling of inferiority and his striving for
superiority. This compensatory psychical structure,
this nervous ‘‘ willing”, utilizes all of one’s own and
foreign experience, purposefully distorting them, it is
true, and falsifying their value at times, yet, on the
other hand, employing their correct content whenever it
suffices for the neurotic objective.

On closer inspection we find a perfectly explicable
phenomenon, namely that all these lines of direction
are provided, on numerous sides, with warning-signs
and encouragement, with reminders and summons to
action, so that it is really possible to speak of the
existence of a widely ramifying safety-net. Everywhere
we encounter the neurotic psychic life forming a super-
structure built over a threatening infantile situation, a
super-structure, changing in the course of years and
adapting itself to reality more than would have been
the case in the child’s ordinary evolution. It is not
to be wondered at then, if every psychic phenomenon
of the neurotic is permeated by this rigid system and
appears /ike an analogy in which the lines of direction
always stand out in relief. Such phenomena are:
the neurotic character, the nervous symptom, the de-
meanour, every device used in life, the evasions and
deviations that occur as soon as decisions are about
to threaten the god-like state of the neurotic, and finally


38 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his view-of-the-world, his attitude to men and women
and his dreams. I presented my interpretation of the
last-named phenomenon in 1911. Bringing my views
upon dreams into harmony with those on neuroses, I
found their sain function to consist of simplified early trials,
and of warnings and encouragements favourable to the life-
plan ; and to have as thetr object the solution of some future
problem. A more detailed exposition is to be found in
the chapter on ‘‘ Dreams and Dream-interpretation ”.

How does this striking similarity in psychic pheno-
mena arise, where everything seems to be permeated
with and guided by the same tendency—a striving
upwards, a striving toward the masculine, toward the
feeling of god-likeness? I pointed out these facts in my
neurological study, ‘‘ Ueber Zahlenanalysen und Zahlen-
phobie” (Neurolog.-psychiatr. Zettschrift, 1905), a work
that was regarded, when viewed from the position then
generally taken, as incomplete and along wrong lines.

The answer can be easily extracted from the above-
mentioned work. The hypnotic nature of the goal of the
neurotic, forces his whole psychic life into an integrated
adaptation. As soon as the patient’s life-line has been
recognized, he will always be found at that particular
place where we should expect to find him according
to his presuppositions and previous history. The strong
urge toward the integration of his personality, flows from
an inward necessity and has been created by his tendency
to safeguard himself. The path is made secure and
unalterable by the proper schematic ‘‘ arrangements”
of character-traits, affect-preparations and symptoms.
At this point let me append some remarks about ‘ affect-
disturbances”, and neurotic ‘‘sensibility” in order to
prove the existence of an unconscious ‘‘ arrangement ”’
for the purpose of keeping them within the life-line, thus
employing them both as a means to an end and as an
artifice of the neurosis.

For example, a patient with agoraphobia, in order
by a complicated mechanism, to raise his prestige at
home and force his environment into his service and to
prevent himself likewise from losing, while on the street
or in open places, the ‘‘ resonance” so fervently desired,
unites unconsciously and emotionally into a ‘‘junktim ”,
the thought of being alone, of strange people, of
purchases, search for the theatre, society, etc., and


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 39


the phantasy of an apoplectic stroke, a confinement on
the street, disease infection through germs on the street
The exaggerated size of the safety-coefficient as contrasted
with the thought potentialities is clearly seen. In this
way the discernible purpose can be followed to its final
objective and the life-line recognized. Similarly the
neurotic precaution of a patient subject to attacks of
anxiety, who wishes furthermore to withdraw from
making a decision, be it in an examination, a love-
affair or an undertaking, will force him by thus estab-
lishing a proof of illness, to connect his situation with
that of an execution, a prison, a shoreless sea, being
buried alive and with death. In order to evade a
decision about the success of a love-affair, the following
connection of ideas may be resorted to as serving the
desired purpose: a man, a murderer or a burglar, a
woman, sphinx, demon or vampire. Every defeat is
felt as all the more threatening because of being brought
together with the thought of death or pregnancy,
(encountered among neurotic men also). The trans-
ferred affect compels the patient to avoid a certain
undertaking. Father and mother are at times invested
by phantasy with the rdle of lover or spouse until
the bond is firm enough to secure an evasion of the
marriage problem. Religious and ethical feelings of
guilt are, as is so frequently the case in compulsion-
neurosis, constructed and utilized in order to attain a
sensation of power, (e.g. ‘‘if I do not pray at night my
mother will die”; the statement should be made
positively in order to understand the fiction of god-
likeness: ‘‘if I pray she will not die”’).

Together with the exaggerated personality-ideal and
the ‘‘anxieties” of a neurotic type designed to secure
it, we also find exaggerated ‘‘expectations” whose
certainty of disappointment leads the patient to rein-
forced and definitely conditioned affects of mourning,
hatred, dissatisfaction, jealousy, etc. In these cases the
insistence upon principles, ideals, dreams, castles in the
air, etc., plays a tremendous réle and the neurotic can,
by connecting these with some person or situation,
deprive everything of its inherent value and so exhibit


1 ‘*Junktim”: purposive connection of two thoughts and affect-complexes
that have in reality little or nothing to do with one another, in order to
strengthen the affect. The metaphor has a similar origin.


40 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his superiority. The great importance of love in
human life and the neurotic’s search for superhuman
influence and importance in love, bring about the
frequent occurrence of an ‘‘arrangement” like that of
disappointed expectation, so that the patient may in this
manner evade the sexual problem. Masturbation-
compulsion, impotence, perversions and fetichism are
found to lie along some indirect route of such a
main line.

As a third type of construction designed to prevent
defeat or a marked inferiority feeling, I shall briefly
mention the anziczpation of sensations, feelings and
apperceptions, that have the significance, in connection
with threatening situations, of acting as preparations,
warnings, and encouragements such as occur in dreams,
hypochondriac and melancholic conditions, in illusions
in particular, in psychosis, in neurasthenia and in
hallucinations. A good example is provided by the
dream of children who wet their bed, picturing them-
selves in the toilet so that they may be able to develop
their generally revengeful and obstinate enuretic attitude,
uninfluenced by the intellect. Similarly, images derived
from tabes, paralysis, true epilepsy, paranoia, heart and
lung affections etc. can be employed to produce fears or
secure safety.

In order to present an intelligible, but admittedly
schematic picture of the peculiar orientation of neurotics
and psychotics, I suggest that we present the common
attitude towards nervousness in a formula and then
compare that formula with another representing the
above views and corresponding better with reality. The
first formula would appear as follows :


Individual + experience + environment + demands
of life =a neurosis.


In this formula the individual is regarded as weakened
either by a feeling of inferiority, by heredity, by
‘‘sexual constitution”, by emotionality or by his
character. Furthermore his experiences, the environ-
ment and the external demands weigh upon the patient
so heavily that they induce him to ‘‘take refuge in
sickness”. This interpretation is manifestly wrong


1 This view-point has since then, in consequence of the study of war-
neuroses, been accepted by practically all writers,


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 41


and gains no support from the secondary hypothesis
that the deficiency in wish-fulfilments or the ‘‘ libido”
that exists, in reality, is corrected by the neurosis.

A better formula would read as follows :—


Evaluation (1+ E+M) + Arrangement (Experiences +
Character + Emotionality + Symptoms) = Personality-ideal.


In other words the only definite and fixed point con-
cetved of ts the personality-ideal. In order to approximate
more nearly to his god-likeness, the neurotic makes a
tendentious evaluation of his individuality, his experi-
ences and his environment. But since this does not by
any means suffice to bring him to his life-line or nearer
to his goal, he provokes experiences which his previously
determined favourable applications make easier—of
feeling set-back, deceived, suffering —all of which
give him the trusted and desired basis of aggression.
That he constructs so much from real experiences
and from possibilities and builds just the type of
character-traits and affect-preparations that fit into his
personality-ideal, follows from the above description
and has been discussed by me in detail. In a similar
fashion the patient identifies himself with his symptoms,
all his experiences taking the form that appears necessary
and useful for the heightening of his feeling of person-
ality. Not the slightest trace of a predetermined
autochthonous teleology is to be found in this modus
vivendi, projected and tenaciously adhered to by means
of a self-suggested principal goal. The neurotic life-
plan is maintained and teleologically arranged only by
the urge toward superiority, by the careful evasion of
dangerous-looking decisions, by previously tested
wanderings along a few clearly determined lines of
direction and the enormously increased safety-net. In
consequence, the questions relating to the conservation
or loss of psychic energy lose all their meaning. The
patient will create just so much psychic energy as will
enable him to remain on his path of superiority and
express his masculine protest and god-likeness.


Psychic Treatment of Neuroses


The most important element in therapeutics is the
disclosure of the neurotic system or life-plan. In its


42 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


entirety this can only be conserved if the patient
succeeds in keeping it away from his own self-criticism.
The partially unconscious course of the neurosis, working
in opposition with reality, is explained first and fore-
most by the definite tendency of the patient to arrive at
his goal. Its opposition to reality, 2.2. to the logical
demands of the community, is in this system connected
with the limited experiences and differences in the type
of the relations which were efficacious at the time of the
construction of the life-plan, z.e. in earliest childhood.
An insight into the meaning of this plan is best obtained
through artistic and intuitive self-identification with
the patient’s personality. A person will then realize
for himself how unconsciously comparisons are made
between himself and the patient, between different
attitudes of the latter or similar actions of other patients.
In order to bring order into the material apperceived,
into the patient’s symptoms, experiences, manner of life
and development, I make use of two prejudices of my
own gained from experience. The first deals with the
origin of the life-plan under aggravated conditions—(organ-
inferiorities, pressure in the family, a neurotic family-
tradition)—and centres my attention upon identical or
similar reaction-types in childhood. The second lies in
the assumption of the above empirically obtained and fictitious
identification according to which I estimate my apper-
ceptions. Further on I shall explain this by an
example.

From my remarks it is apparent that I always expect
from my patient the same attitude that he has shown,
in conformity with his life-plan, toward the persons of
his early entourage, and at a still earlier period, toward
his own family. At the time of his meeting with the
physician and frequently earlier, the same connection
of feelings is found as that which exists in persons of
greater ability. That the transference of such feelings
or the opposition to them seems to begin later, must
be based on some mistake. The physician probably
recognizes them in these cases later. Often too late,
especially in those instances where the patient, in the


1 Cf. ‘‘On the Réle of the Unconscious” in this volume—‘ Genius’ (Gets?)
does not seem to protect an individual against a purposive concealment of


the facts. And the god-likeness at times plays curious tricks upon the
practitioner too,


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 43


consciousness of his hidden superiority, brings his treat-
ment to an end or where through an aggravation of the
Symptoms, an unbearable condition has been created.
That the patient is under no circumstances to be offended
I need not inform psychologically trained doctors. But
this may occur without the knowledge of the physician
and harmless remarks may be purposefully revaluated
if the latter does not clearly understand the nature of
the patient. It is therefore essential, particularly at the
beginning, to proceed with caution and to fathom as
quickly as possible the neurotic system of an individual.
As a rule, with any experience, this is discovered on
the first day.

Even more significant is the necessity of odvzating
the possibility of positive aggressive preparation for an attack.
At this place I can only give a few hints, designed to
prevent the physician from falling into the position of
being treated by the patient. First of all, not even in the
safest cases, should a successful tssue of the cure be pro-
mised ; it should never be made more than a possibility.
One of the most important devices in psycho-thera-
peutics is to ascribe the work and the success of the cure to
the patient, who is to be employed as a fellow-worker
and treated like a friend. The custom of having pay-
ments depend upon the success of the treatment creates
enormous difficulties. It is best, at every point, to keep
to the assumption that the patient craving for superiority
as we know him to be, ts going to use every promise of the
physician—that which he makes with respect to the duration of
the cure as well—to secure the discomfiture of the doctor.
Consequently all the necessary questions—the visiting-
time, a friendly and open welcome, the question of pay-
ments, free treatment, the physician’s pledge to secrecy,
etc. — should be regulated immediately and strictly
adhered to. It is under all circumstances a tremendous
advantage if the patient goes to the physician. To pro-
phesy, where tt ts certain, an aggravation of the dtsease as
zn cases of fainting-spells, pains or agoraphobia, saves
an enormous amount of work at the beginning, because
the attacks, as a rule, do not then take place, a fact that
corroborates our view about the marked negativism of
neurotics. Zo clearly show pleasure at a partial success
or to boast about tt would be a great mistake. The
situation would soon take a turn for the worse. It is


44 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


therefore best to centre all interest upon the difficulties
patiently, without annoyance, and in a calm scientific
manner.

In complete agreement with the above is the basic
principle never to allow the patient, except under great
protestations and explanations, to force upon anyone
a superior rdle such as that of teacher, father, saviour,
etc. Such attempts represent the beginning of a move-
ment on the part of the patient to pull down, in a manner
to which he has been previously accustomed, a// persons
standing above him and by thus admintstering a defeat, to
disavow the physician. To insist upon any superior rank
or right is always disadvantageous with nervous patients.
The best thing is to be open and to avoid, bearing
in mind the danger of a mistake in technique, being
dragged into any undertakings by him. It would be
even more dangerous to take him into your own service,
put requests to him, expect anything from him, etc.
To expect secrecy from a patient indicates a complete
absence of an elementary knowledge of the psychic life
of a neurotic.

While these and similar measures dictated by the
same attitude bring about the best adapted relationship
of equality, the uncovering of the neurotic life-plan pro-
ceeds apace in friendly and free conversation, it being
always the etter tactics to let the patient take the initiative.
I found it the safest course to search for and merely
unmask the neurotic line of operation as shown in
expressions and in the train of thought, and at the same
time unobtrusively educate the patient for the same
kind of work. The physician must be so convinced of
the unzqueness and exclusiveness of the neurotic direction-line,
that he is able to call up the true content (of the patient’s
mind), always telling him beforehand his disturbing
‘‘arrangements” and constructions, and trying to dis-
cover and explain until the patient, completely upset,
gives them up in order to place new and better hidden
ones in their place. How often this will occur it is
impossible to say beforehand. Finally, however, the
patient will give in, all the more easily, if his relation to
the physician has not permitted the feeling of a (possible)
defeat to develop.

Just as there are these ‘‘arrangements” lying along
the path of the feeling of superiority, so there are also


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 45


definite subjective sources of error utilized and conserved
merely because they possibly deepen the feeling of in-
feriority and thus furnish irritations and stimulations for
further constructions. Swch errors and their tendencies
must be brought within the vision of the patient.

The patient’s primitive apperception-scheme which
definitely and distinctly evaluates all impressions and then
groups them ina purposeful manner (above-below, victor-
vanquished, masculine-feminine, nothing - everything,
etc.) is always to be indicated, unmasked and shown to
be immature, untenable and with a purpose in view:
namely, that of continued hostility. It is this scheme
likewise that shows us, in the psychic life of the neurotics,
traits similar to those found in the beginnings of culture,
where necessity has forced people to such types of safety.
It would savour of the fantastic to suspect in such
analogies anything more than mimicry, possibly a repeti-
tion of phylogenesis. What impresses us in primitive
man and in the genius, is the overbubbling power, the
Titan-like defiance, the raising of one’s self from nothing
to the godhead, constructing out of nothing a world-
dominating sanctuary. In the neuroticas in dreams, this
can easily be seen to be a ‘‘ bluff” even though it is the
cause of great suffering. The fictitious triumph that the
nervous patient gains by his manoeuvres exists only in
his imagination. We must show him the view-point of
others, who generally feel their superiority demon-
strated in a fashion similar to the love-relation of the
neurotic or his perversions. At the same time there
takes place, step by step, the wacoverzng of his unattainable
goal of superiority, the demonstration of the purposive vetling
of the same, of his all-dominating, direction-determining
power and of the patient’s lack of freedom and hostility
toward mankind conditioned by the goal. Ina similarly
simple fashion we find, as soon as sufficient material is
at hand, the proof that all neurotic character-traits,
neurotic-affects and symptoms, serve as means partly
to continue along the prescribed path, partly to make
that path secure. It is important to understand the
nature of the genesis of the affect and the symptom,
which as we have shown above, owes its efficiency to
a frequently meaningless ‘“‘junktim” also operating
according to plan. The patient often discloses the
‘‘junktim” quite innocently. At other times it has


46 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


to be extracted from his analogizing explanations, his
previous history, or his dreams.

The same tendency of the life-line is disclosed in the
world-view and the life-view of the patient, as well as
in his outlook upon and his grouping of experiences.
Falsifications and conscious additions, purposive special
applications markedly one-sided, unbounded fears and
expectations clearly impossible of fulfilment, are en-
countered at every step and they always serve the
patient’s life-plan with its glorious last act. Many
derailments and checks will have to be unearthed and
this only succeeds after a careful, ever-increasing under-
standing of the unified tendency (of the life-plan) has.
been attained.

Since the physician obstructs the neurotic strivings
of the patient he is regarded as an obstacle in the way,
as an obstruction preventing the attainment of the
superiority-ideal along the path of the neurosis. For that
reason every patient will attempt to disqualify the physician,
deprive him of his influence, conceal from him the true
state of affairs and he will always find some new turn of
affairs to hold against the practitioner. Particular
attention is to be paid to these, for in a well-planned
treatment they disclose most clearly the tendency of the
sick person, by means of a neurosis, to maintain his
superiority. And especially is it to be borne in mind
that the further the improvement has progressed—(when
there is a standstill there exists almost always a hearty
friendship and peace except that the attacks continue)—
the more energetic will be the patient’s attempts, by
means of unpunctuality, waste of time or non-attendance
to jeopardize the success of the treatment. At times
a marked hostility arises which like all the phenomena
of resistance possessing the same tendency, is only to
be neutralized if the patient’s attention is drawn again
and again to the realization that his behaviour is quite
natural. J always find the hostile relation of the patient's
relatives to the physician of advantage and I sometimes
have carefully attempted to sttr it up. Since generally,
the tradition of the entire family of the sick person is
neurotic, it is possible by uncovering and explaining
it, to greatly benefit the patient. The bringing about of
a change in the nature of the patient can emanate from him
alone. 1 always found it most profitable ostentatiously


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 47


to sit with my hands in my lap, fully convinced that
the patient, no matter what I might be able to say on
the point, as soon as he has recognized his life-line, can
obtain nothing from me that he, as the sufferer, does
not understand better.


Appendix


I shall in this Appendix give, in excerpts, some
notes bearing on the above-described life-analogy of the
neurotics, taken from the psychic life of a twenty-two
year old patient who came under my care in connection
with masturbation-compulsion, depression-manifesta-
tions, unwillingness to work and timid, embarrassed
behaviour. Let me state that answering to this analogy,
the more intensely the patient has undertaken the evalua-
tion of his person, all the more will he be called upon
to accomplish it by way of arrangements—(relating
to experiences, character-traits, affects and symptoms)—
whether his evaluation be conscious or under the
pressure of defeats in life. J¢ zs 2m this way that both the
neurotic attacks as well as the choice of neuroses, that ts to
say, the chrontc attacks, are to be explained; both must be
able to stand the test of being utilizable for the life-plan.
From the differential diagnostic point of view, an
insight into this connection is of the greatest import-
ance. However, the practitioner needs an exact know-
ledge of organic nervous diseases and of pathology,
because mixed forms are frequently found.

Let me now in order to make the matter clearer
to my reader, assume, as is done in certain problems
of mathematics that can only be solved by this artifice,
that my task is provisionally solved and let me attempt,
in so far as this is possible in a sketch, to prove the
correctness of my solution by examining my data. Let
us start with a provisional premise—that the patient is
striving after a modus vivendi Zo attain the goal of
perfection, superiority and god-likeness. In our uncon-
strained conversations the patient very quickly furnishes
us with ample justifications for this assumption. The
special kind of aristocracy of his family is described, its
exclusiveness, its principle of ‘‘noblesse oblige” and
how an older brother had brought down upon his
head universal criticism for marrying below his rank.


48 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


This insistence upon the high position of the family is
quite intelligible and is to be regarded as necessary
because in this way 47s own position also rises. As a
matter of fact, he attempted to dominate all the members
of his family either by amiability or force. An external
attitude exhibited the same urge upward: he was
particularly fond of climbing on the roof of his family
house, went to the further-most edge but would not
permit any other member of his family to attempt to go
so far. Only he!—He showed great excitement in
childhood whenever he was punished, fought against
every form of compulsion and never tolerated the
slightest influence. He generally did just the opposite
of what other people, particularly his mother, asked
him todo. He would sing and hum to himself on the
street, at public places in order to show his contempt
for the world (i.e., Ae 2s arranging feelings of superiority).
In his very first dreams he already found the warning
not to allow himself to be cowed by me. He was very
careful not to step on the shadow of a person, in order—
(this is a frequent superstition)—not to absorb the latter’s
stupidity ; (positively interpreted: I am brighter than all
of you!) Strange door-latches he would only touch
with his elbows not with his hands. (‘‘ All people are
dirty, that is, only I am clean”. This is also the
impelling-motive of washing-compulsion, of cleanliness-
frenzy, fear of infection, fear of contact.) Occupational
phantasies : to become an aeronaut, millionaire, to make
all people happy. (He, in contrast to all others)—Flying-
dreams.—What is to be inferred from this ensemble
all points to a high self-evaluation.

Looking more closely at the matter, from these
spasmodic exertions and peculiarities of the patient,
we obtain the impression of great unhappiness and
insecurity. He always came back to his weak con-
stitution, described in detail his female build, em-
phasizing the fact that he had always been reproached
for it and that he had been tortured in childhood with the
doubt as to the possibility of his ever becoming a mature
man. Statements to the effect that it would have been
better had he been a girl, had made a deep impression
uponhim. That,atan early period,a neurotic system had
been developed in which the necessary emotionality for
enabling him to force his way through life was not absent,


TREATMENT OF NEUROSES 49


is proved by the early appearance of traits of de-
fiance, rage, desire for power and cruelty, all of which
tended towards the masculine side and were directed in
particular against his sister and mother. These traits
became clearly discernible when, for instance, at the
suggestion that he play a female rdle in some minor
theatrical performances, he flew intoarage. He pointed
heatedly and with purposive fears to the late appearance
of his body-hair and to a phimosis (organ-inferiority !).
The doubt concerning his ability to play a masculine
sex role was deeply rooted in him and urged him to
exaggerations in many directions of a type considered
masculine, to professions of narcissism and closed the
extension of his life-line in the direction of love and
marriage. Thus he developed to the point of masturba-
tion and remained there. No matter how publicly and
definitely he may exhibit this attitude of superiority, as
soon as we examine the presuppositions of his actions,
we come into unmistakable contact with a deep-set and
easily deepened feeling of inferiority. In order to obtain
the feeling of security he was compelled to extend his
life-line in such fashion that he approached the whole
problem of hetero-sexuality in a circuitous way—and
thus got the serual-direction that fitted tnto his system,
masturbation. He was compelled to stabilize this as a
compulsion, to fall back upon it as a security against
any threatened approach of a woman, to force it upon
himself by means of a headache in case of resistance,
and to ameliorate it by sleepiness. In order to intensify
his fear of women he collected all the instances in his
experience indicating the ruinous rdle they have played.
Instances to the contrary he disregarded. What possi-
bility of love or marriage still remained, he excluded on
some such principle as, for example, only to marry
according to ‘‘Gotha”’? or by positing an ideal that
appeared even to him unattainable.
Apart from masturbation in half-sleep he tried a
number of other devices of which the most disturbing
socially, was his tendency to change of profession and
his complete unwillingness to work. The meaning of
both was easily decipherable. His ‘‘ hesctating attitude”
he conserved as useful, in order not to be compelled to
approach the marriage problem. His construction of


1 The Almanach de Gotha, the equivalent of Debrett, [Tr.]
D


50 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ethical and aesthetic schemes had protected him from
prostitution and from ‘‘free-love”. These prejudices
must not make us blind to the neurotic tendency in-
herent in them.

At the same time this ‘‘arrangement” of the
‘‘ hesitating attitude” made it possible for him with the
large number of fatal experiences inherently conditioned,
(in consequence of delays, laziness, postponements etc.),
to reinforce a second safety construction—that of an
intense family feeling. This always brought him back
again to his special relationship to his dogmatic,
domineering mother. It was just the difficulties of his
life that had forced the latter to turn all her attention to
him and he could thus feel that there really was a female
personage over whom he ruled despotically. He knew,
in masterly fashion, how to attract her by describing
his depressions, by self-drawn ornamental decoration
of his letters which were supposed to represent revolvers.
Hostile attacks as well as occasional indications of
tenderness always rendered her tractable. Both were
his weapons, his devices for dominating his mother,
and since 2% this case the sexual problem was excluded
there existed in this relationship an analogy to his life-
line, the attainment of domination. In order to be able
to evade other women he developed a mother-fixation.
In some cases a Caricature of an incestuous relation
might in this way arise, in others this might be reflected
as an ‘‘incest-analogy” of a patient’s life-line, a ‘‘bluff”
of the nervous psyche that should not be allowed to
deceive the physician.

The psycho-therapeutic treatment has for its object
consequently, to show the patient how in his prepara-
tions while awake and occasionally in his dreams, he
is always attempting in an habitual manner to fall
into the ideal situation of his main path; to show
him that first, through negativism and later on of his
own free will, he can change his life-plan and with it


his system and so gain a contact with human society
and its logical demands.


V


Contributions to the Theory of Hallucination
(1912)


THE facts connected with brain and nerve stimuli,
the seat, according to most assumptions, of sensations,
apperceptions, and occasionally of memories and reflex
and motor impulses, do not carry us any further than
the vibration and undulatory theory of nerve-substance
and its chemical transformations. To look for more
than plausible, or at best ultimately, undemonstrable
connections is a logically incorrect inference, per-
missible only in folk-psychology. The building up of
the psychical life out of mechanical, electrical, chemical
or analogous stimuli is to such an extent incompre-
hensible that I prefer to fall back upon the hypothesis
which assumes that in the nature and meaning of ‘‘ life”,
there must be included a soul-organ whose function is
not that of subordination but co-ordination and which,
starting from small beginnings, develops ultimately the
final function of responding to these stimuli.

At whatever point we examine the workings of this
psychic organ we find it engaged in reacting to inward
and external impressions and always clearing the way
for the actions and practices of the individual. How-
ever, it is not the will alone that is here to be considered
but, likewise, the planned ordering of the stimuli, our
understanding of them and their connection with the
world, be it conscious or unconscious; our anticipat-
ing and piloting conation in the direction character-
istic for each individual. The character-path is always
in motion and tends definitely in the direction of an
amelioration, of the supplementing and heightening
(of life), as if all the sensations connected with our
personal situation conditioned a feeling of restlessness
and insecurity at times light, at times intense. The


always-wakeful needs and instincts check the sleep of
61


52 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the psychic organ. In every one of the manifestations
apprehended by us we may interpret the restlessness as
past history, reaction to environment as the present and
a fictitious goal of salvation as the future. It is not to
be assumed that in all these instances attention is
operating with unbiassed readiness, dispassionately
taking memories and uniting them with impressions
that possess no specific tendencies in order to produce
a final integration. To an experimenter and observer
not versed in the individual-psychological method, even
the gross differences disappear and he will never become
aware of decisive individual under-tones. To such
a person, for example, fear is fear. But it is far more
vital, if we are to obtain an understanding of mankind, to
know whether the fear is of a kind impelling him to run
away or to call in the aid of a second person. If I were
simply to examine an individual’s capacity to remember,
strength of memory, receptivity or quickness of response,
I would not in the least know what objective he had.
Consequently experimental psychology, by itself, is not
able to teach us anything about a man’s talents or
values, because it can never tell us whether an individual
is going to use his psychic capital for good or evil,
quite apart from the fact that some people may be
specially apt at a test and not successful in life. The
success of a test, too, is dependent upon the nature of
the relation existing between the examiner and examined,
between the examined and the field covered by the
examination.

Every apperception and perception is concerned with
complicated activities in which the particular psychic
situation plays a great rdle and enormously influences
attention. Even simple perception is not merely an
objective impression or experience; it is a creative
act consisting of anticipatory and subsidiary thoughts
causing the whole of our personality to vibrate. Yet
perception and apperception are not fundamentally
different acts. They are related to each other in the
same way as is the beginning and temporary ending
of some incident. Everything flows into apperception
that we at any given moment need and that we expect
will enable us to approach our individual goals. The
degree of pleasure and pain experienced is exactly
sufficient for furthering the attainment of an anticipated


THEORY OF HALLUCINATION 53


goal. It may in fact be said to spur us toward it.
That apperception is in the nature of a creative act is
to be inferred from the fact that we are able to apperceive
objects and persons just as in memory, but from an
angle not permitted by the immediate perception, when,
for example, we see ourselves in a memory-picture.
This creative act of a capacity inherent in the psyche,
unfolding itself and at the same time possessing definite
contact with the exterior world, is also the explanation
of hallucination. It is an identical psychic power that
permits, though in different degrees, the creative and
constructive activity found in perception, apperception,
memory and hallucination.

This quality which might roughly be called that
of the hallucinatory components of the psyche, is more
clearly apparent and more easily discerned in childhood
than afterwards. We are compelled either to greatly
limit or even to completely exclude hallucination as
such because of its contradiction with rational thinking,
the fundamental function and condition of the life of
society. The psychic power contained in hallucination
is confined within the frame of perception, apperception
and memory, all of which are very easily demonstrable
and possess attributes of value for society. Only in
those cases where the ego has separated itself from the
community and approximates to a condition of isolation,
are the clamps removed; in dreams, for example, in which
the ego seeks to overwhelm its neighbour; in the terrible
uncertainty of a death in the desert, where the torturing
thought of slow destruction allows an hallucination to
develop like a consoling fata morgana, and finally, in
the neurosis and psychosis which portray, in reality, the
situation of an isolated man struggling for prestige.
With ecstatic fervour such individuals rush drunkenly
into the realm of the unsocial, the unreal, and con-
struct new worlds in which hallucination gains a value
because rational thinking is not so important. Asa
rule enough community feeling still persists for the
hallucination to be felt as unreal. This holds generally
both for the dream and the neurosis.

One of my patients who had lost his sight through
atrophy of the optic nerve, suffered continually from
hallucinations which, so he insisted, were exceedingly
painful. The current assumption that the irritable


54 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


condition of the optic nerve associated with this disease,
leads to excitations which are then reinterpreted and
rationalized, shirks the problem involved. Excitations
within the sphere of vision we freely grant. The
peculiar reinterpretation into contents of definite type
whose common element always appears in the form of
suffering for the patient, forces us to the assumption
of a tendency working uniformly, with the object of
appropriating and using these excitations as data. It
is in this manner that we arrive at explanations of
a psychological nature. Up to the present, research
has been concerning itself with the question of the
nature of hallucinations, answering by a meaningless
tautology that they are excitations in the sphere of
vision. We individual-psychologists start with the
assumption that it is impossible to give a name to or
recognize the nature of all the fundamental facts con-
cerning life and nature, the objective fact of life itself,
of organic assimilation, of electricity ; we look upon
hallucination as an expression of the psyche as con-
trasted with the true and logically determined content
of society prefigured in apperception and memory, the
nature of which is to a certain extent also hidden from
our view. Our examination thus teaches us that the
victim of an hallucination has taken himself out of the
domain of the community feeling and by evading logic
and gagging the feeling for truth, has been striving
for a goal different from the usual one.

The objective in such a case cannot be extracted
from the hallucination without some difficulty. Like
every psychic phenomenon torn from its context, it is
multiple in meaning.*’ The true meaning of hallucina-
tion, its significance, the where and the whyfor—
these are the questions put by individual-psychology—
can only be given after a knowledge of the complete
individual and his personality has been attained. We
regard the hallucination as the expression of a person-
ality when in a peculiar position.

In the case in question we know that sight has gone
and the hallucinatory capacity intensified. The patient
complained ceaselessly about ‘‘ perceptions” that did


1 Some interpretive artists, like the psychologists of sex, stress very super-


ficially the double meaning of the phenomenon and then speak of an
inner-psychology.


THEORY OF HALLUCINATION 55


not always appear agonizing to us, for example, when
he saw colours or trees or the sun following him into the
room. We must here call attention to the fact that this
man had himself tormented people all his life and
tyrannized over his whole family. The impression
obtained from the history of his early life was that this
man believed his greatness to consist in setting the tone
and in compelling his entire family-circle to concern
themselves continuously with him. Since his blindness,
he could no longer achieve this in the course of his
normal business-activity or in the superintendence of the
household, but he could accomplish it by continuously
referring to his agonizing hallucinations. He had merely
changed his tactics. As his sleep was extremely fitful,
the impulse to dominate worked at night also. Out of
the excitations emanating from the sphere of vision he
constructed a supplementary hallucination which gave
him the opportunity of binding his wife to him absolutely.
He saw (in his hallucination), gypsies rob and maltreat
her. Onsuch occasions, in an attack of cruelty and very
likely also in revenge for the loss of his eye-sight, he would
repeatedly wake his wife in order to convince himself of
the falseness of his hallucinations and, at the same time,
to prevent his tormented spouse from being removed from
his proximity.

Just as this patient, through intensive pre-occupation
and the development of a hallucinatory capacity, again
reasserted his lust for domination after all power had
apparently been taken away from him, so my experience
teaches me many individuals behave who are subject to
hallucinations and whose illness has the same etiology.
The following is a splendid case, of an instructive kind,
obtained subsequently. A man of good family, of
fair education but conceited, stingy and unwilling to
meet life, had completely failed in his profession. Too
weak to ward off, by himself, the threatening catastrophe
or yet to endure it, he turned to drink. A number of
attacks of delirium tremens accompanied by hallucina-
tions brought him to the hospital and freed him from
the necessity of accomplishing any task. Such a
turning toward alcoholism is frequent and intelligible—
exactly as indolence, crime, neurosis, psychosis and
suicide, represent both the flight of puny, unstable and
ambitious men from the anticipated defeat and their


56 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


revolt against the demands of society. After leaving
the hospital he was completely cured of alcoholism
and became a total abstainer. His history, however,
had become known and his family refused to concern
themselves with him, so that there was nothing left for
him to do but to make his living by means of poorly-
paid navvy work. Shortly after, hallucinations set in
and disturbed him in his work. He repeatedly saw a
man whom he did not know and who made his work
distasteful to him by making mocking grimaces. He
did not believe in the reality of this figure. Incidentally,
he knew the significance and nature of hallucinations
from the period of his alcoholism, One day he threw
a hammer at the figure in order to free himself from
all doubt. The figure jumped aside nimbly and
subsequently gave him a good thrashing.

This remarkable reaction naturally suggests the
thought that our patient was occasionally capable of
mistaking a real man for an hallucination, just as is
described in a passage of Dostoevsky’s ‘‘ The Double”.

This case teaches us another thing also. It is not
always enough to make a person a total abstainer. He
must be transformed into another man, for otherwise he
will fall a victim to some other form of evasion, such
as, in this instance, hallucination and its disturbing
consequences appear to be. Just as in the first case,
the position of the patient prevented his removal from
the sphere of his family because his prestige-policy
would suffer, so in the second the fear of admitting
defeat in life, in other words the same prestige-policy,
led to a declaration of illness and of taking refuge in a
hospital. Only in such a manner can the above be
understood, namely that hallucination, like alcoholism
previously, was to furnish consolation and be the excuse
for the disappearance of ambitious egotistic hopes.
This man was only to be saved by freeing him from
his isolation and restoring him to the community.

We see here likewise how alcoholism with its power
of inducing hallucinations serves both as the material
and as a suitable soil for the subsequent development of
the latter. Had there not been this previous alcoholic
stage some other preoccupation, some other neurosis,
would surely have set in.


THEORY OF HALLUCINATION 57


Our third case dates from a time subsequent to the
war and is concerned with a man who after the normal
inhuman and frightful war experiences, took ill with
manifestations of fugue, great irritability, attacks of
anxiety and hallucinations. He was, at the time, under
medical examination in connection with a request for an
invalid grant to which he felt himself fully entitled on
account of his greatly depreciated power of making a
living. He claimed that frequently, particularly when
he was walking alone, he noticed a figure following him
and causing him great fear. All these phenomena taken
together with a marked absent-mindedness, had made it
impossible for him to accomplish as good work as
formerly.

The complaint of reduced capacity for earning a
living, of a loss of formerly possessed capabilities was
found often after the war, in people who had taken part
in it. It cannot be denied that many people did actually
lose a good deal of their working-capacity in conse-
quence of so many years of disuse. Nevertheless some
of that lost capacity could have been regained. We do
not always, however, find preparations whose object is
the recovery of lost capabilities. In some cases it is
noticeable, indeed, that hope has been abandoned to an
extent quite contrary to common sense. As soon as
we know their previous history, these all turn out to be
neurotic individuals of old standing who have always
recoiled from decisions and who now, when confronted
with new tests, fall back, as on previous occasions, upon
a neurotic stage-fright. Their ‘‘hesitating attitude” is
still further intensified by the lure of a sick-grant, and
by the fervent search for a privilege which will obviate
both the necessity of further trials and the expenditure
of effort. They look upon this invalid-grant as a sign
of tenderness and of petting, a confirmation of the
justice of their cause and the injustice of the world.
The monetary value seems only of apparent interest to
them, merely an admission by society of the extent of
their sufferings. The neurotic manifestations must
therefore rise to a point disclosing adequately the patient’s
inability to work.

Their earlier history removes such people from the
suspicion of simulation. Frequently this is the only
evidence. The patient, in the case before us, had always


58 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


been isolated. He had had no friends, no love-affairs,
and had lived a retired life together with his mother, he
himself completely rupturing all relations with his only
brother. It was the war that again brought him into
contact with a social group. The social group itself
would never have succeeded in regaining him.

One day when a grenade burst near him, fear-mani-
festations set in and the above-mentioned hallucination
which is also to be interpreted as fear. His illness
made it possible for him to again withdraw from a social
group unpleasant to him. His attitude toward society
had become even more hostile. The secret revolt had
of necessity to express itself in his profession, for that
in the fullest sense of the word, implied an affirmation
of willingness to co-operate with society. Weaned even
more than formerly from the desire of co-operating, he
very likely did regard himself as suffering from reduced
capacity for work. His absent-mindedness rather in-
dicates his lack of absorption in his work. Society,
whose enemy he had always been (he said to himself),
would now be made to pay for its last attack upon him.
It was to pay him in the form of a pension just as a
conqueror received tribute. When he returned from
the front he deprived the normal processes of thought
of their validity and took refuge in a hallucination that
would save him. This remained with him after the war
until he received his pension which, to him, was a
symbol of triumph. In this, as in the former case, a
cure could only have been attained had a more adequate
adjustment to society been possible. A disappearance
of the symptoms, such as at times occurs even without
treatment in conditions where a lesser degree of tension
prevails, would only have been an apparent success.


VI


The Study of Child Psychology and Neurosis


Lecture delivered befove the International Congress of Medical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 1913


I


IF we were compelled to name a common element in
the relations of the child and the neurotic to the environ-
ment, we should select lack of independence as that
trait. Neither the child nor the neurotic has advanced
to the point of being able to cope with the problems of
life without the aid of others. The neurotic requires
this aid toa far greater degree than the necessities of
society exact. What in the case of the child the family
naturally perform, that the family, physician and the
rest of the environment together do for the neurotic.
With the child it is helplessness and weakness, with
the neurotic, ‘‘being sick” that is selected for the
purpose of imposing increased tasks upon the pre-
viously mentioned persons, of burdening them with
greater requirements or demanding sacrifices on their
part for the sake of one’s own personal advantage.

The similarity in the zzcreased demands of child and
neurotic would alone justify our comparison. More
important are the results obtained by ‘‘ comparative
individual- psychology”, which tells us that in the
individuality of a man we must try to find, focussed in
one single point, both the past, present, future and the
goal. We must assume—our proofs will have to follow
after increased study of the subject—the possibility of
recognizing the traces of external influences from re-
actions in the various attitudes and modes of expression,
in short from the modus vivendi of an individual.

Starting with this view-point, we insist that our task
in individual-psychology is to interpret completed con-
cepts like will, character, affect, temperament, and indeed

59


60 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


every psychic characteristic, in the light of the specific
means at their disposal corresponding to and bringing
to realization, a conceived life-plan. If proof of illness
is necessary it will appear as the will of a patient to
undergo treatment. In this way his life-plan, such, e.g.
as limiting the sphere of action to the house as in agora-
phobia, is tremendously furthered. The same patient
will probably later on show a desire to give up the
treatment if, in the prosecution of his plan, it seems
necessary for him to utilize some error in the cure.
That is simply equivalent to saying that if an individual
pursues a course with two contrary purposes, he may
still desire the same thing. The two will-efforts may
also be distributed between two people:—thus if two
people do not do the same thing, it is still the same
(Freschl, Schulhof). That in this case no knowledge
is to be obtained from an analysis of the phenomena,
can be safely claimed. What interests us is the exist-
ence of the individually-conceived element, the personal
essence, as a preparation anterior to the actual event
and as a goal posterior to it, the event itself being
found at the point of intersection. In both cases the
sum total of everything necessarily appertaining to the
event—the energy, temperament, love, hate, under-
standing, lack of understanding, pain and pleasure,
amelioration and lack of amelioration—will all be
present in exactly that degree that the patient regards
necessary for securing the desired outcome. That the
conscious and unconscious nature of thinking, feeling,
and willing is conditioned by the urge toward the forma-
tion of personality can easily be proved. It is in this
way that repression makes tts appearance and it is to be
interpreted, not as the explanation of the individual ego,
but as the means and mechanism employed by it.

The same inter-connections hold, I have shown,! for
the determination of character and its role in the service
of the personality. The gradations in the powers in-
herent in the constitution (of an individual), the child’s
evaluation of them and the experiences obtained from the
environment, influence both the goal set and the life-
line. As soon as both are definitely fixed, character and
instincts will be seen to fit into them exactly. ‘We must not,
of course, off-hand regard every departure or variation

} Adler, The Neurotic Constitution: London, Kegan Paul.


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 61


in the means adopted, as indicating a fundamental differ-
ence in the purpose of the psychic life. No matter how
great the dissimilarity between a hammer and a pair of
tongs we can put in a nail with either. In neurotically-
disposed children of the same family we, at times, see
one Striving for domination in the family by defiance, the
other by submissiveness. A five-year-old boy suffered
from the habit of frequently throwing everything he
could lay his hands on out of the window. After he
had been thoroughly punished he took ill, possessed of
a fear that he might again throw something out of the
window. By the utilization of these symptoms he
succeeded in chaining his parents to his side and of
becoming their master. One of my patients, until the
appearance of a brother, had been a frightfully spoiled
child. His antagonism to his younger brother, for a
time, took the path of defiance and laziness and so that
he might regain the attention of his parents and chain
them down, he developed an enuresis and refused all
nourishment. He succeeded in this way in displacing
the youngerchild. Having gained his object he became
an exceedingly pleasant, industrious boy, but since to
retain his favoured position permanently, he had to live
under great tension, he developed a severe compulsion-
neurosis. A markedly developed fezechzsm easily betrayed
the main basis of his operations, which was unmasked
as an arrangement for depreciating woman through fear
of her. The supremacy this patient tried to obtain through
violent aggressiveness, was obtained by his at one
time favoured younger brother, more easily by a marked
display of amiability. A slight tendency toward stutter-
ing revealed in the latter, likewise, the lines of defiance,
ambition and the feeling of fundamental insecurity.
Thus the entire course of psychic life, that of neurotic
will, feeling and thinking and the relation of neurosis
to psychosis, exhibits itself in the form of a completed
arrangement of long standing, as a method for the
triumphant overpowering of life. Its beginnings in-
variably take us back to early childhood. It is during
this period that, from hints thrown out by our constitu-
tion, and from the nature of the psychical framework of
the environment, we should look for the first tentative


1 Cf. Appelt, ‘‘Fortschritte der Stottererbehandlung’”’—in Heslen und
Bilden.


62 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


attempts leading subsequently to the ever-impelling goal
superiority.
ea te nee to understand in what the arrangement of
the life-system consists, let us visualize the manner in
which the child confronts life. Whatever be the epoch
in which we care to place the first beginnings of.
consciousness, it must clearly be at a period in which
the child has already collected some experiences. Now
it is of the greatest significance to remember that this
collection of experiences can only then succeed if the
child already has some goal in its mind. Otherwise life
would be a meaningless groping and every evaluation
impossible; it would be senseless for us to speak of
necessary groupings, of the application of higher view-
points, of interconnection or of utilization (of experi-
ences). Every evaluation would be lost if, in a purely
fictitious mass of matter, a fixed goal were absent.
Consequently it ought to be clear ¢hat nobody really
permits experiences as such to form, without thetr possess-
ing some purpose. Indeed experiences are moulded
by him. That simply means that he gives them a
definite character, being guided by the way in which
he thinks they are going to aid or hinder him in the
attainment of his final goal. What is active within our
experiences and continuously at work, is the life-plan
with its goal. This it is that gives us the impression
that former memories can encourage or frighten us,
memories we can only understand and properly evaluate
after we have recognized in them some guiding voice.
At whatever point in the life of the child, or during
anamnesis, we undertake the examination of an experi-
ence or a memory, we find the manifestation as such
telling us nothing. In itself it is multiple in meaning.
Every interpretation must be read into it and demands
proof. That is equivalent to saying that what interests
us, does not inhere in the phenomenon itself but lies, one
might say, in front of and behind it; that we can only
then understand a psychic manifestation if we have
previously intuitively felt it to possess a life-line. A
life-line, however, must have at least two points and
our first task then becomes the union of these two points
of psychic life. In that way we obtain an impression
which is then either extended or limited by the addition
of newelements. What occurs in this process is perhaps


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 63


best to be compared with a portratt-painting and its value
to be measured not by fixed rules but by what it actually
represents. Sometimes the attitude takes on a plastic
form, as in the case of one of my patients suffering
from attacks of hysteria accompanied by loss of con-
sciousness, paralysis of the arm, and amaurosis. An
examination showed that zx order to keep a secure hold
upon her husband, she had, in addition to successive
attacks every day, developed marked suspicions against
everybody, particularly against physicians. To demon-
strate to her graphically her hostility to the world, I
told her that she was like a person who, from some dts-
tance, stood warding off people with outstretched hands.
Thereupon her husband, who was present throughout
the treatment, informed me that zs exactly what had
happened during her first attacks; she had_ suddenly
stretched out her hands as though to ward off someone.
The patient’s first attacks began at a time when she
suspected her husband of unfaithfulness. As was dis-
closed through anamnesis the patient was then behaving
as she had done in childhood when, on one occasion
being left alone for a short time, she had almost become
the victim of an attempted rape. Only when these
two widely separated manifestations are connected, do we
first get an impression and realize—and this is contained
in neither of the two phenomena—that she zs afraid of
being left alone! As such a possibility she feels is now
to present itself again, she directs against it the whole
force of her valuable and useful accumulated experiences.
We now for the first time are in a position to realize
what we should have assumed at the beginning, that
the following conclusion has been drawn by her from her
childhood experience:—a girl should always have some
one near her. At that period her father could alone
serve that purpose. He served all the better because
all thought of sexual connection was, at that early stage,
excluded and because he represented a counter-balance
to her mother who was extremely partial to her older
sister.

The above considerations, which I and my co-workers
have frequently discussed, adequately demonstrate the
untenability of other interpretations, that of the French
school who aim to explain the illness as due to former
experiences and those of Freud and particularly Jung,


64 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


who emphasize the point mentioned above as though
the patient were the victim of some form of earlier
recollections. The later modifications of this theory
are more in consonance with the actual conflict but still
suffer from a defective understanding of the patient’s
life-line. For both the event and the actual conflict are
held together by an activating life-line. The goal that
continually holds the patient in its grip has led az one
point to the making of an experience and at another to the
lifting of an event into the realm of an individual experience
and conflict.

For psychology, particularly for child psychology,
it follows as a necessary corollary that we are always
to draw interpretations and conclusions from the entire
context and never from a single fact.

Pursuing our individual - psychological interpreta-
tion of the above case it is apparent that but slight
insight into the disease was gained by knowing that the
patient was afraid of being alone. A nervous condition
like the latter has a multiple significance and a few
facts tell us little. One fact must be connected with
another. The early childhood memories of our patient
are permeated with thoughts and feelings of rivalry
against her sister. ‘These memories rise to the surface
more specifically in connection with the fact of her sister
always accompanying (her parents), while she had to
remain home alone. We here find in an infantile re-
collection given by the patient as her earliest, the
same theme often recurring, and the likelihood of our
assumption about the patient’s life-line is increased.
Can, however, another of the patient’s symptoms,
the sporadically occurring and ‘splitting’ headache
be explained on this interpretation? And why does
this pain always occur during the menstrual flow?
In anamnesis the statements of the patient suggested
that this symptom manifested itself shortly after a scene
with her unjust mother. Her mother had seized her by
the hair and the patient who was having her menses
at the time, ran directly to the freezing river flowing
past the estate, in the hope of either getting ill or dying.
Such attacks of rage, designed to hurt another person
and going so far as to endanger the patient’s own
life, she had frequently witnessed in the case of her
older brother. But in imitating her brother’s behaviour


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 65


she had at the same time sinned, in a marked manner,
against a rule demanding unconditioned obedience from
a girl: she had been in ice-cold water in winter during
her menses! Her rage had carried her beyond her
feminine nature! Although she did not understand
her procedure, and fell back on causes and activities
lying on the surface, she was in reality making a
résumé along the following lines: my brothers revolted
and became the masters of the house; my sister enjoys
the favour and love of my mother; I am a girl, the
younger sister, in fact, and yet I am left alone; sickness
and death can alone prevent my humiliation! The


longing for equality is so definitely expressed in this
mood and its corollaries that it would have been super-
fluous for it to have become conscious. The result
obtained by its expansion is in itself sufficient. Other
reasons admittedly exist explaining why this situation
should remain in the unconscious. There is really no
need for the mechanism becoming conscious. A full
consciousness of the process might indeed jeopardize
the desired success. It would be impossible for the
personality of this girl to remain intact, were she to
behold with her own eyes what we know, that the main
presupposition of her life, her life-plan, is based upon
a deeply-rooted feeling of the zxferiortty of woman! In
order to protect herself against such an admission she
draws from all her experiences the moral that seems to
attach to them, that zo mazntain her importance she must
not be left alone! When, consequently, she fears the
recognition of her importance and her influence and
hold upon her husband slipping from her, ¢he offenszve
and defensive mechanism developed all this time and to
whose most important element we give the name
neurosis, comes immediately into action to demonstrate
first, the need of her power and finally to regain in
appearance at least, her former dominance. She must
not be left alone. :
Having now forged forward to the central point of
all our action, feeling and thinking, with the psychic
physiognomy of the patient thus sharply outlined, as
a natural corollary of this very distinctness of the
psychic portrait, a large number of additional character-
istics and individual peculiarities follow. The fear of
being alone would necessarily have driven her to seize
E


66 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


upon the most obvious weapon—anxiety. The question
has but to be put,to obtainits corroboration. For instance,
an attack of fear regularly supervenes whenever she sits
alone in the back of a carriage while her husband drives.
This symptom-complex is the answer to the feeling of
subordination, to the exclusion of her will, the absence
of the required ‘‘resonance”. She regained her calm
only when she also sat in front. The tectonic form of
this attitude demands no further discussion. Indeed it
becomes more clear when we discover that these fear-
attacks occur at every turn in the road, at every
encounter with other carriages. She would then im-
mediately seize the reins held. by her husband, although
realizing that she was the unskilled one and he the
practised driver. She was also seized with fear when
the horses ran fast. Her husband would on such
occasions in order to tease her, spur the horses on to
even greater speed. Then her fear-weapon deserted
her! It is interesting and important for our under-
standing of apparent cures to see what has happened :
the attack of fear did not take place lest her husband
continue to urge the horses on !1

A new and highly significant insight has thus been
obtained without trouble. We find ourselves con-
sequently in a stronger position when called upon to
answer the following quite justified question :—why in
her striving for equality with man did not the patient
reach the point of herself seizing the reins? Her whole
past answers this unhesitatingly :—she has in fact no
confidence of obtaining this equality with man and falls back
consequently upon the alternative of using man as a
means, aS a Support, as a protector, zz order thus to
establish her superiority over him.


II


The study of the psyche must like the study of
pedagogy be prepared to rely more than it has hitherto
done upon the results of neurology and psychiatry.
There is no need of my dwelling upon this point before
so well-qualifiedan audience. Similarly psycho-therapy

1 In the treatment of war - neuroses the strong - current specialists,


hypnotists, and charlatans were led astray by such apparent successes 3 With
them of course both patients and science,


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 67


induces us to attempt the investigation of the psychic
life of children. If our assumption, as I have tried to
show again to-day, be correct, that life’s experiences,
the teachings of the past, the expectations of the future,
are all grouped around the fictive life-plan formed in
childhood, that what is required is but a slight falsifica-
tion of accounts, a little autism, (this being probably its
purpose), to restore the old lines and give either open
or disguised expression to our intensified aggressiveness
against the demands of society, then there remains
nothing for us to do, if we desire to eradicate the con-
sequences of the life we have been living in our phantasy,
but to resort to a thoroughgoing revision of thts infantile
system. The synthetic view this necessitates, 1 have, I
believe, placed in the proper light by insisting that
symptoms, traits of character, affects, evaluation of the
patients personality and his sexual relations must all be
given the same position as the neurosis and psychosis viewed
as complete units. ‘They are all means, contrivances,
sleight-of-hand performances subserving the tendency
which impels what is below to force itself above. In
a patient’s experience of the vicissitudes of life, as well
as in the manner in which the practitioner is moved by
the contemplation of the psychic physiognomy, the
impression of zucreased tension is always present, taking
the form of a kind of maliccousness that has sprung up
between the patient and the world and suggesting the
means to be employed if he hopes to successfully
overwhelm it. We are really describing infantile
circumstances and the child’s psyche, in demonstrating
how fear has become a weapon in the service of self-love ;
how an individual personal compulsion has been posited
zn order to cancel the alien compulsion of soccety, the latter
represented by what we have spoken of as the hesztating
attitude when a decision is to be formed; when activity
is Limited to a small circle, when there is an unwillingness
to play the game, and a desire to remazn alone or finally,
when zdeas of greatness are found. It would be utterly
wrong to interpret all these manifestations, without ex-
ception, as infantile traits. What we actually perceive
is that an individual who feels weak, be he child,
mature person or savage, is forced to take recourse to
the same methods. Their discovery and training takes
us back to the childhood of an individual. There we


68 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


know it is not direct assault or action that promises
best success but obedience, submission and the various
forms of childish defiance such as refusal to sleep or
eat, indolence, uncleanliness and the manifold forms of
definitely demonstrable weakness. In certain respects
our civilization resembles childhood :—it gives the weak
special privileges. But if life is the continuous struggle
the neurotically disposed child by his demeanour seems
to think it is—this being his main presupposition—then
it inevitably follows that every defeat, every fear of
an impending decision must entail a nervous attack,
serve aS a weapon, as a sign of revolt of a man who
feels his inferiority. The hostile attitude of the neurotic
which from childhood gives him a definite orientation,
is reflected in hyper-sensitiveness, intolerance to every
form of compulsion including that of civilization itself
and in the insistent striving singly to defy the whole
world. It is this same attitude that repeatedly spurs
him on to transcend the limits of his power, resembling
in this respect a child who experiments until burnt by
the fire or becomes bruised by knocking itself against
the table. The re-inforced attitude of hostility, of
competing and comparing, planning and day-dreaming,
the artificial training of technical tricks of the organs
and finally the obtrusive, defiant and sadistic stirrings,
the belief in magic, the idea of god-likeness, the admir-
able evaszons taking the form of perversions originating
in fear of one’s partner, all these are regularly found
in children who have grown up either under an unbear-
able feeling of pressure, under conditions making for
softness and effeminacy or with retarded development
of body or mind. An exceptionally large coeffictent of
safety makes possible a progress upward and protects
the individual from defeat. Yet at the same time, as
if by some miracle, all kind of obstacles’ force their way
between the patient and the fulfilment of his task. Among
those playing a decisive part and assuming the réle of
an excuse ts tliness. Unimportant details, over-evaluated
as in the compulsion-neurosis, are carried along without
serving any purpose until the proper time for action
has been wasted.


It cannot be denied that this heightened incitement


_ 1 Cf. the chapter on ‘‘The Problem of Distance, a fundamental Element
in Neurosis and Psychosis ’’, in this volume.


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 69


toward certain success does occasionally lead to excellent
results. But what we nerve-specialists behold is gener-
ally a sad wt aliquid fiert videatur, in which the natural
meaning of organs must be falsified so that the brakes
can be applied to their functions. The weak man is
likely in his fanaticism to pervert every function. To
evade a demand of reality, to give the semblance of
suffering a frightful martyrdom, thought stops and
brooding is substituted. Av artzfictally constructed system
interferes with the night's rest, preparing, in this way, for
tiredness in the day-time and consequent inability to work.
The sense-organs, mobility, the vegetative apparatus
lose their functions by means of the operation of ideas
with a definite bias and the purposive directing of the
attention into other channels. The ability to identify
one’s self with harrowing sensations gives rise to
pain; fixation upon nauseating memories to nausea
and vomiting: Through a long prepared tendency
whose object is the careful evasion of a sex partner,
strengthened by ideals, arguments and lofty demands
of like import, the capacity for love, sufficiently narrowed
in scope to begin with, is then entirely destroyed.

In many cases the specific individuality of the patient
demands so peculiar and circumscribed an attitude
toward the problem of love and marriage, that both
the type and the time of the illness can almost be said
to be determined beforehand. To what an extent such
a life-plan goes back to childhood may be gathered from
such instances as the following :—


I. A woman about thirty-four years old who a few
years before had become ill with agoraphobia, was at
the time of treatment still suffering from fear of railroads.
It was enough for her to bein the neighbourhood of a
railroad station to be seized with a violent attack of
trembling, forcing her to turn back. These and similar
occurrences suggest the idea of an obstacle as though she
were confined within the limits of some magic circle.
Her earliest recollection was a scene between herself and
a younger sister in which she tried to usurp the latter's
place. The multiple meaning of this occurrence is clear.
If we were to draw a line from this early incident to
the railroad-phobia, the last of her manifestations, and
compare the two as though implying that she was trying


70 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


to compete with the railroad as she had with her sister,
then we would immediately realize that the patient was
avoiding those places where her desire for domination
found no encouragement. She remembered many such
instances in connection with her demeanour toward her
older brothers who always forced her to obey. We may
consequently expect that this patient will in life try to
dominate women and withdraw from the authority of
the man, be he driver or the locomotive engineer and
will eradicate love and marriage from her programme
of life. During girlhood she was accustomed for long
periods of time to walk through her estate whip in hand
and strike the male servants. We must expect occur-
rences that clearly imply attempts to treat man as a
subordinate. Practically in all her dreams men appear
in the form of animals and are either conquered or put
to flight. Only once in her life and then only for a
short time, did she come into close contact with a man.
He turned out, as might have been expected, to be a
weakling, was homo-sexual and used his impotence as
an excuse to break his engagement. Her railroad-
phobia was the equivalent of her fear of love and
marriage. She dared not trust herself to the authority
of a stranger.


II. The mechanism of the ‘‘ masculine protest ” can,
of course, be studied in childhood also. It manifests
itself with especial clearness among girls. The direction
taken by the expansion-tendency is found in many varia-
tions, and we soon discover to what a white heat the
actual expectations and tensions of the child in relation
to its environment are aroused. In no case have I ever
found this masculine delirium to be absent.

From this feeling of curtailment there develops
regularly the fanaticism of weakness, thus opening
a door to the understanding of all the child’s forms of
hyper-irritability, negativism and neurotic artifices. An
otherwise healthy girl of three years showed the follow-
ing manifestations :—continuous trials of strength with
the mother, frightful sensitiveness to every form of
compulsion and relegation, stubbornness and defiance.
Refusal to take food, constipation and other revolts
against the ordinary household arrangements took place
continually. Negativism developed to a degree that


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 71


it became almost unbearable. Thus one day, when her
mother suggested to her gently that she should take
her afternoon tea the following monologue occurred:
‘“‘If she says milk then Pll drink coffee and if she says
coffee then I'll drink milk!” Her longing to be like
a man was frequently indicated. One day she stood in
front of a mirror and asked her mother: ‘‘Did you
always want to be a man also?” As the impossibility
of any change in sex became clear to her, she suggested
to her mother that she would like to have another sister
but under no conditions a brother; that when she was
grown-up however, she would only have boys. Later
on, she still betrayed an unquestionably high estimation
of the male.


III. Because of its exceptional clarity let me give
the following details from the life of another healthy
girl three years old: Her favourite occupation consisted
in dressing herself in the clothes of an older brother,
never in that of her sister, at least not at the beginning.
One day, when on a walk with her father, she stopped
in front of a boys’ clothing-shop and tried to persuade
him to buy her some boy’s clothes. When he pointed
out to her that a boy did not wear girl’s clothes, she
pointed to a little cloak that might, at a pinch, be made
suitable for a girl and asked that she at least be allowed
that. In this instance we have what is a not infrequent
change in the form assumed by the main path (of char-
acter), one at the same time dependent upon the mascu-
line terminal goal and one which insists that even the
semblance of being a man suffices.

In these cases, which I consider typical, and in both
of which we observe a fairly general type of develop-
ment, it is essential to ask the following question. What
method has pedagogy heretofore offered for reconciling
one half of mankind with an unalterable condition which
it dislikes? For one thing is clear—that if such a
reconciliation is not successful, we shall at all times have
before us the condition which I have just discussed in
detail; a permanent feeling of inferiority will continu-
ally give occasion for dissatisfaction and lead to various
attempts and contrivances for proving one’s own superi-
ority 2” the face of all obstacles. In this fashion arise
those weapons in part connected with reality, in part of


72 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


an imaginary kind, that form the external picture of the
neurosis. That this condition has advantages, that it
enables a person to live in a more intensive and subtle
manner, is not to be pleaded when our task is that of
pondering over some means to be adopted for cancelling
the far greater disadvantages. This mood with its
feeling of inferiority at one pole, and its longing for
quasi-masculine recognition at the other, is still further
intensified when the girl is relegated to the background
by the boy, when she sees her possibilities of develop-
ment curtailed, and when the female molimina, menses,
child-bearing and climacteric, with their new disad-
vantages, appear. Jt zs well-known that these periods are
decisive in neurotic revolts and we may consequently predict
these revolts beforehand. Although one of the roots of
neurotic troubles has thus been laid bare, we must un-
fortunately admit that neither in our pedagogic nor in
our therapeutic equipment, has any method been found
of preventing the consequences of this natural situation
and that imposed by society. From our point of view
we may provisionally draw the following conclusion :—
the necessity of impressing upon the child early, both
prophylactically and therapeutically, the unchangeable-
ness of the organic sexual character; that the dis-
advantages are ot to be regarded as uuconquerable but
to be looked upon as difficulties inherent in life which
others know both to appreciate and, if need be, to battle
against. With that I think the uncertainty and resigna-
tion present to-day in woman’s work will disappear and
with it, that exaggerated desire for recognition that so
frequently makes her appear inferior.?


IV. This is the case of a ten-year-old boy. I give
it to show how, after poison has once entered social
relationships, in this instance the masculine protest of
the female sex, it can also pass over to the other sex,
to the boy and there induce the same manifestations.
It is to be assumed from the very beginning considering
the well-known nature of man, that the boy not only
feels himself honoured by the high estimation some-
times openly expressed, at other times, indicated by
social conditions, but that he also feels more duties


1 Cf, Schulhof, Judividualpsychologie und Frauenbewegung (Reinhardt,
Munich, 1914).


\


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 73


tmposed upon him. Consequently, in his case, the tension
in his relation to the world is also increased. This
tension, in so far as it has given rise to actual achieve-
ments, has produced our culture the latter being, to a
large extent, based upon it. Any normal pressure that
bars the road of cultural aggressiveness, suffices for bring-
ing to the front powerful hostile attitudes, maliciousness,
lust for power, phantasies. The boy frequently is afraid
of not fulfilling his duties properly, of not being able to
obtain that degree of recognition he feels necessary for
masculine perfection. We therefore find very early,
in cases of organ-inferiority, among depressed and
petted children, the beginning of plan-weaving, and a
haste and greed in the pursuit of superiority whatever
the difficulties. Thzs often leads consequently to a utiliza-
tion of their weakness, a general hesitating attitude, a
leaning toward doubt and vacillation, an ever recurring order
to retreat; or again it may lead to an open or concealed
revolt and a definite unwillingness to play the game. Here
we have come to the basts of the neurosis and should stop to
contemplate the damage inflicted.

The next case concerns a very near-sighted boy who,
in spite of all his efforts, was not able to cope with a
two-year-old sister. His aggressiveness showed itself
in numerous quarrels. Over his mother he likewise
had no influence. The father, who in importance and
influence dominated the others, kept strict discipline and
frequently swore at what hetermed ‘‘woman-rule”. The
boy in every way resembled the father, as I shall prove
later on. In his somewhat hard-pressed situation it
was not quite so easy to bring positive proof of his
former equality with his father. On account of his
short-sightedness he generally had bad luck in his
boyish exploits. On one occasion when he wanted to
make use of his father’s type-writer, his father rather
abruptly called a halt to this scientific pretension.1_ The
latter, a passionate hunter, occasionally took the boy
with him, and this finally seems to have become the
particular masculine attitude proving to the boy his
equality with his father and his superiority over ‘‘the
females”. Whenever he was not taken along the boy
took ill with enuresis, his father always becoming fear-


1 This appears to us, contrary to the opinion of others, not as an experi-
ence but as indicating the relation between father and son.


74 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


fully agitated in consequence. Later a night-attack
occurred whenever the father exercised his authority over
the boy. These inter-connections were brought to light
after several conversations with the boy and it was
furthermore discovered that enuresis had been made
possible by bringing together the necessary elements in
dream-hallucinations. The suffering quite clearly re-
presented a violent revolt directed against the father.
The boy would generally dream, either before or after
his night attack, that his father (who had not taken
him on the hunt), had died. When asked about his
plans for the future he answered that he wanted to
become an engineer like his father and have a house-
keeper. I asked him whether, like his father, he did
not wish to marry. He dismissed this suggestion with
the remark that women were of no value and were only
interested in finery. The prepared attitude that this
boy was going to take, his arrangement of life, is thus
clearly discernible.


V. Similar and yet entirely different, were the mani-
festations of the masculine protest encountered in a boy
of eight years suffering from status lymphaticus and
who was somewhat retarded in his intellectual and
bodily growth. He came under my care on account
of masturbation-compulsion. His mother devoted
herself almost entirely to the younger sisters and brothers
and left him in the care of servants. His father was a
man of quick temper always giving orders. The boy’s
inferiority feeling showed itself in a timid retiring nature
and in a grateful attitude to all who paid any attention
to him. The most far-reaching compensation he found
in an untiring interest in juggler’s tricks to which his
attention had been directed in connection with fairy
tales and cinema performances. Far more than other
children, did he succumb to their influence and he was
always prepared to find a magic wand that would take
him to fairy-land. He deceived himself to such an
extent, with a partial realization of this idea, that he
always allowed others to do everything for him, this
being in reality a distorted picture of what he saw in his
father who was likewise compelling everyone to serve
him. Along this path he could proceed only if he re-
mained clumsy and incapable. Therefore he remained so.


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 75


The masturbation was discovered after some time by
the mother who, thereupon, again turned her attention
to the boy. He gained, in this way, an influence
over her and his importance considerably increased.
In order not to lose it again he would have to continue
masturbation. So he continued tt.

His goal, that of being the equal of his father,
showed itself incidentally in a desire, partaking of the
nature of a compulsion, which led him to wear the stiff
hat of grown-up people—just like little children who
desire to be grown-up—and also of holding cigarette-
butts in his mouth.

Permit me to briefly extend the knowledge of the
neurotic manoeuvres developed in childhood to the
history of mankind. The belief in personal and alien
magic properties was far more definitely met with
formerly than to-day, but it is to-day likewise the almost
general pre-supposition of human behaviour and of
deficient belief in one’s self, ze. of the feeling of
inferiority. The masculine neurotic’s fear of his wife
and his maliciousness, find their analogies in witch-
mania and witch-burning ; the female patient’s fear of
the man and his masculine protest, in fear of the devil
and of hell, in attempts to practise witch-craft. By
humiliating woman her present ingenuousness in love
suffers and our education, in the main, aims at creating
a mutual attraction instead of evaluation. In endeavour-
ing to forcibly impose man’s authority we are far less
likely to further a psychic hygiene than to encourage
illusory thinking.


Concluding Remarks


I, The organic and psychic mechanism which con-
fronts us at every point as the ‘‘incitement to the
positing of a goal”, exists preformed in our conception
of ‘‘life”. Life insists that we act. Through action
we establish the fizal character of psychic life.


Il. The uninterrupted attraction that striving after a
goal gives us, is conditioned in man by his feeling of
curtailment. What we call instinct is in fact the path (of
life) and can be shown to be oriented toward some goal.
The conative faculty, in spite of apparent contradictions,
is ready to forge forward toward this zntegrated goal.


76 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


III. Just as an organ inadequately prepared for the
work it is called upon to do, creates an unbearable
situation, and becomes the cause of innumerable
attempts at compensation until finally it feels itself
strong enough to meet the demands of the environment,
so the psyche of the child, in its doubt, turns to the
store-house containing the accessories to the powers
that are to serve as the superstructure of its feeling of
uncertainty.


IV. The foremost task in the study of the psychic
life is to reckon with the tentative attempts and exer-
tions of strength, growing out of the constitutionally
given powers and the initial and subsequently well-
tested efforts for utilizing the environment.


V. Each psychic phenomenon must therefore be
interpreted as a partial manifestation of an integrated life-
plan. All explanatory attempts that refuse to follow
this course and, instead, attempt to penetrate into the
child’s psychic life, to analyse the manifestation itself and
not its synthesis, must be regarded as unsuccessful. For
the ‘‘ facts” of the child’s psyche are not to be taken as
jinished products but rather as preparatory movements
in the direction of a goal.


VI. According to this view nothing consequently
takes place without swdserving some tendency. We shall
therefore attempt at this point to call attention to the
following guiding principles which we consider the
most important.


Realities.—(a) The development of a capability for
attaining superiority.

(4) Coping with the environment.

(c) The feeling that the world is hostile.

(z) The amassing of knowledge and
piling up of achievements.

(ec) Use made of love and obedience,
hatred and defiance, of community
feeling and the lust for power.

Imaginary.—(/) Development of the As-If (phantasy,
symbolic successes).

(g) Use made of weakness.

(2) Procrastination in making decisions.
Search for protection.


CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND NEUROSIS 77


VII. The unquestioned presupposition for these lines
of direction is to be found in one factor—a high-
set goal of omnipotence and god-likeness, that must
remain in the unconscious in order to be efficacious.
Depending upon the experiences and constitution of
the individual this goal may, in a marked degree, take
a concrete shape and in this form rise into consciousness
as psychosis. The unconscious nature of the power-
goal is conditioned by its unbridgeable contradiction
with the real demands of the community feeling.


VIII. The most common form in which it appears,
although when necessary other apparently contradictory
ones are to be found, is the scheme ‘‘man . . . woman”
and hints at the sum total of all the powers the child
wishes to possess. The contrast contained therein is, as
a rule, the feminine element interpreted as hostile and
to be conquered.


IX. All these phenomena are very prominent in a
neurotic individual because the patient has to a certain
extent, through his attitude of hostility, withdrawn
himself from a thorough revision of his false infantile
judgments. His ingrained solipsistic standpoint is of
great help to him in this connection.


X. We ought not to be surprised, therefore, if every
neurotic behaves as if he were always called upon to
furnish evidence for his own superiority in general and
for that over his wife specifically.


VII


The Psychic Treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia
(1911)


THE individual-psychological method perhaps more than
any other possesses characteristics of a definite kind and
it is essential thus to limit its field carefully. That it is
only of value in diseases of psychical origin is to be
understood from the beginning. The possible psychic
utilization of the material at hand ought, at the same time,
not to be complicated by any intellectual derangements
such as imbecility, mental deficiency or deliria. How
and to what an extent, psychosis is amenable to treatment
must remain an open question; but it certainly yields
to analysis, shows the same main principles as neurosis,
and may become of tremendous service in the study
of abnormal psychical attitudes. That cases of psychoses
complicated by intellectual degeneration, and which had
made no progress, can upon more intensive application
of the method of individual-psychology, both improve and
be cured, I can demonstrate from my own experience.

If the field included in the individual-psychological
method is thus to be fully utilized, it is of primary
importance to know whether there is any possibility of
recognizing a psychogenic disease.

The scientific conviction of the psychogenic origin
of the typical psycho-neuroses, neurasthenia, hysteria
and compulsion-neuroses, is so firmly established that
criticisms are only hesitatingly advanced. The most
important is that which stresses the constitutional factor
and groups all manifestations as inherited degeneration,
including therein both functional, organic and psychic
phenomena, but not taking into consideration the transition
Jrom organ inferiority to the development of a neurotic
psyche. That this transition does not always take place
and lead, like other transitions, 4o genius, crime, suicide,
psychosis, 1 demonstrated long ago. In that and other


1 Adler, Studie aiber die Minderwertigkett der Organe (1917).
78


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 79


works I came to the conclusion that inherited inferiorities
of gland or organ, if they make themselves felt psychic-
ally, were inducive to a neurotic disposition, z.e. if they
caused a child with some inherited stigma to feel a sense of
inferiority in relation to his environment.1 The decisive
factor in such a case would be ¢he sztuation in which the
child finds itself and its personal appraisement of this
position with its naturally infantile errors. Upon more
careful investigation, the neuroses show themselves to
be not so much disposition as position -diseases. In
this way external signs of degeneration, if they have led
to any disfigurement or ugliness, or if they represent
externally visible indications of a more deeply rooted
organ-inferiority and unite with them, may, apart from
their objective symptoms, evoke a feeling of inferiority and
uncertainty in the child's psyche. For instance, deformed
ears with inherited auditory anomalies, colour-blindness,
astigmatism or other refraction anomalies accompanied
by squinting, etc. Ina similar way will organ inferior-
ities operate, particularly if itis not life that is threatened
but the possibility of psychic disturbances developing.
Rachitis may interfere with the development of stature
and thus become the cause of marked shortness and
plumpness of figure; rachitic deformities — flat-feet,
bow-legs, knock-knees, scoliosis etc., may diminish
both the child’s mobility and self-esteem. Jmsuffictency
of the suprarenal glands, the thyroid gland, the thymus,
the hypophysis, of the znxternal genital glands, particu-
larly inherited types of unimportant character whose
symptoms generally call forth censure more than active
intervention, become of momentous significance not
only for organic but, above all, for psychic develop-
ment, by either evoking or suppressing a feeling of
humiliation and inferiority. Similarly, ersudatec dia-
thesis, status lymphatico-thymicus and asthenic habitus,
hydrocephaly and slight forms of zmdectlity, all exert
a ruinous influence upon both feelings. Juherited
inferiority of the urinary and digestive apparatus creates
both objective symptoms? as well as subjective feelings


1 Adler, ‘‘ Ueber neurotische Disposition ’’—in Hezlen und Bilden (1914).

2 Adler, ‘Zur Etiologie, Diagnostik, und Therapie der Nephrolithiasis ”’
(Wiener Klin. Wochenschr., XX, no. 42). tens

Adler, “‘ Myelodysplasie oder Organminderwertigkeit”’ (Wiener Med. Woch-
enschr. 1909, no. 45). Among other things this paper treats of the superiority


80 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


of inferiority that frequently, due to infantile mistakes,
find an outlet in some circuitous fashion ;—in enuresis
and incontinentia alvi. The demands made by the
body, the fear of punishment and pain, also lead to
exaggerated precautions in eating,drinking and sleeping.’

Considerations and demonstrations of this kind relat-
ing to the subjective and objective radiations of organ
inferiority, seem to me to be of great significance for
they throw light upon the development of neurotic symptoms,
particularly upon the development of neurotic character-tratts,
by the utilization of inherited organ inferiorities. At the
same time they show the secondary nature of constitu-
tional organ-inferiority and.the primary nature of
psychogenic factors in the etiology of neurosis. The
actual basis for what might be characterized as the rather
tense relation between the organic and psychic, is easily
recognized. It has its roots in che relative organ inferiority
of the child, even of the healthy child, as compared with .
the adult. Among the latter it gives rise, likewise, to
a feeling of inferiority and uncertainty, one however
that is bearable. In cases of absolute, permanent and
poignantly felt organ-inferiority, those unsupportable
feelings of inferiority arise that I have found among all
neurotics. It is a trait of our civilization that the child
zs at all times desirous of playing the role of the grown-up,
that he dreams and weaves phantasies about just those
successes that, from their very nature, present difficulties
to him. A short-sighted individual wishes to see every-
thing, one possessed of auditory anomalies to hear every-
thing ; one afflicted with speech-defects or stuttering, will
desire to speak incessantly, one with inherited mucous
growths, septum deviations or with adenoid enlarge-
ments preventing sniffing, will want to smell continually.?


of my view over the subsequent one of A. Fuchs. Cf. also Zappert, Enuresis
und Myelodysplasie, published 13 years later: Wien. Klin., Wochenschr.
1920, no. 22.

1 Jean Paul’s Schmelsle excellently describes the fear of night, indicates
the ‘safety devices” to be discussed later, and allows us to infer clearly the
inferiority of the urinary and digestive apparatus.

? In all these cases of organ-inferiority due to a ‘‘ gualified infertority
Jeeling”’, altered or refined functionings, valuable enhancements of the
impressions of the sense organs, such as increased sensibility, increased
sensations of tickling to be detected within the periphery of feeling, are
to be interpreted as a changed method of functioning of the organ of
inferiority. The foot is an atrophied hand yet its achievements when
adjusted to the ground are quite evident.—Tickling sensations in the nose,
in the throat and the air passages, constrictions of these passages, induce-


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 81


Slow-moving, plump individuals throughout their lives
possess the ambition of occupying the first place just
as do second-born or last-born children. A child
not particularly nimble-footed will be continually
afraid of being late and can be easily urged on by
all sorts of reasons to make haste or to run, so
that throughout his life he appears to be under the
compulsion of indulging in a competitive race. The
desire to fly is most likely to occur in children who
have already experienced difficulty in jumping. This
antithesis between organically conditioned limitations
and wish, phantasy and dream, in other words the
psychic compensation-strivings, is of so thorough-going
a type that a fundamental psychological law might be
deduced from it of the following nature: an indirect reversal
of organ-infertority into psychic compensatory and hyper-
compensatory strivings through the subjective sensation of
inferiority.

The external demeanour and the inward psycho-
logical behaviour of a neurotically disposed child gener-
ally shows, therefore, the indications of this indirect line
of evolution at a very early period of childhood. His
behaviour, however great the differences in individual
cases be, can best be interpreted to imply that he desires
to be ‘‘on the crest of the wave” in all life’s relations.
Ambition, conceit, desire to know everything, to discuss
everything, to be distinguished for bodily strength,
beauty, distinction in dress, to be the chief member of
the family, of the school, to have all attention focused
upon him either 4y good or bad actions, all these things
characterize the early phases of abnormal development.
The feeling of inferiority and insecurity forces its way
through easily, expressing itself in fear and tmzdity,
both to be regarded as neurotic character traits. In
this fixation (of neurotic traits), the child is guided by
a tendency closely related to ambition, which, put in
words, would be:—J must not be left alone; someone


ment of flow of secretion by intensified nasal inspiration (desire to smell),
these all play a leading réle in xervous asthma, spells of sneezing and probably
in hay-fever. A delightful description of nervous nasal conditions of irritation
and the feeling of inferiority connected with it is to be found in Vischer’s
Auch Einer. The inflation and artificial intensification of this ‘‘ defect”, to
secure one’s self against marriage and against entering into social and love
relations, are so correctly depicted that we are justified in assuming that the
gifted philosopher had derived his facts from actual observation.
F


82 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


(father or mother) must help me; people must be friendly
to me; treat me tenderly ; (here we are to add: for I
am weak, inferior). All these inward conversations
become the guiding principles of psychic stirrings. A
permanently irritable Ayper-sensitiveness, mustrust, and
querulousness, prevent humiliation or slights from finding
room to develop. The case may be reversed, and the
child may develop remarkable keenness, anticipate tts
feelings, grope about for all possibilities leading to humiultia-
tion, so that he can secure himself against it either by
active intervention in the form of definite precautions,
presence or agility of mind, or by obtaining the pity
and the sympathy which his exaggerated description of
suffering has awakened in the breast of some stronger
individual. The child may likewise call to his aid real
or simulated illnesses, fainting-spells and death desires,
extending to the point of impulses toward suicide with
the ever-present purpose of either evoking pity or taking
revenge for some humiliation.*

The feelings of hate and revenge that burst forth, the
wild anger and the sadistec desires, the craving to indulge
in forbidden acts, the continual disturbance of educational
plans by indolence, laziness and defiance—all these are
indications of a neurotically-disposed child’s revolt
against imaginary or real oppression. Such children
make much ado about eating, washing, dressing,
cleaning of teeth, going to sleep and learning; resent
every reminder to attend to defaecation and urination.
Or they ‘‘arrange”’ accidents, vomiting, for instance,
if forced to eat or urged to go to school; soil themselves
(by defaecation or urination), develop enuresis so that
people are always around them, see that they are not
left alone or allowed to sleep alone; interrupt their
sleep to obtain expressions of love, or to be taken into
their parent’s bed, in short, do everything to get recog-
nition, resorting either to defiance or falling back upon the
sense of pity their environment extends to them.

These facts, as a rule, stand out clearly and are quite
consistent with one another whether they are obtained
from life, from a neurotically disposed child’s traits of
character, from the anamnesis of a neurotic or by the clear-
ing-up the dynamics of his symptoms. Occasionally


ee See Adler—‘‘ Ueber den Selbstmord insbesondere im kindlichen Alter ””
—in Heilen und Bilden.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 83


we have to deal with imagined ‘child-paragons” who
exhibit an astounding obedience. Every now and then,
however, they too betray themselves by some unintel-
ligible outburst of anger ; or we may be led on the right
track by their hyper-sensitiveness, continuous condition
of feeling hurt, copious tears; their various causeless
pains and aches (headache, stomach-ache, pain in the
legs, migraine, exaggerated complaints of cold and
heat, tiredness). It is thus easy for us to understand
how this obedience, modesty, ever-ready willingness to submtt
are but means adopted for the purpose of obtaining
recognition and reward, of drawing out expressions of
love, just as holds true for the neurotic in the ‘‘ dynamics
of masochism” as | have been able to show.?

We must now mention a number of manifestations
found in the neurotically-disposed child and closely con-
nected with what has previously been described. They
all disclose the desire to annoy parents by obstinate
adherence to unnecessary or disturbing activitiesdesigned
to draw attention to themselves even though this attention
take the form of anger. In such tendencies are to be in-
cluded some of a playful nature like pretending ¢o de deaf,
blind, lame, dumb, clumsy, forgetful or crazy, stuttering, making
grimaces, stumbling, sotling one’s self. Normal children
likewise possess such inclinations, but it requires the
diseased ambition, the defiance and urge towards obtain-
ing recognition possessed by the neurotically-disposed
person, to enable anyone to adhere for any length of
time to such make-believe games and fooleries or actually
utilize them. Such children may either with malicious
intent or in order to torment others—but frequently, I will
admit, to escape from tyrannical oppression—adhere to
and practise, for a long time, disease-symptoms or bad
habits either personally experienced or observed, such as
biting nails, picking the nose, thumb-sucking, playing
with genitals (with the anus, etc.). Even timidity and
fear can be stabilized for these purposes and employed
with a definite object, such as not being left alone,
of being served by others. In all these instances the
assumption of some corresponding organ inferiority
plays a réle (vide my book on Organ Inferiority).

From these peculiarities of the neurotically disposed
child, transitions lead to the symptoms of hysteria, com-

1 ‘* Psychische Hermaphroditismus ”” in Hedlen und Brlden.


84 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


pulsion - neurosis, accident - neurosis, accident- hysteria,
neurasthenia, convulsive tic, fear-neurosis and to those
apparently mono-symptomatic functional neuroses (stutter-
ing, constipation, psychic impotence, etc.), all of which,
on the basis of my experiences, I regard as zntegrated
psycho-neuroses. Those manifestations accepted during
childhood, without full realization (of their nature), on the
basis of some reflected attitude and whose purpose 1s to
reach the line of least resistance for the well-equipped
aggressive instinct, are all provided with typical super-
structures and elaborately endowed with the neurotic’s
symptoms. To what an extent increased suggestibility
(Charcot, Struempell), hypnotic condition (Breuer), the
hallucinatory character of the neurotic psyche (Adler), z.¢.
identification, come into question, I shall not discuss here.
It is certain, however, that every hallucinatory attack,
as well as the permanent neurotic character, develop
uniformly under the influence of an infantile attitude,
an attitude that has taken on abnormal forms owing to
childish wish-phantasies, errors and false evaluations.
The wish-phantasies of the child possess by no
means merely a platonic value. They represent the
expression of a psychic stimulus which completely
dictates the child’s attitude and so necessarily his acts.
This impulse is differentiated into grades of intensity
and grows enormously in the case of neurotically dis-
posed children, compensating in this way for their
increased feeling of inferiority. Investigation will at
first bring to the surface, recollections of events
(‘‘infantile experience, dreams”) toward which the
child has assumed a definite attitude. I have already
pointed out, in discussing the ‘‘aggressive instinct”
(I.c.), that the ‘‘importance of the infantile experience lies
in the fact that it must be interpreted to mean ¢hat the
power-instinct and tts limttations—(both as wish and as wish
suppression)—there find expression ; and that furthermore
the contact with the external world, whether it be in the
form of non-pleasurable experiences or be due to the
expansion of the desire for culturally denied goods,
unquestionably occurs where organ inferiority exists and
so compels a transformation of the instinct.” The per-
ceptible extension of instincts in neurotically disposed
children, springs indirectly from the feeling of inferiority,
taking the form of a tendency to overcome weaknesses


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 85


and the longing for triumph and is clearly visible in
dreams and wish-phantasies, the hero réle, the whole
attitude being but an attempt at compensation.

In this more deeply hidden neurotic layer, analysis
also discloses sexual wishes and stirrings that, in rare
imstances, are of an incestuous nature. We also find
attempts at and actual sexual activities, directed toward
complete strangers. These facts, quite unknown in child
psychology before the phantastic analyses of Freud, naturally
do away definitely wth the previous assumption of the chila’s
zmnocence and purity, yet we will learn to understand them
better if we remember the frequently limitless expansion
instinct can acquire and the compensatory balance possessed
by the neurotically disposed child in the shape of its feeling
of infercority. In other directions beside that of sex
does this uprooting of instinct activities make itself
felt. We meet with intensified instincts of gorging, of
seeing everything, of filth, of domination, of sadistic and
criminal tendencies, defiance, rage, assiduous reading and
extraordinary attempts to achieve distinction for one’s self in
some way or other. All these tendencies become really
clear only if we are successful in bringing to the surface,
the early awakened desire for domination and its various
manifestations.

The meaning of this desire for power is: / want to
be aman. It permeates both boys and girls to sucha
frightful degree that we are from the very first, forced to
assume that this attitude came to the front to counter-balance
the non-pleasurable sensation of not being masculine. The
neurotic psyche 1s, as a matter of fact, under the coercion of a
(psychic) mechanism, the psychic hermaphrodism and sub-
sequent masculine protest previously described. The fixation
of the inferiority feeling in neurotically disposed children
leads to the compensatory stimulation of instinct activity
and constitutes the beginning of that peculiar develop-
ment of the psyche which terminates in the exaggerated
masculine protest. These psychic processes become
the cause of the neurotic’s abnormal attitude toward the
world and impress upon him, to a very marked degree,
traits of the kind already mentioned, and which can be
deduced neither from the sexual nor ego instincts. They, on
the contrary, take in him the form of the 2deas of greatness,
frequently actually modifying and obstructing the sexual

1 Adler, ‘‘ Psychische Hermaphroditismus”’ in Heclen und Bilden.


86 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


instinct and, at times, even opposing that of preserva-
tion itself. a

Accompanying the contact of the exaggerated instinct-
expansion with the culturally denied gratification of
instincts, are other traits, feelings of guzlt, cowardice,
irvesolution, hesitation, the fear of a fiasco, of punishment.
I have described them in detail in my work on The
Neurotic Constitution. Quite often masochistic stirrings,
exaggerated willingness to obey, to submit, self-puntshment,
are discovered and we may infer the nature of the
psychic mechanism as well as the earlier history (of
the case) from these character-traits. The strongest
hindrance to the extension of instinct is encountered
when on the border line of the community feeling. This
event is in the nature of a reminder and thereafter takes
over the task of weighting down the organic instincts
with all sorts of obstructions. The neurotic feels himself
a criminal, becomes extremely conscientious and just, yet all
the time his attitude ts determined by the fiction that he ts
really wicked, dominated by uncontrollable sex desire, given
over to unlimited self-indulgence, capable of any crime or
license. He is in duty bound, consequently, to take
specific precautions. Through his one-sided striving
for personal power he becomes in fact an enemy of
society.

The arrangement of this fiction though clearly over-
done, serves the main object of the neurotic, which ts to
guard himself against defeat.1 The tendencies for security,
help to build up a third group of character-traits that
are all adjusted to the leading principle which is
‘‘precaution”. Distrust, doubt are the most prominent
of these precautions. /ust as frequently, however, we find
exaggerated tendencies toward cleanliness and order, economy
and continual examination of people and things, and tt ts in
consequence of this, that the neurotic never finishes
anything.

All these traits interfere with the spirit of initiative,
with the development of social responsibilities and are
closely connected with the indecision due to a sense of
guilt. Everything is previously considered, al/ conse-
quences taken tnto consideration, the neurotic being in a


1 In this respect the neurotic resembles that character in the Nestroy play
who says: ‘If I once begin !””—‘* But I never begin!” He is afraid of his
own urge toward activity. Cf. also The Neurotic Constitution.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 87


continual state of extreme expectation of possible con-
tingencies and his rest disturbed by assumptions and
anticipations about the future. A magnificent defence-
mechanism pervades all his thinking and acting and
shows ttself unfailingly in his phantastes and dreams.
Frequently it is forced to fortify itself ezther by some
reminder, or by the unconscious arrangement of defeats,
Jorgetfulness, tiredness, laziness and painful sensations of
all kinds. A tremendous rile in this defensive mechanism
ws played by neurotic fears, expressed in the most varied
JSorms—phobia, anxiety dream, hysteria and neurasthenia and
obtruding ttself in the form of an obstruction directly or
endtrectly (“as an example”), in front of the attempted aggres-
ston. The training of all these tendencies making for
safety leads at times to a perceptible intensification of
the intuitive faculty and intuitive penetration. If not
that, it at the very least brings about the semblance of
such an intensification. It is upon this that is based
the claim of some neurotics to telepathic faculties, know-
ledge of certain kinds of predestination, and their possession
of the power of suggestion. ‘These traits then unite with
those of the first group, those that had their origin in
ideas of greatness. We must, at the same time, regard the
distinctiveness assumed by the ideas of greatness as com-
pensatory and as a defence against the feeling of inferiority.
I am also acquainted with other safety devices among
which might be mentioned the following :—masturbation,
serving the purpose of protection against sexual intercourse
and its consequences, psychic tmpotence, ejaculatio praecox,
sexual anasthesia and vaginism. ‘These are always to be
found among individuals who are not capable either of
devotion to others or the community. In a similar
manner infantile errors, functional diseases and pains
are given an evaluation and become fixed if they prove
to be adapted to strengthening the neurotic in his doubts
or keep him away from participation in life. Not infre-
quently the ball is started rolling dy the question of
marriage or the adoption of some profession. On such
occasions, the tendency to seek safety expresses itself ina
diseased fashion, the warning-signs often being placed
so far apart, that all meaning and connection seem to be
absent. The neurotic, however, always acts logically.
He begins by avoiding society, imposes all sorts of
restraints upon himself, interferes with his studies and


88 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his work (by headache for instance); paints the future
in the most sombre colours and begins to hoard. At
all times he is warned by a hidden voice whispering:
‘‘ How cana man possessed of such faults and deficiencies
as you, with such poor prospects dare make up his mind
to such a momentous act!” What, for lack of a better
name, we call neurasthenta, ts full of such arrangements and
tendencies all aiming at security. They are absent from
no neurosis and show us a sick individual, as it were, on
his line of retreat. ;

A fourth group of tell-tale indications of a neurotic
attitude consists in the way in which actions, phantasies,
dreams, subsidiary details clothed in the language of
sex, show the desire to be a man as in group I. In
my works on The Neurotic Constitution and Psychic
Hermaphrodism \ discussed these facts in detail. Zhe
neurotic ts destined to outgrow his actual situation of uncer-
tainty in his search for security. Uncertainty however
is, upon analysis, still shown to exist in the neurotically
disposed child’s judgments as to his real sex rdle.
Many of my male patients had during childhood and
often until puberty, feminine features or secondary
feminine marks to which afterwards they attributed
their feeling of inferiority ; or they had anomalies of the
external sexual organs, cryptorchism, adhesions, hypo-
plasia and other growth-anomalies upon which they felt
they could fall back whenever an excuse was required.
Photographs and pictures taken of children at a very
early age have taught me that the wearing of a girl’s
dress for a lengthy period of years, laces, necklaces,
curls, and long hair evoke this same feeling of inse-
curity and doubt in a boy. The same in an intensified
degree holds true for the threats such as circum-
cision, and castration, or the falling off or rotting of the
penis, with which parents menace their children who are
detected practising masturbation. The child’s strongest
tendency is and always remains the same: to grow up
to be a man, a longing which may be symbolized by
the male sex organs of the adult. The same longing
is manifest in girls where the feeling of inferiority
engendered by their situation as compared with boys
leads regularly to a compensatory masculine attitude.
Thus by degrees the whole world of ideas of the
neurotically disposed child, all the relations of society,


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 89


fall into two groups, masculine and feminine. The
wish to play the masculine réle, the hero’s réle, is
present at all times even if, as in the case of girls,
it takes the queerest forms. Every form of activity
and aggression, of power, riches, triumph, sadism,
disobedience, crime are falsely evaluated as masculine
just as in the grown-up’s world of ideas. As feminine
are reckoned suffering, waiting, enduring, weakness
and all masochistic tendencies. These latter when they forge
Jorward in the neurosis, are never to be regarded as end-
goals, but as always having as their object—since they are
zm reality pseudo-masochistic traits—the clearing of the path
Jor masculine triumphs, t.e. for that desire for recognition
so prominent in the first group. The other traits of this
(fourth) group belong to the masculine protest—the
forcible exaggerations of the sexual feeling and desire,
exhibitionist and sadistic stirrings, early sexual maturity
and compulsion onanism, nymphomania, spirit of ad-
venture, strong sexual craving, narcism and coquetry.
Feminine phantasies (pregnancy and childbirth phan-
tasies, masochistic stirrings and feelings of inferiority),
appearing at the same time, serve as reminders that the
masculine protest is to be strengthened or security
to be obtained against its consequences and frequently
takes the shape of the requital commandment: ‘‘ What
you do not wish others to do to you, do not you do
to others” !1—The concept of compulsion is enormously
extended, even the merest suspicion of it being ener-
getically resisted by a continuous struggle, so that
normal relations like that of love, marriage and every
other adjustment are felt as unmanly, z.e. as feminine
and consequently rejected.


1 In the case of a man suffering from asthma nervosum and who now, after
treatment, has for a long time been free from attacks, definite pregnancy
phantasies made their appearance as soon as the patient wanted to embark
on any undertaking. These pregnancy phantasies accompanied by feelings
of oppression in the breast, ended in ideas of greatness:—he became a
millionaire, benefactor, saviour of the country, etc. Accompanying this
feeling was the quick breathing that occurs in arace. The dynamic importance
of the pregnancy phantasy is to be sought in its reference to the endurance
and suffering of the woman, which is both a self-criticism and at the same
time an added irritation: ‘‘ You are only awoman! It serves you right if you
suffer”! Thereupon follows the masculine protest.—A reinforced scaffolding
is here utilizing the pregnancy phantasies and the asthma 2m ¢he manner of an
anticipatory repentance. Now he was permitted to be a man and oppose his
environment inimically. ‘‘I may take greater liberties than others because
Iamill”. For this illness he thus brings a true proof, an alibi.


go INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Thus in the neurotic, we have an extremely large
number of interconnected character-traits, which aid or
obstruct one another according to a definite plan and
which permit an inference as to the nature of the abnormal
attitude. All,in the last analysis, are to be traced back to the
exaggerations and false evaluations of masculine and feminine
features. Wf any criticism is to be passed on the above
presentation it is perhaps this, that the arrangement is
too schematic, cannot possibly exhaust the exuberant
interrelations of single traits but at best give only one
part, that however the most significant to be gleaned
from the study of the neurotic’s character. evertheless
I am convinced that, given these facts, tt would be legitt-
mate to infer the existence of a psychogenic disease. Often
we are able to prove it. If now I turn to the problem
under discussion, whether trigeminal neuralgia ts a disease
of psychogenic origin, 1 can on the basis of information
obtained from diseases similar in nature, answer in
the affirmative. The psychical structure of trigeminal
neuralgia, its psychical dynamics, are so identical in
the three cases examined by me and exhibit so clearly
traits of a psychogenic nature, that all criticism is com-
pletely disarmed. Of great importance too for our
problem is the fact that not merely does trigeminal
neuralgia follow the above described main outlines of
the neurosis, dut that every single attack represents a
transference of some psychical happening. \We can now
attempt to explain the relations of the neurotic psyche
and the neurotic character to this disease and to indi-
vidual attacks.

My patient O. St. was a state employé twenty-six
years old. He came to me with the information that
an operation had been advised for the trigeminal
neuralgia from which he was suffering. His illness
had already lasted a year and a half. It had seized
him one night and affected the right side of his face
and had, since then, recurred repeatedly every day in
the form of acute attacks. During the last year he had
been compelled to take morphine injections every three
or four days because of particularly severe pains. This
had always relieved him. He had tried a number of
treatments which consisted either of medicines con-
taining aconite or of being subjected to electrical and
thermal treatments, all without success. He had also


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA QI


been given two alcohol injections which had only
served to intensify the pain. A lengthy stay in the
south had brought some relief although there too he
had had daily attacks. He was now quite dispirited
and in order not to ruin his career had resolved to
submit to an operation. It was only because his very
conscientious surgeon would not promise certain relief
from the operation that he had decided to ask my advice.

I had at about this time collected an enormous mass
of data concerning the psychic origin of neuralgic
attacks and of trigeminal neuralgia and had also been
able to make use of older observations. The uniform
conclusion to which I had come from analysis and the
comparison of individual attacks might be formulated
in this way: ¢rigeminal neuralgia and its individual
attacks regularly appear when an affect of rage has been
linked with the feeling of humiliation.! Waving arrived
at this result it was then possible to understand the
abnormal attitude of patients afflicted with trigeminal
neuralgia and ¢o recognize the dependent disease manifesta-
tions as the equivalents of affect processes.2. This was corrobo-
rated bya fact obtained within a short time. The patient
was expecting degradation, was, so to say, lying in watt for
tt, and this concept of humiliation had thus been tremendously
enlarged, Now in general in neuroses, tn some less tn others
more, a patient actually looks for and arranges such deprecta-
tions tn order to draw from them the inference that he must
protect himself, that he ts not properly apprectated, that he
has always been followed by bad luck, etc. Such an attitude
characterizes neurosis in general and not trigeminal
neuralgia alone. When analysed and referred back
to some pathological situation of childhood, the psychic habitus
of the neurotically disposed child is always clearly vtsible.
It ts a feeling of inferiority compensated by the masculine
protest. Coming back to our case, analysis disclosed
the following :—


I. Cryptorchism.—His own discovery of it. The feel-
ing of inferiority and uncertainty as to whether with this
defect he could develop into a mature man. Added to


1 Cf. the formulation in “ Aggressionstrieb ” in Hetlen und Bilden. The
formulation could also be :—it takes place in situations in which others have


had an affect of rage. res
2 There is no need of wasting a word about the superficiality of those


critics of my position who accuse me of being “‘intellectualistic”.


92 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


this are recollections from his 6-8 year concerning sexual
attacks upon girls with the purpose of obtaining some
light upon sexual differences, and the emotionally tinged
recollections of children’s games in which he had been
the hero, or at least a general or the father of the family,
which has the same purport.


II. Apparent or real preference shown to his brother
five years younger, who was allowed to sleep in the
parents’ bedroom. Subsequent to this came recollections
of his attempts to get into his parents’ bedroom. There
were a number of means at his disposal in childhood.
First was fear, fear of being alone (pavor nocturnus),
which he occasionally succeeded in expressing to such
a degree that his mother took him into her bed. Then
came auditory hallucinations also capable of evoking fear
(fear as a means of safety), or noises attributed to burglars
which always came from the direction of the parents’
bedroom, so that he had to go there to look: at this point
he could introduce the game of playing the father, a
clear masculine protest against the uncertainty of his
sexual role. The meaning of this infantile behaviour,
which represents the most frequent type of escape from
a pathological childhood situation, is now definitely
indicated :—‘‘I feel insecure, I am not successful; I
am not given sufficient recognition (witness the prefer-
ence shown to my brother); I must be helped; I wish
to be the father; I wish to be a man”. As a contrast
to this, as we shall see, false evaluation, we should
imagine the following: ‘‘I do not wish to become a
woman” !—The thought, ‘‘I wish to become a man”,
is only made tenable and only becomes bearable when
joined to the contrasting thought :—‘‘I might also be-
come a woman” or ‘‘I do not wish to become a woman”.
A third way of circumventing the preference shown the
brother, of playing the rdle of the father in order to
obtain equality and to learn how adequately to fulfil
his sex role, secure his manhood, was given by illness,
particularly by illness attended with pains. Analysis
brought to light, as is so frequently the case, recollections
of actual, and of exaggerated pains and simulations of
such. We are interested here in their nature. They

1 Among the newer psychologists Julius Pikler, starting from entirely


different premises, has come to similar conclusions with regard to “ contrast-
thinking”. Cf. also The Neurotic Constitution.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 93


were almost always toothaches. Now for the first time
in the analysis do we obtain a feeling of having come
to a somewhat deeper understanding of the reason the choice
of the neurosis to be adopted in thts particular case, fell upon
trigeminal neuralgia. The patient was a strong healthy
boy who probably knew no other pains but toothache.
We are thus forced to the assumption that at some point
in his life there must have been a phase in which he
equated the following conditions :—pain—feeling of in-
Jeriority—increased recognition by the environment.

We have so laid bare the dynamics of his pathological
childhood situation. The possibility of his being forced
to play an inferior, painful and feminine réle has led
indirectly to exaggerations of his masculine protest. As
such are to be reckoned defiance and obstinacy, of a type
which his mother still recollects with shuddering. Of
the many activities that allow the child an opportunity
to exhibit defiance, I have already mentioned eating,
washing, teeth cleaning and going to sleep. It is therefore
exceedingly significant that all patients I can think of
suffering from trigeminal neuralgia—and this is in agree-
ment with the descriptions of others—have had most of
their attacks while eating, washing, teeth cleaning or
going to sleep. Attacks also occur when in contact
with anything cold. My patient shortly after the first
appearance of the disease had retired to the country
where his mother lived, thus gratifying an old infantile
longing. The mother, carrying to excess her solicitude
and love for the sick son, supervised his diet carefully
and always provided him with warm water for washing.
When he was compelled during his treatment to eat in
Vienna he had severe pains; when he ate at home none
occurred. When he had progressed far enough to go
to his office he had to live in Vienna, and on the very
first day on which he washed himself with cold water
in the new residence, he was seized with another attack.

Another group of attacks was connected with zs
desire for recognition in society. In this way seizures
could occur either in connection with real, supposed or
feared humiliations. He wanted to play the most
important rdle at all times, was put out if occasionally
he was not included in the conversation or if he could
not hear the conversations of others. The scheme of
the infantile pathological situation is easily recogniz-


94 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


able here:—father, mother and younger brother with
himself as the inferior person. The symptoms of fear
of society, of agoraphobia found in other neurotics,
whose safety devices against defeat take the form of fear,
or occasionally vomiting, migraine, etc. and where fear of
humiliation guides the patient, is in our case represented
by an attack. I know of other instances of trigeminal
neuralgia in which ‘he patient withdrew from all par-
ticipation in society giving his suffering as an excuse. In
still other examples symptoms such as migraine, nausea,
general and apparently rheumatic pains, ischias, blush-
ing and flow of blood to the face, preceded the trigeminal
neural gia.? ; ;

Sexual considerations played an important part in
this triangular situation (parents, brother, ego), and lay
at the root of the attacks. His sexual life was both
normal and satisfactory. One marked trait was present
however that is typical for a large group of neurotics,
namely that love became strong only when a rival made
his appearance, t.e. when love came to be connected
with the masculine characteristic of robbing and fight-
ing. This trait ran through his entire erotic life. It
brought back to him vividly the triangular situation of
his pathological childhood, thus showing to what an
extent his erotic life had been poisoned by his prestige-
seeking policy. While living in the south he met a
girl whom he began to court until he found out that
her dowry was very small. This sufficed to make him
desist ; but his love was again inflamed when another
applicant for her hand appeared. This increase in
love was paralleled by an increase in the severity of the
pains that set in; when, for tnstance, he saw the two alone
and the girl smiled at the latter, etc. During his treat-
ment we could refer a few of his attacks to this affair ;
he had pains when the girl told him in a letter that she
had had a good time in the company of the other man.
A number of attacks were associated with the period

1 Cf. Henschen’s theory of the rheumatic origin of trigeminal neuralgia.

® The examples of trigeminal neuralgia in ageing people, particularly
among women, are especially complicated, most specifically on account of real
and imagined humiliations caused by age. That our society treats the age-
ing woman so inhumanly, constitutes one of the saddest chapters in our
civilization. Among my patients, attacks were due to the following :—lack
of interest, fear of ridicule, fear of preference shown to other people, the


mirror, choice of clothes (she might be laughed at) and expenditures of
money which might interfere with her standing and make her poor.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 95


during which his letters were taken away by us. On
this occasion he began to wonder why the girl had not
written for so long atime; she was very likely having a good
tame with others, etc. Day-dreams and phantasies also
appeared. He would let the girl marry and then incite
her to break her marriage vow. This trait, we will
admit, had become greatly intensified shortly before his
illness dy an unusual circumstance. While he was on
a short journey a colleague of his had seduced his
mistress. He planned all kinds of revenge. Into this
markedly emotional period of his life fell another event.
He had reason to believe that the wife of one of his
superiors was making advances to him. Apparently
the husband also noticed it and began to annoy him in
the office. In order not to spoil his career he submitted,
though with continual secret revolts. The night before
the superiors return from hts vacation he had the first
attack of hts trigeminal neuralgia and one of such severity,
that he raved and yelled and could only be calmed by
a morphine injection. He did not go to the office the
next day and took out a sick leave in order to undergo
treatment. To all physicians, including myself, he
reiterated the wish of returning to his bureau as soon
as possible and everything that could be done to
facilitate this was promised him.! The alcohol injection
was to have restored him to health immediately. We
saw above the effect it had. But we now know why it
so intensified the pain, for hzs real unconscious striving had
as tts object the desire to remain incapacitated for work,
and not to return to hts office. One thought alone he
could not suppress, the thought of emerging out of the
situation as a man, as victor; expressed in terms of the
infantile pathological situation: ‘‘/ want my mother!”
When with her his condition improved a little, but not
before he had demonstrated by means of successive and
rapidly following attacks, particularly during meals,
the extremely dangerous nature of his disease and the
possibility of death through starvation thus through
fear and fright making his mother even more amen-
able to his desires.

An analysis of one of his dreams during treatment
exhibits the most important conditions for his uncon-


1 Notice here the agreement with the dynamics of accident neurosis and
hysteria which likewise appear only in neurotically disposed people.


96 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


sciously false attitude and his neurosis. He dreamt as
follows :—

‘7 found myself naked in the room of my sweetheart.
She bit my thigh. TI cried out and awoke with a severe
attack of my neuralgia”.

The events responsible for this dream occurred the
evening before and were as follows :—the patient had
received a picture post-card from Graz and among those
who had signed it was the name of his brother and the
girl in the dream. Nothing seemed to have any taste
during supper and he had aslight attack. In explanation
of the dream, he added that the girl had been his mistress
for a time but that he had very soon become tired of her
and given her up. A short time before his dream his
brother had become acquainted with her. He had.
warned his brother but, as the card indicated, without
any effect. This upset him all the more because he
possessed as a rule great influence with this brother and
had so to speak taken his father’s place since his death.

‘* Naked”. He had an aversion to undressing in
the presence of girls. This is clearly connected with
his cryptorchism.

“* She bit me in the thigh”. In explanation he said
that the girl had all sorts of perverse tendencies and had
once bitten him. The somewhat leading question as to
whether he had ever heard of anyone being bitten in
the thigh, he answered with a reference to the stork
fable

“*T cried out”. This he always did in severe attacks.
Then his mother would always come out of the neigh-
bouring room to soothe him and, if necessary, eventually
give him an injection of morphine.

The interpretation of the dream is so apparent that
there is no need of any further detailed discussion. The
patient answered a feeling of humiliation by a train of
thought leading to an attack but yet permitting the
attainment of his symbolical goal, that of dominating


1 This reference will give the experienced psychologist no difficulties.
We are dealing with a patient whose iliness is of a kind to make him fear pain.
Further inquiries indicated his early knowledge of the pain experienced by
women in child-birth. This pain had been made plausible to him in child-
hood by the statement that the stork had bitten his mother in the leg. ‘* She
bit me in the thigh” has the following meaning here :—she has degraded me to
the position of a woman and by her relation with my brother, humiliated and
emasculated me. We must bear in mind his cryptorchism.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 97


his mother. In other words he transformed himself into a
dominating man. His emasculating stigma — cryptor-
chism—would then fall from him and he would be able
to exhibit himself naked. He was now a man, need
not bow to anyone, was freed from all service even if it
lead through the circuitous path of pain. He safeguards
this feeling of masculine superiority —as in his infantile
pathogenic sttuation—by means of pains and isolation.

The transition in a dream from a feeling of sub-
missive femininity to one of masculine protest is not
always found as clearly as in this case. Particular
appearances at times often mislead even us znxto assuming
primary homo-sexual tendencies. The masculine réle played
by the neurotecs of both sexes in life and in the dream, ts
explained by the masculine protest. If a rival of the same
sex was involved then the victory was often symbolized
by the sexual act in which the neurotic, either in a dream
or in phantasy, played some kind of a masculine rile. The
problem of the active homo-sexual individual is, accord-
ing to my experience, to be interpreted in the same way.
There, however, the sexual instinct is placed directly and
not merely symbolically, in the service of the lust for
power, of the masculine protest. The homo-sexual
individual passes from a phase of uncertainty of his
sexual réle to that of sexual inversion. The passive
homo-sexual arranges his transference to the feminine,
for the purpose of making himself quite definitely felt
afterwards ; of getting recognition by jealousies, con-
quests or exactions ; above all, however, he makes this
transference in order not to disclose his erroneously
assumed lack of masculinity in normal love.? On the
other hand the fundamental problem, the starting point
of the psychic hermaphrodism with its subsequent
masculine protest is, for the above reason, rendered less

1 T.e. with apparently ‘‘feminine” weapons. I have already pointed out
this mechanism, one that can easily mislead us to the conception that the
neurosis is entirely a ‘‘feminine offering”. An examination of meurotic
dynamics would prevent this error from arising. “‘ Aeminine” final goals just
as ‘* masochistic” ones are quite untenable assumptions, are only excuses ; they
are ‘‘ feminine” methods for the ‘‘ masculine” protest.

2 Just as the previously mentioned masochist who, by erotic submission, 2.e.
from his point of view, striving for recognition, attempts to awaken the sexual
desire of a woman. From this point a number of perversions branch off that
have as their object, through OS a gas of the person courted, fo awaken
% re Pat si fight ine tacicre hunting”. Cf. Adler, Problem der


Homosexualitat (Munich, 1918). 3


98 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


visible both in the neurosis and the dream, so that we
are in consequence generally compelled to work with
fragments belonging to the psychic mechanism and
whose complements we have first to find.

The treatment of our patient took place under pro-
pitious circumstances. Previous treatments had been
unsuccessful. However, much time was necessarily
consumed and the patient’s career suffered more and
more. Fortunately favourable prospects presented them-
selves of his being transferred to another office where
his feeling of being subjected to the tyranny of his
hated superior would certainly be lessened. ‘The treat-
ment closed with a provisional-success and that has now
lasted a number of months. He now works in a new
bureau and lives apart from his mother. His friends
and acquaintances frequently express their astonishment
at his having changed from a violent, restless and quick-
tempered man, into a quiet and adaptable one and that
he no longer feels his connection with his office to be in
the nature of acompulsion. For us this has the specific
significance that his former false attitude has been corrected,
a correction that should not merely prevent attacks but
also other forms of neurosis.

My two other cases refer to patients who had passed
their climacteric. They developed severe symptoms of
the illness when placed in a situation they regarded
lowering. They had however been neurotically dis-
posed from childhood. As in our first case, analysis
showed, in both instances, organ inferiority, a feeling of
inferiority and the masculine protest. Their whole life
had been spent under the dominating thought :—I wish
to bea man. It was easy to refer this attitude back to
the feeling during childhood of uncertainty as to their
sex role. On the whole the interconnections were more
complicated, and the causes for attacks more frequent,
than in the case of the man, because we were here deal-
ing with women of more advancedage. The prospect of
realizing any of their masculine protests was exceedingly
poor and the adjustment to their lot at the same time
difficult. Yet in spite of all the obstacles, the treatment
brought about a marked reduction in the number of
attacks and in their severity, inspired the patient with
a greater enjoyment of life and I expect ultimately to
succeed completely in both cases.


TREATMENT OF TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 9


These are the data that I can bring forward at present,
to prove my contention concerning the psychogenicorigin
of trigeminal neuralgia and I suggest an examination of
every case from this characterological point of view.
I will not deny that occasionally a case occurs whose
etiology is to be sought in pathological and anatomical
lesions. Its course would however have to be different
from the examples with which we are acquainted and
it should not be possible to connect an attack with
a psychical happening. The absence of the above-
mentioned character-traits ought to put us on the right
track quickly.

Another theory that might be regarded as a rival of
the psychogenic theory of the neurosis, namely ¢he toxic
basts of neuroses, 1 shall dismiss with the same remark :—
the possibility of resolving the symptoms into psychic
states disproves it entirely. Whatever toxins are found
in the neuroses and psychoses become effective only
through the intensification of the feeling of inferiority
dating from childhood and the subsequent stirring up of
the masculine protest. In other words the toxins can
only call forth a neurosis in individuals so disposed, by
evoking the feeling of humiliation, 2% the same fashion as
an accident does when it becomes the cause of an accident-
neurosts.*

The organic complement (of the disease) is probably
to be sought in the direction of a tonus of the nervus
symphaticus and an intensified irritability of the nerves
of the blood-vessels such as exists in certain psychic
irritations. The pain would become analogous to that
which is experienced in attacks of compulsion-blushing,
migraine, chronic headache, hysterical and epileptic
unconsciousness in connection with pathological after-
effects, all of which begin with acute vascular changes.
An important réle is played by its identification with
an attack that is to secure safety. The starting point,
however, always remains the neurotic disturbance of the
psychic equilibrium.


? Awakening of a feeling of illness and the disclosure of inadequacy.


VIII


The Problem of Distance


(A basic feature of neurosis and psychosis)


THE practical importance of /udividual-psychology is to
be sought in the degree of certainty with which an
individual’s life-plan and life-lines can be determined
from his attitude toward life, zoward society, toward the
normal and necessary problems of communal life, his plans
of obtaining prestige and the nature of his group
consciousness. Assuming the acceptance of many of
my conclusions! let me direct your attention to the
fundamental and at the same time, the determining
factor in the psychic life of both healthy and nervous
people—‘‘ the feeling of inferiority”. Similar in nature
must be reckoned the ‘‘urge toward the positing of a
goal, toward the heightening of ego consciousness”, a
“‘ compensatory” function as well as the ‘‘life-plan”
obtruding itself upon the individual for the attain-
ment of his goal through the employment of various
‘‘aggressions”’ and ‘‘deviations”’, along the line of the
‘¢ masculine protest” or the ‘‘ fear of taking a decision”.
I shall further assume a knowledge of the neurotic and
psychotic psychic life, the fixation upon a ‘“‘ guiding
fiction”? in contrast to its absence in the healthy man,
who regards his ideal ‘‘ guiding principle” as giving
only an ‘‘approximate orientation” and to be used as
a means only. Finally, I assume the acceptance of the
fact that, regarded as a whole, neurosis and psychosis
are to be interpreted as a ‘‘ safety mechanism” of the
ego consciousness.

The manner in which the uninterrupted strivings
of mankind ‘‘upward”, have conditioned a cultural
progress, perfecting at the same time, both a method
and technique of life in which all possible eventualities
and organic realities become of some utility even if not

1 Cf. for instance—Adler, The Neurotic Constitution, and Adler-Furt-


mueller, in Hezlen und Bilden (1914).
100


THE PROBLEM OF DISTANCE IOI


put to their proper use, must by this time, have assumed
sufficient definiteness to place in a proper light the
importance of the dénouement in psychic life as contrasted
with causal attempts at explanation. The concrete
evidence for the untenability of the so-called sexual-
psychology—in which the sexual atiitude of the neurotic
is quietly seized upon by many people as a factor to be
thought of as ax ‘‘analogy” of the life-plan, is clearly
presented and the untenability of this view is to be
regarded as one of the fundamental principles of
individual psychology.

In our investigations, we found the tendency to seek
the ‘‘attainment of pleasure” to be a varzadle and in no
way determining factor, adjusting itself completely to
the orientation of the life-plans. Trazts of character and
affects, contrary to the almost generally accepted belief,
were there shown to be well-tested and, in consequence,
tenaciously fixed preparations for the attainment of a
fictive goal of superiority. The theory of the ‘‘ inherited
sexual components, perversions and criminal tendencies”,
naturally becomes untenable as soon as this fact is
disclosed. We are then justified in defining the general
subject of psycho-neurosis to include the study of all
those individuals who had possessed from childhood—-
be it in consequence of organ inferiority, an erroneous
system of education or a bad family tradition—a feeling
of weakness, a pessimistic perspective, and all those
familiar and similar contrivances, prejudices, tricks and
states of exaltation that develop in connection with the
construction of an imaginary and subjective feeling of
predominance. Every trait, every facial expression is
so definitely connected with the promised goal of peace
and triumph that we can justifiably claim that a//
neurotic mantfestations show a belief in an all-powerful
ambition linked with deficient strength of personality, to be a
necessary presupposition of thetr condition. Only when so
viewed are they intellegible.

Exactly similar psychic over-exertions as our school
has demonstrated hold true for phantastes, dreams and
halluctnations. The driving power is always something
in the nature of a preparation, a groping; in the nature
of an ‘‘if it were” tendency toward expansion, of a
striving for power over others, of search for an outlet,
of security against danger. Here we always have to


102 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


remember that the second purpose lies nearer at hand,
that the consequences of an act do not flow from the
taking of a decision and that frequently, the social after-
effects of the proof of really being ill or its imagined
belief, suffice to satisfy the urge toward recognition.
To what an extent, however, a// experience is to the
neurotic, merely the material azd means for obtaining,
through the employment of his life-perspective, renewed
stimulations along the path of his neurotic leanings,
that is proven by his utilization, at one and the same
time, of apparently contradictory attitudes *—in ‘‘ double
vie”’, dissociation, polarity, ambivalence. To which we
should add, the falsification of the facts of the external
world, that may go so far as complete exclusion, the
wilful and purposeful shaping of an emotional life and
sensations with the externally directed reactions derived
from them, and the planned interplay of memory and
amnesia, of conscious and unconscious stirrings, of
knowledge and of ignorance.

Once having reached this point and made certain that
every psychic expression of the neurotic possesses within
itself two presuppositions—the feeling of inadequacy,
inferiority on the one hand, and the compelling, hypno-
tizing striving toward che goal of godlikeness, on the other—
then the ‘‘ multiple meaning” of the symptom which
Kraft-Ebing had already pointed out, need no more
deceive us. In the development of the psychology of the
neurosis this multiple meaning represented no small
obstacle. To this is largely due the fact that phantastic
systems and narrow restrictions were permitted to domi-
nate neurology, the first method leading to insoluble con-
tradictions and the second to sterility (in results). The
individual-psychological school is committed, on prin-
ciple, to investigate the ‘‘ scheme” of a psychic disease
consisting in adhering to the route repeatedly taken by
the patient. _Our work has demonstrated the great
importance to be ascribed to the actual material, and
even more, to the patient’s evaluation of it. A proper
understanding of the individual and an individualistic
discussion was, for that reason, a necessary preliminary.
The perfecting of the life-plan, on the other hand, the


' We wonder whether it really is so difficult to understand the ‘‘ semblance ”


in the so-called introversion and its opposite, to conceive both as means to
an end?


THE PROBLEM OF DISTANCE 103


rigid insistence upon complete superiority, bring to
light its contradiction with the demands of reality—
2.e. with society; shake the patient free from his helpless
behaviour and experiences and compel him to oppose
the normal decisions inherent in social life with a revolt
en the form of an illness. A clear-cut psychological-social
element thus enters the neurosis. The neurotic’s life-
plan is always operating with his own individualistic
interpretation of society, the family, the relations of the
sexes, and discloses in its perspective the uncritical
assumption of his own inadequacy in life and of the
hostile attitude of his fellowmen. The recurrence of
generalized human traits, although without inward
adjustment and in an intensified degree, should impress
us again with the fact that both neurosis and psychosis
are not far removed from the essence of psychic life, that
they are indeed but varzants of it. He who questions
this must be prepared then to deny, now and for all
time, the possibility of any understanding of psycho-
logical phenomena, for the methods of normal psychical
life alone are at our disposal for investigation.

Adhering to the conception of a determining neurotic
line, rooted in a feeling of inferiority that has as its
goal an ‘‘upward movement” as posited by our school,
we obtain a ceaseless ‘‘here and there”, a ‘‘half and
half”, as a sort of neurotic hybrid; the attitude found
in a state of exaltation deprived of all force, in which
traits either of fainting or exaltation generally come to
the front. Asin the case of neurotic doubt, compulsion-
neurosis or phobia, the terminal effectis either a“nothing”
or almost a ‘‘nothing”. At best it represents the pre-
parations connected with an apparently difficult situation
and a certification of illness, an arrangement to which—
in more favourable instances—the actions of the patient
seem bound. We shall see why later on.

This peculiar occurrence, demonstrable in all neuroses
and psychoses, in melancholia, paranoia, and dementia
praecox, has been described by me in detail under the
term ‘‘ hesitating attitude”. Favourable circumstances
enable me to deepen this conception.

If we follow the patient’s life-line in the direc-
tion indicated by us and try to understand how in his
own individual manner—(that means simply by his
manipulation of individually-gained experiences and


104 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


personal perspective)—he is intensifying his feeling of
inferiority and yet freeing himself from responsibility by
attributing this inferiority to heredity, the fault of his
parents or to other factors; and if finally, we recognize
both by his demeanour and his manoeuvres, his insist-
ence upon impeccability, then it must be all the more
astonishing to notice how, at a given place in his aggressive-
ness, his behaviour deviates from the direction expected.
To enable the reader to get a better idea of this I shall
subdivide it into four modes, each one challenging
attention by the fact that the patient attempts unerringly
to interpose a ‘‘ distance” between himself and the antici-
pated act or decision at that particular point. As a rule
the whole disturbance appears as a sort of stage-fright
confronting us in the form of a symptom or neurotic
disease. Coincident with this purposeful ‘‘distance”,
frequently expressing itself in some bodily sign, the patient
is giving shape, in varying degrees of intensity, to his
separation from the world and reality. Every neurolo-
gist will be able to dovetail this disease-habitus with
his own experiences, especially if he take into con-
sideration the manifold gradations.


I. Retrogressive movement. — Suicide, attempted
suicide; severe attacks of agoraphobia with great |
“distance”; fainting, psycho-epileptic attacks; com-
pulsion-blushing and severe compulsion neurosis;
asthma nervosum; migraine and severe hysterical
pains ; hysterical paralyses; aboulia; mutism; severe
anxiety attacks of all kinds; refusal to take food;
amnesia; hallucination ; alcoholism, morphinism etc. ;
vagabond habits and tendency toward crime. Anxiety
and falling dreams as well as criminal ones are frequent
and indicate what exaggerated precautions are at work
—the fear of what might conceivably happen! The
concept of external compulsion is tremendously extended
and every communal as well as humanitarian demand,
rejected with exaggerated sensitiveness. In severe
cases, which must be included here, every useful activity
is interdicted. The sickness-certification naturally has
its positive side in the assertion of one’s own will-power
and triumphs negatively likewise over the normal
communal demands. This holds true for the other
three categories too.


THE PROBLEM OF DISTANCE 105


II. Cessation.—The impression obtained is that of
some magic circle drawn around the sick person prevent-
ing him from coming into closer contact with the facts
of life, of confronting truth face to face, of permitting
either an examination of his worth or a decision. The
direct cause (for the neurosis) is furnished by professional
tasks, examinations, society, love or marriage relations,
as soon as they take the form of problems bearing on
life. Anxiety, weakness of memory, pain, insomnia
with subsequent incapacity for work, compulsion-
phenomena, impotence, ejaculatio praecox, masturbation
and completely disqualifying perversions, asthma, hys-
terical psychosis etc.—these are all safety arrangements
to prevent any regional over-stepping. The same
applies to the less violent attacks of the first category.
Dreams of being confined, of impossibility of attainment
as well as examination dreams, occur frequently and
outline concretely the patient’s life-line, how he breaks
off at a definite point and then constructs his “distance”.
Niebuhr in his Hestory of Rome, III, 248, says: ‘‘ National
like personal vanity is ashamed of non-success for it is
a greater confession of limitation in powers than the
most shameful disgrace, which carries in its train, sloth-
ful and cowardly cessation of all energy: the former
utterly destroys all court-like pretensions while the latter
permits them to survive”’.


Ill. Hesztation and mental or actual (oscillations) “to
and fro”, make the ‘‘distance”’ secure and terminate
with an appeal to the above mentioned diseases, to
the doubt that is often combined with them or to a
“‘too late” (fatal delay). We find definite exertions
to kill time. This is an inexhaustible field for com-
pulsion-neuroses. Generally the following mechanism
is discernible :—a difficulty is called into life, sanctified
and then an attempt made to master it. Washing-
compulsion, pathological pedantry, fear of contact
(found likewise as a spatial expression of arrangements
of distance), tardiness, retracing one’s steps, destruction
of work begun (Penelope), always leaving something
untouched—all these traits are frequently encountered.
Just as often do we find work or decisions postponed
because of ‘‘irresistible’” compulsion toward unim-
portant activities, pleasures, until action is too late;


106 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


or a difficulty, generally self-constructed (eg. stage-
fright), makes its appearance just a moment before a
decision is to be taken. This behaviour is clearly
related to the former category but with the difference
that in the above instances, the act of decision is pre-
vented. A frequent type of dream consists in any kind
of a ‘‘to and fro” movement or in tardiness employed
as provisional attempts at a life-plan. The superiority
and safety strivings of the patient betray themselves
in a fiction, frequently mentioned, never unmentioned
and never understood. The patient ‘‘says it but does
not know it”! It begins with an ‘‘if” clause:—‘‘if
I didn’t have (this disease), I would be the first”. That
as long as he maintains his life-line, he never frees him-
self from this life-falsehood is intelligible enough. As
arule, the if-clause contains some unfulfillable condition
or the patient’s arrangement, and any change of it lies
entirely in his own hands.


IV. Construction of obstacles and their mastery as an
tndicatzon of ‘‘ distance’’.—Here we encounter less severe
cases always operative in life and occasionally taking on
brilliant aspects. At times they arise spontaneously or
(secondarily) out of the more severe cases, by the aid of
some medical treatment. At times both physician and
patient are under the credulous belief that a ‘‘ remnant”
is nothing but the old ‘‘distance”. But the patient is
then utilizing it differently, with a stronger social mean-
ing. As formerly he constructed ‘‘distance” in order
to break off, so now he creates it in order to triumph.
The ‘‘meaning”’, the goal of this attitude is now easily
guessed :—The patient is now protected both against
his own judgment and, in the main, against others’
evaluation of his self-complacency and prestige. If the
decision goes against him, then he can fall back upon
his difficulties and upon his (self-constructed) sickness-
certificate, if he emerges as victor then his thoughts
will read ‘‘ What might he not have accomplished had he
been well, he who has accomplished so much though
ill, with one hand it might be said!” The arrange-
ments of this category are :—slight conditions of anxiety
and compulsions; fatigue (neurasthenia) ; insomnia ;
constipation ; stomach and intestinal disabilities con-
suming both strength and time and demanding a


THE PROBLEM OF DISTANCE 107


pedantic and time-killing regime; headaches; poor
memory ; irritability ; moodiness; pedantic insistence
upon a submissive environment and uninterrupted
preparations of hostility against the latter; masturba-
tion and pollution with superstitious conclusions etc. —
throughout, the patient is testing himself to determine
whether he really is efficient, and arrives consciously,
or without admitting it to himself unconsciously, at the
conclusion of pathological inadequacy. Frequently
this conclusion, unexpressed but easily recognizable,
inheres in the very neurotic arrangement under the pro-
tection of the patient’s life-plan. Once the ‘‘ distance”
has been effectively constructed, the patient can permit
himself to appeal either to some ‘other will-power”’
or battle against his own attitude. His line is then
composed of the following factors:—unconscious arrange-
ment of ‘‘distance”—a more or less unfruitful attack
against it. We must clearly recognize that the battle
of the patient against his symptom, and his complaints,
his desperation and possible sense of guilt in the stage
of the developed neurosis, are primarily designed to
accentuate the importance of the symptom in the eyes of the
patient and his environment.

In conclusion, let me point out in these neurotic
methods of life that a// responsibility in connection with
success appears to be cancelled. To what far higher
degree this factor is concerned in psychoses I shall
attempt to present later on. So the life of the neurotic,
as is consistent with his atrophied community sense, is
spent predominantly within the circle of his immediate
family. If the patient frequents wider circles he always
exhibits a tendency for and a retrogressive gravitation
toward his immediate family.

It is but in agreement with the views of the individual-
psychological school that the analogy of neurosis with
the behaviour of healthy persons, should obtrude
itself markedly. The psychic demeanour of either
type is to be understood, in the last analysis, as a
prepared answer to the questions suggested by society.
We consequently regularly find the following con-
stituent, immanent presuppositions and safety devices:
a life-plan whose goal is unification, operating with
a special purposeful self-evaluation ; a goal of superi-
ority and psychic manipulation which—in an inte-


108 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


grated connection—has developed out of an infantile
perspective.

Quite as convincing is the similarity of our types
with the creations of mythology and poetry. This is
not surprising. They are all creations of the human
psyche born of the same types of ideas and method of
thought. They have naturally influenced each other.
In the life-line of these artistic figures the indication of
‘‘distance” is again perceptible, most clearly in the
figure of the tragic hero where it begins as ‘‘ peripetia,”
and is then linked with the “‘ hesitating attitude”. This
“technique” has palpably been taken from life, and
the idea of ‘‘tragic guilt” points as an ‘‘ illuminating
intuition” at the same time to activity and passivity,
to ‘‘arrangement” and the vanquishing of the life-plan.
Not merely fate, but predominantly, some prepared
experience is portrayed in the person of the hero, whose
sense of responsibility is only apparently extinguished, in
reality persisting, for he has overheard the ever-tnststent
question about his adjustment to the demands of soczety, so
that as hero he may emerge victorious over the rest of
the world.*

Thus he who seeks new, strange paths for society is
threatened with an intensified danger of losing touch
with reality. The interplay of vanity and insecurity,
common to all these types, brings to the front the
peripetia and within its individual ‘‘ distance” constrains
it to decisive action.

1 The ‘“‘chorus”, on the other hand, represents the voice of the com-


munity which in the later phase of dramatic evolution, is transferred to
the hero.


IX
The Masculine Attitude in Female Neurotics


IN a series of works on the mechanism of neurosis, I
described the uniform result (at which I arrived), and
which I regard as the main motive force in neurotic
disease :—the masculine protest against feminine or appar-
ently feminine stirrings and sensations. The starting-point
of the neurotic constitution is rooted in an zxfantile
situation of pathologentc origin, in which the most minute
expression of this play of powers becomes visible: on
the one hand uncertainty as to future sex-réle, on the
other, intensified tendencies to playing the masculine
(domineering, active, cruel) rdéle with the use of all
available means.

Quite apart from the certainty with which the rather
general aversion of the neurotic for his feminine line and
the strengthening of his masculine line, can be shown to
exist in his acts, wishes, dreams, it is not in the least
astonishing that the period of sex discovery should take
place under intense excitement for the child. Man
patients speak of special doubts that persisted up to the
later years of childhood —others carry such definite
characteristics of exaggerated masculine protest along
with them throughout life—so that their adjustment to
the communal level, be it profession, family, love or
marriage, went to pieces in consequence of it. All,
however, and this testimony strikes us more forcibly in
the case of female neurotics, definitely insist that they
had, at all times, longed to be complete individuals and
that they had given expression to this wish in various
ways. Iregard it, on the basis of my results, as fully
proven that what in these remarks of our neurotics is
but weakly forced into consciousness—the far larger
portion of its power dwelling in the unconscious—is
the compelling force that gives rise to the neurotic’s


symptoms, actions and dreams. Let me present the
109


IIo INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


following fragments taken from various analyses of
mine and which enable us to survey as from a vantage-
point the adjustment of female neurotics.


First case.—A tendency by means of cleverness, courage
and deceit to make good the fact of not being a man.


A female patient twenty-four years old, suffering from
headaches, insornnia and from excessively severe out-
bursts of rage predominantly directed against her
mother, recounted the following experiences. — Re-
turning home one evening she was the witness of a
scene in which a man reprimanded a prostitute for
having spoken to him. Other men in his company
were gently attempting to pacify him. The patient, at
the same time, was seized with an irresistible desire of
herself interposing and explaining to the excited man
the unreasonableness of his behaviour. Analysis dis-
closed that she wished to act like a man, to transcend
her feminine rdle which counselled reserve, and to behave
just as the men were doing, but better informed.

On the same day it so happened that she was an
auditor at an examination. The examiner, an educated
witty man who was indulging in his ‘‘ masculine
protest”, poked great fun at the candidates and rather
frequently dropped remarks about ‘‘ geese”. The patient
rose angrily, left the examination hall and was wrapped
for the rest of the day, in thoughts of how she might
have made a fool of the professor at the examination.
That night she did not sleep except toward morning,
and then she had the following dream :—

‘‘T was completely wrapped ina veil. An old man
approached me and pointed out querulously that the
veil was quite useless because people could see right
through it”’.

The old man bore the features of a well-known
German pathologist and as the patient emphasized, is
a permanent dream accompaniment of hers. Then came
to her mind incidentally, a number of individuals, a
strict but witty examiner. Extraordinary cleverness
emerges as the common element of all these people.
The expression ‘‘ people can, after all, look through the
veil” was taken from the treatment.

‘‘Completely wrapped in a veil’’.—She is thinking
of the apparent contrast, of the Venus of Milo. On


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 111


the previous day she had spoken of it and praised it
as a work of art. Other thoughts were connected with
the covering attitude exemplified in the Venus of Medici
and the absence of limbs in the Venus of Milo, as might
easily have been anticipated.

A third chain of thought questioned the validity of
the remarks of the old man (in the dream). Would it
not be possible, say with numerous shawls, as in the
case of dancers, to cover nakedness?

I need not explain that the tendency of the dreamer
was in the direction of concealing her sex identity.
The position of the hand in the Venus of Medici, the
absence of limbs in the Venus of Milo, all give clear
expression to the wish disclosed some time ago not
to be a woman and to be a man.

The two experiences of the day, the insomnia, the
desire to behave like a man in the scene, to get the
better of the strict professor and dupe me by means
of protecting veils, represent one part of that continuum
of which the neurosis of the girl forms the content.
There is a slight doubt thrown out in the dream as to
whether this transformation will be successful. This
doubt, brought into relation with the infantile patho-
logical situation, must correspond to some primitive
uncertainty, an uncertainty bearing on the question
of the future sex rdle. Later on the neurotic character-
traits unite with this phase, which then consists of
apparently masculine features and defensive tendencies,
the last mentioned constructed to ward off the danger of
leaning toward the feminine, of being pushed ‘‘ below”.


Second case:—Brought up by a neurotic mother. Fear
of child-bearing the cause of the errors of education.


A woman thirty-eight years old, under treatment for
frequent attacks of anxiety, occasional attacks of heart
palpitations, painful pressure on the breast and ‘‘appendi-
citis pains”, stood in a peculiar relation to her only child, a
girl of ten. She kept her under continued surveillance,
was always dissatisfied with her progress and unceas-
ingly found fault with the somewhat mentally retarded
but good-natured child. Excitement occurred daily and
frequently a whipping would be the termination of an
unimportant controversy between mother and child, the
father being called in to arbitrate. The child had con-


112 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


sequently fallen into an unconscious attitude of defiance
and created all sorts of obstruction, as is generally the
case —at eating, dressing, going to bed, washing,
learning.*

Her first attacks appeared when she was nineteen,
shortly after her secret engagement to her present
husband. Her engagement lasted eight years, was
strongly opposed by her family and brought in its
train many frustrated excitements. Shortly after the
marriage, the attacks disappeared only to reappear after
the birth of the child. During this period her husband
had resorted to coitus interruptus. After a physician
had called his attention to the. possible danger of this
habit and referred his wife’s attacks to this fact, he took
refuge in other protections against conception. The
result was marvellous and attacks ceased for a while.
Suddenly they set in again without the sexual habits
having been changed and for three years now they
have defied all treatment. Sexual relations are entirely
satisfactory.

If there were such a thing as pure neurosis, an
anxiety-neurosis, she undoubtedly might have—until
three years ago—been said to possess it. Analysis dis-
closed her physical content and her hysterical build.
Masculine protest traits stand out very clearly :—
defiance, hyper - sensitiveness, domineering - desires,


1 Friedjung has described the fate of the only child in an interesting series
of statistics, and primarily holds psychic factors responsible : — petting,
anxiety, etc. The case above, as well as other similar cases, both corroborate
and further extends his view-point. It uncovers what is perhaps the funda-
mental cause for the restless, fault-finding, bringing-up—rhe mother’s fear of
another confinement. The exaggerated solicitude, by day and by night, was to
serve as a proof ‘that it is difficult enough to endure the trials of one child”.
To this must be added the fact that the soil of the neurotic development of
both mother and daughter was prepared by the existence of a number of
organ inferiorities. Both had been quite weak since early childhood. The
mother’s menses did not begin before her eighteenth year and the birth of the
child was rendered exceedingly difficult by parturition weakness and subse-
quent (weakness of the genital system). Shortly after the birth of the
child a prolonged bronchial catarrh set in (weakness of the respiratory
system). Her brother was suffering from laryngeal growth and her father
had died of pneumonia. The daughter had had nephritis and uremia
following scarlet fever (kidney inferiority), and later on chorea (brain in-
feriority) and appeared intellectually retarded. The house-physician warned
her against becoming pregnant again.

Thus do the neuroses of female patients reflect, in every individual case, the
convulsion that is shaking our civilization to its foundations—the woman’s
horror of the feminine, her infantile fear of the coming parturition. Moll has
recently corroborated the above-mentioned facts.


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 113


vanity. Her feeling of inferiority was kept intact dy
the fiction of unusually strong erotic strivings. These
“libidinous ” desires had existed since her eighth year,
had at all times kept alive a fear of falling or giving
birth to a child, and had inspired the patient with a
fear of the feminine rdle. After becoming acquainted
with her husband, and during the long period of their
betrothal, she created for herself a dependable safety-
device by utilizing this fear and unconsciously (by
hallucination), ‘‘arranging” it. To this safety-device
she added pains in the breast and stomach, in order to
make all illegal (sexual) relations impossible. In her
unconscious phantasy she beheld herself in the réle of
a passionate and yet weak-willed girl, a depraved being
blindly following the lead of sex. Against this fiction
of a libidinous female she protected herself by her fear
and her neuroses. This struggle against her feminine
nature was staged in her unconscious, but it had deposited
from childhood something in the nature of a precipitate
in her conscious self, consisting 7% the definitely conscious
destre to be a man. Whenever, therefore, the situation
became tense—be it that the apparently harmless coitus
interruptus conjured up the picture of her pregnancy,
or that the unfavourable economic situation in which
she had been living during the last three years, made
her attach greater importance to the possible danger—her
reaction took the form of attacks directed against her
femininity and her husband. Nocturnal seizures dis-
turbed him in his well-merited repose: these were
designed to bring concretely before his eyes how dis-
agreeable it would be to be awakened at night by a
child’s crying. She was always able likewise to with-
draw from her husband, or by an attack of breathlessness
warn him of the threatening possibility of tuberculosis
following pregnancy. She was thus able also to avoid
society and chain her husband down to the house when-
ever it suited her; and so she forced her somewhat bluff
husband to subordinate himself to her in many ways.
The most important result of this analysis I would
like to point out, is the manner in which her Fault-
finding , tormenting method of education served her unconscious
purpose. She wished to prove by her haste, her continual
restlessness and pre-occupation, that even one child was


giving her too much trouble. Her circle of acquaint-
u


114 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ances had obtained the correct impression when they
insisted ‘God be thanked that you have only one child”.
She followed the child mercilessly, corrected it, passed
from one excitable state to another, carefully prevented
the child from having intercourse with other children
and thus aided a behaviour that had its origin in an
unconscious attitude, to take the form of a@ logical repre-
sentation, which said :—‘‘ my girl shall not become like
her mother, she must not become sexually premature !”

Other mothers with similar attitudes, act differently
but the tendency is the same: day and night they are bound
to the child. They pet it uninterruptedly, always busy
themselves with it and, not infrequently, disturb its night’s
rest by unnecessary precautions. They keep untiring
watch over its taking of nourishment, stool-functions,
weight, measure, take temperature, etc. If the child
takes ill, then the ruinous effect of the mother begins in
earnest. ‘‘ Sense becomes nonsense, kindness, misery”.
This continues until the child gradually begins to feel
sensible of its powers and holds the mother in check;
until it begins to suspect in the most minute relations of
the nursery, an attempt at domination and consequently
rears itself up against her in permanent acts of defiance.

The dreams of this patient always represented a
section taken from the ensemble of her psychic reactions
and showed in clear outline the neurotic dynamics, the
psychic hermaphrodism with its subsequent masculine
protest. The symbolism of ‘‘above and below” is of fre-
quent recurrence. One of her dreams was as follows :—

‘‘T am fleeing from two leopards and climb on a
chest. I awake in fear”’.

The analysis disclosed a train of thoughts referring
to a second child from which she was taking refuge
‘‘above”’, to the masculine. Identical with the latter is
her neurotic main symptom, fear, which is her most
important safety-device against the feminine lot of child-
bearing. At the same time in the upward oriented
striving in the dream, there is brought to light an
initiated attempt to dominate her parents, who she
imagines, are an impending danger.


Il. Attempt at reversal as the masculine protest.


i¢ That this desire toward ‘‘reversal”, to reverse
everything, is connected with the patient’s thought of


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 115


behaving like a man, I can demonstrate from the
analysis of the dishonest dream of one of my female
patients (cf. Zentralbl. f. Psych. 1910 Heft 3) where |
also give the analysis of the symptoms. As I am about
to show the presence of this ‘‘reversal” in a dream
analysis, I also feel it my duty to return briefly to a
theme sketched, in its theoretical bearings, in the intro-
duction to this book. Sveep, in our interpretation of the
psyche as a safety-mechanism, ts a condition or brain-function
zn which the rectifying capabilities of the psychic organism
have in part ceased their work. From this view, ‘‘ deep
sleep” indicates the degree of this cessation. Biologic-
ally considered this arrangement may be regarded as
designed, by periods of rest, to protect the most recent
and most delicately organized of the specific brain
functions to which we must assuredly reckon those
dealing with rectification. The corrective, however,
is produced by the concentrated and assiduous activity
of our sense organs and in these we must include
the motor mechanism. As this sensory apparatus
whose function is to assure the safety of our being,
beyond the range of the body must, in part, be ex-
cluded during sleep, the adjustment to the external
world, in the widest sense of the term, is lost and
with it the normal possibility of a corrective. Fiction,
whose content can be shown to consist of a primitive,
analogical and pictorial safety-device against the feeling
of inferiority, develops in wild abundance. In this
fiction the reaction is toa veal feeling of inferiority as if
there existed some danger of again being forced
‘“‘below”’. Since this anticipatory sensitiveness is re-
garded as feminine, as a purposely exaggerated safety-
tendency, the still wakeful psyche reacts to it with the
masculine protest. From it arise, couched in the jargon
of the infantile psyche, representations of an abstract,
condensed, reversed symbolical and sexual nature,
whose imaginary elaboration springs likewise from an
originally intensified safety-tendency. The symbolical,
z.e. fictive representation of the dream, certain dream
complexes which are to be broken up into their con-
stituent dynamic contents, seems to have vaguely been
in Bleuler’s mind when he speaks of the symbolic mean-
ing of sexual occurrences. To Freud and his school
they possess real, purely sexual significance, sexual


116 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


representation, perverse (sexual) thought-connections,
incest-complexes. The difference between Freud's and
my dream and neurosis analysis lies, viewed from this
angle, in the fact that Freud takes as real experiences,
the consciously exaggerated fiction of the patient,
passes over the purpose and incites the patient to give
up this ‘‘ phantasy that has become an element of con-
sciousness”. My view penetrates more deeply into the
problem, attempts to break up the patient’s fiction by
showing it to be a creation of his own making, and to
follow it back to its origin in feelings of inferiority and
masculine protest. The corrective powers of the patient,
constrained within the bounds-of his affective attitude,
are freed and utilized for the production and blending
of masculine protest and reality. The essence of
psychosis and neurosis lies in the fusion of the correc-
tive faculties, a condition wherein the patient’s fiction
obtrudes itself definitely in the shape of the masculine
protest. The selection of the neurosis is, however,
conditioned by the infantile structure of this fiction and
takes on the form best fitted to advance the recognition
sought from the environment, something in the nature
of a discharge along the line of least resistance.

The reversing type of procedure of many neurotics
must consequently unite itself with a fiction of a primal
nature which has as its object palpably the reversal of
the relation felt, from the point of view of the mascu-
line protest, as inferior and inherent. The tendency to
reverse everything will thereupon influence decisively
the nature of the neurosis. Our patient distinguished
herself by the fact that she attempted to reverse
morality, law, order, in and out of the house. And the
starting-point for her protesting procedure was based
on a false under-evaluation of her feminine rdle, whose
dangers she felt in far too extravagant a manner. To
free herself from it, she tried to track down her
femininity in the hope of being able to translate it into
the masculine, but got no further than two incidents in
her attempts at explanation. She had come into the
world from the wrong end as her mother had told her
in early childhood in commenting upon her attempts
to paddle in the water, and following upon a brother.
So she desired to reverse everything, her birth and her
late arrival. All her behaviour was to that end. She


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 117


attempted to play the rdle of the superior with me at
first, too, instructed me and broke in on the conversa-
tion. One day she sat in my chair. The following
dream occurred in a later phase of the treatment.

‘‘T am watching a game of rings with carousel.
Afterwards I climb up. The director began a quick
turn and I fell on another person, etc. I was on top.
Then the director of the game said: ‘Now we shall
turn in the reverse direction’. Then suddenly we found
ourselves in our old places”.

The remarks of my well-trained patient disclosed the
following :—‘‘ Ring-game might possibly mean ‘life’.
I possibly had heard the jocular utterance that life was
a ring-game. That I should leap upon a person is a
conception known from earlier explanations, meaning
I am a man, am above, and is connected with sexual
intercourse. Incidentally, in Vienna people say, ‘I
sleep on him’, meaning I would like to possess him.
The spatial conception of this scene is to be interpreted
temporally :—I leap upon many. You must evidently
be the director for you frequently tell me that I am
reversing things, that I would like to have things other-
wise. If you had anything to say about it I would be
in my proper place, z.e. a woman”.

The dream analysis has thus progressed to the point
I postulated, so that we are in a position to predict that
the dreamer will answer her realization of the feminine
role with a masculine protest. From her view-point that
means, to reverse her organically-conditioned nature, to
change it into its opposite. How strong this protest is,
can be seen from the frequent attempt of repeating this
leaping upon a person, a trait which we must regard
as characteristic of the psychology of the Don Juan and
Messalina types, and of erotomania. In the Messalina
type the restless conquest represents a vestige of the
tendency of reverting to the masculine ; in the Don Juan
type it is to be interpreted as an intensified masculine
protest, z.e. as a compensation for a feeling of inferiority.
A further indication of this strong longing for ‘‘veversal”
is exemplified by that of the thought-connection in the
dream picture. Here analysis discloses an ‘‘ascent”’ to
masculinity ; the actual words, an ascent to her proper
place, that of the female. Freud in his ‘Dream
Analysis” has stressed the fact that dreams are to be


118 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


read inverted but without being able to explain this
remarkable phenomenon. Our assumption permits us
to say it is a tendency of the dream-fiction to reverse
the external structure of the dream.

I might add to the previous account, the fact that
the patient frequently complained in the morning of
headaches, as on this occasion after the dream, which
she attributed to the peculiar position in which she
found herself upon waking. Sometimes her head hung
downward over the edge of the bed, at other times her
position was entirely reversed and her head was at the foot
of the bed. Both positions can be explained as attempts
at reversal. I have a dream of hers in which all people
are represented as standing on their heads. In this
connection, another detail is to be emphasized; one
that her parents in particular regarded as pathological,
namely, a dance-mania, that often seized her and com-
pelled her to whirl around wildly. Analysis revealed
‘¢synchronous ” phantasies due to a tendency commonly
found, in which a man successfully courted her. The
motive of the reversal occurs here too, but toned down
by the erect attitude, appearing thus to obviate what the
patient most fears, the superiority of man. In dancing
according to her artificial evaluation equality reigns.
Her emotionally-tinged impression was, ‘‘there I also
can play the man”.

The patient suffered chronically from incontinence
of urine and of stool, because her mother had in early
childhood already, assured her that this trouble might
make marriage impossible.

Where did this feeling of inferiority reside which the
patient answered by a tendency toward reversal ?

The day before her dream, she had reprimanded a
friend because the latter had visited a young man at his
residence. Her friend retaliated by asking her whether
in her life she had never committed some piece of
stupidity. Subsequently the patient called to mind the
fact that a number of years back, when there was no
question of medical treatment, she had come to me to
ask a personal favour without her mother being aware
of it. Because of the nature of our relations there could
have been no suggestion of the patient conceiving any
tenderness for me. Nevertheless her resistance to the
treatment caused her to take refuge in a fiction, as


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 119


though like her friend, ‘‘ she had leaped upon a man”.
She adhered all the more tenaciously because she could
make a categorical imperative of it, never to visit a man,
also being able in this way to make use of the feeling
against me, since I was, in her opinion, threatening to
vanquish her and appeared to be gaining influence over
her. The dream represents a defiant ‘‘no” and neuro-
psychologically, has the same value as her urine and
stool incontinence. It reiterates the same thing: ‘I
shall not let myself be persuaded by a man: I want to
be aman!”

During the treatment, after marked betterment in
the patient’s condition had already set in, it so happened
that she saw a cousin living with them, attack the
servant. She was so shocked that she spent the whole
day weeping. She came weeping to her treatment ter-
minating her tale finally by telling me indignantly, “Mow
[am going to marry the first one that turns up so that I
can get away from this house!” It was easy enough
to suspect that this idea, considering the previous
history of the girl and her insistent wish to be a man,
would be bound to culminate in a sort of reaction and I
expected a turn for the worse to set in. Given the
psychical constitution of this girl, the reaction ought
to take that form which would give rise to severe
scruples in her mind—her idea of marrying the first
man who appeared—and make her realize the danger
of her procedure. As a matter of fact I was able to
observe the reaction the next day. She was more
unruly than usual, unexpectedly came to the office on
time, although somewhat defiantly calling especial
attention to her punctuality. Then she told the following
dream :—

‘¢T seemed to see a number of marriage candidates
placed in a row. You were at the end of the line. I
passed all of them and selected you as my husband.
My cousin, astonished at my behaviour, asked me why
I selected a man with whose faults I was acquainted?
I answered him, ‘For that very reason!’ Then I said
to you that I would like to stand on top of one of the
men who had a pointed head. You, however, said that
I had better not do that”.

‘© A series of marriage candidates ””—Yesterday, she
said she wished to marry the very first man she met,


120 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


In her dream, where she selects the last one in the line,
this is reversed. Thereupon, a sentence from Herbart’s
Pedagogics comes to her mind :—if a series of ideas
successively enter consciousness then the last one always
cancels the one preceding. Comparing this remark of
hers with the corresponding ‘‘sketch” of the man
(‘‘a series of marriage candidates”—), we infer that
she desires none of them, a desire which might have
been anticipated at the start. Dream-analysis disclosed
further—‘‘ either no one or someone whom I know very
well”. That was myself. In continuation of my
devaluation she adds—‘‘ because I know fzs faults”.
‘‘ My cousin is going to be astonished just as I was”—
reversed—‘‘at his behaviour’. The man with the
pointed head is one of her former admirers and she had
been frequently teased on his account. He has been
introduced into the dream in order to demonstrate to
what an extent she would like to be superior to man ;
how she would like to stand on his head in order to
be ‘‘above”. This ‘‘ wanting to be above”, one of
the significant expressions for the masculine protest, is
but another way of expressing the ‘‘reversal”’, co-
operates in this dream with the ‘‘ reversed’ and appears
logically in the humiliation of myself, ‘‘ whose faults
she already knows”. I actually told her ‘‘she had
better give up”, ze give up the over-developed
masculine protest.—She contented herself by subjecting
me to a harmless depreciation.

Her hostile attitude toward men was still more
intensified by the action of her cousin. This time, how-
ever, she contented herself by indulging in an exagger-
ated expression of her masculine protest consisting in
locking the door of her bedroom as though her cousin
wanted to attack her; protecting herself now in this
way and not as she had formerly protected herself against
marriage, by soiling the bed.

This reverting to infantile situations is in the nature
of intense abstraction. Neurotics are men who instead
of actively breaking new paths like the artist, genius and
criminal, hark back to the memories of childhood when-
ever they rebel and attempt to secure themselves against
present and future dangers. Of as great importance is,
likewise, the fact that their infantile analogical appercep-
tion is not corrected for society—but for that of gaining


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS rar


personal security at any price. We thus receive an
impression of infantilism which is to be understood not
as a psychic hindrance but as representing, after the
infantile analogy, the manner in which the patient is
trying to find his bearings in the world.

Quite frequently the tendency for ‘‘reversal” is
encountered in the form of a superstition whose aim is to
act as if really seeking the contrary of the gratification
so ardently desired. The impression conveyed, is that
of an attempt on the part of the patient to play a trick
on God or fate, an attempt indicating the intense degree
of uncertainty existing, and the extent to which the patient
is aiming, by some device, to approach an individual,
both hostile and stronger. Accompanying it, another
trait is frequently found whose object is to have the
person’s personal situation create a bad impression in
order to prevent other people’s envy and hatred. The
fear of the ‘‘evzl eye” and ‘‘ sacrifice” in folk mythology,
the latter performed to prevent the dissatisfaction of
more powerful beings, belong here. We have but to
call to mind the ‘‘ Ring of Polycrates”’.

2. E. W. twenty-four years old, youngest daughter
of a tobacconist, suffering for five years from compulsion
manifestations. Until about a year ago she had a
noticeable speech defect. She would halt in her talk,
search in vain for the proper words, and be possessed at
the same time by the feeling that everyone was watch-
ing her while she spoke. In consequence she avoided
society—as far as she could—became greatly depressed
and was not even able to enjoy certain instruction that
she had looked forward to with great pleasure and which
was to further her education. Her mother, a nervous
and eternally nagging woman, whose most marked
characteristic was avarice, attempted at times by severity,
at times by consulting nerve specialists, to wean her
away from her depressing thoughts and cure her of her
speech impediment. As this did not succeed, she sent
her daughter to relatives in Vienna and upon her return
the speech defect had actually disappeared entirely.
During her visits to me, z.e. a year later, she showed
no trace of it. Other symptoms however set in. The
girl was, at definitely recurring times, seized with the
thought immediately after exchanging a few words with
anyone, that that person found her company both un-


122 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


pleasant and irksome. And this compulsion-idea with
which she occupied herself even when she was at
home alone, would in every case throw her back into a
mood of depression, so that, as formerly, she avoided all
society.*

I always find it a justifiable proceeding to utilize the
first information given by the patient and to sketch out
an approximate picture of the purpose she wishes her
disease to serve her. This picture is to be drawn, as
though it were a fiction, an ‘‘As-If”, knowing that
further analysis will bring out a number of additional
features. In this connection you must permit me to
fall back upon some personal experiences and both
ask and answer the following question :—what picture
should or could, the sick person have presented in normal
health? Thus the necessary measure of comparison
would be gained both for determining the extent of the
deviation from the normal and the extent of the harm
inflicted upon the social organism. The comparison
shows that the normal picture, for some reason or other,
Jrightens the patient and that he plans to evade it. In
the above-mentioned instance, it is easy enough to see
that it is the normal relation to a man, against which
the girl is seeking to protect herself. It would be quite
erroneous to imagine that this temporary supposition
solves the riddle, although my psychological preparatory
studies justify me in taking the main-motif of the evasion
—a fear of the man, of defeat—as a tentative mode of
explanation. Any expectation of a cure must however
be linked up with the disclosure of the specific errors in
the development and these must be unlocked by our
pedagogical approach. This begins with the patient’s
relation to the physician, a relation that should reflect
every phase of the sick person’s social adjustment.
This we must presuppose, for otherwise the stringing
together of the patient’s statements by the physician
would become defective and the latter might very easily
overlook important attitudes of the patient directed
against himself.

The very first bits of information obtained from my
patient corroborated and added to these suspicions.
She claimed to have been a healthy child full of life and


1 The paranoid trait — the guilt of the other one —a d
definitely. | aera


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 123


always superior to her playmates. From her numerous
and diverse memories she brought to the surface the
following :—

When she was eight years old, her sister married
and her brother-in-law who laid great stress upon social
standing and outward appearance, forbade her to have
social intercourse with poor and badly brought-up
children. As a matter of fact a number of people were
continually zzzerferzng with her. She called to mind a
school teacher who had treated her unjustly and she
had often been zerribly humiliated by him.

When she was eighteen, a young student who was
a good deal sought after by all her female friends,
entered her circle of acquaintances. She alone was
unpleasantly affected by hts consctousness of success and
frequently took a determined stand against him. Her
relation to him became less pleasant, in consequence,
for he annoyed and humiliated her in every way and she
more and more withdrew from the circle. One day he
sent her, through a malicious girl, a message to the
effect that he had now seen through her and that she
was merely playing a game with him, her nature being
in reality quite different. This superficial and unim-
portant remark threw her into a condition of marked
indecision.1. She dwelt continually upon this message
and developed an extraordinary degree of absent-
mindedness in her intercourse with people. In the
midst of a conversation the student and his remark
would always reappear and prevent her from being at
her ease in society. She became excited, wezghed every
word and paused frequently in her conversation. Gradu-
ally she preferred being alone, which meant remaining
in the company of her quarrelsome mother where, of
course, she also found no rest. She was often under
the care of physicians but showed no improvement. It
is of great importance to keep the mother’s attitude in
view. She insisted doggedly that her daughter was
suffering from ‘‘mere fancies”, that she could easily
change if she wanted to, a criticism that always irritated

1 On account of the tense relation existing between herself and this man
this experience was very much welcomed. She accordingly kept it fresh in
her memory because she could utilize it to safeguard her ‘‘distance” from
love. She needed this ‘‘dzstance” in order to evade being dominated or


defeated. To her ‘sacrifice, service” or a gift to others on her part (z.e,
any expression of social feeling), seemed a humiliation.


124 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the latter who parried by claiming that her mother did
not understand what was taking place within her.

Thus four years elapsed and the parents finally
came to the decision of sending the girl, who went less
and less into society, to relationsin Vienna. She stayed
there a few weeks and returned home apparently well,
7.¢. without any speech impediment. She had, however,
become far more reserved and taciturn.

Shortly after her return the above-mentioned com-
pulsion-idea developed, due to an excited scene with
the student who again through a friend sought to
humiliate her.

She gave me some further reminiscences. The.
student had, on one occasion, in revenge against a girl,
concocted a successful plot for having this girl slighted
at a dance by all the young boys and she had left the
hall weeping. He had made a remark about another
girl to the effect that she would stand on her head if he
asked her to. To my question as to whether she found
the student unsympathetic she answered unhesitatingly
SIGS

At our next meeting she told me a dream which, to
show the connection of these impressions, I shall quote
together with the interpretation. The dream was as
follows :—

““7 was walking in front of a working-man accompanied
by a young, blonde girl.” She continued hesitatingly, and
enststing that she did not know how she had come to such
thoughts, that the father had made a criminal attack upon
the girl. I shouted out to him: “leave the girl alone”!

After some friendly insistence, the patient consented
to make the following statement. A year before, during
her visit in Vienna, she noticed at a performance in a
theatre, a man fondle his little daughter sensually. But
this man was not a working-man. About the same
time a cousin who was on an excursion with her tried
to put his hand under her skirt. She pushed him aside
and yelled: ‘‘ Leave me alone”!

She herself in childhood had been the blonde girl.
Shortly before she had read in the paper of a working-
man who had attacked his own child.

The starting-point of this dream lay in thoughts
connected with the illness and death of her father.
Stimulated by a question that had come up during


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 125


treatment, she asked her mother what this illness had
been and she discovered that her father had died of
consumption of the spinal marrow. When I asked her
whether she had any clear notion as to the origin of
this disease she told me she had heard that it was the
result of ‘‘high living”. I informed her that this was
wrong but that until very recently, this origin of the
disease had always been taken for granted. She told
me further that her father had led an inactive life and
much to her mother’s annoyance, had spent the whole
day either in a bar-room or coffee-house. She was six
when he died. A sister had committed suicide three
years before decause her betrothed had deserted her.

When I asked her why in the dream she had pre-
ceded the working-man, she suddenly said, ‘‘ because
all these events lie behind me”. She was not able to
explain the working-man. All she knew was that he
was poorly dressed, tall and haggard in appearance. I
reminded her—having myself arrived at a definite con-
cluston—of her desire to be ahead of men, to be superior
to them ; and of the order her brother-in-law had given
her (in youth) not to associate with poorly dressed or
poor children. Her dream was merely carrying out
this interdiction but with a different purpose, the inter-
diction in this case being to associate with men. To
that my patient made no answer. When I asked her
whether her father was tall and haggard, a question
suggested by the connection of the conversation with
her father and the clearly-expressed incest-problem that
seemed present, she answered affirmatively.

The analysis of the dream as such, contained a
definite warning against men, and this came out more
clearly when brought into relation with the inferred
psychic situation of the patient. Our working hypothesis,
that the girl’s illness was to serve the purpose of pro-
tecting her against men, received corroboration. The
dream as well as the disease consequently represented
a precautionary device and proved conclusively the nature
of the illness to have been of psychic origin. Let me
now, on the basis of my data, explain in greater detail
this essential point of both neurosis and dream-life. To my
mind it represents an attempt at an anticipatory mental
preparation designed to secure personal superiority.

Normal human thought and its pre-psychzcal (uncon-


126 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


scious) acts are under the pressure of the safety tendencies.
Steinthal has, in an analogous manner, represented Zhe
psyche as an organic constructive-force fulfilling in a high
degree the demands of expediency. Avenarius and
others have pointed out the empirical purposiveness of
human thought. Recently Vaihinger’ expressed the
same belief. I became acquainted with his ideas long
after I had arrived at the hypothesis of safety-tendencies
and arrangements. In his work there will also be found
a rich storehouse of data taken from other authors, who
had expressed similar views. Claparéde attempted quite
frequently to explain neurotic symptoms as atavistic
traits, an attempt that like Lombroso’s, must be rejected,
Sor along the lines of least resistance, the possibilities inherent
in the whole of past existence may at any time reassert
themselves without exhibiting any connection with pre-
viously existing protective measures. Sut the concept of
purpose includes wzthin rtself the teleological problem, although
predicating nothing as to the type and inward nature of
the adjustment. My interpretation of this ‘‘ purpose”
insists quite dogmatically, that the dominating tendency of
the psyche lies in the nature of the precautions which, in the
form of a compensatory super-structure, lift itself above the
organically conditioned feeling of insecurity. The gnawing
sense of insecurity and inferiority in children, either
with inferior organs or with more marked feeling of
inferiority in relation to their environment, compels
them to a more intensive elaboration, a more intensive
forcing of their safety-tendencies, processes which when
pushed beyond the bounds of the individual’s neurotic
constitution, lead to psychosis and suicide. Let us
remember that the patient’s sister, when her love was
spurned, committed suicide while in a condition of inten-
sified inferiority feeling, a psychical development that I
regard as basic for the understanding of the suicide-
complex. x the tremendous, all-enveloping dynamics of life,
the masculine protest plays the part of fortifying the ego-line,
‘‘as-uf” to be masculine were synonymous with certainty
and completeness.

Examining the data the patient has up to the
present given us, we see it consisting of two types first,
reminiscences in which a man gains or tries to gain


1 The Philosophy of ‘As Jf’: English translation (London;
Paul & Co., in this Library). a 3 a ae


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 127


the upper hand and second, dreams corroborating the last-
mentioned interpretation by the fact that, in a sort of a
sketch, she represents all men zwcluding her father—and
in this instance that is the meaning of the incest-
complex—as immoral and uncontrolled, and represents
herself as trying to guard herself against their unbridled
instincts just as deer protect themselves against a hunter.

This attitude toward possibilities of escape, and of
falling back upon a line of retreat and preparation for
defence, must have begun somewhere. We should,
consequently, expect to be told of attacks of all conceiv-
able kinds and of an attitude arising out of the girl’s
feeling of insecurity, an attitude disclosing the patient’s
type of reaction and indicating that it did not develop
out of the unconscious fixation of some simple event, but
in its final form, was the product of the girl’s feeling of
insecurity and her reactions to the demands of the
external world. ‘The results obtained from a careful
interrogation of her earliest memories strengthen our
expectation. The patient called to mind games she had
played with other children when she was four or five
years old. At first, she remembered ‘‘father and
mother” games in which she generally took the rdle
of mother. Her second recollection was that of playing
‘‘doctor”’, a game found everywhere. The first game
is made up of the child’s longing to become the equal
of the grown-up. Erotic (additions) are quite frequent
and these lead to the ‘‘doctor” game, which is almost
completely erotic in character, and in which body
exposure and touching of the genitals generally occur.
My definite statement to this effect led to the patient’s
admission that they had also done the same. In con-
nection with this statement she told me that when she
was five years old she had been docked into a room by
the twelve-year-old brother of a girl friend and been taught
masturbatory practices which she continued until she
was sixteen years old.

The patient then discussed the fight she had under-
taken against masturbation. The basic motive of this
struggle lay in her fear that, by continuing the practice,
she might become highly sexed and thus /a// a victim to
the first man who appeared. Were we again approach
our former belief that the patient was suffering from a
fear of men and that to make herself all the more secure, she


128 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


had over-emphasized her own sexuality which apparently
was quite normal, but which it is impossible in the
present ‘‘arranged” condition to correctly estimate. It
can, however, be claimed with certainty that she is
exaggerating her sexuality. We must be careful, con-
sequently, not to adopt her estimate as ours.

These beginnings of an analysis already indicate that
in order to secure her own safety, the patient depreciated
man. ‘‘All men are bad—-wish to oppress, besoil and
dominate women !”’

We should expect to discover a number of typical and
atypical attempts having as their object the playing the
superior rdle and, at all costs,-nullifying the assumed
privileges of man actually existing in our civilization ;
in short by developing certain traits or by occasional
minor attacks, to find attempts to destroy man’s pre-
rogatives. Ad the weapons employed in women’s fight for
emancipation should become visible in her behaviour. Only
they will however appear aistorted and changed into infantile,
ridiculous and useless forms. This individual struggle,
in a way a private enterprise against masculine pre-
rogatives, shows in its aspect as the analogue, precursor
and often accompaniment of the great social struggle
for women’s emancipation, that it has arisen out of the
woman’s desire of equality with man. It has taken the
line of evolution from inferiority feeling to compensa-
tion (cf. Dénniges’ Memoirs).

The following traits of character will appear less
definitely :—defiance particularly of man, (in this case
of the student); fear of being alone; timidity fre-
quently indicated by arrogance; dislike of company ;
open or concealed hostility toward marriage; depre-
catory attitude toward men accompanied, however, not
infrequently by strong desire to please and make con-
quests; embarrassment, etc.—Our patient’s neurotic
symptoms take the place of traits of character. Her
stuttering is the substitute for embarrassment. Her
desire to please and compulsion-ideas such as the
hostility of the surroundings, lead to the same goal,
and arise out of the realization of her own hostility
toward her environment. An ever-ready feeling of
distrust completes her safety-preparations. Morality,
ethics, religion, superstition, may all be called in
as aids. Frequently all sorts of inconveniences and


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 129


contradictions occur ; desires that all might be changed
arise, Or an exceedingly active delight in opposition
develops, making social intercourse with the patient
more difficult. The physician like a good teacher will
have to concern himself with all these traits not because
the patient drings them to his notice but because they are
present and actually constitute all the patient’s tendencies
and powers. Their concealment is due to the fact that
the patient’s attitude causes him to show his brusque
side and aggressive attitude toward everyone.
Accompanying the above traits are at times found,
attempts at raids (of a masculine type), and of attacks
upon man which the physician can often detect. They
can all be translated:—‘‘No I shall not subordinate
myself; I shall not be a woman. They will not
succeed with me. They are going to be put in the
wrong!” Attempts are made to invert the rdéles, to
give orders in the treatment, to put oneself (literally
and figuratively), in the physician’s place, to be superior
to him. For example, one day this patient came to me
with the statement that the treatment had made her
even more excitable. On another occasion she told
me that on the preceding day she had for the first time,
attended a course in stenography and had become more
excited ‘*than she had ever been.before!”’ .When: I
pointed out to her that this was directed against me,
she gave up her resistance on this particular point,
not because it had disappeared but because she realized
that I did not take these attacks seriously and that, at
the same time, I was not attempting to humiliate her.
The suggestions given above enable the physician
to predict that a patient, in such a mood, will assume
an attitude in which she desires to znvert everything.
“(As if” in this manner the appearance of femininity
could be avoided! One of my patients, in such a
mood, dreamt that all girls stood on their heads.
Analysis disclosed a desire to be a man and to be able
to stand on one’s head as boys often do, an action
forbidden to girls on ethical grounds. This emphasis
upon the difference (in sex) is adhered to consistently,
is employed in ‘‘examples” and becomes almost sym-
bolical. A patient will often refuse to visit the physician
and, on the contrary, ask that he visit her in her home.
Most frequently the tendency toward inversion is ex-
I


130 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


pressed in the dream by a woman being substituted
for a man, the depreciation of the masculine taking
place at the same time. This is more cautiously
suggested by the hermaphrodite symbol or castration-
concept as Freud, myself and others have often proved.
According to Freud and others, the least important
aspect of this idea is the shock experienced by the
threat of castration. I, on the contrary, have come to
the conclusion, that in the castration phantasies, traces
of the uncertainty of the sex-réle are indicated and that
they serve to give expression to the possibility of a
transformation of a man into a woman. One of the
dreams of the patient illustrates the train of thought
so well that it might be taken as a model case.

‘‘I was being treated by a nose specialist. The
physician was away at an operation. His female assist-
ant cut out one of my bones”.

Upon analysis we found, as though it were a matter
of no importance, the fact that some years before, the
patient had been treated for adenoids. She was particu-
larly attracted to the physician and this sufficed to make
her precipitately retreat. The linking up of this recollec-
tion with a lecture indicated a definite connection with
me. I too had succeeded, by getting around her assumed
prejudices against men and in gaining her good will
and consequently her safety-tendencies manifested them-
selves in a dream to warn her against the future. The
dangers against which she wished to protect herself
beforehand in the dream are her ‘‘ marked sexuality”
and the ‘‘brutal lust of man”. As a matter of fact the
assistant was not a physician and had never performed
an operation. It is her dreams that have created female
surgeons. Taken in its proper context we are really
dealing with a transformation of a man into a woman
and of a still further depreciation of a physician intoa
female assistant. This centres our interest upon the
problem of transformation. The bone that has been cut
out is to be interpreted as the male genital. As the
patient admitted this, we may assume that, she had when
a child believed she had been changed into a woman by
castration, an assumption she denied. Many examples
have taught me, however, that such and analogous
sexual theories can persist in a pre-psychic form, z.e. that
all the conditions for the development exist and yet that


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 131


these tentative beginnings never mature into a conscious
judgment. In many other instances such a conscious
fiction can be actually proved. Its frequency, as well as
the circumstance that patients with predisposition for
the fiction, behave as if the phantasy were conscious,
warrants the following important conclusion: — The
motive power of the psyche 7s not desire for knowledge, but
the feeling of specific inferiority and uncertainty which ts
sketched, at first, pre-psychically and then develops in con-
sciousness into a judgment ora phantasy whenever necessary.
If, however, as it appears to be, the feeling of inferiority
is based on sensations evaluated as feminine, then we
must look upon the guiding fiction, upon the ‘‘tendency”’
of the neurotic, as a compensation taking the form of
the masculine protest.

Our knowledge of the above - mentioned dream
extends far enough for us to realize that the dreamer
is complaining of her lost womanhood (the loss of the
bone), and, at the same time, protesting against the
fact that men are superior to her. Her masculine pro-
test is part of her ideal of personal equality : — ¢he
physician is to be transformed into a woman. Anyone not
addicted to merely literal interpretation of words, will
realize that there is no difference between this desire of
hers and her other wish—that of becoming aman. For
is it not the cancelling of her sense of inferiority, the
goal of her longing? This purpose is to be gained as
much by raising her importance as by lowering that
of man, who at present enjoys a higher evaluation. We
are still not clear about the sentence—‘‘ The physician
was away atan operation”. All the patient can tell us
in its elucidation is that she never heard of the nose
specialist making visits of that nature. In consonance
with the tendency of her dream, the explanation seems
to be that the man is to be done away with and replaced
by a woman physician. In other words we might say,
‘¢ All men can go to the devil!”

The following surmise might also be quite justi-
fiable. The above traits of thought seem to point rather
definitely to the possibility of an arrangement for homo-
sexuality. The dream-sketch, as well as the psychic
situation of the patient, show clearly her desire to make
a woman out of a man. Additional support for her
tendency to withdraw further from any relation with


132 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


men is furnished by recollections and impressions of a
masturbatory nature going back to the erotic games
with other girls.

Finally, let me say that the patient remembers the
fact that her birth was not welcomed by either her
mother or elder sister. The latter, in particular, always
treated her harshly and a bad relationship had always
existed between them. From the above-described line
of retreat from any relationship with men, we must then
draw the conclusion that she resisted the zdea of being in
subordination to any woman too. Throughout life her
striving had been to be superior to girls and women
and she strenuously fought all influence emanating from
her mother. There is no indication of any primary,
active or inherited homo-sexuality, in the strict sense of
the term, no more than there is in other instances. Yet
it is clearly to be seen how experiences and her tendencies
force her into an ‘‘as if” homo-sexual attitude and in
addition, determine the nature of this attitude although
not expressing themselves decisively.

Her behaviour in many respects will be regarded
‘‘reversed”’ and in part as ‘‘perverse”’, because under
the domination of her fiction of man-equality she tries
to reverse, change and distort most if not all things.
This desire which under certain conditions may develop
into a mania,’ remains in the unconscious and can only
be cured if the patient is given the opportunity of under-
standing it and of deepening her powers of interpreta-
tion. This possibility depends upon the pedagogical
tact of the physician.

Occasionally a patient allows us to realize that we
are on the right track by other means than those men-
tioned. It may occur to her to indicate that she is not
averse to developing a love-affair (with the physician),
but everything pertaining to sex is to be excluded. So
in this form too does the masculine protest assert itself.

The patient subsequently stated, with great hesitation,
that the nose-specialist to whom she had been so strongly
attracted, had kissed her a number of times and she had
made but weak attempts to repulse him. When finally
she found the courage to tell him, on one occasion when
he wished to force a kiss from her, that she considered


_ 1 The relationship of this case with paranoidal dementia is not to be
dismissed off-hand.


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 133


his attitude horrible and that she would not come again,
her complaints disappeared, and she felt very well for
about three months. Then came her contact with the
student and shortly after his rather stupid remark that
she was really other than she appeared, there arose
compulsion-ideas to the effect that she could not mix in
society because of the poor impression she made.

That she permitted the physician so easily to kiss
her, appears on first thoughts rather strange and to
contradict apparently the assumption of a masculine
protest. Experience teaches us, however, that the
awakened masculine adventure-spirit, not infrequently
makes use of feminine weapons and that to be kissed
and the awakening of love can be felt as a gratification
of power. The very moment, however, that the man
tried clearly to demonstrate his superiority and use force
then she had to prove to him that she was his superior.
This is so typical a case in its psychological make-up
that it ought to be quite generally intelligible. Every-
one knows that the individual who has not yet admitted
his love, can thus intensify the love of the one who has
confessed to it, just as that which appears unattainable
is greatly desired and the more openly expressed love
is generally rebuffed. Neurotic girls must therefore
always fail in their attempts at establishing relations
with men because they are immediately struck by the
feeling of subordination and possessiveness in the love
relation and it becomes unbearable. The improve-
ment in the condition of the patient is easily enough
intelligible, for she has triumphed both over the physician
and those sexual desires regarded as feminine and of
inferior value.

When, however, she saw herself defeated in her
struggle with the student and when he even succeeded
in capturing her friend, then she gave to his words an old
meaning, her fear of people detecting the feminine
sensuality as represented by her onanistic practices.
The student’s words were quite general—one could see
that she was different from what she appeared to be. And
so his words were given the meaning that everyone
could recognize her sensuality and take the same
liberties as the physician. She herself was too weak
to protect herself against a man.

This postscript given very unwillingly had been


134 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


preceded by complaints lasting an hour about her condi-
tion and doubts as to the possibility of a cure. It was
easy to see that this behaviour of hers was directed
against me. It was as easy to see that she defended
herself against me by falling back upon the fact that I
had taken advantage of her ‘‘ weakness” to force from
her numerous admissions. In order therefore to remain
in a strong position as regards me, she had to show that
her condition had become worse, which at that particular
stage of the cure was equivalent to saying—‘‘ He must
not gain any power or influence over me”’.

Let us point out briefly how the fear of men also has
a tendency to ‘‘ reverse itself”’, in such a train of thought
as, for instance,—‘‘the man should get frightened ”.
This mode of thinking is identical for the neurotic feeling
of the patient, with an emotional wave proceeding from
‘‘below to above”. This tendency toward reversing,
expressing itself occasionally in turning ‘‘the bottom to
the top”, and in turning tables, seats and boxes around,
is found not only in neurosis, but also in psychosis.
Its psychological equivalent is the well-known negative-
istic attitude that can always be replaced mentally by a
‘‘reversal”. Let me point out the fact that in the case
of our patient, other trains of thought also made their
appearance with which we are quite familiar from the
study of psychosis; such, for instance, that people can
look through her, that everyone experiences a disagree-
able feeling in her presence, that she can be easily influ-
enced. In contrast however, to psychotic individuals,
we must insist that such a person always knows how to
bring her infantile fiction into such harmony with reality
that the impression of her suffering from a psychosis
is absent. The lack of psychosis is consequently not
due to any inherent trait of the fiction, which here only
serves to make the patient even more careful, but to the
weakness of the correlation between the lines of conduct
to be corrected and the necessity of adhering to a
logical procedure. Our patient may, in order to
obtain security for her assumed feminine weakness,
strengthen as much as she wishes the fiction that she is
to behave like a man, she will always find another kind
of safety-device given by the correlation of her rectifying
mechanism with reality so that she will consequently
behave ‘‘sensibly”. Here we approximate to Bleuler’s


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 135


views, that a ‘‘loosening of associations” is characteristic
of schizophrenia. Our stand-point however, presupposes
the relative inferiority of the rectifying mechanism
whose compensatory capacity no longer suffices when
the mechanism proceeds to undertake heavier tasks.

A number of years ago I made observations on a
patient who had dementia praecox in its declining stage.
One day he pointed to a pack of hounds and said with
a significant gesture, that these were all well-known,
beautiful women and gave me the name of every one
of them. He was under the influence of the fear of
woman and safe-guarded himself in belittling the sex by
transforming all women into dogs, ze. in ‘‘ revers-
ing” things. His rectifying apparatus was not strong
enough to harmonize his facts with reality, to turn
the whole thing into a joke, or to be able to regard
his statement as an insult. The compensation of the
rectifying apparatus was still functioning in connection
with the depreciatory tendency of the safe-guarding
mechanism.

A dream of our patient which she had the day after
giving me the information about the behaviour of the
specialist, shows the same psychic dynamics. Her
dream was as follows.—

‘‘T went to buy a hat. As I was returning home I
saw, in the distance, a dog of whom I was very much
afraid. I wanted the dog however to be afraid of me.
I came nearer and he jumped upon me. _I pacified him
and stroked him on the back. Then I got home and
lay down on the sofa. Just then two cousins came on
a visit and mother brought them in, looked for me and
said: ‘There she is’. I felt embarrassed at being
surprised in this attitude”.

Analysis disclosed angry thoughts connected with
the information she had given me. She has to be on
her ‘‘guard”. Thestrengthening of her safety-tendency
demanded this. She had shown her weakness and had
been defeated and I—the dog—had sprung upon her.
She apparently thinks of her defeat in terms of sex
symbolism, not however to be taken at full value. The
actual symbolical expression used for ‘‘ defeat” and for
the feeling of femininity, and which clearly makes the
antithesis too strong, she secures by establishing a
reminder. Its origin is to be found in the warning,


136 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


safe-guarding tendency. Thus she lowers me to the
position of a dog and in her supplementary state-
ment clearly indicates in what way she is planning
to ‘‘reverse”’ the admitted fact of my superiority. ‘I
wanted him to be afraid of me!” During the first days
of the treatment she felt fatigued (upon her return home)
and used to rest upon the sofa. These symptoms were
palpably ‘“‘ arranged” in order to prove—as she herself
at times stated—that her conversations with me did
not calm but on the contrary tired her. But what is
more important, is that she had lain in the same way on
the sofa after her nose operation in the office of the
specialist who had then kissed her, a secret that I had
‘‘wrung” from her. Both cousins were at that time
married. She had associated with them when they
were single. Then they had often come for there were
many house-parties. They always came in the company
ofeither their mother oraunt. 7Z7hey would have considered
zt immodest to have gone anywhere alone. She, however,
had gone alone both to me for treatment and formerly to
the nose specialist where she had had the above-
mentioned experience. In the dream she goes out
alone to buy a hat. The last purchase of a hat had
occurred in the company of her quarrelsome mother and
perturbed her a good deal, for her mother was continually
complaining about money-expenditures. The pacifica-
tion of the dog refers to the way in which, on one
occasion, she had consoled a rejected suitor. Thus it
would happen to me.

The problem contained in this dream thus reads,
‘*Shall I go alone or with mother? The latter alternative
is unpleasant because my mother always tries to down
me. I want to be the dominant one and I shall therefore
goalone. As I am afraid of men I shall consequently
try tochange the rdle. Once I caused a man who wished
to become intimate with me deep anguish, repulsing him
because I was afraid of further advances on his part.
I have often the same fear whenever I speak to a man.
Only when I meet a man for the first time am I able
to make him feel my superiority. The oftener I go
to the doctor the weaker I become. But quite apart
from that, it is not becoming for me to visit him alone”.
Her propriety-tendencies which she occasionally brought
into play against me, arose out of the above consideration


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 137


and had, of course, been ‘‘arranged”. Asa matter of
fact, she absented herself from the treatment two days
later without any reason.

In short her feeling of weakness arose out of her fear
of man and the only possible corrective lay in behaving
as though she were a man. To take this thorny path,
brought her into numerous contradictions all of which
could be traced back to the non-rational nature of her
fiction. The world regarded her as a woman and she
herself was open to feminine impulses which she
markedly restrained, although by no means suppressed.
This restraining of her feminine impulses led to a
‘‘reversal”’, to what might be called an acid reaction,
which transformed into a safety-tendency reads :—‘‘I
do not want to be a woman; I want to be a man!”—
She took this attitude toward everyone, toward her girl
friends and toward her physician. In the latter case
however her safe-guarding fiction would have then to
break down and be brought into harmony with reality.

The continuation of the treatment is the most difficult
pedagogical task of the nerve-specialist, for he must
bring the patient into a mood where he will take kindly
to being led. On one occasion the above patient
appeared in my office markedly depressed and when I
asked her what she wanted to say to-day, made no
answer. Finally when I pointed out to her that her
bad humour was necessarily part of the hostile attitude
toward me, she exclaimed, ‘‘ Why do you say that ?”—
This was not the first time I had heard these words
from her. She had repeatedly used them when she
introduced herself and her mother to me the first time
and had used them whenever her mother, in narrating
the story of her illness, added critical remarks of her own
to the effect that her daughter was taking no trouble to
be different. I must consequently assume that the
patient had succeeded in foisting upon me the rdle of
her mother, z.e. in regarding me as in the afore-
mentioned dream of the doctor, as not being a man.
This is her final purpose. As soon as she had depreci-
ated me she proceeded to an attack. Other indications
of hostility that came to light on the same day consisted
in disguised reproaches against me in connection with
the aggravation of her condition, of so subjective a tone
that the idea that she would like to try her fortunes


138 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


elsewhere was clearly discerned. She actually gave ex-
pression to the hostile thoughts directed against me and
indicated that she intended to give up the treatment, at
least fora short time. That this was all directed against
me, is easily seen even though the patient denied having
been conscious of such a purpose. Let me assume pro-
visionally that her behaviour is her answer—somewhat
in the nature of a compulsion—to the feeling of defeat ;
of lack of resistance and adjustment. Its connection
with the nature of her disease is there manifest. Her
feelings are of such a type that other people, particularly
men, were regarded as stronger, hostile and superior.
On account of her safety-tendency and desire for power, she.
had from the beginning underlined and grouped in a
one-sided way, her own quite normal feelings and forced
them into the rdle of a scare-crow. The masculine
protest turns against this fiction for reasons of its own
safety because this fiction has been evaluated as feminine,
as shown by her attitude toward me. Jn the mechanism
of the masculine protest this activity of her safe-guarding
tendency continues to strengthen all her feelings of man’s
superiority and hostility. In consequence, her early
recollections were full of examples in which the man
was the stronger. Her psyche is always under the
influence of what might be called an ascending
fiction, whose point of departure is drawn with powerful
strokes in some such way as the following :—‘‘I
succumb, therefore I am too weak”. The desired
counter-foil to the above is the end-goal: ‘‘I must
behave as though I were a man, z.e. I must belittle
man for I am too feminine and shall otherwise succumb”.
The neurosis within these two fictions is staged, its
exaggerations and suppressions being determined by
the safe-guarding tendency.

Let us turn back. Of what did the patient complain?
She experienced, she said, a feeling as if people were hostile
to her, as though she made a bad impression upon them!
This compulsion-idea flowed, of necessity, from the
psychic situation of the patient, for it not only brought
into strong relief her feminine fiction and thus took
the form of a reminder, but also made room for
her masculine fiction. She could then discard her
feminine rdle and live as far as this was possible in her
masculine rdle; to her mother she could behave as


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 139


though she were a man. Her mother is the only
person with whom she has, since her illness, been in
touch and whom she dominates, at times reducing her to
the point of desperation. The feeling of hostility which
animates her is then transferred to others, for ‘‘only he
fears misfortune who is himself wicked”. The marked
absence of social consciousness is quite noticeable.

We must remember that other disease-manifestations
had preceded her compulsion-idea; for example, her
speech impediment and her exaggerated timidity when
in the presence of others. This was in fact the first act
of her neurosis, the expression of her increased tension
when in company. It is as if she were making special
efforts to safe-guard herself in speech—in order not to
succumb—and were, at the same time, quite capable of
constantly keeping before herself the safe-guarding fic-
tion of her weakness in the form of a mechanism related to
stuttering. This attitude she was able to maintain until,
on account of the attacks of men—the physician, her
cousin—she was compelled tn the protection of her masculine
protest zo go further and ecther fight or run away. This
is the point she had reached in my case, as the above
account shows. Analyses of stutterers justify me in
making the same inference. Their stuttering is an
attempt to withdraw, by means of passive resistance,
from the superiority of others. It is based on an
intensified feeling of inferiority whose persistent and
tenaciously held purpose is to watch, examine and steal
marches upon their partner. The main idea is to gain
a (decisive) influence by means of a masochistic attitude
and to be able in addition to say, ‘‘ What would I not
have accomplished had I not been a stutterer!” Thus
do these patients console themselves and evade their
own sensitiveness.

I know that many a reader of my earlier works has
been puzzled by this point and has asked how any
person could, under these circumstances, have developed
a masculine protest. The analogy with fasszve resistance
(of the patient) ought to clear up this question. In
such behaviour, special cases are frequently encountered
in which ‘‘feminine” and ‘“‘ masculine” lines temporally
coincide and effect a compromise, the uninterrupted
safe-guarding tendency continuing however to adhere
to its upward-tending impulse. This is clearest in the


140 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Messalina types where defeat is felt as victory. Can
this really be so difficult to grasp?

Let us go back to our patient. We can now put
into their proper relationship both of the trains of
thought directed against me. Her pointed remarks,
her subjectively aggravated condition, are as much
threats against me as her actual threats to absent herself
from treatment. The first remind us more of present,
the last of earlier disease-manifestations. We are now
familiar with the cause of the strengthening of her
masculine protest; it is her submissiveness during
treatment. She informed me, for instance, that she had
dreamt but only remembered that she woke up after a
shriek.

Such fragments of a dream are well adapted for
interpretation. It is much as if the physician had
forced an entry into the psyche by means of a large
breach in its walls, without having first to overcome
minor obstacles. Upon my questioning her as to the
nature of her cry, she answered by giving me some
recollections going back to her childhood. Asa child
she would cry frightfully if any of the other children or
any people tried to hurt her. On one occasion she
had been locked in a cellar and terrified in addition by
the information that rats were there. She had also
shrieked at the top of her voice in the office of the nose-
specialist. I believe that a similar situation had occurred
in her dream, z.e. she had shrieked during her dream-
fiction as though something similar to what we have
just mentioned, were going to happen to her.

Every dream can be best expressed by such an intro-
duction as the following: ‘‘Granted that...” I
mentioned this long ago in my smaller studies and I
am now in a position to give fuller details. Many
points in Freud’s interpretation of the dream will be
corroborated, other points, on the contrary, shown to
be unimportant and misleading. We cannot definitely
enough insist that dream analysis was made possible
by Freud’s work on the dream-content, the dream-pur-
pose and the residue of waking life contained in the
dream. Freud’s conception that the main function and
guiding principle of the dream is to revivify and achieve
in the dream, the old wishes of childhood, must how-
ever be given up. It served, and could have served, no


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS tar


other purpose except that of a temporary expedient,
and although self-contradictory and meaningless when
brought into connection with reality, it did nevertheless
fulfil in a masterly way, its purpose of bringing the
dream under the control of ordered thinking. The
principle of wish-fulfilment is itself nothing but a fiction
although marvellously adapted to advance the true
understanding of the dream. What makes its employ-
ment as an accessory, seem so self-evident from a logical
view-point, is the wide range of such an abstraction,
allowing space for all psychical impulses. Indeed all
that is necessary is to search for the actual or possible
impulses that lie behind the dream-fragment of a fulfilled
wish. Nevertheless the positing of Freud’s formulas has
enabled us neurologists to bring order into the dream-
material and to gain a perspective. It was possible to
apply the calculus to it. (Vaihinger.) The contradic-
tion that the stress seemed to fall upon infantile wishes
called up by analogous complexes of the present as
opposed to the past, that a new contradiction obtained
from past experience had to solve the dream, proved the
untenability of Freud’s formulas and forced him to the
creation of extensive fictions. Of these the nearest at
hand was the concept of fixation of incestuous infantile
relationships, and this had to be generalized and dis-
torted into gross sexuality, because the dream fiction
rather frequently operated with sexual analogies in order
to express other relations, just as quite frequently
happens among people conversing in a public-house.
The most striking feature, the protective, antici-
patory and safe-guarding elements that cause and are
the contents of the dream, were actually obscured and
forced, in hostile fashion, into the background as soon
as Freud’s formula permitted us to apply a calculus to it.
These features consisted of the protection, anticipation and
safe-guarding aspects that engender and form the content of
every dream. The main function of the dream ts the attempt
to safe-guard the importance and superiority of the ego.
That function according to our views determines the
main character of the dream-work. The dreamer
attempts to gain the masculine line, and protect himself,
like the neurotic, paranoic, artist, and criminal, against
any nascent feeling of defeat. His evaluations of
masculine - feminine come from his childhood, are


142 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


individual and, by their contradiction, constitute the
main fiction of the neurotic. The ideational impulses
of dreamer and neurotic take final form in analogies,
symbols and other fictions based on the contrast of
below-above and masculine-feminine. The tendency is
always upward toward the masculine protest, analogous
to a turning of the body, to a raising up of the sleeper.

If now we apply these two categories, according to
which the dream must be orientated, the guzding pictures,
as Klages says in his Prinzipien der Charakteriologie
(Leipzig, 1910), to this minute fragment, namely the
motor affect-expression (the shriek), into which we have
gained some insight from the statements of the patient,
then we obtain the following :—First, the patient is
afraid of an act of violence similar to what she had
suffered in childhood from a boy and later at the hands
of the nose-specialist ; secondly, she reacts toward the
anticipation in the same way in which she acted in her
childhood toward any humiliation. To this is to be
added a suggestion given by the patient which had
been obtained from me. I had in conversation, in order
to show the difference in the type of psychic reaction of
man and woman, mentioned the fact that if both men
and women were clothed in woman’s dress, we should
be able to recognize the woman by the way in which
she would behave if a mouse appeared. The woman
would draw her dress about her legs. A similar idea
recurred in the patient’s previous recollection of her
imprisonment in the cellar with the rats. Thus in her
motor affect-expression, the shriek, there is also present
a psychic content :—‘‘ They want to imprison me, force
me, humiliate me (cellar) because I ama girl!” Asa
counter-attack we find a psychic content responding to
the feeling of the feminine rdle, namely, the masculine
protest which tells her, ‘‘ Yell! that people may hear
you, that they may refrain from forcing you, that they
may free you!”’

If we compare these two reciprocally sustaining
trains of thought with the patient’s attitude toward
me, we discover a second train of thought accurately
reflected and brought directly to bear upon me. The
patient ‘‘yells”, z.e. takes up a hostile position to me,
protects herself against my ‘‘ superiority” and declares
she wishes ‘‘ to be free”’, z.e. absent herself from treat-


MALE ATTITUDE IN FEMALE NEUROTICS 143


ment. Her first train of thought, ‘‘I am being over-
powered, held captive, humiliated ”, must therefore have
been present in the forgotten dream-fragment. When
I made this statement she made no remark, so I con-
tinued and insisted, ‘‘I must have appeared to you in
this dream as the superior man”. Her resistance
continued and was only slightly influenced by my
declaration that in her exaggerated precautions, she
was conjuring up unnecessary /ear-spectres, being afraid
that she would succumb to my treatment, a treatment
against which she protested by yelling.

Her sense of her feminine rdle, of her possible
longing for love, is clearly exaggerated in the interests
of her safety and the libido, against the latter of which she
wishes to protect herself and is consequently falsified.
She behaved as if she felt weak in my presence, believ-
ing this fiction to be the truth, because thus she felt
herself best protected. Now we understand what her
tendency toward “reversing” means :—<he desire to be
the stronger one.

Unfortunately I did not succeed in keeping her
under my treatment for more than a few days, a fact
that indicates the severity of her disease, her un-
approachability and her incapacity for true human
relationship. A year later I. was informed that her
condition had become aggravated in the foreign country
to which she had gone.


x


The Concept of Resistance during Treatment
(1916)


A PATIENT who had been under individual-psychological
treatment for two months came to me one day and asked
whether she could not come the next time at four o'clock
instead of three. No matter how insistently patients,
in such and similar cases, make their requests, we
are justified in assuming that the desired alteration
is an indication of intensified aggressiveness, of a
masculine protest directed against the physician. We
would be wrong and acting in direct opposition to the
purpose of the treatment, which is to enable the patient
to gain inward freedom, if we did not attempt on such
occasions, to investigate the reasons for the request.

The patient claimed that she would have to go to
the dressmaker at three o’clock, a rather weak reason,
which was only slightly strengthened by the fact that
owing to the length of the treatment, the number of free
hours was somewhat restricted. As I was not free at
the hour she asked, I suggested as a test five or six.
This the patient rejected with the remark that her mother
would be free at five and expected her at a friend’s house.
So we see here an insufficient reason advanced (for
the alteration) and are consequently justified in assum-
ing that the patient is showing a resistance to the
treatment.

Freud has repeatedly pointed out that analysis must
realize these resistance phenomena which are frequently
connected with transference. Since according to our view
the psychic relations involved in these two questions are
different (from those of Freud) and are frequently mis-
understood, I shall attempt to discuss them in relation
to the above-mentioned case.


What we have first to consider is the particular
144


THE CONCEPT OF RESISTANCE 145


point in the analysis of the treatment, at which resist-
ance asserted itself. In the case we are discussing the
patient had been talking for a few days about her
relations to her brother. She told me that occasionally
when alone with him she experienced an inexplicable
Jeeling of disgust. She had, however, no feeling of
aversion to him and gladly accompanied him to the
theatre. But she was careful not to offer him her
arm on the street lest strangers might mistake her
for his mistress. She often conversed with him at
home and frequently permitted him to kiss her, a
practice in which he liked to indulge. Kissing was
one of her most passionate pleasures and at times she
experienced a veritable kissing-mania. Of late she had
been more reserved toward her brother because, owzng
to her acute sense of smell she had noticed that his breath
had a bad odour.

The patient’s psychological relation to her brother is
thus clear enough. She experiences certain emotions
and plays with certain possibilities agatust which she
zmmedtately seeks to protect herself. If these emotional
Stirrings take the form of female desires (permitting
herself to be kissed, taking her brother’s arm, desire for
the society of men), then she confronts them with the
masculine protest, clothing the protest, however, in az
znconspicuous logical dress.

What does she do to maintain her masculine atti-
tude toward her brother? Unconsciously she intro-
duces a false evaluation, develops such remarkable
and fine perceptions and prophetic vision that she is
occasionally quite right in her inferences.1_ The fear of
being mistaken for her brother’s mistress only those
will be in a position to understand who have had a
similar attitude toward one of their brothers. She is
quite right about the odour from her brother’s mouth,
although it is rather peculiar that xo one else in the
zmmedtate circle of relations who are frequently kissed by
him, seems to have noticed it. Our patient has conse-
quently made a revaluation unfavourable to her brother,


1 A maniac may also be in the right. If I am to correct a lesson, and
this is often to be done with patients mutatis mutandis, and discover a real
typographical error, I have the right to point this out again and again.
However, we are concerned with a lesson and not with the pointing out of
a printer’s error.

K


146 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


indicating clearly what her object is. Some people
would perhaps in this case only hear her ‘‘no”.?

If anyone doubts the likelihood of any indications of
sexual love between a brother and sister, instead of
calling attention to the extensive data furnished by
history and what can be obtained from criminal
statistics and pedagogical experiences where they
are proved, I would merely insist that 7 do not regard
them as possessing any great depth. It seems to me that
it is very much a case of a brother and sister playing
‘¢father and mother” in the nursery, where the girl by
reason of her neurotic masculine attitude, attempts to
safe-guard herself in order not to go too far. Her
brother has long ceased to be to her merely a brother
but occupies the rdle of the future suitor. She lives
together with him in a world of fancy and tries to show of
what she ts capable and in what way she ts planning to pro-
tect herself.?

Her recollections and the surviving emotional traces


1 False evaluations whether under or over-evaluations are of the greatest
importance in the psychical dynamics of normal life and of neurosis and merit
the most detailed study on the part of individual psychology. The ‘‘ fox and
the sour grapes” represent an instructive example. Instead of realizing his
own inferiority the tox deprives the grapes of their inherent value—and thus
retains his high spirits. He is prepared for his mega/omania. These types
of psychical procedure primarily serve the maintenance of ‘‘ free will” and of
personal worth. The same purpose is served by the over-evaluations of
personal achievements and aims caused by the individual’s flight from the
pessimistic feeling of his own inferiority. They are thus ‘‘arranged” and
arise out of an exagperated safety-tendency directed against the feeling of
“‘being below”. That the exaggerated masculine attitude of male and
female neurotics, utilizes to the full this ‘‘arrangement”, I have repeatedly
shown. The senses of the patient—hearing, smelling, vision, and skin,
organic and pain sensations—are over-worked, over-concentrated and made
subservient to this safe-guarding tendency so that the patient becomes the
judge and the culprit rolled into one. Compare Schiller’s epigram: ‘‘ You
are right, Schlosser, we love what we possess and desire that which we do
not own! Only he possessed of a real soul loves, whereas he of a small mind
lusts!” When the patient actually understands his attitude he corrects it by
bringing his values into harmony with the facts of reality. His adjustment
has then begun.

> This anticipatory thinking, anticipatory perception with its accompany-
ing safe-guarding tendencies, is one of the main functions of the dream and
among other things, at the basis of what seems to be telepathic and prophetic
happenings, just as it is also the essence of every form of prognosis. The
poet Simonides was once in a dream warned by one who was dead, against
embarking on a certain sea-trip. He stayed at home and was afterwards
informed that that particular boat had sunk. We may perhaps be allowed to
assume that this famous poet, who had been so ‘* pointedly” warned against


this journey, would probably have stayed at home even if he had not had
this dream and this warning.


THE CONCEPT OF RESISTANCE 147


of past events tell her of what she is capable. The total
impression the patient receives is the following: ‘/ am
a girl, not strong enough to conquer my sexual desires ;
even in childhood I possessed little energy, my fancy
playing with forbidden objects and I was not even able
to control myself (my desires) in my brother’s presence!
I am going to be calumniated and maltreated; I am
going to be sick, to bear children in pain, be conquered,
be a slave! I must therefore from the beginning and at
all times be on my guard, not succumb to my desires,
not subject myself to a man, indeed mzstrust all men!
To do that I must myself behave like a man!” Her
feminine sexual nature becomes her enemy and this
enemy she endows with unbelievable powers and wiles.
In this way there arises in the emotional life of the neurotic,
a caricature of the sexual instinct which it ts really worth
while attacking. ‘The male neurotic likewise fears those
emotions he regards as feminine, such as tenderness,
desire to subordinate himself to a woman, which make
their appearance in his love-life and he consequently
makes caricatures of them in order to attack them.
From other, non-sexual relations, he obtains analogies :—
bodily traits, former weakness, indolence, listlessness,
and early infantile errors.! All serve as evidence of
the presence of non-masculine, z.e. feminine traits and
are confronted by the masculine protest. That real
accidents are ‘‘arranged” and put into effect, that the
defiance attitude enables female patients (this holds for
girls who show defiance of their mother’s warnings),
to employ their own female sexual activity in the form
of the masculine protest and enables male neurotics to
avoid the love relation by resorting to feminine softness
and aboulia (in the case of so-called ‘‘neurasthenia ”),
impotence and fear, all this I have discussed in other
sections of this book. These ‘arranged’ and fre-
quently caricatured inner-perceptions find a place in the
woof and warp of the psyche and serve as warning signs


1 [ had some patients who were always glad to point out the periodicity
of their attacks, thus directing attention to their feminine ‘‘nature”, but
thereby betraying, in my view, the fact that they had remained under the
influence of a fundamental doubt—‘‘ am J, or am I not, masculine or feminine ?”
Their theory (of periodicity) calms them: ‘‘ Every person is both masculine
and feminine!’ When analysed I always encounter some evidence that the
periodicity of these attacks is being used as a means of resistance against the
physician. But the patient is always implicated in it.


148 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


that are to call forth powerfully the masculine protest
and the protections against succumbing.

We have thus come to the conclusion that the
patient hardly runs any danger to-day of committing
incest, and that zz her desire to safe-guard herself she
has gone further than was really necessary, but that by
so acting she has served one of the main objects of
her masculine protest namely, zo¢ to have her future
life develop along feminine paths or be dependent
upon men.

The depreciation of man ts a normal manifestation among
neurotics. This fact may appear quite clearly, as in
the example above, or it may be so completely disguised,
that some readers seeing my statement would find their
data unable to throw any light on the general validity
of my interpretation. Frequently enough we do dis-
cover in neurotics, masochistic and ‘‘ feminine” traits
and far-reaching tendencies toward subordination and
suggestibility for hypnotism. The hysterical longing
for the great, strong man before whom we can bend
our knee has always appealed to us! How many
of the neurotic patients are inspired with admiration
for their physician and chant hymns of praise to his
honour! They act as though in love. But the obverse
side turns up after a while,’ for none of them can
stand adjustment. They argue as follows: ‘‘ What a
weakling Iam! I must use all my means in order not
to succumb!” And like a person about to make a
high jump they withdraw a few steps and duck their
heads with increased effort, in order to jump over the
others. One of my patients frequently said that she
was unmoral and was at all times ready to enter intoa
liaison. Unfortunately men repulsed her aesthetically.
Another patient who was being treated for impotence,
had been previously hypnotized by a charlatan. Upon
leaving, this hypnotizer had told the patient that if he
would put the fob of his watch around his head he
would fall asleep. The patient was not cured of his
impotence but always fell asleep. He visited many
physicians after this and whenever their medicine or
mechanical treatment were ineffectual, he asked to be
hypnotized, which none were able to do. Thereupon


.) Cf. my discussion of pseudo-masochism in the ‘‘ Psychic Treatment of
Trigeminal Neuralgia’, in this volume,


THE CONCEPT OF RESISTANCE 149


at the end of the visit, he took out his fob and showed
the physicians how he put himself to sleep. The
meaning of his behaviour was: ‘‘You cannot even
do what a charlatan did; you cannot even do what a
fob can!” If the patient, who since that time has
become distrustful and interested in depreciating men
and women, ever becomes aware of the secret of his
psyche, the fob will lose its power.

Whenever I traced this depreciatory attitude toward
the masculine to its origins, I always found it rooted in
some infantile pathogenic situation in which the patient
when a child, desired to get the better of his father
and either actually attempted or filled his imagination
with the various attitudes of offence and defence, to be
adopted toward father, brothers and sisters. But it
seems also quite clear that the character of the neurotic-
ally-disposed child, his exaggerated envy, ambition,
and will-to-power, greatly stirs up his desire for
domination.

From this view-point it is easy to grasp the double-
role of the neurotically-disposed child zz hzs relation
to women and also easy to test it by means of the data
obtained. On the one hand, woman—like everything
we cannot obtain immediately—is idealized in the most
extravagant manner and clothed in all the magic
qualities of strength and power. Mythology, folk-
tales and folk-beliefs frequently deal with a type of
giantess, of female-demon,—as in Heine’s poem Zhe
Lorelec—where the man is represented as microscopic-
ally small or hopelessly lost. The neurotic frequently
retains terrifying traces of his infantile attitude, conscious
or unconscious phantasies or protected memories (Freud)
and reminiscences of women who towered above him
or found their way over him (cf. Ganghofer’s biography
and similar statements in Stendhal). Later on a feeling
of timidity in the presence of women or the fear of
remaining tied to them, of not being able to get loose
from them, is found expressed in one form or another
in the psychical super-structure. Against this com-
pulsory psychic relation which threatens to subordinate
a man to a woman, the neurotic directs all his safe-
guarding tendencies, strengthens his masculine protest
and his ideas of greatness and by means of these
safety tendencies, humiliates and depreciates woman.


150 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Quite often two types of female figures appear in
his phantasies and in his consciousness: Loreley
and (Wismamitras) beloved; the ideal and the coarse-
realistic figures; the mother (Mary) type and the
prostitute (cf. O. Weininger). In other cases either
a composite form arises like the real hetaira, or one of
the above two types appears very definitely in the
foreground (feminist and anti-feminist). :
When not more than six months old the child is
known to reach out for all objects and is unwilling to
return them. Shortly after that, under the pressure of
a will-to-power, it seizes hold of people who take an
interest inhim. Jealousy is the safe-guarding tendency
accompanying this desire for possession. If the child
is forced to make further anticipatory constructions,
(uncertainty as to sex-réle), then an early sexual
maturity or timidness often arises. I have come to
the conclusion that zz the relation of the child to tts
parents, a subsequent neurotic trait ts already operative
which attempts both to posit, and at the same time protect
ttself against, a goal of god-likeness. Passive experiences
as such possess no driving force; they are not causes
but merely land-marks, recognized in each tndividual
perspective of power, employed, remembered or forgotten.
They have obtained recognition because they portray
striking manifestations of the dynamics of the neurotic
and furthermore, because they can be utilized in the
neurosis as reminders or types of expression within the
frame-work of the masculine-protest. ‘‘l ama weakling
in regard to women! As a child I already subjected
myself, in the form of love, to a woman”. Reading
between the lines this means: ‘‘I am afraid of women”.
Immediately following this ‘‘daemonic” fear of woman,
ofher ‘‘ puzzling nature”, her ‘‘ eternal inexplicability ”,
her ‘‘compelling power”, we find man either resorting
to depreciation or flight. Psychic impotence, ejaculatio
praecox, syphilophobia, fear of love or marriage then
supervene. If the masculine protest manages to assert
itself and makes sexual intercourse possible, the neurotic
feels either the completely disqualified woman, ‘the
prostitute or the corpse, worthy of his love. Analysis
subsequently discloses the real motive, the belief that these
can more easily be controlled. As another alternative we


1 7.e. objects incapable of resistance, of deceit, or domination.


THE CONCEPT OF RESISTANCE I5I


find the masculine protest forcing a man unwilling to
face the world, into the réle of a Don Juan.}

L have never met a masculine neurotic who has not in some
Jorm or other, laid particular stress upon the inferiority of
women and probably, at the same time, of man. The fight
against a rival in love arises out of the latter tendency ?
and is primarily envy. The female neurotic even more
consistently depreciates both man and woman. Our
patient, as she is dealing with a male physician, resorts
as on other occasions, to a depreciation of the ever re-
appearing man. This she doesall the more insistently if
she realizes that he is ‘‘ superior” to her in knowledge.
In the present case her ‘‘ves¢stance” set in after I had
explained to her important facts about the character
of her neurosis. She countered with a new protest,
“* Because you were correct tn so many things”. But she
wished to be in the right! If in her dream or in day
phantasies she drew pictures in which she represented
herself as frivolous or wicked and entertained thoughts
of sexual relations with her brother or with me, this is
to be understood as a neurotic exaggeration designed to
safe-guard her against just these things. This ‘‘ /ove-
transference” to the physician is consequently fictitious,
to be interpreted as a caricature and not to be taken as
‘“‘tibido”. It is in reality no (real) ‘‘transference” but
simply an attitude and habit going back to childhood
and representing the road to power.

The later development of her disease was typical.
The final struggle for the depreciation of the physician
began. She knew everything more thoroughly and
could do it better than the doctor. Hardly an hour
would pass without her attempting by means of objec-
tions and reproaches of the most flagrant kind, to under-
mine his medical prestige.

The means at the disposal of individual psychology
suffice amply for eradicating the patient’s mistrust against
people in general. Patience, prevision, warnings make
progress fairly certain for the physician. The progress
consists in disclosing to the patient the pathogenic
infantile situation in which his or her masculine protest

1 Many (two) women at the same time or closely following each other ;
never permanent. Only the sensation of a transitory victory not entailing
any return on thetr part entices such people.


2 Cf, also the corresponding behaviour of the patient in the chapter on
‘¢ Psychic Treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia’”’.


152 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


is rooted. The friendly relation to the physician permits
both patient and physician to get a complete insight into
the neurotic activity, to realize the falsity of his emotional
promptings, the erroneous assumptions made by the
neurotic disposition and the neurotic’s superfluous ex-
penditure of energy. From the individual-psychologist
the patient learns for the first time in his life, to know
himself and to control his over-tense instincts. To
accomplish this it is necessary to do away with resistance
against the physician. The practitioner makes his
connection with the patient through vestiges of the
group-consciousness that survive in the neurotic or
psychically diseased individual.


XI
Syphilophobia


(1911)


A Contribution to the Meaning of Phobias and Hypochondriac
States in the Dynamics of the Neurosis


I HAVE rarely encountered a case of neurosis that did
not disclose in a marked manner, a train of thought
indicating a fear of syphilis. Sometimes this symptom
was in the foreground—frequently the only one for whose
sake the patient had come to see me; at other times it
became fused with numerous other symptoms in the
most complicated manner. Generally the patients are
individuals who have never been infected. However,
neurotics who had at one time been infected, show at
times a phobia of this type although they substitute for
it frequently a fear of gonorrhea, lice, vermin, tabes,
and paralysis; or they tremble finally at the thought
of the children they are not for a long time yet
to beget. They exhibit a tremendous interest in this
syphilis-complex, pursue the theme by talking and
reading about it, and not infrequently we see how this
interest manifests itself in drawing and inventiveness.

That people with phobias, and hypochondriacs are
careful, is well known and we would not waste time
mentioning it zf zt were not for the fact that they share
this trait with all neurotics. A thorough investigation
of this condition would demonstrate to everyone’s satis-
faction that the phobic and hypochondriac symptoms
possess one admirable trait, that they safe-guard their
possessors against danger to an extent making pre-
cautions in our sense of the word seem almost super-
fluous, for they can be entirely replaced by phobias, just as
fear is replaced by safe-guards.

There thus arise those portrayals of personal situa-


tions which present such great difficulties for the neuro-
153


154 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


logist attempting to understand and analyse them.
Since the phobia springs from the patient's safety-tendency,
protecting him even more than is necessary, he may allow
himself the luxury of being careless. In fact every man
possessed of the fear of syphilis can quote instances
of the lack of precautions taken. The psychical connec-
tion of this ‘‘ voluntary ambivalence”’, as Bleuler would
incorrectly say, is hardly suggested by this phrase. /¢
ts inherent in the dynamics of the psychical hermaphroditism
with tts subsequent masculine protest. The controlling, one
might say, watching (Schiller’s ‘‘sentimental” ) power
of the neurotic psychic life becomes subjected to the
following influence: ‘Look, how careless I can be!
I know no limits! Therefore be careful!” This is
the coercive psychic stirring of the man with phobias,
stirrings that he permits to come to the surface either
because he is reminded of imprudent acts or because,
and this is more significant, he arranges them on a small
scale,

Belonging to this neurotic arrangement, for instance, is
a permanent or transient prejudice against safe-guarding
tactics. In explanation of this ‘‘ irresponsibility ” we
often find many apparently inadvised remarks such as
that the ‘‘safe-guarding measures are of no value!”’ or
‘‘T am not able to use them ”’ and phrases of that kind.

That the objections of the frivolous-appearing neurotic
have a certain amount of justification cannot be denied.
However, this justification ought to hold for all! Indeed
it is easy to satisfy one’s self that the patient with syphilo-
phobia of this type is also quite capable of employing
safe-guarding measures.

To this behaviour of the patient the same significance
is to be attributed as that I have repeatedly described in
my former works :—he is playing with danger, running
after punishment in order to entangle himself all the
more securely in his own safety-net, to keep more
definitely before his eyes both the dangers existing in
the external world and his own inferiority. One of my
patients who came to me shortly after being infected
with lues to be treated for neurotic symptoms, expressed
the above attitude in the following words :—‘‘ Now, that
I have become infected with lues my fears have become
somewhat lightened. For ten years I have been waiting
in fear and trembling for this infection!” What really


SYPHILOPHOBIA 155


brought him relief was the fact that he was now freed
from love and marriage.

Most of the people with syphilophobia, however,
protect themselves immediately against the danger of
infection, by safety-measures. They safeguard them-
selves against every line of contact, far or near, that
could possibly be infectious; they refrain from touch-
ing or from drinking out of strange glasses; shut them-
selves off from company and use only private lavatories.
Belonging to the larger circle of their safety devices
we find masturbation, ejaculatio praecox, pollutions and
psychical impotence. The possession of avarice, for
example, renders the path to love extremely difficult.
Their aesthetic and ethical principles attain a tremendous
size, their eyes, ears, and noses detect mistakes and
confusion everywhere. Girls with syphilophobia flirt
continuously but start back frightened from the thought
of love and marriage, just as the male patients do. Their
explanations are based either upon men’s odour, un-
cleanliness, fickleness, deceit or their unchastity when
entering the marriage relation. Not infrequently girls
give expression to a fear of being infected by their
husbands. Other safety-devices are frigidity, used by
women and homo-sexuality and perversions employed
by both men and women.!

When analysis has disclosed the various intercon-
nections of the symptoms and the patient realizes that
his fear of syphilis is a form of retrospective protection,
a kind of hallucinatory excitement, mirroring the final
consequences of an ill-considered step leading to a
possibility of infection,? this fear, in many cases, then
decreases. For the attainment of a definite cure of the
neurosis we have in many cases to continue until the


1 A double psychical mode can be detected in perversions, as I have
pointed out in another connection, cf. the chapter on ‘‘ The Problem of Homo-
sexuality’. The first mode consists of perversions, in the main masochistic
or pseudo-masochistic in type, designed ¢o chain down an individual by
personal submissiveness. The second type consists of perversions representing
an extreme form of submissiveness, with the object of getting rid of ones
partner, of instilling fear into oneself, of fleeing from other partners, from
marriage, etc. These are all quite transparent when masochism is confined to
the domain of phantasy. Connected with these—in revenge—are often found
sadistic utterances and either fancies or feelings of revulsion; a tendency
toward lust of power, sternness. :

2 The hypochondriac’s condition is made up of hallucinatory irritations that
visualize the final consequences, t.e. termination in some infection, anticipatory
tabes, paralysis, headache and forgetfulness.


156 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


very end of the analysis, which demands a profound
grasp of unconscious basic facts and impulses. The
final conclusions to be obtained from such an analysis
are the following :—


1. The fear of syphilis is never the only form of
safety, but is regularly found with either all or, at any
rate, most of the neurotic safe-guarding tendencies.

2. All safe-guarding tendencies are initiated, one
might say formally announced, by the appearance of
nervous premonitions. ;

3. The nervous premonitions arise out of the feeling
of inferiority and uncertainty due to organic inferiority
and developed in childhood from the fear of permanently
occupying an inferior rdéle, all these feelings being, to
a great extent, retained in the unconscious during sub-
sequent development.


The forms of this neurotic dynamics I have discussed
in different parts of this volume. They are connected
with the various efforts made by the masculine protest
in its reaction to the feeling of femininity and refer to
the contrast, to be taken both literally and figuratively
and expressed in the relations of the ‘‘ above and below”’.

The fear of woman stands out definitely as the most
prominent of the safe-guarding tendencies encountered
among those afflicted with syphilophobia. The history
of the patients generally discloses strong, masculine
parents, who by their importance and power oppressed
the child and made him partially responsible for his
neurosis. The degenerate children of geniuses furnish
the best evidence for this. The neurotic resorts to de-
preciation of men and women in order to escape from
his own feeling of inferiority.

An equally marked and exaggerated craze for clean-
liness is also quite apparent and is similarly due to
safe-guarding tendencies. It expresses itself in wash-
ing-compulsions, fear of stains, dirt or dust. It is part
of this same tendency to endow both defecation and
urination with a kind of ritualistic aspect. Here con-
stipation, like all other symptoms, often assumes the symbol of
an impulse toward cleanliness and waste of time. Organic
inferiority, manifestations of the urinary and intestinal
apparatus (haemorrhoids, fistulas, hypospadia, enuresis
as well as urinary disease in early stages), are frequent


SYPHILOPHOBIA 157


and their manifestations are kept in the memory as
fear-inspiring reminiscences although likewise used as
preoccupations.

Phantasy is continually infested with problems—
depending upon how early attention has been drawn to
them and when checked—of illness, death, pregnancy,
childbirth (in men also). It fixes its attention upon
eruptions, spots or swellings and employs them sym-
bolically just as it does thoughts about castration and
the smallness of the genitals. The sensation of an un-
attained and never-maturing masculinity, introduces com-
pensation, extreme exaggerations of domineering, sadistic
and erotic <mpulses.

An acute mzstrust of people, the continuous deszre to
jind fault, is connected with this depreciatory tendency and
prevents the development of any permanent friendly or
love relationship. An additional obstacle in life is
furnished by ¢he doubts carried over from childhood
and originally engendered by the feeling of inferiority,
representing the most prominent form of that primary
uncertainty which leads to laziness.

From experiences possessed by everyone, people
suffering from syphilophobia derive the conviction of
the exaggerated nature of their eroticism. This convic-
tion weighs heavily upon their resolutions, evokes the
phobias and continually intensifies them. If this fear
does not suffice to safeguard the patient then psychical
impotence or other safeguards develop. Not infrequently
other phobias accompany it such as agoraphobia, ery-
throphobia, neurasthenic hysterical and compulsion
manifestations that disqualify the patient for social inter-
course, thus protecting him against love and marriage.
On one occasion I witnessed a ‘‘combination ” including
a sneezing-fit in which the patient behaved like the
hero in Vischer’s Auch Ezner without having known
this novel. : ;

Girls with syphilophobia are found with the masculine
attitude fully developed. The depreciation of man reaches
the same proportions as the depreciation of women
among men.

The significance of the phobza as a means of safety
is clearly seen in those cases where the patient, if he is
on the point of seriously considering marriage, errone-
ously finds an exanthem or a gonorrhceal flow and takes


158 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


to flight. Signs of organ inferiority such as para-urethral
canals, phimosis, diminutive penis, cryptorchism, small
testes and enlarged labia minora are frequent.

Analysis discloses, as so often in the psychology of
neuroses, an explanation quite opposed to the view-
point of the patient. The patient intimates that he is
afraid of lues and will consequently refrain from sexual
intercourse. But we can prove that ke zs afraid of
women and consequently ‘‘ arranges” his syphilophobia.
The hostility against the other sex always breaks
through and can be traced back to early childhood.
I have already referred to the literary and scientific
utilization of this problem (Schopenhauer, Strindberg,
Moebius, Flies, Weininger) and shall therefore briefly
point out the adzguzty of the fear of women as expressed
zn poetry and art. My attention was called to the poet
Georg Engel (Die Furcht vor der Frau, and Der Rezter
auf dem Regenbogen) because of his sharp formulation
of the problem, as well as to the very thoughtful work
of Philip Frey, Der Kampf der Geschlechter (Vienna,
1904).

Schopenhauer expresses himself as follows in his
Aphorismen zur Lebenswetsheit: ‘*‘Both the knightly
principle of honour and venereal disease have poisoned
vetkos kat didia Of life. WVenereal disease has a much
more extensive influence than we imagine at first
blush, for it is confined not merely to the physical
will but likewise to the moral side. Since Amor’s
quiver became filled with poisoned darts, a strange,
hostile even infernal element has entered into the rela-
tion of the sexes in consequence of which a sinister and
terrible mistrust permeates it. The direct influence of
such a change in one of the bases of all human society,
has spread, ina smaller or lesser degree, to the other
human relationships”. We are certainly not doing
an injustice to the penetrating vision of the great
philosopher by bringing his ‘‘hostile” relationship to
women into connection with his originally hostile attitude
toward his strong-minded mother. That Schopenhauer
in other respects also approximated to our portrait of
the person with syphilophobia is well-known. Let me
emphasize hzs trembling and astonishment at the potency of
the sexual instinct, his hyper-sensttiveness, mistrust and
definitely expressed depreciatory attitude in dealings with


SYPHILOPHOBIA 159


men and women. Did he not bestow upon his dog the
name ‘‘man”? His negation of life is a negation of
the sexual instinct in the same sense that syphilo-
phobia is. It is the same motif as that found among
our neurotics :—The struggle against the strong woman,
the fear of woman, the fear of being placed “ below”.
August Strindberg, one of the most marked of mascu-
line protesters, wrote the following in his Book of Love
about the weapons of love: ‘‘ With what weapons can
woman best defend her petty personality so as not Zo
be subordinated to man and lose her personality?” Let
me in this connection, refer to the man’s neurotic fear
of the woman who is ‘‘on top” and to the secret wish
of all feminine neurotics, to be ‘‘above”, facts pointed
frequently out in this book.

I shall now mention a number of pazntings that have
sprung from the same psychic mechanism. The impulse
perceptible in them is so clearly to be traced back to the
fear of woman, that we ought not to be surprised to dis-
cover in them again, all the above-mentioned problems of
phobia. This is more definitely noticeable in symbolic
and stilistic representations A number of the very finest
works are concerned with the Kampaspa,! Delilah and
Salomé motif and when regarded superficially, seem to
present the idea of triumph in the abstract or the power
of love. At times, this problem—fear of woman—
becomes even more general and delineates it spatially
(big woman—small man, the woman above—the man
below). That the Madonna motif is well adapted for
this theme is easily understood. Among the reactions
to this original fear (of woman), there is also found
the depreciation of woman szuce art is predominantly in
the hands of men.* Of decisive importance is the fact
that as in phobia, a whole series of pictures could be
presented taken either from one or a number of artists,
that show the above-stressed safe-guarding tendencies.
This is quite noticeable in the general insistence
on these problems by Rops. The identity of these
with the problems of the neurotic, hardly need any
more proof than my drawing your attention to the


1 Kampaspa the mistress of Alexander riding on Aristotle.

2 This is clearly one of the reasons for the superiority of man in art, namely
that the most far-reaching problem connected with painting and sculpture Aas
its origin in the psychic impulses of man.


160 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


following pictures: ‘‘La Dame au Pantin”, ‘‘Sphinx”
‘‘ Cocottocracy”, ‘‘ L’Alcoholiste”, ‘‘ Mors Syphilitica”.
Baudelaire’s statement that he could not think of a
beautiful woman without at the same time associating
misfortune with her, sounds like the text to the above
pictures and describes the sensation of syphilophobia.
In his Les Fleurs du Mal Baudelaire says: ‘‘ You tread
over the dead, O Beautiful One, and ridiculing them,
select as your prettiest ornament, fear, Murder and
horror are your loveliest decorations to tell us hypo-
critically and ostentatiously of your pride. You are the
moment which barely blown across our path is gone,
the flame that barely crackling fades away. The man
who ardently embraces your beautiful body is like a
dying man who clasps his own grave.” ?

As has been frequently pointed out the artist is
made of the same stuff as the neurotic. The uncertainty
springing from organic inferiority? accompanies him
throughout life ; he never feels anywhere at home; his
fear of action, of tests, stage-fright and of never coming
to an end, areas much to be interpreted as safety-guarding
tendencies pushed too far, as is the neurotic’s pulling
back in the case of the fear of high places, or agoraphobia,
and his quaking before the most powerful of masculine
triumphs, love. Heis not so much afraid of the heights
as the depths and whzle his greed impels him upward, he
zs trembling at the idea of being ‘‘ below”. He is saved
from a neurosis which he possesses to a certain extent,
by his strong and potent social feeling. His syphilo-
phobia is but a small part of the safe-guarding tendency
protecting him against falling ‘‘ below” and for that
reason he draws it in most horrible colours.®

In practice, from my experience, we generally
obtain examples like the following, all of which can be
easily understood in the light of what we have said
above.


1. A recently and happily married manufacturer
came to me one day with the complaint that during the


1 Cf. the discussions in Gustave Kahn’s Das Weis in der Karikatur
Frankreichs (Stuttgart) from which work these quotations have been taken.

® Cf. the chapter on ‘‘ Psychic Compensation” in Adler, Zhe Study of
Organ Inferiority. English translation, 1917.

8 One neurotic showed a pronounced aversion to painting. He explained


it by saying: ‘‘ Painting arranges all things that are co-ordinate as though they
stood above another.”


SYPHILOPHOBIA 161


last few days he was uninterruptedly tormented by the
fear of contracting lues. He could neither sleep nor
work; was afraid to sleep with his wife, to kiss her or
to make use of the lavatory for fear of infecting her.
After detailed questioning it was discovered that shortly
before the outbreak of his phobia, he had kissed an
unknown girl at the station. He was cured after two
interviews, after it had been made clear to him that he
was trying to safe-guard himself by means of syphilo-
phobia against any further deviations. His disposition
toward phobia was probably not appreciatively influenced
by the cure.

2. Dream taken from the prolonged treatment under-
gone by a physician suffering from compulsion-ideas
and frequent pollutions.

‘‘] dreamt that I was present at the siege of Vienna
by the Turks, waiting for their defeat and flight. In my
dream I knew at what time the defeated Turks would
appear before me for I had read it. In order to be of
aid I took my revolver and tried with the help of some
comrades to take the fleeing Kara Mustapha prisoner.
At the appointed time Kara Mustapha appeared with
a number of others on black horses. My comrades ran
away. I saw myself confronted by an overwhelming
power and was on the point of fleeing when I received
a shot in the spinal cord. I felt how I was dying”.

The analysis showed this as an attempt at anticipatory
thinking in the dream, concerned with reflections about
the contraction and final outcome of lues, tabes and
death. The connection of thought led from Turks to
polygamy. What the dreamer, a young physician,
knew from reading, related to the period of an exanthem-
atous eruption. The horsemen ora black horse (‘‘ That
is the dark thanatos”) is death. The shot in the back
means, in addition to tabes, also the experience of being
defeated by a man (one more hole!) and the seizing
of the gun is the attempt at masculine protest. The
masculine protest finally triumphs in a roundabout way
by the use of the precaution, ‘‘ Renounce the prostitute !”
In other words, renounce those women who are the
only ones to be taken into consideration in our patient’s
case. As an additional protest-thought we have :—many
wives, Turks, harem!—The second dream which |
analysed in ‘‘ Traume einer Prostituierten ” (Zeztschri/t

i


162 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


fiir Sexualwisenachaft, 1908, Heft 2) discloses a similar
safe-guarding tendency. Lenau has treated the same
problem and in similar fashion in his Warnung tm
Traum:

‘“‘No house was now to be seen and frightened he
beheld only graves and solemnly beckoning crosses
around him. Then she turned toward him in the moon-
light to heal him of his suffering; but she who with
grey-blurred countenance clasped him to her breast was
—Death.”

I shall not give any detailed analysis here. In
those cases where a patient shows syphilophobia we
can be certain that the fear of women or the fear of men,
generally both, is likely to be encountered.


XII


Nervous Insomnia
(1914)


A DESCRIPTION of the symptoms of insomnia will not
give any essentially new information. The complaint
of the patient will refer either to decreased duration and
insufficient depth of the sleeping state or to the time of
wakefulness. The main emphasis, and it seems rather
trite to mention it, always falls on the insufficient rest
and its resultant tiredness and inability to work.

For the sake of accuracy let me state that quite a
number of patients complain of the same fact (z.e. tired-
ness, etc.), although enjoying undisturbed or even more
than normally lengthened slumber.

The nature of the illness of which insomnia is
a symptom can be easily circumscribed. There is
no psychic disease and no accompanying group of
symptoms in which this suffering is not to be found
either of long-standing or intermittent. The most
serious forms of psychic diseases, the psychoses, are
generally heralded by exceptionally severe types of
insomnia.

The attitude of the patient to his symptoms is inter-
esting. He markedly stresses the tormenting nature of
his disease and the numerous remedies taken against
it which are always of no avail. One man spent half
the night ardently trying to conjure up sleep, while
another did not retire till past midnight in order to
fall asleep from extreme tiredness. Others repeatedly
attempt to remove even the gentlest noises or count
up to one thousand a number of times, occupy them-
selves with long trains of thought or experiment
and changing from one position to another until day-
break. : 5

In some instances—in milder forms of insomnia—


sleeping rules are formulated and adhered to. In one
163


164 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


case sleep could be obtained only if the patient drank
some alcoholic beverage, took some bromide; if he ate
a little or a good deal, early or late at night; after his
card-game; if he had company or was alone; had
taken neither black coffee nor tea; or on the contrary
imbibed one of these drinks. The not infrequent anti-
thetic nature of the conditions propitious for sleeping
is a striking fact; all the more so because a fairly large
number of explanations are given for their attitudes,
some insisting that sexual intercourse is a well-proved
expedient, others that on the contrary, abstinence is,

It is easier to snatch an afternoon sleep, but here too
there are a series of conditions (‘‘if no one disturbs
me”, ‘‘if I can retire at the proper time”’, ‘‘ immediately
after eating”’, etc.). It may, on the other hand, tire
a person or cause headache or drowsiness.

If we look over the descriptions given by the patients,
we get the impression not only of being in the presence
of sick people—especially if we consciously fix our atten-
tion upon the effect of the disturbance—but of individuals
with diminished, increased or nullified capacities for
work, of there being some obstacle in life for which
they lack all sense of responsibility.

For the sake of simplicity let us dismiss older
examples where alcoholic intemperance or misuse of
narcotics have gained control over the patient and
engendered new symptons and obstacles. The examina-
tion of insomnia due to organic causes does likewise not
fall within the compass of this work.

It deserves to be mentioned, however, that frequent
use of narcotics aids the patient in gaining the same
excuse for increased difficulty of his work as does
insomnia. He will get up later, suffer from a feeling
of drowsiness, lack of concentration, and waste, as a
rule, a good part of the day trying to recuperate from
his slumber.

The ‘‘harmless methods” on the other hand, have
a bad reputation. They either are only efficacious at
the beginning of the treatment or not at all. They
work initially with those patients who, in all walks of
life, are characteristically known by their external
obedience and good-natured amiability. The stopping
of a successful cure always shows the patient’s attitude
to the new treatment, as if he wished to demonstrate


NERVOUS INSOMNIA 165


the uselessness of the physician’s endeavours. More
obstinate and unwilling neurotics occasionally begin
the treatment by insomnia and try Zo put the blame upon
the physician. Generally during their anamnesis we
discover that they have on past occasions, likewise,
employed insomnia as a means and as a sign of increased
aggravation of their condition, in order thus to be able
to demand that they be spared certain work and to be
able to force their own will upon other people.

All that we can infer from the patient’s descriptions,
or all we ourselves can feel intuitively, indicates the
pronounced estimation in which sleep is held. No
physician will underestimate the importance of sleep
but those who obtrusively force into the foreground
self-understood facts should be asked the object of their
procedure. What, in the long run, is meant by this
marked stressing of sleep, and what here manifests
itself definitely enough, is this—that the patient demands
recognition of his difficult position. For only if this
acquiescence is obtained will he be excused from respon-
sibility in his mistakes of life and be permitted to attach
double importance to his success.

If one follow the psychic trial of strength lead-
ing to the arrangement of insomnia which develops
later into a weapon and protection for the threatened
personality-feeling, we soon learn to understand how
insomnia has taken its proper place in connection with
the endangered situation of the patient. The feeling of
the applicability of the means (insomnia) used, the patient
obtains from experiences either of his own or others, or
from the effect of the suffering inflicted upon his environ-
ment and upon himself. We should not be surprised
then, if the physician or any other method adopted, are
frequently designed to serve no other purpose but that
of confirmation, z.e. as long as the psychic situation of
the patient is unknown and remains unchanged.

Here it is where Individual-psychology can set in.
Its therapeutic purpose should be that of bringing the
patient to the realization of the true nature of the inter-
connections of his symptoms and his giving up of his
secret desire of not being held responsible for his plans.
He will be impelled to assume responsibility, to take
definite action or to renunciation, as soon as he acknow-
ledges to himself and the physician that his insomnia


166 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


is a means to an end, and when he refuses to see any
mysterious destiny in it. Its coincidence with other
nervous symptoms such as compulsion and doubt, in
so far as their technical employment in the neurosis is
concerned, is clearly visible.

We are quite clear now as to the type of person who
will develop the symptom of insomnia and we can
describe him to the patient with astounding accuracy.
Such a type exhibits lack of faith in his own powers and
an ambitious personal goal. Traits like the over-
valuation of success and of the difficulties of life, of a
certain unwillingness to face life, will never be found
missing any more than the hesitating attitude and the
fear of making decisions. Generally the minor means
and artifices of the neurotic character are clearly mani-
fested, such as pedantry, depreciating tendency and
lust for domination. Occasionally the tendency to self-
depreciation appears, as in the hypochondriac and
melancholic attitude. In short, insomnia may represent
an important connecting link in the chain of every
neurotic’s method of life.

Speedy success in treatment is not to be obtained
with any certainty. If such a success is imperatively
required it is possibly best accomplished by informing
the patient directly and tactfully, that insomnia is a
favourable sign of a curable psychic disease. The next
step would be to endeavour, by showing great interest,
to discover the nature of the patient’s thoughts at
night and to pay no further attention to the insomnia.
Occasionally insomnia is then displaced by a very deep
sleep extending far into the day—which, like insomnia,
prevents him from accomplishing his task.

The patient’s thoughts during his sleepless hours are,
in my opinion, of great significance from two aspects.
They are either a method of remaining awake or contain
the basis of the personally conceived psychic difficulty
for whose sake insomnia has been called into existence.
The latter I shall discuss in the following chapter,
‘‘ Individual-psychological Conclusions on Sleep Dis-
turbances”. I always detected the following meaning
in the train of thoughts of a sleepless person, obtaining
some object without incurring any responsibility, other-
wise either apparently unattainable or attainable only by
the employment of one’s whole personality and conscious


NERVOUS INSOMNIA 167


responsitility. This meaning was frequently to be read
** between the lines’, at other times to be inferred as
the purpose, but occasionally appeared quite clearly
from the context. Insomnia thus fits easily into the
group of psychic manifestations and arrangements that
have as their object the construction of a ‘‘ distance”
between the imagined goal and the patient, the initia-
tion of an ‘‘actio in distans”’.

The task of individual-psychology is to describe this
‘“‘actio”, to furnish us with an understanding of the
patient’s attitude to his world and to demonstrate the
connection of insomnia with individual difficulties. The
therapeutic and truly valuable part of such a study lies
in the fact that it discloses to the patient his fictive,
misunderstood and logically contradictory leading idea,
and frees him from the obstinate immobility of thought
derived from it. Atthe same time the patient is care-
fully forced out of his position of irresponsibility and
compelled to accept responsibility even for his un-
conscious fictions. That this gradual clarification is to
be attempted only with the kindliest of attitudes on the
part of the physician, our school has frequently enough
emphasized.

The means for engendering insomnia are com-
paratively simple and easily understood as soon as the
utility of the symptom has once beendemonstrated. The
methods coincide absolutely with those a person would
employ who purposely desired to be sleepless. To
mention only a few :—card-playing, paying visits or in-
viting people to the house; restless movements in bed ;
occupying one’s thoughts with business; thinking of
difficulties ofall kinds and exaggerating them; planning,
counting, indulging in phantasies; insistent desire to
sleep; counting the strokes of the hour when awake
and permitting them to wake one up; falling asleep
and permitting one’s self to be awakened by a dream
or by a pain or fright; getting out of bed and walking
up and down the room; waking up at an early hour.
They are always acts that almost anyone would be
able to accomplish after some practice if they were at
all necessary to free him from responsibility. For
example, a patient makes up his mind to get up early
the next morning in order to study for an examination.
He is terribly afraid that his insomnia may interfere with


168 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his plan which thus proves his sincerity. He wakes up,
ze. wakes up at three in the morning, remains sleepless,
complains bitterly about his mysterious fate and is thus
quite freed from any guilt in connection with his
examination. Is there anyone who doubts the possi-
bility of waking up at any predetermined hour ?

More puzzling is the disturbance of slumber through
pain. In my examples it was always a question of
pain in the leg, abdomen, back of the head and the
back. My explanation of the first is that it is caused by
spasmophilic susceptibility induced by unconscious but
planned over-reaching. The last I found in people who
were accustomed 7o znhaling of air and who generally
had scoliolithic curvature of the spinal column. Incident-
ally, these anomalies in position play a great rdéle in the
symptomology of neuroses and can easily be employed
by unconscious tendencies for engendering pain, par-
ticularly in the group of symptoms connected with
neurasthenia and hypochondria. Frequently the patient
can be lifted out of his fixated susceptibility to pain,
provided one has a certain degree of luck, by persuading
him that he has a segmental naevus in his head (a sign
of inferiority).1_ Subsequent orthopedic treatment is im-
portant and valuable. Frequently the patient’s carriage
tells us of the existence of such an interconnection.

Of much rarer occurrence but very illuminating are
those instances where according to the patient and his
family, sleep can be obtained by the patient’s allowing
his head to hang downwards over the edge of the bed,
of making movements with the head or striking it
against the wall. Many people will perhaps regard
as less certain, the method adopted by patients with
purposeful intensified hyper-sensibility who attempt to
prevent every conceivable noise or glimmer of light,
and being almost inevitably defeated, in view of the
impossibility of their task, awake up (that being their
object).

I shall now give a few examples to illustrate my
views. A patient whose illness and conscious behaviour
was to dominate and annoy his wife, began to suffer
from insomnia due to the fact that (as he says), the
slightest noise awoke him. Even the breathing of his
sleeping wife annoyed him. The house-physician

1 Cf. my Studie tiber Minderwertigheit von Organen,


NERVOUS INSOMNIA 169


thereupon advised him to sleep alone. A painter whose
frightful conceit prevented him from ever finishing a
painting and placing it before the public, is attacked at
night by spasms in the leg, which compel him to jump
out of bed and walk up and down his room by the hour.
On the following day he is, of course, incapable of work.
A female patient suffering from agoraphobia developed
in order to dominate her household more effectively,! was
nevertheless not able to prevent her husband from going
to the tavern in the evening. She developed the habit
of waking up at night a number of times, frightened and
groaning, and annoyed her husband to such an extent
that on the following evening, he became sleepier earlier
and came home earlier. She thus attained her object.
Another patient who was compelled against his will to
travel occasionally and who in general wished to prove
to himself and others that illness incapacitated him for
his profession, interrupted his sleep continually by
means of stomach-ache and pains in the back as de-
scribed above, and slept consequently far into the day,
increasing his tiredness and consequently his inability to
work in the day-time, by taking sleeping potions. His
condition had hardly improved when he discovered two
valuable ideas that would in similar fashion, excusably
make him incapable of work. He found that riding in
the morning was very beneficial for his health and he had
himself consequently awakened at six o’clock. Never-
theless he retired at midnight. In order to harden himself
for the bad beds in which he slept when away from home,
he bought a field-bed and slept very poorly until two in
the morning and then crept into his comfortable bed.
In both cases the result was inability to work. Another
patient wished by conscious exaggeration to make his
rich relatives shoulder the blame for the bad state of his
business. Although according to him, the cause of his
illness they refused to help him. He had learned the
trick of pressing his arm, on which he lay when asleep,
so hard that it would wake him up. Now that in
_addition to everything else he had also become sleepless,
the guilt of his relatives was self-evident.

The physiology of sleep has, as its main specific trait,
the piling up of enervating materials and the flooding
of the blood vessels in the brain. There certainly are

1 Cf, chapter on ‘‘ Dreams and Dream Interpretation’, in this book.


170 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


forms of insomnia caused by primary disturbances of
the sleep-regulating mechanisms (painful vascular
and kidney diseases, psychic shocks, etc.). Neurotic
insomnia is of an entirely different nature. Like other
nervous symptoms it helps the nervous expansion
tendencies and Zo a certain extent this nervous insomnia
forces tts way through, irrespective of the physiological con-
dition of insomnia.


APPENDIX


On Positions assumed in Sleep


The individual-psychological methodology thus shows
us that the phenomena in sleep are adapted to the
individual life-line and as long as these phenomena are,
according to the superstitions of mankind, regarded
as the effects of powerful causes, they are quite
removed from the influence of human caprice and
responsibility. We are convinced, however, that the
actual and real foundations for dream-building and the
desire for sleep, never manifest themselves in an un-
diluted physiological manner but that they are always
understood by the tendency of each individual and
utilized and elaborated in the interests of an individual’s
expansion-tendency. A careful examination based on
extensive data will certainly show that the s/eeping-
posture of a person indicates his guiding-line. A few
examples follow below. Generally it is possible to tell
an individual who has been thoroughly analysed by
individual-psychology, what his sleeping-posture is.
The following are a few examples. I respectfully


invite psychiatrists, neurologists and teachers to increase
this list.


1. K. F. sixteen years old, apprentice, suffering from
hallucinatory confusion. An examination of his sleep-
posture showed that he was accustomed to sleep on his
side with drawn-up arms, a rather provocative position.
I frequently met him in the day with his arms drawn
up. His psychic condition showed complete dissatis-
faction with his profession. He had wanted to become
either a teacher or a pilot. When asked whether he
knew how he had developed the habit of holding his


NERVOUS INSOMNIA 171


arms drawn up, he stated that that was the way in which
his favourite teacher M. had always walked. It was
this M. likewise who had made him think of the idea of
becoming a teacher, a plan that had to be abandoned
owing to the poverty of his parents.

His sleep-posture consequently very clearly indicated
hostility to his present occupation and was an imitation
of Napoleon arrived at by the circuitous route of the
imitation of the teacher who had the same psychical
make-up. The obsession of young Kellner, we should
remember, was that he was destined to be the field-
marshal in the attack on Russia, an idea that in the
following year was taken up by other apprentices.

2. S. suffering from progressive paralysis. In sleep
he drew himself together covering even hishead. From
his medical history I extracted the following :—‘‘ No
megalomania, apathetic, helpless, without initiative.”

Let me in conclusion on the basis of personal obser-
vations of sleep-postures taken by children, again insist
upon the great significance their proper understanding
might have for teaching.


XII


Individual-Psychological Conclusions on Sleep
Disturbances


(1912)


A PATIENT who had for a long time been suffering
from intermittently recurring attacks of fainting through
which his domination over his whole family, particularly
over his mother—as analysis showed—was to beachieved,
awoke on two successive nights in great fear and was
unable to sleep again until three in the morning. The
patient’s situation was briefly as follows. He was on the
point of travelling with his parents to Karlsbad when, on
account of some unforeseen difficulties, the journey had
to be postponed for a fortnight. The night after this
was decided, he woke up in great fright, called his nurse
who was sleeping in the adjoining room and through
her persuasion, as the patient had foreseen, the mother
soon appeared. The patient asked for a bromide that
he had been taking for a long time in connection with
a former treatment. After being awake from one to
three in the morning he fell asleep. The same thing
happened the following day. On the first night, while
awake, the thought of a type-writer had come into his
mind, on the second night his thoughts had, in addition,
wandered to the towns of Gorz, Budweis and Gojau.
He thought of the last as a city but did not remember
where it lay. He had had a dream with the following
content :—‘' It seemed to me that we had received news
from Karlsbad that my mother’s favourite brother had
died. I put on mourning and boasted about it”. The
analysis of the dream showed that he had once had the
wish that his brother, his mother’s pet, should die. The
transference of the scene to Karlsbad, however, indi-
cates that the father is meant here. He apparently
worshipped him but desired his death nevertheless so


that he might have his mother, whom he did not love,
172


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 173


for himself. This riddle is quite intelligible in spite of
all, if we remember that the possession of his mother had
become his objective of battle, the symbol for his domina-
tion and will to live ; that, for many years, all that he did
not possess and would never be able to possess, he
believed he could obtain by dominating his mother.
Every set-back that he experienced he saw in the form of
something his mother had taken from him. Since the
domination of his mother had become the symbol of
domination—all sexual motives being quite absent—he
was living entirely under the hallucinatory idea (for it
cannot be called by any other name), that if he possessed
his mother he would become ruler, kaiser, God.

The type-writer which he thought of during one of
his sleepless nights was his brother’s property, and the
latter refused to let him use it, even when he wanted it
Jor practice. Indeed on one occasion when the brother
had visited Paris, he took the machine along, just as
rather recently he had had his mother accompany him
when he went to look for a summer residence.

I do not mean to contend that in order to account
for an attack, a number of superimposed causes of a
humiliating nature are necessary. In the majority of
cases, however, this assumption has proved to be true,
a fact that often renders a general view of the situation
as well as an insight into the interconnection of the
attacks with their determining causes difficult. In one
case we find: first a disappointed expectation, the
postponement of the journey and secondly, the mother’s
going with the brother—two causes whose inner con-
nection as indications of the favourite brother’s superi-
ority over the patient, are quite evident. We likewise
discover what the nature of the favouritism shown the
brother appears to him to be, and how he reacted to it
by means of aggressive acts and death wishes.

By means of his attacks, not dissimilar to epilepsy,
he had succeeded in certain cases where he had received
a set-back, in having his mother partially pay more
attention to him, only however to leave the rather dis-
agreeable fellow shortly after. These attacks became
milder after a time owing probably to his realization of
theirnature. Similar results could be obtained by means
of nocturnal attacks accompanied by fear. Indeed he
could do more. His mother would have to come to his


174 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


room at night and stay with him as long as his sensitive
and offended nature thought fit. This is what his
thoughts connected with the type-writer mean. That
is the reason also why he developed his arrangement
of insomnia.

That his attitudes had the object of attracting other
people to him, can be seen from the unimportant detail
that, on the following day, he asked me to come to
him instead of his coming to me as usual.

Another justifiable question is the following. Why
did he seize upon the arrangement of fear? And why
did he come to use a construction like insomnia?

The answer to the first.can be derived from the
material bearing on the analysis of his personality.
In childhood he had been afraid of locomotives and
their whistles and would utilize this fear to force his
mother to come to him so that he could hide his head
in her lap. Apart from this he had always been a
brave child. We may therefore surmise that his
nocturnal fear was connected with a locomotive. Do
we not know that he wanted to travel to Karlsbad and
that his brother had gone away with his mother in a
train?

During the second of his sleepless nights there
came to his mind not only the type-writer but also the
town of Gorz in Istria and Gojau, a town, as it turned
out, near Budweis. He had been in Gorz once to meet
his mother when travelling from Venice to Karlsbad.
On that occasion he arrived in Budweis at 1 o’clock at
night, had been compelled to wait two hours at the
station and left again at 3, in a sleeping coupé. He
fell asleep at 3. Now this interval between 1 and 3
at night was the time during which, on his two sleepless
nights, he had suffered from fear. In other words both
of his attacks were repetitions of his journey to Karlsbad
and he thus indicated that a psychic condition had
matured in him of such a nature, that he could hardly
wait until he would again be travelling alone with his
mother to Karlsbad. This impatience expressed itself
in his incessant complaint about the heat by which he
seemed to say, ‘‘I must immediately get out of Vienna”.

He could not, at first, think of any place called Gojau.
Upon consulting the railroad guide he found that it was
a place connected with Budweis by an infrequently used


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 175


side-line. I am indebted to G. V. Maday for pointing
out the thought of death recurring here again, —for this
side-line ended in a station called ‘‘ Black-Cross”’.

His waking up at 1 o’clock at night, z.e. at the exact
time when he had been sleepless in Budweis while
waiting for the Karlsbad train, demonstrated clearly that
in spirit, the patient was, in his sleep, making the journey
to Karlsbad that he had made on one occasion before
without his mother. This time, however, he was attem pt-
ing to achieve by means of his infantile ‘‘ arrangement”
of fear definitely connected with insomnia, his personal
ambition of making his mother come to his room. His
psychic condition might then be described as follows :—
“Tf I didn’t have to wait (z.e. for my mother to be sub-
ordinated to me or for my brother’s or father’s death),
I might—as my brother did—journey along with my
mother”. His wish for preferment of the kind that had
existed in childhood when his mother would put her
hands over his ears when the locomotives whistled—
this wish went back consequently to a reminiscence (of
childhood), just as his sleeplessness was connected with
Karlsbad. He would then by means of his fear and
insomnia, be able to dominate his mother and perhaps
persuade her to take the trip.

Among other things this case can show us how
the guiding ideas of the personality-ideal do not rest
even during sleep and how, so to speak, they pass
transformed into bodily attitudes (2 the dream into
psychic), 22 order even during sleep to ferret out tentatively
the path leading to the attainment of the guiding-idea. As
in all instances of great uncertainty, the extent of the
anticipatory construction is dependent upon personal
experience. For ample reasons, the most abstract experi-
ences, those reminiscences nearest to the essence of the
idea, are the ones utilized, for they possess the value of
warnings or stimulz selected not because of their proved
efficiency during danger but because ¢hey seem to fit in
best with the whole personality. They must, in some
way or other, however, be really efficacious for they
would otherwise soon be abandoned. This subjective
evaluation need not possess the slightest objective
significance. All that is necessary is that the neurotic
arrangement formed, should lie along the path of the
neurotic’s fictive goal. In the above case the only thing


176 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


demanded was that his standing in the eyes of his
environment should rise. The patient has forced his
mother against her will to serve him. This represented
the part of his former God-ideal he had so far attained,
in this particular case, part of his former Kaiser complex.
(From this point of view we are in a better position to
understand the hallucinatory ideas of epileptics and
other psychotics who so frequently wish to be Kaisers,
the expression of powerful abstractions corresponding
to the original guiding fiction.)

The following example illustrates how ungratified
vanity may, by means of the more powerful tension of
thought-functioning, lead to insomnia. The laurels of
Miltiades kept Alcibiades awake. Indeed insomnia is
frequently found as the result of ungratified vanity.
The patient is like a man on his guard.

I hope it will not diminish the interest of the
following case if I state that it was a physician who here
subjected himself to an analysis. The reason for the
analysis lay in the following occurrence which the author
relates thus :—

‘‘T was able in connection with the terrible catas-
trophe of the ‘Titanic’, to study the way in which it
affected me. In my free moments I found myself often
talking about the catastrophe and arbitrarily discussing
the question, to which I continually returned, whether
some means could not have been devised to save the
drowning people.

‘One night I woke up. Like a true psychologist
I put the question to myself why I, ordinarily an
excellent sleeper, woke up then? I could not find any
satisfactory answer and, within a short time, found myself
seriously thinking Low zt would have been possible to save
the drowning passengers of the ‘ Titanic’. Shortly after,
about three o’clock, I fell asleep.

‘¢On the following night I again woke up. I looked
at the clock and saw that it was half-pasttwo. Transient
thoughts about the various theories of insomnia flitted
through my brain. One of the theories that occurred
to me was that which claimed that, once accustomed to
wake up, it was easy always to wake up at the same
time. Suddenly, however, I realized intuitively what
the nature of my awakening was. The ‘ Titanic’ had
gone down at half-past two. In my sleep I was a


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 174


passenger on the boat, had thoroughly identified myself
with the terrible situation of the wreck and had now for
the second time awakened when the boat was going down!
_ ‘*On the second night my thoughts likewise travelled
in the direction of finding a means of saving one’s self
in such a situation, of saving one’s self and others.
At the same time I suspected that a preventative and
preparatory attempt at safety was involved here that
was to serve, at one and the same time, pre-
caution and ambition. I realized without further
trouble that the trip to America—an old longed-for
goal—symbolized in an imaginative way my struggle
for scientific recognition. As I would have acted in
the waking state I acted when asleep. I was in search
ofa method of safety and constructed a most ingenious
situation to prepare myself for defence and mobilize
my resources :—‘ /magzne yourself in the greatest kind of
danger—ponder over it! Regain consciousness !’

‘‘It was quite easy to understand that this method
of reacting toward threatening dangers and people close
to me, must represent my personal attitude. I soon
found the connection.

‘I am a physician. It is one of my duties ¢o find
methods against death. From that point—I was on
familiar ground. The fight against death had been
one of the strongest spurs dictating my selection of a
profession.! Like so many other physicians I had
become a physician in order to conquer death. The
occasion for such a guiding fiction is generally derived
from some experienced dangerous situation and critical
illness.

‘‘T remember a number of occasions in my youth
where death had seemed near. I had developed after
rachitis, in addition to difficulty in movement, a mild
form of spasm of the vocal cords, a condition I later
on, as a physician, encountered frequently among
children. ‘The glottis would contract during crying and
produce a condition of breathlessness and loss of voice,
interrupting the crying until the cramp had spent itself
when the crying could again continue. This lack of
breath is exceedingly uncomfortable as I well remember.
I believe I was hardly three years old at the time... .
The unnecessary fright of my parents and the solicitude

1 «© Ueber Berufswahlphantasien” by Dr Kramer in Hetlen und Bilden.
M


178 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


of the house physician had not escaped me and filled
me, quite apart from the discomfort due to lack of
breath, with a feeling that to-day I would like to
designate as one of restlessness and uncertainty. I
remember further how, on one occasion, shortly after
an attack of coughing, the thought occurred to me that,
since no remedy had heretofore availed, I might myself
rid myself of this annoying trouble. In what manner
I had come upon such a thought, whether through
suggestion from without or whether it was some idea
of my own, I cannot say. However I determined to
stop the crying and thereafter whenever I felt the desire
to cry, I gave myself a shove, restrained my weeping
and the coughing ceased. I had discovered a method
against my suffering and possibly, against the fear of
death.

‘Shortly after—I had become three years old in the
meanwhile—my younger brother died. I believe I
understood the meaning of death. I stayed with him
until he expired and realized when I was sent to the
house of my grandfather that I would never see the
child again, that he would be buried in the cemetery.
‘My mother called for me after the funeral to take me
home. She was very sad and had been weeping but
smiled a little when my grandfather in order to cheer
her up, made some jocular remark probably referring
to the possibility of her having more children. Fora
long time I could not forgive her that smile and I may
be justified in inferring that my resentment indicated
that I must quite clearly have realized the awe inspired
by death.

‘‘ When I was four years old I managed to get under
a wagon twice. All I remember is that I woke in
pain on a couch without knowing how I had come there.
Apparently I had been unconscious.

‘‘When five years old I had pneumonia and was
given up by the doctor. Another physician, however,
suggested a new treatment in consequence of which I
recovered in a few days. In the joy over my recovery
the question of my having been on the brink of death
was afterwards discussed fora long time. It was from
that time on, I recall, that I began to picture my future
profession as that of medicine. In other words I posited
a goal that I might expect would put an end to my


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 179


infantile worry and fear of death. It is clear that I
anticipated more from the profession than it could give.
I should not have expected that any human power would
be able to conquer death or the fear of death and left it
to God. However life demanded action. Consequently
I was compelled when changing the form of my guiding
fiction to alter my goal in such a way that it would
approximate to reality. I was led to select medicine
as my profession in order to conquer death and the fear
of death.

‘‘From the phantasy connected with the selection of
a profession occurring in a somewhat mentally retarded
boy based on similar impressions—the death of a sister,
sickness since early infancy, knowledge of death—I found
that this boy had determined to become a grave-digger
so that, as he told me, he would be able to dig the grave
of others and not be buried himself. The rigid anti-
thetic nature of his thoughts, for the boy afterwards
became neurotic—above or below; active or passive ;
hammer or anvil; flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta
movebo—did not prevent a middle course from develop-
ing, for the recurring infantile fiction passed from a
stage of indifference to one of contradiction.

‘‘The following experience dates from the time of
my selection of a profession, z.e. when approximately
five years old. The father of a playmate asked me what
I intended to become. Ianswered,a doctor! The man
who had possibly had bad experience with physicians
retorted, ‘Then you ought to be suspended from the
nearest lamp-post!’ Naturally this exclamation left me
quite unaffected because of the nature of the idea that
had dictated my choice. I believe I thought at the
time that I would become a good physician to whom no
one would be hostile.

‘Shortly after I went to a board school. I remember
that the path to the school led over a cemetery. I was
frightened every time and was exceedingly put out at
beholding the other children pass the cemetery without
paying the least attention to it, while every step I took
was accompanied by a feeling of fearand horror. Apart
from the extreme discomfort occasioned by this fear |
was also annoyed at the idea of being less courageous


1 For the significance of death in philosophy, cf. P. Schrecker, Persin-
lichkettsphilosophie (Munich, 1912).


180 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


than the others. One day I made up my mind to put
an end to this fear of death. Again (as on my first
resolve), / decided upon a treatment of hardening.
(Proximity of death!) I stayed at some distance
behind the others, placed my school-bag on the ground
near the wall of the cemetery and ran across it a dozen
times, until I felt that I had mastered the fear.
After that, I believe, I passed along this path without
any fear.

“‘Thirty years after that I met an old schoolmate
and I exchanged childhood reminiscences of our school
days. It happened to occur to me that the cemetery
was no longer in existence and I asked him what had
happened to it remembering the great uneasiness it had
at one time caused me. Astonished my former school-
mate who had lived longer in that neighbourhood than
I had, insisted that there never had been a cemetery on the
way to our school. Then I realized that the story of
the cemetery had been but a poetic dress for my longing
to overcome the fear of death. It was to serve the
purpose of showing me, as in other relations of life,
that death and the fear of death could be overcome
and that some method of accomplishing tt must exist. It
had had the effect upon me of some powerful vow, that in
critical situations I would succeed in discovering a remedy
for it. Thus did I combat my infantile fears, became
a physician and in this manner do [I still ponder over
the problems of the psychical type that attract me as
we have seen to be the case, to a marked degree, in
connection with the ‘ Titanic’ catastrophe.?

‘‘My ambition, has been so definitely fixed by the
guiding fiction of overcoming death that other goals
hardly present any interest. I may have given the
impression as though ambition was quite wanting in
me in connection with the main human relations! The
explanation for this double vie, split in personality, as
writers call it, lies in the fact that ambition after all
represents a means to an end, not the end, and in conse-
quence it is occasionally employed, occasionally pushed

_7 Another way of overcoming the fear of death is found in Wagner’s
Steefried: ‘*No longer does fear obsess me at the idea of the dusk of the
gods since it has been willed!” Cf. in this connection the psychical mechanism
which I have described as characteristic of compulsion-neurosis (the fiction of


free-will, substitution of external compulsion by one’s own etc.), and the work
of Furtmiller, 2¢hzk und Psycho-analyse, Munich (1912).


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 181


to one side, depending upon the manner in which the
anticipated goal can be more easily attained either with
or without it.”

This short analysis shows the same dynamics that
I have proved exist both for the healthy and diseased
psyche. Waking up at night proves to be a symbol, a
simile of life in which is reflected the past (uncertainty),
the present (danger from unscrupulous people), the
future (search for a means) and the guiding goal (the
overcoming of death).

Sleep may be looked upon as abstraction; its purpose
described as enabling the socially conditioned day-
thinking, thinking which has been socially adjusted,
to obtain rest, permitting the sense organs with their
function of social intermediary and their tendency to
transcend the purely individual and corporeal, to cease
temporarily from functioning. In sleep both the cor-
poreal and psychic life is thrown upon the mercy of a
fixed, already prepared psyche belonging to previous
periods which have also been well prepared. These
preparations seize upon the psychic activities of the
previous day and conduct them further onward to the
goal toward which they tend. Remnants of conscious
ideational processes, such as ¢he dream, reflect in hal-
lucinatory fashion, these progressive psychic activities.
The dream which is merely an accompaniment as dream-
thinking, never the cause of any action—for on account
of its abstract and fragmentary manner of expression
it is generally not fitted for it—need not be intelligible.
Where it is intelligible, where it initiates or seems to
initiate actions, where it attracts, repulses, or warns,
there it is being directed by some individually prepared
tendency. The same is true with regard to what the
dream remembers or forgets, both remembering and
forgetting being induced by this previously mentioned
tendency.

Sleep disturbances belong to the same tendency.
Insomnia is safe-guarded so that it may be used as a
certificate of illness as in our first instance, whenever
it proves itself to be the best fitted means for the
attainment of personal superiority and the gratification
of one’s own will. Those complaints of patients that
seem to contradict this interpretation, merely serve the
purpose of increasing the prestige the symptom enjoys.


182 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Wakefulness in these cases results from a definitely
planned arrangement, even if it unconsciously persists
by reason of the mechanism of fright, pain or some
arbitrary act of unknown motivation. The accompanying
dreams in the form of analysis frequently show the
source which the neurotic tendency has either falsely
stressed or out of which it has purposely derived the
feeling of solicitude for that which is to be confronted.
That dreams may be of secondary importance, or even
be missing, is elucidated by the second case described.
On the basis of extensive material we are justified in
interpreting the patient’s intermittent insomnia as a
tremendous faith in himself, to whom waking thought
represents incontrovertible authority. The absence of
dreams during the two nights—as the dreamer states—
is not at all peculiar. Since his acquaintance with the
problems of dream-analysis, he has very rarely dreamt,
probably because dreams have lost their value and
significance owing to his better preparation for his
actions.

In the first case we discern clearly a line of direction
that seems somewhat suspicious, a self-depreciatory
willingness (epileptic neurosis) to go as far as death
if necessary, for the attainment of a vague idea. His
transient sleeplessness appears as though he had
stumbled on his path, just as the attacks of loss of
consciousness were accompanied by marked traumatic
lesions. The final course this case will take is not
quite transparent, yet as an indication of the rdle of a
genuine and an affect-epilepsy it ought not to be passed
over. When treated psycho-therapeutically these attacks
became amenable to explanation, could be predicted,
made milder and possibly even reduced to certain
proportions. Once when under observation for a
month with the regard to the necessity of a trepanation,
the attacks that had occurred regularly every fortnight,
suddenly ceased. From my treatment he derived
merely an amelioration in the intensity of the attacks,
a freer manner and a more sociable character. Shortly
before he gave up my treatment, on account of his
stubbornness and obstinacy, I had succeeded in
proving to him that he was unconsciously working
in the direction of developing digestive disturbances.
Some days after that he took ill with a long drawn-out


CONCLUSIONS ON SLEEP DISTURBANCES 183


icterus. I can give some further personal details of
this case. I was informed, at second hand, that he sub-
sequently exhibited frequent attacks of rage, developed
deliria of short duration in which he played the rdle of
a Kaiser—(this I had inferred from_his unconscious
phantasies where he had used the Kaiser role as a
symbol). Half a year after the end of my treatment
he died from heart-weakness during a short attack of
rage, and not during an epileptic seizure.


XIV


Homo-sexuality !


(Lecture delivered before the J uvististisch-Medizinische
Gesellschaft of Zurich, 1918)


IT is in the nature of human association to develop
autonomously certain conditions and rules (Furtmiiller)
which we all accept and which at all times we feel as
inherent, real and existing.

The historical data concerning ‘‘Greek love” is
extraordinarily complex and tiresome and we must
therefore search for synthetic view-points if we wish
to briefly present the history of the psychological
analysis of homo-sexuality. Perhaps it will suffice,
if to-day, I point out the main points in the views of
the largest of the group—to which scientists and laymen
alike belong. To them the most significant fact in
homo-sexuality is the emphasis on the question of
inheritance, as though implying that individuals come
into the world homo-sexual. The attitudes on this
question are divergent. One group assumes that the
germinal complex—in the case of a masculine homo-
sexual—is decreased in favour of a complex of a
somewhat feminine type; the second group believes
in certain inherited components, that have been
specifically strengthened, etc.

No one has ever claimed that the inherited feminine
factors, the female-appearing aspect, is any more
prominent among masculine homo-sexuals than are
female traits in a woman, and yet in examining homo-
sexuals we almost exclusively find individuals either
with female tendencies or such as are directed into
female channels, whereas the masculine tendencies
appear to be absent. On the other hand, (normal)
women frequently exhibit masculine tendencies. For


1 Cf, Adler, Das Problem der Homo-sexualitat (Reinhardt, Munich, 1917).
184


HOMO-SEXUALITY 185


the demonstration of these being inherited and not
acquired traits the above facts are quite unfavourable.
For we may justifiably ask where are the masculine
impulses? Let me add parenthetically that, of course,
the masculine impulses are not lacking z.e. not entirely
so, but that they are forced so far into the back-
ground by the feminine bearing (of the homo-sexual)—
at least in certain clear-cut examples—that this dis-
crepancy, this inward contradiction is particularly
noticeable.

A second objection that is equally justified and must
be unhesitatingly faced, is the enormously frequent
occurrence of facultative homo-sexuality, z.e. of a certain
number of homo-sexual experiences in the life of an
individual, be it in childhood, on long journeys as in
the case of sailors and prisoners, in the life of the
soldier or in boarding-schools. This facultative homo-
sexuality, which many reliable informants assume to
be almost a normal manifestation in the life of every
individual, does not incline us any the more to attri-
buting a perponderating importance to the factor of
heredity.

A second group of scientists assumes a fixation
of certain sexual experiences (generally in childhood).
The facts seem in one sense to contradict this theory,
for we know that such apparent or really homo-
sexual experiences in childhood are extraordinarily
common and that the homo-sexual experiences described
by patients or people accused of indulging in them,
turn out frequently to be of so vague a type that we
can at best draw no conclusions from them except that
it is quite remarkable to notice the extent to which the
homo-sexual regards such early experiences as basic for
his whole development. The same objection applies
to those authors who wish to explain the homo-sexuality
by the assumption that such early experiences become
fixed.

We feel ourselves compelled to propound another
problem and one which is likely to place the question-
able nature of this last explanation in an entirely
different light. We may rightly ask why homo-sexuals
fixate these particular experiences, experiences that we
normal people unquestionably also share. That is a
problem with which pedagogy is concerned although


186 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


from another angle. What is it that we customarily
imitate? Is not man in the expression of his imitative
faculty, quite definitely directed and circumscribed by
almost inviolable laws? If we watch young people,
children, grown-up people, all of whom show marked
tendencies toward imitation, we shall find that no one
ever imitates anything that does not in some way fit
into his purpose. é

Now why does a homo-sexual find the fixation of a
homo-sexual experience fits into his nature? We shall
have to go back to a time prior to the experience to
explain this. In examining particular cases it was
discovered that quite apart from any sexual occurrences,
these people particularly emphasized the fact that even
when they were only two or three years old, they had
been regarded as girls, had taken a special pleasure in
playing with dolls, spent almost all their time in the
company of girls, etc.

Thus the interpretation of a fixation of infantile
experience hardly leads us to any understanding of the
apparently alterable attitude of some people, an attitude
that seems from the earliest years of an individual’s
existence to challenge the whole nature of our society.
By his development, the homo-sexual negates the
fundamental principle of the preservation of society and
it is hardly feasible to believe that—irrespective of the
manner in which he has come to his view-point and his
emotional outlook—he should not have felt, noticed and
utilized the tremendous resistances that have blocked
his path during his homo-sexual evolution. We
might say that it is so infinitely more difficult to be
homo-sexual than normal that this fact alone should
give us a measure of the tremendous expenditure of
energy necessary for going through life as such. This
expenditure of energy is noticeable in fact in every
pervert. It can be observed in the very nature of his
deductions, in his attitude toward men, women, toward
his experiences. Step by step we can see the prepara-
tions he makes for coming to a unified attitude, one
out of which it will not be easy to shake him. The
mixed cases—of which there are so many and which
are really in a large majority—frequently show the
homo-sexual development in its various stages and how,
only by the expenditure of very special powers, are


HOMO-SEXUALITY 187


homo-sexuals able to abandon the normal path and so
distinctly circumscribe life that there is left no room for
anything but homo-sexuality.

Appealing both to our sympathies and our sense of
the comical is the manner in which such an individual
in question hypnotizes himself step by step and forces
upon himself violently the concept that he is not adapted
for normality. His arguments have so little cogency
that we must have accustomed ourselves to the language
of the homo-sexual to remain patient. {fam acquainted
with some who in their external appearance are quite
normal and who yet emphasize some detail about them-
selves, such as the fact that their language is not
masculine in structure, that their hair-growth is not as
strong as in other men, etc. There is no difficulty in
corroborating the impression that homo-sexuals have
gone to some pains to bring together everything that
will give convincing evidence for their belief that they
are different from other men.

Our question is therefore to find out from what
source has come this ineradicable tendency to disclaim
all masculine traits and the desire to gain complete
certainty, corroboration and justification for their speci-
fically different emotional and intellectual view-point.
As in the case of all manifestations of the human
psychic life we can only arrive at an understanding
of the situation when we have grasped the meaning
of the whole personality, when we have discovered its
object and penetrated into its inmost soul, understood
the nature of its answer to the demands of communal
life. After homo-sexuals tell us of their activities which
have possibly brought them into conflict with the law,
or which torment and circumscribe them, we find that
in other walks of life the normal standard to be expected
of a man quite adapted to life—except possibly sexually
—is likewise absent. The most salient traits—which
appear clearly in the character of a homo-sexual are the
following :—zxordinate ambition and extraordinarily pro-
nounced caution or fear of life.

Starting from these universally encountered facts we
may ask ourselves what is going to be the fate of an
individual who possesses within his nature two such
contradictory traits of character as an ambition that
never can hope to be gratified and a cowardice that


188 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


paralyses this activity as soon as the very first steps
have been taken to gratify his ambition. In some form
or other every neurotic possesses those two traits
although more weakly expressed. We thus find upon
further inquiry into the character-physiognomy of the
homo-sexual the fact corroborated that he presents us
with the clear-cut picture of a neurotic man, whose
nervousness does not express itself clearly because,
through his homo-sexuality, he has confined his activity
within narrow limits of a type that the nervous man
only succeeds in developing by means of a neurosis.
In this narrow circle nervous symptoms cannot exhibit
themselves very well. As a rule the homo-sexual dy
excluding the conditions making for difficulties, succeeds in
creating for himself a type of existence to which he is
either quite adapted or which he can more easily follow
than that of hetero-sexuality, which continually throws
him into the current of life and brings him into relation
with all the problems, demands and difficulties of social
existence. Nevertheless among many homo-sexuals
whose sphere of activity has not become too narrow,
we encounter some remarkable symptoms. Of these
symptoms the prevailing forms are compulsion-
manifestations.

In the history of homo-sexual childhood we are struck
by a number of manifestations of similar behaviour and
similar expression that can easily be connected. One of
the most important points of my interpretation is the fact
that I have succeeded in demonstrating that it is at all
times exceedingly difficult for homo-sexuals zo realize
the nature of their sex and that this realization has taken
place much later than in the case of other children.
As a rule we find, in these cases, that as children
they had a fine complexion, wore long dresses, wore
girlish clothes for a longer period than other children,
always had girl playmates and that they hardly came
into contact with experiences that would emphasize the
fact that their sex was different from that of girls.
They are already mistakenly embarked along the path
of a girl’s psychic development when, to their astonish-
ment, they are made aware of the fact that they really
belong to the other sex. This added difficulty for
children, whose ambition is particularly stimulated
and whose caution hinders them from undertaking any


HOMO-SEXUALITY 189


new action, is of extraordinary importance. After that,
experiences of a different kind no longer suffice (to
dissuade them) and they, on the contrary, utilize these
different experiences in order to give strength to the
belief that they are different from other children, that
a miracle of nature has here become manifest and that
they represent a new species. This difference asa rule
appears to them in the nature of a distinction, a view-point
that their ambition of course willingly encourages.

How does ambition come to play so great a réle
among these children? We are not here concerned
with children whose development has proceeded along
direct lines and not been rendered difficult but, either
with children who have developed a feeling of weakness
and inferiority from the fosztion in which they found
themselves, or with those who have been on the one
hand, weighed down by the pressure of their environ-
ment or, on the other, so petted that a very early desire
for being protected in the future against every rough
blast of wind, of always occupying first place, takes
on an intensive form.’ This holds for both extremes of
bringing-up, for both feed and intensify the child’s
longing to attain a future in which he will remain
entirely untouched by the difficulties of life. This
striving and the fear of not succeeding, causes their
phantasy to be directed in a strange manner toward
the idea of domination and desires of domination and
induces them to search for a type of prospective situation
in which they need fear danger from no side. If besides
the difficulty of recognizing his own sex, the existence
of impoverished and bad pecuniary family conditions,
or of disorganized relations between the parents, gives
the child additional difficulties, they are likely to suggest
to him the thought of looking for the consummation
of his ambition by a very narrowly circumscribed
method. The question that mainly arises is that of
his relation to the other sex.

Various answers can be given to this. We know
that in some cases of homo-sexuality the opposite sex
seems to have been completely excluded while in others
a number of compromises exist. In all instances how-
ever there is a kind of condemnation of the other sex.
When a child turns in the direction of homo-sexuality,

1 Cf, Adler, Studie tiber Minderwertighett der Organe (1907).


190 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


it is at the same time showing its depreciatory attitude
toward the other sex. This is but the same mechanism
looked at from another angle. Each manifestation
calls up the other so that both lines are bound to meet
at some point. We must consequently regard them
not separately but in their inter-connection. If on
account of the aggravated nature of the infantile
situation an ardent ambition has developed, the latter
will quite clearly not be able to last unless carefully
protected. The coalescence of these traits of character
are impossible because a specific attitude developed not
only in the adult life but even in early childhood, can
be perceptible in bodily movement and more particularly
in the attitude assumed toward life. To understand
this we need take into consideration but one fact, that
these characteristics are not so definitely apparent in
safe-guarded situations. The attitude of the homo-
sexual toward life will always be a hesztateng one.

Homo-sexuality has a number of different aspects.
In some fashion or other and in varying degrees, a
homo-sexual will be found to be antagonistic to social
life, to have changed his occupation, to have begun
later and finished earlier. His entire life flows along
as though regulated by some brake-mechanism. The
power required for operating this brake, he must himself
produce again and again.

First Case—A man in the thirties, belonging to the
most aristocratic circles, well-built, with muscles of an
athlete. He has admittedly a less pronounced growth
of hair on his face than the normal man. He informed
me that his brothers were likewise not distinguished for
their hair-growth, although this had not been true of
his father. His father, an immigrant, had come from
a region well-known for the fact that the race of people
inhabiting it possessed a meagre facial hair-growth.
This trait of which the patient had spoken to physicians
and which he had persuaded himself was a proof of his
hereditary homo-sexuality, he himself could demon-
strably trace back to a racial peculiarity. Yet this
seems in no way to have affected his attitude. This in
itself must suffice to demonstrate the nature of the
purposive ingenuity employed by the patient to prove
his contentions. We must not think of his action as
prompted by any evil intent but rather as exhibiting


HOMO-SEXUALITY IQI


that unconscious deceit possessed by neurotics, to which
they continually come without realizing it, through
their ever present caution in life. This is therefore
more in the nature of naughtiness than of consciously
dishonest purpose. He was the youngest of three
brothers. All the children were very strictly super-
intended. Until the age of ten he had never associated
with girls. His brothers were the only members of his
family with whom he had been in any way intimately
connected. Hewas the youngest. This last factor is
not without significance for the psychology of the
youngest child is extraordinarily complicated and in-
teresting. There are two traits in particular which
always distinguish youngest children, traits found in
such different proportions that such children seem,
for example, often to exhibit contradictory character-
istics. The first trait is the sensation of oppression
due to their small size. They always appear under
pressure and can always be recognized by the fact that
they wish to be bigger than they really are. They are
always intensely affected by events and words referring
to their smallness and which might possibly hurt their
vanity. We know in what way the fairy-tale stresses
the role of the last-born and of the particular tempera-
ment ascribed to him there. He is always at work—
he is the one that possesses the magic boots, etc. This
it is that makes plausible the phenomena that some
well-known historical personages whose rapid progress
is most markedly apparent in art, were very frequently
last-born children. We can speak here of josztzon-
psychology. The position of youngest under the pressure
of ambition spurs him continuously on and he is always
desirous of accomplishing more than those around him.
This happens however only under propitious conditions.
Sometimes, on the contrary, the difficulties and obstacles
that confront the youngest child are frequently the cause
for his loss of faith in himself and of his development
of special caution and resignation. This caution may
even be expressed to some degree in the features. In
army reviews during the war I was able to pick out
those who were last-born children. Their features
reflected either a restless and trembling ambition or
the desire to break loose.

Our patient stated further that he had been pushed


192 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


aside by his older brothers, although he always wished
to be in the foreground; that he was continually throw-
ing challenges to the others and that, in short, he was
swayed by a more than normal ambition. On the other
hand he stated that he never cared to take any risks,
thought over every situation a hundred times and became
a prey again and again to doubt and trembling. The
family supervision was a particularly careful one so that
any premature knowledge of the nature of sex can be
excluded. At the age of ten he was put into a convent
school where he remained in the exclusive company of
boys. I know that this convent school is strict and
narrow. When his sex-instinct began to exhibit itself
more definitely he was not at all clear in his mind as
to the meaning of sex nor of his particular sex-rdle.
Girls appeared to him as something puzzling and unin-
telligible. In addition he had been taught that any
yielding to sexual instinct was a heinouscrime. When
later on despite everything, matters became clearer and
he had learned more about sex from his comrades,
masturbation was the only path left open tohim. This,
it is true, he also regarded as a sin, but looked upon
it as the lesser of two evils, for in this case he was at
least harming no one else. From the point of view of
the community this attitude is quite erroneous. Kant
has propounded the question why masturbation should
be regarded as something sinful. To me it seems that
the nature of general normal human feeling, the nature
of the differentiated social consciousness, of love of
one’s kind, makes each individual regard masturbation,
which is a form of anti-social sexual gratification, as
wrong even if we have to accept its existence as in the
cases mentioned above.

In the above example we should particularly stress
the fact that on account of his social position, as an
aristocrat of very exalted position, his life had to a
marked degree to be an isolated one. He associated
with few people, and from the beginning he had been
educated for the life of a land-owner. As a matter
of fact there is nothing in his whole life that could
be regarded as an indication of initiative. He had
graduated under very normal conditions from the
convent school and taken over his parent’s estate. He
was not an evil-intentioned individual and has never


We


HOMO-SEXUALITY 193


harmed anyone. He has always remained exactly -
where he was placed or where a rigorous destiny
had put him. We become aware of the ‘ distance”
firmly-adhered to, separating him from the life of the
community and its demands and present in his homo-
sexuality likewise ; and we find with regard to the ques-
tion of sex a defective activity, although it admittedly
is often more strongly expressed than here.

Then suddenly a real event happens. He marries.
His wife was an orphan belonging to a family of
high station. Shortly after his acquaintance with
her he confessed to his homo-sexuality. As is so
frequently the case with girls, she was attracted by
the task that seemed to present itself of playing the
role of saviour; and so she married, well aware of
all the conditions and limitations. The marriage
was a thorough failure. He turned out to possess
complete psychic impotence. Behind this psychic
impotence lay of course his incapacity for applica-
tion to any task. People of this kind, incapable of
devotion either to a particular task or individual and
always interested in maintaining their reputation, are
always at some distance from actual life. Our patient
was in a psychic stage of development in which he
shrank back from any further test of his worth. He
now had an estate and a wife, and refused to recognize
any other demands of life. His subsequent policy was
to reject all further demands by proving his homo-
sexuality and his neurotic troubles to constitute an
illness. He could feel quite guiltless as regards his
wife for he had confessed everything to her and she
could not justifiably reproach him. Because of the
situation in which she was placed, she was now
obliged to be at his disposal as friend, helper and
secretary. He had made no promises to her. Here we
consequently have a situation as far removed as possible
from the bustle of the world, one that we might have
surmised, from what we knew of his childhood, our
patient would seek to attain. We may assume on the
basis of many other manifestations in his life and on
that of other neurotics, that his purpose not to participate
in life of the group was firmly rooted and that it is to be
regarded as his ideal solution of life. Supported by the
fact that he had arrived at an ideal solution he came to

N


194 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the physician full of caution and ostentatious secrecy,
the same causes that he had used to excuse himself
from associating with his fellow-men lest they immedi-
ately recognize a homo-sexual in him; for homo-sexuality
appeared to him a stigma. ;

In all these cases that view-point is also important
which insists that homo-sexuals stress their delinquency
with pride! unless certain circumstances prevent its
expression. Even the compulsion-ideas and compulsion-
acts coincide with a mood of the patient’s that seemingly
rejects them and to whom they appear unintelligible.
From the previously attained view-point this attitude
shows some fundamental differences although psycho-
logically the difference is not very great. A sexual
compulsion idea propelled by the sexual instinct must
seek some outlet, and if that outlet is still possible and
made easier by the nature of the patient’s activity, then
compulsion-ideas must in some fashion be intelligible
to him, for otherwise he would be turning aside from his
goal of gratification. Quite a number of homo-sexuals
find something unintelligible and mysterious in their
thoughts and phantasies and try incessantly to fight
against them. The analogy of homo-sexuality with
compulsion-neurosis is thus fairly well established.


Second case :—

In scientific literature for reasons probably con-
nected with jurisprudence, masculine homo-sexuality
is mainly discussed. The same basic principles can be
shown to exist however in the case of female inversion.

The patient, the elder of two children, was 25 years
old. She was 4 at the time her younger brother was
born. Upon his birth all attention was transferred to
him and she was pushed into the background. Out of
this fact afterward developed an over-powering ambition.
Her family life was sombre, her father a man of violent
temper and her mother improvident. The rather intelli-
gent girl noticing what was happening in the family,
was revolted by the idea of marriage, withdrew herself
from the company of her father, finding him merely a
brutal, bad-tempered man. She attempted to extend

1 Cf. Pindar, Fragment 123 (ed. Christ). ‘‘He who is not inflamed with


love for the youth Theoxenes has a heart of stone. Condemned by Aphrodite,


he strives arduously to gain money or is driven along that cold path which ends
in his becoming a servant to female effrontery.”


HOMO-SEXUALITY 195


this idea to have it include her brother, in order thus to
convince herself that all men were brutal. She there-
fore withdrew from association with both of them.
Her life naturally then became exceedingly isolated.
She experienced no desire to play and was exceedingly
unpleasant in her relations to her playmates. However,
her ambition gained for her the sympathies of her
teacher. The family decided to let her study. At the
age of ten she witnessed a servant give birth to a child.
Her disinclination to and terror at the feminine réle
were markedly increased by this sight. As puberty
approached she began to brood to an unusual degree
and fell a victim to drink. So here again we find an
expenditure of energy necessary to force the patient out
of the groove of normal life in which, as the child of
wealthy parents, she had been brought up.

Her definite transformation into the homo-sexual
phase took a considerable length of time. She had
become acquainted with a female homo-sexual of her
native place. It was only two years after she had met
this girl, however, that one day, after a violent quarrel
with her mother, she went in a spirit of revenge to live
with this homo-sexual and from that time on she con-
tinued to live with her. She had always kept at a dis-
tance from men, except for a young man, a relative, of
peculiarly repulsive figure and ugly features. With
him she became more intimate, carried on scientific and
social discussions and occasionally allowed him to take
her out. He appeared to be absolutely safe. This
extreme caution proved her misfortune, for one day she
admitted to him her homo-sexuality and he thereupon
endeavoured to persuade her to marry him. They
married and separated after four weeks. She proved
to be impotent if we may use that expression. The
matter became public and the mother with whom the
girl had always been on terms of intense enmity, asked
me to undertake the treatment.

The patient discussed her inclinations with me and
her ambition to do something in science. Her aversion
for the female réle was so clear-cut that it could not
possibly be misunderstood. She attempted to make
herself impossible in society. Whatever the nature
of the work proved to be she always found some way
of discontinuing it. This idiosyncrasy was rooted in


196 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


an erroneous infantile evaluation of the demands of life,
demands she exaggerated because of her pessimistic
outlook and her fear of not being able to fulfil them,
a fact reflected in her low estimate of women. The
dangers of normal sexual life appear to homo-sexuals,
when seen through their pessimistic spectacles, extra-
ordinarily great and we must regard it as natural that
they recoil from all undertakings that would lead to an
acquiescence in the (true) sexual réle. Their attitude
is that of people desirous of interfering with the flight of
time and normal development. We know the reasons
but inverts do not, and they fight against recognizing
them. They accept as true what we know to be error
and are fortified in their stand by the mistakes of an
apparently scientific, specialistic and lay literature that
tells them that their belief in the unalterability of homo-
sexuality is right. The psychic atmosphere in which
homo-sexuals live, build their phantasies and act,
renders them zrresponsible. The possibility of their ever
becoming amenable to the intervention of society is,
however, by no means excluded. It seems to me that
the most important thing in any attempt at a cure is,
after all, the recognition of the logical demands of life
and this is felt even by patients and at the very least
enables them to develop great secrecy and causes them
considerable excitement on those occasions when they
are pursuing their zaée fixe or following their enthusiasm.
The voice of the community, that must always show
Ae disapproval of homo-sexuality, is announced in this
act.


XV


Compulsion Neurosis


(Address delivered November 1918 before the Gesellschaft
dey Aerzte, in Zurich)


ALL who know the state of mind of the compulsion-
neurotic will have realized that such a person is struggling
along lines of activity removed from those of normal human
expression. Worry and torment are never absent in the
compulsion-neurotic.

It is astounding to find patients who have never
been in touch with medical literature, call the promptings
of compulsion-manifestations by a term that both science
and philosophy have taken over, namely an imperative.
Philosophy, strange as it may appear, is frequently
found to employ the same expressions and possess the
same conceptions as the neurotic.

The forms which compulsion-neurosis generally
exhibits are washing-compulsion, prayer, masturbation,
ethical ideas of the most manifold kind, brooding, etc.
From the view-point of a systematic subdivision of
the field, compulsion-neurosis could be considerably
extended, for we find the same mechanism in the
symptomology of enuresis nocturna, nervous refusal of
nourishment, hunger-compulsion, perversion, etc.

The symptoms of compulsion-actions have been
neglected in the literature of the subject.

I am personally acquainted with three cases of the
compulsion.

Let me first mention the now unknown romanticist
von Sonnenberg who from early childhood till the
age of puberty suffered from the symptoms of prayer-
compulsion. He was an obstinate, ambitious and
unrestrained boy, frequently at odds with his environ-
ment. At an early age religious ideas manifested


themselves. This latter symptom generally appeared
197


198 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


during the hours of instruction and in consequence
either the instruction would be interfered with or interrupted.
Jean Paul has also described in Schmelzle’s Journey to
Flaez a number of compulsion-acts. During the child-
hood of the hero of the story, the latter was at times
seized with the necessity of shouting ‘‘ Fire,” a fact that
easily led to panics. These and similar symptoms
are remarkably frequent and lead at times to marked
disturbances in public life.

In the third case, found in Vischer’s Auch Ezner
the entire point of view of the hero is built upon his
sneezing and sniffling compulsion.

It is particularly characteristic of compulsion-neurosis
that all such acts possess as an introductory stage, what
might be called the struggle of the patient against the
environment. In this introductory phase he is subjected
to sensations of oppression. All writers on the subject
specifically mention that the patient is fully aware of
the senselessness of his compulsion-symptom.

Like all maxims and views found in the literature on
neurosis this statement must be taken with a grain of
salt. Some patients stated that they had experienced a
feeling of deliverance and satisfaction at the manner
in which their symptoms behaved because these were
rooted in their whole nature and thus demonstrated
both their justification and necessity. Previous to this
stage of an emotionally determined decision in favour of
the symptom, there is found a tremendous tension in
the psyche that may have been in existence for months
or for years. We are thus justified in assuming that
the position taken by the patient only serves to loosen
the symptom as if in his professed struggle against the
compulsion-act he wished to appropriate to himself
the right of producing the symptom. We must likewise
not forget that the nature of the patient’s method of
argument is arbitrary for he is judge, plaintiff and
defendant rolled in one.

Compulsion-neurosis presents a fairly complete
disease-picture and exhibits the basic traits of general
neurosis. Inter connections of the most manifold type
exist. The transition to the neurasthenic complex is
of very normal nature. If we carefully observe such
a compulsion-act as air-inhalation which is far more
frequent than generally assumed, then its connection


COMPULSION-NEUROSIS 199


with a large number of neurasthenic, stomach and
intestinal disturbances will soon become apparent. Its
relations to hysteria are just as frequent and in war-
neuroses analogies with hysterical tremor, paralysis and
Spasms were indeed widely known. Not infrequently
indications of either slight or severe paranoidal mani-
festations are found in compulsion-blushing. The
connection with anxiety-neurosis is shown by the fact
that when the compulsion-symptoms are suppressed
their place is taken by anxiety. Often the compulsion-
neurosis either passes into alcoholism or morphinism or
is connected with them. The connection with impulsive
insanity, compulsion-impulses toward criminality, with
compulsive self-accusation and moral insanity, all result
in special neurotic physiognomies. A large number of
relations exist with such apparent bad habits, as e.g.,
certain forms of laziness, pedantry, waste of time and
particularly tormenting and hypermoral conceptions,
fanaticism for truth, etc.

In one sense every individual shows in his psychic
constitution traits that call to mind compulsion-neurosis
and which, developed along many different lines, lead
occasionally to disturbances of a definite type. For
instance, exaggerated faith in supernatural help which
in certain individuals permeates their whole life and
activity. And then again, conditions about which
normal people might easily give us information such
as counting of syllables, reading signs of firms, counting
windows, etc., all of which appear quite senseless.

Between compulsion-neurosis and neurotic doubt an
extraordinary connection exists.

The psychic interconnection of all these manifesta-
tions should bring home to us the danger of becoming
lost as in psychology, in the study of differences that
cannot be measured.

There are a number of proofs for the correctness or
approximate accuracy of a neuro-psychological view-
point.

One test is the following. In the absence of the
family physician a neurologist might be called in to
examine a patient. He must not allow himself to be
enticed into asking leading questions nor into making
methodical inquiries, yet he must proceed in such a
manner that light can be thrown upon the whole


’


200 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


personality of the patient. And this he must do without
previous consultation with the family physician. The
physician generally sees the connections that emerge
from the questions and answers of the patient during
the examination although the latter has not the slightest
notion of what is happening.

This method is of course not free from criticism and
a further test as to the correctness of our interpretation
of the symptoms is consequently necessary. It is best
to put on one side the question of symptoms, which is,
of course, the real reason for the treatment, and concern
one’s self exclusively with the personality of the patient.
Attempts should be made to obtain information about
him, to penetrate into his nature, his purpose in life
and his attitude toward the demands of family and
society. A fairly sharply-outlined conception of his
character will then soon emerge. The examination
will soon prove that the patient possesses a number of
traits that can then be fused together into a composite
picture.

We shall first of all find that we are not concerned
with individuals to be thought of as exclusively passive,
for a certain degree of activity will be present. This
can be detected in the fact that they do not keep them-
selves completely in the back-ground. As a rule they
have passed examinations and have learned something.
They are, however, all on the threshold of some
definite decision in life—love, marriage, the selection
of a profession, the coming on of age, etc.

After drawing a conclusion from the sketch (of their
lives) furnished from the direction of their character-
lines, after traits of marked sensitiveness and an
attitude we might call unapproachability have been
demonstrated to exist, after we have shown patients
to possess little love of neighbour or humanity, few
friends, and an ambition so noticeable that they are
conscious of it themselves, then we are in a position to
visualize concretely how these individuals answer the
demands of life with a kind of warding-off gesture.

As in other neuroses we may here speak of a
positional-disease in contradistinction to a dispositional
disease as some authors assume. Frequently the family
influence weighs down so heavily upon the patient
that it forces him either into latent or open opposition.


am Oe head


COMPULSION-NEUROSIS 201


An attitude of hostility is then manifested in connection
with every demand made by society.

If we were to put the question to the patient, ‘ What
would you do if you were quite well?” he would almost
certainly name that particular demand of society that
it might be assumed he was trying to evade.

Second-born sons, girls in families of boys, boys in
families of girls, are with astonishing frequency subject
to compulsion-neurosis. The second-born is practically
always in a position which brings closer to him than to
others (either through error or by favourable events)
the temptation of fighting with.reinforced energies for
recognition within the small family circle.

The third test for the correctness of the results
obtained consists in the direction-lines that we have
shown to exist in the inner nature of the patient, letting
us see that the symptoms are necessary, opportune and
in some form or other utilizable. There is, of course,
not the slightest necessity for assuming any causal
dependence, for the patient is not, for example, bound
to his symptom as would have to be the case causally.
It looks more as if the patient were letting himself be
enticed and mislead by his symptom. In fact we are
dealing with a human deviation so near to all of us that
we can sympathize with it.

This error in the psychic structure of the patient
arises from his more or less pronounced pessimistic
outlook, built on a feeling of inferiority and it quite
automatically produces in him the temptation to turn back
as soon as society makes demands upon him. Such a fact
also proves that any alteration of the patient’s real
nature can come about only dy explanation.

Let me explain the above inter-connections by means
of two cases.

Case 1 deals with a young woman who had been
forced into marriage against her will by a somewhat
strict father. She had always been serious, ambitious
and markedly conscientious, her conscientiousness to
be explained by the fact that her father, whom she
regarded as the most definite personality in the family,
laid weight upon this particular quality. She was the
only girl in a family consisting of three boys and told
me quite spontaneously that she keenly felt her secondary
position. Her duties were concerned with household


202 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


matters and there she was under the care of a somewhat
cantankerous, complaining mother.

She showed little resistance to her (enforced) marriage.
It had been a Catholic marriage but had been annulled
after two years on account of certain offences of her
husband. Shortly after that she became acquainted
with a man with whom she soon fell in love and to
whom she was married according to the Hungarian
rite. This marriage met with the disapproval of her
mother-in-law. Then came the war. She-had had a
boy by her first marriage and with the child she was
compelled to join her step-mother while her husband
was inthe army. She thus found herself shortly after
her marriage, in a position from which with every fibre
of her being she wished to free herself. For this new
situation called into life again a feeling of defeat such as
she had known when living with her own mother. Her
mother-in-law’s criticisms were very severe. About that
time a book of Prof. Forster’s fell into her hands, where-
in she read that the marriage relation was under all
conditions undissolvable and that divorce was a crime
against morality.

After that she from time to time had the feeling,
accompanied by depression, that she ought really to
return to her first husband. The depression itself was
constant. It was one of those cases of compulsion-
neuroses where manifestations of depression occur which
in turn feed the compulsion-idea. The significance of
the compulsion-idea lay in the fact that it furnished her
with a certificate of illness and obtained through it
certain privileges that as a matter of fact her ambition
most coveted. She was then freed from criticism, could
put the care of her child, z.e. the household duties upon
which she definitely looked down, in the hands of her
mother, and soon found herself the centre of attention in
the family and possessed of a number of fictive advan-
tages, which any ambitious young woman might regard
as some sort of a recompense for all the disadvantages
that had been her lot in connection with her brothers.

If anyone doubts the correctness of the goal of
supertority 1 postulate in all neuroses, let him make the
following test. Let him, for example, look for the
purpose of the symptom or compulsion-idea such as
this woman’s belief that she had committed asin. What


COMPULSION-NEUROSIS 203


is the real ulterior notion behind this thought? Her
conscientiously religious father had never developed
such anidea. In other words, the daughter.is insisting
that she is more conscientious and more religious! She
was an extremely ambitious person and one whose
ambition had never been gratified because it cou/d never
find fulfilment in a new situation, or, for that matter,
considering its nature, in any situation. She really was
indulging in a revolt that took the form of passive
resistance, a type of behaviour that can be shown to
exist in every neurosis. She disqualified herself for the
performance of her proper work éy positing a compulsion
of her own making in place of that of society and of life and
so preoccupied, she pushed aside all the demands of
society and of her immediate family circle. It can in
all cases be shown ¢hat the greatest enemy of such pattents
zs time. She must waste her time, for the very existence
of time constitutes a demand in the form of—‘‘ How are
you going touse me”? Zo waste time the patient devised
an extensive system of correspondence with clergymen
and moralists, and depressions with their forced appeal
for sympathy from her environment. She shrank back
before the fulfilment of the duties her second marriage
entailed, because she wished in particular to evade the
criticisms of her second mother-in-law.

Case 2. The patient is an unusually able and
ambitious person. He had in childhood already felt
his incapacity to face life, and this had definitely differ-
entiated him from his comrades. He had never had
any idea about his future life or of marriage. We
may conclude, considering the natural development of
such tdeas, that this was not merely a case of such
thoughts being absent, but of a decision not to have an
occupation and not to marry, resolutions that are
frequently found in children. The patient was un-
usually ambitious, but, as this evaszon proves, lost
confidence in himself.

He had been carefully brought up by his parents.
His father was a markedly honourable person. The
patient had in his childhood already suffered from
being placed in uncomfortable situations that had
wounded his pride in his moral conduct. He had been
detected by his father in a white lie and this had followed
him throughout life. Not long after this event, com-
pulsion-ideas in the form of an intense feeling of guzlt


204 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


manifested themselves. His suffering made his whole
environment feel uncomfortable and his family tried to
mitigate it. For months at a time he brought accusa-
tions against himself on account of some erroneous
information he had given; brooded a whole year over
inconsequential matters ; informed his parents of every-
thing and then went to his teacher and informed the
latter that a year before he had given an incorrect piece
of information.

He passed his examinations and graduated from a
high-school. Then when he was about to face life and
pursue some occupation, he was prevented by a severe
illness. Not only did his consciousness of guilt persist,
but it compelled him to kneel down publicly and repeat
prayers to himself. Then he consoled himself with the
hope that people would regard him not as a fool but as
an extraordinarily religious man. It was upon such an
assumption that he prostrated himself in public.

His illness seemed to disappear as soon as he was
told to look about for some other profession. He went
to another city. There, after lengthy preparations, he
threw himself upon the ground in front of a shrine to
the Virgin and, in the presence of a large number of
people, made accusations against himself and confessed
his sins publicly. He was put under confinement
and then taken home by his father.

After some amelioration in his condition he began
to study for another profession. Then one day he
suddenly disappeared. He was found in an insane
asylum to which he had sought refuge until he got
better. There, freed from all demands, his condition
improved. His self-condemnatory ideas gradually dis-
appeared into the background. They were, as a matter
of fact, concerned with utterly unimportant questions,
and although they still terminated with an imperative
necessity of kneeling down and praying. He felt him-
self, however, now capable of making some resistance.
The physician advised him to return home and éake up
some kind of work.

On the same day he suddenly appeared, absolutely
naked, in the common dining-room.

_ After a considerable period of time he left the asylum
in a greatly improved condition and pursued his studies
further. On every occasion, however, on which he


COMPULSION-NEUROSIS 205


was confronted either with a self-imposed task or one
imposed from without, he fled to the insane-asylum and
stayed there for some time. He was regarded as a man
with excellent knowledge of his own subject, thus
showing that he was not merely passive, but really in
advance of his colleagues. He himself, however, was
entirely under the ban of his own incompetence. His
greatest ambition was to be superior to others, par-
ticularly to his older brother. His illness permitted
him to feel somewhat gratified; did he not hold so
much zz reserve! He could for this reason always be
permeated with the thought of what he might have
accomplished had not this fatal neurosts befallen him,
consumed so much of his time and caused him such
endless trouble and worry! From the above we may
draw legitimately the inference that his intense ambition
led him on into a diseage that proved his salvation,
just as under similar conditions, people seize upon a
narcotic, upon alcohol, morphine, and occasionally even
enter politics.

To build up such a life upon purely intellectual
lines is impossible. Consequently he employed all his
abilities and feelings in the construction of his disease
arrangement.

He was now satisfied if he only proved merely
superior to the members of his smaller circle of acquaint-
ances. This can also be inferred from the nature of
his compulsion-idea, ‘‘I am better than the others for
I feel myself guilty where others are incapable of it. I
am more pious, virtuous, more conscientious than all
the others put together, including my father.”

As he wished to be the first in a small circumscribed
group, not the first in society, not along the main paths
of life and not by means of the exertion of all his
powers, he was content with his own personal opinion
and with the simulation of superiority.

The tendency toward a goal of superiority is found
in all neuroses and is the driving force of compulsion-
neuroses. Itisneverabsent. Nevertheless the symptom
of compulsion-manifestation is adapted only for neurotic-
ally disposed individuals whose life-line lies in proximity
to the demands of society. The outburst of a com-
pulsion-neurosis would then, just as a revolt, prevent
complete devotion to society’s demands.


206 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Conclusion


When in a mood of anxiety, worry and torment,
compulsion-ideas, compulsion-speech and compulsion-
acts appear in the form of ‘‘an imperative intuition.
The frequency of these neuroses is well known but is
even greater than generally assumed to-day, that is, if
we interpret the neurotic compulsion as a symptom-
picture of the neurosis and it is not made to appear
curtailed by an unjustified method of subdividing it.
As a literary example let me quote the delightful
biographical sketch of life written by the now forgotten
romanticist, Sonnenberg, who was suffering from melan-
cholia when he died; secondly, Vischer’s Auch Ezner,
and the figure of Schmelzle drawn by Jean Paul.
Enuresis, compulsion hunger and sexual perversions
belong unquestionably to this group.

The generalized statement of some authorities that
the essential traits in the compulsion neurosis consist
of the patient’s realization of the senselessness yet
inevitableness of his acts, does not always hold.
Occasionally, on the contrary, the patient emphasizes
the purposeful nature of the compulsion and its corres-
pondence with his character. The significance of this
stress on the senselessness of the phenomenon does not
lie in the place where the scientists look for it, z.e. as
though constituting a proof of the unhampered intel-
ligence of the patient, but rather because it secures a
certificate of illness for him. It lies in the fact that it
underlines the inevitableness of his acts in spite of all
efforts, in the establishment of a condition of frightful
suffering, and the piling of additional loads upon him
that lead finally either to a partial or complete exemption
Srom our normal duties.

The lines of demarcation between the neuras-
thenic, hysterical and fear-neurotic complexes are often
vague. Alcoholism, morphinism, etc., are closely re-
lated; impulsive insanity, instinctive activities, com-
pulsory self-accusations and certain stereotyped features
and disturbances of psychic nature show a similar
psychological structure. Manifestations of normal
psychic life conduct us to the utilizable basis of the
compulsion-phenomenon. Certain types of habits, ex-
aggerated principles, misuse of truth and of morality


COMPULSION-NEUROSIS 207


are psychologically of similar structure. The connection
with a mood of doubt interfering likewise with any
progressive movement is also close.

The explanation of compulsion-neurosis according
to the individual psychological method discloses the
unconscious purpose of the patient to unburden and free
himself by means of a diseased compulsion from the com-
pulston due to the necessary demands made by society :—
to construct a subsidiary field of action in order to be
able to flee from the main battle-field of life and fritter
away time that might otherwise compel him to fulfil
his individual tasks.

The only test for the correctness of the psychological
demonstration of our views must be a proof that the
patient has been planning to withdraw himself from
the demands of life or at least to obtain some mitigation
of the responsibility for his decisions or his actions,
by the use of means other than those of the compulsion-
neurosis, z.e¢. quite independently of pathological mani-
festations, and by the employment of excuses, evasions,
and pretexts.

The treatment should consist in clearing up the
nature of the facts, in removing of erroneous notions
dating from childhood, in frank discussion and treat-
ment of the exaggerated ambition, and lastly, in isolat-
ing the patient’s self-love and hyper-anxiety tendencies.


XVI


On the Function of the Compulsion-Conception as a
Means of Intensifying the Individuality-Feeling


(1913)
I


IN a general way I might claim that in every com-
pulsion-neurotic there inheres the function of with-
drawing from external compulsion, so that he may
obey only his own compulsion. In other words, the
compulsion-neurotic struggles so definitely against the
will of another and against every foreign influence, that,
in his fight against these, he comes to the point of
positing his own will as sacred and irresistible. The
following is a very instructive case. A woman, forty
years old, complained of not being able to do any house-
work because she had lost the knowledge of performing
even the simplest things. She was consequently under
the compulsion of repeating to herself all the things
she had todo. She then was able to perform her tasks.
If, for example, she had to place a chair at the table
she would first have to say to herself ‘‘I must place
the chair at the table!” Then she would succeed.
The patient (in other words) had first to replace an
external will, the obligation to do (female) house-work,
by her own will in order to do anything. Those who
remember Furtmiiller’s delightful work on Ethics and
Psycho-analysis know this mechanism to be one of the
pillars of ethics. It represents also one of the main
pillars of compulsion-neurosis and enables the patient
to prove his semi-godlikeness where all other influences
appear nullified. Let me briefly mention also how the
working-compulsion enables a person to demonstrate
the uncleanliness of his environment, how the mastur-
208


FUNCTION OF COMPULSION-CONCEPTION 209


bation-compulsion prevents the influence of the sexual
partner, how the prayer-compulsion appears, in the
most peculiar manner, to place at the disposal of the
person praying all heavenly powers. ‘If I did not do
that ; if I say or do that; if I do not say that prayer,
and say those words; such and such a person will die.”
The meaning becomes immediately clear as soon as we
State the positive formula: ‘‘If I do this or leave it;
if I let my will work; then this person will not die.”
Thus the patient obtains an illusory proof, just as if he
were lord of life and death or like a deity.

On this subject we may further add that excessive
doubt and neurotic anxiety represent means utilizable
in the neurosis and permit the patient to adhere to his
life-line, to thwart every outside influence (on his pro-
fession and attitude) and every outside expectation.
Compulsion, doubt and fear will always be found to
represent these safe-guards in the neurosis, that are to
enable the patient to appear on top, masculine and
superior, as I have shown in the previous chapters.


II


A patient aged 35, suffering from apathy and com-
pulsion-ideas, and always in doubt as to her practical
abilities, disclosed herself on the first day (of the treat-
ment) as an art enthusiast. The deepest impression
made upon her by any pictures were (1) the self-portrait
of the ageing Rembrandt, (2) Signorelli’s frescoes of the
Day of Judgment and (3) Giorgione’s Three Ages (also
known as The Concert).

We see the patient’s interest fixed on old age and
the future, and we may assume that we are dealing with
a person who believes that she is only with difficulty
maintaining her balance, a person obsessed by fear,
and to whom it appears that any loss whatsoever is
likely to plunge her into serious deviations. She must
therefore be a person who is trying to pass from an
insecure position to one of comparative equilibrium, for
which reason her artifices, z.e. her neurotic symptoms,
appear necessary.

And yet all must be lost—youth, beauty, power,
influence! Only two ways are left open, either reversal
and search for a new life-line ; and this makes her feel

O


210 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the illness arising from her former position to be a
disturbing element. This path is bound eventually to
take her to a nerve-specialist! Or she may intensify
her symptoms and her prominence in order to gain
power. Such patients are generally sent to a physician
by their families.

Any position that is tenaciously adhered to through
pedantry, fear and compulsion, merely indicates in a
neurotic patient an old feeling of insecurity. We may
indeed, in the above case, have to assume that this
woman who, when first told that she was dissatisfied
with her feminine rdle, denied it, had nevertheless
arrived at her neurosis by means of the masculine
protest.

She told me the next day that the society of Vienna
was quite exhausting to her, that it was easier to rest in
the country. The connection permits us to infer that
this tiredness represented a purposeful arrangement
with the object of indicating that any future transference
of residence to Vienna was unfeasible.

If we connect the explanation of both these days we
obtain the following picture :—an unusually ambitious
woman who always wished to play the main rdéle, is not
content with her rich fund of abilities, but trembles at
the idea of not being able, as she grows older, to hold
her own in the upper society of the capital. She looks
busily into the future in order to anticipate her dethrone-
ment, and from the impressions she is able to utilize, and
the ever-present difficulties of life, she weaves an
emotionally steeped belief that she is not adapted to
practical life, z.e. not adapted to the réle of an ageing
housewife.

She must therefore succeed in evading either by
neurosis or neurotic symptoms—in this case by means
of compulsion-ideas or by a feeling of helplessness and
tiredness—a truth that she posits unconsciously, for she
assumes that age degrades a woman, makes her merely
man’s helper, an article of luxury, to an even more
marked degree than in youth. Instead of indulging in
extensive discussions let me provisionally give as proof
of my contention the fact that this woman, the nearer
she felt herself to the rdle of a woman, all the more
definitely refused “to play the game”. She became
frigid and retired for four days during her menses.


FUNCTION OF COMPULSION-CONCEPTION 11


On the second day she told me the following dream:
‘On your table Wilde’s Dorian Gray was lying. Inside
the book there was a large piece of white artistically
embroidered silk. I asked myself how this piece of silk
came to be in the book.”

The first part of the dream contains a corroboration
of the aggravated cause of her present condition, like
the portrait of Dorian Gray beginning to age. White
silk, silk embroidered curtains and similar things have
particular value for the patient. ‘‘ A book on my table;
a book written by me.” Her precious things, her
treasured possessions in my book! This astonishes
her. The thought arose in her mind whether I was not
going to write about her fear of old age.

Her old attitude of reserve interposed as a utilizable
method of increasing her distance from the physician.

The necessity of intensifying the neurosis is caused
by numerous factors :—the struggle against her feminine
role, z.e. the over-evaluation of the masculine (artistic)
profession ; the depreciatory attitude toward the house-
wife ; natural events such as marriage, love, old age,
and discussions of all kinds that threaten her ideal of
superiority. The neurosis is made up of individually
utilized and recognized psychic and bodily artifices
through whose interaction the fiction of being excep-
tional, of power and of free-will, can be preserved. The
exclusion of all external demands was given by the
increase in power due to the certificate of illness.


XVII


Neurotic Hunger-Strike


THE fear of eating begins as a rule at the age of seven-
teen and almost always with girls. Its adoption is
generally followed by rapid decrease in weight. The
goal, to be inferred from the whole attitude of the
patient, is the rejection of the woman’s réle. In other
words it is an attempt by means of an exaggerated
abstinence—as is so generally the case—to retard the
development of the female bodily form. One of these
patients painted her whole body, in addition, with
tincture of iodine in the belief of inducing decrease of
weight in that manner. At the same time she re-
peatedly impressed upon her younger sister the import-
ance of eating and was always inciting her to eat. One
patient finally reduced herself to a weight of twenty
kilo and looked more like a ghost than a young girl.

In all these instances we are dealing with girls who
as children had already tested the value and significance
of the ‘‘hunger-strike ’ as a means of attaining power.
In every developed neurosis this pressure upon the
patient and upon the physician is always present. By
doing this everything is at once centred about her
and her will dominates the situation in every respect.
We can now understand why patients of this type lay
so much value upon the nature of the food and why
they must safeguard this evaluation by means of a
‘fear arrangement.” This process of nourishment
cannot be stressed too much, for its over-evaluation
permits them to logically pursue their goal to rule over
others (like a man! like a father !). It is only then that
they feel the right to criticize everything for they have
now arrived at the point of view which allows them to
make efforts to look down upon the cooking skill of
their mother, to dictate the choice of foods, to insist
upon punctuality in meals, to force people at the same

212


NEUROTIC HUNGER-STRIKE 213


time to direct their attention to them and to solicitously
inquire whether they are not going to eat.

_One of my patients changed her attitude after some
time, and insisting suddenly upon the importance of
eating, began to crave and devour huge quantities of
food, a behaviour that evoked the same solicitude from
her mother. She was engaged and apparently desired
to marry as soon as she was ‘‘ well.” However she
obstructed the progress of her female rdle by all sorts
of nervous symptoms (depressions, outbursts of rage,
insomnia) and particularly by resorting to continual
‘‘fattening cures,” thus developing into a monstrosity.
She continually consumed bromide and declared that
without it she felt worse; she complained at the same
time of marked bromide acne, which disfigured her just as
much as her excessive fatness. (Nervous constipation,
desire for defaecation, tic, cutting of grimaces or com-
pulsion-neurosis frequently serve the same purpose.)
Many patients attain the same goal by eating in public
and fasting in private. The enormous importance of
hunger-strike in melancholia, paranoia and dementia
praecox, where by means of negativism the will of the
environment is rendered impotent, is well known.

The artifice of ‘70 and Fro’ is analogous to many
other neurotic arrangements. By means of it the
symptom of ‘‘ frittering away time” is developed. This
is quite intelligible when it is remembered that the
patient through ‘‘fear of making a decision’”’—in the
above instance, through ‘‘fear of his partner’—has
decided upon the ‘‘hesitating attitude,” ‘‘retreat” or
suicide. The importance of the nourishment is first
over-evaluated and then we have the fear of the taking
of nourishment so that finally, as might have been
expected, there is no other alternative but that of either
adopting the hesitating attitude, of a truce, or of retreat-
ing before the normal demands of society. In this
behaviour we see definitely reflected the old infantile
feeling of inferiority in connection with the demands of
life. Other ‘‘artifices of the weak” are easily enough
detected. Impulses toward revenge are always present
just as is the exercise of tyranny over the other members


of the family.


XVIII


Dreams and Dream-Interpretation


(Lecture delivered in September, 1912)


Tuts is an age-old problem that can be traced back to
the cradle of mankind. Fools and wise men have tried
their hands at it and kings and beggars have attempted
to extend the limits of their world knowledge by dream
interpretation. How does the dream arise? What
does itdo? How are its hieroglyphics to be deciphered ?

Egyptians, Chaldeans, Jews, Greeks, Romans and
Teutons listened eagerly to the mystic language of the
dream and in their myths and poems, we find indicated
many traces of their arduous research for its under-
standing, for its interpretation. We hear them re-
peatedly insist as though obsessed; the dream can
disclose the future! The famous dream-interpretations
of the Azble, the Talmud, Herodotus, Artemidorus,
Cicero, and the Nzbel/ungen-Lied, impress upon us with
undeniable certainty the conviction that the dream is a
peering into the future. Even up to the present day
the idea of obtaining knowledge of the unknowable is
always brought into connection with reflections upon
dreams. That our rationalistic age externally re-
pudiated the hope of unveiling the future and laughed
at such attempts is intelligible enough and it is this
attitude that has made any occupation with the problem
of the dream open to ridicule.

In order to circumscribe our field let me insist that
I do not hold the view that the dream is a prophetic
inspiration, that it can unlock the future or give know-
ledge of the unknowable. My extensive preoccupation
with dreams has taught me one thing, that the dream
like any other psychic manifestation comes into being
through powers inherent in each individual. At the
very threshold of any investigation there appear prob-
lems indicating that the possibility of dreams being

214


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 215


prophetic was not easy to posit and that dreams are
more likely to confuse than clarify the situation. The
question to be asked clothed in all its difficulties is :—Is
it really impossible for the human mind, within certain
definite limits, to look into the future?

Unbiased observations lead to the strangest results.
If the question (of the dream peering into the future) is
put directly, an individual will generally deny it. But
let us not pay any attention to mere external words or
thoughts. If I were indeed to question the other portions
of his body, (¢.e. not his mouth or brain) for example,
his movements, carriage, his actions, then we would
receive quite a different impression. Although we
deny the possibility of looking into the future, our
whole manner of life is such that it betrays exactly to
what an extent we would like to obtain certainty with
regard to future events. Our behaviour clearly shows
that, right or wrong, we do adhere to a possibility of
obtaining knowledge of the future. Indeed it can
further be shown that we would not be able to do any-
thing if the future complexion of things—either those
we desire or fear—did not determine the direction to be
taken, furnish us with the incitement to act and disclose
to us both the evasions and obstacles. We contenually
act as uf possessed of fore-knowledge of the future, although
we realize that we can know nothing.

Let us start from the petty things of life. If I buy
something I obtain an anticipatory sensation, taste and
pleasure. Frequently it is only this steadfast belief in
an anticipated situation, with its pleasures and incon-
veniences, that makes me act or refrain from action.
The fact that I am open to error will not deter me. On
the other hand I refrain from acting in order, zf doubt
develops,: to weigh two possible future situations without
coming toany decision. If I go to bed to-night I do
not know that on the morrow when I awake there will
be daylight, but I prepare myself for it.

But do I really know it? Do I know it in the same
sense as I know that I am standing in front of you?
No, my knowledge is of an entirely different order. It
is not to be found in my conscious thinking. Yet its


1 The function of doubt in life and in the neurosis is, as I have shown,
always to obtain a cessation of aggressiveness, to evade decisions and to con-
ceal this fact from one’s self.


216 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


traces are indirectly in my bodily attitude, at my
command. The Russian scientist Pawlow was able to
_ show that in the stomach of animals when they expecta
certain food, the juices necessary for digestion are
secreted as though the stomach had fore-knowledge of what
foods it was to receive. That means, however, that our
body must be operating, like our mind, with some
knowledge of the future if it wishes to play its rdle
and be adequate; that it makes preparations as though
it could foretell the future. This reckoning with the
future is as in the last-mentioned instance quite foreign
to our conscious thinking. Let us however ponder on
this question! Would we ever act if we consciously
grasped the future? Would not reflection, criticism,
the constant weighing of pro and con constitute an in-
superable obstacle to what we really desire tc do, to
act? Our apparent knowledge of the future must conse-
quently remain tn our unconscious. A condition of diseased
psychic make-up exists—it is common and expresses
itself in manifold ways—extreme doubt, compulsion-
brooding, /folze de doute—where the inward suffering
actually drives the patient zx¢o the only path for properly
safeguarding his importance and his feeling of individu-
ality. The painful examination of one’s own future pro-
spects so prominently emphasizes its uncertainty and the
anticipatory thinking is so definitely of a conscious kind
that a set-back follows. The impossibility of knowing
the future either consciously or with certainty fills the
patient with indecision and doubt and thus every one
of his activities is interfered with by considerations of a
different character. The contrast is given by that mania
which manifests itself where a secret and otherwise un-
conscious future goal expresses itself impetuously,
overwhelming reality with evil intent and enticing the
conscious self to irresistible assumptions in order to.
protect the pathological self-consciousness from making
mistakes in its co-operation with society.

That conscious thinking plays but a minor réle in
dreams hardly needs proof. Similarly the critical
faculty and the contradictions brought about by the
inactive sense organs are also inoperative. Is it
conceivable that the expectations, wishes, and fears
connected with the given situation of the dreamer
should manifest themselves undisguisedly in the dream ?


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 217


A patient had been brought to the hospital after he
had taken ill with a severe attack of tabes; his mobility
and sensibility was in consequence of his disease
markedly limited and he had in addition become blind
and deaf. As there was no means of communicating
with him, his situation was indeed a very remarkable
one. When I saw him he was continually demanding
beer and abusing the nurse in all sorts of obscene
language. His real strivings, as well as his method of
enforcement remained untouched. If, however, we were
to imagine one of his serise-organs as functioning it is
evident that not only his statements but likewise his
thought-connections would have taken a different turn.
The non-functioning of touch during sleep is felt in
many ways particularly in the displacement of the
realm of action and in the less hampered emergence of a
goal. This necessarily leads as compared with the
waking stage, to an intensification and stressing of
conation and in content to analogical but more sharply
outlined characterizations and suggestions. These
latter, however, in consequence of the dreamer’s caution
may be accompanied by restrictions or obstacles. Even
Havelock Ellis (Zhe World of Dreams) who offers other
explanations mentions this problem, Looked at from
other view-points we can understand why in the case
of the above patient, as in dreams, only an under-
standing of the true situation of affairs could bring
about a rationalization (Nietzsche) and a ‘‘ logzcal inter-
pretation”.

Nevertheless the direction of the activity and there-
fore the anticipatory, prescient function of the dream is
always clearly discernible ;1 it foreshadows the prepara-
tions developed in connection with actual difficulties en-
countered by the dreamer’s life-line, and the safe-guarding
purpose is never lost sight of. Let us attempt to trace
these lines by an example. A patient with a severe
case of agoraphobia, who had taken ill with hamotropia,
dreamt the following as she lay in bed incapacitated
from pursuing her duties as a business woman :—

‘‘T enter a shop and find the girls playing cards.” —

In all my cases of agoraphobia I found this
symptom used as an excellent means of forcing upon


1 First described in Aggressionstrieb 1913 (Cf. Heilen und Bilden), in
Chapters vii, x and xi of this work, and in 7he Neurotic Constitution.


218 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the environment, relations, husband or wife, employees,
certain duties and dictating laws to them like @ kazser
or deity. his tyranny is accomplished by preventing
any person from being absent or withdrawing from
business on such excuses as attacks of anxiety, dizzi-
ness or nausea.!_ I always in such a case think of
the similarity of this attitude to that of the Pope, the
deputy of God, who regards himself as a prisoner (in the
Vatican) and who by this very renunciation of his
personal freedom, intensifies the worship of the believers
and forces all potentates to come to him (‘‘ The journey
to Canossa”) without their being able to expect a
return visit. The dream of my patient occurred at a
time when this trial of strength had already become
manifest. The interpretation is simple. The dreamer
put herself into the future situation in which she would
be out of bed and on the look-out for transgressions of
rules. Her whole psychic life is permeated with the
conviction that without her nothing could possibly be
in proper order. This conviction she adheres to in
other phases of life, for she degrades everyone and tries
pedantically to improve everything. In her ever-wakeful
distrust she is always endeavouring to discover errors
in others. .So thoroughly is she filled with experiences
emphasizing mistrust that she really developed greater
acuteness in detecting mistakes than others. She knew
exactly what employees would do if they were permitted
to? She also knew what men do when they are alone.
‘*All men are alike!” For that reason her husband
always has to remain at home.

Unquestionably considering the nature of her pre-
parations she will, as soon as she recovers from lung-
trouble, discover quite a number of omissions in her
business, which is situated right near her home. She
may even discover that the employees have played
cards. The day after her dream she had the servant
bring her the cards and on some pretext or other, had
the girl-employees called to her bed-side repeatedly in
order to give them new directions and to supervise
them. In order to obtain light on the future she only


1 Cf. Adler, ‘‘ Beitrage zum Organischen Substrat der Neurosen ” (Oesterr.
Aeratezeitung, 1912, Hefte 23 and 24), and an excerpt from the medical history


of the above-mentioned patient in the chapter on “The Réle of the Un-
conscious ”, in this book,


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 219


has to ferret out in her sleep-consciousness, in con-
sonance with her over-strained goal of superiority, some
fitting analogies and to take literally and seriously the
fiction of the recurrence of similar} mantfestations in indi-
vidual experiences. Indeed in order to prove herself to
have been in the right all she need do is, after her
recovery, to increase the standard of her demands.
Mistakes and omissions would then certainly be found
to exist.

As another example of dream interpretation, I would
like to use the dream of the poet Simonides as handed
down by Cicero, a dream interpretation that I have
already used to develop a part of my theory of dreams
(cf. the chapter ‘‘ On the Concept of Resistance”). One
night shortly before embarking on a journey to Asia
Minor Simonides dreamt ‘‘a dead person whom he had
piously buried warned him from taking the contemplated
journey.” After this dream Simonides discontinued
his preparations for the journey and stayed at home.
According to our experiences in dream-interpretation we
may assume that Simonides was afraid of this journey,
that he used this dead person® who was under obligations
to him, zo frighten and protect himself by the thought of
the horror of the grave and by presentiments of meeting
a frightful end. According to the narrator the boat
capsized, an event that probably presented itself to the
dreamer’s mind on the analogy of other shipwrecks.
If the boat had really arrived safely at its destination
what would have prevented superstitious natures from
assuming that it would have gone down had Simonides
not heeded the warning and been on board?

We find consequently in dreams two types of
attempts of pre-interpreting, of solving a problem, and

1 The deeper knowledge of this ‘‘ fiction of similarity” one of the most
important assumptions of thought and of the causality principle, I owe to
my friend and collaborator A. Hautler.

2 T intend further on to discuss in detail the employment of such very broad
emotion-provoking reminiscences that serve the purpose of inducing affects
and their consequences, cautious actions and at the same time, loathing,
dizziness, anxiety, fear of the sexual partner, fainting and other neurotic
symptoms. Much of these I have discussed in my book, Zhe Meurotec Con-
stitution, and have been able to reduce it either to a likeness (e.g. incest-
likeness, crime-likeness, godlikeness, megalomania, smallness-mania) or what
I have described as a ‘‘junktim.”’ As far as I know only Prof. Hamburger
has arrived at even approximately similar results. For a detailed description
of this neurotic ‘‘arrangement”, cf. the chapter ‘‘ On Individual-psychological
Neuroses”, in this book.


220 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


of initiating what the dreamer desires to put into a
given situation. This he will seek to accomplish
along lines best adapted to his personality, his nature
and character. The dream may depict a situation
which is anticipated in the future as already exist-
ing, (the dream of the patient with agoraphobia), in
order in the waking state to put this arrangement
into effect either openly or surreptitiously. The poet
Simonides apparently employed an old experience to
prevent him from travelling. If you firmly believed
that this is an experience of the dreamer, that it is
his own interpretation of the power of the dead man
and that it is his own situation that demands an answer
as to whether he is to go or not, if you take all these
possibilities into consideration then you get the un-
mistakeable impression that Simonides dreamed this
dream in order to give himself a hint that he could
clearly and without hesitation remain at home. We
may assume that even if he had not had this dream
our poet would have remained at home. What then
about our patient with agoraphobia? Why did she
dream of the carelessness and disorderliness of her
employees? We may detect in her behaviour the
following assumptions: ‘‘ When I am not present every-
thing goes to pieces and as soon as I regain my health
and take charge of affairs | shall demonstrate to every-
one that nothing can get along well without me.” We
may consequently be certain that upon her first appear-
ance in the shop she will discover all sorts of derelictions
of duty and of carelessness for she will be looking
about, argus-eyed in order to show her superiority.
She will probably be able to prove she was right and that
is why she anticipated the future in her dream.1 The
dream therefore like character, affect and the neurotic-
symptom is arranged by the dreamer in accordance
with a predesigned purpose.

Permit me now to interpolate here a discussion so
that I can meet an objection which very likely has


1 It may be surmised that Simonides who as a poet yearned for immortality
was according to this dream possessed of a fear of death, whereas the patient
with agoraphobia pursuing her fictive goal of domination, had a queen ideal.
Cf. also for the first, ‘* Individual-psychologische Ergebnisse tiber Schlaflosig
keit” (Mortschritte d. Medizin ; Leipzig, 1913), where, among other things, the
relation of the infantile fear of death to the choice of a medical profession
is emphasized.


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 221


occurred to many of you. How am I to explain the
fact that the dream attempts to influence the future
complexion of things when most of our dreams appear
so clearly to contain unintelligible and often enough,
stupid and meaningless matters? The importance of
this objection is so distinctly felt that most of our
authorities have looked for the essence of the dream
in these bizarre, unoriented and unintelligible mani-
festations and have tried to explain them ; or stretching
the unintelligibility of the dream-life they have denied to
them all importance. Scherner and Freud in particular
among the newer men must be given the credit of
having attempted the interpretation of the mystery of the
dream. Freud in order to give a foundation to his dream-
theory, according to which the dream represents a kind of
revelling in infantile unfulfilled sexual wishes, regarded
this unintelligibility as a purposive distortion, as though
the dreamer in spite of the restrictions imposed upon
him by civilization, did nevertheless desire, in phantasy
at least, to gratify his forbidden wishes. To-day this
view has become as untenable as that of the sexual
basis of neurotic diseases or the sexual basis of our
civilization. The apparent lack of intelligibility in the
dream is to be accounted for primarily by the circum-
stance that the dream is not a means for the attain-
ment of a future position but an accessory phenomenon,
an indication of power, a sign and a proof that both
body and mind are making an attempt at anticipa-
tory thinking and at anticipatory groping in order
to justify the personality of the dreamer in connec-
tion with some approaching difficulty. In _ other
words we have here a synchronous movement of
our thought, one running in the same direction as the
character and the nature of the personality demand and
expressing itself in a difficult language which even
when understood, is not at all clear. Yet this language
indicates the direction toward which the path tends.
As necessary as is intelligibility for our waking
thought and speech, preparing as it does our actions,
so superfluous does it become in the dream, for the
dream is to be compared with the smoke of a fire
which but points out to us in what direction the
wind lies.

On the other hand the smoke may serve to tell


222 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


us that a fire is to be found in a certain place
and experience teaches us to infer the presence of
wood from the fire and from that the fact that something
is burning.

If we break up a dream into its constituent parts
and if we can discover from the dreamer what these
individual parts mean then a moderate expenditure
of industry and a certain degree of penetration will
indicate to us that behind the dream exist forces at
work striving toward a given goal. This direction
is adhered to by man in other aspects of life besides
those of the dream and is conditioned by his ego-
ideal and by those difficulties and inadequacies felt
by him as oppressive. From this view-point then,
which can rightly be called an artistic one we obtain
a knowledge of man’s life-line or, at least, of part
of it and we get a glimpse of that unconscious life-plan
by means of which he strives to dominate the pressure
of life and his own feeling of uncertainty. We also
get a glimpse of the detours he makes in the interests
of this feeling of insecurity so that he may avoid
defeat. We have the right to employ the dream as
much as any other psychical manifestation and just
as much as the whole life of man, for the purpose of
drawing conclusions concerning his position in the
world and his relation to other people. Jz dreams all
the transttional phases of anticipatory thinking occur as tf
atrected by some previously determined goal and by the
utelization of personal experiences.

We thus arrive at a better understanding of the
initially unintelligible details found in dream-structure.
The dream rarely gives a presentation of facts—and
even when it does, this is conditioned by a specific
trait of the dreamer—in which recent happenings or
pictures of the present occur. For the solution of an
undecided question simpler, more abstract and infantile
comparisons are at hand, comparisons frequently suggest-
ing more expressive and more poetical images. For
example, an impending decision may be replaced by an
impending school examination, a strong opponent by
an older brother, the idea of victory by a flight to the
sky, and a danger by an abyss or a fall. Affects that
play a rdle in dreams always arise from preparations
and anticipatory thinking, and from the protective


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 223


devices for the actually threatening problem. The
simplicity of the dream scenes—simple in comparison
with the complex situations of life—represent to such
an extent the attempts of the dreamer to find some
outlet by excluding the confusing multiplicity of powers
present in any given situation, that he is willing to
pursue a guiding-line that resembles these simple
Situations. Just as a pupil who does not understand
a teacher’s question, for example, often looks quite
bewildered when asked with regard to the propulsion
of energy, ‘‘ What takes place when you are pushed ?”
If a stranger were to enter the room, as this last question
was asked, he would look at the teacher with the same
lack of comprehension that we exhibit when told a
dream.

Lastly, the unintelligibility of a dream belongs
together with the problem first discussed. There we
saw that zz order to obtain protection for an act we require
a belief in the future that ts steeped in the unconscious. ‘This
basic attitude for human thoughts and actions, according
to which an unconscious guiding-line leads to a person-
ality ideal within the unconscious, I have discussed in
detail in my book The Neurotic Constitution. The con-
struction of this personality ideal and the guiding lines
leading to it contain the same cognitive and emotional
material as does the dream and the emotional processes
that lie behind it. The same necessity that forces one
kind of psychic material to remain within the unconscious
presses at the same time so heavily upon the thoughts,
pictures and auditory impressions of the dream that the
latter, 2x order not to endanger the ego's untty of personality
must likewise remain in the unconscious, or better, must
remain unintelligible. (Think, forexample, of the dreams
of the patient afflicted with agoraphobia). What she
tried to achieve by means of her unconscious personality
was the domination of the environment. If she could
have understood her dream then her despotic strivings
and actions would have had to give way to the criticism
of her waking thoughts. But as her real desire was
to rule, her dream must remain unintelligible to her.
From this point of view it is also possible to understand
that psychic illness and all forms of nervousness become


1 These may gain tendentious strength from the dream picture if this is
necessary for the sake of safety.


224 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


untenable and are bound to improve if we succeed in
bringing into consciousness and blunting the over-
strained goals of the neurotic.

Let me now show partially how, with the help of
the patient herself, the interpretation of a dream was
conducted. The patient came under my treatment on
account of irritability and suicide-mania. I wish to
stress particularly the fact that the analogical aspect
of the dream-thought is always found to be prominent
in the supposition ! with which the dreaming individual
begins. The difficult nature of the situation lay in the
fact that she was in love with her brother-in-law. The
dream follows :—


A Napoleon Dream.”


‘‘T dreamt that I was in the dancing-hall, wore a
pretty blue dress, had my hair dressed nicely and
danced with Napoleon.”

‘(Tn this connection” (said the patient) ‘‘ the follow-
ing occurs to me:

‘‘T have raised my brother-in-law to the rdle of
Napoleon for zt would otherwise hardly be worth while
taking him away from my sister (z.e. her neurotic nature
is not at all fixed on the man but on the desire to be
superior to her sister). In order to cover the whole
matter over with the mantle of righteousness and
further, in order not to give the impression as though
I had been instigated by revenge because I had come
upon the scene too late, I have of necessity to imagine
myself as the Princess Louise so that it appears quite
natural for Napoleon to divorce his first wife Josephine
in order to take a wife of equal rank.

‘‘ With regard to the name Louise, I had been using
it for some time. On one occasion a young man asked
for my Christian name and my colleague knowing I did
not like Leopoldine, said simply that I was called Louise.

‘That I was a princess I dreamt frequently (guid-
ing-line) and this is indeed my most intense ambition,


1 Cf, Vaihinger, The Philosophy of As If, whose theory of knowledge
is in complete agreement with my beliefs on the psychology of the neuroses.

2 Napoleon, Jesus, Jeanne d’Arc, the Virgin, as well as the Kaiser, father,
uncle, mother, brother, etc, are frequent compensation-ideals of the intensified
lust for superiority and represent, at the same time, the directive and emotion-
ally-steeped preparations of the psychic life of the neurotic,


DREAMS AND DREAM-INTERPRETATION 225


which in dreams permits me to construct a bridge over
the gulf separating me from the aristocrats. Further-
more this illusion is calculated to make me feel, when
awake, all the more painfully, the fact that I was
brought up away from home and that I am alone and
thrown upon myself. The sad thoughts that come over
me, enable me éo behave harshly and cruelly to all people
who have the good fortune to be connected with me.

‘* As far as Napoleon is concerned, let me point out
that since I am definitely not a man, I want to bend
the knee only before such as are greater and more
powerful than all the others. Incidentally this would
not prevent me from stating that Napoleon was a
burglar (burglar-dreams). Then again I should only
bow before him and not really submit to him, for I
would like to hold the man by a string, as is to be
inferred from another dream—and then, and then I
would dance.

‘Dancing must be a substitute for many things
to me because music exerts a tremendous influence upon
my soul.

‘¢ How frequently during a concert was I seized with
the intense longing to run over to my brother-in-law
and almost suffocate him with kisses.

“In order not to allow this desire for a stranger to
rise up before me, I must throw myself passionately
into dancing or if I have no partner, remain seated with
compressed lips and stare gloomily into the distance in
order to prevent any one else from approaching me.

““T did not wish to succumb to love, and yet in my
opinion balls and love belong together.

“¢T selected the blue colour because it is most becom-
ing to me and because I had been actuated by the desire
of making a good impression upon Napoleon. I had
now the desire to dance, something I formerly was not
able to do.”

From this point on the interpretation might proceed
much further and finally disclose the fact that the un-
conscious life-plan of this girl had as its purpose the
will to rule, a purpose now altered and weakened to
the extent that she no longer regards dancing as a
personal humiliation.

I have come to the end. We have seen that the
dream represents a subsidiary psychic manifestation as

P


226 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


far as action is concerned, but that as in a mirror it
may betray events and bodily attitudes that are related
to subsequent acts. Is it therefore to be wondered at
the folk-soul at all times with the infallibility that holds
true of all universal feelings, accepted the dream as a
pointing toward the future? A very great man, one
who united within himself the focal points of all the
sensations of man, Goethe, has expressed the dreamer’s
‘‘slimpse into the future” and the help and strength
flowing from it in a wonderful ballad. The count
returning to his castle from the Holy Land finds it
empty and desolate. At night he dreams of a dwarfs
wedding. The conclusion of the poem is :-—

‘‘ And were we now to sing of what happened later
on, then all the noise and riot would have to cease. For
what he saw so nicely in miniature, he became ac-
quainted with and enjoyed on a larger scale. Trumpets
and the jingling, ringing peals of music rang out, and
rider, chariot, bridal throngs, all approached and bowed
before him, an innumerable happy lot. Thus it was
and thus it will ever be.”

The feeling that this poem of the dreamer is directed
toward thoughts of marriage and children is quite °
sufficiently stressed by the poet.


XIX


On the Role of the Unconscious in Neurosis
(1913)


Our understanding of the individual problems in the
psychology of neuroses is so definitely bound up with
the individualistic mode of approach that it may be
maintained that every working-hypothests also built up out
of individual experiences, furnishes us with a picture of the
breadth of view-point and the limits of knowledge possessed
by the analyst. This is so manifestly true that it explains
why observers come to different views, evaluations and
hypotheses ; why it is that one school of thought either
emphasize or minimize one point, and another another ;
why the significance of certain data escapes some and
unimportant details are given special significance by
others. He who insists on adhering to a well-formulated
doctrine cannot easily be shaken,* unless he becomes
aware of its inner contradictions. In general he
behaves like a nervous patient who refuses to make any
change in his life-plan until he has become aware of his
unconscious ideal of greatness and has given it up as
unattainable.

In contrast to other writers I would like to stimulate
the reader to test (my views) and to apply my inter-
pretation to the following discussions. Psycho-therapy
is an artistic profession. Self-analysis—important only
for the understanding of one’s own life-line—is compar-
able, in a way, to a portrait by one’s self. It can give
us no guaranty that the analysis is ‘‘ unpredjudiced”’,
because this portrait is obtained by the employment of
the unfortunately limited means of personality (or of
two personalities) and because the individual's per-
spective does not allow either one’s self or others to be
viewed in any but an individual manner. To apply


1Cf. Furtmiiller, Psycho-analyse und Ethik.
227


228 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


personal, ze. types of argument different from the
customary in science in the evaluation of psycho-thera-
peutic views, is an unjustifiable nuisance, explicable
only because of the newness of our subject and which
will surely not continue to exist for any length of time.

These afore-mentioned limits of individuality are not
so disturbing an element in psycho-therapeutic practice.
If the neurotic has gone to pieces under the pressure of
reality the physician can teach him to come to terms
with both reality and society.. The impact of patient
and physician always prevents the neurotic from living
in his fiction. While the patient is imagining himself
to be fighting for his superiority the physician can
demonstrate to him the one-sidedness and sterility of
his attitude.}

One of the greatest difficulties in treatment is the
fact that the patient, although he may possess the
proper insight into the nature of the neurotic mechanism,
still partially maintains his symptoms. This he does
until another of the neurotic artifices is disclosed,
perhaps the most important namely, ¢hat the patient
makes use of the unconscious in order to be able to follow
the old goal of supertortty and his old preparations and
symptoms in spite of his recognition of them. Having
established this fact we find ourselves again in the
presence of that type of explanation of the neurotic
life-plan discussed and commented upon in my book
The Neurotic Constitution. ‘The neurotic psyche in order
to be able to attempt the attainment of its over-strained
goal must have resort to artifices and stratagems. One
of these artifices 1s to transfer the goal or the substituted
goal into the realm of the unconscious. If this ‘‘ moral”
goal is hidden away in some experience or in some
phantasy, then he may to such an extent, fall a victim
to amnesia, either partially or completely, that the
fictive goal becomes lost to view. The patient and,
incidentally the critic, can attain the same object, if
he overlooks the fact ofa firmly maintained reminiscence,
a symptom or phantasy transcends itself purposively.

It is but another method of expression, flowing
logically from what I have established above, if I insist
that this same goal or remnants of experiences and
phantasies connected with this goal, are to such an


1 Cf, the chapter on ‘‘ The Concept of Resistance”’, in this book,


THE UNCONSCIOUS IN NEUROSIS 229


extent and in such a form accessible to consciousness
that they aid and do not prove an obstacle to the
attainment of a personality-ideal. The biological sig-
nificance of consciousness, as well as the significance
of the above-described participation of consciousness,
lies in the fact that it renders possible actions directed
to the attainment of a unified life-plan. This view is
particularly in accord with the important teachings of
Vaihinger and Bergson? and point to a quality of con-
sciousness that has developed out of the instincts and
has adapted itself to purposes of aggression.

The conscious conception responding to the over-
strained neurotic ideal is, therefore, as far as its conscious
quality vs concerned, an artifice of the psyche, as analysis of
over-evaluated ideas, of mania, hallucination?, indeed of
all psychoses, clearly discloses although, it is true,
the plan of operation does not become conscious. Every
conscious manifestation of the psyche points, in the
same way, to the conscious fictive terminal goal, just
as the unconscious impulse does, if rightly understood.
The cheap method of talking of ‘‘ cortical consciousness ”
can only deceive persons who do not know the connec-
tions. The frequent antithesis between the conscious
and unconscious impulses is only an antithesis of means.
For the purpose of heightening the feeling of personality
or for the attainment of the goal of god-likeness, it is
irrelevant.

The final purpose and all its over-strained form-
transferences must remain in the unconscious if, by
reason of its marked contrast to reality, it renders
action in the direction of the neurotic guiding-line
impossible. Where the quality of consciousness is
necessary as a method of life, as the protection of the
unity of the personality and as the protection of the
personality-ideal, it will appear both in the most fitting
form and extension. Even the fictive goal, even the
neurotic life-plan can partially become conscious, if
such a procedure is calculated to produce the heighten-
ing of the feeling of personality. This is particularly
true of the psychosis. When, however, the neurotic
goal might nullify itself by coming into direct opposition


1P, Schrecker, Bergson’s Philosophie der Persinlichkeit. Recently these
facts have been prominently stressed by Furtmiiller and W. Stern, __
2 Cf, the neurological discussion of Berger’s Hofrat Eysenhardt, in this book.


230 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


with the feeling of the community, then its life-plan is
formed in the unconscious. ;

These conclusions based on the contents of neurotic
manifestations, attain theoretical confirmation in one of
the inferences that flows from the fundamental doctrines
of Vaihinger, regarding the nature of the /ictzon, even
though he does not put it in words. In a magnificent
synthesis this brilliant thinker takes the nature of think-
ing to be the means of conquering life, thought seeking
to attain its purpose by means of the artifice of a fiction
theoretically valueless but in practice an essential idea.
It was essential to have a profound conception and
clarification of the nature of the fiction, in order to make
us thoroughly acquainted with the artifices of our
thinking, a conception that is certain to transform our
whole view of life. In its very ‘‘discovery” there is
entailed the further inference that the guiding fiction
of psychic life also belongs to the unconscious and that
its emergence into consciousness might for its purpose
be in part unnecessary and partly injurious.

Psycho-therapy can begin here by bringing into
consciousness the guiding ideas of greatness, thereby
rendering their influence upon active life impossible.
Bearing this in mind we shall show, in the following,
that it is only the unconscious guiding idea of personality
that makes the complete neurotic system possible.*

1. The niece of one of my patients gives her
employer (my patient) notice. My patient is worried
feeling that she is irreplaceable although before that
she had not thought highly of her. She complained
that she would not be able to manage alone, yet doubts
whether she can employ any other person. Her
husband is out of the question ; her companion but a
parrot. We seem to hear the words, ‘‘ Only I, I, I!
What would happen if I were not here?”

The woman suffered from agoraphobia. In other
words she cannot go out. Indeed how can she go out
if she always had to be behind the counter? She safe-
guards herself by means of her agoraphobia, in order
to stay at home and demonstrate her irreplaceability.
She has pains in her legs. Takes 3-5 grains of aspirin.
She frequently wakes up at night in pain, takes a


1 The contrast between the view of Freud and these other writers is
clearly manifest.


THE UNCONSCIOUS IN NEUROSIS 231


powder, and thinks of her business tasks. This happens
a number of times every night. She suffers from pain
so that she may think of her business even at night.
The patient’s strained ideal of importance, to be a man,
queen, always first—is only effective as long as it
remains in the unconscious. Reminiscences of child-
hood reminding her of the more fortunate rdle of the
boys, are in consonance with her present view of the
inferiority of woman.

2. The dream of a girl, twenty-six years old, who
came under my treatment on account of outbursts of
anger, suicidal thoughts and truancy.

‘‘T seemed to be married. My husband was a dark
man of medium height. I said, ‘If you do not help
me in the attainment of my goal I shall resort to any
method, even against your will.’”

The unconscious goal of the patient’s childhood had
been to change herself into a man (cf. Caeneus, Ovid).*

She had not been unconscious of this goal in child-
hood although it did not have the significance for the
little girl that it possesses for us. Perhaps it might be
better to say that its psychological and social meaning
could not have been clearly grasped by the child. This
goal expressed itself, however, in unusual, exaggerated
wildness, in an almost compulsive craving to put on
boy’s clothing, to climb up trees, to select the rdle of
the man in children’s games and to assign female rdles
to boys—this in order to maintain the principle of
metamorphosis.

Our patient was an intelligent child and soon
recognised her guiding-fiction to be untenable. Then
two things happened first, she changed the form of her
fiction which now became—‘‘/ must be petted by every-
one!’? This, reduced to her line of power-craving,
meant—‘‘I must dominate everyone, draw everybody’s
attention to myself.” Secondly she forgot her original
guiding idea, so that she might thereby continue to hold tt.
This artifice of the psyche is exceedingly important.
I need hardly insist that it is never a case of the
suppression of sexual impulses or ‘‘ complexes” in the
unconscious but simply a question of having the will-
to-power that arises out of the personality-ideal become
unconscious, that it concerns fictions that must to such
1 Met., xii. This valuable reference I owe to Prof. Oppenheim, of Vienna.


232 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


an extent be adhered to in the individual’s interests,
that they are unable to be employed, tested or
minimized. In this way does the personality ideal safe-
guard itself in order not to be dissolved and so that
the absolutely necessary unity for which, above every-
thing else, the patient has striven be not lost. And
this he attains by concealing his fictions, by withdrawing
them frout CONSCLOUSNESS.

3. Dream of a patient who came under my treatment
because of attempts at suicide, uselessness, clumsiness,
sadistic phantasies, perversions, compulsion-masturba-
tion and persecution-ideas. ;

‘‘T informed my aunt that I was now finished with
Mrs P. I knew all her good and bad traits and I
enumerated them. My aunt answered: ‘You have
forgotten one trait—her lust for domination.’ ”

The aunt was an efficient, somewhat sarcastic woman.
Mrs P. had toyed with the patient to the extent of
making him wild. She showed him by her attitude
that she despised him, repulsed him and others yet
after a time made advances to him again. Naturally
enough the humiliations affected the patient most. Just
as is the effect of defeats for most neurotics, these
humiliations were merely excuses for adhering all the
more to this relationship in order to induce, if possible,
some change in the situation and either to dominate it
or unnecessarily chain himself. The irritated, intensified
feeling of inferiority searches for some hyper-compensa-
tion and is a typically neurotic trait. Such patients for
instance never free themselves from people who have
defeated them. Once having understood this trait the
whole secret of the neurosis lies exposed before us.

In the scientific literature on the subject similar
traits are utilized for masochistic purposes. In my
chapter on The Psychic Treatment of Trigeminal-neuralgia
I have already cleared up this confusing error. We
may only speak of pseudo-masochistic traits. For,
like sadism, these acd the aspiration for superiority and
occasionally appear antithetic, ambivalent, but this ¢s true
only as long as we are ignorant that both forms of life tend
equally toward the same goal. They are of antithetic
nature only to the observer, but not to the patient, or


from the stand-point of a properly understood neurotic
\ife-plan.


THE UNCONSCIOUS IN NEUROSIS 233


The patient had always possessed a remarkably
strong tendency towards analytical examination of the
world and of humanity. As so frequently happens this
trait developed from a marked depreciatory tendency.
The analytical neurotic almost literally acts according
to the maxim: Dzvide et impera! He breaks up the
often delightful interconnections and obtains a worthless
mixture of schedules. Ecce Homo! But does this really
represent the man? Does this represent the real, living
psyche?

The patient would like to be sarcastic like his aunt.
However, all he possesses is backstairs humour and
he never finds a ready answer. To this ‘hesitating
attitude”, it is true he owes his life-plan which forces
him always to answer in such a way that his ‘‘opponent”
—and everyone ts his opponent—is annihilated ; or either
not to answer at all or inadequately so that both he and
his family get the impression that it is necessary to
treat him gently and to help him in every way.

The day before his dream the patient had been
under the influence of a conversation with his older
brother with whom he had never felt himself capable of
coping. His brother promised that he would try again
to help and obtain a position for him. To prevent such
promises of his older brother had always been the
patient’s speciality. And it became necessary to put
him under treatment because he had attempted to
commit suicide shortly after he had thanked his brother
for getting him a position. One day, when his brother
scolded him for his shabby clothes, he dreamt that he
was wearing a suit over which he had poured ink.
When the psychical situation of the patient is known
then his dreams are intelligible without any great
necessity for analysis. We see here that the thoughts
and anticipated acts have as their object, to deprive the
brother of his importance, to nullify his influence and
his achievements surreptitiously and secretly. ed, zx
spite of all, our patient feels himself to be a moralist and
zdealist.

His tendency to depreciating his brother operated under
cover, one might say in the unconscious. Vevertheless
it accomplished more than it would, were it consciously
realized, because the influence of the community-feeling ws
made impossible.


234 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Where this tendency came from is easily explained.
It is a product of the patient’s over-tense ideas of great-
ness. But why does it operate in the unconscious? In
order to work at all! For the personality-ideal of she
patient would feel such a conscious depreciatory and
accusatory wish to be in the nature of a detraction,
would have a feeling of inferiority. So he resorts to
detours, to traits characteristic of clumsiness and help-
lessness, traits that represent the craftiness and refine-
ments of a well-tested feeling of inferiority in. professions
and in life! So likewise the attempt and the recent
threat of suicide is a method of increasing the pressure
upon the brother. :

From the above we draw the very important practical
conclusion that we must regard the neurotic action as
though it were obeying a conscious goal."

And we may provisionally say that the unconsciousness
of a fiction, of a moralizing experience or of a reminis-
cence develops as an artifice out of the psyche whenever
the personality-feeling and the unity of the personality
is threatened by its coming into consciousness.

‘‘Do not forget the lust for power!” is my warning
to the patient. In the dream I am placed in the same
line as the aunt, and the brother with Mrs P. all of
whom were superior to the patient. This transformation
of two men into women is the result of that impulse
toward depreciation about which I spoke above. But
the patient is already warned in the dream, through the
words of his aunt, ze. my words. That had up till then
been my task and the most important task a psycho-
therapeut possesses. The present stage of the neurosis
is consequently the following :—The patient reacts to
the humiliation inflicted upon him by his brother by
depreciating his brother. And then he suddenly calls
himself to order as in other cases I have done.

The next day he wrote a letter to his sister; a letter
he had hesitated to write. For the first time he openly
complains of his brother’s arrogance. At the end, it
is true, he added that she should keep the contents a
secret. Thus open fight still seems difficult for him
because it would disclose his secret lust for power.


* This view-point is based particularly on the realization ¢hat the patient
must proceed along teleological lines.


XX


Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis
and Psychosis


A Contribution to Melancholia
(1914)


THIS essay is essentially based on the belief that all
psychogenic diseases, which we reckon as belonging to
neuroses and psychoses, are symptoms of a higher kind
and consequently constitute the technique, representa-
tion and products of individual life-lines. The detailed
proof I reserve for another essay. However it is im-
possible even here not to take into consideration this
provisional assumption. In doing so I gladly acknow-
ledge my indebtedness to the views of some well-
known scholars. To mention but one psychiatrist,
Raimamn has pointed out clearly the connection be-
tween individuality and psychosis. The development
of psychiatry likewise shows the progressive blurring
of boundaries. Ideal types are disappearing both from
literature and practice. Let me also mention here the
‘‘unity of neurosis” upon which I have laid emphasis.
In general it may be said that we are approaching a
point of view to which individual psychology has made
important contributions. That view-point is that the
neurotic methods of life seize with an apparently un-
alterable regularity, based upon individual experiences,
upon the means of a utilizable neuroses or psychoses,
in order to triumph.

Psychological results of individual psychology are
well adapted to corroborate this view-point. For they
suggest as one of their final results that the patient
is constructing an inner world of his own on the basis
of a defective individual perspective in definite con-
trast with reality. Nevertheless this perspective which


dictates his attitude to society, is from a human point
236


236 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


of view easily understood and is in other connections
quite general. We frequently call to mind individuals
who in life or in poetry have skirted around such an
abyss. Up to the present there is not the slightest
proof that either heredity, experience or the environ-
ment xecessarily lead to a general or specific neurosis.
This etiological necessity, which is never free from per-
sonal tendencies or personal connivance, exists simply
in the rigid assumption of the patient who thus safe-
guards his neurotic or psychotic inference and with it
the integrity of his disease. He might be able to think,
feel and act in a less etiological manner if he were not
impelled onward upon this journey by his goal, by that
imagined final scene. However it is a categorical com-
mand of his life-plan that he should fail either through the
guilt of others and thus be freed from personal responsibility,
or that some fatal trifle should prevent his triumph.?
The essentially human nature of this longing is strik-
ingly manifest. The individual helps along with all the
powers at his disposal and thus the calming hypnotizing
safeguarding currents of the /fe-/ze permeate the whole
content of life. Every therapeutic treatment and certainly
every clumsy and tactless attempt to tell the patient the
truth, deprives the patient of the very source of his
irresponsibility and must expect to encounter the most
violent resistance.

This attitude which we have so often described
originates in the ‘‘ safeguarding tendency ” of the patient
and exhibits his inclination to resort to detours, truces,
retreats, tricks and stratagems as soon as the question
of socially necessary decisions comes up. The analyst is
well acquainted with all the excuses and pretexts used
by the sick man in order to evade his tasks or his own
expectations. Our contributions have thrown a clear
light upon these problems and exposed them to view.
There are very few instances in which the attribution of
guilt to others appears to be missing. Among these
instances, the disease-pictures of Aypochondria and melan-
cholia force themselves most upon our attention.

I should like to raise the question of the ‘‘ opponent”
which can be employed as a very useful guide in making
the nature of the psychogenic disease picture more
transparent. The solution of this question no longer

1 Cf. the chapter on ‘* The Problem of Distance.”


LIFE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY 237


exhibits the psychogenically diseased individual in his
artificial isolation but in his socially determined system.
It is easy to understand from this fact the belligerent
tendency of the neurosis and psychosis. What might
otherwise be regarded as the termination namely, the
specific disease, now takes its proper place as a means,
a method of life, a symptom indicative of the path taken
by the patient either to attain his goal of superiority or
to feel his right in possessing it.

In many psychoses and also in neurotically-diseased
individuals the attack as well as the accusation fall not
simply upon one person but upon a number of people,
occasionally upon the whole of humanity, hetero-sexu-
ality or the whole world -order. This behaviour is
unusually clearly apparent in the case of paranoia. The
complete withdrawal from the world which means, of
course, at the same time, condemnation of it, is expressed
in dementia precox. In a more concealed fashion and
limited to only a few persons do we see the struggle of
the hypochondriac and the melancholic. Here the view-
point of individual-psychology allows us a sufficiently
wide field of vision for understanding even the artifices
used in these cases. Thus, for example, when an ageing
hypochondriac succeeds in freeing himself from work
in which he fears disappointments, at the same time
forcing some relative to take charge of his house and
make sacrifices for “him. The ‘‘distance” to the
decision—in this case his literary talent—is sufficiently
great not to be overlooked. He emphasizes this
“distance” by resorting to an unusually effective
agoraphobia. Who is at fault? He was born in the
revolutionary year (1848) and insists that this is a heredi-
tary stigma. His digestive disturbances represent in the
enumeration of the means he adopts (Stern) important aids
to his lust for dominating his environment. This lust
for domination is thus incited to increased work. These
disturbances are caused by air-inhaling and purposive
constipation.

A craftsman fifty-two years old has an attack of
melancholia one evening when his daughter before going
out on a visit, forgets to take leave of him. This man
had always insisted upon his family looking up to him
as the head of the family and forced definite services
and strict obedience upon them by means of his hypo-


238 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


chondriacal troubles. His neurotic stomach could
stand no restaurant food. His wife was consequently
compelled when he went upon his vacation, ‘« necessitated
by his condition of health,” to prepare his food in a
kitchen which she rented in the country. The fact that
he was ageing he attributed to the ‘“ unfilial” actions
of his daughter and he regarded it as an indication of
weakness. When his prestige was threatened, his
impending melancholia was to bring home to his
daughter her guilt and to show his family the full
significance of his capacity for work. Now he had
discovered a way of acquiring and enforcing that prestige
which he seemed to have failed to obtain in the world
in spite of his achievements. He was thus on the road
to zrresponsibility if for any reason his personal réle should
fail him.

A manufacturer twenty years old, was as he grew
older, subject every two years to a fit of melancholia
which lasted a few weeks. As in the case mentioned
above, he also began to take ill when through, an
unfortunate event, his prestige was threatened. He
also neglected his work and frightened his family,
who were dependent upon his work, by continual
complaints about impending poverty. The situation
he thus called into existence resembled in every detail
an overwhelming of his environment. All complaints
and criticisms stopped in his presence, ke was freed
Srom the responsibility for his reckless adventures and his
importance as the maintainer of the family became clear
to everyone. The stronger his melancholia became,
the more bitterly he complained, the higher did he rise
zn value. He became well when the resentment against
his adventure had disappeared. Subsequently, his
melancholia always recurred whenever he found himself
in a financially insecure position and on one occasion
because of the intervention of the tax officials. His
condition always improved as soon as his troubles were
over. It was quite easy to see that he was carrying
on a policy of prestige-attainment within his family,
seeking safety in his melancholia whenever discussions
on vital matters came up. In this way he could excuse
himself and also relieve himself of any responsibility if
anything went wrong and if everything ended well,
receive zucreased recognition. Our example thus shows


LIFE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY 239


clearly the symptom of the “‘ hesttating attitude” we have
described and also the creation of ‘‘ distance”? wherever
a decision is to be taken.

Before I enter upon a description of the last-mentioned
example of melancholia, let me attempt to define more
sharply from the view-point of individual psychology
the mechanism of melancholia and to throw some light
upon that aspect in which it is in marked contrast with
paranoia. If we once admit the social-conditioning
and the belligerent attitude of melancholia we shall
easily discover what it is in the goal of superiority that
hypnotizes the sick man. The path he takes in the
beginning is certainly rather strange. For instance,
he minimizes himself, andécczpates situations of intense
misery and, identifying himself with them, acquires a
feeling of sorrow and the outward expression of being
completely broken up.! This seems a contradiction of
his affirmation of a goal of greatness. As a matter
of fact his exhausting physical weakness became in
his hands a rather fear-inspiring weapon for securing
recognition and escaping responsibility. For anyone
to be able to achieve a true melancholia is, to my mind,
something in the nature of a work of art except that,
of course, the creative consciousness is wanting and
that the patient's attitude represents a condition with which
he has been acquainted since early childhood. Tracing it
back to his earliest childhood we find that this attitude
is in reality an artifice, an automatically conditioned
method of life, taking the form of a rigid life-line when
he is passing through a period of uncertainty. Actually
this consists in the desire to force his own will upon others
and in safeguarding his prestige by threats of becoming il.*
He bends all his energies with their accompanying
bodily and psychic possibilities, towards the achieve-
ment of this purpose. He disturbs his sleep, his
nourishment, his stool and urinary functions so that
he may lose strength and prove that he is ill. He
is quite willing to follow this course to its logical
conclusion of suicide. An additional proof of the

1 Just as, for example, the actor in Hamlet. ‘‘He weeps for Hecuba!
What’s Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba that he should weep for her?”’ In
his complaints the psychotic individual betrays in much the same way as the
neurotic, the nature of his ‘‘ arrangement.”


2 Often the melancholic type of procedure shows itself to be either incident-
ally or predominantly the revenge cmpulse of impotent rage.


240 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


aggressive nature of melancholia is furnished by the
occasional appearance of the murder impulse and by
the frequent presence of paranoiac traits. In these cases
the attribution of guilt to others becomes prominent
as for example in the case of the woman who believed
herself to be suffering from cancer because her husband
had forced her to visit a relative suffering from that
disease. Summarizing we may say that the difference
between the melancholic and paranoidal attitude seems
to consist in the fact that the melancholic feels himself
to be guilty whereas the paranoiac accuses somebody
else. To make the matter clearer let me add that these
individuals resort to this procedure only zf they find no
other method of establishing their superiority. We might
incidentally point out that both these types represent
universal human traits and as soon as we look for them
they will be seen to have an extensive distribution.

The psychical susceptibility to psychoses is frequently
diminished by the fact that the goal of superiority?
possesses even greater strength. The asserted impossi-
bility of correcting ‘‘maniacal” ideas is partially true
but flows logically from the compelling nature of the
goal. We were able to show above how the psychoti-
cally diseased individual protects his personality-feeling
at all times by creating ‘‘distance”’ which he attains
by the subterfuge of a life-falsehood. In order to
cure his neurosis it is necessary for the patient to
“‘ temporarily”? weaken his guiding ideals. A success
running counter to his symptoms will only then be
really efficacious if the patient is disposed to let himself
be healed or if he is able gradually and unnoticed to
slacken the rigidity of his goal. As far as we can see
the maniacal idea commits no mistakes. It is under
the compelling influence of the guiding idea and fulfils
its ultimate purpose which is to make itself irresponsible
and protect the ego-consciousness by the creation of
‘‘distance.” A logical examination hardly touches the
mania because in its capacity as a well-tested modus vivendt
et aicendt, zt fulfils its purpose and because, moreover, the
patient runs for protection to his limited appreciation of that
communal sense of reality which we all share.


1 I am not here considering the intermediate conditions ranging from
marked incapacity for fixing attention to idiocy produced dy inactivity of the
reasoning powers, of long duration.


LIFE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY 241


The melancholic individual we have just been
describing betrayed the whole arrangement of his ill-
ness in a dream which he had at the very beginning
of the treatment. He had become ill when removed
Jrom a place where he occupied the principal position to
one where he would have to prove his worth. Twelve
years before, at the age of twenty-six, under similar
circumstances he had also had an attack of melancholia.
His dream was as follows :—

‘‘T am at a pension where I eat my mid-day meal.
A girl in whom I have been interested for some time,
serves the meals. I realized suddenly that the world
was coming to an end, and at the same time the thought
occurred to me that I might now be able to rape the
girl, for I could not be held accountable. However, after
I had committed the rape it became evident that the
world was not going to end.” The interpretation is
simple. The patient wishes to evade all decisions
relating to love because he is unwilling to shoulder
the responsibility. He has often toyed with the idea
of a world-catastrophe (enemy of mankind). Thedream,
in a sexual disguise, indicates that he would have to
believe in a world-catastrophe in order to be able to
conquer, for in this manner a sense of irresponsibility
could be created. His final act (the rape) shows him
on the way to the attainment of his goal through a
fictitious arrangement, an ‘‘as if”, a provisional testing
of a method of attack which consists in doing violence
to others.*

We are now in a position to examine the guiding
line of the patient. He shows himself to be a man
with no trust in himself, and ove who does not expect to
succeed by a direct line of attack. We should therefore
expect to find from the facts of his early life and from
the study of his present melancholic stage, that he is
going to attempt to attain his goal along some circuitous
path. We may also assume that he is going to create
‘distance’? between himself and the direct approach to
his goal. Perhaps we are even justified in assuming
that should he have to decide he will lean toward an
‘“‘ideal situation’? because in such a situation, con-
fidently anticipating a threatening catastrophe, he


1 Cf. Dream and Dream-Interpretation, in this volume and the author’s
dream-theory in his Zhe Neurotic Constitution.
Q


242 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


will himself be free from all responsibility. He will
only regain his confidence, it may be assumed, when
certain of victory. TZhzs zdea obtained from the dynamics
of the dream coincides with the view expressed above about
melancholia. Now this attitude, be it remembered, 1S
typical, to a certain extent, for the majority of mankind
and is frequently encountered among neurotics. It is
part of the essence of the specific power, the singleness
of the guiding superiority-belief and the defective
connection with the logical demands of life, when
irresponsibility and its related ideas are driven into the
realm of the psychotic. To account for this we might
provisionally assume a special degree of stubbornness
and an unsocial craving for domination in our patient,
although he denied possessing these traits when asked.

Let me now mention a few of this patient’s remi-
niscences. Once in boyhood when dancing he fell
down pulling his dancing-partner down with him and
losing his glasses. Before raising himself he reached
out for his glasses but carefully held his partner down
with his other hand, a fact that led to an unpleasant
scene afterwards. In this occurrence we may already
detect his unsocial attitude, his tendency to violence.
His customary means of enforcing his will are also
clearly perceptible from other childhood reminiscences.
For example, he remembers lying on the sofa and weep-
ing for an unconscionably long time. He did not know
how to account for this last reminiscence. His older
brother, who corroborated the patient’s stubbornness
and will to dominate, informed me quite spontaneously
when interrogated, that his younger brother (our patient)
had on that occasion forced him by his incessant crying
to surrender the whole sofa to him.

I cannot discuss in detail here the manner in which
the patient disturbed his sleep, his nutrition, his nutritive
and excretory functions, how he lost strength and thus
gave proof of being ill. Nor can I dwell on the
manner in which by positing unfulfillable conditions
and guarantees he attempted to demonstrate both to
himself and to others the hopelessness of his condition ;
nor how he felt the steps taken by his family and the

1T have discussed the purposive moulding and survival of childhood


reminiscences in Zhe Neurotic Constitution, and in a paper delivered before
the congress of psychotherapy at Vienna in 1913.


LIFE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY 243


interference of the physician as an additional affront.
He went so far as to deny to himself all ability and
all possibility of making a living, in that way forcing
his family and his friends into his service and into his
power, using them then in connection with attempts to
make his business superiors more amenable to his wish,
which was that he should be transferred to a place
where he could again play the réle of master. His
hostility was therefore directed against all the officials
under him, and it took the form of interfering with all
their demands. His plan was to pass from a condition
of irresponsibility to one of violence. Then having
finally attained his goal he would allow himself to be
convinced that the world was not coming to an end.

In my book, Zhe Neurotic Constitution, 1 found the
necessary conditions for the development of mania, to
judge from selected cases, to be the following:


1. An intensified feeling of uncertainty and inability
to face an imminent decision.

2. The mechanism is a marked deflection from and
devaluation of reality. (Among other things this means
a denial of the value of rationality as a function of
society.)

3. Intensification of the guiding-line leading to the
fictive goal of superiority.

4. Anticipation of the guiding ideal.


With regard to its bearings on melancholia I would
like to add to this last trait, the fact that the sick man
tried to approximate to this well-tested picture of a
helpless weak, needy child for he discovered from
personal experience that it possesses a great and most
compelling force. His attitude, symptoms and his
irresponsibility are formed with them in mind.

Psychiatrists insist that the essential character of
psychosis is to be found in the absence either of a
motive or at least of an adequate motive, for an act.
This manner of presenting the problem is almost
incomprehensible. The problem of ‘‘motive” we
individual psychologists are well aware of and it is
never absent from our discussions. The vital rdle
assigned to-day to individuality and character in
modern psychiatry is a real sign of progress, and leads
directly to our own problems.


244 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


We must remember that the most important question
for the sound or the diseased psyche to answer is not
the where-from? but the whither? For it is only after
we are acquainted with the impelling goal and witha
knowledge of its direction that we can attempt to under-
stand its various movements, movements which we take
to be in the nature of individual and special preparations.

According to the Viennese psychiatric school melan-
cholia is defined as follows (Pilz, Spezielle gerichtliche
Psychiatrie; 1910): ‘* The essential trait of melancholia ts
a primary (t.e. not induced by external circumstances), de-
pression tn the nature of sadness and anxiety accompanied by
thought interference”. (tis a natural conclusion from our
view to lay stress upon those motivations caused either
by the nature of the goal or by those special guiding
lines that we interpret individualistically. This moti-
vation is synonymous with the disguised activity of
melancholia. In melancholia we find in complete form
the ‘‘ hesitating ” attitude and the ‘‘ progressive advance
backwards”’, both conditioned by the ‘‘ fear of taking a
decision”. Melancholia is thus an attempt, a con-
trivance for conducting in a round-about way what we
have designated as the ‘‘remnant” and the ‘‘ distance ”
of the individual, to its true goal of superiority. Asin
all cases of neurosis and psychosis this is accomplished
by the voluntary assumption of the ‘‘cost”. Thus this
illness resembles an attempt at suicide in which it
frequently actually terminates. Thought interferences,
speech-disturbances, stupor and bodily carriage enable
us to visualize concretely the ‘hesitating attitude”
which as intentional disturbances of social functions,
point to a decreased community feeling. Fear at all times
serves the purposes of security, a weapon of defence
and a proof of illness, and paroxysms of rage and the
raptus melancholicus break out occasionally in the form
of expressions of a fanaticism of weakness, an in-
dication of disguised emotions ; maniacal ideas point to
sources of purposive phantasies which both furnish and
‘‘arrange” the patient’s affects in the interests of his
illness. The mechanism of anticipation and absorption
in the rdéle of a person about to perish is unmistakable.
The illness always seems to be most intense in the
morning 7.¢. as soon as the patient enters upon the activities


of life.


LIFE-LIE AND RESPONSIBILITY 245


The experienced observer has unquestionably not
overlooked the ‘‘ belligerent atittude’’ of the melancholic
individual. Pilz, for example (I.c.), shows among other
things, that the conscience-qualms of the sick man
often have as their consequence the bestowal of senseless
gifts or of testamentary provisions. We object only
to the phrase ‘‘senseless”. An apparently passive
psychosis zs always teeming with feelings of hate and with
tendencies toward depreciation. The sick man, for that
reason, after having satisfied his desire to punish his
family, is seized with the proper conscience-qualms
accompanying his act, so that he may be freed from
responsibility.

The previous history of our patient shows very
clearly that all persons afflicted with melancholia belong
to a certain type who are not intensely interested in
anything, who easily become uprooted and who easily
lose their belief in themselves and in others. Even
when quite well they exhibit an attitude of ambition, of
hesitation; they recoil before responsibility or they
construct a life-falsehood whose content is their own
weakness and whose inference leads to a struggle against
others.


XXI


Melancholia and Paranoia


(1914)
Individual Psychological Results Obtained from a Study of Psychoses


PRELIMINARY remarks :—Tzhe following are the forces con-
attioning neuroses and psychoses discovered and described by
me :—infantile feeling of inferiority; safeguarding ten-
denctes ; automatically tested methods ; characteristic tratts,
affects, symptoms and attitudes taken toward the demands of
communal participation ; the employment of all these methods
Jor the purpose of an imaginary increase of the feeling of
personality as against that of the environment ; the search
for a circuttous method and for the creation of ‘‘ atstance”’
between themselves and the expectations of the community in
order to evade both a true evaluation of life and personal
responsibility and accountability and finally the neurotic
perspective and the purposive, at times insane devaluation of
reality. All these facts led me and a number of other
investigators to posit some principle of explanation, a
principle that has in a very wide sense proved itself
both valuable and essential for an understanding of
neuroses and psychoses. The above - mentioned
mechanisms are described in detail in the author’s books
The Neurotic Constitution, Studie iiber d. Minderwertigkeit
von Organen, and the present work.

My later conclusions about the mechanism of
psychosis can be put in the following way. There are
first the three essential meanings of mania already
emphasized; the anticipatory and hallucinatory repre-
sentations of a wish or the fear whose purpose is to
secure safety ; the purposive devaluation of reality and
the resultant heightening of the ego consciousness. To


' Bleuler strangely enough speaks deprecatingly of the fact that “* people
attempt to explain everything thereby.” To me and to others its value
consists just in this fact.


246


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 247


these should be added two more of great significance ;
the struggle against either the immediate or the larger
environment and ¢he transference of the scene of activities
Srom the main sphere of action to a subsidiary one.

All these five conditions of mania stand in a logical
and psychological relationship to one another.

In the statements that follow, prepared for the
Congress of Psychology and Psychiatry, which was to
have met in Berne in 1914, and which I now print un-
changed, I shall attempt to present the psychological
structure of melancholia and paranoia in accordance
with the above conclusions.


Il. Melancholia


Attitude and life-plan of individuals disposed to melan-
cholta ; outbreak of the disease and the struggle against the
environment , transference to subsidiary sphere of action from
Sear of taking decistons that might bring about humiliation.


1. Melancholia develops among individuals whose
method of living has, from early childhood, been
dependent upon the acts and the aid of others. Defective
activity and manifestations of a non-masculine type are
predominant. Such people are generally found to limit
themselves to the society either of their family or of
a small persistent circle of friends; always try to rely
upon others and are not even above forcing others
to submit to them and to accommodate themselves to
them by making exaggerated references to their own
inability. That their tremendous egoism in times of
prestige worship like that of our own, occasionally
brings them external success does not in any way
contravene our statement. The fundamental questions
in their own life, their progress, development, even
their adherence to their own spheres of action, these
they either evade or approach only hesitatingly,
especially if difficulties present themselves. The typical
manic-depressive on the contrary can be broadly
characterized by the fact that he begins every act
enthusiastically but loses interest very soon after. This
characteristic rhythm which holds for their movements
and attitudes when they are well is intensified and
reinforced during the period of their illness by call-


248 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ing up maniacal ideas and by their ostentatious and
purposeful elaboration. :

Between these two forms lies intermittent melancholia
whenever the patient’s fluctuating belief in his success
is called upon to ward off some demand of life (marriage,
profession, society).

2. The whole life-conduct of the ‘‘ melancholy type”
shows its presupposition and starting point to be a
fictive but all-permeating stand-point, a melancholic
perspective rooted in infantile psychic life, a perspective
according to which life resembles a difficult frightful
game of chance in a world full of obstacles and in which
the majority of men are hostile. We recognize in this
attitude of antagonism to the community-feeling an
intensified sense of inferiority, one of the contrivances
that lie at the basis of the neurotic character as described
by me. When protected by their special aggressive
tendencies which are transformed into traits of character,
affects, preparations and acts (crying !), these people feel
themselves able to cope with the facts of life and they
try when ‘‘sane and healthy” to achieve a reputation
among a small number of friends. By letting their
subjective feelings of inferiority take a concrete shape
they are in a position to insist from childhood either
openly or secretly, upon an increase in their ‘‘ disable-
ment grant”.

3. From the incessant attempts made from early
childhood to gain prestige it can be inferred that their
self-assessment is quite low and yet all their actions
seem to suggest—and these disguised hints disclose
the psychical affinity with paranoia—that some neglected
opportunity for an extraordinary development had some-
how been missed. They indicate familiar unfavourable
circumstances (as the source of their failure) or betray
in their maniacal melancholic ideas the ineradicable
assumption of super-human, even divine powers. It is
on such an assumption that are based the complaints in
which the sick individual bewails, in what really repre-
sents a disguised idea of greatness, the terrible fate which
will overwhelm his family when he is gone; or he speaks
in a self-accusatory way about his part in the destruction
of the world; in the outbreak of the world-war or in
the death and ruination of certain people. Often there
is found in this enforced complaint about his own


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 249


unworthiness, a warning reference to real material and
moral dangers for his family circle and that of his
friends and an equally marked stressing of the personal
significance of the patient. Such then is the goal of
victims of melancholia and with such an object do they
accuse themselves openly of all kinds of inferiority and
take upon themselves ostentatiously the blame for all failures
and errors. ‘The success of their behaviour is such that,
at the very least, they become the centre of attention of
their limited circle and are able to induce those individuals
who feel obligated to help them to increased activity, to
note-worthy sacrifices on their behalf, and always to make
advances to them. On the other hand they themselves
have become freed from even the slightest feeling of
obligation or tie, a condition fitting well into their
ego-centric guiding-ideal, for this ideal causes them to
feel every connection with others, every adaptation to
others or the interference of others with their rights, as
an unbearable compulsion and as a serious loss of per-
sonal prestige.

Together with these self-accusations and _ self-
reproaches we always find disguised references to
heredity, to parents’ errors in bringing them up, and
to wilful lack of consideration on the part of relatives
and superiors. This accusing of others—another
phenomenon related to paranoia—can be deduced from
the initial melancholic situation. To give examples;
if for instance an outbreak of melancholia occurs in a
younger daughter when the mother has decided to go
on a lengthy journey with the elder daughter, or if a
business man is suddenly afflicted with the disease after
he has been persuaded against his will to come to certain
decisions by the decisive vote of his partner.

References like the above, to melancholia, body
anomalies, etc., serve also to establish the fact that,
according to the patient, we are here dealing with
an unalterable and incurable disease, this of course
enormously increasing its importance.

Melancholia thus like every neurosis and psychosis,
helps the patient’s object of heightening the social
value of his own will and personality, at least in his
own opinion. Its special compulsory nature, among
individuals of infantile mentality, is due to the pressure
of a deeply felt dissatisfaction and a feeling of inferiority


“


250 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


which objectively considered is unjustifiable. It is an
incomprehensibly great payment that these people
make for a behaviour in the difficult crises of life
which, after all, is inherently consistent. Their sensitive
ambition which spurs them on persistently, although
with secret trembling, to seek superiority, forces them
likewise to retreat or waver before the more important
social tasks. By means of systematic self - restric-
tion they thus reach a subsidiary track represented
by a circle of friends strictly limited, and by tasks to
which they adhere until threatened by what appears
to them a change fraught with difficulties. Then
the scheme that was constructed in childhood, never
revived and which has always remained untested inter-
poses itself and they minimize their own importance in
order to gain power through weakness and illness.

4. The most prominent offensive weapon of the
melancholic type which he uses for raising his position
and which he has employed from childhood on, consists
in complaints, tears and depression. He shows his
weakness and the necessity for helping him in the
most agonizing manner so that he may either force or
mislead others to aid him.

5. These patients obtain in their own way, the
appearance and conviction of irresponsibility for their
lack of success in life, because they repeatedly insist
upon the unalterable nature of their weakness and
their lack of external help. The psychic affinity with
the phobic and hypochondriac type is clearly discern-
ible. However it is characteristic of melancholia that
with the object of a more powerful attack and because
of a more extensive feeling of inferiority, the realization
of inferiority disappears and all criticism of the maniacal
ideas is excluded, by means of a marked anticipation
of an inevitable tragedy and a determined absorption
in the imminent danger. The categorical imperative
of melancholia is ‘‘act, think, feel in such a way as
if the horrible fate that you have conjured up, had
already befallen you and was inevitable”. The main pre-
supposition of melancholia-mania is to possess a prophetic
insight, to be like a God.

It is only by following up this recognition that, when
measured in terms of the common bond of the pessi-
mistic perspective, the interrelation between neurosis and


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 251


psychosis becomes clear. To take simple examples :—
In enuresis nocturna it is ‘‘ Act as though you were in
the lavatory”! Pavor nocturnus: ‘“ Act as though you
were in great danger”. So-called neurasthenic and
hysterical sensations, conditions of weakness, paralyses,
dizziness, nausea, etc.: ‘‘Imagine you have a circlet
around the head, something sticking in your throat ;
that you were on the verge of a fainting-spell ; that
you could not walk; that everything was in a whirl
around you ; that you had eaten some bad food ”’, etc.

It is always a question of effect upon the environ-
ment. This is true, as I have already insisted for
some time, in case of ‘‘ genuine epilepsy ”, in which as
if in pantomime, death, impotent rage, manifestations
of poisoning, warding off danger and defeat, are re-
presented. The nature of the material presented is
dependent upon the organism’s possibilities often deduc-
ible from inherited manifestations of inferiority (cf.
Adler, Studte ib. d. Minderwertigheit v. Organen, 1917),
and they begin to play a rdle as soon as they are able
to benefit and to be of benefit to the higher ideals of the
neurotic. In every case, however, either the patient’s
symptom or the attack signify that he has withdrawn
either from the present, (by means of anticipation) or
from reality (by absorption in his rdle). The success
of this withdrawal is probably most definitely expressed
in genuine epilepsy. One of the commonly recurring
features of one of the types seems to be the fact that the
patient is the last-born (occasionally a person followed
at a long interval by another child) ; an asymmetrical
lower displacement of the right side of the face ; increase
in the protuberance of the parietal bone and traces of
left-handedness.

The psychosis discloses, corresponding with the
more determined attitude of the patient who is on the
point of giving up all honest strivings, a more marked
withdrawal from the world and a more extensive
depreciation and overwhelming of reality.

6. In the psychosis as in the neurosis, the intensified
reference to the unchangeability of the weaknesses and
sad destiny awaiting us, prove to be necessary in new
and apparently difficult situations, professional decisions
and tests of all kinds devised with the object of develop-
ing hesitation or abandoning a certain course, as in the


252 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


rather complicated instance of stage-fright. The in-
vestigator must be very careful not to over-emphasize
his own impression of the difficulties of the situation.
For what guides the man afflicted with melancholia in
his fears, what makes his maniacal ideas ‘‘ incurable”
is not the lack of intelligence or logic, but the lack of
desire, the methodical unwillingness to apply this logic.
The patient will feel and even act illogically if he can
only in this way, and only by means of mania, approach
nearer to his goal and heighten his personality con-
sciousness. Anyone who attempts to tamper with his
mania appears to him, consequently, as an enemy and
he therefore regards all medical measures and attempts
at persuasion as directed against his position.

7. It is one of the peculiar traits of the melancholic
type that it succeeds in establishing its disease-picture
by continuing old well-constructed preparations and
that, by freely expressed, intensified reference to its
own weakness, it extends the compulsion of continuous
and useless helping and the solicitude of the environ-
ment. The uselessness of every external pacification
after melancholia has manifested itself, is not the result
of any lack of logical deduction but flows from the
unbendable purpose of the sick man to increase the
shock to his environment to the highest degree, to
limit the action of all concerned and deprive them of
all their prospects. A cure will take place, depending
upon the degree of confidence in life still remaining in
the patient, as soon as he has enjoyed the satisfaction
of having demonstrated his superiority. Promising
results have also been obtained by tactful reference to
real connections made with no suspicion of posing as
superior or a desire always to be in the right. The
prophecy when the termination of any melancholic
arrangement will take place is certainly not any easier
than to foretell when a child will stop crying. Hope-
less situations, an unusual degree of lack of interest
in life evidenced from early childhood, provocations,
and an ostentatious lack of respect on the part of the
environment may lead to attempts at suicide as an
extreme act of revenge for activity continually directed
against one’s own person.

The fear of lack of success, anxiety, competition, or
expectation of not being able to cope any longer with


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 253
society or the family, force this type in case of sub-
jectively-felt trouble, to resort to anticipating their ruin.
The melancholic view-point growing out of this self-
absorption, which by reason of its purposive achieve-
ment in waking life and dreams always becomes more
and more deeply rooted, in its influences upon the
whole organism, is the continual motive for a poorer
functioning of the organs. If carefully done the
functions of the organs, the carriage, sleep, muscular
strength, heart-activity, intestinal manifestations, etc.
can be prognostically evaluated. The psychological
connections militate against the etiological interpretation
of Abderhalden’s discoveries in psychosis. From our
view-point they must represent definitely conditioned
manifestations or simply intensified symptoms, appear-
ing in psychosis, of an inherited organ inferiority.
We must, among other things, emphasize the fact that
organ inferiority may represent the final stage of an
important basis of etiologically significant infantile
inferiority feelings.

8. Organs, in so far as they can be influenced, come
consequently, under the power of the melancholic goal,
adjust their functions to the need of the whole situation
and thus help to establish the physiognomy of clinical
melancholia (heart, body-carriage, appetite, stool, urine
activities, trend of thought). In so far as they obey
compulsory stimulations they are forced into a melan-
cholic mood. Or it may be that the function remains
approximately normal but is felt by the sick person to
be diseased and is complained of. At times a disturb-
ance and an irritable condition are induced by the sick
man by means of a clear and meaningless behaviour
(by sleep disturbances, by enhanced inducing of stool
and urine activity).

g. In the last case as well as in connection with the
acceptance of nourishment, the patient often shows a
series of disturbances automatically induced and which
then follow systematically and methodically without
sufficient self-criticism. These manifestations as well
as the patient's exhaustive demands on the functions
of his organisms and his erroneous evaluation of a
fictive norm lacking in him, indicate his purpose of
visibly procuring a real proof of illness. —

10, The acceptance of nourishment is restricted by


254 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the calling up of thoughts suggestive of disgust or
anxious suspicions (poison) and besides, like all other
functions, is under the pressure of purposive melancholic
self-absorption (‘‘as if nothing were of use, as if every-
thing must end badly”). Sleep is disturbed by com-
pulsory brooding, by thinking of not sleeping and also
by resorting to distinctly purposeless means. Stool
and urinary functions can become diseased either by
contrary influences or by making continual claims upon
them, in some cases by producing a condition of irrita-
tion in the respective organs. Heart-activity, breathing,
the attitude of the diseased personality, the tear-glands
occasionally, come under the pressure of the melan-
cholic fiction tending toa ceaseless self-absorption in a
situation of despair.

11. A closer view, one that is made possible only by
means ofan individual psychological synthetic approach,
shows the melancholic attitude to be the picture of a con-
dition which may appear, at the same time, an offensive
weapon among people who find themselves in the posztzon
described above, people in whom we otherwise might
expect angry perhaps raging and revengeful outbursts.
The early acquired deficcency of the social activity conditions
that peculiar attitude of attack which, resembling suicide,
proceeds from an injury inflicted upon one’s self to a
threatening of the environment or to acts of revenge.

Occasionally in raptus melancholicus or suicide,
which always represents an act of revenge, the affect
to be expected is clearly manifest.

12. The presupposition of all activity, the concealed
reference to the importance of one’s own person, ex-
pressed in the demand for the subordination, in the
claim upon the services of others, is never absent.
Since the insistence upon the guilt of others is likewise
always present, the melancholic attitude thus establishes
the fictive superiority and irresponsibility of the sick
man. By reinforcing the last-mentioned traits (insist-
ence upon the guilt of others), paranoiac nuances are
enabled to force their way into melancholia.

13. Since his fellow-man merely serves him as a
means for heightening his own personality-consciousness
(the pose of friendship and attentive interest is at his
disposal as well as disease), the melancholic individual
recognizes no limits to the extension of his tyranny over


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 255


others, robs them of all hope, and will proceed either to
Suicide itself or the thought of suicide if compelled zo
surrender his main object of being freed from the demands
of others, or actually commit suicide when he comes
upon invincible obstacles.

14. In other words an outbreak of melancholia
represents the ideal situation for individuals of this
type whenever their position is threatened. The ques-
tion why, nevertheless, he does not enjoy this condition,
is unnecessary. The fact is, that melancholia does not
permit any other mood to arise and since the patient’s
object is success, there is no place for any feeling of
joy that might interfere with his compulsion-attitude of
depression.

15. Melancholia vanishes as soon as the patient has
attained, in some manner or other, the imaginary feeling
of having regained his superiority and a protection
against possible misfortunes by a proof of illness.

16. The attitude of persons who are likely to succumb
to melancholia is one of distrust and criticism of society
from childhood on. In this attitude likewise we can
recognize as one of the primary assumptions a feeling
of inferiority with its compensation, and a cautious
search for superiority in spite of all statements to the
contrary.


Il. Pavanoia


1. Paranoia attacks people whose attitude toward
society is characterized by the fact that after a fairly
mild upward tendency of their activity or life-line they
come to a halt at some distance from the goal that
either they or their environment had expected, and that
then generally by means of extensive intellectual or,
at the same time, active operations in an imaginary
struggle directed against self-created difficulties, they
obtain an unconscious excuse for either covering up or
justifying, or indefinitely postponing, their possible or
anticipated defeat in life.

2. This attitude both zz fofo and in individual
questions is prepared early in childhood, tested, blunted
and protected against the most serious objections of
reality. That is why the paranoiac system possesses,
to a greater degree than other psychoses, definite


256 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


methodical traits and can be influenced only at the
beginning and under propitious circumstances. In
paranoia neither the communal feeling nor its function,
the ‘‘ universally valid ” logic of reality, is ever entirely
destroyed. : .

3. One of the presuppositions of this attitude is
shown to consist in a profound feeling of dissatisfaction
with life, felt to be unalterable and which compels the
patient to try to conceal his lack of success both to him-
self and others in order not to wound his pride or self-
consciousness.

4. To this activity always present and perceptible—
as a rule of a belligerent type and, owing to the nature
of its devices, directed toward a goal of superiority—
is due the fact that the break-down generally takes
place in later years. The maniacal idea thus likewise
obtains traits of an externally more mature type.

5. This activity whose goal is that of an ideal of
superiority, must in its development, automatically lead
to an attitude of criticism and hostility toward the patient's
Jellowmen, an attitude that in the last analysis, is directed
against others, against influences and situations behind
which humanity as such is suspected of being concealed.
In this way others are made responsible for that part of
the patient’s over-emphasized plans that did not succeed.
In paranoia the anticipation of the goal of superiority
(megalomania) also serves to put on a firm basis the
feeling of superiority and permit the patient to evade
responsibility for failure in society by creating secondary
regions of activity.

6. In the paranoiac’s attitude we find reflected the
hostile attitude toward his fellowmen which goes back
to earliest childhood. This flows automatically from
his active striving for universal superiority which finds
expression in the form of the idea that he must be given
consideration, in the persecution-mania and megalo-
mania. In all three of these situations the patient
pictures himself as the centre of his surroundings.

7. In the pure form of paranoia, to be taken into
consideration only as a boundary case, there is con-
sequently always an upward tendency, which is brought
to a halt by the creation of the mechanism of the mania.
This is true also of dementia praecox where ¢he fear of
‘ife and its demands seem to be greater and which con-


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 257


sequently manifests itself earlier. On the boundary
line can be noticed cases of zyclothymia, hysterical
aboulia, depressive manifestations of a neurasthenic
type and conflict-neuroses (cf. The Neurotic Constitution)
which show a more marked repression of a temporary
kind, following an initial aggression. Dynamically
the behaviour of psychogenic epilepsy, chronic alcohoi-
ism, morphinism and cocainism, shows great affinity
with the above. The differences seem to exist in the
more tenacious and intermittent repression of the latter
after more extensive activity or a lower degree of
connection.

8. Both in the forward as in the backward movement
of the psychotic wave, a hostile belligerent trait often
ending in suicide, is clearly recognizable. Indeed
psychosis may be regarded as the intellectual suicide of
an individual who feels himself unequal to the demands
of society or of attainment of his own goal. In his back-
ward movement there is discoverable a secret actio in
distans, a hostility toward reality, while the forward
movement indicates its inward weakness at the time of
its exaltation.

g. The self-evaluation of the paranoiac is intensified
to the point of similarity to the deity. It is built up
on a compensatory feeling of inferiority and shows its
weakness in its speedy renunciation of being able to
fulfil the demands of society, the surrender of plans, the
transference of the field of action to the domain of the
non-real, in the marked tendency toward constructing
paranoidal excuses of a preoccupational nature and in
the insistence on accusing others. The patient clearly
lacks faith in himself and his mistrust and unbelief in
men, and in the knowledge and ability of men, force
him toward the construction of cosmogonic and religious
ideas of government as well as to the inherent contrast
of these phantasies to the general views. These are all
necessary to enable him to get his balance and his
additional ballast.

10. The ideas of the paranoiac are very hard to
correct because the patient needs them just in this
particular form if he is to establish his point of view,
the attainment of irresponsibility as an excuse for his
lack of success, and if he is to force his activity in
society to become arrested. These ideas permit him,

R


258 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


at the same time, to adhere to his fiction of superiority
without necessitating a test for he can always ascribe the
blame to the hostility of others.

11. If melancholic passivity is an actéo in distans for
coercing others to subordinate themselves, the purpose
of the paranoiac’s active phantasy can, on the other
hand, be said to consist in obtaining @ tme-consuming
pre-occupation and an excuse that will relieve him from
responsibility for his lack of success.

12. In contrast, melancholia is, at least externally,
based more on the guilt of others than on that of
external circumstances.

13. Every discernible outbreak of paranoia occurs
when the patient finds himself in a dangerous situation
where he feels his demands for a social position definitely
lost. This happens as a rule when on the eve of some
undertaking, during its course, or when anticipating
either a demotion or the coming on of old age.

14. The final condition results from the intermediate
creation of a preparatory mania-mechanism by whose
action the patient’s feeling of responsibility is destroyed.
His feeling of importance is, however, increased by
means of his self-identification with his persecution
mania, his respect-demanding mania and megalomania.
This mechanism represents a compensatory activity that
has grown out of his expectation of depreciation and
develops in the direction of the ‘‘masculine protest”
just as we have shown in the case of the psychology of
neuroses (cf. Zhe Neurotic Constitution).

15. The construction of maniacal ideas can be traced
back to childhood where, in an infantile fashion, they
are connected with day-dreams and phantasies relating
to situations of humiliation.

16. The paranoiac attitude gives both the soul and
body its adequate position in the mania system. Stereo-
typed expressions, attitudes and movements are associ-
ated with the guiding idea and incidentally are also
found abundantly on the confines of the disease and in
dementia praecox.

17. Melancholic traits are frequently intertwined
with those of paranoia. In particular do we find that
complaints about poor sleep, deficient nourishment tend
when subsequently amplified, in the direction of ideas
of persecution, poison and megalomania. This last


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA 259


path is at times, taken only to emphasize the special
nature of the patient’s disease.

18. Hallucinations are connected with marked self-
absorption in the rdle to be played and represent both
encouraging or warning admonitions. They occur
whenever the patient’s will-direction is to be regarded
as final and yet he is not to be held responsible. These
admonitions are to be taken as analogies like the dream,
need not be intelligible to the patient but should be
characteristic of the policy he wishes to adopt on certain
definite problems. Both hallucinations and dreams thus
prove to be contrivances for objectifying those subjective
tmpulses to whose apparent objectivity the patient uncon-
ditionally surrenders himself (cf. dream theory of the
author in the chapter on ‘‘ Dreams and Dream Inter-
pretation” in this book, and in his Meurotic Constitution
l.c.). The coercion toward irresponsibility prevents
the will from being under one’s own direction and
substitutes in its place apparently strange faces and
admonitions.

19. We must add to the above the fixing of the
mania-system by means of a purposive, z.e. a favourable
selection of reminiscences, and ax evaluation of experiences
as viewed from their final object. From our view-point
the tendency of this establishing of a system and its
vital necessity owing to the nature of the goal-positing,
emerges quite positively. (This goal consists in an
order for retreat ; an arrangement of non-responsibility ;
that of the guilt of others and the concealment of the
personal and evident collapse.)

20. Our attitude thus shows that paranoia makes its
appearance at the point where normal human beings
lose their courage, where more susceptible natures
commit suicide or querulously complain about others,
and where the more aggressive types by cowardly avoid-
ing the demands of life, turn to crime or alcoholism.
Only people well prepared for adaptation to society
maintain their equilibrium. Occasionally we encounter
mixtures of the above tendencies.

21. The szngle-handed struggle of the paranoiacally
disposed individual to conquer, results in every person
being treated as an enemy or as a figure in a chess
game. A feeling of real good-will toward his fellowmen
is absent as much in the paranoiac as in all those affected


260 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


by neurotic and psychotic diseases. Such a person is
never a dependable participant in the life of society and
enters into normal human relationships (love, friend-
ship, occupation, society, etc.), with an incorrect
attitude. This anomalous attitude arises from a low
self-evaluation and an over-evaluation of life’s difficulties.
This it is that misleads him into the creation of an
arrangement like neurosis and psychosis. His hostile
attitude toward society is, in no sense, inherited or
ineradicable but merely a tempting outlet in an
extremity.

22. Paranoia rarely disappears because it manifests
itself just at that part of the life-line where the patient
suspects his zzeviztable collapse will occur. However,
quite senseless subjective exaggerations are amenable
to correction in the beginning, and on such occasions
the disease may be cured.

23. The attitude of a person predisposed to paranoia,
already exhibits in childhood an active aspect which
brings the person quite easily to a halt before difficulties.
We often discover in the life of a patient frequent
interruptions of an apparently puzzling nature, of the
direct line of development. All enterprises that retard
progress (including therein frequent changes of occupa-
tion and vagabondage), are in reality coercions of the
guiding idea which demand that zzme be wasted in order
to gain lime.

Love of domination, insufferability, lack of fellow-
feeling, absence of love relations or the selection-of a
few docile persons are regularly recurring manifesta-
tions in the person’s life. He is recognizable by his
querulous and unjustly critical nature.


APPENDIX
Excerpts from the Dreams of a Patient with Melancholia


An official forty years old is transferred to another
bureau. Thirteen years before that he had developed
signs of melancholia on a similar occasion. As on the
earlier occasion he found himself incapable of perform-
ing the necessary duties. Incidentally there appeared
certain thoughts in which he hinted at the responsibility


MELANCHOLIA AND PARANOIA © 261


of others for his condition. According to him he was
neglected and difficulties were put in his way. We
have, in short, as is almost always the case in melan-
cholia, the path leading to paranoia vaguely suggested.
He asked me for poison in order to escape his torments.
No matter what the event was he always succeeded in
seeing its worst side. Insomnia, digestive troubles,
uninterrupted depression and extreme fears of the future
increasing from day to day, allowed us to diagnose the
case with certainty.

Above I have shown why melancholia is to be re-
garded as a ‘‘ remnant problem” where the sick person,
to prove his illness falls back upon the device of accusing
and depreciating himself in order to escape taking a
definite decision. Our patient, for example, will, in
his own way, either try to circumvent a success un-
favourable to his plans or weaken it by proving himself
to be ill or finally, by having his success interpreted as
a part payment for an imagined deficiency transcending
everything the world has hitherto known. There is
always present the compulsory demand that he be
assisted by others whose kindness is to be taken
advantage of and they themselves incited to making
greater efforts in his behalf by the patient’s insistence
upon his illness. Interpreting this situation in its
infantile meaning we come to the picture of the weeping
child. The following are the earliest childhood re-
miniscences of this patient:—He pictures himself as a
little boy lying on the sofa and weeping. When eight
years old, an aunt strikes him; he runs into the kitchen
yelling, ‘‘You have deprived me of my honour!”
With this special contrivance, z.e. to shatter the nerves
of bystanders by weeping and complaining (to over-
power?) he now faces every new situation. Let us not
overlook the fact that this contrivance is only intelligible
if we assume that we are in the presence of a very
ambitious man, one however, who does not believe in
himself to the extent of imagining he would be able to
attain his goal of superiority by direct methods. It is
quite apparent how—and this belongs together with the
above—under the pressure of his secret idea of god-
likeness he would like to be freed from the responsibility
of his achievements in real life so as not to put his god
to atest. This explains his ‘hesitating attitude” and


262 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his unconscious arrangement of the ‘‘remnant” and his
“distance” from the goal of superiority which he is
afraid of losing whenever a new Situation arises.

In the first week of the treatment, the patient dreamt
his dream of the world catastrophe narrated in chapter
19. If youremember we also found there the mechanism
of melancholia. He posits the possibility of a complete
lack of responsibility interpreted in his own sense and
discloses himself as a strong person, in phantasy play-
ing with the fate of the world like a god. When every-
thing is about to end he may do anything.’ Is not the
same sentiment present in his ‘‘ You have robbed me
of my honour”? When he underrates himself may we
not have the continuation read, ‘‘Now I am going to
approach with my strongest move”? Is not suicide in
the air here and is not depression being employed for
the purpose of extortion ?

All must submit to his will! That is the object of
his melancholia. The following is a second dream:
‘*A girl I saw on the street comes to my room and gives
herself up to me voluntarily”. What is behind this
dream? Simple enough. How far removed am I
removed from open aggressiveness! There must be a
magical power that compels everyone to submit to me!
Like a sleight-of-hand performer he helps things along
by a threat of world destruction and by the influence of
his depression.

A third dream exhibits the arrangement of his de-


pression. ‘‘I find the work easy in another post which
I had refused. Everything is pleasant and in the best
of order”. In other words ‘‘ Where I am not present


there I shall find happiness” .* This is an assumption
suggested by his attitude so that he may make the
present situation appear painful. To disprove it is
impossible, for if he chooses to imagine himself some-
where else we are dealing with an unfulfillable condition.
Unquestionably could we transport him to that place
he would discover some other subterfuge.


1 Freeing himself at the same time from the community feeling.


® This is the last line of Schubert’s famous song “ Der Wanderer”
(Translator).


XXII


Individual-psychological Remarks on Alfred Berger’s
Hofrat Eysenhardt


(Lecture, 1912)


Introduction.—Dr Francis von Eysenhardt was born a
few years before the outbreak of the revolution of 1848
in Vienna. His youth coincided with the reactionary
period of the early fifties of the last century and he
entered the criminal division of the royal courts of
justice at a time when the old absolutist Austria was
being transformed into a modern State.

Eysenhardt’s success was due primarily to his own
extraordinary abilities. He succeeded in uniting within
himself the qualities of the old officialdom with the
demands the new spirit made upon the state officials.
At an opportune moment he showed the nature of his
own political opinions by insisting that an unconditioned
loyalty to the emperor was essential.

His reputation as a criminal lawyer of ability and
his brilliant oratory combined to make him very popular.
He was made attorney general to the dismay of the
criminal world and of advocates. After a number of
years he again became a judge and was made presiding
officer of the jury courts. His intellectual gifts and his
prodigious memory astonished everybody. He was
occasionally criticized for showing partiality. Uncon-
sciously he seemed always to be interested only in
obtaining a conviction, and the severity of the punish-
ments that were meted out when Eysenhardt was the
presiding judge horrified everyone. Yet in his case
everyone felt that the impossibility of influencing him
in any way was but the expression of a strict sense of
justice which he would apply to himself as well as to
others. It was regarded as but a just reward for his
services that he received the highest judicial position


in the giving of the country and was made hofrat.
263


264 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Eysenhardt, it was said, was destined to become the
minister of justice in the next ministry.

Both the external and the private life of Eysenhardt
had not been of the usual kind. He had no friends, not
even acquaintances. Whole days would elapse during
which he would speak no other words than those de-
manded by his official position. His nature was
reserved, unfriendly and shy. These traits were due in
great measure Zo the frightfully strict and even cruel
bringing up that he had received as a child. His father
had been accustomed to punish him with a whip for the
slightest error, and in this way the child’s feeling for
revenge was definitely fed. The cruel treatment at the
father’s hands came to an end when young Eysenhardt,
with the little money he had saved, bought a revolver
and threatened his father with it. In his youth he
exhibited a somewhat abnormal sexuality; he never
associated with respectable girls and was a frequently
seen visitor of disorderly houses. His father, it became
known, had on one accasion whipped him unmercifully
when the young boy had bought a fazr of lady’s gloves
Jor himself. When alone Eysenhardt would cover ¢hese
gloves with tender kisses.

Thus Eysenhardt spent his life despised, feared and
admired at one and the same time, in spiritual and
intellectual isolation, conscientiously fulfilling his official
duties. Suddenly a remarkable transformation took
place within him. His outward appearance, in all
respects old-fashioned and known all over Vienna,
changed, and he appeared one day with his beard
trimmed in elegant fashion, instead of the short, rather
bristly full-beard, and with new and modern clothes.
But it was not only his external appearance that had
changed. His hard sombre nature seemed to have
received an illumination from within which was
pleasantly reflected in his outward form and character.
This change was interpreted to mean that Eysenhardt
would soon receive a high, if not the highest post in the
judiciary. The assumption was perhaps not quite
erroneous, for Eysenhardt himself expected promotion.
He remained in this almost exalted frame of mind for
about three weeks until an important event brought
this, possibly the only happy period of his life, to an
abruptend. A tooth fell out! This sign of oncoming


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 265


age found him utterly unprepared, and exerted a fright-
ful influence upon him. The disturbance in his nervous
and psychic life refused to right itself, and he was
constantly ¢roudbled by doubts as to whether his intellectual
Capacities were not likewise showing signs of waning.
His usually unshakable nature was now filled with
vague fears of impending danger.

When the anticipated ministerial crisis did not bring
him the post of minister of justice this had the effect of
an electric shock upon him. He found himself thinking
continually of the reasons for which he had been passed
over. At the same time he began to busy himself
intensively with his own ego, something that was quite
new to him. He was no connoisseur of human motives
and feelings. He possessed only the remarkable gift of
being able to extract from the evidence collected, all the
criminal processes that led a man step by step to commit
acrime. This he then knew how to present marvellously
and dramatically. He never recognized in the criminal
a fellowman, a person related to himself. Since he had
become psychically ill, however, he began to change.
His conscience began to annoy him; he suffered from
hallucinations at night, and on one occasion there
appeared to him in such a hallucination a person whom
he had sentenced very severely for child-rape, a man
named Marcus Freund. In all the hallucinations in
which persons appeared to him whom he had prosecuted,
he was the defendant and they were the accusers. From
the first time Marcus Freund appeared to him he was
unable to rid himself even in day-time from the thought
of this man, and so he finally decided to go through
the whole case again ¢o convince himself that Marcus
Freund had actually been guilty. However he delayed
and delayed until one day he heard accidentally that
Freund had died, that he had died on the very night
upon which he had first appeared to him. After that
his collapse became more pronounced, and he imagined
that the rest of the world was occupying itself with the
case of Freund to the same extent that he was. Hand
in hand with this break-down of his steel-like personality,
the elementary sexual instincts of his nature seemed to
become more manifest. In his own home this inward
collapse of the man had hardly been noticed. The
appearance of this new tormenting compulsion-rdea had


266 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


pushed into the back-ground the feeling that he was
losing his intellectual capacities, and in consequence his
mind became freer and capacity for work greater. He
succeeded in pulling himself together once again when
he was nominated to preside over a very important
espionage case. The notification of his nomination was
sweetened by the confidential hint that he had only been
passed over in connection with the post of minister of
justice because he was to be reserved for this exceedingly
intricate espionage case. Eysenhardt seemed to be his
own self again and forgot all about Marcus Freund.
However the evening before the last day of the final
session of the espionage case something happened which
drove him to suicide. The cause of this catastrophe
was never entirely cleared up but it was brought into
relation with the espionage trial and in which the wife
and daughter of the accused, ¢he latter a girl under age,
played a réle. There was also the story of a nocturnal
adventure in which a police agent found Eysenhardt
in a place of ill repute, a very unpleasant situation for
him at the time. Eysenhardt left the following note:


‘“In the name of his Majesty the Emperor !

‘‘T have committed a terrible crime and I feel myself
unfitted either to hold my post any longer or as a matter
of fact to live. I have sentenced myself to the most
severe punishment possible and shall within the next
few minutes carry it into effect myself”.

EYSENHARDT.


We cannot begin our discussion any better than by
first paying our respects to the psychologist and thinker,
Berger.

We long ago answered in the affirmative the question
whether the analysis of a work of art for the purpose of
discovering the main-springs of human action is justifi-
able. The only important question to be discussed is
simply the general nature of the tact to be employed,
and it is of course quite impossible to come to any
complete agreement about it.

With regard to the life-history of Hofrat Eysenhardt,
there is another important reason for calling this novel
to the attention of psychologists, namely its truth to life
produced not merely because based upon an historical
personage but due likewise to the creative imagination


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 267


of an artist-psychologist who has more than once given
proof of his intuitive knowledge of the human soul.

I would not at all be surprised ¢f every psychologist
took Berger's creation to be either a corroboration or an
after-experience of their own teachings. For everyone
sees only what he can understand and tries to bring his
knowledge to bear upon the investigation of the human
soul and of art, just as Steinherr brilliantly points out
in Berger’s book.

We have no destre to tamper with the marvellous out-
pourings of our poets and thinkers and shall therefore
attempt merely to determine, through their creations,
to what an extent we are on the right path and how
much of their work can be understood by reference to
the working methods of individual-psychology.

Our field of inquiry leads in the same direction as
that opened by Berger’s art. We always concern our-
selves with striking characters and try to trace back to
childhood and even further, the beginnings of every
act. Weare interested in the striking transformation of
personality and endeavour Zo grasp the manifold thought-
connections and forms of expression of man zz fhetr
entirety.

The thorough survey of the phantaszes of children
regarding their future professions which we owe to
psychologists of our persuasion has taught us in the
same way as have our experiences with neurotic people,
that the choice of a profession despite many provisos,
is likely to show the inmost essence of the fictive life-
plan, and that this choice of profession is under the
dictatorship of a deified and dogmatic concept of personality.*

We shall direct all our attention to the inter-relation
of personality and neurosis.

From this connection, if we are interpreting the
neurosis correctly, there flow ‘those fundamental and
abstract guiding-lines of the human psyche which enter
into the creation of a character of unusual personality,
whether he be a creator or a destroyer of cultural values, a
normal man or an unfortunate carrier of psycho-neuroses
and psychoses. ia

The scientific judgment and prejudices concerning the


1 That it represents in a way the essential fulfilment of a deeper-lying
‘* formal ” PenAee to move (instinct?) cf. Kramer, Berufswahiphantasien
in Hetlen und Bilden.


268 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


psychological structure of unusual men which have been
held so far, will find excellent corroboration in the
description of Eysenhardt.

The poet has created his hero so carefully and so
completely that we may cheerfully follow in his steps
without even pointing out warningly that the adtractzon
of a work of art arises from its synthesis and that the
analysis of science profanes and destroys this synthesis.

Having now drawn general attention to the book,
our task is to attempt a grouping which will give us
an understanding of the dynamics of the life expressed
in our hero so that we may, in part, obtain a support
and also some useful formulas for a knowledge of man
and also mould our practical activity wth a view to
education, self-control and cure.

Let us begin with Eysenhardt’s bodily traits. We
are told of his slender shoulders, his bossy forehead,
his bushy eyebrows, of the tardy appearance of his
moustache, his jaundiced complexion, the blueish rings
around his eyes, and of his stomachic and biliary dis-
orders. Clinically this seems to be the picture of a
man who has preserved o/d traces of rachitts, inferiority-
mantfestations of the digestive tract and a suggestion of a
degeneration of the secondary sexual characters as ts so
common with neurotic people.

It has frequently enough been pointed out that this
group of body manifestations with its accompanying
consequences, pains and inadequacies, misdirects people
into making an infantile self-evaluation whose final
result produces a feeling of inferiority and uncertainty.

The situation of the youthful Eysenhardt, an only
child with a tyrannical father, must have conduced
markedly to the intensification of what Janet calls
‘‘sentiments d’incomplétude ”.

In order to meet life squarely and to gain security
the psyche of such children must exaggerate, by way
of compensation, the normal contrivances, set its idea of
personality higher and affirm it more dogmatically. Such
children pursue their path toward a god-head they have
themseives created and which then as god, devil or demon,
apparently directs their steps.

Their will and desires become: more expressive and
aggressive, their actions more secretive and cunning;
lust to dominate, envy, cruelty, avarice, flare up and


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 269


the preparations for life are more carefully and precisely
made.

LT prefer to follow Berger’s description.

Eysenhardt is an ambitious man, a truckler and
a person of officious patriotism. He is hard and
courageous, plays the role of a saviour of society,
exceedingly skilful, possessed of great gifts as a talker,
a great memory and marked intellectual capacity. His
curiosity and desire for information and his acute per-
ceptions would have made him a detective genius. He
is lonely, egotistical, keeps all the old forms and loves
the sharply outlined and clear-cut paths in carriage,
attitude, habits and thought. No one is indifferent
to him; he is either hated or loved.

Gottlob Steinherr, a disappointed climber, but not
inferior to Eysenhardt in originality, knows Eysenhardt’s
ideal of personality of the older time when the latter’s
ambition had expressed itself more directly and more
openly. He znfers that Eysenhardt represents a case of the
change of criminal and anti-social instincts into legal ones.
He assumes that his guiding-lines are brutal sexual instinct
and unlimited self-complacency ; he wishes to dominate men,
even to enslave them, and to possess women.

Let us recall the facts we know: Az exceedingly
ambitious fictive personality-ideal in danger of being destroyed
by his father. He learns to understand his environment
and the necessity of an apparent submissiveness to power
and yet threatens his father, one day, with a revolver.
His personality-concept had unquestionably borrowed
many traits from his tyrannical father, but had then
developed far beyond it and had learned to avoid a
strong opponent and oppress a weak one. zs sexual
behaviour does not represent the cause of his actions but merely
an analogy. His aggressive attitude becomes hesitant and
extends in regard to women no further than the glove.
The strong woman, the domineering woman, Dion’s
fury (Plutarch) fill him with terror. He elevates the
prostitute to the rdle of lady and dreams of the conquest
of achild. He might easily have become a homo-sexual but
having a contempt for men he has conquered this tendency or,
he might have developed a desire for the impotent woman or
even a Corpse. ;

His psychical gesture seems to indicate that he is
looking for a line of development for maxims of conduct.


270 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


He is walking at the very edge of the pavement and
moving along the very limits of bourgeois morality.
His pen, lead-pencil are found lying in their proper
places after his death. He has found the proper limits
for his hyper-tense aggressiveness and his reputation
and the norm of his sexual commonplaces are enough
to prove to himself that he is a man. His reputation
gives him ample opportunity for enjoying the illusion
of superiority. He devaluates man in order to make himself
a god.

a The higher his position the weaker does his energy
become. When his life-line is tending upward this
consumption of energy, this advocate’s love of hunting
decreases. When the hope of a post in the ministry
is held out to him he becomes human; social feelings
suddenly develop and burst asunder the heavy coat
of mail protecting his attitude from his fellowmen.
Eysenhardt passes through a transformation when he
feels himself in close proximity to his godlikeness.


How Eysenhardt changed


Is such a change in a man, or let us say, in a
neurotic, possible? In the developed neuroses we find
as a rule so marked a constancy in the manifestations
that we get the impression of an integrated mechanism.
A deeper knowledge teaches us however that not even
in this phase does the psyche always run the same
course. A patient may be just pleasantly excited, or
he may be depressed or exuberant, despondent or
hopeless or joyful, full of initiative or faint-hearted,
in short, all the traits are found in that antithetic order
called by Lombroso bipolar, by me polar and herma-
phrodite, ambivalent by Bleuler and ‘‘double vie”,
split personality etc. by others. In the stage ante-
cedent to the developed neurosis and which is at times
described as neurotic but which is generally that of
health, such antithetic actions can likewise be observed.
In the form of hesitation and doubt, anxiety, shyness,
fear of taking a decision and in the trembling experienced
when in the presence of anything new, we perceive active
and passive traits and impulses, some of which approxi-
mate to reality, some to the ego ideal. The developed
neurosis shows itself as a safeguard of increased strength


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 271


and forces to the front the more fundamental character-
istics. ‘* Ambivalence” proves to be the integrated methods
of attaining the goal.

Hofrat Eysenhardt was expecting the final consum-
mation of his ambition. We know, however, that such
an advent can never take place satisfactorily because
the guiding goal is zmaginary and placed too high for
fulfilment. We know that many a neurotic looks
forward to happy events with inward trembling and
hesitation although he is, at the same time, perceptibly
exalted and transported to such an extent by his intensi-
fied personality consciousness that he becomes ‘‘ another
man’. The author describes this stage humorously
and allows Eysenhardt to change into a modern man
whose whole external appearance seems heightened.
A modern elegantly trimmed beard takes the place of
the short bristly full-beard. Here too a neurotic trait
is mentioned, the fact that he rather mourns the loss
of one of his bodily possessions. We suspect that
Eysenhardt whose ‘‘ masculinity” has been curtailed,
is mourning the loss of his manhood. He now becomes
approachable and kindly disposed, for the automatic
raising of his ego-consciousness permits him to waive
part of his ‘‘distance”. He freely gives advice and
encouraging praise, shows himself more liberal and
casts off some of that intense desire always to prove
someone to be in the wrong. He is playing his old
role, is still the same angular person Stezxherr knew him
to be but in a more propitious position. The accused also
profit by his change, for they are no longer the necessary
sacrifices to his sadistically incited lust. Even his
physiognomy loses its expression of tense desire for
domination. His safe-guarding trait of thriftiness is
softened and even his emotions from our view-point
apparently primary and unalterable elements exhibit
a change of emphasis to the degree at least of making
the formerly pleasurable exercise of his profession now
appear a terrible burden from which he would like to
be freed. Omnia ex opinione suspensa sunt.

His life and attitude show the neurotic safeguarding
preparations for the anticipated appointment and zs
memory discloses those remintscence-restdues favourable to
these preparations. nthe midst of it all the old fear of
uncertainty reappears, the fear of taking decisions,


272 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


agoraphobia. As Berger says in another place, Eysen-
hardt in his sense of incomplete manhood has a presenti-
ment that just as his father had defeated him so now
he would succumb again.

A lower incisor loosens and breaks off while eating.
The symbolical influence of this event interpreted by
Eysenhardt as another sign of inadequacy, the loss of
some bodily possession damaging to his masculine
power, strikes him with all the force of a superstitious
impulse or, whatever it is, that intellectual people con-
ceal in its place. The approaching end! All is vanity!
The truth overwhelms him almost at the very moment
of his ardently-longed-for triumph, the triumph for
which he had worked throughout life, toward which his
whole life-plan had been directed! The old uncertainty
holds him in its vice. What if his intellectual powers,
his main weapons disappear? So again he takes re-
course to his old method, the method to which he was
accustomed. He wants some proof of his powers, some
certainty, an examination. Sy means of the self-criticism
to which he subjects himself it 1s within his power either to
lower or raise his prestige. What he is most afraid of is
not reality but the semblance of reality, z.e. whether he
is to be deprived of his worldly power. In this condition
of hypochondriac doubt zs construction of fear spurs him
on to take even greater precautions. A sensation of
pressure on the heart, slight attacks of anxiety these are
but intensified hallucinatory safeguards and warnings.
The magnificently constructed rdle of the self-complacent
ego has, however, been shaken to its foundations.
When disappointment follows and his triumph, em-
bodied in the post of minister of justice miscarries this
comes upon a man who is already sick, a prey to un-
certainty and who has been cut loose from his old
safeguarding constructions.

What will happen in all these instances where the
path to victory has been cut off and the harrowing
feeling of decreasing manhood seeks some way of pull-
ing itself together again? Attempts and preparations
come to the front to demonstrate that the personality
once possessed has not really suffered and that, on the
contrary, it is now even more firmly fixed. The motor
habits of Eysenhardt take him more frequently to
Kaertner-strasse and its side-streets than before. We


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 273


may assume that his degenerate sexuality, as in all
cases of neurotic climacterics, has not developed from
any biological wave but from the desire to redeem his
fortune; that, in other words, it is a self-deception whose
basis is the intensified will to power, the intensified
neurotic guiding-line. Berger seems to incline towards
this view even when he acquits Eysenhardt of the
charge of sensuality, for he makes him feel that his
slight lapses are rather to be interpreted as acts of
secret despair, z.e. what we call the masculine protest, when
humiliation, the reappearance of an inferiority feeling
and the sinking of the sense of personality, are involved.

But there is another respect in which Eysenhardt has
undergone a transformation, and this transformation
shows us to what an extent the development of a
character under the stress and tear of the world, is
dependent upon the person’s own opinion of himself.
It is, in other words, changeable, and can like every
other scheme be exchanged for another, since the character-
picture never represents a purpose in itself but a
psychical attitude by means of which the personality
ideal is either to be attained in the quickest manner
possible or its attainment attempted in some circuitous
way, despite the appearance of insurmountable obstacles.
Eysenhardt becomes more human and more humane to
show that if he wills it he can be these too. ‘‘ His ego
hermetically sealed against contact with any other per-
sonality moves more freely”. His conscience awakens.
We may justifiably assume that ¢hzs awakening 1s a
contrivance of the psyche for the purpose of raising the
ego-feeling when it appears to be in an insecure situa-
tion. This and the realization of the mistakes one
has committed bring the penitent nearer to God. It
presupposes an opponent upon whom the hero’s superi-
ority can be proven. But who ts Eysenhardt’s opponent ?
Whom does Eysenhardt desire to put in the wrong
this time, Eysenhardt whose whole life-plan has been
to prosecute others for their mistakes? Whom does
Eysenhardt, who always possessed complete control
over all his expressions and thoughts, now accuse?
His thoughts, etc., have now gained ascendancy over
him and he zs forced to take his guiding-line literally, to
strengthen the fiction of his god-likeness and adhere
to it to the bitter end. Hzs opponent now is the state, the

S


274 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ruling regime, the patriarchal and paternal power that
punishes and rewards. Eysenhardt’s humiliation was
a mistake, for the state had possessed no better servant.
This servant had, however, an unquenchable ambition
to become the judicial ruler of the state, and when he
found himself cheated of his fiction and of his assumed
right, ke put into operation those mechanisms that, to his
mind, were most dangerous for the state. The trans-
formation of his attitude to one of mildness and soft-
heartedness was the strongest attack and the most
powerful revolt that he could make against the state.
‘‘ Mildness is anarchy”’ he had always preached, and
he therefore became mild.

We have here a change in the guiding-fiction. Eysen-
hardt at first wished to act as he had done in the case
of his father during his early preparations for life, to
rule by subjugating others. When this development
was blocked just within reach of the goal, he created
still stronger protections and safeguards, and ded a revolt
in the form of judicial clemency.


Hofrat Eysenhard?’s mysterious Experience


The letter in which Eysenhardt described his suffer-
ings was not burnt. The author states that he forgot
to burn it. Berger is too good a psychologist to stop
at this point. Let us therefore continue along the
above lines. Eysenhardt selected the arrangement of
forgetting in order to incite himself to further revolt
and to show the public where loyalty to the state lead.

Remember that Eysenhardt’s fiction was to control
from the beginning of his career his masculine protest.
This consisted in attaining domination by subjecting him-
self to the powers of the state. This fiction of his can be
traced very far back, at least as far back as the time
when his direct attack against his father failed and he
was forced to make a detour. Directness did not remain
one of his characteristics. Now we find him defeated
again on his main line and at a time when death had
already sent him a messenger. What could possibly
be expected but that he would abandon his detour and
proceed to a direct attack against the state that had so
ungratefully repaid his loyal services, that he would
reject those maxims and laws that had hitherto bound


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 275


him both in his interest and in that of the state. All
these surgings now partially expressed themselves and
his anarchistic mildness became strengthened. ~

Nerve specialists have all had numerous experiences
with the revolt engineered by ageing people, their
giving up of positions, deserting their families and the
world in order, on all sorts of pretexts, fo bring about a
change in the form of their guiding-line.

Eysenhardt at this stage tried to approach the
medical profession which he had formerly despised as
destructive and anarchistic in character. He regarded
an interview with a physician however as a humiliation
and therefore wrote down his hypochondriac and anxiety
conditions and attempted to exorcise the sick person
within himself by speaking of himself as though he
were a different person, saving in this way his feeling-
personality.

This was at the time when he expected his prefer-
ment and when the very upsetting event of the loss of
his tooth occurred. Connected with it were trains of
thought and emotional consequences which made him
feel his capacities, particularly his memory, to be waning.

Here we have the typical ‘‘ hesitating attitude” of the
neurotic whenever he finds himself in the presence of a
new situation, or that a new task is about to confront
him. Eysenhardt with his firm grasp on the normal
environment that had permitted him all his triumphs,
had lost all his elasticity and hardly trusted himself to
make the necessary changes for his new position.

Here the poet Berger comes to our rescue and
describes the tentative preparations he made, the trans-
formation of his outer person, the brightening of his
features, etc. We infer from these fundamental facts
and his compulsory execution of them, the existence of
an inward insecurity demanding compensation. It is the
same feeling of insecurity that has driven him out of
society and from associating with respectable women.
He feels confident only of dominating prostitutes and criminals.

The psyche, in particular the neurotic psyche, has
a very peculiar method and contrivance at its disposal
for meeting insecure situations. /¢ underestimates tts
own powers and insists upon its possession of some in-
feriority so that it may gain room for expansion. This
is the only position that a neurotic really knows well


276 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


and from which he is able to form an estimate of life.
Every prick of envy, of incited craving for domination
and aggression will then become more perceptible,
caution will mark every step he takes so that he may
gain victory. J/¢ zs this “hesitating attitude” of caution
that makes neurotics develop misgivings as to their
abilities. It is thus not a mere evasion of Eysenhardt
if he imagines that his memory has suffered, for it
represents, on the contrary, his strongest means of
protection, the best method of warning himself, of re-
doubling his attention, mobilizing his forces so that
he may attain his guiding-goal and personality-ideal
or, at least, spare his own feelings if he cannot other-
wise succeed by some pretence of illness.

Now what réle does the lost tooth play in this con-
nection? It is impossible to over-estimate Eysenhardt’s
evaluation of even the smallest parts of his body.
Because of his feeling of inadequacy the neurotic can
stand no loss of any kind. Nor should we exclude the
well-known symbolical significance of the loss of a
tooth. Its loss has at all times been associated with
thoughts of death, old age and pregnancy. In dreams,
phantasies and poems we find the tooth standing for
something growing, some after-growth, as an expres-
sion of masculine power, and its loss is consequently
the symbol of emasculation. The emotional idea that
the novelist wishes to convey is probably identical.
Eysenhardt takes the loss of his tooth as a sign of
the decrease of his creative powers. Did he have to
interpret it in this fashion? Remember that Czsar
when falling, on his landing in Egypt exclaimed,
‘‘ Africa, I seize you by the hand!” Why did Eysen-
hardt set so high a value on this event and why did
he not interpret it in another way? The answer is
simple enough—decause this evaluation was of help to him.
He found himself, according to our view, in a hesi-
tating attitude demanding caution and just before a
decision and change in his situation. Zhis tooth fell
out at a most opportune moment, or to put it in a different
way, he utilized this event in order to increase the
strength of his safeguards.

Hts logical faculties then came under the sway of his
end-purpose.

Then came his humiliation. His expectation of obtain-


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 277


ing @ fost in the ministry was not fulfilled. In conse-
quence of this set-back a series of hallucinations appeared
every night, generally in the form of figures of men,
occasionally of women, and he was able to recognize
from certain details that they were all people he had
sentenced. These hallucinations interfered with his
sleep and filled him with fear. I cannot here enter into
the discussion of these details brilliantly described by
Berger. They seem to have the purpose of demonstrat-
ing the need for the establishment of some illness and
the danger to the existence of the state of his penitence.

My observations of psychotics and neurotics lead me
to believe that the latter resort to hallucinatory images
when they are about to develop safeguards of particular
clarity and penetration.

As a matter of fact Eysenhardt’s hallucinations
always called up his feeling of inferiority. For instance
he allows others to demonstrate their superiority, to
accuse him on account of his severity, to suggest to
him that he also is a criminal just as Marcus Freund
had actually called out to him during the latter’s trial.
The figure of this man in his series of hallucinations has
the same significance and shows even more definitely
the vulnerable part of Eysenhardt’s psyche, that part
to which attention has already been drawn. Eysenhardt
like Marcus Freund 2s afraid of woman and finds pleasure
only in prostitutes as Freund had in children. The
analysis of perversions found among neurotics shows
the succession of events to be as follows: fear of woman,
at best excepting prostitutes, followed by sex gratifica-
tion only through children. Such a person may as a
matter of fact proceed along this line as far as necro-
phily or homo-sexuality. The worthless fickle woman
is the ideal of most neurotics and their policy will always
be to depreciate a woman until they have rendered her
worthless.

It is along such a line that Eysenhardt obtained the
clearest insight into his own character, because in his
feeling of inadequacy which events had recently inten-
sified we find him craving for increased indulgences so
that he may begin to develop his masculine protest.
Has he any presentiment that this path leads to the
craving for the child? He protects himself at any rate
by developing warning hallucinations and terrifying


278 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


images. He has his hallucinations just as others have a
feeling for society or a religion, in order to protect himself
by means of an aggressiveness which defeat has called
forth.

Two other conditions favouring hallucinations co-
operating with each other are found. Hs c/mess and
the hallucinations—the accompanying anxiety condition
as well as his doubts as to his abilities, demonstrate
him to be ill—destroy a wonderful instrument forged for
the use of the state. J accusing himself he ts accusing the
state, the administration of the law, public safety of
which he had been one of the guardians, and by his
penitence he is shaking to its very foundations the
concept of justice he had held. He is delivering body
blows at his opponent now, his real opponent, the state,
the ruling classes—all of whom have contributed to his
defeat.

The psychic situation portrayed so concisely by his
hallucinations aid us in what follows. Ina moment of
deep humiliation he conquers his desires for revenge by
erecting terror-inspiring spectres which are to show him
what would happen if he proceeded on his normal course.
The meaning of his aggressiveness is a neurotic and
hostile preparation directed against his sleeping and
unsuspecting master, whom he is threatening in much
the same way in which he once threatened his father.
His neurotic perspective, in its search for security,
sought and found in Marcus Freund a threatening
reminiscence. And so Eysenhardt becomes again the
victor.

When he accepted the presidency of the espionage
case upon whose proper conduct the welfare of the state
might depend, he felt that he had returned as conqueror.
He made his preparations as on former occasions. ‘‘He
did not think of Marcus Freund any more”, because he
did not need him any longer. His protesting sexual
tension had become allayed.

Against ‘‘ladies” he was also able to protect him-
self, for here his old construction of shyness when in
their presence still proved efficacious. But he fell a
victim to a child. ‘‘ Daimonic” femininity conquered
him, as from childhood he had had a foreboding it
would. This was however from the very beginning a
construction of his own making. We now had but one


BERGER’S HOFRAT EYSENHARDT 279


alternative left if he wished to evade the compelling
power of the triumphant woman—death. He proceeded
along this path firmly and thus fulfilled two of the above
enumerated conditions :—he deprived the state of a loyal
servant whom it could ill afford to spare, and left
behind him among the mass of people a shattered faith
in the course of justice. The first of the reasons for his
hallucinations, namely that he should shrink back before
the idea of violating a child, had become meaningless.
So once again had he aimed at the head of his father,
the father who had punished him for his craving for
love, but this time it was himself he had to strike if he
wished to hit the real enemy.


XXIII


Dostoevsky
(Lecture delivered in the Tonhalle of Zurich,.1918)


BeLow the earth in the mines of Siberia, Dimitrji
Karamasov expects to sing’ his song about eternal
harmony. The guilty and yet innocent patricide takes
up the cross and finds his salvation in the all-forgiving
mutual harmony.

‘‘For fifteen years I was an idiot”, says Prince
Mischkin in his amiable smiling manner, the man who
could interpret every twist in a hand-writing, who gave
utterance to his ulterior thoughts without the slightest
embarrassment and who immediately recognized those
of others. We have a greater contrast here than can
well be imagined.

““Am I Napoleon or am I a louse?” Roskolnikov
ponders in his bed for more than a month in order éo
cross the line set by his former life, his community-feeling
and his experiences. Here again we have the great
contrast, the contrast in which we ourselves participate
and which we ourselves feel.

It is the same with his other heroes and is the
same in his own life. ‘‘Like a hot-head” the youth
Dostoevsky flew about under his parental roof and if
we read his letters to his father and his friend we will
find an extraordinary amount of humility, submissive-
ness and acceptance of his often tragic fate. Hunger,
torment, misery, of these he was to taste frequently
enough in his life. He passed along life like a pilgrim.
The young hot-head took the cross upon himself like
the wise Sossina, like the all-knowing pilgrim in
“Youth” and he walked step by step, gathering
together all experiences, embracing all humanity in
one broad embrace, for the sake of obtaining know-
ledge, of touching life in all its phases, to seek truth,
to seek ¢he new teaching.

280


DOSTOEVSKY 281


Anyone who holds within his breast such contrasts,
who is compelled to bridge such contrasts, must indeed
drink deeply if he desires to gain any repose. For he
will be spared no trouble, none of the sufferings of life ;
he will not be able to pass even the most insignificant
bit of life without trying to see how it fits into his
formula. His whole nature impels him onward toward
an zxtegrated interpretation of life so that in his eternal
oscillations when in this state of restlessness he may
find security and rest.

To gain repose he would have to be able to
arrive at ¢ruth. But the road to truth is beset with
thorns, demands great exertions, great perseverance,
a tremendous training of mind and soul. Is it strange
therefore that this restless seeker after nature came far
nearer to true life, to the logic of co-operation than
others who could far more easily have taken an attitude
toward life?

He had been brought up in needy circumstances and
when he died all Russia in spirit followed his cortege.
He who enjoyed working, who was full of life, who
always had a word of encouragement for himself, his
friends, was more incapable of work than other people,
for he was afflicted with that frightful disease, epilepsy,
which often prevented him from making any progress
for days and weeks. The ‘‘criminal” to whose legs
chains had been bound for four years in Tobolsk and
who for four years was compelled to serve as a convict in
a Siberian infantry regiment, this noble innocent sufferer
leaves his prison with the following*words and feelings
in his heart :—‘‘ My punishment was just for I had evil
intentions in my heart against the government. But
it is too bad that I must now suffer for theories, and for
a cause that is no longer mine”.

The contrasts in the life of his country were of
course numerous. When Dostoevsky appeared before
the public, Russia was in a ferment and the question
of the freeing of the serfs was uppermost in everyone’s
mind. Dostoevsky was always impelled toward the
‘“poor and lowly”, toward children, toward sufferers.
His friends told many a tale of the ease with which he
made friends with beggars who came to visit his friends
as patients, how he would draw them to his room, enter-
tain and try to understand them. When in prison,


282 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


his greatest misery was caused by the fact that the
other convicts regarded him as a nobleman and withdrew
from him. His persistent longing was to understand
and analyse the meaning of prison life, of its inner laws,
to gain a knowledge of those boundaries within which
an understanding and friendship with the others was
possible. Like many great men, he utilized his banish-
ment for the purpose of developing a sensitiveness even
under petty, oppressive circumstances, to practise his
penetrative vision in order to attain to knowledge of
the inter-connections of life and then to call a halt and
unite in one synthesis all the antitheses that threatened
to shake him to his foundations and confound him.
Amidst the uncertainties of his psychic contradic-
tions the goal of his striving was the discovery of some
valid truth. He himself was alternately rebel and
obedient slave, was drawn to abysses from which he
shrank back frightened. To obtain truth he made
error his guide. His principle had been for a long
time, even before he gave it expression, fo approach
truth through falsehood, for we never can be certain of
possessing truth and have to be prepared to resort to
infinitesimal lies. Thus he grew up to be the enemy
of ‘‘ Western” culture, whose essential traits appeared
to him to be @ striving to arrive at falsehood through
truth. He could find truth only by uniting the anti-
theses struggling within him, the contrasts that always
expressed themselves in his creation and threatened to
destroy him and his heroes. In this spirit did he accept
an invitation for the rdle of poet and prophet and he
proceeded to establish limits for his se/-love. The limits
of power intoxication he found set by the love of one’s
neighbour. What had originally spurred him on wasa
clear-cut striving for power, for domination and even
in the attempt to include all life in one formula there is
manifest a great deal of this impulse towards superiority.
In all the deeds of his heroes we find this up-stroke
impelling them to raise themselves above others, to
accomplish Napoleonic tasks, to approach to the very
brink of the abyss, even to suspend themselves over it,
running the danger of falling into its depths and being
shattered. He says of himself: ‘‘I am reprehensibly
ambitious”. However, he succeeded in making his
ambition of some use to the community. He proceeded


DOSTOEVSKY 283


similarly with his heroes; he permitted them all to madly
transcend the limits that he had discovered from a realization
of the logical demands of communal co-operation. He drove
them all, by inciting their ambition, vanity, self-love, on
to the uttermost confines of life and then set the chorus of
Juries upon their path and drove them back again to the
boundaries imposed by human nature where he allowed
them to sing hymns in harmony. There is no zmage
so often occurring in his work as that of a ‘‘ boundary”
occasionally also the picture of a wall. He says of
himself, ‘‘I have a mad love of penetrating to the limits
of the real, there where the phantastic begins”. His
attacks he describes as making him feel as though an
intoxication of joy enticed him to the furthermost limits
of the sensation of living, where he felt himself near
God, so near indeed, that only one step would have
sufficed to cut him off from life. This picture recurs
again and again in all his heroes and has a profound
significance. Let us listen to his new messianic teach-
ing—The great synthesis of uniting heroic life with love of
neighbour has succeeded. It is at this boundary line
that the destiny of his heroes, their fate seemed to be
consummated. To that limit he too was induced to go.
There, he had a presentiment, he would find the richest
fulfilment of human worth in the form of fellow-love
and so he drew this boundary line with the greatest
precision, with a precision that few had ever succeeded
in doing before his time. This goal became of particular
significance for his creative faculty and his ethical
stand-point.

Again and again he and his heroes were tempted to
advance to the uttermost limits of experience, where
groping and hesitating he brings about their amalga-
mation with humanity, in deepest humility before God,
Czar and Russia. For this feeling that held him ina
vice and which might be called the limit-feeling, one
which caused him to call a halt, one which had become
transformed into a safeguarding feeling of guilt—as his
friends often spoke of it—he knew no cause. Strangely
enough he brought it into relation with his epileptic
attacks. The hand of God appeared whenever man in
over-weening conceit wished to transcend the limits of
his community-feeling and warning voices were heard,
recommending introspection.


284 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Roskolnikov, who bravely pursuing his thoughts of
murder, who on the impulsive feeling that everything
is permitted chosen natures, was already thinking of the
nature of the weapon to be used, lies in bed for months
before crossing the line. And finally when with his
club concealed under his coat, he runs up the steps to
commit the murder, he finds that he has heart-palpitations.
In this heart-palpitation we recognize the voice of life,
and in it Dostoevsky’s sensitive feeling for the limits of
life are expressed.

A number of his creations picture, not an isolated
hero overstepping the limits of neighbourly love, but,
on the contrary, a man lifting himself up out of in-
significance and dying nobly and heroically. I have
already mentioned the novelist’s love of the small,
the insignificant. In such cases the men of lowly
origin, the ordinary man, the prostitute, the child, be-
come the heroes. They all suddenly begin to assume
tremendous size until they come to the boundary line of
the all-embracing human heroism to which Dostoevsky
wishes to conduct them.

Throughout his whole youth the concept of the
permissible and unpermissible, of the boundary line, had
been brought clearly home to him. In his early man-
hood the situation remained the same. He was handi-
capped by his illness and his spirit was very early
affected by his harrowing experience when about to be
executed, and by his banishment. In childhood, his
father, apparently a rather strict and pedantic man,
appears to have tried to cope with the boy’s stubborn-
ness, his unbroken fiery spirit, and apparently he drove
him too forcibly toward the boundary line.

A short fragment entitled ‘‘St Petersburg Dreams”
dates from early life and we should for that reason
expect a definite line of action to be manifest. If any-
thing may be inferred logically from the development
of an artist’s soul it must refer to lines of connection
leading from his earlier work, his sketches and plans,
to the later forms of his creative activity. But we
must remember first and foremost, that the orbit of
artistic creation passes outside the battle of life. We
may consequently assume that every artist will show a
turning-off, a halt, a retreat, as soon as the normal
expectations of society confront him. The artist who


DOSTOEVSKY 285


out of nothing, or let us say, out of an anxious attitude
toward the facts of life, creates a world and who, instead
of an answer in terms of practical life, gives us a
puzzling artistic creation, such a man is averted from
life, and its demands. ‘‘ Well, but I am a mystic and
dreamer !”” Dostoevsky tells us.

We obtain some notion of Dostoevsky’s method of
attack as soon as we’ discover exactly at what point of
man’s activity he halts. That, he indicates clearly enough
in the above sketch. ‘‘As I approached the Neva, I
stopped fora moment to cast a glance up the river into
the misty cold and indistinct distance where the last
traces of the purple dusk disappeared”. Then he hurried
home and like a normal man dreamed of Schiller’s
heroines. ‘‘The real Amalia, however, I had never
noticed; she lived in my vicinity”. .. Intoxicated
with love, he preferred to suffer and found this suffering
sweeter than all the pleasures of life. ‘*‘ Had I married
Amalia I would certainly have been unhappy”. Is it
not the simplest thing in the world? One is a poet,
indulges in dreams at the proper distance from the
turmoil of life, stops for a moment to find the sweet-
ness of imagined love unsurpassable, and realizes ‘‘ that
reality destroys even ideal constructions. Do I not
wish to travel to the moon!” That means, however,
that he wishes to remain alone and to love nothing
earthly !

Thus the poet’s ramparts became a protest against
reality and its demands. This is different from what
we find in The Idiot or in the case of the sick man who
had ‘‘ neither protest nor voice”. Dostoevsky did not
know that his endurance of misery would one day be
his distinction. When by annoyance and reproach he
was forced out of his orbit, he found the normal man
within himself, the destroyer and revolutionary Gari-
baldi. In discovering this he discovered what no
one had understood until then, that humility and sub-
missiveness do not signify final acts but are revolts
indicating the ‘‘distance” that is to be overcome.
Tolstoi also understood this secret and preached it
frequently enough to deaf ears. ;

A real secret may be published in the newspaper
and yet no one will know anything about it. No
one knew, for instance, on whom Harpagon Solowjow


286 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


wished to revenge himself by starving himself and
dying in misery while concealed among his dirty
papers was hidden a fortune of 170,000 roubles. How
he must have enjoyed himself inwardly when he shut
himself off sadly and helplessly from his cat, his
cook, and his housekeeper, and remained in debt to
everyone! He held them all in the palm of his hand,
forced them all to beg, all those who only recognized
money as a power and prayed to it. True enough this
resulted in his developing a peculiar obligation, and
methodically doing violence to life. He himself had
to starve and perish in order to carry out his method
of attack. ‘‘He is elevated above all desires”. Musta
person necessarily be crazy to do this? Well, Solowjow
is willing to make this sacrifice if necessary. For then
he could without any responsibility show his contempt
for mankind and its conceited fortune-chasers, harass
everyone who comes near him. He has everything
that would enable him to enter the best of society and
yet, he halts for a moment, throws his magic wand
into the dust-bin and feels great and elevated above
mankind.

The strongest point in Dostoevsky’s life is that all
his magnificent creations were to arise in the following
way namely, that the act was to be regarded as futile,
pernicious and criminal and that salvation was to lie in
submission as long as submission contained within itself the
secret enjoyment of superiority over others.

All biographers of Dostoevsky have busied them-
selves markedly with explaining one of his earliest
childhood reminiscences, that he himself mentions in his
The House of the Dead. For the better understanding of
this reminiscence let me give something of the mood in
which it arose.

At atime when he had almost despaired of making
any connections with his fellow-prisoners he had re-
signedly thrown himself upon his bed and mused on
his childhood, on his whole development and life-
experience. Suddenly his attention becomes fixed upon
the following reminiscence: One day, wandering too
far from his father’s estate and cutting across the fields,
he suddenly stopped, frightened at the voice of someone
calling, ‘‘ The wolf is coming!” He hurried back to
the shelter of his father’s house and there he saw in the


DOSTOEVSKY 287


field a peasant and to him he ran for protection. Weep-
ing and frightened he held on to the peasant’s arm and
told him how he had been frightened. The peasant
made the sign of the cross with his fingers over the boy,
consoled him and promised that he would not let the
wolf devour him. This reminiscence is generally inter-
preted as if it characterized Dostoevsky’s bond with the
peasantry and the religion of the peasantry. However,
the important thing here is the wolf, the wolf that drives him
back to man. ‘This experience persisted in him as the
symbolical expression of his whole striving, because it
lay in the direction-line of his activities. What made
him tremble at the idea of the isolated hero is compar-
able to the wolf in the experience. The wolf drove him
back to the poor and the lowly and there, in the sign
of the cross, he tried to make his connections. There
he wished to be of help. This is what he means when
he says, ‘‘ My whole life belongs to my people and all
my thoughts to humanity ”.

Even though we emphasize the fact that Dostoevsky
was a Russian and an opponent of modern culture, that
the Pan-Slavic ideal had taken firm root in him, this
need not be in contradiction with his spirit, the spirit
that wished to search truth through error.

In one of his greatest messages, in his speech In
memory of Pushkin, he attempted nevertheless to establish
a connection between Western Europe and the Russo-
philes. The effect that very night was glorious. Ad-
herents of both parties rushed to him, embraced him,
expressed themselves in accord with his standpoint.
But this unanimity did not last long. Men had not
as yet thoroughly awakened from their slumber.

While Dostoevsky was trying with all his intensity
to put into effect and carry to the masses the longing
of his heart, the consummation of an all-embracing
humanity—a task for which he had been destined—he
also formed for himself a concrete symbol of this fellow-
love. This would naturally suggest to one who was
attempting to save himself and others, the idea of a
saviour, a Russian Christ, who had turned aside from the
merely human, from worldly power. His confession of
faith was simple, ‘‘For me Christ is the most beautiful
and the most exalted person in the history of the world”.
In this passage Dostoevsky discloses with incisive


288 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


sharpness his guiding-goal. It was thus he had
described his attacks of epilepsy where in his feeling of
rapture he had ascended, had attained eternal harmony,
felt himself in the proximity of God. His goal was to
be with Christ always, bear His wounds, fulfil His task.
He attacked isolated heroism, that heroism which he had
experienced personally perhaps more keenly than anyone
before him, recognized it as a diseased conceit, as self-
love in contrast to that feeling of a common bond which
to him was inherent in a love of one’s fellowmen and in
the logical demands of society. ‘‘Bend your knee, proud
man!” To those who had given up, who hurt in their
self-esteem were striving for peace, he cried: ‘‘ Work,
sluggards!”? People who referred him to human nature,
to its apparently external laws, in order to refute him
he answered by saying, ‘‘ The bees and the ants know
their formula, it is only man who does not know his!”
We can add the following to the inferences that flow
from Dostoevsky’s striving: Man musi look for his
formula and he will find it in a willingness to help others, in
a capacity for sacrificing himself for his people.

Thus he became a solver of riddles and a God-seeker.
He felt his god more intensely than most other semi-
sleepers and dreamers. ‘‘I am no psychologist”, he
once said: ‘‘I am a realist”. And here he strikes at
the point separating him most sharply from all artists
of modern times and from all psychologists. He was in
intimate connection with the community-feeling, with
the very bases of society, the one true reality we do
not completely know but would like to understand.
And that is why he could call himself a realist.

Let us now look into the reasons for the tremendous
effect exerted upon us by Dostoevsky’s personages.
The main reasons are to be sought in their integrated
unity. No matter at what point you take and examine one
of his heroes you will always find him with the complete
paraphernalia of life and ideals. To find analogies we
would have to go to the realm of music where the
same holds true, for a melody discloses in the course
of its harmonic development all the currents and move-
ments of the whole piece again and again. So also
for Dostoevsky’s figures. Roskolnikov is the same when
lying in his bed and pondering over the murder he is
to commit, as when he ascends the steps with his heart


DOSTOEVSKY 289


palpitating ; he is the same when dragging the drunkard
from under the wheels of the wagon giving his last
penny for the man’s starving family. This it is which
Creates singleness of purpose in these characters and
is at the bottom of the influence they exercise upon us.
Unconsciously we carry away in the person of every
one of his heroes a firmly fused plastic figure as though
it had been cast in some imperishable medium, figures
similar to those in the Bible, of Homer, of the Greek
tragedies where we have but to mention the names
in order to bring before our soul the whole of their
influence.

There is another difficulty in understanding the
effect Dostoevsky produces, but fortunately the condi-
tions necessary for solving it areat hand. The difficulty
consists in our realization of the double axis on which every
one of these figures revolves, each axis marvellously fixed to a
definite point. Every hero moves securely in a space
bounded on one side by isolated heroism where the
hero becomes a wolf and, on the other, by the sharply
drawn line of love of fellow-men. This double axis
gives each of his characters so secure a hold and so
fixed a view-point that they remain firmly imprinted
upon our memory and feeling.

One word more about Dostoevsky as a moralist.
He was forced by circumstances, the antithesis in his
own nature which he had to negate, the tremendous
contrasts in his environment which he had to bridge,
to look for formulas that would both embrace and help
his deeply-felt longing for an active expression of love
of man. And so he reached that formula that is to be
placed far above the categorical imperative of Kant—
“‘ That every person participates in the guilt of his fellow-man.”
We know to-day more than ever before how deep this
formula goes and how intimately it is bound up with
the truest realities of life. We may deny this formula
but it will always reassert itself and give us the lie.
But this formula means far more than just an idea of
love of fellow, which is indeed frequently misunder-
stood, arrived at through vanity or just a form of the
categorical imperative that retains its value even in
the isolation of personal ambition. If I participate in
the guilt of my neighbour and in the guilt of everyone,
then I have an eternal obligation impelling me to

a


290 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


assume this responsibility and commanding me to pay
the price.

Thus he remains both as artist and moralist a great
and unapproachable figure.

His achievements as a psychologist have not yet
been exhausted. We venture to say that his psycho-
logical seer-vision penetrated deeper than the science
of psychology because he was better acquainted with
nature and psychology has developed conceptualisti-
cally. Anyone who like Dostoevsky has tried to
ponder upon the significance of laughter, upon the
possibility of learning to recognize a man _ better
from his laughter than from his life-attitude, any-
one who went so far that he came upon the idea
of the accidental family, where every member lives
for himself, isolated from the other, and implanting
in their children the tendency for still greater isolation,
greater self-love, that man has seen more than can be
expected or demanded from any psychologist. Anyone
who remembers how Dostoevsky in A Raw Youth lets
a boy under his bedcover give expression to his
phantasies by ideas of power will have realized the
truth and sensitiveness of his description of the origin of
mental ailments in life as serving the purpose of revolt ;
anyone who has felt to what a degree Dostoevsky has
recognized the tendency to despotism implanted in the
human soul, he will admit that Dostoevsky must be
regarded as our teacher even to-day, as the teacher
Nietzsche hailed him to be. His understanding and
his discussion of the dream have not been superseded
even to-day and his idea that no one acts or thinks
without a goal or a final climax, coincides with the
most modern results of students of the psyche.

Dostoevsky has thus become a great and endeared
master in a distinct number of fields. His realistic
portraiture of life explains why his work comes upon
us like a flash opening the eye of the sleeper. The
sleeper rubs his eyes, turns around and knows nothing
of what has happened. Dostoevsky slept little and
woke up many times. His creations, his ethic and his
art take us very far in an understanding of human
co-operation.


XXIV


New View-points on War Neuroses
(January 1908)


THE new literature on war neuroses has repeatedly and
persistently insisted upon the small degree in which our
present neurological attitude differs from that which
prevailed before the war. We have the same material,
neurologists tell us, the same etiology, the same course
of the illness and the same difficulties. It is only in
connection with therapy that fundamental changes have
occurred and these have resulted from conditions im-
posed by the war and the military situation.

We ought however to emphasize one new and
important change and one that is likely to increase the
difficulties of present-day neurological investigation.
The treatment of neurosis among the civil population
in times of peace had as its unexpressed but self-evident
object the patient’s cure or at least freeing him of his
symptoms so that he might be able to find himself
again and pursue a course of life dictated by himself.
Military neurology had as its object naturally enough
not the desire to cure a man for his own sake but for
the sake and the advantage of the army and the ‘‘state.”’
Medical ideas of the purpose to be served and purely
medical considerations were thus mixed up with
what ought always to be an objective science and
therapy. However necessary and desirable such purely
medical considerations may be they clearly increase the
difficulties for a proper understanding of the problems
since the picture of the disease to be investigated would
then have to be inordinately stressed on one side or the
other. Our problem thus narrows down to the manner
in which a neurotic behaves in a situation tmposed upon him
from without.


There is enough pre-war material at hand for enabling
291


292 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


us to obtain some insight into the peculiar position this
question occupies. Practically every physician knows
the results of the variously graded suggestion-therapy
as applied to single disturbing and insistent symptoms.
Unfortunately the belief was frequently indulged in,
that a permanent cure had been effected, a belief that
oral information and letters seemed to corroborate even
when the patient was at that very moment undergoing
treatment either for old or for some new manifestations
of his trouble.

Let me remind you of the results brought to the
fore-ground in the treatment of symptoms where the
object was not so much curing the patient as enabling
him to perform some set task. A law student, for
example, just before his examinations complained of
insomnia, tiredness, forgetfulness and head-aches. His
examination was to take place within eight days. Let
me give you all the steps in the cure of his case by no
means an infrequent one. Undoubtedly instances do
exist where either through the doctor’s suggestions or
by some other therapeutic procedure a student is suc-
cessfully helped over an examination. (For example,
by suggestions to remain awake, hypnosis, applications
of cold water, electric treatment, medicines). In the
case of a neurotic the words of the physician or indeed
of any person are quite enough to improve the patient’s
condition.* Everyone will be in agreement with me in
considering such cases, no matter what the nature of
their symptoms, as slight and lying on the border-line
of the normal. The foregoing treatments were of
course, not always successful. Some students took
their examinations and found themselves utterly unable
to concentrate their attention. In a large number of
instances the symptoms became exaggerated and they
then used their sufferings as an excuse for changing
their profession. Occasionally a severe neurosis de-
veloped or suicide took place. Quite a number of
those whose condition became aggravated regarded
the treatments they had undergone as responsible and
were generally corroborated in this supposition by the
next doctor they visited. I remember a case where a

' Visiting a physician means to half of the ‘‘neurotics” a decision to


improve to give up a symptom that has become unnecessary. All the
tendencies found in modern neurology are founded on these 50 per cent. cures,


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 293


man cured his wife’s fear of being driven fast by spurring
on the horses to even greater speed.

No one would claim that the above cases were cured.
Barring a few people not even the war neurologists
ever believed that they had done more than rid the
patient of his symptoms and they always preferred after
treatment to keep these men out of the front ranks. In
contrast to the treatment given in peace times where
the physician always has some purpose and attempts
with the patient’s co-operation to carry it out, the war-
treatment had for its immediate object making a person
fit for active military duty although the nature of this
service could be gradually reduced and made lighter.
The neurotic was thus even if kept behind the front or
in the very rear continually confronted by new and vital
decisions arising from the success of the treatment. The
authorities are quite rightin emphasizing the importance
of the ‘‘ atmosphere” in the infirmary. This atmosphere
is however by no means merely the result of the attitude
adopted toward the inferences drawn from the cures but
is made up of hundreds of details among which are
included, to a smaller or greater degree, some assump-
tions of a more or less justified nature about the subse-
quent question of utility and the problems of the future.

The question of the granting of a pension must be
included here although we do not wish to imply that
the annual grant of money ever appeared to the neurotic
as a goal worth striving for. This was not even true
for the patient who became hysterical about the possi-
bility of accidents befalling him. The pension has,
however, for the war neurotic a value like that ascribed
to a war-medal. It is an official document and a
certificate of illness to be shown the patient’s relatives. It
can also be used to protect himself from further attempts
to drag him back to military service. Every neurologist
must have been struck by the very critical tone employed
by the pensioned invalid whenever he is being re-
examined and by his insistence that his papers should
be perused. The ‘‘imaginary pension” is what most
impresses the neurotic, even when he seems to be obey-
ing conscious logical interpretations like fear, danger,
home-sickness and personal gain. ;

Every move of the physician is, as in peace time,
answered by a contrary effort of the patient. I always


204 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


examined neurotics away from their home and their
relatives. As long as this reaction can be regarded as
a purely neurotic one and as long as it persists, both
the absence or the occasional presence of relatives, their
distance or their nearness, will affect him in the same
way. Every irrational bias on this question renders
the simplification and at the same time the process of
amelioration more difficult. Demands made by private
nursing-homes can for example be definitely made
dependent upon the nature of the betterment produced.

It is always possible to prove that the ‘‘ lability” of
the neurotic symptoms arises from the neurotic’s position
and we may claim that it is a position-illness. It is for
that reason that it is so vital for the neurologist to
possess a complete understanding of each individual
attitude and every aspect of the patient’s language, a
knowledge which it is at times difficult to obtain.

Forming one part of the neurotic’s ‘‘ position” is the
nature of the treatment used. The problem becomes
insoluble if the sick man is treated by more than one
physician. Small neurological nursing homes are for
that reason to be recommended. Records of cures
obtained there would be of service and methods of treat-
ment could then be evaluated according to their success.
Only information about cures should be accepted when
given by the physicians who had actually treated the
patients.

Only those methods of treatment can be taken into
consideration as part of a true psycho-therapy that have
succeeded in unmasking the patient’s psyche. All the
‘‘psycho-therapeutic”” measures used in present day
nervous treatments must therefore be excluded from this
definition and regarded only of value as general maxims
to be applied. In war-time whatever success they
possess is derived entirely from the use of authority
and the bestowal of a ‘‘minimum of comfort.” In the
first method of treatment hypnosis, waking suggestion,
sham neurosis and the ‘‘ psycho-therapeutic” prepara-
tion before the actual cure, ought also to be included.
Heroic methods often take the form of such painful
procedures as the water-bed, frightening the patient,
depriving him of certain objects and the conscious
aggravation of his condition. At best the Frank method
recommended by Sauer is but a make-shift for it tells


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 295


us too little of the psychic make-up of the patient, puts
him too much in the power of the physician and seems
to be operating with a kind of ‘‘counter-shock.” ‘The
success these methods can be shown to have had in
war-times and occasionally during peace, is based upon
the neurotic disinclination for treatment—itself a neurotic
symptom. Followers of Freud apply this method to
officers and the Kaufmann method to the troops with
approximately the same results.

The greater insistence upon action in the methods adopted
to-day is quite noticeable among all the practitioners.
Bringing the patient into more favourable surroundings,
calming him and waiting are no longer regarded as of
any importance. The fundamental point in present-day
war neurology is the attempt to destroy the neurotic’s
obstinacy by calling forth counter traits of the indi-
vidual. I mean the examination and the disclosure of
the neurotic obstinacy. Such is the case in that therapy
which externally impresses one as milder but which is
in reality more drastic and fundamental and which
apparently promises a quicker and more durable success
in those cases where neurotics are employing their
war experiences as subterfuges. This method likewise
cannot entirely prevent the patient’s psychical ‘‘position”
from becoming aggravated and it suffers unfortunately
from the taint of being after all but a sham procedure.

The question as to whether neuroses are acquired or
inherited has not been entirely neglected but the
educational factor, the influence of environment and
children’s imitation of their neurotic parents have become
of more importance than before. The frequency or the
regularity of a neurotic pre-history is to-day always
insisted upon. The parent’s position in life and society
as understood by individual psychology is from a prog-
nostic point of view held to be decisive. The indi-
vidual-psychological penetration into the psychic picture
presented by a patient, the proper kind of anamnesis
and a better understanding of the patient’s view-point
toward life than has hitherto been obtained is bound to
give us the safest guide as to the extent of the aggravation
absent in no neurosis and will also aid us in unmasking
all shams. note

A view fairly dominant today is that which insists
that the symptom preferably selects a type of disease


296 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


from which the patient has formerly suffered and locates
it in the same place. That is simply insisting that it
develops in connection with an organ of inferiority, or
that the symptom represents a permanent fixation of
such normal manifestations of an affect as trembling,
nausea-fixation, speechlessness, etc. Very few attempts
have been made to study the cause of this fixation.
One of the favourite assumptions is that the tendency
toward fixation is a neurotic trait like the lability of
the symptom. We might assume from the ‘‘ position”
of the patient that the real explanation is that the
neurotic fixates a symptom by identifying himself with it if
it suits his purposes and rejecting it if it does not.
Similar things are found among normal people under
normal conditions.

I wish now to comment upon a number of statements,
observations and suggestions made within the last two
years in various publications. Schanz (1) regards the
starting point of ague to lie in the deficiency of a
vertebral segment which Blencke (2) insists actually
exists and which manifests itself, if at all, only indirectly
inague. ‘‘Neurasthenic” pains can be more frequently
attributed to this deficiency. We can often satisfy
ourselves of the existence of a naevus either at the place
where the pain is felt or in one of its segments. This
finding, together with a minimal degree of scoliosis or
kyphoscoliosis generally present simultaneously, protect
the diagnosis against the suspicion of simulation being
present. Andernach was always successful when using
verbal suggestion followed by the application of the
Faraday brush. He insisted likewise on atmosphere
favourable to suggestions. Rottmann, followed by
Josef and Mann, tried to conquer the patient’s psyche
by a sham operation during narcosis and imposing
bandages afterwards. Kalmus and E. Meyer favour the
Kaufmann method which has recently become milder. It
now consists of a preparation in the form of verbal
suggestion followed a few days later by faradization
but with electrical currents of medium strength and inter-
rupted by military gymnastics. E. Meyer wishes to
exclude from this treatment psychopathic patients of the
neurasthenic type, for example, all those who have
major attacks of hysteria or general psychical manifes-
tations, in other words severe cases. Incidentally let


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 207


me add that the physician is of more importance than
the nature of the treatment. Simulation should not be
assumed foo hastily. As we are always bound to find
irritations of the psychopathic constitution faradization
is to be rejected.

Liebermeister (3) seems to have some important
suggestions. As his treatment is not allowed to be
practised outside of Germany I can only refer to remarks
taken from reviews of his work. I infer from these that
he insists that the practitioner should either pledge
himself to bring about a cure or not accept payment.
Adler (4) has come to the same conclusion. He stresses
in addition the importance of the individual-psycho-
logical method and an educational therapeutics by
means of which the neurotic fundamentals of character
persisting since childhood, can be shown to be defective
or erroneous. If we disregard all schematic interpreta-
tions we shall find that the neurotic instinctively protects
himself against the general demands of life by resorting
to a subjective feeling of weakness. By self-identifica-
tion with a danger he attempts ¢o protect himself against
areal danger. The neurosis thus becomes a means of
evasion. The prognosis will be more favourable if
there are indications of an earlier active cooperation in
the patient’s previous history, of progress in school,
friendship, love affairs, marriage at a proper age,
children, occupation, etc. The neurotic always betrays
himself by his tendency to adhere to the ‘‘ protecting”
small family-circle. Both the symptoms and their
fixation are dominated by the ‘‘safeguarded future
goal.” It is quite easy to distinguish between simula-
tion and true neurosis. The above statements taken
from a lecture directed against the use of high-voltage
currents terminated with the warning that ‘‘ all methods
of treatment were to be avoided that hurt people’s
dignity.” Lewandowsky (5) says very much the same:
‘‘Sick people develop a neurosis in order to secure
safety. Among some of them an inherited inability to
subordinate one’s self, an unwillingness toward adapta-
tion plays a prominent réle in the development of the
desire to remain at home. . . The real cause of the
illness is not to be found, however, in their past history
or in a traumatic condition of any kind but in the future,
in those things that the patient no longer cares to


208 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


endure . . . The illness allows him to gain his wish to
run away from danger.” Lewandowsky also stresses the
danger of bringing many neurotics together in one place
on account of the possibility of infection. He considers
the treatment more difficult when the patient is in his
own home, because that is where after all he most
wishes to be. He does not however indicate what
means against the desire to remain at home are to be
adopted. The writer quite correctly points out how
one cure brings others in its wake. I too remember a
number of clear-cut cures accomplished by a nurse
speaking to patients of other patients who had been
cured. Lewandowsky possibly exaggerates the im-
portance of military rank upon the success of the treat-
ment. His treatment consists in attempts to aggravate
the situation, supplemented by suggestion, by faradiza-
tion, although different from that used by Kaufmann,
and by hypnosis. He rejects the employment of either
sham-operations or sham-narcosis. Meyer (6) regards
every method as good as long as the physician believes
in itand applies it fearlessly. The important thing is
to convince the neurotic that he can be of use in his
former occupation. Raether (7) describes an application
of the Kaufmann method consisting of a kind of psycho-
therapeutic introductory treatment followed during the
same visit by an application of the faradic current.
Subsequent treatments should follow. The results
showed that 97 per cent. of the people were cured and
rendered capable of undertaking civil occupations.
L. Mann (8) points out that as early as 1911 he had
already used verbal suggestions and subsequent applica-
tions of the faradic current.

From Naegeli’s (9) work, Unfalls-und Begehrungsneurosen,
I would like to call attention to the fact that cures took
place and working capacity was restored as soon as the
nature of the vitality of the individual was discovered.
He strongly opposes Oppenheim and denies as most
people did then, the existence of ‘‘ accident neurosis.”

Troemner (10) shows the existence of a pseudo-
clerodermatic form of traumatic neurosis (Oppenheim)
which he interprets as the hysterical paresis accompanied
by tropho-neuroses in consequence of an injury to the
back of the hand due to the wearing of a bandage for
two months. The same author describes one of the


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 299


manifestations of ‘‘bilateral monzsthesia” in which
two widely separate points of a compass applied at
the same time were felt as one. He regards this asa
utilizable demonstration for the existence of an hysterical
restriction of attention. Leusser (11) comments on a
case of tachycardiac paroxysm extending over four
generations. Heinze (12) describes the success obtained
by the hypnotic treatment of hysterical war-manifesta-
tions. He obtained 86 per cent. cures and was even
successful in cases of stimulated hypnosis. None of
these patients regained complete working capacity and
in spite of the curing of their symptoms only a small
number could be put to military work. He regards
neurotic war diseases as transient reactions developing
out of psychopathic inferiority. Minkowski (13) calls
to mind a case of Israel’s thirty years ago, when the
latter performed a sham operation upon a patient and
where the success lasted until such time as the patient
discovered the truth. Bumke emphasizes the tremen-
dous complication of psychic situation pictures. He
claims the same to hold true for hypnosis. Some of the
patients are refractory, others use hypnosis to protect
the line of retreat, while still others are so over-joyed at
the cure that we hardly have the right to assume that a
‘wish idea” existed. Bumke’s experience led him to
the conclusion that no pension be granted or that the
possibility of the patient’s being able to work denied.
All physicians should definitely oppose all sham opera-
tions and other treatments suggested, because the
personnel must be properly educated first of all not to
employ either compulsion, punishment or deception.
Kraus (14) seems to have missed the whole nature of
neurosis, in which the symptom is of course only a
means, if he claims that neurasthenia is not the sole
concern of neurology. His argument is apparently
based upon the fact that he regards constitutional causes
and organ inferiority as necessitating neurosis but not
as bringing one to it.

Mohr (15) finds the essence of depressions to consist
in a conflict of the feeling of duty with the desire to
evade unpleasantness as found developed among many
conscientious and scrupulous people. (We might if we
so desired say something about ‘‘ unsocial conscientious-
ness”). A cure can only be secured through psychical


300 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


influences. The following conditions are necessary to
the treatment: small nursing homes for about twenty
to thirty patients and one physician; separation from
home ; exclusion of other treatments and the application
of psycho-therapy leading the patients to dominate
their symptoms. Weichbrodt (16) points out the fact
that the disease often makes its appearance long after
the trauma. Occasionally it arises through reappear-
ance of the trauma or, in the case of soldiers who have
not yet been at the front, at the prospect of such a re-
awakening. With regard to the question before the
soldier, namely, shall he go home or be sent to the rear?
the author refuses to give a direct answer. He thinks
that the Rothmann method merely fixes the patient’s
thoughts upon his disease. Narcosis he suggests
might also be abandoned. The Kaufmann method he
would retain. In the use of hypnosis he regards the
authority of Nonne as of the greatest importance.
Nonne’s method consisted of a bath of twenty-four
hours’ duration that might at times be extended to
forty hours. An intensification of its effect occurs if
the bath takes place in a closed and noisy place. The
success does not extend to hysteria, but only affects
the neurotic disturbances. Permission to go out or the
granting of a furlough is to be denied. Few of the
patients invalided in this fashion can be used for war
service but they are all capable of following their own
occupations. He is not in favour of pensions. The
treatment is not suitable for officers. Alt (17) only
believes in ‘‘hinterlands neurosis.” According to his
view 75 per cent. of his patients can be used for barrack
duties. Quensel (18) regards the war neurosis as a
combination of a real disease and a reaction against
circumstances. Jolly (19) regards 1 to 3 per cent. of the
war neurotics as capable of field duty and lays particular
stress upon the therapeutic value of work. Hypnosis
did not appear to be of great value but he praises the
electro-psychic treatment. He recommends weak appli-
cations of currents supplemented by exercise. ‘ What
is to be taken into consideration is not how the men
receive their discharge but what happens to them after-
wards.” His inquiries showed the following results:
of 41 hysterical patients 30 were unfit; 3 in active
service, 5 Bi and 3 C3. Of 23 neurasthenics, 1 was


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 301


in active service, 15 Br; 3 C3 and 4 unfit. Of 14
cases suffering from slight disturbances, 5 were in
active service and 9g g.d.f. In one third of the hysterical
cases the intelligence of the patients ranged from slight
feeble-mindedness to imbecility. This author makes
an exceedingly important remark without following it
up. He found a very large number of unskilled workers
among his examples. The enormous amount of data
gathered by the Cracow Nervenzentrale gives the same
result. A fact of considerable significance can be
gleaned from this Cracow material ; for example, clear-
cut and easily discernible instances of war neurosis
are relatively rare among officers. This seems to
indicate that only wavering natures and those exhibiting
timidity when faced by their social obligations, become afflicted
with neurosis. Kehrer (20) definitely gives up all hope
of being able to restore any perceptible number of war
neurotics to active military service, but urges practi-
tioners to do their best to turn them into people who
might be useful workers behind the front. His method
is based on the idea of aggravating the patient’s condition
in every way including therein the restriction of nourish-
ment, milk diet and ‘‘ forcible or compulsory exercise.”
He criticizes the misuse of the faradic current by non-
medical practitioners and expresses his disappointment
with a psycho-therapeutic that tries to explain the
symptoms without however further entering into the
question. Healso lays great stress upon the atmosphere
being of such a kind that everyone would be willing to
say that he would not leave unless cured. He wants
to place the military authorities in control.

Sauer (21) together with Frank accepts the early view
of Breuer-Freud according to which the neurosis is a
kind of compressed affect. He rejects Freud’s later
view of the sexual origin of war neurosis. He attempts
to diminish the ‘‘tension of the affect” by having the
affect revive in the hypnosis. He mentioned cures that
were subsequently corroborated by letters received from
the field. Wexberg years ago justifiably insisted in
regard to these and similar theories, that anyone who is
changed by an experience or trauma does not become
ill on account of it but is already ill. We must further
take into consideration the fact that little is learnt of
the patient’s nature by this treatment, so that it might be


302 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


contended that it is not dictated by any knowledge of
the causes and that any aggravation of the situation is
due to an unscientific method. It is quite natural to
assume that the patient discloses more about his psychic
life and goal in these therapeutic treatments than the
physician notices and that while in this position he is
in reality beginning to abandon his symptoms. That
does not mean that the practical utility of the method
is thereby denied. The fact should also be mentioned
that this writer prefers hospitals to be situated in the
patient’s native place. Jalowicz (22) emphasizes the
rarity with which neuroses arise on the field of battle.
Of twenty-five cases he found only two where the
individuals had not been under treatment before. He
calls attention to the existence of a ‘‘battle tonus”
in the front ranks hostile to the development of a
neurosis and shows the misuse of the traumatic ‘‘ shock
due toentombment.” He insists that he never founda
neurosis following a real ‘‘entombment.” He also
insists as against Oppenheim on the possibility of a
transition from simulation to true neurosis, and warns
against sending the man home too quickly. However
his opposition to Oppenheim is only an apparent one
for Jalowicz like the former is not really thinking of the
origin of the neurosis in those cases which begin as
simulations but of the neurotic symptoms themselves.
The ‘‘symptom susceptibility”? does in truth require
for its full development a number of preparations and
arrangements of which some, as practice during peace
time shows, fall into the category of simulations and
aggravations. ‘These latter occur in the ‘‘ latent period ”
and can be best studied and predicted in dreams.
Sommer (23) cured functional deafness among soldiers
by an experimental psychological method. While the
patient is sitting in front of an apparatus for the analysis
of finger movements a bell is suddenly sounded behind
him. A movement of the forearm follows proving that
he has heard the tone. Practically all of his cases also
suffered from a physical injury such as rupture of the
ear-drum. Sommer finds the essence of the neurosis to
lie in a ‘pathological compulsion towards the sup-
pression of reflexes”. This can hardly be taken to be
more than a round-about manner of describing the facts.
Nissl v. Meyendorf in his discussion of the above claims


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 303


that in these cases of deaf soldiers the probability is
that they could really hear. The therapeutic effect of
Sommer’s method is perhaps to be regarded as similar
to that obtained by dismissing new cases after thorough
examination with the statement that ‘‘no such disease
exists.” Imbhofer (24) points out the difficulty of un-
masking individuals who are simulating deafness and
that a great deal of time, continuous observation and,
in some instances, a particularly ingenious physician,
are needed. The whole organic make-up and previous
history of the patient is important. The anesthesia of
the ear-drum is unimportant. The results obtained from
the organ in a static condition are however significant.
The psychology of people actually deaf is also to be
used. Idiocy is also to be reckoned with.

Erich Stern (25) finds the pathogenesis of psycho-
neurosis to consist ‘‘in a lability of the psycho-neurotic
individual factors out of which there then develops a
labile equilibrium of the entire psyche.”

Struempel (26) distinguishes between two groups
of functional nerve diseases; first those diseases that
have nothing at all to do with consciousness and second
those that are connected with a changed condition of
consciousness. Among the first he includes epilepsy,
chorea, eclampsia, myasthenia, tetany, real neuralgia
and migraine. These he calls somatic functional
neuroses. He finds it difficult to place tick, tremour,
myoclonia and vasomotor secretory traumatic neuroses.
Manifestations connected with the loss of functions such
as degenerative reactions, reflex rigidity of the pupils,
absence of reflexes and their pathological intensifica-
tion with increased reflexogenous zones, all suggest
the above being really organic diseases. In favour
however of their being psychogenic in origin are the
irritability symptoms, the characteristic anaesthesia and
hemi-anaesthesia and the possibility of evoking attacks
by suggestion. It is possible that this division is too
finely drawn in some respects, for example, in the
importance assigned to reflex intensification and the
extension of the reflexogenous zone, a condition which
is frequently found in psychogenic war neuroses especi-
ally where an unconsciously acquired spasm is noticed.
This fact has been remarked by practically every
observer.


304 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Rothe (27) recommends the practice of stoicism as
a method of combating stuttering. Considering the
frequent failure of most treatments this is indeed an
interesting view. Rothe quite rightly attempts to
obtain a psychic transformation of the whole man in
the conviction that ‘stuttering for the stoic is a test
imposed by fate and the man must then prove himself
worthy by developing calmness,” for otherwise the
basis of the evil remains unknown and if, at best, it
does disappear this takes place without the physician
getting any knowledge of it.

Stertz (28) lays stress on the normal affect-radiations
and their hysterical symptoms. The former are to be
regarded as physical and not psychical. The hysterical
types of reaction are independent of the synchronous
organic changes and are the outgrowth of a definite
kind of predisposition. Like Charcot and Breuer, he
finds another cause for the outbreak of the disease in
the ‘‘hypnoidal condition”. The tendency toward
“fixation” is perhaps a general principle of psycho-
pathological predisposition. Hysterical complexes may
exist without desires, wish concepts, expectations and
fears. If however these do exist, as in the case of
pension-.and war-hysteria, they constitute a never-failing
source of energy for the feeding of the disease. The
apparent objection as to whether ‘‘lability” of the
symptoms and their fixation represent a general pre-
disposition and when the one or the other is operative
Stertz does not consider at all. Nor does he mention
the means by which he has succeeded in excluding the
definitely-given goal of hysterics. On the other hand
his conception of the pension- and war-hysteria approxi-
mates to that of the ‘‘actual position”. Zangger (29)
argues from the view-point of a person who believes in
neuroses being cured by improving the character of the
patient and by a sharpening of his intellect. Dubois
(30) rightly, although without any weighty reasons,
attacks the concept of ‘‘conversion” of the Freudian
School. He feels ‘‘all observable nervous disturbances
to be ordinary emotional physiological manifestations
of an emotional situation differing from the normal only
in their intensity and fixation”. This is correct to the
extent that we never actually perceive hyper-physio-
logical manifestations. The concept of ‘conversion ”


NEW VIEW-POINTS ON WAR NEUROSES 305


presupposes, even in its most minimal significance, the
conservation of psychic energy and owes its existence
to the fact that the physician designates every reaction
deviating from his own as a conversion. Overlooking
the existence of individual and utilitarian reactions
Schuster (31) comes to the conclusion that in cases
where the function is pathologically changed either
permanently or transiently, the anatomical substratum
has in some fashion deviated from the normal.

Nonne (32) in his suggestion method is only con-
cerned with freeing the patient of his symptoms. His
method is applicable to officers also. The capacity for
revision is great. He rarely is able to restore his
patient to full capacity for field service. The main
value of his treatment consists in its success in obtain-
ing an a.v. and obviating the necessity of granting
pensions. In 42 new cases 26 were able to do full
work, 16 were still suffering but could perform light
duties and 2 had relapses. The original Kaufmann
method has here been transformed into a persuasion
method helped along by faradic stimulation.

Strasser (33):—‘‘Every thing that can creatively
develop from the imaginative faculty of man can be
utilized in the symptom complex of a functional emo-
tional or neurotic disease. Every psychic activity is to
be understood as in the main an anticipatory preparation
for the future. The final orientation of the psychic event
which people like to ascribe only to the ‘pension
hysteria’, can be shown to exist in every neurosis.
The belief that something has been created can express
itself functionally in exactly the same manner as the
creation itself. ‘Trauma’ has the ability to push
aside personal responsibility. Numerous tracts lead
from the healthy condition to that of neurotic disease
and practically every individual preserves in some form,
either a memento or some protective mechanism of this
development. From the individual-psychological view-
point we must recognize behind every neurosis the
existence of a weakling whose incapacity for adapting
himself to the ideas of the majority calls forth an
aggressive attitude taking on a neurotic form. The proper
therapy must solve the fundamental conflict between
the duty to the community and to the individual.

War neurosis has accelerated the discussion of the

U


306 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


fundamental questions in the psychology of neuroses.
The further study of the data and the numerous writings
on the subject will probably lead to integrated view-
points approximating to ours.


0 ON OW be WN Hw


LITERATURE


. SCHANZ, 1. m. W., 1916, H. 12.
. BLENCKE, Jd7d., H. 32.
. LIEBERMEISTER, Ueber die Behandlung von Kriegsneurosen


(Halle 1917).


. ADLER, Lecture delivered before the meeting of Army Physicians


at Cracow, Nov. 1916.
LEWANDOWSKY, WV. m. W., 1913, H. 30: Feldarztliche Beilage.


. MEYER, Zher. Mh., June 1917.

. RAETHER, Arch. f. Psych., 1917, vol. 57.

olde WEANING 20.0772. 7s TO17, INO» 20:

. NAEGELI, Unfall- und Begehrungsneurosen (Stuttgart 1917).

. TROEMNER, Aerztlicher Verein in Hamburg, May 22, 1917.

. LEUSSER, /. m. W., 1917, n. 23.

. HEINZE, Med. Sektion d. Schles. Ges. f. vaterl. Kultur zu Breslau,


March 9, 1917.


. MINKOWSKI, /dzd.

. KRAUS, Kriegsdrztliche A bende.

. Mone, 7. KZ, 1915.

. WEICHBRODT, Arch. f. Psych. vol. 57, H. 2.

. ALT, Lbzd.

. QUENSEL, Zwanzigster Vers. mtttledeutscher Psychiater u.


Neurologen in Dresden, Jan. 6, 1917.


. JOLLY, /ézd.


. KEHRER, Zschr. f. d. ges. Neur. vol. 36 H., 1 and 2.
. SAUER, Léid.
. JALOwIczZ, Ibid.


. SOMMER, Zwanzigster Vers. mitteldeutscher Psychiater u. Neuro-


logen in Dresden, Jan. 6, 1917.


. IMHOFER, W. &/. W., 1917, no. 23.

. ERICH STERN, Sommers KL. psych. u.nerv. Kr., 1917, vol. 10, H.1.
. STRUEMPELL, MM. K7., 1916, vol. 36.

. ROTHE, Zschr. f. ges. Neur. 1917, vol. 36.

. STERTZ, Ostdeutscher Verein f. Psychiatrie, Dec. 1916.

. ZANGGER, /Veurol. Ges., Berne 1916.

. DuBois, Ldzd.

. SCHUSTER, Weurol Zb/., 1916, H. 12.

- NONNE, Wandervers. d. stiddeutschen Neurol. u. Psych. in Baden-


Baden, June 1917.


. STRASSER, Schweizer Korr., Bl. 1917, no. 9.


XXV
Myelodysplasia (Organ Inferiority)


IN my Studie tiber Minderwertigheit von Organen | was able
to show in connection with the study of the urinary
apparatus that all pathological changes whether func-
tional or morphological are associated with an hereditary
inferiority of the organ and the nerve superstructures.
This inferiority frequently remains latent and the result-
ing deficiency is compensated for in ‘some way. Very
often the inferiority discloses itself at one point of the
organism and dominates the whole picture of the
disease.

I pointed out there that the most definite mani-
festations were the inheritance of the disease and its
occurrence in families ; childlessness ; signs of degenera-
tion; and anomalies of the reflexes. In conclusion
starting from one of the signs of inferiority, enuresis, I
was able to show that others were connected with it.
In my Statistics, consisting at that time of fifty cases
but which since then have been considerably augmented,
I succeeded in proving the unified and exclusive nature
of the symptoms of organ inferiority.

An important part was there shown to be played
by the segment inferiority which in cases of enuresis is
expressed in the inherited anomalies of the lower
extremities and in the arrangement of the naevi, neuro-
fibromata and angiomata found in the affected area.

What I was most concerned with was to substitute
for the concept of ‘‘disposition”, a hypoplastic and
dysplastic predisposition of organs and their nerve
superstructures so as to strengthen our case by a
clinical demonstration of the inferiority symptoms
mentioned above. ‘

Since my work covered the anomalies and the
diseases of the whole organism my conclusions, summed


up in my theory of organ inferiority and which I tried
307


308 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


to prove held for the whole organic system should on
account of their fundamental importance, be given a
more prominent place. It was possible to show re-
peatedly that the organ inferiority developed genetically
affecting the whole organ and tts nerve superstructure yet
manifesting itself only in certain places. I refer to
pages 7, 10, 22, 25, 30; 31, 47, 53, 57; and 61 ofany
book where I said: ‘‘ We must insist that the already
described synchronous occurrence of multiple organ
inferiority extends to individual parts and to the nerve
tracts of the central nervous system, that frequently the
efficiency of an organ corresponds proportionally to the
efficiency given by nature to those particular nerve
tracts that are connected with its associated organ, from
which it receives stimulation and to which it carries
impulses.’’—Adler, loc. cit. Cf. also the appendix, page
75 (On the inferiority of the Urinary Apparatus, the
history of individuals afflicted with enuresis, their
family-tree etc.): I said: ‘‘I must here confine myself
to showing how the focusing of the inferiority manifesta-
tions by means of enuresis comes about and to prove
by specific cases the synchronous inferiority of the
central nervous system and the sexual apparatus.” On
p- 78 of the same book I state that ‘an originally
inferior psychomotor superstructure is found associated
with that organ which inadequately responds to its
environment, namely the bladder. ...” The foregoing
quotations as well as the whole aim of my book was
to prove that inferiority might manifest itself morpho-
logically and functionally (cf. pages 5-17 of my book)
at certain definite places in the organism and _ its
‘nervous superstructure.”

Alfred Fuchs propounds the following view in his
study of Myelodysplasie (Wiener Med. Wochenschr., 37, 38,
1919) :—‘‘ There is a possibility that the picture shown
by a few perhaps even by many diseases which seemed
up to the present to imply a functional neurosis will turn
out to be due to a neurosis that can be traced back to a
congenital hypoplasia or dysplasia of the lower sections of
the spinal cord.” His work which called attention, in
the main to interrelations already described by me from
the study of which the same conclusions were drawn as
those I had reached from an examination of the very
extensive body of facts in my possession, induced Fuchs


MYELODYSPLASIA (ORGAN INFERIORITY) 309


to postulate six groupings of the factors belonging to
the symptom-complex of myelodysplasia :

_ 1. Sphincter debility particularly enuresis nocturna
in adults.

2. Syndactyly. In discussing it Fuchs mentions
some additional symptoms such as congenital pigmenta-
tion arranged in mechanical order extending from the
sixth dorsal vertebra to the middle of the os sacrum;
hypertrichosis lumbalis and pes planus.

3. Disturbances of sensibility.

4. Defects inthe lower portion of the spinal column
and the os sacrum; rudimentary development of a
spina bifida occulta and presumably the presence of
Supernumerary Sacral vertebrae and changes in shape of
the lower lumbar vertebrae, etc.

5. Anomalies of the reflexes.

6. Deformities of the bone structure of the foot and
trophic and vaso-motor disturbances of the toes.

The first symptom I have discussed together with a
number of other childhood defects in my previously
mentioned book, where a whole section is devoted to
them (II. Anamnestic References). There I regarded
these defects as significant indications belonging to inferior
organic systems and came to the conclusion ‘‘ that
hereditary defects of children, their existence in the
parents, their brothers and sisters and subsequently
their own children, must be looked upon as suspicious
suggestions of inferiority in the organ connected with the
particular defect.” Since Fuchs regards as of equal value
both the enuresis of adults and of children I am saved
the trouble of proving the similarity of our views on
this point. That my conclusions go further need not
be considered. But as an example take my suggestion
that other parts of the system and not merely the
associated nerve tracts may be the indication and the
result of inferiority. In a study of nephrolithiasis
(Wiener Klinische Wochenscrift, no. 49, XX.) I was
able to show its connection with enuresis and thus
justify that statement in my book where I claimed
that a large proportion of the diseases of the urinary
apparatus were connected with an hereditary inferiority
of the organism which then expressed itself in the form
of enuresis. Other signs of inferiority are also present
such as anomalies of the lumbar vertebrae subsequently


310 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


proved by Jehle and other scientists to hold for ‘‘ lordotic
albuminuria’”’, a disease in which anamnesitic enuresis
always plays an important part. My suggested con-
nection of enuresis and other indications of inferiority
of the same type with tabes, I was subsequently able
to confirm in other cases. I had previously pointed out
the similar observations made by H. Schlesinger (a
combination of nephrolithiasis with syringomyelia and
tabes) and by Israel (dystopia of the kidneys, and
hydrocephalus). ,

The question that I would now like to ask is whether
myelodysplasia really constitutes ‘‘ ax etcological element of
zmportance,” as Fuchs believes and whether enuresis can
actually be traced back ‘‘2zx all probability to a congenital
hypoplasia or dysplasia of the lower sections of the spinal
cord”; or whether on the other hand as I first em-
phasized it cannot be shown to belong to a defective
embryonic functioning of a urinary apparatus and nerve
superstructure inferior as a whole. As this question
contains the only fundamental deviation from my views
I feel constrained to enter upon it briefly although the
main points can be found in my earlier articles. In
favour of the independence of the therapeutic effects
obtained through psychic influences is to be mentioned ?
first the actual success obtained by its employment, a
fact that Fuchs also mentions. Equally corroborative
is the fact that despite marked uniformity the course of
the disease is variable that very often transitions occur
into pollakiuria, dysuria, a greater retentive capacity
caused by over-compensation (cf. my Studie), and finally
anomalies in the bladder-discharge. The appearance
of all these manifestations, one following the other, are
due to psychic causes. For the facts to fit into Fuchs’
theory it would be necessary to regard the clear-cut
picture presented by an illness as common as enuresis
as due to some anomaly of the spinal marrow which
would always produce the same effect, an assumption
disproven by the one circumstance that enuresis is not
even invariably found in hydromyelia. That it could
be invariably caused by the manifold and abortive
anomalies that I and Fuchs subsequently assumed,
is consequently an unwarranted hypothesis. More


1 Paul Federn was able to observe, in a large number of cases, how
enuresis was arrested by a change of environment.


MYELODYSPLASIA (ORGAN INFERIORITY) 311


justifiable is the view flowing from the doctrine of
inferiority according to which enuresis indicates a
functional arrest at an early stage of development
and an inferiority of the organic system. Other
morphological signs of inferiority both in the organ
itself and in the afferent and efferent nerve tracts and
the central nervous superstructure may likewise be
found to be associated with it.

Every one of these additional anomalies can, under
suitable conditions, themselves become active causes and create
symptoms but cannot call into existence an enuretic
complex. ‘‘ The organic nerve diseases are however accord-
ing to our premises only special instances where a
localized inferiority has led to inflammatory or de-
generative changes.” (Cf. Studie, p. 69.)

With regard to the second point syndactylism I, like
Fuchs, see in it only the bringing into prominence of
one of the many peripheral degenerative signs from which
the inferiority of the lower extremities is to be inferred.
Its connection with the inferiority of the urinary system
(as well as with the sexual and excretory systems), I
have stressed in my Studie, etc., where | explained it
as due to the participation of adjacent segments. In
chapter three of my Studie I took the attitude that the
peripheral degenerative stigmata like the defects of
children, indicate inferiority of the organ and the
superstructure with which it is connected. ‘‘If any
trace of this embryonic arrest (in the organic system)
extends to the body extremities and is there detected
by the scientist, it takes the form of well-known de-
generative stigmata.” It is Fuchs’ merit to have
discovered what according to him is one of the most
frequent signs of degeneration. Though we are justi-
fied in speaking in this case of a co-ordination as I
mentioned in connection with Fuchs’ first point, we
have no right nevertheless to speak of ‘‘ coincidence”
as Fuchs does in his summary or to regard syndactylism
as a “symptom” of myelodysplasia. If however it
really is coincidence then Fuchs’ view that degenerative
indications and stigmata are to be interpreted as peri-
pheral signs of inferiority of the organ to which these
signs belong is in accord with my own, the latter being
then indeed strengthened by this discovery of the role
of syndactylism.


312 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


The appearance of degenerative signs in the lower
extremities together with enuresis, I myself pointed out
and I shall return to the subject briefly again.

In my Studie a prominent position is assigned to a
view emphasizing the importance of the naevus and other
anomalies of the blood vessels as signs of inferiority of
the organs connected with them segmentally (cf. p. 40 of my
Studie).

According to this naevus theory, a number of external
stigmata such as naevi, angiomata, teleangiectasies and
neurofibromata exhibit ‘‘connections” with the segments
of the respective internal organs so that their presence
indicates an inferiority of the segment (‘‘a segmental
deficiency”). This is not to be taken in Fuchs’ sense
as signifying that the naevus is dependent upon
anomalies of the spinal marrow but as indicating a
peripheral co-ordinated inferiority symptom.

That these stigmata are frequently found within the
area of inferior or diseased organs, occasionally longi-
tudinally displaced, I was able to observe in a con-
siderable number of cases. I was also able to confirm
my belief that these connections hold true in the case
of inferiority of the urinary apparatus. Following me
Robert Frank? called attention to the signs of pulmonary
tuberculosis found in these cases but interpreted them
differently. Josef Uhrbach? mentions the ‘‘ naevus
theory” in his study of tabic bone and articulation
diseases and accepting my interpretation, infers the
existence of a predisposition to tabic arthropathia due
to the presence of inferiority signs (naevi on the back
and the belly, genua vara and vein ectasia). Sigmund
Steiner has been re-examining my conclusions on the
basis of his very extensive material and has corroborated
my statement that for the majority of the anomalies of
the spinal column a naevus can be shown to exist, a
fact that certainly speaks in favour of an inherited
inferiority of the spinal column in cases of curvature.

In my book I also recognized and mentioned other
signs of inferiority of the enuretic complex such as
anomalies of the spinal column, pes planus, lordosis hyper-
trichosis and suggestions of spina bifida, The frequency of
the enlarged hiatus sacralis and its demonstration by


1 Miinchener Med. Wochenschrift, 1908.
2 Wiener Klin, Rundschau, nos. 31 and 32, 1919.


MYELODYSPLASIA (ORGAN INFERIORITY) 373


Roentgen rays I regard as a valuable contribution to
our knowledge of inferiority signs. In this case neither
can the coincidence be denied nor the independence be
rejected. It would be just as correct to call myelody-
splasia a symptom of the naevus as the reverse.

I have barely touched on the third point, the dis-
turbances of sensibility in organ inferiority. A reference
was made to the connection with the zones of Head and
an attempt made to connect meralgia paraesthetica with
the inferiority of the urinary apparatus (Pals’ earlier
discovery of the coincidence of the meralgia paraesthetica
made it possible for us to draw this disease definitely
into our discussion). This is all the information that
I can at present furnish on this point. The description
of a ‘‘feeling of dullness” in the lower extremities, a
condition that according to Fuchs is to be brought into
close relation with the enuretic complex certainly con-
stitutes a notable extension to our knowledge in this
thorny field. To interpret this as an ‘‘organic spinal
symptom” merely reflects the author’s stand-point. This
dullness may just as well be an expression of cerebral
as of peripheral inferiority and represents either a
qualitative, or on the analogy of bone and_ skin
anomalies, a morphological variety. The results
obtained from such sensibility tests will always depend
as much upon the training of the brain and the course
of the childhood defect as upon enuresis. The final
decision always rests upon the compensation made by
the brain, and it is always justifiable to assume that
brain inferiority is at the basis of all inferiority mani-
festations and consequently of any co-ordinated enuresis.
In the discussion of the inferiority of the sense organs
given in my book I showed that the inferiority symptoms
are disclosed in the absence of partial perceptions, by
“dissociated sensation stoppages” as well as often by
an intensified capacity for perception. The latter is to
be interpreted as a compensation tendency from which
occasionally hyper-compensation arises and at times
artistic abilities take their origin. These explanations
render any direct dependence upon myelodysplasia of


1 Colour-blind individuals may be taken as examples, for some of them,
‘the Daltonists,’”” are prominent painters. This perceptive symptom,
colour-blindness, is based upon peripheral inferiority. Similar perzpheral
stigmata can be shown to exist in the other sense organs.


314 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


even the sensibility disturbances doubtful for the
majority of cases and justify the attempt to include this
‘“symptom” as co-ordinate with the others. It should
be placed on a level with toxic, neurotic and the
extensive hyper-aesthesia symptoms found in moral
insanity. :
Point 4 the persistence of an opening in the canalis sacralis
etc.—I called them suggestions of spina bifida in my
Studie—really represent the cardinal point of Fuchs’
presentations. According to my theory they fall in the
category of signs of segmental inferiority and retain
their individual justification and are independent of the
inferiority of the spinal marrow. Anomalies and per-
sonal carriage associated with the lumbar vertebrae are
frequently met with and are, at times, found connected
with diseases of the kidneys such as nephrolithiasis.
We would have to go as far back as Gall in the history
of medicine if we wished to be really fair in the question
of the origin of the concept of the coincidence of the
frame-work of the spinal column with the efficiency
of the spinal marrow. Fuchs’ observation about the fre-
quency of hiatus anomalies thus constitutes an increase in
the number of inferiority signs even if not in his sense.
With regard to the fifth point let me refer to the
fourth chapter in my Studie (Reflex Anomalies as Indications
of Inferiority), where I came to the conclusion (page 44)
that the absence of certain manifestations in the case
of an inferior system of organs, represents ‘‘ motor
insufficiency, deficient production of the respective gland
secretions and above all a more deficient development or, even
an absence, of reflex actions of all kinds. They may however
also mean just the opposite, namely motor hyper-activity,
hyper-secretion and intensification of the reflexes.”+ Let
me again at this point call attention to the question of
a defective reflex mechanism with an inferior organ and
childhood defects, such as enuresis, blinking, stuttering,
vomiting, etc. Connected with enuresis we find
sphincter cramp, ‘‘an additional sphincter reflex”
(defective reflex) and the not uncommon Freudian
adductor phenomenon that represents a partial myo-
tonia. The non-appearance of the inherited reflex
mechanism is dependent upon the extension of the
peripheral tracts, those of the spinal marrow and of
' This passage is not italicized in the text.


4


MYELODYSPLASIA (ORGAN INFERIORITY) 315


the brain. Toxic influences (of the thyroid gland and
the epithelial cells) as accessories of manifold inferiority
can no more be summarily dismissed than can the
Symmetrical or unsymmetrical compensation of the
spinal marrow and brain. Morphological changes may
consequently be looked upon as originally co-ordinated
stigmata capable under certain circumstances of giving
rise to ‘‘symptoms”. Apart from this an embryonic
character is predominant in the reflex anomalies, as I
have tried to show in the case of changes in the palatal
reflexes connected with organ inferiority.

With regard to the sixth point, the inferiority signs in


. the lower extremities, in addition to what I have already


stated let me mention disproportionate size of the legs.
The deformities that Fuchs mentions—pes planus, varus
valgus, are no more to be brought into relation with
the ‘‘spinal marrow symptoms” than are the above-
mentioned inferiorities.

The remarks made in my Studie in connection with
the summary of the traits of the enuretic-complex I
would like to quote briefly not only to show their
identity with Fuchs’ conclusion but also to indicate
their divergences (p. 76) :

‘“‘The segmental inferiority found among people
afflicted with enuresis must be greatly stressed. I
should not so much emphasize the skin anomalies
frequently found in the form of naevi or neuro-fibromata
above the kidneys, in the bladder area or in the groin,
but the inferiority that affects the whole dorsal side of
the rump expressing itself as a primary weakness of
urine, stool and semen discharge, that frequently can
be overcome and hyper-compensated, and clearly is
connected with an inferiority of the spinal marrow in
the region of the lumbar vertebrae. Frequently the
lower extremities are embraced in this inferiority. This
question is of importance for tabes, ischias, stool incon-
tinence and in the history of enuretic families. The
spinal column participates therein with the suggestion
of spina bifida or deformity, the lower extremities by
developing deformities such as unequal length of the
legs or diseases of the joints.”

Incidentally Fuchs disposes of the ‘‘ neurotic ” theory
of neurosis. I myself had passed through the same
stage before and believed firmly in the organic basis


316 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


of enuresis and other defects of childhood. My findings
however led me further and impelled me to take into
consideration likewise the synchronous inferiority of the
brain. The childhood defects thus were shown to be
‘signals indicating the as yet unsuccessful conquest of
the inferiority of the peripheral nerves and the central
nervous system.” In pursuance of this thought and
following up my discoveries among neurotics I came
to the conclusion that ‘‘all manifestations of neuroses
and psycho-neuroses are to be traced back to organ
inferiority, to the degree and the nature of the central
compensation that has not yet become successful and to
the appearance of compensation disturbances.” Thus
I came to the conclusion that enuresis was due, in every
case, to an inferiority of the organ and its nerve super-
structure and that the compensation developing induces
in the inferior brain a ‘‘condition of high psychic
tension out of which there springs the predisposition
of neurosis.”? That these conclusions have met with
some acceptance is, among other things, shown in the
very readable work of Otto Gross* who starting from
a more limited view-point and following up the work
of Anton comes to the conclusion ‘‘that in the psycho-
pathic constitution is to be found the direct expression
of a disturbance in compensatory regulations, that
indeed there may even be a lack of relation between
the compensatory appropriation of the whole brain and
its capacity to perform compensatory super-activity.”

I would like again to emphasize the fact that the
neurotic symptoms preferably attack the area of the
inferior organ and its psychic super-structure,* that they
revive childhood defects or are involved in the assump-
_tion shared also so far as I can see by the psycho-
analytic school. The insistence that enuresis is to be
included entirely among neuroses, a view combated by
me, is in the main an achievement of the Breslau school.
It certainly cannot be claimed that this school ‘‘ belongs
to a certain speculative tendency.” 4


1 Cf. also Adler, Die Disposition zur Neurose in Heilen und Bilden.

2 Ueber Psychopathische Minderwerthigheiten (Braumiiller, Vienna).

8 Cf. Adler, Der Ageressionstviel im Leben und in der Neurose, in Hetlen
und Bilden.

* Since then a number of scientists, notably J. Zappert (Wien. Klin.
Wochenschr., 1920, No. 22), have supported my interpretation against that of
Fuchs who disagrees on a few details.


XXVI


Individual-psychological Education


(Lecture delivered before the Ziivich Association of Physicians, 1918)


THE tremendous importance of a thorough, complete
understanding of educational questions and the necessity
for every physician mastering them up to a certain
point, is particularly clear when looked at from the
standpoint of the nerve-specialist’s treatment. We
demand justifiably that the doctor in particular, have
a knowledge of men, and we know that such a vital
question as the relations between physician and patient,
always break down if the physician is either lacking
in knowledge of men or in methods of education.
It was this attitude and interpretation of his rdle
that made Virchow say: ‘‘ Physicians will eventually
become the educators of humanity.”

A question that has become acute in our day and
which is bound to become even more acute in a
short time, is that relating to the relative spheres of
physician and educator. It is quite essential to reach
some unanimity in regard to the whole range of
problems involved and to obtain a bird’s-eye view of
them. Both sides overlap but co-operative work is
entirely absent.

If we but ask what purpose education serves, all the
main points involved will certainly fall within the
domain of the physician. The education of children
so that they may become individuals actuated by
ethical principles, the utilization of their virtues for the
good of the community, are regarded by every physician
as the self-evident presupposition of life. It may
justifiably be demanded that all his actions, measures
and moves be in conformity with this object. The
immediate direction of the education will always be


in the hands of the educator, of the teachers and
317


318 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


parents, but we may assume that they will acquaint
themselves with those questions and difficulties that
only the physician can really plumb to their depths,
because he must unearth them from out the patho-
logical interrelations of the psychic life. I wish in
particular to emphasize the fact that it is impossible
to cover in a short time a field of such tremendous
extent and that until a unified conception can be
reached, it is only possible to touch briefly on certain
questions whose more extensive discussion will be the
concern of the following future generations. Neverthe-
less it is important to become acquainted with those
view-points that individual-psychology insists are of
fundamental significance and whose misunderstanding,
it is claimed, will be visited upon the children in the
course of their development.

What brings the physician into the closest contact
with educational questions is the relationship between
psychic health and bodily health, although not however,
in that general sense so often spoken of, namely a
sane mind in a sane body, a rather unwarranted con-
ception. We all have ample opportunity of seeing
physically healthy children and adults whose psychic
condition is by no means healthy. It is difficult, if
not impossible, for a child with a weak constitution
to attain to that harmony expected of physically normal
children. Let us take the case of a child born with
a poor digestive system. From the very first days he
will be cared for most carefully and solicitously. Such
children will consequently grow up in a markedly
affectionate atmosphere; they will find themselves
always protected, their actions directed and circum-
scribed by a large number of commands and pro-
hibitions. The importance of food will be markedly
exaggerated so that they will learn to prize and even
over-value the question of nourishment and digestion.
It is the children with digestive troubles who form
the main contingent of those who put difficulties in
the way of their education, a fact with which the older
physicians were already acquainted. It has been claimed
that such children must become nervous. Whether
such a definite compulsion exists is doubtful. It is
however true that the ‘‘inimical” character of life
weighs more heavily upon the souls of children who


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL EDUCATION 319


suffer and invests them with an unfriendly pessimistic
attitude toward the world. Sensible of their deprivation
they demand stronger guarantees for their importance,
become egotistic and easily lose their contact with their
fellowmen, because the discovery of their ego has
rendered the discovery of their environment a somewhat
antagonistic element.

The child is beset with a tremendous temptation by
its relation to the environment, its attitude toward
school, to the frequently intensified discomforts entailed
by the weakness of the stomach and intestinal tracts
to obtain compensatory advantages that can be derived from
proving himself ill. He will, for example, develop
an extraordinary tendencye to being spoiled; from
earliest childhood accustom himself to having others
clear away all difficulties for him ; it will be more difficult
for him to become self-reliant and he will invariably
refuse to make increased efforts in all the dangerous situa-
tions of life. His courage and his self-confidence will be
shaken almost to their foundations. Such an attitude
persists to old age and it is not easy to change a child
who for ten, fifteen or twenty years had been a weakling,
pampered by everyone, into the courageous man full
of initiative, enterprise and self-confidence, demanded
by our times.

The harm inflicted upon the community is of course,
much greater than the above standpoint lets us see,
for we must take into consideration not merely chil-
dren with stomach and intestinal weaknesses but all
those born with inferior organs, those whose sense-
organs are deficient and who, in consequence, find the
approaches to life rendered more inaccessible. We
frequently find such difficulties mentioned in biographies
or by patients. In such cases the physician will have to
concern himself not merely with the psychic educational
question—but will endeavour with all his powers, to
apply some remedy or treatment for correcting defects
so that the child may, at an early stage, be prevented
from falling back upon his weakness. We will do this
all the more energetically if we ourselves realize that
we are here not dealing with any permanent deficiences
or with smaller or greater difficulties, and that the
important point to bear in mind is that an original
organic weakness, when subsequently corrected, may yet


320 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


live on in a permanent feeling of weakness and make an indi-
vidual unfit for life. These conditions become of extra-
ordinary complexity because the children themselves,
to an unusual degree, strive to make some compensa-
tions and corrections. Only a few succeed in making
any good compensations and most of them attempt,
in some fashion or other, to equalize the differences that
exist (between them and healthy children), to make
up for their deficiencies either by having recourse to
cultural methods or by intensifying both their initiative
and their mental powers.

In all these cases we shall find noticeable traits of
character causing disturbances such as, for example,
psychic sensitiveness always leading to a conflict. We
must remember that we are here dealing with manifesta-
tions of daily life which we cannot pass over lightly for
otherwise both body and soul would be injured.

It is difficult to stress adequately enough how great
is the distress and tension reigning in the child’s soul.
It is an easy matter to understand the mental habits of
men who have become useless if we suppose that their
uselessness is a persistence of something they have
brought with them from the nursery. Dzsease and the
idea of disease means much more to the child than we
generally imagine. Anyone who wishes to survey the
child’s psyche from this angle, will soon discover that
to a child these are important experiences, and that
illness in almost all cases appears not as an increase
of difficulties but as their alleviation, that it is even
prized as a means for obtaining tenderness, power and
certain advantages at home or in the school.

There are a large number of children who always
have the idea that they are ill, who always feel weak.
In all these cases where a persistence of the symptoms
cannot be explained by any medical findings, it proves
that the children are making use of this feeling of illness in
order to gain prominence, to do justice to their desire
for domination and importance in their own family.
For example, in cases where long after the whooping-
cough has passed, children still adhere laboriously to a
similar cough. We find that they invariably succeed in
frightening their families by these attacks. This would,
for instance, be a case where it would be essential for
the physician in his pedagogical capacity to intervene.


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL EDUCATION 321


On the other hand there are also parents and
educators who take the opposite view-point, treating
their children with severity, even with brutality, or wish,
at least, to give the children the impression of being so
severe.

Life is so diverse that it compensates for the errors
of the educator. Nevertheless, a man whose childhood
has been spent in a loveless atmosphere shows, even in
old age, indications of this bringing-up. He will always
suspect that people desire to be unkind to him and he
will shut himself off from others, lose touch with them.
Frequently such people appeal to their loveless child-
hood, as if that exercised some compelling force.
Naturally enough a child does not necessarily develop
mistrust because parents have been severe, to be as cold
to others as they have been to him, or to distrust his
own powers for that reason. It is, however, in such soil
that neuroses and psychoses are prone to develop. It is
always possible to disclose in such, a child’s environ-
ment, some disturbing individual who, either through lack
of understanding or evil intention, poisons the child’s
soul. Hardly any person except the physician is able in
such cases to bring about a change in the environment
either by alteration of residence or by explanations.

There are, however, certain complications only dis-
covered through a profound understanding of the
individual, which, when grasped, clarify the picture to an
extraordinary degree.

There exists, for example, a fundamental difference
in the psychic development of the first-born as con-
trasted with that of the second or last-born child. The
individuality of an only child it is also simple to
characterize. A family where there are either only boys
or girls, either one girl among a number of boys or
one boy among a number of girls, expresses itself in a
definite psychic manner. It is from such facts and
positions that children develop their attitude. Frequently
it is possible to pick out the oldest or youngest child by
his behaviour. I have always found that the first-born
possesses a sort of conservative tendency. He takes
the element of power always into consideration, comes
to an understanding with it and exhibits a certain
amount of sociability. Compare with this, for example,
Fontane’s biography where he states that he would give

x


322 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


much if anyone could explain to him why he always
had a certain tendency to side with the stronger. I in-
ferred from this and rightly, that he must have been a
first-born child who regarded his superiority over his
brothers and sisters as his inviolable possession.

The second-born always has before and behind him
some one who can do more, of more importance, who
generally possesses greater liberty of action and is
superior to him. If a second-born child is capable of
any development he will unquestionably live in a
condition of continuous endeavour to surpass his elder
brother. He will work restlessly as if under full steam.
In fact, the restless neurotics are, to a preponderating
degree, second-born children, the first-born rather un-
willingly tolerating rivals.

In the attitude of the type perhaps most prominent
found among last born, we find something infantile, a
reserve and hesitation, as if not trusting oneself to
perform praiseworthy acts that others are either seen to
do or are assumed as doing. Such people easily infer
that the whole question is one of stabilizing a situation
originally existing. He is always surrounded by people
who can do more, meets only people who are more
important than himself. On the other hand, he is as a
rule able to attract to himself all the love and tenderness
of the environment without giving anything in return.
There is no need of his developing his powers for he is
automatically forced into the centre of his environment.
It is easy enough to understand all the injury this
entails to his whole psychic development, for he thus
learns to expect to have everything done for him by others. A
second type of last-born is the ‘‘ Joseph type.” Rest-
lessly pushing forward, they surpass everyone by their
initiative (Kunstadt) frequently transcending the normal
and become path-finders. Both in the Bible and in
fairy-tales, people’s knowledge of mankind has gener-
ally given to the youngest with the greatest gifts, the
possession of magic boots, etc.

The behaviour of an only girl among a number of
boys is also important. Here so many tense situations
develop that we may assume that an opportunity for
abnormal attitudes to develop will arise; I am not
speaking here of absolutely final results. It is made
clear to the girl at an early age, that her nature is


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL EDUCATION 323


utterly different from that of the boy and that much
will remain forbidden to her that is boy’s right by
nature, which he may claim as his privilege. It is not
easy in such a case to have either praise or pampering
serve as a substitute. For we are concerned here with
emotional values that to the child represent something
essential and irreplaceable. The girl is continually
bothered, receives orders and instructions at every step.
In such children we find a special sensitiveness to
criticism, continual attempts to show the strong side,
to appear free from all vices; and at the same timea
fear lest her unimportance be discovered. These girls
frequently furnish the material for future neurotic
diseases.

The same holds true in the case of an only boy
among a number of girls. It is just here that the
contrast seems even greater. The boy is generally
provided with special privileges. In consequence the
girls work in unison against their only brother. Such
boys often suffer as if at the hands of an extensive
conspiracy. Every word he utters is marked by the
sisters ; he is never taken seriously ; his good traits are
decried, his defects made prominent, and as a result
the boy frequently loses his self-control and self-con-
fidence and generally shows but poor progress in life.
Then people speak of his indolence and laziness. How-
ever this is only an external manifestation which with
its consequences is based upon a pathological abnor-
mality of temperament, on a fear of facing life. The
important point to remember is that we are dealing with
people who have either lost their belief in themselves or
are prone to lose it. Such boys will habitually recoil
from action, are afraid of being made fun of, even when
there is no reason for such an attitude. They soon give
up all real work, devote themselves to killing time, and
become demoralized. Difficulties of the same order are
frequently encountered where an older brother is brought
up together with a younger sister. asian

Another point to be taken up by the physician is the
explanation of sexual questions to children. No single
answer covering all cases can as yet be given because
of the differences in various nurseries, of individuals and
of the environment in which children grow up. One
point should however be remembered, that it is an


324 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


injustice that is very easily visited upon children, if
they are kept in ignorance of their sex rdle longer than
necessary. Strangely enough this happens all too
often. Patients have not infrequently told me that
even up to their tenth year they were not quite certain
to which sex they belonged. Throughout their develop-
ment a feeling manifests itself as if they had not been
born like other people as boys or girls and would not
develop like them. This gives these children a tremen-
dous feeling of uncertainty noticeable in all their actions.
The same is true of girls.) There are some who up to
the eighth, ninth, tenth, twelfth and even fourteenth
year grow up with considerable uncertainty as to their
sex and who in phantasy always imagined that, in some
fashion or other, they might still be transformed into
men. This fact is also supported by certain descriptions
in the literature on the subject.

In all these cases the normally certain evolution is
interfered with. The years of childhood are spent in
endeavouring to supplement their sex rdle artificially,
to develop along masculine lines and to avoid making
any decisions that might result in defeat. An un-
certainty of a fundamental character is either clearly
shown or to be inferred from the pretentious and
exaggerated actions in which they indulge. Girls adopt
a masculine attitude and force themselves preferably to
a behaviour that seems to them and their whole en-
vironment as characteristic of boys. They prefer to
romp about, not merely in the wild harmless fashion
which we gladly concede to children, but in an emphatic
manner as if under some constraint, and do it so con-
sistently that it very early impresses even their parents
as of a pathological character. Boys too show them-
selves as if possessed by some wild turmoil, but, taught
by the obstacles they encounter, they generally soon
desist and develop an hesitating attitude or turn their
attention to girls. The awakened eroticism then takes
on in both sexes unnatural and frequently perverse traits
that run parallel to their general attitude.

Let me now speak of certain manifestations that are
commonly regarded as acts of defiance. A large number
of signs are assigned to defiance that the physician
considers indications of illness. As such are to be
reckoned the frequently found form of refusal to take


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL EDUCATION 325


nourishment and even those types of rebellion connected
with defaecation and micturition. All the pathological
symptoms which in more pronounced forms we have
found in enuresis, or in an inexplicable or unchangeable
kind of constipation, are frequently based upon some
deeply-rooted defiance in children, who would like to
utilize every opportunity for escaping from the com-
pulsion to which they are subjected, because they feel
force, in any form, as an encroachment and humiliation.
They derive a feeling of satisfaction from their refusal
to adapt themselves easily to the demands of their
environment as though this were a measure of their
importance. We interpret it as a sign of revolt. It is
simple enough to test the matter for we will always find
other signs of defiance. The same is true for harmless
bad habits like nose-picking, slobbering, and_nail-
biting. Bad habits clearly indicate a development in
a direction antagonistic to the demands of the com-
munity. Someone with the rdle of an opponent is never
absent. The symptom itself is almost always due to
inferior functioning.

It is exceedingly interesting to follow the whole
chain that is formed when we take into consideration
the various transformations in the nature of a child’s
choice of profession, as, for example, in the case of a small
girl passing successively from the rdle of princess,
dancer, teacher and finally, somewhat resignedly, to
that of the house-wife. We frequently find that the
choice of profession in the case of grown-up children,
is dictated by the desire to do the opposite of that
suggested by the father. Naturally this opposition
does not develop openly. The logical faculty is con-
strained by the pressure exerted by the nature of the
final objective. The advantages of one profession will
be especially emphasized and the disadvantages con-
nected with another just as markedly underlined. In
this way it is possible to argue both for and against
every point. This attitude must likewise be definitely
taken into consideration. But from another angle the
physician is also concerned, both in regard to the
advice he hazards about the profession as in regard to
what he says about the actual choice of a profession. He
must primarily be guided by his knowledge of the
person’s physical fitness ; yet realize on the other hand,


326 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY.


that the psychical factor is just as important and may,
in some cases, be more fundamental.

It is, of course, an exceedingly disagreeable task
to pursue every individual who has gone wrong or who
is afflicted with a neurotic illness or a psychosis, in
order to improve or heal him. That would constitute
a tremendous waste of energy and it is about time
that we seriously turn our attention more definitely to
prophylaxis. There are already an ample number of
secured points of vantage. We have for instance,
constantly been trying to work toward the goal by
educating both parents and physicians. Better results
are, however, imperatively necessary in view of the tre-
mendous increase of neurotic and psychotic phenomena
in connection particularly with demoralization. Perhaps
the first requirement would be to disseminate the ideas
derived from a knowledge of men and the educational
ideas obtained through individual-psychology ; then to
apply them so that all can aid us with their strength
and in every possible manner. The psychic anomalies
of development which at first seem but minor bad


habits afterwards lead to the forms of neurotic disease
and crime.


XXVII


The Individual-Psychology of Prostitution


I. Premises and Standpoint of the Critical Observer


In life as in science we continually discover that
the discussion of the simplest as well as of the
most important questions frequently becomes futile
because the selection and arrangement of the de-
finitely emphasized reasons advanced for and against a
position are based upon a biased and often untested
stand-point. It is then not so much the acumen of an
opponent as his differently oriented kind of interest
which enables him either to advance criticisms or
demolish them, to present data and statistics, to evaluate
or to bring forward new points of view. No matter
how great be the objectivity we ascribe to ourselves or
which we would like to retain, it is the conscious and
critical stress upon the personal attitude and the evaluation
of every pro and con through this personal perspective
that first gives us the scientific qualification for examina-
tion and discussion, just as it likewise furnishes us with
the possibility of a systematic development of our
premises. If we do not realize this then the whole spirit
of inquiry turns in a circle to such an extent that it
believes that that which at first it had merely presup-
posed represents in reality a conclusion. How all kinds
of methods are tendentiously utilized for this purpose
has been often enough commented upon in statistics.

In order to clearly delimit our scope of investigation
I wish to state that by prostitutes | mean individuals generally
of the female sex, who use their sex for the purpose of making a
living. Looked at from the stand-point of man’s feeling
of kinship, prostitution is an occupation based upon
the fact that imstead of insisting upon the manifold and funda-
mental responsibilities contained in sexual intercourse, tt treats it
on the analogy of trade as a monetary equivalent.

From this conception there demonstrably follows a

327


328 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


further inference that society has, at least for some time
to come, forced the intercourse of the sexes into definite
forms, and brought them into association with certain
responsibilities that have been tested and come to be
regarded as necessary and useful for its survival. The
duration of the marriage tie and courting seem to be
forms that will endure. If we point out the freely-
accepted compulsion that leads us to form friendships,
to found a family and the demand that both personalities
in such relations be respected, then we should easily
be able to understand how all the consequences following
simultaneously upon sexual intercourse should be re-
garded as self-evident demands of a society that is trying
to safeguard its existence by just such methods.

Such an observation is in complete harmony with
historical, juristic and sociological examinations. In
fact it is, in addition, the only attitude that permits us
to understand the ethical problem involved in prostitution,
the old, hitherto unsolved question, why a society that
tolerates and facilitates this social phenomenon should never-
theless consistently stamp it as a disgrace or even punish
it. From our viewpoint we insist that society has in
prostitution, created a kind of outlet, a special exit and escape
from difficulties besetting 1t; that numerous communities feel
themselves condemned to accept this outlet, yet because it seems
counter to certain of their goals that are differently oriented,
they find tt necessary to put tt under a moral ban.


Il. The Public and Prostitution


As acompromise corresponding to our social structure
—in the worst sense of the word, for two mutually
antagonistic tendencies of society, condemnation and
facilitation give prostitution both its form and contour
—we shall find the psychology of public prostitution
means a mass phenomena to many people as though
it were a peculiar phenomenon and the attitude of
individual people to the problem will be essentially
conditioned by the position they take toward the pre-
liminary one namely, to what extent such people affirm
or deny certain consequences that inhere in our existing
society. The position that a man takes toward prosti-
tution will give us a better idea of his attitude toward
the demands of society, will furnish us with clearer


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITUTION 329


reflection of the degree of his social adjustment than,
asa rule, he himself could give in words. For example,
the well-fed, self-satisfied bourgeois will, in general,
regard the legitimate marriage tempered by prostitution as a
‘* self-evident” presupposition in his view of the uni-
verse. He who holds conservative views and is intent
on maintaining the state of the family and, in particular,
he who is aiming at strengthening and increasing the
population will logically enough realize the disadvan-
tages of prostitution. On the other hand, where there isa
tendency toward breaking the ties of family, prostitution
will be regarded, both as to its nature and importance,
more sympathetically and possibly even furthered.

These various types of individual are difficult enough
to keep apart or to understand and for that reason any
bond they may have with society at large disappears
if their attitude toward the problems of society is not
consciously emphasized. We are, indeed, compelled in
all investigations of this type, to determine the position
taken by such persons toward the community, quite apart
from any personal statements they may make. It is
necessary to take their attitude toward the opposite sex into
consideration to an even more marked degree, for their
position toward the problem of prostitution is directly
dependent upon the former.

So far our examination of the erroneous premises
of all observers of prostitution has in the main dis-
closed three groups of prejudices, each of which when
tested by their practical consequences have led to value-
less, sterile or damaging attitudes.

The first group includes generally all those writers,
observers and laymen who being inimically disposed
to the world, in other words, pessimists, have ceased
to concern themselves seriously with cultural progress.
Corresponding to their attitude toward life, which they
have never understood, and an attitude which in truth
is expressed in their emotional carriage, they but see in
prostitution another proof of the rottenness of existing
things and they will mainly stress in what has been
called the ‘‘necessary evil”, the evil aspects of the
question, insisting upon the inherited deficiencies of
human nature, and they will stress in a hostile manner
the uselessness of all human endeavour. Sometimes
the sterility of this superstitious conception is replaced


330 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


by a violent condemnation masquerading in the form
of an ethical, moral or religious criticism. But if we
draw attention to the view we advanced before, that the
position taken toward prostitution is dependent—and
based—upon our solution of the antecedent question
namely, the attitude toward society, then we shall find
that all the paths expressed only serve a previously
biased view-point and that all the moralizing in the
world has not been able to do away with prostitution.
Even force has not been able to do it. We shall,
however, be able to understand the reason for the
uselessness of all the protesting tendencies as soon as
we realize that human society needs just this form of
prostitution and creates it from within itself and that
certain elements exert a facilitating influence and others
either obstruct or condemn. The legal measures hither-
to taken and the average morality of society correspond
nicely to this policy of compromise.

However objectively we may view the nature of
prostitution we shall always find that it can only have
its roots in human circumstances which see no contra-
diction in the fact that a woman is considered a means of
gratifying sexual lust, or becomes a mere plaything and toy of
man. In other words prostitution is only possible in a
civilization whose goal is roughly that of giving gratifi-
cation to men. It is quite intelligible therefore why
the feminists and suffragists regard prostitution as an
indignity to woman, and attack it. An unconscious
presupposition inheres in the view-point, the view-point
to which we take a sympathetic attitude and which
we discussed above, namely, the purpose of revolting
against and destroying the existing order of society
with its masculine privileges.

Because of the indissoluble connection of two
problems—prostitution and sexual disease—we must
expect that those interested in public hygiene, in the
lower classes, in nationalism, will make determined
attacks upon the continuation of prostitution. Such
strivings are particularly noticeable in the case of small
threatened nations, who are still expending tremendous
energy towards increasing their population which has
come to be regarded as a guarantee of their continued
existence. If we examine the relation of individuals in
such a group to the existing circumstances, we shall


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITUTION 331


unearth among them too, although to a lesser degree,
corroborating tendencies of a striving towards a radical
transformation of social life.

If one ask what may the history of that culture be
which expresses itself as thoroughly satisfied with pro-
stitution, we shall find the answer among those circles
who hold the present condition of civilization to be
useful and unchangeable. This is the circle composed
of that large compact stratum that has rather romantic-
ally been called the Philistines. Since they form the
larger part of the inhabitants of the city and country,
their view-point becomes that of the authorities and
governing bodies, who consequently deal with prostitu-
tion as if it were an unchangeable institution and only
half-heartedly engage in the battle against venereal
diseases. To this group also belong a large number of
physicians and fathers who in the hope of sparing their
children more intense emotions, and possessed of a kind
of sexual fetishistic conviction of the necessity of youth
indulging in habitual sexual intercourse, incite them to
visit prostitutes.

But these supporters likewise show their contempt
for prostitution. Indeed they go so far as to regard
inhuman treatment of the prostitute’s person as con-
stituting a recommendation for sexual intercourse.
They thus reflect most faithfully the psychology of a
civilization not able to understand that this degrading
prostitution supplements its purpose of putting diffi-
culties in the way of the propagation of society.

Nevertheless there always exist a number of people
whose psychic make-up calls for prostitution. We can
disregard the above-mentioned physicians and those
parents who think they are sparing their children greater
conflicts in directing them to proceed along the line of
least resistance. Just as barren do the attempts of those
people appear to us, who, barely passed their boyhood,
desire to attest the right of their tumultuous youth to
frequent prostitutes. However in their psychic make-
up we already discern elements more clearly found in
three distinct groups of men, all of whom are in such
intimate contact with prostitution that we shall only
then be able to understand the psychological problem
involved in it, when we have grasped the individual-
psychology of these individuals.


332 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


III. The Groups included in Prostitution


The three categories of individuals we now wish to
discuss are the following:

1. Those in need of prostitutes. —To this group belong
that very large mass of people of a definite nervous
type that I have described in detail in my work, The
Neurotic Constitution, and also in the Homo-sexual Problem
(cf. Urologic and Cutaneous Review, technical suppl. St Louis,
1914). I shall now give a schematic description.

The external attitude of these individuals is frequently
quite similar. Among them are found individuals given
to outbursts of rage and with a tendency to tyrannical
lust of power, men, who, to a certain degree, exhibit
great impatience and hyper-sensibility in making proper
adjustments to society. They are also characterized by
a noticeable kind of precaution; they generally select
safe professions and are conspicuous for their boundless
distrust and the fact that they really never can become
friendly with any one. Their pathological condition
and envy are quite marked. At times they feel them-
selves impelled to accept public offices, generally fulfill-
ing their tasks by having frequent recourse to deception,
intrigue and policies redounding to their personal
prestige. Occasionally by mistake they succeed in
founding a family. They generally treat their wives
and children with the most inconsiderate severity, are
continually bickering, always dissatisfied and finally
find their way back to the prostitute. They may, on
the other hand, treat their wives as prostitutes. They
either evade every difficulty or try to circumvent it by guile.
Their whole object and purpose in life seems to be the
gaining of cheap triumphs and a willingness to be
guided by a number of principles which always have
as their purpose putting someone else in the wrong.
Forever complaining and forever passing judgment
upon others, their type approximates to the one we first
described. Their rejection of society however and even
of prostitution is more consistent than that of the first
type. Their dissatisfaction extends to women in general
whom they regard as a lower type of human being.
To them as to the strict anti-feminists woman becomes a
means to an end. ‘They make use of her just there where,
because of her inability to resist, they feel that the


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITUTION 333


superstition of masculine superiority can best be demon-
strated. It is this type of man who feels the need of
the prostitute and maintains her. Among such indi-
viduals we find very prominent the conviction of the
supremacy of the sexual instinct in human psychic life,
although this is frequently disguised in rather bizarre
or scientific dress. In reality the true although un-
recognised motive for his view of life, the underlying
supposition of his thoughts and actions, his masculine
paroxysms, all merely slink around the really great
difficulties of life in order to gain easy triumphs over
persons either inherently powerless or made so. Closely
related to this type are certain vice-crusaders who,
through fear of women, erect difficult, often unfulfillable
conditions for sexual intercourse, side-stepping at the
same time all the real difficulties. Belonging to the
group of unmistakable supporters of prostitution will be
found children of good families often described rather
superficially as ‘‘morally insane” and incurable, but
who, according to our experience, really fall into the
group mentioned above, 7.e. into the group who, on
account of a latent sensitive pride, evade the demands
of life because of their own uncertainty, prefer to accept
a moral condemnation to the chance of incurring
possible defeat in the pursuit of honest tasks. How
essentially related these people are to the public pro-
stitutes toward whom they feel themselves impelled,
will become more apparent later on. This same
attraction for the prostitute is noticeable among people
who fall easy victims to alcohol for they, like this whole
group we have been discussing, desire to make easy
compromises with life, gladly discover excuses for their
non-fulfilment of duty and become expert in the art
of pushing aside all serious responsibilities. People
with criminal inclinations often show the same inclina-
tion for prostitution. Criminal tendencies we shall find are
at the bottom of their preference for evading the more difficult
attempts that a solution of the important problems of life would
involve and meeting them in their own way, which is to trans-
gress the laws of society. A peculiarly intimate connection
exists between certain forms of neurosis and psychosis
and prostitution. We may point out in addition that
these individuals, as can be seen from their disease,
possess a feeling of inferiority, deficient self-confidence, a


334 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


pathological desire to succeed, a tendency toward irresponsibility
and a preference for psychic artifices and practices flattering to
their self-esteem, just as is the conquest of a woman
although they pay for her. Psychically related to them
are those individuals who seek wives of low culture or
even prostitutes in order thus to still their fear of women
and permanently satisfy a lust for domination.

Unquestionably included in the stream of visitors
to houses of prostitution, others beyond these sharply
defined types are found. We should remember that
occasional and transcient attitudes may bring people
of a different type into relations where an intensified
inferiority feeling might then snatch at a quick, easy
gratification. In the same way a girl who is not really
adapted for this rdle may find her way into the ranks
of prostitutes. The endeavour to make other social
connections shows itself quite clearly in these cases.
However, not these but the really large inexhaustible
number of those who need prostitutes form the pillars
of prostitution from its institutional side.

2. Brothel Keepers.—People will probably agree with
us if we recognize as the basic psychic trait of brothel-
keepers, the fact that these individuals prove the con-
nection of prostitution with mass manifestations, for
they possess a deficient social feeling, an inclination to obtain
easy successes, the idea of using woman as a means to an end
and a tendency toward effortless gratification of their will to
power. The tremendous aid prostitution receives from
this type of individual cannot be sufficiently estimated.
The brothel-keeper has the function of a peace-maker
and he or the pimp conduct the potential prostitute
along the road of public prostitution, develop her secret
inclinations and kill the last bit of feeling of responsi-
bility in a girl who, if left to herself, might still waver
and hesitate. The psychic relationship with the type
who require prostitutes is quite clear. The personal
strivings are all directed toward occupations demanding
no work and the distance separating them from the
criminal type is generally small. The tendency toward
alcoholism and brutality represent paroxysms to be ex-
pected in individuals sensitive in regard to their feeling
of weakness and are consequently to be regarded as
compensatory acts of an ungratified desire for prestige.
The attitude taken by the brothel-keeper towards society


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITUTION 335


certainly contains something in the nature of a critical,
belligerent and revolutionary suggestion, and the in-
sistence upon his important rdle as saviour and protector
of the prostitute is an eloquent testimony to his desire
to play the great man. Punishments inflicted by the
court he bears as does a duellist his wounds, and he feels
himself repaid and consoled by the increased respect
and admiration he then receives from his own circle.
He has thus gained and constructed for himself a fictive,
subjective world far removed from a harsh reality and
a world that will do justice to his pathological desire
for importance. I hope we shall not be misunderstood
if we emphasize his relationship with the ‘neurotic
character.” In conclusion, such an investigation casts
a clear light upon the psychic constitution of those who,
when placed before life’s difficulties, seek an escape by
turning their wives over to others as the price of their
own promotion.

3. The Prostitute. —The ordinary views about the
motives that lead to prostitution contain little psycho-
logical data of a helpful kind. The feeling that penury
and misery are the decisive factors is untenable. For
above all such an assumption tells us nothing about the
manner of selection of those poor girls who are liable to
fall victims to prostitution. Or will it be contended
that this is merely dependent upon a lesser or greater
degree of privation? If so I think we should certainly
be under-estimating—I shall not speak of morals or
character—the disinclination felt for that social humilia-
tion commonly connected with the idea of prostitute.
What is probably behind this erroneous analysis are
those sad instances where, not infrequently, a girl under
the pressure of worry and poverty sells her chastity
temporarily or permanently, to the first one she meets,
either without taking her inclinations into consideration
at all or indeed often definitely in opposition to them.
The difference between such girls and real prostitutes,
lies in the continuous and industrious preoccupation of the
latter with their profession which goes so far that prostitutes
who have become wealthy, continue to practise their
occupation with the assiduity of trades people. What
is it that binds these people with such firm shackles to
their profession? Is it not the same satisfaction that a
business man obtains from performing his work? Is it not


336 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


the same need of prestige, the same “ expansion tendency ”’ met
with among all people, but particularly marked among
those we are accustomed to call ‘‘ neurotic characters ” ?
In the preceding section we described the frantic attempts
of some people either to visit prostitutes or become
brothel-keepers, and were able to show that these deceptive
enthusiasms represented evasions and borrowed illusions
of power. These unsocial manifestations reflect fear of
the normal demands of society, which are consistently
rejected, a deficient self-confidence in one’s own ability
to fulfil the expectations of society and finally an arti-
fice for obtaining unobtrusively a subjective feeling of
heightened personality by means of the sexual relation-
ship. That this self-enrichment is based upon a heightened
illusion of a perfect masculinity has been already suggested.
What if it were possible to find the same psychic motives
in the make-up of the prostitute? What if it is just
these facts that render a girl amenable to prostitution
and direct her to the path?

Before entering upon a discussion of the questions
and the answers that have been advanced, let me
mention another widely disseminated theory as to the
psychic constitution of the prostitute and show its un-
tenability. It is, of course, pardonable if ignorant
laymen who wish to remain true to their social obliga-
tions, picture the prostitute whose trade they condemn,
as an abyss of lust, a permanently passion-inflamed
individual. Scientists, however, who come to such a
conclusion can have done so only through carelessness
or blindness. But since this conception is frequentl
found in scientific monographs often interlarded with
Lombroso’s impossible findings about the inherited nature of
prostitution, we must point out that the prostitute is
utterly devoid of passion when plying her trade.
Naturally this does not hold when she is indulging in
a real love affair, in her relations with the brothel-keeper
or in any homo-sexual relationship into which she may
enter as she frequently does. It may be said that it is
only in this last type of relationship that her sexuality
expresses itself, frequently enough in a perverted form
sufficiently indicative of the prostitute’s disinclination
for her feminine réle. In her profession she plays the
role of a woman only for an easily duped partner, for
she herself is far removed from it, is simply a vender


INDIVIDUAL-PSYCHOLOGY OF PROSTITUTION 337


of her body and remains frigid. Thus while the man
in need of the prostitute believes that he has demon-
strated his superiority over woman, she is aware merely
of her power of business attraction, the nature of her
demand and her monetary value, and so degrades the
man to the rdle of her means of subsistence. Both
of them, consequently, come by means of a fiction to
the illusory feeling of personal predominance.

By recognizing this we shall come considerably
nearer to the cardinal point in the questions put above.
The bold scheme of converting sexual intercourse
into a monetary equivalent is as characteristic of prosti-
tution as of the two groups described above. As in
the case of men engaged in prostitution, this fiction of
an achieved triumph, of an ever renewed importance,
constitutes the reason for the permanence and unchange-
ability of the institution, just as it represents the principal
incentive for all those concerned in it.

However, the ability to transmute a woman’s body
and soul—one of her inalienable functions—into money
can only be possessed by an individual in whose psychic
life the presupposition of woman’s inferiority is firmly rooted.
This is shown in the forms of social intercourse used
and in the evolution of every prostitute. Corrupted
generally early in life, these girls feel themselves to
have been the victims of the “superior man’; he remains
the respected assailant, she is condemned. It is not to
be wondered at then that waiting for a man is esti-
mated as weakness, as the enemy, as a fatal deception
and that at the same time, it occurs to them to attempt
to imitate man, to have a profession, to give up all
feminine attitudes and morality. This will appeal all
the more to the naive mind, the more impossible it
appears on account of the girl’s previous history or
the feeling of man’s worthlessness, for the feminine
role, marriage and motherhood, to become deepened
and the expectations of society to be fulfilled. It is
the persistent trait of every prostitute’s career to obtain,
by prostitution, both an outlet for herself and that prestige
otherwise denied her. She takes up her career after
fruitless or apparently fruitless attempts at work, be it
as maid, governess, or working-woman. However, the
scheme of things she dreams of is always that of the
“active”? man not that of the ‘‘ passive”” woman.

y


338 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


Of fundamental significance in this developmental
process is the universally disseminated poison of a super-
masculine view of life. It permeates the family life of
the prospective prostitute, permits fathers to exercise
tyrannical arbitrary power and turns a wife and mother
into a terrifying example of the nature of the woman’s
role to be expected. This then elevates the brother to
an envied position and makes the girl feel that her
femininity represents a stigma and a reproach. The
belief in her own power decreases and the seducer,
often himself immature, encounters a resistless, weak
being who has grown up in the fear of man or in baffled
rage at her feminine destiny, who probably for the
same reasons—her revolt against the restrictions of her
parents—cannot develop along normal lines, a course
of evolution rendered still more unlikely by her seduc-
tion. The subsequent effects of her seduction are
worthy of mention. The inferences she draws are not
always made with the object of correcting the situation
but merely to strengthen her inferiority feeling, her
distrust of her own powers and her horror at the
feminine role. The broad easy path of prostitution
now opens before her, where, drunk with activity, she
may revolt against the demands of society, escape from goals
difficult of attainment, be brought nearer to the stress
and turmoil of masculine activity ; a road that promises
her prestige and saves her from a feeling of absolute
nothingness. This explanation may not strike us as
correct. But ask the prostitutes and the brothel-keepers !


IV. Prostitution and Society


The circle is now complete. To-day we still see
human society unable to formulate its demands with an
strictness or to render them possible of fulfilment. Ail
this is further complicated by the presence of women
who recoil in fear from the struggles of life and attempt
to find easier outlets. To this is to be added a civiliza-
tion that is more and more bringing all its ideals into
harmony with its concept of world-market and trade.
We see the victims of this civilization making a virtue
of necessity, filling a gap in our normal social life and
then perishing tolerated and at the same time spurned.


XXVIII


Demoralized Children


(Lecture delivered April 1920)


OF the ‘‘ blessings” that came in the wake of the Great
War perhaps no one thing is of such importance as the
tremendous increase in the demoralization of youth.
Everyone has noticed it and many have taken cognizance
of it with horror. The published statistics were signi-
ficant enough and their significance must become
greater to all who stopped to think that only a small
part of the damage inflicted comes to our knowledge
and that a large number of other cases are destined to
run their course in silence for months and years, until
finally we are confronted with individuals no longer to
be reckoned as among the demoralized but among the
criminals. The numbers are large and the number
that never finds its way into statistics, still greater. In
the early stages most of the demoralization takes place
within the family circle. An improvement is expected
from day to day and certain measures are applied. As
there are quite a number of transgressions that occur
among the demoralized youth that are not directly
punishable by law or juvenile courts, and although
they inflict extensive damage upon the family, they are
covered up without leading to any change in the nature
of the culprit. It is, of course, not at all necessary to
give up all hope about the mistakes and transgressions
of youth, but considering the remarkably deficient
knowledge and understanding with which these matters
are approached, optimism is not justified. Nevertheless
we should point out that in the developmental stages
of man, particularly during youth, not everything takes
its course along ideal lines, that deviations occur, and
if we were to transport ourselves back to our own


youth and our youthful companions, we would be able
339


340 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


to rake up a number of transgressions committed even
by children, who subsequently became either tolerably
efficient people or even distinguished men. How ex-
tensively youthful transgressions spread, a cursory
summary may perhaps show you. I have occasionally
attempted to make investigations in schools in such a
tactful manner that no one could possibly be hurt. On
a sheet of paper on which no names appeared, answers
were to be written to the following questions: Has any-
one ever lied or stolen? The general results showed
that all the children confessed to petty thefts. One of
the interesting episodes was the participation of a female
teacher in the answers and her recollection of having
committed a theft in childhood. But now let us call
attention to the complicated nature of such a question!
One child may have a kind and intelligent father who
knows how to come to an understanding with him and
in many cases may succeed. Another child may have
done the same thing but perhaps more clumsily, con-
spicuously or brazenly and he will then immediately
feel the whole brunt of the family discipline descend
upon him and the conviction impressed upon his mind
that he is a criminal. We should therefore not be
surprised that the difference in the nature of the punish-
ment is correlated with a difference in the subterfuges
adopted. It is the worst of all pedagogical principles
to tell a child that he will never amount to anything,
that he possesses a criminal nature; conceptions that
belong to the domain of superstition, although there are
scientists who also speak of hereditary criminals. We
have thus reached that point at which current educa-
tional systems cease to have any method which they can
apply for the control of the initial or later stages of de-
moralization. That ought not to surprise us for we are
here concerned with facts in the child’s psychic life,
whose understanding is as yet confined to an extra-
ordinary small circle of people.

Generally when we speak of demoralization we think
of the school years. The expert observer will, how-
ever, be able to point out a number of cases where the
demoralization began before the school days. It is not
always possible to attribute them to the bringing-up.
Parents must be told that no matter how careful they
are that part of the education of which they know or


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN 341


notice nothing and which emanates from other circles,
influences the child more than their consciously superior
education.

These extraneous influences that find their way into
the nursery represent all the events and conditions of
life and of the environment. The child is impressed by
the difficulties with which he sees his father beset in
order to make a living, and he realizes the hostility
of life even if he does not speak of it. He will develop
a conception with the inadequate means at his disposal,
with childish interpretations and experiences. This
view of the world then becomes for the child a measure
of evaluation; he makes it the basis for his judgments in
every position in which he finds himself and will draw
the correspondingly necessary inferences. These are
in large measure wrong because we are here dealing
with an inexperienced child whose reasoning powers
are undeveloped and who consequently is liable to make
false deductions. But just visualize the tremendous
impression made upon a child whose parents live ina
poor dwelling under depressing social circumstances, and
contrast it with that of a child who does not feel life’s
hostility so definitely. These two types are so distinct
that it is possible to infer from every child’s expression
and manner of speaking to which group he belongs.
How differently will this last-mentioned child’s attitude
toward life be, with his self-confidence and courage,
and how markedly will this be reflected in his whole
carriage. The second type makes friends with the
world easily because he knows nothing of life’s diffi-
culties or can overcome them more easily. I have
asked children among the proletariat of what they were
most in fear and practically all answered—of being struck
—in other words, of occurrences taking place in their
own family. Children who grow up in fear of a strong
father, stepfather or mother, retain this feeling of fear
till puberty, and we must remember that on the average
the proletarian does not give us the same world-satisfied
impression as the average bourgeois who is more
courageous. A good deal of this pitiable bearing can
be traced back to the fact that he has grown up in an
atmosphere of fear of life and punishment. This is the
most venomous kind of poison for developing pessimism
in children, for they retain this perspective throughout


342 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


life, have no self-confidence and are indecisive. To gain
a courageous attitude afterwards requires both time and
energy. The children of well-to-do parents generally
answered the question of what they feared most, by
saying school-work. This shows that neither indi-
viduals nor their own environment frighten them and
they feel themselves to be in the midst of life where
tasks and work exist of which they are afraid. This of
course makes us assume the existence of untenable
conditions in the schools, which instead of training them
to face life gladly and courageously merely filled them
with fear.

Let us now go back to the question of demoralization
before the school-days. We ought not to be surprised
to find, in view of the excitable state of the moods
called up by all the disturbing relations that create fear
of life, and in view of the envisaging of one’s neighbour
as hostile, that children will make a persistent effort to
gain prestige and not to appear as the insignificant
personages to which people often try to reduce them.
It is one of the most important principles in any
educational system to take the child seriously, to regard
him as an equal and not to humiliate and make fun of
him; for the child feels and must necessarily feel all
those expressions of his immediate surroundings as
oppressive, just as the weaker person possesses a sensi-
bility different from that of an individual who finds
himself in an assured position of a mental and bodily
superiority. We are not even in a position to state
exactly how a child is affected by the fact that it cannot
do the things that he wonderingly sees his parents and
brothers perform daily. This should be remembered.
Everyone who has developed a capacity for reading
the child’s soul, must have realized that every child
possesses an extraordinary craving for power and importance,
for increased. self-consciousness ; that he wishes to exert
influence and appear important. The young would-be hero
represents but a special case of the power that all wish
to have.

Differences between them can be easily explained.
In one case the child may be living in harmony with
his parents, in another he may fall into a hostile attitude
and develop antagonism to the demands of society in
order not to utterly succumb to the feeling that he is


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN 343


nothing, plays no réle, is quite disregarded. If such
a stage of development is actually reached, where
children realize their insignificance and their loss of
importance, they set immediately to work to protect themselves
—all children do it—and then indications of demoraliz-
ation may appear very early. I once met a five-year-
old abomination who had killed three children. “This
somewhat mentally-retarded girl always resorted to the
following method in her ‘‘crimes”. She would look
for girls smaller than herself—she lived in the country
—take them along to play with her and then push them
into the stream. It was only when the third child had
been killed that the perpetrator was discovered. She
was placed in a lunatic asylum. She did not show the
slightest realization of the depravity of her actions. She
cried, but passed easily over to other subjects, and it was
only with the greatest difficulty that any information
could be obtained about the nature of the whole situation
and her motives. For four years she had been the
youngest child among a number of boys and had been
excessively petted. Then a younger sister had appeared
upon the scene and the parents lavished all their atten-
tion upon the newcomer while she, the elder, was pushed
into the background. This could not however endure
and she developed a hatred of her younger sister that she
was, under the circumstances, unable to gratify because
the baby was very carefully guarded, and because she
possibly realized that she could be easily detected. She
thereupon generalized and transferred her hatred to
younger girls, all of whom she regarded as potential
enemies. In all of them she saw her own young
sister on whose account she was no longer being petted.
In this mood she now progressed to the point of even
killing them. Attempts made to bring such children
back to normal paths, within a short time, go awry,
_ because these children are at times mentally defective,
oftener than one believes. One must be prepared for a
treatment of long duration, and by using infinite tact
and a special kind of training, render the child capable
of again taking part in the life of society. But these
cases, which are exceedingly common, are of lesser
interest to us because of their connexion with mental
deficiency and we must, in a way, accept them as
instances of biological sports, for they probably would


344 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


never fit entirely into human society. But the great
mass of our demoralized youth is free from any taint of
mental inferiority. On the contrary we often find
extraordinarily gifted children who for a time progress
quite well and develop capabilities up to a certain point,
put once they have broken down they are utterly unable to
prevent a catastrophe overtaking them along one of the main
lines of life. In every case we find the same regularly
recurring traits :—a marked development of ambition although
not outwardly expressed ; sensitiveness to being pushed aside or
ignored ; cowardice consisting not simply in running away but
in sneaking away from life and its demands. From these
few traits we can draw a picture of the whole. Only
an ambitious child is capable of being frightened away
from a task that threatens to extend beyond its powers
and of striking out along another path as though
covering up its weakness. This is the ordinary course
of demoralization found in schools. This demoralization
as connected with some failure that either has taken place
or is about to take place, and shows itself at first in
absence from school. But as truancy must, of course,
be concealed, we naturally find that at first notes of
excuse are forged and then signatures. But what is
the child to do with its free time? An occupation must
be found. As arule a union takes place of all children who
have gone along the same road, all who have been
overtaken by the same fate. These children are, as a
rule, all tremendously ambitious and desirous of playing
a role, but do not trust themselves to attaining it along
the main lines of human endeavour, and in consequence
seek activities that will give them satisfaction. Some
individual is always found to be best fitted for leader-
ship and competition then ceases. Each one has some
idea of what should be done. Imitating forms em-
ployed by their elders, they will develop a code of ethics
applicable to a demoralized group. They try hard and
with great ingenuity to think of deeds to perform that
will enhance their importance in the eyes of their
comrades. These are always carried out by deception,
or hyper-deception, for they do not trust themselves to
act openly—in consequence of their cowardice. Once
on this road there is no turning back. Occasionally
mentally defective boys join the group. They are made
fun of, have tricks played on them and their pride, then


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN 345


incite them to exceptional efforts and actions. Or it may
be that being accustomed to a definite kind of treatment they are
specially trained to obedience and their task becomes one of
recewing orders and carrying them out. It frequently
happens that some one plans a specific transgression
and the younger, inexperienced, inferior ones undertake
it. I shall pass over other temptations although some-
thing might be said about them too, such as vicious
books, the cinema, but they do not become directing
forces until later. The cinema could never survive if
it were not for the cleverness and the special skill dis-
played in selecting subject matter, whether criminal or
detective, that stimulates the audience. In this over-
evaluation of guile and subterfuge, the cowardice to face
life is manifested.

The formation of bands is so common that it is
the first thing that comes to mind when thinking of
demoralized youths. But the demoralization of an indi-
vidual distinct from a group is quite frequent. Sucha
person’s life is similar to that we have described above,
though apparently the directly impelling motives are
different. Let us keep before us the fact that in the
cases of group demoralization described above, the fate
of the individuals is foreshadowed as soon as they have
suffered some set-back or expect one. The same is true of
a single individual. The simple, almost unwitting,
persons come under this rule to the same extent as
the more complicated. It is always some offence to
one’s amour propre, the fear of making a fool of one’s
self, the feeling of some decline in power or the will to
power, that becomes the occasion for a deviation to some
side-line of development. It looks almost as if these
children were seeking for some subsidiary field of action.
Frequently demoralization shows itself in a special
form of laziness, which must then be looked upon
neither as hereditary nor as the acquisition of a bad
habit, but rather as a method of preventing any of
them being put to tests. A lazy child can always fall
back upon laziness as an excuse. If he fails in an
examination it is the fault of his laziness, and such a
child prefers to attribute his failure to laziness than to
inability. Thus, like an experienced criminal, he is
forced to prove an alibi ; he must in each case demonstrate
that his lack of success is due to laziness. And he


346 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


succeeds. His laziness covers his failures, and from
one point of view, that of sparing his conceit, his
psychic situation has improved.

We know the demerits of our schools. The crowded
classes, the insufficient training of many of the teachers,
occasionally their lack of interest, for they suffer in-
tensely from cramped economic conditions and more is
hardly to be expected of them. Primarily, however, the
greatest drawback of the school is the prevailing tgnorance
about the psychic development of the child; and that is the
reason why hitherto the relations of the teacher and
pupil have been so much more hopeless than those
existing anywhere else in life. If the pupil makes a
mistake he is either punished or given a poor mark.
That is about the same as if a doctor called to treat
someone who has broken a bone, saying: ‘‘ You have
a bone-fracture! Good-bye!” That assuredly is not
the purpose of education! In the main the children
take care of themselves under these horrible conditions
and progress, but what of the gaps in their development?
Children will proceed until they finally come to a point
where their deficiencies assume such a form that a halt
must be called. It is sad enough to realize how difficult
it is even for the best child to progress, how under the
weight of the accumulated difficulties he is afflicted with
there emerges the painful feeling of being unable to
perform the tasks others achieve, and finally to be a
witness of his wounded and offended self-esteem! Many
pass beyond this stage too, but many prefer to develop
for themselves some subsidiary field of action.

Individual demoralization thus develops in the same
manner as group demoralization. MHere,. likewise, the
feeling of inferiority, of inadequacy and of humiliation
tower above everything else. Let me quote the case of
a boy, an only child, whose parents devoted great pains
in educating him. At the age of five he already regarded
the locking of chests, when the parents were absent, as
a great insult and succeeded somehow in procuring a
skeleton key and ransacking the chests. He was im-
pelled to this conduct by his striving for independence,
his will to power asserting itself in antagonism to his
parents and the laws of society. Even to-day, at the
age of eighteen, he indulges in household thefts unknown
to his parents, although they believe they are aware of


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN 347


all of them. When his father tells him, ‘‘Of what use
are these acts to you? As often as you steal I discover
the fact,” then the boy has the proud realization of
knowing that his father does not know one in twenty
and continues his thefts in the conviction that all that
1S necessary is to be clever enough to escape detection.
Here we have an example of the frequent struggle
between a child and its parents that induces the former
to resort to acts contrary to the moral code of society.
When fully grown-up this young man will undoubtedly
provide himself with these psychic aids and supports
that will enable him to transgress without feeling any
pricks of conscience. His father is a business man, and
even though the son is not permitted to visit his father’s
factories, he knows that the latter is engaged in the
manufacture of chains, etc. When conversing with
people he calls his father’s attacks upon him unjust,
because the latter is simply doing what he does, simply
on a larger scale. So here again we have an example
of the educative influence of the environment of which
the parents are totally ignorant.

Let me now give one case from proletarian circles.
An illegitimate six-year old boy is taken to the home
of his mother who is married. His real father has dis-
appeared and his step-father, a cranky old man, although
not really interested in children, is very demonstrative
to his own daughter, fondles her, brings her sweets
while the boy is forced to look on. One day, a fairly
large sum of money belonging to the mother disappears
without a trace. Shortly after that, after further sums
had disappeared, she discovered the culprit to be her
son, and that he had spent the money in purchasing
sweets, occasionally sharing it with his comrades with
the object of showing off. So here we have another
example of the secondary field of action, serving as
usual the old main object of triumphing and gaining
prestige at any cost. These thefts happened a number
of times, whippings followed, and his step-father did
not spare him. I saw the boy myself, covered with
stripes, his whole body full of scratches and cicatrices.
In spite of the punishments, however, the thefts, as
might have been expected, did not cease. The mother,
it is true, was rather clumsy, for she had made the thefts
rather easy for the child. But how many mothers show


348 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


any intelligence in such cases? The analysis showed
that the boy had been taken care of by an old peasant
woman who, when visiting the adjacent villages, had
always taken him with her and had given him some
sweets from time to time. The child was then trans-
ferred to a new environment where he found himself at
a great disadvantage compared to his former home.
His little sister he sees petted and fondled, given sweets
denied him. It is she, not he who attracts attention.
He was very good at school. His transgression 1s
found exactly there where he would be expected to look
for an enemy and appeared almost as inevitable. And
so it is in many cases. Demoralization has the effect
of an act of revenge and brings to the child a psychic
relief.

Let me again emphasize the fact that the trans-
gressions of demoralized people are not of an active,
courageous kind, except when they operate in large
numbers and this would again point to cowardice.
Their most frequent dereliction is theft, which is essenti-
ally the crime of cowardice. ’

If we wish to understand clearly both all the inter-
relations and the position of the children to society
we should bear two things in mind. First that their
ambition and vanity are signs of their craving for power
and superiority so that in consequence they try to
obtain prestige along some side-path as soon as the
main-line of development is closed to them. Secondly,
their relation to their fellows is somehow deficient ; they
are not good companions, they do not easily adjust
themselves to society, have something of the dog-in-
the-manger attitude and exhibit little contact with the
outer world. At times, nothing but a meaningless
pretence or a mere habit is all that remains of their love
for their own people; often even this is missing and
they may then even attack their own family. They
play the role of people whose feeling for society is
defective, who have not discovered the point of contact
with their fellowmen and look upon them as hostile.
Traits of suspicion are very common among them ; they
are always on guard lest someone take advantage of
them and I have often heard these children exclaim that
it is necessary to be unscrupulous, 2.e., that superiority
must be attained. Suspicion creeps into all their


DEMORALIZED CHILDREN 349


relations and adds to the difficulties of living with
them. Cowardly subterfuges develop automatically
through this lack of trust in themselves.

The question now to decide is whether this craving
for power, this deficient social consciousness is due to
different causes? We can definitely answer in the
negative for they do but represent two sides of the same
psychic attitude. The feeling of co-operation must suffer
where the craving for power exists, for a person possessed
by the latter thinks only of himself, of his power, of
his prestige, acts in utter disregard of others. If an
individual succeeds in developing a feeling of co-
operation the best guarantee against demoralization
is given.

I am quite at sea as to what can be done in an age
of intensified demoralization like ours. The correct and
proper thing is clearly to act immediately. Even in
‘times of complete peace our civilization was not able to
gain effective control over demoralization and crime ; she
could merely punish, revenge herself, frighten people,
never solve the problem. She kept the demoralized at
elbow distance. Visualize, if you can, the frightful fate
of these people, whose loneliness must in itself drive
them to crime; people who are criminals only because
they have lost contact. From that they develop into
habitual criminals. It is a piece of utter stupidity,
for instance, to herd together during examination,
demoralized individuals with their own kind or with
criminals.

We must reckon with about 40 per cent. of the crimes
remaining undiscovered. Among the demoralized the
percentage is even higher. A short time ago, a youth-
ful murderer was convicted and his lawyer knew that
this was the second murder for which he had been tried.
When criminals meet they discuss the number of times
they have not been caught and this naturally increases
the difficulty of combating crime and constantly renews
the criminal’s courage.

Evils are also noticeable in the type of attitude taken
by society. Both courts and police work to no purpose
because they always centre their attention upon questions
other than the really radical and determining ones. To
improve the situation the first requirement is to have
a different and a more humane personnel. Institutions


350 INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY


ought to be erected for taking care of these demoralized
children, for bringing them back to life; not shutting
them off from society, but, on the contrary, making them
more adapted for it. That can only happen if we have
a full understanding of their peculiarities. Nothing can
be accomplished if any kind of person whatsoever (e.g.
a retired officer or a subaltern) can be appointed director
of an institution of this kind merely because he enjoys
political protection. Only such people are to be con-
sidered for these posts who have a strongly developed
community-sense and a full understanding of the people
entrusted to their care. The essential point of my
argument is this, that in a Civilization where one man
is the enemy of the other—for this is what our whole
industrial system means—demoralization is ineradicable,
for demoralization and crime are by-products of the struggle
for existence as known to our industrialized civilization.
The shadows of this struggle fall very early across
the soul of the child, destroy its poise, facilitate its
craving for greatness and render it craven and incapable
of co-operation.

To limit and do away with this demoralization a
chair of curative pedagogy should be established. It is
indeed hard to understand why such a chair does not
already exist. To-day a true understanding of the
problem is exceedingly rare. All persons in any way
connected with this problem should be compelled to
take an active part. The institution itself should be in
the nature of a central exchange bureau which would
give information on all matters relating to the prevention
and combating of demoralization.

In addition, county institutions of an advisory nature
should exist for the lighter cases. For the more severe
forms the relatives of the patients must suggest a method
of treating them, for the patients themselves would never
be able to find one.

In conclusion teachers should be made acquainted
with individual-psychology and curative pedagogy, so
that from the very beginning they might be in a
position to recognize the signs of demoralization and
to intervene helpfully themselves and nip the danger
tactfully and lovingly in the bud. A model school


for the practical education of the personnel should
also be founded.


INDEX


Abderhalden, 253.
Aboulia, 104, 147.
Adler, Alfred—Heilen wnd Bilden, 13, 18 (n.), 22
(n.), 38, 36, 61 (n.), 79 (m.), 82, 85 (n.),
91 (n.), 100 (n.), 177 (1.), 217 (m.), 816 re
», Homosexualitdt, 97 (n.).
», Minderwertigkeit (Organ Inferiority), 18 (n.),
82, 78 (n.), 88, 160 (n.), 168 (m.), 246, 251,
310-6 passim.
3, Myelodysplasie, 79 (n.).
»» Nephrolithiasis, 79 (n.).
1, Neurotic Constitution, 60 (n.), 86(& n.), 88,
92 (m.), 100 (m.), 217 (m.), 219 (n.), 223,
228, 241 (n.), 242 (m.), 243, 246, 267 (n.).
Agoraphobia, 38, 94, 104, 217, 230.
Alcoholism, 104,
Algolagny, 35,
Alone, fear of being, 63-5, 81-2.
Alt, 300, 306.
Amaurosis, 63.
Andernach, 296.
Anxieties, 5, 39.
Appelt, 61 (n.).
“ arrangement” of the neurosis, 37 seqq.
Artemidorus, 214.
* As-if” phantasy, 76, 122, 129: v, also Vaihinger.
Asthma nervosum, 89 (7.), 104.
Autism, 67.
Auto-suggestion, 17.
Avarice, 19, 155.


Baudelaire, 160.

Bed-wetting, v. enuresis.
Berger, Alfred, 263-79 ; 229 (n.).
Bergson. 229,

Blencke, 296, 306.

Bleuler, 115, 134, 154, 246 (m.).
Blushing, 104.

Breuer, Josef, 17, 84, 304.
Bumke, 299.


*¢Canossa, The Journey to,” 218.
Castration, fear of, 157.
Character-traits, 9, 90, 101.
Charcot, 84, 304.
Child-bearing, fear of, 111-4.
Child-psychology, 59-77.
Children, demoralized, 339-50.
Cicero, 214.
Claparéde, 126.
Clumsiness, 19, 74, 83.
Colour-blindness, 313 (n.).
Community, feeling of, 9, 20.
Compensation, 224 (n.). ,
Compulsion-conception, function of, 208-11.
Compulsion-neurosis, 197-207 ; 21, 27, 61, 78, 89,
104, 106, 121 seqq., 133
Constipation, 84, 106, 213.
Contrast-thinking, 92 (n.).
», Cryptorchis in, 91, 96, 97.


Daltonists, The, 313 (n.).

Daneing, 225.

Deafmutism, 19, 83, 104.

Dementia praecox, 135, 213.

Dissociation, 21.

Distance, problem of, 100-8; 8 (n.), 11(n.), 68 (n.),
123 (n.)}, 236 (n.), 237.

“ Doctor-game,” 127.

Donniges, 128 ‘

Dostoevsky, 280-90; 15, 56.

Doubt, 215-6.

Dreams, 24 (m.), 95-7, 101, 104, 105, 110, 124-5,
130-1, 136, 146 (v.), 161, 169 (m.), 211, 214-26,
231, 232, 259, 260-2.

Dubois, 304, 306,


Education, Individual-psychological, 317-26.
Ejaculatio praecox, 87, 150, 155.

Ellis, Havelock, 217.

Engel, George, 158.

Tere; 19, 28, 40, 73-4, 82, 197, 251, 307, 309-10,


Envy, 19.
Epilepsy, 104,
Eyes, twitching of the, 19.


False evaluations, 146 (n.).

‘* Father-and-mother game”, 127, 146,

Fatigue, 106, 136.

Federn, Paul, 310 (n.).

Feminine traits in male, 19, 34.

Fichte, 29.

Fiction, 230.

Flies, 21 (n.), 158.

Forster, Prof., 202.

Frank, Robert, 294, 312.

Freschl, 60.

Freud, 17, 115-6, 141, 144, 221, 230 (n.), 295, 301.
Freudian School, 11.

Frey, Philip, 158.

Friedjur g, 112 (n.).

Frigidity, 155.

Fuchs, Alfred, 308, 310, 311, 313, 814, 315, 316 (n.).
Furtmiiller, 180 (.), 184, 208, 227 (.), 229 (n.).


Ganghofer, 149.

Genius, 42 (n.).

Gerontophily, 29.

Giorgione, 209.

Glands, 79.

Goal, the psychic, 2-15, 33, 38, 47, 62, 75-7, 100-1,
202, 217, 219, 229, 231, 289, 252.

Goethe, 226.

Gross, Otto, 316.


Haemotropia, 217.

Hallucination, 51-8, 101, 104, 170, 265.
>, auditory, 92.

Hallucinatory excitement, 155 (n.).

Hamburger, Prof., 219 (n.).

Hate, 82.

Hiautler, A., 219 (m.).

Heinze, 299, 306.

Henschen, 94 (7.).

Hermapbroditism, psychical, 16-22, 34, 97.

Herodotus, 214.

‘*Hesitating attitude,” 49-50, 103, 105, 108, 190
213, 275.

Homosexuality, 184-96; 29, 35, 97, 131-2, 155.

Hunger-compulsion, 197.

Hunger-strike, neurotic, 212-3,

Hy per-sensitivene:s, 19, 82.

Hysteria, 63, 78, 83, 104.


Imbecility, 79.

Imhofer, 303, 306.

Impotence, 40, 147, 150, 155, 193.

Incest, 85.

Individual, unity of the, 2,

Inferiority, feeling of, 6, 10, 11, 13, 18 seqq,, 32, 87,

79, 84, 100, 118, 182-3, 151, 234.

», Organ-, v. myelodyspiasia.

Insomnia, 163-71 ; 106, 176.

“ Intellectualistic,” 91 (.).

Israel, 310.


Jalowicz, 302, 306.

Jean Paul [Richter], 80 (7.), 198, 206,
Jeanne d’Are, 224 (7.).

Jolly, 300, 306.

Josef, 296.

“ Junktim,” 39 (n.): 38, 45, 219 (n.).


352


Kahn, Gustave, 160 (n.),
Kalmes, 296,

Kant, 29.

Kaufmann, 295, 305.

Kehrer, 301.

Kis-ing-mania, 145 seqq.
Klages, 142.

Kramer, Dr, 177 (n.), 267 (n.).
Kraus, 299, 306.


Laziness, 82.

Leusser, 299, 306.
Lewandowsky, 297.
Life-lie, 235-45; 12 (n.).
Logic, 24.

Love, 9, 11, 94.


Magic, 29, 30, 69.

Maun, L., 296, 298, 306.

Masculine attitude in female neurotics, 109-43.
» protest, the, 70, 109, 114-20, 133, 145, 147-8,
150


Masochism, 20, 86, 97 (m.), 148 (& n.), 232.

Masturbation, 28, 30, 35, 40, 47, 49, 75, 87, 107,
127, 132, 155, 197.

Megalomania, 28.

Melancholia, 247-55 ; 236, 243, 260-2.

Memory, defective, 4-5, 107.

Meyer, E., 296, 298, 306.

Minkowski, 299, 306.

Moebius, 21 (n.), 158.

Mohr, 299, 806.

Music, 225.

Myelodysplasia (organ-inferiority), 307-16; 80-1,
160.


Naegeli, 298, 306.

Napoleon dream, a, 224.5.
Narcissism, 49,

Necrophily, 29.
Nephrolithiasis, 309, 810.
Neuralgia, trigeminal, 78-99.
Nissl v. Meyendorf, 302,
Nonne, 305, 306.


Oppenheim, 298, 802 : 231 (m.).
Organ-inferiority, v. myelodysplasia.
Over-compensation, 310.

Ovid, 231.


Paedophily, 29.

Painting, 159 (n.), 160 (n.).
Palpitations, 284,

Pals, 813.

Paralysis, 17, 171.

Paranoia, 247, 255-62, 237.

Pavor nocturnus, 92, 251.

Pawlow, 216.

Peripetia, 108.

Personality, split, v. dissociation.
Perversions, 155 (n.).

Phantasy, 156.

Pikler, Julius, 92 (n.),

Pilz, 244, 245.

Pindar, 194 (n,).

Plutarch, 269.

Position-diseases, 79.

Power, love of, 21, 29, 81, 231, 282,
Prayer, 197.

‘*Pre-psychic”’ forms, 130,
Pregnancy-phantasies of male, 89 (n.).
Prostitution, 329-38,
Prudishness, 19.
Psycho-analytical method, 17.


Quesnel, 800, 306.


INDEX


Railroad-phobia, 69-70.
Raether, 298, 806.
Rembrandt, 209.

Repression, 17.

Resistance, 144-52, 219, 228 (n.).
Responsibility, 235-45.
Reversal, 114-21, 132, 134, 135.
Richter, v. Jean Paul.

‘*Riug of Polycrates”, 121.
Rops, 159.

Rothe, 304, 306.

Rottmann, 296,
Rubber-fetichism, 28-9.


Sauer, 294, 301, 306.
Schanz, 296, 306.
Scher er, 221.
Schiller, 21 (m.), 146 (m.), 154.
Schizophrenia, 135.
Schlesinger, H., 310.
Schopenhauer, 29, 158.
Schrecker, P., 179 (.), 229 (n.).
Schubert, 262 (n.).
S-hulhof, 60, 72.
Schuster, 305, 306.
Sculpture, 159 (n.).
Self-accusation, 204, 278.
Signorelli, 209,
Silbermeister, 297, 306.
Similarity, fiction of, 219 (n.).
Simonides, 219-20; his dream, 146 (n.).
Sleep, positions in, 170-1.
Sleep-disturbances, 172-83.
Sneezing-compulsion, 81 (n.), 198.
Sommer, 302, 306.
Sonnenberg (von), 197.
Speech-impediment, 121 seqq.; v. also stuttering.
Stage-fright, 106, 252.
Stendhal, 149.
Stern, Erich, 303, 306.

1. W., 2(m.), 229 (n.), 287.
Stertz, 304, 306.
Strasser, 305, 306.
Strindberg, 158, 159.
Striimpel, 16, 84, 308, 306.
Struggle for existence, 13 (n.).
Stutering, 19, 83, 84.
Suggestion-therapy, 292.
Suicide, 8, 78, 104, 126.
Syphilophobia, 153-62 ; 150.


Telephatic claims, 87.
Transference, 17, 42, 144, 247,
Troemner, 298, 306.


Ugliness, 19.
Uhrbach, Josef, 812.
Unconscious, the, 227-34; 42 (n.).


Vaginism, 87.

Vaihinger, 8, 126, 141, 224 (n.), 229, 230,
Vischer, 81 (n.), 198.

Vomiting, 19, 82, 94,


Wagner, Richard, 180 (n.).

War, demoralization due to, 339-50.
War-neuroses, 291-806 ; 66 (n.).
Washing-compulsion, 48, 197.
Weichbrodt, 300, 306.

Weininger, 21 (n.), 150, 158.

Wexberg, 301.

Wilde, Oscar, 211.

Wish-phantasies, 84.

Women, fear of, 49, 149-50 155, 159, 277,


Zangger, 304, 306.
Zappert, J., 316 (n.).


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
THE EDINBURGH PRESS, 9 AND II YOUNG STREET, EDINBURGH


Roy


ay.
BS
i
’


