A Candle in the Dark (Thomas Ady, 1655)
==========================================================
Ady's 1655 attack on the witch-hunters, arguing witchcraft prosecutions rest on false testimony and melancholy. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_a-candle-in-the-dark-_ady-thomas_1655).

394 A Ie ED
(Candle in the Dark:


SHEWING


The Divine Caule of the diſtractions of


t.ewhole Nation of ENGLAN Dar:d
of the Chriſtian W OR LD.


Thar is, the Lord doth Avenge the blood of the Innocent
upon the Inhabitants of the Earth:


Tuſtitia Thronam firmat.
The King that faichfully judgeth the poor, his
Throne ſhall be eſtabliſhed, Prov. 29. 14.


Scriptum eſt


This Book is profitable to bee read by all Uh of Aſſizes,before they


paſſe the ſentence of Condemnat ion againſt poor People, who are ac-


cnſed for Witchcraft ; It is alſo profitable for all ſorts of people to
read who deſire Knowledge, prof 4 2


— — _ -— — _ mma RR —
Dy THowas Apy M. A. 164


—__——.


Lm—


7 ' LONDON.
Printed for Robert 1bb'r/on dwelling in Smithfield necr
Hoſter Lane End, 1655,


— — — -» ___— _ . —— PR — - « - = Un m—_ = I_—_ -_ -


-


PE oe ear EE
| T he Reaſon of the Book.


: He Grand Errour of theſe latter Ages % aſcvi-
b:ng power to Witches, and by fooliſh imag ina-
tion of mens byains, withoat grounds in the
Scriptures, wrong full killing of the innocent
under the name of Witches ; unto which Tdo-
WSEATe | ar) and bloud-gailtineſs ( being as bad, or
S_ESSEED' worſe than the [dolatry of the ancient Heathen)
men are led as violently by fond imagination, as mere the Eyhclt-
j ans to the worſhipping of Diana, and of the Image which ( as
. * they blindly thawght ) fell dawn from Jupiter, Atts 19. 35, 1t &
| reported by Travellers, that ſame People in America do worſhip,
for 4 day.the firſt living Creature they ſee in the morning, be it but.
4 Fird, or a Worm ; this Iaolatry is like the Idolatry of this part of *
| the World, who when they are aſflifted in Body, or Goods, by Gods
th hand, they have an eye to ſome Mouſe, or Bugg, or Frog, or other
living Creature, ſaying,.-It is ſome witches Impe that us ſent to
afflict them, aſcribing the Work of God, to a Witch, or any mean
Creature rather than to God. Myr, Scot publiſhed a Bosk, called
his Diſcovery of Witchcraft, in the beginning of the Reign of
| Qneen Vilecber » for the inftrutt ion of all Judges, and Juſtices
of thoſe times; which Book did for a time taks great impreſſion in
the Magiſtracy, and alſo inthe Clergy, but ſmce that time Eng-
land hath ſhamefully fallen from the Truth which they began to
receive ; wherefore bere i again a neceſſary and illuſtrious diſ-


eour ſe fer the Magiſtracy, andother People of this Age, where [


| | entreat all to take natice, that many do falſly report of Myr, Scot)
| s hat he held an Opmion, that Witches are not, for it was neither


his Tenent, neither is it mine ; but that Witches are not ſuch as are \
commonly exeented for Witches,


Az; A


'A Candle in the Dark,
The Firſt my ſhewing what Witches are in the Scripture-


ſence, throughout the Old and New Teſt ament,


The Second Book, ſhewing how groſly the Scriptures have been
miſ-interpreted by Amichriſt concerning Witcher, by which in-
terpretation he hath made the Nation: go aſtray, With a confuta-
tion of thoſe Errours.


The Third Book, totching ſome erroneous Engliſh Writers,


who have upheld the ſame Errours which Antichriſt bath broa-


ehed tothe world;


Alſo the Works of a Scotch-man, called, The VVorks of
King James, With an addition of fifteen Cauſes ; alſo a reference


ts Scot, and alſo the opinion of Luther concerning Devils, Alſo an


inſtruttion to Lawyers,


oc rw uu” 7 id


OF p_


Errata,


*pe 11. line 3.for Maginusgroad Mazns,p. 35, |. 21, for 6 Chron. r. 2 Choe

p 22, [. 1, for Proph't?, r. Propher. ſs, p 28. 1, 23 for ragisr. mags, p, 20:
1. 11, for inchintarion, 7. inc:ntation, p+ 38 1, 15, for little 7. li:he, 1. 19, for
rax, f. tap, thrice in th: ſame page, inp 48. I. ®. for Charms 7, Charmer,p.
76. J. 33+ tor equiyocitelys 7 equirocilly, p. 77- 1- 8. for Scopala.r. Seapula,
over p 79. f-r Oracle-giver,r. couth ſayer, ſo over p.87. Necromancer ſhould
not be. T he Sceond Book.

Pap. 92,1, 5. for drew F, grew, p. 96.-1. 10, for inquiſitions r., irquiſitors,
p. 106. [, 8. ror ſuperſtitions, r. ſaſpicizns, p. 122, I. 35, for quem, F. GUM,
P. I:4, I, 15. for an 7. an?.p 429, 1, 15, or prereinatual f, preternarmural, p,
126.1, 28, for any ſort, -. every other fort. p: 145. 1. 36, for diſcovered, r, dil-
courſed, p. 146. 1, 36. for and by them calt on cn cure, 7. and by them can


caſt 0n,or inflit and cure diſcales, p.147,1 « 4+ for ſend y. teaci.p. 470. | 17,for
endicat, r, indicart,


Reader, take notice that moſt of racſe fauls_are mended with Pen ant.


Inke already,


TO THE
Prince of the Kings of the Earth.


xd T is the manner of men, O heavealy King, to
dedicate their Books to lome great men, there-
by to have their Works protc&ed and counte-
nanced among men; but thou only art able
WET by thy holy Spirit of Truth to defend thy
Truth, and to make it rake impreſſion in the heart and un-
deritanding of men: Unto thee alone do I dedicate this
Work, intreating thy moſt High Majeſty to grant, Thar
whoever ſhall open this Book, thy holy Spirit may ſo poſ-
fi 436 {els their underſtanding, asthat the ſpirit of errour _ de-
part from them, and that they may read, and try thy 'Truth
by the rouchſtone of thy Truth, the holy Scriptures, aud
finding that Truth may embrace it, and forſake theſe dark-
{ome inventions of Antichriſt, that have deluded and deft-

led the Nations now; and in former Ages.
Enlighten the World, thou that art the Light of the
W orld;and let Darkneſs be no more in the World now, or in
any tuture Age ; but make all people to walk as Children of
the Light for ever; and deſtroy Antichriſt that hach decei-
ved the Nations, and fave us the refidue, by thy ſelf alone,
and ler not Satan aiy more delude us; tor the Trurh is thine


( tor eyer,


-


B


Cl -
4 .
A \ yY
. | m—_ Vie v y_- "F ebcind ——— N & © BY py Wor 2.4» ev ”
9 WY ASA AS ret yn; BT OI ” = EINE __ ; . WA | - l DN ML LAN.
8 57 T 4h. « MAPOOS Ou Ap AO © _ ”—- 34 _ bas LO — » g ” > — Cn Oy I Ds
at WT I A ' ph i 54 7
4 *; Ad 5 add, "FFAs:


To


—_—


.
.
= \
$ f Ns ES SL Wear I re - \ 4 $ , & " >
be" " "4 pts I WE” wr *7— ug "#*" . 2a os 4 , 1. F 46, 8 >, . "we
L, , REIT 2 - OY RY SSIS» RN a 4 LS gd


©


TITEL)
Þ +


PPPPPEPS © 94 4S
SIS AE


To the Reader.


&&
>
&o


_—


I


> F you be a courtcous Readery] intreat you that
what weaknetle ani 1mpertections you ſhall
think youctpie 11 this Book from the Author
45 N*

re thercot, you vaile them by for the Truths


\ up


) ſake whercupon this Book treateth, ©
Secondly, it you be {ſo diſcourreous.as to
carp and cenſure,then ] intreat youto. carp only at me, and

- Not at the Truth, leſt you refilt the truth.
Thirdly, I intrear you toRead my Book thorow before
you caſt it by, for otherwiſe, Sir, ir may argue weakneſle
H in your ſcltro {light the Book betore you ſee the Argument,
"4 It is one of the vanities of the World to write many
7 Books, and when a man hath taken pains to write , few
_. Men will take the painsto read; which Solomon intimateth
oy \Fecle. 12, 12, but Sir, if you find no [-leaſureto read and
conſider, then I pray find no leaſure to gainſay, or to ar-

n gue againſt, | |
ti - Fourthly, tor all places of Scripture alledged in this Book,
4 i& you ſhall ſearch our Engliſh Tranſlations, and not find
them to carry the ſenſe which I driveat in my diſcourle, I
1rear you either to ſearch the Originall, or elſe to look
upon the Latin' Tranſlations of Funivs and Tremellins, which


carry the true ſenſe of the Originall, as ic was written by the
Spirit of God,


Your Frieud
i 1+ © | T- A.
z ES q | Nop ans ſed quid,


To


_—_— ©
Sn. £haf or "4
- - 5


COL ST

EIPEPS

T the more Fudiciou and Wiſe,and Diſ-
creet part of the (lergie of _


Jojpua 7. I'T.


T «ct words, Ifraecl hath finned, are not {o to be n- *


derſtood, as if 1frae! had been tree trom all other fins
but only that of Arhar,: and yet that finne' of Achar
was the ſinne that kindled "rhe anger of God againſt 1frael;
ſo likewiſe, 2 Sam. 21, 1, David had been anadulterer, 7oab
was a murderer, Shimei a rayler, Shebaa wicked man of
Belial , and ' many fins were 1n T/rael at that time, and yer
the ſinne that kindled Gods wrath, and brought the famine,
was the blood-guiltineſs of Sav!, as appearcth inthe Chapter
and verſe aforeſaid; ſo likewiſe 1 Kings 16, 30. eAhab was
more wicked than all that were before him, yet the ſin that
colt him his lite, and his crown, was murthering of Naborh,
Chaprer 21. 19. ſothat itis cafily gathered, that ſome one
abominable {inne doth ſometimes more proyoke God to an-
Ser, againſt any particular man, or againſt a Nation, than
all other finnes that are commonly committed:Then you that
ſhould beas meſſengers from God, in thar you cry againſt
ſinnc in generall, yee do well, bur in that yee ſeek not our
this curſed Achans wedg that hath defiled Ezg/and and the
Chriſtian world, look to ir betimes; leſt it be laid to your
charge, it the Nations periſh for lack of knowledg.
| Your Friend
T,. ef.


Non quis, fed quid.
B 2 A


_


4


-aMLLtadd883954398 8642344


PREFACE

: C Ince the time that I have tryed to bring truth #pon the ſtage of
the world, to be cenſured by all men, I being acquainted with
but few in compariſon of all, and ſome of them knowing my intent
z0 put this diſcourſe in Print, 1 have neerly gueſſed by common
diſcourſe amongſt them, what the cenſare of this book.will be,
that is, it will be the ſame among many, that it is among few; for
among few, 1 find ſome ſo reaſonable in their diſcourſe , that
when they find by argumentation, that there is reaſon and grounds
in the Scripture for what I write, they upon ſecond cogitations,
and delib:rate mn (ings, have yeelded tothis truth , ( and ſome
of them very learned.) Some again, after ſome ſerious argumenta«
 Fion, being fully convinced that this is the very truth, yet doe
ſtill ſuſpend their cenſareytill they ſee how it will be approved of
by others; by which they ſhew they are ready at all times, to beleeve
as the Church beleeves,and to pin their opinion uponthe ſleeve of
other mens judgements, A third ſort there arewho at the firft on-
ſet of diſcourſe, do think themſelves ſo ſarely grounded, and this
trath ſo froneley- and vain an opinion, as that they cannot
ſpeak, without diſdain, as great Goliah ſpakg to litt ls David,
and thas they beginue in fury,O groſſe ! what madneſſe is this ?
what will you ; Non the Scriptures? what anſwer you to thu ?
. Thou ſhalt nat ſuffer a Witch to live: but when they are ſo ſud-
denly anſwered, ond ſuddenly convinced that this place of Scrip-
tare maketh nothing for them, and that this their great Cham-
pion-argument, hath ſo ſoon received a ſtone in the forehead,t hey
either let their diſconrſe fall tothe ground like Goliah, azd light
21s as a new opinion; or elſe they runne away cowardly, like __
ajt


A Preface


hoſt of the Philiſtines, a"d forſake the Scriptures ( which they
firſt pretended ſhould be their only weapon to fight withall ) and
betake themſelves to their leggr,runing into ſome vain ſtory taken
out of Bodinus or Bat. Spincus, or ſome ſuch popiſh Vain wri-
ter v5 and repor t that it was done in Lancaſhier, Or 12 Weſtmcr -
land, or in ſome remote - place farre off; and that they heard it
credibly reps rted from men of worth and quality, and ſo they in-
gage me to anſwer to a ſtory, which they would compell me to be-
leeve, or elſe to oe ſee where it was done; but if it happeneth
( a5 often it doth , that I make it appear by Scripture, that it is
abſurd or impoſſible, not to be reported by a Chriſtian, or
that Iſhew them the ſtory, in any of the aforeſaid Anthers, who
have been the Authors of many vain fables, then they preſently
fly to another ſtory, as vain and abſurd as the former, andthat
being anſwered, they fly ts another, ſaying, Sir, what do you
anſwer to this? in which manner of diſputes I have heard ſome-
times ſuch monſtrous impoſſibilities reported and affirmed to be
true, ( for they had it by credible report ) as would make th:
Angells in Hegven blaſh to hear them, Therefore ſetting aſide
all ſuch unſcholar-like way of arguing, T deſire all to argue by
the Scriptures, and I will anſwer, or to anſwer by the Scriptares,
and I will argue by the Scriptures, as followeth inthis Dilems-
m1, |


s


$


DILEMMA


* ;


| THAT
Cannot bee anſwered by


VV ITCH-MONGERS.


Lutke 4. 4, 8 12.


SESSSDSDNSED
A


Hriſt who is our forerunner, Heb. 6. 20. by whoſe holy Spiric

the holy Scriptures were written, whoſe words were of equall
truth and authority with the Scriptures; Yer when he was to conquer
the father of lies,the Prince of darknefſe ( not for his own ſake, buc
for our example Jalchough hee was able to have argued by common
reaſon,beyond the wiledome of Solomon, yet being tempted, would
not anſwer any one temptation without Scriptumeſt, ir is written
(becauſe the Scriptures are the only rule of righteouſneſle; whoſoever


| then will take example by him, to try the Truth by Scriptures,and to


argue by them,as he did 1n this place of L«ke,(and not by {range re-
ports, Which are the objeRts of yain credulity Jlet them anſwer me by
Scriptum eſt,

23 Whereis it written in all the old and new Teſtament, that a
Witch is a murtherer, or hath power to killby Witchcratc,or to af-
fAli& with ary diſeaſe or infirmity?

'2 Wheeisitwritten, that Witches haye Imps fucking of their
boaics ? |

3 Wheic is it written, that Witches have biggs fur Imps to ſuck
003


4 Where


GE ILE TEA


- =— —


”  W—


Where is it written, that the Devill ſettech privy marks upon
Witches, whereby thcy ſhould be known or ſearched our? or that any
man or wornan hath any mark upon their body any more than natural,
or by ſome diſeate or hurt, which 1s preternatural?

5 Where is it wri:tea, that the tryall of a Witch ſhould be by
finking or {wimming in the water? or by bigos or privy marks, or ſuſ-
pition of people, to be fignes of a Witch?

6 Where is it written, that Witcnes can hurt corn or cattell, or
tranſport corn by Witchcraft, or can fly in the aire, and do mary ſuch


ſtrange wonders? 6
Where is it written, that a Witch is {ſuch a man or woman that


maketh a league with the Devill, written with his or her blood, and
by vercue of that covenant to have the Devill at command ?

8 Where is it written, that any man or woman was called in the
Scripture ſtrix,or /aw2ia,or where is any word of ſuch fignification or
importance, either in the Hebrew text, or inthe Latin tranſlation ,
where is a Witch ſaid in the Seriptures to be any ſuch kind of perſon?


9 What is a witch inthe ſcripture ſenſe,according to Dew.18.10,1 1


where al! ſorts of witches are nominated by nine terms of deſcription?
10 Where is it written, that there are any other ſorts of Witches


than ſuch as are there deſcribed? Dext.,18,10,11,


11 Where do we read of a he devill,or a ſhe devill,called ;zncabwus


or ſuccubus, that uſeth generation or copulation with Witches, or


V Vitches with them?
12 Itis written, Woe unto ſuch as devour widdow3 houſes, and


in a pretence make log prayers, Matth,23.14.

13 Iris written, the Lord haterh the hand that ſheddeth innocence
blood, and the falf witneſs that ſpeaketh lies, and the feer tha: are ſwift
ro do milcheif, and a heartthat deyiſeth wicked imaginations, Pro.6.
17 19,19. ? |

14 lr is written, (hall there be eyill in a City and the Lord hath not
done it? 4mos,3.6. |


I5 Ic is written, there is no God with me, I kill an4T make alive;


I wound, and heal,Dexr.3 2.39. and again, the Lord killeth,and ma=


keth alive; hee bringeth down to the grave,and bringeth up;:he Lord


maketh poore, and makerh rich, 1 Sam, 2.6,7-
16 Itis written, If ye were blind yee had had no finne, but now


ye layye lee, therefore your fine remaineth,7ohy 9.4,


%


.
%
—Y


x7 It.


AN T .


ae


oy
WE.
- my , ey” 3 "©
—W" #4 e > : I w ? 6 + I wh,
PF was \ o Pa, x" —_ = & = "2.
ON s +> RE LS»... -
hn, | C7 14 TS
y WK; p C = C4 oY Js Fu ud ® 2 :
. £ = G : | 5 -) . \ A $a Ry - \
of IT; 6. » | ' , , \ _
=


” -
. " x


17 Ir is written , Becauſe they received nor the love of the Truth,
that they might be ſaved;therefore God ſhall ſend them ſtrong delufie”
o8s, that they ſhould beleeve lies, that they might be damned that
beleeved not the Truth, bur had pleaſure in untighteouſneſs 2 Theſ.2.
I © Il 3, D
18 It is writtea,Thou ſhalt not raiſe a falſe report : put not thy Þ
hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witneſle, Exodys 23.1.
19 It is written, If ye any way atflict the widdow or the fatherlefle,
2nd they cry at all unco me,I will ſurely hear their cry;and my wrath
(hal wax hot,and I will kill you with the ſword,and your wives ſhall
be widdows,and-your children fatherlefle, Exodus 223.2342 4.
| 20 Ic is written, God ſaw that the imaginations of the thoughts of
\\3P* mens hearts were only eyill continually;$z ur repented the Lord that he
'; had made man, & therefore he deſtroyed the old world,Ge».6.5,6;7»
Therefore you that are of the ſacred order ofthe miniſtry;that do ule
to cry to the people, give ear with fear and reverence to the word of
God,as it is written in the text, how dare ye teach for doftrin, the
traditions of Antichriſt that are not written in the Book of God? |
Whether do not ſome preferre the mad imaginations of Cornelius |
Agrippa and others, before the Scriptures, for the defending their |
-Opinions?
So much for my Dilemma, now for the Text,


AY


3 BY . Bs
_ 40, ”" » fs | WH
Ca ” I = f
BPRINyzy a i
ny > ,
g _-—
FL "LAG
FCS
"*


(Fy
74


A
Candle in the Dark:


= SHEVVING
The Divine Caule of the diſtractions


of the whole Nation of ENGLAND,
and of the Chriſtian World.


Dent eronomy 18, 10,1.


2x Et the Reader take notice that in all the Scerip-
"Ke tures there is not any kind of Wirch ſpokea of
82 DS bur ſuch as are mentioned in theſe two verles;
BE 5 which that cvery one may underltand, I will

expound punCtually, not according to our

Engliſh obſcure tran(lations,but according tothe
true meanings and {ignification of the originall text, as it
was written by Moſes inthe Hebrew tonguc, and as it is true-
ly cranſlaced ( for the better and eaſier {atistaCtion of many
thathave not knowledge in the Hebrew tongue;) by 7univs,
and Tremelliw, in their Latin Bible ; whether allo I retecre
the Reader for all places of Scripture, alledged in this Book;
and here I do in Gods names and in Zeal for his truta, Re
all


WY


The Firſt Book,
and intreat him that thinketh himſelf rhe learnedſt Clerk , to
ſhew mee in all the Scriptures, tucha word as Striges or la-
mie, or any word of that fignification , importing ſuch do-
Arins, as have a long time defiled the Nations,


Deut, 18.10,17, | |
Let there not be found among you, any that maketh his
{onne or his daughter to paſſe thorow the firc, a uſer of divi-
nations,a planetarian, or a Conjecturer, or a Jugler.


Alſoa uſer of charmes, or one that ſeeketh an Oracle,or a


South-ſayer, or one that asketh counſell of the dead,


The Latin tranſlation is this.


Ne invenitor inte qui traducat filium ſunm, aut filiam ſuam


per ignem, utens divinationibus, planetarins, ant conjettor, at


preftigiator,


Items wtens incantatione, aut lequirens pythonem yant ariolus,


aut necromant is; |
The Hebrew Text. :
13172 DEP DÞÞ wi fm 122 VE 52. NY? NI


IN YN 122) af 2p? NaN Nam) *NVID) NIN)
| 2 ©


And here is the Hebrew Tex: written inthe Roman cha-
ractcr,with the conſtruction,of every word.

Lo jimatzzx ne invenitor, beca iv te, magnabir qui traducat,
beao filiunm ſuum, uubitto aut filiaw ſuam, oaclc per ignems,
| koſem keſamimt d:vinans divinationes, megnonen, planetari-
us, uamenachelſc ast conjettor, umechaſc{cph aut reſt 1gt-
ator, vechobhir chabher incamars incantatior.c , velsoel ob

requirens pythorem, vejiddegnoni, aut ariol»:, vedhoreſc c}
hamethum a#t conſulens mortuos; ſo much for the Text.


Exodus 22.18, 7
NNN 89 NEWID


Aechaſecſcepha lo thechajeh,praſtigiatricem non fines vivere.
| There


", "2


The Text opened.


There is alſo another word, Hartumim in Exodus 4.17.Geu.4t
$. and inother places, which is taken in the gencrall (caſe
for Maghw a Magician; that hath one or all theſe cratts or
impoſtures, yet by many it is reſtrained to rhe particular,and
often tranſlated Ariolm, being the moſt allowed fignificati-
on, tor Arioli, were called Magi, being counted wiſe men,
and therefore the word is uled for all ſorts of Magicians;
theſe andall other words in the Scriptures concerning Wit -
ches are conſonant to the words in the Text,


The Text opened,

He Text is verbatim, according to the Originall as it was
written by Aoſes inthe Hebcew tongue, which I will
expound orderly: and here, is to be noted, rhat in theſe two
verſes, 'are nine ſorts of Witches nominated by God, unto
Moſes, 'and the people, to this end and purpole; that whereas
God hath chofen the Pere Iſracl, ro be a peculiar church
and people to himlelt, he would be their only Counſellor, to
keep them in the way of wiſdome and holineſle, and rhere-
tore commandcth them, in no wiſe to aske count{ell of any
but the true prophers and meflengers of God, as appearerh
inthe 14. and 15, verſes of this chapter, and becaule there
were ſo many ſorts of people inthe world, that did common-
ly abuſc and uſurp the_ office of Gods Prophers: God de-
{cribeth them) 1n the 10, and Lt. verſes of this chapter, by
nine ſeverall nominations or deſcriptions,commanding them
to ſhun and avoyd them as falſe Prophets and deceivers of the
people; for it was the manner of the heathen (ro ſeek unto
tuch for counſell,)% the Lord having caſt out thoſe heathen
peoplesfor fuch abominable ways giveth his own people war-
ning Of all {uch ways to avoid them, $znot to hearken to them
namely,to thoſe nine ſorts of witches,or deceiversor falſe pro-
phetrs,or ſeducers of the people from God and his prophers,to
lying Idolatrous waies, & giveth them waraing 1n the three
laſt verſesof the ſame chapter ofall falſe Prophets wharſoc-
ver, that ſhould preſumptuouſly rake upon them to ſpzak
any thing in Gods name which God had not commande4,or
to ſpeak inthe name of other - that ſuch ſhould be ſlain,
2 all


” ow" ”
_ w_— AT w . "_ ho ” 5T—_ —w


The Firft Book,


and theſe nine appellations inthe tenth and eleventh verſes,
are not tearms of diſtin&tion, but ſeveral terms of defcripti-
on, whereby to dilcern falſe Prophets, or Witches, whom
the Lord would have cut oft from among his people; and
therefore the Lord deſcriberh them in rhe tenth and eleventl:
verſes, ſheweth the deſtruction of the Nations that hearken-
cd to them, inthe 1 2, 1338 14, verſes (where allo he come
mangerh his people to be holy, and not like thote, Nati-
ons ) promiſerh rhat his people ſhould always have a true


| Propher amongſt them ro hearken unto,in the 15, 16, 17, &


18, verſes (which although it was fulfilled in Chriſt chiefly,
Ads 3.23. yet it is meant and allo verified of all the reſt
of the Prophets, that were {uccelsively Meſsengers of Chriſt
from Moſes, till the coming of Chriſt 1a the Fleſh ) commatn-
deth them to hearken to {uch a- Prophet, in the nineteenth


yverle, but for all falſc Prophets, the Lord will have them


cur off in the twentieth verſe, and ſetterh down a triahand a
diſcerning rule between a true Propner, and a falſe Prophet
that ſpeakerh in Gods Name; in the one and twentieth and


two and tweatiethiyerſes, as appeareth orderly in the chapter,


wao ſo plcaſcth to read ir. |

Ani now to come to the Expoſition, or Intergretation
or: theſe rwo verles, Deur. 18. 10, 11, and of the nine ap-
eons or de(criptions therein contained, And firſt, for
tae faclt, .

Let there not be found among you, any that maketh his
Son or his Daughter to paſs through the Sa this 1s the firlt
deſcription whereby God deſcribeth a Witch, or a falſe
Prophet ; and in what manner this ſhould be a deſcription
ofa Wich, or talſe Prophet, thar we may the better under-


ſtand, I mult firſt define what a Witch is, and thencome ro
the matter, |


The Definition of a Witch, or a certain Demonſtration what «
W itch i ( for the vulgar capacity.)


A Witch is a Man, or Woman, that pratiſeth Devilliſh
crafts, of (educiag rhe peopie tor gain,trem the know-


ledge


The Definitionof x Witch:
ledgeand worſhiip.of God, and.from the truth to vail &es
culiry, ( or beleeving of lyes) or to the Worſhipping- of
Idok, ; tee 5


So likewiſe for the definition of Witohcrafe.
Itchcratt isa Devilliſh cratr of ſeducing the people tor
WM. gain trom the knowledge and worſhip of God, and
from his Truth to vain creduhity ( or beleeving of lyes ) or to
the worſhipping of Idols; 0
Thar ir 15a Craft truly fo calkd, . and likewiſe that it is-for
gain is proved, Atts 16, 16,19, the Maid that followed P41
crying, brought inher Maſter mactvgaint3 and chatit is a craft
of peryerting the people, or ſ{educing-therm from God and
his Tcuch) is proved; ' Afts 13.6, 7, 8. Elimas-the Sorcerer
labourcd to pervertthe Depury fromrthieFaith. So likewiſe,
Afts 8,'9, 10, 11, verſes, it doth, more: plainly! prove all in
theſe words,' And there was a naur;betoto in the City called
Simon, which uicd Wircheratr, and 'bewitched the people of /
Sawaria, ſaying. that he: himſelf was ſome great man, to
11gmirticy gaveheed fromithe leaſt to the greateſt, ſaying,
hisman4s the great. power of God, and gave heed unto
him: | becauſe thar of long time he had bewitched them with
Sarceries ; How bewirchedtheny with Sotceries?' That is,
ſeduced them with Devilliſh e&ratrs ( as the f reck.- and alſo
Tremelims Latine Tranſlation do more plainly illuſtrate): in
this ſenſe ſpeakerh Pa4/ro the Galathians 4,1, O fooliſh Ga-
lathians who hath bewitched-you; rhat you-fhould-nor obey
thetruth? and that Witch). os Warchcraft is takeft'in'no
other ſenle in all the Scripture,” it 'appeareth by the whole
current of the Scripvures;as'you' may; ſeg in this' Book. Bur
now to rerwiitd theiTexty nn I GL
eq*f? 1 115 21-7 HT DAT PIE 2 tet] fOy LIRIEALGTS:
NT Ne PHBL WE 28 IH OPS © Dene. 118, IO4xFT, TOI PTS) COCT |
T.Hefirſt defcriptionot Watch in the Texr's,) Let there |
4 not beef among.,you, any tharmaketh lys Son-ot- '
tus Daughter topaſsthrough the'fire,-» 1177 12,
. Here we muſt! noze that there-was' If! thoſe! days a great
{dol of. great: requeſt — the Rlearhen, the wo on
3 WIL


-


The Firſt Book,


hich Idol was Molech, agd was firlt let up by the Ammo-

ww, 1 King. 11, 5. and by them called M*lcom, and from
thence grew in requelt, and defiled a great part of the world,
who were generally led after ir to Idolatry, infomuch that
the Kings and Nobles of the'earth did ſometimes make their
Sons and their Daughters paſs through the fire in honour to
that Idol, as Manafſes did, 2 Chron, 331'6, and how thar paſ-
ſing through the fire,was, or in what mannerz1s queſtionable;

Some think they burnt them in the fixe, as Burnt-offerings
to that Idol, becaule it is ſaid, Dexr. 1 2. 31. they burnt their


Sous and their Daughters in the fire to their gods ; and alſo
in Pſal, x06, 38, But although that was one Grand Abo-
mination amongſt the Heathen, ſometimes to burn their
Children in Sacrifice to their Idols, upon ſome cxtraordi-
nary requeſt, or Petition made to” their Idols tor the obtai-
ning of {ome great matter ( which was alſo forbidden the
ple of Iſrael in that place of Deuteronomy 12, 31.) yer
tis notthe meaning of this place, in Dexr, 18, 10, but on-
ly that they made them paſs through the fire, as an Idola-
trous Ceremony, whereby they cated them to theit: Ido}
Molech, And this is the molt allowable Expoition;tor--b+
therwiſe they muſt have bereaved themſelves of Children ;
but we read that Maraſſes was notletrochildleſs, for Anmor
his Son reigned in his '{tcad, 2 Chron, 33. 20. but yet in
what manner {ocyer it was, that they made their Children
to pals through the fire, the {cope and meaning of the text,
Dent, 18, 10, is, That they ſhould not be Ring-leaders to
Idolatry; as in Zevit, 26, 5 ,.wholoever did give his Chil-
dren to Melech was to be.ſlain, with all that followed him
in his Idolatry; they thatfollowed him: ta Idolatry were to
be ſlain as Idolaters, but he that gave his: Children ro- Mo-
lech, ro make them pals wes, the fire, 1s chiefly named
| here, to be ſlain, as a Ring-lcader of other men to roomy
and is -1n' Devr; iB:x25;.rcchoned; amongſt Witches,accor-
ding tothe defuuition of a Witch afore-ſhewed, Witches be-
ing 1n all the Scripture-ſence-only Seducers, or inticers of the
people to Spiritual Whoredom, and here 1n the Text Mo-
fes {peaketh, Per Synecdbcen;” of oue Idol for all ;* all one as
fk 70 if


m—


_ WEET——— IRR ee WI IRR TY OOO ons


A Ring-leader to _Idolatry.


ithe had ſaid, Let none be found among you that is an inti-
cer or ring-leader of the people to Idolatry, in which fence


all Idol Prieſts axe Wuchcs, ani| are ſtiled fo ia common.


Scripture phraſe, 1 Sam, 6, 2, the Philiſtims called their
Pricits, an.t South-ſayers OSA tor the ſerting up or up-
holding of any Idol, 1s the Grand Witch-craft of all, and the
very Mother of all other Witch-cratt, andir is moſt proba-
ble the Prieſts of Molech were firſt devoted to that ſervice, by
uſiag that Ceremony of paſſing chrough the fire ; and all thar
did 1n like manner paſs through the fire did become Prieſts,
or at leaſt Servants to the Ido), for the work of the Burnt-


offerings, in this ſence is Feſabel, called a Witch, 2 King.9.22.


Why was it ſaid the Witch-:rafts of Jeſabel ? Becauſe ſhee


was an upholder of Baa, and his Prophets, who were jug--


ling Seducers of the people to Idolatry : Why in the ſame
verie is it ſaid the Whoredoms of Jeſabe/ ? Becaule Spiritual
\Whorcdom ( or Idolatry ) and Witchcraft are inſeparable


COM PAiNONsy therefore it 1s {aid, Scortationes & pre ſtigie Je=
zebele, the Whoredoms, and juglings, or Wairch-cratts of,


Jeſabel; in this ſence is Maſſes truly faid to uſe Witch-
craft, $ Chroz, 33, and the firit eight verſes, almaſt all that


is ſpoken of in Dext, 18, 10,11. 41anaſſes is {aid to be uilty ;


of in this place of Chrozicles ; Firſt, he (ct up ſeveral Idols, .


and immediatly follows the inſeparable compamons, thar is.


the Witcher, or Prieſts of Idols, called here South-ſayers,
with their {everal W itch-crafts, in the ſixth verſe of the fame


Chapter ofthe Chronicles, W ny do Idols, and Witch-crafts,.


and Witches come inrolling together fo thick in this place? -

The firſt Reaſon is, becaute as the ſetting up of an Idol is
Witch-craft, ſo where Idols are, there muſt. necds bee
Witches ; namely South-ſaycrs, or Idol Prieits, or cl{e the


Idol of it ſelf can do nothing; as when it. is ſaid in 2.King...


I, 2, Ah:ziah cnt to inquire of the god of Ekrox , it is not to
be ſuppoſed that there could be an anſwer given by rhe bare
Idol ( being bur a ſtock ) but the aniwer or Divination mult.


come from the Prieſts and South-{ayers, that were there be-


longing to that Idol, and upholding it.


The fecond Reaſonis,. becauſe as I haye faid before of the
nine


i5-


The Firſt Book,


nine ſevera) appellations of Witches 1n Deme, 18, 10, 11,
that they are not terms of diſtin&ion bur of deſcription ;-ſo
here in the 2 Chron, 33. all that is ſaid of —_—_ in the {e-
ven firlt Verſes of the Chaprer, is not to be underſtood as ex-
preſſions of leveral diſtin& rhings done by Maraſſesbur a full
expreſſion of one thing by ſeyeral terms of deſcription, ex-
preſſing fully that one aft of Xanafes, rhart is, firit he {et up
leveral Idols, as inthe third, fourth, and fifth, and the be-
ginning of the fixt verſe of the Chapter doth appear ; and
then it tolloweth thar he uſed choſe things thar did neceſ{a-
rily belong to the Idol; without which the Idol could be of


'no force, or requeſt ach, it Ig and that was as ap-


peareth in the {1xth verſe, he uted Divinarions, and Conye-
QAurings, and Juglings, and fer up an Oracle, and Sourh-
ſayers, (the Laune tranſlations) Er divinationibus, & cons
[ett ationibus, & preſtigiis uſus eſt, inſtituitq ; pythonem & a-
riols ) (o all that Alaneſſes did, was {etting up of Idols with


their adjunRs, and though the Idols indeed were ſeveral and


various, yetall was one aCt, tending only to rhe making up
of one compleat Idol-houſe, that was the Houſe of God, vere
the fourth, and ſeventh, he abuſing ir, and making it an
Houſe of Idols, this one at produced one effect ; that was,
he made J#dab and Feruſalem go aſtray to Idolatry, as ap-
peareth verle nine , but Jeſiab deſtroyed the Idols, with
their AdjunSats, Oracles, and South-fayers, 2 Kg. 23, 24.
being 14ol Prieſts.

Somuch tor the firſt and grand deſcription of a Witch in
the text, that 1s, a Ring-leader ro Idolatry, intimated in
theſe words, Let there not be found among yon, any that maketh
his Son or his Daughter to poſs through the fires this firſt de-
{cription being rightly underſtood, rhe other eight-will bee
rhe more cafily <3? mea being bur appurtenances to the
firſt, or rather Monlters in the belly of the firſt.

Now tolloweth the ſecond Scion, or appellation of
a Witch, that 1s, Ler there not be found among Jon, any that u-
ſeth Divinations,

To uſe Divinations was to take upon them to tell things to
come, and things hidden, winch things could not be done by


any


U Dieviner.

any but by God, and his Prophets as'appearethy 7/a. 41. 23.
Shew whart-isto come after, that we the Br that yec arc
gods ;. - yet as Gods Prophets could rell things to come, {o in
the ſccond of Kingsy'6. 12. Eliſhs the Propher could-rell the
King of 1/rae! what was ſpoken inthe ſecret Chamber of the
King of 4ram; 'and akhough God- wonld have his-peopte
Enow, that none could do theſe things truly bur himlſclt, by
his Prophets, and theretore hee would: have his people to
hearken after gone bar his Prophets, in enquiring of thinge
to come, or things hiddcn; yer many falſe Prophets did
cake upon them to tell ſuch things meerly to ſeduce the peo-
ple for-gain, pretending that they could do it, either by ver-
cuc of their Idol, and ſo led the people a whoring after them,
aSinz King. 1,2, Ahaziah {ent tocnquire of the god of Ek-
ron, and feremiah, 23, 13, they Propheticd by Bal, and (c-
duced my people,

Or elle talſly pretendingthemſelves to be Gods Prophets,
and {0 1nafair pretence, ro peryertthe people from the truth
10. lycS, as Micha 3, 11, Quorum Prophete, pecunia divi-
zazt, Whoſe Prophets do give Divinations for money ; and
Fer. 23-21, 1have not ſpoken to them, and yet they have Pre-
pheſied ſaith the Lord, Inthis ſence Samwel (aid to Saw, Ke-
bellio eſt ficut peccatum divinationis, Rebcllion is as the 111 of
divination, or according to our Engliſh tranſlations, « as the
(in of Witchcraft, 1 San, 15. 23; and tor theſe diyinations,
and falſe Prophefies they had this colour, That' whereas
Goddid uſually ſpeaktohis Prophets in Dreams, and Vitt-
ons of the night, as appeareth, Numb, 12, 6, theſe Witches,
or tallc Prophers pretended that they had alſo Dreamed, and
had ſeen V iftons, thatſo they italia bewuch and {ſeduce the
people trom Gods way, Dexr. 13.1.5, and alſo Jer.23,” 25.


T hey prepheſi: _ in my name, ſaying, I havt dreamed, 1 have


dreamed 3, andvetl,27, Think they to cauſe my people ſors for-
get my Name by their Dreams, which they tell every one 'to bis
neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal ?
nor but that Dreams wereto be declared and'regarded, it it
were truly done without deceit, for it followeth-in the twen-
ty cighth verſe, - He that wy Dream, let him tcll a a)

'c


17


The Firſt Book,


he that hath my Word, let him ſpeak, my Word faithfully ; but
theſe Dreamers) or Witches, did falſly pretend Dear, and
Viſions, that they might ſeduce the people, verl. 32. theſe
were the right Enthulialts of the Heathen, this was one great
pracble of the Prieſts of the great Idol Apolls, that was called
the Oracle of «Apello, they, would lye down behind the Al-
tar, and {kcep for a time, and then make pcople beleeve they
had ſecna Viſion, whereby they could derermine their mat-
ters, and accordingly gave their Divinations, or Oracles ;
many other colours, or pretences, had their Diviners,for their
cheating Witch-cratt, or Divanations, as they would make
the people beleeve they could ralk with the ſpirit depar-
ted of wi dead, and {o know things hidden, or things to
come, bur oftthat more in the ninth deſcription, and indeed
moſt of rhe following deſcriptions, or appellations in the
text werelinken tothe ſecond, to lying Divinations, as alſo
linked to cach other, yer becauſe the manner of their a&ions
were various, the Lord here deſcribeth them according to
the variety of their ations, all tending toone end, and that is
to oppoſe the way of God, and the Prophets for gain,


A Onueſtion reſolved,


QEcing itis manifeſt by the Scripturcs, as appeareth in this
({ccond deſcription ot a Witch, thar hethat ufeth Divina-
tions is a Witch, and one main pretence in giving Divinati-
ons, Was Drcams and Viſions of the night, then un may bee
omg that hethar telleth a Drcam to his neighbour, there-
ro bec ecnſured as a Witch, or clſc mult needs bee a Pro-
er. SN OP TRAR
E To this it-is anſwered, That Dreams in the Scripture do
appear to. be of. two forts, the firſt ſort were Prophetical ,
wherein men had a dire&t conumand trom God ta go and
Propheſie tothe people, and theſe Dreams came, ordinarily
to the Prophets,, upon ſo many ſeveral occaſions as were
needtul-for. the Prophers to admoniſh the people, to ſhew
them their fins» and declare the truth to them, and for rhe
| declaring


orce-telling thingsro come, uſcth Divinations, and ought.


AM Dirviner.

declaring of future things to'rhe people, either concerny 1s
Judgements of God that would come upon them for their
{ins it they did nor amend, or concerning ſome great work,
that God would do for his peoplethar feared himy an theſe
Dreams were proper tothe Prophets only, N#mb.12,6, and
they that did falſly pretend ſuch Dreams, and Inſpirations, to
dilemble the Prophets, to ſeduce the people to Idolatry were
Witches, or falſe Prophets, according to this ſecond deſcrip-
tion of uſing lying Divinations , and ought to bee (lain,
Dent. 13,1.5.

Secondly, the ſeconl4 fort of Dreams that we read of in the
Scriptures were warning Drcams, whereby men were fore-
warned of things ro come, but were not thereby ſent to Pro-
pheſie to the people by ſpecial command from God, bur were
torewarned ; Firſt, tor the avoyding of danger that might
come upon them, or others whom this Dream concerned, or


at the leaſt chat they might know the danger before it came, |


and theſe Dreams were common to many as well as to the
Prophets, both to the godly and ungodly, Mar. 2. 12,13 and
27, I9, Gen, 40, 8, and Chap. 41, Daz. 2, 1. Secondly, theſe
ſorr of warning Dreams fore-ſheweda bleſſing upon the god-
ly to encourage them, Gez. 37. 5.9. and for theſe ſorts of
Dreams, we read by theſe examples in the Scriptures, thar
they are common to all forts of pcople, and uſetul either to
hcar, or todeclare, but whoſoever did declare a Prophetical
Nream, was either a rrue Prophet indeed, or clic a lying En-
chuſialt, or falſe Prophet ( ſuch as were che Idol Pricits of
the Heathen) to {educe the people, as isſhewed in the Scrip-


rures bcfore mentioned inthis ſecond deſcription; aud alſo 1n


Jeremiah 22.16, 25.

And whereas ſome may queſtion whether Dreams ate now
ſent by God to forewarn, as inancient times, ſo longas we
haveno Scripture to the contrary ( but rather for it ) wee
may not deny it; and do al{o finde by common experience
thar ſome have dreamed of their Childe falling into rhe fire,
and ſome into the water, and of other ſeveral dangers con-
cerning themſelves, and others, of which ſome haye come to
pals that might have been prevented, by prayer and dili-


19


16 The Firſt Book,


oent care, I know a man that was fore-warned in a Dream
of theſe Wars in England before they began, ( or wereslike
to bee) but Propherical Dreams are not uſual in theſe


days.

Fer here it may further be noted, rhat in.ſome caſe a man
may alſo declare a Prophetical Dream, and yer be neither a
true Prophet, nor a Witch, or falſe Prophet; and that hath

ſometimes been (een. by experience in ſuch as have been
troubled in their phantaſies through diſtemper of body, or
other diſtraing occaſions hurting their phantaſic, they ima-
ginc that God hath {poken to them by Dream, or Viſion,
or Voyce heard, or by an Angel, and hath bidden them
go Propheſic ſuch and fuch things, and theſe are to be cha-
xitably judged of, and not raſhly cenſured ; this diſtemper
of body may be diſcerned by the cftefts, that is, Death, or
Sickae(s following within a ſhort time after, it not prevented

| byche Phiſiciansz alſo troubled phanſic by outward diſtra-
\ tions may be diſcerned by the fore-going occaſions that
have troubled them, and hurt their phanties; and here is
required great diſcretion in all that ſhall ſee, or hear a Man or
Woo declarc a Ig trom God Ts he thinketh) for
the intent of a falſe Prophet is only to deceive, or ſeduce for
advantage of gain or preterment ; ſome have written con-
ccraing Dreams that ſome Dreams are Diabolical, which
are only Philoſophical Notions, having no grounds in the
Scripture. And whereas it is manifeſt 11 the Scriptures. that
God (pcaketh ro men by Dreams, and interpretations of
Dreams are only by the Spirit of God, Gey, 40, 8 I think it

- preſumption and Phantaſie, to adde any ſuch diſtinftion of
Dreams, except Enthuſtaſmes, which although they arc
of the Devil, yetare no real Dreams, but Lycs, for the En-
thuſiaſts did falſly pretend that they had Dreamed, Fer, 23,

25, 27. 32. |

Nana Dreams I deny-noty. which come from the nwwl-
titude of buſineſs, and trom the-natural diſpoſition of the bo-
dy, bur none of theſe are any way.concerning future events,
bur are only the objefts of our Natural afte&tions, and al-
though ſome of theſe are lafciyious Dreams, ſome Murthe-


rous


A Planetarian.


rous, forme Covetous, and inthat ſence may be called Dia-
bolic al ; yet in theſe Dreams are nothing beſides Nature,
neither hath che Devil any turther a& in them than in our
corrupt {tragling afte@ions in rhe day time ; and though our
thoughts arc ſometimes worle inthe night than inthe day, ic


is becaule our afteStions are bultcd inthe day with other ob- -


jects preventing ſuch thoughts, =_
So much for the Second deſcription of a Witch in the
text thar is an uſer of Divinarions or talſe Propheſies,
The Third Deſcription,


He Third deſcription of a Witch in. the text, D em:, 18,


youa Planetarian ; ſome have thought by a Planetarian here


15 meant ſuch a one as did obſerve the courſe and influence.


of the Planets,. and from thence | cs prediCtions..of furure
events, that theſe were unlawful Arts, and ought not to be
praiſed, and therefore have aoſolutely condemned judici-
all Aſtrology, bur if they be right in this opinion, how then
do they an{wer to Pſal, 19.1, The: Firmament ſheweth the
works of his hanas ; this is notto be underlitood only. of the
making of the Canopy of Heaven, tor then it had been (aid


the Firmament is the works of his hands (he that liketh nor.


this expoſition, let him read Corneline Gemma . de. natura Coe
met ) and God himſelt ſpeaketh of the influence of the Hea-
vens, Job 38, 31, Canſt thou reſtrain the ſweet influence of the
Pleiades, or canſt thou looſe the bonds of Orion? &c, And where-
as {ome have ſaid, That the Star that ſhewed the birch of
Chriſt, Mat. 2. 2. was Miraculous, and not any Natural
Star, how.then could the Wiſe men or Aſtrologians ſee the
{ignificationof that Star by their Science of Aſtrologie,where-
as if it reacheth not to the knowledge of turure contingen-
fics, . then much leſs ro the knowledge of things (ſupernatural
or miraculous, and yer they ſaw that the Stars appearance
did {ignific the birch of thar great King (although I deny
not, that the motion of the ſtar in rhe ninth verſe might bee
muraculous.)And to come farther,74dg.5.20.theStars in their


Rampires fought againſt Siſera ; it is not ſpoken of any thin /
: D ad.


3


10,11, is Planetarim, let there not be found among


2


The Firſt Book,


beyond nature, but the Prophethdid obſerve that the ſtars in
their natural places fought againl(t Siſers, allo Gen. 1, 14, God
made the Lights of Heaven to be ſigns for ſea ſons, and for days,
axd for years ; it {cemerh then thar judicial Altrology is not
condemned in the Scripture, it 1: be not abuſed ; what then
was a Planetarian in the {ence of the text? and why were
they forbidden by God, and fer in the Caralogue of W utches ?
To this it is anſwered, That under the colour of Aſtrologie
theſe Planctarians that arc here forbidden did harbour them-
ſelves, that becauſe there was ſomewhat in that Science for
the knowledge of fome future things, therefore in the pre-


rence of their knowledge in that Science they did rake upon


them to compare themſelves with the Prophets, and to draw
the people atter their uncertain Predi&ions, as it they had
becnequal withthe Prophets, and many ot them having no
knowledge art all in that Science, yet did under the colour
thereof harbour their deceitful Oracles, or Divinations, a-


PV ro the Planets, calling them gods, as Mars


the god of Warre, Venm the goddeſs of Beauty, 8c. and did


| alſo aſcribe ſo much to their influence, as they beleeyed no


power aboverhem, and ſo drew the people a whoring after
them, to make them forget God rhe Author of all things,
and to Deifie the Creature; and theſe Planetarians being
meer Narturaliſts, and ts, yr power aboye the Pla-
nets, would bear a breaſt againſt rhe Prophas, and under-


 Taketo do thoſe things that were only proper ro the Pro-


phers to do, and could be done by no other power but by the
Spiric of God, Das, 2, 2, 3,4. they would undertake the in-
terpreration of Dreams; 1t the dreams were related to them,
nevertheleſs the cxpounding of dreams 1s of God only, ver.
27,28, andGer. 41. 16. and 40, 8. And whereas God did
pur 1nto the heart ofNebuchadnezzargto put them to difhculr
rask, rheyſaid nomanuponearth was able todoit, Daz.2.10,


Inferring that the Prophersthemſelves could dono more than


ary ycaſo did they deific the Planets, that they aſcribed
tothem to be the gods of the ſeven Days of the Week, and
cauſed the people to worſhip them and bring their daily
oblations ro them, andto keep Holy days to them, from
thenames of which Planets the days do take their nominati-


ONs ;


A Planetarian.


ons ; as Sunday from the Sun, Monday from the Moony &c..
andinother Tongues is more maniteſt tor every day;zwhich it
it betrue that rhe Planets have their ſeveral influences upon
the ſeveral days of the Week, yet their wickedneſs was in
denying God that made the Heavens, and their Hoſt, andin
deitying the Creature ; and for this they are deſcribed am
Witches, or ſeducers of the people to Idolatry, andthisIdo-
latry God warneth his people to avoyd, Dent. 4. 19. Take
heed when thou lifteſt up thine eyes to Heaven, and ſeeft the Sun
and the Moon, and Stars, with-all the Hoſt of Heaven, ſhowlde
be driven to worſhip them and ſerve them, which the Lord thy God
hath diſtr:buted to all people under heaven, Although God had
givenand diſtribured their influence to all people under Hea-
ven» yet men may not worſhipthem, but worſhip God that
madethem.Solikewiſe Dext.17.3.alſothis Idolatry part of the
Iſraelites were defiled with, Jer. 44 17. they burnt Incenſe,
and poured Drink-offerings tothe o_— of Heaven,. or ( as:
itis in the Original ) to the works of Heaven, that is,to the
Planets ; of this 1delatry 706 cleareth himſelf, Fob 31, 26, If I
did behold the Sun when it ſhined, or the Moon walking in
her brightneſs (that is, it I did behold chem with adoration )
this had been iniquity, for I had demied the God above, as.
followeth ver. 28. alſo 2 Chrox.. 33. 5. This was part of
Manaſſes Wirchcraft, he built Alcars to all the Hoſt of Hea-
ven, and made the pcople 80 altray, verſ. 9. Ando for this.
Third deſcriptionota Witch inthe text, a Planetarian, that


15, 'that under the colour of Aſtrologie {educeth the people |


to lying vanities, or Divinations, cauſcth them to deifie
and Idolize the Planets, or thar|boaſteth himſelf in his Pre-
dictions againſt the Prophets, crying peace when the Pro-
phers Propheſie deſtruttion, 1ſa. 47, 13, Let thy Aſtrologi-
ans ſtand upthar do view the otars, and do make known
their monthly Prediftions, and fave thee from the things.
that ſhall come upon thee, I might quote alſo ſome prophane
Writers ofthis ſort, who areſeducing Witches, becauſeun--
der pretence of Aſtrologic they teach things beyond the
intent and ſcope of that, or any lawful Science. As Julins:
Alaternw hath deyillſhly written,. That he that is born when:

; Saturn.


27


24 The Firſt Book,

SAa#rn is in Leone, ſhall live longs and go to Heaven when he
dycth; and ſo Albwmazar lain, Who {o praycth to. God
when the Moon 1s 1n Capite draconis, {ball Obtain his Prayer.
Thcſe Planerarians, for theſe and the like 1mpious deyices,in
+45 wc ofa lawtu] Scicncc, arc deſcribed in the text among

Wi |
' Allrologians have alſo annexcd to their Science of Aſtrq-
logic, EO Rhagnortcy the Cxleſtial Bodies, as
they fay, having fixed their Charadters upon the interiour
Bodies of men ( as he that rcadeth their Books may ſee, with
the reaſon thereof ) and therefore thele Arts together with
Altrologie do ſerve them ro make their Prognoſticks concer-
- ningtheltrength, health, diſpoſition, and ſeveral cycnts of
any mans lite ; which Prognoſticks do often happei: true,
becauſe Narturescoutle may be probably conjectured by the
courſe and character of the Planets (although rheſe Arts arc
much abuſed by wandring Gyplies, who under colour of
{uch knowledge, do commonly cheat filly people, and alſo
rob their pockets, when they are viewing thew hands. and
face to tell them their Fortunes; ) now herein was one diffe-
rence between Planctarians, or Aſtrologians, lawtul or un-
lawtul in the Scripture ſence, the lawful Aſtrologian forc-
telling probable eyents,fore-ſcen by Natural cauſes upon any
pcrſonyzor Nation; as Deborah obſerved the Stars concerning
Sicera and his Army (although ſhe knew what ſhould come
co pals more certainly by the Spirit of Prophetic than by the
Stars,) The uwlawtul Aſtrologian, or Planctarian torc-
relling things not only probably, bur certamrand necc(larily
,to come to paſs, as it there were ſuch ſtrong mcelination, un-
flucace, and co-aTton 11 thoſe Celeſtial Bodies, asthar our
_ earthly bodicscauno way avoyd trhemy and as if God hath
No Decree but what may be torc-ſcen i11 rhe Stars. Bur the
Scripture, and truc Religion teacherh us otherwile, tor as a
man may not be {o ſtupid as to deny the influence of the
gtars, {o no manmay be ſo Arhciitical as to deny that Di-
vine Providence ruleth all interiour bodies ; not only i1
. that ſenſe, that Aſtra regunt hamines & regit aftrs Dems,
{wivch is the Aſtrologians Creed) but beyond the influence
of


4 (onpRurer.

ofthe Stars; otherwiſe it were if vain to pray to God for
recovery from ſickneſs, or loſs, or calamity, becanſe haply
the Stars threaten death, or ruine; in vain it were then for:
the Elders of the Church to pray over the ſick, with hope ot
their recovery, except the Stars ſay, Amen. In vaiait were
then for a Nationto faſt, and pray tor Peace when the Stars.
threaten War. In vainit were for a man tohope for proſpe-
rity in all his undertakings, by walking in Gods way (as is
taught in Dem, 29. 9.) becaulcthe Stars in that mans Nati-
vity threatenevil, and no proſperity to the whole courie of
that mans lite, But as a skilful Phyttian may by good Phi-
fical applications of remedies TN the days of a man,
upon whom the Stars have a bad influence, and threaten
death ( which Aſtrologians themſelves confeſs ) how much
more may true Religion in a. man. obtain a ble for
health, and proſperity, and peace, beyond what the Stars
do promiſc? which isrche whole diſcourſe of Lev:s. chap. 26.
therefore it mult nces follow that Grace may turn away the
bad influence, and Vice may hinder the good influence of
the Stars from a Man, or a Nation; and they that were ſuch


meer Narturalits, as that under colour of their ſcience in


Aſtrologie they taught the people otherwiſe, rhey were (c-
ducing Witches ; aud they that did feck to fuch tor Divina-


tions, and did not regard Divine Providence to rule beyond.


the Stars influence, and {oneglected.ſecking to God in time
of trouble, they were Idolaters bewitched,

Another way might Aſtrologians become Witches, thar
is, if an Aſtrologian finding that many of his Progaoſticks
happened true, and did thereby diſſemble Propheſ1c, pre-
rendingthathe did by Revelation, or prophertical Inſpirati-
oft fore-tcll thoſe things which yer he did only conjeRurall
foreſee by the Stars, that pretence or difſſimulation 9
him a Watch, fitto ſeduce and miſ-lead the people. Somuch
for the Third deſcription.


The F ourth Deſcription.
T He Fourth deſcriprion, or term of deſcription; of a
Witch in the text is C CE 6s a Conjecturer ; that bars

ac


25


The Firſt Book,


fach a one that had ſome particular prerence or colour where-
upon he grounded his Divinations, ——__ people be-
leeve that thereby he could Drvine or Prophetic unto the peo-
ple; whereas yer it Was altogether a coulening impoſture, or
uncertain guefiugy or conjefturing, and according to that he
15 herc deſcribed by Moſes as a Wirch ; wWhatthat Impoſture
was, Expolitors have givenſeveral gloſles, one Expotttion is,
Thar they obſerved the flying of Fowls,and thence gave their
uncertain Prediftions, or Divinations, bur for that we finde
no example in the Scriptures in the Original ſence, and
therefore leave ity and do allo think, thar ro obſcrve the fly-
ins of Fowls for Predi&ions of weather, as alſo the poltures
of 5, and creeping things is no offence, nor is here for-
bidden. Another expoſition is, Thar they obſeryed the in-
tralls of Beaſts, from whence they prerended they did know
the will ofthe gods ; and that was indeed of Bealts that were
offered in Sacrifice to their Idols, By which pretence being
but a meer couſcning Impoſture, they ſeduced the people to
Idolatry, and therctoxe were reckoned and deſcribed among
Witches in the rext; and for that expoſition we have that
example in the Scriptures, Ezek, 21. 26, (which in Tremel-
[ins tran{lation is thus) To uſe Dirvinations, he will furbuſh
Knives, he will conſult with Idols, he will look in the Liver,
this is a plaindemonſtration of this Fourth deſcription of a
Witch inthe text ; that'1s, {uch a one as pretended to the
people that their Idol gods hiding their ſecrets in the jntralls
of the ſacrificed Beaſts, he being one of their Prieſts, could by
{carching the intralls, conjeQture to the people the meaning of
the gods, This expoſition is agreeable to that, 2 Chrox, 33, 3.
when Manaſſes had built Idol-Altars inthe Houſe of God, ir
followerh immediatly in the {txt verſe, Et Divinationibus ,
 & conjellationibus & preſtigizs nſw eſt ; and he uſed Divinati-
ons, and Conjeturings, and Juglings, all tending to one
end, to {cduce the people to ldolatry, as followeth in the
ninth verſc,* he made Judah and Fernſalem to go altray, for
God had appouncd his [27 where to 1nquire after uncertain
* conjecturiags, by any Idol Impoſtures of the Heathen, bur

to inquire after himfclf , by the Prophets, and by his


Prieſts,


AM ( onjenrer. 27
Pricſts, by 2n Ephodz by Hrim and Thummim, as appcarcth,
1 Sam. 30, 7. Exod; 28, 30. | |
Some report that the Romer South-layers did rake the
anckle bone of « Bealt ſacrificed, which bone was by them
called ta/#s inthe Latine, the aid bone is caſte to be (cen in
the toot of any Oxe 'or Sheep, and hath four ſides equally
poyſcd, and being caſt upon # Table it falleth contipgently
like a Dye; and therefore ate the Dyes called by the ſame
name in latin 2ali, and when thoſe Idol Prieſts, the Roman 2
South-ſayers,would enquire of their Idols for Divinations, or :
rather give Nivinarions in the name of their Idols,they would
caſt that bone uponthe Table, and according to rhe ſeygral
contingent falling OE DO the caſt of a Dyc, {o they
gave ſeveral conjecturing Divinations, every {ide when it.
chanced upward being of a ſeveral fignification, given by
their Idol, as they prerended; a meer cheating Impoſture to-
feduce the people; a: liyely demonſtratjon of it may, be ſeca
A O” caſting the bone 1n the' ſame manner ut certan
childiſh Games called cockanp-all, f
It may be collefted allo, Thar the Idol Pricfts of rhe Hea--
thendid ſometimes uſe this impoſture for one, ( rhey having
divers waystodelude the people) that was, for the Prieſt to.
be blinde-foldea, and one or more tortouch him, and: he to.
conjecture or gueſs who it was that touched him; which
was caſily done by the confederacy of tome ſtander by, ſome
Pricſt like hym(elt, who gave him a private token which the:
people did not take notice of, but were thereby deluded; and
thought him to have a Propherical inſpiration trom the Idol
gods, and this is colle&ed from Aſarrb. 26, 68. cſpecially if
that place be compared with Mark, 14. 65, where un appear-
eth, That the corrupt Jews, who had been defiled. by the:
manner of the Heathen, did blind-fold Chriſt and ſmitebun,
and ſaid,Prophefie,, who it is that {mote thee they offering rowy:
Chritt by ſuch ways as they had feen: the Heathen: try they
Prophets by, who notwithſtanding were Impaſtars and falls;
Prophers. So much for the Fourth term, of deſcription of a
Wuchin the texts Conjeftor, a Conjeurer.. -


F. 2 The:


23


The Firſt Book,


The Fifth Deſcription,


The Fifth A ppeliation, or terms of deſcription of 4 Witch mthe
T ext is Preſtigiator, that is,a Jugler.


e interpretation of this word is plain inthe Scrip-


es, thatis, one that worketh falle or lying Won-

- ders, or lying Miracles, 1n ppot"On of the true Mi-
racles that were wrought by God, by his Prophets, ſuch
were Jannes, and Jambres, 2 Tim. 3. 8, 9. As Jannes and
Sees withſtood Moſes, ſ» alſo do theſe reſiſt thetrmrh; now
w James and Jartbres withitood doſes it appearerh, Exod,

« 5. $.9. God would hayc his Prophets, Moſes, and Aaronto
known by their Miracles, that the people might beleeve
that God had ſent them, they wrought che Miracles that
God had commanded them, Exod. 7. 13. but it appearcth in


verſ\. 14, that theſe Juglers withſtood them, and when the
 Meſſen


ers of God wrought true Miracles, thoſe Witches
wrought lyiag Miracles in oppoſition of them, Fecerwnt fimsi-
Titer, they did the like, The Latin tranſlation 1s thus ; T wn
vocauit Pharo ſapientes & Preſt igiatores, Ks fac erent ip quoq;
+ vr {ag ſuts incantation.bus ſimliter ; and Pharoah cal-
led the Wile men, and Juglers, that the Magicians of Egypr
might alfo do the like with their inchantments ; fo likewiſe
verl. 25. Fecerunt ſimilticr magis ſuis incamation/bus , the


.- Magicians did the like with their Inchammments ; this word


Simrliter, the like, or in like manner, is of great importance,
lealt ſome ignorant reader of the Scriptures ſhould ſuppoſe,
that the Magicians did the: ſame Miracles that the Prophers
did, whereasthole as of the Magicians were only deluſions,


. (although cough ro blind Pharaohs eyes, becauie God
$


would harden hi


cart.) Andas it appeareth in 2 Tim. 3, 9.


thewraCtions were only mad fooleries that came to light, and.
Were proved ridiculous,. as the words import, for the craft
of Jugling, tothem thar are not acquainted with it, breederh
great admiration inthe beholders, and ſeemerh, to filly peo-
ple, to be miraculous, and yet being known is bur deceit and


toolery,


A Jugle,

foolery; ſothat the beholder himſelf cannot but bluſh, and
be aſhamed to think he was ſo eaſily couſefed,- and did fo
much admire a ridiculous: Impoſture, that cratt of Jugling
conſiſtech, © WE

Firſt, In light of hand, or cleanly conyeyance.

Secondly, In contederacy ; and

Thirdly, In the abuſe of Natural Magick, |

The firit is profitably ſeen in our common Juglers, that go
up and down to play rhtic Tricks in Logs hs and. Markets, I
will (peak of one man more excelling in that craftthan others,
that went about in King James his time, and long fince,who
called himſelf, The Kings Majeſties moſt excellem Hocus
Pocus, and fo was he called, becauſe that ar the playing of
every Trick, he uſed to ſay, Horm pocus, toxtns talonta, vade
celeriter jubeo, a dark compoture of words, to blinJe the eyes
of the beholders, to make his Trick pals the more currantly
without diſcovery, becauſe when the cye and the car- of the
beholder are both earneſtly bulied, the Trick is not ſo cafily
diſcovered, nor the Impoſture diſcerned ; the going about of
this Fellow was very uictul tothe wiſe, toſce how eaſily peo-
pleamong rheancient Heathen were deceived, in times and
places of ignorance, tor in theſe times gar ned pris (yea
and ſome alſo that think themſelves wiſe ) will ſtand like
Pharaoh and his Servants, and admire a Jugling Impoſture ;
or like the filly Samaritans, Acts 8, 10. whodid ſo much ad-
mire aſcducing Jugler, as they laid, He was rhe great power
of God, until they ſaw the true and real Miracles of Philip,
verl. 6. And others again on the contrary will ſtand aftright-
cd, Or run out of the room ſcared like fools, lay » Ihe
Devil is in the room, and helpeth him-to do {uc Tricks .
and ſomeſaying abſolutely, He is a Witch, and Dug ro >C
hanged; whenas he did only att the parc of a Witch to-en-
lighten, and nor to deceive, thar people might ſee and dil-
cernthe Impoſtures by which the Idols of the Heathen were
madetamous, by their jugling Pricſts, and might laugh at
their vanities ( they thatwould ſec the manner of this part
of Jugling, or cleanly conveyance more fully, may rcad


Maſter Scors diſcovery of WIRES where it 1s (ct down
3 at


> Cs:
mem”: .-


The Firſt Book,


at large, to the {atisſaftion of all thole that are nor wilfully
' jenorant ; as allo briefly alterward in this Fitth deſcriptions
attcr page 34. And now tor 1l]uttrating of the Hiſtory of
Pharaohs + 6p" cievy ] will parallel this Hocwe Pocus, or Eng-
liſh Jugler, 2 licthe with them ; they are- called Preſtigiatores,
Juglers, Exod, 7. 14. and yet inthe ſame verle, and alfo' in
vert. 25, it is{faid, rhey didin like manner by their inchant-
ments; Why with their Inchanrments? Not that Jugling
and Inchamting arc one and the ſame impoſture, but the rea-
ſon is, becauſe when they wrought a Jugling Trick, or ly-
ing Miracle, they always 1pake a Charm, or Inchantation im-
mcdiatcly before it, like rothat of our Engliſh Jugler atore-
ſaid, to make the deluſion the ſtronger, by bulyung the ſenſes
of Hearing and Secing inthe SpeQator both at once, tor a
Charm, or Inchantationwas only a compoſure of words to
delude people, who th that words tpoken ina ſtrange
manner had vertue and cfhicacy in them(as may be ſcen more
tully in the Sixth deſcription tollowing ) therefore are they
{aid ro work their talſe Miracles by their Inchantments,. be-
caule they ſeemed to filly beholders to do them by their in-
chantations or words, when as indecd they did them only by
wh hand, or cleanly conveyance called Legerdemain ;
and they thar are well acquainted with this craft of Jugling,
may eaſily conceive how theſe Magicians did their Fears
without ſo much admiring them, when rhey read the Hiſtory,

- aSitthey had done great Wonders, which were only dcluit-
ons 5 Theſccond and third Miracle, that they diſſembled, do.
plainly appear in the letter of che Hiſtory, Exod, 7. 2, they
{cemed to turn water imo bloud, Fecerune fimiliter, and yer
mark well the Hiſtory, and yecſhali {cc there was no water
in Zgypr, for Moſer had turned itall into bloud before, vert.
20,21, 24,25. {othen they could finde no River or Pond
to dothat teat in, it mult needs follow then, that they ſent
for water where it was to be had, which was no-ncarer than
Goſhew, and fo ſhewed a petty Jugling Trick before Pharach
in a room, with a Bowl or Tray of water, omg it upon.
the ground, and by {light ot hand conveying bloud into it to
colour nt; fo ukewilſe for the Third Miacle which oF
| 1-


af Jugie. Je

diſſembled, Chap. 8. 7.'it was neceſſarily done by 4 {uch
veſſe} of water; for they could not fine any other water
free in all e/£g7pt» wRRD were not already full of the abun-
dance of Frogs, verl. 3. $- and what comman Jugler might
not caſily diiſemble thar Miracle, by ſetting a bowl of wa-
rer down before Pharaoh and his Servants, aud by flight of
hand conyeying 1n three or four Frogs, and ſo holding up
their ſtafte, and ſpeaking certain words ro make it ſeem to
filly ſpe&arors that rhe waters brought forth thoſe Frogs ;
The tiſt Miracle indecd {cemeth more difficult to diſſemble,
and yet not (o difficult it you ſaw it ated, tor what is eaſicr
than for a cunning Jugler to hold up a ſtaftc as it he would
throw it dowa, and then to {peak a lofty inchantation, to
buſie the intention of the Spectators, and then with flight of
hand to throw down an arrificial Serpent inſtead of his ſtaffe,
and convey away his {tatte, that fo they might think his
ſtaffe was turned intoa Serpent, for theſe Hiſtories are ſer
down KOO the apprehen{1on of the deceived behol-
ders, -and not that the Magicians did them really, for then
we mult beleeve that they wrought real: Miracles as the Pro-
phets did, which were an ignorant and abſurd' renent;
whereas the Scriptures do mantelſt char they were only mad
foolerics, and were diftoyered and came to light, 2 Tim.3.9.
yet many are ſoſtupid, that rather then they will not have
them really done, they ſay they were really done by the pow-
er of the Devil, and {o aſcribe power to the Devil for work-
ing Miracles, whereas we never read in the Scriptures that
the Devil may have any ſupernataral power aſcribed to him,
bur is anly the Facher of Lyes.

The ſame kinde of Jaleline Tricks were the Impoſtures of
Simon Magus, 10 Atts 8, 9. which although the people did
for atime behold with admuration, yet when they ſaw real
Miracles wcought by Phitip, verl. 6. 12. they belceyed him,
and not the Impoſtor any longer, for they did caſily fee
- diftcrence berween real Miracles, and cheating Impo-

ures.

Some again will have it, that theſe As of Pharaohs Jug-
lers, and others im the Scriptures might be real as they ſee-

mea


-_


The Firſt Book,


med to be, and yetbrought 'to pals by the profoundnefs of
the Art of Ma 64 which Art is of greater force (lay they )
than Jugling, or clſe why were they calleq inthe lame verſe,
Exed.y. 11, Juglers, Wiſe men, and Magicians all at once ?
bur let not any be fo weak inunderſtanding as to think, That
anyArt in the World could do that really that required ami-
raculous hand of power to doyfor this is the eflential or formal
reaſon of a Mirac'e to be done by a power Supream, and be-
yond the power of Manor Devil, or the vertue of any Art;
and for this word, Magicians, in its own proper ſence 1tis ta-
ken for Wiſe and Learned men, in Affrelogie, and other
Arts whercin Schollers are inſtituted; and fothere is no difte-
_.Tence between vez! and cd! in the Greek, neither was ir
rakenin any other ſence among the ancient; and ſuch were
they that cameto Chriſt and offered gifts, Meth, 2, 1, 11.
called Mag ; in this ſence alfoit is ſaid, That Afofes was lear-
ned inall the wiſdom of the e/£gyprians, Acts 7. 22. andhere
in Exod. 9,11, theſe Juglersare called Magi, Wiſe men, and
Learned, becaulcthey pretend fo, and were fo thought by
the people, whereas they were indeed but cheating Impo-
ſtors, bur becauſe they and many ' other: couſening Mares
meationed in the Scriptures , have by uſurpation ob-
taincd that appellation-from the peopic, Magicians, or Wiſe
men, therefore it is uſed and taken by ſome Writers for
ſuch as uſc all coulening Diabolical Impoſtures; yer Moſes
here inthis place of Exod, 73 13. gave them not that manner
of name or appellation, only Magiciaxs, but withall deſcri-
berh them by their peculicr appellation, that is Juglers; and
ſo inallthe Old Teſtament, where Magician is taken in the
worlt ſence, 1t 15 not ſet alone, but conjoyned with ſome o-
ther terms of an Impoſtor tor a more full deſcription, fo thar
a Mag.cian in the worſt ſence in the Scripture phraſe is onlvan
Impoſtor, cr Deceiver; in the beſt ſence, a learned Wiſe
man, therefore no real Miracle, but only deluſions can bee
wrought by Mag:ch,

_ Tſatdalittle before, That this craft of Jugling confiſteth
 ofthree things ; the Firſt is, Slight of Hand, or cleanly con-
veyance ; the Second 15 Confederacy, that 1s, when manyor


tew


_ ka.
few agents do agree together in bringing to paſs cheating


im es, cotrary to the truth. An example of rhis wee
have inthe Hiſtory of Bell, the Idol, in the Book: of Dariel,


which though it be called Apecripha, and doubtful whether it
de a true Hiſtory, yet this example whether ic bee true or
not, it doth plainly demonſtrate the Witchcraft of Idol
Pricſts by confederacy, which is one main arm c£ the craft
of Jugling, Yiſa, 14. 14+ 20. it appeareth plain how they
confederated together in extolling the Idol, to uphold ir for
tacir own delicious maintenance, and to {cduce rhe Kin

and people to Id6latry, by making them beleeve that Bell di

cate up all the daily proviſion that was ſet before him,
whereas they themſelves, with their Wives and Children,
came inat ſecret doors in the nighr, and did cate up and car-
ry away all that was provided at the Kings charge, until
Daziel diſcovered that rhcir jugling impoſture; and al-
though there be not (o plain a demonſtration of the Jugling
Impoſtures of every Idol (ſpoken of in the Scriptures, yer no
Idol but had the like deluftons ; for they built their Idol
Houſes on purpoſe with ſeveral (lights, and (ecret conveyan-
ccs to bring their Jugling Tricks to paſs, and had daily new
inventions of new Impoſturcs whereby they deceived the
World, and ſeduced them to Idolatry , therefore Eliiah,
x King. 18. 49. would not truſt rhe Prieſts of Baal to remain
in their own Idol Houſe, when he would diſcover them to
the people, but cauſed them all ro come forth to Mount
Carmel, and then he ſaid, as in verſ, 24, The God that an-


ſwereth by fire, let him be God, Why did he cauſc the Kins


to command them all to Mount Carme/? The reaſon was,
becauſe if they might have acted their part in their Idol
Houſe,being built with ſecret conveyances for all deceit, they
might have ſecretly fired the Oblation, and ſo might have
deluded the people, {i1ll making them beleeve their Ido!
had anſwered them by fire, bur being in Mount Carmel, re-
more fromtheir Idol Houſe, they could only a& the part
ot Mad-men, cutting themſelves that the people might have
lomewhar to gaze at, but could bring nothing to pals ro
{aye their credit or their lives; the deluding impoſtures of


F the


The Fivſt Book,
- Pricits of Bard, trecalled Preftigie 1/abele, 2 King, 5. 22
- J tolings Or Wirchcraft of Jeza * becauſe ſhe bog, an
C


Idolatrous Woman maintained tho
their Witchcraft, or deluſions, ro ſeduce the people to Ido-
larry. | ;

The third Branch whereupon this craft of Jugling con-
ſiſteth, is the abuſe of Natural Magick, that is, the abuſe of
their knowledge in Natural cauſes, as for inſtance in ſome
tew ; take Woolfs dung, and carry it inyour pocket that it
may take the hear of your body, and it will make any mad
Buil, or other Cartel of that kinde to fly from you, and to
run very farrc my from their paſture to the admiration of
the beholders. Takea pecce of paper and rub one part of it
with freſh Lemmon peeles and dry ir again a little, and then
dip your Pen in Inke; that is made of ſtone blew, ſteeped two
or three days in cold watcr, and write upon the place that
had the tincture of the Lemmon pecle, and it will write a
purebrighrtred, and then with the {ſame Pen and Inke write
upon another place of the paper, and it writeth blew, where-
by there iscanſed great admiration inthe beholders, to ſee a
man with one Pen, 'and one and the fame Tnke write red
and blew.

Albarria Magn, and allo Miſaldns do write of many
wonderful things that may be done by the knowledge of
Natural cauſes, or the ſecrets of Nature, which although


many ofrhem be falſe, yertor ſuch asare true, they may bee.


Jawtully Gone ; and therein we may glorihe God, in behol-
ding die onderful Works of his han1s, in the ſecret cauſes
of things, |
Bur now forthe avuic of rheſe things, as namely by the
doing of theſe things to ſeduce the people, by making filly
ptaple beleeve wedo them by a miraculous power, thereby
pretending our {elves to be- Prophets, as did Simen Mag me jn
the 4s; rhis 1s Tight Jugling Witchcraft, or to make the
people belceve that they are done by the power of ſome Idol,
thereby ro teduce the people, or any way to affront the Pro-
phers, by comparing them with true Miracles, to withltand
the truth) as Pharaohs Magicians did;were right Witchcraft,


Ys:


Prieſts of Baa! in .


2 -


A Tugla:


So likewiſe for the Oyntmeng' called Xrguemtwn armari-
»m, or Weapon ſalve (that is an Oyatmejx 'nade of fuch
ingredients, as by anointing the Weapon: wherewith a-man
or beat} is wounded, it healeth the Wound, (it it be true by
certain experience, as many Phiſmians and Chiyrurgions do
affirm ) ir may lawfully be uſed, and we may glotihe God
in the uſe of it, who hath given luca excellent ſecrer


qualities to the Creatures, .which are made tor the uſe of


man. |

Alſo Jacob uſed the pecled rods, which by their ſecret 0-
pcration being ſer before rhe ſheep in rhe hear of theix Gene-
ration, cauled them, by beholding them in their conceiving,
roconccive and bring jorth party coloured Lanabs ; bur it
any man ſhall uſe theſe ſecrets to this end ro make the people
beleeye they are Prophets, and do them by a miraculous
power, that lo they may ſeduce the people to errour under
a.colour of working Miracles, ſuch men are: {cducing
Witches.

Thus a Planetarian abuſing the lawful Science of Aſtro-
logie may become a Witch, not only under the notion of 2
Planctarian,but of a Jugler ; as for inſtance, Pedro Mexia, 2
Spaniſh Hiſtorian, wriceth of one Co/ambus, who coming to
an {land in the new-found World called Hsſpariola, deiwed
Traffck with the Natives tor Victuals, which they denying»
he told them they ſhould all dye of the Plague, and for a ſ{ign
hereof they ſhould ſee the Moon as red as bloud at ſuch a
time, and contrary to her former condition; afterward they
beholding the Moon eclipſed at the ſame time tote-rold by
Columbus, and knowing no rules, of Aſtrologic, they belee-
ved his words and crayed pardon, and. brought him ſupply
of ViStuals; This was but a. remiſs degree . of deceiving
Witch-craft, or rather a Chear, becauſe-1t tendeduorro 1d6-
_ . Jatry, but yer uathe att it (elf, pretending falſly a miraculous

power, it was Jugling Witch: craft. FE
Iris z0wtully demonſtrated what a Jugler is inthe Sp:
ture ſence, but yer Moſes mentioneth both | Sexes in. the


Scriptures, fit. 1s written, Exed. 22, 18, Preſt1giatricerm! ne -


ſmito vivere, {uffcr nota ] vgling Woman to liye.. This.is not
-


any


- one end of the Wireupon his waſte, and maketh his 2p


. The Firſt Book,

any thing different in Nature from Preſtigiatey & Juglin
a. bi: only in Sex, as it he had ſaid, As you Fats. mt
ro ſuffer Jugling ſeducing mento live, fo likewiſe it there be
a Woman tound among you that uſeth this craft of working
falſe Mixacles, to delude and ſ{cduce the people to Idolatry,
although ſhe be the weaker Sex, ro whom mercy might
ſeem to be due, yet ſuffer her not to live; all one in ſence
withthat Levis, 20, 27 where Witches of both Sexes are men-
tioned-none verſe; 1fa man or woman be a giver of Oracles,
or Divinatiens, or a South-ſayer, they ſhall.be put todeath ; yet
whereas Moſes, in all the Law, ſpeaketh more fully of
Wicches in the Maſculine, than in the female Sex; i con-
fureth that common tradition of people that Witches arc
molt of the temale Sex.

Here I amcompelled (for the fatisfattion of ſome that
are {o weak incapacity that gs will rather ſtand to cavil in
a diſputative way, than to underſtand things that are not tn
them(clves difputarive, but demonſtrative) ro demonſtrate
_ tew of the moſt admured Tricks of common Jug-

ing.
irſt, A Jugler knowing the common tradition, and too-
liſh opinion that a familiar Spirit ur fome bodily ſhape mutt
be had for the doing of ſtrange things, beyond the Vulgar
capacity, he therefore carrieth about kim theskin of a Mouſe
{topped withteathers, or ſome hike Artificial thing, and 11


the hinder part thereof (ticketh a ſmall ſpringing Wire of a-


bout a foot long, or longer, and when he begins to att his
part ina Fayr, or a Market before Yulgar people, he bring-
cth forth his Impe, and maketh ir ſpring from him once or
twice upon the Table, and then catcheth it up, ſaying,
would you be oe? I will make you ſtay and play {ome
Tricks for me before you go, and then he nimbly ſticketh


c
{pring up three or four times to his ſhoulder, and nimbly
catcheth Rt, and pulleth ir down again every time, ſaying,
Would you be gone ? introth if you be gone I can play no
Tricks, or Feats of Ativity to day, and thMholdcth it faſt
none hand, and beateth it withthe other, and flily-maketha


ſqueek=


A 7ugler.

ſqueeking noyle with his lips,as it his Impe cried;and then puts
teth his Impe in his breeches, or in his pocket, faying, I will
make you itay,would you be gone? Then begin the fully people
to wonder, and whiſperzthen he ſheweth many {lights of aCti-
vityasif he did them by the help of his Familiar,which the ſ1]-
lieſt ſort of beholders do verily beleeve; amonglt which he c-
ſpycth one or other young Boy or Wench, and layeth a teſter
or ſhilling inhis hand" wettel, and biddeth him hold it faſt;bur
whilſt che (aid Boy, or filly Wench thinketh to encloſe the
peece of ſilver fatt in the hand, he mmbly taketh it away
with his finger, and haſteneth the holder of it to cloſe his
hand, ſaying, Hold faſt or it will be gone,ana then mumblerh
certain words, and crieth by the vertue of Hocww,, Pocus, hay
paſſe reſt or, be Tone; NOW OPCTN YOUrL hand, and the filly Boy
O Wench, and the bcholders ſtand amazed to ſce that there
is nothing left inthe hand ; and then for the confirmation of
the wonder,a Confederate with the Jugler,{tandeth up among
the crowd ( in habit like ſome country-man or ſtranger thar
came in like the reſt of the poopie ) ſaying, I will lay with
you forty ſhillings you ſhall not convey a ſhilling out of my
hand ; its done faith the Jugler, take you this ſhilling in
your hand, yea marry ( faithhe ) and I will hold it fo falt as
it you ger it trom me by words {peaking, I will ſay youſpcak
m the Devils name, and with that he lookerh in his hand in
the ſigh of all the people, ſaying, I am (ure I have it, and
then claſpeth his hand very cloſe, and layeth his, other hand
toit alſo, pretending to hold 1t the faſter, but withall (lily
conveycth away the ſhilling into his. glove; or into his pockey,
and then the Jugler cryeth, Hay ef, preſto wade, jubeo, by
| The vertue rh ocus Pocus, tis.gexe; then the Contederate o=

peneth his hand, and ina diflembling manner faineth him-
ſclf much to wonder, that all that are preſent may likewiſe
wonder ; then the Jugler calleth to his.Boy,. and biddech him
_y him a glaſs of Claret Wine, which hee taketh in his

hand and drinketh, and then he taketh our of his bagge a
tonnel made of Tiny or Latine double, in which double de-
vice he hath formerly pur ſo much claret wine as will almoſt
fill the glaſs again, and ſopping this tonncl at the licele _

3 WI


The Firſt Book,


with his fnger,turneth it up that all may behold 1tto be empe
ty, and then ſerterh it to his fore-heads and taketh away his
fingcr> aud letterh the Wine run into the Glaſs, the filly
Spectators thinking it- to be the: ſame wine which he drank


ro come again out of his fore-head ; then he faith, It this be
not cnough I will draw good Claret Wie our of a poſt, and
then takerh our of his bagge a Wine-gimblet, and ſo he pier-
ceth the Poſt quite rhorow with his Gimbler; and then is one
ot his boys on the other {ide of the wall with a Bladder and
a Pipe (like aswhen a Clilter is admuniſtred by 'the Phiti-
rf and conveyeth the Wine to his Maſter thorow the Poſt,
which his Maſter ( Vintner hke ) draweth forth iato a
Pot, and falleth it uxo a Glaſs, and giveth the company to
drunk. |

Another way it is very craftily done:by a Spa»:/Þ Borachio,
that is a Leather Bottle as thin and little asa Glove, the neck
whereof is about a foot long, with a {crew art the top iaftead
of a {topple ; this Botrle the Jugler holderh under hjs arm,


and letteth the neck of it come along to bis hand under the


ſleeve of his Coat, and with the fame hand taketh the tax .in


thefafſerthar isin the poſt, and yer holderh the tax half in
and half our, and craſherh the Bottle with his arm, and


with his other hand holdetha Wine-pot to the tax, fo that ir
{cemerh ro- the beholders that the Wine cometh our of the
tax, which yet cometh out of the Bottle, and then he giverh it
among the company to drink; and being all drunk up bur
one -ſraall glaſs at the laſt, he calleth to his Boy, faying,
Come {irrah, you would faine haye a cup, but his Boy make-
.cchanſwerin a dildainful manner, ſaying, No Maſter not I,
it that be good Wine that 1s drawa our of a Poſt I will loſe
my head ; yea firrah ſaith his Maſter, then your head you
{hall loſe 3 come {irrah, you ſhall go to pot = that word ;
then he layceth his Boy down upon the Table upona Carpet,
with his face downward commanding him to lye {till then
'thetakerh alinnen cloth, and (ſpreadeth it upon the Boys head
broad upon therable, and by \Itght of hand conveyerh under
the cloth a Hcad with a face, limned (o like his Boys Head
211d Face that it is not diſcerned from it; then hee SANE
Ort


A 7aghe.
forth his Sword or Falchion, an feemerh to cut off his Boys


head ; but withall it is to be noted, That the contederating


Boy purrerh his head thoxow a {lit in the Carper, and


thorow a hole inthe Table made on purpote, yer unknown


to the Spectator,» and his Maſter allo by ſlight of hand lay-
eth tothe Boys ſhoulder a peece of wood made concave at one
end like a {guppit, and round at the other end like a mans
neck with the head cut oft, the concave end is hidden under
the Boys ſhirt, and the other end appcareth tothe company
very diſmal ( being limbned over by the cunning Limbner )
like a bloudy neck, ſo lively 1n ſhew that the very bone and
marrow of the neck appeareth, infomuch that ſome Specta-
tors have fainted ar the figart hereot; then he taketh up the
falſe Head atorcſaid by the hair, and layethir in a Charger at
the tcet of rhe Boy, rake the barc bloudy neck to the view
of the deluded bcholders, tome gazing upon the neck, ſome
upon the head, which looketh gaſhftul, {ome beholding the
Corps tremble like a body new {lain ; then he walkerh by the
Table, ſaying to the hcad, and the ſceming dead Corps,
Ah ha, firrah, you would rather loſe your Head then drink

your Drink; bur preſeutty ac {mauteth his haud uponhis breaſt,

ſaying, To ſpeak the very truth m.cool bloud, the fault did
not delerve death,. theretore I had belt {:r on his Head a-
'gain; then he ſpreaderh his broad linnen cloth upon the Head

and takerh it our of the Charger, and layerh it to the ſhoul-:
ders ofthe Corps, and by flight of hand conveyecth borh the
Head and the falſe neck 1nto lis Bagge, and the Boy raiferh

up his Hea | trom under the Table ; then his Maſter taketh a--
way the linnen cloth that was {pread upon him) and faith,

By the vertue of Hecus pocus, and Forrnnatus his Night-cap,.
I wiſhthou mayclt live again; then the Boy rileth up ſafe

and well, tothe admiration of the deluded beholders.

Theſe and the like Jugling Tricks ( fome whereof are done
meerly by {light of hand, ſome have a help trom falſe Inſtru--
ments, as falſe Knives, falſe Boxes, fallc Locks, falſe Waſe-
coats, and the like,are many ofthem demonltrared by Maſter
Scot, and many are daily inyented, which are all done by
common reaſon, withour the leaſt compa with gy en 5 l

unlels


39


=
-»,
a . ” .
- AQ; - :


' The Fir8t Book,


| (unleſs they do them to ſeduce, and thenthe Devil is indeed


1n their heart, as he was in Simon Magns, in the 4At:,and is in
every wicked man. ) And yet ſomerimes it hapnerh, thar if
here have been any Univerſity Schollars at the beholding,
or at the afting of theſe common Tricks, they have gone
our and fallen intoa diſpute upon the marter, tome ſaying,
Sen[us nunquam fallitur errca proprium ob;ettum, {ome havye
faid that the Jugler by his Familiar doth thicken the Air,ſome
againthat he hurterh che Eye-ſight, and fo deceiveth the be-
holders; and in all their difcourte they ſhew themſelves yery
fhiloſophical, but very little eapacioms, And Cooper wri-
ting upon that ſubje&t; hath pretended to ſhew himſelf T heo-
logical, but betraycth himſelf to be yery fillv, blinde, and
19N0rant,

It being fully demonſtcarted what a Jugler is in the Scrip-
ture lence, ct every one conſider ferioufly who be the Juglers,


 ofthisand former Ages, that pg, a to be pur to death by the


Law of Moſes, we might think that no man were to lilly and
tooliſhrothink that itis meant common Juglers, who play
their Tricks in Fayers and Markets, nor Gentlemen who
ſometimes inimitation of them, do 1n ſport, play Tricks of
{light of hand, or legerdemain, with confedcrates or without,
tor it is moſt certain and true, that if it bee rightly under-
{tood, that theſe do a grear deal of good, that recreation ten-
ding rightly to the illumination of people of all forts, to
ſhew them the vanity .and ridiculouſncſs of thoſe deluſions


- andlying Wonders, by which men were ſo cafily deluded in


old times by Pharaohs Magicians, by $imen Aagns, and Eli-
mas the Sorcerer, and now adays by our profeſſed Wizzards,
or Witches, commonly called Cunning Men, or good
Witches, who will underrake to ſhew the tace of the Thick in
che Glals, or of any other that hath done his Neighbour
wrong privily, when as they do all by Jugling deluſions,
and are themſelves right Witches, that cauſe men to ſeek to
the Devil for help, that will undertake and promilc to un-
witch people that are (as fools commonly ſay ) bewitched ;
theſe common {porting Juglers ailo may illuminate peo-
ple toſce the Juglng Wuchcratt of Popith Prieſts, in aaulog
| 60


' 4 Jugler: :
Rheods to move their eyes and hands in compaſſion to peo-
ples praycrs, of which you may rcad more fully atter-
ward, :


Diſcovery ot Witchcraft, in the fifteenth Book) Chap. 43.
there was a Maſter of Arts condemned only for uſing himſelf
tothe ſtudy and practiſe of rhe Jugling craft, bow juſtly I
will not controvert ; butthis I ſay, That if a man may not
{tudy and practiſe the diſcovery ot Cheats without being a
Cheater, nor the diſcovery of Witchcraft without being ac-
counted a W itch, 1t is the way for Witches and Cheaters to
play their pranks, and no man able to tax them, or accuſe
them, or to ſay who they are that are Witches; and this


fooliſh nice cen(uring, and ignorant condemning hath bred


great _ Oe ignorance of this ſubjet of Witchcraft ;
which God himſclt deſcriberh ſo often in the Scriptures, for
people to know and avoyd the prattile of ſeducing, or bei

ſeduced by it, bur for that Maſter of Arts before named, the
Lord of Leiceſter having more wiſdom in ſome things than
ſome had, did prore&t him for a time after he was condem-
ned, but what became of him is not mentioned, but yer if he
had been a Ju kr, or praQiſer of that Craft to this end, to
withſtand the Prophets whenthey wrought true Miracles, as
Pharaohs Juglers withſtood Moſes, or if he were one that
practiſed it to ſeduce the feopy after lying deluſions, to mag-
nifie hunſelt as a falſe Prophet, like Sin0# Magns "a


As, or to cauſe people to aſcribe miraculous powerto him;


or toſcek to the Devil as our common Deceivers;called good
Witches, dey he was deſeryedly condemned ; but to ſtudy
Witchcraft, and aftually ro demonſtrate ic by praiſe, to
ſhew how cafily people were and may be deluded by it ( ſee-
ing God hath commanded Wirches co be put to death, and
w__ they were or arc; isnot now adays fully underſtoo4 (no
not by the Learned ) is no more deſerving death than for
Maſter Scst to write a book in the diſcovery of it, or for a
Minitter to diſcover to the people the danger of an Idol; to
which Witchcraft is neceſlarily joyned as an upholder and
compauion, or tor a Minitter yan the ſecret and danges

rous


Yet in Queen Elizabeths time, as appeareth in My. Scots


Ms


\*


gporod


The Firſt Book;


: ature, and ſeveral windings of Sin and Satan ; for the
> phe Witch 1s not 1n doing falſe Miracles, Or any 0-
ther \Wirchcraft by. demonltration or diſcovery, but in ſedu-
CLNg le from God, and his Iruth; As for example, P ha-
«obs Magicians inthat they djd throw downthcir ſtafte, and
made it ſceme to be turned intoa Serpent; tothe end to with-
ſtand Moſes, androſeduce the e/£gyprians, they were abſo-=
Jute Witches, burit any man now do the very ſame, or had
then done it to diſcover the Jugling deceit of it, hee is no
Witch, buta tcacher and in(truter ot the people,
So again for another example, he that gocth behinde a


Rhood, ox other Popiſh Image, and draweth the ſecret Wiers


that cauſcth the eycs and hands of the Image to move, tothe
end to delude and ſeducethe people to Idolatry, by admira-
tion of ir, as Popiſh Prieſts do ; heis anabfolute Witch, bur
he that goes behind it, and acteth the ſame part, and then
comethourand ſhewerh peoplethe Impoſture, and ſhewerh
themthe Wyers and ſecret deluſions, is not a Witch, but a
giſcoveret'ot a Witch (that did it to the cnd to ſeduce )
and a Teacher and umnator of the people, See more in
the Sixth deſcription. :
. -But we mult know that in Queen Elizabeths time the Pro=
cteſtant Religion bong then 1n its minority, when as Popery
* was but only ſupprefled, and not worn out of che memory,
nor out ofthe heartsand affteQtions of men (that. yet in out-
ward ſhew were Proteſtants) it was a bricf tenent in the -
piyerſities, that he that did bur ſiudy and comemplate upon
this (ubje& of W icchcraft was a dealer with unlawful and
vain Science, and ought to þe cenſured for a Witch, and by
this fubtull exadirion they feared all Students, that no .man
daxed to (earch into the bowels and ſecrets of that Craft, leaſt
( as they knew full well ) thereby he ſhould diſcover to the
Worldihe ſecret Impoſturcs of the Popiſh Religion, which is
altogether upheld by Witchcraft,. of which Ralgion, many
ftogd daily in expetarion to havoit ſet on foot as briet as ever
when as.they hoped”) thetymes would change. Hath God
given ning ſeveral delcriptians of Witchcraft at once? De


: : ut,
38, 10, Id 206 Iciieratced them inmany places of Scripture


that


4 i


Se if As RR OT ern A,


A TJugler:
that wemight take notice, who and what they are, with the
Myſtery of iniquity, and delufgons that rhey praQtſed ? and
ſhall not we ſtudy and contemplare upon it? by this yain tra-
dition were many of their devilliſh Wirchcrafts concealed,
and came not to light, for many years, to the view of the
world ; example of that Popiſh Idol, Cheapſide Croſſe, which
ſtood for many years like the Golden Image of Nebuchadnez-
z4ar, few men knowing the juglin itchcraft that was
therein, untillat the command of the Parliament it being
pulled down, there were tound therein the ſeyerall flights to
move the Arms, Eyes, and Heads of the Images, and the
Pipes roconvey the water to- make the Images ſhed tears in
compaltea tro the as dar; and to convey Milk into
the breaſts of the Image of the Virgin Mary, thar the poor
deluded people f ſeeing ſach lying Wonders, as Images of
Gold to moye, to weep, and ſhed tears in abundance, and
Milk todrop our of the Virgins breaſts, through her earncſt
labouring with her Sontohear, and grant the prayers of the
people ) went home, bewitched to that devilliſh Idolatry by
that grand Witch, that Whore of Rome that hath deceived
all Nations with her Witchcraft, Revel. 18, 23. yet, to the
grief of the hearts of this Popiſh crew, in the beginning of
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, many of their devilliſh Witch-
crafts were daily diſcovered, as in Maſter Lamberts Book of
the Perambulationof Kerr it appeareth, was diſcovered the
Rhoed of grace in Kent, who was always accompanied and
helped by little St. Ruwball, which Idol as Mr, Scot notcth in
Lib, 7. Chap, 6. was not inferiour in all deluding Impoftures
ro the great Idol Apollo ( or Apollos Oracle) whoſe Prieſts
werethe grand Witches of the World in its time ).yer after-
ward the wires that made the eyes of the Images to 20gglcy Z
and the Pins and Inſtraments for ſ{eyeral deluſions were diſ-
covered, with all the Witchcraft of the jugling Pricſts, wich
every circumſtance thereof, which Image and Inſtruments
were openly burnt rogether, by the authority and cormand
of rhe Queen. ft gg |
And now it falleth in my way to ſpeak of another grand
Witch of the World, thar is, Ph the great” Idot p
| 2 rec


|


The Firſt Book,

the Twrks, who by his Juglings and Divinations hath ſedu-
ced 2 great part of the World to an Liolatrrous worſhip,. ſo
abſurd and filly, that his Diſciples are aſhamed to ler any
Chriſtians come neer the place of his ſuppoied Sepulchre ar
Mecha, leſt they ſhould laugh ar their folly in worſhipping an
Iron Sepulchre, therefore all Chriſtiazs are forbidden to
come within five miles of that place upon png of death z and
becaule various reports have been abroad by ſeveral Authors
concerning this Deceiver of the world, I will only cice the
moſt allowable reports confirmed by Lampadin in Mehificia
Hiſtorico 9. and alſo by Gulitlmms, Bidaulp an Engliſh ra-
ycllor ( called, The Travels of certain Engliſh-men into farre
Countries ) very agreeable tothe foreſaid Lampadius ; ) This
devilliſh Impoſtor Mahomer deſiring ro magnifie him(elf a-


- mons the people, did firſt of all delude his Wite, making


her belcevethat he was a Prophet of God, for having the
Falling-ſicknef s, with which he fell often, and lay like aman
ina trance, he told his Wife that Gabriel! the Arch-angel


' did often appear to him, and reveal fecrets from Heaven, and


for the confirmationthereotSergime a wicked Monck,who was
his inſtruecr, affirmed, That Gavrie! did uſc to appear toall
Prophets, and fo both of them together did perilwade the
filly Woman that the reaſon of his talling in a Trance was,
becauſe the Angel was ſo glorious that he was not able to
behold him without falling, and that all the time of his lying
thus proſtrate the Angel was talking with him ; this filly
Woman rejoycing inthis, That ſh: was married to a Pro-


| phet, reported the thing among other Women, ſo that in


time this fellow obtained among -pratling Women, anJ .
common people, the name ot a Prophet "hs Devil by this

fellow taking occaſion, and waiting his. opportunity to de-
ceive the World (as alſo by Sergizs. the Monck.who was his


. companion) it hapned about the year of our Lord Chriſt,


$97. about which time alſo began. the Antichriſtian Pope-
dome at Rome ) that Heraclims the Rowan Throne yardey a
mg uſc of the Armics of the Sarazens againſt the Perſians,


(and not giving them. their daily. payzor itipend, which they


expectedand required of. his Captains ayer them ) they xe-


volted


A 7ugle.
volted from him ; then this Mahomet, with his companion


Sergius (econding him) became the Head of rhe Rebellion,
or at leaſt deſired {o to be thought by the id that {o he


-mioht any way become great among them ; bur the Souldi-
jc a ann him, Sergizs and he did fo ule their
wits to perlwale them) telling them, That he was ordai-
ned by God to that eaJ, and ſent by the Angel Gabrie/to
bring the people to the worſhip of God by the power of the
Sword ( for id he, Chriſt came only by Miracles anJ Signs
to perſwade, but I am the next Prophet, and the laſt t

ſhall come, and am to compel people by the Sword ) fo that
partly by ſubrilty, aud partly by compulſion hee drew a
mighty Army to him, to the- overthrow of the Emperours
power in thoſe parts, from whence came that mighty Em-
pire of the T##ks ; and becaule that Sergizs had counlelled
him, that the only way to increaſe in ſtrength was to ſer up
a New Religion, he gathered unto him beſides Sergize, John


Presbyter an Arrian Heretick, and 'Selan a Jewiſh Aſtrolo-


ian, and another Barras,. Perſam FJacobitam'; who toge-
therzthat they might draw all people after him;Coyned a Re-
ligion, paxtly of the Circumciſion, that ſo he rfiight win the
Jews, os the Saracens ( who coming of Iſhmael, do ule the
Circumciſion of eAbraham to this day ) and. were called: Sa»
racens, becauſe Hagar was Sarahs Maid,, and Hagarens
from their Mother Hagar) and partly. of Chriltianiry. thar
{o he might win Chriftians. ( for the T»rks do acknowledge


Chriſt ro have been a Propher, bur they deny his Divinity,


and his ſatisfaCtion for the Sins of Man, for. they. ſay. thar
God had no \Witfe, and therefore could haveno Son; anda
this andthe like filly conceits is compoſed the Txrkiſh Al-
eoran) and that he might diltinguiſh his SeX-from Jews and
Chriſtians, he hath inſtituted his Sabbath oa the Friday, an1


for theinticing of all men to his Religion, he telleth them,
That they that fighr boldly forhis Worſhip, ſhall (if they bee-
ſlain ) cnter direMly into Paradice, where they ſhall injoy-
plenty of pleaſures, meat, and drink, and pretry Wenches.
abundance, and with theſe hopes ( ſaith Lampadins ) his.


Souldiers are ſobewirched may they are always furious and
3.


orcedy:


MZ


The Firſt Book,


dy of fighting, be their danger never ſo great. Much
Ny of _ of this Impoltor by ſeveral Hiſtorians, bur
I haveonly deſcribed him briefly by thete his ſeducements,
. (alchough he had many more) wherein may be noted thar
| he was a Jugling falſe Prophet, in faining himſelf ro be in
extafie of minde, in a miraculous manner talking with the
Angel Gabriel ( according4o this fifth term of deſcription in
 thetext) whereas he was only viſited with the firs of his E-
pileptick. diſeaſe; and inthat he pretended theſe abſurd Fan-
raſhes to be revealed to him by the Angel, he was a Diviner,
and a lying Enbufieſt (according to rhe ſecond term of de-
_ ſcription inthertexr ) inborh which ſenſe Sergi#s the Monck,
andthe reſt of his Companions aforeſaid, who joyned with
him in his deluſions, were Witches alſo; and herein it -is -
ſange to (ce the world of people that are infatuated by fo
groundleſs a Religion, for were it not for the ſtupidiry of
me nsmindes and underſtanding, God did enough diſcover
this Mahomet (the founder of this Turkiſh Religion) to bee
anImpoſtor') ar his death, for when hee boalted himſelf
that at his degth he would rife again the third day as Chriſt
did, Albanar, oncof his D{ciples, to try thetrutch of his Do-
&rins and vaticiniations, gave him a of deadly poyſon,

which being drunk he {welled and dyed, and ſome hopin
to ſee his ReſurreFtion ler him lye twelve days above ground,
untill he ſkunk ſo mtollerably that all men left him; and up-
on the twelfth day Albu»ar coming to view his Corps found
His bones almoſt barc, his fleſh being caren with Doggs ;
wherefore he gathered his bonestogether aiid buricd them in
a por, yerfor the eſtabliſhing of the Empire, to his Succeſ-
ſors, they maintain ſtill his Religion,” and have made him an
Jron Sepulchre at Mecha. | Des |
So muchtor the Fifth deſcription of a Witch in the text,


Freftigiarvr, a Jugler,


The


"Wes -


| 4 Charmer


The Sixth Deſcription,


He Sixth deſcriptionot a Witch inthe Text, is, TwoAnta-
'F tory OC Htens incantatione » that 1 1Sy All Inchanter » OL ulcer .
ot Charms or a Charmer. |
A Charm (as is (aid before inthe Fifth deſcription) is on-
ly a ſtrange compoſure of words to blinde the underſtandings
of people, it pretending that by vertue of words great mat-
rers were brought to paſs, and theſe Charms were ww cither
before a Juglin Trick; to bulte the naindes of the SpeQators,
ro make the Trick pals the more currently withour being
rceived, as RR es uſed them, who are ſaid to-
othat which t Hieyl oh with their Inchantments, becauſe
they ſeemed ro do things by vertue of words ſpoken, which
were not done at all, but Gy diſlembled by fs jugling craft ;
(which demonſtration of a Charm, or. Incantation uſed in
that kinde is alſo ſet dewn. in the Fifth deſcription ).or elſe
otherwiſe theſc Charms were; ſed gr {(poken alone without a
ling flight, and thereby 1 Way Pete ctended) that by vertue.of
{uch and ſuch words ſpoken, ſuch things ſhould Ba to paſs
as the party deſired, who inquired v5, Charmers for mat-
ters of concernment ; ſoretinaes theſe Charms were givenin
writing for amr Dug, bis PRrIRE- or to in his
pocket,. pretending. that by ye thoſe words his
ters ſhould be brought: ro pales 1 dre wor of hen
cither (poken, ' or writt pe Ss noforce to
to paſs ;. neither was It, the, word Ephatha, MEAT > 34- Os
opened theears of the. deaf. (as I Womans Wizards
would Ci Prog FeNe It was ) him
far tha ke it; yet ſuc Ss a TIED ts, |
Hall Proghers. « as NEL Gods Prophets ſpake. mos in
the name of the Lord, and the things they
paſs by Gods power, thoſe Idol Prieſts and.
Pretenced, that by vertue of words they could-b
he like, 2ad ſo they led the people a-ghor
regard more their Fooliſh deluding
of Godzihat bringeth all things to open”, |


ad


The Firſt Book,


The Rewan South-ſayers gave their Charms in verſe,
from whence is derrved the word Charm, from Carmen, ſigni-
fying a Verl6, or a Charm ; the manner of Charms ſome-
times conſiſted 1n bleſſing and curſing, the Inchanter preten-
ding, That by vertue of a Charm he could bleſs, and that
they were bleiled that carried ſuch words about them writ-
renina pager: or that had ſuch words ſpoken to them, or in
their behalf by the Charms ; and that by verrue of an Incan-
tation pronounced againſt any man, that man was curſed,
and that he that carried ſuch a Charm with him, his enemies
were curſed, and ſhould fall before him, Eliſha indeed cur-
ſed rwo and forty Children in the name of the Lord, and
they were accurled, becauſe ir was the wrath of God pro-
nounced againſt them by his Propher, 2 King, 2, 2 3. but hee
that impureth it to the yertue of a Curſe, and uſerh ſuch
words as Eliſha \ſpake to bring ſuch a thing to paſs, againſt an
_ enemy, without warrant from God, hee is an inchanting
Witch; and he thar truſteth ro ſuch words meerly for the
vertue of words, cither of bleſſing or curſing, is an [dolater,
not diſcerning the power of » the Curſe without cauſe
ſhall not come, Prov. 3. 33. neither ſhall bleſſing or curſing

revail any thing if it benot from the Lord ; it Aticaieh had
Þrophclied good rothe King of [ſrael, as he would have had
him) it had not availed, bur it had been a meer Charm,
that is, a meer compoſare of unwarranted words, 1 King.
22, 13, and yet his falſe Prophets could pleaſe him well,
making him beleeve that by vertue of their pretended Pro-
pheſie ( which was but a meer Charm) all things ſhould
go well with him, 1 King. 22. 10,11,12,

A moreplain demonſtration of this Diſcourſe is the Hiſto-
ry of Balaam, Numb. 22, 6, 'Balac ſcht to Balaam to Curie
_ the peopleof Iſrael, burhe concludeth, Numb, 23. 27. there
is no inchaming againſt Iſrael, for had Ba/aam played the
inchanting Wirch, as: Balac would have had him, it had
availed norhing, becanſe Charms are of no force, no more
than 'Divinations, which arc only .given by deceiving
Witches to cheat Idolatrous foo!s of their mony, And in
Chap. 24. yer, 1, it is faid, Salaam went not as Mm v4

ct


4 Chaner. © *


ferch Inchantments, or Incantations, that is, groundleſs and
unwarranted Execrations, which arc but Charms of no
force, but only to delude the Hearers ; for it is underſtood in
the Chapter and Verſe aforeſaid, not that Balzers. had for-
merly gonctofterch Incantations, for it is ſaid in Chap. 22.
verl. 19, and chap. 23, 3» 4» 5. verſes, he went to inquire of
the Lord ; but here in Chap. -24.' 1. it is ſpoken according to
che intention of Balak and his Princes, for they deſired that
Balaam would but curice [ſrae!, whether he had warrant or
not, ſuppoſing the words b.ing but ſpoken by him were ſuf-
ficient, as 1s ſaid in Chap. 22, verl. 6, and Chap 23. verſ. 1r.
which intcation of theirs is here in Chap. 24. verl. 1. called
ferching of Incantations, for it implycth the fooliſh ſuppoſi-
tion of Balakand his Princes, which they expreſled in chap.
22, yerl, 6, That whomſoeycr Balaam curied were accur-
{ſcd, and whom he bleſſed were bleſſed; for if a very Prc-
phet ſhould fo farre tranſgreſs, and go without warrant
from God in bleſſingand curſing, or Prophecying, that Pro-
phet were no more a Prophet, but an inchanting deludins
Witch, and his words would not be worth regarding ; an

this is a {ufficient demonſtrationof a Charmer, or Inchanter,
or uſer of Incantations, being the Sixth term of deſcription
inthe text, that is, that maketh any compoſure oft words to
delude the people, pretending to the people any -vertue in
words to bring things to paſs, and {o cauleth people not to
diſcernthe power ot God thar bringerh all things to paſs, but
to impure things tothe power of words, being bur Charms,
or Incantations. And indeed the fore-named Hiſtory of
Balaamy, it it be rightly obſerved, is a large and a plain de-
monſtration of the vanity of this ſort of Witchcraft, whereby
people were commonly ſeduced by faiſe Prophets, or
Witches, by liitening only to the ſound of words, and not
ro God the only diſpolcr and bringer of all things to pals;
for it appcareth inthe Hiſtory, that when Balak had cauſed
Balaam to try all the ways that could be tocurſethe people by
Charms and he could not ( becauſe God gave him no war-
rant, and he knew it was 1n vain to do it without warrant )


yet Balawm tranſgreſſing the word and command of God)
H ſhewed


Ae.


49


$0 - The Firſt Bock,


ſhewed to Balak the only way to bring a Curſe u Iſrael
indeed, and that was by {cducing them to Ido i
cauſing their God to bee angry with them, as appearcth,
Numb. 24. 14, Where It 1Sto be marked, That Rx pars 1!
that verſe this counſel of Balaam to Balak is not ſet down ar
large, yr the ctte& thereot appearcth in the next Chapter,
and alſo in Revel. 2. 4. and. 7»de, yer. 12, where we may
(ce that Balaam for reward taught Balakto-lay a ſtumbling-
block before the people, to cauſe them. to fall, that ſtumb-
ling-block werethe Idols of Moab, which they being defiled
ahatl, brought down the trownsof God upon them, Nemb,
25. 3- butto hurt them with Charms or Incantations, was
a Vain and Idolatrous fuperſtition of Balak, and if Balaam
had -<ns bus cxpettation, he had been indeed a Juglins
Witch. |

The manner of Heathen Kings was, to ſtrengthen them-
ſelves in their Kingdom ( as : thought in their Idola-
trous credulity ) by theſe Inchantments, ſuppoſing, thar if
their inchanting falſe Prophets, ( which were alſo Planetari-

ans, and South-fayecrs, and Jugling deluders) did but utter
their Inchantments, ( being prerended Prophecies, and cur-.
{ings artificially compoſed ) againlt their enemies, that then
their enemies thould tall before themg, and this is manifeſt in

- the Scriptures, not only of Balak. but of the King of Babel,

- andoftheChaldeans, (4.47.12, Stand now with thy Inchant-
ments wherewith thou halt labourcd from thy youth, it per-
haps thou maiſt profit, it perhaps thou ſhalt ſhew thy {elt
ſtrong. This alſo was Ahabs Idolatry, when he defired Mi-
caiah to Prophciic good unto him againſt Rameth Gilead, .
thinking by vertue of ungrounded Prophecie ( which had
yo but a meer compoſed Charm ) hee ſhould preyail,
i King. 22,13.

Here may ariſe a Queſtion, Whether every one that cur-
ſeth his Neighbour be a Witch or not; according to this
Sixth deſcriptionintherexr 2

Tothis I anſwer, Thar all bleſſing and curſing is nor the
formal cſſence of an Inchanter, for every one ought to bleſs,
Lukes 6, 28, and he indeed that curſeth his Neighbour, fay-


ng,


AM Charmet: |
ing, A Plague take bim,or 1 would he might break his neck, or ne-
ver come home again,is acurling railer,like Shimer,and a wicked
breaker of Gods Law, tor we ought to pray for our cne-
mies; bur all this kinde of paſſionare curſing doth not make
an Inchanter, or Witch, bur that bleſſing or curſing that
maketh an Inchanter or Witch, or is of the eſſence of an In-
chanter, is the proteſſed craft of compoting bleſkings and
curſings, whereby they drew the people a whoring after
them, makins them beleeve, that by vertue of Charms,
wanomſoever they bleſſed were bleſled, and whom they cur-
ſed were accurſed , as Balakand his Princes veing trained up
iathat kinde of Idolatry, thougat, and faid of Balaam; and
had Bal:am anſwered them according to their expeSations,
he had been an Inchanter, or Witch, or falſe Frophet ; this
deſcription of a Charmer, as alſogll the nine rerms of de-
{cription of a Witch in the text, being only deſcriptions of
falſe Prophets that ſeduced the people; and whereas Gods
Prophets bleſſed in the name of the Lor1, as 1ſaac bleſſed
Jacob, or curicd, or pronounced a Curlſc, as E!i/ha againſt


5x


the forty and two Children, 2 Kzg. 2. 24. and inall this, and __


in ail other Propheſyings they did nothing of themfelyes,
nor could any whit cranſgreſs the Word of the Lord ; ſo on
the contrary, falſe Prophets would give Divinations for re-
wards without any warrant or command from God ; as
Balak (uppoſing Balaam would doe, {entthe reward of Divi-
nations» Numb. 22, 7, ( that is there to be taken ) he ſent the
reward of Inchantments, or Incantations; tor Divinations
againſt any man, that 1s unwarranted Propheſying againſt
any man; 15 Inchantments ( Divinarions properly pretending
Predictions, and mamicſtation of things hidden, being the
Second deſcription) but to uſe any compoſure of Divining
words, thereby to cauſe any thing to come to paſs, as Balak.
thought Balaam could do, and as Ahab thought Micaiab
could doezis Incantation, or Inchanting here.
Here may ariſe atother Queſtion, Whether was Balaar
a Witch or not, as ſome have ſuppoſed ?
Anſw. It he was a Witch, it mult be according to ſome
one term of deſcription in Dex. 18, 10, 11, but which of
H 2 rheſ(c


-f


The FirÞ Book,

theſe can wecall him? Inchanter he was none, for he refu-
{cd rodo it» although he was offered a reward. Surely Ba-
laim was a Prophet of God, whom Balak, thought could
bring things to paſs by his own power, he not diſcerning the
power of God. All that we rcad of him in uttering, of his
Parables was to this end, That 1ſrae! was blcfied, and In-
caitations or Curling could not hurt them.

2 The Hiſtory is a real Prophecic ated by Balaam by.
| Gods appointment, concluding all in this one Dottrin, That
the only way to bewitch Iſrael, was to lay ſtumbling-blocks
before them, to infnare them with f1ns, and to bring down
Gods Judgements upon them, Numb: 24. 14. Kevel, 2, 14.
vet the calling of this a Prophecic {cemeth to be contradifto=

y to the Scriprtures,tor how could he be ſaid to be a Prophet

| God, thattaught Balak how to bring a curle upon [ſrael?

ucit we mark well the Hiiltorygit may {cem to ſome to be ful
of contradictions, as in Namb, 22,12, God {aid to Balaam,
Go not, and ver{. 29. Kiſe up andgo with them; and verl. 22:
T he wrath of Ged was kindled becauſe he wem ; and verl. 34.
Balaaw laid, If it diſpleaſe thee, I will return home again; and
verl.. 35. The Agel ſaid, Ge with the men; what is the mean-
1Ng of this, 'go net, and yct go lo often repeated ? That 1s,
g0 not according tothe hirc and requeſt of Ba/akto play the

ncaanter, but £o ro do the work ot a Prophet, to thew the
vaility of Balak, his thoughts, who thinkerh that words can
preyail cither to Bleſs or toCurſe without warranttrom God;
and {0 Balaam as a Prophet obeycd the Lord, and did asthe
Lord commanded him, as. appcareth in all the Hiſtory ;
but yer it | pare Revel, 2.14. hce taught Balak to lay a
ſ{tumbling-block beforc the people, was that the part of a
Prophet? yca according tothe. fore-named ſeeming contra-
_ dictions it was, and it was not; for in the truth of the Do-
&rin that he delivered to Balak, that that was the only way
ro bring a C urfc upon the peoplc, to caule them to commit
Idolatrv, it was I parc of a Prophet, bur in that it became
a ſnare to Iſrael, if wasthe part of a Witch, or a falſe Pro-
plct , yet God would have ſuch a thing come to paſs by his
Prophet tor the tull illuſtration of this Doftrin jn the Scrip-


ures


4 Charmer.

eures, (for our ſakes) that no Inchantment can hurt us, but
the only thing that can hurt any man is ſinning againſt God,
as God hath taughr us cllewhere, Dezr. 28, the tourtcen firtt
verics, the only way to bc blelſt, 1s, ro keep the Commande-
ments of God, and trom vcrl. 15.to the end of the Chapter »
the oaly way to be accurſt, is, t> difobey God, and break
his Commandements. And whereas Balaam was blamed,
and attcrward {lain for teaching this Dogtrin {o plain to
Balak,who abuled it to inſnare [/rae/, yer God hath taught us
the ſame Doftrin, that we might knoiv with Iſrael, and by
Iſraels example, that nothing can hurt us bur {1n. So we may.
conclude of Balaam, that he was a Prophet, aud yet acted the.
part of a Prophet and a: Witch both at once ( ar leaſt) a Pro-:
phet, in that. his Do&rine was-true,. a Watch, 1n that hee.
taught Balak; to play the Witchz. that 1s, to draw the
pcopleto Idolatry, according to the Firſt deſcription, which.
15 the ycry cllcnce of Witchcrafrz and although God would
have this thing come co paſs torour 1n{truction, yer this was:
the crrour of Balaaw, . That hce had laid open to Balak; the
way to bewitchthe people, and 1n this only he tranſgretled,,
he did that which God had not commanded him, . as ſome 0-
ther Prophets did beſides him, 1. King. 13. 18, 19, 22,

To this Sixth deſcription ofa Witch in the text, 1s referred
that place in Jerem. 23, 19, ſo commonly falfly interpreted as
talily tranſlated, Becauſe of Oathes the Land monrneth, as it
it were meant of common Swearing, which although Swear-
ing be a wicked thing, yet what room is there 1n that place
for Swcaring? unlel(s yee will bring it in abruptly by head
and ſhoulders, what cohcrence is there? T remelizs ttanſla-
reth it thus, The Land is full of Adulterers, and becauſe of
Execrations the Land monrueth ; Execrations 1s there taken
for Incantations, being by a Synechdoche put for all kind of
Witchcraft, being an inſeparable companion of I.lolatry,
Adulterers are taken for Idolaters in a Spiritual ſcnſc, and the
falſe Prophets thar uſed theſe Incantations to {ſeduce the pco-
pleare ſpoken of, verl, 1,11, 13. who being falſe Props


or Witches, had defiled the Land with their ſcyeral feducing
Witchcratcs , leading the people .co Tdolatry, and in this
; practice .


y


The Firſt Book,


iceof Charming Execrations, they were ſeducers of the
Rc ro repole confidence in ungrounded, and unwarranted
compoſures of words to bring things to pais, which words {
compoſed are meer Incantations, or Charms.
In this Sixth deſcription of a VVitch in the text, or under
the term of a Charmer, is contained Conjurers, who are
Witches only in this ſenſe, That they pretend that by ver-


' .tue of words they can do many things, and amongſt the reſt,


that they can by vertue of words command the Devil, which
yet is but a meer cheating deluſion to deceive poor Idolatrous
people, who do more credit the vertue of words than they
credit thetruth of GodsW ord;which tooliſh prattice is ſuffict-
ently contuted, Atts 19. 13, certain Exorciſts, or Conjwrers, did
take upon them to name over them that had evil Spirits, the
nameof the Lord Jeſus,ſayingsT adjure you byJeſn whows Paul
preacheth, and the Evil Spirits anſwered and faid, Jeſws [
acknowledge, and Paul Ikyow, but who are yee? Paul and the
reſt of the Apoſtles dill indeed caſt our Devils in the Name of
Jeſus, bur not by the bare naming of Jeſus, but by rhe ſpirir
'and power of Jetus; but if words could have done it, then
choſe Conjurers might as well have done it, and then every
one that could bur imitate.the Apoſtles, and the Prophets,
and (peak the ſame words, or the like, might work Mira-
cles, 35 God will have it known otherwiſe, as appeareth
in this place of the As aforeſaid, That no words (poken,
but the power of God bringeth things to pals.

This/ was the manner of Idolatrous Heather, to repoſe
great confidence in Charms, and they that ſtudied this pra-
Etice of making and compoſing of Charms to ſeduce the peo-
ple to this kinde of Idolatry, were Wairches, according tothis
oIxth deſcription in the text, Wrens incantatione,

It we dobut read of the Heathen, we may ſee in many
places how they Idolized Charms, or Incantations.

Plutarch (auth, That Agazice the Daughter of Hege-


'* torts Theſali being s$kiltul in the courſe of the Planets,


tore-told to certain credulous people an Eclipſe of the
Moon, and they hail ſuch confidence in Charms, thar
when they flaw it cam: to. pals, they belceved that Aganice

| had


A Charmer.
had with Charms plucked rhe Moon from hcaven, Like to
that in Virgil Eclog, 8.


Carmina vel Calo poſ. HNt deducere Lanam,
Carminibwus Circe ſocios mutavit Uyſſis,
Frigidn inpratis cantando rumpitur anguis,


Inchantments pluck ont of the Skie

The Moon, though fhe be placed high;
Dame Circcs with her Charms ſo fine,
Ulyfles Mates did turn to Swine;

The Snake with Charms ts burſt in twain,
In meadows where ſhe doth remain,


Notwithſtanding the Prophet David celleth us, That the
cat Adder heareth not, or regardeth nor the voyce of the
molt skiliul uſer of Charms, P/al. 58. 5. where he alluderh
(with gas Po the vain conceit of the Heaghen, who re-
poſed ſuch confidence in Charms,and imputed ſuch power to:
words. This Heatheniſh Witchcraft to cauſe people thus to
Idolize Charms, is ſtill pra&iſed by the Pope and his Trains
their whole form of Religion,. both in publike worſhip and
common practice, conſiſting of Charms of all.ſorts, and of
that very ſpecifical difference of Incantation or. Charming,
which 1s called Conjuring,.. and if we look inthe Maſle-book,
and if you (carch Dxrandws, you may finde Charms abun-
dance, and he that is loath to take ſo much paines, let him
but ' look Mr, Scots diſcovery of Witchcraft, the.rwelith
Book, the ninth Chapter, and ſo forwards, where he hath
neatly ſet forth the Witchcraft of the Pope, and his Train; in
the manner of their ſeveral Charms ( though not exemplify-
ingthetenth part of them) I will alſo ſhew you three or
four of thefi, which Maſter Scot hath alſo rchcarſed,. with
_— more,

e firſt ſhall be the Amnlet that Pope Lees ſaid he ha

from an Angel, who did bid him take it to a certain King.
ong Bartel, andthe Angel ſaid, that whoſoever carri

that VYriting about him, and fajd eyery day three Pater


noſt erss..


The Firft Book,


noſters, three Avies, and one Creed, ſhall not that day bee
conquered of hisenemies, nor. be in any other danger ghoſt-
ly or bodily, bur ſhall be proteged by vertue of theſe holy
Names of jelus Chriſt written, with the four Eyangelitts,
and the Crofles berween them,


+ Jeſus + Chriſt #s + Meſſi + Soter + Emanuel + Sabbaoth
+ Adonai 1 Unigenitu + HMajeſt as T Paracletut + Salvator No-
ſfter + Agiros Likiros 4 eAgios t Athanatos þ Gaſper 4 Melchiar
+ & Balthaſar + Matthens 4} Marcus þ Lucas þ Johannes,


Another Charm of Pope Leo ſent to a King, having the
like vertucs init, being read or carried about a man ( being
in an Epiſtle written þy St, Saviawr jn theſe words, )


The Croſs of Chriſt i a wonderful defence 4} The Croſs of
Chriſt b: always with me 4 The Croſs is it which I do always
worſhip 4+ The Croſs of Chriſt « true health }. TheCroſ\ of Chriſt
doth looſe the bands of death + The Croſs of Chriſt s the truth
and the way | I take my jonrney upon the Croſs of the Lord 4 The
Croſs of C hriſt beateth down every evil } The Croſs of Chriſt
giveth all goadthings 4 The Croſs of Chriſt raketh away pains
everlaſting + The Croſs of Chriſt jou me 4 OCreſs of Chrift
be upon me before and behind me 4 becauſe the ancient enemy can
not abide the ſight of thee 4 The Croſs of Chriſt ſave me, keep
me, govern me, and direit me 4 Thomas bearing the nore of thy
Divizxe Majeſty + Alpha 4 Omega | firſt and lajt 4 midſt 4 and
end 4 beginning + avd firſt begotten 4 Wiſdome + and


Vertue |


This is {till a common praStice among the Pagſts to carry
Charms about them ( ro make them Shor-tree) when they
goto Warrc, as alſo hath becn found by expcricnce in the
late /r:h \Warrcs (before the Ceſſation of Arms proclaimed
by King Charls) many of the poor Idolatrous 1riſh Rebels
being found flain with Charms 1n their pockets, compoſed
by the Popiſh Clergy,the Witches of rhelc latter times.


Another


A Charmer.
Another tobe ſaid intime of Sickneſs ; firſt, ler the Party
ſprinckle himſelt with Holy Water, and chea (ay this Charm


following, :


he}


Aqua beneditt a ſit mihi ſalus & vita,
Let Ho!y Water be both life and health ts me,


Another to be ſaid every day, and uponevery occaſion, as
often as any danger or occaſion ſhall be; firlt, let the party
that would be bleit croſs himſelf with his finger, making a
{ign of the Croſs three or four times, and then fay theſe
words, and then without doubt he ſhall be ſafe,


Signum ſan{t « cructs def.ndat me a malis preſentibus, prete-
ritis, & futuris, interioribus & exterioribus,


That is, The ſignof the Holy Croſs defend me from evils
preſent, paſt, and to come) inward and outward,

A Charm or Conjuration, or an Exorciſm, whereby they
wake Holy Water in the Popiſh pontifical, /» Eccleſie


dedicatione,


I conjure thee thou Creature of Water,in the name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghoſt, that thou drive the Devil ont of
every corner of this Church and Altar, ſo that he remain not
within our precinits, which are juſt and holy. |


After theſe words ſpoken, ſay they, that Water ſo Con-
jurcd hath power and vertue to drive away the Devil, and
with this Holy Water they uſe many ſeveral Conjurations
to keep the Devilin awe; with it they Conjure him from
their Churches and dwelling houſes, from their meat and
drink, andthe very Salt upon the Table; and if it were aot
for their continual Conjurarions, they make people belceve
the Devil would walk every where, and kill, and devour,and
carry away ; therefore they Tharm and Conjuce their Bells


ia the Steeple (which they alſo Baptize and name by che 6 -
I name "Þ


; The Firft Book,


me of ſore Saint or Angel, and after theſe Ceremonies,
( lay they) and after ſuchholy names named over the Bells,
2:1d rac name of ſome Saint orAngel given to eachBel,&werir-


' rea upon them, thoſe Bells have vercue to drive away and


clear the air from Devils every where within the ſound of


them, from whence was the firſt beginning of pailing peals,.


that the Devils mighe not come near to carry away the Soul
ot the dying man ( although our Church ule ( Iconteſs )to
ring fuch peals only to give riorice to their Neighbours, who
defire to ſee them, and to pray for them before their depar--
tare.) They alſo uſe Charms at Funerals, perſwading peo-
le; that the Souls of the dead, and alſo their Bodies, would
carried away by the Devil, if ir werenot for their char-
mins ( of which toppery Bxcas a learned Theologian re-
proyeth them, Loco 24, 2#4ſtione 16,) and ſo the poor Po-
Piſh people are deluded fo long as they ſee not the Devil in
anugly thape, they think they are ſafe, and the Devil farre
crouehs whercas the Devil 15 no where more than in a Po-
iſh Charm or Conuration; and yer Maſter Scor hath colle-
ed in his rwelfcth Book {ſo many Popiſh Charms, as it ap-
arcth they had Conjurations, and other Charms for the
lague, the Quartain Feaver, the Conſumption, the Tooth-
ache, and all manner of Dilcaſes in Men and Cartel; and it


| $oboor r {til} among common filly country people, how
x


cufing Cartel, Men, Women) and Children; for churning of
Burter, for baking their Bread, and many other occaſions ;
one or two whereof I will rehearſe only, tor brevity,

An old Woman in Efex wiio was living in my time, ſhe
had lived alfo in Queen Maries ' time, had learned thence
many Popiſh Charms, one whereof was this; every night
when the lay down to ſleep ſhe charmed her Bed, faying ;


| Matthew, Mark, L«ke, and Jobs,
The Bed bebleſt that 1 lye on.


cy had learned Charms by tradition fromPopiſh rumcs, for


And this would ſhe repeat three times, repoſing great con-
fidence therein, becauſe( as fhe ſaid) ſhe been taught


it


ir, when ſhe was a young Maid by the Church-men 0
thoſe.tumes. ER |

Another old Woman came into arrhoule ata time when
as the Maid was churning. of Butter, and having labou-
red long and could not make her Butter come, the old Wo-
man told the, Maid what was wont to be done when ſhe was
a Maid, and alſo in her Methers young time, that if it hap-
pened rheir Burrer would k come readily, they uſed a
Charm to be {aid OVCT ty, WT. yer 4t was in beating, and it
would come ſtraight:wways, ani that was this: |


.


Come Butter come, come Butter come, Peter ſtauds at the
Gate, waiting for a buttered Cake, come Butter come, '


Thissſaid the old Woman,being ſaid three rimes,will make
your 'Butter come, for it was taught my'Mother by a lear-
ned Church-man in -Queen aries days, when as Church-
men- had more cunning, and could teach people many a
trick, that our Miniſters now a days know nor.

"Thus we may ſee {till how the Witchcrafts of that grand
Witch, that Whore of Rome, hath deceived all bo le; yer
I would not have any think that I accuſe the old Wives for
Witches, for they uſed theſe 'Charms not to ſeduce, bur
were ſeduced, and bewitched by them to repoſe confidence
in them; but the Popiſh Rout, the contrivers of theſe
Charms, todelude the people, were the Witches ; thoſe poor
deluded old Wives were Idolaters,Idolizing of words,


.60 The Firſt Book,


| LLLLLIPLLLLHKHSEKHEGHALEAERY


A Devilliſh practice of Conjuring
Charms ufed by the Popiſh Clergy, diſco-

» R  _ yered at Orleazce in Faggie, ated chiefly by

4 two Popilh Doftors Wivinity, Colimann,

| and Stephanus Aterbatenfis,and their

yery found out.


Gb a * #


Nthe place aforeſaid, in the ycar of our Lord, 1534. it
happened. that a Maiors Wite dyed, and was buricd in
"= _ the Church 'of the Franciſcavs, her Husband giving the
ly  PopiſhClergy only fix Crownsat the Funeral, whereas they
[ expected a greater Prey,. and were much. diſcontent ; it hap-
| pencd ſhortly after that as they. were mumbling their Pray-
=_— ers a Popiſh manner, according to their uſual cuſtom, in
bd. the.Church, there was heard in a ſecret Wainſcot over the
Mt Arthes of the Church a great rumbling noyſe, the Moncks
=. With.che ſaid Doors preſently began.ro Cotyure, and to ask
it jt were not ſome ſpirit of ſome body YE dead, an1 if it
wer *,:hey conjured the ſame Spiricto rumble again by way


.


EW of anlwer, which it did; then they charged him by their
| Copjurarionsto anſwer by rumbling and knocking whoſe
T age 1t was, they named many = 12 oy formerly been dead
A and buried, andthe: Spirit would not anſwer by rumbling
} and knocking when they named them ; bur ar laſt to bring
;  _  theirpurpoſeto pals, they named the Maiors Wiife, and then
=: the Spirit rumbled exceedingly, and made a fearful noyie,
.Þ this they ated ſeveral times, that it might be known in the
13 Citys lo that many people came to the hearing and witneſſing
_ ofthis ſtrange Wonder ; but at the laſt they by their Conjura-

- tions had made the Spirit ſo tame, as it made them anſwer

by knocking to any thing they deſired ir ſhould anſwer; al-

= "ways when 1t anſwered not by Pg then they concluded


\ )

'F the thing was not ſo as they asked, or demanded, but other-
I NF. Ways
|


A Charmer. ©


ways when it knocked, then that was an afhrmarive to the
thing asked ; ar Jaſt oy the Spiric confc(s by that


manner of anſwering, Thatir was the departed Soul of the
Majors Wife, and that ſhe was damned for holding the He-
reſie of Luther, and that ſhe deſired that her Body might bz
taken up again and buricd in ſome other place, for that place
was not fit tor the body of the Damaed, being a Conſecrated
place. Bur the Maior being wile, and full of courage, ſo
Lancia the matter, that he with the help of ſome of the
Ciry that loved him well, cauſed the place to bee ſearched
where the noyic was 3 the Moncks did take the matrer gric-
vouſly, and would have reſifted, it bcing at a time of the
holy Conjuring,. but yet the Maior cauſing a ſearch, found
there a young Boy, placed there by theſe Popiſh DoQors, ©
purpoſe to act the part of a Spirit, as. formerly related, an
upon examination he confeſſed the whole impoſture, to the
ſhame and confuſion of the Aﬀors and Contrivers thercot,
who were by the Laws ( which were rhen and there free
notwithſtanding the Popiſh Tyranny ) ccnfured to be car-
ricd to the place of Exccution, there to confe(s their delu-
ding Witchcraft,

Let the Reader take ſpecial notice, that the Aors, and
Contrivers of this notable peece of Witchcraft were Witches
inathree-told ſen(e. |


Firſt, Intheir bringing ro paſs their cheating impoſture, by
confederating with a young Boy to att the parr of a Spirits.


they were Juglers,according tothe firſt term of deſcription.


ccondly, In their Charms and Conjurations, whereby :


they charged the Spirit to an{wer them, they were Inchan-


ters and Conjurers, according to this. Sixth term of. de--


{cription.


Thirdly, In their conſulting wich the ſpirit of the: dead,,


the Maiors Wite, they were Necromancers, according to
the Ninth term of deſcription.


This Impoſture may be paralleled with that of the Witch.
of Ender ; trom this couſening Witchcraft of the Popiſh-


crue, our common Wizards have learned their craft of
coulcrung the people, making them beleeyc they can Conjure


I'3 up


*,


. 4 £ 4 -P » "EFT. ©.4
424 i . ! rar & > lat. Aides. 704 *, 4 F
: da » * | .. "ns « UL BN pg 3340 ,o +, a.) WP. \ R "4 . f
4 Ws m"— ret, 9 _ , —_—Y T's F 4
\ i LETS" 4 bas a, -.
0 ow» fp £ a KOT o C's +  _ —_ _ x
* a, ITT”


Be? 5
+
4
in


The Firſt Book,


up the Devil to give them Oracles according to the'tmarter
that they (eek ro the Wizard to be reſolved of, and-can.con-
jure him down again at their pleaſure. As for example, I
will give you a true ftory, but whether you beleeye it or
not, it will ſerve -to 1lultrate the manner of their decei-
VINgs.
\ Butcher in Eſſex having loſt Cattel, hee reſolved hee
would go to a-Cunning many to know what was become of
his Cattel, and fo-went to a notable couſenins Knave, that
was ( as common people ſay ) $kiltul in the Black Art, and
this deceiving Witch, ſeeing his opportunity of gaining a
Fee, for the purpoſe in hand, uſed his-Conjurations 1n a room
contrived for his -uſual impoftures, and Cy came ina
'Confederate of 'his covered over with a Bulls Hide, and a
pair of horns on his head, the poor Butcher fitring and look-
ins itia Glaſs made for that purpoſe, in which hee was to
behold the'Objet more terrible, and not ſo eaſily diſcove-
red as it he had looked rign upon it, for he was charged by
the Conurer not to look behind him, for tf he did, the Devil
would be outragious ; this confederate, or counterteit De-
vil, aftcr the Conjurers many exorciſing Charms, or Conju-
ratiohs, willed the Butcher to look Eaſt and Weſt, North
nd South to finde his Cattel ; the Butcher ſought much' to
finde his Cartrel according to the Devils counſel, bur yer per-
ceiving after much ſeeking and not finding that it was a
Mecr pecce otK navyery, returned to the Conyurer again, and
defired him to call up the Devil once again, which he did as
formerly, but the Butcher had appointed his Boy to ſtand
nearhand without the houfe with a Maſtiff Dogge, and at
'theBurchers whiftle, 'the Boy as he was appointed, let go the
Dogge, which came in preſently to his Maſter, and ſcifed
 *ueponthe Knave in the Bulls hidez the Conjurer cried ont, as
"-Hkewiſe the Devil, For the love of God take off your Dogpge,
#Vay, ſaid the Butcher, fight Dogge,' fight Devil, if you will
" wrttere your Devil, I will venture my Dogge; but yer after
'Tmuch inrceaty he called off his Dogge, bur wittily diſcoye-

'redrhe chearing craft of Conjuring.
HethataRerh the part as this Conjurer did, with the ſame
intent


-
_——


. 4 Charme..


intent to deceive,. and to make filly people belceve and: re-

poſe confidence in words ( that 1s, in Charms and Conurati-

ons to command the Devil, and to Keep him in awe) 1s 4
ſ(educing Witch, as he was; but hethat adtcth the lame yart,

and cauſcth people to-wonder at him, andrto think thar hee

hath really conjured the Devil, tothis intent only to ſtew to

the world in a ſporting way, how. cafily people are and baye

been deceived, 15 no hs but may be an inlkruger and
inlightner of filly people, a. to the Fifth deſcription

of Jugling deluſions;in Pag.42. And truly (if people were not

ſo much naturally given to vali credulity,, or belceving of

Lyes) that ſorr of Coyurers ( ſo commonly prated of by

ſilly people) had not been heard of in the world, had nor.
theſe delnders learned this couſening craft from the Popiſh.
rout, whereby they delude filly people, making them be-
leeve they do things really by. yertue of words, as by the na-
ming of the Truuty; 'and the ſeycral names of God, and of
Chriſt, and by naming of Angels, Arch-Angels, and the
Apoſtles ( jult the ſamc withPopiſh Conjurarions. ) whercas
their douigs,. as likewiſe the Popes, are all but cheating im=
paſtures , for it Conjuring Charms could keep the Devil
mn awe, why did hee not {ubmit to the Conjurers, 4s


19,13!
dpPHþPHHP php tb 1$$GÞ þD$$$ÞÞ$ bb bb $4:41d-


Another notable true Relation of what happened in a Town in:
England, wherein « plainly ſhewed hom eaſily men are de=
ceived by Tugling Confederacy in Con'uration,


| T happened, thata Miniſter being remote from his dwel--
ling, lodged inan Inne, and becauſe he wanted company:
fit tor him, he ſent tor a young Cambridge Schollar to keep
him company, who being of his ea cg and dwel-
ling in the Town, came to him, andafter ſome diſcourſe they:
[ fell into adiſpure about Witches, and their Power, the Mi-
niſteraffirming, That Witches do truly conjure up the De--
vilin ſeveral ſhapes as they liſt, tor faid he, I know m
that


The Firſt Book,


+


thar ſtood privately behind os oj when a Conjurer raiſed


up the Devil in the ſhape ofa Cock , and then again in the
ſhape of a Horſc, and heard the Cock crow, and the Horſe

neigh, bur being very dark they could not {ee him; bur the
_ Scholar holding the contrary opinion, ſaid, I will undertake
to demonſtrate the ſame thing to you in this Chamber, ſo as
you ſhall verily think chat 1 Conjure up the Devil in ſuch
thapes; Come on laid the Miniſter, it _ can do that, then
alſo will I acknowledge theſe things to be but deluſions,

Now mark how ſtrangely it happened, There was a Tap-
© Rters Boyin the Inne atthat time, who had by wanton cuſtom
gotten a faculty of jmitating the crowing of a Cock, the
neighing of a Horſc, the barking of a oy e, the quacking
of Ducks, and the noy{e of many ſeveral Bealts, in a very
wonderful manner ; the Scholar therefore, for the lively
ating of the forefaid Deluſion, went down, and inſtructed
this Boy to bring up a Jugge of Beer, and to ſet it down by
the fire, and then to convey himſelf under the Bed, and
withall to a the part of all (cveral Creatures as the Scholar
ſhould call for them by Conjuration ; now when this Boy had
ſo conveyed himſelf under the Bed, the Scholar did pur out
rhe Candle, and left no light inthe Chamber bur the obſcure
light ofa dim firezthe reliques of an Oftrec Faggot, and {aid
tothe Miniſter, Now will I make you belceye that I Con-
jure up the Devil, Come Pl#to, I have a Letter to be ſent
with all ſpecd rothe Pope, rhercfore I conjure and command
chee to come ſpeedily to me from the loweſt pit, in the ſhape
of a fwitt running Horle, that may carry this Letter with
ſpced, and bring me an anſwer ; then began the Boy to
{nort,and neigh, and ſtamp, very much reſembling a wilde
marwood Horſe, in ſo lively a reſemblance, as it mace the
Miniſter begiato look {ad, and amazed ; then ſaid the Scho-
lar, Now The well con{1dered rhe matter, thou art not a
Crcarure ſwift enough for this buſineſs, therefore I conjure
thee down again, and I command P:#ts to come to me in
rhe ſhape of a Grey-hound, Preſto,vade, jubeo, celeriter ; then
the Boy under rhe Bed barked, and howled fo like a Dogge,
as rhe Mimitcr did more and more creep cloſe to the corner


of


—  — ——=> JI-_——  _— _ —


© tn OradegiverT
of the Chinney, ſighing very ſadly, Then ſaid the Scho-


lar, I conſider that thou art not ſwift enough for my pur- -

ſe, therefore I command thee to return tothy place, and '
end me up a Cock ; then the Boy crowed ſo like a Cock; as .
no car ſhould diſtinguiſh ir from a natural Cock ; then ſaid.
the Scholar, I hou art not a Creature ſwift enough for ' my


parpoſc, therefore I command Plzto to ſend me up a Duck;


at that command the Boy did fo lively a& the quacking of


Ducks, as a man would haye thought thar many Ducks


becn in the room. Then began the Miniſter ſeriouſly ro ex-.
hort and admoniſh the Scholar, ſaying, YVerily tho# art farre:
gone, certainly thou art farre gone in thus oraft, and many.

| Set the Boy under, the.
Bed burſt our laughter, and came forth and ated his pare


more words ; at.which {o {ad


again openly, and madcthe Miniſter aſhamed.


Yet here it may be noted, that the Miniſters phantaſie was
ſo farre deluded, that he would not be perſwaded, but that


- {aw real Ducks ſquirming about the room, as he expreſ-
cd,

 Ifay theny how little credit ought Miniſters or other men
to give to flying Reports, when they themſelves may ſo
calily be deluded? The ſetting of Spels is referred to this de-
(cription, and 1s done only by confederacy with him thar is
ſpelled ; who fcigneth himſelf ſo Charmed, or ſpelled, that
others who would be in like ation of Theevery, might fear
ro come into that place to ſteal, pecauſe of the Spel. So
much for the Sixth term of deſcription in the text, Vrews in=
caxtatione, that iS, an Inchanter, or Charmer,


He Seventh term of deſcription of a Witch in the rext,

is Requirens Pythonzm, that is, Pythonicwa Sacerdes, ac-
cording to the ſenſe of Plzt:rch, De defefF. Orac. one that
ſceketh out an Oracle, as did the Prieſts of the Idol Apolls,
which - was called the Oracle of «4 polls; the ſame prattice
was common to the Prielts of all Idois, that were in requeſt
before the Idol Apello (although indeed Sono being the molt
famous of the lateſt Idols, hath more Hittories and reporrs
{till extant conceraing Bs than all ———

_ nave


A
Z A


* The Firſt Book,


have) as Plurerch witneſſeth, that in Bevtis there had been
. many Oracles, ſome whereot grew filent when their Prieſts
dyedand ſome grew out of requeſt for want of {ubtilry in gi-
yingan{wers (and becauſe the impoſtures grew ſo common
*thar people knew them, and would not be deluded by them
any more.) We read there of the Lebadian Oracle, and the
Amphiaran Oracle, and alloof an Oracle of Mop, and ar
Amph:lochi, and many morc ; og had _— es __
appellation, according to the Language of the people ad-
- , as the Lebadian Oracle was on in | 3 Folic
ve, and had its peculiarappellation in that Language;
| the Oracle at Delphos was called by ſuch appellanons
as came from the Greek, and alſo from the Rowan Lan Iagc,
as Pythe, and Python, and Oraculum, and Oracles vſcd by the
ancient Heathen, were by the Hebrews in their Language
called Ob, which Oracles were only giving Divinations ro
the peoples inquiries, as when Ahafiz fem ro inquire of the
ood of Eckron, 2 we L. 2, {ave only this word 06 in the
text» Which is tranſlared Python, implicth, the impoſture
whereupon theſe deceivers upheld rheir Divinations, as fol-
lowerh by and by.
This is not to be underſtood that they thar did ſeck to
- fuch Witches as gave Oracles, that they alſo were Witches,
for theſe were only bewirched 1dolaters, but they only were
W izches.inthis-rerm of deſcription, rhat being ſought unto
by theſe deluded Idolaters, uſed fuch deluding impoſtures,
whereby they made the people beleeve they tought out an
Oracle ( thatis, an anſwer tothe inquiry of thoſe Idolaters)
either dirc(tly from their Idols, or elfe that they ſought out
an Oracle from the ſpirits of the dead.. as did the Pythiniſt of
Ender, in which ſenſe alſo they were called Necromamiſts,
that is, ſuch as asked counſel of the dead,. being the Ninth
term of deſcriprion, 2 Chron, x0, 13. Sanlus conſulere Pythe-
zen quefiſſet, Saul had ſought to ask counſel of the Oracle,
there Sai wasan Idolater, and not a Witch; bur ſhe thar
ſought out that Oracle for him from the dead, ſhe was a.
deluding Witch, : .
This deſcription, or term of deſcription of a Witch, hath a
| VALIOusS.


4n Oracle-giroer.

various manner of expreſſion in the Scriptures, which is
necdtul to 92 axtcl y tne Reader, for in this text, Dexs, 13,
1,11, {icha Win is called Pythonem requirens, one that
ſeckerh out an Oracle ; and in Levir. 20, 6, there ſuch' x
W icch is called Python, an Oracle-giver, in theſe words, A=
ima ques converterit ſe ad Pythenes & arioles mt ſcortando ſette=
tr eos, Fc, Thar foul that tarneth himſelt after Oracles
and South: ſayers; to commit Idolatry, in following them,
ſhall be cut oft; and in verl(. 27. of the ſame Chapter, Fire
autem aut mulieres ſi erit ex cis 'Pytho, aut ariolns, omninz morte
afficiuntor ; It there ſhall be found either man or woman that
is an Oractcr, ora Sourh-ſayer, they ſhall be put to death.
There is alloa Marginal note of Tremelline worth noting, in
theſe words, Qui Diabolicis axtibus reliquos 4 Det cultn &
ſi ſanitficatione avocant; Thoſe Oraclers and: South-fayers

ſaith he, arc ſuch as by their Neviliſh deluding craft do lead
others from the true Worſhip of God, and living holily.
People fo miſ-led to Idolatry are ſpoken of in verl\.6. chap. 2e.
of Leviticus afore noted, And further, look 1 Saw. 28, 7,
there ſuch a Wirch being of the female kinde, is called, Mmlrer
Pythone predita, A woman that hath the craft of Oracling,
of {ceking out an Oracle, And As 16. 16, there fuch a
Witch is {aid tohave aus wwS3, the ſpirit of Oracling ;
Where Beza in his Latine tranſlation ſaith in his marginal nes,
that that ſpirit of Oracling was o»ly an expreſſion, alinding tothe
1del Apollo, which was called Python, and gave anſwers ants
them that acked, namely, by the Prieſt s that belonged unto it, of
which Idol the Poets feigned many things ; ſo they that had ths
:mpoſt ure off Divination, were ſaid by the Heathen to be inſpired
by the ſpirit of Apollo, Plutarch de def. Orac. and m this
place of the Ats St, Luke ſpeaketh after the common phraſe of
the Heathen, becauſe he atlivereth the error of the commos
people, but not by what inſt init the Maid gave Divinations,. for


it is certain that under the mark. of that Idol, the Devil played bis.


de luding pranks, and this ſpirit of Apollo was north! 4 Gut is
wnch as to ſay, an impeſture, or delnding trick, of the Devit,
pratiſed by the Prieſts of Apollo. So much faith Bezs, who
y expoundeth, that that ſpirit of Divination, or Ofa-

K S clng,


& /


The Firſt Book,

ding was only a Devilliſh deludipg impoſture, and not a fa-
miliar Devil, as many do fondly imagine. And whercas it
1s ſaid iathe yerſe tollowing, that Pax! did caſt that Spirit
out of the Maid, it was, that he by the power of the Goſpel of
Jeſus rebuked her wickedneſs, {o that her Conſcience bei,
ecrrified, ſhe was either converted, - or elle at the leaſt dare
notto follow that deluding craft of Divination any longer ;
as when Chriſt did caſt oug (even Devils out of Mary Mag da-
len, it is to be underitood that he did convert her trom ma-
ny Devilliſh ſintul courſes in which ſhe had walked, Lzke
$. 2, and To 47»

( Bur if any be ſtill ſo obſtinate as to follow the common
fond tradition, that Python, or ſpiritms Pythonis, was areal fa-
miliar viſible diſcourſing Devil, yet I hope none are ſo mad
as to ſay upon ſerious conſiderations that it was any thing
bur a (pirirof lying Prophecic, or Divination, or Oracling
11 all the diſcourſe of the Scripture, no man can ſhew inall
the Scriptures, be they never {o groſly expounded, that any
inan or woman had a.killing, or a murdering Devil, where-
by to bewitch any man todeath, nor rhe lealt colour of anv
{uch Devilliſh expoſition. )
 ThisSeventhterminthe text, namely, Requirens Pythonens,
Qne that ſecketh out an Oracle, dittcrerh not from the ſecond
term of deſcription, that is, #rens Divinationibms, one that
wcth Divinations, or falſe Prophecies, fave only in this, that
that ſecond term of deſcription 1mplieth only bare Predi&i-
-Ons of future things, and telling oft hiddenthings, by which:
the Witch was delcribed, but this Seventh term of deſcripti-
on implieth {ome particular impoſtures, whereupon the
Witches grounded their Predictions; according to which
othees they are called Oraclers, or ſeekers out of Ora-
cles; the Hebrew word is 06. and is tran{lated Pyrhon ; Ob
hgnifierh properly a Bottle, orany ſuch like hollow thing ;
and here inthe text, and in all other Scripture-ſenſe ir im-
Jet the impoſture of ſpeaking with their mouthes in a

tle, ftrom.a hollow Cave in the earth, out of which
Came a Fees {poken ty ſome confederate with the Im po-
Nor, or. '


itch, which contederate was upon ſuch occaſi-
. on


"4n Oracleegirver;


onto go into a ſecret conveyance, and to make anfwer to


the inquiry, with a hollow ſounding voyce, cauſed by the
Bottle, 9k ſo it ſeemed to the filly Jaded people, that rhe


yoyce came out ofthe firm ground) 'asan anſwer ſeat by the
ods, by the departed ſoul of ſome: Prophet, or 'ocher man.
were called.


that had tormerly died ( in which ſenſe alfo
N ecromaniiſts, trom asKing counſel of the dead, being the


Ninth term of deſcription) for which impoſture all Idol.


houſes, and houfes.of all ſuch other Witches as praftiſed
the (ame impoſture, that the Idol-Prieſts did pradtice, were
built and contrived on purpoſe with a room called Mantenm,
in which the ſaid Cave and hollow paſſage was, in which


room ſome fond Writers do ſay, that the Devil {pake, bur:


had itbcen ſo, that a real familiar Devil had anſwered, as is
fondly imagined, why then did: he an{wer only in that
room ? Surely it their Devil was ſo familiar, and at com-
mand, he mightas well have anſwered in.any room as in


that, but a contederate man or woman could: not bring to:


paſs the impoſture inany room but in that. |
This impoſture is alluded unto by the Prophet 1faiah
29, 4 Sitq; quaſe Pythanis e terra vox tua, & & pulvere ſerma
runs pipiat, and thy voyce ſhall be as an Oracler out of rhe.
_ earth, and thy ſpeech ſhall be whif pering our of the duſt : be-
cauſe they wed cheating impoſtures to ſeduce the people,
making thenPbeleeve they could call the departed Ghoſts of.
their friends ro- give-them Oracles, or-an{wers: to their in-
quiry, out of the carth; this 1mpoſture the Prophet Iſaiah
warneththe people to/ayoyd the delufionot ir, 1ſaiah 8. 19.
in Tremellimstran{lation/ Qunm enim edicant vobss, conſulite
Pythones' & ariohos, qi: pipinu' & muſſitant 5 nonne: populus
Deun ſnum har tr os ' 8r'0'0i0entibw mortuos conſulat ?
tor whenthey fay unto you, ASk counſel: of Oraclers, and
South-ſaycrs, that whiſper an4 mutter, ſhould nor a people
ask counſcl of their God >. Shall they. ask' counſel of the
dead for them that are living > And herein oe 29. 4. the
Propheralluderh not tor all the impoſtuxes of ſuch Oracliog
Idols, which were. many; but only to-this'one im >
trom whence they had' their deſcriprion,. or term. of appel-
SE "1 on WES: E lation,


69


The Firſt Book,


lation from: ſpeaking in a Bottle out of the carth, In this
ſenfethe Pythonift of Endor was called Mnlicr prihone predita,
2 Womanindued with an Oracle, or with the unpolture of
Oracling, becauſe ſhe made it {cems by che toreſaid impo-
ſture to filly, deluded, or bewitched people, that the dead
ſpake out of thecarth, by which impoſture ſhe deluded Sae!,
1 Sam. 28, And becauſctbat Hiſtory of the Witch of Ender
| hath been commonly miſ-interpreted, and many unwary
Readers da beleeve,, that that which ſhe did was ſomewhat
more than a. couſeaing impoſture, and that ſhe did either
raiſe up Semxel,. or the Devil inthe likeneſs of Sarae/, or
aſſuming the body of Samxel, and (peaking init ( where by
the way it is to be noted, that if any {uchthings were, it ma +
kcrh nothing to prove the. common errorgthat a Witch is any
where at all raken for a Murthcrer ; for the ſcope of all thar
the did, was only at laſt to give an Oracle, or Divination to
Sant) yet let but ſuch a Reader as thinketh ſhe did any thing
really ; examine well the Chapter, and he ſhall findeit was on-
ly a deluding cheating impoſture by a confederate in the
ground, and he that will not beleeve thus, let him but gather
ul p -> qi eftions» and I will lay down my Anſwcrs as fol-


weth.

The firſt Objection, or ground of miſtake, is, the twelfth
verſc of the Chapter, 1 Sam, 28..And when the woman ſaw Sa-
melo. Here perhaps you wil fayzit is plain ſhFſaw Sammel!?
Anſ.. tis. nothere to þe undcriiood accor to the letter

of the Hiſtorys neither did yet any Expoſitor fo underſtand
it, for ir maynot be fuppoſcd that any Devilliſh Craft can
caalla Saint fron Heaven ; no, but you will fay, It was the
Devilin the likeneſs of Sawwe!; I anſwer, It yau hold to the
Ictter of the Fliſtory, | you mult {ay ir was real. Samwel,. but
it you yary-fromche letter, whence then can you gather that
it was the Devil ? And why is not this Expoſition true, that
the only pretended thar ſhe (aw Same, to briug about her
couſcning impolture? for I haye made... 2 in all the _
diſcourſcof this Book/by the catrei-of the Scriptures) that |
all Witchcraft was _ dcluſton,:.and to {ay that it was
the body ob: Same] railed up by the: Devil; i to _— he

| cyl


CU Eooo—_— yy


An Oracle-giever. 4;
Devil able to work the ſame Miracle. chat was wroug by
Chriſt upon the Croſs, who by the power of his Gad-h
raiſed up the Bodics of the Saints, for a time, - who appeared
unto many, from whence .the Cemurion concluded, that
Chritt was the Son of God, . knowiug:thatno'ather power
was ablc todo ity Afar. 27, 52» 53» 54- | 3 Yrs 's
The ſecond Objection may be, the learnedof Sane! that
it was Sas1,as in the twelfth ver ic, Aud when the woman ſaw
Samucl fhe [aid unr2 Saul, why baft tho deceived me, for than
«rt Saw? therefore ſhe ſaw him. |


Azſw. The ſeeing of Sawze! could inſtrult her nothing,.


if living Same! had been there, much lefs dead Samuel, nor
tccing the Devil in Samxels likere(s, for neicher the body of


Samuel, nor the Devil, was a Looking-glaſs to ſee Swwl in,


bur it was her (ubcill pretence,. and colour, that ſhe had fecn


Samrel, and fo found out Saw by her craft, whom.ſhe knew


before g think you that this ſubrill Wizard did not knowthe
wes when ſhe dwelt nighthe Kings:Court, asappearcth in
the Chaprer,for he went thither and ſtayed whnle ſhe ated her
party and afrer a while ſhe p
Servants did cat, and re che ſame 7 Bur you
may ſay, he was diſguiſed, A4nf.. He was taller than allthe
menin 41ſrxe! by the head and ſhoulders, and without ma-
king himfelt ſommch the ſhorter, he could not but be known
by a ſubrill Wizard. Alſo I anſwer 3 That the Servants of
$a, that could fo readily tell him where he ſhould fande
ſuch a womanat Ezdor, could not butbe watimate with her,
and ſo warn het of Savls commgy, -ar give her ſome dilcoyery
of the preſent occaſion, ar their contino-zlong with Saul, or
clſc how could they have concealed her, and kept her coun--


red meat, and he and his


{cl iathe timea little before, when Sax! had made ftrit pro--


clamation that all Wizards ſhould be baniſhed the Land, as.
they were ; and doubtleſs had nor thoſe ſeryants concealed.
her, ſhe had alſobeen baniſhed. Again, . Sa»/-could not bur
diſcover himſelf to her, by his Oath that he {ware roher im--
mediately before, . for who was able to ſave herfrom. puniſt--
Went our the King.
Another ObjeQion is, Sasl hinaſelf ſaw Sawnrh or the
Devil ia his likeneſs, .


< . %
— <Abadto con oo to . .
- _
- _ % 4 <4 » -
al 2 ws -- 2 _— ITE"


The Fit Book,


4a. I is plainin the Hiſtory, he ſaw neither Samuel, nor
his li » for he (aid tothe woman in verl. x 3, 14. what
{eweſt then and what form and faſhion s he of ? where it is
plain he was only too credulous, and beleceycd that ſhe had
{cen ſome apparition, for it he had ſcen any thing himſelf,
why did he ſay, what ſaweft thos ? She aniwered,l ſaw ar
old man cloathed in a mantle, raking a true deſcription of
hon, becaule ſhe knew that he was the man that Sasl
deſired, then Sax! acknowledged that it was Samvel, only
from her deſcribing of him) verſ. 14. and therefore bowed
himſelf with his tace ro the ground in honour to Same!,
whom he expected ſhould an{werhim our of the carth,

Another Objzetion 1s ; But Same! talked with San! ?

Anſ, It is proved betore that $4»! ſaw.no body, . therefore
Saxl only heard a voyce which he imagined came from $a-
awnel, pr was only the yoyce of a- Confederate under the
ground,


Burt you will ay,that rhe Scripture ſaith, Same! ſaid unto
Saul, Why haſt thog diſquicted me?
Anſ. It you hold meto the letter of the Hiſtory, why do
ou not hold your {clfro it, but fays it was the Devil inthe
likeneſs of Samnel, as that it was cy. Samuel you will not
ſay, why not a Confederate then ? and here indeed the Hiſto-
ry is ſctdown only according to the apprehenſion of $41, not
diſcovering the ympolture,

But how ſhould ſhe deſcribe a manſolike Samzxcl? that is,
an old man cloathed in a mantle ?

Anſ. Theonly noted Prophet in 7 retreat knownto all,
and could not be unknown to a ſubtil Wizard, whoſe pra-
&ice was to be acquainted with all things of note, the better
0 help her craft of Oracling Diyinations upon any occaſion

Or gain, |
Another Objection, Bur if ir were not Samwel, nor the
Devilz what Confederate was avleto tell $4-1 fo right, and


givelſo trucan Oracle of whar ſhould betide Saul the next
Sy in the battel ?


Znſ. All ſuch Oraclers and Wizards did giye Oracle
two ways. | Rn
| Firſt,


4n Oracle-giver.

Firſt, In doubtful things, they gave doubtful anſwers,

Secondly, \V here were more certain probabilities, there
they gave more ccrtain anſwers, Now what was more cer-
tain than that the Kingdom ſhould be rent trom San! ? $a-
mael bgd Prophclicd of it, and all 7ſrae/ knew it; and what
was more probable than that the time was at hand, when ſo
mighty an Hoſt of his encmics were come againſt him, when
his heart and ſpirit failed him, and when God had forſaken
bim ? andif it had not come to paſs, ſuch Oraclers did uſe
to have cvaſ1ons, the fault might have been laid upou Sa-
»#els Gholt, and further CO might {till have becn
wrought to blinde Sazls eyes; and had it happencd how it
could, ſothatthe Witch had come off blewly, and her im-
poſture beenafterward knownto Sas, yet ſhe had the Oath
of the King to fave her harmleſs. |

Further, it is the opinion of ſome learned men, that there
was 10 certainty at all in the anſwer given to Saxl, andthat
it was meerly conjectural, and though happening ſome way
true, YCtit failed in theday prefixed, for whereas it was dr
T o mor row ſhalt thou andthy Sens be with me, veil, 9. It was
very falſc, for when the Phil;fimzs went up to Battel, David
returning was three days marching back to Ziglag, 1 Sam.
30, I, andoneday purſuing his enemies, verſ. 17. and the
third day after that, ridings was brought to David from rhe
Camp of Saul, that $ax/ and his Sons were dead, 2 S4m. 1 2,
3» 4. which made inall ſeven days, and therefore it was not
likely that $4»! and his Sons were ſlain upon the morrow,
which was the {cope of the Oracle, or anſwer that was given
to Saul; this I fay,1s the opinion of a learned Writer, So
much by the way. |

Further, if it had not been a meer deluſion to blinde the
eyes of Saul, why muſt Samxe! bee deſcribed an old man
cloathed in amantle? That indeed was the faſhion of living
Samuel, but after he was dead and buried, had Sammel ap-
peared as ſhe pretended; or had the Devil appeared in his
likeneſs, as ſonfte fond Readers ſuppoſe he did, it muſt haye
been like Sawnelin a Winding-ſheet; but indeed had ſhe de-


ſcribed him by bis Winding leet that might bafe been
_ANY,


4


by


®
Le  , OY —_ 4
w - , -
Ws”
x + Is a.
= - 6 ET


7h The Firſt Book,


any man cl{c as well as Samxel, and Sax! had not been (o
- eajily deluded 1n his tond credwity and Idolatrous way, If
you think it an incredible thing that Sax/ ſhould be ſo caſily
deluded; look 7ſ#iah 8, 20. inthe Latine tranſlation ( which
carrieth the true ſenſe of the Original, how-odly/ſocwar our
Engliſh Tranſlators run) where the Propher ſpeaking of
{ach as would counſel men to {cek ro Oraclers and South-
ayers, he ſaith (1n Tremelims) An non loquuntay in ſenten-
tian illam cuicungq; nulla eft Iucis ſcintilla ; do they nor g1VC
this counſel roſuch as have not the leaſt ſpark of light or un-
derſtanding? and this was S«*ls caſe, Saul indecd had been
a wiſe man formerly, when the Spirit of God was upon
him, whenit was {aid, 1s Saul alſo among the Prophets? bur
then when God had forſaken him, his witdom, his courage,
and his vicoriouſneſs went all away 6.4 ar and then, and
| never till then, was he deceived by a Witch. And however
- manyerroneous Readers, when win. read this Hiſtory of the
Witch of Ender, do ſuppoſe ſhe did ſuch things really as arc
{et down, only according to the apprehenſion of the Spe&a-
tors ( namely, Sal and his Servants ) yet let them but con-
{ider the nature of impoſtures, an+they may cafily conceive
how ſuch a cheating impoſture might cafily, and till may be
brought to pals to delude fools, by an ordinary Jugling con-
federacys according to the manner afore Shred, as well
and as rcally as evcr ſhe did it, and that without a familiar
Devil (as is fooliſhly ſuppoſed ſhe had ) only a Devil ruling
inthe heartof them that doitro the like end, ro delude and
Icad people from God, as ſhe did, the Devil being the Father
of all lying dcluſions, and rulerh in the hearts of the children
of diſobedience, Such a Devil was inthe heart of Ahabs Pro-
phets, 1 King. 22.23. ( Butforfuchas will notallow of that
expoſition, that the Witch of Ender did all by a confederatec,
ſay, fhe might do it alſobyrhe impoſture of Hariolating,
as may be ſecn in the latter cnd of the Eighth term of deſcrip-
FS} tion following) And truly, for ſuch as will ſtill beleeve =
common fooliſh errour, that Pythox was (ſuch a Witch as
had a familiar ſpirit ( except they mean ſuch a lying ſpirit
of Oraclins Divination) I wonder hoy farre ary wil
. h retch


-
— 4g 2
þ .


—— I | or ——_—


4 Sonth-ſayer:

ſtretch the ſenſe and coherence of the Scriptures, to make any
ſuch interpretation ? ; #

Look but Treweliwus Tranſlation, 2 Chron, 33. 6. it 1s faid
of Manafeh, among the Witchcratrs which he utcd ( or ra-
ther that the Idolatrous Prieſts under hira uſed ) 1»/tirnirg;
Pjthonem ; What is that? Did he ſer up a familiar Spirit?
one that had a familiar Spirit ; or did he ſet up an Oracle ?_
Which is beſt ſenſe 2 but the common conceit of Readers is,
becauſe their Dictionary ſaith P3rhon fignihieth a Devillith
ſpirit of Divination, or one that hath ſuch a Spirit, there-
forc that muſt needs be a familiar Spiric ( and indeed the
common abuſe of words may make words {1gnifie any thing)
but let ſuch as truſt only to their Latine Dictionaries, or
Greck Lexicon, ſhew mc 1n them or any authentique Wri-
tcr, but eſpecially in rhe Scriptures, where Pyrhor 1s taken in
any (uch ſenſe asa familiar Spirit, ( eſpecially where it is ta-
ken for a killing ſpirir of a Witch) according to the com-
mon dodrin of Devils, that hath dcfhled the Nations, bur
only for a ſpiritof lying Prophecic, or one that hath ſuch a
Spirit or Devil in his heart ; and inthe text it is taken for the
Oracle of the Devil; and if any carpat words, yet they muſt
CXamine as well the ſenſe of the Original, and the ſenſe and
coherence of the Scriprurcs from place to place, as what
words may by abuſe and ill cuſtom {1gnihe ; yet I ſay, where
do we read of a Familiar Spirit. in all the Scriptures, 1t they
be truly tranſlated, eſpecially where do we read of a killing
{pirit ofa Witch 2 So much tor the Seyenth term of deſcripe
tion, Requirens Pythonem, Fs


T he Eighth term of Deſcription,


He Eighth term of Deſcription of a Witch in thetext,

iS, Ariolze, tor the moit part written Hariolwus, and is

by all men taken tor a South-layer, but a Sourh-ſayer
diftereth not from #t«<ns Divinationibus, beins the Second
term ot de{cription, for what difference is there berween
vouth-laying, and uling of Divinations, or lying Prophecies ?
ſo thenir might ſeemto be a TRSOgn in the text ; but wx 4

2 Yat


The Firſt Book,


hath been (aid before, that theſe Nine terms of appellation in


the texts arc not terms of diſtinftion, but ſeycral terms of de-
{cription, ſoit Moſes had ſer here dowa a hundred feycral
terms of deſcription, lignitying one and the {ame thing, ir
had not been a rautologie in the worſt ſenſe, but a more full
expreſſion of the ſame thing for illuſtration of the marter in
hand: bur yer as molt of the reſt of the terms of deſcription
inthe rext did all read ro Divinations (being the Second
term of deſcription ).only they do imply a feveral impoſture,
whereupon the ſelt-{ame \Vitches grounded their Divinari-
ons, and yer being deicribed by their {everal umpoſtures were
not ſo many ſeyeral kinds of Witches, but ſtill one and the
ſame kinde, and all of them falſe Prophets, who by ſeveral


impdſtures ſeduced the people; fo it may well bee unler-


ſtood, that underthis Eighth term of deſcription in the text,


'Harielus, commonly called a South-ſayer, is implied ſome


particular impoſture uſed in their Divinations, whereby ra
delude and feduce the people, which impoſture, though it be
not fully declared in the Scriptures, what it was, yet it may
be collected by the teveral places in the Scriptures where the
ſaid expreſſion is ſo often repcated, that it was ſome impo-
{ture uſed, rogecrher with the tore:aid impoſture of Oracling,
( beiag the Seycnth deſcription ) becauſe in moſt places of
the Scripture, Pythones & ariots arc named togerher as one
and the ſame, although implying a ſeveral unpoſture, The
Hebrew word in the text is Jiddegnoni, or as by ſome pro-


nounced Jiddoni, and figniftieth Hariolns, but the Hebrews:


borrowed a word trom {ome other Language, which word


_ 18 Hartumim, which in Gey, 41. 8, 24, and 1n ſeveral places


of Scripture is uſed as a gencral word for all ſorts of Witches,
and 1s by Tremelins tranſlated Magnus, a Magician, but by


common uſe did fignific among the Hebrews, Hariolur, a
South-laycr, and yer uſed equivocately. to cxpreſsthe Genus, |
 andrne Species asone, becauſe Sourh-{ayers were Magicians,


and were counted the only wiſe men, and 15 by many Ex-
poſitors expounded Hariolus, The Latines commonly uſed
another word, Harsſpex; and herc ir may be noted, thar theſe
words Haitum:m, Hariolns, Haraſpex, do imply the impo-

Irc


.
_— ———  —  ,——__—_— -


—_— — ——— —— ———_— ET


A South: ſayer.
{ture of a hollow feioned voyce, which thoſe Witches or
Deceivers uſed in their Oracling Divinations, by harring in
their throats, and theſe are they that are alſootiherwie called
Pythones, according to another impoſture of ſpeaking 1n a
Bottle, as inthe Scycath term of deſcription is before thew-
ed Plutarch de defec, Orac. ſaith, They that uſcd to draw a
Propheſying voyce out of their belly are allo called Pythoxes,
that is, as Johannes Scapn/a upon the place of Platarch, ſaith,
41 Titu's e ventre Hariwlaxtes, and this was the impoſturc
aimed at inthe text under the Eighth term of deſcription, 4-
riolas, namely, that they ſpake with a counterfeit voyce of
harring in the throat, whereby to diſſemble ſome other, and.
therefore changed their Natural voyce, and theſe were they
thar ſpake in the room of the Idol Houſes, called in Greek
and Latine Maxteium ( as 1a the Seventh deſcription ) and


theſe were they that ſpeaking in that room in a Cave under.


the ground, or ſome other hollow place, did thereforechange
thcir natural voyce, to counterteit the voyce of ſome other ;


ſuch a onc was he that being contederate with the Witch: of:
Endorgteigncd the voyce of Samxeltalking to Saxl ( as. 1s more


fully (et dow11 inthe Sevcathterm of deſcription) or ſhe her
{elf might by cls Impolture ſpeak all that was { poken to
Saul; and thele dil rather har 1n their throats, that they
might thereby the more terribly diſlemble a voyce from the
dead riſing again,, and theretore diftered as much as they:
could from Human voyce; tuch a one was alſo by the Greci-
ans and Latines called Mantes, which ſome Writers that.
knew not the impolture, ſay it was the Devil;- but Mantes
was {uch a \V itch, or falſe Prophet, as bad that devyilliſh im--
poſture of harring 1a their throats to deccive the people, cal»:
led ot ſome Vent riloquium, A { peaking inthe belly, and they
that praftiled this impoſture were ſo pertect in it, that they:
would ſpcak {o ſtrangely, that many times they dared to
practice their impoſture above ground, whereby they made:
ir ſeemto {illy people that the ſpirit of Apollo, or ſome other
Idol (which they called gods) ſpake within them, accor-


ding tothe expreſſion of Saint Luke, who uſed the yulgar cx--
preſſion, Attq 16, 1, where it is faid, the Maid bad Spiriens .


E273 Pye


>


77


7


The Firſt Book,


Pythonis, the ſpirit of Oraclings or as Beze expounds it, the


ſpirit of Apolio, which he ſaith was only a devilliſh couſening


impolture ( as is before noted ar large in the Seventh de-
{cription ) And this expolition of Ariolos is agreeable to the
ſaying of the Prophet, Iſa. 8, 19. QZnum enim edicunt vebs
conſulite Pythones & ariolos, qui pipiunt er muſſitant ; and when
they ſay unto you, Ask counſel of Oraclers, and South-ſay-
ers, -that peep, and that, mutter , here Tremelixes gives this
Expoſition ; The Propher ( faith he) aggravateth the heinous
crime of thoſe Witches from the vanity of thoſe Divinations ,
which the very manner of them betrajzeth, thoſe Sedxcers have


wt ſo much wit that they dare ſpeakso the people the thing they


pretend to ſpeak, in plain and open terms, with an audible cleer
Voyce, as they that are Gods Propheti, who ſpeak the Word of
God as loud as may be, and as plain as they can tothe people, but
#hey chirp in their Bellies, and very low is their throats, like
Chickens half out of the ſhels in the hatching, So much Tre-


wolins, And further he ſaith, Thet mary Hiſtorians do mens


Ton theſe their deluſions, but eſpecially Origenes adverſ,


Celſum.

This impoſture of ſpeaking in the Belly bath been often
prattiſed in theſe latter days 1n many places, and namely in
this Iſland of E»g7iard, and they that practiſe ir do it com-
monly to this end, to draw many filly people to them, to
ſtand wondring ax them, that ſo by rhe concourſe of people
money may be given them, tor they by this impoſture do
make the pcople beleeve that they are' poſleſſed by the De-
vil, ſpeaking within them, and tormenting them , and ſo
do by that pretence move the people to charity, to be li-
bcral to them.

Maſter Scot in his Diſcovery of Witchcraft, L:b. 7. Cap. 1,


* writcth of {uch a one at Feſtwel in Kent, that had ſo perte&t-


ly this 1mpoſture of ſpeaking in the Belly, that many Mini-
{ters wcre deceived by her, and made no queſtion but ſhe had
been poſleſt by atormentins Devil, and came and talked fo
long with that Devil, an i charged him in the name of God
ro £0 QUut of her, as that he {aid he would kill her, he would
tear her it pecces, he would kill themall ; Healſo told them

who


An Oracle-girver.
whom ſent him in, andagcculed ſome -poor people for
Witches, The words and teſtimony of rhis Devil were taken
in writing, and how may they char ſent him had Witched
to death, and yet wacathis marter came to examination by
two wile Julticcs of the Peace, Mr, Thomas Wotton, and Mr,
George Darrel, the Maid bcing diſcreetly examined, conte(=
{ed the whole tmpoſture F and tor confirmarion of the rruth
of the matter, ſo plain was the Maid in confeſſion, that ſhe
ated che ſame thing over again betore the ſaid Magiſtrates,
and many other Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, to the
ſhame of thoſe Miniſters who had taken the reftimony of the
Devil againſt poor people in, writing, and were credulous
therein, belceving and teaching {uch D oErins, that a Witch
can ſend a Devil to poſlefle and rorment pcople, and ano-
ther Witch can caſt him out; bur it they and all Miniſters
were Icd by the Spirit of truth, they ſhould know, that this
deluding Hagge was the Witch, and not chey whom ſhe ac=
cuſed ; tor what diftcrence was there between her wapoſture
and a ſpirit of Divination ? like the Maid, in Afs 16, 16,


* tormerly mentioned, whoſe ſpirit of Diviaation or Ocacling
* wasonly a Devilliſh coulening impoſture, faith Beza; and


{uch ought ro be put to dcath by the Law of Moſes, becauſe
they uſe Divinations, prerending'the diſcovery of Witches,
it being manifeſt rherein that they are the Witches, and be-
cauſe they by falie accul.icion murther others; ſuch a Maid
was lately at Braztree in Efſex, who practited the ſame im-
poſture to the aſtoniſhment of many, an gained mony from.
the deceived beholders, until the report thereof grew ſtale,
and tools had done wondering, and:rhe concourle of people
ceaſed. and her gains came not in, and ther the Devil did
caltly leave her, and the bulinefs almoſt torgotten, and yer
no men ſo ready to put in execution the Law of God againſt
her, or any ſuch, as againſt poor people that are accuſed by
{uch, and by fools, and hanged up without groundor war-
rant, or poſſibility of truth. _ |

This impoſture hath wrought ſtrange deluſions among the
ancient Heathen, and the actors thereof did by this impo-


[ture delude the people ; one way very notable was ( by _
Pare


9


The Firſt Book,


{peaking in the Bclly in the manmsr aforeſaid) they would
make it ſeem to the itanders by that a voyce came from afar
o#,or trom {ome {ccret 7a that that voycewas the yoyce
ot ſome of the gods, and then they would report abroad that
in {uch a place a voyce was heard, declaring, or comman-
ding ſuch and ſuch matters, and the poor deluded ſtanders
by would witneſs, and report the {Fne to be true, whercas
the voyce came only trom the deluding Witch that was a-
mong them when they heard the voyce ; as we may read in
Plutarch de defec, Orac.

A certain ſhip ſayling by the Ifland of Pax# ( in which
ſhip were ſome e/Zgyprians, the manner of which Nationwas


10 pradtiſe the ſeveral impoltures of Witchcraft, for their ad-


vantage and fame among the people) there was heard from
the ſhore of Pax# a voycc, calling thrice to Thamus by name,
(he being an Zgyptian 1n the ſhip) Thamns, when thou
comelt ro Palos, report that great Pay 1s dead ; which thing
he did. When he came near Pales he looked toward the
ſhore, and crycd aloud, Great Pas 1s dead yg then there was
heard a tcrrible fighing and groaning, which much aftrighted
the people inthe ſhip; the report ot this was ſpeedily teſti-


fied at Rewey: in ſo much that this Thamss was ſent tor by


Tyberius Ceſar, and ſo was much taken notice of in the Em-
pcrours Court; and although many were deluded by that
voyce, which was ſo heard by the ;nen 1n the ſhip, and did
much diſpute about it what it ſhould ftgnifie, yet they that
do rightly underſtand the impoſture of Hariolating, or
{peaking 1n the belly, may cafily conceive that Thamss him-
{clit was the man, or ſome conftederate with him, that ſpake
the voyce, and madethat mighty groaning at the laſt, there-
by to delude the people,and to make himſclt tamous,as ſome
great Man,to whom ſorne of the gods had ſpoken;and whereas
1t was about the time that Chriſt was Crucihed, And ſome
would have it that that voyce was _ {poken by ſome
ſtrange Spirit, and might f1gnihe Chriſt : 1 yeeld rhus farre,
that Thamzs him(clt might have heard the tame of the paſſa-
ges of the Lite, and Death, and Reſurre&ion of Chriſt,
and might {pcak of, and concerning Chriſt, not that -he


bclee-


A South-ſayer.


beleeved in Chriſt, but would tell ſome notable thing 1his
own deluding way, for the magnifying of himfelt among -
| the people, implying, that he was the man to whom ſuch a


voyce ſhould come from tne gods; and whereas he (aid,Great
Pan is dead, it was becauſe the Fews were th crity of
Shepherds, and the Heathen had teigned Paxto be the god of
Shcphgfds; thus might he mean Chriſt, as the Maid 1n the
Atts, ch. 16. 16. acknowledged Par! and his DoXrin, not
by belict, but thereby to uphold and countenance her im-
poſture among rhe people, tor hcr own fame and gain; fo
might this Impoſtor mean Chriſt, although)s nor he, nor any
other, did cvcre conclude any thing fully concerning the


meaning of that voycc, but leſt it doubttul ( as all Ocacles


of the Heathen were ) i:lomuch that ſome told Tiberime, that


it was (poken trom the 5:45 of one that was riſen up between
Mercury and Penelopa, '| has did Thamw by his impoſture get
himfelt fame at the Emycrours Court ( which was the thing
hc aimed at) and lett{uperttirious fools diſputing of an am-
biguous Oracle,

It hath been credibly reported, that there was a man in the
Court, in King James his days, that could act this impoſture
{olively, that he could call the King by name, and caule the
King to look round about him, wondring who it was that
called him, whercas he that called him ſtood betore him in
his preſence; with his face roward him; bur after this impo-
{ture was known, the King in his merriment would fome-
times take occaiion by this Impoſtor ro make {port upon
ſome of his Courtiers ; as ter inſtance, There was a Knight
bclonging to the Court, whom the King cauſed to come be-
fore hum in his private room ( where no man was but the
King, and this Knight, and the lmpoſtor ) and feignced ſome
occalion of {crious diſcourſe with the Knight ; bur when the
King beganto { peak, and the Knight beading his atrention
tothe King, tuddenlyrhere came a voyce as out of another
room) calling the Knight by name, Sir John Sir John, come
away Sir 7ohz; at which the Knight began to frown, that any
man ſhould beſo unmannerly as to moleſt rhe King and him 3


a: d {tyllifuung to the Kings diſcourſe, tic yoyce came gall
ir


N


82


The Firſt Book,


Sir Joh», Sir John, come away and drink oft your Sack ; at
that Sir Job beganto {well wich anger, and looked into the
next rooms to {ce who 1t was that dared to call him fo im-
portunately,, and could not fade our who it was, and ha-
ving chid vt waomlocyer he tound, he returned again to
che King ; the King again had no ſooner began to {peak as
formerly, but rhe voyce came again, Sir Fohn, come away,


your Sack ſtaycth for you; at that, Sir Joh» begun to ſtamp


with madneſs, and looked out, and returned -{everal times
to the King, bur could nor be quict in his diſcourſe with the
King, becauſe of the voyce that '{o often troubled him, till
the King had ſported enough. So. much tor this. Eighth
term of deſcription. of a Witch in the text, Ariolzs. a
Sourh-ſayer,


The Ninth term of Deſcription,


He Ninth. term of Deſcription, is, Necrowantis,. a
Necromancer,, that 1s in the ſenſe of the Hebrew, Con-
ſulens mort#03, one that (ecketh counſel of the dead, as
Tremelius noterh in the margent,

This-is the laſt term fer down by Moſes in the text, deſcri-
bing a Witch, and this rerm 1mplyerh the pretence in the
impoltures uſcd by the torcſaid Oraclers, and South-ſayers,
as 1n the Seventh and Eighth deſcription ( is amply ſct
down } ; and that the world might fully underſtand the de-
laſion of Witches, 2/oſes here terterh down this laſt and.
more full expreſſion, or term. of deſcription of a Witch,
Necromantis, which 1s all one with the former, an1 in re-
ard of Preaictions was called inthe Second deſcription, U-
tens D;vinatione, a. Diviner ; un regard of the impoſture of

iving Oracles from a hollow Caye in the carth, with a

ttles was called O# in the Hebrew ( tranſlated Python by
Tremellins) thatis, anOracle, or an Oracler, according to


\


| the ſenſe of Platarch, de defeti. orac, and in regard of the


impoſtare of countertciting a voyce of another by harring in
their throats; was called, 4r:9/us, or Hariolus; in regard of
theasking counſel of the dead was called,. Ne:romantss, or


Conſu-


J . + = 1 ) p
7 o6 Ss > 4. 4 > \ oo 4 I _ Day


A Necromancer.

conſulens mort#et, one that asketh counſel of the dead ; and
in regard of the Charms ind Conjurations that they uſed, in
calling up theſouls and ſpirirs of the dead, they were Chat-
mers, or Conzjurers.

The Seventh and Eighth rerms of deſcription do imply
the impolſtures which theſe deluding- Witches uſed in their
Oracling Divinations ; this Ninth term of defcriptton im-
plicth thcir pretence which they had in thoſe coufening im-
poſtures, that is, they pretended rhat they conſulted with
the ſouls of them that were departed this lite, and thereby
could tell chings to come, or things hidden ; and this was
one pretence ot all that were Oraclers, or South-{ayers, ac-
cording to which pretence they were called Necroman-
cers, according to that place in [ſa 8. Ig, ( very: fly
rehearſed again in this detcription ) in Tremelius tranila-
tion ; For when they ſhall ſay unto you, Ask counſel of
Oraclers and South-{aycrs, that whiſper, and that mut-
ter, ſhould not a people ask counſel of their God ? ſhall
they ask counſel of the dead for them that arc living?
And rhis pretence of theſe Witches is manitett, not only in
the Scriptures, but in common Wrlters, where we may
rcad the Tenents, and the Opinions of the Heathen concer-
ning this matter, Platarch de defec, erac, ſhewerth their opi-
nions and vain conceits, That the ſouls of men that were
departed this lite, were of more excellent perfe&ion, rhan the
{ſouls of men inthe priſon of the body ; and theſe were by
thoſe vain Heathen called Gerii, which Genii or departed
fouls ( fay they ) being of ſuch perteCtion, and having like-
wiſe familiarity with the' gods, would ( when they were
fought unto by men living here) come and inſpire them
to give Divinations, which they could eaſily do, by reaſon
of their perteSt eſtate after rhis life. Theſe were by ſome of
the Heathen called, and eſteemed gods, and were among the
Ramans called Manes, that is, Infernal gods, or fouls of men,
to whom they offcred Sacrifices, called Inferie,

The Pythoniſt, or Witch of Ender did a& her part fo ſub-
tily, that ſhe did not only pretend inſpiration from the Soul
of Samwuel, but ( to ſarisfic Savts infatiable blindnefs in _=
2 C


"" 28


The Firſt Book,


demand )that ſhe covld call him up, and make him appear
to her, both Boy and Soul unitedagain, to propheſic again
to $:#/; whichthing indeed was atted by her according to
the ſillineſs of Sawls . Terms as appcarcth more fully in the
Seventh delcription, who after the Spirit of God had for-
{akenhim, was given over to oelecve {uch fooliſh fancies of
faithleſs. and ignorant people, as filly Women, and Chil-
dren, and fools are inclined to beleeve unto this day, that
people after their death can walk, and frequent the Houſes,
and Gardens, and Orchards, where they have uſcd to be in
their life time, which thing is a meer tancy of faithle(s and.
"20708 people, and cannot be brought to paſs by either
itch or Devil , cither really, or in appearance; for it was

a Miracle once done by the power of Chritt at his ſuffering
uponthe Croſs, that many of the bodics of the Saints thar
were departcd roſc, and appeared unto many in the holy
Cuy, Mat, 27, 52, 53.from whence the Centurion acknow-
Fi. Chriſt ro be the Son of God,knowing thar ſuch rhings.
could not be done but by the mighty power of God ; and he
that readerh over rhe foreſai Book of P/ararch, ſhall cafily
finde, thar one of the chick grounds ot Oracles and Divinartt-:
ons, was this vain conceir of the Heathen, that wanted the
lighr of the Scriprurcs,. that the {ous of dead men did give
an{wcrs tothem thathad knowledge in the Art of {ceking of
Oracles ; which Art indeed was only a craft of working 1m-:
polturecs to delude the people, as 1s {cr down more at large 11
the Seventh an1 Eighth deſcriptions; and from this old con-
ccit of the Heathen, and praice of theſe deludins Witches
of ancicnt. umes, hath Re grand Wirtch,- that Whore of
Rome ( the Popeand his train) derived her notable Witch-
craft, whereby. ſhe hath deluded the world, tcaching people
to invocatethe {ouls of Saunts departed, as likewiſe to con-
jurethem. |
Let bur the Reader look back to the Sixth term of-de-
ſcription (a Charmer ) and there he may read of a notable
pecce of N ecromancy acted by two Popiſh Doors at Orle-
axce in France, With their devilliſh Conjurations. Theſe Ro-
wan Witches are the. Necromancers of thele latter Ages, ac-
| cording


A Necromancer.


cording to this Ninth deſcription; theſe arethe Inchantersof
theſe latter Ages, as is fully demonſtrated 1n the Sixth de-
ſcription ; theſe are the Jugling Witches of thele latter Ages
in the Chriltian world, as 1s tully demonltratred in the Fitch
deſcription, and rheretore it 1s faid of this Purple Whore, Ke-
vel, 18, 23, with thy Witchcrafts all Nations were decei-


ved. And he that will be zealous for God, in obeying the -


command given in Exod, 22,18, Swffer wot a Witch to live,
mult leave his tond 1gnorant courſe of teaching people to
hang up poor, and. widows, and aged, and lame help-
leſs people, and mult bend his devotion againſt that Whore
of Rome (as all the world ought to do) as allo againſt the.
Mahometan \N itches among the Twrks, Therefore ut were a,
g00d Law in Eng/ard, it duly kept,, That no Jeſuite, orPo--
piſh Pric{t ſhould be ſuffered to live,. in any parc of theſe Do--
mimons, becaule rhele Witches are they. that. bewirch the
people ( where they be tollerared ) by their ſeveral deluding
1npoſtures, leading the people to Idolatry, and alſo rothe


undermining of Governments, . So much tor the Ninth term;
of de{cription of a*'Witch. in the text, a. Necromantiſt, one:


that asketh counſcl of the dead.
The falſe Prophets of ancient times having their ſeveral:
| Impoſtures and pretences,.. whereby they ſeduced rhe people
to vain Idolatry, which was abominable to Gods eyes, are
here by the Spirit of God demonſtrated to the world by the.
Nine teveral terms of deſcription inthe text,. that the world
mizht fully know the myltery. of iniquity, and avoyd all
{uch evil workers, as  deccivers- of his people, and learn to,
know God, and his Prophets) who teach people the righr
way of God;. andtheſeare the terms of expreſſions that are


uſed in the Old Teſtament to demoaltrate falſe Prophets.


according to. which expreſſions wee uſe the general word
Witch,. or Sorcerer, in the E-g/if Tongue, and.do finde no
other {ort of Witches ſpoken ot- in the Scriptures, What ſort.


of Witches ſoeycr arc ſpoken of in the New. Teſtament, are


all taken in.the ſame ſenſe rhat they. are in the Old Teſta»
ment, and are ſufficiently gloſſed .at the beginning of this
Book, uponthe Definirion of «AER and Wirchcratr HRT
7” 3. yet


The F irſt Book,


in Revel, 22.15. there is found a word that is uſed as a
general expreſſion for all ſorts of Witches, which word be-
caulſc it hath becn abuſed by ome Popiſh OUIEIEE, and
blinde interpreters, diſputing upon the ſame word ulcd by the
Scpruaginty it may not be omitted to ſpeak ſomewhat of it,
the word is ozpraw, {ignitying by Etimology a Poyſoner,
or a compounder of Poyſons, and is tranſlated veneficns, (ig-
ma 3 alſo a Poyſoner, and yer both words both in Greci

Larine are u{cd commonly tor a Witch in gencral of all
ſorts, and is ſo taken in that place of the Revelations, and
from hence ſome thar are willing to uphold fond Opinions,
dodraw this fond conclufion, That a Witch is {uch a one as
Killeth people by Poyſons, and can infe& the Air, and bring
many mortal Diſeaſes by Witchcraft, and by the fame cratt
. can kill any particular Man or Beaſt with looks, ty poyſo-
ning the Air ina dire& line, as ſome teign of the Cockatrice.
Bur what Logician will not ſay it is an abſurdity to draw a
Conclufion, and ground an opinion, from the bare ſignifica-
tionof words? and yet for the words, it is cafily conceived,
that a Witch was firlt called oxppexss in Greek, and Veneficus
in Latine, by a Metaphor taken trom the deccictulneſs of a
Poyſoner, that giveth a man Poyſons by deceit to betray his
litke;orfrom a deceirfulApothecary,orMountebank;thart ſelleth
Poyſon, ſophiſticated Medicines, inſtcad of whollome Phy-
ſick, as a Wirchis taken in no other ſenſe in all the foregoing
places of Scripture than for a Deceiver, or Impoſtor ; yet
becaule (as I have faid before) that bare ſignifications of
words do prove nothing direQly, therefore let us bur cx-
pound Scripture by Scripture, and we may cafily finde that
peppers, Vexeficns, is taken for a Deceiver, or Impoſtor, and
not for a Poyſoner or Murtherer, and for that look Revet.
I8. 23, With thy Witchcratts all Nations were deceived ;
there the conjngal word is paanus os vercficis twis, as much
astofay, with thy poyfoned Medicines, or Poylons, all Na-
tions were deceived ; there is the ſame Mctaphor uſcd a-
Eau, and ſuch words as might ſignifie Poyſonsare uſed for

iviog Witchcrafts ; with thy 'Witchcratts all Nations
were deceived, not killed, $o then, toconclude with Rewe-

Lv lations,


— _


4 Neeremancer:
lations, we read not in all the Old or New Teſtament of a
Killing Witch, or Murchering Witch, bur only of deceiving


Witches, Impoſtors, or falſe” Prophets, ſeducins people to-


Idolatty by their deluſions and impoſtures.

He that will have any further deſcription of a Witch, let
him rake this detcription ; A Witch is as like a Prophet as
can be, and yet a. ep HY Prophet,. Das, 2. 33. A.
Decree went forth from the King, that the Magicians ſhould
be ſlain, and they ſought Darie/ and his fellows to be lain ;
there the Executioners Knew no difference between the Magi-
cians and Daviel, that was a Prophet, for the word Magi-


Clan, or Wiſe men, being properly taken ina good ſenle, was
equivocally given to South-ſayers, and all forts of deceiving


Witches, as well as to thoſe that were termed Wiſe wang
as to the Prophets themſelves, and under that Necree Daniel


himſelf had been ſlain, if it had not been ſtayed by Gods pro--


vV1idence.


The blaiphemous Prieſts and Phariſees-called Chriſt a De--


cciver,. or Impoſtor, or as Beza expoundeth, a Jugler, and


a Seducer, Matth, 27, 63, when as he was the great Pro-


pher of the world.


Platarch (aith, De defef, Orac. That he which firſt began


the Oracle of Apollo was Coreta, who (ct'up the Oracle,. in a
2565 of being Divinely-in{pired with the ſpirit of Pro-
phecic.


Mr. Scot in his Diſcovery, who (was a Student in the.


Laws, and learned inthe Rowan Laws ) ſhewerth, Lib, 12.


Cap, 5+ & 6. that certain Colleges were erefted at Rowe, in;


time of Heatheniſh ignorance, tor Diviners and South-ſayers


co be inſtituted to expound the mindes and admoniſhments.
of the gods, and by their Law young Princes were te be _ |


to Hetrwria to learn, and bring home the cunning of


Arr ( it being the only Divinity the poor Heathen knew, to-

ſeek ro ſuch as pretended they could know- the mindes and:
wills of the gods) and in proceſs of time theſe Colleges 1n-'
crealcd to a great Univerſity, in which were brought up:


ſuch as learned the praftice of Divination, or Augury, by
leycral impoltures deſcribed in the text ; who notwithſtan»


8


A x KY F
ak.


The Firſt Book,


ding they were accounted Prophers among the Heathen, yer
areall aimed at, and deſcribed in the text for Witches, and
South-ſaycrs, and ſuch as the people of 1/rael ( being a cho-
ſcn people) to be taught by God and his Prophets) were
commanded to deſtroy, that no ſuch bewitching falſe Pro-
phcts ſhould be found among them ; ſuch a one was E!imas
the Sorcerer, called both a Sorcerer, and a falſe Propher,


\ Aﬀs 13, 6. and thele were fuch as were ſometimes great


Scholars, yet abuſing their learning.

Some may object and ſay, If Witches were only falſe Pre-
phets, then all falſe Teachers are Witches?
 Anſw. A Witch and a falſe Propher are reciprocal terms,
bur not a Witch and a falſe Teacher, for all the Nine terms
of deſcription inthe text are plainly deſcribing Witches and
falſe Prophets as one and the ſame, and having one of theſe
two propertics ; |

Firſt, He ſetteth up an Idol, which is the firſt main Witch-
craft, being the firſt deſcriprion in the rext ; or,

Secondly, He uſerh ſome, or all of the cight following


 Witchcratts deſcribed in the text, either to confirm and up-


hold his Idol by {cducing the poopie, or cl{e to make the peo-
ple belceve that he is a true Prophet of God, as did Sim
Mag in the Afts, and as is rehearſed inthe ſame Chapter in
the text, Dext. 18, 20, for the morc full and general deſcrip-
tionof a Witch, or falſe Prophet, which was deſcribed inthe
rext, by Nine ſpecifical deſcriptions, ſpecifying the Nine
Witchcrafts of ſuch ſeducing falſe Prophets : bur yer it doth
not follow that all falſe Teachers are Witches ; tor a man


may be a falſe "Teacher through weakneſs of underitanding,


and crror of judgement ( as were the Scribes and Phariſes 11
ſome things) and yet nota Witch ; but he that is a wiltul
upholdcr of Hereſies, or any vain unprofitable Dottrin, only
todraw people toa head to uphold his own gain, and fo tor
gainmakeththe people to mils of the ſincerity of Religion,
although he be no Impoſtor , nor bringeth himſelf within
the compals of the puniſhment ducto a Witch from the C vil
Magiſtrate, becaule he dorh nor uſe impoſtures, or any of
the Nine Witchcratts deſcribed 1n the text, yet in his intent


">


*
_— = ——
ern


" »
-
wy 7 I oY
- : . nf "ye _ LO 4a” Þ ay”
—__—


A Candle in the dark: 3g
he maketh gain his end, and perverteth ſouls in a ſmooth -
pretence of holine(s. I know not how his finalimteution- difr}
tererh from the final intention of a Witch ( thar is, gain by --
ſcducing%the people ) nor whether he or a Witch ſhall haye -
the greateſt condemnation art the laſt day, Ats 20. 30. for it
appcareth in verl, 20, following the text, that a falſe Pro- - Fo
pher confidered diltinctly trom the foreſaid» impolſtors, is in "
the ſame Condemnation, and the ſame with a Witch, and
ought®to be ccn{ured 'by the Civil Magiſtrate to dye as a 3
W ich, mecrly quatens aftalle Propher ; for although he bee - Y
deſcribed by his {everal 1impaſtures before inthe text, yer the
bare uſing of inpoſtures maketh not a Witch, unleſs by:
them he be a falſe Propict ; ( as is demonſtrated more fully in
the Fifth deſcription ) {o then, the Formal ratioof a Witchz
or that which maketh himrto be a Witchyyis, becauſe he: is a
| falſe Prophet, {othart it followcth, that as cvery, wiltul-fallc
| _ reacher, or wiltul upholderof Hereſfie, or any vain unpro-
| ' fitable Docria to (ſeduce the people for gain, differeth not in
{


> -— «x 2 "a
70 - poly ww ry : þ A 4 _w_ +


his final intention trom a falſe Prophet , ſo by the ſame rea«-
{on he diftercth not from a Witch ; and atthough he cannot
always be.convicted by the Magiſtrate, yet in Gods fight he is
a very Witch,
Our E»2/;h Tranſlators not knowing the difference of the
| terms of deſcription in the text, by the {ſeveral impoſtures
therein implicd, according to the intent and meaning of the
Scriptures, have uſed words promiſcuouſly one for another,
withour expreſſing the true and full mcaning of the Origi-
nal ſo well, as is expreſt by Junius and Tremelinus in Latine,
25 in Des, 18, 10, 11, they call a Diviner a Witch, and a
South-ſayer a Wizard, expreſſing ſpecifical deſcriptions by
gencral words, that may be as well given to any of the nine;
and in Exod, 22, 18, they call a Jugler a Witch, uſing the
{lame general expreſſion that they uled before, for one that
| uſeth Divination, or a Diviner; they call a P:anerarian an
obſerver of times, a phrate more obſcure thancan imply the
original m2aning or the Scriptures; they call a Conjecturer
ai Inchanter, and tacy call an Inchanter a Charmer, whereas


inthe Orivinal and Larine Tranſlations, an Inchanter; = a
| N 1aſ-


LS


= -—— — —=i — > ue + =


- wellgiventoany


The Firſt Book.
{ . T_T |
Charmer is.all one rerm of deſcription ; call an
Oracter one that hath a familiar vPirity and BL be as
of the Nine terms inthe text ( by the ſame
reaſon that all Witches hayca familiar ſpirit,according to the
commontenenty though it cannot be proved that any had
any, otherwiſe than the ſpirit of crror ruling in their hearts, )
And 2 Chron, 33. 6. there they call uſing Divinations, obſer-
ving of times, which phraſe they uſed before for a 7 Beravo
rian; and it we compare ſeveral Engliſh Tranſlations, wee
may finde them much varying one from another in tranſla=
ring of thoſe terms, not but that they were good and able
Linguiſts, bur not knowing the ſeveral impoſtures implyed
intheſe original terms of deſcription, could not expreſs them
inſuch apt words in Exgliſh, aS1t they had known the myſte-
of iniquity according to the original ſcnſe and meaning,
ey, 44. Ts they tranſlate It, Is not thu lhe cs by which ”y
Maſter divineth ? Herethey would make \Vitchcraft lawful,
for Divination is Witchcraft.) bur the original ſenſe is. no-
ing ſoas they tranſlate it ;look T reme/lins, All this argueth
that theſe our ancichtt Biſhops and great Clerks knew not what
Wicchcraft was in the Scriprure ſenſe,


— —_— i — OI OY
Mo ———— —  eow_—__—__w__—_—_—_—_ = A— nh n—_
-


SY OE OE WO WY WE WY UE UE WY UY WY WP Lp ww Y  wY WWE WE wUWwYy uu


ODOT CNOQUNNt@nNIMKEDORICIOCMGOOC


GE


THE


SECOND BOOK:


SD 1 i5maniteſt, that the Scriptures were given by

WS Godzfor arule for manin this depraved nature

& rowalk by, That whereas all Maqkinde ſince

Mx the fall ot 4dam are naturally darkned in their

x cl Rae ap: 24 and ayerſe from the truth of

God, the Scriptures might be a light wito us, to lead us in
the righteous way of Gods truth,

And now Chriſt Jeſus the Lightof the World (in whom
are fulfilled all the Divine Myſteries of the Scriptures) is
come imo the world to cnlighten the world ; and whereas be-
tore his coming the world fate in darkneſs, and were wholly
giVento run after Idols, and to be ſedueed by Idol-Pricſts,
who practiſed the (eyeral Witchcrafts deſcribed in the "text,
Dent, 18, 16, 11. to ſeducethe people to Idolatry, yer then
at the coming, and by the power of the coming of Chriſt,
( who was manifeſted by Miracles, and taught the os by
his Spirit of Truth) were all thoſe ways of darkneſs difcoye-
red to the whole Word, to be lying deluſions, tending to de-
{tru&ion, as is propheſied by the 7: gong [ſa. Chap. 8. hee
ſpeaking of Witches, and their deluſions, and the datkſome
errours and evils Powys pong, them, from che nineteenth
Verſe tothe end of the Chapter, immediately in the rwo firſt


Verſes of the next Chapter, he propheſicth' of Chriſt, "the-


light of whoſe coming ſhould deltroy the ways of darknels, in

theſe words, In the way of the Seabeyeud Jordan, Galile the

Genes, rhe people that ſate in darkneſs ſhall ſee great "2

and upen them that dwell in _ Land of the ſhagow of dew Lebs
3 | e4


- —


QYOI OR EOYOIOYOLOYO
e/\SToj\v 1, 90 ST] v \- -
y, ad
cr &n DB &p> 3 cM a> Gd; 3
_


Sr /


9>


wag


—_ "a
8 BW % ,
4 4
OA. *.. Y
T td


The Second Book.


light hive forth ; andthus it was fuwfilled at his coming. The
Nations that were given to Itdolatry,' and ſeduced 'by talſe


Prophets ( being Idol-Prieſts, and deluding Witches) were
ſo cnlightned that all Idolatrous deluſions were diſcovered,
the Oracle of -Apslo, 31:4 ot all Idois, drewdumb, Simon 1Ma-
gx, and Elimas the Sorcercr, and all bewitching, talle Pro-
phers were confounded, and all rheſc Inliruments of dark-
nels grew.out of requeſt among the people, boring clearly di{-
covere:| thax they were ail Lyars, and ulcd lying deiufions
to deceive the Nations, And notwithſtanding rhis pertect
rule of rightcoulncls in the Old and New Teſtamcat, writ-
ten by the Prophets betore the coming of Chriſt, and art hig
coming finiſhctl by him and his Apoſtles, yer {uch is the ob-
ſtinacy of mans dark:ome nature, that men will carrya Can-
dle of their Owa tn their han.1s, even at Noon-day, imagi-
ning they can by their owit wiſdom finde out truths that are
Not Writtenzn the Scriptures, and that their Candle will en-
1shrenthem more than the beams of rhe Sun when it ſhincth
forth in its full {trength; Like a fiily Labourer, rhat corunt-
ing the day by aPocket Watch, wii VV heels being our of
Ltcr. Went too faſt, he had tuch a co-21t of his Warch, that
be attigmed, That the Sun un. tac 5:10 went too flows for his
Magn was known to be true. -
_ Thusdo men piay with the Scriptures, preferring Human
traditions. beyond the truth of God contained in” the Scrip-


ture; and this is thecauſe why men a long time have been


deeerved by the Man of Sin, who till prevaileth to lead the
World in darknels, becauſe they. loye not the truth, but
have pleafure in unrighteouſne(s, 2Treſ, 2. 10,11, 12, for
this manof fn,that-Whore of Rowe, being the grand Witch
of the eafIian, world, pointed at Revef. 18, 23, thar hee
Faight Htw have freedom to deceive the Nations, hath
broached this Dogrin wherewith he hath defiled the world,
thata.:Wych isnot. a falſe Propher, or a Deceiver, but one
thar can ſend the Dewi to kill mcn and womei;, and cj1il-


_ dren, and tomakethe ground barren, and men and women


renun Generation, and kill the children in the Wombe;


\ $ad can with looks Kill Lambs and Cartel, and can fly inthe


v'\ : Air,


—


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch,

Ait, and can do many things 'by the help of the Devil ;
which things arc not poſlible to be done by any power, but by
the mighty power of God. wy
We may read of the Priclts of the Idol Afaroth, that were
iced real Wirches in the Scripture Lenſe, who proteſled to
do {uch things by the-power ot their Ido], but were'dilcove=
red by Bartholomeus the Apoltle,to be deceivers of the people,
by the Devils ſubril deluſions, who ruied 1n their hearts, fo
they with their Idol were deſtroyed, and many people con-
verted to vac Chriſtian Faith, Hexdor fizs 19 the fitth pageot his
Theater of Hiſtory ( his words arc thele, Bartholomerns Jdo-
lam Aſtaroth evertt, fraudes Satane qui miraculis hemines ef -

Acinatos morbis 'am premebat, 1am refſos levabat, detexit. &c.)
And where do wercad ia Holy Wric (or common Hitltory:
that ſaver of truth) that men by Devils could do fauch
things really 2 and to uphold ſuch errours contrary co Scrip-
ture, what is this but mcer preyarication with the truth, an1
rcliiting Gods holy Spirit of trurh ? Where do we finde any:
{uch. thing in Scriptures , or any {uch detcriprion of a
VVitch, or that a VVitca was ſuch a one as hath made a
League with the Devil, andſcalcd ir with his bloud, or hath
Imps fucking him, or Biggs, or privie Marks, or that lycth
with Incubus, Or Succu#bus, Or any {uch phratc OL exprcfſt-
0:1 in all the Scriptures? V Vhar leatt inkling have we of
theſe rhings in all the Scriptures? VV hence received the
Church ot Eng/and this Docria? O tooliſh E-gland, who
hath bewitchcd youzthat you ſhould not obey the truth? Sure»
ly it was the Pope. . This groundlels, impious, and tantaſtt-
cal Doctrin was never taught by Gods Propnets, but. that
VVitch, the Pope, knowing 1n his Conſcience thathe is the
very VVitch, the Deceiver ot the Nations pointed at in the
Revelations, ang that the Scriptures were [o plain,rhat by the
light thereof his devilliſh deluſions mult neeas come ro light,
it che VVorid ſhould haye true 1n{1ght -1nto the Scriptures,
and ſo that by. thar means all Nations would rifc up on
lum and deſtroy him, he not only laboured to hide the
YCriptures from the common people, which he did for a long
tune, but allo hath been ſo bold as to preyaricate. wich the
© " "00 2 SCL1p=


-
-.
+. © ,
=
- =


\


"2 -%


The Second Book.


Scriprares , and to publiſh thro the Nations , that
VVicches were to be underitood no Deccivers, but ſuch as
practilcd ſuch wonderful "rn hy the Scripture teacheth us
that the doing thereof ought te be attribured to no Creature, -


. buronlyro the Creator, as Pope Inxocent the cighth to the


Inquiſitors of Almam, and Pope Julixs the ſecond, to the
Inquifitors of ay Kr ſent choſe words; Ir is come to our.
cars, that many icwd perſons of both kinds, as well male as
temale, uſing the company of the Devils Incxbue and Suc-
cubss, with 10S» and Conjurations, do deſtroy the
birch of VVomen with childe, the yo of all Cartel, the
Corn of the field, the Grapes of the Vine, the fruit of the
Trees, Men and VVomen, and all kinde of Catrel, and
beaſts of the ficld, and with their ſaid Inchantments do whol- J..
ly extinguiſh, ſuffocate, and ſpoyl all Vine-yards, Orch-

yards, ws, Paſtures, Graſs, green Corn, ripe Corn,


 andall other proviſions, men and women are by their impre-


catious ſo afflicted, with external and inward pains and dif-
calcs, that men cannor begets nor women bring forth, nor
accompliſh the duty of V Vedlock, denying the faich which


" inBavtiſm they profeſs, to thedeſtruftion of their ſouls; Our


pleaſure therctore is, That all inpediments that may hinder
the Inquiſirors Office be remoyed from among the people,
leſt this þlot ot Hereſie proceed to defile them thar be yer iu-
nocent, and therefore we do ordain by vertue of the Apoſti-
cal authority, that our Inquiſitors of high 4/main may exc-
cute the Office of Inquiſition, by all Torturcs, and Aﬀfiictions,
inall places, aud upon all perſons. V Vhat Scripture had the
Pope for this > we read indeed of {ſuch Fiftions in the Poets,


a5 11 Ovids Mctamorp"1- 7.


Cum volni ripu ipſis mirantibus amnes

In foxtes redire ſuesconcnuſſaq; ſiſto,
Stantiaconcatio cantu freta, nubila pello,
Nubilaq; induco , ventos abigoq; voceg;
Vipereas rampo verbis & carmine faces,
Vivaq; ſaxa, ſua convnlſaq; roberaterra,


Tradition; of the Romiſh Witch.
Et ſylv as meveaynteeq; tremiſcere montes,


Es mmngive ſolum, maneſqs exire Sepulcbris,
Fe quog; Lnnatr


T he Rivers I can make retire

into the Fountains whence they flow,
Whereat the banks themſelves admire,

1 oan make ſtand ng waters go;
With Charms I drive bath Sea and Cloud,

1 make it calm, and blow aloud ©
TheVipers jaws, the reckie ſtone,

with Word and Charm 1 kreak in twain,
The force of earth congeal'd in one,

I move the Woods, th* Hills tremble plain :

I make the ſouls of neex ariſe,


Tpluckthe Moon ont of the shies,
Alſo 0vid,de Mciea Epilti 4.
Et miſernm tenues in jecur urget ack


She ftlicketh alſo Needles fine,


In livers,whereby men do p;ne.
Alſo Virgil :
Neſcis quis teneros oculus mihi faſcinat agnas,


Throw notlwhence ſome fi erce bewitching eye
With looks doth kill my Lambkins as they te.


Theſe are the Popes Scriptures whereon he groundetlt his.
groundleſs inyentions to torment the Chriſtian VV.orld, and


upon theſe grounds being inventions and paſtimes of Poets,..


hath he ſent our Inquifitors in all places to torment ; from:
thence is the Spaniſh Inquiſition. waich maketh ſearch for:
_ . Herericks and VVitches all as-one, and now leſt the world: -
ſhould take notice that his daily praRice is to torment and kill


Re-


et


96 The Sccond Book. | |


Reformiſts, and ſo his Villany ring the more in the cars of
the world, he hath joynedas equivocal with the word Here-
| tiques, V Vitches, a more ignominious name, thereby to
| in{tigatc people the more againſt themy, and ſo by this means
will not be ſeen to kill men for matter of Religion, for then
men would rc{1lt and help one another, but under the name
of V Vitches he melzeth away every one that hath bur a ſmell
of the reformed Religion, and the world perceiveth ir nor;
_ thisisthat Grand Witch, the V Yhore of Rome, the Pope and
his train,
ters And thele Inquiſitions, before mentioned ſent out by the
Pope; have for © Be mation of their villanous Doftriins &
Inventions, ſer forth great Volumes of horrible lyes and im-
poſlibilirics, .and alſo for the hiding of their unparalleled
cruelty fromthe cars of the world, ot which fort are James
Sprenger, Henry Inſtiter, in malleo maleficarum , allo Nider
and Cumanus, Danens, Hyperics, Hem:ngius, but molt of all
Bodinm and Barthelomen:; Spinens (1 do not (ay that all theſe
dycd Papilts) and leſt their authority ſhould tail in decei-
vins the world in this DoCtrin of Devils, fome great Scho-
lars of thc Popiſh rout have approved and affirmed the mat-
tcr to be truc in {ome caules writing of faſcination, and of
that ſort are Thomas Aqninar, and Swares, In which Au-
thots (although they were learned men) whoſocver read-
eth their diſcourſe of this fubjectsſhall finde nothing at all pro-
ved, cither by Scripture or Philoſophical argument, bur
they take it tor granted and undoubred truth confirmed b
tradition, that Faſcination or Vrchcraft is an Art of killing
and afflictiag Men and Cartcl, and upon this Hypotheſis
they take in hand to diſpute upon it, not whether it be true
Or not, bur how it may bc done, as they conceive, for ſay
they, Erfs agens on poteſt diffundere att ionem ſnam uſq; ad
rem aiſtantem, fit tamcn ut aer prox.mns inficiatur & uſq; ad
 certam diſtantiam perveniats & fic xoceat alicrt ; it tiN1s {nbject,
the force of faſcination had bcen firſt proved by them, then
this their rea{on hal had foe feemingtorce in it, but becauſe.
it can no way bc proved by firm Argument, they- quote
Hiſtory for it, and to paſs on to their hypothetical diſputes:
about


— — ——
_— . Fe . ,
—— Toe a | _
« TACT - Pa. .


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch.
about the reaſon of it, and that they may make the matter
ſeem true, onequotes anothers authority for it, and Suarez
gquoteth T homas Aquinas and P lin, an Plixy Citeth FHlogo=
nus and Niphodoras, and Apollon:des for his Authors, that
among the T riballians, and Illyrians, and S cythians, there be
certain Women that can kill with their eyc-ſight whom they
look wiſhtully upon; mark; but how firlt things are reported
by Travellers who may lye by authority; then Pliny gather-
eth their {everal reports into the Volume of his Natural Hi-
ſtory ( whomall men may (cc was abuſed by being toe cre-
dulous of other mcns reports ) and yet Szarez is forced to
uſe Plinies Pen ty prove that which cannot.be proved or de-
fended by reaſon, and having no better. Argument, he ſaith
turcther, Sur qui negant illam vin faſcinationis, ſe non eſt cur
experientiam a Philoſophis & medicis comprovatam, & fere
communi ſenſureceptam, negemns ; by which Argumentaman
may as well provethat Idols were gods, becauſe they were
approycd in their time by men of all Arts and Sciences, | Ex
fere commmnni ſenſu recepea ; andfurther ( according to Plinies
report ) he ſaith, that theſe women do kill but by tome poy-
ſonous quality of their Natural complexion, and inward hu-
mours of their bodies, communicated ro the vital ſpirits, and
by the ation -of the minde brought to the eye-{ight, and
from thence infeCting the party whom they look upon, and
this \ he ſaith exprſly ) cometh naturally to pa's, aud of in-
bred natural caules in the Witches bodies ; but mark how
this fellow (although notable for learniug) hath wildered
himſelf in {carching out the reaſon of a meer vain ſ{uppoſiti-
0, and erroncous tradition, that Witches can kill by looks ;


tor whereas he giveth this reaſon, that Witches have inward


natural poylon, whereby they naturally kill others; what
an abſurdity is this to ſay, that any Creature can by its natu-
ral quality be contrary or deſtructive to.its ownſpecies? for &
Viper cannot poyſona Viper, nor a'Toad cannot poyfon a
[Toad for theirnarure 1s One, and not contrary to its own
ſpccics»

 Seconiily, whereas herea'onerh, that this poyſon is com-
municarcd tromthe hymours HRT vita! ſpirits and byihe


actio1 -


--


97


The Second Book, ©


ation of the minde brought to the cyc-ſight, Ir is raoft ab<
Card in Phitoſophy ; for what Phyſician or Philoſopher doth
not acknowledge that rhe vital ſpirits, once poyſoned, do tuf-
focatc the Heart, the fountain of Lite ( as is often ſeen in the
Peſtilence ) whereby the Witch her ſclf muſt needs periſh ;.
and is alſo often ſeen un thoſe who having bur the Natural hu-
mours of their own bodies corrupt, the vital ſpirits are debi-
licated, and cannot operate, butthe party decayethand ſoon
periſherh, becauſe the cannot abide any corrapt poyſon,
Sr COMNTAry temperature to- its Own nature. =
Thirdly, whereas. he faith, 0ige® 2x apt is ſent from the
Witch by the force of ſeeing, this alſo1s an abſurdiry in Phi-
lolophy; for all ſound Philolaphers' do- acknowledge, that |
Oculns hen vidit emittends vim ſuaw videndi ad obiettuns viſi-
bile, ſed vecipiendo PO ho ab objcfto ; how then can
the fight ( it it were poylon)) hurt any way. the parry upon
whors it only: lookoth> DE TEN 4 pals 4
Fourthly,. whereas he faith, that W irches do kill by their
natural complexion and inward humour, being naturally :
poyſon, whart an abſurdity ariicth irom hence in Divinity ? |
To conceivethat God ſhould make men and women natu-
rally poyſon, and deftruftive to others, and yet ſhould make
a Law that ſuch ſhould be purto death, yea cruel death, for |
being ſuch as God made them in their nature and complexis = |
on? Surely.if man had ſtood inthe manner. in which he was |
made, God had nor puniſhed.-him with death.. Now after he
| hath thusintrapped himſelt in his Diſcourſe, by ſecking our
2 reaſon of that which is not ( but only conccived to be by
tredulous peopke) he ftalleth off from his. own weak reaſons;..
tothercalon that Thomas 49*:zas giveth,.and that is, That
lomerimes-this Faſcination is'wronght by a ſecret compatt
wich the Devil; buthow can theſe Reaſons accord one with
theerher? for if it be natural to the Witch to bewitch orhers,.
what a<deth ſhe rhen- to feek help of rhe Devil to do that
| which ſhe can doby nature ?. Far, Dew-'eft author Nature, and


——x


+ ſure the Devil cannot make more pertect or forceable that
which God hath made; but ſuch 1s the nature of all theſe


Popihh Writers, that when they cagnor firongly. enough.
P_—


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch? |

maintain a Lycy they father their Lyes upon their Maſter the
Father of Ly, andarc forced, after all their vainargumen»
tationgy uſe his name to uphold aLyc, and ( rn 36 ag

were great Scholars) have rather inta chemſclves w

folly in reaſoning, and with ſo ma errour { whereby
they have expoſed themſelves to the laſh of common Cen-
ſure ) thanto torſaketheir Popiſh darkneſs, which they are
ingaged to defend, Whar ſhall not be done to bring the
Popes cnds to paſs? what Lyes, what fooliſhFittions, what
impofſibilitics can the Heart of man deviſe, that gheſe to-
gether have not affirmed tor truth unto the World, to inte&t
the Nations with Hereſie, or Atheaſmy whereby to deſtroy
the Chriſtian Church 2 And for further confirmarion of the
matter, they have deviſed, among other Torcures, ro make
people conteſs that they can do {ach impoſlibiliries ,onc of che
molt devilliſh cruelrics that hath beca deviſed among men;and
that is, to keep the poor accuſed party from ſleep many
nights and days, thereby to diſtemper their brains, and hurc
their fancies, at lengrh ro extorr confeſſion fromthem, and
then to bring their own con{efſion as an evidence againſt them;
and it they cannot make them conteſs, they torture one of
their lictle Children to make it accuſe their Parents, and that
they call confeſſhon; this trick will rame any wilde Beaſtzand
make i traQable, or any wilde Hawk. and make it rame,
and come to your fiſt, how much more may it make men
or women yceld to confeſs Lycs, and impoſſibilitics ? And i
that device will not ſerve, then they ſhave them; and ſear
narrowly all parts of their bodics, where they think modeſt
men will not be forward to look,to ſee thetruch of the mar-
ter, and there they report that they have found the Devils
privie Marks, and Biggs, for the Devil to fuck them ; a moſt
ecv1lliſh Lye and invention, unle($s:they . can ſhew me Scrip=-
ture for it, but I can ſkew them Scripeure againit ir, Job, 2.36
Without Go1 was nothing made that was made ; who then
made thoſe Biggs, or Teats, and who made the bodies of
thoſe Devils called Imps? Alio what Scriprure faith, that
Biggs or privie Marks are ſigns or triais of Witches? ( yet 1
dcay got but ſometimes are a fleſhy Warts, and otner
2 PLeter


} The S econd Book.


preter-natural tumours written of uber Awhors, as

diſcaſcs of the body ) and among other devices (as Maſter

Scot in his diſcovery afftirmeth ( who'was zcalous for Gods-

ruth, and took avax” won than ordinary to ſearch and con-

futc thoſe impious Writers) they have ſet down certain

wor whereby to {uſpett and appre|
cle;

Firſt, If chey will nor faſt on Fridays.

Secondly, If they faſt on Sundays.

Thirdly, If they ſpettle atthe time of Eleyation..

Fourthly, It they refuſe Holy Water.

Fifthly, It they deſpiſe Croflcs.

Sixthly, 1t they deny any of the ſeven Sacraments,
"Theſe aregreart ſuſpicions that they are Witches ; for the-
Devil ( {ay they) chooſcth thenyby liek: {1gns ( beins ſteps:
to the reformed Religion). apprehend them, bring them to
the Tormentor ; bur if they {ce any of theſe ſigns, they will
eaſily finde other holes enough 1n. their Coates ro con-
demn them _..

Then they caſt them into the water, to ſee whether they
will fink or {wim, a mcer Jugling deluſion to blinde peoples
eycs, for he that hath been uſed to the Art of Swimming
may know, that few.men or women being tied hand and:
teer together can ſink-quite away till they be drowned, orif
he lay them flat on their back, and hold up their feer with a
ſtring, their fore-part will nor ſink, and therein they can uſe
Jughns to blinde the peoples eyes for difference fake; for
whenthey willfave any man or woman, they will let looſe
the ſtring which-they hold in their band, and let: their -feer
{ink figit; 'and then all their body will fink, then they cry out
to the people, Look you now; and ee the difference betwixt
an honelt man or womanzand a W uchytake her our, the is an
hogeſt woman, yea verily, for ſometimes ſhe 1s one of their
own confederates. . Yer whercas ſome may obje&, that ſome
of chem thar axe caſt fairly into the water, withour holding
up their feet with a ſtring, do fink more than others, and
ſomeagain do ſwim more than othcrs (although none do
Sk quite away without any part appearing-aboye yrarer?


LO


aend Witches, which arc


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch, tor
The reaſon of this difference is cake to conceive” to met of
knowledge ; for, © 2-5 oy Torr es nr
Firſt; There is difference of conſ{titutton'in ropes bodies
ſome arc heavie of remper, and they {ink-moſt ;-ſorne agaitr
are more light of tempcr, fuller ot vital ſpitits,/ and rhey
fink not ſo much. Ce. .
Secondly, we muſt obſerve the Syſtole and'Diaſtole of
breathing; ſome happen to fall into the water when their bo#
dies are full of bedarh. and they ſwim moſt ; fome happents
fall inrothe water when their breath is out of their bodies, be 4
fore they can draw it up again, and they ſink moſt.Some are
kept long faſting in watching and torment, and then are calt
into the water when their bowels and veins are empty of food
and hlled with Wind,and theſe ſwim more than tholethatare
filled with nouriſhment; or perhaps they are kept faſting {6
longthart they have ſcarce any lite left, and then they happen
to-ſunk moſt;bur if they doit muſt not ſerve their turn, for the
cruel Inquiſiror will itill torment them till he-extorr confeſ?
: {10n, if the party hve long enough for his cruelty-to take
place. Some again are Women caſt into the water, withthei£
Coates tied dots roward:their feet, and Men with their ap-
parrel on ( and for this they pretend modeſty) bur whe
knowethnot that their apparrel will carry them aboye water
fora time ? Some again are Women, whoſe bodies are di-
lated with bearing of Children, .and do always after remain
{ponsiouſly hollow, more apt to {ſwim thanto fink, eſpecis
ally tied hands and fect together, to bring their bodies into a
round andapt faſhion to ſwim, They thatare uſed co the Art
of {\wimming inthe water, might caſily diſcover theſe to' be
but Deluſions and Juglings, if they were not too credulous ;
and yct with theſc hath poor England been tdewitched and de-
R ceived, as alſo with the tormer, of keeping the accuſed from .
fleep till they confeſs ; and theſe: deluſions have been imp
ouſly acted here in Eglard, of late in Eſſex, and+S»ffolk, by
a wicked Inquiſitor pretending authority for ity tothecutrins
oft of fourteen innocent people at Chelm: ford Aﬀiizes, ani
about an hundred at Berry Aſſizes, whereof one was a Mi-
rafter nzer Frem/ngham, of about fourſcore years age, wherein .


3 thus,


[262 The Second Book.


_ this again hath laid ſuch a preſident for the Popes Tnqui-
(fion' ( if times of Popiſh Tyranny ſhould again come in,

from which God in his mercy detend us) as would not eaſi-
ty berempoved, when although we have no Laws in Exp iand -
zotry people upon. Lite and Death by any Inquiſition, or
Inquittor, in that mainer ; yer it may then bee aid, was it
Law then, when the Law was'/in your hands, and is it not
Law now ?. bur it {uch times of tyrannous Inquiſition come,
do they that have hada hand in this preſident thinkthey ſhall
elcape it, ortheir Poſteriry ? There is alrcauy a prefident for
—_ of Miniſters for Witches.

o ſome credulous le hearing ofthe Condemration
of thole people, have publiſhed a Book, wherein they report
ſuch impoſhibilarics to be done by them) as I hope no wiſe
man will beleeve ; wherein allo. Hoy, the Gaolcr, is
brought infor a Witnels, a fellow, that 1s not fit to bear the
Office of a Gaoler, nor any other Ofhce in a Chriſtian
Co wealth, who alſo wautcd Vails, and thought the
more Priſoners were executed, the more he ſhould gain; and
yer it is reported, his Teſtimony was takenas an Evidence a=
ga them, although his teſtimony was partly of impoſsi-

ilities, partly mecr prevarications and lycs, to the diſ-ho-
_ of Gods Majeſty , and the ſhedding of innocent
Bur (cceing then chis miſerable Maſſacre of people rhrough-

/ out the Chriſtian World hath been bur a trick of Antichriit,
£0 blinde the World, thatthereby he might the more eaſily
and quuetly deſtroy the Church under the name ot Witches,
Soles i good Chrittians haye bcen deſtroyed in this impious
way» thea thouſands of the Souls of ſuch are now under the

Altar, Rewel, 6, Hz JO, cry.ugs How long Lord, holy and

xxue, will it be cre thou avenge our bloud upon them thar

dycll upoathe carth? being bo: of them the very pcople

. that have bzendcitroyed tor the Word of God, and tor the
tcftimony ofthe truth 3 arid cheretore have becu brought incy

theſe murderous Iaquiſxors hands ; And although it may be

ſaid, Thelc in England have nor been flain tor the teſtimony

of the cruch ; yer 1 anfyer, The Church Randeth for the


teſtimony


re R


en NEE


— a.


rr I ot


of that Popiſh crew, and


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch: 107
teſtimony of the-cruth, andrhis perſecution was invented a«


ainft the Church, and ſo they as Mcmbers of the Church

ye been {lain by the cnemaics invention ; for had they been
againſt the Church, thoſe
wrongtul accuſations had not. been brought againſt them by


them. But it may be (aid, Some' of thelewere Scoulds aud.


Brawlerszthetetore their Soulsaxe not. under the Alrar. I an-
{wery yea, and many honeſt Livers thathave been cxecured
inthat kinde lately, and in times paſt ; bur whatſoever they


werc, if they were unjuſtly ſlain, know, that it God would.
avengcthe bloud of Cain, will he nar. aycnge the bloud of :


thele ? |


Before the deftruCtion of Germany, that Nation was ſo de--


luded by thele Popith errours, that they-pur to death thow-
(ans in that kinde, of all ſorts,. and that Nation was .{o carrti-


cd away with that darkſome Idolatrous- opinion-of Wxches.


power, that ſeldom came any thing croſs, but ſome were ac-


culed to have occaſioned it as Witches, and at laſt God (ent.


deſtroying Plagues among them,. and their hearcs were {6


hardened, that they digged the dead our of the Graves £o-
; 1o blinde were they.


cut off their Headsto itay the P |
and (o given over; that rather thau they would acknowledge
Gods hand tn all things, thev would fay, the dead in-their


Graves, by the Devils helps. brought the plague ; - and Jome


Phyſicians among them were ſo bold to affiraa it for-truth,


 whoalthongh they might be ſome way approved inPlayhick;.
 yct beſides their horrible Arheiſm, rkey ſhewed their fillineſs, .


and it may be ſail of thamas of many'ignocan Divyſiciant,


Inſcitie pallium maleficinm & iucautatis ;, A. Cloak fora Nhy-
{iclans ignorance, when he caunot finde the walon and rhe -
nature of the Dilcaſe,. hefaith, rhe Party is bewitchad;. chis -
hath indeed baen written of by ſome-woreby Authers, bur
how, anlin what mauncr? Semertws Lib. 4, de fehrabaw, cap./2;.


hc being loath to defuleſis pen with ſuch an impious opinions


faith, / had rather refer the Reader to the writing of 4wothor -


war, Hercul. Saxonias Lib. de plica.cap, 1 1. tax bring my
felf upon the St We for breaching of ſuch an.opinon ; where 374
you may read the


words of H Te. Jax on, aforciaid, _— |


4 *
—_—_. ow... es F Eg =
6 ., y
: <Re* Ki ” ,


The Second Book.
(hucth ic off to Joh. Yeſino Leopolienfi, as an opinion of his;
2nd he like an Atheiſt Ta mdecd ownthat opinion, That tis
Polonia and Germany, Witches ater theirexecution aud burial,
did commonly ſend deltroying peſtilence ; I think indeed
the exccuting ot ſo many innocent poor people did bring the


| Peſtilence, andthe Sword, and Famine, all againſt them, be-


caule they provoked God with ther,own inyeutions, tending
hot only to Idolatry, in imputing the Work of the Crea-
bo = a Creature, bur alle to the ſhedding of innocens

_ D_

. Maſter Scot in his Diſcoyery tellech us, That our Engliſh
pcople in Ireland, whoſe poſterity were lately barbarouſly
cut off,.were much given to this Idolatry in the Queens time,
infomuch that there being a Diſcale amongſt their Cartel
that grew blinde, being a common Diſeaſe in that Country,
they did commonly execute pcople tor it, calling them eye-
biting Witches; Great Britain hath been much infetted
with that Arheiſmy and many people both in England and
Scotland have been by tooliſh falſe accuſations put to death,
tor doing ſuch things as arc not in the power of men, or of
Devils -to do, but only of the Creator ; And before theſe
Warsbegan, what Athciſtical reports were publiſhed of cer-


tain Lancaſhire people, that they could transform themſelves


into Grey-hounds, and into Men and Women again, and.
pull down Butter and other proviſion from the Air, ( or trom
whence any crack-brained accuſer would imagine?)


Vi cop King Cherls went Jaſt to Szetland betorc theſe


ars, as he came back again ſayling over the River Hum-
ber,. the Veſſel in which his Plate was carried, was reported
{0 be caſt away). and then was that Atheiſm ſo great, even at
the very Courtof Ezxglard, that they reported \Viitches had
done 1t, inſtead of obſcrving Gods ſupream Providence ,
(whercas Chriſt ſaith, 4 Sparrow ſhall not fall ro the ground
without Geas providence ) {mce which we have had bloudy
\Vars, and wherc is the Court now ? and now. of late hath


becnin the year one thouſand {1x hundred forty five, that


orcat {laughter oft Men and W omen called Witches, art the.
. Afbizes at Ferry, and at C be-2p+forc), thole poor accuſcy people


WCrc


re rn on—— >
— — ——_— —_L


Traditions of the Romiſh Witch.


were watched day and night, and kept from flcep with
much cruelty, till their Fancies being hurt, they would cone
fels whar tacir Inquititors would have them, although ir
w.rca thing impo'sible, and flat contrary to ſenſe and Chri-


{tian underſtanding to belecye ; ( where, for the removing of


Objections it is ro be noted, Thar a Fancy ſo hurt with
watching,cannot afterward of a long time recant, or deny that
which they have confeſlcd, no more thana Hawk chrough-
ly tamed by watching can grow ſpecdily wilde again, al-
though you give them their tull ſleep; this manner of ex-
rorting confeision, and ſeeming to convict them, being bur
ameer Jugling Trick invented by the Pope, an their Trial
ia that kinde being Jugling Warchcratt it felt, thar may make
the wilſeſt man confeſs any thing though never fo falſe)
What troubles have followed this Slaughter, blinde men
may (ce. |

A iictle before the Conquelt of Scotland (as is reported up-
on good intelligence ) the Presbytery of  Scot1and did, by
their own pretended authority, take upon them to Summon,
Convent, Cenſure, and Condemn people to cruel death for
Witches and ( as 1s credibly reported ) they cauſed four
thouſand to be ex&uted by Fire and Halter, and had as many
in priſon to be tried by them, when God ſent his conquering
Sword to ſupprels them, its occaſion of which Wars there
were many Muniſters ( whereof many were Presbyters )
flain ; What 1s become of their Presbyterian Authority
naw 2 Yer becaulc there arc lome that {lighting theſe obſer-
vations will hardly be beaten from this conceit of Witches
power) which they have {o long beleeved, and will nor yer
think but that Watches have a familiar ſpirit, by whoſe help
they kill, and aft ſtrange Wonders; tell me, where is a place
in all the Scripture that (aith ſo? ſhew me in all the Scrip-
tures ſuch a word) as Striges, lamie, In:nbus, and Surcubm,
or any word of {uch {1gnification or importance; what were
Pharao! his Magicians, but deluders of Pharavh and rhe
People? could they by the help of Satandoany thing truly ?
weic they rea] Miracles? did not their madne's come ro


light? 2 T\# 3.9, Wat {pirit had the Maid that fo:Jowed
P Part,


|


|


Ke
108
Paul? AR. 16.16, whichis {aid to have the ſpirit of P zthow]
was it more thana couſeming {pirir of Divination, for gain >
yct{til| you will ſays the word Python hath been interpreted
by many one that had a familiar ſpirit ; imagine they had
a tamiliar '{piric ( although it 1s but a weak Argument to
oround an opinion upon the bare ſignification of a word ( ex-
cept you will have it a {educing lying [pirit, fuch a one as
was in Ababs Prophets) yer 1 fay, antwer me theſe Four
Queſtions, =
Firſt, Tell we where a Witch did, or could kill a man in
Scripture > What did Sal goto the Pythoniſt of Exdor for ?
was itthat ſhe might help him Kill the Philiſtians, or meer-
ly for Augury or Divination ? what did Pharaoh call his
Wirches the Magicians before him tor? was it to kill any
Man or Bcaſt by their cunning? or meerly to work lying
Wonders, and diilemble the Mikes that God wrought by
Aoſes? fothat they might withſtand Aoſes, and the truth,
and blinde Pharaohs cycs, becauſe God would harden his
heart 3 tell me where you tinde 1n all the Scriptures, thar a
W itch did, or could kilia man by Witchcratt ; ſhew me in
all the Law of Meſes concerning the condemning of men or
women tor Murthcr, that a Murtherer was called a Witch,
Ora Wuc ha Martherer, Deut, 1 0, 21d other places of Scrip-
rure ; arethere not {everal Rules ſer down for the trying of
Murther? ſhew-me one that intimatcth the Wirching of Men

or Cattcl ro death ?
Secondly, Shew me in all the Scriptures where Witches
are ſpoken of, thata Witch wasa fecrer perſon, or unknown
tothe World, that ſhould nced to be tried by blinde circum-
$«$<<9>4 {tances, and preſumprions, and ſuperſtitions, or by privie
Marks, or by Teats, or Biggs, by ſtinking or ſ{wimmins,
or by confcſhons? were not Pharaohs Witches called Preſti-
£1atores & magi, openly known > did not Pharavh call them
rogether without privie ſearch, or inquiry ? did not Sau!
baniſh all the Witches as people openly known, and profeſ-
{ing the Artot Augury, and their ſeveral couſcning practi-
ces? when $aulinquired fora Witch, did not his ſervants
preſenrly te:l hum there was one at Ender, was ſhe not know


With» -


© Confatation by Scripture? 107


without privie ſearch, or pfime marks? Did not the Maid
| inthe Ats, that was ſaid to have the ſpirit of Pythor, or to
| be a Pytheniſt, tollow Pan, crying openly? did not Simon
Magw atthis Deluſions openly, to ſeduce rhe people? as like-
wilc Elwas the Sorcerer ? were not the Wirchcratrs of Jez.a-
bel known to be her deluſions that ſhe wrought by the Prieſts
of Baal, to ſeduce the people? were not the Witchcrafts of
Manaſſes open ations, that made Fnaa and ern to £0
aſtray ? where then do weread of a Witch by ſuſpicion, or
to be tried by preſumptions, or ſuſpicions, or privie marks,
or other ſigns that are mans inyention? whence came this
darkneſs and blinde errour, bur from the Pope, that gran4
Witch that hath bewirched all Nations? we ſearch for
Witchcratts and abominatious in a poor womans wooden
diſh , and Chriſt telleth us, they are all ina cup oft Gold, in
the hand ofthe great Whore, Revel, 17. 4.
Thirdly, Shew me in all the Scriptures where Witchcraft .

- went withour Idolatry, ſa. 19. 3. and had not a neceſſary

dependance on Idolatry, Naham 3.4. Look again, Dent.
18. 10, 11, where all forts of Witches are ſpoken of, why
were they to be cur oft and deſtroyed ? the reaſon is immedi-
atly given, vciſ, 14, becaule rhey defiled rhe Nations, in ſc-
ducing them unto Spiritual VV horedom) and the Nations
were deſtroyed for {ceking, and making inquiry after their
Divinations, or South-{ayings,or Oraclecs, whereas inquiries
ought to be to Gods Prophets, verſ. 15. Was not this Sawls ]-
dolatry, when he {ought to the Witch of Endor? 1 Chro, 10,
I 33 14. Was not this the {in of Manaſſes, where he is blamed
for uſing Witchcrafts, when he made Juds at III g0
aſtray to Idols? 2 Chron. 33. 9. were not the Witchcrafts and
V Vhoredoms of Feſabel{ct downas two inſeparable compa-
nions, her Witchcratt being the upholding of the Idol Pricſs
of Baal, that by Wirtchcratt ſeduced the people to Idolatry ?
were not Pharaohs Magicians ſeducers of Pharaoh, and the
people, from God? was not Simon Hagp:'s thelike > but alas,
now, and where haye thoſe poor ſouls that are commonly
hanged for Witches ſeduced the people to Idolatry? who
hath been led after them for Divinations, and Southſayings?
P' 2 many


The Second Book.

indeed have been led aftce Sourhſaycrs, but they arc
hr good Witches, and whercas they as Witches ought
to dycy many have bcen put to death by their devilliſh talſe
accuſations, and if the Witch of Endor were now living a-
mongſtus, we ſhould call her a good V Vitch, fo blinde are

the tunes. :
Fourthly, Shew me inall the Law of God againſt Adul-
tcrous uncleaneneſs (where Moſes writeth of ſeveral kindes of
uncleancneſs, as man with man, man with beaſt, woman


with bcaſt, and many more ) the lea(t intimation of unclean--
neſs, by Incubre,. or Saccubus ; what, did Hoſes forget.


this ?

Yet becauſcthis opinion hath been ſo upheld by reports and
imaginations, and by the extorted confeſſion.of people thar
have been condemned in that kinde, and ſometime. by the
voluntary confeſſion of deſpairing melancholly - people that
have beentroubled in mindey and wiſh rather to dye than ro
live, although Yolenti mori, non eff adhibenda fides; Yetl in-
treat you fo run over theſc ſeyera} places of Scripture with,
me a little, and fcc how this opinion of V Vitches power a-

reeth with the Scriprures, yea how flat contrary it 1s to Gods
and the grounus ot Qur Chriſtian faith.

Yer firlt, becauſe ſome men will not underſtand the Scrip-
tures in any other {cnle than as their: own Expoſttors have
done; be it right or wrong ; thercfore I refer, them that will
{eek farther than the Scriptures, ro the words of a general
Counſel, which Mr. Scot 19 his Diſcovery. bath alleged as
followerh,Concil, Acqui. in decret. 26, the words ofthe Coun-
ctl, It may not be omitted,that certain wicked VVomen fol-
lowing Satans provocations, being ſcduced by the illuſion
ot the Devil, beleeve, and profeſs rhat.in the night time they
ride abroad with Diaza the Goddeſs of the Pagans, ar clic
with Herodias, with an innumerable multitude, upon certain
Beaſts, and pals over many Countries and Nations in the
{fenceot the night, and do whatſoever theſe Ladics or Fai-
nies command, &c. lct all Miniſters therefore in their ſeyeral
_ Cures preach to Gods people fo, as they may know all
thoſe things to be falſe, and wholocyer beleeycth that any


Crcature


—O—
—_—  — —


—_ « ——  — — _ —— —__


Confutation by Scripture:
Creature can be made by them, or changed into better or


worſe, or be any way transformed into any other kinde, or.


likene(s,by any bur by the Creator himſelt,is afſuredly an In-
fidel, and worle than a Pagan. So much for the words of
the Council, Yerhere 15 to be noted, thar this great general
Council, that thought theſe people beleeved, and conteiled
ſuch things to be true 1in their apprehenſion, did not then
know the inhuman cruelty that was uſed upon thoſe people
by the cruel Inquiſirors to compel, and extort confefsjon for
thcir own gain,. they.being maintained by the ſpoyl of ſuch
people being condemned,

ow for the Scriptures, do but mark how thoſe that
maintainz. and report the power of V Vitches, have cqualled


- their {upernatural power, with the Miracles-of the Prophetss


of Chriſt, and his Apoſtles; it was the Miracle of Miracles,
thatthe Virgin Mary conceived with childe without a man
they ſay, a VVitch may do the ſame by Incubms, .as Bodirr
and other Popiſh VVriters afhrm, and that ſuch a chulde
will naturally becomea V Vitch, ſuch a one they ſay Merle
was ; no, bur you fay theſe were Atheiſts, we beleeve nor {oz
But lome will ſay, the Devil can condenſe a body. and lye
carnally with a womanin the ſhape of a miaan;: but not beger ;
yet it was a Miracle that Angels appeared to Abraham 1n the
thape of men, Ger, 18, 2, yct they will ſay.no, but we bes»
leevethe Devil may aſſume and raiſe a dead body for a time;
and fo appear to a woman, and lye with her ; and y2t.it was
a Miracle at the ſuffering of Chriſt upon the Crols, that dead


bodics were raiſed for atime, and appeared to many, . Marth. .


27. 52.. yet a poor VVench was-execured ar the Afizes at
Chelmsford, who-was compelled by the Inquiſitor (by keep-
ing her from ſleep, and with promiſes and threatnings) to


contc(s that ſhe was married to the Devi), and thar he lay


with her {1x times 1n a.mans ſhape; no, bur yet ſome will ſay;
the Devil cantake upon him an apparent Body, ad ſo may


talk with a woman, and .{cem to lye with her 1n ſhape of 2 .


man» and {fo ſhe ſhall be hanged for things ſeeming fo ; yet +


it wasa Miracle that Moſes and Elias appeared to the Apor


{tes ia a Viſion, Marth, 17, 3. Further, Chrilt Caith, 4 Spirit


P3 bath


The Second Book.


hath net fleſh and bones, Luke 24. 39. and yet ſome fay, the
Devil can condenſe a body, ſome lay he can aflume a body,
ſomes lay he can have an apparent body ; thus do they make
the Word of God of no validity by their groundleſs traditi-
ons; for it the Devil can have to much as an apparent body,|
what validity was in the words of Chriſt, ro take away the
doubt of the Diſciples, when they ſuppoled they ſaw a Spi-
rit2 Where alſo 1s that fooliſh Dottrin of Imps, ſucking of
men and women-W itches become ? Are thoſe Imps bodics
or {pirits ? it bodics, then who madethem ? Without God was
wothing made, Joh. 1+ 3. it (pirits, then {pirits can have bo-
dily thape, and fleſh, and bones; and thus. you make the


 wordsot Chriſt of none efe&t by your traditions. Chriſt diſ-


penſed Devils toenter into the Herd of Swine, and they went,
Mark 5.12. they faya Witch can do more; ſhe can ſend
the Devil into menand women, and chuldren, and cattel, to
Kill them and to witch them ro dcath. |

God (aid to Satan, Al! that Job hath i in thine hand, Job r.
12, and Job himſelf, all but his life, Job 2, 6, they lay, God
permitteth a Witch to do more, to {end Satan to deltroy a


mans goods, and cattcl, and children, and lite and all ; thus


they deliver for Do&rin the traditions of men. Job ſaid, The
Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, bleſſed be the name of
the Lord, and acknowledged Gods hand in all things, nei-
ther tempted he God fooliſhly ;Bur it one ſhould be fo aficted
now adays, inſtead of acknowledging Gods {oyereign hand,
all the poor Wives and Widows in a Country mult be called
Coram nobis, as being acculcd to have done it. Chrilt faith,
Revel. 1,18, I have the keys of Hell and Death, but they lay,
God ; bb the keys of Death likewiſe ſomcrtimes to an old
Wirch (man or woman) and permits them to witch men
ro death ; Chriſt ſaith, M Sparrow falleth not to the ground
witheut Gods providence, Matth, 10 29. but they ſay, God
layeth his providence ſometimes art the fect of an old Witch,
and permutteth her to tend the Devil to deſtroy men and cat-
tel ; ſome will ſay, A VVitch cannot hurt a godly man, bur
only a wicked man, and yet God faith, he1is the Author of
all affliction that comcrh to the wicked, Levit, 26, from the


tour-


— ——


Confatation by Scripture?

fourteenth verſe to the thirty fourth, Alſo the Scripture ſaith,
The Lora killeth and makgeth alrve, 1 Sam, 2. 6. maketh poor,
aud maketh rich; and in Dent. 32,39, There is no God with
mes I hill and give life, I wound and make whole ; butthey lay,
God permitterh ag old V Vitch to ſend the Devil to kill, and
make poor, and wound, and a good V Vitch can heal again
by unwitching.


God did ſhut up every wombe of the Houſe of Abimelech,.


that they bare no children, Gey, 20,18. they ſay a VVitch
can do the ſame ( God permits it ) and make men and wo-
men barren, Chriſt gave his Diſciples power over Devils, to
caſt them out, Luke 9. 2. they ſay, a V Vitch can tend a De-
vil into men and cattel to aftiiit them; and a good VVirch
caiicaſt them our by unwitching, notwithſtanding, Chriſt
faith, Marth, 12, 25, Every kingaom divided cc it ſelf is
brought to deſolation; yer they (ay, that is done by conlent of
the Devil, waena good V V itch unwitcheth a man ; thus do'
they make the words of Chriſt of none ette& by their rraditi-
ons. Chriit came and appeared unto his Diſciples, and va-
niſhed away again inviſible, Luke 24. 31, they ſay, a V Viech
can g01nvitible by the help of the Devil, eſpecially if one of
the 6.19 of the Fairics will but lend her Giges inviſible ring,
Chriſt was lifred up into the Air, and taken up out of their
ſight, A&s 1.9. and Bodinws and other Popiſh V Vriters af-
firm, that a V Vitch can belitted away in the Air by drink-
ing the broth of a {odden Infant ; but poor Germany, . that
bled theſe Doftrins, and in that confidence executed
many pcople for V Vitches, was compelled afterward to


boyl their children to quell their hunger , and found by fad


experience? that there was no luch vertue in that woful Li-
quor, God {aid ro Hoſes, Go up into the mounta.n and dye,
De-at, 32,49, 50, and he did ſoy Chap. 34. verl. 5. they ſaya
VVitch can (lo ig at the word of the Devil, and dye when
je lift, tGelcape hanging ; and waat 1s a mare common re-
POrt Wien Poor Woman 1 laid in priſon, and there dycth
by griet and hard ufave, than to report, the Devil promiſed
her ſh! ſhould nor be hanged, and was as good as his word,
tor {h2 dycd 12 priton Þþ:tore the day of Execution came z

TALL


1-12


” ————_ ee eee __ _— at


The Second Book.


thus do they make the Devil able to determine, and limir the
lite of Man, as God did the like of Moſes.

It is ſaid 11 Iſa, 41. 23, Shew what 15 10 come after, that we
wy know yee are gods ; They ſay, a Witch can truly fore-.
tcl things to come by her {pirit of Divination ( which- the
call a Fanuliar ) and can by the {ame familiar rell what 1s
done in another Town, or Houlſc, or Cowntry, and can ell
2 man where arc his Goods that arc loſt, as well as Samuct
could tell Sax! of his Fathers Aſſes when they were loſt, and
ſuch they call good Witches. ' : ;

Alſointhelame Verlc, Eſa. 41. 23. it followeth in the end
of the veric, do good, or do evil, that we may be diſmayed,
and beholdit togather ; theſe words have relation to the tor-
mer words, That we may know that ye are gods ; thatis, ſhew
what 15 to come hercattcr , or do good, 07 ao evisy that we may
know ye are gods, and be diſmayed at your doings ( eyen as
when God ſendeth the evil of puniſhment or aMiction upon a
people, then they aredilmayed art the fight and apprehenſion
ofit,) as in Fob 40.11, And here when we read that God
claimerh the doing thereof as his own Prerogative, interring
aS much as to ſay, They are gods that can do this, I think
that aftcr the reading of this verſe in /ſaiah, and Feb, no man
ſhould be {o groſly Idolatrous ſtill, as to aſcribe ro a Witch
the (ending of any aMiction ; thoſe words alſo, Do good, or do
evil, (the whole verſe having relation to the ſeventh verſe)
wecre {pokento the Idol Prieſts of the Heathen,who were the
Witches mentioned in the Scriptures, and had as 9rcat a
ſhare inthe Devil, as any Witch can have, and yet God chal-
Iengcth them todo cither good or evil; and yet when any
evil of affliction cometh upon Men or Bcaſt, theſe Idolaters
will {till aſcribe it to a Witch, ſaying ſtill, God permits it.
God lent anevil ſpiritupon Sa#/to vexc him) 1 Say, 16, 14.
they lay a Witch can ſend an evil (pirit upon men or women
to vex Or torment them ; E/ſha curſed two and $-ty chil-
drenin the name of the Lord, and they were dettroycd of
Bears, 2 King. 2.24. they fay a Witch can curſe men and
women 1n the name of the Deyil, and Death or ſome other


Eyil ſhall betide them,


Pharaots


\
6 |


(onfatation by Scripture.


Pharaohs Magicians, though they were themſclves Witches,
yet whenthey ſaw Lice creeping upon Men and Beaſt, they
acknowledged the imager of God. They, it they {ce a man


ſmitren with a loufie diſeaſe as Herod was, ſay preſently he is
bewirched. It was a great Mirack that Chriſt made the
Wind and the Sea obey him, Hark 4, 41, they (ay Witches
cando the ſame, and raiſe Windsand Tempelts, and make
it calm at their pleaſure. Was not this one accuſation that
was brought againſt Mr, Lewis a Miniſter executed at Berry
Aſhizes, that - had raiſed a Tempelt, and caft away two
Ships at ſea by Witchcraft ? Chriſt by his Almighty power
walked upon the waters, Mat. 14. 25. they (ay, caſt a Witch
into the waters and ſhe will not {ink; and what hath been
more reported and beleeved than this Jugling deluſion before
{ſpoken of?

God claimeth it as his own Prerogative to ſend Light-
ningsand Thunders, Fob 38. 25, 35. but they ſay, when ir
Thundereth or Lighteneth,that W itches do ſometimes cauſe
it, eſpecially if it beat an Aſſize time, when many Wirches
are condemned ; and what hath been a more common report
thanthis, when God hath ſent thundring yoyces from Hea-
venat an Aſſize time among the people, to warn them, in-
ſtead of diſcerning that God was angry, they ſay, the
Witches and the Devil was angry, and have cauſed that
thunder? |

God teacheth us in Levit, 26, that he himſelf {endeth Bar-
renne(s, and Famine, Sword, and Peſtilence, and all Diſ{-
cales, and all Adverſfities, as the puniſhment of Sin, but


which of theſe have not been aſcribed to Witches? andif the
{everal accuſations of people that have been condemned for '


Witches, but only here 1in Ezgland, within the memory of
man were Regiltred, we might rcad ſuch a hotch potch of
impoſſibilitics, as he that beleeveth that they have beenjuſtly
put to death, muſt not beleeve the Scriptures, nor aſcribe
any thing to Gods mighty Providence, but he may alſo a-
{cribe it ro the will and pleaſlureof a Witch ; when Chriſt
did dy the Spirit of God calt out Devils, and the Phariſces
aſcribed that work to Zeelzebub, Chritt chargerh them with


Q the


—


114 The Second Book.


the {iq againſt the Holy Ghoſt, Matth, 12, 28, 31. but alas,
how common Aa thing is it to aſcribe to the Devil and
Wicchcs) the works that God relleth us in the holy Scriptures
are his own Works, and cannot be done by any other power
but by the Spirit of God ? me thinks this ſhould ſcare all ob-
ſtinate V Vitchmongers. I heard a S«folk Miniſter ( whoſe
habit and garb might ſeemrto claim the title of Rabbi, Rabbi )
affirm, that one of the poor women that was hansed for 2
VVitch at Berry Aﬀſizes, in the'ycar 1645. did ſend her
Imps intothe Army, to kill the Parliaments Souldiers, and
another {cnt her Imps into the Army to kill the Kings Soul-
diers) and another cauled a mans crop of Coru to fail, and.
cauſcd that Corn which he had to be blaſted, and tipt, or
crockt, and this Miniſter did veriy athrm that thoſe thinss
were truce, for the VVitches: (laid he) confeſſed thoſe
things ; but when I came toargue with him, and totell him
that theſe things in the Scriprure-ſenſe were Gods Preroga-
tiveshe could an{wer nothing,he was not fo well skilled in the
'Scriptures ; but he replied;7 hox ſhalt nor ſaffer a Witch to live,
demancied oft him, what was the {1gnitfhcation of the Hebrew
rexts or of the L atine trantlation, and what was meant by a
VV itch in that xlaceyhe could nor tell;thus bath the ſalt of the
carth loſt its {avour ; and whereas thoſe ſhould ſeaſon people
with wholfome Dorin, ſome teach Dottrins of Devils, and
the inven:ions of Antichriſt, to defile the Nations.

And people arc now to intected with this damnable Hereſic,
of a'cribing ta rhe power of VVirches, that ſeldom hath a
manthe hand of God againlt him in his eſtatc, or health of
body, or auy ways. bur prelently he crycth out of ſome poor
innocent Neighbour, that he, or ſhe hath bewitched him;
for {aith he, tuch an old man or woman came lately to my
door, and deſired fome rclict, and I denied it, and God for-
givc me, my heart didritc avainlt her ar that time, my mind
gave me ſhe looked like a V Vitch, and preſently my Child,
my V Vite, my Selt, my Hortc,,my Cow, my Sheep, my
Sow, my Hogge, my Dogge, my Cat, or ſomewhat was
thus and thus hanilcd, tn ſuch a {trange manner, as I dare
fear the is a V Vitch, or clic how ſhould thoſe things be, or


CONC


FA 0bjeftions anſwered. i135


come to paſs ? ſeldom | gocth any man or womantoa Phy-
| fician tor cure of any Ditcaſc, but one queſtion they ask the

the Phyſician is, Sir, do you not think this Party 1s 11 ill
handling, or wdcr an 11] rongue ? or morc plauny, Sir, do
you not think the party 1s bewitched ? and to this many an
ignorant Phytician will an{wer, Yes verily g the reaſon is, Ig-
»orantie pallium malcficium © incantatio, a cloak for a Phytt-
cians ignorance, whenhe cannot fuude the nature of the Liſ-
caſc, he ſaith, the Party is bewitched, Burt tor all ſuch as go
on to defile the people! with thete DoCQtrins, that not only
haveno groun:s in the Scriptures, but arc flat contrary to
the light of the Scriptures. I demand of them, art whoſe
hands will Chriſt require at the latter day, not only the bloud
of the innocent, but alſo the Souls of tuch as have periſhed
by the prattice of thele Arheiſtical and bloud-guilty ways?
which are in every point {o abſurd and phantaſtical, that it
many Miniſters can fay they never did teach any (uch Do- .
ctrin ro the pcople yet are they guiltyy in that they have not
preached againſt rhe(e devilliſth Do&rins, which do make
again{tthe true worſhip of God, and agaiult the lite of charity
toward our Ncighbour;and toward the poor and widows,and
| lameand aged peoplc.

Many ObjeCtions and evaſions are daily brought againſt
uus my Diſcourſe, which though they arc weak and trivo-
tous, yet would fill whole Volumes it I would ſtand to an-
{wer them.

1 The common cyaſjonof eyery one when they can prove
nothing, nor anſwer, bur are fully convinced of their errours
by the Scriptures, 15, Say no more, we acknowledge that a
Witch can do no more than God permits her, or permits
himto do, but what God permits, that a Witch can do ; this
15 juſt as when God and his Prophets taught the people car-
ly and latc, that they ſhould not aſcribe any power to Idols,
as it tac people had anſwered the Prophets, Say no more,.
we know theſe Idols can do no more than God permits them
to do, but it God permit them to fave, or dc{troy, they can
do it. 590 when God &aimecth it as his own Prerogarive, to
Kill and make aliyc, make rich and make poor, wound and


Q 2 heal,


— —_ ”= = _


116


The Second Book,
heal, (and many other things, as I have already 'proved by
Scripiurc J and w:ll not have his Prerogative aſcrived toany
Creature, yet ſtill ye ſay, the Lord permits it, whereas yer
yee have no more ground or warrant in the Scripture, that


God permits any ſuch power to Witches, than the Heathen
had to ſay, the moft high God permitted their Idols alſo to


| be gods, audto have power to kill, or to ſaye alive.


Further, Ye ſay, God permits one man to murther ano-
ther, yct tor this the murthercr ought to be flain; 'thar is truce
indeed, but for that yee have Scripture, where yec read in
the Law, of Murther, how it was to be judged, that is, it one
man did wiltully {mite another with his hand, or any other
naaterial inſtrument, that he dyed, it was murther, Namb,
35. 16, andſo forward, but where do you read that God
permits any (uch thing ro come to paſs by a Witch, or that
any man can Kill another by Witchcratr, or without a ma=-
rerial Inſtrument? and when it is proved by many places. of.
Scriprure, that many ſuch things as yee aſcribe to Witches
are Gods Prerogartve, yer {till yce cry, God permuts it.

2 Another Objection 1s this, It 1s ccrtain that rhere are
ſome people in Germany, and Peloxia, that do commonly (ell
Winds by the Deviis help to Sea-men, to carry their ſhips.
whithcr they intend; therefore a Witch can make a League
with the Devil, and by his help can raiſe Winds.

TorhisI anſwer, 1 do nordeny: bur theſc are Witches, be-
caule they uſe Impoſtures to deceive the world, and. {educe
rhem to that damnable Idolatry of aſcribingto the Devil aud
VVitches, and (ceking to them for that which bclongeth ro
God aloneto give, namely VVinds for their Journey ; bur
thac they do ſuch things rcally wichouc dclution. is falſe,
which I will firſt prove by Scripture, and then ſhew you the
dcluſion ; for Scripture, firſt I prove, if they can by the De-
vilsraile Winds, then they can alſo ſend tair weather, for
the North-wind driveth away rain, as Job 37. 22, fair wea-
ther cometh out of the North, and Job. 38. 24, God ſpeak-
ang of his own mighty work ſaith, By what way # the light,
parted, which ſcattereth the Eaſt wind #90n the earth? and.
Zoh, I, 3, Withont God FAS nothing made, who then makerh


theſe_


L


Objeftions anſwered. 17
theſe winds? Pſal. 148, 8. the \Vinds fulfill the Word of )
God, or blow at Gods decree, Alſo Solomon reckoneth the
Winds among (uch things as keep a natural courſe, and. de-
{cribeth the natural courſe rhereof, Eccleſ. 1.6, Allo things
miraculous can be done by God only, but that was one of
the Miracles by which Chriſt ſhewed himſelf ro be God, he
made the winds and the ſea obey him, Mark 4. 41. Alfoitisan
ap{ucdiry inPhiloſophy>. to ſay that a Witch, or the Devil,
can cauſe \Vinds, tor Winds areexhalations drawn from the -
Earth, wy the influence of the Sun and the Stars, and driven -
back by the coldneſs of the middle resion of the Air, which
cauſerh rheir ſeveral motions, and therefore he that faith a
Witch or a Devil can cauſe Winds, muſt aſcribe alſo ro them:
that they can rule the Stars, and diſpoſe the quality of the
middle Region, by which ir mult tollow that they can ſend
what Sean. 6 they liſt, and ſo by conſequence caule the -
earth to ring forth, or to be barren, which were the heighr
of Idolatry to beleeve.. And now:to come tothe impoſture it -
ſelf,. wherewith the foreſaid Impoſtors do deceive fools ,.-
| eg og beleeve they ſell them VVinds tor their Jour- -
| ny. The poor Mariner who delireth co haſten his Journe


homewards ( but withall conſftderech not that all mea mult /

Wait upon Providence) faith, I would give five pounds the -

VVinds would riſe, or that they would tura fit: for our Jours- -
| ney ; and being among ſtrangers he is. preſently over-heard

| by ſome of the FaQtors of thole oth. who preſcutly

take occaſ10ntorell himy that they will undertake for half the -

money) to carry him to one that ſhall. help him to a. V Vind .
according to his minde, .then by degrees they .draw: him on

tillchey bring him into rhe company of more of their Con-:
federares, who do fo cunningly. combine to obſcure his intel-

| kc by diſcourſe, that. at the laſt they lead him ( like poor:
Saul, whenrhe Spirit of. God ha forſaken him) to ſeek to
a V Witch, then do they lead him tothe Impoſtor, who being -
{om?skiltul Aſtrologian in thoſe Cou:nries, can .give a necr.

guclis by the Stars, when ſuch a V Vind will ariſe, and accor-:

d1ngly prefixeth a day, ſaying, a week hence, or rwo days-

Rxcccy or ſometimes a fortnight hence vou ſhall have a-


Q 3 VVind..


— <<” wo roam,


215


The Second Book.


VVind, in which promiſe it otter happeneth that the Im-
poſtor [um{cl 1s decciyed, when his Prognofticks tail him ;
and thcntacy prefixe anorher day, and do lirongly perlwade
the lilly mai to fiay till rhenz whercas they Know till the
V Vinds rite ke cannot but ftay,and I my felt have talked with
Scamen,who contcts that ſometimes they have been driven to


ſtay a weeks {omcrimcs longer alter the day prefixed, and


attcr rhey parted with their money ; bur 1t it happeneth
that ſome man after he hath laid our his moncy upon thoſe
Impoſtors, hath (pcedily a V Vind tor his Journcy ; then he
rcjoyceth, and then the Impoſtors are credited ; then he re-


cciveth from the Impoltor a bottom of Thread, which the


[mpoſtor faith he had trom fuch an old V Voman ( becauſe
he will not ſcemto be the V Vitch himſelt ) and this Thread
15 to. be carricd by the Mariner, or by the Merchant, into the


- Ship, and he muſt by degrees continually unwinde the bot-


rom of Thread, fo long as he would have thar V Vind blow ;
bur it all things happen well, then it is concluded, {urely it
15 by verrue of the Thread ; bur it V Viinds prove by the way
croſs, then it is the fault of him that unwindcth the bottome
too faſt, or too flow, or with the wrong hand ; and thus are
poor Idolatrous fools cheated by them that make a rich trade
of their Impolture. I deny not bur this deluſion is variouſly
atcd in ſeveral Countries, and ſome T ravellours report
{ome one way, and ſome another way of the manner, and
carriage of the Impoſturc ; bur he that belecverh that ir is
xcally done, and not a deceiving impoſture, is an Idolatcr,
and as bad as an Infidel, and fer fuch Mariners as will buy


Winds in that manner, the Mariners of Tarſh:{ ſhall rife up


1Judgement againſt them, who when they ſaw the Wind
riſe, and the Sca rempeſtuous, and againſt their Voyage,
thcy fought for whoſe {in that cvil was come upon them,
Jonah 1.7. thoſe poor Heathen knew that Winds and Tem-
pelts came not from a Witch, but from the hand of God.
To conclude, ſtorics reported by Travellours prove nothing,


- neither arc they lawtul Objections, and when we hear ſuch
' athing reported contrary to the Scriptures, and to human
capacity it mult needs tollow that it is a dcluding impo-'


ſturc,


a. AA.


ObjeFtions anſwered.
ſture, although the ſtory be true from him that reporteth it ;


/ and {ome Travellours that report this thing, yet are perſwa=


ded inthenaſclves that it is but deceit. And whereas ſome
would confirm this Objection by Scripture, becaule it is ſaid,


. Fob, 1, 19, attcr God had faid ro Satan, All that Job hath


112 thy power, there came a ſtrong Wind from the Wilderneſs, and


{mote the houſe that it fell upon the young men that they dyed.


Hence they argue,that the Devil raiſed that wind; but this
isa falſe couchuſion, tor then they may as well argue that
the Devil ſent the fire from Heaven, as in vetſ; 16, which is
yet called the fire of God ; and feb himfelt aſcribed all to
God only, vcrl, 21. |

Secondly, It the Devil had by Gods peculiar diſpenſati-
on raiſed that Winds, God permurting him ro ali Zob, yer
- doth not follow that he can 'do 1t at the command of a

itch, |

Thirdly, Some to prove the power of Witches to aMiG:
men, and women, and cattcl, and to bring to paſs ſtrange
things, do alledge Job 2.7. yer there 15not a Witch mentto-
ned 11 all the Hiſtory of Feb, bur how abſurdly they do ar-
Sue let wiſe men judge ; becauſe God ſent Satan tro afflidt:
ob, therefore a Wirch can lend him to afflict man, God


119


permitterh it, ſay they, by which Argument they ſtill labour


to maintain that God lendeth his Prerogatives to a Witch.
What though God hath power over Satanzto command him.


ro execute his Will, rororment and afMict the wicked for pu-
niſhmentzto afflic the righteous ſometime tor trial 2 doth ir
therefore follow that.a Witch can do it, becauſe God did it ?
and where do we read in Scripture that God permits it? and if


God ſhould permit it, where do we read that a Witch hath


any {uchpower or command over theDevil,or any ſuch league


or covenant with the Devil > or that God permits the Devil.


to be at the command of a Witch?

Fourthly, Some will allege the Witch of Ender, and yet
we ncvcr read that the Witch of Ezdor could hurt, or fend
the Devilto hurt any man or woman, or clnlde, or cattzl OL
caiſe Winds, or the like ; neither did Sas/ go to her to de-


{rc her to kill the Philiſftines, bur he went for Divinations,
tar


120 The Second Book.


to know what ſhould become of the Battel the next day. And
what Objcetions ſoever any man fhall bring from the Witch
of Endor, they themſelves may an{wer, it they read but the
Seventh deſcription of a Witch, in the firſt Book et this
Treatiſe, and he that was bewitched by the Witch of Ender
was Saul, and {uchas ſought to her as Sal did, becaule they
were deluded by her,
Fifthly, Some will allege, and objet, Thar the Serpent
tempted Eve, and from thence they will argue, that the
Devil can aflume the bodies of Creatures, and appear in bo-
dily ſhape, and make alcague with a Witch, and exccute hcr
will to kill and afflict people and cattel ; but this is a poor
conſequence, that becaulc he can tempr, therefore he can kill
at the command of a Witch; and whereas they would
prove from hence, that the Devil can aſflumea bodily ſhape,
and appear toa Wi itch, it they bring that Argument trom
the literal ſence of the Hiſtory, they muſt ſearch narrowly
to prove the Devil was in the Serpent ; for it is ſaid, The
Serpent was more ſubtile than any beaſt of the field, interring
that the Serpent did tempt by its own natural fubrilty, or elſe
why was that cxprefion of the {ubtilty thereot uſed by Mo-
ſes ? and hence they muſt conclude, that it was the Serpent,
and not the Devil, which tempred Zv-, which were an ab-
{urd concluſion ; and yet it they run upon the lerter of the
tory, they cannot deny that concluſion to follow, for there /
15not any mention of the Deyil in all the Hiſtory ; bur if
they could prove thence that the Devil did aſſume the body
ofthe Serpent, it maketh nothing to the purpoſe, to prove
Witches power to kill, for the Devil did only beguile Eve,
and not kill her,
_ Andalthoughithath been a common cxpoſition of that
place, thatthe Devil did enter into the body of the Serpent,
-” _ and ſoappearcdunto Eveina bodily ſhape, and talked with
her, tempted her to cat the forbidden Fruit, yet if this
expoſition be well and wiſely conſidered, it is moſt groſs and
crroneous 3 for Firtt, here ariſcth an abſurdily, according
to their own tond tenents, for then they muſt conclude that
Ewe was a Witch, tor ſay they, wholocycr hath had any


familiar


0 Wy OY 3 go
ObjeFtions anſwered. Ts
familiar diſcourſe wich the Devil is in ſome degree a Wirch, *
and ought not to be rruſted, although ſhe hath made no com=
pact with the Devi., and I have known lome hanged in my
time tor that coniefIi9;y, altaough they did abſolurely deny
that ever they ma.1c compact with him, or did any mur-
ther by him 3 bur yet to {pcak the truth, it it were fo, thar
any mail or Woman coul have tamiliat diſcourſe with the
Devii, this maketh not a W itch, for Chriſt himſelt was aſ-
faulred by the Devil, and ar{wered his teatations by Ser:p-
rum eft, Matth. 4, yea, 1 may tarchcr fay, it any man conld
entcr into an eXpiicitec venaiit with the Devil to kill by his
help, this indeed woul - make him a Murtherer, bur not a ;
Witch in the Scripture {2n(c, although indeed no man can
prove by Scripture | any ſuch compa&tt ar all, or it there
could be ſuch a compatt made with the Devil, yer that God
would ever permit the Devil to pcriorm his covenant with a
man» to kit or hurt at his command, cannot be proved. So
much by the way,
Sceconcity, Trerc ariſerh another abſurdity direMly from
that expoſition that the Devil did cnter into the body of rhe
Serpents aid {fy rempted Eve, for thence it mult needs fol-
low, that tic Levii can open the mouth of a Serpent, and
caul(c jt ro lycak, and raik, and fo that the Devil ſhould have
power to work a Miracic, equal with that great Miraclethat
w.$-rought by the mighty poi er oftGod,when he opened the
mouth of 8alawms Aflc, and cauſed him to ſpeak to Balaamy
which thins were 1nolt outragious Blaſphenay to afhirm; we
muſt nrecs conciuce ten that it was neither the Serpent that
by its own nat ral {uotilty tempred Eve, as the letter of the
Story imy ortctity nor the Devil aduting the body of the Scr=
pent ; Burt whereas Arſes was here ro teach rhe people
a orcat myſtical DoQrin concerning the fall of Man-
kind by fin, uato which {19 man was drawn by the
temprations and alinreme:irs of rhe Devil ; Moſes
know:n1s that toe | cavacit, of weak people is natu-
rally citranged from Spir:ruai matters, aad it he ſhould have
raughr 11 plain ecrins that the Devil tempted man'to fall,


fiiey wouwd not have underitood his DoStrinz becawe rhey
R kncvy/


— =» - SF I.


,


_ God gw


_ CT _ —_——_—  Y—-
* c ce.”


©.
- —_ i.
- ww .


The Second Book,


knew not what the Devil was. therefore he, by the Spirit of

iding him. taught the people; in. a Parabolical
way, in which Parable when he ſpeaketh of the Serpent, and
of his (ubrilty, he exprellcth the ſubtilty and malice of the
Devil that tempted Eve, and all Mankind to dilobediencs
a4 od, and this Parable he tollowcrh. Allegorically,
whenhec ſaithy, The Lord ſatd unto the Serpent, upon thy belly
ſhalt thou go, and duft ſhalt thou cat all the days of thy life;
whereas * ryan thisto be a Parable, we mult hold thar
the Serpent before thar time had eggs, and did not creep up=
on his belly, andalfo that the Serpent ſinned, and is pu-
niſked for fun; and yet if the Devil had power to abuſe the
body of the Serpents the Serpent was compelled to do that
which they ay hedid z but for thole that will take the Scrip-
tures every Where in a literal ſence, they mult alſo hold that.
the Trees of the Feild did {peak, where it is ſaid in a Para-
blc, The trees. ſaid to the Olive-tree, be thou King over ma ,
Judg. 9, 8, But yet if they will not be beaten off trom this,
that the Devil can aſlumea bodily ſhape, ir makcth nothing
to prove that Witches are fuch people as can kill b;
Witchcraft, or {cnd the Devil to kill, for there is no ſuc
expreflion of a V Vitch jinall the Scriprures, but only that a,
W itch. is ſuch a one as laboureth by Diabolical craft to
{educe the people trom God, and his Truth; to Idolatry, and.
bcleeving of lycs.

Sixthly, Some will abjeR; and fay, It is manifeſt that the,
Devil can helpa Witch to fly inthe Air, and be tran ſported wh; +.
ther ſte liſteth or elſe how had the Devil power to carry Chriſt,
ard ſet him #j07 the finacle of the 1 expler Matth., 4, and
Luke 4. p

Ianiwer, T his indeed ſeemcth tobe a ſtrons Argument, if
we take the Scriptures at the (econd hand, as they are tran{la«
cd unto us 11 the Exgliſh, bur it we {earch the original mca-
ning of thc Greek text (as it was written by the Spirit of
God ) we ſhall tncethere is no ſtrength ar ail in that Argu=-


OE O's tor St. Luke, 4. 5. laith only, AVL)aMy «urs, GHem (ub-


dnx ſſe' enum, Or ſubducens enum, an. in the ninth yerTe1s rhe
(ame {calc and to tranflated by 7remellizs and Bean and
NGO


_——— — — I em > —— —


% | . » v Y go

0bjeRtions anſwered. X23
no otherwiſe to be underſtood, but that he was led by the
Devil from place to place to be tempted ( not that the Devil
had power to lead him againſt his will ) bur bcing tull of the
Holy Ghoſt, did by his own Drvine counſel yeeld ſo fatre to
the Devilzas to be led into temptation, that fo he might ovcr-
come temptation ; and whereas ft, Matthew uſeth anorher
phraſc, mgghaulure cvry afumpſit euns Diabolms, yerſ, 5, 8.
this ſoundeth indeed ( ef pecially in ſome of our Eng gh
tranſlations) as it the Devil had tran{ported him in the Air
from place to placc, but ic was nothing ſo; if we compare
Matthew an Lake together, and this phraſe uſed by Mat-
thew, ſaith Tremellins, 15 by a Metaleplis, (o that it is plain
this Objection is of no force, for Chriſt walked up to the
Mountain, and likewile walked up the ſtaycrs of the Tem-
ple, and leaned upon, and looked over the Battlements of
the Temple, which went round about the Temple to keep
men from falling, of which we read, ſaith Beza, Dcut. 22. 8.
which we falfly tran{late, Pinaclcs, «; I;yow wnwy &ai 7 718:v0v
wi, agd hee (et him againſt the Battlements of the
Temple.

Seventhly, Another ObjeCtion ariſeth from this Dilcourle,
and that is this ; {: ſcemerh the Devil can ſome way talk, anil
diſcourſe with a Witch, and therefore can mike a League and
Couenant nith her : for he talked and diſcorrſed with Chriſt him-
ſelf,, how much more eaſily can he talk, with a ſinfull man or
Woman ?

Tanſwecr, Inthe ſame manner that he talked with Chriſty
he talkcth with every man and woman; he '{aith to a 'T hiet,
Steal ; toa Cut-purſc, Curt 4 Parſe ; to a Drunkard, Drink,
off your Bquor ; tOA Murrtiercr, Xl ſuch a man, anl thelc
obcy him ; he fatth to a righteous man, Steal, and he an-
{wcrcth, /t i written thou ſhalt not ſteal; the Devil ſaith a-
gail, Go and lye with ſuch a Whore ; he an{wcreth, It & writ-
ten, thos ſhalt not commit Adultery, and fo likewiſe for all
the Commandcements ; neither is 1t to be underſtood other-
wile of the temptations wherewith Chriſt was tempted ; as if
the Devil could utrer a human voyce without a tongue, Or
any organ of ſpeaking , that were an abſurdity in Phuo-

\ 2 lophy,


o * — »


The Second Book.


ſophy, for Nateranthil fecit fruſtra ; and this were ſuper-
Anous in Nature for a man to have a Tongue, and other
Organs of tpeaking, ifa verbalſpeaking could be ma !e with-
out them ; and whereas It 1s Written) that the Devil ſaid un-
to Chriſt this and that, it was only a mental diſcourſe between
Chriſt and the Devil, and is expreſicd in Scripture, accor-
ding ro Human capacity by a proſopopoia, a Figure very tre=
quent 1n Scripturezas in Pſal.g8.g.d:cha b.12.there the Scrip-=
rure by this Figure bringeth in Hills and Flouds ating as a
man;zand fo1n ar, 4.Lzke 4. the Devil tempting ot Chritt 1s
unroduccd in the ſtory, as ſpeaking like a man, rhis 1s uſed
{omectimes in Parablcs, asin Job, trom the ſeventh verſe of
the firſt Chapter to the. rweltth, allo Chap. 2. rhe fix firſt
ycrlcs; and in Ger. 3, 1. 1 King, 22, 21, 11thelc and many


Places by this Figure, {peaking and diſcourling veroally, and


Humanadtion is aſcribed to ſuch as it doth not proverly bec-
long 3 ſo that it appearcth to thoſe that rightiy underſtand,
that this objection allo is of no force ; bur yet (till tor rhoſe
that arc obſtinate, 1 lay, letthem prove a League or Cove=
nant by the Scriptures, berwcen the Devil and a Witch, or
that the Devil hath power, or permiſſion to pertorm ſuch a


Covenant it madc.


Eighthly, Some again will objec and iay, 1f V:tches cand
»ot kill, and do many. ſtrange thmgs by Witchcraft, why have
many coufeſſedthat they have done ſuc.» Murth:rs, and other

range matters, whereof they have been accuſed :

Tothis | anſwer ,, It Adam and Eve in their IIHNOCCNCY
were {o calily overcome, aud tempted ta fin, how much
more may poor Creatures now ater the Fail, by pcrizvaſtons;
pronules, and threatnings, by keeping from {keeps and con-
tinual torture, be brought to contels that which is faiſe and
impoſſible, and contrary tothe faith of a Chrittian te
beleeve?

Someindeed haycin a melancholly diftration of mindc
confeſicd yoluntariy , yca and accuſed themſelves to bce
Witches, that cowmd do, and had done ſuch
and wonders by the help of the Devil ;


diltempcr, and you ſhall inde th


range things,
but mark well thcir
at Lacy are dceply gone by
1:ftrmiry


NO  'T— _ C—  —


— ” ——  —>  — —_ _— _


Objeftions anſwered.
infirmity of body affecting the minde, whereby they conceit
{uch things asnever were,or can bezas 1s ofcen proved by expe-
rience among Phyliciais,many of thoſe dying ina very ſhort
time,(alrhough they be not put to dcarh)except they be cured
by the Paytictan ; and truly if {ſuch Dod@rins had not becn
taught to ſuch people formerly, their melancholly diſtem-
pers had not had airy ſuch objeds to work upon, but who
ſhall at laſt anſwer tor their conteſion, bur they that have
integed the mindes of common people with ſuch devilliſh
dodrins, whereby ſome are inltigated to accule their poor
Neighbours of impoſhbilities contrary to the Scriptures, and


ſome drawa to confeſs lyes, and impoſſlibilities contrary. to


Chriſtian light?

And indeed vain and fickle are the mindes of ſuch diſpu-
tants> who do firſt of all tather their vain opinions upon the.
Scriptures , pretending that they are undoubred truths
grounded upon the Scriptures, ſaying, Thos ſhalt not ſuffer a
Witch to live; but being ſhewed their crrours, how they wrelt


the SCFIptures, wil rather torſake the Scriptures, whuch are -
the rule of righteouſneſs, then torſake their Opinions, and


will belceve confeſſion againlt the Scriptures. Some men


will yet yeeld thus farre, that theſe Contcffions of poor accu--


{ed people do many times extend to impeſiibiliues, and that
they verily beleeye that the Devil deludeth theſe people
making them belceye that he bringeth to paſs {uch things as
rhey require him to do, which yet wou'd come to pals by
Divine provideace.Some again do ({o Idolize theDevil,asthar
they affirm rhat cheſc things are real, and do withall\ cry out;


Great u the power of the Devil; and yet for any of theſe Opi--


1197s can produce no Scriprturcs to prove them, but only
Conteſlion; and although thoſe Contcihons are ſometimes:
extorted, {ometimes volurary 1n poor. mYyancholy, or dt-
{tracted people ; {ometimes in wicked people, who delight
to make the world wonder at Iyes, or imp9'sibilities, though
it o2 rotheir own confuſion ( they being given over by God.
at tothe Devil ſeeing his opporrunity, inſtigateth them to-
be his Inttrumens touphold all lying Diabolical Doarins,..
fo-chat no true beleevins Chriſtian bur may diſcern that ail.


v6 2. thele-


125;


The Second Book.


thzie Contelsions are from the Devil, the Father of lyes ) yet
| ay, Suppolc with theſe Conteſsion-mongers, that theſe
Contcllors are deluded by Satan, to thunk they do ſuch things
by the help of the Devil, yet where do we read in Scripture
that (uch arc Witches who are deluded by Satan, or that
ſuch ſhould be ſlain, or putto death? we read indeed, that
Witches were all forts of deluding falſe Prophets, but not


ſuch as were deluded by Satan,


Secondly, It you will {till achrm, that their Confeſsions
are rcal truths, and not deluſions, but that they do indeed
bid the Devil do ſuch things, which ( as yec ſay) he doth ;
yet how can yee prove it by Scripture ? where 1s any ſuch de-
{cription ofa Witch in the Scripture? but ſurely it is moſt
horrible devilliſh torſaking of the Scriptures, to beleeve that
there is any truth at all in theſe Contelsions, and ſuch people
asatc thus ſeduced by Satan to lying Conteſsion, ought ra-
ther to be taught better knowledge, than to be (lain in their
1510rance, and periſh alrogerher tor lack of knowledge; bur
it is, and hath been the manner of theſe latter Agcs, tor a
Miniſter to go to {uch, and inſtead of inſtructing them ,
whereby they might become inſtruments of ſaving their
ſouls, they urge them to lving Conteſsions, and fo do as
much as they can to {end the ſpirit of errour into them to
their confuſion, yca and for the molt part, thcſe men who
uphold their errours by the Conteſsions of theſe poor accu-
{cd people, do altogethcr mi(-inrerpret their Contelsions for
the upholding of ſuch lyes, for the broaching whereot they
have tormerly mi{-1nterpreted and belyed the Scriptures ;
for ler but any man that is wilcy and free trom prejudice, go
and hear but the Confeſsions which are fo commonly alleg-
c> and he may {ce with what catching, and cavelling, what
chwarting and lying, what flat ard plain Knavery thele Con-
teſs10ns are wrung from poor innocent people, and what
monſtrous additions and multiplications are afterward invei-
ted to make the matter {cem true, which yet 1s molt dam-
nably falſe, and flat againlt Chriſtian light, and human rca-
ſon to belceve. And tor {uch as can hardly beleeve that Me-
lancholy, or diſtemper of boy, and troubled phantafic, Fn

| cauſc


og ow _— . TY — 4 =
- wpy «7


_——— +


Objeftions anſwered,


cauſe peopleto imagine things ſo really, as to confeſs them
to their own deſtruttion, though moſt falſe and impoſlsible ;
ſet them but conſider the late example of a grave Minitter a-
bout the Iſle of E/y, who by a troubled phantaſie was ſo delur
ded ( or rathcr did {o delude himſelf by weakneſs of Phan-
taſic and imagination ) as he reported that an Angel told
him, that the Judgement Day ſhould be upou the next Frt-
day ; by which report many of the Inhabitants were much
troubled till the day was over ; if then a grave Miniſter ma
be mi(-led by Phantaſfie,and diſtempered minde ; how muc
more plain common people, who have fuch Accuſations
broughr again(t them as are (ufficient to break their brains?
Further I tay; thar it the man of ſin ſpoken. of in the ſecond
to the T he fſalonians, chap. 2+» had not broached theſe crrours
to the world.theſeConicflors had had no ſuch lying imaginati-
ons to confels, for their Conteſ(sions are not from themſlelves,
but from the Devilz. that fo he might delude. chem thar love
10t the truth,. bur ao urge, and1cek {uch Contelsions againſt
the truth, as 1t 15 {aid jn the cleventh verſc,. For this cauls.
God ſhall ſend them ſtrong deluſions that they ſhauld beleeve.
a lye, &c,
Ninthly, . Some will obje&t, and ſay, They have helped

fcarch, and have tound Biggs, and privie Marks upon {ſuch
as have becn accuſed to be Witches ; but I demand ot them,
Where doth the Scriptures teach us that. a Witch. is known
by Biggs, or privie Marks? I alſo an{wer, That very few
pcople 1n the \World are without privic Marks upoa rheir:
bodics, as Moles or {tains, even ſuch as Witchmongers call,
The Devils privie Marks ; whic'1 Marks Aſtrologians. do
aftirm to be the characters of the Stars, variouſly fixed upon
men accoraing to their Nativity, and many an honeſt man
or woman have {ſuch excreſcences growing, upon .their bo+
dics, asthele Wirchmongers do call, the Devils Biggs; as tor
examole; There is a Dilcale often tound 10 men or women in:
rhe {cat of people, called Hemorroids, or Piles, or the ſwel-
1113 9: tae Hemorroids veins,aDiſcaſe weil known to Phyſtci--
ans-many times {wciling forth in the (car of people that are tul.
9; Melaacaoly blond, and are often. tound in faſhion like.


127


The Second Baik.


Biogs, and ſomctimes iſſuing torch bloud, and for this Diſ-
cale many have becu accuſed by ignorant people, and pur to
death tor Witches ; this was part of the Evidence that
was brought againſt Maſter Lewis a Miniſter, exccuted at
Berry, inthe year 1945, |

There are alſo tound often times Excreſ{cences upon
the Bodies of men and women, called Y errzce penſiles by the
Phyſicians, as we may read in Leonartws Fuchins, in the
third Book of his Inſtitutions of Phyſick, chap, 26, where he
reckonetn up the {everal preter-natural' tumors of mens Bo-
dies; theſe area certain kind of long flcſhie Warts, in taſhion
of Biggs, or Teats, and do grow commonly on honeſt
people, or any {ort of people, and upon Beaſts, and yet for
theſe Excreſcences being but outward tumors of the
Body, many 1nnocent people have been condemned aud
Exccuted,

Another Tumor 15 found by the Phyſicians, called Thy-
101 both in Greek and Latine, rifing oa ſeveral parts of the
body like Biggs, or Teats, theſc and orher kindes of pretcr-
natural Tumors, of which we may read in Phyfick Authors,
which ſomerimes being tell, and tull of pain by reaſon of the


.rankncſs of bloud that teedeth them, and theretore ifluing
forth bloud, are called of ignorant Witchmongers, Devils


Brg 95,

here be alſo ſome Natural parts of the Body called by a
gencral name Glandnlz, and by a particular name Toxſfile, in
the jaws ot people, and in ſome people do plainly ap-
pear underthe Tongue like little Biggs,which ſome ignorant
Witchmongers having found in people, have taken them as
a great evidence againſt poor 1nnocent people, and for theſe
have many becn executed; but let any wiſe man conſider,
what body, of whatſoeycr conſtitution, eſpecially of poor
pcople that commonly want food, can ſpare a daily exhauſt-
ing of bloud to nouriſh Imps fucking them, without ai cx-
hauſting and over-throwing of their own Natural lives?
whereas tew poor or old pcople, but through want of nou-
riſhment and weakneſs of nature, hayc rathcr want of


bloud, thanaun oycrpluls of bloud,
| T cre


_— ——_ ——_ D—


Oljefions anſwered; |


There be alſo often found in Women with Childe, and in |


Women that do Nurſe children with their Breaſts, and in
Women that by any accidental cauſe do want their men»
ſtruous courſes, certain ſpots black and blew, as it they were
pinched or beaten, which ſome common ignoxant people
call Fairy-nips » waich- notwithſtanding come from
the cauſes aforeſaid ; and yet for theſe haye many ignorant
Searchers given Evidence agaialt poor innocent people.

But if any man will yer turther cavil againſt Philoſophy,
and Phylſick Rules, then let him ſhew me any {ach deſcrip-
tion of a \Vitch in all the Scriprures, as Biggs, or Teats, or
privie Marks, or Imps ſucking them, or kept by them ; and
turther I ay, that for any Kinde of DI2S5s or any things like
Biggs, more than hath been found by Phyſicians to be preter-
nat-v#l Tumors, or Diſcaſcs of the Body, or elſe Natural
Palts, to belceve, is folly and madneſs, and to affirm, is a
phantaſtick Lyc, invented by the Devil,and the Pope.

Tenthly, Some men will Object, and (ay, If Witches have
wot power to afflitt, and torment, ayd kl! People and Catrel, how
cometh it to paſ. s thas after the angring of ſuch anold 93411 Or Wo-


mar, or ſnch a lam: man, or woman, that came to my Horſe and,


deſired relief, and I rated her away, and gave her no relief,
or did net give her that which ſhe deſired; ſuch and ſuch croſſes
and loſſes came upon me, or ſuch a Ch.lde was taken in ſuch 4
manner, with ſuch a Sickneſs, preſently after,or within few days
afier his or her cow.ng to my door? ©

To this I anſwer, They that make this Objection muft
dwell very remote from Neighbours, or elſe mult be known


' togive very little, or norehict to the poor, if it can be ſaid at


any time when a croſs cometh upon them, that one poor bo-
dy or other hath not been ar their door that day, or not
many days before, let it happen at any time whatſoever;
ſhall this chen be laid to the charge of him, or her rhat came
laſt begging to their door ? then by thar reaton no man in
England can at any time be afflicted buthe muſt accuſe fome
poor body or other to have bewicched him for Chriſt ſaith,
The poor ye ſhall have always ; and I think no man ot abiliry ts
long free trom poor coming or tis door,


o g econd-


11d


F "I " a + ut ' "BEE "


43S. The Second Book,
Secondly, I anlnys, £0 hath given it as a ſtri& Coms


%


| the next Chapter it foloweth;verl.”14, 1 5, whoſoever hear k;


"aunts croſſes and offiiftians, and diſeaſes upon them, as tol-


laſt at my door, that I age frees. him or her for a Witch;
ecaule I did not relieve ſuch a


., * 3...


yr


0bjeFions anſwe) ed.” 13 I


riſces that it was a finto cat with wwaſhen hands, and yet the
Scripture tellcth us that thele things were falſe,
Secondly I a{wer, God gave his Laws, that weſhould add
nothing to them. nor rake any thing from rhem, Dexe. 12. 32.
why then thould any main be fo bold,contrary to the Com=
mandement of God, to maKe ita Law to put poor people to
death, upon toolith and tcigned fuppolitions, or by the com-
mon renent, ang general biunde opinion of people without
oround in the Scriptures? |
Tweltthly, Some will yet object and ſay, If we may net
concinge Murthers and trials of Witches from B.ggs and privie
eMarks, and ſinking, and ſwimming in the water, becauſe we
| have no warrant or mention of ſuch trials in the Scripturesgthen by
the ſame conſequence we may not try a Murtherer by any trial :
bat ſuch as 1s mentioned in theScriptures;batthis is takgn for gran-
ted, that if amurthered man bleedeth new and freſh,yhen the Mur-
therer ts near the dead Carcaſe, it diſcavereth the Murtherer,and
many Murtherers have been diſcovered by Gods providence in that
manner, and have confeſſed the Murther, and yet there is no war-
rant for this trial of a Mwrtherer in Scriptare,
To this ſubtile Argument I anſwer, That a Judge may
be too preſumpruous 1n condemning a man upon any ſuch
evidence as that is; for a dead body will for the moſt part
bleed freſh and new. it it lycth wo or three days unbu-
ried; as it 1s often ſeen in thoſe that dye a natural death upon
their Bed, and not Murthered, the bloud doth many times
1{fuc out of their mouthes in great abundance, at ſuch times
as the Humours of the body begin to putrific ; and by the
ſame reaſon a murthered Body will, when it hath lain rwo
or three days, iflue torth blond, both at the mouth, and at the
wound, whether the Murtherer be prefcat or not. And what .
it God by his providence hath ſo brought it to paſs {ome-
times, that the murthered body hath bled when the Murche-
| rer hath been preſent, an4ſo at the fight of the bloud me
[> Murrnerers Conſcience hath fo accuſed him char he hath been
driyca to confeſs rhe Murther ? we may notthence conchudes
Or argue, taat tis IS a Cain trial of a Murtherer, withour
his owa Contcfſi 1, or other maniteſt proofs, for by that
2 m2a:1$


1132


The Second Book.


means we.may ſometimes condemn a guutieſs man that
{ta2deth by at rae ſame tune of ifluing forth b.vud trom the
dead vodyy which 1s a common and a natural tinge

Seconuly, i an{wer this {ubtiic Obje&icn thus. Murther
by wc hand 15a ccrtainthing, we know it by-experience, and
alſo the Scripture ſpeakerh of it, and tor the trial and find=
ing out of Murther, when we finde a man murthered, wee
have an ordinance ur the Scriptures, Det. 21. the ſeven firſt
verſes, They were to make diligent inquifition. according to
the Law of Moſes, and in the ſeventh verſe every man
ought to clear himſelf that his hand hath nor ſhed the bloud
of him that was ſlain; and it God blefteth his own ordinance
of making ſuch {tri& ſcarch and inquiry, by this wonderful
and miraculous kinde of bleeding ( as you ſuppoſe it to be )
yet there is the ground of it, it 1s his own ordinance, and
therefore God bletleth it, and diſcovereth the Murther ; Bur
ROW toapply thisto a Witch, there is no conſequence at all,
for when we finde a man deal, or when any party is difea-
tedy we have not any ordinance in the Scripture to make
ſearch who hath bewirched ſuch-a man, or Killed ſuch a man
by Witchcratr, but whoſe hand hath flain him, As alſo in
Nunb.2:5.16, whohath ſmitten him with an inſtrument of
Iron, or any material inſtrument, or hand-weapon; wee
may not then expect that God ſhould anſ{yer mens fancies,
and vain imaginations. of Murthering by W itchcraft, that
have no ordinance in Scripture, as he doth his own Ordi-
nances; and for ſinking, and {wimming, Biggs. and privie
Marks, that may. as well happen to one man astoanorher, to
make them f1gns.and rrials.ot Witches, or Murtherers, is.a
undlels thing, and indeed at firſt invented by the Popes
qui{itors,. who rather than they would not inſnare whom
they aimed at to put them to death, they would make any
thing a ſ1gn or token of a Witch ; and it all theſe ſigns that
theſe Popiſh tyrants have affirmed to be ſigns, were as they
{ay,true f{1gns of \V itches, then all people under the Heavens
might be by one fign or other proved to be Witches; thee
ok may as well ſignific a Thict, or a Cut-purlc, as-a

1h, being indeed no f1gns at all, be
Lhir--


ObjeFFions anſwered, IT

Thirteenthly, Some will obje& and ſay, If we may wot ſup-
poſe that Witches can kill, or afflift people by Wuchcraft, except
we have ground and warrant for it is the Scriptures, then bythe
ſame reaſon we may not hang a Thief for Felony, for by the Scrip--
cures he ought to have reſtored four-fold, and we finde no war=
rant in Scripture toput bim to death?

To this it is anſwered, to pur a Thief to death for Their,
is cicher lawtul, or unlawful ; itic penot lawful by the Scrip-
tares, though a thing commonly done, then we may not
prove any thing lawiul by inſtancing in a thing unlawtul.

Secondly, Itit be lawtwl to pura Thiet to death without.
warrant from the Scripture, as yce {uppoſe it to be, yet there--
in we go beyond our warrant, only in the matter of puniſh--
ment, which pumſhmenr yet falleth- upon the guitty. Thiet,,
who is certainly conyicted by infallible teſtimony, according.
ro Gods ordinance ; but whoſocyer putteth manor woman
to death for bewitching people to death, or for afflicting.
man or bea(t with diſeaſes by Witchcraft, h beyond his.
warrant in.matter of guilt,. for the SR bg where faith
that a WitcITwas, or can be guilty of any ſuch thing as.kil-
ling by Witchcraft, or aflicting by Diſcaſcs,. or any croſs or.”
adverility by Witchcraft upon men or-cattely and ſo in this
we ſinnot, in iaflicting greater punifthment upon a. Witclt
then is due. by the Law of God fn by Law wc ought.not to,
ſuffer aWitchto live ) but the ſta 1s, 1n inflicting puniſhment:
upon the innocent, in Condemningthem.for Watches. which
arenot Witches,for a Witch inthe Scriptures is only aſeducer
of the people to Idolatry, and for killing without aſtroak of.
the hand;or {ore material inſtrument,God claimetty ir as his.
own Prerogative proper to himlelt only, Dext,3 2.3 9:1 Sam, 2.6:
ſo that 1mpuring it to any otherzis againſt the Scriptures,

Fourtceathly, Some will objet and.ſay, Although there
were no Murthe.ing:Witches ſpoken of in the Scriptures, or any
ſuch d ſcription of a Witch, as one that maketh a L:agee with
the Devil, or that lyeth with [ncubus, or Succubus, or- that
hath Insps,or Biggs, or privie Marks by which they are knowng,
yet ſuch may be ſprung np ſince the Scriptures were writies, 451
new fins increaſe daily,

S 7. "Tor


{i

|

|
:

|

F:

Fa

k

>


The Second Book.


To this I anſwer, It there be new fins it muſt be in refe-
rence to the Law, tor that makerh {in to be (in becaule it is a
breach of the Law ; now, No man may adde any thing to the
Law of God Dcut. 12, 32. and theretore we may not {uppoſe
chat there be any {us that are not mentioned in the Law ;
allo {uch {ins are not mentioned 1n the Goſpel ; and Saint
Paul (aith, Whoſoever preacheth any o:her Goſpel than that we
have recerved, let him be accurſed, Gal. 1.9.

Fiftccathly, ir hath been objected by tome, That a Judge,


or 4 Fury-man, is ot to queſtion any truth of opinion RR.
pM


the power of Witches, or what Witches are, but to be guided


the Law of the Nation, and to go according to the evidence of
Witneſſes, and if any one will come and witneſs _ Oath ag ain(t
any men or woman, that he or (he is a Witch, the Jury ought 10
caſt her, and the Jndge ought to condemn her,

To this Objettion I antwer, Dent, 17.6. At the month of
twpor three witncſſes ſhall he that 15 worthy of death be put to
death, but at the manth of one witneſs he ſhall not be put to death,
It is taken for granted, that a man or woman is ſometimes
given over to bear falſe witneſs, rheretore Goertiath made it
one of his Commandements, Thor: ſhalt not bear falſe witneſs ;
and here in Dext, 17, 6, God hath given us this ruleto avoyd
talſe witneſs, That one Witneſs ſhall not paſs as a ſufficicat
evidence upon Lite and Death,and yet many have wrongfully
ſuffered death at the mouth of one Wimels contrary to this
Law, without examination of the condition of the W itncis,
whether Mad, or fooliſhly prelumptuous, or malicious,

Secondly I an{\wer, Where two or three Wirnciles are to
paſs for true eyidence againſt any Perſon, it is to be under-
{ſtood only in martcrs prefcribed by the Word of God, as
Murther by an initrument ſmitten, or caſt at a perſon, or by
the hand, or by ſome apparent infallible way, Nnmb. 35.
x6, 8c, bur not in matters that are no way grounded upon
the Word, bur are flat contrary to the Word of God, and
are only mens imaginations, for we have no warrant to put
anyperiontodcath upon a imaginary offence ( it it were
likely that rwo or three thouid agree rogerher 11 {uch a refti-
m2ny ) ncither ought a Judge, or any Magiſtrate to ad-

minitter


_ — <——<——> Go os —— —— __—


Objeftions anſwined: 135


miniſter an Oath, or take, or hear an Oath in any thing
Moral that is not preſcribed in Gods Word, but only 1ma-
ginary ; a:dit two or three would {wear point blank a-
gant any perion to bea Witch, they ought not to be (uffe-
red totwear againſt any in that manner, except it be to
{wear againlt ſuch Witches as the Scripture ſpeaketh of, ac-
cording the whole diſcourle of this Book, and therein allo
they ought ro give a reaſon of their Oathz and the Judge:


—_— TY I" 8


% -


and Jury to confider tt. | | |
Thirdly I aniwer, That Oathes that have bcen. ufually
taken againlt many perſons in that kindc, arc 19tto be regar-
ded, though true ; as that ſuch a one hath been ſeen to have a
Rat or Mouſe creep upon her, or uader her Coats, or was
heard ralking to her Jnps, rhele are. not material teltimo-
nics, bur arc tooliſh and tenflefs arguments,. not grounded:-in
the Word of God.. Further, it the Wirnefles can {wear that
any perſon kcepeth and teederh Impss. it 1s not a material
Oath, for it isas lawtul to keep a Rat, or Mouſe, or Dor-
moule, Or any Creature tame as to keep a tame Rab-
bitz or Bird ; and onc may be an Imp as well as anather,. and
{o may a Flca or Loutc by the ſame reaſon ; aud forthe De-
vil nec4 not £9 tar for a bodiiy ſhape to appear 1n, or to ſuck.
| -ME1ns or womcas ficth in; and it rhele were material Oathes;.
| -Who then may not be proved a Witch? and yer there was.
an honelt woman (to always formerly reputed ) executed
| at Cambridge 1n the year 1645. tor keeping a tame Frogge 11
a Box for {port Fa Phantatic, which Phanta{te of keeping |
things tame ot {everal {pecics is both lawtiul and. common a-
mong very innvcers harmleſs peoples. as Mice, Dormice,.
| Graſhoppers, Carerpillers, Snakes; yea a Gentleman, to
| pleaſc his Phantaſie in trying concluſions,.did once keep in 'a-
Box a Maggot that came out of a-Nurstillit grew. to an in--
credible bigneſs; all theſe are Arguments of nofoxce ;.yea T.
turther ſay, it two or three would{wear that they ſaw: Far
Crcature {1:ck. any perſons fl:ths.. 1t doth not prove 1t £o be a
Es or that the Devil is 1n it, or therefore the Perſon a.
Vitch,
Laſtly I auſwer, It a Judge, or a Jury be bound _ 5s
LV7


eee.


The Second Book,


Law of thcNation to proceed according to that Law: yet they
are bound more by the Law of God to proceed according to
his Law, and it chere be any Law of any Natioa made to
put to death people tor any {uppoſed imaginary Wirthcraft,
not ſpoken of in Gods Word, that Law ought to be abroga-
ted, tor we may not adde to Gods Law, Dexr. 12. 32, and
| inthe mean time, that Nation that maintaineth ſuch a Law,
W_—- . that Judge, that Jury which proſecurerh ſucha Law ( being
' not grounded in, bur contrary to the Law oft God ) they
j all hazard themſclyes under the Curſc of Gods Law,
# Exed, 22, 239 74. ;

Sixceenthly, The laſt and wileſt Objettion 1s this, It # ma-
mieſt in the Scriptures that a Witch may kill by Witchcraft, for it
appeareth Numb. 25. 9, that after Balaam had tried all wa Ys to
Curſe the people, there dyed of the people twenty four thouſandgand
although he could not hurt them by Inchantmem ( « he affirmeth
chap. 23.23.There isno Inchantment againlt 1ſracl ) yet it ap-
peareth, Revel, 23-14. that he taught Balacts lay a ſtumbling-
block before the people, in inticing thems to commit Idslatry, which
brought down the anger of God upon them that they dyed,
Numb. 25, 9,

Tothis l anſwer, This indeed is the only W itchcratt that
can kill or hurt any man ( according to the whoie Diſcourſe
of the Firſt Book, of this Treatiſe) {educing the people to I-
dolatry, whereby they do cauſe them to provoke God to
anger, and to ſtrike them 1n his diſpleaſure ; and this is the
Dottrm weougit to learn by the Hiſtory ot Balaam, yea this
is the oy Waitchcratt that is ſummarily included in all the
qi Nine tcarms of Deicription, Dewr. 18, 10, 11. ( bcing the
$; - 4difcourie of my firſt Book) and to ſhew any proof of any
| -thev SJortof Witches in the Scriptures, I challengeall Wirchmon-
DTS yer4ome will torſake the Scriptures, and confute me
{trong;y, with a repetition of ſome of *Bedi»s !ycs, or the like
Stories, rcliing them tor truth.

Bur tor all fuch as do{till labour,by Obje&ions, Cayils,. In-
ventions, and Imaginations, to uphold the oid Traditions
and Errours of that grand Witch the Pope, and his Train,
concermng Witches, and their Powcr, and not __ bo

| CLCANLE


The Concluſion.


cleanſe the world from theſe DoArins of Devils ; let them
rake heed that the ſaying belongeth not ro them, that Stephes
ſpake to the Jews, As 7. 51. Tee [if-necked and nncircun-
Ciſed in heart and ears, yee do always refiſt the Holy Ghoſt, as
your fathers did, ſo do yee; AS 1t 1s written, 2 Theſ, 2,10, 11,12.
becauſe yee received not the love of the truth, that yee might be

aved; for this cauſe God hath ſent you ſtrong deluſi,ns, thar you
ſhould beleeve a le, that they all might be damned who beleeved


not the truth, but had pleaſure in #nrighteouſneſs.
A Concluſwn,


HE that groundeth his Opinion upon Phanſie and Hu-
man traditions, and reports, withour light, and rule of
the Scriptures, is like a man groping 1n the dark, who for
want of light ruſherh his face nd the door, But if any
man will torſake blinde imaginations, and be guided by the
light andrule of the Scriptures, he ſhall finde by chem) that
Witches are only falſe Prophets, who uſed ſeveral deluding
1mpoſtures to deceive' the people ( accordiug to the whole
Diſcourſe of the firſt Book of this Treatile, and theſe were
not poor men and women, ſuch as are commonly executed
for that fal{ly-1mpured Crime of Witchcratt) but were open
praticers of their (everal Witchcrafts, to delude and ſeduce,
and thoſe had not their Craft from a Familiar, or by makin

a League with the Devil, as hath been commonly imagined,
but were in a manner learned, and uſed Books written for
that purpoſe, to teach them their manifold impoltures,where-
by to gain a maintenance among the people, by making
them beleeve rhey were Prophets; as wee may rcad, As
19. 19, many oft them being conyerced, by. the pow-zrtull
preaching of the Goſpel, brought their Books, and burnt
them betore the peoples theſe Books containing ſuch {ubtile
devices as were practiſed thenby the falle Prophets,or Witches
of the time, to deceiverthe people, and now adays by the Po-
piſh Rout, and by our common Wtzzards, But now forthe
thouſands of people that have been executed for Witches 11


ſeycral parts of the World, by the common manner of fond,
'E talle


—


talſe accuſations, at whoſe hands will God require their
bloud, bur at rhe hands of the WW hore of Rome, and of thoſe
chathave joyncd with her in her abominations? Revel, 18, 244
[n her was found thebloud ( not only of Saints ) but of all
char weredlain upon the carth, This doubtleſs muſt be un-
derſtood of thoſe that are unjuſtly lain, and who are they,
but inch as are ſlain by wrongful accuſations? which wroigtul
accuſations are occationed by the devilliſy Doctrins where
with ſhe hath defiled the Nactions.

Further I ſay, Thar this Doctrin oft Witches power is the
main ſtrengthof Antichriſtian policy; tor whereas that Ro-
wiſh Whore knoweth, that in all Nations the Civil Magi-
rate will hold his power,and not re(ign it to her, to haye ab=
folure power to kill tor Religion, ſhe mainaineth rhis dame
nable Do&rin to this end, that under the name of Witches
ſhe may melt away all whom ſhe teareth, or (uſpe&eth will
be oppolſers of her Anrichriſtian pride, and herein ſhe inga=
geih che Civil Magiſtrate, by her ſubrill Doin, to cur off
whom ſhe plealerh ; and how can that be. ſaid to be a Go-
vernitqent for the defence of —_— Lives and Eſtates > where
contrary to all Law theſe Villains can ſteal away both lite and
eſtate from whom they pleaſe ( excepr from ſuch as are in
places of Dignity, or {0 well eſteemed u1 Common-wealths,
or have ſuch friendſtip among the potent of the Land, thar
thereby chey are able to withitand their Advetſaries) and
theſe poor accuſed people have no redreſs, or help at the
x hands of the Magiſtrate; but he who ought to be their De-

fender is bewitched, and ingaged againit them z he is taught

indeed not to ſuffer a Witch to live, but never truly taught

w who, and what are Witches ; and that many times they that

wgage him by thar lying Do&rin, are the very Witches

themſelves, aimed at inthe Scriptures, that ought oot ro be
kiffcred tolive,


THE


139


DIIIZTIIALEIIIASN
FH HF RUTIRRrons
THE


THIRD BOOK:


SHEWING
T he vanity of ſome Engliſh V Vriters


concerning V Vitches. .


SAS Odin, Hyperius, Hemingin, and other Popiſh
JD Bloud-luckers, mentioned before in the Se-
> 3 cond Book of this little Trcatife, having defi-
SD 45 lcd the World with their abominable inventi-


SSR ons, contrary tothe ſenſe and truth of Gods
Word, their deviliſh Doctrins being already declared fuf-
ficiently to be wholly difſonant to the Word of God; yet
ſome of our Ergli{h Writers ( who otherwiſe might {cem to
have been wiſe and learned men) have defiled thcir Pens
with theſe groundleſs Phantaſtical Do&ris, which VVri-
ters are briefly theſe.

The firſt is James Biſhop of Wintoy, ſetting forth three
Books , called Demonelogy, in the name and title of the
Worksof King James ( an1 whether the Biſhop or the King
were the Compoſer of that Work, I ſtand not to argue 3
which VV orksare colle&ed out of theſe Popiſh Writers be-
fore mentioned, which the Author acknowledgeth in the
Preface to his Book, where he alledgerh Bodinus, Hyperine,
and Hemingius for confirmation of the truth of the -matter
contained in his V Vorks, but not a jot of Scripture is pro-
duced inall the VVork, if rightly interpreted, to prove ir to
be truth. and yer the Author himſelf confeſſeth of Bodinms,
that his Book of Demoxzomame is: collefted with greater dili-

TI a SCNCC)


"Y 5 _ : :
b- _ "les. WEIIEE = wm
- I———. _ ; on
i - —


oO The Third Book.


gence, than compoſed with judgement; and truly I wiſh
every wiſe man (that defireth to be reſolved in his judge-


ment concerning theſe Opinions ) to oblerve that paſlage ; -


or if he be {uch a one as can read, and ſearch the teverall
Writers of this ſubje& of Witchcrait, let him obſcrve the
variety of their Opinions, how tew ot them do agree 1n one
renentz Or in their manner of writing, by which 1t 1s cafily


* concluded; thar all their rradirions are but Phantſies, contrary
to the ſound of Gods Word ; even as a wiſe Judge, exami-


ning {cycral Wirncfles of one thing, it he ftinderh not their
reltimony to agree, he concludeth, that rhey compacted to-
gether ro witneſs a thing falſe ; and truly, although wife and
learned men have been delu.ied by thelc lying inveations, yer
compare bur their Opinions one with another, and allo with
Holy Writ, and you ſhall hnde; that all rhcir Opimoir arc
but one monſtrous Devil, {triving to get the maſtcry of the
Spirit of cruth ; and wherher this \ork was cither compo-
{cd by King ames, or by the Biſhop, may be very well {uſ-
pected, or rather by ſome Scoriſh man , blinded by ſome
Scotiſh Milt, who defied to ſct forth his own Tenents for
the upholding of Popith crrours, ani Popiſh Writers, ſuf-


| anc conturcd betore by Scot, inhis Ditcovery of Witch-


cratt, he not being able any whit to anlwer Scor 1n his Di(-
courſe, labourcth.to uphold talle Tenerms and Doctrins, by
the amhoricy of a King, becaulc he could not finde any thins
in the Scriptures to uphold them, or to anſwer Scot, as wce
may rcad in the Pretace, that his whole aime is at Scor, whom
he talfly chargeth wich the Tenent, and Affirmation, That
uIcre 1s no {uch thing as Witchcratt. ; whereas Scet in all
his whole Book faith no fuch thing, bur only chat Witch-
Crait 1s acraft of deceiving, and ({cducing the people, and
not of killing and making barren, and raiſing Winds, and
{uch like Inventions ; hethat readcth that Pretaces and ſeeth
how Scer 1s fixlt and chicfly aimed at in the whole
Work, might preſently expect that in the Work he
fhould fiade Scot notably 'contured, or at the leaft in ſome
way anſwered, but readinz over the V Vork; he ſhall finde
not OL thing or other anſiercd at all, but only a bare af-


firmation


OO ——_— CO


i


The intituled Works of X. James anſwered. 141
firmation of ſuch Tenents, without any ground, or warrant =
of the Scripture, which Tenents were contuted by Scer, by
the Scriptures ; ſo that for any man to an{wer that Wor
ot the Author at large, were only to do that which Scot hath
a]rcady done, incontuting Bodinxs and others ; and whereas
this Author pretendeth a refutation of Scot, he hath done
nothing cle but written again the fame Tenents that Bodinws
and others bad betore written, and were by Scot confuted ;
like an obſtinate Diſputant, that rather than he will not hold
his Argument, though never {o fooliſh, he will deny thz
Conclutton. One Dilputant wiſely and plainly proycrth thar
a thing is, and the other foolkthly (aith {till it 1s. not 3 or one
proveth that a thing is not, aid rhe other fooliſhly ſtill ſaich ©
tis; by which way of arguing a cailde may hold an Argu-
ment againlt a learned Doctor, though never fo falſe.

Yet tor the an{wering of the Tenents of this Author in
that Work, Firſt, he ſaith in his firſt Book, as allo in the
Pretace, That Wairches can by the help oft the Devil caule to.
be brought unto them all kindes of dainty Diſhes for their:
delicious maintenance; { and yet {ay I, how many poor lean
{tarved people have been cexccured in ſeveral places for
Witches) ani for the truth of this Doctrin, he bringerh no.
place of Scripture to prove ity. but ouly afhrmecth it to bee
truc,tor theſe reaſons ;

Firſt, The Devil 15a Thiet, and delighterh.to ſteal.

Secondly, He 1s a Spirit, and theretore can ſubrilly, an41
ſuddcaly tranſport the ſame from whence and whither hee
will ; by which way of argument, rejecting the Scriptures, 4
ma: may aſhrm tor truth any vain imagination, bc it as ab-
{ard as this torm2r ; as, that the Devil is a Thick, and there-
forc hath a Mountain of Gold, which he hath raken out of
evcry mans. Pure, and heaped up in Hell, which he being 2
Spirits hath caſiiy tran{porred. from the carth, and rheretore
are {o many men haſtening to Hell, becauſe there is abun-
dance of Gold ; Bur if luch fooliſh. Arguments as theſe were
ot any torce, what necd then any Scripture to teach us the
cruth? Butit we examine the truth of this Doctria by the
SCrIptures, it will proyefor want of groua\ in Scripture very

2 pliaur>


The Third B 00k.


phamaſtical, avd in oppoſition tothe truth of the Scriptureg
very blaiphemous z tor hereby we ſhould yeeld {till thar whar
was done by the Angel of God in miraculous manner, bring-
ing food to Elijah, r King. 19.6, may be done by the Devil,
bringing variety of tood to them that {erve him ; and where-
as God by a Miraculous hand brought his people through a
barren Wilderneſs, and fell them 1n that Wildernels ; che
{lame thing might as well have becn done by. the Devil, who
( fairh he) can bring his ſervants all manner of dainty
diſhes.
This rhat is already written were enough to diſable, and
make voyd all the three Books of Demonolog.e written by tais
Author ; but yet for the (aristaction of ſuch as will expe a
Merhodical anſwer, I will begin with his Works 1n order as
they {tand, and in brief ſhew the vanity of them ; as for ex-
_ be faith in his Epiſtle to the Reader, Sorcery and
V icchcraft aredifterent trom Matick, and Necromancy, and
= in the firſt Chapter of the Second Book, he {aith, the
id ſpoken of in the faxtecnth of rhe Aits was a VVitch, be-
cauſe the had the {pirit of Pyrhox, and yet we finde in the
Scripturc, that they that had the ſpirit of Pythow, were alſo
Necromancers; how then can this diſtinction hold , that
VVirchcraft diftercth from Necromancy ? for by that diſtin-
ction a Pythoni/t were a VVitch , K's a Necromancer not a
VVitch; yet what was the Pythoniſt of Endor but a Necro-
mancer, pretending to conſult with the dead 2 and Necreo-
warcy was the pretence of all that were faid to have the ſpirit
of Pytho ; that was, that they conſulted with rhe Souls of
the dead, as in Plutarch, and alſo in holy VVrit, as in 1ſa.
S. 19.(ir is manifeſt inany Tongue but our EF» gl;h) which
1n Tremellixs tranſlation is to this ſenſe ; for when they ſhall
ſay unto you, Ask counſel of thoſe that have the ſpirit of
Python ( or the impoſture of Oracling ) and of South-layers,
ſhould nor a people ask counſel of their God? Shall they ask
counſcl of hh dead for them that are living? ſo then 1t 1s
Plain, this diſtinQion is wholly diſſonant trom Scripture, and
that this Author wrote not according to Scripture, but by
phantaly and imagination, —
| n


The intituled Works of K, James anſwered. 147

And now for his Firſt Book, and the whole diſcourſe of it, |
he laycth this foundation he produceth rhele places of Scrip-
ture to prove that there is ſuch a thing as Witchcraft and
Witches, Exod, 23. 18, 1 Sam, 15. 23, Alts 8, Als 16,
and here he never {carcheth the ſente and meaning of theſe
Scriptures, bur proveth that Witches arc, which thing no.
man denycrth ; and yet mark bur his proofs, Exod. 22, 18,
which is raken fora Jugler, or one that worketh falſe Mira-
clcs to deceive and {educe, in the fame {ſenſe is ro be under-
ſtood, As $8. gy, 10, concerning Simer Magus who was a
Juglcr and Magician ( Jugling being one main part of Ma-
oick inthe Scripture diſcourſe ) ſuch were Pharachs Magici-
ans, which Magicians this Author diltinguiſheth from-
Witches, and yet would prove by theſe places rhar rhere is
ſuch athing as Witchcraft and Watches ; fo likewiic 1. Sam.
L5. 23. Rebellion 1s as the ſin of Divination,. from hence hee
would prove Witchcraft alſo, and yet his diſtinCtion deni--
cth that Neeromancers ( whoſc mein drift was. to give Divi-
nations, by conſulting with the dead ) are Witches ;. and
this is the {um of his furſtChapter,where any wiſe manmayſ{ce
how he hath loſt himſcll in proving,and notable to prove that
which is cafily proved,. and that which no man denicrh, That
there is ſuch a thing as Witches and Witchcraft; for all the
relt of his Diſcourſe us firſt Book, itis ro proverhar there
arc Magicians and Necromancers,. which thing no man de-
nicth according to the Scriptures ; but though this be a true
Concluſion, yct it aritcth not from his pgoofs before men-
rioned,. according to his own diſtinctions; for he produceth
thoſe proots only to proye thatthere are W irches,. which yet
he diftinouiſher from Magicians and Necromancers ; :;
vainly. then doth he railc trom theſe proofs a diſcourſe of
Mag icigens and Necromancers? And turther, in all this Diſ-
courſe, he writing only accozaing to hisown imaginations-,
without grounds 1n the Scriptures, or 1a Arts,.and Sciences,
he ruanerh iato groſs ablurdicies, as in the third Chapter; .
that Judicial Aſtrologie is attained by Circles and Conjura-
tions, raiſing of Spirits to refolye their doubts, which ſhew--


zh how. bile rcading he had in that. Science ; and in- the -
fourth,


The Third Book.


fourth Chapter he bringeth in healing by Charms, an1
Stones, and Herbs, as it by his method they were a part of
Aſtrologic, and not only in chat hath he ſhewed his weak-
neſs, bur in reckoning | Stones and Herbs among Magick
Charms. In the Fitth Chapter he faith, Magicians conjure
the Devil in a Circle, aqd it racy mits the leaff circumſtance,
the Devil breaketh into the Circle,, and carricth quite away
Body and Soul ; and yet faith, a little before, in the ſame
Chapter, that the Devil having preſcribed that form of do-
1ngs that he may ſecemto be commanded thereby, will not
pals the bounds of thoſe injuntions ( Circles ), Inthe fixrh
Chapter he talkerh, That they make a League with the De-
vil written with theix bloud, and fo learn of him to play
Juglins Tricks, and Tricks upon the Cards and Dice ( 1n
which alſo he ſhewecth himſelf bur a filly Gameſter, in think-
mg ſuch Tricks cannot be played without a League with the
Devil ) and yer by his diſtinctions, and by his whole Diſ-
courſe, he {aith, theſe Magicians (though 1n league with the
Devil ) arc no Witches, which is contrary to the general
Tenent that ever was of his own Se& ( that is, where luch a
League was made; it made a Witch ) but ro ſpeak the truth,
the 11] coherence of the Writings of his, and all other Wri-
ters of that ſort, ſheweth, that they have no ground but
Phantſy, and Fiction, tor any league or tranſa&ion with the
Devil, cither by Magician or \Vitch (to uſe his own di-
ſtinftion ( though ſencele(s) cither in Scripture, or Human
rcaſon guided by the Scripture, and this isthc whole {cope
of his firlt Book.

Inthe Firſt Chapter of his Sccond Book he refuterh him-
felt, and plainly contetlcrh ( though dully ) thar all his
former proofs of Scripture concerning Witches were to bee
under{tood only of Magicians, and not of Witches; but ſaith
he, [I houghthar be true, yet the Law of God {peaketh of
Magicians, Inchanters, Diviners, Sorcerers, and Wiirches,and
wharſocyer of that kinde that confult with the Devit, but
doth not ſay where the Law (peaketh ſo, nor where ſuch arc
{aid ro conſult with the Devil, bur lctrerh it pals tor granted
which yct I will grant ; thus ftarre the Law of God FE

: 0


*
= d  —_—
an


The intituled Wor ks of Ring James anſwered. ig
of Magicians, Inchantcrs, Diviners, and Sorcerers, bur 1:0t
of Witches diſtin from theſe, for theſe were Witches in all
the Scripture-ſence, and Diviners were Magicians, and Ma-

Icians were Sorcercrs, and Inchanters were Witches, and
if wereall the reſt ; burſtill mark how he labourerh to pro-
duce ſome proots beyond all this, whereby he would make 2
Witch ſomewhar ( he cannot tell whar ) diſtin& from Magi-
ciais, Diviners, Inchanters, and Necromancers ; tor ſaith he,
the Maid that followed Pax! crying, Atts 16, was a Witch,
whoſe ſpiric of Divination was put to {tlence, faith he, and
fhe was a Witch, becauſe ſhe did not raiſe the Neyil, but hee
{pake by her tongue publickly, and privately, and that by
her conſent, and this 1s his ultimate proof of a Witch; which
I grant; ſhe was a Witch, but why diſtin& from the reſt >
what was ſhe more than a Diviner? and the Scripture ſaith
ſhe had che ſpirit of Pzthon, which was a ſpirit of lying Pro«
phecie or Divination ; and faith he, ſhe was a Witch, be-
cauſc the Devil ſpake by her tongue, and that by her con-
ſent, as if he ſpake not by the tongue of all Diviners, Inchan-
ters, Pythonitts, South-ſayers, Necromancers, and all falſe
Prophets,and that by their conſent; ſhe was a Witch ſaith he,
becaulc ſhe raiſed not the Devil, bur yer ſay other Writers of
his Sect, they are Witches that raiſe the Devil, and ſhe had
been a Witch if ſhe had raiſed the Devil ; and he himſelf in
his ſeventh Chaprer faith, Devils are made commonly: ta
appear by Witchcraft ; from theſe grounds in Scripture,
( which arc all ſpoken of Deceiyers, and falſe Prophets, ac-
cording to the whole difcourſe of my firſt Book, which in-
deed were Witches 1n the Scripture-{enſe, though weakly bs
diſcovered by this Author) he goeth on preſumpruouſſy in - :: Y/ 5 of
the ſecond and third Chapters, to lay that Witches are ſach
as do compatt with the Devil, and in great number meer in |
Houſes, and Churches, and adore the Devil in Pulpits, and
learn of him to do miſchict, and do render account ar their
ſeveral meetings, what milchiet they have done for his fer-
vice, andto kijle his hindcr parts for adoration, and this 1s
all the {cope of his ſecond and third Chapters, . without any
titcle of prook from Scriprure, BE only confeſſion of Con-


Cemned


146 The Third Book.


cople ( which is no proot ) being contrary to Scrip=
_ pH 9h and ( al} Circumltances conſidered) is : |
Confcſſion; for as he dully argueth in his firit Chapter, that
becauſe they are loath to contels without Torture, therctore
they are guilty 3 we may argue the contrary, they theretorc
are not guilty, their Conteſſhon being exrorted, which Con-
fcſſonyer he would argue to be true, becauſe ſaith hc, the
Devil was worthipped among the Heathen, and gave Ora-
cles, and Reſponſes, and was honourcd with bloudy Sacri-
fice, and gave Divinations by the intrais of Beaſts ; Bur al-
: though theſe things were done by Heathen an that wor-
| ſhipped Idols, and had Oracles, and Reſponſes from their
Idol Pricits ( which were the Witches, and talſe Prophets
of the times ) and in that {ence might be (aid to worſhip the
Devil;as in 1 Cor. 10. 19, 20, ({ becauſe the Devil was 1n the
Jdols, or rather in their Pricits, anJ fo by them wrought
deluſions under the mask of Idols) yet what conſequence
is here, that becauſe the Devil was 1n this {ence worſhipped
.publickly by Idolaters, that theretore he is now privately
worſhipped by the _ Conventions and Atlemblics of
Witches? or where do we read 1n Scripture, that Wirchcs
were {ſuch as did mect ro worſhip the Devil? they were in--
deed fuch as ſeduced people to worſhipping of Idols, by the
- deluſions of the Devil ruling 1n their hearts. And in the
fourth Chapter he ſaith, that V Vitches can be tran(porced in
the Air, by the Devils help, becauſe Habbakksk was tran(-
ported by the Angel, in the Hiſtory of Daniel Apocyypha,
which it this were a true itory Canonical, yet what abſurdiry
is this, to equalize the Devils power with the power of
God by. his Angel? And what conſequence is here? It the
| Angel did fo tranſport, theretore the Devil doth tranſport ;.
and yet this is the whole {cope of his fourth Chapter, In the
: hich Chaprer his whole (cope is, That V Vitches can make
pi&ures of V Vax, or Clay, and roſt them, and {o conſume
the party whom they intend,. and can receive from the Devil
ſtones-and powders, and by them caſt on can Cure dilcaſes ;

. that they. can raiſe Storms and Tempeſts, and do man
frange things, and that po man js ſure to _ vr
'Y 1rch=-


_— 4 "y —


Is _—__G_T-c. TY


SIG 5


w
The intituled Works of K. James anſwered, 147

VVitchcraft, which as I have ſhewed in my ſecond Book,
arc not only inventions and fthctions of Antichriſt, without
groun.i in Scripture, but flat againſt Scriptarc,. and the
taith 0; Chrittiais to beleeve. | 2

And whcreas he {aith further, The Devil can fead VVirches +c£ath
to poylon p2oplc, I auſwzr, fo he may reach any man elle
that will undertake it ; tor that 1s not any whit more efſen=
tial to a V Vitch thanto any other murthering-minded man
or womat, no more than {tabbing with a Knife or Dagger. |
The (cope of the ſixth Chaprer 1s, Thar the Devil appears
to V Vitches, and teacheth them to do milchiet, bur.ycr they
have not powcr to hurt a Magiltrate ; bur ſure it VViech-
crait conlifted any whit in the Art of poyloming, why then 1s
the Magitltracc tree? tor certainly many N 0: raj ca

udges, and Kings themſclves, have been poyloned; hath a

Vitch then leſs faculty in poyſoning Magutrates then 0+
ther men have had? why then 1s their Craft counted fo |
dangerous? The {cope of his (eycnth and laft Chaprer 15,
that Spirits did more commonly appear in time of Popery
than now, and the rcafon thereof he giveth betore he pro-
verh itto be true; that is, that the Goſpel hath diſpelled thoſe
Spirits that were wont to appear, "This reaſon hath a {ſmooth
Pretence 1t 1t were given of a true thing, butthe thing which
he arguerh uponis not true,for there were no more Spirits ſeen
in time of Popery than now ( and that is juſt none at all)
but there were more lyes reported by papiſts, aud in time of
Popiſh ignorance, than now, and the Goſpel indeed hath dif
pelled thoſe Popith Errours which were wont to deceive the
people more than now ; and who ſo denycth thar Spirits ap=
pear, he faith they are Sadduces , whereas yet there was ne-
ver aty ſuch diſpute among Sadduces,whether Spirits did ap-
pcar viltble or not ; neither were the Phar:ſces that oppoſed
the Saddvces to filly as to affirm any ſuch thing ; but it any
{iuch thing were, as viſible apparition of Spirits, doubtleſs
had bcen no Controverlie, for the Sadduces might bave ſcen
them as well as the Phariſees ; this is the ſcope of his Firſt
and Second Book. And here Iam compelled to go back as
gan to the thiry Chaprer of the wn Book; to an{wcr one Ho

2 11S


c


XC


=_ The Third Book.
© his Tenents, which I think very material to be anſwered our
of ofder, becauſe if I had taken it in order it would have


ſpoyled my method in anſwering ſo curtly as I have done,
(his writing being ſomewhat immerhodical.)


Look in his firit Book; the third Chapter, and ſee how he
by the bare ſignification of a word, labourcth ro ground an
abſurdity, ſaying, Necromancy is one that Prophetieth by the
dead, and that is, faith he, one that conlulteth with the De-
vil, aſluming the body of thc dead party ;. but as L have ſaid,
what Logician doth not know that it is not a legal manner
of arguing, but moſt abſurd to draw a Concluſion from the
bare {1gnification of words, or from what words may fign-
fie ? but he that argueth truly, muſt argue as the words are


| taken, and not as they may {iguific, and alſo fearch the Ori-


ginal {ence of the Hebrew, and yet for the word it {elt.it hath
not the leaſt ſignificationot the Devil, or thar the Devil can
aflume a dcad Body, or the leaſt {1gnification of Prophecy-
ing by the Devil, bur only by the dead, according to the vain
Icnent of the Hearhen, that the Souls of the dead ( by rea=
ſon of their perfect cſtate after this lite ) could inſpire men /
living upon the carth, with knowledge of things to come, in
which pretence thele Witches called Necromancers uſed Di-
vinations, or lying Prophccics, as maniteſtly appcareth in
Plutarch, de, defctt, Orac, and by Scripture, as I have ſhew--
cd more fully in the Ninth deſcriptionin my firſt Book ; and
as for that "Tenent, that the Devil-can aſſume and raiſe a
dead Body, it is moſt abſurd and blaſphemous, for it was
W the divine miraculous power of Chriſt upon the Crols,
that the bodies of the dead were raiſed for a time, and ap-
peared unto many,. Matth.. 27. 52, 53, from whence the
Centurion acknowledged Chrilt to be the Son of God, know-
ng, that fuch things could not be done but by the mightyPow-
cr ot God ; yetif this abſurdity were true, That the Devil could
aſlume the bodies of the dead, ir makes nothing to prove
their common main Tenent, that Witches are ſuch pcople as
can kill by Witchcraft, .for a Necromancer is only one that
raketh inhand to Propheſic by the dead, or to give divina-
£03, and not one that kilkÞh, or witchcth people to death ;
X neither


The intituled Works of K.. James anſwered. 149
neither doth ir agree with this Authors diſhiaftions.to hold
any ſuch Tenent, that a Necromaxcer 1s one that conlalteth
with the Devil aſſuming a dead body, tor he faith. in_hug.
Sixth Chapter of his Second Book, and alſo in the rh
Chapter ot the Third Book, that the Devil appeareth to
Witches, and they conſult with him , having aſſumed a
dcad body ; why then doth he in his former diſtinctions make
adiftcrence berwixt a Necromancer and a.Wairch ? |

And now to proceed to the Third Book; as followeth, He
laboureth to prove in his Third Book,. Thar the Devil can
appcar bodily, arid doth commonly haunt Houſes and Fieids
in ſhape of men departed this life, and ſometimes as Fairies,
ſometime in manner of Browsn:»g ( as he calleth ic ) thar is it
that by our old Wives Fables is called Robin. Good-fellow ) and
that theſe are true, and not faiſe Fables,. and for thar in his
firlt Chapter he OF ak » 1ſa, 13+. 21, where it is aid, That
Zim and Ohim ſhall dwell 1n their houſes, and Jim ſhall cry
in their Palaces, which ſaith he, arc inthe Hebrew the pro-
per names of Devils; buyfhow erroneous this expoſition is,
let them that can read the Hebrew text ſee, .and for them that
cannot read the Hebrew text, let them read the Latine tran(-
lation of J«ninus and Tremellizs, which is thus ; Et recaba'-
bunt fere illic, 3 implebunt domos eorum noxia animalia ; ha-
b:tabuntqz illic ulule, & ſcopes ſaltabunt illic, clamitabitq; ter-
Tificum animal in viduatis palatiis ipfins,,.. & ſerpens in templis.
voluptariis : That is, Wilde Beaſts ſhall lodge there, and
hurtful Beaſts ſhall fill their Houſes, and Owls ſhall dwell.
there, and Night-birds ſhall hop there, and a Dragon ſhall
cryintheir deſolate Palaces, and the Serpent in their pleaſant
Temples ; ( Treazellizs in his Marginal Notes ſaith, Terrifi- -
cum animal, id eſt draco_) Thoſc wereall only {uch Creatures.
as do commonly inhabit deſolate places ; The Prophet
ſpeaking inthe former verle of deſolarion that. ſhould. come.
upon the Land;. and indeed the Devil hath leaſt to do in de-
{olatc places, and is moltbuſted where people are moſt ; bur .
had Zimand [im been the proper names of Devils, .it had
got made any thing to the purpoſe, to prove thar the Devil
walketh up and dowa in corporal appcarance, for it 15 ſaid,.

"7. ve


iy


x50” ©" The Third Book.


Bevel, 2. 13. that the Deyil dwelt at Pergamm, and yet it is
not meant that he was thereſcen art all to appcarm any ſhape,
but was there ur the hearts and works of wicked mech; he
fach is the marmer of all that are rainted with Popiſh Te-
nems,that rhey wou'd have people conceive ofthe Devilzthar
he is {ome ugly terrible Creature ro look upon, {ome black
man with a pair of Horns on his head, and a Cloven Foot,
and a long Tayl, or ſome monſtrqus Beaſt that inhabircth in
Woods, and walketh about in the nighrro fcare people, and
this dodtrin is maintained by Popita Writers, leaſt pcopie
ſhould diſcern that the Devil 15 11 all their Popiſh Do&rins
and actions, and in the hearts of all Popiſh ſeducers, and de-
ceivers of the world. | |
: Further, in his his Third Book he talketh of Tucubw, ang
Snccrubm, 'as if it were an undoubred truth that the Devi
lyeth commonly with Witches of both Sexes, having copu-
lation with them, bur for this he hath nor the leaſt Scrip-
tare, nor the leaſt {ſeeming Argument, but only conſtrained,
extorted, belyed, nullified Confeſſion of poor condemned
pcople, which is the only Argument tor all the devillith
cnents of all Writers of thus fort, and yer they begin with
Scripture, ſaying, Thox ſhalt not ſuffer a Witch to Ive; and
upon this they raiſe a long difcourle, contrary to all Scripture,
and truth, and poſſibility, all which they will father upon
the Scriptures, and yet when they are pinched by diſpute to
prove their Tenents by Scripture, they fly off to confeſſion ;
this confeſſion I ſay is inall the diſcourſe of this Author his
only Argunienr ( which isno Argument ) and yet he preten-
derh his diſcourſero be grounded on the Scriptures, and in
that pretence in his laſt Chapter he concluderh his whole
diſcourſe with the Law of God, ſaying, Theretorc theſe
pcople ought to be pur to death according to the Law of
God, whereas yct 1n all his diſcourſe he could not produce
the leaſt jot or titrle of the Law againſt any fuch kinde of
ſuppoſed Witches as he talkerh of, nor the leaſt colour of
argumetitto prove his {uppoſals, in all the Law, or all the
Scriprures, without miſconſtruing the Lay of God, and the
Scriptures, So much for this Author,
. Coopcr


Cooper anſwered,

T He ſecond Ergliſh Writer upon this ſuojeS& is one The-

7245 Cooper a Minitter, who himſfclt being infeed with
the common Popiſh renent, {ent forth by Pope Innocent the
Eighth, and Pope J#ls#s the Second, and afhrmed by Be-
dinws, and other bloudy Inquitttors mentioned in my Second
Book, that Witches are Murtherers, and {uch as can raiſc
Winds, and do things impoſſible, by the help of the Devil;
This Cooper, inſtead of being himicit a Minifter to jnſtruct,


and teach the people in Gods Truth, grounded 1n Scriprtures,..


he becamea bloudy Inquiſitor to finde our Watches, thar is a


bloudy Perſecutor of the poor, and an accuſer of them to be


Witches, who by his blinde zeal in this Kinde did cauſe ma-
ny to be executed tor Witches, as he confeflerh in his firſt
Book. the firſt Chapter, and f1xtcenth Page, and after this he


reading Mr, Scors Ditcovery of Witchcraft, which he was.


no way ableto contute by Scripture, nor to an{wer him tru-
ly, hce bring gallei{ in his Conſcience, and netled 1n his
minde concerning his reputation in the World ( which he
tcared he ſhould looſe it his wickedneſs ſhould be convitted
and laid open) inſtead of humbling his Soul before God, and
begging pardon for his f1n ; he wrot a Book in defence of his
errours, . called the myſtey of Witchcraft, wherein he hath
( as others have done ) pretended to confute Scor, and to that


end hath writ down many Popiſh inventions, adding there-


uno many of his own toolith imaginations,. without one jot


of Ecripture to provc or ground any of his Tenents, and af--


ter long diſcourle of meer lyes and 1maginations, in a pre-
tence of holy Zeal, yet quite contrary ro Gods truth ( yea I
may ſay, imaginations reſiſting Gods holy Spirit of Truth )
hath thought ita ſufficient contutation of Scor, to fetch him 0-
ver with an ule of reproof,. as appeareth ia his firſt Book, the
cighteenth page, juſt asit a man ſhould preach contrary to


the Scriptures that Idols are gods, and labour to prove it by


EXPErience \ as this Cooper labourerh to prove his Tenents
conccriuug Wiuches ) or to-proye itby the example of ſuch


152


The Third Book.


a$have been ſlain, becauſe they would not fall down before
an Idol, and worthip it ( as. this Cooper Jaboureth to prove his


errours concerning Witches from the example of many thar '


have beenexccured for Witches) and then ſhould fetch them
over with an uſe of rcproot; that ſay Idols are no gods ; and
after this groundlcſs ulc ot reproot, this Cooper goeth on ſtill
in a frivolous diſcourſe, without any Scripture to prove his
Do&rin, and at laſt labourcth to ſhew that Juglers are
Witches, which no man yet did ever deny ( it they were
ſuch as wrought falſe Miracles to ſeduce the people, as Jaxres
and Jambres, and Simon Magus, and Elimas the Sorcerer )
bur he laboureth to prove that common Juglersarc Witches,
that do work their Tricks of Activity, {aith he, by a Fami-


' Har, which yer (faith he) are no real Miracles, but they


'hurt the Eye, and thicken the Air, faith he, whereby the
make things ſeem to be really done that are not done 3 whic
thing nr IgA do, thatis, to hurr the eye, and touch


it not, andtothicken the Air were a Miracle it ſelf; but to
. cleartheſe vain Fancics,who knowcth not that Juglers do play


their Tricks only by the ſlight ot hand, called Clearly Con-
weyance, or Legerdemain ? and what common Jugler that


hath gone abour to Fairs, or Markets, to ſhew his Tricks of


 torhe ſarisfaCtion of any man


Attivityto get Mony, will not 1a privace for a ſhilling ſhew
any Trick that he hath aCed openly, and ſhew how it1s done

at defireth it» and that with-
out a Familiar, or the leaſt appearance of any fuch yain
Phamtſy as fools imagine ; Bur yet it I ſhould rake it for gran-
ted, thattheſe common Juglers are \Witches, and do work
their Fears by a Familiar Devil, as he afhrmcth, yer what
doth that make towards the proving of theſe poor, and aged,


_ and lame pcople to be Witches, that have ſo commonly


been faid to be Witches > What Tricks of Attivity have
they ſhewed, either in Fayers or Markets, or in publick, or in
private? ſurely if they had been Condemned tor Witches,
for any ſuch thing doing, they ſhould not nced to be found
out by an Inquiſitor, ro be tried by Biggs, or privic Marks,
or þy ſinking or {wimming 1n the water, tor their aCtions
wolld declare them opculy. Allo 1t conmon Juglers were

| Witches,


»—


Mr. Cooper Anſwered, ,
Witches, as he fairh; yer how doth this prove that'a Witch
is a Murtherer, which is the main dritt of his.Book;.: and to
that end he bringcth many places of Scripture to prove thac
thercare V Vitches, which thing no man doth deny. Aitcr=
ward he affirmcth, that Witches do make a real League
withthe Devil, (which hath been a common fooliſh traditi-
on } and tor that he alledgeth Pſal, 58. 5. where ſaith he the
Original yceldeth thus, Which hearech not the Charmer, or
mnterer, joyuing ſocieties together , where ( faith he ) the
Holy Gholt ſerreth down the efte& of a Charm, namely,
chat it isablc to ftay the Adder from ftinging thoſe that ſhall
rouch him ; bur mark how this tellow belyerh the Scriptures,
tor which ( becauſe many underſtand not the Hebrew) I re-
terre them to the Tranflation of ſrnivs and Tremellixe, which
iStnis; & ne non auſcultat wocs ——_ Ktentis ncanta-
tron.bus peritiſſimi, Which hearkeneth not to the voyce of mut=
rerers, or of the moſt skiltul uſer of Charms ;-{o that there is
not a word of joyning Socicries togerher, not a word of the
Devil, nor of any league withrhe Devil ;z yer if it had been
ſo, and thathe could have proved ſuch a League or Cove-
nant, it had made nothing to. prove that a Witch is a Mur-
cherer ( which is his drift ). for a League might be made for
a Decciver, as well as for a Murtherer ; And whereas hefaich
the place aforeſaid proveth rhe efte&t of a Charmy that it can
ſtay the Adder from ſtinging, it proveth the clean contrary
for if the Prophet had ſaid the A der hearkneth to, or regar-
deth the voyce of a Charmer, it had proved that a Charm 1s
efteFual ; bur in that he ſaith the Adder regardeth not, or
hearkneth nor to the yoyce of the Charmer be he never {o
$kilful, ic proveth that a Charm is of no force ; and indced
the Propher doth there allude deridingly to the vanity of that
Idolatrous conceit of the Heathen, who thought that
charms had vertue inthem, and {o were ſeduced by charms
ro put confidence in charms and conjurations, according
ro the Sixth term of deſcription in the Firſt Book of thus
Treatiſe, ſhewing the common conceit of the Heathen ors
ccrning charnas, appearing in their Pocts; Frigidas in pratis
FaniAnde rr mpitnr ang uis, | : £
X (Thy


ra ———_
_—w''TS])C'D'©TnTI—
—
— — - X
 ————_ —
_ __ —_— ” 4


-


ELIE Fo ON Fu F :
b Iv. "—__ :
Ala AMIS. onx rvor, vc


}


NE ge a OE Wt
0 PX . «< = IE s YZ 6
< « es _ mm _— —_ ds . — CES Don
Ver Wor ETD 0 US ACSI To ne OB VL on Ls FANG


as. rat ms ey
COAL $4 ACE LO, o—_—


W 4 Rte


The Third B 00k.


This ſellow doth further contradift himſelf ſundry ways,
one of his moſt manitelt ablurd contradictions 1s 1n page 83.
wherc he conteſlerh that God only hath power to lend Satan
ro torment the wicked, and affliitthe godly, and yet he at-
firmeth in pag- 261, that \Vitches alſo can lend Saran to poſ-
{cls men, and torment them. |

Who 1o pleaſeth to read over this Aurhor,ſhal find that he is
bold roafhrmznot only that the Devil doth at the command of
a Witch raiſe ſtorms,poylonthe Air,blaſtCornskill Cattel,tor-


' ment the bodies of men, but allocalt out Devils, as in page


x58.alfothar he ſometimes enlivencth a dead childezand bring-
eth it troa Witch in her travelling ro bring forth cuulde , and
telleth her that ic is the childe bora of her body, begotten by
tnmlclf, and fo. (airh he, ſhe is deceived wita her new darling,
as in pag. 1232, {o that according to the Deviliſh doCtrin of
this Author, the Devil canraiſe the dead) as Chriſt railed La-
2174 and Dorcas, and caſt our Devils, as Chriſt did ; but to
concludes they: that ſhall read his blafphemous and vain ima-
ginations, and yet ſhall ſce cherewithall the pretence of holy
zcal inall his Diſcourſe, may plainly behold in him the Dc-
= OY hunſclt into an Angel of Light ro deccive the

orld, Ed


© And(ol leave this Cooper where I found him, namcly, ina


Stationers ſhopgdear of raking ups
Maſter Perkins auſmered.


"Here is yetanother Author writing upon this ſubjet of


Witchcratt,wel knownroalland that 1s M. Perkjns,who
decaule he was ſuch a choſen inſtrument of rar.
Gods \Vordin his lite, I bluſh to name him, leaſt ſome ſhould
think ] go about to defame him fo long after bis death ,
whom I honour inhis Grave; but yettotake away all fuſpi-.
cons inthat kinde, her every one knows: that the. 0jume of,


Mi, Perkins his Works, in which is contained that, Freatilc;


of Wiccheraft, was not put inprin by himſelf, but were cer-
min Wrirngs found in his Sindy afccr his death, moſt -ok


- Which were taughr by him in the Puypit yy bis Life-tigaes kar,


Riz


Mr. Perkins Anſwered. &
not all, and were pur in' prelle for the benchit of his Wie,
who had bur trail means tor her maintenance in hct wid»
dowhood; which ring being well conſidered, it may well
bee queſtioned, whetiuwcr that trearite oft Witchcraft, was of
his own writiag Or uot, and it it was, yet it may well bee que-
{tioned, whctacr hee wrote ity with an inteat to teach it tor
Truth opcalyy or oaly with an iarcat to confute {uch Here-
fies, as had tormerly bcen delivered by Bodinus, Hiperins, and
other popiſh writers, it hee had lived, for it it be well confide-
red and comparcd with thoſe Authors, it is only a colle&ion
of mingled norions our of them, pur into another Method;
alloir might bee toiſted inamong his writings, by ſome Igno+
ran or Popith Heretique, who deſired to bolſter his Errors
under the name of ſo tamous an Initrumentia the Church
as Mr. Perkzns was; alſo it might bee added to his works, by
taOle that were appointed by his Waite to put his works 1.

print, cirher tor the bolſtring of their awn Errors, or tor the:
| inlarging of the Volume, to make the Book (elithe berter;;
yea many wayes Mr, Perkins may bee clear from being the.
Author of that Treatiſe; Bur yer if ſome will {till beleeve
that 1t is his work, let them but compare it with the Scrip»
tures,and ſee how little conſonant it is with the Scriptures; hee
delivereth the common Error, that Witches can kill by
Witchcratt, have made a league with -the Devill; bave the
Devill at their call, char the Devill.is ready at a watch-word
given him by the Wirch to. do miſchict, and many 1uch
ttrange inventions, whercof there is not the leaſt inck.ing1iathe
Scriptures; and therefore need no farther confutation,


- Mr. Gaule anſwered,


Go the finiſhing of my Book, there is come tomy hand
the works of a tourth Englyſh Writer, Mr. ; ohn G au/e, 4
Miniſter of $ra»ghrox in Hunimgton ſhire, whom | find (iahis
zeal tor Godg& mhis Religious hatred to the barvarous cruel-:
rf of-thus age, i:1 pena ng: the poor at14- innocent) much
inclining to the Truth, 'and I cannot ſay of him, bur his


tenions Were godly; bur = hath been to [wayea by the com


—


*1
44


-


4 -- +£s FRE
.


The Thizd Book.
mon tradition of mens and the impetuouſneſle of the rimes,
and the aurhority of ſuch Writers, as hee calleti the learned,
as thatalthough hee hath wricen ſome Truths ” ng
allo whereof hee hath don2 much . good in Gods Vineyard,
inlabauring to ſtay that blooly periecution on toor agaialt
the poor and Innocent) yet he hath much {werycd from rhe


Truth of rhis{ubje& of Witches and Witchcraft, 1nthat hee


yeilderh atallto the common contagion of Error that hath.
defiled rhe World, (not that Witches are, for that were my
Error to deny: ſecing the Scriptures do manifeſtly condemn
them) bur that Witches in the Scripture ſence; are ſuch as
have made a farailicr compa with the Devills and receive
ower from him to Kill an4 che like; I wonder (buc that the
ur of darkneſle is nor yer tully paſt) rhat ſo many Mini-
ſters.ſhould ſtill wander in this darkſome imaginationg what
leaſt intimation or deſcription of ſuch a kind of Witch hath
God given us1n the Scriptures? or of Devills 1a the corporall.
ſhape of Imps, making a familicr compa with any of man-
ind, or any ground tor {uch imaginary whimles.of mans
brain; what conſequence 1s there in Logicall diſpute, or in
Theologicall Principles, that hee that denicth thele phanta-
fies, denicrh that there is a Devill, and fo finally rhar there
18.4 God; the Scripture teacheth us that there is ia. God,
and ikewile a Devill, or Devills; but waar Scriprtureſpeaketh
of a. familiar Devill, or Jmp? or that a Witch can kill by
Witchcraft, or hurt either body - or: goods, by. Witckcraft,
by. the Devills help, either by Gods permiſſion or: withow?
1 rather think tharthis forſaking of rhe Scriptures, anddelives
ring for Doctrinthe traditions of Antichriſtian Popiſh Wri-
ters, 1Sa forlaking of God, and conſequently a denying of
God; hee ſaith hee could inſtance from ſtory, how many have
had no Faith of Witches being, till their tarde body or


goods, hath ſerved to unwitch .them of their. opinions and
concelt; 1Sthis a Theologicall way of Argumeat to ;ground
a DoQtrin upon vain reports, and phantaſmes without Scrip-
ures? yea flat contrary to the Scriptures? Dev. 32, 39,
1 Sam. 2. 6,7, Jarc any man contrary to thoſe and many pla=


x50f Scripnue (when hee isafflictcd 10 bady or. goods) alaibe


!


Mr. Gaule Anſwered, TM
» a Witch ( upon vain Phantaſic, an caraal reaſon,
perltitious imaginations, and foolith tradirions) with-
ripturcsy which by the Scripteres we arc taught to a-
only ro God ? yes, men daredo ſoy and Miniiters dare
ſoy And this ts the coxdemnation, that light is come into
ld, and men love darkzeſs rather than light, But now to

& to the man himlcelt, of whom I have written ſparingly.
Gaule, it this work of mine ſhall come to' your hand, as
rs hath come to mine, be not angry with me for writing .
Is Truth, I am {ure you ſhall get morc cltimation among
: Beleevers, more tavour with God, and do more good in
riſtsV inc-yard by acknowledging your error, aud by em-
cing Gods Truth, than by being carried away with the
-11Ms of theſe flouds of iniquity that have over-flowed the
{tian world. You ſay in your ſecond caſc, pag. 24. It is
id to obſerve any ſpecifique difference of Witches, 11
-:h you acknowledge the {ubje& to be difficult to write

.3 Sir, I have given you tull ſpecifical deſcriptions of

em according tothe Scriptures, thea although Sir, yoube

arned in other things, ditdain not to learn of me the truth
this ſubject, I doubr nor, bur if you had firſt read my Book,

'ux own Book had becn more perfect, Suffer not a Witch to

ve ; Pra feloens a Jugling perſon, that worketh falſe ]

liracles to teducettite people to Idolatry, Exod. 22. 18. Jo-

zs deſtroying of Witches, 2 King, 23» 24, what was it bur

illing dowa the Idols, witttheir Adjan&s, Oraclers, and
wth-{ayers, that werethe Idol Prieſts that ſeduced the peo-
e? Examine the places which are your own quotations; .

en Sir, I intreat you, in Chriſts name, that as you have -

en fervent for Gods Cauſe with A4pollos, At. 18, 25.10 learn

; me the way of God more perteMly,y as he did of the Di-

ples, verſ. 26. fare-well Sir, the Spirit of. God be your fa-

auliar Spirit to guide you 11 the truth ;

g* | Mt


 Nonquin? Sed quid?


7


.
.
—o——— ONT ION «4 E oy"


=
.
d þ
p 8
. 4
»
" "©
” : 1 L
» $4.6 ws . Oe «Ks te L 's l
= : _
AJ . 4 7 by. OY pl —4 4 _ Sv
OW. VO regete .7 w MM - un rod "4 CTR l "I Waters 1+ 7 l 44S a : 4 " FA Cw 4 2 4 rm h—_
| , - "_ , C_R * , a a Kos 3»
. - . . q P, 4 F þ WAS £ FEY dd Fo
» 4 - "4 , £ Ls Ws =
ng > us « 4


*


Sono Sata Air aan nenrttr SE hf. got wot monte
6d fo to png n+ OO ates tte 1 age," On q
0 F.
24 5's AT" - 3 o 5 F, NO . G Z


MES £h X 3. - Maſt cy


En #——D—
—— DT”. .- aq ; a ——_— :


» 4 __ o
<—_— 4 __ d


8 The Third Book:
Maſter Ciftard anſwered,


Here is yet another Book come to my hand written by
I bir George Giffard, anablc Minilter of Gods Word in
Malden, which becauiethe common way of ſome mans ar<-
guing is by queſtioning, what ſay youro this ? and what ſay
-youto that Author ? theretoreI will give a brief deſcription
_ of lis Tenents, which are chiefly three ; rhe fit is, That a
VVitch cannot by a Familiar, or by any cratty any way hurr,
or weaken the life, health, or eſtate of any man, by vewitch-
 1ng with dilcaſc, or infirmity, cither Man or Beaſt, ox hurt-
lng his Goods ; aud this he proverh plainly by Scriptuxe, and |
Reaſon. as I haye alſo done in my Second Book off this
Dilcourle, Ke
| Theſccond Tenent is) That V Vitches have Imps and Fart
miliars. Thethird Tenent is, That theſe Famuliars do nd
thing really, but only do deceive the V Vitch, by making her *
beleeve they do that which cometh to pals upon Man or
Beaſt by Divine providence ; bur tor theſe two laſt Tenents
he doth nor prove by Scripture as he did the firlt, nor yet af-
firm for truths, bur only ing overcome by the ſtrengch of
common report, grounded upon the Confeſſion of {uch as
have been #5. he only ycelderh to thoſe ſtrong deluſie
ons which have deceived many, Hypothetically arguing, if
Witches have ſuch Imps or Famuliars, they are only de-=
ceived by them; bur herein is he nor confident, and therefore
theſe rwo laſt Tenents being not confirmed by him do cons
frm nothing,and for the firſt of therwo, That V Virches have
Imps, 15 (uſtciently difproved in my Second Book, and that
all their Confeſſions areno argument ; then for the laſt Te,
nent, bavins reference tothe firit, it is in like manner nulli- 7 i
fied, for if they have na Imps, nor no Familiar, then they
are not deceived by them, nor do beleeye or contels any hh
thing, whctcig theyſeam to him to be deceived, any further
than Confeſſon iswrung trom them, by them who are the
deceivers of themſelves and others, by rhe Decciver of the
VVorld, that dycllcth ja uiemy except ſometimes by ai
| depth


<0


The * Contluffon;  u67


depih of Mclaitholly, or diſtcrivert4 brain; as Have formet-
ly uemouſtratod 10. my Secona Book, aid therefore need no
turcher aulwcr, Tf 6b8- _
-: Somuch tor rhiis Auchor wii I beleeve had more of the
Spirit of grurch 1g him than many ot his proteſiors tf

Now tor all thathave writrea in thatkinde, 1 ſummon all
VVitch-mongers to ſhew me in the Otd' or [New Teltinient,
whichare given as arulc of truth, the leaſt talerence of any
ſuch DoRrin as is delivered by them. Allo, 1 defire any man
of right underſtanding, to compare thens with rhe Scriptures,
and \o cotnparealto this my Book with the Scriptures, and
to ſee which, of them is 'ma{t\ confortun with the Scripruress
and which is molt dillonanrc from the' Scriptures, an4 foto try
them by Gods touch-ſtone of truth;


SHE} The. Conclaſion,


O conclude, you that are convitedof your Errors, and
4 yer domake a light matter of it, and lay it 1ot tO heart
Was C4inant Ahab accuried tor-murtherins of each of taem
one man, and do yee mak<e ic a light matter ro have murthe-
red thoulands by your:ignoranrdotrin'? V.Vhat will it avail
at the latter day. that yce have preached, and; prayed; and
ſpread forth your hands, and made great ſtir tt prerence of
Religion? It Chriſt ſhall ſay, Depart fron me yee workers of
in.qu.ty, asd ſhedders of innocent bloud? it thouſands that are
wrongfully {lain ſhall rife up in Judgement againſt you, It it
ſhall be {aid to many Miniſters, and Preachers of the V Vord,


aa that yee have noctaught againſt thele-abominations, yec ate
partakcrs 1n them.


Canſes of npholaing the damnable Doftrin of Witches power,


[ I didnot aime at brevity, I might enlarge this Volume
KL uponthcle particulats tottowing, which 1 will-only name
wo leave them, being rhe cauſes of upholding the opinions of
{VV Kches, power, - ; | ETEL $a tos Cp
x SomneMiniſters for want of due examining of the: Serip=

MEL S 6 Lures,


£
1
: g 4
4
. ha
_
47 Th


168 The Third Book.
tures, havetaughtinthe Pulpirs unwarilys and inconſiderates
_ ly, the Doarinof Witches Power, as alſo ſome haye pub-
Iiſhed their Works in print.
2 Many Miniſters aJthough they are of the contrary opi-
" niony yct bayeneglecttcd to beat down the common phanta-
\ ſticalconceir of people concerning Witches: power.

3 Thecommon? hatredthart all men do bear to a Witch,
{o rhat it any poor Crcature hath the report of being a Witch,
they joyn their hand with the reſt in periccutingyblindly, with-
out due confideration, = ES ry

' 4 The talc reports that are commonly raiſcd 1inthat kinde

_ concerning Witches» whereby men lead one another like

_ . wandring loſt Shcep, to beleeve lyes ; it is certain it was done

in {ucha place I have credibly heard it.

5 Vaincredulity, which all men are naturally prone unto

ever {ince Adams Fall, that is a Vice whereby men are (ub-

 jc&ro beleeveevery lying report, being the ground of 1nfide-
liry - Credula mens hominis, CF crete fabulis AuYes, |

6 Infidelity, or not beleeving the Scriptures to be the only
pcrftctt rule of righteouſneſs, and rouch-{tone of rruth,

7 Ignorance of the Scriptures, cicher by wreſting them, or

by ncg ting to ſcarch them, or want of being able to read

_ them, or when they are read, want of ability to underſtand
them ; all ſuch men may be led away with any opinion.

$ .Generality.ot opinion maketh weak people, and 1gno-
rant-to arguce,ſ{ure it is (afeſt ro ſay,and think as others do.

' 9 Obttinacy inopinionin ſuch as have ſome weak know-
ledge; ler {uch be beaten from one Argument they. will fly
toanathery and beat them from all Arguments, yet at laſt
they will {till hold their opmion.

10 Mclancholly, which frameth much repreſentation in
the minde of any terrible report or docrin ( though it bee
groundleſs and talſe ) and cauleth itto take great impreſſion
19 the deluded underſtanding.

11 Timerouſnc(s, whereby men like litrle Children, and
Women eſpecially, are afraid of eyery idle fantaſtical reporr
that they hear of Witches poyer, cſpecially if they be alone in
WE: 2: es
Br q 12 Crackt


Cauſes of upholding this damnable Doftrin. 169

12 Crackt Phantaſie, whereby many a man or woman,
ſpecially in Sickneſs have ſtrange Apparitions cither 1n bed,
or abroad, which they report to filly people, and are belee-
ved, whereas it is nothing but their broken and hurt fancy,
occaſioned in ſome by fickneſs or diſtemper, in ſome by
much Drunkenneſs, in ſome by a blow onthe head and 1a .
Scholars ſometimes by over-much ſtudy, whereby they pre-
{ently conceit, and are judged by others to be bewitched, or
at leaſt to be purſued by a Witch, or by a Witches Imps, and
judge {ov themlſclves,

13 Pcoplethat arc handled by ſtrange Diſcaſcs, as Chil-
dremin Conyulſion Fits, or Women in Fits of the Mother;
and the like, are by ignorant bcholders; and ſometimes by
1gnorant Phylitians (aid to be bewitched, as were Frogmortens
Children ſaid to be falſely.

14 Old Wives Fablcs, who fit talking, and chatting of
many falſe old Stories of Witches, and Fairies, -and Robin
Gooa-fellow, and walking Spirits, and the Dead walking a-
gain; all which lying fancies people are more naturally in- -
clined to liſten after than to the Scriptures.

15 Another abominable cauſe is the ſuffering of Impoſtors ;
to live, ſuch as filly people call Cunning men, who will un- y
dertake to tell them who hath bewitched them, who, and . |
which of their Neighbours it was, by the deluſions of ſuch
Impoſtors, many poor innocent people are branded with a. .
report of being Wuchcs, by reaſon of which report coming
firſt from a Witch, they are in proceſs of time ſuſpected, ac- -
cuſcd,arreigned, and hanged,


A Reference to Myr, Scots Treatiſe of Spirits, a»d alſothe-
17 Opinion of Luther concerning Devils,
| Might further enlarge this Volume with a Treatiſe of Spt- -
r1ts, or the nature of Devils, concerning which people have -
much abuſed themſelves for want of knowledge inthe Scrip-
ruresz but. for brevity I refer the Reader to Mr, Scet> who hath
excellently writren 1n the latter cud of his Diſcoveryof Witch -
_ craft, a Diſcourſe called, 4 Treatiſe of Spirits ; alſo I thought
good to adde in brief the mw ot Lather concerning arr
WwW 4


be >. be TAs:


which are'theſc ; De phreneticis ſic ſentio, omnes moriones C qui
uſu rat.on;s privantty 4 demonibus vexari, non quod ideo dam-
nat ſunt, ſed quod vari:'s modis Satan homines tentat, alias gra-
1ns,aliog lenitt, alios longins, quod medici multa ajaſmod iri-
baunt natural:bus canſit, & remediis aliquando mitigant, fit |
guedigrorant quanta ſit potentia & jus demonum, Chriſt us nou |
dubitat, curvam illam anym in Evangelio, vinttam a Satana dis
cere; & Petrus Attoram aecimo, oppreſſos a Diabolo dicit, quos
Chriſt us ſanarat, ita etiam multos ſurdos, claudos malitia Sa-
tans tales eſſe, Deo tamen premittente ; deniq; peſtes, febres, atq z
alios graves morbos epera demoniorum eſſe, qui C tempe-
ſtates incendia frugum calamitates operantur Vere af firma-
mis ; Summa wali ſunt Angeli, quid minum, ſi emnia faciunt
mala hnmano generi noxia & pericula intentent, quatinus Deus
premittit ; etiamſi plurima talia herbs, & aliis remediis natu- |
ral;bus Curari poſſunt, volente Des, © miſercnte noſtri, exem- |
plum Jobi endicat, que pafſus fit a Satana, que medicis omnia
naturaliter fieri, © curari aſſereret ; ſciendum eſt igitur phre-
neticos a Satana tertari ſaltem temporaliter, an Satan non faceret
phrencticos? qui corada replet formicatione, cades, rapinay GT om-
P20 »;bus pravis affettibus ; ſumma, Satan proprior nobis eſt quam
ullus credere poſſit, cum [anttiſſimis ſit propinquiſſimus adeo, ut
ipſum Paulnum colaphizare & Chriſtum wvehere poſſit quor ſum
| Liber. Theſeare the words of Luther, and where he faith ar
the laſt, that the Devil could carry Chriſt whither he liſted,
it 1S his crrour, for the Devil did not carry him art all, bur led
him by temptation, as appcareth, Leke 4. and as I have more
at large written in my Second Book, in my an{wer to the
Sixth Objcthou, it you look back to it; yet from this brief
Ditcourſe of L»ther may be obſerved, That the Devil may
þelaid co be an inſtrument in all Diſcaſcs, croflcs, and ca'a-
nurics, as Luther proverh by the Story of Job, and the faying
of Chriſt concerning the woman, Luke 13, 11.16. and as 1s x
expreſled, 2 Theſſ, 2.18, Luke 11, 14, but yet it mult nece(-
{arily be true that the Devil is Gods Inſtrument 1n all theſe I>
aſflictions, as 7-6 acknowledgeth in all his afflitions, alcri-
bivg all ro God, Ch.p. 1, 22, 2.10.9. 34. and God claimeth
theſethungs as his own Prerogatives, Lev, 26, Dent, 32. 3 ge
TOM


A Reference to Mr.Scots Treatiſe;


From all which it 1s fully concluled, That the Devil is
only Gods inſtrumenc to ali and remprt the righteous, to
aſfict, rempry and torment the wicked, and 11 all this doth
nothing but by Gods pcculiar diſpenſation not by a bare per-
miſſion, nor by the appointment of a VVitch ; whatfoever
{ome have written more concerning the nature of Devils, as
that there are 1acubrm, and Succubus, the He Devil, and the
Shce Devil, that the Devil maketh a League wich V Virches,
and that the Devil is the V Vitches Inſtrument as well as Gods,
and that by GoJs permiſiion ; that the Devil walkerh in
Churci-yards. andncar Sepulchers, and in deſolate places ;
that he is black, tharhe aſlnmeth a Corporal ſhape, that hee
hati a Cloven Foot, that he walketh in the dark Nights, that
he lometimeroareth, and maketh a fearful noy(e, that he u-
{cth to ſcare people un VVoods and F iclds, that there arc
hery, aicry, carthy, and watery Devils, that there are de-
orces orders, and ſupremacies among Devils, that ſome arc
greatcr 11 power than orhers ; theſe are all difſonant to Scrip-
rur2, and are only the yain tancics of men, who delight to
fill the world with Fables.

And whercas [ome do argue from Matthew 12, 24 that
ſome Devils are greater in power than others, and alſo in de-
gree and ſuperiority, becauſe Beelzebab is there called, The

rince of Devils, it is to be underſtood that the Phariſees cal=
led him the Prince of Devils, becauſe Bzal-zebxb was the
chict Idol by which the 1fraelites had been gffiled ſometimes
and was by them called therefore, the chief Devil, or the
Prince of Devils, and was called by them Beelzebub, by an
Antithiſis, putting e for 4, which Idol was ſpoken ot ,
I Kings, 1. 2, and Feza and Tremeliizzs do both agree 1n
that Expolition, that it is meant of Baa/zebaub, if we look
their Notes upon Matthew 10, 25. and Beelzchub may bce
interpreted, The Prince of Flies, not becauſe Devils ate
Flies ( as ſome imagine in the tory of Francis Spirab )
but becauſe his Temple was peltered with Flies,throughthe
{mcll ofthe abundance of Fleſh that was there ſpent daily, and
alto becauſe the Country being much troubled with Flies, the


pcople uſcd to ſeek to that Idol for help againſt that annoyance
of Fiics, (aith Beza. Lycifer


r


v7


192


The Third Book.


Lucifer is alſo by ſome thought to be the chief among De-
Vils) - that os 4 he fell, all bis Angels jell with him, trom
that place in /ſa, 14. 12133 14, 15+ but that is only an Alle-
gorical expoſition of the fall and exile of Nebuchadnezzar,
who is there Mctaphorically called Lacifer, becauſe of his
pride, in exalting himſels as farre above others in his own
thought, as the bright Morning Star exccedeth other Stars.

He that would rcad theſe things more at largc handled,
may read Mr. Scot atorcſaid, as alloa little Book, called, The
Dexcon of Spirits,


| A 1 Inffruction for Lawyers,


YOuthararelcarned in the Laws of the Land, are com-

monly tound tobethe moſt able and worthy to be Judges |
of the people} and theſeLaws which are the rule of Juſtice, are '
concluded by you, all robe cxcceding good Laws ; and there-
fore it muſt needs follow. that (ſuch opinions as do make theſe
Laws ofno validity arc abſurd opinions, therefore 1 am bold
to ſtate two Queſtions, or Caſes, and leave them to your
Wiſdoms. : EN:

I. A manis found dead inthe Ficlds,. who a lictle before
went out well; another man being his Adverſary is queſtioned
for his Lite, as being ſuſpe&ted to have murthered him; this
man proving that he was a hundred, or two hundred miles
from the place whgre and when the man dyed, is quir by the
Law. I demand then, what Juſtice is inthat Law that quireth
him,if he might ſend theDevil, or lcave order with the Devil
or with his Imps,toW itch him to death atrhar time ?

II, Two men ſtrive together, one overcometh and beateth
the other, who preſently {icknerhy and withinthree days dy-
cthz the other 1s queſtioned by che Law for his Life ; what
Juſtice were inthis Law, if an old Wick hating one, or both
of them and Sg, opportunity ſhould have power to witch
the oneto death, thatſo ſhe might caulcthe other to be Han-
ged(for him ? |


FI.NIS.


—_— wv *--


— - "a>


YT a7


4
