. 
. 
. 


ss Sg ar a 
+e Veeg ees 


oe 2 dee ae 
atv Wet ee eee tae 
Pree ae a 
ee 
. cyae ere 








fae. are Sie ae oh: ae Fay ob OES, 


ay ees ler aay oe 


ee a Se ee ee ee ee 
i 


= 


a | 


» 


f 
ih 
So 
2 

q 
} 

‘< 

2. ri 
i , Section 














>» 


4 


Teds, ; pee 





ry, i bl 
‘eaten 


a: "ee 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2019 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https://archive.org/details/aeneastacticusasO0aene_0O 


‘A 
THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


EDITED BY 
-CAPPS:. Pa: D:, LL.D: T. E. PAGE, trrr.p. 
W. HAD: ROUSE, curren: 


AENEAS TACTICUS 
ASCLEPIODOTUS 
ONASANDER 


vy 


"> 


A 


a 


ie 


4 


P 


ArT 


Bi 
oe 


Re 
4 


ce <g 


5 


Sbt eee 











AENEAS TACTICUS 
ASCLEPIODOTUS 
ONASANDER 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
BY MEMBERS OF 


THE ILLINOIS GREEK CLUB 





LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


NEW YORK:-G, P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MOMXXIII 





CONTENTS 


AENEAS TACTICUS— 
PREFACE 


INTRODUCTION 


TEXT 


ASCLEPIODOTUS— 
PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 
EXT. 


List or TrecuHnicaL TERMS 


ONASANDER— 
PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 


TExT 


INDEX 


343 
368 


sy 


we 


es 


=\ 


y 








| Nes (ans 


ih 





AENEAS EACTICUS 


PREFACE 


Earty in 1917, Marte iam diu furente, the attention of 
the Faculty Greek Club of the University of Illinois 
was turned toward the art of war, in which, as in so 
many other fields of scientific and humanistic in- 
terest, the Greeks achieved results of more than 
transitory value. The military manual of Aeneas, 
styled the Tactician, suggested itself as a mono- 
graph in this field well suited for discussion by such 
a club, and portions of this treatise were accordingly 
translated by the following members: J. C. Austin, 
EF. C. Baldwin, H. J. Barton, L. Bloomfield, H. V. 
Santer. Mo. Curl, BK. W.. Drury, 5. Engel, 
H.S. V. Jones, J. W. McKinley, C. M. Moss, W. A. 
Oldfather, A. F. Pauli, A. S. Pease, R. P. Robinson, 
C. A. Williams, and J. Zeitlin. Of the versions thus 
produced a number were discussed and criticized at 
a series of meetings, and all were subsequently 
revised and edited by Messrs. W. A. Oldfather, 
A. S. Pease, C. M. Moss, and H. V. Canter. An 


1x 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


introduction, critical apparatus, notes, and index 
have been added to make the work conform to the 
general plan of the Loeb Classical Library.1 


1 The introduction, the preparation of the text, and the 
notes have been the work of W. A. Oldfather; the text 
and translation of the excerpts from Julius Africanus have 
been made jointly by Messrs. Oldfather and Pease. 





= —————————————e 





INTRODUCTION 


Or Aeneas, commonly known, since Casaubon’s 
time, as the Tactician, little is recorded, and not 
much more may be with a fair degree of probability 
inferred from the treatise before us. Mr. 'T. Hudson 
Williams very properly insists upon the scantiness © 
of our direct evidence that Aeneas was actually the 
name of the author of this military handbook, and 
upon the necessary uncertainty that attaches to all 
arguments based upon conjecture only. But after 
all, the evidence, though not amounting to demon- 
stration, has unusual cogency, and little of our 
knowledge regarding the minor authors of antiquity 
can be regarded as resting upon a firmer basis of 
attestation and inference. ‘The case for Aeneas may 
be put thus. 

It is true that the ms. superscription runs A‘Aavod 
TAKTLKOV UTOUVHPG TEpL TOV TOS yxpr) ToALOPKOLpPEVOUS 
avrexe.v, “ Aelian’s tactical treatise on how men in 
a state of siege should resist’; but the ascription 
to Aelian is absurd, partly because of the utmost 
difference in style between this tractate and Aelian’s 
other work, but more especially because it contains 
not a single historical reference to an event that 
occurred within four centuries of Aelian’s time. 


B 1 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Again, taxtixdv tzopuvnua is an impossible designa- 
tion for the work of Aeneas, if for no other reason, 
because it contradicts his own definition of tactics, 
quoted by Aelianiii. 4, as emurtyjpny ToAEuiKoV KIVo Ew 
“science of military movements,’ of which there is 
hardly a trace in the present work. The length of 
the remainder of the title, furthermore, when com- 
pared with the brief designations by which the 
author refers to his other works, shows clearly that 
this latter part does not belong to the original 
superscription. If we bear in mind, finally, that in 
the sole authoritative ms.1 this treatise follows the 
work of Aelian, the conclusion is unavoidable that 
the superscription derives from a misapplied sub- 
‘scription to Aelian, to whose treatise the words 
TAKTLKOV vTOpVnHa exactly apply. The subscription 
to our work runs Aiveiov roAvopkntika’ 7) AtAcavov Kabas 
7 apx7 (followed by an erasure of thirteen letters), 
“ Aeneas on Siege Operations; or Aelian as at the 
beginning.’ Here we clearly have to do with a bit 
of genuine tradition, followed by a corrective note 
intended to bring the conjectural superscription and 
the traditional subscription into harmony. Direct 
Ms. evidence, accordingly, where it possesses any 
substantial authority, assigns our treatise to an 
Aeneas. Whether, however, woAvopxyn7iKa was the 
author’s own designation for his book may be 
doubted, partly because, in referring to his other 
works, he generally uses an adjective with the word 
BiPros, and partly because this manual contains 
almost no advice about how to besiege a town, 


1 And so probably in the collection of military writers 
dating from early Byzantine times, for M seems to have 
been copied from an uncial ms. 


2 





INTRODUCTION 


which is the only meaning of voAvopxéw and related 
words. 

Accepting the unimpeachable ms. testimony to 
authorship by Aeneas, we may now compare the 
internal evidence offered by the work itself with 
what is known from other sources about the military 
writer Aeneas. 

Beginning with the latest and the least specific, 
Johannes Lydus, De magistratibus, i. 47, in the sixth 
century of our era,t mentions along with five others 
an Aeneas as an authority upon zoAvopkytiKa or 
“Siege Operations.’ Aelian, Tactica, i. 2, in the 
second century after Christ, mentions Aeneas as the 
first military writer (after Homer, to be sure) who 
composed otparnyixa Pifdia ixavd, ‘a considerable 
number of military manuals,’ which Cineas the 
Thessalian (an associate of Pyrrhus of Epirus) epit- 
omized ; and in iii. 4, Aelian quotes his definition 
of tactics as eruoTypynv . . . ToAEuLKOV KLVATEwWY, © the 
science of military movements.’ Polybius, x. 44, 
inveighs in a characteristic vein against the recom- 
mendation of an Aeneas, 0 Ta Tepi oTpaTnyLKoV 
vropvipata cvvtetaypevos, ‘who composed treatises 
on military science, with regard to signal fires.” 

The conclusion from this evidence is that an 
Aeneas, living before the time of King Pyrrhus, 
composed a number of treatises on military science, 
among them works on tactics and siege operations, 
and discussed signal fires. All this agrees perfectly 
with the internal evidence of the treatise itself, 


1 For some reason omitted by Schone in his testimonia. 

2 The brief note in the lexicon of Suidas (tenth century), 
under the lemma Aiveias, seems to be taken entire from 
Polybius. 


3 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


which deals with siege operations, particularly from 
the side of the defence, and which several times 
mentions signal fires, the very passage of which 
Polybius speaks being cited from another work in 
ch. 7. 4. Furthermore, the author frequently refers 
to other writings of his on military science, and the 
first sentence of a book on naval operations is con- 
tained in the ms. at the end of the present treatise, - 
so that, even without the evidence of the subscrip- 
tion, there can hardly be a justifiable doubt that 
ours is the work of the Aeneas whom Polybius, 
Aelian, and Johannes Lydus mention. The argu- 
ment derives additional support from Fr. Haase’s 
happy emendation in 31. 18, where the author, as 
would be not unnatural, chooses his own name as a 
sample with which to illustrate a system of crypto- 
gramic writing. To be sure, the account of the 
operation breaks off after spelling out awe, but one 
can hardly avoid the conclusion that Aiveiav or 
Aivéav (for the accusative is required) originally 
stood in the text. Mr. Williams, indeed, pronounces 
the verdict ‘not proven,’ but he seems to demand 
a completeness of demonstration which can seldom 
be secured in things philological, and with this single 
exception Haase’s emendation has been generally 
approved. 

Aeneas gives abundant evidence of first-hand 
acquaintance with his subject and an experience 
in military operations which, though extensive, is 
almost wholly confined to the geographical limits of 
the Peloponnesus and the western coast of Asia 
Minor (with the adjacent islands). He seems, accord- 
ingly, to have served in these two fields, and as 
few Asiatic Greeks were drawn to the Peloponnesus, 


4 


INTRODUCTION 


while thousands of Peloponnesians, and especially 
Arcadians, served as condottiert in the Fast, it can 
hardly be doubted that Aeneas was a Peloponnesian 
who had seen service in the Aegean and in Asia 
Minor.! 

Regarding the period in which Aeneas wrote, it 
has been observed that more than half his historical 
examples fall within the years 400-360 B.c., and that 
their number becomes greater as one approaches 
the latter date. Thus incidents are cited for 397, 
382, 379, 370, 369, 368, 363, 362, 361, and close with 
the capture of [lium by Charidemus in 360. On the 
other hand the book was written before 346, because 
it represents the Locrians as still sending maidens 
to Ilium, a custom which Timaeus®? tells us ended 
at that time. We can, therefore, with a high degree 
of certainty place the composition in the years just 
following 360, because neither Philip of Macedon nor 
the stirring events of the Phocian war (356-346) are 
mentioned. Indeed it is extremely probable that 
Aeneas composed his manual in 357-356. Alfred von 
Gutschmid has pointed out Aeneas’s habit of illus- 
trating his point by the most recent events, and 
with that in mind the two specimens of secret 
messages Acoviavos Kadds’ “Hpaxdeidas Keto (as 
given by M). ‘ Dionysius is fair; let Heracleides 
come, in 31. 31, can hardly refer to anything but 
the war between Dionysius II of Syracuse and Dio 
and Heracleides operating from the Peloponnesus in 


1 The utter neglect of Athens as well as the employment of 
occasional non-Attic idiom and vocabulary make it almost 
certain that he was not an Athenian. 

2 Preserved in the scholia to Lycophron v. 1144 (Scheer’s 
edition). 


5 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


357.1 Heracleides, it may be noted, remained behind 
for a while and came on after Dio with a few war- 
ships and a considerable force of men. Now the use 
of the singular form 76de in the text and the absence 
of a connective between the first two and the last 
two words make it evident that we have here to 
do with a single message, whereas no one who ordered 
Heracleides to follow could possibly be speaking in a 
favourable manner of Dionysius. A further touch 
of verisimilitude is furnished by the use of the 
Syracusan (Doric) dialectal form “Hpaxdeidas, the 
very way in which Dio would have addressed Hera- 
cleides, although Aeneas himself is writing in Attic- 
Ionic, and consistently avoids Doricisms. Kadds 
accordingly must be changed to agree with the 
remainder of the message, and here Hermann 
Schéne’s emendation xddAos, ‘docked’ or ‘ de- 
horned,’ used of an ox or goat which had been 
rendered harmless, is an apt expression, equivalent 
to our English phrase “ with one’s wings clipped,’ or 
‘shorn of one’s locks.’ Considering also that KxoAos 
was actually used in military parlance of an indecisive 
or interrupted engagement, witness the xddos payy 
of the Jhad, Book viii, and that the corruption to 
kaAos is easy in view of the commonness of this 
formula in dedications and inscriptions of many kinds, 
it may be accepted as highly probable that Aeneas is 
here giving an actual or supposititious message, very 
likely from Dio himself, to Heracleides in Greece, 
ordering him to follow, since Dionysius had lost his 
power and was no longer dangerous.* This message 


1 For the details of which one may refer to A. Holm, 
Geschichte Siziliens, ii. 177 ff. 
* This corresponds exactly with the facts. Dio set out 


6 


INTRODUCTION 


was sent in the fall of 357, very shortly after which 
the present treatise was probably written. 

Casaubon thought that our Aeneas might be iden- 
tical with the Aeneas of Stymphalus in Arcadia, who, 
as general of the Arcadian League, in 367 B.c. drove 
out Euphron the tyrant of Sicyon with the help of 
Sicyonian exiles (Xenophon, Hellenica, vii. 3. 1). 
This suggestion, which has been elaborated by Hug, 
has been very widely, although not universally, 
accepted, and in view of the converging lines of 
evidence from several different quarters, the dis- 
cussion of which here, however, would take us too 
far afield, may be regarded as probably correct, 
although it is perhaps unwise to call our author out- 
right ‘ Aeneas of Stymphalus ’ as does Hug. 

In its general literary setting the work of Aeneas 
belongs to the type of the didactic handbook which 
began to appear toward the end of the fifth century, 
under the influence of the Sophists and Socrates. 


against Dionysius II with scarcely eight hundred men, 
a ridiculously small number in comparison with the enemy. 
‘** But Dio was justified in his belief that the ruler’s power was 
crumbling and that he had completely undermined it,”’ as 
Eduard Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, v. 513, expresses it. 

Hermann Diels and, independently, Herbert Fischer, con- 
jecture xaxws, which requires something more of a change 
than xé\os, for M, and probably its predecessor, had only 
KAC. Diels speaks of a telegram of the younger Dionysius 
to Heracleides, but it seems more reasonable to suppose that 
Dio sent the message, because, although Dio and Heracleides 
eventually fell out, they were both in exile in Greece in 357 B.c., 
and it was Heracleides’ victory over Philistus in the sea-fight 
the next year which finally compelled Dionysius to flee. 

1 Examples of which from this same period we have in 
Xenophon’s essays On Horsemanship and On the Duties of 
a Cavalry Commander. 


7 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


His literary work, which Polybius sums up under the 
general title otpatnyixd iPAia, ‘ Works on military 
Science, was divided into a series of special mono- 
graphs. Aeneas himself refers to five: (1) 7 wapa- 
oKevacTiky PiPAos (WajAs ‘ebe:), ‘ Treatise on military 
Preparations ’; (2) 1 wopiuo7iKy BiBAos (14. 2), “On 
(War-)Finance ’; (3) 7) orparomedevtixy BiPAos (21. 2), 
‘On Encampments’; (4) <eriPovAdv?> BiPAos, 
“On Plots’ (11. 2, see the apparatus criticus at this 
point); and (5) axotvopata (38. 5). This last title 
has been variously understood, either as ‘ Historical 
Illustrations * (Casaubon, Mahlstedt), ‘ Lectures ’ 
(Christ-Schmid), or ‘Admonitions’ (Kéchly, Hug, 
and others), of which the last suits the context best, 
besides being supported to some extent by Isocrates’ 
use of the word (dd Demonicum, 12 and 17), which 
he paraphrases by ovovdator Aoyor and co¢ia. Besides 
these the ms. contains at the end a fragment of 
what Aeneas himself calls (6) a vavtixy tagus, or 
a work ‘On naval Tactics.’ That this was an in- 
dependent monograph has been doubted by Hug, 
but upon insufficient grounds. Such a treatise was 
essential to a well rounded scheme of manuals on 
military science, since nowhere in the world has 
so large a part of warfare been necessarily waged 
upon the water as in Greece. We must also assume 
the existence of a special treatise (7) ‘ On the Con- 
duct of Siege Operations,’ a roAvopkyTtixy PiPros, 
partly because Aeneas was subsequently listed among 
the poliorcetic writers, whereas the present treatise 
deals exclusively with the defence of fortifications, 
but especially because the introduction to the present 
monograph, when considered as but a chapter in a 
comprehensive treatise on military science, by its 


8 


INTRODUCTION 


emphatic contrast of the relative positions of the 
attacker and the defender, clearly indicates that the 
conduct of siege operations had already been treated. 
Last is (8) a taxrixy BiBAos, or TaxtiKa, ‘On Tactics,’ 
to which Aelian refers, and from which he quotes 
the definition of tactics as given above. Into this 
general scheme of military manuals the present 
treatise would fall most naturally as a counterpart 
to the roAvopkytiKy BiPXros, if it be not actually the 
second half of that work, to which the introductory 
sentence makes such direct reference. This sup- 
position would also relieve us of the necessity of 
restoring by conjecture an otherwise unknown ad- 
jective to agree with £/BAos asa title for this treatise. 
A general work treating of both the offensive and 
the defensive in time of siege might, without too 
great impropriety, be called a zoXtopxytixy BiBXos 
‘On the Conduct of Siege Operations,’ but the second 
part alone could not be designated by that title. As 
regards chronological order, it is obvious that Nos. 1, 
2, 4, and 5 preceded the present treatise because 
they are referred to as already written. Also, 
according to our hypothesis, No. 7 immediately 
preceded, just as No. 6 followed. No. 8 is in no 
place referred to, even where, as in 1. 2, such a 
reference would have’ been most appropriate. It 
was probably, therefore, planned and composed 
after this book was written. No. 3, on the other 
hand, although not yet written, was clearly planned, 
and, as is natural, the author is more ready to 
introduce a few topics from it into his present work 


1 The parallel with the vaurix) taéis which is bipartite 
also suggests that the present treatise was cast in the same 
form, as Fischer suggests. 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


than from a treatise which had been published and 
was already known. 

Literary sources of a direct kind did not exist for 
Aeneas, and his account is mainly drawn from ex- 
perience and from oral tradition. Herodotus is occa- 
sionally used for illustrations, Thucydides once only 
(for the siege of Plataea); but Aeneas was under 
the influence of the latter’s vocabulary and style. 
Xenophon’s dAnabasis may have been drawn upon 
for the anecdote of how a panic was stopped by 
a clever joke (27. 11), but there is a marked 
variation in detail and the same anecdote is else- 
where ascribed to Iphicrates. Von Gutschmid 
thought that Ephorus was used occasionally, but 
that is doubtful. 

The title of the present treatise, as already noted, 
has probably been lost ; the latter part of the super- 
scription, however, we retain, enclosing it in brackets, 
as the best designation that has come down, and use 
as a translation of it the somewhat conventionalized 
title, “On the Defence of fortified Positions,’ the 
equivalent of which in Latin, German, or French 
has become sanctioned by general usage and is 
essentially correct. 

Our treatise shows evidence of systematic planning, 
and although certain paragraphs, or even chapters, 
might appear somewhat more logically in a different 
connexion, and some of the transitions are not well 
marked, Kirchhoff’s theory of wholesale displacement 
is certainly wrong.t The following are the general 
divisions of the subject : 


1 Fischer’s recently proposed explanation, namely that 
Aeneas was engaged upon this from 379 to 356 B.c., constantly 
revising his lecture notes and adding references to the most 


10 


INTRODUCTION 


I. On selecting and disposing troops and on 
preparing positions in and about the city 
for facilitating the defence (1-10.24). 


II. On maintaining morale and discipline and 
general measures for thwarting treachery 
and revolution (10.25-14; phases of this 
latter topic are considered in a number of 
other chapters). 


III. On repelling sudden forays (15-16.15). 


IV. On checking, at a distance from the walls, 
the advance of a foe, and on taking special 
precautions in regard to religious proces- 
sions outside the city walls and treachery 
at the gates of the city (16.16-20: 21 is 
transitional). 


V. On guarding the walls by night and by day 
and preventing smuggling of arms to 
revolutionary factions and their direct com- 
munication with the foe (22-31). 


VI. On means to meet the actual assault of the 
foe upon the fortifications (32-40). 


It may be said of the measures recommended by 
Aeneas that many of them seem to us simple, a few 
almost trivial. But the same is true of the elements 
of all great inventions which have become part of 
our thought and action. Even the somewhat naive 


recent happenings as illustrative material, is not likely to 
win general assent. ‘The case of Aristotle’s Metaphysics is 
very different. There is nothing to show that Aeneas was 
a school lecturer and it is difficult to picture him in that 
capacity. 


11 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


cryptogram in 31. 31 which called forth von Gut- 
schmid’s scorn, though hardly likely to deceive any 
military censor today, might well have imposed 
upon a simple-minded gateman or upon barbarian 
police, at a time when all reading was uncommon, 
writing none too easily legible, and tricks with 
vowels and consonants well-nigh unheard of even 
among the learned.t Military science in the hands 
of its great masters is still a simple thing. Battles 
and campaigns are won and lost, as the annals of 
the great strategists show, by the observance or 
neglect of such elementary considerations as rapidity 
of motion, concealment of purpose, concentration of 
a superior force at the point of impact, and the like,? 
which anyone can appreciate and which seem almost 
too trivial for formal statement. ‘AzAovs 6 pvOos 
THs aAnGeias ebv—“‘ Truth’s story is by nature 
plain.” 

One ought rather to note the large number of 
devices which, although war has taken on such a 
different external aspect, even yet apply, such as 
censorship of letters, police prohibition of gatherings, 
putting out of lights, passports, exclusion or intern- 
ment of suspicious aliens, special regulations for the 
surveillance of lodging-houses, interest moratoria and 


1 In this connexion it might be noted that precisely 
this very cryptogram was employed for the title of a mediaeval 
Ms. in Rome, Cod. Roman. Bibl. Vitt. Em. 1369 (Sesso- 
rianus 43), 's. xiii. JL: e= br? t=: ne: 12220 -— eats 
Lucubratiuncule Egidii. (From Herr Sechel as reported by 
Diels, p. 29, note 4.) 

2 Thus it is reported of the Confederate General Forrest, 
that he summed up his military science in a single phrase 
in response to the question, how he won his successes: 
‘* T get there first with the most men.” 


12 


INTRODUCTION 


supertaxes on wealth, bonuses for importers of food 
and munitions, signals, trenches, mining and counter- 
mining, masks for protection against smoke and fire, 
secret methods of communication, and the employ- 
ment of dogs. As the first writer upon military 
science Aeneas should always command the atten- 
tion of students of’ that subject, so long at least as 
the necessity of defence against aggression devolves 
upon a watchful citizenship. 

That the works of Aeneas were highly regarded 
is shown by the fact that early in the next century 
Cineas, the friend of King Pyrrhus, prepared an 
epitome of them, a thing that he would hardly have 
done except at the suggestion or with the approval 
of that great commander, who himself wrote a 
treatise upon the art of war. The true worth of 
Aeneas is better appreciated by the admiration of 
Pyrrhus, one of the world’s half-dozen greatest 
captains, than by the strictures of any closet philo- 
logist. In the second half of the second century B.c. 
the fifth book of Philo the Mechanician upon the 
attack and defence of fortifications makes use of 
Aeneas. Polybius used his treatise on Military 
Preparations. Onasander towards the middle of the 
first century after Christ, Aelian early in the second 
century, and Polyaenus shortly after the middle of 
the same century, knew and made use of this work. 
Karly in the third century Sextus Julius Africanus 
transferred bodily large portions of the present 
treatise to his Keoro‘.! Traces of Aeneas’s influence 
appear also in an anonymous Byzantine military 
writer of the sixth century, and possibly elsewhere. 

1 These excerpts will be found at the end of the present 
translation. 


13 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Probably about this time was composed the corpus 
of Greek military writers as represented in the 
Laurentian ms. at Florence, a ms. which alone 
saved to the modern world Aeneas and several other 
authors of this group. 

In the nineteenth century the text of Aeneas 
passed through singular vicissitudes. Almost redis- 
covered for scholarship by Haase, Kéchly and 
Riistow, it was inevitable that a certain furor philo- 
logicus then raging should fall foul of it. The earliest 
editors had followed the ms. tradition wherever it 
could be understood, and had not attempted to 
prescribe how Aeneas ought to have expressed him- 
self. With the greater refinement in the study of 
style and syntax which the nineteenth century 
achieved, but while the historical attitude had not 
gained the ascendancy, it happened more than once 
that a text was practically rewritten by a courage- 
ous but over-zealous philologist. Thus Rudolph 
Hercher in the early ’seventies, misapprehending the 
numerous non-Attic forms, strange syntax, and loose 
or redundant expressions in Aeneas, conceived the 
idea that a pure and succinct Attic text had been 
disfigured by an interpolator, and accordingly 
discarded about one-twelfth of the book. Arnold 
Hug went further in this direction, eliminating about 
one-fourth in order to secure a correct and elegant 
literary form, and even Adolph Lange, though de- 
fending the text with great acumen against many 
changes of interpolation, himself rejected approxi- 
mately one-tenth of the whole. This was of course 
to reduce the process of emendation to the point of 
absurdity and a reaction inevitably followed. A 
theory of wholesale displacement of paragraphs and 
14 








INTRODUCTION 
chapters, first suggested by Adolf Kirchhoff, had 


but a short vogue. No motive or occasion for such 
transpositions is conceivable, and the order of topics, 
although not in every instance the most logical, is 
on the whole satisfactory when one bears in mind 
that the author was neither a scientist nor an accom- 
plished man of letters. 

The increase in our knowledge of the changes in 
syntax, forms, and vocabulary brought about by the 
inscriptions and papyri discovered in the last few 
decades, and the greater attention paid to the 
language of others than the Atticists, has enabled 
us to form a truer judgement of the «ovv7), or common 
Greek idiom, which was the universal means of 
literary communication in the Hellenistic period. 
The formation of this common idiom has now been 
traced back with certainty to the Delian league of 
the fifth century, and its basis is recognized to be a 
mixture of Attic and Ionic with elements, in greater 
or less proportion, from other dialects. As a fully 
developed literary style it makes its appearance 
shortly after the age of Alexander, but we now 
recognize that Aeneas is one of the very earliest 
documents preserved from the period of transition 
and development, and our duty is not to reduce his 
work to the standards of the strictest Attic prose of 
the fourth century, but to accept it as it has come 
down to us, emending only what is impossible in 
form and syntax, and endeavouring to understand 
rather than to transform the document. Mahlstedt’s 
exhaustive lexicographical study of the vocabulary 
of Aeneas, and the more general treatment of his 
style by Behrendt, both appearing in 1910, reached 
the certain conclusion that Aeneas is a forerunner 


15 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


of the xo.vy. This sober historical point of view is 
also characteristic of Schéne’s elaborate recension, 
which is the basis of the present text. Much re- 
mains yet to be cleared up in the interpretation of 
the subject matter, ‘but the essential character of 
the language and style can now be regarded as 
finally determined. 

In yet another aspect Aeneas supplies us with a 
valuable historical document, and that is in the light 
he throws upon the chaotic conditions that obtained 
in Greece during the severe social revolutions of the 
fourth century, which contributed perhaps more than 
any other single cause to the destruction of the 
fabric of early Hellenic civilization. The history of 
the time is full of the records of brutal revolution 
and bloody revenge. Plato has drastically charac- 
terized the oligarchic state as “not one but two 
States, the one of the poor, the other of the rich 
men; and they are living on the same spot and 
always conspiring against one another.” ! Again 
he depicts Greece as he knew it in a prophecy of 
what would happen should his ideal guardians 
“acquire houses and lands and moneys of their 
own. ... Hating and being hated, plotting and 
being plotted against, they will pass their whole life 
in much greater fear of internal than of external 
enemies, and the hour of ruin, both to themselves 
and to the rest of the State, will be at hand.” 2 

We have at times in this treatise what seems 
almost a commentary upon these passages from 
Plato in the matter-of-fact words of Aeneas, who 
like a professional soldier seems to have held aloof 

1 Republic, 551 © (Jowett). 
2 Republic, 417 a, B (Jowett). 
16 





INTRODUCTION 


from the partisanships of politics, so that some who 
have failed to grasp his true attitude have regarded 
him as a moderate democrat and others as a supporter 
of oligarchy. More than half his military admoni- 
tions are directed towards preventing treachery and 
forestalling revolution. The men for whom he wrote 
his manual were clearly in constant danger of the 
enemy within their own gates, a peril which became 
more rather than less acute when armed foes without 
were threatening the very existence of the state. 
Upon one memorable occasion at Argos the revolu- 
tionary assassins carrying concealed daggers mingled 
with the officials and leading citizens at a religious 
festival outside the walls, and struck them down, 
each one his man, at the very moment of their 
devotions about the altar (17. 2 ff.). Paralysing 
indeed must have been the terror in many a com- 
munity in Greece when such occurrences were felt 
to be not merely possible but perhaps actually 
impending. 


MANUSCRIPTS 


Aeneas survived the Middle Ages in but a single 
Ms., now preserved in Florence and the parent of 
all others known to exist. This is the famous 
Laurentianus Graecus LV 4, commonly called M 
(2.e. Mediceus, described by Bands Catal. Codd. 
MSS. Bibl. Laurent. t. ii., 1768, 218- -38). It contains 
the corpus of Greek military writers, a collection 
which no doubt dates from early Byzantine 
times. The three descendants of M are all in Paris, 
ye respectively as A (Parisinus Graecus 2435), 

(banc Graecus 2522), and C (Parisinus Graecus 
2443). Of these C, although the only ms. known 
to Casaubon, and hence the source of the edztio 
princeps, is worthless, being descended from B or a 
copy of B, except in so far as some corrections of 
corrupt passages, introduced by its copyist, Angelus 
Bergelius, possess independent value as emendations. 
A and B, however, are not without critical worth, 
because M suffered somewhat from dampness after 
they were written and is in consequence quite illegible 
in places, besides containing a few lacunae which did 
not exist when the copies were made. They are 
cited only where the text of M is lost. Fortunately 
they were copied with unusual fidelity, so that almost 
nothing of the text of M, as it existed in the fifteenth 
century, is lost to us. 


18 


INTRODUCTION 


For a considerable portion of Aeneas the excerpts 
included by Julius Africanus in his Keoroé furnish an 
excellent check upon M, since they represent a 
tradition of Aeneas—rather seriously disfigured to 
be sure—which is seven or eight centuries older than 
that ms. A text of these portions of Africanus is 
furnished by R. Schéne in his edition of Aeneas, 
based in part upon materials collected by Fr. Haase 
and K. K. Miiller, and in part upon his own collations. 
The most important readings in which Africanus 
differs from the tradition in M are given in our 
apparatus criticus as Ms. readings. 

Jacob Gronov was the first to use M as an aid in 
constituting the text of Aeneas. The peculiarities 
and characteristic faults of this ms. are best set 
forth in A. C. Lange, De Aeneae Commentario 
Poliorcetico, 58-65, and R. Schéne’s edition, x f. 
Despite the bad state of the tradition and the 
abysmal ignorance of the scribe, the comparatively 
large number of places where a critical mark was 
written above words which were thought to be 
corrupt, and the blank spaces left where the original 
was illegible or defective, are evidence of the faith- 
fulness with which the copy was prepared. 

The chapter headings, although older than the 
third century of our era, because known to Africanus, 
can hardly have come from Aeneas himself. In 
deference to custom, and for the sake of convenience, 
they are retained, but enclosed in brackets, to in- 
dicate their later origin. 


19 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


EDITIONS 


Is, Casaubonus : Aiveiov taxtikov Te Kal toALopKyTLKOY 
UTOMVNLG TEPL TOV TOS Xp} TOALOPKOVPEVOV AVTEXELY. 
Paris, 1609. Text, notes, and Latin translation. 
This is the edito princeps, appended to 
Casaubon’s edition of Polybius, and the whole 
republished by Jacob Gronov and by J. A. 
Ernesti in their editions of Polybius published 
at Amsterdam in 1670 and at Leipzig in 1763-64, 
respectively. Gronov later published from M 
(see below) Supplementa Lacunarum in Aenea 
Tactico, etc. Leyden, 1675. 

Jo. Conradus Orellius: Aeneae Tactict Commentarius 
de toleranda Obsidione, ete. Leipzig, 1818. This 
edition contains Casaubon’s translation, together 
with notes of Casaubon, Gronoy, Koés, Caspar 
Orelli, Conrad Orelli, and others. It appeared 
as a supplement to Schweighiauser’s Polybius. 

H. Kéchly und W. Riistow: Aeneas von Verteidigung 
der Stédte. Leipzig, 1853. Aeneas occupies a 
part of vol. i of the editors’ well-known Grie- 
chische Kriegsschrifisteller, Griechisch und Deutsch. 
A supplement in vol. ii. 2, contains readings 
from B (see above). This edition is particularly 
valuable because of the introduction, the schol- 
arly translation, the notes, and the illustrative 
diagrams. 

R. Hercher: Aeneae Commentarius polworceticus. 
Berlin, 1870. LEditio maior. An editio minor, 
later in the same year, corrected a number of 
errors that appeared in the former edition. 

A. Hug: Aeneae Commentarius poliorceticus. Leipzig, 
1874. 


20 


INTRODUCTION 


R. Schéne: Aeneae Tactici de Obsidione toleranda 


Commentarius. Leipzig, 1911. This admirable 
work, based upon new collations of M, A, and B 
(see above) and prepared with the utmost 
accuracy and acumen, completely supplants all 
previous editions, and is the basis of the text 
as printed in this volume. An idea verborum 
(which is in large part actually a concordance), 
composed with the assistance of Ferdinand 
Koester, adds materially to the value of the 
work.t 


TRANSLATIONS 


In addition to the translations, listed above, by 


Casaubon, and by Kéchly and Riistow, the following 
should be mentioned : 
M. le Comte de Beausobre: Commentaires sur la 


JN 


Défense des Places d’Aeneas le Tacticien, avec 
quelques Notes, etc. Amsterdam, 1757, 2 vols. 
de Rochas d’Aiglun: Traité de Fortification, 
d’Attaque et de Défense des Places par Philon de 
bysonee.  \waris, 1872. Hhis: is voll yi’ of 
series iv of the Mém. de la Soc. d’Emulation du 
Doubs, 1870-1871 (Besancon, 1872), and contains 
a translation, with notes, of Aeneas, chapters 
8, 16, 21, 22, 24-26, 31-35, 37, 39, 40, in whole 
or in part. Chapter 31 is taken from the trans- 
lation of Beausobre. See R. Schéne, Rhein. 
Mus. Ixvii. (1912) 303. 


1 An edition announced by L. W. Hunter in 1913 is 


awaited with interest because of the promise to explain 
much of the corruption in M stichometrically, i.e., by the 
falling out of an entire line at points where a group of 
similar letters appears either at the beginning or at the end 
of successive lines. 


A) | 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


No translation of Aeneas has previously appeared 
in English. 


CriticaL Works 


Beside the editions and translations enumerated 
above, the following monographs have contributed 
much to the understanding of Aeneas : 

C. Behrendt : De Aeneae Tactict Commentario polior- 
cettco Quaestiones selectae. Diss., Kénigsberg, 
1910. Behrendt’s commentary as_ published 
covers only the first seven chapters. It is to 
be hoped that the remainder may soon appear. 

Fr. Blass: Literarisches Zentralblatt, 1879, 1261 f. 

Hermann Diels: Die Entdeckung des Alkohols. 
Abhandl. der Kénigl. Preuss. Akad. der Wiss., 
Berlin, 1913, No. 3, 19. 

Herbert Fischer: Quaestiones Aeneanae. Pars I. 
Giessen Diss., Dresden, 1914. 

A. von Gutschmid : Kleine Schriften, vol. iv. 218-21 ; 
Vv. LON H.2s 204i. 

Fr. Haase: Neue Jahrbiicher, xiv. (1835) 93 ff. ; xvii. 
(1836) 206 ff. 

F. C. Hertlein : Symbolae criticae ad Aeneam Tacticum. 
Wertheim, 1859. 

A. Hug: (1) Prolegomena critica ad Aeneae Editionem. 
Ziirich, 1874. (2) Aeneas von Stymphalos, etc. 
Ziirich, 1877. (3) Neue Jahrbiicher, cxix. (1879) 
241 ff., 639 ff. 

L. W. Hunter: Aeneas Tacticus and Stichometry. 
Classical Quarterly, vii. (1913) 256-64. 

A. Kirchhoff: Hermes, i. (1866) 448 ff. and in the 
preface to Hug’s edition, vii ff. 

22 


INTRODUCTION 


G. H. Koés: Epistolae Parisienses, ed. Bredow, 1812, 
110 ff. (dealing with mss. ABC). 

A. C. Lange: (1) De Aeneae Commentario poliorcetico. 
Berlin, 1879. (2) Neue Jahrbiicher, cxix. (1879) 
461 ff. (3) Anzmadversiones criticae in Aeneae 
Commentarium poliorceticum. Cassel, 1883. 

Chr. Mahlstedt: Uber den Wortschatz des Aeneias 
Taktikus. Kiel Diss., Jena, 1910. 

M. E. E. Meier: Opuscula academica, vol. ii., Halle 
1863, 292-306. 

A. Mosbach: De Aeneae Tactict Commentario polior- 
cetico. Diss., Berlin, 1880. 

R. Pdhlmann: Geschichte des antiken Kommunismus 
und Sozialismus. Munich, 1901, vol. ii. 
346-8 (=Geschichte der sozialen Frage und des 
Sozialismus in der antiken Welt. Munich, 1912, i. 
421-24), 

J. J. Reiske : Animadversiones ad Aeneam Tacticum, 
published by R. Hercher in his editio maior, 
128-33. 

J. Ries: De Aeneae Tactict Commentario poliorcetico. 
Diss., Halle, 1890. 

W. Riistow und H. Kéchly: Geschichte des griechi- 
schen Kriegswesens. Aarau, 1852, 196 ff. 

H. Sauppe: Ausgendhite Schriften. Berlin, 1896, 
631-645. 

K. Schenk]: Bursian’s Jahresberichte, xxxviii. (1884) 
261-270. 

E. Schwartz: Azezas, in Pauly-Wissowa’s Realency- 
klopddie, i. (1897) 1019-1021. 

T. Hudson Williams: The Authorship of the Greek 
military Manual attributed to ‘Aeneas Tacti- 
cus.’ Amer. Journ. of Philol. xxv. (1904) 390-405. 


23 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


SYMBOLS 


A =Codex Parisinus Graecus 2435, s. xvi; the more 
careful copy of M. 

B = Codex Parisinus Graecus 2522, s. xv. 

C =Codex Parisinus Graecus 2443, a. 1549. 

M = Codex Laurentianus Graecus LV, 4, s. x. 

J. Afr.=Excerpts from the Keoroi of Sextus Julius 
Africanus, an author of the third century. 


Note on Jutius AFRICANUS 


As a necessary supplement to Aeneas we have 
included a text and translation of those portions of 
the Keoroi of Sextus Julius Africanus which are 
clearly derived from the treatise before us. In so 
doing we have been compelled to emend the ms. 
tradition of Africanus in a much more drastic way 
than we should consider justified in a critical edition. 
Schéne, following Hercher’s example, very properly 
left the ms. tradition as it stood, so as not to dis- 
guise any variants which might possibly throw light 
upon the present state of M. But to translate it is 
necessary to have a text which makes tolerable 
sense, which in this case necessitates liberal emenda- 
tion. As in Aeneas, however, every real departure 
from the ms. tradition is noted in the apparatus. 
The references to mss. are taken from Schéne’s 
edition and represent his selection of the critical 
materials gathered for a recension of Africanus by 
Fr. Haase and K. K. Miller, with his own collation 


24. 


INTRODUCTION 


of the Barberini ms. in the Vatican (see the preface 
to his edition of Aeneas, ix). We have also made 
use of the text of the Keoroé in Thevenot’s edition of 
the Veteres Mathematici, Paris, 1693, 275-316, with 
Boivin’s notes, 339-60. 


25 


AINEIOY 


TiIEPI TOY 


WO XPH IOAIOPKOYMENOY2 ANTEXEIN® 


“Ooous Tov dvOpamuy € EK THS abrav" OpjLwLevous 
ywpas drrepopLol TE aydves Kat Kivovvot OUpL- 
Baivovow, av tt odddAua yevynTa Kata yay n Kara 
Oddaccar, droNetmer at Tots TrEpLyLYVO}LEVOUS avray 
oiKela TE (x@pe Kal 7OAus Kal Tarpls, WOTE OUK av 

2dpoynv mavtes avaipefeinoav: tots be wtrep TaV 
peylotwv pédAAovat Kiwduvevew, lep@v Kal TaTpioos 
Kal yovéwy Kal Téxvwv Kal TOV aAAwV, odK loos 
ovdé Guovos aywr é€orw, aAAa owletor pev Kat 
Kavd@s apvvapevois Tovs mroAeuiovs doBepods Tots 
évavtiois Kal dvoemiBérous eis tov Aowmov xpovov 
elvat, KaK@s b€ mpoceveyVetar mpds Tods KLVdUVOUS 

3 ovdeula éAmis owTypias tbrapfer. Tovs ody v7Ep 
TOOOUTWY Kal TOLOUT To peddovtas aywrileaBat 
ovdeulas TapacKeuTs Kal mpoBvpias eMureis eivat 
det, aAAa moAA@v Kat Travrotwy Epywv mpovorav 
Extéov, omws Sid ye avtovs® pndev davadat 

4 ohadévres: av b€ dpa Tt otuTTwua yévyntat, ard’ 
ol ye Aowmol Ta UrapyxovTa els TavTO TOTE KaTa- 
26 














AENEAS 


ON THE DEFENCE OF FORTIFIED 
POSITIONS 


WHEN men set out from their own country to en- 
_ counter strife and perils in foreign lands and some 
_ disaster befalls them by land or sea, the survivors 
_ still have left their native soil, their city, and their 
_ fatherland, so that they are not all utterly destroyed 
But for those who are to incur peril in defence of 
_ what they most prize, shrines and country, parents 
and children, and all else, the struggle is not the 
same nor even similar. For if they save themselves 
by a stout defence against the foe, their enemies 
will be intimidated and disinclined to attack them 
in the future, but if they make a poor showing in the 
face of danger, no hope of safety will be left. Those, 
therefore, who are to contend for all these precious 
stakes must fail in no preparation and no effort, 
but must take thought for many and varied activi- 
ties, so that a failure may at least not seem due to 
their own fault. But if after all a reverse should 
befall them, yet at all events the survivors may 


1 Aidtavod Taxtikov Urouvyna epi TOO kTXN. M. Cf. Intro- 
: Pp 
duction, 2 ff. 
2 Hertlein: durav M. ? Kochly and Riistow: durods M. 
y 


27 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


OTH TALEV av, Kalamep tTwées TOV ‘EMijvev eis TO 
EoxaTov adixdpevor maAw avéAaBov éavtovs. 


i: 


Thy otv Tv cwpdtwy otvtagw oKeapévous 
mpos TO peyelos THs méAcws Kal THY Siabeow Tob 
aoTeos Kal THY dvAdKwy Tas KaTAOTdOELS Kal 
mepwodias, Kal ooa adda TwpLace Kara THY moAw 
Xpnoreov, Tos rabra Tovs [LEPLOLLOVS TrOLNTEOV. 
Tovs pe yap. EK TTOPEVOMEVOUS det ouvrerax au 
mpos TOVS eV TH Topela TOTous, WS xp? ropeveoDau 
Tapa Te Ta emuKivouva Ywpia Kal epupva Kal 
OTEVOTIOPA Kal TEdWWa Kal Umepdeia Kal evedpeuTLKG, 
Kal Tas TMV ToTau@v® diaBaoers Kal Tas eK TOV 
ToLovTwY mapaTdéets’ Ta SE TELYHPN Kal moALTO- 
dvdakyjoovTa® mpos pev Ta TovadTa ovdev Set 
ouvreTaxGar, mpos dé Tovs ev TH TOAEL TOTOUS Kal 
Tov TapovTa Kivdvvov. mp@Tov pev ovv avTa@v* 
amrovetuat Set TOvS Ppoviywwrdtous TE Kal Ep- 
meipous pdAvoTa qoA€uov, of mEpl TOUS apxovTas 
1 Added by Hertlein. 2 L. Dindorf: roXeuiwy M. 


2 Meier: roXtrogu\akjo bvTa M, Haase. 
4 Casaubon: durévy M. 


1 Because this was the side unprotected by their shields. 
Approaches to city gates in particular were frequently so 
constructed as to compel assailants to expose their right. 
sides to missiles hurled by the defenders, for example, the 
main entrances at Tiryns and at Mycenae. Such also was 
undoubtedly the character of the famous “‘ Scaean (i.e. left- 
hand) Gate ”’ of Troy. 

2 See below § 6, and especially ch. 10. 

3 These men constitute a staff of military advisers, the 
remote prototype of the modern General Staff. Kéchly and 


28 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, 1. 1-4 


some time restore their affairs to their former con- 
dition, like certain Greek peoples who, after being 
reduced to extremes, have re-established them- 
selves. 


1 


Now the disposition of the troops is to be made 
_with reference to the size of the state and the 
_ topography of the town, its sentries and patrols, and 
| any other service for which troops are required in 

the city,—in view of all this the assignments are to 
_be made. So men who are going to fight outside 
_the walls must be drawn up in a manner suitable 
to the country along their line of march, according 
as they are to march past dangerous or fortified 
places, through narrow passes or across plains, past 
higher ground upon the right! and points exposed 
to ambush, with reference also to the river-crossings 
and the formation of a line of battle under such 
_conditions. But the forces which are to defend 
the walls and keep watch over the citizens? need 
not be so arranged, but rather with reference to 
the positions within the city and to the immediate 
danger. First, then, it is necessary to select the 
most prudent citizens and those most experienced 
in war for attendance upon the civil authorities.® 


Riistow seem to be in error in identifying these men with 
the body of troops mentioned in 16.7; 17.6; 26.10; 38. 
2, for these latter are selected for some particular purpose, 
or else are the same as the reserves mentioned in §§ 6 and 
7 below. In some of the more highly organized Greek 
states military control was vested in a permanent board 
of Generals, ten in number (as at Athens), elected directly 
by the citizens. Livy xxiv. 28 gives an example of how 
this precept of Aeneas was put into practice during the 
confusion at Syracuse in 214 B.c. 


29 





~I 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


” ” \ > , , \1 
€oovTat’ emeita Aowrov amoAéyew owpyata Ta 
~ \ / 
duvnoopeva puaAdioTa ovety, Kal pepioavTa® 
/ a ” \ > / A \ \ / 
Aoxica, va els Te Tas e€ddous Kal Tas KATO modu 
meprodtas Kal Tas Trav TOVOUILEVOY Bonbeias 7 
els TWO. adAqy OLOTPOTTOV TavTaLs Aevroupyiav 
dmTapYwow oOvTOL TMpoTETAaymEevoL TE Kat SvVATOL 
ovTes UmnpeTetv. elvar d€ adtovs evvoUs TE Kal 
a / 
Tois KaleoTyKdot Tpay_acw apeoKopevous’ péeya 
yap mpos tas T@v GAAwy eémiBovAds ToLvodTo®* 
> / e / > > > / / \ vn 
alpdov darapyov avt aKpomoAews: doBos yap av 
ein Tots evavtia Bédovow ev Th moNev. TYE Bev 
dé Katt emyreAn77s avr av ecoTw) Ta Te adda 
Ppovepos Kal EUPWOTOS, Kal @ av mAetoTo KivduvoL 
elev pretaBoAns yevomevns. Tov dé AowT@v Tovs 
> 

pwparewratouvs AuKia Kal vedtnt. ekAéEavTa 
DeeN \ \ / \ \ / \ \ 
emt tas duAakas Kafiordvar Kal Ta TEixyn, TO Se 
mepiov mAnGos pepicavTa mpos TO pAKOS TOV 
VUKT@V Kal TOV puddcav TO mA Gos KaTavetpar, 
Tov d€ oyAwy TOUS pLev els THY ayopay, Tovs de els 
TO Fearpov, Tovs de aAAous ets Tas ovoas® ev TH 
mode. evpvywpias, va pndev Epnuov 7 els Svvaev 
THS TOAEws. 


DK. 


JAN 6 ) \ \ > / ” >) / 
plotov’ d€ Tas aypElous ovoas etpuywpias 
ev TH moAa, Wa pH ocwudtwy eis attas én, 
~ / \ e / > / 
tuproby tadpevovTa Kal ws pddvota aBdrous 
1 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 


2 Casaubon: perpicavta M. 
3 Hertlein (roodrov) : todro M. 4 Hertlein: caio M. 


5 dvccag M (« deleted? ovcas A, otcas B). 
§ Casp. Orelli: et’xpnorov? R. Schone: d&xpyorov M (re- 


tained by Casaubon, defended by Fischer). 
30 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, 1. 4-1. 1 


Next one must pick out men capable of the greatest 
physical exertion and divide them into companies, _ 
that there may be ready for sallies, for patrolling 
the city, for the relief of those hard pressed, or 
for any other similar service, these who are picked 
men and able to give assistance.t They must be 
both loyal and satisfied with the existing order, 
since it is a great thing to have such a group 
acting like a fortress against the revolutionary 
designs of the other party, for it would be a terror 
to the opposition inside the city.2. And let the man 
who is to lead and have charge of them be not merely 
prudent and vigorous, but also one who would run 
the greatest risks from a change of government. 
From the rest the strongest, in the prime of manhood, 
should be chosen for the watches and the walls, while 
the remainder should be divided and apportioned 
according to the length of the nights and the number 
of the watches. Of the common soldiers some should 
be stationed in the market-place, some in the theatre, 
and the rest in the open places in the city, so that 
as far as the city’s power permits no part may be 
unguarded. 


nat 


And that there may be no need of troops to 
guard them, it is best to block up the useless open 
places in the city by digging ditches? and by 


* Compare the modern equivalent in the shape of Arditi, 
Stoss-Truppen, and Battalions of Death. 

? See ch. 10 for a detailed treatment of this topic. 

3 That is, across the entrances to them. 


31 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


mowobvTa Tots vewrepilew BovdAopévois Kai mpo- 
/ 

KataAapBavew atdtds. Aaxedayiovior 8)' On- 
/ ~ ~ 
Baiwy éuBaddgvrwy é« te TOV eyyuTaTw olKi@v 

4 ~ ~ 
duadvovres Kal ek TOV alaci@v Kal Teryiwv? 
la ») ~ 
aAAot Kat’ adAouvs Témous hopyods ys Kat AiBwv 
mAnpobrres, pact d€ KAL TOLS EK TMV tep@v xyaAKots 
/ ~ 
Tpimoow, ovTwy moAA@V Kal peydAwv, xpnodpevor 
7 
Kal TOUTOLS TpoaTroTTAnpwWoaVTEes Tas TE eloBodrds 
Kat Tas dudd0us Kal TA evpUywpa TOD moAiowaTos 
3 4 A >] 4 >) ~ >] ’ A 
exwAvoav tovs eloBdAdew émiyetpodvtas eis avTo 
TO TOALopG. 
A A >] A 7 A > J ~ / 
TlAaratets 5 eet Hofovto vuKtos ev TH ToAEL 
©nBaiovs dvras, katavonoavtes ov ToAAovs adrods 
évTas ovdE Epywy TOV mpoonkdovTwy amTopévous, 
oloévous ye pevTo. Katéxew THY TOAW, evdpuioav 
emifeuevot padiws KpaTycew. texvalovow odv 
ev0éws Toidvde. THY apyovTwY of pev Opodoyias 
aw A ~ A e 
émo.obvTo Tots MxnBaious ev TH ayopa, ot dé TapHy- 
tA A »” / f \ 
yerAXrov Kkpida tots aAXois troAitats omopadyny ev 
° ~ >] ~ \ >) / > ¢ A A / 
€k Tov olki@v pn e€vevar, Kal’ eva de Kat dvo 
/ > J 
Tovs KoWovs Tolyous Siop’TToOVTas Aabpaiws Tap 
adAjAovs abpoilecBar. Eroysacbévtos de zAjOovs 
> , \ 3 \ Saas \ \ es 
agioayou Tas® pev du0dovs Kat Tas pvpas 
/ 5 A \ 
érudAwoav audéas avev dsbroluvyiwv, amo* de 


1 Sauppe: 6é M. 
2 Meineke: recyav M. 
8 A corrector in C: rots M. 
4 Hertlein: t76 M. 


32 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, mu. 1-5 


making them as inaccessible as possible to any 
who might wish to start a revolt and begin by taking 
possession of them. So, when the Thebans had 
broken in, the Lacedaemonians, some here and 
others there, filled baskets with earth and stones 
from the nearest houses, which they tore down, 
and from fences and walls, making use also, it 
is said, of the many massive bronze tripods from 
the temples, and with these they managed, in 
advance of the Thebans, to block up the entrances 
and passages and open places and kept them out when 
they tried to break into the city proper.! 

On another occasion, when the Plataeans became 
aware during the night that the Thebans were in 
the city, they perceived that there were not many 
of them and that they were taking none of the 
proper precautions because they fancied that they 
were in possession of the town.2 The Plataeans 
concluded, therefore, that they could easily defeat 
them by an attack, and so promptly devised the 
following scheme. Some of the authorities engaged 
the Thebans in the market-place in a discussion 
of terms, while others were secretly passing the 
word around to the rest of the citizens not to go 
out of their houses singly, but one or two at a time 
to break through the party-walls and assemble 
stealthily in one another’s houses. When a suffi- 
cient fighting force was ready, they blocked up the 
streets and alleys, using wagons without the draft- 

1 This occurred in the summer of 362 B.c., shortly before 
the battle of Mantinea, in which Epaminondas lost his life. 

* This was the famous night attack upon Plataea in the 
spring of 431 B.c. which opened the Peloponnesian war. It 


is described in detail by Thucydides ii. 2 ff., whose account 
is closely followed by Aeneas. 


D 33 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


onpetov abpovodevres EpepovTo emt Tovs OnBatovs. 
da. d€ ToUTOUS Ta, yUvaia Kal Ol olKéTaL HoaV 
emt Tots Kepdpots, wate Povrouéevwv TOV OnBaiwv 
mpaccew Kal auvvecBar ev oKdTEL, OvK EAdTTW TO 
Tav apakav BAdByv 7 bro THV mpooKeyevev 
avtots avOpwmwv yevéoBar. ot pev yap edevyov" 
amretpou ovTes 7 xp7) GwWOHVvar dia Tas dpakers TAV 
auaEav, of S€ eumeipws dSiwKovtTes Taxv roAXAovs 
edGerpav. 

"E Efovoreov d€ Kal Ta UmevayTia TOUTOLS, ws. pds 
pLev ovans evpvxwpias Kivduvov eva Tots ev Th 
moAeL, av mpoxaradapBavwow ot emBovdevovres: 
Kowod yap Kal €vos OvTOS TOTOV TOLOVTOV TAY 
d0acavtwv av ein TO Epyov. dvo b€ 7 TpL@v OvT@YV 
To@vde TOTWY, TAdEe av ein Ta ayabd: ef pe 
eva 7) O¥o KataAapBavorev TOTrous, Tov Aowmov av 
Tots évavtiows Umdpxew: et d€ mavTas, ywpiobevtes 
av Kat pepiabérvtes acbeveotépws diaKkéowrTo pos 
TOvs dmevavTious abpoous ovTas, el pn EKaOTW 
jeeper UrrEpeXovev TOV ev TH move. ws be aves 
Kal KaTa TOV aMwy mavTwy OeAnuatwy xpn Ta 

/ e 
evovta vmevavTia Tots Tpoyeypaupevots Uaovoety, 
Va [1 ATEPLOKETTWS TL ETEPOV alph.” 


III. ["AAAn zodttodvAdkwv otvtaéts | 
"EK Tpooparov dé evyLyvopevou doBov douv- 


TAKTW TOXEL, TayxLoTa ay TLS €ls ovvragw Kal 
dvdaxiv THS TOAEWS TOUS qwoXtras KaTAOTHOAL,® 


1 @gvyov Kirchhoff, from Thucydides ii. 4. The better 
reading égevyov was restored in Thucydides by Hude. 

2 R. Schone: aipjcac M. 

3 Kéchly and Riistow: xaracrjoo M. 


34 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, wu. 5-11. 1. 


animals, and rushing together at a given signal, 
fellupon the Thebans. At the same time the women- 
folk and the house-slaves were on the tile-roofs.t 
The result was that when the Thebans wished to 
act and to defend themselves in the darkness they 
suffered no less harm from the wagons than from 
their assailants, since they fled without knowing 
which way to turn for safety because of the barricades 
of wagons, while their pursuers, being acquainted 
with the ground, soon killed many of them. 

Yet it is necessary to set forth also the reasons 
which make against this practice, such as the great 
danger to the besieged if there is only one open 
place and the conspirators are the first to seize it. 
For when there is only one such common spot, the 
advantage would lie with those who first take it. 
But if there are two or three such places, there 
would be these advantages: If the conspirators 
should seize one or two there would still be one left 
for their opponents; and if they should seize them 
all, by separation and division they would be weaker 
in the face of their united opponents, unless indeed 
each division were numerically superior to the 
defenders of the city. In the same way in all 
other decisions one should consider the inherent 
objections to the prescribed rules, that one may 
not inadvisedly adopt another course. 


III. [Another Organization of City Guards] 


When sudden fear falls upon a city without 
military organization, one could most speedily 
organize the citizens for its defence by allotting 

1 From this vantage-point they joined in the outcry and 
hurled tiles upon the enemy in the streets below. 

35 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ei exdoTn dvdAn pepos Te Tod Telyous KAjpw 
amodelEcev, eb’ & eADoGaar edOds ai puiat duha- 
€ovow. Kata modumAnfevav’ dé dvdAjs exdorns 
270 peyefos Tov Tetyous pudarrovrwy. ETELTO. 
ovtws adh” exdotyns dvds Tovs Suvapévous Tots 
owpLace TOveoat dmoheyew els TE THY ayopay Kal 
TAS Trepiodlas, KQL €L 7 ado det xpjovar Tots 
3 TowovTols avOpurrrous..® OpmoTpoTrws bé Kal ppoupiov 
770 CULL wv PpoupoupLevov [Lepos TL TOU TElyous 
Tov CULPLAY OV exdoTous a7ro8u8d00u purdrrew. 
eav dé moXttar ev vroria mpos adAnjdovs* dow, 
KaTa avapaow eKdoTnv TOD TElyous Set emLoTHoaL 
avOpas muaTOUs, ot KwAUTAaL EgovTat, av TIS émt- 
4 XE“ aAdos avoBatvewv. ev etpnv7 de Kal abe 
Xp) ovvteTaxOat Tovs Toliras. Tp@Tov pev puyns 
exdorns amodetfau pueapxnv dvOpa TOV emet- 
KE€OTATOV TE KAL Ppovy~kwTaTov, mpos ov, E€av TL 
ampoodoKnTws VUKTOS yevyrar, owvab pos bifcovrat. 
5 xe de Tas eyyurdras® pujuas Tijs ayopas eis TV 
ayopav ayew Tovs  pupapxas, Too de Oedrpov Tas 
eyyuTaro pupas els TO Déarpor, els TE TAS dAAas 
EKAOTOV eyyuTata evpvxwplas abpoilecbau Tos 
puwdpxas joer av efeveyKapeveoy Trop: avTOUS 
6 Ta. OmrAa* ovTw yap av TaXLOTA ES TE Tovs Tpoa- 
HKOVTAaS EKAOTOL TOTOUS AadikoWTO Kal éyyuTaTw 
TOV odeTéepwv olkwyv elev, SdiaméuTorevy Te av 
olKovomobvTes mpos TOUS KaT olKov, TéKva Kal 
yuvatkas, ov0 mpdcw atT@v diateAodvtes. TeV 
Te apxyovTwy det mpokekAnp@obar eis dv Exaorou 


1 Hercher: xaramoX\urAnbiay M. 2 Reiske: é¢’ M. 
3 Casaubon: dv@pwros M. + Casaubon: dAd\ove M. 
5 éyyirara R. Schone: éyyurdrw Hercher. 


36 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, 11. 1-6 


to-each ward a section of the wall to which it is 
to hurry and mount guard, letting the number of 
the inhabitants of the ward determine the extent 
of that section of the wall to whose defence it 
is appointed. The next step is to assign the 
able-bodied men from each ward to duty at the 
market-place, upon patrols, and wherever else such 
men may be needed. Similarly when a stronghold 
is occupied by allies, let a section of the wall be 
given to each contingent of the allies to defend. 
Should the citizens, however, suspect one another, 
trustworthy men should be stationed at the several 
places for ascending the wall, who, if anyone else 
attempts to mount, will prevent him from doing so. 
In peace, also, the citizens ought to be organized 
in the following manner. First of all one should 
appoint as captain of each precinct the most capable 
and prudent man, to whom the citizens are to rally 
if anything unexpected occurs at night. The pre- 
cinct captains should muster at the market-place 
the men of those precincts nearest the market- 
place, at the theatre the men of those precincts 
nearest the theatre, and so for the other open 
places the precinct captains with the armed men 
who have reported to them should gather, each 
in the one that lies nearest to him. For this is the 
quickest way by which each group would both 
reach their stations and be near their own homes, 
and so, as heads of families, could communicate with 
their households, that is, with their children and 
wives, because stationed not far from them. And 
it should be determined beforehand by lot to which 


St 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ b) / ~ / ye | \ / 
tomov eovtes THV avdAdeyéevTwv emt Ta xEiAy 
> ~ ~ ~ 

amooteAotat: Kal TOV AoiTav evexa émysedcias 
e 

nyemoves eoovTat, avmep evOds ryenovevowow 
oe. 


[Ilept ovoojuwr] 


Edvdvrata det' adtrots memovjobar ovoonua, 
ag’ wv pu ayvojcovot tos mpooidvTas avTois: 
on ‘yap Towovoe ouveBn. Xahkis 7 ev Edpirw 
KateAn poy b7r0 puyddos OppLwprévov ef *"Epetpias,” 
TOV eV 7H monet TWOS TEXVAOOJLEVOU ToLovoe. 
Kara TO <pnLoraroy THS Toews Kal 7bhas ovK 
avovyouevas exwr® eEpepev TupyaoTpyy, nv* puddo- 
ow Tas yuepas Kal Tas vUKTOS eAabev VUKTOS 
Tov proyAcv sd.ampyoas Kal deEdpevos Tavry? 
oTpatiwtas. alporobévtwr de ev TH ayopa ws 
dtoytAiwy avopav e€onuavlyn To TohepuKov OTT0UO}. 
moot de TOV Xadkidéwv dv’ ayvorav amoNuvra.: 
ot yap expoPnbevres erifevTo _Pépovres Ta. oma 
mpos TOUS moAc tous os mpos tAious,® avros 
ExaoTos doKk@v vortepos’ mapaylyvecbar. ovTws 
ov Kal? €va Kal dvo ot mActorou amwAdvrTo,® 
[LEXPL Ypovw vVoTEpov eyvwaay TO oupBaivov, THS 
ToAcews dn KaTEXopevns. mroAceobvTa ovv xp7 


- , pauppe : dé M. 2 Hertlein: é¢perpeias M. 
3 éyov C, adopted by Casaubon and Hercher. 
4 R. Wiinsch : mupyactphyny M : rip év yaorpy L. Dindorf: 
mop év yaorpn kal Jacoby. 
> Orelli (after Casaubon): ratra 7 M. 
6 Hercher: ¢id\ous M. 7 Hertlein: tarepov M. 
8 Casaubon: d7rw\\ovTo M. 








1 This incident probably took place during the war over 
the Lelantine plain in the latter part of the seventh 
century B.c. 


38 


- AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, m1. 6-1Vv. 5 


quarter each of the authorities should go and send 
detachments of troops to the battlements. More- 
over, there will be leaders to look after everything 
else, provided that they thus assume immediate 
command. 


IV. [On pre-arranged Signals] 


As quickly as possible the besieged must be pro- 
vided with signals, so that they will not fail to 
recognize those who approach them. For this is 
the sort of thing that has happened: Chalcis on 
the Euripus ? was captured by a fugitive operating 
from Eretria, aided by one of the inhabitants of 
the town who practised a stratagem of the following 
description. To the most deserted part of the city, 
where the gate was regularly closed, he kept bring- 
ing a firepot, and by keeping the fire going day 
and night he secretly one night burned through the 
bar of the gate and admitted soldiers at that point.? 
When about two thousand men had gathered in 
the market-place, the alarm was hastily sounded 
and many of the Chalcidians were killed because 
they were not recognized, for in their panic they 
aligned themselves with their enemies as though 
they were their friends, each thinking that he was 
late in coming up. In this way, then, most of them 
perished by ones and twos, and the city had been 
in the hands of the enemy for some time before the 
citizens knew what was happening. It is necessary, 


2 In this difficult passage we follow Wiinsch and Behrendt 
(see the latter’s dissertation, pp. 78 ff.). The word translated 
** firepot ’’ occurs nowhere else in Greek, but there are close 
parallels and the general sense of the passage is clear. 


39 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Kal eyyvs ovToov TOV TroAELiwV, m™p@rov jeev Ta, 
dmoore\Aoueva ex THS moAews KATO yay 7) KaTO. 
OdAarrav émi Twa mpadEw mpos Tovs tmopevovTas 
peTA ovoonuwy amootéAAcobar Kal Hucpw@v Kat 
VUKTEPWO@V, Wa pL ayvodo. Todcuiwy adrots 
6 émudaivopevwv, el’ didvor 7) moAdusoi elow: emt 
dé mpaéw mopevlevtTwy Kal méuTrew TWas yvwoo- 
yevous, Wa Kal Ta ToLabTa ws eK mAEloToV TAY 
ATOVTWY Ot DmopevovTes eld@ow" péya yap av 
Pépor mpos TO peMov € eK metovos mapackevaleobar. 
7 Tots O€ [7] OUTW ) mparrovow a cup BeBn Kev éupave- 
cbynoeTar TWaV? dy YEVOLLEVEDV a* éml mapa- 
delypatos Kal Lapruptov Kkallapod mapaheynTar. 
8 Ilevovorpare yap "A Onvaiav oTparnyoovre eény- 
yerbn ote ot ek Meydpwr ot emuxeupotev abiko- 
jevot TrAoLous emBeoOau VUKTOS Tats TOY "AOnvatev 
yuvarew Oeopopdpia ayovoas ev "Edevotve: 6 de 
9 [evotorparos acovoas Tpoevnopevoev.” Emel be 
ol eK tav Meydpwv as AeAnbortes améBnoav Kal 
am0 THS Dadarrns eyévovto, e€avaotas 0 Tlevot- 
oTpatos THY evedpevdervtwr® Te avdpav expatryncev 
Kat dvéhberpev tos mAelotovs, Kal Tv TrAciwv 
10 ots apixovTo eyKpaTns eyeveTo. ETTELTO. mapa 
XpHua Tots €avToo OT patios mAnpwoas Ta 
mrota €AaBe THv yvvaik@v tas emitydevoTaras 


1 Added by Casaubon. 

2 Reiske: idéwow M. 3 Wiinsch: trav M. 

4 Wiinsch (cf. Goodwin, Moods and Tenses, § 258; Kiihner- 
Gerth, i. 220, n. 2; perhaps the least unsatisfactory restora- 
tion of a serious corruption): iva M: R. Schone indicates a 
lacuna after yevouéver. 

5 Casaubon: mpocevédpevoey M. 

§ Meineke: évedpevovTay M. 


40 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, tv. 5-10 


then, in time of war, especially when the enemy is 
near at hand, first, that the forces which are being 
sent from the city on some enterprise by land or 
sea should be furnished with signals for use both by 
day and by night to those who remain, in order that 
the latter, if the enemy appear in the meantime, 
may not be unable to tell friend from foe. And, 
secondly, after their departure upon the enterprise, 
persons who will recognize the signals should be 
sent to watch, so that the men at home may get 
information of this kind while those returning are 
still a great way off For it would be a great advan- 
tage to make preparations long beforehand for what 
is impending. What has befallen those who did 
not take such precautions will be clear from some 
actual incidents which may be told in passing as 
illustration and definite evidence. Word was brought 
to Peisistratus, when he was general at Athens,! that 
the Megarians would come in ships, and attempt a 
night attack upon the Athenian women while they 
were celebrating at Eleusis the festival of Demeter. 
On hearing this Peisistratus set an ambush ahead 
of them, and when the Megarians disembarked, in 
secrecy as they supposed, and were some distance 
from the sea, he rose up and overcame those who 
had been trapped, killed most of them, and captured 
the ships in which they had come. Then after 
quickly fillmg the ships with his own soldiers, he 
took from among the women those best fitted to 


‘1 This incident occurred during the long series of wars 
with Megara in which Salamis was first lost by Athens and 
then recovered for her by Solon, and Peisistratus captured 
Nisaea, the haven of Megara. As Peisistratus at the time 
of the adventure here described was not yet tyrant, it must 
have occurred prior to 561-60 B.c. 


4] 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


r ~ \ / > \ / > \ 
ouptActoa, Kal KaTyHyeTo «is Ta Meéyapa ope 
3 / ~ / / > A a 
ll amwrépw THs TwoAews. KaTiddvTes obv Ta TrAOta 
/ > z \ ~ / a 
mpoomAéovta amyvrTwyv moAAot tHv Meyapéwv, ai 
/ \ e + / ¢ > \ 
Te ovuvapxyiat Kal ot aAXor, Bewpevor ws e€ikos 
> / b) > 
atywadwrTous ayopuevas ws mAciotas... 2 Kal per 
b] / > A 
eyyxeipioiwy amroBavres Tovs ev KataBaXeiv, daous 
\ \ / ~ 
dé av dvvawTo TOV emidaveotatwy ovvapmalew eis 
\ ~ A 4 3 / ~ > a 
127a zAota. Kal ovTws émpaxOn. SHAov ody ort 
\ / 
[ETA CVTONMWY Kal [47) Ayvooupevwv pos aAAjAovs, 
\ 3 / \ \ A A 
Tas alpotcets Kal Tas mréusers Set Trovetobar. 


V. [Ilept zvAwpdv | 


"BR r A A / \ A d 
Teta TUAWpOVs KabeaTavat fu) TOUS TUXOVTAS 
5 A / \ 5 / \ \ e ~ 
aAAa Ppovipovs Kat ayyxivouvs, Kat 81) tdrrovoetv 
duvayevous” ael TL TOV eloKoputlouevwy, ete de 
Kal edmdpous Kat ois evéxupa ev TH moAEL bmapxeL, 
/ A A 4 5 \ A e¢ 5 
Texva Kal yuvaika Aéyw, adda pr) otrwes be 
” av 4 >] / a“ 3 ay 
evoerav 7 avvaddAayudtwy avayKnvy 7 de adAdAnv 
zA \ \ 
Twa amoplav meiobetev td TWwY 7 adTOL Trapa- 
/ yy b] \ ~ / \ 
2 keAevoatev av Twas él vewrepiou@. AevKwv de 
~ ~ A 
6 Boomdpov tupavvos Kat tT&v dpovpa@v Tous 
b> ] >) / 
ypewdetrA€eras dia KuBetav 7) dv adAdAas® axodacias 
amrop.icbous é7roiet. 
1 Casaubon indicated the lacuna. 


2 Meineke: uh brovoetv undvvayévous M. 
3 ypeoperhéras . . . KuBiay . . . duéAdove M. 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, iv. 10-v. 2 


make the voyage, and late in the day landed at 
Megara at some distance from the city. Now many 
of the Megarians, officials and others, when they 
caught sight of the ships sailing into the harbour, 
went out to meet them, wishing, no doubt, to see 
as many women as possible brought in as captives. 
(Then the Athenians were ordered to attack the 
enemy], and disembarking with daggers in their 
hands to strike down some of the Megarians, but 
to bring back to the ships as many as possible of 
the most prominent men; and this they did. From 
what has been said, then, it is clear that for the 
conduct of musters and expeditions it is necessary 
to have prearranged signals, and those of a kind 
that cannot be misunderstood. 


V. [On Gate-keepers | 


In the next place, no chance persons should be 
appointed keepers of the gates, but only discreet 
and sagacious men always capable of suspecting 
anything brought into the city; and besides they 
should be well-to-do and men who have something 
at stake in the city, that is to say, wife and children ; 
but not men who, because of poverty, or the pressure 
of some agreement, or from other stress of circum- 
stances, might either be persuaded by anyone or 
of themselves incite others to revolt. Leuco, the 
tyrant of Bosporus,! used to discharge even those 
among his guards who were in debt as a result of 
dice-playing or other excesses. 

1 This was the region about the Cimmerian Bosporus (the 


entrance to the Sea of Azov) over which Leuco, an able and 
honourable man, ruled from 393 to 358 B.c. 


43 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


VI. [‘Hpepooxozia | 


Xp7 d€ Kal TuwEpooKdotous mpo THs mdAEws 
KafioTravat emt Tomw tiynAD Kal ws ek AEloTov 
paivouev@’ nepookorrety b€ éf ExdoTw ywpiw 
Tpets TovAdXLOTOP, Ly) Tovs TUXOVTAS, add’ éutrei- 
pous moA€jov, oTrws pycae dyvovay Sogalev" Te 
6 oKOTOS onudvy 7 dtayyetAn eis THY moAW Kal 

2 pataiws oxAn Tots avOpwrois. mdaoyovor dé TadTa 
ol ametpor Ta€ewv Kal moAduov, ayvoobytes Tas 
T&v ToAcuiwy éepyacias Kal mpageis, elTe ek 
TapacKevys mpdocerat, elTe Kal Tapa TavTOUaTov. 

30 dé € EMLTTELPOS, yvovs THY TOV mrohepuicoy Tapackeuny 
KaL 7ARGos Kal Topetas Kal Tv adAAnv Kivnow 
Tob oTpatevpatos, ovTwW THv adAjfevav eudavie?. 

4 “Edy d€ pL) imdpxwow TOLOLOE TOOL, WOTE Kal 
els TV moh am avr av" daivecbar Ta _onpcia., 
dAAous en dMous TOTroUs Siadexripas. elvau Trav 
GELpOoMEevWY onuEelwy, ol onuavodow*® «is TV 

5 moAw. etvar d€ TOs UEpOoKOTOUS Kal TOOWKELS, | 
ot doa px old Te dia* THY onpetwv SydAodv, adrX’ 
attav twa dén &€ avaykns ayyéAdew, ddvwvra® 
Taxd adixvetobar, Kal® ws éx mAeloTou ayyéAAwow. 

6 “Aptoroy dé immaciiwv ovTwv ToTWwY Kal bTap- 
yovTwy immwy" imméas ovveipew, wa dia THvde 
Oaocov ayyedAnrac. Te [TE Oe eK Tijs _mohews 
TOUS 7[LEpOoKOTTOUS op8pov 7) €TL VUKTOS, iva Tots 
TOV TmoAepLieay oxorrots pq) KaTadnAor Wow 7uepas 

7 Topevopevoe emt Ta? auepooxo7eta.® atvvOnpa 


1 Casaubon: dogédfov M. 2 aravrayv M. 
3 Koéchly and Riistow: onuaivovow M. 
4 Added in B (C). 5 Suynoovrac R. Schone. 


44. 











AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, vi. 1-7 
VI. [Scouting by Day| 


Day scouts also must be stationed before the city 
on a high place visible for as long a distance as 
possible. At least three scouts should be at each 
place, not chosen at random, but men skilled in 
warfare, so that a single scout may not ignorantly 
form an opinion and signal or announce it to the city 
and trouble the inhabitants to no purpose. Persons 
inexperienced in military formations are likely to 
do this through not knowing whether the enemy’s 
acts and deeds are intentional or only accidental, 
but the experienced man, understanding the pre- 
_parations of the enemy, his numbers, line of march, 
and other movements, will report the truth. 

If there are no such places from which the signals 
may be given to the city, there must be relays of 
persons at different points to receive the signals as 
they are raised and pass them on to the city. The 
day scouts must also be swift of foot so that they 
_can come quickly and report, even from great dis- 
_tances, matters which cannot be signalled but must 
_by all means be reported by one of them. 

_ Ifthere are at hand horses and places fit for the use 

of horses, it is best to employ relays of horsemen so 
_that messages may be conveyed more quickly. The 
day scouts must be sent from the city at dawn or while 
it is still night, lest they be seen by the scouts of 
_the enemy as they go by daylight to their posts. 


6 «av Hercher. 7 C: imméwy M. 

8 A correction in B(C): cuviweipeww M: cuvepyetv Hercher: 
cuvaipev Meineke: ocuvynuepede Bursian: cuvayeipew Old- 
father. 

® B in margin (C): érecra M. 

10 Casaubon: juepockoria M. 


45 


AENEAS TACTICUS 
dé uy)’ Exe adTovs EV KAaL TO AUTO... .,” OWS [NTE 
EKOVTES [LATE AKoVTEs, eav avAAndOHow tro TaV 
TroAciwr, Elmety Exwot TO TOV ev TH TOAEL GUVOnLAG. 
mapayyeAXco$ar dSé Tots HEepooKdTOLs aipew TA. 
avoonua® eviote, Kalamep of mupoevTal Tovs 
Tupaous. 


VII. 


"“Orav b€ 7) xwpa eyKdprws* diaKénra® pw 
TOppw ovreoy ToAcpiov, elcos moAXovs THY EV TH 
Troe mepl TOUS eyyvs Xe@povs dvatedctv, yAuxo- 

2 wévous TOU KapTob. TovTous 8 obv els Tay moAw 
abpoilew wWde xp. mpa@Tov pev tots ew GpLa. 
Wriey OvvovTL onpatvew dmveva ets THv moAWw: 
€av O€ Kal emt mA€ov THS ywWpas éoKedacpévor 
Mow, v0 diadeKTHpwWY onuaivecbar, OmwWS TAVTES 

37 ot mAEtoToe TapayiyvwrvTar eis moAWw. émevdav 
d€ TovToLs onuavO7 amévat, oUTwWS Tots Ev TH 
moAev Seimrvotrovetafar: TO dé TpiTov onpaivew Ets 

4 dvdakyy iévar Kat Kabiotdvar. ws d€ det TodTo® 
ylyvecbar Kal ws aipew tovs dpuKtovs, ev TH 
Hapackevacrich BiBrAw mevoves elpntar. obev 
del Ty pabnow AawPavew, wa pr) dis’ wept TOV 
avTav ypddew ovpPi. 


1 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
2 A lacuna of five letters is indicated here in M. 


3 gioco a M. 4 Reiske: éyxapmos M. 
5 W. Dindorf: diaxecrar M. 
6 Casaubon: rot'rous M. 7 Casaubon: unéeis M. 





1 For one of the recommendations of Aeneas upon this 
point see the long quotation from Polybius given as Frag. 3 
at the end of this text. This, the earliest form of telegraphy, 


46 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, vi. 7-vit. 4 


They must not have the same watchword... so that 
if they are captured by the enemy they may be able 
neither willingly nor unwillingly to reveal the watch- 
word of those in the city. The day scouts should 
_be told to raise their signals now and then just as the 
| night scouts raise their torches. 

| 





VII. 


Whenever it is harvest time in the country and 
the enemy is not far away, many of those in the city 
are likely to tarry in near-by places, eager to save 
the crops. These persons must be gathered into 
the city thus. First, they must be signalled to 
come into the city by sunset, but if they are scattered 
over too much territory signals must be given by 
relays, so that all, or most of them, may reach the 
city. When the signal is given for them to leave 
the fields, one must also be given to those in the 
city to prepare the evening meal. ‘Third, the guard 
must be signalled to go and take their posts. How 
this is to be done and how they are to raise the 
signal fires! is treated more fully in the book on 
Miltary Preparations. One must get his informa- 
tion from that, so that I may not have to write twice 
about the same matters, 


seems to have been employed first by the Persians in 490 
B.c. (Ephorus, Frag. 107 in Fragm. Hist. Graec.), then by 
the Greeks at Artemisium in 480 B.c. (Herodotus vii. 182), 
and became a common thing in the Peloponnesian war. 
Readers will be reminded of the brilliant description of such 
a beacon signal given by Aeschylus in the Agam. vv. 281- 
316. Compare in general A. C. Merriam, ‘‘ Telegraphing 
among the Ancients’’; Papers of the Archaeolog. Inst. of 
America, iii. 1, 1890. 


AT 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


VIII. 


Mera 5€ radrta els THY ywpay mpoodexopevov 
Trciw Kat peilw dvvauw TroAcniov mp@Tov ev THV 
xopav ducemiPoAov eivat tots mroAepious Kat duc- 
oTpaToTrédeuTOV Kal OUoTpOOTOpLOTOV KaTacKevalew 
Kal TOUS TOTAaULOVs SuvadtaBaTous Kal mA«tous.* 

2 IIpés te tas amoBdaces t@v modAeuiwv els Ta 
poappwon Kal oTeped Coa Kal ola xp KaTa-~ 
oxevaleobar doAdpata Tots amoBaivovat, Tots Te 
év TH YWpa Kat TH OAc Aywéow ota Els TOUTOUS 
det Ppaypata mapacKevalecbar mpos TO py 
elomActy 7 Ta eloTrAcvoarvTa fur) SUvacOan ex7rAcBoat, 

37a Te KaTaATTavomEeva EV TH YWPA EKOVGiws, Els 
ypetav dé dépovta Tots evavtiows, otov pods” 
TELxoTouay 7 oKnvoTouay u aAAnv twa mpaéw ws 

4 det” aypeta Trove ty 4 pen pletpovTa. apaview 
TQ TE Bpwra Kal mora Kaul Ta, KaT dypovs eyKap7ra> 
Kat Ta GAAa® KaTa THY xXwWpav, Kal Ta’ oTdowa 
voaTa ws damota det Trovetv, Ta TE immaoyLa THS 

5 xWpas ws Sel avum7ma rovety, TEpl prev OvV TOUTWY 
TavTwy Mode pev vov mapadrcimeTat, ws det ExaoToV 
TovTwy yiyvesbar, wa py Kal tav’Tn, Atav zroAAa, 
dnA@tar*® yéyparrar bé reA€ws epi adTav ev 
th Ilapackevactixy BiPrAw. 

1 ardevorous Orelli: drXoiovs Meineke (drXéous Koester): 
éXatous Haupt: dvcm\ous Hercher. 

2 Hertlein: mpdc re M. 3 Casaubon: wcdn M. 

4 Added by Haase; ef. ch. 21 

5 R. Schone indicates a lacuna here. 

mavta R. Schone. 


6 
7 kai ra added by Meineke. 
8 Orelli: 6yXodrac M. 


48 











AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, vir. 1-5 


VIII. 


Next, if the invasion of a more numerous and 
larger force of the enemy is expected, first, the 
region must be made difficult for the enemy to attack, 
to encamp in, and to forage in, and the rivers must 
be made hard to ford and swollen.! 

The number and kinds of stratagems to be em- 
ployed against enemies disembarking on sandy and 
rocky shores ; what kind of barriers must be ready 
against them at the harbour of the country or of 


the city so that vessels cannot enter, or, if they do, 


cannot sail out; how to make useless the material 


voluntarily left in the country which might be useful 
_to the foe, for example, that for building walls or 


huts, or any other enterprise ; or, if it is not de- 
stroyed, how to conceal both food and drink, the 


_ products of the fields and other things in the country ; 
and how one must make standing ? waters undrink- 


able, and places fit for cavalry movements unfit for 
them,—the particular treatment of all these sub- 
jects is for the present omitted, to avoid explaining 
them at this point, since they are too numerous. 
They have been fully treated in the book on Meltary 
Preparations. 


1 For this idiomatic use of moXv’s for a thing in violent 


_motion compare especially Demosthenes, De corona, 136 


ToANG péovtt, and Plutarch, Agesilaus, 32 éppin dé mretaTos 
. .. 0Evpdé7as. ‘The manoeuvres intended are probably 
damming up stream courses or breaking dikes, so that the 
rivers would occupy more beds, channels, or depressions, 
and thus become literally ‘larger.’ Notable examples 
of the same thing in the recent war have occurred on the 
Yser, the Piave, and the Scarpe. 

2 That is lakes, pools, wells, and cisterns ; not ‘ stagnant’ 
water. 


E 49 


2 


3 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


IX. 


“Av d€ Opacvvecbai te emiyeipHow ot émtdvTes 
TpOs Ge, TAOE TOLNTEOV. TPH@TOV [EV xp7) owpact 
TOToUS TWas THS ouelas Xwpas Kkatadafetr, 
émrelra, exkAnoiaoavTa TOUS abroo" oTpariatas 
7 troXitas adAda te mpoeimety adtois, ws drap- 
xovons TWOS avrots mpagews els TOvs ToAemlous, 
Kal orav VUKTOS onuavn Th oddmyyt, eTolLous 
eivat Tovs ev TH Tria, avada. ovTas TA omha Kal 
abpovobevras els Xwplov pyTov emecbar TO Tyou- 
bev. duayyeAGevrev ouv TOUTWV Els TO oTparo- 
medov TOV TOAELiWY 7 THY TOAW, S¥vacaL” a7ro- 
Tpéa wv emixeip@or mpdocew, TovTwy Se 
ovTw mpaylevtwv Tots ev didAiots Pdpoos eptroun- 
ceis®> émuyeip@v Te GAA’ ovd* dediuws, Tols be 
Troepious poBov euTapackevacers, woe ert 
Ths avTav® npewetv. 


X. 


Ae? S€ Kat tade mapnyyéAGar Tv toAitav Tots 
KekTnpevois Cevyn 7 avdpamroda v7eKxTiPecbat eis 
TOvS TpocolKous, Ws ovK eloakdvTwr" Elis THY 
moAw. ots 8 av pr drapEn Evia tap’ ovs Ojoovrat, 
Tovs® apyovtas onpocia mapatilecbat Tots mpoo- 
oikols, mapacKevalovtas ov wv owljceTar Ta 
UTeKTUeueva. 

1 Casaubon: durod M. 
2 Casaubon: dvvavrac M: dtvarac Herm. Schone. 


3 Meier: éumomoeas M. 
4 Casaubon: émiyerpovte GAXNov M. 


50 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, 1x. 1-x. 2 


IX. 


If the invaders try to overawe you, your first 
action must be to occupy certain places in your own 
country with men, and calling an assembly of your 
own soldiers or citizens, explain the situation to 
them, telling them that there is some operation on 
hand for them against the enemy and that when 
a signal is given by trumpet at night those of military 
age are to be ready to take arms, gather in an 
appointed place, and follow their leader. So when 
this is reported to the camp of the enemy, or to 
their city, you can divert them from what they are 
attempting to do. If these things are so done you 
will inspire your friends with courage by your initia- 
tive and fearlessness and arouse fear in your enemies 
so that they will remain quietly at home. 


X. 


One must also notify those citizens who own 
cattle or slaves to place them in safety among 
neighbours, since they cannot bring them into the 
city. The authorities at public expense must 
place such property with neighbouring peoples and 
provide means for its support if the owners have no 
friends to whom they may entrust it. 





®> Added by Casaubon. 
§ Hertlein: durav M. 
7 Casaubon: eicaétévtwy M. 
8 Hertlein: mpdc rovs M. 


51 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


[Knpvypara } 


” / ~ / / 
3 Errevra Kynpvypwata Tovetobar Toudde Sid TWoS 
/ \ > ~ A 
Xpovov, pofov Kat amoTpoTHs TOV emBovAevovTev 
\ 
evEKEV KaraKopiCew Ta, eAcvbepa. cwpaTa Kal 
Tous Kap7ovs ev TH TOAEL, TOU bé avnKovoTObYTOS 
e€ovotay eivat TH Bovdouervw alrnuia ayew Kat 
/ \ > ~ 
4 pepew Ta EK THS YWpas. Tas TE EopTas KaTa 
/ y / 2907 ~ / 
moh ayew, ovAdoyous Te tOlous pndaod pare 
nLEpas punre VUKTOS yiyveoBar, TOUS be avay- 
Kalovs 7 év mpuTaverw 7 ev BovAf 7 ev ade 
pavep@® Tommw. pnde AWeobar pdvTw idia dvev 
lan \ A 
5 ToD apxovTos. pyde dSeimvety KATA GuUGOLTiaY 
DONORS a Qe ee Todi) Ce ” , 
aAN’ ev Tats avT@v* otkiats ExaoTous, €€a yajou 
/ \ ~ 
Kal TEploEetTVOU, Kal TadTa mpoamayyetAavTas 
Tots apyovow. 
> \ \ or LO > / z a“ av 
Eav d6€ dow dgvuyddes, éemuknptccew, Os av 
b) A nv / av / > ~ “a e / 
aoTtav 1 Edvwy 7 SovAwv amoKwh, a éxdoTw 
6 TOUTWY EoTaL. Kal éedv Tis TWe TaV duyddwv 
b) \ 
ovyyernTa, 4 Tap EeKelvwy Tiow 7 emvoToAds 
/ BD! / > / / BD! > / 
Teun 7 S€Enrat, elvat Twa Kivdvvov 7 é7uTiptov 
1 Casaubon: rupcaveiw M. 
2 Kéchly and Riistow: airav M. 


1 That is, within the walls, since many Greek festivals, 
then, as now, were held at sacred spots in the countryside. 

2 So as to avoid unauthorized efforts to foretell the future. 
The unwelcome prophecies of those who did not represent 
the ‘ patriotic’ point of view, might be very disconcerting, 
as well-known instances from the Old Testament show. 
Similarly under the Roman Empire the charge of merely 
having had a horoscope prepared was sometimes regarded 
as sufficient warrant for putting a pee LES and ambitious 
man out of the way. 

8 The exception made is due to the marked religious 
character of these particular feasts. The meal, attended by 


52 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x. 3-6 


[Proclamations | 


Furthermore, proclamations such as these are to 
issued from time to time to frighten and deter con- 
spirators: The free population and the ripe crops are 


to be brought into the city, authority being given to 








anyone so disposed to lead away or carry off from the 
country, without fear of punishment, the possessions 


_of anyone who disobeys this regulation. The usual 


festivals are to be celebrated in the city,’ and private 


_ gatherings shall not take place, either by day or by 


night, but those which are really necessary may be 
held in the town-hall, the council-chamber, or other 


public place. A soothsayer shall not make sacrifice 
on his own account without the presence of a magis- 
_trate.2, Men shall not dine in common but each 
in his own house, except in the case of a wedding 


or a funeral feast,? and then only upon previous 


_notice to the authorities. 


If there are any citizens in exile, announcement 


is to be made what is to be done with each citizen, 
_ stranger, or slave who may try to leave. And if any 
person associate with any of the exiles, or in dealing 
_with any of them send or receive letters, there is to be 
_a definite risk or even a penalty awaiting him. Out- 


large numbers of guests, was an essential feature, serving 
originally, no doubt, to secure as many competent witnesses 


as possible to the fact and the good faith of the transaction. 


_Even after a battle the funeral meal might be held in the 
house of some private person very closely associated in some 
responsible way with the enterprise. ‘Thus after the battle 


of Chaeronea in 338 s.c. the funeral feast was held in the 
house of Demosthenes (De corona, 288). 

4 For the purpose namely of getting in touch with those 
exiles, the most dangerous class of enemies to the 
established government. 


53 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


b) A A 
avT@. Tav dé exTmeuTOUevwy Kal eloayoeévwr 
> ~ >s 
emLoTOA@y eivat émicKdmyow, Tmpos' ovs oto07- 
7 GeTat mpoTepov. OmdAa ois e€oTw E€vdos TrAciw 
> / \ > / / \ 4 
atoypagecOar, Kat eEdyew pndéva pydev ozdov, 
\ > ~ 
pnde evéxupov déyeobar. otpatiotas pu) probod- 
¢ A ~ 
afar pndé eavtov pucboty avev TavV apxovTwr. 
> A A 
8 éxmActvy undéva dor@v pyndé pérouxov avev ovp- 
5A. / Xr A ‘0 2 e / a] 
Bodov, Ta te mAota mpotapnyyéABar® dpyilecPat 
BE) Gl vA > A > / 3 / / 
9 Kal’ as 7UAas ev Tois e€xopevois pnOjcetar. E€vous 
\ > ~ 
Tovs adikvoupevous Ta OTAa euhavy Kal mpdyxerpa 
/ \ ~ A 
pepew, Kat evdOvs* atrdv mapaipetoba,* Kai 
See SN , e , \ \ , 5 
avTovs pyndeva vrrodéxeaIat, Unde TOUS TAavdoKéas, 
avev TOV apxovTwyv, Tos d€ dpyovTas amoypda- 
deofar Kat map @ Tives,® drav’ KaTaywvTat. 
\ \ , Can a 3 , \ alg 
10 Tas O€ viKTas tro TOV apyovTwy TA TraVvdoKEta 
” / \ / / Lu 5d) 
e€wlev KXetecfar. dia xpdvov d€ Twos, Goor av — 
Tadareipio. adt@v wow,® éxxnpvttecbar. oj1opous 
\ nv \ / av > JA A / 
d€ 7 KaTa Traidevow 7 Kat GaAAnv Twa xpeELav 
> ~ 3 / A \ / 
ll émdnuodvtas amoypadecfar. tats de dypootats 
/ 
adikvoupevais mpecPelats amo moAcewv 1 TUpadvvwv 
a / ? \ > ¢e ~_10 A 20 ‘yr 
7) oTpatoTédwyv od xp7) ev avTots’® tov eédovTa 
/ > Cee ae | A (eI ~ ~ 
diadéyeobar, aAd’ aet mapetvai™ twas Tov TOALTaV 
Tovs TlOTOTATOUS, OL eT avTaV auvdtateAotow™ 


1 C: mpouvs M. 2 Hertlein: rpoonyyé\@a M. 
3 Hercher: et) M. 4 Reiske: wapjcba M (ef. 30. 2). 
5 Hertlein: ravdoyéas M. 6 Herm. Schéne: driver M. 
? Kéchly and Riistow: 67’ av M. 
8 Hertlein: ravdoxeta M. ° B: woe M. 
10 Herm. Schéne: atrots M. 
11 Suggested by R. Schéne. © Reiske: cuvredotow M. 


~ ne 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x. 6-11 


going and incoming letters shall be brought to censors 
before being sent out or delivered.1. Men who have 
-more than one equipment of arms shall return a 
list of them, and no one shall send any weapon out 
of the city or receive such as security. Soldiers 
may not be hired nor may one serve for hire without 
the permission of the authorities. No citizen or 
resident alien shall take passage on a ship without 
a passport,? and orders shall be given that ships 
shall anchor near gates designated in what follows. 
Strangers arriving shall carry their weapons uncon- 
cealed and ready at hand, and immediately upon 
arrival shall be disarmed, while no one, not even 
the innkeepers, shall receive them without permission 
from the authorities, who shall record also in whose 
house any persons are, when they take lodging; 
and at night inns must be locked from the outside 
by the authorities. From time to time vagrants 
among these strangers shall be publicly expelled. 
Citizens of neighbouring states, however, residing 
in the city for the sake of education * or for some 
other special purpose, shall be registered. Not 
everyone who wishes may converse with public 
embassies representing cities, princes, or armies, 
but there must always be present certain of the most 
itrusted citizens who shall stay with the ambas- 











1 Plautus in the Trinuwmmus (from Philemon je. 263 B.c.), 
|vv. 793-5 makes mention of portitores who even in time of 
peace might break the seals and inspect letters. 

2 The first mention of such a passport is in the Birds of 
| Aristophanes (414 8.c.), vv. 1212-15, where it would seem 
that a od¢payis or visé by an officer was also required. 

3 That is, in the larger places mainly students, but in the 
ordinary cities for which Aeneas wrote more likely visiting 
sophists, philosophers, music teachers, and the like. 

55 





12 


13 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Lex pes dy evdnu@ow ot mpeapers. Kal QV dv 
omavicy n mods, oirou 7 €Aaiov 7 dAAou TWOS, 
T@ elodyovts Kata mAnOos THY €icayomevwv 
ToKous mpoKxetofar Kal ortédavov didoc8ar eis 
/ > \ / > \ \ Poa 
TyuLnV, TH Se vavKAjpw avoAKny Kat KaloAKyy. 
e€omAusias Te muKVas TroleicBar, Kal E€vous Tovs 
A > 
evoypouvs TOV Katpov TovTov pcliotacBar ets 
ywpiov pyTov 7 Kat oikov dwatedciv: 7 Se av 
y+ 2 / / an e ) ~ 
aAAy* paivntat, Cnutay mpoketovat Ws aduKoov TL. 
/ 


14 OTaV TE DOTA TovToLs TO? euTropla Kal Tparnpto. 


KAcieoOar, Kat Ta iyva KaraoBevyvobat, Kat TOV 


15 acy pndeva ETL Tape ivan’ OTaV Oe TW aay - 


16 


Kalov Te ovp ph, weTa Aapamrhpos Badilew, ews dy 
avrimapayyeAty.” Kal os av Karapnvion TWA. 
emBoudevovra ™H ToAeL, 1 7 0 TL av THY Tpoyeypap- 
peveoy TLS TPATTOMEVOV eayyetAy, avnyyeAbar Te 
avrT@ apyvptov Kal TO ayyede ev eupavas T™po- 
ketobar ev ayopa nN emt Bwpod nH eV tep@, iva 
TpoxXelporEepov Tis ToAUHon pnvdew Te TOV TpO- 
VEY PA peEvenv 

“Ent de povdpxe nN oTpaTny@ 7 puydd. duva- 


OTEVOVTL xp1) KaL TQOE mpoknpvTTeobat = 6 0) eee 


1 Casaubon: xadoduxyy M. 
2 Casaubon, Behrendt: 4 de, av d\\n M. 
3 Meineke, Schenkl: 7a révroe M. 
4 rapiéva. Meineke: zpotévac Hercher. 
> R. Schéne: rapayyer07 M. 
§ Kéchly and Riistow indicated the lacuna. 











1 This seems to be the earliest instance of profit-fixing 
(and hence price-fixing) as a special war measure. Casaubon 
thought that the purpose was to prevent profiteering ; 
Kéchly and Riistow on the other hand, that it was to 


56 


i 





AENEAS THE’ TACTICIAN, x. 11-16 


sadors so long as they remain. For the importer 
of whatever the city lacks, grain or oil or anything 
else, profits shall be specified in proportion to the 
- amount of his importations,! and he shall be honoured 
with a crown, and the shipmaster shall be granted 
allowance for the hauling up and down of his vessel.? 
Frequent calls to arms shall be given and all strangers 
in the town shall at this time assemble in a specified 
place or remain indoors; if, however, one of them 
shall appear elsewhere, a penalty shall be prescribed 
for him as a malefactor. At a given signal their 
stores and shops shall be closed and their lights 
extinguished, and no one else shall come in. When- 
ever it is necessary for anyone, he may go out with 
a lantern, until orders are issued to the contrary. 
For whoever points out anyone conspiring against the 
city, or reports anyone as doing any of the things 
above-mentioned, a reward in money shall be 
announced, and the reward shall be displayed openly 
in the market-place or on an altar or in a temple, 
in order that men may the more readily venture 
to report any violation of the provisions mentioned. 

Concerning a sovereign, a general, or a fugitive 
ruler one should make also the following proclama- 


encourage capitalists to undertake the serious risks involved 
in supplying a city during war-time. It seems most reason- 
able to suppose that the setting of a fixed percentage of 
profit which must have been guaranteed by the state would 
act both to “ encourage production,” that is, in this case, 
importation, and to keep down prices as well. 

2 In ancient times, as now, the bulk of the foodstuffs 
transported in Greece was carried in light coasting vessels 
which were pulled up on shore when not in use. Aeneas 
probably has in mind the charges for this hauling up 


and down, and not ordinary harbour tolls, as is generally 
assumed. 


57 


17 


18 


19 


20 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


eav d€ Te Kat adtos mdOn 6 dmoxretvas, Tots 
TEKVOLS avrod amodisoabat TO ayyedev apyvtptov: 
eav O€ 17) 2 TEKVA, TO eyyuTaTo) yevopevy.” Kal 
ip gis Gy conerea TO puydou ) povapyw 7 
oTpaTny@ mpagy Tie ee TOY TpOKElLeveny a7ro- 
did008ar Kal Ka0odov at7T® civary dia yap tadra 
MpoXElpoTepws av eyyxeipotev. ey® de Sev 
oTparomédy Todo , dvayyethavra* oui, mavTay 
GKOVOVTWV knpoéau. el Tis BovAeTar amévar, p12) 
apeckomevor” Tots mapotow, e€etvar amadAdr- 
Teoar: add’ vorepov® .. .” memwAncetau: ta 8° 
eAdcow TOUTWY aduenpLaT a, Kara TOV VO|MoV TOV 
TPOKEL[LEVOV Oeopos 7] " Cnuia. eéav dé Tus paivnrat 
BrAanTwv Te TO oTparevpa, daddy 70 oTparo- 
medov, Oavatos éoTw 7° Cnuia. peta S€ tadra 
aie Ger Ta€ewv emyseAccay TroinTéov. Kal 
Tp@Tov eTLOKETTEOV el Opmovootaw ob moXiral, ws 
ay ovTos jeeyloTou TovTou ayalot ev rohopxit 
El Ps Ly, TOV TA EvavTia dpovovvTwY Tots Tapodat 


1 yé&ve Reiske: yévec or yévous Kirchhoff : yévous Hercher. 
2 Hercher indicated the lacuna: R. Schéne suggests very 
plausibly 76 peo, which the translation follows. 


3 Orelli: éay M. 4 Meier: dvayyei\av7e M. 
> dpecxduevos Casaubon. § ‘orepav Wiinsch. 

7 R. Schone indicated the lacuna. 

8 Orelli: 7 M. 2 AC: 7M. 


1 Obviously the reward of the assassin has been lost here, 
the general character of which can be learned from other 
sources. ‘Thus in the decree of Demophantus at Athens, in 
410-9 B.c., the assassin was to be regarded innocent of all 
crimes or guilt and to receive one-half of the confiscated 
estate of the tyrant, while if he perished in the attempt his 
children were to be treated like the descendants of Harmodius 
and Aristogeiton, that is, maintained and honoured at the 
public expense (Andocides, De mysteriis, 93 ff.: Demo- 


58 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x. 16-20 


tions': If the tyrannicide himself come to grief, 
the reward announced shall be paid to his children, 
and if he have none, to his next of kin. And if 
anyone of the associates of the exile or sovereign 
or general do some [service to the state, one-half 
of] the reward shall be paid him and a return to his 
home shall be granted, for because of these considera- 
tions he would the more readily make the attempt. 
In a mercenary force, after a call for silence, the 
following shall be proclaimed in the hearing of all : 
If anyone is displeased with the existing conditions, 
and wishes to withdraw, he may do so, but afterwards 
. . . he will be sold into slavery. For offences less 
than these imprisonment shall be the penalty, ac- 
cording to the existing law. If anyone be shown to 
be injuring the army or demoralizing the camp, death 
shall be the penalty. Then attention shall be given 
to the other classes. First, one must note whether 
the citizens are of one mind, since that would be 
of greatest advantage during a siege. If not, one 
must, without arousing suspicion, remove [the most 


sthenes xx. 159). At Ilium, early in the third century, the 
rewards are most detailed and explicit. The tyrannicide is 
to receive a talent of silver and have a bronze statue erected 
in his honour; he shall be kept at the public expense; at 
contests called to the front seat by name; and receive a 
pension of two drachmas a day as long as he lives. A 
foreigner is to receive citizenship in addition to these rewards, 
while a slave is given his freedom, one half talent of silver, 
and (probably) one drachma a day as pension (Inser. in 
Dittenberger’s Orientis Graeci Inser. Sel. no. 218, ll. 19 ff.). 
Fragments of a similar decree from Eretria at about the 
middle of the fourth century s.c. have also been published 
(see A. Wilhelm, Jahresh. d. ésterr. arch. Inst. 8 (1905), 
pp. 13 ff.), and for Erythrae, in the age of Cimon (J.G. i. 9). 
For a general discussion of such legislation see Recueil des 
inser. jurid. grecques ii. (1898), pp. 25-57. 


59 


21 


22 


23 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


, 1 \ 2 9 No ee / E \ 
TPAayLact aiiey te KQL LAALGT AV HYEHovas TE KAL 


aitiovs yevopevous ev TH moAcL mpakews Tivos 
peOiotdvar avtovds avuTémTws peTa mpoddcews 
evAoyou EKTELLTOVTO. ary ws mpéaBers TE Kal 
ex dAdas Snooias epyacias. ofov Kat Atovdovos 
empatev Aemrivay TOV adeApov avrod, EXOVTA 
Lupaxociwv® TH Anbar oikeiws Kal op@v Kata 
moAAa ioxupov adrov ovTa: yevopevos atta ev* 
dropia Twi, Kat OedAwy adrov petaotyoacla, 
pavepas pev ovK emexeiper exBadrew adrov, 
yvovs oT tept adtov moAAy pet edvoias ioxds 
EGOLTO Kal vewTEpov av TL yévoiTo: Texvaler de 
TOLOVvoE. TéuTeL adTov peta Eevwyv oAlywv eis 
ToAw ovojLa. ‘Iuépav, Kedevwv dpovpav THV pev 
eSayayetv THv O€ KATAOTHOAL. yevopLevov dé avrod 
ev TH ‘lwépa, méurbas exéAevoev adrov mepievew, 
pexpis av adtos petaméeppynrar. 

IIdAews 8° opnpevopevns, otav én adtyV oTpa- 
Teta ylyvntat, Tos ‘yovets THV OpnpevovTa Kal 
Tovs eyyvs Ta yevr!® peDioracbar EK Tijs ToAews, 
axpus av 7 mrohopxta. mapeAdy, iva pn epopoow 
ev Tats mpocaywyats Tv mroAepicoy Tos abrav’ 
matdas CUILTPOTAyOLLEVOVS Kal TO eoxara 7 
oxovTas' éeyywpet yap avrods evdov ovTas Kal 


1 Kéchly and Riistow indicated the lacuna: Herm. 
Schéne suggested ro’s dvvatwrdrous, which the translation 
follows. 

2 Hercher: uddiora M. 

3 Meineke: Zupaxovciwy M. 

4 Added by Casaubon. 

5 Hertlein: o7pa7ia M. 

6 éyyirara yéver Kirchhoff. 

7 Kéchly and Riistow: aurav M. 


) 


; 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x. 20-23 


influential of] those out of sympathy with the existing 
order of things, especially those who might become 
leaders and responsible for action in the city, sending 


them away somewhere on a plausible pretext, as 


ambassadors or on other public business. For in- 
stance, Dionysius did this in the case of his brother 
Leptines, when he saw that he was popular with the 
people of Syracuse and in many ways influential. 
Becoming suspicious of him and desiring to get rid of 
him, he did not openly attempt to expel him, for he 
knew that he would have great support and favour 
and that a revolution might ensue, so he devised this 
scheme. He sent him with a few mercenaries to a 
city named Himera, directing him to bring back part 
of its garrison and reorganize the rest. When he 
arrived at Himera, Dionysius sent him word to stay 
there until he sent for him. 

When a city has given hostages and a campaign 
is made against it, the parents and next of kin of 
the hostages should depart from the place until 
the siege is over, in order that they may not, in the 


assaults by the enemy, see their own sons brought 


forward and meeting a cruel end. For it is possible 
that these people, if they were in the city, might go 


1 The Dionysius mentioned here is the first of that name 
(405-367). The event mentioned occurred probably in397 B.c., 
the year in which Himera came over to Dionysius (Diodorus, 
xiv. 47. 6), or soon thereafter, at all events before the battle 
of Cronium, in 383 B.c., in which Leptines lost his life 
(Diodorus xv. 17. 1). From the phrase used by Diodorus, 
pe?’ obs ‘Imepaious meteréuwaro (xiv. 47. 6), it would seem 
that this might be the very occasion referred to by Aeneas, 
although it is possible that the year 386 B.c. is meant, at 
which time Dionysius I sent Leptines and Philistus into 
exile (Diodorus xy. 7. 3). 


61 


AENEAS TACTICUS 

24 vrrevavTiov TL mpagar. éav dé dpa duvoxepes’ 7° 
fev TOVOE TOV Tpopdcewy é€ EKTEMTELW, ouvdudyew 
avTovs ws eAaxtoTov jueTeXOVTAS epywv Kat 
mpakewy Kal [TE Orrou Egovrau penre O TU mpd 
€ovow mpoevdevat, Kal ws qKvoTa em opav avTo@v 
OvaTnpobvras Kal vUKTO, Kal uepav: Kal dAAas 
en aAAaes® mpageus Kal Aevroupytas avrots TO 
TAnGos émippetv avuTomtws, pel” dv ovtTes ev 
25 dudakh paAAov ecovtar 7) duvAdEoval tt. eoTwoay 
de OverAnupLevor Ws els TapaTnpynow ovTws yap 

av OvaKcetpevor 7 NKLOTO. dy dvvawTo vewTeploar. 
"Ett toivuy pndé eis Tas KOITaS Aaparipas 
pepeobat unde ao vuktepwov déyyos’ dn yap 
TWes, Emel TaVvTy? eFetpyovrau pnoev® vewTepioar, 
fédovtes, punde mpos Tous TroAepuious TL mpagar, 
26 rodvde Texvdlovor. adv yap Tots KadAdfois’ Kal 
oTpwuact dhepopevol® eis tas dudAakas Avyva ot 
de dGdas ot 5é€ AaumThpas, Wa 57° mpds TL KoLTA- 
cbdow, d1a TovtTwy tav deyyéwv" atvaonpov 
emoujoavTo: O10 det mavTa Ta ToLatTa bromTEvEL. 


XI. [’EmBovdar] 


"Ett 5€ Kal Tv moditav Set Tots avtimpo- 
Aupoupevois mpocexew Tov vodv Kai undev ed0ews™ 
> / \ / ¢ / \ tea e 
2 amodéxecOar dia Tade. pyOyoovrar de E€Fs at 
1 Casaubon : dvcxepis M. 
2 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 


3 Reiske: érd\\as M. 
: Kochly and Riistow: woel mapa tpicly M. 


5 Casaubon: éml mavtn M. 6 Casaubon: undé M. 
7 Orelli: dxodov#os M. 8 Haase: gepovévors M. 
® Casaubon: dé M. 10 Added by Hercher. 











AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x. 23-x1. 2 


so far as to engage in some act of opposition. If, 
however, it prove difficult to send such persons out 
on these pretexts, they must continue in the city 
but share in only the fewest possible works and 
undertakings, and they must not know in advance 
where they are to be or what they are to do, being 
as little as possible their own masters by night and 
day. And on one duty and special service after 
another, without raising suspicion, many persons 
should’ keep coming and going about them, in 
whose company they will be under guard rather 
than on guard. But let them be divided, so that 
they may be kept under watch, for in this manner 
they would be least able to begin a revolution. 

Again, citizens are not to go to bed with lamps 
or any light at night, for in some instances persons 
who have been thwarted in every way from be- 
ginning a revolution (which was what they wished), 
and from entering into negotiations with the enemy, 
have contrived thus: carrying lights to their positions 
on guard-duty, along with their baskets and bedding 
—sometimes taking torches, sometimes lamps — 
ostensibly in order to have some light to go to 
bed by, they have by these lights given a pre- 
arranged signal. Accordingly, all such matters must 
be regarded with suspicion. 


XI. [Plots] 


One must, further, keep an eye on those of the 
citizens who are disaffected and not be too ready 
to accept their advice. To show this, I shall here 

11 Hercher (geyyav: peyyéwy Behrendt): rodrov rov gey- 
yatov 

2 R. Schéne: roto de (with indication of wrong order) M. 

13 edndws (cf. xxviii. 7) Herm. Schone. 

63 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


> \ > ~ 
emtBovAat ex THs BiBAov' trapadelymaros Evexev, 
doa Kata 7OAW e€ apydvTwY 7 wTdv yeyovacw 
Uj ~ a 
Kal ws eviat adTaV KwAVOEtoat SieAVOnoav. 
/ \ 7 / ~ > / 
3 Xtov yap pedrAovons mpodidoc0a, TOv apyovTwy 
TS, oupiTpod.dovs Kal amar cv Tovs ovvdpxovras” 
iy 
ETTELOE Acywv, ws, emre.o7) lpn ein, Tov TE 
Aysévos TO KAetOpov eis viv dvacmdcavras Enpavae 
Set Kat muocadophjoar Kat Ta TraAaa THY vedv 
appeva amroddcbar, THY TE vewpiwv éemeokevacbat 
/ ~ 
Td oralovra. Kal THY eXomev ny avTav oroay Kal 
TOV mUpyov, ev @ OuT@vTo OL apxovTes, ExOpeEvoV 
Ths oTods, wa é€K mpoddcews KAijwaKes Tpo- 
mopiaba@auw* tois pédAAovor KatadauBdavew Ta 
4 vewpia Kal TV OTOaY Kal Tov mUpyov. ett de 
/ \ \ a ~ \ / 
cuveBovrAeve Kal TO 7AH Gos Tov TV moAw dv- 
AacoovTwv dojura0ov TrOUHOAL, iv’ wes eAdvoTov 
5 Onbev avarAwjna TH ToAEt ne Kat dAdAa TOUTOUS 
OMOTpoTr|A Aéyov ETTELOE Tovs cuvdpxYovTas amep — 
eueAAev® Tois mpodidotor Kal emuTufepwevous® ovv- 
olcew mpos THY KatdAnbw: wote aet Set mpoc- 
éyew Tois ta Towatra TeAcodv’ omovdalovow. 
6 aqua dé Tob Telyous exdrjoas® Katexpéuace Sixtva 
> / \ / ¢ \ ~ / \ ~ 
ehadera Kal aveva, woe Enpadvar HédAwy, Kai aAAn 
e / 9 7 \ / wv > A > 
totia® e€w Tovs KddAovs €exovTa: Kal? amep ev 
VUKTL avepnGay OTPATL@TAL. 


1 ropiotixfs BiB\ov Hercher: odirixfjs Kéchly and 
Riistow: Casaubon thought of the dkovcuara: R. Schéne 
with great probability suggests an é7iBoudav BiPNos. 
Casaubon: dpxovras M. 

R. Schéne: T poo mops dBow M. 

Casaubon: 7) M. > Meineke: éued\dov M. 
Kéchly and Riistow: émi@euévors M. 

B?C: ecodv M. 

Haupt: émidjoas M. ® Orelli: cveca M. 


— 


In ke & WW 


@ 


DD 
ws 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xr. 2-6 


note in order and by way of example, from the 
book on this subject, how many plots have been 
made within various cities by officials or by private 
citizens, and how some of these have been com- 
pletely frustrated. 

Just before the betrayal of Chios,! one of the 
officials, who was a party to the act of treason, deceit- 
fully persuaded’ his colleagues, that, since the state 
was at peace, they ought to draw the barrier of the 
harbour up on land for drying and caulking, to sell 
_the old rigging of the ships, and to repair the leaky 
/roofs of the ship-houses as well as of the adjoining 
arsenal and of the tower next to this arsenal, in 
| which the magistrates took their meals—all as a 
pretext, so that ladders might be at hand for those 
who were to seize ship-houses, arsenal, and tower. 
He further advised that the majority of the men 
who were doing guard-duty in the city should be 
paid off, on the pretext that the expense to the 
| state might be as small as possible. With these and 
| similar arguments he won over his colleagues to 
every measure that would contribute to the victory 
|of the conspirators when they made this seizure. 
| Accordingly, one must always keep an eye on those 
who are too eager to effect matters of this kind. 
| At the same time he fastened to the wall and 
hung out, as if for drying, deer nets and boar 
nets, and in other places sails with the ropes hang- 
ing, and it was by these that the soldiers climbed 
up at night. 















1 Nothing is known further about this event. Chios 
had tyrants (Athen. vi. 259 a, s), and was the scene of 
frequent and fierce struggles between oligarchs and 
democrats (Aristotle, Pol, 1306 b 3 ff.; Aelian, Var. Hist. 
xiv. 25). 


| 


F 65 


7 


10 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


II pos dé avtioracwwtas ToLdvde empaxOn ev” Apyet. 
peAAcvTwr yap T&v tAovaiwy Thy Sevtépav erriPeow 
émitiecbar TH SHuw Kal E€vouvs emayopevwv, 0 TOO 
Sywov mpooTaTys, Tpoarcldpevos TO péAAov, THY 
emiOnoomevwy Twas Tv drevayTiwy ovTwY TO 
dju@ avdpas bvo mpoomomodpevos gPidovs civar 
amoppiytous, ToAcuious atT@’ Kabiornow avTovs 
Kal emoies KaK@s ev TH havep@, ovyn Se Ta” ex 
T@v evavtiwy PovAcvuata jrKovev. map avTa@v. 


> \ > > A > / \ / s e 
émeL 0 €v TH eloayecbar Tovs E€vous oav ot 


mAovowor, dua d€ Kal TOV Ev TH TOAEL TWEes HoaV 
ETOLOL, Kal Els THY EmTLoCcav vUKTa Emedrev TO 
epyov eceo0ar, edo€e TH TOG Siuov mpootrarn THv* 
taxloTyny exKAnoiav ovvayayetvy Kal TO wéAXov p12) 
mpoeuretv, va wn Taoa 7 mohus TapaxOA, elmovTa. 
de ada TE KQL OTL oud €pov «in ev TH emovon 
yuk ovv tots omrous mavTas “Apystous? Tapetvar 
€v TH avTov® pudy ovras EKAOTOV.! eav (dé Tis 
adAAws® exOjraw TH oma, 7 addy eeveydpevos 


pari, Ws mpoooTns Kal emBovdctov TO On L@ 


TAOXETW TL.  TovTO On atvrTo iva Kara Tas dvAdas 
OVTES OL mAovavot pn SvvwrvTar eis tadTo ab por- 
obévres pera Tav €évwv emBeobar, add’ €v Tats 
dvdats ovrTes Siakexwpiouevor Wow ev moots 
Eye? / 
oAtyou pudérais. Kadds dé Soke? Kal ayywows 
pet’ aodhadreias diadtoar To wéAAov. 

1 Orelli: dv7é M. 

2 Casaubon: 76 M. 3 Added by Schenkl. 

+ ciety K6chly and Riistow: eizrey Herm. Schone. 

> Schéne: M, now illegible, formerly reported to have 
bev oda (?): dye ods A: Eve obs B. 

6° Kéchly and Rtistow: adurov M. 7 Meier: éxardv M. 

8 d\doce Reiske (&\Xoo’ R. SchGne). 


66 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x1. 7-10 


Against revolutionists the following plan was 
carried out in Argos. When the rich men’s party 
was about to launch the second attack! against the 
people and was bringing up mercenaries, the leader 
of the people’s party, who had found out what was 
about to happen, just before the attack won over two 
men of the party hostile to the people, to be his secret 
accomplices, and while publicly treating them as his 
| enemies and abusing them he heard from them in 
_ private the plans of the opposing party. Then, when 
the rich men were in the act of bringing in their 
mercenaries, and others of their party were at the same 
time ready within the city, and the deed was to take 
place the next night, he decided to call an immediate 
assembly of the people, without announcing what was 
to come, that the city might not be thrown into utter 
confusion, and told them, among other things, that 
it was desirable for all Argives to stand at arms 
during the coming night, each man with his own 
tribe. Further, that if anyone should follow a different 
course in arming himself or should appear elsewhere 
and out of his proper station, he should be punished 
as a traitor and conspirator against the people. The 
purpose of this was that the rich men, scattered 
among the various tribes, should not be able to 
assemble at one point and attack with the mercen- 
aries, but should be distributed in the several tribes 
as a small minority among their fellow-tribesmen. 
And he seems to have dealt skilfully, cleverly, and 
safely with the impending danger. 

1 This is probably to be referred (with Hug, Aeneas von 
Stymphalus, p. 6, n. 6) to the revolutions of 370 s.c., that 
finally ended in the notorious cxvtadioués, in which the 


people clubbed to death more than a thousand of the 
oligarchs. See Ed. Meyer, Gesch. d. Alt. v. § 948. 
67 


10° 


11 


12 


13 


14 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ > aA ~ 
IlapamAnoiws dé ev “Hpakreia 7H ev TO IovtTa, 
Yj / ~ 
ovons OnuoKpatias Kal eémPovdAevovTwy Tav 
~ / \ ih > / 
mAovoiwy 7@ Oyuw Kat peAAdvTwY émiTibecbar, 
/ ¢ / ~ ~ 
TMpOYVOVTES OL TpOGTATaL TOD OHLOV TO L€AAOV, OVa@V 
avtots tpi@v dvdAdv Kal Tecodpwyv ExaTtooTvwr, 
emetoav TO TAHYos éEjKovTa elvar ExaTooTvas, va 
> / \ > \ \ \ > \ ” 
ev TaUTals Kal els Tas dvAaKas Kal els Tas dAAas 
Nettoupyias qdowtrdow ot mAovovor. ovveBawev 
Kal evTad0a dueaxedacpévous elvat Tovs mAovatous 
Kal ev Tats exatooTvow oAlyous’ éxaoTob. mapa- 
? A 
ylyvecbar €v moAAois Snpdtais: OpmoTpoTov dé Te 
, \ , aS , , 3 
TOUTW Kal maa Ev Aaxedaipove yeveoBar. 
papebetons yap emBovdAns rots apxovow ore orav 
6 mtdos* apbF emInoovTar, €mavoav TOUS ey- 
Xetpodvras eméabar, Knpvyua _avayyetAavres TOUS 
Tov 7tAov? peMovras & dpa pn apa. 
> ~ 
"Ev Kopxvpe d€ eavdoraow Séov yevéoBar ex TOV 
mAovotwv Kal oAvyapxyiK@v TO One (evredrjer® Se 
Kal Xapys “AGnvatos poupav EYwV, OomEp’ ovv- 
n0eAev ™) emavaoTdcet) eTexvacbn Toovde. TOV 
Ths Ppoupds Twes apyovres ouxvas mpooBadrdopevor® 
1 Casaubon: 6Alyos M. 
2 Kochly and Riistow: wadav M. 
C: yivecOa M. 4 Casaubon: 67’ ay 6 mydds M. 


Casaubon: andov M. 6 Casaubon: émdnuet M. 
Casaubon: ®crep M. § Casaubon: mpoBaddéuevoc M. 


-T ot w 


1 Some details of the party strife are given in Aristotle, 
Pol. 1305 b 2 ff. The date of this particular occurrence is 
not known. For further experiences of the city see below, 
xu 

2 That is, each of the three tribes (a characteristic of Doric 
social structure) had four ‘ hundreds,’ or twelve ‘ hundreds ” 
in all, as in old Athens each of the four tribes was divided 
into three trittyes or ‘ thirds. 


68 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x1. 10*- 14 


Similarly, in Heracleia Pontica,! when the demo- 
cracy was in power and the rich were conspiring 
against it and about to make an attack, the leaders 
of the popular party, who knew what was imminent, 
persuaded the people to establish a division into 
sixty ‘hundreds’ in place of their former three 
tribes and four ‘ hundreds,’? so that, in the new 
divisions, the rich should do both guard-duty and the 
other services. The result was that here, too, the 
rich were scattered, and were, in each ‘ hundred,’ 
few among many of the popular party. And a 
similar thing took place long ago in Lacedaemon.? 
When the authorities were informed of a conspiracy 
to attack at the moment when the felt cap? was 
raised, they thwarted those who planned the attack 
by giving the men who were about to raise the 
felt cap the order not to raise it. 

In Corcyra a rebellion of the wealthy oligarchic 
party against the rule of the people (the Athenian 
Chares, who at that time lived there and com- 
manded the guard, helped in this rebellion) was 
contrived in the following manner.® Some of the 
captains of the guard drew blood from themselves 


3 This was the dangerous revolution of the Parthenii, or 
‘ half-breeds,’ as they might be called, which finally ended 
in the peaceful colonization of Tarentum, about 708 pB.c., 
according to an untrustworthy legend. See Ed. Meyer, 
Gesch. d. Alt. ii. § 306 a. 

4 The felt cap had probably a symbolic meaning here. 
It was the headdress of the ordinary free man as such, and 
seems never to have been worn by slaves, so that its 
elevation symbolized the assumption of the status of free 
men. Among the Romans, indeed, one of the formal sym- 
bolic acts of manumission was the bestowal of a pileus, the 
Italic equivalent of the Greek ziXos. 

5 This is set in 361 B.c. by Diodorus xv. 95. 3. 


69 


15 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Kal Topas é&v TO owpare Touodevou Kal atwa- 
twbevres €BSpapov els TIV ayopav ws myyas 
exovTes, aya 8 avrtots evovs TpoTTapEecKEVaopLeE- 
vou ot te ada oTpari@arar Ta OTAa efnveyKavTo 
Kat tav Kopkupaiwy ot emBovdevorres. TOV 
07 aAAwy ayvootyvtwy TO mpaypwa Kal eis éxKAyoiav 
TapaichnDevrev ovveAapPdvovTo ob mpoorar au TOU 
O7n}Lov, WS EemavacTacews yevomevns * e€ abrav, 
Kal Ta dAAa peSioracayv mpds TO cuudépov avdtois.® 


XII. [Ilept ovxppdywv a& Set zpovoety | 


Xpr dé Kat CULL oy els Thv 7OAw . . .* unmoTeE 
duc OvareActy TOUS OU[LLAXOVS, aAAa Svecxedacbar 
OMoTpoOTMWs THY avT@V Evekev Tots TpoELpHpEevots. 

A \ b) \ \ \ / / / / 
TO 6€ adTo Kal peta E€vwv pioboddpwv pédAAovTas 
Tl Mpaooew del xpi) Umepéxew TAYGer Kal duvdpet 
Tovs eTayomevous ToAitas Tay E€vwv: ef SE pH, 
em exeivols ylyvovTat avTol TE Kal 7 7dXLs. otov 
Xakkndoviots todvopKovpévois TrapdvTes avppayot 
...° eémeusav doovpav adtois ot tHv Xadkn- 
doviwv® OULPOXOL. Bovrevopeveny Ta avrtots’ 
UpLPEpovTa ovk edacav® of Ppovpot emuTpebew, 
eay py) Kal Kulurnvots Sox i eivau CuuPepovTa, 
wote Tois XaAknooviois” tiv dpovpav eow ovoav™ 

1 Added by Casaubon. 2 Meineke: ywouévys M. 

3 Hercher: durots M. 

+ Casaubon indicated the lacuna: Reiske suggested érny- 
uévwy, Which is followed in the translation. 

5 Sauppe indicated the lacuna: R. Schéne suggests that 
an expression like kiyévvoy rapecxevacay and some mention 


of the Cyzicenes have fallen out. 
8 Kadxdovlwy M. 7 Kéchly and Riistow: dutotc M. 


70 











AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, x1. 14-x11. 3 


with cupping-glasses, and made cuts on their bodies 
_and ran out bleeding into the market-place, as though 
they had been wounded. At the same time the 
other soldiers, who had been prepared for this, 
speedily took up their arms, and with them the 
Coreyreans who were in the conspiracy ; and while 
the others had no notion of what was happening, 
and had, indeed, been summoned to an assembly, 
the leaders of the people’s party were seized, as 
if they had been the ones who made the uprising. 
The rest of the affair, also, the conspirators arranged 
to their own advantage. 


XII. [Precautions with regard to allied Forces| 


If allied forces [are admitted] into the city they 
should never be stationed together, but should be 
separated in the manner already suggested and 
for the same reasons. In the same way those who 
are to make use of mercenary troops should always 
have citizens under arms surpassing these mercen- 
aries in number and power, otherwise both the 
citizens and the state are at their mercy. [A danger] 
of this sort [befell] the Chalcedonians ! while in a state 
of siege, due to the presence of allied forces sent by 
[the people of Cyzicus}, their allies. When the 
Chalcedonians were deliberating upon measures 
affecting their interest, the troops of the garrison 
said that they would not consent unless it seemed 
advantageous to the people of Cyzicus as well, so 
that the garrison within the walls was much more 


1 Nothing further is known about this event. 


8 Casaubon: é¢ncav M. 8 Casaubon : doxe? M. 
10 kadxidovios M. 11 Casaubon : éow dpav M. 


71 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ToAv poBepwrépay eivau rev mpoxalnevenv 70 - 
4Acuiwv. Set obv prymote els moAW olKetay peilen 
dvvapw emaktov’ déyeolar THs Brapyovons Tots 
moNrats, E€vors TE Ypwpevynv® ael Set THY TroAW 
TOAA@ wrepexew THs TaV E€vwv Suvapews: ov 
yap aodarés Eevoxparetobar Kat émi® puobo- 
5 popous yiyveobar. otov Kat ‘Hpaxdrewrats Tots 
ev T® Ildvtw cuveBn. emayouevor yap E&€vous 
metovas TOU TpoonKovTos, Tp@Tov pev Tovs 
avtiotaowwras avetAov, émerta avdtovs* Kal THY 
moAw amwdAcecav, tupavvevbevtes to Tod «to- 
dyovtos Tovs &€vous. 


XIII. [Hevorpodgia’ | 
"Av é¢ dé€n Eevotpodetv, Bde av aodaré€orara® 
ylyvo.tto. xp Tots év TH moder edTopwTaTots 
mpooTaéat Kata dvvayw exdoTtw tapacxeiv E€vous 
EKAOTOV, TOUS pev TpEls, TOvs de SVo, Twas de 
eva’ abpoicbevTwy Sé€ cowv av déou0,’ dueActvy 
2g avTovs® eis Adyous, KaTaoTHoavTas em avTovs 
T@v ToATaY Tos TMLGTOTATOUs Aoxayo’s. TOV 
dé puctov Kat thy tpodyv ot E€vor mapa TaV 
piobwoapevwy AapPavevTwy, TO pev TL Tap 
3avTav, TO bé€ Kal THs moAcews ovpuPaddoperns. 
Kal diaitacbwoav exaoTo. ev tats Tov pucbw- 
Gapévwy olkiats, of d€ Tas AevTovpyias Kal Tas 


1 Casaubon: ém’ aurov M. 
* Kéchly and Riistow: xpwuevov M. 


3 Casaubon: én M. 4 R. Sch6ne: duto’s M. 
° In M this word follows the next sentence. 
6 Hercher: dogarécrara M. 7 R. Sch6ne: dcwv déoro M. 


8 C(?), Casaubon: éavrodc M. 


1 This is clearly a reference to the career of Clearchus, a 
~ 
(2 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xu. 3— x11. 3 


terrible to the Chalcedonians than was the besieging 
enemy. One must, therefore, never admit into a city 
an alien force greater than that already available to 
the citizens, and the state employing mercenaries must 
always be much superior to them in strength, since 
it is not safe to be outnumbered by aliens nor to be 
in the power of mercenaries, as actually happened to 
the inhabitants of Heracleia Pontica ; for, by bringing 
in more hired troops than they should, they first 
made away with those of the opposing faction, but 
later brought destruction to themselves and the 
state, being forced into subjection to the man who 
introduced the mercenaries.1 


XIII. [Maintenance of Mercenaries] 


If, however, it is necessary to maintain mercen- 
aries it may be most safely done as follows. The 
wealthiest citizens should be required to provide 
mercenaries, each according to his means, some 
three, some two, others one. When as many 
as you need are assembled, they should be divided 
into companies, and the most trustworthy of the 
citizens placed over them as captains. Pay and 
maintenance the mercenaries should receive from 
their employers, partly at the private expense of 
the latter, partly from funds contributed by the 
state. And each group of them should board in 
the houses of their employers, but they should be 


former pupil of Platoand Isocrates, who entered the city with 
a force of mercenaries in 364-3 (Diodorus xv. 81. 5) and 
| ruled for twelve years. His régime was marked by much 
violence, not all due to his fault, and he enjoys the distine- 
tion of being the first prince of whom it is recorded that he 
founded a library. See Ed. Meyer, Gesch. d. Alt. v. § 980. 


73 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


exkouTias Kal Ta dAXa emitdypata ex TOV apyovTwv 
abporlouevor tro tTa&v Aoxaydv stanperovyvtwv. 
Kop.d7n d€ Tols mpoavaXicoxovow eis tovs E€vous 
xpove Twi yevécOw dtrodoyilopévwr' Tav eis THY 
TOAW elodeponevwy Tapa éxadoTov TeADV: ovTw 
yap av TdyloTd Te Kal dodaddotata Kal «vTeA€- 
otata EevoTpodnybein. 


XIV. [‘YadderEis eis dpudvorav®| 


Tots pev ovv ev TH mode brevavtia BéAovow 
tots KaleornKdot Tpoodépecbar ws mpoyéypamTar. 
TO O€ mAjOos Tov modT@v eis oOudvoray Téws 

peahora xe?) mpoayew, dAdo Te dmrayopevov 
avtovs Kal Tovs xpewherreras® Koupilovra TOKWY 
BpaxvTynTe 7 oAws apatpobvta, ev de Tots Atay 
emuctvOvvoLs Kal TOV ofetAnuaTwy TL mEepos, Kal 
mavra oTav déy,* ws Todd ye hoPepwrarot Ededpoi 
elow ot ToLoide avEpwrrot, TOUS TE EV ATTOpia OVTAS 
T@V avayKaiwy eis evmopiay KabioTravat. Kal 
omws lows Kal advmws tots mAovaios tad’ av® 
ylyvomEeva TmpaTTOLTO Kal e€ olwy Topwr® zopt- 
olTO, Kal mrept TovTwv ev TH LloproTiKA BiBAw 
OnAwTiKOs yéypamTat. 


XV. 


Karackevacbévtwy S5é TovTwy, av Tt ayyeddA’ 
a“ ~ / / > / 2. 38 \ 
7) mupoev0H Bornbeias Sedpuevov, eftévar emi Ta 


1 Haase: vrodoyfouévors bd M. 
2 In M these words follow the next sentence. 
3 Casaubon: xpeodecdéras M. 4+ Haase: 67’ ay dé M. 


74 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xu. 3-xv. 1 


_assembled by their captains for the performance 
_of public services, night watches, and other tasks 
_ assigned by the authorities. Reimbursement should 
| be made in due time to those who have incurred 
| expense for the mercenaries, after deducting the 
| taxes due the state from each individual. For in 
_ this way maintenance may be provided for mercen- 
| aries most quickly, safely, and cheaply. 


XIV. [Suggestions for securing Loyalty | 


With those, then, in the city who are opposed to the 
existing order one may deal in the manner already 
prescribed. In the meantime it is of primary import- 
| ance to win over the mass of the citizens to a spirit of 
| loyalty, both by other influences and in the case of the 
| debtors by the reduction or complete cancellation of 
| interest, and, in cases of especial danger, of some 
part of the principal, or even all of it when necessary ; 
| for such men as these are the most formidable of 
| adversaries. Adequate provision must also be made 
| for those who are in want of the necessities of life. 
| How these measures may be taken fairly and without 
| offence to the wealthy, and from what revenues the 
|} expenses may he met, has also been clearly ex- 
| plained in the book on Fimance.} 






XV. 
After the foregoing matters have been arranged, 


|if a call for help come, either by messenger or by 
signal-fire, troops must be sent out to the parts of 


1 See Introd. p. 8. 


> Hertlein: raira M. 6 Casaubon: 7ovwy M. 
7 Casaubon: dyye\dév M (dyyeddev 7 Oldfather). 


75 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


2 KaKovpeva Ths ywpas. Tovs oe oTparnyous 
Tovs" TapovTas evOds ovvrdrrew,” t va pen oTropadny 
Kat Kat OAlyous e€iovTes emt Ta adTav® a7odA- 
Niwvrat* dv’ atra€lav Kal Kd7ov akatpov, évedpevd- 
pevol Te UTO THV TroAELiwV Kal Kaka _mdoxorres. 

3 adda ypi) ToUs TE TapayLyvopLevous emt Tas mUAas 
abpotlecbar péxpe Twos 7AjGous, ws Aoxov" 7 
diAoxlas, eita ovvraxGevras KaL TYEHOVOS: adrois 
ppoviwov dolévtos, ovTws EexméuTrec0ar Kal omev- 

4 dew tdvras® ev ta€er ws padtora. eémeita aAdo 
Kal’ dAdo _7AnDos* oUTWS EKTEUTEW Kal ev TAYEL 
HEXpis ob ixavol doxovow exBeBonOyxevar, iva. 
Kal od TH mopela exopeva 7 Ta Ep, Kal eqy Te® 
preper’? jwépos ben Bon oar edv Te aya mavra 
den), padiws tmdpyn™ oUppLLoryely aAArAous Kal 

5 pn Spomp ToppwHev Tapayiyvovran. re ™po dé 
avr@v det mpwTous Tovs dmdpXovTas iméas Kal 
Kovgous €&.évar, punde TovUTOUs aTdaKTous,”® 7™po- 
efepevvvrds TE Kal mpoxarahapBavovras Ta 
vinAa TOV Xwpiov, iv’ ws €K metorou TpoeLo@ow 
ob omAtrau™ Td 7 av moNepienv Kal pundev eSaidvns 

6 avrots Tpoomeon mepl Te Tas KapTas Trav 
Xwpiov Kal Tas Béaes Tov dxpohopuay Kal Tas 
exTpoTas TOV ooay, Omrov av Tptodoe dow, eivat 
onpeta, va pr) Teplt TadTa oyilwrTa am adAjAwv 

7 of bmoAcXEypevor Ou’ Ayvovav THs 0d00. amvovta™® 


1 Added by Hercher. 2 Casaubon: ouwtdatre M. 
3 Hertlein: durév M.-~ + Casaubon: dod\Xovra M. 
5 Casaubon: Aéxw M. 6 Reiske: dyTac M. 

* Meineke: kal xara M. 8 Casaubon: wados M. 
® Casaubon: 7a M. 10 Reiske: uépy M. 


11 Casaubon: trapxyew M. 
12 Casaubon: mapayiyvovra: M. 
13 Suggested by R. SchGne. 


76 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xv. 1-7 


_the country that are being devastated. The generals 
must immediately marshal such men as are at hand, 
in order that they may not go forth in small and 
-seattered groups, each bent upon saving his own 
property, and ruin themselves from lack of discipline 
and premature exertion, meeting disaster through 
ambuscades of the enemy. Those who report for 
duty must assemble, up to a certain number, at 
the gates, for instance, the quota of one or two 
companies, and only after they have been marshalled 
and a capable leader has been assigned them must 
they be dispatched from the town, and then they 
must hasten as fast as military order will allow. 
Then other groups in succession must be speedily 
dispatched in the same fashion until enough seem to 
have been sent forth to render the assistance needed. 
This must be done in order that the divisions may 
| be close together on the march, and, if it is necessary 
for one division to assist another, or for all to act 
together, they may easily be united and those in 
the rear may not have to come from a distance on 
the run. The available cavalry and light - armed 
troops, however, also in good order, should go ahead 
of the others and should reconnoitre and preoccupy 
the elevated positions, that the heavy-armed troops 
may be aware as early as possible of the movements 
of the enemy and may not be surprised by any sudden 
attack. At places where there are turning-points, 
bases of the ridges, and forks in the roads, that is, 
wherever there are diverging ways, signs should be 
placed, lest at these points the stragglers, through 
ignorance of the road, be separated from their fellows. 





\ 4 Kochly and Riistow: zodira: M. 
19 Reiske: mpooréca M. © Hertlein: amdvras M. 


17 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


> \ / / > A ~ 
Te els THY TOAW TEepvAaypevws avaxwpetv ToAAdY 
evekev Kal paAtota evédpas doBovpevov troAeuiwv: 
yA \ \ / > / / / 
non yap mept Borfevay apvAaktov Tovdvde ovveBn. 
8 TpiBaddAadv euBaddovrewv els TH — ABSnpirev 
/ > / 
xopar, eme€eOovtes “ABonpirae Kal TapaTaéw 
mowjodpevo. KadAAoTOv epyov etpydoavro: OUpL- 
Baddvres yap KartéBadov moddods Kat evikwv 
9 7ARGos Todd Kat paxyov. ot dé TprBadAdoi, 
ayavakTicavTes TH ovupPdveTr, amaddayevtes Kat 
> / € et , > / > \ 
avaAaBovres avTous,' mdaAw apucoprevot ets THY 
x@pav Kat evédpas mpoKaficavres EKELPOV THY 
xwpav anv “ABdnpitav ob mrdppw Tijs Todews, ob 
d€ “ABOnpirae dmrepppovnaavres avTav dia TO 
TPoEtpyagpLevov Epyov emeBorouv Tavovoeln mA07 
paun Kal mpoduia ot O€ omiyov avTous els TAs 
10 evedpas. o7rov bn? €yerar ex pds modAews, 
TocavTns ye TO péyeBos, meiorous ev edaxtore 
xypovw amror€ofar. ovd€ yap aKovoavtes TOV 
+ an / ¢ 
dr\cBpov TaV mpwTwv emeEcAPdvTwv of aAdAot 
eméayov THs PBonfeias, add’ ddAos adAAov zapa- 
~ ” la A > ~ / 
Kadav éomevdev Bonbetv Tots émeEcotor, péexpr 


Honuw0n % oA avdpav. 


XVI. ["AAAy Bo7Gea] 
"08" otv dAXos Tpdmes Bon betas BeAriov 6 av cin 
2émt tods euPeBAnKkoTas. ampa@Tov wev ody vuKTos* 


1 Hercher : durov’s M. 2 Casaubon : dé M. 
3 Hug: 60’ (¢.e. 66’) M. 4+ Added by R. Schéne. 





1 Diodorus xv. 36. 1 ff. sets this occurrence in 376-5 B.c., 
but ascribes the disaster mainly to the treachery of a force 


78 














AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xv. 7-xv1. 2 


Likewise when the bands return to the city they 
should employ caution, for many reasons, but chiefly 
for fear of the enemy’s ambuscades. For this sort of 
thing has been known to happen to incautious relief 
parties. When the Triballi were invading the country 
of the Abderites,! the latter sallied forth against 
them, formed in battle array, and carried out a 
brilliant operation; for joining battle they killed 
many and defeated a large and powerful force. 
Now the Triballi, enraged at the occurrence, with- 
drew and reorganized, and making another inroad 


_ into the country set ambuscades and started to lay 


waste the land of the Abderites not far from the 


| city. The Abderites held them in contempt because 


of the previous achievement and made a hasty attack 
against them with great force and eagerness, but 


_ the Triballi drew them into their ambuscades. On 
_ that particular occasion it is said that more men 


perished in a shorter time than had ever been the 
case, at least from a single city of similar size. 
For the others, not having learned of the destruction 
of those who had gone out first, did not pause in 


_ their rush to the rescue, but cheering one another 
on, hurried away to render assistance to those who 


had already sallied forth, until the city was bereft 


- of men. 


XVI. [Other Kinds of Relief] 


Still another kind of relief would be more effective 
against the invaders. In the first place one should 
of Thracians who turned upon the Abderites in the course 
of the battle. 

79 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ae \ 30 LY aee b B A A iS / cess > 7 ” 
¥ xpy evdvs" Bonfeiv, eldoTa Oru araxTdéraToL av 
Kat amrapacKevot TPO THS Ew” eiev ot avOpwrot, 
~ \ > / \ > a 
TOY pev eTevyojevev Ta olKeEta, ow lew ws TAXLOTA 
é€x TOV aypayv, etépwv dé mrepoBnpuevenv els ToOvS 
~/ >] 
KwOvvous Tpotevan, ota. etkos Tpoodatws ayyed- 
pevanv,® dav d€ mauTav amapacKevwy 6vTwr. 
3 xp? obv TV pev BorGevav eUTpeTrilew abpoilovra 6 OTL 
TAYOS, GLa TAV pLEVv TO deja adaipodvta, Tots dé 
4 Oapaos eutrovobvta® tovs de omAtlovra® det yap 
2 A / 
GE etdevau OTL TOV moAcptov ol pera Evvécews Kal 
eMLOT INS yuyvouevor ev Todeuia,” KOT apyas [Lev 
TO loxupoTarov avray® ev raget ayouau mpoodexo- 
plevol Twas ep eavTovs tévar® Kal ETOYS EXOVTES 
apvvecbar: twes de diacTapevtes adTaV KaTAa THY 
/ > A A > oN > fi / 
ywpav adikotow, aAdot 5° av evedpevorev poadeyxo- 
pevoit Twas Bonfodvras tudv ataxrov BornOnow. 
as LESAN See IN E ! ? ~t STs 
5 Se? otv py evOvS avTovs TpocKeEipevov evoyAety, adr 
~ a \ 
€doat TovTovs mpdotepov Fapofjoar Kat Katadpovn- 
AN / \ e ~ 
cavTas cov em AenAatnow Kat mAcoveEiay opujoat: 
“ey / \ \ 
dua & av odToL oiTiwy Kal TOGEwWSs TANPOUUMEVOL Kat 
> A \ > A ~ 
otvwhevtes awedets™ Kat ameBets Tots apxovor 
6 yiyvowTo. EK Oe TOUTWY elkos pox@npovs adTav 
> 
Tos aydvas Kal THY aToYwpnow oupBaiver, 
/ 
7 edvmep ye ov adtots evKat (pws emf). 2 yroy.a- 
opuevngs yap Got THs onfetas els TOV TmapnyyeALevov 
TOTOV Kal eoTTap Levey non TOV moAepiooy mpos 
dpmaynv, ovTw xp) avTois mpooKetabar Tots pev 
1 Hercher: ei@) M. 
2 rpobécews Wiinsch (accepted by Behrendt and Fischer). 
> Casaubon: oi 6’ M. 
4 Defended by Behrendt from usage of Herodotus: 


nyye\uéevwv Casaubon. 
> Casaubon: éumoowivtac M. 


80 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 2-7 


not in the night-time go straight out to give assist- 

ance, seeing that before dawn the inhabitants would 

be in very great disorder and also unprepared, some 

hurrying with all speed to save their property on the 

farms, others dreading to face danger, as is natural 

when the alarm is sudden, while still others are 
wholly unready. It is necessary, therefore, to 
assemble and prepare the rescue force with all 
speed, at the same time freeing some from their 
fear, inspiring others with confidence, and arming 
still others. For you must know that when an 
enemy goes to war with judgement and under- 
standing, he at first advances the strongest of his 
forces in military order, expecting a counter-attack 
and ready to defend himself. Meanwhile a part of 
these invaders separate and devastate the country, 
while others would lie in ambush expecting some 
of your forces to come in disorder to lend assistance. 
It is not best, therefore, to disturb them by an 
immediate attack, but to allow them first to become 
bold, and in their contempt of you to start off 
pillaging and satisfying their greed. At the same 
time these men when sated with food and drink 
and heavy with wine would become careless and 
disobedient to their leaders; and as a result of this 
they will be likely to put up a poor fight, and 
will retreat, at least if you fall upon them oppor- 
tunely. For, when your supporting force is ready at 
the appointed place, and the enemy has already 
scattered for plunder, then and then only you should 

























6 Casaubon: 6mXifovrac M. 7 Casaubon: év mode wa M. 
8 Hercher: du7av M. ® Added by R. Sch6ne. 
10 Casaubon: judy M. ! Casaubon: duedde?s M. 

12 Haase: émidjon M. 


G 81 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


inmedow mpokatadauBdvovTa Tas amoxwproets, 
Tots 6° eémtAékrois éevédpas rovovpevov, Tots 
LAA / 4 b] / >? a \ > 
adrots Kovdois’ emidawopevov atrois, tovs 6 
¢ At 10 / > / A 2 \ / de ~ 
omAitas abpoous ev TAEEt AyovTa,” un TOppw Sé TOV 
mpoTreuplevtwr® ep@v. 
> / \ A , 2 eo» \ \4 
Eurifeco Oe Tots Trohepious ev ols dKwy [eV [7) 
pax7on, [aX OpLevos d€ pe7) éAacoov efeus TOV TroAe- 
8 piwv. dua ov Ta TpoTepa® etprpLeva. AvoiteAet 
Tote epetvar Kal Edoat TOVS TOAELioUS Ws TAELOTHY 
KaTactpat THs xwpas, va 57° AenAatobvTes Kal 
diamreTTAnpwpevor Aap’pwv padiws cor THY dikyv 
PS) / / \ Xr @ / / 2 7 / 8 
woovow: Ta Te yap Andlevta mavT av’ ow loito, 
7 > > / > > / / A > / 
ol T aducnoavres KOT agiav AdBovev | Ta emruripud. 
9 6€€ws O° av Bonbjcas Tots Lev AUTO amrapackevous 
TE Kal ov TETAY[LEVOLS Kwovvevors, ol Te TroAg€uot 
puukpa fev av PUdoateyv KaKoupynoaytes, ev Taker O 
Nv ” 7 > / “A > / \ \ 
10 av ett OvTes aTYLwWpNnToL av améABorev. aodv dé 
Kpelooor, ws yeypamTat, evdovTa advAaktws diaket- 
/ ? A > / AN / / av / 
11 pevors adrots emuféobar. €av O€ oe AdPn 3 plaon 
Ta EK THS KwWpas Aendarnbevra., ov xp? THY dlwsw 
avray moveltobar Tas adras 6d0v0s Kal TOUS avrovs 
ywpous, aAAa THdE” prev dAlyous emidaivecbar Kal 
SuWKovTas 42) emucatahapBdvew Ekovolws Kal 
3 / + / / 
avuTomtws, GAAo 5é mAnP0s peta a€toxpéov duva- 
pews omevoew Kat aAAas odovs OTL TaxXLOTA 
Topevopevov, Kal PUdoavras” ev TH TOV ayovTwv 


1 Casaubon: xot¢ws M. 2 Casaubon: dyovrac M. 
3 Casaubon : rpoopbévrwy M. 
4 Added by Casaubon. 5 arpétepov Casaubon. 
®§ Reiske: 7 M. 7 Hertlein: wavta M. 
8 Orelli: cwfowro M. 
8 Added by Casaubon. 10 Casaubon: rijode M. 


82 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 7-11 


attack them, cut off their retreat with your cavalry, 
set ambuscades of picked men, and, engaging them 
with -your other light-armed forces, bring up your 
heavy-armed troops in close formation not far behind 
the divisions already sent forward. 

Attack the enemy where you are not unwilling 
to do battle, and where you will not be at a dis- 
advantage in the fight. Hence, for the reasons 
already stated, it is sometimes to your interest to 
give the enemy rein, and to allow him to lay waste 
as much of the land as he wishes, where, while 
plundering and laden with spoil, he will easily suffer 
punishment at your hands. For in this way all 
that has been taken would be recovered, and those 
who had done the damage would receive their just 
deserts. On the other hand, if you should hastily 
send out relief forces, you might endanger your 
own men, unprepared and not yet in order, while 
the enemy, although they would already have done 
a little harm, yet, because they were still in order, 
would get away unpunished. But it is much better, 
as I have written,! to give way to them, and then 
| attack them when off their guard. But if the 
plundering of the country has escaped your notice 
or has occurred before you could prevent it, you 
| should not make your pursuit of the enemy along 
the same roads nor in the same places, but should 
cause only a few to make a demonstration there, and, 
in their pursuit, intentionally but without arousing 
suspicion, refrain from overtaking them, while the 
army as a whole, in considerable strength, should 
hasten as quickly as possible by other roads, and, 

1 The reference is to §§ 5, 6, and 7 of this same chapter. © 

1 Haase: ¢@dcavros M. 
83 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ \ \ A b] ~ / / > / 
Xwpa rept TA Opia Eevedpetoa (dOacat dé ce EiKds 
Pb) / 
EOTL, TPOTEPOV Els THY eKElvwY adiKopmevov, dua TO 
/ 
Xeiav ayovtas abrovds Bpadutépws mopevecbar), 
\ bud / a A 
Ty 0 emiGeow attots mrovetobae SeuTvoTrovoupevots 
ob yap Aendarinoartes, év TE TH avTa@v” non yeyo- 
vores Kat ev aodare? ovres, pos padupiar Tpe- 
TO[LEvoU apvdaxrorepws a av dtaKkéowTo. dpiarov O°, 
Wa veoKpnow* Tots oTpaTidrais xpnon, dTapyov- 
/ 
Twy ye? mActwy, Kata OddAattav Thy diwéw 
A / \ / \ \ A >? \ 
movetaGar: TO Te yap POaca Kat Ta adda els TO 
, / 2\ \ a , ec19 
d€ov cou ouuPijoeTar, eav un Katodbbys tA€wy ta 
avt@v.  Kupnvatovs dé cat Bapxaiovs Aéyerau 
\ ” \ / \ ¢ / ¢ \ 
Kat aAAas Twas ToXEts Tas apa€énAdTous TE ddovS 
Kat pakpas Ponfeias emt cvvwpidwv Kai Cevydv 
Bon Get: Kopodevtwv S€ eis TO TPOOHKOY | Kat €€fs 
Tov Cevyéwy TaparaxGevrov, amoBavres ot omAtrat 
Kat ev Tager yevouevor edOds _VEOKMATES Tpoo- 
epepovTo Tots TroAELiots. ols ovv edTropta Cevyar, 
KaXov TO mAcoveKTHULA, TAXYY TE Kal VeOKULATAS TOUS 
oTpaTwwras els TO dSéov éAfetv: einoav dé av at 
apuatéar ev0vs Kal epupa Tats oTparomedetais: ot 
Tpavpatiar Kal et Tt GAAO yévoito ovuTTwELA Tots 
/ 
OTpaTwOrats, emt TOUTOUS amdyour’ av els THY TrOALW. 
Kat € Edy pev HY xXwpa pay eveloforos, aA’ oAtyan 


@ow at etoPoAat Kal orevai, TpoKaTacKevacavTas” 


1 Casaubon: Nav M. 2 Hercher: durav M. 
3 Added by Casaubon. 4 Casaubon: tvaveouncow M. 
> Casaubon: 6é¢ M. 6 Casaubon: xpnvaious cai M. 


7 Kéchly and Riistow: mpoxatacxevacavta M. 





1 This region was widely celebrated for its horses and 
cars, and according to one account the Libyans were the 
first to yoke horses to a chariot, a tradition which would 


84 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 11-16 


anticipating the enemy, should lie in ambush in 
the land of the invaders, near the border. You 
may reasonably expect to reach their land first, since 
because of driving their booty they must advance 
more slowly. And you should make your attack 
upon them while they are at the evening meal; for 
when the marauders are already within their own 
border and feel themselves secure they would be 
inclined to carelessness and be more off their guard. 
The best plan of all, however, in order to have your 
soldiers fresh for battle, provided boats are at hand, 
is to make the pursuit by sea; for you will thus out- 
strip the enemy, and the other conditions necessary 
for success will favour you, provided you are not 
detected by them on your voyage. Of the people 
of Cyrene and Barca and certain other cities the 
story runs that they made their rescue expeditions 
over long wagon-roads in four- and in two-horse 
vehicles ;4 and when they had reached the ap- 
pointed place, and the vehicles had been arranged 
in order, the heavy-armed troops alighted, and, 
forming at once in ranks, attacked the enemy with 
unimpaired strength. Hence, for those who have 
a ready supply of vehicles, it is a great advantage 
to have their soldiers arrive quickly where they 
are needed and with fresh strength; further, the 
wagons would be a ready defence for the camp, 
while soldiers who were wounded or suffering from 
any other mishap could be conveyed in them back 
to the city. 

And if the country be not easy to invade but have 
few and narrow approaches, you should prepare 


be very natural if the suggestion that Libya was the original 
home of the ancestors of the thorough-bred horse be correct. 


85 


17 


18 


L$ 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


avTas, ws mpoyéypamtTa: ovTw pepiobévtas,” emi 
tats eloBodais*® evavtiotcbat Tots emyeipodar Kal 
BovdAopévots pos THY TOAW 7pootévar, TpodiaTaka- 
/ 4 \ \ FR a / \ 2 z 
jevous® Kal Tovs PpvKro is yrwpilovras Ta aAAjAwv 
m7aOn, 0 o7rws TQ pLepn Bonff, ¢ av Tt dewvTar aAAjAwy. 
av d€ pn dSucetaBodos 7 7 Xwpa, 7 de® ToMax i) 
moMous eloBadeuw, xpnoysous" catdadbeny THs 
X@pas TOTOUS, wore Tots mroAep.tous yaremnv eivar 
77 md.pooov emt THv mOAW. ay de pode TatTa 
dTapXN» TOV Aouray katadaBety € eyyvs Ths ToAEws 
Xwpia cUELaxa mpos TO pedxeobat Te * mAcovEenTiK@s 
Kat evaTraMakTws exe Tod Xeoptou" orav BovdAn” 
ATLEVAL mpos Ty moAw* Kay" * ores euBahovtes ot 
moA€ pow els THY Xwpav mpos TH 7OAw TopEevwvTat, 
Kardpxew™ bas Tis paxns €k TOV Xewpiov TOUTWV 
Opumpevovs. Tas 8 emecets avTots movetobat 
del mAEOVEKTOOVTG EK TIS Xwpas Th ovvn beta 7oAd 
yap mpoegets” Tpoevdars TQ Xwpia KQL 7 mpodycy ets 
TOTOUS otovs av ov BovAn,”* cot pev yywotovs” Kat 
\ ~ \ A 
émuTndetous Kal dvdd€acbar Kai di@Eat Kat guyetv 
Kal amevar eis THY TOAW AaApaiws Kal davepOs— 
ere O€ Kal Ta emir7deua TpoewooTa O7ov av THis 
xwpas bmapXT) op —, Tots de TroAep.ious aouv7 Gers 
Kal ayv@Tas Kat ‘we mameere TavTwy ToUTWY. 
1 Orelli: aita M: avrais Capps. 
2 Casaubon: yepicbévta M: pépy mepicbévra Capps. 
3 Kéchly and Rtistow; rjs eicBodjjo M. 
4 Casaubon: mpocdiatatauévous M. 
5 Added by Hercher. 6 Hertlein: #67 M. 
7 Herm. Sch6ne: xp? buds M. 


8 Casaubon: 7 M. 


9 Herm. Schéne: éxwv 76 xwplov M. 
10 Hertlein: 67’ av Botha M. 
11 Herm. Schone: xai M. 


86 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 16-19 


these in advance by such a distribution of forces as 
has just been described, placing soldiers at the 
approaches to oppose those who are attacking and 
wish to march upon the city, having stationed in 
advance other troops who are made aware by signal- 
fires of the fortunes of the several divisions, in order 
that these may bring support, if in any way they 
need one another’s help. If, on the other hand, the 
land is not difficult to invade, but it is possible for 
large forces to attack at many points, the strategic 
positions of the country should be seized, so that 
the approach to the city may be difficult for the 
enemy. Again, if such places do not exist, it is 
necessary to occupy near the city other points of 
support, so that you may both fight to good advan- 
tage and also be able easily to withdraw from the 
place whenever you wish to retreat to the city. 
And then if the enemy break into the country and 
make for the city, you must begin the fighting, 
setting out from these places. You must always, 
in making your attacks upon the enemy, strive to 
profit from your acquaintance with the terrain; for 
you will have a great advantage from previous know- 
ledge of the country and by leading the enemy into 
such places as you may wish, which are known to 
you and suitable, whether for defence, or pursuit, or 
flight, or withdrawal into the city either secretly or 
openly. Moreover, you will also know in advance 
what part of the country will supply you with 
provisions, whereas the enemy will be unacquainted, 
ignorant, and embarrassed in all these particulars. 





12 Herm. Schéne: mopevovrar kal dpyew M. 
13 Reiske: mpojtes M. 14 Hertlein: Bourke. M. 
15 Casaubon: yvwrovs M. 16 Casaubon: cuv#Oes M. 


87 


20 


21 


22 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


3Q 7 a Pad + y lon / > / 
elooTes O€ OTL ATrELpOV OVTA THS KWpas ov povov 
b) / ~ / <> / > % \ ~ 
QOUVaTOV mpagat tt av OéAev, adda Kat owb yas 
XaAerrov, TOV Ye Ev TH Xwpa Bovdopeveny € ETTLYELPELY, 
mpos mavT av” ar oApens Kal beds SLAKELLEVOL 
opddAAowTo d1a TO*® udev THY TovwovTwy eikaleww. 
dueveyKou yap av EKATEPOUS® | Ooov El Tots pev VUKTOS 
paxeobar etArxer? Tots d€ TWL€pas, el oldv Té TwWS 
nv’ tTotro apa yeveotar. dmdpXovTos d€ oor 
vauTiKov, TeTANnp@obar Tas vats: od yap €Adoow 

>) ~ 

Tovs ToAEutous oxAjcovow ot év Tats vavaiv, éav ye" 
mapamAéov® tmapxn mpos Ta EmiVardoo.a Ywpia Kal 
Tas mapa OdAraccav odovs, WwW tro tuadv® Te 
OxABvTat Kal UO THY eK THV VHaV KaTa VwTOV 
avtots THv amoBacw moLovpéevwv.  Tadra d€ ovTwWs 
TpaTTOVTEs’ aTapacKevacToTaTols av Tots moAe- 

/ > A \ \ / \ > ets ~ > A 
putous emiBetabe Kat mapa dd€av Ta ad’ buadv adrots 


amroBain. 
XVII. 


"Ev™ dé zy Ouovoovan moder Kal dTéTTWS pos 
adAjrous €xovTwv xp7) mpovoobvTa evAafetobar Tas 
pet OxAov e€ddous emt Gewpiav aprados Kat 
immodpomias Kat Tov GAAwy aywvwv oaat ye 


Hertlein: eidéras é7e M. 
R. Sch6ne: mavra* 7) M. 
Casaubon: d:67. M. 
tots érépos M: rots deleted by Schéne: éxarépos 
Hercher. 
®> Herm. SchGne: vuxrés (space of 6 lett.) nxn M. 
6 Hercher: 4 M. 
7 Kéchly and Riistow: te M. 
Kéchly and Rtistow: rapari\éwy M. 
® Casaubon: 7judv M. 10 Added by R. Schone. 


88 


BP OC NW eH 


oo 


: 
| 
: 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 20—xvu. 1 


The enemy, moreover, knowing that if one is un- 
familiar with the country, not only is he unable to 
accomplish anything that he wishes, but it is also 
difficult for him to get away in safety, at least if 
the inhabitants wish to attack him, would come to 
grief from their spiritless and timid disposition to- 
wards everything, because they are unable to con- 
jecture anything of the sort. For there would be 
as great a difference between the two parties as if 
it were the lot of the one to fight by night and 
the other by day, if this could in any way happen 
at the same time. If you have a naval force the 
ships must be manned, for the marines will annoy 
the enemy as much as the infantry if your fleet 
sails by the coasts and the roads along the shore, 
so that the enemy will be embarrassed both by you 
and by the men from the ships who disembark in 
their rear. By your doing so the enemy would be 
most unprepared for your attack, and they would be 
surprised by the outcome of your manceuvre. 


XVII. 


In a city in which harmony is wanting and where 
the citizens are mutually distrustful, you must exer- 
cise foresight and caution about the crowds that go 
out to see a torch-race,! horse-racing, or other 


1 A characteristic form of sport among the Greeks, in 
which not merely speed and endurance were tested, but 


especially the skill with which a lighted torch could be 


carried a considerable distance. It was most famous at 
Athens, butalso is attested for a number of other communities. 





11 Casaubon: zpdatrwy M. 12 Casaubon: éav M. 
18 Casaubon: rotc M. 


89 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


¢e / A ~ 
lepoTroulat Tavdonuel eKTOS THS ToAEWS KAaL Ov 
Yi 
OmAoLs TOTAL exméuTovTal, ETL Kal TrEpl Tas 
mavdnuous vewAKias' Kal Tas ovvexdopas TAY 
” ~ ~ 
TedevTnCdvTwV: eve yap Kal ev To@de Kalp@ 
2 opahjvar TOUS ETEpous.” Tapddevy}La dé efoiow 
YEVvopeEvov malos. eoprijs yap 7avonpLov efw THs 
mOAEws “Apyetov yevowevys eftjyov" TomaTTy ovv 
omAows THV ev TH WAucia cuyvol b€ TOV emBou- 
AevovTwy Kal avrot mapeckevdlovto Kal avrTots 
/ > 
3 cuveltovrTo evoTrAoL Els THY TOT, Kal ws* eyéveTo 
m™pos T@® va@ Te kat TH Pwu@, ot pev mroAdol ra 
omAa Géuevor amtwrépw Tod vaod mpos Tas edyds TE 
4 ~ b] 
Kat TOV Bwuov wpuyncav. Tv de émBovAevdvTwv 
ot pev emt TOV OTTAwY Orrepweway, ot Oe Tats apxats 
TE KAL TOV moAur@v Tots Tpo€eXovat TapeoTnoav €v 
4 Tats evxais, avnp avdpl, EXOVTES eyxeuptoua: Kal 
Tovs pev KateBeBAnjKeoar,’ ot d€ atT@v els THY 
mow ovv Tots OmAoLs EoTevoav. ETEpor dé THY 
> ~ \ 
ouveTtPovrevovTwy BrouetvavtTes ev TH OAL eT 
vont ~ SI 
Tav TpoadtobevTwr® omAitav’ mpoKatréAaBov ovs 
~ ~ ‘4 ~ 
mpoonke Tomous THS ToOAews, Ware SeEacbar TaV 
y A 2 , 8 \ ag \ , 
e€w ovs e€BovdAovTo® 610 det? Tas TovavTas 
b] \ > > \ ~ > / a 
emuBovAds ev ovdevi Kaip@ advdAdktws Sdiaxeiobar. 
5 Xtou d€ ayovres Ta Avcovtowa Kal TéptTroVTEs ToUTAS 
~ / 
apmpas mpos Tob Avovicov Tov Bwyov, mpoKaTa- 

1 Casaubon: veodxiac M. 

2 Casaubon: éraipous M. 3 Casaubon: é&elpywy M. 

+ cuxvol (Meier) 6é trav (Kéchly and Riistow) . . . mape- 
oxevagovro (Meier) . . . cuvelrovro évorha: (Hercher) . . . os 
(added by Orelli) : cuxvav Tav 6éKTN. . . . Tapecxevafov KTH. 

. ouvynttobvTo 67a M. 

5 Hertlein: xareBeSrjxeicav M. 


6 W. Dindorf: mpocadtic@évTwy M. 7 Meineke: é7\wv M. 
8 Casaubon : éBouXevovro M. ® Casaubon: 67 M. 


90 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 1-5 


contests—whenever, that is, there are sacred rites 
in which the entire people engage outside the city, and 
processions that issue from the city under arms— ; 
also about the public hauling up of ships and the 
obsequies of the dead. For it is possible on such an 
occasion for one faction to be overthrown, and as an 
example I will cite an actual instance. A public 
festival of the Argives! took place outside the city, 
and the citizens formed an armed procession of men 
of military age. Meanwhile many conspirators also 
got ready, equipped themselves with arms, joined the 
procession, and when it came to the temple and the 
altar the majority set down their weapons at a dis- 
tance from the temple and went to pray at the altar. 
Of the conspirators, however, some remained with 
their arms, and others took their stand beside the 
magistrates and leading men of the city while they 
were at prayer, each beside his man, with dagger 
in hand. These men some of the conspirators 
struck down, while others with their arms hastened 
into the city, and still others of the conspirators, 
who had remained in the town with the hoplites 
who had been previously collected, captured those 
quarters which were necessary for their purpose, 
and so admitted only those whom they wished. 
Accordingly, against such treachery one must at 
no time be off his guard. The people of Chios, 
when they celebrate the festival of Dionysus and 
send brilliant processions to his altar, first with 


1 This was on the occasion of the short-lived oligarchic 
revolution after the battle of Mantinea in 418 B.c. The 
_“ hoplites who had been previously collected,” of whom 
Aeneas speaks below, were clearly the thousand Lacedae- 
monians who helped the oligarchs, according to Thucydides 
v. 81 (cf. Plutarch, Alcib. 15). 


QI 


6 


2 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


AapBavovor Tas els THV ayopav depovaas ddovs 
dvdakais Kat duvdpect moAAats, KwAVLa yobv' od 
puukpoyv Tots BovAopévois vewrepilew.  apiorov dé 
TAS apXaS TPATov peTA THS Tponpynuevyns” duva- 
pews lepoTrornoat, ToUTwY dé EK TOD OxyAOV aTraAAa- 
yevTwV, OUTW Tous adXovs GUMLEVAL. 


XVIII. 


"Orav d5€ of éxmopevbevTes® TrapayévwrTa. Kal 
detAn ylyvnTat, onuatvew* dermvotoetobar Kal 
eis dudakny evar. ev @ ot PvAakes edTpeTriCovTar, 
évy tovTw Tept TOV TVAwVY EmipednTéov OmwWsS 
KaA@s KAeiwvTat: Kat yap® mept tas Badavous 
ToAAa oddAyata ylyvetar dua Tas TOY apxYdovTwy 
padakias. oTav yap emi tas mvAas Tis adtav 
eMOwv KXreicat pt) adtoupyos ylyvntat, addAa 
mapadovs THv Badavov T@ mvAwp@ KAetoat KeAcUn, 
Tade Kakoupyetta. v0 mvAwpav Povdopéeve 
vuxtos de€ac8ar Tovs modcuiovs. 6 pe Tis 

1 Kéchly and Riistow: otv M. 


2 Meier: zpoepnuevns M. 

3 Meineke: eiomopevéévras M. 

4 Casaubon: onuaive: M. 

5 Oldfather (cf. xxiii. 2): xNelwvrae (Space of 5 letters) zrepi 
mépras M: yap B in margin (for wéprac): rept yap ras 
Casaubon. 





1 For understanding the following passage it is perhaps 
necessary to observe that ancient city gates, which were 
regularly two-valved and opened inward, were locked by 
passing a long bar from jamb to jamb. In the upper 
surface of the opening into one of the jambs in which the 
bar rested, a deep socket was cut and a hole bored through 
the bar at the point which overlay this socket. Through 
this hole and into this socket was then dropped the bolt-pin, 


92 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 5—xvimt. 3 


guards and numerous forces take possession of the 
roads leading to the market-place—truly no slight 
hindrance to those who wish to begin a revolution. 
It is best for the officials to begin the celebration 
accompanied by the previously selected force, and 
only after these have been separated from the 
populace to allow the others to come. 


XVIII. 


And whenever those who have gone out return 
and it is late afternoon, one should give the signal for 
the evening meal and for mounting guard; and while 
the guards are making ready care must be taken 
that the gates are well locked, since many mistakes 
are made about the bolt-pins as the result of 
slackness on the part of the authorities. For when 
any of them goes to lock the gate, yet does 
not do so with his own hands, but gives the bolt- 
pin over to the gate-keeper and orders him to lock 
it, the following sorts of mischief are done by gate- 
keepers who wish to admit the enemy by night.! 


a metal cylinder, in such a way that approximately one 
half of it would be in the socket, the other half in the hole 
in the bar, but that its top should be below the upper surface 
of the bar, so that it could not be pulled out by any chance 
comer. In order to extract the bolt-pin it was necessary, 
therefore, to have a key so shaped as to reach down into the 
hole, while the bolt-pin and the key had to be fitted to one 
another by hooks or catches, so that the key could take 
firm hold of the pin and draw it out.—The above note follows 
the results of Kéchly and Riistow’s elaborate discussion of 
the passage. For modern survivals in Greece and elsewhere 
of this general method of locking by means of a bar and a 
bolt-pin see H. Diels, Antike Technik (1920), 40 ff., and the 
literature cited there. 


93 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


npLepas eis THY Baravodonny TOV muh@y dppLov 
mpoeveBarer, Omres 7) BaAavos e€w evn Kal pay 
eupaddAnrar eis TO TpUTyNa. dact de Kal eu- 
4 BeBAnuévas® BaAdvous de eSarpeb var. eu- 
adAopevns Kat odAtyov GpLpLov eis tv Badavo- 
Sdxqv oeteobau abopyti, wa prndets atoPynrar. 
peeTewpos ody 7 Pddavos eyiyvero mpoomumTovons 
Ths wapov, Wore padiws adryy eEapeOHvar. 
5 “Hédn dé mvAwpos dbeEdpevos tHv BadAavov mapa 
oTparnyod euBaretv, evreuav AdOpa opidry® 7 
pwn THY Padravor, Bpdoxov XAivou meptBadaw év- 
éBadev, eita pet odtyov T@ Kiv@ dvéoTracey. 
6 dAXos be TpoeTouyLaaas €v yopydbep Aem7@ eve- 
BaXev* TPOonppLevou Awov, Kal voTEpov avéoTacey. 
e&nped " d€ Kal duncreusiere 2 BdAavos. ETL 
d€ Kal Deppactia Aen7@ 2enpéy XP" d€ Tod 
Deppactiov TO pev eV [€pos eivat olov owAva, 
TO O€ ETepov TAaTv, WoTe TH pev GwAnvoede? 
droAauBavew tHv Bddravov, 7@ dé émAauBavew. 
7 etepos 6é eAabev Tpebas TOV poxhov pueAAwv 
euBdiMrew, iva. pn KaTeAPy eis TO Tpv7na 7 BaAavos 
KaL VOTEpOV aobeioa? avotxOy 7 vAn. 
8 Ilepi ’Ayatay dé ev 7oAeu’ . . . emtxetpodvTes KpUu- 
daiws dé€ac8a. E€vous mpGrov pev THs Badavov 
1 Casaubon: éfouévyn wi) M. 
2 éuBeBrynupéevas M. 3 Casaubon: cundn M. 
K6chly and Riistow: é8arev M. 
5 Hertlein: éwodeica M. 
§ Added by Kéchly and Riistow: space of four letters 
vacant in M. 


7 Casaubon added ‘Hpa:éwy from Polyaenus ii. 36, but 
that is more than doubtful. 


ro 


1 That is, so as to fit about the cylindrical pin. 
2 A similar story is told about Heraea in Polyaenus ii. 


O4. 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 3-8 


Some one during the day has poured sand into the 
bolt-socket of the gate, so that the bolt may stick 
outside and not drop into the hole. They say, too, 
that bolt-pins already dropped into place have been 
extracted in the following manner. While sand 
was poured into the socket a few grains at a time, 
the bolt-pin was shaken noiselessly so that no one 
would notice it. Accordingly, as the sand worked 
down, the bolt-pin came to the top, so that it was 
easily taken out. 

It has also happened that a keeper of the gate, 
on receiving from the general the bolt-pin to put in 
place, with a chisel or file surreptitiously made a 
groove in the pin, looped a linen thread about it, 
and inserted it, and then after a little drew it out 
by the thread. Yet another prepared a net of fine 
meshes to which was attached a linen thread, put 
the pin in that, and afterwards drew it out. The 
bolt-pin has also been removed by driving it up out 
of the socket with blows from beneath. Again, it 
has been removed by means of delicate pincers ; 
and for this one part of the pincers must be grooved,! 
the other flat, so as to get an under-hold on the 
bolt-pin with the grooved part and an over-hold 
with the other. And still another, just as he was 
to drop the bolt-pin in place, secretly turned the bar 
in order that the pin might not fall into the hole 
and that afterwards the gate might be forced open. 

In the city of . . . near the border of Achaea ? 
certain men who were endeavouring to smuggle in 
mercenaries began by getting the dimensions of 

36, but Heraea is an Arcadian city at a considerable distance 
from Achaea, and the event described by Polyaenus took 


| place between 240-235 B.c., more than a century later than 
the time of Aeneas. 
95 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


yy \ / / ~ / > ~ 

9 €haPov TA wéTPA TpOTW TOL@Mde. TpoKabevTes Ev TH 
TLEPS els THY Badavodonny Awov Xertod Kal 
toxupob Bpoxov Kal TAS apxas ef ovoas apaveis, 

ws ev TH yuKrt eveBANOn 7 Bddavos, avéoracay" 
Tats apxats” Tob Xivov Tov Bpoxov Kat tHv BdAavov, 
AaBovres 5€ Ta peTpa avTHs mdAw KaljKav. 
emelra Tpos féeTpA OUTW THS Baddvov Badavaypav 

10 émrotrnoavTo =TpoTm Tormde. EeyadKevoavTo oi- 
hwva Te Kal dopuoppadida.® nv d€ 0 pLev cider 
epyacllets Kkalldmep etwle yiyvecBar- tas de* 
poppoppagidos TO ev O€V Kal TOAD [4€pos Elpyaorto 
Kablarrep Tats aAAats Poppoppaiow, n O€ AaB) 
Hv KolAn wor7rep oTupartou a To oTeAcov® éu- 

11 BoAAerat. Kal mapa pev TO yadne? eveBAHOy 

/ > / \ > / if \ \ 
oteAcov, amevexbevtos de eEnpébn, wate mpos THY 
Baravov® mpooaxletoay apyocat. TPOVONTLKOS 
o7 doKeEt moun Oivat mpos 70’ Tov xadkéa pendev 
dom TEDoAL O TE oipwy ot evexa epyaobeis ein 
Kal 7) doppoppagis, Kat TA apweva ylyvecBar. 

12 "Hédn dé twes ev TH BadavoddKn ovons Badavou 
TO Tepiwetpov de EdaPov. amydAdv KepapuKoV 
mepieriEavtes lovin AeTTa KabljKav, apyevw 
muelovres mept tHV BadAavov tov mndAdv- emeita 
avéotacav tov myAov Kat eAaBov tov tUmoVv THs 
BaAdavov, mpos ov THY Badavaypav emoijoarvTo. 

13. Lup Barrera’ yevéobar Tyuévw “Podiw ev *Iwvia 

1 Orelli: dvéoracey M. 2 Lange: ras dpxas M. 
3 L. Dindorf: gopuopopida M (and so below where M has 
only one p). 

K6chly and Riistow: ve M. 

R. Schéne: 7 (lacuna of thirty letters) crekéa M. 

cigwva Kéchly. 

K6échly and Riistow: zpés 76 Behrendt: mpécre M. 


“Nm Ot wm, 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 8-13 


the bolt-pin in the following manner. During the 
day they let down into the socket a loop of fine and 
strong linen thread, the ends of which were outside 
but not in sight, and when at night the bolt-pin was 
put in place, with the ends of the thread they pulled 
up the loop and the pin, took its dimensions, and 
replaced it. Next they made a pin-hook to fit the 
dimensions of the pin thus taken, in the following 
manner. They had a tube made and a needle for 
sewing rush-mats. Now the tube was made in the 
usual fashion, but the mat-needle had the point and 
the longer end made like other such needles, while 
the head was hollow like that of a spike at the butt 
of a spear into which the shaft is fitted; and at 
the blacksmith’s shop a shaft was fitted into it, 
but when they took it home this was removed, so 
that the head fitted the bolt-pin when they were 
put together. Now that seems a very shrewd 
device to prevent the blacksmith from suspecting 
the purpose for which the tube and the mat-needle 
were made and the fittings devised. 

Some other men once, while the bolt-pin was in 
the socket, got its measurements in the following 
manner. They wrapped a lump of potter's clay 
in a fine linen cloth and let it down into the socket, 
pressing the clay about the bolt-pin with a tool: 
then they drew up the clay, took a cast of the pin, 
and made the key to fit. 

The great city of Teos in Ionia once came very near 


8 Herm. Schéne suggests rap’ éAdxucTov HAPev broxeipros in 
place of cuu8d\rera, because it appears that the town was 
not actually captured ;; the end of the narrative, however, 
§ 19, is suspiciously abrupt. 


H Q7 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Tews modus edpeyebns mpoooTos® bro TOD muAwpod. 
aAda Te ou mpoovvelevTo Kal vUKTa doeAqvov Kal 
oKoTEWwny, ev 7 Eder TOV prev avotEat, Tov de peTa 
Eevwy elceAPetv. emer 5° dev” eis THY Eemodoay 
voKTOL mpax Ova, Taphv TO muAwp@ avip ooTts 
emrel owe ap Kal dvAakal Te ETL TOD TELxXEOS xab- 
loravto Kal at mUAa eueAdAov KAcieoPar, oKdTous 
otv 0n Ovtos, amnAAacaeTo, éeKdyoas apy 
ayabidos® Awov KAwotot, Omep ovK Epedrev 
padtws Ovappayhvar. THhv O€ ayasida emropevIn 
atreNoowv? a0 THs Trohews TEVTE oradua, OTN 
eweMov | OL elomopevodprevort nee. ere dé 
Tmapyay 0 oTpaTnyos KAcioat Tas rinas, Kal EOWKE 
KaTQ TO eJos 7@ mvAwp@ euBadrety TH Badavov, 
SeSdpevos EVETELLEV Aabpatcs apopytt pwn 7 
opirn’ tHv BddAavov, wore evexeobae Awvov. cira 
Bpoxov mep.bets Kaine THY Badavov EXOMEVYV 
b7r0 Tov Awov: pera de TadTa KiWioas TOV jeoxAov 
Kal emdelEas TO oTpaTny®@ KeKAevopevqy Ty 
mvAnv eiyev novyxtiav. Xpovov d< mpotovros ava- 
omdacas 77v Badavov, THY apxnv TOU omdprov 
mpos avtov® edqoev TODOE EVEKEV, o7rws,® el 
Kabutvwcas TUxO0L,”° eyepJein oTw@mevos BO TOO 
Nivov. 6 S€ Tryevos raphy dveckevacpévos pel” 
dv ewedAev elomropeveobar eis ywplov pyTov mpos 
Tov Tv ayabida exovta. Hv dé mpoovyKeipevov 


1 Schenkl: mpoerdoroo M (defended by Hunter who follows 
Hug placing i7é before Tyyévy). 


2 Haase: dé M. 

3 Casaubon: dxaydidos M (and similarly below). 

4 Casaubon: éropevOnv M. > Hertlein: dmaAdccwy M. 
6 Hertlein: eicmopeviuevor M. 7 Casaubon: oundn M. 
8 Hercher: du7ov M. ® Hercher: 67 M. 


98 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvi. 13-18 


falling into the hands of Temenus the Rhodian 
through the treachery of the gate-keeper.1 Among 
other things they agreed upon a dark, moonless 
night, on which one was to open the gate and the 
other to enter with mercenaries. Now when the 
plan was to be put into execution the following 
night, a man came up to the gate-keeper late in the 
evening, when the guards were stationed on the 
wall and the gates were about to be locked, as it 
was already dark, and then disappeared, after first 
making fast the end of a ball of twisted linen cord, 
which was not likely to be easily broken. He went 
away, unrolling the ball as he went, until he reached 
a spot five stadia * from the city, where the troops 
which were to enter would come. Then, when the 
general came to lock the gates, and as usual gave 
the gate-keeper the bolt-pin to put in place, the 
latter took it, and with a file or a chisel, noise- 
_lessly and without attracting attention, cut a groove 
in it so that a thread would catch it. He then 
slipped a loop over the pin and let it down with 
_ the thread attached to it. After that he shook 
the bar, showing the general that the gate was 
locked, and held his peace. Some time after he 
drew up the pin and tied the end of the cord to 
himself, so that if he should happen to fall asleep 
he would be awakened by a pull at the cord. Now 
Temenus, provided with the forces which were to 
| enter with him, came near to a place agreed upon 
with the man who had the ball of cord. And a 


1 Nothing further is known about the incident described 
) here. 






2 Approximately one-half mile. 


to J.. Dindorf: téixn M. 
99 


19 


Li) 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


TO Typevp 71p0S TOV muhwpov eADovre" cts TOV 
X@pov ory TO" OmadpToV. Kal el pev HV eTOULG 
TO TuAwpa dmep HOere, mpocemonoa” Tpos Thy 
apynv tod Aivov paddov é€piov Kat adetvar, omep 
>] \ ¢ / 4 / \ \ / 
idav o Pypevos ewedAAev o7revdew pos Tas 7UAas 
et 0 ameTUyyaveyv 0 muAwpos Tod DeAjpatos .. . 
) \ / > ~ \ / 5 a \ 
ovoev mpocdaibas adjKev to Awov,® wate Tov 
Tywevov é€x mroAdod dbdcar re Kat Aabety amad- 


v 


a 


25. > A \ \ / 
Aayevta.® joldvovto ody év TH vuKTL TO OTapTOV 
/ >] ~ / @7 aS + 
dmapyov...” ev TH TOAEL, oY Olov TE HV Tpot€evat. 


Tpomov d€ Kata Tovde mpoedo0n odts 70 


~ / b] / > \ / ¢ 
muAwpod. oavvybles emoijoato, emet peAAoev at 


mUAa KAEleobar, Ddpiov Exwv eErévat® ws Eh’ Vdwp. 
3 / \ eDire\\ \ / 9 / ek > 
adixvovjzrevos de emt THY KpHVnVv® AiBovs ETifer Ets 
TOTOV yvwoTov Tots TroAEulois, eb OD Poit@vTes 
v4 \ ~ / / 4 / 

eUpLoKov dua TOV TiWeuevwr AiGanv diep BéAou 
dnAoty 0 THs Tews puhag. el pev yap Tparny 
pvdacao,’® eva. NiBov" érifer mpds Tov ouyKet- 
evov TOmov, el dé Sevtépav, dvo, et dE TpiTHY, 
Tpels, 718 


12 


> \ Ur / ” \ \ 

el O€ TeTapTny, TéTTApas. ETL OE Kal 7 
~ / \ \ ‘14 ~ A_ 15 Ao 

Tov Teiyous Kal Kata Ti Tov dvdakav” AeAdyxou, 
i > ~ / / ay Be 

tovTw doty'® TH tTpdTtm onuaivwy evedwKer. 
~ 5 A Ss ‘ / = / / 

Tatta det otv ovuBaddAduevov mavta dvdAatrecbat 


1 Hertlein: é\dav M. 
* Kochly and Rtistow: réov M. 
Casaubon: tpoornijca M. 
Capps and Rouse indicate a lacuna. 
Hertlein: rov Nivov M. 
Casaubon: dmadhayévrac M. 
R. Schéne suggests dvev uaddod and an indication that 
from this Temenus concluded that conditions were un- 
favourable for his attempt. 
8 Casaubon: elovévac M. 
9 Casaubon: krXivny M. 


100 


iv) 


1D oo & 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvii. 18-21 


previous arrangement had been made with the 
gate-keeper that Temenus was to pull the cord 
when he reached the spot, and if the keeper had 
things ready as he wished, he was to tie a flock of 
wool to the end of the cord and let it go, and, when 
Temenus saw that, he was to hurry to the gate. 
But in case of failure to secure what he wished [he 
was to let the cord go without anything tied to it. 
Accordingly] he let the cord go without anything 
tied to it, so that Temenus with a long start got 
away without being discovered. They found out 
accordingly in the night that the cord was [... 
so because the situation was unfavourable] in the 
city it was impossible to proceed. 

Here is also another way in which a city was 
betrayed by a gate-keeper. He made it his custom 
to go out with a water-jug, as though for water, when 
the gates were about to be locked. On arriving 
at the spring he would put stones in a spot known to 
the enemy, who, when reaching the place, found out 
by means of the stones just what the city watchman 
wished to reveal. For if he was to keep the first 
watch, he would place one stone at the prearranged 
spot, if the second, two, if the third, three, if the 
fourth, four. Furthermore, by giving signals in 
this fashion, he furnished information both as to 
what position on the wall and to which detachment 
of the guards he had been assigned by lot. Accord- 


| ingly, with all this in mind, the officer should be on 





10 Kéchly and Rtistow: ¢uvdAdcooev AB. 
11 Casaubon: avé’ av AC (avéav B). 
12 Casaubon: tpityc M. 13 Casaubon: 7 ABC. 
14 Orelli: 7 M. 15 Kéchly and Rtistow: duAdcav M. 
16 R. Schone (se. 67 of): & ofy ABC. 


101 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Kal Tas 7UAas avrov Tov apxovTa KAeiew Kal pH 
aAAw dvddvar THv Badravov. 

22 FY oe mpdcoovra. d€ TL ToLovTOY TOV peoxAov 
agavilew: dn yap Twwves emupaverres UmrevavTlou 
ebuacavtTo maAw KAetoat, Tod poxhob TapovTos. 
duo det mavTa Ta ToLabTa Tpovoeir. 


XIX. [MoyAod zpias ] 


Acampiovra de poxAcov edavov émuyetv: Paacov 
yap Kal axpopyrt padov mproOnoerar. eav dé 
KQaL omoyyos emi TE TOV Tplova Kal TOV peoxhov 
emdeOf), TOMA KW@POTE POs 0 popos* EOTAQL. 
ToAXa 8 av Tus Kal dra o OuoTpoTra ToUTOLs ypdibat. 
adda Tatra pév taperéov. 


XX. [KwAvpa rev mepi poyAods Kat Baddvous 


KAKOUpYNUATOY | 


His 6é TO TOUTWV pedev | KaKoupyeto0ar xen 
TPBTOV pe oTparnyov pn Sedermvnkota bu 
adTob® tHv KAetow Kal THY émywéAcLav movetotat, 

unde adAAw morevew pabtjuws diaKketsevov: €v 
52 Tois* émuKwdvvols Kal mdumav ovvvouv Set 

2mept TavTynv civat. Emerita Tov poxAov aeatdy- 
p@obar dia pxjKous TpLyh 7) TeTpaXH* azmproTos 
yap €oTat. emewta PBaddvous euBadrrcobar Tpets 
[4q) OpoTpomrous, TovTwy Se Exaotov gvdAdTreww 
1 Hercher indicated the lacuna: a short space in M. 
2 Haupt: xov@drepos 6 woxdds M. 
3 Hertlein: avrod M 


+ Added by Hertlein. 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xvin. 21—xx. 2 


his guard, should lock the gate himself, and should 
not give the bolt-pin to anyone else. 

. . . When engaged in any such enterprise one 
ought to conceal the bar; for it has happened that 
opponents have appeared and locked the gate 
again by force because the bar was still there. 
And so one should make provision for all such 
contingencies. 


XIX. [Sawing through a Bar] 


In sawing through a bar pour on oil; for thus the 
sawing will go faster and with less noise. And if a 
sponge ! be tied to the saw and to the bar, the noise 
will be much less distinct. One might write down 
many other similar suggestions, but we may let them 
pass. 


XX. [Prevention of Tampering mith Bars and Bolt- 
pins | 

To prevent deception of the kinds just mentioned, 
in the first place the general ought before dining to 
give personal attention to the locking of the gate, 
and not carelessly to trust to anyone else, while 
in dangerous situations he must be extremely vigilant 
about this. Next, the bar should have three or 
four strips of iron from end to end, for thus it cannot 
be sawed through. Then, three dissimilar bolt-pins 
should be put in, and each general is to have one of 

1 He probably means that the sponge should have been 
first soaked in oil. In that way it would feed oil steadily 
and uniformly. ‘This is one of the very few suggestions for 
' the assailants of a beleaguered city rather than its defenders. 
Tt is clearly an afterthought on his part, and would have been 


relegated to a footnote were he writing under modern 
conditions. 


103 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ava play’ Tv oTpaTny@v: et de mAEloves elnoar, 
3 maAw Kal? TLepav TOUS Aaxevras. apiotov Oe 
Tas Baddvous Ley efaipeTas elvan, to dé Aomidos 
oLonpas KkatexeoOar, iva Ly) Ady efarpoevy) 
peTewpilyTa, TH KapKivw iy WOTE TOV peoxAov 
STwbeioba? emuxdeopevwv TOV TUABY Kal ayoL- 
youwevwy: tov d€ KapKivov eoKevdolat, OTwWs v7 
\ / ! 3 VLG ae \ / 
THv omida Kabinra® Kat padiws tHv BdadAavov 
, > A NN GSS A / 
4 petewpilyn. “AmrodAAwviarar de ol ev TO [lovee 
mabovres TL TOV TPOYEy PUpLpLeveanv KaTecKevacay 
Tas mUAas KA€etecBar b7r0 opupas Te peyadns Kal 
KTUTFOV mayureyeBous yuyvopevon, Ws oyedov KaTa 
méoav THY mow axoveo ba OTaV KActwvra 7 
avolywvTat at mUAau: ovTw peydAa TE Kal Ge- 
/ ay \4 r <é \ be > \ \ > 
5 oloypwueva Hv Ta* KAetbpa. To de avTo Kal eV 
’ / iA \ ¢€ / ~ ~ 4 
Alyivyn. orav d€ at mvAa KAetoP@ow, Tots PvAake 
/ ; \ / / 2a \ / 
otvOnua Kal mapactvOnua Sovras emt TA PvdAdKia 
dvaTrépiysac. 


XXI. 


Tlepi d€ apuevwv eToyLacias Kal doa xp7° mrepl 
Xwpav pirtav mpoxarackevalem® ea! Ta eV 
TH XHpe ws det apavilew 7 axpela® movety Tots 
evavtiois woe ier? Tapaheimerau: ev 6€ T@ 
IlapackevaotiK@ mepi TovTwv Tedeiws SyAobrat. 

/ ~ 
Q7€epl b€ dvAdkwy KaTacTacEwWs Kal TEpioder@v”™” 
\ 
Kal Tavelwy Kal ovv0nuaTwy Kal Tapacvv0n- 
1 R. Sch6ne: dvépa M. 
2 Eberhard: wore woxA@ trobeicba. M. 
3 «* Nescio quis” in Hercher’s ed. : xa@yn7a M. 
+ R. Schéne: ravra M. 


°> Added by Hercher. 
6 Casaubon (C?): mpoxatacketage AB. 


104 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xx. 2-xx1. 2 


these in his keeping ; if, however, there should be 
more than three generals, then the custody of the 
boit-pins must be determined each day by lot. 
But the best thing is to have the bolt-pins so that 
they cannot be removed but are held in place by 
an iron plate, so that when it is raised up the pin 
cannot be lifted higher by the pincers than just 
enough to slip the bar under when the gate is closed 
and opened, while the pincers must be so made that 
they can pass under the plate and easily lift the 
bolt-pin. The citizens of Apollonia Pontica, after 
having had one of the experiences already described, 
provided that the gates should be locked with a 
great hammer and the making of a tremendous 
noise, so that the locking or opening of the gates 
could be heard over almost the entire city, so 
ponderous were the fastenings and so strengthened 
with iron; and the same thing was done in Aegina 
also. When the gates are locked, give the guards 
password and answer and send them to their posts. 


DOT: 


Provision of tools, and all suitable preparations 
on friendly soil, and the methods necessary for 
concealing the property in the land or for rendering 
it useless to one’s opponents, are here omitted, but 
these have been fully set forth in the book on 
Military Preparations. About the disposition of 
guards and patrols, however, and panics, and watch- 

words, and countersigns, the greater part will have 


7 Oldfather: kai ef A cat 7 B: cai 6h R. Schone. 
8 Casaubon: 7xpela M. 
®° Herm. Schone: we AB (uo B in margin). 
10 Hertlein: wepiodiiav M. 








105 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


7 \ \ \ > ~ ~ 
patwv Ta pev moAAa ev TH LUtparomedevtiKH 
BiBrAw ypamréov dv tpdmov det yevéoBar, dAlya dé 
avTav Kat viv dnAdooper. 


XXII. [OvAakai] 


A > \ ~ / \ 

NuxtodvAaketofar év péev tots Kwéddvvois Kal 

6 , eee 5 \ / / 1 

mpookalnuevwv' dn eyyvs Trohepiicay monet y] 
« \ 

2 oTpaToTeow @oe.” Tov peev orparnyov" TOV TOO 
odov HyeHove Kal Tous per avrod Terao 
KaTa* TO. Teprapxeta Kal THY ayopav, €av oxuUpo- 
TITOS peTexn* el O€ pT, Tpoxarerdnpevar TOTroOv 
Tijs mOoAEws epuporarov TE Kal emt mActorov am 

3.avTod Ths mokews Opwmevov. Tept dé TO OTpA- 

~ \ ~ 
THyLOV oKHnYodV Kat StaTeAety del TOV oahnuyKriy 
Kat TOUS OpomoKrpuKas, we, Edy Te d€7 onyavat 
y) TapayyetAat, ef ETOLLOV dTdpxwo, Kal ol te® 
dAdo. dvdaxes 70 péAXov alobwvrat Kal ot TrEpiodot 
Omrov av" OvTes TUYWOL KATA TEpLodiav THs mdAEws. 
Uy ~ >? 

4 €meita ToUs Te eT TH TEixyer PUAaKaS Kal TOUS EV 
TH ayopa Kal emt Tv apxyeiwy Kal TOV eis THV 
> \ > ~ \ lon / \ ~ + 
ayopav eloBoAdv Kat tod Bedrpov Kat Tov addAwv 
KaTexXoLEvWY ywpiwy dia Bpaxyéwv te pvddooew, 

\ \ Ss \ \ \ 7 \ 
Kat moAAds eivar tas duAakas Kat dua moAdAods 
b) / > \ ~ > IN. / 

5 avOpwmous. ev yap T@ & ddAtyou gvAdccew 
OUT av KaTa pKOS ypovou dUvaiTd Tis mpa€ai 
Tt mpos Tovs moAcuiovs Kal vewTepicar Pldcas, 
e / eh Sh 4 > / \ / r 
frre T av Unvor eyyLyvowTo dua Bpayéos dvdAac- 
covtwy, T@® te moAAovs aya dudAdocew padAdov 
dvvaiTo exdepopvbetabat TL THY TpAaccopEevwr. 


1 Meier: zpoxadnuévwy M. 2 Added by Meier. 
° K6échly and Riistow add y after orparnyiv. 
4. R. Schéne: cal M. 5 Added by Casaubon. 


106 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxt. 2—xxur. 5 


to be written in the book on Encampments, but a few 
of these points we shall now also set forth. 


XXII. [Guards] 


To keep guard by night when danger threatens, 
and the enemy are already lying near the city or 
camp, it is necessary for the general in command of 
the entire force and his staff to take their post at 
the city-hall and the market-place, provided these 
be defensible ; but if not, the strongest place in the 
whole city and the most conspicuous should have 
been previously occupied. Close by the general’s 
quarters the trumpeter and the dispatch- bearers 
should encamp, and remain there, so that if a signal 
or a dispatch be needed, they may be ready at hand, 
and the other watchmen and the patrols wherever 
they may happen to be in their circuit of the city 
may be aware of what is to occur. Moreover, the 
guards upon the wall and in the market-place, and 
those at the municipal buildings and entrances to 
the market-place and at the theatre, and other 
occupied points, should keep guard in short watches ; 
and there should be many guard shifts, and many 
men together in each. For in guarding by short 
watches, no one would be able, through the length 
of time he was on guard, to have any dealings with 
the enemy, or to gain headway in starting a revolu- 
tion. And in short watches sleep would be less 
likely to steal upon the guards. Moreover, with 
many men on guard at once, some rumour of what is 
being done would be more likely to leak out. It is 


6 Casaubon: cite ot ABC. 7 Orelli: éa4v AB. 
8 Sauppe: 67’ av M. ® Casaubon: 7d M. 


107 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


a ’ 7 e / + > A 
EVPNVOPEVaL TE iS aELOTOUS A{LELVOV €V TOLS 


~I 


, \ , 1 / > a 5 9 
Kwodvvols Kal mavtTas' duAdéar ev TH VUKTL, Ww 
¢€ A > ¢ / \ ¥ / 
ws mAeioto. Kal éexdotnv dvdakiv mpopvddc- 
cwow. éav dé dAlyou Te Kal paxpas dvrAdcowow, 
7 ~ aA 
UTVOS e ay eyylyvouro dua TO pijKcos TOV gvia- 
KY, Kal €l TWEsS Te eyxerpotev vewTeploat, dmdpxoe 
av avtTols Tod ypdovov TO pAjKos Kal dodoa Kat 
Aabeivy mpdéavtas Te mpos tovs mroAeptouvs: 810 
del Ta ToLabTa pr) ayvoeiv. ett d€ ypn ev Tots 

A ~ / 

KwodUvols Kal Tadde aTpovoety. TaV dvdAdKwY 
pndéva mTmpoyryvwoKew pre omooTyy™ pte 
7 / ~ / \ ~ >) ~ a 
omov pvdAdéEer THs moAews: pndé TOV avTa@v aet 
Tovs avTovs jyetoBar, aA’ WS TUKVOTATA mavra 
peBrordva TA TEpl THY TohuropuAantay: OUTW 
yap av qKvord Tis dvvaiTo Tots efw Tpoo.oovs 
dndoty tT. 7 mpoodéEacbar Tapa TV rokeae 


\ / 1 A y 
8 LY) TpOELooTres* OTTOU TOU TELYOUS THV VUKTO. ECOVTAL 


9 


\ e ~ \ 
junde jel av, adn’ ayvoobdyTes To péAXov. Kal 
TOUS TpLEpas dvddgavras p27) puddocew vuKTos: 
od yap émiTyidevov? mpoedévar a péAAeL EKaoTos 
Tpaocew. 

/ / 3 av >] ~ Sk ~ / 
IlpofvAdccordy 7 av ek TeV emt TH TeELXEL 
>| / 6 , a : ey eee \ 

dvrakiwv® mpodvAakes de. €€ ExkaoTOV yap 

/ > ¢ / 

gvdakiov Kal’ exdorny pudaxny" mpodvAac- 
/ e 

covTwy eis avyp emt TO EXO PLEVOV dvAakvov, 
\ > 3 

Kal am ékelvov dAXos els TO eydpmevov, Kal azo 

R. Sch6ne: wavra M. 

Mor. Schmidt: éroverjvac M. 

Meineke: undé M. 

Behrendt: mpoedé7wv M : mpoerdévtwy R.' Schone. 


R. Schéne suggests that undé belongs after érirjéecov : 
Herm. Schone thinks of a lacuna. Ought not the clauses 


oa -. WOW Nw FH 


KGL wake VUKTOS. ang sour... = Tpaccev to appear in reverse 
order? (Oldfather). 
108 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxn. 5*-9 


better for as many as possible to be on watch in 
time of peril, and for all to do guard-duty during 
the night, so that as many as possible may be keeping 
guard at each watch. But if few are on guard, and 
for long watches, sleep would steal upon them 
because of the length of the watches, and if any men 
should attempt a revolution, the length of the time 
of duty would favour them both in getting a start 
and in escaping detection in any dealings with the 
enemy. Such considerations, then, ought not to 
be ignored; but in times of peril one must keep 
still other things in mind. Thus, no one of the 
guards should have any previous knowledge either 
of the number of his watch, or where in the city 
he is to be on guard. Nor should the same officers 
always command the same men; but as frequently 
as possible all the regulations concerning the watch- 
ing of the citizens should be changed, for thus would 
a traitor be least able to betray anything to outsiders, 
or to receive anything from the enemy, not knowing 
beforehand on what part of the wall he would be 
in the night, nor with whom, but being ignorant of 
what was to occur. And those who guard by day 
should not be employed at night, for it is not 
fitting that they should know beforehand what 
each is to do. 

Guards from the stations on the wall should keep 
watch as follows. From each of the stations, at 
each change of the watch, one of the guards should 
go to the nearest station, and from this another to 
the next, and from the other stations still others 


6 Kéchly and Riistow: gu\dcwy M. 
7 Casaubon: dvAakny Tov M. 
109 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


tav dAAwy adAdou eis Ta ara mapnyyeIen de 

10 mrovety amakaTravTas™ TooTo G70 GUGONUwWY. KaL 
ovTw moAdol TE Kal Gua Tepiodevcovow® Kat 
puukpov ekaoTtos* ywpliov KwyOyoeTat, Kal ov 
Boyd’ ot avTol Tapa Tots avrots drateAobot, 
muKkva adrAwv puddkav Tap” aAAois yeyvopeveny 
puna: TovTov 6€ OvUTW Tpaccou“evov ovK 
av te’ éx ta&v dvdAdkwy vewrTepioben. 

11 Tods de mpopvddcaovras® dvTuTpoouTous aAAnAots 
eordvau: ovTws yap av mavTyn am atvtdv BrAémow7o, 
Kal TKLOTOL bio TWwwV aypevbetev Aafpa mpoced- 
Odvrwy,® dep 46n yeyovoTa Epi TA uEpooKoTLAa 

12 ded7jAwrar. ev d€ Tats yeywepwats Kai oKoTEWwats 
vos aAAnv Kat"? ahhgv avrovs AiBous BadAew 
els TO ew J€pos Tod Tetxous, Kal ws 67) 6 Opwpevous 
TWAS bn adray epwrovTav tives elev" ao 
TAVTOMETOU yap ay yroratete tev TwWes mpoomreAdlovres. 

13 av dé OoKh, Kal els TO €ow ) HEpOS Ths TOAEws TO avTo 

movetv. ot S€ Twes TodTO daow PAaBepov ectvac: 
F606 yap mpooidvtTas THY ToAcuiwy Ev TO OKOTEL 
mpoaobdveobat 6Te evTat¥a od 7 mpoowrnréov™ €oTl 
dua THV povav TE TOV TepLoouy Kal TO SddAew, 

14 ard padrov els TOV OLY a Lvov TOToV. apioTov 
6 év rovavtas v€w e€€w Tod Telyeos Ktvas® 


1 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 

2 Herm. Schone: dma wdavras M. 

3 Meier: zepiodevovow M. 

4 Casaubon: éxacrov M. > Hertlein: dv’ dua M. 

6 Casaubon: mpocdt\aiw M. * Sauppe: érav7 M. 

8 Kirchhoff: rpoguvAdcowcw M. 

9 K6échly and Riistow: zpoe\Odvtwy M. 

10 &\Anv kal added by Casaubon. 11 eiciv Hercher. 

2 Mor. Haupt: mpomoOdvecba (space of 3-4 letters) of 
7 poo T iy aLov M. 13 Casaubon: xiva M. 


110 





. 
; 
; 








—EEEE 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxi. 9-14 


to the remaining ones. Let everyone be ordered 
to do this at given signals. In this way many will 
make their way around the walls at the same time, 
and each wiil move but a short distance, and the 
same men will not often remain together, since 
different guards will be constantly coming in contact 
with one another. If this be done no act of treachery 
could be performed by the guards. 

The guards should stand facing one another, for 
in this way they can see in all directions and they 
will rarely be caught by any foe coming secretly 
against them, a thing that I have noted} as having 
actually happened to day-watches. During the 
dark winter nights stone after stone should be 
thrown over the walls, and, as if persons were seen, 
let the guard ask, “Who goes there? ’’, for any 
who might be approaching would thus be recognized 
without more ado. If it should seem best, this could 
be done also inside the city. Some, however, say 
this is dangerous, for a party of the enemy which 
might be approaching in the darkness are made 
aware in advance that they must not attack at this 
point, by the noise of the patrols and the throwing 
of stones, but rather at the point where there is no 
noise. The best plan, however, on such nights is to 
have dogs tied outside the wall to keep watch.? For 


1 The reference may be to Ch. vi. 6, but this precise 
detail is not in the form in which the treatise has come down 
to us, very likely as a fault of the tradition rather than an 
oversight on the part of the author. 

2 Dogs were used by the Spartan Agesipolis at the siege 
of Mantinea in 385 B.c. (Polyaenus ii. 25); by Philip of 
Macedon for tracking down his foes in the Balkan moun- 
tains (ibid. iv. 2.16); by Aratus for guarding the key fortress 
of Acrocorinth after its capture in 243 p.c. (Plutarch, Aratus, 
24); and Vegetius iv. 26 recommends that they be used 


EFI 


16 


17 


18 


19 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ / 7 > / 
mpoadedéo0at vuKTepevovTas, olmep é€x mAélovos 
eudaviotow Tov ek TaV ToAquiwy KaTdoKOTOV 
vn b) / / ~ / / 
7 avropoAov mpooteAalovta TH ToAce Aabpaiws 
nH 7 OppicdjLevov avTopodobyTa: Gua. d€ Kal Tov 
dvAaka, eav Tvxn Kalevdwr, Eeyetpovot Sida. TOV 
draypov 

Sblicaon ca TAS moAews edTpoc0da Kal everifera 
Tots moAeios 7, TOE pvhaxas kaforavar Tovs 
Ta TAEloTA KEKTHILEVOUS KAL EVTYLOTATOUS TE Kal 
Tay peyloTov jueTexovTas TH moAeu- peddvora 

\ 
yap av avtots TMpoonKor pen) mpos mOovas Tpasme- 
ofa, adda jeepevnLevous av Tov vobv® Tpooexew. 
BO 83 aus TravOnpors EopTats xp7) Ov Kata TOAWw 
dvAdkwv ooo. ev ow@pacr padAiota UmomToL Tots 
1 ¢€ A_4 \ y > / @ > \ ~ / 
avtav* Kal amorou, adliecVat amo THv dvAakeiwv 


>) aes. € / \ 4 5 \ 
KaT olKlas €opratew. Kat aya? pev modv- 
A / 4 \ > \ av b] > >} ~ 
wpetabar dd€ovow, apa dé ovdev av em adrtots 
” ~ > \ A / ” > \ 
eln mpafor. avTt de tTovtwy addAous eis Ta 


duraketa Kabotavar muoToTépws €xovTas: Tept 
yap Tas eopTas Kai’ TOUS ToLovTOUS KaLpOUS 
pdrvota ot BovAdpevot Te vewrepilew eyxetpodow. 
ooa de mafea yéyove mepl Tovs ToLvovToUS’ KaL- 
povs, ev adrXous dnAobrat. 

MaddAov® d¢ ay. TOUTOLS pnoe Tas avaBdces € eT 
TO Tetxos evmdpous civar adAa KAcLoTas, Wa pndevi 
eyylyvytat mpokaTtadray Pave TL Tod Tetyous Bovdo- 

1 Casaubon: 7 M. ? Capps: space of 4-5 letters in M. 

3 Added by Haase. + Kéchly and Riistow: aurév M. 

> Casaubon: dd\\a M. 

6 Added by Kéchly and Riistow thinking that it was 
in M. 

7 Casaubon: Tod cro:xeiov To’s M. 

8 Herm. Sch6ne: 6uarov M. ® Kirchhoff: é M. 


112 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxi. 14-19 


they will detect at a greater distance the presence of 
a hostile spy, a deserter who is stealthily approach- 
ing the city, or one who is somewhere making his 
way out to desert; they will also by their barking 
rouse the sentinel if he happens to be asleep. 

If any part of the city is easily accessible and 
exposed to the attacks of the enemy, the sentinels 
stationed there should be the wealthiest and most 
highly respected citizens and those who hold the 
most important offices in the city. For it would 
be in the highest degree to the interest of such 
men not to turn aside to pleasures, but rather, bear- 
ing in mind their position, to maintain a vigilant 
watch. At the time of the public festivals those of the 
city guards who are greatly suspected and distrusted 
by their own comrades should be sent away from their 
posts to celebrate the festival at home. For they 
will think that they are being honoured and at the 
same time would have no opportunity to carry out 
any plot. And in their places more trustworthy men 
should be assigned to guard duty; for during the 
festivals and on such occasions revolutionists are 
extremely likely to venture on some enterprise. 
An account of the disturbances which have arisen 
on such occasions has been given elsewhere. 

It is better, moreover, that the ramps leading 
to the top of the wall should not be open, but 
rather be kept closed, thus rendering it impossible 
for anyone desirous of betraying the city to the 


for guarding the walls at night, along with geese, which 
made themselves famous by saving the Capitol from the 
Gauls. See also below, § 20, for the use of dogs by Nicocles. 


¥ 113 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


pevep evdodvar Tots TroepLiots, aA’ @ow ot' dvAakes 
oUs av od Bovdy” €f avayKns Em TOO Tetxous dva- 
TeAobyTES Kal py KataPaivovTes, av Te TWES 
efwlev THs ToAews Adbwow drrepBavres, pen) padiws 
Oud TAVEWV karaBatvwow* amo Too Teiyous Els 
THhv ToAw, eav py GédXwow ad tYnAdv* KaTa- 
mda@vres Kwdvvevew Kat uynTE Aabety unte dbacar. 
mpérro® 6° av TO TapacKevac“a TovTO TrEpt Tas 

20 avaBacers Kal €v Tupavvov aKpo7oAe. peta de 
mv ev Nd&éw® vavyayiav emBoudevopevos™ 0 
ppovpapyos NuxokAjs dvoBdces kAcvoras Tooas 
KateoTyce pUrAaKas® emi TO TetXel, ef de THS 
Toews TEeplodlas eémoletTo jueTa KUV@V* mpoc- 
edé€xyovTo yap e€wlev twa emBovdAny. 

21 “Ev opovootor b€ Kat pndevos baomTEVOVTOS EV TH 
moder ev Tols eml® T@ Telyer HvdAakeiows Set Tas 
vUKTOS Avyva Kaiecbar ev’? Aaparjpow, iva Kal’ ovs 
dv Te mpoomerAaly sronepior, apwot TO oTpaTny@ 

22 Tov Aapmr ipa. €av de” a) patvyrau pos TOV 
oTpatnyov 0 AaumTip ToToV KwAvovTos, aAdos 
dtadexTnp vmoAauBavwv AauTTHpL PawéeTw TO 
oTpaTny@, 0 6€ oTpaTyyos TO Eeudarvilojevov 

10 


avT@ Tots dAAos dvAakt SynAovtw oddAmuyye 7 
1 Added by Capps. 2 Hertlein: BovAe M. 

3 Casaubon: xataBaivovow AB. 

4 Hertlein: dzad\jAwy M. 

> Casaubon: ™ POT peT OL M (ABC). 
6 Casaubon: tiv éw M: év Kitiw Kochly and Ristow. 

7 Casaubon: émiBovhevouevors M. 

8 mu\axas Behrendt. 


° rots ért added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
10 Added by Casaubon. 


1 If Casaubon’s conjecture be right we have a reference 
114 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxu. 19 — 22 


enemy to seize part of the wall in advance, and that 
the sentinels, men of your choice, may be obliged 
to remain constantly on the wall and not come down. 
Then if any enemy, attacking the city from the out- 
side, should succeed in scaling the wall by surprise, 
they could not easily and quickly descend from the 
wall into the city, unless they were willing to take 
the risk of leaping down from high places and to 
forgo the advantages of surprise and _ initiative. 
This method of guarding the ramps would be suit- 
able also for the citadel of a prince. After the naval 
battle off Naxos,! Nicocles, the commander of the 
garrison, inasmuch as plots were being formed 
against him, closed the ramps, posted sentinels on 
the walls, and kept up a patrol with dogs outside the 
city; for the people were expecting a treacherous 
attack from without. 

When the people are united and no one in the 
city cherishes suspicions, lamps set in lanterns should 
be kept burning throughout the night at the posts 
of the sentinels on the wall, so that if a hostile 
movement should be directed against any of them, 
they may raise the lantern as a signal to the com- 
mander. If the nature of the ground prevents the 
light from reaching the commander, another guard, 
as a relay, should with his lantern give the signal 
to the commander, who, either with the bugle or 
by means of dispatch-bearers, as the circumstances 
may demand, should transmit to the rest of the 


to the famous battle off Naxos in 376 B.c., in which Athens 
won back her supremacy at sea. On the other hand, if 
Koéchly and Riistow’s suggestion év Kuitiw be followed, 
the great defeat of Evagoras of Cyprus by the Persians in 
380 B.c. is meant. The latter had a son Nicocles, well 
known from the works which Isocrates addressed to him. 


115 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


A , ¢ , 1. , \ 
23 Tots SpopoxrpvEw, OmoTeépws’ av ovpdépn. Kata 
d€ Tovs Kalpovs TOUTOUS Kal OUTW TEpL Tas dU- 
Aakas diateAovyTwy mapayyeAr\éobw TH GAAw 
/ r bu AH 2 ) / > / r 2A 8 / 
oxAw, oTrav onpwavO7,” pndeva efvevary e€av Oe 
TUS a emt TwWa m™pagw avayKatov, [LeTa Aapur- 
TH}pos mopevecUar, wa moppwlev Katddynros 7 
24 Tots TEprodevovdt. pd” epyaleoBar pndeva 
OnpLcoupyov 7° ae a iva pr wWogou aro 
TIWOwV yiyvevrat Tots pvaak w. 

“Ov & av tpomov tows Kal KoWwas paKpoTépwv 7 
Bpaxvtépwv vuKT@v ytyvoudvwv Kat maow at 
dvAakal yiyvowro, ..  apos KAepvdpav yp puiac- 
GEL, TavT Hy de ovpmeraBddew dud dexnLepioos.* 

25 .@Mov d€ aUTAS Kkexnp@obar Ta €owlev, Kat peaxpo- 
TEPwV jev YUYVOLEVOV TOV VUKTOYV Rie gers TOU 
Knpod, wa mAdov _vowp xywph, Bpaxvtépwy be 
mpoomaccea Bau," iva edacoov déxnTar. rept 
pev obv pudacav ioOTHTOS ixav@s" Hoe dednhucbu. 

26 “Ev de Tots dcwdvvorepots TOUS jpioeas T@Y Tpo- 
VEYPappLevev eis Tas pudanas Kal Tmepvodias xen 
Teva Ga, KAaL OUTW TO HULLOV Tis oTpaTuas vUKTOL 
ExdoTnv pudAdée axwdvvwy Sé Kat elpyvatwv ovTwv 
édayioTa Te Kal eAaylioTous THY avOpwmwy oxreiv. 

27 Kal €dv TE TEpLodEetas xp1) TH oTpaTHny@,® oKv- 

1 Kéchly and Rtistow: 7 é7orépws M. 

2 Kirchhoff: onuewd7 M. 

3 Added by Meineke. 

4 The lacuna determined by Herm. Sch6ne: rdvrws sug- 
gested by R. Schone. 

> Diels (Antike Technik?, 1920, 195. 1): cupBadrew drad0x7 
pepidos M. 


6 J. Afr.: mporeddocec@ar M. 


7 Casaubon: txavéc M. 
Q 


8 Capps: rav orparnyov M. 
116 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxu, 22-27 


sentinels the warning he has received. On such 
occasions, while the sentinels are thus engaged, the 
rest of the inhabitants should be notified that after 
a given signal no one is to leave his house. If, 
however, one should go out on some necessary errand, 
he should take a lantern with him in order to be 
visible to the patrols at a distance. Moreover, no 
workman or artisan should work at his trade lest 
noises made by any persons reach the sentinels. 

A plan by which the watches may be apportioned 
fairly and equally to all the sentinels, according 
as the nights become longer or shorter [has been 
explained . . .14, where it was stated that the 
watches] should be measured by the water-clock, and 
this should be reset every ten days. But a better 
plan is to smear the interior of the clock with 
wax and then to remove some of the wax when 
the nights grow longer, so that the clock may contain 
more water. When, on the other hand, the nights 
grow shorter, more wax should be added in order 
that the clock’s capacity may be less. Let this, 
then, be sufficient explanation about the equalization 
of the watches. 

At times of less imminent peril half the men 
enrolled in the army should be detailed for guard 
or patrol duty, and in this way half the army will 
_ be on guard every night. In times of peace and 
_ security the smallest possible number of the troops 
should be subjected to inconvenience, and to as little 
as possible. And if the commander needs some 


1 A reference to some other work by the author has fallen 
out here, as H. Schéne saw. It was probably the =rparo- 
medeuTiKy Bi8dos which treated of closely related topics, as one 
can see from Ch. xxi. 2 above. 


117 


28 


29 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Tadida €xovoay onpetovy mapa Tod otpatynyod' 
Trapadidocbat TO Tpuro pvdaxe, totrov b€ T@ 
exomevyp KaL ETEpoV ETEpW, [EXpL av” reprevexO7 
uP oKuTanis Kvichyy Thy 7OAW Kal KopoO7 Tapa 
TOV oTparnyov" mpoeiphobat de Tots mpopvragw pT) 
TOppwrEepw TpoeveyKety Thy oxuTarida Tod eXOME- 
vou dvAakos. éav 8 6° éMav KatadaBy Toor 
Eonuov PvAakos, maAw* avTididdvat ap ob €AaBev 
Thv okuTadrida, Ww atobyrat 6 oTpaTyyos Kal yv@ 
TOV pen _TapadeEdpevov aAd’ exAeimovra pudarny. 
os 8 av pudaris avT@ ovons [1) Taph els TO 
TETAYLEVOV, O Aoyayds adrod TApaxpnuUa THV 
dvraknv am0d000u, o7rogov" dav" evploxy, Kal 
karaornoares carts vITEp avTou pudager. emeuTa 
6° mpd€evos €€ adrhs® amodib0Tw TH Tprapevw THV 
dvrakiy, 6 dé Ta€lapxos adrov TH VoTEpaia CnpovTw 
TH vourloperyn Cnta. 


XXIII. [’Emé€od0s Aabpaia ev vuxri | 


’"Emeddous 5€ trovovpevov Aabpaiws €v vuKTt Tots 
mpookalypevois Todos TADE TpOVOEtY.  TPA@ToV 


1 The words rapa tod orparnyod after cnueiov in M seem 


to be a gloss (Oldfather). * Added by Meineke. 
3 Hercher: dé M. 4 Orelli: wav7’ M. 
5 Added by Casaubon. 6 Hertlein: wécov M. 


I 


Herm. SchGne (= 67 av): & av M. 
8 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
®° Herm. SchGne: av’rod M. 





1 This passage is obscure because almost nothing is 
known of the method by which mercenaries were hired, 
but it seems most probable that agents contracted with a 
state to furnish a certain number, and that the agent con- 
tinued to represent these men, 7.é., be their mpdéevos, since 


118 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxu. 27 — xxi. 1 


patrol-work, a marked baton should be handed by 
him to the first sentinel ; he in turn must pass it on 
to the next man, and one to another, until it has 
made the round of the city and has been returned 
to the commander. And previous instructions should 
have been given to the watchmen not to carry the 
baton beyond the position of the next man. If, 
however, a sentinel, on his arrival at a post, should 
find it deserted, he should return the baton to the 
man from whom he received it, so that the com- 
mander may be aware and may investigate which 
of the sentinels has failed to take the baton and 
has deserted his post. Whenever a man who has 
a turn at the watch does not report for duty, 
his company-commander should at once sell his 
position for whatever it may bring, and should put 
another man on guard to take his place. Then the 
contractor of mercenaries, the same day, should 
pay the money to the man who has purchased 
the post, and on the following day the taxiarch 
should impose on the contractor the customary fine.! 


XXIII. [Secret Salles by Night] 


One who is making secret sallies by night upon 
an enemy encamped outside must use caution in 


they would not be citizens of the city which hired them. 
In this case it would appear that the contractor or agent 
whose man had failed to do his guaranteed duty would have 
to pay back the fee to the one who bought the vacant 
position, as well as pay a fine for the failure of his man 
to be at his post. Where the risks of the contractor were 
as high as this would indicate, we may be certain that he 
must have counted on making a large gross profit on his 
original contract. ‘The closest parallel to such a person 
nowadays would perhaps be the padrone. 


119 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


7 
pev pudagar ows px Tis efavropodjan® ereura 
pas drratfprov punoev elvan, iva pr) O° UEP Tis 
TOAEWS arp TUpwoeaTEpos WY TOD GAAoU exdrvy TO 
2 peAdov. Tots Te TOV KvVaV DAaypods Kal TOV 
5 / \ \ > / ay ~ 
adeKTpvovev Tas dwvas apavilew adwva movobvTa 
TOvoe TOV Kalpov, emikavoavTa TL Tob owpaTos: 
\ \ € / \ \4 7 / 
Kal yap at TOUTWY dwvat mpo* OpUpov dbeyyopevar 
> 
3 expaivovot TO peAAov. emoinoavtTo dé TiVves Kal 
ToLovoe TEXVATAVTES. OTADLAGLOD TpooToOLNnTOD 
\ ~ 
peta Tmpopacews evAdyou yevoyévov’ zap adrtots, 
\ 
KaLpov THpHGaVTES Kal eTe€eAMovTes eeVevTO Tap 
> / A / \ / ” / 
4 €dmida Tots modelos Kat KaTwp0woav. dn dé 
, ” \ @ ” > , 6 
Twes TeLxnpels OVTES Kal ce eAabov emefeMovtes. 
Tas pev mUAas arrédeysar" opards Tots mronepiots: 
7 O€ padora ever Peres etxov ot evavTiot,® TavTy 
KaTeTmeTaoay cucderevov* Kal avnpav dua ypovou TWos, 
wore Kat apxas peev Dovpdca TOUS Troepious, 
voTepov d€ Kal ToAAGKIS yuyvomevou apeéAetav etyov. 
5 ot de ev TH TOAcL Ev VUKTL OteAOVTES TOD TELYOUS GGOV 
HOedov, Kal avTioonV TapacKEevacdmevon KaTETE- 
Tagav TO LoTiov. THpHaavTes Se Katpov emeEcdOov- 
tes eméVevto mapaddEws Tots ToXepiows: movotvTes 
de TadTa epvrAacoov py Tis avTopoAjon. 610 det 
pndev TOV ToLovTWwY Tapopay. 
6 Od \ ie >? ~ Et > / 2 oh x 
Bd pnv ovd ev Tats vu€w acKémTws pet OxAoV 


1 Casaubon: ph éfavrouortnon M: wh éFavrowortnby Herm. 
Schone. 2 Kéchly and Riistow: 47@’ trép M. 

SeCe ec NL. + Added by Lange. 

> Casaubon: yevouevno M. 

6 Kéchly and Riistow: @de é\AdvTes M. 

7 Hertlein: avédeuav M. 

8 Hercher: cixev roto évavtio M. 

9 


Kirchhoff: dyyetov M. 10 Casaubon: xai M. 
120 








AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxi. 1-6 


these matters : first, to see that no one deserts, and 
then that there is no light burning out-of-doors, 
lest the air above the city, becoming more luminous 
than the rest, should disclose his purpose. He must 
suppress the howling of dogs and the crowing of cocks, 
making them mute for this occasion, by cautery of 
some part of their bodies, because their cries, uttered 
before daybreak, reveal what is on foot.1_ Some have 
used the following devices in making sallies: a pre- 
tended sedition arising among them on some specious 
pretext, watching an opportune moment and sally- 
ing forth they have attacked their enemies unex- 
pectedly, and have succeeded. Others who were 
besieged have secretly gone out thus: They 
walled up the gates in sight of the enemy, but 
where he was most open to attack they let down 
a sail, which they raised after a time, so that 
the enemy was at first surprised, but later, when 
it was done many times, became indifferent. Then 
the residents at night broke down as much of the 
wall as they desired and built a false structure in 
its place and let the sail down over it. Then, 
watching the favourable moment, they sallied forth 
and attacked the enemy unexpectedly. But while 
they were doing all this they took good care to 
prevent any desertions. Accordingly, one must 
overlook none of these considerations. 

Nor again should a leader inconsiderately go out 


1 Similarly Julius Africanus, Keoroi, 9, tells how the 
Parthians kept their horses from neighing by so tightly 
binding their tails as to rob them of their spirit by the pain 
which the cord inflicted. It is reported that the mules 
belonging to the American army in France were prevented 
from braying by a simple surgical operation. 


121 


8 


10 


11 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


exTropeuTéov,' ofa Kal €v Tots Kalpots Tv ém- 
Bovdevovtwy Ttwées Texvalovow, of péev €ow THs 
moAews ot bé Kal e€whev, mpocayeobar BovAdcpevor 
ToLolode dmarnLace, TupaevoavTEs TF eum) 
aves vewdplov 7 yupvacioy 7” tepov mavdnuov 7 
bu orep av efo0os YEVOLTO 7AnGous GvOpebrrany 
Kal ov Trav TUXOVTO. TpovoovvTa ovv Kal Ta 
TolatTa pn €Toluws amodéyecBar. mpakis de 
Kal 70° eSovobj cera e€ apxyovtwy.® TpoeTousd- 
oavres KATO 7 THY Xapay OopuBov yevéobar Kat éx 
TOV aypav ets Thy m0AW ayyeAqvac Away 
emBovdAnv, du Omep EpsedAov of moAtTaL oevoew els 
BonPevav, yevouévov d€ TovTov ot Te* apxovTes Kal 
ot ovveléAovres® Tovs roXitas® mapexdAovy eis 
BonBevav. ézretd7) 8% HOpoicbn to mARBos Taev 
molTav mpos tas mUAas ovv OmAots, ToLdvde 
eTeXvaoayTO. mpoetmov ol dpxovres Tots Hbporope- 
VOLS OTL Tpia Hep avTovs yevopévous det evedped- 
oa puuKpov amet €pen THs ToAEws, mapayyethavres 
a. mpoonKcev pos TA peMovra., Tots d€ akovovow Mu 
aviTomra.. Kal Tovs peev efayayovres exadOioay els 
ywpia émuTHdera ws evedpevaorvTas Tots euPeBANKoat 
modelos’ avtot dé AaPdvres cuwpata adrois 
ovvloTopa THs mpa€ews mpoeTropevovTo ws KaTa- 
oxewopevol® te Ta ayyeAAdpeva Kat mpoKidv- 
vevoovtes? THY GAAwY, Wa dnVev mpoaydayouev Tovs 
modeious els Tas evedpas ws wvmohevyorTes. 
mopevbevres 5€ els TOmOV O7rov Hv avTots EeviKOV 


1 Casaubon: éxmopevtatoy M. * Added by Orelli. 

> Koéchly and Riistow: mpdtes . . . wie EoroPjoerar éé- 
apxovTwy M. 

+ Kéchly and Riistow: ye M. 
ne 


oe  Sae 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxi. 6-11 


at night with a crowd, because at such times some 
of the conspirators are forming plots, some within, 
some without the city, wishing to lure one out with 
deceptions such as beacon-torches, setting fire to a 
dockyard, or a gymnasium, or a public temple, or 
some building on account of which a crowd of men 
—and influential men too—might rush out. A leader 
should, therefore, use foresight, and not readily 
accept at their face value even such incidents. I 
shall relate also the following sharp practice on the 
part of officials. It was arranged that a disturbance 
should arise in the country, and that word should be 
brought from the fields to the city of a robbers’ plot, 
of the very kind at which the citizens were sure to 
hurry to the rescue. And when this occurred, the 
magistrates and their supporters summoned the 
citizens to the rescue, and when the full number of 
the townsmen was gathered at the gates under arms, 
they contrived as follows. The magistrates told the 
crowd that they must divide into three parts and lay 
an ambush a little distance from the city, and 
explained what they must do, the hearers having 
no suspicion of the truth. They then led the people 
forth and stationed them in suitable places as though 
to ambush the invading enemy, while they them- 
selves, taking troops who were accomplices in the 
matter, went ahead as though to inquire into the 
report and meet the danger first, ostensibly in order 
to entice the enemy into the ambuscades by pretend- 
ing to flee. But going to a place where they had a 





° Kéchly and Riistow: cuveOovres M. 
6 Casaubon: rodeuious M. 7 Added by Herm. Schone. 
8 Casaubon: kataxoyouevoi te M. 
° Hertlein: mpoxwduvetovres M. 


23 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


TponToacpevov Kpudaiws' Kopwobévtes? Kata 
/ > / wv \ » > 
OdAatrav, avaraBovres EfOacav Kai €dabov eicaya- 
yovtes eis THY TOAW Kat addAdAas ddovs, ws TOUS 
>) / / / > / A \ 
éme€eMovtas moXitas mdAw amayayovtes’ THY Se 
moAw KatadaBovres tots E€vois TaV ev Tais 
>) / ”/ \ \ P] / \ \ > / 
evédpats OvTwWY TOUS Lev EpuyadevoV, TOUS dE EdE- 
XoVTO. 610 Set mavTa Ta ToLatdTa UromTevew Kal 
A 3 / 4 >] / v7 / 
p17) dAoyloTws vUKTWp Els TOAE Lous EEodov 7ANGous 
moveto0au. 


XXIV. [XvvOnuarwvr*! 


IlapadidevtTa 5é cuvOyyata det mpovoeiv, éeav 
TUX) TO OTpaTevpa pLyades OvTES amo TOAEwY 7 
eOvav, O7wWs py, av TAapexy TO Ev Eidos SUo ovdpmaTa, 
appiPorws mrapadobjncetat, otov tade, Avdoxovpor 
Tuvdapidar, mept evos eideos Sv0 dvdmata ov Ta 
attra: Kat adore be “Apyns *Evudduos, “AGn va 
IlaAas, fipos eyxerplouor, Aapras gas, Kal ia 
OpoTpo7ra TouTols, airep Suopynpdveurd € EOTW Tropa 
TA voprlopeva exdoTw cOve* tv avOpwmwv Kat 
BAaBnv épel, edy Kara yA@oody TUS mapayyeAAn 
pua.AAov® uy KOWwov Tl aTaow. ev pydor o ov 
évois od det Ta Tovadra mapayyeMeu, ode ev 
eOveor ouppaxous.  otov Xapidoyju@ ’“Qpeirn mepl 
thv Atodida ouveBn, KkarahaBovre “TAvov TpoTe 
To@de. TH apyovtt Tod “[Aiov Hv oikéryns éxmo0- 
pevopevos emi Aciav aet, Kal udAvora ev Tats véw 

1 Casaubon: kptiwar do M. 2 C(AB?): xovicbévter M. 

3 repi o. suggested by R. Schéne: oc. tapddocis by Herm. 
Schone. 


4 Casaubon: @0e. M: &7 Hercher. 
5 Added by R. Schone after Haase. 


124 


¢ germ 


a es 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxi. 11 — xxiv. 4 


mercenary force, previously arranged and secretly 
brought in by sea, they picked them up before any- 
one knew of it, and secretly entered the city by other 
roads, as though returning with the citizens who had 
gone out for the attack. Then, with the mercenary 
force, they occupied the city, and of those in the 
ambuscades they banished some and admitted others. 
Accordingly, one must be suspicious of such acts 
and not inconsiderately make a sally in force at night 
against an enemy. 


XXIV. [Of Watchwords] 


In giving out watchwords it is needful to provide, 
if the army happen to be a mixture from different 
cities or tribes, that the word shall not be given out 
in an ambiguous way, in case one concept may 
have two different names, as for example, Dvoscuri 
and T'yndaridae, two dissimilar words for one concept ; 
or, again, Ares, Enyalius; Athena, Pallas; sword, 
dagger ; torch, hght; and others like these ; for they 
are hard to remember if contrary to the custom 
of the several tribes, and they cause harm if one 
issues a password in dialect instead of in language 
common to all. One should not, then, issue such 
_ words to mixed mercenaries nor to allies of different 
tribes. Such a thing happened to Charidemus of 
Oreus in Aeolis when he had taken Ilium ! as follows. 
A slave of the commander of Ilium went out for 
booty from time to time, and particularly at night 


1 This happened in 360 B.c. and is the latest event to 
_ which Aeneas makes reference. An account varying in 
some minor details is given by Polyaenus iii. 14. Thus, 
for a second time, as Polyaenus remarks, was Ilium captured 
by the use of a horse. 


125 





5 


10 


11 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


b] / \ > / > / 

e€eTTopeveTO Kal EloeTropeveTO Elodywv' TA aypev- 
¢ / > ~ 

Gevra exaotoTe. ev d€ TH xpovw TovTwW KaTa- 


pabav o Xapidnos Tabta mpdoocovta oikevodran, 


\ >] / / > / A 
Kat els Aoyous Kpupatous adikdpevos dopodoyeirat, 
KQL ETELoEV AUTOV EKTOpEeVUAVAL EV PNTH VUKTL Ws 
DNS / ae, \ > / > aN > A 
emt Aelav: jucO” Ummov dé éxéAevoev adtov e&edOciv 
> ~ f e? e / ? ~ > ~ > \ \ 
EV TH VUKTL, Wa at TVAaL adT@ avoryUetev, aAXAG p27) 

\ \ , OHNE EAN ee / ’ ¢ 
KaTa THY diadvow* 7 THY EKTOUdda TUAIda WoTEp 
ie Eee ws 2 7 > » \ 
etwer,® etoéAfor. ‘yevouevos 5° e€w Kat diadrey- 

\ ~ / A > >] ~ / ¢ 
Geis TH XapidHjpw eAaBev wap attav E€vous ws 
TpiaKkovTa TeOwpaKiopevous Kal ExovTas eyyxerpiova 
Kat OmAa Kat epixepadaias Kpudaias. wes 
amynyayeév Te otv adTovs ev TH vuKTL ev EeabATt 

/ Nia ov. Wo? \ ¢ / > / 
davaAn Kat expvibe TA OTA, Kat Opowwoas aiypadru- 

>) ~ 
Tos, pet GAAwY yuvatk@v Kal maldapiwy, Kal 
TOUTWY Ws alywarwTuwY, eloeTopeveTo avorxfertodv 


3 ~ ~ ~ \ \ iva ¢ \ ° \ ¢ 
atT@ TOV TVABV dia Tov immov.  O7rov dn EvOds ot 


eloeAOovres Epyou elyovTo Tov Te TUAWPOV aTrOKTEL- 
VaVTES Kal ets aAAas fevas mpagets OpuncavTes, Kal 
TOV mvA@v eyKpatets OvTeEs, ep as ed0Us, od 7Oppw 
OVTOS Tod Xap.idypov, Taphoay ragets Kal Kar 
éhaBov tO moAicpa. peta 5€ TavTa Kal adTos 
eloemropev0n peta maons THs Suvaprews. apa de 
ToUTois Kal To“wdvd Eempakev. TOD oTpaTevpmaTos 
TWL péper evedpas EmoijoaTo, mpovorjcas OTe 
Ta,peouTo Bonfeva emt TO ywpiov.  Ozrep oven 
evOvs yap aicbopevos “AOnvddeopos * ‘TuBptos, ov ov 
Topp [LET OTpArevpLaTOos, € emelparo Bonbetv € emt TO 
ywplov. etvxe dé Kal avros ayxivws’ madAw av6- 
uTomTevaas,® Kal ov Tas €vedpevopeévas OdovsS 
emopev0n mpos TO “IAvov, aAAa aAXas zropevbeis 
1 Casaubon: eicaypov M. 2 Hertlein: duéd\vow M. 
126 





a So vee 


7 
| 
‘ 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxiv. 4-11 


used to go out and come in with what he had on each 
occasion taken. At this time Charidemus learned 
that he was engaged in this business and made a 
friend of him. At a secret conference an agreement 
was made, and Charidemus induced him to go out on 
a given night as though for booty, bidding him leave 
on horseback, after nightfall, that the gates might 
be opened for him, but not to re-enter by the passage 
or the wicket-gate as he was accustomed. When 
he was outside and talking with Charidemus he 
received from him about thirty mercenaries secretly 
provided with breastplates, swords, weapons, and 
helmets. So he led them off in the dark, in mean 
garb and with arms concealed, disguising them as 
captives, in company with others, women and 
children, these too apparently captives, and entered 
the city through the gate which was opened for him 
because of his horse. There, immediately upon their 
entrance, they set to work, killing the gate-keeper 
and doing other barbarous acts. Charidemus was near 
the gates of which they kept control, and his troops 
immediately went in and took the town. Then he 
entered in person with all his forces. At the same 
time he carried out such a scheme as this, also: 
He laid an ambush with a part of his army, foreseeing 
that aid would come to the place, as actually hap- 
pened. For Athenodorus, the Imbrian, who was not 
far away with his army, as soon as he learned the 
news, set out to succour the place. He too seems 
shrewdly to have had his suspicions and marched 
unobserved during the night to Ilium, not by the 


3 Casaubon: ciwéy M. 4 Casaubon: xopudaias M. 
5 C?: Bayxivws MAB. 
6 Casaubon: mddw ay (space) trorretcac M. 


127 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


edabév re ev TH vuKTi Kal APev mpos Tas TUAas. 
12 Kat eAabdv TWES ouvercehdovres? els THY moh ev 
TO DopuBu, ws ToD Xap.djpov ovres OTPATEVHLATOS.. 
13 €7TELTA 7TpO rob metovas: eloeABety eyvadobnoay TO 
ovvOnware, Kal ol prev e€émecov avray, ol d< Kal 
mept Tas mUAas SuedOapyoav: Tots pev yap Wy TO 
14 ovvOnpwa Tuvdapida, ToD’ Oe Avooxoupor. Kal Tapa 
TooTO eyeveto THV* moAW pr) avricaradnpOyvac 
TapaypHua v7m7o Tov “APjvodcpou ev TH avTh 
VUKTL. mapayyedew ov xp?) Ta ovvOnjpara 
edpvnovevTa Te Kal ws pdAvoTa® adehpa tats 
15 peAAovoats mpd€eor yiyveobar, ofov Tabe. Emr prev 
aypav tmopevopevois® “Apreuw °*Ayporépav, emt 
de KAoTHY TWa mpakewv “Epujv Aodwoyv, emt be Bua- 
op.ov" “Hpaxdea, Tots G€ pavepots eYXEUPT AoW 
“HAvov Kat Lednvyy, KaL Ws pahora OLoTpoTra 

16 TOUTOLS Kal KowdTaTa Taow. ‘IdiKparns dé odde 
To® atTo otvOnua éexédevev Tov? mepioddy TE Kat 
pvhaxa™ exe, adra ETEpoV eTepw deddaba, Wa o 
pee TO mp@Tov epuTnbes a amoxpwytar Zevs UwTnHp, 
edy TobTO EX Tvxn, 0 O° dvrepwrn bets” Hooedav. 
oUTW yap av iKLioTa odddAowTo bro THY TroAEuL@Y 


1 Kochly and Riistow: cuvedOdvtes M. 
* Casaubon: melovoc M. 
3 rots Casaubon: ro suggested by R. Schone. 
+ Added by Hercher. 
5 Kéchly and Riistow: udduora wo M. 
6 Kéchly and Riistow: ropevdmevoc M. 
7 Casaubon: Biacuav M 
8 Added by Casaubon. 
9 Casaubon: tiv M. 
10 Casaubon suggested 7év rpoptdaxa, comparing § 19 
11 Casaubon: av épwrnfeic 


128 


—_—" 


ste. le 


+ arep 


eS ee a a 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxiv. 11-16 


roads which were ambushed but by other routes, 
and came to the gates. In the confusion, some of 
his troops went into the city with the others without 
being noticed, as though they belonged to the 
army of Charidemus. Then before many of them 
had entered they were detected by their countersign, 
and some were expelled and some killed at the gates, 
for their countersign was Tyndaridae while that of 
Charidemus was Dioscurz. By so narrow a margin 
it was that the city was not recaptured at once, 
that same night, by Athenodorus. So it is important 
to issue watchwords easily remembered and as 
nearly related as possible to the intended operations. 
For instance, when going for game, Artemis the 
Huntress ; for some stealthy enterprise, Hermes the 
Trickster ; for some deed of violence, Heracles ; for 
open undertakings, Sun and Moon; and others as 
similar as possible to these and quite comprehen- 
sible to all. Iphicrates t would not allow the same 
watchword to be issued to the patrol and the guard, 
but employed a different word for each, that the one 
first questioned might reply, Zeus the Saviour, if 
he happened to have this one, and the other 
Poseidon. For in this manner they would be least 


1 Probably the greatest tactician whom Greece produced. 
He was active from about 395 to 355 B.c. Numerous strata- 
gems are ascribed to him, and a large number of new 
weapons and pieces of equipment, the best known being, 
perhaps, the [phicratides, or marching shoes. He developed 
the use of light-armed men, the peltasts, and was the first 
to introduce the constantly fortified camp. It was to these 
two features of their tactics that the Romans owed most 
of their military supremacy, and as the development of 
their military organization followed soon after the time of 
Iphicrates, it is tempting to think that they took these two 
epoch-making ideas from him. 


K 129 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


17 Kal efavTopodoiro TO ovvOnpa. mAdvns d€ yevo- 
peevns Tots pohagw om adAjAwy cuprypa@ xpycbat 
mpos avrous, TovTov’ d¢€ mpoovyketobae: mAqy yap 
T@ €1006TU dyvworos® tots dAdow €oTar, €av Te 

18 EMnves edv TE BapBapor @ow. tpoevOvpety dé 
TOV KULaY, up dua TOV oupvy}Lov aovppopov Gs 
adray 7. expnoavto de avT@ Kat ev O7Bais c ore 
TI Kadpecav kataAaBovres éoxeddoOnaay VUKTOS 
Kal nyvoneay aAAjAous, Tpos oupryjov dé avved€- 

19 yovto.® 7a de ovvOjpara epw7do0ar Kow@s Tots TE 
meplodevovot Kal TpoPvrakw: oddev yap TmpooHKeL 
TOV. €TEpov epwrdv. ws* yap epiodos Kat 
ToA€wos av epwrw7. 


XXV. [IlapacvvGjparTAa | 


"Evior d6€ mapacvvOjuao® yp@vrar tav Te 
Tavelwy EVEeKEY KAL TPOS TO yvwpiletv wadAoV Tods 
2 didrovs. elvar d€ Kat TapacuvOywata ws idiairara 
Kal dvoyvwoTdTata Tots moAEpiows. ein & av Ta 
mapacvvOyuata Toudde. ev pev Tails cKoTewwais 
vue TO te ovvOna Epwrdav Kal posvety Tl, p-aMov 
de’ kat Wodov® Eeudavicar, TOV dé <purreLevov TO 
Te ovv0nja amoxptvecbav kat aAdo 7° mpoovykKel- 
pevov dwvjca 7 Yodov eudavicar: ev S€ Tots 
1 Hercher: durov’c, réuro M. 


2 Hercher: dyvworov M. 
3 Meineke: éavrois mpés Tuptypov ouvenéyovTo M. 


4 Casaubon: 6 M. ° Casaubon: dvepwrdv M. 
6 Koéchly and Riistow: rapacuvOjuarr M. 
7 Added by R. Schone. 8 Casaubon: Widov M. 


9 Hercher: d\\w M. 
130 


—hee tte ee 


et 


se Re 
ie. ae 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxiv. 16 -— xxv. 2 


likely to be deceived by the enemy, and the 
watchword to be betrayed. If the guards become 
separated from one another they should give a 
whistle agreed upon beforehand to call one 
another. For, except to the man who already 
knows it, this signal will be unfamiliar, as well to 
Greeks as to barbarians. One should watch the 
dogs lest on account of the whistling there be some 
trouble from them. This method was used at 
Thebes when the Cadmea was captured: the forces 
were scattered in the darkness and unable to recog- 
nize one another, but were collected by whistling.! 
The watchwords should be asked by the men on 
patrol and the advanced pickets, each from the 
other, for there is no propriety in having only the 
one do the asking, since in the guise of a patrol 
even an enemy might do that. 


XXYV. [Additional Tokens of Recognition] 


Some employ an additional token of recognition, 
both to prevent panics and the better to recognize 
their friends. Additional tokens of recognition 
must be as distinctive and as difficult as possible 
for the enemy to understand. They may be as 
follows. On dark nights ask the watchword and 
say something else, or rather also make a noise, 
and the one questioned must in reply give the watch- 
word and utter some other word or make a noise, 
according to previous agreement. Again, when it 

1 This was probably the recapture of the Cadmea from 

_ the oligarchs and the Sparians in 379 s.c., rather than the 


original capture in 383. The reference in Ch. xxxi. 34 
doubtless points to the former. 


131 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


paewotls ypovors TOV eV EpwravTa TO cvVOnUWa TOV 
mirov aderéobar 7 ev TH yxEupt ExovTa éemuléobar, 

3 €oTw b€ Kal érayayéoba Tov miAov emt TO Tpdcw- 

4 7ov Kal amayayéolat amo Tob mpoowrov, eT. dé 
KaL TO OOpv Karam at TMpoovovra. 7 Els THV aplaTepav 
mapaAaBetv, nN ExEW EV TH Yelp apavTa 7 aveAeoba, 
TOV d€ Epwrwpevov TO TE ovvOnwa. popeccoc: 
KQL TOUTWV TL TPOOVYKELMLEVOV TOLHGAL. 


XXVI. [epsodetas | 


Ifepuodevew juev® €v tots KWwdvvOLS mparov® TOV 
év TH ayopa HOporcpevav Adxwv dvo W70 TO Tetyos 
evadva€ aAArAors, Oveokevaojevous Tots Umapyovow 
6mAots Kal TapacvvOnuacw,* ws aKpiB@s ék 

2 mAelovos Siayv@var €avTovs. TOUS de THY TpPwWTHV 
pudasny TepLodevovTas adelmvous xp7) Teprodevew 
TUyXavovat yap Ol THY TPWTNHV mpopuddcaovres a a.7T0 
Seimvou ovtes® pabupoTepws TE Kal axodactorépws 
3 OvaKetprevor. Tepiodevew dé dvev Aapmrhpos, dy 

pn Xlav xeywwv 7° Kal OKOT os" el O€ pH, OUTW O 
AauTT7)p peyyeTo, els vibos pev pen dev (kexadvdbw 


yap Twe), em Oe THY viv Kal Ta TPO TMV TOd@V" 


/ / / Wy 3 
4 jovov peyyeTo. eV immo7popovon d€ moAeu Kal ev 


> A 
immactee XElpw@vos immevau _Trepiodevew: €V yap 
Tots pixeow Kal mAois® Kal jen KEOL TOV VUKTOV 

5 0Gccov aviolr’ dv 7) TEptodeta. ea de Gua TovTOLS 
1 Herm. Schone suggests \idov after #7, comparing xxvi. 6. 
2 Added by Herm. Schone. 
3 Herm. Schone: mpa&rov dé M. 


4 Casaubon: zapactv@nua M. 
5 Casaubon: or.odermvovovtog M. 


132 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxv. 2-—xxvi. 5 


is light, the person asking the watchword may 
remove his cap, or, if he holds it in his hand, may 
put it on, or he may also bring his cap to his face 
and take it away from his face, or, further, may 
advance and fix his spear, or transfer it to his left 
hand, or hold it aloft in his hand, or merely raise 
it; and the person who is asked for the watchword 
must both reply and do whichever of these actions 
has been agreed upon. 


XXVI. [Patrols] 


In times of danger the first thing is for two of the 
companies assembled in the market-place to patrol 
alternately at the base of the wall, provided with 
the arms available and with tokens of recogni- 
tion so as to recognize one another with certainty 
from a considerable distance. And those who patrol 
during the first watch must do so before they have 
had their supper, for those who are on guard during 
the first watch, if they have just eaten, are more 
careless and undisciplined. And they should patrol 
without a light, unless it be very stormy and dark. 
But if they have a light it must not shine upward 
(for it must be covered with something), but merely 
upon the ground and in front of theirfeet. Inatown 
in which horses can be kept and on ground passable 
for them patrolling can be done in winter by horse- 
men, for in the cold and mud and long nights the 
patrolling would thus be more quickly accomplished. 


6 Casaubon: # M. 

* Casaubon: dirwy M (with indication of corruption 
over 7). 

8 Orelli: 6yA\oo M. 


133 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Kal emt Too Tetxous Teprodevwow, .. | woTE Twas 
peev TH" efw Too Tetxous Cnororenadees Twas de 
67a €ow: exyew be Kal TEpLodevovTas MBovs ¢ ev Tats 
okoTewais vét Kat BaddAew GAAnV Kal adAnv eis TO 


” / ~ / ~ ~ 
e£w pLépos TOU Telyous. ot dé ovK ezratvobat TOTO 
8 A \ / > e / + > /, 
7 dua Ta Tpoyeypappeva. ev vroia dvTwy aAAj- 
\ \ \ > a 
dows . . 2 xp b€ Tas mepiodeias civar KaTW TOD 
/ 


Telxous, Kal py) avaBaivewy Tovds* mepiddous mAnv 
TOV puddxav. 
Katie Edy oTpateupa KexaxoTrabnKky?® pax Aerpbev,® 
7 Oud TO 7ARGos amoBaAetv veKxpav 7 Tpavpa- 
Tua," 7 OUpLpaXwY aTrooTdoer 7 du dAdo Tt 
OUpTrTeDpLo. adupa Kal TETOTEWLEVOY te emKi- 
duva Te 7" ” mroAcptoov eyyvs OVTWY, yp1) TA Tpoye- 
8 ypaypeva KaTa Tas dvrakas aipsres Kal Tas 
TepLodous ev TOLS TOLOVTOLS KaLpots TUKVaS TE xP) 
mepiodeveww Kal ov Set mpobupetcbar ev Tais 
Teplodeiais evpioKew TWas TOV mpodvAaccdvTwy 
GpedeoTepws duakeysevous Oia Umvov 7 KapLaTov" 
od yap ovpdépet ovTW Siakelevov TO OTPATEVPA ETL 
aGuporepov Kabloravar (etkos dé OTav evpeOH 
aloxpov Tt mov abvpety), adda pGAAov pos 
9 Oepametav Te Kal avadAniiv attav" tparécba. Kat 
meplooous €v Tols ToLovTOLS KaLpots ek 7rAciovos 
ywplov KaTadyAous eivat mpootdvTas Tots PvAakt 


1 R. Schéne places a lacuna here for which he suggests 
Tovrous otirw TeTAaX Oa. * Hercher: eis ra M. 

3 R. Schéne places a lacuna here (space of three letters 
in M) in which he supposes that some prescription beginning 
xpn mev . . . to balance xp7 dé stood. 

4 Casaubon: tac M. 

5 Kéchly and Riistow: kexaxordénxev M. 

6 Casaubon: \n¢ééev M. 


134 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvi. 5-9 


And if together with these some men also patrol 
upon the walls [they should be so placed] that some 
may watch the outside of the wall and some the 
inside. They should also on dark nights as they 
make their rounds have stones and throw them now 
and then outside the wall. Some, however, do not 
approve this custom for the reasons already men- 
tioned.t_ In case they are suspicious of one another 
. the patrolling should be done at the base of the 
wall and no patrol except the watchmen should go 
up on the wall. | 
Now if an army has suffered in morale because of 
defeat in battle, or from the size of their losses in 
dead and wounded, or from desertion by allies, or 
through any other misfortune it loses heart and has 
become discouraged, and if there is danger because 
of the nearness of the enemy, the directions already 
given in regard to the watchmen are to be carried 
out. At such times frequent rounds are necessary, 
but the patrol must not be too eager on his rounds 
to find members of the outposts in a rather careless 
condition from sleep or weariness. For it is not 
expedient to make the army, when in this state, 
still more disheartened—and a man is naturally dis- 
couraged if he is found behaving basely—but rather 
to turn one’s attention to the care and recovery of 
one’s troops. And at such times the approach of 
the patrols should be evident to the guards from 


1 The reference is to Ch. xxii. 13. 


7 R. Schéne: aroBarety 7) rpavudtwr M. 
8 Casaubon: déuuet M. 2 Casaubon: 4 M. 
10 Casaubon: # M. 1 R, Schéne: ai’rav M. 


135 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


pwvobvrds Tl mroppwUev, OTWS dveyepOi eav 
Kalevdn 6 mpopvrag KL TopackevdonTar aro - 

10 Kpiveoba TO EpOTU|LEvoV. aptotov dé avrov TOV 
oTpaTnyov ev Tots ToLwovToLs Katpots emuyseA@s 
EKGOTHY” TEplodevely preTA TOV avT@v atroAéktrwv® 
avopav. dvmevavtiws’ S€ TovTows dvaKerpevov 
OTPATEVLATOS ETTLOTIEDYEOTEPWS TOUS PUAAKas eferd- 

11 Cew. epodevew TE TOV OTpaTYYyOV pnd€zrore THY 
av7nv apav add’ aet dvahAdooorra., > Wa fq) 7p0- 
eLdoTes® capes ex moAAob Xpovov THY adiew Tob 
oTpaTyyob ol oTpari@rar tavTny’ padiora THY 
copay prAdcowow. 

12 “Arodéxovrau d€ TUWeES Kal TOOE emayyeMopevenv 
TWOV Kal KeAevovTwY. TOV ToXirapxov, €av 7 
Gedy meptodevew dia Kdtov® Twa 7 dppwortar, 
beim d€ €ld€vat Tov ) puddooovra Kal’ exadoTyv 

13 duAakyv, Tade TroLetv xp) AapTTHpas eivat mpo- 
ouyKelwevov e€oTw® maou Tots emt T@ TeEtxeL 
dvAakw Kat eva’? mpos ov mavTes avTapotow™ ot 
mpodvrakes: aeipéobw dé ex Tdm0v olev mavTes 


14 opovra ol emt TOU Tetxous dvAakes. e€av de pen) 
UTapYn oO TOLOUTOS TOTOS, monagxcugentmay EK 
Twwv vibos «ws peyLorov. TELTA ATO TOUTOU 


aipéobw AaumTyHp, Kal mpos Tobrov avraipecbat 
\ + > LA vA > > ¢ / 
Tovs adAXous Kal’ eva exaotov ad’ Exaotov dvdAa- 


1 Meineke: dv éyep07 M. 2 Herm. Schéne: éxacrov M. 
3 Casaubon: dmodextwy M. +* Casaubon: tzevayriow M. 
5 Mor. Haupt: adda dla Naw Bavorvra M. 

§ Kéchly and Riistow: mpotddvres M. 

7 ravirny Tavrny J M. 8 Meineke: ¢d8ov M. 

’ Added by Meineke. 
10 Added by Kichly and Riistow (eis Casaubon). 
11 Meineke: dvtaipovow M. 


136 


; 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvi. 9-14 


a long way off by their uttering some sound from 
a distance, so that the guard may be wakened 
if he is sleeping, and may be prepared to answer 
whatever is asked. It is best of all at such times 
for the general himself carefully to make each 
circuit with the same picked men. But when the 
army is in the opposite mood it is well to inspect 
the guards much more energetically. The general 
must never make his round at a fixed hour, but must 
constantly shift it, lest the soldiers, knowing definitely 
long beforehand the coming of the general, may 
watch with especial care during that time. 

At the advice and bidding of certain persons, 
however, some men adopt the following plan. If 
the commander of the city,! on account of some 
weariness or ill-health, does not wish to go on 
patrols, yet desires to know who, in each watch, 
fails to keep guard, he should act as follows. Let 
it be previously arranged that all the watchmen at 
the wall shall be supplied with lanterns, and that 
there shall be a particular one at the appearance 
of which all the watchmen shall raise theirs. This 
one should be raised from a place at which all the 
watchmen on the wall will see it, but if there be 
no such place ready, let one be built somehow, as 
high as possible. Then from the top of this let a 
lantern be raised and at its appearance let the others 
be raised, one by one, from each several post. Then 


1 The rare word zoXirapxos occurs elsewhere (¢.g., Acts of 
the Apostles xvii. 6 and 8, in the form modirdpyns ; OIG. ii. 
1967 ; Dittenberger, Sylloge* 700. 2 and 48, ef. note 3) almost 
exclusively at Thessalonica (Saloniki) and the vicinity. It 
is not improbable that Aeneas got the term from there, as it 
appears that he saw military service at one time or another 
in the north Aegean. 


137 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


EY »” >} A \ 4 >] / > 
ESL Oe: SpE LS _apOpetobar, Pa OUTWS ElOEval €l 


TAVTES Hpav ob mpodvAakes 7) €kXEimEL Tis TOV 
pvAdkwv. 


XXVII. [THaveiwv*] 


Tovs é€ mepl ToAw 7 oTparomeda efaipvys 
OoprBous Kal poBous VEVOLLEVOUS VUKTOS 7 pe? 
TLEPaV, amep vTd TwWwy Kahetra Tavera (EoTW 
de To Ovouwa, [leAomovyvyjotov? Kat pddvoTa “Apxa- 
duxov), mpos* tadr’ otv ties KedeVovot, KaTa- 
mavew* Oédovres atta, mpoovyKeicbar tois ev 
Th mode onueta, a iddvtes yvwoovTary yva- 

covra® de OTe eaTw mdveiov Wde- aicOycovrat 

dua” mupds Te TpoovyKeElevov eml Ywpov evKaTC- 
3 7Tov® 7aow els S¥vapW Tots ev TH moAet. apioTov 
de mporrapnyyeABar, Kal’ ovs dy TOY OTpaTLWTaY 
yevyrat PoBos, Kara, Xwpav TE Tipepetv Kal avaBoay 
TaLava., n Aéyew OTe ein Taverov® Kal TOV dxovovTa 


bo 


4ael TO mAnatov™ mapayyeArew. Kal’ ovs av 
>] / 

ToO oTpaTevuaTos pn avtimaavilwow,” «tdevar 

1 rept maveiwy or Tavelwy Kkatdwavois suggested by R. 
Schone. 2 Casaubon: zeXorovjciov M. 

3’ Added by Herm. Schone. 4 C: xararavery M. 

5 Haase: 0’ M. 6 gic@noovrac Hunter. 


7 Herm. Schéne: maveov' éotw 6¢ aicOncovra wupds M: 
éotw 5é mupds Hunter. 

8 Koéchly and Riistow: éxxkarérrov M. 

9 Néyerv 76 in in warjov Herm. Schone. 

10 C: tov rAnoiov M. 0 Meier: dvtimaavifouow M. 


1 Groundless fear, called ‘ panic’ fear, was ascribed to 
the mysterious Arcadian mountain god, Pan. Greek armies 
seem to have been peculiarly subject to these panics, due, 
doubtless, to the rather indifferent discipline which generally 
prevailed. 


138 


| 
| 
| 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvi. 14-—xxvu. 4 


they should be counted, and thus it may be known 
whether all the watchmen have raised them, or if 
any one of the guards is missing. 


XXVIII. [Of Panics] 


The confusions and terrors that suddenly arise 
in a city or a camp, by night or by day, are by some 
called panics—the word is a Peloponnesian, particu- 
larly an Arcadian one.’ Accordingly, against these 
some who wish to stop them advise that signals be 
appointed in advance for all the inhabitants of the 
town, which they will see and recognize, and in the 
following way they will know that there is a panic, 
namely, by noticing a previously arranged signal- 
fire at a place as conspicuous as may be to all those 
in the city. And it is best to announce beforehand 
that, wherever panic occurs among the soldiers, 
they should stand in their places and shout “ Paean,’ # 
or say that it is a mere panic, and that every one who 
hears it should pass the word along to his neighbour. 
Now wherever in the army they do not answer the 
paean, it will be known that there the terror pre- 


* Paean was a very ancient god of healing among the 
Greeks, who later came to be identified with Apollo, As- 
clepius, and others. He was called upon with the cry (7 
Ila:jov or ie Ilacdy to cure an evil or avert a misfortune. 
Out of this custom developed a song in honour generally of 
Apollo as god of healing, with the refrain i) Ilaav. <A 
paean, or solemn hymn with the refrain (7) Hasav, was com- 
monly sung before entering: battle, but it is likely that a 
mere invocation of the god is hereintended. (A. Faighanks, 
in his exhaustive work on the Greek Paean, Cornell Studies 


in Class. Philol. xii, seems to have overlooked this passage 
in Aeneas.) 


139 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


\ / \ / + 3A /, e 
Kara TouTous Tov @oBov ovTa. eav b€ TL O 
oTpaTnyos PoBepov atoOnrar, TH odAmuyye on- 
poatvew: TovTo 8 €oTw yvwarov OTL ely: TO TroNepLLov. 
pans de yevouevns Kal ven Fevrav ws 7a. ToAXa. 

/ b] 
ylyvovrar ofou, eviore pev Kal _TIMEP AS: Kal 

\ 

5 vuKTos O€ Kal mavU. ws det otv noodv Tu 
TOLOUTOV yeveotar, xen els THY vUKTOL TrapnyyeAdat 
Tots OTPATLUIT ALS TaoU KaTa Ta omAa ¢€ivat ws 

6 puadtora, ws éodpevov TL TeEpl avrous. 7po- 

/ > 
elvooTas ovv elkés é€oTw,® édv TL yeyvaran, [7 
5 A 
ampoadoknTous* mpoomecetv, punde tro ddPwv 
e€amiwaiwy tapdooectar Kai amroAdvoba. 

7 E Ip / Sy / e KK / ¢ \ rye) 5 6) / 

vppatas d€, 0 Aakwvwv appootns emt Opaxns, 
b] \ ~ \ Sd, ~ 
ETmMEL AVT@ TUKVA EylyvovTO ev T@ oTpaTevpaTt 

\ / / \ >) > / : + / 
Tas vuKTas poPot, Kal ovK 10bvavTo are TpoTw 

8 tadoa, Towovoe Tapnyyeirev Ets vUKTO., OTav 
TLS ASpuBos yeyyaran, avaxadiew avtovs «vOds 
POS Ta. OmAa €v TH evvp), aviotacbar dé pdeva 
opbdv: av dé tis t6n Twa opOov, TapyyyeAev ev 
méow, womrep Todeiw TH eTavactavt yphoba. 

9 Oud yop, TOV poBov TOU TapayyeAevros ovdeva. 
WeTo°® GyLV Lov} TEL. Tos: de Tovrois, ors 
adnbas" TO TrapayyeAua peTa poBov 7 Hy ‘yevomevov® 
TWOS FopvBov emAnyn Tis TOV oTOvdaLoTEpwV 
avdpav ovxt favatnpopov, tav de gdavrAwv Twa 

10 wote Kal amolavetv. cupBavros 5é€ TovTov 
danKkovady Te ot avOpwror Kat evraPovpevor® 

1 Hertlein: are M. 
2 C: nocovric M (with some unknown mark over gc). 
3 éoT. M. 4 Herm. Schiéne: drpocdoxyjros M. 
5 ékavacravte Meier (cf. § 10). © Hertlein: gero av M. 


7 Hercher: ddnééo M. 5 Kéchly and Riistow: tryeudvoc M. 
8 Casaubon: evA\aBouuévou M (evAaBouuévor B). 


140 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvir. 4-10 


vails. But if the commander sees any reason for 
fear, he must give warning by the trumpet, and this 
is to be understood as a call to arms. It is after 
a defeat in battle that such fears are most likely 
to arise, sometimes by day but especially by night. 
But that this may be less likely to happen, orders 
for the night should be given to all the soldiers 
to keep under arms as much as possible, as though 
something might happen where they are. ‘Thus, if 
they are forewarned, it is not likely that, in case 
anything happens, they will be taken by surprise on 
colliding with the enemy, or that they will be dis- 
turbed because of sudden terror and perish. 

Euphratas,! the Laconian governor in Thrace, 
since panics occurred in his army frequently at 
night and could not be quieted in any other way, 
used to give orders of this sort for the night: that if 
any confusion should arise, his men should im- 
mediately sit up in their beds with their arms at 
hand, but that no one should stand upright, and 
if anyone saw a man standing up, Euphratas gave 
orders in the hearing of all to treat him as an enemy. 
For he thought that through the. fear which this 
command would inspire none would forget it. More- 
over, that the command should actually inspire fear, 
on one occasion when a panic arose, one of the 
more respectable soldiers was wounded, though not 
mortally, while one of the baser sort was fatally 
injured. As a result of this, the men obeyed and, 
paying close attention, refrained from panics and from 

1 Nothing further is known of him, and his name is not 
mentioned in Porolla’s Prosopographie der Lakedaimonier, 
Breslau, 1913. Some have thought that Eudamidas (Porolla, 
No. 295), who was campaigning in Thrace in 362 B.c., may 
have been meant. 


141 


ial 


12 


13 


14 


15 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


eTmavoavto Tav Te DBoptBwv Kat Tod mepideds 
e€avioracba, éx T&v Koit@v. émavOy Sé Kat 
TOL@OE TpOTe. oTpato7mredw FopuBovpevep VUKTOS 
knpvéas oun" 6 Knpus avnyyethev TOV pnvvoavTa 
TOV apevra TOV Urmov™ ou év HV TO BopupyFhvae d@pov 
dpyupi lov AnbeoBar.® xp7 8, ay TL ToLoDTOV eV 
Tats vvél Tacyy oTparevpa, age EKGOTHV pudaxny 
kafeoravar EKGOTOU Aoxou 7 nH TAEEws emt Tots epaoe 
Kal TOCS pegous avopas oi i mpooegovow" omrws edy TWO. 
aicbavwrvrar é€K med Umvou 7 GAdws® epxomevov 
OopuBov, «b0d 6° mapwv KabéEer Kai KwdAvoet 
adtika. Tod d€ dXrdXov mAjOovs amo oavaatTiov 
ExadoTov avdpa mapadvAdocew, Omws, édyv Tis 
foBos yévntat, odToL 67)" etdores TOUS pLaratous 
doBovs Katamavawot Tovs Trap" avr@® EKAOTOS. 

Adtrov &€ OopuBety vurros® To T&v evayTiwv 
oTpatrevpa Saudrers Tas ayeAaias peTa KwdwvwY 
adievra” eis TO oTpatomedov Kat dAXa trolvy.a, 
otvov troticavtTa. 


["Eyepots | 
Tevouevns 5é€ auéepas yor Tovs dvAakas p77” 


e000 ddiévar ex Tav dvdrakeiwy mply 7) TA E€w 


1 Casaubon: ovyf M. 

2 Casaubon: agedévra immov M. 

3 Capps (taking the supplement d&pov dpyvpiou AnPerGau 
from Eberhard): tamov dike OopvBnOjvac M 

4 Haase: dv dpa co mpocéiwow M. 

> Koéchly and Riistow: d\\w M. 

6 Added by Herm. Schéne. 7 R. Schone: dé M. 

8 Kéchly and Riistow: du7@ M. 

9 Kirchhoff: vosror M (with a mark of corruption over 7 
and a short space after the word). 13° Sauppe: aguévres M, 


142 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvir. 10-15 


rising from their beds in terror. And panics have 
been stopped in this way also: when confusion arose 
in camp at night, the herald commanded silence and 
announced that the man who reported the one who 
had turned loose the horse which had caused the 
commotion would receive a present of silver.' It is 
necessary, too, if an army has this sort of experience 
by night, to station men in each watch of the night 
over every company or band, both on the flanks and 
in the centre, to take special care that, if they 
should perceive any disturbance coming on because 
of sleep or anything else, whoever of them is at 
hand may check it immediately. And of the rest 
of the troops, there should stand on guard one 
men from each mess, so that if any fear should arise, 
they, knowing what fears are groundless, may each 
calm the men at his own post. 

But the commander should himself throw the 
army of the enemy into confusion at night by driving 
into their camp a herd of cows wearing bells, or other 
animals, having first made them drunk with wine.? 


[ Reveille] 


At daybreak one must not permit the guards 
to leave their posts at once until the neighbourhood 


1 Much the same story is told by Xenophon of Clearchus 
on the retreat after the battle of Cunaxa (Anab. ii. 2. 20), 
and by Polyaenus iii. 9. 4, of Iphicrates. The idea was a 
good one and was probably employed more than once. 

2 The use of a similar device, 7.e., oxen with lighted faggots 
tied to their horns, enabled Hannibal to escape with his 
booty through the mountain passes of Campania (Polybius 
i. 93: 10siS s “Lavy i: 16..5:ff.). 


11 Koéchly and Riistow: roricac M. 
12 Added by R. Schone (after ypy Meier). 


143 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


mpoepevvn evra eupavichy Kat kaapa elvat 7o- 
epi" Kal ovr ATTLEVaL ToUs amo TOV pudaxay 
py aa mavrtas’ adda Kata pmépy, OWS GaeEl TIVES 
emt Tots dudakelois diateA@ow. 


XXVIII. [IlvAwpixa | 


~ \ 
ITpovoetabat 5€ Kat Tade Ev PoPw ovans ToAcCws. 
7 \ \ yy ~ ‘ / \ > ~ 
mUAas Tas prev aAAas KekActoba, piav dé aved- 
yOar 4 av dvompocodwTatov 7 THs mdAEws Kal 
“54 EN a SENS JAD f Cm ¢ 
emt amAetotov am adtrhs* peAAwow opdobar ot 
/ > 
2 mpoo.dvTes, Kal Ev TAVTH EKTOUGOA, Wa owpaTa 
\ > / \ N 2) / / e/ 
pev avipwrwv Kata THVv exTouada mvAida €&in 
7 ? 
Kat eloin Kal’ eva ovTw yap av nKLOTA TIS 
AavOavou' atrowoA@v 7 KaTacKoTros ela, 
> A / 5 ~ 
3 eavTep ye 7% O muAwpos vonpos.® macav® dé 
avolyeoBar vmoluyiwy evekev Kal auak@v Kal 
3 / >] rNé 7 \g Se. dé > / 
aywyiuav éemopadrés.” Kal? eay te d€n eicevey- 
:) Yj >? ~ 
KaoGau oirov 7 é€Aaiov 7) olvouv ev Taxer 7) TOV 
€ / :) / / 
OmoTpoTray TOUTOLS, apagars 7 cwpatwy AnOeL,° 
/ / 
rabra Oe xp? Kara Tas eyyut Tara mUAas Komicew,* 
.. Kal OUTWS a 8 rayloTa Kal pdora etoxoptabety. 
470 >; dAov™ ut avotyecbat mpwt mUAas ampooke- 
> / 
TTWS aw oxpuatrepov, ew Te pndeva” adieoBar 
i 
mow 7° e€epevvica” Ta mrept THY ToAWw: Te TE 


1 


pnde® mdota Kata Tavras opuilecbar add’ 
1 Meineke: dmavrac M. 2 Boivin: atrév M, J. Afr. 
3 éy xa’ év J. Afr. 4 Meier: A\avOavn M. 


> M, J. Afr.: defended by Mahlstedt. 
6 Added by Hercher: way J. Afr. 
7 Casaubon: émodgac(?) M: éricpas AB. 
8 ef 6€ Te TOUTwY avayKkaiws denoe J. Afr. 


9 J. Afr.: 7a0y M. 10 Cf. note on iii. 5. 
144 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvu. 15 - xxvii. 4 


has been carefully reconnoitred and shown to be 
clear of the enemy. Even then they must not all 
leave their posts at once, but in detachments, so 
that some shall always continue on guard. 


XXVIII. [On Gates] 


When a city is in fear precautions must also be 
taken as follows. Close the other gates but leave 
one open where access to the city is most difficult, 
and where those who approach are going to be in 
plain sight for the longest distance. In this there 
should be a wicket gate so that through it men may 
go and come singly, for in this way a deserter or 
spy would be least able to escape notice if he should 
enter, that is, if the gate-keeper is discreet. But 
it is unsafe to open the entire gate for beasts of 
burden, wagons, and loads. And if there be any 
need of importing quickly food or oil or wine or 
similar supplies, either by wagons or by a squad of 
men, these should be brought in by the nearest 
gates, . . . as that would be quickest and easiest. 
In general, the gates must not be opened incautiously 
early in the day, but later, and no one should be 
let out until the region around the city has been 
reconnoitred. Again, boats are not to be moored 


1 C: xomifev M. 
122 Hercher placed a lacuna here, comparing J. Afr. 
| MT poegLovTOS TTPATEVLATOS. 





| 38 Hercher: kai éav M. 14 Gov mpdyua J. Afr. 
15 B (second hand) C: wndévra M: owWirepoy te unbéva 

| €&m J. Afr. IST ay ATE. 

_ 17 éfepevvncn J. Afr. 18 Hercher: pyre M, J. Afr. 


L 145 


| 19 kar’ atras J. Afr. 
| 


Or 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


aTWTEPW, WS HON ye Kal Huéepas* mohhat mpageus 
avorx Jerod appotéepwy mVvABV yeydovacw emt 
TEXVAOMATWY Kal Tpoddcewy ToLWvde* yvwoln- 
: \2 24° Ga) ” \ , 

ceva de”? eb evos epyou moAAa mapamAnoiws 

/ / / \ e / 
TrovTw mpaxlevTta. Ilv0wv péev 6 KaAalopénos, 
Kat TOV ev TH TOAEL TWHY ovVEeDEAdVTWY, THPHGAS 
Tehéws TO Hovyaitatov® THs Nuépas, ayaa €x 

~ / > / / 

mapackeuns miGovs elcayovcoats KatéAaBe KdAalo- 
pevas: jrevovodyv* év tats muUAas tav apakdr, 
kal’ ds, E€vwv mpotmapyovtwy Kpudaiws ov 
TOppw THS TOAEWS, TOUS LEV TOV TOALTAY AaborTes, 
tovs 6€ dldcavres, Twas 5é THV E€ow ouvepyovs 
” / \ / > / >] 
EXOVTES KaTETXOV THV moAw. “Ididdns te “ABv- 
dnvos KaTa ‘EMqjorovtov kaTaropBavev Tdpuov 
aAAa TE TeEpt THY avaBaow VUKTOS ETL TOD TElYoUS 
Ad@pa mapeckevdoato® Kat ayudéas mAnpdoas 
dpvydvev Kat Batwrv mapémepbev mpos TO Tetyxos, 
76) TOv mvA@v Kekrevopevwv, ws TV Ilapiavav 
ovoas Tas a patas, aitwes® €APotcat mpos Tas 
mAas ihilorze, ws poBovprevan moAejLious. ds 
Edel EV Kaip@ TwWe dpagphivat, iva at muAae el 
mpnol@o. Kat mpos To oBervdew tav Llapravav 
€ 7 >] \ \ EA / > / 
OpunodvTwy avTos Kara aAXov té7oVv etoehO. 

Aoxet 6€ prot owvayayovru! On Awreov tiva det 
dvrdoocoba® Kat é€v ois Katpois Exacta, wa 
Tis pendev ed Ows amodéynrar. 


1 Gronov: juépac M. 

2 Suggested by Herm. SchGne: rodvde €¢’ M. 

3 Hercher: jovyérarov M. 

4 Added by Casaubon: R. Schéne suggests plausibly 
KaTaéas Twa or ulav (sc. duakar). > rapacKevacaro 

6 Herm. Schone: ér éyyds M. 7 Casaubon: eupa aie M. 

8 Haase, Kirchhoff: tva 6) ¢@u\doonobe M. 


146 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxvin. 4-7 


at the gates, but at a distance, since in time past, 
even in the daytime, when both gates have been 
open at once, many things have happened by tricks 
and pretexts such as the following—and from a 
single occurrence many cases similar to it will be 
understood. Pytho of Clazomenae,1 having also 
some confederates in the city, watched carefully 
for the most quiet hour of the day, and captured 
Clazomenae by means of wagons, which, in accord- 
ance with his plan, were bringing in wine-jars. 
While the wagons were stopping in the gates (for 
there were mercenaries ready in concealment not 
far from the city near the gates), his men, eluding 
some of the citizens and outstripping the others, with 
the aid of some persons inside got possession of the 
city. And Iphiades of Abydus ? on the Hellespont, 
in his capture of Parium, among other preparations for 
scaling the wall by night, secretly prepared wagons 
filled with brush and brambles and sent them to the 
wall (the gates being already closed), as though they 
were wagons of the Parians, which after their arrival 
were parked near the gates from fear of the enemy. 
At a suitable moment they were to set fire to the 
wagons, so that the gates might catch fire, and when 
the citizens of Parium had gone to put out the flames 
he himself might enter at another point. 

It seems to me that I must show, by a collection 
of instances, against what things one must guard 
and on what occasions, so that one may not be so 

simple as to take anything for granted. 


_ } Otherwise entirely unknown. 

_? He is known merely as a tyrant of Abydus at the 
time of Aeneas (Aristotle, Politics, 1306 a 30; Demosthenes 
xxiii. 176 f.). 





147 


i) 


Go 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


XXIX. [“OzAwy Adbpa etoxoptdy | 


\ \ ~ >) / > \ / 
Ilept d€ Ta&v eloxopilopevwy els thy modAW 
ayyelwyv Te Kal dopnuatwv, ev ois av Tt Kpudatov 
Sty e141» ty Ape” 3 / / 
evelyn, ots’ 70 7OAIs Kal 7) aKpomroAus KaTeAndOn, 
~ / ¢ >) A A \ 
viv dnAwbijoeTar. aTrEp evAaBetobar det Kal 
7) adpovriorws avuTaov Exe, Kal pdhora TOV 
muAwpov ev TLOL Kapots, orav efwbev Te Eowbev 
\ > 
poBepov 7. eaTw dé ot mpooeKTéov etoKopilo- 
pévois.  e€oicw O€ Kal Tapadelyuaros EVEKEV 
emt modfer yeyevnmeva. KateAn pin yap mods,” 
eowbev TW ovvPehovtwy, Ev eopTh mavojuw 
TpoTW ToLmde. TpPATov pev Tots Tpoevdnuyjoac. 
/ y > A \ V)\ 3 \ > ~ ~ > / 
E€vois emt TO péAXov® Kat mrodkit@yv Tots avdzdAots 
TE Kal ovvepyots e€oopevots elceKoploOnoav Bapakes 
/ 4 \ / 5 \ “6 7 
Aiveot* Kat orodAtdia® Kai mepikedadaia® d7da 
Kynuloes paxarpar TOka Tofevpata ev KiBwrots’ ws 
A / 
doptaywyots KaTeokevacpeva,® ws (uatiwv evov- 
A + > / iv ¢ > A 
Twv Kal dArAwy aywyiwwv: dmep ot €AApertoTrat 
avoi€avtes Kal (lOdvTes WS (udTia povovy§ KaT- 
EonILTVAVTO, EXPL TYLNOOVTAL OL eloayayovres. 
Kal rabra [Lev ereOn eyyds THS ayopas, Orrov 
\ 
eeu: ev d€ Tapoots Kal pimois Kal toriows® Aut- 


1 Casaubon: avtixpudacoy éviows M. 

2 Meineke conjectured here ’AudiroNs and for émi mpdéer 
either émi Opaéi or év Tots él Opaxns (see explanatory note). 

3 Hunter places these words after cuvepyois. 

5 oes Quvéous J. Afr.): Nuwator M. 

5 grodidas J. Afr. 

® Defended by Mahlstedt: mepixedadaias J. Afr. 

7 KiBwrlos J. Afr. 

8 This reading of M and J. Afr. is retained by Casaubon 
and Behrendt; it is generally changed to karacxevacuévors 
(or -aus). 

® Koéchly and Riistow: tcrotc M. 


148 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxix. 1-6 


XXIX. [Importation of Arms by Stealth] 


I shall now discuss the smuggling into the city 
of jars and packages, in which there may be some- 
thing hidden by means of which a city with its 
acropolis has in past instances been seized. These 
matters must be attended to and not disregarded, 
particularly by the gate-keeper, at certain times, when 
there is reason to fear any disturbance from without 
or within; and he should look to it when things 
are being brought in. I shall relate likewise, as 
illustration, some things that have actually happened. 
A city was captured, with the complicity of some 
within it, upon a public holiday, in some such manner 
asthis.! First of all, to the aliens who had established 
themselves there in anticipation of what was to take 
place, and to the unarmed citizens who were to be 
accomplices there were brought in linen corslets, 
cloaks, helmets, shields, greaves, short swords, bows, 
arrows, stowed away in chests like those of merchants, 
with the statement that clothing and other mer- 
chandise were in them. The revenue officers, opening 
these, andseeing what they thought was only clothing, 
affixed their seals until the importers should put a 
value upon them. ‘These cases were then stored in a 
convenient spot near the market-place. In crates 
also and wicker frames and wrapped up in half-woven 


i Meineke, by clever emendations, made it out that the 
city was Amphipolis, and the occasion the capture by 
Brasidas in 424-3 B.c., which caused Thucydides to be 
exiled. But a careful comparison with the conditions 
described by Thucydides iv. 103 ff. makes it clear that that 
occurrence is not the one referred to here. 


149 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


vpavTois’ Sopatia Kal aKovtia evetAnuéva eio- 
nvexln, Kal even Omrov ExaoTa ovvedepev av- 
UTOTTWS* ev Oo ayyeow axvpwv kal epi mrékrat 
Kal pupa. aomtdva” ev Tots eplous Kal axvpous® 
KEKPULLLEVA, Kal aAAa evoyKoTepa ev capydvats 
aotadpidos Kat ovicwy mTAnpeow, eyxeuploua. de ev 
7 aupopedor TUP@v Kat toxyddev Kal eAadv. elo 
nvexOn de eyxeuploua Kal ev ouKvots memo yupva, 
dmewa}Leva" Kara Tovs muv0udvas els TO oTrepya 
TOV olKU@V. Oo 8 emtPovAcvwv TE Kal WYEL@V 
8 e€whev etonvexOn ev Ppvydvev popypare. VUKTOS 
de yevowevns KQL ab povobevrw TeV emf oopLeven, 
EKGOTOS OV EdEL THPHGAVTES KaLpoV, ev @ pdALoTa 
olvepevor Hoav ot aor KaTa THY 77OAWw ota 87° 
Ev €opT i) mp@rov puev TO Pop pea. eXvOn, Kal ef 
avTov® 6 TYE HOV ETOWLOS nv" erreur. adAou pev 
avTa@y Tovs Tapaovs efetAvccor" ™pos Tas Anipets 
TOV Sopdtwy Kal acovTiw, eTepow® dé Ta ayyn 
TOV axvpwv Kat <piey e€exevouv,? ot d€ Tas 
capyadvas avereuvov,® adda. dé Tas KiPwrovs 
GVOLYOVTES Ta omAa eS 1]pour, ot d€ Tods audopéas 
ouverpipor, iva Taxeto. 7 Anppes TOV eyXeuproteny 
9 yevoiro. apa de Tabra Kat od méppw ovTa 
aA wy ETOPOVVETO G7T0 onpetou Tod ev TH TOE 
10 Kal Ws paray§e YEVO[LEVOD. a omhuobevtes™ oe 
EKaOTOL TOS TpoonKovaw OmAots ol pev TWES 
att@v él mupyous wpunoav KaradaBety Kat 


2 


1 nuvpartiaios J. Afr. 2 domdioxia J. Afr. 
3 Casaubon: axvper M. 
4 Casaubon: azew w eva M (with mark of corruption over 


second w). > Schenkl: oc 6é M. 
8 é& airfs (‘forthwith’) Eberhard, Mor. Schmidt. 
7 Meineke: é&A\ucoov M. 8 Meineke: érepos M. 


150 


| 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxix. 6-10 


sail-cloth, spears and javelins were brought in, and, 
without arousing suspicion, placed where each would 
be serviceable. And in baskets of chaff and of wool, 
bucklers and small shields were concealed in the 
wool and chaff; and others still smaller in baskets 
full of raisins and figs, as well as daggers concealed 
in jars of wheat and dried figs and olives. And 
daggers were likewise carried in unsheathed in ripe 
gourds, pushed down along the stems among 
the seeds of the gourd. Likewise the deviser and 
leader of the plot was carried in from without hidden 
in a load of faggots. And when night was come, 
and those who were to make the attack were 
assembled, and each one was looking out for the 
opportune time, at which all the rest of the citizens 
were completely intoxicated (as would be likely on 
a festival day), first of all the load was loosened 
and out of it came the leader ready prepared. 
Then some of them unrolled the crates to seize the 
spears and javelins, others emptied the baskets of 
chaff and wool, others cut open the hampers, others, 
opening the chests, took out the arms, and still 
others smashed the jars so as to lay hands upon the 
daggers as quickly as possible. Ali these things 
took place at the same time and not far away from 
each other, at a signal given in the city as if for battle 
array. And when each one had equipped himself 
with arms suited to him, some of them rushed to 
seize the towers and the gates, through which they 








9° Added by Hercher (very uncertain). 
*0 Hercher: avéreuov 
11 R. Schone: ywiuevov M: xai os Pddaye Fv TO yivduerov 
Meineke: rats @&w dddayé yerouévov Hug. 
12 B (second hand) C: ér\odévras M. 
151 


Jka 


12 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


\ \ > 
mvras, Kal’ as Kat Ttovs' addAouvs mpocedéxorTo, 
ot O€ él TA apxela Kal Tas evavTias* oiKias, of 
be + 3 LAA / 7 
é, dAAow® arkAwy TOTWY ELYOVTO. 
> \ ¢€ Sad / ~ ? / / / 
Eis dé dpuoias mpakers TOV elpnucévwv dSedpevol 
> / > \ > \ + / > / 
Twes aomidwy emet ovdevi GAAw TpoTW edvVaVTO 
¢e / Q 10 > / @ 16: > ~ 4 
érouudoacbar o¥dé etoayayeolar, tAR00s oicudv 
Kal épydtas apa TovTwr® elonydayovTo. Kal ev 
\ A ~ ay > A ” > \ ~ 
pev TH havep@® adda ayyeta emAekov, ev dé Tals 
\ vA / \ > / yA 
voEw omAa, mepikedadaias Kat aomidas, émAexor, 
ais oxava mepieTifecav® oKiTwa' Kat EvdAwa. 
3 \ \ b) \ ~ \ / 
GAAa pry ovdé TOV Kata EadatTay mpocoppilo- 
\ 
pévwv mAoiwy vuKTOS Kal HLEpas oUTE peyaAwy 
” A > , g > ee , 
OUTE pikp@v adiacKkeTmTws® Exew, adAa euPaivor- 
/ > A 
tas Tovs ApevodvAakas Te Kat amrooToAgas idetv 
avtovs® Ta aywyywa, evOvpoupévovs’ ote Kal 
3 ~ 
Likvwvior apeAjoavTes Tv TowovTwv peydda 


eopadnoar. 


XXX. [Ilept o7Awy cicaywyhs | 


_Upovoety dé KQL TA ETL TPACEL eloayojeva Kal 
els THY cyopav exTilepeva oma Ta Te ETL TOV 
KamnAelwy Kal mavromuActuv, ay" abpovabevrey 
mos TL yevoit av,” Grrws pndeve eTOULa, H) 
tav BovAopévwv vewrepilew: evnbes yap Ta&v pev 


1 Kéchly and Riistow, and Hercher from J. Afr. 

2 évavtiwy Casaubon: rév é€. Kéchly and Riistow (cf. 
J. Afr. ras modeuov [for rodeulwr] oikias). 

3 Herm. Schone: oc dé d\Xo. M. 

4 Oldfather: 67\a oco.wy M (with mark of corruption over 
w): dda suspected by Hercher: oictas Casaubon: oicvov 
R. Schone: dda, 7AHGos olovwyv Hunter. 

5 Hertlein: dvtwo M. 8 tpoceribecay Meineke. 


152 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxrx. 10 - xxx. 2 


admitted the rest also; others fell upon the city. 
hall and the houses opposite ; some took one place 
and some another. 

In an enterprise similar to the kind already 
described, certain persons were without shields, 
and when in no other manner were they able to 
provide or import them, they brought in quantities 
of osiers and also workmen to handle them. And by 
day they wove other kinds of basketry, but by night 
they wove armour, such as helmets and shields, to 
which they attached leathern and wooden handles. 
Furthermore, it is necessary to be watchful not only 
of vessels which come in by sea to anchor near by, 
night or day, whether great or small, but also it is 
necessary for the inspectors of the port and the 
supervisors to go on board and personally to see 
the wares, having in mind that the Sicyonians also, 
forgetting such precautions, suffered a serious disaster. 


XXX. [On the Introduction of Arms] 


One ought also to take precautions in regard to 
the arms imported for sale and displayed in the 
market-place, likewise those in the small shops and 
the bazaars (since these, if gathered together, would 
make a considerable number), to prevent them 
from being ready at hand for anyone of those who 
desire to start a revolution. For it is silly to take 


7 Casaubon: ocvxva M. 
8 J. Afr. dtackémrws M : det aoxéxrws Kochly and Riistow. 
9 J. Afr. : eidévar avtotc M. 
10 J. Afr.: ev@vumouyévovoc M. 
1 Added by Casaubon. 2 Schenkl: yévoro M. 


153 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


APuvoupLeveny avdpav mapawpeto0a. Ta. oma, ev 
de TH ayopa Kal Tats ouvorkias abpoa vrapyew 
owpakous* Té Gaomuolwy Kal ey xerprdtooy KLBwTLA.. 
du0 Set Ta eloapixvovuerd Te Kal no povopeva, 
OmrAa [L7) expéepectat Te Els THY ayopay Kal vUK~ 
TEpEVELY OTTOU av TOXN, aAAa mAnv detyparos TO 
ado TAnbos mpw* exTiowTd Tis, civar Sypuoaia® 
Kpivew. 


XXXI. [Ilept émoroAdv kpvdaiwv | 


Ilept 5é€ emoroAdv Kpvdaiwy mavrota. pe 
elow at mrepipers, mpoovyKetafar dé det* TH 
/ \ / 207 e \ / 
méeppavTe Kat deyouevw dia: at d¢ AavOavovoat 
/ / av > > é > \ 
pdadvora Tovaide ay elev. em up0n emaToAn 
@oe. els popria 7 7, dda oKevy) eveBXi0n BuBAtov 
7 GAdo Tt ypeppa® TO TUXOV Kal beyebet Kal 
maAraloTyTL. ev ToUTwW dé yeypamrat! 7 emsor ona] 
ema iLomeveoy ypappdreov Tob mpwrTov oatixyou' 
7 Sevrepov  TplTov, emoTuyuats de eAaxioraus 
Kal dSnAordraus mAny TH TeuTopevw. €iTa 
apucojevov TOO BuBAtou map ov et,® e€eypadero 
Kal ra emLOEoN LAT UEVE yeep. TWeis epetis 
TA €K TOD MpwTov oTixov Kat SevTépov Kal Ta 
dAAa woattws, eyvwpile ta emorarevta. ddrLya 
& dv tis OéAwy emoretAar Kat Bde owjoa, 

1 Casaubon: cupaxous M. 

2 Added by Herm. Schone. 

3 Schenk]: dyuocla M (dnudorw generally). 

4 Added by Casaubon. 5 Meineke: dpaua M. 

6 § éyéyparro Hertlein. 

7 Added by Hug: ypauudrwr 7} M. It would seem, how- 


ever, that something more has fallen out. 
8 €e. Hertlein. 


154 


— 1A 


| 
| 


| 
j 
| 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx. 2—- xxx. 3 


away the weapons from men who are entering the 
town + while there are assembied in the market- 
place and the lodging-houses boxes of small shields 
and chests of daggers. Accordingly the imported 
and collected arms ought not to be exposed in the 
market-place and be left overnight in any chance 
spot, but, with the exception of a sample, official 
permission may be required before anyone exhibits 
them in bulk. 


XXXI. [On secret Messages] 


In regard to secret messages, there are all sorts 
of ways of sending them, but a private arrangement 
must be previously made between the sender and 
the receiver. Especially secret messages might 
take the following forms. In one case a message 
was sent in this way: in with merchandise or other 
baggage there was inserted a book, or some other 
chance document, of any size or age, and in this 
the message had been written by marking the 
letters of the first, second, or third line with dots, 
very small and discernible only to the recipient. 
Then, when the person intended received the book, 
he made a transcript, and by setting down in order 
the marked letters from the first line and the second 
and the others in the same way he discovered the 
message.” But should anyone wish to send a brief 


1 See Chap. x. 9. 

* The following instance from recent events may be of 
interest in this connexion : “‘ Chandra (that is, Ram Chandra, 
the editor of a Hindoo revolutionary paper in San Francisco) 


_ got all the news he wanted for his paper from India, and said 


he did it through copies of the Koran, marked peculiarly ”’ 
(The Washington Post, April 24, 1918, p. 1, col. 6). 


155 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ , 2 \ , 1 , 
Tapomotoy TovTw.  EemLoToAnv ypapavra Tept 
TWO pavepas Ev mAcioow, ev TAUTH TH ETLOTOAH 
TO aro Trove tv ETTLOT LALy6 LeVOV ypdppara, ju 
OTwV” eupaveets dep av BovrAn2 thy dé eém- 
onwactay elvat ws ddnroraryy emuoTuyuats dua 
moAAod 7 ypappats TOpapiy ecw. a Tots pee 
adXous pe depiay brmovoiav e€er, TH O€ TEpLTOLEvep 

4yvwoTn eoTar 7 emloToAn. . . .4 meuméobw avip 
b) / / \ nv \ > \ \ + 
ayyeAtay hépwv Twa 7) Kat emioTtoAnv wept adAwv 
avep@v: tod de péAAovtos mropevecbar Kpudaiws 
avTod «is TO TOV UBrodynudtwv méAua evTeOyjTw 
> \ \ / \ / \ 
els TO preTa€v BuBAlov Kat KatappamTécbw, mpos 
d€ Tovs mndAovs Kal Ta VdaTa els KacatTepov 
>» A / 5 Av \ fa] \ \ 
eAnAacpévov? AemTov ypadécbw mpos TO pa 
adavilesOar wo Tov doar TO ypappara. 
42 dpucopLevov dé map ov del, Kal dvamavowevou ev 
TH VUKTi, dvadvero Tas padas TaV droonpaTov, 
Kal e€eAwmy Kal avayvous, adAa yparbas AdPpa ert 
KalevdovTos Kat éyKarapparpas amooTeAAéTw TOV 
avdpa, avrayyeiAas 7° Kat dovs tu’ dépew pavepOs. 
4 > ” ” ” e / > / » \ 
oUTws ovv oUTE aAXos OUTE 6 hépwv EldHjoer ypr SE 
Tas padhas TOV VTodnuUaTwV ws adndoraras mrovety. 
6 Eis "Edecov 8 etcexouicbn ypaupata Tpomep 
TOLMOE. avOpwr7ros ered emuaToAy EXwv 


dvAdos eyyeypapperyny,® ta dé dvAAa ed’ EAKer 


Or 


_ 


Kéchly and Riistow: ypavac M. 

Herm. Schéne: 6é é7e M. 

Kirchhoff: ¢ugdav} domep év BovhAn M. 

Hercher placed a lacuna here. 

Meineke: 7Aacuévov M. 

Herm. Schone (partly after Hercher): docrei\as kal M 
(defended by Behrendt and Mahlstedt): dvramocreidas J. 
Afr.: avremicreihas Kichly and Riistow. 


156 


me oO bo 


ao uw 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxr. 3-6 


message, he might use also the following method, 
which is similar to the preceding. Writing in detail 
and undisguisedly on some subject, in this message 
you may reach the same result by marking letters 
by which you will indicate whatever you may wish. 
And the marking must be made as inconspicuous as 
possible, by dots placed far apart or by rather long 
dashes. These will arouse no suspicion whatsoever 
in others, but the letter will be clear to the 
recipient. . . . Let a man be sent bearing some 
message or even a letter ostensibly about general 
matters, not secret, and, just before he starts, 
without his knowledge let a letter be inserted in 
the sole of his sandals and be sewed in,! and, to 
guard against mud and water, have it written on a 
piece of thin-beaten tin, so that the writing will 
not be effaced by the water. And when he reaches 
the one intended and goes to rest for the night, this 
person should pull out the stitchings of the sandals, 
take out and read the letter, and, writing another 
secretly while the man is still asleep, sew it in and 
send him back, having given him some message in 
reply or even something to carry openly. In this 
way, then, neither the messenger nor anyone else 
will know the message. It is necessary, however, 
to make the sewings of the sandals as inconspicuous 
as possible. 

Again, a letter was brought to Ephesus in some 
such manner as this. A man was sent with a 
message written on leaves which were bound to a 


1 This particular device is mentioned by Ovid in the Ars 
amat, ili. 621 ff. 


7 Kéchly and Riistow: re M, J. Afr. 
8 Meineke: yeypauuévny M. 





u 


8 


g* 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


/ > iN / 
KaTadede neva qe emt Kvnpny. etoevex Dein 8 
dy ypapy) Kal ev Tots THY yuvatKav wow éxovow" 
avT éevwtiwv édacpovs evetAnwevous AeTTOVS pboht- 
Bdivous.” exoptobn de emtotoAry mept mpodoaias® 
els otpatomedov avtikabypévwv mrodepuiwv* sro 
Tov mpooldovTos Woe. TaV eElovTwY imméwy eK 
Ths moAews eis Tpovounv TaV moAcyiwv Evi ey- 
if ¢€ \ \ / ~ / , 

KaTeppagdy v7ro0 TA TTEpVyLa TOD Badpakos BuBAtov- 
@ evtéradto, édv tis éemddvera TOV TroAeiov 
yevntal, mecetvy amo To immov ws aKovTa Kal 
CwypnOjvar. Kal YEvopevov 5° €v T@ otpatorrédw 
dmrodob ivan" To PuBAiov @ der.” staynpérnoev 
5 68 immevds ddedgos ddAbG5 aAAos b€ inméa 
EKTTEULTIV ELS THY nviav tod xadwotd BuBAlov 
evépparev.° eyeveto Oé mept emaToAny TOLOVOE. 
moAews ‘yap mohvopKoupLevn)s Emel TapnAdev cow 
Ths moAews 0 KopiCev Tas emotohas TQ pep 
mpod.oovTe Kat Tots aAAois ois Edepev™ ovK aTrO- 
/ \ \ \ A ~ / oO 
didwow, mpos dé Tov apyovta THs moAews HAOev 

iy \ \ > \ 28 e > > / 
pnvdwy Kal Tas emuaToAas €did0v. 6 8 aKov- 

SEOs, , \ Ae \ eo» 12 
cas éxéAevev TavTas pev Tas ETLGTOAdS ois Ehepev 
> i 113 \ 2 Atty Saptee , 
a7rodovuval, Ta d€ map exewwv, et adnbés Tu 
unvver, Tap avTov eveyKetv? Kal 0 pynvdwy Tadra 
” ¢ \ ” \ A > \ \ 
empagéev. 0 de apywy AaBwy Tas emuoToAds Kal 
avakaAecdevos Tovs avOpwmouvs Ta onueta TE 


1 Kéchly and Riistow: éxovcas M. 
2 Kochly and Riistow: évwriwy éveiinuévors NewTOIs pod- 
Bdivos M. 
3 Casaubon: mpocodias M. 
4 Casaubon: dyvtiKa@jmevov trodéuov M. 
5 Casaubon: év o M. 
6 Hercher suggested plausibly a7ed607. 
7 Hertlein (Hercher?): wo de M. 8 Capps: 6¢ M. 
8 


15 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxi. 6-9° 


wound on his leg. Writing could be brought in 
also on thin pieces of beaten lead rolled up and 
worn in women’s ears in place of ear-rings. A letter 
having to do with betrayal was once conveyed by 
the traitor to the camp of the beleaguering enemy 
in this way. As the horsemen were going out of 
the city for a raid upon the enemy one of them had 
a sheet of papyrus sewn under the flaps of his breast- 
piate, and he was instructed, if the enemy should 
appear, to fall from his horse as though by accident, 
and to be captured alive; and when he was taken 
into camp he was to give the sheet of writing to the 
proper person. The horseman assisted as a brother 
would a brother. Another man, when sending out 
a horseman, sewed a sheet of papyrus to the bridle- 
rein. And the following incident happened about a 
letter. During the siege of a city, when the man 
carrying the message entered the town, he did not 
give the letters to the traitor and to the others to 
whom he was bringing it, but went to the command- 
ing officer of the city, disclosed the matter, and 
handed over the letters. When the officer heard 
it he ordered him to deliver these letters to those to 
whom he was bringing them, but to bring to him their 
answer as evidence that he was telling the truth. 
The informer did so, and the officer, taking the 
letters, called the men to him, showed them the 


1 A proverbial expression; cf. Plato, Rep. ii. p. 362 pb 
adehpos avdpi wapeln. 





9 Kirchhoff: tanperno ev . . . adedpov M. 
10 Casaubon: évéypavev M. 
11 R. Schéne: kai rpocédepev M (with mark of corruption 
over 0). 12 Casaubon: édepoy M, 
13 se, ypauuata (R. Schéne): ras Casaubon. 
159 


gb 


10 


i] 


13 


14 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


aS , A 5 Mi ¢ € ‘i “Jone TI 
edetkvuevy TOV SaKTvALIwY, AmEp wpoddyouv adbTaY 
> \ / \ / > / \ ~ 
etvat, Kat Avwv ta fuBAia edyAov TO mpaypa. 
TexviK@s de SoKEl Pwpdoal, OTL Tas TEUTOMEVAS 
A ~ s ~A 
Tapa Tod avOpaov otk améAaBev? tv yap adrois 
3 ~ 
apvnbjvar Kat daoxew emiBovAevecBar td Twos. 


tas 8 avramooreAdopévas AaBwv avavtiAéKtws* 


nreyEev. 

K / de \ DO / > ‘9 

omiceras O€ Kal Woe. KUoTW toopeyeby 

y sO ene, 0 pn 4 \ \ rs 
nkv0w omdon av BovdAn* ampos To 7APos 
TOV ypapdnoopevwy dvojoavTa Kal atrodjocavra® 

/ A Y ~ ¢ 5) 
opddpa Enpavar, émeita én” adtHAs ypaysar 6 Te av 
BovdAr® peda KaTaKorry, EnpavOevrav de TOV 
YpapLpLaTov eSehety" Thy Tvonv THS KVOTLOOS Kal 
ouutuecavTa® ets tHv? AnKvbov evOetvar: TO dé 
oTopa HS KUOTLOOS UmepexéTw TOD oTdpmaTos”® 
~ Yj 
THs AnkvOov. Emerita dvojoavta THY KVOTW EV 
~ / 3 ~ i All e / 
TH Ankvlw evotcay, va drevpvvO7 ws pwadsora, 
Kal é€datov é€umAnoavta mepitewetvy THS KUOTI- 
dos TO _ bmrepexov Ths AnkvGov Kal mpocappocat 
T® oTopatt ws adndAdtata, Kat BvoavTa THY 
AijxvBov Kopicew davep@s.  diadaveés Te odv TO 
édavov € EoTaL ev TH AnkvOw Kal ovdev dAdo pavetrat 
evov. oray de EX\On map dv det, e€epdoas TO 
éXavov avayvwoeTrar dvojoas Thy KUOTW* Kal 
éxomoyyloas Kal KaTa TavTa els THY adTHVY ypabas 
amooteAXeTw. dn O€ Tis ev SdéATov* EvAw 

1 Koéchly and Riistow: atrév M. 

2 Hertlein (ovx ¢\aBe Casaubon): 671 cat @haBev M. 

3 Casaubon: dy dvti\erTws 

4 Casaubon (BovAn Lange): 6réon avTiBotX\ee M: oéréon 
ayTiBoret Eberhard: é6écn av BotdAn Lange. 

5 Koéchly and Riistow: gvojnoac kai drodjcac M. 

6 Meier: Bovdex N 


160 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx1. 9*- 14 


marks of the seals which they admitted to be their 
own, and, opening the letters, exposed the matter. 
And he seems to have detected this skilfully in that 
he did not accept from the man the letters that were 
sent. For then it would have been possible for the 
men to deny it and claim that someone was plotting 
against them. But by taking the letters that were 
sent in answer he proved the case incontestably. 
Messages are sent also in this way. Take a 
bladder in size equal to a fiask large enough 
for your purpose ; inflate it, tie it tightly, and let it 
dry ; then write on it whatever you wish, in ink 
mixed with glue. When the writing is dry, let the 
air out of the bladder, and press it into the flask, 
letting the mouth of the bladder protrude from the 
mouth of the flask. Then inflate the bladder inside 
the flask in order to expand it as much as possible, 
and filling it with oil, cut off the part of the bladder 
that comes over the top of the flask, fitting it in the 
mouth as inconspicuously as you can, and, corking 
the bottle, carry it openly. Hence the oil will be 
visible in the flask, but nothing else. When it 
comes to the appropriate person, he will pour out 
the oil, inflate the bladder, and read the writing. And 
washing it off with a sponge, let him write on it in the 
same manner and send it back. It has actually 
happened that someone has written on the wooden part 








7 Kéchly and Riistow: é&de M. 
8 Kéchly and Riistow: cuumécavrac M. 
9 Added by Hercher. 
10 Koéchly and Riistow: rod rwuaroo M. 
1 Gronov: drep8vd7 M. 
12 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
| 13 Casaubon: tives M. 
| 14 Hercher: 6éArw M: 7@ ris déATov EvAw J. Afr. 


M 161 


15 


16 


iL? 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ypdibas Knpov _emrerngev" Kal ada els TOV Knpov 
eveypaipev. eiTa OTav EdOn Trap" Ov eel,” eK- 
Kyjoas® Tov KNpOV Kal avayvovs ypapas TmaAw 
woavtws* emeotetnev. evdexyeTau® de Kal els Trvetov 
ypaavTa péAave ws BeAriore Edy EnpavOjvac, 
ETrELTO. AevKaoavra apavicew TA Ypappata. oTav 
otv adikntat mapa Tov meumouevov, AaBdvra els 
vdwp Detva TO mg tov" pavetrat otv ev T@ VOaTL 
acpiBas arava TA yeypappeva. ypapouro 5 
ay Kal els 7TlVaKLOV Tpwixor® amrep av Bovdn.’ 
ETTELTO. kataAcvKk@oa Kal enpavarra yparpau t imméa, 
pwoddpov 7 0 TL av BovdAn,” exovTa® t(watiopov 
Aevicov Kal TOV Um7oVv AcvKov" et O€ ey, Kal aGArAw 
xpwpatt, mAnv péAavos. €emeita dSodval Tut ava- 
Oeivar eyyvs THs ToAcws. els 0 av® TUXN tepov ws 
eve G[LEVOS. “os ov de det dvayravae Td YEypappeve., 
xe) éOovra ets TO tepov Kal yvovra TO TU GKLOV ove 
OF LW TW TPOOVY KELLEY, dmeveyKavra els olkov 
Oetvat els EAatov: TavTa obv TA yeypappeva pavetrat. 
Ilacdy dé adndorarn mrepuips, mpaypaTwdeotarn™ 
de vov por 7° dv aypaypatwv" * eupavicOnoerae 
EOTL de TOLade. aoTpayadov edeyeOn Tpumhoa 
TPUTIYPLATA” ElKOOL KaL TéTTApAa, EE Els EKAOTHV 
1 Valekenaer: éré6ynxev M: érérnéav J. Afr. 
> Meier: mapdv de? M. 
3 Kéchly and Riistow: éxxvicac M: éxxwajoas J. Afr. 
4 @rts aws M. 5 Kirchhoff: \éyerar M. 
6 dxjpwrov Hercher: (wypadixoy Meier. 
7 Meier: Bove M. 


8 Suggested by Diels. 9 Meier: éavy M. 
10 Casaubon and Stahl: evéduevoo M: evéduevov Meier. 
1 Meineke: écov M. 12 toayuarodestarn M. 


13 Added by Meineke. 4 Herm. Schéne: 61a ypauparwr M. 
130 Je Aire.) Ge nie 


162 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxi. 14-17 


of a tablet, poured wax over it, and written something 
else on the wax. Then when it came to the appointed 
person, he, scraping off the wax and reading the 
writing, again in the same way has sent back a 
message.t It would be possible, also, to write on a 
boxwood tablet with the best quality of ink, let it dry, 
and then by whitening the tablet to make the letters 
invisible. When, then, the tablet comes to the 
recipient, he should take it and put it into water ; 
and so in the water there will clearly appear all 
that was written. You might also write on a tablet 
for a hero’s chapel whatever you desire. Then it 
should be whitened and dried, and a light-bringing 
horseman painted on it, or anything else you please, 
with white apparel and his horse white; or if not 
white, any colour except black. Then it should 
be given to somebody, to be hung up near the city 
in whatever shrine he may chance upon, as though 
it were a votive offering. And he whose part it is 
to read the message must go to the shrine, and 
recognizing the tablet by some prearranged sign, 
must take it back home and put it into oil. And so 
everything written on it will become visible. 

The most secret method of all for sending messages, 
but the most difficult, namely, that without writing, 
I shall now make clear. It is this.2 In a suffi- 
ciently large astragal? bore twenty-four holes, six 

1 This was done by Demaratus, the exiled Spartan king 
at the time of the expedition of Xerxes, as told by Herodotus 
vii. 239, whose account Aeneas follows closely here. Com- 
pare also Polyaenus ii. 20; Justin ii. 10. 13 f.; A. Gellius 

| xvii. 9. 16 f. for this stratagem. 
_ ? The detail with which Aeneas describes this device 
_ makes it certain that it was an invention of his own. 


_ 3 Astragals, or knuckle-bones of sheep, were often used 
like dice and were among the familiar playthings of children. 


163 





AENEAS TACTICUS 


\ Pits , 2? \ A , 
mAevpav TOU aoTpaydaAou: EOTW de TQ Tpvi77)- 


18 Lata Tov _dotpaydhov aTo.yeta.  dvapvnoveve™ 


19 


O° ap’ HS dy meupas apéy® to dAda Kat 
TO EXO[LEVOL dep ev exaoTn mAeupa yeypamrar. 
peta O€ TadTa, OTavy Twa Gens ev avtots 
TiVecbat Adyov, Nuoe dueipew, olov,* é€av GéAns 
Aiveiav? Sndotv e&v TH dtépoer® Tod Xivov 
ap&duevos ek THs mAcupas TOD aotpaydAov ev H 
To adda eoTiv, dteipov,’ Kal® tapehMOwv Ta exopeva 
ToUTou® Tapaypappata, OTav EABns" eis mAevpav 
od TO (Ota €oTw, Sieipov madw, wapels d€ TovTOV 
Ta €xoOmeva, O7rov ovuBaiver TO vi'* elvar, Sletpov™ 
Kal mdAw mapels Ta“ é€ydueva TovTov, Omov TO” 
el €otw,”* dierpov TO Awov, uu ovrw TO emtAourra 
Too AMyou dvtvypapa evetpe eis Ta TPUTTLATA, 
womep 6 apte eOéucba® dvoya. €aTar ovv rept 
Tov aotpayadov ayalis Xivov teTodoTEvpévn,® 
Oenoet de Tov" avayiyvwoKkovTa” dvaypageoBau 
ets déATov TA SynAOVpEVva ypdupara € eK TOV TpUTTy- 


pdtwv. avararlw de yiyverar 7 e€epois™ TH 
tJ. Adr-snotan vie 
26 M: de J.-Aim: 3 dpémra J. Afr. 


4 Kéchly and Riistow: Nivw diaipeivy €avy M. 

5 Haase (Aiveias: Aiveiay Hercher: Aivéay also is possible 
—R. Schéne): eAndiwv7n adic M (with marks of corruption over 
the first 7 and the second ). 

6 Casaubon: diaipéoee M. 

7 Added by Williams. 8 Added by R. Schéne. 

9 Hercher: rovrwy M: rod ira J. Afr.: rot dkga Kéchly 
and Riistow. 

10 J. Afr. (€\Ons): 20m M, 

11 Orelli: ovro tw Ta M: 08 76 iSta ypdupa J. Afr. 

12 Williams (7 Orelli): rov eva: M (with mark of corruption 
over e). 

18 _Kéchly and Riistow from J. Afr. dijpor. 


164 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx. 17-19 


on each side. Let the holes stand for letters, and 
note clearly on which side begins Alpha and 
the following letters that have been written on each 
particular side. Then, whenever you wish to 
communicate any word by them, draw a thread 
through them, as, for instance, if you wish to express 
Atveiav by the drawing through of a thread, begin 
from the side of the astragal on which Alpha is 
found, pass the thread through, and omitting the 
characters placed next to Alpha, draw through again 
when you come to the side where Iota belongs ; 
and disregarding the characters following this, again 
pass the thread through where Nu happens to be. 
And again passing by the succeeding letters draw the 
thread through where Ei! is found. Now continuing 
in this way to write the rest of the communication, 
pass the thread into the holes in such a manner as 
that in which we just now wrote the name. Accord- 
ingly, there will be a ball of thread wound around the 
astragal, and it will be necessary for the one who is 
to read the information to write down upon a tablet . 
the characters revealed by the holes. The un- 
threading takes place in the reverse order to that of 


1 The original name for e, whereas the name Epsilon is 
due to a later misunderstanding of Byzantine usage. 


14 roy Ta M. 15 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 

16 Haase: éveorw M. 

17 R. Schone thinks that directions for spelling the rest of 
the name are missing here, but the author may have stopped 
at this point after making the method clear. 

8 Sauppe: wa7ep ap trae weOa M (with marks of corruption 
over the first « and the second e). 

19 Herm. Schéne: zewroudévyn M. 

20 Hercher: dvaywooxovra M. 

2! Boivin, Kéchly and Riistow: ¢éleco.s M. 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


evepoet. Sdtaddper dé ovdev Ta ypadupaTta ava- 
TaAw ypaphvar eis THV" déATov: ovdev yap ATTOV 
yrootycerar. KatopaGety de metov® Epyov €otiv 
20Ta yeypappeva 7 TO Epyov avro yevecOar. ev- 
TpeTeoTepovs 6 av TovTo ylyvouro Evrov as 
omapwatov® tpumnbévtos ooa ye® Ta oToLyeta 
TOV ypoppaTwv: €meita woatTws eveipew TO 
Awvov els TA TpUTHULATA.  O7mov & av els TO adTO 
TpUmn pa oupph dis eveipecVar, womep TO adTo 
ypapya ols epetis ypapeoBar, mpotrepieAiEavra 
TO Awvov Tepl TO §vAov eveipew. yiyvouro 5 

914” Kal woe. avTi Tod aotpayddov Kat EvAov 
mowjcavTa” KUKAov EvAWwov AcGvat, Kal TpHoat 
edeEns KUKAW Ta OTOLYElA TOV ypappaTwY TETTApA 
Kat elkoot: vmorias & evexev Kal dAda ev peow 
Tob KUKXOU TpUTGAL, ETELTA OUTW Els TA OTOLYETA 

92 epeENs OvTa TO Aivov eveipew. Stay dé dis TO 
avTo ypdupa cupPaivy® ypadew, ex Trav ev pow 
TpuTnLaTov mpoevetpavra eis TO avTo ‘ypadupa 
evetpar’ ypdppa® dé Jey TO TpUTUG. 

93 "“Hén dé twes eis Tus BuBAcov ypaibavres ws 
Aemrorarov juaKkpovs® * artxous Kat Aem7a YPAppLara., 
iy os evoykoTarn yevyntar” 7 emaToAn, eita emt 
TH Ww Too yit@vos trobevres Kal amomTvEavtes 
Tob yiTwvickov éml TH Wpuw, avitromTos 67) SoKet 


1 Casaubon: évépie. M. 2 Added by Hercher. 

> Orelli: wXetcrov M. 4 Hercher: evrperécrepov M. 
5 C: omdauaiov M. 6 Casaubon: écate M. 
7 Hertlein: rojoac M. 8 Meier: cuuBaive. M. 


®° Hercher: ypdupata M. 
10 Kéchly and Riistow: 76 M: eis BiBXiov J. Afr. 
11 uixpovs one ms. of J. Afr. and Birt. 
12 J. Afr.: yivnra M. 
166 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxi. 19-23 


the threading. But it makes no difference that the 
letters are written upon the tablet in reverse order, 
for none the less will the message be read, although 
to understand what has been written is a greater 
task than to prepare it. But this would be ac- 
complished more easily if a piece of wood about a span 
long were perforated just as many times as there 
are letters in the alphabet, and the thread were 
then in the same way drawn into the holes. 
Wherever two insertions into the same hole occur, 
the same character being written twice in succession, 
you should wind the thread around the wood before 
inserting it. Or it could even be done as follows. 
Instead of the astragal or the piece of wood, make 
a dise of wood, polish it, and bore successively on the 
disc the twenty-four characters of the alphabet ; 
but to avoid suspicion you should bore other holes 
also in the centre of the disc, and then in this way 
run the thread through the characters, which are in 
their regular order. But whenever the writing of 
the same letter occurs twice in succession, you must 
insert the thread in the holes bored in the centre of 
the disc before running it into the same letter ; and 
by letter I mean the hole 

Again, some persons, after writing long lines 
with fine characters upon some very thin papyrus, 
so that the message may be as compact as possible, 
have then placed it on the shoulder of the tunic and 
spread a part of the over-tunic out on the shoulder. 
Naturally the transmitting of the letter is un- 


1 For a diagram and explanation see H. Diels, Antike 
Technik?, 1920, 74-75. 


167 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


oy ¢ A an >) ~ \ ’ / 

evar 1 Kouldn THS EemoTOARsS Kal €evdeduUKOTOS 
\ \ 

TWOS TOV XLTWVLOKOV Kal OUTW PEpoLEevon. 

24 Maprvpiov dé étt Ta eiomeuTrOmeva peeTa emt- 
A \ , chine \ »” 1 
Bovdjs xaXerov duAdEar. of yodv mept “IXvov* av- 

\ 
PwiTOL KaL EK TOGOUTOV ypovo”U Kal OUTw diaTeETa- 
/ 2 4 3 / / \ > a > a 
peevow” ovrw® dSvvavTar dvdAdEat 7) etaeAOeiv adrots 
\ ~ A 
tas Aoxpidas’ Kaito. toootrov attots é€oTw 7 
\ \ € / > > >\/ / 
omovd7) Kat 7 pdudAaky. add’ dAlyo., mpocéxovTes 
~ > 6 A A Q / > NX © 4 aK \ > / 
7@ Aabciv, AavOavovow ava érea* 7roAda elodyovres 


2 cwpaTta. mapa dé Tots madaorépois Kal Towvde 
\ > i? / \ tf ~ 
TOTE erexvaoOn. HToridacav yap GéAwv mpodobvat 


Tysofevos “Aprapacen mpoovvebevTo aAAjAots 6 pev 
26 THs ToAEwWS TL Xwpiov, 6 dé Tob oTpatomébov, «ts 
omrep eTokevov Trav 6 TL? HOeAov GAAHAots Eudavicar. 
erexvalero dé wode® Tod To€evatos epi Tas 
yAudidas’? éAiEavres TO BuBAiov Kal mTEpwoarTes 
27 eTokevov els TA TpOGVyKEleva Ywpia.  eyeveTo SE 
KATOPAVT)S: 0 Tyuogevos mpod.oovs THY ITortéavay: 
Tofevwv ‘yap 6 “ApraBalos els TO Tpoovy Kei evor, 
apapTwv Tot ywpiov dia mvetpa Kal davdAnv 


M has a space of four letters after this word. 
Hertlein: dcarerayuévar M. 3 Casaubon: 6uTw M. 
Orelli: averea M (with sign of corruption over the first e). 
Herm. Schéne: 6 7 a&vru M. 
Herm. Schéne: afero 5é roo M (with mark of corruption 
over the first e). 

7 Casaubon: mvA\ac yAudac M. 


o fF WH 


for) 


1 This is the earliest of a long series of references in ancient 
authors to a singular custom whereby the Locrians sent 
annually for many centuries two maidens to the service of 
Athena at [lium as an atonement for the injury done to Cas- 
sandra by Aias the Locrian. The inhabitants of the city 
were expected to prevent their introduction, killing those 
who were caught and burning their bodies. Only recently 


168 





AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx. 23 -27 


suspected, if one puts on an over-tunic and wears 
it in this manner. 

There is proof, however, of the fact that it is 
difficult to guard against anything sent in by artifice. 
At any rate the people at [lium who have been so 
long and so well prepared, are not yet able to prevent 
the coming of the Locrian maidens! into their town, 
although they use such great care and watchfulness. 
But a few men, bent on deceiving, succeed in secretly 
bringing in many maidens, at yearly intervals.” 
And among the ancients the following scheme was 
once contrived. When Timoxenus wished to hand 
over Potidaea to Artabazus,? they prearranged, 
the one a certain spot in the city, the other one in 
the camp, to which they used to shoot whatever 
they wished to communicate with each other. They 
adopted the device of winding a sheet of writing 
around the notched end of the arrow, and, after 
feathering it, they shot it into the places previously 
determined. But Timoxenus was discovered in the 
attempt to betray Potidaea. For Artabazus, shoot- 
ing toward the designated area, missed the spot 
because of the wind and because the arrow was 


a remarkable inscription has been discovered in West Locris 
which makes special provisions for the selection of the 
maidens. The best discussion at present of the whole 
matter is by A. Wilhelm, “* Die lokrische Madcheninschrift,”’ 
Jahresh. d. ésterr. arch. Inst., 1911, xiv.: 163-256. 

2 Possibly zo\\a should be construed with érea. The sense 
will then be: ‘‘ have been secretly each year for many years 
bringing in maidens.” 

3 The incident is taken direct from Herodotus viii. 128. 
This device was often employed in ancient times, the best 
known case, perhaps, being that in which Caesar contrived 
in this way to get word to the beleaguered Quintus Cicero. 
Caesar, Bell. Gall. v. 48. 


169 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


TTEPwWOW, Barrer avdpos IlorwWararov tov doy, 
Tov 6é€ Brn Berra" TrEpLedpajLev oyAos, ota pret 
yiyveobar ev TO moA€ en avTiKa de TO TOFEvjLa, 
AaBovres édepov eml Tovs oTpaTnyovs, Kal oUTWwWS 
28 KaTapav7s EYEVETO 7 mpatis. ‘lIotvatos dé Bov- 
Aduevos TO “Aporayopa OnUTVvat amooThvar, 2 
adAAws ev oddapas elyev aopahas® dnAGoau, aTeE 
prdaccopevey TOV OO@v Kal ovK EeUToOpoV ov" 
ypdppata Aabetv dépovta, tav de> SovAwY Tov 
moTOTAaTOV aTrokupnoas eoTi€ev Kal eméoxev ews 
29 avégvoav® at tpiyes. ws d€ avédvoarv’ TaxLoTa, 
eeptrev eis MiAnrov, émoreiAas T@ érreotivypevw® 
+ \ >) / 3 \ ot 2) / >? A? \ 
ardo pév oddev, eretOav 8° adikynrat ets MiAnrov zpos 
"Aptorayopav, KeAcvew Evpyjoavta Katidetv els THY 
Kedadyv. Ta dé otlypata éojpawev & ede® zovetv. 
/ \ \ e / \ / 
30 241k papew d€ Kal Woe. mpoauvieLevov TA Pwv7- 
EVTO YPapparo. ev KevTyacr TiWec8a, omdoTov 
d%° ay TuxN ExaoToV ov," ev Tots ee eee 
31 TooavTas oTlypas civat. otov Tdd_° 
Atovictos Kodos ¥ 
A Ns Gacieicins: Gace Fe eee 
‘“Hpakreidas AKéTw 
2*-P*KA-:::A°C:: K:-:TPi::-8 
1 Hercher (from Herodotus): mpoBAnGévra M. 
* Added by Casaubon from Herodotus. 
3 dogdartw M. _ 4 Added by Valckenaer. 
> Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
6 Meier: av éfvcay M. 
7 These three words added by Hercher from Herodotus. 
8 Casaubon: émitiyévw M. 
®° Meineke: de? M. 10 Added by Hercher. 
1 Casaubon: év M. 
12 Herm. Schéne: xadéc M (cf. Introduction, p. 6): Kaxas 
Diels and Fischer. 
170 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxr. 27-31 


badly feathered, and hit a man of Potidaea on the 
shoulder, and a crowd gathered around the wounded 
man, as often happens in war. And immediately 
picking up the arrow, they brought it to the generals, 
and thus the plot was revealed. Again, Histiaeus, 
wishing to tell Aristagoras to revolt, had no other 
safe means of communicating, since the roads were 
guarded and it was not easy for a letter-carrier 
to escape notice, but shaving the head of his most 
faithful slave, he tattooed it and detained him until 
the hair had grown again. And as soon as it had 
grown, he dispatched him to Miletus and gave the 
tattooed man no other orders except that when he 
had come to Miletus, into the presence of Aristagoras, 
he should request him to shave his head and examine 
it, whereupon the marks indicated what was to be 
done. | 
But it is also possible to write as follows. It 
should be arranged in advance to express the 
vowels by dots, and whatever the number of each 
vowel happens to be, so many dots are to be placed 
in the writing. As for example the following :? 


““ DIONYSIUS DOCKED ”’ 
Di.tiNiii:S:.:°:S D::cK:D 


‘ > 


‘LET HERACLEIDES COME’ 
BoD HOR Cho DoS ColuM: 


1 The story is from Herodotus v. 35. 
2 See Introduction, pp. 5-7. 


13 In M only the consonants are given: Casaubon added 
the dots for the vowels. In this scheme the vowels from a 
to w would bear the numbers one to seven. In English the 
correspondences will necessarily vary somewhat because of 
the different number and order. 


Pe 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


KL Tobe aAXo* att Trav povnevrav ypapparov Tt 
Beobar 6 0 Tt On. Kal Tade° Ta TejTOpeva ypap- 
pata els Twa ToTOV .. . 7TH mEeuTropevw SHAov 
/ @ 26 rN ws) a] / > \ 9, \ 
yiyveoBar eMbovros tod avbpurrou eis THY TOAW Kat 
mowhobvros Te 7 COVOULLEVOD, OTL HKEL AUT ypappara 
Kal Ke(Ta ev TO mpoppyGevre? TOTW. Kal OUTWS 
ovTE 6 hépwv older 6 oTw HVvEXOn ovTE 6 AaBav yrw- 
oTos €oTat oT exer. roAXAoL Sé Kar’ *Haetpov 
32 Kvolv expnoavTo Woe. amayaydovtes Séoptov* 
mepieOnkav Tept Tov abyéva tuavTa, ev @ emuoToAn 
evéppamto. ita adyKav vuKtos 7 pel” Huépav 

\ “A > > / ” LA 4 > / 
mpos ov e€ avayKns eweAAey néew d0ev amryxOn. 

€oTt d€ TotTO Kal® Meccarov.’ 

\ \ \ / > \ > / 
33 Xp7y de Tas mapayryvonévas ed0ds avotyew 

/ >] / \ / / 
d€ATrouvs. ‘“Aorudvaxte 61) Tupavva Aapbaxov 
mreupbetons emiaToAns ev i) yeypapreva. qv E- 
vvovTa THV emBovday ap” nS avnpen, Tapa TO [L7) 
ev0vs avotgéar Kal dvayv ava TA Yeypapypeva add 
dpeAnoavtos atvrtob, mpos dAdo 6é yevopévov 
mpoTepov, diehOdpyn, THY EemaToAnY Exwv TEpL TOUS 

/ \ \ b) \ Ci ed 4 \ > / 
34 daxTvAous. dua THY avriy aitiav Kat ev ©7Bats 
7 Kadpea Karen pin, ths te AéoBov év MutiAjvn 


TapamAnowa TovToLS ETpAaxOn. 


1 Haase: ri dai M. 

2 R. Schone sets a lacuna here, suggesting the following : 
T® TeuTouevm yywordoy vr avOpwrov KatatibecOar yrworod Kai 
aitov, TW O€ reumouévw S7dov xTX. The translation follows 
what seems most plausible in the suggestion, 7.e., . . . 7 
avOpHmrov yrwotod Te mTeurouévw SHrov. Other (briefer) 
supplements require ‘emendation as well. 

3 Casaubon: moppndevrs M. 4+ Casaubon: decuoy M. 

5 Kochly and Riistow: éyéyparro M. 

6 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 

7 J. Afr. (Oerradév): Oeccadovixdy M. 


172 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx1. 31-34 


And here is another way: Instead of the vowels, 
put in anything whatever. And again, the follow- 
ing. The letter should be sent to a certain place 

... by a man known to the recipient] and it should 
be indicated to him that a message has come for him 
and is in the appointed spot, by the fact that the 
man comes to the city and buys or sells something. 
And by this method neither does the bearer know to 
whom the message has been brought nor will the 
recipient be known as having the letter. Many in 
Epirus used to employ dogs in the following manner. 
After leading the dog away in leash they placed 
around his neck a strap, inside of which was sewed a 
letter. Then at night or during the daytime, they 
dispatched the dog to the person to whom he was 
sure to go, that is, to the one from whom he had 
been taken away. And this is also a Thessalian 
custom. 

But the letters must be opened as soon as received. 
In fact Astyanax, tyrant of Lampsacus, did not at 
once open and read a letter sent to him in which 
was related evidence of the plot by which he was 
destroyed, but neglecting it, and attending first to 
other matters, he was killed while still holding the 
letter in his fingers.1_ For the same reason also the 
Cadmea in Thebes was captured,” and in Mytilene 
in Lesbos something similar happened. 


1 Nothing further is known of this Astyanax. The same 
thing happened to Julius Caesar. At the very moment 
when he was struck down he held in his hands a paper given 
him by Artemidorus which contained a full statement of the 
conspiracy. 

* This was referred to also in Ch. xxiv. 18. The particular 
incident in the mind of the author was, no doubt, the occasion 
when Archias, the oligarchic leader, was given a paper 


173 


30 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


DAods de Bacréws vavapyos Tapa Baowréa ava- 
Bas, Emel ovx otov Te HY UTOLVHLATA ev BuBricp 
€XovTa elovevat mapa Paowtiéa (jv d€ atT@ Tepl 
mToMAav Te Kal peyaAwy Stapevnuovevréov), eypa- 
wato eis TA SiaoTHpaTa THs yeypos TOV SaxTVAwV 
TEpl WV pynTéov Hv avT@. 

Ilept tiv T&v TowvTwv emysredccav TH TvAWPAa 
movntéov,, ws av pndoev® AavOavy® eis THY moAW 
elopepopevov unre OTrAov ATE ypawpaTa. 


XXXII. [’Avriunyaviyara | 


ITpos de Tas TOV evavTiwy TpocAaywyas penxavy- 
pacw 7), ow@pacw evavTioboba ave. mpG@TOv juev 
els TA UTTEpaipomeva EK TUpPywv 7H LoTav* 7 TOV 
OfLOT POTTY ToUToLs tora,” ots ta® mpocaybévtTa 
brrepaipeuv © XP), TLoW advarpnjTots 7repipAnGevro. 
katareTdobat b770 TevovTewy.! aa Te® Kal b7o- 
Oupudv Kamvov toAddv tévta® Kal? bddamrew ws pé- 


1 Herm. Schiéne: zoynréov M. 
2 unbev M. 
3 L. Dindorf: \avAavnrar M. 
4 Casaubon: toriwy M. 
5 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
§ Kéchly and Riistow: uzepaiparo M. 
7 Kochly and Riistow: trovedyrwy M. 
8 Kéchly and Riistow: 6¢ M. 








telling about the design on his life, while sitting at table the 
evening of the night on which he was murdered. He thrust 
the paper under a cushion with the remark “‘ Serious business 
to-morrow.” 


174 


AENEBAS THE TACTICLIAN): xxx1- 35 — xxxir. 1 


Glus,t the admiral of the great king, came up 
before the king, and since it was forbidden to come 
into the king’s presence with a sheet of notes (and 
he had to report upon many important affairs), he 
wrote in the spaces between the fingers of his hands 
the things he had to say to the king. 

The gate-keeper ought to be watchful about such 
matters as these, so that nothing brought into the 
city may escape him, whether it be weapon or 
message. 


XXXII. [ Counter-devices| 


Against the approaches of the foe you must take 
the following measures with engines or with infantry .? 
In the first place, against objects raised higher than 
the wall from towers or masts or devices similar to 
these, there should be stretched on thongs and 
covered with some impenetrable substance sails 
which will have to be overshot by the missiles. 
And in particular one must set smoking materials 
that will send up a great smudge from beneath, and 
must kindle those which will rouse as great a blaze 


1 Glus (the correct form is Glos) is well known from the 
Anabasis as one of those who supported the younger Cyrus 
in the revolt against his brother. He was admiral of the 
great king’s forces in the war against Evagoras of Cyprus, 
between 387-6 B.c. and 380-79, the year in which he was 
murdered. 

2 In this chapter there are many echoes of the devices 
employed by the Spartans in the long siege of Plataea, 
428-7 B.c., which seems to have made an epoch in ancient 
siege operations. A full account of the events at Plataea 
is given by Thucydides ii. 75-8. 


nS 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


2 yootov mop TVEOVT avraeipecbar mUpyous EvAivous 
7 aAda vy € eK popuav aTAnpoupeveny popuwov 7 eK 
NBoow §  €K mivOv. toxovev" d av ta BéXn Kal? 
KaAdLwv Tapsol opBiwy Kat mayioov ovvTBepevenv. 

3 HTouyudoBau® be Kat Tots els TO xetAn /pnXavnpacw 
elomimrovow™ KpL@ Kat Tots OpmoTpomrots TOUTW,° 
epopara., oaKKous axvpwv mAnpodvra TpOKpELav- 
yuew® Kat’ ayyeta eploy Kal aoKovs Boetous 
veodaprous TEPVT[LEVOUS 1 7 memtAnpwpevous® TWav 

4 Kal? dda TovTOLs OpoTpoTTa. Kal OTav 7 TUANY 7 
addo Tt TO Teiyous SiaKkdmTy, xp7) Bpoxw TO Trpot- 
oxov" avaAayBavecbat, va uy SUvNnTAL mpooTimrew 

57TO pnXavna. Kal mapacKevalectat d€ Omws 
diBos dpua€omrAn Ons apiewevos EuTimTy Kal ovvTpiBy 
To" TpUTavov™ tov de XiBov adgiecbat a.7r0 Tav 

6 TpowoTar, €XOmevov tO Kapkivwy.  Omws dé 7) 
apapTavyn Too Tpumravou 0 » Nios PEpopLevos, xderov™ 
Xp7) mpoapiecBar, Kal OTAV AUTY mEoH El TO TpUrra.- 

7 vov, «v00 Tov ABov érradicofar. aproTtov dé mpos 
Td. OvakomrTovra TO Telyos Kal TOE TapeoKevacUat. 
6tav yvas h* mpocayeobar Tob TetXous, TavTN Xp7) 
eowbev dyTuTapackevdlew dyTixplov, dtopvEavTa 
Tod Telyous PexXpl TOO aMov }-€pous tov TAiVOwv,* 
iva He mpotdwow TpoTepov ot moA€ poe" orav de 
eyyus n TO OlaKOTTOV, OUTWS Eowlev TH avTLKpLw 


l Hertlein: tcxo M. 
2 Added by R. Schone (Kéchly and Riistow). 

> Hertlein: 7roiuacra M. 
+ Casaubon: evorovow M 
> Hertlein: trovtwy M. 

6 Casaubon: mpockpenarviey M. 

7 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 

8 Casaubon: memAnpwuévwv M. 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxx. 1-7 


as possible, and build in opposition wooden towers, 
or other high structures with baskets filled with 
sand, or built of stones or bricks. And even basket- 
work made of reeds, upright and transverse, woven 
together, may stop the missiles. Against contriv- 
ances for attacking the battlements, such as a ram 
or other like instrument, you must also make ready 
protective devices to hang in front of them, sacks 
full of chaff, and bags of wool, fresh hides inflated 
or filled with something, and other things similar to 
these. And when the ram is battering a gate or 
some other part of the wall, you must catch up 
with a noose the projecting part of the engine, so 
that it cannot strike again. And you must make 
ready a stone large enough to fill a wagon so 
that it may be let fall upon the drill and crush 
it. The stone, held in place with grappling hooks, 
must be dropped from the projecting beams, and 
in order that in its descent it may not miss the 
drill, a plumb-line should be lowered in advance, 
and when it hangs over the drill, then the stone 
should at once be dropped after it. It is best to 
adopt this measure also against the engines that 
are battering the wall: When you see what part 
of the wall is being attacked, you should prepare a 
counter-ram at that point, inside the wall, and 
excavate the wall just as far as the outer layer of 
bricks, so that the enemy may not be aware in ad- 
vance. And when the ram is close at hand you must 
strike from within with the counter-ram, which must 





® Added by Hercher: 7 Kéchly and Riistow. 
10 Casaubon: rpocisxov M. N Casaubon: rév M. 
12 Hercher: xaérnyv M. * Kochly and Riistow: # M. 
14 Casaubon: Tov rrivOov M. 


N 177 


10 


1] 


12 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


matew* Kal modv i loxUpoTepov 0 ayTiKptos yiweobar.” 


uae d€ Ta peyaha pnxavnpara, ep” ols owpard Te 
a. mpoodyerar Kal Bedn e€ abtav adierat dra 
TE KQl KkatamaNrau® Kat odevddvat, els d€ TAS 
opopivas oikias Kat Tuppopa Togevpara, mpos d€ 
\ / 
TAUTA TA MNXAVIWATA TPATov fev xp7) TOS ev TH 
ToXet Kpupatws drropvocew Kara Tas Tpocaywyas 
Tov pnxXavnpatos, wa ob TPoxol Trav pnxavnpdr ov 
emi Torres ovvwow els TA UmopvypmaTa: €7eiTa 
eowbev a dvTo<tpew eK poppav TAnpovpevonv® pdppov 
Kal AiBav € ex TOV DrrapXovTo epupia, Orrep TOU TE 
LNXavTLaTos drepeEet Kal TA EK TOV eva Tle Bedy 
apya moujoe.  mpoKkaddvmTew O€ apa TovTOLS Kat 
muKVa* TapaTeTdopaTa 7 toTia, éptpaTta Tov 
cloadienevwv PedOv, amep oyyjoes Te TA U7eEp- 
mintovta Tov Ped@v, Kat padiws ovdAdeyroerat, 
YaprautreTes OE pendev €oTat. TO Ode avro movety Kal 
q dy aA TOU Teixous drepTeTh yuyvopeva, TA BEeAn 
TOUS dmnpeToovTas TE kal _TOvS Ovarropevopevous 
BAanTn Kal titpwoKn.” 4 dé av Tod TeElxous 
xyeAwvn mpocaxGetca OvvyTau® TL TOO TeElyous 
duopvEar 7 kataBarety, TUT H xen avriotoGar 
TOPETKEVATHEVOY Tos pLev TO O.opuypa mp 
Trove tv Tod, pos Oe TO meon LG TOU TELYOUS 7 Tadpov 
eowbev cpvocew, Wa [2 etoehOwow Kal aa 
avracipew Terxlov” TeixilovtTa mpoTepov 4 TecEtV 
TO Tetxos, 7° SwopvoceTar, av pn aAAws dvvyn 
Kwdvew. 


1 Capps: yiverar M. 2 R. Schéne: xaramwé\Tar M. 
: Casaubon : mdnpounevou M. 4 Th. Mommsen: yuuva M. 
5 Haase: BAdmre: kai titpw@oKxer M. 
6 Haase: duvijcerac M. 


7 Added by Meineke. : 


— 
~ 
oO 
3s 
= 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxu. 7-12 


be much more powerful. Furthermore, against the 
large engines on which many troops are moved up, and 
from which missiles are shot, and especially catapults 
and slings, and incendiary arrows against the thatched 
roofs—against all these, I say, those in the city 
must, in the first place, secretly dig beneath where 
the engine is to be applied, so that the wheels of 
the engines may sink and fall into the excavations. 
Then, on the inside, you must build a defence of 
baskets of sand and of stones from what you have 
near by, which will overtop the engine and render 
the missiles of the enemy useless. At the same time 
you must spread out from the inside of the wall 
thick curtains or sails as a protection from the 
oncoming shafts, which will stop the missiles that 
fall over the wall, so that they will be easy to gather 
up and none will fall to the ground. The same must 
be done at any other part of the wall where the 
missiles might come over and injure or wound the 
helpers and passers-by. And at whatever part of 
the wall by bringing up a pent-house a portion of 
the wall can be dug through or broken down, there 
counter-preparation must be made. ‘To forestall 
the piercing of the wall a large fire should be built, 
and to provide against a breach of the wall a trench 
must be dug inside, so that the enemy may not 
enter. At the same time you should build a counter- 
rampart where the breach is being made, before 
the wall collapses, if you cannot otherwise stop the 
enemy. 


179 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


XXXII. [’Eumpyas] 


Xp7 dé tats mpooeveybeioats yeAwvais émuxetv 
miooav Kal oTummetov' Kal Detov emBahrew, 
ETELTA proywbevra® paxeMov Kal efapavra eT - 
adievat axoiva émt Ty xeAcwvyy. Ta O€ TOLAatTA 
TMporewomevas amo Too TElyous emPadrerau Tots 
Tpocayopevolis LYNYavyWace. TupuTpavat xXp7 Tatra 

2 moe. TmapeckevacIw fvAa otov Urrepa, peyeBer® 
de TOAAD “preilor: Kal els prev Ta aKpa ToD EvAov 
Kpodoa ovd7pta og€a puuKporepa” Kal peilen, 
Tepl de Ta. aAXra peEpn) TOU EvAov Kal avw Kat 
KaTW ywpls TUpos oKevactas loxupas: To O€ 
eldos yevéo8w otov Kepavvos TOV ypapopeveny.° 
TobTO de adieoBar ypr) és TO TpocayomEevov p7n- 
xavnpva. EOKEVAT[LEVOV ovTws WOTE eumnyvuoBau 
els TO enxavne., Kal ET YLEVELY TO mp euma- 
3 YEVTOS avrod. emer av TWeES Maou Tijs mohews 
EvAwou poauves 7) TOD Telyeds TL, xpn ToUTOLS 
UmrdpxYew mos TO py euTiumpacba’ tro THY 
moAeiwv midrous® Kat Bipoas mpos TH emad€w?. 

4é€av b€ eumpnol@ow mvAa, mpoodépecbar Evra, 
Kal euPddAdAovTa ws péytotov TO Tp over, 
pexpt od av? tadpevons Ta Eowlev, Kal avTt- 
deiuys €k THY cor ovvuTapyovTwr® TaxoTa: 
el O€ px), EK TOV eyy’TaTa oiKL@v KalatpodrTa. 
1 Casaubon: oriamvov M. 
2 proywoavtra J. Afr., Hercher. 
3 Boivin (after Casaubon): mporewduevos M. 
4 Gronov and Kdéchly and Riistow: taepueyéén M. 
5 Suggested by R. Schéne. © Hertlein: 76 ypagduevoyv M. 
7 Kochly and Riistow: éumimpacbac M. § Koraes: mXeiovo M. 


® Kéchly and Riistow: raéu. 10 Added by Meineke. 
11 Boivin, Hertlein: tagpevon M. 


180 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxin. 1-4 


XXXIII. [Setting on Fire} 


You must pour pitch and cast tow and sulphur 
on the pent-houses that have been brought up, 
and then a fagot fastened to a cord must be let down 
in flames upon the pent-house. And such things as 
these, held out from the walls, are hurled at the 
engines as they are being moved up, by which the 
latter are to be thus set on fire. Let sticks be pre- 
pared shaped like pestlest but much larger, and into 
the ends of each stick drive sharp irons, larger and 
smaller, and around the other parts of the stick, 
above and below, separately, place powerful com- 
bustibles. In appearance it? should be like bolts of 
lightning as drawn by artists. Let this be dropped 
upon the engine as it is being pushed up, fashioned 
so as to stick into it, and so that the fire will last 
after the stick has been made fast. ‘Then, if there 
are any wooden towers, or if a part of the wall is of 
wood, covers of felt or raw hide must be provided to 
protect the parapet so that they cannot be ignited 
by the enemy. If the gate is set on fire you must 
bring up wood and throw it on to make as large a 
fire as possible, until a trench can be dug inside and 
a counter-defence be quickly built from the materials 
you have at hand, and if you have none, then by 
tearing down the nearest houses. 


1 The pestle meant by the word tepoy here is the large 
instrument (three cubits long according to the advice of 
Hesiod, Works and Days, 423) used to stir the meal or dough 
in the large kneading-trough. 

2 That is, the end of the pestle, bristling with iron points. 





22 R. Schéne: av ri déy M (cf. xxiii. 5 and xxxii. 12). 
13 brapxévTwy J. Afr. 


181 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


XXXIV. [Ilupos ofeorHp.a pos Ta EumTripmpdpeva | 


"Hav d€ Te of mok€mior meip@vrar eumrympavar 
ioxupG oxevacia mupds, oPevvdew' ypy avo 
” 5 \ 7 e Dy Dae A 
o€eu- ov yap ETL pediws eSamTeTaL. p-aMov 
d€ 1€@* mpoaneipew: TOUTOU yap Top ovx amTE- 
TQ. TOUS de kataoBevvuvras dro T@v vipnho- 
TEpWV EXEW TEPL TO TPOGWTOV Epu“a, va Hocov 
oxABVTAat Tpocaicaovans avTots Ths dAoyos. 


XXXV. [IIvpds oxevacia | 


>) A \ ~ / >) \ e a » | 
Adrov b€ mip oKevalew iaxupov wde, Omep ov 
mavu tu’ KatracPévvuTa.. micoav, Oetov, oruT- 
metov,> pavvav Bavwrod, dadc0s mpiopata ev 
3 / 6 > / 2 / ER iA 7 
ayyelois® e€amTovra mpoopepew, eav BovdrAn 
TOV TOAELiWV TL ETpNOOHVaL. 


XXXVI. [KAywanwyv mpoobéce Kwtpara | 


Tats de TOV KAyudcoov mpoobeceow avrodo8au 
@oe® €av pev UmrEpeXy) TOU TelXous a KAtwa€ 
mpootelcioa, yp, OTav em akpwv 7 O° avaBal- 


1 R. Schéne and Lange using some older conjectures: 
TWES TOhEMLOL mat (with mark of corruption over .)... 
Tal €umiumpauevar loxupat oxevacla mpos TO wup cBevvvew M. 
C: pdiwo M. 

Added by Meineke: déos J. Afr. and Polyaenus vi. 3. 
Meineke: mrdvrn> ravuTn M. 

orumetoy M. 6 Orelli: évavtiws M. 
Hertlein: Bovje M. 

Added by Hercher. 

® Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 


182 


aonu &® w ~w 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxiv. 1 — xxxvi. 1 
XXXIV. [Fire-extinguishers| 


If the enemy tries to set anything on fire with a 
powerful incendiary equipment you must put out 
the fire with vinegar, for then it cannot easily be 
ignited again, or rather it should be smeared before- 
hand with birdlime,! for this does not catch fire. 
Those who put out the fire from places above it 
must have a protection for the face, so that they 
will be less annoyed when the flame darts toward 
them. 


XXXV. [Incendiary Equipment} 


And fire itself which is to be powerful and quite 
inextinguishable is to be prepared as follows. Pitch, 
sulphur, tow, granulated frankincense, and pine 
sawdust in sacks you should ignite and bring up 
if you wish to set any of the enemy’s works on fire. 


XXXVI. [How to Prevent the Placing of Ladders] 


The placing of ladders must be prevented thus. 
If the ladder when in place overtops the wall, you 
must, when the person who mounts it is at the top, 


1 This word is omitted in the original, but despite Julius 
Africanus and Polyaenus vi. 3, who write éf0s, birdlime is 
certainly meant, partly because vinegar has already been 
mentioned, and partly because ‘smear’ (7poaNeigewv) is 
appropriately used only of a substance like birdlime, certainly 
not of a liquid like vinegar. Philo Mechanicus vy. 90. 17 
(Sch6ne) mentions birdlime as one of the important objects 
with which to be supplied in case of a siege, and (99. 26 ff.) 
recommends that wood which is in danger of being set on fire 
be smeared with birdlime or a mixture of blood and ashes. 
Thus Theophrastus also, De igne 61, notes that things smeared 
with birdlime do not take fire; ef. Pliny, V.H. xxxiii. 94. 


185 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Vwr, TOTE amaca Tov avopa 1) 71 KAtuwaKa EvrAw 
duKp@, €av a) ddhws Kwrvew x71) oud TO UTOTO- 
2 SeveoUar eav O€ apria 7 TH Teixer” 7 KXipag, 
TV Lev KAtwaKa ovX otov Te amwheiv, Ta de 
dmepPatvovra XP dn@oa. eav de tabra ev 
advvara. Soh eivat, memounoau xp7) oiov Ovpav 
éx oavidwy, eet emav TpoopepnTat 1 KXipag, 
mpovrorBeva" TH KAipace TH Tpoopepopevy oTav 
d€ Tmpocln 7 KXipwag Tmpos tv Ovpav, e€ avayKns 
bmaxGelons THs Ovpas 7) KAtwa€ aimrer, oovdvAov 
mpotmoTiepevov, ovde mpocoTabjva® Suv7jcerat. 


XXXVII. [‘Yaopvccdvtwy yvdous Kal KodAvats | 


Tods 5€ troptccovras be Kwdvew. éav S0- 
KHs® dmopvccecbar, ws Bablutatny éxros xp7 
THv Tappov opvacecbar, Omws Els THY Tadpov TO 
drropuy|La. apicnrat Kal ol UTOpvagorTeEs oplGow. 

2 ed b€ Gol vTapXN, KaL TeLxlov TELXLOaL Els AUTH 


ws loxupoTarwy" Kal peyiotwy Aldwv. av 

/ \ 
3 dé pen) bmapxy Teixioar AiBous,* EvAwV popuTov 
KopicavTa .. . av d€ Ta vropvypaTa TAs Ta- 


dpov mn° mpooméeon, tTav’Tn émPadrdAovtra™" EvAa 
Kal TOV opuTov euTphoae Kal Ta aArka Kata- 
oKEeTaoaL, orrws 0 Kavos es TO _ duopuypa T70- 
pevonTal Kal KaK@s TroLnon”” Tods ev TH opvypate 


1 Meineke: dp mr avn M. 

2 Orelli: tw re exec M (with mark of corruption over c). 
3 Added by Casaubon. 4 Hertlein: tzomporibévac M. 
° R. Schéne: mpocradjvarc M. 

§ Sox J. Afr., C, Casaubon, Hercher. 

7 J. Afr.: isxuporarny M. 8 J. Afr.: Xidous M. 
° R. SchGne recognizes a lacuna here 


184 


ARNE AS THE TACTICIAN;: (xxxvi. 1 — xxxvit. 3 


thrust him or the ladder away with a forked pole, 
if you cannot keep him away otherwise because of 
arrows shot from below. And if the ladder is even 
with the wall it cannot be pushed away, but those 
who climb over the wall should be thrust off. And 
if even this seems impossible, there must be made a 
sort of door-frame of planks and when the ladder is 
being raised, the frame should be placed in advance 
underneath it. When, then, the ladder approaches 
the frame, at the raising of the frame from beneath, 
if a roller has previously been attached to the edge 
of it, the ladder necessarily falls, and it will not be 
possible to set it up. 


XXXVII. [Detection and Prevention of Mining 
Operations | 


Those who are constructing mines are to be 
prevented in the following manner. If you think a 
mine is being made you should dig the moat outside 
the wall as deep as possible so that the mine may 
open into the moat and those who are digging it may 
be exposed to view. And if you have a chance, a 
wall should also be built in the moat, of the very 
hardest and largest stones available. But if you 
have no chance to build a stone wall you should 
bring up logs and rubbish ..., and if the mines 
at any point open into the moat, there you should 
dump the wood and set fire to the rubbish and cover 
the rest over in order that the smoke may penetrate 
the opening and injure those in the mine. It is 

10 Added by Meineke. 
1 K6chly and Riistow: émi8addXovres M, EuBaddAovras J. Afr. 
2 R, Schéne: moja M. 
185 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ovTas: evdexerat dé Kal moAdodvs armodréobat 
4 avT@v v7T0 Tod KaTvod. dn S€ TWeES Kal odf- 
Kas Kal juchiooas els TO dudpuypa apevres 
5 edupvavTo Tovs ev TO opvypare ovras. xpn de 
amA@s etzety™ Kal? év twa TomTov" opvacovow 
avOuTopvccew Kat avtiotofar Kal eumysmpavar 
~ > 
6: - TO ev T@ Opvypatt paydmevov. tradaov 
d€ tu Xe Bees B : r 
é tu A€yerau .. . pacw Bapkatovs zoAop- 
KOOVTGa,® Emel EmrexXElper Opvooew. ot dé Bapxator 
aicOouevor To’ emyetpnua tod “Apudowdos, H70- 
-Z aN , x , ” SN \ 
potvto pn Adbn 7H d0daon, Everta avip yxadrKeds 
avedpev evOvuyaas: aomidos yadAKkwya mepipépwr® 
evTos? Tov TELXEOS emava mpootaxev”” mpos TO 
bd } a 67) GAA 
7 Odmredov.” TF pev On a NK a VY mpos a 
TMpootoxor TO XaAKMpa* 7) de dwmpvooero, 
avTAXEL. avTopvacorTes obv ot Bapxator TOUT I, 
améxtewav troAAods THv bropvccdvTwy. Olev Kat 
vov xp@vrar TovTw TH evOvprpate® yvwpilovres 
7) UTOpvooETat. 
z \ a \ , 14 eee A 5 , 
g Kat ots pev mpoonke* ta ex ta&v evavTiwv 
Texyvaopata KaTavT@vTa® apdvew™" dedjAwrat- 
Tots de UTopvoocew pehovow @O av YEVvOLTO 
9 loxuporarov ppaypa. xp7) dvo dak av TOUS pu- 
povs els TO avTO Shoal, GUUTETAOAVTA KATA TO 
1 Casaubon: cdixac M. 
2 Herm. Schiéne: ayvwooew M. 
3 J. Afr.:>7pomov. Mi. 
4 For the lacuna which he recognizes here R. Schéne 


suggests gopurov kai ottw diapGeipew TO KTH. 
> The lacuna is indicated by Rouse. 


6 Casaubon: rodopxodvtac M. 7 Added by C. 
8 Koéchly and Riistow (from Herodotus): éridépwr M. 
9 Wesseling: évtoc M. 10 Casaubon: mpocicxew M. 


1 Wesseling (from Herodotus): rade M. 
186 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxvit. 3-9 


even possible that many of these may be killed by 
the smoke. And in some instances, by releasing 
wasps and bees into the opening, men have worked 
mischief with those in the mine. One must, in a 
word, at whatever point the enemy are digging, 
construct a countermine beneath and against them, 
and by setting fire to [rubbish in the countermine 
thus destroy the] fighting force in the mine itself. 
Now an old incident is told. . . of Amasis in his siege 
of Barca, when he was trying to dig a mine.1_ The 
people of Barca, who were aware of the attempt of 
Amasis, were concerned lest he might elude or antici- 
pate them, until a coppersmith thought out a device. 
Carrying a bronze shield around inside the wall he 
held it against the ground above various points. 
And of course at all other points the parts to which he 
applied the bronze were without sound, but where 
the digging was in progress beneath the shield 
became resonant. So the people of Barca dug a 
countermine at this point and killed many of the 
enemy's miners, and as a result even now men use 
this means of ascertaining where mines are being 
dug. 

I have already explained by what means one 
should oppose and ward off the devices of the enemy. 
For those, on the other hand, who are to construct 
mines, a very effective form of protection would be 
this. One should fasten together the poles of two 
wagons, having first turned them back each in the 


1 The incident is taken from Herodotus iv. 200. 








12 Casaubon: wtropvocero M. 
13 Hertlein: a’r@ év rn vuxti M. 
144 Hertlein: mpocjrev M. 15 Casaubon: kai M. 
16 R. Schéne: kai avriwueda M. 7 C: duivyn M. 


187 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


ETEpOV [Lépos Tis apdéns, OmTws perewproddow 
OL pup“ol els TO avTO vevovTes: emreura, ovUTws* 
emuovvoetv ana EvAa Kat pimous Kal adAAa dpa- 
ypara eTmava, rabra” d€ TAD xaraneipar. 
eorau obv Tobro Kal mpooayayety O7ToU Bovdev 
TOUS Tpoxovds Kal amayayety, bo de ToUTW TAH 
ppaypwatt Tovs bropvocovtas civar. 


e 


XXXVIII. [’Emxoupnrixa | 


"Ev 6€ tats mpooBodais Tov ToAepioy 7pos 
TO TELXOS LnXavywacw nN Kat oopLace xp? Oua- 
Tera Oa Tovs ev TH moAeu jeaxopevous Tpia epn, 
OTWS ol pev pdxywvTat, of dé davamavwrTat, ot 
d€ TapackevalwrTal, Kal veokunTes® Gael emt 
Tob Tetyous wow.* det Sé€ Twas Kat ddAdous 
emAeAeypevous mAnGet amAEtove pera ToD oOTpa- 
THYyoo Supmrepwevar KiKhe TO TEtXOS, eTTUKOU- 
poovras det TWL TTOVOULLEV@ JLEpEL* TO yap €7LOv 
EGAAov ot zrod€ptoe Pofodvrar tod wdmdapyovTos 
Kal TapovTos non. Tas Te KUVas Seapety TOV 
Kalpov TovTOV’ peTa yap omTAwv Kat GopdBov 
Tov avOpwrwr® tpexovTwy KaTa THY TOAW bv 

1 J. Afr.: drwo M. 
2 Kochly and Riistow: cravwratra M: éravw, 7a J. Afr. 


3 Casaubon: veoxufjres M. 4 Casaubon: cwuacw M. 
5 Haase: OopuBotvtwy kai avOpérwv M. 


1 Apparently the poles, which seem to have been hinged 
at the point of attachment, are thought of as being turned 
(or ‘spread back’ cuumeravyum) in a direction which event- 
ually would bring them back upon the body of the wagon 


188 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxvir. 9 — xxxvill. 3 


direction of the other part of its wagon, in such a 
way that the poles may be raised aloft, inclining 
toward the same point.|. Then when this has 
been done, one should fasten on in addition other 
timbers and hurdles and other sorts of covering above 
and smear these over with clay. This device, then, 
can be advanced and withdrawn on its wheels 
wherever you desire, and those who are excavating 
can keep under this protection. 


XXXVIII. [Use of Reserves | 


During the attacks of the enemy upon the wall 
with engines of war, or even with infantry, the 
defenders within the town should be divided into 
three groups, so that one group may be fighting, 
another resting, and the third preparing for action, 
and that there may always be on the wall soldiers 
who are fresh. And certain other picked troops, 
in considerable number, must go around the wall with 
the general, constantly relieving any section that is 
hard pressed. For the enemy fear the reserves more 
than the force already on duty before them. And 
the dogs should be tied up at this time, for when 
men are hurrying through the town, with noise of 
arms and confusion, if the dogs in addition, because 


(kara 70 Erepov uépos), but they are actually lifted only to 
an angle, say, of 45° to 60°, and their tips are then firmly 
fastened together. From the point of convergence timbers 
are extended to the sides and covers of the wagon-bodies 
and then a roof in the shape of an oblong pyramid is con- 
structed. The passage is very obscure, however, and a 
corruption may lurk in the words cuurerdcayta xard. 


189 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


anfevav’ opua@car” at Kvves dxAotev av mpoo- 
KELLEVOL. 

4 Tots TE ETL TO TeiXer paxopevous Trapatvety ota 
exdoTw def, Tods pev evrawvoovra,” Tav oe 
Seduevov-* opyn Se pndéva® petievar® pndé’ tev 

5 TuxovTwv avepwrwv: alvujorepos yap elev av. ei dé 
Twas det preTievat apeAodvTas Kal aKoopodvTas, 
Tovs Ta mAeloTa KEeKTNUEVOUS Kal eV TH mode 
Ouvapews® padora [eTEexovTas* Ely yap av Tb 
TowobTo Kal tots aAdots Trapadery pa. ev ois KaLpots 
EKAaOTA TOUTWY Set Tapetvar,® ev Tots “Akovopact 

6 yéypamTar. xepuddia Sé px) éemitpémew aKaipws 
apvevat, Trapeckevacbat de” Omws Kal TA adebevTa 

Tev TH TIHEpa ev VUKTL avadéyyntat Woe. Karo 
Kpepwavyvew xp7) ev Kodivois avopas KaTa Tob 
TetXE0S olTwes avadefovow: tous" d€ avdpas xp7) 
Tovs avadéEavtas” Ta xepuddia avaPaivew els TO 
Tetyos, KaTtakpewacbervtwy diKTUwY cveiwy 7 €Aa- 
detw 7 Tats ex TOV cxowiwy KALake TeEmoLN- 

8 uévats. Tavtas 6° toas™ elvat Tov apiOuov Tots 
avadéyovow avOpwzots, O7ws, €dv TWes Trov@ow, 
Tayv avaBaivwow: mvAas yap p17 avotyeobat vuKTos, 
aAAa tats TovavTats KAiwaks yphjofat Kat av Twa 


BovAnobe. 


Casaubon: ad7jbeav M. 2 Lange: dpéca M. 

Meineke: érawotvrac M. 

Casaubon: rév dedeuévwv M. 

unbéva M. 6 Added by Casaubon. 

Added by R. Schone. 8 Orelli: Suvauévous M. 
9 From tapinut; for the sense compare 26. 8 (Pease): 

mapawvety Kéchly and Riistow: moetv Hercher: zepaivew 

Oldfather. 


7 Oe Oe 


190 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxvit. 3-8 


of the unusual doings, should begin to run amuck, 
they would make trouble. 

And to those who are fighting on the wall the 
general should give such advice as is necessary for 
each, to some commendation and to others an appeal, 
but he should not in anger reprimand anyone, even 
of the common soldiers, for that would dishearten 
them the more. If, however, it is necessary to 
reprimand anyone for neglect and lack of discipline, 
it should be those who are most wealthy and in- 
fluential in the city, for such a case would be an 
example to the others also. The occasions on which 
it is expedient to overlook each of these matters I 
have discussed in the work on Admonitions. And 
one should not permit the throwing of small stones at 
unsuitable times, but should provide that even 
those thrown during the day may be gathered 
again during the night, in the following manner. 
Men should be let down from the wall in baskets to 
pick the stones up again, and when they have 
gathered them they should regain the wall by means 
of boar- or stag-nets which have been let down, 
or else by rope ladders, which should be equal in 
number to the men who are gathering the stones, 
so that if any are hard pressed they may quickly 
climb up again. For the gates must not be opened 
during the night, but ladders of this sort should be 
used, and other devices you may choose. 


10 Casaubon: 6 6é M. 0 Hercher: éurwo M. 
2 Hertlein: dvadétovrac M. 
13 Orelli: daxruNwy cotwy rehagiwy M (with marks of cor- 


ruption over the second : and the e). 
4 Kirchhoff: diccac M. 


191 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


XXXIX. [AoAcdpara | 


Xp7) d€ moAvopKoupevovs Kat TA ToLadra Texva- 
Cew. év tats muAats Kat ets TO é€ow paAdov 
[LEPOS opugarra tadpov evlev Kal évOev mdpodov 
Aumovra., & éreura emefeABovras Twas aKpoPoXilecbar 
Kal mpoayew Tv moAcquiwy wate ovverodpapetv 

2 els THY modu. tous peev ov EK THS moAews KATO 
pevyovTas eis THY TOAW xp) evev Kal evOev Tapa 
tas AcAeyupéevas mapodous eloTpexew” tous be 
TOV Toe ptov OUVELOTPEXOVTAS etKos® E€OTL, PH 
TMpoevooras THY Tadpov, Opa TE Kal Kexpuppievs 
ovans, elomintew Kal PUeipecbar tro Tav? €ow 
Ths TOAEwsS Ev TH Kalp@ TovtTw* TovTwv Sd eivar 
OUVTETAYLEVOUS TWas EV Tats diddoLs Kal mpos® 

37Tots opvypace. Tav’ mvdAdv yxwpats. eav Oe 
mAcioves TOV Tone puto emecopepwvtat Kat BovAr’ 
avrovs Katexew,® yp7 jrowacbar dverbev® azo 
TOU pecoTrvAov mhnv § SUAwy™ ws TaxuTato Kal 

4 ceoidypoola. atdrtyv. orav odv BovdAy’ azoda- 
Betv" tovs etotpéxovras troAcutous, TavTHY adrévat 
bpOnv: Kat avry Te TWas 7) TAY Pepopern dua- 
plepet™ Kal TOUS aroAepious OXHTEL [L1) elovevau, 
dpa o€ Kal THY emi TH Telyes BaddovTwv Tovs 

5 mpos Tats mUAats moAeuiouvs. xp7 dé Tots didous 
ael mpoeipjota, edv amore avtots’® oA€uLot 


1 J. Afr.: mpocdyew M. 2 Casaubon: ein 6c M. 
3 Added by R. Schéne: @cipecOar gow M. 
4 Added by Hercher. > Casaubon: 7pw M. 
6 Added by Kéchly and Riistow. 
7 Meier: BovAe M. 8 J. Afr.: éyew M. 


® Casaubon: avéev M (with sign of corruption over a). 
10 Orelli (after Casaubon): riAy mvAav M. 


192 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxix. 1-5 


XXXIX. [Stratagems| 


Those undergoing siege should also contrive such 
measures as these. At the gates and somewhat inside 
them they should dig a trench and leave a passage 
on this side and on that. Then some of them should 
go out and engage in skirmishing and lure the enemy 
to make a dash into the town with them. Of course 
the men from the town, as they retire into it, are 
to run along the passages that have been left on 
either side, but it is likely that those of the enemy 
who run in with them, being unaware of the trench, 
especially since it is concealed, will fall into it and be 
killed at that instant by those within the city. 
And of these some should be stationed in the passages 
and in places at the trenches near the gate. Andifa 
larger number of the enemy come in after these and 
you wish to catch them, you should have ready above 
the centre of the gate a porteulli is of the stoutest 
possible timbers overlaid with iron. When, then, 
you wish to cut off the enemy as they rush in, you 
should let this drop down, and the portcullis itself will 
not only as it falls destroy some of them, but will also 
keep the foe from entering, while at the same time 
the forces on the wall are shooting the enemy at the 
gate. And you should always give instructions in 
advance to your own party, in case the enemy rush 


1 Vegetius iv. 4 speaks of this device as one quod 
invenit antiquitas. It was employed successfully by the 
men of Salapia in 208 B.c. against Hannibal (Livy xxvii. 28. 
10-12), and by the Lycians of Xanthus against M. Junius 
Brutus in 42 g.c. (Appian, Bell. Civ. iv. 78). 


1 Hertlein: todaBe M. 


2 Orelli: rodtuvdepouern Siadéper M. 
18 Hertlein: dvéic M, 


fe) 193 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


cuveloTintTwow, om THS TmOoAews cuvabpo.icby- 
GoVvTal, OTwWs TH TOTW ot Piro diayryyvwoKwrTat: 
>? \ Cree, / y+ > LA A 
ov yap pdd.ov puydadas Te Ovtas pe” OmAwY Kal 
peta OopvBwv ovvevominrovtas SiayryvwoKeobat. 
670n d€ Tots Bpacvvopévois te Alay’ Kal mpoc- 
merAalovor TH TetyeL eyYUTEpw TOU Tpoa7jKovTos 
vuKTOS 7) LEO” HLEpay, Bpoxous 7; TpEpas [Lev Kpupatws 
KaTeokevacav vuKTos de akpUmTous, ois Tpo- 
KaAovpevow® akpoBoAtopots Tov eEiomEecoVTA ava- 
omdoovow. €oTw dé o prev Bpdyos omAov ws 
> / \ Ae pA PS) / fi LA 3 
loxupoTatou, TO de EXkov emi dVO THXELS aAvOtS, 
\ > + 7 7 
TOO by Ovary Oivac: to 6 GaAdo, dbev eAovot, 
cxotvov.  odAos* de €owW KaTAKpe“aTaL Kal ava- 
omdtat OmAou 7 KyAwvelots.2 of dé modeutoe 
eav duatéuvew éemixyep@ot, mpos Tatta mdAw ot 
eowlev Kndavetots XPOvTAt Kabvevres, iva p7) Ova- 
TEWVYTAL’ al yap advcets mpos Ta Towadra mpay- 
pat@oes Kal Svopetayeiptorov, aua de Kat 
aAvotredds.® 


XL. [OvAak7 mdAcws | 


“Av 4 7 mAs peyadn Kal p27) ixavol Mow ot év 
™) moAEt avOpwrrou mepuoTtacbar év KUKA@ THV 
moAw, Tots O€ dmdpxovor Bedns avTny SuadvdAdéar, 
xp) Tijs moAews ooa dy n eUmpoooda oixodopety 
vin? €k THV vrapxXoVvTwY, iva, av TWes TOV 

/ a / av / ~ / 
Todeniwv 7 Aabpaiws 7 Pia avaBBow, ev azrerpia® 
1 Hercher: ré\cov M. 

* Koéchly and Riistow: mpocxadovmevor M. 
3 Casaubon: ddvoeo M, advois C. 
* Koéchly and Riistow: éd\ws M. 
®° Casaubon: adwvioc M. 6 Casaubon: Avo.redéo M. 


7 Meineke (or ty): bWee M: dymra J. Afr. 
194 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xxxrx. 5 - xu. 1 


in with them, in what place in the city they are to 
make their rendezvous, in order that your friends 
may be distinguished by their position. For it is 
not easy to distinguish between men in a promiscuous 
armed throng, rushing confusedly in together. And 
on some occasions, against enemies who were 
over-confident and were approaching the wall more 
closely than was prudent, either by night or by day, 
the defenders have made ready nets, secretly by day, 
but by night without attempt at concealment, and 
luring the enemy forward by skirmishes have hauled 
up those who became entangled. The net should 
be of the very strongest rope, and the line that lifts 
it should be of chain for a distance of two cubits, 
to prevent its being severed, but the rest, from the 
point where they are pulling it, may be of rope. 
The whole device is let down and hauled up from 
within the wall by ropes or by swing-beams. If, 
however, the enemy try to cut their way out, then to 
meet this the besieged should again use swing-beams, 
letting them down so that the net may not be cut ; 
for to use chains to prevent such an occurrence is 
troublesome and inconvenient, as well as too costly. 


XL. [Guarding a City| 


If the city is a large one and the men in the city 
are not numerous enough to man its walls all the 
way around, and yet you wish to keep it closely 
guarded with the men you have, you should, from 
the materials at hand, build up high all the easily 
assailable parts of the city wall, so that if any of the 
enemy shall scale them, either by stealth or by 


8 amopia Casaubon, Hercher, Capps. 
195 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


YEVO[LEVOL 7) ovvwvTaL Karamnoay ad’ dwndAdr, 
Cp TavTaTaoe Ee ExXovTEs O77 KaraBatvwow. 
Tapa d€ Ta W@Kodopnmeva evOev Kal evOev guiac- 
covTwy ek TOV? trapyovTwy avOpumwv, iva Tovs 
Katamno@vras amo TOV tinADv diadBeipwow. 

2 Atovdovos de moAw droyxelpiov rovnodmevos, 
avopav Tav pev® ev TH moAcL TeOvNKOTWY, TOV SE 
TepevyoTw, n0éAnce Katacyxetv: Hv Sé peilwv 7 

3 WoTE UT oAywv puddocecBar. ETYULEANTAS [eV 
ovv Twas per oAiyev ods EVEOEXETO emeOTITE,” 
Tov b€ ev TH TOAcL Ta peytota Suvapeévwv Tots 
olKeTals® ouvwdKicev TOV SeoToTa@v Tas Ovyarépas 
Kal yuvaikas Kal adeAdds: ovTw yap otv® weTo 
pddvota moAcumwrarovs éoeofar tots Seomdtais 

4 Kal avT@" muoToTépous.  Luwwzr7ets d€ mpos Aata- 
wav toAeobvtes Emel Ev KWOUYW HOaV Kal OTaVEL 
avop@v, TOV yvvaik@v Ta emletKéoTaTa owpaTa 
popdwcavtes Kal OmAlcavtes ws és avdpas udAora, 
avTt omAwy Kal mepikedadaiwy tots te Kddous 
Kal TA OpoTpoTa ToUToLs SovTes YaAKWwWpaTa, TeEpt- 
hyov tod telyous 7 pwadvota ot modgutor opeobau 

5 eweAAov. Baddew dé* odK ciwv adrdas: méppwlev 
yap katddndos BdAAovea yuv7}.  movotvres Se 
radTa TOUS avropodous epvAacoov un diayyeAGy. 

6 “Eav dé OéAns emi TO Telyer mepiddovs zA«tous 


1 Oldfather (or &\\y): aa Tacwarac. M (with mark of 
corruption over the third and the fourth a): maw driwot 
Orelli: aX dropScx Tots wacr Casaubon. 

2 éx Tév added by Casaubon: of irapxovres dvOpwro J. Afr. 

3 Added by Lincke (Philol., 1914, 157). 

4 Added by Casaubon. 

5 Kéchly and Riistow: dvvauévove oikérac M. 

§ Meineke :3 av M. 7 Sauppe: ai7é M. 


196 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xz. 1-6 


force, from their unfamiliarity they may not be able 
to leap down from great heights, being at the 
same time completely at a loss for any place to 
descend. And at either side of the parts that have 
been built up some of the available men should 
keep watch to destroy those who may leap from the 
high points. 

When Dionysius! had subjugated a certain city 
and some of its defenders had been killed and the 
others had fled, he wished to retain the place, but 
it was too large to be guarded by a small force. 
Accordingly he left some in charge with a few 
available men, and to the slaves of the most in- 
fluential men in the city he married the daughters, 
wives, and sisters of their masters; for in this 
relation he thought that the slaves would be most 
hostile to their masters and more faithful to him. 
Again, the people of Sinope in their war against 
Datamas,? when they were in danger and in need 
of men, disguised the most able-bodied of their women 
and armed them as much like men as they could, 
giving them in place of shields and helmets their 
jars and similar bronze utensils, and marched them 
around the wall where the enemy were most likely 
to see them. But they did not allow them to throw 
missiles, for even a long way off a woman betrays 
her sex when she tries to throw. While they were 
doing this they took care that deserters should not 
disclose the stratagem. 

If you wish the patrolmen upon the wall to appear 

1 Clearly Dionysius I. of Syracuse, but the precise occa- 
sion is unknown. 

* His active career extended from circa 384 to 362 B.c. 


Kéchly in a note sets this event in 379-8, but the reasoning 
is not very cogent. 


197 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


paivecbar, xen Tepuevat emt vo, “EXOVTAS 74, 
dopara TOV eva. oTixov € emi 0) dpioTep@ WUw, Tov 
6° €Tepov emt T® de£i@* Kal ovTw davodvrat eis 

7 réooapas. eav dé Kara’ Tpia meptiwot,” Tov per 
m™p@Tov avopa emt TH 5eEi@ Wuw exew To Sdpv, 
Tov 0 eTepov éml TH apiorep@* Kat ot dAdo Kara 
TAUTA. Kal ovUTw davobyTat eis dvo. 

8 Ilepi 5€ tpodfs aoitov Kal dv ods év toAop- 
Kia Kal VOdTwY ws Set moTYLa TroLetv, ev TH Ilapa- 
CKEVAOTLK]) Bvprw dedi Awran. emet Sé€ Tat? 
Hptv elpyTat, Tept vavTuKts rdfews Oley. 

Navtixod dé orpatevuatos dvo eict orddot. . . . 


1 Added by R. Schone. 

2 C: repidor M. 

3 The manoeuvre described by Aeneas does not produce 
the result desired. Possibly the text is corrupt; if so, the 
corruption is very old, as J. Afr. has essentially the same 
provisions. R. Schéne (elaborating a suggestion of Graux) 
suggests: édy dé €0é\ns él r@ Telxer mepiddouvs Svo mXelous 
gaiverOat, xph mepuévar ert dvo, Exovras ava dvo ddpara (or dvo 
éxovtas Exactov Sépara), TO év emt TH apioTepw Gum, TOG 
ErEpov éml TH Seki * Kal otTw pavobyrat eis Técoapas. éav de 
KaTa Tpla (se. odpara) mepulwot, TOV bev Tparov dvdpa émt T! 
deEi@ Wuw Exew 76 Ev ddpu, TO 0 ETE pov érl T@ dpioTepy * Kal oi 
dro (se. éxérwoav) kara Tavra* Kal otrw pavodvrat eis Exaoros 
dvo. ‘**If you wish two patrolmen upon the wall to appear 
more numerous than they are, you should make them go 
their rounds two abreast, each man with two spears, one on 


4 


198 


AENEAS THE TACTICIAN, xz. 6-8 


more numerous than they are,’ you should make them 
go their rounds two abreast, one rank with their 
spears upon the left shoulder, the other with their 
spears upon the right, and thus they will appear to 
be four abreast. And if they go about three abreast, 
the first man should have his spear upon his right 
shoulder, the next upon his left, and the others 
similarly, and in this way each man will look like 
two. 

Now out wheatless rations and things of 
which the¥e is a scarcity during a siege, and about 
how waters are to be rendered drinkable, I have 
explained in the book on Military Preparations. 
And inasmuch as these points have been described 
I shall pass on to naval manceuvres. 

Of a naval armanent there are two forms of 
equipment... . 


1 See the critical note for a discussion of this passage. 


his left shoulder, and the other on his right, and thus they 
will appear to be four abreast. And if they go about three 
abreast, the first man should have one spear on his right 
shoulder, and the other on his left, and the others similarly, 
and in this way each separate man will look like two.” 

4+ The subscription in M runs Aiveiov moXopxyntixa® 7 
Aihtavod xadws 4 apxn* followed by an erasure of 13 letters. 
See the Introduction, p. 2. 


199 


TESTIMONIA ET FRAGMENTA 
le 


Aelian, Tact. i. 2 kat wepi tis Kal’ “Ounpov taxtt- 
KS EVETUYOMEV ovyypapevou LTpatokre? Kal “Ep- 
pela Kat Opovtwr TH Kal” Huds avdpt draTiKa. 
2) / \ A / >] / \ 
efetpydoavro be TH Decoptav Atvetas TE dua 
qTAELOVWV OO Kal otpatynyika PiBAia tKkava ovv- 
tagdpevos, @v emlTopnv oO Oerrahos Kwéas 
ezoinoe, Iluppos te 6 “Hrreipwitys taxtixa ovvéetake 

Ae / e 4 33) \ 7 
kat AXeEavdpos 6 TovTov vids Kat KXéapyxos. 


II. 

Aelian, Tact. iii. 4 dpov dé atris (se. THs Ta- 
KTucys) €Oevto Aveias peév éemuotiuny eivat Trode- 

LK@ 4 TloAvBuos Sé, éav tis mAHOos 
puxk@v Kkujoewv, Ilo ; 7) 
ataktov mapaAabwyv totto ovyKpivyn Kal KaTa- 
Aoxicas ovrdoyion madevon TE XpNOiLwWs TA TpOS 
TOV 7OAELOV. 

i: 

Polybius x. 44 Awvetas de Bovdnfeis diopwoa- 
bat THY Towavryy amopiav, 0 Ta TEpl TOV oTpa- 
TNYLKOV DTrOpY LATA OUVTETAYPEVOS, Bpaxo bev TL 

mpocPiPage, Tov ye pnv dSé€ovTos akprY mdp7roAv 
TO Kara THY emivovav amehetpOy. yvoin 8 av 
Tis eK TOUTwWY. gyal yap Setv Tovs péAAovTas 
200 


ATTESTATIONS AND FRAGMENTS 
ie 


And upon the subject of tactics in Homer we have 
read Stratocles and Hermeas and Fronto the ex- 
consul of our own time. Now the theory has been 
elaborated both by Aeneas in detail (and he also 
composed a considerable number of military manuals, 
of which Cineas the Thessalian made an epitome), 
and by Pyrrhus of Epirus, who composed a treatise 
on tactics, and by Alexander his son, and by 
Clearchus. 


Il. 


Aeneas defined it (sc. tactics) as the science of 
military movements, but the definition of Polybius 
was, that tactics was when a man took an un- 
organized crowd, arranged it, divided it into 
companies, grouped them together, and gave them 
a practical military training. 


JIN 


Aeneas, therefore, the writer of the treatise on 
tactics, wished to correct this defect, and did in 
fact make some improvement; but his invention 
still fell very far short of what was wanted, as the 
following passage from his treatise will show. “ Let 


1 Reiske: rod mss. 


201 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


aAArAous dud T@v Trupady OmAody TO Karerretyov 
ayyeta KaTaoKevdo KEpaped’ KaTa Te TO 7AdToS 
Kal KaTa TO Babos toopeyeOn mpos acpiBevav: 
eitvat d€ padtora TO ev Bdbos Tpidv mynY@v, TO 
de mAdtos mHyeos. ita TapacKkevdcar deAAovs 
Bpaxd Kata mAdtos evdeets THY oTOUdTwv, ev de 
ToUToUs peoous euTreTnyevar PaxTnplas Sinpnuevas™ 
ica pepy TpioaxtvAa, Kal’ éxaotov dé Lépos 
elvat TEpLy papry EVOnLOV. eV exdorTo de pepet 
yeypapo al Ta mpodavéorata Kal kaboduxcbrara 
T&V ev Tots TOAELLKOTs OvpBaLvovTwr, otov evOews 
ev TO TPWTW SLOT Ta pelo Um7TEts Els THY YWpay, 
ev 6€ TH Sevtépw didtt welot Bapets, ev 5€ TH 
Tpitw yrol, Tovtwv 8 é&As melol pel” imméwv, 
eira Acta, peta 6€ Tatta otros, Kal® Kata TO 
GUVEXES OUTW, péxpis* av Ev Tdacals ypadH Tats 
ywpats Ta pddAvoTr av éex Ta&V evAdywv Tpovoias 
TvyxavovTa Kal ovpPaivovta Kata Tovs eveoT@Tas 
Kalpovs eK TOV Tone puuic@v. TOUTWW dé yevopeveny 
duporepa Kehever Tphoa Ta ayyeta T™pos akpt- 
Bevav, wate Tovs avAtcKous icous elvar Kal Kat’ 
loov amoppetv: eita 7AnpwoavrTas vVdaTos emHetvat 
tovs dedXdovs exovras tas® Baxrnpias, Ka7eiTa 
Tovs avAicxous adetvat pely dua. Tovrov de 
ovpBaivovtos S4Aov ws avayKyn, TavTwv towv Kat 
Omoiwy ovtTwy, Kal” dcov av amroppén TO vypov, 
KaTa TooodTov Tovs deAAovs KataPaivewy Kal Tas 
Baxrnpias KpvTTeo0at Kara TOV ayyetwv. oray 
dé TO _Tpoeipn eva yevntal KaTa TOV yYELpLOLoV 
isoraxyn Kal ovudwra, TOTE KopicavTas él TOUS 


1 Dindorf: kepaymata or kepauata Mss. 
2 These two words added by Casaubon. 


202 


FRAGMENTS 


those who wish,’ he says, “to communicate any 
matter of pressing importance to each other by 
fire-signals prepare two earthenware vessels of 
exactly equal size both as to diameter and depth. 
Let the depth be three cubits, the diameter one. 
Then prepare corks of a little shorter diameter than 
that of the mouths of the vessels : and in the middle 
of these corks fix rods divided into equal portions of 
three fingers’ breadth, and let each of these portions 
be marked with a clearly distinguishable line ; and in 
each let there be written one of the most obvious 
and universal of those events which occur in war ; 
for instance in the first ‘ cavalry have entered the 
country, in the second ‘hoplites, in the third 
‘light-armed,’ in the next ‘infantry and cavalry,’ 
in another ‘ships,’ in another ‘corn,’ and so on, 
until all the portions have had written on them 
the measures on the part of the enemy which may 
reasonably be foreseen and are most likely to occur 
in the present emergency. Then carefully pierce 
both the vessels in such a way that the taps shall be 
exactly equal and carry off the same amount of 
water. Fill the vessels with water and lay the corks 
with their rods upon its surface and set both taps 
running together. This being done, it is evident 
that, if there is perfect equality in every respect 
between them, both corks will sink exactly in 
proportion as the water runs away, and both rods 
will disappear to the same extent into the vessels. 
When they have been tested and the rate of the 
discharge of the water has been found to be exactly 
equal in both, then the vessels should be taken 


3 Added by Casaubon. 4 Casaubon: éxpc MSS. 
5 Sealiger: rypjoac Mss. 6 Added by Reiske. 


203 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


TOTOUS ev ois EKATEPOL pehAovow ouvrnpety Tas 
TupoeElas, ExdTEpOV Getvae tTa&v ayyelwy. e€ir 
ema euTeon Te TOV EV TH Baxrnpia YEYPAPPEVEnY, 
Tupoov dpae Kehevet, Kal weve EWS AV aVTAaipwow 
Ol ovvTeTaypevor’ yevouevwy dé davep@v apdo- 
TEépwv Gc TOV Tupoav xabedeiv, cir edléws 
apetvat tovs avAioKous pet. oTav O€ KaTa- 
Baivovros Tob peMod Kal THS Baxrnptas Eby 
TOV YEYPappeveny 0 BovAeu OnAoby KaTa TO xeiAos 
Tob Tevyous, dpa KedeveL Tov TuUpoov: Tous oo 
ETepous emtAaBetvy et0éws tov avAicKov, Kal oKo- 
melv TE KATA TO xetAds €oTL THY ev TH BaKTypia 
YEYPApLpevenv* €oTat O€ TovTO TO dnAovpevor, 
TAVT@V LooTAXas Tap’ dyuporT€pots KWOULEVOY. 

Suidas Aivetas: obtos eyparpe Tept Tupoay, 
ws not TloAvBios, Kat epi orpatnynudtwr 
dToOpvna. 

DV. 

Jul. Africanus, Keoroi c. 37 p. 302% Thev. (aecord- 
ing to mss. EP!) daoi dé tTwes Tv apyaiwy ort 
KaL <O> Tod éyéws lds Kat aomidos cadauavdpns 
Te els TOTO (sc. yptaoua BeABv) arrapaBaros. 


V 
Johannes Lydus, Ilept dpydv tis “‘Pwpaiwv 
moXretas i. 47, in defining adwpdropes and Bere- 
pavot, cites a series of Roman authorities and then: 
‘EAAjvwv dé Aidvavos Kat *Appravds, Aiveias, 


+ Shuckburgh’s translation, slightly revised. 
2 This notice is clearly taken direct from Polybius. 
8 The same substances are mentioned in Philo Mechanicus 


204 


FRAGMENTS 


respectively to the two places from which the two 
parties intend to watch for fire-signals. As soon 
as any one of these eventualities which are inscribed 
upon the rods takes place, Aeneas bids raise a lighted 
torch, and wait until the signal is answered by a 
torch from the others ; then, when both torches have 
been simultaneously visible, lower them, and then 
immediately set the taps running. When the 
cork and rod on the signalling side has sunk low 
enough to bring the ring containing the words 
which give the desired information on a level with 
the rim of the vessel, a torch is to be raised again. 
Those on the receiving side are then at once to stop 
the tap, and to see which of the messages written 
on the rod is on a level with the rim of their vessel. 
This will be the same as that on the signalling side, 
assuming everything to be done at the same speed 
on both sides.” ! 

Aeneas wrote on signal-fires, as Polybius said, 
and a treatise on stratagems.” 


IV, 


Some of the ancients say that the poison of the 
viper, asp, and salamander does not lose its virtue 
for this purpose (z.e. the smearing of missiles) .° 


V. 
And of the Greeks, Aelian and Arrian, Aeneas, 


vy. 90. 17 ff. as necessary supplies in a beleaguered city. 
Such topics as this must have been treated by Aeneas in his 
Ilapackevacrixh Bi8ros, On Military Preparations. See 8. 2-5; 
40. 8, and the Introduction, p. 8. 


205 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


’Ovijcavdpos, Ildtpwv, *AmoAAddwpos ev ois 
moAvopKyTiKots, KTA.* 


Jutit Arricant Keor@v capira EX AENEA EXCERPTA2 
XXXVIII. Ils wip duvayeba cBéoar (=Ch. 34) 


"Kav yu@v ot modepwoe Tupi KaTaocKevacT@ 
Tetyos 7) Tbe ETEPOV ETpHGOVal, Tas oaPéeoat 
duvdpcba; oBeoouev adrto ovvTduws KaTaxéovTes 
df0s. Tovs dé ofevvivtas amo T&v tindAotépwv 
def mEpt TO mpoowwTrov exe epupd TU iva Hooov 
oxAodyra mpocaiscovons avtots Ths droyds. et 
d€ ov Tpoyv@s Ta, peMovra Kaleobar, xptoov 
e€wlev £0, Kat TOUTOLS OV TpdELoL TOP. 


XLV. [lds Hyets eurpjowpev; (=Ch. 33. 1) 

“Epmpyowpev jets Kal? nua@v EpXOmevov pay. 
yavov 7 vay" 7 mUpyov TroA€Lov ouTws: emuyetv® 
det micoav Kat Belov émPadrceu, emer proya- 
cavTa paredMAov emapeivar® cxyowiw ép orep 
OéAopev. Ta. d€ ToLvatra TMpoTewopueva" ad av 
toraucOa Tomwy emiBdAAeTau Tots Eemidepopevots. 


XLVI. IIpos katopévas wvAas (=Ch. 33. 4) 

"Eav éumpnobOow at mvAat, det mpoodepecbar 

, WS , 8 ¢ , \ a A 
EvAov Kat €uPpaddAovra WS [EYLOTOV TO TTUP 7TOLELY, 

1 This testimony is not given by R. Schéne. The citation 
of Aeneas involves an obvious anachronism. 

2 For these excerpts we give R. Schéne’s constitution of 
the text, noting only those points at which some change 
seems necessary. 3 Meursius: épimuate Mss. 

4 Boivin: iva ody Mss. °> Boivin: émicyety MSS. 


206 


—-_ 





FRAGMENTS 


Onesander, Patro, and Apollodorus, in their works 
on the besieging of cities. 


Excerpts From AENEAS IN THE Keorol or JUuLIus 
AFRICANUS 


XXXVIII. How we can put out Fire 


If our enemies shall set on fire a palisade or any- 
thing else with an incendiary preparation, how can 
we put out the fire? By pouring vinegar over it we 
shall at once put it out. Those who put out the 


fire from places above it must have some protection 


for the face, that they may be less annoyed when 
the flame darts toward them. And if you know in 


_advance the parts that are likely to be set on fire, 
rub vinegar! on the outside, and the flame will not 
advance on them. 


XLV. How shall we ourselves set Things on Fire ? 
Let us set on fire an engine coming against us 


or a ship or a hostile tower in this manner. One 


must pour pitch and cast sulphur, then set on fire a 
fagot and let it down by a rope upon the particular 
object we wish. And such things as these, held 


out from the places in which we are standing, are 


hurled at the approaching engines. 


XLVI. Against the Burning of a Gate 


If the gate is set on fire you must bring up wood 
and throw it on to make as large a fire as possible, 


1 See note on Aeneas, ch. 34. 1. 


—_——_— 


6 Cod. Monac. 195 m?. * Boivin: mporewoudvwy Mss. 
8 Aeneas: é€u8daddovrac or €uBaddovTas MSS. 


207 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


HEXpLs ov Tappevoet TO eowbev, Kal env Tl dé7* 
eK TOV GOL dTrapyovTwv olKOU eabareens 


XLVIII. [epi KcAepvdpas (=Ch. 22. 24 f.) 


Krebvdpa mavv xpnoyov® K7THua mpos Tovs 
VUKTUp gu Adooovras, [LAK POTEpwY 7 Bpaxvtépwr 
vUKT@V yevopeveny* adr de cin Bee ours. 
yp7) Keknp@alar adtis Ta €owlev Kal waxpoTépwv 
Yvopevenv TOV vuKT@v adpatpetabar tod Knpod, 
iva 7A€ov vdwp Xwp), Bpaxurépwv dé mpoo- 
mAdooeobat, iva eAacocov déxynrat. Thy de TavTNS 
omnv axpib@s det trovetobar,* du’ Fs TO THS Tpo- 
feopias vdwp expe?. 


XLIX. IIvAwpixdv (=Ch. 28. 1-43; 29. 12) 


"Ev odBw peevovons® modews Tade det Tm™po- 
voetobat. mvAas Tas puev aAXas xexhetoban, play 
de avedyOar, du’ Hs av SvoTtpocodatatov 7° Tis 
modews Kal émt mAetoTov am attav pédAdovow 
opdobat of mpoidvres. Kat ev adtH TH TVA Set 
exToudea,” wa owpata pev avOpamwv bv adbris 
eloiy®’ ev Kal’ ev ovTwWSs yap av HKLOTA TIS 
AavOdvy? Kat de adrtis elowwy adtrouodros” 7 
KaTadoKoTros, eavirep 6 TUAWPOS 7 VoNpds. TV 
dé avolyecba" trolvyiwy evexev Kal auaEav Kat 


»y 5 / 3 / > / / 
aAAwv AYWYlLWY ATOTPETTW. el O€ TL TOUTWY 
1 Aeneas: 6é évi Mss. 2 Paris. 2441. 

3 After this word the mss. have 70. 
4 Boivin: mvetc@a mss. 5 wev ovens Boivin. 
6 §vcmpocodwrarov 7 later Mss.: others dvampocodérarov 7. 
7 Boivin adds eivac. 8 Aeneas: eicly Mss. 


208 


FRAGMENTS 


even if it be necessary to tear down some one of the 
buildings that stand in your town, until you can dig 
your trench inside. 


XLVIII. On the Water-Clock 


A water-clock is a very useful thing for those who 
are keeping guard at night, according as the nights 
become longer or shorter, and it is constructed as 
follows. One should smear the interior of the 
clock with wax, and then remove some of the wax 
when the nights grow longer, so that the clock may 
contain more water. When, on the other hand, the 
nights grow shorter, more wax should be added in 
order that the clock’s capacity may be less. And 
its orifice, through which the water for a particular 
period flows out, must be made with exactness. 


XLIX. On Gates 


| When a city is in constant fear precautions must 
be taken as follows. Close the other gates but leave 
one open, where access to the city is most difficult, 
and where those who advance are going to be in 
plain sight for the longest distance. And in this 
gate there should be a wicket-gate, so that men may 
pass through it singly. For in this way anyone, 
| whether deserter or spy, is least able to escape 
notice if he should enter, if the gate-keeper is sharp- 
witted. Yet I advise against opening the whole gate 
for beasts of burden, wagons, and other things that 
are brought in. But if it shall be necessary to bring 


® Boivin: \avOdver Mss. 10 Boivin: av’rémods Mss. 
| 11 Aeneas: dvvec@ar MSS. 


P 209 





AENEAS TACTICUS 


avaykaiws Senoe du dpatdv eioxopileobar, aitov 
7 owov 7 éeAaiov 7) Tv TowvTwY TL, TwWUaTwWY 
TAHOE. TabTa eloxopilecOat det mpoeEvdvTos oTpa- 
TevuaTos. TO d€ OdAov mpadypa mvAas Tpwt pT 
avotyeoBar, ousitepov Te pnbeva ef adieoBar, 
mpl av eCepevvqon 7a mept THY TOAW. erL TE 
pynte tAota Kat’ auras oppilecdat, aAAd amrotépw* 
(29. 12) xp7) ‘yap Kal Tovs eMyuevioras” mpoo- 
opp Omevenv TAotoy VUKTOS 1) HLEepas TEpl TOUTWY 
p71 adwackértws exew, ad’ éuBaivovras* idetv 
avTovs Ta aywyya, evOvpovpévous ott TovTwY 
KaTapeAnoavTes TA peyadAa eapadncar. 


L. “OmAwv AdOpa eioxopd7 (=Ch. 29. 1-12) 


\ aA ~ 7 / > ~ i 
Ilept ths tv omAwy AdOpa elokopmidys Arts 
> \ 7 > A “a 
EOTL AUTH exTefeurau Tots pev tadatots moh 
Adicus TeTpay}Levy, 1) jpiv d€ Tapadery}a yevopern) 
T™pos TO ie 7" DeAopev, Kal pn TaoxEW Ws 
elOoTes. ” wev ovv e€oTiv eopT? mavdnjLos Tots 
ap nav ee mpoevdnuovtoat Edvois Kal Tpo- 
doTais ws eis TO péAAov Yuly ovumpaTTovow, 
> / A / / \ / 
eloxopilecbar Set Sapaxas Awéovs Kat orodidas 
¢ / 
Kat mepiukedaralas o7Aa Kvnpidas paxaipas To€a® 
Tofevpata ev KiPwriots ws doptaywyots KaT- 
eokevacpeva, ws tuatiwy® evovTwy Kat addwv 
> / A e >A \10 > / 
aywyluwy. admep ot édApenorat”® avoiEavtes 


1 Aeneas: dorépwy MSS. 
2 Meursius and Cod. Paris. 2437. 3 Cod. Paris. 2437. 


4 Boivin: éuBaivorvra Mss. : Boivin : éxréOnra MSS. 
6 Boivin: 7 mss. 7 Later mss.: 7 older ss. 
8 Aeneas: Togérofevuara MSs. 
9 Aeneas: iudriov MSs. 10 Aeneas: évAyuevioral MSS. 


210 


FRAGMENTS 


in any of these things in wagons—some grain, or 
wine, or oil, or such supplies—you should send the 
army out beforehand, and bring the goods in with a 
gang of men. In general, the gates must not be 
opened early in the day, and even later no one should 
be let out until the region around the city has been 
reconnoitred. Again, boats are not to be moored 
at the gates but at a distance. For the revenue 
officers also must be watchful of vessels which anchor 
near by, night or day, and they must go on board 
and personally see the wares, having in mind that 
men who have neglected these precautions have 
suffered serious disasters. 


L. Importation of Arms by Stealth 


Concerning the stealthy importation of arms, as 
to just what it is, this has often been set forth by 
the old writers, and has become to us a model for 
accomplishing what we desire, and, through this 
knowledge, for avoiding mishap. So, if there is a 
public holiday, there must be brought in for the 
aliens! on our side who have previously established 
themselves there, and traitors co-operating with us 
in what is to take place, linen corslets and cloaks 
and helmets, shields, greaves, short swords, bows, 
arrows, stowed away in chests like those of mer- 
chants, just as if clothing and other merchandise 
were in them. The revenue officers opening these 






__ 1 These may have been mercenaries hired by ‘us,’ 7.e., by 
the exiled faction which is seeking to regain possession of 
the city. The original in Aeneas is written from the point 
of view of the defenders of the town. 


211 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


Kal lddvTes, WS taTLAa pLovov TYyYLnOoOVTaL. E€tT 
atvta* elodyeoOar Kat TiWevar mpo Tihs ayopas- 
ev d€ Tapoots Kal pimols” Kat toriows® Huwdar- 
Tialots SopdTia Kat aKovTia evetAnuéva, ev de 
ayyeow* axvpwv méATat Kal piKpa daomdioKia 
KeKpupyicva, Kal TO TOUTWW evoyKOTEepa €v oap- 
yavaus® aoTadidwy Kal ovKwY TAnpEct, eyxetpioua 
dé &v dpupupopebor® TUp@v Kal loxddwv Kal 
cedar, Tov O€ THs em Bovlfs Hyewova ppvydvev 
ev epoprpate. KaL ef prev pry yuwobetev’ tao 
Tov ev TH mode, vuKTOS yevopevns abpoileaBau 
Tvs em un oopevous det Kaup@ ev @ olvobvra 
of moAtrat. Kal mp@rov pev AvOiirw® 7d dhd- 
prea dua TOV Yyemova, emeiTa Tovs aAAovs Ta 
dAxra AvcavTas det AapBavew, Kal TOYS apdupopéas 
ouvtTpipew dua TO OUVTOMUS emraipew* aro onuetou 
te? ExaoTov mpoonKovTws o7mAilecfat. Kal Tov- 
Twv Twas Execbar TUpywv Te Kal TOV TOU Telyous 
muAav: Kal mUpywv pev dia TO 61a oKddAns 
Erépous avadévecar, mvA@v 5€é dia TO cicdéyeoOau: 
kal Tovs dAdovs els te Ta apyeta Kal Tas 
moAemias” otkias® eiotpéxyew.* ef d€ mpo THs 
éomépas yvwoletev, Tod epyov det mapautixa’® 
tovtous’® éyeofat Kalas mpoednAwOn: od yap 
dAAws «8 BovAcdvon. 


1 R. Schone: ed raira mss. 2 Aeneas: purrots Mss. 
3 Kéchly and Riistow in Aeneas: iorots mss. 
4 Aeneas: dyeow MSS. > Aeneas: omapydavats MSS. 


8 duBiBopetor, dupiBopevor MSS. 


212 





| 


FRAGMENTS 


and inspecting them, will appraise them as mere 
clothing. Then these must be brought in, and 
set at the edge of the market-place; and also 
in crates and wicker-frames and wrapped in half- 
woven sailcloth spears and javelins, and, in baskets 
of chaff, bucklers and small shields concealed, and 
the things that are smaller than these in baskets full 
of raisins and figs, as well as daggers in jars of wheat 
and dried figs and olives, and the leader of the plot 
in a load of fagots. And if they should not be 
discovered by the men in the city, then, when 
night has fallen, those who are to make the attack 
should be assembled at a time when the citizens are 
intoxicated. And first of all the load is to be 
loosened, so as to get the leader, then the others 
must unpack and take the rest of the things, and 
smash the jars so as to get the contents quickly, 
and at a signal each is to arm himself appropriately. 
And some of these men are to seize the towers and 
the gates of the wall—the towers so as to take up 
others by a ladder, and the gates so as to let them in 
—while the rest should run to the city hall and the 
houses of their opponents. But if they should be 
discovered before evening, they must begin at once 
as already set forth; for any other course would be 
ill-advised. 


7 Editors: 7 uev un éyvaobn Mss. (The text before Boivin 


had ei.) 8 Boivin: 6% Mss. 
9 R. Schéne: Av67 Mss. 10 Boivin: onuecodra Mss. 
1 Boivin: dpxata ss. 12 Editors: moXéuou Mss. 
13 Boivin: ofkelas MSs. 14 Cod. Paris. 2441. 
16 Boivin: wap’ atvd Mss. 16 Editors: rovrou Mss. 


213 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


LI. Ilept xpudias éemuoroAdy etomoptrijs 
(Ch ieei) 
A / / > A > / 
Tots Kexpnuevois mpoddtats avayKatov etdevat 
m@s éemuoTtoAds det adtovs eloméuTmew. amrooteAde 
yobv ovTws. Teuméodw avip ev TH ghavep@ 
/ 
dépwr' emiotoAnvy twa epi ddAdAwy mpaypaTwr. 
Tod dé mopevecGar pédAovTos Kpvdaiws avTod «ts 
~ \ 
TO TV dDrodnudtwr Téa evTeOATw Eis TO 
\ , \ / \ \ \ 
petatd BiBXAlov Kat Katapamtécbw: mpos dé Tovs 
myAovs Kal Ta vOaTa els Kacoitepov €AnAacpévov" 
/ \ A \ > / e \ ~ 
ypadeofw mpos TO pn adavilecBar tmo Tov 
a“ 
dddTwv Ta ypdppata. adikoudvov Sé mpos dv 
del? Kal avamavouevov vuKTos davadvérw Tas 
papas Tav d7odnpaTwyv Kal e€ehwv avayvovs Te 
\4 LAA RK / A LQ > VNAé A ay 5 
kal* adda yparbas Aabpa amooteAX\eTw Tov avdpa, 
avtamooteiAas Kal dovs Tu dépew davep@s* ovTws 
\ 4 + 7 ¢e / > / 
yap oUte aAAos ovTe 0 hépwv €idijoet. 


“Erepov ado mavoupydrepov (=Ch. 31. 16-19) 
> , > / A lon 7, 
Aozpayadov ctpeyeOn det oe tTpuTioa: TpuT7- 
BS QaRe DL Qe \ a , 
pata KO, €€° els exdoTny TAEUpav TOO aoTpaydAov: 
coTw O€ TA Tpumjpara oToLyeta. OvapynLoveve 
de ag: 7s av meupas apEnrat TO aAga Kat Ta. 
exopeva direp ev exdoTn mevpe yeypamrar. peta 
dé tabta orav twa OédAns ev att ribeoOar, Aw 
djoar. duapodvrTa’ dé SdyAotv ev tH Tod AXivov 
duepoet,® ap€duevos ex THS mAeupGs Too aoTpa- 
LA > eo A tA > / NG A \ >? / 
yadov, ev 7 TO aAda eoTi, mapeh\Owv Ta exomeva 
1 Boivin: gavepdv Mss. 


2 Meineke on Aeneas: 7\acuévoy Mss. 
3 Later mss.: 67 earlier mss. 4 Boivin: ra Mss. 


214 


—~ 





FRAGMENTS 


LI. On the secret Sending of Messages 


Those who employ traitors must know how they 
should send in messages. Dispatch them, then, like 
this. Let a man be sent openly bearing some 
message about other matters. Let the letter be 
inserted without the knowledge of the bearer in 
the sole of his sandals and be sewed in, and, to 
guard against mud and water, have it written on 
beaten tin so that the writing will not be effaced 
by the water. And when he reaches the one 
intended and goes to rest for the night, this person 
should pull out the stitches of the sandals, take out 
and read the letter, and, writing another secretly, 
let him send the man back, having dispatched some 
reply and having given him something to carry 
openly. For in this way no one else, not even the 
messenger, will know the message. 


LII. Yet another shrewder Device 


In a sufficiently large astragal you must bore 
twenty-four holes, six on each side. Let the holes 
stand for letters, and note clearly on which side 
begins Alpha and which of the following letters 
have been written on each particular side. Then 
whenever you wish to make some communication 
by means of it, tie a thread to it. And you are to 
make clear your differentiation between the letters 
by the drawing through of the thread, beginning 
from the side of the astragal on which Alpha is 
found, omitting the characters placed next to Alpha 

5 Boivin: re Mss. 6 Aeneas: é€& dy MSS. 

7 Editors: dcacpodvrac Mss. 
8 Casaubon on Aeneas: diarpéoer Mss. 


215 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


TOUTOU! ypappara, otav €AOns ets a7Aeupav ob TO 
Lara yeaa eort, dieupov® Kat maAw mapets Ta 
Exoueva, Orrov TO vo® civa oupBaiver Stetpov,” 
Kal ovTws Ta TOU Adyou dvruypaetev av eis Ta* 
TpuTnpata.  denoeTat dé TOV dvayweoKovTa dva.- 
ypageobar ets déATov 7a° On Aovpeva ypdppara eK 
TOV TpuTpaTOV, avamadw ywouerns ths e&ép- 
cews® TH evepoe.” 


LIT. “Erepa mept tovtov mapa tev radadyv 
mpaxlevra (=Ch. 31. 31 f.3 31. 23; 31. 14; 
31. 33; 31. 24) 


Ereppln ypeppard MOTE mrohhacts Kar” "Hrew- 
pov® ovTws Xpycapeveny avTa@v.  KUVL deopor* 
Teekotes TeEpt Tov adyéva évéBadov Tod iudvTos 
écowlev émotoAnv, eita’® vuKtos TotTov adjKayv 
av @? e / \ 3) Ze > / 7 me ne 
7 we?’ YLepav mpos ov €€ avayKkyns nuedrAev HEew, 
(4 > / v7 \ ~ / 
olev amnvex in. EOTL oe TobTo @erradov. 

(31. 23) “AdAou TWeES els BiBAcov ypdsbavres ws 
Aemrorarov juarpovs orixous Kat Aemr7a ypdupara, 
iva evoyKoTara yevnrat, eira + €ml TOD Wpov Tob 
yitwriokov vm0levTes Kal amontv€avTes, av- 
UTOTTOV ETOLOVY THY KOMLLONY THs emLoToOANs. 

(31. 14) “AMou madw ev TO Tijs d€éArou fvdw 
vpaibavTes KT|pov emer gay Kal ada els TOV Kn pov 
eypaibav. eita oTav EAbn”” map’ dv det Tov Kypov 

1 Hercher on Aeneas: 70d iéra Mss. 
2 Aeneas: dinpov MSS. 
3 Orelli and Williams on Aeneas: ézrov eivac Mss. 

+ Boivin: dvrvypdgecey dpicra MSS. (avTiypade év P?), 

> Aeneas: 6éATa Toy MSS. 6 Boivin: éfscdoews MSS. 

7 Casaubon on Aeneas: évdpfe Mss. 


216 





FRAGMENTS 


when you come to the side where the letter Iota is 
marked, pass the thread through, and again, dis- 
regarding the characters following this, pass the 
thread through where Nu happens to be, and thus 
the elements of the word would be indicated in the 
holes. And it will be necessary for the one who is 
to read the information to write down upon a tablet 
the characters revealed by the holes, the unthreading 
taking place in the reverse order to that of the 
threading. 


LIII. Other Devices for this from the Ancients 


Letters were often sent in Epirus by the employ- 
ment of the following method. After getting a 
collar around a dog’s neck, they placed inside the 
strap a letter; then at night or during the daytime 
they dispatched the dog to the person to whom 
he was sure to go, that is, to the one from whom he 
had been brought. And this is a Thessalian custom. 

Certain others, by writing long lines with fine 
characters upon some very thin papyrus, so that 
they may be as compact as possible, then by placing 
it on the shoulder under the over-tunic and spreading 
that out, have caused the letter to be transmitted 
without suspicion. Others, again, after writing on 
the wooden part of the tablet, have poured wax over 
it and written something else on the wax. Then 
when it came to the appointed person, he, scraping 


8 Aeneas: kaTjreipov MSS. 
® Boivin: decuay or decuay Mss. 
10 Added by Boivin. 11 Aeneas: eis Tov MSS. 
12 Aeneas: 6re 7\Oes MSS. 13 Aeneas: 67 MSS. 


217 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


EKKVNOAS' Kal dvayvods OmoLoTpéTWSs avTaTréoTetAev. 
(31. 33) éyw b€ Tas tapaywopévas SéATous® edOds 
avolyew trapaw@, (31. 24) dudte Ta elomeuTropeva 
peta emiBovAns mavu xaAerov pvdAdéar. 


LIV. ‘Yzopvecdvtwy yvdots Kat KaddAvots 
(—Ch. 37. 1-4) 

Aet tovs wbmoptccovtas de kwodvew. €av 
OoKh tmopvacecar, ws Baburarny® xen THY 
eKTOS Tappov opvocecbat, orrws els iia Tappov 
TO drropuypua dpienrae Kat ol? dTropvacorTeEs 
opFaou. ea d€ cou dra pXy Kal TELXtov TELYLOGL 
ets adriy ws toxuporaroy Kat peylotwy Aifwv. 
eav O€ LL bmrapxy Teixioa AiBors, cvAwv doputov® 
Kopuuce. é€av O€ Ta Uroptypata TH Tabpy 
T™poomreon), eu Baio Tov" popurov Epp] cov Kal 
7a adda KATOOKETAGOY, OTWS O Kamrvos els TO 
diudpuypa mopevonTar Kal KaK@s moun® Tovs ev 
TH opvypmate ovrTas* ovpPaiver yap mroAAovs t7o0 
Kkamvod} amoAdéoJar. dAvuaved dé Tovs wr- 
optcoovtas® odfjKkas Kal preXiooas adeis els TO 
Oudpuyyia. yor d€ Kal? ov ay dpvacover TO7oV 
avTopvcoew Kal UTayTay. 


LV. Ilept to6 rods bropvccovras 1 PrAdmrecBat 


(=Ch. 37. 8 f) 


A € / / 4 “A / 
Tots tmoptocew peAAovew ovTws av yEvotTo 
/ > + \ 7 ¢ ~ \ 
Tepidpaypa layupwratov. xp1 dvo aua€av Tovs 
1 Aeneas: éxxw7joas MSS. 
* Added by the editors from Aeneas. 


5 Aeneas: Badd Mss. 4 Added from Aeneas. 
5 Aeneas: peyiorotatwy Mss. © Aeneas: £uvAogevxTdv MSS. 
wey 


218 


— 





FRAGMENTS 


off the wax and reading the writing, sent back a 
reply in a similar manner. And I advise that 
letters be opened as soon as received, because it is 
very difficult to guard against anything sent in by 
artifice. 


LIV. Detection and Prevention of Mines 


Those who are constructing mines must be pre- 
vented in the following manner. If it appears that 
a mine is being made you should dig the moat 
outside the wall as deep as possible, so that the 
mine may open into the moat and those who are 
digging it may be exposed to view. And if you 
have a chance, a wall should also be built in the 
moat, of the very hardest and largest stones avail- 
able. But if you have no chance to build a stone 
wall, bring up logs and rubbish. And if the mines 
open into the moat, dump the rubbish, set fire to 
it, and cover the rest over in order that the smoke 
may penetrate the opening and injure those in the 
mine, for it happens that many are killed by smoke. 
And by releasing wasps and bees into the opening 
one will work mischief with those in the mine. 
One must, at whatever point the enemy are digging, 
construct a countermine and oppose them. 


LV. To protect from Injury those who are digging 
Mines 


For those who are to construct mines a very 
effective form of protection would be this. One 
7 Boivin: éuBdddovras MSs. 8 Aeneas: rove? MSs. 


9 R. Schéne (katopticcovtas or dvtoptccovras Boivin): 
Topvccov Tas MSS. 


219 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


pupods eis Tavro ovvonoar, oupmeTaoavra KATO. 
TO ETEpOV }4€pos THS apagns, ¢ OmTwWs peTewprol@ow 
ob pupol els TtavTo vevovTes. emreura. oUTws 
ETLOVVOELV aa fvAa Tots’ pupots Kat aAAa zrept- 
Ppdypara | eTmavw, TA dé TAG Kadvzsar. iy dy 
ov ToOTO” mpooayew orrov BovAer TOUS Tpoxovs 
Kal amayew,® bo d€ ToUTW TH Ppdypate Tovs 
Dropvacovras iva. 


LVI. AoAtevya (=Ch. 39. 1 f.) 


\ / 7 A / 
Tovs modtopKovpévouvs ovtws det dodvevecGat: 

> ~ / > Wee) lan 7 > / 
ev tats mUAais els TO €ow padAXov Epos dpvEavTas 
tappov evlev kat evlev mapodov Aueivy Kat 7po- 
dyew Tv ToAcuiwv, woTe Twas ouvdpapety eis 
tiv ToAW. xpy yodv evOev Kat evlev mapa Tas 
AceAcyupevas* mapddous elorpéxew. Todvs de TOV 
A \ 
ToAcLimy ouvtpéxovTas €iKos e€oTW eETrecety pn? 
TpoELooTas THV TAPpov KEKpPULLEeVNS AUTHS OVENS. 


LVIa. “AAXo &” obdzep Goous av Oédepev TOV 
ToAcuiwy KaTadoxapev (=Ch. 39. 2-4) 


NVA / / 
Tév eicepyouevwv moAcuiwy ocovs KaTexew 
~ 4 
BovAnbGpev av, ovtws® Toujowpev. edowpev 
Elovevat OGovs av yuiv 7° evyEpes KTEtVaL’ Tpo- 
7 de yy @ 3 A ~ iA wv 8 
erounacbw dé avwhev amo Tod pecomvAov Eow 
Tov mvA@v TAY? ws TayuTaTn? Kal ceoLdn- 
1 Editors: ¢ mss. 
2 Editors: etn otv Trovrousimss. (roto Boivin). 


3 Boivin: éwdyev Mss. 4 Aeneas: eAnuévas MSS. 
®> Added from the text of Aeneas. 
6 Editors: otrws av Mss. 7 Editors: éoriv Mss. 


220 





FRAGMENTS 


should fasten together the poles of two wagons, 
having first turned them back each in the direction 
of the other part of its wagon in such a way that 
the poles may be raised aloft, inclining toward the 
same point. Then, when this has been done, one 
should fasten on to the poles in addition other 
timbers and sorts of covering above, and cover them 
over with clay. This device, then, could be advanced 
and withdrawn on its wheels wherever you desire, 
and those who are excavating could keep under this 
protection. 


LVI. A Stratagem 


Those undergoing siege ought to contrive thus. At 
the gateway and somewhat within it they should dig 
a trench and leave a passage on this side and on that, 
and should lure some of the enemy to make a dash 
into the town with them. Of course they must 
themselves run in along the passages that have 
been left on either side. But it is likely that those 
of the enemy who run in with them, being unaware 
of the trench, since it is concealed, will fall in. 


LVla. Another Method by which we may catch as muny 
of the Enemy as we please 


However many of the enemy we may wish to 
catch as they come in—let us do it in this way. 
Let us allow to enter as many as it is convenient 
for us to kill. You should have ready inside, above 
the centre of the gate, as stout a portcullis as possible, 


8 Editors: éws Mss. 
° Added by the editors from Aeneas. 


221 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


paola adrnv 7* orav ob} BovAn trodaPeiv rods 
eloTpexovTas moAetous ox. TavTnv aes opOnv 
Kal avrn Té TWAS 7 770 loos: Pepopevous Ovapbepet® 
Kal Tous _ToAcpious oxic’ pn) €lovevan’ ope d€ 
Kal ob emt T@ Telyes BadAérwoav post tats 
mvAats moAepiovs. 


LVII. [lds 80’ ddiywv avOpdmwv peydAns modews 
dvraky yevnoetat (=Ch. 40.13; 40. 4 f) 


> \ e / / oo \ \ e \ > € 

Eav 7 mods peyadn 4, Kat py tkavol Wow oi 
ev TH moAev dvOpwrro Tepulotacbat Kab KUKAObV 
THv TO0AW, Tots dé dmdpxovar BeAns adTyV Ovagu- 
AdEat, so THs ToAcws doa av 7 evmpocoda olKo- 
douety tinAa ex TOV brapyovTwv, ws edv Twes 
~ / / av / > ~ > > / 
Tov moAcuiwy Bia 7 Adbpa avaBGow ev azrepia 
ywopevor py) SUvwvTar KaTaTydav. mapa de Ta 
’ JRE G SO, Leg / ¢ 
@Kodounueva® evlev Kat evlev vdAaccovTwy ot 
dmdpNovTes avOpwmo., va Tovs Katamynd@vtas amo 
Trav dyn A@y duadbeipwow, (40. 4 f.) aAAa pny 
Kal yuvatoy EVOVTWV KAL yepovTav KaL TaLdaplov, 
TOUTWY ETlEeLKEOTATA OWuaTa Siapophody Kal 
¢€ / e > BA / 3 \ \ A 
omAilew ws els avdpas uddtora. avi dé dmAwv 
duddvat ToUs Te Kddous® Kal TA TOUTOLS OM“OTpOTTA 
ddovtas’ yadkwpata mepidyew Tod Telyous, BadXew 
dé 7) Kal akovtilew pndayd@s ev’ KaTddyAov yap 
yuvatov moppwlev Badrdov§ 


1 Editors: ws kai... # Mss. (7 Boivin). 
2 Capps trom Orelli on Aeneas: d:ag¢Geiper Mss. 
3 Added from Aeneas. 4 Aeneas: mpd MSs. 


> Aeneas: olkodounuéva MSS. 
222 





FRAGMENTS 


and this should be overlaid with iron, so that when 
you do not wish to admit the enemy as they run in, 
it may keep them from entering. Drop this, and 
the portcullis itself not only will destroy some few or 
many of them as they sweep in, but also will keep 
the foe from entering; at the same time let the 
forces on the wall keep shooting at the enemy by 
the gate. 


LVII. How a large City can be guarded by a few Men 


If the city is a large one and the men in it are 
not numerous enough to man its walls all the way 
around, and yet you wish to keep it closely guarded 
with the men you have, you must from the materials 
at hand build up high all the easily assailable parts 
of the city wall, so that, if any of the enemy shall 
scale it, either by force or by stealth, from their 
unfamiliarity they may not be able to leap down. 
And on either side of the parts that have been built up 
the available men should keep watch to destroy those 
who may leap from the high points. Moreover, you 
should disguise the most able-bodied of the women, 
old men, and boys that are in the town, and arm them 
as much like men as you can. And in place of arms 
give them their jars and similar bronze utensils, 
and march them around the wall, but do not by any 
means allow them to throw missiles or yet to hurl 
a javelin, for even a long way off a female betrays 
her sex when she tries to throw. 





6 Aeneas: xAddous MSS. 7 Aeneas: Odvres MSS. 
8 Editors from Aeneas: “a\\ov Mss. 


223 


AENEAS TACTICUS 


LVI. [epi tod orpariudtas dAiyous ovras 
todAovs daiveobar (=Ch. 40. 6 f.) 


"Kia bara \ ~ / nv / / \ 
av em T@ Telxer 1) YApaxe BovXrn TOUS Tept- 
ddous mci TOV ovTa@y paivecbar, xp) TEepuévar 
emt Ovo, é EXovTas Ta dopara TOV mp@Tov oTixov emt 
T® apwoTtep@ wuw, Tov d€ etepov emt TH SeEia: 
Kal oUtTws dhavobvrar els téooapas. éav Sé ézi* 
~ ~ \ ~ 
Tpia TEepudor, Tov pev mp@Tov avdpa emt Ta 
~ ” ” A / \ \ LA ee. | ~ 
defup apm exew TO ddpv, Tov Os eTEpov emt TH 

aploTep@, Kal oUTw pavobyTat cis* dvo. 
1 Added by Boivin. 2 Later Mss. : epidox earlier Mss. 
3 Aeneas: e/s MSS. 


rr — —  — — — — ——— 


FRAGMENTS 


LVIII. How Soldiers who are few may appear to be 


many 


If you wish the patrolmen upon the wall or rampart 
to appear more numerous than they are, you should 
make them go their rounds two abreast, the first 
rank with their spears upon the left shoulder, the 
other with their spears upon the right, and thus 
they will appear to be four abreast. And if they 
go about three abreast, the first man should have 
his spear upon his right shoulder, the next upon 
his left, and in this way each man will look like two. 


Q 225 





ASCEEPIODOTUS 





PREFACE 


Tue text of Asclepiodotus in the present edition was 
prepared by W. A. Oldfather, the remainder of the 
work by W. A. Oldfather and C. H. Oldfather 
jointly. Much important assistance was given in 
the numerous difficulties which such an undertaking 
affords by Messrs. Arthur Stanley Pease and John 
B. Titchener, and Major T. J. Camp, to whom we 
hereby tender our grateful acknowledgements, but 
we assume full responsibility for all errors. 

Because of certain obvious differences between 
Greek and modern tactics, the termini technica have 
been a special source of embarrassment, and we do 
not claim that our rendering of them gives, in every 
instance, anything more than an approximate 
equivalent. The precise technical significance of 
the modern terms employed should not everywhere 
be pressed, but their proper meaning will always, 
we trust, be clear from the context. 


CHARLES HENRY OLDFATHER 
WILLIAM ABBOTT OLDFATHER 


April 30, 1920 


229 


INTRODUCTION 


In a manuscript of the tenth or eleventh century, 
now at Florence, is found the Outline of Tactics by 
Asclepiodotus the Philosopher. The early date of 
this manuscript, which is the archetype of all the 
others which contain this work, can leave little doubt 
that the name is genuine. When we come, however, 
to inquire further about the author, we find no 
certain landmarks. Among the men of that name 
in antiquity he can be identified, with any degree 
of probability, only with the Asclepiodotus who is 
mentioned in five places by Seneca in his Naturales 
Quaestiones as a source for his illustrations, in two 
of which he is further described as a pupil (audztor) 
of Poseidonius. That he stood in such a relation to 
the great Stoic is all the more probable since Aelian 
in the beginning of his work on tactics says that 
Poseidonius also wrote on the same subject, giving the 
title of his work as Téxvy tax7iK7).1 We know from 

1 This work by Poseidonius must have been in the mind 
of Philodemus, his younger contemporary, when he raised 
the question in his IIepi tot kad’ “Ounpov ayabod Baciéws, 
p. 33 ed. Olivieri (1909), ef d€ 7G Gitocddw mpéwer TA TeEpl 
oTparevuatos evrpeT@s kal dv evKoculas ypade. Unfortunately 
the lines immediately following are so injured that we can- 
not tell what his answer was. But he proceeds to present 
the views of Homer on the same subject at some length, 


and can hardly, therefore, in principle have denied the 
propriety of a philosopher handling the question. 


230 


INTRODUCTION 


Seneca that on other subjects, such as earthquakes 
and volcanic eruptions, Asclepiodotus wrote along 
the same lines as his master, and he may very well 
have followed him into the field of military science. 
After Aeneas Tacticus, who belongs to the earlier 
group of military writers, Asclepiodotus, the earliest 
among the later tacticians, is the first whose work 
has come down to us. While the former was in all 
probability a general, or at least a man intimately 
acquainted with military affairs, in the case of the 
latter we find that the discussion of tactics has 
become the subject matter for lectures by philoso- 
phers and theorists. Nor is this without good reason. 
Aeneas wrote in the middle of the fourth century 
B.c., when the quarrels and battles of Greek states 
were still the most important political events of the 
Mediterranean world, and the Greek phalanx was 
of all battle arrays the most formidable ; Asclepio- 
dotus wrote when no Greek state possessed a military 
establishment of any power and the cumbersome 
phalanx had long since bowed before the mobile 
maniples of Italy. A spirited treatment, therefore, 
of the old Greek phalanx could hardly be expected. 
No treatment of the subject, indeed, would have been 
written at all had not the philosophers in laying 
claim to all branches of learning included tactics 
as well The tramp of the phalanx, that had once 


The sad experience of the Peripatetic Phormio, who under- 
took to instruct even Hannibal at the court of Antiochus 
de imperatoris officio et de omni re militari, is reported at 
length by Cicero, De oratore, ii. 75 f. 

1 This seems to have been true, in particular, of Poseidonius, 
who found the basis of all practical affairs, even of carpentry 
and bread-making, in philosophy. Cf. Seneca, Epist. 
Ixxxviii. 21 ff.; xc. 7 ff. 


231 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


reverberated among the hills around Thermopylae 
and Marathon, now echoed feebly in the halls of 
theorists and rhetoricians. 

A corresponding flagging of interest would be 
expected in the form of the discussion also, and in 
consequence the style of Asclepiodotus does not 
cause surprise. There is not a single illustration 
drawn either from history or from experience ; little 
effort is made to vary the almost inevitable monotony 
of a treatise on such a subject; the sentences are 
short and stiff, the language unimaginative ; not 
even an extra sentence is spent upon an introduction. 
The whole is a dry, but most orderly, exposition 
of the different branches of the army, their equip- 
ment, their number, their manceuvres, etc. So 
sketchy, indeed, is this little work of twelve chapters, 
that those who hold that Asclepiodotus merely 
edited the work of his master, think it the outline 
of the latter’s lectures which he amplified before 
his class; and the nature of the treatise to some 
extent bears out their contention: no _ historical 
material to confuse the pupil, everything very clear, 
the most important facts stressed, diagrams and 
figures employed. It would thus be very similar 
to the material dictated by the medieval professor 
to his students, and then lectured upon. In a sense 
it is a study only of antiquarian interest, as was 
freely confessed by Aelian in the introduction to 
his work, a funeral oration upon the past glory of 
the Grecian Phalanx, although, without the personal 
interest of the orator, it becomes rather the coroner’s 
stilted verdict on a tragic death. 

It would be a mistake, however, to think too lightly 
of the value of even these late theoretical works 


232 


INTRODUCTION 


upon phalanx tactics. They must consist in large 
part of quotations from early military handbooks, 
and these quotations are of the utmost historical 
value, even though they may be sometimes mis- 
understood, improperly elaborated, and occasionally 
treated in too theoretical a fashion. The materials 
for a reconstruction of Macedonian tactics are after 
all in a large measure preserved here, and it is the 
proper task of criticism to understand and interpret 
them. This attitude which Lammert takes (see 
Bibliography), in contrast with the occasionally 
almost supercilious comments of Kéchly and Riistow, 
is, without a doubt, the proper one to assume towards 
the later tacticians. 

In a papyrus of Herculaneum containing an index 
of Stoic philosophers there appears a _ certain 
Asclepiodotus of Nicaea, son of Asclepiodotus and 
pupil of Panaetius. Comparetti in his reconstruc- 
tion of the lines following reads ‘ who was also a 
pupil of Poseidonius.’1 The reading was attractive 
and was accepted by Gomperz, Diels, and Susemihl, 
notwithstanding considerable chronological  diffi- 
culties. For Panaetius died in 110-109 B.c., and the 
dates of birth and death for Poseidonius are given as 
135 (or 130)-51 (or 46) B.c., the earlier date allowing 
him to be about twenty-five years of age when his 
teacher died. If Asclepiodotus was the pupil of 
both Panaetius and Poseidonius, he would have had 
to be nearly as old as his second teacher, and survive 
him, writing his edition of his master’s Tactics after 
the latter’s death at the advanced age of eighty- 
four. That Asclepiodotus attained such an age is 
possible, but the attempted identification of the 


1 Rivista di filologia, 1875, iii. 543. 
233 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


pupil of Panaetius with the pupil of Poseidonius will 
probably have to be given up since Crénert has 
shown that Comparetti’s reconstruction of the text 
is impossible The lines, properly restored, merely 
inform us that the pupil of Panaetius ‘ also visited 
Rome, and so Zeller’s insistence upon an older 
philosopher Asclepiodotus, a pupil of Panaetius, 
and a younger, a pupil of Poseidonius, is probably 
justified. It is unlikely that Asclepiodotus was 
older than his teacher, nor could he have been 
much younger than twenty-five in 51 (or 46) B.c. 
when Poseidonius died, since a younger man would 
scarcely have won the distinction of being one of 
the three pupils of Poseidonius and have been able 
to continue his master’s work. The date of his 
birth, therefore, must fall somewhere in the period 
135 (or 130)-76 (or 71) B.c.? 


1 Sitzb. d. k. preuss. Ak. d. Wiss., 1904, 480. 

* It is not, indeed, impossible for Asclepiodotus to have 
been a pupil of Panaetius and Posidonius and to have 
survived the latter, for this was the relation of Philippus of 
Opus to Socrates and Plato, and Plato lived to be at least 
eighty years of age. Philippus was Lwxpdrovs kai avrov 
II\atwvos axoverns (Suidas), and survived Plato, editing 
his Laws and adding thereto his own Epinomis (Philologus, — 
1908, Ixvii. pp. 452 ff.). The determining reasons, however, 
for rejecting the identity of those Asclepiodoti are that 
Asclepiodotus the pupil of Panaetius being listed immediately 
after one who died during his master’s lifetime, is presum- 
ably to be reckoned among the older pupils and not the 
very youngest (so Crénert); and that in the very brief 
remarks characterizing the several pupils, surely if this 
Asclepiodotus had been the pupil also of Poseidonius and 
edited certain works of his, that circumstance would much 
more naturally have been selected for purposes of 
characterization than the trivial fact that he also visited 
Rome. 


234 














INTRODUCTION 


Our knowledge, then, of Asclepiodotus, the author 
of the present work, is limited to the five times 
Seneca mentions him, and to any inferences we may 
draw from his Tactics. From the latter we may 
well conclude that he was not a military man, nor 
even greatly interested in military matters, for a 


real enthusiasm for one’s subject cannot be con- 


sistently repressed into such a cold and methodical 


style; rather he was a chair-strategist, as Kéchly 


and Riistow denominate him, although not all their 
strictures are just. He was rightly termed ‘the 


philosopher,’ for certain sections of his work can 
_ scarcely be brought down from the heaven of pure 
theory. So, for instance, his repetition of the 
advice of ‘most tacticians’ that the phalanx 
consist of 16,384 men, since this number is evenly 
divisible by two down to unity; his strong 


dependence upon mathematical forms and propor- 


_ tions, so that one feels that he is dealing more with 
_ numbers than with men, his pedantic divisions of the 


chariots and elephants,! or his elaborations upon the 
array of an army in march, some of which are 
obviously impracticable and of use only on the 
drill-ground.? 

From the citations in Seneca it appears that he 
continued the meteorological studies of his teacher. 
Of the five references, three have to do with 
phenomena attendant on earthquakes and volcanic 
eruptions,®? one with the nature of winds,’ and the 
last with the character of subterranean water. 
All these subjects fall quite properly under the 


t Chi: viii: 10: “7(Cheaxt. 1¢ 
3 Seneca, Quaest. nat. ii. 26. 6; 30.13 vi. 22. 2. 
2 lbid. Viele. 5 Ibid. v. 15. 1. 


to 
oo 
Nn 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


title of his work as given by Seneca, Causes of natural 
Phenomena. 

The work of Asclepiodotus was drawn upon by 
the tactician Aelian, who wrote in the time of the 
Emperor Trajan, to whom he dedicated his dis- 
cussion of tactics. In connexion with this use by 
Aelian arises a most interesting question. In his 
opening chapter, Aelian mentions by name several 
writers, who had published works in more recent 
times on tactics, such as Aeneas, Cineas, Pyrrhus 
of Epirus and his son Alexander, Clearchus, Posei- 
donius, and others, and acknowledges his indebted- 
ness to many whom he does not name. But he 
makes no mention of Asclepiodotus who was certainly 
his main source. K. K. Miiller gives two possible 
explanations for his failure to acknowledge such a 
debt of obligation.2 Aelian may include Asclepio- 
dotus under the other writers whom he has read, and 
intentionally fails, perhaps, to mention his name in 
order that attention may not be called to the extent 
of his obligation. Or Asclepiodotus bore a very 
unusual relation to the work which we have now 
under his name, a relation well known in antiquity, — 
but obscured in the course of centuries. Because 
Seneca speaks of Asclepiodotus as if he were the 
medium through which the teachings of Poseidonius 
had come to him, and because of parallel instances, 
Miiller feels that Asclepiodotus merely transmitted 
the work of Poseidonius on tactics, for the knowledge 
of which Aelian is our only source. Then, as time 


1 Ibid. vi. 17. 3... id apud Asclepiodotum invenies, 
auditorem Posidonii, in his ipsis Quaestionum naturalium 
Causis. 

* Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyklop. ii. 1638. 


236 


INTRODUCTION 


passed, the relations of the master and of his pupil 
to this work became increasingly obscure and some 
attributed it to Poseidonius, others to Asclepiodotus. 
The manuscript preserved to us would thus have 
‘come from the latter group, or else part of the 
original subscription has been lost. 

_ The question how closely Asclepiodotus followed 
the lost work of Poseidonius must remain unanswered. 
The Tactics have the appearance as much of an 
abridgement of a larger work as of an outline for 
lectures—an abridgement in which the author re- 
solved to strike out everything but the cold facts 
_and succeeded only too well. Neither in this subject 
nor in his work on meteorology are the titles of the 
books of Asclepiodotus the same as those of his 
‘master's, and, as he is quoted in Seneca, there is 
something to be said for the view that he may have 
departed at times perhaps widely from the tradition 
of his teacher. 

The value of the work depends, of course, upon the 
use and the nature of its sources. The fact that 
Poseidonius continued in his history the writings of 
Polybius, makes it highly probable that the latter’s 
work on tactics was drawn upon, and other writers 
‘on tactics, mentioned by Aelian, may well have been 
put under contribution. Bui the fact that all these 
jearlier treatises have disappeared, coupled with the 
‘cursory nature of the work itself, precludes any 
answer to this most important question. It must be 
borne in mind, however, that probably Asclepiodotus, 
and certainly his master Poseidonius, were not 
intimately acquainted with the arts of war, and that 
at all times, and perhaps especially in the Hellenistic 


1 Cf. E. Oder, Philologus, Supplb. vii., 1899, 302 f. 
237 














ASCLEPIODOTUS 


period, works of this nature contained much material 
which was confined to drill-grounds and never in- 
tended for actual employment upon the battle-field.1 


BrIBLIoGRAPHY 


A. Bauer: Die griechischen Kriegsaltertiimer, in Miiller’s 
Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, iv. 
1 (2nd ed.), 279 f., 287, 422, 425, 450. 

W. Capelle: Der Physiker Arrian und Poseidonios, 
Hermes, 1905, xl. 6383 f. 

W. Capelle: Zur Geschichte der meteorologischen Lit- 
teratur, Hermes, 1913, xlviii. 344 f. 

W. Christ: Griechische Literaturgeschichte, in Miiller’s 
Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, vii. 
2 (6th ed. by Schmid and Stihlin), 354, 7. 

D. Comparetti: Papiro ercolanese inedito, Rivista di 
filologia, 1875, iii. 548. 

W. Cronert: Eine attische Stoikerinschrift, Sitzb. der 
k. preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1904, 480. 

H. Delbriick: Geschichte der Kriegskunst im Rahmen der 
politischen Geschichte, Berlin, 1901, ii. 1, 200. 

H. Delbriick : Die Perserkriege und die Burgunderkriege, 
Berlin, 1887, 305 ff. 

H. Delbriick : Die Manipularlegion und die Schlacht bei 
Cannae, Hermes, 1886, xxi. 64-90, esp. 83 ff. 

H. Diels : Doxographi Graeci, Berlin, 1879, 19 and 225. 

R. Forster: Studien zu den griechischen Taktikern, 
Hermes, 1877, xii. 431 f. 

F. Haase: Ueber die griechischen und __lateinischen 


1 The vexed question of the precise relations of Aelian 
and Arrian to one another and to Asclepiodotus belongs 
properly in a discussion of the later authors. Both drew _ 
largely from Asclepiodotus. 


238 








INTRODUCTION 


Kriegsschriftsteller, Neue Jahrbiicher fiir Philologie, 
1835, xiv. 115 ff. 

F. Haase: De militarium Scriptorum Graecorum et 
Latinorum omnium Editione instituenda, Berolini, 
1847, 8, 27 ff., 32 ff. 

Max Jahns: Handbuch einer Geschichte des Kriegswesens, 
etc., Technischer Teil, Leipzig, 1880, 117 ff. 

Max Jahns: Geschichte der Kriegswissenschaften vor- 
nehmlich in Deutschland, Miinchen und Leipzig, 
1880; -4-.5 £55.67. £. 3, 130d. 

H. Kochly: De Libris tacticis, qui Arriani et Aeliani 
feruntur, Supplementum, Turici, 1852, 33 ff. 

H. Kochly : De Scriptorum militarium Graecorum Codice 
Bernensi, Diss. Turici, 1854, especially 27. 

H. Kochly und W. Riistow: Griechische Kriegsschrift- 
steller, Leipzig, 1855; i. Introduction, Asclepiodotus, 
Greek text and translation; ii. Introduction and 
critical notes. 

E. Lammert: Polybios und die romische Taktik, Program 
des k6niglichen Gymnasiums zur Leipzig, 1889, 
11 ff., especially 13. 

Angelo Mai: Spicilegium Romanum, tomus iv., Romae, 
1840. Pages 577-81 contain a reproduction of the 
first two chapters of the Laurentian ms. as copied 
by Leo Allatius. 

K. K. Miiller: Article “ Asklepiodotos,” Pauly-Wissowa 
Realencyclop. ii. col. 1637-1641. 

K. K. Miiller: Festschrift fiir L. Urlichs, Wiirzburg, 1880, 
106 f. 

K.K. Miller: Festgabe zur dritten Sacularfeier der Julius- 
Maximilians - Universitat zu Wirzburg, Wiirzburg, 
1887, 30 f. 

E. Oder: Quellensucher im Altertum, Philologus, Supple- 
mentband, 1899, vii. 290 ff. 

F. Osann: Der Taktiker Asklepiodot, Zeitschrift fiir die 
Altertumswissenschaft, 1853, xi. 311 ff. 

W. Riistow und H. Kochly: Geschichte des griechischen 
Kriegswesens von der 4ltesten Zeit bis auf Pyrrhos, 
Aarau, 1852. 


239 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


R. Schneider : Legion und Phalanx, Berlin, 1893, 70 ff. 

S. Sudhaus: Aetna, Leipzig, 1898, 61 f. 

Franz Susemihl: Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur in 
der Alexandrinerzeit, Leipzig, 1892, ii. 144, 244 f. 

EK. Zeller : Die Philosophie der Griechen in ihrer geschicht- 
lichen Entwicklung, 3rd ed., 1880, i. 1, 569, 585 ; 
4th ed., 1909, iii. 590. 

For some other references of minor importance see the 
detailed list in K. K. Miiller’s learned and thorough article 

* Asklepiodotos,’ given above. 


EDITION AND MANUSCRIPTS 


The only edition of Asclepiodotus is that by H. 
Kéchly and W. Riistow, Leipzig, 1855 (see Biblio- 
graphy). It was based upon collations of three 
Paris mss., but Kéchly had no knowledge of the 
Florentine ms., from which they are descended, 
Laurentianus LV 4, a parchment codex of the tenth 
or eleventh century. The present text represents, 
therefore, a new recension made from a collation 
of the text of the Florentine ms. and copies of its 
diagrams, prepared for this purpose by the ac- 
complished scholar Professor Dr. Enrico Rostagno of 
the Bibliotheca Mediceo-Laurenziana at Florence, 
to whom we take this occasion to express publicly 
our great indebtedness. For a brief discussion of 
the archetype and its descendants, together with 
some remarks upon the text of Asclepiodotus, 
those who seek further information may be referred 
to an article by W. A. Oldfather in The Amer. 
Journ. of Philol., 1920, xli. 127 ff. 

Suffice it to say here that the variant readings in 


24.0 


INTRODUCTION 


the descendants have independent value only as 
emendations, those in the ms. copied by Salmasius 
being, of course, the most important in this respect. 
Mere errors and omissions are, therefore, not 
recorded. Our knowledge of the first three (A, B, C) 
of these mss. we owe to the apparatus criticus in 
Kéchly and Riistow, of the fourth (V) to Mai’s 
reprint which, although employed by Kéchly and 
Riistow, was newly collated for this edition, and of 
the last three to specimen photographs of a few 
folios from the beginning of each (covering the 
whole of Chapters i, iv-vi, and parts of ii, iii, 
and vii), these being sufficient to determine the 
fact that they are practically worthless. 


SyMBOLS 


F =Cod. Laurentianus LV, 4. s. x-x1. 

A =Cod. Parisinus 2522.  s. xv. 

B=Cod. Parisinus 2435.  s. xvI. 

C=Cod. Parisinus 2528. s. xvir. This ms. was 
copied by Salmasius. 

D=Cod. Parisinus 2447.  s. xvi. 

EK=Cod. Parisinus Suppl. Gr. s. xvi. This ms. 
was copied by P. D. Huet at Stockholm 
in 1642. 

V=Copy of the Laurentian ms. by Leo Allatius, 
in the Bibliotheca Vallicellana at Rome. 
Chapters i and ii were printed from this 
ms. by Angelo Mai, Sprczlegium Romanum, 
vol. iv (see Bibliography). 


R Q41 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


The text of Asclepiodotus may be not infrequently 
controlled by the works on tactics which are current 
under the names of Arrian and Aelian. Whether 
they derive in part directly from Asclepiodotus, or 
merely employ in large measure the same sources, 
has not been decided as yet, but in any event they 
frequently discuss the same topics in very much 
the same fashion, and they throw light accordingly 
upon a number of corrupt or lacunose passages. 

In the Lexicon militare! also we possess an im- — 
portant subsedium for determining the text. This — 
work of uncertain date, but anterior to the Byzantine 
period, was drawn in very large part direct from 
Asclepiodotus, Arrian, and Aelian, numerous passages 
from whem it repeats verbatim, and others with only 
slight variations. Its quotations from Asclepiodotus, 
therefore, in so far as they have not themselves 
become garbled,* give the text as it stood several 
centuries before the time of F. In a score of cases 
emendations of F supported by the Lex. mil. (so — 
designated in the notes) have been introduced into — 
the present edition, while in two other instances 
the reading in the Lez. mil., as being more easy and 
natural, may possibly be correct. 

In the notes to the translation we have given 
references to the treatment of the same general 
topic in Aelian’s Tactics. Since, in the edition of 


1 Best edited by Kéchly and Riistow, Griech. Kriegs- 
schriftsteller, ii. 2. Leipzig, 1855, 217 ff. It appears 
ordinarily as an appendix to the lexicon of Suidas. For a 
discussion of the sources and the text-critical value of the 
work see a note by W. A. Oldfather and J. B. Titchener in 
Class. Philol., 1921, xvi, 74-76. 

2 Thus it gives ékraro like F, alongside of éxraxro: in 
§ 14 (=Ascl. ii. 9). 

242 





INTRODUCTION 


Kéchly and Riistow, Arrian’s T'actics have the same 
chapter and paragraph enumeration as Aelian’s, 
we have not thought it necessary to add Arrian’s 
name. 


Tue D1acRams 


A notable feature of the great Florentine ms. is 
_its series of diagrams which go back to Asclepiodotus 
himself, as is clear from the way in which mention 
is made of them in the body of the text. These 
have been reproduced in this edition from tracings 
prepared by Dr. E. Rostagno. In a few instances 
where the inscriptions in F have faded since the 
copies A and B were made, the inscriptions in these 
latter mss. have been given in the notes. As 
might be expected in a thousand years or more of 
copying, a number of demonstrable errors have 
crept into the diagrams, so that in nearly every 
instance it has been found necessary to supplement 
the originals in the text with the reconstructed 
figures of Kéchly and Riistow in the notes. Even 
though frequently in one respect or another these 
diagrams in the ms. are erroneous, it seems desirable 
to retain them as an indication of the approximate 
appearance of the work as it left the hand of the 
author, of the degree to which they have been 
modified in copying, and of the evidence upon which 
the revised figures were constructed. 


243 


244: 


ASKAHIIOAOTOTY 
DIAOLOSOT 
TAKTIKA KE@AAATA 


Ilepi tHs parayywv diagopas. 

Ilepi tov apiOuot Kai THs dvouacias THY mepOv THS Padayyos 
TOV OTNITOY. 

Tlepi duardgéews trav avdp@yv THs Te Kal’ OAnv THY Padayya 
Kal THS KATH Wép7. 

Ilepi dvactnuatwy avror. 

Ilepi tOv barwv THs TE TUUmeTplas Kal Tov eidous. 

Ilepi 77s Tay Wur@v Te Kal wedTaoTav Padayyos Kal Tis 
TOV mepav Takews TE Kal dvomacias. 

Ilepit rhs T&v imméwy Padayyos Kal THY Ovo“aciGy THs TE 
OAns Kal THY pEpav, 

Tlepi apuarwr. 

Ilepi EXepavTwr. 

Ilepl trav Kown? Kata Thy Kivnow cvopmacier. 

Ilept trav €v rats mopeiats oxnmaticuav TOv KaTa GuUP- 
TAYUATO. 

Ilept ray Kata Thy Kivnow atrav mpooctayuaTwv. 


Gaal 2 KOINH F. 








CHAPTER HEADINGS OF THE TACTICS 
OF ASCLEPIODOTUS THE PHILOSOPHER 


. The different Branches of the Army. 
. The Strength and the Names of the Subdivisions of 


the Hoplite-Phalanx. 


. The Disposition of the Men both in the entire Army 


and in its Subdivisions. 


. The Intervals between the Soldiers. 
. The appropriate Size and Character of the Arms. 
. The Phalanx of the light Infantry and of the Tar- 


geteers, and the Disposition and Names of its 
Subdivisions. 


. The Phalanx of the Cavalry, and the Names of the 


whole Body as well as of its Subdivisions. 


. Chariots. 

. Elephants. 

. The Terms in common Use for military Evolutions. 

. The various Arrangements of the Divisions of the 


Army on the March. 


. The Commands used in military Evolutions. 


TEXNH TAKTIKH 
I. Ilepi tHs daddyywv dvadopas 


Tis Tedelas TapacKeuts mpos m7oepLov Ourrijs 
ovons, YEepoaias Te Kal VaUTUKAS, TEpl THS Xepoatas 
Ta. vov AeKréov. TavTNS TOWUV 70 be €OTL 
HaXYwov, TO 6 eis THY TOUTOU xpetay danpeTooy, 
olov taTpav Kal oKEvopopwy Kal TOV Opotonv. 

Tod dé paxiov TO [Lev eo! meCov, TO 8 OXn- 
pearuKoy: TO pev yap Tool xpHTar mpos THV 
paxnv, TO dS emi TWos oxetrat. 

2 Tod dé b7 welot To wey €otw orditGv ctornya, 
TO O€ meATAaGTaY, TO b€ THY Karovperwv WAdv. 
TO [Lev Ovv Trav oT7AuTay are eyytlev paydpevov 
Baputarn KEXPNTAL oKevfpj—daomior TE yap jeyt- 
OTaLS Kal Oespage Kal Tats KynptoL oKémeTal—kKal 
ddpact pakpots Kata Tov pynOnodpuevov Maxeddviov . 
TpOTOV* TO de TOV pray TOUTOLS dar” évavTias 
KovpoTaTn KEexXpnTaL TH oKeuy dua TO mdppwlev 
BaMew, oUTE mpoxynpiow OUTE Ouspage KEKOopN- 
pévov, akovtiows bé€ Kal odevddvais Kal dAws Tots 


: 
1 koopovmevov V (Leo Allatius). 





1 For this use of ¢dd\ayé as applying to any kind of 
military fighting foree (not recorded in the lexica) see 
below, ch. i. 4. 


246 





AC RIES 
I. The different Branches of the Army + 


Wuereas the complete equipment for warfare is of 
two kinds, namely land and naval forces, we are now 
to speak of the land force. This, then, consists on 
the one hand of the fighting men, and on the other 
of those who serve their needs, as, for example, 
surgeons, baggage-carriers, and the like. 

Of the fighting men, some are infantry, the others 
mounted ; for some fight on foot, the others on their 
mounts. 

The infantry is divided into the corps of hoplites, 
the corps of targeteers, and the corps of so-called 


| light infantry (pszloz). Now the corps of hoplites, 


since it fights at close quarters, uses very heavy equip- 
ment—for the men are protected by shields of the 
largest size, cuirasses, and greaves—and long spears 
of the type which will here be called ‘ Macedonian.’ 
The corps of the light infantry on the contrary 
uses the lightest equipment because it shoots from 
a distance, and is provided with neither greaves nor 
cuirasses, but with javelins and slings, and in general 


Asclep. i. 1=Ael. ii. 1-3 references to Aelian below 
(=Arrian ii. 1-3 in Kéchly are understood to include 
and Riistow’s parallel Arrian as well). 
column edition, so that Asclep. i. 2=Ael. ii. 7-9. 


247 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


3 5 , , , 1 , 

e€ amooTnpatos Aeyouévois To€evpacw. TovTwv 
O ev peow TWS €OTL 70 meAraoTuKov ovornpLa.” 
ny TE yap TEATN pLuKpa Tis eoTW GaomLdicKn Kal 
Kovgy, TA Te OOpata TOAD THY OTrALTOV peyeber 
AevTropeva. 

Kara 7a atta 67 Kal THs OxnwaTLKAS Suvdpews 
Tpets eto. dvapopat’ 7 ev yap e€oTw tmmKy, 7 
\ > ¢ / > A ¢€ / \ > >? 
de Ob apuatwy emtedcirar, 7» Tpitn 5é dv éAe- 

/ > > ¢ / / \ > / 
pavrwv aAr apyarav TE Tépr Kal edepavTo 
ws ovK evpua@v els paxny O Adyos els voTEpov 

e 
dvoBeBAnote Thv Oe” iamucgy ws Today KaL 
Tapa moAhots Katpots Xpyowtepay® Tats pays 
yA 
vov dveAodpev: E07! yap auras €lOn Tpla, TO bev 
TO’ eyyvbev [ax opLevov, TO O€ moppwber, TO O€ 

/ 
pecov. Kab TO peev eyyubev opotws Baputarn 
KEXPNTAL i ete ToUs Te I inmous Kal TOUS avOpas 
Tmavtaxobev Owpakt mepioKkémov,® prakpots pevrou" 

Wuevovy Kal avTO Tots ddpacw, bu°° 6 Kal dopa- 
a < ate fi 
Topopov TodvTo Kat EvoTopdpoy mpooayopeveTat, 
7 Kat® Oupeopopov, OT av Kat aomidas Eviot Pop@or 
Tapapnkers Ola TO ouvvemioKeTecVar® Kal Tov 
immov. TO de TroppwHev paxdouevoy To€oTav TE 

\ ~ / ‘7 \ \ ~ / 
Kat LKv0adv éyeTar: pécov bé TO THV Kadovpe- 
vav akpopoAoTa@v, ot 67 Tots aKpols éemiKoww- 

M opevdovas Kal Tokevpace Kal Ows Bas Tols €€ GMOOTHMATOS 
Aeyouevors K. and R. ? yap C (Salmasius). 

3 K. and R.: oddols cai Xpnoipws épav F, 

+ K. and R.: wév re F: pwévto. ABCV. 
pev K. and R.: 6¢ ABC. 
mepicxémwy corrected to -érov F (first hand probably). 
pev KF: 6€ K. and R. 8 Supplied by Oldfather. 
F has xat rotdro xai in the line above and 7 @upatopépor 
here. K. and R. saw that the xai belongs after 7. 

10 cuverioxémresGar F: corrected in V (Leo Allatius). 


248 


Io oO 


ie) 


i tr i i 





TACTICS, 1. 2—3 


with those missiles which we call ‘long-distance 
missiles.’ Thecorps of the targeteers stands inasense 
between these two, for the targe (pelte) is a kind of 
small, light shield, and their spears are much shorter 
than those of the hoplites. 

In the same way there are three branches of the 
mounted force: the first is cavalry, the second is 
furnished with chariots, and the third with elephants ; 
but let the consideration of chariots and elephants, 
since they are not naturally well adapted for fighting 
purposes, be deferred to a later time, and we shall 
now discuss the cavalry, since it is much employed and 
upon many occasions more useful in battles. There 
are, then, three branches of the cavalry service: the 
first which fights at close quarters, the second which 
fights at a distance, and the third which is inter- 
mediate. Now the cavalry which fights at close 
quarters uses, similarly,! a very heavy equipment, 
fully protecting both horses and men with defensive 
armour, and employing, like the hoplites, long spears, 
for which reason this arm of the service is also called 
the spear-bearing and the lance-bearing cavalry, 
or even the shield-bearing cavalry, when it, some- 
times, carries unusually long ? shields for the purpose 
of protecting the mount as well as the rider. The 
branch which fights at long range is called both 
the archer-cavalry and the Scythian cavalry; and 
the intermediate variety, the skirmishers. These 
latter are posted on the flanks and do their fighting, 

1 That is, like the heavy-armed infantry. 

2 For dois used of long shields, as here, compare 
Xenophon, Anab. i. 8. 9, who says that the Egyptian 
yeppopopo. were equipped with modnpect EvNivats doricw (ef. 
ibid. ii. 1. 6). 

Asclep. i. 3=<Ael. ii. 11-13. 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


voovres ol pev TOEOLS, ot de dicovrtous pedxovra, 
Kat TH aAAy* Xpopevor oKEUH of pev ovTws, ot 
d€ eKelvens: av pe Evlol” LeTA THY GKOVTLOW 
eyyvbev [LaYovTaL, OUs Ldiws eAadpods ovop.alovaw: 
or av dé mroppwbev aKovTilwor p.ovov, Tapartivovs. 

Eioly otv at madcar tTav ta€ewv Siadopat aide,® 
@v éexaotn ddday& mpocayopeverar mepiexovoa 
ovoThpata KaTa apiOuov emirnderov Kal HyEepovas 
adr ay mpos TO padiws movety TO TrapaKeAcvdpeva, 
Tpos THV epi} iepov yupvaclay TE Kal aoKnow Tijs 
mopetas Kat oTparomedevoews Kal TapaTaéews Kal 
mpos Tovs em adAnOeias aydvas. 


II. [epi pepav THIS parayyos Tav oTATaOV THs 


TE OVOLLAGLAS QUTOV Kal TOU apiOob 


’AvayKatov d€ mparov thy dddayya Katadoyioar: 
tobto b€ éort KaTapepioa eis Adyous. 6 dé Adyxos 
éoTl dprBjios avop@v ets oUppLEeT pa. Svarpav THY 
padayya: ovppeTpa oé eoTe Ta TE weva pepyn, @ 
pendev Tay darayya mpos THY payny Avpaiveras® 
du 6 Tov apiOuov tod Adyov of péev oKTW, ot Sé 


1 @\dyn (and similarly 77 and cxrevf) F: aitG V (Leo 
Allatius) K. and R. : 2 éno. uev K. and R. 
3 Added by K. and R.: @ D. 
4 C(Salmasius): éo71 Oéueva ra Tie weva Ta wépn undev F: éore 
Oéueva TA méon & wndév V (Leo Allatius). 
> \vuaivytra F. 





1 There seems to be no trace in actual practice of this 
threefold division in the cavalry. The author seems especi- 
ally fond of such groupings by three, even to the point, 
one is inclined to suspect, of inventing some. Compare x. 15 
and xi. This seems to be a trace of earlier rhetorical training. 

2 i.e., mutually interchangeable. 

3 If the text be sound, and it will be noted that it depends 


250 





TACTICS | #'3 — 1271 


some with bows and some with javelins, the former 
using the general equipment of the light cavalry, the 
others that of the heavy cavalry. Of this intermediate 
variety some, who in a narrower sense are called the 
light cavalry, after hurling their javelins fight at 
close quarters, but when they merely hurl their 
javelins from a distance, they are called Tarentine 
eavalry.t 

These, then, are all the different military forces, 
each one of which is called a phalanx and 
includes divisions of a suitable size and _ officers 
sufficient in number to put-orders into effect 
easily, both in daily exercises and in service upon 
the march, in camp, in battle formation, and in 


actual fighting. 


Il. The Subdivisions of the Phalanx of Hoplites, their 
Names and their Strength 


It is necessary, first of all, to divide the 
phalanx, that is, to break it up into files. Now 
a file is a number of men dividing the phalanx 
into symmetrical” units, and by ‘symmetrical ’ 
I mean those which do not interfere with the 
fighting efficiency of the phalanx.’ Accordingly 
some have formed the file of eight men, others of 
in part upon an emendation by Salmasius, the definition of 
a file is somewhat unsatisfactory. The file, the smallest 
unit of the phalanx, corresponds in formation to the file in 
modern armies, except that it was normally of eight to sixteen 
men, but in actual use to the squad, being the basic tactical 
unit. The second part of the sentence seems to suggest 
that any scheme of formation for purposes of marching or 
manoeuvring is to be subordinated to the fighting efficiency 
of the phalanx as a unit. 

Asclep. i. 4=Ael. iii. 3. Asclep. ii. 1= Ael. iv. 1-3. 


251 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


deka, ot b€ dvoKaideka avdp@v TeTOjKaoW, ETEpoL 
d€ efxaidera mpos TO CULMETPOS | exew TH 
parayya els TE TO OuTAacudoa mpos* Tas pnbn- 
copevas xpetas emt Ovo Kal TpidKovra. avopas 
Kal €lS TO ovvarpetobar els TpLov em avopas 
OKTwW* ovdevV yap eumodov® EéoTar Tots Ome 
paxopnevors yrots akovTilovaw 7 odevdovHow 7 
Kat ToEevovew:* vrephioovTa: yap TO THs PaAayyos 
Babos. 

"Exadctro b€ 6 Adxyos mddAar Kal oriyos Kal 
ouveoria® Kal dexavia,® Kal o pev dpioros Kat 
YE Ov TOU oTLyoU oxayss, 6 0 O€ EaxyaTos ovpayos: 
VOTEpOV d€ peraray Gets 0 orixos Suapdpous Eaxev 
TOV LEep@v eTVU PLAS TO TE yap TpLov TpptAoxvov 
wvepnacTa® Kat Syowpia, TO Mev WS POS TO TOV 

\ b) ~ ~ \ \ e \ \ ~ 
dexac€ dvdpav 7AnOos, TO 0€ WS mpos TO TaV 
dwdeKa, kat 0 TYE LOV Tprhoxirns kal SuyLoupi7ns, 
Kal TO TéTApTOV EvwMpoTia Kal evwWyoTapXNsS Oo 
NYVOULEVOS. 

€ Le , ciemty2 \ , 7 
<“O b€ Hyovpevos WVdpacTAL KAL TPWTOOTATYS >, 
emuoTtaTys O€ O emdpevos, wate Kal’ oAov® Tov 
otixyov eivat mp@tov® mpwroorarny,” eita emora- 

1 K. and R. (after C?): ris Padavyyoo F. 

2 dirdacidcar K. and R.: mpds C (Salmasius): durdaova Tas 
F: durdaciova (?) pds C (Salmasius). 

3 yap eutodov F: 6é éumodoy K. and R. 

+ AC (Salmasius): curvwuerca FB (0 in marg.): cvvwuoriad 
V (Leo Allatius): évwuoria K. and R. 


5 dexava F. 

6 gvduacro K. and R. 

7 Supplied by K. and R. to fill the evident lacuna. 
8 K. and R. (note): xadéXov F. 

9 Added by K. and R. (note). 

10 rpwrooratay K. and R, (text). 


252 


TACTICS, 11. 1-3 


ten, others. of twelve, and yet others of sixteen 
men, so that the phalanx will be symmetrical both 
for doubling the depth of its units, in circumstances 
to be described later, so that it may consist of thirty- 
two men, and also for reducing it by one-half, z.e., to 
eight men; for thus it will not interfere with the 
light infantry who fight in the rear, since, as they 
use javelins, slings, or also bows, they will be able 
to shoot their missiles over a phalanx of this 
depth. 

Now the file was formerly called a row, a 
synomoty, and a decury, and the best man and the 
leader of the row was called the file-leader (lochagos), 
while the last man was called the file-closer (owragos). 
But when later on the row was reorganized its parts 
received different names; for the half is now called 
the half-file (hemilochion), or the double quarter 
(dimoiria), the former term being used for a file of 
sixteen men, the latter for one of twelve, and the 
leader is now called the half-file-leader (hem- 
lochites) and the double-quarter-leader (dzmozrites), 
and the quarter is called an enomoty and its leader 
an enomotarch. 

[The leading man has been given the name of 
the front-rank-man (protostates)|, while the one who 
follows him is called the rear-rank-man (epvstates), 
so that in the whole file there comes first a front- 
rank-man, then a rear-rank-man, then successively 


1 In the classical period down to the innovations of 
Epaminondas the battle-line of the Greeks was usually 
eight men deep, the Lacedaemonians only extending this 
at times to twelve men. Our author’s ideal for the depth 
of the perfect phalanx is sixteen men. 


Asclep. it 2—Aelsyv. 1-2. Asclep. it. 3=Ael. v. 4. 
253 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


TV,” €t0? efi TpwrooTarny, eira emaTarny, KaL 
TOUTO Tap. eva Mexpls ovpayod, Kal’ a a aroma 


mpwrToararns Aoxayés TApaoTaTat 
emoTarns TApacTaTat 
TPWTOOTATNS TApaoTarat 
ETLOTATNS TApAcTaTat 
TpWTooTaTys™ TApAoTaTat 
SHES ovpayos neaaoreee 


4 “Or av de Aoxep Aoxos maparebh, wore Aoxayov 
Aoxay@ Kal ovpayov ovpay@ Kat Tovs peerago 
Tots opolvyous mapiotacBar, ovddoxvop0s oTau 
TO ToLobTov, ot de opdolvyo® tav AOywWY TPwTO- 

/ v 3 ie 8 \ \ / 4, 2 
oTaTat W emloTaTat Ova TO TapadAnAovs* toracbat 
TAPAoTaTat KeKAnoovTa.. 

5 ‘O o€ € TmavT OV ovMoxtajLos paray§, As? TO 
TaV Aoyayav' tdayya péTwrov Kal pAKOS Kal 
TpOGWTTOV Kal OTOMA Kal TapaTagéis Kal TpwToOAOXIAa 
KaAetrar Kal mp@tov Cuyov: 0 b€ KaTomw KeEljmevos 
pea" Tobrov otiyos TOV emoTaT av Kara [k7KOS 
THS padayyos SevTEpov Cuyov, Kal 6 ToUT@ mapan- 
Anos on avTov Tpirov, Kal TeTapTOV core! TO 70 
ToOrov" Cuyov Kal TE UTTOV ws avTws” Kal EKTOV 
Kal eSijs [EX PLS ovpayou: Kowas dé may TO pera 
TO peTwTrov THS parayyos Babos emrovopdlerau 
Kat 0 amo Aoyayod ém otpayov oatiyos KaTa 
Baéos. 

1 éristarév K. and R. (text). 2 mpwrocrarye F. 
> Lex. mil. 8, quoting this passage. K. and R.: decuogevya F. 
4 rap addjros Lex. mil. K. and R. 
5 «at K. and R. 6 K. and R.: Adéxwv F. 
7K. and R. (F2): sapt ABCV. 
8 ei tt B: eiot A: etn V. 
9 rod Tov F. 10 dutwo F. 


254 


PACRICS 1.5.5 


a front-rank-man and a rear-rank-man, and so on, 
one after the other, until one reaches the file-closer, 
according to the following diagram : 


Front-rank-man (= file-leader) comrades-in-rank 


Rear-rank-man comrades-in-rank 
Front-rank-man comrades-in-rank 
Rear-rank-man comrades-in-rank 
Front-rank-man comrades-in-rank 


Rear-rank-man (=file-closer) comrades-in-rank 


Now when one file is placed beside another, so 
that file-leader stands beside file-leader, file-closer 
beside file-closer, and the men in between beside 
their comrades-in-rank, such an arrangement will 
be a formation by file (syllochismos), and the men 
of the files forming the same rank, front-rank-men, 
and rear-rank-men, will be called comrades-in-rank 
because they stand side by side. 

The assembly (syllochismos) of all the files consti- 
tutes a phalanx, in which the rank of the file-leaders 
is called the front (metopon), the length (mekos), the 
face (prosopon), the mouth (stoma), the marshalling 
(paratazis), the head of the files (protolochia), and the 
first line (proton zygon); and the rank behind this 
consisting of rear-rank-men running the length of 
the phalanx, is the second line, and the rank parallel 
and behind this the third line, and the line behind 
this is the fourth, and similarly the fifth and the 
sixth and so on down to the file-closer ; but taken 
all together everything behind the front of the 
phalanx is called its depth, and the file, from file- 
leader to file-closer, is the file in depth. 


Asclep. ii. 4=Ael. vi. Asclep. ii. 5= Ael. vii. 1-3. 
255 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


SS Spool si sjsjoyspsayoyo™ 
FE thod Pian (ocd cd se fac Isaac cs ee 
SISISISISISISISIS 6 | 6 ys 
slelelelslelslelelelel lene 


6 Kat oe jeev TOUTW en evletas Ketpevou" OTOLYELW 
A€yovtat, ot d€ TH® KaTA pHKOS orixy Cuyewv: 
dvatpeDetons de Tis darayyos dixa KaTQ TO pAjKos 
TO pev Tpeov Kepas TpooayopeveTat defvov TE Kal 
Aavov, avTn dé 7) dixoTomia dudadrds TE Kal apapos. 

‘Omcdaov d€ det TO 7AR Gos eivau Tis parayyos 
ovK evAoyov Suopilew: mpos yap nv EKaOTOS EXEL 
TAPAcKevIY TOU mx Gous Kat Tov apiOpov S.opiaTeoy, 
adh eTLTIOELOY EKGOTOTE elvan del mpos ToUs 
peTaoxnpariopovs TOV TAY LATO, Aéywo de Tas 
ovvaipéecets WT * av&joers: Su O TOvs GpTLaKts 
aptious paAAov exrXexTéov ws péxpt povados 
dtaipetaGat Suvapevovs: Kal Tovs ye Aetovas 
TOV TAKTLK@V EvpTGELS TETTOLNKOTAS THY Padayya 
Tav onmditav pupiwy é€akicyitwy TpraKooiwy 
oydonKovTa Tecoapw, ws dixa Svarpoupev ny 
Lex pe povados, TavTnS d€ Huloevav TH tov WAdv. 
drroKetobw O° otv Kal nuty toco’Twy avdpav 
evar THY dadayya, Tov dé Adyov EExaideka. 


x 


1 The diagram in K. and R. contains 13 in a row. 

2 K. and R. suggest that xeiuevor or dyes is to be supplied: 
I have introduced the former from xe?o@ac in Lex. mil. § 22. 

$ K. and R:: 70 F. 

4 K. and R. suggest 7. 5 Om. K. and R. 


1 That is, numbers, which when divided by 2 remain 
even, as 4, 8, 16, etc. 


256 


TAGCIICS  1n..6 7 


Os oro MOO" ONO" Oo "0° "6: 0) Oo" rank 
DS Ope Orr Ow Oo © COMO .O, Ofrank 
Set Oies Of Ora! Out 2405.0 OV CO... O40, rank 
Sean On OueOenGy. O-. Or .On Of Of),O"lasE rank 


And those who stand behind one another in this 
formation are said to form a file (stoichein), but those 
who stand side by side are said to form a rank 
(zsygein). When the phalanx is bisected by a line 
running from front to rear, one half is called the 
right wing and the other the left wing, while the 
point of division is called the navel and the joint. 

How great the strength of the phalanx ought to 
be is not easy to determine, for the strength must 
be determined in proportion to the number which 
each commander is able to equip ; only the strength 
must in every instance be suitable to the changes 
in form of the detachments, I mean the decrease 
and increase of their depth. Accordingly you should 
rather select numbers which are evenly divisible 
by two down to unity,! and you will find that most 
tacticians have made the phalanx to consist of 
16,384 hoplites, because this number is divisible 
by two down to unity, and half that number (2.e., 
8192) for the phalanx of the light infantry.? Sol et 
us also assume that the phalanx will consist of this 
number of men, and the file of sixteen men. 


2 The number 16,384 represents, of course, only an ideal 
for tactical convenience and exactness in manceuvres. 
As an ideal or standard theoretical number it does no harm, 
since no-one would dream of allowing it to interfere with 
practical considerations. 


Asclep. it. 6=Ael. xxvi. 1-2.; vii. 3. | Asclep. 11. 7= Ael. viii. 
s 297 


8 


9 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


"Eoovrat 57) of ev dvo0 Adyou diAoxla Kal 6 em” 
avTots apxev diAoxirys, ot Oe TOUT WY duTAdovot 
TeTpapxia Kal O Em avrois TETPAPXNS, ot O€ ETU 
TOUTO duTAaovot Takis Kal O 1yEWwv Takiapxos 
puev maAat, viv de Kat EKATOVTEPX TNS ol dé THs 
TAEEWS SumAdowot ovVTAaypa Kal O emi ToUTOLS 
OVUVTAYLATApYNS. 

Tovs de EKTAKTOUS” TO pev traraov 7» Takis 
elyev, ws Kal Tovvopa onpatver, du OTL THS TAa€ews 
e€dpiOjor® Ompxov, OTpATOKNpUKA, onpevopopov, 
cadmuyKTHy, mNpEeTaY; ovpayov’ Tov per, omws 
™ pwvn onpaivor TO TPOOTATTOLEVOV, Tov 6€ 
onueiw, €l° [7 puvis KaTaKovew evdexolTo oud 
OopuBov, tov d€ 7H caAmuyyt, O7rdTE nde onpetov® 
B2Xé€rrovev Oud KovLopTov, Kal TOV OmIpEeTay, WOTE 
TU TOpAKopLaat TOV ets THY xpetav, TOV ye" nv 
EKTAKTOV ovparyor Tpos TO emavayew TOV daroAeu- 
mopevov ev® TH Ta€eL. OKT yap avdp@v dvtTos 
tod Adyou oxTadoxia TO TeTPAywVOV ETrOleL OYHLA, 
Orrep dua TV Tavraxobev _toornTa. jeovov TOV 
pep@v THs dadrayyos opoiws KaTaKovEw Trav 
mpooTtaTTouevwy Suvapevov evrAdyws Takis eTwWvo- 


1K. and R.: én F. 

2 C (Salmasius), Lex. mil. § 14, K. and R.: éxrdrous F. 

> K. and R.: é& dpuOuol F: & dpi@uw [sic] C (Salmasius) : 
évapiOuo. V (Leo Allatius). 

4 gadmeyKTnv. nucddopov F: cnuecopdpov K. and R. I have 
changed the order of these words to correspond with the 
sequence in which they are defined below; it is also the 
order in the Lew. mil. § 14. 

> C (Salmasius), Tee mil. § 14, K. and R.: & ona ec F. 

6 C (Salmasius), Lex. mil. § 14, K. and R.: oore & eun 
5 conue. ov F. 7 Lex. mil. § 14, K. and R.: réye F. 

8 éri K. and R.° émi riv raEw Lex. mil. § 14. 


258 


‘DACTICS, 1.8 =9 


Now two files will form a double-file (dzlochia) 
and the officer in command will be a double-file- 
leader (dilochites), and twice this number will be a 
platoon (tetrarchia), and the officer in command a 
platoon-commander (tetrarches), and twice this latter 
‘number will be a company (taais), and the officer 
in command a company-commander (tazzarchos), as 
he used to be called, but nowadays also a captain- 
of-a-hundred (hekatontarches), and twice the number 
of a company will be a battalion (syntagma), and 
the officer in command a_battalion-commander 
(syntagmatarches).1 

The supernumeraries were formerly attached to 
the company, as their name (ektaktoz)? indicates, 
because they were not included in the number of 
the company: an army-herald, a signalman, a 
bugler, an aide, and a file-closer. The first was to pass 
on the command by a spoken order, the second by a 
signal, in case the order could not be heard because 
of the uproar, the third by the bugle, whenever the 
signal could not be seen for the dust ; the aide was 
there to fetch whatever was needed, while the 
supernumerary file-closer was to bring up the 
straggler to his position in the company. For 
when the file consisted of eight men, eight files 
constituted the square, which, alone of all the 
detachments, by reason of the equal length of the 
sides of the formation could hear equally well the 
commands from every quarter and so was properly 


1 The file has thus 16, the double-file 32, the half-company 
64, the company 128, and the battalion 256. 
2 That is, ‘a body of men outside the company ’ (¢avis). 
Asclep. ii. 8=Ael. ix. 1-4a. Asclep. ii. 9=Ael. ix. 4b. 
259 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


/ > Ld A / ¢ 
pacto: OditAaciacbevtos 8° vorepov Tob Adyov 7 
ouvragiapyia’ TO TeTpadywvov arretéAecev, Ou 
els TAUTHV peTHAGOV of ExTAKTOL. 
i0 To dumAdowov d€ Tob ovvTdypatos mevTaKoo.ap- 
ylav Kal Tov éml TOUTW TEVTAKOOLapYnY WYdpacay, 
\ \ / / / \ \ e€ / 
To d€ ToUTOU diTAdoLov yiALapyiav Kal TOV NYyELOVA 
/ \ \ / / / \ / 
xiAvapxynv, Tas 5é dUo xtAvapyias mada ev Kéepas 
Kat TéAos Kal TeAdpynv TOV HyOUpEvoV, VaTEpoV 
d€ prepapyliay Kal pepapynv: Ov O Kal TO ToOUTOV 
dutAdowov dadayyapyia Kat viv ett Kadetrat, mAqY 
Kal GTOTOUN KEepaTos, Kal O nyewwv mddrar pev 
otpatyyces, viv de dadrayyapyns: TO dé THs 
/ Ae 2, 3 ~ ) r ~ PS) A / 
hadayyapxias* nTrot avotouns duzAobyv dudadayyia 
Kal Képas Kal 6 em’ adTh Kepapxns, adTo Sé TO ex 
~ a / e / rie) eee eS ¢ / 
T&v dvetv Kepatwv 7 ddadray€, ed i) © orparnyos, 
KEepaTa. exoves dvo, darayyapxias AToL amoTopas 
5, pepapyias® 7, xtAvapxias 65, mevTaKoovapxias 
AB, ouvragiapxias £0, Ta€vapyias pkH, TeTpapxias 
avs,’ diAoxlas dif, § Noyxous ako. 


1K. and R.: cuvtatia F (ef. § 10). 

2 6 6K. and R. 

3 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: ékraro F. 

4 Lex. mil. § 18, K. and R.: dddayyos F. 

5 K. and R. (after B and C ’): Snepapxias F. 

6 BC (Salmasius), K. and R.: « F. 

7 Spe (sic) K. and R. 

8 ABC (Salmasius) V (Leo Allatius), K. and R.: ¢gie F 
(but ¢78 below). 


1 Or ‘command,’ to preserve in the translation the 
suggested etymological connexion between rév mpocrarto- 
yuévov and Takis. 


260 


TACTICS, n..9—10 


called a company;! when, however, the file was 
later doubled, the battalion (syntazxtarchia) con- 
stituted the square, and, as a consequence, included 
the supernumeraries.? 

Two battalions are called a regiment (pentakosi- 
archia), and its commander a colonel (pentakosiarches), 
and two regiments a brigade (chzlarchia), and its 
commander a brigadier-general (chzliarches), and two 
brigades were formerly called a wing and a comple- 
ment (¢elos), and its leader a complement-commander 
(telarches), but later it was called a_ division 
(merarchia), and its leader a division-commander 
(merarches) ; two divisions, consequently, are even 
yet called a corps (phalangarchia), as well as a half- 
wing (apotome keratos), and its commander, formerly 
a general, is now a corps-commander (phalangarches) ; 
when the corps or half-wing is doubled it is a double- 
corps (diphalangia) and wing (keras), and its com- 
mander a wing-commander (kerarches) ; and, finally, 
the union of the two wings is called the army 
(phalanx), under the command of the general, 
comprising 2 wings, 4 corps or half-wings, 8 divisions, 
16 brigades, 32 regiments, 64 battalions, 128 com- 
panies, 256 platoons, 512 double-files, and 1024 files. 


2 The battalion is the real unit of the phalanx, a perfect 
square of 16 ranks and 16 files. As a square it became the 
tactical unit for all the quarter-turns, etc., of the phalanx, 
pivoting on the men at the four corners, and so is the smallest 
unit to have its own officers outside the ranks. It was known 
under several names, in Asclepiodotus as syntagma and syn- 
taxiarchia (ii. 9), in the Anonymus Byzantinus as tagma. 


Asclep. ii. 10= Ael. ix. 5-10. 
261 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


p* Kepas & ovvragapyia 

& am TOTOM_A pen Taéus 

N p pLepapyia OVS TeTpayia 

tS xiAvapxia dip dtAoxia 
TEVvTAKOOLApYla akd Aoxos 


III. [lepi duatd€ews tHv avdp&v Kal? cAnv Te 
Thv dddayya 7° Kata TA*® pLépyn 
Avareraxrae d€ n TE OAy paraye Kal TO HEpy 


Kara, reTpdoa, wore TeV Tecoapwy ATOTOMAV THY 
peev aploray KAT apeTnVy roo defL0d K€paros Tera Bau 
deLiav, TV de /OevTépav dpiorepay tod Aawod Kal 
de€vav Ty TpUTIY, Thy O€ TETAPTHV Tob defv0d 
Aavav. ovTw yap* OvaTETAyLEV@V ioov® eival 
oupPyoeTal Kata SUvayw TO de€vov Kepas TH 
had: TO yap bro mpwrov® Kal TeTAdptov, Pact 
yewmeTpior, icov e€oTra. T@ vm0 SevTépov Kal 
TpiTov, ey Ta® Teooapa ava. Aoyov" a: 

2 Tov atrov dé tpdmov Kal Exar ay aor OMY HTOL 
padayyapxeay SvaKoopunooper’ emel” yap Tov 
pLev aor as eoTw 7 Hepapxia, Téraptov b€ 7» xtA- 
apxyla’ THv pev dplotnv yxAtapyiav THs Se&tas 

1 2, 2 kal K. and R. 
3 Om. AC (Salmasius), K. and R. 
aoc (Salmasius). 

K. and R.: iony F. 


ABC (Salmasius), K. and R.: mpaérov F. 
vyewuerpo K. and R. If it is necessary to emend I 
should prefer yewuerpixol or yewmeérpat. 
g snoded by Oldfather. 
dvdhoya C (Salmasius), K. and R. 
10 kai K. and R. in the text, but it would seem from the 


note that é7ei was intended: é7i C (Salmasius). 


262 


TD oO 


TACRICS iin 6.21082 


2 wings 64 battalions + 

4 half-wings 128 companies (tazzs) ? 
8 divisions 256 platoons 

16 brigades 512 double-files 

32 regiments 1024 files. 


III. The Disposition of the Men both in the entire Army 


and in its Subdivisions 


The entire army as well as its units is disposed 
on the basis of a fourfold division, so that of the 
four half-wings the bravest holds the right of the 
right wing, the second and third in point of valour 
the left and right, respectively, of the left wing, and 
the fourth the left of the right wing. For with the 
units ordered in this manner the right wing will 
have the same strength as the left, since, as the 
geometricians say, the product of the first and the 
fourth will equal that of the second and third, if the 
four be proportionate.? 

In the same way we shall arrange each half-wing 
or corps; since, indeed, a half of it is the division 
and a fourth the brigade ; we shall station the bravest 
brigade on the right of the right-hand corps, the 


1 Called a syntagma in ii. 8. 

2 Just above this unit has been called a taxiarchia. 

3 There is some point to this arrangement, if one thinks 
of an arithmetical series, where, ¢.g., in the series 5, 7, 9, 11, 
5+11=7+9; but the words clearly refer to a geometrical 
series 2, 4, 8, 16, or a proportion 2: 4:: 8:16, where 2x 16 
=4.x 8, although it is difficult to see how one multiplies 
strength by merely adding together units. 


With Asclep. iii. 1-3 cf. Ael. x. 
263 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Hepapxtas ragopev defy, THV O€ devrepay kar’ 
apeT nv THs Aatds apiorepar, defuay d€ TH" TpiThy, 
TH OE drrohevropev yy Aavav® Tis deElds. ovTw yap 
ioooevjcovcr Kal at jeepapxtar. 

3 Kat Tas XAvapxias d€ ws avrws diabyjoopev. 
Kal yep TOUTWV Tpcov pév eoTw 7 TEVTAKOGL- 
apxia, TéTaptoy dé 7 ovvTagiapxia: ovKObY TH 
pev mpwTynv Kal TerapTny ouvTaéapxiav TH 
de£ta TevTaKooLapxia veobpev THY TmpwTHV EV 
Tots defvois atTns pepior tTiWWevres, Sevtepav dé 
Kal Tpiryy ovvragiapytay TH Aad TevTaKkoot- 
apxia mpoove“otuev KaTa TO ltcov pépos avThs 
TeV TeEs. 

4 Thy d€ mA” cuvTagiapylay exaoTny yULov 
jeev exovoay TV raglapxiav, Téraptov dé THY 
TeTpapxtav Kata Tov avtov Adyov dvaljooper, 
ware Tas ev avTn Tagvapxias tooobeveiy. 70 5 
OpLovov yeyovev Kal* emt THS TeTpapxias® Kal 
yap TavTyns nutov prev 1 StAoxia,® téraptov be 6 
Aoxos. 

5 Tov jevTOU ye Aoxov ov KaTa TavTa’ duaragopev, 
ard TOUS pev mpoow 1 Tov avop@v KaTa THY pwn, 
Tous 6° omicw Kara TY dpovnow dadepovtTas, 
avr ay de TOV mpocw Tovs Aoxayovs peyeDee TE 
Kal porn Kal EUTEeLpia mpovxovras® TOV au 
tobto yap To Cuyov ovvéyes tiv dddayya Kal 


1 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: deéav: rhy 6é F. 
2 K. and R.: Aray F. 
3 K. and R.: devrépav wadw F. 
4K. and R.: 76 kai F. 
5 rerapxias F. 8 Styodoxla F. 
7K. and R.:: adra F. 8 apovxovr(as) F. 
204 


TACTICS, 111. 2-5 


second and third in point of valour on the left and 
right of the left-hand corps, and the remaining 
brigade on the left of the right-hand corps ; for thus 
the several corps will have a uniform strength. 

The brigades also we shall order in the same 
manner, since a half ef these is the regiment, and 
a fourth the battalion. We shall, then, assign the 
first and fourth battalion to the right-hand regiment, 
setting the first among its right-hand units, and 
we shall, further, assign the second and third battalion 
to the left-hand regiment, disposing them in the 
regiment on exactly the same principle. 

Each battalion also, since it has as its half the 
company and as its quarter the platoon, will be 
ordered in like manner, that its companies may 
have an equal strength. The same arrangement 
applies also to the platoon. For its half is the 
double-file, and its quarter the file. 

We shall not, however, arrange the file as above, 
but we shall place the strongest in the front rank 
and behind them the most intelligent, and of the 
former the file-leaders shall be those who excel in 
size, strength, and skill; because this line of file- 
leaders binds the phalanx together and is like the 


1 Aelian, in the parallel account, follows our author, but 
arranges the divisions of the army on the basis of the strength 
of the commanders and not of the men. This is worse than 
the arrangement proposed by Asclepiodotus, for in practical 
operations we know of such a distribution of strength only 
in the largest divisions of the army. It remained for the 
philosophers to seize upon an arrangement applicable only 
to large masses and apply it down to the very lowest unit, 
the file, and, as in Aelian, even down to the individual 
officers ! 


evith Asclep. ili. 4¢f. Ael. x. Asclep. iii. 5=Ael., xiii. 1-2. 
265 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


otov THs payalpas €oTl TO oToua, Obey Kal audt- 
oTomous KaXrodar Tas audotépwhev" Aoyayots ovv- 
exouevas Ta€ets. 

6 Act d€ Kat TO devTEpov Cuyov py mavu yetpov 
celval, wa meGovTOs TOU Aoxayod 0 mapedpevwv 
mpoehOdov ets 70 mpoow _ouvexy THY padayya.. ot 
d€ ovpayol ot rt &v tots Adyxots Kal ol ¢ EKTAKTOL 
cuvecer TOV GAAwY SiadepéTwoar, of “ev, Wa TOUS 
idiovs KatevOdvwot Adyous, of S Omws oToty@at 
TE TA OvYTaypata Kat Cuy@ow adAdArrors Tovs TE 
Aettotaktobvtas® dia detriav eis raéw érav- 
dyouv Kal év Tots Gvvacmicmots cuvedpedverv* 
avayKa Couey. 


IV. Tlepi SLAOTNUATwV 


Totrov 51) Tov tpdmov eEopowwléevtwy TH oAw 
TOV popiwy és av eln pytéov Tepl SvaoTHarwv® 
Kara Te [uAjKos Kat Babos: Tpurra yap eSqupyrau’ 
Tpos TAS TOV moAepiienv" ypelas, TO TE dpavoraroy, 
Kal?’ 6 addAjAwy améyovot KaTad TE phKOs Kal 
Babos Exaoro. mHYELS TéooApas, Kal TO TUKVOTATOV, 
Kal’ 6 ouvnomKws exaotos amo Tov addAwv 
mavtrayolev SidotyKev mynxvatov didoTyLa, TO TE 


K. and R.: dudorépober F. 
C (Salmasius) D, K. and R.: ékravo F. 
Nuroraxtodyras C (Salmasius). 
cuvepetdery K. and R. perhaps rightly; cf. Polyb. xii. 
A ley 
5 A (2nd hand), K. and R.: mepidcacryxacr F. 
6 éfedpnrac C (Salmasius) E. 
7 ro\euxov K. and R. 


266 


] 
2 
3 
4 


ACIICS. ro — tva. | 


-eutting edge of the sword, for which reason the 
companies, when covered on both flanks by file- 
leaders, are called double-edged (amphistomot). 

The second line must also be not much inferior 
to the first, so that when a file-leader falls his com- 
rade behind may move forward and hold the line 
together; and the file-closers, both those in the 
files and those attached to larger units, should be 
men who surpass the rest in presence of mind, the 
former to hold their own files straight, the latter to 
keep the battalions in file and rank with one another, 
_besides bringing back to position any who may leave 

their places through fear, and forcing them to close 
up in case they lock shields.? 


| IV. Intervals 


Now that the parts of the army have been brought 
into due relation with the entire force, we may well 
ppcrk of the intervals in both length and depth. 

The needs of warfare have brought forth three 
systems of intervals: the most open order, in 
which the men are spaced both in length and depth 
four cubits apart,” the most compact, in which with 
'locked shields each man is a cubit distant on all 
sides from his comrades, and the intermediate, also 

1 'The importance of the ranks of file-leaders and file-closers 
can scarcely be exaggerated ; the former were the first to 
_meet the enemy and in between them and the file-closers 
_ were included the less brave. 


2 The cubit may be taken as approximately eighteen 
inches. 





Asclepadil: 6—Ael pail. 3,/5)¢)Xd. 3: 
Asclep. iv. 1=Ael. xi. 1-4. 


267 





ASCLEPIODOTUS 


[Léaov, 6 Kal TUKVWoW erovopdlovoW, @ SveoTHKact 
mavTayolev dvo mhyxeLs am adAjAwY. 

2 Diverar 5€ pretaBorr}) Kara Tas ypelas Ex Twos 
TOUT WY ets Te Tav Aowt@v, Kal ToL KATA PAKOS 
[Lovor, 6 Kal Cuyetv epapev Aéyecbar, 7 Kara 
Bdabos, 70 Kal oToLyety, 7) KAT apdw, Omrep ovo- 
paleTar KATA TapacTaTyY Kal emioTaTny.” 

3 Aoxe? dé 70 TeTpdanyv Kata dvow civar, bev 
ovee KelTar em atT@ dvoua: avayKatov dé TO 
dimnxv? Kat et’ pwadAdAov ro mynxvatov. TovTwr 
dé TO prev dimnyv Kata TUKVWoW, EdyV, ETwWVO- 
pactat, TO dé mnxvatov Kata ovvaomiopor. 
yiveTat Oe  peev TUKVOOKS, oT ay nets Tots TrO- 
Acpsious TH parayya ema ywfLev,” 6 6€ ouvacTt- 
opL0s, Or ay ot TroNe€pLL0l Tey ema yuvran. 

4 °Ezret ody _xtdvor elKoot Téooapes elow ol KaTa 
jeerwrrov THS padayyos adwpioprevot Aoxayot, 
ofjAoy, ore TeTaypevor prev edeEovot TIXELS ef 
Kal éevevyKOVTa Kal TeTpaKioylAious, OmEp EoTt 
oTadia S€kKa Kal mrXELS EvevAKOVTA €, TETU- 
KvwKoTes Oé€ oTadiovs mévTE Kal TIXELS ens” 
ouvynomiKotes dé oTadiovs dvo Kal jyiov Kal 


1 Oldfather: ré cai crotyov F. Omrep Kal oToxely Was sug- 
gested by K. and R.; possibly 6 cai should be read. 
2 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: ka TapacTarny émiotary F, 
Perhaps one should read kai wapacrareiy kai émictareiv. 
> B (margin) C (Salmasius) E, K. and R.: 0 rnxvu F. 
K. and R.: éor F. 
B (margin) DE, K. and R: xa F. 
B (margin) E, K. and R.: éreuer F. 
B (margin) C (Salmasius) DE, K. and R.: wyxee* wh FB. 


wm oF 


a 


~I 


1 It must be borne in mind that one soldier is included 
in the interval, i.e., the distance is from right shoulder to 


268 


TACTICS, rv. 1-4 


called a ‘compact formation,’ in which they are 
distant two cubits from one another on all sides.! 

As occasion demands a change is made from one 
of these intervals to one of the others, and this, 
either in length only, which, as we have noted before, 
is called forming by rank,” or in depth, z.e., forming 
by file, or in both rank and file, which last is called 
‘by comrade-in-rank ’ and ‘ by rear-rank-man.’ 

The interval of four cubits seems to be the natural 
one and has, therefore, no special name ; the one of 
two cubits and especially that of one cubit are forced 


formations. I have stated? that of these two 


spacings the one of two cubits is called “ compact 


_ spacing ’ and the one of a single cubit ‘ with locked 


shields.’ The former is used when we are marching 
the phalanx upon the enemy, the latter when the 
enemy is marching upon us. 

Now since the file-leaders, forming the front of 
the phalanx, number 1024, it is clear that, drawn 


up in the most open formation,* they will cover 





4096 cubits, which is 10 stades and 96 cubits; in 
the compact formation, 5 stades and 48 cubits ; 
and with locked shields 24 stades and 24 cubits.® 


right shoulder or from breast to breast. The interval of one 
cubit seems hardly enough, but it was used only in receiving 


_ acharge (cf. § 3 below) and is the interval of the Swiss pikemen 


of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (cf. R. Schneider, 


Legion und Phalanx, 70). 


2 The reference is to ii. 6. 

3 Cf. § 1, above. 

4 Tdtrw (‘draw up’) is used here without qualifying 
phrase, since the formation has no special name (cf. § 3 above). 

® That is, the phalanx of 16,384, drawn up 16 deep, would 


_ occupy 2048 yards, 1024 yards, and 512 yards respectively. 
| Asclep. iv. 2=Ael. xi. 1-4. Asclep. iv. 3=Ael. xi. 5. 


Asclep. iv. 4= Ael. xi. 6. 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


/ if 
TMHXELS ELKOOL TEToapas, TpOS O Ge’ Senoer Kal 
ww / aw 
TOV xwpiwy Tas eKAoyas TrovetoBaL. 
2 


V. Ilepit émAwy id€as* Te Kal ovppeTpias 


~ / > / / / 
Tay d€ dadayyos acridwv apiotn 7 Makedovixy 
lon > / >) / / / \ 
yaAkh oKTwrdaXraotos, ot Atay KoiAn: Sdpu dé 
av ovK e€AatTov dexamHyYeos, WaTE TO mpomrimTov 
avTod eivat ovK edAaTTov 7 oKrdanxy, ov all 

29\ A oe/, 13 

ovde peetlov ereAcoay dvo® Kal d€Ka TXEw,” 
WOTE THY TpOTTwOW EivaL Sexdanxur, @ 67 Kal? 
” Maxedoveer parays xXpwmevn ev KaTaTUKV@ 
OTACEL dyiTrovoTos civar éddxe® Tots soAeptors. 
evdr)Aov yap, OTL TOV JEXpL TOU mepmrTou" Suyod 
Td dopara TpOTMMTEL Tob [LETWTTOV’ OL prev ‘yap 
év T® SevTépw Cuy@ TIXETL Svat vToBeSnKores 
OKT T™XEwWV® THY Too jueTeTroU TrovodvTae 7p0- 
mTwow, €€ d€ of Ev TH Tpitw Cvya, ot & ev TO 
TeTapTw Tecodpwv, dvo dé of ev TH TéeuTTYH, 
S / 9 be ~ / a / 4 
mpoPeBAnuevar? d€ Too mpwTov Cuyod mévTe oa- 
9 piccat. Kat Makeddves pv’? ovtw TO oTotxw,™ 
pact, THv Sopatwy ob povov TH der TOUS TroAELLOUS 
exmAntrovow, aAAa Kat Tav oxaya@v EkaoToV 


1 K, and R. (note): odo F. 2D: eidéac F. 
3K. and R.: we forater cay kal F: pelfova Oéoav cai C 
(Salmasius). 


- TNX EW F. In a strict Atticist one should, of course, 
accent m7xewr, but F (below, note 8) testifies apparently to 
myxéwv (nxXaiwv), and perhaps K. and R. are right in accent- 
ing the word thus. > Om. C (Salmasius). 

6 Added by C (Salmasius) i in the margin. 

7K. and R.: mwéxpe wéumrov F (réumrrov DE). 

8 rnxalwy F. 9 K. and R.: rpoBeBAnuévor F. 

10 K. and R.: mwevre recoaper’ kai BaBvddrioe yap otrw F: 


270 














AGIs a iy 2 4 v.72 


It will be necessary, therefore, for you to select 
your terrain with all this in mind. 


V. The Character and appropriate Size of Arms 


The best shield for use in the phalanx is the 
Macedonian, of bronze, eight palms! in diameter, 
and not too concave ; and their spear, moreover, is 
not shorter than ten cubits, so that the part which 
projects in front of the rank is to be no less than 
eight cubits—in no case, however, is it longer than 
twelve cubits, so as to project ten cubits. Now when 
the Macedonian phalanx used such a spear in a 
compact formation it appeared to the enemy 
irresistible. For it is obvious that the spears of the 
first five ranks project beyond the front, since the 
soldiers in the second rank, being two cubits back, 
extend their spears eight cubits beyond the front, 
those in the third rank six cubits, those in the fourth 
rank four cubits, those in the fifth rank two cubits, 
and so five spears extend beyond the first rank. 
And the Macedonians, men say, with this line of 
spears do not merely terrify the enemy by their 
appearance, but also embolden every file-leader, 


1 The ‘palm’ may be considered as approximately 
three inches. 


Ascleps ve 1-2 — ely xis XIV. 


TévTe Téegoapes. Kal BaSvrtwvio yap mpoBeBAnuméva d€ TOU mpwTou 

fvyo0 mévre capioca Kal waxeddves wev C (Salmasius): K. and 

R. suggest also the possibility of a lacuna. The ‘ Baby- 

lonians’ here are probably due to a bold attempt to emend 

a dittography of rpoBeBAnuévar (or -wévor as it appears in F). 
1 B (margin) E, K. and R.: rév orotyov F 


Pel 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Trapafapodvovot meVvTe Suvdjreot meppoupn|Levov™ 
ot de pera To” méumtov Cuydv, el? Kal pn Tas 
caplooas* mpodyovot Tod pletwrov, aAAa Tots 
ye cwpaow emPpilovres aveAmiotiav Tots mpwTo- 
oTatais puvyns mapéxovTar. evo b€ Tas TOO 
[eTWTOUV mMpoTimTovaas aKpuas e€tcodcbar BovdAd- 
peevot TA Odpata TAY drriow Cvyav avEovow. 


VI. Ilept WuAdv re Kat meATaoTav 


e \ U \ \ \ \ ¢ so 
Of dé YuAot Te Kat TeATAGTAL TpOs TAs appolovoas 
xpelas vio Tob oTparnyod TayHoovTat TOTE pev 
™po° THs parayyos, TOTE Oe b7r0 TH ddrayy., 
dddore be KaTa de€id Te Kal aptoTepa ovoudalerar 
d€ TO ev TpoTakis, TO 8 UrdTakis, TO SE TpocEr- 
7 > 4 \ > / ~ / 
Taéis' eoTt O OTE Kal euTrAcKdpevor TH Padrayyt 
map avdpa tattovra: A€yera® S€ Kal TodTO 
> 
mapevTaéis, du OT avouotwy eott mapevbeats, 
a ~ > / ~ ~ / 
otov yurA@v wap o7mdAitas: THY yobv TH Opotwv 
/ e e ~ > ¢ / av ~ 
mapevbeow, otov omAitav Tap omdAitas 7 YAadv 
e 
mapa wyrovs—pybyjceTta’ yap Kat 1 TovTwY 


1K. and R. suggest re¢payuévov which appears in the 
parallel passage, Aelian, Tactica, xiv. 5 

2 rov F. 

3 B (margin) C (Salmasius) D, K. and R.: eva: F. 

4D, K.and R.: rac capio F (at end of line) : : Tals capicoas 
B (margin) C (Salmasius) E. 

5 rpdo F. 
6 DE, Lew. mil. § 28, K. and R.: Aéyorra F. 
7 K. and R. Suances evpeOnoeTat. 


1 This includes the file-leader himself. 


v© 
~ 
v© 


PRCTICS. v2 vi. I 


protected as he is by the strength of five! ; while 
the men in the lines behind the fifth, though they 
cannot extend their spears beyond the front of the 
phalanx, nevertheless bear forward with their 
bodies at all events and deprive their comrades in 
the front ranks of any hope of flight. But some, 
who wish to bring all the projecting spear-points to 
the same distance in front of the line, increase the 
length of the spears of the rear ranks.? 


VI. Light Infantry and Targeteers 


The light infantry and targeteers will be stationed 
by the general as the situation demands, sometimes 
before the line of battle, sometimes behind it, and 
on other occasions now on the right flank and again 
on the left ; the first is called van-position (protazis), 
the second rear-position (hypotaxis), and the third 
flank-position (prosentaxis).2 Sometimes they are 
incorporated in the phalanx and stationed one 
beside each man; and this is called insert-position 
(parentaxis), because there is an_ insertion of 
different branches of the service, e.g., light infantry 


_ with hoplites; but the incorporation of like arms, 








such as hoplites beside hoplites or light infantry 
_ beside light infantry—the reason for this will be 


2 Cf. Aelian xiv. 7 and the Scholiast on the Iliad, N 130; 


_ but it is very doubtful if this was ever actually done. 


3 The reasons for such positions are clear. The rear- 
position was the first in order of development, when the 
lighter troops served merely as reserves. Later they 


_ became an offensive weapon for the army. 


Ascleps vas b—JAels vines awe ly xexi? 
T 273 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


, , 1 \ es 2? \ 
Xpela—, mapévTakiw* pev ovKeTt, mapenPodnv de 
> / 
ETrovop.alovot. 
/ \ \ \ *e / \ ” 
2  Noyous pev 67 Kal otto. Téocapas Kal €iKoot 
\ / Ud 
Kat xtAtiovs e€ovow, ef péAAovor cuptrapeKTet- 
aA / ~ e€ ~ 
veobar TH dadayy. TOY omditav brotatTOmevot, 
\ >) \ ¢ / 3 ~ ~ 
od pv amo cExaideka avdp@v—nuov yap adta@v 
\ ~ > > >] 
€oTt TO TANVos—, ard’ €€ oxta dydrovere. 
oy \ OE , \ \ > 3 / 
3 “Eora 6€ Kamit tov7Twy to pev ex 6° dywv 
7 Yj \ b] A 
avoTaocs ett de eK dvely cvoTdcewr* TEvTNKOVT- 
/ \ \ / / ¢ / > > 
apxta, TO d€ TovToOV ditAdcLov ExaTovrapyia, éd 
a / ¢ 7 , \ 
HS €GovTaL ol EKTaKTOL, TevTE TOV apLOuor, 
a / \ / \ 
OTpATOKHPVE TE Kal OnpeLopopos Kat oadAmiyKTIs, 
\ / \ ~ ¢ 
bmNpETHNS TE KAL OVpayos: TO OE THs EKaToVTApytas 
/ / \ \ / / 
dumAdovov <iuAayia, TO d€ TovTov dumAdovov 
, «e \ / 
Eevayia, Hs TO diAdowov®> ovoTpenpa, TovToU 
\ \ ~ >] / eo / \ / 
d€ TO SimdA0by émevayia, hs madkw TO dimAdovov 
A e \ / ¢ ~ ~ / 
otidos, ob} 57 ouvTebévtos 7 TOV WAV yiverar 
/ aA \ > , ~ Ui YA 
ddray&, Hv Kat éemitaypa Kadotow enor. TavTns 
>) > \ 
d€ EKTAKTOL’ AVOPES OKTW, ETLEEVAYOL ev TEDOapeEs, 
/ 
avoTpeppatapyar® dé ot Xourot. 
B (margin) C (Salmasius) E, K. and R.: map’ @v raéw F. 
C (Salmasius), K. and R.: vyiv F. 
Lex. mil. § 30, K. and R.: dvo F. 
D, K. and R.: ovoracec: F. 
C (Salmasius), K. and R.: ékraro F. 
These bracketed words are supplied by K. and R. from 
the corresponding passage in Aelian, Jactica, xvi. 3. See 
also Lex. mil. § 30. In substance they are without doubt 
correct and necessary. 
7 K. and R. (cf. Aelian, Vactica, xvi. 4; Lex. mil. § 30): 
cevayol F. 
8 of cvorp. K. and R. The omission of the article is 
attested also by the verbatim quotation in Lea. mil. § 30, 


274: 


wo = 


ao uo — w 











TACTICS, vi. 1-3 


discussed later }—is not called insert-position, but 
rather interjection (parembole).? 

Now these light infantry will also have 1024 

files, if they are to stand behind the phalanx of the 
hoplites and extend the same distance, without, 
however, a depth of sixteen men—for they are 
only one-half as strong—but obviously of eight 
men. 
With these, also, four files will form a squad 
(systasis), two squads a platoon (pentekontarchia), 
and double the platoon a company (hekatontarchia), 
to which will be attached the supernumeraries, 
five in number, an army-herald, a signal-man, a 
bugler, an aide-de-camp, and a file-closer. Two 
companies will form a battalion (pszlagza), two of 
these a regiment (xenagza), the double of which will 
be a brigade (systremma), two brigades a division 
(epixenagia), the double of which will form a 
corps (stéphos), and where this is doubled we 
have the phalanx of light infantry, which some 
call also a supporting force (epitagma). To this are 
attached eight men as supernumeraries, four of 
_ whom are generals and the others brigadier-generals 
_ (systremmatarchar).* 


1 Cf. x. 17 below. 

2 In the definition of some of these terms Asclepiodotus 
| differs from Aelian. 

3 The importance of the light infantry is not adequately 
_ appreciated by Asclepiodotus. With each increase in the 
depth of the phalanx and, consequently, in its immobility, 
the light infantry became more necessary, until the Mace- 
_donian phalanx was helpless without it. 


Asclep. vi. 2—Ael. xv. 2. mseleps Vi. s—Ael. xvi. 
275 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


VII. [epi TOV imTEwWV 


Ot dé ye immeis, womep Kat ot ydol, mpos Tas 
mapakoAovfovous xpeias Thy ta€w apPavovow, 
Kat padtota avT@v ot axpoBoAvoTal: otro. yap 
Ol emiTNoELOTATOL mpos TO kardp&au TpAavLaT wv 
KOU excarecacIau m™pos paxynv Kat Tas rafets 
dvahboau Kal Um7rov dvaxpovoacGat Kal TO7OUS 
apetvous mpokatadaBety Kal Tovs mpoKaretAnp- 
pevovs avadaPety’ Kat Tovs UmdmToUs Eepevyioat 
Kat evedpas TapacKevacat Kal TO OAoY mpoaywvi- 
caobat te Kal ovvaywricacbat: moAAa yap de 
co€UTnTa Kal peydda Katepydlovrar mepi Tas 
paxas. 

2 Tas d€ rakes avTaV KaTa oXHHLa ol pev TE- 
Tpaywvov memolnvrat, ot Oe ETEPOUNKES, aAAos 
dé popPoedds, Kat Erepor odnvoetdées TOL EpPo- 
Aoevdés. Kowds d€ amavtTes etAnv® KaXdotvor TO 
GVOTHMA TOD GyHMaTOS. TH pmev ovV popBoedet 
Tov eiAdv SoKovor etradot KexpHoba Tp@Tot 
ev immuch TOAD duvnfevres, ™pos TE Tas dmoaTpopas® 
Kal Tas emoTtpodas THY Ummwv, OWS pn GUV- 
TAaPATTOWTO Tmpos TaGas Tas TAEvpas oTpedeaOau 
duvapevor’ Todvs yap aploTrous Tay imméwv KaTa 
Tas mAevpas érattov,* madAw Tovs e€€xovrTas 
apeThH KaTa Tas ywvias: éxdAovy dé Tov pev KATO 
Thv Tpocw ywvriay iAdpynv, Tov d€ KATA THY OTTiTw 
ovpayov, Tovs dé Kata THY SeEcav Kat Aatay wAayto- 
pvAakes. 

1 dvacretha K. and R. 2 iin F. 


3 Oldfather: dzopiac F: dvacrpopas K. and R. 
4D, K. and R.: éAdrrwyr F. 


276 














TACTICS, vir. 1-2 


VII. The Cavalry 


Now the cavalry, like the light infantry, take their 
positions according to the demands of battle, and 
especially is this true of the skirmishers ; for these 
are the most useful to draw first blood, to provoke 
the enemy to battle, to break their ranks, to repulse 
the horse, be the first to occupy points of advantage, 
carry such positions as the enemy have already 
occupied, reconnoitre terrain that looks suspicious, 
lay ambuscades, and in general to open and support 
the struggle ; for by their swift manceuvring they 
render many valuable services in battle.1 

Now some order the horsemen in a square, others 
in an oblong rectangle, others in a rhomboid, and still 
others in a wedge-like or pointed formation. But all 
agree in calling the formation of the body a squadron. 
It appears that the Thessalians * were the first to 
use the rhomboid formation for their squadrons in 
cavalry fighting, and this with great success both in 
retreat and in attack, that they might not be thrown 
into disorder, since they were abie to wheel in any 
direction ; for they placed their crack troopers on 
the sides and the very best of these at the angles ; 
and they called the man at the fore angle a squadron- 
commander (zlarches), the one at the rear angle a 
squadron-closer (uragos), and those on the right 


and left angles flank-guards (plagzophylakes). 


1 According to Aelian xvii these and other similar 
services are performed by the light infantry. 

2 Aelian adds that this was under Jason, but thinks 
that the formation was actually much older, and later 
attributed to him. 


Asclep. vii. 1=Ael. vii. 4-5. Asclep. vii. 2=Ael. xviii. 1-3. 
200 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


3) elas on epsBodoevoets LKvas eSeupely Kat Opdkas 
déyerat, VaTEpoV d€ ypyoacfat Kat Maxedovas 
TaUrals, ws eUXpnoToTEpais” TOV TeTpAy@ven” 
TO yap [eer wTrov Tav éuBordwv Ppaxv’ yu 0pLevov 
womep KaTL TOV pouBoedar, QvmrEep Hutov E€orTe 
TO euBodoewses, peorny emroleu THv SumTevow, 
ETA TOU Kal Tous nyewovas mpoPeBAnoba TaV 
aAAwy: Kal Tas dvaorpopas evjuapeoTepas Tov 
TETPAYWVMY ETL TOUTE yweoba, m™pos eva TOV 
iAdpxny amoBAerovrew amdvray, WS Kal emt THS 
TOV yepdva 7 TT TES yiveTau. 
4 Tats d€ tetpaywvos Iidpoa te Kat YuKeAol Kat 
"EAAnves €xp@vto 61a TO é&v TovTois Stvacbat 
Cuyetv Te dua Kal oToryety tas etAas. An 
"EAAnves erepopjKkes TH mANOE THY etAnv evad- 
Adtrovres TH Oper TO OXHWA TETPaywvov arTredi- 
docav. déka yap €€ Kata uAKos, oxTa Sé KaTa 
Babos*® avdpas étattrov, adr’ &v ditdaciow dia- 
oTypact dia Ta TOV inmmwv peyéln. Evior de 
TpitAdovov TO pHKos ToD Balous Kar’ apiOjuov 
TOWNOAVTES TpuTdovov Oudornja kata Bdos 
amédocav, wor eivar madw TO oxnua TeTpdywvor, 
spBérepor ovToL dvavonfevtes, ota: odde* yap 
TO immKov Palos TH mel tiv adbriv wdediav 
Tapexer” mpocepetoov Te® Kal Guvexov THv eEtAny, 

1 ypnororépars C (Salmasius). 

2 chddpa 6&) K. and R.3; but Bpax’ is supported by the 
parallel passage in Aelian, Yactica, xviii. 4, although the 
recension ascribed to Arrian xviii. 4 reads 76 pérwrov és 
6&0 amoNyov. 

3 K. and R.: miAdéoo F. 4+ K. and R.: ody én F. 

5 K. and R.: ot mapéxe F. 8 tpocepetoov Té F. 

1 According to Aelian, under Philip. 
278 








TACTICS, vir. 3 — 4 


It is said that the Scythians and Thracians invented 
the wedge formation, and that later the Macedonians 
used it, since they considered it more practical 
than the square formation; for the front of the 
wedge formation is narrow, as in the rhomboid, 
and only one-half as wide, and this made it easiest 
for them to break through, as well as brought the 
leaders in front of the rest, while wheeling was thus 
easier than in the square formation, since all have 
their eyes fixed on the single squadron-commander, 
as is the case also in the flight of cranes.? 

The Persians, Sicilians, and Greeks regularly 
used the square formation since it can hold the 
squadrons in both rank and file; but the Greeks 
modified the squadron formation by making it an 
oblong in mass, while giving it to the eye the appear- 
ance of a square. For they drew up the riders with 
a front of sixteen and a depth of eight, but they 
doubled the interval between the riders * because of 
the length of the horses. And some made the 
number of men in length three times that of the 
depth and then tripled the interval in depth, so that 
it again appeared to be a square, and these, in my 
opinion, had the better plan; since the depth of the 
cavalry unit, provided it is enough to hold the 
squadron firm and in line, does not have the same 
importance as in the infantry, rather it may work 


* Compare the numerous passages on the flight of cranes 
collected by J. B. Mayor and J. E. B. Mayor in the former’s 
edition of Cicero, De Natura Deorum, on ii. 125. See also 
Greg. Naz. Orat. 28. 25 (Patr. Gr. 36. 61 4), where the in- 
vention is ascribed to Palamedes, and the Schol. of Elias 
Cretensis (Patr. Gr. 36. 788 B). 

3 That is, in the files, as compared with the interval 
between them in the ranks. 

Asclep. vii. 3= Ael. xviii. 4. Asclep. vii. 4= Ael. xviii. 5-9. 


279 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


adda yap* Kat PrAGBnv eumoetv otde mAciw TeV 
ToAcpmtoov* emBadiovres yap aAArAous exTapar- 
Tovar Tovs immous, obey TETPay@vov bev ovTOS 
Too" apiBuod Oenoet TO OXHpa Trovety ETEPOLLNKES, 
ETepouyKous O€ OvTOS, eEav én ToLety TeTpAywVoOY, 
TpLOVv 7) TeTTApwWY immoTa@v*® civar Senoe TO Bablos 
KQL 7pOs TOUTO ‘ye TO UHKos e€tcobobar. 

5 IlAnv edo€e To popBoedés avayKaidrepov* civat 
TMpos Tas peTaywyas dua THY Tpos WyE“ova vebou, 
Kal Ou OTL Opoiws TO TeTpaywvw Kal Cvyetv 
dvvatar Kal o7oixyelv, Oley of pev ovTws ado 
cuvetagav, wore dpovticat Tod ovvayudorépou, 
omws av Kat Cvyh Kal orowyH, ot dé ovTEe Tod 
Cuyetv ovte Tob oroyety edpdvticav, evo 5€ Tob 
Cuyetv, od pevTot TOO oToLyely, Evior 6€ avaTradw. 

6 Tots pévro. Cvyctv dua Kat ororyety avro 
mpoeAopevors TETAKTAL TO peyiorov" Cuyov Kara, 
jeecov eK TmepiTToo apby.ob otov® déxa Kal Evds, 
oldv €oTe TO EK Tov aa €v Th vroKeyevn d.a- 
ypapn eit ep exdrepa Tobde dvo cuya dude 
avToo Aeumopeva,” mpoow peev ws TO €k TOV 
OUYKELpEvor, omrlow d€ ws TO ex Tov Ys wot’ 
EKAOTOV TOV B Kat Y orowxety EKGOTW Tov a mAqy 
TOV ducpoov & Kal a* emeiTa eSijs [LeTa [LEV TO p 
Cuyov TO cK TOV 68 dudd« avrod Acu7opevor, pera 
d€ TO y TO® Ex Tay €€ Kal TOUTO duddu Tob ¥ 
Neurduevov, Ware ExaoTov Te THY 58 ExdoTw TOV 


1 Om. by K. and R. 2 Om. C (Salmasius). 
3 immwv K. and R. + K. and R. suggest émirndecérepov. 
> K. and R.: puécor F. 6 K. and R.: rap F. 
7K. and R.: Auroueva F. 8 Added by K. and R. 





1 The idea behind these words is more clearly expressed 
280 





PACTS. war. 4 = 6 


more havoc than the enemy themselves, for when the 
riders run afoul of one another they frighten the 
horses. Hence, if the number of the cavalry is a 
square number, they will have to be drawn up in an 
oblong rectangle, but if the number of men is not a 
square number and a square must be formed, the 
depth will have to be fixed at three or four horse- 
men and the front arranged accordingly.1 

And yet the rhomboid formation has seemed more 
necessary for manceuvring because it bears toward 
a leader and because, like the square, it is capable 
of both rank and file arrangement, for which reasons 
some have ordered it with this in mind, namely that 
attention be paid to both rank and file, others have 
paid attention to neither rank nor file, some to rank 
only and not to file, and still others the opposite. 

Now by those who prefer to order the squadron by 
both rank and file the longest line is stationed in the 
middle, consisting of an odd number such as eleven, 
designated by the line aa in the following diagram ; 
then before and behind this line are two others, 
each two men less in number, the front ££, the 
rear y y, ordered so that each man in f and y is in 
file with each in a except the two end men in a; 
then again after the line 6 there comes the line 66, 
also two less in number, and after the line y there 
comes the line ««, and this also is two less than the 
line y, so that each man in the line 66 is in file with 
in Aelian xvili. 9: “‘ When the number of riders in rank 
equals the number in file, the number is a square number, 
but the formation is an oblong rectangle, the depth of which 
is greater than its length; but when the formation of the 


squadron is a square the number of the horsemen in rank 
is different from that in file.” 


Aselep. vii. 5=Ael. xix. 1.3. Asclep. vii. 6=Ael. xix. 4. 
281 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


DR \ \ / A A 
BB mapa rovs akpous orotyetv, Kal ExacTov TOV 
E€ ExdoTW TOV YY_Tapa ToOvs €ayadTous. €aoV- 
\ \ \ Wa) \ = Nu Ea Ne eas > A 
Tat 67) TA joey Kara B Kal Y Cuya amo évvéa. avdpav, 
TO. de Kara 0 Kal € azo c, omotws dé Tourous Ta 
juev ep exarepa, otov TO €K TOV oe Kal ny 
€OTAL aro TevTaoOs,, Ta. 5° ere €Efs ws TO ex TOV 
6 Kat 70 eK Tov kK azo Tprasos. puovados be 
devopevyns® EoTw* Oo mpdcw Kata‘ To A iAdpyns,° 
\ \ \ _ 
6 € Ombev Kal KaTa TO jt Odpayds: mAaytodd- 
a - ~ / Ss ~ 
Aakes O€ of akpot TOD a Luyod, Wolf” elvar TO THs 
7 5s 3 a e \ Necessity, \ \ 
eiAns mARGOs avopav evos Kat e€nKovTa. TO Oe 
amo TOO & peaov cuyoo | emt TOV iAdpynv Tplywvov 
oxnua euBoddv Te Kal opyvoedes ovoualerat: 
bmoyéypamTat d€ ovTwWSs* 


AN 
806 
ZOE TE ZZ 
AAAAAAA 
BBBBBBBBB 
A2AAAAAAA A AAA 
Pe De ree! ve! re a Peg fred f= 
EG CSEEESE 
H HHHH 
K K K 
M 


¢ 6 ne ” \ ” A , ay 
Ocous npece THhv elAnv Cuyetv pev, OVKETL 
\ A \ > 
d€ Kal growxetr, TO HEeyLoTov Kal jeécov Cuyov ek 
mepuTT@v" _avdpav WOTTED Kal TO TpoTepov TETTOLN - 
\ 
KOTES, OLOV TO aBydela, TO. ed’ EKATEPA 
, \ Fyn a 
[LovaoL AevTropeva 7 TATTOVOLW, WOTTEp To OtKApv 
ple 2K. and R.: Nuropévno F. 
3 éorac K. and R. 4 rapa K. and R. 5 thapxn F. 
6 A (margin) C (Salmasius), K. and R.: icoo F. 
7 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: pecdfvyov repirrav F. 
282 





TACTICS) vi. 67 


each man in the line 6 except the end men, and 
each man in the line ¢e is in file with each man in 
the line y y except the last men; then the lines P 
and y will be formed of nine men, and the lines 6 
and « of seven men, and in the same manner will be 
ordered the lines after these, z.e., the lines ¢¢ and 7 7 
will have five men, and the lines 6 and « three men; 
and of the remaining lines of one man each let the 
front one A be a squadron-commander (z/arches) and 
the rear one » be a squadron-closer (uragos); and 
the flank-guards will be the men on the ends of line 
a, so that the strength of the entire squadron will 
be sixty-one men. The triangle from the middle 
line to the squadron-commander is called a ram and 
wedge-shaped. The figure follows: 


IMS WEN 
AION NS WEN OD 
SAXAIMAUS WOPNO> 
roxy pin Corban] (SF (eet fe IN] (ae) 
Oneal Oo Gai IN 
V1>)9S> wpe 
1d w 
> 


Those who prefer to order the squadron by rank 
and not by file, make the longest and centre rank 
odd in number as above, as aByde¢7n,) and then 
place, before and behind, ranks one man less in 
number, as the ranks 61x Ay v,so that @ is not in 


1 From here on the diagram after § 9 is in mind. 


Asclepi vil 7 —Ael- xix. 13: 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


cuyov, wote TOG pyre T@ O pre t@ B orowyeiv, 
GAN’ €v TO jeeTagv avTa@yv KetoBat eis todjunpoober, 
as aUTWs O€ Kal TOV By TO U Kal TOV 76 TO K Kal 
TO X Trav dé, TO Oe fh TOV él Kal trav EF TO Dz 
OvTW yap KelyLevenv ovde cis TOV _ EV TO die Apo 
Cvy@ ovoevl Tov ev tm apydseln OTOLX TEL. 
dpoiws Sé€ Kal TO Eompe Cuyov epmpoobev Tob 
ikApy Tdocovow, WOTE TO é pare 7@ 0 pyre 
TO Ue em evOeias elvan, adv’ év 7H* peragi TOT) 
Kal Kara ro B ToD TPwTov Cuyod, Kal TO O perake 
TOU t te ws Kara, TOY, Kal TO 7 peragv Tov kX as 
KATO. TO 5, TO d¢ p pueTakd Trev Aj ws Kara, TO E,” 

Kal TO O° eras) TOV [LV Kara. 70 €.7 otrw yap 
To €07pG Cuyov ovdevt TOV EY TH TrapedpevovTt 
cuy@ _OTOLXNCEL, otov T@ GiKApiy, aAda TO Tap 
ev,” olov TH apysela. eoTa TOLWUV Kal TO efijs 
Cuyéy olov TO TUPX TO jev T™pO avToo [1 oroxoby 
TO compa,” T@ O€ map €Vv, olov TO OiKkAi, Kal TO 
pac to" wev TOPX Od OTOLXTOEL, * 7@ b€ Tapa 
TOUTO Eonpe, To be fF ov oToxnoe TH POS, 


T@ O€ Tapa TobTo TUPX’™ oO de a iAdpxys jeTagd 
rat > 


pev eoTtar TOV }4},"* em” edOeias Sé Tir Tv ev 
TO pas”. Kat TovTw dé TH euBore Kal TOV 
Smuobev ioov TAEAVTES cop Anpodar THY ethyy, Hs 
0 pe a €oTaL iAd.pxnss odpayos be a’® 6 €ayaTos 
Tav dvety euPoAwy, ot d€ a7” mAaytodvAakes. 


\ , ¢ Rn , ” 5 \ \ 
Kal davepov, OTL THS ToLva’THs elAns Et Kal [7 


1 ixduy F. 2K. and R.: « F. 

3 K. and R.: @dAd\a 76 F. 4K. and R.: txaix« F. 
oe Kevand ce sdee 6K Sand Re=thek: 
7K. and Re-7s 8K. and Re--wa EF 


9 K. and R. added ¢. 
284 


| 
| 
| 
; 





TACTICS, vit. 7 


file with either « or f but stands before and between 
them, and in the same manner ¢ between fy, x 
between yd, X between de, » between ¢€(, and v 
between (7. When the ranks are so ordered not a 
man in the rank 6.x Aypv will be in file with a man 
in the rank aByée¢n. After the same fashion they 
place the rank €o7po before the rank G.K A pv, so 
that € is not directly before either @ or c, but is in 
their interval and in line with f of the first rank, o is 
between tx and in line with y, 7 is between « A and 
in line with 6, p between A p and in line with e, 
and o between ».v and in line with ¢ For by this 
arrangement the rank £0 7 po will not be in file with 
the nearest rank 6.x A wv, but with the second rank 
aByée€n. So also the next rank tu¢y will not 
be in file with the one immediately preceding it 
Eomzpo, but with the second rank @cxKApv, the 
rank ~w-s will not be in file with tv¢ x, but with 
the one beyond it €o7po, and the rank { { will not 
be in file with the rank Yos, but with the one 
beyond it sv¢yx; and the squadron-commander a 
will be beeveen /*, and directly before someone 
in the rank Yws. Now since they place a wedge 
behind, exactly like the one in front, they complete 
the squadron, which will have a as a squadron- 
commander, « the last man in the two wedges as 
a squadron-closer, and ay as flank-guards. And it 
is apparent that in such a squadron, though the 


10 K. and R. added ¢. 1K, and R.: xai 7é F. 

12 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: cvorayjoe F. 

* K. and R.: a series of certain emendations for the 
corrupt rapa TotT0 Kai To pS TS mapa 7d Wows F. 

44K. and R.: 7o Ac F. 16 K. and R.: 7d = 

16 Supplied by K. aa R. BY? K and Re: 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Ta ovvey Cuvya orowyet, adAAa ta €v map €v 
KEelpeva. 

8 “Emmet? d€ ovveBn Cuvyetvy pév, od orotxety Oé, 
TotbTo nuav dpovTilovtwv, oarouyety Aéyerau ct 
ye povens ev TH Taker ppovriCopev TporTov Too 
KaTa Tov ltAdpynv TE Kal obpayov o7ixou, otov 
TOU AW 73TH A Kal TOV ep exdrepa., * otov peKKoy 
Kal PPAAG},” ETELTA TOV pera Tovade, Olov Too 
Te poyoy Kal TOO Sp Eps, eita Ta edefijs, TOOT” 
Eo TOU TE Teor" Kat TOU XEEX, Kal Ta pera 
TOUTOUS ERE Kal 60a, Kat ETL TOV Tapa TovTOUS 
to” re 86 Kai Tob vv kal TehevTaiwv TOV Kara 
tovs trAaytodvAakes, Kal! ovdev prev Otoicer KaTa 
THY Oéow TOU Cuyobvros™” [LeV, [A] OTOLXOvYTOS dé, 
THO TETE PO Anifer Tis Tag ews Kal TH dpovrid: 
OTOLYHTEL pe, Ou OTl of TeTAypEVoL Kara, orotxov 
adArAous ouvéxovow, ov Cuyroer d€, OTL O TP@TOS 
TOO TpPUyTov oroixov, otov 6 a, TH TOO OevTEpou 
TmpwTw, olov TH }, ovK em edOcias early xara 
To Cuyetv.'* 

9 “AAAa® Kat dooe pyre Cuyetv pyre orouxety 
paov | THY ethyy mpovduuntnoar, aAAov TpoTrov 
els TavTnv enyvecav thy Oéow"> Taccovar yap 


1 The tentative restoration of this extremely corrupt 
passage follows the lines marked out by K. and R., with 
some simplifications.  émeidn ocuvéByuev ov Tovro dé judy 
ppovrigovTwy fuyetvy Néyerar pdvws ev ye (el 6€ C) ev 7H Taka 
ppovrigouev Tov F's: émet 6€ cuvéBn Svyelv wév, ov oTaxetv dé TovTO 
nuaoy ppovrifdvTwy, ov fuyety Névyerar wév, oToLxelv Oé, el ye udvoy 
év TH Taker HpovTifouey mpwrov Tod K. and R. 

2 éxatépa F: éxarépa AC (Salmasius). 

3 K. and R.: @ YRYG. # K. and Reza 

°K. and R.: pory F. 6 K. and R.:sipe 


286 


j 


PACHICS avi. % 9 


successive ranks are not in file, the alternate ones 
are. 

Though, when considered in the foregoing manner, 
the squadron happens to be ordered by ranks and 
not by files, it is still said to be in file formation, if 
only we regard the formation of the first file from 
squadron-commander to squadron-closer, namely the 
file aw767wa, and those on each side of it, namely 
huxkvf and {¢AAP}f, then the following files 
woyow and > peps, further the next in order Tut 
and yppy, then the next £6 € and o (a, the suc- 
cessive ones 06 and v v, and finally the flank-guards. 
Now such a formation will in no way differ from that 
called the ordering by rank and not by file, and yet 
in our apprehension and conception of the ordering 
it will be by file, because the men are contiguous in 
file, but it will not be by rank, since the first man in 
the first file, namely a, is not directly before the first 
man in the second file, namely 4, by rank. 

But those who wish to draw up the squadron 
neither by rank nor by file, prefer another arrange- 
ment for this formation ; for they first station as a 
SCE Vile —iNelaxixe lan Sclep. vil-. 9 — velexix, G-110: 


7 ro0 re TIT added by K. and R. after C (Salmasius), 
which has 6é (for re). 

| Eggoalmasius), K. and R.: écrw kai rod Y¥mmy F. 

eee Ey Keand hy: (misprint). 

MOK and ie) ron “ Added by K. and R. 

12 Cuyavroo F. ise ke andeltas iG. be 

14 The last three words are added by K. and R. (from C ?). 

* K. and R., following in the main C (Salmasius), which, 
however, has ay. oToxelv . . . mpoduunOnoay .. . émnvecav 
Géow: F has dc0 wy Te ororxelv pH dé fuyety KaTa TO TO fvyov 
dAXov TpdTov “-addov THY ElAnv Tpcbvunbeioay Ela Ta’THY ETAL NO OV 
TH Oéow, 


287 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


mp@Tov THs elAns' mpdcwmov Kai oiov Cuyov ras 
els ToUpmpoaber Ovo mAeupas TOU popBoedobs, 
otov aberp ha} SXTVT,” AaPdoevdes® oXHLA, ei” 
efis 0770 TobTo Sd avToo Acuropevov To @ /Ptove 
Ppacr, efra EtykmAEpG* Budde Kat totro Tob 
TPO avrob Aevoprevov,* Cuyapxobvros Tob ev TH 
Kara TO pecov ywvia, olov Tav aam, eSijs dé 
TOUTW TO TORKROAPX’, ob Cuydpxns 6 6,7 Kal b7r0 
TOUTO 70° bo TOs, Sah 0 TO tot, Kal €oxaTos 
ovpayos oO G. pavepov ovv OTL Décer peev ovdev 
dvoices TAY TporEepwv, Aner SE ovov, ws eK THs 


dmoypadyns SAAov EoTar. 


\ \ / 

10 Tarrovor 6€ Tas etAas, womep Kat Ta yda, 
\ \ \ ~ LA 10 \ de e \ ~ / 

ToTE pev mp0 THS dadrayyos,” ToTé bé bro TH Pa- 


1 eidno F. 2K. and R.: A62TPc adc XCNH F. 
3 B (margin) C (Salmasius) : AaBoedéeo re 


K. and R.: 6 Biov @ dpe ZN TAIMo F. 

K. and R.: Aurépuevory F. 

K. and R. (who read, however, or instead of 70): 
fvyapx ovvT os Kay TO dexaTnvywviav oiov TO 7 ef7s | d€ ToUTw Td 


KAAPX F (rd OTKOAPX C). 7\ OA Es 
288 


_— 


or 


a 


EACIICS, vir. 9 ~ 10 


face and a kind of rank of the squadron the opposite 
sides of the rhomboid 4 6E7Y fa} oyov7, like the 
letter A, then, in order, the line two men less in 
number 66 cove dpyp ¢yv, then the line ty x7rrAepo 
also two men less than the one before it, with the 
man at the centre corner leading each line, 2.e., the 
men aw7; then the line toxdApy whose leader 
is 6, then the line Yu7¢s, behind it } w 4, and last 
a squadron-closer a. It is clear, then, that such an 
arrangement will not differ from the former ones 
save in conception only, as will be evident from the 
diagram. ! 


The cavalry force is stationed, like the light in- 
fantry, sometimes before the phalanx, sometimes 


1 After one has observed the great care with which our 
author dwells upon these different formations, man by man, 
rank by rank, file by file, he is rather surprised to find that 
they differ only in the way one looks at them—that, in fact, 
paragraphs 7-9 are to be taken in a Pickwickian sense. 


Asclep. vii. 10=Ael. xx. 1. 
8 Supplied by K. and R. °K. and R.: ¢ oF. 


10 After ¢ddayyos F has the dittography rére 6é td ris 
Parayyoo* Tote 6€ UTO TH Gadayye. 


U 289 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Aayyt, arAoTe 8 ex mayiwy, obev Kal TOUTWV TO 
TAOos parayya prev ov kahobvow, emiTaypa d€, 
womep Kal TO Trav pray, du OTe emt TH dddaryyt 
TaTTOVTAL! TOs Tas TapaKkaAovoas avriy Xpetas. 
11 Tas pev otv dvo etAas emdAapyiav wvdopuacar, 
Tas dé dvo émdAapyias Tapavtwapyiav,” tas dé 
dvo Tapavtwapyias” immapyiav, tas d€ bVo0 tmmap- 
xlas edimmapxiav, TO dé dSumAobv THs ehimmapyxias 
téXos avdAoyov TO Kepare TNS padayyos. 70 
yobv t&v dvo TeAGY TO OdoV EmITAYHA ‘yiveTaL 


avadoyov TH Padayye. 


VIII. Mept apparwy 


Tév d€ apuarwy Kat eAedavtTwy et Kal THY 
xpHow omavilovoay edploKoper, adr’ Ou@s pos 
TO TéA€ELOV Tijs ypapys TAS ovopacias exOnodpeba. 
KaXovat TolWwov Ta ev dVo dpuata Cvyapxiav, Tas 
de dvo Cuvyapxias ovlvyiav, dvo Oe ouluyias 
emoucuytay, ovo dé emoucuylas dpparapxiay, 
Kal TO EK TOV? appwaTapyi@v Képas, ov TO durAa- 
ovov padayya. mreloot dé padrayer OppLaTwv 
Ypwpevov* efeoru Tats avrats ovopactars GUYKeE- 
pyoba. €or. d€ THY dpuatwy Ta pev wdd, 
Ta O€ dpemavnddpa Kata Tovs a€ovas. 


IX. [epi eAehavrwy 


"Emi b€ t&v eXedavTwy 6 pev Evos €&r€havTos 
apywy Cwapyos ovoualetar, 6 bé duety Oypapxos 
1K. and R.: rdrrew F. 


» K.and R.(from Arrian and Ael. Tact. xx.2; Lex. mil. § 32): 
TapavTiapxiay and -riapxias F. 3 Svoty K. and R. 


290 


TACTICS, vir. 10 — rx. 1 


behind it, and at other times on the flanks, for which 
reason this arm of the service is called a supporting 
force (epitagma), as in the case of the light infantry, 
and not a phalanx, because it is attached to the 
phalanx according as need for it arises. 

Now two squadrons are called a battalion (epzl- 
archia), two battalions a Tarentine regiment (Yar- 
antinarchia), two ‘Tarentine regiments a_ brigade 
(hipparchia), two brigades a division (ephipparchia), 
and the double of the division a complement (ée/os), 
corresponding to the wing of the phalanx. The 
two complements form the entire supporting force 
(epitagma), corresponding to the phalanx.! 


VIIL. Chariots 


Although we rarely find any use for chariots and 
elephants, we shall, nevertheless, set forth their 
nomenclature to complete this discussion. Two 
chariots are called a pair (zygarchia), two pairs a 
double-pair (syzygza), two double-pairs a chariot-unit 
(episyzygia), two .chariot-units a chariot-line (harmat- 
archia), two chariot-lines a wing (keras), and the 
double of this a phalanx. If several phalanxes of 
chariots are to be used, the same nomenclature may 
be employed. Some of the chariots have no offensive 
weapons, while others carry scythes on the axles. 


IX. Elephants 


In the branch of the elephants the leader of 
a single elephant is called an animal-commander 


1 That is, the phalanx of light infantry (cf. vi. 3). 


Asclepa wir. lA ele xx. 2: Asclep. viii=Ael. xxii. 
Asclep. ix=Ael. xxiii. 
+ xypwuévy K. and R. > guvKkexpnoba F. 


291 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Kal TO ovorTn[La Onpapxia, o de Teood pa eTl- 
Onpapxos KaL emInpapxia TO ovoTna, 0 b€ THY 
OKTW iAdpxns, Tov oe efxaldeka, edepavrapxys, 
Kepapyyns dé 0 TaV OVO Kal TpLaKovTa, 6 de THY 
OuTrAacroveny parayydpxys, Kal Opwvtuws TO 
avoTnpa Kal’ ExdoTyy apynv KeKAjgeTat. 


\ a \ \ , > a 
Xt ITlepu TWVY KATA TV KLWIOLV OVOLLAGLWV 


Ta pev otv €tdn THs TeAclas Suvduews Kal Ta 
ovopata THY ev avTH TaypaTwy elpnTa: é&fs 
d€ mept THY ovouatwy aKkddovfov Hé€yew, ois 
Ypwmevor pretappvbuilovow* of otparnyol Tas 
parayyas: pact yap TO pev TL kriouw* emt Sdépu 

eT domtba., TO O€ jetaBoAnv Kal eTLOTpOPTY, 
dAAo Kat dvaoTpopiy, ETEpOV Kal TEpLoTacpov® 
Kal ekTEpLOTTAO}LOV, dmoxaTdotacty Te Kal e€7l- 
KaTadoTaow, oTo.xety Te Kal Cuyetv* Kat eis dpbov 
amrodotvar Kal é€eAiooew® Kai dumAacialew- daci 
d€ TL kal eTaywynv Kal Tapayarynv def vay n 
Aaiav Kal’ 7Aaylav dddayya Kat opOiav Kai Aogijy, 
Kal trapepPoAnv Kal tapévOecow, mpdTakw’ Te Kal 


1 K. and R. write with one p and so apparently F. 

2 Kk. and R.: kAjow F. 

3 Added By K. and R. from Arrian and Aelian, Tactica, 
xxiv. 2 (cf. § 7 below): érepov kal éxrepicracpor F. 

+ These rae words are omitted by K. and R. but 
supported by the parallel esses in Arrian and Aelian, 
Tactica, xxiv. 2; cf. ch. x. § 11 below, last note. 

5 K. and R.: éfere F. 

6 K. and R.: cal xara F (but cf. Arrian and Aelian, l.c., 
§ 3, and § 21 below). 

7 K. and R.: ratw F. 


292 


PACTICGS tea fx). 


(zoarchos), the commander of two a beast-commander 
(therarchos) and his command a beast-unit (therarchia), 
the commander of four a top-beast-commander 
(epitherarchos) and his command a_ top-beast-unit 
(epitherarchia), the commander of eight a troop-com- 
mander (z/arches), of sixteen an elephant-commander 
(elephantarches), of thirty-two a wing-commander 
(kerarches), and of double this number a_phalanx- 
commander (phalangarches); corresponding names 
will be given to each unit.! 


X. The Terms used for military Evolutions 


The different branches of the entire army and the 
names of its lesser divisions have now been given; 
it remains to consider in turn the terms used by the 
commanders in manceuvring the divisions of the 
phalanx. For they use first ‘right-’ or ‘left-face’ 
(Alisis), then ‘ about-face’ (metabole) and ‘quarter-turn’ 
(epistrophe), also ‘back-turn’ (anastrophe), further ‘ half- 
turn’ (perispasmos) and ‘ three-quarter-turn’ (ekperi- 
spasmos)and ‘return-to-original-position’ (apokatastasis) 
and ‘advance-to-original-position’ (epzkatastasis), ‘order 
files’ (storchein) and ‘ order ranks’ (zygein), also ‘ lines 
front’ (eis orthon apodunai) and ‘ counter-march ’ (ex- 
eligmos) and ‘ doubling’ (diplastasmos); they use also 
‘march-in-column’ (epagoge) and ‘march-in-line’ 
(paragoge), and these either ‘to the right’ or ‘to 
the left, ‘extended front,’ ‘column formation,’ and 
‘oblique front’ (plagia, orthia, lore phalanx), ‘ inter- 
jection’ (parembole) and ‘insertion’ ( parenthesis), and 

1 It is very doubtful if such terms as these were known 
outside the class-rooms of the philosophic strategists. 

Asclep. x. 1=Ael. xxiv. 
293 


2 


3 


= 


Or 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Cary, 1 Sis EIN, a ¢ ¢ , 
brdéTaEw" Kai emitakw, @v Exaorov 6 Tt onuaiver, 
dnA@oar Oud Bpaxeoy mrerpacopeDa.. 

KAtous pev oov EOTW y) kar’ avopa Kinous, emt 
ddpu prev 7) emt deEid, em aomida S€ 7 én” api- 

Ze \ A ¢ mY One 2.7 , \ 

OTEpa, Em O€ THY immoTav” ef Hviav: yivetat be 
\ > / ~ 

KaTa Tas ek mAayiwy éefddovs Tav TrodceuiwV 

avTimopias yapw  vmEepKepdcews® Smep eoTW 
tmepParéobar TO Kepas TOV ToAELiwV. 

J] pa ye eS nN \ 3, REN Fhe / \ 

é dls emt TO avTO ywomeryn* KAloLs KATA 
vwToOV Tas THY OTALTHVY oyfers petatletoa KaAetrat 
petaBody, 7S ovo Ovadopat, ev amo TAY 7r0- 
Acpiov, nv Kal em ovpav errovopn.dlovow, 7 8 
éml Tovs moAEmious am’ odpas® Kadovpev7. 

3 \ / b] CP >) vn / iA 

Emvotpod7) b€ €oTw, OT av muKVa@oavTes OAoV 

\ 
TO ovvTaypa Kata Adyov Te Kal Cuyov ws €vos 
~ / 
avdpos c@ma KAivapev, Ws av TmEept KEeVTpPOV TrEpL 

\ = (Rye a Thy Sen / \ / 
Tov mp@tov Aoyayov,® et wev emt Sdpu, Tov SeE.ov, 
el 6€ é€m aomida, TOV apioTtepov OAov’ Tod ovV- 
Taypatos mepievexfevtos Kat petadaBdvTos® Tov 
eu-Tpoovev TOTrov KaL emupaveray emt Sdpu jev 
THY €K defudv, € em aomtoa dé THv emt Aaav. 

Oiov éoTw ovvTaypia To aByo,° Aoxayav” 5° ev 
avr@ Cuyov TO x 1 B- ov Aov d€, OTL defvos pev 
é€otat Aoyayos 0” Kata TO Bf, Noite d€ 6 KATA TO G, 

1 Uritaiw F. 2 K. and R. suggest imméwr. 

3 A and B in margin, K. and R.: 7 vrepacwo F. 

+ yiyvouevn K. and R.: ywouérn is attested also in Lex. mil. 

A. 


2 dmoupao B 


° K. and R. (Aoxaydv C, the second rept suggested by K. 


and R.): mepixevtpov mp&rov Noyov F. _7 bdo F. 
8 K. and R.: mweraBadXovtoe F. ® abr: FE: 
10K. and R.: Aoxayor F. 11 Supplied by K. and R. 


1 The great confusion of these terms during this period 
204 


TACTICS, x. 1-5 


‘van-position’ (protaxis), ‘rear-position’ (hypotaais), 
and ‘supporting-position’ (epztaxs). The significa- 
tion of each of these terms we shall endeavour to 
explain as briefly as possible.! 

Right- or left-facing, then, is the movement of the 
individual men, ‘ by spear’ to the right, and ‘by shield’ 
—called in the cavalry ‘by rein’—to the left; this 
takes place when the enemy falls upon the flanks 
and we wish either to counter-attack, or else to 
envelop his wing, z.e., overlap the wing of the enemy. 

The double turning, which is performed in the 
same way, whereby the soldiers face about to the 
rear, is called an about-face (metabole), of which there 
are two kinds, the one from the enemy, called ‘to 
the rear’ (ep uran), and the other toward the 
enemy, called ‘from the rear’ (ap’ uras). 

It is a quarter-turn, when we close up the entire 
battalion by file and rank in the compact formation ? 
and move it like the body of one man in such a 
manner that the entire force swings on the first file- 
leader as on a pivot, if to the right on the right 
file-leader, and if to the left on the left file-leader, 
and at the same time takes a position in advance and 
faces ‘by spear’ if pivoting right and ‘by shield’ 
if pivoting left. 

Let the battalion, for example,? be af y 64, and 
a 8 its rank of file-leaders; it is clear, then, that the 
right file-leader will be the one at £ and the left the 
was probably due to the fact that such discussions had lost 
all contact with the drill-ground. 

2 That is, two cubits apart. 


3 The diagrams to explain this and the following evolutions 
will be found on p. 301. 


ASCLED. 42 — NelaxKxVvnil i) ASCLED aX. o— Nel XV. 2-4 
NSClepe xo.4— Atel cay 5. 


295 


6 


zu 


8 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Kat em Sopu pev TO Kara To B Hep, | en domida 
d€ TA KATA TO G* pLeévovTOS Tovey Tob B, El em 
oTpepopiev édov 76 aByd ovvTaypa emt dcpu, TO 
KaTo Ty ap Cuyov peTAOTHOETAL em THV mpos 
opBas avT@ Oeow THv Be Kal oAov TO Bady' EOTaL 
WS TO pela €TEOT POJLpLEVOV €mt Odpuv Kal KaT- 
evAnpos® TOTOV pev TOV EuTpoaber, Emipaverav dE 
TH deEvav. 

“Avaorpopy | O¢ eoTW dmoKaTdaracus THS em- 
oTpopis els ov® mpokaretxe TO OUVVTAYLA TOTOV, 
olov TOV KaTa TO a 1 BY 6. 

[Tepromracpos d€ €oTw 7? ex Ovely emoTpopay 
Too owTayparos Kivqots KAT TO avTO pépos ws 
TO B OKA: THs pev yap mparns ETLOTPOPHS THS 
Kata To Beln emexel TOTOV i TOV eumpooder, 
emupaveray de THV Se€av, THs 5 EE apyHs Becews 
Ths aByo ets® Todmiow PrEzet. 

’Exmepiomacpos b€ eoTw, OT av eK TpLoOv émt- 
oTpopay’ emt 7a, avTa ovvex@v KW TOW Ta. ouv- 
TaypaTa els TOV omlev TOTroV Kal Ty els Aavov 
emipaveray, Kabdrrep € Exel TO Bare, tod wev BAKA ets 
TovpTpoolev KaTO THY (Sefiay KEL[LEVOV emupavelar, 
Tob 6€ KaTa THY ef a apis Oeow B ady els rovmobe 
TE [LETATIEGDOV Kal Ty dprorepav PAé€zov emupdvevav. 

Kat davepov, ote Tov exmepiommacuov ov KaTa 


1 Bear F. > K. and R.: karewkndaoo F. 

3 K. and R.: jy F. 

. BoaBra F: K. and R. delete Bo. It is, however, a mis- 
take for 74, which I have introduced into the text. 

5 Lex. mil. § 37, K. and R.: om. F. 

6 Omitted by K. and R. 

7 B (margin) C (Salmasius), Lex. mil. § 37, K. and R.: 
mepiotpéguy F. 
296 


TACTICS, x. 5-9 


one at a, and the divisions of the force at 6 will be 
on the right, and the divisions at a will be on the 
left; if, then, we make the entire battalion af y 6 
quarter-turn to the right, while ( holds his position, 
the line a 6 will occupy the position Pe at a right 
angle with a £, and the entire unit will be swung to 
the right into the position /£ « (7, occupying a position 
in advance and facing to the right. 

A back-turn is the reversal of the forward-turn 
to the position the battalion originally held, as to 
a By 6. 

A half-turn is the movement of the battalion by 
two quarter-turns in the same direction, as 6 6« A; it 
proceeds from the first forward-turn position f « (7, 
takes a position in advance, and faces to the right, 
and, if considered from its original position a y 6, 
it faces to the rear.! 

It is a three-quarter-turn when the battalions 
move by three quarter-turns in the same direction to 
the position behind and facing left from the original 
station, as Byvé, a position which, considered from 
£ @« X, lies before and faces the right, and considered 
from the original station Bady, lies behind and 
faces the left.? 

It is obviously impracticable to revert by a back- 

1 Such an evolution could scarcely ever have been used 
in actual warfare. 

2 This evolution must have been confined to the drill- 
ground, where for purposes of discipline and exercise 


formations are still taught which find no place in aciual 
battle. 


Asclep. x. 6=Ael. xxv. 7. Asclep. x..7= Ael. xxv. 8. 
Asclep. x. 8=Ael. xxv. 9. 


8 B (mar in) C (Salmasius), K. and R.: cuvéxwy yivnrar F. 
297 


10 


11 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


avaotpopyy amoxabioravew’  mpoonket — denao- 
jueo. yap TpLav dvaoTpopav, iva sep ere 
Tis TE em 70 BOKA Kat THs em To Ppeln Kat ETL 
Tis emt TO Bady »—aAra KaT emLoTpopry piav 
Ty emt TO Odpu, 3. ért TO Bady*® rod Bavé TOTOV 
plev exer TOV epmpoodev,® emupavevav de Ty eK 
defidv. Kahetrat d€ " Kar emLaTpopyy els TO 
e€ apyis dmoxaTdoraouss eTLKATAOTAOLS. 
pev. ovv TpwTy _emuoTpogy) Kal 1) TplTn Ka- 
Aovpevn EKTIEPLOTFAG]LOS povax@s amoxabioravTat, 
1 bev KATO. dvaorpopry povers 5 Beli, 7 O€ Kar” 
EN Lovers 4 Beve: 4 S€ dy wéon TovTwWY 
n BOKA, Hv Kal TE pLoTAO}LOV kahobpev, dux@s 
amoxabiorarat, Sat Oe or 1 kara avacTpopry 
Kivnous avTHs ton €oTl TH KaT ETLOTPOPHY™ ovo 
yap. dvaorpopats dmoKATAoT GET AL Th Te €is TO 
Bela KaL TH Els TO Bady,’ al dvo emaTpogats 
STLKATOUTHOET OR, TH Te eis TO BaVE Kat TH Ets TO 
padoy 
Ki "S en aomioa Trovoiweba® THY emLOTpOPyy, 
Tomov epe€er TO ovvTaypa Kal OUTW TOV eumpooter, 
emipavelayv Oe evayTiay THY Kar’ dpuorepay: ce 
perataxfev yap To a 1878 rept pevovra TOV a 
Aoyayov Oéow e€e THY" GOTP KaTAa TPwTHY ETL- 
OTpOPny, KaTa OE TEPLOTTAGJLOV THY aG7TU, EKTTEpL- 


amokabiordva K. and R. 2 K. and R.: Bara F. 
K. and R.: rév euev (space of three letters) F. 

K. and R.: xardoracic F. 

K. and R.: povayd xabicravra FB. 

K. and R.: xadicrara F. 

Ba (erasure of one letter) Ar F. 

The words from xai 6vo to the end stand thus in F 
(except 77 twice), but have fallen out in ABC. 


298 


or Om oO me & eH 


TACTICS, x. 9-11 


turn from the three-quarter-turn to the original 
position, for we shall require three back-turns to do 
this, one to the position @@xA, one to Pe (x, and 
one to Bady; but it is practicable by a quarter-turn 
to the right, because £6 a6 y occupies a position before 
Bypvé and faces to its right. The return by a 
quarter-turn to the original position is called advance- 
to-original-position (epikatastasis). 

Now the first position, the quarter-turn, and the 
third, called the three-quarter-turn, can be restored 
to the original position by a single evolution, the 
first Bey, by a single back-turn, the second Bypv& 
by a single quarter-turn; but the position between 
these two, 6 6x A, which we also call a half-turn, can 
resume its original station equally well by two 
evolutions, because its movement by a back-turn 
equals that by a quarter-turn ; since it requires two 
back-turns to revert to the original position, first to 
Be ¢y and then to Bad y, and also two quarter-turns 
to advance to the original position, first to B wv € and 
then to Bady. 

If we should make the quarter-turn to the left, 
then the battalion will in the same way occupy the 
position in advance, with its face, however, to the 
left; since a Py6, by pivoting upon the stationary 
file-leader a, will by the first quarter-turn take the 
position aozp, by the half-turn the position ag7v, 

With Asclep. x. 11 ef. Ael. xxxiv. 1. 
° rovovweda K. and R. 10 K. and R.: dpiotepév F. 


1K. and R.: oo riv F: as C (Salmasius). 
12 K. and R.: repisracudy tTiva CTY EF. 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


A \ \ -T- J. 1 A 
omacletoa Sé tiv addy’ Kal éemKataocrabecioa 
\ 1 -9-§ ¢ \ A > , 2 \ 
mv apyd. 1 dé T&v amoxatactdcewr™ diapopa 
Omoia Tats emt Sdpu cot voeicbw. 
Tatra dé yiverau omdr’ av ot mod€ptor Tapa- 
datvwvTar Kata mAevpav THs dddAayyos.* 





Kit 2* 2% 
(2?) litterae evanidae. (?)* litterae bibliopegi incuria abscisae (Rostagno). 


(In place of this figure which contains some errors and is not easy to 
understand, K. and R. have substituted two which will be found on the 
opposite page. On these figures in general see the Introduction.) 


12 Eis op@ov dé é€oTw amodobvat TO emt THV e€ 
apxns O€ow amoKaTacTica: avdpa eKkacTov wore, 
el é€mt Sdpu KAivew €k THV ToAquiwy KeAEJowTO 
> > >) 24 5 \ 5 zA / >] \ \ 
e(ra av0is ém’* opbov amodobvar, denoer emt Tovs 
modeplous maAw Tpémecba. 

13. "E&eAuypos® b€ yiverau tpryds, Maxedovxds te 


1K. and R.: émixaracraca Ty F. 

2 K. and R.: xaracrdcewy F. 

% A lacuna is assumed here by K. and R. since an explana- 
tion of croxeiv Te Kai fvyeiv in § 1 above is not given at this 
point, although an extremely verbose one appears in Arrian 
and Aelian, Zactica, xxvi. 1, in this same relative position. 


300 


TACTICS; x. 11 — 13 


by the three-quarter-turn the position a 4 x w, and by 
the advance-to-original-position, the position a [ y 6. 
The different ways of returning to the original 
position you may consider similar to those used in 
evolutions to the right. 

These evolutions are used whenever the enemy 
appears on a flank of the army. 





It is called lines-front when man by man the force 
reverts! to its original position, so that in case the 
command has been given to turn to the right from 
the enemy and then to form lines-front, the men 
will have to turn back so as to face the enemy. 

There are three types of the counter-march, the 


1 That is, from a turn to the right or to the left. 


Wselep. x7 12—Ael. xxvis 3: 
Asclep. x. 13—Ael; xxvii. 1-2 ; xxviii. 1. 


These terms were defined, however, in ch. ii. 6, above, and, 
as nothing new is to be added, Asclepiodotus may have 
been satisfied with that. 

+ K. and R. suggest eis or és 6p@dv which is more natural, 
is supported by Aelian and Arrian, Yactica, xxvi. 3, and 
Lex. mil. § 38, and is perhaps correct. 

5 jéeXcyuds (at beginning of a line) F. 

301 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Kal Aaxwvuros Kal ETL Kpnrucos TOL Tlepoucos: 
TobTo de yiweTar duxy@s, 7) KATA OTOtYOV 7) KaTa 
Cuyov.* 
\ \ GN b] > / fey eS, ~ 
Makedovikos pev obv €oTw eSehuypios, oT’ av TOO 
Aoxayobvros cuyob TOV OlKElOY TOTTOV emr€XOVTOS 
Ta Omlow Cvya TOV epTpootev KaraAaBn TOTOV™ 
peOroTapevan HEXpis ovpayod, eita Kat avdpa 
petaBadovrav: otov et Tob apyse Luyod Ao- 
XayobvTos Kal PEVOVTOS. emt Tavroo Ta Els TOUTICW 
TO" CiOiK Kal TO ApeV EO els TO Tpocw kaliornTar, 
"TOL KOTO. Cuyov, WOTE TO ao Gtk peTAOTHVAL 
TO Aveo KATO TO PxPas 7) Kara crotyor, ware 
TO bev KO yevertau | KATa TA US, TA dé te Kara Ta 
TO Kal TO" ef; otov Ta OD Kata TA of Kal Ta 
ep Kara Ta px Kal ra® CX Kara TO a: eiTa 
Kal Kar avopa peraPddwow a0 ovpayod, le 
pépn, BAemew Sé Kata Ta aBy5s dua TO ‘Bev 
b ~ \ / \ \ iA \ 
opOivar TOUS ToAepious. davepov dé OTe Kara 
TOUTOV TOV eSehuypov 7 parayé dd€evev av vrro- 
Xwpetv Tod OlKEelov TOTOU Kal duyh Tapa Anovov 
movetv, 6 67 Oappadewrépous pev moret Tovs 
/ > / \ \ > / 
moAeutous, aoleveatépous 5€ Tovs e&eAicoovTas. 
¢€ \ \ >? \ \ > / / 
14 *O d€ Aakwrixos €€eAvypos Tov evavtTiov ToUTw 


1 This whole sentence beginning with roiro dé does not 
appear here in F, where, as K. and R. saw, it belongs, but 
between the words ré7ov and pefictauévwy in the middle of 


the next sentence. __ 2 See preceding note. 
¢ K-and\ R..i:; abipadl. + K. and R.: rovricw re F. 
5 K. and R.: pera F. 6 K. and R.: z@ F. 
7 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: xara F. 
8 


K. and R.: xara F. 


TACTICS, x. 13 — 14 


Macedonian, the Laconian, and also the Cretan or 
Persian; and each of these, again, is performed in 
two ways, either by file or by rank.! 

It is a Macedonian counter-march when the rank 
of file-leaders holds its original position, and the 
rear ranks down to the file-closers march through to 
a forward position and then each man about-faces ; 
thus a B ydeis the rank of file-leaders and remains 
in the same place, and the back ranks (7 @ux and 
\pv&o move forward, either by rank so that ¢7 @ k 
marches through first and becomes zpotv and 
\ pv &o becomes f x ws, or by file so that « o takes 
the place of vs, «€ of Tw, and so on, as Ov of cy, np 
of px, and ¢A of ~¢; and then each man from the 
file-closer on about-faces, 2.¢e., 7patv and dy~pws 
turn about and face with a Py de as their front line, 
because the enemy was seen in the rear.” It is clear 
that in this kind of counter-march the phalanx would 
seem to yield ground and to be almost in flight, 
which emboldens the enemy and disheartens those 
who are counter-marching. 

The Laconian counter-march takes up a position 

1 The importance of the counter-march by files is evident, 
when one bears in mind that in the front lines of the ancient 


phalanx were stationed the best soldiers (cf. iii. 5-6). 
2 The following diagram will explain this manceuvre: 


expos 
Tp io 7 v 
apy de 
GeneO can 
Amvéo 
Asclep. x. 14=Ael. xxvii. 3: xxviii. 9; of. xxxiv. 4. 
® Supplied by C (Salmasius), K. and R. 


fo kerand yn: \z FP. 1 ride K. and R.: 76 de F. 
2 The additions were made by K. and R.: pév ra Hyw F. 


303 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


peraAap aver TOTOV" peraBahrerv yap €KaoTos 
eT ovpday, JevovTos TOU ovpayobvros luyotd otov 
Tob Aveo: Ta yap Aowrd, To te CHOiK Kal TO 
a Bye pcOioratar ed’ exdrepa . . . Tod odpa- 
yodvros, duy@s O7jAov ort, WTOU KaTa _oTOtXov 
nH KaTa cuyov, Kal Géow exer TO pev COR rip 
to) ZHOIK,? ro b€ aBySE tH Tob ABTAE? 
ToUTO 51) TOL O Pete e€ehuyp.os THY evavTiav 
KaTQa TOV Makedovurcor Tots | ToAc tous TOpEXETAL 
d0€av- epoppay yap Kal émévar dogerey av omufev 
Tapapavetow, wate KataTAnéar adtovs* Kat det- 
Aiav €k Todd yevéobar. 

15 ‘“O Kpnzikos dé Kal ITepoucos kadovpevos pLéoos 
€oTl appotv: ov yap TOV omev THs pddayyos 
peTadapBaver TOTOD, ws 0 Makedovkds, ovre 
Tov éumpoobev, ws 6 Aakwvikds, add’ emi Tod 








ZaHeeOL leant 


A ot ae TAS 
? litterae evanidae (Rostagno). 
avdrod ywplov Oo Lev Aoxayos Tob ovpayod Tov 
Tomov? petaAapBaver Kal of KaTa TO €&fs eEmt- 
304 


TACTICS, x. 14-15 


the opposite of that shown above; for each soldier 
about-faces to the rear, while the rank of file-closers 
\ wv €0 holds its position; and the other ranks (7 61k 
and af#+yée march through on either side [to a 
position behind the] file-closer—and this, clearly, 
in two ways, either by file or by rank—and (7 6c 
take the position ZHOIK, and a fy d« the position 
ABTAE.! By this form of manceuvre the Laconian 
counter-march arouses a feeling in the enemy just 
opposite to that aroused by the Macedonian; for 
they would seem to those who have appeared in the 
rear to be making for and charging upon them, so 
that they dismay the enemy and arouse fear among 
them. 

The so-called Cretan and Persian counter-march 
is an intermediate between these two; for it does 
not occupy the position behind the phalanx, as the 
Macedonian, nor the one before the phalanx, as the 
Laconian, but occupies the same ground, while the 
file-leader takes the place of the file-closer, and in 
like manner the rear-rank-men those of the front- 

1 To explain the manceuvre : 

aByde 
6 ay GY GP 
Amv éo 
ZH®IK 
ABTAE 
Asclep. x. 15=Ael: xxvii. 45, xxviii. 3; a xxxiv. 5. 
poe they suggest rapidyra els Tov SmeBev TOTov. 


2K. and R.: ZHOIK iB > K. and R.: ABrAE F. 
4K. and R.: atroic F. 5 K. and R.: roueév F. 


x 305 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 
OTaTaL Kal mpwTooTdTa’ Kal .. .? qmapamo- 
pevopevor Kkavrabda (Oux@s ip Kata Adxov 7H Kara 
Cuyov, axypis av o ovpayos TOV TOD Aoxayod TOmTov 
avTyseTaraBy, otov Aoxayodvros Too a iByde Kal 
ESTs _ emLoTaToovTos” Tob C SH etK Kal ep is Tob 


SBy8e ouTw yap O basins ovK amoornoet 


TOU avTow Xwpiov aH pan ONY Se O7TEp Tei EoTaL 
XPHOLLov, OT0T av Mow ot exaTeépwlev TOTTOL 


davrdtepor. 
16 Poovra d€ KaTA cuyov eehuypot, oT av Ta 
Kepara. peDioryrat Tay aTroTOMAY: dua Tadra® 


yap loxupa Trove tra" Ta, peoa Tijs padayyos. 


EVLOTE de KATO QTTOTOMAS ouK eyxwpet Tovs 
7S 


e€eAypovs mowmoacbar, oT av eyyds dow ot 
moAguior, aAAd Kata ovvTaypa, woTe TO TOU 

/ \ > / \ \ 
ouvraypatos deiov avtyseraAayPaverw Ta Aaa 
Kat avamradw?® 


1 K.and R.: mpoorara F. 

2 For the lacuna which K. and R. recognize at this point 
they suggest mpwrogtdra: ws atirws Tov Témov épetis meTahap- 
Bdavovce taparopevduevac, but, since the actual words are 
uncertain, they leave xai in the text. a 

3 Supplied by K. and R. 4 K. and R.< Appa 

> C (Salmasius), K. and R.: é&ncaros F. 

6 K. and R.: 6a tv aroréuwy Tavras F. 

7 isxupomoetrac C (Salmasius), K. and R. 

8 K. and R: rov rod dedvod cuvrdyuatoo avTimeradauBavery 
Ta Nard Kai ava taow F. C (Salmasius) wrote in the margin 
kal Tov Nady Ta deka, Which would require tov degiov Tod 
cuvTaymatos above. 


306 


TACTICS, x. 15 — 16 


rank-men . . . marching past each other, and this 
in two ways, either by file or by rank, until the file- 
closer has in turn taken the place of the file-leader. 
That is, consider the line of file-leaders a B y de, of 
rear-rank-men (7 6.x, then Apv€o, and after it as 
the rank of file-closers 7po7v; then af yde takes 
the position of tpa7v, (7 OrK of Awvéo, ApvéEo 
that of (76x, and tpo7rv that of aByde! By 
this counter-march the phalanx will not change its 
ground, and this we shall find advantageous, whenever 
the terrain before and behind is less favourable. 

Counter-marches are made by rank, when the 
half-wings exchange positions each within its own 
wing,” for this strengthens the centre of the phalanx. 
Sometimes it is not advisable to make the counter- 
marches by half-wings, when the enemy is near by, 
but rather by battalions, so that the right wing of 
the battalion occupies the left and vice versa. 


1 Cf. the diagram : 


a B y 6 © 
e ° @ +) e 
7 p oc T v 
¢ n 6 t K 
e e i) e @ 
A i" 7 é 0 
A pe v é oO 
@ e J g 2 
¢ q 6 t K 
7 p o T v 
e e e e o 
a B y 6 € 


2 Since the strongest half-wing occupies the right flank, 
the second strongest the left, and the others the centre, by 
this evolution the two stronger half-wings will exchange 
places with the two weaker, and so the centre will be 
strengthened and the wings weakened. 


Asclep. x. 16=Ael. xxvii. 5; xxviii. 4. 
307 


17 


18 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Ot: Baer AGE 


Zot Olek 


Me S\Olan NLS oO 
lurery 


—— ——— 


/ \ / ~ >! \ ih, 
AurAactacar de AéeyeTar Siy@s: 7) yap Tomov, 
> e ¢€ / / ~ / ~ > ~ 
ev @ 7) paray€, peevovTos 708 TAnGous THY avdpav, 
7 TOV d,puB wor avr ay: yiveTau de ex d-TEpov OuxOs 
Kata Adxov 7 Kara Suyov, Tadrov de etrety Kata 
Palos 7) KaTa phKos. KaTa phKOS pev OvV 
yerat OuTAaovagpLos avop@v, oT a poeTako 
TOV TpotTapxovTwy Aoywv TrapeuPadrdwuev 7 Tap- 
euTrA€Kepue aAAous adtots* toapiOjous TO HeAjKos 
THs parayyos puddrrovres, WOTe TUKVWOW ‘yeve- 
ofa pLovnv €K THs TOV avdpav OuTAacudcews: 
Kata Bdbos d€, or av peTta&d THY TpotinapyovTwv 
A ” De ey / 2 ¢ 
Cuy@y adda avrots toapiOwa TrapeuParurer WOTE 
/ 
kata Palos etvat mUKVWOoW povay: Th de drevyvoyxe 
mapenPorr TmapepTrAOKHS, elpnTau TpoTeEpoy. 
Tozou de yiveTau OumAacvagpios KATA [LHKOS LEV, 
/ 
OT av THY Tpoerpy Levy KATA pLnKOS TUKVWOW 
LLAVOTNTL PETATATTWpEV, 7° Ot aapevtelevTes* 
e€eNlEwou Kata pKos Tpos® TO [47° UTEpKEepacOhvat 
bo THY ToAcUiwv 7° OT av brepKepacat Bovdwpcba 
Tovs moAeuious: TO 6 vmepKepdoar eat TO TH” 
1 @\dous abrois Lex. mil. § 40 (cf. below ada advrois), K. 
and R. (in note, &\dous nlone | in text): ddAjAous F. 
2 K. and R. after C (Salmasius), which, however, omits 
avTots: mpovmapxovTwy ddd ad’roic todpiOua wore F.: Lex. mil. 
§ 40 reads rapeuBdrwuer 7) mapeuTrAEK@mEV GAA avTois KTV. 


308 


TACTICS, x. 17 —18 


The term doubling is used in two ways: either of 
the place occupied by the phalanx, while the number 
of the men remains the same, or of the number of 
the men; and each of these may be by file or by 
rank, also called by depth or by length. Doubling 
of men, then, takes place by length when we inter- 
ject or insert between the original files other files 
of equal strength, maintaining all the while the 
length of the phalanx, so that a compact order 
arises only from the doubling of the men; doubling 
takes place by depth when we interject between 
the original ranks others of equal strength, so that 
a compact order arises only by depth. The difference 
between insertion and interjection has been explained 
before.t 

Doubling of place occurs by length when we 
change the above mentioned compact formation 
by length into a loose formation, or when the inter- 
jected men counter-march by rank, either to prevent 
being outflanked by the enemy or when we wish to 
outflank the enemy; by outflanking is understood 


1 Cf. vi. 1, where, however, a slightly different word is 
used for ‘ insertion.’ 


PXSCIED a Xouhd — NCL PEXEk. li 5) 25,0: 
Asclep. x.) 18—xxixe 7519; xxxvilis 1-9) 


3 wavoTnre meraraTTouern oi F. 

4 rapevTibevtes F : rapevrebévres Lea. mil. § 40. 

° Thus have K. and R. reconstructed the confused passage 
which runs in F: xara pcos. rotitro 6é yiverac br’ av 
UmepKkepacat Bovlwueba Tovs moNeuiovc. TO 0 UmEpKEepdoar EeoTiv 
TOT@ Képatt UrepBaéobar TO Exeivwy Képas TOU ETEpou" EvioTeE 
kai €A\NLTovToOG dtodtyorynra avopay ...19... e&eNiEwor 
kata Badoo mpos TO UTEpKEepacOjAvat b7O TOV Toteuiwr. 


309 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


, mY Ob igen iise , W5 , 1 
KEpate TO eTépw vTrepPar€oar TO Exeivwy Képas'— 
eet \ , i SF \ mie ues $9 / 
TotTo d€ yiverar’ éviore Kal Tod érépov' éAdel- 
1 es) , ie A ¢ o> » p) 
movros du oAvyoTnTa’ avdp@v, ws, oT av ye Kal 
Cay / e , e A 2 
EKATEPOV KEpas WARS ase i brreppadayyety 
Aéyerau. 

19 Kara BaBos d€ yierau TomToU duTAacvacpos, 
OT av THY mpoeipnuervny Kata Bdbos mUKYwoW 
LLavoTnre peTararropiev 7? ot mapevtebevtes* e€€- 
ehiEwou kata Babos.* 

a \ 

20 ‘AmoKkaraorioa. d€ OT av BovAcipeba emt Ta 
e€ apxAs mapayyeAodpiev eFedicoew TOUS jLeTa- 
TeTaypevous els OUS mpoetyov Tomous. Evior Oe 
Tovs ToLwovTovs dimAaciacpods amodoKiyualovow 

A afin 
Kal pddtoTa eyyds ovTwy TeV Todepiwv, Ep 
Exdtepa Oé€ THV Kepadtwy Ttods yirAods Kal Tovs 
immeas emeKTeivovtes THV® dw TOO" Si7rAaActacuod 
Ywpls TApayns Tis parayyos dmob.oacw. 

21. [wera de ek TOV TOLOUT OY OXNLATLO LOY 
ddray€ ToTE fev TeTPAywvos, ToTE JE TapapnKns 
Kal nTow mwAayia, OT av TO pHKos ToD Bdbous 

, 28 9 2 Q/ o> DL \ 
modAaTAdowov 7,° 7° opBia or av avamadw To 
, A Tass , Ewe esa / ¢ 7 10 
Babos Tod pnKous: TovTwy 6 ava pecov 7 AoEn, 
7 Oatepov Képas mAnoiov Eéxovoa Tv TroAELiwv 
~ ~ > > 

Kal ev avT@ Tov ay@va Trowoupevyn, Garepov™ 5 ev 


1 See note 5 on p. 309. 
2 C (Salmasius) ? K. and R.: trepdarayyw F. 
3 wavornre meTaTaTTouern oi F. 4 rapevridevtes F, 
5 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: ére:ra F. 
6 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: # éxreivovreo F. 
7 K. and R. (B? C?): 4 rod F. 
8 Added by K. and R. 
® Added by C (Salmasius)? K. and R. 10 oxy F. 
1K; and Re: cack. 


310 


TACTICS, x. 18 — 21 


the throwing of one wing about the wing of the 
enemy—and this is done sometimes even when a 
wing is numerically inferior to that of the enemy— 
as when both wings are used in a flanking movement, 
it is called a double outflanking. | 

Doubling of place is performed by depth when we 
change the above mentioned compact formation 
by depth into a loose formation, or when the inter- 
jected men counter-march by file. 

Whenever we wish to return this compact forma- 
tion to its original position, we shall command the 
men who have changed their position to counter- 
march to their original stations. Some condemn 
such doublings, especially when the enemy is near, 
and, by extending the light infantry and cavalry on 
both wings, give the appearance of the doubling 
without disturbing the phalanx. 

By such evolutions a phalanx assumes the form 
sometimes of a square, sometimes of an oblong 
rectangle, or, again, of an extended front when the 
length is many times as great as the depth, or of an 
extended depth when the depth is many times as 
great as the length; an oblique front lies midway 
between the last two. In this formation one wing is 
drawn up close to the enemy and fights the contest, 
while the other is partly withdrawn and refused ; 


Asclep. x. 19=Ael. xxix. 9. 
mAcclenwix 2O— Nel. xxix, a3, 05 65 10. 
Acclem,. x. 71 — Nel. xxx: 
#311 


22 





ASCLEPIODOTUS 


amootace. d. dooToAfs’ e€xovoa, deEra pev 2? 


TO Oe€tov® mpopePAnpevn, Aaa dé 7 To Aa. 






OPGH 























ae 


* hic litterarum vestigia sunt tam evanida, ut quid legeretur scriptum deprehendi 
non possit. 


** quid pictum esset in tabula apioTepa inscripta non patet (Rostagno). 


\ \ \ + / ) / > A 
IloAAa 5é Kat adda oyrjuara od pdvov ev Tats 
A / 
paxais, aAAa Kav Tats Tropetats layer mpOs Tas €€at- 
puns Trav TrohepLiaay epodovs: KaTadvarpetrau yap 
els Ta pepy TOTE jLev TA peilov, ToTE dé Ta eAdTTW, 
otov Kepara Kal amorowds, @or ev TH oulevget 
TAS polpas TOTE fev avTLaTOMoUSs yevecbaL, ToTE 
\ > / yy \ ¢e / a“ e 
de approropous, adAoTe S€ OpovoaTcpous 7) €TEPO- 
OTOMOUS. 
nv \ > CaN / e ~ \ / 
H yap €&€ évos pépous bhop@vrat Tovs 7oAeptovs 
n ek duvet? 7 TpL@v 7 TavTaydDev, TEepL wV EERS 
ElpnTal. 


XI. Ilept mopevav 


Tapaywyy Kahetrat 7 Tijs padrayyos aro Kal? 
oAnv 7 Kara been) Kal, et Kal’ oAnv, 7° zAayia 
Aéyeran, or” ay Kara TH mAayiav Oéow Badiln, 
7) opia, 67 av Kata THY dpBiav- Kat et trAayia 
mopevolto, HToL Kat opOdv,’ 6r av Kata Tovs 

1K. and R.: dciirocroAny F. 

27K and, R. (Gmsss?) ce. 3K. and R.: ra deéa F. 


4 A lacuna is perhaps to be assumed here since an ex- 
planation of mwapeuBor7, rapévOecis, mpdrakis, vrdragis, and 


312 


EACTICS xs: ot > xa. 1 


it is called the right oblique when the right wing is 
advanced, and the left oblique when the left wing 
is advanced.! 

Many other formations are in use, not merely 
in battle, but also on the march to guard against 
the sudden attacks of the enemy; for the entire 
army is broken up into its parts, sometimes large and 
sometimes small, such as wings and half-wings, so 
that when the parts are combined the army may 
face the enemy with inner fronts or with outer fronts, 
and at other times with corresponding or again with 
different fronts. 

For the enemy is descried either on one side, or on 
two, or three, or on all sides. Each of these situa- 
tions has been discussed in order. 


XI. Formations in Marching 


A march in line (paragoge) is the march of the 
phalanx, either as a whole or by its parts ; as a whole, 
it is called either a march by front when it advances 
with extended front, or a march by file when it 
advances in file. And if it march with an extended 
front it is either forward by the rank of file- 

1 The figures to explain these formations will be found 
below: square (Fig. 21), extended front (Figs. 1 and 2), 
extended depth (Figs. 3 and 4), right oblique (Fig. 6), and 
left oblique (Fig. 5). 

With Asclep. x. 22 cf. Ael. xxiv. 1. 

With Asclep. xi. 1-2 cf. Ael. xxxvi. 
éritaés in § 1 above is not given; but the first four terms 
are defined in vi. 1, and éziraéis is clear from the definition 
of émitayua in vii. 10, so that Asclepiodotus himself may 
have omitted the definitions here. 

5 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: nexaxewn F. 

6 K. and R. (ABC?): 7 F. 7 K. and R.: xaropOov F. 


313 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


Aoxayous, 7 7) em ovpay, or” av KATA TOUS ovpayous: 
opHta de el Pépoito Kal TO Aoxayooy Coyov, 6 d7 
Kal OTOL Aéyerau, Oektov exe’, defua KaXetrat, 
EL de Aavov, apiorepa: Aoén d€ ws jatires Aaa TE 
Kal deEea 7) TO Tpovyov" Exovoa Képas Omevepor, 
KUT?) dé Kal Koihy Kal ETL LTLOS els Tovmiow 
7 Kal Tpoow a TO oropa KotAov 7 kuptov 7 ets 
/ 
Tovmiow 7) Kal Tpdcw €miKeKappevov® Exovca, ws 
/ 
Exel TA UTOVyeypaypera. 











Omnia sunt tam evanida, ut aciem oculorum penitus effugiant (Rostagno).* 


1 éyo. K. and R. 2 K. and R.: mpodxov F. 

3 K. and R. from the inscriptions on the accompanying 
diagrams. F has only rovzicw 6€ kal mpdcw 76 ordpua Kotor 7 
KUPTOV 7) €MLKEKAMMEVOV. 

4 In ABC the following inscriptions, which must have 
stood at one time in F, as there are still faint traces, 
especially above Fig. 7 where «x of xupr7 is still legible, are 
attached to the illustrations: miayela xarevOeiay (l. raya 
kat 6p06v), mrayela (l. mrayia) em’ ovpav, dpBia dei, cplia 
dpiorepd, apiotepa (1. Nok aprorepa), Seka (L. NoEH SeEra), KUpTH, 
KotAn, émikdurios 6ricw, émikadumios tpdcow. These figures have 
been reconstructed by K. and R. and in that form are repro- 
duced on the opposite page. 


314 


TACTICS, x11 


leaders (Fig. 1), or backward by the rank of file- 
closers (Fig. 2); but if it move in column, if the 
line of file-leaders, which is also called the mouth, 
is on the right, it is called by the right (Fig. 3), and 
if on the left, it is called by the left (Fig. 4); also a 
left (Fig. 5) and right (Fig. 6) oblique march-in-line 
when the corresponding wing is advanced ; a convex 
(Fig. 7), concave 1 (Fig. 8), and a half-square march 
backwards (Fig. 9) and the same forward (Fig. 10), 
when the front is bent concave, convex, or as a half- 
square forward or backward, as in the following 
diagrams.” 


Fig. | Fig. 2 Be oe 


, 4 





’ Fig. 10 ! 


Fig 8 


1 Most unusual formations, certainly, for marching. 
2 The treatment of this and the following paragraphs in 
Aelian is very different. 


315 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


1 O° 8 1 A \ , 5 , ay 

2 To & odphiov' trobro Kat mAadyiov od pdvov emt 
Tijs oAns pahayyos exdexeobat bet," aAAa ‘yap® 
Kal emt TOV pep@v: El yap* KaTO Képara Padilou 
7 parays, 7 KAT opOva® wu TAdyia, Kal, elTe KAT 
opOva ETE  wAdyea, 7 KAT eTayuy ny rou ovlevéw: 
coTt O€ KAT eTAywynv pev, OT av TO SevTEpoV 
EmNTAl TH TMpoTépw, Kata ovlevEw dé, OT av 
pnd etepov Oarépov mponyArac. 

3 Tod & dpBiov’ Kata ovlev€w eidn técoapa: 7 

\ / > ” \ / 8) 2y \ \ 
yap de€iad eoTw ayupon Ta oTOpaTa® 7] Aaa Kal 
A e 9 ¢ \ / 
KaAetrat 7 parays OMOLooTO[LOS, 1) peev deEud, 7) 
dé Aad, 7°° evayTiws ever TA oropara, Kal €l pLev 
Kata Tadta ovvamtovv ddAdjAos", avtioTomos 
emovopatetar, el dé Kata Tovs otpayovs, apdt- 
OTO}LOS. 

4 Tdv dé Kar éraywyhv Tropevopevany * qovety 
eorw opOia eTEpooTomms™ jLovor, wore * TO pev 
exer deEvov, TO 5€ Aatov oTdpa: od yap ofdv Te* 
emt Ta alta exew dudw, oddev yap dioicer THs 
v4 \ / 216 =A \ \ / 4 / 
oAns Ta Képata, du® 6 Kal Ta TAAyLA OUTwWS [LOVOV 
oulevxOnoovra: Kat emaywyny® yap ta” mAaya 

1K. and R.: Tod’ dpédv F. 
2 émidéxecOar xp7j K. and R. after C (Salmasius), which, 
however, has xp7. 

K. and R. delete yap. 4 ei ye F. 

5 K. and R.: Badigfor } yap karopba F, 

K. and R.: kai ef mAdyia F 

7 K. and R.: rod 6é kara F. 

8 +a orouara added by K. and R. 

® Added by K. and R. (after AB). 10 K, and R.: ed F, 

1 C (Salmasius) in margin, K. and R.: ey F. 

T2eKG and etias deTeTaywyny opevowevwy F. As K, and R. 


suggest, Ta oréuara is to be understood, if not actually 


supplied. 
3 K. and R.: érepdcrouoc F. 14K. and R.: & én F. 


316 


ow 


a 


TACLICS 3x1. 9 = 4 


The march by flank! and the march by front need 
apply not merely to the entire phalanx, but also to 
its parts; for if the phalanx should march by wings, 
it may be either by column or by front, and each 
of these again either in sequence (epagoge) or in 
parallel formation (syzeuais); it is a march in 
sequence when the second wing follows the first, 
and in parallel formation when neither precedes the 
other.” 

There are four kinds of march in column in parallel 
formation : for the fronts may be either right or left, 
which is called the order with corresponding front, 
right (Fig. 11), or left (Fig. 12); or the fronts may 
be opposite, and if the men should march with fronts 
side by side it is called a march with inner fronts 
(Fig. 13), but if with file-closers side by side a march 
with outer fronts (Fig. 14). 

When the army advances in sequence formation 
and in column, it can do so only with different fronts, 
so that one wing has its front right and the other its 
front left (Fig. 15), it being impossible for the fronts 
to be on the same side, for the march by wings would 
then differ in no respect from that of the phalanx in 
a body,’ since in this way the fronts will follow one 
behind the other; but when the army advances in 


1 That is, in file, or in column. 
2 That is, when the wings are side by side. 
3 Asin Figs. 3 and 4. 


ASelepe xis — Aelixxxvile 2 5 oO. O- 
Asclep. xi. 4=Ael. xxxvii. 4. 


19 K, and R.: oovra F. 
*6 These words, & 6... émaywyhv, are supplied by K. 
and R, MW 7a yap F. 


317 


5 


6 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


n OMOLOOTOLLWS ovvteInoovray 7] dpproropins: 
tots yap ovpayots Too fipomscoon TOTE bev ob 
oxayot, ToTé d€ of ovpayol Tod Emopevov peTa- 
TAYHOOVTAL.” 


























by ty SY Z ye YL AZ ZB Z 

ANIZNANZIN A e. E|| A= 

A\A\ZNA NANA A A= 

YY | Y Z | Zz Bo9 °2 | oo° 90 ° BO 1 

YN ANA ZA AWA EEE 
—_— = = 2a ere Epo. = SS ee 

\ \ \ \ \ yp 

Kat ta dAvo€a d€ ovrriféueva Sittas €xovar 

/ \ \ \ b] ~ / 
dtadopas: 7 yap Aawv ev Aad TarTeTar pépert 


Kat Oe€vov evdeei@ Kal Kadetrar 4 CAN xKotda- 
/ \ > / \ / ” e \ 
éuBodos, 7 avdtradw Kal Aéyerar EuBodos, ws Ta 
UTOTETAYMEVA OXHMATA. 





(These figures as reconstructed by K. and R. are given on the opposite page.) 


v7 >) 4 \ / 7 A 
Kort 0° OTe Kal TeTpapepia mopevovTat Kata 
\ \ 
amoTopas tmavtoxofev dvdAatrouevor Tovs 7roAe- 
\ / / 
pulous Kal yiveTa TeTpamAevpov® TeEpiotopov ToTE 


1K, and R.: cugfevxOjoovra F, which, though impossible 
here, supplied the clue to the supplement of K. and R. 
above. 2 K. and R.: raparayjoovra F. 

> In ABC apparently the following inscriptions, which 
must have been in F, where a few letters of érepéarouos are 
still visible, are attached to the illustrations: de&a duo.d- 
TTOMOS, APLOTEPA OMOLOTTOLOS, AudiaTouos, avTicTOMOS, ETEPOTTOMOS. 


318 


TACTICS, x1. 4—6 


sequence formation and with extended front it will 
have either corresponding fronts or outer fronts, 2.€., 
behind the file-closers of the leading wing will follow 
either the file-leaders (Fig. 16) or the file-closers 
(Fig. 17) of the second wing. 

The wings also, when in oblique formation, have 
two different positions: either the left wing is ad- 
vanced on the left side and the right wing on the 
right, in which array the entire phalanx is called 
a hollow-wedge (koilembolos, Fig. 18), or just the 
opposite formation is assumed, when it is called a 
wedge (embolos, Fig. 19) ; see the following diagrams. 


‘ ‘ h 
r Fig.i18 


Fig ll Figl2 Fig 13 Figl4 — Fig5 
‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 






' 
’ 
' 


noan on ee! 


eee See 





Sometimes the army marches in four parts by 
divisions, on its guard upon every side against the 
enemy, and we have a four-sided figure fronting on 


Asclep. xi. 5=Ael. xxxvii. 6-7. 
Asclep. xi. 6=Ael. xxxvii. 8-9. 


The figures as reconstructed by K. and R. are given on this 
page. 

+ C (Salmasius), K. and R.: we ea F. 

5 K. and R.: rerpdmevpay F, 


319 


7 


8 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


\ Ly / 

fev €TEpounKes, ToTEe OE TeETPdywVOV, TavTa- 
/ ” / 

xobev Exov oTdpata ws TO DTOyeypampevov. 

















(These figures as reconstructed by K. and R. are given on the opposite page.) 


7 3 vn \ \ / Te / >! 

Or’ av d€ Kata mAciw péepn TropevwvTar, 7) 
coTapueva ovvTaypwaTta mopevoeTar 7 TremAey- 
preva’ memAeypeva O€' é€oTw or av dAo€a To- 

/ 2 ) A3 \\ vA ~ / 
pevnrar™ voeidn® tHv OAnv TowotvTa dddAayya: 
> / PS) \ ¢ Y ae) )N \ r / 4 
eoTappeva O€ O70T av Kata TrapadAnAdypappa 
povais Tats ywvias? ovvantovta aAAjAos, Tats 
dé mAevpais emi ro mpdow BAémovta. Kal o 
TovTwyv dé TUTOs EK THS UToypadhs €oTar davepos® 
yévoito 5 av KaTa TO E€lKOS Kal ETEepA oYHMATA 
mM™pOs TAS avaKuTTOVGas apudlovTa xpelas. 

"Avaykaotatn 8 otea" Kal 7) TOV oKevopdpwv 
aywyh yye“ovos Seouévn KaTa TpdTOUS YyiveTaL 

1 kal memeyueva wey K, and R, who report ABC as having 
only 7 wemXeyuéva dé. If so F confirms the essential correct- 
ness of their reading. 2 K. and R.: ropevera F. 

3 K. and R.: voed7 F. The smooth breathing is etymo- 
logically correct and I see no reason to follow the lexicons 
and introduce the rough. 

4 trapad\n\oypauuov K. and R. after C (Salmasius). 

5 K. and R.: yovias F. 

§ gavepovy K. and R. (apparently from A and B, for the 


phrase is omitted by C). 
7 otca F (the & added by the first hand). 


320 


TACTICS <x. '6— §& 


each side, an oblong rectangle (Fig. 20) or a square 
(Fig. 21) which fronts on all sides, as the following 
diagram shows.! 


; Fig. 20 \ OS sy | eee 





When the army marches in several divisions, the 
battalions will be either in loose or close formation : 
it is the close formation when the march is by 
battalions en échelon, the entire phalanx assuming the 
form of a V (Fig. 22) ; the loose formation, when the 
battalions form parallelograms with only the corners 
touching one another, but with the fronts facing 
forward (Fig. 23). The form of these dispositions 
will be clear from the following figure. There might, 
of course, be other orders of march, meeting the 
situations that arise. 

The baggage-train, which is very essential and 
requires its own commander, is convoyed in five 

1 The locus classicus for this order of march is the 
Anabasis of Xenophon iii. 4. 19-23. 

Asclep. xi. 7=Ael. xviii. 2-3. Asclep. xi. 8=Ael. xxxix. 
Yi 321 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


TEVTE® 7 yap Tpodyew del THs dddayyos, 67 av 


€x ToAeiwy arin,” i) emarodoubetv, or av els 


moXeuiovs eupdadrAn, 7 mapa Tv dddAayya Kata 





























!f(This figure as reconstructed by K. and R. is given on the opposite page.) 


Ya \ 5 OD SR A 2 > ’ 
Nata 7 dSeEta civar, OmdT av oPjra” TavavTia 
eon, 9 TO ye AcvTOmevov ayomeva evTos KotAn TH? 
dadayyt mepiexeoVar Tavtayolev ovtos Tov déous. 


\ A 
XI. Wept trOv Kata tas Kwijceis TpooTraypaTwv 


Tooovtwy d€ ovTwv Kal ToLovTwY oYNnLATLOLa@V 
EmOMEVOV AV Eln Tots TEpt avTaYV émLéval TpOOTay- 
pact, Ka a* oynuatilew te atta Kal Kwweiv 
duvnodpela Kat atoKxabiotavew* eis THY mpotmdp- 
yovoav Ta€w. TodTo yap Hv Ere Aeuropevov. 

“Or av pev obtv emt dopv Ta ovvTaypata ém- 
otpéepew Bovrdpcba, tapayyeAobuev tov emt Tod 
deEto0 Adyov® Hovyiav ayew, Exaotov b€ TaV ev 
tots aAAows Adxous emt Sdpu KAtvat, mpocayeu” TE 
emt TO Oe€iov, eita els dplov amodobvat, €metta 


bo 


1 K. and R.: dein F. 2 K. and R.: goBetra F. 
3K. and R.: dyduevov. 4 Kothn 7H F. 

4K. and R.: «ada F. ° amoxabioravar K, and R. 
6 K. and R.: Nofdv F: Noxaydv C (Salmasius). 

7 F (K. and R. had emended to this the form zpodyeuw 


in ABC). 


1 The importance of the heavy baggage-train to the 
322 


FACHEICS, xi.8 —xn. 2 


ways: it must precede the phalanx when the march 

is away from the enemy’s country, or follow it, when 

the march is into the enemy’s country, or parallel 
Fig. 23 

\ Me oa 

Fig. 22 


the phalanx on the right or left side, whenever 
danger is suspected from the opposite side, or, 
finally, it may be convoyed within the hollow square 
of the phalanx, when danger threatens on all sides.! 


XII. The Commands used in military Evolutions 


Such being the number and character of the 
evolutions, there would naturally follow a discussion 
of the commands used in these movements, by which 
we can order and move the troops, and return them 
to their original station ; for this is the one thing we 
have left to do. 

When, therefore, we wish the battalions to quarter 
turn to the right, we shall command the right file 
to hold its position and each man in the rest of 
the files to right face, to advance to the right, and 
then to face to the front; then we shall command 
ancient army is hardly appreciated by our author, who dis- 
misses it in these few words. 

Asclep. xii. 1-2=Ael. xxxii. 2. 
323 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


/ 
mpooayew TA oTliow Cuvyd, Kal Tav’THS yevomevyns 
THS TUKVWOEWS ETLoTpéhew emt SdpU, Kal EoTAL 
TO OVVTAYLGA ETEOTPApLLEeVvoV. 
> \ de yd .\\ \ > > Lo A / > ~ 
3 “Eav oe emi tiv €€ apyfs* O€ow amoxatacticat 
7 = eee 3 / / 
Povrdpeba, én aomida petaBadreobar Tapay- 
yerodpev — 7) dé peetaBoAyn ti onpatver TpoTEpov 
elpyTa—, cir dvaorpepew oAov 70 owTayjLa., 
emeita €€ apxys” tov oyayav hpepovvtwv ot 
\ 
Aowrot Kata Cvya mpoayérwoay, émeita peTa- 
VNAg Q 2) Be) “a > > a 2 yA 7 e 
fadAéobwoav, ef a &€ apyns® Eevevov: Emeita 6 
8 \ b] / / 3 ¢ \ \ + ee = > / 
e£tos npepeitw Adyxos,® of dé Aowrol em” daomida 
\ 
KAWweTwoav Kal mpodyovtes amoKxabiorabwoar. 
e \ \ 4 > 
oUTW yap THY Taw, hv mpdTEepov eixyev, EKaOTOS 
amroAnberau. 
> 
4 Et & ém aomida Bovdoiuefat éemorpéder, 
mapayyedodpLev €KGOTOU ovvTdypwaros tov Aarov 
Aoxov® Tpepetv, Tov de dMuv ExaoTov ém ao7ida 
KAtvar Kal mpoadyew” els TO Aad, eira els opGov 
amodobval, emeita mpoodyew Ta omiow lvyd, 
Kal yevomevns THS TuUKVwWCEwWS em aoTida emt- 
/ \ \ 
oTpédew rept Tov Aatov Aoyaydov, Kat yéyove TO 
TapayyeAGev. 
5 ‘Amokaraarhoat dé Povdrdmevor EKacTov (peTa- 
Badoduev, eita ovvtaypa avaotpeatw, eita ot 


! F (K. and R. had emended to this the form zpodyeuyv in 
ABC). 

2 The repetition of the phrase before rév \oyayav seems 
to have no precise meaning and is probably due, as K. and 
R. suggested, to the appearance of the same phrase at two 
other places in the paragraph, especially the one just below. 

3 Noxayos (suprascr.) C (Salmasius). 

4 Bovldueba K. and R. 

5 Noxayds above Adxos C (Salmasius). 


324 


TACTICS, xu. 2-5 


the rear ranks to advance, and, when in this way 
we have the compact formation, to quarter turn 
to the right, and the battalion will be swung to 
the right. 

If we wish the battalion to resume the original 
position, we shall give the command to left about 
face—the meaning of ‘ about face ’ has been explained 
above 2—and then for the entire battalion to resume 
its original position ;? after that, while the rank of 
file-leaders holds its position, let the other soldiers 
advance by rank and about face in the direction 
originally faced; next let the right file hold its 
position and the rest of the soldiers left face, and 
advancing wheel to original position. In _ this 
manner each man will resume his former place. 

If we wish to quarter turn to the left, we shall 
command the left file of each battalion to hold its 
position, and the other files to left face, to advance 
to the left, and then to face to the front ; after that 
we shall command the rear ranks to advance and, 
when in this way we have the compact formation, 
to quarter turn to the left on the left file-leader, 
and the command is carried out. 

If we wish the battalions to return to their original 
position, we shall make each man about face, and 
each battalion resume its original place; let the 


1 The verb used here, as defined in x. 4, means to ‘ pivot 
on the right file-leader,’ and so the evolution is clear. Cf. 
the opposite evolution in § 4 below. 

eee IS. Inxs 

3 That is, the battalion shall pivot on the right file-closer, 
wpe now, because of the about-face, is the left file- 
eader. 


Asclep. xii. 3= Ael. xxxii. 3. Asclep. xii. 4=Ael. xxxii. 4. 
Asclep. xii. 5—Acl. xxxilz 5: 


325 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


A \ b] / ¢e \ \ \ A 
oxayo. npewettwoav, ot d€ Aowrot Kata lCuya 
/ ” / 1 po he “A > 
mpoayerw@oay, €mevra, petaBahreobuoay ep a ef 
apyns evevor, emetta’ 6 Aatos Adxos TPE ELT, ot 
de Aowrrot ETL ddpu KAwavtTes mpoayeTwoay,” Ews 
av amoKaTaoTh Ta Ovaoripara, eira. els opUov* 
dmodoTwoay, Kal mavres e€ovor THY Taew HY 
TpOTEpov elyov. 
>) ~ 

6 ‘Hav dé émi Oopu Té pLommay BovAwpea, dvo 
emoTpopas emt TO avTOo* TroLHoaL mapayyehobpev" 
dmoKaTaoTHaae de Bovdopevor mapayyeAobuev ¢ ETL 
em Oopy TepLoTrav—eK TEeCodpwv yap EemioTpopav 
Eis TO avTo 7dAWw amoKabiorarai—, TovTwy de 
yevowevwv® ett TapayyeAobuev Ttovs Aoxayovs 
>) A \ \ \ / 7 \7 
npewetv, Tovs de Aowrods petaBadAdcofa’? Kat 
3 / \ > / / > / 7 / 
amuevat Ta Omiow Cuya, eira madw" petaBadre- 

\ \ \ / > ~ \ \ \ 

aba, Tov deEvov dé Adyov hpewetv Kat Tovs AouTrods 
em aomida KAwvarres TPOAyEW . Kau amoxabioravew* 
els TO €€ apxijs dudoTyLUG, etra’ ets opGov aro - 
dobvar, Kal oUTws €oTar els TO €€ apyns Kab- 
cOTOTA. 

7 Ei dé em’ aomida BovAcucba wepiomay, Tots évav- 
Tlois TrapayyeAobpev em aomida dis emvotpedew,” 


1 The words from peraBaddX\écOwoay to érecra are supplied 
by K. and R. from the parallel passage in Aelian, Tactica, 
xxxii. 5. 2 K. and R.: mpocayérwoar F, 

3K, and R.: dpdny F. 

4 roavTd dépu F : 76 atrd rouréotw éri dépv K. and R. But 
dopu derives probably from a gloss on 7é a’zé and does not 
appear in the parallel passage in Aelian, Vactica, xxxii. 6. 

5 K. and R.: mapaxatacrfjoa F. 

6 The contraction for oveywy is by a much later hand in 
an erasure of about three letters (Rostagno). 

7 Supplied by K. and R. from the parallel passage in 
Aelian, Vactica, xxxii. 7. 


326 


TACTICS. xi, 5:= 7 


file-leaders hold their position and the rest advance 
by rank and about face in the direction originally 
faced, then let the left file hold its position and the 
rest right face, advance until the intervals between 
them are resumed, and then face to the front ; and 
all will have the original line. 

If we wish them to half turn to the right, we shail 
command them to make two quarter-turns in that 
direction ; and when we wish them to resume the 
original position, we shall command them to half turn 
to the right—for the original position is again taken 
by four quarter-turns in the same direction—; when 
this has been done we shall command the file-leaders 
to hold their position, the rest to about face, and the 
rear ranks to advance and then about face ; and we 
shall now command the right file to hold its position, 
and the rest to left face, advance, resume the original 
interval from one another, and then face to the front ; 
and in this way the battalion will return to the 
original position.! 

If we wish to half turn to the left, we shall give 
the command in just the opposite way, to quarter 


1 These marchings are necessary to change from the 
compact formation, in which all wheeling by battalions is 
done, to the normal formation with interval of three cubits. 

Asclep. xii. 6=Ael. xxxii. 6-7. 
Asclep. xii.7= Ael. xxxii. 8-9. 


8 droxatioravac K. and R. 

® For what has obviously fallen out (the ei below after 
dépu in F is probably a remnant of it, as K. and R. saw), K. 
and R. suggest efra droxaracrica: Bovdduevor waduy em’ dorida 
dls émiotpépey ; compare Aelian, Vactica, xxxii. 8. 


327 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


.. . GAAa pe) emt Sdpv, Kal’ Tats Ouolas aywyats 
xproaclar. Opotws dé Kal éxmeptomdoa BovdAd- 
[LEVOL Tpls eTLoTpeopev TA OVVTAYLATA. 

g ‘Eav d6€ cata Képas tiv dddAayya muKv@car dén, 
mapayyerAoduev emt Tob de€vob Tov de€tov Adyov 
npewetv, Ttovs dé Aowrods emi Sdpu KAivayTas 
mpooayew emt TO de€idv, Erreita els OpBov amo- 
d.uddvat, Kal mpooayew Ta Omicw Cuvyd. amo- 
KATAOTHOGL de Tpoatpovpevor Tapayyehobuev TO 
pev Aoxayoobv Cuyov Tpepetv, 7a 8 dmiow lCvya 
jueTtaBaoueva a avievat,” eira maw peraBadrecbar, 
Emetta TOU Seto Aoxou Tipepoovros ot Aovrrot em 
aomida KXivavTes mpoayeTwaay, Ews av Ta €€ apyns 
SuaoTHMaTa GuvTnpHoavTes eis oplov amodaow? 

9 Ei dé 76 Aawdv Képas TUKVOOAL d€n, TavavTia 
Trapayyehobev, El oe O° pecov THs parayyos, 
THv deEvav amor opay er aomiba KAwavres, THY 
dé Aadv émi ddpu, efta mpocdyew® Kedevovtes 
emt Tov oudarov ths dddayyos, emerta els dpBov 
amodobvat Kal® mpooayew Ta omicw Cuyd, e€omev 
6 mpoapovpeba. AMOKATAOTHGAL d€ Bovddpevor 
peTaBadreobau mrapayyehobpev Kal Tpodyew KaTa 
Cuya Xwpis 708 mposTou, emeta maAw jeeraBan- 
Aeobar, Kat THY pev SeEvav didadayyiav émt Sop, 


1 C (Salmasius), K. and R.: ei F. 
2 K. and R. (AB?): davier@at F ‘C). 
3 K. and R.: dmoducew F. 
4K. and R.: 7oév F. 
5 K, and R. (Aelian, Vactica, xxxiii. 4): mpodyew F. 
§ Supplied by K. and R. 
1 As in § 6 above. 
2 That is, the centre, the point of division between the 
two wings. 


328 


TACTICS, xu. 7 —9 


turn twice to the left, [and then, wishing to return 
to the original position, we shall command them 
to quarter turn twice to the left,| not to the right, 
and to perform the similar! evolutions. In the 
same way, when we wish to make the three-quarter- 
turn, we shall make the battalions perform three 
quarter-turns. 

If the phalanx must assume the compact formation 
by wings, we shall give the command, if on the right 
wing, for the right file to hold its position and for 
the other files to right face, close up to the right, 
and then face to the front, and for the rear ranks 
to advance. Then, if we wish to resume the original 
position, we shall command the rank of file-leaders 
to hold its position, the rear ranks to about face 
and advance, and then again to about face; after 
that, while the right file holds its position, let the 
other files left face and advance, until they have 
resumed their original intervals, when they face to 
the front. 

If the left wing must assume the compact forma- 
tion, we shall give the opposite commands. If the 
centre must assume the compact formation, we 
shall command the right wing to left face and the 
left wing to right face, then to advance to the navel? 
of the phalanx, to face to the front, and to advance 
the rear ranks, and we shall have the desired forma- 
tion. If we wish the wings to resume their former 
position, we shall command them to about face and 
all the ranks save the first to advance and then 
about face; and we shall order the right wing to 


Asclep. xii. 8=Ael. xxxiii. 1-2. 
Asclep. xii. 9= Ael. xxxiii. 4-6. 
329 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


thy b€ Aavav em” aomida KXivar, eira Kara Adxous 
aKkoAovbety tots YOUHLEVOLS, axpis av Ta €€ apys 
AgBwou OvaoT para, cira els opUov amrodobva. 

Ae? 6€ advw ta’ ddpata civa év Tats muKVwWoECL 
TpOs TO [Ln EuTrOdOWY Tats KAioeou yivecOaL. 

10 Tats 8’ atrais aywyats ypnoipmats ovoats pods 
Tas T&v ToAcuiwy aidvidious émidaveias*® Kat" 
Tovs yiAovs aoKrjooper. 

.. 2 7a pev dwvA, Ta dé dia onuciwy dpatar, 
evia d€ Kal da THS GaAmiyyos. cadéorata pev 
yap cote Ta® dua dwvAs SnAovjeva—od py TmavToTE 
duvatov dia KTUTOV THY OTAWY 7 Sia TVET OV 
opodpay euBodds, aBopuparepa d€ ta bia TOV 
onpcteov: aan’ evlore Kal ToUToLs emumpoo0otn’ 
ip jAvov avTavyela 7) TAXUTHS dépos Kal KoviopTob 
ih Kal ouBpov AAAs, du’ 6 od ‘pddvov Tpos mdoas 
Tas dvaxumTovoas® Ypetas evTophaar onpeto, 
ois mpoonFrorar n parayé, GAA’ evioTe™ m™pos 
TOUS Kalpovs avaykKn Kawa mpoceuploKe, 7)ipy 
advvarov dmavra oupmecely, aor adnAov eivar 
Kal oddmyye Kal pwn Kal onpete TO mapdyye\ea.. 

11 Ta pévrou dia puvis CUVTO}LG TE elvau del Kal 
avapdiBora. TodrTo av yévoito, ef Ta iduKa™ 
TOV yevOv TE KaL KOWaY TpoTaTTOYWEV’ apdt- 

om TPE 2 éumodov F, 

3 aipyidious éripaveias Tv mo\euiwv C (Salmasius), K. and R. 

+ Added by K. and R. 

5 For the obvious lacuna K. and R. suggest from the 


parallel passage in Aelian and Arrian, op. cit., xxxv. 1 Ta 
dé mapayyéA\uata d&éws déxerGar THY OTpaTLaY acKTTOMEY, TA MEV 


KT. 6 Supplied by K. and R. 
7 K. and R.: émimpocbeln F. 
® Supplied by K. and R. (without any note: in ABC?). 
avrixurtovcas K, and R. (probably a mere misprint). 


330 


TACTICS; xi. 9 —11 


right face and the left wing to left face, to follow by 
files the leading files until they have the original 
intervals, and then to face to the front. 

In the compact formations the spears must be 
elevated, so as not to interfere in the turnings. 

We shall train the light infantry also in the same 
evolutions, which are so advantageous in case the 
enemy appears suddenly. 

[We shall, furthermore, train the army to distin- 
guish sharply the commands] given sometimes by 
the voice, sometimes by visible signals, and some- 
times by the bugle. The most distinct commands 
are those given by the voice, but they may not 
carry at all times because of the clash of arms or 
heavy gusts of wind ; less affected by uproar are the 
commands given by signals ; but even these may be 
interfered with now and then by the sun’s glare, 
thick fog and dust, or heavy rain. One cannot, 
therefore, find signals, to which the phalanx has 
been accustomed, suitable for every circumstance 
that arises, but now and then new signals must be 
found to meet the situation ; but it is hardly likely 
that all the difficulties appear at the same time, so 
that a command will be indistinguishable both by 
bugle, voice, and signal. 

Now the commands by voice must be short and 
unambiguous. This would be attained if the 
particular command should precede the general, 


Asclep. xii. 10=Ael. xxxv. Asclep. xii. 11=Ael. xI-xlii. 


10 rpocelOiorac K. and R. 11 g\réviora F, 
122K. and R.: oivrova F which might be defended 
(‘sharp,’ ‘ crisp’) were it not that Arrian and Aelian, op. 
cit., xl. 1, have cvvroua in the parallel passage. 
13 6’ av K. and R. (AB?): om. 6 F (C). 14 ciraidixa F. 
331 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


)\ 1 \ \ / e ° vv / c¢ rNt 

Boda’ yap 7a Kowd: ofov odk av djoatpev “ KAivat 
3 \ 80 299 3 > (igo) A / A +) a7 A A 
emt dopuv, » GAA’ “emi Sdpu KAtvaL,”’ wa py dia 

\ / e \ 2) oe) ” e \ 2702. o¢: ~ 
THY mpolvpiav ot pev em’ aAXo, ot dé em’ ado THs 

/ lot 
KAicews mpoeipnuevns vevowow,® add’ opod To 

oun , € \ IQA 6 , Sm 
avTO ToLnowow: ws de ovde “ pweraBddAov * Emi 

/ 3 
dopuv, arr’ “ émi dSdpuv petaBadrdAov®”’ dryoamer, 
ovo “ é&é\uace® Tov’? Adkwva,’ add avaradAw 
CEN ING 2 DN 29 \ 8 

tov Adkwva é&é\ucce”” Kal... 

/ Sina \ iA e / 

... TapaoTnht emt ta OmAa. 0 oKevoddpos 
b) ~ 
amToywpeitw THS PddAayyos. novxia de EoTw 
Kal mpooexeTe TH TrapayyéAuatt.  vzrdAaBe® tiv 

/ > / / > / \ / 
oxevyv: avdAaBe. Siuaoryfr. avddaBe ro ddpv. 
OTOIXEL, Cuyer,”® Tapopa. emt TOV Tyovpevov. 6 
ovpayos amrev0uvérw Tov LoLov Aoxov. OUVTHPEL 
Ta €€ apxns Siaornpara. emt Sop KXivov,” 
mpoaye, EXOU ovTws. to Babos OumAactale, dro- 
KatadoTnoov. To Palos nutoiale, atoKataoTn- 
gov. TO phKos dumAaciale, amoxatdoTycov. Tov 
Adkwva™ é&é\ooe, amoKxatdornoov. emloTpege, 
amoKaTdoTynoov. emt Sdpv tepio7a,” dmoKaTa- 

.) > 
OTNOOV 7) EMLKATAOTYHOOV, KATA Ta avTa Kal Ee * 
aomloa. 

Adrat 61a Bpaxecy at Tob TaKTLKod Kalnynaets, 
Tots pev Xpwpuevors owryplay tropilovaa, Tots So 
evavTiois KWWOUVoUS emdyoucaL. 

1 dug‘oda F. 

2 éridov followed by space of four letters F (émi dépu A 


2nd hand in margin). 
> vevwow K. and R. (perhaps a misprint, as there is no 


note). 4K. and R.: dare ovdéy weraBddrau F. 
5 K. and R.: weraBadrew F. 
6 K. and R.: égeNiooa F. 7K. and R.: ri F. 


8 What has been lost here, probably two or three sen- 
332 


PACIICS, x11:. 11 


since the general are ambiguous. For example, 
we would not say, “Face right!” but “ Right 
face!”’, so that in their eagerness some may not 
make the turn to the right and others to the left 
when the order to turn has been given first, but that 
all may do the same thing together ; nor do we say, 
“Face about right!” but “ Right about face!” 
nor “ Counter march Laconian!” but “ Laconian 
counter march! and... - 
tand by to take arms! Baggage-men fall 
out! Silence in the ranks! and Attention! Take 
up arms! Shoulder arms!! Take distance! Shoulder 
spear! Dress files! Dress ranks! Dress files by 
the file-leader! File-closer, dress file! Keep your 
original distance! Right face! Forward march! 
Halt! Depth double! As you were! Depth half! 
As you were! Length double! As you were! 
Laconian counter march! As you were! Quarter 
turn! As you were! Right half turn! As you 
were! or Forward to position! either Right!? or 
Left ! 
These are in brief the principles of the tactician ; 
they mean safety to those who follow them and 
danger to those who disobey. 


1 « Arms’ (cxevj) here probably mean merely the defensive 
equipment, shield and helmet. 
2 Literally, ‘in the same direction,’ 7.¢., to the right. 


tences containing further illustrations, the reason for this 
order in giving commands, and the sentence introductory 
to the following list of commands, can be recovered from the 
parallel passage in Arrian and Aelian, op. cit., xl. 4-xlii. 1. 


® K. and R.: brédaBe F. 10 crocxyer fuye F. 
11 K, and R. (AB?): kewov F. 12 Naxov F, 
13 trepicra F. 14 K. and R. (AB?): émi F. 


333 


A LIST OF SOME OF THE MORE IMPORTANT 
TECHNICAL TERMS IN ASCLEPIODOTUS! 


axpoBodorns, Skirmisher; of 
horsemen, i. 3; vii. 1. 

dxpov, wing of a line of battle, 
ie 

aupicTomos -ov 3 mopela audi- 
oTouos, when the main 
divisions of an army march 
in parallel or in column 
formation with the line of 
front-rank men on _ the 
outside, ili. 5; x. 22; xi. 
3 and 4. 

avactpépw, to wheel to the 
original position, after a 


military evolution, = d7o- 
KadioTnMt, amokabioTavw, 
Milos 


dvactpog7n, Wheeling back to 
the original position, x. 1 
and 6; wheeling in general, 
vii. 3 (also vii. 2 K. and 
18%) 5 

avtiropta, counter attack, or 
frontal attack, x. 2. 

avtigrouos -ov ; mopela avrti- 
otowos, When the main 
divisions of an army march 
in parallel formation with 


the line of front-rank men 
on the inside, xi. 3. 

atoxabicrnu, to return to the 
original position, xii. 11, 
etc. 

amokaraoracts, return to orig- 
inal position after wheel- 
ing or other evolutions, x. 
1; 9and1l. Cf. émxara- 
OTQAOLS. 

améorao.s ; év dmoordoe, at a 
distance, at some interval, 
xe le 

[aroctpopy, wheeling away 
(from the enemy), retreat, 
vil. 2 (Oldfather). ] 

GAMTOTOMN 3 amoToun Képaros, 
half-wing, or corps, theo- 
retically 4096 men, ii. 10; 
iii. 1 and 2. 

dpads -a& -dv, Open, wide, 
opposed to muxvés, of the 
space between soldiers in 
array, iv. l. 

dpapds (neu. perf. ptep. of 
dpapioxw used as a sub- 
stantive), joining - point, 
point of division between 


1 No attempt has been made to include every technical term, or all 
instances of each term cited, but only the most noteworthy or unusual. 


334 


LIST OF TECHNICAL TERMS 


the two wings of an army, 
il. 6. 
apparapxia, unit of sixteen 
war-chariots, viii. 1. 
domdicxn, Small shield, i. 2. 
aomis, shield ; ém’ domida, to 
the left, x. 1, etc. 


dexavia, decury, older de- 
signation for a file (\éxos), 
in? 

didornua, interval between 
soldiers in rank and in 
file, iv. 1. 

duimmevois, breaking through 
with cavalry, vii. 3. 

duictn, to take distance, for 
the different spacings in 
the ranks, xii. 11; cf. 
d.doTnua. 

di\oxia, two files, ii. 8 and 
10: ili. 4. 

dtNoxiryns, commander of two 
files, ii. 8. 

diuopia, half-file, where the 
file had twelve men, ii. 2. 

diuocpirns, leader of a half- 
file, ii. 2. 

dir\acia~w, to double either 
the number of soldiers in a 
given area, or the area by 
deploying the soldiers, x. 1. 

dipadayyia, double corps, or 
wing, theoretically 8192 
men, ii. 10. 

dixoTouia, point of division, 
116: 

dopatopépos -ov, spear-bear- 
ing, of cavalry, i. 3. 

dopu, spear; émi ddpv, to the 
Hight, x: 1,’ete: 


dpemavnPpopos -ov, scythe-bear- 
ing, of chariots, viii. 1. 


ein, Squadron of cavalry, 
Vil. 2. 

EKATOVTAPXNS = Takiapxos, Cap- 
tain of hundred, really 128 
men, il. 8. 

éxatovtapxia, two platoons of 
light-armed troops, a com- 
pany, composed of 128 
Men; Vio: 

éxtrepiomacuos, three-quarter- 
turn, x. 1 and 8. 

EKTAKTOS -n -ov; of EKTAKTOL, 
the supernumeraries, at- 
tached originally to the 
Traits, but later either to 
the civrayua, ii. 9, or the 
éxatovrapxla of light-armed 
troops, vi. 3, or the ¢adayé 
of light-armed troops, vi.3. 

éXehavTapxns, commander of 
sixteen war-elephants, ix. 
1, 

éuméxw, to incorporate, of 
light infantry, man beside 
man, in the phalanx of 
hoplites, vi. 1. 

évavTios -a -ov; am évavTias, 
on the other hand, i. 2. 

évwuotadpxns, leader of an 
évamoria, li, 2. 

évwuotia, quarter-file, ii, 2. 

é€apiOuos -n -ov, outside the 
normal number, or in ad- 
dition to it, ii. 9. 

é€eXvyués, counter-march, x. 
1S te 

éfeNicow, to counter march, 
5 <A ee gh pal ta Bs 


335 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


éraywyn, sequence forma- 
tion, 7.¢., when one wing 
follows the other, both 
marching in column, x. 
1; xi. 2 and 4. 

émOnpapxia, a unit of four 
war-elephants, ix. 1. 

émrLOnpapxos, a commander of 
four war-elephants, ix. 1. 

érikabiornu:, to advance to 
original position, x. 10; 
cf. émwikaTaoTacts. 

EMLKAULTLOS -Ov } €mlKauTLos els 
rovticw (sc. padayé), half- 
square march backward, 
xi. 1; é. eis 7d mpdcw, the 
same forward, xi. 1. 

érikatdotacts, advance to 
original position after 
wheeling, x. 1 and 9; ef. 
aMTOKATACTACLS. 

érixowwwvéw, to be attached 
to, or stationed upon, i. 3. 

érdapxia, battalion of cav- 
alry, vii. 11. 

émiéevaryia, a division of light- 
armed troops, 2048 men, 
Vil: 

émigevaryyos, commander of an 
émitevayla, vi. 3. 

ér.otarns, 2nd, 4th, 6th, etc., 
man in a file, ii. 3 and 4; 
Vel 2. 

ém.oTpopy, quarter-turn, x. 1, 
4, etc. ; wheeling towards 
(the enemy), attack, vii. 2. 

ériougvyla, unit of eight war- 
chariots, viii. 1. 

éritayua, supporting-force, 
the phalanx of light-armed 
troops, 8192 men, vi. 3; 


336 


vii. 10; the full force of 
cavalry, vii. 11. 

évitaéis, Supporting-position, 
x. Lief sar O). 

émipdveca, facing-right, or 
-left, of an army, x. 4 
and 5. 

ETEPOTTOMOS -OV 3 ETEPOTTOMOS 
mopeta, When the wings of 
an army march in column, 
with their front-line men 
on opposite sides, xi. 4. 

éegirmapxia, division of cav- 
alry, vii. 11. 


fuyapxéw, cf. Cvydpxns, Vii. 9. 

fvydpxns, rank-leader in cav- 
alry, the man at the corner 
of each rank when in 
wedge-formation, vii. 9. 

fvyapxia, a unit of two war- 
chariots, viii. 1. 

fuyéw, to stand in ranks, of a 
phalanx, ii. 6 ; of a cavalry 
squadron, vii. 4 and 5, etc. 

sapxos, driver or commander 
of a war-elephant, ix. 1. 


jutroxcov, half-file, ii. 2. 

nutdoxitns, commander of a 
HUAXLOV, ii. 2. 

hucoidfw, to halve intervals, 
guid 


Onpapxta, unit of two war- 
elephants, ix. 1. 

Ojnpapxos, commander of two 
war-elephants, ix. 1. 

Oupeopopos  -ov, bearing a 
large, oblong shield, of 
cavalry, i. 3. 


LIST OF TECHNICAL TERMS 


ikdpxns, (1) front-man of a 
cavalry squadron,  sta- 
tioned at the point of the 
wedge, vii. 2; 3, etc. ; (2) 
commander of eight war- 
elephants, ix. 1. 

immapxia, two Tapavtwapxiac 
(q.v.) of cavalry, vii. 11. 


KaTaTuKVOS -ov 3 €v KaTaTTUKV® 
oTdcel, in compact forma- 
HOns Va. 1. 

kepdpxns, (1) commander of a 
wing, 8192 men, ii. 10; (2) 
commander of thirty-two 
war-elephants, ix. 1. 

képas, (1) wing of an army, 
formerly 2048 men=vep- 
apxia, later a  double- 
corps, consisting of 8192 
men, ii. 10; (2) squadron 
of thirty-two war-chariots, 
viil. 1. 

kAiows, right- or left-face, x. 
1 and 2. 

KolAeéu.Bonos, 
xe 

Kot\os -n -ov; KolAn dadayé, 
concave formation, xi. l. 

kuprés -9 -dv; KupTn pddayé, 
convex formation, xi. 1. 


hollow - wedge, 


Nofds -7 -dv 3; NOEN Parayé, a 
phalanx in march with ex- 
tended front, one wing in 
advance of the other, x. 
Msaxnle 

Noxayés, first man and leader 
of a file (Adxos), ii. 2, ete. 

Aoxos, a file, consisting of 
sixteen men, ii. 1, etc. 


epapxns, commander of a 
pepapxia, ii. 10. 

pepapxia, command of 2048 
men, a division, ii. 10; 
ii ep 

ueTaBbadrw, (act.) to cause to 
about face, xii. 5; (mid.) 
to about face, xii. 3. 


peTaBorn, about-face, x. 1 
and 3. 
MeTAywy?, manoeuvring, 


wheeling, vii. 5. 
peTaTatTw, to reorganize, il. 2. 
uétwtov, front lineof phalanx, 

ii. 53 iv. 4; v. 1 and 2. 
ufos, first line of a phalanx, 

li. 5. 


fevayia, two battalions of 
light-armed troops, a regi- 
ment of 512 men, vi. 3 
[supplied from  Aelian, 
Tactica, xvi. 3]. 


éxTaoxia, a military unit of 
eight Adxor, ii. 9. 

oudogvyos, comrade-in-rank, 
ii. 4. Cf. rapacrarns. 

OmoLogTOMOS -ov 3 Tropela OMoLd- 
oTowos, When the divisions 
of an army march in 
parallel formation, with 
the front-line men on the 
same ‘Sidé, xi. 35 ‘or in 


column, with the same 
disposition, xi. 4. 
dupadros, centre, point of 


division between the two 
wings, li. 6; xii. 9. 

bpAos -a -ov; Padayé dpHia, the 
phalanx marching forward 
in file, or in column, xi. 1 ff. 


Sot 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


6pOds -n -dv3 els dpOdy arro- 
dotva, to face the front 
originally held, lines front, 
x. L and 12; xii. 6, etc. 

ovpd; én’ ovpdv, about face 
to the rear from the enemy, 
x. 33; an’ otpas, about face 
from the rear toward the 
enemy, x. 3. 

ovpayds, (1) the last man in 
file, file-closer, ii, 2; iii. 
6, etc. ; (2) the man at the 
rear corner of a squadron, 
vii. 2, etc.; (3) a super- 
numerary to the rdés, ii. 
9; ili, 6; or the éxarorrT- 
apxia, vi. 3. 

6xnuaTiKds -7 -dv, pertaining 
to the mounted force of 
an army, whether cavalry, 
chariots, or elephants, i. 
1 and 3. 


Tapaywyn, march in line, 
where the phalanx on the 
march keeps the original 
battle-line, x. 1; xi. 1 ff. 

TapacTaTns, comrade-in-rank, 
li. 43 iv. 2. Cf. dudgvyos. 

maparaéis, first line, or front 
line, of a phalanx, ii. 5. 

Tapedpevw ; 0 mapedpevwv, COM- 
rade behind in file, iii. 6. 

mapeu8orn, insertion, differ- 
ing from wapévraéis in that 
soldiers of the same branch 
are inserted in the battle- 
line, as hoplites beside 
hoplites, vi. 1. 

mapévdecis, insertion, general 
term including both zrap- 
euBor7 and mrapévraiis, vi. 1. 


338 


mapévraéis, insertion, differ- 
ing from zapeu8ortn in 
that soldiers of different 
branches of the army, as 
light-armed troops, are in- 
serted in the phalanx of 
hoplites, man beside man, 
Viele 

TevTakoo.dpxys, Commander 
of a mevtaxoo.apyxia, li. 10. 

TevTakoo.apxia, command of 
512 men, ii. 10: ni S.: 

TevTnkovTapxia, two squads 
of light-armed troops, a 
platoon, composed of 
sixty-four men, vi. 3. 

mepiomacuos, half-turn, x. 1 
and 7. 

wraylos -a --ov; mdAayia 
gddayé, an army in march 
with the front extended, 
Kgl sexdoels 

mrayopvdaé, guard on the 
flank of a wedge-shaped 
squadron, vii. 2; 6, etc. 

mpoarywvigfoua, to open battle, 
Vilewle 

mpomTwots, projection of 
spears before a phalanx, 
Werle 

mpocévtagis, flank-position, 
used of light infantry 
stationed on the wings of 
the phalanx, vi. 1. 

mpoowmov, front 
phalanx, ii. 5. 

mporaéis, position of the light- 
armed troops in front of 
the phalanx, vi. 1. 

mpwrodoxia, front line of the 
phalanx, ii. 5. 

mpwrocTarns, front man in a 


line of 


LIST OF TECHNICAL TERMS 


files db, also 1st. Srd, 
5th, etc., man in a file, 
ibid., 3 and 4, 

mixvwots, Close order, a com- 
pact arrangement used in 
attack, the men being 
spaced two cubits from 
one another, iv. 1 and 33 
xii. 4 and 9. 

cadmyxTys, bugler, ii. 9; 
vi. 3 

onuetopopos, Signalman, ii. 9 ; 
vi. 3. 

=Kvdns, branch of cavalry 
armed only with bows, 
ie 

ottpos, two divisions of light- 
armed troops, a corps, 
4096 men, vi. 3. 

otixos, a row of soldiers, 
used for both ‘ rank’ and 
“fle; yw. 53 as an old 
designation of ‘ file,’ ii. 2. 

atoxéw, to be in file, of a 
phalanx, ii. 6; of a cav- 
alry squadron, vii. 4 and 
55 Ele: 

otéua, front line of phalanx, 
ii. 5; xi. 1; van of army, 
Ries eb. 

oTparnyés, general, formerly 
of a corps of 4096 men, 
but properly commander- 
in-chief of a phalanx of 
16,384 men, ii. 10. 

oTparoK7npvé, army-herald, i. 
Ols. WI. res 

cvfevéts 3; KaTa ovfevéw, used 
of the march of an army 
when the columns are 
parallel with each other; 


opposed to kar’ éraywy7y, 
5d er 

cugvyia, a unit of four war- 
chariots, viii. 1. 

ov\\oxiou.6s, assembly of the 
files in parallel formation, 
constituting the phalanx, 
1 os: 

cuvacmicuos, formation with 
locked shields, to meet 
attack, ili. 65. iv. 3. 

cuvedpevw, to close up, draw 
together, of troops taking 
up the compact formation, 
iii. 6 (but cf. crit. note). 

cuveickeérw, to protect at the 
same time, of armour pro- 
tecting both man and 
horse, i. 3. 

ctvTayua, two companies or 
a battalion, ii. 8; ili. 6; 
cuvragvapxia takes its place 
in ii. 10; iii. 3 and 4. 

ouvTAy MATa pXNS, commander 
ofa cwvTayua, Vets 

cuvrakiapxia, battalion, ii. 9 ; 
takes the placeof stvrayua, 
ii. 10; iii. 3 and 4. 

gvvwuoria, a squad of soldiers 
bound by an oath, an 
early term for file (Adxos), 
He? 

ctoracts, four files of light- 
armed troops, a squad, 
consisting of thirty-two 
men, vi. 3. 

cvoTpeuua, brigade of light- 
armed troops, 1024 men, 
vi. 3. 


tagiapxia, eight files (Adxox) 
339 


ASCLEPIODOTUS 


of infantry, =rdéus, ii, 10; 
iii. 4. 

Tagiapxos, commander of a 
company, composed of 
eight files (Adxou), ii. 8. 

Tas, a company, eight files 
(Adxo.) of infantry, ii, 8 
and 9. 

Tapayrivapxia, two battalions 
of cavalry, vii. 11. 

Tapavrivos -n -ov; ot Tapav- 
tivo, cavalry who fight 
only at a distance with 
javelins, i. 3. 

Tehdpxns, commander of a 
Tédos =puepapyns, li. 10. 
Téos, (1) in infantry, a divi- 
sion, 2048 men=uwepapyia, 
ii, 10; (2) in cavalry, a 

half-phalanx, vii. 11. 

reTpdpxys, commander of a 
TeTpapxia, li. 8. 

tetpapxia, four files (\dxor) of 
infantry, a platoon, ii. 8; 
iii. 4. 

TeTpds; KaTa TeTpadda, ON a 
fourfold division or basis, 
rir 1 

7dcevua, missile of any kind, 
1.23 

rokorns, archer, part of the 
cavalry, i. 3. 

UmrepBadrdw ; TO KEepas vITEp- 
Baréc@ar, to outflank on 
one wing, x. 2 and 18, 

jmepkepaw = UmepBaddw, x. 18, 

itepparayyew, to outflank 
on both wings, x. 18. 


340 


vmnpérns, aide-de-camp, ii. 
Os sviess 

broBaivw, to march behind, 
as one rank of soldiers 
marches a certain distance 
behind another, vy. 1. 

UrocTo\nH ; 6 rocro\js, held 
back, partly withdrawn, 
refused, x. 21. 

vréraéis, rear-position, of 
light infantry stationed 
behind the phalanx, vi. 1. 


parayyapxns, (1) commander 
of a darayyapxia, ii. 10; 
(2) commander of a full 
force of sixty-four war- 
elephants, ix. 1. 

gahayyapxia, Corps, 
men; tia tOe see. 

padayé, (1) any branch a 
the service, i. mile -sa.g4c 
(2) specifically, the force 
of hoplites, consisting of 
16,384 men, il. 10, etc.; 
(3) the full force of sixty- 
four war-chariots, vili. 1. 


4096 


xAudpxns, commander of a 
xiAvapxia, ii. 10. 

xXA\apxia, brigade, 1024 men, 
ii. 10; iii. 2 and 8. 


Yirayia, a command of two 
éxatovtapxia, a battalion 
of light-armed troops, vi. 
3 [supplied from <Aelian, 
Tactica, xvi. 3}. 


ONASANDER 


PREFACE 


In the preparation of the present work Mr. Oldfather 
is primarily responsible for the introduction, text, 
and list of rare words. Mr. Titchener rendered 
assistance in collecting material and collating mss., 
and also prepared the first draft of the translation, 
which has been further revised by Mr. Pease. 


WILLIAM A. OLDFATHER 
ARTHUR STANLEY PEASE 
JOHN B. TITCHENER. 


Ursana, Ixuinots, Feb. 1, 1922. 


INTRODUCTION 


Or Onasander, the author of the present =rparnyiKos 
(sc. Adyos), or The General, we know from the 
biographical article in Suidas that he was a Platonic 
philosopher who, in addition to a military work,! 
composed a commentary upon Plato’s Republic.? 
Traces of Platonic philosophy have been sought 
in the present work, especially in the admonition 
that friends should fight beside friends (Ch. 24), 
and in the distinction made between ¢#66vos and 
(jAos (Ch. 42. 25). But the essence of the first idea 
is as old as Nestor’s advice in the Ilad (B 362 f.) ; 
it was practised among the Eleans, Italic Greeks, 
Cretans, and Boeotians, being characteristic of the 
Sacred Band of Thebes, and something similar 
may not have been unknown at one time in Sparta,? 


1 The mss. of Suidas give Taxrixa rept orpatnynudruv. 
Bernhardi (following Kiister) puts a comma after raxrixd, 
as though different works were referred to, but it is much 
more likely that only one was meant, whether we take the 
words epi otpatnynudtwy as explanatory of raxz7ixd, or 
suppose that 7 has fallen out. In any event the title given 

by Suidas is inexact, for the better mss. of Onasander give 
| Srparnyexds (the inferior ones ZrparyyKa or =rparnycky), 
which is undoubtedly correct, and is attested also by the 
so-called Leo xiv. 112. Suidas exemplifies late usage 
which applied raxz:x¢é to any military treatise. 

* This has left no trace. 

3 The evidence is collected and discussed by Erich Bethe, 


343 


ONASANDER 


hence it can hardly have escaped the attention of 
military writers. The same topic is treated also 
in extant literature from before the time of 
Onasander by Xenophon in his Symposium, viii. 32, 
34, 35, so that, although Onasander can hardly have 
been ignorant of the famous passage in Plato 
(Symposium, 178 © ff.), it is hardly necessary to 
assume that this was the immediate source. 

As for the discrimination between ¢@dvos and 
(jAos there is no real parallel in Plato, whereas an 
almost exact counterpart exists in Aristotle (Ihet. 
ii. 11. 1), a circumstance which escaped Schwebel.! 
Such definitions, however, were the stock in trade 
of philosophers, and do not presuppose a specific 
source unless there is some marked similarity in 
expression. On the contrary, one would rather be 
inclined to wonder that, in an ethical study of war- 
fare like the present, a commentator upon Plato’s 
Republic should have failed to show at any point 
some trace of the not infrequent references to war 
and its basic cause, the character of the good soldier, 


Rhein. Mus., 1907, Ixii: 445 ff. The ¢dirtwv in of the 
younger Scipio (Appian, Hisp. 84) seems to have been 
composed rather of friends of Scipio, than of mutual friends, 
so that I cannot agree with Wecklein, Philol., 1876, xxxiv: 413, 
who compares it with the iepos Néyos of Thebes. In Magna 
Graecia so closely connected was paederasty with war that 
it was even said to have been in origin a military measure. 
(Suidas s.v. Oduuprs.) 

1 The Pseudo-Platonic “Opa (which Schwebel, following a 
very dubious tradition, ascribes to Theophrastus) give a 
somewhat different definition of ¢@ér0s, and of ¢@évos only. 

2 Compare the scholium to Aristophanes, Plutus, 87, 
where the definition of the word as given by the philosophers 
(rapa Trois giiocdpots) is contrasted with that given by 
the rhetoricians. The Stoics, of course, had their definition, 
see Diog. Laert. vii. 111. 


344 


INTRODUCTION 


the need of constant military exercise, the style of 
life of the soldier, the professional aspect of success- 
ful military preparation, mathematics as a necessary 
element in an officer’s education, proposals looking 
toward the elimination of certain of the more cruel 
aspects of warfare, at least between civilized states, 
and similar topics discussed in that great work. 
Such silence on the part of Onasander, although not 
sufficient, perhaps, to cast doubt on the identity 
of our author with the writer mentioned by Suidas, 
would more naturally suggest that in The General 
we have a study anterior to a period of preoccupation 
with Plato. 

The only other references to Onasander from 
antiquity are in Johannes Lydus, De magistratibus, 
i. 47, who names an ‘Ovijcavdpos among Greek 
military writers, and in the Tactica of the so-called 
Leo} xiv. 112, “Ovijcavdpos b€ Kai aitos otparnyiKov 
guvtagas Aoyov. In this connexion some conclusion 
must be reached about the proper form of the name, 
which has been much in doubt. The reading of 
all known mss. except F and D (see below under 
‘Mss. and ‘Symbols’), supported by Suidas, is 
‘Ovécavdpos and so the majority of editors print 
the ‘mame. Ony the other hand the’. earliest 

1 This work, long ascribed to Leo VI, is now known to 
antedate his period, and must go back to Leo III (a.p. 711- 
741), commonly, but incorrectly, called the Isaurian. This 
conclusion was first advanced by Zachariae von Lingenthal, 
Byz. Zeitschr., 1894, iii: 437 ff., and the demonstration 
completed by K. Schenk, ibid., 1896, vi: 298 f. Of course 
the Emperor is only to be regarded as the one under whose 
auspices the work was composed. See also R. Helbing in 
his review of R. Vari’s new edition of the Tactica, Budapest. 
1917 (unfortunately inaccessible as yet), in Berl. philol. 
Wochenschr., 1919, 97. 

345 


ONASANDER 


authorities, Johannes Lydus and the so-called 
Leo, of whom the latter must have had access to 
better sources than Suidas in this matter, give the 
form “Ovijcavdpos.1 Scholars have been divided, 
Schwebel (in his commentary), Fabricius, Koraes, 
M. Haupt, von Rohden, Jahns, Bechtel (a propos of 
an inscription, Bezz. Beztr., 1896, xxi: 236) favouring 
"Ovicavdpos, while the early editors and translators 
uniformly, Haase, Kéchly, K. K. Miller, Christ- 
Schmid, and works of reference in general employ 
‘Ovécavépos. As far as the then available evidence 
went it favoured slightly the spelling with », for all 
the mss. but F go back to but a single source of 
the tenth century,? the period to which Suidas 
belongs, while the Tactica of Leo * and the work of 
Johannes Lydus are respectively two and four 
centuries earlier. If the literary evidence is about 
evenly divided, then one feels inclined to decide 
in favour of the form ’Ovjcavépos, because this, 
especially in its Dorie form ’Ovdcavdpos, was a 


1 Tt is worthy of note that the so-called Leo has the 
correct form of the title, while the designation in Suidas is 
markedly inexact. 

2 See K. Krumbacher, Byzant. Literaturgesch., 2nd ed., 
1897, 638, and the literature there cited. 

8 The author of this work must have had a ms. of 
Onasander before him, because he paraphrases a large part 
of the present treatise, and since he worked under the 
encouragement of the Emperor it is to be supposed that he 
had the best available sources. No doubt the author of the 
archetype of the majority of our present codices, in the 
tenth century, also had good ms. material to work upon, 
but that was two centuries later, and besides this archetype 
clearly represents a seriously corrupt and_ interpolated 
vulgate. The testimony of D, a late interpolated ms., for 
"Ov7jcavdpos is worthless. 


346 





INTRODUCTION 


relatively common name,! while “Ovocavépos seems 
to occur but once, and then, as Bechtel (loc. cit.) and 
others have thought, by a mere stone-cutter’s error.” 

Such was the status of the question until Dr. 
Rostagno’s collation of the Florentinus, which is 
incomparably the best ms., showed that it had the 
following subscription : 

ONACANAPOY CTPATHFIKOC :— 
Plut. lv. 4 f. 215y. 

a form of the name, which had been known, indeed, 
before, but because it appeared only in the late 
ms. B, had been rejected by Kéchly with a “ sce /” 
I have not, however, hesitated to accept it as the 
correct form of the name, partly because of the high 
value of the testimony of the Florentinus, but 
especially because it affords the best explanation 
of the other two forms, for “Ovocavédpos is an easy 
corruption of “Ovacavépos, and ’Ovjcavdpos merely 
the Attic (or Koine) spelling. 

With reference to the period in which Onasander 
lived, it can scarcely be doubted that the Quintus 
Veranius to whom the present work is dedicated 
was the consul of a.p. 49 who died while in command 
in Britain ten years later, so that 59 is the terminus 
ante quem for the composition of the treatise.? If 


1 Approximately thirty-five instances have been noted, 
without making an exhaustive search, principally from 
Rhodes, Eretria, Athens, Laconia, and Jonia. 

2 ’Ovécavépos can hardly be derived from dvos, what- 
ever one may think of the possibility of such a name among 
the Greeks, while the stem dvécac@a, as Bechtel observed, 
does not seem to appear in Greek nomenclature. 

° Karlier but baseless conjectures are mentioned by 
Schwebel, p. [8]. The year 58 might be more appropriately 
taken, as P is unlikely that Onasander would have dedicated 


347 


ONASANDER 


we are inclined to press a little the author’s own 
characterization of his work as raAawy Te iyepndovev 
kata tiv oeBacTHV eipyvyy avabnpa (prooem. 4), 
and see in these words a reference to the time of 
composition being a moment of universal tranquility, 
we might accept Zur-Lauben’s suggestion (preface, 
p- 6) that the treatise was composed in the year 
53, this being perhaps the only one in the period 
for which there exists no record of military opera- 
tions. But the expression employed, while certainly 
appropriate at a time of complete peace, does not 
necessarily imply quite so much, and it is better to 
rest content with a date shortly anterior to a.p. 59.1 

The treatise consists of forty-two chapters upon 
various aspects of a commander’s duties, notably 
ethical considerations regarding the character, social 
status, bearing, behaviour, and attitude of a general 
towards his troops, the enemy, and his fellow-citizens ; 
the morale of the troops, the effect of particular 
policies and tactics upon morale, and the like ; 
together with much sound advice about elementary 
matters. In two respects Onasander differs 
markedly from other Greek and Roman military 
writers. He regards everything from the point 
his work to Veranius after the latter had gone to Britain in 
this year. For Veranius see the article in Prosop. Imp. 
Rom. iii. 399 f. 

1 Some slight general confirmation of this approximate 
dating is supplied by von Rohden (see Bibliography), who 
finds approximately the same technique regarding the 
avoidance of hiatus in Onasander and in Ps.-Longinus, 
for the latter, it is now agreed, belongs to the period of the 
early empire. Von Rohden’s results may, however, need 
modification, because they are based upon Kéchly’s text 


which departs at many places from the best ms. tradition 
in the matter of elision. 


348 


INTRODUCTION 


of view primarily of the commanding officer, to 
the question of selecting whom he devotes a long 
and valuable passage, and he lays uncommon stress 
upon the zmponderahilia, especially ethical and 
religious considerations. There is nothing very 
philosophic nor technically military in the treatise, 
which is intended to give merely the broad principles 
of generalship (otpatynyikal vdnyijces, prooem. 3), 
and lays no claim to originality (¢b¢dem).+ 

One feels no more inclined to extol the treatise 
as being “the most learned, concise, and valuable 
to be found upon the art of war,’ ? than to decry 
it as “useless and pedantic,’ and the author as 
one who “ talks Greek like a doctor of the Sorbonne,’ 
or to regard it as a mere “ wilderness of general 
phrases,”’ whose “ useful observations. are but grains 
in the chaff of trivialities.”’4 The truth, as often, 
lies here between extremes: xpatiory 5° aipeors 7 
Tov pésov, as Onasander himself says (A, 10). 

Actual performance falls below the statement in 
the prooemium that the study has drawn merely 


1 It seems unduly severe for Kéchly and Riistow: 1855, 
84 and Max Jahns, 92,to denounce Onasander for lack of 
originality when he disclaims it himself. 

2 Guilliman writing in 1583, as quoted by Zur-Lauben, 
preface, p. 9. 

3 The Prince de Ligne, as quoted by Jahns, 94. One’s 
respect for the prince’s judgement is seriously qualified, 
however, by the circumstance that he has the highest 
admiration for the so-called Leo (ibid. 120), ranging him 
beside Napoleon, and far above a mere Caesar or Frederick 
the Great, whereas the Tactics of Leo are in part a watered 
paraphrase of Onasander himself, together with extensive 
extracts from the Strategica ascribed to Mauricius, and 
from other sources. 

* Kochly and Riistow: 1855, 85. 


349 


ONASANDER 


upon those arts and practices employed by the 
Romans in the establishment of their empire, for 
specifically Roman institutions are regularly neg- 
lected even when appropriate, and in only one 
instance (Ch. 19) is a manceuvre recommended, 
which, though perhaps not impossible in a Greek 
phalanx, is certainly suggestive of the Roman 
maniple tactics. Elsewhere only general principles 
are proposed which apply to almost any army at 
any time, or else, although very rarely, if ever, is 
a custom peculiar to the Greeks described In 
particular many of the qualities which Onasander 
requires of a commander-in-chief, are, mutatis 
mutandis, quite as applicable to-day to higher officers 
in general, as they were in the reign of Claudius. 
The burden of the treatise is really ethics, morale, 
and the general principles of success in arms. As 
such, a good deal of it will necessarily sound common- 
place, some of it even trivial, for the principles of 
success in war have often been declared by experts 


1 Thus it has been noted that in Ch. 10. 25 ff. the Greek 
inspection of victims before battle is mentioned, not the 
Roman augury with the sacred chickens. But the Romans 
also took auspices before battle, no less than the Greeks, at 
least during the Republic. In the same chapter (10. 4) 
exercises for soldiers are mentioned, which are drawn from 
Xenophon (Cyrop. ii. 3. 17 f.). But similar exercises were 
employed by the Romans (see the article ‘‘ Exercitus ” 
in Pauly-Wissowa, 1654), and although exercise in throwing 
clods is not recorded for the Romans, so far as I am aware, 
Vegetius (ii. 23) especially recommends that soldiers be 
trained to throw stones, and in a sham battle what better 
substitute for these could be desired than clods? It is 
true that the Roman legion is not specifically mentioned, 
but neither is the Greek, for that matter. The word ¢d\ay& 
could be used of either, but Onasander is writing of armies 
in general and not of particular forms of organization. 


350 


INTRODUCTION 


to be very simple, and the difficult matter in war, as 
in many sports and occupations, is not the principles, 
but their application. Nevertheless every failure 
is easily traceable to the neglect of some important 
principle, and these can hardly be inculcated too 
often. If a manual expresses the principles of the 
art clearly and pointedly, one can hardly in fairness 
demand more of it. Estimates of value regarding 
a work of this kind will necessarily differ, but when 
so great a commander as Prinz Moritz von Sachsen, 
Marshal of France, and author likewise of a classic 
work on the art of war, Mes Réveries, “‘ declared with 
pleasure that he owed his first conceptions of the 
conduct of a commander-in-chief to Onasander ” 
(Zur-Lauben, preface, p. 5), no mere closet philolo- 
gist, at all events, may deny the possibility that it 
may prove useful to the professional soldier. The 
little treatise is merely a plain tale simply told, and 
it is the better part of criticism to express apprecia- 
tion of the work that is valuable and well done rather 
than to strain to find what is useless or inappropriate. 

The style of Onasander is straightforward and 
not ill adapted to the subject matter. Although it 
is not so fluent and simple as that of Xenophon, 
whom he seems to have admired and followed, it 
nevertheless stands comparison with that of Polybius 
or Plutarch, but only an enthusiast like Zur-Lauben 
could speak of its “ beauté majestueuse, élégance 
nerveuse, et clarté percante.” 

The influence of Onasander in antiquity was con- 


1 He was especially indebted to the Cyropaedia and the 
Anabasis. He drew also from Homer, Herodotus, Thucy- 
dides, and Polybius among extant authors, but is in no 
case slavishly dependent upon any particular source that 
bas come down to us. 


351 


ONASANDER 


siderable. Most subsequent military writers are 
indebted to him, notably the so-called Mauricius 
and Leo, of whom the latter in a large measure 
paraphrases Onasander, turning him into “‘ wretched 
Byzantine Greek.’ 1! In the Renaissance he enjoyed 
a remarkable popularity. Translations, beginning 
with that of Sagundinus in 1493, appeared in rapid 
succession in Latin, Spanish, German, French, 
Italian, and English, and such a demand, for these 
were no mere philological exercises, shows that 
many a practical soldier took to heart his counsel, 
and that much of it has passed thereby into the 
common body of military science. Towards the end 
of the next century the first Greek text appeared, a 
fairly good piece of scholarship, by Rigaltius, which 
held its place until Schwebel’s elaborate study, 
more than a century and a half later. Since that 
time Onasander has been known to few beside 
professional philologists, but it may be hoped that 
others outside the ramparts of scholarship may 
have their attention drawn to his work by the present 
unpretentious publication. 

A few words seem to be necessary by way of 
explaining this edition. It would have been much 
easier to reprint Kéchly’s text, but inasmuch as 
only one of the four old and really valuable mss. of 
Onasander was adequately known (namely the 
Parisinus 2442), the great Laurentian ms. of the 
Tacticians had never been really collated, and the 
Vatican and the Neapolitan mss. never examined 
at all, it would have been scarcely proper merely 
to reproduce an old and occasionally imperfect, 
though in the main most admirable, text. The 


1 Kéchly and Riistow: 1855, 85, note 198, 
352 


INTRODUCTION 


apparatus aims to give all the ms. readings that 
have any critical value, or may throw light upon 
the tradition of the text, and all the valuable 
emendations of modern scholars, especially those of 
Kéchly. Knowledge of the inferior mss. and 
readings of earlier editors have been drawn generally 
from Kéchly, whose work in this respect is most 
exact and thorough, although we have been able 
to use the work of Rigaltius from the edition of 
1600 in a privately owned copy, as well as Schwebel’s 
edition of 1762, and that of Koraes, 1822, lent by 
the courtesy of the libraries of Harvard University 
and Princeton University respectively. Departures 
from K6chly’s text have generally been recorded 
except in matters of elision (where Koéchly nearly 
always elided with or without ms. authority), and 
of movable nu (which Kéchly added somewhat 
arbitrarily). In these points the best ms. authority 
(F, and frequently FGH) has been followed. Cases 
where FGH merely run preposition and substantive 
together have not been recorded, or where iota 
subscript (without indication of a different con- 
struction) has been omitted, or movable nu has been 
added or left off (except for F), or compound words 
written as two (unless such a usage is occasionally 
recognized), or obviously erroneous accents or breath- 
ings occur, or where GH have trivial misspellings. 
The punctuation of FGH has likewise not been 
recorded, although it has been duly regarded in 
constructing the text. 

The bibliography, which is more complete perhaps 
than any to be found elsewhere, has been drawn 
up with especial care, and omits, we trust, no title 
of substantial value for the criticism of Onasander. 


2A 353 


ONASANDER 


EDITIONS 


Nicolaus Rigaltius : ‘Ovordvépov = =tpatnycKos. 
Onosandri Strategicus. Sive de imperatoris 
institutione. Accessit OvtpBixiov “Emitjdevpa. 
Paris, 1598 and 1599. ‘This is the edztio princeps.1 
It was republished in 1600 at Heidelberg by 
the Commelin Press with the notes of Portus 
and Gruterus, and again in 1604 with the notes 
of Portus, with which edition the more elaborate 
observations of Gruterus, published separately 
in the same year, were sometimes bound. See 
below. 

[Henricus Monantholius: Onosandri et Aristotelis 
Mechanica cum commentariis. Paris, 1599. 
Fabricius, Brbl. Graeca, vol. iv. 339, quotes 
this entry from a Leyden catalogue, but the 
title itself is absurd, and the entries in the 
catalogues of the Brit. Mus. and the Bibl. Nat. 
under the Monantholius edition of Aristotle 
do not mention Onasander. We have here 
probably a cataloguer’s error, due possibly 
to two different works being bound together. 
The Onasander was probably the edition of 
Rigaltius. | 


1 Max Jahns, Gesch. der Kriegswiss. i. 9, note, who 
mentions an edition of the Scriptores (i.e., the Rei Militaris 
Scriptores, Rome, 1487, and frequently thereafter), Rome, 
1499, in which the collection is enlarged by the addition 
of Onasander’s treatise, which, however, was again omitted 
in the edition of Bologna and the subsequent reprints, had no 
doubt in mind the Latin translation of Sagundinus, q.v., 
which meets his description in every detail except that it 
appeared in the edition of Rome, 1494, only, not 1499. 


354 


INTRODUCTION 


Aemilius Portus and Janus Gruterus: “Ovoodvdpov 
Xtpatnyikos. Accedit seorsim in eundem 
Onosandrum Jani Gruteri uberior commen- 
tatiuss + Item sAenilit;? Porti 2'.)i breues .. . 
observationes. Ex Officina Commeliniana 
[Heidelberg], 1600; also the work of Rigaltius 
and Portus alone, ibidem, 1604. Gruterus’ 
notes were published also by the same firm 
in Varii discursus, sive prolixiores commentarii 
ad aliquot insigniora loca Taciti et Onosandri, 
Part I, 1604, and Part II, 1605.1 These 
observations of Gruterus seem to have been 
bound occasionally with the edition of Rigaltius, 
and also with the notes of Portus, but not always, 
since the latter combination alone was used by 
Schwebel (preface, [6]). On the somewhat 
complicated relations of these three works see 
pehwebel, loc. cit.3 Fabricus, op. ct. 338 ; 
Haase: 1835, 98. The copy of the edition of 
1600 owned by Mr. A. 8. Pease, although its 
title-page professes to have Gruterus’ notes, 
does not contain them. The Notae of Rigaltius 
are dated in both preface and colophon 1598. 

Joannes a Chokier de Surlet : Onosandri Strategicus, 
sive de imperatoris institutione ... , without 
place or date, but the preface is dated Rome, 
1610. This edition is a part of Chokier’s 
Thesaurus aphorismorum politicorum, Rome, 1611. 
It contains the text and translation of Rigaltius. 


1 The copy in the Brit. Mus. is described thus: ‘** Another 
edition) [i.¢., of Rigaltius]._ Accessit Urbici inventum, Graece 
et Latine: interprete N. Rigaltio, cujus item adjiciuntur 
notae; ut item J. Gruteri discursus varii. . . . In Biblio- 
polio Commeliniano: [Heidelberg] 1604, 1600—05.”’ 


355 


ONASANDER 


Its only value lies in the “ political disserta- 
tions’ added by Chokier. The Thesaurus 
(containing Onasander) was republished at 
Mainz, 1613 and 1619 (third ed.; Cat. Bibl. 
Nat.); Frankfurt, 1615; Liége, 1643; Kéln, 
1649, 1653, and 1687. The editions of Liége 
and K6In do not contain the Greek text (Cat. 
Bibl. Nat.). 


Nicolaus Schwebelius : Onosandri Strategicus, sive 


de imperatoris institutione liber, ete., : 
notis perpetuis criticis emendatus. ... Ac- 
cedunt duo indices, etc. . . . Niirnberg [1762]. 
This is commonly bound with the translation 


- of Zur-Lauben, Paris, 1757. 
A. Koraes (Korais, Corais, or Coray) : “Ovynodvdpov 


LrpatynytKds kai Tuptatov 76 tpotov HAeyetov, peta 
THs LVadAckns €exatépov petappacews. Llapépywv 
“EAAnviKns PBuBA.oPjkns Tduos weurtos, Paris, 
1822. The French translation is that of Zur- 
Lauben, which Koraes reproduces even when it 
is based upon readings different from those which 
he prints. 


Arminius Koechly : ‘Ovocavépov =tpatnytxes. Ono- 


sandri de imperatoris officio liber. Leipzig, 
1860. This is the most valuable edition of the 
text. It completely supplants the earlier edi- 
tions, using all the critical materials previously 
collected, and adds new manuscript readings, 
especially from one of the oldest mss., Paris. 
2442. 


INTRODUCTION 


TRANSLATIONS 


Latin 


Nicolaus Sagundinus : Onosander ad Q. Veranium 
de optimo imperatore eiusque officio per 
Nicolaum Sagundinum (sic) e Graeco in 
Latinum traductus. Rome, 1494.2. This pub- 
lication was in the well-known and frequently 
reprinted Re: militaris scriptores, which in- 
cluded among others Vegetius, [rontinus, 
Modestus, and Aelian. Only the 1494 edition, 
however, contains Onasander. This translation 
of Onasander was reprinted at Paris, 1504 
(colophon) or 1506 (preface); at Basel, 1541, 
1558, and 1570.3 

Joachimus Camerarius: Onosandri Graeci autoris 
de re militari commentarius in Latinum sermo- 
nem conversus. . . . Niirnberg, 1595. This was 
an independent work made from a mutilated 
ms. It was published after the death of 
Camerarius by his sons. Max Jahns, Gesch. 
der Kriegsniss. 93, is certainly in error in 

1 There seems to have been some doubt as to the correct 
spelling of the name. The editio princeps and the Paris 
reprint have Sagundinus, the Basel reprints and editors 
use the form Saguntinus. Fabricius, Bibl. Gr. iv. 337, and 


Haase, 1835, 99 give some references where the form 
Secundinus appears. 

* So Haase, 1835, 98; Kéchly in his edition, p. vii.; 
and the catalogues of the Brit. Museum and the Bibl. Nat. 
and Hain* 15915. Fabricius, loc. cit., gives 1493. 

3 A Latin translation in ms. exists in the Escurial library, 
ili. S. 11; also at London, 12 C. XIII, the latter under the 
name WNicolao Secundino, so that the Escurial translation 
is probably the same work ; see Haase, 1835, 99. 


357 


ONASANDER 


speaking of this edition as containing also the 
Greek text. 

Nicolaus Rigaltius. For his translation and reprints 
of it, see under Edttons, Rigaltius, Portus, and 
Chokier. The Latin translation by itself was 
published at Helmstadt in 1619.1 


Spanish 


Al. de Palencia: Tratado de la perfecion del 
triunfo militar. Printed about 1495, but without 
indication of place or date. The translation 
was composed in 1459.2 

Jac. Dieg. Gracian de Aldarete: Onosandro Pla- 
tonico de las calidades y partes que ha de tener 
un excellente capitan general y de su officio y 
cargo. Barcelona, 1567. 


German 


Anon. : Onexander von den Kriegsshandlungen und 
Rathen der hocherfarn guten Hauptleut sampt 
iren Zugeordenten. Mainz, 1524 and 1532.3 


1 It is more than doubtful if the work of Dominicus 
Syllenius Graecus, described by Fabricius, op. cit., 339, 
under the heading Versiones, as being ‘“‘ de vetere et recen- 
tiore scientia militari, omnium bellorum genera terrestria 
perinde ac naualia, nec non tormentorum rationes complec- 
tente. Venet. 1599’, contains a translation of Onasander. 

2 Max Jahns, Gesch. der Kriegswiss., 93. 

8 Fabricius, loc. cit., gives 1531. This translation is 
said to contain a chapter, otherwise unknown, upon the 
Athenians, Spartans, and Macedonians. See Zur-Lauben, 
quoted by Fabricius, loc. cit.; Jahns, op. cit., 93. It 
can hardly fail to be spurious, since any such details would 
be alien to the general tenor of the work, as well as opposed 
to the express statement of the prooemium. 


358 


INTRODUCTION 


A. H. Baumgartner: Onosanders Unterricht eines 
Feldherrn, iibersetzt und mit Anmerkungen 
erlautert; in Vollstandige Sammlung aller 
Kriegschriftsteller der Griechen. Mannheim, 
1777,1 and separately in 1786. This is said to 
be a poor piece of work, based on Schwebel’s text. 


French 


Jehan Charrier: L’art de la guerre composé par 
Nicolas Machiavelli; l’éstat aussi et charge 
d’un lieutenant général d’armée, par Onosander, 
ancien philosophe platonique . . ., Paris, 1546.” 

Blaise de Vigenere: L’art militaire d’Onosender, 
autheur grec, ot: il traicte de loffice et devoir 
d'un bon chef de guerre, etc., Paris, 1605. 
The translation seems to have been completed 
in 1593, but was not published until after 
the author’s death (Jahns, op. czt., 93). The 
commentary and essays were so extensive as 
to make the whole work extremely bulky.® 
It was by means of this translation that Prinz 
Moritz von Sachsen made his acquaintance with 
Onasander (Zur-Lauben, preface, 5). 

Baron de Zur-Lauben: Le général d’armée, par 

1 Jahns, op. cit., 94, gives the place of publication as 

Frankfurt and the date as 1779 (on p. 10, Frankenthal 

and Miinchen). This may have been a different edition 


but it is more likely that we have here only a different title- 
page. 


s 
2 The catalogue of the Bibl. Nat. indicates that there 
were other editions of this translation, but the volume 
which would contain them has not yet appeared. The 
Brit. Mus. possesses only this edition of 1546. 

3 Max Jihns, op. cit., speaks of 1500 pages, but the Brit. 
Mus. cat. records only 734. The book is a quarto. 


359 


ONASANDER 


Onosander. Ouvrage traduit du Grec, ete. 
Paris, 1754 and 1757. The reprint of 1757 is 
bound with Schwebel’s edition of 1762. Another 
edition appeared in vol. i. of Zur-Lauben’s 
Bibliothéque militaire historique et politique, Cos- 
mopolis [Paris], 1760. It was also reprinted by 
A. Koraes in his edition, Paris, 1822, q.v. 

Charles Guischardt!: Les institutions d’Onosandre 
pour servir a l’instruction d’un général. Tra- 
duites du Gree. In his Mémozres militaires sur 
les Grecs et les Romains, vol. ii, 49-106. The 
Hague, 1757,? and Lyon, 1760. ‘This translation 
was reprinted by Liskenne and Sauvan; see 
below. 

[A. Koraes: Paris, 1822. See Editions.] 

F. C. Liskenne et J. B. B. Sauvan: Bibliotheque 
historique et militaire. In eight vols. Paris, 
1835-46; and 1851 ff. The translation of 
Onasander, by Guischardt, is in vol. iii, 405-35. 


Italian 


Fabio Cotta: Onosandro platonico dell’ ottimo 
capitano generale e del suo offizio. Tradotto 
di Greco in lingua volgare Italiana. Venezia, 
1546 and 1548. This work was translated into 
English by Peter Whytehorne. It was re- 
published by G. Daelli in Bibhoteca rara, 
Milano, 1868, vol. iv. 


1 Thus Haase: 1835, 98, and the catalogues of the Brit. 
Mus. and the Bibl. Nat.; Guischard, Fabricius, op. cit., 
339, Brunet, Graesse ; Guischart, Jahns, op. cit., 93. 

2 Haase, ibid., and the catalogues of the Brit. Mus. and 
the Bibl. Nat. give 1758. 

360 


INTRODUCTION 
English 


Peter Whytehorne: Onosandro Platonico, of the 
generall captaine and of his office, translated 
out of Greke into Italyan by Fabio Cotta, a 
Romayne ; and out of Italyan into Englysh by 
Peter Whytehorne. London, 1563. 


Modern Greek 


G. Apostolos Skalasteras: Bucharest, 1832. M. 
Konstantiniades (see next item) claims that this 
version was not made from the original Greek, 
but only from a translation. 

Michael Konstantiniades : ‘Ovncdvipov 2 rparyyeKos, 
petappac Gels ék THs apxatas eis THY Ka? apas 


“EXAnvixjy. Athens, 1897. 


CRITICISM 


Anon.: Acta litteraria, vol. i, part I, 22-8; Nova 
acta erudita, 1763, 201-11; zbid., 1768, "313-19. 
The last two Arieles are devoted to a critique 
of Schwebel’s edition. The first is not accessible 
to me. 

H. Delbriick: Geschichte der Kriegskunst im Rahmen 
der politischen Geschichte. Berlin, 1921, vol. ii, 200. 

Christ - Schmid -Stahlin: Griechische  Luteraturge- 
schichte, 6th ed., Miinchen, 1921, vol. ii, 422. 

Th. Crenius: De eruditione comparanda. Leyden, 
1699, 470, 570 ff. Crenius seems to have 

361 


ONASANDER 


added some observations of his own to the 
work of Naudaeus which he republished. See 
Schwebel, pref. [10]. 

J. A. Fabricius: Brbliotheca Graeca. Leipzig, 
1795, vol. iv, 336-40. 

Fr. Haase: “ Uber die griechischen und lateinischen 
Kriegsschriftsteller,” Jahrb. fiir Philol., 1835, 14: 
86-118. 

De militartum scriptorum Graecorum et Latinorum 
omnium editione instituenda. Berlin, 1847. 

M. Haupt: Varia (including a brief note on Ona- 
sander). Hermes, 1871, 5: 175. Reprinted in 
Opuscula, 1876, vol. iii, 518 f. 

Max Jahns : Geschichte der Kriegsnissenschaften, etc., 
Miinchen und Leipzig, 1889, vol. i, 5-10; 90-94. 

Herman Kéchly: Index lectionum im _ literarum 
universitate. Ziirich, 1854. A discussion of 
Mss. of Onasander, principally Bern. 97 and 
Panic 522. 

H. Koéchly and W. Riistow: Griechische Kriegs- 
schrifisteller, Leipzig, 1855, vol. ii, 1, 84 f. 

K. K. Miiller: “ Ein griechisches Fragment tiber 

Kriegswesen,’ in Festschrift fiir L. Urlchs, 
Wiirzburg, 1880, 106-38. On the Laurentian ms. 
of Onasander. 
“Kine griechische Schrift itiber Seekrieg’’, in 
Festgabe zur dritten Sdcularfeier der Universitat 
Wiirzburg, Wirzburg, 1882. On the general 
classification of the mss. 

Gabr. Naudaeus : Syntagma de studio militart. Rome, 
1637. Republished as Naudaer lbibliographia 
militaris, Jena, 1683, and included in Thomas 
Crenius, De eruditione comparanda, Leyden, 1699. 

G. Rathgeber: Article “ Onosandros,’ in Ersch 

362 


INTRODUCTION 


and Griiber’s Encyklopddie der Wissenschaften 
und Kiinste, series 111, vol. iv, 9-12. 

H. von Rohden: “Quas rationes in hiatu vilsndo 
scriptor de sublimitate et Onesander secuti 
sint,’’ in Commentationes in honorem F. Bicheleri et 
H. Usenert. . . . Bonn, 1873,.68-94. 

Cl. Salmasius: De re militari Romanorum, Leyden, 
1657. Republished in J. G. Graevius: Thesaurus 
antiquitatum Romanarum. For Onasander see 
vol. x, 1389. 


MANUSCRIPTS 


The mss. of Onasander are much more numerous 
than those of the other Greek military writers, and 
thus testify to his abiding influence throughout 
antiquity, but only a few of them, and these mainly 
copies from existing codices, have ever been collated, 
and two of the very oldest seem not to have been 
used at all prior to this edition? As K. K. Miiller 
has observed (Festgabe, etc.), the ms. tradition of 
Greek military authors falls into three main groups, 
the first of which is composed of the Florentinus 
LV. 4, s. X, and its descendants (especially A and 
B, see below); the second, of the Parisinus 2442, 
s. XI, the Vaticanus Graecus 1104, s. XI, and the 

1 Most of them are listed by Zur-Lauben in the preface 
to his translation (from Montfaucon, Bibl. Bibl.); Haase, 
De milit. script. Gr.; and K. K. Miiller, Festgabe zur 
dritten Sdcularfeier. Add to those mentioned in these 
works one at Perugia (Blume, Bibliotheca librorum wuss. 
Italica, in Supplementum itineris Italici, Gottingen, 1834, 
aah and another at Turin (Fabricius, Bibl. Graeca, iv (1795), 


363 


ONASANDER 


Neapolitanus III C 26, s. XI, and their descendants 
(e.g. M and Vat. 2201 are direct copies of the 
Vaticanus) or closely related mss.; the third, of the 
Ambrosianus 139 (old no. B 119), s. X (or XI accord- 
ing to an older dating). 

The Florentinus is incomparably the best ms. for 
Onasander, so that the disagreements of other mss. 
need be considered only in the relatively few passages 
where it has obviously suffered from corruption. 
Mss. A and B are faithful copies of the Florentinus, 
and Kéchly collated these two mss. himself, so 
that this branch of the tradition was fairly well 
known even before the collation of the parent ms. 
In view of this fact and of the rare critical acumen 
of Kéchly it is but natural that the present edition 
will be found to differ in only a few places, and 
generally in points of minor importance (but uni- 
formly along the line of closer adherence to the 
Florentinus), from the text as constituted by that 
great scholar. 

The second family represents a markedly inferior 
text, but probably one of wider circulation, and so 
presumably the vulgate of Leo’s time. It is valuable 
primarily only when the Florentinus is corrupt. I 
have given, however, in the apparatus criticus all 
the important variations of the three leading ss. 
of this family from the printed text, so that the 
material upon which a judgement must be based 
may not be withheld from others. 

The third group, represented by the Ambrosianus, 
gives us a text varying so widely from that of 
the other lines of tradition that both K. K. Miiller 
and the editors of the catalogue of the Ambrosian 
Library, Drs. Martini and Bassi, regard it as no 


364 


INTRODUCTION 


longer a recension but as a Byzantine paraphrase. 
I have taken, therefore, no cognizance of it, not, 
of course, because I am unaware of the value which 
a close paraphrase like this, and even a much freer 
one like that of many passages in Leo’s Tvactica, 
have in attesting the direct ms. tradition, but merely 
because it has been impossible in the time available, 
because of the delay and uncertainty of communica- 
tion with Italy, to secure photographs of the Ambro- 
sianus and present this secondary material in a form 
suitable for a volume of this series. 

To sum up: we have in F an excellent, old, 
uninterpolated, but not faultless text; in PGH 
and most other mss. a Byzantine vulgate; in the 
Ambrosianus 139 a Byzantine paraphrase; in Leo 
a Byzantine plagiarism. 

1 Similarly, in the case of Leo, it has been impossible to 
secure from Hungary the new critical edition of the Tactica 
prepared by Dr. R. Vari, and published by the Budapest 
Academy as long ago as 1917, while any extensive use of this 
work in the old editions would be unprofitable. It should 
be noted, however, that Leo agrees occasionally with F 
against all other mss., which would suggest that the 
tradition represented by F and not the vulgate was 
the basis of his paraphrase, a condition apparently some- 
what different from that which Wescher, Poliorcétique 


grecqué, p. Xxxix, presupposes for the tradition of the military 
technicians. 


ONASANDER 


SYMBOLS 


I give here, in addition to the symbols for the 
four great mss., those used by Kéchly for the ss. 
from which readings were given by his predecessors. 
The names Rigaltius, Schwebel, Koraes, and Kéchly 
in the apparatus refer to the texts, or notes as the 
case may be, and those of Sagundinus and Camerarius, 
to the translations produced respectively by these 
scholars. 

A Parisinus 2522,s. XV,acopy of F. The corrector, 
A m?, is derived from R, or a very closely related 
Ms. (Kéchly.) 

B Bernensis 97, s. XV-XVI, a copy of F but with 
some emendations. (Kéchly.) 

C Morellanus, once in the possession of F. Morellus 
at Paris. It seems to be descended from F 
but has many deviations and peculiar readings. 
(Rigaltius.) 

D An inferior sixteenth century ms. (Koraes.) 

E In the library at Munich in the eighteenth 
century ; it agrees closely with the late mss. 
of Rigaltius. (Schwebel.) 

F Florentinus LV. 4, s. X, collated by Prof. Dott. 
Enrico Rostagno for this edition. The symbol 
F is used by Kéchly for a very few readings 
from a Florentine ms. (presumably LV. 4) 
furnished Schwebel by Dom. Mar. Manni. 
For these the designation “ F (szc) ”’ is used. 

G Vaticanus Graecus 1164, s. XI. See H. Photo- 
graphs of this Ms. were used. Two leaves are 
missing (for details see apparatus on 10. 27 
and 35. 3). Some portions, especially of 


366 


INTRODUCTION 


fol. 117, are illegible. For a description see 
Wescher, Poliorcétaque grecque, pp. xxiv ff. 

H Neapolitanus III C 26, s. XI. H and G agree 
so closely that they are certainly copies of the 
same archetype, probably uncial. Photographs 
of this Ms. were used. 

K A late and inferior ms. owned by Koraes. 
(Koraes.) 

M “ Cod. Mediceus, ex Bibl. Reg. Catharinae’’, a 
direct copy of G. (Rigaltius.) 

N A late ms. owned by Joh. Nagel, agreeing 
generally with the late mss. of Rigaltius. 
(Schwebel.) 

P Parisinus 2442, s. XI, collated for Kéchly by Jakob 
Huntziker. For a description see Wescher, 
Poliorcétaque grecque, pp. xxvif. (Kéchly.) 

R A late and extensively interpolated ms. of 
Rigaltius, the probable source of the readings 
of the second hand of A. (Rigaltius.) 

V “Vet. Membranae”’ or “ Vetusta Macrocola,”’ 
seldom reported upon. (Rigaltius.) 

v Vulgate reading of the mss. used by Kéchly 
and his predecessors. With this A m? (although 
Kéchly quotes the latter separately) nearly 
always agrees, and when it does so is included 
under that symbol. Because of its age and 
importance P is cited separately, even if agree- 
ing with v, when specially reported by Kéchly. 

Q All mss. or all other mss. (including FGH). 

Note.—The quoted phrases “ alii codd. ut vid.’, 

‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.”, etc., are taken from Kéchly’s 

apparatus (based upon inferences from the earlier 

editions), unless some other authority is cited. 


‘ 


367 


ONASANAPOY 
STPATHEIKO> 


IIPOOIMION 


‘Inmxav pev Adyar 7 KUVIYETUROY 7 adAvevTe- 
K@V TE av Kal yewpyic@y our ay par oV m™poo- 
dwvyow nyovpat mmpémew* avOpurrots, ofs mobos . 
éxeo0ar Towdvde Epywyr, oTparTnyLcis de mrepl 
Gewpias, @ Koivte Ovypane, ‘Papators Kal 
pddtota “Pawpaiwy tots Thy ovyKAntiKny apioTto- 

/ te \ \ \ a , 
Kpatiav Aedoyydo"® Kai Kata THY YeBaorod Kai- 
capos emippoovvyv tais* Te UmaTows Kal OTpaTn- 
yixats €€ovolats Koopmovpevois® dua TE TraLdelay, 
Hs odK em OAlyov Exovow EpTrEeLpiav, Kal TpOyoVwWY 

2 afiwow. avebnica d€ TpoyTous odio’ tovde Tov 
Adyov obx ws arretpous” oTparnylas, aAAa pdhora 
THOE Oappijcas, 7? TO pev duabes THs puxis Kal 
To" map aAAw xatopFovpevov nyvonaev, TO be 
ev eTLOT HL) TO Kahas EYOVTL TpocEew“apTUpNoey. 

3 obey, et Kal mapa moAXots davein vevonuéva Ta 
map euod ovvreTaypéva, Kal KaTa TovTO av 
nobeinv, OTL un povovy oTpaTnyiKas auveTagaunv 
1 F (subscr.): Ovnodvdpov D: ’Ovocdvdpov 2. See Introd. 

2 apéme. GH. 3 Nehoyxaow GH. 

368 


ONASANDER 
THE GENERAL 


PROOEMIUM 


Ir is fitting, I believe, to dedicate monographs on 
horsemanship, or hunting, or ee or farming, 
to men who are devoted to such pursuits, but a 
treatise on military science, Quintus Veranius, should 
be dedicated to Romans, and especially to those of 
the Romans who have attained senatorial dignity, 
and who through the wisdom of Augustus Caesar 
have been raised to the power of consul or general, 
both by reason of their military training (in which 
they have had no brief experience) and because of 
the distinction of their ancestors. I have dedicated 
this treatise primarily to them, not as to men un- 
skilled in generalship, but with especial confidence in 
this fact, that the ignorant soul is unaware even of that 
in which another is successful, but knowledge bears 
additional witness to that which is well done. For 
this reason, if what I have composed should seem 
to have been already devised by many others, even 
then I should be pleased, because I have not only 





4 Koraes : rots vH (G illeg.). > Corrected from -vys P. 
6 ENR: d¢yoi GHP. 7 ameipys P. 
SEN: 7) GHP. ° Added by Kéchly (G illeg.). 
2B 369 


+ 


Or 


ONASANDER 


dpyyycels, adAa Kal oTparnyucts eoToXacdpny 
Kat Tis ev avTots Ppovijcews, eUTUXOLNY T av, éi, 
a 67) ‘Pwpatous duvdmer kat dv Epywv mémpaxrtat, 
Tatr éyw Adyw meptrafeiv® tkavos etvar mapa® 
TOLOUTOLS avOpaot doxyracbeinv. 

To dé owvTaywa Jappodvrt [ou Aowrov etmeiv ws 
oTpaTynyav TE ayalay aoKnols éoTae TaAdaav TE 
NYVELOVvOV Kara THY oeBaoTHy etpnvay avabnua, 
etoopieD Te Kal ef punoev GAXo, Tap’ Ty aitiav ot TE 
MTALOOVTES eopddAnoav TOV oTpaTnynodvTwy, ol TE 
eUmpayijavTes evepOnoav® eis dogav" peahvora. de 
THY ‘Papatwr a per ay evVONTO}LEV, ws ovTe BaotAeds 
ovte 7dAus ovTe eUvos jeetCov _Tyepovias exparu- 
Vago béyebos, aAN’ 08d’ eis toov ajAacer,” WOTE 
TOGOUTOLS BeBavwcacbae ypovors akivytov duva- 
oretay. ov yap TUX juou doKxotow drrepapavTes 
Tovs THS ‘IraAtas Opous eml TépaTa Hs EeKTEtvaL 
THY OPETEepav apxny, ara mpakeou oTparnyucats. 
ouveTAapBavectat jev yap evxeoUau del Kat TI 
TUXIV s od pay TO Tropdmav olecbat Tavryy Kparety. 
aAn’ avonrou ot Kal Ta apanpara: Tis TUYNS 
eyKAnuata movns TOLOULEVOL, Sod THS TOV oTparn- 
youvrwy dpedetas, Kal Ta Karoplupara Taurns,: 
ov Tis euTrerplas TOV NYOULEVOV’ ovTe yap 
ETTLELKES dvemiTipnrov ovTws atroAurretv® TOV Tra 
ovra Tots odous, ws mavT Ov aitraobat ay TUXNY 
ovte Sikalov apaptupov él tTocodrov ematvov TOV 


Kochly : mpafat Q (rpa///// G: mpaéar A). 


1 
2 GH: mepiBanreiv v. 
3 Kochly: efvar ddfaue* ef On mapa Q. 
= évépbeca P: 7ép0yncav Kochly. > #racav P. 
8 aNd wees (the breathing over the second a changed 
to an accent) H: dyvénros von Rohden. 


370 


THE GENERAL, PrRooemMium 3-6 


compiled precepts of generalship, but have also 
endeavoured to get at the art of the general and 
the wisdom that inheres in the precepts. I should 
be fortunate if I should be considered capable, 
before such men, of making a summary sketch of 
what the Romans have already accomplished by their 
mighty deeds. 

It remains for me to say with good courage of my 
work, that it will be a school for good generals, 
and an object of delight for retired commanders in 
these times of holy peace; and we shall know, if 
nothing else, for what reason some generals have 
stumbled and fallen, but others have prospered and 
been raised to fame; and we shall consider above 
all the valour of the Romans, how that neither king, 
nor state, nor nation has held a greater position of 
leadership, nor even equalled them in the establish- 
ment of a dominion, unshaken through so many 
years. For it is not by chance, as it seems to me, 
that they have overrun the boundaries of Italy and 
extended their sway to the limits of the earth, but 
by deeds of generalship. For it is necessary to pray 
to Fortune to do its share, but not to consider that 
Fortune has entire control. Stupid are those who 
make disasters chargeable to Fortune alone, rather 
than to the negligence of commanders, as well as 
those who attribute successes to her, and not to the 
skill of the generals. It is neither reasonable simply 
to dismiss without punishment a general who has 
met with complete disaster, on the ground that 
Fortune is responsible for all things, nor is it just to 


7 odaduatac G: oddduwa tac H. = & rrorovjuevas von Rohden. 
® With this word F (and its copies A and B) begins. 


10 g@rroNeimety V. 


371 


7 


10 


ONASANDER 


ed he 4 ¢ / > 
Kkatopbobvra TepLopay ep ooov amavTwy ava- 
Teva TH TUXN THV Xapev. 

“Exredn de dvoet mavtes avOpwrrot tots prev Ou 
E€uTreiplas ovvretdx Oa dokotol, Kav aoalevads 
> / 1 \ \ > ie > 
amayyéAAntar, TO morTov els adAnfeay aro- 
vé“ovow, Tots dé arreipois,? Kav 7 duvara® 
mpaxOivat, dua TO adoKtwacrov am.oTobow, avay- 
Katov jyobpae TEepl TOV ev THE 76 doy oTpa- 
TNYN|LATWV 8 poropeveny TOOCOUTO* mpoeurrety, OTL 
TavTa oa _Tetpas Epywv eAnAvbev Kat wv770 
av0pav TovovTw, ay amdyovoy dmrdpxee ‘Pwpaiwy 
aTav TO yevet Kal apEeTH expt ToD Sedpo Tpo- 
Tevov. ovlev yap eoxedtaopevov arrohew Kal 
vewrTépa yvwpn TOdE TrEpléyer TO OVVTaypa, aAAa 
mavTa Ova mpd€ewv Kat adnbuwav ayovev KEXW- 
prkora. pddtora jev® ‘Papratous: ad Te yap Tou - 
gavres! epuddtavro® mafety Kat du wv eunyavy- 
cavTo® dpdoat, mavTa pot ouveiAeKTaL. KaiTot 

> 10 ’ / ¢ ~ eA ir 11 / Q? 
otk’? yyvonKa, OTt waAXov av tis etAeTo™ Tay 

lo A ~ 
EavTod Kal THs Olas ayxwolas Ta OTpATHYHMaTA 
doxety eivat, mActova Onpedmevos ETawvov TOY T- 
u ~ , 

oTevodvTwy, 7 amo” THs aAAoTpias emuwotas’ eyw 
d€ o¥ mapa tobr’ éAatTobcbar dSoK@. Kabdzep 
yap, et Tus ev moAduots adros oTpatevodpevos™* 
ouveragato Toivde Adyov, odK av Tapa TOUTO 
HTTOVos HELOOTO papTuplas, OTL [7] [ovoV pvatkAs 
amayyéAnra. GH. 2 dreparos GH Koraes. 
ef d0vara GHyvy. 4 rocotrov GHv. 
T@ yéver Kal dpeThy V: TO yéver’ Kal dperny GH. 
Om. vGH Kéchly. 
ToNELTAVTES Kochly. 8 éptatay 7d P. 

9 éuayjnoavto GH: dikavoy éuaxnoavto EF(sic)N ‘ aliique 
codd.” (Schwebel) A m?. 

372 


1D OF WwW eH 


THE GENERAL, Prooremium 6— 10 


leave the successful general so far without recognition 
that gratitude for everything is offered to Fortune. 
Now since all men naturally give credit for 
truthfulness to those who appear to write with 
professional experience, even though their style 
be feeble, while for inexperienced writers, even 
though their teachings are practicable, they feel 
distrust on account of their lack of reputation, I 
consider it necessary to say in advance, about the 
military principles collected in this book, that they 
have all been derived from experience of actual deeds, 
and, in fact, of exploits performed by those men 
from whom has been derived the whole primacy 
of the Romans, in race and valour, down to the 
present time. For this treatise presents no im- 
promptu invention of an unwarlike and youthful 
mind, but all the principles are taken from authentic 
exploits and battles, especially of the Romans. 
For the expedients they used in order to avoid 
suffering harm, and the means by which they con- 
trived to inflict it, all this I have collected. Nor have 
I failed to perceive that a writer, seeking greater 
praise from credulous readers, would prefer to have 
it appear that the source of all the military stratagems 
he described was himself and his own shrewdness 
rather than the sagacity of others. But I do not 
think that the latter diminishes one’s glory. For if 
a general after experience in the field had composed 
such a work, it would not be considered of less value 
because he introduced and commemorated in his 


10 +’ von Rohden. 11 e{\atro GHA m?. 
22 Kochly : ard rv mistevodvtwy 7 THs F: aro 7. 7. 4} aro 
THs VGH. 


13 Om. wv. 14 avrocrparevoduevos VGH. 


ONASANDER 


ayywolas (tdlav eUpeow elonveyKaro oTpaTnyn- 
pedro, aAAad Kal 7a du dAAwy ev mpaxGevra 
pynen mrapabepLevos els ovvragy Hyayev, OUTWS 
ove eau ov otouar TovAarrov emaiveny olcecbat 
Tapa Tob0’" ore pq TayTAa THS Euhs opodoya 
ouvEedews etvat,, todvavtiov dé mpoetAnda tov 
T emawov aveTiplovov e€ew Kal THY TloTW aov- 
KOPAVTNTOV. 


I. [Ilept aipécews otparnyod? | 


Dnt Towuv atpetofar TOV oTparnyov ov Kara 
yer KplvovTas, Wa7rEp TOUS lepeas, ovoé KaT 
ovotas, Ws TOUS yupVvaotdpxous,® adAa owdpova, 
eyKparh, VATT I, Avrov, duazrovoy, VOEpOV, agr- 
dpyupor, [LTE VEOV [LITE arenivceio = av TUYn Kal 
TaTépa Taldwy, tkavov Aéyew, evdo€ov. 

2 [a |* ca@dpova pév, wa pry? tats dvoikais 
avOeAxopevos Ydovats aroXcimy THY trép TaV 
peyloroy ppovTioa.. 

3| eiiee| eyKparh d€, erred)” THAUCAUTHS apyis 
pweAXet Tuy Nave at yap axparets! Oppua.t Tpoc- 
aBobcar tiv Tod dvvacBai Ti’ Tovety e€ovoiav 
GKATAOXETOL ylyvovTat pos Tas e7Ouptas. 

1,Om. vGH. 

2 Not in FGH. F has no indication of any break be- 
tween the prooemium and the first chapter, but only after 
§ 1 of the chapter. GH have in the body of the text dpy7 
Tod otparny:xod. All the titles date from different periods 
subsequent to the original composition ; that of Chap. ix, 
because of &\nxTAa, castra, must be assigned to Byzantine 
times. 3 yuuvacidpxas A m? vGH. 


+ These marginal paragraph letters are not in F but they 
appear in GH (and apparently most of the later mss., to 


374 


THE GENERAL, prooemium 10 —1. 3 


work, not only the personal discoveries of his native 
wit, but also the brilliant deeds of other generals ; 
in the same way I do not consider that I myself 
shall win less praise, because I admit that not every- 
thing I write springs from my own intelligence. 
On the contrary, I have chosen the opposite course, 
that I may have praise without reproach and trust 
without slander. 


I. [The Choice of a General] 


I believe, then, that we must choose a general, 
not because of noble birth as priests are chosen, 
nor because of wealth as the superintendents of 
the gymnasia, but because he is temperate, self- 
restrained, vigilant, frugal, hardened to labour, alert, 
free from avarice, neither too young nor too old, 
indeed a father of children if possible, a ready speaker, 
and a man with a good reputation. 

The general must be temperate in order that he 
may not be so distracted by the pleasures of the 
body as to neglect the consideration of matters of 
the highest importance. 

He must be self-restrained, since he is to be a 
man of so great authority; for the licentious 
impulses, when combined with the authority which 
confers the power of action, become uncontrollable 
in the gratification of the passions. 


judge from the silence of Kéchly). In F the first line of 
each subdivision begins with a red letter, and in nearly 
every instance an interval is left between each pair of sub- 
divisions. 
5 rais muotkais un VGH. 6 érei VGH. 
7 éyxparets corr. to axpateis P. 


375 


ONASANDER 


4 [y |] vnrrny 3, omrws em ay pum] Tats peyt- 
orats mpageow: EV VUKTL yap ws Ta ToAAa Puxis 
Tpewovons oTpaTnyod yvwpyn TeAELodTat. 

6 [8°] Arrov dé, ézrevd7) KaTaoKeeTevovow” ae 
modvuteXets peearera damav@oa ypovov ampaKTov 
els THY TOV NYOULEVvaV TPUPH. 

6 [e ] dcazovov 8, iva pea) Tp@ros TOV oTpa- 
TEVOLEVWYV, aA’ VOTATOS” Kam) 

7 ls | VoEpov d€° o€bv yap eivat del TOV oTpary- 
yov emt mav aTTovTa Ou WKUTHTOS Puyfs KaTa TOV 


“Opmpov 


€ \ \ 2\ / 4 
WOEL TTEPOV HE VO7)La* 


moAAdKis yap amporAnmrov Tapaxal mpoomecodoat 
oxedidlew avayKalovor TO ouppepor. 
ers Ae ] aduAdpyvpov d€* 7 yap adhapyupia do- 
KyLacdncerat Kal TPWTH* TOD yap ddwpodoKrjras 
Kal peyadoppovers mpotoracba TOV TpAayy~aTwv 
avTy’  mapaitia: moAAoi yap, Kav d1a® THY 
> / b) / ~ \ / > / 
dvdpiay aomlot moMais Kal Sdpacw dv7Brepwow, 
mepl TOV Xpucov dpavpodvra.: Oewov yap TroAe~- 
pilots omrAov TOUTO Kal SpaoT7pLov els TO VUKGD. 
ce 
9 [n’] otre 5€ véov ovTe mpeoBUrepov, émeLd7 Oo 
peev amotos,® 6 aoleryns’® ovd€éTepos ‘yap 
> / e \ / iA / 11 \ \ > / 
aoparrs, 0 ev véos, wa uy Te dia THY adodyio- 
Tov m7Talon ToAuav, 6 dé mpecBUTEepos, Wa pH TL 
\ \ \ > ! ? , 13 ! 
10 dua THY pvoixiy acbéverav édXeiz7. KpaTioTy 


1 xaracKeveTevouw F. 


2 Kéchly: torepos FGHEN: torepor P. 


"Om. b: 4 4 évvonua GH. 5 dmpocdéxynra VGH. 
5 Schwebel supported by Leo, Tactica, ii. 8: cuudépor * 
(interval) 7 5 agiurapyupia Q. * airy VGH. 


8 Q def. Koraes: d\éyor0s Kéchly. 
376 


THE GENERAL, 1. 4—10 


Vigilant, that he may spend wakeful nights over 
the most important projects; for at night, as a 
rule, with the mind at rest, the general perfects his 
plans. 

Frugal, since expensive attendance upon the 
luxurious tastes of commanders consumes time un- 
profitably and causes resources to waste away. 

Hardened to labour, that he may not be the first 
but the last of the army to grow weary. 

Alert, for the general must be quick, with swift- 
ness of mind darting at every subject—quick, as 
Homer says, “ as a bird, or as thought.” 1 For very 
frequently unexpected disorders arise which may 
compel him to decide on the spur of the moment 
what is expedient. 

Free from avarice; for this quality of freedom 
from avarice will be valued most highly, since it is 
largely responsible for the incorruptible and large- 
minded management of affairs. For many who can 
face the shields and spears of a host with courage 
are blinded by gold; but gold is a strong weapon 
against the enemy and effective for victory.” 

Neither too young nor too old; since the young 
man does not inspire confidence, the old man is 
feeble, and neither is free from danger, the young 
man lest he err through reckless daring, the older 
lest he neglect something through physical weak- 
ness. The ideal lies between the two, for physical 

1 Odyssey, vii. 36. 

2 The Romans of this period enjoyed among the Greeks 


a singularly evil reputation for greed; see especially a 
striking passage in Diodorus Siculus xxxi. 26. 


9 érerdy . . . dodevns del. von Rohden. 
10 6€ Koraes (6 Kéchly): ov& érepos F(GH). 
H Ome vGH. 12° omls ot 13 €\Nirry Koraes. 


BT 


ONASANDER 


d atpeots 7 Tob j4écou" Kal yap TO Suvarov ev 
TO punderrons” YEYNPAKOTL Kal TO Ppovipov ev TO 
pin mavu vedlovTr, ws oltwés ye 7° cwpatos 
pwapynv avev puxfs eudpovos* edokiacav 7 
wuynv Ppoviov avev owpatikns Ee€ews, ovdev 
emépavav’ uh yap voTepjnoaca dpdovnots ovdev 
evonoe® KpetrTov, 7 8” é€AXeizovoa Svvapis odvdev 

ll ereXetwoev. 6 ye pay eVOoKyL@V ov pKpa TOUS 
eAopevous® wyyncev: ovTwa yap dvOpwrrou pirodow 
avtopaty® Sdiavolas €umTwoe, ToUTYD TAaXD pev 
emitattovTt telfovtrat, Aéyovts 5 ovK amorovat, 
KWovvevorTe O€ GuvaywVvilovTat. 

12 [0’] marépa 5é€ mpovxpwa paddAov, ovdé Tov 
amaloa tapartovpevos, av ayafos 4: eav' Te 
yap ovTes TUXWOL ViITLOL, uxXAS Elow toyuUpa 
PiAtpa epi THV evvolay efounpevoaobar dvvdpeva 
oTpatyyov™ ™pos _Tarpioa, dewol Kal ogeis 
pLUwrrEs TATPOS, ofol te avaorHoar Oupov em 
moAeuious, av Te TéAELoL, cvpBovdor Kal ovoTpa- 
THYyou" Kal MLOTOL TOV _aTroppyyrav OTN pEeTat 
yuyvopevor ovyKaropbotor TA KOWG. mpdypwara. 

13 [e ‘| déyew 8 txavov' evlev yap Tyoopa TO 
WeyLoTov wderetas ifeoBa™ dua OTpaTEvHaTos* 
eav TE yap EKTATTN TPOS LaxXnV OTpATHYOs, 7 TOD 

1 §:aipeots TOD RP (corr. to 5’ 7 alpecits and so v): 6.’ aipecis 


GH. 


2 uh Oérw GH. 2 Crs 4 éudpovws F. 

5 #4 VGH. 6 évevonoe GH. 

7 Koéchly : 4 é\etmovca 02. 8 é\\ouévous GH. 

 avroudre: corr. to a’roudtw P: ad’roudrw v: a’roudTy 
FGH. 10 €4v AB Kochly: ay Q. 

TE EC. aviviGiae 12 Schwebel: orparnyod 2. 


13 AB (cusrparnyot GH): cucorpatrnyo F: orparnyol v. 
14 HEecbar P: Heec@ac GH. 


378 


THE GENERAL, 1. 10-13 


vigour is found in the man who has not yet grown 
old, and discretion in the man who is not too young. 
Those who value physical strength without discre- 
tion, or discretion without physical strength, have 
failed to accomplish anything. For a weak mind 
can contribute no valuable ideas, nor can strength 
unsupported bring to completion any activity. 
Moreover, a man of good reputation is of no slight 
assistance to those who choose him; for if men 
have a spontaneous and natural love for their 
general, they are quick to obey his commands, they 
do not distrust him, and they codperate with him 
in case of danger. 

I should prefer our general to be a father, though 
I would not refuse a childless man, provided he be a 
goodman. For if he happens to have young children, 
they are potent spells to keep his heart loyal, 
availing to bind him to the fatherland, a powerful 
and keen incentive to a father, capable of arousing 
his heart against the foe. And should his children 
have reached manhood, they will become advisers 
and aides, faithful guardians of his secrets, and they 
will help him to bring the affairs of state to a 
successful issue. 

A ready speaker!; for I believe that the greatest 
benefit can accrue from the work of a general only 
through this gift. For if a general is drawing up his 


1 Thus Homer felt that the great leader must be pidwy 
TE pyTHp Euevac mpnkthpa te épywv (Iliad, ix. 443), and the 
harangue before battle was a necessary formality, which a 
Caesar felt must be delivered even to his tenth legion and in 
the crisis of the unexpected attack of the Nervii (Bellum Galli- 
cum, ii. 21. 1 f.). Compare also Cicero, Philippica, iv. 5. 


379 


ONASANDER 


Aoyou mapakéAevots TOV prev Sew@v eToinoe KaTa- 
ppovety, Tov de KaAdv emBupiety, Kal ov oUTWwSs 
aKkoats evnxotoa odAmuyé evelper ysvxas els ar- 
Aav paxys, ws 2Xoyos «ls mpoTpom7y dpeTas 
evaywviov’ pnfeis aixyyualovoav® avéotnoe mpos 
Ta Sewa THY Sidvorayv, av Té TH ovpPH mTatopa 
TEpl TO OTpaTomEdov, 7 TOD Adyou Tmapnyopia Tas 
ysvxas avEeppwce, Kal Todd 81) XPnsyL@rEpos €OTU 
oTparnyoo Aoyos odK adUvaTos WoTE Tapapubetobat 
Tas €Vv oTpaToTedois® ovppopas, Tov ETTOLEVOOV 

14 70’s Tpavyatiats latp@v: ot péev yap exelvous 
p.ovous® tots dapydaKkots Gepamevovow, 6 dé Kal 
Tos KapLvovTas evuporepous emolnoevy Kal TOUS 

15 EppwpLevous dvéornae’ " Kal WoTEp Ta adpara. vo- 
onuaTa TRV Opwpevenv Svoxepeotépay exer THY 
Oepameiav, ovtTws wuyas €€ abvpias tiacacbat 
Aoyw tapyyopicavta SvcKkoAWTepov, 7) TwEaTwv 

16 davepav e€€ emutodjs® Pepamedoa® vocov. ovdeE 
ywpls otpatny@v'® ovdé pial’ modis exzréeprper 
oTpaToTedov, ovde dixa rod dtvvacbar Adyew 
AlpnoEeTal OTPATHYOV. 

17 [va’] tov dé evdo€ov, dtt Tots addEous aayaAXer 
To m7AnPos tmoTraTTomevov: ovMeis® yap éexwv 
bropever TOV avdtobd'* yelpova KUpiov avadéxyeoOau 

IS kat yyeuova. madoa S€ avayKn Tov ToLodToY 


1 éy dyau. VGH. 2 axuafoucay VGH. 
3 Om. vGH. 4 trois orpar. VGH. 
3 iatpav uev F. 6 udvos PR. 

fi 


Kéchly’s suggestion that the order might be rods kduvovras 
dvéotnce Kal Tovs €ppwuévous evOvuorépovs érolncev perhaps 
derives some support from F’s forms éroincey and dvéornee, 
but Leo, Tactica, ii. 14, as Kéchly himself observed, had 
clearly the present order in the text before him. 


380 


THE GENERAL, 1. 13-18 


men before battle, the encouragement of his words 
makes them despise the danger and covet the honour; 
and a trumpet-call resounding in the ears does not 
so effectively awaken the soul to the conflict of 
battle as a speech that urges to strenuous valour 
rouses the martial spirit to confront danger. Should 
some disaster befall the army, an encouraging speech 
will give the men’s souls new strength ; and a not 
unskilful address by the commander is far more 
useful in counteracting the despondency of an army 
in the hour of defeat than the physicians who attend 
to the wounded. For the physicians with their 
medicines care only for the wounded, whereas the 
eloquent general not only heartens the disabled but 
also sets the well on their feet again. Just as hidden 
diseases are harder to cure than those with external 
symptoms, so it is more difficult by a consoling 
speech to cure a heart of its despondency than to 
minister to an obvious and manifest disease of the 
body. No city at all will put an army in the field 
without generals nor choose a general who lacks 
the ability to make an effective speech. 

The general should be a man of good reputation, 
because the majority of men, when placed under the 
command of unknown generals, feel uneasy. For 
no one voluntarily submits to a leader or an officer 
who is an inferior man to himself. It is absolutely 


8 émuroddjs P: émcorodjs (in marg. yp. émurod\d7js) GH. 
9 Peparete. GH: Oeparrevery Vv. 
10 grpatnyod Koraes and Kéchly. 
1 FGH (though the testimony of GH on such a point is 
practically worthless): ovdeuia Kéchly. 
27d GH. 13 oddels VH (od Sets G). 
14 girod FGH. 
381 


i9 


20 


21 


ONASANDER 


4 \ / > \ ” ~ 1 id 
oVvTa Kal Tooa’TAas apeTas ExovTa wWuxAs,’ Coas 
elpnka, Kal evdoofov eivar. 
\ \ / \ / 2A > \ “yd / 
Ont dé pyTe TOV movavor, eav eKTOs 7} TOU- 
TOV, atpetobar oTpaTnyov dua Ta Xpypara, pyre 
TOV TEVITO., eav ayabos ib Tmaparretobau dua TV 
evoetav' o0 PNY xp} ye TOV mévnTa ovde TOV 
/ > \ \ \ / \ \ / 3 
mAovatov, adda Kal TOV mAovotov Kal TOV TéVATA" 
+Q> a 4 ¢ ent ERD > 
ovo ETEPOV yap ov@ aipetov? ovT azodo- 
/ > > > / 6 PS) \ 
KYLAOTEOV dua THY TUynv, aA EdeynTeov® dia 
TOV TpoTov.  ovde' AOVaLos ayabds wv TocovTw® 
dolce, TOU yevvaiov mévynTOs, Gaov at Eemdpyupot 
Kal KaTaXpvgor mavoTrAat Tov KaTayadAKwy Kal 
ovdnpav—at pe yap? T@ Koapw mAeoveKtovow, 
at 5 avr@" TO Spacmpic dtaywrilovrar — 
et ye pen) XPNPaTLoTsS ein” tov O€ eee 
ov) av mAovowTatos wv Tvyn, cupBovdAetow 
\ 4 14 s 
MOTE atpetoa: dey 5€ odBodroorarny,4* pera- 
Bodov, Epo pov y) TOUS mapamAnovov Th ToUTous 
TparTovras: avayKn yap Tovs ToovTous puKpo- 
ppovas eivau Kal mepl TO KEépoos ETTONILEVOUS Kal 
HE LLepupynpLevous  Tepl TOV TOPLOLOV TOV XPNUATwv 
OrAws pndev’® eoynKevar TOV KaArABov emiuTnOevpaTov 
I poyovey de” Acpumpav"® agiwow ayamav j.ev 
det mpooovoay, od pny arroveay emulyrety, ovde 
TavTy® Twas Kpivew akiouvs 7 un” Tod oTpaTnyelr, 
1 rhs pux7s B Kochly. 2 elpnxe F. 
3 cal Tov wévnta om. F. 


4 FGH Rigaltius Schwebel: ovéérepov Kochly. 


5 F: aiperéov GH Kochly. 8 éxNexréov VGH. 
7 6 6¢é FVGH: corr. AB (ot 6€ C: ovx dé R). 
8 rocotrov VGH. ® After yap VGH add xa. 
0 After aité VGH add pévy. 1 Siaywrifwrra GH. 


12 ypnuatioth ein F, which marks a break at this point. 
13 ay rixn Fs av roxe R. 
382 


THE GENERAL, 1. 18-21 


essential, then, that a general be such a man, of such 
excellent traits of character as I have enumerated, 
and besides this, that he have a good reputation. 

A wealthy man in my opinion must not be chosen 
general on account of his wealth, if he has not these 
qualities ; nor must a poor man, provided that he 
be competent, be rejected on account of his poverty. 
It is not necessary that the general be rich or poor ; 
he may be the one or the other. Neither the one 
nor the other must be chosen nor rejected on account 
of his fortune in life, but must be tested by the 
standard of character. Even the wealthy general 
who is good will surpass the noble but poor general 
only in the same degree that armour inlaid with 
gold and silver surpasses that of bronze and iron 
—the former have the advantage in ornamentation 
but the latter prove superior in efiiciency—provided 
that he is not a man who deals in money. Were 
he the richest man in the world, I should not 
ever advise choosing a man who deals in money. 
I mean by this expression a usurer, a trader, a 
merchant, or those who are in a similar business. 
For these men must have petty minds; excited 
over gain and worried about the means of getting 
money, they have acquired absolutely none of the 
noble habits of a general. 

An illustrious family name we should welcome, 
if it be present, but if lacking it should not be 
demanded, nor should we judge men worthy or un- 
worthy of commands simply by this criterion; but 


14 680do0y:at nv RG (08-) H (68-) P (corr. to 68o0Xo0crdrnv). 

15 wewopnuevous GH. 16 6d\ws dé undev GH. 

17 Koraes: te Q. 18 \aumpav Kéchly. 

18 ot8’ €x TavTn7s VGH. = -—~KGchly: eduy F: elvac VGH. 
383 


22 


23 


24 


25 


ONASANDER 


aA wotep Ta CHa aro TaV (Oley mpagecwv efe- 
Talouev, OWS evyeveias EXEL, OUTW xp?) oKorretv 
Kal Tv TOV avOpwTwv evyéverav. Kal yap a- 
mTeplomTov, Ti Tots eumpoobev empaxOn Kaddv, e&- 
eTalew, o8 Ti moinoovow ot viv aipebévtes: Worrep 
Tov Tava yeyovotav owdlew Huds Svvayevwv Kat 
Ta viv, Kal? Ta Tpdabev THpNOdVTWY eKElVHV. ETL 
d€ m7@s* ovK amaidevTov Tovs pev oTpaTLwTas 
Tots aptoTelois Tyndv, od Todvs eK TraTépwr* 
AapTpav,* adAa tovs attovs Te yevvaioy épyaca- 
[Lévous, Tovs d€ aTpaTnyovs dia Tovs mpoyovous 
atpetobar, Kay aow axpnorot,” pn dua THY oh@v 
avT@v doeTHy, KQV [L1) ‘evel Aapmpivenvrar ; m™poo- 
OvTEy juev 07) TOUTWY exeivous eUTUXIS 0 oTpaTnyos, 
amovrwy 6 ékelvwy, Kav Toph Tabra, a- 
mpaktos. €Amica 5° av Tes Taxa, KQL dyuetvous 
ecco0au oTpaTnyous Tous ovK EXOVTAS evoeuvu- 
veoUas Tpoyovots: of pev yap emt marpace KU- 
dawopevor, Kav €AXNiTwow,® oidwevor THY EK TOV 
mpoobev evKAeay odio. dvddtrecBar moAAa Kal 
pabupotepov diotxodow, ots 8° ovdeuia mpov7- 
dpyet Sd€a mpoydvwv, odTo. THY EK TaTépwr* 
éhattwow éfédovtes’ avamAnp@oar tH odeTepa 
mpobvpia diAoKkwdvvotepov emi Tas mpakers aptaA- 
A@vrat' Kat Kabdmep of TeveoTepo. THY €vTO- 
pwrépwv taraimwpotepov emt THY TOO Blov KTHoWw 
wpuynvra. To éAdetrov avarAnp@oar THs TvyNS 
omevoovTes, OUTWS, ols p71) TapeoTe KAnpovojou- 


1 dy repiorroy F, corr. C: dvénrov VGH. 
* Kochly: kai mpoa Bev (ra mpbcbev CRDENA m?): rapnoov 
Oarroyv éxewvov bre tH F: kal mpooBev. €xeElvo dé ras VGH. 


3 FGHR: spoyévwr v. 4 \aumrpo’s VGH. 
384 


THE GENERAL, 1. 21 — 25 


just as we test the pedigrees of animals in the 
light of the things they actually do, so we should 
view the pedigrees of men also. For it is dangerous 
to consider what fine thing a general’s ancestors 
have done, rather than what the generals now chosen 
will do, as if those long dead could still protect us, 
and as if they would maintain us in our former 
possessions. As a matter of fact, is it not sheer 
stupidity to honour soldiers for valour, not those 
of famous families but those who have done some 
noble deed themselves, but on the other hand to 
select generals, even if they are incompetent, on 
account of their ancestors and not on account of 
their own worth, even if their families are unknown? 
Of course, if a general has birth in addition to these 
other qualities, he is fortunate, but even if he has 
a famous name without the other qualities, he is 
useless. It might perhaps be expected that those 
men who cannot take pride in their ancestors 
would become even better generals ; for men who 
glory in their forefathers, even if they are them- 
selves failures, believing that the fame of their 
family is theirs forever are often too careless as 
administrators, whereas those who have no ances- 
tral renown to begin with, desiring to make 
up for the obscurity of their lineage by their own 
zeal, are more eager to take part in dangerous 
enterprises. Just as the poor man, eager to supply 
what fortune omitted, will endure more than the rich 
man in getting a start to make his fortune, so 
the man who can avail himself of no inheritance 


5 FC: xpnorot © (including P). § é€\N\eilnwow VGH. 
7 FCD :: é\@dvrTes VGH. 


256 385 


ONASANDER 


, / 10 ae , / \ 3 \ 
evn tmatépwv' amoxpyoacbar dd€y, THv apeTny 
idudKTHTOV olKELWoacVaL TpoaLpodyTat. 


II. [Ilept ayafot orpatynyod diatpects |” 


Znrovobw® pev 57) Hiv 0 oTpatyyos 6 ayalos* 
evyevys Kat? mAovowos, p1) amrodokyralécbw de 
TméVvNs joer aperijs, et Kal pn’ azo Aapmpav. 
2 aipefets O° 0 oTpaTnyos €oTw xpnores, €U7poo- 
NYOPOS, ETOULOS, drdpaxos, [1 OUTwWS _ eTUELK TS 
WOTE Katappovetobat, pyre hoPepos wore [ot- 
oetobat, iva pyre Tats yapiow exAvon TO oTpa- 

3 TOmEOOV [LATE TOS PoBous ahdotpiwon.  Aoxayovs 
d€ kaforate Kal Trakudpxous" Kal XuAvdpxous," 
Kal El TLV dMav 7 HY EBOVveDV mpoodety avTa dogat,” 
TOUS evvovoTarous Th TaTpto., TLOTOTATOUS,”” ev- 
pwotordrous, evdev On: ovdev av kadvou™ Kal 

4 Tovs eUmopwTdtous Kal Tovs EvyeveoTaToUS: ov 
vap, ws oAlyous atpovjevous’® otpatynyovs ék 
TpoTov SoKydoat pdov, Kav aT 6 TOV ypnudtwv™ 
pet evyevelas OyKos, OUTWS TOV Kal Aoxay@v Kal 

5 Ta€vapyav 7hAGos. obev TO pev evyeves emt TOU- 
TwV TpoKpireov els MPOXELpov a oft oe doKt- 
paciay, 3 76 Oe eV evTropia,” ° errevd7)"" dvaraoat 
Te Kal dobvaL OTpaTLWwTaLs Ol EK TeEpLovotas du- 
vatol, yopnyia 6 amo THY nyoujevwv ddrtyyn mTpos 

1 FGHR: mpoydvwyr v. 

2 In text GH (v?): om. F: C puts it after § 1 where it 


really belongs, since § 1 is properly the conclusion of the 
preceding chapter. 3 ZyretcOw Koraes. 


s\n) nuy oTparnyos 6 dyabds GH: orparnyés ayabds Vv: 
dn oTparnyos huty PITS von Rohden. 

> Om. Q. ei un kal VGH. 7 rakiapxas GH. 

8 kal xiudpxous FC: om. vGH. 9 d6fe VGH. 


386 


THE GENERAL, 1. 25-1. 5 


of ancestral glory determines to make his own the 
virtue which he himself acquires. 


Il. [The Characteristics of a good General} 


So that general is to be praised who is good, 
wealthy, and well-born, but the excellent general 
who is not wealthy is not to be rejected, even if 
of humble family. The general when chosen must 
be trustworthy, affable, prompt, calm, not so lenient 
as to be despised, nor so severe as to be hated, so 
that he may neither through favours loosen the 
bonds of discipline, nor estrange the army through 
fear. He must appoint as lieutenants, captains, 
and colonels, as well as other officers, if it seems 
necessary, men who are most loyal to their country, 
most faithful, and most vigorous—though there 
is nothing to prevent their being of the greatest 
wealth and nobility. As the number of generals to 
be chosen is small, they may be easily judged 
from their characters, even if the dignity of wealth 
and birth is lacking ; but this is not the case with the 
multitude of subordinate officers. And so by off- 
hand judgement required at a crucial moment the 
nobility have to be preferred, but when there is no 
urgency, the wealthy, since those who have abundant 
means can spend money on the soldiery and make 
them gifts; for a slight expenditure by the officers 


10 kal mustoratrous VGH: micrordrous Te kal C. 

1 Om. vGH. © kwrtn v: kwrtin GH. PF aipovpyévors F. 

M Kochly : a7 xpnudtrov F: dard ypnudtwv GH: ard (om. 
Tay?) Vv: ami Tey xX. wer’ OY amy THY x. 6 wer Von Rohden. 

1 xatpov doximacias GH: kapy doxiwacias ENRA m2, 
After doxiuaciav an interval in F. 

16 dropia Rigaltius. 17 érecdy y’ von Rohden. 


387 


ONASANDER 


/ 
Tovs UmoTaTTOMEvous’ EvVovVOTEpA TapacKeuvalet 
\ \ ‘Q Vena X a >) t ! 3 
Ta T1AHOn: Kat aodadrets at” pelovwv motets 
~ / 
Tpaypatwy Tots mept mAEdvwv Kiwduvevovow, «Et 
\ \ > ~ 

pn mavu TO muoTOV, Ws av el oTpaTnyot Tts,* 
>) A / 
EK TOU TpOTTOU TApEexXOLTO. 


Ill. [Tepe TOU exe TOV oTpaTyyov BovAevras* | 


/ 

Atpeio8w dé row’ ovvédpous, ot’ pebéEovow 
auto Taons Bovdjs Kal KOWWVHGOVOL yrouns 
3 * ag €g / ef 10 >} id 11 nv > 
QUTOU® Ol’ TOUVTOV ELVEKA aKkodovbjaorres, y e€ 
QaUT@V TOV 1VELOVO@V Tous EVTLLOTATOUS [LET QTIELL- 
TOLLEVOS GUVEOPEVETH, ws," a ye Tis av evvornjon 
poev [Lovos, ws Ta avrod, ov BeBaiws” ouevobrac. 
2 yrapn Yor 1 peev GVETUKOUPHTOS jeovoupevn 7a- 
arTatveu 3 Tept THY (Olav eUpeow,. 7 be UmTO TOV 
méhas emyrapTupyletoa TLOTOUTAL TO Ha) opahepov. 
3 ov pen ara pee ovrms aaratos coTw THY dua- 
voiav, ws avTov avTm” TApLTAV ATTLOTELD, une 
iv4 3 4 € a A >] »v ~ > 
OUTWS avladns, WS LN TL Kal TAP adh TOU Tap 
avrg" KpelTTOV oteabat von Ohya: avayKen yap 
TOV TOLOUTOV 7 Tac? Tpoo€XovTa KGL pendev 
~ > 
avta'® modda Kab aovupopa mparrel, 7 pnd 

AL 5 20 
oAvy aAAwv!® axovovta, mavta 8 avtod,” zoAAa 


Kat dewa7! StapapTavery. > 


i) 


umorerayuévous VGH. 2 FC: dogdddtea VGH. 
miorts GH. ' 4 EF: ef ravu ozparnyis €x VGH. 
Om. F which has not even an interval between II 
and III. 


iJ) 


ou 


6 F; 6é ad cal VGH. 7 of kal VGH. 
8 ai7@ Koraes. 9° 4 vGH. 10 F: évexa 2 KGchly. 
11 Del. of . . . dxoNovdjocovres von Rohden. 


2 Kochly: ws & yé ris évvonon méev udvos Ta avdrod BeBaiws F: 


388 


THE GENERAL, 1. 5-111. 3 


for the benefit of their men makes the rank and 
file better disposed; and the pledges of greater 
rewards can be depended upon when made by those 
who have more at stake—that is, if the confidence 
a general ought to inspire is not altogether furnished 
by his character. 


III. [The General’s advisory Council] 


The general should either choose a staff to 
participate in all his councils and share in his 
decisions, men who will accompany the army 
especially for this purpose, or summon as members 
of his council a selected group of the most respected 
commanders, since it is not safe that the opinions 
of one single man, on his sole judgement, should be 
adopted. For the isolated decision of one man, 
unsupported by others, can see no farther than 
his own ingenuity, but that which has the additional 
testimony of councillors guarantees against mistake. 
However, the general must neither be so undecided 
that he entirely distrusts himself, nor so obstinate 
as not to think that anyone can have a better 
idea than his own; for such a man, either because 
he listens to every one else and never to himself, 
is sure to meet with frequent misfortune, or else, 
through never listening to others but always to 
himself, is bound to make many costly mistakes. 





wote (wore Te PD) Oe? a evvofqoar wey medeTav pdvos Oé ob TH 


avtod BeBaiws PDGH: von Rohden objects to ov. 


13 rraiee VGH. 4 aipesw VGH. 
15 Kochly: atrov atr& F: adrés atr@ VGH (at76 GH). 
16 Kéchly: at7é F: atrov VGH. 1 aon F. 


18 Kéchly: aivé FGH: aire v. 19 Koéchly: ddiyer Q. 

20 Koraes: 8 atvrod FC: 6.’ avroo PGH. 

21 Kochly : om. . 2 auapravew VG (du-) H. 
389 


ONASANDER 


IV. [Ilept rod ori Se? ay apxnv Tov moAdmov 


e€ evAdyou aitias emayeuw]* 


Tas & apyas tod moAguou peahora Pye xXpn- 
vat Ppoviws ovvioracdar Kal peta Too Sucatov 
maou pavepov yiyveobat toAcuotvTa: TOTE yap Kal 
Qeot ovvaywviotat tots ortpatevovow evpevets 
Kabioravtat, Kat avOpwmo. mpobvpdtepov avTt- 
TAaTTOVTAaL Tots dewots?® eElddTes yap, ws ovK 
apxovow arr aputvovta,* tas dvxas aovvet- 
O1jTous KaK@v exovres evtedf® Thy avdpetav® eic- 
PEpovTalt, Ws, OGoL ye vopiCovor veweonoew" TO 
Oelov emt T@ Tapa TO dixatov expépew moAEmov, 
avry TH OLNOEL, KAV [Ln TL SEwvov amo TOV TroAcuiwV 
array rice pedAn,® mpoKxaToppwoobow. dua ToOTO 
bet TOV oTparnyov, QV TE Bovderau TUXELVY KAL WV 
[L7) Tapaxuphoae, Aoyep Kal mpeoBetats 7™po- 
KaAetaobar® mparor, iy” €v TO Ha) ovyKkaraPatver 
Tots as vovpevors Tovs evavtious avaykn SoKh,” 
Kal [1 Tpoaipécer THV duvapw e€ayew Troe) - 
govoay, emyLapTupapevos'® TO Jetov, Ws OUTE 
KaTappov@v av ovpBaiver Tovs roAepnodvTas 
mAOXELW, GVEMECHTWS ETELOW, OUTE EK TaVTOS 
TpoTov Ta dSewa Spadcat mponpnuéevos Tovs 7o- 
Nepiovs.* eiddvar dé ypy, Kabdt. od pdovov oikias 

1 Title om. F. 


9 A \ ~ , > ‘ / 
2 Peds cwaywviaTis Tots oTpaTevuacw evuevhs kablorarar VGH 
(a Christian interpolation). 


3 evavtioss Kéchly. 4 agudivwyvtac PGH. 
5 éyreNe? corr. to évred F m?(?): évtedet AB. 

6 dvdpiav Vv. 7 uh veueonoew VGH. 

8 Koraes: wédXe 22. 

9 


F (also conj. by Schwebel): mpockanetc@ac VGH. 
10 FCGH: Tous dé&lous rots évavrios ENPRV. 


THE GENERAL, tv. 1-4 


V. [The Necessity of a reasonable Cause for War| 


The causes of war, I believe, should be marshalled 
with the greatest care; it should be evident to 
all that one fights on the side of justice. For 
then the gods also, kindly disposed, become com- 
rades in arms to the soldiers, and men are more 
eager to take their stand against the foe! For 
with the knowledge that they are not fighting 
an aggressive but a defensive war, with con- 
sciences free from evil designs, they contribute 
a courage that is complete ; while those who believe 
an unjust war is displeasing to heaven, because of 
this very opinion enter the war with fear, even if 
they are not about to face danger at the hands of 
the enemy. On this account the general must 
first announce, by speeches and through embassies, 
what he wishes to obtain and what he is not 
willing to concede, in order that it may appear that, 
because the enemy will not agree to his reasonable 
demands, it is of necessity, not by his own preference, 
that he is taking the field. He should call heaven to 
witness that he is entering upon war without offence, 
since he has not failed to consider the dangers that 
fall to the lot of combatants, and is not deliberately 
seeking, in every possible manner, to ruin the enemy. 
He should know that not only is a firm foundation 

1 Something of a commonpiace even in antiquity; for 


typical expressions see Thucydides ii. 74; Xenophon, 
Cyropedia, i. 5. 13-14; Dionysius of Halicarnassus ii. 72. 30. 


1 §oxet v (incl. P) GH. 

2 F (also conj. by Koraes): wodeuoicay VGH. 

13 ériuapTupomevos VGH. 

14 FC: mponpnuévos trois rodeuios GH: mponpnuévors rors 
modeuios Py. 


391 


ONASANDER 


Kal Telyous €dpatotepov thiotacbar Set Tov Oe- 
peAvov, ws aalevots ye ovTos’ ouyKatappunoo- 
pévwv® Kal TOV émrotKodopoupéevwy, aAAa Kal 7O- 
Aguov tas® apyas bet KaTacKevacdpevoyv iayv- 
p@s Kal Kpymtda mrepue|Levov aopadeias,* ov- 
TWS efdyew Tas Ouvdyters” cy yap aolevn Ta mpay- 
para €oTw, emeloay obTot péya Bdapos avadAdBwow 
mod€nov, taxd OAiBovrar Kat borepotow. dOev, 
womep ayalov KuBepyyitnv ex Aywevos e€aptvad- 
pevov TO” oKados Kal Ta Tap av’T@® amavra 
TOUTayTe., on ETITpeTrew” xp7) TH TUXYN, ws 
alaxroTov yee Kal opadepov drrodeiEavra ToA€Lov 
Know, OOTE Kal Ova Badarrys 707) Kal dua vis 
dyew 70 OTparevjic., Kamera mpvpvav Kpovecbar*® 
THS pev yap dvolas Kal mpomreTeias €kaoTOS Kar 
eyéhacev, ths 8° aolevetas Katedpdvncer,” of 8° 
€yOpol, oltwes moT av Wow, Kav yn wabwow, ws 
odxyt pr Bovdnfévtas" adr’ od duvnbévtas dia- 
Oeivai ru dixaiws eutonoar. 


V. [Ilepi rot e€tAcotcar mparov trép THY awap- 
x EN 518) 5G Ne 7 > / 14 
Ti@v TO Oetov'® 6 oTpatynyos eEdywv eis modemov | 


> / \ \ / e \ \ 

Eéayérw dé tas duvdpers 6 oTpatnyos Kabapas 
7H ols vopot™ tepot 7 ols pavTets UpyyotvTaL Ka- 

1 FENRGH: év7as PA m?and ‘*quidam libri” (Schwebel). 

2 A m? GH (v?): ovyxatapricopévwr F, 

3 PGH: rev roXéuou Tas V: toANeuodvtas F. 

4 Koéchly suggests dogadas. 5 Om. vGH. 

6 Kéchly: airGé ENR: attévy VGH: atrivy F: zap’ aire 
mept av7ro von Rohden. 

7 F (and Leo, Tactica, xx. 170 éwirpere): émitpéxew VGH. 

Se avi rl 


392 


THE GENERAL, rv. 4-v. 1 


necessary for houses and walls—for if this is weak 
the superstructures will also collapse—, but that in 
war also it is only after one has prepared a firm 
beginning, and has laid a safe foundation, that he 
should take the field. For those whose cause is 
weak, when they take up the heavy burden of war, are 
quickly crushed by it and fail. Just as a careful ship- 
captain, after he has given his ship a.thorough over- 
hauling and outfitting while in harbour, and has 
done everything within his own power, must then 
commit his craft to Fortune, so it is most disgraceful 
and dangerous for a general, after he has given 
intimations of a beginning of war, implying an 
immediate advance of his forces by both land and 
sea, then to back out. For while every one laughs 
at folly and rashness, we despise weakness, and the 
enemy — whoever they may be—even if they 
experience no harm, have good reason to hate the 
would-be invaders, as men who have not lacked the 
will, but lacked the ability to put a matter through. 


V. [Propitiation of the divine Power by the General 
before leading the Army into Battle| 


Before the general leads out his army he must see 
that it is purified, by such rites as either the laws or 


° Q: kpotcacbac Kochly, after the emendation in A. 
10 kateppdvncay F, followed by an interval, as though a 
chapter ended here, with the first letter of uy rubricated. 


1 Bovdrnbévres G: Bovdnbévra H. 12 Added by Kéchly. 
13 +6 Getov GH: om. v. 
14 Om. F (whole title) : in text GH. 
15 Os vouo. PGH: as of vouoc ENR. 


393 


ONASANDER 


@ / ~ ” nv ) ames | \ a 907 

apotows, macav, et Tis 7) Sypocta’ KnAis 7 tdiov 
4 e / 

pooAvcopatos* EexaoTw@ oavveoTW, aTrodLoTopTrOU- 

jLevos. 


VI. [Ilept rod dyew &v ta€er 76 oTparomedov |* 


"Ayetw d€ TO oTpatevpa av év Taker, KaV pnTHw 
perry cup Barrer, ara dua peaxpas 0008 Te 
parodota Kal Toa HILEp@v avvew Topetav, Kal 
ev TH pidta Kat ev TH Toei. dua jeev TiS. diAias,* 
iva. eOilnrav? ta oTpaTevpara peeve ev Ta€et 
Kal ovpdvddtrew Tovs idlovs Adyous Kal emecbar 
Tois nyemoow, dua Oe THS TroNepias Tmpos Tas 
eCatprns émBovAas® YUyvoHevas, iva [L2) év oft 
Kapa" GopvBotpevou Kats emavabeovres Kal aAAot 
mpos adAdovs depopevor® udev prev avdowor d0a- 
obévres,? moAAa dé Kal” dewa afwow, adr’ dua 
Kal els mopelay Wow emideEvor Kal els paxnv 
eUTpeTtels,” EexovTes Kat TO ovvOnua® Kat aA- 

2AnAous év ta€er Br€movtes.* ovordAXNew S€ Tet- 
pac8w rv Tmopetav™® ToU oTpaTevpaTos, ws Evt 
uddwora, pos oAtyov, Kal Oud ToLovTwY, ay 
Ovvarov 7) H, Xwplwv ayer Tas Tagels, du av ovK 
av é€kOABouevar oreval Kal ov¥K Exovoat mAdToS 
3 €k mAeupds éml pnKiotov éxtabetev’ Kat yap «v- 


OZ 16 / 17 \ \ 5) SS a 
TQ EOTEPAL VlyYvovTat TT POs Tas alpve LOUS TWV 


1 Snuocia 0. 
2 Kochly: 4 (or # F) dcauorttcuaros FPGH: diauddrvoua R. 
3 Om. F (whole title): in text GH. 
4 FC (kal rodeuia): kal év 7H... . pidias om. VPGH. 
5 FCENR: eifera PGH: é6igfecOa v. 
® emeBohas Schwebel.” 7 xaipod VGH. 
8 Om. kai . . . depduevo. CH (added in margin by m![?}). 


9 d0dcavres VGH. 
394 


THE GENERAL, v. 1 -v1. 3 


soothsayers direct, and must avert whatever taint 
there is in the state or in any citizen, by expiatory 
sacrifices. 


VI. [On Maintaining Military Formation] 


The general must lead his entire army in military 
formation, even if he is not on the point of battle, 
but is completing a long journey and a march of 
many days through either a friendly or a hostile 
country ; through a friendly country, that the soldiers 
may become accustomed to remaining in rank, to 
keeping to their own companies, and to following 
their own leaders ; through a hostile country, to guard 
against sudden attacks from ambush, that the soldiers 
may not be thrown into disorder at a critical moment, 
running against and stumbling over one another, 
and so accomplishing nothing but rather suffering 
severe loss; they must proceed, prepared at the 
same time for marching and for battle, remembering 
their watchword and keeping their eyes on their 
comrades inthe ranks. The general must attempt 
to make the marching order of his army as compact 
as possible, and should lead his troops through such 
a country—so far as he is able—that the ranks may 
not be so cramped, being narrow and having no 
width, that they cannot be deployed to a considerable 
distance laterally. For lines so disposed suffer more 

10 Om. H (end of line). 11 és mropeiay V: evmopeiay GH. 

12 FC: evapereis VGH. 

13 In GH in marg. epi rod éxew otvOnua Tov adv (which 
Rigaltius found in three mss. and which appears also in A m?), 
absurd as a chapter heading. 

14 B\émrovtas F. 18 FC: orparetav VPGH. 
16 etmabéctepov R: etrabéorepor V. W viyvwrTa GH. 


395 


ONASANDER 


ToAcuiwv emipavetas at Tovadrar Kal HKLOTA Spa- 
OTHplol’ av Te yap odio. KaTa péTwWTOV UraVTT- 
cwow ot moAdutoe tAaTUTEpo. TeTAypEVOL, padiws 
avTovs TpémovTat, Ka0dmep ot Tovs emt KEepws 
ovras ev Tats pdaxats KuKAovpevol, av TE KATA 
peonv THv dSvvauw é€K TAEevpads éemBddAwou, Tayd 
du€oTmacay avTa@v THY Topeiav Kal dréKoay — em- 
oTpeyavTwv yap avTa@v els padayya mpos avvav 
aolevns 1 paxn yiverae” Kal ovK /Exovea Babos—, 
eav® TE TOUS KATO, 7? Kara vwTOU peaxn dewv7® 
Kal 7popavh Tov breOporv exovaa., KaV ema pewpa 
Oe TOA OWoW els peTwTrOV, n avn? yiyverau 
udyn Tots €v TH MpwToTOpEia TETAypEeVvoLs* TAXD 

4 yap avrovs TepioTioovTat.  oupPawer dé Kal Tas 
mapaBponbetas Suayepets Kal ampaKtous yiveoBar” 
TOV yap amo THs ovpayias Tots els THY TpwTO- 
mopetav Bovropévwr® Bonfety 7 TOV mpwTwv Tots 
Katomw Bpadeta 7 adi€is Kal ov Kata Katpor® 
ylyveTat, dua moa, @v voTepovow 7 mponyodbv- 
TAL, OTAOLWY lévat mpoOupovpevonv. 

5 HH be ovveotaAwery Topela Kal TeTpaywvos 7 LY 
mavu Tmapapnkns els 7aVTO KaLpov evpueTaXetpe- 
oT0s"' €oTL Kal acpahys. eoTe 6 ore Kai" 
cuveBn Te ToLwotrov® ex THY EKTEWoUevwVY oTpa- 


/ vA \ \ / > 
Trevpatwy, wote Ilawka Kat mroias® apydi- 


F: émiBdd\d\wow VGH: ériBddwow Koraes (Kochly). 
F: yiyverar GH Kochly. 3 dav . . . éxovca om. R. 


a f we 


7 EF. 
Kochly : dev wdyn x. mw. 7. 6. & Badbos* Kav F: dew7 
axn omotws kK. 1. Tovetrat T. 6. woatTws (ws attws G, ws atlrws 
H) ovx éyovsa Babos xdv VGH. The order dew ayn is 
defended by von Rohden. 6 air GH. 

7 FGH: yiyvec@ac A m? Kochly. 8 Bovrouévas R, 


396 


THE GENERAL, vi. 3-5 


under sudden attacks of the enemy and are 
least effective; should the enemy with a more 
extended front encounter the head of the column, 
they would easily put it to flight, just as in battle one 
army, by outflanking an enemy advancing in column 
formation, routs it. Should the enemy attack the 
centre of the column from the flank, they would 
quickly pierce it and cut through—for if the column 
wheels to meet the enemy, forming a phalanx, 
even this, lacking depth, will make but a weak 
resistance—; and, finally, should the enemy attack 
the rear of the column, the fighting with back to the 
foe would be dangerous and entail obvious destruc- 
tion ; and evenif the soldiers in the column venture 
to face about and form a new front, the battle would 
amount to the same thing as the previous attack on 
the advance guard, 2.e., the enemy would quickly 
surround them. Furthermore, assistance is difficult 
to give and ineffectual, for when those in the rear 
desire to give aid to the head of the column, or 
those at the head to those in the rear, their arrival 
is delayed and ill-timed, however eager they may 
be to cover the many stades which separate them 
from the van or the rear respectively. 

A marching formation that is compact and 
rectangular—not very much longer than its width— 
is safe and easy to manage for every emergency. 
A too greatly extended line of march may at times 
produce panic and apprehension due to uncertainty, 


9 xkaipov F, 10 4 uh wavy C (Capps): Hrep ) ravu VGH. 
11 edueraxelpitos F. 12 Kéchly: 7 F: om. vGH. 
13 rocotTwy F, = Om: vGH. 


19 Koéchly: om. AB(F ?): arvas rovads PGH: ravixds rroias 
mous R: mavixd kal tolayv twas EN. 


397 


ONASANDER 


ddfous eumintrew: eviote yap ot mp@tTor KaTa- 

/ > b] ~ > Aa \ >? / peak, 3 
feBnkotes €€ opewHv ets Yuda Kal emimeda ywpia 
feacduevor Tovs KaTomW émxataBatvovtas €d0- 
Eav eivat ToAeiwy epodov, wate edAAHoal” mpoc- 
BadAew ws €xOpots, twas d€ Kal els yetpas 
eMeiv 767. 

6 AapBavere d€ THY Gepametav Kal TO droldya 
Kal TV amooKeuny dmacay ev peor TH duvet 
Kal pe Xwpis: av O€ py 7a. KaTOTW aopaAj Tavu 
Kal elpnvata vopiln, Kal TV ovpayiay ek Tov 
EppwLeveaoTaTwY Kal avdpeloTaTwy ovvioTacbw, 
pnbev* Siadepew adrTnv olomevos mpos Ta ouL- 
Baivovra THs mpwromropetas. 

7 Ilpomepumérw d€ timmets tovs Srepevvnoopévous 

\ ¢€ / \ / > CN e / \ 

TAS odous, Kat parol, oT’ ay DAwdets Kat TEpLKE- 
A BN 5 dAa } 
KAaopévas® Addots Eepynyias dueEin: moAAdKis yap 
evedpat Troe Liev droKabelovrar,® Kat Aabotcat 
peev EoTW OTe Ta 0Aa ovvétpusay Tav éevavTiwv 
TpaywaTa, [7 Aafoboat dé dua puuxpas ppovTidos 
ppovnow jeeyaAny eapTupnoay TO Trohepicn” 
8 oTpaTnya. TI peev yap medidda Kat YArny y 
TavTwv ois (Kav?) Tpoepevvjcacbar® Kal yap 
KovLopTos avadepomevos® pel” TpEepav™ epayveoev 
THY Tov TroAeptay epodor, Kal 7rUupa KaLopeva'* 

vUKTWp emipocvoev 2 aH eyyvs oTparomedetay. 

9 ~Ayérw dé¥ Tas dSuvdpers, pu) pwéeAAwy ev EK- 

1 ywpeta GH. 2 uehjoa VGH. 

3 duvduer . . . ovpaylay Koéchly (in part after Schwebel 
and Koraes): duvdue xwpis dv uh Ta KaTorw (karérw F) dopadrq 
mad Kal elpnvaia voulen (vouifn F) ei De kal uh (uh kal F) ri 
ovpayiav Q. 4 F: undev vGH. 

5 trepixekNeromévous V: TepikexNecouevas GH. 


6 FC: tmepxadéfovra GH. 
398 


THE GENERAL, vi. 5-9 


for sometimes the leaders, after descending from 
mountains into treeless and level regions, observing 
those in the rear still descending, have thought the 
enemy were attacking, so that they have been on 
the point of marching against their own men as 
enemies, and some have even come to blows. 

The general must place his medical equipment, 
pack animals, and all his baggage in the centre of 
his army, not outside. Should he consider that his 
rear is not quite secure and undisturbed he should 
form his rear guard of the most vigorous and 
courageous soldiers, realizing that, in the light of 
experience, the rear is no less important than the 
front. 

He must send ahead cavalry as scouts to search 
the roads, especially when advancing through a 
wooded country, or a wilderness broken up by 
ridges. For ambuscades are frequently set by 
the enemy, and sometimes failure to detect them 
brings complete disaster to the opposing side, 
while their discovery, by a slight precaution, attests 
to the general of the enemy great prudence on the 
part of his adversary. For in a level and treeless 
country a general survey is sufficient for a preliminary 
investigation; for a cloud of dust announces the 
approach of the enemy by day, and burning fires 
light up a near-by encampment at night. 

If the general is not about to form his line of 


7 F (76 wrodeuiw) toteulwy VGH: 7@ Trav Tokeulwy Kéchly. 

8 FC: prny ravtav dus (6yis GH) cal wh mpoepevvjcarrds 
Tivos (-vjocavTos Tivos GH) édj\woev VGH. 

9 FCD: dvagawouevos VGH. 

0 FC: xaé’ quépay VGH. 1 FC: rupaxrovueva VGH. 

12 EF: émtpoevoay A m? GH (v?) Kéchly. Oy) 


399 


10 


11 


12 


ONASANDER 


/ >) / roles | ’ , / / 

Tagew els ayn, €av’ emelyntal tr bOdvew ovv- 
TOMWTEpOV, EL aopares civar vomilor, Kal vUKTWwP* 

NX de / LA 2 A3 £. 4 / 
peMwv oe Kpivew dpa” 7@* odvorrov yeveobat 

A / 

Tots mroNepLtots evOds° TO Tpaypara dua paxns 
axon” mpotTw Kal [L1) mroNny dvuerov: moAAdaKus? 
yap 7™po TOV Kwovvev 0 KOTOS €daTavnoEV 
THY akunV® TOV CWLATWV. 

7 \ 

Avodevwv Sé€ ovppaxida yav mapayyeAderen 
Tots OTpATEvLaow améxeobar THS Xpas, KQL [LT 
ayew Te pyre? pbetpew: apeioes yap mAnGos 
amav ev O7Aols, OT av EXN THY Tob dvvacGai TL 
movety é€ovoiav, Kal 7 eyyvs ous §ayalav’® 
deAcaler Tovs adAoyiotrous emt mAcovefiav: puuKpat 
de mpopacets'” 7 amnAdotpiwoay OUpLLaXous 7 Kal 
mavTeAas” eeTohenwoar. Tv O€ TOV TroAepioov 
PUeipeTw Kal KaleTwW Kat Tepveobw* Cypia yap 
XPnUATwv Kal KapT@v evdera precot moAELov, ws 
ise tie asia mpoavareweba'? LevTou T™p@Tov, 

perAXret mrovetv: moAAadKis yap 7 Tod peAMovtos 
eae, dewod'® mpoocdokia ouvqvayKace, Tmpw 7 
mabetv, trocyéofa: te Tods KwédvvevovTas BV 

/ b) > / 17 A > \ 5 4 
TpoTepov ovK €BovdAnOycav™ motetv: émeidav 5 ama€é 
mabwow, ws'* ovdev Ett yetpov dydopevor TOV AOUTa@V 

~ > \ \ > ~ / rr 19 
Katadpovotow. et d€ 7oAdv ev TH ToAEuia wéeAAeL 


LF: pudyny wed’ nuépay (uweOquépay G) édy 6€ érelynrac VGH. 

2 FC: et@0s ENAm?’GH and the mss. of Rigaltius. 

oT On we + givorroc F corr. by AB. 

> FC: om. ENA m? GH and the mss. of Rigaltius. 

6 gyo\n GH and the mss. of Rigaltius. 

7 With this word F indicates the beginning of a new 
section instead of after cwudtwy below. 8 dyunv GH. 

9 un Oivew (O7yew GH) twos undé VGH. 

10 +éy ayabev VGH. 


400 


THE GENERAL, vi. 9-12 


battle, but is hurrying to be the first to arrive at a 
given point, he should lead his army by night marches 
also, provided he thinks it safe. But if he intends 
to decide the issue by battle as soon as he comes in 
sight of the enemy, he should at once advance slowly 
and not try to march too far; for in many cases, 
before the actual fighting, fatigue lessens men’s 
physical fitness. 

When passing through the country of an ally, 
the general must order his troops not to lay hands 
on the country, nor to pillage or destroy; for every 
army under arms is ruthless, when it has the oppor- 
tunity of exercising power, and the close view of 
desirable objects entices the thoughtless to greedi- 
ness; while small reasons alienate allies or make 
them quite hostile. But the country of the enemy he 
should ruin and burn and ravage, for loss of money 
and shortage of crops reduce warfare, as abundance 
nourishes it. But first he should let the enemy 
know what he intends to do; for often the expecta- 
tion of impending terror has brought those who have 
been endangered, before they have suffered at all, 
to terms which they previously would. not have 
wished to accept ; but when they have once suffered 
a reverse, in the belief that nothing can be worse 
they are careless of future perils. If he intends to 


~ 


1 K6chly: émirdéov eer ai pwaxpal 6€ rpoddces F: ér 
meovecia® ukpa (upd GH) dé mpodace. VGH. 

12 4 (4) GH) mavredas VGH. 

13 reuvérw VGH. dotep  ovcia VGH. 

1° ENP (margin) V (margin) G (margin) H (margin): rpéo 
avatewécOw F: rpoavaridécbw P: mpoavariber bw 

16 Gewotd écecdac VGH. 7 ovK "BouNnOnoay vGH. 

18 F@:"om: vGH. 19 ay . . . wéAdAn (uéAAn GH) VGH. 


2 AD: 401 


14 


13 


14 


ONASANDER 


KATQOTpAaTOTEdEVELY YPOVOY, TOGaDTa Kal ToLabra 
pleiperw’ THs xwpas dv atvros ody e&er ypeiar, 
iv de > a2 Xr Gé ~ AL 3 v7 
atta d€ avayKata® dudaxbevta Tots diAlous® Eorat, 
TouTwy hevdéodw.4 

~ \ / b) / | ek) > \ ~ 

Tay d€ duvdpewv exrretAnpwpevwv punt emt THs 
(OvoKTHTOV? pLnT el THS vmNKdOV pent el THs 
oupLpaxidos KkaleCopevos eyxpoveceron xwpas* Tovs 

\ 
yap iOlous dvadesoet Kapmovs Kat Cnwoer mA€ov 
TOUS pidous nH TOUS mrohepiious perayeren* o ws 
Oarrov, €av akivouva 7 Ta. otKoL,’ Tas Suvdpets’ 
EK yap THs moAeuias, €f ev Ein Sales KaL €D- 
8 / \ ‘v4 \ y” Q 8 > de / 
alyuwr, Tpodnv e€er Kat aplovov,® «¢ dé py, 
A >] 
THv ye didiav® o} Avpavetrar, moAAA 8 Guws" 

J Ho 9 Stl A > , ¢ , 
Kat amo Aumpads" tHs adAoTpias c€er mAcovEeKT?- 
para. 

Dpovrilerw d€ mrept Te ayopas Kal THS TOV 
ELLTTO PWV Kau KaTa yhv Kat Kata OdadAaTTav 
TapaToumys, Ww aKxwdvvov THs Tapovaias odiow 

\ > / 
ovens adxvws mapaxouilwor Tov els TA E7LT?- 


deca Poprov. 


VII. [Ilept rot orav dca orev@v péedAy TO 
oTpatomredov aye | 


"Ezevdav bé TOU" dua oTEeVvaov puedAy’'8 TOLEet- 


ofar tiv mdpodov 7 du opewhs Kat duvaParov 


1 PberpécOw V. 2 av xal a F, 

3 FC: ¢gitos VGH. 4 Kochly: geldecba Q. 

5 FC: unr’ ériris dcoxrnTrou om. VGH : unr’ emi rhs barnKdov 
om. R. 

6 With this word F indicates the beginning of a new 
section. 

7 axivduvov # olko. VPGH. 
402 


THE GENERAL, vi. 12 — vit. 1 


encamp for some time in the enemy’s country, he 
must destroy only things of such a number and sort 
as he himself will not need ; whatever, if preserved, 
will be of advantage to his friends he should spare. 

When the army is recruited to full strength, he 
must not settle down and stay either in his own 
country, or in that of a subject nation, or in that 
of an ally ; for he will consume his own crops, and do 
more damage to his friends than to his enemies. He 
should lead out his forces over the frontier as soon 
as possible, if matters are safe at home; for from 
the enemy’s country, if it is fertile and wealthy, he 
will have abundant provisions, but if it is not, he 
will at least not be injuring a friendly country, and 
he will still derive great gain even from the distress 
of the hostile country. 

He should consider the matter of supplies, and the 
convoying of his merchants by land and sea, that 
they may arrive safely at his base of supplies, and 
that they may without hesitation transport their 
cargoes of provisions. 


VII. [On Leading an Army through narrow Defiles| 


Whenever the general intends to march through a 
narrow pass, or to lead his army over mountainous 


8 trpudiv . . . addoviay VPGH. 

9 ri Tedéav R. 10 6.’ duws RGH. 

1 Naurpads EFNPRH (Aaurpas G) Saguntinus and Came- 
rarius. 

12 4 kaTadadatray 7 maparourns F. 


13 ofrws P: otrw EN. 14 rapakouifovor PGH. 

Ibe Ore: Vi 16 Title om. by F: in marg. GH. 

7 elre VGH. 

18 _Kochly (v?): wéAXNec FGH. 19 Added by Koraes. 
403 


ONASANDER 


ywpas ayew Tov oTpaTov,' avayKatov mpoEeK7eu- 
TOVvTa TL pepos THs Suvduews mpoKatadAapuBa- 
veobat tas te dmepBordas Kal Tas T@V oTevOv 
mapodous, pn PbOdoavTes ot mroAduol Kal KaTa- 
OTaVTES ETL THY Akpwv KwAVawor THY dveKBoArvy 
9 TovetoGar. To 8 atTto medpovticiw,? Kav av- 
Tos dedty moe ptev eloBoAjv: od ‘yap om" 
Opaoa pe XpHouLov, puddgacbar | dé mabety® otk 
avayKatov, ovdé Placar pev avtovs eiaBadovtas® 
Els THY ToAetav emetyov, amokAetaa’ de® rovs 
evavtious® emt odds tovtas od mpovonréov. 


VIII. [Ilepit rod wovety yapaxa |" 


"Ev 6€ 67" 7H Tv ex@pav KataoTpatoTe- 
evar” YapaKka meptBaheobar® Kal Tadpov, Kav" 
ep Tepav pedAn Ty mapeuBoAqy Onoew: OpLeTa- 
vontos yap uP TOLaUTN Kal aagadrs” OTpaTo- 
medela Oia Tas aidvidiovs Kat ampoArnmrovs"® 
emBonds. Y Kkabordre d€ pviaxas,” Kav pa- 
Kpav evar voulcy TOvS TOAELLLOUS, WS EY YS OVTWyy® 

9 o7rou® ~8 av peddy™ moAvypoviov Tifecbar THY 
TrapeBorny ovK dyremovTay™ TOV Trohepiov, 
emi TH pbetpew THY xopav rovovjevos Thy 
provnv™ 7 Kat Katpots ededpetwv® BeATioow,” 


1 FGH: orparnyov P and ‘* mss. quidam”’ Schwebel. 
2 redpovtjcbw or -eic0w F m! corr. by m?. 
3 FC and perhaps others: om. PGH. 
4 FEN and perhaps others: de? GH (v?). 
> uh maberyv VGH. 
6 F (and conj. by Koraes): ei¢8a\X\ovras VGH Kéchly. 


7 droxNetobac Mm?: dmoxexXeto bar EN. 8 uev F, 
9 rroeuious VGH. 10 'Title om. F: in margin GH. 
weOnr i 12 xaractparomedevovTwy F. 


4.04; 


THE GENERAL, vi. 1 — vit. 2 


and difficult country, he must send ahead part of 
his foree to occupy the mountain-passes and the 
defiles, lest the enemy, coming first, make a stand 
on the summits and prevent the army from crossing. 
This he should observe even if fearing an attack by 
the enemy. For naturally it is not advantageous 
to take the initiative, without also recognizing the 
necessity of taking precautions against injury ; nor 
is it necessary to outstrip the enemy in making an 
invasion into his country, without taking measures 
to prevent the enemy from marching against one’s 
own country. 


VIII. [On Making a palisaded Camp) 


When encamping in the territory of the enemy, 
the general should fortify his camp with a palisade 
and a ditch, even if planning to remain in camp but 
one day ; for on account of sudden and unexpected 
attacks, a fortified camp of this sort will be safe 
and never regretted. He should place guards, even 
if he believes the enemy to be at a great distance, 
just as if they were at hand. Whenever the enemy 
are not attacking, and he intends to encamp for 
some time, either for the purpose of ravaging the 
country, or to await a more advantageous time for 


13 tepiBarrdécbw VGH. 

14 F (and conj. by Koraes): ay vGH. 13 dcgadeis H. 
ampoodnmrous C: ampocdoxyjrouvs VGH. 

lv F (and conjecture of Schwebel): émi8ovdds Q. 


18 gvAaxds Koraes and Kéchly. 19 FC: évras VGH. 

20 drov VGH. 21 R: wédr\n Q. 

2 ov KatemivTwy P: ovxatemiovTway G: ov | KkarémidvTwv H: 
ov katereryovTwy EN. 

23 7 érl VGH. 24 vouny ENR. =SE PGE? om. Vv: 

26 épedpevévTwry F, 27 BeXriocov H. 


405 


ONASANDER 


exheyeoBu Xepia. py «Awd? punde vorepa® 
yap TolavTa Tats avapopais Kal Tats amo TOV 
Tommy Svowdlats vocovs Kat Aoyovs euPadrdrer 
oTpatevpac.,® Kat modAA@v pev exaKwoe Tas 
>) / \ \ 5 / iv \ J 
eveElas, moods de amwdAccev, wWoTe pu) [MOVOV 
b) / b) \ \ 3 \ > / / 4 
dXrtyov, aAAa Kai acbeves amroAcimec Oar oTpaTevpa. 


IX. [epi rod cuveyds tradAdcoew 7a arAnkra }° 


Xpyoyrov 6€ Tov Kal owTHpLov oTparomed 
und emt THs. avr ris peeve TapenBodjs, eav yn 
Xeyadevy Kal Tols oKYHVwWpact dud Tip copay Tou 
Karpoo meTohuopevy ToyXavy at yap! TOV javay- 
Kaley exkpioets” emt TOV adr ay yuyvopevar® 
ywpiwy atpovs dueplopotas avaméumoveat oup- 
petaBpadAovow Kal TV TOO TeEpiexovTos aépos 

gxvow. ev de Tals xEpactats® yupvaléTw Ta 
oTpaToTreda Kal TmoAe UK Kal ovvTpoga” movetodw 
Tots dewots, par apyety ev" unre pabupeiv: 
7 pev yap dpyta TA OWLATA pahbaxa Kal acbevf 
Kateokevacev, 7) S€ pabuyia tas wuyas avavdpous 

\ \ > / ¢e \ ¢ \ / 

Kal detAds éemoinoev’ at yap roovat deAealovoar 
~ 3 ¢ / / \ >? / / 
Ta Kal TEpav ouvnfer tas éemubvpias diadbei- 
3 povar kal TOV edToAorarov. 2 bev od joakpav 
amdyew™ Tovs avdpas T@V move" emelody yap 
peta ypovov avayKalwrvTa mpos ta zoAcutKa 

A 793915 ¢ / 9c ei) coe | A 
ywpetv, ov0’ yndéws e€iacw ovr emt odd 

1 FEN: éA\wdn PRGH. 

2 Kochly : unde (uh 6¢€ FGH) vocepa’ 2. 

3 rois cTpatevuacw VGH. 4 76 orpdrevyua VGH. 


> Title om. by F: in margin GH. &)pxrov is a Byzantine 
word unknown earlier ; see Du Cange and Sophocles. 


406 


THE GENERAL, vut. 2 - 1x. 3 


battle, he must choose a locality that is not marshy, 
nor damp ; for such places by their rising vapours and 
rank smell bring disease and infection to the army, 
and both impair the health of many and kill many, 
so that the soldiers are left few in number and 
weakened in strength. 


IX. [On continually Changing Camp] 


The general will find it advantageous and healthful 
for his army not to remain long in the same camp, 
unless it is winter and the army happens to be 
in huts on account of the time of year; for the 
necessary bodily excrement, deposited in the same 
place, gives off rank vapours and taints all the 
surrounding air. In winter quarters he should 
exercise his army and train it to be skilled in war 
and accustomed to danger, permitting no idleness 
nor relaxation; for idleness makes the body soft 
and weak, while relaxation makes the soul cowardly 
and worthless; since pleasures, capturing the pas- 
sions by the enticement of daily habit, corrupt even 
the most courageous man. For this reason the 
soldiers must never be without occupation. When 
after some time spent in idleness they are compelled 
to go against the enemy, they do not go willingly nor 





SO mesh: 
7 FCEN: éykpyoes P: éxpjoes GH: émixpices R. 
yryvouevor F, 
° B and Schwebel: yemadiars Q: Tots ye wadlors Koraes. 
avatpopa VGH. 1 éxovta R: éxwv corr. to ékwr A m2, 
12 evrod\uwtarov P. 
13 émayew ENM (margin): ézeiyew PGH. Kéchly suggests 
the addition of ée?. 
1 dvayxdgovrar GH. 15 ovy VGH. 


407 


ONASANDER 


, TANS Pater \ \ > 
pevovow, ard’ exdeduntnpéevow tayd pev dppw- 
dodo, mpiv 7 Kal meipGoar Ta Sewd, Tayd de 
Kal meupadoavTes amroywpotow, ovr €Amilew 


” , \ / / 
OUTE hépew TOUS KLVOUVOUS dvvdpevot. 


X. a’. [Ilepi rod detv* yupvdlew tov otparov® 
adelas ovons® | 


Avérep ayabod orparnyod Kal Ta xpnoywa TOTE 
KaTaoKkevalery, OT ouK emetyovow at TOV €K 
TapaTakews aywvwy avayKal, Kal Ta axpnoTa dua 
THY TOV CHWUaTwWY GoKynoW EmiTaTTEW. tkavy 
yap oTpatomédols aveois, Kav" odddpa Tadraimwpor 
wow,® 7° wr dia Tov Sewdv eis TO aAnOwov ayew- 
viopa etpa.® yvuvalérw de® Tovotadé Tio” 
TpOTrOLs. 

3 / ~ 5 \ \ vA A .- eee) 

2 °Exratrétw mp@rov avadovs ta o7Aa maow, Ww 
ev pedéty™ odiow 7 TO pevew ev Ta€EeL, Kal Tats 
+ “4 ~ 5 p= / > / id 
dpeot Kal Tots dvdouacr auv7ijBers adAAjAoLs yeyvo- 

~ \ / 

prevol,” Tis Umo Tia Kal TOU Kal feTAa 7TrOGOUS,”® 
Cw) 7f\14 / / 3° 15 > / 
bm o€v'* mapdyyeAua mavTes Mow” ev Taker 

\ > / 
Kal Tas Te eKTaGEls Kal GvoTOAas Kal eyKAtoets 
emt Aaa Kal defud, Kal oxy peTaywyas Kal 
dvaoTHuaTa Kal TUKVWOELS, Kal Tas bu adj Awy 
avteEddous Kal eladdous, Kal Tas Kata Adxous 


1 ywevotow F. 

2 FEN (and M by conj.): éxdeditirnuévor P: éxdedinrry- 
péeva. GH: éxdedirropéva R. 3 Om. vGH. 

4 dec ENRGH. 5 otparnyov ENR. 

6 Title om. F: in margin GH. 

7 Kav wn Capps. 8 radaurwpeow von Rohden, 

Delve ne metpG sy Neen 

10 FGH: rolots 6€ Tice V. 11 éx wedétns VGH. 


408 


——$—$ ET I 


THE GENERAL, 1x. 3-x. 2 


do they long stand their ground, but because they 
have departed from their former habits, they quickly 
become dismayed, even before making trial of 
danger, and even if they do make trial, they quickly 
retreat, being incapable either of feeling hope or of 
sustaining the stress of battle. 


X. (1) [The Need for Drilling the Army in Time of 
Peace] 


On this account it is the duty of a good general 
to prepare what is useful for war, when the necessity 
of a pitched battle is not pressing. _He should also 
assign unproductive tasks to keep the army in good 
condition. For it is sufficient relaxation for soldiers, 
even if they are very weary, to exercise in arms 
without the dangers involved in a real battle. The 
general should train his troops in some such manner 
as the following. 

First arming the soldiers, he should draw them up 
in military formation that they may become prac- 
tised in maintaining their formation ; that they may 
become familiar with the faces and names of one 
another; that each soldier may learn by whom he 
stands and where and after how many. In this 
way, by one sharp command, the whole army will 
immediately form ranks. Then he should instruct 
the army in open and close order; in turning to 
the left and right ; the interchange, taking distance, 
and closing up of files; the passing and repassing 
of files through files; the division into files; the 


22 ~iyvouevat Kal GH: yeyvouevac’ cal P: yiyvwyta a Ms. of 


Scaliger. 13 récwy C, eumorre Lv. 
15 gdGow GH. 16 Nad kai deka V. 


4.09 


ONASANDER 


PS) , \ Wie | / \ A 9 >’ \ 
laupécels, KaL Tas KaTaTagets Kal THY emt 
, > , 2 \ \ pint / a 
parayya exTelvovoay” Kal THY emt Babos v7r0- 
oréhovoar,” Kal THY GyupuT@poowmoy pany, oT 
av ol KaT ovpay emoTpeyavres m™mpos Tovs Ku- 
KAovpevous poaywvrat,’ Kat Tas avakdAnoes éK- 

dvacKkéeTw. 

3 Kabarep yap emt TOV jLovoiK@v opydvwv ot 
pev? apynv exovres TOO pavBavew emitibevres 
Tovs daxTUAovs emt TE Ta TpHaTa® THY adrAdv 
KaL OvaoT nara TOV Xopday TmoNaces aAov 
eJeoav én aAAgy" Kal ov Kara TAY cippovurny 
dudoraow, eita ports émexteivavtes® Bpadd pev 

wv 9 \ / \ de Gé e 
atpovov? tods dakTUAous, Boadd dé Tiléacw, o8 
6° é&v pedern THS povatkhs aveTiTyo<evTWs Oy” Ep- 
pub propery” TH xeupt ov ogUTITOS jueTadepovow, 
omy te PBovrovrat Trapalrefat THs dvamvors Kal 
dvoiFar KaL Trapapnrae Xopars: TobTov Ox7rou 
TOV TpOTOV Ot puev aovvnfers Kal avdoKnto. THs 
Trafews dua Tapaxyov mroAAod poAus adAjAwy dia- 
peapravovres eyKatardooovrau® moldy avaAtaKov- 
Tes Xpovov, ot Oe OUYKEKPOTNILEVOL dua TayoUSs, 
os etrrety avToLaror, dépovTa. mpos THv Takw 
evapovioyv Twa Kal KaAnv éxaAnpobyTes™ ow. 

ey \ \ 7 \ b] / 

4 Eira dveAwy ta orparetuata mpos adAnjdAous 
aolonpw pwayyn ocvvayeTw vaplynKas 7 oTUpaKas 
3 / Bb) / ) 7 \ / 
akoVTiwy avad.idoovs, ef dé Twa Kat BeBwAacpneva 


1 Om. vGH. 7 Om: 

3 After trooré\\oveav VGH add kai riv él ujKos éxrelvoveav 
(unxos GH), obviously a gloss on émi gddayya €éxTelvovcay 
which means the same thing. 

4 udxovrac VGH. 5 wev yap R. 

6 ronuuata PGH. 

7 RA m?: én’ Gdn F: én’ &\\n VGH (€raddAy GH). 


410 


THE GENERAL, x. 2-4 


arrangement and extension of files to form the 
phalanx; withdrawing of files for greater depth 
of the phalanx; battle formation facing in two 
directions, when the rear guard turns to fight an 
encircling enemy; and he should instruct them 
thoroughly in the calls for retreat. 

For just as those who begin to learn to play a 
musical instrument, in placing their fingers on the 
stops of the pipe or on the strings of the lyre, often 
set one finger on one and then another on another, 
without observing the interval that produces har- 
mony, and then, with great effort, extending their 
fingers, they lift them slowly and slowly place them 
again; whereas practised players, no longer giving 
any evidence of care, with disciplined hand swiftly 
change from one note to another, lightly checking 
or opening the flow of air at will or lightly plucking 
the strings; in just this manner men unpractised 
and inexperienced in military formations, with great 
confusion and failure to find one another, will only 
after loss of much time take their places; but 
those who are well trained in formations quickly— 
indeed automatically, so to speak—rush to their 
stations, presenting a harmonious, I may say, and 
beautiful sight. 

Next after dividing the army into two parts he 
should lead them against each other in a sham 
battle, armed with staves or the shafts of javelins ; 
if there should be any fields covered with clods, he 


8 FC: émexreivovor VGH. 9 aipovor F. 
10 Deleted by von Rohden. 
1 FCE: pepvduoudvy PGH: appvOucouévn R. 
12 rapawikac PGH. 
13 éykatdooovra corr. to éykatatdcoovra G. 
14 KC: amom\npodvtes VGH. 


41] 


ONASANDER 


media ein, Bwroust te KeAedwv? alpovras*® Bad- 
Aew"* ovTwv € Kal YudvTwY Tavpeiwr? ypyoOwr® 
Seay \ / / > b] A \ / a 
emi THv paxnv: SeiEas 5 adrtots Kat Addovs 7H 
Bovvovs 7 opfious romous’ KedevéTw odv Spon 
/ 
KkataAapPavecbat: more dé Kal emtoTHioas emt 
avT@v Twas TOV OTpaTiwT ov Kal avadovs 4G 
puukp@ mpdobev edyv omdAa, ToUrous éxPahobyras® 
ETEPOUS EKTEULTETW* Kal Wout Tovs pretvavtas’® 
ETALVELTW Kal p47) EKTTEGOVTAS 7) TOvs exBaddvTas.™ 
eK yap THS ToOLA’THS aCcKYyGEews Kal yupvacias 
dyatves prev TO oTpaTevpa, mav 6” 6 TL ovv 
“fs b] Ad \ / 13 v A \ Ss 14 x rNé 
notov eobier Kal miver, Kav ALTOv 7,4 modvTEAE- 
OTEpOV oudev” emuCnToov O yap amo ray TOVWV 
Ayos Kal TO Odiibos ¢ ikavov oxbov €oTl" * Kal yAved 
Kpaua, Kal’ oTEppoTepad TE TA OWpaTA oguow® 
\ 
ylyveTat Kal aKunta,® Kai cuveBilerar Tots péA- 
Aovow Sewots, OpO@Tu Kat mvevaTte Kat acbuarr™ 
\ A 
Kat OdAmeow acKidoTois Kal Kpvpots” drratOpous 
eyyupvaloueva.” 
/ \ / \ \ e \ 

IlapamAnoiws 5€ yuuvalérw Kat TO tmmuKov 

apidras rovovpwevos™ Kat diwyywata Kal oup- 
\ Awe \ 5) motes , \24 

mAoKas Kal akpoBoAtopods Ev Tots éemumédois Kal 

\ >) \ \ e/ ~ / > Be WX / 
mTept adtas Tas pilas T@v Addwyv, €d’ Gaov Suvarov 
€oTt Kal TOV Tpayéwv emupavew: od yap otov 

1 kal Bedovas (space for nine letters) ely Bodous F: BeBoda- 
opuéva Tadia ein BdAovs GH (waidéa PR and Bédous P). 


2 ré Kal eae Hi. 3 aipovras F. 4 Badety VGH. 
> DEKN: kal ravpeiwy F: €éx ravpeiww VGH. Kéchly 
suggests raupelwy kai Tovrots. 8 xpjcbw VGH. 


7 Kochly after Saguntinus: 7 dp@iovs Bovvods rémous F: 
7) 6pOious Bouvods 7) Tomovs VGH. 

8 éxBadovras K: exBaovras C: éxBad\\ovras VGH. 

9 4 vGH. 10 yelvorras PGH:  evovras EN. 

11 éxBaddovras F. ee Eds E 3 ég bin kal rivy F. 


412 


THE GENERAL, x. 4-6 


should command them to throw clods; if they 
have any leather straps, the soldiers should use 
them in the battle. Pointing out to the soldiers 
ridges or hills or steep ascents, he should command 
them to charge and seize these places ; and some- 
times arming the soldiers with the weapons I have 
just mentioned, he should place some on the hill- 
tops and send the others to dislodge them. He 
should praise those who stand firm without retreating, 
and those who succeed in dislodging their opponents. 
For from such exercise and training the army is 
kept in good health, eating and drinking everything 
with heartier appetite, even if the fare is plain, 
desiring nothing more luxurious. For the hunger 
and thirst derived from toil are a sufficient relish 
and a sweet draught, and muscles become harder 
and untiring; and trained by sweating, puffing, 
and panting, and exposed to summer heat and the 
bitter cold under the open sky, the soldiers become 
accustomed to future hardships. 

In the same way the general should train his 
cavalry, arranging practice battles, both pursuits 
and hand-to-hand struggles and skirmishes in the 
plain and around the base of the hills, as far 
as it is possible to go in the broken country ; 

1 This passage is derived from Xenophon, Cyropaedia, 
ii. 3. 17-18. Compare the Introduction. 

14 Koraes: av durov 7 FGH: avi Anrov 9 P: dvti dirov 9 
EN: dvte Nirov 7) Re dy re Nerov YC: avtiAntrov # A m2. 

15 KGH: ovéev v. 16 tot VGH. 


17 Added by Kéchly. 8 goicat Q, 
19 a@yunta PGH: dxunra DEN. 


2 copate kal rvevuate. VPGH. 

21 kpnuvoits KN. 2 cuyyuuvatoueva VGH. 
9 / , ey is 

23 rovouuévors F: morovuevov R. 244 Om. vGH. 


413 


ONASANDER 


, \ oe? \ \ Al 
te PidleoPar mpos avavTn Kal KaTa mpavods 


immalecbar.” 


B’. [Ilept zpovopay ]* 


7 Lwppovetre d€ TEpl Tas mpovoj.as KQL Lt) ebvéT@ 
Tats duvdpcow,* emrevday els evoOatLova mone - 
peteoy ctopaAy? Xwpav, ardKTws pépecbar mpos 
Tas wdedias * at yap peyLorar ouppopad Kav 
To.otade’ yiyvovtar® zroAAdKis yap ardKTous Kab 

/ 
omopace mept Tv Aeiav ocecoBnuévois®  e7rume- 
covrTes ot troX€utoe Kat dua TO aovvyTaKTOV TOU 
AnO \ PS) \ \ A Ss 10 \ > 
mAnfovs Kat dia To Bapets eivar’® Tovs atoxw- 
poovtas tats wohedrctars ovTe Tots OmAows ypjobar 
/ DQ hel / 2 A \ 
duvaevous ovT™ aAArjAois emKovphaat zoAAods 
8 duehPerpay. «t 5€ Tiwes Stya TOO Tov oTpaTnyov 
~ 4 e 
KeAcdoat Tpovopevotev,” odTOL KoAalCEoBwr.* adrds 
> 5 aN / A 
ye pny or av emt thy dAElav EexTeuTn,” Tots 
A \ > / / A 
uiAots Kat avdmAois ovvTaTTéeTw'® wayiwous tm7eEts 
\ > 
Kat melovs, ov” mept ev THY AElay ovK aaxo- 
res 18 / ~ 2 , Xone 
noovTat,® pevovTes O€ ev Taker mapadvda 
19 \ , 72 % > i; 
Eovow® tods mpovopevovtas, Ww’ 7 adiow acdadrs 
> 
7 aTroxwpnats.” 
1 rpauvols A m7. 
2 imragecdac GH: tarrdagfecbar A m?. 
3 Title om. FGH: rév rpovoudy A. 
4 F puts the break here. 
BRON GHK (e’c8ad\n GH). 
6 woherdeias GH Kéchly (v ?). 
7 rots rowotcde VGH Kéchly: om. C. 
8 yizvwrra F. 


9 cecoBnuaivovs GH. 
10 §:a 76 dovvTaKxTov ... elvac om. R. 


414 


THE GENERAL, x. 6-8 


for it is not possible to charge uphill nor to ride 
downhill. 


(2) [Foraging Expeditions | 


The general should be cautious in the matter of 
foraging expeditions, and not allow troops, when 
invading a rich hostile country, to search for plunder 
in an undisciplined manner; for the greatest mis- 
fortunes befall men acting in this way, since it has 
often happened that the enemy, falling on men 
scattered and without order in their eager search 
for booty, on account of this lack of order and the 
fact that they were loaded with their booty have 
killed many as they were retreating, unable to 
give aid to their comrades or to use their arms. 
If any men do plundering without the command of 
the general, they should be punished. When the 
general himself sends out foraging parties, he 
should send with the light-armed and unarmed men 
guards, both horse and foot, who shall have nothing 
to do with the booty but are to remain in formation 
and guard the foragers, that the return to camp may 
be safely accomplished. 


1 duvapévas otre VGH. 
2 rpovoueve éemixepjnowow VGH: érixnpycovew Koraes. 
3 xodafécOwoav VGH. 
M4 atro yé unv CR. 
13 réumrn VGH (réurn GH). 
16 FKRGH: évtatrérw v. 
7 of F. 
18 goxo\nowvTa Jos. Scaliger reports from an old ms. 
19 trapapuddéwor V. 
20 broxwpynots Koraes. 


AV5 


ONASANDER 


y’. [Ilept xatackdmwy | 


9 Ei de ovAddBor MOTE KATQAOKOTOUS, [L7) [LLG KE- 
xp7oGe youn: aA’, av prev aobeveorepa Ta Ova 
qTEp™ Ta Tapa TaVv _TOAcutCov elvat vouiln,® 
KT ewdTw TovTous, av de Kat omAine Kadrd 
KEXPNILEVOS H Kal TapacKevats evredcar Kal 
var ToAAR Kat eve€ia TwpLaTov Kal mevBqvicn 

\ 

OTPATEVLATL KAL Hyeudoow dpiorous Kal euuTrerpia 
pepeAeTyNUEVN, Tapa AaBow TOUS KaTacKOToUs Kal 
ev KOOMW THY OTpatiav’ emderEdpevos OUK av 
GudpTo. mote Kat albwous arroméupas® Ta pev 
yap mAeoverTHMaTa Tov avruToAemeny* ayyeAro- 
preva poBetofar suvnvayKacev, Ta O €AaTTMpaTa 
Oappety mapeotiaato. 


6’. [Ilept vuxrodvAdkwy }* 


/ \ / \ / a3 2 
10 @vXaKkas 6€ KaTataTTéTwW Kal aAEious, WwW &v 


, / uu \ A \ ¢ ¢ \ 
pepe. SteAOuevor™ THY THs vUKTOS Wpay ot peEV 
brvobv" of dé ypnyopetv’® aipa@vtTar'™ ovTe yap 
avayKaotéov oul’ umvoxvovpevois muaTevTEeov GAnv 
aypumvnoew viKTa tovs adttovs*® etkos yap™ 
mote® Kal mapa yrwunv evdidovTwy Tav pedA@v 

ll adrouatov uUmvov émedeiv. dpfoi 8 éara@tes 
dvratrovrwy'® at yap Kkalédpar Kat avamTwoets 


1 Title om. FGH. 
2 ra ida iyrep om. F: ei ENP: rep GH. 
3 tows jwapaxphua after vouifm A m* in margin. 


4 xrewérw R. 5 gay v (€av GH) av F. 
8 évredécei G: év redéot H. 7 Schwebel: orpareiav 2. 
8 dwoméupa F. ° avtirddwy VGH. 


416 


THE GENERAL, x. 9-11 


(3) [Spies] 


If the generai should at any time capture spies, 
he should not employ any one single method in 
dealing with them. If he considers that his own 
army is weaker than that of the enemy, he should 
kill them, but if he has complete equipment of arms, 
thorough preparation for war, a powerful army, 
vigcrous and disciplined, excellent officers, all trained 
by experience, he will make no mistake if, after 
making the spies examine his army drawn up in 
battle array, he occasionally even sends them away 
unharmed ; for reported superiority of the enemy 
necessarily causes fear, but reported inferiority brings 
courage. 


(4) [Guards by Night} 


The general should appoint guards and a rather 
large number of them, that, by dividing the night 
into watches, some may sleep and-some stand guard. 
Men must not be compelled to stand guard the 
entire night, nor even if they volunteer to do so must 
they be trusted ; for it is only reasonable that some- 
times, when the body is tired, sleep will come of 
its own accord, even against one’s will. The guards 
must remain standing while on duty; for seats and 


10 FEN: 7 PGH: ww R. U GreANdpevar GH. 
12 §avov VGH. 13 éypyyopow VGH. 
14 aipotyra: ** quidam libri mss.” (Schwebel). 
15 dyoutvjca VGH. 18 rovro.s for To’s avrovs F. 
7 vap av VGH. 19 Oi. Re 


19 réy du\accévTwy VPGH. 


ONASANDER 


suvekhvovoa’ TA TupaTa papalivovow Els Umvov, 

7% 8 dyvdoTacts® Kal 6 TOvos THY oKedAdv® eypn- 
12 yopow evriOno TH Ovavotw. KaovTwy 8 ot 
dvdakes TUpa TOppwrEepes THS oTparomedetas” 
ouTws yap TOUS pLeV TpoovovTas: dua TOO PuTos 
€x moAAod ovveisovtat, Tots & ék Tob dwros ev 
oKOTW TUyydvovTes OVK GOpyaovTaL, péxpis av 
els yelpas eAfwouw. 


[Ilepi Aafpatas avaywpyaews Tod 
OTPATEVLATOS 


13. Et 6é€ BovdAoird more’ viKtTwp avacTHoat TO 
oTpatevpa AavOdvwv rods moAeutovs, 7 TOTOUS 
mpoxataraBéobat mpoapovjmevos®’ 7 Tods OovTas 
db Y 9 1 Be 10 B rn ott > SZ : 
pevyww® 7 undEeT@ ovdomevos!® eis avayKn 
eAGetv TOU paxeoBan, mupa moa Kavoas avaxe- 
petTw* BAemovres puev® yap ot TroA€uor TA POTA 
doKodau Kata Xw@pav avrov peévew, apwTlorov dé 
peTta€v" yevonéevns THs TapeuBoAns dmdvorav 
bs » / 1 aeneee / PEs, 14 
avadaPovres,” ws devyovow, évédpas te mpoek- 
TEUTOVGL KAL OLKOVOLW. 


\ ~ a 
s’. [Ilept orparny&v Kkowodoyoupevwy tots 
~ > A 
T@Y evavTiwy oTparyyots |® 


3 \ > eds \\ ~ >’ ~ / > y+ ” , 
14 Eav & emt trav atradv prévwy eis ow Epynrai 
moTe T® THV ToACUiwY oTpaTny@,'® Kowodoyn- 


1 gvAd\vovcat VGH: cvAXovrac A m2. 
2 8 davatacis FG: 6é avdoracis H. 
3 FGH: 7év oxeXOv xal 6 Tévos V. 
4 FC (6é C): 6¢ rv puraKov mupa (pa P) vVPGH. 
2 RR: lovras C: bvtas Q. 


THE GENERAL, x. 11 —- 14 


reclining positions, relaxing the body, are conducive 
to sleep, but standing erect and keeping the legs 
stretched makes the mind wakeful. The guards 
must build fires at some distance from the camp. 
Thus because of the light they will see at a distance 
men advancing toward the camp, but those who come 
from the light will not perceive the guards, who are 
in the dark, until they fall into their hands 


(5) [Secret Retreat of the Army | 


If the general desires to withdraw his army by 
night without the knowledge of the enemy, either to 
be the first to occupy a certain position or to escape 
from the position he is in, or to avoid the present 
necessity of battle, he should retreat leaving many 
fires burning ; for as long as the enemy see the fires 
they believe that the army is remaining in the same 
place, but if the camp becomes dark while the 
retreat is going on, the enemy will suspect their 
flight, send ahead ambushes, and follow in pursuit. 


(6) [Parleys with the Generals of the Enemy | 
But if, while keeping his army in the same spot, 
he should come to a conference with the opposing 


1 This precept also derives apparently from Xenophon, 
Cyropaedia, iii. 3. 25. Compare Thucydides iii. 23. 3-4. 





6 Title om. FGH. 7 rapa R. 8 mpoatpounevous R. 

° @ (space for five letters) P and ‘*‘ veteres membranae ” 
(V ? Rigaltius). 

10 un 6€ rw F: pndé VGH: uy cai RA m?. 

11 FEN: Bovdouévors PGH (v ?). 





12 Om. vGH. ; 13 \aBovres VGH, 
14 évédpas . . . dusxovow om. R. 
15 N:om. 7@ F: om. ray 2. 16 grpatynyav F. 


419 


ONASANDER 


aojevos, Ws atTos eimeiv  aKodoat tt Bovdd- 
LLevos, exhefdpevos™ TOUS KpartiaTous KGL agvo- 
TpEeTECTATOUS TOV Vvewr, evpwoTous KaAovs peyd- 
Xovs, O7Aots? Svampeméor Koopyjoas exwv? rept 
avrov® GmravT are moAAaKis ‘yap Touovde TO 
may aro }€pous opBevros® nAriabn, Kat odK es 
@v mKougev 0 oTpaTynyos éemeta0n, Ti det mrovety, 


GAN’ €& dv cider® boyy. 


C’. [Ilept adrouodwr]? 


~ \ > / ” av \ b) 
Tév dé adtoudAwy et twes % Katpov aduiK- 
A / a\ a 

voovTat pnvvoovTes 7 Wpav éemillécews, 7) Odov 
? Dv Q / Baé ‘- ia A_9 
exayyéAXovrar Kabnyjcacba® Kai dia oKoTav 
3 A 

aopdtwv tots’ moAeuiows afew, SyHoas adrovs 
ayéTw,' TobTo mov odio” davepov, ws, eav ev 

\ \ 
aAnfevowor Kal éml owTynpia Kal vikn mdvTa 
Toujowot Too otTpatevuatos, Avoe Té ohas Kal 
5 A 5 / / 13 IN S > / 
wpeas Swae Kata€kious,” e€av efaTraTnowat 
/ 

Kat pevowvra™ Tots opeTepous eyxeupioaL” Bov- 
Adoprevor TO orpareupa, Trop’ avTov éKelvov TOV 
Kaipov ovTes’® ev deopots bro TOV KWOUVEVOVT@V 
KaTaopayycovrae TloTLS yap avroporou TL _pnvtov- 
TOS QUTY BeBacorarn, TO be avrov eivar Tis 
adToo" buys Ktpiov, aAAd Tods odnyoupevous.’® 


Ue @ raved 

2 Kéchly suggests xai before é7Xo1s and kai otrws before 
EX WV. 

3 Koéchly: adrov FEMN: atrév PGH and “‘ quidam mss.” 
(Schwebel). 

4 Kochly: 6¢éev Q. > édricbev F. 8 téev F. 

7 Title om. FGH. 8H dpav ... Kabnyjoac@a om. R. 

9 SiackoTmay F: d:a oxdmwvy Re: tows tirwy C margin: 


orlBwy or ctevGy conj. Koraes. 


420 


THE GENERAL, x. 14-15 


general, either to make or to receive some proposal, 
he should choose as an escort the strongest and 
finest-looking of the younger soldiers, stalwart, 
handsome and tall men, equipped with magnificent 
armour, and with these about him he should meet 
the enemy. For often from the view of a part the 
whole is judged to be like it, and a general does not 
determine his course of action by what he has heard, 
but is terrified by what he has seen. 


(7) [Deserters] 


If any deserters arrive in camp to tell of a suit- 
able opportunity or hour for attack, or if they 
offer to act as guides over a road and assert 
that they will lead the army along it, unseen 
by the enemy, the general should lead these 
deserters with him securely bound, making it plain 
to them that, if they are truthful and bring safety 
and victory to the army, he will set them free and 
present them with fitting rewards, but that if they 
attempt to deceive him and wish to betray his army 
into the hands of their own friends, at that same 
“suitable opportunity’ they will be slain in their 
bonds by the endangered army. Confidence may 
be most safely placed in the word of a deserter, 
when he knows that his life is not in his own hands, 
but in the hands of those whom he leads. 


Oni le 1 gyéror GH. 2 HC: ome vGH: 
13 FC: kar’ agiav v (katagiavy GH). F indicates a break at 
this point. 14 Wevcovrat GH. 
1° An old ms. reported by Scaliger: eyxempjoa Q. 
16 Om. vGH. 1 Kéchly: atrod F: éavrod VGH. 
18 FC: iyyoupévous VGH. 
421 


Ly 


18 


ONASANDER 


\ ~ A ~ 
[Ilept tot opav Kai tiv t&v Trodeuiwv 


mapepnPoAny |* 


‘Oparw dé Kal THY TeV mrolepiooy TrapeBoryjy 
ELTELpWS* [LITE yap, eqv ev" emuTeow Kal KaTa 
KUKAov idy® Keievov Bpaydy Thy TeEpipeTpov 
Kal ovveoraduevov Xdpaxa,,* SoKetrw ToUs 7O0Xe- 
jtous ohtyous® elvar — mas yap KUKAos €AdTTH 
Thv TOU oxnpmaTtos ow exer THS e€ avaddyou 
OTEPEO[LETPOUjLeVn|s Gewpias, Kal mActovs dvvarar 
deaotar TO ev avT@® TEpLy PApojLevoy evpos, 7) 
lowy av’ tis ower TEKUNPALTO —, pyre, av at 
mevpat Tob xdparos emt HAjKos exTEtvwaor Kal 
KaTa TL [€pos oTeval Tuyydvwow 7) oKodial Kal 
moAvywrioe Kal d€vywviot,® todd TAABos €AmiléeTH 
THs jev yap oTpatomredeias 1 dxus coe 
paiverat, Tos & ev avth mepietAnppevous avdpas 
od TavTws mAElovas exer TOV ev KUKAW TrEpt- 
ypapopeveny ob & éml tTav op@v Kat Addwv 
Xdpaices, Eav a) ouppveis™ Mou mavTn, petlous 
jLev _Opavrat TOV é€v Tols emimédois, €AaTTOUS 
dé H KATA THY oyu avdpas TEpleXovow: moa. 
yap avOpurav evTOS dmoActimrerat yupva HEpn) 
TOV yap ToLovTwY TOTWY avdyeen moa peev elvau 
Bdapalpa, modAa dé Kpnuvwdn™ Kal Tpayea Kal 
AKATACKTVWTA, TOD Sé yapakos mp0 THY avOpuaTrwv 
TUemevov, TovToVv To pAKos edAoyws ETEKTEL- 
vera’. nr obdv, éemedav dn Bpaydv® Kat 


1 Title om. FGH. 


2 CEMN:: om. FPGH. 3 76n R. 
4 kewwévny Taxa év mepiuéTpy Kal cuvectadruery xdpaxc VGH. 
5 é\atrous VGH: om. moXdexuious R. 8 tov éavT® F. 


422 


THE GENERAL, x. 16 - 18 


(8) {On the Inspection of the Enemy’s Camp] 


The general should skilfully inspect the camp of 
the enemy. If he sees a circular palisade contracted 
into a small circumference, lying in a plain, he 
should not conclude that the enemy are few in 
number; for every circle appears to contain less 
than it actually does by the theory of proportionate 
geometrical contents,' and the space enclosed within 
a circle can hold more men than one would think 
to see it. If the sides of the palisade happen 
to be long and close together in certain parts, or 
crooked with many acute angles, he should not 
conclude that the camp contains a great number 
of men; for this type of camp appears large but has 
no more men within its walls in every case than 
circular camps have. Palisades on hills and moun- 
tains, unless compact in every respect, appear greater 
than those in plains, but they contain fewer men 
than the eye judges; for many parts of such 
camps are bare of men, since there must be many 
ravines in them and many steep and precipitous 
banks unsuitable for pitching tents, and as the 
palisade is built to defend the men, its length 
must be accordingly greater. The general, therefore, 
judging merely the position and shape of a camp, 


1 The author seems to be using of a plane figure a term 
properly applicable only to a solid. 


* Added by Koraes: om. Q: tis wavtws R may retain a 
suggestion of it. 


8 éxreivouor F, 9 Kal d&vywrioe om. VGH. 
10, As F. 1 cuvgveis H. 127Om-.viGi 
13 to$ro ro VGH: rov R: rod A m?. 14 érexreivovot. VGH. 


19 éredav dn Bpaxdy F: érel dav ibn Bpaxd GH: Bpaxd vP. 
4.23 


19 


ONASANDER 


ouveoTta\uévov, Katadpoveitw avdAdoyilopevos Kat 
TOV TOTOV Kal TO OXHMA, LT, av Kal TapapyKn, 
KaTaTrAnTTéoUw. 

Totdrta pevrou yeyvackav’ eVKAipw OTE oTparn- 
yla xpnodotu, Kal _Kataotpatomedevoas ev ohiyen 
xQTQA TO 7 pOELpnfLevov OXIA, Kal, €l d€ot, kal 
ovvOAibas TO oTpadTevua pt) TpoayéTw pyTE” 
Seuxvitw® rots OVTEDTPATOTEDEKOTL,: Kat 7) 
TpoxaAoupevors eis ayn pea? efayero: doKEiTW 


20 6€ Kal dedtévar. moAAaKis yap ol TroNepLw0L Karo 


21 


ppovijaovres ws ord yenv® ovT@V TOV evavTiwv, 
oxpet Kal ovK euTeipia’ oTpaTyyiKH Ta TmpayywaTa 
KplvovTes,® pabuporepov aveoTpapnoar, advadkrws 
Kal GTAKTWS THS dias mpoiovres® mrapePpoAns, ws 
ov TOAUNGOVTEY ot tot TOV TroNepLieny emescdev- 
ceolal, 7) Kal TH yapake TepioTavres™ moAop- 
Kovow dmpooddKnTou Tob peAXovtos §=exxvb7- 
ceofa. mAnfous: 7 8 aveAmotia Tav dewav 
apeAcotépous émoinoe Tovs otTpatiwtas. ela 
det Tov Kaipov apmacavta® Kata moAAas €xk- 
dpaovra* tod ydpaxos mvdAidas ev ta€er TOV 
DToKELevwV avdpeiws exeo8ar mpaypyatwv. 

‘O d€ €idms otTws oTpatnyeiv eloeTar, Kav 
bo TMV ToAcuIWY Ev Tots avTols KaTAOTpAaTHY)- 
Tol, Kal Spdoal te Ppdvysos eoTar kat dvdAdkEacbar 
Tmpopn ns: e€ @v yap atros eloerat, Ti det movetv, 
EK TOUTWY ETEPOV TOLODVTOS YyYWOETAL, TL XPT) LL} 


1 ywookwrv F. 2 eire F: undé Koraes. 
3 Om. P “alii codices ” (Schwebel). 
: dvrearparomedevKéat F: avticrparomedevxdct Vv. 
5 xai VGH. 6 FENRGH: 6Alyor P ‘alii codd.” 
7 ovxewtreplia F: éxmecpia H. 8 xpivavres K Koraes. 
4.24 


THE GENERAL, x. 18 - 21 


should not be emboldened at the sight of a small 
contracted camp nor downhearted at the sight of an 
extended one. 

With this knowledge he should make use of 
opportune strategy. Stationing his army in a small 
camp, according to the above-mentioned plan, and 
if necessary, even crowding the soldiers together, 
he should not lead them from the camp nor show 
them to the enemy encamped opposite, nor lead them 
into battle if the enemy challenge, but he should 
even give the impression that he is afraid. For 
often the enemy, growing bold in the belief that 
their opponents are few, judging by sight and not 
by strategic experience, behave thoughtlessly. 
They go forth from their camp carelessly and without 
discipline, believing that their opponents will not 
dare to come out and attack; or they even surround 
and blockade the palisade, unaware of the multitude 
of men about to pour forth upon them; and with no 
expectation of danger soldiers become heedless. 
Then, seizing a favourable opportunity, the army 
must rush forth from the many little gates of the 
palisade, and in battle array courageously grapple 
with the task before them. 

The general, having this knowledge, will know 
how to do his part, and even if he is out-generaled 
in these same matters, will be both wise in action 
and prudent in devising protection; for from the 
knowledge that instructs him in what he must do, 
he will know, when his opponent is trying to do 
this to him, what he must not himself suffer, since 


* apotovras R. 10 FC :-om., vGH. 
1 gmrpoaddxynrov FE. eG i. 13 gordoavras VPGH. 
144 FPGH: ékdpapuorras v. 


425 


ONASANDER 


mallet at yap. idvae mpos TO AvTeEty € ejuTreLplat Kat 
Tas TOV TéAas Emwolas TeKaipoVTaL. 


0’. (Ilept azoppytwv |* 


22 ITpodyew Ovlet d€ou" VUKTWP 7) pel Tepav emi 
TL TOV aATrOppHTaV, 7) Ppovpiov® nH mTodkwW 7 aKpa* 
7) qTapodovs Katadnpopevov® 7 TL. TaV aAAwv® 
dpacovta,’ a® dua TaXOUS Aafovra® tovs moAepious, 
adhos O° OUK éore mpagat, pandevt _TporeyeTen, 
par ent Th pnTE Tl TOUT dyeu" Thy oTpaTiay, 
el uy) ToL TOV HYEWOVOV dvayKatov elvat vopiCor 

23 Mpoeumety. YEVO[LEVOS O° én avT@v T&Vv TOTWY 
eyyus ovTos Tob map ov Opaaat Tt det Katpod™ 
dudoTw TO Tapayyehua Kal TL det TpaTTew ona 
veTw TAD be ToOTO éoTw Kal ou odtyns pas: 
Gua yap ot myeHoves akovovolL Kal OL U7oTE- 

24 Taypevot TOUTOLS* ioacw. adpwv dé Kat atedArs, 
GOTLs QV To TOU d€ovTos els TO 7Aj Gos avaxouwd- 
onra THY mpagw: ol yap movnpot padvora qrepu” 
Tovs TovovTous ceToponotat Katpovs, Tap” ous 
épobytés Te Kal'® pnvioovTes olovTat TYAS Kal 
dwpeds tev€ecGar’ apa tTav oAcuiwv: ovK 
éotw 5 ad’ ob otpatedvpatos ovK amroddpacKovot 
mpos aAAnAovs SobAot te Kal éeAcvepor Kara 
moAAas mpodaces, as'® avdyKn mapéxecOar 7O0de- 
jLov. 


1 Title om. FGH. 2 dé Hén VGH: 6é K,. 
3 dpoupiwy F. 4 &xpay VGH. 
5 KkataderWouevov H. 5 é6dwy D. 
7 Spacavra FPGH (corr. A ?). 8 Added by Koraes. 
9 \abety VGH. 10 FC: dyew vVPGH. 1 ef dé un F. 


426 


THE GENERAL, x. 21 - 24 


personal experience in inflicting damage warns of 
the designs of others. 


(9) [Secret Plans] 


If the general must make a march by night or 
by day for some secret purpose, to seize a fortress, 
city, height, or pass, or to do anything else that 
must be done quickly without the knowledge of the 
enemy, which otherwise could not be done at all, 
he must tell no one beforehand against what place 
or for what purpose he is leading his army, unless 
he considers it necessary to warn some of the higher 
officers in advance. But when he has reached the spot 
and the moment is near at hand when he must act, 
he must give his orders and point out what is to be 
done. These orders must be quick and brief, for at 
the same instant that the leaders receive instructions 
their subordinates also know them. Thoughtless 
and futile is he who communicates his plan to the 
rank and file before it is necessary ; for worthless 
scoundrels desert to the foe especially at critical 
times, when, by revealing and disclosing secrets, 
they believe they will receive honour and reward 
from the enemy. There is no army in which both 
slaves and freemen do not desert to the other side 
on the many occasions that war necessarily affords. 


 Koraes: dvtwy 76 rapdv Spacat ri Se? Karpod Q: dvTwv, rap’ 
dv Spdcai re det Karpov Schwebel after Scaliger. 

13 Koraes: éora Q. 

14 F': rovrous of brorerayuévor. PR: rovros of 0. Vv: of v. 
rovrous GH. 

1° AB Kéchly: rapa Q. 

16 karpods* alpodvra ére kal Fy 


7 reviacbac EN ‘alii codd.” GH. igfOm:, VGH: 
427 


25 


26 


27 


28 


ONASANDER 


7 TTI \ ~ \ / > / ~ e ~ 1 
u. [Ilept tis mpo wayns emicképews TOV tepadv | 


M47 be >) / >) / \2 Dit 
nte de els Topetay e€ayéTw TO” oTpaTevpa 
/ A 
LLNTE TPOS LAX TATTETW, LT) TPOTEpov AuaduEVos* 
1AA’ 3 7 >) A3 / 4 \ / 
a. axorovbotvtwy atTa@*® OvrTa* Kai pavtets. 
la 
aptoTov prev yap Kal avTov éeumeipws ém- 
oKemtec0ar dvvachar Ta tepad> pdotov ye py 
>) A ~ 
ev Taye. pabety e€orw Kat adrov atT@® avp- 
>) \ ~ 
Povdov ayalov yevéoar. yevopevwy 87 Kad@v 
~ ~ 5 
TOV tepOv apyeo8w mons eee Kal KaAEiTw 
TOUS TyEwovas mavTas € emt THY op Tov lep@v, wa 
eaodpevoe Tots UTOTATTOILEVOLS™ Gappetv Aé€yovev 
amayyéAAovtes,® ws ot Beot KeAevovor udxeobat: 
mavu yap avabappodow at duvdpes, or av pera 
a A ~ > \ 
THs Tov Oedv yvapns eEtévar vopilwow emt 
Tovs KWOdUVoUS* avTOL yap OmuTevovTaL® Kat (dav 
EKAOTOS Kal oneta Kal Pwvas TapaTypotou, 
¢€ 3 e \ / / \ \ 307 
» O drép mavrwy. KadAépnots Kal Tovs tdia 
dvabupobytas” avéppwoev. é€av dS emi Todvar- 
Tiov Ta lepa yevntat,” pévew emt TOV adTa@v, Kav 
~ \ 7 
opddpa Tt emelyn, av vroueverw TO SVaypyoToV 
—ovlev yap dvvatar mabety xelpov, wv mpopnvver 
TO SayLoviov—, ws, av yé TL KpeitTov™ Eeoeobat 
“rr ~ / 13 5 f} AA A Av. @ 
pean TOv mapovTwy,”* avaykn Kad\epety, Geoba 
i<4 A 7 \ 
de Tijs avras TLEpas moAAaKis* wpa Yop uta Kab 
\ 
akapys xpovos 7) placarras edvrnoev™  vOTE- 


, 15 16 § \ > \ 
PpynoavTas. KaL pot OKEL Tas Kar OUPQaVvoV 
1 Title and break om. FGH. 2.Om, F. 

3 atrav R. 4 @itcar R. 


5 F indicates a break here. 
6 Kéchly : airg Q (aitG GH): atrov aird F. 
7 robs broratrouévous VGH: rods broretaypuévous D. 
8 dmrayékov .. R. 


4.28 


THE GENERAL, x. 25 — 28 


(10) [Taking the Omens before Battle] 


The general should neither lead his army on a 
journey, nor marshal it for battle, without first 
making a sacrifice ; in fact, official sacrificers and 
diviners should accompany him. It is best that the 
general himself be able to read the omens intelli- 
gently ; it is very easy to learn in a brief time, and 
thereby become a good counsellor to himself. He 
should not begin any undertaking until the omens 
are favourable, and he should summon all his officers 
to inspect the offerings, that, after seeing, they may 
tell the soldiers to be of good courage, since the 
gods command them to fight. Soldiers are far more 
courageous when they believe they are facing 
dangers with the good will of the gods; for they 
themselves are on the alert, every man, and they 
watch closely for omens of sight and of sound, and 
an auspicious sacrifice for the whole army encourages 
even those who have private misgivings. But if 
the omens are unfavourable, he must remain in the 
same place, and if he is hard pressed for time he 
must patiently submit to every inconvenience—for 
he can suffer nothing worse than what Fate indicates 
beforehand,—since, if his condition is going to 
improve, he must have favourable signs in a sacrifice. 
and he must sacrifice several times on the same day ; 
one hour, even one minute, ruins those who start 
too soon or too late. And it seems to me that the 


9 6re TevEovTac KA m? GH and all Schwebel’s ss. 
10 Sucgynuotdvtas VGH (-uovvtas H). 
WL yivnrat GH: yiyvnrac VA m?. 
12 From xpeir. to 6 orparyyos XIII. 1 is missing in G. 
13 tov TapdvTwy wédrAy VH. 14 éguris év F. 
 grepnoavtas R. botepnoavTas wo FE. 


4.29 


16 


bo 


ONASANDER 


GoTeépwy KWHoELS Kal avaTodas Kat dUceLs Kal 
oXNLAT EY eyKAtoets! TplyWVveV Kal TETPAYWVEY 
Kal OLapleTpwv 7 Our dvd. om\dyxveov adAovo- 
LLoppw Jewpia Tpoonpatvew, jv at Tapa puKpov 
Svagpopat Kal duvdpers Kal drroPevascers® év TEP 
pra paddrov de® wpa Kat Baotrets eroinoay Kat 
aiypadwrous. 


XI. a’. [Ilept rod ore Se? THV ToAcuiwy oxnua- 
Tilonevwrv devyew py) aTrA@s Kal ws EeTvxev 
exeoar THs Suwkews |* 


“Exrev07 de moNaces Bvojévots ws peev ets paxny 
KaAa ylyverat Ta lepa, Oia dé pans oAov evloTe 
OTpOTEULaT ey oAeBpov MPOOHILALVEL, TOV avay- 
KULOTAT IY” Tyoopae mept! TOUTOU ppacar. THs 
yap OUTaENns olKOULEeVnS mroMas Kal 7TravTolas 
clvar ouubeBnKev Wea ToTmwv, adndAov dé, ev 
OTrolols” EekaoTor moAdEunoovow: Kal THS peV 
odav® attav éumeplav éyovo® ywpas avOpwzrot,”® 
Tv O aAAoz piav ovuK icace. 11 qoAAakus 8° et!” 
oT paTnyos aKovoas pds TEpas odov améyew 
Tovs ToAcptous dvaoTnoas ayet Tov oTparoy, 
emELYOMEVOS dra prayns eAGetv Tots TroAeptots, © 
Tov Oo STroXwpovyT@V emi7noes Kal Ha peevov Teo 


ws KaToppwootow éemetar, TOv Sé tavro' TodTo 


/ a lg) 20 > 8 / \ 
TOLOUVTWI, EWS € WOLV €lS voKwWplas Kal 


1 éxxdioers R: éxXioers A m?. 

2 admobewoes K: admobéces Koraes. 3 8 Kéchly. 

4 Title om. FP: in margin in HAPRM (and therefore in 
G) after the first line of § 4. 

5 avayxaiwy VH. 6 Koraes suggested xai before zrepi. 


430 


THE GENERAL, x. 28 — x1. 3 


motions of the heavenly bodies, their risings and 
settings, and their positions—trine, square, and in 
opposition—are indicated by the art of extispicy, 
through another form of observation, and that trifling 
differences in these things have, in a single day, or 
rather in a single hour, led to power and deification, 
and have made both kings and captives. 


XI. (1) [Pursuit of an apparently fleeing Enemy must 
not be careless and haphazard | 


Since frequently the omens from a sacrifice are 
favourable for battle and yet sometimes foretell 
the complete destruction of the army through 
battle, I have considered it of the utmost necessity 
to say a few words on this point. The topography 
of the inhabited world differs widely in its various 
parts, and it is impossible to foresee in what sort of 
country a war will occur. Every man is well ac- 
quainted with his own country but not with foreign 
countries. Often a general, on hearing that the 
enemy are but a day’s march distant, will call out 
his troops and lead them forward, hurrying to come 
to close quarters with the enemy, who, purposely re- 
treating, do not make a stand against him; and so he 
assumes that they are afraid and pursuesthem. This 
continues until they come into a broken country, 


7 


Tolots V: motos H. 
8 gagas Rigaltius and ‘alii codd. ut vid.” 


9 éyouvow H. 10 oi dvOpwro A m?, 

1 tcaow HA m?(v?), but F writes icaoe rodddxs without a 
stop. 12 6’ 4 F: corr. A: dé v: 57 H. 

13 FC: dvacrjoas . . . Toreuioos om. VH Saguntinus 
Camerarius. 1 xevovtwy R. SA) 

16 rau7d F: at’ré vH. 17 Koraes conj. éws av. 


431 


ONASANDER 


TepikeKAeicpLevous OpEect TOTOUS, é7iKerTaL pndev 
dhopwmevos, eita euPadwv' els tods Tomous 
e_\ A Neu? > / a > ZA at 
b70 TY ToAcuimy ameKrctoOn THs eicfodAjs, 
7°? TO oTpatevua eionAPe, Kai KataraBdopevor 
/ > 
Tas Te els Tovpmpoober* Sidd0us Kai KUKAw Ta 
/ 
peTEWNA TAaVTA KaTacyOVTEs, WaTep ev Cwypeiw® 
TWwt ovveTédnoav pev® Tovs oAeuious,” 6 dé 
Tapiov® ev vTO THS OpuHS epepeTo SoK@v emt- 
Ketola. guyowayoter tots moAepious, ots® mpoo- 
OA nas ” \ \ A , 
eMGav™ otk eyvw, peta O€ Tadra. meptPAeysapevos 
Ta TE mpdow Kal Gmiow Kal Tapa mAcupay, 
Kat mavTa mAnpn Jeacdpevos mroAeLtony 7 ovvn- 
Kovtioby [LETO. Too OTpaTEvpLaros, 7 aTrouayeoBar 
pa) Ouvdjrevos Kal [L7) Tmapad.dovs Awe duepbeipev 
TaVTAS, 7} TApAdOVS KUpLOUS ETTOLNGE TOUS ToAcutous 
Tob Oo TU” BovAovrar Siafetvar. det Toivuy Tas 
dmoywpynoes vdopdcla. tav Todepiwy Kat py 
> 7 7 \13 / \ A 
aTretpoKdAws emecbar Kat mrepiBAémecPar 5é wGA- 
ov tTovs Tdmovs 7 Tovs TroAEuiovs Kat du av 
” pS Ge ’ ! 15 5718 ¢ , 
aye. ywpiwy™ oparv, emthoyileabat OTe TAUTH 
/ 

mdAw drootpéepar Set, Kal jrow 7 pnd? eiopeoiene 
GAN amotpémecBar Tihs Heat n «ltoBaddovra 
mpoopav Kai eis*® tas trepBodds Kal Tovs GUVaTTTOV- 
Tas avyévas THY op@v amoXeitew™ Tovs Tapa- 

> / a3 > >| / 20 ¢ > 5 \ 
dvrdtrovras, Ww aadadjs” odiow 1 avaKkoptd7 

1 Barov F, 2 Koéchly: rats eicBodais Q. 

3 (v?) Kéchly: 4 FH. 

4 eicrovumpocbev F: eis rotvoua mpicbey R. 

5 NRE (margin) Saguntinus: fwypwrut F: fvyéypw P (in 
marg. fwypot): fvywyp» H (in marg. fwypod ? very faint): 


fwypapely E (text). Rigaltius also quotes (wypod from the 
margin of ‘‘ veteris membr.” (= V *). § Om, ¥ 


7 F leaves after this word space for three or four letters. 
432 


THE GENERAL, x1. 3 — 4 


surrounded by mountains on all sides, and the 
general, unsuspecting, still attacks them; next, as 
he marches against their positions, he is cut off by 
the enemy from the road by which he led his army 
in. They seize the passes in front of him, and all 
the heights round about, and thus confine their 
enemies in a sort of cage. But the general is carried 
away by his impetuosity, in the belief that he is 
pursuing a fleeing enemy, without noticing whom 
he is approaching ; and later, on looking before and 
behind and on both sides, and seeing all the hillsides 
full of the enemy, he and his army will be destroyed 
by javelins, or, unable to fight and unwilling to 
surrender, he will cause all to die of hunger, or by 
surrender enable the enemy to dictate whatever 
terms they wish. Therefore retreats on the part of 
the enemy should be suspected and not stupidly 
followed; the general should observe the country 
rather than the enemy, and notice through what sort 
of terrain he is leading his forces; and he should 
take into consideration that it is necessary to return 
by the same road by which he came, and should 
either refrain from advancing and turn aside from the 
route, or, if he does advance, he should take pre- 
cautions, leaving forces to hold the mountain passes 
and connecting defiles in order that his return may 





8 Kéchly: Tapwy Q (mapay H): apérepov Koraes, 
® FCD: os R: és EKN: of H Rigaltius. 

10 FCD: ™ poe Bev Vv: ™ poe Bay H. 1 +a re om. VH. 
12 Schwebel: rout! F: rots 671 v: To’s 671 HR: és 671 EN. 
ag exer Oar (om. cal) vH. 

14 FCH: x@poy Pv: xa@pov A m?: dv dv aye x@pov R. 


1 wronoyifecOar VH. TE eee W cire VH. 
18 7} eicBaddovTa mpoopay and eis om. F: ec Bdd\ovTo A m2, 
18 Grrodiewy PH. 20 tee SS H. 


QF 433 


ONASANDER 


/ A 3 \ ~ 
5 ylyynta.. tadta d eipjobw Kat Tob KaTaoTpa- 
A 4 7 \ ~ \ 
TE Os elena Kat ToD” je) KaTaoTpa- 
Thyetobau: Kahov jev yap Kal TO AaBetv OUTwW 
dvvacVat roAEuious, avayKatov dé To 7) AndOAvar.4 
, \ A , > - 
B’. [Ilept tod mpoctecBar tovs amayyeAAovtds Te |° 


6 IlpooécOw b€ Kai mdavta tov BovdAdpevov Ti® 


amayyéAAew Kat doddov Kal €AeVOepov Kal vUKTWwWp 
Kal pel? 7uépav Kal ev" Tropeia Kal eV KOTAORNVaTEL 
Kal dvamavopevos Kal ETL Aourpob Kal E77 Tpodijs * 
ol yap dvaBaArdopevoe Kal Svompoourot Kal Tots 
UTNpETaLs TOUS mpoowovras avaxomrew* KeAevov- 
Tes mroAAOV Kal peeydAco™ elkoTWs StapapTa- 
vovot mpaynaTwy, m7 Kal Tots OAots pabupodyTes 
odaddovrar: moAXdKis yap ev o€et To duvapevov 
Kaip@ Placbjvar madpecoiv Twes pnvvortes. 


XII. [Ilept dpuoromovias |” 


> 2s , \ / 43 , \ 
; Av7 LoTpaTomedevauny de TroNepstep | Xepane pn de 
THS KaTa Kaipov aproToToLias aperetrar éav 


jLev yap ed’ eauT@ vopicn TO OTE BodAera TO 


OTPATEUpLA T™pos paxnv EKTATTEW € ivat, Kaw® 


1 F: évexa vH. 

2 FH: epi rod v: kal mept rot Katraotparyyety rovTwy 
évexa K, 

3 F indicates a break here. 4 Necpbecivar F. 

> Koraes apparently added the title, for it does not appear 
in FH, and even Rigaltius and Schwebel have merely ‘* De 
nuntiis admittendis.” 


6 >> HRA m?. 7 Om. vH. 8 éristpopijs F. 
9 FH Leo. Tactica, xvi. 21: dvaxdrrey RA m?: dva- 
Kkaumrev DEKN. 10 weyadwv kal VH. 


434 


THE GENERAL, x1. 5 — xu. 1 


be safe. This advice is given for the purpose both 
of outwitting the enemy by these tactics and of not 
being outwitted oneself; for though it is a fine thing 
to be able in this fashion to ensnare the enemy, yet 
it is absolutely essential to avoid being ensnared 
oneself. 


(2) [Recerving Messengers | 


The general should receive every man who wishes 
to report anything, whether slave or freeman, by 
night or day, on the march or in camp, while resting, 
in the bath, or at table. For generals who pro- 
crastinate and are difficult of access, and who order 
their servants to keep out those who come to see 
them, naturally either miss many important oppor- 
tunities or even through their negligence suffer 
complete ruin; for often men bring information at 
a critical moment about something that can be 
frustrated in the nick of time.? 


XII. [Meal-times] 


The general, if encamped opposite the camp of 
the enemy, should not be careless of the proper 
time at which to serve meals. For if he considers 
that it lies with him to lead out his troops to battle 

1 Alexander, on being asked how he conquered Greece, 


replied, undév dvaBadd\duevos, ‘By never putting anything 
off’ (Schol. A on Homer’s Iliad ii. 435). 





1 FH: ¢acbjvacv: ppacdFvac DR Koraes : rpax6fva con). 
Koraes. me Pitleom. FH: 

23 toteulw F: moteuiwv VH Kéochly. 

4 dpicrorocias F. 15 Del. Koraes. 


435 


ONASANDER 


nvika’ av €BédAn,* mrapayyeAdérw Tats Surdueow 
dproromovetcOau: eqv O€ ets TooadTny avayeny 
eAnAvéws TuyXavy dud Twas TOTOUS 7 Xdparos 
aobéveray 4 Twas adXas airias, wor emt Tots 7ro- 
Aepstots amroAcreihOar ro*® eEdyew omdte Tmpoat- 
pobvrat Kal TH avayKynv odiow emitiOévar Tob 
Ta OTrAa AapBavew Kal avrimapatarrecbat, 1) 
OoKveiTwW Kal Ewer apiorotrotetofar onpaivew, 47) 
dldowaw viotiow eémbévres ot modAdutor TH 
avayKny Tod payeofar. Kal TO atvorov ovK eV 
puxp@* Geréov ovd€ Tapopatéov THY THY TOLOUTwY 
mpovovay eupayovTes yap oTpaTiara peTpios, 
WOTE 47 TOAdY evdopricacba’ Th yaoTpt Kopov, 
duvapuKeTEpos m™pos Tas paxas eto: TroMaxes 
Kal’ mapa Tod&’ yr7rHOn oTpatomeda THs’ toxvos 
eMeurrovons® dua THY evdevay, OTav pn ev oget 
Kaup@ Kpuyrat 7a Ths paxyns, GAAa du’ Hépas 
6Ans AapBavn” To TédXos. 


XIII. [Ilepi tod efvar tov otpatynyov evOvjprov ev 
tats dvompayiats |" 


"Or ay O€ Tus euTeon Svobupia orparedpacu”” 
Kal oBos 7 q ouppaxias Tots Trohepious aduypevns™ 
7) TPOTEpyLaTOS opuou™ yeyovotos, 0° oTpatnyos 
ToTe 67)" pahora Tols OTpATLWTALS iAapos Kal 


yeynOws Kai axatdmAnktos dawéobw.” at yap 
dyseus TOV TVELOVOOV ouppeTacynuatilovar TAS 
1 jvik’ Kochly. 2 6édn V (0éXn H). 
3 Om. vH. 4 FH: cucxpe v. 
BP evo, otigat H: éudoprica Vv: évpoprdoat ie 
6 yap kai VH.* a am R. 
8 €\\urovons (Schwebel) Koraes. 9 FC: om. vH. 


436 


THE GENERAL, xm. 1 — xi. 2 


whenever he wishes, he may set a meal hour for 
his troops at whatever time he wishes. But if he 
should chance to have come into such extremities, 
because of the terrain, or the weakness of his camp, 
or for some other reason, that it is left in the power 
of the enemy to attack whenever they desire, and 
to compel his army to seize their arms and draw up 
for defence, he should not hesitate to order the first 
meal at sunrise, lest the enemy, by a prior attack, 
force his men to fight while still hungry. On the 
whole, this matter must not be considered of slight 
importance nor should a general neglect to pay atten- 
tion to it ; for soldiers who have eaten moderately, so 
as not to put too great a load into their stomachs, 
are more vigorous in battle ; armies have often been 
overpowered for just this reason, their strength 
failing for lack of food—that is, whenever the 
decision rests, not on a moment's fighting, but 
when the battle lasts throughout the entire day. 


XIII. [Courage on the Pari of the General when in 
Adversity | 


Whenever despondency or fear has fallen on an 
army because the enemy has received reinforcements 
or gained an advantage, then especially the general 
should show himself to his soldiers gay, cheerful, 
and undaunted. For the appearance of the leaders 
brings about a corresponding change in the minds 





10 NauBaver VH. 1 Title om. F: in margin H. 
2 orpareduati Kochly. -18 FENRH: dad¢vyuévors v. 
ee diva sl 15 With this word G resumes. 


16 FEN: de¢ vPH (a lacuna in G but the top of 6 and a 
circumflex accent can be seen). 
17 Koraes: daivecdar VGH: om. F. 


437 


ONASANDER 


buyas Tv vbroTaTTouevwy, Kal oTpaTyyod pev 
> , 2 Mane rAd Se a 
ed0vpovpévov’ Kat tAapov PAémovros® avabappe? 
Kal T0* otpaTomedov ws ovdevos ovTos SeLwod,> 
KaremTnyotos dé Kat Avmovpevov ovyKata- 
mimtovat Tats dtavoiats ws peydAov odict KaKkod 
mpodawopevov. 10 xp7 mA€ov TH oyHpaTe Tob 
Tpoowmov oTpaTnyetv TH Tob mAnfouvs «d0vpiav 
/ \ \ 
7 Tots Aoyors Tapnyopew: Aoyous juev yap moAAot 
Kale qrlornoav ws Tod KaLtpod mremAacpévoLs 
ewexev,’ dusv d5€ Oapcotcav® avumdxpitov eivat 
/ > / \ > / i > Ar de? 
vouilovrTes emioTwoavTo THVv adoPiav ayably) Se 
¢e >? > -~ 10 > / ~ > A Ail 8 A 
7» €€ apo emoriun Tod Te elmetv, a det, 

~ ¢ A A 

Kal obOjvat, o7otov det. 


XIV. a’. [Ilore det” PoBov euBarrew 7d orpa- 


/ ~ (Ou \ > \ ~ > / 13 
TEVLATL T@ LOLW TOV ATO TMV EvavTiwv | 


/ ~ 
Kaéamep ye pv ev Kaip@ otpatevpatos ava- 
ve : 14 coe ey \ he ’ 2 
dponos'* wvyncev, ovtTws Kat ddBos wdéAncev. 
67 av yap pabuuH orpardémedov Kai azmeléotepov 
7 Tots yovpevois, Tov amo THv ToAeuiwv"® 
droonuatvew det” Kivduvov, ody yKioTa doBepo- 
A \ > 
TowobvTa THV EKeivwy epedpeiav? od yap Set- 
\ yj 18 A ¢ > ye A 2 
Rovs eora'® srovetv ovtws, adda aodareis: ev 
ev yap Tats dvabvpiats Oappetvy avayKatov, év 
A / A 
dé Tats pabupiats doPetofar- tods pev yap 
> lal ~ 
detAovs avdpeious moet, Tods dé Opaceis’® zpo- 


1 jroretayueévwy VGH. 2 ebdvuov VGH. 

3 FENGH: Bnérortes Pv. 4 FGH: om. v. 
5 ws obdevds dvTos devo? om. Camerarius. 

6 kai rool R m2, 7 évexev GH KoGchly. 

8 Q: @dpoouvs F: Oappotcay Kéchly. 

9 & Kéchly. 10 dugots A m?, 


438 


THE GENERAL, xi. 2-— xiv. 1 


of the subordinates, and if the general is cheerful 
and has a joyful look, the army also takes heart, 
believing that there is no danger; but should he 
have a frightened, worried appearance, the spirits 
of the soldiers fall with his, in the belief that 
disaster is impending. On this account, the general 
must inspire cheerfulness in the army, more by the 
strategy of his facial expression than by his words ; 
for many distrust speeches on the ground that they 
have been concocted especially for the occasion, 
but believing a confident appearance to be unfeigned 
they are fully convinced of his fearlessness; and it 
is an excellent thing to understand these two points, 
how to say the right word and how to show the 
right expression. 


XIV. (1) [When one’s own Army must be made to fear 
the Enemy] 


Just as the recovery of courage at a crucial 
moment benefits an army, so also fear is advan- 
tageous. For whenever an army becomes idle and 
inclined to disobey its officers, the general should 
suggest the danger from the enemy, especially by 
representing their reserves to be formidable. It will 
not be possible thus to make the soldiers cowardly but 
only steady, since in despondency it is necessary 
to be of good courage, but in idleness to fear; for 
fear makes cowards bold and the rash cautious. 


1 6re VGH: KGchly suggests ofa. 12 Om. EN. 
13 Title om. F: after ogé\noev GHAP (in text GH). 
14 avabdppnos VGH. 15 rév F, 
16 rortéuwy F. MuOm. Re 
18 és7t GHA m?. 19 FKR: @apoe?ts VGH. 
4.39 


ONASANDER 


> / 

2 un Geis. appotepa dé ovuBatver oTpatorrédots, 
Kal OUTWS Karamem Ay Gat moAeious Wore pendev 
eGédew Toluav, Kal ovTws KaTtadpoveiv? wore 

\ WZ A ¢e / \ A \ 
pndev dvratrecbar: mpos exdtepov dé Set Tov 
\ ¢ / a 
oTpatyyov ypyoobar Kai cidévat, mote Set Tavti- 
mada tazmewa® Kat AOyw Kal oynyaTtt TroLety, 

Kal 7OT ata’ dewa Kal PoBepwrepa. 


B’. [Ilept 76 Oapptvew 76 dedis otpatevpa |* 


3 MeMovons Oe pans, oTe ddndov exovTa Ta 
orparedpara® THY Kpicow Tod moAduov OuareTa- 
pakrau TO popw, duvets 7 AaPetv aixpa- 
AwTouvs oO oTparnyos® 7 amo evedpas 7 dia- 
KpoBoAwcapevos® 7 Kal amooTaTobvTas Tijs idias 
mapeuBorAns, ef pév Twas ‘yevvatous” Tots ppo- 
vH“act Kal Tots Gwpyao. KaTapdboLt, ToUTOUS 7 
amToKTEWaTHW TapaypHua AaBwv 7 Seas mapa- 
d6Tw Tols emt TadTa TeTaypevois PudAdtTew KeAEv- 
cas,"' Omws p27 moAAol Dedowvrat tTovs avopas, 
el O€ aobevets Kal ayevvets™ iat puxpordyous, ETL 
Kal mpoamrerAjoas’® opiow emt THs ldlas oKyVAS 
Kal mpodovracas' opiv” 7& b68w'® tas puxas 
ets Ta m7 Anon mpoayeTw"! daxpvovtas Kat Seo- 
pevous, Gua éeywv Kal evderxvdpevos’® Tots oTpa- 

1 yap VGH. 

dare unodev ébédeww ToAUaY Kal oTws Katadpovety om. R. 

det Ta Tameva vGH (der Ta Tameva G). 

K6chly : wor’ ai F: mér’ av ra VGH. 

Title om. F (but a break is indicated) GH (both without 

any break); probably composed by Koraes, since Rigaltius 

and Schwebel print merely the Latin caption ** Militum 


animos ex captivorum adspectu excitari posse.’ 
6 éyov 7d oTparevua VGH. 


440 


oO wm w 


THE GENERAL, xiv. 2-3 


These two misfortunes happen to armies, to become 
so terrified of the enemy that they are unwilling to 
attempt any offensive, and so bold that they are un- 
willing to take any precautionary measures. With 
regard to each the general must arrange his plans, 
and know when by voice and look he must make the 
enemy appear weak, and when more threatening 
and formidable. 


(2) [Encouraging the frightened Army] 


On the eve of battle, when the army, uncertain of 
the outcome of the war, is distrustful and fearful, the 
general, if he is able, should manage to capture some 
prisoners by ambush or skirmishing, or some men 
who have strayed from their own camp. If he 
learns that they are strong in courage and in body, 
he should either kill them on the spot or turn them 
over, securely bound, to men assigned to this duty, 
with orders to guard them, so that not many of his 
own forces may see them; but if they are weak 
and cowardly and spiritless, after threatening them 
in the privacy of his own tent and enslaving their 
minds through fear, he should lead them, weeping 
and supplicating, before his army, pointing out to 








7 FDGH: écarérpaxra ** omnes codd.” (Schwebel, mean- 
ing probably EN and the mss. of Rigaltius [except M)). 

8 ef duvnOn (duvn07 GH, -@et A m?) €Gd5w AaBeiv 6 orparnyés 
aixuadkwrous VGH. 9 dv’ axpoBotrodpevos F. 

10 FRGH: yevvaios Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

D FGH: xedXevoas puddtrew V. 

2 ayevets PGHv(*). 13 xpo////////hjoas G (lacuna). 

14 Ggicw . . . TpodovAwoas om. R. 

15 zpodovdw/////////av G (lacuna). 16 rod poBou F. 

 mpocayérw VGH. 18 FGH: éexviiuevos VGH. 


44] 


ONASANDER 


/ 3 A \ 
TLUWTALS, WS ayervets' Kal TaTeWwol Kal ovdeVvosS 
aio, Kal ws mpos ToLovTovs éoTly avdpas® 
A e / 
avTots 7 waxy SedtdTas OVTWs TOV OdvaTov, aTTOME- 
vous yovaTwy Kal mpoKvdAtouévouvs TavV €eKaaTOU 
ToO@V. emavalappet yap €mi TovToOLs 6 oTpaTos 
/ ~ 5) 
707 mpoKaTavevonkws THv roAcuiwy deus Te 
\ ~ 2 _\ 
Kat 7Ta0n Wuyns: acl® yap, 6 undémw Tis EWpaKer, 
>). / 4 A / ia] 5 lon LA a] / 6 ” 
eArriles* petlov yevioccba® ths adAnBelas,® ere 
\ A A / / \ > / A 
Kat T® Tod pédXovTos PoBw THY €Amida peTpEl 
mpos TO yaAemwrepov. 


XV. [“Ore dcadopat moAAat tOv ra€ewv |" 


Tafis 5° od pia mrod€uov,® zoAAai b€ Kat dia- 
Popo. Kal mapa Tovs OmAicpovs Kal Tapa ToOvs 
OTpaTEevopevous® Kal Tapa TOvs TOTOUS Kal Tapa 
Tovs avTiToA€mous,° dv Tas dtapopas 6 oTpaTnyos 
em avTav eloeTar TOV Koupay” a 8 av oby™ 
PROTO modAats apyclo® TapaTagect diya TeV 
én avTa@v TOV Tpay aT ov avayKynyv E€xovc@v 
voetobat, TatO” ws ev Kedadaiw Sieur. 


XVI. ["Ore apos To avrimdAeov Kat TO tdLov 
ovvta€er |4 


‘Immets pev O7) oTpaTnyos OvY OUTWS, WS Bov- 
Aerar, paGAdAov & ws avayKkaleTrar, Ta€er* mpods 


1 dyevets PGH. 

2 dvdpas éorw Rigaltius Schwebel Koraes. 

3 ef VGHKPA m2. 4 édrifew K 

5 Kochly (note): yiyver@a: (text): yevéoOac Koraes: yiverac 


vGH: ye F. Perhaps yeyevjcba. 
8 Schwebel: rats add\nBetas 2. 
7 Title om. F and no break indicated: in margin GH. 


442 


THE GENERAL, xv. 3 —- xvi. 1 


his soldiers how base and wretched and worthless 
they are, and saying that it is against such men 
that they are to fight, men who are so greatly afraid 
of death, who cling to the knees and grovel at the 
feet of every one. The army is emboldened at 
all this, since they know before the conflict the 
appearance of the enemy and his state of mind. 
For what a man has never seen he always expects 
will be greater than it really is; so also because of 
his fear of the future, a man measures his appre- 
hensions by reference to the more grievous outcome. 


XV. [The Difference in Battle Formations] 


Battle formation is not of one but of many and 
various kinds, with regard to arms and soldiers and 
terrain and enemies. These differences the general 
will have to know on the occasions themselves, but 
what pertains in large part to many formations I 
shall briefly summarize, without considering the 
details which, in the actions themselves, must 
necessarily be understood. 


XVI. [Battle Formation with regard to that of the 
Enemy | 


The general will arrange his cavalry not as he 
wishes but rather as he is compelled; for he will 


8 FC Leo, Tactica, xx. 182: om. vPGH Saguntinus Came- 
rarius. ° F Leo (/.c.): orparevoauévous VGH. 

10 gyturodevlous VGH. 

1 FCD: airév ... Tov katpov VGH. 

12 FGH: 4 8 ovyx v. 18 gouofee VGH. 

14 Title om. F: in margin GH: cuvrdta Koraes: cuvtaoces 
GH Rigaltius Schwebel. 


443 


ONASANDER 


yap TO avTimoAquov immKov Kal TO idtov oTHoEL. 
taTTéTw 8 ws Ta TOAAA KaTa Tas eK TapaTa€ews 
pdxas emi Képws,' a Kai” KaTa Tpdcwrov Kal eK 
mrayiwy mpocfaAdovres® Kat Tomw peilove xpw- 
pevot, peO ovs* otdK ér GAA TeTaypevor 


U 5 ~ ~ ~ ~ 
Tvyxavovaw, exwow amoypyolar TH THs tmmKHs 


ETTLOTHILN. 


XVII. [°Ore tods Yidods axovtiotas Kal to€dtas 
kat opevdovioTas® mpwrous otha THS PadAayyos |* 


A / 5 A \ / 7 A 

Wurovs 5€, axovtictas Kat to€dtas’ Kal odev- 
dovyTtas,® mpwrovs mpo THs dddayyos ta€eu® 
KaToTW pev yap ovtes mAciova Kaka dLabycovor 
Tovs ldious 7) Tovs TroAEious, Ev pécots 8 adrots 
ampaktov e€ovor THY idiav éptretpiav, ovl’ dzo- 
ywpety ava moda Suvawevoe Kata THY avatacw”® 
TOV dicovTiowy, OUT ef em pops Badei™ Tpo- 

Ov évenv aAAwv Kal mapa Toot OVTWY, OVOE 
nyoup 1AAwy ol v, ovoe 
pe ot opevOovijrar KUKAOGE TOV Otvov™ ee 
ps ied 

TAS opevoovns Tra,pd. mevpav cOTWTW prrteor™ 
omhuray Kat Tpos TOV popBov ay TUTTALOVTODY, 
ot TE Toforau mpotovres peev Tov aAAwv ets aura, 
TA OWuaTa Kal KaTa oKoTOV éKTo€evovor TA 
). 17 A be \ Xo av >] >) ~ 4, 18 
BéAn,”” peta d€ Tovs Adxous 7 ev adbTois pécots 


1 éx mapardgews . . . émixnpws F. 
2 kata Tas . . . iva kai om. R and Camerarius. 
> mpoBdddortes Vv (?)GH. + Om, 


o 


The ending is too much abbreviated in GH to tell which 
form is used. See below, § 1. 

6 Title om. F: in margin GH. 

7 cai roédrTas Om. F. 


8 F (without accent) R: cgevdonards VGH. 
$44 


THE GENERAL, xvi. 1 —xvu. 1 


oppose his own cavalry to that of the enemy. As 
a rule, in pitched battles he should arrange his 
cavalry in column formation, in order that attacking 
both in front and on the flanks and covering a 
greater amount of space (if no other soldiers are 
drawn up in their rear), they may thus be able to 
make use of their skill in cavalry fighting. 


XVII. [Placing the ight-armed Troops, Javelin-throwers. 
Bowmen and Slingers, before the Phalanx] 


The general will assign his light-armed troops— 
javelin-throwers, bowmen, and slingers—to a position 
in front of the phalanx, for if placed in the rear they 
will do more damage to their own army than to the 
enemy, and if in among the heavy-armed, their 
peculiar skill will be ineffectual because they will be 
unable to ‘take a step backwards in throwing their 
javelins or to charge forward and cast them, as 
other soldiers are in front of them and at their 
heels, nor will the slingers be able to execute 
the whirling of their slings, as their fellow-soldiers 
stand at their side and, in their turn, are caused 
to stumble in trying to avoid the whirling slings. 
If the bowmen are placed in front of the army, they 
will shoot their arrows at the enemy as at a target ; 
but drawn up behind the ranks or in among the 


9 FC: orjoe VGH. 10 gvactacw F. 

1 Badd\ew VGH Kéchly. 2 uév VGH, 

13 Kochly : .cgpevdovnrai xukdoce Tov dewoy F: ocevdorFrac 
(cpevdovirac GH) kékdous TSv Nivwv VGH. 

14 rapam\evpay éotw Tay F, 15 yidiow R. 

16 Kochly: dyrimadvrwy EF: dytimirrévtav VGH. 

17 F indicates a break at this point. 

18 EPGH: rots uésous VGH. 


4AS 


ONASANDER 


” Dg 1 / 2 « \ \ \ 

ovTes ets visos' To€evovaw,” wore mpos pev THV 

y” \ / 7 \ / Ss / ) 

avw gopav Tovov exew TO Bédos, avlis dé, Kav 
\ aA / ~ / > b 

Kata Kehadns minty THV Todeniwv, éexrAcAvobar 
\ \ / aA \ >) / 

Kal pin Tavu Te Avmety Tovs exOpos. 


XVIII. [Ilept tod &v rots tpaxéou toms TaTTELW 
Tovs ytAovs |* 


Ei 6€ cupBaivow® yiyvecBa® thv paynv év 
xXwplows Twas pev yOawadovs Tiwas dé Bovvoedets 
Eyovot TOmous, TOTE 67) pdAioTa Tods WAods eV 
Tots Tpayéow TaTTéTw, Kal 61, Kav’ advros Ta 
media, KaTelAnupevos Hh, TOV dé mroAEuiwv BEpn 
TWa THS padayyos oxBaders® OvaKaTexy” TOTOUS, 
KaTa ToUTOUS emayeToo' Tovs purous: paov Te yap 
Baddovres™ dToxwpovow amo TOV Tpaxewy, paora 
Te Tots avavrecw éravabéovow, av edadpot 
Tvyyavwow. 


XIX. [Ilept ro ywpia eyew tas mapardaées bv’ wv 
27 A e VFO AMIN A erie! > 
ofetrodaw ot yuAot evtos THY KovTa@V™ Eto- 
epxomevoe vVrrooTtéAAeobax |* 


7 A / \ \ / @¢ 3 

Eotw 6€ diaornipata® Kata tas Ta€es,* wv, 
b] \ > / ” / ~ 
ETELOaV EKKEVWOWOW™ ETL TpPOAyoVTwY* THY 7O- 


Aepiwv ta BéAn, mplv eis xetpas eADety Tas daday- 


1 thous R. 2 rotevcouvow F. 

3 FC: ravry ENPGH Rigaltmus ‘* alii codd. ut vid.” (but 
om. kal). 4 Title om. F: in margin GH. 

5 cuuBaive. VGH Kochly. 6 FGH: yivec@a v. 

7 kat RA m2. 8 FGH: 6x6a6n Pv. 


9 Siaxaréxer VGH. 
10 arayérw GH Rigaltius ‘“ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 


THE GENERAL, xvi. 1 — xrx. 1 


heavy-armed they will shoot high, so that the arrows 
have impetus only for their upward flight, and 
afterwards, even if they fall on the heads of the 
enemy, will have spent their force and cause little 
distress to the foe. 


XVIII. [Disposition of light-armed Troops in a broken 
Country | 


If the battle should happen to be in a country 
that is level in some places but hilly in others, then 
the light-armed troops should by all means be 
stationed in the uneven section, and then, if 
the general himself should have seized the plain 
and some part of the enemy’s phalanx should possess 
the heights, he should send against them the light- 
armed troops; for from the uneven ground they 
can more easily hurl their weapons and retreat, or 
they can very easily charge up the slopes, if they 
are agile. 


XIX. [The Phalanx should leave Intervals for the light- 
armed Troops to retire through the Ranks] 


There should be intervals within the ranks, so that, 
when the light-armed troops have discharged their 
weapons while the enemy is still advancing, before the 





11 Baddovtes VGH. 12 Om. F. 
13 FEN : ruyxdvovow GH. 


UGE 
14 kxov GH (probably xovraév): xrov VM (a copy of G): 
axovtiwy K (and others—Koraes). 19 Sudornua VGH. 
16 FCGH: mpdéers PD: mapardéecs Koraes. 
17 FGH: éxxevdoas P (‘* codd. reliqui omnes” Schwebel). 
18 tpoayayovTwy VGH. 


4 AT 


ONASANDER 


yas, emotpépavtes ev Kéopm dueEiwow' peony 
Thy dddrayya Kal atapdxyws emi THY ovpayiav 
amokop.ic0@ow: ovrTe yap KuKAevew avrTovs amray 
TO oTpaTevpa Kal KapmTTew® KaTa Képas acdadés 
€oT®— Taya ydp mov d0dcovow* adtrovs ev 
TOUTW ouUpuiEavTes OL ToAguLOL Kal pLécoUS aTro- 
AaBovres —, otre dia TOV TeTUKVWUevwV Pidle- 
ofa, Kal «ls Ta Orda éeumintrovtas Tapayov 
éumovetvy Tats Ta€eow GAAov pods aAXov evoeiovTos. 
at 6€ Kata Képas édodo. tav yYurAdv 7Aciova 
EET GE TOUS _ToAcptous, é€x mAayiwv aKOvTL- 
Covrwy Kal els Ta yupve. mrapaBialopevwy® Tatew. 
» O€ Ths odevddovns Gpvva, Xaderrarary Trav Ev 
Tots purois é€oTW* O TE yap j0A: 880s Ouoxpous 
av TH aépe AavOdver depopevos, aor dmpoopars 
advrderois® Tots T@V mroepitcoy euTrimrew" owe 
ow, avris T& THs e€uTTWoEws apoodpas pues 
Kal v0 TOO poiov® TpiBpomevovy TH dpe" To" 
Bédos exmrupwlev as Baburara Sverar THs capKos, 
mote pnd opdcba, tayd S€ Kat Tov OyKoV 
ETULVELV. 


XX. O7ws ache éav atop pds oupLpaxtas 0 
oTpaTnyos, i Oe moA€utot eVTop@ow, €7- 
dépecbar avtots* | 

Ei 5€ adros pev éevdens ein THs TeV pray 
cuppaxytas, ot dé" mod€uror TavTy mAcovextoter, 


delEwow GH: SelEwor Vv: Svetiwor Kéchly: denéwou Koraes. 
KaTakaurrev VGH. 3 ésrw Kochly. 
d0dcwow VGH. 

mapaBiatouéve P and ‘S quidam Mss.” (Schwebel). 
FCGH: dpuraxTws dmpooparws P Rigaltius A m?.: apuAd- 
KTws Kal dmpoopdtws EN. 7 FC: éurinmrea PGHA m. 


448 


a Ow em DO FH 


THE GENERAL, xrx. 1 ~ xx. 1 


two armies come to close quarters, they may about- 
face, pass in good order through the centre of the 
phalanx, and come without confusion to the rear. For 
it is not safe for them to go around the whole army, 
encircling the flanks—since the enemy would quickly 
anticipate them in this manceuvre, coming to close 
quarters and intercepting them on the way—nor 
is it safe for them to force their way through the 
closed ranks, where they would fall over the weapons 
and cause confusion in the lines, one man stumbling 
against another. Attacks of the light-armed troops 
on the flanks cause the enemy greater loss, since 
they cast their javelins from the side and of necessity 
strike the body where unprotected. The sling is 
the most deadly weapon that is used by the light- 
armed troops, because the lead slug is the same 
colour as the air and is invisible in its course, so that 
it falls unexpectedly on the unprotected bodies of 
the enemy, and not only is the impact itself violent, 
but also the missile, heated by the friction of its rush 
through the air, penetrates the flesh very deeply, 
so that it even becomes invisible and the swelling 
quickly closes over it. 


XX. [How to attack, without light-armed Troops, an 
Enemy who has many] 


If the general himself should lack an auxiliary 
force of light-armed troops while the enemy has a 


1 For other testimony as to the heating of the lead glans 
by the rapidity of its flight through the air see Lucretius vi. 
306 f.: Ovid, Metam. ii. 727 ff.; xiv. 825. 


8 6¢ GH. ee pvgou GH. 10 €y T@ aépt vGH. 
i Om, PGH. 2 Title om. F: in margin GH. 
13 veri Fk, 14 rattny VGH. 


2G 4.49 


ONASANDER 


e \ / \ / Yj 
Ol ev’ TpwTOOTaTAL TUKVOL TOpevedbwY? ExoVTES 


avopopnrers® Bupeous, | woTe oKémew Oda TA 
copara, Tots penKeow,” of dé pera TOUTOUS kat 
ot KaTomw TOUTWY axpt TOV TedevTaiwv brep® 
Kedadns apdevo. tovs Oupeods Téws EexovTwv, 
axpt av evTos yévwrTa® BéAovs: ovTws yap, 
ws etmetv,’ Kepauwhévtes odfev reioovrat® 
2 Sewov bo TOV exnBoruv. el O€ map’ ExaTépors 
7 Tov fidcv ein PonGe.a, pote ™po THs ex 
XELpos pans” diepopodibécav® Tots avrumdAous, 3 7 
PETA THV oupmoxny Tis padayyos éx mAayiwv 
emBeovres”” amoxpnodwy"® Tots Bédcow: ovvedav- 
vovtat® yap ets _oAtyov Kat ovy ATTOV GopvPobyTat 
7 / 
Tots TovwovToLs apivyTyptots. 


rur a A ~ ~ 
XXI. [Tlept rod pay eis odd phKos éxrTetivew 
\ / \ ~ > / 
Thv pddayya tas KuKAdoets THY €vavTiwv 
oBoupevous™ | 


Tas dé Kucdaoers puidrreabar BovAdpevos pene 
ovTws emt pLHKOS exTeweTw Thy Svvayw, WoTeE 
TouTav acbern Kat aBabA tovrnoa tiv dddayya 
—raxyv ydp tov ovpBaiver Tods moAeulous diap- 
pygavras adtriv Sdiodov movetcOa, Kal pnKeTe 
Tapa Kepas evepyety tais KuKAwoeow, GAA 
duexmrecovTas’® pécous KaTa vwToUv yiyvecbar Tov 


1 6¢ F, 2 ropevécbwoav VGH. 
3 Kochly : émiujces Q. Kochly : avdpounkeow Q. 
2 a RA m?. § yivwrra BF. 
CFC: : ws eltov GH: ee | (om. ws). 
8 anoovrat R. 9 udxes H. 
° axpoBorifécOwoav VGH. 11 FGH: émidévres v. 


2 droxpyncbwoay VGH. 


450 


THE GENERAL, xx. 1 — xxt. 1 


large force of them, the front rank men should 
advance in close formation, with shields the height 
of a man, tall enough to protect the whole body, 
and those who follow and the ones behind them, 
even to the last rank, should carry their shields 
above their heads, while they are within bowshot 
of the enemy. For thus roofed in, so to speak, 
they will suffer no danger from missiles. But if 
each army should have a number of light-armed 
troops, the general should order his own light- 
armed men to be the first to hurl their weapons 
against their opponents before the hand-to-hand 
battle; or after the clash of the phalanx, attacking 
from the flank, they should make use of their 
missiles, for thus the enemy will be forced together 
into a narrow space and will be greatly confused by 
such tactics. 


XXI. [The Needlessness of Lengthening the Phalanx in 
Fear of an encircling Movement of the Enemy} 


The general who wishes to guard against an 
encircling movement of the enemy should not so 
extend his forces lengthwise as utterly to weaken 
the phalanx by giving it no depth. For this would 
result in the enemy somewhere quickly breaking 
through; and no longer attempting an encircling 
movement on the flank, but piercing the centre 
instead, they would take their opponents in the 


3 gweraivevtar P Rigaltius and ‘*quidam libri” 
(Schwebel). 

ls Rigaltius Kéchly : goBounévas A: Po8ovuevos Schwebel : 
goBovuevov Koraes. ‘Title om. F: in margin GH. 

15 éxrewdtw él uqKos A m2, 16 Siavecovtas A m2. 


451 


ONASANDER 


5) ! A 4 opN \ , , 
evavtiwy' To de’ avTo py povov dvdAatrécw 
a > A \ / A 2A > ~ \ 
mabetv, aAka Kat Cnreitw mrovetv, av aobevA Kai 
Nerv KaTavojnoyn THY TOV ToAELIinV® dddayya—, 
Ath ¢ Aes) Z ? \ / 3 \ £ 
un? ovtws em otpav avoteAdéTw* THY Tapdataéw 
>] No / e rr 4 > > ~ £2 
ets 7oAd Babos trooréAAwy,* wor €x Tod pdoTov 
Tous moAeuious vbirepKepdcavtas evTos atti Aa- 
A > ! / 5 \ ’ / 
2 Bety. loxuporroteitw =pevrow ye Thy ovpaytay 
Kat TOUS Tapa mAevpay TOV KEepaTwv p17) eAaTTOV 
TOV TMpwrTootaTav: ovx ATTov yap® amoxwdAvov- 
> ~ 
ow ol KaT ovpay Tas KUKAwGELS THY Ertl Képas 
EKTEWOLEVWY, eav qroe" pldoas 6 oTpaTnyos 
TO péMoy amAwoas THY ovpayiavy Kal Tapa Ta 
Kepata® THs pddayyos dvaByBdoas* exatepwber 
TApAoTHGy tous KaTomW els TO m7pdcwmov TAY 
moreninv, 7 Kal mapayyeiAn Tots eplacpévois 
70) KUKAwOHVaL TA VOTA Tots THY Tponyouvpmevwy 
vwtows eyKXivovtas’® audioropov rovetobar TH 
/ 
Bas / \ / \ e ~ 
3 ’Ayyivous pev oTpatnyos tis moAAovs opav 
Tovs oAeuiouvs' atros eAdtToo'” oTpaTwwrats 
pérdrAwv Kwévvevew e€eAdEato Kal eémeTHdevoe 
A <> ) A 
TOLOUTWY émiTVXELY TOTWY, EV ois 7 Tapa ToOTA- 
putav odpdv ta€dmevos amesBe trax! TAaUTH HV 
KdKAwow TOV ToepLicny, 7 Tapwpeav eKhefa- 
prevos’® adrots Tots Opeow amoxAetoer Tovs drep- 
Kepaca.'” BovAopevous, dXlyous emoTHaas Em TOV 


1 rotro 6 Koraes. 

2 Koraes and Kéchly independently and so the tr. of 
Camerarius: zediwy F: refév VGH. 

® guctedérw GH. 4 Koéchly: dmrocré\\wy Q. 

5 Kochly : pév yap Q. 6 Arrov wéev yap VGH. 

7 46n VGH. 8 Kéchly: 74 mapa vVH: 7a rapaxépara G. 

9 kal mapa... avaBiBdoas om. F, 


452 


THE GENERAL, xxi. 1-3 


rear; and this very manceuvre the general should not 
only guard against but also strive to execute if he 
discovers that the enemy’s phalanx is weak and thin. 
Nor should he contract his phalanx, drawing it out 
toward the rear to great depth to such an extent that 
the enemy would easily outflank and surround it. 
But he should make his rear and the flanks of the 
wings as strong as the front ranks. For those in the 
rear will prevent the phalanx being encircled no less 
than those who are posted so as to extend the flanks, 
if the general, anticipating what is to happen, spreads 
out his rear guard and posting it on either flank of 
the phalanx opposes his rear to the front of the 
enemy, or if he commands those who are already 
encircled to turn their backs to the backs of the 
front ranks and fight on a double front 

A shrewd general who sees that the enemy has 
many troops when he himself is about to engage 
with fewer, will select, or rather make it his practice 
to find, localities where he may prevent an en- 
circling movement of the enemy, either by arranging 
his army along the bank of a river, or, by choosing 
a mountainous district, he will use the mountains 
themselves to block off those who wish to outflank 
him, placing a few men on the summits to prevent 


10 éykNivavras Koraes Kéchly (but the latter probably 
through a misprint ; compare his note). 

1 Kochly: uév yap boris roddovs 6pav Tr. r. FCv (dpwr F): 
pev yap doris dp@v Tovs toeulous tmoddovs GH. 

2 érdtrwow F, 13 wéd\Nov GH. os Lan 

 Rigaltius (in a note correcting C) Koraes Kéchly: 
aaoredetrac FC: arofeira: Schwebel (probably a misprint) : 
om. P Rigaltius GH (Kéchly’s apparatus is partly in error). 

16 Grwfetrar . . . éxeEduwevos om. P Rigaltius GH. 

7 CENA m?: tmép xképas F: trepxepdoras PGH. 


453 


ONASANDER 


dynA@v Tovs amokwdvoovtas' strep Kedadrjv 

4 dvaBavras yiyveoba Tovs 7oAepiouvs. od p7yV 
 OTpaTnyLK _ Ppornots evrab0a ovMapBdverar 
[Lovov, add. Kal 7) TUX” det yap emiTuyety ToLOv- 
TwWV xwpiwy: ov yap avTa” ye kataoKevacactat 
Ouvarov Tovs® Té7rous* Trav ovTey pevTOL TOUS 
dpelvous exAdEacbar Kat Tods GuvoloovtTas evvonaat 
Ppovipov. 

5 [Todds d€* eiwfacw of peyadn Suvaper Kal 
Tohvavdpy KEXPN[LEVOL pnvoevdes oXHWa moun 
cavres THs maparagews emLevat, vopilovres OTL 
mpooayovra® tovs moAeuiovs Kal Kat avdpa’ 
BovAopévous® cuvarrew, eita Kata TO HutKUKALOV 
els OO0v KUpToUpevous evatroAnbovTat TH TeEpt- 
éxyovte KoATw,® tas idias Kepaias émiovvamrovTes 

6 adAjAats” eis KUKAOV OXHMWA. TMpOos OUs aVTETTAK- 
Téov" ody Bde TpLyH 5é dSueAwy TH idiav dvva- 
pw trav” pwev dvetv® Exatépw péper KaTa Kéepas 
mpooparr€rw™ tots mroAcquiows, TH Se Evi, Tots 
eis Tov pecov KdArrov Tod pyvoeidods artt- 
TAPOTETAYHEVOUS 5” evayTios”” eordrw™ KaL 1) 
mpoayeTw 7'° yap pévovtes emt Tob Kukdoevdoos 
oXn[LATOS ob Kara peony tHhv™ dadrayya TeTaypevor 
TOV exOpav ampaKxrou pundev™ Op@vres eoTfov- 
Tal, 4 mpotovTes ets Tobpmpooder, el PovdowTo 
mpoayew padrayyndov eis eddetav éx TOO ovypato- 


1 droxwX\ticavtras PA m2, 

2 Kéchly: ai7é F: airg CEN: aizéd PGH and “alii.” 

3 Om. F. 4 yap KA m?. 5 of ye VGH. 

6 FPGH: mpocdéorvra: Vv. 7 FC: xara dvdpas VPGH. 

8 BovNouévors VPGH: BovAduevoe Koraes: avrov’s should be 
added, suggests Kéchly. 

9 FGH: xixdw PvA m2, 10 é\AjAos VGH. 


454 


THE GENERAL, xxi. 3-6 


the enemy from climbing above the heads of the 
main army. Not alone does knowledge of military 
science play a part in this matter but luck as well; 
for it is necessary to have the luck to find such 
places; one cannot prepare the terrain for oneself. 
To choose the better positions, however, from those 
at hand, and to know which will be advantageous, 
is the part of the wise general. 

It is often the custom of generals who are in 
command of a powerful and numerous army to 
march to battle in a crescent formation, believing 
that their opponents also wish the battle to come 
to close quarters, and that they will thus induce 
them to fight; then, as their opponents are bent 
back into the road at the points of the crescent, 
they will intercept them with their enveloping folds, 
joining the extremes of their own wings to form a 
complete circle. Against troops advancing in this 
fashion, one should not likewise adopt the crescent 
formation, but dividing his own army into three parts. 
the general should send two against the enemy, one 
against each wing, but the third division, that which 
faces the central hollow of the crescent, should 
stand still, opposite the enemy, and not advance. 
For if the enemy maintain this crescent formation, 
those drawn up in the centre of their army will be 
useless, standing still and doing nothing; but if 
marching forward they wish to advance in a body, 








1l airo’s raxtéov R: davriraxtréov VGH. 


12 rotv VGH: trois PA m?. 3 §votv ENR: doety GH. 
14 rpoBadrdérw F, tiled hp 
16 gvrimaparerayuevos F (corr. B): avtiraparatropévors VGH. 
MW égyaytiws VGH. 8 iotdtw R. vor F 
20 Om. vGH. 21 kal undév Koraes. 


455 


ONASANDER 


evdods amAovprevot OXTPATOS, aAAnjAous ex BAixpovar’ 
Kal Avoovat Thy Tagéw” pes yap emi Képws* emt 
THS avThHs pevovTwy xwpas* Kat payouevwv ody 
oidv Te TO yutKUKALov eis edOetav avedDeciv®? —- 
eva 67) TeTapaypévwy attav Kat AcduKdrwv 
Thy Tagw TH Tpitw Taypati Kat édédpw" 
mpooBadrerw® tots amo Tod pécov KUpTwLaTos 

7 mpoayovouw® ardkTws «lis Tovpmpoobev. ear 
de dtapevwow™ emt tod KotAov oxHpatos, Tovs 
utAovs Kat ExnBdodrovs evOa" Kat’ avtiKpd TaTTéTw 

g PadAdovres yap adtvrovs modAAa Avayjcovow. od 
pyv adda Kat et o€f mdon TH idta dadrayye 
mpooBaNreu'® KaTa Odrepov Képas™ TOV Trohepiony , 
ovK av apapTo. mpos THV €K TOO pnvoedods oxX?)- 
paros Kichwow ovTws av remy" émt todd yap 
of €€ evavtias eis yxelpas tévat mavoTpaTia Kw- 
Avopevoe Kat OAlyovs KepacOyjoovrar, THV emt 
Jarépov Képws'® wove Haxopevwy, of Kal mp@Tot 
Katy avay env cuppi€ovar dua TH Ao€jv epodov. 

9 Ovn axpnorov d€ Tore Kal dyTuTraparagdpevov 
b7o mdba TO oTparevpare ywpetv, ws KaTa- 
mem AnyjLevov ,"" 7) Kal emoTpepavTa _TapamAnotay 
vyn morvetaba. TH emixe@pnow™ ev Taget, eit” 
avbus —petapadopevoy™ ayremevat Tots émovcw: 
éviore® yap tro yapas of moAdusor Sdéavtes 


1 éxOrlYouow GH. 2 F marks a break here. 

3 Schwebel: émi xépas Q (émixépas FGH). 4 yopeias F. 
> Kochly: €ddeiy Q (€dOew F). © arpdyuar. A m?, 
7 épodw ENR (marg.): ¢¢66pw A m?. 

8 FC: mep:Badd\érw VPGH. 

9 rpocayouow GH Rigaltius ** alii codd.” 

10 Koraes: 6¢ 5) uévwow F: 6€ 6h uévovow VPGH. 

1 éyradda VGH. 12 Om. F. 


456 


THE GENERAL, xx1. 6-9 


changing from the crescent formation to a straight 
line, they will be crowded together and will lose 
their formation—for while the wings are remaining 
in the same position and fighting, it is impossible 
for a crescent to return to a straight line. Then 
when they are confused and their ranks disordered, 
the opposing general should send the third and 
reserve division against the men advancing in dis- 
order from the centre of the curve. But if the 
enemy remain in the crescent position, the general 
should post his light-armed troops and archers 
opposite them, who with their missiles will cause 
heavy loss. However, if he advances with his whole 
phalanx obliquely against one wing of the enemy, 
he will make no mistake in attacking in this manner, 
as far as the encircling movement of the crescent 
formation is concerned ; for the enemy will be pre- 
vented for a long time from coming to close quarters 
with their whole army, and will be thrown into 
confusion little by little, since only those of one 
wing will be fighting, that is, those who will neces- 
sarily be the first to be engaged because of the 
oblique attack. 

It is sometimes a useful stratagem for an army 
facing the enemy to retire gradually, as if struck by 
fear, or to about-face and make a retreat similar to 
a flight but in order, and then, suddenly turning, 
to attack their pursuers. For sometimes the enemy, 
delighted by the belief that their opponents are 


13 rpocBadde F: mrpooBadXdy V (rpocBadd\n GH): rpocBdadry 


K: mpooB8ado. Koraes. 14 wépos VGH. 
15 tro mond G, 16 képatos VGH. 
W xataremAnyuevwv VGH. 18 broxwpnow VGH Kochly. 
19 Koraes: weraBaddduevor Q. *0 évious F. 


457 


ONASANDER 


gevyew Tovs evavtiouvs Avoavres Tas’ Tages 
EmLKeOVTAaL mpoTndadvTes dAAwY aAAo, éd’ 
akivduvoy émotpésavras® payecbar Kat atT@ TO 
map €Amida tod orhva Odpoe* KatardAnéa- 
pévous els duy7v adlis tods mada diwKovTas 
TpémreaBa. 


XXII. [Ilept tod Eyew neywpiopévous émAexrous 
ets Bonbeay TOV KataTovovpevwy. rept? Tod 
exe eyKpvupara |° 

“Exero d€ Tov Kal oTpaTiiTas Aoyddas idia 

TeTAy[LeVOUS a7r0 TAS dddayyos worep éd<Bpous 

TOU TrohepLov | 7pos Ta KaTamrovovpeva pépn THs 

duvadews, io” e€ ETOULOV TOUS emuxoupygovTas” 

emayyn* Kal adAAws ovK oAtyov wvnoav aicuAres 
emeMovres On KeKoTLAKdGL’ ToUs TE yap 

TeTaraiTwpyKoTas® dn Tav diAwy avéAaBov 

Kat Tots moAemulous exAeAvpévois axudlovTes em- 

éfevto. ylyvorro 8 av te Kal tTovTov® ypyat- 

pwrtepov, ex’? THs Tapatdgews amwrépw oradiois, 

Omdaols av amoxphy at’T@ doxH, éxméeurbar” 

pLepos Tu” THs avToo™ omparias” ampodpatov Tots 

TroNepious, TmapayyetAas" odiow, émeidav cup 

Badrn™ Tots evavriots, TOTE Trovopevous Tropa. TOV 

oKoTa@v avaotavras'® émetyeobar® Kat pwadiora 


Omen ee 
2 PGH: émixéwyrat F: émixépovraa DENR: émidépovrac 


Koraes: émixéovtac Kéchly. 3 émucrpévavta VPGH. 
4 @Gapoety VGH. 5 xai mepi Koraes. 


6 Title om. F (and no indication of a break): in margin 
GH. The second sentence is probably a correction of the 
first, but it seems to be in all the mss. which have the other 
also, 7 émixoupnoavtas A m?, 


458 


THE GENERAL, xx. 9 — xxi. 2 


fleeing, break ranks and rush forward, leaping ahead 
of one another. There is no danger in turning to 
attack these men; and those who have for some 
time been pursuing, terrified by the very unex- 
pectedness of this bold stand, immediately take to 
flight. 


XXII. [Holding Reserves for the Assistance of 
exhausted Troops. Holding Reserves in Con- 
cealment| 


The general should also have somewhere a picked 
corps, stationed apart from the phalanx as military 
reserves, that he may have them ready to give 
assistance to those detachments of his force that 
are exhausted. These fresh troops are of not a little 
advantage in attacking tired men; for, besides reliev- 
ing those of their own men who are worn out, they 
attack in their full freshness a wearied enemy. It 
would be even more advantageous for the general to 
send a certain part of his army some little distance 
from the encampment—as far as seems best to him,— 
unseen by the enemy, with orders to rise up and 
hasten when the battle is begun, which they will 
learn from scouts. This is especially to be done 


8 kexomiakoras V (komiaxéras A m?): Kkexomraxéras GH. 


° rotro VGH. 10 ef VGH. 
doxn a’T@ Vv (Sox att GH). 
Si ces v (-» GH): éxméupas A m?: éxréuvo. Koraes. 
Bra Ee: 14 Koraes: atrod Q. 
1 grparias GH: orpareias v. 
16 VGH: rapayyetha F: wapayyetdat re Kochly. 
17 guuBadrrec GH: cvuBadr V. 
18 gvactavtas F: dvtacricayvtas V: avacteicavtas GH: 
davactynoovras A m?. 
19 érd-yec@ac Schwebel and Kéchly. 


er 


459 


ONASANDER 


TOUTO TounTeov, oTav mpooddKipos ovoa ovata. 
To8 Kalpod Kalvoreph” dogavres yap ot mroA€utot 
ToUTOUS exelvous eiva Kal ouppdaxous mobev® 
mKew Tots evaytiots, tows av eT Kal TpoovovTw 
mply 7 ouppigar TOUS emBadAovras eis puynv 
Oppnoacer,» od TocotTov, Gaov éotiv, aAAa metov 
émuevat mAnGos vopilovres. dAdws Te Kal ev 
avtots Tots dewoits éemiddverar modcuiwy arreipa- 
otwy* éxmAntrove. tas pvyds: mpoAauBavoveat” 
yap Tt xetpov, o0® melcovrat,’ doBepwrepov ek- 
éyovrat TO wéAdXov. 

"Exmnerixwrdrn Out twice Spacrixwrarn” 
padiota mavTwv, 7 Kara vwtov t&v moAcuiwv 
aidviduos émtBoAn," et mn Suvarov yévoiro mpo- 
extreuavTe® otpatiwt@v ovvtaypa™ viKTwp €K- 
mepieAbety Kedetoau’® tovs modeuious, iva Kart- 
Om atvTav yevwvTal TaVvTEs, ware ewbev ava- 
ordvras’" eK THs evedpas pera, TO ouppigar 
T™pos paynv Ta oTparevpara KaTo THY ovpayiav 
emupaiveobat tots moAeuiouss oddé yap pevyou- 
ow av ere opiow eAmis amoXcizoito’® owrnpias, 
otd els todricw Sduvapéevois’ émuotpadyvar dia 
Tovs €€ evavTias paxouevous, od eis TO mpdcw 
pepecbar dua Todvs KatTomw émiKepéevous.”” 

1 xadvarepn F: xadvorepet R. 


2 Om. vGH. 

3 FC: dpufoac vPG (épufoa H). 

4Q (cf. Galen xiv. 679 ed. Lips.): dmpooparwy Kéchly 
(with other suggestions): dmeipatwy Koraes. 

° brohauBdvovoa vGH. 

: Kéchly : ov FC (# C in marg.): 6 PGH ‘‘ceteri codd. 
ut vid.”: é» Schwebel. 

7 mnoovra R. 

8 6’ 4 F: 6¢ VGH: 36’, 4 Koéchly. 
460 


THE GENERAL, xxi. 2-4 


when expected reinforcements come too late for the 
battle, for the enemy believe that these are the 
reinforcements arriving from some place or other for 
their opponents; then possibly even while these 
reinforcements are still advancing and before they 
enter the battle, the enemy will take to flight, 
judging this force to be, not what it is, but much 
greater. Besides, the arrival of unfamiliar hostile 
troops at the very moment of battle lowers the 
morale ; for anticipating some greater misfortune 
than they are about to suffer, soldiers regard the 
future with greater fear. 

Most terrible, or rather most effective, of all 
manceuvres, is a sudden attack against the enemy’s 
rear. For this purpose, if in any manner it should 
be possible, a detachment of soldiers should be sent 
ahead by night, with orders for all to march around 
the enemy in order to come to their rear, so as to 
start up from ambush early the next morning, after 
the battle is begun, and to appear suddenly on the 
enemy's rear. For no hope of safety would remain 
for them in flight, and they would be unable to turn 
backwards, since the opposing army would attack, 
or to go forward, because of the detachment assail- 
ing their rear. 


9 dpactnpiwrary VGH. 1 Om. F. 
= émeBour7 ENR. 12 kat ef VGH. 
13 arpoexméupar Tt VGH. 14 gtcrnua VGH. 


15 Kedevoas 

16 dvacravTes VGH. 

7 é4y VGH: om. F (at end of line). 

18 JroXelroto VGH. 

19 Suvauévous PA m2, 

*0 At this point M is said to have a long interpolated 
passage, which, since it does not appear in M’s archetype G, 
need not concern us. 


for) 


461 


ONASANDER 


XXIII. [epi rod ev TO KaLp@ aire THS paxns 


expovety YappLoovva. Tots bmnkoois* et Kal' 
pevdy, ows cvupeper |” 


K \ 8 / / > / a_3 
at 0% mote mapimmalouevos euBonodtw Tots 
iN > \ b] \ ~ PS) ~ / 4 / »” 5 
dirows, ef prev emt Tod de€vod tvyou* Képws ay, 
‘yK@ow avdpes® ot emt tot Aawb To de€tov 
~ > \ ~ ~ ~ 

Képas TMV moAeuiwy, ef & emt Tod’ Aaob, viKav 
/ \ / / Dus \g >) > 7 
Aeyérw To didvov de€vov, €av Te Kal® Kat adn- 
Gevav 7 TotTo ywopuevov® eav TE pay Kal yap 


67)" 70 wseddos avayKatoy eizretv, omov “ wéya 
seikoe! opwpev'*”’ ofov Bonoat Boe pLaKpav 
amootatobvtos Tot! T&v mroAcuiwy yeudovos 7 
emt Oarépov KEpws ovTos 7) Ta peca™” ouvexovTos 
THS Gadrayyos, * TOI KEV 6 Tov TroAcpieov oTpa- 
THYOS i a Ros Baovreds,” 7) OoTis av wore 7. § 
2 Kat TadTa xp Body ovTws, wot dua” Kat Tovs 
moAeious KaTaKovew” ot tre yap didtor'® tods 
aogetépous axkovovtes emtiKudeoTépous avabap- 
povar Kat dimAdowot ylyvovta® tats mpobvpiats, 
ot te €x8pot ta odbdv abrav édkatTapata Tvv- 
Javopevor ovyKaraminroual tats dravoias, aor 
€oTw ore Kal ets puyiy 4 apa TO deSacbae Touadryy 
3 dyjunv opuav.° ovtws ToAAd Kis OUVIVEeyKEV Kal 
vmaxdos* 6 wev A. 


* Title om. F and no break indicated: in margin GH. 


3 rh R. 4 rixn V (tvxn GH). > ov F, 

6 Kéchly: dvdpes Q. 

7 Natod . . . él rod om. R (A m? with the note Xelre év 
dv riypapy). 

8 dv (kav F) re eal Q: édv re K6chly: «adv re Koraes. 

9 kdv Te. . . yeyvouevov om. R. 

10 kav GH. 1 FC: de¢ PGHv(?). 

12 vikos FGH. 13 Spwpev P (Spwpev GH). 


THE GENERAL, xxnr. 1-3 


XXIII. [Announcing favourable News in the Midst of 
Battle ; even if false it 1s advantageous | 


Sometimes the general should ride along the lines 
and call out to his men, if he happens to be on the 
right wing, “ Our left wing is defeating the right 
wing of the enemy,” or if he is on the left he should 
say that his right wing is conquering, whether this is 
true or not,! for deceit is necessary when “a great 
strife has arisen.’’? For example, when the leader 
of the enemy is some distance away either on one 
wing or holding the centre, he should call out, ““ The 
general of the enemy has been killed,” or “ the king,” 
or whoever it may be. And one should shout this in 
such a manner that the enemy also may hear; for 
his own soldiers, learning that their side is more 
successful, are encouraged and doubly eager to fight, 
while the enemy, learning of the misfortunes of their 
side, lose heart, so that sometimes they start into 
flight immediately on hearing such a report. In this 


1 There are many instances of such salubria mendacia in 
antiquity ; see especially Herodotus iii. 72; Frontinus i. 
11. 6 ff.; ii. 7. 1 ff. Actual instances when one wing was 
falsely told that the other was victorious are given by Livy 
ii. 64; Frontinus ii. 4. 11; Polyaenus i. 35. 

2 Homer, Jliad xiii. 122. 





alos hy. 

1 Kochly: xépws 7 éml ra péoa Q: 7) ert Ta wéoa dvTos or 7 
Ta ede éxovtos Or 7) Ta wéca cuvéxovtos Koraes. 

6 wv F. lv F Saguntinus Caer aris ws Oadua v. 

8 gia R. 9 yiyvwvtac PGH. 

*” FC: opév GH (and probably P and ‘*ceteri codd. ut 
vid.,” though Kéchly gives the obviously false reading dpudav 
for them). 


463 


ONASANDER 


\ U 1 iA A / > ~ 
Tovs @tAiovs’ apa Tots modepiows eEarraTrhoat, 
A \ / A 
Tots ev TA KpEiTTW, Tots de TA Yelpw pevdopevor. 


XXIV. [Ilept rod ofkeiovs* mpos olkeious® Kat 
YVwplILOUS TPOS yvwpijwous TaTTELW | 


y? \ ~ \ \ / > \ 
Mpovijov d5€ oTparnyod Kat TO TaTTEW aderdovs 
> > A > \ 
map adeAdots, gidous Tropa. pirous,” epacras 
Tapa maduKots*? OTav yap 4 TO Kwdvvedov TO 
mAyaiov’ mpoadiAdatepov, avayKn Tov ayaT@vTa 
diroxwdvuvetepov brép’ Tob méAas aywvilecbat- 
Kat 6% Tis aldovuevos pt) amododvat xapw av 
«0 mémovlev aicytverar KaTadimwy Tov evepyeTy- 
cavra® mpatos adtos ap€éa® duyis. 


XXV. [Ilept rod py de Eavtod diddvar Tov oTpa- 
Tnyov Ta onueta etre THs ovupPoAfs «ite 
dAAns" twos mpadews, AAG bia TOV HryeLover™ | 


A \ / \ / \ 
Ilév 6€ mapayyeAua Kat ovvOnua Kat tapactv- 
/ \ ~ ¢ / > / 
Onua diddTw Sia TOV Hyeudvwv: EemiovTa yap 
vA ~ 
KypUTTEW amacw (ldlwToV Kal amrElpov KoOULOF 
\ / > ~ 

KkaléaTnkev, Kat ypovos ev TH TrapayyéANew 
> / Weis esi to ? 13 Gd) 
avaNiokeTat, Kat GopvBos ood mavtwy addAjAovs 
2 / 14 70’ ¢ \ ‘0 / a 15 
epwravtwy'* ei 6 pev mpocébnké Tu mActov 
e e A > e ~) > / ~ e / 
Gv 6 otparnyos eimev, 6 8 adetAeto Tob pybévtos 

1 gl\ous VGH. 

2 AENRGH: oixous P ‘* et ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

3 Title om. F: in margin GH. 4 girls F. 

> FC: épacras mapa maidixois om. PGH ‘*ceteri codd. ut 

6 F: rod mAnoiov PGH ‘‘ceteri codd. ut vid.”: adngoiov 
TO Kochly : : T@ wAnoloy Koraes. 


7 bro F. 8-ENR Camerarius indicate a break here. 
® dpiacbar VGH. 


464 


THE GENERAL, xxim. 3 — xxv. 1 


way it is very often useful to deceive both one’s own 
army and that of the enemy by false news, good 
for the former, but bad for the latter. 


XXIV. [In the Ranks Friends must be placed by Friends 


and Acquaintances by Acquaintances| 


It is the part of a wise general to station brothers 
in rank beside brothers, friends beside friends, and 
lovers beside their favourites... For whenever that 
which is in danger near by is more than ordinarily 
dear the lover necessarily fights more recklessly for 
the man beside him. And of course one is ashamed 
not to return a favour that he has received, and is 
dishonoured if he abandons his benefactor and is the 
first to flee. 


XXV. [The General must not give the Signal for Battle 
or any other Action to his Army in Person but 


through his Officers | 


The general should give every command or watch- 
word or countersign through his officers, for to come 
and give orders personally to the whole army is the 
act of an unpractised and inexperienced commander. 
Time is lost in passing orders down the line, and 
confusion arises, as all the soldiers question each 
other at the same time. One man through ignorance 
adds something to what the general has said and 


1 See the Introduction, p. 343 f. 


10 Schwebel: rod crparod A Rigaltius H (G has lost all but 
otpa in binding) ‘‘ alii codd.”: rot crparnyod ENR. 

11 GH: eive G\Ans om. v (AP ?). 
- 2 juerépwy GH (queréo[ G). Title om. F and no break 
indicated: in margin GH. 3 ravras F. 

4 gowravTwy adAjAous VGH. 15 FGH: méor v. 


Qu 465 


2 


2 


ONASANDER 


\ \ Yj A A ¢ 
Tapa Tv ayvorav. det d€ Tots mpwToLs TyEpoow 
> A > / > A A > / 
elmetv, exeivous d€ amayyetAar Tots pet adrovs, 
eita TovTovs Tots Katomw, «iO «Ens axypr TaV 
teAcvTaiwy, Tovs TmpwTous Tots*® bad 7dda* on- 
v4 \ 
pLaivovTas’ OUTWS yap ev TAaYEL Kal peTa KOO[MOU 
\ > ~ 
kat pe? novyias etcovtat, mapatAnoiov’ Tod 
TapayyeAwaros tots ppvktwpodat yeyvopevou® 
Kal ‘yap eKeiveov, 6TaVv 9 Tp@Tos apn TOV PpuKrov, 
O OevTEpos TO" eT adbrov emUpoevoey, elf? 
6 TpiTos T@ TeTAPTW, Kal TéTapTos TEpTTW, Kal 
/ of 9 % 3 ie , 10. 27 
méumTos exTw? Kat Kal’ eva mavres® adAyjdAots, 
er > > > ~ \ / / \ \ 
wot ev o€et dia peykous oTadiwy TO onpavlev 
\ ~ A 
UmT0 TOD TpwTOV TAaVTAS ETLyVaVaL. 


XXVI. [Ilept tod px) pdvov cuvOyjpuata, aAAa Kat 


mapacvvOyuata™ ddovar |™ 


“i de TrapacwvEnja Ly Oud poris Aeyéobu, 
aAAa da owpaTos yweotu, n vedpate® XEtpos n 
oTAwy™ ouyKpovoel 7} eyKAicet Sopariou 7 Trapo.- 
popa Eipovs, & (Va [L7) LOVOV YEVOKLEVNS TOTE Tapaxys” 
TLOTEVOWOL TO Aeyouevw ovvOypyati—rodTo yap 
dvvavrat KaL mroA€ Loe KkatadaBéobat moAAdKis 
acovovTes—, aAAa Kal TO TapacwvOnware.' xXpyot- 
pwtatov oé mov TobTO Kal mpos Tas eTepoyAwo- 
cous ouppaylas TOV eOvOv- ovtTe yap Aéyew ovTE 
Eviievar duvdpevor™” dPwvins aAdAotpias atT@ TO Tapa- 

i el F. 2 a’rovs Tovras karorw F, 
Tovs VGH. 4 brorddas F. 
: he es GH: rapardAnovov V: mapa Tov mapamAnolov R. 
6 FGH: ywopévov v. 7 FP: rov vGH. 


8 kal rérapros méumtw added by Koraes. 
9 6 wéumros TH Extw VGH. 


466 


THE GENERAL, xxv. 2 — xxv. 2 


another omits something. But one should com- 
municate his orders to his higher officers and they 
should repeat them to the officers next below them, 
who in turn pass them to their subordinates, and so 
on to the lowest, the higher officers in each case 
telling the orders to those below them. In this 
manner the soldiers will learn the commands quickly 
-with order and calmness, just as a message is carried 
by fire-signals. For after the first signaller uplifts his 
fire, the second signals to the next, and the third 
to the fourth, and the fifth to the sixth, and one by 
one each follows the other, so that in a short time, 
over a distance of many stades, the message signalled 
by the first is known to all. 


XXVI. [On giving both Watchwords and Countersigns]| 


He should give the countersign not by the voice but 
by some gesture, as a wave of the hand, or the clash 
of weapons, or dipping a spear, or by a side-wave of 
his sword, in order that when confusion arises the 
soldiers may not have to trust to the spoken watch- 
word alone—for the enemy hear this so often that 
they are able to get it—but also to the countersign. 
This is most useful in the case of allies who speak a 
different language, for, unable to speak or to under- 
stand a foreign tongue, they differentiate between 


10 FC: xa@’ & (kadév G: xadév H) drravres VGH. 

1 GHEN: epi cvvOnudtwv A * ceteri.” 

2 Title om. F without indication of break: in margin 
GH: before iva uh AR. 

13M (conjecture): vedua F: vetuatos PvGH. 

14 6rdov KR (well thought of by Kéchly but certainly 
wrong). 

15 yevouévou moTé Tapaxov R. 16 F indicates a break here, 

17 otr’ éxovtwy Néyewv ore Evrrévar Svvauévwv R. 


467 


ONASANDER 


64, , / ! est , 
cuvOyuaTe Kpivovot Td Te hiAtov Kal TO* mroAgmov. 
d1dd000w dé tadTa, Kav pn paxeofar pédAAwow,” 
ev Tals mrapepBoArats mpos Tas adjAoUs Tapayds. 


XXVII. [Iept rod py Avew Tas Ta€els pute EV 


Tats dvatageou pnte ev Tats droywproect |* 


IlapayyeAreTw dé Kal Tas dTroxwpycets ev 
Ta€e. movetofar Kai tas* Oudgeus, iva TTOV TE 
opadAcpevot PAaTTwvTaL® wu Kat avdpa omopddes 
ev tats duyats wvmominrovres Tots oAeulots, 
mdéova te’ KatopPobvtes BAdmTwor KaTa Takets 
Kat Adxyous taxupdoTepot Tots Pevyovow emidawvo- 
evo, mpos b€ Kal aodaddorepot: mroAAdKis yap 
aTaKTws' émudhepouevouvs of mroAduror Peacdpevor 
ovpppovicavtes avfus ék petaBodjjs adr av Karo 
oTavTes eis Takw madwrtporov® eTOLnTaYTO THY 
diw€w: odAws dé pen dev opiow Gyretvov elvan 
AeyeTu® Tob pevew ev Ta€er und éemodadréorepov 
Tod dvew. 


~A Y 
XXVIII. [Iept rod™ dc’ emipedcias Exe Tov 
oTpatnyov Aaumpov éxTatTew TO oTpaTevma |" 


MepeAnpevov S° €oTw TH otpatny@™® Aapumpov 
EKTATTEW TO OTpaTEv“Aa Tots O7AoLs, padia™ 8 7 


' Added by Kéchly. 2 kal. . . wédAXNovow VGH. 
® AGH: vroxwpycecw v Kéchly. Title om. F without 
indication of break: in margin GH. 4 Om. vGH. 


5 Bddrrovrac GH: Brarrouevoe opddAdwvrat (cpadrovTa P) 
P ** ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

6 rrelova 6€é VGH: mXelova ré Koraes. 7 drapaxrws F, 

8 raristpopov GH Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

9 Neyovtavy VGH. 


468 


THE GENERAL, xxvi. 2 — xxvii. 1 


friends and enemies by this countersign. One should 
instruct the army in these signals in camp, even if it 
is not about to fight, as a protection against con- 
fusion and uncertainty. 


XXVII. [Soldiers should never leave the Ranks whether 


in Formation or in Retreat] 


One should command both retreats and pursuits 
to be made in formation, so that, if defeated, the 
soldiers may suffer less injury, when in their flight 
they encounter the enemy, by not being scattered, 
man by man, and, if successful, they may inflict 
greater injury on the enemy by keeping their ranks 
and companies unbroken, appearing stronger to the 
fugitives, and moreover being safer themselves. For 
often the enemy, observing their opponents advanc- 
ing without order, by a concerted plan about-face, 
form ranks once more and reverse the pursuit. In 
a word, the general should say that nothing is more 
advantageous to his men than remaining in rank, and 
nothing more dangerous than breaking ranks. 


XXVIII. [The General must be attentive to the Splendour 
of the Army’s Equipment| 


The general should make it a point to draw up his 
line of battle resplendent in armour!—an easy matter, 


1 This was a principle upon which Julius Caesar laid great 
emphasis (Suetonius, Julius, 67; Polyaenus viii. 23. 20). 

10 rod un 6c PGH Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” : roo &’ 
AENM (by conjecture). 
WAG Fire Ja 12 Title om. F: in margin GH. 

13 FCP: rév crparnyov GH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.”’ 
14 jnidta R. 


469 


ONASANDER 


\ 4 / \ / / \ 
ppovtis avtn mapaxadéoavte ta Eldn Onyew Kat 
Tas Kopulas Kal Tovs Oudpakas ounyew SewdrTepot 
yap ot emovtes haivovtar Adxou' Tots TOV OTrAwV 

> / 2 \ \ \ > y+ / 3 
albvypwaci,” Kat morAda Ta dv dpews SetpaTa 
/ A A > 
mpoeuTintovTa’ tats puyats tapdarrev® TO ayvTt- 
TOXepov. 


XXIX. [Ilepit rob &y 7H Kaip@ ths ovpPodAjs 
aAaddleu |° 


"BE / de A / \ NES) iA r A 8 
mayeT OE TO OTpaTEvpa Kat odv" adahaypwa, 
Tore de kat adv Spoua@: Kal yap oxpus® Kal Bor) 
Kal maTayos orev eSiornor Tas TOV evavTiov d1a- 
volas. avatewdovtTwy de Kata Tas epddovs abpdot, 

\ > A > A (3 W2abik \ va / 
mpl ets Xeipas eMciv, wep” Tas Kepadas peTewpa 
Td, gion m™pos’” TOV TAvov Boyd TapeyKAwovtes 
copmypevat yap aix pal Kal Aapmpa Sion Kal 
emdAAnra To/pouc.ppLc.ipovTa. T™pos  avrTavyevav 
jAtov Sewn aorpamny mroNepiou TpoeKmetrer” 
Kal Tautl'® pev ed yiyvoito Kat mapa Tots mo- 

A > 

Neptiows, avtikatamAnrrew avayKatov, et dé pn, 
TPOEKTIANTTEW. 

> ! /18 

Eviore dé8 ore ypHoyLov ev Kaup@ pen) poavew 
exTaTTOVTa THY duvapur, aAAa Téws evTos™ Too 
ydpakos KaTéxew, aypt” av KaTomTEVon THY TOV 


1 Xéxos R. 2 aldiyuact F: éO0yuacw GH. 
3 §elypara PGH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
4 mpoceumimrovra V (mpos €u- GH). 5 raparre: P. 


6 Title om. F without indication of break: in margin 
GH: before dvarewévrwy AR 

7 kal TO orpdrevpa ody Kochly. 

8 FENRGH: civadayue Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” 


470 


THE GENERAL, xxvut. 1 —- xxix. 3 


requiring only a command to sharpen swords and to 
clean helmets and breast-plates. For the advancing 
companies appear more dangerous by the gleam of 
weapons, and the terrible sight brings fear and 
confusion to the hearts of the enemy. 


XXIX. [Shouting in the Midst of Battle} 


One should send the army into battle shouting, 
and sometimes on the run, because their appearance 
and shouts and the clash of arms confound the hearts 
of the enemy. The dense bands of soldiers should 
spread out in the attack before coming to close 
quarters, often waving their swords high above their 
heads toward the sun. ‘The polished spear-points 
and flashing swords, shining in thick array and 
reflecting the light of the sun, send ahead a terrible 
lightning-flash of war. If the enemy should also 
do this, it is necessary to frighten them in turn, but 
if not, one should frighten them first. 

It is sometimes advantageous before a critical 
battle for the general not to be the first to form a 
line of battle but to wait within the camp for a time 


9 dwes R. 0 trdtayo EN: mayo. PGHA m?, 
1 KGH: io P Rigaltius **‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
12 kal mpds VGH. 13 rapexkNivovra VGH. 


14 rpocadd\nda VGH. 
1 Kochly: mpocexréure F: dvtiméure VGH. 
16 raurq P: ratty Vv (raitn GH): ratra Koraes. 
17 yiyvowro PGH Rigaltius *‘ alii codd. ut vid.”: éylyvovro 
ENR. 
18 FGH: 67 v: de? more Te xpnoiuov R. 
19 FC: éyyis PGHA m? ‘cet. codd. ut vid.” 
20 dxpis GH Kochly. 
471 


ONASANDER 


r , € , Saar aly gue / 

TroAELiwv TapaTagéw, O7TOLQ@ TLS EOTL KAL WS TETA- 
Nis Sle see ¢ , 

KTau KQL ed OlLWV LOTATAL KWPLWV. 


XXX. ["Ore det Tov oTpaTnyov 7™po Tod 7roA€mov 
ovMoyilecBar, Tis opethet” UravThoa KaTO. 
THv ovppodAnv 7T@ det Kal Tis TH aAAw*® Kat 

¢ a b / 4 \ 227 y 5 
ovtws KabeEhs eEeralew* Tods idiovs apyovras 
mpos Tovs TOV evavTiwv |* 


Kira mov tore” cavdAdoyioduevov, tivas Ticw*® 
GVTITATTEW xpT) Kal Tiva TpdTov, Womep® ayabov 
latpov mpokatavojoavTa” vooov owpmatos avrTet- 
dyew Ta aAcEjuata Kal thy Sdvayw eKTaTTEW, 
ws av dpior” avTa dogau" ouppepew* avayKa- 
Covrar yap ot oTpaTnyol moMaxces Kat” Tpos Tous 
omAuapovs TOV evay Tio Kal ™pos Ta evn Kal 
mpos Ta HOn Ta idta oTpaTevpaTa Koopety Kal 
TApATaTTELW. 


XXXI. [Ilepi rob, eav of evavtion mpotepevwor™ 
T@ immK@, exAéyeobat orevovs Tozovs |” 


‘Inmoxpatotvtwy b€ Tay Todcuiwv, éav  Svva- 
Tov, emrAceyécbw'® ywpia tpayéa Kal oTeva Kal 
Tap opn, &” KLoTA immdoia, 7 puyomayeiTw 

1 6¢ réraxrat K: dcaréraxrar Koraes. 

2 diros R: wdeider Rigaltius. 3 Koéchly : 7éy ado 2. 

+ éficdfew H(?)M (G has lost the middle of the word in 
binding). 5 dpxovra R. 

6 Title om. F without indication of break: in margin GH 
(badly mutilated from trimmed margins in G). 

’ FGH (70d GH): 70d réte PR: rodro roré Chokier: zrepi 


Tov wore EN. 


472 


THE GENERAL, xxrx. 3 — xxx. 1 


until he observes the battle array of the enemy, its 
character, arrangement, and position. 


XXX. [The General must decide before Battle who 
should oppose whom and thus in Order arrange his 
own Officers against those of the Enemy | 


Next the general must consider which troops to 
oppose to which of the enemy, and in what manner ; 
just as a good doctor who foresees an illness of the 
body, he must bring forward his defences and arrange 
his forces as it seems to him most advantageous ; 
for generals are often compelled to equip and 
marshal their own armies with reference to the 
armament, nationality, and customs of the enemy. 


XXXI. [Narrow Places must be chosen if the Enemy 


are superior in Cavalry | 


If the enemy are superior in cavalry, the general 
should choose if possible a locality that is rough and 
hemmed in, near mountains which are least suitable 
for riding, or he should avoid battle so far as he 


8 FGH: tiva orjocev P Rigaltius and all Schwebel’s mss.: 
tivas 6€ riow Koraes. 9 Somep yap VGH. 
10 FGH: xatarpovojcayta ENPA m? Rigaltius. 
11 66& v (60é) GH). 
12 kal. . . mapatarrev om. ENR Camerarius. 
13 20m VGH. 
A: mporepevouor VG (mporepevo[ H). 
15 Title om. F: in margin G (mutilated) H. 
16 éxheyécOw VGH. 
1 Kochly: rapédpn fxicra Fs rapdpa VGH. 


473 


ho 


ONASANDER 


Kara Ova, Ews av emt delous evpn TomToUS 
Kal Tots olkelots dpp.oCovras Tmpaypacw. + amo- 
NedcibOwv? dé TWeEs Kal émt TOO Xdparos ot Trapa- 
puddrrovres THhv TapenPorAnv oTpaTi@atrat Kal mpos 
THY THS dmooKeuns” gpvdakny, wa py KaTavonoas 
0 oTpaTnyos TOV Trohepiooy epniov ovTa Tréusn 
TOUS dpmacomevous TA eV atT® Kal Katadnoué- 
/ 
vous TO xwplov. 


XXXII. [epi rob pundev TAPAKEKLWVOUVEU{LEVOV 
Touety Tov oTparnyov |* 


Tovs jeer? yap TO idva Kalatpobvtas® epuwara 
oTparnyous 1 TTOTA{LOVS diaBaivovras 7 KpN- 
pevovs Kat Pdpabpa Katdomw rovovpéevous TaY 
diriwy,’ Ww 1 pévovtes vikdow 7 Bovdnbértes 
pevyew amdAwvrar, oUTE mayTav émawetv ovTe 
wéyew exw may yap TO TOparcerwOvvEerpevov 
padMov* ToAUNS eorly 7 yrayuns Kal TH TUXY 
KEKOWWVIKE mAetov? 7 TH Kploel. O7ov yap 7 
vik@vTa Set Kpatetv 7 qrrndevra Tots oAous"® 
eopada, mas Mie iw Ts 7 ppovncer TO 
viuKav 7 mpoatpéoer TO” nrTao0ar paprupnoctev; 
eya) O€ oTpaTLWTats re ek oTpatevpatos dido- 
ToAuws Kiwoduvevew emitpemtéov civar vopila— 
Kal yap Spa@vrés te petlov wvnoav Kat tabovTes 
otlev tocobrov éAvmynoav—, oTpatevmare Se TayTt 


1 rayuacw Kochly. 2 drodedeldOwoay VGH. 


mapackeuns VGH. 
4 Title om. FAENPR Saguntinus Camerarius: in margin 
GH: no break indicated FGH. > Om. GH 


47 4 


THE GENERAL, xxx. 1 — xxxm. 3 


may until he finds an appropriate place, adapted 
to his own circumstances. A certain number of 
soldiers must be left behind at the palisade to guard 
the camp and the baggage in order that the general 
of the enemy may not discover that the camp is 
deserted and send men to plunder its contents and 
seize the place. 


XXXII. [The General must do nothing rash| 


Generals who destroy their own defences or cross 
rivers or who post their armies with steep cliffs 
or yawning gulfs in the rear in order that the soldiers 
may either stand and conquer or in their desire to 
escape be killed, I am not wholly able to praise nor 
yet to blame, for everything that is ventured rashly 
is rather the part of recklessness than of wisdom, 
and has a greater share of luck than of good judge- 
ment. For in a case when one must either win a 
victory and prevail, or else be defeated and lose 
everything, in such a case how could anyone 
attribute victory to foresight or defeat to deliberate 
choice? But I do believe that certain soldiers of 
the army must be allowed to run desperate risks— 
for if they succeed they are of great assistance, but 
if they fail they do not cause corresponding loss,— 


8 uev dpnrat dia Kadapotytas F. 7 ditwy VGH. 
8 Added by Kochly, 9 mréov VGH. 0 érdos R. 
1 Kochly: més évraddd tis 7 F : wGs evratéa ry of (TH oF 
GH) vGH: és ay évratéa tis 7 Koraes: mas évratéa 7G wikav 
7 ppovjcer K. 2 700 F. 13 @ioTriuws VGH. 
44 éritparréov Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” A m* GH. 
A475 


+ 


5 


~I 


ONASANDER 


THv ddynAov exKupevew roxy ov doxipal. 
pdrdoTra 8 dpapravew ovTOL pot SoKovow,” ot 
TWes ev pev T@® viKav oArtya UTHCEW jee Newses 
Tovs moAepious, é ev 0€ TO qrraoba preyaAa Brdibew 
Tous didovs dmoxpavrat TovovTous oTpaTnynLaow. 
Ee d€ m7pddnAos pe opiow ) oAeBpos* etn, Kay 
pe? mrapaBoAous EVXELPNTWOL OTpPATHYylals, 7mpd- 
dnAos dé Kal 7” TOV Toei qtr erro amwdXeua, 
ToT ® ovK av pow do€evevy apapraver Peed es 
tas duyas TOV piriwy” apewov yap ev T@ ToAuav 
er adhjAw To? taxa pndé meicecBai ti Sewvov 
Gua Kal dpaoa Cite, n emt mpodynAw TH pndev 
dp@vras amoAeoBau mavTas aroAwws “houxalew’ 
drrodencvUTw™ pLevTOL [41) [LOvov ev Tots TowovTous 
ywplois, omov Kat aAnfevav ovK €oTL owTnpia 
tots devyovow, adda Kai &v TavTi TOTwW Kal TdO7 
paxn dLidacKeTw oud mAevovwv, OTL Tois pev 
pevyovot m™podnAos O° oAeOpos, ws av dn per 
efovolas emiKeLevwv" THY TodAEuiwv pndevos 
ett Suvapévov diakwdvew Tovs diwKovTas mav™ 
6 BovdAovra® diafeivar’* tovs gevyovras, Tots 
dé pévovow ddndos 6 Bavatos apvvomevois. ot 
TWES yap TeETELOMEVOL TUYYaVoVoW eV Tats Tapa- 
Ta€ecow,® ws hevyovres prev aloxyp@s azroAobyrat, 
pevovtes 8 etdKAEHs TEOvAEovTat, Kal xeElpov’ 


1 riyew H. 

2 Kochly: waditora & av. obrol wor Soxodow F: uadiora 5 dv 
obrol (otrol G, otro. H) por Soxotcw apapraver VGH. 

STO at. 

4 Kochly: cgiow dre@pos FC: cgicw (cdiow G, cdiow H) 
ein PGH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 


5 dy wo R. 6 drwded tor’ F., 
7 ditwy VGH. 8 Om. vGH. 
9 Héml . . . Hovxafev om. R Camerarius. 


476 


THE GENERAL, xxxu. 3-7 


yet I cannot countenance gambling with the entire 
army as the stake. Most of all those generals seem 
to me to be at fault who make use of stratagems 
which in the event of victory will cause small loss to 
the enemy, but in defeat the greatest loss to their 
own army. 

If the destruction of one’s army is evident, except 
through the use of some daring strategy, and if the 
destruction of the enemy by defeat is also evident, 
then I do not think a general would be at fault in 
cutting off the retreat of his own army. For it is 
better, by showing courage at a time when it is 
uncertain whether one will perhaps escape a severe 
defeat himself, to endeavour at the very same time 
to inflict a defeat, rather than, when it is certain 
that all will perish if they remain inactive, to keep 
quiet like cowards. He should not only point this 
out in those localities where in actual fact there is 
no safety for fugitives, but also in every locality 
and every battle he must show by many reasons 
that death is certain for those who flee, since the 
enemy would at once press on freely, as soon as no 
one is able to hinder the pursuit, and could dispose of 
the fugitives as might suit them; but for men who 
stand and defend themselves, death is not certain. For 
the men in the lines who chance to believe that if 
they flee they will perish shamefully while if they 
remain in rank they will die a glorious death, and who 


10 JrodeixvuTo R. 1 émixvemmévav R. 12 Grav VGH. 
18 FGH: Bovderau P Rigaltius “ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
14 §iadqvac FH. 13 gdevryovow R. 16 mpodtecw VGH. 
* 


477 


9 


10 


ONASANDER 
> \L ~ > A aN ~ A / 
ae’ mpoodoK@ow €K Tod Katadumety Thy Ta4éw 
) ° ~ / / \ 
n €K TOO pvuddTTEW, ApioToL KATA Tovs Kwovvous 
8 avOpes | efeTalovrar. Ovdrrep ayabov pév, €f mav- 
Tas ovTws Exe ywpns meica” otpatynyds, et 
> b) \ 
de pn, adda pévToe y® ws mdAeloTrovs: 7 yap 
A / / ) A 
mavTedets tmepieToinoato* vikas 7 puKpots €Aar- 
TwWpLAcL TEPLETIEGE. ; 
A > 
Tav 0 €x mponajpewos Kal mplv 7 oupBareiv 
ETWOOULEVDV oTparnyots” at Trap: avdTov Tov THs 
peaxns Karpov’ ETVOLAL viKns Kal GVTLOTpATHYNOELS® 
EOTW OTE kat mAelous Kat Gavpacuarepar ylyvov- 
Tou Tots" THY oTparnyuery <parewpiav HoKnKOoW, 
ds OUK coTw vTroonuavar” doy 7 a * mpoBovdAcioa. 
WOTTED yap ot KuBEepvnTaL mpos ev TOV 7oby exc 
yLevoy aVvayovTaL mavra eSmpTupevou’ Ta Kara 
THhv vadv, eretoav 6° eumréon xeyuwwr, ody 6 BovdAov- 
A INO GQ 5 jis 
Tat movovow, ard’ Oo avayKalovrar, TroNAa Kal 
™pos TOV amo THS TUXNnS émelyovTa’® KivdvvoV 
\ > \ ~ 
EVTOALWS rrapaBalAopevot, Kal ov THV amo THS 
\ 
jucherns etopepopevou'” pvnuny, ara" TH eK 
Tv Kaip@v Ponfeav: ovTws ol oTpaTnyol THY 
pev Ovvapw exTra€ovow, OTmws odior vopilovar 
cuvolcew, emeday 5 6 Tob roAguou mepioTy 
\ \ , \ , 20 a 
yeyiwmv moAAa Ooatvwv Kat mapadAatTwv* Kal 
1 Kochly: xelpova del VGH: yxelpov ef F. 
2 reicat F: reicee VGH. 
3 Kochly (after Camerarius): éei rots y’ F: ézei roi ye 
(ro ye GH) VGH: ei 6é uy, Tovs ye welorous Koraes. 
4 reperouncayvTo F (corr. by a later hand) vGH. 
TepleTrOLNTaVTO . . . €AaTTWuao. OM. R. 
mepiemecov VGH : repiémecev Kochly: 4 yap. . . mepiérece 
om. Camerarius. 7 rots ctpatnyois VGH. 
8 Koéchly: émwwoia vixac kavtictparnynoes F: éivoa kai 
avristpatnynoes VGH. 9 @avuacwwrepo VGH. 


478 


ao wu 


THE GENERAL, xxx. 7 — 10 


constantly anticipate greater dangers from breaking 
the ranks than from keeping them, will prove 
themselves the best men in the face of danger. 
On this account it is a good plan if the general can 
win over his whole army to this opinion, or, if not 
all, at least as many as possible, for thus he either 
gains an absolute victory or meets with but a slight 
defeat. 

Plans and counter-stratagems for victory that 
are originated at the very moment of battle 
are sometimes preferable to those which are 
conceived and contrived by generals in anticipation 
and before the engagement, and they are some- 
times more worthy of remark, in the case of -those 
made by men who are skilled in military science, 
though they are things which cannot be reduced 
to rules or planned beforehand. For just as 
pilots for their voyages, before sailing from the 
harbour, fit their ship out with everything that a 
ship requires ; yet when a storm blows up they do, 
not what they wish, but what they must, boldly 
staking their fortunes against the driving peril of 
chance and calling to their aid no memory of their 
past practice but assistance appropriate to the 
existing circumstances ; just so generals will prepare 
their armies as they believe will be best, but when 
the storm of war is at hand repeatedly shattering, 





10 yiyvwvta GH. 11 rots eb VGH. 

12 éricnuavar V: émionudavac GHA m?*: émonufva (?) C. 

13 Om. F which also marks a break after mpoBovdefoat. 

ss eENPTTWLEVOL P: é&yprnuévo. GH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. 
ut vid.’ 


19 odds C. 16 éreiyovrar Rigaltius. 
' eripepduevoc VGH. 18 dda kal VGH. 
19 of wév orparnyol Thy Sivauy F, 0 rapadatrwy GH. 


479 


ONASANDER 


TouKktAas eTaywv TEeploTacets, 7) THY aToBawovTwr" 
év opBaduots oyus emulnret Tas eK TOV Kaupa@v 
emwvotas, ds 7 dvayKn Ths TUxns wadrov 7 7? 
Evin THS €treiplas broBaAAer. 


XXXIII. [Ilepit rod 7 Tov otparnyov atroxerpt 
mroAeuety |* 
Mayéobw d5€é 6 oTpaTnyos avTos mpounbéorepov 
nt Tohunporepov, 7 Kal TO Topdmay amexeobu 
Tod’ Tots moAeulous eis yetpas iévary Kal yap «i 
KaTa® Tovs ay@vas avuTrépBAntov" avdpiav eicevéy- 
KaiTo,° Tocotdrov ovdev woheAjoar Svvatat oTpa- 
Teva. HaxXoperos, Ogov amroBavesy Pardxpac: _OTpa- 
THYOB yap ? yveopm mAgov ioxver zis popns: 
owpLaTos puev yap avdpia Spdoai tuo péya Kat 
oTpaTiw7yns SUvaTat, yvwpns dé mpounbeta Bov- 
2 Acdoat TL Kpetrtov" ovdK aAdos. ovTrep 5 av 
TpoTrov, et KuBepyyTys adeyuevos THV oidKwv, a 
del Tovs vavTas” movetv, atdtos mpatTot, Kuwdv- 
vevew av oupPain To oxd¢gos, ToUTOV, €l OTpATY- 
yos* amootas Tot yuan te Bovrcvew emi Tas 
TOV otpariwT ay KkataBaivor xpelas, 7 T@v 
oAwv"* axuBépyntos apérera THY GvayKaLoTEepay a- 
3 ss moujce. PorGevav. opovoy on Kpives 


*® otparnyov eutrapaBardobar"® rH EavTod wux7™ 


1 FC: drouawovtwy GH: darouerdvTwr P. 


2 Om. 7 F. 3 Title om. F: in margin GH. 
4 4 uhm VGH. > Om. R. 8 ei kal kara VGH. 
7 FGH: trép8rdnrov P Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

8 eisnvéyxato VGH. ° Om. vGH. 


10 dydpia dvdpaca Ti F (dvdpelac Spaca Ti GH). 
11 xpeitrwy Koraes. 


480 


THE GENERAL, xxxu. 10 — xxxim. 3 


overthrowing, and bringing varied conditions, the 
sight of present circumstances demands expedients 
based on the exigencies of the moment, which the 
necessity of chance rather than the memory of 
experience suggests. 


XXXII. [The General should not himself enter Battle] 


The general should fight cautiously rather than 
boldly, or should keep away altogether from a hand- 
to-hand fight with the enemy. For even if in battle 
he shows that he is not to be outdone in valour, he 
can aid his army far less by fighting than he can 
harm it if he should be killed, since the knowledge 
of a general is far more important than his physical 
strength. Even a soldier can perform a great deed 
by bravery, but no one except the general can by 
his wisdom plan a greater one. If a ship’s captain 
leaving the helm should himself do what the sailors 
ought to do, he would endanger his ship ; in the same 
way, if the general, leaving his function of wise 
direction, should descend to the duties of a simple 
soldier, his neglect of the whole situation, due to his 
lack of governing, will render useless the common 
soldier’s mere routine service. Similar, I think, is 
the notion which the general gets into his heart 


122 FC: rais vairass PGH Rigaltius ‘* plerique codd.” 
(Schwebel) om. roe GH. 

13 rodTo mote? oTparnyos * ei VGH. 

i Kochly : i Tey duewovwy F: n yap Tov dwewv dye vGH: 
perhaps 7 Ty dwewdyvwy can stand. 15 +6 rov Koraes. 

© exmapaBddrecbar K: éxrapaBahdr€éobae GH. 

W Wux7 (poxn corr. by marg. gloss misplaced at ouumaons 
to yux7 GH) 716 r9s VGH: Yux7 TotT0 Te Tijs KGchly. 

21 481 


ONASANDER 


™@ THS oupTaons, el meigerat TL, Suvdpews 
den Beiv" el ep, ev @ Tob oUpLTaVTOS 7) owTnpia 
oTpaTevpatos €oTUW, obros ovoev el rebungerau’ 
TeppovTiKe, TO TAY atpeiTar ovvdtadOeipar, Kal 
> ~ > ~ 
opbas 6? av tis airedoauro ToOTOV as dmpaKxTov 
oTpaTnyov p-aMov 7 avOpetov. 6 pev yap Troha 
yoru OTpATNYNTGS . dpreabycerar CEMVUVO[LEVOS 
emt Tats amo wbuyhs evmpayiats, darts S ovTws 
azeupoxaNdos €oTw, wor av, et py dia pays 
ets yetpas eAOou Tots rodeious,A oddev avTov 
a€vov etpyaobau’ vopilew, ovK avdpetos, aAAd 
dAoyos* Kal ToAunpds eoTw.” odev emdaiven® 
/ a \ 
pev Se TH AnPe TO diAoKwduvov, Wa TV 
mpobvpiav exxadnrar® tev oTpaTwwTav, aywvi- 
LecBar dé aodadréorepov, Kat tod Oavarov pev 
A \ 
KaTappovetv, €l TL TAaOXOL TO oOTpaTevpa, pnd 
a NOEL ¢ / A 0 \12 \13 \ 
avTov" atpovuevoy Cav, cwlouevov de” Kat? rH 
297 / i ” \ > 7 \ 
idiav duddtrew Wuxjv: dyn yap eTLKVOEOTEPA TQ 
tav diAiwv™ ovra MOTE oTpaTnyos amroBavay 
EUELWOEV* OL jeev yap MTALOVTES evraveldppyoav 
> 
TO avtimadov aoTpaTtyynTov idovTes, ot 6 evdTu- 
xobvres edvabdpunoay Tov td.ov ryeuova Cntobvtes7 
ctpatnyod 8 €or, TO mapimmalecBar tats Ta- 
Ecow, émudaivecbat tots Kwduvevtovow, emawelv 
Tovs avdpilouévous, ametrciy Tots amodeAdor, 
a \ , > A 115 ¥ 
mapakanety tovs péAAovtas, avamAnpoty To” EéX- 
deirov, avtyserayew ei Séor Adyov, Emapvvew Tos 
1 rod cUumavtos . . . TeOvnterac om. ENPRV Camerarius. 
2° Orn. wild: 3 wore VGH. 
4 FC: rév rodeulwy P Rigaltius Schwebel’s mss. GH. 


5 elpyacrae P Rigaltius Schwebel’s mss.: #pyacrac GH: 


Hpyaocta R, 
6 Added by Kéchly : cat del. Koraes. 


482 





THE GENERAL, xxxm1. 3-6 


when he thus disregards the welfare of his whole 
force in the event of accident to himself; for if 
he, with whom the safety of the whole army lies, 
has no care lest he himself should die, he prefers 
that everyone should die with him, and rightly he 
would be censured as an unsuccessful rather than 
a courageous general. He who has accomplished 
many feats of generalship through his wisdom must 
be satisfied with the honour for his intellectual 
successes, but he who is so stupid that, unless he 
comes to close quarters with the enemy, he believes 
he has accomplished nothing worthy of mention, 
is not brave but thoughtless and foolhardy. Hence 
the general must show himself brave before the 
army, that he may call forth the zeal of his soldiers, 
but he must fight cautiously ; he should despise 
death if his army is defeated, and not desire to live, 
but if his army is preserved he should guard his 
personal safety, for sometimes the death of a general 
lessens the glory of his army, since the defeated 
enemy is encouraged, perceiving that its opponents 
are without a general, and the successful army is dis- 
couraged, feeling the need of its own general. The 
duty of the general is to ride by the ranks on horse- 
back, show himself to those in danger, praise the 
brave, threaten the cowardly, encourage the lazy, 
fill up gaps, transpose a company if necessary, bring 


7 F indicates a break here. 

8 jmrodaiver VGH. 9 67 F. 

10 éxxadetrat P Rigaltius ‘* cet. codd. ut vid.” GH. 

1 Kochly : undé abrov (?) v: undeavtov GH: née airov R: 


pnd airov F, 2 ai, fev cwfouev ovdé R. 
13 FGH Saguntinus Camerarius: om. v. 
14 gov VGH. 


15 wédovTas avatAnpody ts RM (conjecture) Camerarius. 


483 


ONASANDER 


Kapvovet, mpoopadolar Tov Kaipov, THY WpaVv, TO 
peeAdov. 


XXXIV. [Ilepi tod edepyerety Kata TO éTpov eva 


4 ~ > / 1 
EKaOTOV TOV avdpayalovyTwr’ | 


‘Avaxaheodpevos 0 €k THs pads mp@Tov jev 
GTo0dLooTW Tots Meots Ouotas Kal Toumas,” ais €k 
Tob Kaupod xpjovact Tapert, TO voprlopeva 
XaploTHpia ETA THV TOO ToA€jLov mavrTehh viKny 
emayyeAAcpevos* amodwoew: Eemerta Tovs ev 
aplotous é€v Tots Kwodvvors e€etac0evTas TYyLaTw 
dwpeats Kal Tysats, als vowos, Tovs dé Kakovs 
2 havevtas Kodalérw Tysat 8 eoTwoav pev Kat 
at Kata tTa®° maTpia Kat Kata’ Ta Tap €kda- 
GTOLS vouLLa? oTpaTynyiKal® dé adrat- travo7AiaL,® 
Koopot, Aadtpwv ddcets, TEVTNKOVTAPXUALs EKa- 
TOVTAPXUAL, doxayiar, Tagewr'? abnynces, Kal 
Giles dAAa at” Kata vomous map éKaoTOLS Tyepovian” 
Tov’ pev lOiwT@v Tots avdpayaljnoacw at jtrous 
efovoial, Tov d€ TyEpovev Tots aprarelaaows 
at jpeilous Tyepovea: obra yap drorBat te? 
peyaAowuyor Tots 7301) TO yevvatov elpyaopevols 

>? 
mpoTpoTat Te avayKata. Tots Tov avT@v eémt- 


1 tov dvipayabodvra GH. Title om. F without indication of 
break: at rév ev idwwray § 2 (or a little above GH) Q: in 


margin GH. 2 roumais F 
3-C: xpyora Q. 4 émayyeAduevos VGH. 
5 F indicates a break here. 6 GEN: om. FvPH. 


K6chly: kai 7a map’ F: kat rap’ Q. 
FENR: orparnyxais P Rigaltius GH ‘‘ceteri codd. 
ut vid.” 

9 ENR: ravorNias F: ravordas P Rigaltius GH * ceteri 
codd. ut vid.” 10 Noyayla: Tdgewy: F: rdéews VGH. 

1 Om. vGH. 12 Del. von Rohden. 


484 


co 


THE GENERAL, xxxitt. 6 — xxxiv. 2 


aid to the wearied, anticipate the crisis, the hour, 
and the outcome. 


XXXIV. [Conferring Rewards proportional to the 
Valour of each| 


On returning from battle, the general should first 
offer to the gods such sacrifice and festal celebrations 
as the circumstances permit, promising to offer the 
customary thank-offerings after complete victory; 
then he should honour those soldiers who have faced 
danger most bravely with the gifts and marks of dis- 
tinction which are usually given, and he should 
punish those who have shown themselves cowards. 
Honours should be bestowed according to tradition 
and custom in each case. Those bestowed by 
generals! are the following: full equipments of 
armour, decorations, spoils, and appointments to 
commands such as over fifties, over hundreds, over 
companies, over squads, and the other parts of com- 
mand prescribed by the laws of the country in 
question. The bravest of the private soldiers should 
receive the lesser commands, and those of his officers 
who have distinguished themselves should have the 
higher commands, since these rewards strengthen 
the self-esteem of those who have deserved well, 
and encourage others who desire similar rewards. 

1 Or, reading orpatnykal 6€ attrac wavomNiac and taking 
orparyyexal with ravorNa (Schwebel and Konstantiniades), 
the meaning is ‘“‘full equipments of armour for generals.”’ 


Possibly the words wevrnxovrapxiat . . . ExdoTas Ayeuoviat 
belong after ai weifous Fyeuoviac just below. 


13 y indicates a break at this point (but not FGH). 
14 FCEN: dpicretovor P: -o.w GH Rigaltius. 
15 gi duoBai te kal VGH. 


ONASANDER 


A a \ \ \ > / ~ 
3 Gupotow. dmov dé Ty pev azrodidora Tots 
ayalois, Tyswpia 8° od mapamtéuTetar THY KaKa@v, 
evTatla Kadas éAmidas exew avdyKn TO oTpa- 
/ cL \ \ > / ¢ £ 
ToTedov ol prev yap epoPyOycav apmapTavew, 
€ y 2 t 
4ot dé eprornlncav avdpayaletv. ev0a" peév- 
TOL xen kat VuK@VTG pea) Kar” avopa jeovov dporas 
EKTIVELY, * ada. Kab 7@ OUELTIAVTL orparevpare TOV 
nan var’ emiKkapiiav* a7odwdvat: Ta yap’ TeV 
CoA eMLTpETET Tots OTpaTiorats Svapmalery,® 
" Xapaxos  amrooKeuys 7 Ppouptou KUPLEvOELEV, 
ore’ dé Kal ToAEws, €t pn Te péAdou _Trept avThs 
5 xpnorotepov BovAcvew. ovTws yap av Kat pad- 
ora® nmw téAos eiAnddros Tob ToAguov ovvoicou” 
™pos Ta peAdovTa mpoOuporepov él was pdxas 
avTav evovTw, cl p17) vopilojey TOUS per On- 
peuTucods Kuvas deAca lew dvayKatov elvat Tots 
Kuvynyots atwate O@npiwv't Kat tots tod avAdAy- 
d0évros Cawov omdAdyxvois, Tots 6€ vuKaoL oTpa- 
TWWTaLS TA TOY YTTHUEVWY" Els mpoTpoTVY™® oD 
: / if, 14 / > 5 / 
para 57 Te cuudépov azrodidovar. 


XXXV. a’. ["Ore od” ypr mavrore emutpémew Tas 
dpTayds, Kal OTL TA GWuaTa ov xp7) dpmalew, 
aAAa TOV oTpaTnyov mimpacKew |* 


> 3 
Tas 8° apmayas ovr emt maons pans em- 
, JS BOE ape 
TpeTTEoV, OVO atel”” madvrwv, adr’ dv pev, dv & 


1 At this point GH indicate a break. 
2 At this point F indicates a break: évraiéa VGH. 
3 éxrelvew VGH. 
4 FGH: émixapdiay P: émi kapdtav ENRV. 
> Om. vGH, reading émirperrérw dé. 
6 domdfew A m?. 7H F. 


486 


THE GENERAL, xxxrv. 2- xxxv. 1 


Whenever honour is paid to the brave and punish- 
ment of the cowardly is not neglected, then an 
army must have fair expectation; the latter are 
afraid to be found wanting, the former are am- 
bitious to show prowess. It is not only necessary 
in victory to distribute rewards to individual men 
but also to make recompense to the army as a whole 
for its dangers. The soldiers should be allowed to 
plunder the possessions of the enemy if they should 
capture a camp or baggage train or fortress, or 
sometimes even a city, unless the general intends 
to put it to a more profitable use. This course will 
serve well the interests of the future, especially if 
the war is not ended, since the soldiers will be 
more eager to enter battle, unless we are to believe 
that, while huntsmen must entice their dogs with 
the blood of wild beasts and the entrails of the 
animal which the dogs have caught, nevertheless it 
is not at all advantageous to give the possessions 
of the defeated enemy, as encouragement, to the 
victorious army. 


XXXV. (1) [Undiscriminate Pillage must not always be 
permitted ; Prisoners must not be regarded as Loot, 
but must be sold by the General] 


Plundering should not be permitted after every 
battle nor in the case of all kinds of property, but 


8 Kochly: ére GH: én P Rigaltius “alii codd.”: gr 


DERN. 9 Bovrtevery . . . uddiora om. F. 
10 Koraes: cuvoicesQ. 1 Onpiov VGH. © jrrapévwr F. 
13 rpovounv VGH. 14 Om. vGH. 15 6rc o¥ om. V. 


16 Title in VGH only: om. Q: in margin GH. 
 ért vGH: del KGchly. 
487 


ONASANDER 


ov, TOV S€ cwudTwY HKLoTAa’ TadTa dé TimpadcKeL 
27Tov oTpaTnyov. et d€ ypnuatwy déor Kal damavys 

Kowns Kal peydAns, Kal doa ayeTar Kal déperar 
3 7av?’ ws adrov avaméumecbar KypuTTéTw. yvody* 

6° av avros apiota mpos Tovs Katpovs, et Ta” 
mavra d€ou Aap Paver, elT €K pLepous, elte pnOev 
aov® eTUNEV” ov ye pny eotu moA€pov" Kat Tots 
Kowots eivar ypnuatwv darbiAevay Kat Tots oTpa- 
TUT US dvemucedAutov" apeheay: on O€ Kal 
Tapa Tovs’ TOV yTTHLEVwr® mAovrous Kal Tapa 
Tas TOV Tomo eddauovias at wdércral odior 


daxirA€otepar yiyvovTa..? 


B’. [Ilept atypadarewv | 


\ \ > > S. AN e 5A. ” 
4 Lovs d€ atywadwrous, €av 0 7oAEos ETL oUY- 
oo \ / \ ~ \ 
eoTws 7, p71) KTEWETW, padioTa ev THV™” Tpos 

‘4 e / \ ~ ¢€ \ / 
ovUs €oTw 0 70AEmos, Kav boKH OL, TOUS CULpaxous™ 
> A / \ \ \ > / \ 
dvaipetv, nKioTa Se Kat Tovs’* Evdo€oTaToVs Kal 

\ \ A / > 4 \ 
Aaumpovs mapa Tots modelos, evbupovpevos 7a 
~ / \ \ / ~ / 
adynra THs TUxNS Kal TO TaXivTpoTOYV TOD SaLpoviov 
~ \ \ ~ he vf 
dirotvros ws Ta moAAa vewecay, Ww et” TiwWewV 

Se TG NON , a \ / 5 ’ 
atro'® 7 cwudatwv, wv odvs mdUos, 7 Ppoupiov 

1 yvoin VGH. 2 eire VGH. 

3 FGH: om. P Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.” 

4 Kochly: ore uqv éort F: ob (08 GH) yé unr éorly Rigal- 
tius GH and ‘‘codd. ut vid.”: wiv. . . Kevdvvous (Ch. xxxvii. 
4) om. G, by loss of one leaf in binding. 

> mo\éuw Koraes. 

6 émixwduTov Rigaltius Schwebel ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.”: 
émuxwAuTov H. 7 wap’ atrovs F. 


8 nrrwuévov FH. 9 ylyvervra H. 
10 Title om. FHA: without indication of break in FH. 


488 


THE GENERAL, xxxv. 1-4 


only in the case of certain things, and least of all of 
prisoners, for these should be sold by the general. 
If he lack money and resources to meet a large 
public expense, he should order that all the 
plundered property, including the live-stock, be 
turned over to him. The general will know what 
is best according to the circumstances, whether to 
seize everything or a part or nothing, of that on 
which he chances ; certainly it is not the character- 
istic of war to cause both abundance of wealth 
to the community and unlimited gain to the 
private soldiers; in fact it happens sometimes that 
the gains of a victorious army are proportionate 
to the wealth of the vanquished and the prosperity 
of their territory. 


(2) [Prisoners] 


Prisoners, if the war is still in progress, the general 
should not kill—at the very most he may kill, if he 
thinks best, the allies of those against whom the 
war is directed, but least of all those who stand in 
highest repute and position among the enemy, 
remembering the uncertainties of chance, and the 
reversals caused by providence, which usually brings 
retribution. His purpose should be, if his army 
should capture certain prisoners for whom there is 
a great desire in their own country, or some strong- 


1 FCH: oveords P: cuverds EM (G missing) NV: cuvexas 
R (?). 12 Capps: Tovs Q. 

13 doxjon (Soxqcer H) Tots TUMpAX OLS vH Saguntinus Came- 
rarius : padvora, bev, Kav Soxy avrots, mpos ots EaTiv O TédNELOS, 
Tovs cupudxous Kochly. 14 kai TéTe ToUs Kochly. 

15 Kochly after C: veuecdv ei F: veuecav 7 PH Rigaltius 
**ceteri codd. ut vid.” 16 ai@is F : ad’rois H. 


489 


ONASANDER 


KpaTnoaew,' (kava avtikataAAaypata® dovds exn? 
Kopicac§a: Ta THV diriwy,* 7 ToTE ye? pH 

5 Bovropevwv evdikws els toov autvytar® pera 
d€ Ta Katop0wpmaTta Kat Tovs KWdUvoUS émLTpE- 
méo0wv' abrois evwylat Te Kal KALolaL Kal TOVEV 
avéoets,® wv’ eiddtes, otov téAos éoti Tob® payo- 
pévous vwiKav, UTo.evwor TA SvaXEpH TaVTA TPO 
TOU vuKaV. 


XXXVI. a’. [Ilept rob Odarew tods ev troAduw 


2 , 10 
avatpoujLevous | 


ITpovoetobu dé THs Tov vEK POV Knodelas, PATE 
Katpov nO? capay pinte TOoTroV * pare @oBov mpo- 
paorlopevos, ay TE TOXN VuKay, av TE HTT ehpevos: 
dota pev yap Kal 1” Tos Tovs dmrouxopevous 
evoeBe.a, dvayKata d€ Kal um mpos TOUS C@vras 

2amddekis. ExaOTOS yap THV oTpaTiwT@v wes 
avTos dpedovpevos, el meow ETUXEY, Tap: op0ad- 
pLots opa@v TH TUynv Kal Bmrép Tod pédXovTos 
KATApLAVTEVOMEVOS, WS Ovd avros, el Tebvar, 
Ttapnodpevos emax0as déper tiv artvuBevtov™ 


vBpw. 
1 xpatjoat PH Rigaltius (xparjoa H). 


2 dvrixkaraddypyata H. 3 éye. PH Rigaltius. 
4 ditwy VH. 5 +6 ye VH: roiré ye Koraes. 
6 dudverar PH. 7 émirpevécOwoav VH. 
8 dvetces R. 9 ros VH. 


0 Title om. F without sign of break: in margin H without 
sign of break. 


1 EPH: pyre rérov om. v. 12 gon F. 
13 FC: od H Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.”: os & avrés 
TeOvain R. 4 GrvpBurov F, 


490 


THE GENERAL, xxxv. 4— xxxvi. 2 


hold, that he may be able by giving enough in 
exchange to redeem the property of his friends, 
or at least then, should the enemy not wish to deal 
justly with him, that he may protect himself on 
equalterms. After successful engagements and the 
dangers of battle, the general should allow feasts 
and celebrations! and holidays, in order that the 
soldiers, knowing what happens as the result of 
victory by battle, may patiently undergo all hardships 
necessary for such victory. 


XXXVI. (1) [On the Burial of the Fallen| 


The general should take thought for the burial 
of the dead, offering as a pretext for delay neither 
occasion nor time nor place nor fear, whether he 
happen to be victorious or defeated. Now this is 
both a holy act of reverence toward the dead and 
also a necessary example for the living. For if the 
dead are not buried, each soldier believes that no 
care will be taken of his own body, should he chance 
to fall, observing what happens before his own 
eyes, and thereby judging of the future, feeling that 
he, likewise, if he should die, would fail of burial, 
waxes indignant at the contemptuous neglect of 
burial. 


1 The exact meaning of xXiciac is uncertain, although it 
seems to denote entertainments at which the participants 
sat or reclined upon couches. Zur-Lauben (followed by 
Koraes) renders the word by ‘ spectacles,’ Konstantiniades 
by * cuumdoia.’ 


491 


3 


ONASANDER 


B’. (Ilept ro ézavopfotoba: tiv éAadrrwow }* 


Ei de ¢ ~ 2 Q / 3 \ > 
i Oe aTTHT0," Tapayvdyncdpevos® rods dva- 
/ ] 
owlévras eK THs peayns® epedpeveTw, KaLtpov® 
eva mov Kat padXov olopevos. eravopaicacbar 
Thv eddtTwow. «idBacr yap ws Ta moAAG per 
evmpaylas® ot oTpaTiarat padvporepov exAveoGar 
mTept Tas pudAakds’ y) yap Tav 7réAas KaTagppovnats 
dyreAetvas” odio. yiyverat aitia®’ tay oiKkewr, 
/ \ 3 / A ” 

ouTws Te ToAAdKis Ta edTVYHMaTA TAEfov EBAare 
T&v SvoTvxnudTwv. oO pev yap mTaloas édL- 
dax0yn Kat dvddEacba® to wéddov, &€€ dv éxaber, 
0 de Tob duvaTuxetv"® ametpos odd’, ws det dudagau 
Tas evmpayias,” euabev. eit 13 a viK@v rH 
avray exeTw™ mpounferav UTEP TOO yen) mabeiv’® 
apeA@v, nv av eis TO” dSpaoai ri Tous ExOpovs 
pabupobvras etoevéyKaito.® ddfos yap evKatpos*® 
3° tA Q / ¢ 20 \ / + 

acpaArea mpounbys, ws” Kat Katadpdvynois akat- 

/ 


pos* evemPovAevtos TOA. 


XXXVII. [Ilept rod ev Kaipd ecipyvns: wy 


aduAaKktws” eivar |” 


“Avoxas de Touodrevos pnd 4 emuiTiecbw pnd 


\ \ 7 
avtos advAaktos €oTw* adda TO pev ovyov 


1 Koraes: title om. 2: without sign of a break FH: 
** De cladibus acceptis sarciendis ’ Rigaltius Schwebel. 
TTST WD H: TT Bvrae V. 3 Tapauvdnoduevos VH. 
Tous €K THS “axns avacwhévTas VH. 
xaipwa Schwebel: édedpevérw 7G xarp@ Koraes. 
evrrpaylars PV A m?. 
dué\era V (duehela H) defended by von Rohden. 
Added by Kochly. 
g@uvdéas PH Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.”: guAdéac EN. 


aowTran & WY 


ec 


ew be a oe 


THE GENERAL, xxxvi. 3 — xxxvu. 1 


(2) [Encouragement in Defeat} 


If the general be defeated, by encouraging the 
soldiers who have survived the battle, he should pre- 
pare for another bout, thinking that very likely there 
is at such a time an even better opportunity to 
retrieve defeat. For, as a rule, soldiers after victory 
are accustomed to relax their vigilance, for their 
contempt for their near-by opponents causes careless- 
ness of their own interests, and thus good fortune 
has often done more harm than misfortune. For 
he who has suffered a defeat has been taught to 
guard in future against that from which he has 
suffered, but he who is inexperienced in misfortune 
has not even learned that it is necessary to guard 
his success. On the other hand, if victorious, the 
general should take the same precautions against 
suffering harm through negligence which he would 
use in trying to inflict harm upon the enemy if they 
were off their guard. Seasonable fear is wise pre- 
caution, as ill-timed contempt is recklessness that 
invites attack. 


XXXVII. [Precautions in Time of Peace] 


After making a truce he should neither make an 
attack nor himself remain unguarded ; he should, on 


10 Sucraxeitvy H. 11 ovx VH. 

2 guddEacbar Tas Svompayias Koraes. 13 ot’ VH. 

1th rh F. 15 éye vH. 16 trayeiv A m?, 

17 Koraes: jv dp’ els 70 F: fv Gp’ éord H: dp’ és 76 Rigaltius 
Schwebel: dpecriv R. 38 eionvéyxaro VH. 19 evxarpws H. 

20 Om. v: tpoundds kat H. 21 axpos R (A m?), 

22 apudaxtos ARH (?) Koraes: advdaxrov P, 

3 Title om. F: in margin H. 

+4 unr (om. émitibécOw und’) adtos H. 

493 


ONASANDER 


Seay, \ \ \ ae e we ee 1 99 
ExeTW TMpos TOvS TOAEULOUS, Ws Ev" cipyvn, TO 4 
b) \ > \ \ ~ e > / “A 
aodhadés ets TO py) Tafeiv, ws ev modAduw. Se? 
yap ovK aovvOynKov ev omovdats civat ovT” avrov 
Aa cs b] \ 5 ~ LAA’ v4 3 ¢ 
tT. P0avew aceBés Sp@vta, arr’ Umonrov, ws 
/ \ > \ a_A / 4 
dvdatrecbar TO amo THv* moAquiwy vmovdAov- 
addn\or yap at THY oTEelcapevwY yvamar. Kal 
Tapa col ev eoTw TO BéBasov Tob px adiKjoa 
\ A 
dua TO evoeBés, mapa Sé Tots moAEiows brrovoeicbw 
\ \ A Sy MS \ > G2 .6 > Ar \ 
TO py) moTov dwa TO armexbes® aodadrjs yap 
a 7 \ An “A se r A A 
ottos’ Kat mpounbys, os otde BovdAnfetor ois 
modeptos emiléoba Tov tot Svvacba: tapacmov- 


Se \ b) o , 8 ¢ 53 a A 
4 HOAL KALPOV ATTOAMELTTEL. OULTLYES €77L TOLS 


a) a9 a \ CeN e@ XN ‘0 ? § , 
€OlS TOLOUVTAL TV UTEP WV AV TTAUWOLV EKOLKLAY, 


evocPes”” wev Ppovotaw, od nv aodady mrovodow. 
\ 13 


CEN > / 19 (>) Touts , A 
5 KOpLoy yap avonTwr” eat eAmidt Tob TovUs* Tapa-~ 


/ >? / ou 3 /, 14 ” 
omovoncavTas eKTisew dikas ampovontous™ EexeL 
- n\ \ ~ 5) / 15 7% > \ 16 / 
TOUS TEpt GPaV Kwodvvous,” wWamep adTovs® awle- 

7 ~ 

cba wéAAovras apa TH" Tovs €xPpods amrdAAvobar,”* 
He V9 \ ~ -~_ 20 8 / / > e / 21 
e€ov™ peta THS TOV” idiwv mpaypaTtwv aodareias 

A / ~ ~ 4 
metpav AauBavew Tis TMV ToAcLiwv aoeBelas* OUTWS 
yap avtot™ re dua TO mpounfés odK av TTAloaLEV 
b] / > / / ¢ / ~ > 
émiBovArcvbevtes, aceBrjcoval Te ot ToEWLOL TH Ertt- 

~ \ A 

yeiphoat Kat OoKety TeTOWnKEevat av,” €t™ eduvH7Onoav. 


1 Del, Amz. 2 odk F: ore H: 085’ Koraes. 

3 C: avromrov Q (atro rrov H). 

4 rv drovtww (for 76 dd Tév) F: 76 b7d Tay R. 

5 FC: dadixetoOac ENPH Rigaltius ‘*‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” : 
ddcxjcbac A m?. 

6 FH: drax6és Rigaltius ‘* quidam codd. ut vid.” 

7 otrws PH Rigaltius ** alii codd. ut vid.” 

8 F: émiXelro. H Schwebel: émireiree Koraes: dvadetzor 
Rigaltius (no report of other mss.). 

9 FH: rods Oeovs v. 10 evioeBH VH. 

11 Added by Kéchly. 12 FHV (?): dvdnrév v. 
4.94. 


THE GENERAL, xxxvi. 1-5 


the one hand, make no move against the enemy, 
as in peace, but, on the other, he should be protected 
against danger, as in war. He must not break faith 
in a treaty, nor be the first to commit any sacrilegious 
act, but he must be suspicious enough to watch for 
festering deceit on the part of the enemy, for the 
intentions of those with whom the treaty has been 
concluded are uncertain. Let your part be a firm 
resolution not to transgress, because of the sacred 
nature of the treaty, but suspect a breach of faith on 
the part of the enemy due to their hostility. That 
general is wise and cautious who affords the enemy, 
even when they desire to attack, no opportunity to 
break their compact. Those who leave to the geds 
revenge for what they have suffered are piously 
minded but certainly do not act safely. For it is 
absolute folly to be careless of the danger to oneself 
in the hope that treaty-breakers will pay the 
penalty—as if one would himself be saved as soon as 
the enemy perish !—when it is possible to make trial 
of the irreligion of the enemy while at the same 
time safeguarding one’s own interests. With this 
precaution one will save himself from defeat if plotted 
against, but the enemy will commit sacrilege both 
if they attempt a breach of the truce and if they let 
it be seen that they would have done it if they could. 


13 FK: rovrous H ‘cet. codd. ut vid.” Rigaltius Schwebel. 
4 @rpovonrous Oldfather: ampovonrus 2. 


5 rot. . . Kwvddvov VH. 16 aités R (A m?). 
76 R. 18 diré\ucba PH. 

19 FH (Leo, Tactica, xvi. 20 éecrw): é& @r v. 

* RRs, qm. v. 21 dodareias F. 

22 atrots F: airdés R. *3 Added by Oldfather. 


24 kaieiv: «at del. Koraes after Leo, Tactica, xvi. 20: om. 
Te-ol TohEmtor, EmLXELpHoaL, DoKEety weTOLNKEvat 


495 


ONASANDER 


XXXVIII. a’. [Ilepi rot tas* tpocayopevas oAXets 


> > / ” \ / 2 
ev adeia exew Kat diAavOpwria | 


Tais 6€ mpooxwpovoas*® dodeow, el TwWes 
eTTUTPETIOLEV avTas* aptapevar, diravOpdirws Kal 
xXpnoTas mpoopepertar” Tpoocayayo.to® yap av 
ovTws Kat tas aAdas. 7 yap é€Amis tod Tav 
avtav tevEeoba" derAcdlovca mpocayera® rods 

2 moAXods §=avTovs exovTas® eyyerpilew.  saotis dé 
muKpaOs” evOvs Kal ToAcuuKds™ TpoogepeTau Kv~ 
ptos YEVOMEVOS Toews 7 Ovapma ley 7 KTelvonv a7 
KATAOKATTWY, * aor Tpuwtepas dvariOnae Tas ad\as 
modes, woTe Kal Tov moAEuov atta éimovov 

3 Kal THY viKny dvoeATW KaTacKevalew: e€lddTES 
yap, WS amapaityTov™ e€oTw 7 THV dtroyxerpiwv 
mpos TOU KpaTnoovTos™® TyLepte., may oTLoby 
DTTOfLEVOVGL Kal qjovety Kal maoXew o7ep TOU p41) 

4 Trapadotva. tas modes. ovfev yap ovTws KATO- 
okevaler yevvaiovs, ws dfos’? dv péAdovor 
meloecOar Kaxa@v'® eiEavtes: 17) yap mpoodoKia Tav 
dew@v €k TOO kabupetobar™ Ta opérepa Sewn 

5 evTtOnor pirorysiav ev Tots KWOwvols. XaAerrat 
de” at mpos TOUS ATE YVWO}LEVOUS Tetpae paxns: 
ovoev yap XpnoTorepov eAmiCovtes ex Tod Tapa 
Ywpety Ov tetcovTar KwoduvevovTEs alpodvTaL eT 


Onis 
2 Title om. F: in margin H without mark of break. 
3 rpoxwpotcats A m*, + atras F. 
> rporpepécbwy F. 6 apocayoro H. 
7 reviacbar VH. 8 mpocaye VH. 
9 C: égyovras (om. avrov’s) F: oftws éxovras vVH. 
10 mixpos VH. 11 qoNeuxos VH:: aroXeukds edOds R. 


12 kaTakoémTwy V: KaTa KouTTwv H. 
13 ai7@ F: éritrovoy avrw or aire v (é. att AA). 


496 


THE GENERAL, xxxvi. 1-5 


XXXVIII. (1) [Treatment of surrendered Cities mith 
Trust and Humanity | 


If any cities should open their gates in surrender 
early in the war, the general should treat them in a 
manner both humane and advantageous, for thus 
he would induce the other cities also to submit. 
The enticing hope of a similarly fortunate fate 
leads the majority to surrender voluntarily. But 
he who acts in a harsh and savage manner, immedi- 
ately after becoming master of a city, plundering, 
slaying, and destroying, makes other cities hostile, 
so that the war becomes laborious for him and victory 
difficult of attainment. Since they know that the 
punishment of the conquered by the conqueror is 
merciless, they are ready to do and suffer anything 
rather than surrender their cities. For nothing 
makes men so brave as the fear of what ills they will 
suffer if they surrender; indeed the expectation 
of the evils which will ensue from their subjection 
produces a terrible pertinacity in danger. Moreover, 
fighting is dangerous against desperate men,! who 
expect from surrender no amelioration of the fate 
which will be theirs if they continue to fight, and 
therefore prefer, if they can inflict much harm, also 

1 The idea was well expressed by Vespasian, ui} cup- 
whékesOat Oavar@o.v avOpwros: ovdev yap adKiuwrepov eivar Tijs 
amoyvacews (Josephus, Bell. Lud. iii. 7. 18). 

4 dmrapairnrés VH. 

19 FH: troxeipwy PA m? Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

16 Kochly (but no note): rov’s xpatjcavras FH Rigaltius 
Schwebel Koraes and apparently v. 

7 otfév . . . ¢d80s om. R Camerarius. 

18 kax@s VH. 19 kabupécbar F. 

20 With yarerai 6¢ G resumes. 


QK 497 


ONASANDER 


6 tod moAAa Spav Kat mdoxew. obev at moAvopKiat 
Tots We’ oTpatnyots adpoor Kal TeOnpiwpevois* 
Tahatmepor® ylyvovtat* Kat moAvypdviot, morte? 
de Kal ateActs, ody AKioTa d€ odadrepai Te® Kal 


> / 
ETLKLWOUVOL. 


fb’. [Il@s xpnoréov mpoddtats |? 


7 Tots d€ mpoddrats Tas TE moTELs Kal Tas emay- 
yeXias dudarrétw, pu) Sua TOvSs yeyovoras, adda 
dud Tovs eaouevous, WwW eElddTes, ws opetAerat 
od.iot ydpis, «Aduevol® Ta THY ToAcuiwy emt Tas 
avTas «vepyectas TpéTmwvrTar® AauBaver yap Te 

8 .aMov Gey mpooorn dvdovs n xapilerar." 10 
xp?) mpoOvpos extTivew'* Tas dorBas ov ‘yap 
UKAOTHS THs aducnbetons moAews eoTw, adda 
OTpaTNYOS THS EavTOO maTpioos. 


90.0.6 DERI Mept Tob TOV OTpaTyyoV eV yvwoet 


elvat THs TOV aoTpwv Kwioews |* 


\ \ \ Ae \ \ ? Set pie 
IIpos 5€ Tas embéoers Kal Tas €K mpodoctas 
vuxtepwas Katadjpers TOV TOAEwv"® odK a7reLpoV 
> A ~ \ \ / ~ ~ 
elvat det THs UmEpyetov KaTA THY VUKTA hopas TOV 


1 ro.oicde VGH. 

2 FGH: re@ypwuévors P Rigaltius ** ceteri codd. ut vid.”: 
TeGecpauevors R. 

3-ECD: om. vGH. 4 yiyverrac GH. 

5 rot) GH: oddol Rigaltius A m?: zod\ai Schwebel 
Koraes. 6 Koraes: cdadeperepar kai Q. 

7 Koraes: title om. FAGH without indication of a break 
in any one of these mss.: ‘‘ Fidem proditoribus esse ser- 
vandam ” Rigaltius Schwebel. 


498 


THE GENERAL, xxxvint. 5 — xxxrx. 1 


to suffer much. On this account the sieges of such 
insensate and savage generals become wearisome 
and long drawn-out, sometimes even fail of accom- 
plishment, and are extremely dangerous and pre- 
carious. 


(2) [How to treat Tractors] 


One should keep promises and pledges to traitors, 
not on account of what they have done but of 
what others will do, in order that these, knowing 
that gratitude will be due them, may choose the 
interests of their country’s enemies and turn to the 
same sort of service. For he who gives to a traitor 
receives much more than he bestows. On this 
account it is necessary to pay the reward cheer- 
fully, for the general is not an avenger of the 
betrayed city but the commander of the army of his 
own country. 


XXXIX. (1) [On the General's Knowledge of the 
Courses of the Stars] 


In night attacks and surprises of towns through 
treason, the general must know the heavenly courses 


8 éNouévors V: €A\Nomevors GH. 9 tpémrovra. PGH. 

ape kk 11 yapiferdar R. 12 éxreivew VGH. 

13 rs doTpwov P: tod dotpov Schwebel. 

1} Title om. FENR: in margin but mostly illegible in 
photographs GH. 

1% FENRGH: mpodocia P: mpodocia Rigaltius ‘ ceteri 
codd. ut vid.” 

16 Schwebel following Camerarius: rév mod\éuwy F: trav 
todeviwy PGH **ceteri codd. ut vid.” Saguntinus. 


499 


ONASANDER 


amAaveyv, émet moAAdKis ampdakrous e€eu Tas émt- 

2 Bodds.* coTw yap OTE OUVTETAKTAL THs, TOV 
mpodor@y TpiTny 7 TeTapTnV nH OmdoTHY® av Tus 
eVICa.LpoV wpav vopuily* ths VUKTOS, avoigew Tas 
mUhas 4 Twas KaTacddéew THv emt THS moAEws 
avTimpatTovTwy? 7 dpouvpa® tav Eevdov rodepiov 
emOycecbar- Kdmevtra Svetv’ Oarepov ouvpPé- 
Bynkev, yTow® OGrrov 7 Ede mpoomeAdgavra® TOV 
Trav mroepLiay oTparov™ Kardapwpov™ yeveolar, 
mpl 7 Tovs mpodoras ETOLLOUS eivat, Kal ovras 
amtoKwAvbjvat Ths mpakéews, 7 toTepiaavTa™ Tots 
pev Tpoddtats attiov yevéobar Oavarov dwpa- 
Getow, adrov Oe perder TOV TpoKeyLevov™ avvoa. 

3 Spae5 xpn Kat" THY odov TEKMOLPOHLEVOY, ater 
e£odetoat Set, Kal 1a oradiow Kal Ths wpas™? 
atoyalouevov, oaov'® eis tHv® mropetav avadddoet, 
Kal azo TOV doTpwv opavra,” mocov" TO Tapwxn- 
KOS 70) KaL TOGOV TO arrohevTropevov [L€pos, ovTws 
aKpib@as ovMoyiodsrevov,” iva pare plaon pene 
Bpadvvy, POS avdrny KEW THY @pav Too ou- 
TETAY}LEVOU Karpoo Kal €TL TpocidvTa™ aKovecbat 
Kal evTos elvat TOV TELXYOV. 


1 ériBovtds GH ‘libri scripti tantum non omnes” 
(Schwebel). 

2 6rocrny F (corr. AB) GH: érws ry Rigaltius ‘* ceteri 
codd. ut vid.” 

3 Om. K Koraes. 4 voulfe. GH. 

5 FGH: avrirapararrovrwy Rigaltius A m? ** ceteri codd. 
ut vid.” 

6 dpovpa R. 

7 FCKGH (kazi v: kame dvetv GH): xdsrecra Svoty Koraes : 
kamdvety Rigaltius: xamidvoiv EN: xami dvotv R Schwebel. 

8 cite V (cire GH). 

® rpocmepas R: mpods ridas suggested by Kéchly. 


500 





THE GENERAL, xxxix. 1-3 


of the stars by night, otherwise his plans will often be 
of no avail. For instance, some traitor has appointed 
the third or the fourth, or whatever hour of the night 
he considers most favourable, for opening the gates 
or slaying some of the opposing faction in the town 
or attacking the hostile garrison within the town; 
then one of two things has happened; the general 
has reached the camp of the enemy too early and 
has been detected before the traitors are ready 
and has been thwarted in his attempt, or else 
he has arrived too late and has thus been the 
cause of the traitors’ being detected and put to 
death and of his own failure to accomplish any of 
his plans. Accordingly he should form an estimate 
of the road, deciding at what point he is to set out; 
then he must determine the distance and the time 
—how much of each he will have to spend on the 
journey ;—and, finally, he must, from his observation 
of the stars, estimate exactly what part of the night 
has passed and what part remains, in arder that he 
may arrive neither too early nor too late; then he 
must get there at precisely the appointed time, so 
that news of his attack may not reach the enemy 
until he is actually inside the fortifications. 


0 7H... oTpaTHYS vGH. 
it Kardpopov Fm! corr. m’. 
i ER: vorepnoayTas GH Rigaltius ° ** ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
= T poepnuev wy R. 4 FGR: om. v. 
15 6cov VGH: écwv K Koraes. 
16 kal ray added by Kochly. 
1 rhv épavy VGH. 18 6¢nv VGH. 
19 Om. vGH. 20 dpayv F. 
2 FC: cvAd\oyicduevos PGH A m? Rigaltius ‘* ceteri codd. 
ut vid.” 
2 Kochly : wpocidyras Q. 
501 


ONASANDER 


B’. [Ils apépas atpety xpi modAw}" 


> > e / > / + / / 
4 Ei & npépas avaoryioas dyou otpatevpa modes 
> 
eK mpodootas Anouevos KaTa THY ovyKEYyLevnV 
a 
Wpav, TOUS KATA THV OdoV UroTinTovTas aTavTas” 
mpoattoaTéh\Awy immets ovdAdauBavérw 1 TIS 
Le ? 
~ >] \ ~ , / > A 7 
TOV ETL THS xwWpas POdoas amodpaywv pnvdoy 
Thv epodov THv roreuiwv, add’ aidvidiws® adu- 
/ ? A ; 
RakTois 4 emupavera yévnrau’ tot orparevparos. 
5 emeXovta 8 e€aidvns ampoodoKynTols ypyH, Kav 
\5 \ / / 7 / ™» > > 
py KaTa mpodociay péAAy® AapBavew, adrdXr 
EK Tpoppycews aywvrilecbar dia peaxns, 1 ava- 
aAvecPar, aA ws o7t pddAvota POavew ampoc- 
/ 7 / is / ” / 
dAAovra’ cite doovpiw eite yapaxe cite moder 
/ >) , 2 
Ce) v x3\ 7 Ss ~ \ / 
dvwota 5 Or av oAlyov etvar doK7® to didtov 
7 \ ~ > Ur > / | ¢ \ 
6 oTpaTevpa Kat TOV exPpav eAaTTovpevov: at yap® 
> ~ 
ampoAnmrou” trav odeniwy émddverat b1a TO 
mapdAoyov é€xmAyntTover Tovs evavTious, Kav Wau 
7) , 

/ ¢ + / ¢e \ 
KpeiTTous, ews,” av ye ovvdewpyowow™ atrovs™ 
Kal ovrevoacbat Kal avalapphoar Karpov AdBwor 

> 
/ A A 
Kara jucpov _dvayKalovrar KaTadpovety' ovTws 
evioTe TA mpara Kat apxyopmeva poPepwrepa TAY 
7 Xpoveco évwy elvat Ooxet. 610 moAAdKis 7d 
p Ke L/h 
TWEes TO mapadogp THs emupavetas KaramAyga- 
EVOL Tovs evayTlous TAXU Kat aKOVTAaS bmera av" 
iY 
) Tovety EKdVTAs vayKacay TA TpOoTATTOMEVA. 


1 Koraes without ms. authority: Saguntinus alone in- 
dicates a heading with the words ‘‘De urbe interdiu 


occupanda.” > Om. R. 
3 aipvidios F: Kochly suggests aipvidios. 
4 yiyvnTra VGH. 5 kay uy om. F. 8 ué\\ec GH. 


THE GENERAL, xxxix. 4—7 


(2) [How to capture a City by Day] 


If setting out by day, he lead his army to capture 
at an appointed hour towns that are to be betrayed, 
he should send horsemen ahead to seize every one 
met on the road, that no native of the country may 
run ahead and warn of the approach of their enemy 
but that the army may appear suddenly to the 
enemy and catch him off his guard. He must fall 
unexpectedly on an unsuspecting enemy, even if 
he is not expecting to seize the towns through 
treachery but to fight openly after a declaration of 
war, and he must not hesitate but strive in every 
way to attack fort or camp or town before his 
advance is known, especially if he knows that his 
own army is small and inferior to that of the enemy. 
For unexpected appearances of an enemy, because 
they are unforeseen, terrify their opponents, even 
should the latter be stronger; but at length, if 
those who have been taken by surprise should 
observe their own forces or get the chance to plan 
and renew their courage, they gradually and of 
necessity come to despise their foes; in this way 
the beginning of a war sometimes seems more 
terrible than the latter part. On this account, 
armies have often so terrified their opponents by 
the unexpectedness of their appearance that they 
have either quickly subdued them against their will 
or else have forced them to agree to comply with 
their own demands. 


7 mpoBadr\ew ta F: mpoBaddovta P. 8 doxec GHR. 
9 ai ye F. 10 drpdcdnrro VGH. 
1 @s VGH. 12 GuvOewpnoovow PGH. 
13 Kochly: atrovs Q. 14 brératev PGH. 


503 


ONASANDER 


XL. [Ilept woAopxias |" 


IToAvopkta be orpariwr av" avopiav® eémlnre? 
Kal OTPATHYLKIV emivouay Kal Lenxavnpdrov Tapa. 
oKevyy dogpadrs [EVTOL KQL 21) aTTov a.7Tpo- 
Opatos TOV rohopKoupeveny EOTW* TO yap emBou- 
Aevopevov, OT av ot* KaKod Tuyxdver ywookn, 

A TAA \ > Av ~ 5 ¢€ N26 
Typet paAdov To emPovAedov*® 6 pev® yap e&w 
~ > / ~ 
Kwovvov SoK@v eival TpaTTEL TL TOV TpOKELLevwr, 
¢€ xr) nv >? law | 8 / 8 e 8 >? b) ~ ~ 5 
omoT av avTa@’ dd&y,° o Evy avT@ TH Kwodv- 

TOC SAG,. RO 7 he 10S ee ee 

vevew® Urdpywy Cnret d¥acas” SpGoar," omdr av 
\ \ \ ~ 
Katpov AaBy* O10 yp7 Tov ToALopKobvTa Kal TAdpw 
\ / \ A \ 3 > / 
kal xdpaxi Kat dvdAakais ro tdvov acdadrilecbar 
\ A 
oTpaTomedov. Kal yap o& prev TodopKodvTes, 6 
Ti av péeAAwot mpdaTTEw, Opa@vTar Tots amo Tod 
/ A 
Telyous, ot dé ToALvopKovpevor 7pOBAnWa TO TETYOS 
€xovtes adpator moAAdKis exyvbévtes bia muAdY 
) pnxavas evéerpyoav 7 oTpatiwtas epdovevoav 7, 
0 TL KaTa xXElpas odiow Ein, TOOTO ETOINOaY. 


XLI. [epi rod yew evédpas tov oAvopKobvtra 
mpo TOV TvAdY |” 


¢ 5) \ a / 13 5) \ 
Hruora ) av TOUTO ToAunoaey, €l Tapa 

/ 14 \ ae A oN / ¢ E | A 
qvAats KQL TUALOL LLLKPals OXOUS O 770 LOpKWV 


1 Om. F without indication of break ENRM (G imperfect 
here) Camerarius: in margin H (margin of G patched) 
without indication of break. 

2 Kochly: orparnyay Q. 3 dvdpelav GH. 

4 FGH: ei EN: 6, 7 R. 

5 ém:Bouevduevoy DPG HA m? Rigaltius ** ceteri codd. ut 
vid.” : ériBovredov G m*, 


504 


i Se. 


THE GENERAL, xt. 1 - x11. 1 


XL. [Sreges] 


A siege demands courage on the part of the soldiers, 
military science on the part of the general, and 
equipment of machines of war. The general must 
take no fewer precautions and be no less observant 
than the enemy; for the army attacked, when it 
knows just what its danger is, guards especially 
against the army attacking. ‘The army that believes 
itself out of danger does what work is at hand when 
it pleases, but that which is in danger strives to 
surprise its enemy by dealing him a blow whenever 
it has an opportunity. Hence it is necessary for the 
besieging general to fortify his camp with trenches, 
palisades, and guards. For whatever the besiegers 
intend to do can be seen from the walls; but the 
besieged, with the wall as a shield, often without 
detection pour through the gates and burn the 
machines or kill the soldiers or do whatever damage 
comes to their hands. 


XLI. [Ambush laid by the Besieger before the Gates 
of a Town! 


The besieged would by no means attempt this if 
the besieging general should post at both large and 


6 6 wey om. DPGHA m? Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 


7 avro R. 8 66fe. PGH. 

9 76 kwduvedov R. 10 Kochly: ¢0dca 2. 

1 FPGH (épdcac GH): kai re Spicarv: 7) 6pica K: dpacai 
tt Kochly. 


2 Tithe om. F: without indication of break AENR 
Saguntinus Camerarius: in margin without break GH. 

3 rodujcew R (ro\ujoecey A m2”). 

M4 rais midas VGH. 


505 


ONASANDER 


, 

mpokalion” OoTpaTyyos TOUS Tas aipvidious eK- 
dpopas Tv 7roAcuiov? dmoxwddaovras, emrel Kav 
ToNaces AdGovev em eevor Tots €KTOS. XpyoyLor 
d€ Ta 7oAAa voKTWp Tots moAopkotow at Tpoo- 
Boda: Tois yap evdov ov dvvapévois opav Ta 
yeyvopevas dua TO oKoTos SewdTepa SoKel Ta 
TParToHeva., Kal TI mpodnybw avayKalovTar xade- 
TUWTEPAv exew Tav Kara aAjfevay evepyoupéevwr, 
olev Tapaxat tTe* Kat FopuBor yiyvorrau ovdevos® 
OuvapLevov owppovety év tots TovovTois, GAAa Kai 
TOAAA TV od Spwuevwv ws yiyverat® AeyovTwv, OVA” 
ee 7 ~ 8 Oe 5 / w> ¢ / 9 
omy’ mpocPpadrodow® etdévar Suvaevwv, ovl” omdcot, 
“AP elses / 10: S,a5 SA A eee 
uf’ doles peEpect,”® duadpopat 5é€ dSedpo xaKetoe 

\ \ \ / \ ” / 
Kat Boat Kat Oar Ilavikov Exyovra Tapayov. 


XLII. a’. [Iept tod ore 6 ddBos Wevdys pavris™ 


eoTiv | 


‘O yap poBos wsevdns pedvres, a. ddouKe, Tat 
oljoeTar Kal yiyveoBar, Kal may TO €v VUKTL, KaV 
[ALK pov > poBepwrepov Tots Bere 
ovdels yap, 6) Bremer, déyet dia TO oKOTOS, aAAa 
mas, 0 aKovel’ Kal Ev0s mov pavevtos 7 y) dvetv* emi 
TetXous moAeuiwy TO 7mav 7107 oTpareupa TOV 
teryav éemipeBynKévar Sd€avtes a amerparnoay,, ® €pn- 
plous KaTaAurovres emdA€ets Kai mUAas.7® 


mpoxabioas F. 
F: zé\ewy PGH—nothing known about other mss. 
3 vwounea GH. * Om. vGH. 5 undevos von Rohden. 
6 yiver@at (om. ws) V: yiyvecba (om. ws) GH Koraes. 
7 GH (008 brn): 08 Th 77 F: 088’ orn P: 08 67 Rigaltius 
‘‘ alii codd. ut vid.” 
8 rpocBdd\X\ovcw P Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.”: mpés 
Baddovow GH. 


506 


1 
2 


THE GENERAL, xu. 1 — xu. 1 


small gates companies of soldiers to prevent sudden 
sallies, since otherwise the defenders might without 
warning attack the besiegers. Attacks by night are 
generally advantageous to the besiegers, since the 
besieged are unable to see what is happening, on 
account of the darkness, and everything seems more 
terrible to them, and they are compelled to regard 
the attack as more dangerous thanit really is. Hence 
tumult and confusion arise; no one is able to use 
sober judgement in such circumstances, but many 
things that are not happening are said to be 
happening ; and the besieged is not able to know 
from what direction the enemy is attacking, nor in 
what numbers, nor with what forces, and men run 
hither and thither, while the shouting and con- 
sternation cause disorder and panic. 


XLII. (1) [Fear ts a false Prophet} 


Fear is a false prophet and believes that what 
it fears is actually coming to pass. At night every 


_ trifling occurrence seems more terrible to the be- 


sieged, for on account of the darkness no man tells 
what he sees but always what he hears. If one or 


_two of the enemy appear somewhere on the walls, 





_the defenders, believing that the whole army has 


already mounted the walls, turn and flee, leaving the 


_ battlements and gates undefended. 


9 os... 6rdco.0m. R Camerarius: oi@’ 67éc01 om. VGH. 
0 Kochly: k«dXlwace Fv: kXiuacw GH: kdAjuaot EKN: 


| kKNiwaée Saguntinus. 1 Om. Kochly. 12 uavTns A. 


1 Title om. FPVGH: without indication of even a break 


FGH. 14 §votvy v: dovety GH. 


13 averparnoay VGH. 16 KC: rodas VG: mods H. 


507 


ONASANDER 


B’. [°Ore adrov yph Tapddevyya TOV OTpaTyyoV 


ylyveobar Tols OTpaTLwTats 


29 Hi 6é€ re Oud YELpOS O oTpaTnyos e€cpyaoacbat 
o7revool, cue oKveirw m™p@Tos avTos opOhvae 
ToL@v: ov yap oUTws Tails amo TAY KpeiTTOvWY 
amretAais avaykalouevol TL moLotow, ws Tats amo 
TOV oceuvoTépwv Siatpotais: tOwv yap*® Tis Tov 
NYE Ova m™p@Tov eyxetpoovra Kal ore del omevdeuv 
enable? Kat pen) movety Hd€obn® Kal ameuBety €do- 
BiOn- Kat otk €8 ws SdoddAov émiTaTTdopevov 
dteTeOn TO AROS, GAN’ ws €€ toov® mapakadov- 
prevov SveTpary. 


[Ilept zoAopkyrnpiwy pnyavnuarwr |’ 


3 IloAAdy 6é Kai rokiAwy cs TOV pnxaver® 
TrohopKnTnpicoy XpyceTau Kara ddvopi® 6 oTpa- 


THYOS. od yap em €emol TO A€yew, OTe det 


Kptovs éxew™ 7 EdemdAets 7 capPdKas 


mUpyous wvmotpoxous® 7 xeAwvas xwoTpidas 7 
KkataméAtas' Ths yap Tov troAquotvTwy TvYNS 
Kat mAovTov Kal duvdpews idia TabTa Kal THs 
TOV eTOMevwV apxiTeKTOVWY" emuwotlas’® Eis Tas 

1 Koraes apparently without ms. authority: FGH do not 
indicate even a break (the same holds for all the sub-titles 


in Ch. xlii.): ‘* Imperator suo exemplo milites provocat” 
Rigaltius Schwebel. 
2 FC: uh om. VGH: xuweitrw VGH: xwetro A m2. 
“ 6é vGH. 4 éuac@a A m2. 
5 ndéoOac RA m2. 6 éricov VGH: éricov A m* 
7 Koraes (see on sub-title to § 2): ‘* De machinis ad op- 
pugnationem ” Rigaltius Schwebel. 


508 


THE GENERAL, xu. 2-3 


(2) [The General must set a good Example to his Soldiers] 


If the general is in haste to finish some enterprise 
that he has on hand, he should not hesitate to be 
prominent in the work, for soldiers are not forced 
to activity so much by the threats of their immediate 
superiors as by the influence of men of higher rank. 
For a soldier seeing his officer the first to put his 
hand to the task not only realizes the need of haste 
too but also is ashamed not to work, and afraid to 
disobey orders ; and the rank and file no longer feel 
that they are being treated as slaves under orders 
but are moved as though urged by one on the same 
footing as themselves. 


(3) [Siege Engines] 


Of the many and various siege engines the 
general will make use according as he has oppor- 
tunity. It is not my part to say that he must use 
battering rams or ‘ city-destroyers’ or the sambuca, 
or wheeled towers or covered sheds or catapults ; 
all this depends upon the luck, the wealth, and the 
power of the combatants, and upon the skill of the 
workmen who accompany the army for the purpose 


1 An arrangement for lowering a bridge from a movable 
tower to the walls of a city. Its name was derived from its 
similarity to the triangular four-stringed musical instrument. 


8 dyTwv unxaynudtov VGH. 
9 tots Kata Ovvawy VGH. 
0 Om..R. 11 C: om. FvPGH. 12 kal VGH. 
13 7) wrorpdxous GHENP “‘alii codd. ut vid.” 
4 FGH: rots Rigaltius ‘‘ et alii codd. ut vid.” 


1° dpxerexroviay PGH: dpyirexrovikay v. 16 érivoial’ F. 


509 


ONASANDER 


/ ~ 
4 opyavucas KaTacKevds. oTpatnyod 8 dias 
ayxwolas €epyov Towvoe” av etn, et® BovdouTo 
> ¢ 
mpooparrAew* pnxavas: Kal? ev pev amoypyobw 
aA YU A > 
LLépos Tots epyows adtots—ovdée yap aAAws® av Tis 
evmropyacey ev’. KUKAW TavTL TH TelyeL TEpt- 
“a / 
OTHoaL pnxavas,’ el un) mavu puiKpa TdALs Eln—, 
> \ \ / \ A / \ 
ets 7roAAd dé Taypata SueAwy TO oTpaTevpa KaTa 
\ ~ / 
ta adda’ Tob Tetyous En KeAeveTw TAS Kipasras 
¢ >) / 
Tpoopepew ouTws yap els Qunxaviav ol mroAop- 
KOU[LEVOL Tron eumintovow: av Te yap dyvedr- 
cavtes TOV ddAwy pEepa@v Tod TEeliyous emi Tas 
mpoofoAas® Tav pnxavav apvvwow, amavtes ot 
\ / \ / 
KaTa Tas KAiwaKas pndevos amoxwAvovTos padiws 
2 / ~ ~ A 
emPaivovat THY TELYaYV, av TE ducAovtes odds 
avrovs em Bon Ojowar® Kara, HEpn, opodporepas 
evepyelas yeyvowerns KaTa Tas eupodas Tav 
opyavev ot Kotanerpevres™ ovde™ pedxeoBae TOU- 
Tos ToAUHGavTes® advvaTHooVaL TO EmLpepopevov 
\ 
KaKOV amoKpovecPar. did7ep Kalamep™ aryabov 
, \ 15 eee \ ‘16 rye ity tise 
maXatoTny mpodekvuew prev Kat'® oKialew™ els 
\ / a A eats. PI 18 
moAAa pépn det meptom@vtTa Kat emopaddovTa 
~ A Cc: EA 
depo KaKelce’® mpos moAAa Tovs avtimdadous, Evos 
\ A > ~ / > P 20 \ a. 21 
de Cytetv eyxpata@s AaBopuevov avatpepar” To may 
cGua THs moAews. 


1 F indicates a break here. 

2 ro.dvd’ Kochly. 3 eye VGH. 

+ rpoBa\\ev GH A m? Rigaltius and mss. ‘‘tantum non 
omnes ” (Schwebel). 

5 FR: a\\os PGH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 

6 Kochly: evropjce: &v F: evropjoeey GH: etropjoee Vi 
dopo ese R. 

g TEeplaT Ty aL unxavaits GHP “alii codd. ut vid.” : wepibetvat 
unxavats A m*: mepiOjvar unxavais DENR. 


510 





THE GENERAL, xui.-3 —6 


of building engines. The task of a general’s peculiar 
skill, if he wishes to employ engines, is to use 
them at some one locality—for he would not have a 
sufficient supply of engines to place them in a circle 
completely about the wall unless the city were very 
small,— and, dividing his army into many parts, he 
should [station his engines at certain points and 
should] command his men to bring forward their 
ladders against the other parts of the wall, since 
in this manner the besieged are rendered helpless. 
For if the besieged disregard the other parts of 
the wall and only make a defence against the 
attacks of the engines, all the besiegers who 
attack with ladders will easily climb over the wall 
without opposition, but if the defenders divide their 
forces and send aid to each part as the battle grows 
more violent through the attack of these engines, 
those who are left and who do not venture to fight 
with them will be unable to repel the advancing 
menace. On this account, just as a good wrestler, 
the general must make feints and threats at many 
points, worrying and deceiving his opponents, here 
and there, at many places, striving, by securing a 
firm hold upon one part, to overturn the whole 
structure of the city. 





8 Kochly (except that he read 7é\Xa): cal kara Ta GANa 
FC: xai ra &\\a PGH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 


° mpoBotas FGHR. 10 éri te BonOjnowor VGH. 

Nl Karadnpbévtas F. 12 6d5e VGH. 

13 Supplied by Kéchly, who suggests also @appodrres. 

14 ®s v: om. PGH. 15 rahaorte H. 

16 /OmAP; 7 FCDGH: cxevafew v: cxedafe Koraes. 

18 repispddXovTa Koraes. 19 kaxetoar GH. 

2% FD: dvacrpéyar PGH Rigaltius Schwebel *‘ ceteri codd. 
ut vid.” 21 FGH: om. v: wav 76 Koraes. 


51] 


7 


10 


ONASANDER 


A \ A > / \ ~ 
[IIa@s yp duareActy erretyovTa Ta THs 
moAvopktas |* 


> > > / 3 A / 
Ki & ev raye omevoou" Tus eferety fpovptov 7) 
TOAw y) xdpaka Kal atT@ Kapvor 7 dvvapus® pede 
/ > 
piay @pav amtooTHvat Bovropevep TOV epupdron, 
els Taypata dueAwy TO oTpaTevua, do* ay (kava 
7] 5 a \ \ > , AG , 
eivat ot doKH Kata THY avadoytay Tod® zAjBovs 
\ \ \ ~ 
Kal Kata, TO peyelos THS mroALopKoUperns ToAcws, 
\ A 
vuKTos ap&duevos edOds TH ev mpwTwW TpocBadA- 
/ ~ >? 
hérw" tdypat. TO Sevtépw Kedctoas® ededpevew 
> lan , \ 
KaL eTouLe® elvar, TO d€ TpiTwW Kal TETEPTOs Kal 
El TUXOL TepTTOV ov, TmapayyeNere"® Tpemeobat 
Kara Kotrov" cira, orav TO TPWTW KaTaTELpacy™ 
TWO XpOvov, TOUTOUS [LEV dvakadeodsrevos OTTOTTE|L~ 
TETW) KOULNTOMEVOUS, ONMawET@n de TO OevTepy 
mpotevat Tod Xapaxos, 6 O€ TpiTos Taypwardpxns 
dvacTnoas ev ToUT@ kabomuleran TO bg’ eauTov 
Taya’ Kal eta Tovs dSevTépouvs THY tony wpav 
Tots mpwros aywvilecBar ake* TO TpiTov, KoL- 
DATES ASSO Se , 16 \ A ae - 
peacdw" dé To SevTEpov Taypa,'° weTa TodTO O° ad 
> 
TO TETApPTOV, <i eSis TO TELTTOV, ev jueper TOV 
OTpaTlwT@v avatravopevwyv. opoiws 8 émovv- 
a A ~ \ 
amTovons THS HuEépas of mp@ToL TH vuKTL Tpoc- 
oY ig ¢ 6 4\ A 19 , * A 
Badovtes® ewlev 7aAw mp@ro.u” tpocayovTwv: et 
€ » / 
wpas,*? ei pwev €€ ein Taypata, dVo KwduvevoarTes, 
> \ / Neer f ” \ > 6d > be 
el d€ meévte, dvow™ Err puxpov emiBevtes, et SE 
* See note on title before §2: ‘*Quomodo oppugnatio 
acriter urgendo ORES possit ” Rigaltius Schwebel. 


2 FGH: orevder v. n OvUvamls avTe@ Kduvor von Rohden. 
4 Koraes, comparing Hee Tactica, xv. 16: 67’ Q. 

> txkava ef | valo. F corr. B: om. oi vGH. 6 airod A m’% 
7 


mpoBaddérw VGH Rigaltius A m? ** ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
512 


THE GENERAL, xuu, 7-10 


(4) [On ending Sieges by vigorous Action] 


If a general desire quickly to capture a fort or 
city or camp and his force grow weary, while he 
wishes not to spare one hour from attacking the 
defences, he should split his army into divisions, as 
many as he considers sufficient, according to the 
number of his men and the extent of the besieged 
city, and then he should attack immediately at 
nightfall with the first division, ordering the second 
to remain near in readiness, but the third and fourth 
and fifth, if there chance to be a fifth, he should order 
to sleep. Then when the first division has attacked 
for some time, he should recall it and send it to its 
quarters to sleep, but he should give the signal to 
the second division to march out from the camp ; 
at this point the commander of the third division 
should arouse and arm his troops. After the second 
division has fought as long a time as the first, he will 
lead out his third division and order the second to 
rest ; after this the fourth, then in order the fifth, 
while the soldiers in turn rest from fighting. Thus, 
at daybreak, those who attacked first at night should 
again attack first at dawn, remaining at the front 
two hours, if there are six divisions, but a little 
longer if five ; three hours if four divisions, and four 


9 7d deUTepov . . . €rouwov von Rohden. 


1 kata meipas HF. 


8 Kededoa F, 
10 rapayyedeTw GH. 


22 wera 76 VGH. 13 gywvicacbar Koraes. 

14 ¢éen F: rdéec von Rohden. 

 Koipacbac VGH. 16 Om. FGH. 

7 § aro F: 6¢ af ro VGH. 18 tpotBaddovtes VGH. 

19 rpdro. madkw VGH (mporo GH): rH vucri. . . mpero 
om. R Camerarius. 

20 dpas F. 21 Suvoty v: doety GH. 


Oo 513 


ONASANDER 


, 1 A > \ Boge ee er 
TETTAPA, TpEeis, EL O€ Tpla,” TéTTAapas,*® amLoVTES 
/ an 
aptotoTrotetobwy,* eEns 5 of pet attovs Kal 
/ e 4 A 
mdaAw ot eta TOUTOUS Axpt THY TeAcUTALwWY, WoTE 
ll KUKAov> Twa mepiayecbat.  TovTov yap sup- 
/ e) 
Batvovtos auddtepa av ylyvoito: Kal ai® mpoo- 
\ A >) 
Borat Kat vi«Twp Kat pel” Huépay adidrertTou 
/ \ ~ 
mpooaxOycovrat, Kal ot mpoaBdAAovTes apres 
A / 
Kal veapol Tas avamatoes ev pepet TroLovpevoL 
12 wayovvrar. Tovs pevTor ToALopKoupevous, “Nd av 
mavu moAXot tTuyxdvwow,’ oléo0w tis TO adTo 
35 / ~ 
oTpaTHynua avteccotcecVar*® TO yap Kwédvuvedor, 
+) uA / 
ovo av emitpémy Tis, Umvw yapilecBa? BovAerar: 
doBw yap Tod dSewod, map’ ov avatraveTat ypdovov, 
e 10 LA / owe bi | 5A > / : \ \ 
ws? ddwoonevns ths’ modews eypiyyope’ Kal TO 
moAopkovpevov, Kav odAtyov % TO ToAvopKoby 
avTo, Tacovel’® mpocaptver, Kal mav Ooov év- 
/ 
TELYLOLOV E€OTL KEKWNTAL, OTL Kal TO pwEeAAoV dofe- 
>) A 5 / >) 
pWTEpov, ws, el" Tapa puKpov apeAjoaev, azro- 
13 Aovpevor Twavres. O0ev 87° aca avayKn Tpv- 
xomevous avTovs Kal pnde play Wpav avamavAav 
A > A 
toyovtas, aAAa Kat'® aypumviats’? Kal dvots 
Kdpvovtas, €tta Kal mpos Ta’® wéAdovTa treTada- 
5 A 
mwpnkoTas’ acblevéotepov Tots adpeTépois mpoo- 
apvvew 7 Tovs Senoomevous Kal TAapadwaovTas THV 
moAw éxméuTreww. 
1 térpa GH. 2 FGH: pets v. 3 rérrapes R. 
p p p 
4 dpiototmoeicbwoav VGH. 
5 FCR: kikto VGH (xixikw GH): kixrw twi Schwebel 


Koraes. 6 FGH: om. v. 7 ruyxavovo. P: -ow GH. 
8 tw altT@ oTpaTnynuaTe avTitacocecOar VGHA m?, 


514 








THE GENEWAL, xtir. 10-13 


hours if three divisions ; on their return they should 
receive their rations in order, the first division, then 
the second, and so on to the last, like the revolution 
of a wheel. With this plan, there are two results : 
unceasing attacks by night and day, while the 
attackers, taking their turns at rest, will fight 
freshly and vigorously. But no one should believe 
that the besieged, even if very numerous, could use 
this same stratagem, for in danger no one would 
wish to enjoy sleep even if it were permitted, since 
from fear of peril, during the time at which one is 
resting, he lies sleepless, as though the city were on 
the point of capture. The besieged, moreover, even 
if their assailants are few, defend themselves with 
all their strength, and everything within the walls 
of the city is in a state of excitement, in even greater 
terror of the future, as though if one minute detail 
were overlooked, they would all be lost. On this 
account there is every reason why men wearied, 
without an hour’s rest, tired by guard-duty and 
labour, and fearful for the future, should defend 
themselves more weakly, or should send out 
messengers to discuss the surrender of the city. 





9 Om. ro yap. . . xapiferda H. 

10, Om. 1: 11 Om. vGH. 

2 cate PA mn. 13 radon orovdy V (rdon orovdh GH). 

Moet R. 1 §e¢ PGH Rigaltius ‘‘ alii codd. ut vid.” 

16 ebay et. W a@yputvoiats GH. 

18 Koéchly: ef cai 7a mpds Ta F: 7 kal mpds ta VGH (eira 
mpos Ta B). 


19 teraderwpynkoras G: -xords H. 


212 515 


14 


15 


16 


ONASANDER 


[Il@s xp tov orparynyov avamavecba |* 


2_\ > ¢ , ” , 2 2 

Adros otv 6 atpatynyos, tows pyoe Tis,” €€ 
adduwavTos 7 atOynpov KexydAKevTar povos aypuT- 
vos €oTws*® emi tots avrots epyous*; od dArTa- 
LAAG > ea“ > / / e 5 S 
agAAa map’ ov avamraveTat xpdvov — odTos 
i 6 » \ , 7 ¢ as. cone 
Odiyos® éoTw Kai odvTopos’—, eva Tév* ev 6&€n 
MLOTOTAT WV Kal dvOpevoratwov TYE wOva Trav KaL 
Ta, devrepa Tis oTpaTnyuKTs apXns €XOvTwv 
emloTnodtw Tols Eepyo.s."° 


[Ila@s ra SoxotvtTa THs ToAcws pépy avadwra 
elvat moAAdKis evadwra yiyverat |™ 


*Eviore 5€ Ta SoKxotvTa pépn moAews” eivat 
Kpynpvwon Kal TeéTpats arroTémolts wyupwyeva™ 
Tov dia yeElpos aveoTnKoTWY TEeLy@v™ EdwKE Tots 
moopKovow adopuas peilovas® eis TO vwKav" 
etwlev yap mws ws ta moAAd Ta Toltadra’® tev 
moAewv, Oa doer TMLoTEVETAL TO epupVoV, apvra- 
KTeto$at Kal yKLOTA PpovTid. mapaypuTvetalat 
oTpatiwta@v.” évOa orparnyos ayablos evonoev 
6 de® movnoal, Kai Twas TOV etToALoTATwr® 


mapakaréoas emayyeXlau l ts 6At ae 
V S$ Kal TyLats OAvyous, ots 

1 See note on title before § 2: ‘‘Quo pacto imperator 

quiescere a laboribus ieee possit ” Rigaltius Schwebel. 
2 rls corr. Tivés (?) G 3 éorw VGH. 

4 kai wovos dypumvos tora émli Tocovro.s épyos Koraes. 

5 otrws F. 6 6 \éyos RA m?. 

7 ob} . . . ovvTouwos om. Camerarius. 

8 év airG* F: éva trav ait@ Kochly suggests. 

9 nyeuovav VGH. 10 rots Epyous éviore 5é KTA. F. 
516 


THE GENERAL, xxi. 14-16 


(5) [How the General should rest] 


“But has the general himself, then,’’ some one 
may perhaps say, “ been made of adamant or iron 
to have remained alone without sleep throughout all 
these deeds ?”’ Certainly not; but during the time 
that he sleeps—and this must be little and cut short— 
he should hand over the command of the army to one 
of his most trusted and courageous officers, who is 
also second only to himself in military rank. 


(6) [Parts of a City seemingly most impregnable are 
often easy to capture] 


Sometimes those parts of a city that seem pre- 
cipitous and are fortified by the sheer rocky cliffs, 
offer the besiegers greater chances for victory than 
do fortresses erected by human hands, for those 
places whose fortification relies upon natural strength 
are wont to be less carefully watched and guarded 
by soldiers. Then the wise general considers what 
he must do, and encouraging a few of his bravest 
soldiers with promise of reward, men who are best 


i See note on title before § 2: ‘* Loca quae obsessi 
inaccessa existimant obsidentibus saepenumero prodesse,” 


Rigaltius Schwebel. 12 ris modkews VGH. 
13 6yupérepa VGH (6x- GH). 
14 F indicates a break here. 13 welfous VGH Kochly. 


16 FC: rowtdvra ENPGH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
Tapayvurvetobat otparewwrav H. 

18 FENR: 67 GH Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
evTo\nwTatwv GH. 


20 FGH (6\- GH): 6diyars ENRA m? Camerarius. 
517 


ONASANDER 


Gov avaBaivew' eire bu avr s Ths dvo w cage 

P? \ / 7 ne 

eive Ola KAyaKwV ex aTyoe T ns 7 d€ews* 
ifs ? 7] 

e / \ / 

bmoKkataPavres* yap evTos Tetyous® 7 mvAida 

duexorsav 7) wUAnV avéwEar. 


C’. [Ilept ris amo tv cadmiyywv wdedetas |* 


17 Méya 8 av ovioee Kal te’ Towvde ovvemt- 
/ > \ \ e / > 
vonfeév, et Kat oadmyKxtas ot PO0doavrTes ém- 
Pivat Tob Teixous avyinoaev® axovobleioa yap 

/ / > \ ~ > \ \ 
moAeuia odAmy& amo Tery@v €v vuKTl Tog 
exTrAngw emipépe Tots TmoAvopKkoupevors as 7197 
KaTa Kpatos eadwKdow, wote Tas mUAas Kal Tas 
emanrfers amrodimovras devyew: dev Srzov cup- 
Baiver ylyveobau Tots ew oTparierTats padiay 
THY Te TOV TVADY ExKoTHV Kal THY ET Ta Teixn 
dua TOV KAydKwv avaBaow, ovdevos ETL TOV 
modeiwy arrelpyovTos: ovTws mov Sduvarov évi 
Kat avoTtAw cadmiyKThn? oAW adAdvat. 


[Tie yp) movety Tov otpatnyov peTa TO 
7 =) A \ > 10 
eActvy THY TroAw | 


\ 

18 Ei dé 6% twa axpudalovoary ere" mn ben Te Kal 
Ouvdpet TOAW €ppwevws*® edwy ets oBov y) 
dmovotav KOL, fy TWOTE KATA TaypaTa Kal 


1 FC: dua Baivey ENPGH Rigaltius A m?. 

2 F Leo, Tactica, xv. 20: dia twos Bialas dvaBdcews (but a 
little later Leo uses the expression 61a ris dbucxepelas Exelyns): 
ducxepeias VGH: dvcxepias A m?*. 

3 Kochly suggests rdaons roXews. 

4 FGH: ioBdvres v. 5 FGH: rod relxous v. 


518 


THE GENERAL, xii. 16-18 


able to climb up by using either the natural 
unevenness of the ground or else ladders, he accom- 
plishes his attempt; for descending stealthily within 
the walls they break down a postern or open a gate. 


(7) [The Advantage of Trumpets] 


Some such device as this would be of great 
assistance—if those who have succeeded in mounting 
the walls draw up trumpets after them. For a 
hostile trumpet heard at night from the walls brings 
great terror to the besieged, as if they had already 
been overcome by force, so that abandoning the 
gates and fortifications they flee. The result is that 
breaking down the gates and mounting the walls 
by ladders is easily accomplished by the soldiers on 
the outside since no one of the enemy resists any 
longer. Thus in some such way it is possible that 
one trumpeter, even without arms, can capture a 
city. 


(8) [Conduct of a General after the Capture of a City] 


If the general capture by force some city, flourish- 
ing in power and in the number of its citizens, and if 
he fear or suspect that the inhabitants advancing 


6 See note on title before § 2: ‘‘ Quid valeat tubicinis 
opera in expugnatione ” Rigaltius Schwebel. 
7 FGH: kai ro v. 
8 dviujoacev corr. to kabiujoaer (?) by early, perhaps con- 
temporary, hand in F. 9 cadmixTH GH. 
10 See note on title before § 2: ‘*Quid debeat agere 
imperator in urbem expugnatam invadendo” Rigaltius 
Schwebel. A break here is indicated in GH. 
1 éri v (éme GH) 2 éppwuevnv F. 
519 


19 


20 


ONASANDER 


\ € , Es 1 Vie 8 
avotpogas vmavrTialovres auvvwvtTa’ Tovs” em- 
/ ) 
eLlomimTovTas® 7 Ta peTéewpa KatadapPavopevor* 
\ 5) ~ 
Kal Ta akpa Ths moAews evOev avtemiovev® ert 
\ 
moAD KaKwaovtes® Tovs modeulous, KnpUTTETW 
\ 5 / A e 
Tovs avotAovs p17) KTElvat. ews’ yap EeKaoTos 
eAmiler Andbets teOvni€eo8at, Bovderau pldvew 
dpadoas Kal maoXuv aAda 7 Kal dpay, moAnot 
Te On moAEmlous eicKkexupevous e€jAacav 7 Kal 
\ 
un? duvyfevtes eis axpdtroAw epupvyv KatetAy- 
Onoav,? evOev adfis eis mévov'' Kat Tadairwpiav 
/ 
KaTéoTnoav"” Tovs moAeuious, wore SeuvTépav em- 
avaipetoGat todopKiav . . .° 7 Kal moAvxpoviw- 
/ ” >) 7 \ >] / \ ~ 
Tépav, eoTw 6 OTe Kal emadyeotépav peta TroAAs 
, A 5 \ ’ JO 14 \ a 
metpas KaKa@v. et dé dia Bon Fein Tooe* TO K 
puypa, TAYa fev Kal TAVTES, ws O€ mpoodnAov 
ctrrety, ol ye mAciovs Ta omha pifovor' Tav TE 
yap Bovdopeve du dpyhs exaorTos eis apuvav 
e ~ 
leva Sedtads TOV méhas, pit) Tote ovxX EauTa’® 
a 
Tavra” dpovn,® pirrew avayKacOrjoeTat, wore, 
\ iva 7 \ 
Kay TAVTES BovAwvrar® Ta OTAa pvddtrew, dia 
/ 
TH mpos arAnAous drrovoav adrov ExaoTov ded.0TA, 
~ “2 3 
py povos w7Avopévos AndO7A,” o7meddew azroti- 
1 gudvowro VGH: dudvoro A m2. 2 ras GH: rots A m?. 
3 émurimrovtras VGH. + xaradaBduevo. Koraes. 
5 CGH (B): dv7’ érioev F: dvrerivoev P Rigaltius ‘< alii 
codd. ut vid.” : dvremireivoev R. 
6 kaxwoavTes V (kKak@oavtes GH). 
7 Kochly: os F: 6 ENGH Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.”: 
5 Schwebel Koraes. 
8 a@\dd te G: GNA te. HA m?: Gddore Rigaltius ‘ ceteri 
codd. ut vid.”: é\Xo 7 Koraes. 
9 Kochly : 4 un VGH: kai wh (om. 9) F. 
10 FC: xarn\elOnoav GH: xcarnudrlcOnoav ENR: xarnnloOnoav 
P Rigaltius ‘* alii codd. ut vid.” 


520 


THE GENERAL, xuir. 18 — 20 


in companies and crowds may defend themselves 
against the invaders, or that seizing the heights and 
the citadel of the town they may advance from there 
and cause great loss to their opponents, he should 
command his own soldiers not to slay unarmed men 
of the enemy. For so long as every man expects 
to be killed after capture, he wishes first to do some 
deed of bravery, and even though he suffer, yet to 
accomplish something, and many inhabitants of 
towns have driven out enemies even when introduced 
into the town, or, failing in this, have crowded into 
the fortified citadel from which they have caused 
great labour and loss to their adversaries, who must 
enter into asecond . . . and longer siege, one that is 
sometimes more distressing and attended by great 
hardships. But if the above-mentioned command 
should be published, quickly all the inhabitants, 
or, needless to say, at least the majority, would 
throw down their arms. For every one who through 
anger wishes to defend himself, will be compelled 
to lay down his arms for fear that his neighbour 
may not be of the same mind, so that even if all 
should wish to keep their weapons, on account of 
this suspicion of one another, each one fearing that 
he alone may be taken with arms on his person, 


ll zécov A m?. 

12 Koraes: xatreorjoarto &. 

13 Schwebel noted the lacuna here: cai om. K. Koraes 
suggested that 7 cal be deleted, Kéchly suggests ov~x jrrova. 

44 Om. vGH. 

15 eis RA m? for dc dpyfs. 

16 ait@ v: att@ GH (éauré F). 

W ratra Fv: travta C: 7’ attra GH. 

18 Schwebel: ¢pove? FP “‘omnes codd. ut vid.” (¢povei GH). 

19 Bovdovrar GH. 20 -\nG09 F: NecPOein VGH. 


521 


ONASANDER 


bd 1 ¢ \ 3é a2 \ \ 3 \ 4 
guevov'— ot yap cfeis? Katpot THV® KownNV 
TA / a 
yuunv davepav odK ea yiyveobar—, ot Te 
\ ’ \ >) 
EToyLol mpos TO owleoBar, méexpt prev ovdev els 
/ > % \ ¥. 
éAmida KEKi}pUKTAL GwTyplas, «lL Kal® pun yvwun, 
5 27 b) / \ ’ \ > 4 / b] 
GAN” avdyKn TO emLov apvvovTal KaKOV, E7TEL- 
~ / 
dav d€ puxpav éAmida Tot owdlecbar AdBwouw, 
ikérat TOo® Aourov avTt Todcuiwy travtTdow. 
¢ e A / \ \ \ ¢ / 
oUTws Te 6 prev KnpvEaS Kal TOvs TA OTrAa Pvdar- 
\ 5 / 
Tew Povdropévovs pimtew atta avaykaler” orpa- 
A \ , ? \ 3 , ? 40 10 
Tiwta@v dé Oavatos év péev® dyas edTrapapvOnros 
—doKkel yap Tod wKav evexev yeyovévar—, ev b€ 
vikas Kal KataAnjbeou moAcwv Tots vuK@oW OLKTL- 
oTos, adpootvns te’ paddov” 7 avdpias® pap- 
TUpiov** el pevTo pvynoiudKws exou® tots 7nT- 
THuLEVvols” oTpaTnyos, 1) Tapa TovTo.s’® oiéobw 
/ 
tu dépecbat BArAaBos,” ote Tovs™ éevTvyyavovTas 
\ 20\ a OO Ne \ , 
py ed0ds KTevodar” oaxorAR yap BovdAevcerau 
peta TOO aKxwdvvov THY aduvvav avavTaywvioTov™ 
” 124 \ S 6 a 25 wee / 
exw, TL” xp7 diabetvar” rods €adwkoras. 


1 Kochly von Rohden: ozevdew droribéuevoe F: omevderv 
amoridec bac VGH. 

2 * oi yap d&ets etc.] desunt in LR” Rigaltius. He means 
probably oi . . . owfec@a, words which he brackets in the 
text. 3 Om. vGH. + kawhvy VGH: kal rhv Koraes. 

5 otk €@at (€eOo.ww GH) gdavepay VGH. 

6 kav v: kav GH for ei kai. 

7 Added by Kochly. 8 FGH: om. v. 

® Kochly : rods pirrew atta Bovdouévous Puddrrew avayxd fer 
F: rods ra SrAa guddrrew Bovouévous plimrrew mapacKevafer 
vGH (except BovdA\ouévars GH). 

10. dmrapautOntros VGH. 1 Om. KR Koraes. 

2 uddior’ R. 13 dvdpelas GH. 

522 


THE GENERAL, x11. 20 ~ 22 


hastens to give up his weapons. For a sudden 
emergency does not give time for the common opinion 
to become known. And those who are ready to 
protect their own lives so long as no hope of safety 
has been announced, strive to avert the imminent 
danger, if not as they wish, then as they must, but 
when they perceive a small hope of safety, they 
become suppliants instead of enemies. Thus this 
proclamation compels even those who wish to keep 
their arms to throw them down. The death of 
soldiers in battle admits of easy consolation, for it 
seems to have been the price of victory, but in 
victory and the occupation of cities it is a matter of 
sorrow to the conquerors, as an evidence of thought- 
lessness rather than bravery. If, however, the 
general is revengeful toward the conquered, he 
should not think that no harm is done them if his 
men do not slay on the spot all whom they meet, 
since at his leisure he will be able to plan in perfect 
safety his uncontested vengeance and the fate that 
the conquered must undergo. 


14 Koraes: paprupet F: waprupetyv VGH. 

15 wév Tra F : yap tws v: yap Ta GH. 16 éyea VGH. 
7 prrwuevas R. 18 rofro VGH. ce , 
20 BrAadBws GH. 21 rods uy F. 

#2 xrevovow Kochly: xreivovow vGH. 


t 
3 duuy avvavtayevicroy F (thecorrection is probably by the 
first hand, in Rostagno’s opinion): duvyay dvavtayovorov 
CP: duvvay avrayaévicrov GH Rigaltius *‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
24 €xovrt. VPA m? GH: éxwv Ti F. 
2 diadjvac H: dcaP var (?) corr. to diadetvac G. 


523 


ONASANDER 


\ ~ 
[Tov Awd péAAovra rodAw aipnoew todvs Kara 
\ A 
Thv xwpav acbevets eis adtnv xpt) méuTrew |* 


293 Ei Oe \ \ Zs / > \ > / 6 
i de TH Kata KpdTos ameyvwKws eéxTropOnow 
els Xpoviov KkataBaivo mroAvopKtay oldjuevos Awe 
\ 
mueoas” Ty TOAw atpncery, a Twa. av emt Tijs 
ywpas ete? Kataddbn owyata, TovTwY Ta peV 
Eppweva Kal aKualovta tats AAukiais els apvvav 
r / / a wv ) ~ / 4 / 
ToA€uov Aafwv, 6 Tt wep av adTa@ S6En,* drabécbw, 
yuvao. d€ Kal Travdapia” Kal aobeveis dvOpcirous 
KaL yeynpaKoras Exwv® els THY mohw amomepmeTen” 
TavTa yap axpnoTa pev eis Tas mpdaéeus e€oTat,” 
Tas 6é€ mapeokevacpevas® Tois® evdov tpodas*® 
OGrtrov cvvavaddce, Kat troAcpiwvy padAdov 7 
/ 2, 7E_ 12 / 13 
diriwy ebeEer tpdmov. 


. [‘Ozotov elvan xp) TOV OTparnyoy pLeTa 
TH vikny | 


24 Et 6€ tw mdvta Kata Saiwova Kat vobv 
Ywprocev, wate Tots OAois emHeivar ToD toA€pwou 
mpaypac. TéAos, EoTwW 7) Papvs emt Tats edmpa- 
ylais, add’ evpopTos,” unde tUdov amnvh trept- 


dépwv, GAN’ edyeverav mpoodiAn exwv: oO” pev™® 


1 See note on title before § 2: ‘‘ Imbelles captivos remit- 
tendos, si fame urbs premenda sit” Rigaltius Schwebel. 
Kochly : \wué méoar F: om. mécas VGH. 


9 

3 Om. vGH. 4 d6fe GH. 

5 cal mardaprea FPGH: om. v. 

6 €\av Koraes. 7 Added by KéGchly. 

8 eis 6€ Tas Tapackevas povas F: Tas nope ee Tas 
Taperkevag uévas GH Koraes. ros 6¢ VGH. 


10 ras rpopas GH: orpogpas P Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.” 
524 


THE GENERAL, xin. 23 — 24 


(9) [Necessity of sending Women and Children into a 
City to capture it by Famine] 


If the general should despair of sacking a city by 
force and should settle down to a prolonged siege, 
believing that he will capture the city if he has 
pressed it hard by famine, he should take prisoners 
whatever persons are still in the country. Of these, 
to the men in the prime of life he should assign 
work on the defences such as seems best to him, 
but the women and children and feeble men and 
old people he should send of his own accord into 
the city. These will be useless in action but will 
consume more quickly the supplies of the besieged 
and will serve the purpose of enemies rather than 


friends. 


(10) [Conduct of the General after Victory] 


If the war should chance to turn out in every- 
thing according to the general’s desire, so as to put a 
complete end to the enemy’s activity, he should not 
be overweening in his good fortune, but gracious ; 


he should not show violent stupidity but kindly good- 


11 gywavaddoe Oatrov VGH. 

2 ditwy ec VGH (ée GH). 13 +érov Scaliger. 

14 See note on title before §2: ‘* Qualis esse debeat im- 
perator parta victoria’’ Rigaltius Schwebel. 

15 aire Scaliger. 

16 Kéchly: ddAdgopros F: ad’ Nagupros G: aA gupros H: 
aX’ &g@upros V: add’ Gdopros Koraes. 

1” rpocgthh* éxetvos von Rohden. 

18 Kochly: €ywv" Guév F: éxeiva (éxeiva GH) wey VGH. 

525 


25 


26 


ONASANDER 


yap b0dvov éyévynce,' avry® dé CiAov éemeomacato? 
hUdvos prev ovv e€oTW odvVN THV Tpos Tovs* 7réAas 
> ~ HA \ / ~ > a 5 
ayabav, Cros d€ pulunois Tov map adAdAos 
KaA@v, TocovTov Te® drev7}) LAAHA U 
; wvoxev aAAjAwY, wore 
aA > ~ \ 
TO Lev ploveiv’ eUXV elvat TOU Kat ap aAAw Te 
kaNov pn eivat, TO de CnAodv e7Oupiav Tis Tov 
lowy KTYGEWS. aVvnp ovv dyabos ov Lovov 
matpioos Te Kal oTpatiwTiKod mAyOfous apioTos 
e / > \ \ ~ \ ] \ > > \g§ y) / 
nyewwv, adda Kal THs Tept adrov els atet evdoo€las 
akwovvov® odK aVvontos oTpaTyyes.” 
1 éyévynoay v: éyévnoay PGH: éyévyncev Kochly von 


Rohden. 

2 Kochly (without a note): taita FGH Rigaltius Schwebel 
Koraes v (apparently). 

3 éveoracato G Rigaltius ‘alii codd. ut vid.” : évecmacraro 
H: éordcaro RA m?: ésracavto K: érecracavto Koraes. 


THE GENERAL, x11. 24 -— 26 


will; for the former excites envy, the latter causes 
emulation. Now envy is a pain of mind that 
successful men cause their neighbours, but emula- 
tion is imitation of the good qualities of others; 
such is the difference between them that envy is 
the desire that another may not have good fortune, 
but emulation is the desire to equal the possessions 
of another. A good man, then, will be not only 
a brave defender of his fatherland and a com- 
petent leader of an army but also for the permanent 
protection of his own reputation will be a sagacious 
strategist. 


4 mapa tots Koraes. 
5 FGH: addA7jA\as P Rigaltius ‘‘ ceteri codd. ut vid.” 
6 tocotrov 6€é te VGH: : Tocoiroy 5é ro. RA m?. 
7 pboviy P. 8 dei GH Kochly. 
° Deleted by von Rohden. 
0 Subscription évacavdpov orparny.ixés F (see Introd.). 


wy - 


me. 
HE 
ae | 
* * 
fae 
’ 
. 


+t 
a pd 
‘ 
' 
a > : 


. 


ii. OAR Aa Seaee 





god 


2. Ee canbe 

Tae {T94 3% ' ; ‘eke 
tid oe Ps, he Ht: ae = 

St thet ; 


3 ek dk ~ <3 rotors te Li 
» Ot Silveeh off on ohne 


i, 4s , * 
7 ‘ y ah tee 
‘ Lee i) ; 
bur at Sasa Aah Aa 
re pe ae 
3 Cy a es at a4 
4 * « “ 
ore ee 
tet : 4% Veit ret eG 


ro UpGhtenDEd noise iene 


INDEX 


The numbers refer to pages. 


Abderites, 79 
Abydos, 147 
Achaea, 95 
Admonitions, work on, 191 
Aegina, 105 
Aelian, 205 
Aeneas, 165, 201, 205 
Aeolis, 125 
Alexander (of Epirus), 201 
Amasis, 187 
ancestors, effects of, 
general, 385 
animals, pedigrees of, 385 
Apollodorus, 207 
Apollonia Pontica, 105 
Arcadian, 139 
Ares, 125 
Argives, 67, 91 
Argos, 67 
Aristagoras, 171 
armour, 383, 469, 485 
Arrian, 205 
arsenal, 65 
Artabazus, 169 
Artemis, 129 
astragals, 163, 165, 215 
astrology, relation of, to extispicy, 
431 


on the 


Astyanax, 173 
Athena, 125 
Athenian(s), 41, 43. 69 
Athenodorus, 127, 129 
Athens, 41 

Augustus Caesar, 369 


Barca, 85, 187 
baton, 119 
bazaars, 153 
bees, 187, 219 
bells, 148 


bird-lime, 183 

bladder, 161 

bolt-pins, 93, 95, 97, 99, 103, 105 
Bosporus, 43 

burial of the fallen, 491 


Cadmea, 131, 173 

Caesar, Augustus, 369 

cap, felt, 69 

catapults, 509 

caulking of ships, 65 

censorship of letters, 55 

Chalcedonians, 71, 73 

Chalcidians, 39 

Chalcis, 39 

Chares, 69 

Charidemus, 125, 127, 129 

chariots, 249, 291 

cheerfulness, importance of, 439 

children, advisable for the general 
to have, 379 

Chios, 65, 91 

Cineas, 201 

circles, area of, 423 

city-destroyers, 509 

Clazomenae, 147 

Clearchus, 201 

clock, 117, 209 

cocks, cautery of, 121 

Coreyra, 69 

Corcyreans, 71 

cows, 143 

crescent formation, 455, 457 

Cretan(s), 303, 305 

eon importer honoured with, 


Cyrene, 85 
Cyzicus, 71 


Datamas, 197 
529 


INDEX 


decorations, military, 485 

Demeter, 41 

deserters, 421, 427 

dice-playing, 43 

Dionysius, 61. 171, 197 

Dionysus, 91 

Dioscuri, 125, 129 

disease, 407 

dogs: aan salal| bal ote Slew. 
189, 217, 487 


elephants, 249, 291, 293 

Eleusis, 4 

embassies, public, 55, 61 

Encampments, work on, 107 

Enyalius, 125 

Ephesus, 157 

Epirus, 173, 201, 217 

Eretria, 39 

Euphratas, 141 

Euripus, 39 

exercise, need of, 409 

exiles, 53, 59 

extispicy, relation of, to astrology, 
431 


factions : see party-struggles 

family, important for the general 
383, 385 

famine, 525 

Fate, 429 

fatigue, effect of, 401 

fear, a false prophet, 507 

festivals, 53, 91, 113, 149, 151, 
211, 491 

Finance, work on, 75 

fire-extinguishers, 183, 207 

fire-pot, 39 

fire-signals: see signals 

fires to deceive the enemy, 419 

foraging, 415 

Fortune, 371, 373, 393 

frankincense, 183 

Fronto, 201 

funerals, 53 


Glus, 175 

gods, 391, 495 

gourds, 151 

Greek(s), 29, 181, 205, 279 
gymnasia, superintendents of, 375 


Hellespont, 147 
Heraclea Pontica, 69, 73 
Heracleides, 171 


530 





Heracles, 129 

Hermeas, 201 

Hermes, 129 

Himera, 61 

Histiaeus, 171 
holidays: see festivals 
Homer, 201, 377 
honours, aw ‘arding of, 485 
hostages, 61 

hundreds, 69 

huntsmen and dogs, 487 


idleness, prevention of, 407 
Ilium, 125, 127, 169 

Imbrian, Athenodorus the, 127 
inns, 55 

Tonia, 97 

Iphiades, 147 

Iphicrates, 129 

Italy, 371 


Lacedaemon, 69 

Lacedaemonians, 33 

Laconian(s), 141, 303, 305, 333 

ladders, 65, 183, 185, 19, Sls 
519 

lamps and lanterns, 57, 63, 115, 
1337 


Lampsacus, 173 

leeches, 71 

Leptines, 61 

Lesbos, 173 

Leuco, 43 

lightning, representation of, in 
art, 181 

lights : see lamps 

Locrian maidens, 169 

lot, use of, 37 

lyre, strings of, 411 


Macoconlaaise 2475271, 249; 303; 
305 


market-place, os ao 34; D093 
107, 133, 149, 

marshy land to ae avoided for 
camps, 407 

meals, 435 

medical equipment, 399 

Megara, 43 

Megarian(s), 41, 43 

mercenaries, 67, 71, 73, 

99, 119, 125, 127 May 

merchants, 383, 403 

messages, secret, 155 ff., 161 ff. 

messengers, 435 


75, 95, 


ae me ea 


——S 








INDEX 


Miletus, 171 

Military Preparations, work on, 
47, 49, 105, 199 

mines, 179, 185, 187, 219 

Moon, 129 

musical instruments, 411 

musical intervals, 411 

Mytilene, 173 


Naxos, 115 

needle for mats, 97 
nets, 65, 191, 195 
Nicocles, 115 


omens, 429, 431 
Onesander (sic), 207 
Oreus, 125 

osiers, 153 


Paean, 139 

palisades, 423, 505 

Pallas, 125 

panics, 139, 141, 143, 397 

papyrus, 159, 167, 217 

Parians, 147 

Parium, i47 

parleys, 419 

party-struggles, 31, 59, 67, 69, 
91, 93, 118 

party-walls, 33 

passports, 55 

Patro, 207 

pedigrees of animals, 385 

Peisistratus, 41 

Peloponnesian (word), 139 

pent-house, 179, 181 

Persian(s), 279, 303, 305 

physicians, 381, 473 

pilots, simile from, 479, 481 

pincers, 95 

pipe, stops of, 411 

pitch, 183, 207 

Piataeans, 33 

Plots, work on, 65 

poison, 205 

Polybius, 201, 205 

portcullis, 193, 221, 223 

Poseidon, 129 

Potidaea, 169, 171 

priests, choice of, 375 

prisoners, treatment of, 441, 489, 
525 

proclamations, 53, 57, 59 

purification of army, 393 

Pyrrhus, 201 


Pytho, 147 


races, torch and horse, 89 
ramp, 113, 115 

rams, 177, 509 

reinforcements, 461 

reserves, 459 

rest, how the general should, 517 
revolution: see party-struggles 
rewards, 57 

Rhodian, Temenus the, 99 
Romans, 369, 371, 373 
rush-mats, 97 


sacrifices, 395, 429, 431, 485 

sacrilege, 495 

sails, 65 

sambuca, 509 

sandals, 157, 215 

sawing through the bar, 103 

Scythian(s), 249, 279 

sheds, covered, 509 

ship-houses, 65 

ships, overhauling of, 393 

shouting in battle, 471 

Sicilians, 279 

Sicyonians, 153 

siege engines, 509 

signals, 39, 45, 47, 75, 87, 101, 
111, 139, 203, 205, 467 

Sinope, 197 

slings, 445, 449 

smuggling, 149, 211 

soothsayers, 53, 395, 429 

spies, 113, 417 

sponge, 103, 161 

staff of the general, 389 

stars, knowledge of the, 431, 499, 
501 


5 

Stratocles, 201 

sulphur, 183, 207 

Sun, 129 

Bureudered cities, treatment of, 


sweeps, 195 
Syracuse, 61 


tablet, boxwood, 163 
Tarentine, 251, 291 
tattooing, 171 
Temenus, 99, 101 
Teos, 97 
thank-offerings, 485 
theatre, 31, 37, 107 
Thebans, 33, 35 


531 


INDEX 


Thebes, 131, 173 
Thessalian(s), 173, 201, 217, 277 
Thrace, 141 

Thracians, 279 

tile-roofs, 35 

Timoxenus, 169 

topography, 431 

torches, 47, 63, 128, 205 
torch-race, 89 

tow, 183 

towers, 509 

traders, 383 

traitors, treatment of, 499, 501 
Triballi, 79 

tripods, 33 

trumpets, use of, 519 
Tyndaridae, 125, 129 


usurers, 383 


vagrants, 55 
Veranius, Q., 369 
vinegar, 183 


wagons, 33, 35, 85, 145, 147, 187, 
189, 211, 221 

wasps, 187, 219 

watches, equalization of, 117 

watchword, 47, 105, 125, 131, 
133, 465, 467 

water, treatment of, 49, 199 

water-clock, 117, 209 

weddings, 53 

whistling, 131 

women, use of as patrols, 197 

wrestler, simile of, 511 


Zeus the Saviour, 129 


Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. CrarK, Limitep, Edinburgh. 





Date Due 


JUN 301999 =| 
Me. 


UN 30 20 ee
