The Dramas of Aeschylus (Aeschylus, 1886)
==========================================================
The complete surviving Aeschylus — all seven tragedies (Agamemnon, Choephori, Eumenides, Persians, Seven Against Thebes, Prometheus Bound, Suppliants) in Anna Swanwick's celebrated verse translation, 4th revised edition 1886; metrically and stylistically distinct from the Blackie translation already in the library. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramasswa00aescuoft).

DRAMAS    OF    ^SCHYLUS. 


TRANSLATED   BVT 


ANNA    SWANWICK. 


FOURTH  EDITION  REVISED. 


LONDON:   GEORGE  BELL  &  SONS,  YORK  STREET 
COVENT  GARDEN.        ^ 

188fi. 


LONDON'  : 

PRINTED    BY    WILLIAM    CLOWES    AND   SONS.  LIMITED, 

tTAHFOOD  STREET    AND   CHAKIKG   CB06S. 


^^^^ 


nM') 


^ 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction  to  the  Trilogy 

,         .    xvii 

Agamemnon    

1 

Choephoki      

.       79 

EVMENIDES 

.     139 

The  Persians         .... 

.     190 

Seven  against  TnEBiiS  .         , 

.     261 

Prometheus  Bound 

.     3?,1 

The  Suppliants    ^,^      .         .        . 

.     399 

PEEFACE  TO  TEE  TPJLOGY. 


It  has  been  tnily  remarked  by  Shelley,  "  tliat  the  jury 
which  sits  in  judgment  upon  a  poet  must  be  composed 
of  his  peers ;  it  must  be  empanelled  by  time  from  the 
seleetest  of  the  wise  of  many  generations."  By  the 
verdict  of  this  august  tribunal,  ^Eschylus  takes  rank 
rath  Homer,  Dante,  and  Shakespeare,  and  may  -justly 
be  rcgarded  as  one  of  "  the  unacknowledged  legislators 
of  the  world." 

As  it  may  appear  presumptuous  to  offer  to  the  public 
a  new  translation  of  the  yEschylean  trilogy,  the 
grandest  dramatic  work  of  classical  antiquity,  I  may 
perhaps  be  allowed  to  state  that  I  have  not  entered 
upon  the  task  altogether  uninvited.  On  the  publica- 
tion of  my  translation  of  "  Faust,"  and  the  other  master- 
works  of  Goethe,  in  Bohn's  Standard  Library,  I  was 
strongly  urged  by  the  late  Baron  Bunscn  to  undertake 
the  translation  of  the  Greek  dramas.  I  felt  honoured 
by  the  proposal ;  and  though  I  was  not  immediately 
impelled  to  act  upon  the  suggestion,  his  words  have 
dwelt  in  my  memory,  and  have  encouraged  me  to  com- 
plete an  arduous  and  very  difficult  undertaking. 

Considerable  diversity  of  opinion  prevails  respecting 
the  propriety  of  employing  rhymed  metres   as   sub- 


viii  Preface. 

stitutes  for  the  complex  forms  of  classical  poetry; 
henco  it  may  not  be  inexpedient  briefly  to  state  my 
reasons  for  adopting  them,  as  aflfording  in  my  judgment 
the  only  adequate  vehicle  for  reproducing  the  choral 
odes  of  the  Greek  dramas. 

"With  regard  to  the  principles  which  should  guide 
the  translator  in  the  execution  of  his  task,  it  is,  I 
believe,  universally  recognized  that  a  translation  ought, 
CIS  faithfully  as  possible,  to  reflect  the  original,  both  in 
spirit  and  in  form,  and  that  any  wilful  or  unacknow- 
ledged deviation  from  it  is  tantamount  to  a  breach  of 
trust.  The  difficulty  of  rigidly  applying  these  prin- 
ciples to  the  translation  of  the  choral  odes  will  be 
apparent  when  we  remember  that  the  medium  through 
which  the  thought  of  the  ancient  poet  has  to  be  re- 
embodied  differs  so  essentially  from  that  of  the  original 
as  to  render  the  principle  of  imitation,  with  reference 
to  their  musical  intonations,  inapplicable.  The  futility 
of  attempting  to  imitate  the  forms  of  classical  poetry 
in  a  language  the  metres  of  which  are  governed  not  by 
Time,  but  by  Accent,  has  been  pointed  out  by 
Professor  Newman,  in  the  preface  to  his  admirable 
translation  of  the  Iliad,  the  excellence  of  which  can 
only  bo  fully  appreciated  by  a  careful  comparison  with 
the  original. 

"An  accented  metre,"  he  says,  "in  a  language 
loaded  with  consonants  cannot  have  the  same  sort  of 
sounding  beauty  as  a  quantitative  metre  in  a  highly 
vocalized  language.  It  is  not  audible  sameness  of 
nctrc,  but  a  likeness  of  moral  genius  which  is  to  bo 


Preface.  ix 

aimed  .it,"  The  translator,  having  thus  no  authorita- 
tive models  to  necessitate  the  adoption  of  particular 
forms,  is  at  liberty,  without  incurring  the  charge  of 
unfaithfulness,  to  adopt  those  metres,  rhymed  or 
uui-hymed,  which  approve  themselves  to  his  judgment 
as  most  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  original. 
In  order  to  fulfil  this  condition,  however,  he  must  take 
into  consideration  the  highly  lyrical  character  of  the 
choral  odes,  which  associated  themselves  not  only  with 
music,  but  also  with  the  choral  dance. 

Now,  this  lyrical  element  of  ancient  poetry,  not 
admitting  of  translation,  requires  to  be  born  anew,  and 
for  this  purpose  we  have  a  most  felicitous  adjunct  in 
rhyme,  which,  when  judiciously  employed,  may  be 
regarded  as  a  musical  accompaniment,  pervading  the 
choral  harmonies,  enhancing  their  beauty,  and  at  the 
same  time  serving  to  mark  the  time. 

The  only  possible  objection  to  the  use  of  an  ornament 
80  attractive  and  significant,  and  at  the  same  time  so 
conformable  to  the  English  language,  is  the  notion, 
very  generally  entertained,  that  "  the  exigencies  of 
rhyme  forbid  faithfulness."  Holding  fidelity  to  the 
spirit  of  the  original  to  be  the  cardinal  virtue  of  a 
translator,  I  should,  if  this  opinion  were  well  founded, 
abandon  rhyme  without  hesitation.  It  appears  to  me, 
however,  that  the  objection  is  overstated,  and  that  it  is 
better  to  aim  at  the  true  lyrical  ideal,  however  difficult 
of  realization.  The  solution  of  the  problem  can  only 
be  worked  out  by  experience.  How  far  I  have 
succeeded   in   combining    scrupulous   fidelity   to   the 


X  Freface. 

original  ^nth  the  employment  of  rhyme,  it  is  not  for 
me  to  judge;  metrical  translation  must  always  be  a 
matter  of  compromise,  and  no  one  can  be  so  sensitively 
awaro  of  tbe  sbortcomings  of  a  translation  as  tbe 
translator. 

My  desire  to  bespeak  for  tbe  dramas  of  i^schylus 
that  intelligent  study  which  is  essential  for  their  true 
appreciation  has  induced  me  to  attempt  in  my  intro- 
duction a  very  slight  sketch  of  the  progress  of  religious 
thought,  as  manifested  through  a  few  of  the  great 
master-works  of  literature  and  art.  Poets  are  repre- 
sentative men ;  and  poetry,  under  its  higher  aspects, 
may  justly  be  regarded  as  the  fairest  flower  of  the  age 
and  country  which  gave  it  birth,  drawing  its  nourish- 
ment from  the  deepest  roots  of  national  life,  and  con- 
cealing beneath  its  delicate  petals  the  germs  of  the 
future.  Hence  every  great  poem  requires  for  its 
elucidation,  not  only  to  be  studied  in  connection  with 
contemporaneous  history,  but  also  to  bo  brought  into 
comparison  with  the  kindred  productions  of  other 
ages  and  nations.  New  insight  is  thus  gained  into 
the  developments  of  history,  and  the  tendencies  of 
modern  thought  are  more  clearly  interpreted  when 
brought  face  to  face  with  the  conceptions  and  aspira- 
tions of  tho  old  pagan  world.  If  a  complete  history 
of  religious  development  were  to  be  given,  it  would  of 
course  lo  necessary  to  go  back  to  tho  prior  Jlonothcisni 
which  probably  preceded  tho  earliest  rautheistic  nature- 
worship  of  which  wo  liavo  any  record,  and  also  to 
investigate   tho   links  of  transition   from   tho  Vcdio 


Treface.  xi 

Dmnities  to  the  ideal  Personalities  of  Olympus.  Sach 
an  inq[uiry  would,  however,  exceed  the  scope  of  an 
introduction. 

In  considering  the  Zeus  of  ^schylus  I  have  con- 
fined myself  almost  entirely  to  the  conception  of  the 
Olympian    king  embodied   in    the    Orestcia,   leaving 
untouched    the    apparent    discrepancy    between    the 
character  there  portrayed  and   that   depicted  in  the 
Prometheus  Bound.     I  agi'ee  with  those  critics  who 
believe  that  the  discrepancy  is  only  apparent,  and 
would  vanish  had  we  the  opportunity  of  studying  the 
other  members  of   the  Prc«nethean  trilogy.     Critics 
are    agreed    that    the    Suppliants  ought   also  to   be 
regarded  as  a  member  of  a  trilogy,  in  association  with 
the  lost  dramas  of  the  ^gyptii   and  the  Danaidcs. 
These  fragmentary   works  can,   I    believe,  be  only 
satisfactorily  interpreted  when   studied  in  connection 
with  the  Orestcia.     The  investigation  would,  however, 
necessitate  a  reference   to   the    remaining  dramas  of 
iEschylus,  and  must  therefore  be  postponed  to  a  future 
opportunity. 

All  true  lovers  of  Art,  who  recognize  her  legitimate 
function  as  a  revealer  of  truth,  a  mediator  between  the 
Finite  and  the  Infinite,  cannot  fail  to  regi'ct  the  sub- 
ordinate position  to  which  she  is  condemned  in  the  pre- 
sent day,  when  she  is  too  often  regarded  in  the  light  of 
a  mere  elegant  superfluity,  as  one  of  the  costly  adjuncts 
of  our  modern  civilization.  The  true  dignity  of  art 
has  been  nobly  vindicated  by  Hegel  in  his  celebrated 
work,  entitled  "  Vorlesungen  iiber  die  Aestlietik."    As 


xii  Preface. 

this  work  is,  I  believe,  comparatively  little  known  in 
England,  I  have  ventured  to  recast,  with  some  modifi- 
cations, a  few  of  his  leading  ideas,  and  to  embody 
them  in  my  introduction.  I  refer  more  especially  to 
his  analysis  of  the  Greek  dramas,  and  to  his  exposition 
of  the  fundamental  ideas  which  characterize  the  three 
great  eras — the  symbolical,  classical,  and  romantic — 
which  mark  alike  the  history  of  religion  and  of  art.  I 
have  also  availed  myself  of  C  O.  Miiller's  admirable 
dissertations  on  *'  the  Eumenides,"  together  with  Pro- 
fessor Max  Miiller's  lectures  on  language,  second 
series,  and  his  history  of  ancient  Sanscrit  literature. 
With  regard  to  mythological  lore,  I  am  chiefly  in- 
debted to  Wclcker's  "  Griechische  Gotterlehre,"  Kuhn's 
"  Herabkunft  des  Feuers,"  and  also  to  Guigniant'a 
"Eeligionsdo  I'Antiquite,"  translated  from  the  German 
of  Creuzer. 

Eegents  Pace,  June  18G5, 


PKEFACE  TO  THE  FOUE  PLAYS. 


The  kind  reception  accorded  to  my  version  of  tlie 
Oresteian  trilogy  has  encouraged  me  to  complete  my 
task  by  translating  the  remaining  dramas  of  the  great 
Athenian  bard. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  with  accuracy  the 
original  number  of  the  -3l]schylean  dramas  ;  the  lowest 
estimate  is  seventy-five,  the  highest  one  hundred.  Of 
this  treasure  of  poetry  seven  dramas  only,  together 
with  a  few  isolated  fragments,  have  escaped  the  wreck 
of  time,  ^schylus  has  been  compared,  not  inaptly,  to 
the  Sphinx  of  the  Egyptian  desert,  buried  up  to  its 
shoulders  beneath  the  accumulated  sands  of  ages. 
"  Enseveli  et  eternel,  le  front  sortant  du  sepulcre, 
Eschyle  regarde  les  generations." 

The  influence  of  his  genius  has  been  far-reaching  in 
space,  as  well  as  enduring  in  time : — it  is  interesting 
to  consider  the  vast  area  over  which  the  spirit  and 
language  of  Hellas  were  diffused  by  means  of  her 
colonies,  which  were  found  scattered  and  isolated  in 
every  region  of  the  known  world  ;  from  Spain  in  the 
west  to  the  countries  bordering  upon  the  Euxine  in 
the  east ;  from  Pannonia  in  the  north  to  Libya  in  the 
south. 


xiv  Preface. 

The  importance  of  poetry  as  one  of  the  great  civiliz- 
ing forces  of  humanity  was  not  overlooked  by  these 
Hellenic  communities.  They  recognized  the  prime 
truth  that  "  the  mind  of  a  nation  constitutes  its  firmest 
bulwark."  Theatres  accordingly  were  erected  beside 
their  citadels.  These  edifices,  it  must  be  remembered, 
were  not,  as  with  us,  mere  places  of  amusement. 
Owing  to  the  religious  element,  which  from  its  cradle 
pervaded  the  Athenian  drama,  the  Hellenic  theatres 
were  invested  with  somewhat  of  a  sacred  character,  and 
their  dramatic  performances  constituted  a  characteristic 
feature  of  the  national  life.  .^Eschylus,  we  are  told, 
was  the  favourite  poet  of  the  Hellenic  colonists. 

•'^schylus  present,  Hellas  was  not  altogether  absent. 
His  colossal  genius  thus  protected  these  infant  com- 
munities from  the  inroads  of  surrounding  barbarism, 
and  maintained  them  in  the  circle  of  Hellenic 
civilization." 

It  would  bo  well  if  the  civilizing  agency  of  poetry 
were  more  universally  recognized.  The  human  mind 
requires  to  be  lifted  occasionally  above  the  level  of 
ordinary  life,  where  it  is  exposed  to  the  perpetual 
harass  of  material  cares.  Poetry,  the  highest  embodi- 
ment of  idealized  passion  and  imaginative  thought, 
must  ever  bo  regarded  as  u  mighty  agent  for  the 
accomplishment  of  this  object.  Poets  of  the  highest 
order  belong,  however,  not  to  one  ago  or  country,  but 
to  humanity.  It  is  thcrcforo  important  that  the 
productions  of  those  master-spirits  should  bo  adequately 
translated    and   thus    rendered    generally  occossiblo. 


Prfface.  xv 

This  is  more  especially  true  at  tlie  present  time,  when, 
with  the  spread  of  educatiou,  the  multitude  of  readers 
will  be  indefinitely  increased. 

Shakespeare  has  been  not  inappropriately  styled  "  the 
modern  ^schylus ;"  an  association  which,  to  the 
English  reader  at  least,  invests  with  peculiar  interest 
the  prophetic  poet  of  the  ancient  world.  The  perusal 
of  his  master-works,  like  those  of  his  great  compeer, 
illustrates  the  truth  proclaimed  by  the  Apostle  from 
the  Athenian  Areopagus,  "  that  God  has  made  of  one 
blood  all  nations  of  men  ;"  notwithstanding  the  diver- 
sity of  external  surrounding,  we  discern,  in  the  per- 
sonages of  the  ^schylean  dramas,  whether  human  or 
superhuman,  beings  of  like  passions  with  ourselves, 
endowed  with  the  same  mental  constitution,  and  subject 
to  the  moral  laws  impressed  by  the  Creator  upon  our 
common  humanity.  In  bis  sublimer  passages  we  soar 
with  the  poet  as  on  eagle's  wings,  and  anon  we  come 
upon  pregnant  utterances  which 

" fix  themselves 

Deep  in  the  heart  as  meteor  stones  in  earth 
Dropped  from  some  higher  sphere." 

" "Who  can  mistake  great  thoughts? 

They  seize  upon  the  mind, — arrest  and  search 
And  shake  it ;  bow  the  tall  soul  as  by  wind, — 
Pvusb  over  it  like  rivers  over  reeds, 
Which  quaver  in  the  current." 

Such  are  the  thoughts  of  .^schylus  I 
From  all  this  wealth  of  poetry  many  readers  are, 
however,  practically  excluded,  not  only  by  the  foreign 


xvi  Preface. 

language  in  which  it  is  embodied,  but  nlso  by  their 
unfamiliarity  with  the  mythological  lore  of  Hellas. 
Like  travellers  in  a  foreign  country,  they  shrink  from 
the  exertion  of  exploring  an  unknown  region  without 
the  assistance  of  a  guide.  In  order  in  some  measure 
to  supply  this  want,  I  have  prefixed  to  each  drama  a 
brief  introduction,  setting  forth  the  main  incidents  of 
the  situation,  together  with  other  explanatory  details. 
In  these  introductions  I  make  no  claim  to  originality ; 
I  have  consulted  the  various  works,  bearing  upon  the 
subject,  to  which  I  had  access,  and  from  them  I  have 
endeavoured  to  bring  together,  as  concisely  as  possible, 
such  materials  as  seemed  subservient  to  the  object 
which  I  had  in  view. 

With  regard  to  Prometheus,  I  have  felt  the  im- 
possibility of  treating  adequately,  within  the  narrow 
limits  of  an  introduction,  a  subject  so  vast,  and  with 
reference  to  which  such  diverse  opinions  are  enter- 
tained. ■  The  theory  propounded  by  Schoemann  appears 
to  me  to  be  one  of  the  most  successful  attempts  to 
reconcile  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  cha- 
racter of  Zeus  as  portrayed  in  the  Prometheus  Bound, 
and  that  depicted  in  the  remaining  dramas  of  .■Eschylns, 
more  especially  in  the  Suppliants  and  the  Orestoian 
trilogy.  I  have  accordingly  given,  in  my  introduction, 
a  brief  epitome  of  some  leading  ideas  embodied  in 
Schocmann's  essay,  and  to  that  I  must  refer  the  reader 
for  a  more  complete  exposition  of  his  views. 

In  the  introduction  to  my  translation  of  the  Ores- 
toian trilogy,  I  liavo  alluded  at  some  length  to  the 


Preface.  xvii 

tlieory  which  refers  the  origin  of  the  Hellenic  mytho- 
logy to  the  phenomena  of  the  natural  world ;  and  which, 
through  the  researches  of  Prof.  Max  Muller  and  other 
mythologists,  is  shown  to  rest  upon  a  basis  of  fact. 
The  application  of  the  tlieory  to  the  legendary  lore  of 
Hellas  has  given  rise  to  so.  much  controversy,  and  has 
opened  so  wide  a  field  of  speculation,  that  I  have 
abstained  from  entering  upon  the  subject,  and  must 
refer  the  reader  to  the  Eev.  G.  W.  Cox's  "  Mythology 
of  the  Aryan  Nations,'  where  it  is  fully  discussed. 

Having  in  the  choral  odes  of  my  second  volume 
observed  the  arrangement  of  Strophe  and  Antistrophe, 
which  forms  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  original,  I 
have  thought  it  advisable  to  bring  my  version  of  the 
Oresteian  trilogy,  in  this  respect,  into  harmony  with 
the  remaining  dramas  of  iEschylus,  and  have  moreover 
carefully  revised  the  whole. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  great  pleasure  in  expressing 
my  grateful  acknowledgments  to  my  friend  Professor 
Newman,  for  his  most  kind  and  valuable  assistance. 
This  assistance  has  reference  not  merely  to  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  more  obscure  passages  of  the  original, 
the  difficulty  of  which  is  greatly  enhanced  by  the 
corrupt  condition  of  the  text,  but  also  to  his  proposed 
corrections,  for  which  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  notes 
printed,  as  in  the  Trilogy,  at  the  end  of  each  drama. 
I  have  in  addition  to  thank  him  lor  important  aid 
in  rendering  the  original  into  English.  The  whole 
of  my  translation  has  been  submitted  to  his  revision, 
and,  with  his  permission,  I  have  freely  availed  myself 


xviii  Preface. 

of  the  numerous  proposed  emendations  with  which  ho 
has  from  time  to  time  most  kindly  favoured  me. 

I  am  also  indebted  to  my  friend  Mr.  W.  W.  Lloyd 
for  several  valuable  suggestions,  for  which  I  beg  to 
express  my  cordial  thanks.  I  moreover  gladly 
acknowledge  my  obligation  to  previous  commentators 
and  translators. 

In  the  preparation  of  my  introductions  I  have 
consulted  the  following  works,  from  which,  for  the 
most  part,  I  have  borrowed  my  materials.  Grote's 
'  History  of  Greece ;'  Bunsen's  '  Gott  in  der  Geschichte ;' 
'  Ariadne,'  von  0.  F.  Gnippe ;  '  Die  Aeschylische 
Trilogie  Prometheus,'  etc.,  von  F,  G.  Welcker ;  '  Des 
Aeschylos  gcfesselter  Prometheus,'  von  G.  F.  Schoemann ; 

*  Des  Aeschylos  Werke,'  iibersetzt  von  J.  G.  Droysen ; 
Hegel's  '  Vorlcsungen  iibcr  die  Aesthetik.'  I  am  also 
indebted  to  an  interesting  essay  on  the  religion  of 
^schylus,  by  Brook  F.  Westcott,  which  appeared  in  the 

*  Contemporary  Review.'  In  the  preface  to  my  second 
volume  I  have  borrowed  some  thoughts  from  Victor 
Hugo's  '  Shakespeare.' 

I  am  happy  to  state  that  in  a  separate  volume  my 
translation  of  the  j^schylcan  dramas  is  asssociated 
with  Flaxmau's  illustrations. 

Kegenx's  Park,  1872. 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  TRILOGY. 


In  order  to  appreciate  the  poetry  of  antiquity,  it  is 
necessary  to  take  into  consideration  the  religious 
ideas  which  lie  at  its  root,  which  also  in  the  course 
of  their  development  have  determined  the  character 
alike  of  ancient  literature  and  art ;  when  we  consider, 
moreover,  the  immeuse  influence  which  the  stream  of 
Aryan  thought,  by  its  interfusion  with  Christianity, 
has  exerted  over  the  culture  of  the  Western  world,  a 
new  and  twofold  interest  attaches  to  each  of  the  great 
master-works  of  classical  antiquity,  as  exhibiting  not 
only  the  level  which  the  religious  thought  of  the  age 
had  alrearly  reached,  but  also  as  indicating  the  direc- 
tion of  its  future  development. 

Accordingly,  in  offering  to  the  public  a  new  version 
of  the  Orestcia,  the  only  complete  trilogy  which  has 
escaped  the  wreck  of  time,  it  may  not  be  altogether 
irrelevant  if  I  endeavour  to  determine  the  position  of 
iEschylus  among  those  kindlers  of  the  beacon-fire, 
through  whose  agency  the  light  of  ancient  wisdom 
was  transmitted  from  age  to  age  before  the  advent  of 
Christianity. 

With  this  view  it  will  bo  necessary  to  give  a  sketch 


XX  The  Trilogy. 

(necessarily  very  meagre  and  imperfect)  of  the  progress 
of  religious  thought,  both  before  and  after  his  appear- 
ance on  the  stage  of  history,  and  as  art  has  its  root  in 
the  religious  nature  of  man,  we  shall  thus  obtain  a  key 
to  tho  three  great  epochs  which  mark  the  artistic 
dcvcloijmcnt  of  humanity,  which  have  been  charac- 
terized as  the  Symbolical,  the  Classical,  and  tho 
Komantic  eras. 

When  the  rays  of  tradition  first  dawn  upon  our 
planet,  we  discover  the  primeval  ancestors  of  tho 
Aryan  race,  before  their  dispersion  from  their  common 
home,  still  g;izing  with  awe  and  wonder  upon  the 
working  of  the  vast  nature-powers  by  which  they  were 
cnvironctl.  While  led  through  tho  religious  instincts 
implanted  in  human  nature  to  recognize  the  existence 
of  a  Being  or  Eeings  who  hear  and  answer  prayer, 
they  were  unable  to  separate  tho  idea  of  mind,  as  a 
causal  power,  from  the  aspects  of  external  nature. 
Accordingly,  tho  shadowy  divinities  of  tho  Vedic 
Pantheon,  Indra,  Agni,  Varuna,  can  hardly  be  regarded 
as  distinct  personalities,  holding  definite  relations  to 
each  other,  or  to  their  worshippers.  As  in  the  fluctu- 
ating scenery  of  the  diurnal  drama  the  sun  is  obscured 
by  clouds,  v.'hich  in  their  turn  are  scattered  and  anon 
collected  again,  so  these  deified  impersonations  of 
physical  phenomena  loom  dimly  before  our  mental 
vision,  each  supremo  and  absolute  in  turn ;  nor  is  it 
easy  to  deterraino  whether  beliind  these  innumerable 
divinities,  tho  conception  of  Ouo  infinite  Spirit  had  yet 
d.t\aied  upon  the  Ai'yau  mind. 


The  Trihgij.  xxi 

The  deities  of  the  Vedas  vanish  from  our  gaze,  lost 
"  In  the  deep  backward  and  abysm  of  time." 

After  the  lapse  of  ages  they  reappear  upon  the  ptago,, 
so  modified,  however,  that  it  is  difficult  to  recoguize 
their  identity :  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Himalayahs 
they  assume  the  form  of  the  great  Brahminical  trinity, 
Vishnu,  Brahma,  and  Siva,  emerging  from  a  back- 
ground of  Pantheism  ;  while  in  Greece  we  beliold 
them  metamorphosed  into  the  hierarchy  of  the 
Olympian  gods.  So  striking  is  the  contrast  between 
the  deities  apostrophized  by  the  Vedic  bards,  and  the 
grand  impersonations  of  Grecian  poetry  and  art,  that 
without  conclusive  evidence  the  connection  between 
them  could  hardly  be  recognized.  This  evidence  is 
twofold ; — in  the  first  place,  comparative  philology 
reveals  the  fact  that  the  sacred  names  of  the  Greek 
Pantheon  are  in  the  Vedas  intelligible  words,  expres- 
sive of  natural  phenomena  ;  while  in  the  Iliad  we  are 
introduced  to  the  Olympian  deities  during  the  process 
of  transformation  ;  we  detect  their  forms  gradually  dis- 
engaging themselves  from  the  physical  phenomena  with 
which  they  were  associated,  of  which  also  they  may  bo 
regarded  as  the  spiritual  but  almost  impalpable  essence. 

This  transformation  of  physical  into  humanized 
deities  has  been  compared  by  "Wclclier  to  the  myste- 
rious process  by  which  the  chrysalis  passes  into  its 
more  perfect  form.  "  The  Nature-god,"  he  sajs, 
"became  enveloped  in  a  web  of  mythical  fable,  and 
emerged  as   a   divine,  humanized   personality."     For 


xxii  The  Trilogy. 

the  principle  which  lies  at  the  root  of  this  meta- 
morphosis, he  points  to  the  gradual  development  of 
human  nature,  to  the  growing  consciousness  of  free- 
will, accompanied  by  the  recognition  of  mind  as  a 
higher  manifestation  of  deity  than  any  material  pheno- 
mena, and  consequently  of  man  as  the  true  Shckinah. 

As,  however,  in  the  earlier  Vcdic  worship  men  were 
unable  to  separate  the  idea  of  mind,  as  a  causal 
power,  from  the  varied  aspects  of  external  nature,  so, 
when  they  began  to  direct  their  thoughts  within,  they 
were  equally  embarrassed  to  distinguish  between  the 
divine  and  human  elements  in  the  soul  of  man.  Every 
inward  movement  which  appeared  at  all  exceptional  was 
ascribed  to  the  prompting  of  a  deity ;  not  only  were 
the  nobler  emotions  of  courage  and  self-restraint 
referred  to  divine  inspiration  (of  which  in  the  Iliad  we 
find  innumerable  examples),  but  the  gods  are  also 
represented  as  the  authors  of  delusion  (ii.  8,  xxii.  24) 
and  treachery  (iv.  93),  as  when  Zeus  sends  the 
deceitful  dream  to  Agamemnon,  and  Athena  prompts 
Pandarus  to  violate  the  treaty.  One  of  the  most 
noteworthy  instances  to  this  perplexity  is  found  in 
Agamemnon's  exculpation  of  himself  touching  the 
outrage  upon  Achilles  (xix.  85)  : 

•*I  am  not  pnilty,  Jove  ami  Fate  |  and  the  duslx-roamin^ 
Fury— 
Tia  these  who  in  assembly  fuM  |  my  breast  witk  savago 
frenzy."  • 

•  I  have  avftilcil  my.M-If  here  and  in  subsequent  quot&tioos 
ol  Prcfcssor  Nuwiuans  translation. 


The  Trilogy,  xxiii 

A   plea,  the  justice  of  whicli  is  admitted  by  Achilles, 
who  echoes  the  sentiment  of  Agamemnon  : 

"  0  Father  Jove,  great  frenesies  |  to  men  thou  truly  sendcst." 

Iiloreover,  on  the  first  transference  of  human  passion 
and  emotion,  together  with  the  co'nditions  of  human 
existence,  to  the  super-mundane  sphere,  the  very  con- 
ception of  divine  existence,  as  absolved  from  restraint, 
would  lead  to  the  deification  of  human  infirmity  to- 
gether with  the  higher  attributes  of  humanity  r  of  this 
we  have  a  memorable  example  in  the  character  of  the 
Homeric  Zeus.  This  tendency  would  doubtless  be 
accelerated  by  the  phenomena  expounded  by  Prof.  Max 
Miiller,  in  his  "  Lectiires  on  Language."  As  the  several 
branches  of  the  Aryan  stock  dispersed,  migrating  from 
their  common  home  in  Central  Asia,  the  original 
signification  of  words  was  forgotten  or  obscured ;  and 
thus,  language  originally  descriptive  of  natural  pheno- 
mena became  transferred  to  the  conditions  of  human 
life — a  translation  which  totally  metamorphosed  the 
character  of  the  occurrence. 

The  transference  of  human  faith  and  worship  from 
the  vague  nature-powers  of  the  Vedas  to  the  humanized 
deities  of  Olympus,  together  with  the  association  of 
the  latter  into  a  celestial  hierarchy,  under  the  supre- 
macy of  Zeus,  assumed  in  Grecian  mythology  the  form 
of  a  revolution,  and  was  symbolized  under  the  grand 
old  allegory  of  the  battle  between  the  Titans  and  the 
Olympian  gods.  This  revolution,  involving  a  variety 
of  complex  phenomena,  especially  the  fusion  of  the 


xxiv  Tlie  Trilogy. 

mythology  of  different  tribes  or  nations  into  one,  was 
doubtless  accomplished  in  its  main  features  in  the  ages 
iinterior  to  Homer. 

However,  as  we  have  no  Grecian  literature  to  illus- 
trate this  period,  we  are  unable  to  trace  the  history  of  tho 
transition,  nor  can  we  determine  how  far  the  current 
mythology  of  his  age  was  modified  by  the  individual 
genius  of  the  great  epic  bard,  whose  immortal  work, 
while  inaugurating  a  new  epoch  in  the  history  of 
civilization,  at  tho  same  time  exhibits,  as  has  been 
truly  said,  tho  last  lingering  traces  of  the  primeval 
age.  A  superficial  acquaintance  with  tho  Iliad  suffices 
to  reveal  the  original  elemental  character  of  the 
Homeric  divinities,  a  fact  which  would  bo  more 
generally  recognized,  were  we  not  accustomed  to  carry 
to  the  perusal  of  tho  earlier  poet  the  conceptions 
derived  from  the  artistic  impersonations  of  a  later  age. 
This  transitional  character  of  the  Homeric  mythology 
will  be  more  apparent  if  we  carry  back  to  their  original 
root  in  natural  phenomena  a  few  of  tho  Olympian 
divinities,  and  then  follow  the  process  of  their  develop- 
ment, as  they  appear  successively  in  the  Iliad  and  in 
the  Orcstcia.  Tho  connection  between  Jupiter  and  thp 
sky,  familiar  to  Greek  and  Latin  scholars,  may  bo 
traced  down  to  tho  latest  period  of  classical  poetry; 
60  Horace— "  Manet  sub  Jovo  frigido  vcnator."  It 
was  reserved,  however,  for  tho  science  of  comparative 
philology  to  point  out  the  origin  of  this  connection. 
Tims  wo  learn  that  "  Zeus,  tho  most  sacred  name  in 
GrcL-k   mythology    is    tho   samo   word   as   Dyaua  in 


The  TriJogy.  xxv 

Sanscrit,  whicli  means  the  sky;  and  that  originally 
Dyu  was  the  bright  heavenly  deity  in  India,  as  well  as 
i:i  Greece." 

It  is  remarked  by  Welcker,  that  "  the  greatest  fact, 
when  we  go  back  to  the  highest  Grecian  antiquity,  is  the 
idea  of  God,  as  the  Supreme  Being,  associated  with  a 
natnre-worship,  never  entirely  suppressed,  together  with 
the  conception  of  a  divine  family  derived  from  Zeus." 

Accordingly,  we  recognize  in  the  Homeric  Zeus 
three  distinct  elements,  the  divine,  the  physical,  and 
the  human,  welded  together  into  an  artificial  unity,  and 
exhibiting  a  character  of  marvellous  incongruity,  en- 
dowed with  attributes  the  most  inconsistent  and  con- 
tradictory. Thus,  in  not  a  few  passages,  he  is  re- 
presented as  the  supreme  deity — 

"  Who  reigneth  mighty  over  all,  both  mortals  and 
immortals."  (IL  xii.  242.)  "Whose  decree,  once 
sanctioned  by  the  nod,  is  neither  deceptive,  nor  re- 
vokable."  (II.  i.  527.)  "  The  Counsellor,  greatest  and 
best ;  Father  of  gods  and  men ;  the  Guardian  of  the 
oath."  (iv.  235.)  "  The  Vindicator  of  righteous  law." 
(xxi.  3S7.)  The  High  Arbiter  of  war."  (xix.  224.)  His 
superiority  over  the  other  gods  is  forcibly  brought 
out  in  the  beginning  of  the  8th  book  (18 — 27,)  where  the 
other  dwellers  in  Olympus  are  invited  to  grasp  the 
gulden  chain  dropped  from  Heaven's  heights,  and  held 
immovably  in  the  hand  of  Zeus  : 

"  Lay  bold,  and  throw  your  force  on  it,  all  gods  both  male 
a:id  female, 


XX vi  The  Trilogy. 

Yet  never  shall  ye  down  to  earth,  drag  from  the  lofty 

hoaven 
Zeus  the  supreme  deviser."  * 

It  is  as  the  god  of  compassion  that  the  diviner 
aspect  of  his  character  is  the  most  conspicuous 
(ix.  502) :  when  we  consider  the  savagery  of  an  age  in 
which  human  victims  were  sacrificed  to  appease  the 
Manes  of  the  dead,  and  where  tendencies  to  cannibalism 
may  perhaps  be  detected  (iv.  35),  (xxii.  345),  (xxiv. 
212),  the  prominence  given  to  compassion  as  an  attri- 
bute of  the  supreme  Deity  is  very  remarkable. 

Notwithstanding  these  high  attributes,  no  exercise  of 
providential  power  is  ever  assigned  to  the  Homeric 
Zeus ;  ho  is  beguiled  by  Hera,  yet  swayed  by  her 
counsel  (xvi.  4G0),  and  though  desirous  to  save  Ilium, 
yet,  at  her  entreaty,  he  surrenders  it  to  destruction 
(iv.  43).  Like  the  heavens,  now  bright  with  sunshine, 
and  anon  dark  with  storm,  he  exhibits  all  the  capricious 
fluctuations  of  an  elemental  power,  being  alternately 
malignant  and  benign,  without  any  apparent  motive 
beyond  his  own  caprice,  uninfluenced  by  moral  con- 
siderations. Then,  again,  with  regard  to  his  supre- 
macy, not  only  is  it  questioned  by  Poseidon  (xv.  185), 
it  is  actually  imperilled  by  that  deity,  in  conjunction 
with  Hera  and  Athena  (i.  3P6 — 400),  and  is  only 
rescued  from  their  machinations  by  the  intervention  of 
Briarcus. 


•  Crcuzer  baa  pointed  out  the  s;uiic  image  in  a  pissage 
of  the  Bliajravat-^rita. 


Tlie  Trilogy.  xxvii 

These  legends  probably  symbolizo  convulsions  of  the 
elements,  which  threaten  to  blot  out  the  sky,  of  which 
Zeus  is  the  impersonation.  In  this  character,  as 
an  elemental  god,  ho  is  not  only  the  father  of 
rivers,  he  also  presides  over  all  meteorological  pheno- 
mena. 

Thus  with  his  iEgis,  the  dark  storm-cloud,  he  veils 
the  summit  of  Mount  Ida  (xvii.  593),  and  even  ocean 
shudders  at  his  dreadful  bolt.  He  rains  (xii.  5).  He 
snows  (xii.  280).  He  deviseth  hail  and  piercing  sleet, 
and  rainy  flood  (x.  5).  He  uproots  the  sturdy  oak 
(xiv.  415),  and  he  snaps  the  bow-string  of  Teucer  (xv. 
469).  Occasionally  the  moral  and  physical  elements 
are  most  curiously  blended,  as  in  the  elaborate  descrip- 
tion of  the  rain  deluge  with  which  he  punishes  the 
crooked  verdict  of  the  unjust  judge  (xvi.  385).  Many 
other  passages  of  a  similar  character  might  be  cited. 

But  it  is  in  his  relation  with  Hera,  and  the  various 
heroines  who  are  represented  as  the  objects  of  his  love, 
that  the  human  element  in  the  conception  of  the 
Homeric  Zeus  appears  under  its  most  revolting  aspect. 

His  character  has  accordingly  been  described  as  the 
most  repulsive  in  the  whole  circle  of  Olympian  life, 
exhibiting  the  very  temper  of  the  most  advanced 
depravity.*  "  It  is  the  Jupiter  of  Homer  in  whom 
we  see  first  the  most  complete  surrender  of  personal 
morality  and  self-government  to  mere  appetite,  and  the 
most    thoroughly    selfish    groundwork    of    character. 


Gladstone's  Homer. 


xsviii  The  Trilogy. 

Abandonment  to  gross  pa'^sion,  ungovernable  self- 
indulgence  rises  to  its  climax  in  him." 

We  seem  to  inhale  a  purer  atmosphere  when,  by  the 
ai<l  of  comparative  philology,  we  are  enabled  to  trans- 
late back  into  natural  phenomena  occurrences  which, 
when  transferred  to  the  sphere  of  human  life,  are 
repulsive  and  revolting.  Thus  it  is  not  difficult  to 
recognize  the  physical  idea  which  underlies  the  con- 
ception of  Hera,  whose  name — derived,  according  to 
Wtlcker,  from  cpa,*  the  earth — sufficiently  indicates 
the  original  conception  symbolized  by  her  marriage 
with  Zeus,  the  sky.  Ge,  the  earth,  is  invoked  in  the 
Iliad,  with  Zeus  and  other  divinities  (ii.  277 ;  xix. 
258).  Of  the  three  goddesses,  Hera,  Dione,  and 
Dt meter,  in  whom  the  primeval  goddess  reappears 
mythically  metamorphosed  (who  also  originally  held 
the  same  relation  to  Ztus  as  seen  on  ancient  coins), 
Htra  is  alone  distinguished  in  the  Hiad  as  the  Queen 
of  Heaven,  while  Demeter,  without  Divine  significance, 
is  alluded  to  in  connection  with  agriciiltural  pursuits 
(xiii.  322;  v.  500),  and  Dione  appears  as  the  mother 
of  Aphrodite  (v.  370). 

It  was  through  the  Archtean  race  that  Hera  acquired 

*  Prof.  Max  Miillcr  and  other  Sanskrit  acholara,  while 
recorrni7,in;j;  tliat  in  many  of  her  traits  Hera  is  tlio  Earth, 
maintain  that  the  derivation  of  her  name  from  tpa  is  im- 
jKissilile.  '1  hoy  consider  that  it  may  be  safely  derived  from 
Svaryil,  an  adjective  of  Svar,  sky.  Hera  became  o^unOpoyos 
witli  Zeus,  and  it  is  siiggestiHl  by  Prof.  Max  Miiller  that  in 
that  cajMicity  ouo  of  her  many  cognoiniua  uiay  have  bocumo 
her  noinen. 


The  Trilogy.  xxix 

her  high  position  in  the  Olympian  theogony  :  among 
a  warlike  people,  who  abandoned  agriculture  to  their 
dependants,  the  physical  attributes  of  the  goddess  were 
gradually  cb^'^ured,  and  accordingly  we  find  her  in  the 
Iliad  as  the  peculiar  patroness  of  Achilles,  chief  of  the 
battle-loving  myrmidons  (i.  208;  ix.  254).  Though 
the  physical  attributes  of  Hera  are  almost  entirely 
suppressed  in  the  Iliad,  we  trace  a  curious  lingering  of 
the  natuT'j  element  in  the  Theogamia,  described  with 
such  luxuriance  of  imagery  in  the  14th  book  (345- 
351)  :  "  As  the  story  of  the  Olympian  Father  descend- 
ing as  golden  rain  into  the  prison  of  Danai  was  meant 
lor  the  bright  sky,  delivering  earth  from  the  bonds  of 
winter  ; "  so  the  union  of  Zeus  and  Hera,  shrouded  in 
golden  mist,  doubtless  typified  the  same  natural  pheno- 
menon, followed  as  it  was  by  a  new  outgrowth  of 
tender  herbage,  "  the  lotus,  the  crocus,  and  the  hya- 
cinth." A  similar  remnant  of  natural  symbolism 
might  probably  be  detected  in  other  Homeric  legends, 
which  in  their  human  aspect  are  puerile  and  revolting  : 
as  when  the  refractory  spouse  of  Zeus  hangs  suspended 
by  a  golden  chain,  a  pair  of  anvils  attached  to  her 
ankles  (xv.  19).  How  far  Homer  recognized  the 
original  significance  of  these  legends  is  an  interesting 
but  still  unsettled  question. — Miiller  (Prol.  279). 

If  from  the  thundering,  cloud-compelling  Zeus  of 
the  Hiad,  we  turn  to  the  Zeus  of  the  Oresteia,  the 
contrast  is  so  remarkable,  that  it  would  almost  appear 
as  if  the  great  dramatist,  by  the  very  emphasis  with 
which  he  brings  out  the  providential  charact  r  of  the 
Supreme  liuler,  desired,  like  his  contempt )rary,  Pindar, 


XXX  The  Trilogy. 

to  enter  his  protest  against  tlic  unworthy  conception 
of  the  Epic  bard.  This  hypothesis  seems  the  more 
plausible  when  we  consider  that  the  age  of  iEschylus 
immediately  succeeded  that  of  Pisistratus,  who  had 
given  his  sanction  to  the  enactments  of  Solon,  "  by 
which  tho  Iliad  was  raised  into  a  liturgy,  periodically 
rehearsed  by  Jaw  at  the  preatest  of  the  Athenian  fes- 
tivals ;  "  "exhibiting  for  the  first  and  last  time  in-thj 
history  of  the  world  the  preservation  of  a  poet's  com- 
positions made  an  object  of  permanent  ]>ub]ic  policy." 
Accordingly,  in  the  opening  chorus  of  the  Agamem- 
non, Zeus  is  represented  as  conducting  in  person  the 
grand  judicial  retribution  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
crime  of  Paris,  involves  Ilium  in  ruin.  In  the  second 
chorus  this  providential  action  of  Zeus  is  brought  out 
with  even  stronger  emphasis ;  he  is  there  represented 
as  having  with  prescient  might  foreordained  the  blow 
which  fell  at  length  in  accomplishment  of  his  decree. 
The  mighty  net  of  Divine  retribution  is  cast  over 
the  devoted  city,  and  the  character  of  Zeus  is  vindi- 
cated as  the  righteous  governor  of  men.  So  again  in 
the  third  chorus,  it  is  Zeus,  protector  of  the  guest,  who 
sends  Helen,  a  fury  fraught  with  destruction,  to  avenge 
on  the  sons  of  Priam  the  violated  rights  of  hospitality  ; 
and  whereas,  in  the  Iliad,  there  is  division  in  heaven, 
the  deities,  swayed  by  motives  purely  personal,  and 
often  of  the  lowest  character  (xxiv.  30  ;  iv.  48),  take 
part  in  the  quarrel,  and  aj)pear  arrayed  against  one 
another  in  the  hostile  ranks  ; — in  the  Orcsteia.  on  the 
contrary,  they  aru  represented  as  leagued  with  Zeus  in 
cariyiug  out  the  great  ends  of  justice.     Thus,  when 


The  Trihgy.  xxxi 

the  cause  is  brought  before  the  celestial  tribunal, 
"  without  dissentient  voice  they  cast  their  votes  into 
the  bloody  urn,  sealing  the  doom  of  Troy."  (Ag.  789.) 
Zeus  is  not  only  represented  as  exercising  supreme 
authority  in  the  moral  government  of  mankind — 

"  In  will,  in  deed, 
Sole  cause,  sole  fashioner"  (Ag.  1462); 

he  also  acts  inwardly  on  the  souls  of  men  :  it  is  Zeus 
whose  highest  gift  is  an  untainted  mind  (Ag.  900) ; 
who  leads  men  to  wisdom  through  suffering  (Ag.  169); 
a  function  in  which  he  is  aided  by  the  subordinate 
deities  (Ag.  175),  who  are  represented  as  the  exponents 
of  his  will.     (Eum.  588.) 

In  the  Suppliants,  together  with  a  curious  lingering 
of  the  mythological  element;  we  find  the  grandest 
ascriptions  of  omnii^otence  to  the  Olympian  king. 
Thus,  he  is  invoked  as  "  King  of  kings,  most  blessed 
of  the  blest,  among  the  Perfect,  Power  most  perfect, 
Zeus,  supreme  in  bliss !  "  (Sup.  518.)  He  is  charac- 
terized as  "Mighty  Zeus,  Protector  of  the  guest,  the 
Highest,  who  directs  Destiny  by  hoary  law."  (Sup. 
655.)  "Zeus,  Lord  of  ceaseless  time"  (Sup.  567), 
"almighty  Euler  of  the  earth."  (Sup.  795.)  He  is 
likewise  ai)ostrophized"as  the  gre  it  Artificer,  supreme 
Kuler,  who  knows  no  superior,  whose  deed  is  prompt 
as  his  word  to  execute  the  designs  of  his  deep-counsel- 
ling mind.  (Sup,  587.)  Thus  the  mythological  vesture, 
woven  of  Nature  and  Humanity,  which  had  well-nigh 
shrouded  the  grander  feature  s  of  the  Homeric  Zeus,  is 
partially  withdrawn  in  .^schlylus,  and  we  behold  a 


xxxii  The  Trilofjij. 

Being  whom  men  could  worship  without  degradation, 
till  in  the  fullness  of  time  the  light  of  celestial  Truth 
burst  with  clear  efifulgence  on  the  heathen  world. 

We  can  hardly  imagine  that  the  capricious  elemental 
deity  of  the  Iliad  should  have  been  metamorphose  1 
into  the  venerable  deity  of  the  Oresteia  by  the  slow 
process  of  spiritual  development  alone,  without  the 
action  of  external  agency  :  if  we  consider  the  affinity 
between  the  Hellenic  and  the  Persian  races,  and  the 
close  contact  into  which  they  were  brought  in  Asia 
Minor,  the  modification  of  Grecian  thought  by  the 
interfusion  of  Persian  elements  will  not  a2)i)car  re- 
markable. In  support  of  this  hypothesis,  I  might 
appeal  not  only  to  the  high  spiritual  character  attri- 
buted to  Ahura-Mazda,  the  Zeus  of  the  ZL'ud-A vesta, 
but  also  to  the  sharp  contrast  there  exhibited  between 
the  principles  of  Good  and  Evil,  a  feature  which 
strikingly  distinguishes  the  theogony  of  iEschylus 
from  that  of  Homer. 

The  relics  of  ancient  sun-worship  which  are  dis 
covered  in  various  k>calities  of  Greece  bear  witness  to 
the  vast  iuflueuco  exerted  by  the  celestial  luminary 
over  the  imaginations  and  the  religious  emotions  of  the 
primeval  world,  an  influence  which  is  also  attested  by 
tlie  numerous  iliviuities  in  whom  the  Sun-god  reappears, 
mythically  Uiutamorphoscd.  Helios,  in  tho  Iliad,  is 
eliaraetrrizf'  ^  us  "  the  Unweariable  ;  "  "  the  Bringer  of 
light  ;  "  lik.  Mithra,  who  has  a  thousand  ears  and  ten 
thousand  eyes,  "  Ho  overscoth  all,  and  hcarkoneth  to 
nil  things  "  (iii.  277).  On  tho  roconciliation  of  Aga- 
momuou  and  Aeh  Iks,  a  boar  is  sarriliced  to  Helios 


TJie  Trilogrj.  xsxiii 

and  to  Zeus  (xix.  197).  The  Trojans  sacrifice  to  the 
Earth  and  to  Helios,  the  Achasans  to  Zens  (iii.  104). 

Id  the  opening  chorus  of  the  Agamemnon,  the  ancient 
Arcadian  Suu-god,  Pan,*  whose  name  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  Iliad,  is  associated  with  Zeus  and  Apollo,  as 
sending  the  Fury  to  punish  crime.  The  original  charac- 
ter of  this  divinity,  who  \vith  Zeus  and  Apollo  shares 
the  epithet  Lykeios,  is  betrayed  by  many  significant 
symbols,  associated  with  his  effigies  and  his  worship. 
Among  the  various  impersonations  of  the  Sun,  how- 
ever, there  is  none  which  can  compare  in  interest  and 
significance  with  Dionysos  and  Apollo,  both  solar 
divinities,  whose  worship,  nevertheless,  offers  many 
remarkable  points  of  opposition  and  contact. 

The  celestial  luminary  was  imagined  to  sleep  during 
the  winter  and  to  awake  to  consciousness  in  spring ; 
accordingly  Dionysos,  rising  from  the  sea  at  the  vernal 
equinox  to  inaugui'ate  the  new  solar  year,  was  hailed 
with  transports  of  joy  by  his  enthusiastic  votaries. 
The  fluctuating  character  of  Dionysos  reminds  us  of 
the  nature  deities  of  the  Yedas;  Proteus-like,  he 
assumes  every  variety  of  form  and  age  ;  he  is  the  god 
of  summer  and  of  winter,  of  darkness  and  of  light ;  he 
holds  in  his  hand  the  inebriating  chalice,  together  with 
the  eosmical  mirror,  exhibiting  the  images  of  all  things. 
His  worship  is  of  peculiar  interest,  from  its  association 
with  the   Greek  drama.     Grecian  tragedy,  as  is  well 


*  In  my  revised  version  I  have  followed  Prof.  Newman's 
reading  of  this  passage,  which  omits  the  name  of  "  Pan  "  in 
this  connection.  c 


xxsiv  The  Trilogy. 

known,  was  an  expansion  of  the  choruses  chanted  at 
the  Diouysic  festivals,  which  rehearsed  the  vicissitudes 
of  the  solar  god,  in  his  progress  through  the  heavenly 
signs.  This  circumstance  exerted  "  an  overruling  effect 
upon  the  quality  of  the  Athenian  drama  ;  "  "  from  this 
early  cradle  of  tragedy  arose  a  sanctity  which  compelled 
all  things  to  modulate  into  the  same  religious  key."* 

Peculiar  interest  moreover  attaches  to  Dionysos, 
from  his  association  with  the  mysteries  which  exerted 
so  powerful  an  influence  over  the  Grecian  mind. 

The  story  of  Dionysos,  embodying  some  of  the  main 
features  of  his  worship,  appears  in  the  Iliad  (vi.  132), 
invested,  however,  with  ethical,  not  religious  signifi- 
cance. "  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  pre- 
cisely those  divinities,  Demeter  and  Dionysos,  whose 
truly  religious  influence  was  most  profound  and 
pervading  in  Greece,  are  all  but  unmentioned  in 
Homer,  and  may  be  said,  in  fact,  to  be  excluded  from 
his  scheme  of  the  divine  community ."f  An  interesting 
question  arises  as  to  the  cause  of  this  omission  on  the 
part  of  the  great  epic  bard.  Are  we  to  imagine  that 
the  peculiar  sanctity  whicli  attached  to  these  divinities 
induced  him  deliberately  to  avoid  the  subject ;  or  must 
wo  conclude  that  in  the  Homeric  age  their  worship 
Lad  not  yet  assumed  that  mysterious  and  impressive 
character  which  subsequently  distinguislicd  it  ?  I 
confess  I  am  unable  to  decide  the  question,  but  incline 
to  the  litter  hypothesis. 

*  Tlioory  of  Greek  Tragedy.    Do  Quincey. 
t  Homer,    his   Art    and    his    Age.     W.  Watkiss  Lloyoi 
Classical  Museum,  XXH. 


Tlie  Trilogy.  xxxv 

The  original  solar  signification  of  Apollo  is  main- 
tiiued  among  other  eminent  scholars  by  Creuzer, 
"Welcker,  and  Gerhard,  who  appeal  alike  to  ancient 
monuments  and  coins,  and  to  vestiges  of  ancient  Sun- 
worship  found  in  various  localities  in  Greece.  "  If  we 
desire,"  says  Creuzer,  "  in  studying  Greek  mythology, 
to  reach  its  ultimate  roots,  we  must  explore  the  ancient 
literatures  of  Persia  and  India.  If  from  this  point  of 
view  we  investigate  the  original  identity  of  tha  Sun- 
god  and  Apollo,  we  shall  find  in  the  figurative  language 
of  the  Vedas  the  primitive  occasion  of  the  transition 
from  the  former  to  the  latter." 

One  of  the  most  striking  features  of  the  ancient  Sun- 
worship  was  its  dualistic  character,  founded  upon  the 
twofold  aspect  of  the  solar  luminary,  as  at  the  same 
time  a  beneficent  and  a  destroying  power,  as  conquer- 
ing and  conquered,  as  dying,  yet  endowed  with  ever- 
renovated  life  ;  a  conception  which  explains  the  enigma 
said  to  be  uttered  by  the  oracle  of  Apollo  at  Claros,  in 
Ionia,  "  I  am  Jupiter  Ammon  in  Spring,  and  black 
Pluto  in  Winter."  In  order  to  understand  the  more 
terrible  aspects  of  the  ancient  Sun-god,  we  have  only 
to  remember  the  annual  fevers  occasioned  by  his 
scorching  rays,  and  the  danger  of  famine  from  failure 
of  the  crops :  after  the  lightning  of  Zeus,  there  was  no 
natural  agent  so  destructive  as  the  arrow  of  Helios  ;  as 
calamity,  moreover,  was  regarded  in  ancient  times  as 
the  expression  of  Divine  anger,  expiatory  and  peniten- 
tial rites  formed  an  essential  element  of  the  ancient 
Sun-worship.      This   twofold  aspect  of  Helios   finds 


xxxvi  Tlie  Trilogy. 

expression  also  in  the  name  of  the  latter  Sun-god, 
Apollo,  which,  in  the  ancient  Doric  ^olian  form,  was 
not  'Atto'XXov,  the  Destroyer,  but  'ATrf'XXuf,  the  Averter. 
It  is  under  his  darker  aspect  "as  the  Minister  of 
Vengeance,  and  the  Chastiser  of  Ai-rogance,"  that  he 
appears  for  the  most  part  in  the  poetry  of  Homer. 
"  His  punishments  are  pestilence  and  death ;"  "Achilles, 
to  whom  he  is  particularly  hostile,  calls  him  the  most 
pernicious  of  all  the  gods."* 

While  the  Homeric  Apollo,  in  liis  relation  with 
mortals,  appears  thus  in  the  light  of  a  malevolent 
and  destroying  power,  among  the  Olympians  ho 
is  introduced  in  association  with  the  Muses,  as 
the  god  of  Music,  charming  the  assembled  deities 
with  his  harp  (i.  603).  The  notion  that  the  stars 
and  the  other  heavenly  bodies  accomplished  their- 
revolutions  to  the  sound  of  music  is  expressed  in  the 
ancient  poetry  of  India,  and  also  in  that  of  the  Persians. 
As  the  rhytlim  of  the  cosmical  movements  depended 
upon  the  solar  luminary,  the  great  ordercr  of  times  and 
seasons,  it  is  not  surprising  that  from  the  most  remoto 
antiquity  the  Sun  god  was  represented  as  playing  on 
the  cithara ;  in  this  character  he  is  portrayed  on  the 
oldest  Archaic  vases,  cncu'cled  by  the  dancing  hours. 

Although  in  the  Oresteia  Apollo  is  introduced  inci- 
dentally as  a  destroying  and  avenging  deity,  as  in  the 
passage  already  quoted  in  the  1st  Chorus  of  the 
Agamemnon,  and  also  where  ho  is  invoked  by  Cassandra 


•  C.  0.  Miillcr's  Uistory  of  tbo  Dorians. 


Tlie  Trilogy.  sxxvii 

as  her  destroyer  (1047),  he  nevertheless  wears,  for 
the  most  part,  a  more  benignant  aspect.  He  is 
emphatically  the  Healer,  the  Prophet-leech,  who 
purifies  from  all  defilement  (Eum.  62) ;  the  god  of  joy, 
whom  it  befits  not  to  invoke  with  words  of  sorrow 
(Ag.  1056) :  the  most  striking  point  of  divergence 
from  the  Homeric  conception  of  Apollo  is  to  be  foimd 
in  his  relation  to  Zeus,  with  whom  he  appears  in  the 
most  intimate  association.  As  the  god  of  prophecy, 
the  guardian  of  the  sacred  oracles,  he  declares  most 
emphatically  that  he  is  simply  the  expounder  of  his 
father's  will,  and  consequently  that  he  cannot  lie. 
(Eum,  585,  588.)  It  is  under  this  aspect,  as  the  god 
of  Truth,  that  a  deep  significance  attaches  to  the  func- 
tion which  he  assumes  in  the  court  of  Areopagus  as 
Exegetes,  or  expounder  of  the  imwritten  law.  "  At 
Athens,  the  Exegetea,  who  presided  over  the  purification 
of  blood-guilty  persons,  were  elected,  or  at  least  their 
election  was  ratified,  by  the  Delphic  Oracle."*  In  this 
character,  Apollo  appears  before  the  Areopagites,  to 
expound  the  law  in  relation  to  homicide,  and  thus  the 
deep-thoughted  poet  enforces  the  important  principle 
that  the  judicial  proceedings  of  human  tribunals  must 
be  under  the  presidency  of  Truth. 

According  to  Welcker,  however,  the  Moon  appears 
of  all  natural  objects  to  have  been  the  most  universally 
adored.  Several  tribes  in  Africa  and  America  are  said 
at  the  present  day  to  worship  the  moon  without  the 


Dissertations  on  the  Eumenides.    C.  0.  Miiller. 


xsxviii  The  Trilogij. 

suu,  wliile  no  nation  Las  been  known  to  whom  the  sun 
is  sacred  without  the  moon.  In  primeval  ages  the 
computations  of  time  were  based  upon  the  changes  of 
the  moon,  which  accordingly  in  the  Indo-Germanic 
languages  is  known  as  "  The  Measurer ;  "  and  so  deeply 
did  the  lunar  phenomena  appeal  to  the  religioiis 
emotions  of  humanity,  that  among  all  early  nations,  as 
well  as  among  the  Jews,  the  new-moon  festivals  were 
celebrated  with  peculiar  solemnity.  In  warm  climates, 
moreover,  vegetation  is  nourished  almost  entirely  by 
the  dew,  which  falls  most  copiously  when  the  moon  is 
full ;  hence  Selene  was  early  characterized  as  the 
mother  of  Herse,  the  Bringer  of  the  Dew.  It  would 
be  very  interesting  to  trace  the  various  media  of  tran- 
sition by  which  the  bright  nocturnal  luminary  was 
gradually  metamorphosed  into  the  Huntress  Diana — 

"  Fair  silver-shafted  queen  for  ever  chaste, 
Who  set  at  nought  the  frivolous  bolts  of  Cupid." 

So  great,  however,  is  the  diversity  of  form  under  which 
the  Moon-goddess  has  been  conceived,  exhibiting  a 
diflerent  physiognomy  in  every  different  locality,  ac- 
cording to  the  varied  aspect  under  which  she  has  been 
regarded,  that  I  must  contentmyself  with  a  brief  notice 
of  her  characteristics,  as  she  appears  in  the  Iliad  and 
the  Oresteia. 

To  the  goddess  of  the  green-wood  and  the  glade 
belonged  of  right  all  animals  both  tamo  and  wild ; 
accordingly  sho  is  chnractcrized  in  the  Iliad  as 
(roTi'ta  Oipwi),  "  Queen  of  all  Vonisou  "  (ixi.  470), 


The  TriJogif.  xxxix 

and  iu  the  Agamemnon  she  is  rci)rcsGntcd  as  taking 
under  bcr  especial  care — 

"  The  tender  whelps,  new-dropped,  of  creat'jres  rude, 

Sparing  the  udder-loving  brood 

Of  every  beast  through  field  or  wood  that  roves," — (Ag.  139.) 

While  thus  gracious  to  the  lower  animals,  towards 
humanity,  on  the  contrary,  she,  like  the  Homeric 
Apollo,  wears  the  aspect  of  a  destroying  rather  than  of 
a  benignant  power.  Thus  she  is  represented  as  made 
by  Zeus  (X/oi/ra  -ywai^t),  "  a  lion  unto  women,  to 
whom  he  hath  granted  might  to  slay  whomso  she 
willeth"  (xsi.  484).  Accordingly,  in  her  anger  she 
slew  Laodamia,  daughter  of  Bellerophontes  (vi.  205), 
and  wrathful,  on  account  of  her  neglected  rites,  she 
sends  the  savage,  white-tusked  boar — 

"  Who  visited   with   dire  annoy  |  the  orchard-grounds   of 
CEneus."    (ix.  540.) 

Andromache,  too,  in  her  address  to  Hector,  alludes 
to  her  mother  slain  by  "  arrow-pouring  Artemis." 
(vi.  428.) 

In  the  Agamemnon  she  appears  under  the  same 
dark  aspect,  as  the  goddess  for  whose  propitiation 
the  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia  was  consummated,  a  tragedy 
which,  by  calling  down  upon  her  husband  the  ven- 
geance of  Clytemnestra,  forms  the  groundwork  of  the 
drama. 

Far  more  prominent,  however,  is  the  position  as- 
signed to  the  Maiden  Goddess,  Pallas  Athena,  who 
may  be  justly  regarded  as  the  bright,  consummate  flower 


xl  Tlie  Trilogtj. 

of  Grecian  mythology  ;  and  most  interesting  it  is  to 
trace  the  history  of  her  growth  from  her  rise  in  the 
land  of  the  Aryans  to  her  culmination  in  the  majestic 
goddess  of  the  Eumenidcs. 

The  elemental  character  of  the  Homeric  Zeus  sug- 
gests the  idea  of  some  natural  phenomenon  underlying 
the  extraordinary  birth  of  his  brilliant  offspring,  "  from 
no  mother  born."  Accordingly  her  name  has  been 
regarded  as  corresponding  to  the  Sanscrit  Ahana,  a 
recognised  appellation  of  the  dawn  in  the  Veda ;  and 
thus  her  miraculous  birth  from  the  head  of  Zeus,  trans- 
lated back  into  Sanscrit,  implies  that  Ushas,  the  Dawn, 
sprang  from  the  East,  the  forehead  of  the  sky.* 
Welcker  gives  a  different  interpretation  of  her  name. 
"  The  Grecians,"  he  says,  "  brought  with  them  from 
their  distant  home  the  conception  of  an  element  of 
light  and  warmth  above  the  atmosphere,  independent  of 
the  sun."  He  derives  her  name  from  aiO,  to  bum, 
with  the  ancient  suffix  r^vrj,  and  regards  her  as  the 
impersonation  of  the  pure  Ether,  the  abode  of  Zeus. 

The  peculiar  rites  with  which  her  worship  was 
celebrated  in  different  localities,  together  ^^-ith  the 
symbolism  associated  with  her  effigy  on  ancient  vases 
and  coins,  attest,  according  to  Welcker,  the  original 
elemental  character  of  the  goddess.  This  deified  im- 
personation of  a  uaturc-power,  whether  identified  with 
the  Ether  or  the  Dawn,  became  gradually  invested  with 
a  variety  of  attributes,  human  and  superhuman ;  accord- 


*  Max  MuUcr.     Lectures  on  Language.    2nd  Series. 


TJie  TrUogy.  xli 

ingly,  the  Athena  of  the  Iliad,  though  more  sharply 
defined  than  the  Olympian  Zeus,  nevertheless  exhibits 
the  same  transitional  character  which  marks  the  other 
deities  of  the  Homeric  theogony.  In  her  divine  capacity 
she  is  the  goddess  of  war  and  of  industrial  art,  the  re- 
presentative of  practical  sagacity  as  opposed  to  poetic 
inspiration,  which  was  assigned  to  Apollo.  She  hears 
and  answers  prayer ;  she  acts  inwardly  on  the  minds 
of  the  Hellenic  heroes ;  she  restrains  the  wrath  of 
Achilles  (i.  198) ;  she  imparts  aid  to  Tydeus  (iv.  390). 
Many  similar  examples  might  be  adduced.  Neverthe- 
less she  is  not  above  the  practice  of  deceit,  as  when  she 
persuades  Pandarus  to  violate  the  treaty  (iv.  94),  and 
also  where  she  lures  Hector  with  guile.  Moreover,  the 
intimate  connection  between  the  bright,  heaven-sprung 
goddess  and  her  father,  which  in  the  later  mythology 
forms  one  of  her  most  striking  characteristics,  is  only 
slightly  indicated  in  the  Iliad  (viii.  38,  373).  In 
general,  her  relation  to  the  Thunderer  is  one  of  hostility ; 
she  is  represented  as  leagued  with  Hera  and  Poseidon 
in  their  attempt  to  shackle  Zeus,  for  whom  she  ex- 
presses her  contempt  in  no  measured  terms,  while  with 
Hera  she  appears  most  intimately  associated : 

*•  Close  sat  they,  side  by  side,  and  woes  against  the  Trojans 

plotted, 
Truly  Athena  dumb  abode  before  her  proper  Father, 
Though  wounded  by  his  argument,  and  seized  with  fierce 

displeasure,     (viii.  458;  iv.  21.) 

Traces  of  meteoric   symbolism  in  connection  with 
the  virgin  goddess  may,  I  think,  be  traced  in  the  Uiad. 


xlii  The  Trilogy. 

Thus,  in  girdiug  herself  for  battle,  sLo  lets  fall  upon 
the  starry  pavement  of  her  father  the  brilliant  robe — 

"Whose  tissue  she  herself  had  wrought,  and  with  her  hand 
embroidered ;" 

her  ^gis  is  the  terrible  storm-cloud ;  her  casque,  all 
golden,  measured  to  contain  a  hundred  cities'  footmen, 
recalls  the  vaulted  sky.  She  descends  from  heaven 
like  a  meteor  (iv.  70),  or  like  a  rainbow  wrapped  in 
purple  cloud  (xvii.  551).  Thus,  too,  she  is  described 
as  blowing  with  gentle  breath  the  spear  of  Hector  (xx. 
4-10),  and  as  becoming  invisible  by  assuming  the  casque 
of  Aides  (v.  845). 

The  flaming  chariot,  with  its  golden-trapped  steeds, 
in  which  she  descends  with  Hera  to  the  assistance  of 
the  Greeks  (v.  720,  748),  while  suggesting  to  the 
imagination  the  bright  rays  of  light,  which  spring  with 
the  speed  of  lightning  through  the  portals  of  the  east, 
recalls  also  the  Vedic  invocation  to  Ushas  (the  dawn) 
to  come  in  her  ample  and  beautifid  chariot,  dispersing 
the  darkness;  or  we  think  of  the  Golden  chariot  of 
Savitri,  or  of  Indra,  decorated  with  golden  ornaments, 
his  white-footed  coursers  harnessed  to  his  car  with  a 
golden  yoke. 

The  function  assigned  to  birds  in  tho  Iliad  seems 
also  like  an  echo  of  tho  Vcdas,  Thus,  when  Athena  is 
despatched  by  Zeus  to  distil  nectar  and  ambrosia 
into  Achilles — 

"She  plunged  in  semblance  of  a  hinl,  the  Icngthy-featherM 
os]irey. 
Shrill  screnming  down  from  upjicr  sky."    (xix.  349.) 


The  Trilogij.  xliii 

It  is  interesting  to  remember  in  tliis  connection  the 
Aryan  myth  according  to  which  the  gods  allowed  the 
heavenly  soma- drink,  the  Vedic  prototype  of  the 
Grecian  nectar,  to  be  brought  down  to  earth  by  a  falcon. 
In  illustration  of  this  subject  Kuhn  quotes  two  Vedic 
hymns  (R.  iv.  26),  (R.  iv.  27),  in  the  first  of  which 
occurs  the  following  passage  : —  "  The  speeding  falcon, 
the  strong  bird,  allied  to  the  gods,  brought  the  quicken- 
ing, invigorating  soma  from  afar,  stealing  it  from 
highest  heaven." 

When  Athena  and  Apollo 

"  Over  the  ainnes   take  their  seats,   in  guise  of  plumM 
vultures, 
Upon  the  lofty  beech  of  Zeus,  the  ^gis-holding  Father," 

(vii.  59.) 

they  remind  us  of  the  two  birds  who  sit  in  friendly 
fashion  upon  the  summit  of  the  soma-bearing  tree  of 
the  Yedas.  Thus,  too,  she  sends  a  heron  to  greet 
Ulysses  and  Diomede;  they  recognized  the  cry,  and 
rejciced  in  the  divine  message  (x.  275).  Welcker 
detects  a  figurative  allusion  to  meteoric  fact  in  the 
epithets  yKavKmnis  and  rptToyeVeta,  by  which  the  Homeric 
Athena  is  distinguished. 

If  we  turn  now  to  the  Athena  of  iEschylus,  the 
grand  impersonation  of  the  wisdom,  benignity,  and 
might  of  her  father,  we  recognise,  as  before,  the 
emergence  of  the  classic  ideal  from  the  symbolizing 
tendencies  of  the  earlier  nature-worship.  Seldom  has 
the  imagination  of  poet  been  haunted  by  a  more 
majestic  image  than  the  Athena  of  the  Eumenides ;  and 


xliv  The  Trilogy. 

as  we  picture  her  "  like  an  orator  on  the  B^/xa," 
organizing  tlie  court  of  the  Areopagus,  she  recalls  the 
grand  vision  of  Divine  Wisdom  recorded  in  the  book  of 
Proverbs  (viii.).  She,  too,  standeth  in  the  top  of  high 
places,  and  her  voice  is  heard,  unfolding  the  great 
truth  that  human  laws  and  institutions  are  entitled  to 
reverence  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  based  upon  the 
strong  foundations  of  eternal  justice  and  morality. 

"  By  me  kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice  ; 
By  me  princes  rale,  and  nobles,  even  all  the  judges  of  the 
earth."    Prov.  viii.  15,  16  ;  compare  Eum.  (461,  535). 

Most  emphatically  does  the  Grecian  poet  proclaim 
through  the  lips  of  Athena,  that  righteousness  must  be 
based  upon  reverence  and  holy  fear,  thus  coinciding 
with  the  highest  utterance  of  Hebrew  wisdom  ;  "  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil  "  (Prov.  viii.  13),  (Eum. 
661,  669).  Thus,  too,  wisdom  is  represented  by  the 
Grecian  as  by  the  Hebrew  bard,  as  presiding  over  the 
phenomena  of  external  nature  (Prov.  viii.  27),  (Eum. 
792).  Yet  while  Athena  alone  milocks  the  sealed 
thunder-halls  of  Zeus,  she,  like  her  Hebrew  prototype, 
"  rejoiceth  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,"  and  as  a 
gardener  cherishes  his  saplings,  so  "  she  loves  the  race 
of  righteous  men,  exempt  from  suffering  "  (Eum.  872). 
This  recognition  of  moral  distinctions  as  the  ground 
of  divine  favour  forms,  pci'haps,  the  most  striking 
point  of  divergence  between  Homer  and  JEschylus,  and 
forcibly  recalls  the  high  moral  tone  of  the  religion  of 
Ahura-Muzda. 


Tlie  Trilogy.  xlv 

Truly  it  may  be  said  of  the  Virgin  Goddess  that, 
like  the  golden  dawn,  which  she  is  thought  to  imper- 
sonate, she  brightens  more  and  more,  still  heralding  by 
her  effulgent  but  imperfect  light  the  advent  of  the 
perfect  day.  In  following  the  history  of  the  Virgin 
Goddess,  it  is  interesting  to  remember  that  the  dis- 
appearance of  her  colossal  statue  from  the  Parthenon 
in  the  fifth  century  was  coincident  with  the  hymn 
addressed  to  her  by  her  passionate  worshipper,  the  neo- 
Platonist,  Proclus ;  thus  at  the  last  "  she  makes  a 
swan-like  end,  fading  in  music,"  and  vanishes  from 
history,  after  commanding,  for  upwards  of  a  thousand 
years,  the  love  and  veneration  of  her  votaries. 

In  connection  with  the  study  of  ancient  poetry,  as 
recording  the  religious  life  of  humanity,  it  is  interesting 
to  consider  the  history  of  plastic  art,  which  may  be 
regarded  as  its  sensible  expression,  and  as  manifesting, 
through  the  medium  of  ideal  forms,  the  successive 
stages  of  its  development.  Thus  if  we  revert  to  that 
phase  of  the  religious  life  which  is  embodied  in  the 
earliest  literary  relics  of  the  Aryan  race,  we  shall  re- 
cognize the  impossibility  of  embodying  in  harmonious 
forms  beings  so  impalpable  as  the  deities  apostrophized 
by  the  Vedic  bards.  In  the  poetry  of  those  eaiiy 
times  we  discern  the  working  of  the  untutored  mind 
struggling  to  body  forth,  through  the  imagery  of 
external  nature,  its  religious  yearnings  and  aspirations ; 
embarrassed  by  the  complexity  of  unintelligible  pheno- 
mena, and  destitute  of  any  principle  of  selection,  the 
imagination  runs  riot,  blends  together  images  the  most 


xlvi  TJie  Trilogy. 

incongruous,  and  exhibits  that  tendency  to  symbolism 
which  subsequently  blossomed  out  into  the  colossal 
systems  of  India  and  Eleusis. 

The  transference  of  human  faith  and  worship  from 
vague  nature-powers,  dimly  recognized  as  personal 
agencies,  to  veritable  personalities,  endowed  with  con- 
sciousness and  wiU,  and  distinguished  by  diversity  of 
attribute,  moral  and  intellectual,  constitutes,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  second  great  stage  in  the  history  of  human 
progress.  This  emancipation  of  the  divine  idea  from 
its  association  with  natural  phenomena  would  lead  to 
the  recognition  of  the  human  form  as  affording  the  solo 
adequate  medium  for  the  manifestation  of  spiritual 
existence,  a  discovery  which  lies  at  the  root  of  classic 
art,  and  inaugurates  the  second  epoch  in  the  artistic 
development  of  humanity.  V/e  have  only  to  pass  from 
the  Hall  of  Egyptian  Antiquities,  in  the  British 
Museum,  to  the  gallery  of  the  Elgin  Marbles,  in  order 
to  appreciate  the  importance  of  the  transition. 

The  Greeks  thus  realizing  the  idea  that  their  divini- 
ties manifested  themselves  throngli  the  human  form,  and 
striving  to  glorify  the  temple  hallowed  by  the  presence 
of  Deity,  were  led  to  discover  the  essential  charac- 
teristics of  the  human  organism  as  a  vehicle  of  superior 
intelligence.  In  reproducing  their  impressions  through 
tlie  medium  of  art,  they  have  given  birth  to  models  of 
ideal  beauty,  which  show  us  how  fiiir  is  the  tabcnmclo 
of  the  immortal  soul,  when  the  lower  propensities  ore 
subjected  to  higher  needs.  They  detected  tlio  Diviuo 
idea  with  rcferenco  to  the  human  form,  and  accordingly. 


The  Trilogy.  xlvii 

in  contemplating  tlicse  glorious  creations  we  exi^erienco 
that  indescribable  content  wbicli  invariably  comes  over 
the  soul,  "when,  by  any  agency,  we  are  lifted  above  the 
limitations  of  the  finite  and  phenomenal  into  the  region 
of  eternal  truth. 

Grand  and  beautiful  as  are  the  classic  gods,  they 
nevertheless  fail  to  touch  the  deepest  springs  of  human 
feeling.  Though  invested  with  the  attributes  of 
humanity,  we  feci  that  in  their  emancipation  from  the 
Eorrows  and  sufferings  incident  to  our  mortal  life  they 
are  not  true  exponents  of  human  nature,  while  as 
symbols  of  Deity  they  are  inadequate  to  shadow  forth 
the  one  infinite  and  eternal  mind.  From  their  cold 
though  perfect  beauty,  the  heart  of  suffering  humanity 
turns  to  the  thorn-crowned  figure  of  the  Son  of  Man, 
and  recognizes  in  the  man  of  sorrows  its  true  type  and 
representative. 

By  revealing  God  as  a  spirit  immanent  in  the  human 
Boul,  imparting  authority  to  the  oracles  of  conscience, 
and  sanctity  to  the  inner  life,  Chiistianity  has  dispersed 
the  crowd  of  heathen  divinities,  and  exalted  to  the 
throne  of  the  universe  a  Heavenly  Father  whose  glory 
is  reflected  in  the  Son  of  Man.  Christ's  realization  of 
conscious  union  between  the  divine  and  human  spirit, 
wrought  out  through  the  discipline  of  sorrow,  and 
issuing  in  perfect  love,  has  revealed  a  depth  of  spiritual 
life  of  which  in  the  profoundcst  myths  of  classical 
antiquity  we  see  only  a  dim  but  most  wonderful  fore- 
shadowing. 

The  transition  from  the  classical  to  the  romantic  era 


xlviii  TJie  Trilogy. 

finds  its  explanation  in  these  grand  central  truths  of 
Christianity,  which  have  left  their  impress  alike  on  art 
and  on  literature.  Thus,  in  the  head  of  our  Saviour  in 
the  Cena  of  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  we  see  that  marvellous 
union  of  sublimity  and  pathos,  which,  while  lifting  the 
soul  into  a  higher  atmosphere,  at  the  same  time  appeals 
to  the  deepest  sympathies  of  the  human  heart.  Thus, 
too,  the  gi'aud  figures  of  the  Sistine  Chapel,  the  pro- 
phets and  sibyls  of  Michael  Angelo,  while  exhibiting 
the  human  form  cast  in  the  majestic  mould  of  the 
Olympian  gods,  bear  traces,  at  the  same  time,  of  those 
inner  life-struggles  which  impart  to  every  noteworthy 
countenance  so  deep  and  often  so  tragic  an  interest. 
The  literary  productions  of  the  romantic  era  also  bear 
witness  to  the  deeper  significance  which  attaches  to 
human  nature  since  the  advent  of  Christianity — a  phe- 
nomenon the  recognition  of  which  is  essential  to  the 
true  appreciation  of  classical  literature. 
I  The  fundamental  distinction  between  the  ancient  and 
Imodein  drama  will  be  more  fully  recognized  if  we 
ibring  into  closer  comparison  the  two  great  fathers  of 
'dramatic  art,  -^schylus  and  Shakespeare,  who,  though 
separated  from  one  another  by  an  interval  of  nearly 
twenty  centuries,  yet  oftcr  some  rcmai'kable  points 
both  of  analogy  and  contrast. 

In  studying  the  dramas  of  iEschylus,  whon  we 
penetrate  below  the  surface,  wo  lind  that  the  solution 
of  problems,  ethical  and  religious,  bearing  upon  man's 
nature  and  destiny,  constitutes  their  essence,  an  object 
to  whicli  the  delineation  of  character  is  made  subscr- 


The  Trilogy.  xlix 

vient ;  whereas  in  the  dramas  of  Shakespeare  the  de- 
velopment of  character  constitutes  the  primary  aim, 
to  which  he  subordinates  the  underlying  idea  of  the 
whole  ;  accordingly  we  should  vainly  seek  in  the  im- 
personations of  the  ancient  bard  that  marvellous 
insight  into  the  more  subtle  phenomena  of  human 
nature  which  imparts  so  intense  an  interest  to  the 
productions  of  Shakespeare.  In  iEschylus  the  collision 
between  moral  principles,  whose  harmonious  action  is 
essential  to  the  moral  order  of  the  world,  is  set  forth 
by  personages,  hAiman  and  superhimian,  whose  charac- 
ters are  drawn  in  bold  relief,  without  exhibiting  that 
delicate  shading  which  charms  us  in  the  delineation 
of  the  modern  bard.  These  personages  are  led  in 
obedience  to  one  moral  principle  to  violate  another, 
which  in  its  turn  finds  advocates  and  champions.  The 
collision  between  these  opposing  interests  and  the 
various  passions  evoked  in  the  struggle  sustain  the 
interest  of  the  drama,  while  the  denouement  exhibits  the 
vindication  of  eternal  order  by  the  triumph  of  that 
principle  which  is  of  primary  obligation.  If  Ave  apply 
these  principles  to  the  Oresteia,  we  find  that  while  the 
several  members  of  the  trilogy  are  linked  together  by 
a  chain  of  ethical  sequence,  which  resolves  itself  into 
the  great  doctrine  of  retribution,  each  drama  is  at  the 
same  time  devoted  to  the  solution  of  a  particular 
problem,  and  constitutes  accordingly  a  complete  and 
independent  whole. 

The  collision  of  duties  set  forth  in  the  Agamemnon 
is  of  peculiar  interest,  as  illustrating  a  struggle  which 

d 


1  The  Trilogy. 

has  its  counterpart  in  the  most  toucliing  narrative  of 
Jewish,  history.  Agamemnon,  as  king  and  army  chief, 
receives  what  he  believes  to  be  a  divine  command  to 
propitiate  /Vi-tcmis  by  the  sacrifice  of  his  daughter ;  an 
ordeal,  the  terrible  reality  of  which  can  only  be  ap- 
preciated when  we  consider  the  proneness  to  human 
sacrifice  which  characterized  the  early  ages  of  society. 
Abraham,  when  subjected  to  a  like  trial  or  temptation, 
after  manifesting  his  perfect  submission  to  what 
appeared  to  him  to  be  a  divine  monition,  was  led  to 
recognize  the  true  voice  of  God  as  harmonizing  with 
the  most  sacred  intuitions  of  the  human  heart,  and 
accordingly  forbore  to  slay  his  child.*  Agamemnon, 
on  the  contrary,  yields  to  the  suggestion  of  Calchas, 
and  by  the  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia  violates  his  obli- 
gations to  his  daughter  and  his  ^vife.  Clytemnestra 
appears  as  the  avenger  of  her  child,  and  in  vindication 
of  nature's  violated  rights,  prepares  for  her  husband 
an  ignominious  death.  The  stern  reprobation  of  Aga- 
memnon expressed  by  the  Chorus  may  be  compared  to 
the  sublime  protest  of  Micah,  and  other  Hebrew 
prophets,  against  such  deeds  of  blood.  Thus  tho 
cruel  perversion  of  religion  which  foimd  expression 
in  human  sacrifice  was  condemned  by  tho  Grecian  poet 
no  less  than  by  tho  Hebrew  sago,  a  consideration  which 
invests  tho  /Eschylcan  drama  with  profound  signifi- 
cance. 


•  I  have  followed  Dean  Stanley's  interpretation  of  this 
nanative. 


The  Trilogy,  H 

In  order  to  appreciate  the  fundamental  idea  which 
underlies  the  drama  of  the  Choephori  we  must  take 
into  consideration  the  sacred  duty  of  avenging  blood, 
"  recognized  by  the  earliest  customs  and  national  laws 
of  the  East  as  well  as  of  the  West."*  On  the  murder 
of  Agamemnon  by  Clytemnestra,  it  was  the  bounden 
duty  of  his  sou  Orestes  to  avenge  his  death  ;  the  ghost 
of  his  murdered  father  and  the  Delphic  god  demand  it 
of  him.  The  collision,  therefore,  which  forms  the 
groundwork  of  the  drama  is  between  the  duty  of 
Orestes  as  the  avenger  of  his  father,  and  his  instinctive 
recognition  of  the  reverence  due  to  his  mother,  which 
tends  to  withhold  him  from  the  commission  of  tho 
deed.  "With  admirable  skill  the  poet  makes  us  feel 
the  terrible  nature  of  the  struggle,  and  the  religious 
motives  which  decide  the  issue.  When  Orestes,  almost 
overcome  by  his  mother's  agonizing  entreaties,  hesitates 
to  commit  the  bloody  act,  Pyladcs,  who  has  accom- 
panied him  as  a  representative  of  the  god,  admonishes 
him  of  his  duty,  exclaiming — 

"  Choose  all  for  foemen  rather  than  the  Gods." 

A  profound  thought  underlies  the  greater  heinousncss 
attached  to  the  murder  of  Agamemnon  by  Clytem- 
nestra, than  to  the  murder  of  Clytemnestra  by  Orestes. 
The  bond  which  unites  the  mother  and  the  son,  which 
Orestes  is  required  to  violate,  is  instinctive,  resting 
Upon    a   law   of    nature ;     the   tie    which    unites   the 


Dissertations  on  the  Eumenides.    C.  0.  Miiller. 


lii  The  Trilogy, 

husband  and  the  wife  is  of  a  different  order,  involving 
intelligent  volition  and  reciprocal  engagement.  The 
institution  of  marriage,  morever,  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
law  and  order,  and  with  the  consequent  permanence  and 
sanctity  of  the  domestic  relations  is  the  sole  guarantee 
'for  the  healthy  development  of  society;  hence  the 
conjugal  tie  requires  to  be  placed  under  the  special 
guardianship  of  the  gods  and  of  eternal  justice. 
Hera,  who  in  the  Iliad  plays  so  prominent  and  often 
so  undignified  a  part,  is  introduced  in  the  Oresteia  in 
her  grand  matronly  character,  her  union  with  Zeus 
being  alluded  to  as  imparting  sanctity  to  the  marriage 
tie.  A  comparison  between  the  Choephori  of  ^schylus 
and  the  Hamlet  of  Shakespeare  may  serve  to  exhibit 
more  strikingly  the  fundamental  difference  between 
the  ancient  and  modern  diama.  In  both  tragedies  the 
father  of  the  hero  has  been  murdered,  and  the  mother 
has  married  the  miu:derer ;  in  both,  the  son  is  urged 
by  supernatural  visitations  to  avenge  the  crime,  and 
both  are  prompted  by  the  same  motives  of  disappointed 
ambition.  In  the  ancient  drama,  however,  the  death 
of  Agamemnon  is  represented  as  the  vindication  of  a 
moral  principle,  violated  in  the  person  of  Clytemncstra. 
Accordingly,  when  pleading  fur  her  life,  she  not  only 
appeals  to  the  filial  reverence  of  her  son,  but  also 
represents  herself  as  having,  by  the  death  of  hor 
husband,  accomplishLd  tho  ends  of  divine  justice.  In 
the  modern  drama  tho  murder  of  the  king  is  repre- 
eented  as  an  act  of  pure  wickedness ;  hence  when 
Hamlet  i8  summoned  to  avenge  his  father's  death,  uo 


The  Trilogij.  \m 

external  object  which  claims  his  reverence  intervenes 
to  check  his  purpose.  The  hesitancy  must  therefore 
come  from  within ;  accordingly  the  collision  is  found 
not  in  opposing  moral  principles,  but  in  the  personal 
character  of  Hamlet.  His  soul  is  not  organized  to 
perpetrate  this  deed  of  horror ;  consequently,  wavering 
in  his  resolution,  and  overwhelmed  with  disgust  at  the 
world  and  at  life,  he  perishes  in  the  consummation  of 
his  revenge.  So  marvellous  is  the  skill  with  which  the 
character  of  Hamlet  is  drawn,  so  absorbing  the  in- 
terest which  it  awakens,  that  in  studying  it  we  are  apt 
to  forget  the  fundamental  idea  which  underlies  the 
drama,  the  denouement  of  which,  like  that  of  the 
several  members  of  the  Oresteia,  sets  forth  the  great 
law  of  retribution,  and  vindicates  the  moral  order  of 
the  Divine  government. 

In  the  third  member  of  the  trilogy,  the  poet,  whUe 
making  his  drama  subservient  to  objects  connected 
with  the  political  state  of  Athens,  nevertheless  subor- 
dinates these  local  interests  to  the  exposition  of  higher 
truth.  Among  these  political  objects  the  most  impor- 
tant was  the  defence  of  the  Areopagus,  the  existence  of 
which  was  threatened  by  the  growing  ascendency  of  the 
democracy.  It  would  be  difi&cult  to  imagine  a  more 
impressive  means  of  recommending  this  tribunal  to 
the  reverence  of  the  Athenians  thiin  thus  to  introduce 
the  celestial  powers  as  assisting  at  its  inauguration. 
Of  far  higher  significance,  however,  is  the  ethical 
conception  which  underlies  the  drama.  The  word 
Erinys  in  Greek  has  been  defined  to  mean  "  the  feeling 


liv  Tlie  Trilogy. 

of  deep  offencej  of  bitter  displeasure,  when  sacred  rights 
belonging  to  us  are  impiously  violated  by  persons  who 
ought  most  to  have  respected  them."  These  vengeance- 
prompting  feelings,  personified  as  active,  ever-wakeful 
spirits,  became  associated  with  the  great  nature-power, 
Demeter,  under  her  more  malignant  aspect,  and  hence 
arose  the  worship  of  the  dread  goddess,  Demeter 
Erinys.  Both  these  names  have  been  traced  back  to 
the  Sanscrit ;  the  Greek  Demeter  being  identified  with 
Dyava  Mutar,  the  Mother,  corresponding  to  Dyaus 
Pitar,  the  Father,  and  the  Erinyes  being  identified 
with  the  Sanscrit  Saranyu.  Thus  it  appears  that  the 
venerable  goddesses,  like  Zeus  and  Athena,  have  their 
root  in  the  Vedas,  "  In  early  Greek  mythology  they 
■were  attributed  more  especially  to  the  Father,  the 
Mother,  and  the  Elder  Brother,  whenever  their  sacred 
rights  had  been  impiously  violated."  They  are  thus 
introduced  iu  the  Iliad  (ix.  449 ;  ix.  572 ;  xv.  204), 
where  they  are  represented  as  avenging  any  violation 
of  the  natural  order. 

In  this  character  they  also  appear  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  Choephori,  and  in  the  opening  scenes  of  tho 
Eumcnides,  where,  like  blood-thirsty  hounds,  they 
pursue  Orestes  for  the  murder  of  his  mother :  they 
take  cognizance  only  of  the  outward  act,  and  excrciso 
their  functions  with  tho  inflexibility  of  natural  law. 
They  would  not  tho  less  have  claimed  him  as  their 
prey  had  ho  left  unavenged  tho  murder  of  his  father 
(Choeph.  283,  Oil).  In  tliia  fatal  collision  Athena 
appears    as    umpire :    by   establishing    the   court    of 


Tfie  Trihgij.  Iv 

Areopagus  slio  proclaims  the  great  priuciple,  "  tHat  the 
highest  tribunal  upon  earth  is  the  collective  conscience 
of  humanity."*  The  cause  is  tried  before  this  august 
assembly ;  righteous  regard  is  had  for  the  special 
circumstances  of  the  deed  ;  Orestes  is  acquitted,  the 
sanctity  of  the  primeval  goddesses  is  recognized ; 
their  wrath  is  appeased,  and  thus  the  intuitive  thirst 
for  revenge  is  transmuted  into  the  principle  of  eternal 
justice.  Thus  the  drama  of  the  Eumenides  exhibits, 
under  one  of  its  grandest  phases,  the  contest  between 
the  Titans  and  the  Olympian  gods,  issuing  in  the 
triumph  of  free  will  and  moral  power  over  blind 
instinct  and  necessity,  while  the  transmutation  of  the 
Erinyes  into  the  Eumenides  symbolizes  the  profound 
thought  that  even  the  instinctive  tendencies  in  human 
nature  are  implanted  there  by  its  Divine  Author,  and 
consequently  that  man's  highest  well-being  demands, 
not  their  suppression  or  annihilation,  but  their  harmo- 
nious subordination  to  the  higher  faculties  of  the  soul. 
Classical  poetry  affords  the  true  key  to  classic  art ; 
it  is,  therefore,  interesting  to  turn  from  the  study  of 
^schylus  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Parthenon, 
where  the  Athenians  beheld  translated  into  marble  the 
same  profound  ideas  which  the  great  di-amatist  has 
embodied  in  his  immortal  works.  Thus  the  sculptures 
of  the  eastern  pediment,  having  reference  to  the  birth 
of  Athena,  indicate,  by  the  presence  of  the  Fates  and 
other  divine  personages,  the  deep  significance  attached 


*  '  Gott  in  dcr  Gcscliichte.'    Bunsen, 


Ivi  Tlie  Trilogy. 

by  the  sculptor  to  the  manifestation  of  Divine  Wisdom 
in  the  person  of  the  Virgin  Goddess ;  while  in  the 
grand  composition  of  the  western  pediment,  which  set 
forth  the  contention  of  Poseidon  and  Athena  for 
supremacy  over  the  country  of  Attica,  we  trace,  as  in 
the  Eumenides,  the  association  of  interests  purely  local 
and  national  with  truths  of  higher  significance.  Thus 
the  contending  divinities  have  been  regarded  as 
typifying  the  antagonism  between  agi'icultural  and 
maritime  pursuits,  which  formed  one  main  feature  of 
Athenian  life ;  and  also  as  reflecting  the  conflicting 
powers  of  land  and  sea,  as  exhibited  in  the  topography 
of  the  interior  and  the  coast.*  I  doubt  not,  however, 
that  there  rose  also  before  the  mental  vision  of  Phidias 
the  grand  old  allegory  of  the  battle  between  the  Titans 
and  the  Gods,  which  may  bo  regarded  as  the  mythical 
expression  of  that  eternal  struggle  between  the  lower 
and  higher  elements  of  being,  of  which  the  drama  of 
the  Eumenides  afibrds  so  impressive  and  magnificent  a 
symbol :  this  hypothesis  appears  the  more  plausible 
when  wo  consider  the  iutimato  mythological  connection 
which  obtained  between  Poseidon  and  Demetcr- 
Erinys. 

Another  most  interesting  illustration  of  the  intimate 
association  which,  in  classical  times,  existed  between 
Poetry  and  her  sister  arts  is  to  bo  found  in  the  paint- 
ings of  Polygnotus  in  the  Leschc  at  Delphi,  of  which 


*  r.xplanation  of  tlic  Groups  in  the  "NVcstonj  Pediment 
of  the  rarihcnon.    *  Chissical  Museum.'     W.  Watkiss  Lloyd. 


TJie  Trilogy.  Ivii 

a  minute  description  is  given  by  Pausanias,  and  which 
have  been  admirably  restored  by  Fr.  and  Joh.  Eiepen- 
hausen.*  The  first  picture  exhibits  the  capture  of 
Ilion,  the  desecration  of  her  sanctuaries,  and  brings 
before  the  mental  eye  the  outrage  committed  against 
Athena  in  the  person  of  Cassandra,  thus  setting  forth 
the  origin  of  the  disasters  which  befell  the  returning 
armament  of  the  Greeks :  it  would  be  impossible  for 
the  beholders  of  this  picture  not  to  recall  the  speech  of 
Clytemnestra  in  the  Agamemnon  (320),  in  which  she 
forcibly  describes  the  contrast  between  the  state  of 
victors  and  vanquished  in  the  captured  city,  the 
desolation  of  which  is  touchingly  symbolized  in  the 
painting  by  the  empty  cuirass  that  lies  on  the  altar  to 
which  a  child  is  clinging.  The  exhibition  of  the  very 
crimes  so  earnestly  deprecated  by  the  poet  (330), 
prepares  the  mind  for  the  second  picture,  exhibiting 
the  descent  of  Ulysses  to  Hades,  to  learn  from  the 
prophet  the  means  by  which  a  safe  return  might  be 
secured.  The  punishment  of  the  sacrilegious  Tityus, 
and  the  retaliation  on  the  undutiful  son,  could  not  fail 
to  suggest  to  the  mind  of  the  spectator  those  passages 
of  the  Eumenides  in  which  the  poet,  with  terrible 
earnestness,  describes  the  direful  fate  which  in  the 
lower  regions  is  the  sure  award  of  filial  impiety  and 
sacrilege  (260). 

The    schools   of   design   which    are   springing  up 


•  On  the  paintings  of  Polygnotus  in  the  Lesche  at  Delphi, 
*  Classical  Museum,'  vol.  i,    W.  Watkiss  Lloyd. 


Iviii  Tlie  Trilogy. 

tlirougliout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land  bear 
witness  to  the  importance  which  is  now  attached  to 
artistic  culture  in  England. 

It  must  not  bo  forgotten,  however,  that  imagination 
constitutes  the  vital  principle  of  art ;  that  the  jiractised 
eye  and  well-trained  hand  are  powerless  except  as 
instruments  to  embody  the  conceptions  of  the  creative 
mind.  Hence  the  study  of  poetry  acquires  new 
significance,  not  only  as  throwing  light  upon  the 
master-works  of  classical  antiquity,  the  recognized 
models  of  ideal  form,  but  also  as  enriching  the  imagi- 
nation, while  at  the  same  time  it  opens  both  eye  and 
soul  to  discern  the  familiar  beauty  of  common  life. 

What  Joubcrt  has  said  of  Plato  may  bo  applied  with 
equal  truth  to  poetry  : — "  Platon  ne  fait  rien  voir,  r#is 
il  eclaire,  il  met  dc  la  lumicre  dans  nos  yeux,  et  place 
en  nous  ime  clarte,  dont  tous  les  objcts  dcviennent 
ensuite  illumines.  Comme  I'air  des  montagnes  sa 
lecture  aiguise  les  organcs,  et  donne  le  gout  des  bons 
aliments." 

"  Of  imagination,  fancy,  taste,  of  the  highest  cul- 
tivation in  all  its  forms,  this  great  nation  has  abun- 
dance; of  industry,  skill,  perseverance,  mechanical 
contrivance,  it  has  a  yet  larger  stock,  which  overflows 
our  narrow  bounds  and  floods  the  world.  The  one 
great  want  is  to  bring  tlicso  two  groups  of  qualities 
harmoniously  together.''*     I  believe  that  in  poetry  will 


*  Wcdfzcwocxl,    an    aiUrcss    by    the   lU.    Hon.    W.    E\ 
Gladstone,  M.P. 


The  Trilogy.  lix 

be  found  one  of  tlie  missing  links  through  whoso  agency 
this  alliance  between  the  spheres  of  beauty  and  utility 
is  to  be  consummated.  Milton  speaks  of  "  the  glorious, 
the  magnificent,  uses  which  may  be  made  of  poetry 
both  in  divine  and  human  things;"  while  Shelley 
characterized  it  as  "a  fountain  for  ever  flowing  with 
the  waters  of  wisdom  and  delight."  It  becomes, 
therefore,  a  question  of  deep  national  interest  to  con- 
sider by  what  agencies  these  renovating  and  purifying 
influences  may  be  diffused,  and  brought  home  to  the 
heart  of  this  great  nation.  From  Greece,  "  the  fountain 
of  all  instruction  in  matters  of  art,"  we  may  perhaps 
take  a  bint  as  to  one  large  and  important  department 
of  national  education. 

In  this  connection  I  am  tempted  to  quote  a  passage 
from  Grote's  History  of  Greece,  where,  after  alluding 
to  the  abundance  in  the  productions  of  the  tragic 
muse,  at  Athens,  he  proceeds  : — "  All  this  abundance 
founds  its  way  to  the  minds  of  the  great  body  of  the 
citizens,  not  excepting  even  the  poorest.  So  powerful 
a  body  of  poetic  influence  has  probably  never  been 
brought  to  act  upon  the  emotions  of  any  other  popula- 
tion ;  and  when  we  consider  the  extraordinary  beauty 
of  these  immortal  compositions,  which  first  stamped 
tragedy  as  a  separate  department  of  poetry,  and  gave 
to  it  a  dignity  never  since  reached,  we  shall  be 
satisfied  that  the  tastes,  the  sentiments,  and  the  intel- 
lectual standard  of  the  Athenian  multitude  must  have 
been  sensibly  improved  and  exalted  by  such  lessons. 
The  reception  of  such  pleasures  through  the  eye  and 


Is  The  Trilogy. 

ear,  as  well  as  amidst  a  sympatliizing  crowd,  was  a 
fact  of  no  small  importance  in  the  mental  history  of 
Athens.  It  contributed  to  exalt  their  imagination, 
like  the  grand  edifices  and  ornaments  added  during  the 
same  period  to  the  Acropolis." 

The  designs  of  Flaxman  from  Homer  and  iEschylus 
are  wrought  into  our  damask  and  engraved  upon  our 
glass  ;  it  is  time  that  the  thoughts  of  the  great  poets, 
from  whom  he  drew  his  inspiration,  should  be  brought 
home,  with  all  their  rich  treasure  of  imagery  to  the 
hearts  and  minds  of  our  people.  What  noble  enter- 
tainment might  not  be  drawn  from  "  Heroic  poems  and 
Attic  tragedies  of  stateliest  and  most  regal  omament," 
if,  appealing  as  they  do  to  the  feelings  of  our  common 
humanity,  they  were  made  appreciable  to  the  popular 
understanding  by  illustrations  drawn  from  history  and 
art! 

With  reference  to  the  moral  influence  of  poetry, 
Joubcrt  says,  "Vouloz-vous  conuaitre  la  morale? 
Lisez  les  poetes ;  ce  qui  tous  plait  chez  eux,  appro- 
fondissez-le ;  c'est  le  vrai ;  ils  doivent  etre  la  grando 
etude  du  philosoiihc  qui  veut  connaitro  I'homme." 

Believing  that  iEschylus  strikingly  corroborates  this 
utterance,  in  all  humility  I  offer  to  the  public  this 
version  of  his  greatest  work. 


AGAMEMNON. 


AGAMEMNON. 


[The  Watchman  is  discovered  reclining  on  the  flat  roof  of 
the  palace.^ 

Watchman. 

I  PRAY  the  gods  deliverance  from  these  toils, 
Release  from  year-loDg  watch,  which,  couch'd  aloft 

On  these  Atreidan  roofs,  dog-like,  I  keep. 

Marking  the  stars  which  nightly  congregate ; 

And  those  bright  potentates  who  bring  to  mortals 

Winter  and  summer,  signal  in  the  sky, 
|"What  time  they  wane  I  note,  their  risings  too. 

And  for  the  beacon's  token  now  I  watch, 

The  blaze  of  fire,  bearing  from  Troy  a  tale, 
j  Tidings  of  capture  ;  for  so  proudly  hopes  10* 

A  woman's  heart,  with  manly  counsel  fraught. 

Dew-drenched  and  restless  in  my  nightly  couch, 

By  dreams  unvisited,  for  at  my  side. 

Fear  stands,  in  place  of  sleep,  nor  suffers  me 

*  The  figures  correspond  to  the  number  of  lines  in  the 
original. 

t  The  obelisks  refer  to  the  conjectural  emendations  of 
the  text  at  the  end  of  each  drama. 


4  Agamemnon. 

Soimclly,  in  shimbcrous  rest,  my  lids  to  close. 

Then  wlien  I  tliink  to  chant  a  strain,  or  hum, 

(Such  against  sleep  my  tuneful  counter-charm,) 

Moaning,  I  wail  tlie  sorrows  of  this  house, 

Not  wisely  governed  as  in  days  of  old. 

But  may  glad  respite  from  these  toils  be  mine,  20 

When  fire,  joy's  hefrald,  through  the  darkness  gleams. 

[£e  suddenly  beholds  the  heacon-h'fjhf  and  starts  to  h\sfeet.'\ 
Hail  lamp  of  night,  forth  shining  like  the  day, 
Of  many  a  festive  dance  in  Argos'  land, 
Through  joy  at  this  event,  the  harbinger. 

Hurrah!  Hurrah!  To  Agamemnon's  queen, 

Thus  with  shrill  cry  1  give  th'  appointed  sign. 

That  from  her  couch  up-rising  with  all  speed. 

She  in  the  palace  jubilant  may  lift 

The  joyous  shout,  to  gratulate  this  torch, 

If  Ilion's  citadel  in  truth  is  ta'en, 

As,  shining  forth,  this  beacon-fire  proclaims.  oO 

The  joyous  prelude  I  myself  will  dance. 
For  to  my  lords  good  fortune  I  shall  score, 
Now  that  this  torch  hath  cast  me  triple  six. 
Well !  be  it  mine,  when  comes  this  mansion's  lord, 
In  this  my  hand  his  much-loved  hand  to  hold  1 

The  rest  I  speak  not ;  o'er  my  tongue  hath  passed 

An  ox  with  heavy  tread :  the  house  itself, 

Had  it  a  voice,  would  tell  the  tale  full  clear  ; 

And  I,  with  those  who  know,  am  fain  to  sjicak, 

With  others,  who  know  nothing,  I  forget. 

[Exit. 


Agamemnon.  5 

[Enter  in  rank  and  file  the  Chorus  of  Argive  Eldeks,  each 
leaning  on  his  staff;  during  their  sloiv  and  measured 
advance  they  sing  tde  following  Ode,  the  conclusion  of 
which  brings  them  in  front  of  the  staged] 

Chorus. 
Lo  the  tenth  year  rolls  apace  40 

Since  Priam's  mighty  challenger, 
Lord  Menelas  and  Atreus'  heir, 
Stalwart  Atridfe, — by  heaven's  grace 
Twin-throned,  twin-eceptered, — from  this  land 
A  thousand  sail,  with  Argives  manned, 
Unmoor'd, — a  martial  armament. 
Warriors  on  just  reprisal  bent. 
Fierce  battle  clanging  from  their  breast, 
Like  vultures  of  their  young  bereaved. 
Who,  for  their  nestlings  sorely  grieved, 
Wheel,  eddying  high  above  their  nest, 
By  oarage  of  strong  pennons  driven,  50 

Missing  the  eyrie-watching  care 
Of  callow  fledglings  ;  but  from  heaven. 
Some  guilt-avenging  deity, 
Or  all-retrieving  Zeus,  doth  lend 
An  ear  attentive  to  the  cry 
Of  birds,  shrill-wailing,  sore-distrest, 
And  doth  upon  the  guilty  send 
Eriuys,  late-avenging  pest. 
So  for  the  dame,  by  many  wooed. 
Doth  mighty  Zeus,  who  shields  the  guest, 
'Gainst  Paris  send  th'  Atridan  brood  ;  GO 

Struggles  limb-wearing,  knees  earth-pressed 


6  Agamemnon. 

The  spear-shaftj  rudely  snapt  in  twain 

In  war's  initial  battle, — these 

For  Danaoi  as  for  Trojans  be  decrees. 

As  matters  stand,  they  stand  ;  the  yet  to  be 

Must  issue  as  ordained  by  destiny. 

Nor  altar  fires,  nor  lustral  rain 

Poured  forth,  nor  tear-drops  shed  in  vain, 

The  wrath  relentless  can  appease 

Of  violated  sanctities.  70 

But  we,  unhonoured,  weak  of  frame, 
Excluded  from  that  proud  array. 
Tarry  at  home,  and,  age-oppressed, 
On  staves  our  child-like  strength  we  lean ; 
In  tender  years  and  age,  the  same, 
Life's  current  feebly  sways  the  breast; 
His  station  Ares  holds  no  more  j 
Decrepid  Eld,  with  leafage  hoar, 
No  stronger  than  a  child  for  war, 
Treadeth  his  triple-footed  way, 
Like  dream  in  daylight  seen.  80 

[Enter  Clytemxestra,  followed  hy  a  female  train.  The 
Chorus  sings  the  following  Ode  as  it  advances  to  take  up  its 
ustial  position  round  the  altar  of  Zeus,  adorned  with  a 
statue  of  the  godJ] 

But  Clytemnestra,  thou, 

Tyndarous'  daughter,  Argos  queen, 

What  hath  befallen  ?     What  hast  heard  ? 

Confiding  in  what  tidings  now 

Sendest  thou  round  the  altar-kindling  word  ? 

Of  all  the  gods  who  guard  the  state, 

Supernal,  or  of  realms  below, 


Agamemnon.  7 

In  heaven,  or  in  the  mart  who  wait, 

With  gifts  the  altars  glow.  90 

Now  here,  now  yonder,  doth  a  torch  arise. 
Streaming  aloft  to  reach  the  skies, 
Charmed  with  pure  unguent's  soothing  spell, 
Guileless  and  suasive,  from  the  royal  cell. 

What  here  'tis  lawful  to  declare, 

What  may  be  told  proclaim ; 

Be  healer  of  this  care 

Which  now  a  lowering  form  doth  wear,  100 

Till  fawning  Hope,  from  out  the  flame 

Of  sacrifice,  with  gentle  smile 

Doth  sateless  grief's  soul-gnawing  pang  beguile. 

[^Wltile  Clytemnestha  offers  sacrifice,  the  following  Ode  is 
sung  hy  the  Chorus  from  the  altar  of  Zevs,"] 

Strophe. 
The  way-side  omen  mine  it  is  to  sing,* 
The  leaders'  prosperous  might  fore-shadowing, 
For  still  my  age,  unquenched  its  natal  power, 
Doth  suasive  song  inspire,  a  heaven-sent  dower, 
How  the  rapacious  bird,  the  feathered  king. 
Sends  forth  against  the  Teucrid  land. 
With  spear  and  with  avenging  hand, 
Achaia's  double-throned  Might,  110 

Accordant  chiefs  of  Hellas'  martial  flower. 

*  The  original  being  here  in  oracular  style  is  purposely 
obscure,  and  cannot  be  fitly  rendered  otherwise  in  the  trans- 
lation. 


8  Agamemnon. 

Toward  spcar-poising  hand,  tlio  palace  near, 

On  lofty  station,  manifest  to  sight. 

The  bird-kings  to  the  navy-kings  appear, 

One  black,  and  one  %\'ith  hinder  plumage  white  ; 

A  hare  with  embryo  young,  in  evil  hour, 

Amerced  of  future  courses,  they  devour. 

Chant  the  dirge,  uplift  the  wail ! 

But  may  the  right  prevail!  120 

Antistbophe. 
Then  the  sagacious  army-seer,  aware 
How  diverse-minded  the  Atridan  kings, 
In  the  hare-renders  sees  the  martial  pair, 
And  thus,  the  augury  expounding,  sings  ; — 
"  Priam's  stronghold  in  time  this  martial  raid 
Captures,  but  first  the  city's  store, 
The  people's  wealth,  shall  fate  destroy  ; 
Now  from  no  god  may  jealous  ire 
O'crcloud  the  mighty  curb  forged  against  Troy,*  130 
Marshalled  for  battle  ;  for  the  holy  Maid 
Is  angered  at  the  house,  since  of  her  sire 
The  winged  hounds  the  wretched  trembler  tare, 
Mother  and  young  unborn,  her  special  care; 
Therefore  doth  she  the  eagles'  meal  abhor. 
Chant  the  dirge,  uplift  the  wail! 
But  may  the  right  prevail ! 

Epode. 

■fFor  she,  the  beauteous  goddess,  loves 

•  By  a  harsh  metaphor  the  Greek  army  is  called  a  curb 
forged  against  Troy. 


Agamemnon.  9 

The  tender  wlielps,  new-dropped,  of  creatures  rude, 
Sparing  the  udder-loving  brood 
Of  every  beast  through  field  or  wood  that  roves, — 
Hence  with  Apollo  pleads  the  seer  that  he  140 

From  these  events  fair  omens  will  fulfil, 

Judging  the  way-side  augury, 
Partly  auspicious,  partly  fraught  with  ill. 
Oh  !  God  of  healing !  thee  I  supplicate, 
Let  not  the  Huntress  on  the  Danai  bring 
Dire  ship-detaining  blasts  and  adverse  skies, 

Preluding  other  sacrifice. 

Lawless,  unfestivc,  natal  spring 

Of  feudful  jar  and  mortal  hate, 

By  husband-fear  unawed ; 
For  child-avenging  wrath,  with  fear  and  fraud. 
Dread  palace-warden,  doth  untiring  wait."  150 

Such  woes,  with  high  successes  blent, 
By  Fate  on  the  twain  royal  houses  sent, 
Did  Calchas  from  the  way-side  auguries 
Bodeful  proclaim  : — Then  consonant  with  these, 

Chant  the  dirge,  uplift  the  wail  I 

But  may  the  right  prevail ! 

Strophe  I. 
Zeus,  whoe'er  he  be,  this  name 
If  it  pleaseth  him  to  claim, 
This  to  him  will  I  address ; 
Weighing  all,  no  power  I  know 
Save  only  Zeus,  if  I  aside  would  throw  160 

Li  sooth  as  vain  this  burthen  of  distress. 


1.0  Agamemnon. 

Antistrophe   I. 
Nor  doth  he  so  great  of  yore,* 
With  all-defying  boldness  rife, 
fLonger  avail ;  his  reign  is  o'er. 
The  next,  thrice  vanquished  in  the  strife, 
Hath  also  passed  ;  but  who  the  victor-strain 
To  Zeus  uplifts,  true  wisdom  shall  obtain. 

Strophe  II. 
To  sober  thought  Zeus  paves  the  way,  170 

And  wisdom  links  with  pain. 
In  sleep  the  anguish  of  remembered  ill 
Drops  on  the  troubled  heart ;  against  their  will 
Rebellious  men  are  tutored  to  be  wise ; 
I A  grace  I  ween  of  the  divinities, 
Who  mortals  from  their  holy  seats  arraign. 

Antistrophe  II. 

E'en  so  the  elder  of  the  twain, 

Achaia's  fleet  who  swayed, 
No  seer  upbraiding,  bowed,  with  grief  suppressed, 
His  soul  to  fortune's  stroke  ;  what  time  the  host. 
In  front  of  Chalcis,  tossing  off  the  coast  180 

Of  wave-vexed  Aulis,  lingered,  sore-distressed. 
While  store-exhausting  gales  their  progress  stayed. 

Strophe  III. 
Blasts,  dire  delay  and  famine  in  their  train. 
And  evil-anchorage,  from  Strymon  sweep, — 
Ruin  to  mortals ;  with  malignant  power, 
Ruthless  to  ships  and  cordage,  they 
*  The  combatants  probably  are  Uratios,  father  ol  Eronos ; 
and  Kronos,  fatlicr  of  Zeus. 


Agamemnon.  11 

DouMing  the  sojourn  on  the  deep 

Wither  the  Argive  flower.  190 

But  to  the  chiefs  of  that  array, 
When,  than  the  bitter  storm,  the  seer 
A  cure  shrieked  forth,  weighted  with  deadlier  bane, — 
In  name  of  Artemis, — the  Atridan  twain. 
Smiting  on  earth  their  sceptres,  strove  in  vain 
To  quell  the  rising  tear. 

Antistrophe  III. 
Then  thus  aloud  the  elder  chieftain  cried  : — 
"  Grievous,  in  sooth,  the  doom  to  disobey, 
But  grievous  too  if  I  my  child  must  slay,  200 

My  home's  fair  ornament,  my  pride, 

Defiling  these  paternal  hands. 
E'en  at  the  altar's  side, 
With  virgin-slaughter's  gory  tide. 
What  course  exempt  from  evil  ?     Say, 
The  fleet  can  I  desert,  the  leagued  bands 
Failing  ?     With  hot  desire  to  crave  the  spell 
Of  virgin  blood,  the  storm  that  shall  allay, 

Is  just.     May  all  be  well ! "  210 

Strophe  IV. 
Then  harnessed  in  Necessity's  stern  yoke 
An  impious  change-wind  in  his  bnsom  woke, 
Profane,  unhallowed,  with  dire  evil  fraught, 
His  soul  perverting  to  all  daring  thought. 
For  frenzy,  that  from  primal  guilt  doth  spring, 
Emboldens  mortals,  prompting  deeds  of  ill ; 
Thus,  armed  a  woman  to  avenge,  the  king 
In  sacrifice  his  daughter  dared  to  kill ; 
The  fleet's  initial  rite  accomplishing. 


12  Agamemnon. 

Antistrophe  IV. 

Her  prayers,  her  cries  of  "  Father,"  her  young  life  220 
Were  nought  to  those  stern  ximpires,  breathing  strife : 
So,  after  prayer,  her  sire  the  servants  bade, 
fStooping,  with  steeled  hearts,  to  lift  the  maid 
Robe-tangled,  kid-like,  as  for  sacrifice, 
High  o'er  the  altar ;  them  he  also  bade, 
Guarding  her  lovely  mouth,  her  bodeful  cries, 
Stern  curse  entailiug  on  their  houses  twain, 
With  voiceless  muzzles  forceful  to  restrain. 

Strophe  V. 
Then  letting  fall  her  veil  of  saffron  dye,  230 

She  smote,  with  piteous  arrow  from  her  eye, 
Each  murderer ;  while,  passing  fair, 
fLikc  to  a  pictiired  image,  voiceless  there, 
Stro\e  she  to  speak ;  for  oft  in  other  days. 
She  in  her  father's  hospitable  balls, 
With  her  chaste  voice  had  carolled  forth  his  praise. 
What  time  the  walls 
Eang  to  the  Plan's  sound. 
Gracing  her  sire,  with  third  libation  crowned. 

Antistrophe  V. 
What  next  bcfel  I  know  not,  nor  relate ; 
Not  unfulfill'd  were  Calchas'  words  of  fate.  240 

For  justice  doth  for  sufferers  ordain 
To  jnirchase  wisdom  at  the  cost  of  paiu. 
Why  seek  to  reail  the  future  ?  Let  it  go  ! 
Since  dawns  the  issue  clear  with  dawning  day, 


Agamemnon.  13 

What  boots  it  to  forcstal  our  date  of  woe? 
Come  weal  at  last ! 
So  prays,  these  miscliiefs  past, 
Of  Apia's  land  tliis  one  sole  guard  and  stay. 

Hail  Clytemnestra !  Hither  am  I  come 

Tby  majesty  revering.  For  'tis  meet 

When  the  male  throne  is  empty,  that  we  pay  2o0 

To  our  high  captain's  consort  honour  due. 

If  thou  hast  heard  auspicious  news,  or  not, 

That  with  joy-votiching  hope  thou  lightest  up 

The  altar  fires,  I,  as  a  friend,  would  kuow, — 

Yet  shall  thy  silence  nought  unkind  be  deemed. 

Clytemnestra. 
Joy's  harbinger,  be  radiant  Morning  born 
From  kindly,  mother  Night !  So  runs  the  saw. 
But  thou  of  joy  beyond  all  hope  shalt  hear. 
For  Priam's  city  have  the  Argives  won. 

Chorus. 
How  queen  I  through  imbelief  I  miss  thy  word. 

Clytemnestra. 
Troy  is  in  Argive  hands;  now  speak  I  plain  ?         260 

Chortis. 
Joy,  stealing  o'er  my  heart,  calls  forth  the  tear. 

Clttemnkstea. 
'Tis  true,  thine  eye  thy  loyalty  bewrays. 


14  Agamemnon. 

Chorus. 
Of  these  great  tidings  what  the  certain  proof? 

Cli-teainestra. 
Warrant  I  have ; — how  not  ?  or  Heaven  deceives  me. 

Choru8. 
Trusting  the  suasive  augury  of  dreams  ? 

Cl"ktemnestba. 
The  fancies  of  the  sleep-bound  soul  I  heed  not. 

Chorus. 
But  hath  some  wingless  rumour  buoy'd  thee  up  ? 

Clttemnestra. 
Thou  chidest  me  as  were  I  a  young  girl. 

Chorus. 
But  since  what  time  was  Priam's  city  spoiled  ? 

Clytemnestra. 
This  very  night  now  bringing  forth  the  day.  270 

Chorus. 
What  messenger  could  travel  with  such  speed  ? 

Clytemnestba. 
Hephaestos,  a  bright  flush  from  Ida  sending. 
Hither  through  swift  relays  of  conricr-flamo. 
Beacon  transmitted  beacon.     Ida  first 
To  the  Hermaean  rock  on  Lemnos'  Isle ; 
Thence  Athos'  summit,  dedicate  to  Zeus, 


Agamemnon.  15 

The  third  in  order,  caught  the  mighty  glow. 
[Ipsoaring,  bridging  in  its  might  the  sea, 
With  gathered  strength,  the  onward  speeding  torch, 
In  golden  splendour,  like  another  sun, 
Its  message  to  Makistos'  watch-tower  sends. 
Who,  nor  delaying,  nor  by  Sleep  o'erpowered, 
The  courier's  duty  fiiithfully  discharged. 
The  torch,  far-gleaming  to  Euripos'  stream, 
Gives  signal  to  Messapios'  sentinels. 
Firing  of  withered  heath  a  giant  pile, 
With  answering  blaze,  they  pass  the  message  on. 
The  stalwart  flame,  unwearied  and  undimm'd. 
Like  a  bright  moon,  o'erleaps  Asopos'  plain, 
And  wakens,  on  Cithaeron's  lofty  crag, 
Another  speeder  of  the  fiery  post.  290 

The  warder  hailing  the  far-journeying  fire. 
Kindles  a  beacon  of  surpassing  glow ; 
Bounded  the  radiance  o'er  Gorgopis'  lake, 
And  reaching  Aegiplanctos'  mountain  peak 
Urged  on  without  delay  the  fiery  chain. 
AMth  vigour  unimpaired  they  onward  send. 
Kindled  anew,  a  mighty  beard  of  flame, 
That,  flaring  from  afar,  the  headland  crossed 
fO'erlooking  Saron's  gulf,     Down  shooting  then. 
The  blaze,  alighting  on  Arachnae's  height,  300 

The  city's  nearest  watch-tower,  reached  its  goal ; 
Thence  to  the  roof  of  Atreus'  son  this  light 
Darted, — true  scion  of  Idaian  fire. 
Thus  in  succession,  flame  awakening  flame 
Fulfilled  the  order  of  the  fiery  course : 


16  Agamemnon. 

The  first  and  last  are  victors  in  the  race. 
Such  is  the  proof,  the  warrant  that  I  give 
Of  tidings  sent  me  bv  mj  Lord  from  Troy. 

CJiorits. 
The  gods,  0  queen,  will  I  invoke  hereafter. 
But  now  I  fain  would  marvel  at  thy  words, 
Heard  more  at  large  so  thou  wouldst  speak  again.    310 

Clttemnestba. 
Troy  on  this  very  day  th'  Achaians  hold. 
I  ween  ill-blcudiug  clamour  fills  the  town  : 
Pour  in  one  vessel  vinegar  and  oil. 
They  will  not  lovingly  consort,  I  trow  ; 
So  now  from  captives  and  froin  captors  rise 
Two  voices,  telling  of  their  two-fold  fate. 
For  those,  flung  prostrate  on  the  lifeless  forms 
Of  husbands  and  of  brothers,  children  too, 
Prone  on  their  aged  sirep,  lamenting  wail  • 
While  these,  night-stragglers  after  toilsome  fight, 
Keen  for  all  viands  that  the  city  yields, 
Upon  no  order  standing,  but  as  each 
Hath  snatched  the  lot  of  fortune,  take  their  fill. 
At  length  from  fi'ost  and  skicy  dews  set  free, 
They  dwell  in  Iliou's  spear-won  halls,  and  sleep 
tThe  live-long  night,  unsentincUcd  like  gods. 
If  now  the  tutelary  powers  they  fear, 
Who    hold    the    conquered    land,    and    spare    their 
Bhrincs,  330 

Captors,  they  phnll  not  captured  be  in  turn. 
P»ut  may  no  greedy  passion  seize  the  host 


Agamemnon.  17 

To  plunder  things  unlawful,  smit  with  gain. 
A  safe  return  has  yet  to  be  secured, 
And  haK  the  double  course  is  yet  to  run. 
But  guilty  to  the  gods  if  come  the  host. 
Wakeful  may  rise  the  sorrows  of  the  slain 
For  vengeance,  though  no  sudden  ill  befal. 
These  words  from  me,  a  woman  thou  hast  heard  ; 
But  may  the  good  in  overpoise  prevail !  340 

For  I  of  many  blessings  choose  this  joy. 

Chorus. 
Like  prudent  man  well  hast  thou  spoken,  lady. — 
But  I,  on  hearing  of  thy  certain  proofs, 
Forthwith  prepare  me  to  salute  the  gods. 
For  no  unworthy  meed  requites  our  toil. 

[Exit  Clytemnestea. 
Hail,  sovereign  Zeus,  and  friendly  Night, 
Mistress  of  mighty  glories,  hail ! 
Thou  who  o'er  Troia's  tower-crowned  height, 
A  snare  so  closely  meshed  hast  flung. 
That  none,  or  fully  grown  or  young. 
Thraldom's  huge  drag-net  may  avail 
To  overleap.     Vast  ruin  caj^tures  all. 
Great  guardian  of  the  guest, 
Thee  I  adore  ; — 
Wrought  were  those  deeds  at  thy  behest : 
The  bow  thou  didst  of  yore 
'Gainst  Alexander  strain. 
That  nor  the  destined  hour  before, 
Nor  shooting  o'er  the  stars,  in  vain 
The  shaft  might  falL 


18  Agamemnon. 

Strophe  I. 
'Tis  Zeus  who  smote  them,  this  we  may  aver, 
For  easy  'tis  to  trace ; 
The  end  he  shaped  as  he  decreed.  360 

Yet  gods  supernal,  some  declare, 
To  sinful  mortals  give  no  heed 
Who  trample  under  foot  the  grace 
Of  sacred  things.     But  such  are  reprobate  ; — 
Kindred  they  claim  with  those,  in  heaven's- despite, 
fWho  rebel  war  breathe  forth,  transgressing  right. 
Wealth  in  excess  breeds  mischief,  and  o'erturns 

The  balance  of  the  constant  mind  ;  370 

No  bulwark  'gainst  destructive  fate 
In  riches  shall  that  mortal  find 
Who  Justice'  mighty  altar  rudely  spurns. 

Antistuophe  I. 
Frenzy's  unhappy  suasion,  fraught  with  bane 
To  hapless  children,  sways  the  will ; 
Against  the  mischief  cure  is  vain  ; 
Not  hidden  is  the  Hagrant  ill ; — 
Baleful  it  bursts  upon  the  sight ;  380 

Like  spurious  coin,  his  metal  base 
Use  and  the  touchstone  bring  to  light, 
Who,  boy-like,  to  a  mngod  bird  gives  chase, 
And  whelms  his  native  soil  in  hopeless  night 
His  orisons  the  heavenly  powers  disclaim, 
But  sweep  to  doom  the  sinful  wight 
Practised  in  guile; — thus  Paris  camo 
To  Atrcus'  halls ;— the  friendly  board        S'JO 
Ho  shamed,  tho  consort  luring  from  licr  lord. 


Agamemnon.  1 9 

Stbophe  II. 

Bequeathing  to  lier  peoi^le  deadly  stour 

Of  shielded  hosts,  of  spears,  and  ships'  array, 

And  Ilion's  ruin  bearing  as  her  dower, 

She  through  the  portal  swiftly  took  her  way, 

Daring  what  none  may  dare  ; — with  many  a  wail, 

The  palace  seers  peal'd  forth  the  tale. 

[400 
"  Woe  for  the  house,  the  house  and  chieftains,  woe  ! 
Woe  for  the  couch,  the  trace  of  her  once  true !  " 
Wronged,  yet  without  reproach,  in  speechless  woe    ' 
There  stands  he,  yearning  still  her  form  to  view 
Lost  o'er  the  far  sea-wave :  his  dreamy  pain 
Conjures  her  phantom  in  his  home  to  reign. 

He  loathes  the  sculptor's  plastic  skill 
Which  living  grace  belies ; 

Not  Aphrodite's  self  can  still 
The  hunger  of  his  eyes. 

Antistrophe  n. 

And  dreamy  fancies,  coinage  of  the  brain,  410 

Come  o'er  the  troubled  heart  with  vain  delight ; 
For  vain  the  rapture,  the  illusion  vain, 
When  forms  beloved  in  visions  of  the  night, 
With  changeful  aspect,  mock  our  grasp,  and  sweep 
On  noiseless  wing  adown  the  paths  of  sleep. 
Such  sorrows  o'er  the  hearth  brood  evermore. 
And  woes  o'ertowering  these.     The  warrior  train 
Comrades  in  danger,  steered  from  Hellas'  shore, 
Leaving  in  Hellas'  homes  heart-withering  pain  ; 


20  Agamemnon. 

Full  many  sorrows  rankle  at  the  core.  420 

Those  whom  he  sent  each  holds  in  ken, 

But  to  their  homes  return 
Armour  and  in  the  funeral  urn, 
Ashes  instead  of  men. 

Strophe  III, 

For  Ares,  bartering  for  gold 

The  flesh  of  men,  the  scales  doth  hold 

In  battle  of  the  spear. 
From  Ilion,  back  to  sorrowing  friends, 
Rich  dust,  fire-purified,  he  sends, 

Wash'd  with  full  many  a  tear. 
No  living  warriors  greet  them,  but  in^tesid 
Urns  filled  with  ashes  smoothly  spread.  430 

Groaning,  each  hero's  praise  they  tell ; 
How  this  excelled  in  martial  strife ; 
And  that  in  fields  of  carnage  fell, 
Right  mbly  for  another's  w.fo. 
Breathing  such  murmurs,  jealous  hate 
Doth  on  the  Atridan  champions  wait 
Achaians,  cast  in  fairest  mould, 
Ensepulchrcd  'neath  Ilion 's  wall. 
The  foughten  shore  now  firmly  hold,  440 

The  hostile  sod  their  pall. 

Antistkophe  III. 

Direful  the  people's  voice,  to  hato 
Attuned,  which  worlu  th  soon  or  lat,e 
As  ban  of  public  doom- 


Agamemnon.  21 

Now  o'er  my  spirit  anxious  fear 
Broodeth,  lest  tidings  I  should  hear 

That  night  still  shrouds  in  gloom ; 
For  blind  to  deeds  of  blood  the  gods  are  not. 

In  Time  the  swarthy  brood  of  Xight 

With  slow  eclipse  reverse  his  lot, 

Who  Fortune  reareth  in  despite 

Of  Justice.     Eeft  of  succour  lies  450 

The  wretch  once  prone.     Excessive  praise 

Is  bodeful  ever ;  'gainst  men's  eyes 

Zeus  hurls  his  blinding  rays. 

But  may  ungrudged  success  be  mine  ! 

No  city-spoiler  let  me  be ! 

Nor,  subject  to  another,  pine 
Myself  in  slavery. 

Epode. 

Borne  by  the  joy-announcing  flame 

Swift  through  the  town  the  tidings  fly ;  460 

But  whether  true  who  may  proclaim, 

Or  not  a  heavenly  lie? 
For  who  so  childish,  so  distraught, 
To  warm  his  spirit  at  the  beacon's  glow, 
When  other  news,  with  evil  fraught, 

His  joy  may  change  to  woe  ? 
'Tis  woman's  way  the  boon,  ere  seen,  to  prize ; 
Too  credulous,  her  fancy  open  lies 
To  rumour's  rapid  inroad,  but  the  fame  -^70 

Published  by  women  quickly  dies. 


22  Agamemnon. 

Chorus  Leader. 

Soon  shall  we  know  whether  the  signal  fires. 
The  swift  relays  of  courier-light  be  true, 
Or  whether,  dreamlike,  they  beguiled  our  minds 
With  grateful  splendour ; — Yonder,  from  the  coast, 
A  herald  comes,  shaded  with  laurel  boughs ; 
While  Clay's  twin-brother,  thirsty  Dust,  attests 
That  neither  voiceless,  nor  of  mountain  wood 
Kindling  the  blaze,  will  he  report  in  smoke ;        480 
No, — either  will  his  voice  announce  more  joy, 
Or, — but  ill-omened  words  I  deprecate. 
Be  omens  fair  with  fair  assurance  crown'd ! 
May  he  who  'gainst  the  state  breathes  other  prayer. 
First  reap  the  fruit  of  his  malignant  thought. 

[Enter  Herald.'] 
Herald. 
Oh  soil  of  Argos,  oh  my  native  land, 
In  light  of  this  tenth  year  to  thee  I  come  ; 
While  many  a  hope  hath  snapt,  this  one  still  holds, 
For  ne'er  I  counted,  dying  here,  to  share 
Beloved  sepulture  in  Ai'give  soil.  490 

Now  hail,  0  earth,  bright  sunlight  hail,  and  Zeus, 
Supreme  o'er  Argos. 

[Here  the  Herald  salutes  the  statues  of  the  gods  in  the 
orchestra.] 

Thou  too,  Pythian  king. 
With  thy  fell  darts  assailing  us  no  more ; 
Let  it  suflice  that  on  Scamnndcr's  bonks 
Thy  mien  was  hostile ; — now,  Apollo,  lord, 


Agamemnon.  23 

Be  thou  the  Saviour, — be  the  Healer  thou  I 

Ye  Gods  of  Council,  all  I  now  invoke, 

Thee,  my  protector  Hermes,  Herald  dear, 

Whom  Heralds  venerate, — and  Heroes,  ye 

Who  sent  us  forth,  now  kindly  welcome  back 

The  Argive  host,  poor  remnant  of  the  spear.       500 

[i?e  turns  to  the  stage.'] 
Hail  royal  palace  !  roofs  beloved,  hail  1 
Ye  seats  august,  ye  powers  that  front  the  sun, 
If  e'er  of  yore,  now,  with  those  cheerful  eyes 
Receive  in  state  the  monarch  absent  long. 
For  he  returns  bringing  in  darkness  light 
Common  to  you  and  all  assembled  here. 
King  Agamemnon.     Welcome,  as  beseems, 
Him  who  with  mattock  of  avenging  Zeus 
Hath  Ilion  razed,  her  under-soil  uptorn. 
Quenched  are  the  fanes,  the  altars  of  the  gods,     510 
And  of  the  land  entire  the  seed  is  crushed. 
Such  yoke  round  Troy  hath  Atreus'  elder  son 
Fastened  :  and  lo !  blest  by  the  gods,  he  comes 
Of  living  men  most  worthy  of  renown. 
Nor  Paris  now  nor  his  associate  town 
Their  deed  may  vaunt  as  greater  than  their  woe 
Cast  in  a  suit  for  rapine  and  for  theft, 
His  surety  forfeit,  he  to  utter  doom 
Hath  mowed  his  natal  home.     Thus  Priam's  sons 
With  twofold  forfeit  have  atoned  their  crime.       520 

Chorus. 
Hail,  herald  of  Achaia's  host  1 


24  Agamemnon. 

Hebald. 

All  hail  1 
So  please  the  gods,  I  grudge  not  now  to  die. 

Chorus. 
Love  for  thy  father-laud  thy  heirt  hath  wrung ! 

Hebald 
So  wrung  that  from  mine  eyes  fall  tears  of  joy. 

Chorus. 
Sweet  the  heart-sickness  that  o'ercame  you  thus. 

Herald. 
The  key  I  lack  which  may  thy  words  unlock. 

Chorus. 
Smit  with  desire  for  those  who  longed  for  you. 

Hebald. 
Hath  Argos  yearned  then  for  the  yearning  host  ? 

Chorus, 
Ay,  so  that  oft  from  darkcn'd  soul  I  groaned. 

Herald. 
Whence  this  sad  gloom,  abhorrent  to  the  host?    530 

Chnrns. 
Silence  I  long  have  held  halo's  safest  cure. 

Uekald. 
How  !     Aught  didst  fear  in  absence  of  thy  lords? 

Chorus. 
To  die  was  oft  my  wish  as  whilom  thino. 


Agamemnon,  25 

Herald. 
Well  ended,  all  is  well.     But,  in  long  years, 
Some  chances,  one  might  say,  fell  happily. 
While  others  adverse  were.     For  who,  save  gods, 
Lives  through  the  whole  of  life  by  grief  unscathed  ? 
For  should  I  tell  of  toils,  of  lodgment  rude. 
Infrequent  landings,  vexed  by  dangerous  surf, 
tWhat  portion  of  the  day  exempt  from  groans?      540 
Still  more  abhorrent  was  our  life  ashore  ; — 
For  close  to  hostile  walls  our  beds  were  strewn  ; 
Dank  vapours  fell  from  heaven,  while  from  the  earth 
Drizzled  the  meadow  dews, — our  raiment's  canker, 
Matting,  like  savage  beast's,  our  shaggy  hair. 
Or  spake  I  of  bird-killing  winter's  cold, 
Unbearable,  from  snows  of  Ida  born ; 
Or  summer's  heat,  when,  stretched  on  noonday  couch, 
By  breeze  unruffled,  slept  the  waveless  sea  ? 
But  why  lament  these  hardships  ?     Past  the  toil ! 
Past  now  and  gone, — past  also  for  the  dead,  550 

Who  ne'er  will  trouble  them  again  to  rise. 
Why  oall  the  spectral  army-roll?  and  why. 
Living,  bemoan  reverses  ?     Nay,  I  claim 
With  many  a  farewell  to  salute  mischance. 
For  us,  the  remnant  of  the  Argivc  host, 
Joy  triumphs,  nor  can  Sorrow  tilt  the  scale. 
Winging  o'er  land  and  sea  our  homeward  flight. 
We  to  the  sun-light  well  may  make  this  boast, 
"  The  Argi  ve  host,  captors  at  length  of  Troy,       560 
These  spoils,  an  off'ring  to  Achaia's  gods, 
Hang  up,  bright  glory  of  their  ancient  shrines." 
Whoso  these  tidings  hears  must  needs  extol 


26  Agamemnon. 

The  city  and  the  leaders  of  the  host ; 
Also  the  consummating  grace  of  Zeus 
Due  honour  shall  attain.     My  tale  is  told. 

Chorus. 
Ungrudged  surrender  yield  I  to  thy  words. 
Age  still  is  young  enough  for  grateful  lore. 
But  Atreus'  halls  and  Clytemnestra  most 
These  news  concern  ;  me  also  they  enrich. 

{^Enter  Clytemnestra.] 

Clytemnestra. 
The  shout  of  jubilee  ercwhile  I  raised,  570 

When  first  by  night  the  fiery  herald  came, 
Telling  of  Ilion  captured  and  o'erthrown. 
Then  some  one  spake  and  taunting  asked, "  Dost  think 
Trusting  the  beacon-light,  that  Troy  is  sacked  ? 
'Tis  woman's  way    to  be  elate  of  heart." 
By  such  bold  utt'rance  was  my  wit  misprised : 
Yet  still  I  sacrificed  :  and  through  the  town 
With  woman's  note  they  tuned  the  joyous  trill, 
Pffians  uplifting  in  the  gods'  abodes, 
The  while  they  lulled  the  fragrant  incense-flames.  580 
And  now,  what  need  that  thou  shouldst  tell  me  more  ? 
I  from  the  king  himself  the  tale  shall  hear. 
With  honour  due,  mv  venerated  lord 
To  welcome  home,  myself  will  hasten  :  for — 
Wliat  sight  for  woman  sweeter  than  the  day 
Which  to  her  spouse,  Ilcavon-shicldod  from  the  fight, 
Tlirows  wide  the  gates?     Thou  hither  bid  my  lord. 
Beloved  of  Argos,  to  return  with  speed. 


Agamemnon.  27 

Arriviug,  may  he  find  a  faithful  wife, 

Such  as  he  left  her,  watch-dog  of  his  house,  590 

To  him  devoted,  hostile  to  his  foes, 

In  all  points  like  herself,  no  single  seal 

Through  these  long  years  invaded  by  her  hand. 

Pleasure,  or  blameful  word  from  other  man, 

Foreign  to  me  as  dyer's  hue  to  brass. 

A  boast  like  this,  fi-aught  as  it  is  with  truth, 

The  lip  misseems  not  of  a  high-born  dame. 

lExit  Clytemnestba. 

Chorus. 
Behold !     The  queen  herself  hath  tutored  thee ; 
Decorous  words  her  clear  interpreters. 
But  tell  me.  Herald,  touching  Menelas,  600 

Doth  he  in  safety  homeward  with  the  host 
Hither  return,  prince  to  his  country  dear  ? 

Herald. 
False  news  were  I  to  tell,  in  flatt'ring  terms, 
Not  long  would  friends  enjoy  the  fair  deceit. 

Chorus. 
Oh,  could'st  thou  speak  auspicious  words  yet  true  I 
That  here  they  sundered  are  is  all  too  plain. 

Herald. 
The  man  is  vanished  from  th'  Achaian  host ; 
Himself  and  galley.     No  untruth  I  tell. 

Chorus. 
Steering  ahead  from  Troy  ?  or  hath  a  storm, 
A  common  terror,  snatched  him  from  the  host?       610 


28  Agamemnon. 

Hebald. 
Like  skilful  archer  thou  hast  hit  the  mark  j 
And  hast  in  brief  a  mighty  woe  declared. 

Chorus. 
Say,  doth  the  voice  of  other  mariners 
Report  of  hiTn  as  living,  or  as  dead  ? 

Herald. 
Not  one  so  knoweth  as  to  speak  his  doom, 
Save  the  bright  Sun,  feeder  of  teeming  earth. 

Chorus. 
How !     Burst  the  tempest  on  the'naval  host 
Through  anger  of  the  gods  ?  say,  what  the  end  ? , 

Herald. 
Auspicious  day  with  ill-aunouncing  tongue 
Beseems  not  to  defile.     In  weal  and  woe  620 

Diverse  the  honour  due  unto  the  gods. 
When  messenger,  sad-visagcd,  tidings  dire 
Of  routed  armies  to  the  city  bears, 
A  common  wound  inflicting  on  the  state. 
While  many  men  from  many  homes  are  bannoi]. 
Sniit  by  the  twofold  scourge  which  Arcs  U)vcs, 
Twin-speared  Calamity,  a  gory  pair  : — 
Whoso  is  laden  with  such  woes  as  these 
The  ptcan  of  the  Furies  well  may  raise. 
But  coming  to  a  town  in  jubilee,  630 

Glad  messeng(^r  of  safety  and  sucross, 
How  shall  I  tidings  mingle  fair  and  foul, 


Agamemnon.  29 

The  tale  unfolding  of  the  storm  that  smote 

The  Achaian  host,  not  without  wrath  of  Heaven  ? 

For  fire  and  ocean,  bitter  foes  of  yore, 

Sware  true  alliance  and  redeemed  their  pledge, 

Whelming  Achaia's  luckless  armament. 

Then  in  the  night  foul-siu:ging  mischiefs  rose : 

Beneath  the  Thracian  blasts  ship  against  ship 

Dashed  wildly ;  they,  sore-butted  by  the  storm. 

With  furious  wind  and  stress  of  pelting  rain, 

Vanished  from  sight,  'neath  whirl  of  shepherd  dire.  G-ii) 

And  when  uprose  the  sun's  fair  light,  behold. 

The  ^gean  sea  with  flowerage  overstrewn, — 

Corpses  of  Grecian  men  and  wrecks  of  ships. 

Us,  and  our  vessel  with  imdamaged  hull, 

Some  god,  I  ween,  (not  mortal  was  the  power,) 

Ruling  the  helm,  hath  saved,  by  stealth  or  prayer. 

But  Saviour  Fortune  lighting  on  our  ship, 

At  moorage  she  nor  felt  the  billows'  strain, 

Nor  drave  against  the  iron-girded  coast. 

Then  safe  at  last,  from  watery  Hades  snatch'd,    G50 

In  genial  daylight,  still  mistrusting  chance, 

"With  anxious  thought  o'er  this  new  grief  we  brooded, — 

Our  host  sore  wearied,  and  in  evil  plight. 

And  doubtless  now,  if  any  still  survive, 

They  speak  of  us  as  dead.     Why  should  they  notV 

As  we  imagine  a  like  fate  for  them. 

But  may  the  best  befal  1     For  Menelas, 

Foremost  and  chief,  expect  him  to  arrive ; 

If  any  sunbeam  knows  of  him  as  safe, 

Rejoicing  in  the  light,  (through  the  device  060 


30  Agamemnon. 

Of  Zeus,  not  willing  yet  the  race  to  whelm,) 
Good  hope  there  is  that  he  may  yet  return. 
Hearing  this  tale,  know,  thou  the  truth  hast  heard. 
Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Who,  oh  who,  with  truest  aim. 

Did  the  battle-wedded  dame. 

Prize  of  conflict,  Helen  name  ? 
"Was  it  not  one,  unseen,  in  happy  hour, 
Guiding  his  tongue  with  Fate-presaging  power? 
Helen,  the  captor  ; — titled  fittingly, —  670 

Captor  of  ships,  of  men,  of  cities,  she 

From  dainty  curtained  bower  hath  fled, 

By  Titan  zephyr  borne  along  ; 

Straight  in  her  quarrel  mustered  strong 

The  shielded  hunters'  mighty  throng, 

IMarshalled  for  battle  ; — forth  they  sped, 

Swift  on  their  track  whose  viewless  oar 
HarboTir  had  found  on  Simois'  leafy  shore.  680 

Antistrophh  I. 

Wrath,  with  direful  issue  fraught, 

Thus  to  hapless  Ilion  brought 

Dear  alliance,  dearly  bought : 
Kequiter  of  the  outraged  fostal  boanl, 
And  of  high  Zeus,  the  hearth's  presiding  Lord  ; 
Late  vengeance  wreaking  on  the  guilty  throng. 
Who  carol  jubilant  the  bridal  song, 
Which,  fate-impelled,  the  bridegroom's  kin  prolong. 

But  aged  Priam's  city  hoar  690 

A  novel  hymn  doth  now  intone. 

From  many  a  voice;  with  mighty  groan, 


Agamemnon.  81 

Woe  upon  Paris'  bridal  bed 
She  utters  ; — she  who  long  before 
A  dirgeful  life,  alas  !   had  led, 
Weeping  her  sons  in  wretched  slaughter  sped. 

Strophe  II. 
So  once  did  wight  incautious  rear 
A  suckling  lion,  for  the  breast 
Still  yearning,  to  the  house  a  pest. 
Tame  in  life's  early  morning,  dear  700 

To  childhood,  and  by  Eld  caressed. 
Carried  full  oft  in  fondling  play. 
Like  to  a  babe  in  arms  he  lay  ; 
The  hand  with  winning  glances  wooed. 
And,  smit  with  pangs  of  hunger,  fawned  for  food. 

Antistkophe  II. 
But  time  the  temper  doth  bewray 
Inherent  in  his  race.     Due  raced 
Of  gentle  nurture  to  repay, 
Eending  the  flocks  ^-ith  cruel  greed, 
Unbidden  he  prepares  the  feast,  710 

And  mars  with  gory  stain  the  halls. 
Eesistless,  dire,  athirst  for  prey. 
The  pest  the  menial  train  appals. 
Reared  for  the  house  by  Heaven,  fell  Ate's  priest. 

Steophk  III. 

So  came  to  Troia's  walls,  in  evil  hour, 
Spirit  of  breathless  calm,  fair  pride 
Of  riches,  love's  soul-jnercing  flower,  720 

The  eyes'  soft  dart ;  but  from  her  course  aside 


32  Agamemnon. 

Swerving,  to  wedlock  bitter  end  she  wrought. 
To  Priam's  offspring  came  she,  mischief  fraught, 
Evil  companion,  bringing  evil  dower. 
By  Zeus  escorted,  guardian  of  the  guest. 
She  sped,  dire  Fury,  bridal  pest, 

Antistrophe  III. 
Lives  among  men  this  saw,  voiced  long  ago ; 
•'  Success  consummate  breeds  apace. 

Nor  childless  dies,  but  to  the  race  730 

From  prosperous  Fortune  springeth  cureless  Woe." 
Apart  I  hold  my  solitary  creed. 
Prolific  truly  is  the  impious  deed ; 
Like  to  the  evil  stock,  the  evil  seed ; 
But  fate  ordains  that  righteous  homes  shall  aye 

Rejoice  in  goodly  progeny. 

Stbophe  IV. 
fBut  ancient  Arrogance,  or  soon  or  late. 

When  strikes  the  hour  ordained  by  Fate,         740 
Breedeth  new  Arrogance,  which  still 
Revels,  wild  wantoner  in  human  ill ; 
And  the  new  birth  another  brood 
Unhallowed,  in  the  house  doth  bear ; — 
Gorged  Insolence,  and,  not  to  be  withstood, 
Defiant  Boldness,  demon  unsubdued  ; — 
Swart  curses  twain,  their  parents'  mien  that  wear. 

Antistrophe  IV. 
But  Justice  doth  the  smoke-begrimed  coll 
Illumine  with  celestial  shecu, 


Agamemnon.  33 

And  loves  with  honest  wortli  to  dwell. 
Gold-spangled  palaces  with  hands  unclean,  760 

Forsaking  with  averted  eyes, 

To  holy  Innocence  she  flies. 
The  power  of  wealth,  if  falsely  stamped  with  praise, 
With  homage  she  disdains  to  recognize. 
And  to  their  fated  issue  all  things  sways. 

[Enter  warriors  and  captives;  at  last  Agamemkon  appears, 
seated  on  a  cJiariot,  with  Cassa>"dba  at  his  side ;  soon  after 
Clytemkestra,  accompanied  ly  female  attendants,  issues 
from  the  palace.'\ 

Chorus. 

Hail,  royal  lord!     Stormer  of  Hion,  hail ! 

Scion  of  Atreus !    How  compose  my  speech, 

How  due  obeisance  render  thee, 
Yet  neither  overshoot  the  mark,  nor  fail 

The  goal  of  fitting  compliment  to  reach  ?  7G0 

For  many  men,  transgressing  right,  there  be 

Semblance  who  place  above  reality. 
To  him  who  groans  beneath  aflliction's  smart, 

All  men  have  prompt  condolence ;  but  the  sting 
Of  feigned  sorrow  reaches  not  the  heart. 

So  men  with  others'  joy  rejoicing,  bring 
Over  their  visage  an  enforced  smile : 

But  the  discerning  shepherd  knows  his  fleck. 
And  his  unerring  glance  detects  their  guile, 
Who  simulating  love,  with  glozing  art  770 

And  watery  kindness  fawn,  but  inly  mock. 

But  thou,  O  King,  (I  speak  without  disguise,) 

D 


3^  Agamemnon. 

In  Helen's  quarrel  T*nsldng  war's  array, 
A  mien  didst  wear  unseemly  in  mine  eyes. 
Guiding  not  well  the  rudder  of  thy  mind, 
Who  didst,  on  death-devoted  men,  essay 

Courage  to  urge,  by  sacrifice. 
But  those  who  have  achieved  the  great  emprize, 
Not  from  the  surface  of  my  mind  alone, 
I  welcome  now,  with  feelings  not  unkind  ; 
And  inquest  made,  in  time  shall  it  be  known,      780 
Who  of  thy  citizens  at  home  the  while 
Guarded  thy  state  with  truth,  and  who  with  guile. 

Agamemnon,  spealdng  from  the  chariot. 
First  Argos  and  her  tutelary  gods. 
Who  with  me  wi-ought  to  compass  my  return, 
And  visit  Priam's  town  with  vengeance  due, 
Justly  I  hail.     For  in  this  cause  the  gods, 
Swayed  by  no  hearsay,  in  the  bloody  urn 
Without  dissentient  voice  the  pebbles  cast. 
Sealing  the  doom  of  Ilion  and  her  sons. 
But  to  the  rival  urn,  by  no  liand  filled,  790 

Hope  only  came.     Smoke  still  uprising  marks 
The  captui'ed  city ;  Ate's  incense-fires 
Ai-e  living  still,  but,  dying  as  they  die, 
The  ash  sends  upward  costly  fumes  of  wealth. 
Wherefore  'tis  meet  to  render  to  the  gods 
Memorial  thanks ;  since  round  them  we  Lave  oast 
Our  vengeful  toils,  and  in  a  woman's  cause 
The  Argivo  monster,  offspring  of  the  horse, 
Host  sliicild-accnutred,  niudo  its  deadly  leap. 
And  Priam't:  city  levelled  to  the  dust, 


I 


Agamemnon.  35 

What  time  the  Pleiades  in  ocean  waned ; 

So,  bounding  o'er  the  towers,  of  princely  blood   800 

The  raw-devouring  lion  lapped  his  fill. 

This  lengthened  prelude  to  the  gods !  and  now 

Weighing  the  judgment  ye  crcwhile  expressed, 

I  say  the  same,  and  am  with  you  agreed. 

To  few  is  it  congenial,  envy-free, 

To  venerate  the  friend  whom  Fortune  crowns. 

The  jealous  poison,  lodged  within  the  heart, 

Tortures  with  twofold  pang  whom  it  infects  ; 

By  his  own  griefs  oppressed,  the  envious  man 

Groans  also  to  behold  another's  joy.  810 

Out  of  my  proof  I  speak,  for,  well  I  wot, 

Who  friendship  most  pretended,  only  were 

Its  mirrored  image,  shadow  of  a  shade. 

None  but  Odysseus,  who  unwilliug  sailed, 

Once  harnessed,  was  my  trusty  yoke-fellow; 

This  I  affirm,  be  he  alive  or  dead. 

But  for  the  rest,  what  to  the  state  pertains, 

And  to  the  gods,  a  full  assembly  called. 

We'll  weigh  in  free  debate.     Counsel  we  need. 

That  where  the  state  is  sound,  we  keep  it  so  ;       820 

But  where  disease  the  healer's  art  requires. 

By  kind  excision,  or  by  cautery. 

We  shall  attempt  to  remedy  the  harm. 

Now  to  my  palace  and  my  household  hearth 

Returning,  first  will  I  the  gods  salute, 

Who  forward  sped  me,  and  who  lead  me  home ; 

Since  victory  so  far  hath  followed  me. 

Here  may  she  henceforth  stedfastly  abide  ] 


36  Agamemnon. 

Clttemnestba. 
Men  of  onr  city,  Argive  elders  here, 
I  sliame  not  in  your  presence  to  avow 
My  wifely  temper  ;  bashful  Fear  in  time  830 

From  mortals  dieth  :  not  by  others  taught, 
But  from  myself,  the  wretched  life  I'll  tell 
'Twas  mine  to  lead  while  this  man  was  at  Troy. 
First,  for  a  woman  severed  from  her  mate, 
To  sit  forlorn  at  home  is  grievous  woe. 
Hearing  malignant  murmurs  manifold. 
One  courier  comes,  another  in  his  train 
Worse  tidings  brings  to  echo  through  the  house  ; 
And  as  for  wounds,  had  my  dear  lord  received 
As  many  as  report  kept  pouring  in,  840 

A  net  methinks  had  not  been  more  transpierced. 
Or  had  he  died  oft  as  reported  then, 
A  second  triple-bodied  Geryon,* 
■|"A  threefold  cloak  of  earth  he  must  have  donned,^ 
Enduring  death  in  every  form  he  wore. 
Thus  harassed  by  these  ever-rife  reports. 
Full  often  from  my  neck  have  forceful  hands 
Seized  and  untied  the  beam-Guspended  noose. 
And  for  this  cause  our  son,  pledge  of  our  troth, 
Of  mine  and  thine,  stands  not  beside  me  now, 
As  stand  he  should,  Orestes.     Marvel  not, 
•  Geryon,  a  monster  represented  by  the  poets  as  having 
three  bodies  and  three  licads,  and  located  by  them  in  the 
fabulous  island  of  Erythcia.     The  capture  of  the  oxen  of 
Geryou  was  one  of  the  twelve  labours  of  Heracles. 
%  [noXXi7f  HVuBev,  rrju  kotu  yap  ov  Xtyu).] 

I  a^Tce  with  those  critics  who  reject  this  lino  as  spurious. 


Agamemnon.  37 

For  Lira  tby  trusty  spcar-gnest  uourislicth  ;  * 

Stropliius,  the  Phocian,  who  hatli  me  forewarned 

Of  twofold  peril,  thine  'ueath  Ilion's  wall, 

And  next  lest  clamour-fostered  Auarchy 

Hazard  the  plot,  for  'tis  with  men  inborn 

To  trample  further  him  already  down. 

This  pretext,  trust  me,  carries  no  deceit. 

Bat  for  myself  the  gushing  founts  of  grief  8G0 

Are  all  dried  up,  no  single  tear  is  left ; 

Sore  with  late  watching  are  my  weary  eyes, 

Weeping  the  fiery  l)eacons  set  for  thee 

Neglected  ever.     Often  from  my  dreams 

Was  I  awakened  by  the  tiny  hum 

Of  buzzing  gnat,  seeing,  endured  by  thee, 

More  woes  than  could  have  filled  mine  hour  of  sleep. 

These  sorrows  past,  now  with  a  heart  unwrung 

I  hail  my  husband,  watchdog  of  the  fold, 

Sure  forestay  of  the  ship ;  of  lofty  roof  870 

Pillar  firm  based ;  Sire's  sole-begotten  child ; 

Land  beyond  hope  looming  to  mariners ; 

Day  after  storm  most  brilliant  to  behold ; 

To  thirsty  wayfarer  clear  gushing  spring. 

Sooth,  sweet  it  is  to  'scape  from  harsh  constraint ; 

With  such  addresses  do  I  honour  him. 

Let  Envy  stand  aloof!  for  we  have  borne 

Ere  this  full  many  a  woe.     Now  dear  my  lord 

Come  from  thy  car ;  but  on  the  ground,  0  King, 

*  Spear-guest.  The  Greek  word  Bopv^evos  is  explained 
by  Plutarch,  whom  Bishop  Thirlwall  follows,  as  exj^ressing 
the  relation  established  when  a  prisoner  of  war  dismissed  on 
parole  has  honourably  paid  liis  ransom. 


38  Agamemnon. 

Plant  not  the  foot  that  trampled  Ilion.  880 

Maidens,  why  tarry  ye,  whose  duty  'tis 
With  carpets  to  bespread  his  stepping-floor? 
Sudft,  purple-strew  his  passage  to  a  home 
Unlocked  for,  e'en  as  Justice  may  conduct ; 
What  further  she  decreeth  with  the  gods, 
Thought,  not  by  sleep  o'ermastered,  shall  dispose. 

Agamemnon. 

Daughter  of  Leda !  Guardian  of  my  home ! 

Such  as  my  absence  was,  is  now  thy  speech. 

Drawn  out  to  ample  length.     With  better  gi-iice 

My  praise  had  come  from  others  than  from  thee.  890 

And  for  the  rest,  seek  not  in  woman's  guiso 

To  pamper  me,  nor,  gaping  forth  loud  cries, 

Bow  down  to  me,  as  to  barbaric  wight. 

IMakc  not  my  path  with  tapestries  bestrewn 

A  mark  for  envy.     To  the  gods  belong 

Such  signal  honours  ;  but  for  mortal  man, 

On  biight-hued  broidery  to  plant  his  foot, 

I  own  it,  is  to  me  not  free  from  dread  ; 

As  mortal  honour  mo,  but  not  as  god ; 

Without  foot- carpeting  or  gorgeous  web, 

Glotv  resounds  ;  a  constant  mind  to  keep  900 

Is  Heaven's  best  gift ;  him  only  call  we  blest 

Who  ends  in  fair  prosjxjrity  his  days. 

If  thus  I  bear  myself  I  need  not  fear. 

Clttemnestba. 
Against  my  settled  purpose  speak  not  thus. 


Agamemnon.  39 

Agamemnon. 
Deem  not  my  sober  purpose  I  will  mar. 

Clytemnestba. 
Haply  thou  thus  to  act  hast  vowed  in  fear. 

Agamemnon. 
Final  and  sure  my  word  as  man  e'er  spake. 

Cl-YTEMNESTRA 

What,  thinkest  thou,  had  Priam  done  if  victor  ? 

Agamemnon. 
Purples,  I  ween,  he  verily  had  trod. 

Clytemnestba. 
Then  stand  not  thou  in  fear  of  human  blame.       910 

Agamemnon. 
Yet  hath  the  people's  rmnom:  mighty  power, 

CIjTTEMNESTRA. 

Life  envy-free  is  life  imenviable. 

Agamemnon. 
'Tis  not  for  woman  to  be  fond  of  strife. 

Clytemnestba. 
But  it  becomes  the  fortunate  to  yield. 

Agamemnon. 
Does  conquest  in  this  struggle  rate  so  high  ? 


40  Agamemnon. 

Clytemnestra. 
Yield  thee ;  thy  will  bend  willingly  to  mine. 

Agamemnon. 

If  thou  wilt  have  it  so,  let  one  with  speed 

These  buskius  loosen,  vassals  of  the  foot ; 

Lest,  if  with  them  sea-tinctured  robes  I  tread, 

Some  jealous  eye  of  gods  smite  me  from  far.         920 

For  much  it  shameth  me,  with  wanton  feet 

To  mar  this  wealth  of  silver-purchased  web. 

Of  this  enough.     This  stranger  damsel  now 

Kindly  receive.     Zeus,  with  propitious  eye. 

Beholds  the  victor's  sway  with  mercy  crowned. 

For  v;illingly  none  bears  the  captive  yoke ; 

But  she,  the  chosen  flower  of  many  a  spoil, 

Fair  present  from  the  host,  hath  followed  me. 

But  since  herein  I  yield  mo  to  thy  will. 

Treading  on  purple  to  my  balls  I  go.  930 

Clytemnestba, 
A  sea  there  is  (which  who  may  drain  ?)  that  breeds 
Abundant  purple,  fresh  from  many  a  shell, 
Precious  as  silver,  brilliant  dye  of  robes, 
Whereof,  through  favour  of  the  gods,  these  balls 
May  boast,  O  King,  a  store  right  plentiful ; 
And  poverty  is  stranger  to  our  house 
Trampling  of  many  garments  had  I  vowed, 
Had  thus  the  oracles  our  house  enj<Mned, 
Hansom  devising  for  this  precious  life. 
For  while  the  root  lives  on,  the  leafage  spreads. 


Agamemnon.  41 

Screening  tlie  mansion  from  the  clog-star's  ray.    940 
So  now,  returning  to  thy  household  hearth, 
A.S  warmth  in  winter  doth  thy  presence  show. 
And  when  Zeus  breweth  from  the  acrid  grape 
Rich  wine,  then  coolness  thro'  the  halls  is  shod, 
Where,  crowner  of  the  home,  the  husband  dwells, 
Zeus,  Zeus,  all-crowner,  my  petitions  croT\-n  : 
Thine  be  the  care  of  that  which  crown  thou  wilt. 

\_Exeunt  Clytehxestra  and  Agameiixon-  into  the  imlace.'] 

Cliorus.    Steophe  I. 

Whence  this  dread  portent,  that  untircd 

Before  my  bodeful  spirit  floats  ?  950 

Wherefore,  unbidden  and  unhired, 

Waken  these  dark  prophetic  notes  ? 

Why  sits  not  on  my  bosom's  throne 

The  direful  presage  to  disown 

As  riddling  dream,  assurance  strong? 

Time's  youth  hath  flown 
Since  the  stern-cables  from  the  boats 
Were  flung,  what  time  the  ship-borne  host 
Marched  on  to  Ilion  from  the  sandy  coast. 

Antistrophe  I. 

After  long  absence  their  return  960 

With  self- informing  eyes  I  learn  ; 

Yet  in  its  depths  my  soul,  self-taught, 

Chanteth  Erinys'  lyreless  strains  ; 

My  hopes,  of  courage  reft,  depart ; 

Not  vainly  throb  my  inmost  reins ; 


42  Agame.mnon. 

Whirleth  on  eddies  of  dark  thought 

My  bodeful  heart ; 
Yet,  against  hope,  the  gods  I  pray, 
That,  false  to  augury,  my  lay  970 

Futile  may  fall,  with  vain  foreboding  fraught 

Stbophe  II. 

Never  will  perfect  health  confess 

Her  limit  sated  ;  though  disease, 
Neighbour,  with  party-wall,  against  her  press. 

Sailing  with  prosijerous  course  elate. 
Strikes  on  the  hidden  reef  man's  proud  estate. 
Then  if  reluctant  Fear,  with  well-poised  sling,    980 

His  bales  doth  into  ocean  fling, 

Riseth  once  more  the  bark  ;  and  though 

With  evil  freighted  to  the  full, 

Floateth  secure  the  lightened  hulL 

So  likewise,  gift  of  ample  worth 
From  Zeus,  the  year's  increase, 
Whose  teeming  harvests  in  the  furrows  grow, 
Quells  the  disease  of  dearth. 

Antistrophe  n. 
But  when  on  earth  the  crimson  gore 
Of  man  hath  fallen,  never  more 
May  charm  or  spell  the  vanished  life  evoke ; 

Hence  he  of  old,  whose  mystic  lore  900 

Was  skilled  the  dead  from  Hades  to  restore, 
Fell,  blasted  by  the  Thunderer's  wiirniug  stroke. 
fNow  did  not  Fate — a  heaven-sent  Fato — 
BafHe  my  impulse,  ere  too  late, 


Agamemnon.  43 

Leaving  beliind  the  lagging  tongue, 
My  heart  its  bodeful  strain  had  sung. 
But  now  it  raves  ;  no  cheering  rays 

My  anguished  spirit  knows, 
And  hopeless  to  unravel  Fate's  dark  maze  1000 

With  fiery  ardour  glows. 

[Enter  Clytemnestra,  stepping  hastily  out  of  the  palace."] 

Clytemnestra. 
Come  thou  too  in,  Cassandra,  thee  I  mean ; 
For  not  in  wrath  Zeus  placed  thee  in  our  house 
A  sharer  in  our  lustral  rites  to  stand, 
With  many  slaves  beside  his  household  altar. 
Now  from  this  car  descend ;  be  not  too  proud, 
For  e'en  Alcmena's  son, — so  runs  the  tale, — 
Sold  as  a  slave,  endured  the  forceful  yoke ; 
But  if  such  fate  befal  thee,  great  the  boon 
Heirs  of  ancestral  wealth  to  own  as  lords ;  1010 

For  upstarts,  beyond  hope  who  fortune  reap, — 
These  reckless  are  and  cruel  to  their  slaves. 
From  us  thou  hast  what  usuage  warranteth. 

Chorus. 
Thee  in  clear  words  she  hath  addressed,  and  thou. 
Meshed  as  thou  art  within  the  toils  of  Fate, 
Yield  if  thou  canst ;  mayhap  thou  wilt  not  yield. 

Clytemnestba. 
Nay,  an  she  be  not,  swallow -like,  possessed 
Of  an  unknown,  barbaric  tongue,  my  words, 
Beaching  her  mind,  must  move  her  to  comply. 


44  Agamemnon. 

Cliorus. 
Follow !  She  counsels  for  thy  need  the  best .-     1020 
Bo  thou  persuaded; — leave  thy  chariot-seat. 

Cltte^inestba. 
No  leisure  have  I  here  before  the  gates 
To  linger ;  for,  beside  the  central  hearth, 
The  victims  wait  the  sacrificial  fire  ; 
A  favour  that  our  fondest  hope  transcends. 
But  thou,  if  aught  wilt  do  of  what  I  say, 
Make  no  delay ;  but  if,  of  sense  bereft, 
Thou  canst  not  catch  the  meaning  of  my  words, 
In  lieu  (jf  voice,  speak  with  barbarian  hand. 

Gho)nis, 

A  clear  interpreter  the  stranger  n6eds  :  [1030 

Distraught  she  seems,  like  creature  newly  caught. 

Clytemnestra. 

Nay,  she  is  mad  ;  to  her  distempered  thoughts 
She  listens  ;  from  a  newly-captured  town 
She  Cometh  here,  nor  knows  the  yoke  to  bear, 
Till  quelled  in  foam  the  passion  of  her  blood. 
But  words  I'll  waste  no  more,  thus  to  bo  sconied. 

Chorua.  '• 

But  I,  by  pity  moved,  will  not  be  wroth  ; 
Come,  wretched  sufferer,  this  car  forsake  ; 
To  Fortune  yielding,  hansel  this  new  yoke. 

Cassandra.     Strophk  L 

Ah  mo !  alas  !  Gods,  Earth  I 

Apollo,  0  Apollo  1  10-10 


Agamemnon.  45 

Chorus. 

Why  raise  for  Losias  tlicsc  cries  of  bale  ? 
Not  lie  tLo  god  to  need  the  mourner's  wail. 

CaSSAXDEA.      ANTISTROPnE  I. 
Ah  me  !  iJas  !  Gods,  Earth  I 
Apollo,  0  Apollo ! 

Chorus. 

Once  more  she  calleth  with  ill-omened  cry, 
The  god  who  hath  no  part  in  misery. 

Cassaxdka.    Strophe  II. 

Apollo,  0  Apollo ! 
Thou  way-god !  my  destroyer ! 
Once  more  thou  hast  destroyed  mo  utterly. 

Chorus, 
She  seems  about  to  augur  her  own  ills  ;  1050 

Heaven's  breathing  e'en  in  bonds  her  spirit  fill?. 

Cassandra.     Antistrophe  IL 

Apollo,  0  Apollo ! 
Thou  way-god !  my  destroyer ! 
Ah,  whither  hast  thou  led  me  ?  to  what  roof? 

Chorus. 

To  the  Atrcidan ;  an  thou  dost  not  know 
I  tell  thee ;  thou'lt  not  say  it  is  not  so. 


46  Agamemnon. 

Cassandra.    Stbophe  III. 
Ah!  Ah! 
A  heaven-detested  house,  whose  walls  of  yore 
Halters  have  seen,  and  streams  of  kindred  gore ; 
A  human  shambles  with  blood-reeking  floor.  1060 

Chorus 
Keen  scented  seems  the  stranger,  like  a  ho'Jnd  ; 
Ay,  and  the  blood  she's  tracking  will  be  found. 

Cassandea.     Antistbophe  m. 
Ah!  Ah! 
Lo  !  v.-itnesses  trust-worthy  !     Vouchers  dire ! 
These  babes,  who  weep  their  death- wound,  faith  inspire, 
Their  roasted  members  eaten  by  their  sire  1 
Cliorus. 
Thy  fame  oracular  hath  reached  our  ear ; 
But  certes  sejk  we  now  no  prophet  here. 

Cassandra.     Strophe  IV. 
Alas !  ye  gods  ! 
What  is  she  plotting?  what  nciv  blow  ? 
A  mighty  mischief  plots  she  'ncath  this  roof;        1070 

An  unimaginable  cureless  woe, 
Unbearable  to  friends.     Help  stands  aloo£. 

Chorus. 
Dark  are  these  oracles  ;  tlio  first  I  know  ; 
For,  them  the  city  voucheth  wholly  true. 

Cassandra.     Antistrophb  IV. 
Ah  wretched  one ! 
The  deed  wilt  consummate  ?     With  guile 


Agamemnon.  4cl 

Wilt  in  the  bath  thy  wedded  consort  cheer  ? 
How  Bpeak  the  issue  ?     Soon  it  will  be  here  ; — 
Hand  after  hand  is  lifted.     Woe  the  while  !  1080 

Chorus. 
I  comprehend  her  not ;  this  mystic  lore, 
These  blear-eyed  oracles  perplex  me  sore. 

Cassandra.     Strophe  V. 
Woe !  woe  I  Look  !  look !     What  see  I  there  ? 

Is  it,  ye  gods,  a  net  of  hell  ? 
The  wife  herself,  joint-slayer,  is  the  snare. 

Now  o'er  the  accursed  rite 

Let  the  dread  brood  of  Night, 
Unglutled  with  the  race,  their  chorus  swell ! 

Cliorus.     Strophe  VI, 
What  Fury  'gainst  this  house  doth  summon  ?     What, 
The  shriek  to  raise  ?     Such  utt'rance  cheers  me  not. 

Pallid  through  every  vein  1090 

Blood  to  my  heart  doth  run, 
Which  to  the  battle-slain 

Quencheth  life's  sun ; 
But  Ate  comes  amain. 

Cassandra.     Antistkophe  V. 
Hold !  hold  i     Woe !  woe !     The  heifer  there 
Keep  from  the  bull.     In  meshes  fell 
fOf  black-woofed  garb  entangled, — guileful  snare, — 
Catching, — she  smites  him  dead ; — 
Prone  in  his  watery  bed 
He  falls.     Thelavor's  guileful  doom  1  tell. 


48  Agamemnon. 

Cliorus.  Antisteophe  YI. 
I  boast  not  to  be  skilled  in  auguries, 
Yet  mischief  here  I  cannot  but  surmiBe.  1100 

Through  spells,  say,  if  ye  knov, 
To  mortals  here  below, 
What  grateful  cheer  is  sent  ? 
Th-  ir  wordy  arts  from  human  woe 
Breed  dark  presentiment. 

Cassakdba.  Strophe  YII. 
Woe !  woe!  my  wretched  ill-starred  lot! 

Wailing  another's  fate  mine  own  I  mourn  ; 

Why  hast  tliou  led  me  hither,  all  forlorn, 
Unless  with  thee  to  perish  ?  Wherefore  not  ? 

Chonis.    Stkophe  VIII. 

Thou'rt  frenzied,  by  some  god  posscst, 

And  tuneless  quircst  forth  thy  doom,  1110 

Like  nightingale,  with  dusky  plume 

Sateless  of  song.     From  heart  opprcst, 
Ceaseless  her  Itys,  Itys,  flows,* 

Her  life  bewailing,  rich  alone  in  woes. 

Cassandba.    Antistbophe  YII. 
Woo !  woe !     Clear-voiced  bird,  ari'ayed 
In  plumed  shape,  by  powers  divine ; 

*  In  the  Odyssey  (xix.  518)  Penelope  compares  herself  to 
Pandarcos'  child,  the  sylvan  nightingale  which,  in  the  oiien- 
in::;  spring,  perched  amid  the  dense  foliage  of  the  trees, 
warbles  beautifully,  with  frequent  change  of  key,  lamenting 
her  boy,  her  beloved  Itylos,  son  of  King  Zethus,  whom, 
through  insensate  folly,  she  had  slain.  This  is  the  oldest 
form  of  the  legend. 


Agamemnon.  49 

Sweet  life,  unmarred  by  tears,  is  thine  : 
But  me  awaits  the  double-edged  blade. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  YIII. 
Whence  hast  thou  these  prophetic  throes, 

Rushing  athwart  thy  soul,  in  vain  ?  1120 

Why  body  forth  in  dismal  strain, 
Blcut  with  shrill  cries,  these  direful  woes  ? 

W'hcnce  cometh  thus  to  vex  thy  soul 
Of  prophecy  the  dark,  ill-omened  goal  ? 

Cassandra.     Stbophe  IX. 
Oh,  nuptial  rite,  oh,  nuptial  rite, 

Of  Paris,  fraught  with  doom  ! 
Scamander  !  whence  my  fathers  drank, 
Nourished  of  yore  upon  thy  bank, 
I  throve  in  youthful  bloom, 
]\Ic  now  Cocytos  and  the  streams  of  night  1130 

To  augur  on  their  dismal  shores  invite. 

Chorus.     Strophe  X. 
What  thought  hast  uttered  all  too  clear  ? 
An  infant  might  interpret  here. 
Smitten  within  am  I  with  gory  sting. 
The  while  thy  bird-like  cry  to  hear 
My  heart  doth  wring. 

Cassandra.     Antistrophe  IX. 
Oh  deadly  coil,  oh,  deadly  coil 

Of  Iliou,  doomed  to  fall  I 
Alas,  the  flowor-cropping  kine 
Slain  by  my  father  at  the  shrine 

E 


50  Agamemnon. 

To  save  Ler  sacrod  wall!  1140 

But  cure  was  none  :  she  perished ;  vain  the  toil ! 
I  too,  soul-kindled,  soon  shall  press  the  soil. 

CJiorus.     Antistkophe  X. 
This  tallies  with  thy  former  strain  ; 
Sure  some  ill  demon  smites  thy  brain, 
And  falling  on  thee  moves  thee  thus  to  tell 
In  piteous  chant  thy  doleful  pain. 
The  end  I  cannot  spell. 

Cassandra. 
In  sooth  the  oracle  no  more  shall  peer 
Forth  from  a  veil,  like  newly  wedded  bride  ;  1150 

But  flushing  on  the  soul,  like  wind  that  blows 
Sunward,  it  dasheth  'gainst  the  orient  beams 
A  mighty  surge  that  doth  this  grief  o'ertop. 
No  more  through  dark  enigmas  will  I  teach  ! 
And  bear  me  witness,  how  in  eager  chase 
The  track  I  scent  of  crimes  wrought  long  ago. 
For  from  this  roof  departeth  never  more 
A  choir,  concordant  but  unmusical, 
To  evil  tuned.     Ay,  drunk  with  human  blood. 
And  by  the  draught  made  bold,  within  these  hulls    1160 
Abides  a  rout,  not  easy  to  eject, 
Of  sister  Furies  ;  lodged  within  these  walls 
They  chant  in  chorus  the  primeval  curse. 
Hostile  to  him  his  brother's  couch  who  trod, 
In  turn  they  tell  their  loathing.     Ilavc  I  missed, 
Ur,  like  true  archer,  have  I  hit  the  mark  ? 
Or  fitiolling  cheat,  or  lying  prophet  am  I  ? 


Agamemnon.  51 

Before  I  die,  attest  ye  now  on  oath 

That  of  these  halls  the  hoary  crimes  I  know. 

Chorus. 
And  how  can  oath  be  healer  of  a  woe 
Inherent  in  the  race?     Yet  marvel  I  1170 

That,  nurtured  o'er  the  sea,  thou  know'st  to  speak 
Of  foreign  city  as  though  native  there. 

Cassakdba. 
Loxias,  the  seer,  me  with  this  grace  endowed. 

CJiortis. 
How !  passion-smitten  was  he,  though  a  god  ? 

Cassandea. 
Till  now  it  shamed  me  to  speak  of  this. 

Choms. 
True  ;  for  who  fareth  well  grows  over-nice. 

Cassandea. 
Love-wrestler  was  he,  warm  his  favour  brcathed- 

Chorus. 
Came  ye  in  course  to  rite  conjugial  ? 

Cassandea. 
Consent  I  gave,  but  cheated  Loxias. 

Chorus. 
Mistress  already  of  presaging  art?  11  SO 


52  Agamemnon. 

Cassandba. 
Ay,  to  the  townsmen  all  tlieii-  woes  I  spelled. 

Chorus. 
How  then  by  wrath  of  Loxias  unharmed  ? 

Cassandra. 
No  credence  won  I  after  this  oflfenco. 

Chorus. 
To  us  thy  oracles  seem  all  too  true. 

Cassandba. 
Woe !  woe !  alas !  alas !  ye  miseries  ! 
Of  faitliful  auEjury  the  direful  toil 
Kacks  me  once  more,  with  bodeful  preludings 
Vexing  my  soul. — Seated  within  these  halls, 
See,  temlcr  boys,  like  dreamy  phantoms;  children,  1190 
As  by  their  dear  ones  done  to  dtath,  their  hands 
Filled  with  their  proper  flesh,  for  nutriment ; 
Their  heart  and  vitals, — loathsome,  piteous,  meal, — 
Look,  how  thoy  hold, — their  sire  has  tasted,  look  1 
For  these,  I  say,  vengeance  devising,  waits 
A  ilastard  lion,  wallowinj^  in  be<l ; 
House-warden,  sooth,  to  him  that's  come,  my  miister. 
For  the  slave's  yoke,  alas  !  I  needs  must  bear. 
The  naval  leader,  leveller  of  Troy, 
lie  knows  nut  that  the  fell  shenlug,  whose  tongue 
Spoke  words  of  guileful  welcome,  long  drawn  out. 
Like  lurking  Ate,  will  achieve  his  doom.  1200 

Such  things  she  dares  ;  the  female  slays  the  nmlo  ! 


Agamemnon.  53 

Her, — what  detested  monster  may  I  name 
•Vnd  hit  the  mark  ? — Some  basilisk,  or  Scylla 

Housing  in  rocks,  deadly  to-  mar'ners. 

Infuriate  dam  of  Hades,  breathing  f  'rfch, 

Against  her  dearest,  curse  implacable  ? 

What  triumph-notes  ex  iltautly  she  raised, 

All  daring  one,  as  in  the  turn  of  fight. 

Feigning  to  gratulate  his  safe  return  ! 

What  boots  it  whether  I  persuade  or  no  ?  1210 

The  dioraed  must  come  ;  ere  long  to  pity  moved, 

Me  thou  wilt  own  a  prophet  all  too  true. 

Chorus. 
Thyestes'  banquet  of  his  children's  flesh 
I  knew  and  shudder  at ;  fear  takes  my  soul, 
Hearing  the  truth,  no  imaged  counterfeit. 
The  rest  I  heard,  but  f.dlow  not  the  track, 

Cassandba. 
On  Agamemnon  dead,  I  say,  thou'lt  look. 

Chorus. 
Lull,  i^oor  forlorn  one,  thy  ill-omened  tc-uguo. 

Cassandra. 
Yet  o'er  this  speech  no  healing  god  presides. 

Chorus. 
If  be  it  must ;  but  may  it  never  be ;  1220 

Cassandra. 
The  while  thou  prayest,  theirs  it  is  to  slay. 


54  Agamemnon. 

CJiorut. 
What  man  deviseth  this  accursed  deed  ? 

Cassandba. 
Widely  thy  glance  hath  missed  mine  oracles. 

Chorus. 
Ay,  for  the  plotter's  scheme  to  me  is  dark. 

Cassandra. 
Yet  in  Hellenic  speech  my  words  are  couched. 

Chorus. 
So  too  are  Pythian  chants,  yet  hard  to  spelL 

Cassandra. 
Alas  !  what  fire  is  this  !     It  seizes  me. 
Woe!  woe  I     Lykeian  god  !     Apollo!     Woe  I 
The  biped  lioness,  that  with  the  wolf 
In  absence  of  the  noble  lion  couclied,  1230 

Will  me,  her  victim,  slaughter,  and  as  one 
Poison  who  mixeth,  she  my  doom  will  add 
To  crown  her  vengeance  ;  whetting  'gainst  her  lord 
The  murderous  knife,  she  boastoth  to  exact 
His  death,  as  payment  for  escorting  me. 
Why  longer  wear  this  scorn-provoking  gear. 
This  wand,  these  wreaths  prophetic  round  my  neck? 
Thee  I  will  shatter  ere  mysolf  am  doomed. 
Hence  to  destruction  :  I  will  follow  soon ; 
Anothnr,  in  my  place,  enrich  with  woes. 
Beliold,  Apollo's  self  doth  strip  nn-  bare  121(^ 

Of  the  prophetic  robe  ;  coldly  he  gazed, 


Agamemnon.  55 

What  time,  in  these  adornments  vainly  tricked, 

To  friends  and  enemies,  with  one  consent, 

All  undeserved,  a  laughter  I  became  : 

Vagrant  yclept,  poor  hunger-stricken  wretch, 

A  strolling  mountebank,  I  bare  it  all ; 

And  now  the  seer  (his  vengeance  wreaked  on  me 

The  seeress)  calls  me  to  this  deadly  fate. 

My  father  at  the  altar  fell,  but  me 

The  slaughter-block  awaiteth,  smitten  down 

By  stroke  relentless,  reeking  with  hot  gore. 

Yet  not  unhonoured  of  the  gods  we  fall ;  1250 

For  other  champion  of  our  cause  shall  come. 

Seed  matricidal,  venger  of  his  sire. 

An  exiled  wanderer,  from  this  land  estranged, 

Eeturns,  this  vengeance  for  his  friends  to  crown. 

For,  lo,  the  gods  a  mighty  oath  have  sworn, 

His  fatlier's  prostrate  form  shall  lead  him  home. 

But  why,  an  alien  here,  pour  I  my  wail  ? 

When  that  I  first  have  seen  my  Ilion  fare 

As  fared  it  hath,  and  they  who  won  the  town 

In  sorry  plight,  through  judgment  of  the  gods.     1260 

I'll  do  1     I'll  suffer  1     I  will  dare  to  die. 

lliese  gates,  as  gates  of  Hades,  I  adjure, 

One  prayer  I  offer,  "  mortal  be  the  stroke ;" 

Free  from  convulsive  throes,  in  easy  death, 

While  ebbs  my  life-blood,  may  I  close  mine  eyes. 

Chorus. 
Oh  woman,  thou  most  wretched  and  most  wise ; 
Lengthy  thy  speech  hath  been ;  but  if  thou  knowest 
Truly  thine  own  sad  doom,  how  walkest  thou 
Like  heaven-led  victim,  boldly  to  the  altar  ? 


56  Agamemnon. 

Cassandra. 
There's  uo  escape ;  brief  respite,  notliing  more.      1270 

Chorus. 
Yet  to  be  last  is  gain  at  least  of  time. 

Cassandra. 
The  day  is  come,  small  were  my  gain  by  flight. 

Chorus. 
Enduring  art  thou,  and  of  dauntless  mind. 

Cassandra. 
Yet  dear  to  mortals  is  a  glorious  death. 

Chorus. 
Such  words  none  heareth  from  the  fortunate. 

Cassandra. 
Alas,  my  sire,  for  thee  and  thy  bravo  sons  I 

[6'Ae  sittideiily  starts  back, 
Chonis. 
What  may  this  mean  ?     Wliat  terror  drives  thoo  back  t 

Cassandra. 
Alas  I  alas  ! 

Chorus. 
Why  this  alas,  uuIcsh  somu  hunur  bcaru  thoe? 

Cassandra. 
Dlood-reeking  murder  brcathoth  from  those  Imlls.  1280 


Agamemnon.  57 

Chorus 
'Tis  but  the  scent  of  victims  at  the  Iioarth. 

Cassandra. 
Niiy,  but  such  breath  as  issues  from  a  tomb. 

Choriis. 
No  Syrian  odour  tcll'st  thou  for  the  hou>,9. 

Cassandea. 
Well !  I  will  go,  within  these  palace  halls 
To  wail  mine  own  and  Agamemnon's  doom. 
Enough  of  life  !     Strangers !     Alas !     Akvs  I 
Yet  quail  I  not,  as  birde  at  the  brake, 
Tdly  ;  in  death  my  vouchers  be  in  this, 
When,  in  my  place,  woman  for  woman  dies. 
And  when  for  man  ill-wedded,  man  shall  fall.         1290 
Dying,  this  hospitable  grace  I  crave. 

Chorus. 
Poor  wretch  ;     Thy  fateful  doom  my  pity  moves. 

Cassandra. 
Once  more  I  fain  would  speak,  but  not  to  poxvr 
Mine  own  funereal  wail ;  but  to  the  Sun, 
Looking  my  last  upon  his  beams,  I  pray 
That  my  avengers  pay  my  murderers  back, 
Requiting  me,  poor  slave,  tlieir  easy  prey. 
Alas,  for  man's  estate  !     If  Fortune  smile, 
A  shadow  may  o'erturn  it ;  should  she  frown, 


58  Agamemnon. 

A  moistened  sponge  the  picture  doth  destroy.         1300 
More  than  the  first  this  doom  my  pity  moves. 

\_Exit  into  the  palace. 
Chorua. 

All  are  of  boundless  weal  insatiate  ; — 

None  warneth  from  his  halls 
Him  at  whom  Envy  points,  as  rich  or  great, 

Saying,  "  Come  here  no  more." — 
So  to  this  man  the  Blessed  Ones  have  given 
To  capture  Priam's  walls  ; — 
Home  he  returns,  beloved  of  Heaven ; — 
But  must  he  now  the  blood  repay 
Of  ancient  murder  ;  must  he  die, 

And  dying  expiate,  1310 

With  his  own  death,  their  deaths  who  died  of  yore  ; 
Who,  being  mortal,  this  can  hear,  nor  pray. 
That  he  were  born  to  pcathless  destiny  ? 

Agamemnon. 

[/n  the  palace. 
Woe's  me  !     I'm  smitten  with  a  deadly  blow ! 

Chonis. 
Hush  !     Wounded  unto  dcath»who  lifts  tliis  cry. 

Agamemnon. 
Woe's  me  !     Again  !  a  second  time  I'm  struck. 

CJiornjihiem. 
By  the  groaning  of  the  monarch,  wrought  mothinks  is 

now  tho  dcoci ; 
But  together    taking   counsel,   wenyo    wo    now    some 

prudent  scheme. 


Agamemnon,  59 

Cliorus. 

1.  To  you  my  counsel  is  to  raise  the  cry, 

And  to  the  palace  call  the  citizens.  1320 

11.  To  me  seems  best,  at  quickest,  breaking  in, 
To  prove  the  deed  by  newly-dripping  blade. 

III.  I,  this  opinion  sharing,  give  my  vote 
For  action ; — not  to  dally  is  the  point. 

IV.  'Tis  manifest ;  for  they,  thus  preluding, 
Give  to  the  city  signs  of  tyranny. 

V.  Ay,  we  delay  ; — they,  treading  under  foot 

All  thoughts  of  dalliance,  sleep  not  with  the  hand. 

VI.  No  plan  I  know  to  fashion  or  propose  ; 
Against  the  guilty  doer  we  must  plot.  1330 

VII.  That  view  I  share,  for  no  device  I  know, 
By  words,  the  dead  man  to  restore  to  life. 

VIII.  What !  dragging  on  our  lives,  shall  we  obey 
These  home-polluters  ?   Them  our  leaders  make? 

IX.  That  were  past  hearing,  better  far  to  die ; 
For  milder  doom  were  death  than  tyranny. 

X.  How  !  may  we  not  on  evidence  of  groans 
Augur  full  surely  that  the  man  is  dead  ? 

XI.  Ere  we  can  argue,  we  must  know  the  facts ; 

Assurance  differs  widely  from  surmise.  1340 

xii.  This  I  commend,  taking  the  general  vote, 

Plainly  to  know  how  fareth  Atreus'  son. 


GO  Agamemnon. 

[  'llie  doors  of  the  royal  palace  are  thrown  open ;  Ci.ytemxestba 
is  discovered  stduding  with  tht  axe  owr  hrr  shoiddtr.  Be- 
hind her,  under  a  cover,  are  the  bodies  of  AciASiEMSOx  and 

Cassandra.] 

Clttesinestea. 

Though  much  to  suit  the  times  before  was  said, 

It  Bhames  me  not  the  opposite  to  speak  : 

For,  plotting  against  foes, — our  seeming  friends, — 

How  else  contrive  with  Ruin's  wily  snare. 

Too  high  to  overleap,  to  fence  them  roimd  ? 

To  me.  not  mindless  of  an  ancient  ftnjd, 

Hath  come  at  last  this  contest ; — late  indeed. 

The  deed  achieved,  here  stand  I,  where  I  slew.      1350 

So  was  it  wrought  (and  this  I'll  not  deny), 

That  he  could  neither  'scape,  nor  ward  his  doom ; 

Around  him,  like  a  fish-encircling  net, 

This  giimont's  deadly  splendour  did  I  cast; — 

Him  twice  I  smote,  and  he,  with  twofold  groan. 

His  limbs  relaxed ; — then,  prostrate  whore  he  lay. 

Him  with  third  blow  I  dowered,  votive  gift 

To  nether  Hades,  saviour  of  the  dead. 

Thus  as  he  fell  he  chafed  his  soul  away ; 

And  gurgling  forth  the  swift  dcath-tido  of  blood,  1360 

He  smites  mo  with  black  drops  of  gory  dow, 

Not  less  exultant  than,  with  lioavcn-sont  joy 

The  corn-sown  land,  in  birth-hour  of  the  oar. 

For  this  great  issue,  Argivo  Senators, 

Joy  ye,  if  joy  ye  can,  but  I  exult. 

Nay,  o'er  the  slain  were  oS"rings  nioct, — with  right 

Hero  Were  they  poured, — with  cmpliasis  of  right. 


Agamemnon.  61 

Such  goblet  having  filled  with  cursed  ills 
At  home, — himself  on  his  return  drains  off. 

Chorus. 
We  marvel  at  thy  tongue,  how  bold  thy  speech,    1370 
Who  o'er  thy  husband  makest  so  thy  vaunt. 

Clttemnestba. 
As  witless  woman  are  ye  proving  me  ; 
But  I  with  steadfast  heart,  to  you  who  know, 
Proclaim, — and  whether  ye  will  praise  or  blame, 
It  recks  me  not, — this  man  is  Agamemnon, — 
My  husband,  dead,  the  work  of  this  right  hand, 
Doer  of  righteous  deed  ; — so  stands  the  case. 

Chorus.     Strophe. 

O  woman,  what  earth-nurtured  bane. 
What  jjotion,  upsent  from  the  wind-ruffled  sea. 
Hast  tasted,  that  on  thine  own  head  dost  heap       1380 
Cui  ses,  for  incense,  folk-mutter'd  and  deep  ! 

Hast  cast  otf,  hast  slain  ; — 
Out-cast,  uucitied,  thyself  shalt  be. 
Huge  hate  of  the  townsmen  blasting  theo. 

Clttemnestba. 
j\Ie  thou  dost  doom  to  exile, — to  endure 
The  people's  hate,  their  curse  deep-muttered, — thou, 
Who  'gainst  this  man  of  yore  hadst  naught  to  urge. 
He,  all  uniioved,  as  though  brute  life  he  quenched, 
The  while  his  fleecy  pastures  teem'd  with  flocks, 


62  Agamemnon. 

His  own  child  slaughtered, — of  my  travail  throes  1390 

To  me  the  dearest,   -charm  for  Thracian  blasts. 

Him  gbouldst  thou  not  have  chased  from  land  and  home 

Just  guerdon  for  foul  Jeed  ?     Stern  judge  thou  art 

When  me  thou  dost  arraign  ; — but,  mark  my  words, 

(Nerved  as  I  am  to  threat  on  equal  terms,) 

If  with  strong  hand  ye  conquer  me,  then  rule ; — 

But  should  tlic  god  decree  ihe  opposite. 

Though  late,  to  sober  sense  shalt  thou  be  schooled. 

Chorus.     Antistrophb. 

0  haughty  of  council  art  thou  ;  — 

And  haughtily-minded  thou  vauntest  amain,         1400 
As  raveth  thy  mind  neath  blood-reeking  fate. 
Calling  for  vengeance,  glares  forth  on  thy  brow 

Of  blood  the  foul  stain  ; — 
Forsaken  of  friends,  the  common  hate, 
Death-blow  with  death-blow  shalt  ex2)iate. 

Clttf.mxestra. 
This  solemn  sanction  of  mine  oaths  thou  hcarest ; — 
By  the  accomplished  vengeance  of  my  child, 
By  Ate,  by  Erinyes,  unto  whom 

1  slew  this  man, — Expectancy  for  me 

Treads  not  the  halls  of  Fear,  while  on  my  hearth,  1410 
iEgisthos,  kind  as  heretofore,  bums  fire  ; — 
For  ho  of  Inddtiess  is  no  puny  shield. 
Tiiere  prostrate  lies  this  woman's  outrager, 
Minion  to  oach  Chryscis  iwdor  Troy. 


Agamemnon.  63 

There  too,  this  captive  shive,  this  auguress, 

And  this  man's  concubine, — this  prophetess, 

His  faithful  bedfellow,  who  shared  with  him 

The  sailor's  bench.     Xot  unrequited  wrought  they  ; 

For  he  lies — thus.     While  she,  in  swan-like  fashion, 

Having  breathed  forth  her  last,  her  dying  wail,    1420 

Lies  here,  to  him  a  paramour,  and  so 

Adds  keener  relish  to  my  sweet  revenge. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Oh  might  some  sudden  Fate 

Not  tethered  to  a  weight 
Of  couch-enchaining  anguish,  hither  waft 

The  boon  of  endless  sleep ! 
For  our  most  gracious  guardian  slain  we  weep, 

In  woman's  cause  of  yore 

Full  many  a  pang  who  bore. 
And  now  lies  smitten  by  a  woman's  craft. 

Strophe  II. 
Woe !  frenzied  Helen,  woe  !  1430 

Through  thee  alone,  through  one, 
How  many  souls,  how  many,  were  undone ; 
What  havoc  dire  'neath  Troia  thou  hast  wrought. 
»  *  *  »  • 

Steophe  m. 
And  now  the  cureless  woe, 
Heirloom  of  blood,  shed  long  ago. 
Through  thee  hath  blossomed,  causing  strife 
Unquenchable,  with  husband-murder  rife. 


64  Agamemnon. 

Clytemnestra.     STRornE  IT. 

Bowed  beneath  sorrow's  weight, 

Invoke  not  deadly  Fate, 
Nor  in  thine  anger  Helen  thus  arraign,  1440 

As  though  through  her,  through  one, 

Fell  many  a  Danaan  son  ; — 
She-man-destroycr,  working  cureless  bane ! 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  I. 

Demon,  who  now  dost  fall 

Kuthlcss  on  Atrcus'  hall 
Making  the  twin  Tautalidte  thy  prey, 
■fThrough  women's  haughty  reign. 
Gnawing  my  heart,  thou  dost  confirm  thy  sway. 

Like  bodeful  raven  hoarse. 

She  standeth  o'er  the  corse. 
And  chants  exulting  her  discordant  strain.  145Q 

ClYTEMNESTKA.      ANTISTROrnE   IV. 

Ay  now  thy  speech  in  sooth 

Runs  even  with  the  truth, 
Calling  the  thrice-dread  demon  of  this  race  ; 

For  in  their  veins  is  nursed, 

By  him,  the  quenchless  thirst 

For  blood ;  ore  ])aU's  the  trace 
01  ancient  pang,  now  ichor  flows  apare. 

Cliorns.     Strophe  V. 

Miglity  tijo  demon,  dire  his  hate, 
Whom  hero  thou  boastest  to  preside  ; 


Agamemnon,  65 

Woe  !  woe  !  ill-omened  praise  of  Fate,  1460 

Baneful  and  still  unsatisfied  ! 
Alas !  'Tis  Zeus,  in  will,  in  deed, 
Sole  cause,  sole  fasLioner ;  for  say 
What  comes  to  mortals  undecreed 
By  Zeus,  what  here,  that  owneth  not  his  sway  ? 

Strophe  VI. 

Woe !  woe ! 
King  !  King  !  how  thee  shall  I  bewail  ? 
How  voice  my  heartfelt  grief?     Thou  liest  there 
Entangled  in  the  spider's  guileful  snare; 
In  impious  death  thy  life  thou  dost  exhale.  1470 

Strophe  VII. 

Ah  me !  ah  me !  to  death  betrayed, 
Sped  by  the  two-edged  blade, 
On  servile  couch  now  ignominious  laid. 

Clttemnestra.     Strophe  VIIL 

Dost  boast  as  mine  this  deed  ? 

Then  wrongly  thou  dost  read, 
fTo  count  me  Agamemnon's  wife  ; — not  so ; 

Appearing  in  the  mien 

Of  this  dead  monarch's  queen, 
The  ancient  fiend  of  Atreus  dealt  the  blow  ; — 

Eequiting  his  grim  feast,  1480 

For  the  slain  babes,  as  priest. 
The  full-grown  victim  now  he  layeth  low. 


60  Agamemnon. 

Clioi-us.     Antistrophb  V 
That  thou  art  guiltless  of  this  blood 
Who  will  attest?     Yet  by  thy  side, 
Haply,  as  thy  accomplice,  stood 
The  Fury  who  doth  here  preside. 
Through  streams  of  kindred  gore 
Prcsscth  grim  Ares  on  to  claim 
Eequital  for  the  deed  of  shame  ;— 
The  clotted  blood  of  babes  devoured  of  yore.         1490 

Antistbophe  VI. 
TVoe !  woe? 
King  !  King  !  thee  how  shall  T  bewail  ? 
How  voice  my  heartfelt  grief '?     Thou  liest  there 
Entangled  in  the  spider's  guileful  snare, 
111  impious  death  thy  life  thou  dost  exhale. 

AirrisTROPHE  VII. 

Ah  me  1  ah  me !  to  death  betrayal. 
Sped  by  the  two-edged  blade, 
On  servile  couch  now  ignominious  laid. 

Clttemnestba.     Antistbophb  VIIL 

By  no  unjust  decree 

Perished  this  man,  for  ho  1500 

Tlirough  guile  hath  household  death  enacted  hero : — 

His  pro^KT  child  ho  slew, 

Swoot  bud  from  mo  that  grow, 
Ipliigcnia,  wept  witli  many  a  tear. 

Foul  quittance  fur  foul  deed  ; — 


Agamemnon.  fi7 

He  reaped  the  sword's  due  meed, 
Hence  no  proud  boast  from  liim  let  Hades  hear ! 
Chorus.     Strophe  IX. 

Perplexed  I  am,  bewildered  sore 

Which  way  to  turn  ;  escape  is  vain  ;  1510 

Totters  the  house ;  I  dread  the  crimson  rain 
That  with  loud  plashing  shakes  these  walls  ;  no  more 
Falleth  in  niggard  droppings  now  the  gore. 
And  bent  on  deed  of  mischief,  Fate  anew 
On  other  whetstones,  whetteth  vengeance  due. 

ANTl&TIiOPHE    II. 

Earth !  Earth !  oh  hadst  thou  been 

My  shroud  ere  I  my  king 
Prone  in  the  silver-sided  bath  had  seen ! 
Who  will  inter  him  ?     Who  his  dirge  shall  sing? 
So  hardy  thou?     Wilt  thou  who  didst  assail  1520 

Thy  husband's  life,  thyself  uplift  the  wail  ? 
Wilt  to  his  shade,  for  the  great  deeds  he  wrought, 
Eender  a  graceless  grace,  with  malice  fraught  ? 

Antistbophe  III. 

With  tears  of  honest  grief 

Weeping  the  godlike  chief, 
Above  the  tomb  who  now  shall  raise 
The  funeral  hymn  ?     Who  speak  the  hero's  praise  ? 
Clttemnestra.     Stbophe  X. 

Not  thine  the  task  to  counsel  here. 

By  us  he  fell :  this  man  we  slew ; 

Ours  be  it  to  inurn  him  too;  1530 

Borne  from  the  palace,  o'er  the  bier 


k 


68  Agamemnon. 

Shall  sound  no  notes  of  wailing  ; — no, 
But  him,  with  blandishments,  shall  meet 
Iphigenia  ;  by  the  rapid  streams 
Of  Acheron,  his  daughter,  as  beseems. 
Facing  her  father,  sball  around  him  throw 
Her  loving  arms,  and  him  with  kisses  greet. 

Chorus.    Antistbophe  IX. 

That  taunt  still  answers  taunt  we  see. 

Here  to  adjudge  is  hai'd  indeed. 
Spoiled  be  the  spoiler  ;  who  sheds  blood  must  bleed. 
While  Zeus  surviveth  shall  this  law  survive.   .       1510 
Doer  must  suffer ;  'tis  the  Fates'  decree ; 
Who  from  the  house  the  fated  curse  may  drive  ? 
The  race  is  welded  to  calamity. 

ClTTEMNESTBA.      AKTISTROPnE   X. 

Ay !  now  on  Truth  thou  dost  alight ! 

I  with  the  demon  of  this  race — 

The  Pleisthenid — an  oath  will  plight. 

My  doom,  though  grievous,  I  embrace. 

But  for  the  rest,  hence  let  him  haste  I 
Leaving  this  honse,  let  him  another  race  ISoO 

Harass  with  kindred  murders.     For  myself, 
When  from  these  halls  blood-frcuzy  I  have  chased, 
Small  pittance  shall  I  crave  of  worldly  pelf. 

\_Entcr  iEiJ.iSTHQS,  arrayed  in  roi/al  rohts,  and  tcith  anncd 
altcndauts.J 

JEOISTUOS. 

Hail,  joyous  light  of  justice-beariTig  day  I 
At  length  I  can  avur  that  Guds  supernal. 


Agamemnon.  09 

Judges  of  mcD,  look  down  on  earthly  woes, 

Beholding,  in  the  Erinyes'  woven  robes, 

This  man,  thus  prostrate,  welcome  sight  to  me, 

The  wiles  atoning  compassed  by  his  sire.  1560 

For  Atreus,  Argos'  ruler,  this  man's  father, 

Did  from  the  city  and  his  home  expel 

Thyestes,  rival  in  the  sovereignty, — 

My  father,  to  be  plain,  and  his  own  brother. 

But  coming  back,  a  suj^jiliant  of  the  hearth. 

Wretched  Thyestes  found  a  lot  secure, 

Not  doomed  his  natal  soil  with  blood  to  stain, 

Here  in  his  home :  but  this  man's  godless  sire, 

Atreus,  with  zeal  officious  more  than  kind. 

Feigning  a  joyous  banquet-day  to  hold,  1570 

Served  to  my  sire,  for  food,  his  children's  flesh. 

Their  feet  indeed,  the  members  of  their  hands, — • 

Seated  aloof,  in  higher  place,  he  hides. 

Partaking  of  the  undistinguished  parts, 

In  ignorance,  Thyestes  eats  the  food, 

Curse-laden,  as  thou  seest,  to  the  race. 

Discerning  then  the  impious  deed,  he  slirieked, 

And  back  recoiling  the  foul  slaughter  spewed. 

Spurning,  with  righteous  curse,  th'  insulted  boaTd 

Dread  doom  he  vows  to  the  Pelopida?; —  1580 

"  So  perish  the  whole  race  of  Pleisthcnes." 

Hence  is  it  that  ye  see  this  man  laid  low ; 

The  righteous  planner  of  his  death  am  I. 

For  me,  the  thirteenth  child,  in  swathing  clothes, 

He  with  my  wretched  sire,  to  exile  drove. 

But,  grown  to  manhood.  Justice  led  me  back, 

And  I,  although  aloof,  liave  reached  this  man, 


70  Agamemnon. 

The  threads  combining  of  the  fatal  plot. 
Now  for  myself  'twere  glorious  to  die, 
Seeing  this  man  entrapped  in  Justice'  toils. 

Chorus. 
To  honour  insolence  in  guilt,  uEgisthos,  1590 

I  know  not ; — that  with  purpose  thou  didst  kill 
This  man,  thou  boastest ;  of  his  piteous  doom 
Sole  author  thou  : — I  tell  thee  thine  own  head 
To  Justice  brought,  be  sure  shall  not  escape 
The  cursG  of  stoning  by  the  people's  hand. 

^GISTHOS. 

Plying  the  lowest  oar,  dost  menace  us 

Who  from  the  upper  benches  sway  the  helm  ? 

Being  old  thou  know'st  how  bitter  at  thy  years 

Wisdom  by  stern  necessity  to  learn. 

But  bonds  and  hunger-pangs,  to  cure  the  mind 

Of  stubborn  eld,  are  skilful  leeches  found.  1600 

Hast  eyes,  yet  seest  not  this  ?     Against  the  pricks 

Kick  not,  lest  stumbling,  thou  shouldst  come  to  griet. 

Chorus. 
W  oman,  house-mate  to  him  from  recent  war 
licturn'd,— defilor  of  thy  husband's  bed. 
Death  thou  didst  plot  against  tliis  warriot  chief. 

^eiSTHOS. 

These  words  will  ftmntnins  be  of  bitter  tears. 
Tliy  tongue  the  opposite  to  Orplieus  is; 
For  ho  drew  all  by  rapture  of  his  voice, 


Agamemnon.  71 

"VMiile  thou,  by  idle  bark,  dost  all  things  stir 
jTo    hate  ;  —  when    conquered,    thou     wilt     taraer 
show.  •  1610 

Clwrus. 
Shalt  thou  be  ruler  of  the  Argives,  thou, 
Who,  when  that  thou  hadst  plotted  this  man's  death. 
Didst  courage  lack  to  strike  the  blow  thyself  ? 

-^GISTHOS. 

To  spread  the  snare  was  plainly  woman's  part, 
For  I,  his  ancient  foeman,  was  suspect ; 
But  armed  with  this  man's  treasure,  be  it  mine 
To  rule  the  citizens.     Th'  unruly  colt 
That,  barley-fed,  turns  restive,  I  will  bind 
fWith   heavier   thong   than   yokes   the    trace-horse ; 
— him, 
Darkness'  grim  comrade,  Famine,  shall  see  tamed. 

Clwrus. 

This  man  why  didst  thou  not,  0  base  of  soul. 
Slaughter  thyself  ?     But  him  his  wife,  with  thee, 
The  land  polluting,  and  her  country's  gods, 
Hath  slain.     Orestes,  sees  he  still  the  light, 
That,  home-returning  with  auspicious  Fate, 
He  may,  with  mighty  stroke,  deal  death  to  both  ? 

^GISTHOS. 

Since  thou  art  minded  thus  to  act,  not  talk  alone, 
know  quickly. 


72  Agamemnon. 

[To  hia  attendants 
Come  on,  my  faithful  body-guard,  the  fray  is  not  far 
distant. 

Chorus. 
Come  on  then,  and  wfth  hand  on  hilt,  his  sword  let 
each  make  ready. 

^GISTHOS. 

Be  well  assured,  with  hand  on  hilt,  to  die  I  too  refuse 

not. 

Cliorus. 
To  die, — thine  utterance  we  accept,  and  take  as  thy 
death-omen. 

Clytemnestra. 
Dearest  of  husbands  let  us  not,  I  pray,  work  further 

mischief. 
Already  in  our  many  woes  reaped  have  we  wretched 

harvests. 
Of  sorrow  there  hath  been  enough ;    let   us  forbear 

more  bloodshed. 
Go  thou,  and  ye  too  aged  men,  seek  your  appointed 

mansions. 
Ere  aught  ye  do  to  work  miscbanco.     As  fate  enjoined 

we've  acted. 
If  trouble   is   the  lot  of  man,  enough   have  we  on- 

couutorcd  ; 
Sore  smitten  by  the  heavy  hoof  of  some  avenging 

demon. 
'J'lius   ye  a  woman's  counsel   have,  if  any  deign   to 

hearken. 


Agamemnon.  73 

^GISTHOS. 

To  think  that  .their  vain  tongue  'gainst  me  into  such 

speech  should  blossom ; — 
That   they  should  hurl  forth  words  like  these,  their 

proper  doom"  thus  tempting  : 
They  against  sober   reason    err,  thus  to  insult  their 

ruler. 

Cliorus. 
Upon  the  evil  man  to  fawn  is  not  the  wont  of  Argives. 

^Egisthos. 
But,  be  assured,  some  future  day,  I  yet  shall  overtake 
you. 
L  Chorus. 

I       Not  so  if  hither  to  return  some   god   should  guide 
Orestes. 

^GISTHOS. 

Full  well  I  know  that  exiles  still  on  hopes  are  wont  to 

batten. 

Cliorus. 
Work  as  thou  listest.     Gorge  thy  fill.     Stain  justice. 

Thou  canst  do  it. 

.^GISTHOS. 

Be  sure  tliat  thou  to  me  shalt  pay  the  forfeit  of  thy 
folly. 
\  Cliorus. 

Be  boastful  and  be  bold,  like  cock  beside  his  partner 
strutting. 


74  Agamemrum. 

Clttehxestba. 

These  senseless  barkings  heed  not  thou  ;  thyseK  and 

I  together, 

Ruling  within  these  royal  halls,  will  all  things  wisely 

order. 

[Exeunt. 


Agamemnon.  75 


NOTES  TO  THE  AGAMEMNON. 


[Mt  friend  the  translator  wishing  to  obviate  the  charge  of 
arbitrarily  departing  from  -lEschylus,  requests  me  to  draw 
up  a  list  of  the  conjectural  emendations  of  the  text  which 
I  have  suggested.  Space  forbids  my  here  justifying  them. 
I  will  state  them  as  briefly  as  I  can.  F.  W.  N.] 

Agamemnon. 

Vekse  7.  Omit  dartpas  as  an  interpretation  of  dwda-ras,  and 
read  orav  (pOlvacrtv,  avroXas  re  twv8  ,  opa. 

138.  Read— 

X  rocraov  X  yap  ev(f)p(ov  ["Aprepls  fori]  KaXa 

dpoaoicn  XfTrroiaiv  X  paKaKav  re  X  ^ay^f  •  •  • 
142,       Teprrva  [Se  daip-ova  diairiv  6  p-civris] 

TovTuiv  airel  rrvplBoXa  Kpuvai, 

6e|ta  p^ev  Kara/Lio/j.0a  8e  (f)dapara  |  Kpivcov. 

"  Irfiov  X  avKuXfco 

Uaiava  [^delov],  ptjTivas  avrnTvoovs 

Aavaois  )(povias  exevt/das 

+  *A'ypeia  Tfv^r],  (nrfvbopeva  dv(Tiav 

frepav  .... 

la  142,  146,  such  words  as  I  insert  seem  to  be  deficient. 

In  144  I  have  written  KpLvav  for  the  absurd  arpovdav. 

In  148  a  nominative,  expressive  of  Artemis,  is  deficient. 
I  have  changed  dirXotas,  which  can  hardly  bear  the  epiihet 
avTiTTvoovs,  into''Aypeia  (huntress). 


76  Agamemnon. 

164.  Eead  ev^erai  for  the  old  Xe|et.  Oi/Bev  fv^erai  Trpiv 
Kov  •  "  will  not  vauut  that  he  was  aught  of  yore." 

175.  For  Se  nov  read  ye  ttov,  and  remove  the  stop  after 
crci'Ppovelv.  Join  oKovras  with  &o>(f)pov(li',  ^Xfie  with  /:iiaia)s. 
"  And  to  men,  loath  to  learn  sobrict}-,  there  cometh  forcibly 
a  grace  (1  trow)  of  deities,  who  sit  on  holy  bench."  The 
"  grace  "  is  the  painful  wisdom  learned  by  sufleriug. 

226.  For  Trpovairrj  read  TrpovotTre'is. 

233.  After  ypa<i)ais  insert  [TrotKiXats].  In  the  antistrophe 
do  not  omit  irpoKKixiv,  biit  for  infl  read  n^,  and  omit  f]  liefore 
Xvtrts.  To  fXfXXov  8f  npOKXvfiv,  tttj  yivcir  j  av  Xvcrir,  Trpo- 
;(aip€r<». 

278.  For  Itrx^s  read  ocrx'"-^  or  oa-xo^s,  "tivigs'"  of  flame; 
sug$;ested  by  irevKrj,  the  pine.  In  the  corrupt  irpos  fjBovrjv  a 
verb  is  concealed,  sucli  as  Tzpo/ixnaa-ev,  wpojjKpia-ev,  vibrated, 
perked  forward.  npoo-ijXoo-ei/  is  I'ossible,  but  was  less  likely 
to  be  corrupted  than  some  rarer  verb,  as  irpocrrjdpiafv,  imifted. 

290.  Before  (pXtyova-av  a  whole  line  seems  to  Ijc  lost,  such 
as  [avyr)v  K(\fvov(T ,  doTpanais  etiayytKois]  (jiXtyovaav. 

327.  For  wf  bvabaifxovfs  Blomfield  well  gave  in  S  eiSui- 
fiovfs. 

365.  Treading  in  Blomfield's  steps,  I  attempt  the  corrupt 

passage  thus — 

Tr(<^avrai  S  %  fyyevfjf 
drapTTjpoiV   Aprj 
TTVfovTfov,  fxtl^ov  ^  Bucaiujs. 

CpXtOVTUV   ^(Om'tTlOV  VTTfpCPfVf 
X  oil   TOVTO  tii\Tl(TT6v  X  fOT 

ov5'  dT:i]p.(tirroi>  .... 

(TovTO,  the  fact  of  excessive  abuudmce.) 

412.       For  irdptffTi  criyht  lirifios  dXoiSopos 
libiaros  d(f>ffjLii'(oi'  i^flv: 
read  (until  we  ^ct  soniethim;  Ixtter)^ 

irdpt(TTi  (Tiya  Kar   o'fiovi,  diXol8npoSt 
aiarovs  €(pi€fxtv<nv  litty. 


Agamemnon.  77 

Join  aiya  e(piefj.iv(ov.  "  There  is  silence  along  (her)  paths, 
while  they  long  to  view  the  viewless."  I  understand  this  of 
Helen's  o/li^Xi/cij;.     In  antistrophe  for  'EXXaSos  read  "EXKdvos. 

54:1.  For  ov  Xaxom-es,  which  is  nonsense,  read  ao-;(a\Xorrey, 
and  in  540,  naKoppodovs  for  KaKocrrpwrovy. 

741.  This  viery  corrupt  passage  admits  of  an  approximate 
solution,  thus — 

V^plV,  TOT     I]   rod',   0T€  TO   KvpiOV  /jtoXj, 

%  veapois  X  4>avoi(Tav  %  tokouti 
daipova  %  iravropd^av 
uv'upov  6pd(Tos  peXai- 
vas  pf'Kd0poiaiv''ATas, 
flZopivav  TOKeixTiv. 

Vulgo,  f  vea  f  (paovs  kotov  |  Baipovd  f  Tf  t  ■'"o"  "/^"X*"'  "^O" 
Xe/xoi/"]  dvUpov  ....  Qpdcros  Attjs  is  put  for  dpdcreia  "Att/, 
and  d5opevi],/em.,  agrees  with  it.  If  peXaivas  is  correct,  it 
seems  to  mean  "  gloomy  (funereal),"  and  is  joined  with  the 
dative  peKddpoi^.  Then  the  antistrophe  is  (omitting  /St'oi*  in 
749,  and  reading  eSe^Xa  with  Dindorf,  &c.) — 

TO  ;^pvo"o7raGrra  6'  eSe^a  aiiv  ttIvco  ^epav 
TvaXivTpcnrois  oppacriv  XnToiKT,  'Ocrlav  Ttpoai^a,  .... 

(for  vuhj.,  o(Tia). 

776.  Adi-pting  from  Franke  fn  dvcnav  for  eKovcriov,  read 
also  dpr]aKoi<Ti  for  dvrja-Kovai.,  which  cannot  be  right.  Then, 
we  get 

Opdaos  f<  Bvaiciv 

avhpacn  6pr](TK0i(Ti  Kopi^oiv. 

" infusing  into  religious  men  confidence  from  the  sacrifices.' 
844,  noXX^v  .  .  .  Xe'yo).     Schiitz,  if  I  remember,  regards 

the  line  as  spurious,  and  with  good  reason. 

957.  iraprjliTja-ev  ought  to  be  Traptj-uvrja-ev,  they  moored  by 

evvdiai. 

990.  ovSe   TOP  6p6obarj  ....  is  quite  unsatisfactory.     I 

conjecture  oixi  •  .  • ;  has  not  Jupiter  put  a  stop  to  it  ? 


78  Agamemnon. 

99-i.  For  fiolpa  fiolpav,  which  is  nonsense,  read  fjiolp 
afioipd  p!  ;  and  compare  vats  avats,  ydpos  aya^oy. 

1C95.  For  p.(XayK4pa>v,  by  all  means  read  peXayKpoKa,  and 
for  eV  TTeTrXowri  perhaps  ffnrXaKfura. 

1422.  I  think  ttJs  fpi^S  ought  to  be  ttivS"  tprji,  fur  irrriyaytv 
must  have  Agamemnon  as  nominative.  ■napQy\r(ovripa,  a 
delicate  side  dish,  can  only  mean  Cassandra.  It  cannot 
mean  "  a  relish."  XXibjis  cannot  be  right,  but  perhaps  the 
participle  xXtSaJj/. 

1446.  For  Kpdros  la-oy^vxov  (which  is  defective  in  metre  as 
well  as  sense),  read  Kpdros  a-ivoylrvxoVf  "  thou  establishest  a 
soul-blighting  sway  by  means  ol"  women.''  Hermann  by 
inserting  t  after  Kpdros  did  not  imjirove  the  sense. 

1610.  For  o^fi  read  e^dei,  thou  art  hated,  in  contrast  to 
Xapa. 

1618.  For  <Teipa(f>6pov  read  aeipacjjopuv :  "  bands  heavier 
than  common  harues.C 


CHOEPHORL 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


Okestes. 

Chokus  of  Captive  WosiEJr. 

Electea. 

Clytemnestba. 

iEciSTHOS. 

Pylades. 

Nurse. 

Attendant. 


[Scene. — Tlic  royal  palace  in  Argos,  as  in  the  preriotta 
tragedy.  The  tomh  of  Agamemnon  is  seen  in  the 
orchestra.  Ouestes  and  Pylades  enter  in  the  garb  of 
travellers.  They  approach  the  tonib.  Okestes  ascends 
the  steps.] 


CHOEPHORI* 


Orestes. 

THEE,  sliade-escorting  Hermes,  I  invoke, 
In  Hades  guardian  of  my  royal  sire, — 
To  me,  tliy  suppliant,  be  saviour  thou, 
IVIy  firm  ally, — for  to  this  land  I  come 
Exile  no  more ; — on  this  sepulchral  mound 
Father  I  call  thee, — hearken  to  my  cry  1 — 
*  ♦  «  ♦  * 

A  primal  lock,  as  nurture- gift,  I  vowed 
To  Inachos,  and  now  this  second  lock. 
Griefs  token.  Father,  I  devote  to  thee, — 
For,  absent  from  thy  funeral  obsequies, 
I  could  not  then  as  mourner  wail  thy  death, 
Nor  speed  with  outstretched  hand  thy  royal  bier. 

[The  Chorus,  arrayed  in  mourning  costume,  come  forth  from 
the  palace.     Electra  closes  the  procession.'] 

What  sight  is  this  ?     What  company  of  women         10 
Is  wending  hitherward,  in  sable  weeds 

*  The  libation-pourers. 


82  Choepliori. 

Conspicuous  ?     What  disaster  bringeth  tb(!m  ? 
Doth  a  new  sorrow  fall  upon  our  house  ? 
Or  rightly  may  I  deem  that  to  my  sire 
They  bear  libations, — soothing  to  the  dead  ? 
It  must  be  so,  for  yonder,  as  I  think, 
Steering  this  way,  Electra  comes,  my  sister. 
Signal  by  depth  of  woe.     Oh,  grant  me,  Zeus, 
To  venge  my  father's  death ; — be  thou  to  me 
Ally  propitious ! — Now,  my  Pylades, 
Stand  we  apart,  that  I  may  clearly  learn 
What  may  import  this  suppliant  female  train. 

\They  conceal  thera'dves. 

[Tf7«7e  the  Ohorus  encircle  the  tomb,  they  sing  the  following 

Ode.} 

CJiorua.     Sthophe  I. 
Sent  from  the  palace,  forth  I  tread,  20 

Libations  bearing  to  the  dead, 
Guiding,  with  hands  swift-clapped,  a  doleful  train. 
Marred  is  my  cheek  with  many  a  gory  slain, 

Nail-jdoughed  each  new-cut  furrow  bleeds ; 
My  heart  on  cries  of  dolour  sateless  feeds. 
Eendiug  my  flaxen-tissued  vest, 
With  smiloless  passion,  uncontrolled, 
Grief  doth  my  sorrow-stricken  breast 
Dismantle  of  the  garment's  decent  fold. 

AxTISTROPnE    I. 

For,  shrill  of  voice,  hair-bristling  Fe.ir, 

In  Atrous'  household  vision -seer,  80 


Choeijhori.  83 

Breathing  forth  rage  in  sleep, — at  dead  of  night 

From  the  recesses  of  these  royal  halls, 
Eang  out  a  cry  of  wild  affright 

That  heavy  on  the  women's  chambers  falls. 
And  dream-interpreters  proclaim, 
Pledged  to  the  truth,  in  Heaven's  name, 
That  unavenged  'neath  earth,  the  slain 

Against  their  slayers  wrathfully  complain. 

Steophe  II. 
Such  graceless  grace,  against  the  threatened  ill 

Devising  cure,  (oh  fostering  earth  !) 
The  godless  woman  sends  me  to  fulfil. 

To  speak  the  words  prescribed  I  dread ;  40 

For  ah  !  when  blood  hath  once  been  shed. 
Falling  to  earth,  what  ransom  can  be  paid  ? 

Woe  for  the  sorrow-stricken  hearth 
"Woe  for  the  home  in  ruin  laid  ! 

Sunless,  of  men  abhorred,  a  murky  cloud 
Doth  through  the  master's  fall  the  dwelling  shroud. 

Antistbophe  II. 
The  majesty  invincible  of  old, 

Matchless,  supreme,  who  filled  the  ear 
Of  faithful  lieges,  and  their  heart  controlled, 

Standeth  aloof ;— Fear  reigneth  now. 

For  to  Prosperity  men  bow,  60 

Which  they  as  God,  ay  more  than  God,  revere. 

But  Justice'  stroke  some  swift  doth  whehn 


84  Choephori. 

In  light  who  dwell ;  on  others  wait, 
fLingering,  their  woes  in  Darkness'  glimmering 

realm ; 
Others  sheer  Night  enshrouds  in  blackest  fate. 

Steophe  m. 
When  nurturing  earth  is  blood-drenched,  lo 
Fixed  is  for  aye  the  vengeance-crying  gore  ; — 
And  he  who  shed  it,  paying  Ate's  score, 
fDoth  burgeon  out  in  all-entangling  woe.  60 

Antistrophe  III. 
The  bridal  couch  if  man  profane, 
fHopeless  is  cure  ;  though  in  one  common  flood. 
To  purify  the  hand  defiled  by  blood, 
All  streams  commingling  flow,  they  flow  in  vain. 

Epode. 
But  for  myself,  through  Heaven's  command. 
The  captured  city's  doom  I  share ; — 
Led  hither  from  my  native  land, 
'Tis  mine  the  menial's  lot  to  bear. 
Their  acts,  whose  will  my  fortune  sways, 
Just  or  unjust,  I  needs  must  praise :  70 

t  Beneath  ray  vest  grief's  angiiished  throes 
Shrouding,  I  quell  my  bitter  hate  ;  — 
While  numbed  in  heart  by  secret  woes, 
Of  my  true  lords  I  weep  the  hapless  fate. 

Elkctra. 
Yc  captive  women,  yo  who  tend  this  homo. 


Choephori.  85 

Since  ye  are  present  to  escort  with  me 

These  lustral  rites,  your  counsel  now  I  crave. 

How,  while  I  pour  these  off'rings  on  the  tomb, 

Speak  friendly  words  ?  and  how  invoke  my  Sire  ?     80 

Shall  I  declare  that  from  a  loving  wife 

To  her  dear  lord  I  bear  them  ?  from  my  mother  ? 

My  courage  fails,  nor  know  I  what  to  speak, 

Pouring  libations  on  my  father's  tomb. 

Or  shall  I  pray,  as  holy  wont  enjoins, 

That  to  the  senders  of  these  chaplets,  be 

Eequital  may  accord,  ay !  meed  of  ill. 

Or,  with  no  mark  of  honour,  silently, 

For  so  my  father  perished,  shall  I  pour 

These  offerings,  potion  to  be  drunk  by  earth, 

Then,  tossing  o'er  my  head  the  lustral  m-n, 

(As  one  who  loathed  refuse  forth  has  cast,)  90 

With  eyes  averted,  back  retrace  my  steps  ? 

Be  ye  partakers  in  my  counsel,  friends. 

For  in  this  house  one  common  hate  we  share. 

Through  fear  hide  not  the  feelings  of  your  heart ; 

For  what  is  destined  waits  alike  the  free 

And  him  o'ermastered  by  another's  hand ; — 

If  ye  have  aught  more  wise  to  urge,  say  on. 

Choirus. 

Thy  father's  tomb  revering  as  an  altar, 

Since  thou  commandest,  I  will  speak  my  thoughts. 

Electra. 
Speak,  as  my  father's  tomb  revering.  100 


86  Clioepliori. 

Chorus. 

Poux  — 
High  claims  uplifting  for  the  wise  of  heart. 

Electra. 
But  of  our  friends  whom  thus  may  I  address  ? 

Ch(yrus. 
First  name  thyself  and  whoso  hates  -ffigisthos. 

Electra. 
Then  for  myself  and  thee  pour  I  this  prayer. 

Clionis. 
Hearing  my  words,  do  thou  interpret  them. 

Electra. 
Whom  else  to  number  with  this  friendly  band  ? 

Chorus. 
Think  of  Orestes  though  an  exile  stilL 

Electra. 
'  Tis  well, — not  vainly  hast  thou  prompted  mo. 

Cliorus. 
Now  for  the  guilty, — mindful  of  his  death, — 

Electra. 
What  shall  I  say?  miskillcd,  instruct  me  thou.        110 

Chorus. 
Pray  that  to  them  may  come  or  god,  or  mortal,^ 

Electra. 
As  judge  or  oa  avenger  meanest  thou '? 


Choe^ihori,  87 

CJtorus, 
Say  plainly,  who  shall  death  with  death  requite. 

Electba. 
May  I  the  gods  thus  pray  nor  impious  bo  ? 

Chorus. 
How  not  requite  an  enemy  with  ill? 

Electea. 
Of  powers  above  the  earth  and  powers  below 
Herald  supreme,  escorter  of  the  shades, 
Hermes,  now  summon  to  attend  my  prayer 
The  guardians  of  my  father's  house,  dread  powers. 
Throned  in  the  nether  world,  and  mother  Earth,      120 
W  ho  all  things  bringeth  forth,  who  fosters  all, 
And  doth  of  all  receive  again  the  germ. 
And  I,  libations  pouring  to  the  dead, 
Thus  pray,  my  Sire  invoking  ; — "  Pity  mo, 
And  dear  Orestes  pity  ; — how  shall  wo 
Eule  in  our  palace-hoiue  V  for  sold,  alas ! 
By  her  who  bare  us,  we  as  outcasts  stray ; 
\Vhile,  for  -^gisthos,  'complice  in  thy  death, 
Her  lord  she  bartered  ; — slavish  is  my  lot, 
Orestes  exiled  from  his  wealth,  the  while 
Eevel  the  twain,  exulting  in  thy  toils.  130 

That  home  Orestes  may  at  length  return, 
By  glad  success  escorted,  I  implore. 
Give  ear,  and  grant  me.  Father,  to  become 
Sounder  of  mind  by  far  than  is  my  mother, 
With  hands  more  pure.     For  us  these  orisons; 


88  Choephori. 

But  for  thy  foes,  Father,  this  prayer  I  urge, 

That  Justice,  thine  avenger,  may  appear, 

So  that  thy  slayers  may  in  turn  be  slain. 

For  them  an  evil  utterance  I  pour. 

To  us  upsend  these  blessings  from  below,  140 

With  gods,  and  Earth,  and  Justice  conquest-crowned." 

Over  such  prayers,  libations,  lo !  I  pour. 

Yours  be  it  now,  lifting  the  solemn  wail. 

To  crown  with  dole  the  paean  of  the  dead. 

[While  the  Chorus  sings  the  following  Ode,  Electra  ascends 
the  steps  of  the  tomb,  and  pours  the  libation.'] 

Chorus.     Strophb. 
■fDrop  ye  for  the  dead 
Tears  with  pattering  sound ; 
Lustral  rain  is  shed 
O'er  the  hallowed  mound, 
From  the  pure  which  screeneth  bale, 
While  the  powers  of  Evil  qtiail. 
Hear,  0  master,  at  thy  tomb,  loO 

Whispered  sounds  from  sorrow's  mui'ky  gloom. 

Antistrophb. 
Now  in  measured  flow 
Tune  the  notes  of  woo  ! 
When  will  warrior  brave, 
f(  War-god  strong  to  save 
Houses  in  the  dust  laid  low,) 
Hurl  the  spear,  from  homed  bo\f 
Wing  the  arrow's  deadly  flight, 
Or  wield  the  hilled  brand  in  closer  fi^ht? 


Clioejpliori.  89 

Electba. 
These  earth-drained  offrings  hath  my  sire  received. 

\She  perceives  the  lock  of  hair  laid  by  Orestes.] 
Ha !  this  new  wonder  ponder  now  with  me. 

Chorus. 
Speak  on  ;  yet  palpitates  my  heart  with  fear  ? 

Electra. 
Laid  on  the  tomb  this  lock  new  shorn  I  see.  160 

Chorus. 
Shorn  from  what  man,  or  what  deep-girdled  maid  ? 

Electra. 
WTio  here  will  guess  may  easily  diviao. 

Chorus. 
Although  the  elder,  I  from  thee  would  learn. 

Electra. 
There  is  but  one  who  could  have  shorn  this  hair. 

CJiorus. 
True,  foes  are  they  who  with  the  lock  should  mourn. 

Electra. 
And  further,  it  is  like,  yea,  very  like — 

Chorus. 
Like  what  ?    Like  whose  ?     That  I  am  fain  to  learn. 


90  Choephori. 

Electba. 
In  sooth  I  find  it  greatly  like  mine  own. 

Chorus. 
Then  should  it  be  Orestes'  stealthy  gift  ? 

Electba. 
The  semblance  of  his  clust'ring  locks  it  bears.  170 

Chorus. 
But  hither  how  could  he  have  dared  to  come  ? 

Electba. 
He  this  shorn  lock  hath  sent  to  grace  his  sire. 

Chorus. 
Not  less  bewept  by  me  what  now  thou  sayest, 
If,  living,  he  may  never  tread  this  land. 

Electba. 

Eolls  o'er  my  heart  a  surge  of  bitterness, 

Smitten  am  I  as  with  a  piercing  shaft ; 

And  from  these  eyes,  while  gazing  on  this  lock. 

The  thirsty  drops  of  sorrow's  wintry  flood 

Flow  unrestrained.  For  how  may  I  couceivo 

That  other  of  the  townsmen  owns  this  hair  ?  ISO 

And  certes,  she  who  slew  him  sheared  it  not, 

My  mother,— all  unworthy  of  the  name, 

Who  towards  her  children  bears  a  godless  mind. 

Yet  how  with  full  assurance  may  I  call 

This  oflf'riug  his,  dearest  of  mortal  men, 


Choephori.  91 

Orestes, — still,  hope  fawns  upon  my  heart. 

Alas!— 

Oh  had  it,  herald-like,  a  friendly  voice, 

So  I  by  doubt  no  more  should  be  distraught. 

Then  had  it  clearly  counselled  me  this  lock 

To  loathe,  if  severed  from  a  foeman's  head,  190 

Or  else,  akin  to  me,  had  shared  my  grief, 

Gracing  this  tomb,  an  honour  to  my  sire. 

CIl07-l(S. 

But  let  us  call  upon  the  gods,  who  know 
In  what  dire  storms,  like  sailors,  we  are  whirled ; 
Since  if  by  them  our  safety  is  ordained, 
From  tiny  seed  may  spring  a  mighty  stock. 

[Electra,  descending  the  stej>s  of  the  tomh.'] 

Electea, 
And  lo,  these  traces — yet  another  sign ; 
Footprints  that  tally  with  my  own ; — and  see, 
Two  diverse  outlines  are  impressed,  his  o^Mi, 
And  also  of  some  fellow-wayfarer.  200 

The  impress  of  this  foot,  from  heel  to  toe, 
Thus  measured,  hath  the  symmetry  of  mine. 
Travails  my  heart — disordered  is  my  wit. 

[Oeestes  approaching  /ierj] 

Orestes. 

Acknowledging  to  Heaven  thy  prayers  fulfilled. 
Pray  that  the  further  issue  may  be  blest. 


92  Choephori. 

Electba. 
What  have  I  won  by  favour  of  the  gods? 

Orestes. 
Thou  Beest  those  for  whom  thou  long  hast  prayed. 

Electba. 
How  knowest  thou  for  whom  I  raised  the  prayer  ? 

Obestes. 
I  know  Orestes  in  thy  heart  enshrined. 

Electba. 
And  say  wherein  are  now  my  prayers  fulfilled  ?        210 

Obestes. 
Myself  am  he ; — seek  none  than  me  more  dear. 

Electba. 
Stranger,  around  me  wouldst  thou  weave  some  snare  ? 

Obestes. 
Myself  against  myself  would  then  contrive. 

Electba. 
Wouldest  thou  mock  at  my  calamity  ? 

Obestes. 
I  at  mine  own  should  mock,  mocked  I  at  thine. 

Eleotra. 
Art  thou  Orestes  f  Thou  to  whom  I  speak  ? 

Obkstks. 

Myself  thou  seost,  and  discornest  not ; 
Yet  gazing  on  this  lock  of  mourning  hair, 


CJtoe^Jiori.  93 

And  in  my  footprints  marking  well  my  track, 

Thy  fluttered  thoughts  did  paint  me  to  thine  eye.    220 

This  lock,  thy  brother's,  like  in  hue  to  thine, 

Mark  well,  applying  it  whence  it  was  shorn  ; 

Mark  too  this  garment,  by  thy  shuttle  wrought, 

Scenes  of  the  chase,  embroidered  by  thy  hand. 

Be  calm, — through  joy  lose  not  thy  self-control ; 

For  deadly  are,  I  know,  those  near  in  blood. 

EliECTEA. 

Oh !  cherished  darling  of  thy  father's  house, 

Hope  of  our  race,  thou  precious  seed,  long  wept, 

Trusting  in  thy  strong  arm  thou  shalt  regain 

Thy  natal  home.  0  name  beloved,  in  which  230 

Centre  four  dear  affections ;  for  perforce, 

Thee  I  must  hail  as  father,  and  on  thee 

Love  for  my  mother,  justly  hated,  falls  ; 

And  for  my  sister,  pitilessly  slain. 

My  faithful  brother  hast  thou  ever  been. 

My  pride,  my  awe ; — only  may  Strength  and  Eight, 

With  Zeus  supreme,  third  Saviour,  aid  thy  cause. 

Orestes. 

Zeus,  Zeus,  beholder  be  thou  of  these  woes ; — 

Mark  the  young  brood,  reft  of  their  eagle-sire, 

Who  perished  in  the  folds,  the  snaky  toils  240 

Of  direful  serpent ; — orphaned  they  endure 

The  pangs  of  hunger ;  not  yet  strong  of  wing 

To  carry  to  the  nest  the  eagle's  prey. 

So  mayest  thou  behold  us  twain,  myself, 


94  Choei^hori. 

And  her,  Electra,  oflfspring  sire-bereft, 

Thus  doomed  to  common  exile  from  our  home. 

Electba. 
And  if  of  sii"c,  who  greatly  honoured  thee 
With  many  a  sacrifice,  thou  slay  the  brood, 
Whence,  from  like  hand,  wilt  festive  gifts  obtain  ? 
As  none,  if  thou  the  eaglets  slay,  henceforth  250 

To  mortals  will  thy  trusty  omens  bear ; 
Nor,  if  all  withered,  shall  this  royal  stock. 
On  sacrificial  days,  support  thine  altars. 
O  foster  it,  and  raise,  from  low  estate, 
A  house  which  now  seems  fallen  utterly. 

Cliorus. 
Oh  children,  Saviours  of  your  father's  hearth. 
Forbear,  lest  some  one  should  o'erhear  your  words 
And  all,  with  gossip-loving  tongue,  rehearse 
To  those  in  power ;  whom  dead  I  fain  would  see 
Llazing  'mid  spirting  piuc-wood's  pitchy  brands.     260 

Orestes. 

Of  Loxias  the  mighty  oracle 
Will  not  bttray  me,  urging  mc  to  brave 
This  peril,  oft  exhorting  me,  and  'gainst 
My  inmost  reins  tempestuous  ills  denouncing, 
Failed  I  to  chase  my  father's  murderers. 
Stript  bare  and  goaded  on  by  forfeiture, 
He  bade  me  slay  them  as  my  sire  they  slew, 
Declaring  I  should  else  atonement  moke 
With  my  own  life  and  many  grievous  woes. 


Clioepliori.  95 

For  earth-born  med'cines,  that  to  other  mortals      270 

Are  poison-antidotes,  shall  in  us  twain, 

So  he  avers,  show  forth  these  maladies;  — 

A  leprous  canker,  cleaving  to  the  flesh, 

That  eats  with  rancorous  tooth  the  vital  strength. 

And  through  disease  blanches  the  youthful  locks  ; 

Xext  of  the  Furies  other  dread  assaults 

He  pict^ed,  springing  from  my  father's  blood. 

For  the  dark  shafts  of  those  beneath  the  earth, 

(The  slain  who  cry  for  vengeance  to  their  Idn,) 

With  frenzy  wild,  and  groundless  fear  at  night, 

Disturb  and  harass  his  distracted  soul,  280 

Who  clearly  in  the  darkness  Phoebos  sees 

To  knit  his  brow. — Thus  from  the  town  they  chase 

The  wretch  all  mangled  with  the  brazen  scourge. 

Moreover  to  such  caitiff  is  denied 

Or  festal  cup  to  shai'e,  or  solemn  pledge, 

While  from  the  altars,  him,  a  father's  wrath 

Unseen  excludes  ; — him  may  no  host  receive 

To  cleanse,  with  purifying  rite,  from  guilt ; — 

Till,  friendless  and  dishonoured,  dies  the  wretch. 

The  shrivelled  prey  of  all-destructive  doom  ; 

Such  oracles  I  needs  must  trust ;  and  e'en  290 

!llistrustful  were  I,  vengeance  must  be  wrought ; 

For  many  divers  promptings  mingle  here ; — 

The  god's  command,  heart-sorrow  for  my  Fire, 

And  indigence  hard-pressing,  these  forbid 

That  citizens,  of  mortals  most  renowned, 

Who,  with  heroic  spirit,  wasted  Troy, 

Be  slaves  of  women  twain.     For  womanish 

His  soul !  If  not,  the  issue  soon  he'll  know. 


96  ChoejpJiori. 

Chorus. 

Ye  mighty  Fates,  end  ye  the  great  emprize, 

As     Right,    with     Heaven's     high     sanction,     hath 

decreed ; —  300 

"  Let  tongue  of  Hatred  pay  back  tongue  of  Hate ;" 
Thus  with  her  mighty  utt'rance  Justice  cries, 
Due  penalty  exacting  for  each  deed. 
*'  Let  murder  on  the  murderous  stroke  await !" — 
"  Doer  of  wrong  must  sufifer." — This  sage  lore, 

Tradition  utters,  trebly  hoar. 

Orestes.     Strophe  L 
What  word  or  deed  of  mine, 

Father  unblest, 
Can  I,  from  this  confine, 
Waft  to  thy  couch  of  rest,  310 

Changing  thy  murky  gloom 

Into  bright  day ! 
Natlilcss  to  grace  thy  tomb. 
Welcome  to  Atreus'  line, 

Pour  wc  the  lay. — 

Chorus.    STRornE  IL 
My  son,  the  wasting  jaws  of  fire 
Quell  not  the  spirit  of  the  dead, 
Full  late  he  mauifosts  his  ire. — 
When  mourned  is  he  whoso  blood  is  shed. 
The  slayer  is  revealed.     In  time, 
For  slaughtered  parents,  righteous  cry  320 

Of  orphans,  raised  unceasingly, 
A  vailcth  to  search  out  the  hidden  crimo. 


Clioephori,  97 

Electba.     Antistrophe  I, 
In  turn,  our  tearful  strain, 

O  Father,  hear  ! 
Hark  how  thy  children  twain 
Wail  forth  their  anthems  di'ear  ! 
Exiles,  we  seek  thy  tomb, 

Sad,  suppliant  pair ; 
Say  what  of  good  is  here  ! 
What  hoi^e  relieves  otir  gloom  !  330 

Triumphs  despair. 

Cliorus.    Strophe. 
And  yet,  should  so  the  god  ordain, 
Hereafter,  gladder  notes  shall  sound ; — 
Instead  of  this  funereal  strain 
In  palace-halls  shall  ring  amain 
A  pasan  to  the  dear  one  newly  found. 

Orestes.     Strophe  III. 

Oh  haddest  thou,  'neath  Ilion's  walls, 

But  perished,  by  some  Lycian  spear 

Transfixed,  my  father,  to  thy  halls 
Glory  bequeathing,  while  thy  proud  career 

A  lustre  o'er  the  path  had  shed  S4.0 

Which  now  in  gloom  thy  children  tread ; 
Beyond  the  wave,  by  numbers  reared,  a  mound, 
No  burthen  to  thy  house,  thou  then  hadst  found. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  II. 
Dear  to  the  dear  ones  in  the  fight 
Who  perished  nobly,  thou  hadst  lain,— 


98  CJioejjJiori. 

"Witli  majesty  arrayed,  and  miglit, 
A  king  in  Pluto's  gloomy  reign, 
Serving  the  great  ones  who  command  350 

In  Hades. — For  in  upper  day 
King  was  he  over  kings,  whose  hand 
The  fatal  sceptre  wields  which  men  obey. 

Electba.     Antistrophe  III. 
Nay,  Father,  tiuder  Troia's  wall 
With  other  victims  of  the  spear, 
What  need  for  thee  in  death  to  fall, 
And  near  Scamandcr  grace  a  foreign  bier  ? 
Oh  rather  might  the  murderous  twain 
Themselves  have  met  their  death-blow,  slain     360 
[By  kindred  hands,  so  from  afar  the  tale 
Had  reached  thine  ear,  shielded  thyself  from  bale.   • 

Chorus.     [Mesode.] 
Eichev,  my  child,  thy  words  than  gold  ; — 
Bliss  Hyperborean  they  excel, 
fit  may  not  be !  Of  scourge  twofold 
The  clang  resounds. — Already  dwell 
'Neath  earth  your  chanipious  ;  here  who  reign 
Have  hands  unclean  ;  hateful  to  me  the  twain  ; 
Them  in  more  direful  hate  these  chihli-eu  hold. 

Electra.     SrnornE  IV. 
Like  dart  thy  word  of  dread. 
Piercing  mine  car,  hath  sped. 
Zeus,  Zeus,  upsondiug  from  below 
Late  thine  avenging  blow, — 


Choephori.  99 

Upon  man's  daring,  crafty  deed, 
tTo  parents  tliou  dost  deal  their  righteous  meed. 

Chorus.    Strophe  V. 
Oh  be  it  mine  to  celebrate, 
Triumphantly,  the  howl  of  pain. 
From  caitiff  smitten  to  the  death. 
From  woman  yielding  up  her  breath !  380 

jFor  why  the  rage  dissemble  now 
That  shakes  my  soul  ?  at  my  heart's  prow 
Relentless  gales  of  vengeful  hate, 
And  stormful  rancour,  blow  amain. 

Orestes.     Antistrophe  IV. 
Oh  that,  with  arm  of  might 
Great  Zeus,  who  guards  the  right, 
fWoe,  woe, — would  strike  the  guilty  pair  1 
Come  peace  to  this  domain  ! 
Just  meed  may  the  unjust  obtain  1  390 

Eaiih,  and  ye  powers  of  Hades,  hear  my  prayer. 

Chorus.     Axtistrophe. 

For  law  it  is,  when  on  the  plain 

Blood  hath  been  shed,  new  blood  must  fall. 

Carnage  doth  to  the  Fury  call ; 

Avenger  of  the  earlier  slain. 

She  comes,  new  Euin  leading  in  her  train. 

Electba.     Strophe  VI. 
Oh  Earth,  and  ye  who  rule  below, 


100  ,  ChoepJiori. 

Behold,  and  ye  dread  Furies  of  the  slain, 

Biihold  us,  outcast,  miserable  twain ; 

Poor  remnant  of  the  Atridaj  ; — whither  go  ?  400 

Oh  !  Rov'reign  Zeus,  what  refuge  from  our  woe  ? 

Chorus.     Antisteophe  V. 

ThroLbeth  my  woman's  heart  with  fear, 
The  while  thy  dirge  mine  ear  assails ; 
At  one  time  hopeful  courage  wanes, 
And  darkness  o'er  my  inmost  reins 
Jiroods,  as  the  doleful  sound  I  hear. 
Then  once  again  kind  hope  prevails  ; 
She  with  new  strength  uplifts  my  heart. 
And,  full  of  grace,  bids  conscious  grief  depart 

Oeestes.     Antisteophe  VI. 

Can  grief  by  flattery  be  siibdued,  410 

Or  southed  by  fawning  ?  No,  to  quell  the  pain 
By  parent's  hate  engendered,  charms  arc  vain ; 
Like  savage  wolf  that  ravens  for  its  food, 
Tameless  fi'om  birth  is  sorrow's  torturing  brood. 

Chorus.     SiitornE  VII. 

With  Arian  beat  I  strike  my  breast ; 
My  outstretched  hands  in  wild  unrest, 
With  Kissian  mourner's  rhythmic  woe, 
In  quick  succession, — to  and  fro. 
Shower  from  all  quarters  blow  on  blow  ; 
While  with  the  burly  rings  amain 
"My  battci'ed  head  and  my  distracted  brain.  420 


Choojjhori.  101 

Electra. 

Cruel,  all-daring,  Mother,  woe  I 
Alas,  as  foeman  buries  foe, 
A  king,  no  trusty  liegemen  near, 
Thy  wedded  lord  without  a  tear, 
Thou  hadst  the  heart  unwailed  to  send  below. 

Orestes.    Strophe  VIII. 

All  the  dishonour  thou  hast  shown  : 
Therefore  shall  she  our  Sire's  disgrace  atone, 

Far  as  the  gods  prevail, 

Far  as  my  hands  avail ; 
Then  may  I  perish  when  she  lieth  prone  I  430 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  VIII. 

Maimed  was  he ; — let  this  whet  thy  hate ; 
And  with  like  outrage  him  she  did  entomb, 

That  for  thy  life  his  fate 

Might  be  too  sore  a  weight. 
Such  was  thy  Father's  ignominious  doom ! 

Electra.      Antistrophe  VII. 

Our  Father's  lot  thy  words  proclaim ; 
While  I,  despised,  a  thing  of  nought, 
Shut  out  like  vicious  cur  with  shame, 
Forgot  to  smile  ;  alone,  I  sought 
Solace  in  weeping, — anguish-fraught.  4.10 

Hearing  the  tale  my  lips  impart, 
Grave  it,  my  brother,  on  thy  inmost  heart. 


102  Choephori, 

CJiorus. 

Piercing  thine  ear,  oli  may  my  word 
Find  access  to  the  depths  within  I 
True  is  the  tale.     Thy  sjiirit  gird 
To  hear  what  yet  thou  hast  not  heard ! 
Now,  with  undaunted  heart  the  strife  begin. 

Oeestes.     Strophe  IX. 
Thine  aid,  0  Father,  to  thy  dear  ones  lend  1 

Elkctra. 
"Weeping  sad  tears,  my  voice  with  his  I  blend. 

Chorus. 
Our  prayers,  in  concert,  to  the  shades  descend ; 

Give  car,  and  rising  to  the  day  450 

Against  our  foes  join  thou  the  fray. 

Orestes.    A>'tisteophe  IX. 
Aies  shall  cope  with  Ares, — Right  with  Eight. 

Electra. 
Ye  gods,  give  righteous  judgment  in  the  fight. 

Chorus. 

Hearing  your  prayers,  I  tremble :  hid  in  night, 

Tarries  from  Eld  the  doom  of  Fate  ; 

Invoked  it  comcth,  sure,  though  late. 

Orestes  and  Electra.    Strophe  X. 
Oh  curse  that  in  our  house  doth  roign  I 
T)i8cordant  Ate's  murd'rous  blow  I 


ChoepJiori.  103 

Alas  intolerable  pain  1  4C0 

Alas  for  cureless  woe  ! 

Chorus.     AxTiSTRornE  X. 
No  foreign  aid  can  bring  relief; 
No !  from  yourselves  the  cure  must  flow. 
'Tis  blood  must  staunch  your  household  grief. 
So  chant  we  to  the  gods  below. 

Cliorus-Leader. 

Hear,  blessed  powers ; 
Beneath  the  earth  our  orisons  attend  I 

And  with  aspect  benign, 
Succour  and  conciuest  to  these  children  send  ! 

Okestes. 
ily  Father,  in  no  kingly  fashion  slain,  470 

To  me,  thy  suppliant,  grant  to  sway  thy  house. 

Electea. 
I  too,  my  Father,  need  thy  gracious  aid. 
That  scathkss  I  may  work  .^gisthos'  doom. 

Obestes. 
So  mortal  men  to  thee  shall  dedicate 
The  solemn  banquet ; — else,  unhonoured  thou, 
When  grateful  reek  rich  off 'rings  to  the  dead. 

Electka. 
Nuptial  libations  of  my  heritage 
I  too  will  bring  from  the  paternal  home, 
And  chief  in  honour  will  this  tomb  adorn. 


104  ChoepJiori, 

Orestes. 
0  Earth,  my  sire  upsend  to  watch  the  fray.         480 

Electra. 
Persephone,  oh  grant  us  fair  success  I 

Orestes. 
Think,  Father,  of  the  bath  that  reaved  thy  life. 

Electra. 
Think  of  the  net  in  which  they  tangled  thee. 

Orestes. 
In  shackles,  not  of  brass,  wast  snared,  my  father. 

Electra. 
Basely  enveloped  in  the  treacherous  folds. 

Orestes. 
Art  thou  not  roused  by  these  reproaches.  Sire  ? 

Electra. 
Dost  to  thy  deal'  ones  not  uplift  thine  bead? 

Orestes. 
Eitlier  send  Justice,  ally  to  thy  friends, 
Or  give  them  in  like  grasp  thy  foes  to  hold, 
If  tliou,  o'crthrown,  wouldst  victor  bo  in  turn.      490 

Electra. 
And  licarkcn,  Father,  this  my  last  appeal ; 
Dchold  thy  ilctlgliugs  utstlcd  on  thy  tomb; 


Choeiiliori,  105 

Pity  thy  progeny  of  either  sex, 

Nor  Pelops'  remnant  seed  exterminate ; 

For  thus,  though  dying  here,  thou  art  not  dead. 

For  children  are  as  voices  that  prolong 

The  dead  man's  fame  ;  like  corks  they  float  the  net, 

The  flaxen  line  upbearing  from  the  deep. 

Hearken !  For  thine  own  sake  this  wail  we  raise ;  500 

Thyself  art  saved  in  honouring  this  plaint. 

Chorus. 
Unblamed  in  sooth  have  ye  your  speech  prolonged, 
Due  to  his  tomb  and  unlamented  fate. 
But  since  to  action  now  thy  soul  is  braced, 
To  work  forthwith  I     Put  Fortune  to  the  test. 

Orestes. 
So  be  it !  yet  not  out  of  course  I  ask 
What  mean  these  off  rings  ?     By  what  motive  swayed, 
Seeks  she  too  late  to  med'cine  cureless  bale  ? 
For  to  the  dead,  who  heeds  it  not,  she  sends 
A  sorry  tribute  ; — I  divine  it  not ! 
Her  crime  o'er  tops  the  gift ; — for  should  we  pour    510 
Earth's  treasures  to  atone  for  one  man's  blood, 
Vain  were  the  toil ; — so  runs  the  ancient  saw. 
But  if  thou  knowest  answer  to  my  prayer. 

Cliorus. 
That  can  I,  son,  for  I  was  there  ; — by  dreams. 
And  troublous  terrors  of  the  night  appalled, 
The  godless  woman  sent  these  sacred  rites. 

Orestes. 
Heard  yc  the  dream,  and  truly  can  rehearse? 


106  Choepliori. 

Cliorus. 
She,  as  hereeK  relates,  a  dragon  bare. 

Orestes. 
And  what  the  scope,  the  issue,  of  tbe  t.;le? 

Cliorns. 
In  swathing-clothes  she  moored  it  as  a  child.  520 

Orestes. 
What  nurture  might  the  new-born  horror  crave? 

Clwrust. 
She,  in  her  dream,  herself  held  forth  the  breast. 

Oeestes. 
How  by  the  pest  the  nipple  then  unscathed  ? 

Clwrus. 
With  nurture-milk  it  sucked  the  clotted  blood. 

Or.ESTES. 

Not  vain  the  dream  but  by  her  husbaud  sent ; — 

Chonis. 
In  terror  shrieked  she,  waking  up  from  sleep. 
And  many  torches,  in  the  darkness  quenched. 
Gleamed  through  the  palace  in  our  mistress'  aid ; 
Libations  to  the  tomb  forthwith  she  ^euds 
Devising  for  her  woe  a  sovereign  cure.  530 

Okestes. 
I  to  this  earth  and  to  my  father's  tomb 
Pray  that  this  dream  bo  consummate  in  me. 
And  as  I  read  it,  sooth,  it  tallies  well. 


Choe[Jiori.  107 

For  if  the  snake,  quitting  the  self-same  womb, 
Was  girded  straightway  with  my  swathing-clothcs, 
And,  gaping  round  the  breast  that  nourished  me, 
Sucked  with  my  nurture-milk  the  clotted  blood, 
While  she  in  terror,  at  the  portent  shrieked  ; — 
Clear  is  it,  as  she  reared  the  ghastly  pest, 
So  forceful  must  she  die.     I,  drag< >n-like,  510 

Myself  shall  slay  her,  as  this  dream  declares.— 
As  augur  of  these  portents  thee  I  choose. 

Chorus. 

So  let  it  be  !     But  now  direct  thy  friends, 
These  how  to  act,  or  those  aloof  to  bide. 

Orestes. 
Hear  then,  in  brief ;— Sister,  go  thou  within; 
But  these  I  counsel  to  conceal  my  plans. 
For  as  with  guile  an  honoured  man  they  slew. 
Themselves  with  guile  shall  be  entrapped,  and  die 
In  the  same  toils,  foretold  by  Loxias, 
Apollo  Lord,  no  faithless  seer  of  yore. —  550 

For  I,  equipped  for  travel,  with  this  man. 
With  Pylades,  will  reach  the  outer  gate ; 
I  as  a  stranger ; — he  as  ransom-friend ; — 
Familiar  both  with  the  Parnassian  speech, 
The  tongue  of  Phocis  we  will  imitate. 
And  if  no  friendly  warder,  on  the  plea 
That  by  dire  evils  is  the  house  possessed. 
Will  give  us  entrance,  we  without  will  bide, 
Until  some  passer  guess  our  plight,  and  say, 


lOS  ChoejyJiori. 

'^  If  that  ^gisthos  knoweth,  being  at  home,  5G0 

Why  'gainst  the  suppliant  doth  he  shut  the  door?" 

Then  if  the  threshold  of  the  gates  I  cros3, 

And  him  discover  on  my  father's  eeat, — 

Or  should  he  meet  me  face  to  face,  and  set 

His  eyes  on  me,  ere  he  can  speak  the  word, 

"  Whence  is  this  stranger  ?  " — I  will  lay  him  dead. 

Spitting  his  body  round  my  nimble  steel. 

The  Fury  thus,  of  gore  insatiate, 

Shall  blood  untempered  quaflf,  thii'd,  crowning  draught. 

[To  Electra. 
Go  thou, — keep  watchful  guard  within  the  house,    570 
That  all,  well  ordered,  fitly  may  combine. 

[To  the  Chorus. 
To  you  a  tongue  of  wisdom  I  commend, 
To  speak  in  season,  or  from  speech  refrain. — 

[To  Ptlades. 
And  for  the  rest  let  this  man  look  to  it, 
When  in  the  strife  of  swords  this  arm  hath  won. 

[Exeunt  Orestes  and  Pylades.    Electra  enters  the  palace^ 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Full  many  a  horror  drear 

And  ghastly,  Earth  doth  rear ; — 
With  direful  monsters  teems  encircling  Ocean ; 

Meteors,  with  threatening  sheen,  5S0 

Hang  heaven  and  earth  between  ;— 
The  tempest's  wrath  still  raves  with  wild  commotion ; 
These,  and  dire  winged  things,  and  things  that  crawl. 

Thou  mayst  dcscribo  thorn  all. 


Clioeplwri.  109 

Antistrophe  L 

But  man's  audacious  might 

What  words  can  paint  aright, 
Or  woman's  daring  spirit  who  may  tell  ? 

Her  passion's  frenzied  throes, 

Co-mates  of  mortal  woes  ? 
For  love  unlovely,  when  its  evil  spell  590 

'Mong  brutes  or  men  the  feebler  sex  befools, 

Conjugial  bands  o'errules. 

Strophe  II. 
Let  him  confirm  the  truth  I  sing, 
Whose  thoughts  soar  not  on  Folly's  wing, 
Knowing  full  well  what  Thestios'  daughter  planned*; — 

*  ITie  story  of  Meleager,  as  related  by  Phoenix  to  Achilles 
(IL  ix.  529),  is  fundamentally  opposed  to  that  of  the  later 
poets.  In  Homer  nothing  is  heard  of  the  fatal  brand. 
Meleager  had,  in  some  unfortunate  fray,  killed  his  mother's 
brother ;  upon  which  his  mother  solemnly  cursed  him,  and 
prayed  to  Pluto  and  Persephone  for  his  death.  At  this  he 
was  so  indignant  (or  so  paralysed  for  battle  by  believing  in 
the  curse),  that  he  refused  to  defend  his  native  city,  Calydon, 
at  a  critical  moment,  and  was  only  at  last  prevailed  on  by 
his  wife  to  take  arms  and  save  it.  Here  the  story  ends  in 
Homer  ;  though  he  says  that  the  Fury  who  stalks  in  darkness 
heard  the  mother's  curse. 

According  to  the  later  poets,  Meleager  had  slain  seven 
brothers  of  his  mother.  At  his  birth  she  had  been  informed 
by  the  Fates  that  he  would  live  until  a  certain  log  of  wood 
then  burning  on  the  hearth  was  consumed.  On  this  she 
snatched  it  off,  extinguished  it,  and  kept  it  car.efully  in  a 
chest.  But  now,  in  rage  for  the  loss  of  so  many  brothers, 
she  threw  it  into  the  fire,  and  forthwith  her  son  perished. 


110  CJioejyhori. 

Her  fiery  plot,  child-murdering ; 
Wretched,  who  burnt  her  son's  coeval  brand. 
Bom  with  him  when  he  cried 
First  from  the  mother's  womb ; — 
Like-aged  with  him  it  died,  COO 

Whon  dawned  his  day  of  doom. 

Antistrophe  II. 

Needs  must  we  loathe  another  dame, 

The  bloody  Scylla,  known  to  fame,* 
AYho,  lured  by  Minos'  gifts  of  fine-wrought  gold, 

Neck-gear  from  Crete, — devoid  of  shame, 
Nisos,  her  father,  to  his  foemen  sold. 

Deep-breathing,  free  from  care, 

In  slumber  while  he  lay, 

Ruthless  she  cut  th'  immortal  hair :  610 

And  Hermes  seized  his  prey. 

Stbophe  IIL 

But  since  these  direful  woes  have  burst, 

fUntimely,  into  song :  — 
Be  the  foul  wedlock  too  accursed, 

That  doth  this  palace  wrong. — 
And  cursed  be  the  plot  that  snared 

*  Nisos,  king  of  Mcgara,  ia  said  to  have  had  on  his  head 
a  certain  purple  lock,  upon  which,  according  to  the  words 
of  an  oracle,  his  life  dci>en(led.  Scylla,  liis  daughter,  knew 
it,  and  bribed  by  a  pohicn  necklace,  the  gift  of  Minos,  king 
of  Crete,  she  cut  the  fatal  luck,  and  thus  caused  her  father'* 
j.  aih. 


Clioepliori.  Ill 

(By  woman's  brain  devised,) 
The  armed  chief  who  foemen  scared, 

"Whom  faithful  lieges  prized. 
Dear  is  to  me  the  imstained  hearth,  and  dear 
In  woman's  hand  the  unaudacious  spear. 

Antistkophe  III. 

But  first  of  woes  in  every  clime,  620 

The  Lcmnian  is  deplored; — * 
And  still  the  most  detested  crime 

As  Lcmnian  is  abhorred. 
Branded  with  infamy  by  men, 

The  impious  disappear ; 
For  whom  the  righteous  gods  condemn, 

No  mortal  dares  revere. — 
The  lore  which  thus  we  chant  in  choral  strain, 
Say  ye,  doth  Reason  at  her  bar  arraign  ? 

Stropde  IV. 

Eight  through  the  lungs  doth  Justice'  hand 

Drive  home  the  bitter  steel ;  G30 

The  majesty  of  Zeus  they  dared  withstand, 
And  to  the  ground,  with  reckless  heel, 
Trampled  his  high  command. 

•  Herodotus,  after  relating  how  the  Lemnian  women  hnd 
been  put  to  death  by  their  husbands,  ad  Is,  "  From  this  crime, 
aud  that  which  the  women  perpetrated  before  this,  who,  with 
the  assistance  of  Thoas,  killed  their  own  husbands,  all  cruel 
actions  are  wont  to  be  called  Lemnian  thi'oughout  Greece."' — 
(vi.  133.) 


1 12  ClioepJiori. 

Antistrophe  IV. 
Firm  based  is  Justice ;  Fate  of  yoro 

Forged  weapon  for  the  blow; 
Deep-souled  Erinys  dotli  in  time  restore 

Th'  avenger  to  his  home,  and,  lo  ! 

Of  ancient  blood  he  pays  the  score. 

[Enter  Orestes  and  Pylades,  tvith  Attendants,  aU  in  tht 
garb  of  travellers.^ 

Orestes. 

[KnocJcing  at  the  gate. 

Boy,  hear  the  Imocking,  at  the  outer  gate ; —  G40 

Who  is  within  ?     Hola  !     Again  I  call. — 

For  the  third  time  I  crave  a  parley  here, 

If  that  .^^gisthos  heeds  the  stranger's  rights. 

Attendant. 
Well,  well,  I  hear.     Who  art  thou,  friend,  and  whence  ? 

Orestes. 
Me  to  the  rulers  of  this  house  announce, 
For  unto  them,  bearer  of  news,  I  corae. 
Haste,  for  Night's  dusky  car  rolls  on  apaco, 
And  time  it  is  for  weary  traveller 
Anchor  to  drop  in  hospitable  homo. 
Let.  one  in  trust,  a  woman  bearing  rulo,  6o0 

Come  forth  ;  yet  more  decorous  were  a  man. 
For  when  by  bashfulncss  the  tongue  is  swayed 
Darkened  is  speech  ; — Ixildly  man  speaks  to  man, 
And  tells  his  message  forth  without  icscrve. 

[Exit  Atlcndaxt. 


ChoepJiori.  113 

[Clytemnestra  comes  forth  from  the  palace  ivith  Attendants.'] 

Clytemnestra. 
Strangers,  if  aught  ye  need,  say  on,  for  here 
Is  whatsoe'er  best  em  3  th  halls  like  these ; — 
Warm  baths,  the  easeful  couch  that  charmeth  toil, 
The  welcome  presence  too  of  honest  eyes. 
But  if  your  mission  here  doth  counsel  crave, 
'Tis  men's  concern: — we  will  inform  them  straight.  660 

Orestes. 
From  Kiocis  I,  a  Daulian,  stranger  here. — 
What  time  my  home  I  left,  for  Argos  bound, 
Starting  on  foot,  with  baggage  self-equipped, 
A  man  to  me  unknown,  as  I  to  him. 
Met  me,  inquired  my  route  and  told  me  his 
Strophios,  the  Phocian,  as  in  talk  I  learned. 
"  Stranger,"  he  said,  "  since  Argos  is  thy  goal. 
Say  to  the  parents," — strictly  mark  my  words, — 
*'  Dead  is  Orestes ; — grave  it  on  thy  mind ; — 
Whether  the  counsel  of  his  friends  prevail  670 

To  bring  him  home,  or  give  him  sepulture, 
Alien  for  aye ; — bear  thou  their  mandates  back ; 
For  now  the  brazen  urn  doth  shroud  from  sight 
The  ashes  of  the  hero  duly  wept." 
Such  words  I  heard,  and  tell  thee  ; — if  to  those 
Who  here  bear  rule  I  speak,  kin  to  the  dead, 
I  know  not;— but  'tis  meet  his  sire  should  know. 

Electra. 
Woe's  mc  I     Then  are  we  utterly  undone  I 


Ill  Choephori. 

0  liouschold  Fury,  hard  to  grapple  with, 
How  mauy,  tbuugh  aloof,  thou  visitest, 
Piercing  with  well-aimed  arrows  from  afar, 
AVhile  wretched  me  thou  hast  stript  bare  of  friends. 
And  now,  Orestes,  who,  by  lucky  chance, 
His  foot  from  ruin's  slough  had  well-nigh  freed, 
Cancels  by  death  our  cherished  hope,  sole  cure 
Of  the  ill  revelry  that  reigneth  here. 

Orestes. 
"With  hosts  so  richly  dowered  I  fain  had  sought 
Acquaintance  and  kind  cheer,  as  messenger 
Bearing  more  welcome  tidings ;  for  what  bond 
More  friendly  than  of  stranger  to  his  hosts?  G90 

Yet  not  to  consummate  for  friends  a  charge 
So  weighty,  deemed  I  an  impiety, 
By  promise  bound,  and  pledges  of  good-will. 

Clytemnestra. 
Worthy  regard  not  less  shalt  thou  receive ; 
Nor  have  the  less  fair  welcome  to  this  house. 
Another  all  the  same  had  brought  thy  news. 
But  time  it  is  that  strangers  who  have  made 
A  day-long  journey  should  their  strength  recruit. 

•  [To  an  attendant. 

To  the  men's  chambers  usher  him  as  guest ; 

liis  escort  too,  and  fellow-traveller.  70U 

There  be  they  tended  as  botits  this  house. 

Do  yo  my  will  as  who  must  give  aocnunt. 

Ourselves  will  to  the  riders  of  this  house 


Choephori.  115 

Impart  the  tidings,  and  not  poor  in  friends, 
We  will  take  counsel  touching  this  mischance. 

[Exeunt  all  except  the  Chorus. 

Chorus. 
Dear  handmaidens !    Sisters  dear  I 
When,  oh  when,  full  voiced  and  clear, 
Shall  we,  for  Orestes'  sake, 
Loud  the  joyous  Pffian  wake  ? 

Hallowed  Earth  I  Oh  shrine  revered ! 

Funeral  barrow  high  upreared,  710 

O'er  the  naval  hero-king, 

Now  give  ear,  deliv'rance  bring ! 

Strikes  the  hour; — persuasive  Guile 
Enters  now  the  lists.     The  while 
Hermes  leads  to  watch  the  fight 
Of  murd'rous  swords  and  subtle  wile, 
■fErinys,  brood  of  Night. 

[Enter  Kilissa,  the  Nurse,  u'eejnnfj."] 

Chorus-Leader. 
This  stranger,  as  it  seems,  is  causing  bale, 
For  I  behold  Orestes'  nurse  in  tears ; 
Where  wcndest  thou,  Kilissa,  past  the  gates  ? 
Sorrow,  I  trow,  unbidden  goes  with  thee.  720 

Nurse. 
My  mistress  bade  me  summon  with  all  speed 
^gisthos  to  the  strangers,  that  he  may 
More  clearly  learn,  as  man  from  man,  this  tale 


116  CJioejjJiori. 

Newly  announced.     Before  the  menial  train, 

She,  at  the  tidings  by  these  strangers  brought, 

'Neath  mournful  eyes  a  lurking  smile  hath  veiled, 

Exulting  in  events  joyous  for  her, 

But  to  this  house  with  direst  issue  fraught ; — 

But  he  no  doubt  will  in  his  soul  rejoice, 

Hearing  the  tale.     Alas  !  unhappy  me  I  730 

How  did  the  ancient  troubles,  hard  to  bear, 

Whose  blended  horror  darkened  Atreus'  house, 

With  anguish  pierce  my  heart !     But  ne'er  before, 

Have  I  a  sorrow  like  to  this  endured. 

All  other  ills  I  patiently  have  borne, 

But  dear  Orestes,  darling  of  my  soul, 

Whom  from  his  mother's  womb  I  fondly  reared, 

Whose  piercing  summons  waked  me  up  at  night, 

And  for  whose  sake  full  many  a  fruitless  toil 

I  bore  ungrudging  ; — for  like  lamb  unweaned,  740 

The  witless  infant  we  perforce  must  rear 

According  to  its  mood  ; — how  otherwise  1 

For  while  in  swathing-clothes  no  voice  it  hath, 

When  pressed  by  hunger,  thirst,  or  nature's  call, 

But  wilful  is  each  tender  organ's  play. 

Such  wants  presaging,  ay,  and  oft  deceived, 

As  cleanser  of  his  swaddling  bands,  I  ween, 

Fuller  and  nurse  had  common  duty  there. 

I  thus  installed  in  double  handicraft, 

The  young  Orestes  for  his  father  reared. 

Oh  wretched  mo  to  hear  that  he  is  dead ;  750 

But  now  I  go,  the  spoiler  of  this  house 

To  seek ;— right  gladly  will  he  learn  the  tale. 


Choephori.  117 

CJwrus. 
And  how  equipped  doth  she  then  bid  him  come  ? 

Nurse. 
How  ?    Speak  again  that  I  may  clearly  know. 

Chorus. 
Whether  with  body-guards,  or  all  alone  ? 

Nurse. 
Spear-bearing  followers  she  bids  him  bring. 

Chorus. 
Bear  not  this  message  to  our  hateful  lord. 
But  with  all  speed  do  thou  with  cheerful  mien 
Bid  him  approach,  that  fearless  he  may  hear  ; 
For  crooked  M'ord  the  messenger  makes  straight.     760 

Nurse. 
How !  art  thou  sound  of  mind  such  tidings  hearing  ? 

Chorus. 
But  haply  Zeus  a  change-wind  may  vouchsafe. 

Nurse. 
And  how  ?  Orestes  gone,  hope  of  the  house, 

Cliorus. 
Not  yet  1  Dull  prophet  might  interpret  here. 

Nurse. 
What  I  knowest  aught  beyond  what  hath  been  told  ? 


118  Choejihori, 

Chorus. 
Go,  bear  thy  message.     Do  as  we  enjoin, 
What  the  gods  purpose,  that  will  they  effect. 

Nurse, 
Well,  go  I  will,  obeying  thy  behest. 
Fair  be  the  issue  by  the  gift  of  Heaven  1 


lExit. 


Chorus.    Stkophe  I. 
Sire  of  Olympian  gods,  thy  suppliant  calls  I  770 

Oh  waft  propitious  Fortune  to  these  halls  1 
Dispensing  justice  with  omniscient  might, 

fBless  thou  my  longing  sight ! 
This  boon  I  crave  I    Guard  him,  great  Zeus,  and  save  I 

Strophe  II. 
Him,  in  these  halls  ancestral,  place 
Before  his  foeman  ; — bring  them  face  to  face  I 
Him  if  thou  lift  to  greatness,  Power  divine, 
Kequital  double,  three-ft)ld,  shall  bo  thine. 

ANTisTuornE  I. 
Of  him  whom  thou  didst  love  behold  the  son  780 

Orphaned,  a  colt  harnessed  in  sorrow's  trace ; 
fSet  thou  a  limit  to  his  toilsome  race ! 
Grant  him  his  course  to  run. 
With  steps  firm  planted,  and  well-ordered  pace ! 

Strophe  m. 
Yon  too,  frequenting  the  recess 
tOf  wealth-rejoicing  homes,  I  now  address ; 


CJioejyJiori.  119 

Hear,  je  consentient  Gods !     Through  bloody  deed 
Eetributive,  wash  out  the  gore,  7^10 

Dread  heirloom  from  those  slain  of  yore. 

Let  murder  in  this  palace  cease  to  breed, 
When  paid  the  bloody  score ! 

Mesobe. 

Thou  tenant  of  the  cave, — great  Spirit, 

Give  to  the  hero  to  inherit 

His  halls  ancestral ; — may  his  eyes, 

Fearless  and  bright. 
Peer  freely  forth  from  sorrow's  veiled  night. 

Antisteophe  III. 

■fMay  Tlaia's  son,  well-versed  in  guile, 
Upon  the  righteous  cause  propitious  smile  1  800 

Dark  words  and  subtle  speaking,  he  by  night 

Men's  eyes  o'ercloudeth,  nor  by  day 

More  manifest  his  secret  way. 
Yet  many  a  deed,  in  darkness  veiled  awhile, 
By  him  is  brought  to  light. 

Stuophe  IV. 

The  work  achieved,  we'll  chant  the  glorious  ode ; 

Our  woman's  strain. 
Propitious,  with  the  mourners'  stringed  refrain, 
Shall  ransom  this  abode. 
fThen  shall  we  own  the  sway  of  righteous  laws, 
While  Ate  from  our  friends  her  curse  withdraws.  SW 


120  Choephori. 

Antisteophe  II. 
"When  the  fierce  business  must  be  done, 
When  in  thine  ear  she  whimpers  forth,  "  My  Son  ;** 
Steeling  thy  heart,  invoke  tliy  slaughtered  sire, 
f  And  consummate  unblamed  the  vengeance  dire. 

Antistrophe  IV. 
With  heart  of  Perseus  steadfast  in  thy  breast, 

For  the  dear  love 
Of  friends  below  the  earth,  and  friends  above, 

jComplete  the  sacrifice ; — 
Within  the  house  jdant  thou  grim  Death, — dire  gnest, — 
And  let  the  murderer  forfeit  murder's  price.    820 

[Enter  iEcusTiios.] 

yEcisTHOs. 
Not  uninvoked  I  come,  but  liither  called; — 
For  strangers,  as  I  learn,  are  here  arrived, 
Bearers  of  news,  unwelcome  to  our  ears, — 
Oiestes'  death, — which,  charged  upon  this  house, 
From  former  wound  still  ulcerate  and  sore, 
To  mc  a  burden  were,  dripping  with  fear. 
But  say, — these  tidings  must  I  lu)ld  for  true, 
Or  rumours  deem  them,  coined  by  women's  fears,    830 
That  aimless  cleave  the  air,  and  aimless  die  ? 
Knowest  thou  aught  that  may  my  mind  assiu'O  ? 

Chorus. 
We  have  but  heard  :  going  thyself  within, 
Qucpticm  khoBo  Btrangcrs  ; — second-hand  reports 
Avail  not  as  to  hour  the  talo  oneself. 


ChoejjJiorL  121 

^GISTHOS. 

E'coin  would  I  see  the  messenger  and  learn 

Whether  himself  was  present  at  the  death, 

Or  if  from  blind  report  this  tale  he  heard ; 

A  mind  clear-sighted  they  will  not  deceive. 

[Exit  into  the  pulace. 
Chorus. 

Zeus,  great  Zeus,  how  frame  my  cry  810 

Thine  aid  to  win  ? 
How,  invoking  thee  on  high, 

My  strain  begin  ? 

For  anon  with  murderous  blow, 

Either  shall  the  gory  blade 
Atreus'  royal  house  o'erthrow, — ■ 

Prone  in  dust  for  ever  laid, — 
Or  in  Freedom's  sacred  name, 

Kindling  fire  and  holy  light, 
Shall  the  rightful  heir  reclaim 

fWealth  and  crown, — his  twofold  right.       850 

Sole  against  the  tyrant  pair. 

To  such  deadly  grapple  hies 
Agamemnon's  godlike  heir ; — 

None  to  follow  if  he  dies  !  * 
Crown,  oh  crown,  the  great  emprizo  I 

iEGISTHOS. 

[^Behind  the  scene."] 
Alas,  woe's  me !  Alas ! 

*  "E^eSpoj,  an  antagonist  in  reserve.     The  Chonis  uses 
the  technical  lauiiuase  of  wrestlers  in  the  cranies. 


122  CJwej^Jiori. 

ClioriiSt 
Hark  !  Hark  !  again  1 
How  is't  ?  What's  wrought  within  ? 
Stand  we  aloof  while  Slaughter  does  her  work, 
That  of  these  ills  we  guiltless  may  appear : 
For  now  achieved  the  issue  is  of  strife. 

[!Z7ie  Chorus  retire  to  the  further  side  oftlie  tomb^ 

Servant. 

[Rushing  out  of  the  palace.'] 

Oh  woe  1  oh  grievous  woe !  our  master's  slain ;        8G0 
Yet  once  again,  and  for  the  third  time,  woe. 
^gisthos  is  no  more. — With  utmost  speed 

[jffe  knocks  at  the  door  of  the  womerCs  palace."] 

Fling  open  now,  and  of  the  women's  doors, 
The  bars  unloose ;  full  strength  is  needed  here, 
Not  for  the  slain ;  what  bootcth  aid  to  him  ? 
Alas !  alas  !  what,  shout  I  to  the  deaf, 
Or  clamour  vainly  in  dull  sleepers'  cars  ? 
What  doeth  Clytcmuestra ?  Where  is  she? 
Her  neck  it  seems  toucheth  the  razor's  edge ; 
Herself,  ere  long  shall  perish,  justly  slain.  870 

Clytemnestua. 
{^Enters  hurriedly,  unattinded."] 
What  is't  ?     What  tumult  raise  ye  in  the  housa  ? 

Servant. 
'J'ho  dead,  I  tell  you,  now  the  living  slays. 


I 


ChoejyJiori.  123 

Clytejinestha. 
Alas !  of  these  dark  words  the  sense  I  catcli ; 
Through  guile  we  perish,  as  through  guile  we  slew. 
Quick,  bring  a  deadly  axe  ; — - 

{^Exit  Scrvarit, 

"We'll  see  anon 
Whether  we  vanquished  are,  or  vanquisher  ; 
For  to  this  crisis  hath  the  eAdl  come. 

[Oeestes  and  Pstlades  come  forth  from  the  palace,  the  door 
of  which  remains  open.] 

Oeestes, 
Thee  too  I  seek, — he  there  hath  had  his  duo. 

Clttemnestea. 
Alas !  beloved  ^gisthos,  art  thou  dead  ? 

Oeestes. 
Dost  love  this  man  ?  With  him,  in  the  same  tomb,  880 
Then  shalt  thou  lie ; — still  faithful  found  in  death. 

Clytejinestra. 
Hold!  hold!  my  son  ; — Eevere,  my  child,  this  breast 
From  which,  a  sleeping  infant,  thou  full  oft, 
With  toothless  gums,  thy  nurture-milk  hast  sucked. 

Orestes. 
Speak,  Pylades ; — Through  filial  reverence, 
Shall  I  forbear  to  shed  a  mother's  blood  ? 

Pylades. 
The  Pythian  oracles,  still  unfulfilled. 


121  Choepliori. 

Wliere  are  they,  and  thine  own  firm-plighted  vows  ? 
Choose  all  for  foemen  rather  than  the  gods. 

Orestes. 
Thou  hast  prevailed ;  wisely  thou  promptest  me ; 

\_To  Clytemnestba. 
So  follow ; — by  his  side  I  thee  would  slay.  890 

In  life  thou  didst  exalt  him  o'er  my  sire ; 
Since  him  thou  lovest,  sleep  with  him  in  death ; 
Whom  thou  wast  bound  to  love  thou  didst  abhor. 

Clytemxestra. 
I  nourished  thoo ; — with  thee  I  would  grow  old. 

Orestes. 
Thou,  slayer  of  my  father,  dwell  with  me  I 

Olytemnestra. 
Fate  was,  my  child,  accomplice  in  these  woes. 

Orestes. 
And  Fate  it  is  who  doth  this  death  ordain. 

Olytemnestra. 
Dost  not  a  parent's  curse  revere,  my  child  ? 

Orestes. 
My  mother,  thou  didst  cast  me  forth  for  woo. 

Olytemnestra. 
Not  outcast  wast  thou  in  a  friendly  house.  000 

Orestes. 
Sold  doubly  was  I,  scion  of  free  sire. 


Choej)lwn.  125 

CLTTEilNESTRA. 

Where  tlien  the  price  for  which  I  bartered  thee  ? 

Oeestes, 
It  shameth  me,  in  sooth,  to  charge  thee  homo. 

Clttemnestra. 
But  tell  with  mine  the  errors  of  thy  siie. 

Oeestes. 
Sitting  at  home  blame  not  abroad  who  toils. 

Clytemnestea. 
For  wives  'tis  grievous  to  live  spouseless,  child. 

Oeestes. 
The  husband's  toil  supports  the  wife  at  home. 

Clttemkestra. 
Thy  mother,  0  my  child,  art  nerved  to  slay  ? 

Oeestes. 
Thyself  art  guilty  of  thy  death,  not  I. 

Clytemnestea. 
Take  heed,  beware  thy  mother's  vengcfal  hounds.    910 

Oeestes. 
Those  of  my  sire  how  'scape  if  thee  I  spare? 

Clytemnestea. 
Living,  vain  meanings  to  a  tomb  I  pour. 

Oeestes. 
Ay,  foi'  my  fathers  fate  doth  work  thy  doom. 


126  CJioephori. 

Clytemnestra. 
Ah  me  !  this  snake  it  is  I  bare  and  reared- 

Orestes. 
True  prophet  was  thy  dream-engendered  fear. 
Him  thou  didst  slay  whom  thou  shouldst  not  have  slain. 
So  doom  unseemly  suffer  in  thy  turn. 

[Orestes  drags  his  mother  into  the  palace,  followed  hy 
Pylades.] 

Chorus. 
E'en  of  this  pair  I  weep  the  twofold  woo. 
But  since  Orestes  hath  the  bloody  height 
Achieved  of  dire  revenge,  one  hope  remains. 
Not  quenched  the  eye  of  Atrcus'  royal  house.  920 

SxRornE  I. 

Justice,  in  time,  with  heavy  doom. 

Smote  all  of  Priam's  name ; 
So  Agamemnon,  to  thy  home, 
Twin  Lions,  twofold  Ares,  camo : 

Suppliant  at  Pythos'  shrine, 

By  oracles  divine, 
Sped  on  his  way,  the  exile  wins  the  game. 

Strophe  II. 
Hail  jubilant  the  house  redeemed  from  bale  I 
The  godless  pair  no  more 

Shall  waste  its  gathered  store.  930 

Hail,  joyous  riddance,  hail  I 


Clioephori.  127 

Antistrophe  L 
Subtle  of  soul,  Eequital  came, 

Dark- veiled  who  joins  the  fight ; — 
Daughter  of  Zeus,  whom  mortals  name 
Justice,  their  aim  thus  pointing  right ; 

She  with  firm  hand,  the  knife 

Unsheaths  for  mortal  strife, 
"While  'gainst  her  foes  she  breathes  destruction's  blight. 

Stkophe  III. 
fFor  Loxias,  the  king,  940 

Who  in  Parnassian  cavern  holds  his  seat, 

Doth  vengeance  hither  bring, 
Guilelessly  guileful ;  lame,  yet  sure  her  feet. 
Weighty  the  utterance  ;  the  power  divine, 
No  consort  is  of  guilt ;  needs  must  we  pay 
Homage  to  His  heaven-ruling  sway. 
Clearly  the  light  doth  shine ! 

Antisteophe  II. 
tReft  was  I  of  the  sun  whose  sudden  ray 
Did  with  new  joy  illume 

These  halls,  long  sunk  in  gloom ;  950 

It  gleamed, — then  died  away. 

Antistbophe  III. 
fAnon,  the  cheering  light, 
Xew  kindled,  in  this  house  .shall  shine  once  more, 

What  time,  with  lustral  rite. 
From  the  polluted  hearth  is  purged  the  gore, 


128  CJioepJiori, 

And  Ate  put  to  flight.     With  form  benign. 
Fortune,  long  time  an  alien,  comes  to  claim 

Her  home,  redeemed  from  shame. 

Clearly  the  light  doth  shine  I 

\_TJie  scene  opens,  and  Orestes  is  discovered  standing  over 
the  bodies.  Pylades  with  him  and  servants  dis},lay  tic 
role  of  Agamemxox.] 

Orestes. 
Behold  the  tyrants  of  this  land,  the  twain  960 

My  sire  who  murdered,  and  this  palace  reaved. 
Majestic  once  sat  they  upon  their  thrones, 
United  now,  as  by  their  fate  appears, 
And  faithful  to  their  pledges,  e'en  in  death. 
Death  to  my  wretched  sire  conjoined  they  swore. 
Conjoined  to  die ; — well  havo  iLey  kept  thcix  oath. 
But  fmther,  ye  who  hearken  to  these  woes, 
Mark  this  device,  my  wretched  father's  snare, 
His  hands  which  fettered  and  his  feet  which  yoked. 
Unfold  it, — form  a  ring, — and,  standing  near,  970 

Display  the  Hero's  dcath-robc,  that  the  Sire, 
Not  mine,  but  He  who  all  these  woes  surveys, 
Helios,  my  mother's  impious  deeds  may  mark ; 
So  in  my  trial,  at  some  future  time, 
He  by  my  side  may  stand,  and  «-itness  bear 
That  justly  I  did  prosecute  to  death 
My  mother ; — for  of  base  ^Egisthos'  doom 
Eeckcth  mo  not ; — he,  as  adulterer, 
The  lawful  forfeit  of  his  crime  hath  paid. 
But  for  the  woman  who  this  snare  devised 
Against  the  husband,  unto  whom  she  bore 


ChoepJiori.  129 

Tlie  tender  weight  of  children  'neath  her  zone, 
Burden  once  dear,  but  now  her  deadly  foe  ;  980 

What  deem  ye  of  her  ?     Might  she  not  have  been 
A  viper,  or  torpedo,  which  by  touch 
Corrupteth  where  it  bites  not  ?  true  if  judged 
For  reckless  daring  and  unrighteous  will. 
How  name  this  thing,  using  well-omened  words  ? 
Toil  for  wild  beast,  the  laver's  ghastly  pall, 
Shrouding  the  dead  man's  feet  ?     A  net,  a  snare, 
Might'st  call  it,  or  a  feet-entangling  robe. 
Such  were  some  robber's  gear,  whose  trade  it  is 
Strangers  to  dupe  and  plunder  of  their  wealth  ; 
While  slaying  many  a  one  with  such  device,  990 

With  many  a  crime  his  seething  brain  might  teem. 
May  no  such  woman  house  with  me !  Ye  gods, 
Devote  me  rather  to  a  childless  death ! 

Cliorus.    Strophe. 
Alas !  alas,  for  doings  fraught  with  doom ! 
A  loathsome  death  has  brought  thee  to  the  tomb. 

Woe!  Woe! 
To  the  survivor  grief  is  but  in  bloom. 

Okestes. 
Did  she  the  deed  or  not  ?  .  To  me  this  robe 

Attests  that  she  ^gisthos'  sword  imbrued ; 

Behold  the  death-stain  tallies  with  the  time  1000 

Marring  the  broidered  garment's  varied  dyes. 

One  while  I  praise  my  slaughtered  sire,  anon, 

As  present  at  the  scene  1  wail  his  death. 


130  Clwephori. 

This  robe  invoking  that  achieved  his  doom, 
Deeds  T  lament,  and  woes,  and  all  my  race, 
Pollution  reaping  from  this  victory. 

Chorus.    Aktistbophe. 
Alas  !  alas  !  no  son  of  mortal  race, 
Unscathed  life's  pathway  to  the  end  may  trace. 

Woe!  Woe! 
Fadeth  one  grief,  another  comes  apace. 

OUESTES. 

That  ye  betimes  may  learn,  (since  I  myseK  1010 

Know  not  the  issue,)  for  as  charioteer 

With  steeds  ungoverncd,  from  the  course  I  swerve ; 

Thoughts  past  control  are  whirling  me  along, 

Their  captive  slave ;  while  terror  in  my  heart 

Her  p.Tan  and  her  frenzied  dance  prepares. 

Hear  me,  my  friends,  while  Ecasou  holds  her  seat ; 

With  Justice'  sanction  I  my  mother  smote, 

]My  father's  slayer,  a  god-hated  pest. 

As  prime  incitement  to  the  daring  act 

Of  Loxias  I  plead  this  oracle ; 

That,  if  I  slew,  blameless  I  should  bo  held  ;  1020 

But  if  I  failed  ;  — my  doom  I  will  not  speak; 

For  bowshot  cannot  reach  such  mighty  woe. 

And  now  behold, — boariug  this  olive-branch, 

Enwrcathed  \\"ith  wool,  as  suppliant  I  seek 

Earth's  navel  stone,  Apollo's  seat,  where  burns 

The  flame  of  fire,  dcatldoss  tliat  hath  been  named, 

Fleeing  from  kindred  blood.     For  other  hearth 


Choejohori,  131 

Did  Loxias  forbid  me  to  approach. 

And  let  all  Argive  men,  in  after  time, 

Bear  witness  for  me  how  these  woes  were  wrought ; 

Living,  an  exile  from  this  land  I  roam ; 

Leaving  behind,  when  dead,  these  fateful  words. 

Chorus. 
Noble  thy  deed,  then  yoke  not  now  thy  mouth 
To  bodeful  speech,  nor  vent  ill-omened  words, 
Since  thou,  wdth  lucky  stroke  lopping  the  head 
From  serpent  twain,  all  Argos'  state  hast  freed. 

[TAe  Furies  art  seen  rising  in  the  background^ 

Okestes. 

Ah !  ah  !  ye  handmaids,  Gorgon-like  they  come, 
Vested  in  sable  stoles,  their  locks  entwined 
"With  clustering  snakes.     No  longer  may  I  bide. 

Cliorus. 

Dearest  of  mortals  to  thy  father,  say,  1040 

What  fancies  scare  thee  ?     Hold,  yield  not  to  fear. 

Orestes. 
To  me  no  woe-engendered  fancies  these ; 
Too  well  I  know  my  mother's  vengeful  hounds. 

Clwnis. 

Still  reeking  is  the  blood  upon  thy  hand. 
Hence  is  it  that  distraction  smites  thy  brain. 


132  ChoephoH. 

Obestes. 
Apollo  lord  1  swarming  they  press  around, 
And  from  tteir  eyes  there  drippeth  loathsome  gore. 

Chorus. 
One  cleanser  hast  thou,  cling  to  Loxias, 
He  will  uphold  thee,  and  will  free  from  bale. 

Obestes. 

These  shapes  ye  see  not,  but  I  see  them.    Lo,       1050 

They  drive  me  forth, — no  longer  can  I  bide. 

[/7e  rushes  out. 
Chorus. 

But  blessings  on  thee,  and,  in  direst  strait, 
May  He  who  views  thee  graciously  protect ! 

[  While  singing  thefolloiving  Ode  the  Clu/rus  enters  the  palace.'] 

Now  in  Mycenae's  royal  halls. 

The  storm,  o'er  Atreus'  race  that  lowers. 
Running  its  course,  for  the  third  time  hath  burst. 

Child-devouring  horror  first, 

Brooded  o'er  these  walls  ; 

Next  a  monarch's  deadly  bale, 

"When  the  chief  whom  we  bewail, 
War-lcader'to  Achaea's  martial  powers,  1060 

In  the  bath  lay  dead. 

Now,  behold  a  third  is  come, — 

Saviour,  shall  I  say,  or  doom '? 
From  what  quarter  sped  ? 

Full-accomplished,  when  shall  Fate, 

Lulled  to  rest,  her  stormy  ire  abate  ? 


Gwephoru  133 


CHOEPHOEL 
A  FEW  NOTES  ON  THE  Text,  by  F.  W.  Newman. 


The  text  of  this  play,  esj^ecially  in  the  Choral  Odes,  is  mani- 
festly very  corrupt,  and  the  corruption  may  have  been  a 
thousand  years  earlier  than  any  ilS.  of  it  which  came  down 
to  the  age  of  printing.  The  Greek  Commentator,  whom  we 
call  the  Scholiast,  is  often  puerile,  and  absiu-dly  satisfied 
with  a  very  erroneous  text.  Thereby  we  are  driven  to  con- 
jectural improvement,  if  we  are  to  attain  a  text  worthy  of 
the  poet.  Some  of  the  following  suggestions,  I  believe,  seemed 
to  my  friend  ^liss  Anna  Swanwick  to  deserve  her  acceptance, 
v.  56.  Read  ytivei  ;fpoi'i'foj/ray  n;^?;,  omitting  jSpvet. 

64.  Here  retain  ^pveiv,  probably  with  irayKapripas  for 
iravapKiras. 

65.  For  (K  p.ias  obov,  I  wish  e<  TrayKvfiias  oftov. 

67.  lov(Tav  uTTju  all  reject,  p-drr^v  meets  general  approval ; 
but  we  seem  to  need  Kkva-tifv  av  pdrrfv  before  metre  and 
sense  are  satisfied. 

71,  72,  we  require  [Sti]  dUaia,  pf)  dUaia,  [/xiy]  irpiirovT 
ap)(al<n  pov,  for  apxais  ^lov  ',  and  in  73,  ^iaia  (f>vpiopeva)v  for 
^iat,  (^epopAvav. 

150.  (TeQacra  must  be  wrong ;  o-fjSdo-ta  (reverential),  though 
not  in  our  dictionaries,  may  be  right.  This  piece  is  Anti- 
strophic,  but  the  Antistrophe  abounds  in  small  errors.  I 
propose :  152,  for  avi)p  to  read  av  tJkoi  ;  in  154,  tIs  (k  Kfpoiv 
nakiVTovow  evepyoi  for  vulg.  rd  r  iKytpo'iv  naXivTova  iv  epyco. 


134  Choeplwri. 

270.  Hermann  has  arbitrarily  changed  fifiKiyixara  (as- 
suagements) into  its  opposite,  firjvi^aTa,  but  ni(f)ai/(TKa)v  is  the 
faulty  word.  The  smallest  available  change  is  to  place  a 
comma  after  ^poro'is  (other  mortals),  and  write  nitpaiia-Kdv 
eine  rucrde  vav.  .  .  .  Here  nKpavaKeiv  means  Trpocjjaivfiv, 
with  a  future  idea  as  presently  in  inavrt'Weiv. 

361.  The  sense  seems  manifestly  to  require  irdpos  di, 
Toiis  KTUvovras  viv  ovroi  bafiTJvai,  [/caurcoi']  6av.  ,  .  . 

368.  For  ddvpaa-ai,  Dindorf  has  8vva(Tai,  but  the  sense 
requires  ov  Svvaaai. 

370.  For  tS>v  fxev  dpayol,  which  is  unintelligible,  I  believe 
the  poet  wrote  in  continuation,  SoCttos  lAci'elrai  cr(f)av  piv 
dputybv.  .  .  .  Even  so  it  is  quite  unexplained  what  is  the 
"  double  scourge."  Orestes  complains  of  Penury,  Electra  of 
Dishonor.  These  inciy  well  be  the  double  misery  which 
(says  the  Chorus)  thou  art  unable  [to  avert].  To  me  a 
whole  line  seems  lost,  such  as  : 

ov  8vvacrai  yap 
[a-irdi'iv  dpyaXiav  xv^pw  dneipyav^. 
dWci  dLTrXrji  yap  rrjadf  papdyvrjs 
dovnos  iKvfiTai  (r(pav  pev  dpayov 
Kara  y^s  ^8t], 

Thus  bvvaa-ai  has  an  infinitive  dnfipydv  to  complete  it,  "  To 
wish  for  lofty  success  is  useless,  when  you  cannot  [even  rej^el 
Penury  and  Insult]."  The  crack  of  this  double  scourge 
reaches  now  your  champion  in  the  underworld." 

374.  irai(Ti  8f  pdWov  ytyivrfrai  is  hopeless  nonsense. 
MaXXoj/  has  nothing  to  compare.  Teyivyjrai,  "  it  has  be- 
come," has  neither  Predicate  nor  Subject.  Neither  word  is 
hero  endurable.  I  find  nothing  more  proKiblc  than  to  write 
Tfppav  for  TovTuv,  with :  SrvytpStv  T(pp<ov  |  naiat  d'  iS/iiXXwj' 
nfTTovTfrai.  "  But  for  (or  by)  tlie  children  a  limit  of  hateful 
contests  has  been  hard-earned."  The  unusual  position  of  f>i 
in  the  fourth  place  may  have  led  to  punctuating  after  rippw. 
On  this  would  f Mow  a  general  corrv})tion. 


Clioepliori.  135 

377.  For  riKe'irai,  I  propose  i-eXet  crv. 

384-407.  Strophe  and  Antistrophe  both  corrupt.  In  my 
notion : — 

384 (f)p(v6s  oiov  (^nas 

TTOTarai,  ndpoidev  re  npapas  arjrai, 
{_Krjpos]  tjKOTOv  oTvyos ; 

[Spt/iv?  Kapbias  6vpi6s  being  a  mere  interpretation.] 
407.       anXdyxva  84  pot  KfKaivov- 

rai  TTpos  enos  '  tot   av  8'  avr' 
tTra\3r}s  X'^P^  P**'  aTricTTacrev  akyos, 
TTpos  T   fcravev  alKokoas. 
OP.  Ti  cravavTfs  TV\oipeu  av.  Tamp 

iradoipev  a^ea  TTpos  y  irSiV ;  [omitting  TeKo/iej/wi/] 
TTapecTTi  craiviiv,  .... 

391.  Read  Iltcrra  8'  iXoiTo.  ..."  may  (Jupiter)  elect 
Trustees,  Regents." 

400.  Omit  (f)6ip€vav. 

613.  For  uKaipas  8e,  I  suggest  ^Axaio'is  ye.  For  aTreiixfTov, 
I  accept  Blomfield's  aTrevnTeov.  For  (ttikotco,  metre  and  sense 
require  vTTfpK&rco.  Place  a  colon  after  it :  then  for  o-e'/Say  tl(ov 
I  claim  af^aareop. 

633.  A  verb  is  lost  to  which  the  vulgate  TTapeK^avres  is 
nomin.  and  to  pf]  depis  TraTevpevov  is  accusative.  The  particle 
ov  makis  sheer  nonsense.  I  propose,  instead  of  it,  the  verb 
a>X(aav.  In  the  Antist.  to  contrast  child  and  father,  I 
imaiiine  TtKvov  6'  fVetcr^epci  ScJ/ioicri  [roTy  TTUTpos,  x  ] 
alpaTav.  No  one  will  say  that  TTUTpbs  is  here  superfluous, 
nor  can  any  smaller  change  reconcile  the  metres. 

773.  In  this  eminently  corrupt  Ode,  nothing  but  audacity 
can  succeed.     I  propose  : 

773,4.  86s  Tvxas  TrXelv  86pois  Kvplcos,  TTavau<pa 
adevei  paiopiva  <t   Iheiv  8i.a8iKdaai. 

783.  For  eV  8p6pu>  Trpoa-Tideis,  I  suggest  k&v  8p6p<o  npoa-- 
TldflT]!.    .    .    , 


136  Choejjliori. 

784,  5.  Perhaps:  /cnVas  aco^ofxevov  pvdfia  nore  Biadd 
ffjiiTebov.  .  .  . 

[<ricraj  is  my  conjecture,  or  say,  stop-gap,  for  the  impossible 
TLs  av.] 

793.  Bead  ToIvSe  koXus  Krafitvoiv,  and  herewith  end  the 

third  strophe. 

795,  For  dvi8e7v,  which  caimot  here  be  right,  perhaps 
avoTTvelv,  gain  respite. 

799.  For  eVt^opwraTor,  metre  and  sense  suggest  6  tpapia- 
raros.  (To  change  vop.iCfTe  in  the  strophe  for  the  con- 
venience of  this  eVtc^opwTaroff  cannot  be  approved.) 

801.  For  KpvTTT  acTKOTTOv  8*,  I  icquire  Kpv(f>afjLtv  tvaKorrov 
&,  giving  right  metre  and  sense. 

802.  For  vvKTa  irp6  t  op-fiarav  read  vvicrap  rrpovfxpiaTav. 

803.  For  fp.(f)av((rTfpos,  Schiitz  well  \vTites  fp,c})av€aTfpo». 
XPTli^^  is  a  superfluous  word.  I  think  ttoXXq  bk  KoKka  <^v(\ 
should  close  the  3rd  antistrophe. 

805.  The  4th  and  5th  are  variously  comipt.     I  beUeve  in 
Koi  TOT  uibav,  k\vt6v  ^(OfxaTCiv  \vTpov — 
\^Song,  opposed  to  twanging  of  the  lyre.]     I  try  further : 

808.  llt6T](T0fl(V  TTfiXfl  •    TO    8'    tV' 

povv  tuoiyt  Kfpbos  av^ 

avd  rdB',  Ara  S'  anfcrTa  (f)i\.avl 

Td8f  nomin,  will  mean  "  Songs  and  ^lusic."  No  smaller 
changes  can  succeed  ;  but  the  words  (vvow  (fioiyt  are  neces- 
sarily very  uncertain.     Vtdg,  tv  tp-ov  tpov. 

815.  For  ntpa'ivav  excellently  Blomf.  has  irtpaiv  ovk. 

820.  nponpa^ov  xapiv  nipayus  XvTTjpos  is  a  ]>ossibf€  text. 
In  next  line  Ti^rk  can  hardly  Ix!  right.  The  sense  wanted 
is  "  from  thy  inmost  heart  venting  rage."  Kadtls  or  fitOtls 
is  ix)ssible.  Paley's  correction  of  <f>otvia»  arav  into  (fmiviap 
nyav  (sanguinary  rancour)  quite  commends  itself. 


CJwephori.  137 

940-7  is  terribly  corrupt.  No  one  can  make  goo  I  sense, 
good  structure,  and  good  metre  without  grave  changes.  I 
have  proposed 

tS)v  Trepi  Aortas,  6  Tlapvaa-crias.  .  .  ,  firoxdeiop, 
rav  aSoKcos  SoXiav,  ^XayjriTrovv,  iv  ^povois  olaiv   [for 
dflcriu]  \tTroix(Tai,  or  olai  nfToixfTai, 

Next:  Kparel  roi  Xoyof,   to,  Beiov  nep   ovra  /ii;   vnovpyiiv 
[At'a]  KaKoii,  ....  rather  /i»j8'  ?  or  htf  okv  ? 

949.  A  new  enigma.  The  word  in  brackets  might  be 
Toifjifva.  I  do  not  believe  it  was.  It  might  be  pLtlpaxa ; 
but  the  edd.  give  us  ■\|/-aXtoi/.  I  have  imagined  roXiSa, 
equivalent  to  napOivov,  and  here  used  of  a  young  man,  as 
■napBivov  notoriously  may  be.  That  the  termination  does 
not  necessitate  a  feminine  idea,  we  see  in  -^akiba.  Then  for 
"^akiov    oIki&v    duayefiav    So/iotf,  I  suggest : 

fieyav  d(f>Dp(dr)v  [rfiXiSa],  ^aKeav 
ayafiov  iv   86p.ois. 

In  951,  after  del  add  [rvxas  dfifitvav]  as  the  lost  line,  an 
in  next  verse  xpo"?  ^^r  xpo^os.     Presently  for  Opeopivois 
fiiToiKoi,  I  wish  T*  ipaiiipoKTip  firroiKon. 

F.  W.  Newman. 


EUMENIDES. 


DRAMATIS  PEESON^. 


Pythian  Prophetess. 

Apollo. 

Orestes. 

Ghost  of  Clttemnestra. 

Chorus  of  Fdries. 

Athesa. 

Escort. 


I 


\^The  Temple  of  Apollo  ot  Delphi  In  the  hacl-grotind 
the  summits  of  Paruossits.  The  orchestra  represents 
the  open  court  in  front  of  the  temple.  Tlie  Pythoness 
appears  praying  at  an  altar  adorned  icith  images  of 
the  successive  divinities  of  the  sanctuary.] 


EUMENIDES. 


Pythoness. 
Tj^  lEST,  witli  this  prayer,  I  honour  of  the  gods  * 
-■-       Earth,  prophetess  primeval ;  Themis  next, 
On  this  her  mother's  seat  oracular 
Second  who  sat — for  so  tradition  tells ; 
Third  by  decree  of  Fate,  with  her  good  will, 
Doing  despite  to  none,  took  here  her  seat, 
Another  power  Titanian,  child  of  Earth, 
Phoebe  ;  she  gave  it  as  a  birth-day  gift 
To  Phoebos,  who  from  Phoebe  takes  his  name. 

*  In  a  passage  of  deep  significance  ^schylus  traces  the 
successive  steps  in  the  history  of  Kevelation,  as  it  passed 
from  the  Chthonian  (earthly)  to  the  Olympian  powers.  Earth 
herself  was  the  first  prophet.  In  the  simplest  phenomena  of 
nature  she  first  spoke  to  men  of  the  divine  character  and  will. 
As  time  went  on  she  gave  place  to  "Right  "(Themis),  a  daughter 
who  was  born  to  her;  lor  the  teaching  of  society  and  life 
carries  us  forward  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  "  Right "  in 
turn  gave  place  to  a  younger  sister,  Phoebe,  the  embodiment 
of  light,  the  symbol  of  spiritual  intelligence.  With  her 
ministry  the  office  of  the  earthly  powers  was  fulfilled,  and 
she  transferred  her  charge,  not  by  claim  of  succession,  but 
as  a  voluntary  offering,  to  the  bright  God  of  heaven, 
Phoebus,  who  himself  adopted  her  name  for  his  own. — 
Brook  F.  Westcott. 


142  Eumenides. 

Leaving  the  lake  and  Delos'  rocky  isle, 

At  Pallas'  ship-frequented  shores  he  lands,  10 

Then  gains  this  region,  those  Parnassian  seats ; 

Him  onward  speed,  and  mightily  adore, 

Hephaestos'  sons,  road-fashioners,  who  wrought, 

Taming  for  him  the  savage  wilderness. 

Him,  when  he  comes,  highly  the  people  honour, 

King  Delphos  also,  steersman  of  this  land. 

Zeus  with  prophetic  art  his  mind  inspired, 

And  throned  him  on  this  sacred  seat,  fourth  seer ; 

So  Loxias*  now  is  prophet  of  his  sire. 

These  gods  I  worship  with  preluding  prayers.  20 

But  be  Pronflfean :}:  Pallas  likewise  hailed 

With  words  of  honour  !  you  too  I  salute. 

Nymphs  who  frequent  Korykia's  cavomed  rock, 

Kindly  to  birds,  and  haunt  of  deities. 

Bromios,  full  well  I  wis,  the  region  holds, 

Since  with  his  Thyads  thence  the  god  made  war, 

And  Pentheus  coursed,  like  doubling  hare,  to  death. 

The  fouuts  of  Pleistos,  and  Poseidon's  might 

Invoking,  and  high-consummating  Zeus, 

Ah  prophetess  I  now  assume  this  scat. 

Beyond  the  past  my  entrance  may  they  crown  30 

With  fair  response  1     Are  sons  of  Hollas  hero, — 

*  Loxias,  an  epithet  of  Apollo,  interpreted  by  most  etymo- 
logists as  allndinp  to  the  ambi,i;uitics  (Xo^a)  of  Delphian 
oracles;  some,  indoo*!,  think  it  cm  be  referred  to  Xoyof, 
s}>ccch,  as  imi>lyiiig  th.it  Apollo  is  the  interpreter  of  Zeus. 

X  rron.T.in,  an  epithet  of  Athena  at  Delphi,  as  havinj;^ 
a  chapel  or  statue  there  in  front  of  the  great  temple  of 
A])<)llo. 


Eumenides.  1 43 

Let  tliem,  as  custom  is,  approach  by  lut, 
For  as  the  god  doth  guide,  I  prophesy. 

[She  retires  into  the  temple,  and  after  a  brief  pause  returns 
terror-stricken.'] 

Things  dire  to  tell,  direful  for  eyes  to  sec. 

Have  forced  me  from  the  fane  of  Loxias, 

So  that  no  strength  I  have,  no  power  to  move ; 

But  lacking  speed  of  limb,  with  hands  I  run ; 

For  age,  when  scared,  is  nought ;  a  very  child. 

Towards  the  wreath-encircled  nook  I  creep, 

And  at  earth's  navel-stone,  behold  a  man  40 

Defiled  before  the  gods,  as  suppliant. 

Holding  his  seat ; — his  hands  still  dripping  gore, 

His  sword  new-drawn,  his  lofty  olive-branch 

With  ample  fillets  piously  enwreathed, 

"White  bands  of  wool ; — for  so  I  speak  it  plain. 

But  lo !  before  this  man,  on  seats  reclined, 

A  wondrous  company  of  women  sleeps  ; 

Women  ?  nay,  Gorgons  let  me  say ;  nor  yet 

To  Gorgonean  types  compare  I  them. 

Ere  now  in  paintings  [Harpies]  I  have  seen, 

Snatching  the  meal  of  Phineus.     These  to  sight        50 

Are  wingless,  black,  and  loathsome  utterly. 

With  breathings  unapproachable  they  snore. 

Forth  from  their  eyes  drippeth  a  loathsome  rheum  ; 

Their  garb  too  vile  the  effigies  to  touch 

Of  gods  immortal,  or  the  roofs  of  men. 

Tribe  of  this  sisterhood  I  ne'er  have  seen ; 

Neither  may  region  boast  such  brood  to  rear 


144  Eumenides. 

Scathless,  iinvisitcd  by  penance-tliroe. 

But  for  the  issue,  let  lord  Loxias, 

Mighty,  who  rules  these  seats,  himself  provide ;         60 

For  prophet-leech,  and  portent-seer  is  he, 

Who  can  for  others  purify  their  homes. 

[Exit  Pythokess. 

[Th»  interior  of  the  sanctuary  is  disclosed,  and  exhibits  the 
following  group.  Apollo  appears  standing  beside  Obzstes, 
who  is  seated  on  the  Omphalos*  The  Furies  are  reclined 
on  seats,  fast  asleep.   Hebmes  in  the  background.'] 

Apollo. 

I'll  ne'er  betray  theo :  to  the  end  thy  gnard, 

Beside  thee  standing,  or  when  far  aloof ; 

Nor  will  be  gracious  to  thy  enemies. 

And  captured  now  this  maddened  crew  thou  seest. 

By  sleep  the  loathsome  virgins  are  o'erpowercd, 

Hoary  primeval  progeny, — with  whom 

Nor  god,  nor  man,  nor  beast,  will  e'er  consort.  70 

For  Evil's  sake  brought  forth,  in  evil  gloom 

Of  subterranean  Tartaros  they  dwell, 

Abhorred  of  men  and  of  Olympian  gods. 

But  hie  theo  hence,  nor  o'er  relax  thy  speed, 

Fer  as  thou  trcad'st  the  wand'rcr-tramplcd  earth. 

They'll  track  theo  o'er  the  ample  continent, 

O'er  the  wide  ocean  and  the  citied  isles ; 

•  On  the  hwirth  [of  the  Delphian  temple]  burnt  a  per- 
petual fire,  and  near  it  was  the  omphalos,  or  uavcl-atonc, 
which  was  supiv)sod  to  mnrk  the  middle  point  of  the  earth 
—  Smitu'b  Classical  Geography, 


Eumenides.  145 

And  faint  thou  not  nor  fail  before  the  time. 

O'er  this  toil  brooding ;  hie  to  Pallas  city ; 

As  suppliant  her  ancient  image  clasp. 

There  having  judges  of  thy  cause,  and  words  80 

Of  suasive  power,  some  means  we  shall  devise 

For  evermore  to  free  thee  from  these  toils ; 

For  at  my  bidding  was  thy  mother  slain. 

Orestes. 
Apollo  lord,  justice  full  well  thou  knowest ; 
Since  then  thou  knowest,  learn  to  practise  it. 
Of  good  success  thy  might  is  warranty. 

Apollo. 

Kemember,  nor  let  fear  unnerve  thy  mind. 

[To  Hermes. 
But  thou,  true  brother  mine,  blood  of  my  sire, 
Hermes,  protect  him  ; — faithful  to  thy  name, 
Be  thou  his  escort,  shepherding  this  man,  90 

My  suppliant ;  for  Zeus  himself  reveres 
The  sacred  right  of  outlaws,  which  to  mortals 
From  thy  safe  convoy  cometh.  Fortune's  boon. 

\_Exit  Orestes,  conducted  by  Hermes. 

\_Ghost  of  Clytem:n"estra  appears  behind  Apollo.  She  is 
arrayed  in  her  robe  of  state,  sombre  and  shadotv-like.  Her 
hreast  is  bare,  and  the  bloody  wound  visible  near  the  neck.} 

Ghost. 
Sleep  on !  Ho  there !  what  need  of  sleepers  here  ? 
But  I  by  you,  among  the  other  dead, 
Dishonoured  thus,  from  them  the  keenest  taunts, 
For  his  sake  whom  I  slew,  must  needs  endure. 
In  deep  disgrace  I  wander ; — this  I  tell  yon, 

L 


146  Eiimenides. 

Reproach  among  the  shades  forsakes  me  not; 

Dire  evil  I  have  borne  from  those  most  dear,  100 

And  yet  for  me,  by  matricidal  hands 

Ruthlessly  slain,  no  god  is  moved  to  wrath. 

Behold  these  direful  heart-wounds,  whence  they  came, 

For  clear  in  sleep  the  vision  of  the  mind, 

While  unforeseen  by  day  the  fate  of  men. 

Full  many  gifts  of  mine  have  ye  lapped  up ; 

Wineless  libations,  sober,  soothing  rites, 

And  feasts,  I  offered  on  the  sacred  hearth. 

At  dead  of  night,  the  hour  no  god  may  share. 

All  these  down-trampled  now  I  must  behold.  110 

But  gone  is  he,  escaping  like  a  fawn. 

And,  lightly  bounding  o'or  tho  himter's  net, 

At  you  he  mocked,  with  many  a  scornful  jeer. 

Hear  ye,  how,  pleading  for  my  life,  I  speak. 

Awake,  dread  demons  of  tho  lower  world ; 

For  Clytemnesti'a  calls  you,  I,  a  dream. 

Chorus. 
[Moaning.]  * 

Clytkmnestba. 
Moan  on,  but  gone  tho  man,  flying  far  off; 
For  him  are  patron-gods,  though  not  for  mo. 

Chorum 
[Moaning.] 

Cl,TT|:MNESTnA. 

By  sleep  oppressed,  thou  pitiost  not  my  woo, 

His  mother's  murderer,  Orestes,  flics.  120 


Eumeiiides.  147 

Chorus. 
[Groans.] 

Clytemnestba. 
Dost  groan,  dost  sleep,  nor  on  the  instant  rise  ? 
What  have  ye  done  except  to  work  me  bale  ? 

Chorus. 
[Groans.] 

Clytemnestba. 
Slumber  and  toil,  worthy  conspirators, 
Have  sorely  wasted  the  fell  dragon's  might. 

Cho7-us, 
[Redoubled  and  shrill  groans.] 

CJiorua-leader.*     Take  heed  there. 

Seize. 

Seize. 
-     Seize. 
-         -         -        -        Seize. 
-        -        -        -  Seize. 

Seize. 

-        -        -        Seize. 

Clytemnestba. 
In  dreams  dost  track  the  game,  yelping  amain, 
Like  hound  that  never  intermits  the  chase. 

*  MuUer,  p.  61.     These  exclamations  are  uttered  by  the 
leader  and  the  other  Furies  in  rapid  succession, 


148  Eumenides. 

What  dost  thou  ?     Rise,  be  not  subdued  by  toil, 
Nor  yet,  relaxed  by  sleep,  to  grief  be  blind. 
By  just  reproaches  let  thy  heart  be  stung,  130 

For  to  the  prudent  sharp  they  are  as  goads. 
fBut  on  thy  quarry  wafting  gory  breath, 
Scorch  him  with  fiery  vapour  from  thy  maw ; — 
Chase  hard,  with  second  coursing  wear  him  down. 

[2%e  GJiost  vanishes.     The  Chorus-leader  starts  from  her  seat!] 

Leader. 

Awake  1     Awaken  her,  as  I  wake  thee ! 

Sleep  est  thou  still  ?     Arise,  and  slumber  spurn ; 

Then  try  we  whether  vain  our  prelude  be. 

\_Thc  Furies  start  up  one  after  another  from  their  seats,  and 
range  themselves  upon  the  stage,  right  and  left  of  their 
leader."] 

Chorus.     Strophe  L 

let  Fury.  Woe !  woo !  alack  !  Friends,  we  have  Buffered 

scorn. 
2.  Much  have  I  suffered  and  in  vain. 

1.  Alack !  dire  anguish  we  have  borne,         140 

Intolerable  pain ! 

2.  Burst  from  the  toils,  fled  is  the  game  away. 

3.  By  sleep  o'crmastcrod  I  have  lost  the  prey. 

Antistkophe  I. 

4.  Fio!     Son  of  Zousl     Thou  thievish  art,  I 

trow; 

5.  Us,  hoary  gods,  thou  youngster  ridcst  down  ; 


Eumenides.  149 

4.  This  godless  wight,  bitter  to  parents,  thou 

As  suppliant  dost  own. 

5.  A  god  the  matricide  has  filched  away. 

6.  That  aught  herein  is  just  will  any  say  ? 

Steophe  II. 

7.  Voice  of  reproachful  blame,  to  me  in  dreams 

that  came  150 

Smote  me,  like  charioteer  with  scourge  grasped 

tight, 
*Neath  heart  and  reins.     Such  chilly  pang  I 

8.  know 

f  As  from  the  public  scourger's  ruthless  blow. 

An'tistkophe  II. 

9.  The  upstart  doings  these  of  younger  deities. 
Usurping  power  beyond  the  sway  of  right. 

jDark-smeared   from   foot   to  crown,   earth's 

10.  navel-stone  160 
Blood's  horrible  defilement  now  doth  own. 

Strophe  III. 

11.  12.     But  Thou,  the  seer,  with  hearth-stain  hast 

thy  shrine 
Polluted,  self-invited,  self- impelled ; 
Eevering  mortal  things  'gainst  law  divine 
The    Fates    thou     hast    dishonoured,    grey 

with  eld. 

Antistbophe  III. 
13,  14.  file  while  he  plagues,  himself  he  shall  not 
free; 


150  Eumenidea. 

A  captive  still,  though  under  earth  he  fled, 
For,  stained  with  blood,  another  after  me, 
■fAvcnger  stem,  shall  light  upon  his  head. 

Apollo. 
Avaunt,  I  charge  thee,  leave  those  hallowed  scats ;  170 
Depart  with  speed  from  this  prophetic  shrine, 
Lest  thou, — by  winged  glistering  snake  transfixed. 
Shot  from  this  golden-twisted  cord, — through  pain, 
Shouldst  vomit  forth  black  gore,  the  clots  disgorging 
Which  thou  from  slaughtered  men  hast  ruthless  sucked. 
Thee  it  befits  not  to  approach  these  seats, 
But  where  head-lopping,  eye-outscooping  rage, 
With  vengeance  that  doth  sap  youth's  vital  powers, 
Where  slaughters,  mutilations,  stonings  reign,  180 

And  where  impaled,  wretches  with  cruel  throes 
Groan  forth  their  anguish.    These  the  feasts  yc  love. 
And  therefore  are  ye  hateful  to  the  gods. 
Your  whole  aspijct  attests  it, — such  should  dwell 
In  blood-gorged  lion's  den,  not  tarry  hero 
Bringing  pollution  to  these  hallowed  seats. 
Begone,  yc  grisly  troop,  imshophcrded. 
For  to  such  flock  no  heavenly  power  is  kind. 

Chorus. 
Apollo  lord,  do  thou  in  turn  give  ear  ; 
No  mere  accomplice  art  thou  in  those  ills ;  190 

Euthcr  of  all,  sole  author  thou,  sole  cause. 

AroLLO. 
How  BO  I    To  greater  length  extend  thy  speech. 


Eumenides.  151 

Chorus. 
The  stranger  tliou  didst  promiDt  to  matricide. 

Apollo. 
To  avenge  his  sire  I  prompted  him  ;  why  not  ? 

Cliorus. 
With  promise  this  new  bloodshed  to  defend, 

Apollo. 
And  bade  him  seek  as  suppliant  this  shrine. 

Chorus. 
And  these,  his  escort,  thou  forsooth  re  vilest. 

Apollo. 
Because  not  meet  their  presence  for  these  scats. 

Chorus. 
Yet  unto  us  hath  been  assigned  this  charge. 

Apollo. 
What  function  this  ?     Extol  thy  fair  employ.  200 

Chorus. 
All  mother-slayers  from  their  homes  we  chase. 

Apollo. 
How  if  the  wife  her  husband  should  have  slain  ? 

CJiorus. 
Not  one  in  blood  were  she  with  him  she  slew. 


152  Eiunenides, 

Apollo. 

Greatly  thou  dost  misprise  and  set  at  nouglit 

The  nuptial  bond  of  Hera  and  of  Zeus ; 

Dishonoured  too  is  Kypris  by  these  words, 

Prom  whom  to  mortals  come  their  dearest  joys  ; 

For,  under  Justice'  shield,  the  nuptial  couch, 

'Twixt  man  and  wifo  the  heaven-appointed  bond, 

Is  mightier  than  oath  ;  to  wedded  pair, 

"When  one  slays  other,  if  thou  lenient  be,  210 

These  not  pursuing  with  keen-sighted  wrath, 

Not  justly  then  Orestes  thou  dost  chase  ; 

For  thee,  right  earnest  in  his  case  I  find, 

But  openly  in  hers  more  mild  in  sooth. 

But  Pallas  shall  both  sides  with  justice  scan, 

Cliorus. 

Never  will  I  desist  this  man  to  chase. 

AroLLo. 
Pursue  him  then,  prolong  thy  fruitless  toil. 

Clioriis. 
Claim  not  by  word  my  honours  to  abridge. 

Apollo. 
Ileuours  liko  thine  I  would  reject  with  scorn. 

Chorus. 
For  trrcat  thy  rank  bcfciro  the  throne  of  Zens.  220 

But  I,  led  on  by  mother's  blood,  this  man 
To  death  will  chase ;  I  follow  on  his  track. 

[Lxil  Churu*. 


Eumenides.  153 

Apollo. 

But  I  will  aid,  will  save,  the  fugitive ; 

For  dire  with  men  and  gods  the  suppliant's  wrath, 

If  I  his  cause  should  wilKngly  betray. 

^Tlie  scene  changes  to  Athens,  and  the  temple  of  Apollo  is 
transfoitned  into  the  terriple  of  Athexa  Polias  o/i  the 
Acropolis.J 

Obestes,  emhacing  the  sacred  image  of  Palla8. 

Athena,  Queen,  at  Loxias'  hest  I'm  come  ; 

A  wretched  outcast  graciously  receive, 

Not  blood-polluted,  nor  with  hands  unclean, 

For  blunted  now  and  worn  the  edge  of  crime 

At  other  homes,  and  in  the  paths  of  men.  230 

Holding  my  course  alike  o'er  land  and  sea, 

Faithful  to  Loxias'  word  oracular, 

I  to  thy  fane  am  come,  thy  image,  goddess. 

Here  keeping  guard,  I  will  abide  my  doom. 

\Enter  the  Leader  of  the  Chorus,  followed  hy  the  Furies.  As 
they  advance  they  spread  themselves  out  towards  both  sides 
of  the  orchestra.'] 

Leader, 

'Tis  well ;  sure  token  this,  the  man  is  here. 
Follow  the  leading  of  this  voiceless  guide ; 
For  still  we  track,  as  hound  the  wounded  fawn. 
By  blood  and  reeking  drops,  our  destined  prey ; 
Spent  with  full  many  man-outwearing  toils. 


154  Eumenides. 

Pant  my  deep  vitals,  for  on  every  spot 

Of  the  wide  earth  my  charge  I  shepherded,  240 

And  now  in  hot  pursuit  with  wingless  flight  I 

Swift  as  swift  galley  o'er  the  sea  I  course ; 

Here  in  some  nook  ensconced,  crouching  he  lies ; 

Of  human  blood  the  odour  gladdens  me. 

{^The  Furies  having  taken  their  stations  opposite  to  one 
another  in  the  orchestra,  sing  the  following  Strophes  in 
responsive  order. "] 

Chorus. 

1,  2.  Look  here !     Look  there  I 

Peer  everywhere  ; 
Lest,  scathless  in  flight,  illuding  our  sight, 
The  matricide  'scape  unaware, 
y,  4.  He  refuge  hath  found  ; 

With  arms  twined  around 
The  goddess  immortal,  this  murderous  wight 
A  verdict  now  seeks  through  her  aid  'gainst   the 
right  250 

5,  6.  But  baseless  his  trust ; 

Mother's  blood  from  the  dust 
Is  hard  to  recover ; — once  shed  on  the  plain, 
The  life-blood  is  gone,  it  returns  not  again. 
7,  8.  Lo,  suflbr  thou  must 

In  rcipiital  most  just. 
And  I  the  red  clot  from  thy  members  will  drain. 
9,  10.  The  foul  draught  I'll  taste. 

Thy  strength  I  will  waste. 
Then  drag  thoo  wtill  living  to  regions  below, 
The  forfeit  to  pay  for  thy  mothcr'a  death-blow. 


Eumenides.  155 

11,  12.  There  thou  shalt  see  in  durance  drear, 

'Gainst  god  or  guest  or  parents  dear,  260 

Like  thee  who  sinned,  receiving  their  due  meed. 

13, 14.  For  Hades,  ruler  of  the  nether  sphere, 
Exactest  auditor  of  human  kind, 
Graved  on  the  tablet  of  his  mind 
Doth  every  trespass  read. 

Orestes. 

To  me,  long  disciplined  in  woe,  are  known 

Divers  lustrations ;  when  to  speak  I  know, 

When  to  be  silent ;  but  in  present  need 

By  sapient  teacher  I  was  charged  to  speak. 

The  blood  now  sleepeth,  fading  from  my  hand ;       270 

Washed  clean  away  the  matricidal  stain ; 

For  while  yet  fresh,  by  rites  of  slaughter'd  swine, 

At  Phocbos'  altar  it  was  duly  purged  ; — 

Tedious  the  tale,  were  I  to  reckon  o'er 

How  many  fared  with  me  nor  suffered  harm. 

Time,  waxing  old,  doth  all  things  purify ; 

Now,  with  pure  lip,  I  piously  invoke 

Athena,  of  this  region  queen,  to  come, 

My  pleader :  so  she  weaponless  shall  earn 

Myself,  my  realm,  and  all  the  Argive  host,  280 

Honestly  true,  allies  for  evermore. 

But  whether  on  the  Libyan  plain,  beside 

Her  natal  Triton  wave,  she  stand  erect, 

Or  sit,  with  foot  enveloped,  to  her  friends 

Dispensing  aid ; — or  on  Phlegraian  fields. 

Like  warlike  leader,  marshal  her  array, — 


156  Eumenides. 

Oh  may  she  come  (a  goddess  hears  from  far), 
Aud  be  my  savioxir  from  these  miseries. 

Cliorus. 
Thee  nor  Apollo,  nor  Athena's  might 
Can  save  from  perisliiug,  an  outcast,  spurned ;         290 
With  heart  of  joy  oblivious,  thou  shalt  pine, 
The  Furies'  blood-sucked  victim,  a  mere  shade. — 
How  !  no  reply  1     Dost  thou  contemn  my  words, 
Thou,  fattened  fur  me,  thou,  my  victim  doomed. 
Slain  at  no  altar,  but  my  living  prey  ? — 
Our  hymn,  as  chain  to  bind  thee,  thou  shalt  hear. 

[T7ie  Chorus-leader  ascends  the  steps  of  the  altar.  The  rest  of 
the  Chorus  arrange  themselves  in  the  orchestra,  and  sing 
the  following  Strophes.'] 

Choral  Hymn. 
Haste  we  now  the  dance  to  wind, 
Since  beseems  in  dread  refrain, 
To  utter  how  our  bodeful  train  300 

Deal  the  lots  to  mortal  kind. 
Loyal  are  we  to  the  Eight ; — 
"Whosoe'er  clean  hands  exteudeth, 
Not  on  him  our  wrath  may  light, 
Scathlcss  still  through  life  ho  wcndeth. 
But  when  wretch,  like  yonder  wight, 
Gory  hands  to  hide  is  fain. 
Blood-avengers, —  for  the  slain 
True  witnesses, — still  lurking  near, — 
His  doom  at  length  completing,  wc  appear.  810 


I 


Eumenides.  157 

Full  Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Oh  mother,  hear  me,  Mother  Night, 
Who  brought  me  forth,  a  living  dread, 
To  scare  the  living  and  the  dead, 
Latona's  son  does  me  despite  ; — 
Stealing  away  my  trembling  prey, 
Destined  a  mother's  murder  to  requite. 

Thus  o'er  the  victim  chant  we  our  refrain, 
Frenzy's  dread  carol,  madness-fraught, 
The  Furies'  hymn,  from  Hades  brought, 

Soul-binding,  lyreless,  mortal-blighting  strain. 

Antisteophe  L 

For  Fate  unswerving  span,  that  we  320 

This  ofBce  hold  for  evermore : — 
Mortals  imbrued  with  kindred  gore 
"We  chase,  till  imder  earth  they  flee  ; 
And  when  in  death  they  yield  their  breath. 
Not  e'en  in  realm  of  Hades  are  they  free. 

Thus  o'er  the  victim  chant  we  our  refrain. 
Frenzy's  dread  carol,  madness-fraught, 
The  Furies'  hymn,  from  Hades  brought, 

Soul-binding,  lyreless,  mortal-blighting  strain. 

Steophe  II. 

For  even  at  birth  Fate  assigned  our  career  330 

Apart  from  the  gods ; — we  approach  not  their  sphere ; 

Our  banquets  they  share  not, 

White  garments  we  wear  not, 


158  Eumenides, 

Men's  homes  to  destroy  is  the  Furies'  employ. 
When  Ares  in  strife 
Kobs  a  brother  of  life, 
tRelentless,  the  blood-dripping  caitiff  we  chase ; — 
Though  girded  with  strength,  he  must  falter  at  length, 
And  falls,  overpowered  in  the  race. 

Antisteophe  II. 

No  partner  brook  we  in  our  time-honoured  cai'es,  340 
fXor  share  with  the  gods  jurisdiction  nor  prayers. 

For,  us, — the  detested, — 

Blood-stained,  sable-vested, 
High  Zeus  from  his  hall  did  exclude  one  and  all. 

So  downward  wc  stoop 

On  our  foe  with  fell  swoop, 
And  crush  him  with  heavy  footfall  where  he  lies ; 
IThesc  limbs  overthrow  both  the  swift  and  the  slow ; 

Once  prostrate,  our  victims  ne'er  rise.  350 

Strophe  III. 

Men's  glory,  though  beneath  the  sky 
Proudly  august,  below  tho  earth 
Dwindles  dishonoured,  nothing  worth, 
Before  our  dark-stolcd  company. 
What  time  in  bodeful  dance,  untircd,  our  foot  wo  ply. 

Antistropue  III. 
Through  evil  blind,  tho  wrctcb,  though  prone, 
Knows  not  his  fall ;  for  dark  tho  cloud 
That  doth  tho  guilty  mind  o'crshroud ; 


Eumenides.  159 

And  Fame  proclaims  with  heavy  groan, 
The  doom,  like  murky  cloud,   that   wraps  a  house 

o'erthrown. 

Strophe  IV. 
For  such  Fate's  decree : — awful  ministers  we, —    360 
Keen-eyed  to  conceive  what  untired  we  achieve  ; 
'I'Of  crime  ever  mindful,  obdurate  to  prayer. 
Apart  from  the  gods  our  loathed  mission  we  bear ; — 
To  living  and  dead,  'neath  our  sunless  torch-ray, 

Dark  and  rugged  our  way. 

Antistrophe  IV. 

Who  tiien  without  fear  among  mortals  can  hear 
My  Fate-sanctioned  law,  and  who  quail  not  with  awe, 
Mine  oflfice  thus  learning,  my  god-given  right  ? 
For  not  with  dishonour  I  wield  my  dread  might, 
Although  my  hoar  mission,  in  darkness  profound, 
I  hold  'neath  the  ground. 

[Athena  appears  in  a  chariot,  and  alights.2 

Athena. 
A  voice  I  heard  from  far  Scamander's  banks 
Invoking  me,  what  time  the  land  I  claimed, — 
Fair  portion  of  the  booty,  spear-achieved, 
Which  chiefs  and  leaders  of  Achaia's  host 
Apportioned,  root  and  branch,  for  ever  mine, 
To  Theseus'  sons  a  chosen  heritage.  380 

Thence  have  I  come,  urging  unwearied  feet 
Of  prime  young  coursers  harnessed  to  my  car ; 
My  swelling  ^gis  rustling,  without  wings. 
And  now,  beholding  here  these  uncouth  guests, 


160  Eumenides. 

I  fear  not,  yet  the  marvel  takes  mine  eye. 

Who  are  ye  ?     I  address  myself  to  all, 

To  you  and  also  to  this  stranger  here, 

Who  as  a  suppliant  at  mine  image  sits. 

But  no  begotten  race  do  ye  resemble, 

Neither  of  goddesses  by  gods  beheld, 

Nor  in  similitude  of  mortal  shapes ; —  890 

But  to  speak  ill  of  those  who  harm  us  not 

Eeason  forbids,  and  Justice  stands  aloof. 

Cliorus. 
Daughter  of  Zeus,  all  shalt  thou  hear  in  brief. 
The  progeny  of  ancient  Night  are  we, 
"  Curses  "  yclept  in  homes  beneath  the  earth. 

Athena. 
I  know  your  lineage  and  the  names  ye  bear. 

Cliorus. 
My  honours  also  quickly  shalt  thou  learn. 

Athen'a. 
IMine  ears  are  open,  be  the  word  but  plain. 

ChorxiB. 
'Tis  ours  men-slayers  from  their  homes  to  chaso, 

Athena. 
And  to  the  slayer's  flight  what  goal  is  fixed  ?  400 

Cliona. 
Where  to  rejoice  not  is  th'  appointed  doom. 


Eumenides.  161 

Athena. 
And  to  this  bourn  thou  houndest  now  this  man^ 

Chorus. 
Yea,  for  he  chose  his  mother's  blood  to  shed. 

Athena. 
Urged  by  no  mandate  whose  strong  dread  he  feared  ? 

Chorus. 
Where  is  the  goad  should  urge  to  matricide  ? 

Athena. 
Two  parties  plead,  one  only  have  I  heard. 

Chorus. 
But  neither  will  he  take  nor  tender  oath. 

Athena. 
Repute  of  justice,  not  just  act,  thou  wishest. 

Chorus. 
How  ?  Tell  me.     For  no  lack  of  wit  is  thino. 

Athena. 
By  oaths  win  not  unjust  success,  I  say.  410 

Chorus. 
Question  then  put,  and  rightful  verdict  give. 

Athena. 
Leave  ye  to  me  the  ruling  of  the  cause  ? 


1G2  Eumenides. 

Chorus. 
Why  not  ?  just  homage  just  regard  requites. 

Athena. 

"What  wilt  thou,  stranger,  to  this  charge  reply  ? 

Thy  land,  thy  race,  and  thy  misfortunes  tell, 

And  then  ward  off  the  blame  thus  cast  on  thee. 

If,  trusting  in  the  right,  thou  thus  dost  sit 

Clasping  mine  image,  near  my  sacred  shrine, 

Ixion-like,  a  suppliant  revered, — 

To  all  these  queries  give  me  clear  reply.  420 

OUESTES. 

Athena  queen  !  matter  of  grave  import 

First  will  I  from  thy  closing  words  remove. 

Not  blood-polluted  am  I,  nor  doth  stain 

Cleave  to  thine  image  from  thy  suppliant's  hand. 

Sure  proof  of  this  will  I  adduce  ; — 'tis  law 

That  voiceless  lives  the  man  defiled  by  blood, 

Till  purifier's  hand  hath  him  besprent 

With  victim's  blood,  slain  in  life's  budding  prime. 

Long  since  in  other  homes  have  been  performed, 

With  victims  and  with  streams,  these  lustral  rites.      430 

Thus  then  this  care,  as  cancelled,  I  dismiss. 

My  lineage,  what  it  is,  thou  soon  shalt  hoar. 

Argivo  am  I,  my  sire  thou  knowcst  well, 

l\Iarshal  of  naval  heroes,  Agamemnon, 

In  league  with  whom  thou  madcst  Ilion, 

Troin's  proud  city,  and  uncited  waste. 

Keturuing  homo,  ho  without  honour  perished ; 


Eumenides.  163 

For  him,  my  mother,  black  of  soul,  hath  slain, 
Wrapt  in  her  subtle  toils,  which  witness  bare 
To  the  foul  murder  in  the  laver  wi'ought. 
Myself,  long  time  an  exile,  coming  home, 
Slew  her  who  bare  me, — I  deny  it  not, — 
Avenging  my  dear  father,  blood  for  blood, — 
And  sharer  in  the  blame  is  Loxias, 
Who  goads  of  anguish  to  my  heart  announced, 
Unless  the  guilty  found  from  me  their  due. 
My  deed,  or  just,  or  unjust,  do  thou  judge ; — 
Whate'er  thy  verdict,  I  shall  be  content. 

Athena. 

Too  grave  the  cause  for  mortal  to  adjudge, 

Nor  is  it  lawful  for  myself  to  try 

A  suit  of  murder  freighted  with  sharp  wrath.  450 

Moreover,  though,  all  needful  rites  performed, 

My  shrine  thou  visitest  as  suppliant, 

Harmless  and  pure ;  yet  in  my  city's  cause, 

Hurtful  to  it,  I  claim,  thou  shalt  not  be. 

For  these  hold  fimctions  hard  to  set  aside, 

And  not  triumphant  in  their  suit,  henceforth, 

The  poison  of  their  hate,  falling  to  earth, 

Will  to  this  land  breed  dire  and  cureless  plague. — 

So  stands  the  matter ; — each  alternative, 

For  them  to  stay,  for  me  to  banish  them. 

Is  mischief-fraught,  nor  know  I  remedy. 

But  since  this  weighty  cause  hath  lighted  here,        460 

Judges  of  murder,  bound  by  oath,  I'll  choose, — 

Solemn  tribunal  for  all  future  time. 


164  Eumenides. 

But  for  yonrselves  call  witnesses  and  proofs,— 

Sworn  evidence  collect  to  aid  your  suit  ; 

And  having  from  my  townsmen  culled  the  best, 

Them  will  I  set,  truly  to  judge  this  cause, 

Sworn  nought  to  utter  adverse  to  the  Right. 

[Exit. 
Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Subversion  born  of  upstart  laws 
Will  anarchy  and  discord  breed, 
If  he  the  matricidal  deed 
Who  wrought,  prevail,  and  win  the  caase. 
Such  verdict  shall  to  reckless  crime 
Embolden  mortals  ; — through  all  time 
Murder,  henceforth,  unchecked  shall  reign,  470 

And  parents  perish,  by  their  children  slain. 

Antistrophk  L 
For  as  on  evil  deeds  no  more 
Fierce  anger  from  this  frenzied  train. 
Keen  watch  o'er  mortals  who  maintain. 
Shall  steal  full  surely,  as  of  yore ; — 
To  murder  I  will  give  the  rein. 
Who  tells  his  neighbour's  sorrow  o'er,  480 

fShall  hear  in  turn  Griefs  angriished  moan  ; 
Who  comforts  other's  woo,  himself  must  groan. 

SxRoruE  II. 
Let  none,  'neath  Sorrow's  stroke 
Writhing,  our  aid  invoke, 
Pleading  witli  ancruishcd  moan, 
*'  0  Justice,  Justice,  0  Eriuys'  throuo  l" 
Some  father  thus  may  wail, 


Eumenides.  105 

Some  motlier  smit  with  bale^ 
Vainly,  since  Justice'  altar  lieth  prone.  490 

Antistrophe  II. 

f  Throned  in  the  heart  let  Awe, 

Guardian  of  sacred  law, 

There  hold  her  stcdfast  reign ! 
Well  earned  is  wisdom  at  the  cost  of  pain. — 

But  who  in  blithesome  cheer 

That  lives,  absolved  from  Fear, 
Or  man,  or  State,  will  Justice  long  revere  ? 

Strophe  III. 

Neither  life  by  law  unblest,  600 

Nor  by  tyrant  yoke  opprest, 

Sanction  thou ; — 
All  extremes  the  gods  detest ; 
They  the  golden  mean,  I  trow, 
Stamp  with  might.     The  truth  I  speak 
Weighty  is.     Defiant  scorn 
Is  from  godless  folly  born  ; 
While  from  inward  health  doth  flow, 
Beloved  of  all,  true  bliss  which  mortals  seek. 

Antistrophe  III. 
This,  the  sum  of  wisdom,  hear ; —  510 

Justice'  altar  aye  revere, 

Nor  ever  dare. 
Lusting  after  worldly  gear, 
With  atheist  foot  to  spurn ;  beware, 
Lurketh  Eetribution  near, 


166  Eumenides. 

Direful  issue  doth  impend ; 
Honour  then  with  holy  fear 
Thy  parents. — household  rights  revere, 
Nor  guest-observing  ordinance  offend. 

Stbophe  IV. 

But  who  unforced,  with  spirit  free  620 

Dares  to  be  just,  is  ne'er  unblest ; 

Whelmed  utterly  he  cannot  be : 

But  for  the  wretch  with  lawless  breast, 

Bold  seizer  of  promiscuous  prey, — 

I  warn  you, — he,  perforce,  his  sail 
In  time  shall  strike,  when  troubles  him  assail, 
And  breaks  his  yard-arm,  neath  the  tempest's  sway. 

Antistrophe  IV. 

He  cries,  but  mid  the  whirlpool's  roar 

None  heeds  him  ;  for  the  gods  deride, 

fEyeing  the  boaster,  proud  no  more,  530 

Struggling  amid  the  surging  tide  ; 

Shorn  of  his  strength  he  yields  to  Fato  ;— 

The  cape  ho  weathers  not,  but  thrown 

On  Justice'  sunken  reef,  with  precious  freight, 

He  perishoth  for  aye,  unwept,  unknown. 

[Athena  enters  at  the  head  of  the  twthv  Areopagites,.who 
take  their  settts  in  the  orchestra.^ 

Atuena. 
Herald,  proclaim  I     Hold  back  the  multitude, 
Let  Tyrrhene  trumpet,  filled  with  mortal  breath, 
Piercing  the  welkin  with  sonorous  blast, 
King  out  its  brazen  summous  to  the  crowd : 


Eumenides.  167 

For,  while  this  council-liall  the  jurors  fill,  540 

Silence  to  keep  availeth,  and  to  learn 
(Yea,  the  whole  city  and  this  stranger  too) 
What  laws  for  time  eternal  I  ordain ; 
So  may  the  cause  be  righteously  adjudged. 
[Apollo  appears  on  the  stage.l 
Chorus. 
Apollo  lord,  rule  thou  thine  own  domain ; — 
In  this  affair  say,  what  concern  hast  thou  ? 

Apollo. 
Twofold  my  errand  here.    As  witness,  first : 
For  this  man  at  my  shrine  is  suppliant, 
Guest  of  my  hearth ;  by  me  from  murder  cleansed. 
Also  I  come  as  pleader  in  his  cause ; 
For  of  his  mother's  death-blow  mine  the  blame.      550 

[To  Athrna. 
Now,  as  thy  wisdom  prompteth,  open  thou 
The  trial,  Pallas :  legalize  the  suit. 

Athena. 

[To  tie  Chorum. 

'Tis  yours  to  speak ; — thus  I  commence  the  suit. 
Since  that  the  plaintiff,  taking  first  the  word, 
To  state  the  argument  may  justly  claim. 

Chorus. 
Though  we  be  many,  brief  shall  be  our  speech, 

[To  Obestes. 
Do  thou  in  turn  make  answer,  word  for  word  : — 
And  first  declare, — didst  thou  thy  mother  slay  ? 


168  Etimenides. 

Orestes. 
I  slew  her,  nor  have  e'er  denied  the  deed. 

Cliorm. 
Thus  of  three  wrestling-bouts  the  first  is  ours. 

Obestes. 
Not  prostrate  he  o'er  whom  this  vaunt  thou  makest.  56' » 

CJwrus. 
Bchoveth  thee  to  tell  how  thou  didst  slay. 

Orestes. 
This  hand,  my  drawn  sword  wielding,  smote  her  neck. 

Chorxis. 
By  whom  persuaded,  and  by  whose  advice  ? 

Orestes. 
Ey  Phccbos'  words :  he  witnosscth  for  me. 

Chorus. 
How  ?  did  the  prophet  counsel  matricide  ? 

Orestes. 
Certes, — nor  thus  far  havo  I  blamed  my  lot. 

Cliorus. 
Caught  by  tho  vote,  another  tune  thou'lt  sing. 

OUKSTES. 

Fftitli  have  I :  from  the  tomb  my  aire  will  aiiL 


Eumenides,  169 

Chorus. 
Good :  having  slain  thy  mother,  trust  the  dead  I 

Obestes. 
Polluted  was  she  with  a  twofold  stain.  570 

Cliorus. 
How  1  To  the  jurors  make  the  matter  clear. 

Orestes. 
Slaying  her  husband,  she  my  father  slew. 

Chorus. 
But  thou  art  living, — she  through  death  is  free. 

Obestes. 
Her  while  she  lived,  why  didst  thou  not  pursue  ? 

Clwriis. 
Not  of  one  blood  was  she  with  him  she  slew. 

Oeeste3. 
But  am  I  with  my  mother  one  in  blood  ? 

Chorus. 
Thee  'neath  her  zone  she  nourished; — blood-stained 

wretch, 
A  mother's  dearest  blood  dost  thou  disown  ? 

Obestes. 
Now  bear  me  witness  and  expound  for  me, 
Apollo,  whether  I  with  justice  slew.  580 


170  Eumenides. 

The  deed,  as  wrought,  we  do  not  disavow; — 
But  whether  justly  shed,  or  not,  this  blood, 
Judge  thou,  that  answer  I  may  make  to  these. 

Apollo. 
To  you,  Athena's  great  tribunal,  now 
Justly  I'll  speak ;  a  prophet  may  not  lie ; — 
Ne'er  from  my  throne  prophetic  spake  I  aught 
Either  of  man,  of  woman,  or  the  state. 
Which  Zeus,  Olympian  sire,  hath  not  ordained. 
Learn  ye  how  potent  is  the  plea  I  urge  ; — 
The  Father's  will  I  charge  you  to  obey  ;  590 

For  oaths  are  not  of  greater  force  than  Zeus. 

Chorus. 
Zeus,  as  thou  sayest,  gave  this  oracle, 
And  bade  Orestes  here,  his  father's  death 
Avenging,  to  despise  a  mother's  rights. 

Apollo. 
Unlike  the  case,  when  dies  a  highborn  man, 
Richly  adorned  with  sceptres  Hcaveu-bestowed, 
Dies  too  by  woman's  craft,  not  slain  in  war 
By  Amazon's  far-shooting,  eager  bow. 
But  Pallas,  as  thyself  shalt  hear,  and  these 
Who  sit,  by  ballot  to  adjudge  this  cause.  600 

For  when  from  distant  warfare  ho  returned. 
With  fair  successes  crowned,  receiving  him 
With  friendly  welcome,  she,  the  while  bo  bathed, 
The  laver  curtain'd  o'er,  from  head  to  foot, 
Then,  tangled  in  inextricable  maze 
Of  broider'd  garment,  slio  her  husband  smites. 
As  I  have  told  you,  such  the  hero's  death, 


Eumenides.  171 

By  all  revered,  marslial  of  naval  hosts ; — 
Her  thus  I  signalize,  their  hearts  to  prick 
Who  here  have  mission  to  decide  this  cause. 

Chorus. 
A  father's  death  Zeus  honours, — so  thou  sayest, —  610 
Yet  he  his  father,  aged  Kronos,  chained : — 
How  prove  this  deed  not  adverse  to  thy  word  ? 
Here  I  invoke  you,  judges,  to  give  heed. 

Apollo. 
Oh  hateful  progeny,  of  Heaven  abhorred ! 
Fetters  he  might  unloose, — this  ill  hath  cure, 
And  yields  to  many  a  method  of  release. 
But  when  the  dust  hath  once  the  blood  sucked  up 
Of  murdered  man,  he  riseth  never  more. 
No  charm  for  that,  my  father  hath  ordained, 
Who  all  things  else  upturneth  as  he  will,  620 

Nor  with  the  toil  panteth  his  mighty  heart. 

Chorus. 

Beware  of  voting  for  this  man's  escape. 
Shall  he,  a  mother's  kindred  blood  who  shed. 
Dwell  safe  in  Argos,  in  his  father's  house  ? 
What  altars  of  his  people  may  he  touch  ? 
How  share  the  lustral  water  with  his  tribe  ? 

Apollo. 

Thus  I  declare,  learn  ye  how  just  my  words. 

Not  mother  of  her  so-called  child  is  she, 

Who  bears  it ; — she  is  but  the  embryo's  nurse ; 

He  who  begets  is  parent ;  she  for  him,  630 


172  Eumenides. 

As  stranger  for  a  stranger,  rears  the  germ. 

Unless  the  god  should  blight  it  in  the  bud. 

Sure  warrant  of  my  word  I  will  adduce ; — 

Without  a  mother  may  a  father  be ; 

Witness  this  daughter  of  Olympian  Zeus, 

Not  nurtured  in  the  darkness  of  the  womb, 

Yet  such  a  scion  goddess  never  bare. 

In  will,  in  action,  Pallas,  be  it  mine 

Thy  city  and  thy  people  to  exalt. 

This  man  I  sent,  a  suppliant  to  thy  shrine. 

That  faithful  ho  might  be  for  evermore.  6i0 

That,  goddess !  thou  for  allies  mightest  win 

Him  and  his  after-race,  and  that  these  pacts 

Might  last  eternal,  blessed  by  men  imbom, 

Athexa. 
I  do  command  you,  as  your  judgment  leads, 
Just  verdict  give, — of  pleadings  now  enough. 

Chorus. 
By  us  in  sooth  our  shafts  have  all  been  shot, 
The  issue  of  the  cause  I  wait  to  hear. 

Athena. 
How  may  I  rule  the  cause,  imblamed  by  you  ? 

Chorus. 
Ye  heard  what  ye  have  board ; — now  in  your  hoaits, 
Your  oaths  revering,  strangers,  give  your  votea.      650 

Athkna. 
Hear  yo  my  statute,  men  of  Attica, — 


Eumemdes.  17S 

Ye  who  of  bloodshed  judge  this  primal  cause. 

And  for  the  host  of  ^Egeus  shall  abide 

This  court  of  jurors,  sacred  evermore. 

The  Hall  of  Ares  this,  of  Amazons 

The  seat  and  camping  ground,  what  time  of  old, 

In  hate  of  Theseus,  waging  war  they  came, 

And  'gainst  this  city,  newly  fortified, 

A  counter-fortress  for  themselves  upreared. 

To  Ares  they  did  sacrifice,  and  hence 

This  rock  is  titled  Areopagus. 

Here  then  shall  sacred  Awe,  and  Fear,  her  kin,      660 

By  day  and  night  my  lieges  hold  from  wrong, 

Save  if  themselves  do  innovate  my  laws. 

With  influx  base  or  mud,  if  thou  defile 

The  sparkling  water,  thou  no  drink  shalt  find. 

Nor  Anarchy,  nor  Tyrant's  lawless  rule 

Commend  I  to  my  people's  reverence ; — 

Nor  let  them  from  their  city  banish  Fear 

For  who  'mong  men,  imcurbed  by  fear,  is  just  ? 

Thus  holding  Awe  in  seemly  reverence,  670 

A  bulwark  for  your  state  shall  ye  possess, 

A  safeguard  to  protect  your  city-walls, 

Such  as  no  mortals  other-where  can  boast, 

Neither  in  Scythia,  nor  in  Pelops'  realm. 

Behold !    This  court  august,  untouched  by  bribes, 

Sharp  to  avenge,  wakeful  for  those  who  sleep. 

Establish  I,  a  bulwark  to  this  land. 

This  charge,  extending  to  all  future  time, 

I  give  my  lieges.     Meet  it  is  ye  rise, 

Assume  the  pebbles,  and  decide  the  cause, 

Your  oath  revering.     All  hath  now  been  said.          G30 


174  Eumenides. 

{Tlie  first  Areopagite  rises,  takes  a  pehhle  from  the  altar,  and 
drops  it  into  the  urn.  Tfie  rest  follow  in  succession  betvjeen 
the  following  distichs."] 

Chorus. 

This  sisterhood,  oppressive  to  the  land, 

My  council  is  that  ye  in  no  wise  shame. 

Apollo. 
And  I  enjoin  yon,  fear  mine  oracles  ; 
From  Zeus  they  issue,  fruitless  make  them  not. 

Chortis. 
Usurping  championship  of  bloody  suit, 
No  longer  shall  thine  oracles  be  pure. 

AroLLO. 
Did  then  my  Father  towards  Ixion  err, 
Who  first  as  blood-stained  suppliant,  sued  for  aid  ? 

CJionis. 
Say  on  I  but  I,  defrauded  in  my  suit, 
In  turn  will  haunt  the  land,  dread  visitant.  690 

Apollo. 
Alike  of  younger  and  of  elder  gods 
Art  thou  unhonoured.     I  the  cause  shall  win. 

Chortis. 

So  whilom  wroughtcst  thou  in  Phores'  house, 
Moving  the  Fates  mortals  from  death  to  free. 

AroLLO. 

Was  it  not  just  my  votary  to  aid, 
Tlicu  chioOy  in  his  hour  of  sorest  nood  ? 


Eumenides.  175 

Chorus. 
But  thou  the  prime  allotments  didst  o'errulo 
With  wine  deluding  the  hoar  goddesses. 

Apollo. 
But  thou,  full  soon,  defeated  in  thy  suit, 
Wilt  spew  thy  venom,  harmless  to  thy  foes.  700 

CJiorus. 
Since  thou,  young  god,  o'erridest  my  hoar  ago, 
The  issue  I  await  with  list'ning  ear, 
And  doubtful  stay  my  wrath  against  the  town. 

[After  the  twelfth  Areopagite  has  dropped  his  pehble  into  tJte 
urn,  Athexa  takes  one  from  the  altar,  and  holds  it  in  her 
hand."] 

Athena  . 

With  me  it  rests  to  give  the  casting  vote, 

And  to  Orestes  I  my  suffrage  pledge. 

For  to  no  mother  do  I  owe  my  birth ; 

In  all,  save  wedlock,  I  approve  the  male, 

And  am,  with  all  my  soul,  my  father's  child. 

Nor  care  I  to  avengo  a  woman's  death 

Who  slew  her  husband,  guardian  of  the  house.  710 

Orestes,  judged  by  equal  votes  prevails.* 

The  pebbles  now  pour  quickly  from  the  urns, 

Judges,  to  whom  this  office  is  assigned. 

Obestes. 
Phoebos  Apollo,  how  will  end  this  suit? 

*  Athena's  ballot  is  the  mythic  expression  of  the  principle, 
that  where  Justice  is  imdecided  Mercy  prevails. — Muller. 


176  Eumenides. 

Chorus. 
0  Night,  dark  mother,  seest  thou  these  things  ? 

Obestes. 
The  noose  awaits  me,  or  to  see  the  light. 

Chorus. 
Ruin  for  us,  or  firm  prerogative. 

[^The  pehbles  are  poured  out  of  the  urn  and  counted.'] 
Apollo. 
Now  strangers,  count  the  pebbles  with  duo  care ; 
And  while  yo  tell  them  o'er,  let  justice  reign; 
Lack  of  right  judgment  brecdeth  mighty  woe,  720 

Tho  while  one  suffrage  hath  a  house  restored. 

Athena. 
This  man  acquitted  is  from  charge  of  blood. 
For  equal  arc  the  numbers  of  the  votes. 

Obestes. 
Hail  Pallas  I    Hail  thou  saviour  of  my  house  I 
l^Ie,  when  bereft  of  my  internal  land, 
Thou  leadest  homo :  haply  some  Greek  will  say, 
"  The  man  an  Argivo  is  once  more,  and  dwells 
On  his  paternal  heritage,  by  aid 
Of  Piillas,  and  of  Loxias,  and  Ilim, 
Third  Saviour,  mighty  consummator,  Zeus," — 
Wlio,  honouring  my  father's  death,  saves  mo,  730 

Beholding  these  my  mother's  advocates. 
Now  to  my  native  Argos  I  depart. 
Pledged  to  this  country  and  thy  lieges  hero 


Eumenides.  177 

By  oath  to  be  revered  for  evermore, 

That  never  helmsman  of  the  Argive  State 

Shall  hither  bear  the  well-appointed  spear. 

For  we,  ourselves,  though  couching  in  the  gravo. 

On  those  who  violate  these  present  oaths 

By  sore  perplexities  will  work,  and  send 

Iq  march  despondency,  in  crossing  streams  74.0 

Omens  averse,  till  they  repent  their  toil. 

But  unto  those  who  keep  this  pledge,  anl  Loncur 

Athena's  city  with  confederate  spear, 

To  them  will  we  be  gracious  evermore. 

Hail  goddess,  and  these  city-wardens,  hail ! 

Still  may  your  gripe  be  fatal  to  your  foes, 

While  victory  and  safety  crown  your  spear. 

[^Exil. 

Chorus. 

1.  Ye  upstart  gods,  time-honoured  laws 
Down-riding,  ye  have  seized  my  prey. 

2.  But  I,  dishonoured,  stung  by  grief,  750 
Woe,  woe,  my  torture  to  allay, 

On  all  the  gi'ound,  will  cast  around 

Yenom,  whose  baleful  drops  shall  cause 

Where  it  doth  light  a  sterile  blight, 

Fatal  alike  to  germ,  to  leaf. 
The  pest,  0  Justice,  scouring  o'er  the  plain, 
Shall  fling  abroad  its  man-destroying  stain. 

3.  I  groan  anew  ;  what  dare  ?  what  do  ? 
My  pangs  the  citizens  shall  rue ; 

Alas,  most  wretched  are  thy  daughters,  Night ! 
Enduring  this  dishonouraldL'  slight.  7C0 


178  Eumenides. 

Athena. 
l:5e  moved  by  me  to  stay  these  heavy  groans ; 
Xot  vanquished  are  ye,  nor  to  your  disgraco 
Fell  justicje,  equal- voted,  from  the  um. 
Besides  from  Zeus  clear  oracles  were  seut, 
And  he  who  uttered  them  himself  avouched, 
Orestes  for  this  deed  should  know  no  scath. 
Hull  not  your  heavy  verath  upon  this  laud ; 
Your  rage  abate,  cause  not  sterility, 
Nor  rain  your  poison-drops,  like  venomed  daits, 
Ruthless  devourers  of  each  tender  genu.  770 

For  I  most  righteously  do  promise  you 
Both  sanctuaries  and  shrines  in  this  just  land ; 
Seated  at  hearths  with  imctuous  off'rings  fed. 
And  held  in  honour  by  my  lieges  herec 

Choru$. 

1.  Ye  upstait  gods,  time-honoured  laws 
Down-riding,  ye  have  seized  my  prey. 

2.  But  I,  dibhonoured,  stung  by  grief, 
Woe,  woe,  my  torture  to  allay, 

On  aU  the  groimd,  will  cast  around 

Venom,  whose  baleful  drops  shall  causo  7S0 

Where  it  doth  light  a  sterile  blight, 

Fatal  alike  to  germ,  to  leaf. 
The  pest,  0  Justice,  scouring  o'er  the  plain, 
Shall  fling  abroad  its  man  destroying  stain. 

3.  I  groan  anew ;  what  daro ?  what  do? 
My  pangs  the  citizens  shull  rue; 

Alas,  most  v^Tetched  are  tliy  daughters,  Night  I 
Enduring  this  dishonourable  slight. 


Eumenides.  179 

Athena. 
Not  slighted  are  ye,  powers  august !  througli  rage 
Curse  not  with  hopeless  blight  the  abode  of  mau. 
I  too  on  Zeus  rely ;  why  speak  of  that  ?  790 

And  sole  among  the  gods  1  know  the  key 
That  opes  the  halls  w^here  sealed  thunder  sleeps. 
But  such  we  need  not.    Be  appeased  by  me, 
Nor  scatter  o'er  the  land,  from  froward  tongue. 
The  harmful  seed  that  turneth  all  to  bane. 
Of  bitter  rage  lull  ye  the  murky  wave ; 
Be  venerated  here  and  dwell  with  me. 
Sharing  the  first  fruits  of  this  ample  realm, 
For  children  offered,  and  for  nuptial  rite, 
This  word  of  mine  thou  wilt  for  ever  praise.  800 

Ch.rus. 

1.  That  I  should  suffer  this,  oh  Fio  1 

2.  That,  old  in  wisdom,  I  on  earth  should  dwell 
Dishonour'd  !     Fie !  Debasement  vile ! 

3.  Rage  I  breathe  forth,  and  wrath  no  stint  that  knows. 
L  Fie  !  Fie !  0  earth,  alas ! 

5.  What  agony  of  pain  creeps  o'er  my  heart ! 

6.  Hear,  Mother  Night,  my  passion. 

7.  Mark  for  scorn, 
By  crafty  gods  deluded,  held  for  nought, 
Of  ancient  honour  I  am  basely  shorn. 

Athena. 
I'll  bear  thine  anger,  for  mine  elder  thou,  810 

And  wiser  art,  in  that  regard,  than  I. 
Yet  me,  with  wisdom,  Zeus  not  meanly  dowers. 


180  Eumenides. 

But  yc,  if  now  ye  Feck  some  alien  soil, 
Will  of  this  land  enamonr'd  be ;  of  this 
You  I  forewarn  ;  for  onward-flowing  time 
Shall  these  my  lieges  raise  to  loftier  fame  ; 
And  thou,  in  venerable  seat  enshrined 
Hard  by  Erectheus'  temple,  shalt  receive 
Honours  from  men  and  trains  of  women,  such 
As  thou  from  other  mortals  ne'er  may'st  win. 
But  cfist  ye  not  abroad  on  these  my  realms,  820 

To  waste  their  building  strength,  whetstones  of  blood. 
Evoking  frantic  rage  not  bom  of  wine  ; 
Nor,  as  out-plucking  hearts  of  fighting-cocks, 
Plant  ye  among  my  townsmen  civil  strife. 
Reckless  of  kindred  blood  ;  let  foreign  war 
Eagc  without  stint,  aftording  ample  scope 
For  him  who  burns  with  glory's  mighty  rnge. 
No  war  of  home-bred  cocks,  I  ween,  is  that ! 
Such  terms  I  proflfer,  thine  it  is  to  choose ; 
Blessing  and  blest,  with  blessed  rites  revered,         830 
To  share  this  country  dear  unto  the  gods. 
CJiorns. 

1.  That  I  should  suffer  this,  oh  Fiel 

2.  That,  old  in  wisdom,  I  on  earth  should  dwell 
Dishonour'd  !     Fie  !  Dtbascmcnt  vilo  ! 

3.  Kago  I  brorttlic  forth,  nnd  wrath  no  stint  that  knows. 

4.  Fio  !  Fie  !  O  earth,  alas  ! 

T).  What  atjony  of  i>aiii  cri'i-ps  o'er  my  licart ! 

G.  Hear,  ]Motlirr  Night,  my  passion. 

7.  ^lark  for  scorn. 
By  crafty  pods  deluded,  hold  for  nought. 
Of  ancient  honour  I  am  basily  shorn.  810 


Eumenides.  181 

Atuena. 

I  will  not  weary  to  entreat  thee  fair  ; 

For  ne'er  witli  justice  shalt  thou  urge  the  plaint, 

That  thou,  the  elder  deity,  by  me 

The  younger,  and  these  city-guarding  men, 

Wert,  like  an  outcast,  banished  from  the  land. 

But  if  Persuasion's  power  ye  hold  in  awe, — 

The  charm  and  honeyed  sweetness  of  my  tongue, 

Tarry  thou  must ;  but  if  thou  wilt  not  tarry, 

Not  justly  wouldst  thou  on  this  city  huid 

EeVenge,  or  wrath,  or  do  my  people  wrong  ; 

For  thine  it  is  to  share  with  me  this  land,  850 

In  aye-enduring  honour  justly  held. 

Chorus. 
Athena,  (jueen,  what  seat  dost  offer  me  ? 

Athena. 
One  where  no  sorrow  scathes.     Eeceive  it  thou ! 

Chorus. 
If  I  consent,  what  honour  waiteth  me  ? 

Athena. 
No  house  uftblest  by  thee  shall  henceforth  thrive. 

Chorus. 
This  wilt  thou  do  ?  endow  me  with  such  might  ? 

Athena. 
Ay,  and  will  prosper  him  who  worships  thee. 


182  Eumenides. 

Chorus. 
Wilt  thou  sure  warrant  give  me  for  all  time  ? 

Athexa. 
I  may  not  pledge  what  I  will  not  perform. 

Chorus. 
Thine  utterance  soothes  me ; — I  relax  my  wrath.     860 

Athena, 
Established  here  thou  wilt  be  rich  in  friends. 

Clwms. 
What  blessings  shall  we  hymn  for  this  thy  land  ? 

Athexa. 
Such  as,  with  gracious  influence,  from  earth, 
From  dew  of  ocean,  and  from  heaven,  attend 
On  conquest  not  ignoble.     That  soft  airs, 
"With  sunshine  blowing,  wander  o'er  the  land  ; 
That  earth's  fair  fruit,  rich  increase  of  the  flocks, 
Fail  not  my  citizens  for  evermore, 
With  safety  of  the  precious  human  seed  ; — 
But,  for  the  impious, — weed  them  promptly  out.      870 
For  I,  like  one  who  tendeth  plants,  do  love 
This  race  of  righteous  men,  by  grief  unscathed  : — 
Such  be  thy  charge.     Be  mine  not  to  endure 
That,  among  mortals,  in  wars  splendid  toils, 
Athena's  city  be  not  conqaest-crowncJ. 

Chorus.     Stkoi'HE  I. 
I'allfts,  thy  chosen  scat  henceforth  be  mine  ! 
No  more  the  city  I  despise 


Eumenides.  1S3 

Wliicli  Zeus  omnipotent  and  Ares  prize, 
Stronglaold  of  gods,  altar-protecting  slirine 

Of  Hellas'  deities,  880 

For  which,  with  friendly  augury  I  pray ; 

Springing  to  light  from  earth's  dark  womb. 
May  life's  fair  germs  prolific  bloom, 
Lured  by  the  solar  ray. 

Athena, 
I  for  my  citizens  with  gracious  mind 

These  blessings  mediate  ;  these  deities 
Installing  here,  mighty  and  hard  to  please. 

For  unto  them  hath  Fate  assigned  890 

The  destinies  to  fix  of  human  kind. 

But  whoso  findeth  them  severe 
Knows  not  whence  come  life's  strokes  ;  for  crime, 
Dread  heritage  from  bygone  time, 
Doth  lead  him  to  these  powers  august. 
Him  noiseless  Euin,  midst  his  proud  career, 
With  hostile  anger,  levels  with  the  dust. 

Chorus.     Aktistrophe  I. 
Here  may  no  tree-destroying  mildew  sweep, — 

(So  show  I  forth  my  grace), 
May  no  fierce  heat  within  these  bounds  alight,         900 
Blasting  the  tender  buds  ;  no  sterile  blight, 

Disastrous,  onward  creep. 
But  in  due  season  here  may  flocks  of  worth 
Twin  yeanlings  bear ;  and  may  this  race, 
Enriched  with  treasures  of  the  earth, 
Honour  the  Heaven-sent  grace  I 


184  Eumenides, 

Atoexa, 

Ye  city-guardians  do  ye  hear  aright 
VvTiat  thus  she  promises.     For  great  the  might        910 
Erinys  wields— dread  brood  of  night — 
Alike  with  Hades  and  the  Olympian  Powers ; 
O'er  men  confessed  and  absolute  her  reign, 
To  some  she  giveth  song,  and  some  she  dowers 
"With  life,  tear-blindcd,  marred  by  pain. 

Chorus.    Stbophe  II. 

Here  may  there  fall  no  man-destroying  blight ! 
And  ye,  great  Powers,  o'er  marriage  who  preside, 
In  wedlock  bands  each  lovely  maid  unite ; — 
Ye  too,  dread  sisters,  to  ourselves  allied,  920 

Awful  dispensers  of  the  Right, 

In  every  human  homo  confessed, 

In  every  age  made  manifest, 
By  righteous  visitations ; — aye  revered, 
And,  everywhere,  of  deities  most  feared. 

Athena. 

While  thus  ye  ratify  with  friendly  zpal 

These  blessings  to  my  country,  I  rejoice. 

And  love  Persuasion's  eye,  who  moved  my  voice 

To  soothe  these  stern  refusers,  passiou-stuug.  930 

But  Zeus  hath  conquered,  swayer  of  the  tongue, 

Gcxl  of  tho  Forum.     Triuinphs  now  for  ayo 

In  noble  benefits  our  rivalry. 


Eumenides.  185 

CTionis.     Antistrophe  II. 
Witliin  this  city  ne'er  may  civil  strife, 
Insatiate  of  ill,  tumultuous  roar  ; 
Nor  thirsty  dust  quaff  deep  the  purple  gore 
Of  citizens  ;  nor  rage,  with  murder  rife, 

Snatch  greedily  the  vengeful  knife  1 

But  studious  of  the  common  weal 

May  each  to  each  in  turn  be  kind,  940 

Hate  may  they  ever  with  one  common  mind ; 
This  among  mortals  many  a  woe  can  heal. 

Athena. 

Grow  they  not  wise,  as  they  the  pathway  find 

Of  tongue  propitious  ?     From  these  shapes  of  fear, 

I  to  my  lieges  see  rich  gain.     For  here, 

If  ye  these  gracious  ones  with  gracious  mind 

Adore  and  magnify, — your  state  and  town 

Ye  shall  for  evermore  with  justice  crown. 

Chonis.     Steophe  III. 

Farewell,  farewell,  enriched  with  wealth's  fair  prize, 
Farewell,  ye  people  of  the  city,  near  950 

To  Zeus  himself  who  dwell,  to  Pallas  dear, 
Friends  to  the  friendly  Virgin  ; — timely  wise ; 
'Neath  Pallas'  wings  who  rest,  her  feither  doth  revere. 

[Athexa  stations  herself  at  the  head  of  the  Chorus  in  the 
orchestra,  where  they  are  joined  by  the  escort  of  females 
with  torches.  ] 

Athena. 

Ye  too  farewell !    Mine  is  it  first  to  show 


186  Eumenides. 

Your  destined  seats  and  thitherward  to  lead. 

Escorted  by  the  torchlight's  sacred  glow, 

The  while  in  sacrifice  the  victims  bleed  9G0 

The  downward  slope  descend. 
Wliate'er  is  baneful  to  the  land  restrain, 
And  conquest's  gracious  ministry  upsend 
To  this  my  city.     Tutelary  train, 
Children  of  Cranaos,  it  belongs  to  you. 
These  alien  settlers  to  their  homes  to  guide ; 
And  with  my  lieges  may  there  aye  abide, 
Discernment  rightful  of  the  Eight  and  True. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  III, 
Farewell  once  more,  my  farewell  I  repeat,  970 

All  ye,  or  gods  or  mortals,  who  reside 
In  Pallas'  city,  and  who  here  preside. 
Holding  in  pious  awe  my  hallow'd  scat, 
The  fortunes  of  your  life  ye  never-more  shall  chide. 

Athena. 
The  utt'rance  of  your  pious  vows  I  praise ; — 
I  will  escort  you  with  the  flashing  light 
Of  torches,  to  your  cavernous  abodes 
Beneath  tlie  earth,  with  sacred  ministers, 
And  those  mine  image  loyally  who  guard. 
For  now,  of  all  the  land  of  Tlicscns  let  980 

The  eye  come  forth, — a  glorious  company 
Of  girls,  of  wives,  of  matrons  lioar  witli  ehl, 
In  festive  garb  apparelled,  vcrmoil-hued, — 
Proceed  ond  let  the  torch-flame  load  the  way, 
Tliat  evormnro  this  gracious  sisterhood 
May,  witli  events  auspicous,  bless  this  land. 


Eumenides.  187 

[Durinq  the  foUovnng  Chant  the  procession  leaves  the  temple 
and  descends  escorting  the  Erinnyes  to  their  Shrines.'] 

Chorus  of  the  Escort.  Stbophe  I. 
Niglit's  hoary  children,  venerable  train, 
"With  friendly  escort  leave  the  hallowed  fane. 

AIL 
llnstics,  glad  shouts  of  triumph  raise. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  I. 
In  ancient  crypts  remote  from  light, 
Victims  await  you  and  the  hallowed  rite.  990 

All. 
People,  ring  out  youi'  notes  of  praise. 

Chorus.     Strophe  11. 
With  promise  to  this  land  of  blessings  rare, 
Down  the  steep  path  ye  awful  beings  wend, 
Rejoicing  in  the  torchlight's  dazzling  glare. 

All. 
Your  cries  of  jubilee  ring  out  amain. 

Chorus.     Antistuophb  11. 
Let  torchlights  and  libations  close  the  rear. 
Thus  Zeus,  all-seeing,  and  the  Fates  descend, 
To  bless  these  citizens  to  Pallas  dear. 

All. 
Your  cry  of  jubilee  ring  out  amain. 


]  88  Eumetiides, 


NOTES  ON  THE  TEXT, 


EUMENIDKS. 

132.  fTrovpta-naa  rw.  This  use  of  rw  for  airra  is  un- 
doubtedly corrupt  in  1G6  and  337  ;  so,  also,  as  I  think,  in 
Agam.  7.  I  have  no  Index  that  will  tell  of  other  such  jias- 
sages,  but  I  think  this  ought  to  be  fnovpla-aa-d  tw,  i.e.  nvi, 
"  some  one." 

155.  ^apv  TO  nepi^apv  is  clearly  wrong  jSapu  n,  ntpl^apv, 
proposed  by  Wakefield,  is  adopted  by  Schutz  and  Uenuann. 

158.  For  dpovov  Dindorf  reads  6p6p.^ov,  which  has  no 
syntax.     I  can  believe  in  dpon^ot  or  dpofx^oisy  joining  (f>ovo- 

\l^rj  to  6p.(j)cik6v. 

166.  Kcii  Tov  is  absurd :  iavrov  gives  the  necessary  sense. 
The  simplest  change  is  xuvtov  foi  koI  t6v. 

168.  Linwood  condemns  fv  Kiipa.  Certainly  eV  \\'i5n  is 
more  to  the  purpose,  especially  with  tK  y  tp.ov. 

169.  fKftpov.  Scholefield  proposed  t^  tfiov ;  qi(.,  €«  y' 
f'fiov  ?     But  Hermann  suggested  tariv  6v. 

337.  Dindorf  excellently  changes  eVi  t6v  Z  to  cVirdi/o>v. 
and  ovd'  ofiinas  to  ovra  ntp,  o/ia)t  (perliaps  following  Hermann ) ; 
and  bolder  still,  writes  ftouifiov  in  place  of  ix^'  aifutros  viov. 
It  must  Iw  admitted  that  tiie  last  words  are  a  more  interpre- 
tation of  some  adjective  whose  place  they  liave  U8Ur]H'd  ;  but 
I  should  look  rather  for  an  ndjeetivo  which  did  tu>t  contain 
the  word  alfxa,  as  vtoOtjyfj  or  vfoapSfj. 


Eumenides.  189 

341.  In  (fia7ai  Xirals  I  suspect  tliat  efiols  dXlrais,  "  my 
criminals,"  is  hidden.  We  need  such  a  phrase  to  make  edvos 
ToSf  clear.  The  rare  word  aktrrjs  (Homeric  dXeiTTjs)  would 
easily  be  mistaken. 

343.  alfxaToa-rayis  is  metrically  refuted,  but  Dindorf  s  in- 
novations (here  and  in  the  strophic  line  also)  are  extreme. 
We  must  drop  out  aifxaToa-Tayes ;  thereupon  we  find  a  tro- 
chaic word  needful  belore  e'dvos.  The  lost  word  may  have 
been  (poLvov,  interpreted  by  difMaroa-rayes. 

348.  (T(j)aXepa  seems  to  be  active,  and  koX  to  have  been  lost 
after  it :  "  my  limbs,  which  trip  up  even  swift;  runners." 

352.  Kara  ydv,  if  opposed  to  vw   aWepi,  should  be  Kara  yds. 

3G3.  aTLfTai  is  against  the  metre.  Drop  it  entirely,  and 
the  theoiy  of  a  hiatus  in  the  antistrophe  drops  with  it, 

448.  A  corrupt  and  doubtful  word  is  df^Portpa.  Mus- 
grave's  (nificpopd  gives  good  sense.  Av(nTJ]p,avTa,  I  believe, 
ought  to  be  dva-TTeTravTa. 

456.  rj^o)  cannot  be  right.  Better  Ta^w  (Dind.  3rd.  ed. 
V.  488.) 

457  is  a  very  doubtful  line.     Perhaps 

opKov  Trapivras  firjBev  eKdiKois  Cppecriv. 

481.  iiTTodoaiv,  "a  diminution,"  gives  a  wrong  sense: 
Xrj^iv  enidocnv  re,  "  allotment  and  augmentation,"  is  what  we 
ex2)ect ;  yet  eirlSoaiv  would  not  have  been  corrupted  into 
vnodoa-iv.  Is  it  not  possible  that  X^^is  is  the  first  allotment 
of  tax,  and  LnoSoa-is  means  "  a/ifer-payment,"  a  second  rate, 
when  the  first  has  proved  insufiBcient  ? 

492—4.  Vulg.  8€ip.alv€i  is  impossible.  I  suggest  Bapvarai. 
Also  o'lKoi,  "within,"  "in  the  heart,"  for  fv  /cat,  which  is 
nonsense. 

497.  fv  (/)dfi  Kupdiav  is  clearly  wrong.  The  obviously 
right  sense  is  given,  with  right  metre,  by  tls  8e  fxr]b4v  €p.(f>vfi 
KTipi,  8(7pop  dvarpicpav,  ffj-noXis  ^porois.  [f/  ttoKis  ^pOTOs  & 
is  not  Greek.] 


190  Eumenides. 

531.  Tov  ovnoT  avxovvT. — I  think  ovttot  should  be  ot/<«T.' 

553.  Toiyap,  therefore,  is  against  the  sense.  Perhaps 
ri  yap  ;  will  set  it  right. 

570.  TTKJyavcrKa  8'  vufi  is  corrupt.  Read  ^ov\p  Se  (^dcricw 
8(lu. 

582.  TO.  nXei(TT  dfifivov  (v(^pocnv. — "Xfidvov'  is  obviously 
corrupt.  I  believe  the  poet  wrote  dfiiWais  (vfppoaiv,  and 
in  next  line,  napelx^  Xourpa,  Kam  8tpp.aTi.  There  is  no 
reason  for  supposing  a  line  lost. 

677.  Linwood's  Stavojias,  for  Baipiovas,  removes  all  difficulty. 

F.  W.  N. 


THE  PERSIANS. 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 


Chorus  of  Persian  Elders. 
Ato?6a,  Mother  of  XEBXEa 
Ghost  of  Dabids. 
Xerxes. 
Me^senoeb. 


[Scene. — Susa,  before  the  Palace  of  the  Persian  htngs. 
TJie  Thijmcle  *  arranged  to  represent  the  tomb  of  Darius. 
Enter  a  procession  of  Persian  Elders  forming  tJie 
Chorus.^ 

*  The  thymcle  was  a  raised  platform  in  the  centre  of  the 
orchestra,  which  served  as  resting-place  for  the  Chorus  when 
it  took  up  a  stationary  position. — K.  0.  MuUer. 


INTEODUCTION. 


This  drama,  founded  upon  the  Persian  War,  and  pro- 
duced only  seven  years  after  its  termiuation  (b.c.  472), 
is  invested  with  peculiar  interest,  not  only  as  the 
earliest  ^schylean  drama  which  has  come  down  to  us, 
but  also  as  our  earliest  extant  Greek  history,  the  first 
recorded  recitation  of  Herodotus  having  taken  place  at 
the  great  Panathenaea  at  Athens  (b.c.  446).  It  ex- 
hibits, moreover,  the  same  principles  of  dramatic  art. 
and  the  same  conceptions  respecting  the  divine  govern- 
ment which  characterise  the  purely  imaginative  pro- 
ductions of  the  "  warrior-bard."  For  its  full  apprecia- 
tion we  must  endeavour  to  realise  the  magnitude  of 
the  struggle  which  it  commemorates,  together  with  the 
momentous  consequences  to  Hellas  and  to  the  world 
which  resulted  from  the  Hellenic  victory. 

About  eighty  years  before  the  battle  of  Salamis 
(fought  B.C.  480)  the  Persians  had  made  their  fii-st 
appearance  in  history,  when,  under  their  leader. 
Cyrus,  they  overthrew  the  empire  of  the  Medes  (b.c. 
659).  Within  this  comparatively  brief  interval  they 
had  brought  under  subjection  not  only  the  native 
peoples  of  Asia,  but  also  large  areas  of  Europe  and 


194  The  Persians. 

Africa.  At  the  timo  of  onr  drama  tlicir  empire  ex- 
tended southward  over  Egypt  to  Cjrcnaiea,  while  to 
the  north  it  comprised  Maritime  Thrace,  Pfeonea,  and 
apparently  Macedonia,  as  far  as  the  borders  of  Thessaly, 
besides  nearly  all  the  islands  of  the  iEgean,  north  of 
Krete  and  east  of  Euboea.  Their  ambition  expanded 
^th  their  conquests,  till,  at  length,  they  aspired  to 
universal  dominion.  "  The  conquest  of  Greece  was 
represented  by  Xerxes  as  caiTying  with  it  that  of  all 
Europe,  so  that  the  Persian  empire  would  become  co- 
extensive with  the  iEther  of  Zeus,  and  the  limits  of 
the  Sun's  course." 

The  idea  upon  which  this  colossal  empire  was  based 
was  that  of  the  despotic  force  of  personal  will,  involving 
obligation  of  universal  personal  service,  especially  in 
war.  During  the  expedition  of  Xerxes  the  tributaries 
of  the  Persian  king  were  virtually  slaves,  working 
under  the  lash,  and  driven  on  to  the  charge  in  battle 
with  the  scourge.  The  profound  humiliation  of  the 
subject  peoples  is  forcibly  depicted  by  the  Chorus,  in 
the  ode  wherein  they  lament  the  overthrow  of  the 
Persian  power  (v.  586). 

Meanwliilc,  in  the  hc^rt  of  ITellas,  a  now  phase  uf 
politicftl  life  had  been  developed ;  Athens  had  thrown 
off  tlie  yoke  of  her  tyrants,  the  Pisistratids,  and  the 
world  saw,  for  the  first  time,  a  state  comi>osed  of  free 
and  equal  citizoiis.  The  revolution  of  Klcisthcncs 
had  established  the  principles  of  free  spoccli  and  equal 
law,  while  as  yet  this  now-born  liberty  had  not  degene- 
rated  into  liconcc.     Adverting  to  the  Athcuir.n  cou- 


The  Persians.  195 

stitution  at  tha  time  ■when  the  Persians  made  their 
attack  on  Hellas,  Plato  says,  "  Eeverence  was  then  our 
queen  and  mistress,  and  made  us  willing  to  live  in 
ohedience  to  the  laws."  The  strength  of  patriotic 
sentiment  generated  by  the  new  constitution  inspired 
the  amazing  courage  required  in  the  Athenians  to 
encounter  the  hitherto  unconquered  hosts  of  Persia ; 
upon  the  plain  of  Marathon  they  triumphed,  and  their 
glorious  victory  arrested,  for  a  time,  the  encroachments 
of  the  Persian  king. 

His  son  Xerxes  undertook  to  avenge  the  disaster 
which  had  befallen  the  Persian  arms :  after  enormous 
preparations,  he  set  forth  on  his  expedition,  at  the  heaxl 
of  an  army  compose!  of  forty-six  different  nations,  cac)i 
with  its  distinct  national  costume  and  local  leaders, 
while  eight  other  nations  furnished  the  fleet.  Well 
might  the  contemporary  world  be  overawed  by  the 
spectacle  of  so  prodigious  an  armament,  and  regard  the 
cause  of  Hellenic  independence  as  desperate. 

The  victory  of  Salamis  shattered  the  power  of  the 
barbarians,  and  changed  the  destiny  of  the  world. 

"  '  Let  there  be  light !'  said  Liberty, 
And,  like  sunrise  from  the  sea, 
Athens  arose." 

In  celebration  of  the  victory  thus  achieved  by 
struggling  and  triumphant  freedom,  and  in  honour 
of  the  city  of  Pallas,  which  had  won  immortal 
glory  at  Salamis,  iEschylus  composed  his  drama  of 
'The  Persians.'  It  has  been  justly  remarked  that 
*•  ^schylus  is  the  prophet  of  Greek  tragedy."      "  A 


196  The  Persians. 

single  episode,  a  single  generation,  was  insuflBcient  for 
the  display  of  the  dependence  of  life  upon  life,  and  the 
moral  infinitude  of  action  which  it  was  his  design  to 
exhibit.  Thus  he  habitually  composed  groups  of 
three  connected  plays,  which  gave  full  scope  for  the 
development  of  thought  and  work."* 

Unfortunately,  we  possess  only  the  second  member 
of  the  trilogy,  which,  consisting  of  three  separate 
dramas,  severally  entitled,  Phineus,  The  Persians,  and 
Glaukos,!  appears  to  have  been  known  among  the 
ancients  by  the  general  name  of  '  The  Persians.'  To 
this  trilogy  was  appended;  the  Satyric  drama  of 
"  Prometheus,  the  Fire-kindler."  Though  the  second 
member  of  this  trilogy  is  alone  based  upon  history, 

*  "  iEschylus  as  a  Religious  Teacher." — Brook  F,  West- 
cott. 

t  The  ancient  Greek  argument  informs  us  that  ini.  MtVojvor 
Tpay<^ho>v  Alax^'^os  (vUa  ^ivd,  Ufptrais,  FXavKw  noTi-i*!, 
llpofxriOf't.  Fragments,  however,  exist  of  another  iEticliylian 
drama,  entitled  Glaukos  Pontios,  and  various  arguments  are 
adduced  by  "W'elckcr  and  Gruppe  to  prove  that  this  ditima, 
rather  than  the  Glaukos  Potnieus,  formed  the  third  member 
of  the  Persian  trilogy.  This  view  is  supported  by  W,  v. 
Humboldt,  Schlegel,  K.  0.  Miiller,  and  other  learned  men. 
It  seems,  I  confess,  hard  to  understand  why  the  error  should 
have  been  made  on  several  diflcrcnt  occasitms  by  several 
diflereut  writers.  The  princijial  rejison  for  regarding  Glaukos 
Potnieus  as  wrong  seems  to  bo  the  diftlcully  of  discovering 
any  link  of  connection  Ix-twecn  that  le^^cndary  hero,  tlie 
father  of  Bellerophontes,  and  the  tonuination  of  the  IVrsian 
war.  In  the  text  I  have  adopted  the  hyixithesis  of  Welckcr 
and  Grupjie,  and  have  given  a  brief  epitome  of  their  views 
rcsiK.'Cting  the  Glaukos  Fontios. 


The  Persians.  197 

while  the  first  and  third,  together  with  the  Satyric 
drama,  draw  their  materials  from  mythological  sources, 
it  appears  almost  certain  that  these  apparently  in- 
congruous elements  constituted  together  one  grand 
poetic  whole ;  the  leading  idea  giving  unity  to  the 
detached  dramas  being  the  struggle  between  Asia  and 
Europe,  which,  originating  in  the  dim  ages  of  my- 
thology, had  at  length  culminated  in  the  triumph  of 
Hellas  over  the  non-Hellenic  races.  In  the  same 
manner  Herodotus  has  based  his  history  upon  the 
notion  of  a  primeval  enmity  subsisting  between  the 
Hellenes  and  the  nations  of  the  East,  This  apparent 
incongi'uity  vanishes  when  we  remember  that  the  con- 
temj)oraries  of  -^schylus  cherished  the  firmest  belief 
in  the  existence  of  their  legendary  heroes,  whose  pro- 
tection and  assistance  were  continually  invoked,  while 
their  appearance  on  the  scene  of  action,  with  super- 
human stature  and  imposing  mien,  was  hailed  as  an 
omen  of  victory.  jiEschylus  has,  moreover,  in  the 
second  member  of  the  trilogy,  so  treated  the  events  of 
contemporary  history  as  to  bring  them  into  liarmony 
with  the  occurrences  of  the  mythical  past,  invested,  as 
it  was,  in  the  popular  imagination,  with  a  halo  of 
glory  and  sublimity.  This  was  rendered  possible 
by  the  remoteness  of  Persia,  which  was  selected  as 
the  scene  of  the  drama ;  by  the  gorgeous  splendoiir 
which  surrounded  Oriental  life;  by  tiie  vastness  of 
the  armies  assembled  under  the  sceptre  of  the  great 
king,  together  with  the  strangeness  of  the  barbaric 
physiognomy  and  costume.      "These,  exaggerated   to 


198  The  Persians. 

still  greater  proportions  in  tlic  popular  imagination, 
produced  an  impression  of  dim  and  indefinite  grcatnesSy 
not  unlike  that  in  which  the  midst  of  time  veiled  the 
heroes  of  mythology.''* 

Another  feature  of  the  iEschylean  ago  is  the  im- 
portance attached  to  prophecy,  which,  as  wc  learn  from 
Herodotus,  not  unfrequcntly  determined  the  judgments 
of  men,  both  Greeks  and  Asiatics ;  which  also  we  find 
employed  by  our  poet  as  the  most  convenient  link  for 
connecting  the  separate  members  of  his  trilogies. 
Thus,  in  the  Orestcift,  the  Agamemnon  is  connected 
with  the  Choei)hori  through  Cassandra's  prophecy  of 
the  vengeance  which  was  speedily  to  fall  upon  the 
guilty  pair.  If  we  turn  now  to  the  drama  of  '  The 
Persians,'  we  find  the  Ghost  of  Dai-ius  referring  in  tho 
most  emphatic  manner  to  certain  ancient  oracles 
(v.  739),  of  which  tho  calamities  which  had  befallen 
the  Persians  were  tho  recognised  fulfilment.  It  has 
been  remarked  by  "Welcker  that  in  this  passage  allusion 
is  obviously  mado  to  something  which  had  been 
brought  betbro  tho  minds  of  the  spectators  in  tho 
previous  drama,  and  this  hypothesis  is  confirmed  by 
the  prophetic  ciiaractcr  of  Pliineus,  from  whom  tho 
first  member  of  tho  trilogy  derives  its  name. 

Phineus  is  ropres'^utod  in  mythohigical  story  as  ono 
of  tho  sons  of  Agrnor,f  tho  father  of  tho  beautiful 
Europa ;  and  it  is  rolr  ted  of  Agt'nor  by  Ovid,  and  other 
classical  writers,  that  lie  sent  forth  his  sons  in  quest  of 

*  "  iE'cliyhi8." — hci^inald  S.  Coplostone. 

t  Aixjlloniua;  At2,oi  auts  (ii.  v.  237);  Gruppc 


The  Persians.  199 

their  sister,  whose  abduction  by  Zeus  was  reprosented 
by  Persian  literati  as  the  first  act  of  the  conflict  between 
the  Eastern  and  the  Western  world :  this  version 
of  the  Phineus  legend  would  ofTer,  as  remarked  by 
Gruppe,  an  obvious  link  of  connection  with  the  Persian 
war.  There  are  other  versions  of  the  story  which, 
notwithstanding  some  discrepancies  as  to  the  genealogy 
of  Phineus,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  blindness, 
agree  in  investing  him  with  the  prophetic  character, 
and  in  bringing  him  into  connection  with  the  Argo- 
nauts, the  grand  national  adventurers  of  Hellas. 

In  the  single  extant  fragment  of  the  ^schylean 
Phineus  reference  appears  to  be  made  to  the  Harpies : 

Kai  ■^fv868enrva  ttoXXo  fiapyaarjs  yvadov 
(ppvala^ov  (TTojiaros  iv  TvpaTTj  X'^P?* 

Phineus,  according  to  the  ancient  legend,  was  delivered 
from  the  Harj)ies  by  the  Boreades ;  *  and  it  is  related 
by  ApoUonius  (xi.  317)  that,  after  his  deliverance,  he 
prophesied,  and  foretold  to  the  Argonauts  the  success- 
ful issue  of  their  enterprise.  In  accordance  with  the 
spirit  of  the  age,  which  linked  together  the  successive 
conflicts  between  Europe  and  Asia,  the  expedition  of 
the  Argonauts,  with  that  of  the  Hellenes  against 
Ilium,  is  associated,  by  Herodotus,  with  the  Persian 

*  Gruppe  refers  to  two  paintings  upon  ancient  Greek  vases, 
where  Phineus  is  represented  surrounded  by  the  Argonauts, 
with  the  Harpies  driven  away  by  the  Boreades.  In  Ruskin's 
•  Queen  of  the  Air '  (p.  24),  the  reader  will  find  an  interest- 
ing exposition  of  the  signification  of  the  Harpies,  and  of  the 
antagonism  subsisting  between  them  and  the  Boreades. 


200  The  Persians. 

war :  iEschylus  would  probably  give  greater  scope  to 
tbe  prophecies  of  Phineus,  and  would  thus  have  an 
opportunity  of  carrying  back  the  imagination  of  the 
audience  to  the  traditionary  commencement  of  the 
great  struggle  which  had  recently  been  brought  to  so 
glorious  a  termination.  Thus,  according  to  Welcker, 
the  mythological  drama  of  Phineus  would  form  a  kind 
of  prophetic  prelude  to  the  historical  drama  of  '  The 
Persians.' 

Eeference  has  already  been  made  to  the  tendency  of 
jSlschylus  to  group  together  a  long  scries  of  events, 
having  reference  to  some  connecting  principle.  It 
might  therefore  excite  surprise  that,  in  treating  so 
momentous  a  subject  as  the  Persian  war,  he  should 
have  contented  himself  with  celebrating  the  battle  of 
Salamis  alone,  which,  however  glorious  for  Athens,  left 
the  fate  of  Hellas  still  undecided.  This  would  be 
brought  home  with  peculiar  force  to  the  Athenians 
who,  only  ten  months  after  the  retreat  of  Xerxes,  had 
been  obliged  to  migrate  a  second  time  to  Salamis, 
while  Athens  became  once  more  the  head-quarters  of 
their  dreaded  foe.  The  victory  of  Plattea,  which 
insured  the  final  deliverance  of  ITellas,  would  there- 
fore bo  regarded  as  second  in  importance  only  to 
Salamis.  Moreover,  in  the  drama  of  '  The  Persians, ' 
tlio  ghost  of  Darius  alludes  to  the  battle -field  of  Plataja 
on  which  the  ruin  of  the  Persian  host  was  to  bo  con- 
summated, as  the  just  punishment  inflicted  by  Zeus 
upon  their  impiety  and  overweening  thoughts. 

Tliis  prophecy  alone  would  suggest  the  probability  of 


The  Persians.  201 

some  reference  being  made  to  tMs  important  victory  in 
the  third  member  of  the  trilogy,  the  Glaukos  Potnieus. 
According  to  popular  tradition  Glaukos  was  a  fisher- 
man, who  became  a  marine  demigod  by  eating  of  the 
divine  life-giving  herb  sown  by  Krouos :  one  version 
of  the  legend  represents  him  to  have  Leon  one  of  the 
Argonauts,  who,  having  fallen  from  his  galley,  suffered 
this  transformation.  The  so-called  grotto  of  Glaukos 
was  situated  near  the  little  town  of  Authedon  in 
Boeotia :  this  marine  deity,  accompanied  by  strange 
monsters  of  the  sea,  was  accustomed,  once  a  year,  to 
visit  the  surrounding  coasts  and  islands,  and  there  to 
prophesy  impending  calamity.  His  approach  was 
anticipated  by  the  fishermen,  by  whom  he  was  held 
in  peculiar  veneration,  who  also  offered  sacrifice  and 
prayers  to  avert  the  threatened  woe.  It  is  mentioned 
by  Pausanias  (ix.  22,  6),  that  what  Pindar  and 
.ffischylus  heard  from  the  dwellers  at  Anthedon  con- 
cerning this  marine  deity  had  furnished  materials  to 
both  poets,  and  had  sufficed  to  JEschylus  for  the 
creation  of  a  drama.  According  to  Welcker,  the 
extant  fragments  of  this  drama  seem  to  indicate  that 
Glaukos  describes  a  voyage  which  he  made  from 
Anthedon  to  Sicily.  Passing  the  promontory  of 
Euboea,  the  shore  of  Zeus  Kenasus,  and  the  tomb  of 
the  unhappy  Lichas  (frag.  27),  he  came  to  Ehegium 
(frag.  31,  189  ;  Herm.  p.  12),  and  arrived  finally  at 
Himera  (frag.  28)  in  Sicily.  In  the  neighbourhood 
of  this  city  was  fought  the  battle  of  Himera,  on 
which   occasion   the    Sicilian   Hellenes   repulsed   the 


202  The  Persians. 

Carthaginian  invaders,  wliose  attack  took  place  simul- 
taneously with  that  of  Xerxes  upon  Hellas.  It  is 
hardly  to  he  supposed  that  ^schylus  would  iutroducc 
into  his  drama  the  name  of  Ilimera  without  com- 
memorating a  victory,  which  his  contemporary,  Pindar 
(Pyth.  i.  152),  represents  as  not  inferior  in  importance 
to  those  of  Salamis  and  PlatiBa,  the  circumstances  of 
which  also  were  peculiarly  susceptible  of  poetic  treat- 
ment. The  Boeotian  sea-god,  moreover,  would  form 
the  most  appropriate  herald  of  the  Boeotian  victory, 
and  tliu'',  in  his  third  drama,  iEschylus  would  have  the 
opportunity  of  bringing  the  battles  of  Himera  and 
Plata)a  into  connection  with  that  of  Salamis,  which 
formed  the  main  feature  in  the  Persian  trilogy. 

The  plastic  art  of  the  Hellenes  illustrates  their 
tendency  to  regard  the  successive  victories  of  Hellas 
over  Oriental  barbarism  as  phases  of  the  great  struggle 
between  the  higher  and  lower  elements  of  civilization, 
which  formed  so  prominent  a  feature  in  their  my- 
thology. Thus,  in  the  tcmplo  of  Hera,  at  Myccnaa 
(Paus.  xi.  17,  3),  and  in  that  of  Zeus  at  Agrigeutum 
(Diod,  xi.  82),  the  capture  of  Hium  was  associated  with 
the  overthrow  of  the  giants  by  tlio  Olympian  gods.* 
Their  recent  splendid  victories  would  doubtloss  bo 
similarly  regarded  by  them  as  the  nltiraato  triumph  of 
civilization  over  barbarism,  brought  about  by  tho 
intervention  of  the  higher  powers.  This  coucoptiou 
has  found  artistic  expression  in  tlio  beautiful  painting 
on  tho  so-called  Darius  vnso,  "  on  which  tho  celestial 
•  Wclckcr. 


i 


The  Persians.  203 

rl  cities  are  represented  as  consoling  the  terrified  Hellas 
in  face  of  the  tnreatcning  purposes  and  preparations  of 
the  mighty  king  of  Asia."  Moreover,  "out  of  the 
gigantic  block  of  Persian  marble  at  Ehamnus,  three 
leagues  from  Marathon,  which  the  Persians  are  said  to 
have  intended  for  a  trophy,  Phidias  (also  a  prophet) 
created  one  of  the  most  sublime  of  the  Greek  statues 
of  the  gods,  that  of  Nemesis,  whose  stern  form  and 
gesture  admonished  the  Greeks :  '  Be  not  lifted  up ;  to 
God  alone  belongs  the  glory  !'  "* 

It  may  be  remarked,  in  conclusion,  that  this  drama, 
by  the  profound  humiliation  of  Xerxes,  strikingly 
enforces  the  Hellenic  principle  that  the  supreme 
intelligence,  which  ^schylus  invariably  identifies  with 
the  will  of  Zeus,  cannot  suffer  any  inferior  power, 
human  or  divine,  to  overpass  its  legitimate  limits,  and 
thus  interfere  with  the  harmonious  working  of  the 
whole.  At  the  same  time  the  dignity  of  the  Persian 
empire  is  vindicated  by  the  description  of  the  glorious 
and  happy  life  which  the  Persians  enjoyed  under  the 
rule  of  Darius,  which  had  been  forfeited  by  their 
impiety  in  acting  in  opposition  to  the  divine  decrees ; 
moreover,  by  introducing  the  ghost  of  the  mighty  king, 
not  only  as  the  stern  rebuker  of  his  son's  overweening 
pride,  but  also  as  deprecating  in  the  most  emphatic 
manner  any  subsequent  invasion  of  Hellas,  we  see,  in 
this  early  historical  drama,  an  approach  to  the  great 
principle  of  classical    dramatic   art,  which  finds  its 

*  Bunsen's  '  God  in  History.'  Translated  by  Miss 
Winkwortb. 


204  Tae  Persians. 

perfect  fulfilment  in  the  Oresteian  trilogy,  namely, 
the  final  re-establishment  of  harmony  between  the 
contending  powers  whose  collision  has  formed  the 
main  action  of  the  drama. 

The  Satyric  drama,  which  invariably  followed  the 
trilogy,  was  a  relic  of  the  original  dithyrarabic  chorus 
sung  at  the  festival  of  Diouysos  by  groups  of  Satyrs 
who  followed  the  chariot  of  the  vintage-god;  it  was 
probably  intended  to  relieve  the  serious  impression 
produced  by  the  tragedy,  and  to  furnish  amusement  to 
the  populace.  It  is  doubtful  whether  these  Satyric 
pieces  were  ever  in  such  organic  connection  with  the 
three  dramas  which  they  followed  as  to  justify  calling 
them  a  tcirahny ;  the  significance  of  the  "  Prometheus," 
as  the  concluding  member  of  •  The  Persians,'  must 
however  be  admitted.  Welcker  has  shown  that  we 
must  distixiguish  between  "  Prometheus  the  fire- 
bringer,"  and  "  Prometheus  the  fire-kindler ;"  the 
latter  being  the  title  of  the  Satyric  drama  in  question, 
which  he  maintains  had  reference  to  the  establishment 
of  the  Promethea,  the  torch-race,  at  Athens,  an  artisan 
festival  of  which  Prometheus  was  regarded  as  the 
founder.  The  kindling  of  the  sacred  fire  might  well 
be  hailed  as  the  symbol  not  only  of  victory,  but  also 
of  the  brighter  day  which  had  just  dawned  for  the 
Hellenic  race ;  while  the  association  of  the  poorer 
classes,  by  the  introduction  of  their  fiivourito  festival, 
would  impart  to  the  drama  a  peculiarly  popular 
fharnctfr,  and  render  it  the  appropriate  expression  of 
tlio  national  enthusiasm. 


THE    PERSIANS. 


Clwrus. 

THE  Faithful  these,  advisers  old 
Of  Persians,  gone  to  Hellas'  strand, 
Guards  of  these  halls  and  plenteous  gold 
Here  treasured,  \vhom,  as  elders'  meed, 
Lord  Xerxes,  King,  Darius'  seed. 
Chose  wardens  of  the  land. 

But  touching  now  the  safe  return 

Of  King  and  gold-trickt  host, 
My  heart  within  me,  doleful  seer 
Of  mischief,  harrow'd  is  by  fear, —  10 

For  all  the  martial  strength  is  gone, 
Nurtured  in  Asia, — and  doth  yearn 
For  our  young  hero ;  news  is  none ; 
Nor  horseman  reacheth  yet  nor  post 

Our  Persia's  central  home. 

But  they  forsaking  Susa's  walls, 
Agbatana  and  Kissia's  hold. 
Eight  ancient,  forth  to  battle  sped, 
Some  borne  on  steeds,  in  galleys  some, 
Others  in  march,  with  measured  tread, 

War's  serried  ranks  displayed.  20 


206  TJie  Persians. 

Such  were  Amistres,  Artapbren, 
Astasp  and  Megabazes, — tbey, 
Marsbals  of  Persia,  kings  tbeniselvcs, 
But  to  the  mighty  King  submiss, 
Speed  forth,  o'erseers  of  vast  array, 
With  arrow  puissant,  borne  on  steeds, 
Fearful  to  sight  and  dread  in  fight, 

Through  their  bigh-souled  resolve 

And  steed-exultant  Artcmbar, 

Masistres  and  Imaeus  brave,  80 

Puissant  with  bow ;  Pharaudakcs, 

Sosthanes  too,  steed-driver; 

Others  Nile's  vast,  life-teeming  wavo 

Sent  to  the  war ;  Susiskanes, 

And  Pegasti'igon,  Egvpt-born, 

Him  too  who  sacred  Mcnii)his  sways, 

Mighty  Arsamcs ;  Ariomard, 

Whose  rule  Ogygian  Thebes  obeys ; 

And  rowers  from  the  marshy  shore, 

Their  barks  who  guide  with  sturdy  car, 

Well-skilled,  a  countless  host  40 

And  Lydians,  a  lururious  train, 
Who  the  whole  native  people  hold, 
Of  Asia's  niaiiiland  ;  these  the  twain, 
Metragathcs  and  Arkteus  bravo, 
Kingly  commanders,  lead  to  war, 
Sent  ft)rth  by  Sardis  rich  in  gold, 
Mounted  upon  full  uiauy  a  car, 


Tlie   Persians.  207 

Witli  steeds  yoked  tliree  and  four  abreast, 
Terrific  to  beliold. 

And  dwellers  sacred  Tmolos  near 

Are  pledged  the  slavisli  yoke  to  cast  50 

On  Hellas  ; — ^Mardon,  Tbarubis, 

Dread  anvils  of  tbe  spear ; 
And  Mysians  skilled  the  dart  to  tbro'^ ; 
"While  Babylon,  the  golden,  sends 
Her  motley  throng,  which  sweeps  along, 
Some  upon  galleys  borne,  and  those 

Whose  valour  trusts  the  bow. 

Thus  'neath  the  King's  commandment  dread 
Each  sabre-wielding  race  has  sped 

From  Asia's  every  reign. 
Such  bloom  of  men  from  Persia's  plain  60 

Hath  gone,  and  all  the  Asian  earth. 
Yearning  for  those  whom  from  their  birth 

She  fostered,  groans  amain ; 
While  wives  and  parents  count  each  day, 
Still  trembling  at  the  long  delay. 

SxnopHE  I. 

Already  hath  the  royal  host. 
Spoiler  of  cities,  gained  the  adverse  coast ; 
O'er  cordage-fastened  raft  *  the  channel  they 

•  Darius,  about  thirty-five  years  before,  had  caused  a 
bridge  to  be  thrown  over  the  TLracian  Bosphoms,  and 
crossed  it  in  his  march  to  Scythia ;  but  this  bridge,  though 
constructed  by  the  lonians,  and  by  a  Samian  Greek,  having 


208  The  Persians. 

Of  Athamanticl  Helle  passed,  70 

"What  time  tlieir  many-bolted  way 

On  the  sea's  neck,  as  servile  yoke,  they  cast. 

Antristrophe  L 

Thus  the  fierce  king,  who  holds  command 
O'er  populous  Asia,  drives  through  all  the  laud, 
In  twofold  armament,  his  flock  divine, 

Land  troops,  and  these  who  stem  the  brine ; 

Strong  in  his  stalwart  captains,  he 
Of  gold-born*  race  the  god-like  progeny.  80 

Strophe  IT. 

From  eyes  like  deadly  dragon's,  flashing  a  lurid  gleam, 
With  men  and  galleys  countless,  driving  his  Syrian 

car, 
'Gainst  spear-famed  men  he  Icadeth  his  arrow-puissant 

war. 

had  reference  only  to  distant  regions,  seems  to  have  been 
little  known  or  little  thought  of  among  the  Gneks  generally, 
as  we  may  infer  from  the  fiict  that  the  poet  ^schylus' 
speaks  as  if  he  bad  never  heard  of  it,  while  the  bridge 
of  Xerxes  was  ever  remem bored  both  by  Persians  and  by 
Greeks  as  a  most  imjosing  display  of  Asiatic  omnipotence. 
— Grote's  Ilixfory  of  Greece. 

*  An  allusion  is  hero  made  to  the  popular  Ivlief  that  the 
name  of  Persia  was  derived  from  Perseus,  the  son  of  Danao 
by  Zeus,  who  visiteil  her  in  a  shower  of  goUL 

An  interesting  exposition  of  the  original  signification  of  the 
legend  will  bo  found  in  Cox's  '  Slythology  of  the  Aryan 
Nations.' 

»  Pcrs.  731.  754,  871 


The  Persians.  209 

AXTISTROPHE  11. 

And  none  of  valour  proven  against  the  miglity 
stream  90 

May  stand,  a  living  bulwark,  and  that  fierce  billow 
stem ; 

For  Persia's  host  resistless  is,  and  her  stout-hearted 
men. 

Me  s  ODE. 

But  ah !  what  mortal  baiHe  may  * 
A  god's  deep-j)lotted  snare, — 
"Who  may  o'erleap  with  foot  so  light  ? 
fAte  at  fii'st,  with  semblance  fair,  IGO 

Into  her  toils  allui'es  her  i)rey, 

Whence  no  mere  mortal  wight 
May  break  away. 

Strophe  III. 

In  olden  time  by  Heaven's  decree 

Fixed  was  the  Persians'  destiny  ; — 

Tower-battering  war  was  theirs  by  Fate, 

The  turmoil  when  steed-mounted  foes 

In  shock  of  battle  fiercely  close, 

And  cities  to  make  desolate.  110 

*  The  sudden  transition  of  the  Chorus  from  unboucded 
confidence  to  gloomy  foreboding  is  characteristic  of  the  reh- 
gious  conception  common  alike  to  Greek  and  Persian  in  the 
^schylean  acre,  namely,  that  the  gods  cherished  a  jealous 
enmity  towards  vast  power  and  overweening  aspirations  in 
men. 


210  The  Persians. 

Antistbophe  IIT. 
Now  have  they  learned  firm  gaze  to  cast 
On  the  vext  sea,  what  time  the  blast 
Makes  hoary  its  broad- furrowed  plain. 
Confide  they  now  in  naval  craft, 
Cables  fine-wove,  device  to  waft 
Armies  across  the  main. 

Strophe  IV. 
Hence,  swartly  robed,  my  heart  by  fear 
Is  tortm-ed,  lest  ere  long  the  State — 
Woe  for  the  Persian  army !  hear  120 

That  Susa's  mighty  fort  is  desolate. 

AXTISTKOPHE   IV. 
And  Kissia's  stronghold  shall  reply 
Beat  unto  beat  on  doleful  breast, 
While  crowds  of  women  raise  the  cry. 
Woe  !  woe  I  and  rend  their  flaxen-tissiicd  vest 

Stuophe  V. 
Fur  all  the  troops  that  draw  the  rein, 
And  all  who  tread  the  dusty  plain, 
Like  ssvarming  bees,  with  him  who  led  ISO 

Their  martial  host,  abroad  have  sped. 
The  jutting  boat- way  crossing  o'er, 
Sea-washud,  and  common  to  each  adverse  shoro. 

ANTisTRornK  V. 
And  yearning  hivo  witli  many  a  tear 
The  couch  bcdcwcth,  louu  and  dic;ir; 


Tlie  Persians.  211 

The  wives  of  Persia,  steeped  in  woe, 
Lament,  of  their  dear  lords  bereft, 
For  her  fierce  spouse  against  the  foe  140 

Each  sent  spear-armed,  and  mourns  unmatcd  left. 

But  Persian  elders,  come, 
And  seated  in  our  ancient  hall  of  state 
Devise  we  counsel,  with  deep-thoughted  care. 

For  great  in  sooth  the  need ; — 

How  haply  fares  our  king, 
Darius'  seed, 
Xerxes,  from  him  derived  whose  name  we  bear- 
On  bending  of  the  bow  doth  conq^uest  wait '? 

Or  hath  the  might  150 

Of  iron-headed  spear-shaft  won  the  day  ? 

[Atossa  is  seen  approaching  in  a  royal  chariot,  attended  hy  a 
numerous  train  J] 

But  lo,  in  brightness  like  the  eyes  of  gods, 

Comes  forth  a  light — 
The  mother  of  my  royal  lord,  my  queen. 
Do  we  obeisance,  falling  at  her  feet ; 

Yea,  it  behoves  us  all 
With  words  of  salutation  her  to  greet. 

[They  prostrate  themselves  before  her,  touching  the  earth  luith 
their  for  eh  eads?^ 

Of  Persia's  deep-zoned  daughters  supreme  in  rank, 

0  Queen, 
Hoar  mother  of  King  Xerxes,  spouse  of  Darius,  hail ! 


212  The  Persians 

Once  consort,  now   the   mother  of  Persia's  god  art 

thou, 
Unless  our  ancient  fortune  abandons  now  the  host.  160 

Atossa. 
Therefore  I   come  forsaking  our  gold-trickcd  palace 

halls, 
The    common    nuptial    chamber,   Darius'    and   mine 

own. 
Me   too  at  heart  care  rendeth :    my  thoughts  to  you 

I'll  speak, 
Being    by  no    means    fearless    touching    myself,    O 

fr-iends, 
Lest  mighty  wealth  retreating,  o'ertum  with  foot  of 

haste, 
Fortune   which    great    Darius    not    without    Ucav'n 

upreared. 
Hence  care,  all  words  surpassing,  twofold  my  bosom 

rends, 
For  small  the  honour  yielded  to  wealth,  if  men  be 

lost. 
And  liglit  to  strength  proportioned,  shines  not  where 

riches  fail. 
Our  wealth  may  none  disparage,  but  for  our  Eye  wo 

fear,  170 

For  I  the  master's  presence  esteem  the  eye  of  home. 
Wherefore  since  Fate  hath  ordered  that  thus  affairs 

should  stand, 
Be  my  advisors,  Persiajis,  mine  aged,  tnisty,  friends; 
For  aU  my  hope  of  counsol  is  centred  now  iu  yon. 


The  Persians.  213 

CJiorus. 
Queen  of  this  land,  kuow  surely,  thou   needest  nut 

to  utter, 
Or   word   or  deed    twice    over,    whate'er   thy   powei 

commands ; 
For  we  to  counsel  summoned,  devoted  are  to  thee. 

Atossa. 
Ever  have  nightly  visions  manifold* 
Beset  me,  since,  intent  on  ravaging 
Ionia's  soil,  my  son  led  forth  his  power.  180 

But  never  saw  I  dream  so  manifest 
As  that  of  yesternight ; — I'll  tell  it  thee  ; — 
Me  thought  two  women  came  before  my  sight, 
Eichly  apparelled,  this  in  Persian  robes 
Was  habited,  and  that  in  Dorian  garb ; 
In  height  above  their  sex  pre-eminent, 
Faultless  in  beauty,  sisters  of  one  race. 
As  Fatherland  the  one  by  lot  had  gained 
Hellas,  the  other  the  Barbaric  land. 
Bet«-ecn  these  twain,  for  so  methought  I  saw,  190 
Some  feud  arose,  which  learning,  straight  my  son 
Strove  to  appease  and  soothe ;  he  to  his  car 
Yoked  them,  and  placed  the  collar  on  their  nocks. 
Proudly  the  one  exulted  in  this  gear, 
And  kept  her  mouth  submissive  to  the  reins ; 
Eestive  the  other  was  ;  she  with  her  hands 
The  chariot-harness  rends,  then,  without  bit, 

*  The  narrative  of  Atossa  recalls  the  premonitory  dream 
which,  according  to  Herodotus,  was  sent  by  the  gods  to 
Xerxes  and  Artabanus  prior  to  their  expedition  against 
Greece. 


214  Tlie  Persians. 

Whirls  it  along,  snapping  the  yoke  asunder. 
Prone  falls  my  son,  and  close  at  hand  his  sire, 
Darius,  pitying  stands,  whom  when  he  sees,     200 
The  robes  about  his  person  Xerxes  rends. 
Such  was,  I  say,  my  vision  of  the  night. 
When  I  arose  and  with  my  hands  had  touched 
Fountain  clear-flowing,  I  the  altar  ncared 
With  sacrificial  hand,  wishing  to  pay 
To  the  averting  gods,  to  whom  belong 
Such  rites,  oblations  ;  forthwith  I  behold 
An  eagle  fleeing  straight  to  Phoebos'  hearth. 
Speechless  I  stood  through  terror,  friends ;  anon, 
A  kite  I  see  borne  forward  on  swift  wing, 
Tearing  with  talons  fierce  the  eagle's  head  ;      210 
Meanwhile  the  eagle  nothing  did  but  cower, 
His  body  tamely  yielding  to  the  foe. 
Dreadful  these  portents  are  to  me  who  saw 
And  you  who  hear  :  for  well  ye  know,  my  son, 
If  victor,  were  a  man  with  glory  crowned. 
Yet  worsted,  to  the  state  gives  no  account. 
And  saved,  he  none  the  less  this  realm  will  sway. 

Chorus. 
Thee   neither  would  we,  mother,  o'erfrighten  by  our 

words, 
Nor  yet  too  much  encourage  ;  but,  prayerful,  seek  the 

gods ; 
If  aught  hast  scon  of  evil,  that  pray  thoni  to  avert, 
Rut   for  thysolf  and  children,  the  state,  and  all  thy 

friends,  220 


The  Persians.  215 

All  good  things  to  make  perfect;  next,  meet  it  is  to 

pour 
To  eartli  and  to  the  Manes,  libations ;  but  tby  spouse, 
Darius,  whom  thou  sayest  in  dream  to  have  beheld. 
Entreat  to  send  up  blessings,  for  thee  and  for  thy  son, 
From  neath  the  earth  to  daylight,  while  inauspicious 

things, 
Held  under  earth  in  durance,  may  fade  away  in  gloom, 
Thus  we,  with   mind  presageful,  counsel  with  kind 

intent. 
Trustful  that  from  these  omens  the  issue  fair  will 

prove. 

Atossa. 

Well  thou,  the  first  expounder  of  these  my  dreams, 

hast  given 
An  explanation  friendly  toward  my  son  and  house. 
May  the  good  find  fulfilment  ?     The  rites  which  to  the 

gods 
And  to  our  buried  dear  ones  thou  biddest,  we  will 

pay 

Soon  as  we  gain  the  palace.     Meanwhile,  I  fain  would 

know 
Where  on  the  earth  stands  Athens,*  as  men  report,  my 

friends. 

Chorm. 
Far  to  the  west,  where  waneth  our  sovereign  lord,  the 

sun. 

•  Herodotus  relates  that  Darius,  on  hearing  of  the  burning 
of  Sardis,  inquired  who  the  Athenians  were. 


216  Tlie  Persians. 

Atossa. 
NY  hat  I  hath  my  son  then  hankered  this  town  to  make 
his  prey  ? 

Chorus. 

Ay,  to  our  king  all  Hellas  would  then   submissive 
prove. 

Atossa. 
Of  men  then  in  their  army  have  they  so  vast  array  ? 

CJiorus. 
Of  such  sort  was  their  army,  it  wrought  the  Medes 
great  bale. 

Atossa. 
And  what  besides?     AVealth  have  they  sufficient  in 
their  homes  ? 

Chorus. 
A  fount  is  theirs  of  silver;  a  treasure  of  their  soil.*  240 

*  It  is  first  in  an  emphatic  passacce  of  the  poet  iEschylus 
that  we  hear  of  the  silver  mines  of  Laurium,  in  Attica,  and 
the  valuable  produce  which  they  rendered  to  the  state.  We 
are  told  by  Herodotus  that  there  was  in  the  Athenian  trea- 
sury, at  the  time  when  Thcniistokles  made  his  proposition 
to  enlarge  the  naval  force,  a  great  sum  arising  from  the 
Laurian  mines,  out  of  which  a  distribution  was  on  the  point 
of  being  made  among  the  citizens — ten  drachms  to  each 
man.  Themistokles  availed  himself  of  this  precious  oppor- 
tunity, and  jirevaikd  upon  the  jieople  to  forego  the  promised 
distribution  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  efficient  navy, — 
Grote's  Ilisturi/  </  (hrecc.  When  wc  niUienilxT  that  this 
navy  was  the  salvation  not  oidy  of  Athens  herself  but  of 
Greece  also,  we  arc  not  surprisoil  that  the  jxwt  should  make 
such  emphatic  mention  of  "  this  fount  of  silver,  this  treasure 
of  tho  soil." 


Tlie  I'ersians.  217 

Atossa. 
Is  the  bow-stretcliing  arrow  conspicuous  in  their  hands  ? 

CTionis. 
Nay,  lances  for  close  fighting,  and  equipage  of  shield. 

Atossa. 

And  who  then  is  their  shepherd  ?     Who  lords  it  o'er 

their  host  ? 

Clwrus. 

To  no  man  are  they  vassals,  nor  yield  they  to  com- 
mand. 

Atossa. 

How  then,  if  foe  invade   them,  may  they  the  shocli 
sustain  ? 

Clwrus. 
So  that  Darius'  army,  gallant  and  large,  they  quelled. 

Atossa. 
Dreadful  thy  words  to  parents  whose  sons  to  war  are 
sped. 

Chorus. 
But  soon,  if  I  mistake  not,  thou  the  whole  truth  shalt 

learn, 
For  here  a  courier  speedeth  whose  gait  proclaimeth  him 
Persian,  and  he  wall  bring  us  clear  news  of  weal  or 
woe.  250 

[^Enter  Messekgeb.^ 

Messenger. 
0  fenced  homes  of  all  the  Asian  earth, 
0  soil  of  Persia,  haven  of  vast  wealth, 


218  TJie  Persians. 

How  by  one  stroke  oui-  full  prosperity 

Hath  shatter'd  been,  and  blighted  Persia's  flower. 

Woeful  his  oflBce  first  who  heralds  woe ! 

Yet  all  our  sorrow  must  I  needs  uufold. — 

Persians  1  the  whole  barbaric  host  is  lost. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
Grievous,  0  grievous  woe,  2G0 

Strange,  dismal  overthrow, 
Weep,  Persians,  hearing  of  this  di-eadfol  blow. 

Messenger. 
Yonder  our  all  is  ruined  utterly 
Myself,  past  hope  returning,  view  the  light. 

Chorus.     Antistbophe  I. 
Oppressed  by  weight  of  years, 
Too  long  our  life  appears, 
When  this  unlooked-for  woe  assails  our  ears. 

Messenger. 
Present  myself,  not  hearing  others'  words, 
Persians  !  I  can  report  what  ills  befcL 

CJtorus.     Strophe  IL 

In  vain,  aliis,  in  vain,  270 

That  many-natioucd,  diverse-weaponed  band, 
Against  illustrious  Hellas'  land, 

From  Asia  sped  amain. 

Mhssenokb. 
Corpses  of  men  ill-fated  clmko  the  coasts 
Of  Sulamis,  and  all  the  region  near. 


The  Persians.  219 

Cliorus.     Antistp.ophe  IL 

Woe  for  their  end  forlorn  ! 
The  bodies,  thou  dost  say,  of  dear  ones  lcJ6t, 
Full  oft  immersed,  in  death  are  tost, 

Bj  floating  robes  upborne.* 

Messenger. 
Nothing  our  bows  availed ;  but  all  our  host     2S0 
Perished,  by  shock  o'ercome  of  naval  prows. 

Cliorus.     Strophe  III. 
Shriek  out  a  bitter  wail 
For  those  in  death  laid  low ; 
How  have  the  gods  in  all  things  wrought  us  bale !  j 
Woe  for  the  perished  army!   woe  ! 

Messenger. 
0,  Salamis,  most  hateful  name  to  hear ! 
Athens,  alas !  remembering  thee  I  groan. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  III. 
O  Athens,  name  of  dread 
To  foes!    For  we  recall 

*  TrXayKrois  eV  bt-TrkaKecra-iv.  These  words  have  given  rise 
to  a  variety  of  interpretations.  They  have  been  supposed  to 
refer  to  the  ebbing  and  flowing  surface  of  the  tide ;  to  the 
two  opposite  shores  of  the  strait ;  to  the  twofold  surface 
of  land  and  sea ;  to  fragments  of  wrecked  ships,  &c.  The 
word  6t7rXa|  is  however  known  in  Homer  as  a  double  cloak 
(cloak  with  ca])e),  and  in  the  context  most  probably  refers 
to  the  floating  mantles  of  the  slain. 

t  TTavrq.  So  Hermann  for  Trarrd,  and  he  also  adds  6foi, 
to  complete  both  sense  and  metre,  from  a  gloss  in  one  MS. — • 
Taley. 


•220  Ths  Persians. 

How  many  wives  of  Persia  vainly  wed,  290 

By  her  are  widows  made,  bereft  of  all. 

Atossa. 

Long  have  I  silence  kept,  struck  down  by  ills, 

Wretched  : — for  so  transcendent  this  mischance. 

Our  grief  may  be  nor  told  nor  questioned  of. 

Yet  mortals  needs  must  bear  calamities 

Sent  by  the  gods ;  wherefore,  our  sum  of  loss 

Unfolding,  though  thou  groanost  at  our  ills. 

Yet  in  well-ordered  narrative  rehearse 

Who  hath  from  death  escaped  ;  whom  must  we  wail 

Of  princely  leaders  that  the  truncheon  held 

Who  now,  by  death  has  left  his  post  unmanned.     300 

Messengkr. 
Xerxes  himself  still  lives  and  sees  the  light 

Atossa. 

Great  light,  in  sooth,  thou  speakest  to  my  house, 
And  day  clear  shining,  after  murky  night. 

Messenger. 

But  Artembarcs,  lord  of  myriad  horse, 

'Gainst  the  Siloui's  rugged  shores  is  dashed ; 

And  Dadaces,  the  chiliarch,  spcar-struck, 

Forth  from  his  galley  kapt  with  nimble  bound. 

And  Tenagon,  of  Bactria's  true  stock 

Bravest,  the  Bea-lash'd  islo  of  Ajax  haunts. 

Lilaios,  Arsanu's,  Argcstop,  these  310 

Koiuid  tlio  dovo-nurturiug  ishiud  overpowered, 


TJie  Persians.  221 

On  the  hard  coast  lay  butting  to  and  fro. 

Neighbour  to  Egypt's  Nile-springs,  Arkteus  too, 

Adeues,  Pheresseues,  Pharnuchos, 

All  these  together  from  one  vessel  fell, 

Chrysian  Matallos,  captain  of  vast  hosts, 

Leader  of  thrice  ten  thousand  sable  horse, 

In  death  his  ruddy  beard,  bushy  and  thick, 

With  purple  gore  distaining,  changed  its  hue. 

The  Magian  Arabos,  and  Artames,  320 

From  Bactria,  settler  on  a  rugged  soil,  t 

There  perished.     Wielder  of  no  idle  spear,  -^ 

Amphistreus,  and  the  doughty  Ariomard, 

By  Sardis  mourned  ;  Amistris,  Seisames, 

The  Mysian  ; — of  five  times  fifty  ships 

Commander,  Tharybis,  in  Lyrna  born, 

A  comely  man,  no  mark  for  envy  now. 

Prone  lies  in  death.     Foremost  in  valour  too, 

Syennesis,  Cilicia's  host  who  led, 

Whose  single  prowess  wrought  the  foe  most  bale,  330 

A  glorious  end  hath  found.     I  of  such  chiefs 

Now  make  report ;  but  mid  the  throng  of  ills 

Which  overwhelm  us,  I  relate  but  few. 

Atossa. 

Woe  I  woe !     The  very  crown  of  ills,  I  hear. 
To  Persians  shame  and  matter  for  shrill  wail ; 
But  on  thy  track  returning,  tell  me  this, 
How  great  the  number  of  the  Hellenes'  fleet, 
That  they  with  Persia's  armament  should  dare 
Battle  to  join  in  shock  of  naval  prows  ? 


222  The  Persians. 

Mr.SSENGEB. 

Had  conquest  waited  upon  numbers,  queen, 

Then  Persia's  ships  were  victor,  for  the  fleet  340 

Of  Hellas  counted  but  three  hundred  ships,* 

And  other  ten  selected,  in  reserve. 

But  Xerxes,  this  I  know,  led  fifty  score, 

While  those  for  swiftness  most  pre-eminent 

Two  hundred  were  and  seven :  such  the  tale. 

Seem  we  to  thee  the  weaker  in  this  battle  ? 

Rather  some  power  divine  destroyed  the  host, 

The  scale  depressing  with  unequal  fortune. 

Grods  save  the  city  of  the  goddess,  Pallas. 

Atossa. 
Is  then  the  Athenians'  city  still  unsack'd  ?  f  350 

*  The  combined  fleet  which  had  now  got  together  at 
Salamis  consisted  of  366  ships.  .  .  .  We  may  doubt,  however, 
whether  this  total,  borrowed  from  Herodotus,  be  not  largt  r 
than  that  which  actually  fought  a  little  afterwards  at  the 
battle  of  Salamis,  and  which  ^schylus  gives  decidedly  as 
consisting  of  300  sail,  in  addition  to  ten  prime  and  chosou 
ships.  That  great  fX)et,  himself  one  of  the  conib:itants,  and 
si)caking  in  a  drama  rcprescntal  only  seven  years  after  the 
battle,  is  better  authority  on  the  point  even  than  Herodotus. 
— G  rote's  Ilhtory  of  Greece. 

t  The  sulTorings  endured  by  the  Atheninns  in  consscquenco 
of  the  Persian  occupation  of  Attica,  when  the  temples  of  the 
Acropolis  were  pillaged,  and  all  its  buildings,  sacreil  as  well 
as  profane,  were  consigne<l  to  the  flames,  were  so  recent  and 
terrible,  that  any  direct  allusion  to  them  would  have  jarred 
uix)n  the  feelings  of  a  largo  jortion  of  the  audience.  Wo 
cinnot  but  admire  the  skill  of  the  jxict  in  evading  the  question 
which  ho  attributes  to  the  Persian  qucco. 


The  Persians.  223 

Messengee. 
Her  sons  surviving,  she  firm  bulwark  hath. 

Atossa. 

What  the  commencement  of  the  sea-fight  ?     Say. 

Did  the  Hellenes  first  the  onset  lead, 

Or  did  my  son,  proud  of  innumerous  ships  ? 

Messenqeb. 
All  our  disaster,  Queen !  from  spirit  of  ill 
Or  vengeful  power,  none  knoweth  whence,  began. 
For  a  Hellene  from  out  the  Athenian  host 
Came  to  thy  son,  to  Xerxes,  with  this  tale,* 
That  when  the  gloom  of  dusky  night  set  in, 
The  Hellenes  would  not  stay,  but,  springing  straight 
On  to  the  benches  of  their  ships,  would  seek,  360 

Some  here,  some  there,  safety  by  secret  flight. 
But  he,  when  he  had  heard,  perceiving  not 
The  Hellenic  guile,  or  envy  of  the  gods, 
To  all  his  captains  issues  this  command  ; 
When  with  his  beams  the  sun  to  scorch  the  earth 
Should  cease,  and  darkness  hold  the  expanse  of  sky. 
Their  squadrons  they  should  marshal  in  three  lines, 
Guarding  the  outlets  and  the  biUowy  straits. 
And  others  station  around  Aias'  isle : —  370 

For  did  the  Hellenes  'scape  a  wretched  fate, 

*  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  desperate  stratagem  of 
Themistokles,  by  which  he  thwarted  the  resolution  of  the 
Grecian  leaders  to  remove  the  fleet  to  the  Isthmus,  a  resolu- 
tion which,  if  taken,  would  have  involved  the  ruin  of  the 
Hellenic  cause. 


224  T}ie  Persians. 

Finding  by  stealth  an  outlet  for  their  ships, 

Stern  was  the  warning, — every  head  should  fall.* 

Such  words  he  spake  from  mind  infatuate, 

For  what  impended  from  the  gods  he  knew  not. 

And  they,  without  disorder,  but  with  minds 

Obedient  to  command,  their  meal  prepared, 

Afid  roimd  true-fitting  lock  each  mariner 

Strapp'd  well  his  oar.     But  when  the  sunlight  waned 

And  night  came  on,  each  master  of  an  oar  J  380 

Went  to  his  ship,  and  each  one  versed  in  arms ; 

Of  the  long  galleys  line  still  cheering  line, 

Forth  sail  they,  as  to  each  had  been  prescribed. 

And  through  the  live-long  night  the  admirals. 

With  naval  force  entire,  cruised  to  and  fro. 

Darkness  advanced,  yet  not  in  secret  flight 

Ionia's  host  was  minded  to  escape ; 

But  when  white-steeded  Day,  bright  to  behold. 

Held  the  wide  earth,  from  the  Hellenes  first. 

Like  joyous  chant,  rang  out  their  battle-cry,  390 

And  forthwith  Echo,  from  the  island  rocks. 

Sent  back  responsive  an  inspiring  shout. 

On  all  the  Persians,  cheated  in  their  hojics. 

Fell  terror;  for  by  no  means  as  in  flight 

Their  solemn  jwean  did  th'  Hellenes  sing, 

But  with  stout  courage  speeding  to  the  fray. 

•  In  ilhistrntiou  of  this  command,  reference  may  be  madf 
to  the  wrath  of  Xerxes  when  appristnl  of  tlic  licstructiDii 
of  the  first  bridge  of  Iniate  thrown  over  the  HelU'six>nt,  when 
he  causcti  the  heads  of  the  chief  cni^inccrs  to  be  struck  off. 

X  The  phrase  in  the  original  proKibly  means  "  each  boHt- 
swain  of  a  crew.  " 


Tlie  Persians.  225 

The  trumpet's  blare  fired  all  their  ranks,  and  straight, 

With  simultaneous  dip  of  sounding  oar, 

They  at  the  signal  smote  the  surging  brine, 

And  instant  all  conspicuous  were  to  sight.  400 

First  the  right  wing,  well  marshall'd,  took  the  lead : 

Then  their  whole  naval  force  in  fair  array 

Bore  down  against  us.     All  at  once  was  heard 

A  mighty  shout :  "  Sons  of  Hellenes,  on. 

Your  country  free,  your  children  free,  your  wives. 

The  temples  of  your  fathers'  deities, 

Your  tombs  ancestral ;  for  your  all  ye  fight." 

And  from  our  side  clamour  of  Persian  speech 

In  answer  rose ;  no  time  was  then  for  pause, 

But  inst-ant  galley  against  galley  dashed  410 

Her  armat;ire  of  brass.     A  ship  of  Hellas 

Led  the  encounter,  and  from  Punic  barque 

Sheared  her  high  crest.     Thereon  as  fortune  led, 

Ship  drave  on  ship ;  at  first  the  Persian  host, 

A  mighty  flood,  made  head ;  but  soon  their  ships 

Thronged  in  the  strait,  of  mutual  aid  bereft, 

Each  against  other  dashed  with  brazen  beak, 

Crushing  the  oar-banks  of  their  proper  fleet ; 

While  the  Hellenes  ships,  not  without  skill, 

Circling  around  them  smote  :  dead  hulks  of  ships  42C 

Floated  keel-upwards,  and,  with  wrecks  o'erstre^^Ti 

And  slaughtered  men,  lost  was  the  sea  from  sight, 

Ay,  shores  and  reefs  were  crowded  with  the  dead. 

In  flight  disordered  every  ship  was  rowed, 

Poor  remnant  of  the  Persian  armament. 

Then  as  men  strike  at  tunnies,  or  a  haul 

Q 


226  Tlie  Persians. 

Of  captured  fisbes,  the  Hellenes,  armed 

With  splint  of  oar,  or  fragment  from  the  wreck, 

Batter'd,  and  clave  with  dislocating  blows. 

Shrieks  and  loud  wailing  filled  the  ocean  brine. 

Till  all  'neath  eye  of  swarthy  night  was  lost.  430 

But  all  our  losses,  though  for  ten  whole  days 

I  told  them  over,  could  I  not  recount. 

Of  this  be  sure,  that  never  in  one  day 

Perished  of  men  so  vast  a  multitude. 

Atossa. 
Woe !  Woe !     Of  ills  a  mighty  sea  hath  burst 
On  Persia,  and  on  all  the  Asian  race. 

Messenger. 
Be  thou  assured,  but  half  our  loss  thou  knowest ; 
Upon  them  came  calamity  so  vast 
As  twice  to  overweigh  the  ills  yet  told. 

Atossa. 
What  Fortune  could  than  this  more  hostile  be  ?       440 
Say,  what  this  woe  which  came,  as  thou  dost  state, 
Upon  the  host,  charged  with  still  heavier  bale  ? 

Messenger. 
All  Persia's  sons,  in  ftiircst  bloom  of  life, 
Bravest  of  soul,  pre-eminent  by  birth. 
And  to  the  king  himself  still  first  in  trust,— 
These  died  ignobly,  by  inglorious  doom. 

Atossa. 
Ah  wretched  me,  my  friends,  for  deadly  chancol 
But  say,  what  ft)rm  of  ruiu  these  o'crwhulm'd? 


i 


The  Persians.  227 

Messengeb. 
An  isle  there  is  that  frontetli  Salamis, 
Small,  with  bad  anchorage,  whose  sea- washed  beach  450 
Dance-loving  Pan  doth  haunt ;  thither  the  King 
Sendeth  these  chiefs,  that,  when  the  worsted  foe 
Should  in  the  isle  seek  safety,  Persia's  sons 
Might  slay  the  host  of  Hellas,  easy  prey. 
And  from  the  briny  channels  save  their  friends, 
Ill-guessing  the  to-come :  for  when  the  god 
The  Hellenes  crowned  with  glory  of  the  fight, 
On  that  same  day,  with  shields  of  well-wrought  brass 
Fencing  their  bodies,  from  their  ships  they  leapt. 
And  the  whole  isle  encompassed  ;  so  our  men 
Knew  not  which  way  to  turn  ;  oft  time  by  stones    460 
Pelted  from  foeman's  hand,  while  arrows  keen, 
Thick  raining  from  the  bow-string,  smote  them  down  ; 
Eushing  at  last  with  simultaneous  shout, 
The  Hellenes  hacked  and  caiwed  the  victims'  limbs. 
Till  they,  poor  wretches,  all  of  life  were  reaved. 
But  Xerxes  groaned,  seeing  the  depth  of  ills ; 
For  on  a  lofty  height,  hard  by  the  sea, 
His  seat  he  held,  o'erlooking  all  the  host. 
His  garments  rending,  a  shrill  cry  he  raised,  470 

To  his  land  troops  forthwith  dispatch'd  command, 
And  sped  in  flight  disordered.     Thine  it  is 
To  wail  this  sorrow  added  to  the  first. 

Atossa. 
0  hateful  Demon,  how  thou  hast  belied 
The  hopes  of  Persians  !     Bitter  punishment 


228  Tlie  Persians. 

'Gainst  famous  Athens  hath  my  son  devised; 
Nor  did  the  deaths  suffice  of  Asia's  host 
Whom  Marathon  destroyed ;  for  them  my  son 
Thought  to  exact  requital,  but  instead, 
Upon  himself  hath  drawn  this  host  of  ills. 
But  speak,  the  ships  that  have  destruction  'scaped, —  48C 
Where  didst  thou  leave  them?      This  canst  clearly 
tell? 

Messentjee. 
Of  the  surviving  ships  the  captains  straight 
Before  the  wind  took  flight  in  disarray. 
But  of  the  host  the  remnant  met  their  death 
In  the  Bo&otian's  land.    Some  pressed  with  thirst 

Round  sparkling  fount,  some  breathless,  spent  by  toil.* 

»  »  »  *  •  • 

Thence  crossed  we  over  to  the  Phocian  land, 

To  soil  of  Doris  and  the  Mclian  giilf. 

Whoso  plain  Spercheios'  stream  with  kindly  draught 

Waters ;  thereafter  the  Achaiau  soil,  490 

And  cities  of  Thessalians  us  received, 

Straitened  for  food ;  there  died  the  greater  part 

Of  thirst  and  hunger,  for  both  ills  bcfel. 

Magnesia  and  the  INIacedonian  land 

Traversed  we  then,  far  as  to  Axios'  ford, 

To  Bolbo's  marshy  reed,  and  to  the  height 

Of  Mount  Pangaios  and  the  Edonian  land ; 

But  on  that  night,  winter,  out  of  duo  time. 

Some  god  aroused,  who  Strymon's  holy  stream 

Through  its  whole  course  congealed  ;  then  who  before 

*  A  ]iassagc  of  some  length  has  been  lost  from  the  originaL 


The  Persians.  229 

The  gods  had  held  for  nought,  with  fervent  prayers  500 
Invoked  them  now,  bowing  to  earth  and  sky. 
When  from  their  frequent  orisons  the  host 
Had  ceased,  the   stream's  firm  crystal  straight  they 

cross ; 
Then  those  among  us  who  their  march  began. 
Ere  the  god  darted  forth  his  rays,  were  saved  ; 
For,  flaming  mth  his  beams,  the  sun's  bright  orb 
Pierced  the  mid  river,  warming  with  his  blaze  ; 
Then  each  on  other  fell,  and  blest  was  he 
Whoever  earliest  snapt  the  breath  of  life. 
But  the  poor  remnant,  they  who  safety  found,         510 
With  toil  and  many  a  hardship  crossing  Thrace, 
Rescued,  arrive,  not  many,  to  a  land 
Of  hearths  domestic.     Now  let  Susa  groan, 
Sore  yearning  for  our  country's  much-loved  youth. 
True  are  these  things,  but  many  ills  untold 
I  leave,  which  God  upon  the  Persians  hm-led. 

Chorus. 

0  baleful  Demon !  with  what  heavy  weight 
Thy  feet  have  trampled  on  all  Persia's  race  I 

Atossa. 
Ah,  woe  is  me  for  ruin  of  the  host ! 
Oh  nightly  vision  manifest  in  dreams,  520 

To  me  how  surely  didst  thou  ills  portend  I 

To  the  Chorus. 
But  ye  too  lightly  did  interpret  it. 
Nathless,  since  your  response  did  sanction  this, 
First,  I  desire  to  supplicate  the  gods ; 


230  The  Persians. 

Then,  bringing  from  my  house  libations,  gifts 
To  Earth  and  to  the  Manes,  I  will  come  ; 
Too  late,  I  know,  for  evils  past  recall, 
But  more  auspicious  may  the  future  prove  I 
Meanwhile  'tis  meet  that,  touching  these  events, 
Ye  faithful  counsel  with  the  faithful  hold,  530 

My  son,  ere  my  return,  should  he  arrive, 
Console  ye,  and  escort  him  to  his  home. 
Lest  to  these  ills  some  further  ill  accrue. 

Chorus. 

0  sovereign  Zeus,  who  Persia's  host 
Countless  and  boasting  loud 
Hast  now  destroyed, 
Lo  I  Susa  and  Agbatana 
By  thee  are  wrapt  in  sorrow's  murky  shroud. 
And  many  a  maid  her  mantling  vest 

With  tender  hands  now  teareth ;  540 

^A'hile  drenching  tears  bedew  her  breast, 

The  general  grief  that  shareth. 
And  Persia's  women,  delicate  in  woe, 
Longing  their  new-wed  lords  to  see  again, 
Their  bridal  couch  with  dainty  covers  dight, 
Abandon'd  now,  their  tender  youth's  delight, 

With  sateless  moan  complain ;  |i 

While  I,  in  fitting  strain, 
Wail  for  the  fates  of  those  in  death  laid  low. 

SiuornK  L 
For  now  all  Asia  moans,  left  desolate.  550 


Tlie  Persians.  231 

Xerxes  led  forth,  woe !  woe ! 

Xerxes  hath  all  laid  low  ! 
Xerxes  hath  wrought  malignant  overthrow 

To  many  a  sea-borne  raft. 
Why  did  Darius  rule  unharmed  the  state, 

Lord  of  the  archers'  craft, 

Susa's  beloved  leader  ? 

Antisteophb  I. 
Landmen  and  seamen  flax- winged  galleys  bare:  *  560 

Galleys  led  forth ;  woe  !  woe  I 

Galleys  wrought  overthrow, 
Galleys,  by  deadly  crash  of  blue-faced  prow, 

But  through  Ionian  hands. 
The  king  hath  'scaped,  we  hear,  by  fortune  rare. 

Through  Thracia's  wide-spread  lands ; 

Paths  swept  by  storms  of  winter. 

Strophe  II.    . 
The  first,  alas !  laid  low,  570 

Perforce  unurned,  woe !  woe  ! 
Around  Kychreia's  shores  spray-drenched  lie. 
Pour  the  lament,  uplift  on  high 
To  heaven  deep  notes  of  pain ; 
Eaising  the  dismal  cry. 
Your  voices  strain. 

Antistbophe  II. 
By  eddying  currents  torn, 
Gnawed  are  their  limbs,  woe !  woe  I 

*  KivoTTTfpoi.    I  have  adopted  the  emendation  proposed  by 
Schiitz. 


232  The  Persians. 

By  voiceless  children  of  tlie  unsullied  deep.  680 

Mourncth  each  dwelling,  left  forlorn ; 
Parents  bereaved,  and  elders  mourn 
These  heaven-sent  griefs,  and  weep 
Their  sum  of  woe. 

STBOr-HE  III. 
Already  through  aU  Asia's  land 
None  owncth  Persia's  sway  ; 
None,  at  their  sovereign  lord's  command, 

Henceforth  will  tribute  pay : 
Nor,  falling  prostrate,  own  his  right  590 

Them  to  enthrall ;  for  kingly  might 
Hath  passed  away. 

Antistrophe  III. 
No  more  the  tongue  is  guarded  now 

By  mortals ;  from  this  hour. 
Free  are  the  throng  to  speak,  I  trow, 

Since  loosed  the  yoke  of  power ; 
And  Aias'  sea-encircled  isle, 
In  blood-stained  fields  holds  what  erowhile 
"Was  Persia's  flower. 

[^Re'enter  Atossa,  without  regal  state,  accompanied  by 
Attendants  bearing  utensils/or  sacrijice.'] 

Atossa. 
My  friends,  whoso  is  versed  in  sorrow,  knows  COO 

That  when  on  mortals  comes  a  surge  of  ills, 
Prone  are  they  then  to  fear ;  but  when  the  tide 


'^ 


Tlie  Persians.  233 

Of  fortune  smootlily  glides,  fondly  they  trust 

That  the  same  fortune  still  will  waft  them  on. 

So  now  to  me  are  all  things  full  of  fear ; 

Woes  sent  of  Heaven  are  present  to  mine  eyes ; 

Eings  in  mine  ear  a  cry,  no  psean  strain  : 

Such  terror  from  these  evils  scares  my  soul. 

Wherefore  without  my  cars  and  wonted  pomp, 

Once  more  I  issue  from  my  home,  and  bring  610 

To  my  son's  royal  sire,  libations  kind, 

Whate'er  is  soothing  to  the  honoured  dead. 

White  milk,  sweet  di-aught  from  heifer  undefiled  ; 

The  flower-distiller's  dew,  translucent  honey, 

And  crystal  water  drawn  from  virgin  spring ; 

Here  joyance  too  I  bring  of  ancient  vine, 

Draught  unadulterate  from  mother  wild ; 

From  pale  green  olive-tree,  that  while  it  livea 

With  constant  leafage  blooms,  this  odorous  fruit ; 

And  wreathed  flowers,  brood  of  all-teeming  Earth.  620 

But,  0  my  friends,  chant  ye  well-omened  hymns 

O'er  these  libations  offered  to  the  dead; 

Darius'  mighty  ghost  do  ye  invoke, 

While  I,  these  honours,  which  the  earth  shall  di'ink, 

Myself  will  send  to  deities  below. 

Chorus. 

0  royal  lady,  to  whom  Persians  bow, 
Do  thou,  to  halls  below,  libations  send, 
AVhile  we  in  solemn  lay 
Those  who  escort  the  dead  will  pray 
Beneath  the  earth  their  gracious  aid  to  lend. 


234  The  Persians. 

Dread  Powers  who  dwell  below,  630 

Hermes  and  Earth  and  Thou, 
Monarch  of  Hades,  do  ye  now 
His  spirit  to  the  light  tipscnd  ; 
For,  if  a  cure  for  these  dire  ills  he  know. 
Alone  of  mortals  he  may  speak  the  end. 

Stbophe  L 

Me  doth  our  blessed,  godlike  monarch  hear, 
Pouring  these  varied  doleful  notes  of  woe, 

Broken  by  sighs  ? 
To  him  is  my  barbaric  utterance  clear. 
Telling  our  wretched  griefs  in  piercing  cries  ?  640 

Me  doth  he  hear  below  ? 

ANTISTROniE  I. 

But  thou,  0  Earth,  and  ye  dread  powers  of  night, 
Send  from  your  sunless  realms  to  upper  air 

A  shade  of  might ; 
The  monarch,  Susa-bom,  the  Persians'  god, 
Upsend  ye, — Him  whose  equal  Persia  ne'er 

Hath  shrouded  'ueath  her  sod. 

Stbopiik  it. 

Dear  was  the  hero,  dear  his  tomb, 

For  dear  the  manners  it  doth  hide  ;  650 

Aidoncus,  thou,  from  nether  gloom, 

l^scort  and  guide, 
Aidonous,  hear  our  prayer, — 
f The  king  of  Persians  scud,  true  king,  to  upper  air. 


. 


Tlie  Persians.  235 

AXTISTBOPHE  II, 

For  ne'er  in  ■war's  disastrous  game 
Doom'd  he  his  warriors  to  the  grave ; 
No ;  godlike  counsellor  the  name 

His  Persians  gave ; 
Godlike  in  sooth  was  he, 
tSince  still  his  subject  host  he  governed  worthily. 

Stbophe  in. 
Khan,*  ancient  Khan  !  oh  come,  draw  near, 
Come  to  the  topmost  summit  of  this  mound ;     6 GO 
Lifting  thy  foot  in  saffron  slipper  dight, 
The  crest  of  thy  tiara's  kingly  round 

Giving  to  sight : 
Appear,  Darius,  blameless  sire,  appear  1 

Antistbophe  IIL 
■j"0  monarch,  come,  that  thou  may'st  hear 
"Woes,  strange,  unheard  of,  by  our  monarch  borne ; 
For  o'er  us  now  some  Stygian  gloom  doth  lour, 
Since  sunk  in  utter  ruin  lies  forlorn 

Our  martial  flower. 
Appear  Darius !  blameless  sire,  appear  1 

Epode. 
0  Thou  in  death  by  friends  bewailed  sore,  670 

fWhy,  king  of  kings,  say  why 
Hath  dire  calamity, 
Of  blind  infatuation  bom, 

•  The  original  word  is  BaX^i/,  a  Phoenician  word,  signifying 
Lord- 


236  The  Persians.  I 

With  stroke  redoubled,  whelm'd  oui*  land  forlorn? 

All  her  lost  triremes  we  deplore, 
No  triremes  now,  alas,  no,  never  more, 

\The  Ghost  of  Darids  rises.] 

Darius, 

0  faithful  of  the  faithful,  ye  whilome 

My  youth's  compeers,  elders  of  Persia,  say 

With  what  sore  travail  travaileth  the  state? 

The  land,  breast-smitten  and  with  furrowed  check,* 

Moaneth,  and  I,  beholding  near  my  tomb  680 

My  consort,  troubled  am,  but  graciously 

Her  offrings  I  received  ;  ye  also  stand 

Lifting  the  dirge  beside  my  sepulchre. 

And,  shouting  loud  with  shade-evoking  strains, 

Piteously  call  me  :  but  the  upward  path 

Lies  not  too  open ;  for  the  gods  below 

More  ready  are  to  seize  than  to  let  loose. 

Yet,  rank  among  them  holding,  I  am  como ; 

But  haste,  that  time  rebuke  not  my  delay. 

What  this  new  ill  that  weighs  the  Persians  down  ? 

*  (TTfUfi,  KfKOTTai,  Koi  )(apa(T(reTai  TrtSov. 
Considerable  divcreity  of  opinion  prevails  as  to  the  corrtxt 
interpretation  of  this  iiassa.;o.  When  it  is  rcmemlx^n.'tl, 
however,  that  Koirrofiat,  mcd.,  means  to  boat  the  breast  in 
grief,  like  Lat.  phnifjcrc,  it  seems  evident  that  xapua-atrait 
taken  in  connection  with  aTfvti  and  KtKOTrrai,  csin  refer  only 
to  the  irap^Bav  a/ivynnt.  I  thcrefiTe  conclnde  that  by  a  bold 
Imago  the  poet  ascribes  to  the  very  soil  the  horrors  of  frenzied 
mournings  with  the  modes  of  which  the  Greeks  wore  familiar. 


Tlie  Persians.  237 

CJwrus. 

To  look  upon  thee  awes  me ;  690 

To  speak  before  thee  awes  mo : 
By  ancient  fear  subdued. 

Dabius. 

Cut  since  from  Hades  I  have  come,  by  thy  complaints 

persuaded, 
Give  to  mine  ear  no  long  discourse,  but  tell  thy  tale 

concisely  ; 
Laying  aside  thine  awe  of  me,  reveal  the  whole  full 

quickly. 

Chorus. 

I  tremble  to  obey  thee, 
Tremble  to  speak  before  thee 
Things  harsh  for  friends  to  hear. 

Daeitjs. 

"^Yell,  since  thine   ancient  reverence  thy  spirit  thus 

impedeth, 
Hoar  partner  of   my  royal  couch,  do    thou,    much 

honoured  lady,  700 

These  cries  and  lamentations  leave,  and  somewhat  tell 

distinctly. 
That  upon  mortal  men  should  come  afflictions,  is  but 

human. 
Many  calamities  by  sea,  many  by  land  still  happen 
To  mortals,   if  to    wider  scope   their  life  should  be 

extended. 


238  The  Persians.  f 

Atossa. 
0   thou   in   happy   fortune  blest   beyond   the   lot   of 

mortals, 
la  envied  glory,  while  thine  eyes  still  gazed  upon  the 

sunlight, 
Leading  a  life  of  happiness,  a  god  unto  the  Persians. 
Happy,  in  sooth,  I  deem  thee  now,  dying  before  thou 

sawest 
Our  depth  of  ill.     Thou  in  brief  space  the  tale  shall 

hear,  Darius. 
In  utter    ruin,   so   to  speak,    prostrate   lies   Persia's 

fortune.  710 

Dakitts. 

How,  pritheo  ?    Came  contagion's  blast  or  discord  o'er 

the  city  ? 

Atossa. 

By  neither,  but  near  Athens'  walls  hath  our  whole  host 

been  routed. 

Darius. 

What  son  of  mine   an   armament  hath   thither   led? 
Inform  me. 

Atossa. 

Impetuous  Xerxes,  all  the  life  of  wide-spread   Asia 

draining. 

Darius. 

By   land   or   sea,   unhappy   man,   made   be  this  mad 

endeavour  ? 

Atossa. 

By  both  in  sooth ;  a  twofold  front  there  was  of  two- 
fold army. 


I 


The  Persians.  239 

Darius. 
But  how  could  armament  so  vast  on  foot  pass  from  tho 

mainland  ? 

Atossa. 

0  er  Helle's  strait  he  artful  threw  a  bridge,  and  so 

foxmd  passage. 

Darits. 

Thus  hath  he  wrought,'and  so  hemm'd  in  the  Bosphoros' 
strong  current  I 

Atossa. 

So  was  it,  yet  some  demon-power  did  haply  aid  his 
purpose.  720 

Daeius. 

Alas,  some  mighty  demon  came,  and  hath  befool'd  his 
judgment. 

Atossa. 

True,  for   the  issue  clearly  shows  what  evil  he  ac- 
complished. 

Darius. 
And  what  hath  been  the  fate  of  those  o'er  whom  ye 
gi-oan,  lamenting? 

Atossa. 

The  naval  army,  worsted,  drew  the  land  force  to  de- 
struction. 

Darius. 
So   utterly   by  hostile   spear  hath    the   whole    army 
perished  ? 

Atossa. 

Ay,  emptied  of  her  warriors,  moans  all  the  town  of 

Susa. 


240  The  Persians. 

Dabius. 
Woe  for  our  levies  vainly  made,  and  many-nationed 
army ! 

Atossa. 
Perifihed  hath  Bactria's  martial  strength,  and  not  hex 
elders  only 

Darius. 

O  hapless  son,  of  our  allies  the  youth  how  hath  he 
ruined? 

Atossa. 

Alone,  abandoned,  so  they  say,  Xerxes,  with  but  few 
others —  730 

Dabius. 

jIow  hath  he  met  his  end,  and  where  ?  or  is  there  hope 
of  safety  ? 

Atossa. 

Was  fain  to  reach  the  bridge  that  links  two  continents 
together. 

Dabius. 

And  hath  he  to  this  mainland  come  in  safety  ?    Is  this 
certain  ? 

Atossa. 

Ay,  60  prevaileth  the  report ;  in  that  is  no  dissension. 

Dabius. 
Alas !  full  speedily  hath  come  the  oracles'  fulfilment. 
Upon  my  son  bath  Zeus  hurled  down  tho  end  of  the 

predictions  ; 
T  hoped  it  would  be  long  indeed,  ore  Heaven  these  ills 

accomplished ; 


The  Persians.  241 

But  when  in  haste  man  presses  on,  the  god  still  keeps 

beside  him. 
A  fount  of  ills  for  all  my  friends  seems  now  to  be 

discovered ; 
All  this  my  son  through  ignorance  hath  wrought  and 

youthful  daring,  740 

Who  Helle's  sacred  tide,  forsooth,  as  it  had  been  his 

vassal, 
And  Bosporos,  the  stream  of  god,  did  hope  to  cui-b 

with  fetters ; 
The  current  fashioned  he  anew,  and  hammer-beaten 

shackles 
Casting  around,  for  mighty  host  achieved  a  mighty 

causeway. 
Though  mortal,  all  the  gods  he  thought,  infatuate,  to 

master, 
Ay,  e'en  Poseidon  ;  was  not  this  sheer  frenesy  of  spirit 
That  held  my  son  ?    In  fear  I  am  lest  all  the  ample 

treasure 
My  toil  amassed,  become  to  men  the  spoil  of  the  fii'st 

comer. 

Atossa. 

Converse  with  evil-minded  men  hath  taught  impetuous 

Xerxes 
Such  lessons ;  for  thy  spear,  they  say,  won  for  thy  sons 

vast  riches,  750 

While  he,  through  cowardice  of  soul,  his  spear  at  home 

still  wieldeth. 
Thus  adding  nothing  to  the  wealth  bequeathed  him  by 

his  father. 

B 


242  The  Persians. 

Hearing  from  evil-minded  men  full   often  these  re- 
proaches, 
This  expedition  did  he  plan  and  armament  to  Hellas. 

Dabixjs. 

Therefore  by  him  hath  ruin  been  achieved 

Portentous,  aye  to  be  remembered,  such 

As  ne'er  before  on  Susa's  city  fell 

To  drain  it  utterly,  since  Sovereign  Zeus 

Ordained  this  honour,  that  one  potentate 

O'er  all  sheep-pasturing  Asia  sway  should  bear, 

The  sceptre  wielding  of  command  ;  for  fii'st         760 

A  Median  led  the  host ;  another  then, 

His  son,  succeeding,  the  emprize  achieved, 

For  reason  swayed  the  rudder  of  his  mind. 

Third  after  him,  Cyrus,  god-favoured  man, 

Eeigncd,  and  for  all  his  friends  established  peace ; 

O'er  Lydia's  host  and  Phrygia  spread  his  rule, 

And  all  Ionia  forcibly  subdued. 

For,  such  his  wisdom,  God  was  not  his  foo. 

A  son  of  Cyrus  fourth  the  army  ruled ; 

Fifth,  Mardos  governed,  to  his  fatherland  770 

An  outrage,  and  to  Persia's  ancient  throne  ; 

And  him,  by  stratagem,  brave  Artaphron, 

In  league  with  friendly  chiefs  whoso  work  this  was, 

Slew  in  his  palace.*     Next  myself  obtained 

"The  sixth  was  Maniphis,  ami  tho  si'ventli  Artaplircncs." 
As  this  lino  is  ahuost  universally  ro^an'.ed  as  spurious,  I  have 
thousht  it  better  to  omit  it  from  tho  context.     It  has  beeo 


Tlie  Persians.  243 

The  lot  I  craved,  and  witli  a  miglity  host 

Full  many  a  •warlike  expedition  led ; 

But  ne'er  on  Susa  brought  I  bale  like  this. 

But  Xerxes,  young  in  years,  is  young  of  soul, 

And  my  paternal  charge  remembers  not. 

For,  be  assured,  ye  my  compeers  in  age,  780 

Not  all  of  us,  of  yore  these  powers  who  held, 

Shall  e'er  be  proven  to  have  wrought  such  ills. 

Chorus. 
What  then,  0  King  Darius  ?    "What  the  goal 
To  which  thine  utterance  tends  ?    How  in  this  strait 
May  we,  thy  Persians,  fare  hereafter  best  ? 

Darius. 
March  ye  no  more  against  the  Hellenes'  land, 
Not  though  the  Median  host  outnumber  theirs  ; 
The  soil  itself  to  them  is  an  ally. 

UhoTi-us. 
How  meanest  thou  ?  In  what  way  their  ally  ? 

Darius. 
By  famine  slaying  bloated  armaments.  790 

Chorm. 
What  if  choice  force  we  levy,  well-cfiuipped  ? 


reasonably  conjectured  that  a  diligent  reader  had  written 
out  in  verse  the  names  of  the  seven  conspirators,  here  calleri 
friendly  chiefs,  Maraphis  and  Artaphrencs  being  the  two 
last  names. 


244  Tlie  Persians. 

Dabius. 
Not  e'en  tLe  army  which  remains  behind 
In  Hellas,  will  achieve  a  safe  return. 

Chorus. 
How  eay'st  thou  ?     Doth  not  all  the  Asian  host 
Cross  back  from  Europe  over  Helle's  strait? 

Darixts. 

Of  many  few,  if  it  behoveth  one, 

Beholding  tilings  accomplished,  to  have  faith 

In  god-sent  oracles ;  for  ne'er  of  these 

Do  some  fulfilment  find  while  others  fail. 

If  this  be  so,  persuaded  by  vain  hopes, 

A  large  and  cbosen  force  he  leaves  behind.  800 

These  linger  where  Asopos  floods  the  plain, 

Kind  source  of  fatness  to  Boeotia's  fields. 

There  them  awaits  to  bear  of  ills  the  crown, 

Just  meed  of  insolence  and  godless  thoughts. 

For  reaching  Hellas,  awe  forbade  them  not 

Statues  of  gods  to  spoil  or  shi-ines  to  fire. 

Altars  are  swept  away,  and  hallowed  fanes, 

Uprooted  from  their  basement,  ruined  lie  ; 

Hence,  having  evil  wrought,  evil  themselves 

Not  less  they  sutt'ur,  and  shall  suflor  more  ;  810 

Not  yet  is  reached  the  bottom  of  their  woe. 

But  still  it  wellcth  up,  a  quenchless  flo<.)d ;  * 

Such  gouts  of  bloody  slaughter  shall  there  lie 

•  (Kni6fv(Tai.  The  Greek  word  being  wholly  uncertain, 
1  have  adopted  the  onuiuiation  of  Schiitz,  who  is  followed 
by  Bluniticld  and  Diudoil  My  version  slightly  amplifies 
the  original. 


The  Persians.  245 

Upon  PlatfEa's  soil  from  Dorian  spear — 

Tea,  and  to  cliildren's  children,  heaps  of  slain 

Voiceless,  shall  record  bear  to  eyes  of  men, 

That  thoughts  too  lofty  suit  not  mortal  man ; 

For  bursting  into  blossom,  Insolence 

Its  harvest-ear,  Delusion,  ripenoth, 

And  reaps  most  tearful  crop.     Beholding  then, 

Such  the  requital  of  these  impious  deeds, 

Eemember  Athens,  Hellas, — and  let  none  820 

Disdaining  present  fortune,  lusting  still 

For  other,  squander  great  prosperity. 

For  Zeus,  chastiser  of  o'erweening  thoughts, 

Is  aye  at  hand,  an  auditor  *  severe. 

Wherefore,  with  timely  warning,  counpel  him, 

Lacking  in  wisdom,  that  he  henceforth  cease 

'Gainst  Heaven  to  sin,  with  overweening  pride. 

But  thou,  O  Xerxes'  aged  mother  dear, 

Enter  thy  home,  and  taking  fit  attire 

Go  meet  thy  son  ;  for  the  embroidered  robes,       830 

Through  grief  of  heart  at  these  calamities. 

Around  his  person  all  are  torn  to  shreds ; 

Soothe  him  with  kindly  words,  fur  well  I  wot, 

Thy  voice  alone  will  he  endure  to  hear. 

But  I  to  nether  darkness  now  depart. 

Farewell,  ye  elders ;  although  Uls  surround, 

Yet  to  your  souls  give  joyance,  day  by  day. 

For  to  the  dead  no  profit  is  in  wealth. 

[^Ghost  of  Darius  descends.'] 

•  Political  metaphor,  from  the  revision  of  the  accounts  by 
ft  public  officer. 


246  The  Persians. 

Chorus. 
Hearing  of  Persia's  sorrows  manifold, 
Present  and  yet  to  come,  sorely  I  grieved.  840 

Atossa. 
0  Fate  unblest !    How  many  grievous  ills 
Upon  me  fall,  yet  most  this  sorrow  stings, 
That  of  my  son's  dishonour  I  must  hear, 
His  royal  limbs  in  tatter' d  garb  arrayed. 
But  I  will  go,  and  taking  from  my  home 
Costly  attire,  meet,  if  I  may,  my  son. 
For  ne'er  will  wo  our  dearest  fail  in  woe. 

\_Exit  Atossa.] 
Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
Noblo  and  blest  in  sooth  our  city-ruling  Hfe, 

"What  time  our  monarch  hoar,  850 

Eesourceful,  blameless,  imsubdued  in  strife, 
Godlike  Darius  ruled  our  coimtry  o'er. 

Antistbophe  I. 
As  chiefs  of  glorious  hosts  were  wo  displayed, 

fFirm  laws  did  all  things  guide, 
While  scathless  and  unworn,  when  war  was  laid, 
|Iu  triumph  to  their  homes  our  warriors  hied. 

Strophe  II. 
How  many  a  town  ho  took,  yet  seldom  ho  8G0 

The  Ilalys  crossed,  or  from  his  hearth  would  roam  ;  * 

*  The  Ilalys  (which  has  licen  idontifieil  with  the  nicvlcrn 
Kizil  Irmaq)  was  the  ancient  boundary  of  the  Lydian  and 
Persian  monarchies.     It  was  nioaovcr  a  very  dangerous 


The  Persians.  247 

The  cities  such  of  the  Strymonian  Sea, 
The  AchelodeSj  near  the  Thracians'  home. 

Antistrophe  II. 
And  those  tower- girded,  distant  from  the  coast, 
Towns  of  the  mainland,  recognised  his  sway. 
Those   near   Propontis'   gulfs    their    site  which 

boast,  870 

Eound  Helle's  ample  frith  and  Pontes'  bay. 

Strophe  III. 

And  islands  of  the  main, 
Fronting  the  headland  that  o'erlooks  the  sea, 

Hard  by  this  Asian  plain  ; 
Lesbos,  and  Samos  crowned  with  olive-trees, 
Myconos,  Pares,  Naxos,  Chios,  these, 
And  Andros,  joining  Tenos  neighbourly. 

Antistbophe  III. 
Ay,  and  each  isle  that  lies 
Midway  between  the  mainlands  he  controlled ; 
Icaros'  seat  of  old ; 


river  to  overpass,  being  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep 
rocky  chasm,  at  least  in  a  considerable  part  of  its  course. 
The  celebrated  oracle,  "  If  Crocsos  passes  over  the  Halys,  he 
shall  destroy  a  great  kingdom,"  adds  significance  to  the  poet's 
words. 

By  the  hearth  of  the  Great  King  we  may  understand 
Persepolis,  or  some  other  royal  city  of  Persia,  and  may  inter- 
pret the  poet  to  mean  that  Darius,  like  a  wise  ruler,  subdued 
many  distant  countries  by  the  arms  of  his  generals,  without 
taking  the  field  himself. 


248  Tlie  Persians. 

Ehode,    Lemnos,    Cnidos;    Cyprian    towns    of 
fame,  880 

Paphos  and  Soli,  Salamis,  dread  name, 
Whose  mother-city  wakes  these  doleful  cries. 

Epode. 
And  to  his  will  Ionia's  towns  he  bent, 
Well  peopled  by  Hellenes,  opulent ; 
And  strength  exhaustless  his  of  mailed  array. 

Of  allies  too,  a  motley  band  ; 
But  now,  not  dubiously,  by  God's  own  hand, 

Smitten  with  mighty  blow 

Thi'ough  naval  overthrow,  890 

Behold  we  former  glories  swept  away. 

\^Enttr  Xerxes,  with  Attendants.'] 

Xekxes.* 
Ah,  wretciied  me,  whom  Fate 
With  most  uulookM-fur  blow 
Hath  smitten !  With  what  hato 
A  God  on  Persia's  race 
Hath  trampled !     What  dire  woe 
Is  mine !     Unhappy  wight ! 

*  The  account  given  by  Herodotus  of  the  lamentntions 
of  the  Persian  host  on  occasion  of  the  death  of  Masistius, 
general  of  the  Persian  cavalry  at  the  brittle  of  Plat.-va,  may 
be  quoted  as  illustrating  the  prolonged  wail  which  includes 
•the  drama  of  the  Persians.  "  The  grief  was  violent  and 
unboundttl,  manifested  by  wailings  so  loud  as  to  echo  over 
all  Bccotia ;  while  the  hair  of  men,  horses,  and  cattle  was 
abundantly  cut  iu  token  of  mourning." — Grote's  Ilistory 
of  Greece. 


The  Persians.  249 

Loosed  is  my  strength  of  thew, 

These  elders  meeting  face  to  face. 

Would  that,  0  Zeus,  me  too, 

With  the  brave  men  laid  low,  900 

Death's  doom  had  veiled  in  night. 

Cliorus. 
Woe,  king,  for  our  brave  army  !   Woe 
For  honours  vast  of  Persia's  reign. 

Her  warriors  of  renown, 
Whom  Fate  hath  now  mown  down ! 
Earth  mourns  her  martial  bloom, 
Growth  of  her  soil,  by  Xerxes  slain, 
Who  crowds  with  Persians  Hades'  gloom. 
"fFull  many  chiefs,  our  country's  flower, 

Lords  of  the  conquering  bow, 
Now  tread  the  paths  of  doom,  910 

.     For  multitudinous  the  power 

Of  men  by  death  laid  low. 
Woe  for  our  trusty  forces !  woe  ! 
For  Asia's  land,  upon  her  knee, 
In  direful  fall,  0  king !  sinks  direfully. 

Xebxes.    Steophe  L 
Ah,  miserable  me, 
Worthy  of  pity,  wretched,  bom  to  be 
To  race  and  fatherland  a  direful  ilL 

1st  Chorus. 
And  I,  thy  home-return  to  hail, 
An  evil-omened  dirge  will  trill. 


250  The  Persians. 

A  voice  well  versed  in  pain ; 
Like  Mariandyne  mourner's  strain,  920 

A  doleful,  tear-fraught  waiL 

Xerxes.'   Antistbophe  L 
Ponr  notes  of  doleful  sound, 
A  voice  of  wailing,  fraught  with  gi'ief  profound ; 
From  me  hath  changeful  Fortune  turned  away. 

2nd  Chorus. 

With  groans  I  too  will  pay 
Due  honour  to  our  city's  bale — 

Our  sea-inflicted  woes ; 

Yea,  like  the  anguished  throes 
Of  child-reft  sire,  shall  sound  my  tear-fraught  wail. 

Xerxes.     Strophe  II. 

Our  ship-fenced  Ares  from  the  Ionian's  might 
Dire  mischief  did  sustain. 

In  shock  of  changeful  fight ;  930 

The   moui'uful-fatfd   coast   shearing  *  and   land- 
bound  main.f 

Chorus. 
Cry  woo !  search  out  the  worst ;    woe,  woe  1 

*  K(p(Tdfi€vos.  Blomfickl  says,  with  rofcrrnco  to  this  won\ 
"Interpreters  render  it,  'havinr;  devastated.'  But  I  liave 
nowhere  met  Ktipofim  in  the  middle  voice,  except  to  mean, 
shear  the  locks  in  si;jn  of  grief." 

t  Hermann  admits  the  conjecture  of  Pauw  and  Heath, 
fivx}nv  TrXdxa. — Palry. 


Tlie  Persians.  251 

"Where  now  tlie  friendly  band 
Wont  at  thy  side  to  stand  ? 
Such  was  Pharandaces, 
Susas,  Pelagon,  Psammis,  Dotamas, 
Such  Agdabates,  such  Susiscanes, 
Agbatana  who  left.     Oh  say 

Where  now  be  they  ?  940 

Xebxes.     Antisteophe  it. 
Death-stricken  from  a  Tyrian  galley  thrown. 
Yonder  I  left  them  prone  j 
Amid  the  billowy  roar, 
The  rock-bound  coast  they  beat  on  Salaminian  shore. 

Chorus. 

Where  thy  Phamuchos  ?   Woe,'  on  woe ! 
Brave  Ariomard  and  he, 
Warrior  of  high  degree, 
Lilaios  and  the  king 

Seualces ;  Memphis  where  and  Tharybis, 
Where  are  Masistras,  and  brave  Artembar, 
Ay,  and  Hystaechmas  ?     Say,  oh  say,         950 
Where  now  be  they  ? 

Xebxes.     Stbophe  m. 

Ah  me !  Alas !  Woe  !  Woe  1 

They  saw  the  city  hoar, 

Athene's  hated  wall. 
And  with  convulsive  struggle,  one  and  all, 
Poor  wretches,  were  laid  gasping  on  the  shore. 


2o2  Tlie  Persians. 

Chorus. 
Him,  thine  all -trusty  eye, 
The  hosts  of  Persia  who  told  o'er  960 

By  ten  times  fifty  score, 
Alphistos,  Batanochos'  heir, 
Sesames'  son,  who  owed  his  birth 
To  Megabates,  him  didst  leave, 
Parthos  and  great  Qllbares  there 

Didst  leave  to  die  ? 
Unhappy  men  !  ah  me ! 
Persians  of  highest  worth  ! 
For  them  dire  ills  on  ills  I  hear  from  thee. 
And  sighs  of  anguish  heave. 

Xebxeb.     Antbistrophe  TTT. 

Ah  me  1  Alas !  Woe !  Woe  1 

A  thrill  of  tender  pain 

For  my  brave  comrades'  sake, 
Telling  of  ills  most  hateful,  thou  dost  wake.       970 
Cries  out  my  very  heart,  yea,  cries  amain. 

CJiorus. 
We  for  another  mourn, 
Of  Mardia's  myriad  host  the  head, 

Xanthos ; — Ancharcs,  Arian-bom, 

Diaexis  and  Arsaccs,  who 

Afield  oQr  mountrd  forces  led, 

Kigdagatas  and  Lythimnas, 

War-craviug  Tolmos — these,  alas,  980 

These  mom-n  wo  too. 

Sorrow  ostonnds,  ah  mc, 

Sorrow  astouuds  my  mind 


Tlie  Persians.  253 

These  cMefs  on  tented  cars  no  more  to  see 
Thy  royal  pomp  behind. 

Xeexes.     Steophe  IY. 
For  lost  are  they  our  host  who  led, 

Chorus. 
Lost  amid  the  nameless  dead. 

Xerxes. 
Woe!  Woe!  Alas!  Woe!  Woe! 

Chorus. 
Woe !  Woe !  in  sooth,  for  lo ! 
Ill  so  unlooked  for  and  pre-eminent 
As  Ate  ne'er  beheld,  the  gods  have  sent. 

Xeexes.    Antisteophb  IV. 
Stricken  are  we  by  heaven-sent  blow.        990 

Chorus. 
Stricken,  in  sooth,  too  plain  our  woe. 

Xerxes. 
Fresh  griefs,  fresh  griefe,  ah  me ! 

Chorus. 
Meeting  Ionian  seamen,  we 
Have  now,  alas,  encountered  dire  disgrace ; 
Unfortunate  in  war  is  Persia's  race. 

Xeexes.     Steophe  V. 
Stricken,  too  true,  with  host  so  great 


254  The  Persians. 

Chorus. 
Perislaed  hath  Persia's  high  estate, 

Xebxes. 
Dost  see  this  remnant  of  my  warlike  gear  ? 

Chorus. 
Tea,  I  behold.  1000 

Xerxes. 
This  also —  arrows  that  should  hold  V 

Chorus. 
What  sayest  saved  hath  been  ? 

Xebxes. 
Casket  for  missiles  keen. 

Cliorus. 
Small  rest  of  ample  store. 

Xebxes. 
None  left  to  aid  us  more. 

Chorus. 
Ionia's  people  flee  not  from  the  spear. 

Xebxes.    Antistrophb  V. 
Too  warlike  they !  I've  seen  unlooked-for  woe. 

CItorus. 
Wilt  tell  of  flight  and  naval  overthrow  ? 

Xeuxks, 
At  this  sod  chauco  my  robes  I  rout. 


The  Persians.  265 

Cliorus. 
All  me !  Ah  me  I  1010 

Xeexes. 
Worse  than  ali  vie  I  ay,  worse  I 

Chorm. 
Double,  ay,  threefold  curse. 

Xeexes. 
Joyful  to  foes,  to  us  despair. 

Chorus. 
Maimed  prowess  we  lament. 

Xeexes. 
Naked  of  escort  I,  and  bare. 

Cliorus. 
Through  the  disasters  of  thy  friends  at  sea. 

Xebxes.     Steophe  VI. 
Weep,  weep  our  loss,  and  to  the  palace  go. 

Cliorus. 
Aksl  Alas!  Woe!  Woel 

Xerxes. 
Eesponsive  cries  intone. 

Chorus. 
An  ill  bequest  of  ill  to  ilL  1020 

Xerxes. 
Wail  forth  thy  cadence  shrill. 


256  The  Persians. 

Chorus. 
Woe  I  Woe!  Alas!  Woe!  Woe! 

Xebxes. 
Heavy,  in  sooth,  the  blow. 

Chorus. 
Which  sorely  I  bemoan. 

Xebxes.     Antistbophe  VI. 
Ply,  ply  the  stroke,  lift  for  my  sake  your  criea 

Chorus. 
Woe-fraught,  I  weep  amain. 

Xebxes, 
Wail  with  responsive  groan, 

Cliorus. 
This  care,  my  liege,  I  own, 

Xerxes. 
Swell  loud  the  doleful  strain. 

Chorus. 
Woo!  Woe!  Alas!  Woe!  Woe  I  1030 

Xerxes. 
Mingled  with  many  a  blow  t 

Clwriis. 
Yea,  black,  and  fraught  with  sighs. 


Tlie  Persians.  257 

Xerxes.    Strophe  VII. 
Ay,  beat  thy  breast,  and  raise  the  Mysian  wail. 

Chorus. 
Pain,  grievous  pain  1 

Xerxes. 
And  from  thy  chin  pluck  out  the  silver  hair. 

Chorus. 
Woe-fraught,  we  pluck  amain  I 

Xerxes. 
Picnd  with  shrill  cries  the  air. 

Cliorus. 
Cries  shall  not  fail. 

Xerxes.     Antistrophe  VII. 
With  forceful  hand  tear  thou  thy  bosom's  stole.  1040 

Chorus. 
Pain,  grievous  pair. ! 

Xerxes. 
Our  host  lamenting  rend  thy  tresses  too.* 

Chorus. 
Woe-fraught,  we  rend  amain  ! 

*  ylrdWt.  I  dc  not  venture  to  give  the  literal  translation, 
twang.  It  seems  impossible  to  peruse  the  close  of  this  drama 
without  recognizing  that  the  poet's  aim  was  no  longer  tragedy. 
He  evidently  wishes  to  gratify  his  Athenian  spectators  by  the 
grief  of  the  Persians,  which  he  holds  up  to  contempt. 

S 


258  The  Persians. 

Xebxes. 
Let  tears  thine  eyes  bedew. 

Chorus. 
Tears  downward  rclL 

Xebxes.     Epode. 
Wail  forth  responsive  cries 

CJiorus. 
Alas!  Alas!  Woe!  Woe  I 

Xebxes. 
Now  with  loud  wailing  to  the  palace  wend. 

Ckona. 
Alas  I  with  wailing  Persia's  land  resounds. 

Xebxes. 
Through  Susa  let  your  motms  ascend. 

CJiorus. 
I  moan,  yea,  moan  aniain.  1050 

Xerxes. 
Slowly  advancing  pour  your  sighs. 

CJiorus. 
Alas  !  with  wailiut;  Pcrs'.a's  land  rusouudfl. 


The  Persians.  259 

Xerxes. 
For  those  who  perished  in  our  triremes,  woe  I 

Chorus. 
Thee  I'll  escort  with  piteous  notes  of  pain. 

[Exeunt  in  aolemn  procession."] 


NOTEa 


The  Persians. 

99.  In  Blomfield  and  Scholefield  I  read  <pi\6(f)p(ov  yap 
aaivovcra  ro  irpwrov,  rrapdyei  |  ^poTov  eiy  apKixTrara.  It 
se'-ms  iindeniable  that  apK-uarara  is  rightly  corrected  to 
apKvas  "Ara,  aaivovaa  agreeing  with  *Ara :  also  Hermann 
well  changes  a-aivova-a  to  iroTia-aivova-a,  as  metre  seems  to 
require.  But  Dindorf,  in  3rd  ed.,  strangely  cuts  it  down  into 
(Pi\6<ppcov  yap  Tvapacralvd  |  ^porov  (Is  apuvas  "Ara  :  and  the 
Oxford  ed.  of  1851  (perhaps  by  misprint)  wholly  omits 
tti  apicvas  Ara. 

653.  Aapeloi'  oiov  avaicra  Aapeiav.  Schiitz  corrected  oioi' 
into  delov.     To  me  daifiova  Sdov,  tivaKxa  Hfpaav  is  plausible. 

658.  For  ev  tirobaKfi,  I  suggest  ev  TrfbioKec.  In  Theocritus, 
p-fToiKw  is  transitive,  cause  to  migrate.  If  you  so  interpret 
TreSwKft,  it  means  that  Darius  successfully  superintended 
the  systematic  migrations  (that  is,  changes  of  encampment) 
of  his  vast  standing  army. 

664.  Kaivd  Tf — vta  Tf  cannot  be  right.  Perhaps  KoivaXyj] — 
via  Tf,  which  suits  the  metre. 


260  The  Persians. 

C71.  The  corrupt  bwara  seems  to  me  to  conceal  the  lost 
verb.  The  sjTitax  of  the  sentence  may  have  been  something 
like  this :  n'y  rdBe  telv'  eTiTrjvar  in  "px?  I  <''?  ^'■^^f^v  8i 
uvoiav  dfjidpria ;  Who  has  inflicted  on  thy  empire  this  dreadful 
penalty  for  double  folly  ? 

857.  TTvpyiva  conceals  deep  error. 

861.  The  word  lost  may  be  avBpas.  Thus,  av8pas  (s  ev 
TTpdcraovTas  ayov  oikovs. 

920,  For  aiSou,  I  want  aba,  "  dire  hamesser  of  Persians." 

921.  'A-ySa^arat.  I  accept  unhesitatingly  Blomfield's 
correction,  'Addvarot,  from  Herodotus,  vii.  83,  which  further 
convinces  me  that  yap  (jivirris  ought  to  be  xP^awrts,  covered 
loith  gold  lace. 

942.  I  can  only  understand  this  to  mean  that  (Asiatic) 
Greeks  fighting  for  Xerxes,  though  aided  by  Tyrians,  were 
defeated  by  (European)  Greeks.  "  Greeks,"  says  Xerxes^ 
"  were  beaten  by  Greeks." 

F.  W.  N. 


THE  SEVEN  AGAINST  THEBES. 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 


Eteocles. 

Messenger. 

Chorus  of  Theban  Maidens. 

Ismene. 

Antigone. 

Herald, 


[Scene. — Thebes,  in  front  of  the  Acropolis.  The  stage, 
adorned  icith  altars  and  statues  of  the  gods,  is  occupied 
hy  a  crowd  of  Theban  citizens.  Enter  Eteocles  with 
his  train,^ 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  trilogy  to  which  this  drama  belonged  was  repre- 
Bented  b.c.  467,  five  years  after*  "  The  Persians,"  and 
consisted,  as  we  learn  from  the  Didascalia  given  in  the 
Medicean  manuscript,  of  Laios,  CEdipus,  and  "  The 
Seven  against  Thebes,"  followed  by  the  Satyric  drama 
of  the  Sphinx.  It  has  been  appropriately  styled  the 
dramatic  epos  of  the  House  of  Labdacos,  for  though 
the  conflicting  emotions  in  the  soul  of  Eteocles  are 
portrayed  with  true  tragic  insight,  yet  in  "  The 
Seven,"  as  in  "  The  Persians,"  narrative  so  far  prepon- 
derates over  action  as  to  render  the  treatment  of  their 
respective  subjects  epic  rather  than  dramatic. 

In  this,  as  in  the  other  dramas  of  -3]schylus,  the  aim 
of  the  poet  is  to  vindicate  the  divine  government,  and 
to  exhibit  the  ultimate  triumph  of  order  and  justice. 
The  principle  more  especially  emphasized,  that  of 
divine  retribution — "  the  key-stone  of  the  universal 
order" — was  embodied  by  the  Greeks  in  the  word 
Nemesis :  passing  from  the  domain  of  conscience,  it 
became  in  later  times  a  divinity,  and  has  been  aptly 
characterized  by  Bunsen  as  the  ''  Muse  of  Justice."  In 
accordance  with  her  teaching,  the  eternal  laws  can 
•  Paley. 


264  Tlie  Seven  agaitist  Tlitbes. 

never  bo  violated  with  impunity :  witli  sleepless 
vigilance  tlie  dread  avenger  follows  on  the  track  of 
crime :  for  a  season,  perhaps,  no  muttering  is  heard  of 
the  coming  storm;  but  not  the  less  inevitably  does 
punishment  eventually  overtake  the  wrongdoer,  or  his 
posterity.  Associated  with  this  inexorable  law  of 
retribution,  the  poet,  in  the  Theban  tragedy,  exhibits 
the  working  of  those  mysterious  tendencies  to  moral 
evil  which,  like  hereditary  disease,  not  unfrequently 
accompany  the  fatal  heritage  of  crime,  and  which,  if 
not  counteracted  by  the  force  of  personal  will,  issue  in 
the  final  destruction  of  the  sin-polluted  race.  A  brief 
outline  of  the  hoary  legend,  the  main  features  of  which 
would  doubtless  be  embodied  in  the  first  two  members 
of  the  trilogy,  the  Laics  and  the  CEdipus,  is  essential 
for  the  due  appreciutl-in  of  the  concluding  drama.* 

The  crime  of  Laios  may  be  regarded  as  the  fatal 
seed-corn  from  which  he  and  his  descendants  reaped  a 
tear-fraught  harvest.  This  is  indicated  in  the  choral 
ode  of  "  The  Seven  against  Thebes  "  (v.  737),  which  it 
has  been  truly  said  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  drama. 
Eeccived  as  a  guest  into  the  house  of  Pelops,  ho, 
according  to  the  legend,  carried  off  Chrysippus,  the 
son  of  his  host,  whose  curse  against  the  ravishcr  is 
subsequently  confirmed  by  Apollo,  who  thrico  warns 
liim  from  his  sacred  shrine  to  save  the  State  by  dying 
childless.     Ilecdless  of  the  divine  monition,  ho,  in  nu 

*  An  intcrcstinjT  exposition  of  the  solar  character  of  the 
Tliebaii  le;;cnd  will  bo  found  in  Coxc's  "  ilytliology  of  the 
Aryan  Nations,"  chap.  x. 


The  Seven  against  Tliebes.  265 

evil   hour,    "  begat   bis   proper   woe,    in    CEclij^us   the 
parricide  "  (v.  747). 

Laios,  in  order  to  evade  the  oracle  which  had 
declared  that  himself  would  be  slain  by  any  son  whom 
he  might  beget,  caused  the  infant,  as  soon  as  bom,  to 
be  exposed  on  Mount  Cithajron,  the  savage  scenery  of 
which  harmonizes  with  the  dark  passages  of  Hellenic 
lore  with  which  it  is  associated.  Here  he  is  found  by 
the  herdsmen  of  Polybos,  king  of  Corinth,  who  carry 
him  to  their  master,  by  whom  he  is  reared  as  his  own 
child.  ^\  hen  grown  to  manhood,  doubts  having  been 
cast  upon  his  descent,  he  repairs  to  Delphi,  in  order 
to  discover  the  truth  as  to  his  parentage.  Warned  by 
the  oracle  not  to  return  to  his  country,  he  proceeds 
towards  BcEotia,  and  at  the  spot  called  the  divided 
way,  encounters  Laios,  whom  in  a  skirmish  he  slays, 
not  knowing  him  to  be  his  father.  Pursuing  his 
journey  he  arrives  at  Thebes,  where,  after  solving  the 
riddle  of  the  Sphinx,  he  obtains  the  kingdom,  and 
marries  Jocasta,  by  whom  he  becomes  the  father  of 
two  sons,  Eteocles  and  Polyneikes,  and  of  two  daughters, 
Antigone  and  Ismene.  The  truth  respecting  his  un- 
happy marriage  being  at  length  brought  to  light,  he  in 
despair  puts  out  his  eyes,  and  resigns  the  government 
to  his  sons.  They,  wishing  that  the  family  shame 
should  be  concealed  from  the  eyes  of  men,  place  him 
in  confinement,  and  it  is  related  in  one  fragment  of 
the  Thebais,  that  instead  of  the  shoulder  of  the  victims 
sacrificed  on  the  altar,  they  sent  him  the  less  honour- 
able portions.     This,  in   his   rage,    he   cast  upon  the 


266  Tlie  Seven  against  Thebes. 

ground,  and,  at  the  same  time,  prayed  to  the  gods  that 
his  sons  might  perish,  each  by  the  hand  of  the  other. 
Reference  appears  to  be  made  to  this  ancient  form  of 
the  tradition  in  the  Seven  (v.  787).  The  brothers, 
fearing  lest  their  father's  curse  should  be  fulfilled, 
make  an  agreement  to  reign  over  the  Theban  territory 
in  turn,  each  for  the  space  of  a  year.  Eteocles,  as  the 
elder,  reigns  first,  and  at  the  appointed  time  Polyneikes 
comes  to  demand  the  sceptre,  which  his  brother 
refuses  to  resign.  Polyneikes  retires  to  Argos,  and 
persuades  Adrastos,  his  father-in-law,  to  assist  him  to 
recover  the  throne.  Accordingly,  that  prince  and  five 
other  chiefs,  accompanied  by  Polyneikes,  march  against 
the  Cadmeian  city.  With  their  appearance  before  the 
walls  the  third  member  of  the  trilogy  opens. 

Such,  in  outline,  is  the  terrible  story  which  ushers 
in "  The  Seven  against  Thebes."  The  first  tragedy 
probably  ended  ^vith  the  death  of  Laios,  while  the 
wrath  of  CEdipus,  and  his  curse,  twice  pronounced 
against  his  sons,  would  doubtless  form  a  principal 
feature  of  the  second  drama.  This  wo  may  infer  from 
the  prominence  given  to  the  curse  in  the  concluding 
member  of  the  trilogy. 

I  cannot  but  think,  however,  that  we  should  misread 
the  poet  did  wo  imagine  that  the  death  of  the  brothers 
resulted  from  the  inevitable  operation  of  their  father's 
curse.  Eteocles,  though  courageous,  is  full  of  in- 
satiable rage,  and  instead  of  yielding  to  the  pathetic 
pleading  of  the  Chorus,  exults  in  the  prospect  of 
fratricide ;  whilo  Polyneikes  is  roprescnteil  as  sharing 


, 


The  Seven  against  Thebes,  267 

the  malignant  hatred  of  his  brother  (v.  652).  Eteocles, 
moreover,  by  retaining  the  sovereignty,  violates  the 
claims  of  justice ;  and  Polyneikes,  by  seeking  to 
regain  it  with  the  assistance  of  an  invading  host,  is 
guilty  of  impiety  towards  his  country :  thus  the  death 
of  the  brothers,  through  mutual  slaughter,  is  the 
penalty  due  to  their  respective  wrongdoing,  and,  as 
such,  offers  no  violence  to  our  sense  of  justice.  King 
Apollo,  it  is  true,  the  awful  Seventh,  is  represented  as 
taking  his  station  at  the  seventh  gate,  and  avenging 
upon  the  sons  of  CEdipus  the  ancient  transgression  of 
Laios ;  at  the  same  time  the  poet  makes  us  feel  that 
they  have  themselves  succumbed  to  the  evil  tendencies 
inherent  in  the  race,  and  thus  it  is  that  their  father's  curse 
has  exercised  its  dread  ascendency  over  their  destiny. 

Had  the  trilogy  terminated  with  the  death  of  the 
brothers  such  a  catastrophe  would  have  violated  an 
essential  canon  of  classical  dramatic  art,  which  requires 
the  final  reconciliation  of  the  principles  brought  into 
collision  during  the  action  of  the  play.  These 
principles,  in  the  drama  before  us,  are — duty  to  the 
family,  and  duty  to  the  State ;  the  harmonious  action 
of  which  is  necessary  to  the  well-being  of  society. 
Thus  it  would  appear  that  the  decree  of  the  senate 
respecting  the  burial  of  the  royal  brothers,  which  has 
been  regarded  as  a  dramatic  bliinder  on  the  part  of 
^schylus,  is  in  fact  essential  for  bringing  about  a  satis- 
factory denouement.  When,  in  spite  of  the  prohibition 
of  the  senate,  Antigone  proclaims  her  heroic  determi- 
nation to  inter   her  brother,  she  claims  our  warmest 


268  The  Seven  against  Th^hes. 

sympathy  and  admiration  :  bad  she  stood  alone,  her 
heroism  and  sisterly  affection  would  have  offered  a 
refreshing  relief  to  the  deadly  hatred  of  tho  brothers. 
The  action  of  the  Chorus  gives,  however,  a  deeper 
significance  to  the  episode.  The  Chorus,  it  must  be 
remembered,  represents  in  the  Greek  theatre  the  moral 
conscience  of  the  age,  in  its  most  elevated  form  ;*  a 
character  strikingly  exemplified  in  the  drama  before 
us.  At  the  commencement,  indeed,  they  are  timid 
Theban  women,  who,  vividly  realizing  the  brutal 
outrages  offered  to  women  after  the  capture  of  a 
beleaguered  city,  are  possessed  by  overwhelming  fear. 
As  the  drama  develops,  however,  they  gradually 
assume  a  loftier  tone ;  the  words  of  expostulation 
addressed  by  them  to  Eteocles  are  full  of  piety  and 
wisdom :  when,  therefore,  one  half  of  the  Chorus 
follow,  with  Antigone,  the  body  of  Polyneikes,  and 
the  other  half,  with  Ismene,  that  of  Eteocles,  wo  may 
understand  that  the  poet  intended  thus  to  recognise  the 
equal  sacredness  of  the  principles  respectively  repre- 
sented by  the  sisters,  namely,  allegiance  to  the  holy  tio 
of  kindred-blood,  and  fealty  to  the  State — the  object, 
in  Greek  civilization,  of  the  most  ardent  patriotism. 

The  great  Tlu^ban  trilogy,  as  remarked  by  Biiusen, 
begins  and  ends  with  deeds  of  horror  ;  but  as  the  last 
and  heaviest  judgnicnt  is  exccutiHl,  gracious  images  of 
the  future  surround  the  bodies  of  tho  slain  ;  the  devoted^ 
heroism  displayed  by  tlic  Theban  women  "  is  a  living 
pledge  for  the  moral  order  of  tho  world,"  and  offers  a 


Tlie  Seven  againd  Thebes.  209 

spectacle  commensui-ate  in  grandeur  with  the  darker 
features  of  the  drama. 

Yery  interesting  is  tbe  protest  thus  offered  by  the  pro- 
phet-lard of  antiquity  against  that  want  of  respect  for 
women,  and  that  jealousy  of  their  participation  in  the 
functions  of  men,  which  find  such  frequent  expression 
in  Greek  literature,  and  which  are  embodied  in  the 
insolent  language  addressed  by  Eteocles  to  the  Chorus 
at  the  commencement  of  the  drama  (v.  169). 

Such  examples  as  that  of  the  Theban  women  may 
have  inspired  the  wise  utterance  of  Plato,  who  declares 
that  for  the  legislator  to  leave  women  without  educa- 
tion, and  without  sufficient  scope  for  their  energies,  is 
materially  to  cripple  the  power  of  the  State.* 

With  regard  to  the  political  bearing  of  the  drama, 
K.  O.  Miiller  remarks  that  ^schylus  strove  to 
moderate  the  restless  struggles  of  his  countrymen 
after  democracy  and  dominion  over  other  Greeks. 
The  description  of  the  upright  Amphiai'aus,  who 
wished  not  to  seem,  but  to  be  the  best ;  the  wise  general 
from  whose  mind,  as  from  the  deep  furrows  of  a  well- 
ploughed  field,  noble  counsels  proceed,  was  universally 
applied  by  the  Athenian  people  to  Aristeides,  and  was 
doubtless  intended  by  iEschylus  for  him.  In  conclu- 
sion, I  may  allude  to  the  passage  in  the  Iliad  which 
relates  how,  when  the  invading  army  reached  Asopos' 
banks,  Tydeus  was  sent  forward  to  Thebes  to  speak 
the  common  message  of  the  host.  Admitted  into  the 
palace  of  Etoocles,  undaimted  though  alone,  he 
*  Laws,  vii.  805. 


270  TJie  Seven  agaimt  Thebes. 

challenged  the  Cadmeians  to  combat,  and,  through 
Athena's  aid,  came  off  victorious.  Whereupon  the 
Cadmeians  sought  to  compass  his  returning  steps,  and 
planted  an  ambush  of  fifty  warriors ;  these  Tydeus 
slew,  one  only  being  left  to  bear  the  tidings  homeward. 
This  treachery  on  the  part  of  the  Cadmeians 
furnishes  a  motive  for  the  impetuous  eagerness 
manifested  by  Tydeus  to  advance  to  the  attack :  it  may 
also  throw  light  upon  the  iron-hearted  purpose  of  the 
infuriated  chiefs,  which  found  expression  in  their 
terrible  oath — 

"  the  town  to  raze, 
And  ravage  the  Cadmcian's  citadtl. 
Or,  dyiug,  to  imbrue  this  earth  with  blood." 


THE  SEVEN  AGAINST  THEBES. 


Eteocles. 

BURGHERS  of  Cadmos,  timely  words  beseem 
Him  at  the  stem  who  guards  the  city's  weal, 
Guiding  the  helm  with  lids  unsoothed  by  sleep ; 
For,  if  we  prosper,  God  alone  is  praised, 
But  if,  which  Heaven  forefend,  mischance  befall, 
One  man,  Eteocles,  through  all  the  town, 
In  noiseful  rhymes  and  wailings  manifold 
Would  by  the  folk  be  chanted  ;  which  may  Zeus, 
True  to  his  sacred  name,  Averter,  turn 
From  our  Cadmeian  city  ;  you  meanwhile 
It  now  behoveth — him  alike  who  fails 
Of  youth's  fair  prime,  and  him  whose  bloom  is  past, 
Yet  nursing  still  his  body's  stalwart  strength, 
And  each  one  grown  to  manhood,  as  befits — 
The  State  to  aid  and  shrines  of  native  gods, 
That  ne'er  their  honours  be  erased ;  to  aid 
Your  children  too,  and  this  your  mother  earth, 
Beloved  nurse,  who,  while  your  childish  limbs 
Crept  on  her  friendly  plain,  all  nurture-toil 
Full  kindly  entertained,  and  fostered  you 
Her  denizens  to  be,  in  strait  like  this 
Shield-bearing  champions,  trusty  in  her  cause. 


272  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

And  so  far,  to  the  present  day,  in  sooth 

God  in  our  favour  hath  inclined  the  scale ; 

For  unto  us,  so  long  beleaguered  here, 

War  prospers  in  the  main,  through  heaven's  high  w-ill ; — 

But  now,  so  speaks  the  seer,  augur  divine, 

Without  fire  omens,  but  in  ear  and  mind 

Marking,  with  faultless  skill,  presageful  birds, — 

He,  lord  of  these  divining  arts,  declares 

That  the  prime  onset  of  the  Achaian  host, 

Night-plotted,  threatens  even  now  the  town ; 

Haste,  to  the  turrets  then  and  bastion-gates  30 

Rush  in  full  panoply ; — the  breastworks  throng, 

Take  station  on  the  platforms  of  the  towers, 

And,  biding  at  the  outlets  of  the  ports, 

Be  of  good  courage,  nor  this  alien  swarm 

Dread  over-much  ;  God  will  rule  all  for  good. 

Myself  have  scouts  sent  forth  and  army  spies, 

Who,  as  I  trust,  no  bootless  journey  make ; 

And  having  heard  their  tidings,  in  no  wise 

Shall  I  by  guileful  stratagem  be  caught. 

[^Exeunt  Citizens, 
[Enter  JIessexqeb.] 

Messenger. 
Noble  Etoocles,  Cadmeians'  lord, 

I  come  clear  tidings  bringing  of  the  host ;—  40 

Myself  eye-witness  am  t)f  what  bcftl ; 
For  s(>vcn  impetuous  warriors,  captains  bold, 
Slaying  the  sacrod  bull  (mt  black-rimmod  shield. 
And  ti niching  with  thtir  hands  tlio  victim's  goro. 


TJie  Seven  against  Thebes.  273 

Ares,  Enyo,  and  blood-thirsting  Fear 

Invoked,  and  by  them  sware,  our  town  to  raze, 

And  ravage  the  Cadmeian's  citadel, 

Or,  dying,  to  irobrue  this  earth  with  blood. 

And  for  their  parents  whom  at  ho"Eae  they  left, 

With  their  own  hands  around  Adrastos'  car  50 

Memorials  they  were  hanging,  shedding  tears, 

But  from  their  lips  no  word  of  ruth  was  heard ; 

For  iron-hearted  purpose,  all  aglow 

With  manly  courage,  breathed  as  lions  breathe. 

Whose  eyeballs  glare  with  battle.     Such  my  news, 

Which  by  no  sluggishness  have  been  delayed. 

I  left  them  casting  lots  that  each  might  lead. 

As  Fate  assigned,  his  squadron  to  the  gates ; 

Hence  at  their  outlets  marshal  with  all  speed 

Our  bravest  men,  our  city's  chosen  sons ; 

For  near  already,  raising  dust,  comes  on, 

Full-armed,  the  Argive  host,  while  glistening  foam  60 

Mottles  the  plain  with  jflakes  from  panting  steeds. 

But  thou,  like  prudent  helmsman  of  the  ship, 

Make  stanch  the  city,  before  Ares'  blasts 

Swoop  down  ;  for  loud  the  army's  land-wave  roars ; 

Thou,  for  this  charge,  the  swiftest  moment  seize: 

Myself,  sure  watch,  a  wary  eye  will  keep. 

And  thou,  through  certain  tidings,  knowing  all 

Outside  that  happens,  without  scath  shalt  be. 

\_Exit. 
Eteocles. 
O  Zeus,  and  Earth,  and  Gods  our  town  who  guard, 
And  thou  strong  curse,  Erinys  of  my  sire,  70 


274  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

My  city,  where  the  speech  of  Hellas  flows, 

With  utter  ruin,  captured  by  the  foe. 

Uproot  ye  not,  nor  our  domestic  hearths. 

But  grant  that  our  free  land  and  Cadmos'  town 

In  vasgal  bondage  never  may  be  held. 

Be  ye  our  strength ; — our  common  weal,  I  urge, 

For  thriving  cities  honour  best  the  gods. 

[Exit. 
[Enter  Chorus  of  TJieban  Maidens.'] 

Chorus. 
I  wail  forth  mighty,  fear-inspiring  woes  ! 
An  army  hurries,  from  its  camp  set  free  I 
A  mounted  host  onward  in  ample  tide 

Towards  our  city  flows.  80 

Dust  that  on  air  doth  ride, 
Dumb  herald,  clear  and  true,  pcrsuadeth  mc. 
Clatter  of  horse-hoofs  on  my  natal  plain 
Brings  to  mine  ear  war's  dismal  sound  ; 

Air-borne  it  floats  around  ; 
Like  mountain-lashing  flood's  resistless  flow 
It  roars  amain. 
Alas !  ah  mc ! 
Ye  gods  and  goddesses,  oh  turn  aside 
The  impending  woo. 

Leader  of  the  let  Half  Chorus. 
"With  battle-shout,  straight  to  our  city-wall 
The  host  white-shielded  speeds  in  fair  array.  90 

lat  Maiden. 
Who  will  deliver  ? 


Tlie  Seven  against  Thehes.  275 

2nd  Maiden. 

Succour  us  who  may, 
Or  god  or  goddess  ? 

Srd  Maiden. 

Prostrate  shall  I  fall 
Their  shrines  before  ? 

Ath  Maiden. 

Ye  Blest  ones  here  who  reign 
Now  is  the  time  to  clasp  your  statues,  now. 

5/^  Maiden. 
Burdened  with  sorrow,  why,  oh  why  delay  ? 

&th  Maiden. 
The  clash  of  shields  meets  it,  or  not  your  ear  ? 

1th  Maiden. 

■{"When,  if  not  now,  shall  we  our  prayers  begin 

With  sacred  peplus  and  wool-tufted  bough  ? 

8//j  Maiden. 
I  mark  the  rattling  din  ! 
It  is  the  clatter  of  no  single  spear.  100 

9</«  Maiden. 
0  Ares,  tutelary  god  of  old, 
Thy  proper  soil  betraying  what  wilt  gain  ? 

10/^  Maiden. 
O  golden-helmed  god,  the  State  behold 
Which  once  to  count  beloved  thou  didst  deign. 


270  The  Seven  against  Theles. 

Leader  of  \st  Half  Cliorus. 
|Ye  tutelary  gods,  the  land  who  hold, 
Come  ye,  come  all,  look  on  this  virgin  train 
Who,  dreading  bonds,  as  suppliants  on  you  calL 

Leader  of  2nd  Half  Cliorus. 
For  lo  !  with  slanting  plumes 
A  surge  of  warriors  round  our  city  wall, 
On  blasts  of  Ares  riding,  hoarsely  booms.  110 

Chorus.    Strophe  I. 
|Do  thou,  0  Zeus,  all-perfect  Sire,  do  thou 
Avert,  thou  canst,  our  capture  by  the  foe ; 
For  Cadmos'  fort  Argives  encircle  now ; 
Weapons  of  war  my  heart  appal,  for  lo, 
To  chargers'  mouths  made  fast,  their  metal  gear 
Kings  slaughter,  and  with  pride  elate, 
Seven  chiefs,  conspicuous  o'er  the  host, 

With  panoply  of  spear. 
Each  having  gained  by  lot  his  post, 
Stand,  prompt  for  battle,  at  the  seventh  gate. 
«  «  »         .    *  • 

Mesode. 
Thou  too,  Zeus-born,  war-loving  power,  do  thou,  120 
PaHas,  our  city  from  destruction  save ; 
Equestrian  Lord,  thou  ruler  of  the  wave, 
Poseidon,  with  fish-piercing  trident  now 
Grant  respite  from  our  fears,  grant  respite  tboa. 

Antistuoi'UK  I. 
Arcs,  alas  I    Our  town,  the  uauio  which  bears 


The  Seven  against  TJiehes.  277 

Of  Cadmos,  guard  ;—  show  forth  thy  care  divine ; 

Kypris,  do  thou,  fore-mother  of  our  line, 

These  ills  avert,  for  from  thy  blood  we  came ; 

Thee  we  approach  with  god-invoking  prayers.  130 

Thou  too,  Lykeian  *  Lord,  thy  name 

Attesting,  as  our  groans  ascend, 
Smito  thou  the  hostile  host ; — J 

And  thou  from  Leto  who  dost  boast 
Thy  heavenly  birth,  thy  bow,  dread  virgin,  bend. 

Strophe  II. 
The  din  of  chariot  wheels,  alas,  ah  me, 

Around  our  walls  I  hear  ; 

0  Hera,  mighty  queen  ! 
From  axles  overburden'd  creak  the  naves.  140 

0  Artemis  mostdeai:  j 
Madden'd  by  hurtling  spears  vext  ether  raves. 
What  ails  the  city  ?     What  its  doom  will  be  ? 
God  guides  the  issue  to  what  goal  unseen  ? 

Antistrophe  II. 
A  stone-shower  hits  the  towers,  alas,  ah  me, 
Striking  their  very  crown. 

*  The  word  \vKeios,  as  an  epithet  of  Apollo,  has  been 
variously  interpreted  to  mean,  1st,  the  wolf-destroyer,  from 
\vKos,  a  wolf ;  2nd,  the  Lycian  god,  from  'KvKrjyevfjs,  Lycian- 
born  ;  3rd,  the  god  of  Ught,  from  a  supposed  ancient  noun, 
XvKT],  light.  In  the  text  it  is  generally  understood  to  bear 
the  first  of  these  significations.  Sophocles,  in  the  '  Electra ' 
(6),  calls  Apollo  the  wolf-slaying  god  (\vkokt6vos). 

X  AvKfios  yfvov — a  pun  upon  the  epithet  "AvKftos" — 
be  a  wolf-dcstro^-er  to  the  hostile  host. 


278  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Apollo,  our  dear  Lord ! 
With  clang  of  brass-bound  sliiolds  our  gates  resound. 

fZeus  only  can  accord  150 

With  rigbteous  issue  tbat  tbe  strife  be  crowned. 
0  Onca,*  here  enthroned,  blest  Deity, 
Do  thou  protect  our  seven-gated  town. 

Stbophe  IIL 

0  ye  all-puissant  powers, 
Dread  guardians  of  our  towers, 
Of  either  sex,  oh  hear  us,  nor  betray 
A  city  toiling  'neath  the  spear, 

*  Our  poet  cannot  have  mistaken  the  names  borne  by  the 
gates  of  Thebes  in  his  own  day ;  but  two  of  tliem,  Oncan 
and  Borrha?an,  differ  from  the  names  as  given  by  Pausanias 
some  four  centuries  later.  Pausanias  has  the  four  names, 
I'roitid,  Eloctran,  Nc'itan  aud  Homoloid,  in  common  with 
iEscbylus ;  but  besides,  he  lias  the  Ogygian,  the  Crena^n, 
and  the  Hypistai  (supreme),  or  gates  of  Sujireme  Jupiter, 
who  had  a  temple  near  them,  ^schylus  informs  us  that 
Athena  had  a  temple  near  the  Oncan  gates ;  probably  she 
was  hence  locally  entitled  Oncan  Athena.  Oncan  was  thought 
to  be  a  Phoenician  epithet  introduced  into  Thebes  by 
Cadmos.  We  can  only  guess  that  they  were  the  gates 
called  Ogygian  (ancient)  in  the  time  of  Pausanias.  Onca,  aa 
a  Hebrew  word,  cannot  be  confidently  interpreted ;  but  it 
may  belong  to  the  same  root  as  An.ak,  a  celebrated  family 
(if  giants,  .^schylus  does  not  name  the  seventh  gate,  which 
may  have  been  the  Ilyjistan.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
Porrhaian  (or  Porrhcian,  in  some  editions)  meant  simply  the 
north  gate,  and  was  a  secondary  appellation.  We  have 
Bo/j/jar  (tive^of),  with  double  p,  in  Tliucydides. 

I  am  indebted  for  the  al>ovc  note  to  my  friend  Professor 
Newman. 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  279 

To  hosts  of  alien  speect.     These  virgins  hear, 

Most  justly  hear,  with  outstretched  hands  who  pray.  160 

Antisteophe  ni. 

Divinities  most  dear, 

As  Saviours  mustering  near 
Our  city  walls — show  forth  the  love  ye  bear. 

Care  for  our  fanes,  with  aspect  kind, 
And  caring  for  them  save.    O  hear  our  prayer, 
Our  sacrificial  rites  call  ye  to  mind. 

\_Ee-enter  Eteocles.] 

Eteocles  (to  tlie  Chorus). 

I  ask  you,  ye  insufferable  brood, 

Is  this  course  best,  fittest  the  State  to  save, 

The  leaguered  host  to  hearten — falling  thus 

Before  the  statues  of  our  city's  gods. 

To  shout  and  wail — a  nuisance  to  the  wise  ? 

In  trouble  or  in  dear  prosperity, 

Ne'er  be  it  mine  with  womankind  to  dwell. 

In  rule,  her  insolence  keeps  all  aloof, 

In  fear,  worse  ill  she  brings  to  home  and  State  ; 

So  have  ye  now,  rushing  in  hurried  flight, 

Eoused  in  our  townsmen  soulless  cowardice. 

Ye  serve,  as  best  ye  may,  the  foe  without,  ISO 

While  we  within  bring  ruin  on  ourselves ; 

Such  aid  he  reapeth  who  with  women  dwells. 

So  if  there  be  who  heeds  not  my  command, 

Or  man  or  woman,  or  aught  else  between. 

The  fatal  pebble  shall  decide  their  doom, 


280  2726  Seven  againd  TJiebes. 

Nor  death  by  stoning  at  the  people's  hand 
Shall  they  escape.     "What  passeth  out  of  doors 
Is  man's  concern  ;  let  woman  counsel  not. 
Bide  thou  witliin,  and  no  more  mischief  cause. 
Dost  hear  or  not  ?     Or  speak  I  to  the  deaf  ? 

CJtorus.     Strophe  I. 
Dear  son  of  (Edipus,  I  trembled  sore,  190 

Hearing  of  rattling  cars  the  roar,  the  roar, 
When  wheel-impelling  axles  shrieked  amain. 

When  sounded  on  mine  ear 

The  noise  of  fire- wrought  gear — 
Within  the  chargers'  mouths  their  guiding  rein. 

Eteocles. 
What  then  ?  doth  sailor  means  of  safety  find, 
•The  stern  forsaking  for  the  prow,  what  time 
His  vessel  labours  mid  the  ocean  wave '? 

Chorus.     AxTiSTRorHE  I. 
Relying  on  the  gods,  as  was  but  meet, 
When  at  our  gates  pattered  the  deadly  slcct,  200 

With  liurrying  pace  I  sought  their  statues  old ; 

By  fear  possest,  I  there 

Poured  to  the  Blest  my  prayer, 
That  they  our  city's  prowess  would  uphold. 

Eteocles. 
Pray  that  our  towers  be  stanch  'gainst  foemon's  spear. 

Chorus. 
Grant  not  the  gods  this  boon  ? 

*  Tho  sailiT  prayed  to  the  fij^iiri"  of  hi.s  tutelary  god  upon 
the  prow. 


TJie  Seven  against  Thebes.  281 

Eteocles, 

Ay,  but  'tis  said, 
That  from  a  captured  town  the  gods  depart. 

Chorus.    Strophe  II. 
Ne'er  may  this  conclave  of  the  gods  take  flight 

While  I  behold  the  day  ; 
And  never  may  this  city  meet  my  sight  210 

Foe-trampled,  and  to  hostile  fire  a  prey. 

Eteocles. 

The  gods  invoking,  be  not  ill-advised ; 

Obedience  mother  is  of  good  success, 

Sure  pledge  of  safety  ; — so  the  saying  runs.* 

Chorus.     Antristrophe  II. 

True,  but  the  strength  of  god  is  mightier  still, 

And  oft,  in  direst  strait. 
It  lifteth  from  the  lowest  depths  of  ill 
Him  who,  with  cloud-veiled  eyes,  was  desperate. 

Eteocles. 
Men's  j^art  it  is  to  offer  sacrifice 

And  victims  to  the  gods,  when  foes  assail ;  220 

Thine  to  be  silent  and  to  bide  within. 

Chorus.     Strophe  III. 
'Tis  through  the  gods  we  dwell 
In  city  unsubdued ; 
Through  them  our  towers  repel 
The  hostile  multitude. 
"What  anger  can  this  move  ? 

*  The  text  of  this  hne  is  uncertain. 


2S2  Tlie  Seven  against  TJiehes. 

Eteocles. 

I  grudge  thee  not  duo  homage  to  the  gods ; 
But  lest  faint-hearted  ye  the  burghers  make, 
Tranquil  abide,  nor  yield  o'ermuch  to  icar. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  III. 
Hearing  unwonted  din, 
In  tumult  and  in  fear. 
Trembling  my  heart  within, 
I  drew  this  fortress  near ; 
This  seat  of  gods  above.  230 

Eteocles. 
If  now  of  dying  or  of  wounded  men 
Ye  hear,  bear  them  not  off  with  loud  laments, 
For  'tis  on  human  slaughter  Ares  feeds.* 

CJiorus. 
But  bark  1  the  snorting  of  the  steeds  I  hear. 

Eteocles. 
Hear,  if  thou  must ;  but  hear  nut  over-loud. 

Chorus. 
Groans  from  its  base  our  fort,  girt  round  by  foes. 

Eteocles. 
Mine  is  the  task  to  couusol  in  this  strait. 

•  *oj'w  /3poTwi».  It  is  not  easy  to  decide  whether  we 
bHouM  retain  t/xJi/M,  tlio  rcailing  of  the  best  MSS.,  or  a^lopt 
<p6fi<f,  with  BloiiilifM  ami  Diiuiurf,  from  the  Aldine. — Paly. 


The  Seven  against  Thebes,  283 

Chorus. 
Woe's  me !     More  loud  the  rattling  at  the  gates. 

Eteocles. 
Hush,  nor  alarm  the  city  with  these  cries. 

j^  Chorus. 

|y      Associate  gods,  our  towers  abandon  not.  24^ 

Eteocles. 
Plague  on  thee !  canst  thou  not  in  silence  bear  ? 

Chorus. 
Co-burgher  gods !  save  me  from  slavery, 

Eteocles, 
Thyself  enslavest,  thee  and  all  the  town. 

Cliorus. 
All-puissant  Zeus,  turn  'gainst  the  foe  thy  bolt. 

Eteocles. 
Zeus !  what  a  gift  to  man  was  womankind ! 

Chorus. 
Wretched  as  men  are  in  a  captured  town. 

Eteocles. 
The  statues  touching,  dost  renew  thy  cries  ? 

CJiorus. 
Through  want  of  heart  fear  seizes  on  my  tongue, 

Eteocles. 
I  pray  thee  grant  me  but  one  trifling  boon. 


284  2726  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Cliorm. 
Speak  quickly  then,  so  shall  I  quickly  know.  250 

Eteocles. 
Be  still,  unhappy  one,  scare  not  thy  friends. 

Chorus. 
Still  am  I ; — with  the  rest  I'll  bear  my  doom. 

Eteocles. 

This  word  I  to  thy  former  words  prefer. 

Moreover  keeping  from  these  shrines  aloof, 

Proffer  the  better  prayer,  e'en  that  the  gods 

Our  allies  prove  ;  then  having  heard  my  prayers, 

Do  thou  the  auspicious,  sacred  Prcau  raise, 

Hellas'  accustomed  shout  of  sacrifice, 

Clicering  to  friends,  dispelling  di'cad  of  foes. — 

Unto  our  country's  tutelary  gods,  2G0 

The  plain  who  haunt,  the  market-place  who  guard, 

To  Dirka's  fountains,  and  Ismcnos'  waters, 

Make  I  this  iiromise,  that — if  all  go  well. 

And  this  our  town  be  saved — with  blood  of  sheep 

Dyeing  the  sacred  hearths,  and  slaying  bulls 

In  the  gods'  honour,  trophies  I  will  plant. 

And  will  aloft  on  spears,  the  shrines  before, 

Hang  in  the  sacrod  fanes  the  spoils  of  war. 

Pray  to  the  gods  such  pr.ayors,  not  with  fond  moans, 

Neither  with  sobs  of  anguish  vain  and  wild. 

For  none  the  more  wilt  thou  osoapo  thy  doom.        270 

Meauwhile,  six  men  of  war,  myself  the  seventh. 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  285 

I,  at  the  seven  outlets  of  the  ports, 
In  gallant  style  will  marshal  'gainst  the  foe, 
Ere  hurrying  scouts  and  swiftly-rushing  news 
Arrive,  and  by  the  stress  set  all  ablaze. 

lExit  Eteoci.cs. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

I  heed,  but  terror  leaves  my  heart  no  rest, 
And  in  my  bosom  anxious  care. 
Sad  neighbour,  doth  enkindle  there 

Dread  of  the  wall-surrounding  multitude  ; 

Like  trembling  dove  am  I,  that  for  her  brood       280 

Doth  serpents  fear,  fell  inmates  of  her  nest ; 
For  some  against  our  towers, 
A  ^varlike  throng,  in  numbers  strong. 
Advance  ; — ah  what  will  me  betide  ? 

Others,  'gainst  citizens  on  every  side 
Sore  pelted,  hurl  the  rugged  stone ; 

Put  forth,  0  kindi-ed  gods,  your  utmost  powers,* 

Save  host  and  State  as  Sire  who  Cadmos  own.      290 

Antistrophe  I. 

And  say  what  soil  of  earth  will  ye  obtain 

Better  than  this,  if  ye  betray 

To  foreign  foes  this  fertile  land 
And  Dirka's  water,  richest  draught  of  all 
That  the  earth-circling  God  sends  forth  amain, 

*  This  follows  the  conjectural  Travrl  rpoira  fie,  a-vyytvels 
6eol,  answering  metrically  to  koI  iroXeats  pvrrjpes  e\\6eT. 


286  The  Seven  against  TJiehes. 

And  progeny  of  Tethys.*     Hence  we  call,  300 

Gods,  on  your  guardian  band  ; — 

Into  the  powers  outside  our  towers 

Sending  the  coward's  deadly  fear, 
Which  fatuous  casts  the  shield  away, 

Earn  for  these  burghers  glory.     Hear. 
Oh  hear  my  shrill-voiced  wailings  and  retain, 
As  Saviours  of  our  State,  your  stedfast  reign. 

Stkophe  II. 
For  sad  it  were,  before  its  time  310 

To  hurl,  enslaved,  as  booty  of  the  spear, 
A  city  famed  of  old,  to  Hades  drear, 
In  crumbling  ashes  laid  by  Argive  foe, 
Through  heaven's  high  will,  in  shameful  overthrow; 
That  women  old  and  virgins  in  their  prime 
Like  horses  by  their  hair  be  dragged,  ah  me, 
Their  robes  aroimd  them  rent,  to  slavery. 
"Wailcth  the  city  emptied  of  its  store, 

While  captives,  to  destruction  led  820 

Lamenting,  swell  the  mingled  roar. 
This  heavy  doom  forebodingly  I  dread. 

Antistbophe  II. 
For  maids  whose  bloom  is  at  the  full, 
Before  the  rites  the  scarce  ripe  fruit  that  cull, 

Tethys.  An  ancient  sca-pxldtss,  one  of  tlie  daughters 
of  Heaven  and  Earth,  wife  of  Okcanos.  Rivers  and  streams 
were  said  to  be  their  progeny.  Aniphitrita  is  understood  to 
be  anoflier  nnnio  of  this  goddess,  and  Tliefis  to  be  only 
another  form  of  the  name  Tctliys.  So  Virgil,  in  4tb  Eclogue, 
nses  Thetis. 


The  Seven  against  Thehes.  287 

How  grievous  'tis  far  from  their  homes  to  wend 

On  hateful  journey  !     "What  then  ?     I  declare 

Who  sleep  in  death  than  these  far  better  fare. 

Full  many  woes  a  captured  town  attend ; 

As  captive  one  his  enemy  doth  seize,  330 

Another  slays,  or  round  him  scatters  fire, 

While  the  whole  city  is  with  smoke  defil'd. 

And  people-taming  Ares,  wild 

With  frenesy,  all  sanctities 
Foully  polluting,  doth  their  rage  inspire. 

Stbophe  m. 

Loud  clamour  through  the  town  prevails, 
Destruction's  net  draws  near, 
And  man  by  man  is  slaughtered  with  the  spear  ; 
The  new-born  infant  wails,  340 

Its  gory  bleating  at  the  breast  is  heard  ; 
There  Rapine,  sister  to  wild  Tumult,  reigns. 

Spoiler  to  spoiler  gives  the  word ; 
The  empty-handed  empty-handed  hails, 
Seeking  a  partner  in  his  gains. 
Each  greedy  for  nor  Icrs  nor  equal  share. 
In  scenes  like  these  how  may  we  hope  to  fare? 

Antistrophe  III. 

And  fruitage  too  of  every  sort  350 

Is  wasted  ruthlessly. 
Earth-strewn,  sad  sight  to  housewife's  cheerless  eye  ; 
And  earth's  fair  gifts,  the  sport 
Of  worthless  surge,  are  swept  a\Yay 


2SS  Tlie  Seven  against  TJieles. 

In  common  ruin ;  maidens  in  their  prime 

Are  with  new  sorrow  filled  ;  for  they 
Of  haughty  foemen  now  must  own  the  sway. 

Forceful  their  wretched  couch  who  climb  ;  360 
Their  hope  that  death,  their  tear-fraught  woes  to  end, 
O'er  them  may  soon  her  sheltering  night  extend. 

Leader  of  1st  Half  Chorum. 
The  army-scout,  to  me  it  eccmeth,  friends. 
Brings  us  some  recent  tiding  from  tlic  host, 
Plying  in  haste  his  charioteering  feet. 

Leader  of  2nd  Half  Chorus. 
And  lo !  our  king,  offspring  of  CEdipus, 
Comes  in  fair  time  the  herald's  news  to  hear. 
Unmeasured  too  his  footsteps  are  through  haste 

[^Enter  Eteocles  a7id  Train.'] 
Messenger. 
I,  the  foe's  movements  knowing,  can  report  370 

How  at  the  gates  each  hath  his  post  by  lot. 
Tydeus  already  at  the  I'roitid  gates 
Eaves ;  but  to  cross  Ismcnos'  fonl  the  seer 
Forbids,  for  inauspicious  arc  the  rites. 
But  Tydeus,  frenzied,  hankering  for  fight. 
Blusters  with  yoll  like  serpent's  noonday  hiss, 
And  at  the  skilful  seer,  Oiclcs'  son, 
Aimeth  the  taunt  that  ho,  through  cowardice, 
Fawneth  on  death  and  battl(>.     Shouting  thus, 
A  triple  shadowy  plume,  his  h^lmot's  mane, 
He  shakes,  and  underneath  his  hollow  Bhiold,       380 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  289 

Bells,  wrought  of  brass,  clang  terror ;  and  he  bears, 
Enchased  upon  its  front,  this  proud  device — 
The  nightly  firmament  ablaze  with  stars, 
And  in  mid-buckler  shines  the  fuU-orb'd  moon 
Conspicuous,  queen  of  stars  and  eye  of  night. 
Thus  raving,  he,  in  haughty  garniture, 
Shouts  near  the  river  banks,  in  love  with  war, 
As  charger,  panting  fiercely  'gainst  the  curb, 
Hearing  the  trumpet's  blare,  with  fury  chafes. 
Whom,  as  antagonist,  to  him  wilt  set  ? 
Who,  when  the  bolts  are  loosed,  may  warrant  give, 
As  champion  to  defend  the  Proitid  gates  ?  390 

Eteocles. 

I  tremble  at  no  panoply  of  man. 
Neither  have  mere  devices  power  to  wound ; 
Plumage  and  bell  bite  not  without  the  spear. 
This  Night  too,  glittering  with  stars  of  heaven, 
Which  is,  thou  sayest,  set  upon  his  shield, 
If  spelled  aright,  may  truthful  omen  prove. 
For  if  in  death  night  fall  upon  his  eyes, 
Then  to  its  bearer  will  this  proud  device. 
Justly  and  fitly,  answer  to  its  name,  400 

And  'gainst  himself  his  pride  shall  prophesy. 
To  Tydeus,  this  braVe  son  of  Astacos 
I  will  oppose,  as  warden  of  the  gates ; 
lie,  nobly  bom,  revereth  honour's  throne, 
And  boastful  words  abhors  ;  to  shameful  deeds 
Laggart,  no  craven  soul  he  loves  to  be. 
Scion  of  heroes  sprung  from  dragon's  teeth. 

U 


290  The  Seven  against  TJiehes. 

Whom  Ares  spared,  true  oflFspring  of  the  soil 

Is  Melanippos  ;  Axes  will  decide 

The  issue  by  the  die  ; — but  his  true  kin, 

Justice,  hath  sent  him  forth,  her  champion,  410 

From  his  own  mother  foeman's  spear  to  >ard. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Grant  to  my  champion  victory. 

Ye  deities,  since  forth  he  wends 
To  battle  justly  and  our  State  defends. 
But  ah,  by  fear  possest,  I  dread  to  see 
Their  gory  fates  who  perish  for  their  friends. 

Messenqeb. 

Him  may  the  gods  thus  with  fair  fortune  crown  1 

The  Electran  gates  hath  Capaneus  by  lot, 

A  giant  he,  o'ertopping  him  first  nam'd. 

His  vaunt  outsoareth  mortal  pride  ;  these  towers  420 

He  threats  with  horrors,  which  may  Fate  avert. 

For,  God  assenting  or  in  God's  despite. 

He  vows  our  town  to  ravage  ;  not  heaven's  wrath, 

JDown  leaping  on  the  plain,  e'en  at  his  foot, 

Sliall  hold  him  back  ;  lightnings  and  thunderbolts 

To  noonday  solar  beams  he  likcneth. 

A  naked  man  his  blazon,  bcixring  fire ; 

Flares  in  his  hands  a  torch,  for  Bcrvico  prompt; 

In  golden  characters,  ho  cries  aloud. 

Tub  City  I  will  burn.     Against  this  man 

Send  thou — but  who  suth  fociimu  will  confront?  430 

This  bootitcr  who  will  moot  uud  tremble  not? 


Tlie  Seven  against  TJiebes.  291 

Eteocles. 

Here  also  gain  accrueth  upon  gain. 

When  in  o'erweening  ttoughts  vain  men  indulge 

Their  true  bewrayer  is  their  proper  tongue. 

Now  threatens  Capaneus,  for  fight  equipped, 

Scorning  the  gods  ;  and,  practising  his  tongue, 

"With  senseless  joy,  though  mortal,  he  to  heaven, 

High  surging  words  upsends,  defying  Zeus ; 

Full  faith  have  I  that  Zeus,  with  justice'  aid, 

Him  with  his  fire-charged  thunderbolt  will  smite, 

No  whit  resembling  noonday's  solar  beams.  4i0 

Him  to  confront,  despite  his  raving  tongue, 

Is  hero  marshall'd,  ay,  a  soul  of  fire, 

Stout  Polyphontes  ;  trusty  bulwark  he, 

By  grace  of  tutelary  Artemis, 

And  kindly  aid  uf  other  guds.     Tell  on. 

Who  against  other  gates  the  lot  hath  drawn  ? 

Chorus.     Antistbophe  I. 

Perish  who  vaunteth  mightily 

Against  our  city !    His  career 
May  thimder  check,  ere,  with  o'erweening  spear, 
My  home  invading,  me  as  captive  prey  ioO 

He  driveth  from  my  girlish  haunts  away! 

Messengeb. 

Him  next  who  drew  his  station  at  the  ports 
I'll  name.     For  to  Eteocles,  third  chief, 
From  uptum'd  brazen  casque  leapt  the  third  lot, 
His  band  against  Neistan  gates  to  leod. 


292  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

His  steeds,  loud  snorting  in  their  frontlet-gear, 
Eager  to  reach  the  gates,  circling  he  drives ; 
Whistle  their  nozzles  in  barbaric  guise, 
With  breath  sonorous  from  their  nostrils  filled. 
With  no  mean  blazon  is  his  shield  adorned;         4C0 
A  man  in  armour,  to  his  foeman's  tower, 
Eager  to  storm  it,  climbs  a  ladder's  rungs ; 
And  he  too  shouts  in  written  characters. 
That  him  not  Arcs  from  the  walls  shall  hurl. 
Against  this  man  a  trusty  champion  send, 
The  yoke  of  bondage  from  this  town  to  ward. 

Eteoclbs. 

Him  will  I  straight  with  happy  omens  send ; 
Yea,  sent  is  Megareus,  whose  vaunts  are  deeds ; 
Scion  of  Creon,  from  the  heroes  sprung 
Full-armed  who  rose  from  earth-sown  dragon's  teeth, 
He  from  the  gates  will  not  retire  dismayed  470 

By  noisy  snorting  of  infuriate  steeds  ; 
But  either,  dying,  will  repay  our  land 
His  nurture-fee,  or,  seizing  warriors  twain. 
Ay,  and  the  city  on  his  foeman's  shield. 
Will  with  the  spoils  his  father's  house  adorn. 
Now  of  another  brag,  nor  grudge  thy  words. 

Chorus.    Stbophk  II. 

For  him  success  I  pray, 
O  champion  of  my  homo ;  for  them  instood 

Ill-fortimo  ;  and  as  they. 
With  frenzied  spirit,  utter  'gainst  our  town 


The  Seven  against  TJiehes.  293 

High-sounding  words,  may  Zeus,  Avenger  dread, 
By  wrathful  ire  possest,  on  them  look  down  I         480 

Messengeb. 

One  more,  a  fourth,  the  neighbour-gate  who  holds, 

Onca- Athena's,  shouting  stands  hard  by ; 

The  mighty  form  of  huge  Hippomedon ; 

I  shook  with  terror,  I  deny  it  not. 

As  the  vast  orb  he  whirled,  his  buckler's  disk  ; 

Certes  no  vulgar  artist  was  the  man 

Who  this  device  hath  wrought  upon  his  shield ; 

Typhon  forth  darting  from  fire-breathing  lips 

Flame's  quivering  sister,  smoke  of  dusky  hue ; 

And  all  around  the  hollow-bellied  shield  490 

Circled  a  coil  of  intertwining  snakes. 

HimseK  hath  raised  his  war-cry,  and  inspired 

By  Ares,  raves  like  Thyiad  for  the  fight. 

Death  in  his  glance.     Against  such  man's  attack 

Needs  must  we  be  prepared,  for  at  our  gates 

Piout  is  already  boastfully  proclaimed. 

Eteocles. 

First  Onca-Pallas,  near  our  city  gates 
Holding  her  seat,  hating  man's  insolence, 
Shall  him  ward  off,  like  fell  snake  from  her  brood. 
Him  to  oppose  hath  CEnops'  valiant  son, 
Hyperbios,  been  chosen — man  to  man,  500 

Willing  at  Fortune's  call  his  fate  to  prove. 
Neither  in  form,  in  courage,  nor  in  arms 
Blameworthy ;  them  hath  Hermes  fairly  matched 


294  The  Seven  against  TTiebes. 

Since  foe  will  foe  confront,  wlule  on  their  shields 

They  into  conflict  bring  two  hostile  gods. 

For  Typhon,  breathing  fire,  the  one  doth  bear, 

While  Father  Zeus  upon  Hyperbios'  shield 

Sits,  firmly  throned,  wielding  his  fiery  bolt ; 

But  Zeus  defeated  no  one  yet  hath  seen. 

Such  on  each  side  the  friendship  of  the  gods  ;       510 

We  with  the  victors,  with  the  vanquish'd  they. 

Thus  will  it  with  the  mortal  champions  fare, 

If  Zeus  than  Typhon  stronger  be  in  tight ; 

And  to  Hyperbios,  as  the  legend  reads 

Set  on  his  shield,  a  saviour  Zeus  will  prove. 

Chorus.     Antistbophe  IL 

Firm  is  my  trust  that  he 
The  hateful  form  who  beareth  on  his  shield 

Of  earth-born  deity, 
Adverse  to  Zeus,  to  men  a  shape  of  dread 
And  to  the  long-lived  gods,  prone  in  the  field, 
Before  our  gate  shall  fling  his  own  proud  head.    520 

Messengeb. 

Such  be  the  issue!    At  the  northern  gates 
The  fifth  is  marshalled,  near  the  tomb  which  holds 
Zeus-bom  Amphion.     By  bis  spear  he  swears. 
Which  more  than  God  he  honours,  or  hi.s  oyos. 
That  the  Cadnu-iau's  stronghold  ho  will  .'^poil. 
Despite  of  Zeus.     So  speaks  the  stripling  hero. 
Scion  fair-faced  of  m(»th(.T  mountiiin-reared  ; 
Over  his  cheek  spreadt-th  tlio  ton^lcr  down, 


Tlie  Seven  against  Thebes.  295 

Hair  thickly  sprouting  of  youth's  budding  prime.  530 

But  he  with  savage  temper,  which  belies 

His  maiden  name,  and  with  an  eye  of  dread, 

Taketh  his  post ; — yet  stands  he  at  our  gates 

Not  without  vaunt,  for  on  his  shield  brass-wrought, 

His  body's  rounded  bulwark,  he  doth  wield 

The  raw-devouring  Sphinx,  our  city's  shame. 

Her  form  stud-fastened,  brilliantly  embossed. 

A  man  she  holds  beneath  her,  a  Cadmeian, 

A  target  so  for  missiles  thickly  showered. 

Hither  he  comes  no  peddling  fight  to  wage,  540 

Nor  the  long  route  he  traversed  to  disgrace; 

Parthenopaios,  an  Arcadian  bom, 

But  denizen  of  Argos ;  such  a  man 

Dcth  Argos*  kindly  nurture  now  repay 

By  threats  against  our  towers,  which  heaven  avert  I 

Eteocles. 

From  the  high  gods  may  they  the  doom  obtain 
Planned  against  us ;  so,  with  these  godless  vaunts, 
Themselves,  o'erthrown,  shall  perish  utterly. 
'Gainst  this  Arcadian,  him  thou  tellest  of, 
The  warrior  Actor  stands ;  no  boaster  he, 
But  with  a  hand  which  sees  the  thing  to  do  ; 
Brother  of  him  whom  I  before  described.  550 

No  fluent,  deedless,  tongue  will  he  admit 
Within  our  gates  to  aggravate  our  ills, 
Nor  him  allow  to  pass,  on  hostile  shield 
Who  bears  the  image  of  that  hateful  pest. 


296  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

No!  'ncath  our  walls,  sore-batter'd,  she  will  rail 
At  him  who  fain  would  carry  her  within. 
If  heaven  so  wills,  herein  I  truth  shall  speaL 

Chorus.     Strophb  III. 

His  word  my  breast  doth  rend, 
Standeth  my  hair  on  end. 

Hearing  the  haughty  boast  560 

Of  haughty  men  profane  ; 
Ye  Gods,  above  who  reign, 
Here,  in  our  land,  smite  ye  their  alien  host  I 

Messengeb. 

Sixth,  let  me  name  a  man  most  sage  of  heart, 

Amphiaraos,  prophet,  first  in  arms  ; 

He,  marshall'd  at  the  Uomoloian  gates, 

Tydcus  with  keen  reproaches  oft  assails. 

As  homicide,  disturber  of  the  State, 

To  Argos  prime  instructor  in  these  harms, 

Erinys'  herald.  Slaughter's  minister,  67 

Adviser  to  Adrastos  of  these  ills ; 

And  on  thy  brother  Polyneikes'  might. 

Ho  calls,  dissecting  his  ill-omened  namo  ;  • 

Then  in  conclusion,  twice  with  emphasis 

His  namo  repeating,  utters  fortli  these  words: 

"  Pleasing  to  gods  in  sooth  is  such  a  deed, 

Lovely  for  future  years  to  hear  and  toll, 

The  city  of  thy  sires  and  native  gods 

To  spoil,  made  captive  by  an  alien  host 

*  noXvvttKrjs — much  strilo. 


The  Seven  against  Theles.  297 

Can  Justice  the  maternal  fountain  quench  ?  *  580 

Thy  Fatherland,  if  captnr'd  through  thy  zeal, 

How  can  it  e'er  again  be  thine  ally  ? 

Myself  I  shall  this  land  enrich,  a  seer 

'Neath  hostile  earth  sepulchred.     Fight  we  now ! 

For  no  dishonourable  doom  I  look." 

Thus  spake  the  seer,  wielding  his  rounded  shield. 

All  brass,  but  no  device  was  on  its  orb ; 

For  just  to  be,  he  longs,  not  just  to  seem, 

Ripe  wisdom  reaping  from  his  deep-plough'd  mind, 

Whence  honest  counsels  grow.    Against  this  man  590 

Champions,  I  charge  thee,  send,  skilful  and  brave, 

For  terrible  is  he  who  fears  the  gods. 

Eteocles. 
Woe  for  the  omen  which  the  righteous  makes 
Companion  of  the  impious  ;  nought  is  worse 
In  any  cause  than  evil  fellowship ; 
Its  fruit  may  not  be  garner'd  ;  Ate's  field 
Yields  death  for  harvest ;  yea,  the  godly  man. 
With  headstrong  sailors  bent  on  villainy. 
Mounting   the   bark,   sinks  with   the   heaven-loathed 
crew ;  600 

Or,  just  himself,  but  leagued  with  citizens 
Ruthless  to  strangers,  heedless  of  the  gods, 
Caught  in  the  self-same  snare,  he  prostrate  lies, 
Smitten  with  them  by  God's  impartial  scourge. 
So  too  this  seer  himself^  Oicles'  son, 

•  Alluding  to  the  device  of  Justice  upon  his  shield. 


298  The  Seven  against  TJiebes. 

A  righteous  man,  pious,  discreet,  and  brave, — 

This  mighty  soothsayer,  with  bold-tongued  men 

Unholy,  in  despite  of  reason,  joined, 

Their  march  who  trail  to  reach  the  far-oflf  city, —  * 

He,  if  Zeus  wiU,  with  them  shall  down  be  dragged.  610 

But  he,  methinks,  our  gates  will  not  assail ; 

Not  by  faint  heart  withheld  or  dastard  will, 

But  knowing  'tis  his  doom  in  fight  to  perish, 

If  fruit  there  be  in  Loxias'  oracles  ; 

And  He  or  silence  keeps  or  speaks  in  season. 

Yet  against  him  stout  Lasthenes  we'll  post, 

A  stranger-hating  warden  of  the  gates  ; 

He,  old  in  mind,  yet  blooms  in  youthful  prime. 

With  eye  swift-glancing, ;[  and  not  slow  of  hand 

To  snatch  from  'neath  his  shield  the  naked  spear.  620 

But  victory  is  still  the  gift  of  God. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  III. 

Our  just  entreaties  crown, 

Ye  gods,  and  bless  our  town ! 

On  the  invading  powers 

Turn  ye  war's  spear-wrought  woe  I 

May  Zeus,  outside  our  towers, 
With  his  dread  thunder  smiting,  lay  them  low  1 

Mksssnoeb. 
Now  at  the  seventh  gate  the  seventh  chief, 
Thy  proper  mother's  son,  I  will  announce, 

*  Fie  intimates  sarc.istically  that  they  arc  marchinc  not. 
n.s  thoy  piiriHise,  to  the  city  of  ThoKs,  but  to  the  far-oll 
city  of  Hades. 

i  Literally,  "  swift-footed." 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  299 

What  curses  for  tlie  state  he  imprecates  ; 
That  he  may  stand  upon  the  walls,  he  prays : — 
That,  heralded  as  king  to  all  the  land, 
With  paeans  for  its  capture,  he  with  thee 
Fighting,  may  slay  thee,  dying  by  thy  side, 
Or  thee,  who  wrong'd  him,  chasing  forth  alive, 
Eequite  in  kind  his  proper  banishment. 
Such  words  he  shouts  and  calls  upon  the  gods, 
Who  o'er  his  race  preside  and  Fatherland, 

With  gracious  eye  to  look  upon  his  prayers.* 

***** 

A  well-wrought  buckler,  newly  forged,  he  bears. 

With  two-fold  blazon  riveted  thereon  ;  640 

For  there  a  woman  leads,  with  sober  mien, 

A  mailed  warrior,  enchased  in  gold ; — 

Justice  her  style,  and  thus  the  legend  speaks  : 

"  This  man  I  will  restore,  and  he  shall  hold 

The  city  and  his  fathers'  palace-homes." 

Such  the  devices  of  the  hostile  chiefs. 

'Tis  for  thyself  to  choose  whom  thou  wilt  send ; 

But  never  shalt  thou  blame  my  herald-words; 

To  guide  the  rudder  of  the  State  be  thine ! 

Eteocles. 
O  heaven-demented  race  of  CEdipus,  650 

My  race,  tear-fraught,  detested  of  the  gods. 
Alas,  our  father's  curses  now  bear  fruit. 
But  it  beseems  not  to  lament  or  weep, 
Lest  lamentations  sadder  still  be  bom. 

*  I  omit  a  line  which  is  regarded  as  spuriotis. 


300  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

For  him,  too  truly  Polyneikes  named,— 
What  his  device  will  work  we  soon  shall  know; 
Whether  his  braggart  words,  with  madness  fraught, 
Gold-blazoned  on  his  shield,  shall  lead  him  back. 
Had  Justice,  virgin  child  of  Zeus,  in  sooth 
Guided  his  deeds  and  thoughts,  this  might   have 

been;  660 

But  neither  when  he  fled  the  darksome  womb, 
Nor  in  his  childhood,  nor  in  youth's  fair  prime, 
Nor  when  his  chin  thick  hair  o'erspread,  with  hiui 
Hath  Justice  converse  held,  or  claimed  him  hers  ; 
Nor  in  this  outrage  on  his  Fatherland, 
Deem  I  she  now  beside  him  deigns  to  stand. 
For  Justice  would  in  sooth  belie  her  name 
Did  she  with  this  all-daring  man  consort. 
In  these  regards  confiding  will  I  go, 
Myself  will  meet  him.     Who  with  better  right  ?  670 
Brother  'gainst  brother,  chieftain  against  chief. 
And  foeman  against  foe,  I'll  take  my  stand. 
Quick,   bring   my   greaves,  bulwark  'gainst   spear 

and  stones.  ^ 

Dearest  of  mortals,  son  of  (Edipus, 
Be  not  in  wrath  like  him  of  fatal  name  ; 
Let  Argivc  warriors  with  Cadmeians  fight  • 
It  is  enough  ;  their  blood  may  be  atoned  ; 
But  death  of  brothers,  each  by  other  slain,— 
Old  age  to  such  pollution  never  couics. 

Eteoclks. 
If  any  one  boar  evil,  let  it  bo  680 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  801 

Wittout  disgrace,  sole  profit  to  the  dead ; 
On  base  and  evil  deeds  no  glory  waits. 

Chorus.     Strophe  IV. 

TVtat  art  so  eager  for,  my  son  ? 

Let  not  Infatuation's  spell, 
Spear-frenzied,  soul-possessing,  bear  thee  on : 
No,  the  first  germ  of  evil  passion  quell. 

Eteocles. 
Since  God  himself  the  matter  presses  on, 
Let  all  of  Laios'  race,  'neath  Phoebos'  ban, 
Drift  with  the  breeze,  Cocytos'  wave  its  goal. 

Chorus,     Antistrophe  IV. 
Thee  passion  biting  to  the  quick 
O'er  masters,  onward  thou  art  led, 
A  bitter-fruited  deed  to  consummate  690 

Of  blood,  unlawful  for  thy  hand  to  shed. 

Eteocles. 
E'en  so,  for  my  dear  father's  hostile  curse. 
Now  ripe,  broods  over  my  dry  tearless  eyes, 
Telling  that  later  doom  hath  prior  gain.* 

*  \iyov(Ta  Ktphos  TTporepov  vcrrepov  p.6pov. 
Two  translations  of  this  line  are  offered  : 

1.  Announcing  gain  prior  to  later  doom. 

2.  Announcing  prior  gain  of  later  doom. 

I  have  adopted  the  latter,  where  nporepov  is  used  as  anti- 
thetic to  varepov,  but  means  superior,  not  earlier.  The 
annoimcement  may  be  regarded  as  a  sarcastic  intimation 
that  there  is  no  hope  of  Ufe  ;  that  the  only  advantage  that 
either  brother  can  gain  is  to  be  the  last  to  die. 


302  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Chorus.     Strophe  V. 
But  do  not  thou  press  on  ; 
Thy  life  if  Fortune  crowneth,  none 
As  coward  thee  will  brand. 
Thy  hoock)  Erinys,  black  with  storm,  will  leave, 

When,  proffer'd  by  thy  hand, 
Due  meed  of  sacrifice  the  gods  receive. 

Eteocles. 
The  gods,  methinks,  have  long  neglected  us, 
Our  doom  the  only  ofiering  they  esteem.  700 

Why  longer  fawn  then  upon  deadly  fate  ? 

Chorus.     Antistrophb  V. 

Now  is  the  very  hour 
When  near  she  stands.     Her  hostile  power 

At  length  may  own  the  sway 
Of  tardy  change-wind,  and  in  kindlier  mood 

Attend  thee  on  thy  way  ; 
Eut  now  she  seethes  with  fury  unsubdued. 

Eteocles. 
Seethed  over  hath  the  curse  of  CEdipus. 
Too  true  the  Phantoms  of  my  nightly  dreams, 
Ghastly  dividers  of  our  father's  wealth. 

Chorus. 
To  women  yield,  although  thou  Ioto  them  not. 

Etkoclks. 
Say  what  may  yet  be  dune,  and  speak  in  brief.    710 


Tfie  Seven  against  Thehes.  303 

Chorus. 
Tread  not  this  pathway  to  the  seventh  gate. 

Eteoolbs. 
My  whetted  soul  with  words  thou  shalt  not  blunt. 

Chorus. 

Such  conquest,  in  defeat,  the  God  respects. 

Eteocles. 
The  armed  warrior  brooks  not  such  a  word. 

Chorus. 
Wouldst  thou  in  sooth  cull  thine  own  brother's  blood  ? 

Eteocles. 
Grant  but  the  gods,  from  harm  he  shall  not  'scape. 

'[Exit  Eteocles. 

Chorus.     Steophe  I. 
I  shudder  lest  the  house-destroying  Might, 
Unlike  to  gods,  true  prophetess  of  iU, 
A  sire's  invok'd  Erinys,  now  fulfil  720 

The  wrathful  curses,  fraught  with  bitter  hate, 

Of  CEdipus  infatuate. 
Child-slaying  Eris  urges  on  the  fight. 

Antistrophe  I. 

The  lots  between  them  doth  a  stranger  deal, 
Chalybian  colonist  from  Scythia's  bound, 
Divider  stern  of  wealth,  raw-hearted  steel, 


304  Tlie  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Who  to  the  twain  allotteth  so  much  ground 

To  dwell  on  as  they  hold  when  slain, 
Stript  of  all  portion  in  their  wide  domain.  730 

Stbophe  II. 
But  when  in  death  they  lie, 
Spear-mangled,  each  by  other  slain  ; — 
When  drinks  their  native  dust  the  gory  rain. 
Who  then  with  lustral  rites  may  purify  ? 

Who  cleanse  them  from  that  stain  ? 
0  horrors  new  upon  this  house  that  wait, 
Blent  with  the  direful  ills  of  earlier  date  I 

Antistbophe  II. 

For  of  the  crime  I  tell 
On  which  of  old  swift  vengeance  fell,  740 

Yet  whoso  dread  issue  the  third  age  doth  wait ; 
When  Laios,  'gainst  Apollo's  will  divine, 

From  Pythia's  central  shrine 
Who  thrice  proclaimed  the  sacred  oracle, 
"  Die  without  issue  wouldst  thou  save  the  State, — " 

Strophe  III. 
Yet  he,  by  friends  o'erpowor'd,  perverse  of  mind, 

Begat  his  proper  woe 
In  OEdipns,  the  parricide,  who  dared, 
In  field  unhallow'd  whence  he  sprang,  to  sow       750 

A  bloody  of&hoot     Frenzy  blind 
In  wedlock  the  infatuate  couple  paired. 

AsTisTuornE  III. 
And  ncnv  a  sea  of  ill  kinls  wave  on  u-ave ; — 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  305 

One  falls  and  one  doth  rear 
Against  the  city's  stem,  with  clamour  rude 
Its  triple  crest — between,  fence  slight  to  save,     760 

The  breadth  of  wall  extends.     I  fear 
Lest  with  its  kings  the  city  be  subdued. 

Strophe  IV. 
For  the  dread  reconcilements  now  at  last, 
Of  curses  breathed  of  old,  fulfilment  find, 
Nor  doth  the  fated  mischief  lag  behind. 

When  wealth  of  merchants  seeking  gain 
O'erweighted  is,  into  the  briny  main 
From  the  ship's  stern  the  precious  freight  is  cast. 

Antisteophe  IV. 

For  to  what  mortal  did  or  gods  or  men, 

His  co-mates  of  the  State,  such  honour  pay,         770 

And  diverse-nurtured  multitudes',  as  then 

To  CEdipus  they  paid,  whose  hand 
Had  from  the  ravening  monster  purgeel  the  land, 
That  riddling  post  which  seized  on  men  for  prey. 

Steophe  V. 

But  when,  unhappy  wight. 
Apprised  of  his  dire  wedlock,  anguish-fraught, 

Stung  with  intolerable  pain. 
Frenzied  at  heart,  he  twofold  mishcief  wrought ; 
For  with  the  hand  that  had  his  father  slain,         780 
His  proper  eyes  he  did  bereave  of  sight.* 

*  The    epithet  Kpeiaa-oreKvav  being  considered    corrupt, 
I  have  omitted  it. 


306  The  Seven  againd  Thebes. 

Antistrophe  V. 
And  at  his  6ons  he  flung, 
By  ignominious  treatment  vex'd  at  heart, 

Curses,  alas,  with  bitter  tongue, 
That  they  with  iron-wiehling  hand  should  part 
One  day  their  wealth.     I  tremble  lest  that  vow 
Erinys,  swift  of  foot,  accomplish  now. 

\_Enter  Messexgeb. 

Messenger. 

Ye  maidens,  mother-nurtured,  courage  take, 
Our  city  hath  escaped  the  vassal  yoke ;  790 

The  boasts  of  haughty  men  are  come  to  nought. 
Our  city  floats  in  calm,  and  from  the  shock 
Of  many  billows  yet  hath  sprung  no  leak. 
Staunch  are  our  towers ;  the  champions  whom  we 

set, 
In  single  combat  to  defend  our  gates, 
Their  pledges  have  rcdeem'd.     At  the  six  gates 
All  prospers  in  the  main  ;  the  seventh  gate 
Apollo,  King,  the  a%vful  seventh,  chose. 
Avenging  on  the  sons  of  CEdipus 
Laios'  ill-counselled  trespass  wrought  of  old. 

Chorus. 
What  new  event  hath  to  the  city  chanced  ?  800 

Messenger. 
Saved  is  the  city,  but  the  brother  kings — 

Chorum. 
What  saycst  thou  ?     Through  fear  I  am  distraught. 


TJie  Seven  against  Thebes.  307 

Messenger. 
Be  calm  and  listen.     CEdipus'  two  sons — 

Chorus. 
Ah  wretched  me !    Prophet  I  am  of  ills. 

Messenger. 
Earth  drinks  their  Wood,  each  by  the  other  slain. 

Chorus. 
Came  they  to  this  ?    'Tis  horrible,  yet  speak. 

Messenger. 
Dead  are  our  chiefs  by  fratricidal  hands. 

Chorus. 
Then  are  they  slain  by  hands  too  brotherly. 

Messenger. 
Prone  in  the  dust  they  lie,  too  true  the  tale. 

Chorus. 
Thus  dealt  the  god  impartially  with  both. 

Messenger. 
Yea,  he  himself  destroys  th'  ill-fated  race. 

Chorus. 
Cause  have  we  here  for  gladness  and  for  tears.     810 
The  city  prospers  but  its  governors, 
Twin  captains  have,  with  Scythia's  welded  steel, 
Between  them  portioned  all  their  heritage, 
Holding  what  each  received  in  sepulture, 
Borne  onward  by  their  father's  direful  curse. 


308  The  Seven  against  TJieles. 

Chorus. 

0  mighty  Zeus,  and  all  ye  guardian  powers 
Who  save,  in  very  sooth,  these  towers 

Of  Cadmos,  whether  now  820 

Shall  I  rejoice,  and  in  triumphant  strain, 
Our  town's  unharming  saviour,  Fortune,  hail, 

Or  those  war-chiefs  bewail, 
Wretched,  ill-fated,  childless  twain, 

Who  rightly,  as  their  names  avow — * 
Names  full  of  glory  and  of  strife. 
Are  through  intent  unhallowed  reft  of  life. 

STROrHE. 

Dark  curse,  with  full  completion  crowned, 
Of  CEdipus,  inherent  in  the  race! 
Hovers  an  evil  chill  my  heart  around.  830 

Like  Bacchanal,  when  on  mine  ear 
The  tidings  fell  that  the  blood-dripping  slain 
Through  evil  Fate  had  died— their  tomb  to  grace, 

A  dirge  I  wove,  sad  strain. — 
Ill-omened  is  this  concert  of  the  spear. 

Antistrophb. 
Their  father's  baleful  curse  hath  wrought, 
Untired,  its  battle  to  the  bitter  end  ; 
Now  Laios'  wilful  counsels  have  their  meed. 

*  o?  bf)T.  As  only  one  of  the  brotliers,  Polyncikcs,  couM 
be  said  to  liavc  porishcd  6p6a>s  Kar  tnu>wniav,  Ilointann 
thinks  part  of  a  verse  lost  with  an  allusion  to  the  name 
of  Kteoclcs. — Vahy,  I  liavo  adopted  Mr.  Newman's  sug- 
RCStion,  JcdpT*  irtoKKui  Ka\  irokvvtlKdi. 


The  Seven  against  TJieles.  309 

Around  the  city  hovers  care ; 
Not  blunted  are  the  oracles ; — this  deed  840 

[2%e  bodies  of  the  brothers  are  brought  in.'] 

Which  ye  have  wrought,  oh  lamentable  pair, 

All  credence  doth  transcend. 
Dire  woes  are  come,  not  by  mere  rumour  taught. 

Epode. 
Lo,  obvious  now  to  sight  the  herald's  tale ! 
Twofold  anxieties,  disasters  twain 

Of  pride  *  and  mutual  slaughter,  fraught 
With  twofold  doom. 
To  their  dread  issue  are  these  evils  brought. 
What  can  I  sing  ?     What  but  the  grievous  La'  o 
Fixed  at  the  heart  of  this  ill-fated  home  ? 

But  now,  in  escort  of  the  dead. 

Oh  friends !  adown  grief's  sobbing  gale. 

With  measured  beat  of  hands  on  head,  850 

Ply  ye  the  oar-stroke,  ply  amain, 
Which  over  Charon's  river  evermore 

Wafteth  the  galley,  black  of  sail, J 

Unchartered,  to  the  sunless  reign, 

Untrodden  by  the  god  of  light, 

Invisible  to  mortal  sight, 

The  all-receiving  shore. 

*  Hermann  reads,  bl8vfi  dyavopea. 

t  The  dark-rigged  boat  of  Charon  is  here  contrasted  with 
the  sacred  white-sailed  galley  which  went  on  an  annual 
public  mission  from  Athens  to  Deles,  the  favourite  scat 
of  Apollo. 


810  TJie  Seven  against  Tliebes. 

[As  the  funeral  procession  advances,  Antigone  and  Ismexb 
are  seen  approaching^ 

But  for  a  task  of  bitter  pain, 
Their  brothers'  requiem  to  intone, 
Antigone  draws  with  Ismene  near ; 

From  lovely,  deep-zoned  breasts,  I  deem 
Will  they,  in  no  ambiguous  strain. 
With  fitting  wail  their  woes  deplore, 
And  ere  their  utterance  reach  our  ear, 

Usj  too,  it  doth  beseem  860 

Erinys'  harsh-toned  hymn  to  sing, 
And  hostile  pfean  chant  to  Hades'  King. 
Oh  most  unhappy  in  your  brothers,  ye 
Of  all  who  round  their  garments  cast  the  zone ; 

I  weep,  I  moan, — 
Here  is  no  guile, — these  wailings  that  I  pour 
Come  from  my  very  heart,  unfcignedly. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Strophe  I. 

Woe!    Woe! 
Ye  frantic  ones,  your  friends  who  disobeyed. 
By  sorrow  unsubdued,  unhappy  twain,  870 

Spear-armed  your  father's  house  who  captive  made. 

Semi-chorus  II. 
Wretched  in  sooth,  wretched  their  doom,  both  slain, 
Their  house  o'orwholming  in  their  overthrow. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Antistbophb  I. 
Woo  !     Woo ! 
O  ye  your  household  walls  in  dust  who  laid, 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  311 

Who  bitter  kingship  tasted ;  war's  keen  blade 
To  you,  at  length,  hath  reconcilement  brought. 

Semi-cliorus  II. 
The  dread  Erinys  of  their  sire  hath  wrought, 

Fiilfilling  his  stern  curse,  this  stubborn  woe. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Strophe  II. 
Both  smitten  through  the  breast, 
Yea,  through   the  heart,  sprung  from   one  common 

womb ! 

*  *  *  *  » 

Woe  !  Woe  !  ye  fiend  possest ! 

Woe  for  the  curse  of  mutual-slaughtering  doom  ! 

Semi-chorus  II. 
Smitten,  as  ye  relate. 
Smitten  in  home  and  life,  with  ruin  dire, 
By  Wrath  transcending  speech,  and  vengeful  Hate,  890 
Sprung  from  the  curse  of  CEpidus,  their  sire. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Antbistbophe  II. 

The  city  groans  amain, 
The  turrets  groan,  groans  the  man-loving  plain  ; 

But  with  their  kin  doth  bide 
Their  wealth,  dire  cause  to  that  ill-fated  twain 
Of  strife,  whose  issue  death  to  either  side. 

Semi-chorus  II. 
With  hearts  keen  whetted  they 
Their  wealth  apportioned,  equal  shares  they  gain ; — 
Friends  blame  the  umpire,*  neither  may  their  fray  900 
Be  now  applauded  in  triumphal  strain. 

*  The  umpire  alluded  to  is  the  sword. 


312  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Strophe  III. 
Steel-smitten,  hapless  pair ! 
Steel-smitten,  lie  they  there. 
What  fortune,  one  perchance  may  ask, 
Awaiteth  them  ? — A  share 
In  their  ancestral  tomb. 

Sevii-chorus  U. 

Grief,  with  heart-piercing  groan, 
Escorts  them  from  their  home — sad  task ; — 
Sorrow  unfeigned  and  unfeigned  moan, 

Distressful,  joyless,  din !  910 

Wasteth  my  heart  as  from  its  depths  within 
True  tears  I  shed,  weeping  those  princes'  doom. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Antistrophe  IIL 
This  o'er  them  one  may  say, 
O'er  that  unhajipy  twain  ; — 
That  to  their  friends  much  bale  they  wrought 
And  to  the  alien  host. 
Slaughtered  in  deadly  fray. 

Semi-chorus  II. 

Of  womankind  on  earth, 
Of  all,  the  mother's  name  who  boast,  920 

Most  wretched  she  who  gave  them  birth  ; — 

Wedding  her  son  these  forth  she  brought. 
By  kindred  hands  and  mutual  murder  slain. 

Semi-chorus  I.     Stuopiie  IV. 
Brothers  indeed  together  reft  of  life, 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  313 

Severed  in  conflict  rude ; — 
Falling  in  frenzied  strife, 
So  did  they  end  their  feud. 

Semi-chorus  II. 

Stayed  is  their  hate,  and  on  the  gory  plain  930 

Commingled  is  their  life  ; 
Too  truly  of  one  blood  these  foemen  now. 

Stern  umpire  of  their  strife. 
The  fire-born  stranger  from  beyond  the  main, 
The  whetted  steeL     Hostile  was  Ares  too, 
Bitter  apportioner  of  wealth,  I  trow, 
Making  the  curse  paternal  all  too  true. 

Semi-chorus  L     Antistkophe  IV. 

Of  heaven-sent  woe  allotted  shares  have  they ; — 

Unhappy,  doom'd  from  birth  I  940 

Lies  'neath  their  lifeless  clay 
Wealth  fathomless  of — earth. 

Semi-chorus  II. 
Oh  ye  who  your  own  house  have  caused  to  bloom 

With  many  bitter  woes ! 
O'er  you  at  last  these  curses  their  shrill  lay 

Have  chanted,  fraught  with  doom; 
For  now  your  race  is  turned  to  flight, 
In  utter  rout.     Ay,  on  the  very  gate 

Where  fell  your  deadly  blows, 
Stands  Ate's  trophy  ; — and  the  fiend  elate 
After  her  twofold  conquest  ceased  from  fight.       950 


314  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

\_Enter  Antigose  and  Ismexe. — The  former  addresses  the 
corpse  of  Polyneikes,  the  latter  that  of  Eteocles.] 

Antigone, 
Smiting,  thou  wast  smitten. 

ISMENE. 

Slaying,  thou  wast  slain. 

Antigone. 
Thou  with  spear  didst  slaughter. 

ISMENE. 

Thee  the  spear  laid  low. 

Antigone. 
In  thy  toil  most  wretched. 

ISMENE. 

Wretched  in  thy  woe. 

Antigone. 
Pour  forth  lamentations. 

ISMENE. 

Mourners,  weep  amain. 

Antigone. 
Prostrate  lies  the  slayer. 

ISMENE. 

Near  him  lies  the  slain. 

Antioonk.     SrnopnE. 
Alas!  with  wailing  raves  my  spirit.  •»60 


The  Seven  against  Theles.  315 

ISMENE. 

Moans  my  heart  within  my  breast. 

Antigone. 
"Worthy  thou  of  all  lamentings, 

ISMENE. 

Direst  fate  hath  thee  oppressed. 

Antigone. 
By  thy  fi-iend  wert  reft  of  life. 

ISMENE. 

Thou  thy  friend  hast  slain  in  strife. 

Antigone. 
Twofold  horrors  to  relate. 

Isjiene. 
Twofold  to  behold. 

Antigone. 
Brothers  these  by  brothers  slain. 

Ismene. 
Near  them  stand  we,  sisters  twain. 

Antigone. 
Deadly  deeds  to  tell  of.  970 

Ismene. 
Deadly  to  behold. 


316  TJie  Seven  against  TJieles. 

Chorus. 

Woe,  woe,  for  wretched  Fate, 

Donor  of  baleful  dower  ! 
Woe  for  the  shade  august  of  CEdipus  I 
O  swart  Erinys  strong  art  thou  in  power ! 

Antigone.     Antistbophe. 
Woes,  alas,  to  sight  distressing, 

ISMEN^. 

Showed  he  me,  his  exile  past. 

Antigone. 
After  slaying  he  returned  not 

ISMENE. 

Saved,  his  breath  away  he  cast. 

Antigone. 
Perished  hath  he ;  all  too  true, 

IsMENE. 

Ay,  and  him  he  also  slew. 

Antigoxb. 
Wretched  kindred  1 

ISMENB. 

Wretched  fate  I 

Antigonb. 
Cores  from  kindred  strife  that  flow. 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  317 

ISMENE. 

Steeped,  alas,  in  threefold  woe. 

Antigone. 
Deadly  deeds  to  tell  of. 

ISMENE, 

Deadly  to  behold. 

Chorus. 

Woe,  woe,  for  wretched  Fate, 

Donor  of  baleful  dower  ! 
Woe  for  the  shade  august  of  CEdipus  I  990 

0  swart  Erinys  strong  art  thou  in  power  I 

Antigone.     Epode. 
This  in  sooth  by  proof  thou  knowest. 

ISMENE. 

Thou  not  later  this  hast  learned. 

Antigone. 
To  this  city  when  thou  earnest. 

ISMENE. 

And  'gainst  him  thy  spear  hast  turned. 

Antigone. 
Woe  I  alas !  Dire  trouble ! 

Ismene. 
Woe  !  alas !  Dire  grief. 


318  The  Seven  against  Thebes. 

Antigone. 
On  our  house  hath  fallen. 

ISMENE. 

Ay,  and  on  this  land. 

Antigone. 
On  me  above  all  others. 

Ismene. 
On  me  who  forward  see.  1000 

Antigone. 
Woe  for  these  wretched  brothers  I 

Ismene. 
"Woe,  Leader-King,  for  thee  I 

Antigone. 
Of  all  men  most  lamented  I 

Ismeke. 

•  •  «  •  • 

Antigone. 
O  ye  possessed  by  Ate  1 

Ismene. 
Where  shall  wo  lay  the  twain  ? 

Antkionj:. 
In  spot  most  rich  in  honour. 


I 


Tlie  Seven  against  Thebes.  319 

ISMENE. 

Woe,  Sire,  thy  wedded-bane  I 

\^Enter  HbhaIiDi* 
Herald. 

Me  it  behoves  to  publish  the  resolve, 

And  statute  of  Cadmeia's  senators. 

Eteocles,  for  love  he  bore  the  land,  1010 

Shall  be  with  kindly  obsequies  interred. 

For  in  our  city,  warding  off  her  foes. 

Death  he  encountered  ;  free  from  all  offence 

Against  his  country's  rites,  blameless,  he  died 

Where  for  the  young  to  die  is  glorious. 

Of  him,  I  thus  am  ordered  to  proclaim. 

But  this,  his  brother  Polyneikes'  corse, 

Unburied  to  cast  forth,  of  dogs  the  prey, 

As  ravager  of  this  Cadmeian  land. 

Unless  against  his  spear  some  god  had  stood  ; 

Thus  e'en  in  death  polluted  he  will  lie,  1020 

Cursed  of  ancestral  gods  in  scorn  of  whom. 

With  alien  host,  he  sought  the  town  to  capture. 

By  winged  fowl  entombed,  inglorious, 

For  him  this  just  requital  is  decreed  ; — 

No  rearing  of  the  mound  by  pious  hands, 

No  shrill-voiced  wail  shall  grace  his  funeral, 

Unhonour'd  thus  with  tender  obsequies. 

So  they  who  rule  Cadmeians  have  ordained. 

Antigone. 
But  to  Cadmeia's  rulers  I  declare. 
If  none  will  join  in  burying  this  man,  1030 

Myself  will  bury  him,  and  take  the  risk, 


320  The  Seven  against  Thehes. 

Interring  mino  own  brother :— shame  is  none 

To  cancel  fealty  and  brave  the  State. 

Dread  tie  the  common  womb  from  which  we  sprang, — 

Of  wretched  mother  bom  and  hapless  sire. 

Wherefore  my  soul,  do  thou  take  willing  share 

In  woes  he  willed  not ;  living,  aid  the  dead 

With  sisterly  aflFection  ;  his  dear  flesh 

No  hollow-bellied  wolves  shall  piecemeal  rend  ; 

Let  none  suppose  it ; — woman  though  I  be, 

Tomb  and  interment  will  I  scheme  for  him :  1010 

Ay,  bearing  earth  in  fold  of  flaxen  robe, 

Him  will  I  shroud ; — let  none  suppose  aught  else. 

Courage !    Effectual  means  will  fail  me  not. 

Herald. 
I  warn  thee  not  to  disobey  the  State. 

Antigone. 
I  warn  thee  publish  no  vain  words  to  me. 

Herald. 
Harsh  is  the  people  just  escaped  from  harm. 

Antigone. 
Harsh  let  them  be ;  unearthed  ho  shall  not  lie. 

Herald. 
Whom  the  State  loathes  wilt  honour  with  r  tomb? 

Antigone. 
Ay,  for  the  gods  have  not  dishonoured  him.*  1050 

•  Whatever  the  true  Greek  text,  this  sf^cms  to  be  tin- 
scntimeDi. 


The  Seven  against  Thebes.  321 

ELekald. 
Not  till  he  peril  brought  upon  this  land. 

Aktigone, 
The  TSTong  he  bore  with  wrongs  hu  would  requite. 

Herald. 

Ay,  but  'gainst  all  he  wrought  instead  of  one, 

Antigone. 
Last  of  the  gods  is  Strife  to  close  dispute. 
Yet  h"im  I  will  inter  ,  spare  then  tby  words. 

Herald. 
But  know  thou  headstrong  art,  and  I  forbid. 

Chorus. 
"Woe  I  Woe  !     Dire  mischiefs,  vaunting  loud, 
House-miners,  ye  Furies  dread, 
Wbo  from  its  roots  have  quenched  in  doom    1060 
The  race  of  CEdipus ; — alas  ! 
"What  must  I  do  ?    "What  sorrows  bear  ? 
"What  plan  devise  ?     How  may  I  dare 
Neither  for  thee  the  tear  to  shed 
Nor  to  escort  thee  to  the  tomb  ? 
But  from  tbe  terrors  of  the  crowd 
Trembling,  I  shrink.    Thou  wilt  obtain 

^Addressing  the  corpse  of  Eteocles.] 

Many  to  weep  thy  death, — but  he 
Forlorn,  unwept,  will  pass, 

Y 


322  The  Seven  against  TJiebes. 

Moui-n'd  by  a  sister's  louely-wailiug  strain. 
"Who  may  to  tliis  agree  ? 

Semi-chorus  I. 

Let  the  city  strike  with  doom,  1070 

Or  not,  who  Polyncikes  mourn  ; 
We  will  go  and  to  the  tomb 
Him  escort, — a  train  forlorn ; 
For  this  woe  is  common  dower, 

And  the  claims  of  right 

In  our  townsmen's  sight 

Vary  with  the  hour. 


Semi-chorus  II. 

But  this  other  follow  we, 

As  the  city  doth  ai)prove 

And  Justice ; — for  in  sooth  'twas  ho, 

After  those  who  reign  above. 

And  might  of  Zeus, — Cadmeia's  realm    1080 

Who  in  chief  did  save 

From  the  alien  wave 
Wliich  threatened  to  o'erwhclm. 

\_Exciint  in  solemn  procession.  Antigosb  aud  Semi-chorua 
J,  foUow  the  corpse  of  Polvneikes;  Ismenb  and  Semi' 
chorus  II,  that  of  Etbocles.] 


TJie  Seven  against  Ththes.  323 


NOTES. 


TuE  Seven  agaixst  Thebes. 

286.  The  abrupt  ri  yiva^iai ;  cannot  be  right.  I  make 
no  doubt  that  the  poet's  syntax  was  continuous;  whether 
(TTelxovai  <jT{(f)av(iirai,  or,  ttotI  irvpyov  ....  areixcvai 
aTecpdvufia,  as  iu  Soph.  Antig.,  or  again,  o-rfydvco/ia,  the 
roof. 

338.  KopKopvyai  S'  dv  aarv,  ttotI  iroKiv  8'  |  opKava  Trvp- 
yioTis,  should  be  responded  to  by  iravrobanos  8e  Kapiros 
Xap.d8is  Treo-wj'  |  dXyvvfi.  Kvprjaas.  First,  I  make  little  doubt 
that  TTOTt  776X11;  should  be  noTnrCKvaTai  (approaches)  which 
answers  all  the  conditions  of  the  case.  Xext,  the  Cretic 
opudva  convicts  the  Molossus  dXyvvei  as  false.  Ilvpywris  is 
wrong  both  in  metre  and  in  sense.  'OpKdva  must  be  the  net- 
rope,  by  which  victors  swept  the  streets  and  squares,  and 
caught  runaways.  It  seems  to  be  alluded  to  iu  liiad,  v.  487, 
where  it  has  the  epithet  irdvaypos,  which  in  the  tragic  poets 
may  be  iravrdypos,  or  here,  perhaps,  Travrdypevris. 

In  356-364  Hermann  has  rightly  discerned,  that  the 
vvKTepov  reXos  does  not  mean  death,  but  violation  of  the 
person:  that  iXiris  means  apprehension, fear,  and  that  fvvdv 
has  been  inserted  by  some  one  who  did  not  imderstand  the 
word  Ti\os  aright.  For  rX^/xofes  evvav  Hermann  lias  rXrifiov 
alcriv :  but  it  seems  to  me  that  we  rather  need  (writing  ck 
TvxovTo^,  "  any  random  man,"  for  (vtvxovvtos) — 


324  Tlie  Seven  against  Theles. 

rXijfMocriv  yap  alx^fiuXcorov 
du5p6s  (K  TV^ovTos  (a>9 
8vap€v<i}U  vneprepuiv) 
e\ni9  fcm  vvKTepov  reXor  fioXdv, 
^aKXavTtov  dXyiav  tTvlppodov. 

Here  alxfidXarov  must  agree  with  riXos — rather  harsh  ;  and 
f-iptioBov  expresses,  that  this  is  a  new  misery  superadded — 
an  after-clap.  I  have  changed  the  singulars,  bvapitvovs, 
vneprepov,  into  plurals. 

781.  Kpet(r(TorfKV(ov  is  clearly  absurd,  p.icroT€KV(ov  a  highly 
probable  correction. 

728.  It  is  incredible  that  the  poet  should  have  writttn 
lipaias  dpas,  as  in  the  old  text ;  and  to  alter  dpalas  into  dpas 
makes  a  very  weak  tautology.  I  feel  some  conviction  that 
the  poet  wrote  dypias  Tpo(povs,  fierce  nurses,  which  he  then 
expounds  to  be  the  'Apar. 

826.  I  think  the  true  text  must  be — 

01  8^t'  opdciiS  Kar'  tnaivvptav 
[^KapT  eVeoKXeis]  Ka\  iroXvi'(iKf7t— 

in  fiict,  Koi  demands  eVfOKXely  preceding. 

998.  nripa  irarpl  ndpfwov.  IlrJ/xa  is  interpreted  of  Jocast.i ; 
but  could  a  pious  daughter  abruptly  call  her  mother  a  pest? 
To  me  it  seems  that  the  death  of  the  two  brethren  was 
a  v:oe  sleeping  in  the  grave  by  the  side  of  the  father. 

1041.  oil  dtareTifirfTat  is  obviously  corrupt.     I  suggest — 

TJ^rj  TO  Tovb'  ov  brJT   drifxr^T  rjv  6(oii. 

"Hitherto  his  fortunes  have  not  lieen  dishonoure<l  by  the 
goils."  The  reply  is :  "  No ;  not  before  he  attacke<l  this 
country  " — which  quite  agrees, 

F.  \V.  N. 


PROMETHEUS    BOUND, 


DEAMATIS  PEESOX^ 


Prometheus. 

OCEASOS. 

Heph^stos. 

Hermes. 

Strength  and  Force. 

lo,  Daughter  of  Inachos. 

Chorus  of  Nymphs,  Daughters  of  Oceakos. 


Scene. — Scythia  ;  to  the  right  a  rodnj  promontory  of 
Cancasos,  to  the  left  the  Euxine.  Enter  Heph.estos, 
icith  hummer  and  chains :  Prometheus  is  led  in  by 
SiiiENGTH  and  Force.] 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  combat  between  tlae  Titans  and  the  Olympian 
Gods,  issuing  in  the  triumph  of  the  latter,  constrtutes, 
as  Hegel  remarks,  the  central  fact  of  Hellenic  my- 
thology. This  hoary  legend  may  be  regarded  as 
symbolizing  in  the  physical  universe  the  emergence  of 
order  out  of  chaos,  while  in  the  history  of  religious 
thought  it  marks  a  period  of  transition,  characterized 
mainly  by  the  metamorphosis  of  the  nature-powers,  the 
objects  of  men's  earlier  worship,  into  the  humanized 
divinities  of  Hellas,  involving  the  recognized  supremacy 
of  the  higher  over  the  lower  elements  of  being. 

One  phase  of  this  struggle  is  treated  by  ^schylus 
in  the  drama  of  the  Eumenides ;  there  the  hoary  god- 
desses, the  dark  vengeance-powers  of  the  primeval 
world,  are  brought  into  harmonious  subordination  to 
Pallas  Athena,  the  impersonation  of  the  wisdom  and 
benignity  of  Zeus.  Another  aspect  of  the  conflict 
formed  the  subject  of  the  Promethean  trilogy,  wliich  set 
forth  the  relation  between  the  finite  and  the  supreme 
will,  in  their  antagonism  and  their  reconciliation. 

Among  the  grand  ideals  bequeathed  to  the  world  by 
Hellenic  genius  there  is  none,  perhaps,  which  has  more 
deeply  impressed  the  poetic  imagination  than  the  much- 


328  Prometheus  Bound. 

enduring  Titan ;  none,  certainly,  which  has  for  a  longer 
period  coloured  the  stream  of  philosophic  thought. 
The  Promethean  myth,  it  must  be  remembered,  was 
not  the  invention  of  either  Hesiod  or  iEschylus ;  its 
root,  as  Bunsen  remarks,  is  older  than  the  Hellenes 
themselves.  Even  at  the  present  day,  the  legend,  in 
its  rudest  form,  may  be  traced  among  the  Iranian  tribes 
of  the  Caucasus,  while  in  our  western  world  it  has  in- 
spired the  genius  of  more  than  one  great  poet  of  modem 
times. 

The  three  dramas  of  which  the  trilogy  consisted  are 
believed  to  have  been  "  Prometheus,  the  Fire-bringer," 
"  Prometheus  Bound,"  and  "  Prometheus  Unbound,"  of 
which  the  second  has  alone  survived.*  Prometheus 
there  appears  as  the  champion  and  benefactor  of  man- 
kind, whose  condition,  at  the  close  of  the  Titanic  age, 
is  depicted  as  weak  and  miserable  in  the  extreme  : 

"  Seoincr,  they  saw  in  vain  ; 
ITcaring,  they  heard  not ;  but  like.shaixs  in  dreams. 
Through  the  long  time  all  things  at  random  mixed." 

Zeus,  it  is  said,  proposed  to  annihilate  these  puny 
ephemerals,  and  to  plant  upon  the  earth  a  new  race  in 
their  stead.  Prometheus  represents  hiniself  as  having 
frustrated  this  design,  and  as  being  conseciucntly  sub- 
jected, for  the  sake  of  mortals,  to  the  most  agonising 
pain,  inflicted  by  the  remorseless  cruelty  of  Zeus.     Wo 

•  Gruppo  has,  I  think,  satisfactorily  rofnfod  the  pl.iusiblo 
liypofhesia  of  Hermann,  that  the  "  Prometheus  Unlwuntl " 
was  comjxKe*!  prior  to,  and  independently  of,  the  **  Viv- 
mcthcu;>  Uouud." 


Prometheus  Bound.  329 

have  tlius  the  Titan,  the  symbol  of  finite  reason  and 
free  will,  depicted  as  the  sublime  philanthropist,  while 
Zeus,  the  supreme  deity  of  Hellas,  is  portrayed  as  the 
cruel  and  obdurate  despot,  a  character  peculiarly  re- 
volting to  Athenian  sentiment. 

The  attempt  to  explain  this  apparent  anomaly  has 
given  rise  to  a  variety  of  theories  and  speculations.  It 
is  urged  by  some  that  at  the  time  of  ^schylus  so  sharp 
a  line  \\as  drawn,  in  the  minds  of  educated  men,  between 
religion  and  mythology,  that  the  latter  was  accepted 
simply  as  poetical  imagery,  and  was  employed  by  the 
poet  without  any  definite  moral  aim.  Others  imagine, 
with  Welcker,  that  ^Silschylus,  as  a  contemporary  of 
Zenophaues,  and  one  initiated  into  the  Eleusinian 
mysteries,  maintained  an  antagonistic  attitude  towards 
the  traditional  creed,  and  that  in  the  Promethean  trilogy 
he  seized  the  opportunity  to  enter  his  protest  against  it, 
by  represcjnting  the  head  of  the  Olympian  system  under 
so  revolting  an  aspect.  It  must  be  remembered,  how- 
ever, that  the  Athenian  drama  formed  part  of  a  solemn 
religious  festival,  celebrated  by  the  entire  population, 
and  that  the  popular  theology  was  intertwined  with  the 
national  and  political  life  not  only  of  Athens,  but  of 
Hellas.  The  magnificent  statues  of  Pallas  Athena 
and  of  Olympian  Zeus,  executed  at  enormous  cost  by 
Phidias,  the  contemporary  of  .Slschylus,  were  doubtless 
regarded  by  the  multitudes  assembled  at  the  national 
festivals  as  symbols  of  divine  and  very  awful  realities ; 
and  if  we  turn  to  the  remaining  dramas  of  the  poet  we 
find  his  delineation  of  these  divinities  in  harmony  with 


330  Prometheus  Bound. 

tliis  conception,  Zeus,  more  especially,  is  represented 
as  uniting  in  h'msclf  the  sublimest  attributes  of  deity. 
The  Chorus,  in  their  Bolcmn  invocation  (Ag,  160), 
lay  peculiar  stress  upon  the  name  of  Zeus,  as  the 
supreme  deity,  the  prime  source  of  consolation  and  of 
wisdom.  He  is  elsewhere  portrayed  as  the  almighty 
ruler  (Sup.  795),  who  by  ancient  law  directs  destiny 
(Sup.  655),  and  without  whose  will  nothing  is  accom- 
plished for  mortals  (Sup.  804).  He  is  invoked  as  king 
of  kings,  most  blest  among  the  blest,  of  powers  on  high 
most  perfect  power  (Sup,  519).  He  is  likewise  apo- 
strophised as  father,  creator,  king,  supreme  artificer, 
wielding  no  delegated  sway,  and  whose  deed  is  prompt 
as  his  word  to  execute  the  designs  of  his  deep-coun- 
selling mind  (Sup.  587).  He  is  the  all-seeing  father 
(Sup.  130) ;  lord  of  ceaseless  ages  (Sup.  567) ;  the 
guardian  of  the  guest  (Ag.  353)  ;  thepunishcr  of  over- 
weening pride  (Per.  822) ;  the  upholder  of  the  righteous 
law  of  retribution  (Ag.  154).  Many  more  passages  of 
a  similar  character  might  bo  adduced,  from  which  it 
would  appear  that  the  poet,  though  not  emancipated 
from  the  errors  and  limitations  of  Polytheism,  had, 
nevertheless,  risen  to  the  sublime  ideal  of  one  supremo 
ruler,  whose  righteous  will  was  identified  with  the 
eternal  decrees  of  destiny.  Instead  of  placing  himself 
in  antagonism  with  tho  popular  religion,  ho  seems 
rather,  as  the  prophet  of  Polytlioism,  to  have  striven  to 
elevate  the  jwpnlar  conception  of  Zius,  and  of  tho  other 
Hellenic  divinities,  more  especially  Apollo  and  Pallns 
Athena,  who  are  represented  in  tho  Oresteia  as  tlio 


Prometheus  Bound.  331 

ttilling  but  subordinate  executors  of  their  father's  will. 
It  seeras  improbable  that  in  the  Promethean  trilogy 
alone  he  should  assume  an  attitude  towards  the  popular 
religion  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  tendencies 
manifested  in  his  remaining  works ;  the  apparent  con- 
tradiction has  doubtless  arisen  from  the  loss  of  the 
concludiug  drama.  I  agree  with  those  critics  who 
think  that  if  we  possessed  it  we  should  see  the  majesty 
of  Zeus  fully  vindicated,  and  reconciliation  established 
between  the  contending  powers. 

As  it  seems  unreasonable  to  accept,  without  quali- 
fication, the  gross  picture  of  Zeus  as  represented,  in  the 
extant  drama,  by  his  exasperated  adversary,  Prometheus, 
so  we  must  look  elsewhere  for  the  true  ground  of  the 
antagonism  subsisting  between  him  and  the  Olympian 
divinities,  all  of  whom  are  arrayed  against  him. 
Though  the  Promethean  myth,  as  related  by  Plato,  in 
the  "  Protagoras,"  differs  in  many  essential  features 
from  the  version  of  u3Eschylus,  yet  the  fundamental 
thought  there  embodied  is  so  completely  in  harmony 
with  the  teaching  of  the  prophet-bard,  that  it  may  be 
referred  to  as.  perhaps,  throwing  light  upon  the  moral 
significance  of  the  trilogy.  In  the  "  Protagoras "  a 
distinction  is  drawn  between  the  wisdom  which  minis- 
ters to  physical  well-being,  and  political  wisdom  which 
enables  men  to  live  in  organized  communities.  Pro- 
metheus is  represented  as  having  endowed  men  with 
the  former,  but  as  unable  to  invest  them  with  the 
latter,  which  involved  the  exercise  of  justice,  and  was 
under  the  special  guardianship  of  Zeus.     Now  it  is  this 


332  Prometheus  Bound. 

quality  of  justice  which  was  bestowed  upon  mortals  by 
Zeus  that  iEschylus  extols  with  peculiar  emphasis. 
"Riches,"  be  says,  "  afford  no  bulwark  to  him  who 
spurns  the  mighty  altar  of  justice"  (Ag.  381);  firm 
based  is  justice  (Cho,  635)  ;  "  all  must  perish  who 
withstand  her  mandates"  (Cho.  630).  Justice  is  styled 
the  daughter  of  Zeus  (Cho.  934) ;  reverence  for  her 
altar  is  characterized  as  the  sum  of  \visdom  (Eum. 
510). 

It  was,  moreover,  an  idea  familiar  to  the  /Eschylcan 
age  that  all  excellence  was  the  gift  of  the  gods,  more 
especially  of  Zeus,  and  that  it  could  not  be  obtained 
without  their  intervention.  "  God  alone  is  good,"  sang 
Simonidcs ;  "  no  one  wins  virtue  without  the  aid  of 
the  gods,  neither  a  state  nor  an  individual."  *'  Zeus, 
the  great  virtues  attend  upon  mortals  from  thee,"  sang 
Pindar  ;  "  and,"  he  adds,  "  prosperity  lives  longer  with 
those  who  revere  thee,  but  with  perverse  minds  it  docs 
not  equally  abide,  thriving  for  all  time"  (Isthni.  Odo  iii.) 
"  Through  the  favour  of  God  man  blooms  with  a 
wise  heart."*  "An  imtaintod  mind,"  according  to 
iEschylus,  is  "  heaven's  first  gift."  The  Chorus  remind 
Prometheus  of  "  the  dreamlike  feebleness  that  fetters 
tho  blind  race  of  mortals  "  (Pro.  55C) ;  an  expression 
which  recalls  Pindar's  description  of  men  as  "tho 
dream  of  a  shadow  ;"  "yet,"  he  adds.  "  when  sjilondiMir 
given  by  tho  god  comes  to  them,  a  brilliant  light  falls 
upon  men  and  a  sweet  lifo  "  (Pyth.  Odo  viii.  Epodo  5). 
Not  only  was  Prometheus  unable  to  endow  mortals 
•  These  1  assa^es  aro  cited  by  5?clioom;xuu. 


Prometheus  Bound.  333 

with  these  higher  attributes ;  by  conferring  upon  them 
benefits  contrary  to  the  will  of  Zeus,  he,  in  fact, 
alienated  them  from  the  gods,  in  fellowship  with  whom, 
according  to  the  Greek  ideal,  men  foimd  their  highest 
well-being. 

He  may  thus  be  regarded  as  personifying  that  in- 
surgent condition  of  the  will  which,  blind  to  the  per- 
ception of  higher  truth,  is  full  of  arrogant  self-con- 
fidence and  all-defying  pride.  In  many  respects  ho 
offers  a  parallel  to  Milton's  Satan,  "  a  creation  requiring 
in  its  author  almost  the  spiritual  energy  with  which  he 
invests  the  fallen  Seraph."  The  Titan  chained  to  his 
solitary  rock,  and  the  archangel  prone  upon  the  lake  of 
fire,  stand  alone,  the  one  in  ancient,  the  other  in  modern 
literature,  as  stupendous  examples  of  indomitable  will ; 
of  both  it  may  be  said  with  truth  that,  "  what  chains  us, 
as  with  a  resistless  spell,  in  such  a  character,  is 
spiritual  might  made  visible  by  the  racking  pains  which 
it  overpowers."* 

For  the  Titan,  however,  there  is  deliverance,  and 
the-  extant  fragments  of  the  concluding  member  of  the 
trilogy  enable  us  to  form  some  idea  as  to  the  agency 
by  which  it  was  accomplished.  At  the  opening  of  the 
"  Prometheus  Unbound"  the  Titan  was  seen  brought 
once  more  to  light,  after  the  lapse  of  ages,  from  the 
abyss  into  which  he  had  been  hurled  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  "  Prometheus  Bound."  He  was  still  chained  to 
the  rock,  with  the  additional  torment  of  the  eagle. 
which  daily  preyed  upon  his  liver.     The  punishnicats 

•  Clianning. 


334  Prometheus  Bound. 

of  the  Titans,  like  the  Titanic  powers  tlicmsclves,  re- 
present the  absence  of  rule  or  measure  ;  the  restless 
iusatiability  of  the  lower  passions  and  desires  when, 
with  self-asserting  insolence,  they  bid  defiance  to  the 
restraints  of  law.  Under  his  prolonged  torment  the 
spirit  of  Prometheus  is  somewhat  subdued  ;  this  change 
he  himself  prophesies  in  the  previous  drama  (Pro.  520), 
where  he  says — 

*'  By  myriad  panas  and  woes 
Bowed  down,  thus  shall  I  'scape  tbuse  bonds." 

Wc  are  here  reminded  of  the  poet's  utterances  respect- 
ing the  discipline  of  suffering,  which  afford  a  clue  to 
the  significance  of  this  feature  of  the  legend — 

"  To  sober  thought  Zeus  paves  the  way, 
And  wisdom  liuks  with  pain. 

A;j;ainst  their  will 
Eebellious  men  are  tutored  to  be  wise." — (Alj.  170.) 

"  Well-earned  is  wisdom  at  the  cost  of  pain." — (Eum.  499.) 

The  Chorus  consisted  of  the  twelve  Titans,  six  male 
and  six  female  personages,  who,  redeemed  from  Xar- 
taros,  visibly  rcj^rcscnt  one  of  tlic  two  worlds  whoso 
strife  and  reconciliation  formed  the  subject  of  the 
trilogy.  The  elementary  forces  of  nature,  personified 
as  gods,  must  be  defeated  in  order  to  assure  dominion 
to  a  more  spiritual  order  of  divinities ;  but  when  the 
triumph  of  mind  has  been  assured,  tlio  once  rebellious 
nature-powors  reappear,  as  beneficout  but  subordiuato 
agents.* 

♦  Uo;rcl. 


Prometheus  Bound.  335 

They  open  the  drama  with  an  ode  in  which  they 
describe  the  journey  they  have  taken  in  order  to  pay 
Prometheus  a  visit  of  sympathy. 

In  the  well-known  fragment  translated  by  Cicero, 
Prometheus,  in  return,  narrates  his  sufferings,  describes 
the  torment  he  endures  from  the  eagle,  and  longs  for 
death  as  the  goal  of  his  anguish. 

Herakles*  next  appears  upon  the  scene,  and  in  him 
Prometheus  recognizes  his  heaven-appointed  deliverer. 
Nowhere  are  the  noble  and  the  repulsive  features  of 
Hellenic  mythology  more  remarkably  associated  than 
in  the  numerous  legends  which  gather  round  the  person 
of  Herakles.  The  fundamental  idea  embodied  in  this 
Zeus-born  hero  is,  however,  that  of  irresistible  power, 
"  whose  action  is  as  beneficent  to  the  children  of  men  as 
it  is  fatal  to  the  enemies  of  light."  The  heroic  deeds 
of  Herakles  are  glorified  by  Pindar  (Nem.  i.  33,  34, 
62-72),  who  also  appeals  to  them  as  authenticating  his 
divine  vocation  ;  while,  according  to  the  rhetorician 
Aristides,  he  was  styled  by  men  their  saviour,  the 
averter  of  evil.  Nowhere,  however,  is  he  introduced  in 
this  character  more  significantly  than  as  the  liberator 
of  Prometheus. 

According  to  Hellenic  mythology,f  Herakles  closed 
the  line  of  heroes,  the  earth-born  sons  of  Zeus,  whose 
mission  it  was  to  ennoble  and  elevate  the  human  race. 
He  therefore  exhibited  the  highest  result  of  the  fellow- 

*  An  interesting  analysis  of  the  siunificance  of  the  story 
of  Herakles  will  be  found  in  Cox's  "Mythology  of  the  Arj-an 
Nations."  f  Scboemann. 


336  PrometJieus  Bound. 

ship  of  Zeus  with  mortals,  of  which  lo  was  one  of  the 
first  recipients.  Hence  the  significance  of  her  appear- 
ance in  the  "  Prometheus  Bound.''  She,  like  the  Titan, 
resisted  the  divine  will,  and,  like  him,  must  sxiffer  the 
penalty  of  her  rebellion ;  accordingly  the  account  of 
her  sufierings,  as,  wailing  and  distraught,  she  pursues 
her  toilsome  wanderings,  serves  to  heighten  the  impres- 
sion of  the  cruel  tyranny  of  Zeus,  which  it  is  the  object 
of  that  drama  to  produce. 

In  "  The  Suppliants,"  however,  Zeus  appears  in  rela- 
tion to  lo,  not  as  the  obdurate  tyrant,  but  as  the 
beneficent  deity,  whose  severest  judgments  issue  in 
blessings  to  the  individual  and  to  mankind.  Doubtless, 
under  this  aspect  he  would  have  been  represented  in  the 
third  member  of  the  Promethean  trilogy. 

Heraklcs  inquires  from  Prometheus  his  way  to  the 
gardens  of  the  Hesperides ;  the  Titan,  in  reply,  de- 
scribes his  journey  thither,  and  announces  the  dangers 
which  ]:e  will  liave  to  encounter.  Forthwitli  the  eagle 
appears,  winging  its  flight  towards  Prometheus  : 
Heraklcs  utters  the  exclamation,  "  Archer  Apollo, 
surely  guide  mine  arrow,"  draws  his  bow,  and  slays  the 
pest. 

In  what  manner  the  subsequent  liberation  of  Pro- 
metheus was  efFocted  wo  have  no  means  of  determining  ; 
whether  Ileraklos  h  msclf  unloosed  his  chains,  or 
whctlier  tliis  was  accom])lislied  through  the  int<Tvontion 
of  Hermes,  or  some  other  divinity ;  whether  Hcraldcs 
prevaihd  upon  Zens  to  accept  Chciron  as  a  substittito 
for    Piometheus,   ond    whether    Chciron    voluntarily 


Prometheus  Bound.  337 

descended  into  Hades ;  and,  finally,  ^vhcther  the  Gods 
appeared  upon  the  scene,  to  celebrate,  with  Promethens 
and  the  Titans,  the  nuptials  of  Peleus  and  Thetis — 
these  are  questions  to  which  neither  the  fragments 
themselves,  nor  the  testimony  of  other  witnesses, 
enable  us  to  return  a  satisfactory  answer,  and  I  conse- 
quently abstain  from  entering  upon  them. 

The  chief  interest,  however,  centres  in  the  mind  of 
Prometheus,  and  upon  the  agency  by  which  the  arch- 
rebel  was  transformed  into  the  willing  subject  and 
minister  of  Zeus.  The  spectacle  of  his  brother  and 
sister  Titans  and  Titanesses  redeemed  from  durance 
would  tend  to  correct  the  false  impression  which  had 
possessed  his  mind  respecting  the  ruthless  tyranny  of 
Zeus,  and  consequently  the  gnawing  desire  to  witness 
his  humiliation  would  give  place  to  the  unreluctant  re- 
cognition of  his  supremacy.  He  would  accordingly 
no  longer  refuse  to  reveal  the  secret,  upon  the  disclo- 
sure of  which  he,  in  his  blindness,  imagined  the  main- 
tenance of  that  supremacy  to  depend.*  In  Hesiod 
Zeus  is  represented  as  allowing  himself  to  be  apparently 
deceived  by  Prometheus,  when  he  taught  men  to  bring 
worthless  offerings  to  the  Gods ;  the  Titan  there  ap- 
pears as  the  trickster  caught  at  last  in  his  own  wiles. 
That  the  reign  of  Zeus,  whom  the  poet  elsewhere 
extols  as  "  The  Lord  of  ceaseless  ages,"  "  Blost  blessed 
among  the  blest,"  should  be  conceived  of  by  him  as 
contingent  upon  the  word  of  Prometheus,  seems  to  mo 
incredible.     The  voluntary  revelation  of  his  supposed 

•  This  view  is  expounded  at  greater  length  by  Schoemann. 

z 


338  Prometheus  Bound. 

secret  was  tlie  token  that  the  all-defying  rebel  was 
transformed  into  tlie  willing  subject  and  minister  of 
Zeus. 

It  is  related  *  tbat  Zeus,  wlien  be  released  Prome- 
tbeus  from  his  chains,  required  him,  as  a  slight  volun- 
tary punishment,  to  bind  his  head  with  branches  of  the 
agnus-castus  (^vyor),  a  plant  frequently  employed 
for  religious  purposes. 

The  same  symbolic  signification  was,  in  after  times, 
attached  to  the  ring  of  Prometheus,  referred  to  by 
Catullus  and  Pliny.  The  former  relates  that  when 
Prometheus  appeared  at  the  marriage  festival  of  Peleus 
and  Thetis,  he  wore  a  ring,  as  a  slight  token  of  his 
ancient  punishment : 

"  Extenuata  gcrcns  veteris  vestigia  pa?na? ;  % 
Quam  quondam  silici  restrictus  membra  catena 
Persolvit,  pendens  e  verticibus  prajruptis." 

Not  as  an  ornament,  says  Pliny  (xxxiii.  4),  has 
Prometheus  worn  the  iron  ring,  but  as  a  chain ;  and 
(xxxvii.  1),  as  a  slight  token  of  punishment,  a  piece  of 
the  rock  to  which  he  had  been  fastened  was  inserted  in 
the  ring  instead  of  a  gem. 

The  iron  fiugcr-ring  is  not.  like  the  lugos-crown, 
expressly  referred  back  to  ^schylus ;  the  same  signi- 
fication, however,  attaches  to  both,  and  it  is  not  probable, 

•  As  his  authority  for  this  statement,  Welckcr  refers  to 
Athenanis  and  Monndotus. 

X  This  and  tho  following  references  are  quoted  from 
Wolcker. 


Prometheus  Bound.  339 

as  Welcker  remarks,  that  they  should  not  liave  been 
associated  in  the  ancient  legend. 

Thus  the  dignity  of  man,  of  whom  Prometheus  may 
be  regarded  as  the  representative,  is  fully  vindicated, 
when,  instead  of  rebelling  against  the  restraints  of  law, 
he  joyfully  accepts  them,  and  finds  his  true  liberty  in 
obedience;  thenceforth  the  crown,  the  token  of  sub- 
mission, is  transformed  into  an  honourable  adornment, 
and  the  iron  ring  becomes  the  symbol  of  a  holy  con- 
secration.* 

Thus  we  may  imagine  was  brought  about  the  re- 
conciliation of  the  powers  whose  antagonism  formed 
the  subject  of  the  "  Prometheus  Bound."  We  cannot  but 
admire  the  marvellous  art  with  which  the  poet,  while 
making  his  personages  the  representatives  of  certain  ab- 
stract principles,  at  the  same  time  endows  them  with  life 
and  sharply-defined  individuality.  This  impression  of 
reality  is  heightened  in  Prometheus  by  the  allusion  of 
the  Chorus  to  his  marriage  with  their  sister  Hesione. 
The  chorus  of  colossal  Titans,  delivered  at  length  from 
their  mighty  toils,  and  assisting  at  the  deliverance  of 
Prometheus, seems  to  me  one  of  the  grandest  conceptions 
that  ever  entered  a  poet's  mind.  It  harmonizes  with 
the  .iEschylean  conception  of  Zeus,  as  head  of  the 
Olympian  hierarchy,  reigning  supreme  in  the  domain 
of  nature  and  of  mind. 

In  concluding  this  very  inadequate  study  of  a  great 
subject,  I  will  allude,  in  a  few  words,  to  the  theory 
propounded  by  Professor  Kuhn,  with  reference  to  the 
*  "Welcker. 


340  Prometheus  Boun.l. 

Prometliean  myth.*  He  considers  the  name  of  the 
Titan  to  be  derived  from  the  Sanscrit  word  Pramantha, 
the  instrument  used  for  kindling  fire.  The  root  mand, 
or  mantli,  implies  rotatory  motion,  and  the  word 
manthami,  used  to  denote  the  process  of  fire-kindling, 
acquired  the  secondary  sense  of  snatching  away  ;  hence 
we  find  another  word  of  the  same  stock, pramaiha,  signi- 
fying theft. 

The  word  manthami  passed  into  the  Greek  language, 
and  became  the  verb  manthan6,to  learn ;  that  is  to  say 
to  appropriate  knowledge  ;  whence  prometheia,  fore- 
knowledge, forethought.  Prometheus,  the  fire-bringcr, 
is  the  Pramantha  personified,  and  finds  his  prototype 
in  the  Aryan  Matarisvan,  a  divine  or  semi-divine  per- 
sonage, closely  associated  with  Agni,  the  fire-god  of 
the  Vedas.  We  have  thus  another  curious  instance  of 
the  common  elements  which  may  be  detected  in  the 
Vedic  and  Hellenic  mythology,  while  the  development 
of  the  Promethean  myth  affords  an  instructive  illustra- 
tion of  the  mode  in  which  words,  originally  having 
reference  to  natural  phenomena,  gradually  became 
l::vested  with  new  and  more  spiritual  significance  when 
transplanted  to  the  soil  of  Hellas. 

*  An  epitome  of  Professor  Kuhn's  work,  entitled  "Dio 
Herabkunft  des  Feuers  und  des  Gijttertianks,"  may  be  found 
in  Kelly's  "  Indo-Eurojx'an  Tradition  and  Folk-lore,"  from 
which  the  above  notice  is  abridged. 


PROMETHEUS    BOUND. 


Strength. 

TO  cartli's  remotest  plain  we  now  are  come, 
To  Scytliia's  confine,  an  untrodden  waste. 
HepliOBstos !  Thou  tlie  mandates  must  observe 
Enjoiu'd.  thee  by  thy  sire  ;  this  miscreant 
'Gainst  lofty-beetling  rocks  to  clasp  in  fetters 
Of  adamantine  bonds,  unbreakable. 
For  that  the  splendour  of  all-working  fire, 
Thy  proper  flower,  he  stole,  and  gave  to  mortals. 
Such  crime  he  to  the  gods  must  expiate ; 
So  may  he  learn  the  sovereignty  of  Zeus  10 

To  bear,  and  cease  from  mortal-loving  wont. 

Hepji^stos 
Ho !  Strength  and  Force,  for  you  the  word  of  Zeus 
Its  goal  hath  reached,  no  obstacle  remains ; 
But  I  of  daring  lack,  a  brother  god 
Fast  to  this  storm-vexed  cleft  perforce  to  bind. 
Yet  so  to  dare  is  sheer  necessity  ; 
For  grievous  'tis  the  father's  words  to  slight. 

[ITo  Pkojietiieus.] 
*Eiglit-jndging  Themis'  lofty-thoughtcd  son, 
Thee  'gainst  thy  will  must  1  unwilling  nail 


342  Prometheus  Bound. 

With  stubborn  sliacklcs  to  tliis  desert  height,  20 

Where  neither  voice  nor  form  of  living  man 

Shall  meet  thy  ken ;  but,  shrivelled  by  the  blaze 

Of  the  bright  sun,  thy  skin's  fair  bloom  shall  wither ; 

\\'elcome  to  thee  shall  glittering-vestured  night 

O'erveil  the  brightness ;  welcome  too  the  sun 

Shall  with  new  beams  scatter  the  morning  rime ; 

Thus  evermore  shall  weight  of  present  ill 

Outwear  thee  :  for  as  yet  is  no  one  bom 

Who  may  relieve  thy  pain :  such  meed  hast  thou 

From  mortal-loving  wont ; — for  thou,  a  god, 

Not  crouching  to  the  wrath  of  gods,  didst  bring 

To  mortal  men  high  gifts,  transgressing  right.  30 

Hence  shalt  thou  sentinel  this  joyless  rock, 

Erect,  unsleeping,  bending  not  the  knee ; 

And  many  a  moan  shalt  pour  and  many  a  plaint. 

Vainly  ;  for  Zeus  obdurate  is  of  heart ; 

And  harsh  is  every  one  when  new  of  sway. 

Strength. 

Let  be !     Why  dally  and  vain  pity  vent  ? 
This  god,  to  gods  most  hateful,  why  not  hate, 
Who  thy  prerogative  to  men  betrayed  ? 

ITeph^stos. 
Awful  is  kindred  blood,  and  fellowship. 

Strength. 

True,  but  the  father's  word  to  disobey —  40 

How  many  that  be?     Foarcst  not  tluit  still  iimrcV 


Prometheus  Bound.  343 

HEPttSSTOS. 

Ave  ruthless  art  thou,  full  of  insolence. 

Stbength. 
Him  to  bemoan  availeth  nought ; — but  thou 
Spend  not  thy  strength  in  toil  that  profits  not. 

Heph^stos. 
Alas  !  my  much-detested  handicraft  I 

Strength, 
Why  hate  thy  craft  ?  for,  sooth  to  say,  thine  art 
Is  no  way  guilty  of  these  present  woes. 

Heph^stos. 
Yet  would  that  it  to  other  hand  had  fallen. 

Stkength. 
All  save  o'er  gods  to  rule,  vexatious  is, 
For  none  is  free,  save  father  Zeus  alone.  50 

Heph^stos. 
Too  well  I  know  it :  answer  have  I  none. 

Strength. 

Haste  then :  around  the  culprit  cast  these  bonds 
Lest  father  Zeus  behold  thee  loitering. 

Heph.s:3to8. 
Behold  the  shackles  ready  here  for  use. 


344  Prometheus  Bound. 

Strength. 
Cast  them  around  his  hands :  with  mighty  force 
Smite  with  the  hammer,  nail  him  to  the  rocks. 

Hepiijestos. 
The  work  so  far  is  finished  ; — not  amiss. 

Strength. 
Strike  harder  yet :  clench  fast :  be  nowhere  slack. 
His  wit  will  find  a  way  where  no  way  is. 

Heph^stos. 
This  arm,  at  least,  is  fast  beyond  escape.  60 

Strength. 
This  too  clamp  firmly  down  ;  so  may  he  learn, 
Shrewd  though  he  be,  he  duller  is  than  Zeus. 

Hepilestos. 
No  one  but  he  could  justly  censure  me. 

Strength. 

Of  adamantine  wedge  the  stubborn  fang 

Straight  through  his  breast  now  drive,  right  sturdily. 

HEPHiESTOS. 

Alas  !  Prometheus  1  I  lament  thy  pangs. 

Strength. 

Dost  shrink,  lamenting  o'er  the  foes  of  Zcur? 
Beware,  lest  some  day  for  thyself  thou  grieve. 


Prometheus  Bound.  345 

HEPHiGSTOS. 

A  sight  thou  seest,  grievous  to  the  eye. 

Strength. 
I  see  him  meeting  with  his  own  deserts :  70 

But  come,  around  his  sides  the  girdings  cast. 

Hephjsstos. 
Do  it  I  must ;  urge  me  not  over-much. 

Strength. 

Urge  thee  I  will ;  ay,  hound  thee  to  the  work ; 
Get  thee  below  ;  forceful  enring  his  legs. 

Hi:PHiESTOS. 

There,  finished  is  the  work,  nor  great  the  toil. 

Strength. 

Now  the  bored  fetters  strike  right  lustily; 
For  stern  the  overlooker  of  these  works. 

HEPHiESTOS. 

Like  to  thy  shape  the  utterance  of  thy  tongu& 

Strength. 

Be  thou  soft-hearted  but  upbraid  not  me, 

For  stubborn  will  and  ruggedncss  of  heart.  80 

Heph^stos. 
Let  us  begone  ;  his  limbs  are  iron-meshed. 


346  Prometheus  Bound. 

Stkength  to  Peomethkus. 

Hero  taunt  away,  and  the  gods'  honours  filching, 
Bestow  on  creatures  of  a  day ;  from  thee 
How  much  can  mortals  of  these  woes  drain  off? 
Thee  falsely  do  the  gods  Prometheus  *  name, 
Fur  a  Prometheus  thou  thyself  dost  need, 
To  plan  releasement  from  this  handiwork. 

[Exeimt  Heph^stos,  Stbength,  and  Fokce. 

Pbomethetjs. 
Oh  holy  ether,  swiftly-winged  gales, 
Fountains  of  rivers,  and  of  ocean-waves 
rnnumerable  laughter,  general  mother  Earth,  90 

And  orb  all-seeing  of  the  sun,  I  call : 
Behold  what  I,  a  god,  from  gods  endure. 

See,  wasted  by  what  pains 
Wrestle  I  must  while  myriad  time  shall  flow  I 

Such  ignominious  chains 

Hath  he  who  newly  reigns, 
Chief  of  the  blest,  devised  against  rao.     Woe  ! 
Ah  woe !  the  torture  of  the  hour 

I  wail,  ay,  and  of  anguish'd  throes 
The  future  dower. 
How,  when,  shall  rise  a  limit  to  these  woes?  100 

And  yet  what  say  I  ?  clearly  I  foreknow 
All  that  must  happen  ;  nor  can  woo  betide 
Stranger  to  mo ;  the  Destined  it  belioves, 
As  best  I  may,  to  bear,  for  well  I  wot 

*  From  npo,  n.r)Tit—fortthought. 


Prometheus  Bound.  ^17 

How  incontestable  the  strength  of  Fate. 
Yet  in  such  strait  silence  to  keep  is  hard, — 
Hard  not  to  keep ; — for,  bringing  gifts  to  mortals. 
Myself  in  these  constraints  hapless  am  yoked. 
Stored  within  hollow  wand  fire's  stealthy  fount 
I  track,  which  to  mankind  in  every  art  110 

Hath  teacher  proved,  and  mightiest  resource. 
Such  forfeits  I  for  such  offences  pay, — 
Beneath  the  welkin  nailed  in  manacles. 

Hist !  Hast !  what  soimd, 
What  odour  floats  invisibly  around, 
Of  God,  or  man,  or  intermediate  kind  ? 

Comes  to  this  rocky  botmd, 
One  to  behold  my  woes  or  seeking  aught  ? 
A  god  yc  see  in  fetters,  anguish-fraught ; 
The  foe  of  Zeus,  in  hatred  held  of  all 
The  deities  who  throng  Zeus'  palace-hall ;         120 
For  that  to  men  I  bore  too  fond  a  mind. 
Woe,  woe  !  what  rustling  sound 
Hard  by,  as  if  of  birds,  doth  take  mine  ear  ? 

Whistles  the  ether  round 
With  the  light  whirr  of  pinions  hovering  CfCar. 
Whate'er  approaches  fiUeth  me  with  fear. 

\_Erder  Chorus  of  Ocean-Nymphs  home  in  a  winf/ed  car.] 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
Fear  not !  a  friendly  troop  we  reach 
On  rival-speeding  wing  this  cliff  forlorn  ;  130 

Our  sire's  consent  wringing  by  suasivc  speech, 
Me  swift-escorting  gales  have  hither  borne. 


348  Prometheus  Boiuhi. 

For  iron's  clanging  note 
Piercing  our  caves'  recesses  rang, 
And  bashful  shyness  from  me  smote; — 
Forthwith  on  winged  car,  unshod,  aloft  I  sprang. 

Prometheus. 

Alas  I  alas !     Woe  !  woe  I 
Prolific  Tethys'  offspring,  progeny  140 

Of  sire  Oceanos,  whose  sleepless  flow 
All  the  wide  earth  encircles  !  gaze  and  see 
P>ound  with  what  fetters,  ignominiously, 
I,  on  the  summit  of  this  rock-bound  steep, 

Shall  watch  unenvied  keep. 

CllOrUS.      AUTISTKOPHE    I. 

I  sec,  Prometheus,  and  through  fear 
Doth  mist  of  many  tears  mine  eyes  bedew, 
As,  'gainst  this  rock,  parched  up,  in  tortures  drear 
Of  adamantine  bonds,  thy  form  I  view.  150 

For  helmsmen  new  of  sway 
Olympos  hold  ;  by  laws  new-mado 
Zeus  wieldeth  empire,  inii)ulse-?wayod  ; 
The  mighty  ones  of  old  he  sweeps  away. 

Prometheus. 
Neath  earth,  'neath  Hades'  shade-receiving  plains, 
Sheer  down  to  Tartaros'  unmeasured  gloom 
Would  he  had  hurled  mo  ruthless,  Ixiund  with  chaiiiH 
That  none  may  looso ; — So  then  at  this  my  doom     IGO 
Had  no  one  mock'd, — nor  god,  nor  other  kind. 
But  now  most  wretched,  sport  of  every  wind, 
Foes  triumph  o'er  my  pains. 


Prometheus  Bound.  349 

Cliorus.     Strophe  IL 

Who  of  the  gods  a  heart  doth  own 

So  hard,  to  mock  at  thy  despair  ? 

Who  at  thy  woes,  save  Zeus  alone, 

Doth  not  thine  anguish  share  ? 

But  ruthless  still,  with  soul  unbent, 
The  heavenly  race  he  tames,  nor  will  refrain  170 

Till  sated  to  his  heart's  content ; 
Or  till  another,  by  some  cunning  snare, 
Wrest  from  his  grasp  the  firmly  guarded  reign. 

Prometheus. 

Yet  e'en  of  me  although  now  wrunj; 

In  stxibbom  chains  sliall  he  have  need, 

This  ruler  of  the  blest — to  read 

The  counsel  new  by  which  his  sway 

And  honours  shall  be  stript  away. 

But  not  persuasion's  honied  tongue 

My  stedfast  soul  shall  charm ;  180 

Nor  will  I,  crouching  in  alarm. 
Divulge  the  secret,  till  these  savage  chains 
He  loose,  and  yield  requital  for  my  pains. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  II. 

Daring  thou  art  and  yieldest  nought 
For  bitter  agony ;  with  tongue 
Unbridled  thou  art  all  too  free. 
But  by  keen  fear  my  heart  is  stung ; 
I  tremble  for  thy  doom — ah,  me ! 
Thy  barque  into  what  haven  may'st  thou  steer,        190 


350  Protnetheus  Bound. 

Of  these  dire  pangs  tlie  end  to  see  ? 
For  inaccessible,  of  mood  severe 
Is  Kronos'  son,  inflexible  his  thought. 

Pbomethexjs. 

That  Zens  is  stem  full  well  I  know, 

And  by  his  will  doth  measure  right. 

But,  smitten  by  this  destined  blow, 

Softened  shall  one  day  be  his  might. 

Then  curbing  his  harsh  temper,  he 

FuU  eagerly  will  hither  wend, 
To  join  in  league  and  amity  with  me, 
Eager  no  less  to  welcome  him  as  friend.  200 

CJiorus. 

To  us  thy  tale  unfold  ;  the  whole  speak  out ; 
Upon  what  charge  Zeus,  seizing  thee,  doth  thus 
Outrage  with  harsh  and  ignominious  pain  ? 
Inform  us  if  the  telling  breed  no  harm. 

Prometheus. 

Grievous  to  mo  it  is  these  things  to  tell, 

Grief  to  be  silent :  trouble  every  way. 

Wlicn  first  the  heavenly  powers  were  moved  to  mge, 

And  in  opposing  factious  ranged  their  might, 

These  wishing  Kronos  from  his  scat  to  burl 

That  Zeus  forsooth  might  rcigu  ;  these,countcr-wiso,  210 

Resolved  that  o'er  the  gods  Zeus  no'er  should  rule ; 

Then  I  witli  ^aj^cst  couu.slI  si  rove  to  move 

The  Titans,  progeny  of  llcavcu  and  Earth, 


Prometheus  Bound.  351 

But  strove  in  vain  ;  for  they,  in  stubborn  souls 

Of  (Tafty  wiles  disdainful,  thought  by  force, 

An  easy  task,  the  mastery  to  gain. 

But  me,  not  once  but  oft,  my  mother  Themis, 

And  Earth  (one  shape  \vith  many  names)  had  told 

Prophetic,  how  the  future  should  be  wrought. 

That  not  by  strength  of  thew  or  hardiment  220 

Should  mastery  be  compassed,  but  by  guile ; 

But  when  this  lore  I  did  expound  in  words. 

They  deigned  me  not  a  single  look  ;  whereon, 

Of  courses  free  to  choose,  the  wisest  seemed 

Leagued  with  my  mother,  of  my  own  free  will 

The  will  of  Zeus  to  meet,  siding  with  him. 

And  by  my  counsels  black-roofed  Tartaros' 

I\Iurky  abyss  primeval  Kronos  now 

Engulfs  with  his  allies  ;  such  benefits 

From  me  the  tyrant  of  the  gods  received,  230 

And  hath  requited  with  these  base  returns. 

For,  someway,  cleaveth  aye  to  tyranny 

This  fell  disease  ;  to  have  no  faith  in  friends. 

But  toTiching  now  your  question,  on  what  charge 

He  thus  maltreats  me  ;  this  will  I  make  clear. 

When  seated  on  his  father's  throne,  forthwith. 

He  to  the  several  gods  was  dealing  out 

Their  several  honours,  marshalling  his  realm ; 

But  he  of  toil-worn  mortals  took  no  count; 

The  race  entire  he  ardently  desired  240 

To  quench,  and  plant  a  new  one  in  its  stead. 

And  none  but  I  opposed  his  purposes  ; 

I  dared  alone ; — I  saved  the  mortal  raco 


•^'G2  Prometheus  Bound. 

From  sinking  blasted  down  to  Hades'  gloom. 

For  tliis  by  these  dire  tortures  I  am  bent, 

Grievous  to  suffer,  piteous  to  behold. 

I  who  did  mortals  pity,  of  liku  grace 

Am  decm'd  unworthy, — but  am  grimly  thus 

Tuned  to  his  will,  a  sight  of  shame  to  Zeus. 

Chonis. 
Iron  of  heart,  ay,  fashion'd  out  of  rock  250 

Who  at  thy  pangs  thine  anger  shareth  not, 
Prometheus  ;  for  myself,  fain  had  I  shunned 
This  sight ; — beholding  it,  my  heart  is  wrung. 

Pbometheus. 
To  friends,  in  sooth,  a  spectacle  of  woe. 

Chorus. 
But  beyond  this  didst  haply  aught  essay  ? 

Prometheus. 
Mortals  I  hindered  from  foreseeing  death. 

Cliorus. 
Finding  what  medicine  for  this  disease  ? 

Prometheus. 
Blind  hopes  I  caused  within  their  hearts  to  dwell. 

Chorus. 
Vast  boon  was  this  thou  gavest  unto  mortals. 

Prometheus 
Yea,  and  besides  'twas  I  that  gave  them  fira  2G0 


Prometheus  Bound.  353 

Clwrus. 
Have  now  these  short-lived  creatures  flame-eyed  fire  ? 

Prometheus. 
Ay,  and  by  it  full  many  arts  will  learn. 

CJwrus. 
Upon  such  charges  doth  Zeus  outrage  theo, 
Nor  aught  abateth  of  thy  miseries  ? 
To  this  dire  struggle  is  no  term  assigned  ? 

Pkometheus. 
No  other  but  what  seemeth  good  to  him. 

Chorus. 
How  may  this  be  '?     What  hope  ?     Seest  thou  not 
That  thou  hast  erred  ?     But  in  what  way  hast  erred, 
That  to  unfold, — while  me  it  gladdens  not, 
To  thee  is  pain.     Forbear  we  then  this  theme  ; 
But  from  this  struggle  seek  thou  some  escape.        270 

Peometheus. 
Whoso  his  foot  holdeth  unmesh'd  of  harm, 
For  him  'tis  easy  to  exhort  and  warn 
One  sorely  plagued.     But  this  I  all  foreknew ; 
Of  will,  free  will,  I  erred,  nor  will  gainsay  it. 
Mortals  abetting  I  myself  found  bale  ; 
Not  that  I  thought,  with  penalties  like  these. 
To  wither  thus  against  sky-piercing  rocks, 
Doom'd  to  this  drear  and  solitary  height. 
But  ye,  no  further  wail  my  present  woes, 
But,  on  the  ground  alighting,  hear  from  me  280 

2   A 


354  Prometheus  Bound. 

On-gliding  fate — so  sliall  ye  learn  the  end. 
Yield  to  me,  prithee  jrield,  and  grieve  with  him 
Who  now  is  wretched.     Thus  it  is  that  grief 
Ranging  abroad  alights  on  each  in  torn. 

Chorus. 
To  no  unwilling  ears  thy  words 
Appeal,  Prometheus  ;  and  with  nimble  feet 
Leaving  our  swiftly  wafted  seat 
And  holy  ether,  ti'ack  of  birds, 
I  to  this  rugged  groimd  draw  near ;  290 

Thy  woes  from  first  to  last  I  fain  would  hear. 

\^Enter  Oceaxos.] 

OCEANOS. 

The  goal  of  my  long  course  I  gain, 

And  come,  Prometheus,  to  thy  side. 
This  swift-winged  bird  without  a  bit  I  rein. 

My  will  his  only  guide. 
Compassion  for  thy  fate,  be  sure,  I  feel ; 
Thereto  the  tie  of  kin  constraineth  me : 
But  blood  apart,  to  no  one  would  I  deal 

More  honour  than  to  thee.  300 

That  true  my  words  thou  soon  shalt  know ; 

No  falsely  glozing  tongue  is  mine  ; 
Come,  how  I  may  assist  thco  plainly  show, 
For  than  Occanos  a  friend  more  leal 

Thou  ne'er  shalt  boast  as  thine. 

PuoMETHErS. 

litt!     What  means  this '?     Art  thou  too  hither  conifc 


Prometheus  Bound.  355 

Spectator  of  my  pangs  ?     How  hast  thou  dared 

Quitting  thy  namesake  flood,  thy  rock-roof  d  caves 

Self-wrought,  this  iron-teeming  land  to  reach  ? 

Art  come  indeed  to  gaze  upon  my  doom,  310 

And  with  my  grievous  woes  to  sympathize  ? 

A  spectacle  behold ; — this  friend  of  Zeus, 

This  co-appointer  of  his  sovereignty, 

By  what  dire  anguish  I  by  him  am  bow'd. 

OCEANOS. 

I  see,  Prometheus,  and  would  fain  to  thee, 

All  subtle  as  thou  art,  best  counsel  give; 

Know  thine  own  self,  thy  manners  mould  anew, 

For  new  the  monarch  who  now  rules  the  gods  ; 

But  if  thou  thus  harsh,  keenly- whetted  words 

Still  huiiest,  Zeus,  though  thron'd  so  far  aloft,         320 

Mayhap  may  hear  thee,  so  the  pangs  which  now 

His  wrath  inflicts  but  childish  sport  may  seem. 

But  come,  0  much  enduring,  quell  thy  rage ; 

Seek  thou  releasement  from  these  miseries; 

Stale  may  appear  to  thee  the  words  I  speak; 

Yet  such  the  penalty  that  waits,  Prometheus, 

On  a  too  haughty  tongue ;     But  thou,  e'en  now 

Nowise  art  hiunbled,  nor  dost  yield  to  ills, 

But  to  the  present  wouldest  add  new  woe; 

Therefore,  I  charge  thee,  hearkening  my  rede,  330 

Kick  not  against  the  pricks,  since  harsh  the  king 

Who  now  holds  sway,  accountable  to  none. 

And  now  I  go  and  will  forthwith  essay 

If  I  avail  to  free  thee  from  these  toils. 


356  Prometheus  Bound. 

But  be  thou  calm  nor  over-rash  of  speech ; 

Knowest  thou  not,  being  exceeding  wise, 

That  to  the  froward  tongue  cleaves  chastisement. 

Pbometheus. 

Much  joy  I  give  thee  scatheless  as  thou  art. 
Though  in  all  plots  and  daring  leagued  with  me. 
But  now  let  he ;  forbear  thy  toil :  for  Him  34.0 

Persuade  thou  canst  not :  Him  no  suasion  moves  ; 
Nay,  lest  the  joui-ney  breed  thee  harm,  beware. 

OCEANOS. 

More  cunning  art  thou  others  to  advise 

Than  thine  own  self.     By  deed  I  judge,  not  word , 

But,  fixed  is  my  resolve,  hold  me  n^^t  back; 

For  sui-e  I  am,  yea,  sure,  that  Zeus  to  mo 

Will  grant  this  boon,  and  loose  thee  from  these  pains. 

Prometheus. 
For  this  I  praise  thee,  uor  will  cease  to  praise  ; 
For  nought  of  kindly  zeal  thou  lackcst ;  yet, 
Toil  not,  for  vain,  nor  helpful  unto  mo,  350 

Thy  toil  will  prove, — if  toil  indeed  thou  wilt ; — 
But  hold  thee  quiet  rather,  keep  aloof; 
For  I,  though  in  mishap,  not  therefore  wish 
Wide-spreading  fellowship  of  woo  to  see. 
No  truly,  for  my  brother  Atlas'  doom 
Grieves  mo,  who.  stationed  on  the  western  verge, 
The  pillars  on  his  shoulders  bcarcth  up 
Of  heaven  and  earth ;  burtlien  of  painful  grasp. 
So.  in  Cilician  caves  with  ruth  I  saw 


Prometheus  Bound.  357 

Their  earth-bom  tenant,  hostile  prodigy,  360 

The  hundred-headed,  cuib'd  by  violence; 

Raging  Typhoeiis,  all  the  gods  who  braved, 

ELissing  out  slaughter  from  his  horrid  jaws. 

Forth  from  his  eyeballs  flash'd  a  hideous  glare. 

As  though  by  force  the  reign  of  heaven  to  storm. 

But  on  him  fell  the  sleepless  dart  of  Zeus, 

The  thunder-bolt  down-rushing,  breathing  flame, 

\STiich  him  from  his  high-worded  boasting  hurl'd 

Prostrate  ;  for,  smitten  to  his  inmost  reins. 

With  strength  burnt  out,  he  lightning-blasted  fell.  370 

And  now  his  frame,  helpless  and  sprawling  lies 

Hard  by  the  salt-sea  narrows,  sorely  prest 

Beneath  the  roots  of  ^Etna.     Seated  there, 

Upon  the  topmost  peaks,  Hephfestos  smites 

The  molten  masses,  whence  one  day  shall  burst 

Torrents  of  fire,  devouring  with  fierce  jaws 

The  level  fields  of  fruitful  Sicily. 

Such  rage  Typhoeus  shall  anew  belch  forth 

With  scorching  missiles  of  fire-breathing  storm 

Insatiate ;  by  the  fierce  bolt  of  Zeus  380 

Blasted,  but  imconsum'd.     No  tiro  thou. 

Nor  dost  my  teaching  need.     Save  thou  thyself 

As  best  thou  knowest  how.     But  be  assured 

I  to  the  dregs  my  present  doom  will  drain. 

Until  the  heart  of  Zeus  relax  its  ire. 

OCEANOS. 

Know'st  thou  not  this,  Prometheus,  that  wise  words 
To  a  distemper'd  mind  physicians  are  ? 


358  Prometheus  Bound. 

Prometheus. 
Ay,  if  well-timed  they  mollify  the  heart, 
Nor  with  rudo  pressiire  chafe  its  swelling  ire. 

OOEANOS. 

True  :  but  if  forethought  be  with  boldness  leagued. 
What  lurking  mischief  seest  thou  ?     Instruct  me.    390 

Pkometheus. 
Light-minded  folly  and  superfluous  toiL 

OCEAKOS. 

Still  from  this  ailment  let  me  ail,  since  most 
The  wise  it  profiteth  not  wise  to  seem. 

Prometheus. 
But  haply  mine  this  error  may  appear. 

OCEANOS. 

Certes,  thine  argument  remands  me  home. 

Prometheus. 
Good !    Lest  thy  plaint  for  me  work  thee  ill-will. 

Ocean  OS. 
With  him  now-scatcd  on  the  all-ruling  thi-uno  ? 

Promrtheus. 
Of  him  beware  that  ne'er  hia  heart  bo  vosod. 

Ooeanos. 
Thy  plight,  Prometheus,  is  my  monitor. 


Prometheus  Bound.  359 

Prometheus. 
Speed  fortli !   Begone  !   Cherisli  tliy  present  mood.  400 

OCEANOS, 

To  me  right  eager  liast  thou  bayed  that  word, 
For  my  four-footed  bii-d,  with  wings  outspread, 
Fans  the  clear  track  of  aether  ;  fain,  in  sooth, 
In  wonted  stall  to  bend  the  weary  knee. 

[Exit  OcEANOS. 

CJioi-iis.     Strophe  I. 
Prometheus,  I  bewail  thy  doom  of  woe  ; 

From  their  moist  fountains  rise. 

Flooding  my  tender  eyes, 
Tears  that  my  cheek  bedew.     0,  cruel  blow !  410 

For  Zeus  by  his  own  laws  doth  now  hold  sway, 
And  to  the  elder  gods  a  haughty  spear  display. 

Antistrophe  I. 
Eings  the  whole  country  now  with  echoing  groans. 
The  grand  time-honour'd  sway, 
Mighty  now  passed  away, 
Of  thee  and  of  thy  brethren,  it  bemoans. 
And  all  who  dwell  on  Asia's  hallowed  shore  420 

Thy     loud-resounding     griefs     with     kindred     grief 
deplore. 

Strophe  II. 
And  Colchis'  virgin  daughters, 
111  fight  a  dauntless  train  ; 
And  round  Mfeotis'  waters 
The  Scythian  tribes,  holding  earth's  outmost  reign. 


360  Prometheus  Bound. 

Antistkophe  II. 
Aud  thoso  with  sharp  spears  clanging 
"Who  dwell,  a  hostile  power, 
Fortress'd  on  rocks  o'erhanging,  430 

Near  Caucasos, — Arabia's  martial  flower.* 

Epode. 
One  only  of  the  gods  before  thus  bent 
Have  I  beheld,  'neath  adamantine  pains. 
Atlas,  the  Titan,  who  with  many  a  groan 

Still  on  his  back  sustains, 
Vast  burthen,  the  revolving  firmament. 
Chiming  in  cadence  ocean-waves  resound ;  440 

Moans  the  abyss,  and  Hades'  murky  gloom 
Bellows  responsive  in  the  depth  profound  ; 
While  fountains  of  clear-flowing  rivers  moan 

His  piteous  doom. 

Pbometheus. 
Think  not  that  I  through  pride  or  stxibbomncss 
Keep  silence ;  nay,  my  brooding  heart  is  gnawed 
Seeing  myself  thus  marred  with  contumely ; 
And  yet  what  other  but  myself  marked  out 
To  these  new  gods  theii*  full  prerogatives? 

*  The  word  Arabia,  with  Xenophon,  inchided  Jrosopotaniia, 
as  \xiTt  of  the  land  on  which  Arabs  roam.  My  fi ietul  Professor 
Newman  conjectures  that  ^lanlin,  built  on  :\  limestone  rock, 
which  is  said  to  be  2000  feet  hijjh,  was  the  city  vy\flKpr)yivnVy 
of  which  the  ]X)et  had  heard.  The  Arabs  still  nvini  up  to 
the  base  of  this  little  mountain.  No  Greek,  in  .d^schylus'.s 
day,  knew  the  geography  of  Courdistftn  ;  so  it  was  natural  t<' 
include  the  whole  of  the  wonderful  "  Asiatic  Switzerland  "  in 
Caucoiios. 


Prometheus  Bound.  361 

Bat  I  refrain  ;  for,  nought  my  tongue  would  toll 

Save  what  ye  know.     But  rather  list  the  ills  450 

Of  mortal  men,  how  being  babes  before, 

I  made  them  wise  and  masters  of  their  wits. 

This  will  1  tell,  not  as  in  blame  of  men, 

But  showing  how  from  kindness  flow'd  my  gifts. 

For  they,  at  first,  though  seeing,  saw  in  vain ; 

Hearing  they  heard  not,  but,  like  shapes  in  dreams. 

Through  the  long  time  all  things  at  random  mixed  ; 

Of  brick-wove  houses,  sunward-turn'd,  nought  knew. 

Nor  joiner's  craft,  but  burrowing  they  dwelt  460 

Like  puny  ants,  in  cavern 'd  depths  unsunned. 

Neither  of  winter,  nor  of  spring  flower-strewn, 

Nor  fruitful  summer,  had  they  certain  sign. 

But  without  judgment  everything  they  wrougkt. 

Till  I  to  them  the  risings  of  the  stars 

Discovered,  and  their  settings  had  to  scan. 

Nay,  also  Number,  art  supreme,  for  them 

I  found,  and  marshalling  of  written  signs, 

Handmaid  to  memory,  mother  of  the  Muse. 

And  I  in  traces  first  brute  creatures  yok'd, 

Subject  to  harness,  with  vicarious  strength  470 

Bearing  in  mortals'  stead  their  heaviest  toils. 

And  'neath  the  car  rein-loving  steeds  I  brought, 

Chief  ornament  of  wealth-abounding  pomp. 

And  who  but  I  the  ocean-roaming  wain 

For  mariners  invented,  canvass- winged  ? 

Such  cimning  works  for  mortals  I  contrived. 

Yet,  hapless,  for  myself  find  no  device 

To  free  me  from  this  present  agony. 


362  Frometheus  Bound. 

Cliorus. 
Unseemly  woe  thou  bearest.     Driven  astray  480 

Flounders  thy  judgment,  and  like  sorry  leech 
Falling  distemper'd,  spiritless  thou  art, 
Nor  remedies  canst  find  thyself  to  cure. 

Prometheus. 
Hearken  the  rest,  and  thou  wilt  marvel  more 
What  arts  and  what  resources  I  devised. 
This  chief  of  all ;  if  any  one  fell  sick, 
No  help  there  was,  diet  nor  liniment. 
Nor  healing  draught ;  but  men,  for  lack  of  drugs 
Wasted  away,  till  I  to  them  revealed 
Commixtures  of  assuaging  remedies  490 

Which  may  disorders  manifold  repel. 
Of  prophecies  the  various  modes  I  fixed, 
And  among  dreams  did  first  discriminate 
The  truthful  vision.     Voices  ominous. 
Hard  to  interpret,  I  to  them  made  known : 
And  way-side  auguries,  the  flight  of  birds 
With  crooked  talons,  clearly  I  defined ; 
Showed  by  their  nature  which  auspicious  arc, 
And  which  ill-omened — taught  the  modes  of  lllb 
Native  to  each,  and  what,  among  themselves 
Their  feuds,  affections,  and  confederacies.  600 

Touching  the  smoothness  of  the  vital  parts, 
And  what  the  hue  most  pleasing  to  the  gotla, 
I  taught  them,  and  the  mottled  symmetry 
Of  gall  and  liver.     Thighs  encased  in  fat 
With  the  long  chine  I  burnt,  ami  mortals  guided 


PromeiJieus  Bound.  363 

To  a  mysterious  art ;  of  fire-eyed  signs, 

I  purged  the  vision,  over-filmed  before. 

Such  were  the  boons  I  gave ;  and  'neath  the  earth 

Those  other  helps  to  men,  concealed  which  lie, 

Brass,  iron,  silver,  gold,  who  dares  affirm  510 

That  before  me  he  had  discovered  them  ? 

No  one,  I  know,  but  who  would  idly  vaunt. 

The  sum  of  all  learn  thou  in  one  brief  word  ; 

All  arts  to  mortals  from  Prometheus  came. 

Chonis. 
Not  now  for  mortals  beyond  measure  care 
Thy  hapless  self  neglecting ;  since,  in  sooth. 
Good  hope  have  I  that,  loosen'd  from  these  bonds, 
In  might  thou'lt  prove  an  equal  match  for  Zeus. 

Prometheus. 
Not  yet  nor  thus  is  it  ordained  that  fate 
These  things  shall  compass  ;  but  by  myriad  pangs  520 
And  tortures  bent,  so  shall  I  'scape  these  bonds  ; 
Art  than  necessity  is  weaker  far. 

Chorus. 

Who  then  is  helmsman  of  necessity  ? 

Pkometheus. 
The  triform  Fates  and  ever-mindful  Furies. 

Chorus. 
Is  Zeus  in  might  less  absolute  than  these  ? 

Prometheus. 
E'en  he  the  forc-ordain'd  cannot  escape. 


304  Prometheus  Bound. 

Cliorus. 
What  is  orclain'd  for  Zeus,  save  aye  to  reign  ? 

Pkometheus. 
No  further  may'st  thou  question  ;  urge  mo  not. 

Clioriis. 
Deep  mystery,  methinks,  thou  kecpest  vcil'd. 

Prometheus. 

Turn  to  some  other  theme ;  not  meet  it  is  630 

N^ow  to  discourse  of  this,  but  close  to  wrap 
In  strictest  silence  ;  for,  this  secret  kept. 
Unseemly  bonds  I  'scape  and  tortures  keen. 

Chorus.    Strophe  I. 

Never  may  Zeus,  who  sole  doth  reign. 

My  will  with  adverse  might  oppose ; 

Nor  I  to  serve  the  gods  refrain. 

With  rites  of  slaughter'd  kine,  where  flows 
Father  Oceanos'  exliaustless  tide ;  6-40 

Neither  in  word  may  I  transgress ! 
Deep  in  my  heart's  recess, 
Steadfast  for  aye  may  this  resolve  abido. 

AMTIbTliOl'UK   I. 

'Tis  sweet  to  run  life's  long  career 
By  hopes  attended  strong  and  bold, 
Feeding  the  heart  in  blithesome  cheer ; 
But  thco  I  shudder  to  behold 


Prometheus  Bound.  365 

By  myriad  tortures  rack'd  in  sore  distress.  550 

For  thou,  of  Zeus  unaw'd,  hast  still, 
In  pride  aud  sheer  silf-will, 
Mortals,  Prometheus,  honour'd  in  excess. 

Stbophe  n. 

^Vhat  boots  it,  friend,  when  grace  by  grace 

Is  unrequited  ?     In  distress 

Say,  from  ephemera  what  aid  ? 

Hast  not  discerned  the  feebleness. 

Dream-like  and  weak,  that  man's  blind  race 
Cramps  and  confines  ?    No  scheme  by  mortals  laid  5G0 
The  harmony  of  Zeus  shall  e'er  transgress. 

Antisteophe  II. 

This  lesson  from  thy  doom  of  pain 

I  learnt,  Prometheus.     On  mine  ear 

Alighteth  now  far  other  strain 

Than  that,  'mid  Hymeneal  mirth, 

Which  erst,  the  bath  and  couch  beside, 

I  sang,  what  time  our  sister  dear, 
Hesione,  as  thine  espoused  bride  570 

Thou  wast  escorting,  won  by  gifts  of  worth. 
{Eater  lo.] 

lo.* 
What  country  ?     What  race  ?  who  is  he, 
This  man,  whom,  rock-bound,  I  survey, 

*  For  an  exposition  of  the  theory  which  resolves  the  life 
of  lo  into  the  life  of  the  moon,  in  its  several  phases  from 
full  to  new,  and  then  back  to  the  full  again,  the  reader  is 
referred  to  Cos's  "  Mythology  of  the  Aryan  Nations,"  ii.  139. 


366  Prometheus  Bound. 

Storm-battered  ?     What  trespass  hath  thee 

Thus  doomed  to  destruction  ?     Oh,  say, 
To  what  region  of  earth  have  I  wandered,  forlorn  ? 
Ah  me !     The  dire  anguish !     Ah  me ! 

Again  the  barbed  pest  doth  assail ! 

Thou  phantom  of  Argos,*  earth-bom ; 

Avert  him,  O  earth !     Ah,  I  quail,  580 

The  herdsman  beholding  with  myriad  eyes. 
With  crafty  look,  onward,  still  onward  he  hies ; 
Not  even  in  death  is  he  hid  'neath  the  earth  ; 

But,  e'en  from  the  shades  coming  back. 
He  hounds  me,  forlorn  one,  in  anguish  of  dearth, 
To  roam  by  the  sea- waves'  salt  track. 

Strophe. 
Still  droneth  the  wax-moulded  reed, 
Slu'ill-piping,  a  sleep-breathing  strain.  590 

Ah  me !     The  dire  anguish  !     Woe !     Woe ! 
Ah,  whither  on  earth  do  these  far  roaraings  lead  ? 
Wliat  trespass  canst  find,  son  of  Kronos,  in  me. 
That  thou  yokest  me  ever  to  pain  ? 
Woe !     Ah,  woe ! 
And  wherefore  with  brize-driven  fear  torture  so 

A  wretched  one,  phrenzied  in  brain  ? 
Oh  bum  mo  with  fire,  or  o'erwhclm  'neath  the  soil, 
Or  fling  mo  to  ravenous  beasts  of  the  sea. 

•  Argos  Panoptes,  according  to  modern  niythologists,  is 
the  star-ilhimincd  sky  watching  over  the  moon  as  she 
wanders — 

"  pftlo  for  very  wearinc.'«« 
Of  climbing  heaven." 

Cox's  Mythology  of  the  Aryan  Sationi. 


Prometheus  Bound.  367 

Begrudge  not,  0  lord !  to  my  prayers  to  give  heed.  600 
Enough  hath  out-worn  me  my  much-roaming  toil. 
Nor  wist  I  from  torment  how  may  I  be  freed. 
The  voice  dost  thou  hear  of  the  cow-horned  maid  ? 

Pbometheus. 
And  how  not  hear  the  maid  of  Inachos, 
Brizc-driven,  who  the  heart  of  Zeus  with  love 
Doth  warm,  and  now  in  courses  all  too  long, 
Through  Hera's  hate,  is  rudely  exercised  ? 

lo.     Antisteophe. 
Whence  know'st  thou  to  speak  my  sire's  name  ?    610 
Oh  answer  a  wretched  one's  prayer  ; — 
Ah  me  !  the  dire  anguish !     Woe !     Woe ! 
Who  art  thou,  jwor  ^vretch,  who  dost  truly  proclaim 
My  plague,  with  its  phrenzying  torture,  that  came 
From  Zeus  and  doth  sting  to  despair  ? 
Woe  !  ah  woe ! 
With  boundings,  by  food-craving  anguish  pursued, 

On  rushing  with  passionate  throe. 
By  wrathful  devices  of  Hera  subdued, 
I  come.     Of  the  wretched  are  any  who  know  620 

Such  pangs  as  I  suffer  ?  But  now  by  clear  sign, 
Reveal  what  for  me  yet  remaineth  to  bear  ; 
What   cure  for  my  plague.      If  such  knowledge   be 

thine, 
Forthwith  to  the  sud-roaming  maiden  declare. 

Pbometheus. 
Plaiii-iy  I'll  tell  thee  all  thou  wouldest  learn, 
Not  weaving  riddles,  but  in  simple  phrase. 


3t)8  Prometheus  Bound. 

As  meet  it  is  with  friends  to  ope  the  lips. 
Prometheus  sccst  thou,  giver  of  fire  to  mortals,        63C 

lo. 

As  mortals'  common  benefactor  known, 
Hapless  Prometheus,  why  art  suffering  thus  ? 

Pbometheus. 
Scarce  have  I  ceased  singing  my  dirge  of  woe, 

lo. 
To  me  then  wilt  thou  not  vouchsafe  this  boon  ? 

Pkometueus. 
Say  what  thy  quest,  all  shalt  thou  learn  from  me. 

lo. 

Reveal,  in  this  ravine  who  fastened  thee  V 

PxiOMETHEUS. 

The  will  of  Zeus,  but  'twas  HephoGstos'  hand. 

lo. 
And  of  what  crimes  dost  thou  the  forfeit  pay  ? 

Pbometueub. 
Thus  much  alone  to  tell  thee  may  suflico. 

Id. 

Then  further  of  my  roamiugs  tell  the  goal.  640 

What  time  to  mo,  poor  outcast,  yet  must  ran  ? 

PUOMETUKCS. 

This  not  to  learn  wcro  better  than  to  learn. 


Prometheus  Bound.  369 

lo. 
Yet  from  me  hide  not  wlaat  I  needs  must  suffer. 

Pbometheus. 
Not  cliary  am  I  of  such  boon  to  thee. 

lo. 

Then  why  delayest  to  make  known  the  whole  ? 

Peomethetjs. 
Nothing  I  grudge,  but  shrink  to  vex  thy  heart. 

Id. 

Care  not  for  me  more  than  to  me  is  sweet. 

Pbometheus. 
Thine  eager  wish  constrains  my  tongue ;  give  ear. 

Chorus. 
Not  yet :  to  me  my  dole  of  pleasure  deal ; 
Enquire  we  first  into  this  maiden's  plague,  650 

Herself  relating  her  sore-wasting  fortunes. 
Her  residue  of  toil  then  teach  us  thou. 

Pbometheus. 
lo,  thy  task  it  is  their  wish  to  grant. 
The  more  so  as  thy  father's  sisters  they. 
Besides,  fair  guerdon  waits  on  lengthened  tale, 
When  to  deplore  and  wail  one's  evil  plight 
Draws  from  the  listeners  the  kindly  tear. 

lo. 

I  know  not  how  I  can  deny  your  wish, 

2  B 


370  Prometheus  Bound. 

So  in  clear  word  all  ye  desire  to  know 

That  shall  ye  hear ; — Yet  am  I  shamed  to  tell         660 

Wherefore  on  me,  forlorn  one,  burst  the  storm 

Heaven-sent  and  whence  this  form's  disfigurement. 

For  evermore  would  nightly  visions  haunt 

My  virgin  chambers,  gently  urging  me 

With  soothing  words  ; — "  0  damsel,  highly  blest, 

Why  longer  live  in  maidenhood  when  thee 

Wait  loftiest  nujitials '?     For  by  passion's  dart 

Inflamed  is  Zeus  for  thee  and  fain  would  share 

The  yoke  of  Kypris.     Spurn  not  thou,  0  child, 

The  couch  of  Zeus,  but  to  the  grassy  mead  670 

Of  Lerna  hie  thee,  to  thy  father's  herds 

And  cattle-stalls,  that  so  the  eye  of  Zeus 

From  longing  may  find  respite."     By  such  dreams 

From  night  to  night  still  was  I  visited. 

Unhappy  one  ;  till,  taking  heart  at  length, 

My  night-born  visions  to  my  sire  I  told. 

Then  he  to  Pytho  many  a  herald  sent 

And  to  Dodona ;  seeking  to  be  taught 

How  best,  by  deed  or  word,  to  please  the  gods. 

But  they  returned,  announcing  oracles 

Of  riddling  import,  vague  and  hard  to  spelL  fs  ' 

At  length  to  Inachos  came  clear  response. 

By  voice  oracular  commanding  him 

From  home  and  father-land  to  thrust  me  forth. 

At  largo  to  range,  as  consecrate  to  heaven, 

Far  as  earth's  utmost  bounds.     Should  ho  refuse, 

From  Zeus  would  come  the  fiery  thunderbolt, 

And  his  whole  race  extirpate  utterly. 


Prometheus  Bound.  ^'^ 

Then  yielding  to  sucli  Loxian  Oracles, 

He  drave  me  forth,  and  barred  me  from  his  home, 

Against  his  will  and  mine ;  but,  forcefully, 

The  curb  of  Zeus  constrained  him  this  to  do.  690 

Forthwith  my  shape  and  mind  distorted  were. 

And  horned,  as  ye  behold  me,  goaded  on 

By  gad-fly,  keen  of  fang,  with  frenzied  Loimds 

I  to  Kerchneias'  limpid  current  rush'd, 

And  foimt  of  Lerna.     Then  the  earth-born  herdsman. 

Hot-tempered  Argos,  ever  dogged  my  steps, 

Gazing  upon  me  with  his  myriad  eyes.* 

But  him  a  sudden  and  unlooked-for  fate 

Did  reave  of  life ;  but  I,  brize-tortured,  still 

Before  the  scourge  divine  am  driven  on  700 

From  land  to  land  ;  the  past  thou  hearest ;  now 

If  thou  canst  tell  my  future  toils,  say  on. 

Nor,  pity-moved,  soothe  me  with  lying  tales, 

For  garbled  words,  I  hold,  are  basest  ills. 

Chorits. 
Alas      Alas !     Let  be ! 
Never,  oh  never,  had  I  thought 
That  words  with  such  strange  meaning  fraught 

Would  reach  mine  ear,  710 

Nor  that  such  horrors,  woes,  such  cruel  ill, 

♦  In  the  lo  m}th  Hermes  appears  as  the  god  of  the 
morning,  who  with  his  magic  rod  lulls  even  Argos  to 
slumber.  The  thousand  eyes  are  closed  in  death  as  the 
stars  go  out  when  the  morning  comes,  and  leave  the  moon 
alone. — Cox's  Mythology,  ii.  139. 


372  Prometheus  Bound. 

So  hard  to  gaze  on,  and  so  hard  to  bear, 

With  double-pointed  goad,  my  soul  would  chill. 

Fate !  Fate  !  ah  me  1  ah  me  1 
1  shudder  lo's  woeful  plight  to  see. 

Prometheus. 
Too  soon  thou  groanest  and  art  full  of  fears. 
Forbear  till  hSard  the  remnant  of  my  tale. 

Chorus. 
Speak,  teach  the  whole.     To  ailing  ones  'tis  sweet 
Clearly  their  coming  sorrow  to  foreknow. 

Pkometheus. 
Your  former  boon  from  me  lightly  ye  won, 
For  first  ye  craved  from  lo's  self  to  learn  720 

The  story  of  her  toil.     The  rest  now  hearken, 
What  trials  this  young  maid  hath  yet  to  bear 
From  Hera.     ThoTi,  too.  seed  of  Inachos, 
Cast  in  thy  heart  my  words,  that  thou  in  full 
May'st  of  thy  weary  travel  learn  the  goal. 
First,  turning  hence  towards  the  rising  sun. 
Traverse  uncultured  wastes ;  so  shalt  thou  reach 
The  Scythian  nomads,  who,  'ncath  wattled  roofs,* 
Uplifted  dwell  on  waggons  amply-wheeled, 
And  are  accoutred  with  far-darting  bows.  730 

Approach  not  these  but,  skirting  with  thy  foot 
The  sounding  breakers,  hie  thee  from  their  laud. 
Towards  the  left  the  iron-workers  dwell, 
The  Chulybcs,  of  whom  thou  must  })oware, 

*  The  wicker  huts  in  uso  among  tlic  Scythian  nomads  are 
(IcscrilK'd  liv  rleiodotna  (iv.  4G). 


Frometlieiis  Bound.  373 

As  all  uncouth,  of  strangers  ill-approached. 

Hybristes'  *  river  then — not  falsely  named — 

Thou'lt  reach ;  the  ford,  for  hard  it  is  to  cross, 

Attempt  not  until  Caucasos  thou  gain, 

Highest  of  mountains,  from  whose  very  brow 

The  river  spouteth  forth  its  might ;  forthwith 

Its  crest  surmounting,  neighbour  to  the  stars,  740 

Southward  direct  thy  course  until  thou  reach 

The  host  of  man-abhorring  Amazons, 

Who  Themiscyra,  near  Thermodon's  stream, 

Shall  one  day  people,  where  the  cruel  jaw 

Of  Salmydessus  |  hems  the  briny  sea, 

Rude  host  to  sea-men,  step-dame  unto  ships  ; 

These  will  conduct  thee  and  right  willingly  ; 

Then  the  Kimmerian  isthmus  §  thou  shalt  gain 

Hard  by  the  narrow  portals  of  the  lake, 

Which  it  behoveth  thee  with  dauntless  heart 

To  leave,  and  traverse  the  Masotic  strait ;  750 

*  The  river  which  the  poet  calls  Hybristes  (i.  e.,  insolent 
or  violent)  agrees  with  none  so  well  as  with  the  Kouban,  which 
runs  down  violently  from  the  Caucasos  into  the  Crimean 
Bosporos. 

J  Salmydessos.  "  This  name  was  originally  applied  to  the 
whole  coast,  from  the  promontory  of  Thynia  to  the  entrance 
of  the  Bosporos ;  and  it  was  from  this  coast  that  the  Black 
Sea  obtained  the  name  of  Pontus  "A^evos,  or  inhospitable ;" 
afterwards  changed  to  Euxeinos,  or  hospitable. 

§  Leaving  the  Kimmerian  isthmus  (the  Crimea),  she  was 
to  cross  the  Bosporos,  which  flows  into  the  Mieotic  Lake 
(the  Sea  of  Azov).  It  may  be  remarked  that  in  the  fore- 
going account  of  lo's  wanderings  no  consistency  with  our 
known  geography  is  attainable. 


^74  Promdliens  Bound. 

And  evermore  among  manldnd  shall  live 

The  mighty  record  of  thy  passage  there, 

For  men  from  thee  shall  call  it  Bosiioros, 

Quitting  the  plain  of  Europe,  thou  shalt  come 

To  Asia's  continent. — How  think  ye  ?  say, 

Seems  not  the  monarch  of  the  gods  to  be 

Ruthless  alike  in  all  ?     For  he,  a  god, 

Yearning  to  meet  in  love  a  mortal  maid. 

Upon  her  did  impose  these  wanderings  ? 

A  bitter  wooer  hast  thou  found,  0  maid, 

For  wedlock  bond ; — for  what  thine  ears  have  heard 

Account  not  e'en  the  prelude  to  thy  toils.  760 

lo. 

Ah  woe  is  me !     "Woe !     Woe  ! 

Prometueus. 
Anew  dost  shriek  and  moan  ?     What  wilt  thou  do 
When  thou  the  remnant  of  thy  woe  hast  heard  ? 

Chorus. 
How,  hast  thou  aught  of  sorrow  yet  to  tell? 

Prometheus. 
Ay,  sea  tempestuous  of  all-baleful  grief. 

lo. 

What  boots  it  then  to  live  ?     Why  not  with  speed 

Hurl  myself  headlong  from  this  rugged  cliff, 

That,  dashed  upon  the  ground,  I  from  my  woes 

Tvospito  may  find?     Bettor  to  die  at  once 

Tluui  all  my  days  to  linger  out  in  pain.  77 0 


Prometlieus  Bound.  375 

Projietheus. 
II]  wouldst  thou  bear,  metliiiiks,  my  agonies, 
To  whom  it  is  not  fore-ordained  to  die, 
For  death  would  be  roleasement  from  my  pangs. 
But  now  there  is  no  limit  to  my  woes, 
Before  that  Zeus  from  sovereignty  be  hurled. 

lo. 
How  !     Shall  Zeus  ever  be  from  empire  hurled  ? 

Peomethetjs. 
Thou  wouldest  joy,  methinks,  such  hap  to  see. 

lo. 
How  should  I  not  who  suffer  ill  from  Zeus  ? 

Prometheus. 
That  thus  it  shall  be  it  is  thine  to  learn. 

Id. 

By  whom  despoiled  of  his  imperial  sway  ?  780 

Prometheus. 
Spoiled  by  himself  and  his  own  senseless  plans. 

lo. 
But  how  ?     Declare,  if  telling  bring  no  harm, 

Prometheus. 
Wedlock  contracting  he  shall  one  day  rua 

lo. 
Divine,  or  human  ?     If  permitted,  speak. 


376  Promeilieus  Bound. 

Prometheus. 
What  matters  it  ?     This  may  not  be  disclosed. 

lo. 
Shall  then  his  consort  drive  him  from  his  throne  ? 

Prometheus. 
Ay,  a  son  bearing  stronger  than  his  sire. 

lo. 
Is  there  for  him  no  refuge  from  this  doom  ? 

Prometheus. 
No,  none  ;  unless  I  be  from  bonds  released. 

lo. 

Who  shall  release  thee  'gainst  the  will  of  Zens  ?      790 

Prometheus. 
One  of  thy  progeny,  'tis  so  ordained, 

lo. 

How  so  ?  shall  child  of  mine  free  thee  from  bale  ? 

Prometheus. 
Count  ten  descents,  and  after  them  a  third. 

lo. 
Not  easy  is  this  oracle  to  spell. 

Prometheus. 
So  neither  seek  thy  proper  grief  to  learn, 

lo. 
Nay,  hold  not  forth  a  boon  and  straight  withdraw  it 


Prometheus  Bound.  377 

Prometheus. 
Of  two  narrations  I  will  grant  thee  one. 

Id. 

Set  forth  the  twain,  the  choice  then  leave  to  me. 

Prometheus. 
Granted :  Shall  I  the  remnant  of  thy  woes 
Plainly  declare,  or  who  shall  set  me  free  ?  800 

Chorus. 
Of  these  to  her  the  former  grace  vouchsafe 
To  me  the  latter  ;  spurn  not  my  request. 
To  her  the  sequel  of  her  course  disclose, 
To  me  thy  rescuer ;  for  this  I  crave. 

Prometheus. 
Since  ye  are  eager  I  will  thwart  you  not, 
Nor  will  withhold  what  ye  desire  to  know. 
First,  To,  thy  vex'd  course  to  thee  I'll  tell, 
Which  in  thy  mind's  recording  tablets  grave. 
When  thou  hast  crossed  the  flood,  limit  betwixt 
Two  continents,  fronting  the  burning  East  *  810 

Trod  by  the  sun,  [then  onward  hold  thy  course. 
Fierce  northern  blasts  thou  wilt  encounter  first ; 

*  The  poet  here  takes  up  the  journey  of  lo  where  he  left 
it  in  V.  754.  The  stream  which  is  the  limit  of  the  continents 
is  evidently  the  Kimmerian  Bosporos.  She  now  travels 
towards  the  sun  (t.  e.,  eastward).  This  is,  in  Herodotus,  the 
course  of  merchants  travelling  for  gold,  no  doubt,  to  the  Ural 
Mountains.  In  this  journey  the  Volga  must  be  crossed,  most 
naturally  at  Asterakhan,  where,  it  has  been  conjectured,  its 
numerous  mouths,  and  the  Caspian,  may  explam  the  ttovtov 
<p\oi(T^ov  of  our  poet. 


378  Prometheus  Bound. 

Shun  thou  their  downward  rush,  lest,  unaware, 

In  wintry  tempest  thou  be  rudely  caught.] 

The  roaring  sea-wave  skirt  thou  then  until 

Kisthene's*  Gorgoneian  jjlains  thou  reach, 

Where  dwell  the  Phorkidcs,t  maids  grey  with  eld. 

Three,  swan-shaped,  of  one  common  eye  possessed, 

One  common  tooth,  whom  neither  with  his  beams 

The  sun  beholdeth,  nor  the  nightly  moon ; 

And  near  them  dwell  their  winged  sisters  three, 

Gorgons,  with  snaky  locks,  of  men  abhorred ; 

Whom  mortal  may  not  lobk  upon  and  live. 

This  for  thy  warning  I  relate  to  thee ;  820 

List  now  another  spectacle  of  dread. 

The  unbarking  hounds  of  Zeus,  sharp-mouthed,  beware, — 

The  Grifl&ns ;  and  the  Arimaspian  J  host, 

*  Kisthene,  The  character  and  situation  of  this  legendary 
region  vary  according  to  the  theory  entertained  as  to  the 
direction  of  Jo's  wanderings.  Mr.  Palcy,  to  whose  note 
I  must  refer  for  the  gruinuls  of  his  hyix)thesis,  identifies  it 
with  Mont  Blanc.  This  seems,  however,  directly  to  contra- 
dict the  poet's  statement  that  lo,  after  crossing  the  Kimme- 
rian  Bosporos,  travelled  eastward  on  Asiaiic  ground. 

t  Tlie  swan-shaped  daughters  of  Phorkys  are  resolved  by 
modern  mythologists  into  the  weird  .ind  dusky  clouds  never 
illumined  by  tlie  light  of  the  sun  ;  while  their  more  terrible 
sisters,  the  Gorgons,  arc  the  hideous  storm-clouds,  that  rush 
with  fury  across  the  sky. — Cox's  Mi/fhohn/i/,  ii.  287.  These 
legendary  lieings  are  placed  by  Hesiod  in  the  far  west 
(Theog.  274). 

X  The  Arimasjii  are  jilnced  by  Herodotus  to  the  cast  of 
riis  Scythia,  which  was  the  regiim  north  of  the  Euxine, 
bounded  probably  by  the  Tanais  on  the  east  (Ilcrod. 
iv   13-27). 


Prometheus  Bound.  379 

Horse-mounted,  single-eyed,  around  the  stream 

Who  dwell  of  Pluto's  gold-abounding  flood.* 

To  these  approach  not ;  a  far  border-land 

Thou  next  shalt  reach,  where  dwells  a  swarthy  race. 

Near  the  sun's  founts,  whence  is  the  iEthiop  river. i 

Along  its  banks  proceed  till  thou  attain 

The  mighty  rapids,  where  from  Bybliue  heights       830 

Pure  draughts  of  sacred  water  Neilos  sends. 

He  to  the  land,  three-cornered,  thee  shall  guide. 

Encircled  by  the  Nile,  where  'tis  ordained, 

Id,  for  thee  and  for  thy  sons  to  found 

A  far-off  colony  ;  lo,  if  aught  of  this 

Seem  dark  to  thee,  or  difficult  to  spell, 

*  The  theory  which  identifies  "  the  ford  of  Pluto  "  with 
the  Tavtessos  of  Spain  (the  Guadalquivir)  seems  also  at 
variance  with  the  express  statement  of  the  poet.  My  friend 
Professor  Newman  conjectures  that  this  gold-flowing  stream 
was  the  Ural.  The  gold  of  the  Ural  mountains  is  still  cele- 
brated. The  Arimaspi,  with  the  Grypes,  were,  moreover, 
the  recognised  inhabitants  of  this  gold  region. 

%  lo  is  told  by  Prometheus  that  she  is  to  travel  eastward 
till  she  comes  to  the  river  /Ethiops,  which  she  is  to  follow 
till  it  falls  into  the  Nile.  According  to  the  geographical 
theories  of  the  earliest  Greeks,  this  condition  was  fulfilled  by 
the  Indus.  Arrian  (vi.  1)  mentions  that  Alexander  the 
Great,  when  preparing  to  sail  down  the  Indus  (having  seen 
crocodiles  in  the  river  Indus,  and  in  no  other  river  except  the 
Nile  .  .  .  ),  seemed  to  himself  to  have  discovered  the  sources 
of  the  Nile ;  as  though  the  Nile,  rising  from  some  place  in 
India,  and  flowing  through  much  desert  land,  and  thereby 
losing  its  name  Indus,  next  ....  flowed  through  inliahited 
land,  being  now  called  Nile  by  the  Ethiopians  of  those  parts, 
and  afterwards  by  the  Egyptians.  Virgil,  in  the  4th 
Georgic,  echoes  the  obsolete  error. 


380  Prometheus  Bound. 

Repeat  thy  questions  and  be  taught  in  full ; 
For  leisure  have  I,  more  than  I  desire. 

CJiorus. 
If  aught  untold  of  her  sore-wasting  course 
Remains  by  thee  to  be  unfolded,  speak. 
But  if  thou  hast  told  all,  to  us  vouchsafe  840 

The  boon  we  craved  ;  its  scope  full  well  thou  knowest. 

Pkometheus. 
She  of  her  roaming  hath  the  limit  heard, 
That  she  not  vainly  to  have  heard  may  know, 
Her  woes  ere  coming  here  I  will  relate, 
Sure  pledge  thus  giving  that  my  tale  is  true. 
Tedious  array  of  words  I  shall  omit. 
And  of  thy  roamings  reach  at  6nce  the  goal ; 
For  when  Molossia's  plains  thy  foot  had  trod, 
Round  lofty-ridged  Diidoua,  where  is  found 
The  scat  prophetic  of  Thesprotian  Zeus,  850 

And,  portent  past  belief,  the  speaking  oaks, 
By  which  thou  clearly,  in  no  riddling  phrase, 
Wort  hailed  as  the  illustrious  spouse  of  Zeus, 
Fate-destined,— if  this  flatter  thee  at  all, — 
Thence,  fiercely  stung,  along  the  sea-washed  tract, 
To  Rhea's  mighty  gulf  didst  hurry, — whence 
In  courses  retrograde  wert  rudely  tossed. 
And  through  all  future  time  know  certainly 
That  sea-gulf  shall  the  name  Ionian  bear, 
To  all  mankind  memorial  of  thy  way  ;  8G0 

These  then  to  theo  bo  tokens  of  my  mind, 
That  more  disccrneth  than  doth  moot  the  sense. 


Prometheus  Bound.  381 

{To  the  Chorus:\ 
The  rest  for  you  and  her  I  will  relate. 
The  track  regaining  of  my  former  words. 
On  the  land's  verge  a  town,  Canobos,  stands, 
At  Neilos'  very  mouth  and  sand-bar, — there, 
Zeus  shall  restore  thy  reason, — stroking  thee 
With  touch  alone  of  unalarming  hand ; 
Then  thou  dark  Epaphos  shalt  bear,  whose  name     870 
Records  his  sacred  gendering,  who  shall  reap 
All  regions  watered  by  broad-flowing  Nile. 
Fifth  in  descent  from  him  a  female  race. 
Fifty  in  number,  shall  return  to  Argos, 
Not  willingly,  but  wedlock  to  avoid 
Of  cousins  ;  these,  with  passion-winged  hearts, 
Falcons  that  follow  close  on  doves,  shall  come 
Chasing  unlawful  wedlock,  but  the  god 
Shall  grudge  them  such  fair  prey  ;  Pelasgian  soil 
Shall  harbour  them,  what  time,  made  bold  by  night. 
Woman's  fell  prowess  shall  o'er  men  prevail ;  880 

For  every  bride  her  spouse  shall  reave  of  life, 
The  two-edged  weapon  bathing  in  his  neck. — 
May  Kypris  visit  in  such  guise  my  foes ! — 
But  of  the  maids  shall  one,  by  love  beguiled, 
Her  partner  fail  tu  slay ; — her  will's  keen  edge 
Blunted,  she  will  of  evils  twain  prefer 
Eepute  of  weakness  to  bloodguiltness. 
She  shall  a  kingly  race  in  Argos  bear ; 
This  to  set  forth  at  large  needs  lengthy  speech  ; 
But  from  this  seed  shall  dauntless  hero  spring,       890 
Bow-famous,  who  shall  free  me  fi'om  these  toils. 


382  Prometheus  Bound. 

Such  oracle  my  mother,  born  of  eld, 

Themis,  hoar  Titaness,  to  me  rehearsed. 

But  how  and  where,  to  tell,  needs  lengthy  speech, 

Nor  would  the  knowledge  aught  advantage  thcc. 

lo. 

Ah  me  !  ah  woe  is  me ! 
Brain-smiting  madness  once  again 
Inflames  me,  and  convulsive  pain. 
The  gad-fly's  barb,  not  wrought  with  fire. 

Stings  me  ;  against  my  breast 
Kicks  my  pent  heart  with  fear  oppressed.  O*^" 

Mine  eyeballs  roll  in  dizzy  gyre  ; 
Out  of  my  course  by  fi-enzy's  blast 
,     I'm  borue.     My  tongue  brooks  not  the  rein, 

And  turbid  words,  at  random  cast, 
'Gainst  waves  of  hateful  madness  beat  in  vain. 

{Exit. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
Sago  was  the  man,  ay,  sago  in  sooth. 
Who  in  his  thought  first  weighed  this  truth, 
And  then  in  pithy  phrase  cxpress'd  : — 

"  That  wedlock  in  one's  own  degree  is  best." 

That  not  where  wealth  saps  manly  worth,  91 U 

Nor  where  pride  boasts  its  lofty  birth. 

Should  son  of  toil  repair  in  marriage  quest. 

Antistbophk  I. 
Never,  oh  never,  Fates,  may  ye, 
Dread  powers  primeval,  gaze  on  me 


Prometheus  Bound.  383 

Sharing  his  couch  who  reigns  above, 
Or  joined  with  son  of  heaven  in  ties  of  love  1 

For  filled  with  dread  am  I  to  see 

lo's  love-shunning  virgin-state, 
Consunied  in  wanderings  dire  through  Hera's  hate. 

Stbophe  II. 

Wedlock,  when  equal-yoked,  to  me  920 

Nought  dreadful  seemeth,  terror-free. 
But  ne'er  may  mighty  god,  with  eye  of  love, 
Escape  forbidding,  mai'k  me  from  above. 

Antistbophe  IL 

A  battle  to  be  fought  by  none, 

Fruitful  of  fruitless  woe,  were  this  ; 
Nor  can  I  see  the  end  ; — for  well  I  wis, 
The  deep  designs  of  Zeus  I  may  not  shun. 

Prometheus. 
Yea  verily  shall  Zeus,  though  stubborn-soulcd, 
Be  humbled  yet ;  such  marriage  he  prepares 
Which  from  his  throne  of  power  to  nothingness       9^0 
Shall  hurl  him  down ;  so  shall  be  all  fulfilled 
His  father  Kronos'  curse,  which  erst  he  spake 
What  time  he  fell  from  his  primeval  throne. 
From  such  disasters  none  of  all  the  gods 
To  Zeus  escape  can  show,  save  I  alone ; 
I  know  it  and  the  way.     Let  him  then  sit 
Fearless,  confiding  in  supernal  thunder, 
The  bolt,  fire-breathing,  wielding  in  his  hands; 
Fur  these  shall  not  avail,  but  fall  ho  shall, 


38-i  Prometheus  Bound. 

A  fall  disgraceful,  not  to  be  endured.  940 

Such  wrestler  now,  himself  against  himself, 
He  arms  for  battle ; — portent  hard  to  quell ; 
Who  flame  shall  find  surpassing  lightning's  glare, 
And  crash  more  mighty  than  the  thunder-roll ; 
Who  the  sea-trident,  earth-convulsing  plague, 
Poseidon's  sceptre,  shall  to  pieces  rend ; 
Against  this  evil  stumbling,  Zeus  shall  learn 
How  wide  apart  are  sway  and  servitude. 

Chorus. 
Such  talk  'gainst  Zeus  thy  wish,  I  trow,  inspires. 

Peometheus. 
Both  what  shall  be,  I  speak,  and  what  I  wish.  950 

Clioriis. 
And  must  we  look  for  one  o'er  Zeus  to  reign  ? 

PUOJIETHEUS. 

Yea,  pangs  than  these  more  crushing  shall  he  bear. 

Chortis. 
How  canst  thou  fail  to  fear,  hurling  such  words  ? 

PnOMETHKUS. 

What  should  I  fear  who  am  not  doomed  to  die? 

CJiorus. 
To  keener  struggle  he  may  sentence  thee. 

PuOMETnEUS. 

So  let  him  tlion !  all  is  by  mo  foreseen. 


Frometlieiis  Bound.  385 

Chorus. 
The  wise  are  they  who  worship  Nemesis. 

Peojietheus. 
Kevere,  adore,  cringe  aye  to  him  who  reigns, 
For  me,  at  loss  than  nought  I  value  Zeus. 
For  this  brief  hour  let  him  both  do  and  reign,  960 

E'en  as  he  will ; — not  long  he'll  rule  the  gods. 
But  yonder  I  behold  the  scout  of  Zeus, 
Of  this  new  potentate  the  servitor ; — 
Doubtless  some  news  to  herald  he  has  come. 
lE7iter  Hekmes.] 
Hermes. 
To  thee,  professing  wisdom,  steeped  in  gall, 
Who  'gainst  the  gods  hast  sinned,  on  short-lived  men 
Prerogatives  bestowing,  thief  of  fire. 
To  thee  I  speak ;  the  Father  bids  thee  tell 
What  nuptials  these  thou  vauntest  of,  by  which 
Himself  shall  fall  from  sway  ;  and  nought  in  riddles,  970 
But  point  by  point  explain ;  nor  cause  to  me, 
Prometheus,  double  journeys  ;  *  for  thou  seest, 
Not  by  such  dealing  is  Zeus  mollified. 

Prometheus. 
Full  of  high  spirit  and  augustly  mouthed 
This  speech,  as  fits  an  underling  of  gods. 
Younglings  and  young  of  sway,  ye  think  to  dwell 
Henceforth  in  griefless  citadels.     From  these 

•  This  passage  is  also  interj^reted — 

"  Nor  set  before  me  ambiguous  replies." 

2  c 


3S6  Prometheus  Bound. 

Have  ]  not  known  two  potentates  oast  down  ? 

Ay,  and  a  third,  now  reigning,  I  shall  see 

In  basest  and  most  sudden  overthrow.  980 

Seem  I  to  thee  before  these  upstart  gods 

To  quail  or  cringe  ?     Far  from  it,  nay,  no  whit. 

But  get  thee  back  with  speed  the  way  thou  earnest, 

For  of  thy  quest  thou'lt  nothing  learn  from  me. 

Hekmf.s. 
E'en  by  such  haughty  wilfulness  before 
Didst  thou  to  these  dirge  moorings  waft  thyself. 

Prometheus. 
This  my  ill-fortune,  be  thou  well  assured, 
I  would  not  barter  with  thy  servitude. 
This  rock  to  lackey  better  'tis  in  sooth 
Than  trusty  scout  be  born  to  father  Zeus.  990 

Thus,  as  is  fitting,  scorn  replies  to  scorn. 

Hermes. 
Thou  seem'st  to  revel  in  thy  present  state. 

PnOMETnEUS. 

Ecvel  ?     Oh  might  I  in  such  revel  sec 

My  foes !     And  thee  among  them  do  I  count 

Hermes. 
Mo  too  thou  boldest  guilty  of  thy  ills  ? 

Prometheus. 
Shortly  to  speak,  all  gods  I  liatc,  whoe'er, 
By  me  bestead,  maltreat  mc  wrongfully. 


Trometheus  Bound,  .387 

Heemes. 
By  what  I  hear,  not  slight  thy  madness  is. 

Peometheits. 
Mad  let  me  be,  if  to  hate  foes  be  madness. 

Heemes. 
Unbearable  wert  thou  if  prosperous.  1000 

Pbomethexts. 

Alas! 

Heemes. 

That  word,  I  trow,  Zeus  knoweth  not. 

Prometheus. 
Time  as  it  waxeth  old  can  all  things  teach. 

Heejies. 
But  thou  not  yet  hast  sober  wisdom  learned. 

Peo3ietheus. 
Else  I  with  thee,  a  menial,  had  not  talked, 

Heemes. 
It  seems  thoult  answer  nought  the  sire  demands. 

Prometheus. 
Grace  since  I  owe  him,  grace  must  I  repay. 

Heemes. 
Thou  floutcst  me  as  though  a  child  I  were  I 

Prometheus. 
Art  not  a  child,  ay,  simpler  than  a  child, 
If  thou  cspectest  aught  to  learn  from  me  ? 


388  Promeiheits  Bound. 

No  torture  is  there,  no  device  whereby  1010 

Zeus  shall  persuade  me  to  reveal  these  things 

Before  these  woe-inflicting  bonds  be  loosed. 

Let  then  his  blazing  lightnings  hurtle  do'.\'n ; 

^Vith  white-winged  snow  and  earth-born  thunderings 

Let  him  in  ruin  whelm  and  mingle  all ; 

For  none  of  these  shall  bend  my  will  to  tell 

By  whom  fi'om  einpcry  he  needs  must  fall. 

Hermes. 
Mark  now  if  heli)ful  this  may  seem  to  fhce. 

PnOMETHEUS. 

Of  old  my  course  was  looked  to  and  resolved. 

Hermes. 
Take  heart,  0  foolish  one,  take  heart  at  length      1020 
To  deal  discreetly  with  these  present  ills. 

Prometheus. 
Idly,  as  though  a  wave  thou  should'st  exhort, 
Thou  troublest  me.     Harbour  no  more  the  thought 
That  I,  iu  terror  at  the  will  i.f  Zeus, 
Effeminate  of  mind  shall  e'er  become. 
And  supplicate  whom  hugely  I  abhor, 
"With  woman-aping  palms  to  heaven  upturned, 
To  loose  me  from  these  fetters.     Not  a  whit. 

Hkumes. 
Much  may  I  speak,  it  seems,  and  speak  in  vain ; 
For  nothiug  moved  or  softened  is  thy  heart 
By  prayers ;  but  thou,  like  nowly  yoked  colt,         1030 


I 


Prometheus  Bound.  .       389 

Cliamping  the  bit,  dost  fight  against  the  rein 

Fiercely ;  yet  futile  the  device  wherein 

Madly  thou  trustest ;  for  mere  stubbornness 

Avails  the  foolish-hearted  less  than  nought. 

But  mark,  if  unpersu'tded  by  my  words, 

What  storm  and  triple  crested  surge  of  ills 

Shall  o'er  thee  burst  escapeless.     Yea  :  for  first, 

With  thunder  and  with  lightning- flame,  the  Sire 

This  rugged  crag  shall  rend,  and  hide  thy  frame 

Deep  in  the  rocks  embraces  rudely  clasped.  1040 

But  when  time's  lengthened  course  thou  hast  fulfilled, 

Back  shalt  thou  come  to  daylight.     Then,  in  sooth, 

Zeus'  winged  hound,  the  eagle  red  with  gore, 

Shall  of  thy  flesh  a  huge  flap  rudely  tear  ; 

Coming,  unbidden  guest,  the  live-long  day 

He  on  thy  black-gnawed  liver  still  shall  feast. 

But  of  such  pangs  look  for  no  term,  until. 

Some  god,  successor  of  thy  toils,  appear, 

Willing  to  Hadea'  rayless  gloom  to  wend. 

And  to  the  murky  depths  of  Tartaros.  ]  050 

WTierefore  take  counsel : — since  not  feigned  in  sooth 

Is  this  bold  threat,  but  all  too  truly  spoken. 

Trust  me,  the  mouth  of  Zeus  knows  not  to  lie, 

But  every  word  eomplettth.     So  do  thou 

Look  round,  take  heed,  nor  deem  that  stubbornness 

Shall  ever  better  than  good  counsel  prove. 

Chorus. 
Timely  to  us  the  word  of  Hermes  seems, 
For  he  exhorts  thee,  dropping  thy  self-will. 


390      .  Prometheus  Bound. 

To  search  for  prudent  counsel.     Be  advised  I 

For  to  the  wise  it  bringeth  shame  to  err.  lOGO 

Peometheus. 

To  me  who  knew  them,  hath  he  told 
His  messages,  with  utterance  shrill. 

But  nowise  I  imseemly  hold 

That  foe  from  foe  should  suffer  ill. 

So  'gainst  me  now  be  hurled  amain 

Curled  lightning's  two-edged  glare  t 

By  thunder  and  spasmodic  whirl 
Of  savage  gales  be  upper  air 

Madly  convulsed !    Let  hurricane 

Earth  from  its  deep  foundation  rend, 

E'en  from  its  roots.    Let  ocean's  wave, 

Surging  aloft,  tumultuous  rave. 

And,  foaming,  with  the  courses  blend  1070 

Of  heavenly  stars  I     Ay,  let  him  hurl 

This  body  to  the  murky  gloom 

Of  Tartaros,  in  stubborn  whirl 

Of  fortune  caught !     Do  what  he  will 
My  death  he  may  not  doom. 

Hebmes. 
From  fools  brain-stricken  may  one  hear 
Such  counsels  and  such  words.     But  say, — 
What  sign  of  madness  lackcth  here  ? 
What  respite  knows  his  frenzied  ire  ? 
Natlilcss  do  ye,  who  tlius  condole  1080 

With  his  sore  pangs,  far  hence  retire  ; 


Prometheus  Bound.  391 

Go  quicjdy,  lest  harsh  thunder's  bray 
With  terror  smite  your  soiil. 

Chorus. 
In  other  style  exhort  and  preach 
If  to  persuade  me  thou  art  fain ; 
For  all  unbearable  this  speech 
Which  from  thy  lips  hath  burst  amain. 
How  canst  thou  bid  me  consummate 
A  dastard's  part  ?     With  him  the  worst 
I'll  brave,  for  I  have  learn'd  to  hate  1090 

Traitors,  than  whom  no  pest  is  more  accursed. 

Hermes. 
Then  my  fore  warnings  mark,  nor  dare 
When  tangled  in  fell  ruin's  snare 
Fortune  to  blame,  nor  ever  say 
That  Zeus  hath  plunged  you  imaware 
In  doleful  plight ; — nay,  truly  nay, 
But  ye  yourselves ;  for  not  untaught, 
Not  stealthily,  by  sudden  blow, 
Ye  through  sheer  folly  will  be  caught 

In  net  of  boundless  woe.  1100 

Peometheus. 
And  lo  in  act,  in  word  no  more. 
Earth  totters ; — from  below 
Loud  bellows  the  discordant  roar 
Of  thunder ;  lightning's  wreathed  glow 
Blazes  around  me  ;  dust  elate 
Eides  on  the  whirlwind  ;  forward  leap 


392  Prometheus  Bound. 

Of  every  wind  rude  blasts  that  sweep 
In  strife  of  rancoiir-breathing  bate. 
The  sky  is  mingled  with  the  deep. 
Such  tui'moil  to  arouse  my  fear 
Comes  visibly  from  Zeus.     Oh  thou,  1110 

Mother  revered !     Oh  upper  air, 
"WTio  sheddest  from  thy  circling  sphere 
The  common  light !     Behold  ye  now 
What  pangs  unjust  I  bear, 

NOTES. 


Prometheus  Bound. 
550.  After  diuKvaiofievov  a  word  is  lost.     I  suggest— 

fivpiois  fiox^oi-i  8iaKvaic'ifi(vov  (Kav^atpfTotr). 
869.  Tuv  Aioj  yevvTjfiuTov.     Every  one  feels  that  the  pot't 
cannot  have  written  thus.     I  suggest  tmj/S*  oaioytvinj^arti)''. 
as  close  to  the  letters  of  the  text. 

914.  A  word  is  lost,     fidlpat  ^fiaKpatavts^  \e\€(t>p  .... 

will  satisfy  metre  and  sense.     The  old  text  in  the  strophe  i?, 
ij  (T(icf)os,  ^  cr6c})os  7;i;,  I  OS  .  .  .   . 

920-27  appear  to  rae  to  be  antistrophic.    Porlmps  thus: 
(orp.}  ffioi  8  ,  oTTOTf  fuv  ofuiKos,  6  yafios  aipo^os' 

oi/bf  dfdia,  nfj  deSiv  tov 

Kp(l(T(T6vu>V  (p<i)S  i?0V»Ct' 

ofifiora  TTpoabpaKfj  p.t. 
(di/T.)  aTToXfpov  oSe  y   6  TToXf^os,  'mopa  iropifxof 

oii6'  f\(i)  Ti'f  if  yeuoifiav 
Tav  Aii'is  yup  ov\  i'tpct> 

fitpriv  ona  (f>vyoip!'  uv. 

F.  W.  N. 


THE     SUPPLIANTS. 


I 


DRAMATIS  PERSOX^S. 


Choeus,  the  Daughtebs  of  Danaos. 

Dakaos. 

Pelasgos,  KiiJG  OF  Aegos. 

Hebald. 


[Scene. —  The  sea-shore :  on  one  side  the  sea,  on  the  other 
the  gates  of  Argos.  Tlie  Thymele  is  ado)-ned  tcith 
statues  of  Apollo,  Artemis,  Hzbmes,  and  other 
divinities.  Enter  from  the  shore  the  fifty  daughters 
of  Danaos,  accompanied  by  their  father  —  they  are 
arrayed  in  Egyptian  costume,  and  hear  in  their  hands 
the  suppliant  bough,  tcreathed  icith  tcool.  They  form 
the  chorus,  and  as  they  advance  twelve  of  their  number 
chant  the  following  odeJ\ 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  trilogy  to  wliicli  tliis  drama  belonged,  like  that  of 
wkicli  "  The  Seven  against  Thebes "  formed  the  con- 
cluding member,  was  founded  upon  an  ancient  epic,  by 
an  unknown  author.  Of  this  poem  little  is  known, 
except  that  it  contained  five  thousand  five  hundred 
verses,  and  bore  the  title  of  "  The  Danaides," 

The  story  which  it  embodied  appealed  powerfully  to 
that  passion  for  legendary  genealogies  which  formed 
such   a   striking    feature   of    the    Grecian   character. 
Alleged  descent  from  a  common  ancestor  was  the  bond 
of  union  between  the  members  of  every  Grecian  com- 
munity, great  or  small ;  and  as  this  legendary  personage 
was  usually  of  divine  or  semi-divine  origin,  even  the 
humblest  citizen  thus  felt  himself  brought  into  more 
or  less   direct  filiation   with   the   gods.     The   divine 
element   thus,  according   to  the   popular  conception, 
incarnated    in    humanity,    culminated    in    the    great 
national  hero,   Herakles,    "  the   most  renowned  and 
ubiquitous  of  all  the  semi-divine  personages  worshipped 
by  the  Hellenes  " — the  only  mortal  who,  from  a  life 
of  toil  and  sufiering  on  eai-th,  was  admitted  to  the  god- 
head, and  received  into  the  society  of  Olympos.    His 


396  Tlie  SiipiManis. 

descendants,  moreover,  the  Heraklcids,  associated  with 
the  Dorians  in  the  conquest  of  the  Peloponnesus,  were 
glorified  in  the  popular  imagination  as  the  founders  of 
the  great  Dorian  cities  of  Argos,  Sparta,  and  Messcnia, 
and  as  the  introducers  in  those  localities  of  a  new 
social  order.  Peculiar  interest  thus  attaches  to  lo,  the 
progenitrix  of  Herakles,  and  to  the  bii'th  of  her  oflf- 
spring,  Epaphos,  an  event  celebrated  in  such  glowing 
strains  by  the  chorus  of  Suppliants  (v.  580).* 

In  thus  veiling  the  grosser  featiires  of  the  lo  legend,  as 
popularly  conceived,  while,  at  the  same  time,  investing 
it  with  a  more  spiritual  meaning,  ^schylus  appears 
not  only  as  the  great  creative  poet,  but  also  as  the 
true  prophet  of  his  generation.  The  nmncrous  legends 
of  which  the  story  of  lo  may  be  regarded  as  a  typical 
example  embodied,  in  a  vulgar  form,  the  idea  that  it 
was  only  through  association  with  the  divine  principle 
that  man  could  rise  to  his  true  ideal  as  man.  The 
poet  seizes  upon  this  idea,  separates  it  from  the  grosser 
elements  of  the  popular  symbol,  and  extols  the  benignity 
of  Zeus  in  thus  seeking  fellowship  with  mortals — giving 
prominence  to  the  idea  that  through  this  agency  alono 
the  human  race  was  raised  to  a  higher  level,  physical 
and  moral,  than  it  could  otherwise  have  attained. 

The  introductory  character  of  "The  Suppliants" 
has  been  inferred  from  the  extreme  simplicity  of  tlu^ 
plot,  and  from  other  considerations ;  accordingly,  it  is 

•  I  liavc  uot  ftlhidctl  to  the  solar  character  of  the  Hellenic 
legends — a  subject  u|xin  which  so  much  light  has  bcia 
thrown  by  Piofcssor  Max  Miillcr  and  Mr.  Cox. 


The  Sui^pliants.  397 

now  generally  regarded  as  forming  the  first  member  of 
a  trilogy  of  which  the  succeeding  dramas  were  "  The 
Egyptians,"  and  "  The  Danaides,"  both  of  which  have 
been  lost.  Though  deficient  in  dramatic  interest,  this 
piece  is  characterized  by  the  remarkable  beauty  of  the 
choral  odes,  which,  from  their  sublime  simplicity,  and 
from  the  high  conception  which  they  embody  of  Zeus, 
as  the  supreme  and  omnipotent  ruler,  remind  us  occa- 
sionally of  the  Hebrew  psalms. 

It  must  be  remembered,  moreover,  that,  at  the  time 
of  ^schylus,  the  national  legends  had  not  yet  lost  their 
hold  upon  the  popular  belief,  and  accordingly  mythical 
events,  such  as  the  arrival  of  the  Danaides  in  Argos, 
were  considered  not  only  as  having  influenced  the 
subsequent  destinies  of  Greece,  but  also  as  having  been 
brought  about  by  the  inscrutable  counsels  of  Zeus; 
the  unfolding  of  whose  designs,  through  the  medium  of 
tragedy,  was  regarded  as  the  highest  function  of  the 
poet. 

The  ancient  legend  tells  of  the  strife  between  the 
sons  of  Belos  ;  how  Danaos  was  driven  from  his  home 
by  ^gyptos,  who  usurped  his  throne ;  how  the 
latter  sought  to  force  the  Danaides  to  marry  his 
sons,  and  how  Athena  herself  exhorted  Danaos  to 
flee  with  his  daughters  to  the  land  of  lo. 

The  introductory  drama  opens  with  their  arrival,  in 
tlie  character  of  suppliants,  at  Argos,  and  is  founded 
upon  the  protection  accorded  to  them  by  the  Argives 
and  their  king,  Pelasgos :  the  appearance  of  the 
Egyptian  herald,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  play,  toge- 


398  The  Supj^lianis. 

ther  with  his  forcible  attempt  to  carry  off  the  suppliants, 
prepares  the  spectator  for  the  arrival  of  the  Egyptian 
pursuers  in  the  succeeding  drama.  Attention  has  been 
called  to  the  picturesque  beauty  of  the  opening  scene, 
where,  holding  in  their  hands  their  wool-wreathed 
myrtle  boughs,  and  arrayed  in  white  apparel,  which 
formed  a  striking  contrast  to  their  swarthy  limbs,  the 
suppliants  grouped  themselves  under  the  statues  of  the 
gods :  they  would,  moreover,  be  regarded  with  peculiar 
interest  as  wanderers  from  the  valley  of  the  Nile,  "  the 
wondrous  river  fed  with  snow,"  upon  whose  fountains 
no  human  eye  had  been  permitted  to  gaze. 

Of  "  The  Egyptians,"  unfortunately,  no  fragments 
remain ;  it  doubtless  embodied  the  main  incident  in 
the  tragic  story  of  the  Danaides.  It  is  related  in  the 
legend  that  Danaos  was  elected  king  by  the  Argives, 
in  plucc  of  Pelasgos;  being  unable  to  cope  with 
iEgyptos  and  his  sons,  who  still  press  their  suit,  ho  is 
compelled  to  yield  to  their  demand,  and  promises  to 
give  his  daughters  in  marriage  to  their  detested  suitors. 
In  secret,  however,  he  furnishes  each  with  a  dagger, 
enjoining  her,  at  the  same  time,  to  slay  her  lord  during 
the  nuptial  niglit.  The  terrible  deed  was  executed. 
Ilypermuestra  alone,  soothed  by  love,  and  preferring 
the  reputation  of  cowardice  to  that  of  blood-guiltrness 
(Pro.  887),  spared  Lynceus,  the  partner  of  her  couch. 
Hero  one  duty  could  not  bo  observed  without  violating 
another,  and  thus  was  brought  about  tluit  collision 
between  two  priinarv  principles  of  liunian  nature,  the 
reconciliation  of  which  constitutes  the  csscuco  of  tho 


TJw  Suppliants.  399 

^schylean  drama.  The  remark  of  Grotewith  reference 
to  tliis  feature  of  Grecian  tragedy  will  be  perused  with 
interest :  "  The  tragedian,"  he  says,  "  not  only  appeals 
more  powerfully  to  the  ethical  sentiments  than  poetry 
had  ever  done  before,  but  also,  by  raising  these  grave 
and  touching  questions,  addresses  a  stimulus  and  chal- 
lenge to  the  intellect,  spurring  it  on  to  ethical  specu- 
lation." 

From  the  Hellenic  point  of  view,  Hypermnestra  was 
regarded  as  a  criminal,  while  the  bloody  deed  of  her 
sisters  was  extolled  as  an  act  of  heroism,  enjoined  not 
only  by  their  father,  but  by  the  gods  themselves. 

The  suitors,  moreover,  are  represented  from  the  first 
as  in  the  highest  degree  insolent  and  overbearing : 
barbarians,  they  had  dared  to  invade  the  sacred  soil  of 
Hellas,  and  the  vengeance  which  had  overtaken  them 
would  ally  itself  in  the  popular  imagination  with  the 
destruction  of  the  Oriental  hosts  which  had  so  recently 
crowned  the  grand  contemporary  conflict  between  Persia 
and  Hellas.  This  feeling  would  be  heightened  by  the 
war  between  Egypt  and  Athens,  which  began  B.C.  462. 

The  trial  of  Hypermnestra  most  probably  formed  the 
principal  subject  of  "  The  Danaides,"  the  concluding 
member  of  the  trilogy.  From  a  fragment  of  the  pro- 
logue which  has  been  preserved,  we  learn  that  the 
drama  opened  with  the  hymn  with  which  it  was  cus- 
tomary to  awaken  the  newly-married  pair  : 

"  Since  now  arises  the  bright  lamp  of  day, 
The  bridegrooms  I  awake  with  friendly  lay, 
Chanted  by  choral  bands  of  youths  and  maids." 


■lOO  Tlie  SuiyjjUanis. 

The  horrors  of  the  bridal  night  would  thus  be 
revealed,  together  with  what  was  regarded  as  the 
treacherous  clemency  of  Hyjiermnestra,  According  to 
the  ancient  story,  she  was  cast  by  her  father  into  prison, 
and  subsequently  brought  to  trial  before  a  court  with 
the  constitution  of  which  we  are  not  acquainted. 
The  goddess  Aphrodite  herself  appears  to  plead  hor 
cause,  reminding  us  of  the  trial  of  Orestes  before  the 
court  of  Areopagus,  when  Pallas  Athena,  as  president, 
gave  her  casting  vote  in  his  favour. 

One  fragment  fi'om  the  address  of  Aphrodite  has  been 
preserved : 

"  Longs  the  pure  sky  to  blend  ^vith  Earth,  and  Love 
Doth  Earth  impel  to  yield  to  his  embrace ; 
The  rain-shower,  falling  from  the  slumberous  heaven. 
Kisses  the  Earth ;  and  Earth  brings  forth  for  mortals 
Pasture  for  sheep-flocks  and  Dcmetcr's  grain. 
The  woods  in  spring  their  dewy  nuptials  hold ; 
And  of  all  these  I  am  in  part  the  cause." 

Hypermnestra  was  acquitted,  and  from  her  union 
with  Lynceus  sprang  in  course  of  time  the  demigoil 
Herakles.  The  remaining  daughters  of  Dauaos  were 
purified  from  the  stain  of  blood  by  Athena  and  Hermes, 
or,  according  to  another  form  of  the  legend,  by  Zeus 
himself. 


THE    SUPPLIANTS. 


MAY  Zeus,  by  Suppliants  revered, 
Propitious  view  our  naval  train, 
From  Nile's  fine-sanded  mouths  who  steered 
Across  the  billowy  main. 
The  heavenly  region  left  behind 
Whose  fields  with  Syria's  fields  unite, 
Guiltless  we  roam,  not  blood-defiled 
And  by  the  state's  decree  exiled, 
But  wedlock  with  abhorrent  mind 
Shunning  ;  for  by  -S^gyptos'  brood. 
Kin  of  our  blood,  to  marriage  woo'd. 

We  flee  the  unhallowed  rite.  10 

Danaos,  our  father  and  our  guide,* 
Prime  councillor  of  wisdom  tried. 
Casting  for  these  afiairs  the  die, 
Of  ills  the  noblest  chose,  to  fly. 
Free  from  constraint,  the  sea-wave  o'er, 
And  anchor  drop  on  Argos'  shore. 
Whence,  boasting  its  descent,  our  line, 
From  her,  the  heifer  hornet-stung. 


*  (TTaa-iapxos — party  leader. 


2    D 


402 


The  Sujpplianfs. 


Through  breathing  and  through  touch  divine 
Of  Zeus,  hath  whilom  sprung. 
Wherefore,  on  what  more  friendly  land 
Than  this,  a  refuge  could  we  find. 
These  sacred  branches,  wool-entwined, 

Bearing  with  suppliant  hand  ? 
0  city !     Earth !     O  waters  clear  I 
Supernal  gods,  and  powers  severe 
Guarding  the  tombs  who  hold  your  reign, 
And  Zeus,  third  saviour,  (guardian  thou 
Of  righteous  men,)  our  suppliant  train 
Tender  of  sex,  receive  ye  now, 
With  kindly  reverence  native  here. 
But  for  iEgyptos'  haughty  brood, 
Swarm  of  rude  males,  or  e'er  they  gain 
Firm  footing  on  this  marshy  coast, 
Their  s\vift-oared  galley  and  their  host 
Sweep  seaward  ;  there  by  hurricane. 
By  thunder,  lightning,  and  by  rain 
Tempestuous  driving, — ere,  as  prize^ 
They  seize  this  kindred  sisterhood, 
And  our  unuTlling  beds  jirofane. 
Trampling  time-honoured  sanctities, — 
O'crwholm  them  in  the  savage  flood. 


20 


SO 


Stropue  L 

Him  I  invoke,  beyond  the  sea 
Our  champion,  progeny  divine  * 


40 


•  dlov  iropTii/— literally,  diviuc  calf. 


The  SiqjjjUajifs.  403 

Of  her  who  browsed  the  flowery  lea, 

Ancestral  mother  of  our  line 

Through  breath  and  touch  of  Zeus.     For  time, 

When  to  full  jjlenitude  it  came, 

Brought  Epaphos  to  light,  whose  name 

Showed  forth  the  touch  sublime. 

Antistrophe  I. 

His  name  rehearsing,  where  of  old 

His  mother  trod  the  grassy  wold, —  60 

Eecalling  now  her  ancient  toil, 

I  to  the  holders  of  this  soil 

Sure  tokens  of  my  bii'th  will  show  ; 

Ay,  of  my  words  shall  proofs  appear 

In  season  Jue,  unlooked-for,  clear, 

That  all  their  truth  may  know. 

Strophe  II. 

And  should  there  chance  to  linger  near 
Some  native  augur,  on  his  ear 

When  falls  our  plaintive  wail ; 
Will  he  not  deem  the  anguished  note 
Of  Tereus'  bride  *  around  doth  float. 

The  hawk-chased  nightingale?  GO 

*  Reference  is  here  made  to  the  storj'  of  Procne,  daughter 
of  Paudion,  king  of  Attica,  who,  married  to  Tereus,  king 
of  Thrace,  became  by  him  the  mother  of  Itys.  Hearing 
of  the  outrage  which  her  sister  Philomela  had  suffered  from 
Tereus,  Procne  slew  her  child,  and,  being  pursued  by  her 
husband,  was  changed  into  a  nightingale,  and  he  into  a 
hawk.     There  are  other  versions  of  the  story  of  Procne, 


404  The  Suppliants.  i 

Antistrophe  II. 

Driven  from  her  streams  and  woodlands  green, 
Lamenting  the  familiar  scene, 

She  pom's  a  strange  wild  strain. 
Her  child  she  mourns  in  tuneful  breath, 
By  her  own  hand  consigned  to  death, 

Through  rage  maternal  slain. 

Strophe  III. 
Thus  in  Ionian  strain, 
Of  plaint  enamoured,  I  complain. 
The  while  my  soft,  Nile-mellowed  cheek  I  rend. 
And  heart  aflood  with  tears. 
Blossoms  I  cull  of  grief,  while  fears 
Possess  me,  lest  our  suppliant  band,  70 

Escaped  from  that  mist-shrouded  land. 
Find  here  no  guardian  friend. 

Antistrophe  IIL 
But  natal  gods,  whose  eye 
Justice  regardeth,  hear  our  cry. 
Nor,  beyond  right,  let  youth  its  goal  attain  ; 
Abhorring  haughty  wrong. 
Let  sacred  law  o'er  wedlock  reign. 
From  bale,  in  war  who  worsted  fly 
The  altar  shieldoth, — bulwark  strong, — 
Dread  awe  of  gods  on  high. 

SxRornE  IV. 
Though  Zeus  plan  all  things  right,*  80 

*  The  text  is  corrupt. 


Tlie  Suppliants.  405 

Yet  is  his  heart's  desire  full  hard  to  trace ; 

Nathless  in  every  place 
Brightly  it  gleameth,  e'en  in  darkest  night, 
Fraught  with  black  fate  to  man's  speech-gifted 
race. 

Antistrophe  IV. 

Stedfast,  ne'er  thrown  in  fight,* 
The  deed  in  brow  of  Zeus  to  ripeness  brought ; 
For  wrapt  in  shadowy  night. 
Tangled,  unscanned  by  mortal  sight, 
Extend  the  pathways  of  his  secret  thought. 

Stkophe  V. 

From  towering  hopes  mortals  he  hurlcth  prone  90 
To  utter  doom ;  but  for  their  fall 
No  force  arrayeth  he ;  for  all 

That  gods  devise  is  without  eifort  wrought. 

Seated  aloft  upon  his  holy  throne, 

He  from  afar  works  out  his  secret  thought. 

Antisteophe  V. 

But  let  him  mortal  insolence  behold ; — 
How  with  j)roud  contumacy  rife, 
Wantons  the  stem  in  lusty  life  100 

My  marriage  craving  ; — phreuzy  over-bold, 
Spur  ever-pricking,  goads  them  on  to  fate, 
By  ruin  taught  their  folly  all  too  late. 

*  The  metaphor,  taken  from  the  custom  of  the  wrcstliug- 
school,  changes  to  the  tangled  paths  through  a  forest. 


406  The  Sujyjylianfs. 

Strophe  VI. 

Thus  I  complain,  in  piteous  strain, 

Grief-laclcn,  tear-evoking,  shrill ; 
Ah  woe  is  me  !  woe !  woe ! 

Dirge-like  it  soimds :  mine  own  death-trill 

I  pour,  yet  breathing  vital  air. 

Hear,  hill-cro-^vTied  Apia,  hear  my  prayer! 

Full  well,  0  land,  110 

My  voice  barbaric  thou  canst  understand ; 

While  oft  with  rendings  I  assail 
My  byssine  vesture  and  Sidonian  veil. 

Antistrophe  VI. 

My  nuptial  rite  in  heaven's  pure  sight 

Pollution  were,  death-laden,  rude  ; 
Ah  woe  is  me  !  woe  !  woe  I 

Alas  for  sorrow's  murky  brood ! 

Where  will  this  billow  hurl  me  ?     Where  ? 

Hear,  hill-crowned  Apia,  hear  my  prayer ;  120 
Full  well,  0  land, 
My  voice  barbaric  thou  canst  understand. 

While  oft  with  rendings  I  assail 
My  byssine  vesture  and  Sidonian  veiL 

Strophe  VII. 

The  oar  indeed  and  liome  with  saila 
Flax-tisKUcd,  swelled  witli  favouring  gnlos, 
Staiuich  to  tlio  wave,  from  siiinr-storm  fi*co, 
Have  to  this  shore  escorted  me, 


The  Sup;pliants.  407 

Nor  so  far  blame  I  destiny. 

But  may  the  all-seeing  Father  send  130 

In  fitting  time  propitious  end  ; 
So  our  dread  Mother's  mighty  brood, 
The  lordly  couch  may  'scape,  ah  me, 
Un wedded,  unsubdued! 

Antistrophe  VII, 

Meeting  my  will  with  will  divine, 
Daughter  of  Zeus  who  here  dost  hold 
Stedfast  thy  sacred  shrine, — 
Me,  Artemis  unstained,  behold. 
Do  thou,  who  sovereign  might  dost  wield, 
Virgin  thyself,  a  virgin  shield ;  140 

So  our  dread  Mother's  mighty  brood, 
The  lordly  couch  may  'scape,  ah  me, 
Un  wedded,  unsubdued! 

Stkophe  VIII. 

But  if  she  hide  her  face 

Our  swart,  sun-smitten  race, 
Bearing  our  wool-wreathed  boughs,  to  Zeus  will  go, 

Lord  of  the  dead  below, 

Hailer  of  many  a  guest. 

To  him  our  suppliant  train 

Will  wend,  by  nooses  slain,  150 

If  gods  Olympian  heed  not  our  request. 

Oh  Zeus,  for  lo's  sake, 
The  wrath  of  heav'n,  alas,  doth  us  o'ertake ; 


408  nie  Suppliants. 

The  vengeful  ire  I  recognize 
Of  tliy  di'ead  consort  who  subdues  the  skies. 
For  still  the  tempest  raves  amain 
After  the  hurricane. 

Antistrophe  Vin. 

Then  how  may  Zeus  be  free 

From  righteous  obloquy, 
The  offspring  slighting,  scion  of  his  race,  160 

Whom  erst  the  heifer  bare. 

If  now  he  hide  his  face 

From  us  who  seek  his  grace  ? 
Nay,  but  on  high  may  he  attend  our  prayer  1 

Oh  Zeus,  for  lo's  sake 
The  wrath  of  heaven,  alas,  doth  us  o'ertake; 

The  vengeful  ire  I  recognize 
Of  thy  di'ead  consort  who  subdues  the  skies. 

For  still  the  tempest  raves  amain  170 

After  the  hurricane. 

Danaos. 

Needful  is  prudence,  children. — Ye  have  come 

With  prudent  sire,  this  trusty  pilot  old, 

And  taking  forethought  also  here  ashore 

I  charge  you  guard  my  words,  well  tiibktcd. — 

Dust,  voiceless  herald  of  a  host,  I  see ; — 

The  wheel-naves  keep  not  silence,  axle-driven ; — 

And  now  a  shielded  baud  with  brandished  spears. 

With  steeds  and  curved  chariots,  I  descry. — 

rerchauco  the  rulers  of  this  land,  apprized  180 


Tlie  Suppliants,  409 

By  messengers,  to  eye  us  liitlier  come. 

But  whether  harmless,  or,  with  ruthless  ire 

Whetted,  some  leader  ui-ges  on  the  host, — 

Whate'er  betide,  damsels,  'tis  best  to  take 

Seats  on  the  mound  of  these  Agonian  gods. 

Stronger  than  tower  an  altar  is  ;  a  shield 

Inviolate ;  hence  with  all  speed  advance, 

And  holding  in  left  hand,  with  reverent  gi'asp, 

Your  suppliant  boughs,  white  wreathed,  ensigns  of  Zeus, 

The  god  of  mercy,  with  respectful  words,  190 

Urgent  and  sad,  befitting  aliens  here, 

Answer  these  strangers,  setting  plainly  forth 

That  this  your  flight  by  blood  is  undefiled. 

Let  naught  imseemly  wait  upon  your  voice ; 

And  from  your  sober  brow  and  quiet  eye 

Let  no  vain  glance  proceed  ;  in  your  discourse 

Kor  voluble,  nor  over-tedious  be ; 

Jealous  of  such  this  race.     Be  prompt  to  yield. 

For  foreign  art  thou,  fugitive  and  poor; 

Boldness  of  speech  beseemeth  not  the  weak. 

Cliorus. 

Well  thou  advisesl,  sire,  the  well-advised.  200 

I  thy  wise  bests  will  in  remembrance  guard ; 
And  may  ancestral  Zeus  our  cause  behold  I 

Danaos. 
May  he  behold  it  with  propitious  eye  I 

Chorus. 
Beside  thee  now  my  seat  I  fain  would  take. 


I 


410  The  Suj>plian{3, 

Da>'aos. 
Then  dally  not ;  be  your  design  achicvocL 

[_The  Chorus  place  themselves  near  Dakaos.] 

CJtorns. 
0  Zeus  I  my  sorrows  pity  ere  I  die. 

Danaos. 

If  He  be  gracious,  all  may  yet  be  welL 

Chorus. 
•  •  •  »  «  » 

Danaos. 
Now  do  ye  invocate  this  bird  of  Zeus.* 

CllOitlS. 

Lo !  we  invoke  the  Sun's  sustaining  beams. 

Danaos. 
Apollo  too,  pure  god,  exile  from  heaven.  210 

Chorus. 
Knowing  this  lot,  he  can  for  mortals  feeL 

Danaos. 

So  may  he  now,  and  stand  our  prompt  ally. 

•  "  The  bird  of  Zeus "  is  interpreted  by  the  schoh'ast  to 
mean  the  sun,  for  it  arouses  us  frum  sleep  as  the  cock  docs 
Fausanias  distinctly  asserts  that  the  cock  was  considered 
sacred  to  the  sun  (lib.  v.  25,  5) ;  and  that  the  sun  was 
worshipped  by  the  Argives  (lib.  ii.  18,  3).  PmkiMy  thero 
was  some  fancietl  conniction  Iftwoini  aiXtKrap  aud  fjXticroip, 
the  Homeric  title  of  the  suu  (II.  xix.  398  j  llymn.  ad  AjijlL 
SGd).— Foley. 


Tlie  buijpliants.  411 

Cliorus, 
Whom  nest  of  all  these  gods  shall  I  involic  ? 

Danaos. 

This  trident  see  I,  ensign  of  the  god. 

Chorus. 
WeU  hath  he  sped  ns,  well  may  he  reccivol 

Danaos. 

Here  Hermes  also  after  Hellas'  rites. 

Chorus. 
May  he  good  tidings  herald  to  the  free  1 

Danaos. 

Of  all  these  gods  the  common  shrine  revere, 

And  in  these  holy  precincts  take  your  seats, 

Like  flock  of  doves  scared  by  like-feathered  hawks,  220 

Our  kin,  yet  foes,  polluters  of  the  race. 

Can  bird,  devouring  bird,  be  undefiled  ? 

Who  takes  in  marriage  an  unwilling  bride, 

From  sire  unwilling,  how  can  he  be  pure  ? 

Xot  e'en  in  realm  of  Hades,  after  death, 

Shall  one  so  reckless  fail  to  be  arraigned. 

For  there,  among  the  shades,  another  Zeus, 

'Tis  said,  offence  by  final  verdict  dooms. 

Look  out,  and  on  this  place  your  station  take, 

So  happy  issue  your  emprizo  shall  crown. 

\Enter  Knxo,  followed  hy  atlendnnts^ 


412  The  Suiy])liant8. 

King. 

As  from  what  soil  this  troop  may  wo  salute,  230 

Band  un-Hellenic,  in  barbaric  robes 

And  folds  luxuriant  ?     This  female  gear 

Nor  Argos  knows,  nor  any  tract  of  Hellas. 

How  without  heralds,  without  public  hosts, 

E'en  destitute  of  guides,  ye  to  this  land 

Fearless  have  dared  to  come,  is  maiTcllous ! 

Branches,  indeed,  as  is  the  suppliant's  wont, 

Lie  near  you,  hard  by  these  Agonian  gods; 

By  this  alone  may  Hellas  form  surmise ; 

And  many  other  things  to  guess  were  just,  210 

Were  none  at  hand  by  living  voice  to  telL 

Chorus. 

Touching  my  garb  not  falsely  hast  thou  spoken ; 
But  whom  do  I  address  ?     A  citizen. 
Or  tempi c-guai'd,  or  leader  of  the  state? 

Kixo. 

In  that  regard  speak  thou  and  answer  make 

Fearless ;  earth-born  Palaechthon's  son  am  I, 

Of  this  Pelasgic  country  potentate. 

And  they  this  soil  who  reap,  from  me,  their  lord, 

Race  of  Pclasgi  rightfully  are  named. 

For  all  the  land  through  which  clear  Strymon  flows,  250 

Towards  the  sotting  sun,  my  sway  doth  own. 

My  realm  the  lands  of  the  Pcrrhaibi  gird, 

Those  l>oyond  Pindus  to  Pjicdnia  near, 

And  high  Dodoua ;  ocean's  watery  boumo 


I 


The  Suiipliants.  413 

Cats  it  sheer  oflf;  witliin  these  bounds  I  rule. 

This  plain  itself,  this  Apian  land,  of  old 

In  -R-ise  physician's  honour  gained  its  name. 

For  Apis,  prophet-leech,  Apollo's  son, 

Arriving  from  Naupactos,  o'er  the  sea, 

This  land  from  man-destroying  monsters  purged,     2 GO 

Whom  earth,  by  stains  of  ancient  blood  defiled, 

Sent  up  in  anger,  dragon-progeny, 

Co-dwellers  fierce.     Apis,  as  leech  and  seer. 

Blameless,  for  Ai'givc  land  these  ills  hath  cured, 

And  for  reward  huth  mention  in  our  prayers. 

Having  from  me  these  tokens,  in  return 

Show  forth  your  lineage,  and  further  speak. 

Yet  long  discourse  this  city  brooketh  not. 

CTim-us. 

Brief  be  my  tale  and  clear.     Of  Argive  race, —       270 
.Seed  of  the  heifer  in  her  ofispring  blest. 
We  boast  ourselves.     All  this  -will  I  confirm. 

King. 

Incredible,  O  strangers,  soimds  your  tale, 

That  this  your  race  from  Argos  is  derived; 

For  Libya's  daughters  ye  resemble  most, 

In  no  wise  like  to  women  native  here; 

Such  progeny  might  Xeilos  rear  perchance ; 

Such  too  the  Cyprian  character  impressed 

In  female  moulds  by  male  artificers. 

Of  nomad  Indian  women  too  I  hear,  280 

^^'ho,  pannier-borne,  on  steed-like  camels  ride, 


414  The  ISiq^jManfs. 

Dwellers  in  land  hard  by  tte  /Ethiops'  home. 
Haply,  if  armed  with  bows,  I  you  had  deemed 
Unlorded  flesh-devouring  Amazons. 
Instructed,!  shall  better  understand 
How  ye  descent  and  race  from  Argos  claim. 

CTiorus. 

They  say  that  lo,  in  this  Argive  land. 
Of  Hera's  temple  bare  of  yore  the  keys. 

KlXG. 

True,  certes ; — widely  the  report  prevails. — 

Euns  not  the  tale  that  Zeus  a  mortal  loved  ?  290 

CJiorus. 
Ay,  and  with  dalliance  not  from  Hera  veiled. 

Kino. 
How  ended  then  these  royal  jealousies  ? 

CJtorus. 
The  goddess  to  a  heifer  changed  the  maid. 

King. 
Zeus  surely  ne'er  would  touch  a  fair-horned  heifer. 

CJtorits. 
In  fashion  of  a  bull  they  say  he  come. 

Kiso. 
What  further  wrought  the  mighty  spouso  of  Zens? 


The  Siqjplianfs.  415 

Chorus. 
Slie  o'er  the  heifer  placed  tli'  all-seeing  guard. 

King. 
What  heifer-guard  all-seeing  meanest  thou  ? 

CJioriis. 
Argos,  the  son  of  earth,  whom  Hermes  slew.  300 

KiKG. 

What  else  devised  she  'gainst  the  ill-starred  heifer  ? 

Chorus. 
The  herd-tormenting  brize,  relentless  pest. — 
Oestros  those  call  it  who  near  Neilos  dwelL 

King, 
That  from  the  land  di-ave  her  in  lengthened  course  ? 

Chorus. 
This  too  thcu  speakest  consonant  with  me. 

King. 
And  to  Canobos  came  she  and  to  Memphis  ? 

Chorus. 
There  Zeus,  with  soothing  hand,  a  race  did  plant. 

King. 
Who  boasts  himself  the  heifer's  "seed  divine  ? 

CJiorus. 
He  by  the  liberating  touch  of  Zeus 
Distinguished  lightfully  as  Epaphos. 


416  Tlie  Sup2)Iiant3» 

King. 
[Wiat  offspring  then  had  Zeus-bom  Epaplios?*j310 
Cliorus. 
Libya,  with  name  adorned  of  mightiest  land. 

King. 
"What  other  scion  of  this  stock  dost  name  ? 

CJiorus. 
Sire  of  two  sons,  Belos,  my  father's  father. 
[Pointing  to  Dakaos.] 

King. 
Tell  me,  I  pray,  his  name  with  wisdom  franghtl 

C^iorus. 
Danaos,  whose  brother  boasteth  fifty  sons. 

King. 
Of  him  too  grudge  not  to  declare  the  name. 

CJiorus. 
^gyptoB. — Knowing  now  mine  ancient  race 
'Tis  thine  an  Argivo  train  from  dust  to  raise. 

King. 
To  me  some  ancient  tie  ye  seem  to  hold 
With  this  our  soil.     But  your  parental  homo  820 

How  have  je  dared  to  leave  ?    "What  chance  bcfel  ?    * 

Chorus. 
Pelasgic  king,  chequered  are  huniau  ills ; 
•  Tliis  Hue  is  conjectural. 


I 


Tlie  Suppliants.  417 

Sorrows  like-featliered  never  wilt  tliou  see. 
For  who  might  guess  that,  in  unhoped-for  flight, 
Thine  ancient  kindred  should  to  Argos  drift, 
Cowering  through  horror  of  the  nuptial  couch. 

King. 

From  these  Agonian  gods  what  your  request, 
Holding  these  white-wreathed  branches  newly-culled  ? 

Chorus. 
That  to  -ffigyptos'  sons  I  be  not  slave. 

King. 

Speakest  from  hate  or  fearing  tie  unlawful  ?  330 

Clwrus. 
One's  kinsmen  who  would  wish  to  buy  as  lords  ?  * 

King. 
By  such  alliance  waxeth  strength  to  mortals. 

Chorus. 
Ay,  and  the  wretched  to  desert  is  easy. 

King. 

How  then  towards  you  pious  may  I  prove  ? 

*  The  MS.  gives  wvoiro,  which  I  have  retained,  and  which 
seems  to  me  to  give  a  more  satisfactory  meaning  than  ovocto, 
the  correction  of  Boissonade.  I'aley  ado])ts  the  latter,  and 
translates  the  line  thus :  "  Why,  who  would  object  to  masters 
if  they  were  friends?" 

2  E 


418  Tlie  Supj^liants, 

Chorus. 
Us  yield  not,  wlien  ^gyptos'  sons  demand. 

King. 
Grave  the  request  new  war  to  undertake. 

CJiorus, 
But  patron  to  lier  champion  Justice  stands. 

King. 
True,  if  at  first  I  had  a  party  been. 

Chorus, 
"Revere  the  city's  stern  thus  garlanded.* 

King. 
With  awe  these  seats  I  mark  shaded  with  boughs.  310 

Chorus. 
Grievous  the  wrath  of  Zeus,  the  suppliant's  god. 

Chorus.     Steophk   I. 
Son  of  Palacchthoii,  hear  ! 
With  heart  benign  hear  mo,  Pelasgic  l<inpr. 
Me  siippliaut  mark,  exile  loue-waudcriug  ; 
Like  heifer,  wolf-chased,  that  on  rocky  height  ' 

Lowoth,  confiding  in  assistance  uchr, 
The  herdsman  warning  of  Ler  dismal  plight. 

King. 

By  bouglis  new-culled  o'crshadow'd,  I  behold 

*  Reference  is  made  to  the  statues  of  the  Agouiau  guds  as 
pilots  uf  the  state. 


The  Suppliants.  419 

*Tliis  briglit  assembly  of  Agonian  gods. 
No  mischief  may  this  claim  as  town-guests  breed  ;  350 
Nor  from  event  unlooked  for,  unjirepared. 
Be  quarrel  born  ;  unwelcome  to  the  state. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  I, 
That  mischief  on  our  flight 
Wait  not,  may  she,  Giicldess  of  Suppliants,  grant, 
Themis,  from  Zeus,  supreme  Allotter,  sprung ! 
Thou,  eider-minded,  learn  from  me  more  young ; — 
The  suppliant  aiding,  never  shalt  thou  want, 
Nor  will  the  gods  the  good  man's  offering  slight. 

King. 
Not  at«my  private  hearth  suppliant  ye  sit. 
But  if  some  common  guilt  the  state  pollute_.  360 

In  common  let  the  people  work  the  cure. 
No  pledge  I  give,  till,  touching  these  events, 
Counsel  I  hold  with  all  my  citizens. 

Cliorus.     Strophe  II. 
Thou  art  the  state,  the  people,  thou  alone : — 
Ruler  accountable  to  none  ; 
With  sovereign  nod,  the  altar-stone, 
The  hearth,  thou  swayest,  of  the  laud, — ■ 
And  from  sole-sceptred  throne, 
All  issues  canst  command. 
Oh  then  pollution  shun. 

King. 

Pollution  rest  upon  mine  enemies  1  370 

But  you  I  cannot  succour  without  bale, 

*  I  accept  Mr.  Newman's  emendation,  yavCiiiG  ofxiKov  Tovbf. 


420  The  Suppliants. 

Nor  gracious  is  it  to  despise  these  prayers. 
Perplexed  I  am  and  fear  my  heart  distracts, 
To  act  or  not  to  act,  and  bide  my  chance. 

Chorus.     Antisteophe  IT. 

The  jealous  watcher  mark  enthroned  on  high, 
Guardian  of  mortals  travail-worn, 
Who  to  those  near  for  aid  apply. 
And  find  tlieir  lax^'ful  claims  denied. 
At  suppliants'  wail  forlorn 
The  wrath  of  Zeus  doth  bid© 

Implacable  for  aye.  380 

King. 

But  if  ^gyptos'  sr  ns  have  power  o'er  thee. 
As  next  of  kin,  pleading  their  city's  laws, 
Who  would  desire  such  pleading  to  withstand  ? 
To  native  customs  thou  must  make  appeal, 
That  legal  rights  ngainst  thee  they  have  none. 

Chorus.     Steopde  III. 

Ne'er  may  I  subject  be  to  men's  rude  might ; 

Escape  from  baleful  marriage-tie. 

Star-guided,  I  mark  out  in  flight. 
But  Justice'  self  now  taking  for  ally, 
Side  with  the  holy  gods  and  judge  the  right.  390 

King. 
Judgment  not  easy :  choose  me  not  for  judge. 
Before  I  told  you,  I,  though  cliief  in  sway, 
Cannot  herein  without  my  people  act. — 


Tlie  Suppliants.  421 

Ne'er  shall  the  throng  aver,  shoiild  ill  befal, — 
"  Strangers  revering,  thou  the  state  hast  wrecked." 

Clutrus.     Aktisteophe  III. 

Allied  to  both,  Zeus,  with  impartial  ken, 

These  things  beholdeth ;  evil  men 

Fitly  with  bale  doth  he  requite. 
The  good  with  blessing :  wherefore  fearest  then, 
Since  fair  the  balance,  to  uphold  the  right  ?  iOO 

King. 

Deep  salutary  counsel  need  we  here. 

An  eye  clear-sighted,  not  with  wine  surcharged, 

To  plunge  like  diver  to  the  lowest  deep, 

That  these  events,  first,  harmless  to  the  state 

May  prove,  and  next  bring  vantage  to  ourselves. 

So  may  not  ye  be  booty  of  the  strife, 

Nor  ice,  by  yielding  you,  near  holy  seats 

Of  gods  established,  bring,  to  haunt  our  land. 

The  all-destroying  Might,  Avenger  stern, 

Who  e'en  in  Hades'  realm  frees  not  the  dead.  410 

Seems  there  not  need  of  salutary  thought  ? 

Chorus.     SxnoruE  I. 

Ponder,  and  with  just  heed, 
To  me  in  my  sore  need 
God-fearing  patron  be !     Surrender  not 
One,  by  unrighteous  meed, 
Who  shares  the  exile's  loL 


422  TJie  Suppliants. 

AxTISTUOPHE   L 

Sco  me  not  borne  a.'xa.y, 
Tiiou  who  the  land  dost  sway 
With  might  all-potent,  from  these  gods'  blest  shrine. 

Men's  insolence  survey,  420 

And  dread  the  wrath  divine. 

Strophe  II. 
Endure  not  to  behold 
Me  from  these  statues,  aprainst  right,  impressed. 
Thy  suppliant,  like  steed  in  forceful  hold, 
Dragged  by  my  tresses  and  embroidered  vest. 

Antisthophe  II. 
Whatever  thy  decree. 
Know  well,  thy  sons,  ay,  all  thy  house  must  pay 
Like  reckoning,  by  war's  stem  arbitry.  430 

These  just  commands  from  Zeus,  firm-thoughted  weigh. 

King. 

Well  have  I  weighed  them.     Hither  drives  my  bark. 

Escape  is  none,  but  mighty  war  to  wage 

Either  with  gods  or  men  ;  *  fixed  is  the  hull, 

As  if  by  naval  capstans  hauled  ashore. 

Which  way  I  turn,  grief  meets  me  everywhere. 

For  gear  from  plundered  homesteads  other  gear, 

]\rore  than  the  loss,  though  mighty  freight  the  spoil, 

By  favotir  of  Zeus  Ktesios  J  may  accrue  ; 

So  when  tlie  tongue  hath  shot  untimely  forth  440 

•  Literally,  "  Eitlicr  with  tliesc  or  those." 
X  Presiding  over  housebold  property. 


The  Sufplianis  423 

The  stinging  phrase,  provoking  direful  wrath, 

The  wound  by  word  inflicted  word  may  heal. 

But  to  avert  the  stain  of  kindred  blood, 

la  sacrifice  must  many  a  victim.blced, 

To  many  gods,  — for  remedy  of  ill. 

Sooth !  from  this  fray  fain  would  I  keep  aloof, 

Unslvilled  in  evils  rather  let  me  be 

Than  wise  1     Beyond  my  hope  may  good  prevail  I 

Chorus. 
Of  many  solemn  words  hear  now  the  goal. 

Keng. 
I  listen.      Speak.  Thy  words  shall  'scape  me  not.   450 

Chorus. 
Girdles  and  zones  have  I  my  robes  to  clasp. 

King. 

Such  garniture  beseems  the  woman's  lot. 

Cliorus. 
By  means  of  these,  know  well,  contrivance  fair — 

King. 
Speak ;  what  this  word  which  thou  wilt  utter  forth  ? 

Chorus. 
Unless  some  pledge  thou  givest  to  this  train — 

King. 
"What  will  device  of  zones  for  thee  effect  ? 


•i24  The  Suppliants. 

Chorum. 
With  tablets  new  these  statues  they  shall  grace 

King. 
Thy  words  are  riddles ;  plainer  be  thy  speech  I 

Chorus. 
"We  from  these  gods  forthwith  ourselves  will  hang. 

King. 
A  word  I  hear  piercing  my  very  heart.  460 

Chorus. 
Thou  hast  it  now,  for  I  thine  eyes  have  purged. 

Krs'G. 

Divers  these  troubles,  hard  to  struggle  with ; 

A  host  of  ills  bursts  o'er  me  like  a  flood ; 

Euin's  unfathomed  sea,  full  hard  to  cross, 

This  have  I  entered  :  harbour  there  is  none, 

For  should  I  spurn  your  prayers,  poUntiou  uiro 

Tliou  namest,  ovortowering  arrow's  flight. 

But  if  before  the  walls  taking  my  stand, 

I  try  the  issue  with  /Egyptos'  sons, 

Thy  kinsmen  ; — bitter  is  the  cost  to  stain  470 

With  blood  of  men  the  soil,  for  women's  sake. 

Yet  needs  must  I  revere  the  wrath  of  Zeus, 

The  suppliants'  god  ;  for,  among  mortal  men 

No  awe  more  dread.     Do  thou  then,  of  tht-se  maids 

Thn  aged  sire,  these  branches  in  thine  arms 

Taking,  on  other  shrines  of  native  gods 


The  Suppliants.  425 

Lay  them ;  that  all  the  citizens  may  see 

Tokens  of  this  thy  visit.     Touching  mo 

Let  fall  no  random  word ;  for  ever  prone 

The  people  are  to  blame  authority. 

These  things  beholding,  some,  to  pity  stirred,  4,80 

The  insolence  may  hate  of  this  male  troop. 

So  with  the  folk  more  favour  shall  ye  find. 

For  to  the  weaker  side  all  bear  good  will. 

Danaos. 
A  precious  boon  is  this  for  us,  to  win 
A  patron  so  august,  the  reiguing  prince.* 
But  native  escort  and  interpreters 
Send  thou  with  us  ;  so  may  we  surer  find 
The  temple-fronting  altars,  and  abodes. 
Friendly  to  guests,|  of  city-guarding  gods, 
And  may  in  safety  pass  amid  thy  town. 
For  we  by  nature  are  unlike  in  form  ;  490 

Not  the  same  race  rear  Nile  and  Innchos  ; 
Beware,  lest  rashness  slaughter  breed  ;  §  ere  now, 
Hath  friend,  through  ignorance,  by  friend  been  slain. 

King. 

March  with  him  guards,  for  well  the  stranger  speaks. 
Lead  to  the  city  altars,  seats  of  gods  ; 

*  I  adopt  f'yKpfovra — Mr.  Newman's  emendation  for  ev 
pfovra. 

X  For  the  second  TroXia-a-ovxav,  which  is  certainly  corrupt, 
several  adjectives  are  plausibly  suggested;  I  have  here 
adopted  iroXv^tivovs- 

§  (povov  seems  to  me  to  give  better  sense  than  t^o^ov. 


426  TJie  Supplianis. 

And  changing  watchwords,  needless  is  miich  talk, 
While  ye  this  seaman  guide,  suppliant  of  gods. 

[Exit  Danaos,  with  attendants.'\ 

Chorus. 
He  hath  thy  hest,  thus  tutored  let  him  go ; 
But  for  myself, — how  act  ?     Where  safety  find  ? 

King. 

Leave  here  these  branches,  token  of  thy  need.  500 

Chorus. 
Thy  hand  and  voice  obeying,  them  I  leave. 

King. 
Now  to  this  open  grove  betake  thyself. 

Chorus. 
But  how  should  grove  unhallowed  shelter  me  ? 

King. 
As  prey  to  birds  we  will  not  give  thee  up. 

Charm. 
What  if  tu  men  more  dire  than  dragon-brood  ? 

King. 
A  kindly  answer  give  to  kindly  words. 

Clionis. 
No  marvel  if  I  anxious  am,  through  fear. 

Kino. 
But  fear  to  gontlo  blood  unseemly  is. 


Tlie  Supi^Jiants.  427 

Cliurus. 
Cheer  then  by  deeds,  as  by  thy  words,  niy  heart. 

King. 

Thee  no  long  time  thy  sire  forlorn  will  leave.  510 

But  I,  the  people  of  the  land  convening, 
Will  in  thy  favour  move  the  multitude, 
And  how  to  frame  his  speech  instruct  thy  sire. 
Wait  therefore  and  our  native  gods  entreat, 
With  orisons,  thine  heart's  desire  to  grant, 
But  I  to  urge  thy  cause  will  now  depart ; 
Slay  suasion  and  effective  fortune  follow. 
\_Exeunt  KiXG  and  attendants^ 
Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
Hail,  King  of  Kings !     Most  Blest 
Among  the  blest !     Of  powers  on  high 
Most  perfect  Power !     Our  prayerful  cry  520 

Hear,  blissful  Zeus,  and  hate-possest, 
Of  hateful  men  ward  off  the  lawless  pride ; 
Ay,  deep  beneath  the  purple  tide 

Whelm  thou  their  dark-benched  pest. 

Antistrophe  L 
Viewing  with  eye  benign 
Our  v/oman's  cause,  our  ancient  raco, 
Her  tale  recall  who  shared  thy  grace, 
Ancestral  mother  of  our  line. 
Soother  of  lo,  mindful  be  once  more 

Of  her,  through  whom  we  from  this  shore         530 
Our  boasted  lineafre  trace. 


428  The  Suppliants. 

Strophe  II. 
Back  where  my  mother  trod  the  wold, 
Her  ancient  haunts,  flower-gendering  meads, 
Pastures  where  yet  the  heifer  feeds, 
I  now  betake  me, — whence  of  old, 
Brize-goaded,  and  distracted,  speeds 
Through  many  a  tribe  of  mortal  men, 
lo ;— and  while  she  holds  in  ken  * 
The  adverse  shore,  straight  through  the  sea, 
A  path  she  cleaveth,  led  by  Destiny.  640 

Antistbophe  IL 
Through  Asia's  land  in  wild  career. 
Eight  o'er  sheep-pasturing  Phrygia's  plain, 
Till  Teuthras'  Mysian  towers  appear. 
And  Lydian  vales, — she  scours  amain ; 
Cilicia's  and  Pamphylia's  height 
Leaving  behind,  she  speeds  her  flight 
O'er  banks  of  ever-flowing  streams, 
To  the  fair  land  with  corn  that  teems. 
Region  deep-soiled  to  Aphrodite  dear. 

Strophe  III. 
Pierced  by  her  winged  herdsman's  sting,  550 

The  lea  she  gains  all  fostering, — 

•  It  is  difTicult  to  determine  how  the  words  ought  to  be 
joined.  I  place  the  comma  after  KvyLariav,  and  intt-rprct 
op/fft,  she  fixes  as  her  goal.  If  tlie  comma  is  placed  after 
SiaTf'fivovaa,  the  passacje  may  be  translated  thus ;  "  And 
auspiciously  tiividinj^  the  two  continents,  she  fixes  the  billowy 
strait  as  the  limit  between  them," 


The  Suppliants.  429 

That  heavenly  meadow  fed  from  snow, 
O'crswept  by  Typlion's  strength, 

And  by  the  bale-averting  flow 

Of  Neilos'  water ; — there,  at  length, 
Frenzied  she  comes  by  toils  unseemly  spent, 
And  goading  pangs  by  jealous  Hera  sent. 

Antistrophe  III. 

And  mortals  who  the  land  possessed, 

While  pallid  terror  shook  their  breast,  560 

Amazed  a  shape  unwonted  saw, — 

Half  heifer  and  half  maid, 
Mortal  and  brute,  bi-formed.     With  awe, 
The  wondrous  portent  they  surveyed. 
Who  then  was  he  who  gently  soothed  to  rest 
Far-roaming  lo,  brizc-stung,  sore  distrest  ? 

Stkophe  IV. 

Zeus,  lord  of  ceaseless  ages,  thine. 

Oh  thine  was  that  uuharming  might !  670 

The  breathing  of  thy  love  divine 

Arrests  at  length  her  toilsome  flight, 

And  gently,  with  the  mournful  tide 

Of  modest  tears,  her  woes  subside. 
Then,  as  Fame  truly  tells,  receiving  there 
Thy  germ  divine,  her  blameless  child  she  bare, 

Antistrophe  IV. 

From  age  to  age  supremely  blest. 

Hence  the  whole  earth  proclaims,  "  this  seed 


430  The  Suppliants. 

Life  teeming,  springs  in  very  deed 
From  Zeus,  for  who  but  he  the  pest  580 

Could  stay,  devised!  by  Hera's  spite  ?  " 
Thine,  Zeus,  the  gracious  work  was  thine ! 
Hence,  whoso  speaketh  of  our  race  divine 
From  Epaphos  as  sprung,  errs  not  from  right. 

Strophe  V. 

Whom  of  the  gods  more  fitly  now 

May  I  invoke  for  deeds  of  grace  ? 

Father,  Creator,  King  art  thou, 

Whose  forming  hand  begat  our  race ; 
Artificer  supreme,  ancient  of  days, 
Zeus,  the  all-wise,  whose  breath  each  purpose  sways. 

Antistrophe  V. 

Nor  seated  upon  lower  throne 

Wieldeth  he  delegated  sway  ;  590 

Nor  doth  as  his  superior  own 

liuler  whose  word  he  must  obey ; — 
No,  on  his  sovereign  fiat  waits  the  deed, 
To  execute  his  minds  decjvponder'd  rede, 

[^Re-enter  Daxaos.] 

Danaos  [to  his  daughters). 
Take  courage,  with  the  natives  all  goes  wclL 
Decrees  all-perfect  have  the  people  passed. 

CJiorus. 
Hail,  sire  revered  ;  herald  to  mo  most  dear ; 
But  say  what  mcasmc  hath  been  ratified, 
Whereto  the  pooplo's  h;\nd  oat  uumbering  swayed? 


TJi.e  Supplianis.  431 

Danaos. 

Not  by  divisioii  did  tlie  Argives  vote, 

But  so  as  to  make  young  mine  aged  heart.  600 

For  in  full  mote,  with  raised  right-liands  the  air 

Bristled,  while  this  decree  they  ratified, 

That  we  in  Argive  laud  might  settle,  free, 

Not  subject  to  arrest,  inviolate  ; 

That  no  one,  native  here  or  foreigner, 

Should  seize  us ;— but,  should  violence  be  used. 

And  any  of  these  burghers  fail  to  aid, 

An  outlaw  should  he  be,  to  exile  doomed. 

Thus  in  our  favour  spake  Pelasgia's  king, 

Persuasive,  warning  lest  the  mighty  wrath  610 

Of  Zeus,  the  supjjliant's  god,  in  future  time. 

The  city  should  weigh  down,  and  two-fold  wrong, 

To  us  as  strangers  and  as  citizens, 

Upon  the  state  two-fold  pollution  bring. 

Food  of  disaster  irremediable. 

Hearing  such  things  the  Argives,  by  their  hands, 

('onfirmed,  ere  herald  summoned,  these  decrees. 

The  orator's  persuasive  winding  speech 

Heard  the  Pelasgi,  but  Zeus  wrought  the  end. 

Chorus. 

Come  now  for  Argos'  race 

Chant  we  the  gracious  prayer  620 

lleciuiting  kindly  grace. 

May  Zeus,  the  stranger's  friend. 
From  strangers'  lips  regard  with  favour  rare 
Thu  orisons,  and  cro\»n  with  prosperoas  end. 


432  The  Suppliants. 

Strophe  I. 

Ye  gods,  heaven-born,  if  e'er  before, 
Hear  now  the  prayers  that  for  this  race  we  pour ! 

Never  may  this  Pelasgic  town, 

Fire-wasted,  lift  the  joyless  cry 

Of  Ares,  wanton  deity, 
Who  men  in  other  harvest-fields  mows  down  ! 
For  that  a  gracious  law 
They  passed,  to  mercy  stirred ;  630 

And  for  this  pity-moving  herd. 
Thy  supplicants,  oh  Zeus  !  felt  righteous  awo 

Antistrophe  I. 
Nor,  voting  on  the  side  of  men, 
The  women's  cause  did  they  disdainful  slight ; 
But  the  di'ead  watcher  held  in  ken, 
Full  hard  to  cope  with,  vengeful  Might, 
Whom  on  its  roofs  what  house  could  bear 
Wrathful  ?     For  heavily  he  sittcth  there. 
Yea,  sith  their  proper  kin, 
Suppliants  of  Zeus  severe. 
They  venerate  with  pious  foar ; 
Hence    with    pure   altars   they   heaven's   grace   shall 
win.  640 

Strophe  II. 
Therefore,  in  tuneful  rivalry,  lot  vowr 
Ascend  from  lips  shaded  by  olive  bouglis. 
May  pestilence  ne'er  di-ain 
Of  manly  strength  this  town ; 
Nor  discord's  la^vloss  reign 


I 


The  Supiolianis.  433 

With  native  corpses  strow 

This  land's  ensanguined  plain  ! 

Still  may  youth's  gracious  flower 
Unsickled  blow ; 
Nor  Aphrodite's  spouse,  man-slaying  power, 
Eelentless  Ares,  mow  its  blossom  down  1  650 

Antistbophe  n. 
May  offerings  blaze  in  every  sacred  fane,* 
By  foreign  elders  throng'd,  an  honoured  train, 

That  well  may  fare  the  State ! 

Zeus  let  them  hail,  the  Great, — 

The  stranger's  god,  who  fate 

By  hoary  law  doth  rein. 

Fresh  produce  may  the  fields 
For  ever  bear, 
And  may  dread  Artemis,  her  bow  who  wields, 
View  women's  travail-pangs  and  kindly  spare.  G60 

Strophe  HI. 
And  let  no  man-destroying  mischief  lay 
This  town  in  ruins,  arming  for  the  fray, 
Ares,  the  source  of  tears,  of  ruthless  mood, 

Danceless  and  lyreless.     May  the  brood 
Of  fell  disease  far  from  these  burghers  wing 

*  Another  reading  gives — 

"  With  gifts  of  honour  may  the  altars  blaze, 
Crowded  with  envoys,  who  shall  sound  the  praise 
Of  this  well-ordered  State. 
Zens  let  them  hail,  the  Great, 
The  stranger's  god,  who  fate 
By  law  primeval  sways." 

2  P 


434  TJie  Suitpliants. 

Its  joyless  fliglit,  and  the  Lykeian  king 
The  nation's  youth  propitiously  sursey ! 

Antistkophe  III. 
With  every  season's  wealth  may  Zeus  benign  670 

Crown  the  rich  earth,  and  mightily  increase 
Before  the  city  walls  the  pasturing  kine ! 

Ne'er  may  the  gods'  rich  blessing  cease  I 
May  the  well-oraencd  song  from  every  shrine 
Ascend,  and  from  chaste  lips  the  solemn  strain, 
Joy -laden,  lyre-enamoured,  sound  amain  I 

Strophe  IV. 
Still  may  the  people  guard  with  constant  zeal  * 
Their  honours  for  the  vii'tuous,  while  the  sway         680 
Of  prudent  councillors  the  city's  weal 
Makes  stcdfast ;  and,  ere  arming  for  the  fray, 
May  they,  unscathed,  just  pacts  with  strangers  seal  I 

Antistrophe  IV. 
And  let  them,  to  the  gods  this  land  who  hold. 
With  sacrifice  and  laurel  bough  draw  near, 
Jealous  to  keep  their  fathers'  rites  of  old. 
For  venerable  Justice  hath  enroll'd 
This  her  third  statute : — "  Parents  aye  revere."  | 

*  Among  the  various  emendations  which  have  Iven  pro- 
posed of  this  corrupt  passage  tliat  of  Mr.  Newmau,  alcrlfxoiai 
r»/i«r  for  drifiiai  rifias,  api^ars  to  me  to  give  the  b«.'st  sense. 

t  Tlic  laws  of  Draco,  called  Sfa-fio],  arc  alluded  to,  amoi^ 
which  this  triple  precept  occurretl,  borrowed,  as  was  s;iid, 
from  Triptolcmus  :  yofflf  Tifxaw  ^roiij  Kapnoli  d)^aK\fiv  fwa 
^7  (Tivtadai. — Paleii.  In  the  text  the  triad  of  comniaud- 
ments  seems  comi)letoil  by,  Honour  the  national  gods,  and 
hoDour  the  national  magistrates. 


Tlie  Suppliants.  435 

Danaos. 
These  sober  prayers,  daughters  beloved,  I  praise.     690 
But  though  ye  from  your  father  tidings  hear 
New  and  unlooked  for,  keep  a  stedfast  heart. 
For  from  this  suppliant-guarding  eminence 
The  barque  I  see ;  well-marked  it  'scapes  me  not ; — 
The  swelling  sails,  the  bulwarks  on  each  side, 
The  prow  in  front,  scanning  its  way  with  eyes. 
And,  as  to  us  unfriendly,  all  too  well 
Hearing  the  guiding  rudder  at  the  stern. 
Distinctly  now  the  sailors  may  be  seen. 
Their  swart  limbs  manifest  in  white  attire.  700 

Now  ope  to  view  the  rest,  the  attendant  ships ; — 
Meanwhile  this  one,  the  leader,  with  furled  sails, 
Towards  the  shore  is  rowed,  with  equal  stroke. 
You  it  behoves,  calmly,  with  stedfast  mind, 
Viewing  the  danger,  not  to  slight  these  gods. 
With  champions  I'll  return  and  advocates, 
Should  haply  herald  come  or  embassy. 
Eager  to  seize  you  as  the  prize  of  war. 
But  thus  it  may  not  be  ;  fear  not  the  event. 
Yet  were  it  best,  should  we  be  slow  to  aid,  710 

In  no  wise  to  forget  your  shelter  here. 
Courage !  when  strikes  the  appointed  day  and  hour, 
Due  fine  that  man  shall  pay  who  slights  the  gods. 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 

Father,  afraid  I  am,  since  swift  of  wing 

The  ships  advance ;  full  soon  will  they  be  here. 

My  spirit  fails  me,  scared  by  anxious  fear, 


436  The  Sujp;pUanis. 

Lest  that  my  lengthened  flight  no  profit  bring. 
Father,  I  faint  through  dread. 

Danaos. 

Children,  since  ratified  the  Argives'  vote, 

Take  courage ;  well  I  know,  for  you  they'll  fight.    720 

Cliorus.     Antistrophe  L 
Insatiate  of  battle,  fierce  and  lewd 
^gyptos'  race ; — to  one  who  knows  I  speak. 
In  timbered  ships,  blue-prowed,  their  rage  to  wreak, 
Hither  with  many  a  follower,  sable-hued, 
In  prospcroiis  wrath  they  sped. 

Danaos. 

Ay,  but  they  hero  a  numerous  host  will  find. 
With  thews  well  hardened  in  the  noon-tide  heat. 

Chorus.    Strophe  II. 
Oh  leave  me  not  alono,  father,  I  pray ; 
Woman  abandoned  to  herself  is  nought. 
In  her  no  war-god  dwells.     Crafty  are  they  730 

In  mind  and  counsel ;  dissolute  in  thought. 
Neither,  like  crows,  for  alt^irs  care  they  aught. 

Danaob. 
Our  interest,  children,  it  would  much  avail 
Wore  they  to  gods  as  hateful  as  to  thee. 

Chorus.     Antistrophi  II. 
No  awe  of  gods  before  whose  shrines  we  stand, 
Or  of  these  sacred  tridents,  0  my  sire, 


Tlie  Sup;pliants.  437 

From  us  will  hold  tteir  sacrilegious  hand ; 

Too  proud  their  hearts,  mad  with  unhallowed  fire, 

Eeckless  as  dogs,  they  scorn  the  gods'  command. 

Danaos 
But  wolves  o'ermaster  dogs,  so  runs  the  redo ;  740 

And  fruit  of  byhlos  is  no  match  for  corn. 

Clwnis. 
Since  they  the  tempers  have  of  brutes  unclean 
And  wanton,  of  their  power  we  must  beware. 

Danaos. 
No  speedy  task  the  manage  of  a  fleet, 
Nor  yet  to  fix  its  moorings,  nor  ashore 
Safely  to  bring  the  stern-ropes  ;  nor  at  once 
Are  shepherds  of  swift  galleys  wont  to  trust 
Their  anchor-hold,  the  more  when  they  approach 
A  region  harbourless,  what  time  the  sun 
Sinks  into  night ;  for  anxious  travail-throes  750 

In  wary  pilot  night  is  wont  to  breed. 
Trust  me,  the  army  will  not  disembark, 
Till  in  her  moorings  safe  the  galley  rides ; 
Though  fear-oppressed,  beware,  slight  not  the  gods, 
Who  succour  brought ;  nor  shall  the  city  blame 
Your  herald,  old,  but  young  in  eloquence.* 

Chorus.     Strophe  I. 
O  hilly  land,  which  all  revere, 
What  woe  awaits  us  ?  where,  oh  where, 
•  fvyXwcrcrw  (})p(vi — literally,  with  ivell-tonjued  heart. 


438  Tlie  Suppliants. 

In  land  of  Apia,  shall  we  flee, 
If  refuge  dark  lurk  anywhere  ? 
As  sable  smoke,  ah,  might  I  be, 
That  to  the  clouds  of  Zeus  draws  near,  7C0 

Or,  soaring  without  wings,  ah  me, 
Unseen,  like  viewless  dust  dissolve  in  air  I 

Antistrophe  I. 
Scapclcss  is  now  the  threatened  doom ; 
Throbbcth  my  spirit  steeped  in  gloom  ; 
Me  hath  thine  out-look  ruined,  sire ! 
I  faint  with  dread.     Let  me  expire, 
By  twistings  of  the  girdle  slain. 
Or  e'er  the  man  by  me  abhorred, 
T]iis  form  approach  with  touch  profane !  770 

Eathcr,  in  death,  let  Hades  be  my  lord ! 

Strophe  II. 
Oh  for  a  seat  in  upper  air 
Where  the  dank  vapours  turn  to  snow ; — 
Or  might  some  beetling  crag  forlorn, 
Smooth,  steep,  unfriendly,  lonesome,  bare, 
The  vultures'  haunt,  my  plunge  below 
Witness,  ere  forceful  I  am  toi'n, 
Ileart-inercing  wedlock's  dreaded  yoke  to  share. 

Antistrophe  IL 
That  food  of  d.igs  I  then  should  be,  780 

Or  gorge  the  prey-birds,  native  hero, 

Appals  me  not ;  for  death  is  free 
From  ills  that  sorrow's  plaint  endear. 


The  Suppliants.  439 

Yea,  that  its  doom  may  come,  I  pray, 
Ere  I  such  nuptial  couch  ascend  ; — 
Or  other  refuge  is  there,  say, 
From  nuptial-bonds  or  other  savioui*  friend  ? 

Stkophe  III. 

Lift  to  heaven  the  voice  of  wail. 

Hymns  and  supplications  sing  ; —  790 

Prayers  that  may  perchance  avail 

Eescue  from  the  gods  to  wring. 

View  the  conflict  from  the  skies, 

Great  Father! — Violence  behold 

With  righteous  and  not  friendly  eyes ; 
In  dear  regard  do  thou  thy  suppliants  hold, — 
Zeus,  ruler  of  the  earth,  all-mighty  king ! 

Antistrophe  III. 

For  ^gyptos'  haughty  race, 

Male  of  sex,  a  lawless  brood, 

Me,  poor  fugitive,  still  chase. 

And  with  noiseful  clamour  rude. 

Seek  to  capture.     But  thy  beam  COO 

O'er  all  is  poised, — Thou  king  supreme ; 
For  say,  to  mortal  men  apart  from  thee, 
Dread  arbiter,  what  may  accomplished  be  ? 

Choi~a8. 
1st.  Woo,  woe !  alas !  ah  me  ! 

Lo  the  sea-robber  nears  the  land. 
2ud.  Wrecked  be  the  pirate  ere  his  hand 

On  me  lays  forceful  hold. 


ft2XK!mwiiK«avjL<«tmikr««««iktviw*iifv<w«iiaB.^>.^_.„_. 


440  Tlie  Suppliants. 

3rd.  Loudly  I  raise  the  voice  of  waiL 
4th.  Preludes  to  insult  I  behold 

That  me  will  soon  assail. 
5th.  Hasten,  to  shelter  quickly  flee,  810 

6th.  Cruel  of  heart  are  they,  I  trow ; 

Unbearable  by  land  and  sea. 
7th.  Our  patron,  King !  be  thou. 

[Enter  Herald  of  the  So7is  o/'^gtptos.] 
Hebald. 
Haste  to  the  barque,  away,  away  1 

Chorus. 
Eendings,  ay  tendings  of  the  hair. 
And  cruel  stripes  I  now  must  bear ; 
Lopping  of  heads  will  come  amain, 

And  murder's  gory  rain.  820 

Hebald. 
Plague  on  you,  to  the  barque  away. 

Chortis.     Stkophe  I. 
Would  that  where  surging  billows  rave, 
Exulting  in  thy  lordly  pride, — 
Thou  and  thy  nail-clenched  barque  besido, 
Had  perished  neath  the  wave ! 

Heuald. 
Like  to  a  captured  run-a-way, 
Thee  to  my  stocks  I  soon  will  bind. — 
Hence,  I  advise  thco,  put  away 
The  foolish  phrcnzy  of  thy  mind. 


TJie  Suppliants.  4-il 

Ho  there  I     The  altars  quit,  I  say  ;  830 

Hence  to  the  barque ; — I  know  no  fear 
For  what  is  held  in  reverence  here. 

Chorus.     Antistrophe  L 
Never  again,  oh  never  more 
May  I  the  cattle-nurturing  flood 
Behold,  whence  life-sustaining  blood 
Thi'ough  mortals  doth  more  amply  poui'  1  * 

Herald. 
Cling  to  the  shrine  with  reverent  hand, 
Yet  to  the  ship  ye  must  away ;  840 

Willing  or  not,  ye  must  obey  ; — 
Off,  off,  ye  wretches,  to  the  strand, 
Lest,  forcefully,  against  your  will, 
Ye  at  my  hands  bear  ruder  ill. 

Chorus.     StropUe  II. 

Alas !  ah  me  1 
0  may'st  thou  'neath  the*  billowy  wave 

Perish,  -with  none  to  save. 
Driven  from  thy  course  with  adverse  blast, 
And  on  Sarpedon's  sandy  headland  cast ! 

Herald. 
Wail  and  lament  and  call  upon  the  gods ;  8o0 

The  Egyptian  barque  thou  shalt  not  overleap, 
E'en  though  a  strain  thou  pour  more  bitter  still. 

Chorus, 

Alas !  ah  me 
For  this  pollution  I     Words  of  dread 
•  ^poToiai  is  the  text  of  the  MSS, 


442  Tlie  Su])pliants. 

Thou  spcakest,  mad  with  prido  ; 
May  mighty  Xcilos,  thee  that  bred, 
O'crwhelm  thee,  and  thy  ruthless  phrenzy  hide  I 

Hebald. 

Off  with  you  to  the  galley  doublc-prowcd, — 
Such  my  command,  full  speed,  let  none  delay ; — 
Who  captives  hale,  hold  not  in  awe  their  locks.       860 

Strophe  III. 
From  these  altars,  father  dear, 
With  the  spider's  stealthy  tread 
Or  like  vision,  vision  dread, 
Seaward  now  he  draggcth  me 

CO 

Woe,  alas,  ah  mc ! 
Mother  earth,  0  mother  earth, 
Turn  aside  the  voice  of  fear  ! 
Zeus !  great  king,  thou  son  of  earth  I 

ITerald. 
These  gods  of  Argos  fear  I  not,  fr  they 
Nor  reared  me  up,  nor  nurtured  mc  to  eld.       870 

Cliorus.     ANTiSTRornE  III. 
Near  mc  now  he  ragcth,  near, 
Biped  serpent,  void  of  ruth  ; 
Or  liko  viper,  whose  fell  tooth 
Wounds  the  foot,  he  holdoth  nio. 

Woo,  alas,  ah  me  ! 
Mother  earth,  O  mi  ther  earth, 
Turn  aside  the  voice  of  fear ! 
Zeus  I  great  king,  thou  son  of  earth  1 


The  Su;piylianis.  443 

Herald. 

Unless,  my  mandate  heeding,  each  one  hies  8S0 

Ship  ward,  her  tunic  shall  no  mercy  know. 

Chorus. 
Ho  !     City-leaders,  princes  all, 
Your  suppliant  they  now  euthi-all. 

Herald. 
Force  I  must  use  and  drag  you  by  your  lochs, 
Since  to  my  words  ye  lend  no  ready  ear. 

Chorus. 
We  perish  utterly,  0  king. 
Unlooked-for  outrage  suffering. — 

Herald. 
Soon  many  kings,  ^gyptos'  sons,  thou'lt  see  ;— 
Cheer  up  !  that  rulers  fail,  ye  shall  not  say. 

\Enter  King  vjith  Attendants."] 

KlXG. 

Sirrah,  what  doest  thou?     Through  what  conceit 

This  land  dost  outrage  of  Pelasgic  men  ? 

Or  thinkest  to  a  woman's  town  art  come  ?  890 

Thou,  a  barbarian, — too  insolent 

Thy  dealing  with  Hellenes.     Having  erred 

In  many  things,  nought  judgest  thou  aright. 

Herald. 
How  in  despite  of  justice  have  I  erred? 


444  The  Suppliants. 

King. 
A^  stranger  to  behave,  first,  know'st  thou  not. 

Herald. 
How  so  ?  when  I,  thus  finding  what  was  lost  .  .  .  « 

Kdjo. 
What  native  patrons  having  first  addressed  ? 

Hebald. 

Hermes,  chief  patron,  prime  Inquisitor. 

King. 

Addressing  gods,  these  gods  thou  honourest  not. 

Hebald. 
The  deities  of  Neilos  I  revere. 

King. 
Those  here  are  nought,  as  from  thy  lips  I  learn.      900 

Hebald. 

\_Pointing  to  the  Supjiliants. 
These  lead  I  hence  if  no  one  snatch  them  from  me. 

KrNG. 
Touch  them,  thou'lt  rue  it,  and  right  speedily. 

Herald. 
Certes,  no  hospitable  word  I  hear. 

King. 
Who  spoil  the  gods  find  me  iubospitablo. 


Tlie  Suppliants.  445 

Herald. 

Go  to  iEgyptos'  sons  and  tell  them  this. 

King. 

Such  utterance  my  spirit  brooketh  not. 

Herald. 
But  that  with  knowledge  I  may  speak  more  plainly, 
(For  it  beseems  a  herald  to  report 
Clearly  each  circumstance,)  how,  and  by  whom, 
Shall  I,  on  my  return,  declare  myself 
Eobbed  of  this  female  train,  as  kindred  claimed?     910 
Ares  such  plea  by  voice  of  witnesses 
Decidcth  not ;  neither  by  silver's  worth 
Compoundeth  quarrel ;  but,  ere  comes  the  end, 
With  bitter  wrench  from  life  falls  many  a  hero. 

King. 

Why  tell  to  thee  my  name  ?     Tutored  by  time, 
Know  it  thou  shalt  and  those  who  sail  with  thcc. 
As  for  these  maids,  provided  they  consent 
With  willing  hearts, — if  pious  word  prevail, — 
Them  thou  may'st  take  ;  but  by  the  public  voice, 
Unanimous,  hath  this  decree  been  passed ; — 
Ne'er  on  compulsion  to  deliver  np  020 

A  female  train ; — firmly  through  this  resolve 
The  nail  is  driven,  so  to  abide  unmoved. 
Neither  inscribed  on  tablets  nor  sealed  up 
In  folds  of  books  these  matters  are,  but  them 
Plainly  thou  hearcst  from  free-spoken  tongue. 
Now,  \vith  all  speed,  betake  thee  from  my  sight. 


446  Tlie  Sui^plianta, 

Herald. 
'Tis  then  thy  pleasure  to  incur  new  war : — 
May  victory  and  strength  be  with  the  males  I 

T-  \Exit. 

But  in  this  land  male  dwellers  ye  shall  find. 
Drinking,  I  trow,  no  draughts  of  barley  wine.  930 

[To  the  Suppliants 

But  maidens,  taking  heart,  repair  ye  all, 

With  friendly  escort,  to  the  well-fenced  town, 

Shut  in  with  deep  device  of  many  a  tower. 

The  State  owns  many  mansions,  and  myself 

A  palace  have,  built  with  no  grudging  hand, 

If  'tis  your  choice  full  happily  to  dwell 

With  many  others  ;  yet,  if  such  your  wish, 

Make  ye  in  separate  abodes  your  home. 

Choose  of  these  offers  that  which  sccmcth  best, 

Most  pleasing  to  your  sisterhood ;  myself  9iO 

Your  patron  am,  and  all  these  burghers  here, 

For  you  their  vote  who  pledged, — "^liy  wait  ye  then 

For  others  armed  with  more  authority  ? 

Ch.ru^. 
In  return  for  deeds  of  grace 
May  thy  lot  with  grace  be  crowned, 
ITcro  of  Pelasgic  race  ! 
But  hither  send,  with  purpose  kind, 
Our  sire,  of  brave  and  wary  mind, 
Danaos,  prime  councillor  and  guido. 
Ilis  counsel  will  direct  us  here 


The  Suppliants.  ^^"^ 

Whore  we  must  dwell,  and  he  decido 

The  place  where  malice  may  not  reach. 

For  ready  every  one  is  found  950 

Strangers  to  blame.     But  may  the  best  betide ! — 
With  fair  repute  and  with  un wrathful  speech 

Of  citizens,  handmaidens  dear ! 
Your  places  take,  as  Danaos  hath  assigned, 
A  maid,  as  marriage  portion,  unto  each. 

[^Enter  "Daxaos,  toith  Attendants.'] 

Danaos. 

Ye  to  the  Argives  should  with  sacrifice, 

As  to  Olympian  gods,  libations  pour, 

My  daughters  !  for  deliverers  they  have  proved, 

Beyond  dispute.     'Gainst  those  assiduous  friends,  960 

Your  cousins,  all  that  had  been  done  they  heard, 

Indignant,  and  forthwith,  this  body-guard, 

As  mark  of  honour  they  assigned  to  me, 

Lest  too,  by  secret  spear-thrust  slain,  my  death 

Should  curse  undying  bring  upon  the  land. 

Such  favours  reaping,  justice  bids  us  liold 

In  higher  honour  still  their  kindly  grace. 

These  admonitions  too  ye  shall  inscribe 

With  many  prudent  maxims  of  your  sire, 

That  Time  this  stranger  company  may  test.  970 

Each  'gainst  the  alien  bears  an  evil  tongue, 

From  which  the  slanderous  word  full  lightly  falls. 

But,  I  exhort  you,  do  me  no  disgrace, 

Crowned  as  ye  are  w^th  youth's  attractive  bloom. 

Not  easy  tender  ripeness  is  to  guard ; 


448  The  Snjyj^Uajits. 

Wild  beasts  despoil  it, — mortals  too  no  less, 

And  wingud  tribes  and  trcaders  on  the  eartli. 

Her  gusbing  fruitage  Kypris  heraldeth, 

Nay,  tbe  unripe  scarce  suffers  she  to  stay  ; 

And  at  the  virgin's  daintiness  of  form,  980 

Eacb  passer-by,  o'ercome  by  fond  desire, 

Sends  from  bis  eye  a  shaft  of  suasive  spell. 

Forget  we  not  then  wherefore  many  a  toil, 

And  breadth  of  sea  was  furrowed  by  our  keel. — 

Shame  to  ourselves,  but  triumph  to  our  foes. 

Let  us  not  work.     A  two-fold  dwelling  here, 

(One  dotli  Pelasgos  give,  the  city  one,) 

Awaits  us,  free  of  charge ; — easy  the  terms. 

Tbis  only, — guard  tbe  mandates  of  your  sire. 

And  honoiir  bold  in  more  respect  than  life.  990 

CJtorus. 
Be  the  Olympians  gracious  in  all  else  I 
Toncbing  my  youthful  bloom  take  courage,  father ; — 
For  I,  unless  new  plans  the  gods  devise. 
Will  never  from  my  mind's  first  pathway  swerve. 

Semi-choms  A.     StRornE  I. 
Praise  the  blest  gods,  state-ruling  powers  supreme, 

The  city's  tutelary  guardians  praise. 

And  those  who  hauut  old  Erasinos'  stream. 

Scmi-chonit  B. 

Companions  of  our  way,  take  up  the  theme ;  1000 

For  this  Pelasgic  city  let  us  pour 
The  song,  nor  Ncilos'  mouths  henceforth  adore 
With  choral  luya 


Tlie  Suppliants.  449 

Semi-chorus  A.     Antkistrophe  I. 
Nay,  but  tliose  rivers  whose  glad  waters  lave, 
Witli  increase  fraught,  this  region  where  they  rise, 
Soothing  the  earth  with  fertilizing  wave. 

Semi-chorus  B. 
View  us,  Chaste  Artemis,  with  pitying  eyes  ;         1010 
On  us  may  Kythereia  ne'er  impose 
"Wedlock,  with  forceful  rites  !     No,  may  such  prize 
Reward  our  foes. 

Semi-cJiorus  A.     Strophe  II. 
Not  that  this  friendly  hymn  disdains  her  sway 
Who  empire  wieldeth,  Zeus  and  Hera  near, 
Goddess  of  guileful  spells,  Kypris,  whose  reign, 
O'er  solemn  rites  extending,  all  revere. 

Semi-chorus  B. 
Sharing  her  honours,  on  their  mother  dear  1020 

Desire  attends  and  Suasion,  who  in  vain, 
Her  plea  ne'er  urgeth  ;  Loves  with  whispering  play, 
And  sweet  Harmonia,  these  too  share  her  sway, 
And  wait  on  Aphrodite. 

Semi-chorus  A.     Antistrophe  TL 
For  us,  poor  fugitives,  dire  woes  I  dread, 
Yea,  bloody  wars  my  bodeful  heart  appal ; 
Since  hither  sailing,  eager  in  pursuit. 
In  swiftly- wafted  ships  our  foes  have  sped.  1030 

Semi-chorus  B. 
Whate'er  is  fated  that  must  sure  befiil ; 
The  will  of  Zeus,  almighty,  absolute, 

2  a 


450  TJie  Suppliants. 

None  may  transgress.     May  wedlock  find  at  last, 
As  to  full  many  women  in  the  past, 
For  us  a  happy  issue. 

Semi-chorus  A.    Strophe  III. 

From  marriage  with  ^gyptos'  seed 
Thy  suppliants,  mighty  Zeus,  defend ! 

Semi-chorus  B. 
All  yet  propitiously  may  end. 

Semi-chorxis  A» 
Cure  seekest  thou  for  cureless  ill.  1040 

Semi-chorus  B. 
But  certes  thou  the  future  canst  not  read.      , 

Semi-chorus  A.     Antisteophe  IIL 

How  search  of  Zeus  the  hidden  will  ? 
A  fathomless  ahyss,  I  trow. 

Semi-chorus  B. 
For  modest  blessings  pour  thy  prayer. 

Semi-chorus  A. 
What  moderation  urgcst  thou  ? 

Scmi-chorufi  B. 
What  Heaven  ordaincth,  that  with  patience  bear.  1050 

Semi-chorus  A.  Stuoi'IIE  IV. 
From  us  this  wedlock's  hateful  hostile  rite 
May  sovereign  Zeus  avert,  of  old  who  freed 


The  SupiManis.  451 

lo  from  bale, — the  while  her  frenzied  speed 
With  healing  hand  he  checked,  working  with  gracious 
might. 

Semi-chorus  B.     Antisteophe  IV. 
May  He  with  victory  crown  our  woman's  side  I 
The  better  part,  though  blent  with  ill,  be  mine ! 
O'er  our  just  cause  may  Justice'  self  preside, 
Kesponsive  to  my  prayer,  through  saving-arts  divine  I 

\Exeunt  in  jorocession. 


452  Hie  Suppliants. 


NOTES. 


The  Scppmants, 

7.  For  yvioa-delaai  I  think  should  be  read  f^acrdflaai, 
extruded. 

8.  avToyivrjTov  (f)v^dvopa  is  the  old  text.  The  sense  seems 
to  require  an  epithet  meaning  voluntary,  in  contrast  to  Jec/al 
expuhion.  Perhaps  the  word  avrayptros  (Ionic  for  avdalpfros) 
has  been  dropped  out,  from  its  similarity  to  avToyivqrov.  Then 
Ave  obtain,  with  perfect  sense  and  emphasis — 

aXX'  [airaype'ratf]  avroyfvrjrov 
(f)v^avop[iais^  ydp.ov  A^yvTrrov 
Traidayv  dcrefifi  t  ovora^vpevai. 

In  27,  38,  40,  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  believe  that  so  care- 
ful a  poet  as  iEschj'lus  would  write  8€^ai6\  (r(PeT(pi$dfj.evo», 
fTriKeKXdp.(vai ;  which  make  tiie  syntax  as  loose  as  that  of 
Thucydides.  I  believe  in  be^aiadf  (in  apposition  to  Trtpylrarf), 
(T(^fT(pi^apivovs  (^plural,  as  oXoti/ro)  (mKtK\op.fva  (in  apjx)si- 
tion  to  (TTiXt^apepa). 

45.  ((f)ayl/Lv  has  no  s^itisfactory  syntax  ;  in  43  the  old  text 
was  dvdovopov  ray.  Porson  changed  it  to  dvBovofiovaas, 
which  is  not  plausible  to  me. 

.52.  The  old  text  to  re  vvv,  should,  I  think,  Iw  yfytrdv, 
Avhich  completes  the  splendid  conjectural  correi'tions  of 
Hermann  and  others,  who  chanf'e  rfKptjpin  rd  r  dvdpoi'  oid' 
to  T(KfiT]pi\  &  yainvnpoia-ti'.  This  one  example  may  justly 
incite  us  in  nonsensical  passages  to  conjecture  Ixildly. 

G2.  dno  ^u>p(ov  noranmv  r  is  Certainly  wrong.  A  very 
simple  correction  will  be  dno  x"/Ji"w>'  noTnfiS>v  t,  from  her 


Tlie  Suppliants,  453 

feeding-places  and  streams,  or  even  from  her  crofts  ami 
streams.  In  Pindar  we  find  xopros  Xiovros :  in  Eur.  Iph.  T. 
134,  xoprav  evBivdpcov.  (Hermann's  ano  p^Xwpcoj/  TreToXcot 
eypo/ieVa  is  audacity  out  of  place.) 

70.  If  Beipaivova-a  be  right,  we  have  to  join  etVis  with 
y6f8va  ...  in  the  sense  of  *'  I  lament  whether,"  which  is  cer- 
tainly unnatural.  Dindorf  prints  Sei/xa  fievovaa,  I  suppose 
merely  to  show  what  the  metre  requires. 

78.  For  the  old  reading  jSw/^os  "Ap»7s  (j)iyaaiv,  which  is 
certainly  wrong,  an  obvious  correction  is  ^apos  apei(f)iryaaiv, 
which  would  be  unexcnptionable  if  we  foimd  it  in  the  text. 
But  other  possibilities  occur:  thus  the  poet  may  have 
written  ^AprjacpvyeTov  in  imitation  of  the  word  KprjcKpyyerov. 

80.  El  OfiT]  Aios  ev  Travakrjdas  I  This  is  nonsense.  To 
change  Atos  to  6e6s  has  no  plausibility  ;  all  remains  abrupt ; 
6f6s  followed  by  Aio?  is  scarcely  possible.  My  present  belief 
is  that  we  get  the  poet's  sense  by  ^Idela  Aios  ev  TravaXrjde'i 
....  which  means,  "  In  the  straight  line  of  Jove,  thmigh 
drawn  with  perfect  accuracy,  the  heart's  desire  of  Jove  is  not 
easy  to  trace."  Then  the  abruptness  vanishes  and  the  argu- 
ment is  soliil.  Moreover,  in  the  next  line  toi  seems  to 
introduce  a  general  maxim.  This  suggests  to  me  that  iravra, 
which  is  w^eak,  ought  to  l^e  ^povra, 

93.  rav  airoivov  (the  old  text)  is  manifestly  indefensible. 
Critics  do  not  seem  to  have  observed  that  in  place  of  it  we 
need  the  accusative  after  i^enpa^fv.  Then  we  must  put 
a  full-stop  alter  e'^on-Xt'fet,  and  the  sense  needed  will  be 
given  by  Ylavra  voov  baifiovluiv  |  fivjjfjLov  avw  (ppovrjfid  ncof 
j  avTo^fv  i^inpa^fv  .  .  . 

104.  The  little  word  koX  offends  me,  and  suggests  that 
Koi  biavoiav  should  possibly  be  7r«t66?  avoiav.  Is  the  spondee 
in  the  third  foot  satisfactory  ? 

107.  Eemove  the  stop  and  join  ifnrpfnT}  with  y.e. 

115,  116.  TTfXouevwv  Ka\a>s  \  €Tri8pofia>s  odi  ddvaros  anf). 
This  is  mere  chaos.      The  general  sense  needed   is,  that 


454  Tlie  Suppliants. 

"incestuous  marriages  involve  the  gods  in  guilt:"  ivayia 
must  be  the  predicate.  I  propose  to  change  neXofxtvap  to 
TreXot  av  oii,  which  gives  the  sense  excellently.  On  com- 
paring the  strophe,  it  seems  likely  that  v.  116  contains 
epithets  of  reXfo,  as  v.  105  of  /xAea.  To  read  for  v.  116 
cTTt'Spo/ia,  voda,  davaroaayrj,  would  be  very  close  to  the 
letters ;  but  I  think  davaToaa-rrri,  "  laden  with  death,"  more 
likely,  and  it  is  but  T  for  n.     'En-i'6po/xa  I  render  invasive. 

118, 119.  Punctuate  with  comma  after  vovoi,  and  with 
full-stop  after  dird^ei,  and  interpret,  "  The  distresses  are 
indefinable,  into  what  the  wave  is  to  carry  us;"  that  is, 
"  It  is  doubtful,  into  what " 

127.  I  do  not  think  that  Sofxos  8op6s  can  mean  a  house  of 
timber,  as  Scholefield  seems  to  join  it,  but  5op6s  perhaps 
ought  to  be  8opals  hides. 

203-206,  of  Scholefield,  but  207-10,  of  the  Oxford  pocket 
edition,  seem  to  be  out  of  order.  The  first  two  lines  should 
change  places,  and  the  fourth  should  be  first. 

244.  rrjpov  is  difficult  to  justify  and  difiScult  to  condemn ; 
but  I  think  Up6pa^8ov  to  be  a  fair  and  satisfactory  correction 
of  lepov  pa^dov. 

309.  It  seems  impossible  that  pvcriav  can  be  correct. 
I  suggest  ^^ava-fdv,  strokings,  caresses,  equivalent  to  eVa0»;- 
cr(o)v.  The  next  line,  which  is  lost,  may  have  been  rls  ovp 
ds''E,7Ta(})ov  (or  Tis  8rjTa  Kfivco)  KXfwov  ava(j}(p(i  y(i>os. 

394.  p.q  rmov,  for  unlucky,  evil,  is  not  plausible,  fifi 
TtpiTvov  may  suggest  itself;  but  there  are  too  many  other 
possibilities.     I  conjecture  p.tp.iTTlov. 

485.  For  the  unmeaning  «i5  ptovra  I  suggest  ryuc  ptoyra, 
equivalent  to  ffi^aaiktvovra. 

488.  TToXio-o-ovx*"*'  ^^^  regard  as  ^vrongly  re}ieateil  from  the 
preceding  line.  One  may  suggest  ttoXvXXiWow,  or  iroXv- 
(ftVoi'f  (8pns.     Palcy's  iTfpiirrvXovs  is  also  good. 


The  Suppliants.  455 

492.  The  old  ^ojSov  seems  to  me  quite  right,  and  the 
change  to  (^oi/oC  needless.  "  Beware  lest  too  much  confidence 
produce  alarm." 

510.  Perhaps  ovri  should  be  ov  ere,  as  the  sense  seems  to 
require. 

521.  TTidov  T€  (tat  yevf  (t6co.  Obviously  to  me  yevfcrdfo  has 
supplanted  some  epithet  of  avBpav.  The  nearest  word  that 
I  think  of  is  navfx'^^v.  This  is  in  itself  irreprovable  :  Tridov 
re,  Koi  TraVf}(6S>v  \  akevaov  avbpav  v^piv. 

528.  yevov  TroXvuvrjo-Tap  cannot  be  right.  Dindorf  prints 
iTo\vp.vTj(TTop  metri  causa,  I  suppose,  rightly  regarding  v^ptj; 
as  a  pyrrhic  in  the  strophe.  Apparently  for  TToXvp-vfja-Tcop 
we  need  an  accusative  epithet  of  atvov,  and  for  yevov  a  geni- 
tive or  dative,  such  as  yovov  or  yovfj  (not  yevovs,  for  that 
occurs  twice  besides  in  the  sentence).  I  doubtfully  propose 
vfoxTov  fv^poi/'  aivov  |  yovov  TToXvpvrjaTov.  In  the  next  line, 
Toi  must  be  either  interpreted  croi,  I  suppose,  or  changed  into 
(ToL    "'EvoiKoi  seems  to  be  for  the  prosaic  eiroiKoi,  settlers. 

550.  ei(TiKvovp.fvov,  after  iKvelrai,  is  hardly  credible.  Din- 
dorfs  ficn.Kvovp.ivr)  does  not  remove  this  objection.  Hermann's 
conjecture  €y(cexP"Mf'*"?  seems  to  me  quite  justified. 

555.  Surely  vba>p  to  Nei'Xou  ought  to  be  v8(op  re  NfiXou. 
The  poet  says  that  the  wind  of  the  desert  (rv^w  pevos)  and 
the  water  of  Nile  come  upon  the  snow-fed  fields  of  Egypt 
Like  Herodotus,  he  supposed  that  snow,  melting  in  the 
highlands  of  Abyssinia,  kept  the  Kile  full  through  the 
summer. 

558.  dflas  is  clearly  wrong,  yet  it  is  hard  to  beUeve  Bvias 
right.     My  last  thought  is  80X175  ^aSeaia-ov. 

572.  I  do  not  see  how  ^la  can  be  nominative  to  dn-ooTa'fet. 
lo  must  be  nominative  to  d-rroaTd^ei,  therefore  jSt'a  is  corrupt. 
I  conjecture  [tj  S'  olKicrpaTOi  aifcO]  Aios  t'  aTrrjpApra  k.t.X. 

574.  I  protest  against  rendering  Ip/ui,  hallast,  as  an  utter 
monstrosity,  and  suggest  that  it  means  gem,  germ.  Compare 
Iliad,  iv.  177,  and  epnara  for  gems,  fpy^os,  a  necklace. 


456  The  Suppliants. 

580.  The  logic  of  tU  yap  proves  that  the  previous  lines 
asf^ert  the  progeny  to  have  been  Jupiter's ;  hence  Zr]v6s  must 
be  predicate,  and  to  8t]  cannot  possibly  be  right.  I  propose 
to  change  it  to  toSc. 

628.  dpoTois  iv  oKXois  implies  that  aporos  in  a  literal  sense 
has  been  named  in  the  previous  lines :  I  think,  therefore, 
that  a)(opov  has  somehow  come  in  place  of  the  word  aporos. 
In  the  antistrophe,  for  npaKTopd  re  aKoirov,  which  is  certainly 
wrong,  I  would  suggest  irpdnrop'  avroa-Konov. 

672.  Paley  well  changes  tws  to  yds, 

674.  I  hke  the  Aldine  reading  iin^a>nav  better  than  eVl 
^(ofjMU  or  /3o)fxotff.  We  probabh*  all  adopt  fioxxrav  Bfiar, 
with  Ahrens  and  Hermann,  for  fwva-ai  deal  re. 

678-680.  The  common  text  is  certainly  wrong;  yet  it 
may  be  corrected  in  more  ways  than  one.  For  t6  tttoXiv 
KpuTvvai  I  wish  Koi  noKiv  Kparvvoi,  which  explains  syntax 
and  sentiment,  so  as  to  open  the  poet's  meaning,  probably, 
thus  :  (pvXdacroi  r  alcripoiai  rificis  \  to  8f]piov  Ka\  ndXiv 
Kparvvoi  I  TTpofiadiais  ^I'vuprjris  dpx^d.  This  is  the  {xiet's 
ideal  of  a  well-temi^ered  free  state.  "Let  the  folk  reserve 
honours  (public  offices)  for  the  virtuous,  and  let  a  mapstracy 
of  common  counsel  stablish  the  city  by  previous  delibera- 
tions." npojidOiai  is  poetical  for  irpo^ovKevfiara.  For  aiai- 
fioia-i  the  old  text  has  drifilas,  which  is  manifestly  wrong. 

775.  dnp6cr8eiKros,  a  rock  that  "  cannot  be  pointed  at " ! 
Rather,  I  think,  dnp6(Tp.iKros,  iriaccessibJe. 

786.  Tiv'  dficj)'  avrCis  trt  ndpov  |  ripva  yafwv  Kai  Xvrrfpia. 
This  chaos  would  be  desjiei  ate,  only  that  the  metre  of  the 
strophe  giiides  us.  (Dindorf  there  changes  Kap8ias  to  Kdp(ai, 
quite  causelessly.)  I  see  nothing  for  it  but  audacious  con- 
jecture, thus :  f\0tra)  p^pos  npo  Koi  |  ras  yrpjjXiov,  tv\o>v 
I  TacS'  ii^dv,  r(^((r(f)upnv  |  dtpvitov  ydpnv  KaXi-Trrpav.  \  Here 
ravS'  v(f)dv  is  the  (rdpyavai  of  v.  708,  and  KoXvirrpav  is 
accusative  in  ai)|K)sition  to  the  sentence,  as  in  Ag.  218,  where 
wc  supply  X^yo)  with  dpmytiv. 


Tlie  Suppliants.  457 

979.  Kokapa  KoiKvova-av  ur  fxiveiv  epw,  is  confessedly  non- 
sense. The  first  word  is  corrected  to  Kau>pa,  rather  (I  think) 
Kavapa,  since  Herodotus  has  aj/wpoy  and  avapla.  "Aj/copa, 
as  less  usual  than  aapa,  might  get  corrupted.  Further, 
I  suggest,  Kavcopa  [ur  Ka\  \k(i)pa\  kwXvouct'  KcoXvovcra  era  p-eveiv 
epa :  that  is,  ipa  (0tXei)  Ko>\vov(ra,  "  she  loves  to  hinder  the 
Tinripe  from  abiding  safe." 

983.  For  pf]  nadtopeu  I  think  we  need  ^17  XaOupeff  ("  let 
us  not/orget "),  unless  a  whole  line  is  lost  after  8opi. 

F.  W.  N. 


THB  END. 


WKDOS:   VBISTED   BY    WltXIAM   Cr.OWRa   AND   SONS,    LIJIITED, 
SIAMFUKD   STIlEEr    AND   CHAIIISO   CUHSS. 


U^^ 


vNfi*^-^ 


yy^ 


^,  --'y 


^^t^ 


/ 


■(^>- 


V/»  -"^^    >--fe  


"'^y^/ 


o 


•H 
CO 


CO 

e 

CO  TJ 

H    0) 

o 

to 
a; 


cv; 
o  w  w 


University  of  Toronto 
Libr?.ry 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref.  Index  File" 
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


V    ^^ 


,.-</^-  /,<:
