Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, Three Books of Occult Philosophy (1651)
==========================================================================
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim (1486-1535). Three Books of Occult Philosophy (De occulta philosophia) — the great Renaissance synthesis of natural, celestial, and ceremonial magic; foundational for demonology and witchcraft theory. Text: the 1651 London English translation by J.F. Raw OCR via Internet Archive; library stamps and print artifacts removed. Public Domain.

x
¢

A-*

UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

ry
“a
a
‘
A’, /
4 j
| ‘ry

x
¢

A-*

UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

ry
“a
a
‘
A’, /
4 j
| ‘ry

Qa
| ‘
‘
LA
4 f
/ f /
A
aa
f /
y
| de ————
AXA

ve
res
hee,
at
—
‘
‘

ve
«
=»
“+
e
‘ >
‘
» .
~ d
o
he
q
2% “>
A
‘SS
»

Zp Hy}

Ey => -
«
. »
»
»
£5
iy
nxt

Gounfeller to Cc HAR LES the Fighy

enon of Germanys

—

—

‘Tranflated. out of the Latin intot

Englith Tongue, By

a
| | Bas
Pin’
ne.

5 a

va

ote

Pen,

and

a

j/
J
q ’ ‘
‘

Mak he three Books of Co

Ge Pew whoatI fhould.not name,
ny felf above All fee : ings

Like he Wolds eu, which makes me hs aire
I am usbody'd by thy Books, and Thee, 2

Or if pleafet a
Thy Elements do skreen my Soul
ny Self. by thy bri
And then refisme th’ Inclofuve, as was-

Now Iam Earth, 2 and now a Sia,

1 fpan the Heaven and

And
He Crowns my Soul with Fire, ae.
But like the Rain-bow in of mine.

Yet there'sa Law by whith difcompofe
The Afbes, and the felf dijclofe,
But in his Rill He.dash appears
They are bat which he {cat
Who fees thig Fire withouwhis His Bye
Thefe are the for which
Where th Texture me wan

Whiles th els Nights trac’d the flar;
But have My fleries, for which
Thy Book was then thrice-pil'd
Where breaks the Day of thy Divinitie 3
Heav'n ftates a Commerce here with ManShad Hi
But gratefull Hands to take, and Eyes to fee.
Hence you fond School-men, that bigh dee
And with no. Arguments but Noyfe
nochisig’ by Experiment;
{a3

bad
a
t 4
SA
—
Cy
J
t*
bad
he

“ied
en

—

ay

GAD KR |

Pins

“>? J
: r ~
A

An Encominm onthe three B

oft
hy

felfabove Ail

Like the which makes me fire:
I am wibody'd by thy Books, and Thee,”

And inthy P fe.
Thy Elements do skreen my Soul Wa ad ie

Now I am Earth, a and now a Sta, andthen:

I fpan the Heaven and art, and
And which is more, joy Natures w hchei
He Crowns my Soul with Fire, and there doch foine —

But like the Rain-bow in Cloud of mine.
Yet there'sa Law by whith I difc
The Afhes, the Fira

But in his Zasrald till Ee dash appear
Who fees thig Fire withounhis Mash; Hae
Muft needs be /ivallow'd by “the Light, and
Thefe are che for which
Glorious Agrippa, where thy Language pr,
here th Texture m mewanderfar,
hiles chigigh els Night; crae’d the
But I have thole Afyfleries, for which
y Book was more chen ote wlth Pitch,
ow anew beyond the Rays
| ¢ breaks the Day of thy Divinities
Heav'n ftates.a Commerce here with Man,
ut | Hands to take, and Eyes to fee.
Hence you fond School-men, that high triths deride, =2
ad with no Arguments but Noyfe
ou that.damn 42 bar what your Relves savent,
nd yet fad n by Experiment;
our Fate is writeen by an Hat
x

‘
wie “+
al
be
- be
y
x ‘
we
gs
one
P -
oo”
wer
tee
bs
bad ~
Pa
* ‘et

» >

i 4 ‘
we 4

ig
°

i
—_ |

ad

Thelife Frienry. Cor

thefe means famous for learning
gave his minde to wriririg,and c
cult Philefophy ; an: Invert
mation of the ‘uncertainryand vanicy

ings, inwh

he ceacheth that there is no certainty inany thing, but ing |

folidwords ‘of God: and thats: lie:-hid in the
Gods word ; ‘he wroteian Hiftory: of. the

nation of the Emperor Charis; and.alfo of.

thar he publithed commencarteson

dus Lully, and was much
fophy and Aftrology, there were thofe who thought thathe
enjoyed commerce with devils, whom. notwithitanding
confuted in his publithed Apology,

‘ ~ >

himfclf. within che bounds of Art, 1538, He wrote

»
o

d An | A =
we Door of ithe Laws.and Phy." ‘
| fick Matter of the Rolsand Jadge.of
‘hie Apirituall Courtsfrom his: youth he
ledge in all Arts aad Sciences; aftere
wards alfo the followed: the “Army of the. Pringes, and. for
his valor was created Knight-inthe Bield ; avhen hewas by
rms:..about rs 30. He
three/Books Of :
ve or Cynicall.decla-.
Te Jexe, OF the of

uet, urcered
¢ of Love; tht

the firltion Ban
Hernies Trifmegiftus,and of the and
God ; the third was to receivehis d
che fourthiefor the Lords’ of, when
thieic Advocate, Syndice and, Orator ;
Senateof Laxenburc,for the Lords of > Thefiztirto
falure che Prince and Bifhop thereof, written for the Lords of
 hetz she feventh to falace a noble man,written likewifefor
the Lords of the eighth fora certain kinfman oF ‘his,
at Pars whe ninth for the Criftiern
and Sweden, deliverédiat the coming “of
thie che tench at the Penerallof the Lady
Princefs.of Anfriaand Burgundy he wrote alfo.a Di-
logue contorning: and a —
opini6n concer 6ripinall finto the of Cyrem jah
Epiftle to Michael Arando Bithop Paul
plaint a calumay-not proved; Prinrédiae: $39.
and therefore: by:thefe. monomeats, publifhed,. “thename. of
for his variety of Learning-was famous, not.only.a- -
mongft the Gerinanes;- but alfo other ; for Afomus

wanreth Morifters:: amon - the divels,
_ ‘the king ofthellisangry with Alithegl + among{t Philo-

‘fophets Democrinns laughetly. at:all :thin gs, On the.

things:; is ignorant of al

things;and Arifotte chinketh he. knoweth all chings;.

med-contemneth ‘all things; this. Agrippa’ {pareth none; he

‘contemneth, knows, is ignorant, weeps, laughs; is,angryy

carps at all chings, being 4

a nis

¢

“
} ~y
A

and [ome that are perverfe Wilkcome to.
hear What I can whe by their rafbige
Seen the title, cry ont that I reach forbidden Arts, fowthefeedof
Herefies, offend pious ears, and {candalize--excellent
«that Lam aforcerer, and {uperftitious, and divellife; whaindeed
among ft learned men fignifie a forcerer, or one
ont, or divelifo, but a wife man, a pric, a prophets

were Magicianeles, therefore ed

the

of Clrift; and that Magicians , as wifemen,by the,w

evetsof the. world, knew Chrift she anther of che
and came fir ft of att to or bim ; andthat the namecof Mas
gicke was received by Phylofophérs, commended by Divinesaad

unacceptable Fo the Gofpel,. {upercilions |
cenfors Will object againft the Sybilt; Adagicians, and the

A

-Do not doubs but the Titleof our Book}
Occiit Philofophy ,or of Magick,amay by. - ar
| the. rarity of allure many to. readst; a-

Gal pel it elf fooner receive the name of Mupicki into favors
of acon|ciencious are they, that neither Apollo,#or all the Mufes,
por an Angel from Heaven can redeem me from their curfe.
therefore I advifé, that they read not our Writings , nor
‘underftand them nor remem ber them.F or they are pernicious and
full of poyfon; the gate of Acheron is in this book; it [peaks
bet them take heed that it beat not out their brains "But
that.come without prejudice to read it, sf you Lave fo much
“dileretion of pradence, as Bees have in gathering hony, read [e-
_ cnrely,and believe that foall no little profit,and wiuch
but. ‘jon find any things that may not

+ + prove of them, bit declare them to you; but donot refufe other

$, for they that look into the books of Phy fitians,do together
with antidotes and medicines, read-alfo I that

the

hate Writ many sparher hirmatrvely
‘Jott feemed needful that we foowla pals over fewer things
 ingthe judgements of Placonilts, and other Gentile Phalofophers
they did was ent of Writing ro or
iff any error. or uny thing bath
becomen-man, Tretratted thofe which’ Pditbeing a boy,
Sor the» maft pare: thasbook.

blame me'ag ‘Behold thon q
4 and now being old hi

‘for l %

ot
te
i
i
‘

f

Teitemins:
AMA

ect, and di

‘was carryed about im

in #2 France, Germany throug
ome men whether more impatiently, or kwoW wot,
ouldbbave put it thus smsperfett to the prefs Which

b my felf, shinking

cheif I being affelted, determined to ait
that there "vatehe be lefs danger if thefe boo

crime if
Alfowe added fomeC We ert
did feem anfis to pals the curious
underftand by theinequality of the-very phréfes
willing to.begin the work. andtounr
dont,” but vo. it, and put fomse' flours fo

thee;Curteous Reader, again, Weigh not
the prefent time of {etting

by

them, forth, but

Wikked
i
“~
Sy
a
is
‘
te
o
«

oR. P.D.~lobn ritemius.an Abbot.ot Saine.

Sfames in the Suburbs of Herbipals, Hemry Cornes

Hen was of late (moft reverend
Father) for a while converfant

with you in your Monaftery of
erb ip alts, We confe IT ed toget her
geen of divers things concerning Chy-.

fain fatal depravation of times, and men,many falfe

Z
P
f

\y

miftry,Magick; and Cabalie, and
Of other things, which.as yet lye
in flecret: Sciences, and Arts ‘and: then'there |
was one preat queftion amongft the reft, why Ma-
cick, whereas ic was accounted by all ancient Phi-
lofophers the chiefeft Science, &by the ancient wife
men, & Priefts was always had in great veneration, ~
ears came at laft after the beginning of the Catholike
_ Churchto be alwaies odious to,' and_fufpecéed by

_ the holy Fathers,and then exploded by Divines,and
').  e€ondemned by facred Canons, and- moreover by all

2 laws,and ordinances forbidden. Now the catife, as I
conceive is no other

the mo

hers cep in; anid slic Te

he ig tog ether throug Hi Various forts
of errors and faetions of Rel fons;
éd fuperfticions and dangero ites , many

tothe perfection nature, and deftructton of
and injury of God, fet forth’véry many wicked,aad’
~-untaw oks, fuch as we fee catryed about if
thefe dayes, to which they have by ftealth prefixed

t honeft name, and title of Magick.’ T a!
therefore by chis facred title of Magick, hoped ta
gain credit to theit curfed and detéitable fooleries.
Fence it is that this nate of Magitk, formetly

to good and honeft men, and accounted 2° Capitat
crime, if any one dare’ profefs hiinfelf to be

Magician, cicher in DoGrine ot works, unlefs Haply

 fome certain old doting woran, dwelling j inthe -
— Country, would be believed to be skilful, and have

norable, is now inthefe dayes becomé molt

power,thar(as faith fecdithrow

own the Heaven, lift up the carch, hardenfoun-

tains, wath away mountains, raifeup Ghofts,caft
down the Gods, urinate hel;

ords Firgilfings;

the chops even at her will,”
Womake the to groan, and trees

of

d

¥

“a

aT
a.
¢
}
’ ¢
Ww
‘
a
> Ped
d
en

f

Hence thofe.things, which Lucan relates-of Theffala.
. Magicianefs, and Homer of the omnipotency of
Girge, whereof many,Ico nfefs areas well of a fal-
Jacious opinion,as fuperititious diligence, & pernici-
ops labor,as when theycannotcome under a wicked.
» Art, yet they prefume they may be able to cloak.
themfelvesunder that venerable title. of Magick.
Sincethenthefe things are fo, I wondered much,,
and wasnotlefsangry, thatas yerthere hathbeen ij
go man, who did challenge this fublime and facred_
_ difcipline with the crime of impiety, or had deliver-_
edit purelyjand fincerely to us, fince I have feen of
@urmodern writers Roger Bacon, Robert an Englifh
gaan; Peter Apponts, Albertus the Teutonich, Arnol-
das devilla Nova, Anfelme the Parmenfian, Picatrix: —
the Spaniard, Cicclus Afculus of Florence, and many
others, but writers of an.obfcure name, when they
- promifed to treat of Magick, to do nothing but irra-
~~ "+ gionall toies, and fuperftitions unworthy of honeft
“men... Hence my. {pirit was moved, and by reafon
 partly-ofadmiration, and partly of indignation, 3
yvas willing to play the Philofopher, fuppofing that.
Ifhould do no difcommendable work,.who have
been always from my youthra curious,and undaunt-
ed fearcher of wonderfull full
myfteries, if Ithould recover that ancient,Ma-
gick the difcipline of all wife men from the errors.
of impiety , purifie and adorn’ it with its
per. luftre., and vindicate it: from the injuries of
_  Galumniators; whichthingthough Ilongdelibgra-
 tedof icin my mind, yet never durftas yet under-

xw

ony

A:
ets?
‘
x
«
gn
‘ sa

courage, and boldnefs into There feleGing
the opinions of Philofophers of known credit, and

thefe things ac Herbipolis, your tranfcending know-
ledge, and learning, and. your.ardent adhortation

purging che introduction of the wicked (who dif-

femblingly, with a counterfeited. knowledge: did - |
— teach, that traditions of Magicians muft. be learned
_ from very reprobate books of darknefs, as from in-

ftitutions of wonderfull operations) and removing

all darknefs, have at laft compofed three. compe

dious books of ‘Magick, and titled them Of occuls
Philofophy, being atitle lefs offenfive, whith books.
I fubmit (you-excelling in the. knowledge of thefe

things) to your correction.and cenfure,that if have

wrote any thing which may tend either to.che'con-
tumely of nature, offending God,orinjury of Religi- -

on,you may condemn the error; butdf the fcandal

of impiety be diffolved and purged, you may defend -
the tradition of truth; and that you would do fo

with thefe books,.and Magick it felf, that nothing

_may be concealed which may be profitable,and:no-

thing approved of which cannot but do hurt, by

which means thefe three books having pafled. your
examination with approbation, may at length be
thought worthy to come forth with good {uecefs
in publike, and may not be afraid to come under

_ the cenfure of pofterity. |

é.
ify
«
o
a
e
a
~ »
ai
bd
q
j

‘

he

“Hence thofe. things, w hich Lucan relates of Theffala.
that Magicianefs, and Homer of the omnipotency of

Circe, whereof many Ico nfefs areas well of a fal-

Jacious opinion,as fuperititious diligence, & pernici-
ops labor,as when theycannotcome under a wicked.
Ar, yet they. prefume they may be able to cloak.

themfelvesunder that venerable title. of Magick.
Sincethenthefe things are fo, I wondered much,.
and was not lefsangry, that as yet there hath been

goman, whodid challenge this fublime and facred.
difcipline with the crime of impiety, or had deliver-_
edit purely,and fincerely to us, fince I have feen of

-ourmodern writers Roger Bacon, Robert an Englifh.
gman; Peter _Apponus, Albertus the Teutonich, Arnol-
das devilla Nova, Anfelme the Parmenfian, Picatrix:

the Spaniard, Cicclus Afenlus of Florence, and many

others, but writers of an.ob{cure name, when they .
 promifed to treat of Magick, to do nothing but irra-
-- tlonall toies, and fuperftitions unworthy of honeft

“men... Hence my. {pirit was moved, and by reafon
partly of admiration, and partly of indignation,

was willing to play the Philofopher, fuppofing that,

[fhould do no difcommendable work,-who have.

a

wake, but after fome

been always from my youthra curious,and undaunt-.
ed fearcher of wonderfull effedts,and-operstions full
of myfteriess if Ifhould recover that ancient,Ma-
 gick the difcipline ofall wife’ men from the errors.
impiety , purifie. and adorn’ it with its pro-—
luftre., and vindicate it: from the injuries of
calumniators;. whichthing though I long delibgra-

tedof tin my mind, yet néver durft as yet under-- we
conference betwixt us

a

> ‘ ”
~ “+
‘ =
Gal
ae
r
ot
Age
an
‘ Os ing

put courage, and boldnefs into me. There.felecting

thefe things ac Herbi polis, your tranfcending know-
ledge, and learning, and. yourardent adhortation

the opinions of Philofophers of known credit, and
purging the introduction of the wicked (who dif-

femblingly, with a counterfeited. knowledge: did

teach, that traditions of Magicians muft. be learned

from very reprobate books of darknefs, as from in-

ftitutions of wonderfull operations) ane

all darknefs, have at laft compofed three. compen-
dious books of “Magick, and titled them Of Occuls
Philofophy, being atitle lefs offenfive, which books.

I fubmit (you excelling in the knowledge of thefe

things) to your correction and cenfute,that if have

wrote any thing which may tend either to.the'con-

tumely of nature, offending God,orinjury-of Religic -

on,you may condemn the error; butdf the fcandal

of impiety be diffolved and purged,you may defend -
the tradition of truth; andthat you would do fo

with thefe books,. and Magick it felf, that nothing

_ may be concealed which may be profitable,and:no-

thing: approved of which cannot but do hurt, by
which means thefe three books having pafled your
examination with approbation, may at length be
thought worthy to come forth with good fuecefs
in publike, and may not be afraid to come under

the cenfure of pofterity. | 3
Farewell, and pardon thefe my bold undertakings.

«

—
a
ad

ee which you bave fent by this bearer,to
mwetobe examined, with bow much
pleafure 1 received it, no mortall
tongive can ever expre{s, nor the pen —
ofany write; lwoundred at your more
then axning, That youbeing fo yong fhould pe-
fuch fecrets as have beenhide from moft
learned men,and not only cleerly, and truly, but alfo proe
 perly, and elegantly fet them forth. Whence firftt
giveyou thanks for your good willto me, andif 1 [ball
ever beable, 1 {hall return youthanks to the utmoft of my
power, Your work, which no learned-man can fuffiscient-
bycommend, 1 approve of. Novwthat yon may proceed
toward higher things, as-you have begun, and not fuffer
 fuchexcellent parts of wit tobeidle, 1 do with as much
asl can advife, intreat, and befeech you, that
yon mould exercife your felf in laboring after better —
things, and the light of true wifdom to the ,
ignorant ,according as you your felf are divinely enlicht- _
ped ; neither let the confideration of idle vain fellows ©

withdraw yon from your pur pofes fay.of them,.of whom

®

Tritemius, Abbot of Saint Fames of Herbip
ae.
ormcr § his Henr Cornelius
4 A 0 ettef-heym, heakh and love
oF
Fz
be
i

it [aid , The wearyed Ox treads hard, Whereas no man,
tothe of the wife, canbe tralylearned, whois
fuorn tothe rudiments of ontonly faculty, Butgoahath
“God gifted with a large, and fublime wit, mot that
jmitate Oxen, but birds, neither think it foffiels
ent that you flay about particulars, but bend your mindy: - -
confidently to univerfals, for by meuch the mort
ed any one thought, by bow much fewer things ht gigs.
norant of. Moreover your wit w fully aptto all things, —

and to be rationally employed, not in afew, orlowthings, ~~ |
but many, and [ublimer. Tet this one rule 1 advife you to
obferve, that you communicate vulgar fecrets tovulgar’.
friends, but higher and fecret to higher, and fecree = *
friends only. Give Hey to an Ox, Sugartod Parres om-
ly , underftand my meaning, leaft you be trod under the

Oxens feet, asoftentimes it fals ont. Farewell’ my hap-

py friend, and if it lye im my power to ferveyon, com-

mand me, and according toyour pleafure it fhallwithous

delay be done, alfo let onr friend{bip inereafe daily

write often to me, and fend me fome of your Fear-
neftly prayyon. Againfarewell,

“

From our Mona ftery of Peapolit,
the $. day of April, An. M.D.X. 3

te
«
a

y

e
i

o the Revernd Father in Chrift, and moft
Illuftrious Prince, Hermannus, Eatl of Wyda, by
., the Grace of God Archbifhop of the holy
... Churchof Cologia, Prince Elector of the holy
Romane Empire, and Chief Chancellor through
Italy; Duke of Weftphalia, and Angaria, and.de-—
_ + fcended of the Legate.of the holy Church of
‘Rome, -one.of the Vicar Generals.Court, Henry
s Agrippa of Nette{-heym, fendeth gree-
isthe greatnefs of your
Jog nowned fame (moft reverend,
and Iluftrious Prince) fuch is
SZAg, the greatnels of your vertugs,
and {plender of learning, and
rcife of the beft learning, and
grave oration, with folid prudence, and cle-
gant readines of {peaking,knowledgeofma-
things,conftant Religion and cor

Z frequent ex

commend-

Fix

‘wg
»

able conditions, with which you areendow-
-edbeyond the common

fay nothing of thofe! ancient monuments of, .

your eminent nobility, thetreafuresof your

riches,both old,;andinew,the largnefsofyour,

dominion, the ornaments of thefacreddige
nities, with the excellency wheteof-you'ext.

eel, together with the comely. form, .andi
-ftrength of the thefe things,
bevery great,yet lie em._youfar greater chem
all thele, for thofé your Heroick,-and -fiiper-)
illuftrious vertues, -by which you. truly have

caufed, that byhow muchhe mére. any one;

‘isilearned,& loves vertue, fo mychthe more,

he may defire to infinuate hitfelfirito your,
fayor, whencelaHo.amrefolvedthat your
favor fhall be obtained. by ane}, “but after
‘the'manner of the people of Parthia;i.t, - nos
without a prefent, which cuftomoffaluting
Princes, indeed derived from the'Agesof

we fee it obferved. . And when I. {ee certain.
| other, very. learned men to furnifh you with
fair, and great prefents’of their learning

fh ould be ainegleéter, of your worfhip

and...

ll

a

‘

and reverence! durft not app

ly my felf ith.
empty hands to your greatnefs. Now being

| ‘thoughtful! and looking in my
+) ftudy to fee what prefent 1 fhould beftow
upon fuch an i}luftrious Prince, behold! a-

_. mongft fuch things are were clofely laid up,

the books Of Occult Philofophy,or of Magick,pre=

fently offered themfelves, fuch as | accempted

thetnshave neglected to perfect them ; I

es of my ‘yout the aathoti> -

to write while | was very yong, and now |
being paft, were forgetting

fently made haftas it were to pay my vows,
to prefenethen? to your horior to compleae
them. ‘Truly was perfwaded thach could
give nothing more acceptable to you, then-a
wotk of thoft ancient and abfleufe
-Tearning; | fay a Work of my youth.
buta doctrine of antiquity, by none da

faythitherto atteipted ro be reftored: Yee
worthy of you, bur that. might
tiakea way open for gaitr your fiver,
Dbefeech you, if it may-Be; let dheni Be
fed by: yous! fhall be devotedly -youts.if thefe -

4 »
¢
a
a 4
we
“J
nd
A
«

cue

ty of ee greatnels come into knowledge ‘
envy being chafed away by the power’ o

your worthinefs, there remain the memo- —--

ty of them to me , as the fruitof agood —

con{cience , fecing many...thingsminsthem,

feemed to me, being olderas

fo moft neceflary to be knovin

therefore the. work, not only-of my Youth)
but of my prefent Age,

many Errataes.of the work. .of..my.youth, 1

have inferted many thingsin matyplaces,.

and have added things to manyChap-
ters, ‘which may: eafily be peteéived bythe
inequality: of the ;“and: you
know that I fhallall-my life be. devoted to
your moft happy Prince:

a

Mechlinia, Anno M.D. XXX

x
d
o
«

Judicios Reader !

Aut she former without the latter
Out an empty ; with this am
lone are [atufied. To have abure
Diety, to apprehend (ome mo-
tions of the Celeffials, together with the
Common per ations thereof, ahd con-
| of err offial pr "pr isbut whut ts {uperficiall,
Dhy : to ander the my fterions influences of the intelettwall
the Celeffial,, und of beth upon ithe Terveftiall and
receive thufe whereby by we may, be chabled
erful’ thi bh inbberd ble, or
tural power and Wit either. offe to God, or
Keli igton. end Kingdoms, to difcover~
of men, to overcome enemies, to rede
riches, to procure the favor of men, to expel dif to
health, to a ig life, toreneW youth, to foretell future events,

done any miles off, ana {uch like as
ertor's pay {ebm things incredi-
Yet read but thee thon fralt [ee the

poffibility thereof confirmed by reafon, and example. I.

[peak.now tothe judicions , for as for ethers, they neither know,

nor believe, nor will know any thing, but What is vulgar, nay

they think, that beyond this there an) thing knowable;
When as indeed there are profonnd myfteries m all "being 5, even

from Godin the higheft heavens ,to thedivels im: the lobvef bell ;

 Yeain very numbers, names, letters, time,

J
AP
a
“;
+ t
t >
id
we
at
r
ff
1d

‘ ‘

foundly difcnffed. I cannot deny but in Work therey
fuperftition, and vanity comember that the hep
Gold wonjt have the greateft allomunce;canfidtr the time af dark:
which he hath difcovered.and wrote, andthe wit rather admire
bis folidity,then condemn his vanity: Gold hath auch blackusls ~
adhearing toit affoon asit 1. taken out of the ¢anth, Adgfteriaus
truths not. prefégtly foine like rayes of the Sunafjoon ak they |
are recovered from a long darkne/s, but. are clouded With -
obfcurity. Nay Iwill not fay but this Agrippa might
obfcure thefe myfteries like an Hermeticall Philofopher,
on.purpofe.that only the fons of under ftand them. He
perhaps might mix chaffe With his Wheat, that qwick-jighted
birds only might find it out, and not {Wine trample it underfoot. eee
From faying much as tonchingthe excufing, or commending.
this eAuthor,I amalreaay prevented; For at the beginning and
ending of this book thereare feveral Epiftles of bis dwuto atbert,
wherein he excufeth what may be: exceptedagainft him ;
others to him {ufficiently commending what praife Werthyi
bim;to which may be aaded tbat honorable teftismony givien.to bite
by the author of that moft
Theo-magica, /ately fet forth. that I fhall [ay to perfwade
theeto read this book but to defire thee tocaft thine eyeupan
the Index of the Chapters contained therein, whi¢hiss
thereof : and thou fhalt therein [ee uch variety of wonderful
that at the fight thereof thou Wilt be impatient till thon haft
readthem. I fhal crave leave now to {peak one Word-for my *

Self. Ff tranflation foall neither anfYwer the worth of the
Author,or expettation of the reader ;confider that the gnquothne(s i
the Anthors ftile in many paces, the manifold Errata’s, as
literall,as thofeanrefpett of Grammatical conftruttion,may

happily occafion [ome miftakés in this my tranflation.Tet nowithe-.
ftanding I hope Ihave,though withont much elegancy (whith in-

the matter.would not bear) put it into as intelligible an Ens
gh phrafe as the orgsnal would afford. As for the terms of art,
which are many, divers of them Would not bear amy Englifoex-

preffion,therefore J have expreffed thems orGrecifms,

ace .
~ ~ a

if
* e

thew ‘As I cnrforily read over the
book, 1 obferved thefe asyoufee mentioned, If thow foalt'\ meet
with any more, as it is “(ible thon mayft, be thon cdndidyand im-
thems to the Printers miftake; for  Whichyas alfo for taking in
beft fenfe, what ere thee foals for ever

86.1 37-4. Storax. p Tape r. edvfles. ts.r-piace.p.146. 1.7 ghr fort

7§- £298. p} 251. ¢4 p- 251. lec 35+ 98. p

260.4. ATE. P 264-4. p- 304. 1. 26 4 906, 1.7.©. feat.’ p 316. 4. de.

10.4, genii, p.340, 1.26, ter portraiting even inbnetly,t. penetrating even tothe Very
Covanns, p. 404.11, world. p. 16, unite us. p. 437, 1.17. bloront an.
437. 1. 29. ope, the.. p- 445, 1. 8, writ. » 455. 1.30
at | ~ »

a4
v-f
“$3
¥
i
¥
a
a>
x
get
q
bs >

To my * and no els learned

Friend, Robert Childe, Doctor of Phyfick. _

Great men decline ‘migh-
RAED ty men fall, but an ho-
neft Philolopher. keeps his
Station: for ever. To yourfelf
G therefore I crave leave, to. pre-
fent, what | know-you are a-

ble to proteét.not with.{word, but byreafon;

you are able to give alufire'to. fee ic is mot
in vain that you have compafted Sea and
Land, for thereby you have madeia Profe-

lyte, notof another, but of your felf, by be-

ing converted from vulgar, and irracional

incredulities’ to the rational embracing

omagicalk: You « are ‘skilled in
the one as. if Hermes had been your

have nigh in che other a

not that oaly,but what by your accepranee

‘

your Mafter.Many tran{marinePhilofophers, |
which we only read, you have ‘converfed |
with : many Countries,rarities and antiqui-
ties, which we have only heard of, and ad-
mire,you havefeen. Nay you have not only
heard of, but feen,not in Maps, but in Rome
it felf the manners of Rome. ‘There you have
feen much Ceremony, and little Religion’,
-and in the New England, you

have feen amongft fome,much Religion,and

little Ceremony ; and amongft others, |
«mean ithe Natives thereof, neither Cere-
mony, nor Religion , but what nature di-
tates to them. Inthis there is no fmall vari-

ety, and your obfervation not little. In your
paflage thither by Sea; you have feen the
wonders of God in the Deep, and by Land:

‘> a you have feen the aftonifhing works of God -

am the unaccefsible Mountains. You have left
af no ftone unturned, that the turning thereof

might conduce tothe difcovery of what

Was Occult,and worthy to be known. It is. @

part of my ambitiontto let the world know. ~
that T honor fuch asyyour felf, learned

& your experienced fellow-traveller,

Doctor Charlet, who have, like true Philofo-

Le

phers neglected your worldly advantagesto
become matters of that which hath now
rendred you both truly honorable. If | had
as many languages as your felves , the rhe-
toricall and patheticall exprefsions theteof ,
would fail to fignifie my eftimation of,and
affeétions towards you both. Now Sir! as
in reference to this my tranflation, if your —

judgement fhall ‘finde a deficiency therein,
let your candor make a fupply thereof. Ler)
this Treatife of Occult Philofophy.coming

as a {tranger amongft the Englifh, be patro-~*
nized by you ,:remembring that you your,
felf was once a ftranger in the Country of its _
Nativity. This ftranger I have dreffed in

an Englifh garb, but if it be not according
tothe fafhion, and therefore ungrateful to
any;let your approbation make itthe mode;.

you knowltrangers moft commonly induce

a fafhion,efpecially if any once toap-

prove of their habit. Your approbation is

that which it will ftand in need of, and: =

which will render me, Se
S I R,
Mokt obligedly yours,

™

rr
e
we
°
“*
z
bed
‘

™
‘wre
‘
vse + ~
a
«

P Ragmatick Schoolmen, men madeupof pride,
And rayling Arguments, who truth deride,
And feorn all elfe but what your elves devife,
think thefe high-learned Tracts to be but lies,
Do wot prefume, wnle(s with hallowed hand

Totonchthefe books whe withthe world hall ands,

J
‘
»
¢
At
t -

o-

w
ay

as

a

»

“a

Three Books of Occult Philofophy OF
Magick , Written by that FamousMan

Henry Cornelius eA srippaKnight, 3

And Doétor of both Laws, Counfellort to a
Cafars Sacred Majefty, and Judge of the

B O O K I.
CHAP. L
How Magicians Collett vertues from the t

Y Wig SS SVS GEcing there is a three-fold World, Ble
inferior is governe its fuperi-: -
he the influence of che:
yy vertues thereof, fo that the very original,
and chief Worker ofali dothby Angels,

Wy SS

Plants; Metals, and Scones convey from’

cu
oS

 @eliverinthefe three Books : Whereof the firft contatnsnatu-
“gall Magick, the fecond Celeftiall, and che third
= Burl know not whether it be an unpardonable prefumption”
fhe, that J, a man of fo little judgement and
very youth fo confidently fet upon a bufinets fo difficult,

 fo hard, and intricate as this is. Wherefore, whatfoever things
fpave here already, and fhall afterward be faid by me, I would.

4¢mplation of moft fecret things, together With’ the nature,
“power, quality, fabftance, and yertues thereof, as: alfo

fervice he made,and created all thefe things Wife men con-.

whence aff things are, and proceed ; and alfoto
~s*-<. ~. enjoy not only thefe vertues, which aré already inthe more ex-

according to the'rales of Aftrologers, and the doGtrines of

Mathematicians, joyning the Celeftiall vertuesto theformer:

‘Moreover, they ratifie and confirm all chefe with the powers of
o>. divers Intelligencies, through the facred Ceremonies of Reli-

>. therthen they |
and the Congregation of the Faithfull.«

a7

~eéive it no way irrationall that it fhould be poffible forus to

(cend by the {ame degrees through each World, to the-fame- .
Worlditfelf, the Maker of alkthings, and ficit

‘cellent kind of things, but alfo befidesthefe, to draw newer

Sguesfrom above. Hence ic is that they feck afrerthe vertucs of
“the Elementary world, through the help of Phylick,

-turall Philofophy inthe various mixtions: Of? Natérall ‘things,

then-of the Celeftiall world in the Rayes,and influences there-

Tbe orderand procefs of all thefe I (halt endeavor to

haveany one affenttothem, nor fhall I my felf, any-fur-
all be approved of by che Univerfall Charch, —

| »

Pry

Ach >

hat Ma ts, what are the Parts thereof, wid how the Pro
féffors thereof muft be qualified, |

Agick isa faculty of wonderfull vertue fall;
L¥.Ahigh myfteries, containing the moftproto

oft
mot

the
know- is

be
¥ M
i
»
a 7 4
«
a
bad
—
an,
a
fx
ge
j
ty

Whence Earth. quakes are, Why: the whalt Ocean beats.

Paws -

of nature , it inftrn® us concen
ing the differing, and agreement of things amongft themfelyes,
_ whence it produceth its wonderfull effeéts, by uniting théver-~" =
tues of things:through the application of them oneto theo.

ther, and to their inferior futable fubjefts, Joynin ung and knit-
ting ‘them together throughly by the powefs, and vertuesof
the fuperior Bodies, This is the moft perfeét,and chiefScience,
that facred,and fublimer kind of Phylofophy , andlaftiythe
moft abfolute perfe@tion of all moft Philofophy.For
feeing that all conve Philofophy is divided into Naturall,
‘Mathematicall,and Theological: (Natural Philofophy teach-
eth the nature of thofe things which aresin.the world,
fearching and enquiring into their Caufes Fini Pees,

Falhions, Events, their Whole, and Parts, allio
T he ana the Nature of thofe things, 3

(aa Elements, what Fire, EarthyeAire forth

the Heavens their beginnings bad} .--

Whence T ide, whence Rainbow tn gay colours. clad.
What makes the Clouds that gathered are, ana back Me
To fend forth Lightnings, and a Thundring cracks
What doth the Nightly Flimes, and Comets make;
What makes the to {well, and then to
What is the feed of Metals, and of Gold.
What Vertues, Wealth, doth Natures offer

All thefe things doth natural Philofophy, na-
ture contain , us to Virgil's Mu‘e,

Mew Beaft, whence Fire, whence Sn ny

Over his Banks, andthen again.retreats.cc:
Whence ftrength of Hearbs;whence Courage, rage ef

Mathematical Philofophy te

4 > a.

4 ‘
—

e

What makes the Nights fo long ere they be paft

~~ quantity of natural Bodies, as extended into three dimenf-
as to conceive of the motion, and courfe of Celeftiall

As ig great
What makes the golden Stars to march fo faft ;

makes the Moon fometimes to mask her face,
The Sun alfo 3 if dif grace.

Andas Virgil fings,

How th Sun doth rule with twelve Zodiack Signs,
Orb thats meafur'd round about with Lines,
- It doth the Heavens Starry way make known,
eAnd ftrange Eclipfes of the Sun,and Moon.
alfo , and the Stars of Rain, —
Lhefeaven Stars likewife,and Charles bis Wain,
Winter Suns make tow'rds the Weft fo faft;

Allwhich ate underftood by Mathematicall Philofophy.

ng Hence by the Heavens we may foreknow  -

The feafons all ; times for to reap and fow,
And when’ tis fit to launch into the deep, —
end when to War, and When in peace to fleep,
And when to dig up Trees, and them again
| Lofet; that fo they may bring forth amain,
Now Theologicall Philofophy, or Divinity, teacheth what
God is, what the Mind, what an Intelligence, what an Angel, -.
what a Divell, what the Soul, what Religion, what facred In- —
ftitations, Rices, Temples, Obfervations, and facred Myfteries.

are: It inftructs us alfo concerning Faith, Miracles,the vertues

Figures , the fecret operations and: myfteriesof :
Seals, and as Apuleius faith, it teacheth us.rightly to under-
ftand, and to be skilled in the Ceremonial! Laws, the equity of

_ 2 Holy things, and tule of Religions. Burto recolle& my

—
e
a) ~
¥4
”
¢
> A.
+e
CG
a
ag,
Je.

—_—

Book OF Occult Philofophy.

thefe three principal faculties Natural Magick comprehends,

unites, and aCtuates defervedly therefore was it by the Anci-
ents efteemed as the highelt, and moft facred Philofophy, Te

was, as we find, brought to light by moft fage Authours,, and-
moft famous Writers; amongft which principally Zamolx2—

and Zoroajter were fo famous, that many believed they were
the.inventers of this Science. Their track Abbaru the Hyper-

borean, Charmondas, Damigeron, Endoxus, Hermippus follow.
ed : there were alfo other eminent, choice men, as AZercurins

Tre{megiftus, Porphyrius, lamblicus, Plotinus, Proclus, Dar= |

danus, Orpheus the Thracian, Gog the Grecian, Germa the Ba-

bilonian, Apollonius of Tyana, Ofthanes allo wrote excellently

inthis Art; whofe Books being as it were loft, Democritus of
Abdera recovered, and fet forth with his own Commentaries.
Befides Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and many
other renownedPhilofophers travelled far bySea to learn this
‘Art : and being returned, publifhed ict with wonderfull de-
voutnefs, efteeming ofit as a great fecret. Alfo it is welf known
that Pythagoras ,and Plato went to the Prophets of Memphis
to learn it, and travelled through almoft all Syria, Egypt, Ju-

dea, and the Schools of the Caldeans, that they might norbe’ .
ignorant of the moft facred Memorials, and Records af Ma-~ &
gick, asalfo that they might be furnifhed wich Divine things.-

 Whofoever therefore is defirous to ftudy in this Faculty, ifhe

be not skilled in natural! Philofophy, wherein are difcovered ~

the qualities of things, and in which are found the occulr pro-
- perties of every Being, and ifhe be noc skilfull in the Mathe-
maticks , and in the Afpects, and Figures of che Stars, upon

which. depends the fublime vertue, and property of sey

thing; and if he be not learned in Theologie, wherein are.

manifefted thofe immaterial fubftances, which difpence, and
minifter all things , he cannot be poffibly able to underftand
the rationality of Magick. For there is no work that is done

_.. by meer Magick, nor any work thac is meerly Magical, that '

doth not ¢omprehend thefe three Faculties.

» -

‘
™
ra

—

CHAP, IIL
of the four Elements, qualities, and mutnall mixtions,

Here are four Elements, and originall grounds of all cor-
poreall things, Fire, Earth, VVater, Aire, of whichall |
¢lementated inferiour bodies are compounded ; not by way
of heaping them up together, but by tranfmutation,and union;
| and when they are deftroyed, they are refolved into Elements,
~~  Forthere is none of the fenfible Elements that is pure,but they
» ' are more or lefs mixed, and apt to be changed one into the
other; Even as Earth becoming dirty, and being diffolved,
- -becomes Water,.and the fame being made thick and hard, be-
- come Earth again ; but being evaporated through heat, paffeth
into Aire, and that being kindled, paflethinto Fire , and this
= béing extinguifhed , returns back again into Airc , but being
™ __ cooled again after its burning, becomes Earth, or Srone, or .
$ulphur, and this is manifelted by Lightening : Pato alfowas
that opinion, that Earth was whollychangeable,and that the
of the Elements are changed, as into this, fo into oneano-
>. ther fuceeffively, Bur tt isthe opinion of che fubriller fort of
-..__._. *Philofophers, that Earth is not changed, but relented and mix-
ed with other Elements, whichdo diffolve it, and thatitre-
me turns back into it felf again. Now every one of the Elements
two fpecificall qualities, the former whereof it retainsas-
proper-to it felf, in the other, as a mean, it agrees with that

comes next after it. For Fire ishor and dry, the Barth

dry and the VVater cold and moift, the Aire moiftand
| hots And fo.after this manner the Elements,according totwo
qualities, are contrary one to the orher, as Fire to

VVater,.and Earth to Aire. Moreover,the Elements are upon
another account oppofite one to the other : Forfome are
heavy, as Earth and VVater, and others are light, as Aire and

Fire. VVherefore the Stoicks called the former paflives., ‘but
the latter aGtives. And yet once again Plato’ diltinguifherh:

; ‘
« 3
a
ned
D4
e
ge
«
i
r
AG;

Of Occult Philofophys —

Book TI.
three qualities, viz, tothe Fire brightnels, thinnefs, and mo.
tion, but to the Earth darknefs, thicknefs and quietnels, And

according to thefe qualities the Elements of Fire and Earth are

contrary. But the ocher Elements borrow their qualities from

_ thefe, fo that the Aire receives two qualities of the Fire, thin-
nefs and motion; and one of the Earth, viz, darknefs, In
like manner Water receives two qualities of the Easth, dark-

_nefs and thicknefs, and one of Fire, viz. motion. But Fire is.

twice more thin then Aire, thrice more moveable, and four
times more bright : and the Aire is twice more bright, thrice
more thin,and four times more moveable then Water. Where-
fore Water is twice more bright then Earth,thrice more thin,

and fotir times more moveable. As therefore the Fire is tothe
Aire, fo Aire tothe Water, and WatertotheEarth; anda-

gain, asthe Earthis to the VVater, fothe V Vater to the Aire,

and the Aire tothe Fire, And this is the root and foundation — ae

of all bodies, natures, vertues, and wonderfull works; and he
which fhall_know thefe qualities of the Elements, and their
mixtions, (half eafily bring to pafs fuch things that are won-
derfull, and aftonifhing; and fhalfbe perfect in Magick,

a
—-

Of athree:fold confiderarion of the Elements.

F ] ‘Here are then, as we have faid, four Elements,without the

perfect knowledge whereof we can effe& nothing in Ma-
gick. Now each of them is three-fold, that fo the number of
four may make np the’ number of twelve pafling by
the number of feven into the number of ten, there may be a

progrefs tothe fupream Unity , upon which all vertue and
wonderfull operation depends. Of the firlt Order are the

pure Elements, which are neither compounded nor changed,
‘Ror admic. of mixtion, but are incorruptible , and not of

which, but through which the vertues of all natural! things afe ©
brought forth into No man is able to declare their vertues,

cu
¢

SS

“y
- y -
x
a.
a”
a
"hd
f
“Tr
AZ

Of Occult Philofophy: Book Ff.
becaufe they can do all things upon all things. He which is ig-
‘norant of thefe, thall never be able to bring to pafs any won-
derfull ‘matter. .Of the fecond Order are Elements that are

compounded, changeable,and impure,yet fuch as may by art be
reduced to their pure fimplicity, whofe vertue, when chey are
‘thus reduced to their fimplicity, doth above all things perfect
ae all occule, and common operations of nature : and thefe are
2 ‘the foundation of the whole naturall Magick. Of thethird «4
‘Order are thofe Elements, which originally and of themfelves “%
not Elements, but are twice compounded, various,and
changeable one into the other. They arethe infallible AZeds-

«am, and therefore are called the middle nature, or Soul of the

» “middie natore: Very few there are that underftand the deep
‘myfteries thereof. In them is, by means of certain numbers,
degrees, and orders, the perfection of every effect in what
‘thing foever, whether Naturall, Celeftiall, or Superceleftiall ;
‘they are full of wonders, and myfteries, and are operative, as
_ an Magick Natural! , fo Divine : For from thefe, through.
them,proceed the bindings, loofings, and tranfmutations of all
“things, the knowing and foretelling of things to come, alfo.
_ the driving forth of evill, and the gaining of good fpirits. Let
-..- oman therefore, without thefe three forts of Elements, and
the knowledge thereof, be confident that he is able to work
any thing in the occult Sciences of Magick,and Nature. But.
~ whofoever fhall know how to.reduce thofe ofone Order, into
_ thofe of another, impure into pure, compounded into fimple,
and fhall know how to underftand diftin@ly the nature, ver-
tue, and power of them in number, degrees, and order, with-
| out dividing the fubftance, he fhall-eafily atcain tothe know-
ge ard perfect operation of all Nacurall things, and Cele.

f
r.
he
{
ats
he
~s
ha
ce
jor
—
oy 4
NS .
b
¢
J
yr
‘
ha
A
a?
aka
KS
vay

Occult

Of the wonderfull Natures of Fire, and Earth.

are two things ( faith Hermes) viz. Fire ang
Earth ,which are fufficient for the operation of all won-

der full things : the former ts active, the latter paffive. Fire (a¢
&. — faith Dionyfus) inall things, and through all things, come
FP and goes away bright, ic is in all things bright, and
at the fame time occult, and unknown; When it isby)
it felf (no other matter coming to it, in which it fhould
manifeft its proper action ) it is boundlefs, and invifible, of it
felf fufficient for every a&ion that is proper toit, moveable, |.
yielding it felf after a maner to all things thatcome next roit,
renewing guarding nature, enlightening , notcomprehend=-
ed by lights chat are vailed over, clear, parted, leaping back,
bending upwards, quickin motion, high, alwayes raifing mo-
~ tions, comprehending another, not Comprehended ic felf |.
not ftanding in need of another, fecretly increafing of it felf, |
and manifefting its greatnefs tothings that receiveic, Active, ?
Powerfull, Invifibly prefent in all things at once; icwillnot 2%
affronted or oppofed, but as it were in a way of revenge,it /- -
~-will reduce on a fudden things into obedience to itfelf, incom:
prehenfible, impalpable;not leflened, moft rich in all.difpenfa-
tions of it felf. Fire (as faith Pliny) is the boundlets, and
“mifchievous part of the nature of things, it being a queftion
whether it deftroys, or producech molt things, Pire it felf is
one, and penetrates through all things (as fay the. Pythago- |
rians) alfo fpread abroad in the Heavens, and fhining: butin
the infernal! place ftreightened, dark, and cormenting, in the
mid way it partakes-of both. Fire therefore in it felf is one,
but in that which receives it, manifold, and in differing fub- Se
“je@ts itis diftribured ina different manner, as Cleanthes wit-
neffeth in Cicero, That fire then which we ufe is fetched outof | =. =
other things. Itis inftones,and is fetched out by theftrokeof
the fteele: it isin Earth, and makes that, after digging upyto. |
fmoake it is in Water, and heats fprings, and wells: it is

é

° Sa
Ne
a

/~ .y depth of the Sea, and makes that ,being tofled with winds,
| _ | warm: icisinthe Aire, and makes it (as we oftentimes fee)
burn. Andail Animals, and living things whatfoever, as
_ | alfo all Vegetables are preferved by heat : and every thing
~' — \ that lives, lives by reafon of the inclofed heat. The proper-

| thes of the Fire that is above, are heat, making all things Fruic-

'-. | full, and light, giving life to all things. The properties, of
es the inférnall Fire are a parching heat, confuming all things,
a and darknefs, making all things barren. The Celeftiall, and
im .._} bright Fire drives away fpirits of darknefs ; alfo this our Fire
1 Ga LF Aha made with VVood drives away the fame, in as much asithath ©
an Analogy with, and is the vebiculum of that Superior light ;

alfo of him, who faith, Jam the Light of the World,which is
true Fire, the Father of lights, from. whom every good

| thing that is given,Comes ; fending forth the light of his Fire, —
- ** | and communicating it firft to the Sun, and the reft of the Ce-
Ieftiall bodies, and by thefe, as by
3 -veying that light into our Fire. As therefore the fpirits of
darknefs are {tronger in the dark: fo good fpirits, which are
Angels of Light, are augmented, not only by that light, which ~
= . . is Divine,of the Sun,and Celeftiall, but alfo by the light of our
common Fire. Hence it was that the firlt, and molt wife infti-
. tutors of Religions,and Ceremonies ordained, that Prayers,

Singings, and.all manner of Divine Worthips whatfoever
fhould-not be performed without lighted Candles,or
| (Hence alfo was that fignificant faying of Pythagoras. Do not
{peak of God without aLight) and they commanded that for

_ the driving away of wicked fpirits, Lights and Fires thouldbe.

he 4

| kindled by the Corpfes of the dead, and that they fhonld.not
be removed, untill the expiations were after a Holy manner
performed,andthey buried. And the great Fehovah himfelfin
! the old Law Commanded that all his Sacrifices fhould be offer-
ed with Fire, and chat Fire fhould always be|burning upon
Altar, which Cuftome the Priefts of che Altardid ‘always:
and: keep amongft the Romanes. Now the Bafis,
foundation of,ajlthe Blements,is che Earth, for that is the
fobjet, and xeceptacle ‘of all Celeftiall rayes, and

ur

¥

e
a
nf
«3

influencies; init are contained the feeds,and Seminall vertues)
of all things; and therefore itis faid to be Animall, Vege.

table, and Minerall. It being made frnitfull by the other Ele-'

ments, and the Heavens, brings forth all things ofit felf; Ic res’
ceives the abundance of ali things, and is, asitwere the firkt
fountain,from whence all things f{pring, it is the Center,foun-
dation, and mother of all things. Take as much of it as you
pleate, feperated, wafhed, depurated, fubtilized, if you fevit
Jye inthe open Aire a little while, it will, being full, anda.
bounding with Heavenly vertues, of it felfbring forthPlants, = 8 © ©
Worms, and other living things, alfo Stones, and bright fparks | :
of Metals. Jn it are great fecrets, ifatany timé itthallbe |
purified by the help of Fire, and reduced unto its fimplicity |
by a convenient wafhing. Ie is the firft matter of our |
Creation, and the trueft Medicine thatcan reftore , and pre-

ferve us.

CHAP. Vi.

Of the wonderfull Natures of Water, Aire, and Winds. roe

r-~He other two Elements, viz. Water, and Aire are not | ~
A lefs dope then the former ; neither is nature want- |
ing to work wonderfull things in. them. There is fo great a |
neceflity of Water, that without it no living thing can five. |
No Hearb, nor Plant whatfoever, without the moiftening of
Water can branch forth. In: it isthe Seminary vertue of all) _
things, efpecially of Animals, whofe feed is manifeltly wate. |
rith. The feeds-alfo of Trees, and Plants, ‘although’ they are
earthy, muft notwithftanding of neceflity be rotted-in' Water,
before they can be fruitfull ; whether they be imbibed with |
the moifture of the Earth;or with Dew, or Rain, orany other
Water that is on purpofepurto them: For Adofes writes,that
only Earthy and Water bring forth a diving foul.» But he af- ~
cribes a twofold produétion of things to Water,ese, of things
 fwimming inthe VVaters, and of things flying .in

right
»
¥

q

= »
ye
»
‘
we

—

_. That thereof drinks ; and what therein wthrown..
Crathis, asdSybaris (fromthe Mountains rold)

Color the hair like Amber, or pure Gold. “us posed

Some fountains, of a more prodigious kinde,

only change the body, but the minde.

_ Who hath not heard of obfcene Salmacis?

r

above the Earth. And that chofe productions that ate made in,
and upon the Earth, are partly attributed tothe very Water,
tlie fame Scripture teftifies,where it faith chat che Plants, and
the Hearbs did not grow, becaufe God had not caufed it rorain
upon the Earth. Such is the efficacy of chis Element of Water,
that Spiricuall regeneration cannot be done without it, as —
Chrift himfelf ceftified to Nicodemus. Very great alfo is the
__vertue of itin the Religious Worfhip of God, in expiations,
and purifications; yea,the necefficy of it isno lefs then that-of
Fire. Infinite are the benefits, and divers arethe ufes thereof,
as being that by vertuéof whichallthings fubfift, are gene-
rated.nourifhed,and increafed. Thence ic was that Thales of
Miletus, and Hefied concluded that Water was the beginning
. of all things, and faid ic was the firft of all che Elements,:and
‘the moft potent, and that becanfe it hath the maftery overall
the reft. For, as Pliny faith, Waters fwallow up the Barth,
extinguifh flames, afcend on high, and by the ftretching forth
of the clonds,challenge the Heaven for their own: the fame
falling down become the Caufe of allthings that grow in the
Earth. Very many are the wonders that are done by Waters,
according to the Writings of Pliny, Solinus; and many other
Hiftorians, of the wonderfull vertue whereof, Ovid alfo @
makes mention in thefe Verfes.

Hornd Hammons Waters at bigh noox
Are cold ; hot at Sun-rife, andfetting Sun.
Wood, put in bubling Athemas Fir'd,
The Moon thenfartheft from the Sunretird,

Ciconian jireams.congeal his gutsto Stone

Of th Hxhiopian lake ? for Whoofthis,

ere
A 7
o>
4 J
Ss
= fe
a *
s 4
E <
e
E
»
<a
’
> 7 a
f
q
“~
2 Ry
ted
é ad
¢ thin
3 ps
ait

y

But only taft their Wits nolongerkeepy
Or forthwith fallintoadeadly fleep
Who at Clitorius fountain thirft remove,
Leuth wine, and abftinent, meer Water love.
With reams oppos dtothefe Linceftus flowes :
They reel, as drunk, who drinktoo much of thofe. .—
A Lake in fair Arcadia fiands, of old
Call’'d Pheneus ; /ufpetted, as twofold :
Fear, and forbear to drink thereof by night
By night unwholfomeywholfome by daylight.

Yofephus alfo makes relation of the wonderfull nature of 4 éer-
tain river betwixt Arcea,and Raphanea, Cities of Syria i which
runs with a full Channell all the Sabboth Day, and then ofa
fuddén ceafeth, as if the fprings were Mopped; andall the fix
dayes you may pafs over it dry-fhod: but again onthe fea- —
-venth day (no man knowing the reafon of it) the Watersre- _
turn again in abundance, as before. Wherefore the inhabi-
tants thereabout called it the Sabborth-day-tiver, becaufe of
the Seaventh day; whicktwas holy to the Jews. The Gofpel
alfoteftifies of a fheep-poole, into which whofoever ftepped
 firft, after the Water was troubled by the Angel, was made
whole of whatfoever difeafe he had. The fame vertueand éfi- -
cacy we read was in a {pring of the Ponidn Nymphs, which was
in the territories belonging tothe Town-of E/is,at a Village
called Heracleaneer the river Citheron:which whofoever ftep-
ped into,being difeafed came forth whole,and cured of allthis
difeafes. Paufanias alfo reports, that in Lycens, a méuntain
Of Arcadiathere was a {pring called Agria, to which, as often
as the drynefs of the Region threatned the deftrn€tion of
fruits, Pwpiters Prielt of Lycews went, and after the offeringof ©
Sacrifices,devoutly praying to theV Vaters of the Spring hold...
inga Bough of an Okein his hand, put it down rothe bor
tome of the hallowed Spring ; Then the waters being trou. ~
bled, a Vapour aicending from thence into the Air wag blown
into Clouds, with which being joyned cogether, the whole
Heaven was overfpread which being a litle after diffolved

‘

“4
a dt
»
€
aS
“24
‘
“ee
«
a>
we
~ iz

>»

{nto rain,watered all che Country moft wholfomly. Moreover
\Raffasa Phyfitian of Ephefus ; befides many other Authours,
wrote {trange things concerning the wonders of VVaters,
which, for ought I know,arefoundinno other Authour,
-— Jt remains chat I fpeak of the Aire. This ts avitall fpiric, —
paffing through all Beings, giving life, and fubfiftence to all
“things, binding, moving, and filling all things. Hence itis that -
the Hebrew Doétors reckon it not amongit the Elements, but
count it asa AZedium or glew, joyning. things together ,. and.
asthe refounding {pirit of the worlds inftrument. [c immedi-
_atly receives into it felfthe influencies of all Celeftiall bodies,
and then communicates them to the other Elements, asalfo to

all mixe bodies: Alfo it receives into iF it were divine
Looking-glafs, che {pecies of all things, as well naturall, as ar-
cifciall of all manner of {peeches, and retains them ;
- And carrying them withit, and entering into the bodies: of
Men, and other Animals,*through their pores, makes an Im-
_ preffion upon them, as well when they fleep, as when they-be
awake, and affords matter for divers ftrange Dreamsiand Di-
_-vinations. Hence they fay it is, that-a man pafling by a place
where'a man was flafn,or the Carkafe newly hid, ismoved-with
‘fearand dread; becaufe the Aire in that place being full of
the dreadfull fpecies of Man-flaughter, doth, being breathed
in, move and trouble the fpiric of the man with the. like:fpeci-
es, whence it isthat he comesto be afraid. Forevery thing
that makes a fudden impreffion, aftonifheth nature. Whence
it is, that many Philofophers were of opinion that Aire is che
caufe of dreams, and of many other impreffions of the mind,
through the prolonging of Images, orfimilitudes, or {fpecies ©
are fallen from things, and {peeches, multiplyed in che
very Aire)untill they come co the fenfes,and chen to the phan-
ftafy,and fout of him chat receives them,which being freed from
cares, and no way hindred, expée@ing to meet: fiich kind of
{pecies, isinformed by them. For the fpecies of things, al-
though of their own proper nature, they arecarryed:to the -
fenfes of men , and other animals in generally may notwith-
_ Handing get fome impreffion fromthe Heaven, -whileft they

4 gle »
g
aw
z
iy
‘
« ‘
a
x
J
‘
ay 4
d
Ray
a
<* ‘
J
}
«
ad
“J
rq
ee

de in the Aire, by reafon of which, together with the aptnefs
and difpofition of him thatreceives them, they may be carryed ~
‘to the nee of one, rather chen of another: And hence ic is
pofsible naturally, and far from all manner of faperftition, no
other fpirit coming between, that fhonld beable ina
very time to fignifie his mind unto another man, abiding ata
very long and unknown diftance from him ; although he can-
‘not precifely give an eftimate of the time when it fsjyer of ne-
cefsity it-maft be within 24. hours; and Y my felf know how
to do it, and have often done it. : The fame alfo in time paft
did the Abbot 7riteniusboth know anddo. Alfo when cer-
rain appearances, not only fpirituall; but alfo racuralhdo flow a
forth from things, thatis to fay, by acertain kind. of flowings .
forth of bodies from bodies, and do gatherftrengthintheAir,
they offer, and themfelves to us\as well'through fliphe as
motion, as well tothe fight-asto other fenfes, and fometimes
-work wonderfull thingsupon us, as Plotinus proves and teach...
eth. And we fee how by the South wind the Airis condenféd
-intothin clouds; in'which, as in ‘a Looking-glafsare reflé@ted
reprefentations at a great diltance of Caltles ; Mountains,
‘Horfes, and Men, and other things, which when the clouds are
gone, prefently vanifh.. And Art/fotde in his Meteors fhews,
that a Rainbow is conceived in acloud of the Airey: asina
Looking: glafs.' And Avdertus faith;that the effigies Of bodies
may by the {trength of nature, ina moift Aire beeafilyrepre-
fented, in the fame:‘manner as the reprefentations of things are.
inthings. And Ariforletels ofa man, to whom it happened -
by reafon of the weaknefs of his fight; thatthe Airé'that was
nearto him, becameas itwerea Looking-glafs tohim,and'the
beam did réefle& backpon' himfelffand scould nor pe-
netrate the Aire, fo that‘whitherfoeyerhe ‘went hethoughe
he faw his own image, with his face towards him, go before - _
him. In like manner,by the artificialnefs of fome certain: Look-._-
ing-glaffes, may be produced ava diftancein the Aire, Defide-
the Looking-glaffes, what images.we pleafe!;’ whith when ig-
-horant men fee, they think they feethe appearances.of
or fouls ; when indeed they are nothing but.femb

o's
‘
‘
rs
ot
>¢¥
‘
¥ 5

* \ 5 ¥

themfelves, and without life. Anditis wellknown, if
place where there is no light but by the coming in of
gheam ofthe Sun fomewhere through a litle hole, a white
paper,or plain Looking-glafs be fet up againft that light, that

there may be feen uponthem, whatfoever thingsare done

Se without, being fhined upon by the Sun. And there iS another
ae fleight, or trick yet more wonderfull. If any one fhall take
images artificially painted, or written letters, and in a clear

nigh fee chem the beams of the fullMoon,whofé refem-
, °° ‘plances being multiplyed in the Aire, and caught upward, and

: gefle&ted back together with the beams of the Moon,any other

~ that is privy to the thing, at along diftance fees, reads,

__. anid knows them in the very compafs, and Circle of the Moon,
Be which Art of declaring fecrets 1s indeed ‘very profitable for
Towns, and Citiesthat are befieged, being.a thing which Py-
ng, lid Often do, and which is not unknown

in. I will not-excepr my felf. Andall
thefe, and many more, and greater then thefe are grounded
inthe very nature of the Aire, and have their reafons; and
-caufes declared in Mathematicks,and Opticks, And as thefe re-
 femblances are refleéted back to the fight, fo alfo fometimes'to
_ the hearing, as is manifelt in the Echo, But there @femore -
a fecret arts then thefé, and fuch whereby any one may ata
remote diftance hear, and viderltand what anerher
Thereare alfofrom the airy Element VVinds.
nothing elfe, but Air moved, and ftirred up..-OF thefe
there are four thatare principall, blowing from the fonrcor-
mers of the Heaven, viz: Notws from: the South, Boreas from
the North,Zephyrus from the Welt Evrnsfromithe Ealt,which

Pontaous comprehending in thefe verfes, faith, ..

Boreas from the top of ‘lympns blows,
fromm thee bottom cloudy Notus flows.

»
es
a
¢
i
Ky
“fa >
4 ‘
a
‘
ze
«
¥
A
2h
a

is the Wind. , cloudy,moift, warm, race, fick.
| ty, which Hieronimus butler oF rains, Ovid
His fearful a[pett in the pitchie clouds,

White Haire fiream’s, his Beard big-/woln with habres |

Mifts binde bts Brows, raix from his Befome powrer.

But Boreas is contrary to Notus,and is the Northern Wirid,
fierce, and roaring, and difcuffing clouds, makes the Aire »

ferene, and binds the Water with Froft. Bim doth Ovid thus

bring 1 in ipeaking of himfelf. -

Force me befits : ‘with this thick, clouds I drive enyit:

Tofs the-blew Billows, knotty Okes up-rive ;

Congeal [oft Snow, and beat the Earth with baile : ¢

When I my brethren inthe eAire affaile, |

"(For thats our Field) We meet with [uch a Ioock,
That thundring Skies with our encounters rock.

cAnd clowd-ftruck li ightning flafhes from on high,

when through the Craunies of the Earth I lie,’

And force her in her hollow (aves, I make * )

The Ghofts to and the ground to

And Zephy rus which isthe VVeltern Wind, is molt |
ing from the Welt witha pleafant gale, it is cold and moilt, —
removing the effects of Winter, bringing forth Branches, and
Flowers. To this Zwrasis contrary , which is the Baftern
wind, and is called Apelfotes, waterifh, cloudy,and raven-
ous, OF thefetwo lings thus

Perlis! and Sabeas Baie yor
gums perfume the blufbing ‘Maries up-rife :

With fering’ flowery Be phirus blows: 4

C
4 a”

y
a
~¥
In

Ne

Ig Scythia borrid Boreas holds his rain,

Beneath Boites, andthe froxenWain:

land to this oppos'd doth Anfter fteep

ae With fruitfull foowres, and clouds which ever weep.

the kinds of (i What relation they ftand in.to the E-.
Jements, and What relation there betwixt the Elements
| themfelees, and the foul [enfes, and difpofitions of men.

ae | N Ext after the four fimple Elements follow the fout kinds
of perfeé& Bodies compounded of them, and they are

Stones, Mecal:, Plants, and Animals : and alchough unto the

generation of each of thefe all the Elements meet together

. inthe compofition, yet every one of: them follows, .and re-

-- * fembles one ofthe Elements,which is moft predominant. For
all Stones are earthy,for they are naturally heavy,and defcend,
fo hardened with drynefs,that.they cannot be melted. Buc.
~~ ‘Metals are waterifh, and may be melted, which Naturalifts .
confefs,and Chymifts findero be. true,viz. that they aregene--
rated ofa vifcous Water, or waterith argent vive. Plants have
fach an affinity ‘with che Aire, thac unlefs they be abroadin
Aire, they do neither bud, norincreafe. So alfoall.

Havein their Natures a moft fiery force,

And alfo [pring from a (eleftiall fource. i if

Ad is matturall tothem, that that being extinguithed
ye. Arndd again every one of thofe kinds is
diftinguifhed. within it felf by reafon of degrecs of the Ele-
iments. For among{t the Stones they -efpectally are called
earthy thatare dark, and more heavy ; and thofe waterifh,
which are tranfpaggat and are compacted of water, as-Cry-

‘
e
af
d
tal
hy
t
hy
Te
“
‘
Ade
wv
ax”
Ss
pe a
os
ie

Book!I. Occult Philofophy.
ftall, Beryll, and Pearls in the Shels of Fithes : and they are ats
called airy, which fwim upon the Water, andarefpongious,

as the Stones of a Sponge, the pumifh Sténe, and the Stone _
Sophus: and they are called fiery, out of which fire is extra@t- 3°
ed, or which are refolved into Fire, or which are produced of 9-5

Fire: as Thunderbolts, Fire-ftones, and the Stone Asbeftus.-
Alfoamong't Metals,Lead,and Silver are earthy; Quickfilver is;
waterifh: Copper, and Tin are airy : and Gold, and Jron are ay

- fiery. In Plants alfo,the roots refemble the Earth,by reafon o
their thicknefs : and the leaves,Water, becaufe of their juice :
Flowers, the Aire, becaufe ofttheir fubtility , and theSeedsthe

Fire, by reafon of their multiplying {pirit. Befides, they are -
called fome hot, fome cold, fome moift, fome dry, borrowing
their names from the qualities of the Blements. Amongit
Animals alfo, fome ate in comparifon of others earthy, and

-dwellin the bowels of thé Earth’, as Worms.and Moles, and
many other {mall creeping Vermine: others are watery, as ==
Fifhes ; others airy, which-cannot live out of the Aire : others
alfo are fiery, living-in the Fire, as Salamanders, and Crickets,

fuch as are of a fiery heat, as Pigeons, Eftriches, Lions, amd =~. =

_ fuch as the wife man cals beafts breaching Fire. Befides, in A-

nimals the Bones refemble the Earth, Fiefh the Aire, the vital” "a
fpirit the Fire, and the humors the Water., And theféhumots . 2
alfo partake of the Elements, for yellow choller is infteadof~ =
Fire, blood inftead of Aire, Flegme inftead of Water,
and black choller, or melancholy inftead of Earth. Andlaftly,
inthe Soul it felf, according to edufin, the underftanding ==
refembles Fire, reafon the Aire, imaginationthe Water, and
the fenfesthe Earth, And thefe fen{es alfo are dividedamangit
themfelves by reafon of the Elements, for the fight is fiery,nei-.
ther can it perceive without Fire, and Light ; thehearing is - + 73
airy, for a found is made by the ftriking of the Aire; The = 35am
{mell, and taft refemble the Water, without the moiftureof am
_ which there is neither fmell, nor taft ; and lafuly the feclingis
wholly earthy , and taketh grofs bodies for its objet. the

ations alto, and the operations of manare bythe

‘EBlementse The Earth a flow, and firm

ol
all
Se

Occult Philofophy.. Book I

‘jn working : Airefignifies chearfulnefs, and an amiable difpo-

“Geion: but Fire a fierce, quick, and angry difpofition. The
Blements therefore are the firft of all things, and all thingsare
of, and according to them, and they are in all chings, and dif-
their vertues through all chings.

The W fignifies fearfulnefs, & flaggithnets, and remiffenefs

: How the Elements are in the Hegvens, in Stars, in “Divels, in.
“Angels, and laftly in God himfelf.

T isthe ufianimous confent of all Placonifts, that as inthe
originall, and exemplary World, all things are in all; fo.
-alfo in this corporeal world, all things are inall: fo alfothe |
Elements are not only.in thefe inferiour bodies, but alfo in the
Heavens, in Stars, in Divels, in Angels, and laftly in God, the
maker, and orginall example of all things. Now inthefe in-
feriour bodies, the Elements are accompanied with much —
-grofs matter ; but in the Heavens the Elements are with their
matures, and vertues, viz. «aftera Celeftiall, and more excel-
~ Jent manner, then in fublunary things. For the firmnefs of
the Celeftiall Earth is there without the grof snefs of Water :
and the agility of the Aire without running over itsbounds ;
the heat of Fire without burning, only fhining, and giving life
to all things by its heat. Amongft the Stars alfo, fome are
fiery, as ALars, and Sol: airy, as 2upiter, and Venus: watery,
as Saturn, and Mercury : and earthy, fuch as inhabit the - —
eighth Orbe,and the Moon (which nocwithftanding by many
isaccounted watery ) fecing, as if it were Earth, it attra€@tsto
. it felf the Celeftiall waters, with which being imbibed, it doth
reafon ofits neernefs tous power out, and communicate
tous. There are alfo amongft the Signes; fome fiery , fome.
_ earthy, fome airy, fome watery: the Elements rule them al-
fovin the Heavens, diftributing to them thefe four threefold
confiderations ofevery Element,viz. the begigning, mille,

A

me -
- ‘

ar

= Su
—
A
©,
».
“af
des
re: *
d
a
t ?
x
fe =
ay
j ~ > *
Rad
‘4
a* 4

andend: fo Aries pofleffeth the beginning of Fire, the
progrefs, and increale, and Sagittarius the end, Zauructhe
beginning of the Earth, Vergo the progrefls;Capricarw theend; __
Gemini the beginning of the Aire, Libra the progrefs, -
rius the end. Cancer the beginning of Water, Scorpius the
middle, and Pifces the end. Of che mixtions therefore of
thefe Planets, and Signes, together with the Elements are all
bodies made. Moreover Divels alfo are upon this aceount
diftinguifhed the one from the other , fo that fome arecalled
fiery, fome earthy, fome airy, and fome watety. Hence alfo
thofe four Infernall Rivers, flery Ph/egethon, airy Cocytus, wae .
tery Styx, earthy Acheron, Alfo in the Gofpel we read of
Hell Fire, and eternall Fire, into which the Curfed thall be
commanded to go: and in the Revelation we read of a Lake
of Fire, and J/aiah {peaks of the damned, that. che Lord will
fmite them with corrupt Aire. And in They fhallskip
_ from the Waters of the Snow to extremity of heat, andinthe
fame we read, That: the Earth is dark, and covered. with the
darknefs of death, and miferable darknefs. Moreover alfo
thefe Elements are placed in the Angels in Heaven, andthe
bleffed intelligencies ; there is inthem aftability of their e& = =
fence, whichis an earthy vertue, in which is the ftedfaft feag.
of God; alfo their mercy, and piety is a watery-cleanfing = = =~
vertue. Hence by the ‘P/a/mi/? they are-called Watess where
he fpeaking of the Heavens, faith, Who-ruleit the Waters that 3
are higher then the Heavens; alfoin them cheir'fubtill breath
is Aire, and their love is fhining Fire : Hence they arecallédin —
Scripture the Wings ofthe Wind; and in another placethe —
Pfalmiff {peaks of them, Who make/t Angels thy Spirits, and
thy Minifters a flaming fire.. Alfo according to orders of Ans
gels, fome are hery, as Seraphin, and anthorities, and powers ;
earthy as Cherubin s watery as Thrones, and Archangelsiairy
as Dominions,and Principalities. Do we not alfo'readofthe —
_ original maker of all'things, thatthe earth fhall be:opened -
and bring forth a Saviour? Is it noc {pokem of che fame, that
he fhall be a fountain oFliving Water, and regene-
rating the fame breathing the breath of lefe

J
a

Beer, as fach which provoke Urine, Milk, the Menftrua, aad

the fame according to AZofes, and Pawls teftimony , 4 con-
fuming Fire ? That Elements therefore are to be found ever y
where, and in all things after their manner, no mancan deny,: —
’ Firlt in thefe inferiour bodies feculent, and grefs, andin Cel -
ftialsmore pure, and clear ; but in fuperceleftials living, and
in all refpedts bleffed. Elements therefore in the exemplary
-world are Jdea’s of things to be produced, inIntelligencies -
are diftributed powers,in Heavens are vertues,and in inferiour

Of the vertues of things Naturall, depending immediatly upon
gO F the naturall vertues of things, fome are Elementary,
heat, to cool, to moiften, todry; and they are
called operations, or firft qualities, and the fecond act-; for
_ thefe qualities only do wholly change the whole fubftance, _
which none of the other qualities can do. And fome areiny —
things compounded of Elements, and thefe are more then fick 2
qualities, and fuch are thofe that are maturating, digefting, re-

mollifying, hardening, reftringing, abfterging,

. foding; burning, opening, evaporating, {trengthening, miti-

KN, Obftruiing, expelling, retaining, at~-

repercufsing, ftupifying, beftowing, lubrifying, and
‘many more. Elementary qualities do many things in a mixt
_ body, which they cannot do in the Elements themfelves. And

thefe operations are called fecondary qualitits, becaufethey
follow the nature, and proportion of the mixtion of che flt

Vvertuts, as largely it is created of in Phyfick Books. As matu- .

-, + £ation, whichis the operation of naturall heat, according to a

certain proportion in the fubftance of the matter. Induration
isthe operation of cold; fo.alfo is congelation, and fo of the
reft. And thefe operations fometimes act upon a certain mem-

he
te.
af
i9
re
% > re,
J
a
oe,
”
he 4
a
P
‘
“ + |
ing
2e
i = .

Book I. Of Occult Philofophy.
they are called third qualities, which follow the fecond,:as the 7
fecond do the firft? According therefore to-thefe firlt, fecond,
and third qualities many difeafes are both cured, and caufed,
Many things alfo there are artificially made; which men much
wonder at; asis Fire, which burns Water, which they call the
Greek Fire, of which Ariftotle teacheth many compofitionsin —
his particular Treatife of this fubje&t. . In like manner there is
mide’ Fire that is extinguifhed with Oyf, and is kindled with
cold Water, when it is fprinkled upon it ; and a Fire which is
. kindled either with Rain, Wind, or the Sun; and there is
made a Fire, which iscalled burning Water, the Confe&ion
whereof is well known, and it confumes nothing but ic lf:
and alfo there are made Fires that cannot be quenched,andin- =>
combuttible Oyles, and perpetual! Lamps, which can be extin-
suifhed neither with Wind, nor Water, nor any other way;
which feems utterly incredible, but that there had been facha
moft famous Lamp, which once did fhine in the Temple of
Venus, in which the {tone Asbeffus did burn, which being once
_ fired can never be extingnifhed. Alfo on the contrary, Wood,
or any other combultible matter may be fo ordered,thatic
can receive no harm from the Fire ; and there are madecefe-...
tain Confeétions, with which the hands being anointed, We ~~ 5
‘may carry red hot Iron in them, or put them into melted
tall, or go with our whole bodies, being firlt anointed chere--°
with, into the Firé without any manner of harm, and fich like
things as thefe may be done. There is alfo a kind of flax,which.
Pliny cals Asheftum, the Greeks call which ig not -
confumed by Fire, of which Anaxilaus faith, chata Treecom- .-
paffed about with it, may be cut down. with infenfible blows, >

J whe
“~
H
oa . wh.
~ sty a

an |

Of Occult "Philofophy. > ook

CHAP. X.

TT Here are alfo other vertueés in things, which are not from.
+ any Element, as to expell poyfon,to drive away the noxi-
ous vapours of Minerals, to ateract Iron,or any thing elfe;and
this vertue is a fequell of the fpecies, and form of this or that
thing ; whence alfo it being litle in quantity, is of great effica-
cy ; which is noc granted to any Elementary quality. For
thefe vertues having much form, and litle matcer, can do very
much ; bot an Elementary vertue, becaufe ithath more mate-
“ality ,requiresmuch matter for its acting. And they arecalled
occale qualities, becaufe their Caufes lie hid,and mans intele@
carinot in any way‘reach, and find them out. Wherefore Phi-
lofophers have actained’to the greaveft part of them by long |
experience, rather then oy the fearch of reafon : forasinthe
‘Stomack'the meat is digefted by heat, which we know; foit
is changed by a cercain hidden vertue which we knownot: for
truly it is not changed by heat, becaufe then it (hould rather
be changed’by the Fire fide,then in the Stcomack.. So there are"
in things, befides the Elementary qualities which we know,
Other certain imbred vertues created by nature, which we ad-
thire, and are amazed at, being fuch.as we*know not, and in-
deed féldom or never have feen, As we read in Ovid of the
Phenix, one only Bird; whichrenewsherfelf,

the occult Vertues of things.

~All Birds from others do derive ‘sbi

But yet one Fowlethere inallthe Earth, =
Gall dby th’ Affyrian’ Phoenix, who the Wain
age, repairs, ana [avs her felf again.
And'imanother place,

Eg yptus came to fee thie Wondrous fight “te
nd this rare Birds welcom’d with delight.

Lod
»
t
a sll
Bs,
¥ us
‘
“aA ‘
‘
a * :
t
A,
Ph
an
a) >.
‘
«a
é ¥
‘a
rs

_ Long fince Metreas brought a very great wondermen t upon

the Greeks, and Romans concerning himfelf. He faid that he —
nourifhed, and bred a beaft that did devour it felf. Hence ma-

ny to this day are folicicous,what this beaft of Adatreas fhould

be. Who would not wonder that Fifhes fhould.be digged ont
ofthe Barth, of which Ariftorle, Theaphraftus, and Polybius —

the Hiftorian makes mention ? And thefe things which Pas-

_fanias wrote concerning the finging Scones? All thefe areef.

feéts of occult vertues. Sothe Eftrich concoéts cold, and moft —

hard Jron, and digefts 1¢ into nourifhment for his body ;
whofe Stomack they alloreport, cannot be hurt with red. hor
Iron. Sothat little Fifh called Echeneis doth fo carb the vio<
lence of the Winds, and appeafe the rage of the Sea, thar, Jec
the Tempefts be never fo imperious, and raging, the Sails alfo
bearing a full Gale, ic doth notwithftanding by its meer touch

{tay the Ships, and makes them ftand {till, that-by no means
they can be moved. So Salamanders, and Crickets live in the
Fire ; although they feem fometimes to burn, yet they are not

hurt. The like is faidofa kind of Birumen,. with which the:

weapons of the e4maxons were faid to be fmeared over, by -

which means they could be fpoiled neither with Sword nor

Fire ;_ with which alfo the Gates of Cafia, made of Bra&, are.

reported to be feared oversby Alexander the great. We

read alfo that Noah’s:Ark was joyned together‘ with this Bitu-

men, and that endared fome thoufands of yearsupon the

Mountains of Armenia. . There are many fuch- kind of wonder.

- full things, fcarce credible, which notwithitanding areknown

by experience. Amongft which Antiquity makes memtion of |

Satyrs, which were Animals, in fhape half menjand half bruits, ©
yet capable of fpeech, and reafon; one whereof S. Hierome —

reporteth, {pake onceunto holy Antonis the Hermie, and

condemned the errour,of the Gentiles, in-worfhipping {uch
creatures as they were , defied himebathewould
pray unto the true God for him; alfo he affirms thatthere .

was one of them fhewed openly alive, and afterwardsfentto
Conftantinethe Emperou,

oe

a

e
«
‘ ,

OK i.

ty

CHAP. XI.

How Occult Vertues are infufed into the feverall kinds of things

by Ydea's, through the help of the Sonl of the World, and
rayesof the Stars: and what things abound moft With this

Vertue.

Piserit: fay that all inferiour bodies are exemplified by the

fuperiour Jdea’s. Now they define an [dea to be a form, a-
bove bodies, fouls,minds,and to be but one,fimple,pure,immu-
table, indivifible, incorporeal, and eternall : and that the na-
ture of all Jdea’s is the fame. Now they place Jdea’s in the firft

place in very goodnefsit felf (i.c.) God, by way of eanfe ; and

that they are diftinguifhed amongft themfelves by fome rela-

‘tive confiderations only , leaft whatfoever is in the world,
fhould be but one thing without any variety, and that they a-
. greeineffence, leaft God fhould be a compound fubftance. In

the fecond place,they place them in the very intelligible it felf
(i.e. ) inthe Soul of the world, differing the one from the o- ©
ther by abfolute forms, fo that all the Jdea’s in God indeed are |
but one form: butin the Soul of the world they are many.
They are placed in the minds ef all other things, whether they
be joyned to the body, or feparated fromthe body, by acer-

_ tain participation,and now by degrees are diftinguifhed more,
and more. They place them in nature, ascertain {mall feed of

-, forms infufed by the Jdea's, and laftly they place them in mat-
_~ ter,as (hadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the Soul of

the world there be as many Seminal forms of things, as Jdea’s
in the mind of God , by which forms fhe did in the Heavens —

above the Scars frame to her felf thapes alfo, and ftamped-up-
-onallthefe fome properties ; onthefe Stars therefore, (hapés,
properties, all vertues of inferiour fpecies, as alfo-their

‘properties dodepend ; fo that every {pecies hath its CeleRiall

. ‘fhape, or figure that is futableroit, from which alfo proceeds:

@ wonderfull power of operating, which proper. gift itre-
from its own Idea, through the Seminal forme

of he hwy
t e 4,
a

Zz
4 —
x
~ wd -
~ a?
i,”
% ‘
x
st
‘
a
yp
x
a

Book J. Occult Philofophy.

—

“Soul of the world. For Tdsa's are not only effentiall caufes of

every fpecies, but are alfo the caufes of every vertue, which
is in the fpecies: and this is that which many. Philofophers

fay, that the properties, which are in the nature of things —
(which vertues indeed are the operations of the Jdea’s) are.

moved by certain vertues,viz, fuch as havea certain, and fure
foundation, not fortuitous, nog, cafuall, ‘but efficacious,

powerfull, and fufficient, doing nothingin vain. Now thefe

Vertues do not err in their actings, but by by

reafon of the impurity, or inequality of the matter : For
upon this account there are found things of the fame fpecies,

more,or lefs powerful,according to the purity,or indifpofition |

of the matter ; for all Celeftial influencies may. be hindred
by the indifpofition,and infufficiency of che matter. Whence ic
was a Proverb amongft the Platonifts, That Celeftial Vértues
were infufed according tothe defert of the matter : Which

_alfo Virgil makes mention of, when he fings, os

Their fiery are, and from above, |
eAnd from grofs bodies freed, divinely move. -

Wherefore thofe things, in which there is lek ‘of the
of the matter (.e.) fuch things which have a greater refem-.~

blance of things feparated, have more powerfull vertués in
operation,being like tothe operation of a feparated dea. We
fee then that the ficuation, and figuré of Celeftials is the canfe.
of allthofe excellent. Vertnes, that-are in inferiour fpecies:

CHAP.

How it that particlwar Vertues are infufed into. particnlar

dividuals, even of the fame Species...

ere are alfo in many Individuals or particular things,
peculiar gifts, as wonderfull, asin the fpecies, and thefe

alfo are from the figure, and fituation of Celeftiall Stars. For

e
at
a
“
°
«
ese
‘=
«
d

OF Oceule Philofophy. I.
every Individuall, when it begins to be under a determined
Horofcope, Celeftiall Conftellation, Contracts. together
with its effence a certain wonderfull vertue both of doing,and
faffering fomething-that is remarkable, even befides-thac
which it receives from its fpecies, and this it doth partly by the
. = influence of the Heaven, and partly through that obedienti-—
' ginefs of the matter of thingsto be generated, to. the Soul of
the World, which obedientialnefs indeed is fuch: as that of —
ourbodies to our fouls. Forwe perceive that there ts this in
us, that according to our conceptions of things, our bodies are
moved, and that cheerfully, as when we are afraid of, or
fly from any thing. So many timeswhen the Celeftiall fouls
conceive feveral things, then the matter is moved obedienti-
allytoit: Alfoin Nature there appear divers prodigies, by
reafon ofthe imagination of fuperiour motions. So alfothey
conceive,& imagine divers vertues,not only things natural!,bue
alfo fometimes things artificial, and this efpecially if the Souk |
_. Ofthe operator be inclined towards the fame. Whence Avicen
faith, that whatfoeverthings are done here, muft have been
. before in the motfons,and conceptions of the Stars,and Orbes.
-So in things, various effects , inclinations, and difpofitions
~ are occafioned not only fromthe matter vartoufly difpofed, as
many fuppofe,but froma vartous influence, and diverie form ; -
‘pnottruly with a fpecifical difference, but peculiar, and proper. |
And the degrees of thefe are varioufly diftributed by: the firft
Caufe of all things, God himfelf, who being unchangeable,
diftributes to every one ashe pleafeth, with whom notwith-
itanding fecond Caufes,Angelical, and Celeftial cooperate, dif-
~~ pofing of the Corporeal matter, and other things that are
committed fo them. All vertues therefore are infufed by’God,
A Ju, Gy through the Soul of the World, yet by a particular power of

refemblances,and intelligences over-ruling them, ind concourfe
of the rayes, and afpects of che Stars ima cercaimpetoliar har-

monious confent.

ts
¥
t
ft
‘
J
‘
if
—

a
t

e
¥
i
¥
as
Bee
rq
is
/ A
e
WwW

Whence the Occult Vertues of things proceed,

is well knownto all, thatthere is a Certainvertueinthe
+ Loadftone, by which it ateraéts Iron, and that the Diamond”
doth by its prefence take away. that vertue of the Loadftone':
foalfo Amber, and jeat rubbed, and warmed ;draw a ftraw
to them, and the Stone Asbeftus being once firedisnever, or
farce extinguifhed : a Carbuncle fhines in the dark, the Stone
Aetites put above the young fruit of Women, or. Plants,
ftrengthens them, but being put under, caufethabortion; the
Jafper ftencheth blood ;, the litle fifh Echenew {tops the thips
Rhuharb expels choller; the liver of the Camelion burnt, raifeth
-fhowers, and thunders. The Stone Heliotropium dazles the
fight, and makes him that wears ic to, be invifible , the Stone
Lyucurius takes away delufions from before theeyes, the per-
fume of the Stone Lyppariscals. forth all the beafts, the Stone
Synochitis brings up infernal Ghofts, the Stone. Anachitis
makes the images of the Gods appear. The Enne@tis put under
them that dream, caufeth Oracles. There isan Hearbin,
thiopia, with which they report ponds, and lakes are dryéd up;
all things that are fhur, to.be opened; and we. rtad-of an
Hearb called Latace which the Per fan Kings give to their Ems
baffadours, that whitherfoever'they thall come, they fall
bound with plenty of all things. There is alfo\a Sapthian
Hearb, with which being tafted, or at leaftheldiathemouth,
they report the Scythians wilt endure twelve dayes-bamger, ~~
and chirft ; and Apu/eins faith, thathe wastaughtbyamOra-
cle that there were many. kinds of Hearbs, and Scones. with :
which men might prolong their lives for ever, bur that it was
_not lawfull for men to underftand the_knowledge of thafe ~
things, becaufe,whereas they have but‘a fhort time to live, they

ftudy mifchief with all their might, and attemprall manner or %
wickednefs; if they fhould be fure of a very long. time,
would not {pare the Gods themfelves, But, fromwhence thefe-

B if Of 4
OOK I. IT. 9:

Book’.
~-yertues are, none of allthefe have fhewed, who have fet forth
huge Volumes of the properties of things, not Hermes, not
Bochus,not Aaron, not Orpheus, not Theophraftus, not Thebith,
not Zenothemus not Zoroafter, not Evax, not Diofcorides, not
Ifaaick, the Jew,not Zacharias the Babilonian, not Albertus,
not ¢4rnoldus's and yer all thefe have confefled the fame,thac
"Zacharias writes to Mithridites, that great power,and humane
deftinies are couched in the vertues of Scones, and Hearbs.
But to know from whence thefe come, a higher fpeculation is
required. Alexander the Peripateticke not going any further
then his fenfes, and qualities, is ofthe opinion that thefe pro-
ceed from Elements, and their qualities, which haply might
befuppofed to be true, if thofe were of ‘the fame {pecies ;
bat many of the operations of the Stones agree neither
in genere, nor /recie. Therefore Plato, and his Schollers at-
tribute thefe vertnes to Jdea’s, the formers of things. But Avi-
cen reduceth thefe kinds of operations to Intelligencies,
Hermes to the Stats, eAlbertus to the fpecificall forms of —
things. And although thefe Authors feem to thwart one the o-
ther, yer none of them, ifthey be rightly underftood, goes be-
fide truth fince all their fayings are the fame in effeR in
moft things. For Godin the firft place is the end, and begin-
ing of all Vertues, he gives the feal of the /dea’s to his fervants |
> the‘Intelligencies; who-as faithfull officers fign all things in-
 graftedto them with an Ideall Vertue, the Heavens, and Stars,
as inftruments,difpofing the matter in themean while for che
receiving of thofe-forms which refide in Divine Majefty(as faith
PlatoinT imeus ) and to be conveyed by Stars ; and the Giver
offorms diftcibutes them by the Miniftery of his Intelligen-
cies, which he hath fet asRulers, and Controllers over his
_ Works, to whomuch power is iftrufted in things commit-
: ted to them, that fo all Vertue of Stones, Hearbs, Metals, and
ahocher things may come from the Intelligencies the Gover-
tours.” The Form therefore, and Vertue of things comes ficft
Tdew’sjthen from che ruling, and govetning Incelli+
then from che afpects of the Heavens dilpofing, and
Taftly fromthe tempers of the Elements difpofed, anfwering

J
‘
°
We
4 ‘
a
a
Fr
‘or

Bookoh Ok Qecult Philofophy.
the inflaencies of the Heavens, by which the Elementsthem- -
felves are ordered, or difpofed. ‘Thefe kinds of operations ==
therefore are performed in thefe inferiour thingsby expres.
forms, and inthe Heavens by difpofing vertues, in Intelligens
cies by mediating rules, in the origina}l Caufe by Idea's,andex- ~
emplary forms, all which moft of neceffity agreeintheexeeu.
tion of the effect, and vertuc of everything.

There is therefore a wonderfull vertue, and operation in
every Hearb, and Stone, but greater in a Star, beyond which,
even from the governing Intelligencies every thing receiveth,
and obtains many things for it felf, efpecially from the Su.
pream Caufe, with whom all thingsdo mutually, and exa@ly -
correfpond, agreeing in an harmonious confent, as it were in
Hymnes, alwaies praifing the higheft Maker of.all thingsjas bp
the threeChildren in the fiery furnace were all things called np-
on to praife God with fingings.Blefs ye the Lord all things
that grow upon the Earth, and al! things which move in the Ror
Waters, all fowls of the Heavens, Beafts, and Cattle, together
with the fons of men.. There is therefore no other caufe of the
neceffity of effets , ‘then the connexion of all things with the
firft Caufe, and their correfpondency with thofe Divine pat-
terns, and eternal! Jdea’s, whence every thing hath its déeter-
minate , and particular place in the-exemplary world, from
whence it lives, and receives its originall being; And every
vertue of Hearbs Scones Metals, Animals, Words, and Specches,
and all things that are ofGod, is'placed there, Nowthe Art
Caufe, whichis God, alchough he doth by Intelligencies, and
the Heavens work upon thefe inferfour things. doth fometimies
(thefe Afedivms being laid afide, or'their officiating being
fufpended ) works thofe things immediatly by himfelf , whieh
works then are called Miracles : Bur whereas fecondary cantes;
which P/ate, and otherscall handmaids; do bythe Command; |
and appointment of the firlt Caufe, neceffarily a@, andarene-
eeffitated to produce their effets, if God thall notwithftand:
ing according to-his pleafare fo difcharge, and fifpend them,
that they fhall wholly defiftfrom the necefSity of that€om-
mand; and appointment ; then ghey are called

A
«=!

f

of God» the fireih the Chaldeans furnace did nor
the: Children; So-alfathe Sun atthe Command of

back fromiits courfethefpaceof one day-; foalfo
atehe prayer of Hexekiah'it went back ten degrees, or honrs,
So when Chrift was Crucified the Sun was darkened, though at
fail Moon « And the reafons of thefe operations can by no
srationall difcourfe, no Magick; or occultjor profound Science
 whatfoever be found:out, or underitood, but are to be learn-
 @dsandinguiredinto by DiineOraclesonly.

¥

Of the Spirit of the World, what it 18,and bow by Way of medium

and many Pythagorianshaving
molt diligently fearched into the vertues of Celeftiall
! things, and natures.of inferiour thidgs, faid, That all things
are fullof God, and not without caufe :' Forthere is nothing
of fuch tranigending vertues, which being deftitute of Divine
affiftance, is content with the nature of ir felf, Alfo they.called |
‘thofe Divine powers which are diffufed. in things, Gods:
which Zorcajter called Divine-aJlurements, Synefins Symboli-
— call inticements; others called them Lives,and fome alfo Souls;
gs chat thee cf things di depend upon thefe ; be-
caule it is the property of the Soul ta be from one matter ex-
tended into divers things, about which it operates; So is
_ man, who extends his incellect unto incelligiblechings, and his
M@lagination unto imaginable things;.and this is that which -
. they underftood, when they faid, wiz. That the, Soul of one
thing went out, and went into another thing,baltering ir, arid
hindering the operations of it : As a Diamond hinders'the
Operation of the Loadftone, that ic cannot. attra@ Iron..Now
Sou thee firlk ching chat is. moveable, atid as they
bur the body, or the matteris of it felf

uafit for‘ motion, and:doth muctidegencrate'from

a
q
al
a
by
‘

Book ‘OE Occult Philofophy.
{5

the Soul, therefore they fay there.is need of amore execlient -
Medium, viz. Such.a one.that may be as ic were no bodybar,

as it were a Soul, or as it were no Soul, but as it were a body;.

_ viz by which the foul may be joyned to the body. Now -
they. conceive fuch a medium to be the ipirit of the World, —

- viz, that which we call che quinteffence : becaufe it is not

from the four Elements, but acercain firkt thing, having its be-.

_ ing above, and befides chem. There is therefore fuch a kind of
{pirit required to be, asit were the medsum, wheteby Celefti-

all Souls are joyned to grofs bodies, and beftow upon them

wonderfull gifts. This {pirit is after the fame manner inthe
body of the world, as ours is in the body of man, For asthe

powers of our foul are communicated to.the members. of che »

body by the fpirit,fo alfo the Vertue of che Soul of the World

is diffufed chrough all things by the quinteflence : For there is.
nothing found in the whole world, chat hath nota {park of -
? the Vertue thereof. Yet it is more,hay moft of all infu ed into of |

thofe things which have received ,or taken. in moftof this {pirits.

Stars, fo far forth as things render themfelves conformable to.

them. By this fpirit therefore every occult property is convey-

ed into Hearbs, Stones, Metals; and Animals, through che Sun,

Moon, Planets, and through Stars higher. them the Planets,

Now this fpiric may be. more advantagious tous, if apy.one

knew how to feparateit fromthe Elements.: fealtroule
thofe things chiefly, which do moft abound with this{pirit. For
 thefe things, in which this fpiric.is lefs drowned inabody.and —

lefs checked by matcer, do more powerfully, and pertedily

aét, and alfo more readily generate their like: for intt areall -

generative,& feminary Vertues. For which caufe the Alchymuifes:

endeavour to feparace this fpirit from,Gold,and Silver; which
being rightly feparaced, and extracted,if thou
project upon any-matter of the fame kind.(é.)’ any, Metall)
owto dothat, and have feen ic done but wecould make no. :
more Gold, then the weight of chat was, ouc of which we iat fea

will turn it into Gold, or. Silver.“And we know

-teaéted the fpirit. For feeing that is an éxtenfe form,and not

Now this fpiric is received- or}taken, in: by. the rayes ofthe

4 é
q
e
FA
a
»* c
Z
‘
»
—

ee

World, through’the rayes!oF the Stars and can nootherwife |

fid ler, that every’ thing moves; and turns it {elf to its hike; and)

‘an Hearb, ot 2 Plant, but turns it into fenfible Aefh. In

voke to fucha quality, paffion, or Vertue. So Fire moves

the right eye Of 4 Frog the of a mans right

it cannot beyond its own bounds change an im
ma be done |

We mf fo ont the Ports of ies

are not from the nature of the ‘but infafed from.
above, hid ftom our fenfes,-and fcarce’at laf known by our
reafon, which indeed come from the Life, and the. Spirit ofthe.

but by ‘experience, and conjecture ‘be enquired into by:
he that defires to enter upon this ftudy, muftcon-

inclines that to‘ it: felf its intight} as well in property.)
viz, Odile vertne: quality, ‘dix, Elementary “vertue.
Sometimes alfo in fubftance it felf,’as we feein Salt, for what-
foever hath long ftood’with Salt, Becomes Salt: for every a-
gent, when it hath be ‘are to act, doth not attempt to make a

inferiour to it felf, bur as much ag may be, like; and fac

tablé to it felf. “Which alfo-we manifeltly fee in fenfible’ Ani~
‘in which the nutritive Vertue doth: not change the meat:

ma

what thin s therefore there is an excefs of a ality’, or
\pery heat , cold, boldnefs; fear,’ ‘
tred, or atly other’ ‘paffion: or Vertue’; whether it-bée in.
by nature, or fomerimes alfo by art, or chance, asbold-
“nef thefe things do very much move, and pro-

Fire, and Water moves to Water, and he that is bold moves:
‘to boldnefs. And it is well known amongft Phyfitians, ‘that
brain helps the brain, and'lungs; the lungs. So alfo ic’is faid,:

‘
‘ xX
. J
be
a
bs
by 7 ~
Jf
»
i=
{ ~
“4 be
x
»
‘
é
é
“4

Book Of
eye, andthe feft eyethercof, helps the forenels of his’ left
if they Be hanged about in
-‘Colont: The like ixtéported of che Crab.
of a Tortoife helps them that have ‘the in¢hei¢ being
-applyed thus, as footto foot, handto hand, right to right,
After chis manner they fay; that any Animall that barren —
caufeth another co be barrén;and of the Animalhefpecially the
‘Tefticles, Matrix; or Urin. ' Sothey report that a woman fhall
mot conceive, if fhe drink every moneth of the Urin ofa ©
‘Mule,or any thing fteeped in it. If therefore we would obtain
any property or Vertue, let us feek for fiich Animals; or fich
other things whatfoever,.in which fuch a property’ in
eminent manner then in any other thing, ‘andinthefeletus ©
take that part in whieh’ facha property,
vigorous: asif at any time we would promote fove; fetus
feekfome Animail which is'mof loving , of which ‘Kind are
‘Pigeons, Tartles; Sparrows, Swallows, Wagtailes +-and in
-‘thefelet us cake thofe menibers, or parts, in whichthe Vene-
rall appetite ts vigérons, and fuch are ‘thé hearr, teRtitles,
matrix, yard, {fperme, and ménftrues. ‘And it: done at
that time when thefe Animals have this affeGion molt intenfe:
for then they do much provoke, and draw love. In like man-
ner to inereafe boldnefs let ns look for a Lyon, ora Cock,
ofthefe let us takethe heart, eyes, or forehead. And fo we-
‘mul undertand: whieh the faitheis, = |
that Dogs, Crows, ti;
_ alfothe Nightingale, and Bat, and horn Owle, and inthefe
the’heartyheadsand eyes éfpecialfy. Therefore iFany
carry: che! heare Of wCrow; of Bat thall
fleep til he’ calhit away from ‘him: fame the
head of aBat dryed, and bound to the right arme of Him that
‘isawake, ‘for ff apow him wheirhe is afleép;
‘chavhe (hall noc:belawaked cil? it be'tuken of front him:
‘the (amie manher dock 'andah Ow lémake'one talka-
itive, antlof thefe: and ‘heart's So the
ongue allo Water-frog Iidander'thehead makesaman

»

the heart ofa ferich-Owle laid upon the
breaft of awoman that. is afleep is faid to make heructer
~alher fecrets. The fame alfo the: heart of the horn Owle is
~ faid-ro do, alfo the fewet of a Hare laid-upon the breaft of
“one that is afleep. _Upon the fame account do Animals that.
“atelong ltved, conduce to long life; and whatfoever things
a power in themfelves, to renew: themfelves, conduce
“go the renovation of our body, and reftoring of youth, which
have often profeffed they know to be ttue; asis
- manifeft-of the Viper,and Snake. And it isknown that Harts
_ genew their old age by the eating of Snakes. After the fame
manner the Phoenix is renewed bya fire which fhe makés for
felf ; and the like vertue there isin a Pellican, whofe right
~ foot being put under warm dung, after three moneths there is

See “of that generated a Pellican. Therefore fome Phyficians by

, fome certain confe@tions made of Vipers, and Hellebor, and
the fleth of fome fuch kind of Animals do reftore youth, and
“indeed do fometimes reftore it fo, as AZedea reftored old
_ Pileas. Itis alfo believed that the blood ofa Bear, if it be fack-
ar? out of her wound, doth increafe che ftrength of thebedy,

“Hou muft that fo great is the power of
things;.that ey not only work upon all'things that are
“neer them, by théir Vertue, but alfo befides this, they infule
intothem a like power, through which the fame Vertue
alfo work upon other things, as we fee in the Loadftone,

whl Stone indeed doth not only draw. Iron buc
Safufech a Vertue into the Rings y they-can
othe fame, which Axufin, tan fay ch faw. After.

L
i
‘
ck

- f’Oceult Philofophy.

inboldnefs, and impudence doth infec all thargare neer her, *
by this property, whereby they are made like hem felt. There- -

fore they fay that if anyone fhall the inWard garment’

_ of an Harlot, or fhall have aboat him that looking glafs, which”
_ fhe daily looks into, he fhall thereby become Bold, confident,

impudent,and wanton,Jn like maner they {that a cloth that

was about a dead Corpes hath received from. thence the pro-
perty of fadnefs, and. melancholy : and thatthe halter. where-
witha mao was hanged hath certain wonderfull properties.
The like ftory tels Pliny, ifany thall put a green Lizard made =~.
blind,cogether with Iron, or Gold Rings.into a glafs-veffel,
putting under them fome earth, and then fhutting ‘the veffel;

and when it appears that the-Lizard: hath received bis fight,
fhall put him out of the glafS, that thofe Rings fhall help fore
eyes. The fame may be done with Rings, anda Weelcl,whofe —

eyes after they are with any kind of prick put out, itiscertaiy = |. am

are reftored ro fighbagain. Upon the fame.account Ringsare

putforacertain time inthe neft of Sparrows, or Swallows,, .
which afterwards are ufed to:procure love, and favor:

How by enmity and friendfbip the vertues of things are to be try-
E the next place. itis requifite that we confider that all

things. have a friendlinefs, and themfelves,

and every thing hath fomething that it fears & dreads, that isan

enemyy and deltructive to it; and on the contrary fomething

that it,rejoyceth, and delightcth in, arid-js ftrengthened by.

So in the Elements, Fire is anenemy to Water, and Aire-to

Barth, but yet they-agree amongft themfelves..And again,

in Geleftiall bodies, Mercury, Jupiter, the Swn,and Avon: are -
friends.to Saturne; Mars, and Venus tnemies cohim, allthe
‘Planets befides AZars arefriends to Fupiter,allo
nushate Mars; fupiter,and Venus love the Sun, Mars,

LD 3. ~ Ci ry,

= —
>»
r
sae y
CHAP. XVII
a
3g
See
ex
»
Wis
LFS
a
a ~
o =
s ~ .
»
‘ J

Book

 eury, the Afoon.are enemies to him, all befides Saturne
Jove Venus; Pupiter, Venus, and Saturne friends to Mercury,
‘the Sux, Afoon, and Marshisenemies. fupiter, Venus, Saturne
are friends .to the AZoon, Mars, and Mercury her enemies.

There is another kind of enmity. amongft the Stars, viz.
when they have oppofite houfes; as Saturne to the San and

Moon, fapiter to Mercury, Mars to Venus. And theirenmity

is Rronger, whofe exaltations are oppofite : asof Saturne,

andtheSun ; of ?upiter,and AZars; of Venus, and Mercury.

Bat their friendfhip is the ftrongeft, who agree in nature,qua»

‘Jicy, fabftance, and asi ; as Mars with the Sun, and Venus

with the Moon, as fupiter with Venus, as alfotheir friendfhip
whofe exaltation is in the houfe of another, as that of Saturne

with Venus, of Pupiter with the Moonzof Murs with Saturn,
. of the Sun with AZars, of Venus with fupiter, of the Moon

with Venw:. And of what fort the friendthips,and eamities of

the fuperiours fuch are the inclinations of ‘things fubjeCted’

tothem in thefe inferiour. Thefe difpofitions therefore of

friendfhip,and enmity are nothing elfe but certain inclinations
_of things of the one to anothety, defiring fuch, and fuch a thing

ifit be abfent, and to moveto Ni ds it, uniefs it be hindred,

and co acquiefs in it when ir is obtained,fhunning the contrary,

and dreadi

- contented with it. Heraclitus therefore being guided by this o-
‘pinion, profeffed that all things were made by enmity &friend:

fhip.Now the inclinations of friendfhip are fach inVegetables

and Minerals,as-is that attra@tive' inclination, which the Load-

ing the approach of it, and not refting in, or ‘being

{tone hath upon Iron,and the Emrald upon riches, and favour ;

the Jafper upon the birth of any thing, and che Stone Achates

upon Eloquence; Inlike manner there is a kind of Bituminous

. Clay that draws Fire, .and leaps into it,wherefoever ic feesit :
fodoth the root of the Hearb Aproxis draw Fire from
afar off. Alfo the fame inclination there is betwixt. the male

palme,and female:whereof when the bough of one thal! rouch

= ~~ the bough of the other, they fold chemfeivesinte mutual em-
braces; ‘neither doth the female bring without 'the

A ond tree when ruitfull,

”
— =~~
hes
a
»
4 . w at
—
¥
’
a
4 as
ise >
”
‘a
a
¢
4 a
Ait
—_
iv

- |isk, eats Rue, whence we come to know that Orgianum, and
Rue are effe&tuall againft poifon. So in fome Animals there.

ve
om

Book J. - Occult Philofophy.

onl

“The Vines love the Elme, and the Olive-tree, and myrtle love

‘one the other : alfo the Olive-tree , and Fig-tree- Now in

‘Animals there is amity betwixt the Blackbird, and Throfh,

-becwixt the Crow, and Heron, betwixt Peacocks’, and

Pigeons, Turthes, and Parrats. Whence Sappho writesto —

‘Phaon.

To Birds unlike oftimes joyned are white: Doves
the Bird that s green, black Turtle loves.

Again, the Whale, and the lietle Fith his guide are friendly.
Neither is this amity in Animals amongft themfelves, but alfo

with other things, ‘as with Metals, Stones, and Vegetables, fo —

the Cat delightsin the Hearb Nip, by rubbing her {elf upon”
which fhe is faid to conceive without amale; and therebe ~ -

“Mares in Cappadocia, that expofe themfelves to theblaftof ~~~

the wind, and by the attraction thereof conceive. So Frogs,

‘Toads, Snakes, and.all manner of creeping poifonous things
delight in the Plant called Paf-flower, of whom, “asthe Phy-~ -
hing,
The Tortoife. alfo_ when’ he is hunted by the Adder, |

fitians fay, if any one eat, he (hall dye ‘with lang

eats Origanum, and is thereby f{trengthened : and the
_ Stork, when he hatheat Snakes, {eeks for a remedy in Ori-
- ganum : and the Weefell, when he goesto fight with the Bafi-

is an imbred skil, and medicinal! art; for whenthe Toddis

wounded with a bite or poifon of another Animall, he is wont.

to goto Rue,or Sage,and Rub the place wounded, and foef- .

capesthe danger of the poifon. So men have learned many-exs
cellent remedies of difeafes,& vertues of things from bruits;So

Swallows have fhewed us thar Sallendine is very medicinable .

for the fight , with which they cure the eyes of their young;
and the pye when the is fick, puts a Bay-leafe into her neft,and

is recovered, In like manér,Cranes, Daws, Partriges,Blackbitds

purge their naufeous ftomacks with the fame, with which alfo

we
GE
¥
¢
»
COWS allay Che pouon Of the Wnamecicon anc you,
+,” sors

Of Occult Philofophy. Booki
hebe feavotith, is recovered by eating of an Ape. The Lap- _
wing being furferted with eating of Grapes,cures himfeif with -
Southernwood ; fothe Hartshave taught us that the Hearb
Ditany is very good to draw out Darts; for.they being
wounded withan Arrow, caft it out by cating of this Hearb:
- the fame do Goats -in Candy. So Hinds, a little before they
bring forth, purge themfelves with a certain Hearb called
Mountain Offer. “Alfo' they that. are hurc with Spiders,feek
~ aremedy by eating of Crabs: Swine alfo being hurt by Snakes
“cure themfelves by eating of them ; and Crows when they
reeive they are poifoned witha kinde of Fresch poifon, feek
cure inthe’Qake ; |Elephants, when they have fwallowed
a Chameleon help themfelves with the wild. olive. Bears be-
ing hurt Mandrakes, efcapethe danger by.eating of
mires. 'Geefe, Ducks, and like watery fowle, ‘cure them-=
felves with the Hearb called wall-fage. Pigeons, Turtles,
Hens, wich the Heatb called Pellitory of she wall. Cranes
with Bull-ruthes: Leopards cure themfelves, being hurt,with
the'Hearb called Wolfes-bane, by mans-dung: Boars with.
Ivy;Hinds'with the Hearb called Cinnara...

ot

Nhe contrary there ‘are inclinations of Bamitics; and
they areasit were the od‘am, and amper, indignation,
anda certain kind of conttaricty.of- nature, fothac
any thing (huns its.contracy, and drives it away out ofjics-pre-
fence, Suchkind of inclinations hath Rhubarb Choller,
Treacle againit potfon, che Saphir Scone again{t ot biles,and
feavorith heats, and: difeafes of the eyes; the:Amethyft.a-
drankennefs, the Jafper again. Flux of; bleod; aad
offenfive imaginations, thé Emrald, Agais: Caftus —
Malt, “Achates againtt poifon'y, Piony againit-the Rallingfick-
Corailiagainft the ebullition of blackiCholiec, audepeins

ant
J
wf,
ve
ae
a
<3 a
in
”
at
‘ey
™~
f
ets:
»
¥

Book [. Of Occult F hilofopby.
of the ftomack. The Topaze.again{t |
coveteoufnels, luft, and all ‘manner of exceffes of love. The
jike inclination is there alfo of Pifmires againft the/Hearh.O-
riganus, andthe wing of a Bat, andthe heartof.aLapwing,
from the prefence of which they flie.. Origanum its
contrary to a certain poifonous fly, which cannor-endurerhe
Sun, and refilts Salamanders, and loaths Cabbage with facha
deadly-hatred, that.they deftroy one. the other; fo*Gucume
_bershate oile, and will run themfelves inte=a ring they
fhouldtouchit. And.it is faid that theGall.of aCrow' makes -
men afraid, and drivesthem where.it is, asalfo certain
other thiogs ; foa Diamend doth dilageee theshoad -
ftone, that being fet by it, it, will.not bedrawn
toits-and theep fly from,Frog:parfley, asfrom fomedeadly
thing and that whichismore wonderfull, naturehathpidtu- =
red the fign of this death in the livers.of theep; in. whiththe
very figure of Frog-parfly being
pear; So Goats do fo hate Garden were.
nothing more pernicious. And again, among AnimalsMice,
Weefels do difagree; whence itis faid shat Mice willinge
touch Cheefe, if the brains.of, a Weefel be, the renner,
and befidesthat Cheefe willnot be corrupt withrage: Soia
Lizard is fo contrary to, Scorpions, that
with its-very fight, .a8 alfo pats theminto-a cold {weéat there-
they, are killed with the pile.-pfithem, whicheilealfo
cures the wounds made by Scorpions... These
betwixt Scorpions, and Mice wherefore ifia Monfebesp-
_isreported,, There is) alfoam and
thing much an en@iny
be hurt therewith chey,eat tem,andiane The-Sumalfo.
being tormented: the Scorpionjand
Crocodile Riktone If the Bird. doth

aorggodile with his
Moveable; the Bird called Bullard away utvehe
and

= Wiper. An Elephant trembles at the hearing of the grunting
Hog, fo doth’a Lyon at the fight of a Cock: And

thers: will not: touch them that are annointed alloverwith -
the broth-of a Hen, efpecially if Garlickhath been boiledin |
it. There is alfo enmity betwixt Foxes, and Swans, Buls, and.

‘Daws. Amongft Birds alfo fome are at a perpetuall ftrifeone
‘(with another, as alfo with other Animals,as Daws,and Owles,

_ the Kite,and Crows, the Turtle, and Ring-taile, Egepis, and

 .  ‘Bagles, Harts, and Dragons. Alfo amongft Water Animals

g _ there is an enmity,as betwixt Dolphins, and Whirpools, Mul-

. . .§ets,and Pikes, Lampreys, aff Congers Alfo the fiflicalled

= -Poarcontre! makes the Lobfter fo much afraid,that che Lobfter

feeing the orker but neer him,is {truck dead. The Lobfter, and

Gongertear one the other. The Civet Cat is faid co {tand fo

awe of the Panther, that he hath no power co refilt him, or

4  yrouch his skin: and they fay that ifthe skins ofboth ofthembe

. hanged uponé againft the orher,the haires of fhe Panthers

fall off. And Orus «Apollo faith in his Hiereglyphicks, ifany

= one be girt abour with the skin of the Civet Cat, that he may

— pas fafely through the middle of his enemies, andgotatall

 beafraid, Alfo the Lamb‘is very much afraidoftheWeolfand -

flies from him. And they fay that ifthe taile, orskin, orhtad
Of a Wolf be hanged upon the fheep-coate, the fheep are
 troubled,and cannot eat their meat for fear. And ‘Pliny makes
mention of a Bitd called “AZarkin, that btéaks Crows
Eggs; whofe young are annoyed by the Fox thatthe alfo
will pinch, and pull the Foxes whelps, and the Powherfelfal.
fo: which when the Crows fee, they help the Fox againlt her)
againft a common enemy. The litle Bird called a Linnet
 ~fiving in Thiftles, haces Affes, becaufe they eat the Flowers of
 Shiftles. Alfothere is fuch bitter Chmity: becwixt’ the litle
~~ ~ Bird-called Efalon, and the Affe, that their blood will noe
mix together, and that at the braying of the Affe borhthe
*yOung of the Efalomperifh. There is'alfo fich a difa-
‘betwixt’ the Olive-tree and a Harlot, thac if the
it, will ‘citer be Valwayes unfruitfull, or altogether

a
ad
i
}
q
S

Book OF Occult Philofophy.

will be camed by nothing fo much as by thefe: andthe Wolf
fears neither fword, nor fpear, but a ftone, by the throwing of
which ~a wound being made, worms breed in the Wolf A.
Horfe fears a Camel, fo that he cannot endare to fee fo much

as his pi€ture. An Elephant when he rageth, is quieted by fee-- }

ing ofa Cock. A Snake is afraid of a man that ismaked, but:

4 -purfues a man that is clothed. A mad Bull is tamed by being
toa Fig-tree. Amber draws all things to it befides Gar-

en Bafill, and thofe things, which arefmeated with oile,

betwixt which there is a kinde of a naturall Antipathy.

CHAP, XIX.
How the Vertues.of things are to be tryedand found out Which

gift.

Mores thou mutt confider that

and courage in a Lyon,& Cock : fearfulnefs ina Harejor Lamb,
ravenoufnefs in a Wolf, treachery, and deceitfulnefs ina Fox; .
flattery ina Dog,coveteoufnels ina Crow,and Daw,pride ing

Horfe,anger in a Tygre,and Boar,fadnefs, and melancholy

are sn them {pecsfically,or any one Individuall by Way of {peciall :

Car, luft in a Sparrow,and fo of the reft. For the.greareft part of,

naturall Vertues doth follow the {pecies. Yet fome are. in things,
individually ; as there be fome men which do fo wonderfully.
abhor the fight of a Cat,that they cannot. look upon. her with-.
out quaking ; .which fear it is manifeft is not in.chem as they,
are men, And Avicen tels of a man that lived in his; time,

whom all poifonous things did fhun, allofthem dying, which. .

_ did by chance bite him, hehimfelf not being hurt, and -A/-

_bertus reports that in a City of the Udians he faw a wench
which would catch Spiders to eat them, and being -mych:
pleaied with fuch a kind of meat, was wonderfully nourifhed

therewith. So is boldnefs in a Harlot, fearfulnefs ina Thief.
And upon this account it is that Philofophers fay,thacany-

°

thi
are in fome things according to the {pecies.as boldnef

ey

of
a.

<™
«xt
Ley
4 te
os
ra
a
a
» “3

never was fi ck; is good manner
offiekatts + therefore they fay that a bone of dead man,
which névertiad'a feavor, being laid upon the patient, frees
him of ‘his quatcatie: “There are alfo many fingularveetues in. -
“into: things as We have

fubftance, and in other. thin parts, and mem-
bers.

“Gainthow mutt: that the vercties:
fome things in: the whole te whole filbftance of
them, or in all their parts, as that little fith Echenew, whichis —
faid to ftop a thip by itsmeertouch, this it,doth not doac-

cording to particular part, but ‘according tothe Whole
So°the Civet ‘Cat hath this’ in ‘its: whofe’ fob-
fiance, that Dogs by the’ very toudr of bis fhadow hold
their peace. So Salendine ts good for the fight; not according
any oné, buralfitsparts, not More in theroor then inthe
leaves, and feeds ; and of the reft. vertucsarein
things according | to fome parts of only inthe con
eyes, or fome other members, and parts; fo in ch¢ ey.
a dgafilisk, is a moft violent power to allo
as they fee'them the like power is there in the eyes’ on
the Civer Cat‘, Which makes any’ “Ahinial! ‘chat’it'hath
looked’ upon, to Hand: ftill, ‘to amized, -and* not
 tomoveit felf; The like verene is there in the eyes of fome.
Wolfes, which ifthey fee a man firt,: make hinv amazed/and.
fo hoarfe, that if he would cry our, he bath nor the ufe of
Metris hath loft bis voice, and |

a> ‘ - 4 o
a
we
te
at
a -
a
‘eal
“4
i?
¥
ay
¥S >
= t,-
ae
x
¥
é
od
< a.
o
‘ ~

Book. ise

Soalfo there were fome. certain women in Scythia, and ae

mongft the and Tribaliians, who as often asthey

‘looked angrily upon any man,werefaid toflay him. “Alfowe

read of acertain people of Rhodes, called'T elchsmes, whorcor-
rupted all things with their fight, wherefore 7upirer drowned

“them. Therefore Witches, when they wonld afterthismanner.

by witchcraft, ufe the eyes of fach kind of Animalsin

their waters for the eyes, for the like effets. In like mannerdo

- Pifmires fly from the heart of a Lapwing, not fromthe head,
foot, or eyes. So the gall of Lizards being bruifed in Water
_ is faid to gather Weefels together, not the caile or the head of
jt; and the gall of Goats put into the Earth in a brazen Vefel,

gathers Frogs together; and a Goats liver isan enemy to

Butterflies and'all Maggots, and Dogs fhun them that have
‘the heart of a Dog about them, and Foxes will not couch
thofe poultry that have eaten the liver of aFox,Sodivers things
have divers vertues difperfed varioufly through feveral parts,

asthey are from above infufed\into them according co the,

in a mans body the

diverfity of things to be received;
, the ears hearing, Ant

receive nothing but life; the eyes fi

there isin mans body a certain little bone, which the Hebrews =

ed,which is fub-
with Fire, but
a Plane

call LVZ, of the bignefs of a pulfe thatis

corruption, neither. is itsoverc
is alwaies preferved unhurt, out of-which,as they fay, as
out of the feed,our Animall bodies fhailin the Refi

the dead fpring And thefe:vermes aie
geafon, but by experience,

Of the Vertues of things which are in them onlyintheirlife = = >
time, and as remain in them even after their death
Oreover we mult that there are fome \properties

in things only whileft they live, and fome that remain.
after their death. Sothelitle fii Echener thedhipsand

bs

not cleared by

mp
re
“a4
a
°
ie
bend
is

Bafilisky and Catablepa kill with their fight, when they.are
sbut'when they are dead do no fuch thing.So they fay that
in the Coliek, if a live Duck be applyed to the belly, tt rakes:
away-the paiti,and her felfidies like co chisis that whichdre
chyras ayes. youtake aheart newly taken onc of an Ani-
whileftic is yee warm, and hang it upon one that
feayor, it drivesit away. So if any ont fwal-
the heart of Lapwing; or a Swallow, ora Weelel; ora
yee warm with naturall heat, icthalfbe
helpfull to! him for remembring, underltanding, and foretel-
- ling: Hence is this generall rule,viz, Thar whatfoever things
_ gipé taken ont of Animals, whether they be Stones, any Mem-
‘ber, .Exerements, as Haire,/Dung, Nailes, they muft betaken
from thofe Animals, whileft they be yer living; and ifit be
poffible, that fothey may bealive afterwards. Whence they
fay, when you take the tongue of aFrog, you pur the
Frog: into the water again, and if you take the tooth ef a
Wolf, you mult nor killthe Wolf; and fo of the reft. So writes
Democritus} if any. one take out.the tongue of a water-Frog,’
yerliving, no other part of the body fticking coir, and (he be
Jet go into rhe W ater again, & lay it upon the place where the
heart -beats,of a woman, fhe thall anfwer cruly whatloeveryou _
they fay,that if the eyes ofa Frog be before Sun.
fifisig bound to the fick ‘party, andthe Frog be. ler go. again —
Blind ifito che Water, they will drive away
 alfoithar they, will being hound with the Hefh efia Nightingale
inthe skin ofa Hart,keep one alwaics wacchfull without -Meep,
Alfo the ray of the fork fith being bound to the Navil,is faid to-
make a woman have an eafie travel, if it be taken from it alive,
and that put into the Sea again... So they fay the right eye of a
Serpent being applyed, doth help che watering of the eyes,
theSorpeat belergoalive. And thece\is a, contain file, or
great Serpenticalled whole eye,if ithe pulled ontzand
bound to the forehead of the patient, is faid to cure the in-
lamation of she eyes, ond.that the eye of the:
and be is, taken blind: char, didnot detthafith go,

a, ‘pense, : £
‘ > - .

w é & ~
Pics:
‘
A
om
Se;
ie
a >
§
«

being {trained upon aHarp, or Lute:with made of

Book OF Occult Philofophys

are alive, at nel about the patient, are faid to core the -
uattane. So doth the tooth of a Mole taken out whilefttheis

shee. being afterwards let go,cure the tooth-ach: and Dogs _

will not bark at thofe that have che taile of a Weefehthar is
efcaped. And Democritus relates that the congue of a Chame-
leon, if it be taken from her alive, doth condace toagéod
fuccefs in trials, and is profitable for women that are in travel,

it be about the outhide of the houfe, for youmulttakeiheed

_ that it be not bronght into the houfe, becaufe that would be

= . moft dangerous; there be fome properties that res
main after death and of thefe the Platonifis fay, -that they

are things in which the Jdea of the matter is lefs fwallowed up,

in thefe, even after death that which is immortall in

not ceafe to work wonderfull things. So in the: Hearbsyand
Plants pulled afurider, and dryed, that vertneis quick,and epes

rative which was infufed at firft into chem by the Jdea. Thence:

it is,that as the Eaple all her life cime doth overcome all. other:
birds: fo alfoher feathers after! fier death deftroy, and con=

fume the feathers of alfother’ birds)! Upon the: fame: account:
doth a Lyons skin deftroy ali other skins: andthe skavof the

 Civer Cat deftroyestthe skin of the Panthers arid she skinofa.
Wolf corrodes the skin ofa Lamb: And fome of thefedofion
do it by way of acorporeall contra, ‘but alfo fometimes:by

their very found.So a drum made of the skin of a Wolf, makes

adrum of a Lambskin not to found. Alfoa drum made!

| of the skin of the fith called Roteher, drives away all on
things, at what diftance foever the found of it isheard:
firiogs of an inftrument made of the guts of a Wolfjand ~

e

> ‘

* «>
a.
‘>
a
- ed
Ag
‘
Jf
a
f
ee »
e
r
‘

h

PY at
Of

Enferiour things are fubjefted to fuperiour bodies, andhow:
she aélions, and of men are afcribed to

is manifeft chat all things inferiour are fubjeét co the fupe-

.  § tiour, and: after a manner (as faith Proc/ns) they are one in
‘the other,viz. in inferiour are fupertour, and in fupertour are
inferiour: fo in the Heaven are things Terreftiall, but as in

eit caufe, andina Celeftiall manner ; and inthe Earth are

things Celeftiall, but after a Terreftiall manner,as in an effeR..

So wefay that there behere certain things which are Solary,

and-certain which are Lunary, in Which theSun, and Moon

_make.aiftrong impreffion of cheirvertuc. Whence it ts thatthefe

oftthings receive more operations, and properties, like to

thofe of the Stars, & Signes which they are ander:So we know
that Solary:chings refpe@t the heart, & head, by reafonthat Leo

the houfe of the Sun, and Aries the exaltation of the Sun: fo

things under AZars ate good for the head, and tefticles, by

reafomot Aries, and Scorpio, Hence they whofe fenfes faile,
_and-heads ake by reafon of drunkennefs, if they put their tefti-.

€lesinto cold Water, or wath them with Vineger,find prefent
help. Butin reference to thefe jit is neceflacy ro know. how
mans body is diftribuced to Planets,& Signes. Know therefore
that according to the do&rine of the Arabians, the Sun-rules

over the brain, heart, the thigh,the marrow, the right eye, and

the fpirit ; alfo the tongue, the mouth, and the reft of the

Organs of the fenfes, as well internal] as excernall; alfo. the

_ hands, feet, legs, nerves, and the power ofimagination. That

Mercury rules over the fpleen, ftomack, bladder, womb, and

Sight ear, as-alfo the faculcy of the common fenfe. That.Sa-

vules over the liver, and flefhy part of the“ftomack, That™

fupiter over the belly, and navill, whence ic is written by che

Ancients, thac the effigies of a navil was laid upin che temple

Of Pupiter Hammon, . Alfo fome attribute to -him it

»
q
at
J |
i
a |
as
¥,
be}

breaft, bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand; and left car,

and the powers natural . And fome fet Adars over theblood,

and veins, and kidnies the bag of the gall, the buttocks, the ©

back, and motion ofthe fperm, and .the irafcible power:

fleth, fat, belly, breaft, navill, and all fuch parts as ferve to

venerall a&ts,alfo the Os /acrum, the back bone, and loins ; as:
alfo the head, mouth, with which they give a kifs,asa token of -
love. Now the Moon; although fhe may challenge the whole _

body, and every member thereof according to the variety

of the Signes : yet more ey they afcribe toherthe
one, the the

brain, lungs, marrow of the back
~- menftrues, and all other excrements, and the left eye, as.alfo
the power of increafing. But Hermes faith, That there are

feven holes in the Read of an Animall,diftributed tothe feven
Planets,viz. the right €ar to Saturne, the left to 7 upiter, the . ss

right noftrell to AZars, the left to Venus, thé right eyerothe
Sun; the left to the AZoon, and the mouth to Afercury. The .

feverall Signes alfo of the Zodiack take care of their members.
So Aries governs the head, and face; Taurus the neck; Gemini

the arms, and fhouldets, Cancer the breaft,, lungs, ftomack, -

and.armes, Leo heart, ftomack, liver, and back, Virgo the
bowels, and botrome of the ftomack,Zibra the kidnies, thighs,

and buttocks, Scorpius the genitals, the privities, and womb, ~

Sagittarius the and groins, apricornus the knees, Aqua-
rius the Jegsand

of thefe Signes anfwer one the other, and agtee in Celeftials,

fo alfo they agree in the members, which is fufficiently mantfelt:

by experience, becaufe with the coldnefs of the feet,the belly, —

and breaft are affe@ted, which members anfwer the fametripli-
city ; whence itis, if a medicine be applyed to the one,it helps
the other, as by the warming of the fe

ceafeth. Remember theretore this order, afid- know, that.

things which are under any one of the Planets, have acertain
particular afpeét, or inclination co thofe members. thatate
tribuced to that Planet, and efpecially:. to the houfes;andex. .

leati

Againthey fet Venus over the kidnies,the tefticles,the privities,
the womb, the feed, and concupifcible power; asalfo.the .

ins, Pi/ces the feet. And as the triplicities..

et, the painiof the belly

“* ~
- x is
t
q z
“@-
Sag
é
> a
»

Philofphy..  Book4
Of Oceult hilo 2) | 6) 9)

then: Solary things, or things under. the ‘power of the Sun

altationsthereof. For the reft of the dignities,.as thofe tripli-
cities, and markes, and face are of litleaccount in this; upon
this account therefore Piony,Balme,Clove-gilliflowers, Citron-
pils, fweet Majoram,Cynnamon , Saffron, Ligaum Aloes,

Feankincenfe, Amber , Musk, and Myrrh help the head,

and. heart; by reafon of Sol, Aries , and Leo ; fo doth
Rib-wort,the Hearb of AZars, help the head, and tefticles by
reafon of e4ries, and Scorpio : and fo of the reft. Alfo all things
under S.turne conduce to fadnefs, and melancholly; thofe un-

-der Pupiter to mirth, and honour ;, thofe under ALars to bold-

nefs, contention, and anger ; thofe under the S#x to glory; |
yiGtory;and courage; thofeunder Venus to love,lult,and con-
cupifcence ; thofe under Afercury to Eloquence; thofe under
the to acommon life. Alfo allthe aétions, and difpo-
fitions‘of men are diltributed according to the Planets. For
Saturne governes old m:n, Monkes,melancholly men,and hid
treafures; and thofe things which are obtained with long
journies, and difficulty ; but ?piter,thofe that are Religious,

-Prelates, Kings, and Dukes, and fuch kind of gains thar are

got lawfully : AZars rules over Barbers, Chirurgeons, Phyfi-

_ tians, Sergents, Executioners, Butchers, all that make fires,

Bakers,Souldiers,who are every where called Matial men.Alfo

. do the orber Stars fignifie their office, as they are defcribed in

thebooksofAftrologers,

atten

CHAP, XXIII.

Hom We Shall know what Stars naturall things are under, and
what things are under the Sun, which are called Solary.

TOw itis very hardto know, what Star, or Signe every

aN thing is under: yet it is known through the imitation of
_ their ayes, or motion, or figure of the fuperiours. Alio fome

of them are known by their colours and odours, alfo fome by
the effects of their operations, anfwering to fome Stars,.. So

arc,

we
at
a."
* » >
Max
A
Pa
at
q |
“>
q

are, amongft Elements, the lucid flame; in the humours, the
purer blood, aad fpirit of life; amongit talts, chat which is
quick, mixed. withfweetnefs. Amongft Metals, Gold»by reafon
of its fplendor,and its receiving that from the Sun which makes

it cordiall. And amongft ftones, chey whichrefemble the

rayes of the Sun by their golden fparklings , asdoth the glit-
tering ftone Actites which hath power againft the Falling-
ficknefS, and poifons : fo alfo the ftone, whiclris called the eye

of the Sun, beinggaf a figure like to the Apple of the eye, from __
the middle whereof fhines forth a ray , it comforts the brain, =
and {trengthens the fight ; So the Carbuncle which fhinesby 4
night, hatha vertue againft all aiery, and vaporous poifon: ~~

fo the Chryfolite ftone is of a light green colour, in which,

when ic is held againft the Sun,there fhines forth a golden Star; —

and this comforts thofe parts that ferve for breathing, & helps
thofe that be Afthmaticall, and if it be bored through, and the
hole filled with the Mane of an Affe, and bound to the left
arme, it drives away idle imaginations, and melancholy fears,

and puts away foolifhnefs : So theftone called Iris , whichis

like Cryftall in colour, being often found with fix corners, —

when under fome roof part of it is held againft the-rayes of
the Sun, and the other partis held in the fhadow’ it gathers
‘the rayes of the Sun into it felf, which; whileft ic fends them
forth, by way of refle&tion, makes. Rain-bow appear on the

-oppofite wall. Alfo the Stone Heliotropion green like the -

Jafper, or Emrald,befee with red fpecks, makes a man conftane,
renowned, and famous, alfo it conduceth to long And
the vertue of itindeed is ‘moft wonderfull upon the beams of
the Sun,.which it is faidto turn into blood (e.¢.) to appear of
thecolour of blood, asif the Sun were-eclypfed,aiz., When
it is.joyned to the juice of an Hearb of the fame name, and.be
put incoa veflell fullof Water: Thereisalfo another vertue
of it more wonderfull,and that is upon the eyes of men,whofe
fight ic doth fo-dim,and.dazel,chat, fdoth not faffer him that.

carries it tofee it,& this ic doth not-do withour the help of the

Heath of the faid name , which alfo is;called Heliotropium,
following the Sun. Thefe vertues doth Albertus: Magen,

a

| | ia
“>
te
‘
‘
> ‘
°
°
a

Of Occult Philofophy.
‘and William of Par:s confirm in their writings. The Hyacinth
“alfo hatha vertue from the Sun againft pomonnane peftiferous
~ -yapours;it makes him that carries it to be fafe, and acceptable;
it conduceth alforto richés, and wit, it ftrengthens the heart;
being held in the mouth, it doth wonderfully cheer up the
mind. Alfo there is the ftone Pyrophylus, of a red mixture,
which Albertus Magnus, faith -#fculapims, makes mention
-‘ofin one of his Epiftles unto Offavius Auguftus, faying, that
there isa certain poifon fo wonderfull colle which preferves
the heart of man being taken out from burning, fochat if for |
time it be put into the Fire, itis turned into a {tone, and
this is that {tone which is called Pyrophylus, from the fire. It
~~ ath a wonderfulf vertue againft poifon , and it makes him
‘ghat‘carries it, co be renowned and dreadfull to his enemies.
‘But above all, that {tone is moft Solary,which Apollonius is re-
_ ported to have found, and iscalled Pantaura, which draws o-
“ther ftonesto it, asthe Loadftone doth Iron, moft powerfull
- againft all peifons; it iscalled by fome Pantherus, becaufe it
‘is fpotted like the beaft called the Panther. Ic is therefore alfo.
called Pantochras,becaufe it contains all colours. Aaron cals -
it Evanthum. There are alfo other Solary ftones, asthe Topa-
zius, Chryfopafius, the Rubine, and Balagius. So alfo is Au-
rlpigmentum, and things ofa goldencolour, and very lucid.
Amongit plants alfo and trees,thofe are Solary, which turn to-
twards che Sun, as the Marygold, and thofe which fold in their
Teaves when the Sun is neer upon fecting ; but when ‘it rifech
_ unfold their leaves by little and little. The Lore-tree alfo is
‘Solary,as is manifeft by the figure of the fruit &leaves.So alfo
Piony, Sallendine, Balme,Ginger,Gentian, Dittany, & Vervin,
which is of ufe in prophecying, and expiations, as alfo drivin
The Bay-tree alfo is confecrated to Phebus,
fo isthe Cedar, the Palmtggee,the afh, the Ivie, and Vine,. and

whatfoever repel! and lightnings, and thofe hings
ry alfo

Book

which never fear the -extfemities of the Winter. Sola

_- are Mint, Maftick, Zedoary, Saffron, Balfome, Amber, Musk,
 ¥ellow-honey, Lignum aloes, Cloves, Cinnamon, Calamus,

Atomaticus, Pepper, Frankincenfe, fweet Majoram, and

— — —
ak
a
| f
j
> a
a. 2
7 —
j
a
Sal 5 *
he
*e
‘ d
G
e

Book - OF Occult Philofophy. -
Libanotis, which Orpheus cals the {weer perfume of the Sun. |

- Amongft Animals thofe are Solary which are magnanimous,
couragious, ambitious of victory, and renown + asthe Lyon,
King of beafts, the Crocodile, the {potted Wolf, the Ram, the
Boar,the Bull, King of the herd, which was by the Egyptians at
Heliopolis dedicated to the Sun,which they callVerites;and an

Ox wasconfecrated to Memphi, andin Herminthusa
Bull by the name of Paths. The Wolf alfo was'‘confecrated
to Apollo,and Latona. Alfothebeaftcalled BaboonisSolary, @

which twelve cimés in a day,viz, every hour barks, and intime
of Equinoctium piffeth twelve times every hour : che fame alfo
it doth in the night, whence the Egyptians did Engrave him

-upontheir Fountains, Alfo amongft birds thefe are Sofary,
the Phenix, being but one of that kind, and the Eagle, che

Queen of birds, alfo the Valeur, the Swan, and thofe which
fing at the rifing Sun, and asic were Calling upon it to rife, as
the Cock, Crow, alfo the Hawk, which becaufe in the Divinity
of the Egyptians is an emblem of the fpirit, and light, is’ by
Porphyrius reckoned amongft the Solary birds. Moreover,
all {uch things as have fome refemblence of the works of the
Sun, as Worms fhining inthe night, and the-Betle, which isa
creature that lies under Cow- dung; alfo according to-Appions
interpretation, fuch whofe eyesare changed according torhe -
courfe of the Sun, are accounted Solary, and thofe things
which come of them. And amongft fifh, the Sea Calfischicefly
Solary, who doth refift lightning, alfo thell fifh, and the fith
called Pu/mo, both which thine in the night, and the fith called.
Stella for his parching heat, and the fifh called Strombi, that
follow their King, and Margari, which alfo havea King; and
being dryed,are hardened inco a ftone ofa goldencolour.

in
‘
« ad

OF Occult Philojophy.. BOOK 1-

iL.

_. What things are Lunary,or under the power of the Moon,

Hefe things are Lunary,among{t the Elements,vsz. the.
T Earth, then the Water, as well that of the Sea, asofthe —
Rivers and all moift chings,as the moifture of Trees, and Ani-
mals,efpecially they which are‘White, as the Whites of Eggs,
fat, fweat,flegme,and the fuperfiuities of bodies. Amongfttalts,
falt, and infipid : amongft Metals, Silver’; amongf{t{tones,
Cryftall, the Silver Marcafite , and allchofe ftones that are
White, and Green. Alfo the ftone Selenites (e.¢,) Lunary, |
fhining from a white body, with a yellow brightne(s, imirating
the motion of the Moon,having in it the figure of the Moon
; which daily increafeth, or decreafeth as doth the Moon.
me ~~. »; Alfo Pearls, which are generated in fhels of fifhes from the
*droppings of Water, alfo the Berill. Amongft Plants and
‘Trees, thefe are Lunary,as the Selenotropion, which turns
--wardsthe Moon, as doth the Heliotropion towards the Sun,
and the Palme tree fends forth a bough at every rifing of the
Moon; Hyffope alfo, and: Rofemary, Agnus Caftus, and the
Olive.tree, areLunary. Alfothe Hearb Chinofta,which in-
creafeth, and decreafeth with the Moon,viz, in fubftance, and
number of leaves, not only in Sap, and vertue, which indeed
isin fome fort common to all Plants, except Onions, which
are under the influence of J4ars; which have contrary pro-
-perties; Asamongft flying things the Sacurnine bird, called a
Quaile is a great enemy to the Moon and Sun.Lunary Animals
are fach as delight cobein mans company, and fuch as do na-
turally excell in love or hatred,.as all kinds of Dogs : The
_ < Chameleon alfo is Lunary, which alwaies affumes a colour ac-
. cording to the variery of the colour of the objet : as the
Moon changeth her nature according to the variety of the
Signe which it is found in.Lunary alfo are Swine,Hinds, Goats,
and all Animals whatfoever, that obferve, and imitate the
dMotion of the Moon: -As the Baboon, and Panther, which
tohave afpot upon her fhoulder like the Moon, in-

ill
: ‘
£4
re
q
é

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy.
- creafing into a roundnefs, and having horns that bend inwards.
Cats alfo are Lunary, whofe eyes become greater or lefs, ac-
cording to the courfe of the Moon : and thofethings which

are of like nature, as Menftruous blood, of which are made
wonderfull ftrange things by Magicians; The Civet-Cae alfo
changing her fex, being obnoxious to divers Sorceries, and all

Animals that live in water as well as on land : as Orters, and

fuch as prey upon fifh. Alfoall Monftrous beaits, fuch as with-
out any manifeft feed are equivocally generated, as Mice,
which fometimes are generated by Coition, fometimes of the’

trefaction of the Earth. Amongft fowle, Geefe, Ducks,
Didopperi,and all kind of watery fowl as prey upon fith, as

_ the Heron, and thofe that are equivocally produced, as Walps

of the Carkafes of horfes : Bees of the putrefa&tion of Cows,
fmall Flies of putrefied wine, and Betles of the fleth of Affess
but moft Lunary of all isthe two-horned Betle, horned after

the manner ofa Bull: which digs under Cow-dung,and there xi

remaines for the {pace of twenty eight daies, in whithtime
the Moon meafures the whole Zodiack and in thetwenty ninth

day,when it thinks there will be a conjundtion of their bright-

nefs , it opens the dungand cafts it into Water,from whence -

then come Betles.Amongtt fith thefe are Lunary, £Jurus,whofe:

eyesare changed according to the courfe of the Moon, and

- whatfoever obferve the motion of the Moon, as the Tortoife,

_ the Echeneis, the Crab Oifters, Cockles, and Frogs, -

CHAP.

What things are Saturnine,or under the power of Saturne,

S Aturnine things, amongft Elements, are Earch , and-alfo’-
‘i

) Water: amongft humors, black Choller that is moift, as

well natural,as adventitions,aduftCholler is exeepted. Amongft
ta{ts, foure, tart, and dead: Amongft Metals, Lead, and Gold,

by reafon of its weight, and the golden Marcalite. Amongit

{tones, the Onix,. the. Ziazaa, the Camonius, the Saphir, the
brown Jafper, the Chalcedon, the Loadftoné and ail dark,

f

weighty,

he

= ¢
»
«€
a4
i=
»
—_
»
is
a

~~ weighty, earthy things. Amongft Plants, and Trees the Daffo- _
dill, Dragon-wort, Rue, Cummin; Hellebor, the tree from
whence Benzoine comes, Mandrake, Opium, and thofe things
which ftupifie,and thofe things which are never fown,andnever
bear fruit,and thofe which bring forth berries of a dark colour,
and black fruit, as the black tig-tree, the Pine-tree, the Cy-
pref-tree, and a certain tree ufed at burials, which never
fprings afreth with berries, rough, of a bitter talt, of a {trong
-fmell, of a black fhadow, yielding a moft harp pitch, bearing
a moft unprofitable fruit,never dies with age,deadly,dedicated
to Pluto, as isthe Hearb paf-flower, with which they were |
wont Anciently to ftrow the graves before they put. the dead
bodies into them, wherefore ic was fawfull to make their
“ Garlands at feafts with all Hearbs, and Flowers befides paf-
flower , becaufe it was mournfull, and not conducing to
mirth: Alfoall creeping Animals, living apart, and folitary,
— nightly , fad, contemplative, dull, covetous, fearfull, melan-
cholly, that take much pains, flow, thar feed grofly, and fuch
-aseat their young. Ofthefe kinds therefore are the Mole, the
~ Affes, the Wolf, the Hare, the Mule, the Cat, the Camel, the
Bear, the Hog, the Ape, the Dragon, the Bafilisk, the Toad,
all Serpents, and creeping things, Scorpious,Pifmires, and fuch
things as proceed from putrefaction in the Earth, in Water,
or in the ruines of houfes,; as Mice, and many forts of
_ Vermin... Amongft birds thofe are Saturnine, which have
long necks, and harfh voices, as Cranes, Eftriches,and Pea-
cocks, which are dedicated to Saturn, and funo. Alfo the
‘fcrich-Owle, the horn-Owle, the Bat, the Lapwing, the Crow,
‘the Quaile, which is the moft envious bird of all.. Amongft |
- fithes, the Eel, living apart from all other fifh ; the Lamprey,
‘the Dog-fifh, which devours her young, alfo the Tortoife,
‘Oifters, Cockles, co which may be added Sea-fpunges, and all

be
‘

| C H P

é
é
a
a
e
‘
“4
i
¥
is
P
re
G |

E

what things are under the power of Jupitery and are calle

Fovial.

os under 7apiter, among{t Elements, are the Aire: a-

mongft humors, blood):and the fpirit of fife, alfo alf
things which refpeét the encreafe; nourifhment,and vegetati?

_onof the life. Amongfttafts furh as are and

Amongft Metals, Tin, Silver, and Gold, by reafonof their
cemperatencfs: Amongf{t ftones, the Hyacinth, Beri), Saphir,
the Emrald, green Jafper, and aiery colours ¢ Amongft’Plants
and Trees,Sea-green,Garden Bafil,Buglofs, Mace, Spike,Mints,
Mattick, Elic the Violet,;: Darnell, Hetibane, the Po-
plar tree, and thofe which are called lucky trees, as the Oke, “a
the tree A{culus, whichis like an Oke, but muchbigger, the -
Holm tree, the Beech tree, the’ Hafle tree, the Service cree,
the white Fig tree, the Peaytree, the Apple tree, the Vine, the a
tree,the Ath; the Dog-tree,and the Olive tree, “and alfo’
Oile. Alfo all manner of Corn,as Barley; Wheat,alio Raitms,
Licorifh,Sugar, and all fuch things whofe fweetnefs ismanifeft,
and fubcile, partaking fomewhat of an aftringent, and fharp 4
taft, as are Nuts, Abmonds,*Pine-apples, Filberds ~Piftake
Nuts, roots of Peony, Mirabolans, Rhubarb, and Manna,’
pheus adds: Storax. Amongft Animals fuch' have: {ome Rate-
linefs, and wifdominthem, and thofe which are mild; ‘well
trained up, and of good difpofitions, as the Hart, Elephanr, ,
and thofe which are gentle,as cheSheep,andLambs: Amongft
birds, thofe that are Of aremperate complexion, as Hens, toge-
ther with the Yolk of thetr'Eggs.Alfo the Partridge: the
Pheafant, the Swasiow, the Pelhcan, the Cuckow, thé -Stork:’
birds given to a Aind of devotion which are Emblemes of gras
titude. The Eagle is dedicated to eer. the is the Enfigne of .
Emperours,and an Embleme of Juftice,andClemency: Amongft
fith, the Dolphin, the fifh called Anchia, the Sheath fifh, by .
rcafon of his devoutnefs.

CHAP.

d
le

Bookt

ta things are Martiall, amiong{t Elements, Fire, toge- —
with all adult, and (harp things : Amongft humours,
-Cholier; alfo bitter tafts, tare, and burning the tongue , and
tears : Amongft Metals; Iron, and red Brafs ; and all
“fiery, red, and fulphureous things : Amongft Stones the Dia-
mond, Loadftone, the Blood-ftone, the Jafper, the ftone that
confifts of divers kinds, the Amethift. Amongft Plants, and.

- Jrees, Hellebor, Garlick, Euphorbium, Cartabana, Armoni-
ack, Radith, the Laurell, Wolfs: bane, Scammony, and all fuch

-  asare poyfonous,by reafon of coo much heat, and thofe which
are befet round about with prickles, or by touching the skin,

burn it, prick it, or make it fwell, as Cardis, the Nettle, Crow-
foot, and fuch as being eaten caufe tears, as Onyons, Afcolo-

nia, Leeks, .Multardfeed, and all thorny Trees, and the Dog-

tree, which is dedicated to, AZars. And all fuch Animalsasare

x

: = warlike, ravenous, bold,and of clear fancy,as the Horfe,Male,

Goat, Kid, Wolf, Libard, the wild Afs; Serpents alfo, and
Dragons full of difpleafure, and poyfon ; alfo all fuchas are.
offenfive to men, as Gnats, Flies, Baboon, by reafon of his
anger. All Birds that are ravenous, devour fiefh, break bones,
asthe Eagle, the Faulcon, the Hawk, the Vulcur; and thofe
which are called the fatall Birds, as the Horn-Owl, che Scrich-

_ Owl, Caftrels, Kites, and fach as are hungry,and ravenous,and

fuch as make a noife in their fwallowing, as Crows, Daws, the ~

- which above all che reft is dedicated to And

we

4 a
. ty?
“

‘

| mongft Fifhes, che Pike, che Barbell, the Fork-fith, the Fh
that hath horns like a Kam, the Sturgeon, che Glaucus, all
Poe

ad
ou
I
¥
i
A
¢
f

Book! Of Occult Philofophjy
VERE
what things are under the power of Venus, and arecalledVenee

reall, ae.
rT Bete things are under Venug, amongtt Elements, Aireand
Water; among(t humours, Flegm, with Blood, Spirie,
and Seed ; amongft rafts, chofe which are: {weet, un@tuqus,and
deleGtable ; amonglt Metals, Silver, and Brafs, both yellow,
and red ; amongft Stones, the Berill, Chryfolite, Emrald,. Sa-
phir, green Jafper, the Corneola, the ftone Aetites, the Lazull _
ftone, Corall, and all ofa fair, various, white, and green Co-
lour ; amongft Plants and Trees the Vervin, Violet, Maiden-
haire, Valerian , which by the Arabian is called Phu ; alfo
Thyme, the gum Ladanum, Amber- grife, Musk, Sanders, Cori-
ander,and all {weet perfumes,and.delightfull,and {weet fruits,
as fweet Pears, Figs, Pomegranats, which the Poets fay was,in:
Cyprus, firft fown by Venus. Alfo the Rofe of Lucifer was
to her, alfo the Myrtle tree of Hefperus. Moreover
all luxurious, delicious Animals, and of a {trong love, as Dogs,
Conies, ftinking Sheep, and Goats, both female, andmale, __
which generates fooner then any other Animall, for they fay
_ that he couples after the feventh day of his being brought.
forth; alfothe Bull for his difdain, and the Calffor-hiswans:
ronnefs; Amongtt birds the Swan, the Wagtail, the Swallow,
the Pellican, the. Burgander, which are-very loving’ to their®
yong. Alfothe Crow, and Pigeon, which is dedicated'to
and the Turtle,one whereof was Commanded.to be offers
ed at the purification,after bringing forsh. The Sparvow alfo:
was dedicated to Venus, which was Commanded inthe Law!
to be ufed in the purification, -afcer the Lepréfie, a
difeafe,then which nothing wasof more force to refilt it; Alfa
the Egyptians called the Eagle Venus, becaufe the is proneto
Venery, for after fhe hath been trod thirteen timesina day, if
the Male call her, fhe runs to him again. Amongftfifhes,thefe
are Venereall, the luftfull Pilchards, the letcherous Gilthead,
the pet for her love to her yong, the Crab fighting for his

Mate,and Tithymallus for its fragrant, and fweet {mell.

“
“ee
gts
o

Occal Book. L

What ings are the power of are called Mer.
re:

Lat,

Hings under are thefe, Bement: Wa-
ter, although it moves all things indiftin@ly ; amongft
ape humors, thofe efpecially which are mixed, as alfo the Animall
‘tog fpirit ; ‘amonght tafts thofe that are various, ftrange, and mix-
ed’: amongft Metals, Quick-filyer, Tin, the Silver Marcafite;
-amongtt ftones, the Emrald, Achates; red Marble, Topaze,and
thofe which are of divers colours,and various figures naturally,
& thofe chat are arcificiall,as glafs,& thofe which have a colour
mixed with yellow, and green. Amongit Plants,and Trees,the
Hazle, Five-leaved-grafs, the Hearb Mercury, Fumitary,
Pimpernel , Majoram, Parfly, and fuch as have fhorrer and:
lefs leaves, being compounded of mixed natures, and divers.
colours. Animals alfo, that are of quick fence, ingenious,
trong, inconftane, and fuch as become eafily- acquain-
ted with men, as Dogs, Apes, Foxes, Weefels, the Hart, and
‘Mule; and all Animals that are of both fexes,) and. thofe
which can change theit Sexjas the Hare; Civec.Gat,! and
like. Amongft birdsschofe which are naturally wittysmelodious,
and inconftanr, ‘as the Linet, Nightingale,Blackbird; Thrbth,
Lark, the Gnat-fapper,-the bird Calandra, the Parret, the Pic, —
the Bird Ibis, the bird Porphyrio, the black Betle with one
horn. And amongft fith, the fith called Trochius,which goes into
himfelfzalfo for dectttfulnefs; and changeable.
.mefs, and the Fork' fifh for its induftry ; the Malik alo cha.
thes of he bacon the hook

F
“a
i
‘
«5
A
i
a

‘
™

CHA
Rad

©
e
a
y
°
“a
x
<A ¥

Book I. Of Occult Philojfophy.

That the whole fublunary World, and thefe things which it
are diftributedto Planets,

) Oreoverwhatfoever is found in the whole world is made
according to the governments of the Planets, and ac-
cordingly receives its So in Fire the‘enlivening light:
thercof is under the ee. of the Sun,the heat of it under
Mars, in the Earth, the various fuperficies thereof under the
Moon, and Mercury, and théftarry Heaven, the whole mafs- —
ofit under Saturne, but inthe middfe Elements, Aire is under
Jupiter, and Water the Joon, but being mixed are under.
-CMercury, and Venus. In like manner natorall active ‘canfes
obferve the Sun, the matter the Moon, the fruitfulnefs
of ative caufes fupiter, the fruitfullnefs of the matter,
Venus, the fudden effe€ting of any thing, AZars, and Afer-
cury, that for his vehemency, this for his dexterity, and mani-".
fold vertue: But the permanent continuation ofall thingsis:  \-
afcribed to Saturne.Alfo amongft Vegetables, every thing that
bears fruit is from fupiter,and every thing that bears. Flowers’
is from Venus,all Seed,andBark is from AZercury,and all roots -
from Suturne, and all Wood from AZars, and leaves from the:
Afoon. Wherefore all that bring forth fruit, and not Flowers,
are of Saturne and-fupiter, but they that bring forth Flowers,
and Seed, and not fruit, are of Venus, and Mercury; Thefe:
which are brought forth of their own accord without Seed,are’ ~
of the Afoon, and Saturne; All beauty is fromVenus, alk
ftrength from AZars, and every Planet rules, and difpofeth:
that which is like co it.Alfo in ftones,their weight,Clamminefs,:-
Slipticknelfs is-of Saturne, their ufe,and temperament of
_ter, their hardnefs from Jars, their life fromthe San, their’
beauty and fairnefs from Venus, their occule vértue from Aders’
their common ufe from the. TG

A

f>
t
<“
a7
{,
P 7

| How Provinces, and Kingdomes are diftributed to Planets,

: Oreover the whole Otb of the Earth is diftributed by
ee Kingdoms, and Provinces to the Planets, and Signes :
‘For Macedonia, Thracia, Hlyria, India; Arriana, Gordiana;
(many of which countries are in the leffer Afia) are under,
_turne with Capricorn; but. with Aquarius, under himare the
Sauromatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia , Phazania,
Media, Aithiopia, which.Countries for the moft part belong
_ moreinward Afia. Under Pupiter with Sagittarius are
| Tufcana, CelticasSpaine, and happy Arabia: under him with.
Pifces, ate Lycia., Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia;
Nafamonia, and Lybia. Wars with Aries governs Britany,
France, Germany, Baftarnia,the lower parts of Syria,Idumea, —
and Judea : with Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena,Cappado-
San with Leo go-
verns Italy, Apulia, Sicilia, Phenicia,Chaldea,& the Orchenians.
Venus with Taurus governs the Ifles Cyclades,the Seas of litle
Afia,Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Perfia: but with Libra thecom-
mands the people of the Jfland Bratia, of Cafpia, of Seres, of
Thebais, of Oafis, and of Troglodys. AZercury with Gemini,
rules, Hircania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica ». Marmarica,
andthe lower Egypt : but with Virgo, Greecey Achaia,
- Creta,. Babylon, Mefopotamia, Affyria, and Ela, whence.
__ they of that place are in Scripture called Elamites. The. AZoon.
With (Cancer govetns Bithivia, Phrygia,Colchica, Numidia, A-
frica, Carthage, and all Carchedonia,.. Thefe. we have in this,
manner gathered ‘from Frolomies opinion, ;to.. which, .ac-
cording co the writings of other Aftrologers, many: mope may,
beadded. Buc he which’Knows how to compare. thele divifi-
. OF Provintes according to the divifions of,the, Stars, with,
the Miniftery. of the ruling Intelligencies, and-bleth
‘Tribes of Ifrael, rhe lots.ofiche, Apofiies, a
the facred Scripture,(hall be able to obtain great and prophe
exarles concerning every Region, of thingstocome.

‘
~ ‘
»*
Ba
{
j ;
¢
it ‘
i
a“
s
é
4 i

4h,

fen
‘

be
a 4 4
a
4, ‘

Of Occult Philofophy,

Book I.
CHAP. XXKIE
What things are under the Signes, the fixed Stars, and sheir

Images.

He like confideration is tobe had in all things concern-
A ing the figures of the fixed Stars; fo they will have the
Terreftiall Ram to be under the rule of the Celeftiall Aries:
and the Terreftiall Bull, and Ox to be under the Celeftiall
Taurus. So alfo that Cancer Chould rule over Crabs, and Leo
over Lyons : Virgo over Virgins, and Scorpio over Scorpions.
Capricorn over Goats, Sagittarius overt Horles, and Pifces
over Fithes. Alfo the Celcftiall Ur/a over Bears, Hydra over
Serpents, and the Dog-{tar over Dogs, and fo of the reft. Now
Apuleius diftributes certain and peculiar Hearbs to the Signes,
and Planets, viz, to Arses the Hearb Sange, to Zaurus Ver-
vine that grows ftraight,to Gemini Vervine that growes bend-
ing, to Cancer Comfrey, to Leo Sowbread, to Vergo Calamint,
to Libra Mug-wort, to Scorpio Scorpion-grafs, to Sagittarius
Pimpernell, to Capricorn the Dock , t0 Aquarius Dragon- -
wort, to Pi/cesHart-wort. And tothe Planets thefe,viz, to
Saturne sen-green, to Jupiter Agrimony, to Sulphur-
wort, to the Sun Marygold, to Venus Wound-wort, to A4er-
Mulleine, tothe Afoon, Peony. But Hermes, whom Al-
bertus follows, diftributes tothe Planets thefe,vic, ito -
the Daffodill. to Zupiter Henbane, to AZars Rib-worty texche
Sun Knotgrafs, to Venus Vervine, to AZercwry, Cinguefoile,
to the A400n, Goof foot. We alfo know by experience'that
Afparagus ts under e4ries, and Garden-bafill under Scorpie;
For of the fhavings of Ramf-horn fowed, comes forth Afpara- -
gus, and Garden Bafill rubbed betwixt two ftones, produceth -

Scorpions. Moreover I will according to the doétrine of . ~

Hermes, and Thebit reckon up fome of the more eminent —
Stars, whereof the firft is called thehead of e4/gol, anda-
mongit tones, rules over the Diamond, amongft Plants, black —
Hellebor,and Mugwort. The fecond, are the Pletades,or come

‘ a
—
e 7
4”
wre

‘Majoram, Mugwort, and Nip, and the. root of Mandrake,

Stars, which amon ftones, rule over Cryftall, and the ftone

Diodocus; amongft Plants, the Hearb Diacedon, and Frankin-
cenfe ; and Fennill : and amongft Metals, Quick-filver. The
‘third is the Star e/deboran', which hath under it, amongft
ftones, the Carbuncle, and Ruby : amongft Plants, the Milky
Thiftle, and Matry-filva. The fourth is called the Goat-Star,
which rules,amongtft tones, the Saphir, amongft Plants, Hore-
hound, Mint, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The fifth is called the
“great Dog-ftar, which amongft ftones, rules over the Berill : a-
mongft Plants, Savin, Mugwort, and Dragonworc : and a-
monet Animalsthe tongue of a Snake. The fixth is called the
lefler Dog-ftar, and amongit ftones, rules over Achates a-
mongft Plantsthe Flowers of Marigold, and Penyroial. The
feventh is called the Heart of the Lyon, which amongft ftones,

“rules overthe:Granate ; amongft Plants,Sallendine,Mugwort,

and.Maftick. The eighth is the Taile of che lefler Bear, which
samongtt {tones, rules over the Loadftone,among{t Hearbs,Suc-
‘cory, whofe leaves, and Flowers turn towards the North, alfo
Mugwort, and the flowers of Perwinckle; and amongft Ani-
‘mals the cooth ofa Wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the
Crow;.under which,amonpft ftones; are fuch {tones as are of
the Colour of the black Onyx ftone : amongft Plants the Bur,
~Quadraginus, Henbane,and Comfrey ; and among{t Animals
the tongue of a Frog. The tenth is called Spica, which hath
urider it, amongft {tones, the. Emrald : amongft Plants, Sage,

“Trifoile, ‘Perwinkle, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The eleventh

‘is-called Alchamech, which amongft ftones, rules over the Jaf-
‘per: amongft Plants the Plantain. The twelfth is called El-
“pheia, under this, amongft-ftones, is the Topaze ; amonpft

- Plants, Rofemary, Trifoile,andIvy. The thirteenth is called
_ -the'Heart of the Scorpion, under which,amongft ftones, is the
(Sardonius, and Amychift; amongft Plants long Ariftolochy,

cand Saffron. The fourteenth is the FaHing Vuleur, under
avhich,amongit ftones,is the Chryfolite : amongft Plants Succo-
-ty,and Fumitary.' The fifteenth isthe Taile of Capricorn,un-
‘der which,amonglt ftones,is the Chalcedone : amongft Plants,

‘,
a
J
i
t
t
> —

Moreover this we muft know,that every {tone,or Plant, or A-

nimall, or any other ching is not governed by one Star alone,

but many of them receive influence, not feparated, but con-

joyned, from many Stars. So amongft ftones,the Chalcedony

is under Saturne, and (Mercury, together with the. Taile of

Scorpion, and Capricorn. The Saphir under fuptter, Saturne,

and the Star Alhajoth; Tutia is under 7#piter, and the Suan is:

and Afoon, the Emrald under Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, »

and the Star Spica. The Amethyit, as faith Hermes, is under 7

Mars, jupiter, and the Heart of the Scorpion, The Jafper

which is of diverskinds isunder AZars, fupiter, and che Star
~Alchamech, the Chryfolite is under the San, Venus, and Afer-

cury, as alfo under the Star which is called the falling Vultur ;
the Topaze under the S#a,and the Star Elpheia : the Diamond

under A/ars,and the Head of Algol. In like manner amongft —

Vegetables the Hearb Dragonis under Satarne, and the Ce-

leftiall Dragon , Maflick, and Mints, are under ?upiter 5 and

the Sun; but Maftick is alfo under the Heart of the Lyon, and
-Mintunder the Goat-ftar: Hellebor is dedicated to ALanty

and the Head of Algol, Moffe, and Sanders, to the Sus, and

Venus : Coriandet to Veuus, and Saturne, Amongit Animals,

the Sea Calf isunder the Sun, and-Fupiter ; The Fox, and Ape
under Saturne, and Mercury : and Domefticall Dogs under

Mercury, and the (Moon. And thus we have fhewed more

things in thefeinferiours, by their fuperiours,

‘CHAP. XX XIII.

Of the Seals, and Charatters of Natural things. fi,

Stars have their peculiar Natures, properties,andcons - ~~.
ditions, che Characters whereof they produce
through their rayes.evenin thefe inferiour things, in Ble-
ments, in Stones, in Plants, in Animals, and- their members, |
whence every thing receivesfrom ap harmonious’ difpoficion, |
and trom its Star fhining upon it; =.

be
‘

‘4
¢
ot
q
da
Ld i

ale

—

| Charaéter ftampt upon it, which is the fignificator of that

Star, ot harmony, corteining in ita peculiar vertue differing
from other vertuesof the fame matter, both generically, fpe-
cifically, and numerically. Every thing therefore hath its
Charaéter preffed upon it by its Star for fome peculiar effet,
efpecially by that Star which doth principally govern it: And

‘thefe Characters contain, and retain inthem the peculiar na-

tiirés, vertues, and roots of their Stars, and produce the like
Operations tpon other things,on which they are reflected, and
Rr up, and help the influencies of their Stars, whether they be
Planets,or fixed Stars, and figures, and Celeftiall fignes,viz, as
oft as chey {hall be made in a ft matter, and intheir due, and

_accuftomed times. Which ancient wife men confidering, firch

as laboured much in the finding out of the occult properties of
things, did fet down in writing the images of the Stars, their
gures, Seals; Marks, CharaCters, fuch as nacure her felf did

str by the rayes of the Stars, in thefe inferiour bodies,

ome in ftones,fome in Plants, and joynts,and knots of boughs,
and fome in divers members of Animals, For the Bay-tree, the
Lote-tree, the Marygold are Solary Plants,and in their roots,
and knots being cut off,fhew the Characters of the Sun, fo alfo
in the bone, andfhoulderblades in Animals: whence there a-

-tofe a fpatulary kind of divining (i.e.) by the thoulder-blades,
and in ftones, and {tony things the Characters, and images of

Celeftiall things are often found. But feeing that in fo greata
diverfity of things there is not a traditionall knowledge , only

-in.afew things, which humane underftanding is able to reach:
Therefore leaving thofe things which are co be found out in
_ Plants, and-‘Stones, and other things, as alfo, in the members

of divers:Animals, we thall limit our felvesto mans nature on-
ly, which feeing it is the compleateft image of the whole uni-
verfe, containing in it felf the whole heavenly harmony, will

without alldonbt abundantly afford us the Seals, and
‘raGters of all che Scars; and Celeftiall influencies, and thofe as

the more efficacious, which are fefs differing from the Celefti-

-albmature. Butas the number of the Stars is known to God
~ alone, fo alfo their effects, and Seatsupon thefe inferiour

“ +
fed 3
«
a
a
xt
Me
at:
ae

a

BookI. Of Occult Philofophy.
things : wherefore no humane intelle@ is able to the
knowledge of them. Whence very few of thofe things became
known tous,which the ancient Philofophers,& Chyromancers
attained to, partly by reafon, andpattly by experience, and
there be many things yet ly hid in the treafury of nature. We
fhall here in this place note fome few Seals, and Charafters of
thePlanets,fuch as the ancient Chyromancers knew in the hands
of men. Thefe doth 7u/ian call facred, and divine letters, fee-
ing that by them, according ro the holy Scripture is the life of
men writ intheir hands. And there are in all Nations, and -
Languages alwaies the fame, and like to them,and permanent;
to which were added, and found out afterwards many more, —
as by the ancient,-fo by fatter Chyromancers. And they that
would know them muft_ have recourfe to their Volumes. It is
fufficient here to fhew from whence the Charaéters of Nature
have their otiginall, andin what things they ase-to bé en-

F 2 There

a
t~
e
e —
’
‘
‘

Of Oceult Philofophy. 1,
the Figures of Divine Letters.

The Letters, or Charatters of

em

i
Wy

he. Letters, or ‘Charatters of Jupiter

OMG

The Letters, or Charatters of Mars.

The Letters, or (haratters of Venus.

i
» ~ 4

»
j
£
‘
The L tter Ch r
é
Fe
«
PES
‘

¥

—

CHAP. XXXIV.
Mow by Naturall things, and their vertues we may draw forth, a
ana attract the infiuencies, and vertues of Celeftiall bodies. ~

Ow if thou defireft to receive vertue from any part of the
World, or from any Star, thou {hale thofe things be~
ing ufed which belong to this Star) come under its peculiatin-
fluence, as Wood is fitto receive Flame, by reafon of Sulphur,
Pitch, and Oile. Neverthelefs when thou dolt co any one —
fpecies of things,or individual rightly applymany things, which
are things of the fame fubject fcattered amongft themfelves, —
conformable to the fame Jdea, and Star, prefently by thismat-
ter fo opportunely fitted, a fingular gift is infufed by the Jdea,
by means of the foul of the world. I fay opportunely fitted,
viz. under aharmony like tothe harmony, which did infufea ~
certain vertue into the matter. For although thingshavefome
vertues, fuch as we {peak of, yet thofe vertues do fo ly hid that -
there is feldom any effect produced by them ;: but asinagrain. ©
Of Maftardfeed bruifed, the fharpnefs which lay hid isftirred
up + and asthe heat of the firedoth make letters apparently-
feen, which beforé could not be read, that were writ with the
juice of an Onion or milk: and letters wrote upon a ftone with —
the fat of a Goat, and alcogether unperceived , when the
ig put into Vineger, appear and fhew themfelyes. And asa.
_ blow witha ftick ftirs up the'madnefs of a Dog, which before -
lay afleep, fo doth the Celeftiall harmony difclofe yertnes ly-
ing in the water, {tirs them up, ftrengtheneth them, and makes
them manifeft, and as I may fo fay, produceth that.into At,
which before was only in power, when things are
pofed to it ingSCeleftiall feafon. As forexample; [fthou.
doft defire. té-attra& vertue from the Sun, and co feekthole
things that aréMolary, amongft Vegetables, Plants, Metals,
Stones, and Mhimals, thefe things ate tobeufed, andtaken
chiefly, which in a Solary order are higher. Forthefe are

- =< o
sf
ia
’
at
aq
‘
s
‘

:So thou fhalt draw afingular gift from the
San chrough the beams thereof, being feafonably received to-
gether, and through the fpirit of the world.

CHAP. XXXV.

Of the Adixtions of natural things one With another, and their
benefit.

J T is moft evident,that in the inferiour nature all the powers
_ At of fuperiour bodies are not found comprehended in any
one thing, but are difperfed through many kinds of things a-
 mongftus : asthere are many Solary things, whereof every
~ one doth not contain all thé vertues of the Sun: bur fome have
- fome properties from the Sun, and others otherfome. Where-
fore itis fometimes neceffary that there be mixtions in ope-
gations, that if a hundred, or a thoufand vertues of the Sun
were difperfed through fo many Plants, Animals,& the like,we
- may gather all thefe together, and bring them into one form,
in which we fhall fee all the faid vertues, being united, con-
. tained. Now there isa twofold vertue in commixtion,one,viz.
aaa which was firft planted in its parts, and is Celeftiall, the o-
 -ther ts obtained by a certain, and artificial! mixcion of things
— mixt amongit.themfelves, and of the mixtions of them accor- |
_ - -. ding to certain proportions, fuch as agree with the heaven
— under a certain Conftellation; And this vertue defcends by a
certain likenefs, and aptnefs that ts in things amongft chem-
a felves towards their fuperiours, and as much as che following
ence. “do by degrees correfpond with them thar go before, where
the patient is fitly applyed to its agent. So froma certain
 €ompofition of Hearbs. ‘vapours, and fuch like, made accord-
to naturall Philofophy, and Aftronomy, there refulrs a
€@rtain common form,endowed with many gifts of the Stars:
asin the honey of Bees, that which is gathered out of the juice
_ Of innumerable Flowers, and brought into one form, con-

the
a
‘
ba

Book “OF Occult Philofophy..

tains the vertue of all, by a kind of divine, and admirableart

of the Bees. Yet this isnot tobe lefs wondred at which Ez.
dosns Giudius reports of an artificiall kind of honey; which a
certain Nation of Gyants in Lybia knew to make out of
Flowers, and that very good, and not farinferiour tothat of
the Bees. For every mixtion, which confifts of many feverall
things, is then moft perfect, when it-is fo firmly compacted

onall parts, that it becomes one, is every where firmtoit.

felf, and can hardly be diffipated : as we fometimes fee ftones,
and divers bodies to be by acertain naturall power congluti-

nated, and united, that they feem tobe wholly onething: -

as we fee two trees by grafting to become one, alfo Oifters
with ftonesby a certain occult vertue of nature,and there have
been feen fome Animals which have been turned into ftones,
and fo united with the fubftance of the ftone, that they

feem to make one body, and that alfo homogeneous. So.

the tree Ebeny is one while wood, and another while ftone.

When therefore any one makes a mixtion of many matters
under the Celeftiall influencies, then the variety of Celeftiall

actions on one hand, and of naturall powers on the other
hand, being joyned together doth indeed caufe wonderfull
things,by ointments,by collyries,by fumes,and fuch like,which
viz. areread inthe book of (hiram , eArchyta, Demo-
irk and Hermes, who isnamed -A/chorat, and of many
others.

* ¥
tT
tal
a)
as
¢ Am
a

Of the Union of mixt things, and the introduttion of a more noble
form, and the Senfes of life.

Oreover we mult know, that by how much the more
£¥E noble the form of any thing is, by fomuch the more
prene , and.aptitistoreceive, and powerfulltoa&. Then
the — of things dothen become wonderfull, viz. when
they are put to. matters that are mixed ,and prepared in fit fea-
fons,to make them alive, by procuring lifefor them from the
Stars, 2s alfo.a fenfible foul, asa more noble form. For there
is fo great. a power in prepared matters which we fee do then
receive life,. when a perfect mixtion of qualities feems to,break
former -contrariety. For fo much the more perfeé life
things receive, by how much their temper is more remote from
contrariety. Now the Heaven, as a prevalent caufe doth
from the beginning of every thing to be generated by the con-
coGtion, and perfect digeftion of the matter, together with
Jife, beftows Celeftiall influences,and wonderfull gifts, accor-
_ ding to the Capacity that isin that life, and fenfible foul to re-
ceive more noble, and fublime vertues. For the Celeftiall ver-
~ tue doth otherwife lye afleep , as Sulphur kept from Flame,
but in living bodies te doth alwaies burn, as kindled Sulphur,
then by its vapour it fils all che places that are nextto it; fo
certain wonderfull works are wrought, fuch as are read in the
book of Nemith,which is tituled a Book of the Laws of Pluto,
beeaufe fuch kind of monftrous generations are not produced
according to the Laws of Nature. For we know that of
Worms are generated Gnats,of a Horfe Wafpes,of a Calf,and
Ox Bees, of a Crab, his legs being taken of, and he buried in
the ground, aScorpion; of a Duck dryed into powder, and -
put into Water, are generated Frogs ; but if.it be baked in a
Pie, and.cut into pieces, and put into amoift place underthe
ground, Toads are generated of it : of the Hearb Garden. .
Bafill bruifed betwixt cwo ftones, are generated’*Scorpions,

and of the hairs of a menftruous Woman put under dung, are

a
¥
Ay
e
Px:
‘
é
a
4e
‘
‘

Book OF Occult Philofophy..
bred Serpents; and the hair of a Horfe taile put into Water, - ~

- receiveth life, and is turned into a-pernicious. Worm. And

~ there is an art wherewith by a Hen fitting npon Eggs may be
generated a form like to aman,which J have feen,€zknew how © —
tomake, which Magicians fay hath in ic wonderfull vertues, ae
and this they callcthe true Mandrake. You muft therefore
know which,and what kind of matters are either of nature, or
art,begun, or perfected, or compounded of more things, and.
what Celeftiall influencies they are able ‘to receive. For a.
Congraity of naturall things is fufficient for the receiving of
influcence from Celeftiall ; becaufe when nothing dothhinder .

the Celeftials to fend forch their lights upon inferiours, they

fuffer no matter to be a: of their vertue. Wherefore as

_ much matter as i#perfeét, and pure, is not unfit ‘to receive the
 Celeftiall influence. For that is the binding and continuity of -
the matter to the foul of the world,which doth daily flow in’
upon things natural], and all things which nature hath pre--
pared, thacit is impoffible that a prepared matter fhonld not

receive hfe, or amore noble form. |

XXX VIT

How by certain naturall and artificiall preparations We
attratt certain Celeftiall, and vitall gifts.

with Hermes, fay, and Farchus Brach-
manus, andthe Mecubals of the Hebrews confefs, that all oh 2
fublunary things are fabje&t to generation, and corruption;
and that alfo there are the fame things in the Celeftiall world,
but after a Celeftiall manner, as alfo in theintelle@tuall world,
but in a far more perfect, and better fafhion, and manner, but
inthe moft perfect manner of allin the examplary. And after
thiscourfe, that every’-inferiour fhould im its kind anfwer
its fuperiour, and through this the fapream irfelf ,-‘and re-
ceive from heaven that Celeftiall power which they call the

4 «
hal

3 ‘ pect

OF Occult Philofophy. I.

—_—

quinteffence, or the fpirit of the world, or the middle nature,
and from the intelle@tuall world a fpirituall and enlivening
vertue cranfcending all qualities whatfoever , and laftly from
the exemplary, or originall world, through the mediation of
the other, according to their degree receive the originall
power of the whole perfection. Hence every thing may be
aptly reduced from thefe inferiours to the Stars,from the Stars
to.their Intelligencies, and from thence to the firlt caufe it
felf; from the feries, and order whereof whole Magick,
and all ecculc Philofophy flowes : For every day fome naturall
evn ne by art, and fome divine thing drawn by nature,
which the Egyptians feeing, called Nature a Magicianefs, (i.e. )
the very Magicall power ic felf, in the attracting of like by
like, and of futable things by futable. Now fuch kind of at-
tractions by the mutuall correfpondency of things amongft
chemfelves, of fuperiours with inferiours, the Grecians called
cuunéiuw « So the earth agrees with cold water, the-water
with moift Aire, the Aire with Fire, the Fire with the Hea-
ven.in water; neither is Fire mixed with water, but by Aire,
-northe Aire with che Earth, but by water. So neither is the
foul united to the body, but by the fpirit , nor che undeftand-
_ jng.to the fpirit but by the foul. So we fee when nature hath.
- framed the body of the infant, by this very preparative (he
prefently fercheth the {piric fromthe Univerfe. This fpiric is
inftrumenrto obtain of God the underftanding, and mind
in the foul,and body, asin wood the drynefs is fitted to re-
ceive oile, and the oile being imbibed is food for the Fire,the
Fire is the vehiculum of light. By thefe examples you fee
iow by fome certain naturall, and artificial! preparations,. we
are in acapacity to receive certain-Celeitiall gifts from above.
-Forftones, and Metals have a correfpondency with Hearbs,
Hearbs with Animals, Animals wich the Heavens, the Hea-
-vens with Intelligencies , and chofe: with divine properties
attribures, and with God him(elf, after. whofeimage, and
liknefs all things are created. Now. the firlt Image of God is
, the world, of the world, man , of man,beafts, ofbeatts, the
Leophyton (i.e. ) half Aniamil, and half Plane ; of Zeophy-

‘

q
PR:
a
ri
é
am
a
a
F

ton, plants,of plants, metals, of metals (tones. And again in
things fpiri-uall, the Plane agrees with a bruit in Vegetation,
a bruit with a man in fenfe, man with an Angel in underftand- —
ing an Angell with God in immortality. ‘Divinity is annex-
-edtothe mind, the mind to the intelle@, theuntelle&-co the
intention, the intention to the imagination, the imagination
to the fenfes, the fenfes at laft to things. Por this is the band,
and continuity of nature, that all fuperiour vertue doth flow
through every inferiour with along, and continued feries,dif
perfing its rayesevento the very laft things; ‘and inferiours
through their fuperiours, come to the very fupream of all;
For fo inferiours are fucceffively joyned to their fuperiours,
that there proceeds an influence from their head the firlt caufe,
certain tring ftretched out , to the lowermoft things .of
all, of which ftring if one end be touched, the whole doth
prefently fhake; and fuch a touch doth found to the other end, ©
and at the motion of the inferiour, the fuperiour alfo is mo-
ved, to which the other doth anfwer, asftringsin a Lute well.

tuned.

—

CHAP, XXXVIIR

_ How we may draw not only Celeftiall, and vital, but allo cer-
tain IntelleE nall,and divine gifts from above.

i Agicians teach that Celeftial gifts may through inferiors
being conformable'to fuperiors be drawn: down by op-
portune infiuencies of the Heaven; and fo alfo by thefe Celefti-
_al,the Celeftial Angels,as they are fervants of the Stars,may be
procured,and conyeyed tous. Pamblichus, Proclus, and
sus, with the wholeSchoo! of Platoniffs confirm,thatnot only
Celeftiall, and vitall, but alfo certain Intelle€tuall, Angelicall, me
and divine gifts may be received from above by fome cer-

tain matters,having a naturall power of divinity (i. which

»
t

Book I. Of Occult Philofopby. 7 ‘
a

have.a natural! correfpondency with the fuperiors,being right-
Jy receivedjand opportunely gathered together according to
the rules of Natural! Philofophy, and Aftronomy : And JZer-
curiueT rifmegiftus writes,that an Image rightly made of cer-
tain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angel,
will prefently:be animated by that Angel. Of the fame alfo
eAfuftin makes mention in his eighth book De Civitate Deir
Fox thisis the harmony of the world,that things fuperceleftiall
Be drawn down by the Celeltiall, and fupsr-naturall by na-
- turall, becaufe there 1s one operative vercue that is diffufed
through all kinds of things, by which vertue indeed, as ma-
 nifeft things are produced out of occult caufes; fo a Magician
doth make ufe of things manifeft,to draw forth things that are
occult,vs«.through the rays of the Stars,throngh fumes, lights,
founds, and natural! things,which are agreeable to Celeftiall :
in which,befides corporeall qualities, there isakind of reafon,
-fenfe, andharmony , and incorporeall, and divine meafures,
and orders. So we read that the Ancients were wont often to
receive fome divine, and wonderfull thing by certain naturall
things : fo the {tone that is bred in the Apple of the eye of a
Civet:Cat, held under the tongue of a man, is faid to make
him to divine, or prophefie : The fame is Selenites, the Moon
— ftone reported to do, fo they fay that the Images of Gods
may be called up by the ftone-called Anchitis, and that the
Ghofts of the dead may be, being called up, kept up by the
{tone Synochitis. The like doth the Hearb Aglauphotis do,
which is called Marmorites, growing upon the Marbles. of
Arabia, as faith Pliny, and the which Magicians ufe. Alfo
there is an Hearb called Rheangelida, which Magicians dtink-
ing of, can prophefie. Mereover there are fome Hearbsby
which theidead are raifed to life ; whence Xanthus the Hifto-
celssthat with a certain Hrarb called Balus, ayoung Dra-
gon being killed, was madealive again, alfo that by the fame.
acertainiman of Tillum,whom a Dragon killed, was reftored,
life: and reports,that in Arabia a certain man was by
certain Hearb reftored to life. Bur whether or noany
_ things.can be done indeed upon man by the yertue of Hearbs,

‘

4 f
as
—
A
¥
d +
‘
+ f

orany other natural! thing, we difcourfe in the follow-
ing Chapter. Now it iscettain, and manifeft that fach things
an be done upon other animals. Soif flies, that are drown-
‘ed, be put into warm: afhes, they revive. And Beesbeing
drowned, do in like manner recover life in the juice of the

hearb Nip;and Eels being dead for want of water, if with their

whole bodies they be put under mud in vineger, and the blood

ofa Vulcur beingpurt to them, will all of them in a few dayes- —

recover life. They fay that if the fith Echeneis be cut into

peices, and caft into the fea, the parts will within a little time
come together, and live. Alfo we know that the Pellican doth.
reftore her yong to life, being killed, with her own blood,

CHAP. XXXIX

That we may by fome certain matters of the werld ftir up the
Gods of the world, and their miniftring flirits. res

phane Arts may be raifed up as P/ellus faith Sorcerers are

wont to do, whom moft dereftable, and abominable filthinefS _

did follow, and accompany, fuch as were in times paft inthe
facrifices of Priapus, and in the worfhip of the Zdod which was —
called Panor, to whom they did facrifice with cheir. privy
members uncovered. Neither to thefe is that onlike if it be
true, and not a fable ) which is read concerning the dete-

{table herefy of old Church-men, and like to thefe are manifeft ~

in Witches and mifcheivous women, which wickedneffes the
foolifh dotage of women is fubjeftto fallinto. By thefe, and
fuch as thefe evill {pirits are raifed. Asa wicked {pirit fpake
to John, of one (ynopsa Sorcerer ; all the power, faithhe,
of Satan dwells there, and he isentred into a eonfederacy
with all the. principalities together, and likewife we, with
himy.and (ynops obeysus, and we again obey him. Again,
one the contrary fide, no. man is ignorant that fapercelettiall
Angels or fpirits may be gained by us through good works,

NS man is ignorant that evill fpirits, by evill, and pro-

apure

a
a
¢
od

—

a pure minde, fecret prayers, devout humiliation, and the like,
Let no man therefore doubcthat in like manner by fome cer-
tain matters of the world, the Gods of the world may be rai-
fed by us, or at leaft the miniftring fpirics, or fervants of thefe
Gods, and as AZercurius faith, the airy {pirits, not fopercele-
ftiall, much lefS higher. So we read that the antienc Priefts
made ftatues, and images, foretelling things to come, and in.
fufed into them the fpirits of the ftars, which were not kept
there by conftraint in fome certain matters, but rejoycing
in them,viz. as acknowledging fuch kinds of matter to be fu-
table to them, they do alwaies, and willingly abide in them,
and fpeak, and do wonderfull things by them : no otherwife
then evill fpirits are wont to do, when they poffefs mens

bodies.

CHAP. XL,

Of bindings, What fort they are of, andin what wayes they are
Wont to be done.

VV EE havefpoken concerning the vertues, and won-
derfull efficacy of naturall chings. Ic remains: now
that we underftand a thing of great wonderment : and itis.a
binding of men into love, or hatred, ficknefs or health, and
-fuch like. Alfo the binding of thieves, and robbers, that they
cannot fteale in any place ; the binding of Merchants, that
they cannot buy, or fellin any place; the-betiding of an army,
that they cannot pafsover any bound ; the binding of fhips,
that no winds, though never fo {trong, fhall be able to carry
them out ‘of the Haven. Alfo the binding ofa mill, thatit can
by no'force whatfoever be turned round : The binding ofa
Cifterne, or fountain, that the water cannot'be drawn up out
ofthem ; The binding of the ground, that it cannot: bi
forth fruit ; The binding of any place, thar nothing
buileupon it’: The binding of firé,that though irbenever®
‘ftrong, can bura no combuftible thing that is puttoin

ond
¢
bel
“
«
‘
a
P
“¥
‘4
a
oF
e
we
i

a
in

Book I.
the bindings of lightnings, and tempelts, that they fhall do no
hurt. Alfothe binding of dogs, that they cannot bark. Alfo the
binding of birds, and wild beatts, that they fhall not be able
to fly, or run away. And fuch like as thefe, which are fearce
credible, yet often known by experiénce. Now there are fach
kind of bindings as thefe made by Sorceries, Collyries, Un-
guents, love potions,by binding to,and hanging up of things, by

rings, by charmes, by ftrong imaginations, and paffions,
images, and chara¢ters, by inchantments, and imprecations, by
lights, by found, by numbers, by. words, and names, invoca-
ions, facrifices, by fwearing, conjuring, confecrations, devo-

tions,
tions, and by divers fuperftitions, and obfervations, and fuch

like.

CHAP. XLL

Of Sorceries, and their power.

f¥"He force of Sorceries is reported to be fo great, that
they are believed to be able to fubvert, confme, and

change all inferiour things,according to Virgils Mufe. —

Meeris for me thefe hearbs in Pontus chofe,

end curious drugs, for there great plenty groWss
I many times, with thefe, have Meetis
Chang'dto a wolfe, andin the Woods to hide :
From Sepulchres Would fouls departed charm,
And Corn bear ftanding from anothers Farm. |

| = in an other place, concerning the companions of U/pffes,
Whom

The cruell Godde(s Circe thereinvefts
_ With fierce afpetts, and chang d to favage beafts.

A
«
a.
£.
a
» tS
ay
>i
“ <
we
a
i
° 4
by

Occn 300k
Pai

love from. Picus Circerould not gaine

Him with her charming wand, and hellifh bane

Changed to a bird, and [pots his fpeckled wings
With fundry COLONES

Now there are fome kind of thele forceries by
Lucan concerning that Sorcerefs calling up gholts,
where he faith,

all natures produits unfortunate ;
Fome of mad Dogs, whith waters fear and hate ;
Guts of the Lynx ; Hyena's knot imbred ;
| Lhe marrow of a Hari with Serpents fed
Were not wanting ; no notthe fea Lamprey
Which flops the foips ; nor yet the Dragons eye.

And fuch as Apuleius tells. of concerning Pamphila, that
Sorcerefs, endeavouring to procure love; to whom Fotwa
certain maid brought the haires ofa goat ( cut off from a bag
~ or botle made with the skin thereof ) inftead of Beotiusa

: young mans haires: Now fhe ( faith he ) being out of her |
rs witsfor the young man, goeth up to the ryled rough, and in
the upper part thereof makes a great hole open toall the

— orientall, and other afpeéts, and moftfic for chefe her arts,

aa and there privately worthips, having before. fugnifhed her .
a mournfull houfe with fatable furniture, with all kinds of {pices,
with plates of Iron, with {trange words engraven upon them,
fternes of fhips that were caft away,,.and. fittch la-
mented, and with divers members of buryed carkafles ca{t
abroad: here nofes, and fingers, there the flefhy nailes of
thofe that were hanged, and in another place the blood of
them that were murdered, and their skulls mangled withthe
teeth of wild bealts ; chen the offers facrifices( their inchapted

ig:  entrallsdying panting )and fprinkles chem with
Of liquors; fometimes wich. fountain water, fomecimesgaith

_cowes milk,fometimes with mountain honey,and mead

tics thof haiecs into knots, and them, on

{
j
al
A
j
‘
ts
ame

_ they the corn that hath it. The ath

—

with, divers -odours co be burnt, then prefently with an irre-

fiftable power of Magick, and blind force of the Gods, the
bodies of thofe whole haires did {moke, and crafh, aflame the
fpiric of a man, and feel, and hear, and. walk, and come whi-
ther the ftink of their haire led them, and infteed of Beotins
the young man, come skipping, and leaping with joy; and love
into the houfe. Axfin alfo reports, that he heard of fome
women Sorcerefles, that were fo verfed in thefe kinds of arts,
that by giving cheefe co men, they could turn them
into working cattell, and the work being done, reftored them

into men again-

CHAP, XLII.
Of the wonderfull vertues of kinds of Sorceri¢ss .

Qw I will fhew you what fome of the Sorceries are, that
N by the example of thefe there may bea way opened for
the confideration of the whole fubje& of them. Of thefe
therefore che firft is menftruous bloud, which , how
powerithath tn Sorcery, we will now confider ; for, as they

fay, ifitcomes over new wine, it makes it foure, and if it doth -

‘but touchthe Vine it Sm it for ever, and by its very touch
and

ic makes all Plants, and Trees barren, and they that be.newly
fet, to: dye; it burns up all the hearbs in the garden, and

_ makes fruit fall off from the Trees, it darkens ‘the brightnefs
ofa looking glafs, dulls the edges of Knives, and) razors, dims

the beauty of Ivory,and it makes Iron prefently rufty,it makes —
brafs ruft, and {mell very ftrong: <it makes dogs mad, ifchey
do but taft of it, and ifthey being thus mad fhall bite any one,
thae wound is incurable: it kils whole hives of Bees, and |

drives them from the’hives that are but touched with it + ic
makes linnen black that are boyled, it makes Marescaft their’. —

foal if they do but touch it, and makes women mifcarry if
they-be bur-{meared withic ; ic makes Affes barren as

ea
- ze
«

OF Occult Philofophy. Book

_that are to be wafhed, change the colour of them, and takes
away colours from flowers. They fay that it drivesaway ter-

tian, and quartane Agues; if it be put into the wooll of ablack —
Ram, and tyed up in a filver bracelet,asalfo if the foles of the

tients feet be noynted therewith,and efpecially if it be done
by the woman her felf, the patients not knowing of it ; more-
over it cures the fits of the falling ficknefs. But moft efpe-

Cially it cures them that are affraid of water, or drink after

they are bitten with a mad dog, if onely a menftrauos.cloth
be put under the cup. Befides, they report, that if menftruous

women {hall walk naked about the ftanding corn , they make

all cankars, worms, beetles, flyes, and all hurtfall chings fall
off from the corn : but they muft rake heed that they do it
before Sun rifing,or elfe they will make the corn to wither.
Alfo they fay they are able to expell hail, cempefts, and light..
nings, more.of which Pdiny makes mention of. Know chis,that
they are a greater. poyfon if they happen. in the decreafe of
the Moon, and yet much greater, ifthey happen betwixt the

-deereafe, and change of the Moon: Butif they happen in the ©

Eclypfe of the Moon or Sun , they are an incurable poyfon.
But they. are of greateft force of all, when they happen in the
- firft years, even in the years of virginity, for if they.do but
‘touch the pofts of the houfe there can no mifeheif take. effe@ in
‘it. Alio they fay that the threads of any garment touched chere-
with, cannot be burnt, and if they be caft into the fire, ic will
‘{pread no further. Alfo itis faid that the root of Peony being
given with'Caftor, and fmeared over witha menftruous cloth,
cureth the falling fickanefs. Moreover if the ftomack ofa Hart

_ beburne or rofted, and to it be put a perfuming made with a
~menitruous cloth, ic will make crafs-bows ufelefs for the ki-
ting of any game ; The haires of a. menftraous woman: put
-under‘dang, breed Serpents: and if they be burnt, will drive
away Serpents with their fmell. So great a poyfonous force

4s in them, that they are poyfon co poyfonons creatures. There

18.alfo Hippomanes, which amongit Sorceries is not the Jeaft
taken notice of, andsit is-a liccle venemous piece of fleth as

»

~ of menftruous clothes, if they be caft upon purple garments |

j
é
Pd
at
z
A
a
» 7

Book I. Of Occult Philofophy.
big-as a fig, and black, which is in the forehead ofa Cole =
newly foaled,which unlefs the Mare her felf doth prefently ear,

the will never after love her foals, or let it fuck. And for this
caufe they fay there is a moft wonderful power in it to procure
love, ifitbe powdered, and drank in a cup with the blood of
him that is in love. There is alfo another Sorcery, which is
called by the fame name, viz. Hippomanes, viz. a venemous
humour, iffuing out of the (hare of a Mare what time fhe de-.
fires a horfe, of which Vérgid makes mention, when hefings.

Hence comes that poifon Which the Shepherds call
Hippomanes, and from Mares groines doth fall,
The wofull bane of cruell ftepdames ufe
eAnd with acharme *mong ft powerfull drugs infufe.

Of this doth ?uvenall the Satyrift make mention.

Hippomanes, poy{ons that boyled are, and charmes
Are given to Sons in law, with {uch like harmes.

Apollonius alfo inhis Argonanticks makes mention of the
Mas 14 of Prometheus, which he faith groweth from corrupt
blood dropping upon the earth, whileft the Vuleur was gnaw-
ing upon the liver of Prometheus upon the hill Cancafus,
Theflowre of this hearb, he faith, is like Safforn, having a

double ftalk hanging out, one further then anotherthe length oa
ofa cubjt, the root under the earth,as flefh newly cut, fends :
forth a blackifh juice as it were ofa beech; with which, faith
he, if any one (hall after‘he hath performed his devotion to
Proferpina, {mear over his body, he cannot be hurt either —
with fword, or fire. Alfo Saxo Gramaticus writes, that there
was acertain man called Froton, who had a garment, which
when he had put on he could not be hurt .with the point or
edge of any weapon. Thecivet Cat alfo abounds with Sor-
ceries : for, as Pliny reports, the pofts of adore being touched |
with her blood, the Arts of Juglers, and Sorcerers are foin-
vallid, that the Gods cannot be called: up, and will.by no
means be perfwaded totalk withthem. Alfo thattheythatare
-noynted with the afhes of the ankle bone ofher leftfoot,

¢
>- a
re
2 Sieet th

Of Occult Philofophy. Book

‘peing decoéted with the’blood of a W eefell: fhall become odi-
ous to-all. The fame alfo is done with the eye, being deco&ted.

Alfo ‘it: is'faid that the Rraight gutisadminiftred againft the
injufticé, “and corruption of Princes, and great men in power,

_and for faccefs of Petitions, and to conduce to ending of fuits,
andtontroverfies, if any one hath never fo little of it about.
him, and that if it be bonnd unto the left arm, itis fucha
prefent charm, thatifany mando bat lookupona woman, it
willmake her follow him prefently; and that the skin of her
forehead doth withftand bewitchings. They fay alfo thatthe
blood of a Bafilisk, which they.call, the blood of Saturn, hath
fuch great force in Sorcery, that it procures for him that car-
ryes it about him, good fuccefs of his Petitions,from great men
in power, -and of his prayers from God, and alfo remedies of
difeafes, and grant of any priveledge. They fay alfochat a
tyke, if it be pulled out ofthe left eare of a dog, and if be it al-
together black, hath. great vertue.in the prognoftick of life, for

if the fick party fhall anfwerhim that brought itin, whe ftan-

ding at his feet, fhall-ask’of him concerning his difeafe, there
ts certain hope of fife, and that-he fhalfdye, if he make-no

anfwer. They fay alfo, that a ftone that is bie with a mad

dog hath power to caufe difcord, if it be put in drink, and

that he fhafl not be barked at by dogs, that puts the tongue
‘ofa dog im his fhooe under his great‘tue, efpecially if the hearb
of the faine namie, viz. hounditongue be joyned' withic. And
that a'membrane of the fecondines’ofa dog doththe-fame;
and that dogs will fhun/him that hath a dogs heart. And
Pliny reports that there isa red toad that livesin bryers,
brambles, and is full: of “Sorceries, and doth wonderfull
«things: for the liccle boric which-isin his left fide, ‘being caft
into water, makes-it prefently very hor; by which alfo
the rage of dogs is reltrained, and their love is procured, if ir
-beput in drink; and ifitbe bound to any-one, i ftirreth up
_ Halt, On the eontrary, the litle bone which is on the right
fide,omakes hor water cold; and that it can never. be hora-
gait, that’ be raket- out, alfo' ic is faid co cure quartanes
fit be bound to the fick ina fnakes skin, as alfo all other fea.

“4

my
& «

ae

a
‘oo

id

r
f

PY

a

Book Of Occu

a -

vors,and reftrain Joyeand Inft. A nd that the fpleen,and heart
is an effectuall againft, the poifons of ‘the faid: Toad.

Thus much Péiny writes, Alfo itis faid. thatthe fword, with ..

which aman is flain; hath wonderfull power in Sorceries
For if the fnaffle of the bridle, or fpurs be made of it, they
fay that with chefe any horfe, though never fo wild, may be
tamed, and gentled : and that if a Horfe fhould befhod with,
fhooes made with it, he would be moft fwiftand fleet, and
never; though never fohard rod,tire. But yet chey will ‘that
fome Charaéters,and names fhould be written upon it. They fay.
alfo, if any man fhall dip afword, wherewith men were be-
headed, in wine;and the fick drink thereof; he fhall be cured of
his quartane. They fay alfo that a cup of liquor being made with

the brains of a Bear, and drank out of the skull,(hall make him,

that drinks it, be as fierce, and as raging-as a Bear, and think

be changed into a Bear, and judge all thingshefees

to be Bears, and fo co continue in that madnefs, uncilithe
force of that draught fhall be diffolved, no other diftemper

being al] this while;perceived inhim,

CHAP. XLIII.

—

J the Stars, are of great force for the opportune receiving
of Celeftiall gifts under the rayesof the Scars, in as muchas
they. do ftrongly work, uponithe Aire, and breath, For ous
breath is very much changed by, fuch kind. of vaponrs:, “if both
vapours be.of another like: The Aire alfo, being through the
faid vapours eafily: moved, or affected with the qualitics ofin-
feriours, or Celeftiall, daily, and quickly . penetrating’ our
breaft,and vitals,doth wonderfully reduce,ns to thexlike quali-
ties ; ;Wherefore Suffumigations are, wont to-be ufed to,chem
that are about to Sooth-fay, for co affe& their fancy,which in-

deed being appropriated to any certain Deities,do ficus to. re~

Suffumigations alfo,or perfumings,that are proper to

»
a =" |
c
r
“
rs
»
wal

Of Occult Book f.
divine they ‘hy that furnes made with
Lin- feed, ahd Fléa-barie feed , roots of Violets, and
Parfly; “doth to fore-ee things to come, and doth
to Let fio man wonder how great
things do in the Aite, efpecially when he
fhal init cofifider, chat by cérrain vapdars exha-
| roper airy fpirics are prefenely raif-

as alfd Thutdtihgs, and Lighthings> and fuch like things.
thé Liver of a Chamelion Being burnt oh the top of the

doth, 45 ic 1s manifeft, taife fhowets, and Lighthings.
In like m 1 the head, and throat, if they be burnt with
Okén woad , Stortis, atid Lightnings. There are alfo

| tinder opp oFtimhe influencies of Stars, thar make
the iniages of fpirits tih the Aire,or elfwwhere.
$6 they fay, that if of Coriander, Smallage, Henbane, and
Heinlock be fine, that {pirits will to-
hefice they arétalled the fpitits Heatbs. Alfo it is faid
at 4 fuitie made root Uf rlie reedy Hearb Sagapen, with
the juice of Hemlock, and Henbane , and the Hearb Tapfus —
Barbatus, red Sanders, and black Poppy, makes fpirits and
ftrange (hapes appear : and if Smallage be added to them,cha-
feth away {pirits from any place, and deftroyes their vifions.
In like manner a fume made of Calamint, Peony, Mints, and
Paima Chrifti, drive away alfevil fpirits, and vain imaginati- .
ofs. Moreover it is faid that by certain fumes certain Animals —
are gathered cogerher,aivd pit co fipht,as Pliny mentions con-
céning the Rone Liparis, thac with the fume thereof all beafts
are ealied our; fo the bones in the upper part of rhe throat
ofa Hare being butik, sather allthie Serpents roget her, burc-che
of the Hare’ beir irs fame them al
away. The’ fame ‘doth a ‘of che feathers OF
AMfo the lings of an Affe bép burnt, pars All poitorious things
flight; fime of byrne hoot of drives away
the fame doth the OF 4 Mile, ‘With ‘which atfo if it
be ac hoof ofthe left foor, Flits'dtedtiven away; And they

¥
‘The
é
‘
t
J
j
é
i
bi
¢
q

Lignum-aloes , and if then there be fome Sea Water,or blood
caft into that place, the whole houfe willfeem to be full of
Water, or blood; and if fome Earth of plowed ground be
caft there, the Earth will feem to quake. Now fuch kinds of
vapours we muft conceive do inte any body; and infufe a
vertue intg it, which Goth continue long, even as any contagi-
ous, or poifonous vapour of the Peftilence being kept fortwo
yeers in the Wall of a houfe,infe& the inhabitants, and asthe
contagion of Peftilence, or Leprofie lying hid ina garment,
doth long after infect him that wears it. Therefore were cer- -
tain {uffumigationsufed toimages, rings, and fuch like inftru-
ments of Magick, and bid creafures, and as Porphyrams faith,
very effetually. So theyfay, if any one fhall hide. Gold, or
Silver, or any other-pretious thing ; the Moon-eing i con-
junction with the Sun,and fhall fume che place withCoriander,
Saffron, Henbane, Smallage and of cach alike |
quantity, bruifed together, and tempered with the juice of
Hemlock, that which is fo bidfhall neversbe found, ortaken
away , and that (piriesfhall continually keep it ; and ifany one
fhafl endeavour to take it away, he thall be hurt by chem, and
fhall fallincto afrenfie. And Hermes faith,that there isnothiag
like the fume of Sperma-Ceti for the raifing of {pirits: where.
fore if a fume be made of that, and Lignum-aloes, Peppers
wort,Musk, Saffron, red: Srorax. cempered together, with che
blood of a Lapwing, it will quickly gather airy Spirits together,
_and if icbe ufed aboutthe graves of the dead, gathers coge-
ther {pirits, and the Ghofts of the dead. So,as-often.as we
dire& any work to the Sun,we.muft.make fuffymigationswith
-Solary-things, if to.the Mon, with Lunary things, and,foof
the reft. And we-muftiknow, that.as there-is a contraniety: and
enmity in Stars, and fpirits,fo.alfo in faffymigations unco th
fame So there is acontratiety

_Sulphar, Frankincenfe, and Quick+filyer, and, {picts that age
railed by the fume of Liganm-ajoes, are allayed the
ing of Sulphur, As. example in.a{pirits ch

ofa Cock before it, vanifhed away,becaufe there is a contrarie-
G 4 ty

OF Oceule Philo “Book I.

ty at a Cock, a Lyon, and fo the like
“and is tO obferved foch

¢)

CHAP. XLIV,

The Compo ition of [ome fumes appropriated to the Planets.:

VV 7E makea. fuffamigation lac the San in this. manner,

‘wiz, Of Saffron, Amber-gryfe; Musk, Lignum-aloes,
Lignum:balfaim, the fruit of the Laurell, Cloves, Myrrh, and
Frankincenfe, all which being bruifed, and mixt in fach a pro-
portion as may make a fweet odour, mult be incorporated
with the brain of an Eagle, or the blood of a white Cock after
the manner of Pils, or Trochifcks. | high:

For the Afcen we make a faffarpigétion of. the head of: a
Frog dryed, the eyes of a Bull, the feed of white Poppy, Fran.
kincenfe , and Camphir, which mult be incorporated with
Menfttuous blood, orthe blood ofaGoofe.

For Saturne take the feed of black Poppy , of Hen-
bane fe, the root of Mandrake, the Load-ftone, and Myrrh,
Bat make them up with the brain n Of Cat, Of the blood: of a

- For fupiter take the feed of Ath, Li; grumeaines; Storax, the
gum Benjamin, the Lazule ftone, the cops of the feathers ofa.
Peacock, and incorporate chem withthe blood. ofa Stork, ora
Swallow, or the brain ofa Bart. |

For Mars take Enphorbium, Bdellium, gum. Asmoniack,

roots of both Hellebors,theLoad ftone,and a little Sulphur,

and incorporate them all with the brain of a Hart, theb ood
of a Man, and theblood ofablackCar,

For Venus take Musk, Amber-gryfe, Lignum-alocs, red
Rofes , and red Corall, and make them up with the brain of
Spairows, andthe blood of Pigeons

For. Mercury take Mattick’, Sratkincent. Cloves, and
the Hearb. and the (tone and incor-

«
é
“
¥
"fu
i

Book

porate them all with the brain of a Fox, or Weefel, and the
blood of a Pie.
Befides,to Saturne are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous -
roots,as Pepper-wort root,@c, and the Frankineenfe tree : co
Jupiter odoriferous fruits, as Nutmegs, Cloves : to AZarsall
odoriferous wood, as Sanders, Cyprefs, Lignum-balfaim, and
Lignum-aloes : to’ che Sem, all Gums, Frankincenfe, Maftick,
Benjamin, Scorax, Laudanum, Amber-gryfe, and Musk ; to
Venus Flowers, as Rofes, Violets, Saffron, and fuch like: to
Mercury all the Pils of Wood and. frit, as Cinnamon, Lig-
num Caffia; Mace, Citron pill, and Bayberries, and whatfo-
ever feeds are. odoriferous; to the Joon the. leaves of
all Vegetables, as the leaf Igdum, the leaves of the.Myrtle, and
Bay-tree. .Know alfo, that according to. the opinon of the
Magicians,in every goodmatter,as love,soodwill,and the like,
there muft be a good fume, odoriferous, and pretious; and in
every evill matter, as hatred,anger,mifery, and the like, there . =
muft be aftinking fume, thatis.of no worth. The twelve
Signes alfo of the Zodiack have their proper fumes, aseZries
hath Myrrh, Zaurus, Pepper-wort, Gemini, Maftick, Cancer,
Camphir,Zeo, Frankincenfe, Virgo Sanders, Libra,Galbanum, ~
Scorpio, Opoponax, Sagittarins, Lignum-aloes, Capricorgus,
Benjamin, Aquarius, Buphorbium, Pi/ces, red Storax. But
Hermes defcribes the molt powerfull fumeto be, vizs that |
which is compounded of the feven Aromaticks, according to \
the powers of the feven Planets, for it receives from Saturne, = |
Pepper-wort, from /wpiter, Nutmeg, from AZars, Lignum-
aloes, from the Sun, Maftick, from Venus Saffron, from .

the. weer”

Mercury, Cinnamon, and from the AZoon, the Myrtle. “a
My CZ) oom, be f |

touching it,wichfome like quality. Forbecaufe our fpiric is che
fabtile, purelucid, aity, and .un@tuous vapour of the blood,
$c is'therefore fit comake Collyries of the vapours, whi

are more fatable to our fpirit in fubfance, for then-by-seafon

‘poifonings, and love isiinduced ; fome.things, asthe hands, or

when glad Dido bugs him inher lap

_ then’ the other fenfes, and rae | in us the marks of things

things heard, or any thing coming under the other fenfes.

rit doth cafily affe& the imagination, which indeed beit

OF Occult Phitofopky. Badke I.

CHAP. XLV.
Of Collyries, Untkions, Lowe-Medicines ; and their

A'Orceover Coflyries,and Unguents conveying the vertues
AVA ofthings Natural, and Celeftiall co our fpirit, can mul-
tiply, tranfmute, transhigure, and transform it accordingly, as
alo eranfpofe-thofe vertueswhich are inthem inetd it, thatfo
it cannot a& only - 9 its own body, but alfoupon that
which és neer it, and afte& chat by vifible rayes,charmes,and by

of their likeneG, they dothe more ftir-ap, attraét, and cranf-
form the fpirit. '‘The/like vertyes have certain ointments, and
other confeCtions. “Hence by the touch fometimes ficknefs,

gatments being anoired ‘Alfo'by ‘kifles,fome thingsbeing
held in the mouth, love isinduced, asin Virgil we vead'that

reyall-feafts, crown'd with the cheeringGrape,
When foe tmbracing , foall {weet kiffes give, 2ISWOC
Enfpwehid Flame; with deadly bane deceive,

He would ———>

Now the fight, becaule it perceives more purely, and cleerly

more.acutely, and deeply, doth moft of all, and before others
agree withthe Phantaftick fpiric , as is apparent in dreams,
when things feen do more often prefenc themfelves to'usthen

Therefore when Collyries transform wyifuall {pirits, thac {pi-

4 go
re.
te
‘ -

ins =

affetted with divers fpecies, and forms, tranfmits the fame by
the fame fpirit unto the ourward fenfe of fight , by which oc-
cafion there is caufed in it a perception of fuch fpecies, and
forms in that manner, as if it were moved by externall objets,
that there feem to be feen tertible images, and fpirits, and
fuch like: fo there are made Collyries,making us forthwich to
fee the images of fpiritsin the Aire,or elfwhere,as know how
to make of the gall of a man, and the eyes of a black Cat, and
of fome other things. The like is made alfo of the blood-ofa
Lapwing, ofa Bat, and of a Goat, and they fay, ifafmooth —
fhining piece of Steel be fineered over with the juice of Mug-
wort, and made to fume, it will make invocated fpirits tobe
feeninit. Soalfo there are fome fuffumigations, or unctions,
which make men fpeak in their fleep, to walk, and co‘do thofe
things which are done by men that areawake, andfometimes — -
to do thofe things, which men that are awakeCannot,ordare —~
not do. Some there are that make ustohear horrid,ordele®-.
able founds, and fuch like. And this is the canfe Mania- - ~
call, and Melancholy men believe chey fee, and hearthofe —
things without, which their imagination doth only fancy
within, hence they fear things not to be feared, andfallinro
wonderfull, and moft falfe fnfpicions, and fly when none
fueth them, areangry, and contend, no body being prefent,. a
and fear where no fear is. Such like paffions alfocan magical -
confections induce, by Saffumigations, by Collyrits, by Un-
suents, by potions, by poifons, by lamps, andfights, by look.
mg giafles, by images, enchanrments, charms, founds, and
-Mofick. Alfo by divers rites, obfervations, ceremonies, reli-
gions, and fuperftitions; all'which fhall be handfed in their
places, And not only by thefe kind of arts, paffions, appariti- —-
ons, and images are induced, but alforhings themilelves, which .
are really changed, and transfgured forms, asthe
Poet relates of Proteus} Periclimenus, Achelows, and Merra,
the daughter of £rifichrhox: So alfo Circe changed the com-
Pakions of C/yffes,& of old m the factifices of Pupiter Lyceus;
the men that tafted of the inwards of the facrifices, were turn-
ed into Wolves, whith Pliny faith, befell: a certain

“called Demarchus, the fame*Opinion was Axjftin of: for he
- faith, whileft he was in Jta/y, he heard of fome women that by
giving Sorceries in cheefe.to travellors, turned chem into wor-
king Catle, and when they had done fuch work as they would
have them, turned them into men again, and that this befell a
certain Father called Preffantivs.. The Scriptures themfelves
ceftify that Pharao’s Sorcerers turned their rods into Serpents,
-_and water into blood, and did fuch like things.

CHAP. XLVI.

natural aliigations, and {ufpenfions.
Vy Hen the foul of the world, by its vertue doth make
allchings that are naturally generated, or artificially
made, fruitfull, by infufing into them Celeftiall properties
for the working of fome wonderfull effets, then things them-
~ felves not only applyed by fuffumigations, or Collyries; or
oyntments, or potions, or any other fuch like way, but alfe
when they being conveniently wrapt up,are bound to,or hang
ed about the neck, Or any other way applyed, althoug!,
by never fo eafy a contact, do imprefs their verwe upon us,
thefe alligations Pings up, appli~
cations , and contacts the Accidents of the body, and mind
_ are changed intoficknefs, health, boldnefs, fear, fadnefs, and
joy, and the like : They render them that carry them, gratious,
or terrible, acceptable, or rejeéted, honoured, and beloved, or
 hhatefall , and abominable, Now thefe kind of paffions are
conceived to be by the abovefaid, infufed no otherwife, then

ismanifeft in the graffing of trees, where the vitall vertue is

-fent, and Communicated from the trunk to the twig grafted
into it, by way of contaét and alligation ; fo in the female

Palme tree, when the comes neer to the male,her boughs bend

tothe male, and are bowed : which the gardners feeing, bind
) topes from the, male to the female; which becomes {iraight
again, as if it had by this continuation of the rope received

~~”

Book I.

the

ad
ta,
»
a -
a
«
Ry
“a
de 4
°

me Book I. Of Occult Philofaphy.

the vertue ofthe male. In like manner we fee, that thec “a
fith being touched afar off witha long pole, doth prefently
ftupify the hand of him that toucheth it. And if any thall
touch the fea Hare withhis hand or{tick, deth prefently run
out of his wits. Alfo if the fith called ‘Stella, as they fay, bein

faftned with the blood of a Fox and.a brafs nail roa gate, evil

medicines can do no hurt. Alfo it, is faid, thar if @, woman
take aneedle, and beray it with dung, and then. wrap.it-up in
earth, in which the carkafs of a man was buryed, and thal cars
ry it about her in acloth which, was ufed at the funerall, that
no man fhallbe able to ly with her as a oa hath; it_a-
bout her. Now by thefe examples we fee, how by certain.al-
ligations of certain things, asalfo fufpenfions, or, by a fimpls
contact, orthe continuation of any thread, we may be.able
to receive fome vertues thereby. Its neceflary that we know
the certain rule of alligation, and fufpenfion, andthe manner

which the Art requires, vz. that they be done under.acertain,

and futable conftellation, and that they be done. with wye
or filken threads, with hair, or finews of certain
things that are to be. wrapped up, muft he done in the fea es
of hearbs, or-thé skins of animals, or fine cloths, and the like

accor ng to the furablenefs of things : as if you would pro-
cure the ing wrapped up ig

folary vertue.of any thing, this being wrapped up in -

bay leaves, or the skin of a Lion, hang it about.thy neck witha

golden thread, or afilken. thread of a yallow, colour, whileft

the Sun rulesin the heaven. fo thou fhale.be endued. with the
Solary vertue of that thing. But if thou doft defire the vertue
of any Saturnine thing, thou fhale in like maner take that ching
whileft Saturn raignes, and wrap it up in the skin Eig oS
in.a cloth ufed ac a funerall, efpecially if thou defireft it, for

fadnefs, and with a black, thread bang it about, thy neck, In

like manner we mutt conceive of the re

| | | HA P.
‘
£.

. ‘

OF Occult Philofophy. ‘

‘Book
CHAP.XLVIL
Of Rings,and their compofitions.

T) Ings alfo, which were alwaies much efteemed of by the

Ancients, when they are opportunely made, do in like
manner imprefs their vertue upon us, in as much as they do af-
_ fe@& the fpirit of him that carries chem with gladnefs or fad-
nefs, and render him courteous, or terrible, bold, or fearful,
amiable, or hatefull ; inas much alfo asthey do fortifie usa-
 -gainft ficknefs, poifons; enemies, evill fpirits, and all manner
of hurtfull things, or at leaft will not fuffer us to be kept
under them. .Now the manner of making thefe kinds of
Rings, is this, wx. when any Star afcends fortunately,
with the fortunate afpet, or conjuntion of the ALvon,

we takeaftone, and Hearb that is under that Star, and

make a Ring of the Metall that is furable to this Scar, and in ie
faften'the ftone, putting the Hearb, or root under it ; not o-
mitting the infcriptions of images, names, and Charaters, as
alfo the proper fuffumigations, but we fhall fpeak more of
thefe in another place, where we (hall treat of Images, and
Charatters. So we read in Philoftratus Farchus , that a wife
Prince of the Indians beltowed feven Rings made after this
maniner, ‘marked with the vertues, and names of the feven Pla-
nets to Apolloniusof which he wore every day one,diftinguith-
ing them according to the names of the dayes, by the benefit
of which he lived. above one hundred and thirty years, as alfo
alwaies retained the beauty of his youth. In like manner

— (Mofes the Law-giver, and ruler of the Hebrews, being skill-
edinthe Egyptian Magick, is faid by 7o/ephus to have made
Rings of love, and oblivion. There wasalfo,as faith Ariftotle,
amongit the Cireneans a Ring of Battus, which could procure
love andhonour. We read alfo that Ewdamus a certain Philo-
foplier made Rings againft the bites of Serpents, bewitchings,
 andevil fpirits. The fame doth Pofephus relate of
~Alfo we read in Plato that Gygus, King of Lydia hada Ring

, » -

a
s
»
‘

Book I. Occult Philofophy.

of wonderfull, and ftrange vertues, the feal of which,when he
curned toward the palm of hishand, no body couldfeehim,
but he could fee all things by the opportunity of
he ravifhed the Queen, and flew the King his Mafter, a

killed whomfoever he thought ftood inhis way, and in thefe
villanies no body could fee him, and at length by the benefit of

this Ring he became King of Lydia.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the vertue of places, and What places are [utable to every

Star.

Here be wonderfull vertues of places accompanying
them, either from things there placed, or the influences
of the Stars, or any other way. For as Pény relates ofa
Cuckow, in what place any one doth firft hear him, if his
right foot be marked about; and that foort-ftep digged up,there
will no Fleas be bred in that place where it is {cattered. So
they fay that the duft of the track of a Snake being gathered
up, and feattered amongft Bees, makes them return to their
hives. So alfo that the duft, in which a Mule hath rolled-him- _
felf, being caft Pe the Body,doth mitigate the heats of love,
and thac the duft wherein a Hawk hath rolled her felf, ifit be
bound to the body ina bright red cloth, cures the quartane.So |
doth the {tone taken out of the neft of a Swallow, as they fay,
| Bee relieve thofe that have the falling ficknels, and being
ound to the party, continually preferve them, efpecially ifit
be rolled in the blood, or heart of a Swallow. Aad it is re-
ported, That if any one having cut a veine, and being falting,
fhall go over a place where any one lately fell with the fit ofa
Failing ficknefs, that he fhall fall intothe fame difeafe. And
Pliny reports, that to faften an Ironnaile in that place where
he-thac fell with a fit of the Falling ficknefs firlt pitched his
head, will free him fromhis difeafe. So they fay that an Hearb

growing upon the head of any image, being aan or

> ae
‘A

‘ 5
an
‘
‘

Philosphy.
of@utid’upin fome part of ones; garment: with a red thread,

‘Thal prefenely allay the headach ; and that any Hearb gather.

of the brooks orrivers before Sun tifing, that no: body

him thall cure the Tertian,if it be bound to

whe fick party not knowing what is done. But a-

: ‘piongtt' places that are ‘appropriated tothe Stars, all ftink-

ing places, dark, underground, religious , and:mournfull

places, as Church-yards, tombes, and houfes not inhabited by

~ men, and old,tottering, obfcure, dreadfull houfes, and folitary |

dens, caves, and pits, alfo fifh-ponds, ftanding pools, fennes, |
and fuch like are appropriated to Saturne. Unto fapiter are
aferibed all priviledged places,Confiftories of noble men, Tri-
bunals,Chaires, places for Exercifes, Schools,and all beautifull,
‘and clean places, fcattered, or fprinkled with divers odours.
*To. Mars, fiery, and bloody: places, furnaces, bake-houfes,
» fhambles, ‘places:of execution, and, places where there have
been great battailes fonght, and flanghters made, and the like.
Tothe Sun, lipht places, the Serene-Aire, Kings Pallaces, and
» Princes Courts, Palpits, Theators, Thrones, and all kingly,and
Magnificent places. To Venus, pleafant fountains; green Mea-
‘dows, flowrifhing Gardens, garnifhed beds, ftews. (and ac-
cording to Orpheus) the fea,the fea fhore,baths,dancing- places,
and all: places'belonging to women. To «Mercary, fhops,
~fchools;ware-houfes, an Exchange. for Merchants, and the
To the AZdon; wildernefles, woods, rocks,’ ,hils, .moun-
tains, forrefts, fountains, waters, rivers,feas, fea-fhores, fhips,
groves, high-waies, and: granaries for Corn, and fuch like.
a Upon'this account they that endeavor to procure love, are
ee - wont to bury fora certain time the inftruments of their arr,
“whether they be:rings, images; looking: glafles, or any other,
- to nde chem in a ftew: houfe, becaufe in that place they will
comtraéfome venerall faculty; no otherwife then thingsthat
ftand in ftinking »places , become ftinking, and thofe inan
- Atomaticall-place,become Aromaticall,and of a fweet favour.
the Earth’ alfo pertain’ to:this matter.
Hence they that gather a Saturnall, Martiall,; or Joviall
Hearb; mult looktowards the Eaft; or South, partly

Book Of Occult Philofophy,

they defire.to be orientall from rhe Sun, and:partly, becaule -
their principall houles, viz. Aquarius, Scorpius, Sagittarius
are Southern fignes, fo alfo are apricornus, and Pifees.’ Boe.
they that will gather a Venerall, Mercurial, or Lunary Hearby
mult look towards the Welt, becaufe they delight to be weltern,

or elfe they muft look Northward, becaufe their principall

honfes, viz. Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virge ate Northern
fignes, foinany Solary work we muft look towards the Eaft,

‘or South, bue rather towards the Solary body’, “and

light.

CHAP. XLIX~

Of Light, Colours, Candles, and Lamps, and to What Stars,
Houfes, and Elements feverall colours are afcribed, =
Le alfo is a quality that partakes much of form, and isa
(imple act, and a reprefentation of the underftanding ic
is firft diffufed from the Mind of God into all things, borin
God the Father,the Father of light,it is che firft true light;theh
inthe Son a beautifull overflowing brightnefs, andin the Holy
Ghoft a burning brightnefs, exceeding all Intelligencies; ‘yea, ARS
as Dyonifius, faith, of Seraphins, In Angels therefore it isa Rt
fhining. intelligence diffyfed, an abundant joy beyond all
bounds of reafon, yet received in divers degrees, according to
the Nature of the intelligence that receives it; Then it dé-
fcends into Celeftiall bodies, where it becomes {tore of life,
and an effectual propagation, even a vifible fplendor, In. the

fire.acertain, naturalh liveline{sinfufed into ic by the heavens.
And laftly. in men, ‘it is. a clear difcourle of reafon, and kniow-

an
me
™

Of Occult Philofophy. Book I

manifold, either by reafon of the difpofition of the body,as the
Peripatetickswill have it,or which is more true,by reafonof the
xo0d pleafure. of him that beftows it, who gives it to every
one as he pleafeth. From thence it pafleth tothe fancy, yer
above the fenfe, but only imaginable, and thence. to the
fence, but. efpecially to that of the eyes; In them it be- ©
- comes.avifible clearnefs, and is extended to other perfpi-

}

A

o

©

=¥

fle heads: the like done of Affes;and

is

inakes Sétpenits appear they fay Grapes arein their

& cuous bodies, in whichit becomes acotour, and fhining beau-
ty, bur in dark bodies it is a certain beneficial! and gencrative
verfue, and penetrates, to the very center, where the
- beames of it being colle&ted into a narrow place, it be-
: ‘comes a dark heat tormenting, and {corching, fo rhat all things
perceive the vigour of the light according to their capacity, all
which joyning to it felf with an enlivening heat, and paffing
through all things, doth convey its qualities, and vertues
through all things. Therefore Magicians forbid the Urin of
afick man to be {prinkled in the fhadow of a fick man, or to
be uncovered again{t the San or the Avon, becaufe the rayes
: of the light penetrating, bringing fuddenly with it the noxtous
F reafon why Enchanters have a care to cover thetr Enchant-
ments with their fhadow. So the Civet Cat: makes all Dogs
EB dumb with the very touch of her fhadow. Alfo there are made
oe artificially fome Lights, by Lamps, Torches, Candles, and fuch
a like,of fomé certain things, and liquors opportunely chofen,ac-
Beit. cording to the rule of the’Stars, and compofed amongft them-
Selves according to their congruity; which when they be fight-
éd, and hint alone,, até wont to produce’ fome wonderfull,
and Celeftiall which many times wonder ac, as
| Pliny reports out of Andxilads, of 'a poifon of Mares afterco-
pulaction, which being lishted ‘in Torches, doth monftroufly re-
| Brcfenc a of ho
flies ,which being tempted wich wax, lighted nrake aftrange
d oh ‘of skin Of fishted ay

~ 99°

~ “OF Occult Philofophy.
dower, if any one (hall bind a Viall to them full of Oile, and

Book

fhall let it alone till they be ripe, and then the Oile be lighted
in a Lamp,it makes Grapes to be feen. And f0 in other fruits. If
Centory be mixed with Honey, and the blood of a Lapwing,
and be put ina Lamp, they chat ftand about will feema great
deal bigger then they are.wont.: and if it be lighted in a clear
night, che Stars will feem to be fcattered the one from the
other. Such force alfo isin the inke of the Cuttle fith, that it
being put into a Lamp,makes Black.mores appear. It is alfo re-
orted,that a Candle made of fome certain Saturnine things,
if being lighted,it be extinguifhed in the mouth ofa man new-
ly dead, will afterwards, as oft as it fhines alone, bring —
reat fadnefs, and fear upon them that ftand abont it, ©
Of fuch like Torches, Lamps, doth Hermes {peak more of,
alfo Plato, and Chyrannides, and of the latter writers e47-
bertus in a certain Treatife of this particular thing; Colours
alfo are a kind of lights, which being mixed with things,
are wont to expofe them to thofe Stars, to which they are
agreeable. And we fhall afterwards {peak of fome colours,
which are the lights of the Planets , by which even the na-
tures of fixed Stars themfelves are underftood; which alfo
may be applyed to the flames of Lamps, and Candles. But
in this. place we fhall relate how the colours of infériour —
mixt things are diftributed to divers Planets, For all co-
lours, black, lucid, earthy, leaden, brown, have relation
to Saturne, Saphire, and airy colours, and thofe which are
alwaies green, clear, purple, darkifh, golden, mixed with
Silver, belong to Jupiter. Red colours , and burning, fiery,
flaming , violet, purple, bloody, and iron colours, re-
femble (Mars. Golden, Saffron, purple, and bright colours,
refemble the Sw”. But all white, fair, curious, green, ruddy,
betwixt faffron, and purple,refemble Venus, Mercury, and the
Moon. Moreover amongit the houfes of the heaven, the firft,
and feyenth hath white colour : the fecond, and owelfth .
green: the third, and eleventh faffron: the fourth, and the
tenth red : the fift,and ninth colour: the fixt,and

i

N

femble Celeftiall bodies in
Ld | | |

isle OF Occult Philo pphy. 300k
a plack.. The Elements alfo have their colours , by which Na-
Bee turall Philofophers judge of the complexion and property of
their nature ;, For an. earthy colour, caufed; of coldnefs, and
a drynefsis brown, and black, and manifefts black ‘choller, and
a Saturnine nature; the blew ending towards whitenefs,doth
- denote flegme :, for cold. makes white, moifture and drynefs
a : reddifh colour fhews blood, but fiery , flaming, :
2 _ hew choller, which by reafon of its fubtilry, and
= aptnefsto mix. With.orhers, doth caufe diyers colours more:
ie for.f it be mixed with blood,and blood be molt predominant,
itmakesa florid reds if choller predominate, it makes a redith
pices colour; if there be an equall mixtion,it makes a fad red. Butif
aduft choller be mixed with blood, it makes a Hempencolout,
ee ‘and, red, if blood predominate, and fomewhat red if choller
prevaile ;.. buc if ic be mixed: with a melancholy humour,
ae itmakes a black colour, but with malancholy, and flegme to-
fe gether;. in.an equall proportion, it makes a Hempen colour :
If flegme. abound, a mud .colonr, if melancholy , a blewith;
but if it.be mixed with flegme alone, in an equall pro-
makes\a citrine colour; if unequally, apale, or
palith. ow all colours are more prevalent, when they be in
4 ilk, ‘or in metals, or.in perfpicuous fubftances’, or pretious
ftanes; and in thofe things which+e
= colour,efpecially in living things. .

Book I.

Occult Philofophy
(Of Fafi chwation, and the Art thereof.

A (cination is a binding, which comes from the {pirit of the
EF W itch,through the eyes of him that is bewitched,entering

to hisheart. Now the inftrument of Fafcination is the {piric,

viz, a certain pure, lucid, fubtile vapour, generated of che
purer blood,by the heat of the heart. This doth  alwaies fend

forth through the ¢yes,rayes like co ie felf; Thofe-sayes being.

fenc forth, docarry with them a fpiticuall vapour, and chat

vapour a blood, asit appears in bleer, and red eyes, whofe. -

raies being fent forth to the eyes of him that is oppofice, and.

looks upon them, carries the vapour of the corrupe bleod, to-,

gether with ic felf, by the contagion. of which, it dorhinfe&
the eyes of the beholder with the like difeafe. So the'eye being
opened, and intent upon any one with a {trong imagination,
doth dart its beams, which are the Vehiculum ofthe {pirit into

the eyes ofhim that is oppofite to him, which tender fpirict -

{trikes the eyes of him that is bewitched, being ftirred up from.
the heart of him that ftrikes, and poffefleth the breaft of him
that is {tricken, wounds his heart, and infeéts his fpirit. Whence
eApuleius faith, Thy eyes fliding down through my. eyes,into

‘mine inward breaft, ftirs up a molt vehement burning in m

a“

Marrow. Know therefore that men are then moft bewitched, ©

when with ofcen beholding they direct the edge of theirfighr -

to the edg of their fight shat bewitch them, and when cheir
eyes are reciprocally intent one upon the other, and. when
raies are joyned to raies, and lights co lights, for then'the {pis
rit of the one is.joyned to, the ipiric of the other, and fixech its

fparks: So are {trong ligations made, and fo moft vehement ~

loves are inflamed with, the only raies of the eyes, even witha —

certain {adden looking on, .as if it were witha dart, or ftroke
penetrating che whole body, whence then the fpirit, and amo-
rous blood being thus. wounded, are carried forth upon the

lover, and enchanter, no otherwife then the blood and{piric

H 3

a
al
t
ro &
i+
»*
ai
‘

“of the vengeance of him that is flain,are upon him that flayes
him. Whence Lucretine thofe amorous
-witchings.

The body i ts, yer the mind
Js wounded with the darts of Capid blind.

Allparts do Simpathize i'th’ wound, bat
he blood in that whish bad the blow.

$6 great is the powet of Faftination efpecially they va-
of the ‘eyes are fubfervient ‘to the affetion. Therefore
Witches ule collyries, oimtments,allipations, and fach ‘like, to

affeét, and corroborate the fpirie this or that'manner. To

~ procure love,they afe venereall collyries, as Hippomanes, the
blood of. umes or Sparrows, and fuch like. ‘Toindace fear,
they Martiall Collyries, as‘ofthe eyes of Wolves,the Civer
Cat and the like. To procure mifery or be
and fo of reft.

servations producing wonderful

fay that certain ads, and obfervations have
Site power of naturall things, that they believe'difeafes may.
be expelied brouglit this, atid’thus. ‘So they’ fay that-quat-
may be driven away if the parings‘of the tails
be‘bound to the neck of ‘a tive Eel'in a linnen clout, and
water: ‘And faith, that the paring
thiefick matis nailes of his'feer, and hands, Being fuxed-with
"Wax, eute'the quartane, ‘tettian, and quotidian Agae, -andif
they be before’San rifing faftened to another ahs gate, will
fuchilike difeafes. In like ‘manner let ‘alt the parings ofthe

be put Pifmires caves, and chey'fay thar thae which

¥
Ey .
<a
a
é
BG
oF 4
Cy
by

neck, and by this means will the difeafe be removed. They

fay that by Wood ftricken with lightning, and caltbehind  -

the back with ones hands, any difeafe may be cured, andin_

quattanes a piece of a naile from a Gibbet, wrapt up. in-

Wooll, and hanged about the neck, curesthem; alfo a Rope

doth the like, that istaken from a Gallows, and hid under
ground, that the Sun cannot reach it. Alfo thethroatofhim

that hath ahard (welling, or impofthume;being touched with
the hand of him that dyed by an immature death, iscured
thereby. Alfo they fay ,that a woman is prefently eafed of her

hard cravel, if any one fhall put into the bed, where the'wo- —

man in travel is, aftone; or dart, with which ¢itherof thefe
Animals, viz. a Man, a Boar, or a Bear were at one blow
killed. The fame alfo, as they fay,doth a {pear that is pulled
out of the body of a man; ifit fhalinotfirlt couch the ground;

alfo they fay that Arrows pulled out of the body ofman, if
they have not touched the Earth, and be put under any one —

lying down, will procure love; Allo they fay that the fal-

. ling ficknefs is cured. by meat made of the fleth of a wild beaft, .

flain in the fame manner as aman isflain. Alfo they fay thata—

mans eyes that are wafhed three times with the water wherein (8

he hath wafhed his feet, fhall never be fore or bleer!: Ie 18 id

that fome do cure difeafes of the groin with threedtakemout ~~
of the Weavers Loom, being tyed in nine, or feven knots; the’

name of fome Widow being named at every knot... Alfo the ©

Spleen of Catle extended upon pained Spleens, curesthem, if —

he that applies it, faith chat he: is applying a medicine'to the

Spleen to cure, and eafeit; After this, they fay, the patient
muft be fhut into a fleeping room, thedore being fealedup

with a Ring, and fome verle be repeated over.nineteen times,
The Urine of a green Lizard cures the fameidifeafe; if it. be

hanged. up in a pot befonethe patientsbed:chamber, fo that -

he may.ashe comesinand wiithebis hand:

Lizard killed dn the Unineof as they day; iréltfainghis
Jot boc, he that fhall puc hisowoUrise iateia

Maineds {aid co, be made thereby dull co venerous ads,

> «
‘
a
»
‘
Se 4
Pe
ke
«*
“+
owt
a:
- °

~~ wn Urine be dropped upon the foot in the morning, it is a
’ remedy againft all evil medicines. And a little Frog climbing
upatree, if any one fhall fpitin his mouth; and then let him
efcape, is faid to cure the Cough. Itisa wonderfull ching, but
eafy to experience, what Pliny {peaks of, If any one fhall be
forry for any blow that he hath given another afar off, or
nigh at hand,- if he (hall prefently {pit into the middle of that
hand with which he gave the blow, the party that was {micten
fhall prefently be freed from pain. This hath been approved
of ina four-footed beaft that hath been forely hurt.Some there
_ are that aggravate the blow before they give it. In like maner
fpitle carried in the hand, or to fpitin the fhooe of the right
foot before it be put on, is good when any one paffeth
through a dangerous place. They fay. that Wolves will not
come toa field, if oneiofthem be'taken, and the blood let by
and little out of hisdegs, being unbroken, witha knife,
and fprinkled about-the outfides of the field, and he himfelf be
buried in that place,'from which he was firft drawn. The Me-
thanenfes, Citizens of Trezenium,accounted it as a prefent re-
medy for preferving of Vines from the wrong of the Southern
wind, having alwaiesfound it -by moft certain experience; if.
whileft the wind- blows, a white Cock fhouid-be pulled to
piecesin the middle by two men, both which keeping their
“part,mutt walk round the Vineyard, and both meeting in’ the
/.\.. ‘place from whence they began their Circuit, mult in that
--°. phacecbury:the pieces of the Cock. They fay alfo that if any
‘one fhalihold a Viper over a vapour with a f{taffe, he fhall pro-
the ftaffe wherewith Snake'was beaten is
good againit difeafes of breeding women. Thefe things PAxy
recites. Itisfaid alfo ingathering of roots,and hearbs, we muft
‘draw threecircles round about chem, firk with a fword; then
dig them up,taking heed iti the mean time of a contrary wind.
Alfo they fay, chat if any one thall meafure a'déad.man witha
firlt from the Elbow’ro ‘the biggeft finger; chea from
ithe thoulder'to the fame finger, and afterwards fromithehead.
 toche feet, making chrice thofe meénfurations, if any one after-
Wardthall be meatiured withthe fame rope, in thedame mance,

AF
«J
aN
Pe
a

‘

Book I. Ot Occult Philofophy.

“Riis

he fhall not profper, but be unfortunate, and fall into mifery,
and fadnefs. And Albertus out of Chyrannes faith, that if any.
woman hath enchanted ghee to lov@her, take che (heet fhe lies
in, and pifs chrough her hood, and her right fleeve, out of

doors, and che enchantment will be quiteed»-And P/iny faith, |

that co fic by women great with child, or when a medicine is

given to any one of them, the fingers being joynedtogether —
like the teeth ofa Kemb, isacharm. This was known byex-

perience in Alcumena breeding Hercules : and fo much the

worle, if that be done about one, or both knees, Alfo to

fic crofs legged, is Sorcery, therefore it was forbiden: to
be done in the Counfets of Princes, and Rulers,as aching
which hindred all aéts, And it is faid, if-any one ftand-
‘ing before the door call the’ man by: his. name,. that
is lying witha woman ,. and he anfwer., if then he faftema
knife, or needle on the door, and break it, the edge being
downward, he that isin the bed wich the woman cannet cou-
_ ple with-her as long as thofe things fhall be there. ae

CHAP. Lil.
of the Conntenance,and Gefture, the. Habit , and Figure of oh

Body, and what Stars any.of the{e do an{wer; whence Phyfiog-

womy, and (Metopo[copy, and Chyromancy, Arts of dsvina-
tion, have their grounds, te gn

wife then in Hellebor, which when thou gathereft, if chon

pulleft the leaf upward, ic draws the humors upward, and
caufeth vomiting; ifdownward,it caufeth purging, by drawing

the humour downward, How much alfo the countenanee,
gefture,do affect the fight, imagination, and Animalifpiric, no

man is ignorant. So they that couple for genefation,. = is:

countenance, gefture, the motion, fettiig, and
figure of the body, being accidentall co us, con-
duce to the receiving of Celeftiall gifts, and expofe.usito -
the fuperiour bodies,and produce certain effectsin us;no other-

ay

a ‘felves then form, or imagine : Soamild,and cheerfull coun.

ave the-thapes of men-diftinG. For befpeaksn mantic

‘the moft part are wont to make an impreflion on the children —
that are then begotten, of that countenance which they them-

genance of a Prince in the City,makes the people joyfh}t: but
fierce, and fad, terrifies them: fo the gelture,and countenance
one lamenting doth eafily move to pitty : So the thape

ofan amiable perfon,doth eafily excite to love. Thou muf

know chat fuch like geftures, and figures, as harmonies of the

body do expofe it no otherwife to the Celeftials, then odours,
and the {pirit of.a Medicine , and internal! paffions do the
foul. For as Medicines,and paffions of the mind are by cerrain
difpofitions of the Heaven increafed fo alfo the gefture, and —
motion of the body do get an efficacy by certain influences of —
the heavens. For thereare geftures refembling Satusne,which
are melancholy, and fad, as are beating of the breaft,“ftriking
of the head: alfefuch as are Religious, as che bowing of the
knee, and a fixt looks dowaward,as of one praying,allo weep- —
ing, and fuch like,as are ufed by an Auftere,and Saturnine man,
fuch an one as the Satyriff defcribes, faying,

With hang’d down head, With eyes fixed to the cround,
His raging words bites in, and muttering found

Hedoth expre[s with povring lips--——
Acheerfull, and honeft.countenance, a worthipfull gefture,
ing of the hands,as of one the
bending of che knee , with the head lifted up, as of one chat is
worhipping, areafcribed to fupiter. A fowre, fierce, cruell,
angry, rough countenance, and gefture, are,alcribed-to Jars.
Solary are honourable, and couragious geftures, and counte-
nances : alfo walkings abroad, bending.ot che knee,asofione
honoring. aKing with one knee Venerea/,are dances,embrages,
laughtersjamiable,and eheerfullcountenances,
inconftant, quick, variable, and {uch like geftures,aod connre-
nances. Lanary are fuch as are moveable .peifonfyll, and
childifh, and thelike. And as we have fpakeief

é
f
Pas.
op
a
nd
¥
a

be of a black, and yellowifh colour, lean, crooked, of arough —

skin, great veines, hairy all over bis body, little tyes, ofa

frownin g forehead, of a thin beard, great lips, eyes intent upon
the ground , of a heavy gate, ftriking hisfeet together as he
walks, crafty, witty, a feducer, and murderous, ° fapiter fig-
nifies a man tobe of a pale colour, darkifh red, 2handfome

body, good {tature, bold, of great eyes, not black altogether,

large pupill, fhort noftrils, not equall, great teeth before,
curld hair, of good difpofition,and manners. (Wars makes

a man red, ofared hair, round face, yellowith eyes,of a ter-

rible, and fharp looks, bold, jocund, proud, crafty. The Sun.

makes aman of a tauny colour, betwixt yellow and black,
dafht with red , of a fhort ftature, yet of a handfome bédy,
without much hair, and curld,of yellow eyes, wife, faithfall,
defirous Of praife. Venus fignifies a man to be tendi
blacknefs, but more white, with mixture of red,of a handfome
body, ‘a fair, and round face, fair hair, faireyes, the blacknefs
whereof is more intenfe, of good ‘manners, and honeft love,al-

fo kind, patient, and jocund ; AZercury fignifies a maninot

tending towagds

much white, or black,-of along face, high forehead, faireyes,

notblack, to have a ftreight, and long nofe, thin beard, long

fingers, to be ingenious, a fabrile fub-
je& to many fortunes. The Adoonfignifies a manto ibéin co-

four white,mixed with a litle red, of a fair ftacure face,
with fome marks in it, eyes not fully black, frowning forehead,
alfo kind, gentle, fociable. The Signes alfo, and faces of Signes
have their figures, and thapes, which hethat would know,

muft feek ‘them out in books of .Altrology. Laftly,aponthefe

figures, and geftures, Phyfiognomy, and Metopofeopy,arts.of
divination do depend : Alfo ‘Chyromancy, -foretelling future
events,not as caufes, bucasfignes throughilike effe&s,caufed by
the fame caufe. And alchough thefe divers kinds of divinations

may feem to be done ‘by ‘inferiour, andweakfignes, yet.the

judgements of themare not tobe flighted,orcond ;when
is made by them, not outof {uperftition, but

reafon of the harmoniacall correfpondency of ‘all the, parts
ofthe body. Whofoever'therefore doth the mo

te

»

e-
«
©
—
Re

568 | Of Occult Philofophy. Book I.

‘qmitate the Celeftiall bodies, either in nature, ftudy, aQion,
motion, gefture, countenance, paffions of the mind, end:
“portunity of the feafon, is fo much the more like to the hea-

~~ yenly bodies, and can receive larger gifts from them, .

CHAP. LIII.
Of Divination, and its kinds.

— ~

“PP Here are fome otherkinds of divinations depending up.
on naturall caufes, which are known to everyone inhis
art, and experience,to be in divers things; by which Phyfiti-
ans, husbandmen, fhepheards,Mariners,and every one of thefe
out of probable fignes do Prognofticate. Many of thefe kinds
made mention of in his Book of Times. Amongtt
“which Auguria, and eAufpicia are the chiefelt, which were
.. time in fuchefteem amonglt the Romanes, thatthey
ie would do nothing that did belong to private or publique bufi-
‘nefs, without the of the Angares: Cicero alfo in his
‘Book of Divinations largely declares,that the people of Tx/cia
. would do nothing without this art. Now there ase divers
-kitids of Au/picia’'s for fome are called Pedeftria (i.e. which
are taken from four-foored beafts : Some are called Augaria,
which are taken from birds :' Some are Celeftiall;. which are
taken from thundrings, and Iightnings ; fome are called
(aduca{s.e.) when any fell in the temple, or elfwhere-; ‘Some
- were facred; which were taken from facrifices. -Some of thefe
were called Piacula, and fad Axfpicia. as when a facrifice ef-
caped from the Altar, or being fmitten made a bellowing, or
fell upon another part of his-body then he fhould. To thefe is
added Exanguration,viz. when the.sod fel] out of the hand of
‘the Augure, with which it was the cuftome.to view, and take
Motice of the Ax/picinm. Michael Scotus makes mention of
‘twelve kinds of Asuguria’s, viz. Six on the right hand. the
fames of which he faith are Fermova, Fervetus, (onfert,

j

JS

—

’

of Occult Philofophy. 109

Emponenthem, Sonnafarnova, Sonnafarvetue : and the other —
Gx on the lefe hand, the names of which are, Confernova,
(onfervetus , Viaram, Herrenam, Scaffarnova,
Then expounding their names,he faith, Fernova is ane4y-
gurinm;, when.thou goeft out of thy houfe for ro do any bufi-
nefs, and in going thou feelt a man, or a bird going, or flying,
fo that either of them fet himfelf before thee upon thy left
hand, thatisa good fignification, in refrence to thy buGnefs. -
Fervetus is an e4ugurium; when thou fhalt go out of thy
houfe for to do any bufinefs, and in going thou findelt or
feeft a bird , or a man refting himfelf before thee onthe left
fide of thee, that is an illfign in reference to thy bufinefs :
Viaramis an Augurinum;when aman or a bird in his journey;or
flying paffeth before thee, coming from the right fide of thee,
and bending toward the left, goeth out of chy fight, that isa
good fign concerning thy bufinefs. Coxfernava isan e#ugn-
rium; when thou doft firlt find a man, or a bird going, pas
ing, and then he refts himfelf before chee on chy right hie .
feeing of it, that is a good fign. concerning thy bufinels; Gage
fervetus is an e4ugarium ; when firlt thou findelt,-or feel:
man, or abird bending from thy right fide, itisan.illfign
concerning thy bufinefs. Scimafarnovaisan Augurium ; when
aman, ora bird comes behind thee, and outgoeth thee, bur |
_ before he comes at thee, he refts, chou feeing of him on thy
right fide , it is co chee a good fign. Scimafarvetus is an
Angurinm; when thou feeflt a man, or abircd behind thee,but
before he comes to thee he refts in that place, thou feeing of
it, it isa good fign. Scaffarvetus is when thou feeft a man,
or a bird paffing by thee, and refting ina place on thy left fide,
itis an evillfign to thee. Emponenthem is whena man, ora
bird coming from thy left fide, and paffing tothy right,goeth
out of thy fight without.refting, itisa good fign. Hartenais
an Augurium; if a man ora bird coming from thy right band;
paffing behind thy back to thy left , and chou thalc fee him
refting any where, this isan evillfign. Thus-much Scotus, The
Ancients did alfo prognofticate from {neelings,of which Homer
inthe feventeenth book of his Odes, makes mention, becaule

—

tal
hdl
ate

Pa

OF Occult Philofophy. Book I’

' them, propheticall. Doth not the Cock by his crowing

they thought they proceeded from a facred place,viz.the head;
in which the intelleét is vigorous, and operative. Whence al-
fo whatfoever fpeech came into the breaft, or mind of aman
‘rifing in the morning unawares, is faid to be fome prefage, and
an Augurinm. |

CHAR Lim.

Of devers certain Animals, and other things which have a figni-
“fication in Avguria’s.

A‘ L the 4x/picia which firft happen in the beginning of
any enterprife are to be taken notice of : as if in the be-
ginning of thy work thou (halt perceive that Rats have gnawn
thy garments, defift from thy undertakings; If going forth
thou fhalt ftumble at the threfhold, or in the way thon hale
dath thy foot againft any thing, forbear thy journey ; If any
ill omen happen in the beginning of thy bufinefs, put off thy
undertakings, leaft thy intentions be wholly fruftrated, or
accomplifhed to no purpofe ; but expect and wait fora fortu-.
nate hour for the difpatching of chy affairs wich a better omen.
We fee that many Animals are, by anaturall power imbred in

diligently tell you the hours of the night, and morning, and |
with his wings {pread forth chafe away the Lion; and many
birds with their finging, and chattering, and flies by their fharp

pricking foretell rain, and Dolphins by their often feaping a-
hoa the water,fore-run tempelts. Ir would be too long to re.
late allthe paflages, which the Phrygians Cilicians, Arabians,
Umbrians, Tufcians, and other people, which follow the 4u-_
guria's, \earned by birds. Thefe they have-proved by many ex-
periments,and examples.For in all things che Oracles of things
to come are hid: but chofe are che chiefelt which Ominall
birds fal! foretell. Thefe are thofe which the Poets relate
were turned from men into birds. Therefore what the Daw
declares,hearken,and mark,obferving her fetting as the fits,and

> — 7
t
q -
‘

“Book Occult Philofophy.

her manner offlying, whether on the right hand, orleft,whe- =
ther clamorous, or filent, whether fhe goes before, or follows
after, whether fhe waits for the approach of him that paffeth
by, or flies from him,and which way fhe goes ; all thefe things
mult be diligently obferved. Orus Apollo faith in his Hyero-
glyphicks, Daws that are twios fignife marriage, becaufe —
this Aniniall brings forth two eggs, our of which male, and fe-
male muft be brought forth : But if (which feldom happens) -
two males be generated, or two females, the males willnor_ .
couple with any other females, nor females with any other
males, but will alwaies live without a mate; and folicary.
Therefore they that meet afingle Daw, divine thereby that
they fhall live a fingle life. The fame alfo doth a black Hen
Pigeon betoken; for after che death of her mate,the alwaies
lives fingle. Thou fhalt as carefully obferve Crows, which
are as fignificant as Daws, yea, and in greater matters. It was
Epittetus the Stoicks Philofophers jadgement, who was ‘a
Sage Author, that ifa Crow did croke overagainft any one, it
did betoken fome evill, either to his body; fortune, honour,
wife, or children. Then thou fhalt take heed to Swans, who
foreknow the fecrets of the waters, for their cheerfulnefs
doth prefage happy events not only to Marriners, butallo- ~—
ther travellers, unlefs they be overcome by the céming over of
_aftronger, as of an Eagle, who by the moft potent Majetty of
her foveraignty makes nall the predi@tions of all other birds,
if fhe fpeaks to the contrary ; for fhe fies higher then all other
birds, and is of more acute fight, and is never excluded from
_the feerets of 7upiter : She portends advancement,and victory,
but by blood; becaufe the drinks no water burblood. An
Eagle flying over the Locrenfians, fighting,againft the Croto-
nienfians gave them victory. An Eagle fetting her felf una-
waresup»n the Target of Aiero,going forth tothe Wary”
_betokened that he fhould be King. Two Eagiesfitcing all.day
bpomthe hoofe at thebirth of Alexinder of Macedoniaydid
portend to him an omen of ‘two Kingdomés; Afajand
Europe. An Eagle alfotaking off the hat of Lucias Turquinius
| Prifens Son to Demarathus the (orinthian (flying from

°

¥
j

“OF Occult Philofophy. Book |,

“by reafon of fome difcord, and being come into Hetraria,and

going to. Rome) andthenflying high with it, and afterwards
putting it upon his head again, did portend to him the King.
dome of the Romans. Vulturs alfo fignifie diffiulty, hardnefs, ra.

-_-yenoufnefs, which was verified in the beginning of building of
Cities. Alfo they foretell the places of flaughter,coming feyen

dayes before hand; and becanfe they have moft refpeé to that
placewhere the greateft flaughter fhall be, as if they gaped af-
ter the greateft number of the flain; therefore the ancient
Kings were wont to fend out {piesto take notice what place

the Vulturs had. moft refpe& to, The Phoenix promifeth fingu.
lar good fuccefs, which being feen anew, Rome was built ve
_-aufpicionfly. The Pellican, becaufe the hazards her felf for her
young, fignifies that a man fhould out of the zeal of his love

undergo much hardfhip. The penced bird gave the nameto.

the City of Psiavia, and fore

ewed the lenity of that peo-

-ple by its ‘colour, and voice. The Heron isan Augurium of
shard things. The Stork is abird of concord, and makes con-
cord. Cranes gives us notice of the trechery of enemies. The
bird Cacupha-becokens gratitude, for the alone doth expre(s

good turn, alfoinjuftice. The bird Origis ismoft envious, and
_betokens envy. |

ove toher Dam, being fpent with old age. On the contrary,
‘Hippopotamus that kils his Dam,doth betoken ingratitude for

_ »Amongft the fmaller birds, the Pie is talkative, and foretels

guefts. The-bird Albanellus flying by any one, if from the left

tothe right, betoken cheerfulnefs of entertainment, if contra-
. rywife’, betokens,the contrary. The fcrich Owl is alwaies
unlucky, fo alfoisthe horn Owl, who becaufe fhe ,goes.to her
young by night unawares, .asdeath comes unawares, is there-

fore faid to foretell death : yet fometimes , becaufe the is not

~ blind in the dark of the. night, doth beroken diligence, and

watchfulnefs, which the made good, when fhe fate upon the —

Spearof Hero. Dido, when the fees the unlucky Owl, pirtied

»@
“

—

Book I. Of Occult Philofophy. z

The Owl fitting on top of th’ honfe alone,
Sends forth her [ad complaints with morsraf tome’
_ Anin another place,

The flothfull Owl by mortals is

- Thefame bird fang inthe Capitoll when the Romane af-
faires were ow at Numantia, and when Fregelia was pulled
down for a confpiracy made againft the Romans. A/madel
faith, that Owls, and night-ravens, when they turn alide to
{trange countries, or houfes, betoken the death of the men of
that country, and thofe honfes; for thofe birds are delighted
with dead Carkafes, and perceive them before hand. For
men that are dying have aneer affinity with dead’Carkafes. The - :
Hawk alfo isa foreteller of contention, as Nafofings,

Oy

we hate the Hawk; becaufe thar arms amongst aud nls
She alwaies lives——mm—

Lelius the Embafladour of Pompey was in Spain a-
_ mongft the Purveyours, which misfortune, a Hawk flying over
his head, is faid to foretell. And A/madel faith; thatthefe kind .
ofbirds fighting amongft themfelves, fignifie the change ofa
Kingdome ; but if birds of another kind thall fight with
them, and are never feento come together again, it portends |
a new condition, and Rateof that Country. Alfolitelébirds
by their coming to,or departing from, fore fhew that family |
fhall be inlarged, or leffenéd, and their flight,by how much the
more ferene it is,by fo much the more laudable. Whetice AZe- 7
lampus the ines conjeCtured at the flaughter of the Greeks
by the flight of little birds, when: he faith, Thou’ feeft'that fio

bird taketh his flight: in fair weather. Swallows, becatife when
they are dying they provide a place of fafety for their ‘youtg, |
do portend a great patrimony, or Legacy after the as mg ee

¥
e
ai
vv

friends. A Bat meeting any one running away ,fignifies an eva.
fion : for although fhe ‘have noiwings, ‘yet fhe flies. A Spar.
row is a bad ‘omen :toone that rns away ; for fhe flies from.
the Hawk, and makes haft to the Owl, where fhe ts inas great
danger : yet in love fhe is fortunate, for being ftitred np with
juft,couples feven times in an hour. Bees
Kings, for they fignifiean ebfequious:people. Flies fignifie
becaufe being oftentimes driven .
-away,they do yet continually return.Alfo domettick birds are.

not without Asguria’s, for Cocks by their crowing pro-
\mote hope,and the journey of him that is undertaking it.More-
over Livia the mother of Tiderius, when (he was great with
him, took Hen Egg and hatched berbofome, andat
forthhaCock-chick withagreat comb, whichthe |

Aagures iocerpreted that the child that fhould be born of her
Mould be King. And! Cicerowrites that at Thebaw Cocks, by
their ccowing:all night, ‘did prefage that the Beotians would
obtain vidtory againft the ‘Lacedzmontans : and the reafon ij
according tothe Augures interpretations, becanfe that bird
when he ts beaten is (lent,but when he himfelf hath ovércome,
crows. In like manner alfo omens of events are taken from
beafts, Forthe meeting of a Weefel is ominous, alfo meeting
of a Haresn illomentoa traveller, unlefs fhe be taken. A
Male.alfo is bad, becaufe barren. A Hog is pernicious, for fuch
As his nature, and-therefore fignifies pernicious men. A Horfe

betokens quarrellings, and fightings : whence Anchifes feeing

OF Occult Philofophy.

of white Horles,cries outinVirgi/,

With War are Horfes arm'd, yea threaten War,

_ But when they are joyned together in a Chariot, becaule
they draw with an equallyoke,they fignifie chat peace is to ‘be
hoped for. An Affe is an:unprofitable creature, yet did
_,ri4s good; who when he was pronounced.enemy to his coun-

Affe that was. offered to
and rynaing co.the water, by which Asgury,he fuppofing
 hefaw.a way ofllery the of his

. e
ay
R
k
’

friends, that they would convey him to: the Sea; which being
m. ranted, he was fet into a little thip, and fo efcaped the threats

of Sillathe Conqueror.’ If the Foal of an Aflemeetany one

going to an Augury,he fignifies labor,patience,and hinderances,
A Wolf meeting any one isa good fign, the effeét whereof was
feenin Hiero of Sicilia, from whom a Wolf fnatching away
a book whileft he was at School , confirmed to him the fuccefs
of the Kingdom : but yet the Wolf makes him {peechlefs
whom he fees firft. A Wolf rent in peices a Watchman of P-

Africanus, and C. Fulvins at A4intarn, when the Romane:
Army was overcome by the fugitives in Sicilia. Alfo he fignifies
perfidious men, fuch as youcan give nocredit to + Which was
known in the progeny of Romanes. Forthe faith whichthey
long fince fucked from their mother the Wolf, and kept to ~

themfelves from the beginning, asby acertain law of nature,
paffed over to their polterity, To meet a Lien, feeing the is
amongft Animals the ftrongeft, and {triking terrour into all
the reft, is good. But for a woman to meet aLioneffe, is
bad, becaufe fhe hinders conception, for a Lionefle brings
forth but once. To meet Sheep, and Goats is good- Jt is:
read alfoin the Offentarian of the Tu/cians, if this Animall
fhall wear any unufuall colour, it portends to the Emperour

plenty of all things, cogether with much happinefs. Whence -

Virgil to Polliofings thus,

in the Meadows Rams fhall Skarlet bear,
And changing, fometimes golden Fleeces Wear.

It is good alfo to meet Oxen treading out Corn, but better
to meet them plowing, which although breaking the way
hinder thy journey, yet by the favour of their Aufpicium wiil
recompence thee again, ADog ina journey is

Cyras being caft into the woods was nourifhed Dog till
he came to the Kingdom, which alfothe Angel, companionof  ——-

7 obit did not fcorn as acompanion.. The Caftor; becaufe he
bites off his Tefticles, and leaves them tothe Hunters, isan ill
omen, and portends man will injure himfelf. Alfo

»

amongt{t {mall Animals,Mice fignifiedanger. Forthefameday,
that they did gnaw Gold inthe Capitoll, both the Confuls i
were intercepted by Hannibal by way of ambufhneerTaren. 7
‘tum. - The Locuft making a ftandin any place, or burning the
place, hinders one from their wifhes, and is an illomen; on
the contrary the Grafs-hoppers promote a journey, and fore.
tell a good event of things. The Spider weaving a line down.
wards, is faid to fignifie hope of money to come. Alfo the Pif.
mires,becaufe they know how to provide for themfelves,. and ,
to prepare fafe nefts for themfelves; portend fecurity, and.
giches, a great Army. Hence,when the Pifittires had devoured.
a tame Dragon of Tiberius Cefar, it was advifed, that he
fhould take heed of the cumult of a multitude. If a Snake meet
thee, take. heed_of an ill congued enemy; For this Animall
- hath no.other power but in his mouth, A Snake creeping into.
Tiberius. his pallace, portended his fall.. Two. Snakes were
found in the bed of Sempronius Gracchus, wherefore a Sooth-
fayer told him, if he would let the male, or the female efcape, .
either he or his wife would fhortly dye; he preferring the life.
of his wife, killed the male, and let the female efcape, and.
within a few dayes he dyed. Soa Viper fignfies lewd women,,
and wicked children;and an Eel fignifies a man difpleafed with .
every body : For fhe lives apart from all other fifhes, nor is.
ever found in the company of any. But amongit all Axppicia's
and omens, there is none more effe@tuall, and potent then —
man, none that. doth fignifie the truth more cleerly.. Thou
fhalt therefore diligently note, and obferve the condition of
the man that meeteth thee, his age, profeffion,{tation,gefture, —
motion, exercife, complexion, habit, name, words, fpeech,and
all fuch like things. For feeing there are in all other, Animals
fo many difcoveries of prefages,without all queftion rhefe are
more.efficatious, and cleer, which are infufed into mans foul;.
- which Tx/ly, himfelf teftifies, faying, that there is a certain.
Aufpicinm naturally in mens fouls of their eternity, for the
‘knowing of all the courfes, and caufes of things. In the-foun-
dation of the City of Rome the head of a man, was-found.with |
his whole face, ‘which did prefage the greatnefs of the Empire,
and gave the name to the Mountain of the Capitoll. The .-

i

Book: 1. Occult Philofophy.

Brutian fouldiers fighting againft Oftavis, and Antonius,

foundan Athiopian in the gate of their Caftle; whom though

they did flay asa prefage of ill fuccefs, yet they were unfortu- -

nate in the batle,dnd Brutus, and (affins beth Generals, were ~ <

(lain. Meeting of Monks is commonly accounted an ill omen,
and fo much the rather, if ic be early in the morning, becaufe
thefe kind of men live for the molt by the fudden death of
men, as Vulturs do by flaughters.

oo

CHAP. LV.

Aufpicia’s are verified by the light of Naturall inftintt,and

of fome rules of finding of it ont.

Ufpicia, and Auguria, which foretell things to come by
Animals, & birds,Orpheus the divine himfelf (as we read )
did teach and fhew firft of all, which afterwards were had in
great efteem with all Nations. Now they are verified by the
light of naturall inftin@, as if from this,fome lights of divina-
tion may defcend upon four-footed beafts, winged,and other
Animals,by which they are able to prefage to us of the €vents
of things: which Virgil feems to be fenfible of, when he

Nor think I Heaven on them {uch knowledge fates,
Nor that their prudence ts above the fates.

Now this inftin@ of nature, as faith Wiliam of Paris, ismore

fublime then all humane apprehenfion,and very neer, and molt
like to prophecy. By this inftin@ there is a certain wonderfull
light of divination in fome Animals naturally , as it manifeft-
ly appears in fome Dogs, who know by this inftin@ theeves,
and men that are hid, unknown both to themfelves, and men,
and finde them out, and apprehend them,; falling upon them

with a full moth. By'the like inftin@ Vuleurs forefee fururé
flaughters in batles,and gather together into places where Fas

y
o
a
™

OF Philofophy. Book I.
~~ fhall be, as if they fore- faw the fiefh of dead Carkafes. Bythe
fame inftin@ Partridges know their Dam, which they never -
faw and leave the Partridge which {tole away her Dams Eggs,
& fate upon them.By the fame inftin@ alfo certain hortful and
~ terrible things are perceived (the foul of the men being alco-
gether ignorant of them) whence terror, and horror ceafeth
much apon men when they think nothing of thefe things, So.
a thief lying hid in any houfe, although no body knows, or:
thinks of his being there, ftrikes fear, and terror, and a trouble-
fomenefs of mind into the inhabitants of that houfe, alchough
haply not of all, becaufe the brightnefs of this inftinét is notin
yetoffome ofthem. Soa harlot being hid in fome
~ very large houfe, is fometimes perceived to be there by fome
one that is altogether ignorant of her being there. It is men- -,
_ tionedin Hiftories that Heraifcws a certain Egyptian, a man
ofa divine nature, could difcern unclean women, not only by
-hiseyes,but by their voice,being heard afar off, and thereupon
‘did fall into a moft grievous headach. William of Paris alfo
makes mention of a certain woman in his time, that by the
fame inftinét perceived a man whom fhe loved, coming two
miles off. Alfo he relatesthat in his time was a certain Stork
~ convicted of inchaftity by the fmell of the male, who being
judged guilty by a mulcitude of Storks whom the male ga-
_ thered together,difcovering to them the fault of his mate, was,
her feathers being firft pulled off, torn in pieces by them. He
alfo makes mention ofa certain horfe, who not knowing his
dam, and leaping of ber, when afterwards he underftood .
what he had done, bit off his own Scones by way of revenge
upon himfelf for his inceft. The famedoth Varro, Ariftotle,
and Réiny relate concerning horfes. And Pliny makes menti-
On of a certain Serpent, called the 4/p, that did fuch a like.
thing, for fhe coming to a certain mans table in Egypr, was
_ there daily fed, and fhe having brought forth fome young, by
one of which a fon of her holts was killed, after. the knew
it, killed that young one, and would never return to that
houfe any more.Now by thefe examples you fee,how the lights
Of prefage may defcend upon fome Animals,. as figns, or marks

‘7
tt
é
if
y

Book: Of 0c

ult Philofophy.

of things, & are fet it their gefture,motion, oice,ying,going,
meat, colour, and fuch like. For according to the doctrine of
the Platonifts, there is a certain power put into inferiour

things, by which for the moft part they agree with the fuperi- —

ours; whence alfo the tacid confents of Animals feem to agtee. .

with divine bodies, and their. bodies, and affections to be af-
- fe&ted with their powers, by. the name of which they are af-
to theDieties. We muft conlider therefore what Animals

are Saturnall, whatare Joviall, and what Martiall, and fo of

the reft, and according to their properties to draw forth their
_ prefages : fo thofe birds which refemble Saturn, and Mars,
are all of them called terrible, and deadly, as the Scritch Owl,

the Hawlet, and others which we have mentioned before, alfo .

thehorn Owl, becaufe fhe is a Saturnall. Solitary bird, alfo
. nightly, and ts reputed to be molt unfortunately ominous, of
which the Poet faith,

The agly Owl, which no bird Well refents,
Foretels misfortunes, and moft fad events.

~ But the Swan isa delicious bird, Venereall, and Dedicated -

to Phebus, and is faid to be moft happy in her prefages, efpe-
cially inthe 4x/picia’s of Mariners, becaufe the is neverdrown.
edinwater, whence Ovid fings,
happy is thecheerfull, finging Swan
In her prefages

There are alfo fome birds that prefage with their month, |

and finging, as the Crow, Pie, Daw, whence Virgil,
fore-fhow

Oft from the hollow holm that ominous (row.

Now the birds that portend fucure things by their flying

are,vsx. Buzzards, the

Swans, andthe like for they are to be confidered

one- Breakers, Eagles, Vulcurs,Cranes, -

30 OF Occult Philofophy. @Book I.

flying, whether they Ay (lowly, or fwiftly whether to the right

hand, or tothe left, how many fly rogether : apon this ac-
count if Cranesfly apace, they fignifie a tempeft : when flow-

ly, fair weather. Alfo when two Eagles fly together, they are

faid_to portend evill, becaufe that isa number of confufion.

‘In like manner thou fhale enquire into the reafon of the reft, as
is fhewed of number. Moreover it belongs to an artift to

obferve a fimilitude in thefe conjeftures, asin Virgil,V enne
diffembling,teacheth her fon -4neas in thefe verfes,

———— —— Al] this ts not for naught, |
Elfe we in vain my parents eAugury taught, ee

Lo! twice fix Swans in a glad company

 Joves bird pur{ued through the etheriall Skie. |
_~ In Heavens broad tracks : now earth ina long train

feem to take, or taken to difdain ;
As they return with founding wings,they {port,
And Heaven furrounding in along confort.
Fuft [o, I fay, thy friends and fleethavegain'd
The port, or with full failes the Bay ebtatn'd.

Molt wonderfut is that kind of Auguring of cheirs,who hear,
Sunderitand the fpeeches of Animals,in which as amongft the

Ancients, lelampus, and Tirefias, and Thales, and Apollonius

the 7 yanean, who as we read,excelled, and whom they report |

had excellent skill in the language of birds: of whom Philo.
Stratus, and Porphyrius {peak, faying, that of old when Apollo-
‘pins {ate in company his friends,feeing Sparrows fit-

ting upon.a tree, and one Sparrow coming from elfwhete un-

to them,making a great chattering and noife, and chen flying

away, all che reft following him, he {aid co his companions,

that chat Sparrow told the reftthat an Affe being burdened
-with wheat felldownin a hole neer the City, and chat the
wheat-was fcattered upon the ground : many being much

Anoved with thefe words, went to fee, and fo it was, aseApo-

faid, at which they much wondered. Alfo Porphyrins

‘the Platonift in his third book of Saccifices, faith, that there
was

i
t
> é
is
¢
ig =

wasa Swallow : for it was certain, becaufe every voice of
any Animall is fignificative of fome paffion of its foul, as joy,
fadnefs, or anger, or the like, which voices it isnot fo wonder-

fulla thing fhould be underftood by men converfant about —

them. But Democritus himfelf declared this art, as faith Pliny,
by naming the birds, of whofe blood mixed together waspro-
duced a Serpent, of which whofoever did'eat, thould under-

ftand the voices of birds. And Hermes faith, if any one thall -

go forth to catch birds ona certain day of the Kalends of Wo-
vember, and hall boil the firft bird which he catcheth, with the
heart of a Fox, that all chat fhall eat of this bird, thalf under-
ftand the voices of birds, and aJl other Animals. Alfo the
Arabians fay, that they can underftand the meaning of bruits,
who fhall eat the heart, and liver of Dragons. ‘Proclus alfo
thePlatonift believed,and wrote,that the heart of a Mole con-
duceth to prefages. There were alfo divinations, and 4#/i-
cia s which were taken from the inwards of facrifices, the in-
ventor whereof was Tages, of whom Lucan fang,
a And if the InWwards have no credit gained,
ee Ana if this Art by Tages was but feigned.

The Romane Religion thought that the liver was the head of

the inwards. Hence theSooth- fayers enquiringafter future things

in the inwards, did firft look into the liver, in which were two
me heads, whereof the one was called the head forthe City, the
me other for the enemy;and the head of this,or another part being
m- compared together, they pronounced Victory, as we read
in Lucan, that the inwards did fignifie the flaughter of
ig men, and the Victory of (¢/ars, according to thefe
verfes,

inwards all defetts are ominous
On part, and branch of th’ entrals doth increafe,
eA nother part 1s weak, and flagging lies,

Beats, andmoves With quick pulfe the arteries.

Of Occult Philofophy. Book I.

—

Then the bowels being finifhed, they fearch the heart. Now
there were a facrifice found without an heart, ora head was
2. “wanting in the Liver, thefe were deadly prefages, and were
‘called piacularia, Alfo if facrifice fled from the Altar, or be-
ing fmitten, made a lowing, or fell upon any part of his body
then he onght to do, it was the like ominous. We read that |
when Fwlius (afar upon aday went forth co proceffion. with
his purple Robe, and fitting ina golden chair, and facrifice-
ing,there was twice a Heart wanting ; And when C.
Utica was facrificing; there was wanting a Liver. Alfo when
Cains the prince,and M. Marcellus, ©. (landins, and 'L. Pe-
tellins Cofs: were offering facrifices, that the Liver was con-

fumed away fuddenly: and not longafter, one of them dyed

ofadifeafe, another wasflainby men of Lyguria, the entrals
foretelling fo much : which was _— to be done by the
power of the Gods, orhelp of the divell : Hence it was ac-
counted a thing of great concernment among{t the Ancients
as oft as any thing unufuall was found in the inwards : as when
Sylla was facrificing at Laurentum, the figure of a Crown ap.
peared in the head of the Liver: which Po/fhumius the Sooth-
 fayer interpreted to portend a Victory with a Kingdome,
‘ja and therefore advifed that Sy//a (hould eat thofe entrals him-
felf. The colouralfo of the inwards is tobe confidered. Of

thefe Lucan made mention.

Struck, at the colour Prophets were With fear,
_— For with foul {pots pale entrals tinged Were.
black, and blew, with /pecks of [prinkled blood
_ _ There was in times paft fuch a venerable efteem of thefe arte,
 - | that che moft potent, and wife men fought after them,yea the.
. | ; _ Senate, and Kings did nothing wichout the Counfellof the
_Angures. But all.thefe in chefedayes,parcly by.the negligence
and partly by the authoricy of-the Fathers,are abo-
lithed.

CHAP.

ws ‘

| Book I. Philly

CHAP. LVJ.
Of the Sooth fayings of Flafhes, and Lightenings. and how

Monftrous , and prodigious things are to be int erpre-

ted.

of wonders, and how monftrous, and prodigious things
are tobeinterpreted, the Prophets, and Prieftsof Hetrufcus
have taught the Art. For they have ordained fixteen Regions
of the Heavens, and have afcribed Gods to every one of them;
and befides eleven kinds of Lightenings, and nine Gods,
which fhould dart them forth, by fhewing rules for the un-

{trous, prodigious, and wondrous things happen, they do pre-
fage,asis moft certain, fome great matter. Now their inter-
preter malt be fome excellent conjeturer of fimilitudes, as al-
fofome curious fearcher, and of them who at that time are
employed about the affairs of Princes, and Provinces. For
the Celeftials take fnch care only for Princes, peoples, and pro-
vinces,that before the reft they might be prefigured, and ad-
monifhed, by Stars, by Conttellacions, by wonders, and by
prodigies.. Now if the fame thing, or the like hath been feen
in former Ages, we muft confider that very thing, and what
happened after that, and according to thefe, to foretell the
fame,or the like, becaufe the fame figns are for the fame things,
and the like for like. So prodigies have come before the birth;

Ow the Sooth-fayings of Flafhes, and Lightenings, and

derftanding the fignification of them. Butas oftehasMon- |

and death of many emient men and Kings; as Cicero makes

mention of Adidas a boy, into whofe mouth, whileft he was

fleeping, the Pifmire.put cornsof Wheat, which was an omen
of great riches. So Bees fate upon the mouth of P/ato-when

he was fleeping in the Cradle, by which was foretold the

fweetnefs of his fpeech, Heewba,when the was bringing forth
Paris {aw aburning Torch, which fhould fet on fire Troy, and

all Afia. There appeared unto the mother of Phalarss the image

of Mercury pouring forth blood apon the earth, with _—
| | the

“> ay a
“
a
«
ai ~

~ the whole houfe was over-flowed. The mother of Diony fins

dreamed the brought fortha Satyr, which prodigious dreams

- the event that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius
Prifcus feeing a flame lick the head of Servius Tullius, fore.
told that he fhould have the Kingdom. In like manner after
Troy was taken, difputing with Anchifes his father
concerning a flight, there appeared a flame licking the. Crown
of eAcanius his head, and doing of himno hurt : which -
thing, feeing it did portend the Kingdom to e4/canius, per-
{waded him to depart, for monftrous prodigies did fore-run
great and eminent deftruction. Sowe read in Pliny; that
M. Attilius, and C. Portins being Confuls,it rained Milk,and
Blood which didprefage that a very greatPeftilence fhould the
next yeer over-fpread Rome. Alfo in Lucania it rained fpongi-
_ ous Iron,& in the yeer before AZarcus Craffus was flain in Par-
thia; with which alfo all che fouldiers of Lucania,being a very
numerous Army,were flain. Alfo L. Paslys,and C. Marcellus
being Confuls,tc rained W ool about the Caftle of Corifanum,
neer which place a yeer after Z. Annins was flain by AGilas,
Alfo in the wars of Denmark,the noife of Arms, and found of
a Trumpet was heard in the Aire. And Livie concerning the
Macedonian wars, faith, in the yeer when e4nnibil dyed it
rained blood for two dayes. Alfo concerning the fecond pn-
nick war, he faith, that wacer mixed with blood came down
from Heaven like rain, at that time when Aznibal did fpoil
Italy. A little before the deftru€tion of Leu@tra the Lacede-
‘monians heard a noife of Arms in che temple of Hercules,and
at the fame time in the temple of Hercules, the doors that
were fhut with bars, opened cthemfelves, and the arms that
were hanged on the wall, were found on the ground. The like
events may be prognofticated of other like things, as often-
times in times paft fomething hath been foretold of them. Bur
concerning thefe alfo,the judgements of theCeleftial influencies

not be neglected, of which we fhall more largely creat
in the following Chapters, ©

CHAP.

ty 0 ?
° ~
d
t
i
‘
i
x?
i=

Nee

ysnations of Elements.
1. Oreover the Elements themfelves teach us fatall events:
whence thofe four famous kinds of Divinations, Geo-

mancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy, have got
which that Sorcerefs in Lucan feems to boaft.

her felf, when fhe faith, |

The Earth, the Ane. the Chaos , and the Skie,
The Seas, the Fields, the Rocks, and Mountains high =
Foretell the truth——

The firft therefore is Geomancy, which forefheweth future
things by the motions of the earth, as alfo the noife, the {wel-"
ling, the trembling, the chops, the pits, and exhalation, and =i (as=S
other impreffions, the.art of which -4/madel the Arabian fets
forth. But there is another kind of Geomancy , which Di-
vines by points written upon the earth, by a certain power in
the fallofit, which is not of prefent {peculation; but ofthat

Now Hydromancy doth perform its prefages by the im-
preffions of water, their ebbing and flowing, their increafes,
and depreffions, their cempefts, and colours, and the like; to
which alfo are added vifions, which are made in the waters. A’
kind of Divination found by the Perfians, as Varre reports, a
boy faw in the water the-effigies of 4ercury, which foretold
inan hundred and fifty verfes all che event of AZithridates his
War. We read alfo that NwmaPompilius pra@tifed Hydro-
mancy ;. for in the water he called up the gods, and learned of
them things to come. Which art alfo Pythagoras, a long time
after Numa practifed. There, was of old a kind of Hydroman-
cy, had in great efteem amongl{t the 4//yrians, and it was cai-
led Lecanomancy, from a skin full. of water, upon which they -

of Geomancy , Hydromancy, eAcromancy, Pyromancy, four Di
a

Book [,

Stars. with Jong Tatles, by fiery Colouts,

| “put plates of Gold, and Silver, arid pretious Stones; writter

upon with certain images, names, and characters. To this ma
be referred that art, by which Lead, and Wax being melted,
and caft into the water, do exprefs manifeft marks of images,
what wedefire to know. There were alfo in former years

Fountains that did foretell things to come, as the Fathers.

‘ountain at Achaia, and that which was called the water of
i no in Epidaurus ;. but of thefe more in the following Chap-
ters, where we fpeak of Oracles.
~ Hither alfo may be referred the divination of Fifhes, of

which kind there was ufe made by the Lycians in a certain

place, which was called Dina, neer the Sea, in-a Wood dedi-
cated to Apollo, made hollow in the dry fand, into. which , he
that went to.confulc of future things, let down roafted meat,
and prefently that place’ was filled with waters, and a great
multitude of -Fith, and of ftrange fhapes,unknown to men, did

appear, by the forms of which the Prophet foretold what

ould come to pafs. Thefe things doth Athenens more at
Jarge relate out of Polycharmum,in the Hiftory ofthe Lycians,
_ After the fame maner doch Acromancy divine by airy im-

-prefitons, by thé blowing of the Winds, by Rainbows, by

Circles about the Moon and Stars, by Mifts, and Clouds, and
by imaginations in Clouds, and vifions in the Aire.

« So alfo Pyromancy divines by fiery impreffions, and by
by vifions,and imagi-
nations in the fire. So the wife of Cicero forérold that he
would be Confal thé next year, becaufe when a certain man
after the Sacrifice was ended, would lookin the afhes, there
fuddenly broke forth a flame, Of thiskind are thofe that P/i-
ny {peaks of, that rerrené, pale, and buzzing fires prefage rem<
pelts, Circles about the fhuffs of Candles betoken rain; if the
me fly turning,and winding, it portends wind. Alfo Torches
when they {trike the fire béforethem ; and are not-kindled ;

Alfo when. a Coal {ticks to Pots taken off from the fire’, and

when the fire caltsoff the afhes, and fparkles, ot when-athes

a
>»
is
é
é
i
bd
é

becaufe it fearchethinto the flame, and {moak, and thin cos
lours, founds, and motions, when they.are carryed upright, or
on one fide , or round, which we read in thefe Verfes in

Eet Piety be bound, and on th'eAltar laid,

Let us implore the Gods for divine aid.

She makes acute,red,towring flames, and bright,
Increas'd by th aive, the middle being white

And then foe makes the flames without allbound,
Fer towindin and outyand torunrownd,

Like toa Serpenta—=

Alfo in the Athnean Caves, and Fields of the Nymphsin

‘Apollonia, Auguries were taken from fires, and flames; joyful,
if they did receive what wascaft into'them , and fad, if they
did reje& them. ‘But of thefe we thall fpeak in the follow
Chapters, amongft. the anfwers‘ofthe Oracles.

CHAP.:LVITI

Of the reviving of the dead, and
many years together.

above their fenfitive powers ; and thofe-being furmounted,re-

ceive into themfelves by the-perfection of the Heavens, and
Intelligencies, a divine vigour. Seeing therefore all che fouls.

ofmen are perpetual, and alfoall che fpirits obey the perfect
fouls; Magicians thinkthat perfect menmay by the powers
of their foul repair their dying: bodies with otherinferiour .
fouls newly feparated, and infpire them again; Asa Weefell

that is killed, is made.alive again by che-breath, and ery of his.

~ To thefe is added Capnomancy, fo called from fmoak,

of fleeping, and wanting viftwals

HE e-rabian Philofophers agree; thatfomemenmay
elevate themfelves above the powers of their body , and

Dam ;. And Lions make alivetheir dead Whelps by breathing -

é
Ls

Of Occult Philofophy. -BookT:

them. And Becaufe,as they fay, alf like things being ap.

° te

plyed co their like , are made of the fame natures; and every
patient , and thing that receives into it felf che a@ of an
agent is endowed with the nature of that-agent, and made
con-naturall. Hence they think, that to this vivification , or
~ making alive, fome Hearbs; and Magicall confeétions,
fuch as they fay ar¢.made of theafhesof the: Phenix, and the
caft skin of a Snake do. much condace, ‘which indeed to man
feems fabulons, and.to fome impoflible, unlefs it could be ac-
counted approved ‘by-an, Hijftoricall faith. For we read of
fome that have been drowned in water, others caft into the
fire,and put upon the fire, others flain in war, others otherwife
tryed,and after a few dayes were alive again, as’Pliny ceftifies
of eAviela,a man pertaining to the Coniull,of L. Lamia, Ce.
ius, Tubero, (or fidius, Gabsenus, and many others. Alfo we
 -geadthat e/op the Tale-maker, Tindorens, Hercules , and
Palicy, the fons of Fupiter, and Thalia being dead,were raifed
‘to life again; alfo chat many were by Phyfitians, and Magici-
ans raifed from death again, as. the Hiftorians: relate of
eA fculapins; and we have above mentioned out of 7uba, and
Xanthus, and Philoftratus concerning Ti//o,and a certain Ara-
bian, and Apollonins Tyanean.Alfo we read that Glaucus.a
certain man that wasdead,whom they fay, beyond all expe@ta-
tion, the Phyfitians coming to fee it; the -hearb Dragon-wort
- reftored to life. Some fay that he revived by the puting into
_ his body a medicine made of Honey, whence the proverb,
— Glaucus was railed from death by taking in Honey into his
body. Apuleius alfo relating the manner of thefe kinds of
 xeftorings to life,faith of Zachlathe Egyptian prophet : The
_ prophet being thus favourable, layes a certain. Hearb npon the
mouth of the body of a young man being. dead ; and another
upon his breft, then turning towards the Eait, or rifing of the
propitious Sun, praying filently (a great affembly of people
ftriving to fee it) in the firlt place heaved up his breft, ‘then
makes a beating in his veines, then his body to be filled with
breath, afterwhich the Carkafe arifeth, and the young man
fpeaks, If thefe thiags are truc,the dying fouls muaft,fometimes

lying

a
a
Pe

lying hid in their bodies, be oppreffed with vehement extafies,
and be freed from all bodily aétion : Sothat the life, fenfe,
motion, forfake the body, but fo, chat the man is not yet truly
dead, but lies aftonied, andas it were dead for a certain
time. And this is often found, thatin times of Peftilence
many that are carried for dead to the graves to be buryed, re-
viveagain. The fame alfo hath often befaln women,by rea-
fon of fits of the Mother. And Rabbi AZoifes out of the book
of Galen, which Patriarcha tranflated, makes mentionof a
man, who was fuffocated for fix dayes, and-did neither eat,
nos drink, and his arcertes became hard. And it is faid inthe
fame book , that a certain man by being filled with Water,
loft the pulfe of his whole body, fo that his heart was not
perceived to move, andhe lay like a dead man. AlfO it is faid
that a man by reafon of a fal from an high place,or great noife,
or long f{taying under the Water, may fall into a fwoun, which
may continue fourty.eight hours, and fo he lyeas if he were
dead, with his face being very green. And in the fame place
there is mention made of a man that buried a man that feemed
to be dead feventy two hours after his feeming deceafe, and fo
killed him, becaufe he buried him alive, and there are given
figns whereby it may be known who are alive ; although they
feem to be dead, and indeed will dye, unlefsthere be fome
means ufed to recover them, as Phlebotomy , or fome other
cure. And thefe are fuch as very feldom happen. This isthe
manner, by which we underftand Magicians, and Phyficians -
do raife dead men to life,as they that were tryed by the fting-
ing of Serpents, were by the Nation of the A/arf, andthe
Pfilli reftored to life. Now we may conceive that fuch kind of
extafies may continue a long time, although a man‘be nor
‘truly dead, asit isin Dot-mice, and Crocodiles , and many
other Serpents, ‘which fleep all Winter, and ar@ in fach adead
fleep,that they can fcarce be awakened with fire,. And Ihave
often feena Dor. moufe difleRed, and continue immovable, |
as if the were dead, untill fhe was boyled, and chen prefently
in boyling the water the diflected members did thew life-Alfo, —
alchough tc be hard co be believed, we read in fome sab 0

t
F
‘

fome men hvae flept for many yeers together,
and in the time of fleep, untill<they awaked, there was
to alterarion in them,3s to make them feem older : The fame
doth Pliny ceftifie of a certain boy, whom he faith, being
wearied with heat, and his journey, flept fifty feven yeersina
‘Cave. We readalfo that Epimenides Gnofius flept fifty feven
yeers ina Cave. Hence the proverb arofe, To omflzep Epi-
menides. J. Damafcenus tels, that in his time acertain coun- ©
try man being wWearied in Germany, flept for the fpace of a
whole Autumn , and the Winter following, under a heap of
hay, untill the Summer, when the hay began to be eaten up,
then he was fourid awakened asa man halfe dead,and oufof
his wits. Eclefiafticall Hiftoriesconfirm this opinion concerning
"the feven fleepers,whom they fay flept 196.yeers. There was in
Norvegia a Cave ina high Sea fhore,where,asPaulus Diaconus,
and Methodius the Martyr write,feven men lay fleepingalong ~
time without any corruption, and the people that went iffto
difturb them were contracted,or drawn together, fo that after
a while being forewarned by that punifhment, they durft not
hurt them. Now Xenocrates,a man of no mean repute amongit
—Philofophers was of opinion, that this long fleeping was
appointed by God as a punifhment for fome certain fins. Bat
Marcus Damafcenns proves it by many reafons to be pofiible,
and naturall, neither doth he think icirrationall, thacfome
~ fhould without. mest, and drink, and avoyding excrements,
without confuming, or-corruption, fleep many moneths. And
this may befall a man by reafon of fome poifonons potion, or
_  fleepy difeafe, or fuch like caufes, for certain dayes, moneths, —
 oryéars,according to the intention, or remiffion of the power _
ofthe medicine, or of the paffions of their niind. And Phyfi-
~ tians fay that there are fome Antidotes, of which they that
too greasa potion, fhall be able to endure hunger a tong
time, as in former time being fed with a certainfood
an Angell,walked, and falted inthe ftrengthof chat meat,
ayes, And Zohn Rocatins makesmentionaf amanin
AS Venice who Would every yeer falt four dayes with.
chat was ageeater wonder, chatthere was

é
a a
»

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy.

om

a woman in lower Gérmany at the fame time, who took no
food till rhe thirteenth yeer of her age, which to @s mayfeem in-
credible, bot that he lately confirmed it; as alfohetels of 2

Miracle of our Age,that his brother Nicolaus Stone, an Hclyes
tian by Nation, who lived twenty yeers in the wildernefe —

without meat, till he dyed. That alfo ts wonderfull which

phraftus mentions concerning 4 certain man, called Philinus,

who ufed no meat, or drink, befides Milk. And there are grave

Authors who defcribe a certain hearb of Sparta, with which
they fay the Scythians can endure twelve dayes hunger, with-
out meat or drink, if they do but caftit, or holditin their

| CHAP. LIX.
| Of Divination by Dreams.

Here is alfo acertain kind of Divination by Dreams, con.

firmed by the tradittons of Philofophers, the authorities of
-Divines, the examples of Hiftories, and daily experience. A~

Dream] call here,not vain Dreams, or idle imaginations : for

— thofe are vain, and have no Divination in them, bute arife from

the remains of watchings,. and dilturbance of the body. For
as the mind is taken up Bie. and wearied with cares, it fuge
gefts it felf to him that is afleep. I call that a Dream -here,which

iscaufed by the Celeftiall influences in the phanattick fpiric, _

mind, or body, being all well difpofed. The rule of interpre-
ting this is found amongft Aftrologers, in that part whichis

wrote concerning queftions; but yet that isnot fufficient, be-

caufe thefe kind of Dreams come by ufe todiversmenaftera. =

divers mannet, according to the divers quality, and difpofiti-
ons of the phantaftick fpirit wherefore there cannot be given

onecommon rule to all for the interpretation of Dreams. =
But according to the opinion of Synefius, fecing thereare the —
fame accidents to things, and like befall like; fohe whichhath
often fallen npon the fame vifible thing, hath affigned

felf the fame opinion, paffion, fortune, action , event, and. av

Zz.
“4

‘

Of Occult Philofophy. Book L.
Ariftotle faith,the memory is confirmed by fence,and by keep-
| ‘ing in memory the fame thing knowledge is obtained, as alfo
bythe knowledgé. of many experiences,by little, & little, arts,
_-___ qnd feiences are obtained, After the fame account you muft con-
re . ceive of Dreams. Whence Synefius commands that every one
— ‘fhould obferve his Dreams, and their events, and fuch like
rules,viz. tocommit tomemory allthingsthat are feen, and
accidents that befall, as wellin flzep, as watching, and witha
diligent obfervation confider with himfelf the rules by which
thefeare tobe examined, for by this means (hall a Divinerbe
, able by little, and littleto interpret his Dreams, if fobe no-
thing flip out ofhismemory. Now. Dreams are more efficati-
ous, when the Moon over-runs that Sign, which was inthe
- ninth number of the Nativity, or revolution of that yeer’, or
in the ninth Sign from the Sign of perfection, For it is a moft
| true, and certain divination, neither doth it proceed from na-
- tureor humane Arts, but from purified minds, by divine in{pi-

— ration. Now we thall difcufs, and examine that which belongs

CHAP. LX.

Of Afadnefs , and Divinations which are made when men are
aWake, and of the power of a Melancholy humor , by which
Spirits are fometimes induced into mens bodies,

| alfo fometimes,that not only they that are afleep,
but alfo they that are watchfull do with akind of inftigati-

on of minde, Divine , which Divination Ariffot/e cals ravifh-
“ment.orakind of madnefs,and reacheth that it proceeds from
| a melancholy humor, faying-in his Treatife of divination:
__ Melancholy men, by reafon of their eatneftnefs, do far better _
| conjecture,and quickly conceive a habit, and moft eafily receive

an impreffion of the Celeftials. And in his Problemes faith,
1 the Sybils,and the Bacchides,and Niceratus the S yraculan,

a >

Book I. Of Occult Philofophy.
Prophets, and Poets. The caufe therefore of this madnefs, if
it be any thing within the body,is 2 melancholy humor, nor
that which they call black choller, which is fo obftinate, and ©
terrible a thing, that the violence of itis faid by Phyfitians,
and Naturall Phylofophers, befides mandnefs, which it doth in-
duce, alfo co entice evill fpirits to feize upon mens bodies,

Therefore we underftand a melancholy humor here, tobe amas ~

turall,and white choller. For this,when it is ftirred up, burns,
and ftirs up a madnefs conducing to knowledge, and divina-
tion, efpecially if it be helped by any Celeftiall influx, efpeci-
ally of Saturn, who feeing he is cold, and dry, as is a melan-
choly humor, hath his influence upon it, increafeth; and pre-
ferveth it. Befides, feeing he is the Author of fecret contem-
plation, and eftranged from all publike affairs, and the highs
eft of allthe planets, doth alwaies as with-call his — |
outward bufineffes, fo alfo. makes it afeend higher, and be-
{tows upon him the knowledge, and paflages of foture things,
And this is Ariftot/es meaning in his book of Problemes. By
Melancholy, faithhe, fome men are made as it were divine,
foretelling things to come,and fome men are made Poets. He
faith alfo,that all men that were excellent in any Science, were
forthe moft part melancholy. Democritus, and Plato attelt
the fame, faying, that there were fome melancholy men, that -
had fuch excellent wits, that they were thought, and feemed —
to be rather divine then humane.So-alfo there have been
melancholy men at firft rude, ignorant, anid untra€table, as
they fay, Hefiod, Fon, Tynnichus,( alcinen{es,; Homer ,and Lucre-
tins were, who on a fuddain were takenawith a madnefs , and
became Poets, and-prophecied wonderfull, and divine things,
which they themfelves ‘fearce underftood.. Whence divine
Plato in Fon faith, many Prophets, after the violence of ‘their
madnefs was abated, do not well underftand what they wrote,
t treated acurately of cach Arcin their madnefsjas:ail ArtiftS
by reading of them judge. ‘So great alfo fay the
of melancholy is of; that by its force, Celeltiall (pirits alfo are
fometimes drawn into mens bodies, by whofe prefence, and
infting, antiquity teftifies men been made

foe

ear

Of Occult Philofophy. J,
ke moft wonderful things, And-that they think happens un-
er athreefoold difference,according to a threefold apprehen-
fion of the foul,viz; imaginative ,rationall,and mencrall. They
fay therefore , whenthe mind is forced with a melancholy

-_ bumior’, nothing moderating the power of the body, and

; paffing beyond the bonds of the members , is wholly carried

- -—. into imagination, and doth fuddenly become a feat for in-

. ferior fpirits, by whom it oftentimes receives wonderfull
|... wwayes, and forms of manuall Arts, So we feechat any moft
a - ignorant man doth prefently become an excellent painter, or

contrivers of building,and to become a matter in anyfuch Art.

But when thefe kinds of fpirits portend to us future things,

- then they fhew thofe things which belong tothe difturbing of
the Elements, and changes of times, as rain, tempelts,. innuda-:-
tions, earthquakes, great mortality, famine, flaughter, and the
like. As-we readin Aulus Gelius,that Cornelius Patarus his
Prieft did at that time,when Ce/ar, and Pompey were to fight
in Theffalia, being taken with amadnefs, foretell che time,or-
der, and. iffue.of the battell. But when the mind is turned
wholly into reafon, it becomes a receptacle for midle fpirits.

| Hence it obtains the knowledge,and underflanding of natural,
4 | and humane things. So we fee that'a man. fometimes doth on
afuddain become a-Philofopher, Phyfitian, or an excellent
ae Orator,and foretels mutations of Kingdomes, and reftitutions
of Ages, and fuch things as belong to them, asthe Sybil did
to the Romanes; but when the mind is wholly elevated into the
underftanding, then.it becomes a receptacle of fublime fpirits,
| learns of.chem the. fecrets of. divine things, as the Law of
the orders of Angels,and-fych things as belong to the
knowledge of chings eternall,and falvation of fouls. Ir forefees
things which are appointed by Gods fpeciall predeftination,as
future prodigies, or miracles, the prophet to come, the chang-
ing of thedaw, So the Sybils. Propliecyed of Chrifta lon

Ad ‘time beforehis coming. So Virgil underftanding that Chri

Was at hand, and remembring what the Sybil Cumsea had faid,

‘
ane

Book I. OF Occult Philofo oply.

a é

times are come, Cumeza’s prophefie

Now from high heaven fprings anew presen,
eAnd times great order now again ts
The Maid returns, Saturnian Realms

And alictle after i intimating chat ‘fin of no

_effe&, faith,
If any prints of our old vice remain'd
By thee they'r voyd, dnd fear foall leave the Land ; RE
He a Gods life hall take, with Gods foall fee. 4
Mixt Heroes, and himfelf their object be,
Rule with paternall poWer th appeafed earth
He fhall —-—
Then he adds, that thence the fall of the Serpent, and che poi.

fon of the tree of death, or of the <apmarte © of good, ang -

thall be nulled, faying;

————- The Serpent foall

And the deceit full hearb of venome fall.
Yet he intimates that fome puke of originall fin al remain,
when he faith, 2

Some fleps of ancient fraud foall yet be

And at laft with a moft great hyberbole cryes out iin chil, 5a

as the off-(pring of God,adoring of him in thefe weeny
Dear race of Gods,great fiuckof J upiter, 1398
Behold! world foakes on its panderous axe,
See earth, and heavens immenfe,andth Ocean
How all things at th’ approaching Age rejoyce \ - batics
Oh! that my life would laft fo long, and woyce, no
would fuffice thy.atlions to rehearfe.
There are alfo fome prognolticks, which are in the midle, te
twixt naturall, and fupernaturall-divination, as! inichofe who
are neer co death,and.being weakened with old A ge; do fome+

times forefee things to come, becaufe as faith Plate, byhow |
much the more men are lefs hindred by their fotce ddemachetie

more acurately they: underltand, and becaufe they are: neerer
to the place whither they muft go , and cheirbonds being asic
were a little loofed , feeing they are no more: torthe

ealily perceive the light of divine revelation, :

“CHAP.

rw
é
= ail
‘7
c

_ the moreeminent partofthe body , have a greater

third otdes,and have a middle nature betwixt the Ai
Water; then the Organ of tafting

ltkecothe natureof Water ‘Laft of all,the touching is diffu-

fed.through'the whole bod d

(Of Earth.

Objedts fartheht off ,as Seeing,and Heari

OF Occult Philofophy.

Of the forming of Man, of the external Senfes,andalfothe In-
“Ward, andthe Mind; of the threefold appetite of the Soul, *
andpaffions of the Will,

T; isthe opinion of fome Divines, That God. did not im-
mediately creat the body ofman, but by the affiftance of

the heavenly Spirits compound, and frame him; which opi-

nion eAlcino ws, and Piato fayour ; thinking thac God isthe

chief Creator of the whole world, of the {pirits both good and

bad, and'therefore immortalized them: but that allkinds of
mortallanimals were made at the command of God; for if he
fhould have created them, they muft have been immortall.
The fpirits therefore mixing Earth , Fire , Aire, and Water to
gether, made of themall, put together, one body, which
they fabjeéted to the fervice of the foul, affigning in ic feverall

- Provinces to each power thereof, to the meaner of them

mean and low places : as co-Anger the Midriff ; co
the Womb, butto the more noble fenfes:the Head, as the
Tower of the whole body, and then the manifold Organs of
Speech. They divide the Senfe into External, and Internal.
The externall are dividedinto five; known to every one , to

rr

_ which thereare allotted five Organs , or fabjeéts, as it were

Foundations; being fo ordered , that they which are placed in

egree of
purity. For the Eyesplaced in the uppermoft place , arethe
molt:pure , dnd have an affinity with the Fire,and

Light then:the Ears have the fecond order of place, and pu-
omparedto'the Aire : the Noftrilshave the

re,and the
»which is groffer and moft

and is compared tothe prof{ne(s
The more pure fenfes are thofe their

ng,then the Smelling,
then

a ~ . a

v
a
«
a,
a
my

~m

Occult
then the Taft, which doth not perceive but thofe that are nigh.
But the couch perceivesboth wayes, for it perceives bodies
nigh; and as Sight difcerns by the medium of the Aire, fothe
touch perceives by the medium of a ftick or pole, bodies Hard,
Soft,and Moift. Now the touch only is common to allanimals.
For itis moft certain chat man hath this-fence, and in this, and
talt he excels all other animals, but in che other three he is ex-
celled byfome animals,as by a Dog,who Hears,Sees;and Smels
more acutely then Man, andthe Linx, and Eagles fee more

acutely then all other Animals, Man.Now the interior fenfes
are, according to Averros , divided into four, whereof the

firlt is called Common fence, becanfe it doth firft colle, and.

perfe& all the reprefentations which are drawn in by the out-
ward fenfes. The fecond isthe imaginative power, whofe of-
fice is, feeing it reprefents nothing , to retain thofe reprefen-
tations which are received by the former fenfes, and to prefent .
them tothe third faculty of inward fenfe, which is the
phantafie, or power of judging , whofe work is alfotoper-
ceive, and judge by the reprefentations received, what or what

kind of that is of which the reprefentations are , and to

commit thofe things which are thus difcerned,and adjudged,to
the memory tobe kept. For the vertuesthereofin generall,
are difcourfe, difpofitions, perfecutions , and flights, and ftir-
ringsup to a@tion: but in particular, the underftanding of
telle&tuals, vertues, the manner of Difcipline, Counfel, Ele@i-

on, And this is that which fhews us future things by dreams:
whence the Fancy is fometimes named the Phantafticall Incel-
le&. For it is the laft impreffion of the underftanding ; which, °.
as faith Jamblicus, is belonging to all the powers of the mind, |
and forms all figures , refemblances of fpecies, and operations, —
and things feen, and fends forth the impreffions of other -
powers unto others: And thofe things which appear by fence,
it ftirs up into an opinion, but thofe things which appear by _
the Intelle@ , in the fecond place it offersto opinion, butof -
it felfit receives imagesfromall , and-by its property, doth ..
properly affign them,according to their affimilation , forms |

‘the actions of-the foul, and accommodates the externall

“

Pe
‘~
ae
‘
an
a
a
€

be

the internal! , and imprefles the body with its impreffion,
‘Now thefe fenfes have their Organs in the head , for the Com-
mon fence ; and imagination take up the two former Cels of
‘the brain, althongh .Ariftot/e placeth che Organ of the Com-
monfence in the heart, but the cogitative power poffefleth
_ the higheft, and middle part of the head; and laftly,che memo-
ae ry the hinmoft part thereof. Moreover, the Organs of Voice;
and Speech are many, as the inward mufcles of the breaft be:
ewixt the ribs, the breafts, the lungs, the arteries , the wind-
pipe, the bowing of the Tongue , and all chofe parts and muf-
cles that ferve for breathing. But the proper Organ of Speech
_ isthe Mouth, in which are framed words, and fpeeches , the
Tongue, the Teeth, the Lips,the Palate,;&c. Above the fenfible
foul, which exprefleth its powers by the Organs of the body,
- he incorporeall mind poffeffeth the higheft place , and it hath
_ + .adouble nature, the one,which tnquirethiato the caufes, pro-
|. perties,and progrefs of thofe things’ which are contained in «
the order of nature, and is content in the contemplati+
on of the truth , which is therefore called the contemplative
intellect. The other is a power of the mind, which difcern-
ing by confulting what things are to be done, and what things
to be fhunned is wholly taken up in confultation, and action,
and is therefore called the A@ive Intellect. This Orderof
powers therefore lature ordained in man, that by the exter-
Mall fences we might know corporeall:things, by the internall
the reprefentations of bodies, as alfothings abftra@ted by the
mind and intellect, which are neither bodies , mor any thing
like them. And according to.this threefold order of the pow-
_ ers of the foul, there are three appetiresin the foul : The firft
is natural, whichis an inclination of nature into its end , as of
a {tone downward, which isin all tones another is animal,
- which the fenife foliows, and itis divided into irafcible, and
concupilcible - the third. is intelle@ive , which is called the
will, d:ffcring {rom the fenficive,in this, the fenfitive is of it
felf,of thefe things, which may be prefented to the fenies, de-
firing nothing untefs in fome mariner cOmprehended. But the
will, although it be of .it felf, ofall things that are poffible,

»

~ eo

—

A

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy.

yet becaufe ic is free by its -effence, it may be alfo of things
that are. impoffible, asic wasin the Devil, defiring himfelf to
be equall with God, and therefore is altered and depraved
wich pleafure and continual! anguifh, whileft ic affents to the
inferiour powers. . Whence from its depraved appetite

there arife four paffions in it, with which in like manner-the

body is affeéted fometimes. Whereof the firlt is called Oble-
Gation, which is a certain quietnefs or affenration of the mind
or will, becaufe it obeys, and not willingly confents to that
pleafantnefs which the fenfes hold forth ; which is cthere-
fore defined to be an inclination of the mind to an effe-
_minate pleafure. The fecond is called effufion, which is a

remiffion of, or diffoluttion of the power, viz. when be-

yond the oblectation the whole power of the mind,
and intenfion of the prefent good is melted, and diffu-

feth it felfto enjoy it. The third is vaunting, and loftinefs, -
thinking it felf co have attained to fome great good , in the

enjoyment of which it prides it felf, and glorieth.The fourth
and the laft is Envy, or acestain kind of pleafure or delight
at another mansharm , without any advantage coitfelf. Icis

faid to be without any advantage co it felf, becaufe if any one ~

fhould for his own profit rejoyce at an other mans hatm, this

would rather be out oflove to himfelf,chen out ofillwiltoan- -

other. And chefe four paffions arifing from a depraved appe-

tite of pleafure, the grief or perlexicy it felf doth alfo beget
fo many contrary paffions, as Horror, Sadnefs, Fear, and Sor- |

row at anothers good, without his own hure, which we call

Envy, ..e.Sadnefs at anothers as pity isa

kind of fadnefs at anothers mi

ery...

CHAP. LXIL
Of the Paffions of the Mind,their Original,difference, and kinds.

Te paffions of th® mind are nothing elfe bur certain mo-
| tions or inclinations proceeding from the apprehenfion of

ie >

}

Pry
J

any thing, as of good orevill, convenient or inconvenient,
Now thefe kind of apprehenfions are of three forts, viz. Sen.
fual,; Rationall, and Intelle€tuall. And according to thefé
three, are three forts of paffionsin the Son! ; For when they
follow the fenfitive apprehenfion, then they refpe& a tempo-
rall good or evill, under the notion of profitable , or unprofi-
table, delightfull and offenfive, and are called naturall, or
animall paffions. When they follow the rational apprehen-
fion, and fo refpe& good or bad,under the notions of Vertue —
or Vice, praife or difgrace, orunprofitable , honcft
or difhoneft, they are.called rationall, or voluntary paffions.
When they follow the Intelle€tuall apprehenfion , and refj
good or bad,under the notion of juft or unjuft, true or falfe,
they are called intelleCtuall paffions, or fynderefis. Now the
~ fabje@ of the paffions of the foul, isthe concupitive power
‘of the foul, and is divided into concupifcible, and ira-
 fcible, and both refpe& good and bad , but undera different
~ motion. For when the concupifcible power refpe€s good,
and evil abfolutely; Love or Luft, or on the contrary, hatred
is caufed : When it refpeéts good, 2s abfent, fo defire is
caufed; or evill, as abfent, or at hand, and fo is cau-
fed horror, flying from, or loathing : or if it refpe@
pood.as prefent,then there is caufed delight, mirth, or plea-
fare; boc if evill, asprefent, then fadnefs, anxicty ,~ gricf.
But che irafcible power refpe&ts good dor bad, under the
notion of fome difficulty ; to obtain the one, or avoid the
other, and this fometimes with confidence: and fo there's
caufed Hope or Boldnefs; but when with diffidency, chen —
_Defpair, and Fear. But when that irafcible power ‘rifeth
into revenge, and thisbe onely about fome evill paft, asit
were of injury or hurt offered, there is caufed Anger. And fo
we find eleven paffions in the mind, which are , Love, Hatred,
Defire Horror, Joy, Grief, Hope, Defpair , Boldnefs, Fear,

ia
a
‘
}
£

Bookie

Occult

CHAP.)

How the paffions of the mitted change the proper body, by aust
the Accidents, and moving the {pirit. :

Phantafie, or imaginative power hath a ‘ruling power
over the paffions of the foul, when they follow ‘the fen-
fuall apprehenfion. For this doth ofits own power, according

to the diverfity of the Paffions, Firft of all change the proper -

body with a fenfible.tranfmutation, by changing the Accidents

inthe body, and by moving the fpirit upward or downward,

inward, or outward, and by producing divers qualities in the
members, So in joy, the fpirits are driven outward, in fear;
drawn back, in bafhfulnef$, are moved to the brain. So
in joy;the heart is dilated outward, by little, and little, in fad-
nefs,is conftringed by little, and little inward. After the fame
mannerinanger or fear, but fuddenly. Again anger, or de-
fire of revenge produceth heat, rednefs, a bitter taft , anda
loofnefs. Fear induceth cold, trembling of the heart, fpeech-
lefnefs, and palenefs. Sadnefs canfeth fweat ,; anda blewith
whitenefs. Pirty,which is a kind of fadnefs,doth often il] affect
the body of him that takes pitty, that ic feems to be the body
of another man afteCted. Alfo ic is manifeft,chat amonglt
fome lovers there is fuch aftrong tye of love, that what the
one fuffers,the other fuffers.. Anxiety induceth drynefs,; and
blacknefs. And how great heats love ftirs up inthe Liver, and
pulfe, Phyfitians know, difcerning by that kind of judgement
the name of her that is beloved , in an Heroick Paffion. So
Nauftratus knew that Antiochus was taken withthe love of
Stratonica. \c is alfo manifelt that fuch like Paffions, when they
are moft vehement, may caufe death. And'this is manifeft to.
- all men,that with too much joy, fadnefs, love, hatred, men ma-
ny times dye, and are fometimes freed froma difeafe. So we
read, that Sophocles, and Dionyfins the Sicilian Tyrant, did
both fuddenly dye at the newsof a Tragicallwictory. So acer-

tain woman fecing her fon returning from the Canenjiam —

battle,

he
—
{
‘
a
«

a

Book’.

-- pattle.dyed fuddenly. Now what fadnefs can do, is known to
- ally We know that Dogs oftentimes dye with fadnefs for the
1 death of their mafters. Sometimes alfo by reafon of thefe like.
_ -Paffions, long difeafes follow,and are fometimes cured. So alfo
=a fomemen looking from an high place , by reafon of great fear,
tremble, are dim-fighted, and weakened, and fometimes loofe
their fenfes. So fears, and falling-ficknefs, fometimes follow
fobbing. Sometimes wonderfull effects are produced, as in
che fon of Cre/us, whom his mother brought forth dumb, yet 2
vehement fear, and ardent affe&tion made him fpeak, which
naturally he could neverdo, So witha fuddain fall oftentimes
life,fenfe, motion on afuddain leave the members, and. pre-
fently again are fometimes returned. And how much vehe-
ment anger,joyned with great audacity,can do, Alexander the
great (hews, who circumvented with a battle in Jndia,
was feen to fend forthfrom himéfelf lightening and fire. The
Father of Thevdoricus is {aid to have fent forth out of his body,
: fparks of fire ; fo that fparkling flames did leap out witha.
C noyfe. And fuch like things fometimes appear in beafts, as in
a, + sberius his horfe, which is faid'to fend forth a flame out of
his mouth.

F Occult Philofophy

CHAP. LXIV.
How the Paffions of the mind change the body by Way of imitats-
on from fome refemblance; Alfo of the transforming, and

tranflating of men,and What force the imaginative power hath
_ not only over the body,but the foul. :

Tu forefaid Paffions fometimes alter the body by way of
“+ tmitation,by reafon of the vertue which the liknefs of the
thing hath to change it, which power the vehement imaginati-
on moves,as in fetting the teeth on edge at the fight or hearing
of fomething, or becaufe we fee or imagine another.to eat
fharp or fourethings: So he which fees another gape, gapes —
alfo; and fome when they hear any one name foure things,.
their tongue waxeth tart, Alfo the feeing of any filthy ching

—
| ‘

™

caufeth nanfeoufnefs. Many at the fight of mans blood fall se a:

a {woun. ‘Some when they fee bicter meat given to any, per-
ceive a bitter fpitle intheir mouth. And william of faith,
that he faw a mati, that atthe fight of amedicine; went to
ftool as oft as he pleafed;. when as neither the fubftanceof the
medicine, northe odour, northe taft of ic cameto him: but
only a kind of refemblance was apprehended. by him, Upon

this account fome that arein a dream think they burn, andare_

 inafire, and are fearfully tormented, as if they did truly
burn, when as the fubftance of the fire is not neer them, but
. only arefemblance apprehended by their imagination. And

fometimes mens bodies are transformed, and transfigured, ~~

and alfo tranfported , and this oft-times when they ate
ina dream, and fometimes when they are awake. So
Cyprus after he was chofen King of Italy, did very much

wonder at, and meditate upon the fight, and vidtory of Buls, —

andin the thought thereof did fleepa whole night, but in

the morning was found horned, no otherwife then by the ve-

setative power being ftirred np by a vehement imagination,
elevating corniferous humors into-hishead, and producing
horns, For a vehement cogitation, whileft it vehemencly
moves the species, pictures out the figure of the thing thought
on, which they reprefent in. their blood, andthe blood im-
prefleth from it felfjon the members that are nourifhed by it,as
upon thofe of the fame body, fo upon thofe of anothers. As
the imagination of a woman with child impreffech the mark of
the ching longed for upon her infant, and the imagination of a

man bit with amad Dog, imprefieth upon his Urine the image

of Dogs, So men may grow grey ona fuddain,And fome by the
dream of one night, have grown up from boies into perfect

men, Hitherto may be referred thofe many fcarrs of King Da-

gobertus,and Marks of Francifcus, which they received, the
one whilelt he was afraid of correction, the other whileft he
did wonderfully meditate upon the wounds of Chrift... Sojma-

ny are tran{pored from place to place, pafling over rivers,

fires, and unpaflable places, viz. when the {peciesiof any ve-
_hement defire, or fear, or boldaels are impreficd ypon cheir

ipirits,

J

Fs Get

i
a
—
t
—
—
¢
‘

x2 :

turned into men. Pontanus teftifieth that in his time a certain

fpirits, and being mixed with vapors, do move the Organ of
the:touch in their original,cogether with phantafie, which is the
Original of locallmotion. .Whence-they ftir upthe members,
-and.Organs of motion to motion, and are moved without any
miftake unto théimagined place,not out of fight, but from the

-interiour fantafy. So great a poweris there of the foulpon

the body,that which way foever that imagines,and dreams that
it goes, thither doth it lead the body.-We read many other ex-

“samples by which the power of the foul upon the body is won-

-derfully explaned, asis that which Avicen defcribes of acer-
tain man,who when he pleafed could affe& his body with the
palfie. They report of Gallus Vibius, that he did fall into
-madnefs,not cafually,bat on purpofe : for whileft he did imi-
‘tate mad men,he affimilated their madnefs to himfelf; and
became madindeed. And Axu/tin makes mention of fome men
who would move their ears at their pleafure , and fome that

would move the crown of theirhead to their forehead, and
could draw it back again whenthey pleafed : and of an-

other. that could fweat at his pleafure. And it is well
known, that fome can weep at their pleafure, and) pour forth

~ abundance-of tears : and that there are fome thatcan bring up

what they have {wallowed, when they pleafe, as out of a bag,
by degrees. And we fee that in thefe dayes there are many

- who can fo imitate, and exprefs the voices of Birds; Cattle,

Dogs, and fome men, that they can fcarce at albbe difcerned.
Alfo Pliny relates by divers examples,that. women have betn.

_women called Caietava, and another called Aemilia,who after

- mahy years, after they were married,were changed into men.
- Now how much imagination can do upon the foul, no man is
ignorant : for ic isneerer to the fubftance of the foul then the
-fenfe is; wherefore it a&ts more upon the foul then the fenfe
- doth: So women by certain ftrong imaginations, dreams,and
-Suggettions brought in:by cercain Magical! Arts.do oftentimes
theminto moftftrong loving of any one.:So: they fay

that Afedea only by a dream,burnt in love towards Fafon. So

the foul fometimes is by a vehement imagination, or fpecula-

—

‘tion

O
144 O °
¢
§

-pricked, orburned him, he feltno pain, but Jay without any

Book T. of

a certain Presbyter, who as oft as he pleafed, could make
himfelf fenfelefs, and lie like adead man, that when any one.

motion or breathing, yet he could, as he faid, hear mens voices
as it were afar off, ifthey cryed out aloud, But of thefe ab-

ftra&tions we fhall difcourfe more fully in: the following

Chapters.

CHAP,

How the Paffions of the Mind can Work out of themsfelves upon 4

anothers Body.

HE Paffions of the Soul which follow the phantafie,when
they are moft vehement, cannot only change their own
body, but alfo can tranfcend fo, as to work upon another bo-

dy, fo that fome wonderfull impreffions are thence produced —

in Elements, and extrinfecall things, and alfo can fo take away,
or bring fome difeafes of the mind or body. For the Paffions
of the Soul are the chiefeft caufe of the temperament of its
proper body. So the Soul being {trongly elevated, and in-
flamed with a {trong imagination, fends forth health or ficknefs,

not only in its proper body, but alfo in other bodies. So ¢4-
vicen is of the opinion, that a Camell may fall by the imagi-
nation of any one. So he whichis bitten witha mad Dog,pre- —
fently falsinto a madnefs, and there appear in hisUrinethe
fhapes of Dogs. So the longing of a woman with Child, doth

at upon anothers body, when it Signs the infant in the womb
with the mark of the ching longed for. So,many montftrous
generations proceed from 7 rous imaginations of women

with -

tion altogether abftraéted from the body ; as (el/iw relates of

n
it
i*
ft
J
»
* »

Of OccultPhilofophy. Book I.

with Child, as A4arcus Damafcenus reports was at Petra
&ta,a Town {cituated upon the territories of Pi/a, viz.a wench

chat was prefented.co Char/s King of Behemia,who was rough
and hairy all over her body, like a wild beaft, whom her mo-

ther affe@ted with a religions kind ofhorrour upon the pi@ture

of Zohn Baptift, which was by her bed, in time of conception,
afterwards brought after thisfafhton. And this we fee is not
only in men, but alfois done amongft bruit Creatures. So. we
read that.Jacob th¢e Patriarch, with his fpeckled Rods fer in
the watering places, did difcolour the Sheep of Laban. So
the imaginative powers of Pea-Cocks, and other Birds, whileft

- they be coupling, imprefs a colour upon their wings. Whence

we produce white Pea Cocks, by hanging round the places
where they couple, with’ whire Clothes. Now by thefe ex-

_amples it pecan how the affection of the phantafie, when

it vehemently intends it felf, doth not only affe@ its own
proper body, but alfo anothers. So alfo the defire of Witches —
to hurt, doth bewitch men moft pernicionfly with ftedfatt
lookes. Tothefe things Avicen, Ariffotle, Algazel, and Ga-
fen affent. For it is manifeft chat a body may moft eafily be
affected with the vapour of anothers difeafed- body , which
we plainly fee inthe Plague, and Leprofie. Again, in the va-
pours of the eyes there ts fo great a power , that they can be-
witch and infeCtany that are near them, as the Cockatrice, or

- Bafilisk , killing’men with their fooks. And certain women

in Scythia, amongft the I/lyrians, and Triballi,killed whomfo-
everthey looked angry upon. Therefore let no man wonder

_ that the body, and foul of one may in like manner be affe&ted
» ,with the mind ofanother, feeing the mind is far more power-
full; trong, fervent, and more prevalent. by its motion then

vapours exhaling out of bodies; neither are there wanting

_ Mediums, by which it fhould work, neither is anothers body

kefsfubjected to anothers mind, then to anothers body. Up-

on this account they fay, that a man by his affe€tion, and habit

“only, may act upon another. Therefore Philofophers ad-

vise, that the fociety of evill, and mifchievous men be (hun-

é

tyr
“
”

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy. . ae
ned, forrheir foul being full of noxious rayes, thm
that are near with a hurtful] Contagion. On the contrary,
they advife that the fociety of good, and fortunate men be en-
-deavoured after, becaufe by their nearnefs they do us much
ood. For as the f{mell of Affe fetida, or Musk, fo of bad
fp mething of bad, of good fomething of good, is derived ;
upon them that are nigh, and fometimes continues a long |
time. Now thenif the forefaid Paffionshave fo great a power
in the Phantafie, they have certainly a. greater power in the
reafon, in as much as the reafon is more excellent then the
Phantafie ; and laftly, they have much greater power inthe
mind; for this, when it is fixt upon God for any good with
its whole intention, doth oftentimes affe@ anothers body as
well as its own with fome divine gift.. By this means we
read that many miracles were done by «Apollonius, Pythago-
Empedoeles, Philolaus, and many Prophets, and holy men -

Religion.
But of » a more fully in the following igh where we

fhall difcourfe of Religion.

CHAP. LXVI.

That'the Pafsions of the mind are helped by a
Seafon, and bow necefary the of the
inevery work.

He Padfions of thi are se
and become moft verche of the

an

OF Occult Philofophy. Book 1.

they agree with the heaven, either by any naturallagreement,
or voluntary Election. For;as faith Ptolomeus, he which choof-
chat whichis thebetter; feemsto differnothing from him.
— who hath this of nature. It conduceth therefore very much
r for the receiving the benefit of the Heavens, in any work, if —
we fhall by the Heaven make our felves farable to itin our
thoughts , affeGtions, imaginations, elections, deliberations,
contemplations, and the like. For fuch like paffionsdo vehe- —
- mentlyftir up our-fpirit to their likenefs,and fuddenly expofs us,
and ours to the iuperior fignificators of fuch like paflions,
and alfo by reafon of their dignity, and neernefs to the fupe-
riors, do much more partake of the Celeftials, then any ma-
teriall things. For our mind can through imaginations, or
reafon by akind of imitation, be fo conformed to any Star,
as fuddenly to be filled with the vertues of that Star,
as if it were a proper receptacle of the influence thereof. Now
the contemplating mind, asit withdraws it felf fromvall fenfe,
imagination, nature, and deliberation’, and calsit felf back
to things feparated, unlefs as it expofech it felf' to Saturn,
4s not of prefenc confideration, or enquiry. For our mind
doth effe& divers things by faith, which is afirm adhefion, a
“-fixt intenfion, -and vehement application of the worker, or re.
ceiver, tohim that co-operates in any thing , and gives power .
to the work which we intend to do. So that there is made
as it were in us the image-of the vertue to be received,and the..
thing to be doneinus, or by us. Wemnft therefore in evety
- work, and application of things, affe&t vehemently, imagine,
whope, and believe ftrongly, for that will bea great help. And
itis verified amonglt. Phyfitians,that a {trong belief, and an un-.
hope, ‘and love towardsthe Phyfitian, and medicine,
-conduce much to health, yea more fometimes than the miedicine
it felf. For the fame that the efficacy, and vertue of the medi-
cine works, the fame doth the {trong imagination of the Phyfi-
__ fan work, being able to.change the qualities in the body.of the .
efpecially when the pacient placeth much confidence in
“Phyfitian , ‘by that means Gilpofing himfelf for ‘the

£ .
¢
ba
A
A

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy. 149
receiving the vertue of the Phyfitian, and Phyfick. Therefore
he that works in Magick, muft be of a* conftant belief, be cre.
dulous, and not at alldoubr of the obtaining che effect. For.
as a firm, and {trong belief doth work wonderfull things, al-.
though it be in falfe works, fo diftruft and doubting doth.
diffipate,and break the vertu of the mind of the worker, which
is the medium betwixt both extreams, whence it happens, that ;

he is fruftrated of the defired influence of the fuperiors, which’,
could not be joyned,and united to our labours without a firm,

and folid vertue of our mind, Po
CHAP,
How mans mind may be joyned With the mind, and Intelligencies

of the (eleftials, and together with thems impre{s certain won-
derfull vertnes upon inferiour things,

Philofophers, efpecially the 4rabians, fay; that mans;
mind,whenit is moft intent upon any work, through its
paffion, and effects, is joyned with the mind of the Stars, and
Intelligencies, and being fo joyned is the caufe that fome won-
derfull vertue be infufed into our works, and things ;and this, -
as becaufe there isin it an apprehenfion, and power.of all.
things, fo becaufe all chingshave a naturall.obediencesto it,
and of neceffity an efficacy, and more to that which defires
them with a {trong defire. And according to this is verified the”
Art of Characters, images, inchantments, and fome {peeches,
and many other wonderfull experiments to every thing which -
the mind affects. By this means whatfoever the mind.of him .
that is in vehement love affvts, hath an efficacy to.caufe love, ,.
& whatfoever the mind of him that {tronglyhates,dictates,hath .
an efficacy tohurt , and deftory. The like isin otherchings, . .
which the mind affects with a {trong defire.For all thofe things.
which the mind aéts, and gidtates by Characters, Figures, ..
Words, Speeches, Geltures, and the like, help the. « ite of .
the foul, and acquire certain wonderfull vertues, as from che. .
foul

a

ew = —
Oe
‘

Pad =

Hofophy. Book
OOK

foul of the operator, in thar‘hour when fuch a like appetice doth
invade it, {6 from the opportunity, and Celeftiall influence,

moving themind in that manner.’ For our mind, wken it is

carried upon. the great excels of any Paffion, or vertue, often-

times prefently takes of it felfaftrong, better, and more con-
venient-hour, ‘or opportunity. Which Thomas Aquinas in
his third book'againft the Gentiles, confeffeth. So many won-
derfull vercues both canfe, and follow certain adinjrable opera-
tions by great affeions, ‘in thofe things which the foul doth
in that hour tothem. But know, that fuch kind of things
- confer nothing, or very little but tothe Author of them, and
to him which is inclined tothem, asif he were the Author of
them: And thisisthe mannerby which their efficacy is found
out. Andic isa generall rule in them, that every mind that is
excelfenc'it ite makes fuch like things
Le | more fit for it-felf; asal(o- efficatious to that which it defires.
— Every one therefore that is. willing to work in Magick, muft
aes know the vertue, meafure, order,and degree of his own foul, in

the power of theuniverfe,

CHAP.
How our'mind can change’, and bind inferiour things to that
Whithit'defres, vias

i

rE Bere is allo acertain vertue in the minds of men,of chang-
mg,attracting, hindring, and binding to that which they
defire, and all things obey them, when they are carried into a.
great excels of any Paffion or vertu, fo as to excecd thofe things
which they bind. For the fupertor binds that which is inferior,
and convefts it toit felf, and the inferior is by the fame reafon
converted'to the ‘fuperior, or is otherwife affe@ed , and
wrought upon. By this reafon things that receive a fuperior
degret of any Stat,bind,or attractor hinder things which have
an*infertor’,’ according as they agree, or difagree
théemfclves; Whence a Lion ‘is affaid‘of Cock, becaufé the

“2 .

¥

Book!. Of Occult Philofophy:
prefence of the Selary vertue is more: agreeable toa Cock
then toa Lion : Soa Loadftone'draws Iron, bééaule if order
ic hath a fuperior degree of the Celeftiall Bears’
So the Diamond hinders the Loadftone,becaule in the order
of Mars it is fuperior then it.I like mannér any man when lie
is opportunely expofed to: the Celeftiall influencies,aé by the
affeAtions of his mind, fo by the due applications of natnrall
things,if he become ftrongerin a Solary vertue,bindsand draws

the inferior into admiration, and obediente , in érdet ofthe

Moon co fervitude or infirmities, in a Saturnall order to qui-

etnefs or fadnefs; in order of Pupster co worlhip, -in order of -

Mars to fear, and difcord,in order of Vemis to fove;and joy,in

a Mercuriall order to petfwafion, atid obfequioufnels, and the ©

like. Now the ground. of fucha kind of binding ische very
vehement,and boundlefs affection of the fouls, with the con-

courfe of the Celeftiall order. But the diffolutions,orhinderan- _
ces of fucha like binding, are made by a contrary effet, and
that more excellent or ftrong, for asthe greater excefSof the —

‘mind binds, fo alfo it ldofeth,and hindreth. And faftly,when
feareft Venus, oppofe Saturn, When Saturn'or Mars, op-

pole Venus or Fupiter : for Arftologers fay, that thefe are mioft

at enmity,and contrary the one to the other Jcanfing con-

trary effe@ts in chefeinferior bodies; Forin the heavén,where _

ther¢is nothing wanting, where all things are governed with
love, there Can wite be hatred,, or entity. PISA

CHAP. LXIX,

“and the vert he F Words.

jy

being (hewed that there isa great power in the affections

ofthe foul, you muft know moreover, that there’is no lefs
Vertue in words, and the names of things, but greatelt of all

in fpeeehes, and motions , by which we chiefly differ from -
bruits, and-are called cationall,, not from reafon, which is

taken for that part of the foul, which contains the affections,

» *

all

ry
sits >

L 4

a a
wei
—
| fm
“
»
«al

152 Of Occult Philofophy.' Bookl.

which Galen faith, is alfo common co bruits, although in a lefs

degree ; but we are called racionall, from that reafon which is
t

according to the voice underltood in words, and fpeech which
»  is-called declarative reafon, by which part we do chiefly excell

other Animals.For in Greek fignifies, reafon, fpeech,
anda word. Now a word is twofold, viz. internal!,
uttered ; An internall word isa conception of the mind, and
motion of the foul, which is made without a voice. As in
‘dreams we feem to fpeak,' and difpute with our felves, and
whileft we are awake we run overa whole fpeech filently. Buc
= an uttered word hath a certain actin the voice, and. properties
of Jocution, and is brought forth with the breath of aman,
with opening of his mouth, and with the fpeech of his tongue,
in which nature hath coupled the corporeall voice, and fpeech
- to the mind,and undesf{tanding making that a declarerand in-
--__- terpreter of the conception.of our intellect ro the hearers, And
of this we now {peak. Words therefore are the fitceft medium
betwixt the fpeaker and the hearer,carrying with them not on-
ly the conception of the mind, but alfo the vercue of the
with a certain efficacy unto the hearers; and this often-_
times with fo great a power, that oftentimes they change not
only the hearers,but alfo other bodies, and things that have no ~
fife. Now thofe words are of greater efficacy then others,
which reprefent greater things, as intelle@uall, Celeftiall, :atid
fupernaturall,as more exprefly fo more mifterioufly.Alfo chofe
that come from a more worthy congue, or from any of a more
holy order: for thefe,as it were certain Signs, and reprefen-
- _ tations,receive a power of Celeftiall,and fuperceleftiall chings,
as fromthe vertue of things explained, of which they are the

_ vehicula, fo fom.a power pac into. them. by che-vertue of the

fpeaker.
‘gd

wre
rs » a

a
‘
a
‘

Occult

Book

—

CHAP.
the vertue of proper names.

Hat proper names of things are very neceffary in Magicall
operations, almoft all men teftifie + For the natu-

rall power of things proceeds fiuft from the objedts to the
fenfes, and then from thefe to the imagination, and from this —
tothe mind, in which ice is firft conceived; and then is expref-
fed by voices, and words. The Platoniffs therefore fay, that in
this very voice,or word,orname framed,with its Articles, that
the power of the thing as ic were fome kind of life, lies under
the form of the fignification. Firlt conceived in the mind as it
were through certain feeds of things, themby voices or words,
as a birth brought forth, and Jaftly kept in writings. Hence

_ Magicians fay, that proper names of things are certain rayes of
things, every where prefent at all times, keeping the power
of things, as the effence of the thing fignified, rules, andis
difcerned in them, and know the things by them, as by pro-
per, and living Images. For as the great opetator doth pro-
duce divers {pecies, and particular things by the influencies of
the Heavens, and by the Elements , together with the vertues
of Planets;fo accordingto the properties of che influencies pro-
per names refule to things, and are. put upon them by him
who numbers the multitude, of the Stars,- calling’ them all. by
their names, of which names Chrift.in another place fpeaks,fay-
ing » Your names are Written in Heavem «Adam
that gave the firlt names to things, knowing the influencies of
the Heavens, and properties of all things,gave them all names _
according to their natures, asitis written in Genefis , where”
God brought all things that he had created before Adam,that
he fhould name them, and as he named any thing, fo the name
of it was, which names indeed contain in them wonderfull
powers of the things lignified. Every voice therefore that is
fignificative, firlt of all fignifies by the influence of the Cele-

{tiall harmony : Secondty, by the impofition of man, although.
often.

x
te
1§3
aft

ba -

oftentimes otherwife by this, then by that. But when both
- fignifications meet in any voice,ormame; which are put upon
them by the faidharmony or men, then that name is witha
double vertue,vsz. naturall, and arbitrary, made moft efficati-
ous to act, as oft asit fhall be uttered in due place, and time,
and feriovfly with an intenfion.exercifed upon the mattet
rightly difpofed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. So
weread in Philofratus, that when a maid at Rome dyed the
fame day fhe was married, and was prefented to Apollomni,
he acurately inquired into her name, which being known, he
pronounced fome occult thing, by which fhe revived. It was
an obfervation amongft the Romsanes in their holy rites, that
when they did befiege any City, they did diligently enquire
into the proper,and true name of it,and the name-of that God,
under whofe proteGion it was , which being known, they did
then with fome-verfe.call forth the Gods that were the pro-
teCtors of that City,and did curfe the inhabitants of that City,
fo at lengththeir Gods being. abfent, did overcome them, 4s

Vergil tings,

| kept this Realm, our Gods
Their Alsars have forfook,and bleft abodes.

> Slow the verfe with which the Gods were called out, and
the enesties were curft , when the City was. affaulted round
about ; let him that would: know, finde it out in Livy, and
; but alfomany of thefe Serenus Samonicus in his:
book offeerct things makes mentionof.

CHAP
4 & 3 i tie 4

‘
£
i
ad
e “

¥

—

Of many words joyned together, asin fentences, and werfes, and

“of the vertnes, and aftrittions of charms,

Efides the vertues of words; and names, there is alfo'a’

preater vertue found in fentences; fromthe trurh contain-
ed in them, which hath a very: gueat power of imprefii
changing, binding, and eftablithing; forchar being
fhine the more, and being refilted is more:confirmed,and con-
folidated; which vertue isnot in fimple words, bute im fenten-
ces,by which any thing is afirmed,or denyed,of which fort are
verfes, inchantments;imprecations, deprecations, orations, in-
vocations, obteftations, adjurations, conjurations , and
like. Therefore in compofing verfes, and orations, forthe at-

tracting the vertue of any Star, or Deity, you mult diligently —

confider what vertues:any Star contains, as alfo: what ef-
feéts, and operations, and:to infer themin verfes, by praifing,
extoHing, amplifying, and fetting forth thofe' things which
~ fuch a kind of Star is wont to caufe by way. of its influence,and

it dos |

by vilifying, and difpraifing thofe things which it is wontto —

deftroy , and hinder, and by fupplicating, and, bagging for
that which we defire to get, and by condemning,and detefting

that which we would have deftroyed: &hindred:andafterthe

fame manner to make’an elegant oration, and daly diftinét by
Articles, with competent numbers,and proportions. More-
over Magicians command that: wecallupon, and pray. bythe

names of the fame Scar, or name,to themro:whonrfiebia verfe

belongs, by their wonderfull things, or miracles, by
courfes, and waiesin theirfphear, by their light, by the dig-
nity oftheir Kingdome, by the beauty, and brightnefs that ts

init, by their ftrong, and powerfull vertues, and by fuch like
as thefe. As P/yche in eApuleins prayes to Ceres ; faying, I

befeech thee by thy fruicfullright hand, I intreat. thee. by the
joyfull Ceremonies of hatwelts, by the quiet filence-of thy

chelts, by the winged Charidtsof Dragons thy fervants, by:the

furrows

Ve «

their

a
z

© ~~ furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring Wagon, the clam.
myecarth, by the place of going down into cellars at the
‘fight Nuptials of Proferpina,and returns at the light inventions
‘of her daughter, and other things which are concealed in her
‘temple in the City Elewfis in Attica, Befides, withthe divers
forts of the names of the Stars, they command us to call upon
them by the names of the Intelligencies, ruling over che Stars
themfelves, of which we fhall {peak more at large in their
proper place. They chat defire further examples of thefe, let
them fearch into the hymns of Orpheus , then which nothing
is more efficatious in naturall Magick, if chey together with
their circumftances, which wife men know, be ufed according
to a due harmony, with all attention. Buc co return to our
purpofe. Such like verfes being aptly,and duly made according
- go the rule of the Stars,and being full of fignification, & mean-
ing, and opportunely pronounced with vehement affeCtion,
as according to the number,proportion of their Articles,fo'ac-
Hig cording to the form refulting from the Articles, and by the
-wiolence of imagination, do confer.a very great power in the
| inchanter, and fomettmes transfer it upon the thing inchant-
ed,to bind, and direéit to the fame purpofe for which the af.
fections, and fpeeches of the inchanter are intended. Now
the inftrament of the inchanters is a moft pure harmoniacall
fpirit,warm, breathing, living, bringing with it motion, affeétion
and fignification , compofed of its parts, endued with fence,
and conceived by reafon, By the quality therefore of this {pi-
rit, and by the Celeftiall fimilicude thereof, befides thofe
things which have already been {poken of, verfes alfo from the
opportunity of time,receive from above moft excellent vertues,
-  andindeed more fublime,and efficatious then {pirits, & vapors
exhaling out of che Vegetable life, out of hearbs, roots; gums,
> -aromaticall things, and fumes, and fuch like. And therefore
~ °Magicians inchanting things,are wont to blow, and breath up-
on them the words of the verfe, or to breath in the vertue. with
the {pirit, that fo the whole vertue of the foul be ditedted to
__ the ching inchanted,; being difpofed-for the receiving the faid
Vertue. And here itis to be noted,that every

3°
a:
“

and words, as they induce accuftomed motions’ by their accu-
ftomed numbers, and proportions, and form, fo alfo befides
their ufuall order,being pronounced, or wrote

unto noutuall effects.

“CHAP. ‘LXXIE
Of the wonderful power of Inchantments.

Tx fay that the power of inchantments, and verfesis fo
reat, that ic is belieyed they are able to fubvert almoft
all nature, .as faith Apuleius, that with a Magicall whifperin
fwift Rivers are turned back,the flow Sea is bound, the Wi
are breathed out with one accord, the Sun is ftopt, the Moon
isclarified, the Starsare. pulled out, the day is aes back, mF

night is prolonged, and of thefefings Lacan,

The courfes of allthings did ceafe,thenight.
Aftonied was the headlong World, all this.
Was by the hearing of ave

That heat of lowe.

His wits d

Gis

‘dt ed—

Decl Philip. ~Bookd
Snake being charm'd, bur ftin the Mend. po
Charms bear (orn handing anothers Fa arm:

And Ovid.i in book, fine itulofaich.

With doth With’r ring Ceres ye,
Dryed are thefonntains all, el Vota
thefe things were not true, would not be fach ftrid
Statiites made againft them, that
And Tibullu faith of a certain Inchantrefs,
Her with Charms Stars from
And turning th' Courfe of rivers, did ofpy,
She parts the earth;.and Ghofts from Sepulebers.
Draws up, and fetcheth bones away fromth' fires,
_ And at her pleafure {catters Clondsi'th’ Air,
And makes it Snow in Summer bot, and fair. 24 baa

OF all which that Inchancrefs to boalther in Ovid,
when fhe faith,

At will, Imake (wif

To their fountains, whileft their banks admire ;
tofs, and {mooth clear Clowds, with Clouds deform,
With Spels, and Charms'I breakehe Vipers
Cleave Solid Rocks, Oakes from their feafures
Whole Woods remove, the airy Mountains fhake,

_ Earth for to groan, and Ghofts froms graves ake,

»
> ~ ° hey
wi
t-:
>" «
ra}
he
iv
¢
d
we
a
hod
©

Book I. OF Occult Philof 159
Moreover all Poetsfing, and Philofophers do not deny, that’

by verfes many wonderfull things may be done, as Corn to be |

removed, Lightenings to be commanded, difeafes be cured,and

fuch like. For Cato bimfelf in Country affairs ufed fomeim-

chantments againit the difeafes of beafts, which as yet are

-tantinhis writings. Alf fofephus teltifies that Solomon was

skilled in thofe kind of inchantments., Alfo Celfus. Africanus
reports.according tothe. Egyptian dodtrine, that mans body, x

according to the number of the faces of the Zodiack Signs, ‘was Re

taken care of by fo many, v/x. thirty fix fpirits, whereof each

undertake , and defend their proper part, whofe names they

call with a peculiar voice, which being called upon, reftoréto

health with their inchantments, the di feafed parts of the body.

CHAP. LXXIIN
Of the vertue of writting, and of making imprecations, apd in- ae

HE ufe-of werds,and-fpeech,is to exprefstheinwardsof
the mind, and from thence to draw forth the fecrets of a
the thoughts,and to ‘declare the will of the fpeaker. Now writ- a
ing is the. laft.expreffion of the mind, and is.che number of |
Speech and .voice, as alfo the collection, ftare, end
and iteration, making a habit, which is not with the
act of ones voice. And whatfoeveris inthe mind, in Voice, in
word, in,oration, and in fpeech, the whole, and all of this isin
writing alfo. And as nothing which isconceived the mind is
expreffed by voice, fo nothing which is exprefiéd istor-
_alfo written. And therefore Magicians command every
work, there beimprecations, and _in{criptions arade, by whith
the operator may exprels his affection : that if he gather
Hearb, or a Stone, he declare for-what ufe he doth irc if he
make a picture, he fay, and write to whatend he maketh it;
which imprecations, and infcriptions, /bertus alfo iirhis book

a

re

not difallow which al our works
would never be brought jnto effet ; Seeing a difpofition doth
not canfe an Bilt the a@ ofthe difpofition. firid alfo
thac the fame kind of precepts was in afe amongtt the Anci-

_ ents, as Vargsl teftifies, when he fings,

walkie

with the[e threads,in number which ate,

a nots, Amaryllis tye ! of Colours three,
hen bonds I Rei, for Venus be.

ay
a -

t

. d >
ad LX:

gave to manamind.and fpeech which Mer:
curins Trifmegifius ) are thought to be a gift of the fame
 -NOrtue, power,and mort, . The omnipotent God hath by
bis} divided the fpeech of men into divers lanpuages;
“which langnages have according: to their diverfi ity received |
divers,and proper Characters of confifting in their cer-
_-tain order, namber, and figure, not fo difpofed, and formed by
hap, Or chance, nor by the weak judgement of man, but from
eS whereby they agree with the Celeftiall, and divine

— .
a

ars 4
’
»
x
P
re Pie ‘
ot

Book T. .. Of Occule Philofophy.

writing of the Hebrews is of allthe moft facred in the figures =
of Characters, points of. Vowels, and tops of accents, as con-
The pofition of the Starsbeing fir madein the featofGod, - = ~~
which is heaven, after the figure of themAasthe maftersof
the Hebrews ceftifie) are moft fully formedthe letters of the -
Celeftiall myfteries, as by their fizure, form, and fignification,
fo by the numbersfignified by them, as alfo by their various
harmony of their conjunction. Whence the more curious Me-_-
cubals of the Hebrews do undertake by the figure of theirlet-
ters, the forms of Characters, and their fignature, fimplenefs,
compofition, feparation, crookednefs, direétnefs, defet, a-
bounding, greatnefs, litlenefs, crowning opening, fhutting,or-
der, tranfmutation, joyning together, revolution of Jetters;
and of poincs, and tops, and by the fupputation of numbers by 7.
the letters of things fignified to explain all things, how they p <a

proceed from the firft caufe, and are again to. be reduced into
the fame. Moreover they divide the lecters of their Hebrew
Alphabet, into twelve fimple, feven double, and three
mothers, which they fay’ fignifie as Characters of things, the hy en
twelve Signs, feven Planets, and three Elements, viz. Fire, —
Water,and Earth,for they account Aire no Element,but as the :
glew, and {pirit of the Blements. To thefe alfo they appoint Ge
points, and tops > As therefore by the afpeéts of Planets,and=
Signs, togéther with the Elements, the working {piri and Re
truth all things have been, and are brought forth, fo bythefe Sat
Chara@tersof letters, and points,fignifying thole things that
are broughr. forth, the natnes of allthings are appointed, as
certain Siptis; and vehicula’s of things explained with
every whete-their-effence, and-vertucs, Theprotewhd
meanings, and Signs: afe‘inherent in’ thofe:
figures of them, as'alfo numbers, place, order, and'revolution;
fo that Origenes ‘therefore thought that thofe mamesbeing
tranflated into another Idiome; do not-retain their proper’ a
vertne. For only originall names, which are tightly impoled,;
becaufe they, fignify naturally, have anatucalba@ivity Teds’.
not fo withthem which fignifie at pleafurey'which haveno

se

oe

f =
t

© aftivicy,as they are fignifying, as theyare certain natural
things in themfelves.. Now if thefe be any originall, whofe
- words have a naturall fignification, it is mamifeft that this is che
Bebtew, the of whith he that thal! peofoundly,and radi-
palpebferve, and fhall-know-to refolve. proportionably the
jerters thereoffhall have a rule exa&tly to find out any Idiome.
 Fheresare therefore two and twenty Lerters, which are the
foundation of the world, and of creatuces that are, and are
andcvery faying, and every creature are of them,
and: by. their revolutions xeceivechtir Name, Being, and
therefore that will find them ont, muft by each joyning
together.of the Lecters fo longexamine them, uneill che voice
Gadas manifeft, and-the framing of the:moft facred letoess
be opencd.anddifcovered: Forhence voices, and words have
efficacy in Magicall works: becaufe chac im which nature firft
exercifech Magicalkefficacy,is the of God. But thefeare
of more deep fpeculation, then.to-bebandled in this book. Bur
to return to the divifion. of the Letcers, Of thefe,amongft rhe
mothers, viz. feven double, wiz,
aD. The other 12.012.
arefimple. The fame rule isamongt{t the Chaldeans; And by
the imitation of thefe.alfo the letters of other tongues.are di-
ficibuted to Signs, Planets, and Elements; after their order,
For the Vowels intheGreek tongue,viz, A EH IO ¥
anfwer to the feven Planets. BTA ZKAMNT PST.
are attributed to the twelve Signs of the Zodiack,the other five
© 24x ¥ reprefent the four Elements,and the {pirit of the
world. Amongft the Latine there is the fame fignification of
them Forthefive Vowels,.A E1O and J.and V, Confo-
nants are afcribed tothe feven Planets; bur che Confonants
BC DFEGLMN PR ST are anfwerable to thet welve Signs.
K Q XZ make four Elements. -H the afpi-
the Spirit of the World, Y becanfe itisa
Greek, and) nota Latine Character,and ferving only.to Greek
words,follows ¢ nature.of its Idiome.
you mpl nor be ignorant of,

Book Occult Philofophy.

all wife men,that the Hebrew letters are the moll efficacions of
all, becaufe they have the greateft fimilitude with Celeftials,

and the world, and that the letters of the other tongues have
not fo great an efficacy, becaufe they are more diftant from

them. Now the difpofitions of chefe, the following Table.will -—

explain. Alfo all-che Letters have double numbers of their or-

der,viz. Extended, which fimply. exprefs of what number the

letters are to their order and colleéted, which
recolle& with themiel

the names of Letters, according to their various mannets of
numbring. The vertues ‘of which numbers, he that thall know,
{hall be able in every tongue to draw forth wonderfull'm

ries by their letters, as alfo to tell what things have been
paft, and foretell things tocome. There areallo other myfte-
rious joynings of letters with numbers : but we fhall abundant-
ly difcourfe of all thefe in the following Books : Wherefore

we will now put an end co this firft Book. :

ves the numbers of all the preceding .
Ietcers. Alfothey have integrall numbers, which refalefrom |

wt
— “=
»
a

‘

© >

—
ai
a]
€
a >
ts
a
P
d
é
e
td
re
4 ‘
q
j
¥

—

é

en

To the Moft Honorable Lord,Moft 7
Illuftrious* Prince, Hermannus of Wyda,
Prince Elector, Duke of Wefphalia,and Augaria;
Lord and Arch-prelate of Coloma, and Pader-

- bornia,his moft gracious Mafter, Henry Cor-
Agrippa of Nettef-beym witheth health.» 1

Ehold now Ihuftrious Prince, and mot ho-
9 norable Prelate! ) the reft of the books of Occult
Philofophy, or Afagick, which I promifed Tour
Worthine[s that I would put forth When I publife-
y ed the firft of them: but the {uddain, andalmoft
~ snexpetted death of holy Margaret of Auftria my
Princes coming upon it, bindred me then from the endavoring to
put it forth, Then the witkedne/s of fome Pulpit-[ycopbants, and
of fome School. Sophifters inceffantly raging againft mefor a de-
_ Clamation I put forth esd ee: the V anity of things, and the ex~
cellency of the word of God, and contending againft me continually
with bitter hatred, envy, malice, and calumnies, bindred me from
putting of it forth; whereof {ome very proualy, With a full mouth,
and loud voice afperfed me With impiety in the Temple amongita .
promifcuous people. Others With corner-Whifperings from houfe-
ta houfe, ftreet by fireet, did fill the ears of the ignorant With my
infamy : others inpublike, and private afjemblies did inftigate
Prelates, Princes, and Cala himfelf againft me. Hence I began
to be at aftand, whether I fhould put forth the reft of the book
or no, Whileftl did doubt that I foould by this means expofemy
Self to greater calumnies, and as it Were caft myfelf ougof the
{moke into the fire, a certain me,leaft by put-
ting them forth I foouldfeem more offenfive then officions to Jem, “

bad
a
a
¥
. J

and expofe your bighne/s to the envy of malicious Carpers, and.
tongues of detratters. Whileft thefe things troubled me with a
various defparation, the quickne/s of your underftanding, exatt
difcretion, uprightne/s of }udgement. Religion without {uper ftiti-
on, and other moft knoWn vertues ... youn, your authority and in-
tegrity beyond exception, which can eafily, check,and bridle the
tongues of flanderers, removed my doubting, andinforced meto .
fet upon that again more boldly, which Ihad almoft left off by
redjon of defpaire.T berefore (moft Ihuftrious Prince) take in good
part thie [econd book of Occult Philofophy,sm whith We fhew the
myfteries of the (eleftiall Magick, all things being opened, and
maznifelted, Which experienced antiquity relation of, and
which came to my knoWledge,that the fecrets of ( eleftiall Magick.
(hitherto negletted , und not fully apprehended by men of latter
times ) may withyour portettion be by me, after the foewing of na-
turall vertues, propofed tothem that are ftudious, and curious

the[e fecrets by which let him that (ball be profited,and receive
benefit,give you the thanks, who have beenthe etcafonwef this
Edition, and fetting of it at liberty tobe feen

Farewell.

»
I
x >
—
a
hs.
x
yA

The Second Book of Occult Phi-
lofophy, or, Magick , written by
Henry (Cornelius eA grippa.

Boox II.

—

Of the neceffity of Mathematical learning, and of the msany
wonderfull works which are done by Mathematical Arts only.

HE Doétrines of Mathematicks. are fo ne-
ceflary to, and have fuch an affinity with
“Oe Magick, that they that do profefs ic without.
R md m them, are quite out of the way, and labour
“ae invain, and fhallin no wife obtain their de-

ort
fired effeét. For whatfoever things are, and.

are done in thefe inferior natural! vertuésjare

alldone, and'poveriied by sht, mealare; harmony,
motion,and light. And all things which We fee in thefe inferi-
M 4 ‘ ours;

——

»

CHAP, I:
in”
y

ours, have root, and foundation'in them: yet neverthelefs
without naturall vertues, of Mathematical! Do€trines only
works liketomaturals canbe produced, as ‘P/ato faith, athing
not partaking of crach or divinity, but certain Images kin to

themkas bodies going,or {peaking, which yet want the Animall
faculty, fuch as were thofe which among{t the Ancients were

called Dedalushis Images, and avriz27e, of which Ariftotle
makés mention, viz. the threefooted Images of Vulcan,;and

Dedalus, moving themfelves, which Homer f{aithcame out of
their own accord to the exercife, and which we read,moved
themfelves at the fealt of Hiarba the Philofophicall Exercifer :
As alfo that golden Statues performed the offices of Cup -bear-
ers,and Carvers to the guefts.. Alfo we read of. the Statues of
Mercury, which did fpeak, and the wooden Dove of Arthita,
which did fly, and the miracles of Boethius,which Caffiodorus
made meation of, viz. Diomedes in Brafs,founding Trum-
per, and a brazen Snake hiffing, and pictures of birds finging
moft fweetly. Of this kind are thofe miracles of Images
which proceed from Geometry, and Opticks, of which we
fome mention inthe fuft book, where we fpoke of the
Element of Aire. So there aresnade glaffes, fome Concave,

-. others of thé form of a Columne, making the reprefentations
Of things in the Aire feem like fhadows ata diftance : of which
fort Apollonius, and Vitellius in their Books De Perfpettiva,
and Specalu,taught the making, andtheufe. And we read that
CMagnas Pompeius brought acertain glafs amongft the fpoils
from the Ealt,to Rome, in which were feen Armies of Armed

weights, -meafures, proportions, articles,

and

men. And there are made certain tranfparent glafles, which
es: being dipped in, fome certain juices of Hearbs, and irradiated
~ With an artificiall light, fill the whole Aire round about with
Be vifions.. And I know how to make reciprocall’ glaffes, -in
which the Sun fhining,all things which were illoftrated by the
“the  gaiesthereof are apparently feen many miles off. Hence 4 Ma-
| gician,expert in naturall Philofophy , and Mathematicks,and
‘Knowing the middle fciences confifting of both thefe, Arith-
7 matick, Mufick, Geometry, Opticks, Altronomie, and fuch

all
a

Book II. : Of Occult Philofophy. 169

—

and joynts, knowing alfo Mechanical! Arts refulting from
thefe, may without any. wonder, if heexcell other men in Art, | =.
and wit, do many wonderfull things, which the moft prudent; -« -—
and wife men may moch admire, Arethere not fome reliques
extant of the Ancients works,viz... Hercules, and Alexanders
illars, the gate of Cafpia made of brafs, and with Tron.
that it could by no-Wit or Arr, be broken? And the
Pyramis of Julius Cafar erceted at Romeneer the hill Vati-, -
canus, and Mountains built by Artin the middle of the Sea,
and Towers, and heaps of Stones, fuch as I faw in England put
together by an incredible Art. And we readin faithfullHifto-
rians, that in former times Rocks have. been cut off, and Val- -
lies made, and‘Mountains made into a Plain, Rocks have been
digged through, Promontories have been opened inthe Sea,
the bowels of the Earth made hollow, Rivers divided, Seas
joyned to Seas, the Seas reftrained, the bottome of the Sea
been fearched, Pools exhaufted, Fens dryed up, new Iflands
made, and again reltored to the continent, all which,although
they may feem to be againftnature, yet we read have been
done,and we fee fome reliques of them remaining till this day,
which the vulgar fay were the works of the divell, feeing the
Arts, and Artificers thereof have been dead out of all memory,
neither are there any that care to underftand, or fearch
into them. Therefore they feeing any wonderfull fight,
do impute ic to the divell, as his work, or chink it is a
miracle, which indeed is a work of naturall, or Mathe-—
maticall Philofophy. Asif any one fhould be ignorant of the
-vertue of the Loaditone, and fhould fee heavy Iron drawn up-
wards, or hanged in’ the Aire (as we read the Iron Image of © i
Mercury did long fince as. Trevers hang up in the middie.
of the Temple by Loadftones, this verfe attefting the fame. ..24)¢ Mas

The Iron white-rod:bearer fliesi th’ Aire. .

The like to which we read was done concerning thé image7y Cia.
of the Sunat Rome,in the Temple of Seraps) would not fuch
anignorant man, I fay, prefencly fay it is elie work of the Coffer

_-vell? But if he fhall know the vertue of the Loadiftone to the

a

| Accs Phil
OF Occult j ofophy.

‘Bookidi

Iron,-and fhall make triallofie, he prefently ceafeth to won..
‘der, and doth no more feruple it to be the work of nature.
But here it isconvenient that you know, that as by naturall
vertues we collect naturall vertues, fob abftra@ed, mathe-:
maticall, and celeftiall, we receive celeftiall vertues, asmo-.
tion, life, fenfe, fpeech, fouthfaying, and divination, even in
matter lefs difpofed, as that-which is not made by nature, but
only by art. And fo imagesthat fpeak, and foretell things to

— come, are faid to be made, as William of Par relates ofa
brazen head made under the rifing of Saturn, which they fay
fpake with a mans voice. But he-that will choofe a difpofed

Mlatter,and moft fit to receive, and a molt powerfull agent,
~fhall undoubtedly produce more powerfull effe@s. For
icisa generall opinion of the Pythagoreans, that as Mathe-
maticall things ate more formall then Naturall, fo'alfo they
are more efficacious: as they have lefs dependence in their
being, fo alfo in their operation. But amongft all Mathemati-
call things, numbers, asthey have more of forminthem, fo
 alfo are more ‘efficacious, to which not only Heathen Philofo-
phers, bar alfo Hebrew, and Chriftian Divines doattribute
vertue, and efficacy, as well to effect whatis good, as what

Of Numbers, and of their power, andwertue.

Boerhivs faith, chat all things which were —
by the nature of things in its fit Age, to be
«fétmed by the proportion of numbers, for this was the princi-
pall pattern in the mind of the'Greator. Hence is borrowed
the number of the Elements, hence the courfes of times, hence
"the motion of che Stars, and the ‘revolution of the heaven, —
‘gpd the fkare of all things fubfift by che uniting together of
Nambers therefore are endowed with

s
es
bd
4 oF
~»
at
a

Book Il. @£Orcult Philofophy..
fublime vertues. Foritis no wonder, there are fo maby,
and fo great occult vertues in nattaepUee although Of ma-
nifeft operations, that there -fhoulf be in numbérs much
greater, and’ more occule, and alfo more wonderfull, and
efficacious, for as much as they ate more formall, more pér-
feét, and naturally in the celeftialls, not mixt with feparated.
fubftances ; and laftly, having the greateft, and molt fimple
-commixtion with the Idea’s in the mind of God, from which
- they receive their proper, and moft efficacious vertues: where-
fore alfo. they are of molt force, and conduce moft to the ob-—
taining of fpiricuall, and divine gifts, as in naturall things,
elementary qualities are powerfull in the tranfmuting ofany
elementary thing. Again, all things that are, and are made,
fubfift by, and receive their vertue from numbets. For time
confifts of number, and all motion, and action, andail things
which are andmotionn .
Harmony alfo, and voices nave their power by, and conifilt
of numbers, and their proportions, and the proportion a-.
rifing from numbers, do by lines, and. points make Char-
raters, and figures: And thefe are proper to Magicall ope-
rations, the middle which is betwixt both being yi, Md
by declining to the extreams,as in the ufé of letters. And laftly,
all fpecies of naturall things, and of thofe things which are
above nature, ate joyned together by certain numbets > which .
Pythagoras feeing, faith , that number is that by which
things confift , and diftributes each vertue to each number.
And Proclus faith, Number hath alwaies abeing : Yet there's
One in yoyce, another in the proportion of them, another
inthe foul, and reafon, and another in divine things. Bat
Themiftius, and Boethius , and Averrow the Babilonian,
gether with P/ato, do fo extol! numbers, that they thinktio
man can bea true Philofopher without them. Now chey'fpeak
of'a rationall, nnd formal number, not of a material, fen-
fible, or yocall, the humber of Merchants buying, and felling, -~
of which the Pythagorians, and Platonif?s, and our
make no reckening, but apply ic to the proportionrefulsing —
from it, which number they call nacurall; rattonall, and > 33
| » fan, -

f
e
a @
v
a
a *
«
s

Of Occult Philofophy.» Book TT
‘mall ,from which gfeatinyfteries flow,as well in naturall, as”
“divine, and heavenly: things. By it is there a way made for
the fearching out,and Wnderftanding of all things knowable,
By it the next accefsto natural! prophecying ishad: and the
Abbot Foachim proceeded no other way in his Prophecies,but
by formall numbers.

or

—

CHAP. III.

“How great vertues.Numbers have,as Well in Naturall things, as
Go there. lyes wonderfull efficacy, and vertue in num-
bers,as well to good-asto bad, not only moft eminent
Philofephers do unanimonfly teach, but alfo Catholike
‘Dottors, and efpecially Hierom, Axftin, Origen, Ambrofe,
Gregory of Naxtanzen, Athanafius , Bafilius, Hilarius, Ru-
banus, Bede , and. many more confirm. Hence Hilarinus in
his Commentaries Pfalms, teftifies that the fevency
Elders , according tothe efficacy of numbers, brought -che
“Plalmsinto-order. Raban#ws alfo,a famous Doctor, compo-
fed.an excellent book of the vertuesofnumbers: But now
_ show, great vertues numbers have in nature, is manifelt in the
hearb which is called Cinquefoil, 7. ¢. fivelleaved Grafs ; for
this refifts poy fons by vertue of che number of five ; alfo drives
away divells, conduceth to expiation and one leafe of it
_ taken twice in a day in wine, cures the Feaver of one day:
-three che certian Seaver: fonre the quartand.’ like
- Manner four grains of the feed of Turnifole being ‘dutnk; cures
othequartane, but three thecertian. In like manner Verein is
co cure Feavers:, being durnk in wine, if in'tertiansicbe
from the third joynt, imquattans fromthe fourth.:A Ser-
he be once ftruck with a Spear, dieth, if ewiter

“Thefe, and: many fuch''as and
teltified in divers Aughors. We muftknow.now whence chefe
aredone, which certainly have a. caufe, which vations.

“proportion

ey .
(ye
‘
»-
—
tute
y
a
is |
hie
14°
Z

Book II. Of Occule'Philofophy.
proportion of various numbers amongft-themfelves, Thereis
alfo a wonderfull experiment of the number of feven, that .
every feventh male, born without afemale coming betwixt, |
hath power to cure the Kings evill by his touch alone, or
word. Alfo every feventh daughter that is born, is faid won-
derfully co help forward the birch of children : neither is the
naturall number here confidered, but the formal] confideration
that isin the number. And let chat which we {pake before, be
alwaies kept in mind, thar thefe powers are not in vocall;
or numbers of merchants buying, and felling, but in racionall, —
formall,and naturall ; Thefe are diftinét myfteries of God.and
nature. Bur he that knows how to joyn together the voeall
numbers, and naturall with divine, andorder them into the
fame harmony, fhall be able'te work and know wonderfull
things by numbers; the Pythagorians profefs that they can
prognofticate many things by the numbers of names, in which.
truly, unlefs there did ly a great myfterie, Zohn had not faidin —
the Revelation, He which :hath'undérftanding, let himcom-
pute the number of the name’ of the beatt, which isthe num-
ber ofaman, and this isthe moft famous manner of compu.
ting amongtt the Hébrews, and Cabalifts, as we fhall thew.
afterwards. Bye this youmult know, chat fimple
fignifie Divine things: numbers of ten; Celeftiall numbers
ofan hundred; rerreftial ~flambers of a choufand; thofe things
that (hall be in a: future ages’ Befides, feeing the parts of the
mind are aceording to'an Atithmericall Mediocrity, ‘by'reafon
of the identity, or equality of excefs, coupled together, But
the body, whofe parts differ in their greatneGS, is according to.
aGeometricall’ mediocrity, compounded : Butan “animeall
confilts of both, foul’ and body, accofdifig to that,
diocrity, whichis fitable to harmony Hence itis thacnam-
bers do work Very much apon the fonl, figurés pponthe body,
and hatmony‘ipon che whol@animall.,

j
‘
as
a
«
”
ray
x

F *.

Re Of Unity,and the Scale thereof.

N Ow let us treat particularly of numbers themfelves + and

becaufe number is nothing elf but a repetition of Unity,

Jet.us firft confider Unity ic felf. For Unity doth fimply

go through every number, and is the common meature, foun.
tain, and originall of all numbers, contains every number
jeyned together init felf intirely, the beginner of every mul-
titude, alwayes. the fame, and unchangable : whence alfo be.
ing multiplyed into it felf, produceth nothing bat it felf : ‘itis
ind ivifible, void of allpares: Bucifit feem at any time to be
divided, ic is not cut, but indeed Multiplied into Unities :
yet none of -thefe Unicies is greater or leffer then the
whole Unity , as a part is lef then the whole: Ic isnot

- therefore Multiplyed into parts, but into it felf : There
fore, fome called it concord , fome piety , and fome
friendthip, which is forknic, that ic cannot be cut. into parts
But Martians, according to che opinion of Ariftorle faith,
is mamed Cupid, becanfe it is made one alone, and willl.
wates bewailit felf, and beyond it felfit hath nothing , but
beifig void of all haughtinefs, or coupling, turns tts prope
hearsintoic It is therefore the one beginning,,and end
“OF, all chings, neither hath ic any. beginning, or endie fell:

Nothing's before one, nothing is after one, and. beyond it

isnothing, and allchings which are, defire chat one, becaule
allthings proceeded from one, and that all things may be the
it js. neceflary. that. they partake of that one :. And asal
things proceeded of one, into manythings, fo all things
-deavourto return.ro chat onc, from which they proceeded ;

is inecefary that they (hould put off multitude. One therefore

is referred tothe high ‘Ged, whofeeing he is one, and
_ merable,yet creates innumerable things of himfelf,and contains
them within himfelf. There is therefore one God, one worl

@£ the one God, Sun of the one world, alfo one Phosnit

inthe World, one King amongft Bees , one Leader:

rr

i =
q
¢
¢
‘
“4

& Cranes

n
one all become- mortafl, from that one deus (brift they are
regenerated : and.as faith Paw/, one Lord,. ily
Baptifm, one jand Fatheriofall, one mediatorbetwixr
God and man, one ‘moft high Creator, who is overall, by
all, and.inus all. For ch |
all, and we inhim : one Lord 7e/ms Chrift;, by.whomall, -a:
weby him : one God Holy Ghoft, into whom all, and we

Flocks of Catel,one Ruler amongftheards of Beafts,
follow one.and many other Animalls honour Unity; Amongft 4
the Members of the body there is one Principle by which all it 43
the reft are guided, whether it be the head, or ( as fome will ) 2
theheart. There is one Element: overcoming, and penetra-},
ting all chings, wz Fire. Fire. cre is one thing created of God.=
the fubject of all wondring,which is on Earth,or in Heaven,it is a
a@tually Animal, Vegetable,and Minneérall,every where found, |
known by few,catled by none by its proper name, but covered
with figures,and Riddles, without which neither |
Natural] Magick, cam attain to their compleat end, omper a
J

OF Occult Phil phy.

©:-

One Divine effence,
fountain of all vertues
and power swhole name
exprefied with one mo

Gmple

In ineelle@all
world,

In

the Celeftial world.

‘One
ence, the firft Creatur
fountain of lives. .

1One Kin at bears

One fubjea, and inftru.
‘ment of all vercues,na-

and fupernaturall,

living, and laf

Ofie Princé of Rebelli-
on, of Angels, aad dark

nefs,

> “
Be” | The Scale of Unity.
—
Intheexemplaty
a 3 The foul of the world,
| e Sun
fj
A
he Philofopher
T i rs Stone
af
ld. The Heare

nall world Lucifer

Book If.’ Of Occult Philofophy)
| Of the Number of Two, and the Scale thereof. ra

He firft Number is of two, becaufe it is the firft Multitude, _
A it-can be meafured by no number befidesunity alone, ;
the common meafure ofall Numbers: It is notcompounded -
of Numbers,but of one unity only ; neither is ic called a nam-~

ber uncompounded, but more properly not compounded: |
The Number of three is called the firlt Number uncompound-

ed: But che Number of two is che firt branch ofunity, and

the firft procreation: Hence it is called generation, and
and an imaginable Corporation, the proof of the firlt moti-.
on, the firlt form of parity: the number of the firlt equali-.
ty, extremity, and diftance betwixt, and therefore ofpecu-
liar equity, and the:proper a thereof, becaufe it confilts of
two equally poyfed: and it is called the Number of Science, |

and Memory, and of light, and: the number ofman, whois. * \

calledanother, and the lefler World: itis alfo:called: the:
_ number of charity, and mutuall love, of marriage, and focie-:
ty, asit 1s faid by ehe Lord, Two fhall be onefiefh. And:
Solomon faith : It is better that. two be together then one;:
for they have a benefit. by their mutuallfociecy Ifonethalf
fall, he fhall be fapported by the other. Wotohimthacis:
alone, becaufe when he falls he hatty not-another-co help him
_andif two fleep together, they fhall warm: one the other’:
how fhall one be hoe alone? and ifany prevaile againit him;
tworefithim. Andit iscalled the number of Wedlock and
Sex; for there are two fexes, Mafculine, and Feminine s-and.
two Doves bring forth two Eggs, out of the firlt of whichis _
hatched the Male,our of the fecond the Female. It is alfocalled.
the midle, that. is capable, that is good, and bad, partaking,
and the beginning of divifion, of Multitude, and diltin@ion,
and fignifies matter. This is alfo fometimes the number of

cord, and confufion, of misfortune, and uncleannefs; whenge —
Saint Hierom againit Fovian:ss that therefore itwasnot.

—

a
a
rv
»
a2
As

e

Of Occult Philofopby. Book I

two Olives dropping oyle, in Zachariah , two natures

fpoken in the fecond day of the creation of the world, and
Go

‘as I faid, the number of two, is a number of unclean- |

_ bring mifchiefs of evill {pirits to them that travell by night..

producing a living foul,eiz. Barth, and Water.

id faid, That ic was good , becaufe the uumber of-two is
evill. Hence alfo it was,that God commanded that all unclean
Animals fhould go into the Ark by cuuples: becaufe

nefs, and itis moft unhappy in their Soothfayings, efpecially
if thofe things, from whence the Soothfaying is taken, be
turnall, or Martiall,for thefe two are accounted by the Aftro-
logers unfortunate. It is alfo reported,that the number of two.
doth caufe apparitions of Ghofts, and fearfull Goblins, and

Pythagoras (as-Enfebius reports ) faid, that Unity was God,
‘anda good intellect; and that Duality was a Divell, and
an evill incelie&, in whichis a material] multicude ; where.
fore the Pythagorians fay, that two is nota number,bur a cer-
tain confufion of unities. And P/utarke writes, that the Pytha-
gorians called unity Apollo,and two, {trife, and boldnefs ; and
three, Juftice, whichis the highelt perfeftion, and isnotwith-
out many myfteries. Hence there were two Tables of the Law
in Sina, two Cherubins looking tothe Propitiatory in AZofes, .

in Chrift, Divine, and Humane; Hence c%ofes faw two
appearances of God,viz. his face, and back-parts, alforwo ~
Teltaments, two commands of. Love, two firlt dignities,
two firlt »twokinds of Spirits, good, and bad, two in-
telie€tuali createres, an Angell, and foul, two great lights,
two Solftitia, two equinodtials, two poles, two Elements,

j
d
A
ore
bi
‘ >
¢

OF

‘The Scale of the Number of twe.

Theological!
condiiceth to the Ce

of God « ex-|
\{n the Intelle@uall AnAngell. ‘The Soul Two intelligible fub-
theCeletiall world) The Sun, The Moon. Too
In the Elementary Barth, The Water, |Two
world, | ing 2 living foul, |
Inthe leffer world, |The Heart, The Brain, Tw nal sof
In the Infetnall foul. [Beemeth
ing. gnafhi wo
\ damned.
Of the of three and the Seale here

E number of three isan
number, a number.of perfection, a powerfull num.
ber. .For there are three perfons in.God, are three

in Religion, Hence it is

that this. number

cemonies of God, Religion; that
by the folemnity ‘of whieh, and

Odd
pee

al
f
e
r.
»
i

Phil “Book |

“odd numbers to the Ge delight are.

And the itin their fan@iifications, and
Se cations, whence in Virgil,

The fame did cleanfe, and wa[o With Water pare.

Andi it is molt fit inbindings, or hence that of ri

Fa with thefe rbreads,Wwhich are,
“Bout th ah thy image bear.

“And a little afer po

Knots, Amaryllis, tye of
Then fay, bonds I Rei Venus

Jpake three words which cans d {weet at Will,
ak he troubled the raging Waves fland fill.
ae And in Pliny it was the, cuftome in every medicine to {pit
= |... with three deprecations, andhénce to be cured. The number of
ae three is perfected with three Augmentations,long, broad, and
deep, beyond “which ‘there isno progreffion of dimenfion,
whence the firftMomber is called fquare.. Hence it is {aid that to
‘that'hath thrée‘meafures, and to 4 {quare number,no-
added. Wherefore Ariftoricin the beginning of
— | peeches concerning Heaven, cals it as it were a Law, &ccor-
dite towhich' all things difpoled. For Corporeall, and
— things confilt of thteé things, beginning,middle,

asT the world is perfe@ed :

‘ex * +2
R
~— L
x
“a

Book FF. Of Ocenle Philofophy.
hich many call fate, and che execution of thems to the fruit,
incréafe, and a due diftribution of the tncreafe. Fhewhole
 meafure of time is. concluded in thre¢,viz. Paft,prefent, to
come; Ali magnitude.is contained in three;line,faperficies,and
body, every body confifts of three Intervals, length, bredth,
thicknefs. Harmony contains three confents in time, Diapafon,
Hemiolion, Diateffaron. There are alfochree kinds of fouls,
Vegetative, fenficive, and imtelleétuall. And as faith the
phet, God orders the world by number, weight, and meafure, —
and the number of three is deputed to the Ideali forms there-
of, asthe number of two is tothe procreating matter, and —
unity to God the maker of it. Magicians doconftitute three
Princes of the world, Oroma/is, Mitris,. Sraminis (3.e.) God, -
the Mind, and the Spirit. By the three fquare or folid, the three —
numbers of nine of things produced-are diftributed,zsz. of the
fuperceleftiall into nine orders of Intelligencies : of Celeftiall
intonine Orbs: of inferiours into nine kinds of generable,
and corruptible things. Laftly in chis ternall Orb, vsz. twen-
ty &ven, all Muficall proportions are included , as Plato, and
Preclus, dq at large difcourfe. And the number of three
hath ina harmony of five, the grace of the firftyoyce. Alfo
in Intelligencies there are three Hierarchies of Angelicall'ipi-
rits. There are three powers of Intelleétuall creatures,
mory,mind, and will. There are three ordersof che bleffed,
viz. Of Martyrs, Confeflors, and Innocents. There are three
quaternions of: Celeftiall Signs, viz. Of fixt, moveable, and.
common, asalfo of houfles.viz. centers, fucceeding,and falling.
_ There are alfo threefaces, and headsin everySign, and three
Lords of each triplicity. There are chree fortunes amongit the ;
Planets. Three graces,amongft the Goddefles. Three Ladiesof- =
deftiny amongft the infernall crew. Three Judgés-Three furies.
Three- headed Cerberus. We read alfa of athricédoubleHe-
cate. Three. moneths of the Virgin Disna. ‘Three, pertons're

the fuperfubftanciall Divinity. . Three times;, Nature,:

and, Grace, Three: Theelogicall vert
Charity, was three) days in thd Whales belly ; and {p>
many was Chriftinthe graves

Ne
+f
= > «
‘

~ OF Occult Philofophy.

“Book

“The Scale of abe Namber of three.

In theOrt |The Father

-\Supreme.

 He@ual world Innocents.

The Son.

The.
hoft,

\The name
God with}
letters, |:

| idle.

Moveable.

lta the Ce-
leftial world

f the day;|

Contes.

Three Hierar-
of

els

bee deg
f the beled.

iIn the Ele

which the

The breait,
‘where is ‘the
t, the feat
life san{wer.

The belly, .
fa ‘Three. parts
culty of gene
ration 4 ari
the enitall.
(oO. "the Ce. members, an

§
ces
Martyrs-

Three-quater-

| tons of-.
Fixe. ommon.  |Signs.
peccesding Falling. Three

| jhoufes.

Three Lords
of the Tripli

Simple, |Compound- |Thrice degrees

world.

a

it

iin the leffer|Inrelle

| ering to

world, leftiall world. iwering the.

Bn the in- e&o. Megera.. Crefiphone. ‘nall furies.

fernal Acacus. Rhadaman- |Three. infer-
Wicked. Apoftates, us. | nall Judges:

Book If. of Occult Philofopby.

- Of the Number of Fowr, and the Scale thereof.
Tt Pythagorians call the Number of four Tetraétis, and
- prefer it before all che vertues of Numbers, becaufe ic is

the foundation, and root of all other numbers ; whence alfo
all foundations, as well in artificiall things, asnaturall, and di-

vine,are four fquare, as we (hall fhew afterwards: andit-~

fignifies folidity, which alfo is demonftrated by a four fquare
figure. For the number four is the firft four fquare plain,
which confilts of two proportions, whereof the tirltis of one

totwo, the latcet of two to four, and it proceeds by a double

proceffion and proportion, viz. of one to one, and of two to
two, beginning at a unity, and ending at a quaternity: which

proportions differ in this, that according to Arithmatick,.

they are unequall to one the other : but according to Geome- ~

try are equall.. Therefore a four {quare is afcribed to God the
Father, and alfo-contains the mylterie of the whole Trinity :
for by its fingle proportion, viz. by the firlt of one to one,

the unity of the. paternal fubftance ts fignified, from which

proceeds one Son, quali to him; by the next proceffion,

-alfo fimple, viz. of two to two, ‘is fignified by thefecond

proceffion the Holy Ghoft from both, that the Son be equal
to the Father by the firlt proceffion; and the Holy Ghoft be
equall to both by the fecond: proceffion. Hence that foper-
excellent, and great name of the divine Trinity in God's

it is the afpiration He; fignifies ‘the proceeding of the fpirit-
fromboth: for He being duplicated, terminates both fylla-
bles,‘and the whole name, but is pronounced fova, asfome — ~
will, whence that of the heathen, which che

did pi@tare wich four ears, whetice the number four is the foun-

tain, aad’ head of the whole divinity. And the Pythagoriats
call ic the perpetual! fountain of nature for there'arefour
degrees in the Scale of nature, be, to live, to be fen-

<> ° <

a 4
>? a, = :
»
ith ad, V
He, where
written with four letters, v2. Jo é, an ,
a
‘eink

OF Occult Philofophy.

‘Book

‘

{In the: Ele

~The Scale of abe Nomber of three.

‘adai. The with}
1Ghoft ec letters,

In the Intel-}Supreme-

 He@ual world Innocents.

Midle,

Thee Hlerar.|
ree degrees}

f the

imentary
world.

‘n't Be,

|The belly,

where the ‘Three
culty of gesie hin(weri
is, ari

of the damned,

Martyrs.

Three-quater-

fons of-.

C Moveable. |Fixt. ommon. |Signs. |

4 the Corners. Falling. Three q

leftial the day:| NoGurnall, {Partaking. jniomso

Three Lords

ae { of the Tripli

Simple, |Compound- | Thrice degrees

led, pounded. lof Blements.

which the |The breait, parts,

the lefler|Inrelle@ phere is ‘the che

NOrld. ~~~ Tetows, ~an-fheart, the fear

ering to jof life,anfwer world...

the inrellee ing co-.the Ce.'mem ers, an-j.

x -{&uall world, |leftiall world. fwering the E-

[AleGto. Megera.. |Ctefiphone. ‘wall furies.

mi 2veb 2

La

in

ow

a

Of the Number of Fowr, and the Scale thereof

He Pythagorians call the Number of four Tetraétis, and

- prefer it before all the vertues of Numbers, becaufe ic is
the foundation, and root of all other numbers ; whence alfo
all foundations, as well in artificiall things, asnaturall, and di-

vine,are four fquare, as we (hall fhew afterwards: andit-~

fignifies folidicy, which alfo is demonftrated by a four fquare
figure. For the number four is the firft four fquare plain,
which confilts of two proportions, whereof the tirltis of one

totwo, the latcer of two co four, and it proceeds by a double -

proceffion and proportion, viz. of one to one, and of two to
two, beginning at a unity, and ending at a quaternity: which

proportions differ in this, that according to Arithmatick,.
they are unequall to one the other : but according to Geomie-

co God the

try are equall.. Therefore a four {quare is afcri
Father, and alfo-contains the mylterie of the whole Trinity :

for by its fingle proportion, viz. by the firlt of one to one, |

the unity of the. paternalt fubftance is fignified, from: which
proceeds one Son, equall to him; by the next proceffion,

alfo fimple, viz: of two to cwo, ‘is fignified by thefecond —

- proceffion the Holy Ghoft from both, thar. the Son be equall
to the Father by the firlt proceffion; and the Holy Ghoft be
equall to both’ by the fecond proceffion. Hence that fuper-
excellent, and great name of the divine Trinity in God's

written with four letters, vis, Jod, He, and Yaw; Hewhere

it is the afpiration He; fignifies ‘the proceeding ofthe {pirit-
fromboth: for He being duplicated, terminates both fyila- —

bles, ‘and the whole name, ‘but is pronounced ova, asfome

will, whence that “Pow
did pi€ture wich four ears, whetice the number four is the foun-

tain, aad’ head of the whole divinity. And the Pythagoriahs —
call ic the perpetual! fountain of nature for there arefour

is of che heathen, which che Atigients: ~~

a
a
a
a
e
iy
‘
‘
“Ae
«
J
»
e :

Of Occult Philofophy.  BookIl.

fible, counderftand. There are four motions in nature, viz.
afcendent, defcendent, going forward, circular. There are four
Corners in the heaven, viz. rifing, falling, the midle of the
heaven, and che bottome of it. There are four Elements un-
der Heaven, viz. Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth ; according to
thefe there are four triplicities in Heaven: There are four
firft qualities under the Heaven, viz. Cold, Heat, Drine&,
and Moyftnefs,from thefe are the four Humours,Blood, Flegm,
Choller, Melancholy. Alfo the year is divided into four
parts, which are the Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter ;
alfo the wind is divided into Eaftern, Weftern, Northern, |
and Southern, Thereare alfo four rivers of Paradife, and fo
many infernall. Alfo the number four makes up all know-
bedge-firlt it fillsup every fimple progrefs. of numbers. with:
four termes, vse. with one, two, three, and four confti-
tuting the number ten, It fills up every difference of num-
bers, che fir even, and conteining the fir odd in it, Ic
. hath in Mofick, Diateflaron, the grace ofthe fourth voice.
 Alfo it conceins. che inftramenc of fourftrings, and a
Pythagorean Diagram, whereby are foundout firft ofall
muficall tunes, and all harmony of Mufick. For Double,
Treble , fourtimes double, one and. halfe, one and athird
‘part, a. concord of all, a double concord of all, of fivejof
fous, and all confonancy is limited. within. the bounds of
the number four. It doth 2ifo contein the whole of Mathe-
ticks in four terms, viz. point, line, fapesficies, and pro-
fundiry. Itcomprehends all. nature in four terms, 22, fab-
ftance, quality, quantity, and- motion, Alfoatlt naturali Phy-
 dofophy, in. which are the feminary vertues of nature, che na-
fprin the growing form, and the compofitum..
Metaphylick is comprehended in four bounds, viz. being,
 effence, vertue, and action. Morall Phylofophy is compre-
ended withfour. vertues, viz. prudence , joltice, fortitude,
semperance, It hath' alfo the power of jultice : hence fout-
fold. Jaw,. of providence from God; fatall, fromthe foul of
theworld; of nature from Heaven: of prudence, from man.

a
as
‘

Thereare alfo four judiciary powers inall things being,

‘
er

pry

Book IT.

the he intelled, difcipline, of line, opinion, ‘and fenfe. Tc hath alfo great
power inall myfteries. Hence the Pycthagorians did ratifie. .

the number four with an oath, if i¢ were the cheifeft ground:

whereon their faith was srounded, and their belief might be

confirmed. Hence it was called the which

is expreffed in chefe verfes.
I with pure
That's holy, andthe fountain ofuhture
Eternall, parent of the ————— ; f

Alfo there are four rivers of Patadife ; ; Gofpele re

Hebrews received the cheifeflt nam
leccers. Alfo che Egyptians, Arabjans, Pebhians, Magicians, ~
Mahumitans, Grecians, Tufcans , Latineswrite the naifie of.
God with only four letters,
Orfi, Abdi, %is,Efar, Denes

Orpheus his divinity, it ts faid chat Neptwnes Chariots aré

drawn with four horfes. There are alfo four kinds of divine —
| — ptoceeding from feverall deities, viz. from thé alae 34

Diony , and Veni. Alfo the Pro
faw four be the river Chobar, and four
four wheels. | ah itt Daniel, four great beafts did 2
from the Sea, and-four winds did fig
ons four beatt were full of eyes, before, and behind : fandig:
es about the Throne of God, and four Angels;to whom -
the Faith, and the Sea, idftandupon
out corners of the Barth, holding the four winds, chat

upon any Tree.

The Scale of the Rember fowr, anf Wersng she four Elements,

Alla, Sire,
Lacedémonians-
wont to paint fwpiter wit four wings. Hencealfoin _

t. And inthe

rectived

from four Evangelifts rt the whole Church. The... ....
of God written With

a
°
a.
‘
A

OF

as

_.yDomjnations. ~Principalitics.
Powers. . Archangels. {Mar
Verwes, Angels,

Four Triplig--Ari its,

rpius, lwould, where is

-of the Ligh, jAgility.

‘

Four qualition? | Moyfture. 1c

The he Welt.

r

The name: In the Ofigmalr,
God with ‘fc orld,
lewers. . the Law of pro-
| vidence.
our T icGual world
or intelligible ones: whence the
Hierarchies. a-
ll Law.
Four Angels ru- ~
ling over thecor. | ONIN
ners of the Sichael. Raphaels Uriel.
world.
Four” Triplici-[Dan. ~|Jehuda. Manaile- Reuben.
ties of the tribesiAffer. fachar. Benjamin. Simeon.
ties of A the el- Mathew.” James. the rew.
Solidity., |
‘Law of genera- |
ryncis.-
tion
W inter, utumne. |
[Che North |The South. |
j Ctals. Stones.

Book OF Occult Philofophy.

che Elements, in Seeds. Flowers, |

What in .Me- Gold, andI oppers and | quickfilver. |Lead,& Silver.

tals. Ton. | 3

Heavy, dark.

{tones, Bright, ad L

com Mind,. Spiric-

—— ~

| Four morall vers Pact

iit
of
divels, offenfi In she infernal :

is

Four Princesoff
{pirits, upon

che
| of she wee

me,

Clear, and |
ongedicd. | |
Jn the leffer
The Soul. The body. wor id,vs?. 4
— the Law of
Four powers of rhe ‘Intelle@. Phantafy- Senfe. prudence.
powers. Faith. Opinion. Experience.
Rivers, Phiegeton. Coeytus, Styx.
Paymon. maymon.

a

pian

186° “OF Philofply.

_..yDomjnations. “Principalities
| Archangels.

Powers.
Verwes,

Mart

ties ‘tribes
of Iftacl.

Four Trip!

i

| Four qualities

{ Four Eleni¢nts/!

‘
Fone quali

Foe Kinds
A a

Law. of ; of genera

4W inter,
rhe North. }
| Mera.
swimming,

The cameo | In the Original”

 § God with world , whence.
letters» the Law of
Four Triplicicie: bi
ae or intelligible herubin. icGual world,

Four Angels ru- - |
ling over thecore NN
a ners of the Michael. Raphaels Uriel-
world.
3 Four rulers of NON
chuda. Manaile- Reuben.
Four  Triplig- Aries. Gemini. Cancer. n the Celéftiall®
CO OF Signs. Libra. > Scorpius, world, where is
Diaphanouf- ‘JAgility.
Drynefs.-
Four-cornersof- |
the World. (The The Welt.

Book

What  anfwer
the Elements, in
Plantse

Seeds.

Flowers,

Gold » and I
ron.

Bright, and.

What in
tals.

What in ftones,

Copper, and
in.

The Mind,

Four
ofman.

Four powers of: the’
the Soul. :

Four morall vere
tues.

Light and.
aniparent-

rhe spirie-

| Roots.

Lead, & Silver.

Heavy, dark.

Science. pinion Experience.

| A four-fold
pit. |

| Fou
divels, offenft
in the

Samael

four
Rivers,

a

Four Princesoff)
(pirits, upon

\ Js

«
a4
b

Be

| the infernall
is

and pu

Clear, and 4
In the leffer =
The Soul. The body. world,vé7.
. enic- |
Reafon- Phantafy | prudence.
Four Judiciary Faith. ; ee
powers.
Juftice. Temperance. Prudence. Fortitude, |
The fenfes an- |
fwering to the Sight. . |Hearing. Taft,and fimel./Touch. |
Eleme nts- | |
Four Elements:
of mans body, ~|Spirit.. Acth. Humours. |
| Animal. italll. -|Generatives |Naturall.
Gholler, Flegme. Melancholly- -}
inlence: Nimblenes~ Dulnefs - Slownels..
Pa
| | aa
Azaz¢l. Azacl. Mahazael.

reft,according fo their ag¢.Alfo.this number hath
bos great power in expiation

a that. all thin

»
Pd
o's

* ot
wt *

‘He. number five is of no fmail force, for it confifts of the
firfteven, andthe firt odd, asofa Female, and Male
_-. Bor an odd number is the Male, and the even the Female,
Whence Arithmeticianscall that the Father, and this the Mo.
> ther. Therefore the number five is of no final! perfe@ion, of
--yertue, which pees from the mixtion of thefe aymbers :
It is alfo the jut midle of the univerfal number,zz. ten. For if
yon divide the number ten,there will be nine and one,or eight
and ewo,orfeven and three,or fixand four, and every colle@i.
~ on makes the number ten, and the exact midie alwaies is the
umber five, and its equadiftant; and therefore ic is called
by the Pythagoreansthe number of Wedlock, as alfo of jultice,
 becanfe.ic divides the number ten in an even Scale. There be
five fenfes in man, fight, hearing, {melling, tafting::. five pow-
ers in the foul, Vegetative, Senfitive , Concupifcible, Iray
{cible, Rationall : five fingerson the hand five. wanderin
Planets in the heavens, are five-fold
tenms in every fign. In Elements there are five kinds of
 mixt bodiés,wiz. Stones; Metals, Plants, Ani
mals; and-fomany kinds of Animals, asmen, four-foore
beatts, creeping, fwimming, flying, And.therevare five: kinds
by which all chings are made of God, viz. Effence, the fame,
another, fenfe, motion. The Swallow brings forth: burfiyg
which (he feeds. with equicy, beginning with

A

: For in holy things it dtivesaway
~ Diwels.. In-naturall chings,ic expels poyfons. Ic ts alfo called thq
. mumber of fortunatenefs, and favour; and it is the feale;of

Ofthe crofs,yga eminent with the principall

hs vouchiafed co'keepithe {carsin his glorifyed body.
 Theheathen Philofephers did dedicate it as facred to ALercury,

Of the Numoerl ive, ana the Scale thereof.
i

efteeming the vertue ofitto be fo much more excellent then —

the number four, by how mucha living thing is more excel-

-fentthen athing without life. For in thisnumbertheFather
Noah found favour withGod, and was preferved in the floud
of waters. Inthe vertue ofthis number e4brabam, being an -
hundred years old, begat a Son of Sarah, being ninety years
old, anda barren Woman, and paft child bearing,-and grew ~~

up to be a great people. Hence in time of grace the nameof

divine omnipotency is.called upon wi
time of nature thename of God was called upon with three

letters. Sadai : in time of the Law, the ineffable

name of God was expreffed with four, letters F779 infteed

of which the Hebrews exprefs °° Adonai : in time of grace.
the ineffable name of God was with five letters yw The/w,
which is called upon with no lefs myfterie then thar of three

Letters 1.
mile
Z

letters. Forin

The
all
”
z
Pie
¥
o
on ~
cy -

of the Number of five.

Spirits of the firlt Spirits of the fe-|$
iérarchy callédcend Micrarchy (Hierarchy, called|Souls of Ce-|Heroesor the Inrel-

Gods, or the Sons called Intelligen- Angels which arelleftiall bodics, bleffled fouls: [leQual
God, cits. | 3 ee werld

Of the third}

ry

—

fall world.

ss

—

cult

wy

st.
—
Ss
co
«
ge
tr <
—<
& tri
* ves

3 | ~ ‘>
a

Book

the Number fix, andthe Scale thereof.
Ix isa number of perfe@tion, becaufe it isthe moft perfe@ ==

Sin nature, inthe whole courfeof numbers, from oneto
ren, and it alone is fo perfect, that in the colletionofits _
arts ic refults the fame, neither wanting, nor abounding,
For if the parts thereof, viz. the midle, the third, andfixe
part,which are three, two,one, be gathered together, they per-
fectly fill up the whole body of fix, which perfection all the
other numbers want: Hence by the Pythagorians it is {aid to |
be altogether applyed to generation, and Marriage, andis . -~ —
called the Scale of the world. For the worldismadeofthe = ~~
number fix, neither doth ic abound, or is defe@tive. Hence =
that is,becaufe the world was finifhed by Godthefixtrday. For
the fixt day God faw all the things which he had made, and me
they were very good. Therefore the heaven, and ctheearth,
and all che Hoft thereof were finifhed.It is alfo called the num-

ber of man,becaufe the fixt day man was created: anditisalfO = =
the number of our redempcion,for the fixt day (brift fuffered
for our redemption: whence there is a great affinity betwixt
the number fix and the Crofs , labour , and fervitude : :
hence it is commanded. in the Law,—that in fix days the

work is¢o be done, fix days AZanna is to be gathered,fix years
the ground was to be fown,and that the Hebrew fervant fhould —.. —-—-
ferve his Mafter fix years; fix days the glory ofthe Lord
red upon Mount Sina,covering it with acloud: theCherubifts - ©
had (ix wings,6. circles in the Firmament, Artick, Antartick,two ra |
Tropicks, Equinoétiall, & Eclipticall, fi wandring Planets,Sa-
turn, Fupiter, Mars Venus, Mercury the Moon, runningthrough
the latitude of the Zediack , on both fides the Eclyptick., There
are fix fubftantificall qualities in the Elements,vsz. Shatpnels,
Thinnefs,Motion,and che contrary to thefe DulnefS, Thicknefs,

Reft. There are fix differences of pofition, Upwatds, Down.
wards, Before, Behind, on the right fide; one the left fide, There.
are fix naturall offices,without which nothing can be,viz. Mage
nitude, Colour, Figure, Intervall, Standing Motion, Alfgafolid
Figure of any four fqaare ching hath fix fuperhcies, There are
fix Tones of all harmoay, vz. 5, Tones, & 2.half

—_ e

make one tone,which isthe fixe

Occult. Ph

Boo

in the intelli.

Scale of the Namber fix,
Thrones. |Dominations|Powers.- ix orders Angel,

: |Vertues.
| inferieurs.

planets

cy he
‘world.

The Incelieg, emory.

‘in the Cele. Saturn, Jupiter. Mars, Venus, ercury. |The Moon. through the latitude of}
In the Ele-  Reft. Thinnefs. x fabstantificall qua-

mental world. | of Elements,

IMegalefius

— |
oa. =
¢ ~
—
t
©
c
PF
a
©
be
Pe
‘

— rs
A
be |

>»?

Of the Number Seaven, and the Scaletber@if.
Of the Num ¢ Scale thereof,

THe number feaveti ts of various, and manifold power, for
- itconfifts of one, and fix; or of two, and five, or of three —
and four, and tt hath Unity, as it were the coupling together
of two threes : -whence if we conftdér the feverail parts there-
of, and the joyning together of chem, without doubt we thall
confefs that itis as wellby the joynmg together oF the parts.
thereof, as by its fulnefs'aparc. moft full of all Majefty. And
the Pythagorians call the 'Vehiculom of mans life, whichic
“doth not recetve from its parts fo, as it perfects by its proper
right of its whole, for it contains: body, and fopl, for the
body confifts“of foar Elements, and is endowed ‘with four
qualittes: Alfo-the number three refpetts che foul, by reafon
of its threefold power, 22x. rational, irafcible, ‘and con-
cupifcible. The number feaven therefore, ‘becaufe tt confilts of
three, and four, the foul to chebody, atid theyertue
of this number relates co thé generation of men, andit ciofech
man to be received, formed, brought forth, nourifhed, five,
and indeed altogetherto fubfift. For whenthe genicalifted
is recived in che womb of the woman, if ictemamthere
feaven hours after the effufion of it, itis certainthatitcwill
abide there for good Then'the firlt feaven dayesitiscgaga- .
lated, and isfit tofeceive the fhape of aman: then it produ-
ceth macure mfants, which are cafled infantsofthe feaventh
moneth, é. ¢. ‘bécaufe they are Worn the feaventh moneth. , ~~~
After the birth, the feaventh hour tryes wherher tt willlive pee ge
orno: for that ‘which flafl bear the breath ofthe afre after
that hour is conceived will tive. After feavendayesitcaftso®
Aftertwice feaven dayesitsfight beginsto move afeerthe,
light inthe third feavemth tt'turns its eyes, and wholefate =
freely. “After teeth: Afterthe = =
fecond feaventh monetiric fits without fear of failing: Alec

a ¥
= ‘
r
we

Occult Philofophy. If,
. "the third feaventh moneth it begins to fpeak: After the
'- fourth feaventh morieth it ftands ftrongly, and walks : after
_ the fifth feaventh moneth it begins to refrain fucking its Nurfe:
After feaven years its firlt teeth fall, and mew are bred. fitter
» for harder meat, and its fpeech is perfeéted :. After the fecond
feaventh year boys wax ripe, and chen is gene.
' gation: Atthe third feaventh year they grow to be menin
_ftature, and begin to be hairy, and become able, and {trong
- - for generation: At the fourth feaventh year they begin to
~  basrnifh, and ceafe co grow taller : Inthe fifth feaventh year
they attain to the perfection oftheir ftrength: The fixt feaven
_ .-year they keep their ftrength; The feaventh feaventh year
_ they attain to their urmoft deferetion, and wifdome, and the
perfect. age of men. But when they come to the tenth feaventh
year,where the number feaven is taken for acompleat number,
then they come to the common tearm of life, the Prophet fay-.
i _ ing, Our age is feaventy years. The utmoft hight of mans body
Bee _ . iS feaven feet. There are alfo feaven degrees in the body,
—- - which compleat the dimenfion of its altitude from the bot-
aS, tome to the top, viz. marrow, bone, nerve, vein, artery,
ficfh, skin. There are feaven, which by the Greeks are called
__ black members, the Tongue, the Heart, the Lunges, the
- Liver, the Spleen, and two Kidnies. There are alfo feayen
- principle parts of the body, the head, the breaft the hands, che
_, feet, and the privy members. Ic is manifeft concerning breath,
and meat, that without drawing of the breath the life doth.
_ doth not endure above feaven hours : and they that are ftar-
ved with famine,live sot above feaven dayes. The Veins alfo,
and arteries ( as Phyfitians fay ) are moved by the feayenth
fwimber. Alfo judgements in difeafes are made with greater
__. Manifeftation upon the feaventh dayes, which.Phyfitians call
efiticall, +. e. jadigiall. Alfo of feaven portions God Creates
— > thefoul, as divine P/ato witnefleth in Timew, The foulallo
“ geceives the body by feaven degrees. All difference of voices
feaventh degree, after which there isthe fame
are feaven modulations of the voyces,
Dinteflaron, Diapente with a tone, Dia-

A
’

wo

Book II. Of Occult Philofophy. 195
pente with a half time, and Diapafon. There isaffo in Ce- ~ ,
jeftialsa moft potent power of the number feven. Forfecing
there are four corners of the Heaven Diametrically looking —
one towards the other, which indeed is accounted a moft fujf,
and powerfull afpet, and-confilts of the number feven, For
itis made from the feventh Sign, and makesaCrof, the moft .
powerfull figure ofall,of which we thall {peak initsdue place.
But thisyou muft not be ignorant of, that che number fever

hath a greatCommunion with the Crofs. By the fame radiation,
and number the folftice is diftant from Winter,and the Winter
equinoétium from the Summer, all which are done by feven
Signs. There are alfo feven Circles inthe Heaven,according to
the longitudes of the Axel-tree. There are feven Stars about the
Articke Pole,greater, and lefler,called Charls. Wain, alfo feven
Stars called the Pleiades, and feven Planets, according to thofe
feven dayes conftituting a weck. The Moon is the feventhof the
Planets & next tous obferving this number more then the reft,
this number difpenfing the motion, and light thereof. -Forin
twenty cight dayes it runs round the Compafs of che whole
Zodiack, which numberof dayes, the number feven, with its
feven tearms,viz. from-one to feven, doth make,and fillpp,as
nfuch asthe feveral numbers, by adding rothe Antecedents,and

makes four times fever dayes,in which the Moon runsthrough,

and about all the Jongitude, and laticude of the Zodiackby
meafuring, and méafuting again: with che like feven of dayes it_
difpenfeth its light,bychanging it;Forthe firltfeyen dayesunto.
the middle as it were of the divided world, it increafeth; the’ st
fecond feven dayes it fils its whole Orb with light ;° the third

by decreafing is again contracted into a:divided Orb ; but af-.
ter the fourthfeven dayés, it isrenewed’ with the laft diminu- -
tion of its light, and by the fame feven of dayes ic difpofeth —
the increafe, and decreafe of the Seay for in the firtfevenof -
the increafe of the Moon;it is by lirtle leffenad ; inthe fecond »
by destees iticreafed + but'the third is like the firft, and the’
fourth doth the fame: a$ thé ‘fecond. Jt isalfo'applyed to
turn, which afcending from the lower, is the feventh Planet, © Se SS Lee
which betokens reft to which the fevencth:day aletibed;~-

| an

» -&

“owhich fignifies the feven thoufandth, wherein (as fohawit,
neffeth) the Dragon, which is the Divell, and Satan, being
_ bound, men fhallbe quiet, and lead a peaceable life, Moreover.
call fever the number of Virginity, becaufe.
the firft is chat which is, neither generated, or generates, nei-
_ ther can it be divided into’two equall parts, fo as to
be “generated of another number repeated, or. being.
doubled to bring forth any other number of ic felf, whichis
contained within the bounds of the number ten, whichis.ma.
. miffettly the firt bonnd.of numbers, and therefore they dedica-
the number feven to Palas, It hath alfo.in Religion molt.
| -potentfigns of its elteem, and it is called the number of an,
 @ath. Hence amongit the Hebrews to {wear is called Septe-
name, (4, ¢. ). to. protelt by feyen. So Abrabam,when. he made.
Covenant with-Abimelech, appointed fven Ewe, Lambs.for
atelttmony. Icis alfo calledthe number of bleffednefs, or of

Ovhrice, andfouctimesblefed!

in foul, and body. The feventh day the Creator refted.
- work, wherefore-chis day. was. by Ado/fes called
Sabbath(z. ec.) the day,ofireft ; hence it-was thar Chrift reft-.

€d the feveachday.in the grave, Alfochis number hath agreat.
communion with the Crofs, asisabove fhewed, as alfo with.

Chef. Fer in, Chrift.isall our bleffednefs, reft, and;felicity
befides,it is moft:convenient in purifications. Whence. Apulei:,
Faith, and 1, put my, felf forchwith into the bath -of the,
Lobe par my head feven-cimes under, the |
And the Leprous perfon that.wasto be cleanfed, was.
rinkled even times with the bload:of aSparrow; and Elifa

the Beophet, as. it is written.in. the Second, Book. of the

Kings, faith unto.the Leprousprefon; .Go, and wath. chy (elf
_ Seven timesin, fordan, andthy ficth fhall be made. whole,. and.
thea thal tbe cleanied, and ir follows, a. little afer, And:
walhed, feven, times in jordan, according tothe
> pheslaying, and he was.cleanfed,  Alfoit is a numberof ror

P

to the Holy Ghoft, which the ‘Prophet Z/atah defcribes to be.
feaven fold, according to his gifts, viz. the fpirit of wifdom, |
and underftanding, the {pirit of counfell, and ftrength, the’
fpirit of knowledge, and holinefs, and the fpirit of the fear
ofthe Lord, which we read in Zachariah to be the feaven eyes’
of God. There are alfo feaven Angells {piritsftanding in- the’
prefence of God, astsreadin Tobias, and in the
feaven Lamps did burn before thei\Throne of God? and'feaven’
golden Candlefticks, and'in the midle thereof wasoneliketo,
the fon of man, and he had in his right hand feaven Scars: Allo _
there were feaven {pirits before che Throne of God,and feaven’
Angells {tood before the Throne,and there were givento them’
feaven Trumpets. And he faw a Lamb’ having feaven Horns,”
and feaven ¢yes,and he faw the book fealed with fave Sgt ee
when the feaventh’ feal was opened, there was fadefi-’
lencein heaven. Now by all what hath been faid, itis appae’
rent that the number feaven, amotigft che other numbers, may
defervedly be faid‘to be moftifull of Moreover’.
the number feayen’ hath great’conformity ‘with the

«

pentamce. and remiffion : Rence was ordeined the feaventh’

years for every fin,according td the opinion
wife man, fayiag , And ‘Dpon eVery finner feavenfold:
the feaventh-year there were grafted remiflions, and after full
feaven Years there was giving a full remiffion, asis readin
Leviticus. And Cbriff with feaven petirions finifhed his
of our fatisfaétion : hence: alfo it is called che number oFliber-
ty, becaufe the feaventh year the I7ebrew fervant did
liberty for. himfelf; Icis alfo moft ‘furabfe to divine praifes.”
Whence the Prophet faith, Seaven times aday do I praife
thee, becanfe of thy rightéous judgements, It is moreover
ealled the number of revenge, as faith the Scripture, and Cain 7
fhall be revenged feaven fold. And the Pfaimift faith, Ren- aa
der unto our Neighbours feaven fold ‘into their bofome,
reproach. Hence there are feaven wickednefits, as faith:
mon, and feaven wickeder fpirits taken, are read of in the Gof- :
pell. Ie fignifies alfo the rime of the prefent circle, becaufe ‘
it is finifhed in the fpace of feaven days. Alfo it is confecrated | Bs

gwelve; For as three, and four make feaven, fo
make twelve, which are the numbers of the celeftiall ims

and figns, ‘refulting from the fathe root, and” by. the
three partaking of the divinity, and by the nu
nature of inferiour things. There isin faced writ great
obfervance of this-number, before all others, and and
- very. great. are the myfteries thereof; many we have de-
ereed to reckon up here,repeating them. out of holy ‘writ,by
which it will eafily appear,that the number feaven doth fi pnifie
 geertain of facred mylteries.For we read in Genefs,chat
the feaventh was the day of the relt of thé Lord; & Enoch a pi-
ous,-holy man, was bg feaventh from Adam, and that there.
. another feaventh from’ Adam, a wicked man by
name Lamech, that had two WIVES ; and thae the fin of Cain
buld be abolifhed. the feaventh generation ? Asitis written,
Casethall be punifhed feaven fold and he that (hall flay Cain,
revenged feaven fold, to which the Mafter of
the Hiftory colleéts,. that there were feaven fins of
Allo, of all clean beatts feaven , were
che Ark, as: allo. of Fowles: And. ‘after. feayen
Lord rained’ upon the Earth, and upon the feaventh
the fountains of the deep wese broken up, anid the waters cove-
redthe Earth. Alfo Abraham gave to eAbimelech {eaven Ewe
‘Lambs: and Facob. ferved, feaven years for Leah, ‘and feaven
more, for Rachel : and Seaven cople of lfrael
death of in thé fame place,
2a of feaven Kine, and feaven Ears of Corn, feaveh years of
- plenty, andfeaven yearsof fearcity. Andin Exodus, the Sab-
38 both of Sabboths, the holy-reft co the Lord, is commanded t a
be on the feaventh day. Alfo onthe feaventh day AZo/es ceale
‘topray- On the feaventh day there thall be a folemnity of the
Lord, the feaverith year the go out free: feaven,
dayestec the Calf, and the Lamb be with ics damm ; the fea-
venth year fet the ground that hath been wae fix years, beat,
feaventh day fhall Sabboth,and a reft:the fea-
itis the thall Be called holy.

ofthe

~ all
—
te
e

mehoriall, Seaven
Lord, feaven ayes (hall che holy:
celebrated, feaven, dayes. in a year ingly
in the generations, In dk feaventh, moneth you fhallcele-
brate feafts, and thall dwell in Tabernacles, feaver, dayes,:
feaven times he tha!! himfelf ve

roly,
fhalf fhe be wafhed with running water, that is

ous: feaven times he fhall dip his finger.in the blood of a:bul-
lock : feaven times 1 will fmite you for your fins«.In Deu-
teronomy feaven people poffeffed. the of promife. There
is alfo read of a feaventh year of remiffion, and, feaven Candles
fet up on the South fide of the. Candlefticks. And in Numbers
it is that the fons of J/rael offered up feayen Ewe Lambs
without and that feaven dayes they did eat unleavened
bread, and that fin, was expiated with feayen Lambs,& a
and that the feaventh day was celebrated, and haly, ay
firft day of the feayénth moneth was obferyed ,.

and the feaventh moneth. of the fealt of Tabernacles,
Calves. were on. feaventh, day, and
rected feaven A}tars ; feaven da yes the filter of
went forth out of the Camp,, feayen dayeshe.thattous
ched a dead Carkafs was, unclean. And.in feaven pricfts
carried the Ark of the Covenant before the Holt, and
feaven, dayes. they went round the Ciries, and feayen trams
pets were proce the feaven Priefts,and on che feayenth day,
the feaven Prielts founded t the Trumpers., And in the book.of
is nuptials ven, dayes, and the feaventh day he pug fortha
Riddle. his he, was,bound with, feayen.gceen withs,
of his: head .were,fhaved, off, feaven:
epprefied, by the King of
kings, Elias prayed. and at,
the. aveath. behold.a, jittle, cloud feaven\
of Trael pitched over he Spiny —

‘
e
‘

and feaven’ dayes and nights fods friends fate with him on the —

day. the battelt- was feaven years famine |
threatened’ to” David for the pedples: ‘Murmucing
-feavemtimes the child neeftd; ‘that was Elifoa, and
feaven men were crucified together in the dayestigf the firft
—hartvelt Naaman was made clean with feaven walliings by
‘Elifoa, thefeaventh: moneth. Golfas was flain. And in Heller
weread, that che King of Perf had three Ewuxchs: and in ©
Tobias feaven dicen coupled’ with Sara the daughrer of
And in Daniel Nebucadnexzars Furnace was heated
feayen times hotter then it was ufed to be, and feaven Lions |
| were an the den, and the feaventh day came Nebucadnezzar.
Ja'ttie’ book of 70d there ismade mention of feaven fonsof 70h,

Earth.; and inthe fame place, In feaven troubles no evil! (hall
totich thee. In Ezra we read of Artaxerxes his {eaven coun-
fellers : and in the fame place the tramper founded : the fea-
venth moneth of the feaft of tabernacles were in Exraes time,
whileft ‘the children of Z/rze/ were in the Citics and onthe
dayofthe feaventh moneth E/dras read the Lawto the
people, And in the Plalmes David praifed the Lord feaven
times in aday’: filver is tryed feaven times; and he renders
to our neighbours feaven fold inco their bofomes, And Sola.
mon that wildom hath hewed her feaven’ Pillars ;
feaven ‘men that can ‘render @ reafon, feaven abominicions
which the Lord abhors, feaven abominations in the heart of »
an enemy, feaven overfeers , 'feaven eyes beholding. Lfaiah
numbers up feaven gifts of the Holy Ghoft, and feayen wo.
mei fhall take hold on a man. And in Jeremiah, the that
hath born the hath’givén up the ghoft, "In
the Prophet-continued fad for feaven In Z4-
chariah feaven lamps, and feaven pipes cothofe feaven lamps,
and feaven ¢yes running to the whole
Earth, and feaven eyes ‘hpon one’ {tone, and’ the Pat of the
feaventhiday is‘ turned into’ ioy. And in feav
herds aréraifed agdirift che Affyrians.’ “Alfoinrhe GUiper we
sead of feayen bleffedneffes , and feaven vercties, to
heaven vices ‘are feaven the Loads

‘
«
a
“6 |
+”
a
a
‘

er, feaven words of Chrift upon the crofs, feaven wordsof —
the blefled Virgin Wary, feaven loaves diftributed. by the

Lord, feaven baskets of, fragments ,. feaven brothers having
one wife, feaven difciples of the Lord that were.fithess, feaven |
water pots in Cawa Of Galile, feaven woes which theLord
threatens to the Hypocrites, feaven divels caft out of the un-
clean woman, and Lacan wiebeder divells raken in after thar
which was caft out. Alfo feaven years (briff was fléd.into
Egypt ; and the feaventh hour the Fevourleft the Govetnogs
fon. And in the Canonical] Epiftles, Zames defcribesifeaven
degrees of wifdom, and Peter feaven degrees of Verthes,
And in the Aéfs are reckoned feayen Deacons,and feaven difcis
ples chofen by the Apoffles. Alfoin.the Revelations there
many myfteries of, this number: for there we read Of feaven
Candlefticks, feaven Stars, feaven Crowns, feaven Churcies;
feaven Spirits before the Throne, feaven Rivers of Egypr,

feaven Seales, feaven. Matkes, feaven: Horns, feaven Eyes,
feaven Spirits of God, .feaven. Angels with feaven Trumpets,
feaven horns of the Dragon, feaven heads of the Dragon, —

which had feavenDiadems : alfo feaven plagues, andfeayen

_ Vials, which were given to one of the feaven Angells, feaven
heads of thé fearlet Beaft, feaven Mountains, and feaven
Kings fitting opon them, and feaven thunders uttered their
voyces. Moreover this number hath much power, asinnatu-
rall, fo in facred , Ceremoniall, and alfo in other things:
therefore the feaven days are'related hither, alfo the feaven
Planets, the feaven, Stars called Pleiades, the feaven Ages of the
World, the feaven changes of man, the feaven liberail Arts,
and fo many mechanick, and fo many forbidden, feaven
Colours, feaven Metalls, feaven holes in the head of aman,
feaven pair of nerves, feaven Mountains in the City of Rome, —
feaven Romane Kings, feaven Civill Wars, feaven wife men in
the time Of Jeremiah the ‘Prophet, and feaven wife men of
Greece. AlfoRome did burn feayen days by Nero. By feaven
Kings were flain ten thoufand Martyrs. There were feaven
fleepers, feaven principall Churches of Rome, and fo many
Monafteries did Gregory build: So many fons Saine Felicity
--broughe

ve

a
A
‘
>»

forch: chere were feaven Electors of thé Empire

appoinced, and feaven folemn As in crowning thé Empe:

rour; the Laws'in the Teftament require feaven witnéffey

there are feaven civill punifhments, and feaveti canonicill,
feaven canonicall hours, the prieft makes feaven obéy.
fances inthe Mafs; feaven Sacraments, and féaveri orders of
the Clergy, and a boy of feaven years may be ordaiticd by
the leffer order, and may obteina benefice fue Cura. There
are feaven penitentiall Pfaitties, and feaven commands of the
fecond table, and feaven hours were eda, and Eve in P3:
radife, andthere were feaveri* men foretold by an Angell be-
fore they were born, viz. T/wacl, Ifadck Sampfon, Ferémiah,
Fohn Baprift , fames the brother of the Lord, and Cérif
Gefus. Laftly, this number is moft potent of all,asin

; of this Lévy,the moft ancient Poetfang;

The feaventh light is come, and then all things
- The feaventh’s of al thang soriginal,

Perfect, with Wandring Stars the heaven's volv'd,

And with ac many circles wroundroid,

i]
fi thi
4. ig
ee
if
, 43 he

‘*
a?
y
« -
te
i

a
re
ot

»

—_
~ fie,
J.
»
out
a

a

wi
ve
te
“
4 ‘4
¥
al
«

—
é

TheScale

In;the or ‘Araric 2

IN

gible world. | Zaphiel. Zadkiel

the Ce

Teftiall world. | Jupicer.

The Lapwing The Eagle. The Vulcur, |The Swan.
Phe Cucle- he Dolphin.) The Ptke. [The Sea-calf,

In the he Hare (The Wolf. |The Lion.
The Mole. /|Tin. Iron, Gold.
Lead. —«. {The Saphir, |TheDia- | The Car.

The Onyx. mend, jbuncle,

[Theright {The Head, |Therighe The heart.

|The right
lfoor. The lef ear.jhand.
; | The right ear. right No. |
gates of The thadow |The pi of de
In the. infer Hell of death. ftru@ion.

hoe

1s
ok

»
o
»
ay
gl
z
¥,
NDS |
J
oat. C | R
amacl. aphael,
DIND | wow
Mar T
he Sun.
a
“7 .
a
oe.
—

Book

Ocul cule Phileiply.

the

Bheie

name of God wich =

Venus.

Gabriel,

The: Dove,
Thimallus.
Goat,

he Emerald,

The Stork:

The Mulles
Ape. Car.
ck.flver. Silj

Achates,

7’?

[The ei hits

| Seven Stones of

Seren Ai

ce of God.

| tedtothe Planers:}

| Seyen holes of .
~ | head diitr

[whet in

the)

| Seren |

‘the Plan
Planets,
— \

itifernals. which}

deferibes in
oat | Garden ot Nuts,

Rabbi. Jofeph: of a
| Caftilia the Caba: |

SND
Michael,.
3213 Seven Planets,
Mercury. The Moon. .
[Seven Birdscof! thei:
The Owle; Se Fi ae a
Sea:@at, | 26769 Fith of the,
“Planers.
Seven Animals of
all the Planers.
| Seven Metals of the:
» - >
members. Thelef hand, |}: The left
The left nor Themonth..} Thejefe eye,

ftriff,

«
Perdition, The dep |
the “Barri

OF.

the number of Eight, andthe Scalethereof.

THe Pyehagorians call eight the number of juftice and
‘fuinels : fr or

rt, becanfe ic is firlt of all divided into num.
~~» bers-equally even, vizjsinto four, and that divifion is by the
fame reafon madeinto twice two, viz. by twice two twice;
and by reafon of this equality of divifion, it took to it felf the
name of juftice, bue the other received the name, viz. of ful-
nefs, by reafon of theconrexture of the corporeal! folidity ,
fince the firft makes a folid body. Hence that cuftome of Or.

~phens, {wearing by eight dieties, if atany time he would be-

feech divine juftice, whofe names are) thefe. Fire, W att,
Barth; che Heaven, Moon, ‘Sun, Phanes, the Night. There
are alfo only eight vifible Spheres of the. heavens: alfo by it
the property of corporeall nature is fignified which Or-

- -pheus'comprehends in eight of his Sea fongs. This is alfo called
the covenant or circumcifion, which was commanded to be
done by the Zewes the eightday.

- There were alfo.in the old Law eight ornaments of the
Prieft, viz. a breaft-plate,a coat, a girldle, a myter,a robe, an
 Ephod, .a.girdle of the Ephod, a golden plate; hither
belongsthe number to:etetnity,’ and the world;
becaule ie follows the number feven, whichis the myfterie of

time’; ‘hence alfo the number of bleffednefs ; for Chrifttea-

cheth fo many degrees of biefledneffes,as you may fee in Ada-.
thew: tt isalfo called the number of fafety, and confervation,
for there wete fo many fouls of the fons of from which
Davidwasthe. eighth. Alfo Zacharias, the father of re-
ceived his {peech the eighth’ day. They fay this number was‘de-’
dicated te Diony ini, becaufe was born’ the cighth moneth,
_inevérlafting memory whereof, Naxos the Iland was dedicated, -

» men of Naxos fhould fafely bring forth in the eighth moneth,

jand their children fhould live, whereas the children of che.

moneth: in other dv, and their mothers then

e

fe
‘a

Prer

The Seale

A 7

PP.

Bloha Vadaath AON. Vedaath

The Hea-
ven of the

The Hea Hea-. The Hea
ven of ven of ven of Ve-

The moi-

The cold. |The moi-

Eight par-'T he oF

The cold

efs of the
arth,

Merciful.

The wrath Darknefs,

ndignati- Tribulati-
the damn- ~

Book'l I.

In the Elementary |

In the leffet world.

id oO » |
a |
on
a »

a —_

Number of Nine undshe 8 Scale thereof.

4% nineis dedicated to th Mates, by the help of
the order of the Celeftiall Spheres, and divine
_._ Hence there arentne movable Spheres, and accorditig to thofe
there are nine Mufes, viz. Calliope, Urania, Polymnia, Ter.
pfichore,Clio,Melpomene,Erato »Euterpe; Thalia, Which nine

~ Muifes indeed are-appropriated to the nine fo thatthe

fittt refembles the fapreme Sphiere,which they call Prima mo.

“=

_ , and fo defcending by degrees, according to the written

order,unto the laft, which les the Sphere of the Moon,
Calliope is appropriated'to the Primsum mobile;Uraniato
the Starry’Heaven,Polymnia toSaturn,Terplichore,to Pupiter,

to Afars, Mefpomenétothe Erato to. Fenus, Ey.

to Mercu#y, Thalia te-the Moen: -
There are alfO nine orders of bléffed Angels,vix. Sera-
-phim, Chrerubifa, Thrones, Domination, Powérs , Vertues,
Pripcipalficies , Archangels , Angels, which Bzekjel figures
out by sirie Stones, whichare the Saphir, Emraid,Carbuncle,
Onyx, Chryflice, Jafper, Copaze, Sardis: “This

number. hath alfo z agreat, and. Occult myfterie of the Cro&:
For the ninth four our Lord Jefus Chraft breathed out his
Spitit.—And- in—nine-dayes-the Ancients buryed their dead,
and inko many yeers they fay Aiinea received Laws.from
piterina Cave; whence thisnumber was molt efpecially caken |
tae _ notice of by Homer, when Laws were to be given, or an-
“ {wers were to be given, or the fword was like to rage.
ae Aftrologers alfa take notice of the number nine in the
of men, they do of feven; which
they years, whch are eminenc-for fome
— © and incompleatnels,becaale ic'doth notattain to the pertetti-
of the numbeft cen, butis lefsby one, without which itis
= as Anftin incerpréts it of che cén Leapets Neither is
itude of aine Cubics of Og King-of Balan,who i

‘
‘

Ome. -

Se
‘ we
‘a

- e

Book

The Scale of the Number nine.

choivah

ine fhohes repr

‘Henting -the ni
| of Angels.

ph ir.

JEmrald,

—

rs. of Meicu-

Nine orders of di-jFalfe {pi- Spirks of Juglers, pow. fowisg pe ‘4

N
| gt | |
a |

OF the Number Ten, andthe Scale thereof,
HE numberten is called every number, or anuniverfall
- number, compleat,fignifying the full courfe of life : for
Tales “beyond that we cannot number, but by replication; and it

either implies all oumbers-within ic felf, or explains them by
= . ©}. oft Tel and itsown, by multiplying them : wherefote itis

-applyed to the purging of fouls. Hence the Ancients called

and co offer facrifioes were to abitain from fome. certain
things for ten dayes. . Whence amongft the Egyptians it
“was the cultome for him that would facrifice to 7o, to faft
=ten.dayes before,” which eApuleins teftifies of himfelf, faying,

refrain all meat, and be-fafting, There arecen fanguine parts
man, the Menftcues, the Sperm, the Plafmatick fpirit,
2 _the'Mats, the Humours, the Organicall body, the vegerative
 \pare, the fenfitive part, reafon, andthe mind. There are al-'
cartilage, nerve, fibre, ligament , artery , vein, membrane,
 flefh, skin. There are alfo cen parts. of which a maa confils
sintrinfecally; The fpirit, the brain, the lungs, the heart,

Pfalcery ; ten moficall inftruments with which Pfalms were

«

—
—

ry the Pfalms, Sir, on which the:Canticles, Tehila, on which O-

ations Beracha, on which Benedictions Ci, OD waich,

“actounted tobe of amanifold Religion, and power, and is

Ceremonies Denary, becaufe they that were to be expe@ed, ;
| - Jt was commanded that [ fhould for the {pace of ten dayes |

ren fimple integrall parts conftituting man, the-bone,

“liver, the gall; thefpleen; the-kidnies;the telticles, che Matrix.
"There were ten Curtains.in the Temple, ten ftrings in the

fang, the names whereof were, Neza, an which theit Qdes
were fang, Nablum, the fame’as Organs, Mizmor , on which,

es
‘ |
J
x

a4
}

Praifes Hodaia, on which Thanks, Afre on.which the Felici-
ty of any one , Hallelujah, on which the praifes of God only,
and Contemplations. There were alfo ten fingers of Pfalms,
viz. Adam, Abraham, ‘Melchifedech, Mofes, Afaph, Da-
vid, Solomon, and three fons of Chora, there are alfoten == —-
‘commandements ; And.the tenth day after the afcenfion of
Chrift the Holy Ghoft came down, This laftly is
the number, in.which, faced with the Angel all
night overcame, and. at the rifing of the Sun wasbleffed,
and called by the name of J/rae/. In this number Fofua
overcame thirty one Kings, and David overcame Gojiah, |
and the Philiftines, “Daniel efcaped the danger of the =
Lions. This number affOys as circular as unity, beeaufe- being =
heaped together, retfirfg @unity, from whenceit ha
its beginning, and igigeie Gnd, and perfection of all num-
bers, and the begidnjng: ns, Asthenumbertenflows
back into aunity, fromwhehcé itproceeded{o every thing
that is owing is feturned batk‘go that from which ithad
the beginning offits tf SO, Water returns to the Sea,
from whence it Had its beginning, the body returns to the o
Earth, from whénce? it. was taken fime returns into Erer-
nity, from whence tit “flowed, the. fpiric fhall return to
God that gave/it; and laftlysevery creature returns to no-
thing, from wherice it was created, ntither. is it fuppore-
ed but by the word of God , in whom allthipgs are hid ; and
all chings with the number and by the number ren, make
around, as faith Proc/us, taking cheir beginning from God,
andendingin him. God therefore that firft unity, or one —
thing, before he communicated himfelf to inferiours, diffufed
himielf firft into the firft of nombers,viz. The numberthree,
then into the number ten, as into ten Jdea’s, and meafures of
making allnumbers, and all things, which rhe Hebrews call.
ten Attributes, and account cen divine names; For which
caufe there caunot be a further number. - Hence “all cens have ’
fome divine thing in them, and in the Law are required of
God.as his own, together wich the firlt fruits, as the origi.
nallof things, and beginning of numbers, and ever renth is

ry

asthe end giver'to him, whois the beginning, and

Fhe Scale of the Number ten.

a ~
Fy
‘ ~ ’
‘
—
‘
x
©

e

— °
¥ 5
‘ :

‘|Lying {picits

| A

Veffels of in-| Revengers
quity. of wicked- Juglers.

Gall.

nefs,

"Phe Scale of the Number .
inall |The mame Jehova of ten letters col- | The Name Jehovah of ten
le&ed. letters. |
Eheie. nd Jehovahe|Jehova Elo- Elohim
Kether.  jHochmah. Hefed. |Geburah,
In the taphim. tions.- |Powers. |
aioth Hafmal- |Serapkim.
lim. C el.
y\Zadkiel. |
Zedeck. |Madim.
The{phere| The Sphere of]
Mars,

7s
‘
Punt
Mobile.
A Dragom jAn
world
ld ° Te
WOr
‘
ill
= n in- al Se
rnall
is or d.
‘

Book
Extended.

Jehovah Sabaoth Elohim Sabaoth. Sadai,

Ti phereth Nezah. Hod. Iefod.

\Vercues, Angels,
Malachim ies, Elo _ Cherub

i

P

Ve. =

The name of God! _
Ten names of God} —
Malchuth}|
Blefied
men.
The {phere;The {phere of he phere of The {phere phe: Ten fpheres of
the Sun; Venus, Mercury. of che jworld.
| lc mcnts,
Aery, © the or “en{nar [fouls bear

me
‘ >
—

CHAP, XIII.

Of the Number eleven, andthe number twelve, with a double

Seale of the Number twelve Cabilifticall, and Orphicak,
f number eleven as it exceeds the number ten , which is

|... de the number of the commandements, fo it fals fhort. of
number twelve, which is of grace and perfeétion, theres
fore it is called the number of fins, and the penirent. Hence 4
inthe tabernacle there were commanded to be made eleven

_ Coats of hair which is the habit of thofe that are penitent,’
and tament for their fins, whence this numberhathno Com.
| ee" munion with Divine or Celeftiall things, nor any attra@tion, —
Onfcale tending to things above: neitherhath ic any reward;
btit yet fometimes it receives a gratuitous favor from God,as _
to © he whichwas called the eleventh hour to the vineyard of the
4 _. . Lord, received the fame reward as thofe who had born the
burden, and heat of theday. Now the number cwelveis
divine, and that whereby the Celeftials are meafared; itisal
forthe number of the Signsin the Zodiack:over-which there ate
ai twelve angels.as chief, fupported by the irrigation ofthe great _
name of God, In ewelve yeers Fupiter perfeAshis courte,
theMoon daily runs through twelve degrees. There arealfo.
ewelve chief joynts in the body of manjvéz. in hands,elbones,
fhoulders, thighs, knees, and vertebra of the feet. There

a great power of thenumber twelve in divine myfteries.
God chofe twelve families of J/rae/, and fet over them twelve.
Bripces; fo many ftones were placed in che midft of Fordan,
| and God commanded that fo many fhould be fet on the breaft
ofthe Prieft; twelve Lyons did bear-the brazen Sea that-was

© “made by, Salomon: there were fomany fountainsinHelim,
many. feat co the land of promife. and fo many

_Apoftles:of Chrift fet overthetwelve tribes, andewelve thou-
fand people were fet apart and chofen ; the queen of Heayen
crowned with twelve Stars, and in the Gofpel twelve owes

¢

ant

ofthe fragments. and twelve Angels
over the twelve of the Cit twelve fones of the.

heavenly Jerufalem. In inferior: many breeding thi
peoceed. after this number; fo the Hare and Coney —

fruicfull, bring forth twelve: times in the yeer, sad: the
Cammel is £0 many moneths in breeding, the Pea- cock

brings forth twelve Eggs. |

4 wr
«
»

a’

‘
of

a

Occul Philly

~The Seale of theNunibet
The great name =" }
into twelve banners |

Twelve of thel
bleffed Spirits,

lTwelve ruling Afmodel. Ambriel Muriel.

wer the figns.

ny,

s| The brett,

PRevengers|
lof wicked-|

4 of the

i
ax | «bjm. tions.
fi
Simeo
Ne
welve Tribes: Dan. Ruben. Judah, |Manafich. Afher.
Pay |
¢ Apottles las Simon, (John. Peter. Andrew.
a
lA ril May, June, July. Auguilt.
Twelve Moneths. March, |
Upright Bending {Comfrey. |Lady’s |Calamint,|
we ve Plants. Sang. Seal.
Twelve ftoncs. Sa Topaze “| afper.
Twelve: principalt head. The neck, |The arn he heart.| The belly.

Took

J

y

Principa- |Archane JAngels! ligible:
lities. gels. | fors, world,
Iffachar. enjamin. ‘Napthalin Gad. Zabulon. |
jonah, |Obadiah, ‘Zephaniah Nahum Joel,
Barthole- Phibip. Jamies’ the| Shomas. Matthew. James I
mew. elder, yonger.
| Aquarius, Pifces: Ere it
September Ottober. Novemb. id -COH Ji Ye February. world, |
Berill, |Amethyft, |Myacinth, Cryftall. aphic.
In theEle
the. kid- Genitals, |The han
ifters Of or Witches,

| The Orphica

I Scale of

the

[Twelve Dei pats,

RRO Of
Venus. M Ceres,
Phebus. |Mercury, |Jupiter.
welve figns Aries. Gemini
the Zodi-._ Taurus. |Gemini. (Cancer, Vitgo,
July. ugult,
welve mo-Match, [April, |May. June.
Be Twelve con."TheOwle Dove. (Cock. bis. Basle. Sparrow.
LLU. - birds, |
welve con-Shee Goat Goat Bull, (Dog,
Twelve Olive-tree Myrttil- fy |Aefculus,
Laurell, us, |
¢
clive MEM head, | Phe Neck The |

Book II. OF Occult Philofophy.

twelve,

Lon
i
»
> lana efia. —
Mars. uno, w |
us =
us |
a the E
| OGeber. |Novem- }*
ber.
| Daw, _ jHeron. ‘Peacock.  Swam
Goole Pie 3
é
ind 0, [Sheer Morfe.
Affe.
Be Dog tree, ae Ram-thorn,
i-.*
CHAP.
4 . a,
- —

ye

~ OF Occult Philofophy.

- a

Book

' Of the Numbers Which are above twelve, and of their powers,and
‘e4HE other numbers alfo which are above twelve, are en-
3 dowed with many, and various effe@s,the vertues where.
of you. mult underftand by their originall,and parts,as they are
; made of a varions gathering together of fimple numbers, or
--gnaner of multiplication. Sometimes as their {ignifications arife
.. the leffening, or exceeding of another going before,e-

fpecialiy more perfee, fothey contain of themfelves the.-figns
certain divine myfteries, So you feethe third number a-
bove ten,fhews the myfteries of Chrifts appearing to the Gen.
| tiles,for the thirteenth day after his birth a Star was a guide to
a the wifemen. The fourteenth day doth typifie Chrift,who the
a fourteenth day of the firft moneth was facrificed for us; upon:
ei ' > which day the children of 7/rae/ were commanded by the Lord
‘to celebrate the Pafleover... This number CWathew dothfo
carefully obferve, that he paffed over fome gerierations,that
he might every where obferve this number in the genérations
mee of Chrift. The fifteenth number is.a token of f{piricual!! afcen-
fions, therefore:‘the: fong of degrees is applyed co chat*in
: fifteen P/almes. ‘Allo fifteen yeers were added to the life of

~-- ~King Hezekiah : and the fifteenth day of the feventh moneth
was obferved, ahd keptholy. The nimber fixceen, the Pytha-

-gorians call the number of felicity. It alfo comprehends al) the
~~ Prophets of the old Teftament,and the Apoftles,and Evange- |
lifts of the new. The number cigkteen, and twenty, Divineés in-

terpret to beunhappy, for in the former, //rae/ ferved Eglon
King of AZ0ab; inthe other 7acob ferved, and 7ofeph was fold.
And laftiy,amongft creatures that have many feer,thcre is none
‘that hath above cwenty feet. The twenty two fignifes the ful- |

~pefs of wifdom,and fo many are the Chara@ters of the Hebrew
edetters, and fo many Books doth the eld Teftament contain.
Foche number twenty cight, the favour of the Moonisde-

‘|
i
‘|

figned, for the motion. chereofis diftane from the courfe of o-
ther Stars,& as ic were alone is compleated the twenty eighth ©
day, when ic returns to the famé-point of the Zodsake from
whence itcame. Hence twenty cight Manfions of the Moon,
having fingular vertue, and influen@e, are numbdced in the hea-
vens. The number thirty is memorable for many myfteries,
Our Lord Jefus Chrift was baptized the thirtieth yeer of his
Age, and began to do miracles, and toteach the Kingdom
of God. Alfo fohn Bapei/? was thirty yeers old when he

the Lord. Alfo Ezekie/ at the fame Age began to prophecy;and.
Fofeph was brought-out of Prifonon che thirtieth yeer of his
Age, and received the government of Egypt’ from Pharoah
The number thicty two, che Hebrew Doctors afcribe to wife
dom,and fo many paths of wifdom are defcribed by Abraham,
But the Pythagorians call this.the number of Jultice,, becaufe
ic is alwates. divifible into two parts, even untoaunity. The -
number fourty, the Ancients did honour with great-obfervati:
on, concerning which they did celebrate the feaft Teflaroften >
It is faid that ic doth conduce tothe account of birth, .forin fo
many daies the feed is fitted, and transformed in the womb; .
uncillit be by its due, and harmoniacall proportions brought
unto a perfect organicall body,being difpoled to receive ara-
tionall foul. And fo many dayes they fay women be, after
they have brought forth, before all things are ferled within
them, and they purified, and fo many dayes infants refrain
from fmiling, are. infirme, and. live with.a great deal of
hazard. This alfo is in Religion a number. of expiation, and
penitency, and fignifying great myfteries. For incthetime of
the deluge the Lord rained fourty dayes, and nights upom the
earth ; The children of. J/rae/ lived fourty yeers inthe wilder-
nefs; fourty dayes the deftruction of Nineveh was put off. The

fame number was accounted as holy in the fafts of the Saints: —

For Mofes, Elias, and Chrift, fafted fourty dayes.. Chrift was
carried fourty weeksin the womb of a Virgin, Chrift tarryed
fourty dayes after his, bicth at Rethe/em before he was prelene
tedin the Temple: He preached fourty months publickly ;he lay

an to preach in the wildernefs, and to prepare the wayesof —

»
a
“
~ “¥%
«
a
AS
Pour
Ka

Occult Philofophy. Book EI.

foutry hours dead in the Sepulchre,the fourtieth day after his
yefarre@tion he afcended into-heaven, ail which Divines fay:
—_ were not done without fome occult property, and myftericok

| thisnumber. The number fifty fignifiesremiffion of ‘fins, of

 fervicudes,and alfoliberty. According in the Law,on the fif.
tieth year they did remit debts,and every one did return to his:

@wn poffeffions.Hence by the yeer of Pubilee,and by theP/aby

repentance it fhews a fign of indalgency, and repentance,
sag The law alfo, and the holy Gholt are declared in the fame ;

For the fiftieth day after //rae/s going forth out of Egypt, the

Law was given to Adofes in mount Sinai: The fiftieth day after
the refurrection,the holy Ghoft came down apon the Apoftle;

in mount Sion; Whencealfo itis called the number of grace,
and actributed to the Holy Ghoft. The number fixty, was holy
to the Egyptians, for it is proper to the Crocodile,that as the

~ $n fixty dayes brings forth fixty eggs and fo many dayesfits on
them, fo fhe is faid alfo to live fo many yeers, and to have
fo many teeth : and fo many dayes every ycer to reft
folitary withouc any meat. The number feventy hath alfo its
myfteries,for fo many yeers the fire of the facrifice in the Baby-
lonian Captivity lay under che water, and was alive : fom
yeers Jeremiah foretold’the deftruction of the Temple, and

many yeers the Babylonian Captivity endured ,and in fo many
veers the defolation of Jerufalem was finifhed. Alfo there were

Bivettty Phas in the place where the children of Z/rae/ pitched

their Tents. The Fatherswent downto Egypt with feventy

fouls.Alfo feventy Kings with their fingers,and toes cut off did

ather meat under the table of Adontbezeck fevency fons came

orth of che loins of #oas, feventy men,all fons of foro, feventy
weights of filver were givento. Abimelech, and io many mea
 . Abimelech few upon one ftone ; Abdon had feventy fons, and
Nephews,who rod upon feventy Foals of Affes; Solomon had
feventy thoufand men which carried burdens. Seventy-fons /
of King 4hab were beheaded in Samagia ; Seventy yeers,ac

cording to the P/a/mift,arethe Age of maw. Lamech {halt ibe
‘avenged feventy feven fold; Thos thale: forgive chy brocher

“ \

—_

Book II. OF Occult Philofopby. age

feventy feven times. Affothe number feventy two wasfamons
for fo many languages, for fo many Elders of the Synagogue, —
»forfo many interprers of the old Teftament,for fo many Difci. —
ples of Chrift : It hath alfo- a great Communion with the
number twelve; hence in the heavens, every fign being divided

into fixparts,there refule feventy two fives, over Which fo ma-

ny angels bear rule; and fo many are the namés of God: and
every five is fet over one Idiom with fuch efficacy, that the
Aftrologers, and: Phyfiognomifts can-know from thence from

what Idiom every ‘One arifeth. Anfwerable to thefe are fo
many manifeft joynts in mans body, wheteof in every finger

and toe there are three, which together with the twelve Prin-

cipal reckoned before in the number twelve make up feventy

two. The number hundred in which the théep, chat was
found, was»placed, 'witich alfor paffeth from. the left hand to

the right,is found holy atid becanfe it confilts of tens it fhews
acompleat perfection. “But the Complement of all nuinbérsis

a thoufand whichis the four {quate meafure of the humber ten,
fignifying.a compteat, perfe@ion. Thete are al-
fo two numbers efpéciatiy' celebrated by P/ato' in his Repub,
and not difallowed e4riffutlé it Kis Politicks, by which
great matacions it? Cites are forecdld : Theft are theifquare
of ten, and the. Fows fquate meafure thereof, vi. the fourty
four above a hundred arid fever handred twenty cight above

a thoufand, which is fatall : ro which when any Cicy;or
Common Wealth hath-attainéd} ‘ic fall afterward with a
pleat four fquare meafure déeline : bat in fquarés it undergoet
achange, buc for the bettér; ff icbe governed with prudent —._.
dilcipline, -and: chen not with fate, buc imprudency _
fall. And Jet thas witch? fiffice for in. particu

» & e 4 4 4438 |

o

“CHAP. XIV.

the notes of numbers, placedin certain gefturingss
Have often read in books of Magicians, and their works;
and experiments certain, wonderful, & as they feemed'to me
— ridiculous and I did think they. were certain occult
agreements of the divels,by reafon of which I did them:

butafter Idid more ferioufly examine the matter, then I did
-prefently underftand that they were.nog the compacts of
divels ; but that there lay in them the reafon.of numbers, by
which the ancients did. by the various bending forward, and
backward, their hands, and fingers reprefent numbers , by
whofe gefturings the Magicians did filently fignifie words un.
_ known by found, various with. numbers, yet of great vertut,
by thelr fingers joyned together, and fometimes changed, and —
did with facred lence worlhip the Gods that:cule over the
world. .The.rites whereof alfo makes. mention: of
in his Atithmetick,faying, The fingers of the Virgin weremo.
ved all mamner of wayes, who after fhe wentin, did by ex:
preffing feven hundred and feventeen numbers ‘with her bend-
ed fingers callupon Butcthat thefe things may bethe
betterunderftood, I fhall bring fomething ontof . the fayings
_ Ff Beda who faith, When thou faye& one,bend inthe litle fin-
' ger on.thy left hand, and fet it inthemiddleof the Palme,
when chou fayelt two, place the next finger to. the. litle finger
inthe fame place; when three, the middle finger after the fame
Manner; when four, thou fhale lift up chy. littlefinger; when
five, the next to. it. after the fame manner. ; when fix , the
finger alone which iscalled the ring finger, being
— fixt on the mddle of the Palme : when thou fayeft feven, thou
| fhalt put only thy little finger. above the root of. thy
- Palm, the reft in the mean timé-being lifted up; andby x
‘when thou fayelt eight, thy ring finger; when thou fayeft nine,
ten, thou thall fet the naile of thy fore-fnger, or the

‘

C

Book II. Of Occult Philofophy..
middlejoynt of thy thumb. “When thou fayeft twenty, thon”
fhale put the top of chy middle finger clofe betwixt the joynts

of thy thumb, and forefinger. When chou fayeft thirty, thou
fhalejoyn the naile of thy chumb, and fore-finger lightly toge-

ther. When thou fayeft fourty, thou (hale bring the infide of -

thy thumb to the outlide of thy fore- finger, both being lifted

up. When thou fayeft fifty, thou fhalc bend thy chumbwith ~
the outward joynt,like tothe Greek Gamma, to the Palme, ;
When thou fayeft fixty,compafs about thy chumbbeingbended _

as before,with thy fore-finger bowed over it. When thon fayeft

~ feventy, thou fhale fupply thy fore- finger being bowed about
asbefore, with thy thumbftretched at-length, the nailethere-

of being lifted up beyond the middle joynt of thy forefinger,
When thou fayeft eighty, ‘thou fhalt fapply thy fore- finger -
bowed abont as before, with thy thumb ftretched forth ar a
length, the natle thereof comp fetupon the middie.joyntof
the fore-finger. When thou fayeft ninty, thou thallferithe ~
naile of thy fore-finger bent into the roor of thy thumb.
ftretched out. Thusimuch for the’ left hand. Now
make 100. on thy right hand, asthou didft ten on thy leftsand | / tes
200. on thy right, as thou didft cwenty on thy left;2000. on ~
thy right,as chou didft two on thy left, and fotogooo, More-
over when thou fayéft 19000, ‘thou fhale put thy lefthandup- ~
ward on thy breft, thy fifigers only being lifted towatds Heae
ven. When thou fayeft 2e000. thou thale put the fame fpread: >
forth upon thy breaft.. Whem thou fayeft 30000. thonfhale =
put thy thomb ‘on the fame hand downards, onthe cartilaze
of the middle of chy breft, Whew thou fayeflt
fhalt lay the fame upright, and ftretched forth onchymavell ~~
When thou fayeft thou fhalc lay thy
hand downard on thy navell.’ When thou fayelt 6qo00.thoy
(halt hold chy left chigh with the fame,being-downards. When
thou fayeft 70000. the fame thou fhalt put. upon, thy-rhamb
upright. When thou>fayelt then fhalr parthe fame,
downward-on thy thighs \When-chon fayelt goooo. shou hale,
hold thy dopis withthe fame; thy thamb.being turned down-.
wards. Bat whenithon oF 200000, and

” d
2 »

OF Occult Philofophy. “Book

900000, thou fhale t in the fame as We fpoken,

“fill them up on the right part of thybody. But when thoy’ .
fayeft 1000000. thou fhall joyn both thy hands together, and,
¢lafp thy-fingers.one withinthe other. Let thefe fnffice which:
have been obferved out of Bede; Thon hale finde more of:
en Brother Luke of Saint Sepulchers, in his great-Arith-

CHAP. XVI.
oft the various motes of numbers obferved among f she Romans,

4H notes of aremade diverfe wayes ift divers
ae _ d& mations. The Romans did figure them by thefe following
motes; which Valerius Probus hen ancient

Five. Ten, Fifey A hundred.

Avichmecicians, and Calculators, which according to:
the ordet uiinbers are’ nade! this. manner.

49.0) addedanote of privation.
r,

t

e 5 »

».
i
+}
«
«

orathoufand. And thefe notes are
Magicall Characters,

d

Q3 CHAB;

Book LI, OF Occale Philofophy,
ber, yet makes others tofignifie, cither tens, othundreds,op

thonfands, as is well known to Arithmeticians, “Affo
there are fome that mark the numberten with alinedown- 2
ward, and another madecrofsit; and five by that line which
roucheth the other,but doth not go crofsit, ands.unity by char
which is put by it felf, as you may fee in this ¢xample. -
Ggnifics cco, FF Sgnities ten’ and five,
fixteen, Ti ten and feven; and the round .o being ipae j
by it felf fignifiesa hundred ; but being joyned: to ‘orhers,fiz-
nifigs fo many hundredsas the numbers are to which ig is pur, a
a6 thus, or two hundred, thus ede or thus

OF Occult Ply aphy. Book

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the notes or figures of the Gracsans.

1E Gracians ufe the Alphabetical letters for their notes

of numbers, and that three wayes; firft by every Element
according to the feries of the Alphabet fignifying the number
of its Ee. For in the order of which any number doth

poffeffe the place of the Alphabet, it reprefents the number
as here you may ite.

‘19. 20, 21, 22. 23. 24.

And this is the firlt order of numbers among the Greeks,
Secondly, the Greeks divide the whole Alphabet into three
Claffes, whereof the firft beginning from Alpha, is of unites.
The fecond beginning from Jota is of tens. T The third begining
fsom Rho is of hundreds; and this order by the latter of the
Greeks is inftituted after the imitation of the Hebrews. Now
-becanfe their Alphabet wants by that rule, three letters, itis
neceflary to add to them three figures, and to’ interlace

them with the letters, by which,viz. they niin the fixe, the
if

nineti¢eth, and the nine hundreth, as is manifeft in the following

¢.
6, 7. 8. g. 10, 40, §0. 60, 79, 80. 90.
ABTAEs ZHO I KAM N O-M G
109, 200, 300. 400, $00, 600, 700, 900.

Now if to. any of letters there be fubetibed the

oy
A
a
ox .
‘
hi
P

ofan acute tone, then it fignifies fo many thonfands, asin thefe
examples.
1000, 10000, 109000,
P

After the third. manner,the Greeks ufe only fix letters in fig-
nifying their numbers,esz. I, for an Unire, for thennm-
ber five, becaufe it isthe head of the word (i.e, five.
the number ten,from H fora hundred from éxariy, X
for athoufand,from the word xiase. M for ten thoufand from
poe, From which fix letters joyned in number after their man-
er ufto four, orto other they make other numbers,
befides rt which is not multiplyed, nor joyned to, it, felf,; bur:
alwayes fignifies the fives of others, as appearsin the fol-

Au aur

14 15°46 ar

(a9

“OF Oca

gretet my fteries fie

‘CHAP. XIX.

O rhe not es the Hi ebrews, and Galdeans, certain
wakes of Magicians.

HE Hebrew letrersalfo hive marks of numbe rs, but far
“more excellently ‘then any other languages , | fince the
Hebrew letcers, as is andled concern.

thefe in chat part’of’ (abaly which they call Notatiaco,

w the oFincipall Hebrew letters are in number twenty two,
whereof five have divers other certain figures inthe end of 4
word, ‘which therefore they call che five ending 'lecters, whieh
being ‘xdded to thiém aforcfaid make twenty feven, ‘which
ing then divided into three deprées, fighifie the unites,
ate in the firft degree ces which are the and hun-

Now the Chote Hebew number

a?

¢ ‘

they be marked witha great Character, lignifies io man
go.
Se0, 600 \
900, 700, $00, 400, 300, 200. 100,
f

Book if OF Ocal

“Now there are fome which don not ufe thofe final eee
inftead of them write thus,

1000, “900, Soo. "700.
N man. me.
And by thofe fimple figures by the joyning them asi
they defcribe all other compound numbers, aselevenstwel
aigntied andten, ahundred and eleven, by adding to the
 pumber ten, thofe which ate of nites ; in like manner to
the reft after their manner;. yet. they defcribe the fifteenth
number not by ten, and five, but by nine, and fix,vs=. thns
"wand that out of honor to the divine name’ which i imports
fifteen, left it fhould happen that thedacred name fhould be a>
bufed to prophane things. Alfothe Egyptians, A2thiopians,
Caldeans, and Arabians, have their marks of numbers,which.
alfo often times happen amongft Magicall Characters,
therefore that would | know them, muft feekthem, of them’ |
that are skilful of thefe letters. Forthe Caldeans markthe = =
numbers with the letters of their Alphabet after the manner - ae
of the Hebrews. We have fet down’ their Alphabet'inthe~
end of the firft book. Moreover I found in two moft an- ~ aa
cient books of Aftrologers, and Magicians, certain moft ele-
gant marks of numbers, which I thought good to fe _GOWR
in this place; Voi by

a
IRS
of
«

"OF Occult alt Philof Book

Now by thefe mark turned to the left hand are mare tensyafte

“£0, 10.49 60 90

by ‘thofe markes which are turned on
the right made hundreds; on the left

100-200 300 500. 700 800 900

—
—

And by the compofition, and mixture of thefe maskes other
mixt and compounded numbers alfo-are moft elegantly made,
as you may. by nee

J

to of we mutt proceed
numbers ; fuffice for marks

2 A
t
a
1000 “2000
a
i Sto.
d
d

Bogk EI.
CHAP. XX> -

what unmbers are attributed letters, and of divining by she

HE Pythagorians fay (e-riftotle, and Ptolemy are of
‘. opinion) that the very Elements of letters have fome 3

certain divine numbers,by. which collected from proper names as

of things, we may drawconjectures concerning occult things ses

to come. Whence they call this kind of divination Arith-

mancy, becaufe,zix. itis done by numbers, as Zcrentianus.

hath made mention of it in thefe verfes.. |

Names are, they fay, made of but letters few
Unfortunate, of many, do forefbew
Succe/s; fo Heor asd Patroclus flay,

Alfo Pliny faith, That there.was added to what Pythagoras
invented, an uneven number of vowels of impofed names, .
which did. betoken lamenefs, or wantof eyes,andfuch like . = =
misfortunes, if they be afligned to the right fide parts; but oe
aneven number to. them of the left. Andelexandrinus the
Philofopher tanght,How that by the number of letters. we may °
find out the ruling Stars of any one that is born, and whether |
the husband or. wife fhall dye firft, and know the profperous, . ~
or unhappy events of che reft of:our works. His traditions
which were not difallowed by Ptolemy the Aftrologes we fhail

here add, and put: under, Butthofe numbers, whichare de
puted.to.each letter, we have above fhewed in the Greek, ,and
Hebrew letters, the Alphabet being divided into three.Clafles,
whereof the firft is of unites, the fecond of tens, the thirdof
hundreds, And feeing ia the Roman Alphabet there are want+
ing four to make up the number of twenty. feven Characters, -
their places are, fupplyed with I, and fimple.confonants, . _
asin the namés of Zohn, and Valentine, and hi, and hu'afpirace<
confonants as. in Hierom, and ~Hwilbelme, although the

o
pe
é

~ OF6 Occult

Book

Hy.

often as thon<
-both fignifie the if two or feveh, both fignifie’ the’

but hice, Pupiter; five, AL,

dividethe whole collegted er if there remai

Feftall three, Capricorn; if AY |
if Venu (ix, Taurus;it Palladian Aries wleans cight,

Pifeer Phebus twelve, they reprefent
“fons of them are pivett elfwhere. And lec no man wonder that

sieswaderftoodby few; forthe mok High created all

Germans for be the afpera
and French in their vul

A. B. C.D. G. H. I. K. Ny,
"$0. 60, 70. 80, 90, 100. 200-300. 499. $00. 609.790.800.

teulea double true  Teabians,
gar Speech put G joyned with U inftead

7. 9. 10. 20. 30. 40,

Bot def ref to Star of anyo one
-‘ born,compute his name, and of both his parents, through each
letter according to the number above written, and divide the

fam of the whole being gathered together by nine, fub
s and if there remaine a unit

or!

Mars; and the reafons t are fhewed clfe where, ~ In like

fives Cancer;

Kibra; if Mars bis ‘nine, Scorpio; if ten, Virgo; if eleven,

by the numbers of ‘names many.things may be Prognofticated,
ing the fame ) in thofe numbers’ ipe-ecttain occult; ntyfte-

by number, meafare, and weight, from whence the
Setters, and names had its originall, which were noc wBiture

von
Venus; cight,

the rear

(the Pythagorian Philofaphers, and Hebrew Cabalilty

a
- a
Ag
«<
of
P<
te

Hence in the faith, Let. him: which hath uni
ftanding compute.the number, ofthe name of -thebealt, which
isthe number of. a man.-. shefeare not tobeunderitood
of thofe names, which dilagteting difference ef
and divers rites. of Nations according to the caufes of places,or
education have put upon men.;, but thofe which were infised

into every one .at. his birth, by the very Heaven with the cone
junGtion of Scars,and thafe which, the Hebrew: Mecubals,
wife men. of Egypt long t to draw from the: genera:

tion of every ong.
the Gods snd hich are

ment,and dieti¢s,of Heavem faceed numbers; forto'the
Aire they have affigned the nomber eight, and:to- fire five;ta &
the earth. ix, tothe watertwelve.  Befides,unity is aferibed to.
the Sun, which is the only King of the Stars, in which Godpat. 3 /
his Laberpacie. 5;and al fois of: er,doththe Cau» F
powe nf ideal. tcftifie, who
the head. andthe, fatheriobthe Gods, as unicy isthe: begin:
and pareat of numbers The number two is afetibedto
the Moon;, which is the fecond great light, and figuresiout the’
fout of world, andis beewixe thar
unity there conjan@iens
alfo alcribed, to and Platiets
With the Aftrologerss. fo the number. three és afcribed
iter, the. Sun,and foxtunare planets,

¥ {
GG
A
J

‘

| “The therefore is dedicated. to this Virsin
they fay:to be powerfullin Heaven, and in'Hell.
number four ts of theSon,which by that number confticures the
‘corners of ‘the heavens,and diftingui(heeh feafons : itis alfo a.
feribed to Cyllenins, becanfe he alone-is-called the four fquate
Ged, The number five confifting of the firft even, and the fir’
odd, as of female; and male,both fexes, is afligned to Dfertuy, |
it is alfo attributed to the Cefeltiall world, which beyond the
four Elementsis it felf under another form, ‘the fife. “Fhe nom.
ber fix, which confifts of two threes, as a Commixtion of both
fexes, is by the Pythagorians afcribed to generation, and mar.
fiage, and belongs to Venus, and juno. The number feven isof
and belongs to Saturn; the fame alfo doth difpence the
emotion, arid light of the Moon, and therefore:is called by the
Tritonia the Virgin, it begets nothing.
affigned to CMinerva,becaule it proceeds of nothing ; alfoto
Pallas the Virage,becaufe it confilts of numbers, as males and
femaics. Thisalfo Platarckalcribes to Apollo, The number
eight , by reafon it containes the myfterie of jultice , is
ferbed to Fupiter ; itis alfo dedicated to Vidlean, for oF the
fieit motion, and number two, which is drawn twice in
to it felf, it confifts ; It is alfo attributed to Cybele the mother
of the Gods, co whom every. four fquare ‘is actribuced.-
_tatck, affigns it to Bacchile,or Dionyfins, Who faid'to be bom
theeighth monceth : others,becaufle of che cight moneth
donot live, have attributed it to Satwrn;and Ladies
ofdeftiny. The number nine belongs co the tHe
of all Celeftiall influences and vertues, as‘alfo itis
 dedicared tothe nine Mates, as alfo: to Mars, from whonvis the

of allthings; Thenumber ten is Circular, aid’betongsto

the Swn,afterthe fame manner as unity; alfo it is to
fanus., becaufe it is. the end’ of the firlt dfder,” and from
whence begins the fécond unity; ‘it is ‘alfo alcribed co the
‘world. In like manner the number twelve, becaufe the Sun
going round twelvefignies, -diftribuces the yeer into. twelve
moneths, is attributed to the world, the Heaven, and the San.
The number eleven,” becaufe it is femicircular, ais to

¥
“=
j 4. -

CHAP. XXIL

Of the tables of the Planets, their vertues; ded
Divine names, Intelligencies',.and Spirits are fet over
them.

T is affirmed by Magicians, that there are certain tables of
numbers diftributed to the feven planets, which they call
the facred tables of the planets, endowed with many, ard very
reat vertues of the Heavens, in as much asthey reprefent. that
ivine order of Celeftiall numbers, imprefled -upon Celeftials
the Zdea’s of the divine mind, by means‘ of the foulof the
world, and the fweet harmony: Celeftiallrayes, figni:
fying according to the proportion of effigies, fuperceleftiall In-
telligencies, which can: no-other way be:exprefled, then by __
the marks of numbers,and-Chara¢ters. For materiallnumbers,
and figures can de nothing.ia the myfteries of hid things, but
reprefentatively . by formall. numbers, and  figurés:, ‘as
they are governed,and informed by inrelligencies; and divitie
numerattens, whieh unite the extreams of the matter,and fpi+ ©
rit..to the will,of the elevated foul , receiving: throngh
great affection; by the Celeftiall power -of: che. operator,a
power from God, applyed shroughthe foul of the univerfejand
obfervations of: Celeftiall conftellations,to a matter fic for a
form, the mediums being difpoféd by che skill, and-indaltry’
of Magicians; But let us haften co explain the tables feverallys
The firlt of them is affigned to Satarn, and confiltsofafquare

of three, containing the particular nombers of ‘nine, and in’
every line three every way, and through-each Diameter
king fifteen. Now the whole funy of numbersis fourty fives
Over thisare of -
bers with an Jntelligency to. what is good, witha {pirie co
what isbad, and.out of the fame numbers is drawn the‘feal, or
CharaGter of Saturn, and -of the {pirits thereof, {uch as we’
hall beneath aferibeto its table. “They fay that this cable,
Ang witha fortunate Satar engraven on a plate of lead,

«

a
e
a
s¢
sey

a
te

Occult Philofophy. Book If,
—-. G3. |
~ “help to bring forth, or birth, and to make a man fafe, and
powerfull, and to caufe fuccefs of petitious with princes, and
powers: butif icbe done with an unfortunate Saturn, that it
hinders buildings, plantings, and the like,and cafts a man from
honours, «and dignities, and caufes difcords, and quatrellings,
2a and difperfesan Army. The fecond is called the table of Pipi.
ter, which confifts of 2 Quaternian drawn into it felf, con.
taing fixteen particulac numbers, and in every line, and: Dianie.
rer four, making thirty four. Now the Sum of all is 1 36;
there are over it divine names with an Intelligence to
afpirit co bad, and out of it tsdrawn’ the Character of
Jupiter, and the fpirits thereof. They: fay that if ic be imprel.
fed upon a Silver-plate with Zapster being powerfull, and rol.
ing,it conduceth to gain, and riches, favor, and love, peace) aid
concord, and to appeafe enemies, to ‘confirm honors;
ties, and counfels, and diflolve enchantments if it be engrayen
onacorall., Thethisd table belongs to Azars, whichis made
ofa {quate of four containing twenty: ‘five numbers, andof
_thefe-in every fide and:Diametér five, which fixty fre,
and the. fam ofallis 325:: And chere are overit Divine nares
with an Intelligence togood, : witha fpirit co'badjand out of
_ itis drawn the Charafler ‘of Adar’s., and of his fpirits. “Thele
withJZars being fortunate, ‘being engravem-on an Iron plate
makes a mampotentin wat; andjadgments, ‘and pe
tions, and terrible enemies, .aid victorious

them;and if engraven upon the Scone Correola,it
q and the, meftrnes;bur if ic be engraven with Adars beinganfor-

- ona place of red Brafs,ic hinders buildings; cafts down
ae the powerfull from dignities, honors, and: riches; and eaufeth
Begs, Pigeons,.and-Fith; and hinders Mils, and ‘renders chert
unfortunate that. geforthte hunting, or fighting , and caifeth
Dareenefs inmen and women; and other Amunuls, and: {tikes 4.
in alk enemies; amd: compels them to “The
fourth table is of che Suny and!is nade of afquare of Gk) ‘and
Congainsthirty fixinumbers, whereof fixin every fide, and
ameter, prodace-rz 1, and the funvofallis 666." There'are over

it

Book I I,

it divine names with an lotelligency to what is good, and fpi-
rit co what is evil, and ont-of itare drawn Chara€tersof the

Sun, and of the fpirits thereof. This being engraven on a .

Golden plate with the Sun: being fortunate , rendets him
that wears it to berenowned, amiable, acceptable, potent in

all his works, and equals aman to Kings, and Princes,eleyating

him co high: fortunes, rinabling to do whatfoever -he pleas
feth: but with an unfortunate Sun, it makes a tyrant, anda

mantobe proud, ambitious, unfatisfiable,' and tohave an i

ending. The fifth cable is of Venus, confilting of afquare of
feven drawn into it felfjeiz. of fourty nine numbers, whereof
feven on each fide and. Diameter, make, 175. .and;the famief
allis1325. And there are over.it divinenames with) an Intel
ligency to good, and fpiritto evil;. And there is drawa

it the CharaGter of Vewms, andiof the {pirits thereof; <This

being engraven ona Silverplate, emus being fortunate,
cureth concord, endeth, the love of; women;
conduceth to coneeption,is goed apainis ahi:

and Catcle fruitfpland being pur into, a
increafe of Pigeons, J¢conduceth to the cure ofall melancholy

vellers makes them-fortunate, But if ic be formed upea Brats
with an unfortunate Vewss,ic caufeth contrary things to all that

hath bin above faid. The fixt table is of AZercury refultingfrom’ =~

the fquare of eight drawn into.it felf, containing fixty four

numbers, whereof eight on every fide -and by both Diameters — 3 x
make 260. and the fum of all 3080. and over itare fec di.
vine names with an Intelligéncy to what is good, with afpirit ~~

to what isevil, and from it is drawn a Character of CWMercury,

gratefull, and forcunate to do what he pleafeth : it bringeth

gain,and prevents poverty, conduceth to memory,underftand-
ing, and divination, and to the underltanding of occult

for generation; diflelves enchanrments; and, caufthpdace
tween manj).and woman, and maketh all ‘kind of

joy fulnefs;and being

and of the fpirits thereof; and if it.be with Adercury being ,
fortunate engraven upon Silver, or Tin, or yellow Brals,orbe
writ upon Virgin Parchment, it renders thebearerthereof =

t
* we
‘
4 ‘
A
a
«=
¥
“>
s
“y
we
a
¢
a
»
e

oe ¥

x42 OF Occult Philofophy. ‘Book

by dreamss:and if icbe an unfortunate Afercury, doth all
things contfary tothefe.. The feventh table is ofthe Moon, of
afquare of nine multipled into it felf, having eighty one num:
bers, in ‘every fide and Diameter nine, producing 369, and
the fumof all is 3321. And there are over it divine names
withan to what isgood, and a {pirit to whatis |
bad. “And of it are drawn the Characters of the Moon;and of
the fpiritsthereof. This fortunate Moon being’ engraven on
Silver, renders the bearer thereof gratefal, aimiable,pleafant,
cheerfullfhonored, removing all malice, and ill will. Ic cauf-
ethrfecurity in a journey, increafe of riches, and health of body,
--/— @gives away enenties and other evil things from what place
‘how pleaf@t; and if an unfortunate’ Moon -engravéning
plate of where ever it ‘fhall beburied , it makes that
- plate unfortunate, and the inhabitants thereabouts, as alfo
Ships, Rivers, Fountains, Mills,’ and: it ‘makes man un-
fortunate, againft which it {hall be dire@ly done, making him
from his Country, and that place ‘ofhis abode where it thal
~ beburied, and it hinders Phyfitians, and Orators, and all mey
wharfoever in’ their office’ againft whom it. thall be made.
(New how-the feals, and CharaGers of the Scars, and fpirits
gre-drawn ‘from thefe tables, the-wife fearcher, and he which
Chall underftand the verifying ‘of thefe tables, cally

> . ad

hy

»

a
™
as
‘
oe
a

Book I “OF Occ Philgh
Divine names to the numbers of Sam.

Hod,
Agil, Intelligence of Saturn. "ROM.
45. Zazel. Thefpirit of Saturn.
Divine names to the of upiter,
ael. The {pirit of Iupiter.

Nawtes anfwering to the numbers of Mars.

-Hethe letter of che Holy Name.

5. The Inte ce of Mars. ore
325 Barzabel The fpiric of Mars.
Names an{wering tothe numbers of the San, ?
6 Vautheletter of the Holy Name, we AT
6 the ene of the Fly Name,

56 Eloh
Imelligence of the Sum,

157 Kedemel. “The (pirit 0 Venus.

1252 Bne Seraphim TheInvelligenci¢s of Henan

260 Tiriel, ‘The of. Mercury,
2080 Taphehartharach fpirit of Adercury.
Names tothe numbers of the
369 Hafmodai he ofthe Mion"
3331 Schedbath Schartathan the fpities of the Moon,

x
¥
r

ik |

‘
Book

The Table of Mats im bis compafs.

Hebrew notedse:

x { 14 22

Seals or Charablers

of the Intelligence of Mare, Of the Spirit of Mars...

4 »
TBC
ye -
Of Mars.
j
ws See
R |
ay
»

OF Occult Philofopby.. ook
tne . un in his compals.

ro
The Seals or Charatters

the: Of the intelligence of the Sun. Of rhe Spirit of the Sun...

af

le
EI 8 30
a
| ‘
_ é
‘a fa
4 a
Att

The Tableef Venus in her Compafi.

w
a

we

ar} 38 | -33 |
| 46| 15 | | 9
The Seals,or (haratters |
Of V
oC
‘
re
e
v

stn?
tig

‘ ‘

Hebrew notes.

kil

OO

f

V

ts

The able.

Cnus

of Venus.

igences

ell

Of the Int

—

‘
\ en
A
Ai.

fs

ax

ee
oo
- 4 “,
Yu
‘
te
‘
J

Book Id. OF Ocrule 4
“The Fable of Mercury in his
ap 37 | "30 ga) a3
17 47-1 4g 20.) 25 43° 24 |
9 | 54. gt | $0 16
he Seals or Charatters Of the
Of Mercury. of Meraty.
wd

‘
pe
™~ >
“re
t
« ~
A
™
a
J€ > J

lofopby.

a»

The Table of Mercusyix Hebrew notes.

i

OF Ph

a,

PEE

‘ND

—

"D135!

OD
| 8D |

a

ury.

Of the Spirit of Mere

a > Se
B
S
by
is
— = :
y
»
a
‘
s
‘
ina
»
he

Book II.

48 | 8) | | 3274 644.24 bse.)
17, | 49.| 911 33

67. 27-| $9. 10), 10,| $1. “$1, 2
28/6 9. 9.} 20) 13) 53.114 | 45-
The Seals or Charatlers
Of the Moon. :

io
Age
ot
‘
~Y
= an
¢ ;

oe
‘
4s
‘

> “<4
L
ad
se
P
a
a 2

a.

Of

telli ences

the Moon.

4 ‘The Ta ‘the Moon i
‘Table of the in notes a
J >
Ae
Of the pirsts- ence Of tie
‘ 4
‘
—
vf
z 4 3

Book IT.
of Geometrical Figures and Rodies, by whiat

powerful in Magick, and Which are agreeable to each Elee

ment, and the Heaven,

\Eometricall Figures alfo’arifing from numbets, are ‘con--

Iceived to be of no lefs power. Of thefe firft of all,a Circle
doth anfwer to Unity, and thenumberten ; for Unityisthe
Center, and circumference of all things ; and the number ten

being heaped together returns into a Unity from whence kg but

had its beginning, being :the end; and. complement of al
~ pambers. A circle is called an infinite line in which there is no

infinite, not according to time, but according to place; hence

a circular ‘being the fargeft and of all is judged
conjurations Whence .
_ they who adjure evil’ {pirits, are wont to environ themfelves
about with acircle. A’Pentangle alfo, as with the vertue of the’
number five hatha very great command over evil fpirits, fo by
its lineature; by which it hath within five obtufe angles, and~
without five‘ aeutes, five double triangles by which it is

to be moft fic for bindings an

furrounded. Phe interior pentangle containes in it great mylt¢.

ties, which alfo is fo to be enquired after, and underitood; of.
the other figures triangle, quadrangle, fexangle, feprangle, .
oftangle,and the refjof which many,as they are made of many~

and divers infe€tions, Obtain divers fignifications and: ver-

tues according te thé'divers manner of drawing, and propor-. .

tions of lites, and numbers. The Egyptians, and’ Arabians

confirmed that the figure of the Crofs hath very great power, -
cle of all Celeftial powers,and*
re of all, containing
foure right angiés,’ and:it is the firft defcription of theftper--
ing fongitude’and latitude: And they faid it is infpated

and that-is the moft firm receptacle ¢
“intelligences, becaufe it isthe righteft figu

ficies, having

with the fortitude of the Celeftials, ‘becaufe their for ae |

AS

Terminus a quo, nor Terminus ad quem, whofe beginning and —
endisinevery point, whence alfo a circular motion iscalled -

P
e

}
ww
hy
‘J
~ “tw
t
ww

‘Of Occult Philofophy. Book,

~<gefiilts by the ftraitnels of angles and rayes : And ftars are

et then moft potent when, they poflefs four corners in the figure
the heaven, -and make a crofs, by che projection of their

mutually. It hath moreover (as we fhewed before)
very great correfpondency with the numbets 5. 7- 9. po.

tent numbers. It- wasalfo reckoned by the Evyptian Prichts,
from the beginning of Religion amongft facred letters, figni-
“fying them allegoricallysthe life of future falvation. It
was alfo impreffed on the Picture of Serapis, and was had in
great veneration amongft the Greeks. But what here belongs
to Religion we thal! difcufselfewhere. This is to be obferved,
whatfoever wonderfull thing figures work when we write —
themin Papers, Plates, or Images, they do not doit barby
the vertue acquired from fublimer figures, by a certain affeai- |
on which a natural apitude or refemblance procures, in as muck
as they are exactly configured to them, as from an. oppofit
wall the Eccho is caufed, and in ahollow glafs the colledtion
of the folarie rayes, which afterward refle&ting uponan oppor
fite body, either wood, or any combuftible.t ing , doth forth.
with burneit: or as an Harpe caufeth arefounding mane
ther Harpe, which is no otherwife but becaufe 2 furableand a
like figure is fet before it, or astwo ftrings'on a Harpe being
touched with.an equalk diftance of time, and modulated tothe.
™  «.._ fame intention, when one is touched the other fhakesalfo:
Alfo the figures,of which we have {poken,& what characters{o-
opportunely imprefled upon things, thofe ruling, or be rightly,
framed, as one figure is of affinity with, sad dod
other. And as thefeare fpoken of figures, fo alfo they are ‘to
-be underftood of Geometrical bodies, which are a Sphear, ‘2
Tetracedron, Hexacedron, O&tocedron, Icocedron, Dodecar
cedron, and fuch like, Neither muft we pafs over. what,
Aigures Phythagoras and his followers, Zismeus, Locras, and
Plato affigned to che Elements and Heavens: for firlk, of all
 they.affigned to-the earth a four fquare, and a fquare of eight:
~folid angles, and of twenty fourplains, and fix bafes in
 @fa Dice:to thesfire,a Pryamis of a four triangular bale |

a a °

é oo
» «

Book II. “OF Occult Philof

fon many folid twelve to the aire
dron,of eight criangolar bates, and fix folid angles, and twenty.
four plains : and laftly, to Water they have affigned Icoce-
dron twenty bafes, twelvefolid angles: To the Heaventhey -
have affigned Dodecacedron of twelve five cornered bafes,
and twenty folid angles, and fixty plaines. Now he which |
knows the powers, relations, and proprieties of thefe figures,
and bodies, thall be able to work many wonderful things’ in
Natural and Mathematical Magick ‘efpecially‘in-
And Iknew how co make by them wonderful things, in which.
one fee whatloever he pleafed at a long diftance,

CHAP. XXIV.
of Muficall H. armony, of the force and power thereofi

Me Harmony alfo is not deftitute of the gifts of the
Stars ; foritis a moft powerful imaginer of all things, .
which whilft: it' follows opportunely the Celeftial bodies,
doth wonderfully allure the Celeftial influence, and doth.
change the affe@tiohs, intentions, gefturés, motions, actions .
and difpofitions of aif the hearers, and doth quietly allare.
them to its own properties, as:to gladnets,
boldnefs;-orreft; and the like ; alfo ic allures Bealts, Serpents, .
Birds, Dolphins to the hearing of its pleafant tunes. So Birds
are allured with Pipes, and Harts are caught by the fame! Fith .
inthe lake of Alexandria are delighted with fee's Mock.
hath caufed friendfhip betwixt Men and Dolphins. Thefonnd
ofthe Harp doth lead up'and down theHyperborcamSwans,
Melodious voyces tame’ the Indian Elephants ; and the very =
Elements delight'in Mufick.” The’ Hulefian fountain otherwif
calm, and if the Trampet found; rifeth up rejoycing
and fwells over its batike,’Thete are in Lydia thofe whi
they call the Nymphs Hands, which ac the found’ of
forthwith iddile of che fea, "af ‘torhing
lead a dance! atid thervare the fh réss
tehtifies that ‘he fave And thet aie

‘
—

thingsthenthefe. For in the fhore of “rica the fea found,
‘Jikea Harpe. A certain ftone of A¢egaris makes a found like ,
‘Harpe every time the ftring of a Harpe is ftruck ; fo great is the
power of Mafick, that it: appeafeth the minde, raifeth the

Spirit, ftirreth up fouldiers'to fight, and refrefheth the weary,
calls back chem that are defperate, refrefheth travellers, And
the e4rabians fay, that Camels carrying burdens are refrethed
-by the finging of their leaders. In Jike manner, they that carry
great burdens, fing, and are-thereby ftrengthened and refrelh-
ed finging caufeth delight and ftrength, pacifieth the an-
gry, cheareth up thofe that are fad and heavy, pacifieth ene.
mies, moderates the rage of mad men, chafeth away vainima.
-ginations : Hence it ts that Democritus and, Theophraftus af.
firm that fome difeafes of the body, and minde may thusbe
-cured>or-canfed. So we read that Therpander, and Arion of
Lesbos cured the Lesbians,and Ponians by Mufick ; and Z/menis

_ of Thebes cured divers of very greatdifeafes by Mufick ; More.

over, Orpheus, Ampbion, David, Phythagoras, Emspedoéles,

Afelepiades, Timothens, were wont to do many, wondertul
things by founds: Sometimes they did ftir up dull {piritsby
familiar.founds ; fometimes they.did reftrain wanton, furious,
angry fpirits by more grave tones, So. David with a Harp mo-

derated Saul in a rage: So Phythagoras recalled a loxurions

"yong man from immoderate luft.So imorheus ftirred up King

Alexander to a tage, and again reprefled him. S4xo the Gram
marian, in his Hiftory of the Daves, tells of a certan Muficisn,
who boaited that hecould by his .Mufick make every,one that
heard it co be mad ; and when he was conftrained by the Kings

—

rall wayesupon the affe@tions; and firlt, by
v pray ' filled the hearers with a kinde of fa
nefs; t

Sp
ed.untill

he shearing of which |
th. And it is believed (<jelin

°

command to periorm the fame, he endeavoured to work, leve;
atone of
dnefs and unfent
Mance.; and’ la he by asmore earneft Mufick, reduced them
to. furyrand madnefs, ‘We read alfo, that they in edpudia that
ider

at

Book I I.

ea(ed at the found of a Pipe. Alfio Theophraffus reports, that
the found of a Flute curesthe biting of Spiders, And Democri

cure for very many difeafes,

— —

oper at ne

vertue to receive the heavenly gifts ; if with Pythagoras
and Plato we thought the heavens to confift. by an Harmonial
compofition, and to rule and caufe all things by Harmonial
tonesand motions ; Singing can do more then the found of an

Inftrument, in as much asit arifing by an Harmonial confent,
from the conceit of the minde, and imperious affection of the

hearer, which is che bond of foul and body ; and transferring
the affe@ion and minde of the Singer with it , Ic moveth the
afteCtion of the hearer by his affeGtion, and the hearers
fie by his ie, and minde by his minde, and {trikerh the

humors of the body. From hence in moving the affections har-

tifcial and vocal Harmony doth yield a certain power borhto
the fouls and bodies : but it is neceffary that all Conforts pro-
ceed from fit foundations, both in ftringed inftruments, in

together : for no man can make the roaring of Lions, the
lowing of Oxen, the neighing of Horfes, che braying
the grunting of Hogs to be harmonious: neither can the

Of Occult Phylofophy

rus himfelf confefferh that the Confort of Pipers, hath beena

Of Sound, and Harmony, and whence their wonderfulnefs in

Oreover we thal not deny, ‘that there isin Soundsa

phantafie and heart, eafily penetrateth by motion, with the
refrated and well tempered Air, the aerious {pirit of the —
minde, and ftriketh the heart, and pierceth even to the in- .
wards of the foul, and by little and little, infufetheven difpo-
fitions: moreover it moveth and ftoppeth the membersand the —

mgny conferreth {o much, that not onely natural, but alfoar-

pipes, and vocall fingings, if you would have themagree well
of Affes,

‘
a
r »* 2

> ¢ «

f,
k

ftrings made of Sheeps. and Wolves’ guts, be: brought
agreement, becaufe their foundations are diffonant ; ‘bat the
many and divers voyces of men agree together, becaufe :
~ fnave one foundation in the fpecies or kinde: fo many birds
agree, becaufe they have one nigh genus or kinde, anda te.
femblance from above ; alfo artificial! inftruments agree with
natural voyces, becaufe the fimilstude that is betwixt them, js
either true and manifeft, orhathacertain analogy. But every
harmony is either of founds or voyces. Sound fs a breath,
yoyce i8 a found and animate breath ; Speech isa/bréath pro.
nounced with found,and a voyce fignifying fomething ; the fpi.
_git of which proceedeth out of the mouth with found and
yoyce; Chaludius faith, that-a voyce is fent forth out. ofthe in.
cavityof the. breaft asd:heart, by the affiftance ofthe
_ fpirit. By which, cogether with the tongue, forming; and
ftriking the narrow paflages of the mouth, and by the other
vocall:.organs, are delivered forth. articulate founds:
elements of fpeech, by which Interpreter the fecret motionsof
the minde are laid open: but Laétantins faith, chat the nature
of the voyce is very obfcure, and cannot be comprehended
how it made, or whatic is. To conclude, All Mufickcon
fiftech in voice, in found, and hearing: found without Air.can-
not be Andible , which though it be neceflary for hearing; yep, -
Aire, itisnot of it felfaudible, nor to be peracived by any
fenfe, unlefs by aceident;for.che Sight feeth it nor, unlefs it be
coloured; nor the Ears uniefs founding, nor che Smell unles
odoriferous, ner the. Talteunlefs iebe fapid, nor the Touch
unlefs it be cold or hor;.and fo forth: Therefore though
-found cannot be made without Ait; yet is not found of then
ture of Air, nor air of the nature'of found, but air is rhe body
“of the life of onr fenfitive fpirit, andis not of the nature of aty
fenfible obje&, but of a more fimpleand: higher vertue ; but tt
is meetthat the fenfitive fonl fhould:vivific the air joyned toit;
‘and in the vivificated air, which isjoyned to the {pirit,perceive
»the Species of objets put forthintovact, and this is done inthe
Aiving air but a fubtile and Diaphanous the vifible

Occult Philofophy.

.- “dm ordinary air the audible, ina more grofs air thé {pecics of

f

€

t
‘
“es ‘
e |
¥
d ot

Book II. - GF Occult Philofophy.

CHAR, XXVI

Concerning the agreement of thew with the Celéftial bodier, and
What harmony and foun correfpondent of every

Hue underftanding now, that of the feven Planets, Saturn,

Harmony. Saturn hath fad,hoarfe;heavy, and flow words, and
founds,as it were prefled to theCenter;but 4Zars,rough,tharp,
threatning great and wrathful words: the AZoon obfervetha
mean betwixt thefe two; but Jupiter, Sol, Venus and AZercury,
do poffefs Harmonies ; yet het hath grave, conftant, fixed, .
fweet, merry, and: pleafant Conforts ; Sof venerable, fettied,
pureand fweet,with acertain Venus lafcivious, luxa-
rious, delicate, voluptuous, diflolute and fluent’: Adercurg
hath Harmonies more remifs, and various, merry and plea-
fant, with a certain boldnefs: but the Tone of particulars,
and proportionated Conforts obeyéth the nine Pupi-
terhath grace of the otave, and alfo the quinte, the
Diapafon with the Diapente : So/ obtains the of
odtave voice, viz. Diapafon ; in like manner by fifte®h Tones”

apente. A4ercury hath Diateflaron; viz, the prace of the
Moreover the ancients being concent’ with?
tings, as with che number of Elements, accounted 44
the Author of chem, as Wicomachws reports, and by their Ba
ftrings would refemble the earth, by their Parhypas or middle
the water; by.theirnote Or Hyperboleon the
fire; by the Patamete or Synemmegan or rrebi the Air;but
afterwards Terpamder. the Lesbian finding out’ the feventh
{tring, equalled-them co the.number of the Planets. Moreover,
they that followed the namber of the Elements, did affirm,
that the four kinds: reé to them,‘ and alfo to

the four humors, and did think,the Dorian mufick ro be confo-
nant to the water and ‘phi¢

and ‘phi¢gm, the to \choler and

D Mrs, and the Afeon have more of the voice then ofthe —

a Difdiapafon ; Venus keepeth the grace of the:quinte or Di. .

—

ai

“a
ac
re,

_ OF Occult Phylofiphy. ~ Book Tf Book Ii

fife, the

Heavens, have attribut

poffefs che
ton, or B.

18 to Mats the god

the to blood’ and air; che mixt to melan-
choly and earth : Orhers reff Aing the number and vertue of
de Dorian to the Swa,the Phry.

#piter, the mixt. to Sa.

gianto Mars, the Lydiax to
to Venu,

turn, the Hypophrygias to Mercury, the Hypoly

the Hypodorian tothe Moon, the Hypo mized Lydian to the-

mixed Stars : Moreover they refer thefe modes of Mufick to
the Mufes,and the ftrings to the Hzavens,but not in that order

as we have declared concerning the nine Mufes, amongft our

nombers and celeftial fouls ; for they fay Thafia hath no Har.
mony, therefore afcribe her to Silence, and the Earth’; but-
with the (Moon move after the Hypodorian manner:
fring flambanemenos or Ait. Calliope and Mercury
Hypophrygian maner, and the Chord, Hypate- Hypa.
s. Terpfichore with Venus the manner,
manoher with Licanes, Hypaton, or D.Sol-Re. are applied tothe

with Mars keep the Phrygian falhion, ‘and the
Hypatemi(e, ox E,la.mi. Ewt erpe, and the Lydian Mufick, and
cha@hixe Ly

ee with ; Polymnig and Satarn
r, and Lichanes Mefon D.Sol Re,
and fixt Stars the Hype mixt Lydéan Mufick,and

or ‘ascribed, as reade thes

Clio

Calliope alfe doth Chord fecond touch,
the Mercury a: much:

Terplichore frikes the third, and

‘
‘
< “a 4
«
oe
Fy,
>»
‘
~ é
@ »
¢

a

4) tht Phrygians, Eut doth a oloue
er fre sand ja dath

Saturn the fevesth dah with Polymny,
cauféth the mixt Lydian mele
Urania alfo doth the eight create,
And mufickHypo-Lydianelevate.

Moreover there are fomewho find out the harmony of the
Heavens by their diftance one from another. For that fpace

which is betwixt the Barth and the Moon, viz an hundred and
twenty fix choufand Jtalian Miles, maketh the Incervall of a

Tone; Buc from the Moon co: Mercury being half that fpace,

maketh half a Tone; And fo much from Mercury. to Venus

maketh another half Tone; But-from thence to the Sun, as it

from the Moon to the Sun, maketh a twofold Djatef[aron with
a half; Again from che Sun to Jars is the fame fpace as from
the Earth co the Moon,making aTone; from thence to Jupiter
half of the fame making half a Tone ;So much likewile
piter to Saturn, confticuting af half Tone , from whence to

were a threefold-Toneand a half, and makes Diapente; But -

the ftarry firmamencis alfo the fpace of an half Tone, There- —

fore there is from the Sun to the fixed Stars a Diateflaron

diftance of two tones and anhalf, but from the Earth a per-

fe Diapafon of fix perfe@ tones; moreover alfo from the
proportion of che motions of the planets amongft themfelves,

and with the eight Sphere, refulreth the {weeteft Harmony of ©
all; for che proportion of the motions of Saturn to fupiters
motion, is two fold andan half; of Jupiter to AZars, afix-fold -

proportion ; of Adars to the Sun, Venus and Adercury, which
ina manner finifh their courfe in che fame time, is a double

proportion; their motions to the Moon haveatwelve-fold
Proportion; but Saturns proportion to the tarry Sphereisa .

a thoufand and two. hundred, if ic-be true which Prolomy

faith,véz, that, that Heaven is moved contrary tothe primum

mobile in an hundred yeers, one degree.. Thereforethe proper. ~~
motion of the Moon being more {wift, maketh a more acure. .

‘ound then’the ftacry firmament, which is che floweft of

a
©

é

— -
q
i
i
a

a

i
~ a

~ and therefore canfech the moft bafe found ; But by the violent
- motion of the primum. mobile, is the moft {wift, and acute
found of all; but the violent ‘motion of the Moon is molt
flow and heavy, which proportion and reciprocation of moti.
ons yeelds a moft pleafant Harmony; from hence there are not
-any fongs, founds, or moficatl inftraments more powerfull in
moving mans affeCtions, or introducing magicall impreffions,
then thofe which are compofed of numbers, meafures,and pro-
-portionsafter'the example ofthe Heavens. Alfo the Harmo..
py Of the Elements ts drawn forth from their Bafes, and, Age |
gles, of the which we have fpoken before; for between Fite
and Aire, there is a double proportion in the Bafes, and one
and an halfin folid Angles;againin Planes,a double; rhere arif-
éth hence an Harmony of adouble Diapafon, anda Diapente, —
. Berwsxt the Aire and Water, the proportion in their Bafes is
doublé, and one and an half ; hence Diapafon,and Diapente;
but in their Angles double; Hence again Diapafon; but be-
tween Water and Earth the proportion in che Bafes, is three-
fold and a third part more; from hence arifeth Diapafon, Dia-
_pente, Diateffaron: burin the Angles one and an half, again
eonftiruting Diepente. To conclude, betwixt Earch and Fire,
inthe Bafes the proportion is one and’ an half, making Dia-
pente; but inthe Angles, double, canfing Diapafon . burt be-
rween Firc, and Water,- Aire and Earth, there is fearce any
conforancy, becanfe they have a perfect eontrariery in their
Qualities, but they are uoied by the intermediate Element.

CHAP.

‘
¥
F <
>. ¢
nt
« 4
‘
ba en

CHAP. xxv

oft the meafure, and Harmony of mans

man is themoft beautifull and perfettett of
and his Image, and alfo the leffer world; therefore
he by amore — compofition, and {weet Harmony, and

more fublime dignity doth contain and maintain inhiméelf all
numbers, weights, motions, Elements, and all other
things which are of hiscompofition ; and in himas it were in
the ‘apreme workmanthip, all things obtain a-certain highcon-

dition, beyond the ordinary confonancy which they-have ifhe-
ther compounds. From hence all the Ancients in time paft did,

number by their fingers, and fhewed all numbers by chem; ‘and: “\_-
they feem co prove that from the very joynts of mans body =e *
numbers meafures, proportions, and Harmonies were. pie

ed; Hence according to this meafure of ‘the body, st
ed, ‘and contrived their temples, pallaces,

+ theie fhips, engins, and every kind of Artifice, and every pare
and member of their edifices, and buildings, as columnes, cha-

picers of pillars, bafes, buttreffes,feet of and allof this
kind. Moreover--o0d himfelf taught to build the :

Arke according to the meafure of mans body, and he made. - ;
the whole fabrick of the world proportiqnableto mansbody; j
from hence it is called the great world, mans body'the lefle :
Therefore fome who have written of the Microcofme or of
man, meafure the body by fix feet, a fooy by ten degrees,every y
degree by five minutes; from hence are numbred fixty degrees, } BS
which make. three hundred minutes, co the which are compared’
fo many Geometrical cubits, by which AZo/es defcribes
Atke; foras the body of man‘is in lengththree hundred’ mi-
nutes, in breath fifty, in height thirty; fo the length of
was three hundred cubits, the breadth fitey, and- the

righ t thirty; that the proportion of che length to the breadch”

be fix fold, ro the heighthten fold, andthe propoftion ofshe — ~
bade co the two thirds. Mannerthe

«
——

¢

meafuresof all the m

and fo agrecing,

ae

“
—
a
°
Pi-
he
‘
»
‘

es embers are proportionate,and confonant

both to the parts of meafures of the Archetype,
that there is no member inman which hath
not correfpeadence with ‘fome fign, Scar, intelligence, divine
—  ——--~—_name, fometimes in God himfelf the Archetype. But the
whole meafure of the body may be turned, and progceding

S
“$4

®

Adtoitagain.

a
v
»
*«
e -
du.
A
my
“

a4
¢
oy
“4
£
FE , =
os?
|e.

re

| Book If.

et together, 2
vadr

isfe

pr

is the. moft
ght wich h

upri

fure

uare mea

q
faman be

Alfo the four ft

laced

arms {tretche
whofe center

ature

, be will make’

the botom of his b

for,

wre

»
TN

- A

wy
i

¢

y
”

—= -
—
‘
<= x
‘ ad
ai

an ‘
if

F-Occul

a.

a %

P

to

Ph

a

a

ren

the

the crown of

by
theen

le be made

rc

But ifon the fame center-aci

lec fall fo far.

the arms

n

d
rs ends are
le

circle,
; and the
ng

vir

ge

os

ide that

d of the f

nd the feet

as much as the fin

lV

d
f the lower bell
entagon

he navile,make

P

til

Thent

fiter

reference tot

i

fcumference,

p of the head

ng
from the ce

-diftant from the to

ddo confit
aving

an
of the feet,h

he fame

fides.

the ‘circumference of that circle, a
was drawn

int

head,
proad
pit

Is
equal

wi

Lan ‘ors

ue

i
Ps
¥
«Al
‘
in
gs
4 WHE =
be
‘ > ‘

But if the Heels being unmoved, the feet be ftretched forthon ~~~
both fides to the right and deft, and the hands fifteduptothie —
line of the head, then: che ends of the fingers and Toes do
make a fquare of 0 fides, whofe center is onthe navi

the girdling of the y° OE SINTER

in

“

‘

Ph

J
Y

PAS XO?
SA

| hands be thins clevated, and the feet .andiThi

in thismanner, by the which aman is made thorte

_  * OF his feet having reference co the lower belly, they weill make

, equilatecall Triangle; and the center being placed inhi

circle being b about, will the ends

> af

1 Fu...
—
es >
fA

But ifthe hands be
hen the elbow will be equalto the crown of the head, andif; - ok
then the feet being put together,a man ftand thus, he maybe- ==
put into an vilaterall fquare brought by the extremitiesof
the hands and feet : the center of this cis the navel; ~
which is the middle betwixt the top of chehead-and theknerss)

é

- ’ = ;
2 Tin:

let us to particular The compaf of;
man under the armpits contains the middle of his length,

whofe. middle is the bottom. of his breaft and from thence up-

ward co the middle of his breaft betwixt both dugges,and :

_the middle of his brealt unto the:crown of his head, on eyt
the fourth part; alfo trom the bottom of his breaft

- bottom of the knees, and from thence to the bottom of the”
ankles the fourth part of man.. _ The fame is the Jaticude of
fhoulder-blades from one extream tothe other : “The fame
ie the length from the elbow to the end of the longeft finger,
_-and therefore this is-called a cubit. Hence four cubits make
length of man,.and:one.cubit the bredth which is in
‘thoulder: blades, bar that which is mpafs, foot;
_ now fix hand-bredths make a cubjr, fou and four fn.
gers bredchs make a hand-bredth, and the-whofe length of
As of.swenwy Soar hand bredehs, of fix.foor,of nihty fix

dbredths. From the botrom of his breaftco the top of
| 48thefixth partoFhis length, from the top ‘of his breaft
topof hisforchéad, and lowermoft root of ‘his hairs, the
_Menth pate of his length; of a trong, and well fe,pody, af

tthe fuxth part of the length, but oft tall the féventh, Neither
eani(as Varro; and Gellins ceftifie) the tallnef.of mans body
ceed feyen feet. Laftly, the Diameter of his compats isthe
as is from the hand , being thé inwa
bending of the elbow, and as chat frotn the
both dugs , ppward to the upward lip, or’ downward to the
rt of the breaft compaffing. the gullet ;; an
from the ‘fole. of the foot to the end.
of thetegasand from thenée tortic middle
| ce. All chefe meafutes are <o-equall, aitd makéche'
part of the whole height. The head of aman from the botte
OF the -chin-to the crown of “his head isthe -erphth pate of
fengch, as alfo from the clbow to the of the’

ade: 50 preat is lameter of the compafs
comp rawn by the top of the fo
theborom of the of th head, make che he

| Ni
| ma
| of
the
| cal
the
ov
| he
th
at po
f
W

his whole length; So much alfo doth the bredth of the breaft, ~~ =

Nine face-bredchs make a fqnare well ferman, andtenatall .

man. The length of man therefore being divided into nine

parts, ‘the face from the top of the forehead” to the borrome

of-thechin isone; then from che botcom of the throat, or the

‘tapofthe breaft unto the cop of the ftomack is another; from
thence to the navell isachird; from thence tothebottomof —

the thigh, a fourth; from thence the hipp,to thetopof che
calf of the leg,makes two; from thence to the joynt of the foor

the leggs make two more; all which areeight parts. More-

over the {pace fromthe top of the forehead to the crown of the
head & that which is from the chin co the top of the breaft.and

thac which is from the joyne of the foot.to the fole of the foor,

I fay thefe three {paces joyned together make theninth part.

In bredch the breaft hath two parts, and both Arms feven. But

that body which ten face. bredths make, isthe molt exactly pro-
portioned. Therefore the firlt pact of this is from the crown of

the head to the bortomeof the nofe, ; from) thence to the top

of the breaft,the fecond;and:then co the top of the ftomack the
third; and from thence tothe navel, the fourth; from thence to.

the privy members, the fifth; where is the middle of the length

of man; from. whence to the folesof his ‘feet are five other

“parts, which being joyned ta:the former, make ten whole, by

which every body ismeafured molt proportioned meafire,

For the face of a manfromeche bottomof his chin,.cothetop

ofhis forehead, and bottom of the hair is the tenth part. The

hand of a man from the fhutting, to the end of the longeft fin-

ger isalfo one part ; alfo betwixe the middle of both dugsis

one part, and from both tothe top of the gullet is an equilate- _
ralltriangle. The latitude of the lower part of the forehead =
one eare to the other isanorher part ; the laticude of the
whole breaft,viz.. from the top of the brealtto the joynts of
the fhoulder- blades, is on both fides one part,which make two,
The compafs of the head crofs-wife from the diftance of the
-_¢ye- brows by the top of the forehead unto the botromof the.
- hinder pat of the head, where the hair ends, hathalfotwo ..> ==
Parts ; rom the fhoulders.on the ourlide unto the coupling

—

A

_—

O Occn f 0j0
£

the hand, and on the infide from
Agen pits unto the begining of the palm of the hand, and of
the fingers, are three parts. The compafs of the head byche
“middle of the forehead hath three parts; the compats of the
rdling place hath four in 2 well fet man, but in aie
ie three parts and aha ‘or as much as is from the top i
ce Bortom ofthe belly, The compafs of the
“the arm-pit to the back hath five parts,vsz. asmuch ashalfehe
“whole length.From the crown ofthe head, co the knuglesiof the
__gallet ts the thirteenth part of che whole altitude. The 1 arms be.
‘ing’ ftretched upward, theelbow isevento the crown of the
‘ead: Bat now let as. fee how equal the other commenfurations
-gte to‘one the other: As mach as che diftance is from the chin to

‘the top of the breaft, fo is the laticude of the mouth ; 4s
“much as'is the diftance the top of the breaft, to the
_~navell, fo of the ex michas th

diftance the chin to'the:crown of thehead, fo great is
“the faticnde of the gitdling place; asisthe diftance from the
of the nofe to the bottom, inthe betwixt the
chip, “and the Papiond Alfo the cavity,of the eyes from the
eye-brows unto the inwagd corners, and the
upper lip; fay chefe three

é
°
¢
a
WES
€
é
of
i
§
a
at
bY
? »
/ FED
a®
‘.
Pi
4. > 2 ¥

a
B

‘
Occult 279

‘

And from thence where the hand is joyned tothe arm onthe
outfide,and ia the infide from the cop of the naile of themiddle |
finger unto the Jowermoft joync, and from thence rothefhut-
ting of che hand; I fay all thefe parts are equallamongitthem- =
felves. The. greater joynt of the forefinger equals the height

of the.foréheads the orher two co the top of the nailerqnall

the. nofe) from the top co the bottom; the fitand

HLH : Zu,
QE
Ay, A
S
A

oo

joynt of the middle finger equals chat fpace which is betwixt
the end of the nofe to theend of thechin; and the fecond
joyat of the middle finger tsas much as the.diftance from the

botcom of thé chin to the top of the fewer lip} buc che third -
from the monthto the end of the nofe, but the wholehand
asthe whole face. The greater joyntof thechumbis
asmuch asthe widnefs of the mouth , and as the diftagce
twixt the bottom of the chin, and chetropof thelower lip ;
but the leffer joy nt is as.much as the diftance betwixt thérop
of the Jower and the end of thenofe ; the nailes are half as

“much as thofe joynts which ghey call the naile joynts. The

-diftance betwixt the middie of the eye browsto the oucwagd
corners.of the eyes.is as much as betwixt thofecorners and the -
“ears. The hight of the forehead, the length of the nofe, and»
“the-widnefs of the mouth are equatl. Alfo the bredth of the
hand, andfootare the fame, The diltance becwixt the lower

part of the ankle to the cup of the foot is the fame as that be-
‘twixt the top of the foor andthe end of the nailes. - The

diftance from the top of the forehtad to the place beewixt the -
-eyes, and from chat to the end of the nofe, and fromhence to

the end of the chin isthe fame. The eye- brows joynedtoge-

- % - \gher are as much as the circle of the eyes, andthe half circle of

ghe ears equals che widnefs of the mouth : ‘Whencethe circles

te

of the eyes, ears, and mouth opened are equall, The bredth

‘of the nofe is as ‘much as the length of theeye ; Hence the

eyeshave two parts ofthat {pacé which is betwixt both extre-

the head to. the bortom of the chin, theleyes are the middie;

bottom the chin, the end of the lowes lipis the middle; a

mities of the eyes ; a third parc the mofe that is betwixt takes

_ up. From thecrown of thehéad to the knees the navel is the.

middle; from the top of the breaftto the end of the nofe the

fromthe fpace beewiat the eyes to the botrom-of the chin, the
endof the nofe is the middle : fromthe end’ of the nofe to the

third part of the famediftance ische upper lip. Moreover. all
ghefe meafures are cheough manifold proportions, an¢harmo-
‘@iacall confeats confonant oncto the other ; for the thumb is

‘
A
q
e
“4g
t
«
“ab
4 ‘
OL the throat makes the mid¢ le from the crown of
ag
tad

Book I 1. eo Of Occult Philofop

°

co che weelt ina cirtular Meafire ina double propdr
half ; For it contains it ewice and ahalfas five 1s co-cwo; Bat

fhoulder is triple ; The greatneffe of the leg isto thar of the

the fame proportion is of the neck tothe leg, as of thar to
the-Arm. The proportion of the thigh is triple

thence to the foles of the Feet, aThird and a half; From the
neck tothe navell, and to the end of the trunk a Double.

‘The Jatitude of them to the laticude of the thigh; is half fo
mach again; of the headto the neck triple, of the headto —

the knee triple,! the fame tothe leg. The length of the fore-
head betwixt the temples is fourfold to the height thereof ;
Thefeare thofe meafures which are everywhere found ; by

which the members of mans body according to the length,

bredch, height , and circumference: thereof agree
themfelvés, and alfo with the Celeftials themfelves: all which

meafores are divided by manifold proportions either upon

értion and

to the Arm;

The. proportion of the whole Body to the Trunk, is eigth and ©
a half;° From the Trunk or Breit to the lags, and from

the proportion of the fameto the brawn of the Arm neerthe _-
Arm, a proportion half fo much again asof thteeto two; And

them that divide,orare mixed,from whence there refultsama-

nifold Hatmony. For a double proportion makes thrite’2 Di-

apafon ; four times double, twice a Diapafon, ahd Diapente.
After the fame manner are Elements, qualities, complexions,
and humots pfoportioned. For thefe weights. of humors and
complexions are afligned to a found and wellcompofed man,

viz.the eight weights of blood, of flegm four, of choler two,of -
melancholy one , that on both fides there be by order®a-
double proportion; buc of the firltco the third , and of the

fecond to the fourth, @ four times double proportion ;
but of che firft to che faft an cightfold, *~Dio/corides faith,
that the heart of a man in the 'firft yeer hath the weight of two
Drams;in the fecond four,and fo proportonably in che fiftyéth
yeer to have the weight of ahundred Drams, from which
time the decreafes are again reckoned to an equilibrium,which,

thé coutfe being ended,may return to the fame fimic,

‘
on
> » |

—

— -

a at »
“hy
bu
of.
a
‘
ad
ae
é
“3

—

»

y
»

{pace of life by the decay of that member by

‘which account of a hundred-years, he circum(cribed the life of

man. And thisfaith P/ny was the-herefie of the Egyptians.

The motions alfo of the members of mens bodies anfwer
~ to the Celeftial motions, and every man hath in himfelf the -
-. motion of his heart, which aniwers to the motion of the Sun,

-and being diffufed through the Arteries into the whole body,

fignifies tous by a molt fure rule, years, moneths, dayes,hours,

and minutes. Moreover, there is a certain Nerve found by the

Anatomifts about the nod: of the neck, which being touched

doth fo move all the members of the body, that every one of

them move according to its proper motion ; . by which like
touch eAriftotie thinks the members ofthe world are moved.
by God. And-there are twe veines in the neck, which being
held hard prefently the mansftrength fajlesy-and his fenfes are
taken away untill they be loofened, Therefore the eternal

Maker of the world when he was to put the foul into the

‘ body, as into its habitation, firlt made a fit lodging worthy to

-geceive it, and endows the molt excellent foul with a moft
«beautiful body, which then the foal knowing its own divinity,

frames and adorns for its own habitation. Hence the people

Of ethiopia, which were governed by the wifdoth of Gymno-

_Sopbifts, as Arifforle witnefleth, did make them Kings, not: of
thofe which were moft ftrong, and wealthy, but thofe onely

which were moft proper and beautiful ; for they conceived

that the gallancry of the minde did depend upon the excellen-

of the body. Which many Philofophers, aswell ancient as
fuch as fearched into the fecrets of cau-

fes hid in the very Majefty of Nature, were bold co affert, that

there was no fault of, and no difproportion in the body,which
the-vice and intemperance of the minde did not follow, be-

-caufe itis certain that they do increafe, thrive, and operate by

athehelponcofthe other, 2

& O
Var -
é
a
a?

Book II. Of Occult Philofophy.
Of the Compofition and Harmony of the humane foul,

A, Sthe Confonancy of the body confifts of a due meafure
| and proportion of the members : fo the confonancy of
the minde of a due temperament, and proportion~of irs -ver=
cues and operations which are concupifcible, irafcible, and
reafon , which are fo proportioned together. For Reafonto
Concupifcence. hath the proportion Diapafos; but to
Anger Diateffaron : and Itafcible to Concupifcible hath
the proportion Déapente. When therefore the belt propor-
-tionated foul is joyned to the belt proportionated body, itis.
manifeft that fuch a man alfo hath received a molt happy- lot :
inthe diftribucion of gifts, forasmuchasthe foulagrees-with
the body in the difpoficion of Naturals, which agreement in- ~ 7
deed is mofthid,yet after fome maner fhadowed to
wife. But to haften to the Harmony of the foul, we matt in-
quire into it by thofe Mediums by which it pafleth co us,(.e.:)
by Celeftial Bodies,and Sphears; Knowing therefore whatare
the powers of the foul to which the Planets. an{wer, we thal by ere
thofethings which have been {poken of before, the more eafily ae
know their agreements among{t themfelves. For the Afcone
governs the powers of increafing and decreafing; the Phantafie _
and Wits depends on Mercary , the Concupifcible vertue on
Venus ; the Vitall onthe Swn; the Irafcible on AZars; the Nas:
tural on Jupiter. the Receptive on Satarn : but the Willasthe
Primum Mobile, and the guide of all thefe Powers at pleafure, 2 i
being joyned wich the fuperior intelle&, is always tend> =
ing'to good; which intellect indeed doth alwayes fhew'a path-.
way to the Will, as a Candle'to the eye ; but ic movesnorit
felf, but isthe Miftrifs of her own operation, whence it is cal--
led Free will; and althougt it alwayes. tends to good, as an.
obje& furable rode felf: yet fometimes being blinded with: .
error, the animal power forcing it, it choofeth evil) believingit
to be good. Therefore Willis defined:to be a-faculiy of the in-.

we

—

r
e
R

ae"

d 4 » P

“elle, & Will Wherby good | is chofen by the help of Grace;and
Eyil,thac not affifting.Grace rhereforewhich. Divines call Cha-

rity, Or infufed Love is inthe Will, asa firft mover ; which be-

ing abfene, the whole confent. falls into Diffonaney,: More-

foul anfwers to the Earth by Senfe, to the Water by
_ Imagination, to the Air by Realon, to. the Heaven by the
- Intelle&t; and the Toul goes out into an Harmony of them,
according asthefe are tempered in..a mortall body. The wife |
Ancients therefore knowing that the Harmonious difpofitions —
of bodies and foulsare divers, according to the. divertfy of
thecomplexians of men, did not in-yain ufe Mufical founds
and ingings,zs to confirm thé health of the body, and reftore it
being Joft, fo ro bring the minde to wholfome manners, vatill
they make a man fucable tothe Celeftial Harmony, and make
him wholly Celeftial, Moreover, there is nothing more cfiica-.

_ ciousto. drive away evil {pirics then Muficall Harmony (for

they being fain from that Celeftial Harmony, cannot endure

any true confent, as being an enemy to them, ‘bur Ay from it )

as David by bis Harp:appealed San/, being troubled with an
 evikfpirit. tience by the ancient Prophets and Fathers, who
knew thefe Harmonicall myfteries, finging and founds
were into facred fervifes.

opibe of nece fry in evry Magical
Wor

natural vertue doth work ngs fen

whenitis not onely compounded of a natural, propor.
by-a choice obfervacion of the Cele~
leftials: Oppertunc to this (viz, when the Celeftial power is

-moftitrong to thar effet which we'defire, and alfo by

Celeftials), by fubjeGting inferiors: roche Celeftials, as.
propesfemales.cobeimade frpitiul by their males. Alig inevery.

are to. the ‘fituation, motion, and.

q >
ay
‘Zz 4 FS

afpect! of the Stars, and Planets, in Signsand Degrees, and

how all thefe ftand in referencete the-length and Jatitude of -
~ the Climate ; for by this are varyed the qualities of the angles,
which the rays of Celeftial bodies upon the figure of the thing
defcribe, according to which Celeftial are infufed.
So when thou art working.any ching which belongetoamy
powerful, and ruling in the day, hour,and im the Figure of che
Heaven. Neither fhalc thou expeét the fignification of the 4
work tobe powerful, but alfo chou. mult obferve the AZoom
opportunely directed to,this 5:for thou nothing with-
out the affiltance of the And)if thou haft more pactéras
of thy work, objerve them all being motk powerful, and look,
ing upon one the other with a friendly afpect; and sf thoucanft |
not have fuch afpects, it will be. convenient at leaft that thou
take them angular, Bug thou. take the, either
when the looks upon both, or isyoyned to.one, and leoksupon
the other ; or when-the paffeth from the, conjunction, or, aipeat
of one to the conjuGtion. or afpeet of ‘the other : toe that
conceive muft in no wife be omitted; alfothouthale inevery
work obferve A¢ercury; for he is a meMenger betwixt the
higher gods, and infernal gods ; when, hepoethtathe good —
he increafeth their goodnes;. when.co.the bad, Bath influence
upon their wickednefs. We call it an unfortuhateSign,or
net, when it is by the afpe@t of Saturn or. Adars, efpecially.op- —
pofite, or quadrant; for thefe are.afpects of enmity; but acon-
junGtion,or a trine,or, fexule afpect are of friendthip; becwixg
thefe there is agreater conjunCtiom: bur yecif chou doftalresm
dy behold it through a trine, and the Planet be received, itis ‘SS
accounted as already. copjoyned.. Now all Planetsar¢ afraid
of the conjunction of. the S##,rejoycing in the,crine,andfextile

I A P |
4 C H }
‘ —
4 «

aa

ult

Book

»

When Planets are of moft powerful influence.

YOw we fhall have the Planets powerfull when they are
in a Houle, or in Exaleation or Triplicity, or
-. germ, or face without combuftion of what is dire& in the fi-
‘gure of the heavens,véz when they

are in Angles, efpecially of
the rifing, or Tenth, or in honfes prefently fucceeding, or
in their delights. But we muft rake heed that they be not in

the bounds or under the dominion of Saturn or Wars, leaft
~ they be in dark Degrees,in pits or vacuityes. Thou thalt oc-.
ferve thatthe Angles of the Afcendentr, and Tenth and Se-

venth be fortunate, as*alfo the Lord of the Afcendent and ©
lace of the San and Moon, and the place of part of the for-
tune, and the Lord'thereof, the Lord of the foregoing Con-
jon@tion & prevention : But chat they of the malignant Planet

fall'unfortunate, unlefs haply they be fignificacors of thy work,
 ‘orcan be any way advantagious tothee ; or ifin thy revoluti-

on or birth, they had the predominancy; for then they are
not at all to be deprefled. Now we fhall have the A/ocone

‘powerfal ifthe bein her houfe, or exaltation, or triplicity, or

ice, and in degree convenient forthe defired work, and if

it hatha manfion of cthefe twenty and eight futable to ic felf

and the work ; Let her not be inthe way burnt up, nor flow in
eourféslet her not be inthe Ecclipfe,or burne by the Sun, unlef

a fhe be in unity with the Sun; lec her not defcend in the
Southern latitude, when the

goeth out of the burning, neither

fet-her be dppofite to the Sun,nor deprived of light lec her not

 behindred by ot Satarn/T will not here difcourfe any

longer of thefe, feeing thefe, and many more neceffary things
are fufficiently handled in the: Volts of Aftrologers,

ks
at
‘.
a
é

Of the Obfervation of the fixt Stars, and of their Natures. =

T= is the like confideration to be had in all chings con. a
cerning the fixe {tars.Know thisthatallche fixeftarsareof «©
the fignification and nature of the feven Planets; bucfomelare ree
of the nature of one Planet, and fome of two; Henceasoften
as any Planet isjoyned with any-of che fixe {tars of its own nas aq
ture, che fignificacion of that {tar is made more powerful, and op
the nature of rhe Planet nted:
natures, the nature of that which fhall be theftronger with =a
it (hall overcome in fignification ; as for example, if ic of
thenature of AZars, and Venus ; if Afars thallbe che ftronger
wich it, the nature of AZarsfhall overcome; butif Venus, the
nature Of Venus (hall overcome, Now the natures of fixt ftars
are difcovered by their colours, ae-they agrée with certain
Planets, and are-afcribed to them. Now.thecolours ofthe
Planets are thefe : of Saturn, blew, and leaden, and fhining
with this: of ?wpiter citrine neer to a palenefs, and clear |
with this ; of “Wars, red,and fiery ; of the Sux. yellow, and
when it rifeth red, afterward glittering : of Venus, white
fhining; white. with the morning, and reddifh in theeve. | |
ning : of Mercary,glittering; of the AZoon,fair. K now alfo that
of the fixed {tars by how mach the greater, and >the. brighter an
and apparent they are, fo much the anditrongeris
the fignification ;-fuch are thefe {tars which are called —
by the Aftrologers of the firft, and fecond: Magnitude. I will
tell thee. fome. of thefe. which are more potent ro. this fa-
culty, as are viz the Navel of Andromeda in two-and twen-
tieth degree of Aries, of the nature of Venus,8c Mercury;fome -
callit Jovial, & Saturnine. The head of Algol in the eighteenth
degree of Tanrus, of the.matuce of and jupiter. The _
Pleiades are alfoin the twoand twentieth degrec,a Lanag {tar
by Nature and by complexion Martial. Alfo in the thicd degree
of Gemini is eAldeboram, of the nature of AZars, and cOm-
plexion of. Penus ; but Hermes placeth thisin the

©

“
}
a
i

_ ~~" fifth degree of Aries. The Goat ftar is in the thirteenth
degree of the faid Gemini; of the nature of 7upiter, and Sa
the greater Dog. {tarisin the feventh degree of Cancer,
and Venereai : the leffer Dog- {tar is in the feventeenth degree.
of the fame, and is of the nature of AZercury, and léxion
pf Afars. The Kingsftar, which is called the Heart of the Lion,
is in the one and- twentieth degree:of Leo,and of the nature of
Fapiter and Mars; the tail of the greater Bearis in the nine.
seenth degree of Virgo, and is Venereal,and Lunary. The Scat
‘ which is called the-right wing of the Crow isin the feventh de-
gree of Libra, and inthe thirteenth degree of the fame is the
~ deft wing of the fame, and:both of the nature of Satern and
_. (Mars. The Scar called Spicaisin the fixteenth degree of the
fame, and.is Venereal and Mercurial. In the fevenceenth
gree ofthe fame is ¢4/cameth, of the nature of (Mars; and
Jupiter; bueof this when the Swns afpec is full'towards it ; of
whenvomthescontrary. €lepheia in the fourth degree of
Scorpio, ot thenature: of Vents, Afars: The Heart of the
_ Scorpiontsin the chird degree of Sagittarius, of the nature of
Mars, and Jupiter: the falling Vulture is in the feventh de-
gree.of Capricorn, Temperate, Mercurial, and Venereal: The
of Capricorn is in the fixteenth degree of Aguarim, of the
‘nature of Saturn, and ALercury The Star called the Shouldet
isin thethird degree of Pi/cs, of thenatnre of
and’ Mars: And icfhall- bea genes! rule for thee to
aie expect the proper gifts of the Stars whileft they rule,to be pre-
vented of them; they being unfortunate, and oppofite, as
 bove fhewed: For Celeftial bodies, in as much as they are affe-
Med fortunately, orunfortunarely, fo much do they affeé us,
ourworks;aud thofe things which we ule, forcunately, or un:
‘happily. And alchough manycftetts proceed from the fixe Stars,
_-yetthey are attributed to the Planets, asbecaufe being more
—neertous, andmorediftin@and known, fo becaufe they ex-
_ ecute-whatfoever the fuperior Starscommunicate cothem.”

f

7 CHAP.

e*

‘
»
a
‘

ry

J

Ay , CH A?, XXXII. is
Of theSun,and Moon, and their Magicall confiderations:

San, and Moon have obtained the adminiftration or

uling of the Heavens, and all bédies under the heavens;

The Sunis the Cord of all Elementary -vertues; andthe Moon

by vertue of the Sin. ts the miftrefS of generation, increale, or

decreafe. Hence Albumafar faith; that by the Sun and ‘Moon

life is infufed into all things, which therefore Orpheus cals the

enlivening eyes of the heaven. The Sun giveth lighctoall

things of ic felf, and givesit plentifully co all things not only

in the Heaven, Aire,but Earth and: Deep: whatfoever we
have,as Famblicus faith, we have it from the Sun alone, or from
it through other things. Heraclitus cals thé Sun the fountaia

of Celeftiall light; and many of che Plaronifts placed _

foul of the world chiefly in the Sun, as that which filling the

whole Globe of the Sun doth fend forthits rayes onall fides —
as i¢ were a {pirit thcough all things, diftriburing life, fenfeand —

motion to the very Univerfe.. Hence the anciene Naturalifts
called the Sun the very heart of heaven.; and the Caldeans put
itasthe.middle of the Planets. The Egyptians alfo placed icin
the middle of the world, viz. betwixt che twoofives of :the

world,e¢:%. above the Sun they place five Planers; and under.

the Sun,the Moon and four Elements.’ For itis:amongft the
other Stars the image and ftacue of che great Prince of both
worlds,viz.. Terreftiall, and Celeftiall; the true light, and the

moft exact image of God himfelf; whofe Effence refembles the:

Father, Light the Son, Heat the Holy Ghoft. So that thé Pla-
tonifts have nothing to. hold forth the Divine Efleneg more:

manifeftly. by, then this.. So great is the: confonanopafitto

God , that. P/ato cals icthe confpicuous Son of God\and
blicus cals tt the divine image of divine intelligence. Andour

Dionyfius calsit the perfpicuons ftatue of God. It fics asKing
in the middle of orher Planets, excelling allin light, greatnéts,
fairnels; enlightaing all, diftribucing vertue to chem to

inferior bodies, and regulating and difpofing of their mot

NM

Of Occult Philosophy.

iy

al

‘

their dens ; which being put to flight, it followes, Man thall

darknels of the night, fo alfo all powers of darknefs, which we
read of in fob; Affoon as morning appears,they
fhadow of death : And the Pfalmift fpeaking of the Lyons

whelps fecking leave of God :to devour, faith, The Sun

rifen, and they are gathered together, and (hall be placed in

go forth ro his labor. The Sun therefore asit poffeffeth
the middie Region of the world, and as the heart is -in
Animals to the whole body, So the Sun is over the heaven,
and the world, ruling over the whole Univerfe, and thofe

things which are in it, the very author of feafons, from whence

day and year, cold and heat, and all other qualities of fea-
fons; and as faith Ptolemy, when it comesunco the place of
any Star, it ftirs up the power thereof which ic hath in the
Aire.. Soaswith AZars, heat; with Saturn, cold; and it di-

i rem even the'very {pirit and mind of man; from-hence it is

aid by Homer, and approved by 4riffot/e, that there are in

the mind fuch like motions, as the Sun the Prince and mode-

rator of the Planets every day bringethtous; but the Moon,
the nigheft to the Earth, the receptacle of all the heavenly In-

~ Auences, by the fwiftnelé of her courfe is joyned to the Sun, and
other Planets and Stars, every month, and being made as

it were the wife of all che Scars,ische molt fruicful of the Stars,

and receiving the beams and influences of all the other planets
and Stars as a conception, bringing them forch tothe inferior
world as being next to it fel’ ; for all the Scars have influence on:

it being the laft receiver; which afterwards communicateth

the influences of all che fuperiors to thefe inferiors, and pours — |

them forth on the Earth; and ic’more manifeftly difpoteth

thefeinferiors, then the others, and its motion is more. fenfi-

ble by the familiarity and propinquity which it hath with us;
and asa medium betwixt both, faperiors and inferiors, cor-

municareth chem to them all ; Therefore her motion. istobe
obferved before che others, as the ‘parent of all conceptions,

°

Book IT;
 f that from thence theit motions are called daily, or nightly,
Southern, or Northren, Orientall, or Occidentialf; dire@t, of
. “getrograde; and ‘as it doth by its light drive away all the

think of the -

+s

ng!

‘ 4 >
‘
4 cc
bul

‘

r

Of Occult Philofiphy. 285
—

which it diverfe ly iffueth forth in-thefe Inferiors, according to.

the diverfe complexion, motion, fituation,and different afpe@s

to the planets and others ‘Stars;and though ic receiveth powers

from all che Stars, yet efpecially from the Sun; as oft as itisin
conjun@tion with the fame;itis replenifhed with vivifying ver-

rue, and according to the afpect thereof it borroweth itscom-

 plexion; forin.the firft quarter, as the Peripatetickes deliver,
it ishoe and moift; in the fecond, hor and dry; in the third, cold
and dry; in che fourth cold and moift; and alchough it is the
lowelt of the ftars, yet it bringeth forth all the conceptions of
the fuperiors ; for from it tm the~heavenly bodies beginneth
that feries of things which Platocalleth the Golden Chain, by
the which every thing and caufe being linked one to an other,
do depend onthe fuperior, even untillir may be brought to

the fupreme caufe of all, from which all things depend ; from.

hence is it, that without the Moon intermediaring, we cannot
at any time attract the power of he fuperiors. Therefore

T hebit-advifeth vs, for the taking of the vertue of any Star,to-

take the ftone and herb of that plant, when the Moon doth

either fortunately get under or hath a good afpect on that

Star.

CHAP. XXXIII

Of the twenty eight Manfions of the Moon, and their ver-

men of the Indians and ancienteft Aftrologians have- granted

Nd feeing the Moon meafureth the whole Zadiack, in the :
fpace of rwenty eight dayes ; hence isit, chac the wile-

twenty eight Manfions to the Moon, which being fixed inthe ~

eight fphere, do enjoy (as Alpharus faith) diverie names and
proprieties from the diverfe Signs andScars which are contain-

ed ih them, through which while the Mo6n wandeeth,it ob-

taineth other and other powers and vertues ; butevery one of -

thefe Manfions according to the opinion of Abraham,  con-
tainth twelve degrees, and one and fifty minutes, an

dalmoft
cwenty

a Zodiack of che eight fphere,are thefe. The firft is called 41.

«

in

fix fecondls,whole trams and alfo theie bepinnines

nath, that isthe horns of e ries; his beginning is from the
head of Aries of the eighth fphere; itcaufeth difcords, and
journies; the fecond iscalled Allothaim or Albochan,that is the

belly of Aries, and his beginning is from the twelfth degree.

oft one minutes, twenty two feconds com.
‘pleat ; it

taining of captives; The third iscalled -4chaomaxon or
thoray, that is, fhowring or Pleiades;his beginning is from the

‘twenty five degrees of Aries compleat fourty two minutes,and

fifty one feconds; it isprofitable to Saylers, Hunt{men, and Al-

Chymifts ; The fourth Manfion is called Aldebaram ot Aldo.

lamen that is the eye or head of Zanrus;his beginning is from

the eight degree of Zaurus, thirty four minutes, and feventeen

feconds of che fame 7 anrus being excluded; it caufeth the de-
ftruétion and hindrances of buildings, fountains, wels, of gold-
mines,the flight of creeping things,and begetteth difcord. The

fiftts called eAlchatay or Albachay; che beginning of it is af-
terché twenty one degree of Zaurus, twenty five minutes, ©

fourty feconds; it helpeth tothe return fgom a journey, to the
inftruétion of fcholars, ic confirmeth edifices, ic giveth health
and good will, the fixth is called A/banna or Alchaya,that is the

little Star of great light; his beginning is after the fourth de-

of Gemini, fevehteen minutes, and nine feconds ; it con-

‘duceth to Hunting, and. befieging“of Towns, and revenge of
princes, it deftroyeth Harvelts and frnits and hindreth the ope- .
gation. of the Phyfitian. The feventh is called Aldimiach or Al-
areach, the Arm of Gemini the
fevénteeheth degree of Gemini, eight mifutes and chitty four

_ fedotids, and jafteth even co the end of the fign; it conférteth

gin atid friendthip, its profirable to Lovers,it {careth Ayes, de-

royeth Magifterics. And fo isone quarter of the ieayen com-

‘Pleated it ehiefe feven Manfions;atid in the like order ahd num-

w

Of mintires and feconds, the Manfidns
im every quatter have thert feverall begitinings; namely {v,chat

of this qaarter three “Manfions take their be-

uceth to the finding of treafures, and tothe ree

—_

's

oF
‘
fort
= na
the
ae COi
et,
Fx
Ar
ye
- re
he:
fi
ad
¥
nd

“

innings, in che other figns two Manfions in each: There.
the feven following Manfions begin from Cancer, whofe
names are Alnaxa Avatrachyavthat is milty or cloudy,viz.
the eighth Manfion; it caufeth love, frrendfhip, and fociery of
fellow travellers, it driveth away mice and afflicteth Captives,
confirming their iztpeifonmenc. After this is the ninth called
Archaam ox Arcaph,that isthe eye of theLyon;it hindrethHar-
veltsand travellers, and putreth difcord between men. The
tenth is called Algelioche or Albgebh, that isthe neck or fore,
head of Leo; it trengtheneth buildings, yeeldeth love, bene:
volence and help againft enemies ; the eleventh is called 4zo-
bra or Ardaf, that is, the hatr of the Lyons head; it is aod for
voyages, and gain by merchandize, and for redemption of
Captives ; the cwelfthis called A/zarpha Azarpha, that is
the rayle of Leo; it giveth profperity to Harvefts; and Planca-
tions, bur hindreth Seamen, but it is good forthe bettering of
fervants, Captives and companions. The thirteenth isnamed.
Alhbaire, that is Dogftars, or the wings of Virgo; it is pravaient
for Benévolence,gain, voyages, Harvefts, and freedomof
tives; the fourteenth is called Achwreth or Arimet, by others
Azimeth or Alhumech or Alcheymech,that is the {pike of Virgo,
or flying fpike;it caufeth the love of marryed folk, it cureth the
fick, its profirable to Saylors,but it hindrerh journies by land:
and in thefe the fecond quarter of Heaven is compleaced. The
other feven follow, the firlt of which beginneth im the head of .
Libra,viz, the fifteenth Manfion, andhis name is Agraphaor - =
_Algarpha, that is, covered,or covercd flying; its protcable for
the extra@ting oftreafures, for digging of pits, ic helpeth for-
ward: divorce, difcord, and the deftruction of houfesandene-
mies,and hindreth travellers. The fixceenth is called Azinbene or
Abubene, that. is, the Hornsof Scorpio, it hindereth journyes
and Wedlock,Harvelts and Merchandize, it prevaileth for re-
demption of captives. Thefeventeenth is called A/chif,thatis
the Crown of Scorpio,it bettereth a bad fortune, makethlove ~_
durable,ftrengtheneth buildings, & helpech Seqmen; The eigh-
teenth iscalled Alchas or Altob, that is the Heart. of Scorpie; it

caufeth difcord, fedition, confpir acy againit princes and mighty

oF
| “eg
“

OF Occult Philofophy. | Bookll.
inne ones, and revenge from enemies, but it freeth captives and
elpeth edifices; che ninteenth is called Al/atha or Achala,by
~ others Hycula or Axala, that isthe tayle of Scorpio; it helpeth
jm the_befieging of Cities and taking of Towns, and in the dri.

of men from their places, and for the deftrudtion of Sea-
men, and perdition of captives. The twenteeth is called Abna-

die

pagaghat is a beam; it helpeth for the taming of wild beafts, for
= °° the ftrengthening of prifons,ic deltroyeth the wealth of focie-
 ~ ties,it compelleth aman to come toa certain place. The one &

_twentieeth is called Abedaor Albeldach which is a defert ; itis
_ good for Harvelts,gain buildings and trayellers,and caufeth di-
-vorce;& in this ts the third quarter of Heave compleated. There
.remaineth the feven laft Manfions compleating-the laft quarter
 ofheaven‘; the of which being in order co the two and
~ > gwentyeth,beginnech from the head of Capricorn, called Sada-
haha or Zodeboluch, or Zandeldena, that isa paftour; it pro-
A _ moteth the fitght of fervants and captives,that they may efcape,
and -helpeth thecuring of difeafes; the three and twentieth is
Zabadola or Zobrach that is fwallowing ; it maketh for
f£ . divorce, liberty. of captives and the health of the fick ; the
twenty fourth ts called Sadabath or ( badexoad,that is the Star
aoe Of fortune; itis prevalent for the Benevolence of marryed
_ folk; for the victory of fouldiers, it hurteth the execution of
Government, and hindreth chart may not beexercifed ; The
twenty fifth is called Sadalabra or Sadulachia , that is a Butter-
~ flyora {preading forth;it helpeth befieging and revenge, it de-
ftgeyeth enemies, maketh divorfe, confirmeth prifons and buil-
meffengers, ic conduceth to {pels againft copu-
Jatton, and fo bindeth every member of man, chat ic cannot
perform his ducy;the twenty fixch is called Alpharg ot Phragal -
Mocaden, chat is the firkt drawing ; ic maketh for the Union
- aaddove of men,for the health of captives,it deftroyerh prif-
 @psand boildings; The'twenty feyenthis called Alcharya or
thariscthe fecond drawing; it cucrcafech’ Har-
Gain, it healeth infirmities, hindreth
__ buildings, prolongeth prifons, caufech danger to Seamen, and

A

helpeth to infer, mifchiefs on: whom yon fhall pleafe; the
twenty eight and laft iscalled.e dlbotham or Alchalcy, that is

it encreafeth Harvelts and Merchandize, it fecnreth
travellers through dangerous plapes; it maketh for the joy of
marryed couplés,but it {trengthenth prifons,and caufeth lois of
treafures; and in chefe twemycight. Manlions do lye hid many
fecretsof the wifdom of the Ancients, by the which they.
wrought wonders on all things'which areunder the circleof
the Moon; and they attributed to every Manfion his refem- wo

blances, Images, and feals, and his prefidenc intelligences, and

they did work by the vertue of them after diverfe man-

Of the true, motion of theiheavenly bodies to be obferved in the
cight (phere, and of the gromndof Planetary hours.
AV Hofoever will work according to the Celeftiall op-
' portunity, ought to obferve both or one of them,
namely the motion’ of the Stars, or their -times-;—Lfay their
motions, when they ar¢-in their dignities or dejeétions, either
effential or accidentall ; but I call their times,dayes and hours —
diftributed £0 .thein. Dominions. Concerning allthefe; itisa-
bundantly taught.in-chebooks of Aftrologers; butinthisplace
two things efpecially are to be confidered and obferved by us, i
One that we obferve:the motions and alcenfions aad windings
of Stars, even as they. are in truth imthe eight pet
the negleGtof which it. happenech-thac many err in'Fabricaci
the Celeftiall Images, and are defrauded of their defired effe®;, E's
the other thing »we ought to obferve, is aboutthetimesof
choofing the planetary,hours; foralmolt all: Aftrologersdi-
vide‘all chat. fpaceofsime.fromthe Sun; rifing to fetting into
twelve equall parts, andicali chem the twelvehonrsofthe day;
then the time which followeth from che fecting to the rifing, a
in like Manner being divided they

= 4 , i

i

»
a

0 Occ t ilo 0 mK
OO

twelve hours of the night, and then diftribute ‘each of
hours to-every one of the Planets according to the order
“of their{ucceffions, giving alwayes the ‘firft hour of the’ day
-tothe Lord of that day; then to every one by order,even to.
theend of cwenty four hours; and in this diftribution the Ma.
gicians agree with thems but in the partition of the hours fome
do diffent, faying, that the fpace of the rifing and feccing is not
to be divided into équall parts, and chat thofe hours are not
therefore called unequal becaufe the diurnal are unequal to the
no@urnall, but becaufe both the diurnal and noCturnal are even
‘unequalf among{t chemfelves ; therefore the partition of un-
 equall or Planetary hours hath a different reafon of their.mea-
fare obferved by Magicians, which is of this fore; for as in
~ artificiall hours, which are alwayes equall to themfelves, the
—afcenfions of fifteen degrees in the equinoétiall, confticur-
eth an artificial hour : fo alfo in planetary hours che af-
-‘€énfions of fifteen degrees in the Eclipticke conftiruteth anun-—
equallor planetary hour, whofe meafure we ought to enquire
and. find .out by the tables of the oblique afcenfions of every

How fome artificiall things as Images, Seals, and {uch like, may
obtain fome vertue fromthe Celeftial bodies,
is the extent, power and efficacy of the Celeftiall
bodies, that not only naturall things, but alfo artificial

es ‘when they are rightly expofed to thofe above, do prefently
Mee: ‘faffer by that moft potent agent, ‘and obtain a wonderfull life,
Which oftentimes gives them an admirable Celcftiall vertue ;
thing Saint Thomas Aquinas that holy Door, thas
.« €onfirmeth inthis book de fato , when he faith,, that even
buildings and other artificiall works whatfoever,do
teceive a certain qualification from the Stars; fo the Magicians
affirm, that net only by the mixture and application of natur-

nd af
4 go
‘Sher
i’
«
P
j
A

all things, but alfo in Images, Seals, Rings, Glaffes, and fore

OK Re

other Inftruments, being opportunely framed under acertain
conftellation, fome Celeitiall Iiluftration ‘may be taken, and
fome wonderfull thing may be received ; for the beams of |
the Celeftiall bodies being animated, living,fenfualljand bring-
ing along with them admirable gifts, and amoftviolent pow- — +"
er, do, even in a moment, and-at the firft touch, imprint'won-
derfull powers in the Images, thoughtheir matter belefsca-,
pable. Yet they beftow more powerfull verrues on the Im-

ages,if they be framed not of any,bit ofacertainmatter,name-. ~
ly whofe naturall, and alfo {pecificall vertue is agreeable with

the work,and the figure-of the image is like co the Celeftial;for

— fuch an Image, both in regard of the matter naturally eongru>
oustothe operation and Celeftiall influence, and alfofor its
figure being like co the Heavenly one, is bett d tore-—

ceive the operations and powers of the Celeftiall bodies and

figures, and inftantly receiveth the Heavenly gift into it felf;

then it conftantly worketh on. another thing, and other things

do yeeld obedience to.it. Hence faith Ptolemy in centiloguse,
that inferior things do ebey the Celeftiall , and not only
them, but alfo even their Images ; Even as earthly Scorpions
obey not only the Celeftiall Scorpion, but alfo his Image,
if ic (hall be opportunely figured uader his afcent and Domi-

ad

el
‘

the Zodiackcitcle twelve generat images, according the

Tee ced

Fy

ihe Tages ofthe Z what bg ing craven, |

receive from the

Ur ithe Ceteftial, to kenefe
J migesof this kinde are framed, are very many inthe hea-

Die. Some 'vifible and'confpicuous, others onely imaginable,

conceived anid ‘fer’ down-by Egyprians, Dudians and (baldeans ;
and their are fo‘ordered, that ¢venthe figures of fme of
them are diftingujfhed: from others ; for this reafon they place.

umber of thefrgns: of thefe they confticuting Aries, Leo, and

Sagiteary “for che fiery “anid do réport

thar its profitable againft’Feavors, Palfie, Dropfie, Gout, and
‘col anid phleginatick’ infirmiics, ‘and that it makes ‘him

“who carrieth it to be acceprable, ‘eloquent, ingenious and

norable, Becaulé they ‘ate the Houyfes ‘of Mars Sof, and

yer. ‘They made alfo the image of a againft melancholy

‘phantafies, the Dropfic,’ Plage; Feavors, and to expel difeates,.
‘at the hour Of the Sa, the firlt degree of the fign of Leo a-
which is the face Decanate of Pupier; but againkt-
theStone, and difeafes of the Reins, and againft the hurts of
beafts, they made the fame image when So/ in the heart of the
‘Lion the midft of-heaven: and again, becaufe Ge-
mini, Libra, and doconftitute the Aerial and Occi-
dental Tripliciry,andare the houfes of Afercury,Venns,and
are faid co put difeafes,to conduce tofriend-.
fhip andconcord, to prevail againft melancholy, and to caufe
health; & they report that Aquarius efpecially freeth from the
Quarcane, Alfo, that Cancer, Scorpio, and Ps/ces, becaufe they.

conftirate the watry & Northern Triplicity, do prevail again

hot and dry Fevors; alfo againft the Heetick, and all chole-
rick paffions; bat Scorpio, becaufe amongft the members it re-
the privy parts, doth provoke loft: but thefe. did:
it for his face which- be.

“

a;
Pp
Y
™
fez
é
ZL,
ra
¥ =e -
J be & +4

Bookii.” OF Philip:

longeth to they smiade the fame

and Scorpions, poyfons, and evil fpirits; his fecond face a-
fcending, which is the face of the Sun, and’ Decanate of.

piter; and they report that it maketh him who carrieth it,

wife, of a good colour; and they report that the image of
Cancer is moft efficacious againft Serpents, and poyfons, when —

Sul and Luna atein conjun@tion init, and afcendin the

and third face ; for thisis the face of Kenus, and the Decanate,
of Lana; but-the fecond face of Luna,the Decanate of Fupiser:
They reporealfo that Serpents arecormented when the Sas

isin Cancer : Alfo that Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, becaufe

they conftieute the earthly and Souchern po ao cure hot
infirmities, and prevail dgainft the Synocall Feaver ; it maketh
thofe that carry it grateful}'acceprable, eloquent, devout and
religious, becaufe they are the Houfee of Venus, Adars, and Sa-
turns Capricorn a\fo is reported to-keép men in fafety, and alfo

"CHAP. XXX

of the Images of the and Which are with

out shed odiack,

“Here are bef desi in the
ing co the number ofthe faces, of the which, (as Ae soty
faith ) Tencex, the Babylonian long fince wrote, who was-a

moft ancient. Mathematician, after whom the efrabians alfo

wrore ofthefé things. Therefore itis faid; that inthe firlt face
of eAfries,: the image ofa black man, ftanding and
cloathed ina white garment,: girdled about, of a great body,
with teddith eyes, and. great ftrength, and fike one that is
angry ; and chis image fignifieth.a caufeth boldnefs, forci-
tude, loftinels, and (hamelefnefs ;: in che fecond face afcendeth

this. image canfeth! noblenefs, height of a Kingdom, and

° zg ‘ j 4 “

‘
° a
°

afotm of a woman,) otitwatdly cloached with a red garment,
andunder it: .a over her feet, and

AFD
‘
a
“Ju
é 4
> J
“ sie
a
€
>»

: white man, pale, with reddith hair, and cloathed with a red

- garment, who carrying on the one handa golden Bracelet, ang
holding forth a wooden ftaff, -is reftlefs,and like one in wrath,
becdafehe cannot petform that good he would. This tmage
beftoweth wit, meeknefs, joy and beawty - m the firlt face

of Taurus afcendeth 2anakéd man, an Archer, Harvefter or
Husbandman, and goeth forth to fow, plough, burld, people,

and divide the earth, according to'the rules of Geometry ; in

- the fecdnd face afcendeth a maked man, holding in his hand a
key; it giveth power,nobility,and dommion over people:
the third face, afcendeth aman in whofe hand is a Serpent,
and adart,and is the image of neceflaty and profit, and alfo of

mifery- & flavery. In the firlt face of Gemini-afcendeth a man m

whofe hand 1s.a rod, and heis, as ic were, ferving another ; it
granteth wifdom , and the knowledge of numbers and arts in
which there ts noprofit; inthe fecondftace afcendetha man

_ 4n whofe hand isa Pipe, and another -being bowed down,
digging the earth: and they fignifie infamous and difhoneft
agility, as that of Jefters and Juglers; ic alfo fignifies labours
and painful fearchings: In thethird, afcendeth aman feekihg

for Arms, anda fool holding in the right hand a Bird, and im
hisfleft a pipe, and they are the fignifications of forgerfulnefs,

_. wrath, boldnefs, jeafts, fcurrilities, and unprofitable words : In

> the face of Cancer afcéndeth the form of a young Virgin,

adorned with fine cloathes, and having a Crown on herhead;
it giveth acutenefs of fenfes, fubtilty of wit, and the love of
mien: inthe fecond face afcendetha man cloathed in comely
apparrel,or a man and woman fitting at the table and playing; |
ac.beltowech riches, mirth. gladnefs, andthe love of women :
in the third face afcendeth a mana Hunter with his tance
and horne, bringing out dogs forto hunt’; the fignification

OF this is the contention of men, the purfuing of thofe:who

Ay; the hunting and poffeffing ofithings by arms and braw-

din ithe -firlt face of Leo afcendeth’aiman riding

thien-; ic-fignifieth ‘boldnefs, violenee, cruelty, -wicked-
nels, halt and labeuts to:be fultairied. ' In the fecond :afeendeth
a@nimage with handstifed up,

>>»

a
i@ 29
« 6.68 =
“1d
: ‘
a
t
Crowns

Book I I,
te she hath the appe
reatneth, having in his right
Acabbard,8&in his teft a buckler;it hath fignification uponhidden
contentions,and unknown viGtories,8 upon bafe men,and upon fe
the occafions of quarrels and battels : in che third face afcend- eA
eth a young man in whofe hand is a Whip, and a man very fad,
and ofan ill afpe& ; they fignifie love and fociety, and the lof
of ones right for avoiding ftrife, In the firlt face of Virgo he im
afcendeth the figure of a good maide, and a man cafting feeds, .
it fignifiech getting of wealth, ordering of diet, plowing, fow- — <a
ing, and peopling ; in the fecond face afcendeth a black man a
cloathed with a skin, and a man having a buth of hair, holding -
a bag; they fignifie gain, {craping together of wealth and cove-
toufnefs. In the third face afcendeth a white womanand deaf,
or an old man leaning oma ftaff ; the fignification of this is to |
fhew weaknefs, infirmity,lofs of members, deftrudtion of trees, 7a
and depopulation of lands.In- the firft face of Libra afcendeth /
the form of an angry man, in whofe -hand is a Pipe, and the — 2
form of aman reading in a book; the operation of this isin 3
juftifying and helping the miferable and weak againft the pe
powerful and wicked : inthe fecond face afcendtwomen
rious and wrathful anda man inacomely garment, fittingin | |
achair ; and the fignification of thefe is to thew indignation <2
againft the evil, and quietnefs and fecurity of life with plenty SS
of pood chings. In th@thisd face afcendeth aviolentman
holding a bow, and before hima naked man, and alfo another
man holding bread in one tand, and acup of wine in the o- | <i
ther ; the fignification of thefe is to fhew wicked lufts,Gngings, +
{ports and gluttony. In the firlt face of Scorpio afcendeth a
woman of good face and habic, and two men
the operations of thefe are for comlinefs, beauty,and for ftrifes;

deceits, detractations, and perditions; in the fe 2

cond face afcendeth a man naked, and a woman naked, and a

man fitting on the earth, and before him twodogs bitingone ae
another; and cheir operation is for impudence, deceit, and falfe : a
dealing, and for to fend mifchiefand ftrifeamongitmen; in Es:
the third face afcendeth a man bowed downward. upon bis

4 »
—
iJ
F
L
ag

Of Occult Philofophy. ~Book IT.
knees, anda woman ftriking him witha {taff, and it is the fig.
..~ ification of drunkennefs, fornication, wrath, violence, and
ftrife.tn the ficlt face of Sagittarius afcendeth the form of aman
armed with acoat of male, and holding a naked {word in his
hand; the operation of this is for boldnefs, malice, and liberty:
In the fecond face afcendeth a woman weeping, and covered
with cloathes ; che operation of this is, for fadnefs and fear of
his own body. Jn the rhird face afcendeth a man. like in colour
to gold, or an idle man playing witha ftaff ; and the fignificati-
_ on of this is in following our own wills,and obftinacy in them, |
and in activenefs for evil things, contentions, and horrible
matters, In the firft face of Gapricorn afcendcth the form of a.
- ‘woman, and a man carrying full bags ; and the fignification of
_ thefe is for to go forth and to rejoyce, to gain and co Jofe with
- weaknefs and bafene{S: in the fecond face afcendeth two wo- |
_ men, and a man looking towards a Bird flying inthe Air; and
the fignification of thefe is for the requiring thofe things which
cannot be done, and for the fearching afcer thofe things which
cannot beknown: Inghe third face afcendeth a woman chaft
in body ,and wife in her work,and a banker gathering his mony
together on the table ; the fignification of this is to govern in
prudence, in covetoufnefs of money, and in avarice. In the firlt
vw face of Aquarius afcendeth the form ofa prudent man, and of
Woman fpinning; and the fignification of thefe is in the
thought and labour for gain, in poverty and bafenefs : in the -
fecond face afcendeth the form of aman with a long beard ;
and the fignification of this belongeth to the underftanding,
meeknes, modelty, liberty and good maners: in the third face
_ afcendeth a black and angry man;and che fignification of this is.
expreffing infolence, and impudence. the firlt face of.
2 Pifces aicendeth’a man carrying burthens on his fhoulder, and
well cloathed ; it hath his fignification in journeys, change of
place, andin carefulnefs of getting wealth and cloaths : in the
fecond face afcendeth a woman of a good countenance, and
well adorned ; and the fignification is to defire and put ones |
felf on about high and great matters: in the third face
afcendeth a.man naked, or ayouth, and nighhim.a

i

wi

mA

—

maide, whofe head is adorned wich flowers, and it’ hath his
fignification for reft, idlenefs, delight, fornication, and for —
imbracings of women, And thusfar concerning the Images of
Faces. Befides thefe, rhere are as yet three hundred and fixty —
Images in the Zodiack, according to the number ef the de-
grees, whole forms Petrus dee 4bano hath defcribed: without
the Zodiack there are alfo general Figures, which Hyginius
and e4ratus. defcribe for us, and very many particular ones;
according to the number of facesand degrees, exifting therein,
of all which to {peak it would be too Jong ;: bit’ of thefe the
more principal are accounted, Pega/us which prevaileth a-
gain{t the difeafes of horfes, and horfemen.in-battles
Then is Andromache, which. begettethlove betwixt: husband
and wife , fo that itis faid evenico reconcile adulterers : (affi-
opeia reftoreth weak bodies, and-ftrengtheneth the members}
Serpentarins chafeth away poyfons, and cureth the bitings of
venemous bea{ts : Hercules giveth victory in war ; the Dragon
with both the Bears maketh a-man crafty,.ingenious, valiant,
acceptable cothe gods and men: Hydra conferreth wifdom
and riches, and refilteth poyfons. (entauzrus beftoweth health:
and long old age: e4ra conferveth chaftiry, and maketh one
acceptable to the gods ; Cetus maketh one amiable, prudent,
happy both by feaand land, and helps him to recover his loft
goods: the Ship affordeth fecurity in the waters; the Hare
prevaileth againft deceits and madnels; the Dogcureth the.
Dropfie, refifteth the plague, and alfo preferveth from bealts,
and fierce creatures. Orion granteth vitory : The Eag/e giveth
new honors, and preferveth the old. The Swaz freethfrom
the Palfie and the Quartain: ‘Per/ews freeth from Envy and
Witchcrafts, and preferveth from Lightnings and Tempelts -
. The Hart preferveth Phrenetical and mad people. And thus

much may fuffice to have been fpoken.

CHAP.

at
‘

Of the Images of Saturn,

Ut now, what Images they did attribute to the Planets,
SB) although of thefe things very large volumes have been

written by the ancient wife men, fo that there is no need to.
_ declare them here,notwithftanding I will recite a few of them ;

for they made, from the operations of Saturn, Saturn

afcending in aftone which is called the Loadftone , the Image

of 2 man, having the countenance of an Hart, and Camels feet.

and fitting upon a Chayr or Dragon, holding in his right hand,

afithe, in his left hand'a- dart; which image they did hope
would be profitable for prolongation of life; for ¢e4/-

bumafar in his book Sadar, proveth that Saturn conduceth to —

- the prolongation of life : where alfo he telleth chat certain re-
“gious of India being fubject to Saturn, there men are of a

Jong life, and dye not anlefs by extream old Age : They made
-alfo anotherImage of Saturn for length of dayes; in a faphire,

atthe hour of Saturn, Saturn afcending or fortunately con-

 ftitured, whofe figure was an old man fetting uponanhigh |

chayre, having his hands lifting up above his head, and in them

holding‘a fith or Sickle, and under his feet a bunch of Grapes,
his head covered with a black or dusky coloured efoth, and’

alfhis garments black ordark'coloured : They alfo make this

fame Image againft the Stone and difeafes of the kidnyes,viz.
inthe hour of Saturn, Saturn afcending with the third face of
sAquariue: they made alfo from the operations of Saturn, an
Image for the encreafing in power, Saturn afcending in (a-
pricors, The form of which was.anold man leaning ona ftaff
having-in his hand.a crooked fickle, and cloathed in black. They
. alfo made'an Image of melted Copper; Saturn afcending tn his’

 gifing, vs. in the firlt degree of Aries, or whichis more true

a

~ inthe firft degree of Capricorn, which Image they affirm to
_ {peak wich a mans voyce; They made alfo out of the operati-.
ons of Saturn, and alfo AZercury, ati Image of metall,

a beautifull man, whichthey promifed would foretell things

‘

e
¢*
iy

Book II. OF

to come, ‘anid made it on the day. Mer Mercury ,on the third hour

of Saturn, the fign of Gemini afcending, being the honfe of
| Mercury, fignifying prophets, Saturn and (Mercury being in
conjunction in Aquarius in. the pinth place of Heaven, which
is alfo called God; Moreover let Saturn have a trine afpect
on the afcendent, and the Meon in.like manner, and. the Syn

have an afpettion the: place of conjunction. obtainip

fome Angle-may be powerfull and occidental; ler. Adars
combuft by the Sun, but Jet it not hawe.an.afpedt on

and Mercury; for they faid, that the fplender of the powers.ef

thefe Scars was diffaled upon this Image, and. ir
men, and decfare thofe which are,

a

»*

CHAP.

of the Images Jupiter.

Fen the operations of made

f life, an Image, in the hour of Jupiter, Payee RO
nd white Rone:

his exaltation fortunately afcending,in a cleara
whofe figure was a man crowned, cloathed with garments-of a

Saffron Colour, riding npon an Eagle or Dragon, having in his
right hand a dart,about as ic were to {trike ic into the head of

the fame Eagle or Dragon. . They made alfo another Image
of Pupiter at the fame convenient feafon, in 4 white and clear

ftone, -efpecially in Cryftall, and.is was,anaked-man crowned, —

‘having both his hands: joyned’ together and, difted BPs asit
were deprecating fomething , in ,afour-footed , chair,
whichis catried’by four wingedboys; and they affirm. chat, this

Imageencreafeth felicity ,itiches, honor, and. confer reth Bene- :

volence and pro({perity,-and freeth from, cnemies made

alfo another Image:of:Fapiter for a religions and
life, and advancementof fortune: s whole figure was a man
having the head of al yonora.Ram,and Eagles loathed
in Saffron he the Jon

° .
»

onious

—
tS
en
«
é
¥

cHap.
Of the Images of Mars.

the operations of they an in the

hour of (Mars, Mars afcending in the fecond face of

Aries, ina Martial ftone, efpecially in a Diamond ; The form

of which was a man armed, riding upon a Lyon, having i in: his

right hand a naked {word ereéted, carrying in his left band the

a : head ofa man ; they report , that an Image of this kind ren-

“dreth a man powerfull i in good and evill, fo that he thall be

a feared of all ; and whofoever carryeth it they give him the

| . power of enchantment, fo thathe fhall terrifie men by his

looks when he is angry, and ftupifiethem; they made another

Image of AZars for the obtaining of boldne(s courage, and

- _ good fortune in wars, and contentions, the form of which was —

afouldier armed and crowned, girt with a fword, carrying in

right hand a long Lance ; and they made-this atthe hour
of Mer, the firtt face of Scorpie with ic,

=Roin operations of the Sum, they. made an at
hour’ of the: the firlt-faceof: Leoalcending waith,che
‘Sun, the forme’ of which was. a king crowned, fitting ina
‘chair; having a Raven in his underhis teet aGlobe;
heis cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes ; They report chat
this Image rendreth men invincible, and and helps
‘to bring bufinefles to a good. endyand to drive away vain
‘dteamssalfotobe prevalencagainit feavers,and che plague ;and
they made*it in Balanite {tone or.a Rabin, atthe hour of
-the'San, when it in his exaltation forcunatély afcendeth ; They
another Image of the Sénin a Diamond, at che

™

a

(ose!
“Fa

Of the Sew, it afcending in his exaleition ; the figure Of which
was a woman crowned swith the gefture of one dancing and
laughing ftanding in 4 © harioc drawn with four horfes, having
in her right hand a looking glafs, or buckler, in the lefta
ftaffe leaning on her breaft,carrying a flame of fire on her head;
They repore chat this Image rendreth a man fortunate and
rich, and beloved of all; and chey made this Image, ona Cor-
neoll fteneat the hour of the Sax. afcending in the firft face
of Leo, agatnft Lunatick paffions which proceed from the

combuftion of the Moon,

Rom the operations of Venus they made an Image, which
was available for favor, and benevolence, at the very. hoi
it afcending intoPifces, the form of which was the Image o
woman having the head ofabird;and feet-qf an Eagle,hold-
ing adartinher hand. They made another Image of Venus
for to get the love of women, in the Laps Lazwlus, at the
hour of Venus, Venus aSendingin Taurus, the figure of which.
was anaked maide with her haire fpread abroad,having a look-
ing glafs in her hand, and a chain tyed about her neck; and
nigh her 2 handfome.young man, holding her with his:
left hand by che chain,-but with his right band amaking up her
hair, and they bothJook lovingly on one another, and about
them isa little winged boy holding a fwordora dart. They
made another Image of Venus, the firlt face of Taurus or Li-
bra or Pifces with Venus, the figure of which was a
little maide with her hair fpread abroad, cloathed in long and.
white garments, holding a Laurell Apple , or flowers in her
in her-left.a Combe. Its reported to make men

{trong, cheasfull and to give beamy..

CHAP,

a
d

302 OF Oceult Philofophy. Book ll,
CHAP, XLIITI.
Of the Images of Mercury.
FR the operations of AZercury, they made an Image at
the hour of Mercury afcending in Gemini, the
g form of which was an handfome young man, bearded, having
in his left handarod in which a ferpent is twyned about,in
his right carrying a dart, having his feet winged; They re-
port that this Image conferreth knowledge, eloquence, dili- |

gence in merchandizing and gain; moreover to beget

-and concord,and to cure feavers ; They made another Image
of Mercury, Mercury alcending in Virgo, for good will, wit
andmemory ; The form of which wasa man fitting upona
chaire, orriding ona Peacock, having Eagles feet,-and on his
head accreft, and in his left hand holding a cock or fire.

CHAP. XLIV.

Fe the operations of the A/oa#, they made.an Image for
A. travellers againlt wearinefs, at the ‘hour of the AZoon, the
Moon afcending in its exalration ; the figure of which wasa
man leaning on a ftaffe, having a bird on his head, anda flou-
_sitbing tree before him; They made another Image of che
. Moon forthe increafe of the fruits of the earth, and againit
poyfons , and infirmities of’ children, ac che hour-of the
, Moon,ic afcending in the firft face of Cancer,the figure of
_,Was.a woman cornuted, riding on a Bull, ora Dragon wit
fevenheads, or a Crab; and ‘fhe hath inher’ right hand a dag}
inher a looking glafs, clothed in white or green, and ha-
her head cwo Serpents with horns cwined
and toeacharm a Serpent twined about, and to each foot on

Book II. Of Occult Philofophy.

inlike manner. And thus much fpoken | concerning the figures
of the Plants, may-fuffice.

“of the Images of the head and Tayle of the. Dragon of the

Moon,

Hey made alfo the Image of the head and taile of the
Dragon of the AZon, namely betwixt an Aeriall and fiery
circle, the likenefs of a Serpent, with the head of an Hawke

after the man-

tryed about them,
ner of the great letter Theta,&-
they made it whe Dupiter with
the headobtain d the midf of
Heaven : which | Image they af-
firm to availe much for che
fuccefs of Petiti- ons,and would
Imagea good

and fortunate Gentus, which they would reprefent by this
Image of the Serpent; for the Egyptians and Phenitians do
extoll chis creature above all others,and fay itisadivinecrea>
ture and hath a divine nature ; for in thisis a more.acate pin pi
and a greater fire then in any other, which thing's manifelted

both by his fwift motion without feer, hands or any otherin-
{truments, and alfothat it often reneweth his age-with his skin, ©
and becometh young again: :» but they madé the Image of ch
taile like as when the AZoom was Ecclipfed, inthe Taule, sr il |
affeted by Satarnor Afurs,andthey made it to.introduce,an-
suith, infirmity and misfortune; and called it che evill
Genius; fuch an Image a.certaia Hebtew had included ina

golden Belt-full of Jewels, which Blanch the daughter of the
of Burdon (either willingly ot ignorantly ) beltowed on
her husband Peter King of Spaim, the firtt-of that name, with
_, ghich when he was girt, he feemed to himfelf to be compafied

-abo

eS
on
of
a id
pe
—

“OF Occult Philofophy. Book If.

— “about witha Serpent; ahd afterwards finding the Magical vir.
fixed-in the girdle, for thiscanfe he forfook his wife:

CHAP, XLVI.

the Images of the Manfions of the Moon.

TT Hey made alfo Images for every Manfion of the AZoon; in
* the fir for the deftruétion of fome one, they made inan
- Jron ring the Image of a black man in a garment made of haire,
and pirdied round; cafting a {mall lance with his right hand sthey
fealed this in black wax, and-perfumed it with liquid Storax,
and wifhed fome evil'to come.In the fecond, againft the wrath
_ “of the Prince, and for reconcilation with him, they fealed in
- white wax and maftick, the Image of a king crowned,and per-
famed ic with Lignum Atoes;In the they made: an Image
inafilyer ring, whofe table was fquafe, the figure of which was
2 woman well clothed Nitcing in a Chair, her right hand being
‘lifted up.on her head ; they fealed ic and perfumed it with
muske,;Camphire'and Calamus Aromaticus. They affirmed that
this giveth happy fortune and every good thing, In the fourth,
for revenge, ‘feparation, enmity and ill will, hey fealed in
-ged:wax the Image of a fouldier fitting on an horfe, holding
a Serpenc imhis righthand; chey perfumed it with red myrrhe,
and Scorax ; in the‘fifth, for che ‘favor of ‘Kings and officers,
and good entertainment, they fealed in Silver the head ofa
man, and‘perfumed it with Sanders ; in thefixth, for to pro-
love ‘beewixe ‘two, they fealéd: in: white :wax two
imbracing one ‘another, and:perfumed them with Lig-
num Aloes andAmber ; in the feventh, for to obtain every
pood ‘thing , they fealed in Silom the Image of a man
well clothed, holding-up ‘his hands'to heaven as it were
praying and fuppli¢ating, and perfumed irwith good odors
Yo'the eight, for vidtory in war,chey made a feal of Tin, being

an Image Eagle;having the face ofa manjand:perfumed it

a ~ with Brimitone, Jn the ninth, to caufe infirmities, they madea

é
i ©

sown

Book

feal of Lead, being the image of aman wanting his privy parts,

fhutting his eyes with hts hands ; arid they perfomed it with
Rofin of the Pine. In the tenth, to facilitate child-bearing, and
to cure, the fick, they made a feal of gold, being the head of
aLyon, and perfumed it with Amber: In the eleventh, for
fear, reverence and woifhip, they made a feal of a plate of

gold, being the image of a man ridingon a Lion, holding the -

ear thereofin his left hand; and in his right, holding fortha
bracelet of gold, and they perfumed it with good odours and

Saffron.In the twelth,for the feparation of Lovers,they made'a _
~ feal of black lead, being the image ofa Dragon fighting witha

man, and they perfumed it with the hairs of a Lion, and e4fz

fetida. In che thirteenth, fortheagreement of married couples,

and for the diffolving of thechatms againft copulation, they
made a feal of the images of both, of the man in red Wax, of

the woman in white,and caufed them to imbrace one another,

perfuming it with Liguam eloes and Amber. In the four-
teenth, for divorce and feparation of the man. fromthe wo-
man, they made a feal of red Copper, being the image of a
Dog biting histail, and they perfumed ic with the hair of a

black Dog,.and black Cat. dn che fifteenth, for co obtain —

friendfhip and good will,they made the image ofa man fitting,
and inditing of and-perfumed it with Frankincenfe
and Nurmegs In the fixreenth,for to gain much Merchandizing
they made a feal of Silver, being the image of aman fictin
upon a Chair, holding a ballance in his hand, and they perfam-
edit with well fmelling {picts. In the. feventeenth; againtt
Theeves and Robbers, they-fealed with an Iron fealthe Image
of an Ape; and:perfamed, it wath the hair of an. Ape, dn the
cighteenth, againit Feavors and pains of the belly they made a

feal of Copper, being che image.of a Snake, holding his raihae

bove his head, and they perfumed ic. with Harts: horh;.and
ported the fame feal co putto flight Serpents,and all vencmons

creaturesifrosm-the place where it is buriediInshe nineveenthfer

ues, chey;made 2 fealof

facilicaring birth& provoking the meatty bee hand her
$ upon

copper, being the image offa weman,holding,
facejandthey perfumed it with cwen

tierh,
for.

Of Occult Philofophy. Book IT.
for hunting, they made a feal of Tin, being the image of Sa.
__-gittary, half a Man, and half an Horfe,. and they perfumed it
with the head of a Wolf. In the cwentie one for the de-
— ftru@ion of fome body, they made the image of aman with a
double countenance, before and behinde, and they perfumed it
with Brimftone and Jet, and did pucitina box of brafs, and
with ic Brimftone and Jet, and the hairof him whom they
would hart. In che cwo and twentieth, for the fecurity(of Runa-
ways; they made a feal of Iron, being the image of a manwith
Wings on his feet, bearing an helmet on his head, and they per-
fumed ic with Argent vive. In the three and cwentieth, for -
dettruction and watting, they made a feal ofIron, being the
’ jmage of a Cat,having a Dogs head, and they perfumed it with
the hairs of a Dogs head, and buried it ia the place where they
did pretend to hurt. Inthe four and twentieth, for the multi-
plying of Heards of Cattle, they took the horn of a Ram,
Bull,or Goat, or of thaw fort of cattle which they would in-
and fealed'in it burning with an Iron feal, the image of
a woman giving fuck to her fon, and they hanged it on the
neck of that'cattle who was the leader of the flock, or they
fealed it in hishorn. Inthe five and cwentieth, for the prefer-
vation of Trees and Harvelts, they fealed in the wood of a Fig-
tree, the image of a man planting, and the} perfumed ic with
flowers of thé Pig-cree, and did hang it onthe tree. In che
fixand ewentieth for love and favor, they fealed in white Wax
~ atid Maftick the image of a woman wathing and combing her
_haires, and they perfumed it with things {melling very well. In
. the feven and twentieth for to deftroy Fountains, Pits, Medi-
‘vinal ‘Waters and Baths; they made of red Earth the image of
‘aman winged, holding.in his hand an empty veffel, and perfo-
rated; and the image being burnt, they did put in the veffel
Affa ferida, and liquid ‘Storax, and they did overwhelm and
bury:icin che Pond or Fountain which they would deftroy. In
the‘ efghe and cwentieth, ‘for to gather Fifhes together, they
a fealof Copper, being the image of-a Fifh, and they
perfumed dowich che skin of afea fith, and did calt ic into the
water, whecefoever they would have the filbto gather-roge-

—

"ues
S

»
‘
¢
rae
the
cr
a
} .

Book IT. Of Occult Philofop
ther. Moreover ‘together with che forefaid Images, they did
write down alfo the names of the Spititsand cheir Characters,
and did invocate and pray. for thofe things which they pre-
tended to obtain, Sel

by

CHAP
Of the Images of the fixed Behenian Stars.

Be how for the operations of the fixed ftars, according’
to Hermes opinion, under the head of Algol, they made-
an image whofe Figure was the head of with abloody
neck ; they report thac it beftoweth good ‘{uccefs to Petitions,
and maketh him who carrieth it bold and magnanimous, and”
prelerveth the members of the body found : alfo it helpeth‘a-*
sainft Witchcrate, and reflecteth evil indeavors and wicked
incantations upon our adverfaries:. Under che confteHation®
of Pleiades, they made the image of a little Virgin, ‘Or the’
Figure of a Lamp; its reported to increafe the ‘light of the’
eyes, to affemble Spirits, to raife-Winds, to reveal iecret'and -
hidden things : Under Adlebora, they made'an image after the |
likenefs of God, or of a flying man;.it giveth riches and ‘honor:~
Under the Goat they madean image; the Figure of'which was,
asit were, a man willing to make himfelf merry withimufical
intruments;it maketh bim who carrieth ic acceptable honored
and exalted before Kings and Princes; and Jhelpeth the pain
of the teeth : Under the greater Dog-jftar; they made’ the
image of an Hound and Virgins ixbeRoweth and”
good will, and the favor of men, and Aerial fpirics, and giveth fet -
power to pacifie and reconcile Kings, Princes, and other men: —
Under the leffer Dog-jfar they made the image of a Cock, or
of three fittle maides ; it conferreth the favor of the gods, of :
Apirits, and men; it giveth power againft Witchcrafts, and
preferveth health: Under the Heart of Leo, they madethe
image of a Lion or Cat, or the Figure of an honorable Perfon _
fitting in a Chair; itrendreth a man temperate, appeafeth

Philofophy.

Book IT.

«&

_maade the ima

> ing
xa

“=

wera

he

wreath, and giveth favour Under the-tail of Vr/4 Atajor they

made the image‘ofa-penfive Man, or ofa Bull, or the Figure
ofa Calf; ic availechyagain{t incantations, and maketh him who
carrieth it fecure in his travels: Under the wing of Corvus,

- they made the image of a Raven, or Snake, or of ablack Man

cloathed in black; this maketh a mancholerick, bold, coura.
gious, full of thoughts; ‘a backbiter, and caufeth naughty
dreams ; alfo it giveth the power of driving away evil fpirits,
and of gathering them together; it. is profitable apainft the
malice of Men, Devils and Winds: Under the Spike they

ge of a Bird, or of a man laden with Merchan.
dize; it conferreth riches, and maketh one overcome.conten:
tions, ittaketh away {carcity and mifchief : Under Alebameth
they. made the imageiofan Horfe or Wolf, or the Figure of a
man dancing; it is good againft Feavers, it aftringeth and
retaineth theblond : Under Elpbrya, they made the image of
an Hen, or of a man crowned and advanced ;.it beftoweth rhe
good, will and love of men, andgiveth chaftity. Under the
Heart. of Scorpio they made the image of aman armed, and
with a coat. of Male, or the Figure of a Scorpions it giveth un-
derftanding and memory, it maketh a good colour, and aideth
againtt evil {pirits, and driveth them away, and bindeth them :

Under the Vulture, they made the image of a Vulture or Hen,
or of atraveller ; ic maketh a man magnanimous-and proud, it

giveth power over devils and beafts. Under che tail of Capri-

coru-they made the image of an Hart, or Goate, or-of an angry

man; it beltoweth profperity, and increafeth wrath. Thefeare |
the images.of fome of the fixed ftars which they command ’to
be

®
a

Book If.

OF Ocenls Philojophy.

GRAPROXL

Of Geomanticall Figures; Whish are the middle bebWixt Images

"Teed are moreover cértain other Pigures , | framed by
the number and fitwation of the ftars,; ‘and afcribed b
to the Elements, and alfoco the Planets and Signs, which-are

called Géomantical, becanfe that Geoniantical Diviners do

reduce the points of their lot projected, by the excefsaf parity

or imparity into thofé figures; and they alfo being engraven

or imprinted under the dominion of their Planers and Signs,

do conceive the verte and power of images; and thele Figures

areas a middlebetwixt Images and Charafters ; Buewhofoe-
ver defireth exactly to know the naturés; qualities, proprieties,
conditions, fignifications, and Nativities of théefé Figures, let
him read the Volums of Géomancy ; but they are in number
fixteen, whofe names and figures are thefe,

x Figur

‘

sel
‘

Greater aid

Safe-guard entering

7 Obtaining

* {Lefer aid») |

| dequifition

omprchended without

The

«*

threfold. £017 aie
The

Figure. —
Cony une, Aire
ax Bouxd | h
Damned Earth. R |
“S$
| The upper threfbold Q,
| Fire, O}

a

Book I

Of Images, the figure mhereof is not after she of axj
Celefiiall figure, but after the likene/s of that which the mind on
of the worker defires,

Tue remains as yet an other manner of images not accor-
ding to the fimilitude of Celeftiall figures, but according
to the fimilitude of that whieh the mind of the worker defires,
of whofe they are the effigies, and reprefentation : So to pro-
cure love we make images embracing oné the orherito difcord,
ftriking one the othet;to bring mifery, or deftruction a¢dam-
mageto a man,or Houfe,or City or any. thing elfe, we make ime
ages diftorted; broken in meinbets, and parts after thé likenefs
ahd figure of that thing which we would deftroy or damisifie ;
And Magicians advife usthat in calting or engraving images

we would write uponit che name of the effet; and this on |

the back when evill, as deftru@ion; ‘on the belly when good,

as love. Mofeover in the foreliead of the image let be Written

the name of the {pecies or Jndividuam whigh the image re-
pe for whom or againft whom it is Alfo on the

reaft lecthe name of the figne or face af » and Lord:
thereof be written ;~ alfothe names and Charactets of its An.

les, Moreover in making they advife
or the effet for which it is made, be ufed. -AH which Alber-
tus Magnus in His Speculo affirms. Now they ule che images

being made diverfly.according to the vertues thereof; Somes

times they hapg them or’ binde them to the body.5, Somic-.

times they bury thém under che Earth, or aRivet >

they hang them in a Chimny overthe fmoak, Of a tree:
that they bé moyed by the wind; fometime With the head up-.
watd, 8 fornetimes downward; fometimesthey put them into”
hot water,or into the fire, For they fy, as the workers of che’
images do affc& the image it felf, fo dothit bring the Ise pat
fions upon thofe co, whom it was afcribed, as the mind of che
operator hath ditated if, AS we read that Nethanabnt the

arc

gician made images of | is with wax afte? that tanner, and ~

ping.

«
ee

af

“OF Occult Philof phy. ~ Book

f

image inwhich thefe are fortunate, viz. igi

,and the

alte

art he drowned thofe: images in the thip:
of his enemies were in maner drowned in the’Sea,and haz.

_arded. Now that part‘Of Aftrolo which is writ concerning

elections,teacheth us thar the conftellations alfo are to be ob-
ferved for the making of images, and fuch like.

—
8 j —

—

‘CHAP.
of certain Celeftial gi and the of,

will now thew thee: the obfervation of Celeftiall bodyes
which are required for the practife of fome of thee ind
images ; So to make, any one fortunate, we mks. A

¢ator of the life thereof, the givers of life,.the figns, and Pla-
nets. Moreover let the nt, the middle of” the heaven,
and the Lords thereof be fortunate : alfo the place of the Sun,
id_ place, of the Moon ; part-of fortune, and Lord of con-
of prevention made before their nativity, by depref,
g the Malignant Planets. But ifwe will make an image to
procure mifery, we muft do contrarywife, and thofe which we
place here fortunate, muft there be infortunate, by raifing ma-
ignant Stats. In like manner myft we do to make any place,
Region, City, orhoule fortunate, Allo fot deltroying or pre.
judicing any ofthe forefaid , Let: there be made ani

moder the afcenfion of that man whom thou worl

and pre judice,. and thou thall make

the Lord of the | ie of his life, the Lord of the afcends.

0 afcendirig, and t tenth houfe,.

and the ‘Now for the fitting’ of any place, place,
fpitanss in the afcendent thereof; andin the firft, and terith,

and fecon and ci houfe, thou fhall make the lord of the’
nd Pa? Ord oF the houfe of the Moon, fortunate,
ma hot be generated, or abide there, there

f
ie
a
ike
tie

Book Of Occult Philojophy.

would{t chafe away, and.after the likenefs thereof; asif thon
wouldeft chafe away Scorpions fromany place, let animage
of the Scorpion be made, the fign of Scorpio afcending with be |
Moon, and thou fhale make unfortunate the afcendent, and

lord thereof, and the Lord of the houfe of AZars; and thon
(hall make unfortunate the lord of the afcendent in the eighth

houfe , and let them be joyned with an afpe& malignant; op
pofite, or quadrant : and let there be writ ¢ the

the i
name of the afcendent, of the Lord thereof, and of theiben
and of the lord of the day, and of the Lord of the hour. And
Jet there be a pit made in the middle of the place, from which
thou wouldft drive them; and let there be catryed intoit,.
{ome of the earth taken out of the four corners of the fame
place, and let the image be buryed there withthe head-down-
ward, with faying, this isthe burying of the Scorpions, that
they-may not come into this place, and fo of thereft, So for
sain let there be made an image under the afcendent of the: _
nativity of the man, Orunder the afcenfion of that place to’
which thou wouldeft appoint the gain; and thonfhaltmake:
the lord of the fecond houfe, which is inthehoufe of fubftance:
tobe joyned with the Lord of the afcendent in the trine or fex=.
til, and let there be a reception amongft them; thowfhall’:
make fortunate. the eleventh and the Lord thereof, andthe:
eighth; and if chou canft, put pare of the: fortune in the:
afcendent, or fecond; and let the image be buryedin thac:
place, or carryed from that place, to which thou wouldeft ap.
point the gain. Alfo for concord, and love, let therebean
image madein the day offwpiter under the afcendent ofthe na-
tivity of him whom thou wouldft have be beloved, make for- —
tunate the-afcendent, and the tenth, and hide the evil from the
afcendent; and thon mnft have the Lord of thetenth, and -
planets of the eleveneth fortune, joyned tothe Lord: of thes —
afcendent, from the trine or fextil with reception; thenmake
an other image for him whom thou wouldeft ftruptalove;> —
confiden if he beafriend;, or companion of him whom thou ‘
wouldft have be beloved; -and if fo,let there be an image

I

OF Occult Philofophy. Book If;

of the firkt image ; but if che party be a wife, or a husband, ler

— - jt be made under the afcenfion of the feventh ; - if a brother, or

«Coa afifter, or a coufin, let it be made under the afcenfion of the

— third,and fo of the like ; and put the fizgnificator of the afcen-
- dent of the fecond image, joyned tothe fignificator of the
afcendent of the firftimage ; and let there be betwixt thema
 geception, and let the reft be fortunate, as in the firlt image,
afterwards joyn both images together into a matual embrate-
ing or put the face of the fecond image to the back ‘of the fir
image, and lec them be wrapt up ih filk, and caft away or
fpoiled. Alfo for fuccefs of petitions, and for the obtaining

af of a thing denyed, or taken, or poffefied by an other, let
— there be an image made under the afcendent of him who peti.

— tions for the thing ; and caufe that the Lord of the fecond be

_ Joyned with the lord of the afcendent from a trine, ‘or fextile,

and let there be a reception betwixt them, and if it canbe, let

the Lord of the fecond be in the obeying figns, and the Lord of

_ the afcendent in the ruling, make fortunate the afcendent, and

. ae the Lord thereof, and take heed that che lord of the afcendent’

§ be not retrograde or combuft, or falling, or ifthe houfe of

oppofition:s.c.in the feventh from his own houfe; let him not be’

hindred by the malignapt, let him be ftrong,& in an angle; Thon

{halt make fortunate che afcendent, and the Lord of the fecond:

and: the Moon; and make another image for him that fs’ péti-’

tioned-to, and begin it under the afeendent belonging to him,

as if he be a King ora Prince, begin ic under the afcendent of

the centh hovfé from theafcendent of the firftimage; Ifhe

 beafather ander the fourth; ifa fon under fifth, and fo of the’

like; and put che fignificacor of the fecond image, joyned with’

the ford of the afcendent of the firft image,from a trine,or fex-

and it, and pur them both ftrong, and:

without any let; make all evill fall from them.

“Thou: fhall: make forcunate the tenth, and the fourrh if thou’

canlt.orany of them, and when the feeond image fhall be per-

joyric with the felt, face so:facejand wrap chem in clean

haben, and-bury them in the middie of -bishoufe who is'the

petitioner under a fortunate figaificator the fortune

Ps

Book

; frong,and fet the face of the firlt image be toward the North,

or rather coward that place where thething petitioned for

doth abide; or if it happen that the petitioner. goeth forward
towards him with whom the thing petitioned foris, let him
_ bring the images with him as fararhe goes, And letthere
be made an image of dreams, which being put under the head
of him that fleeps, makes him dream true dreams concerning
any thing that he hath formerly deliberated of ; andJetthe
figure of that be the figure of a man fleepingin the bofome of.
an Angel, which thou thall make in the Lyon afcending, the
Sun keeping the nineth houfe in Aries ;. thou thale writ up-
on the breaft of che man the name of the efte& defired, and in
the hand of the Angel the name of the intelligence of the Sun..
Let the fame image be made in Virgo afcending, Adercury be-
ing fortunate in Aries in the ninth-houle, or Gemini alcending
in Afercury being fortunate, and keeping the ninth houfe:in.

Aguarius ; and let it be'received from Saturn with a fortunate
afpect, and let the name of the fpirit of AZercury be writ ups

onit. Letalfo the fame be made in Libra afcending,Vexus be-

ing received from Mercury in Gemsias-in the ninth houfe, by
writting upon it the Angel of Venus, Befides alfo tec the fame
image be made in Aquarius afcending, Saturn fortunately

pofl: fing the ninth houfe in his exaltation,. whichis in Libra;

and let there be writ upon it the Angel of Sturm. Morcover:
let it be made in (ancer afcending the Moon.being received by
jupiter and Venus in Pifces, and being fortunately placed in |
the ninth boule, and let there be writ upon it the {piric of the
Moon. There are alfo. made rings of dreams of wonderfull

efficacy ; and there are rings of the Sun, and Saturn, and the.
conftellation of them is when the Sun or Satars alcend in.

‘their exaltations in the ninth houfe, and when the Moog isjoy-

ned to Saturn in the ninth houfe, and in that figne, which

wasthe ninth houfe of Nativity; and let there be writ upon
the rings the name of the fpiric of the Sun, or Saturs. Let this
which hath been {poken fuffice concerning images, for nowthon.
mayit fiad out more of this mature of thy felf. Bat know this.

x

Oceule Philofophy.

that fuch images work nothing, unlefs they bt fo vivified that
either a naturall; or Celeftiall, or Heroicall, or animafticall, of
lemoniacall, or angelicall vertue be in them, or affiftant to
them. But who caf give a foul to an image, or make a {tone
to live, or mettal, or wood, or wax? and who can raife out
of ftones children unto eAtrabam? Certainly this Arcanum
doth not enter into an Artift of a ftiffeneck; neither canhe
give thofe things which hath them not. No body hath them
but he who doth (the Elements being reftrained, nature being
overcome, the Heavens being over: powered) tranfcend the
progrefs of Angels,and comesto the very Archetype it felf, of
which being then made acooperator may do all chings, aswe
fhall fpeak afterwards,

Of Cliaratters Which are made after the rule and imitation of
 Celeftial, and haw withthe table thereof they are deduced out

PY
i
«ft
a

Jaraéters alfo have their comunity from the rayes of
mithe Celeftials caft rogerher according to a certain num-
ber by acertain peculiar Property, which Celeftials asin divers
ftrokes of their rayes falling’ feverall ways’ amorigft them-
produce divers vertnes:fo alfo Characters being varioufly
protcatted, according to the various concourfe of thofe rayes
quickly obtain divers opérations, ahd alfo more efficacious
times chen the properties.of natutall commixtions... Now
the ‘true Charaéters of the heavens is the writing of Aticels,
amongft'the Hebrews is called the writing
whichrali things ‘are defcribed. and fignified in the Heaven.
for every knowing mian to read. Burof thefe hereafter ; But.
now they.make Chara@ters of Geomantical figures binding to-_
gether the points of each varioufly, and-attributing them.ac-
- _. €ording tothe manner of their figurings, to thof

a \

and fi igns of which they: were made, the of which the:
following table will thew.

O mew The Charaiters ofr

From the people = 8
TheC baratters of

From Conjunttion Hi il

«
| i
Whit
¥
ec ers of V enus. 3
From loofin
- ‘
e

‘From a ter

From a feffer

ves

The haratlers of Jupiter.

hilofophy. ook IT.
: ers of tye oun.
a
a4
The Charatters of Mars.
3 wer,
st & a
From a Bo
q 2:
tain“
‘

BookII. Of Occult Philofopby.

From a prifon

From fadnefs

T he Charaéiars of the head of the Dragon,
The Charatters of the tayle of the Dragon. | |
MO
CHAR

CHAP.

AG Gharatters which are drawn wings 4
fertain

above of a certain manner of Images
made not after the likenefs of Celeftial Images, but
. according tothe emulation of that which the minde of the
Operator doth defire. In like manner alfo it is to bé under-
ftood of Characters ; for foch like Chara€ters are nothing elfe
ea then mages il! dearticulated ; ; yet having a certain probable fi-
militude with the Celeftial images or with that which the mind
Wy cat the: Operator defices, whether that be from the whole
image, or from certain markes thereof expreffing the-whole
image. Asthe Characters of Aries and Taurus we make thus
Gemini from imbracing . of

their, hofns, TiO» Of
Canter froma progtels and regrels Leo,Scorpio,and (4-

from theirtail m vw. of Virgo,fiom Spike

Libra from aballance of Sagittarius froma dart of
“Aquarius from Waters = atid of from Fithes x ike
‘manner the Character of Saturn is. made from a Sickle

of Papier, from Scepter of
arefroma bork ‘of the Son from routidne’, and a golden

of the ein her

horns of increafing and ©. Befides, of thefe, ac-

cording to the mixtions of Signs and Stars, and Natutfes, are

Madeallo mized Characters, as of a ficrycriplicity

Mercury froma Wand

> F
‘
i
ic of Earthi of Aier of
at ae 7

Wich according to the ‘hundred and

rwentie conjun@tions of Planets,refulg fo many compat
saCters of various Figures; as of Saturn and viz. thus,

457. or thus te or Mars,
or thes of Papier, and

And as thefe are exemplified by two and three, foalfo

of the reft, and of more may they be framed: after the fame
manner may the Characters of ocherCe afcending
in any faces degree of bgns, be com endioufly drawn after
the likenefs of the images, asin chefe which ar¢ made accord.
ing to the way of imitation of chat which
the Operator ‘debe; as to love, the figures be mixed to-
gether imbracing and obeying one the other, but-tohatred,
on the contrary, turning away the one from the’ other; con-

Behenits and are chefe,

The Pleiades,

minde of

aw ;
a
NOW We Wl et GOwnl tao |
affigned to the fimex
The head-of Algol
aooram.

leffer Dog-ftar.

Theheart of the Lion,

Za
»
~ : re
‘

ry

The heart the

bis

he Vulture falling.
ont
The tail of Capricorn.
CHAP.

That: Divination ‘Without A Afrology us perf.
E have fpoken if ithe foregoing Chapt of the

vers kindes of Divinations: Bue this is co benoted
that all chefe require the’ tife and rules of Aftrology, as. ak
moft neceffary for the knowledge of all fecrets ; and that a
kinds of Divinations whatfoever ‘have thei¢ atid
tion in Aftrologie fo, asthat Without they
ufe; yer Altrological Divitiatron,inas mach as the the Céleftialvare
of all thofe whith and sry

“7
»
a3
tar
j
aX
¢
Ts *
/ ke

OL Occult Philofopty.; Book
in thefe inferiors, doth give molt certain demonftations by the
fituation, and motion bodies, of thofe things
which are occult or future; of. which we fhall in this plage
fpeak no further, fince of this Science huge, Volums fave been
wrote by the Ancients, and are everywhere extant. Therefore
- whetherthePhyfiognomifts lookupon the body,or countenance
or forehead, or hand, or the Sogthfayer,fearcheth by dre:ms or
Aufpicia, that the jadgment may be'right, the figure of heaven

is alfo to be enquired into. From the judgements.whereof,

together with conjectures of fimilitudes and figns, are produ-
mn true opinions of the fignificators. Alfo if-any prodigie

thall appeas,, the, Figure. of the, wp
uired after, which have gone before in

fuch things are to be

the revolutions of years from great conjunctions, and Eclipfes:
then alfo the Nativities, beginnings, intronizations, foundati-

ons, and revolutions, perfections, direétions of Princes, Nati-

_ons, Kingdoms, Cities, when thefe fhall appear, and upon

what place of the Celeftial figure thefe fell; thac by all chefe

at length we may come toa rational and probable fignifica-

tfon of thefe things, After the fame manner, but-with lefs
2° bour, we fiaft'proceed in the Expofition of dreams. Moreo-
ver, they that being diftempered foretell future things, do it
pot butas thegare inftigaced by che ftars, or inferior inftru-
ments of thefe, whence their Prefi@ions muft at length be
rae ed to the Celeftials, as we read in Lwcan the old Prophet

Light’ niags motion, and the veines Which are
Fibrous, and Warm, and motion ofafair
Afser the City was. viewed, the Sacrifice flain, the infpetion
into,theintrals, did at length by the difpofitions of the Cele-
pro.

Judgement... Alfo Geomancy it {lf the
accuratgof Divinations, which divines, by points of he
| earth, or any other luperfices, or by. fall, Or an other power

——_
t.
‘
¢

an Aftrological manner, by the properties and obfervations
thereof : and hither are referred al natural Divinations by lots
whatfoever,the power whereof can be from no where elfe then
from the-heaven,and from the minde of them chat Work them.
For whatfoever is moved,canfed or produced in thefe inferiors;
mult of neceffity imitate the motions,and influences of the fupe-

the jodgemnetie whereof is fhewed by Aftrological Rules.

Stars at opportune times,under the influencies of the Celeltials,
_and being ‘inferibed, obtain a worderful vertue of Divining,
and foretelling by their:caftings, fuch as thofe Dice Prene/te
had, which we read the Deftinies of the Rossans were Gon-

riours, to which, asto its roots, caufes, and figns it isteduced, —

Hence Dice, Tetracedron, Exacedron, ORocedton, Dodera~
cedron, Icocedron being made by certaia Numbers, Signs, and

Of Lottery, When, and whence he vertue of Divining is incident

Hatfoever Divingtions and Prediétions of humane
events are made by Lottery, muft of nceeffity, befides
the lot, have fome fublime occult caufe; which indeed thaffnor
be a canfe by accident, fuch as Ariffot/e defcribes Fortune to.
be. For in the fertes of Caufes, feeing according to the Plate-
nifts,a. canfe.by accident can never be the prime and fafficient.
caufe, we mult. look. higher, and finde out a caufe which may.
know andintend the effect. Now this we muftnot place in
corporeal Nature, but in immaterial, and incorporeal fub-
{tances which indeed adminifter the Lot, and_difpence the fig-
nification of the truth, asin mens fouls, ‘or feparated {pirits, or
in Celeftial ; Intelligences, or in God himfclf. Now that
there is in maris: foul a Sufficient, power and ‘verthe
dired fuch kinde of lots, ecaufe to

»

yw

325°
thofe fixteen which we above named, making jadgement-after — eA |

é
¥
j

~ ag

our fonla divine vertwe, and fimilitude, and apprehenfion,
and power ofallthings; Andas we faid inthe firft Book, All
things havea natural obedience to it, and of neceffity have‘s
motion and. éfficacy to that which the foul-defires 4
ftrong defire ; and all the vertues and operations of natural
and artifical things, obey ic whenicis carried forth into the —
— excefs of defire, and chen all Lots of what kinde foever ate af-
fifting to the appetite of fuch a minde, and acquire to them.
felves wonderful vertues of paffages, as from that, fo from the
-Celeftial opportunity in that hoor in which the excefS of fath
a like appetite doth molt-of allexeeed init, And thisisthat
round and foundation of all Aftrological Queftions, where.
_ fore the. minde being elevated into the excefs of any defire,
taketh of it felf an hour and opportunity moft convenient’ and
efficacious, on which the Figure of the heaven being made, the
Aftrologer may then judge init, and plainly know concetning
that Which any one defires, and is inquifitive to know. But
‘now becaufe Lots are not directed alwayes by mans minde,
but alf@} as we faid before, ‘by the help of other Spirits ; nor is
the minde of alwayes difpafed to that excefs of paf-
Gon-as we fpoke of - amongit the Ancients, it. was
ftome to premife before the cafting of the Lot, fome. facred
_ performanees, in which they called upon divine Intelligencies
and fpirits for to direct the Lot ‘aright. Whatfoever'kinde of
Ge of Lots portend; ‘nirft of hecef-
‘not be by chance 6r forrune, bur fromn'a by
vetcue whereof the Phantafic, or hand‘ of him that caft the
Lot ismoved, whether that power proceed from the foul of
Operaror through the great excefs of his affeCtion, or'from:
g@Celeftial influence, and opportunity, or from acertain Diety
fpiric affifing, or moving ftom on high; wherher thefe
Dike, or in the meeting of Vertes, flich'as were ‘formerly the
of Moprer and Virgil, of which we read in of

e

«
Sd

what's be far of grac'd wit she Olive h
Prefenting erings ? his White chin
A Roman laws firft fetled Rome,

And from Carets a poor fayl come’
To great ¢

By which Verfes he did not in vain becometo topes of

enjoying the Empire, Alfo among{t Hebrews, and. even a-
mong{t us Chriftians(fome Divines not difapproving of it)Lots
are taken out of Verfes of Pfalms. There are alfo more, & other
kindes of Lots, asare humane Lots, which had no Digination
in them amoneft the Ancients, and are ve ehich by ns in choo-
fing of Magiftrares, to prevent, of. which. alfo a-
gainft Verres makes mention: are dis opr pur-

pofe : But chole which are divine, Low, refpeGing
Oracles, and Religion, of which we ilcouste | in ah fol-
lowing Book: Onely thus, far I. would adyife you, that how
much prefaging, divining or SoutliGaying foever Lots are found
to have,they have them not as they are Lots,but by reafon me a

vertue of a higher joyned to. them.

of the foul the ning the
of the Philefe

Ti neceffary that the heaven. and:

they have a power, influence, and manifelt operation upon
thefe fhould be animated : fecing an Operation can-|

not proceed from a meer bady. Posts, and

fophers affirm therefore shat the workd and; all Celeftialibo~
diet muft have afoul,and chat alfointelligent : Hence Adarces

de
t »
es

“OF Oceu Philip

The world; doth appear

In divers forms, of Aire, Earth, S ea, ana Fire
cA divine foul doth rule, a
Doth wifely govern

Earth weigh d pth a asre,’s
great Jove-— |

© "Dhow doftjoy nto weld
‘All thin refed and diffi

Et through the memsbers of the fame, andthis
"Being divided, andfortoreturm:

“Aad molt full of all Philofophy,
And firft the Heaven; Earthsand liquid plain,
at Tf be Moons bright Globe, and Stars T stanian
it fed within, [pread through the whole
| with the huge he |
Hence man,and beafts and birds derive their firain,
monfters flagsing in the marbled main ;

Thefefeeds have fiery vigor, unda birth
Of beavenly race; but | with ‘heavy earth.

For what do thefe feem to mean , then thie
fhould not only have a fpitit foul, but alfo to partake of che
divine mind; and that the.originall, vertue, and vigour of all
inferiour things do depend on the foul of the worl4? This do

»
ba
rte

ay

Book Il. . Of Occult Phi

ofophy.

a

andconfirm.

| The fame ss confirmed by reafon.

afoul, with which they caufe a foul in thefe inferior and
mixed bodies. They have alfoas we faid in the former book ,a
which by the mediating of the foul is united’ to the bo-

whereof arethe bodies of all living creatures, and by how
much the whole is more perfe& and noble then the parts, by fo.
much more perfe&, andinobleis the body of che world then. —
the bodies of each living thing.It would be abfurd, that allim- |
perfe&t bodies. and: parts of the world; and every bafe Ani=
mal, as Flies, and Worms fhould be worthy of a life, and have

whole, and moft noble body, fliould have neither life,nor font;
It is no lefs abfurd, that Heavens, Stars, Elements, which give
to all things life, and foul moft largely, fhould themfelves be
without life, and foul; and that every plant., or,treefhould: be:
of amore noble condition then the Heaven, Stars, and Ele-
ments, which are naturally the caufe of chem; And what living.
man can deny that earth, and water live, which of themfeives,: .

generate, vivifie, nonrith, and innumerable. trees,
plants, and ae creatures? as moft, manifeftly appears in.
things thae breed of their own accord, and. in thofewhich .
have no corporeall feed. Neither could Elements generate and.

nourith fach kind of creatures, if they themlelves were.
without life or foul. Buc fomehaply may fay, that fuch kind,
of living creatures are not generated OY the foul of the.ecarth,.
or water, but by the influencies of Celeltiall fouls ; -Thefe the
Platonifts anfwer, that an Accident’ cannot beget a-fubitance,

ftance, becaufe an inftrument removed froman artificer

es ~ 7

Theopbra us, Avicen, Algaxeles, and all Peripateticks confels,

alife and foul, and the whole entire world amolt perfe@,

unlefs haply as an inftrument it be fubjected to the nexe fub- &

He world, the heavens, the Stars, andthe Elementshayve

y : For as the world certain Whole body, ‘thé parts

— o

a

a cefrattity: Foritis neceffary

Philo. Book bi,

ofthe ares foalfo thefe: Celeftiall-infuere
‘cies, feeing they are certain accidents being removed far from
vital fabftances, or from the life it felf, cannot generate a vital
f{ubftance in thefe inferiors. And AZercurias in his book Which
he cals De Communi, faith All ciiat is inthe world is moved ei-
ther byincreafe,or decreafe, Now: what.moves,mult needs have

_ life; and feeing that all things move, even the earth,efpecially
‘generative ahd alcerative motion,they mult them{etyes

five. And if any doubt that the heavensilive, faith Thcephra-
be isnovto be accounted:a: Philofopher; and he which

denyes the licaven to’ be animated, fo thatthe mover thereof
isnot the fori thereof, deftroyes che foundation of all

-fophy The world thereforellives, hath ‘a foul, and.fenfes for

it gives life toiplants, which ar¢not produced of feed;' and it

=x

he naihed fouls have reafon,is apparetit hence;
whereas the univerfalt works of che forefaid foulsdo
céttain perpetual order comfpire amongft cheaniclves,it
is neteffary thar they be governed not by chance but by reafon;:
by which teafon hey do dirét,& bring allctheir rit co
Idthavethe

reafon of térrche things, amd water of watety things’; and fo
in the reft; by which reaforreach in their time, place, andorder
are ‘generated, and/being hurt-are repaired. crefore Phito-
fophers think -the foulof the “earth to be as it were
the fouFof fomé‘conttmptible body, butte-berationall ahd.
atfo iftelligent,’ yex and to-be a Befides ic-would be
ab flird, have réafons of oar works, rhacC eleftiall

fgils, and the fool of the univerfe Thould nor have reafons of
But if* (as = Plato) the world be- made: by very

a
—
‘
Ce

might be it ‘Were one’ ibftrumencimaking of many

soodness it. as well as it could be made, itis
ed with not only life, fenfe,: and reafon, but alfo under
ftanding. For the perfection of a body: is its foul;'and that
body is more perfect which: hatha perfect foul
neceffary therefore, feeing Celeftiall bodies are ‘moft perfea,
that they have alfo moft. perfe minds, They partake there-
fore of anintelle®t anda minde.; which the Platoniffsalfo
prove by the perfeverance of their order, and tenor,’ becaufe
motion is Of its nature free, it may eafily farve, and wander
now one way, how ahother,unlefs it were riled by arincelle®
and amind, atid that alfd bya perfect mind feemng from
the beginning the beft way, and: chief end. Which perfe@
mind indeed, becaufe it ‘is moft powerfull in the foul, asisthe
foul,and as are the fouls of Geleftidll bodies, and of Eiements,
withoue all doubt doth moft orderly,and perfe@ly govern the
work allotted co it. For bodies do not reféft'a moft powerfull
foul, and a perfet mind doth not change ics counfel. The foul:
of the world therefore is a certain only thing. filling afl things,
that it might ‘make one of *tte and at

‘

ote found, foundirig from three kinds of creatores;inrell

i , Celeftiall, incorrprible, with one ouly breatti

world, |

of : fouls are very. many; and diverfe
ifold Powet and vertie upon: @

according t
ufeof. Concerning which you ma obferve, be
thefe fouls according to is faid to

double:

all

D

Occult. ht Opny. ook

double vertue;the ane placed in knowing, the othet in vivifying

and: governing its body.. Upon this account in the Celeftiall
{pheres, Orpteus, cals the former yertue Bacchus, the other a
Mufe. Hence he is fot ipebriated by any Bacchus, who hath
not firlt been coupled to bis Mafe. Therefore nine Bac.
chus's are defigned about the nine Mufes. Hence in the nint
{phere Orphens puts Bacchus Cribonius , and the Mufe Gal
ope; in the {tarry heaven Picsonins, and Urania; in the {phere
of Saturn, Ampbietus,and Pelyphymuia; in the fphere of 7
= an er-pfichorre;in the {phere of AZars, Baffarins,
and Clio: in the fphere of the Sux,7rietericus, and AZelpemen-
in the {phere of Venus, Pl and. Erato; in the {phere of
Mercury, Silenus, and Euterpe; in the {phere of the AZoon,
Bacchus, Lyens, and the Mule Thalia. Alfo inthe {pheres of
the Elements,.he names the fouls after this manner. In the
firehe puts the planet, and the morning ; in the air lightening
Fupiter, and fune; in water the Ocean, and Zhetys; in the
earth Plsto, and Preferpina ; but the foul of rhe world or
univerfe, Magicians call the. Jupiter of the world ,-and the
mid of the world Apollo,and the nature of the world, A/iner-
. Ma,befides in the fire they put Valcan, in the water Neptune,
and.they did name them by divers names. Alfo in the Stars of
the Zodiack the Pythagorians did put twelve particular Gods
or fouls placed in the hearts of thofe Sears, and thence govern
"ing the whole Star,viz. in the heart of Aries’ is placed 2 par-
ticular-Pailes; in- the- heart of--7
Gemini a particular Phebus,of Cancer Mercury, ot Leo Fupiter,
of Virgo Ceres, of Libra Vulcan, of Scorpio Mars, of S$ agit.
Diana, of Vefta, of Aquarius apatticnlar
Juno, in the heart of Pifces a particulat Neptune This did
(Manilins fing forthin thefeverfes.

Pallas doth rule the Ram, Venvsthe Bul,
Phebus the Twins, andMercury doth
| | ¢ Cancer, andt L on guides doth Jove.
eres deth Virgo, Vulcan Libta seve,

Yr
on

"For Scorpion Mars ; for Sagittarius f:
Diana cares; for Capricorn dothcare
Vefta ; Aquarius Juno doth protect ;

AndNeptune Piles

And moft ancient Orphens writin; to Mujcus,reckons up more
Dieties ignif ying their re-
fpe@ts, and.duties, calling chem all in proper fongs, Let no one
tl are the names of evill deceiving fpi-
rits; buc of naturall, and divine vertues, diftrubted to the

world by, the true God, for the fervice, and profit of man,who

knew how.to ufe chem : and antiquity it felfhath afcribed to

each of thefe Dieties the feverall members of man; asthe ar
tomemory,, which. Virgil allo dedicates to Phebus, faying,
(yathins pals ny ear, and admonifheth me. So the right hand

being.a token

cifullnefs;Klence they that beg pardon bend them. Some dedi-

cate the Nayell to Venus as the place of luxury ; fome whore-

fér afl che members to it as the center, fay it is dedicated co:
mon the effigies.

Jupiter. Hence inthe Temple of fupiter
ofa navel is celebrated. Many other things the ancients did
obferve, afcribing every little member and joynt to their Di-
eties, which if they be rightly underltood,and the true Dicties
ruling over them known, would not at all fwerve ftom their
duty, feeing alfo facred writ ceftifies that all .our members are

soverned | the fuperior vertues, of which we {hall fpeak

more lasgely. in_the following book; and not members only,
but every, exercife of men is diftributed to its Dietie, as hunt-

ings to Diana, wats to, Pallas, husbandry to Ceres, of which.

thus fpeaks Apolla in his Oracles in Porphyrie

Pallas Joves wars, woods to Diana fair
Afcribed are, to Juno humid Aire,
To Ceres Corn, and fruits; toOfyris:

fortitude, & by which an qath is made,Numa
Pompilins, as faith Livy, hath dedicated co faith : The fingers”
are under the.tuition of Adimerva, and the knees given to Mer. -

«
A
‘ag
eg
«

Of thefeven governers of the world, the Planets, and of their

"various names Serving to Magicall [peeches.

Mor: they did call thofe feven governors of the
world (as Hermes cals them) Saturn, fupiter, Mars,
the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, by many names,
and epithites; wiz. calling-Saturn (celins, fithe- bearer, che
father of the Gods, the Lord ofthe time, the high Lord, the —
great,the wife, the intelligent, ingenioustevolutor; of along ©

fpace, an old man of great profandity, the author of fecret
contemplation, impreffing, or deprefling great thoughts in
the hearts of men, deftroying and preferving all chings, over-
turning force and power, and conftieuting,a keeper of fecret
-things,and a (hewer of them,canfing the lofs, and finding of the
author of fife and death. So Fupiter is called as it were a help-
~ing Father, the King of heaven, Magnanimous, thundering,
lightning, unconquered, high and mighty, great and mighty;
good, fortunate, fweet, mild, of good will, honelt , pure,
walking well, and in honor, the Lord of joy, and of judge-
wife, crue, the fhewer of rruth, the judge of all chings,
excelling all in goodnefs, the Lord of ‘riches, and wifdome.
| Mars is called Afavors, powerfull in wat, bloody, powerfull
inarms, a fword- bearer, magnanimous, bold, untamed, gene-
fous, lightning,of great power and furious halt,again{t whom
mone can deferid him(elf if he refift him, who deftroyesthe

ftrong, and powerfull,and depofeth Kings from their thrones,
the Lord of heat and power, the Lord of fiery heat; -and of
the planet of blood 3 who inflames the hearts of concenders,
_  and-gives them boldnels, The Swyis called Phabus,Die/piter,
Apollo, Titan,P ean, P hanes; Horus Ofiris,as it is in chat Oracle;

e

Apollo, Horus, Kingruling theday

rs,
»
»
ve,
UP
¢
i

dor to all things int

Who changeth times, giveth winds andrain,

 Heiscalled alfo eArcitenens, burning fiery, golden flaming, ra-
‘diating,of a fiery hair, of a golden hair, che eye of the world,

Lucifer, feeing all things, ruling all chings,the creator of Jighr,
the King of Stars, the great Lord, good, fortunate, honeft.

pure, prodent,intelligentwife, (hining over the whole world,
governing, and vivifying all bodies that have afoul, the prince -
of the world keeping all the Stars under’ himfelf, the light of
all che Stars,darkening burning overcoming their yertue by-his

approach, yet by his -and fplendor giving light fplen-
| e night he is called Diony/i#s, butin the
day Apolo, asif driving away. evill things. Therefore the

Athenians called him Alexicacon , and Homer Vilion,i,e. the

driver away of evil things. He is alfocalled Phebus from his
beauty and brightne(s, and Vu/caz from his fiery violence, be-
caufe the force thereof confilts of many fires: He is-alfo.callied:
the Sun,becaule he contains the light.of all the Stars = hence he
is called bythe efffyrians “INN. Adad, which fignifies on/y,

Venus is called the Lady, nourifhing, beautifull; white, fair,

‘pleafing, powerfull, the fruitfull Lady of Jove and beauty; the

progeny of Ages, the firlt parent.of men, who in che beginning

of all chings joyned diverfity. of fexes together ‘witha growing
love, and with an eternail off-{pring propagateskinds of men. —

and Animals, the queen ofall delights, the Lady of rejoycing,
friendly,fociable, pittifull, taking all things in.good parr, al-

-waies bountifnilro mortals, affording the tender.affection of
-amother to ofthemin mifery, the fafegard of.
-mankind, Jetting. no, moment of time. pals without doing
good, overcoming all things by her power, humbling the high.

to the low, the {trong to the weak; rhe noble co the vile,recti-

‘in every fexe,the is found to be of every mind: and fhe is.

‘ying. and equalling all things : and the is called" Aphrodite, be-
ule

and by the Hebrews WOW Schemefch, which fignities. proper.

“called:

Book TI. Of Occult Philofphy, ye

he
t
«

a:
‘ 2 \

‘
j

‘the Sears, difpenfing various lights

talled Lacifera, ie. bringing light, bringing the yeers of the
light’;' and the'ts called ‘He/peras, whien Me follows the
Sun, and Pho/perns,becaule the feads through all things thongh
never fo hard. CWercury is called the fon of. Fwpiter, the
cryer of the gods,the interpreter of gods, Sti/bon,the Serpent-
bearer,the rod-bearer, winged on his feet,eloquent, bringer of
gain, wife, rational! robult, ftour, powerfull in good and evil,
“the norary of the Sun, the meflenger of Zapirer, the meflenger
“betwixt the fapernall and infernal! gods, male with males,
~~ female with females, moft fruitfall in both fexes ; And Lica»
him the of is alfo Herme;
interpreter, brisging to light all obfcurity ,:and openi
 thofe things which fecret. The AZoox is called Phebe,
Diana, Lucina, Proferpina, Hecate, Menftruons,'of 'a half
- form, giving light in the night, wandring filenc, having two
horns, a preferver, a night-walker, horn-bearer, the ‘queen’ of
"heaven, the chiefelt of the Dieties, the firft of the ‘heavenly
_ gods and goddeffes, the: queei of fpirits, the'miftris of all
~ the Elements, whom the ftats anfwer, feafons’ return, Elements
“ferve; at whofe nod liphtnings breath forth, feeds bud, fants
increafe, the initiall parent of frit, the fifter of Phadws, tight,
‘and ight from oné planet ro another, enlight-
ning all powers by its light, reftrainmg the various paffings of
bf the circuits: of the Sin,
~ “the Lady of great beanty, the miftris of rain and ‘waters, the
~ giver of riches,the nurfe of mankind the governor of a! t'Scaces,
kind, mercifall, proteé@ting men by Sea aad land, ‘mitigating

all rempelts of fortune, ifpenfing with fate, nowrifhing all

ftraing the rage of Goblins (hurting theo

things growing on the earth, wandering into‘ divers‘woods.te-
| ings Of the earth,
_ difpenfing the light’of the Heaven, the Wholfome ‘rivers of
_ the Sea, and the deplored filence of the infernals, by its nods ;
the world,treading hell unger her feer; of whofe'thajetty
the birds hafting in the Aire are affraid, the'wild: beats
jing in the mountains, hid in the ‘protind fithes
fwiming in the'Sea ; ‘But ‘of’ thete and the'like ‘names ‘of Stars

planets,and their Epithites,Sirnames, and callings upon,he

a
a
j
4 A

Of Occult Philofophy. 337

he that will know more, and make more curious enquity mult ‘
betake himfelf to the hymnes of Orpheus, which he that truely a
-onderftands, hath attained toa great underftanding of nacu- }) 77

Book H.

That humane imprecations do naturally impre[s their poWers wpe
on external things; And how mans mind. through eash degree
of dependencies afcends into the intelligible tit and becomes
like to the more [ublime {pirits, and Intelligencies,

He Celeftiall fouls fend forth their vertnes to the Celefti-
al bodies,which then tranfmit chem to this fenfible world.

For the vertues of the cerrene orb proceed from no other caule

then Celeftiall. Hence the Magictan that will worke by them,
wfeth acunning invocation of the fuperiors, with myfterious

words,and a certain kind of ingenious {peech, drawing the one

tothe other, yet by anaturall force through a certain mutuall

agreement betwixt them, whereby things follow of their own

accord, or fometimes are drawn unwillingly. Hence faith

Ariftotle in the {ixth book of his Myfticall Philofophy, that

when any one by. binding or bewitching doth call upon the

Sun or other ftars, praying them to be helpfull cothe work de-
fired, the Sun.and other Stars do not heare his words, but
are moved after a certain manner by a certain conjunction,.

and mutuall feries,; whereby the parts of the world are mu-

tually {ubordinate the one to the other, and have a mutuall

confent, by reafon of their great union - Asin mans body one =
member is moved by perceiving the motion of another, and in

a harp. one ftring is moved at the motion of another. So

when anyone. moves. any part of the world; other partsare

moved by ths.perceiving a. motion of that. The knowledge
therefore of things following one the other,
is the foundation of all wonderfull operation,which is necefia- :
rily required.to. the power of accracting fulperior
vertues,. Now the words certain natural

and becaufe the partsof the world motually draw one the o.
ther, therefore a Magician invocating by words, works
_ powers fitred to nature, by leading fome by the love of one to
the other,or drawing others by reafon of the following of one
after the other, or by repelling by reafon of the enmity of one
tothe other, from the contrariety, and difference of things,
and multitude of vertues; which although they are contrary,
dnd different, yet perfe& one part;fometimes alfo he compels
things by way of authority, by the Celeftiall vertue, becanfe
He not aftranger to the heaven. therefore, ifhe re-
ceives the impreffion of any higation, orfafcination, doth mot
receive it according to the rational! foul, but fenfuall, and ithe
fuffers in any part, fuffers according to the Animal! part. For
they cannot draw a knowing and ‘intelligent man by reafon,
but by receiving that impreflion and force by fenfe,in as much
_astheAnimalfpirit ‘of man is bythe influence of the Celeftials,
-and cooperation of the things of the world, affe&ted beyond
his former and natural! difpofition. As the fon moves the fa-
ther to labor, although unwilling, forto keep and maintain
him, although he be wearied ; and the defire to title is moved
¢o anger-and other labors, for to get the dominion. And the
-_indigency of nature, and fear of poverty, moves man to de-
fireriches. And the ornaments, and beauty of women is an in-
citementtoconcupifcence. And the harmony of a wife Muf-
tian sroves his hearers with varfous paffions, whereof fome do
voluntaty follow the confonancy of art,others conform them-
felves'by gefture, although unwillingly, becaufe their fenfeis
captivated their reafon not being intent to thefe things, But
thefe Kinds’ of fafcinattons & lizations the vulgar doth neither
admire, nor deteft, by reafon of theirufpalnefs : but they ad-
other natural! things, becaufethey are ignorant of them,
and’ are not accuftomed to them. Hence they fall into
errors, thinking thofe things to be above nature, or con-
ttaty’ to natute, ‘which indeed are by nature, and ace
.¢ording to nature. We mult know therefore that every fupe-
- moves itshext mferior, in ttsdegree, and order, not only
So theuniverfall foul moves the
parti:

a

‘then their bodies, and the fu

OF Occult Philofophy.,

aprticular foul; and the rational acts upon the fenfual, and
thatupon the vegetable; and. every pact of the world a@s
upon another, and every part isapt to be moved by another ;
and every part of this inferior werld fuffers from the heavens
according to their nature, and aptitude, as one part of the
Animall body fuffers from another. And the fuperior intel-
Je@tuall world moves all things below ic felf, and after aman-
ner contains all che fame beings from the firlt co che lat, which
are in the inferior world. Celeftiall bodyes therefore move
the body of the elementary world, compounded, generable,
fenfible, from. the circumference tothe center, by fuperior,

perpetual, and fpiricuall eflences,depending.on the primary in-

telle@, which isthe a@ing intelle@; but upon the yertue pur

in by the word of God, which word the wafe Chaldeans of
Babylon call the caufe of caufes, becaufe from. it are produced
ali beings, the acting intelled&t which isthe fecond from it de-
pends ; andithat by reafon of the union of this word with the
author, from whom all things being are truely produced,
The word therefore is the image of God, the adting inrelieR
the image of the word , the foul is the image of chis intelle@ 5
and our word is che image of the foul, by which it aéts npoa
naturallghings matucally, beeawfe nature is the work thereof,
Andevery one,of thole fis fubfequear, as a father his
fon, and none. of the Jatter exifts without theformer, For
they are depending among{themlelves, by 2 kind of ordinate
dependeneys’ fo that whenshenlatteris corcupted, 1s cecucn-
ed into that which was next before ir, unttll ic come coxhe
heavens, then unto the univerfall foul, and laftly nate theack-
ing intelle&, by which all other creatures exift, and which it
felf exifts in the principal! author,which isthe creating word of
God,to which at length all things are returned.Our foul there-
fore, ifit willwork any wonderfull thing in thefe inferiors,

muft have refpeét to their beginning, that it may be ftrength-

ened, and illuftrated by that, and receive power of acting
through each degree from the very firft author. Therafore we -

muftbemore diligent in contemplating the fouls of the Stars :
, and intellectual

2 world,

~ — 4
a
‘
é

a Of Occult Philofophy. II.
4vorid,then the Celeftial corporeal, becaufe that is more noble,
although alfo this be excellent,and the way to that; and with.
‘out which medium the influence of the foperiour cannot be at.
tained to. As for example, the Sun is the King of Srars,moft
fall of light, but receives ic from the intelligible world above
all other Stars, becaufe the foul thereof is more. capable of in-
teltigible fplendor. Wherefore he that defires to attra the
influence of the San, muft contemplate upon the Sun, not only
by the fpeculation of the exterior light, but alfo of the interior.
_And this no man can do unlefs he return to the foul of the Sun,
and become like to it, and comprehend the intelligible light —
‘thereof with an‘ intelleCtuall fight, asthe fenfible light witha
corporeal eye.For this man (halbe filled with che light thereof.
and the fight thereof which isan under type impreffed by the
fapernal Orb it receives into it felf,with che illuftration whereof
his intelle& being om na a like to it,& being affifted
by it thal] at length atcain to that fupreme brightnefs, and to
all forms that partake thereof. And when he hath received the
fight of the fupreme degree, then his foul thall come to per-
fe@tion, and be made like to the fpirits of the. Sun,and fhall at-
tain to the vertues, and illuftrations of the fupernaturall ver-
. tue, and fhall enjoy- the power of them, if he hath obtained
faith in the firft author. In the firft place therefore we muft im-
plore affiftance from the firlt author, and praying not eo
with mouth but a Religious gelture and fupplicant foul, alfo
abundantly,unceflantly,and fincerely, that he would enlighten

our mind, and remove datknefls growing upon our fouls by
scafon of ourbodies,

a. ‘
»

the Moft Renowned and
luftrious Prince,Hermannus of Wyda, Prince
Elector, Duke of Weftphalia, and Angaria, Lord

Arch-Bifhop of Colonia, and Paderborne, his
~moft gracious Lord, Henry Cornelius
Agrippa of Nettef-heim:

avery excellent opinion of the Ancient
Magicians (moft Illuftrions ‘Prince

t ho ethat negleti,tr ujt ing only to natar all and Wordly things. are.
wont often to be confouuded by errors & fallaciesyand very

ps that. we ought to labour in nothing more in.
AY gs this life,then that we degeneratenotfrom
NS the Excellency of the mind, by which we
Way come neereft toGod and put on the Divine
nature; leafp at any time our mind Wax-
Ing dull by vain foonld decline
the frailty of our earthly body and vices of the flefo : [owe fhonld
loofe it,as it were caft down by the dark precipices of ‘syne lufts.
Where ‘fore we ought iL to order our mind, that it ry st Self ‘ct |
mindful of its own ana excellency, fhould alWayes bot
Think , do and.aperatée Something of it felf; But the.
knowledge of the Divine {ciewte,, doth.only ana very powerfully
perform this forus.... Kben we by the remembrance of its majefiy
being alwaies bufied in Divine fiudies do every moment contem~
plate Divine things, by. afage and diligent inguifition, and by all
the degrees of the creatures.afcending evento the. Arcbetypehim-

Sublime boufe of the heavens, andthe moft di

te be deceived by evil [pirits ; But the underftanding of Di.
vine things, the mind-from errors,gnarendreth it Di-

vine, giveth infallible power to our Works, and driveth far the
deceits andobfiacles of all evil [pirits,and together fubjetis them
te eur commands; Tea it comapels even good Angels and all the
powers of the world unto our fervice viz. the virtue of our Works
being drawn fromthe eArchetype himfelf, To whom When we

afcend all creatures Hy obey us, andall the quire of hea-
ven dofollow us; For (as Homer faith) none of the gods durft
their feats, Jove being moved;.and then prefently he

ruleth (as faith Ariftophanes) byone of the gods, Whofe right it
is to execute his commaszds, Who then ont of his duty doth manage

our petitions according to our defire. therefore (moft

luftrious Prince) youhave'a Divize and immortal foul given
you, Which fecing the goodnefs of the Divine providence, a well
difpofed fate, and the bounty of nature have in [uch manner
gifted, that bythe acutene/s of your under ftanding, and perfett-
ne[s of fenfes youare abletoview, fearch, contemplate, dsfcern
andpierce thovow the pleafant theaters of naturall. things, the

ficult paflages of

_ things, : I being bound to you by theband of thefe your

 Benedittions. andim

the duft-of antiquity and involved in theobfeurity of oblivion, ax

great vertues-amfo far adebtor as to communicate Without envy
by.the trueaccount of all opinions, Thofe myfteries of Divine
Ceremoxiall Magick, whith Ihave traly learned, and not to hide

_ the knowledge of | thofethings, whatfoever concerning thefe.mat-

ters the Miaci thofe old Priefts of the Egyptians , and Caldeans,
theaucient. prophet s-of the Babylonians,the Cabalifts, the Divine
Magicians of the Hebrews,alfo rhe Orpheans,Pythagoreans
Pjaconilts, theprofoundelt Philefophers of Greece; further

_the Bragmanntof the Indians, the Gynmofophilts of Ethiopia,
andtheuncorrapred Theologians of our Religion have delivered,

and. by: what force of words; power of Seals, by what charms of
mprecarions; and’ by What vertue of obferva-

tioms they in old-time Wronght fo fupendions andWwonderfall

digées; intimating 10-y0n in this third book of Occult Phifofophy

andexpofing tothe light thoferbings Which bave been baryed in

in

a

‘ aw
f

in Cymmerian darkne/s even to this day. We prefent therefore
now to you, a compleat and perfett Work in thefe three books of
Occult Philofophy or M agick, Which we have efetted with di-~
ligent care, and very great labor and pains bob of mind and
body; and though st be untrimmed inre[pett of Words, yet its moft
elaborate truly in re[peét of the matter : Wherefore I defire thus
one favor, that you Would not expect the grace of an Oration, or
the elegancy of {peech in thefe books, which We long fince
Wrote in our youth When our [peech Was as yet rough, and our
language rude; and now we have refpett, not to the ftile of an O-
ration,but only to the feries or order of fentences;We have fiudyed
the le[s elegancy of [peech, abundance of matter (ucceeding in the
place thereof ; and we fuppofe we have /ufficiently fatisfied our
duty, if we foall to the utmoft of our power perform thofe things we
_have promifed to declare concerning the fecrets of Magick,
and have freed our confcience from a dune d:bt. But feeing With-
out doubt, many {coffing Sophifters Will con[pire againft me, e-
[pecially of thofe who boaft themfelves to be allyedtoGod,and fully
replentfoed With Divinity, and prefum to cenfure the leaves of Se
the Sibilles, and will undertake to judge and condemn tothe fire
thefeour Works even beforethey have read or rightly under ftood —
any thing of them (becaufe [uch lettice agrees not With their lips,
and (uch {weet oyntment with their nofe and by reafon of that
Sparke of hatredlong fince conceived againft me, and[carcecon--
taining it felf under the afbes.) Therefore (moft Illuftrions
Prince and wife Prelate) we further [ubmit this work afcribed by.
me to the| merits of you vertue, and now made yours, to your
cen{ure, and commend it to your protection, That, if the bafe
and perfidious Sopbifters Would defame it,by the groffe madne/s of
their envy and malice, you would by the prefpicacy of your di/- ag
cretion and candor of judgement, happily protelt and defend it. —

Farewell and profper.

| The

d

a. «ames

x

x
oF

the kgawledge:of thoferhings, whatfoever concerning thefe.mat-

andthesuncorrnpred Theologians ofour Religion have delivered:
 Benedsttions. andi
digies; intimating-toyon in this third book of Oceutt Phifofophy
‘the duftof amiquity and involved in theobfcurity of oblivion, ax

oft to be deceived by evil [pirits ; But the underftanding of Di.

_. vinethings, purgeth the mind-from errars,gndrendreth it Di-

vine, giveth infalible power to our Works, and driveth far the
deceits andobfpacles of all evil [pirits,and together [ubjetts them
te eur commands; Tea it compels even good Angels and all the
powers of the world unto our fervice viz. the virtue of our Works

being drawn fromthe eArchetype himfelf, To whom When we

creatures neceffarily obey us, amdall the quire of hea-

ven dofollow us; For (as Homer faith) none of the gods durft
their feats, Jove being moved;.and then prefently he
ruleth (as faith Ariftophanes) by one of .the gods, Whofe right it
1s to execute his commauds, Who then ont of his duty doth manage

our petitions according to our defire. S therefore (moft

lnftrious Prince) you have a Divize and immortal foul given
you, Which feeing the goodnefs of the Divine providence, a well
difpofed fate, and the bounty of nature have in [uch manuer
gifted, shat bythe acutene/s of your under ftanding, and perfett-
ne[s of fenfes youare able view, fearch, contemplate, dsfcern
andpierce thovow the pleafant theaters of naturall things, the
Sublime: bonfe of the heavens, andthe moft difficult paffages of

Divine things, : I being bound to you by theband of thefe your

great vertues-amfo far adebtor as to communicate Without envy
by.the truesaccount of all opinions, Thofe of Divine
Ceremoniall Magitk whith Ihave traly learned, and not to hide

ters the Miaci thofe old Priefts of the Egyptians , and Caldeans,
theaucient prophets of the Babylonians,the Cabalifts, the Divine
Magicians of the Hebrews, alfo rhe Orpheans,Pythagoreans and

the Bragmannt of the Indians, the Gymmofophifts of Ethiopia,

anaby: What force of words; power of Seals, by what charms of

mprecarions; and: by What vertwe of obferva-
troms they in old time Wrought fo fupendions and Wwonderfall \

andexpofing tothe light thoferhings which bave been baryed in

é
}
‘
§
‘
Pe

in Cymmerian darkne/s even to this day. We prefent therefore
now to you, a compleat and perfett Work in thefe three books of
Occult Philofophy or Magick, Which we have prefetted with di~
ligent care, and very great labor and pains both of mind and

body; and though it be untrimmed inrefpett of words, yet its moft

elaborate truly in re{pect of the matter : Wherefore I defre this
one favor, that you Would not expett the grace of an Oration, or
the elegancy of {peech in thefe books, which We long fince
Wrote in our youth When our {peech Was as yet rough, and our
language rude; and now we have refpett, not tothe ftile of an O-
ration,but only to the feries or order of fentences;We have ftudyed
the le[s elegancy of {peech, abundance of matter (ucceeding in the
place thereof ; and we fuppofe we have [ufficiently fatisfied our
duty, if we {hall to the utmoft of our power perform thofe things we
have promifed to declare concerning the fecrets of Magick,
and have freed our con{cience from adne d:bt. But {eeing With-
out doubt, many {coffing Sophifters will con[pire againft me, e-
[pecially of thofe who boaft themfelves to be allyedtoGod,and fully
replenifoed With Divinity, and prefum to cen{ure the leaves of
the Sibilles, and will undertake to judge and condemn to the fire

thefeour Works even beforethey have read or rightly under ftood
any thing of them (becaufe {uch lettice agrees not With their lips,
and (uch {weet oyntment with their nofe and by reafon of that

Sparke of hatred long fince conceived againft me, and[carcecon-. .

taining it felf under the afbes.) Therefore (moft Illuftrions

Prince and wife Prelate) we further [ubmit this work afcribed by

me to the| merits of you vertue, and now made yours, to your

cen{ure, and commend it to your protection, That, if the bafe
and perfidious Sopbifters would defame it,by the madne/s of
their envy and malice, you would by the prefpicacy of your di/-

cretion and candor of judgement, happily protett and defend it.

Farewell and profper.

The .

«

©
¢

we
o-*

‘
ve
‘

~ f
°
a 4
A
a

The thirdand laft Book of Magick,
or Occult Philofophy ; written by ,
Henry (ornelius oA ‘orippa.

— —

Of the nece [fit ty, power,and profit of Religion.

it is time to-turn our. pen tohigher
S) matters, and to that part of Magick
which teacheth us to know and-perfe@ly
Ws underftand the rules of Religion, ‘and
& how we ought to obtain the truch by
Divine Religion,and bow rightly topre-
eee pare our mind and fpiric, by which only
SPOS we can comprehend the truth; for it isa

common ‘opinion’ of the Magicians, that onlefs the mind and —
fpirit bein good cafe, the body cannot be in good health

™~

‘

~ghen aman to be truly found when body and foul are fo con.

four mind (faith Hermes) can we not otherwife obtain,

vine flow into our hearts.

7-Hofoever therefore thou art thatinow defirelt ro f

_ termination; for (as AZercury. faith), co publifh ro the know-
Iedgeof many afpeech throughly filled.with fo great majelty
of the Deity,is afign of an irreligious: fpiric; and Divine Pilate

vulged to the people; Pythagoras allo and Porphyrius-conter

pled, and agree together, that the firmnefof the mind and IM,
be nor inferior to the powers of thebody; Butafirm ,

than by integrity of life, by piety, and laft of all, by Divine
Religion : forholy Religion pargeth the mind, and maketh it
Divine, it helpeth nature, and ftrengtheneth naturall powers,
as a Phyfician helpeth the health of the body, and a Husband-
man the ftrength of the earth. Whofoever therefore, Religion
being laid afide, do confider only in naturall things, are wont
very oft to be deceived by evill Spirits;but from the knowledge
of Religion, the contempt and cure of vices arifeth, and a fafe.
guard evil fpirits ; To conclude, nothing is. mare plea-
fant and acceptable to God, than aman perfeétly pious, and
truly Religious, who fo far excelleth other men, as he himfelf
is diftant fromthe Immortall gods; Therefore we ought,being
firft purged, to offer and commend our. felves to divine piety
and Religion ; and then our fenfes being afleep, with a quiet
mind ro expe that Divine Netlar ( Neétar | fay,
which Zachary the prophet calleth Wine making maids merry)
praifing and adoring. that faperceleftiall Bacchas, the chiefelt
ruler of the gods and priefts,the author of regeneration,whom
the old poets fang was twice born, from whom rivers moft Di-

‘Of concealixg of thofe thing which are fe cores in Religion.

this feignce, keep filence and conftantly conceal
within. the fectet clofets of your Religious breaft, fo holy a de-

commanded, that holy and fecret myfteries fhould nor be di-

erated

t
ud »*. - - - =

crated their followers to Religions filente; Orphext alfo,
1 hich a certain terrible authority of Religion did an oath
1 HB of filence, from thofe He Gid initiate to the Ceremonies of
» BB holy chings Whence in the verfes concerning the holy word:
vA

he fings, /
Ton, that Admirers are of verte, ay,

Confider well What Ito you fhallfay.

But yon, that facred laws contemn, prophane !

; Away from hence, return ho more again.

But thou O Mateus whofe mindwshigh, -
O bferve my words, andread them with thineeye,

And them within thy [acred breaftrepone,
And in thy journey , think of God alone
The Author of all things, that cannot dye,
Of whom we foall now treate ——

So in Virgil we vead of the Sybill

The godde/s comes, hence, hence, all ‘ye ophane,
The Prophet cries, andfrom her grovtrefraim

Hencé alfo in’celebrating the holy my fte

precept concerning the Cabalifticall fecree of the Hebrews,

wife men of the people, whole hearts thou‘ knoweft can com-

volumes of the Epypeians & thofe befonging to the fecrets of
their ceremonies, were made of confetrated paper;in thefe they

did write down lerers which might not eafily be known,which
they call holy, AZacrobius Marcellinus and others fay, they’

were called Hiéroglyphicks, leaft perchasice che writings of

thiskind be known thé prophane, which allo

they only were admitted to be initiated, the cryer proclaiming
the prophane Vulgar to depart;.and in E/adras we read this

prehend them, and keep thofe fecrets. Therefore the Religious.

of (eres E.

declared in thefe verfes,- Thou fhale deliver thofe books tothe

a

from.

Ae

N

‘
Sa
A.
A ~

IIT.

Egyptians alfo obferved; hence Adercarins;Orphens, andaall th
-ancient Poetsand Philofophérs, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato
 Ariftoxenns, Ammonins kept them inviolably. Hence Plotinus

from afecret retyred clofeche bringeth forth certain. books
noted with obfcare letters, affording compendious words of

the conceived f{peech,partly by the figures of bealts of this kind,

partly by figures full of knots, and crooked in manner ofa

wheel & fet thick twining about like vine tendrels,the reading
thereby being defended from the curiofity of the prophane,
Therefore we (hall be worthy fcholars of this fcience, if we be
filent, and hide chofe things which are fecret in religion, for
the promife of filence (as faith Tertullian) is-due to Religion,
but they which do otherwile, are in very great danger, whence

Apuleius faith concerning fecretsof holy Writs ; I would tell
‘it you, if ic were lawfull cotellit; you fhould know ic, if it

were lawfullto hear it ;. but. both ears and tongue would con-
tract the fame guilt of rath curiofity. So weread Theodorus
the tragick poet, when he would have-referred fomethings of
the mylteries of the Jews Scripture to acertain fable, was de-
prived of fight. Zheopompus alfo who began to tranflate
fomethings out of the Divine law into the Greek tongue, was
prefently troubled in mind and fpirit, whence afterward ear-
neltly defiring God, wherefore this had happened to him, re-

ceived an anfwerin a dream; becaufe he: had bafely pollated
Divine things, by fetting them forth in publike.One Numenias

alfo.being very curious of hidden things, incurred the difplea-

“fare of the Divine powers, becaufe he interpreted the holy

myfteries of the goddeffe E/eujina and publithed them for he .

‘dreamed that the goddeffes of Elenfis {tood in a whores habit

before the Brothel! houfe, which when he wondred ac, they

“wrathfully anfwered, chat chey were by him violently drawn

from their modefty and proftituted everywhere to.all com-

mets, by which he was admonifhed , ‘that the Ceremonies of

the gods ought not tobe divulged. Therefore it hath alwaies

been the great care of the Ancfents to wrap up the myfteries
-of God and nature, and hide them with’ diverfe Aenigmaes,

which law the Indians,Brachmans, Ethiopians,
all the

and

ITT. OF Occult Philofophy.

and Origenes and the other difciples of e4mmonins (as Por-
in his book of the education and Difciplineof
Plotinus ){ware, never to fet forth the Decrees of their mafter.

phyry xe

And becaufe Plotinas, brake his oath made to Ammonius, and
publithed his myfteries, forthe punifhment of his tranfgreffion,
he was confumed (as they fay ) by the Horrible difeafe of Lice.
Chrift alfohimfelf, while he lived on earth, fpoke after chat
manner and fafhion that only the more intimate difciples
fhould underftand the of God, but the o-
ther fhould perceive the para nly : commanding more-
over that holy things fhould not be given to Dogs, nor

pearles caft to Swine: Therefore the Prophet faith, Ihave hid

thy words in my heart,that I might not fin againft thee. There-
fore it is not fic that thofe fecrets which are amongfta few.
wife men, and communicated by mouth only, fhould be pub-
likly written, Wherefore you will pardon me , IfI pafs over
in filenee many and the chiefeft.fecret myfteries of Ceremonial

Magick,I fuppofe I thal do enough, if I open chofe things which

are neceflary to be known, and you by the reading of this book
go not away altogether empty of thefe myfteries; but on chat.
condition let thefe things be communicated to you, on which
Dionyfins bound Timothy, that they which perceive thefe
Secrets, would noc expole them to the unworthy , but’ gather

them together amonglt wife men, and keep them withthat
verence that is due to them. Furthermore I would alfo warne

- you in this beginning, that even asthe divine powers deteft

publike things and profane, and love fecrecy : So every Ma-
gical experiment fieeth the publike,feeks to be hid,is {trength-

ened by filence, but is deftroyed by publication, neither doth.
any compleate effect follow after; all thefe things fuffer loffe,

when they are poured into prating and incredulous minds ;

_ therefore it beboveth a Magicall operator, if he would get:

fruit from this art, to be fecret, andto manifeft to none, nei-

ther his work nor place, nor time, neither his defite norwill, —
unlefs either to amafter, or partner, or companion, who alfo .

ought to be faithfull, believing, filent, and dignified by nature
and education : Secing that even the prating of a.compani oe

“
a |
°

Oe cult Philofophy. |

effe@in every operation.

CHAP. III.

dignification is required, that one may be atrne Magician
anda Worker of miracles.
Ae the beginning of the firft book of this work, we
{ & have fpoken what manner of perfon a Magician ought to
be; but now we will declare a myfticall and fecret matter, nes
ceffary for every one who defireth to practize.chis art, which is

_ both the beginning, perfection and key of all Magicall opera-

tions, and it is the dignifying of men to this fo fublime vertue
and power; for this faculty requireth in man a wonderfull dig-
nification,for that the underftanding which is inus the higheft

faculty of che foul, is the only worker of wonders, which when —

- ft is overwhelmed by too much commerce with the flefh, and

bufied abour the fenfible foul of the body, is not worthy of
the command of Divine fubftances; therefore many profecute
this art in vain; Therefore it is meer that we who endeaverto
attainto fogreat aheight fhould efpecially meditate of two
things;firlt how we fhould leave carnall affections, fraile fenfe,

and material! paffions. Secondly, by what way and means we

may afcend to an intelle& pure & conjoyned with the powers
of the gods, without which we fhall never happily afcend
to the fcrutiny of fecret things,and to the power of wonder -

full workings, or miracles: for in thefe dignification.confilts

wholly, certain religious art do make
np; natural! dignity is the belt difpofition of the body.and

its Organs, not obicuring the foul wich any groffenefs, and
being without al diftemper,and this from the
tion, motion, light, and influence.of the Celeitiall bodies and
{pirits which are converfant in the generation of everyone, as

commandeth the
7 {pirics

are thofe whofe ninth houfeis fortunate by Saturn, Sol, and.
Mercury alfoin the ninth houle

¢

B

Occult

fpirits; but concerning thefe one we have largely treated in ;

the books of the Stars : But who fois not fuch.a one, it is ne-
ceflary that he recompenfe the defeét of nature by education,

and the belt ordering and profperous ufe of naturall things
untill he become compleat 1n all intrinfecall and extrinfecall

perfections. Hence fo great care is taken in the law of Afofes

concerning the prieft, that he be not polluted by a dead car.
cafe,or by a woman a widow, or menftruous, that he be free
from leprofie, flux of blood, burftnefs, and be perfectin all his
members,not blind, nor lame, nor crook-backed; or with an
ilifavored nofe. And «4puleins faith in his Apology, that the
youth tobe initiated to. divination by magick fpels, ought to
be chofen,found without ficknefs,ingenious,comely, perfect in
his members,of a quick{pirit eloquent in {peech;that in himethe
divine power might be converfant as in the good houfes;' That
the mind of the youth having quickly attained experience, may

be reftored to its divinity, But the meritoriousdignityisper- .

feted by two things; namely learning and practice. The end
of learning is to know the truth; it is meet therefore, as is.

fpoken in the beginning of the firlt book, that he be learned -

and skilful in thofe three faculties; then all impediments being
_ removed, wholly to apply his foul to contemplation & to con-
vert it felfinto it felf;tor there is even in our own felves the ap-
prehenfion and power of all things; but we are prohibited,fo as

that we little enjoy thefe things, by paffions oppofing us even

from onr birth, and vain imaginations-and immoderateaf-
fetions, which being expelled the divine knowledge and pow-

er prefently takes place; but the obtains
e

no fefs efficacy which ofttimes of it felf
powerfull for usto obrain thisdeifying vereue, fo.great'is the

If alone is fufficiently

vertue of holy duties rightly exhibited and performed, that

though they be not underitood , yet piouflly and perfectly ob-

ferved, and with a firm faith believed, they have no lef effica-
cy then to adornus witha divine power
is acquited by the art of Religion, is perf }

ligious Ceremonies, expiations,confecrations:; and holy sites,

°3

d by certainRe--

é
z

OF Occult Philofophy. Book

proceeding from him whofe fpirit the publike Religi-
on hath confecrated, who hath power of impofition of hands,
and of initiating with Sacramentall power, by which the Cha.
racter of the divine vertue and_power isftampt on us which
they call the divine confent,by which a man fapported with the
divine nature, and made asit were a companion of the Angels
beareth the ingrafted power of God ; & this rite is referred to —
the Ecclefiaftical my{teries:If therefore now thou fhalc be aman
perfect in the facred underftanding of Religion,and pioufly and
‘moft conftantly meditateft on it, and without doubting be-
lievelt, and art fuch an one on whom the authority of holy
rites and nature hath conferred dignity above others, and one,
whom the divine powers contegin not, thou fhalt be able by
praying, confecrating, facrificeing, invocating to attra {piri
tualand and to imprinc them on thofe things
thou pleafeft,and by it to vivific every magicall work; But who-
foever beyond the authority of his office; without the merit of
_Sanétity and Leasning, beyond the dignity of nature and edu-
cation,fhall prefume to work any thing in Magick, (hall work
in vain, and deceive both himfelf and thofe that believe on
him, and with danger incur the difpleafure of the Divine

- Of the two helps of Geremoniall Magick, Religion and Swpere
= Fpoalere ase two things, which rule every operacion of Cere-
> moniall Magick, namely Religion and Superftition, This
Religion isa continnall contemplation of Divine things,and by
-. good works an uniting ones felf with God and the Divine
powers, bywhich in a reverent family,a fervice,and a fanktificati-
-onof wosthip worthy of them is performed,and alfo the Cere-
moniesef Divine -worhip are rightly exercifed ; Religion
therefore is a certain difcipline of externall holy things and

be =
ad
é
”

Book IT.

hath fomething of good, becanle itis digetted God his.cre-
ator; and alchongh God allows the Chriftian Religion only,
yet other, worlhips which are undertaken for his fakeyhe doth
notaltogesher reject, and them

Ceremonies by. the which. as it, were certain

a

Church to have ufed:ie as.caken by theft and robbery, of whom
itis written by Salomon, he that takes away any things violent«
!y from father and mother, isa deftroyer ; Buc God is our fa-
ther, and the,Church our mother, as it is written, Is not he thy.

father who poficdeth thee? .and clfewhere,Hear my fonthe

difcipline of thy father,and.delpile noc the. law.of thy. mother;
od, then to be neglected and cone
temned;gorhing pleafeth bim.more, themto be renowned and
adored, Henge he hath permitted no creature of the world
to be without Religion. | Alldo worthip God,pray (as Proclus
faith) frame hymmes: tp -the, leaders of th
hinge pilg alter ad ara +
tional, others, 4a, intellegtuall manner, all rhings in their

Lord: But the. rites and Ceremonies of Refigion, of

the diverfisy of times.and) places, are diverte.. Every cligion

~ not

figns we are
idmonithed of internall and fpiricualtthings, whichis fodecp,
ly implanted in us by nature, that- we more. differ from other
creatures by this then Rationality; whofoever therefore neg-

a,
if
rded;,: ‘

' — =

lects Religion (as.we have ipoken before ). and confides only
inthe ftrength of; natorall things, are very often deceived by
the evil {pirits; therefore they who are more religionfly and ,
holily inftenéted, neither fet-atree nor plane their vineyard, |
nor undertake any mean work without divine invocation, as
the Doctor of the Nations commands the (o/offians, faying,
whatfoever you fhall doin word or deed, do all imthe name
of the Lord Jefus Chrift giving thanks to him, and.co God the
Father by him, Therefore tofaperadde the powers of Religi-
onto Phyfical and Mathematicall vertues is fo far froma faule, |
that noc to joyn them, isan hainous fins Hence in “bro /enato-
rum faith Rabbi Hemina, he that enjoyethany of the creatures
without Divine benediction, is fuppofed both by God and th

“OF Philly. Book

wich ‘an yet'with 4 tem

ipion’ faith which ‘hath not ‘fome-

wemuft ¢

ever therefore: in’ his Religion, though

feward or at lealt
déth-punifh them lets; buthe apaingt and
utterly deftroys ‘prophane’ peffons: and altogether: irreligions
as his eneinies‘for their impiety is preater then the others who
follow a falfe and erroneousReligion : For there is no'Re.

hat of wifdom init; by which they ‘may obtain pardon, who
have kept the'chiefeft duty of man, if not'itdeed, yetininten-

fton: Batno min‘can of timfelf ‘attainto the tee Religion,

he be'taughvit of God. Al worthip therefore, whichis
difference fromthe true’Religion, is faperftition ; ‘In Jike:man-
ner alfothat which giveth: Divine worthip, either to 'whomit
Oughr not; orin'thar manner which it ought not. Therefore
fpecially takeheed ‘feaft-at any ‘time, by fome per-
verfe worthip of fuperftition , we be envious rothe Almighty

—God}andto the holy’ owersunder himéfor this would be ‘not
oni

r wicked, but: an ‘act’ moft‘anworthy Philofophers ; *fa-
petition thetefote althotighiie be far'd ifferene from the’ true
Religion, yer icis‘not afl and whol! y rejeted, beeatife in many
things'it iseven tolerated, obferred by the chief ‘rulers of
Religion ; “Burt calf chat faperfition efpecially,which is-a cer-
tain refembtance of Réligion, which for-4s
whatfoeveris°itr Religion: a3 iniracles, ‘Saetamenes, rites)
fervations and fach From whence it’ secs! no fmal
and alfo obtainsno'lefs ftren: by the credulity of
rator; for how’‘much a conftant: credulity car'do, we have
poker in the fitft book; atid’ is manifeftly: known ‘to the
gar.’ Therefore Tip as
faith fee he ‘credality’ things,

even to mirattes itrOpintons 4nd Ale swhdto-

Salfe; yet beleeveth
Rrongly that ic is and elévares reafon of

be: to'thofe {pirtrs »who

are the thief leaders of chat Retigion «taywwotk chéfe ‘things
which natureand reafon difcern ‘hor; bar incredulity and dif.

fidence doth'weaken every work not only if faperftition; but

‘alfoin true Religion; and enervates the even of

BookI If, OF
the moft ftcong experiments. But, how faperftition imicaterh

Religion, thefe examples declare ;: namely whea worms, and
locults are excommunicared,thas they hurt aot the fruits; wher
bels and Images are baptifed and fuch like; bat becaufe che old
Magicians and thofe who were che authors of this art amongft
the ancients, have been Caldeans, Egyptians, Aflyrians, Perfi-
ans and Arabians, all whofe Religion, was, perverfe and pol-
luted idolatry,we mult very. much take heed, leaft- we fhould
permit their errors to war againft the grounds of the Gatholick
Religion ; for this were blafphemous, and: fubje@ to. che
curfe ; and I alfo thould be ablafphemer, if I thonid not ad-
monith you of thefe things, in this {cience; wherefoever there-
fore you fhall fade thefe, things written by us, know thar
thofe things are only related out-of other Authors, aod not
put down by us for truch,bne fora probable conjecture which
isallyedco- truth: andan AnftruGion for imitation in. thofe
things which are true; Therefore.weonght from their Errors
to colleé& che Truth, which wotk traly, requireth a profonnd
Vnderftanding,perfect Pietyand painfull and laborious .Dili-
gence, and alfo Wildom, whichknoweth out of every Evilito
extraét Good, and.co fic oblique things unto the right ufe.of
thofe things which it governéth,as concerning this «4uguftine
gives usan Exampleofa Carpenter to whom Qbliquevand
Complicate chingsiare no lefsineceflary and convenientithen
the Straight; Ando deb yboold sat

OS

Of the Guides of Rell bring
here are three Guides which bring us even tothe paths of

tcuch and.which rleall.our Rekgion , in which it wholly
confiltech, namely: Love;Hope and Fayth : for Love is the cha-
riot of the ‘Sou!,che moft: excellent of all -chings, defcénding
from the Intelligences aboveeven to the moft inferior things.

‘ ~
¢

«

Je congregates and converts our mind into the Divine beauty,
preferves us alfoin all our works, gives us Everitsaccording to
_our-withes, adminiftreth péwer' to our fupplications as we
readin Homer, Apollo heard Chry/ons prayers becaufe he was
hisvery great friend: and fome read of (Wary Magdalene in
the Gofpell, many fins were forgiven her, becaufe the loved
much; Buthope immovedbly- hanging on thofe things it de-
fireth,when it is certain and noc wavering,nourifheth the mind
and perfetecvic ; Buc: Faith: the: faperior vertne of all not
grounded on humane fiétions, but Divine revelations wholly,
peirceth all things through the'whole world, for feeing it de.
teends from above from the firft ight; andremains neereft to
far morenoble and excellent: than the arts, feiences and
cbeliéfes arifing from inferior things:: this being darted into
our intelle@ by reflexion from the firkt light. To conclude, by
faith man is made fomewhat-the fame with the fuperior pow-
versand:enjoyeth-che fame power with them. Hence Proelu
faith Asbelief-which is a¢redality,.is below. {cience be-
fief whichis acrue faith, ‘is fuperfubftantially above all {cience
and underitanding conjoyning- us immediately to God; for
Faith isthe: root of-allmiracles, by which alone (as the Pi/s-
sonifts telifie) we ‘approach to God, and obtain the Divine
spower and protection. we:read that Daniel-efcaped the
gnonths.of the Lyons, becaufe:he believed on his God: Soto
the.woman with the bloody iffue faich Chrift, thy Faith hath
made thee whole;and of the blind man defiring fight, he requi-
red faith, faying; Do ye believe, that Ican open your eyesado
-Pallasin Homer comforteth; Achilles with thefe words, Iam
come-to pacifie your wrath, if you-will believe. Therefore
Linus the Poet fings.all.things are to be beleeved,- becaufe all
things are eafie to God;nothing is impoffible to him, therefore
nothing incredible ;.therefore believing rhofe things
which belong to: Religion, do,obtain the vertue of them; but

whenwe fball.faile anour nothing worthy

‘

‘

, but of punithment;. As. wehave an example of

-thisin Lube,in-thefe words, Therefore cercain of the vagabond
. Jews, cxorcilts, took upos them fo. call, over them

> ‘
en

—

evil {pirits in the name of the Lord Jefus, faying,we adjure you
by Jefus whom Paw/ preacheth; and the evil {pirit anfwered
and faid,J efus I know,and Pas/I know,but who art thou? and
the man in whom che evil fpiric was, lept on them, and

over came them, fo that they fied our of the houfe nakedand |

wounded, ~

—

CHAP. VI.

How by thefe guides the [oul of man afcendeth up into the Divine
nature, and 1s made a Worker of Miratless |

Ta Our thind being pure and divine, inflamed with
A areligious love, adorned with hope, directed “by ae
placed in che hight and top ofthe humane foul, doth attra

the cruch,and fudainly comprehend it -& beholdech all che fta-
tions, grounds, caufes and fciences of things both natural and

-isnmortal in the divine eruch it elf as ic were ina certain glafs

of Eternity. Hence it comes to pafs chat we, though Natural, -

_ know thofe things which are above nature, and underftand all

things below , and as ic were by divine Oracles receive the
knowledg nor only of thofe things which are,but alfoofthof _

that are palt and to come, prefently, and many years hence;
Moreover not only in Sciences, Arts and Oracles the Under-
ftanding challengeth co it felf this divine vertue, but alfo re-
ceiveth this miraculous power in certain things by command to
be changed : Mente it comes to pafs that though we are fra- _.

medanatural body, yet we fometimes predominate over na-

ture, and canfe fuch wonderfull, fodain and difficult operati-|
ons, as that the evil fpirits obey us,the {tare are difordered, the

heavenly powers compelfed,che Elements made obedient; fo

devout men and thofe elevated by thefe Theological vertues,
command the Elements; drive’ away Fogs, ratfe the winds,
caufe rain, care difeafes,raife thé dead, all which thingstohaye

done artrongft diverfe Nations, Poetsand HiftoriansdO
fing and relate and that thefe'things may athe

Aa 3

x

Book ffl OF Occult P hilofoph
00 ccult Phelofophy.
Co
as
in
P

Apvocates the gods,and doth not confer on them their due ho-

Philofophers, and, Theologians fo the

cophets, Apoftles, and the re{t, were famous by the wonder.
fal power.of God ; therefore we muft know, that as by the

icflax of the.firlt agent, is produced ofcentimes fomething
without the cooperation of the middle caufes, fo alfo by the

work of Religion alone, may fomething be done without the

appl'cation of naturall and Celeftiall vertues; but no man can
work by pure Religton alone, uniefs he be made cotally intel-
je€tuall: But whofoever, without the mixture of other pow-
ers, worketh by Religion alone, if he fhall perfevere long in
the work, is fwaNowed up by the Divine power and cannot
live Jong: But whofoever fhall attempr this and not be puri-
fied, doth bring upon himfelf judgement, and is deliveredto
the evil {pirit, to be devoured,

CHAP. VII.

That the knowledge of she true Gad us neceff ary for a Atagician,
anawhat the old Magitians and Philofophers have thought

conceruing God. -
G eine that the being and operation of all rhings, depend
) on the moft high God Creator of all things, from.
thence alfo.on the hes divine powers, to whom alfo is grau-
ted a power of fafhioning and creating not principallyindeed,
bne in tally by vertue of the firlt Creator (for the be-
ginning of every thing isthe firlt caufe, but what is produced
y the fecond canfes, is much more produced by the firlt,which

_ is the producer of the fecond caufes; which therefore we call

fecondary gods) Ic isneceflary therefore that eve itian
know that very God, which isthe firft caufe, and Creator of
all chings; And alfothe other gods, or divine powers (which

we call the fecond caufes) and not to be

adoration,reverence, holy rites conformable to the condition
ofevery-one,they are to be worfhipped ;Whofoever therefore

nor

é >
™~
a
at

nor, rightly diftribute co them “what belongs.to them, thalf
neither enjoy thet prefence, nor any fucceffefull effe@Rfrom
them. As in Harmony, if ‘one {tring be broken, the whole
mufick jars, and fometimes incurs the hazard of ‘punifh-
ment, as it is written of the e4{fyrians, whom Salmana/ar
planted in Samaria, becaufe they knew not the cultomes of
the God of the Land, the Lord did fend Lyons amongft them,
who flew chem, becaufe they were ignorant of the rights of the
_ god of the Land. Now therefore let us fee, what the old
Magicians and Philofophers thonght concerning God; for we
tread that Dicocreonte, atyrant.of (yprus, long fince asking,
who was the greateft God, the Serapian Oracle anfwered .
him, That he was to be accounted the greateft God, whofe
head was the Heavens, the Seas his Belly, the Earth his feet,his
ears placed in the sky, hiseyes the light of the glorious Sun;
not much unlike to this,Orphews fang in thefe verfes,

The Heaven's Joves Reyall Palace he's King,
Fountain vertue ana Ged of every thing ;
He 1s Omnipotent, and in his brea
Earth, water, fire and aire do take their reft.

Both night and day, trae wifdom With (weet Leve,.

Are alt contain'din this vaft buikof Jove:
His meck_ and glorions headif you Would fee,
Behold the Heavens bigh, and
The glorious rayes of Stars doreprefent

His golden locks, and’s heads adornament. —

Bright Phebus and the Moon, are-thevwo

this great Jove by which all things be ;
His head which preditts 1s plac’d th’ skit,

From which no noife can whifper fecretly,
Te pierceth all; extends,
Aa 4

Book III Of Occult Philosophy
‘

he fpacions Air bas breMft, his wings the Wind,’ 4
By which be flies far fwifter thew theminds

—

His belly is our mother earth, who {wels
Into huge mountains, whom the Ocean fils
Andcircles; bis feet aretherocks and ftones
Which of this Globe are the foundations.
Jove under the earth conceals all things,
‘And from the depth into the light them brings.

Therefore they thought the whole world'to be Jupiter, and
truly he’hath produced the foul of this world, which contain-
ethrthe world in it felf. Hence Sophoc/es faith, in truth thereis
but ‘one onely God, who hath made this heaven and this fpa-
cious earth; and Euripides faith, Behold the moft high, who
every where embraceth in his Arms the immenfurable hea.
ven and earth; believe that he is fwpiter, account him God;and
Ennius the Poet fings,

Behold this bright fublime faining, Whom all
Cal
Therefore the whole world is Pupiter,asxPorphyry faith,a crea
ture made of all creatures, and a God confticuted of -alf
gods;but?«piter is,fo far as we can underftand, from whence all
4 things are produced, creating all thingsby his wifdom. Hence
< Orpheus fings concerning the Holy word;

T here 1s one God, who all things hath created,
Preferves, and over all us elevated.
He only by our mind 1s comprehended,
eAnd to poor mortals He ne’r ill intended. is
Befides Whom, there no otheris-——~ Anda little.after,

y He himfelf is the beginning. middle and end, as the ancient.
have taughe us, to whom God long fince delivered
theft chings in two tables; and he calleth him in che fame verfe
the only great Creator, andimmortall, Zoroa/fes likewile in

—

a
a

gr

Book Occult Philofophy.

his facred Hiftory of the Perfians defineth God thus, God is

the firlt of all chofe things which fuffer neither decay norcor-
ruption, unbegot,never dying, without parts, and moft like
himfelf, The author and promoter of all good things, the fa-
ther of all, moft bountiful! and wife, the facred light of jultice,
the abfoluteft perfe@tion of nature, the contriver,and wifedom
thereof. Apuleius alfo defcribs him to be aKing,the caufe, foun-
dation rm original beginning of all nature,the fupreme beget -
ter of f{pirits,eternal,the preferver of living creatures, a Father
with propagation, not to be comprehen< ed by time, place or

any other circumftance, and therefore imaginable co a few, ut-

terable ro none; from hencetherefore Exripides. commanded

the higheftGod to be cal’d Zupiter,through whofe head Orphe-

us fang all chings came into this light, bur the other powers he
fuppofeth to be fubfervient,viz. . which are without God, and
feparated from him,and are by the Philofophers called the Mi-
nilters or Angels of God,and feparated intelligences;therefore
they fay Religious worthip to be due to this moft high Jupiter

and to him only, but to the other Divine powers noc robe

due unlefs for his fake.

CHAP. VIII.
what the Ancient Philofophers have thought concerning the Di-.

—

Artix: and Prophyry teltific,that the Platoniftsheld three
pe

rfons in God, the firft of which,they call the father of
the world: the fecond they call the Son and the firft mind,and '

fo he isnamed by A¢acrobius.. The third, che {pirit or foul Of.
the world, which Virgil ‘alfo from Plato's opinioncalletha.

fpirit,,.when hefings,

Within the Spirit nosrifbeth, the mind‘
Diffus’d through th’ whole dothinitskind:

The both att, and agitate—

As
a 4 -

Occult Philofophy.

Plotinus and Philo deliver, that the SonofGod, viz. the firh
gnind or Divine intellect floweth from God the Father, even
as a word from the fpeaker or as light from lights from herice
itis that he is called both the word and , and fplendor
of God the Father ; forthe Divine mind by it felf, with one
only and uninterrupted act underftandeth the chiefeft good
without any vicifficude, or mediate knowledge ; he generat.
in: himlelf an Iffue and Son, who isthe Intelligence,
compleat image of himfelf, and the perfe& pattern of the A
whom our and Mercurius name the word or
fpeech; Plato the Son of God the Father Orpheus, Pallas born
‘fai Fupiters brain, that is, wifdom: This is the moft abfo-
lure image of God the Father, yet by a certain relation, ot
fome intrinfecall abfolute thing, as it were begot and diftin. .
guifhed from the Father,who faith in Ecclefiafticus,I have pro-
ceeded from the mouth of the moft high, lam the firlt begor
before allcreatures: famblichus tcftifieth this Son to be One
and the fame God with the Father in Effence, namely calling

om

se

God, both the Father and Son of himfelf. Allo Adercurius
Trifmegifiusinefclepins mentioneththe Son of God indi-

verfe places; for he faith my God and Father begat a Minda
work diverfe from himfelf; And elfewhere, unity begets unity,
and refle&teth his flagrant love ontimfelf ; and in Pimander

( where he feemeth to prophefie of the Covenant of grace to
come, arid of the myftery of regeneration ) faith,the author of
Regeneration is the Son of God, the man by ‘the will of the
ene only God, and alfothat God is moft replenifhed wich the
fruitfalnefs of both fexes. In like manner the Jndian Philofo-

phets afficm the World robe an Animal,partly

parely Femsinine;and Orpheus alfo calleth Nature or the Jove of
this world, both the male and female thereof, atid thac che
gods partake of both Sexes. Henceis it, thatin his Hymnes
he thus faluces AZimerva, You are indeed both man and wo-
a man; and Apuleins in his book.of the.world,out of the Divint-
ty of Orpheus produceth chis verfe of Pupiter,

Jove both male. and female, immortal.

And

—

And Firgil fpeaking of |
defend, and the God guiding
And elfewhere,underftanding Jumo or Alefto, be faith
Neither God abfent praying. |
And Tibullus (ings,

I who prophaned have the Dietics
Of Venus great.

And it isreported that the people of Cacenia'wonderfally ad-
ered the God Afoon, From this compleat intelligence of fu-
pream fecundity his love is produced, binding the intelligente
wich the mind. And by fo much the ntiore,by how muchrit is in-
finitely more intimate to it felf, chan other off-fpringsto their
parents. This is the third perfon, azz. the holy fpicic, Farm-
blichus alfo brings the oracles of the (hal/deans placing a fa-
therly power in God; andan Emanation of the intelle& from .
the Father, anda fiery love proceeding from Father and Son,
and the fame to be God, Hence we read in P/utarch, that the
Gentiles defcribed God to be an intelleGtnall and fiery fpirir, —
having no form, but transforming himfelf into whatfoevér he
pleafech,equalizing himfelf to all chings; and we read in Den
terexomy, Our God is aconfaming fire ; of whom-alf6
_aftes faith,,all things were begot of fire alone; fo alfo Heracli-
tus the Ephefian teacheth; Hence Divine Pleto hath placed.
Gods habitation in fire, namely underftanding the. unfpeak-
able fplendor of God in himfelf, and love about him-
felf; and we read in Homer, The Heavens to. be the Kingdom.
of when he fings,

Jove darkning clomds and reigning im theskie,..

a
«
i

felfin his fourth BookDe Civit.Dei doth reftifie thar Porphyry

father of the univerfe,the fecond, the firlt mind,and AZacrobint
the Son, the third the foul of the world, which Virgi/ accor-

364 OF Occult Philofophy. Bookl Il.

And the fame elfewhere,

The lot of Jove the Heaven is i'th' aire,
He fits- ————-

But e£ther is derived according to the Greek Grammer,
from ~£tho, which fignifesto Burn, and eer /piritus quaf
c#thaer, that is, a burning fpirit; And therefore Orpheus

‘calleth che Heaven Pyripnon, that isa fiery breathing place:

therefore the Father, the Son, and the aimable {piric, which is
alfo fiery,are by the Divine’ called three Perfons; Whoa Or-
phens alfo in his adjurations invocateth with thefe words,

Heaven I admire thee, chou wife work of the great God; I

ddjure thee, O thou word of che Father, which he firft {pake

when he eftablifhed the whole world by his wifdom. Hefiode
-alfo.confeffech the fame things under the names of it iter
d birth

Minervaand Bulein hisTheogony,declaring the twofo

of Fupiter in thefe: words : The firlt daughter called Tritonis
with pray eyes, having equal power with the Father,& prudent
Bule,cthat is counfel,whichOrphews in the forenamedverfes pro-
nounceth plurally,-becaufe of histwofold Emanation, for he
proceedeth both from ?upiter and Afinerva. And Auftin him-

the Platonij? placed three Perfons in God; the firft he cals the

ding to P/ato's opinion, calleth’a fpirit, faying, the | pirit With
$2 maintains, ‘Therefore God,as Paul faith, from whom;
in whom, by whom are all things’ for from the father-as from

-a fountain flow all things, buc in the Son asin a pool all things

are placed in their Ideas, and by the Holy Ghoft are ail things
manifelted, and every thing diftributed co his proper degrees.

CHAP.

ate

Book ITI. OF Occult Philofophy.
CHAP. IX, .

what the true and moft Orthodox faith 1 concerning Godandthe
moft holy Trinity.

He Catholik Doors and faithfull people of God, have
decreed, that we oughr thus.co. believe and _profefs that
there is one only trucGod, increate, infinite, omnipotent, ctern -
al Father, Son and Holy Ghoft, three perfons, coetéernall and
coequall,of one moft fimple Effence,fubftance and nature, This
is the Catholike faith, this is the Orthodox Religion, this is the
Chriftian cruth,that we worlhip one God in Trinity, and Tri-
_nityin Unity, neither confounding the perfons,nor dividing
the fubftance The Father begat the Son from all eternity arid
gave him his fubftance,and neverthelefs retained it himfelf. The
Son alfo by being. begot , received the fubftance of the Father,
but affumed nor che proper Perfon of the Facher;for rhe Fa-
ther trahflated it not into the Son; for they are both of one
and the fame fabftance, but of diverfe perfons, This Son alfo
although He be coeternall with the Father, and begot of the
-fubftance of. the Father before the world; yer notwithftand-
ing was born into the world out of the fabftance of a Virgin;
and hisname.was called perfect Gad, perfe& man, of a-
reafonable foul and humane fiefh, who in all things- was :
man, fin excepted. Therefore itis neceflary, that we beleeve,
that our Lord Chri/t the Son of God, is God and man,
one perfon, two natures; God begor before the world with-.
out amother,man born into the world; without a father, from
apure Virgin, both before and: after his-birch;-he fuffered on
the Crofs, and dyed, but on the Crofs reftored life, and de-
ftroyed death by his death; he was buried and defcended into —
heil, but brought forch the fouls of the Fathers. from hell, and.
rofe again by hisown power;the third day heafcended into the.
Heavens,& fent his {pirit the Comforter, & fhall come toJudge.
the quick and the dead ; and at his coming all men fhall rifea-- _
gain in their fle(b,and shall give an account of their

“
f
g
i

OF Occalé Philojophy. att

the true faith, concerning which if any man doubr, and not
firmely believe, he is farfrom the hope of eternall life and

falyation.

Of Divine emanations, Which the Hebrews call Numerarions
ethers-attributes; The gentiles gods and Dieties; and of the
ten Sephiroths and ten tmoft facrcd names of God which rule
them, andthe interpretation of them. —

G OD himéelf, though he be Trinity in perfons, yet is but
AT one only fimple Effence; norwithftanding we doubt not
but that there are in him many Divine powers, which as beams
flow from him,which thePhilofophers of theGentilés cal gods,
the Hebrew matters numerations,we name Attributes; as wife
dom which Orpheus cals Palas; underftanding,which he Mer-
cury ; The conception of the Form, which he Satwrn ; The
Productive power, which he Weptune ; the fecret nature of
which he Juno ; Love which he Venus; pure life, which
hethe or Apollo. The matter of the whole world, he
calfeth Pan; the foul, as it ingendereth things below, con-
_templateth chings above, and tetracteth its felf into ic felf,he
honored with three names,vizx. (Waris, Neptune and Ocean,

and more of thiskind, of whichhe fings elfewhere,

Bat Why dome fpeakswice God's one alone,

Andofthe fame Valerius Soranusfang,

_ Omnipotent Jove the God and King of Kings,
The Father of the gods, Qne, yet all things.

‘ Therefore the moft prudent Theologi: ans of the Gentilés did
worthip the One God, under diverfe names and powers,

—
— 3
- ™~
ai

‘

diverfe fexes ; .whomas faith, Fraile and weak mortali- —

ty hath digefted unto more, being ming full of his. one frailty,
that every man might worfhip that portion which he efpecial-
ly wanteth ; fo thofe who had need.of faith invocated Jupiter;

they that wanted providence, Apol/o;wifdom, and
fo asthey,wanted other things, they invocated other powers,

Hence arofe that great. yariety of Dieties; by reafon ofthe ma-
ny and diverfe diltribution of graces; but-God.is one;from
whom all things. Therefore Apuleins in his book De mundo
to Faxftin faith, Whereas there is but one God and one power,

et he isnamed by diverfe names, for che multitude of {pecies,
by whofe vartety -he ismade of many fhapes;.and Adareus
Varro in his book.of: the worfhip of,God , faich, As all fouls are
reduced to che one foul of the world.or univerfe, fo,are all che
gods referred to Jupiter, who is the fame God; .w ont
under diverfe names. Therefore it is meet to know the fenfible
proprieties, and perfectly. cointelleCtualize them by the way
of. more fecret Analogy; whofoever underftandeth, truly the
Hymnes of Orpheus and the old Magicians, fhall find that. chey
differ not.from the Cabalifticall fecrets and Orthodox traditi- .
ons; for whom Orpheus cals-Curets and unpollured gods,
nyfusnames Powers; the-Cabalifts appropriate them to the
numeration Pahad, that is tothe Divine fear : fo that which is -
Enfophin the Cabala,Orpheas calleth Might;and 7 ypbon is the
fame with Orphens,as Zamael inthe Cabala; but.the
bales of the Hebrews, the'moft learned in Divine things, have
received the ten principal,names of God, as certain Divine -
powers, ot asit were members of God, which by tennamera-
tions which'they call Sephiroth. as it were veltiments, J
ments orexamplars of the Arehetype,have. an influence on all .
things created,through the high things, even to rhe loweft, yet -
by a certatn order; for firft and immediately have infln-.
ence.on the nine orders of Angels, and quire of

aid

vere

_ the which Sephirob every thing then receiveth power
‘tues The firl of chefeis:the name Ebeia,the name of th
Cerher;which *

“ab
ay.

Divine

g
i
if
and by them into the Cejeitiall Spheres,
»

‘Crown or Diadem, and fignifieth the moft {imple Effence of
the Divinity, and it ts called that which the eye feeth not; and
is attributed to God the Father, and hath his influence bythe

order of Seraphinus, or as the Hebrews call them Haiorh Ha.
cadofch, that is creatures of holinefs, and then by the pri.
mum mobile, beftows the gift of being to all things, filling the
whole Univerfe both through the circumference and center,

‘whofe particular intelligence is called AZeratrron, that is, the
‘prince of faces, whofe duty it is to bring others to the face of
the prince; and by himtheLord fpake to AZo/es. The fécond

* name is Jod or Tetragrammatoxn joyned with Jod his numerati-
“Oh is Hochma; that ts wifdom, and fignifeth the Divinity full
“Of Fdea’s , and the firft begotten;and is ‘ateributed to the Son,

"and hath hisinfluence by the order of Cherubins, or that the

Hebrews call Orphanim, that is, forms or wheels; and from

~~ thence into the tarry Heaven, where he fabricateth fo many
ae ‘figures as he hath Jdeas in himfelf, and diftinguifheth che very
ahs *(baos of the creatures, by a particular Intelligence called Ra-
\ziel/, who was the rvler of e4dam. The name is called
‘Tetrogrammaton Elohim; his numeration is named Prina, vix,
“providence and underftanding, and fignifies remiffion,. quiet-

the ?ubil/ee, penitentiall converfion, a great Trumpet,
“yedeimption of the world, andthe life of the world to come;

“ft is attributed to the Holy Spirit, and hath his influence by thie
order of the thrones,or which the Hebrews call Aralim,thatis

“great Angels mighty and ftrong,and from thence by the pers

Saturn adminiftreth form to thennfertled matter, whofe

"particular intelligence is Zaphchiel, the ruler of Noxb, and
“nother invelligetice named Jophie/ the rbler of and chele
three fupream and agit were’ feats of
* the Divine perfons, by whofé commands all things are made,
“bitiare executed by the other feven, which are therefore called
“the numerations framing. Therefore ithe fonrth nameis
“whofe nonteration is Hefed, whichis Clemerice or goodness,
“gid fignifieth grace, piety,’ magnitivenice, theifcepter
and right hand, and hath his inflox by the order, of the Domi
nations, ‘which the Hebrews call Ha/melim, and: fo through

Book ILE, QE
the fphere of Jupiter Images of bodycs,beftow-
ing clemency and pacifying jultice on all; his particulac intela
ligence is Zadkiell the ruler of e-tbrabam: The fick name
Elohim Gibor, that 1s,the mighty God, punifhing the {ins of the
wicked; and hisnumeration ts called Gebarach, whichis to fay,
power,gravity, fortitude, feeurity, judgement, punifhing by
flaughter and war : and i¢ isapplycd co the Tribunal! of God,
The girdle, the fword and left hand. ef God; it is alfocalled
Pachad,whichis fear,and hath his influence throw the order of
powers which. the Hebrews call Seraphim, and from thence
through the {phere of A4Zars, to whom belongs fortitude,war,
affiGtion,ic draweth forth the Elements;and his particular in-
telligence is Camael, the rulerof Sem/fon ; The fixt name is
Eloha, or a name of four letters, joyned with Vasdahat. his
numeration is Ziphereth, that. is apparel, beauty, glory, plea-
fure, and fignifiech the cree of life, and hath his influence
- through che order of vertues, which the Hebrews Call AZahee
chim, that is Angelsinto the fpere of the Sun, giving bright-
nefs and life co-it, and from thence producing mettals ; his
particular intelligence 1s Raphae/, who was the Ruler of
and the younger, and the. Angel ‘Pede/, ruler of
The feventh name is 7 etragrammaton Sabaoth, or e Adonai Sa-
baoth,that is the God of hofts;and his numeration isNexab,that :
is triumph and viQtory; the right Columne is applyed toit, and
itfignifies the eternity and jultice of a revenging God; it hath:
his influence through the order of principalities, whom the
Hebrews call Elobins, that is Gods, intothe fphere of Venus,

his influence through the order..of

gives zeal and’ love of righteoufnels, and: produccth vege- | :
tables; his Inrelligence is Haniel-and. the Angel Cerviel, the i
tuler of David ; The cighth is called:alfo Elobiom-Sabaoth,
whichis alfo interpreted the Ged.of Hoafts, not of war and
juftice, but of piety and agreement ; for this ma i=
eth both, and precedeth his Army ; the-numetation of this -
is called Hod, which 1s both praife ,confeflion, ho- i §
nor and famoufnefs. Fhe lefc column is attributed: to hath
gels; which the
God, sate the |

A

O

{peech and producech living creatures; his intelligence
ed Sadai, chat is Omniporene, fatisfying all, and is

the living God; his numeration is /efod,that is foundation, and —
 fignifiech a good underftanding, a Covenant, redemption and

reft, and hath his influence through che order of Angels,whom

the Hebrews name Cherubim, into the fphere of the Moon, cau-

fing the increafe and decreafe of all things, and taketh care of

the genui, and keepers of men, and diftributech them; his in:

telligence is Gabriel, who was the keeper of 7o/eph, Fo/wah,
and Daniel; The tenth name is e4donai Melech, that ts Lord
and King; his numeration is AZalchuth, that ts, Kingdom and
Empire, & fignifieth a Church, Temple of God,and a Gate,and
hath his influence through the orderof Animaftick,vic.of blek-
ed fouls, which by the Hebrewsis called J/im, that is Nobles,

Lords and Princes; they areinferior to the Hierarchies, and

have their influence on the fons of men, and give knowledge
and the wonderfull anderftanding of things, alfo induftry and
prophefie; and the foul of AZeffiah is prefident amongft chem,
or.¢as others fay) the intelligence AZetattron, which is called
the firlt Creature, or the foul of the world, and was the ruler

| Of Mofes.

a

Of the Divine names, and their power and vertue.

| G OD himfelf though he be only one in Effence, et hath

diverfe names, which expound not his diverfe Effenccs or

 Dieties,: burcertain proprieties owing from him , by which
names he doth. pour down, as it were by certain Conduits on

usand all his creatures many benefits and diverfe gifts ; ren of

- thefe Names we have above deferibed, which alfo Hierom rece

koneth up to Afarcella. Dionyfins reckoneth up fourty five
namesof God and Chrift. The AZecubages of the Hebrews

chael, who was the ruler of Salomon The ninth nameiscall:

a
¢
f

Of Occult Pbilofopby.

fromacertain text of Exodws,derive feventytwo names,both
of the Angels and of God; which they’call thename Of feven-
ty rwo letters, and Schemhamphores, that is, the expofitory:
but others proceeding further, out of all places of the Scrip-
ture doinfer fo many names of God as: the number of thofe
names is : but whae they fignifie is altogether unknown to ps4
Fromthefe therefore, belides thofe which we-have reckoned
up before, isthe name of the Divine Effence: Eheia 149%,
which P/ato tranflates dv, fromhence they call God
thers that isthe being: Hw N17 is another name revealed
to E/ay, fignifying the Abyfe of the Godhead, whichthe ©

Greeks tranflace 7v7iv, the Latins,himfelf the fame.  -
is another name received from A4o/es which fonndeth Fire,and
the name of God Na ~}.i5 to be invovaced in perturbations
and troubles, There is alfo the nasne Jab?’ andthe name Elion
and the name Afacom thename (phe DDD, the
name Jnsont}) & the name Emeth MON whic; isinterpreted
Truth, and is che feal.of God; and'there aretwo other, names
Zur and Aben both-of chem fignifie a folid work,and
one of them exprefs che Father with the Son ; and many
more names have we placed above in che fcale. of numberssand
many names of Godand the Angels are extracted out of.:the
holy Scriptures by che Cabalilticall calculation, Notariamgand
Gimetrian arts,. where many words retracted by certain.of

their letters make up'one name, or one name difperfed byreach
of its letcers: fignifiech or rendreth more. .Somtimes they are
gathered from the heads of words, as che name Ag/e
trom ehis yerfe-of che Holy. Seripcures ny 3
that is che mighty-God forever; in like mannet.the name: /aia
from chis verfe that is God our
God is one God;in like manner the name fava NIN’ from chis
8979) that is let there bé alight; there was
light;in fixe maner the came Ararita from this veric.
Principle oPhis unity, one beginning of his Individuality. His

re
“A

e |

ia.

ciffatude is one thing,and thisname Hacaba
from this verfe che holy and biefled onesin
‘fike maner this nameFef2 is Found:in th: heads of thefe two
come, andthe other verfe M°1°%OHw px) thac is, his namea.
bides till the end; Thusalfois the name Amen JON extracted
from this verfe that isthe Lord the faichfull
King; fometimes thefe names are extracted from che endof
words,as the fame name Ampex ,from this verfe
that is, the wicked not fo, but the letters are tran{pofed; fo y
by the finall lecters of this verfe MDW chat is, come
what? orwhacishis name? is-found the name Tctragranm
eatonjin all thefe a letcer is put fora word, anda letter exe
tradted from a word, either from the beginning, end, or where
you pleafes.and fometimes thefe names are extracted from all
the lecters, by‘one, even as thofe feventy two names of
-Godare extrafted from 'thofe three verfes of Exodus begine
fromthefothree words, “YO” the firlt and lak
worles being written fromthe right tothe left, but the: middle
contrarywile from the left co-ehe right, as we (hall: thew here-
after; and fometimesa word isextrated from a word, ora
game from a name; by the tranfpolition-of letters, as
from and: Aichacl from 95
Pree fometimes by changing of the Alphabech which
the Cabalifts call fo from the name Trtragram-
maton. are- drawn forth Pas Kuan
fometimesalfoby reafon of the equality-of numbers. names are
changéd.as for. Sadas for ‘ both of
hundecd' and fourteen, fo ai and
‘ne ate equal in for both ‘make thirty one. And
‘thefe are the hidden fecrets concerning which it is moft dif-
judge, andco-deliver a perfedt fcience; neither can
they beunderftoodand taught in any oche? fanguage except
the Hebrews but feeing, the nanies‘ef God (a4 faith in
highly efteemed ofthe Barbarians, whe had them
, without thewhich we can by no means perceive
truewords and names by which

o -* ~

~d

H
f

_ which God oat of his goodnefs hath revealed to us; for they

are the myfteriesand conveyances of Gods omnipotency; nor

ftablifhed by.
animmovable number and figure of Characters, and. breath
forth the harmony of the Godhead, being confecrated! by the

from men yet from Angels, but inftitured and firmly e-

Divine affiftance ; therefore the creatures above fear them,

thofe below tremble at chem, the Angels reverence, the dee
vils are affrighted, every creature doth honor, and every Re-

ligion adore them; the religious obfervation whereof, and de. —

vout invocation with fear and trembling dothyeeld us greac

vertue, and even deifies the union, and gives a power to work

wonderfull things above nature: Therefore wee may fot
forany reafon whatfoever, change them ; therefore Origes
commandeth that they be kept withott-corruption in'their
own Chara&ters; and Zoroaffes alfo forbiddeth the changing

of barbarous and old words;for as Pate faith in Cratylus, All
Divine words or names, have proceeded either from the gods —

firft,or from antiquity, whofe beginning is hardly known, or

from the Barbarians : Pamblicws in like manner advifeth, that
they may not be tranflated out of their own language into a> —

nother; for, faith he, chey keep not the fame force being tran-

‘flated into another tongue : Therefore thefe names of God

are the moft fic and powerfull means of reconciling and. uni>
ting man with God, as we read in Exodus, in-every place in
which mention is made of my name, I will be with thee, and
blefs thee; and in the book of Nambers, the Lord fasth, will

put my name ‘ypon the fons of J/racl and 1 willblefs chem:

Therefore Divihe Plato im Cratylus & inPhilebus command+
eth toreverence the names of Gcod morethan the Images or
ltatues of the gods : for there is a more exprefs. Image and
power of Gad, referved in the faculty of the mind, efpecially
if ic beinfpired from above, than in the works of menghands;
Therefotefacred words have not their power in Magicall o-

perations, from themifelves, as they arewords, but fromthe -
occult Divine powers working by chem in the mindsofthofe —

e molt high God, after a certain manner, with

fore concerning thefe we can fay no more; but’ thofe things |

of
«
f

«

* -monicus delivereth among{t che precepts of Phyfick, that if this
Abracadabra bewritten,’ as is here expreffed, viz. dimi-
nifhing letter after letter backsward, from the laft co. the firlt,
lie cure the Hemitricean Feaver or any other, if the fheet

_ of paper or parchment be hanged about the neck, and the dil

‘who by faith adhere to them; by which mare chefecret pows
-erof God as it were through Conduite pipes, ts in.
~tothem, who have ears purged by faith, andby moft pure

converfation and invocation of the divine names are -made the
habitation of God,and capable of thefe divine inflaences;who.
foever therefore ufech tighely thefe words or names of God
‘with that purity of mind, inthat manner and ogder, as they
were delivered, fhall both obtain and do many wonderfull

as we read Of Medea

pleafant feep fhe cau words thrice foe

he Seas and foon the their fury brake.

Which the Ancient Doétors of the Hebrews have efpecially

-obferved, who were wontto do many. wonderfull chings by
_ words; the Pythagorians alfo have {hewed, how to cure very
wonderfully the difeafes both of body and mind, with cer-
tain words; we read alfo;that Orpheus being one of the Argo:
diverted amoft fierce ftorm by certain words; in like
that eA4pollonius, certain words whifpered,

raifed up a dead maide at Rome; and Philoftratus reporteth

that fomedid by certain words call up Achilles Gholt ; and
 Pawfanias relates, that in Lydiain the Cities of Hiero-(
_ and Hypeps, were two temples ‘confecrated to the Goddels

whom they called Perfica,ia both of which when divine fervice

was ended, a certain Magitian, afterhe had laid dry wood up:

i Altar, and in his native language had fang Hymnes,and

ced certain barbarous words, out of a book which he |

held in his hand.prefently the dry-wood,no fire being put to it,

was feeno be kindicd,and burn molt clearly. Alfo Serenus Sa-

—
—
»
a
é
c
t
a
é
“
f

¢

b ;
~—

—
r
»

lofophy..
a
a
Bb4
Pe

Of Occult Ph
la
a

Ja
ia
a

Book
a id

as
r
a b
a b
a
4 b c a
4 b c a c
1 b r a |
a jb
a ib
‘

‘
¥

OF Philip. | Book Fi}

. Bat Rabbai Hesiie' in his book of fpeculation 1 delivereth a a
feal more efficacious againftany difeafes of man, orany
ogricfes whatfoever, in whofe forefide are the four f vared

names of'God, fo fubordimated to one another in a fquate,

that from che. highelt to the loweft shofe moft holy. names or
Aiea of the Godhead do arife, whofe intention is in{cribed in
the circumferentiall circle, but on the backfide is infcribed the
sfeven lettered name Araritha,and his inter Rese is written
about, viz. the verfe from which it is extracted, even as fee
a here defcribed.

The former part.

Py
t
“A
wi
a? x

But alimutt be done in moft pure gold, or Virgin Parchment, .
pure,clean and unfpotted; alfo with Jake for this pur
pofe, of the fmoak of confecrated wax. lights, or incenfe, and
holy water;, The a@or mult be purified and cleanfed by facri,
fice, and-have.an infallible hope, aconftant faith andhis mind.

yp tothe mofthigh God ,. ifhe would farely obtain this

Divine power. againft rhe aftrightments and-
ther of joveney, waters,enemics, arms, inthe manner as.is a-
bove faid, thefe CharaGters.on the one fide and shefe oa

the back fide maps which are the beginnings and ends of the

five of reprefentation of the.creationof -*
world; andiby thisLigatuce they Jay

free from all mifchicfes, if; thar be. firmly, beleeveth ip

a
Book Occult Phil
t
+f
Gor nC OF Ali

Inthe fore part. In the hinder part,

Neither fet any déftruft or wonder,that facred words, applyed
autwardly can do very much; feeing by them the Almighty
God made the heavens and the earth;and further, by experi-
ence it is found as faith Rab Cofta Ber Luca, that many things
véFcues do very much, As for exateple,
the finger of an abortive childhanged on the neck of a woman
hindreth conception, fo long as it remaineth there ; Moreover

that in diverfe facréd words and names.of God, ‘there is great

and Divine power, which worketh miracles, Zoroaffes, Or-
phens, Famblicus, Synefius, Alchindus, and afl the famous Phi-
fofophers ceftifie; and eArtephius both a Mapician and Philo*
fopher hath written a peculiar book concerning the vertue of
words and Characters. Origen not inferior to the famoufeft
Philofophers, doth maincain agatnit Ce//es, thac there doth
hid wonderfull vertue- in certain Divine tiames and in the

book of Fudges the Lord faith, my name which is Pe/e N73,

figeifieth with us, a workerof miracles, or caufing wonders;
but the true name of God is known néfther to men nor-to An-
gels, but to God alone, neither fhall it be manifefted (asthe
Seripturesteftifie) before the Will of Godbe fulfilled ;

Norwithitanding God hath other namesamoneft the Angels,
others among(t us men; for there is no namé of God amongft us
(as(Mofes the Egyptian faith) which isnot taken from his
works, and fignifieth with participation; befides the. name’ Te
tragrammaton , which is holy, fignifying the’ fubftance ‘of ‘the
Creator in fignification, ia which no ‘other thing is
partaker with God the Creator; therefore’ itis ‘called
parated name,whichis written and not read, neither is itex-
__ptefied by us, but named, and fignifieth the fecond fupernall

Idiome,

OF Occult Philofophy. Book II I.

® eere8

po.”

a

r >

‘
—

Idiome, which is of God, and perhaps of Angels. In like man-
ner the Angels have their name amongft themfelves, and in
their Idiome, which Pas/ calleth the tongue of Angels, con-
cerning which we have very little knowledge with us, ber all
their other names are taken from their offices and operations, _
which have not fo great efficacy, and therefore the Magicians.
call them by their true names,namely the heavenly ones,which

are contained in the holy Bible, =

Book | LT. Occult Philofophy. 379

Of the influence Ie the divine

CHAP, XII, |
ee.” through all the middle

Se

T H E moft high Creator and firft caufe,although he ruleth |

and difpofeth all things, yer diftriburech the'care of ex- |
ecution ro diverfe Minifters, both good, and bad, which 7oha |

in the Revelations cals affifting, and deftroying Angels of
which the prophet {ings elfwhere ; The of the Lord re-

mains in the prefence of them that fear him, that on Te
preferve them ; and elfwhere he defcribes immiffions by ¢ ia
Angels. Now whatfoever God doth by “Angels, as by mini- 1a

{ters, the fame doth he by heavens, Stars, burasitwerebyin- .
ftruments, that after this manner all things might ‘work roge*

ther to ferve him, thatas every: part of Heaven; and every
Star doth difcern evéry corner or place of the earth, and time, a | |
fpecies and Individuall: fo icis fic thatthe Angelical vertueof

thac part and Sear fhould be applyed to them,zs<z. place,time,

and {pecies. Whence 4x/fin in his book of queftions, faith, E-

very viliblé thing. in this World, hath-an Angelicall pow- =

er appointed for Hence Origen on the book of Numbers
faith, che world hath need of Ange!s,that may rule the Armies i

of the earth, Kingdomis, provinces, men,beatts, the nativity, |

and progrefs of living creatures, fhrubs, plants, and other i :
thing‘, giving them chat vertue which is faid co be in them,
from an occult propricty; much more need is there of Angels i

that

“OF Occult Philofphy. Book

that may rule holy works, vertties and men, as they whol.
waies fee the face of the moft high father, and can puide meh
in the right path, and alfo even the leaft ching co chis place, as
fit members of this world in which God as the chief pre.
fidenr, dwelleth, moft {weetly difpofing all things, not being
contained, or circum{cribed, but containing all things, as Zohn
inthe Revelations defcribeth that heavenly City,whofe twelve
gates are guarded withtwelve Angels, infufing on chem what
they receive from the Divine name,twelve times revolved;and
in the foundations of that City che names of the twelve Apo-

files, and che Lamb ; for asin the Law , in the ftones of the
Ephod and foundations of the Holy City defcribed by Eze-

_ kiel, were written the names of the tribes of J/rae/, and the
- mame of four letters did predominate over them; fo in the
Gofpel, the names of the Apofties are written in the ftones of
the foundation of the heavenly City, which ftones ftand for

ghecribes of Z/rae/ in the Church, over which the name of the
Lamb hath irifluence, that is, the name of Fe/zs in which isall

‘the vertue of the four létceréd name ; feeing that 7ebovab the
Father hath givenhim all things : Therefore eRe Heavens re-
ceive from the Angels,that which they dare down;but the An-

gels from the great name of God and 7e/#, the Vertue where- |

of is firtin God, afterward diffuled into chefe twelve and fe-
yen Angels, by whoinit is extended into che twelve figns, and

into the feven platiets, and confequently into all the othet
Minifters and inftruments of God,pourtraiting even infinirely,

Hence Chrilt faich,. Whatfoever you fhall ask the Facher in my
name, he will give you; and after his refurré@ion faith, In my

they fhail caft our devils, and do asfolloweth , fo chat

the name of four letters is no further neceffary,the whole ver-
tue thereof being tranflated into the name $e/xs, in which on-
fy miracles are done;neither is there any other(as Peter

under heaven given unto men, by which they can bé faved bu
bucdetusnorchink,thac by naming Ze/us prophatiely,
-- asthe name of acertain man,wecan do miracles by vertué o!
it : but we muft invocare ic in the holy Spitir, with ‘a pure
mind and a ferverit {pirir, chat we may obtain thofe things

which

avy
‘
¢.
»,
I
a

which are ‘promifed ns in him; efpecially knowledge going

of us, accordiag to

before, without which thereis heating
that of the Prophec; I willhear him he hath known

my name; Hence at.thisgcime.no favor can. be drawn from

the heavens, unlefs the authority, favor and confent of .the

name intervene; Hence the Hebrews and Cabalifts

moft skilfull in-the Divine names, can. work nothing :after
Chrift by thofé old names, as their fathers have dont long

ince; and now itis by

the name by a due pronunciation ig propofedrethem te
be worlhipped, and they fear not only the name but alfo the

Crofs, the fealthereof;-and. not only the -knegs of carchly,,—

heavenly, and hellifh creatures are bowed, but alfo Infenfible

things do reverence it, and alk teémble at his beck, whe _

from afaichfull heart andaccue mouthrthe name is

nounced, and pure hands. impring
Crofs: neither tr doth Chrift Lay

my name they..
certain vertue exprefied in chat, fame. over divelsand fick

fay in-vain.to bis Dugiples, Ia

perfons,and. forth, fecing, the |

reat the vertue,

power. which chis oame is both fi

the inftieucor,and alfo.from, the yertue of him whe eaxpretled

by this name, and froma power implanerd in che yory. words
Henge is itthat, feeing. every fearothand.reyerenceth
the name.of him: who.hath ma wicked

and ungodly if fp.be belive the invocation of Dir

vine names of chis.kimdy do band. devile.s And

expestence confirmed,that no devil nog |
power of Hell, which: vex amd trouble men, can refit this.
name, but willchey., nill they, bow the knee andiobey, when .

the falunferous: fignof the |
caft out. Deyils,¢*c.. unlefs there werea

é
‘
¢
»

OF Occult Phi

AP.

rember and of thir on nr mem.

JE tead diverfe of hol) af
® verte membets of God, and ornaments; but by the
"members of God,-are underftood manifold powers, moft fin.

ly abiding in God himeelf, diftinguifhed amongft themfelves
Bs ‘the facred names of God: but the garments’ of God ‘and
Grasdinens,: are as it were certain wayes and relations, of
Emanations-or conduit pipes, by the which he diffufech him.

of which a8 oft as our mind thall rouch,o

often the Divine power of fome member goeth forth, even as

Fefus eyed out, concerning the woman with the bloody Jflue,

Some: body hath touched me, for I perceive verrpe'co go forth

from me:Thefe' members therefore inGod are like to. ours: but

_ the? Idea’s and exeniplars of our members , to che which if we

Beri

tightly conform our: mmbets, chen being tranflated into the
fame Tmage,we até made the true fons of God,& like to God,
. doing and-working the works of God : therefore concerning
the members of God; many things are drawo forth out of the
eriptuféss for/we read‘ of his ‘in’ the Cancicles ; Thy
Carmel’; and the locks of thy fiead as the purple of

bur-this' Carmel fignifiech notahat mouncain inthe
of Syria, but a ereature, which ingendreth the

of his eyes, eyelids -and' éars, we read in the

| ¢yes-of che Lord-onthe Jatt, ‘atid his ears'to

"prayers, his eyes look towards the poor, andhis eyclidsen-

quire after the fons of men : alfo of his mouth, caft, throat, lips,

and teeth, we read in E/ay, Thou halt not enquired at my

mouth ;,and in the (anticles, Thy throat as the beft wine for

: he hath fhoulders, armes, and fingers, of the

my beloved,that gocth down fweetly,caafing the lips of chole

that are afleep to {fpeak;there are alfoNoftrils, by the which(as

we often find in shes Law ) he {melleth the facrifices for a {weet

which

Book

g
A.
a
€ |
Ne

which we ead in Efay ; -the government is laid upon his

(houlders; cto whom isthe Armof rhe Lord revealed? and

the Kingly Prophet fingeth, chy handsO Lord have made me

and falhioned me, and I will behold the heavens, the
work of thy fingers; he hath alfo a right and left hand;
hence the P/a/mift faith, The Lord faith to my Lord, fic
at ny right hand : and of the left we read, inthe Gofpel, on
which the damned (hall be placed at the laft day: further we
read of the heart,brealt, back, and back parts of God;as'in the

book of Kings, that God found Davida man according to his —

own heart; we have alfo in the Gofpel his breaft upon which
the Difciple fleeping conceived divine myfteries; and the
P/almift defcribeth his back, in the palenefs of gold; and he
him(elf faith in Peremiah, Iwillfhew my back aad not my

face in the day of their perdition, and he faith to AZo/es,Thou ©

fee my back parts ; of his feet the P/almif? faith,

Darknefs under his feet, and inGeme(s heis faid to walk to -

the South, In like manner alfo we read of the garments, and
ornaments of God, as with the P/a/mi/f, the Lord hath reign-
ed, he hath put on beauty, cloathed: with light as wicha gar-

ment; and elfwhere, Thou haft put on comlinefs and beauty; ©

The Abyffe as a garment and his cloathing; and in"Exekée/, the

Lord fpeaketh,faying, I fpread my garmenc over thee and co-
vered thy nakednefs; moreover alfo we read of the rod,Staffe,

Sword and Buckler of God, asin the P/a/mift, Thy rod and
thy ftaffe, they have comforted me; his crath hath compafied
thee about as with a fhield;and in Deatreonomy

word declares to us: from which members and Divine orna-
ments, there is no doubt, but that our members and ‘al! things
about us, and alf our works,are both ruled direéted, preferved,
governed, and alfocenfured, asthe prophet faith, He hath pat
my foot upon a rock, and directed my goings; and elfwhere

he faith, Bleffed be che Lord my God, who teacheth my hand: ~~
to war, and my fingers to fight; and of hts mouth he faith, the
Lord hath put a new fong into my mouth ; and ¢lfewhere our

Saviour faith; I will give you a mouth and wifdom ; and ond

a

w .
J «
re

| we read of the ©
{word of his glory ; and very many of this fort the facred

«
a
o

wal

bair he faith, an hait of your head (hall not perith; and in ano.
ther place, thehairs of your head are numbred; for the
mighty God fecing he would have us to be his Images and like

to imfelf, hath framed members, limbs. and figures after ma-
ny wayes laid open in us, according to the fimilitude of his
hidden vertues, as it were figns Keeping the fame order and

proportion co them: whence the Adecubals of the Hebrews

fay, that if a man ap of the Divine influence do make
" any member of his body clean and free from filchinefs, then it
~ becometh Habitale and proper feat of the fecrec limb of God,
and of the'vertue to the which the fame name is afcribed = fo
that if that member want any thing, the name being invo-
. caged, whenee it dependeth, it heard effectually,
according.to that, I willhear him, becaufe he hath known my
name;and thefe ace the great and hidden myfteries,concerning
which

of theGods of the gentiles, and fouls of the Celeftiall bodies, po
What places were confecrated in times paft, and to wha

Dieten

Philofophers have maintained, as we have fhewed

~ & before, thatthe Heavensand Stars are Divine Animals,

and their fouls intelledtuall,parcicipating of the Divine mind ;

and they aveere, chat fome feparated fubftances are faperior,

Qthers inferior-co them,as.it were governing and ferving, which

and Angels; moreover Plato himfelf
affirmed, that Celeltigll fouls.are not confined co their bodies,

~  agonr fouls to bodies, but to be, where they will, and al-

they rejeyce in the vifion of God, and without any

_ Bogor painsdo rule and.move their bodies, and cogether in

moving them, do eafily govern thefe infetiog things ; chere-

Bis fouls of chis.kind, Gods, and. ap-

pointed Divine honors for them, and dedicated and.

P
j *
q
}
a
J
a
‘
4d
al

‘
‘¢

> §
€

facrificesto them, and did worfhip them with Divine wor- -
1 (hip, and thefe are the gods to the which all people are attri-
buced, concerning which Afofes commanded in Desteronomy,
; faying, leaft perchance your eyes being lifted up to Hea-
ven, thou (houldeft fee the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stats of
r Heaven, and being turned back fhouldeft adore and worthip
them, to which all the Nations are fubje&ted, which are un-
: der the Heaven ; but the Lord ?ehovah hath taken and brought
. you forth from the furnace of Eg yp¢,that thou fhouldeft be an
) Hereditary people to himfelf;and in the fame book chap. 17.be
calleth the Sun, Moon, & StarsGodssand the Do@ors of the He-
brews upon that piece of Genefis where it isfaid,that Abraham
gave gifts to the fons of t ubines,vix.Shemoth,Steltoma,
that is {trange names, but left Z/aac heir of all that he poffeffed,
fay, that the fons of the.concubines werenot in the blefling of
eAbraham, given to fehovah the moft.highcreator,butto |
ftrange gods and dieties,but that //aac and his feed were given
to the omnipotent Jehovah, and in no part to any ftrange Di-
-eties;therefore they are upbraided in Destornomy,becaule they
fervedNitrange gods, and worfhipped them they knew not,
__andcto whom they were not given; and alfo Jofoua Nave, af-
ter that the people were brought into the land of promife,
their enemies overcome, and the lotsof the poffeffions of J/-
rael diftributed, gave the people leave tochoofe that God
whom they would worhhip, faying, leaveis given youthis day
to choofe whom. you. will efpecially’ ferve, whether
the gods which your fathers fervedin AZe/opotamia, or the
gods of the emorites, whofe land you inhabite; but the
people anfwered, we will ferve the Lord Jebovab,and he fhall ~
be our God ; fofbua faid co them, ye cannot-doit, for the
Lord Jehovah ts holy, ftrong, and jealous; but the people
perfevering to ferve Jehovah; he faith to them, ye are
witneffes your felves, that ye have chofen for your {elves
the Lord, to ferve him; take away therefore ftrange gods
out of the midft of you, and incline your hearts to the Lord -
God of J/rae/; and he ereGted a great {tone faying, this ftone
thalbe for a witnefs, leaft afterwards ye will deny

Of Occult Philofophy. Book I

- Jye to the Lord your God; therefore the other gods,to which
the other Nations were given, were the Sun, Moon,twelye
’ Signs, and other Celeftiall bodies, and Divine fabricks, yer

not as they were bodies, but asthe foul adhereth to them, and
the whole A/ilitia of Heaven, which cals the queen of
Heaven, that is the power by which the Heaven is governed,
viz. the foul of the world ,of which feremy faith, The fons
gather fticks, and part thereof maketh a fire, and the women
mingle oyl, thac they might make a cake for the Queen
of heaven, neither wasthe worlhip of Doxlia, to this Queen
and other Celeftiall fouls prohibited them, but of Latria on-
ly, which they that gave, are reproved of the Lord; but the
name of thefe fouls or Gods, we have before declared; ~ but
go what Regions., People, and Citiesthey were afcribed as
proper and tucelar gods; Origen, Tertullian, Apuleius, Di-
_edorus, and very many other hiftorians, partly relate to us:
Therefore all people worfhipped their gods with their proper
ceremonies; The Beotians, Amphiarus;. The Africans, Mopfus;
the Egyptians, Ofiris,and [fis; the Ethiopians, who inhabite
(Mero, jupiter and Bacchus; The Arabians; Bacchus and Ve-
nus ; the Scythians, Minerva; the Naucratians, Serapis; the
Syrians, Atargates; the Arabians, Diaphares ; the Africans,
Celefius; the Nornians, Tibelenus: In Italy alfo by the free
Cities confecration, Delventius, wasthe God of the Cruftu-
men fians, Viridianusof the Narvenfians, Aucharia of the
enlans , Narfia of the Volfians, Valentia of the Otriculans;

Nortia. of the Sutrinians, of the Phalifcians ; thefe
efpecially were famous. The Latians did adore with the high>
eft worfhip, (Mars; The Egyptians,Ifis;the (Moors; Tuba;
the AMacadenians , Cabrius; the Carthaginians, Uranus; the
Liatines,F annussthe Romans, Quirinus; the Sabines , Sanguss,
the e-tthenians, Minerva; Samos,}uno;Paphos Venus; Lemnos,
axos, Bacchus; Delphos, Apollos and as Ovid fingeth.
in his Fa/ti.
Athens do. Pallas; Crete, Dian’ implore.

The Iland Lemnos Vulcan doth adare,
The.Spartans,Juno—

if
is
if
if

Book Of Occals Philofophy.

‘The (arthagisiansand Leucadians did worlhip Satatn;Crere,
Pyreus, Homole, Ida, Elis and Lybia, Jupiter, where was his
Oracle: Epirus,Latium, Gnidus, Lycia, Pifa, Macedonia,Mars.
The Thermodonians, Scythians, and Thracia, the Sun; the
Scythians did worfhip onely one God, facrificing an horfe to
him; the fame alfo the Heléopolitans, and'eAffyrians did wor-
fhip ; and underthe name of Apollo, the Rhodians, Hyper-
boreans and Milefians;and the mountains Parnaffus, Phafelus,
Cynthus, Seratie, wereholy tohim, and the Iflands Delos,
_Claros, Tenedos and Mallow,a place in-the Ifle Lefbos , and the
_Grynean Grove or Town, belides the Cities, Patara,Chry/a,
Tarapnds, Cyrrba, Delphos, Arrephina, Entrofr, Tegyra; Alfo
Thebes, the Ifland, Vaxos, Nifea City of Arabia, Calichoros
ariver Of Paphlagonia, were confecrated to him under the
name of Bacchus and Dionyfins; allo Purnaffus, and Cytheros
- mountains of Boetss, in whichevery feeond yeer by courfe,
the fealts Bacchanalia were kept; alfo the Thamaritans a peo-
pleneighbors to the Hircanians did worthip Bacchus with
their own Ceremonies. The Affyrians firft of all introduced
the worfhip of Venus; then the Papbians in Cyprus, and Phe-
nicians, aad Cythereans, whom (as Ageus reports ) the Athe-

was worthipped; at Delphes, Venus Epitybia; fhe was alfo a-
dored of the (cans; andin Amathusan ifland of the 4 zean

Sea, and in Mempbi a City of Egype,and in Gnido and Sictlia,

nians followed : amongft the Lacedomonians, Venus Armaths —

and the Jduliaz Grove; and_the City Hypepa and Erice a ;

mountain of Sicilia, and in Calidonia, Cyrene and Samos; and

no Diety of the old Gods (Ariftotle being witnefs) is re-
ported to have been worfhipped with greater ceremonies,and
in more places; the French did efpecially worfhip AZercury,
calling him Testates; foalfo the Araadians, Hormopolites,E-
cyptiansand AZemphites. The Scythians about mount Taurus,

did worfhip the Moon under the name of Diana; and in Ephe- _

fus, thehad amoft ftately Temple; and in Adycena after the

death of Thoantes King of Tawrica, her Image being ftollen ~

away by /phigenia and Oreftes , {he was worlhipped nigh 4-
ricia. The Rite of Ceremonies being changed, the was wor-

Cc2a hipped

Sag
a

‘

‘4

rif
a]
¥

Of Occult Philofophy. Book | I If.

are given the

fhipped likewife by the Magnefians,a people of he(falia, and

in Pifa,a City of eAchaia, and in. Tybur, and the eAventinum
a Romaz hill, and.in Pergu a City of Pamphilia, andin Agras
inthe Kingdom of Attica; and the Catenian people are re-
ported to have worfhipped the Moon under the Ada/culine
fexe’; there were alfo other places confecrated to other Die.
ties, as to Pallas, who iscalled Minerva, were confecrated
Athens, the mountains Pyreus., Aracynthus, the River Tri-
tones, and Alcomeneunsa City of Boetia, and Neo one of the
Iflands of the Cyclades.;, The holy places of Ceres are, Eleufs
Attica, Enna, and (atasa,Cities of Sicilia and mount e£tna;
The chief worfhip to Vulean was inthe Ifland of Lemnos, and
in Imsbres, an Wand of Thraciaand Therafia, an Iland confe-
erated to Vulcanjand alfo Sicilia : Vefta was the goddefs of the
Trojans, whom. runaway ¢#eas cartyed into and to.
ans, Idea and: Dindymus, mountains.
of Phrygia,and Reatuma City of Umbria; alfo the mountain
Berecynthus, and Peffinuntiunz,a City of Phrygia ; The Cities
Carthage, Profenna, Arhos, and (Mycena, worlhipped Funes
alfo the Ifland Samus and the people of Phali/cia , Orcheftus
aCity of Boetia,and 7 enatus a Promontory. of Laconia, were
confecrated to Neptune, and the Trezenian Nation and City

_ were under the prote@tion of Neptune: of this fort therefore

were the gods of the Nations,which did rule and govern them,
which himfelf in Deuteronomy calleth Gods of the earthy.

to.the which all Nations were attributed, not fignifying 0-

thers then the heavenly Stars,and their fouls.

‘CHAP:

Celeftiall fouls.

"Dia a*

tures,and of che Catholicks; for Eccléfaftes alfo defcribertythe
foul of heaven, and ferom mpomthe fame exprefly confefleth —
it: In like manner Origen in his book of Principles, feemeth to
_ think chat Céleftialhbodiés are. animated) becaufe. they are faid
to receive commands from God, which is only. agreeable ro
areafonable nature ; for itis written, Ihave enjoyned acom-
mand on all the Scars; Moreover 7oé feemeth to have fully
sranced, thatthe Scarsare not free from che,{tain offin;- for
there we read ;: the Stars alfqare.novclean in his ight;.witich
cannot’ verily. be referred, to. che brightnelsof cheir-bodies;
moreover that the Celeftiall bodies are.‘animated, even
Exfebius the Pansphslian thought,and alfo Asftinin his Exchi-
ridiow; but of che latter, writers Albertus Afagnys in-his book
of four coréquals,. and, Aquinas in his book of Spiritual
Creatures, aad Scot upon the fecond.of the fentences; to
thefe the moft learned: Cardinall Alich. Cw/aus-may, be.added;
Moreover himfelf in a {trong difputation doth con-
vince thefe things;who moreover thinketh it not {trange, thac
the Heavenly. bodies ‘ase> worthipped, with, she .worthip of
Dowiid, and,that theig \fuffcages, and ,helps axe-tmplored; to
whom alfo T confenteth accalion of
Idolatry fhould hinder, this tite; moreover: Plotinws maine.
tainech chat they know our withes, and hear them ; -burifany.
one would contradi@t. thefe,, and -account them faccilegious
tenencs, let; hum hear Exchiridion, and, in his
book of Retractations, and Zhomus inthe fecond book againit
the Gentiles, and in his. Quodfibers, and Scotas-uponthe
fentences, and Galielmus Parifienfs in his fam of the univerfe,

who unanimoofly-anfwery to fay the heavenly bodies are

Book PPR Of Occult'Philofophy. 389
what our Theologians think, concerhim
the heavens and the ‘heavenly: bodies arecanimated
with certain Divine fouls, is not only the opinion of Po- )
ets, and Philofophers,but alfo the aflertion of the facred Scrip- ;
—

ct ~

animated or inanimated, nothing belongeth tothe Catholick
faith. Therefore althoughit feemeth to many ridiculous, that
” the fouls themfelves be placed in the fpheres and Stars, and ag
it were the Gods of the Nations, every one doth govern his
Regions, Cities, Tribes, People, Nations and Tongues, yer
it will not feem ftrange to thofe who rightly underitand

Of Intelligences and [pivits, and of the threefold kind of them,
their diverfe names, and of Infernall and {ubterrancal
FOw confequently we muft difeourfe of Intelligences,
rits and Angels; An Intelligence is an intelligible
ftance) free from/all grofs and pntcifying mafs of a body; im-
mortall, infenfible, affilting all, having Influence over all; _
and the nature of aff intelligencies, {pirits and Angels is the
me. But I call Angels here, not thofe whom we ufually call
evils, but fpiritsfo'calied from ‘the propriety of the word,
as it were, knoWing, underftanding and wife. But of thefeac-
cording to the tradition of the Magicians, there are three
kinds, the firft of which they call fuperceleftiall, and minds
altogether feparated from a body, and as ic were intelleétuall
ao ‘worthipping the one only God ; as it were cheir molt
rm and ftable uniry or center; wherefore they even call them
_. gods, by reafon of a certain participation of the divinicy; for
they are God, overwhelmed with. the Di-
vine Neétar. Thefe are only about God, and rule not the
bodies of the world, neither are they fitted for the govem-
ment of infetior things, but infofe the liphe received: from God
unco the imferior ordéfs,and‘diftribure every ones duty
ef chem; The Celeftiall intelligences do next follow thefe-in
the fecond order, which they gall worldly Angels,viz. being

a
id
i]

e

world,and for the government of every heaven & Star,whenee
they are divided into fo many orders; as there are heavens in
the world, && as there are Stars in the Heavens;and they called
thofe Saturnine,who rule the Heaven of Saturn &
felfsothets Zevial,who rule the heaven of and Fapiter
himfelf,and in like maner they name diverfe Angels;as well for
the name,as the vertue of the other Sears; and becaufe the old
Altrologers did maintain fafty five motions,therefore they in-
vented fo many Intelligences or Angels;they placed alfo in the
Starry heaven, Angels,who might tule the figns, triplicities,de -
cans,quinaries,degrees and Stars; for although the ichool of the
Peripateticks affigne one onely intelligence to each of the
Orbs of the Scars : yet fceing every Star and fmall part of the
heaven hath its proper and different power afid influence, it is
~ neceflary that it alfo havehis raling intelligence, which may
confer power and operate ; therefore they have eftablifhed
twelve Princes of the Angels, which rule the twelve figns of
the Zodiack, and thirty fix which may rule the fo many De-
cans,and feyenty two, which may rule thé fo many Dusnaries
of heaven, and the tongues of men and'che Nations, and four
which may rule che criplicities and Elements, arid feven go-
vernors of the whole world, according to the feyen planets,
and they have given to all of them names, and feals, which
they call Characters, and ufed them in their invocations, in- —
cantationts,and carvings, defcribing them inthe inftruments of
their operations, images, plates, glaffes, rings, papers, wax
lights and fach like; and if at any time they did operate for the
Sun, they did invocate by the nameof the Sun, and by the

names of Solare Angels, and.fo of the reft. Thirdly they efta-

blithed Anpelsas Minifters for the difpofing of ‘thofe ehings
which are below,which Origen callech certain invifible powers
to the which thofe things which are on earth; ar¢ committed
tobe difpofed of For fometimés'they being vifible tonone
do dire& our journies and all onr bafineffes; are oft prefent at
bartels, and by fecret helpes do give the defired fucceffes
their friends; for they ave faldjehat-at their pleafures they ca

procure prosperity, and adverfity, In likemantiet they

Cc 4 diftribave

‘

‘

diftribute thefe: into more orders, fo:asfome are fiery, fonic
-watery,fome aerial,fome terreftial ; which four fpecies of An-
igels, are!comppted according to the four powets of the Ce-
Aeftiallfouls,piz.. the mind, :reafon) imagination, and che vivi--
fying and moving nature; Hence the fiery follow the mind of
the Celeftiall fouls, whence they concur to the contemplation

-Lof more fublime things, but the Acriall follow the reafon, and
_ _favorthe-rationallfaculcy, and after a certain manner feparate
it fromithe fenfitive/and vegetative ; therefore it ferveth for
n ative life, as the fiery for.a contemplative, but che watery
ollowing the imagination, ferve for avoluptuous life; The ©
earthly following nature, favor vegetable nature; moreover
they ,diftinguith alfo this kind of Angels into Saturnine and
—_Foviall, according to.the;names of the Stars; and the Heavens;
Some. are Orientall, {ome Occidentall, fome Meridio-
~ Mal, fome Septentrionall ; Moreover there ts no part of the
world deftitute-of the proper affiltance of thefe Angels; ‘not
becaufe they are there alone,but becaufe they reign there efpe-
cially, for they are everywhere , although fome: efpecially
operaté,and havetheir influence in. this placefome
neither truly are hele things to be underftood, as though they
— were fubjettto the influences of the Stars, but as they have
-correfpondence with the Heaven above the world, from
whence efpecially all chings are dire&ted , and:to the which all
~ things ought to be conformable; whence as. thefe Angels are
appointed for diverfeStars, fo alfo for diverfe places and cimes,
‘mot thatthey are limited by time or place, neither by thebo- —
dies which they are appointed to govern, but becaufe the or-
der of wifdom hath fo decreed, therefore they favor more,
-and patronize thofe bodies, places, times, ftars; fo they have
called fome Dinrnall, fome Noé¢turnall, other Meridionall ; in
dike manner fome are called Woodmen, fome Mountianeers,
fome Fieldmen, fome Domefticks.. Hence the godsof the
Woods, Country gods, Satyrs, Familiars, Fairies of th> foun:
tains, Fairies of the Woods, Nymphs of the Sea,the Naiades,
-Neriades, Dryades, Pierides, Hamadryades, Potumides, Hin-
nides, Agapte, Pales, Pareades, Dodona, Feniliz, Lavernz; —

—

39? Philofophy. ‘Book.

inftru@tion of men,fome beafts which are mo

Pann Mutes, Aonides, Caftalides, Heliconides,. Pegafides,

Meonides, Phebiades, Camenz, the Graces, the Genii, Hob-
oblins, and fuch like 5, whence they call chem vulgar {uperiofs,
ome the demi gods and goddeffes ; fomé of thele are fo fa-
miliar and acquainted with mien, that they are even affected
with humane perturbations, by whofe inftru€tion P/ato think-
eth that men do oftentimes wonderfull. things even as by the
purer nigh.tnto us,as

Apes, Dogs, Elephants, do often ftrange things above their

{pecies;arid they who have written the Chroniclés of thé Danes ~

and Norwegians, doteftife, that {pirits of diverfe kinds in
thofe regions are fabje@ to mens commands ; ‘moreover fome
of thefe ro. be corporeall and mortall, whofe bodies are be-
gotten and dy,yet co be long lived isthe opinion of the Egyp-
tians,and Platonifts, and éfpecially approved by Proclus.
tarch alfo and Demetrias the Philofopher, Amiliauns the
Rhetoritian affirm the fame ; Therefore of thefe fpirits ofthe
third kind, asthe opinion of the Platonifts is; they report

that there are fo. many Legions, as there are Stars in‘ the Hea-
ven, and fo mahy fpirits in evety Legion’, as in heaven ‘it felf
Stars, but there are (as Arhanafius delivereth) who think,
that the crue number of the good {pirits, is aceording tothe
number of men, ninety nine parts, according tothe parable of
thehundred fheep; others think onlynine parts,according to the
parable of the ten groars;others fuppofe the number of the An-
gels equal with men, becaufe it is written, He hath appointed
the bounds of the people according to the number of the An-
sels of God; and concerning their number many have written.
many things, but the latter Theologians following the mafter
of the fentences, 4u/tin and Gregory cafily refolve themfelves,
faying,that the number of the good Angels tran{cendeth hu-
mane capacity; to che which on the contrary, innumerable un-

clean fpirits do correfpond, there being fo many in the inferi-

or world, as pure fpirits in the fuperior, and fome Divines af-

- firm that they have received this by revelations; under chefe

they placeakind of fpirits, fubterrany or obfcure,which the

Platonifts call Angels that failed, revengers of wickedaah

Book, LI
(™
d

Of Occult Philofophy. Book II]

the four parts of the world; under thefe many more Prinets

and ungodlinefs, according to the decree of the Divine juftice,
and they call them evill Angels and wicked fpirics, becaufe
they oft annoy and hurt evenof their own accords; of thefe
alfo they reckon more legions, and in like manner diftinguifh-
ing them. according to the names of the Starsand Elements,
and parts of the world, they do place over them Kings,
Princes and Rulers and the names of them; of thefe, four
moft mifcheivous Kings do rule over the other, according to

of Legions govern, and alfo many of private offices. Hence.
the Gorgones,Statenotte,the furies. Hence Tifiphone, Aletto,

Megara, Cerberus : They of this kind of {pirits, Prophyry

faith, inhabite a place nigh to the earth, yea within the earth
it felf; there is no mifchief, which shey dare not commit;

they have altogether a violent and hurtful! cuftome, there-

fore they very much plot and endeavor violent and fiadden
mifchiefs; and when they make incurfions,fometimes they are
wont colic hide, but fometimes to offer open violence, and
are very much delighted in all things done wickedly and con-

-tentioufly,

o
‘

plating the order of the Diyine providence; the firft in the

CHAP. XVIL_

Of thefe according to the opinion of the Theslogians.

B Ut our Theologians, together with Diony/fias,maintain the
three diftin@ions of Angels; eyery one of which they di-
vide into three orders,they call thefe Hierarchies, thofe quires,
whom Proc/ws alfo diftinguifheth by the number nine. They
lace therefore in the:fuperior Hierarchies, Seraphim, Cheru-
im, aud Thrones, as ic were foperceleftiall Angels contem-

oodnefs of God ; the fecond.in the Effence of God, as. the
orm; the third in the wifdom. In the middle Hierarchy
they place the Dominations, Vertues, and Powers, as it were
worldly Angels concurring to the government of the world ;
the firft of thefecommand that whichthe other execute ; the
fecond are Minifters to.the Heavens and fometimes confpire to
the working of miracles ; the third drive away thofe things
which feem to be able to difturbe the Divine Law ; but in the
inferiour Hierarchy they place the Principalities, Archangels,
whom alfo Jamblicas reckoneth up, thefe as miniftring fpirits
defcend to take care of inferior things; the firft of thefe take |
care of publike things, princesand magiltrates, provinces ahd.
kingdoms, every one thofe that belong to themfelves; when
we readin Dawiel, Bucthe prince of the Kingdom of Perfia
withtood mecwenty one.dayes; and the fon of Syrach
teftifiech, that for every Nationa ruling Angel is appointed ;
which alfo AZofes by his fong in Denteronomy feemeth to thew.
forth, faying, when the moft High divided che Nations; he ap-
pointed them bounds according torhe number of the Angels.
of God. The fecond are prefent.at facred duties, and dire@.

the Divine werthip about:every man, and offer upthe prayers.

and facrifices of men beforethe gods.. The third difpofe eve-
ry {maller matter, and to eagh thing cach onc is: apreferver..
There are alfo of chefe, who afford vertue to the leaft plants.

-and ftones and to. allinferior things;
are.

Of Occult’ Phil Book

6 come T pitojophy.

are common with God, many with men, and they are media.
ting Minifters; but Arhdnafius, béfides Thrones, Cherubins,
and Seraphins, who are next to God, and magaifie him un.
ceffantly ‘With hymns *and ‘continual *praifes, praying for our
falvation,nameth the other orders, which by acommon nate
he callectt the: wilitie ‘Of PhE firlt OF 'chefe: id
of thé whiett he was, ‘who‘fpake Dariel,
faying, Come; that may teach thee what thall'céme’to thy’
people in thie faft dayes; Thenthete ‘is the cutelar orde?, of
which wé read alfoin Daniel.’ Behold, AZichael one of the. -
Princes cometh to my ‘help; and there) <Tn that! cime (hall:
tile tip AZichaél a'gteat ’Prineé, who “ftandeth ‘for the fonsof
people of this Order-was chit’ Raphael allo: who carryed
forthiand brought back Todiah the younger ; after this isthe
 Proeuratory Order; ‘of the which mention is made in 7oé,
where we read, -if the Angel fhall fpeak for him, he will in-
treat the Lord, and the Lotd-will be pléafed with hit; ‘atid-of
the-fame order is expounded'alfo'that' which is written in’ the
fixteenth Chapter'of eclefiafficus about the end. The'works
of the Lord have been made by his appointment from che be-
ginning,and he hath ‘diftributed their portions from the time
they have been made;' he hath adorned their: works forever,
they have*not hungred; ‘nor béén'wearied; ‘and have not de
fifted fronvtheir works, none of them thall oppre(s: his neigh:
 borevenforever. ‘The Minifteriall order followeth, of the
which the Hebrews faith, Are they not afl Méniftring
fpirits, fent forth ‘for :who-thail be heirs-of falyation?
After thefe is the ‘Auziliary ‘otder, of ‘the whieh" we! tead'in
Ejay, The- Angelsof the Lord swene forth ‘and: flew inthe
tencvofthe Afiyriahs 285. thoufands.’ The Receprory order
of: fouls followeth the which we read
the: foul of Lazarus was carryed by Angels into thébofom
Of até taught. thacwwe fhoutd makero

out feivées frienids'ofithe unvizhcoous! Manion, that we may
be Yecetved intoeternall Moreover; thereisthe
order of the Affiftants the which we.reade inZ achary. Thele
aréthe twofonhs of che Oyl-of fplendor,- whio- affiftthe

pe

Book I. OF Occult Philofophy.

is of Angels, by.che which God metals.

bleffed the which God beltoweth prophefie.

fhewing him all the kingdoms of the world; and the Prince _
of thefe

of che whole earth,but the Theologians of the Hebrews do o-
therwife number and call thefe orders; for inthe higheft place
are thofe which they call WPM MM that is, creatures of
fanctity,or the which God giveth the giftof being..
In the fecond place fueceed Ophanim that is formser.
wheels,by the which God 3) diftinguitheth the Chaos : In
the third place are Aralim DINAN great, ftrong, and mighty
Angels, bythe which fehova Elohim pronounced or fehova
joyned with He adminiftreth form to the liquid mat-
ter : In the fourth place are Ha/malimp71awn: by which £/

‘on God frameth the effigies of bodies. The fifth order is Se-

raphim DB Ww by the which lobim Gibor 93 DIN
draweth forth the Elements. The fixt is Zalachim that

The feventh Elohim oymy ‘that is the gods by the: which
God 'Fehovah: Saboath produceth vegetables;
The eighth Beni Elohim E> that is the fons.of God, by

which God Elohim Sabaoth procreateth

Animals; The ninth & lowelt Cherubim O'3)7D by the which _
God Sadai createth mankind; under thefe is the order
Animafticus called that is nobles, {trong men,:or

CHAP. XVIII
Of theorders of evil fpirits, and of their fall, and divers natures.

fe are fome of the School of the Theologians, who |
diftribute the evillfpirits into nine degrees,as contrary to
the nine orders of the Angels; Therefore the firlt-of thefe
are thofe which are called talfe gods, who ufurping the name
of God, would be worfhipped for'gods, and require facrifi
ces and adorations, as that Devil, who faith to Chrift, if. chou
wilt fal down and worfhip me.I will give thee all thefe things; -

ishe who faid,: I will afcend above the height of the

Sy
}

Of Occult Philofophy. ; Book Ik

‘clouds, and willbe like to the moft High; who is therefore
called Beelzebub, that is,an old god. In the fecond place fo}-
low the fpirits of lies, of which fort was he who went forth,

.and was a lying fpirit in the mouth of the Prophets of chap.
and the Prince’of thefe isthe Serpent Pytho; from-whence 4-
polloiscalled Pythins, and that woman a witch in Samuel, and
the other in the Gofpel, who had Pyrho in their belly. There-
fore this kind of Devils joyneth himfelf to the Oracles, and

deludeth men by divinations, and predictions, fo that he, may
deceive. Inthe third-order are the veflels of iniquity, which

are alfo called the veffels of wrath, thefeare the inventors

of evil things and ofall wicked arts, asin P/ato, that devill
Theutus who taught Cards and Dice; for all wickednefs,
malice and deformity proceedeth from thefe; of the whichin
Genefis, inthe Benedictions of Simeon and Levi, Jacob faith,
veflels of iniquityare in their habitattons;into their counfel let
not my foulcome; whom the Pfa/mift calleth veflels of death,
Efay veffels of fury, and Peremy veflels of wrath, Exekjel vel
fels of deftroying and flaying, and their prince is Belial,
which is interpreted without a yoak or difobedient, a prevari-

cator and an Apoftate,of whom Raa/ tothe Corinthians {aith,

what agreement hath Chrift with Belial? Fourthly follow the
revengers of evil, and their Prince ise-4/mode#y vix. caufing

judgement; After thefe in the fifth place come fhe deluders, —

 ornersof theearth; and their prince ts called

whol mitate miracles, and ferve wicked conjurers and witches,
and feduce the people by their miracles, asthe ferpent feduced
Eve, and their Prince is Satan, of whom is written in the Re-
velations,that he feduceth the whole world, doing great figns,
-and caufing frre to defcend from heaven in the fight of men,fe-
{ducing the inhabitants of che earch,by reafon of the igns,which
areigiven him:to do. Sixthly the. Aertall powers offen chem-
felves; they joyn themfelves tothundering and lightnings,
corrupting the aire, caufing peftilences and other evils ; in
the number of which, are che four Angels, of whom the
Revelation fpeaketh, to whom it is given cto ‘hurt che
Earth and Sea,° holding the four windes, frouy the four
AMeririm;

é
‘
‘
H
w

Book II OF Occult Philofophy.

he is the ALeridiaz Devil’, a boyling (pitie devill-
raging in the South, whom Paul tothe Ephefians calleth the

Prince of the power of this air,and the fpirit which worketh in

the children of difobedience. The feventh manfion the furies.-

ffefs, which are powers of evil, difcords, war and deyatta-
tions, whofe Prince in the Revelationsis called in Greek

pollyon , in Hebrew ebaddon that is deftroying and. waft-
ing. In the eighth place are the accufers, or the inquifitors,
i whofe Prince ts e4ffarath, that is, a fearcher out: in the

Greek language he is called Diabo/os, that is an accufer, or cae
lumniator, which in the Revelations is called the accufer, of rhe

Moreover the Tempters and Enfnarers have the laft:place, one

of which is prefent with every man, which we therefore call the

evill Genius, and their Prince is A4ammon, which is interpreted.

covetoufnefs : But all unanimoufly maingain thacevil fpiritsdo-
wander up &down in this inferiour worid,enraged againft all;
whom they therefore call Devils, of whom Asftine in his.

firt book of the incarnation of the word to fanmarius faith:
Concerning the devils and his Angels contrary to Vertues,the

Ecclefiafticalt preaching hath taught,that thereare fuch things; . 3

but what they are and how they are, he hath not clear enough
expounded : yet there is this opinion among{t moft, that this.
Devill wasan Angel, and being made an Apoftate, perfwad-
ed very many of the Angels to decline with himfelf, who evea.
unto thisday are called his Angels: Greece. notwithftanding-
thinketh not thatall chefe aredamned, nor that they are all.
purpofely evil, but that from the Creation of the world, the
difpenfation of things is ordained by this means,that the tor-.
menting of finfull fouls is made over to them : The other
Theologians fay that not any Devill was created evill, bat.
that they were driven and caft forth of Heaven, from the or-
ders of good Angels for their pride, whofe fall not only our
and the Hebrew Theologians, but alfo the Affyrians, Arabians, .
Egyptians and Greeks do confirm by their tenents; Pherecydes

the Syrian defcribeth the fall of the Devils and that Ophis,that

is,the Devilifh ferpent, was the.head of that rebelling Army; .

brethren accufing them night&day before the face of our God.

- «
é

Of Oceult Philofophy. Bo ak 1

is Trifmesiftus (ings the fame fall in his Pimander and. Homer an.

der the name of Ararus, in his verfes ; and Plutarch in his
fpeech of vfury , fignifiech, that Empedocles knew that the
fallof the devils was after this manner ; the devils alfo them.
felves often confels their. fall: they therefore being caf
forth into this-valley of mifery, fome that are nigh to us wan-

derupand down in this obfcure air, others inhabit lakes, rj.

vers-and feas, others the earch, and terrifie earthly things, and
invade -hofe who dig Wells and Metals, caufe the gapings
of the earth {trike together the foundation of mountains, and
vex not only men , but alfo other creatures ; fome being con.
— tent with langhterand delufion only , do contrive rather to
‘weary men, then cohurtthem, fome heightning chemfelves
to the length of a Giants body,and again (hrinking themfelves
upto the fmalnefs of the Pigmies, and changing themfelves

divers forms’ do difturb men with vain fear : others

ftudy fies and biafphemies, as we read of one.in the third
book of Kings faying, Iwill go forth and bea lying fpirit
- inthe mouth of all the Prophets of Achaéb : but the worlt fort
of devils are chofe , who lay wait and overthrow paflengers
in their journeys, and rejoyce in wars and effufion of blood,
and affii& men with moft cruell ftripes: we read of fuch in

Matthew, for fearof whom no man durft pafs that way;

~ moreover the Scripture reckoneth up no@urnall, diurnall, and
meridional! devils,and-defcribeth other fpirics of wickednels

by divers ‘names, as we read in E/ay of Satyrs , Scrichowls,
Syrenes, ftorkes, Owls; and in the P/alms of Afpes, Bafiliskes,
-Eions,Dragons; and in the Gofpel we read of Scorpions. and
Mammon and the prince of this world and rulers of darknels,

_ of all which Beelzebub is the prince, whom the Scriptare cal-

feth the prince of wickednefs. Porphyrie faith, their prince 1s
Serapis, who is alfo called Plutoby the Greeks, and allo
Cerberus is chief amongft them, that three-headed dog : vi
Becaufe he is-converfant in three elements, air, water, and
earth, a-moft pernicious devill ; whence alfo Proferpina,who
can do-very much in thefe three elements , is their Princefs,
_ which the ceftifies of her felfin her anfwers,in thefe verfes. of

. “hee
‘
©
‘

d
it
rc
fs

_ the refurre€tion, by the fame means by the which they came

devils, and granted that they fhould enter into the Herd

—

Of Occult Philofophy. 401
Of threefold nature I Lucina fasr,

The daughter am, [ent from abovethe air;
The golden Phoebe am,and With heads trine,
Whom many forms do change,and the trine fign
Which I bear with forms of earth.fire, and air,
I for black maftives of the earth do care.

Origen’s opinion concerning the devils, is: The fpirits who
aG of their own free will, left the fervice of God with their
Prince the devil;if they began to repent a little, are clothed
with humane fiefh ; That farther by this repentance, after

into the flefh , they might at the laft return to the vifion of
God , being then alfo freed from etheriall and aeriall bodies,
and then all knees are to be bowed to God, of Celeftiall,
Terreftrial, and Infernall things, that God may be all in all :
Moreover Saint Jrenews approveth the opinion of ee

Martyr , who hath faid, Satan never durft fpeak blafphemy

againtt God, before chat the Lord came onthe earth , becanfe
that he knew not as yet his condemnation; but there are many | |
of the devils who are fallen, who hope for their falvation :

Very many think by the Hiftory of Pas/ the Hermite,written

by Jerome, & reverenced by the Church with Canonical hours,

alfo by the Legend of Brandan, they are fo taught ; and even

by this Argument they maintain chat their prayers are heard;

that we read in the Gofpels , that Chrift heard the prayers of

of Swine ; to thefe alfo agreeth the 71. P/alm,according to.
our fupputation, bat according co the fupputation of the
Hebrews the 72, where we read, the Ethiopians fhall fall be-
fore him,and his enemies lick the duft ; there it is read accord-
ing to che Hebrew text, they that inhabit the defert, thall
bend their knees before him,that is,the aiery {pirics fhall adore
him, as the Cabalifts affirm, and his enemies hall lick the duft,
which they underltand of Zazef, .and his Army : of which,
We readin Genefis, Dutt ne all che dayes of thy so

iia
e
d |
‘je |
CS
CS
ie
oo

and elfewhete the Prophet faith,becaufe the duft of the earth is
q his bread;shence the (abalsfts think, chat even fome devils thall
be faved, which opinion alfo it is manifeft that Origen was of.

— 7

CH AP.
is Of the bodies of the Devils.

Cae the bodies of Angels, there is a. great diffen.
_/tion betwixt the lace Divines,, and Philofophers ; for
T homas- affirms that alliangels.are incorporeall,yea-evihangels,
yet that they do affume bodies fometimes, which after awhile
they puc off again; Dyonifius in Divine names frongly affirms
that Angels are incorporeal. Yet Auftin upon Genefis deli-
vers his opinion, that Angels.are faid' tobe Aery , and Fiery
Animals ; becaufe they have the nature of Aceriallibodies,nei-
ther can they be diflofved by death, becaufe the:element which
ismore active then-paflive ‘spredominant tm chem ; the fame
feem to.affirm,thas alt Angels in the beginning of their crea-
tion had Aeriallibedies, being formediof the more pure, and
fuperiour part of the air, being more fit to. act,chen to faffer ;
and that thofe bodies. were after the confirmation preferved.
in good Angels, but changed in the evilin them fall,inte the
pe Pd more thick air, that they might be tormented in the
re: Moreover AZagnns Bafilivs doch attribuce bodies not
only to Devils,but alfo'to-pure angels, as:eertaini thin, Aeriall,
pure {pirits ; to which Gregory Nazianzemdothagree.
leins was of opinion,that ail angels had not bodies ; for in the
book of theDemox of Socrates, he faith, that there is a.more
_ propitious kind of fpirits,which being alwayes free from cor-
porceal bonds, are procured by certain prayers. But Pfellus the
Platonift,and (briftianus do think that the nature of fpirits-is:
- Not without a body;bue yet not that the body of angels,& de-
vils are the fame;for that is without all matcer; but che bodies.
_ Of devilsare in a manner material], as fhadows, and fubje& to:

~ ye! >

Book Of Occult Philofophy.

paffion , that they being ftruck are pained, and may be
burnt inthe fire,into con{picuous afhes, which asis recorded,
was done in And although it bea fpirituall body, yer.
it is moft fenfible, and'being touched, fuffers; and althoughic
becut'afunder, yet comes ‘together again, as air and water,
but yet in the mean time is much pained. Hence itis that they
fear the edge of the fword, and any weapon. Hence in Vir- —
gil the toeEneas,

thon goon thy way and draw thy fword.

Upon which Servius faith that fhe would have emeas have
his {word confecrated. alfo defcribes the kinds of |
Demonaicall bodies-; there is indeed-one body , which onely
abidesthe fire, but being feen,doth not fnffer , which Orpbens
calls fiery, and’Celeftiall Demons : the other iscontemperated
with the mixtion of fire, and air, whence they are called
Etheriall, and Agriall ; co which if any waterifh thing was
added, there arofe.a third kinde, whence they are Called wa-
tery , which fometimesare feen : to which if any earthinels be
added, thisis not very thick; they are called Terrene Demons,
and they are more confpicuous, and fenfible, Now the bodies
of fublime Demons are nourifhed of the moft pure Etheriall
element, and are not ta(hly to be feen of any , unlefs they be |
fent from God ;_ being weaved of fuch bright threails, and {0 -
{mall,that they tranfmit all che rayes of our fight by their finefs,
and reverberate them with fplendor, and deceive by'their fub-
tlety ; of which Calcidins faith, Etheriall,and Aeriall Demous,
becaufe their bodies have net fo much fire as that they are con-
{picuous,nor yet fo much earth that the folidity of them refilts
the couch, and their whole compofure being made up of the
clearnefs of the skie,and moifture of the air,hath joyned toge-
ther an indiffoiuble fuperficies. The other Demons are neither
fo appearable , nor invifible , being fometimes confpicuous
areturned into divers figures, and put upon themfelves.bodies
like fhadows, of blood-lefs images, drawing the filthinefs of

a srofs body, and they have too much communion with the
Dd2z Wood

»

aA”

¢
———

Of Occult Philofophy. ITT,

Wood ( which che Ancients did call the wicked foul ) and by
reafon of their affinity with earth , and water, are alfo- taken
with Zerrene pleafures,and luft; of which fort are hobgoblins,
and Incubi, and Succubi, of which number ic is no abfurd
conjeCture to think that AZe/ufina was: yetthere is none of
the Demons (as Marcus {uppofeth ) is to be fuppofed male
or female, feeing this difference of fex belongs to compounds,
but _the bodies of Demons are fimple , neither can any of the’
Demons turn themfelves into all fhapes at their pleafure ; but
to the fiery, and aiery it is eafie fo to do, viz: to change
themfelves into what fhapes their imagination conceives :
now fubterranealland dark Demons, becaufe their nature
being concluded in the ftreights of a thick and unactive

body , cannot make the diverficy of fhapes, as others can,

But the waterie , and fuch as dwell upon the moift fuperfices
of the carth, are by reafon of the moiftnefs of the element,
for the moft part like to women; of fuch kinde are the fairies
of the Rivers, and Nymphs of the Woods : bur thofe which
inhabite dry places, being of dryer bodies Thew themfelves in
form of men, as Satyrs, or Ono/celi, with Affes legs, or
Fauni, and Incubi, of whichhe faith,he learned by experience

_ there were many,and that fome of them oftentimes did defire,
and made compacts with women to lie with them : and that

there were fome Demons, which the French call Defi, that

Mid continually atcempt this way of loft,

“ve

Of the annoyance of evil fpirits, and the prefervation we have
by good fpirits.

I is the common opinion of Divines, that all evil {pirits
are of that nature, that they hate God as well as men ;
therefore Divine providence hath fet over u¢more pare fpirits,
with whom he hath engrufted us, as. with. Shepheards,and Go-
vernours,, that they fhould daily help us, and drive away
evil fpirits from us , and curb, and reftrain them, thac they
fhould not hurt us as muchas they would ; asis readin Tobia,
that Raphael did apprebend the Demon calicd ed fmodens, and
bound him in the wildernefs of the upper Egypr. OF thefe
Hefiod faith, there are 30000 0f fupiters immortall fpirits ‘li-
ving on the earth, which are the keepess of mortall men, wha
that they might obferve juftice and mercifull deeds, having
clothed themfelves with air,go every where on the earth. For
there is no Pxince,nor potentate could be fafe,nor any woman
continue, uncorrupted, n@ man in this valley of ignorance
could come to the end appoiated to him by God, if good {fi-
rits did not fecureus; evill fpirits thould be permit-
ted to fatisfie the wils of men; As therefore amongf the good
fpirits there is a proper keeper or. protector deputed to every
one ,. ConeeDNanS the fpicit of the man to good ; fo.of evil
fpirits there is ferit forth an enemy ruling over the flefh, and
defire thereof; andthe good fpenir fights for us asa preferver
again{t che enemie, and flefh; New man betwixt chefe con-
tenders isthe midle, and left in the hand of his own Counfell,
to whom he will give viétory ; we cannot therefore. accule |
Angels,if they do not bring the Nations entrulted tothem, to |
the knowledge of the true God, to true piety, and, fuffer
them to fall into errours, and perverfe worfhip : but it is
to be imputed to themlelves, who have of theic own
accord declined from the right path, adhering to the fpirits
of errours, giving vi€tory co.the Devill; for it is.in, the hand
of manto adhere to whom:he pleafe; and overcome whomhe
will; by whom , if once. the the devill be overcom

»f |
“3
ig

i sg

Of Occult Philojophy.

he is made his fervant, and- being overcome, cannot fight any
more with another, as a wafp that hath loft his : to which
opinion Origen aflents in his book Periarchox, concluding,
that the Saints fighting againft evil {pirits,and overcoming, do
‘Jeffen their armie, neither can he that is overcome by any, mo-
Ieft any more; As therefore there is given to every mana
good fpirit, fo alfo there is‘given to every man an evil Diz.
bolicall {pirit , whereof each feeks an union with our fpirit,
and endeavours to attra@ it to it felf, and to be mixed witly
it, as wine with water ; the good indeed; through all good
works conformable co it felf, change us into Angels, by uniting
as it is-writ of Pobn Baprift in AMalachie : Behold I fend

_ mine Angel before thy face - of which tranfmutation , and
union itis writ elfewhere ; He which adherés to God is made
one fpirit with him, An evil fpirit alfo by evil works, ftudiesto.
make hs conformable to it felf,and to unite, as Chrift faith of
Judas Have not chofen twelve & one of youis a devil ? And

this is thac which Hermes faith, when a {pirit hath influence
upon the foul of man; he fcatters the feed of his own notion;
whence fuch a foul being fowen with feeds , and full of fury,

‘brings forth thence wonderfull things, and whatfoever are the |

offices of fpirits : for when a good fpirit hath influence upon
-aholy foul, it doth exalt it tothe light of wifdom ; but an evil

{pirie being transfufed into a wieked foul, doth ftir ic up to.
theft, to man flaughter , to lufts, and whatfoever are the
offices of evil fpirits. Good fpirits (as faith Pamblicus) purge

the fouls moft perfectly ; and fome beftow upon us other good
things; they being prefent do give health to the body, vertue
_ tothe foul, fecurity tothe foul, what ts mortallin us they take
away, cherifh heat, and make it more efficacious to-life, and
by an’ Harmonie do alwayes infufe light into an intel>
“digible mind: But whether there be many. keepers of a man,or

onealone , 7 beelogians differ amongft. themfelves ; we think |

thereare more, the Prophet faying, he hath given his Angels
a charge concerning thee, that they fhould keep thee in all thy
‘wayes: which as faith Hierome, ts to be underltood of any
man, as well as of -Chrilt; All men therefore are governed by

Book

the

‘
fa;

See

the miniftery of divers Angels,and are brought to any degree
of vertue,deferts,and dignity, who behave themfelves worthy
of them; but they which carry themfelves unworthy of them
are depofed, and thruft down,as well by evil fpirits, as good
fpirits,unto the loweft degree of mifery,as their evil merits fhalf
require : but they that are attributedto the fublimer Angels,
are preferred before other men, for Angels having the care of
them,exale chem., and fubjeét others to chem by a certain oc-
cult power; which although neither of them perceive:, yet
he that is fubjected, feels a certain yoke of prefidency , of
which he cannot eafily acquit himfelf , yea he fears and reve-
renceth that power, which the fuperiour Angels make to flow
upon fuperiours , and with a certain terrour bring the inferi-
ours into a fear of prefidency. This did Homer feem to be fen-
fible of , when he faith, chat the Adu/es begot of Fupiter, did
alwayes as infeparable companions affift the Kings begot of
fupiter, who by them were made venerable ; and magniz
ficent. Sowe read that M, Antoninus being formerly joyned
in fingular friendfhip with OGavus wont al-
wayes to play togerher. But when as alwayes Auguftus went
away conquerour, that a certain AZagician Counfelled M. An-
tonius thus.O Antony, what doft thou do with that yong man ?
fhun, and avoid him, for although thou art elder then he; and.
art more skilfull then he, -and art better. defcended then he,
and haft endured the Wars of more Emperours , yet thy Ge-
nius doth much dread the Genius of this yong. man, and thy
Fortune flatcer his Fortune; uniefs thou thalt thun him , ic
feemeth wholly.to decline cohim. Is nor thePrince like other
men , how fhould other men fear, and reverence him, unlefs
a Divine cerrour fhould exalc.him , and ftriking afeat into o-
thers,deprefs them,that they fhould reverence him as‘a Prince?
Wherefore we moft endeavour, that being purified by doing

well, and tollowing fublime things, and choofing opportune
times, and feafons,we be enttufted orcommitred degree
of fublimer, ‘and more potent Angels, who taking care of ws;
we may defervedly be preferred-before others.

F

~—

diac: ‘fo in fuperceleftials doth ic obtain acertain Intel.

which contig of fpirits and

AP.
ng Genin and of th the mat

‘Seles m Ceteftiats hath 2 certain Stor, dnd
Celeftiall | smage which hath influence upon it before o.

ligenve fet over it, and guarding it, with.infinice other mini-
ftring fpirits of its order, all which ate called by acom.
moti name; the Sons of Elohim Sabavth
the Godof hofts, Hence,as often as the moft high
doth defiberate-of War, orflaughter, or the defolation of

Kingdom, or fabduing of any people in thele inferi
Oars, then no otherwilt,when chefe thali come upon the earth

"there. proveeds thele fpirits abovesas ft fs written

Tfaials;! The Dopd of bolts thiall vifitxhe Army of the high,

inthe heavens; the Kings of the earch, in the earch ; of
prefidents:, we read alfo in Das
niel,viz. of the Prince of the Kingdom of the Perfiaes,of the
Prince of the Grecians, of the Prince of the people of i/rae/;

dand:of theirconflict: whichalfo

When that the ara
When Phoebus did 26 Neprane bytrle 93
with Mats. the goa of Wav did ft ines:
Diana did Wich boftile way

Mercury
News feeing there be

all

forts, yee they ate more which are of the
fame order with the prefident of that région, Soin the Solury
region, che 7 are meft potent ; in the Lunary,

| é
there
A
q
Pa
¢

—

Lunar}, wd {fo of the celt. And henec ic is that vations

of our aftairs offer chemfelves, & follow ns places
vinces, bemg more Fortunate in one place more then another,
where viz. the Demon our Genin fhall teceive more power,
or we fhail there obtain 2 more powerfull Denon OF the fanne
they thall cravell into a Solary region;
ot province , {hall be made there far more forcunate, beeaafe
there chey fhall have more powerfull, and more advareagions —
conducters or Gens, by the prefent aid of whom
be brought beyond expectation , and their own power, to
happy events. Hence it is chat the choice of a placejrepion; or
time doth much conduce to the happinefs of life where a
one fhall dwell, & frequent,according to the nature & inftingt
of his own Genius. Sometimes alfo thie change of:the name
doth conduce to the fame,for whereas the properties of names
being the fignificatots of things themielves, do asic were in 2
glafs declare the conditions of their forms;thenecitsomies to
pafs,chat names being changed, the things oftentimes are chan-
ged. Hencethe facred wre doth not without ¢anfe: bring | ih -
God,whileft he was bleffing Abraes,and Facob;changing their
names, calling.the one Abrabam, and the other J/rae/, Now.
the ancient Phylofophers teach us to know the maturesof the —
Genius of every man ,by Stars, their influx, and alpedts;. which
are potent in the Nativity of any one ;. but with infteuctions -
fo divers, and differing among{t themifelves, thae itis
difficult to: underftand the ies of the heavens by theic
directions. For Porphyrie feeks the Genias of the Stary
which isthe Lady i
thence, or from the Planets, which had them moft digmicies,
or from that. inco whofe: houfe the Moon was to enter.
the aldeans ire after the Genius, either t
above, or Moon. Bat’octhers , and arany Hebrews
think it is tobe enquired after from. fomecorner of the hea
ven, or from allo€ them. Orhers leek a good Gasins from the
eleventh honfe; whichtherefore they:call a good Demon ; but’
am evil Genins from the fixth, whic therefore call

of che Nativity: buc Aferme citherfrous |

Demon. But fecing the inquifition of thefe is laborious, & moft

occult, we fhallfar more eafily enquire into the nature of our

Genius from our felves, obferving thofe things which the

infin@&tof nature doth diétate to, and the heaven inclines us

to from our infancy, being diftraéted with no contagion, or

thofe things which the minde, the foul being freed from vain

; _ cares,and finifter affeCtions, and impediments being removed,

doth fuggelt to us: Thefe without all doubt are the perfwa-

fions of aGenins which is given to every one from their birth,

leading, and perfwading us to chat whither the Star thereof

CHAP. XXII.

a8 That there ts a threefold keeper of man, and from whence each of

Very man hath a threefold good Demon, as a proper
skeeper, or preferver, the one whereof is holy, another of
the nativity, and the other of profeffion. Fhe holy Demonis
one, according tothe Do@rine of the AZgyptians, affigned to
the rationall foul; not from the Stars or Planets, but from a
fupernaturall caufe, from God himfelf, the prefident of De-

mons, being univerfall,above nature: This doth dire the life
‘Of the foul; & doth alwaies put good thoughts into the minde,
being alwaies attive in dluminating of us, although we donot
7 alwaies take notice ofit; but when weare purified, and live

_ peaceably, then ic is perceived by us, then it doth as ic were

ak with us,and.communicates its voyce to us, being before

ilent, and ftudyeth daily:cb bring usto a facred perfection.

Alfo by the ayd-of this Demon:we may-avoid the malignity of

a Face, which being religioufly worfhipped by us in. honefty,
and fanctity, as weknow was done by Socrates ; the Pythago-
think we may be much helped by it, as by'dreams , and
figns, by diverting evill things , and: carefully procuring good
things. Wherefose the Pytbagorians were wont with one ris

i
Cc
F

 yvertue. W

Book OF Occult Philofophy.

Alt.

fent to pray to fupiter, that he would either preferve them
from evill, orfhew themby what Demon it fhould be done.
Now the Demon of nativity, which is called the Genins,

doth here defcend from the difpofition of the world, and -
from the circuits of the Stars, which were powerfull in his

nativity. Hence there be fome that think, when the foul is

coming down into the body, it' doth of the quiteofthe

Demons. naturally choofe’a-preferver co it felf, nor only
choofe this guide to it felf,t but hath that willing to defend
it. This being the executor,and keeper of the life, doth help ic.
to the body, and takes care of it, being Communicated to
the body, and helps a man torhat very. office, to which the
Celeftials have deputed him, beirig born. Whofoever there«
fore have received a fortunate Genius, are made thereby ver-
tuous in their works, efficacious, {trong , and profperous,
Wherefore they are called by the Phy/ofophers fortunate, or
luckily born. Now the Demon of 'profeffion is given by the

Stars, to which fnch a profeffion, or fe&, whichany manhath.

profeffed, is fubjeéted, which the foul., when -ic-began to
make choyce in this body, and to cake upon it felf difpofiti-:

ons, doth fecretly defire. This Demon is changed,the pro- —

feffion being changed ; then according to the dignity of the -
profeffion,we have Demons of our profeffion more excellent -
and fublime, which fucceffively take care of man, which pro-
cures a of profeffion, as he proceeds from vertue to:
en therefore a profeffion agrees with out nature, .
there.is prefent with us a- Demon of our profeffion like
us, and futable to our Gemins, and our. life is made more

peaceable, happy, and profperous: but when we undertake -
a profeffion unlike, or contrary to our Genins, our life is:

made laborious, and troubled with difagreeing patrons. So:
itfalls out that fome profit more in any fcience, or art, or
office, in alittle time, and wich liccle pains, whea another
takes much pains, and ftudies hard, and ‘all invain: and:
although no {cience, art, or vertue be co be contemned, yet:
that thou maift live profperovfly, carry on thy affairs happily;:

in the firft place know thy good Gemiws, and thy nature, a]

. Ww _
Fa
m
a
a”
i

Of Qccule Philofophy. Book LILI.
what good the celeftiall difpofition promifeth thee, and God i

the diftribucor-of alichefe,; who diftributes to eachas ke plea
feth, aad follow the beginnings of thefe, profefs thefe, be
-converfant in that vertue co whichcthe moft high diftsibutor
doth elevate, and lead thee, who made e4brahamexcelin
juftice, and’ clemency, J/zac with fear, 7acob with ftrengeh, Ir
Mofes with meeknefs, and Miracles, Fofhua in wat, Phinias
in zeal, David in religion, and viétory, Solomon in knows
ledge, andfame, Peter in faith, fobs incharity, Jacob inde. i

votion, Thomas in pmdence, Afagdalex in contemplation,
Martha in officionfpefs. Therefore'in what vertye thou thinks al
ch thouicanft molt eafily be a proficient in,ufe diligence vo at- r
tain to the height chercef; that thou maift exceHlinone, when

iamany thou canft net: bat inthe refit endeavour tobe 0
great a proficient as chon camft: but if chou fhalr have the
overfeers of nature, and religion agreeable, thou fhalt finde
a double progrefs of thy nature, and profeffion: but ifthey
fhali be difagrecing, follow thehetcer, for thou fhalc better
peroeiye at fome ume apreferver of an excellent prof¢effion,

CHAP. I.

Ofthe tongue of Angels, and of their freaking amongst theme

E might doubt whether Angels, or Demons, fince

'V. they be pure fpirics,nfe any vocal {peech, or tongue
 amonegft themfeives;or cous; but that in fome place
faith, 1f I fpeak with the tongue of'men, or angels : but:
what their fpeech or tongue is, is mych doubted by many. ~
Bor many think that if they. ufe any Idiome,it is Hebrew, be-

caufe that was the firft of all, and came from heaven, and-was
~~ before the confufion of languages in Babylon, in whichthe -

was by God the Father, and the Gofpell. was
preached -by Chrift the Son, and fo many Oracles were given

“=
x=
then of nativity
wet
elves,
a
é

tothe Prophets by the Holy Ghoft; and feeing all tongues
have, and do undergo various mutations, and corfuptions,
this alone doth alwaies cohtinue inviolated. Moreover an -
evident fign of this opinion is,'‘that though each Demon, arid
Intelligence do ufe the {peech.of thofe. nations, with whom
they do inhabit, yet tothem that underftand ir, they never
fpeak in any Idiome, but in this alone. But now how Angels
fpeak it is hid from us,as they themfelves are. Now tous that‘
we may {peak, a tongue is neceflary wittrother inftruments, as
are the jaws, palate, lips, teeth, throat, lungs, the afpera arte-_
ria, and mufcles of the breaft, which have thebeginningof
motion from the foul. .But if any {peak.atadiftancetoan-
other,he mult ufe a louder voice;but if neer,he whifpers.in
ear: andif hecould be coupled to the hearer, afofter breath
would fuffice ; for he would flide into the hearer without any.
noife; as an image in the eye, or glafs. So fouls going ont
of.the body, fo Angels, fo Demons. {peak : and what man
doth. with a fenfible voyce, they do by impreffing the con-
ception_of the {peech in thofe.co--whom theyfpeak, aftera
better manner then if they fhould exprefs it by -an\audible
voyce,So the P/atomi/ts fay that Socrates perceived his Demon
by fenfeindeed, but not of thisbody, but by the fenfe of the
etheriall’ body concealed in this: after which manner Avicen
believesthe Angels were wont tobe feen, and heard by the
Prophets :. That. inftrument , whatfoever the. yertue be, by
which one {pjrit makes known to another {piri¢ what things
are in his minde, is called by the Apoftle Paw/thetongneof. .
Angels. Yet oftentimes. alfo they fend forth: an audible
voyce, asthey that cryed at the afcention of the Lord, Ye.
men of Galile, why ftand ye here gazing into theheaven?. -
And in the old Jaw chey fpake with divers of the Fathers with ;
a fenfible yoyce; but this never but when they aflumed bodies. -
But with what fenfes thofe fpirits and Demons hear our
invocations, and prayes, and fee our ceremonies, we are alto. -
there isa fpirituall body of Demons everywhere fenfible
by natince, fo thatic coucheth, feeth, heareth, without

o*

00 Ccult tlofaphy 413
¢
-€

Organs,

_ areknown to God alone, ‘who only numbers the multitude of

and nothing ‘ganbe an impediment toits ‘Net
do'they after that manner as we do with different

as {ponges-drink in water, {o-do they al]
‘fenfible things their body, orfome other way unknown
‘ous ;ineither are all animals endowed with thofe organs; for
wekniow that want eats, yet we know they perceives
— bueafter what manner we know not.

“CHAP,

Ofte Spi its, and their varions i
the \Sparits are fet over the Stars, ‘Signs,

but their proper, and true names, as'thofe of the Stars,

Stats, and -calls tiem all'by their names, whereof ‘none cin

beknowmby-us but “by divine revelation, and very few ate
exprefied tous inthe facred:writ. But the mafters of the He-

| Drews think that the names of Angels were impofed

them ‘by «dam, ‘according ‘to‘that which

be ht all thing which he-had made unto Adam, that

them, ashe calted any thing, fo the mame

ofit "Hence che Hebrew think, together with
‘that ic ‘the power of man to impofe names

upon Spirits, bur of fuch aman only who is dignified,-and
elevated to'this vertae by fome divine gift, or facred anthoti-
ty : but becaufe name that may exprefs the nature of divini-

ty, Or the whole vettne of angelical cffences cannot be made

by any voce, theréfore names for che molt part are
{putt spon them from ‘their’ works, fignifying ‘fome' certain

whith names then no otherwife then o blations,

Office, or ee, which is required’ by the: quire of Spirits :

Offered to the Gods,’ arid” verte to draw an

‘above or beneath, forto: make any

and-facrifices

= F (
del
¢

be

Crit

rec

pl

—
1§
a *
C(
«
ay
¥..

defired effeét. Phave feeny and. knows fome-writing on- vir.
gin parchment the and:feal of fpitie in the hour. of
the Moon: Which when to be devoured.
by a water-frog, and’/had verfe, the frog.
being let go ineothe water; tains, and fhours prefently- fel.
lowed. 1 faw alfo the fame man_infcribing ‘the: name-ofane-
ther Spirie withthe feal thereof in thehour of Aéers,' which
was given to a€row, who being let go, after a-verfe-mutee-

piven ho
‘red over, prefencly there: followed from: that.corner of the
heaven, whither he flew, lightnings,. fhakings, and horsible,

thunders, with chick clouds Neither were thofe names. of {pi-
rits of an-umknown tongue, neither did they fegnifie.any thigg,
clfe but their offices. Of this kinde are the names of thofe.an-

sels, Raziel, Gabriel, Michael; Raphael; Hawiel, which is.as

much as: the vifton: of God, che'vertue of theficength,

of God, the medicine of God, the glory of Ged, In tke:
manner in the offices Demons are-nead-theig
player, deceiver, a dreamer, fornicator, and
brews the names of Angels fet over the: planets, and‘Ggns,;,

over Saturn Zaphiel : over Pupiter Zadkiel: ower

mael: overthe San Raphael.» over Venus Haniel : ever Aden,

cury Michael over the ALounGabriel, Thefe are thofefeven

which alwaiesftand before the face. of God, te.whom

fore (Mfercurius Trif{megiftus calls che feven governers.of the.
world, who bythe heavens, as:-by inftruments, diftribute the.
infuences of all the Srats and -figns upon thele infections.
Now theréare fome thac°do afcribe them to: the Sears, by-

names ‘fomewhat differing, faying, that over Saturn is{ctan.

intelligence called Oriphiel; over. Jupiver Zachariel; OVER
Mars: Zamael the SunAZ ichael; Venus,
over Mercury Raphael ; -over the Moon Gabriel. And every.

pirits
isentrufted the difpofing of the whole celettial,:and cerrenc_
Kingdoms, which is under the Moon. For thefe-€asfay:the.
more curious ‘Theologians ) govern, all things by, acertaia yin
cificude of heurs, daies, and-years, asthe Aftrologers. teach,
concerning the planets. which they are fet'over ; whichthere-.

one.

f >... » * °

qs
a

a 4
»
—

é

: A
’

one o— thefe governs: ‘the world 354 years, - and feur: months .

which he that will throughly examine, may from thence. draw

over Gemini Ambriel over Cancer (Muriel Over

OF Occult Philo. | Book III.

atid the government begins from the Intelligence of Saturn:
afterward in order,the Intelligences of Pupiter,Mercn.

ty, Mars, the Moon, the Sun raign, and then the govern.
“ment returnsto the Spirit of Saturn. «Abbas Tritemius.vrrit

Maximilian Cefar a fpeciall: Treatife concerning thefe,

tknowledge of future times. Over the twelve Signs are
t thefe, viz. over eAries Malchidael; over Taurus.

Leo Verchiel over Virgo Hamailiel; over Libra Zuriel;

Over Scorpio "Barchiel over. Sagsttarins Advachiel ; over

Hanael , over eAquarius Cambiel ; over Pifces

Apricorn
Barchiel. Of thefe Spirits fet over the planets,and Signs, fobs
made mention in the Revelation, {peaking of che former in

. ‘ the béginning ; And of the feven Spirits which are in the pre-

Neciel, Abdizuel, Faxeriel, Ergeaiel, Ataliel, Axerutl,
E gibiel, Amutiel, Kyriel, Bethnael, G eliel, Requiel,

fence of ‘ths Throne of God, which I find¢ are fet over the
feven planets, in the end of the book, where he defcribes the
platform of the heavenly City, faying that,in the twelve gates
thereof weretwelve Angels. There are again twenty eight
Angels, which rule in the twenty eight manfions of the. Moon,

‘whofe namés in order are thefe; Geniel, Enediel, Amixiel,.

Aaxariel, Gabiel, Dirachiel, Seheliel. Amnediel, Barbiel,

Abrinael, Aziel, Tagriel, Alheniel, Amnixiel. There are alfo
four Pritices of the Angels, which are.fec over the four winds,

and over the four parts ofthe world, whereof AZichael is fet

over the Eaftern wind Raphael .over the Weltern ; Gabrsel
over the Northern ; Nariel, who by iome is called Uriel)is

. over the Southern. There are alfo affigned to the Elements
thefe, viz. to the air Cherub ; to water harfis.; co the

Barth Ariel sto'the Fire Seruph ,or accordi ing to bilom, Na-
thaniel. Now every one of chefe Spirits isa great Prince,

_ and‘hath much power and freedome inthe dominion of his

and heir Elements parts of

own planets, and figns, in their. times, years,
the

We

world

—_ >  .

e
»
‘=
‘=
a
“i
ve
ae
J
‘
A...
= s
»

there are four which as moft potent Kings are fet over the relt,
according to the four parts of the world, whofe names
are thefe, wiz. Urieus, King of the Eaft ; Amaymon, King of
the South ; Paymon, King of

North, which the Hebrew Do@tors perhapscall more rightly
thus, Samut!, Azazel, Azael ,-Mahazuel, under whom ma-
ny other rulé as princes oflegions, and rulérs; alfo there are

innumerable, Demons of private offices.Moreover the ancient.
Theologians of the Greeks reckon up fix Demons, which they

call Telchines, others Alaftores; which beari

ill willco
men, taking up water outof the river Styx wi

ik their hand,

fprinkle it upon the earth, whence follow Calamities, plagues, —
and famines ; and thefe are faid to be Afteus, Megalexins, Ore
menus, Lycus, Nicon, Mimon. But he which defiresto know:

exaCtly the diftin@ names, offices, places, and times of An-
gels, and evil Demons, fethim enquire into the book of Rab-
bi Simon of the Temples. And in his book of lights, and in his

treatife of the greatne

Temples of Rabbs J
of his book of formation,
concerning them,

How the Hebrew " Mecubals draw forth the facred names of An- |
out of thefucred writ, and of the feventie tWwo Angels,
Which bear the name of God, with the Tables of Ziruph, and —

the Commutatsons of letters, and numbers,
| , Here are alfo other facred names of good, and evil Spi-

the former, which the Hebrew. Mecubals draw forth out of
facred.writ;, according to thar art which they

the Weft; Evin, King ofthe .

fsof ftature, and in the treatife of the —
Joneael,and in almoft all che Commentaries.
and he (hall finde it written at large

ritsdeputed to cach offices, of much greater efficacy.then

hey. teach-concer-
ning them alfo certain of God are drawn forth

»

world , and winds. And every one of them rules over manj
legions ; “and after the fame manner amonpft evil ities,

Book III OFO
O ult Phil,
if
a
CHAP... XXV.
»

ont of certain places the generall rule of thefe:is, that where-
 foever any thing of divine eflence isexprefied inthe Scrip~
ture, from that place the name of God may rightly be gathe.
red; but in what place foever in the Scripture the name of
God is found-expreffed, there mark what office lies under
that name. Wherefoever therefore the Scripture fpeaks of.
the office or work of any fpiric, good, or bad, from thence
the name of that fpirit, whether geod, orbad, may be gather-.
ed; this unalterable rule being obferved of good fpirits we
receive the names of good fpirits,of evill the names of evill:&
lerus not confound black with white, nor day with nighc,

nor fight withdarknefs: which by thefe verfes, as by an ex.
appie,is manifelt.. Let them be as duft before the face of the
winde, and let the Angel of the Lord fcatterchem: Let their.

-waiesbe darkeefs, And flippery, and lec the angel of the Lord

Te the 35.Pfaime with the Hebrews, but with us the 34.out of |
which the names of thofe angels are drawn. Midael, &-
5 Mrael,of the order of warrters. So out of that verfe,
Fhor fhale fer over him the wicked,and Satan fhall ftand at his
right hand. Out of the Pfalm 109.with the Hebrews, but with |
Latineathe 108: yoy “PEN
is extracted the name of the evill {piri Schis %y»y which fig-
nifies a {pirit that isa work of engines, There isa certain text.
in Exodus conteined in three verfes, whereof every one is..
writ with feventy two letters, beginning thus : The firlt, Vajifa |
the‘fecond, Vajabo the third, Vajot which
e extended intoonce line, viz. the firft, and third fromthe
left hand to the right, but the middle in a order,be-
ginning from. the right to the left , is terminated on.
«the feft hand: then each of the three lettersbeing' fubordi-
one to the other, make one name; whieWiarefeventy
tWo names, whith the' Hebrews ‘eal! Schembamphore: +o
which ifthe divinename or 74h added, they. pro-
duce feventy two criffyHable names of angels, whereof every

one...

r-
a

one carries the great name of God, as it is written : My Ane |
gel fhall'go before thee ;. obferve him, for my name isin shim,
And thefen are thofe that are fet over the feventy two Celeftial *
quinaries, and fo many Nations, and tongues, and joynts of —
mans body, and with the feventy two feniors of
the Synagogue, and fo many difciples of Chrift: andtheir 7
names according to the extraction which the Cabalifts make, | :

are manifeft in this following table, according toone manner
which we have fpoke of. Now there are many other mannér
or waies of making Schembamphore out ofthofe verfes, as
- whenall three are in a right order written one after the other |
from the right to.the tefe, befades thofe which are extracted
by the abies of Ziruph, Sad the cables of commutations, of _
which we made mention above. And becaufé-thefe tables
ferve for all names, as well divine, as angelical, we fhall —

therefore fubjoyn them to this Chapter.

| “Thele are the feventy two Angels, eating the name of
God, Schembamphora.

a
t
—
oy

—

—

—

“

KING
4] 3] 2] 4] 2)
FEE

q

—*<

ons,

lalalo
tainia

le

ic lal

—
— as |
| tat =
| oe
lon
+ Ine pe
| — «
ry
Ee 3

Book 11

anh.

Averfe Table of the Commurations.

Inizlelale

“

nix!

ia!

|) oP
pp ine? pt
Pe
a "
D.3 Pp

41; ae.
wil

le lol, |

P
| ES

Book IH. Occult Philofophy.
EA

_OF ove |

is

we

OF Philo

on
fine

(Da

Another table of Trap ich is called the Rational. ; |

| oy a

rola .

mit

«

a

Of Occule: Pht

z

o

NI

yodjuen

*SUOTII

NN
IN.
im. |

Book

‘
‘
»
‘4 pan

” ©
‘
j

P DD.

foe 1000 =

ry
rs

Of Occult Philofophy.
Occult Philofophy.
a
| m vo 2
wm
bo m
on
DPD PS PP
ON

a

fe, OF finding out of the names of ppirits , and Genius’s from the
of Celeftiall bodies. |

J -He ancient Magicians did teach an art of finding ont
_..& the name of a ipirit to any defired effe®, drawing it
the difpofition of the heaven ; as for example,any Cele.
Harmonie being propofed to thee for the making an
ae image Or ting, or any other work to be done under acer.
tain conftellation ; if thou will finde out the fpirit that is th
toler of that work; the figure of the heaven being ere@ed,
_..€aftforth letters in their number and order from the degree
. Of the afcendent,according to the fucceffton of fignes through
- each degree by-filling the whole circle of the heaven : then
~thofe letters which fall the places the
~~ whereof thoiwouldeft nfe.,.being according to the number,
—~and-powers of thofe Stars without into number,
| ~~and_order, make thename of a good fpirit : but if chou (hale
from the beginning of a degree falling againft the pro-
 greffe of the fignes, the refulting fpirit thall beevil. By this
‘grtifomeof the Hebrew and Caldean matters teach that the
flatare, and name of any Genins may be found ont ; as for
| @xample,thedegree of the afcendent of any ones,nativity be-
| ingknown , and the other corners of the heaven being Co-
o€quated,then let that which had the more dignities of Planets

which the Arabians call be

_ firltobferved antonegft the reft and according to that in the
-- fecond place , that which fhall be next to it in che number of

| dignities, and fo by order the reft of them,which obtain any
dignitie in thé forefaid corners: this order being ufed, thou.
maift know the true place,8& degree of them in the heaven, be-
gituning from the degree of the afcenderit through each degree
-gecordingito the order of figns to caft 22. of the letters of the
1 Hebrews; Then what letters fhall fall into the places of the
gforefaid Sears, being marked, and difpofed according to the
@tder found out above in che Stars, & rightly joyned

i
i
‘

Book TEE

according to the rules of the Hebrew tongue, makethe name -
of a Genins : to which,according to the cultome, fome AZono-
fylable name of Divine omnipoteney viz. E/, or Iahis fab-
joyned.. But if che cafting of the letters be made: from ‘an
angle of the and againtt the fucceffion of fighsy.and
the letters which fhall fall in the 2adir ( that is the oppofite
int ) of the aforefaid Stars, be that order as: we faid,
joyned together, fhall makethe name of¥an evil Genias. Bur
the Chaldeans proceed another way ; for they take not the
eAlnmtex of the. corners , but the Almatiz of the eleventh
honfe, and do in: all things as hath been faid: Now they
finde out an evil Genias fromthe A/matex of the'angle ofthe
twelfth houfe, which they call an evil fpiric, cafting fromthe
degree of the falling againft the progrefs ‘of thefigns, There
are alfo the e4rabians, and many others, and fome Hebrews,
~ who finde out the name of a Genius by the places of the five
making projection alwayes from the beginning
of Aries , and the letrers being found out according to the!
order of Hylegians with the Aftrologers, being reduced into
a known order, and being joyned together,make the name of
a g00d Genius: but they draw the name of an evil Genins from
the oppofite Hylegian places,projection being made fromithe
laft degree of Pi/ces againt the order of figns. But other-fome
do not take the places of Hy/egians, but the places of A/-
mutex, upon the five Hylegians making projettion from an
Horofcope,as abovefaid : and thefe names being thus diftribuc-
ed according tothe proportioned numbers to the Starry ac-
count,compacted of joyned, and changed letters; .alchough
unknown in found, and fignificative’;. we mult: of neceffity:
confefs may do more by the feeret of the chiefeft Philofophy.
ick work, chen fignificative names, whileft the mind

ina

being altonifhed at che obfcurity of them , and deeply intent,
firmly believing thatfomething Divine is under it, doth re-
verently pronounce thefe words , and.names,although not un-

_ derftood, to the glory of God , capivating himéclf with a.
(Pirituall affection of piety, inthe obedience of him.

e :

cull

i

Book LEE

XXVIL-

the calenlacing Art of {uch nanses by the tradition of Cas

‘balsfts.
| T they call calculatory, and it is made by the following ta-
‘bles ; by encring with fome facred, Divine, or Angelicalf name,
in the column of letters defcending ; by letters
which thon fhale find in the common angles under their Stars,
_and Signs:which being reduced into order,the name of a goed
fpiric is made of the nature of that Star, or Sign, under which

‘fcendin

Signs in the loweft line, the name of an evil it is
made. And thefe are the names of fpirits of any or or

heaven «miniftring ; as. of good, fo of bad, which thou maift
after this manner multiply into nine names of fo many orderfs,
in asmuch as thou maift by entring with one name draw forth
another of a fpirit of a ior order out of the fame , 2
wellofa good, asbadone. Yet the beginning
lation depends upon the names of God;for every word hath a
vertue Afagick,, in-asmuch:as it depends on the word ‘of
God, and is thence framed. Therefore we mult: know that
every Angelicall name muft proceed from fome pri
name of God. ‘Therefore Angels are faid to bear the name of
God, according to that whichis written, my names
in bim. ‘Therefore that the names of good Angels may be
.difcerned from the names of bad, there is wont oftentimes
to be added fome name of Divine omnipotencie , as E/; or
‘On , or Jah, or Fod , and tobe pronounced together wich it:
_ and becaufe jah is a name of beneficence,and od the name of

-adiety,therefore chefe cwo names are put only ro the names of

angels; Butthe name E/,becaufe ic-imports power , and ver-
tue, is therefore added not only to but bad fpirics, for
either can evil fpirits either fubfift , ordo any thing without

Here is yet another Artof thefe kinds of names, which

thou didft enter: bat if thou fhale enter in the column @
by taking the common angles above the Stars, and

of this caleu:

5 % a
»
a
e

ook I EI.

the vertue of £/,God. But we muftknow thatcommon angles”
of the fame Star and Sign are to be taken, unlefs entrance be |
made with a mixt-name,as are the names of -Gemii,and thofe of .
which it hath bin {poken in the preceding. Ch. whicharemade.
of the difpofitions of the heaven, according to the harmo-

ny of divers Stars. For.as often.as the table isto be entred with

thefe,the common angle is to be taken under the Starjor Sign
of him that enters. Thereare moreover: fome that do foex..
tend thofe tables , that they think alfo if there be an.entrance .
with an extrance, with the name of a Star,or office, or any des
iced effeGt,a Demon whether good,or bad,ferving to that of.
fice,or efke&,may be drawa out; Upon the fame accouncthey
that entex with the proper name. of any perfon, beleeve that ;
they can extra the names of the Genii, under that Stanwhich .
fhall appeer ta be over fach a perfon, as.they (hall by bis Phy-
lognomy , or by the Paffions.and inclinations of his mind, .
and by his profeflien, and:fortune,know himco be AZartial,
or Satwrnine, or Solarie, Or of the nature of any other Star.
And although fuch kinde of primary names have none or little. .
power by their fignification, yet fuch kind of extracted names,
and fuch as are derived from them,are of very great efficacy; .
as the rayes of the Sun collected in a hollow glafs, do indeed.
moft ftrongly burn, the Sunit felf being. fcarce warm. Now -
there isan order of letters in thofe tables under the. Stars, .
and Signs, almoft like thac which is with the Aftrologers, of .

tens, elevens, twelves.. Of this calculatory Art A/fon{ue

Cyprinus once wrote, and I know who elfs,and alfo fitted it ro.
Latine Charatters ; But becanfe the-letters of every tongue, as
wefhewed in the ffirft book, have in their number, order,and .
figure a Celeftiall and Divine originall, I fhalleafily granc.
this calculation concerning the: names of fpirits to be
made not only by Hebrew letters,but alfo Chaldean,and Ara- -
bick, any other, the tables being.
rightly. made after the imitation of the prefidents. Buthere ic _

is objeGted by many, that it falls out, thatincthefe tablesmen.:
of a differing nature, and Fortune, do oftentimes by reafon

of the famenefs of name obtain the fame Genius of the fame.

Of Occult Philofopby, =» gay.

re
f.
t
‘

t Philofophy. Book

name; We moft know therefore that it muft not be thought

abfurd that the fame’ Démon may be feparated from any one

foul, ‘and the fame be fet over more: Befides,as divers men

have many times the fame name, fo alfo fpirits of divers of-
fices and natures my be noted or marked by one name, by
one and the fame feal, or CharaGter , yet in a divers refpe@:

for asthe ferpent doth fometimes typifie Chrift , and fome-

-. times the devill, fo che fame names, and the fame feals may be

applied fometimes to the order of a good Demon, fometimes

of .a bad. Laftly,che very ardent intenfion of the invocator,by

which our intelle& is joyned to the feparated ‘intelligencies,
caufeth that we have fometimes one fpirit , fometimes ano-

ther , although called upon under the fame name, made ob.

- There follow the tables of the calculation of the names of
{pirits, and bad, under the prefidency of the 7. Planets,

and under the order of the 12, Militant Signs, =

A
a
Be
A
bar
“>
A
3°
‘
a,
‘
% f i > 4A

Tig en entrasce of the godd odd Angels;

{of evil.

—, <
| | a
rey
iJ
| x
f
e

Book If],

Philofophy.

Ain The lin
Stop ply pe! 2

: x
t
t
i
ae
‘

CHAP. XXVIIL

How Sometimes names of Spirits are om. thofe things

| Finde yet another kinde of names given to the fpirits from
thof things, which,they are fet over, their names beingas

it were borrowed from the Stars, or men, or places, or times,

or {uch like things, the divine name being added attheend,

thus. The Spirit of Saturnis calledSabathiel: the Spirit of —

jupiter, Zedekiel: the Spirit of ALars, Adadimiel : the Spi-

rit of the Swn, Semeliel, or Semefchia; the Spirit of Venus,

Nogabel; the {pirit of Afercury, ochabiah, or (ochabiel ;

the Spirit of the AZ00n, Fareahel,or Levanael. In like manner

alfo they call che Spirits which are fet over the fignes by the

names of fignes in order's from efries Teletiel, Suriel, To- .

mimiel, Sattamiel, Ariel, Betuliel, Ada{niel, Acrabiel,Chefe-

tiel, Gediel, Deliel, Dagymiel. And if we.call them from the

latin words, Ariel, Tauriel,Geminiel, Cancriel, Leouicl, Virgie

niel, Libriel, Scorpsel, Sagittariel Capriel, Aquariel, Pifciel

and from the Planets, Sasurniel, loviel, Martiel, Soliab, Veo

neriel, Mercuriel, Lunael; or Lunaiab. Now becaufe (as we

faid before all fpirits, as well good asbad, feek foraunion

with man, which oftentimes in fome fort they obtain, we read

that fome men are called Gods, and angels, and Divels. So

the names Of them which are endowed with any fingular ex-

cellency of vertue, or with fome defperate wickednets have:

departed this life, have. obtained a place amongit the names

of good and bad Demons, and are reckoned amontt them, .

whether we fhall think that the fouls of thofe men or the Ge-

nii whether good or badare fignified. So we readin Efdras

that the name ofthe Archangel Jeremie! was from Jeremiah

the Prophet. So Zachariel from Zacharia; and Uriel from:

Uriah the Prophet, whom Joachim flue. In like mannerSama-

Exekiel, Daniel, werethe names. of Angelsaswellas

A
é
«
oor

2 gel, andis the fame as the Lion of God; fometimes allo it
~ qs the name of an evil Demon, aud of a City whichis thence

phets. Phaniel is the name of an Angel, and ofthe place
where Jacob wreftled allnight. e4rie/is the name of an ans

ealled Ariopalis, where the Ariel was worfhipped, We

finde alfo in facred writ that many names of evil Demons had |

their rife from molt wicked men, or from the habitations of

-_-yeicked men; as the name Afaroth which is the name of an

evill Demon, was formerly the name of the City of Og King
of Bafan, in which dwele giants; in like manner Aftareth was
formerly the City of the e4morrbei; Ruphaim avalley, and

the country of the Adophyii; and alfo they were the

names of Idols, andevill Demons; as Remma was the ftatue

ofthe Idoliof Damafcus; Chamos the Idol of Afoab; Melchim
the Idol ofthe Amante ; Bel the Idol of Babylowians; Adra-
melech the Ido) of of the e4ffirians ; Dagon the Idol of the
Allophyli. And Phile makes mention of feven golden Statues

. which the e4marrbei had,which they called the holy Nymphs,

which being,called-upon did thew to the Amsorrbei every hour

theieworks ; and che names of them were the names of wo-

_ ftones, which in like manner could not be burnt with fire, nor

bat their
_ fins. ‘Therefore chey are not reckoned of the fpecjes of man/as
faith Rabbi Mofes the Egyptian ) but of the fpecics of

_ them pretious ftones, engraven,and confecrated, one of which
had avertue to reftore fight ro the blind; neither could any

tach, Anmalech,names of Kings, have obtained the order of evill
name Enakim becaule they did not partake of the image

men, which were the wives of feven wicked men, which con-
fecrated them after the floud, viz. Chanaan, Phut, Selath,
Nebreth, Abirion, Elath, Defwat, and there were put upon

fire burn thefe ftones ; and the books were confecrated with

cut with yron, nor obliterated with water, until che angel of
the Lord took them, and buried them in the bottome of the
fea. Moreover we know that Nimbroth, Chodorlaomor, Ba

fpirits. Alfo giants are called with divels after acommon

of God e#.they have not received the fplendor of the fpiritual
reafon hath multiplied evil kinds of frauds &

«*
a
>’
é
a
a
a
4 ©
©

P
3 ‘phy oie

a

and divels, only that they have the ‘thape of 2 man,
(he faith) were the fons-of Adam, which were predéecéfors
ro Séth after Abel ; of which che wife men of the Hebrews ja

faid, that Adam begat Tochot divels, Butafter
that he had foutid favor in the eyes of God, he’ begor Seth af-
ter hisown image, and fitnels; who according to the i-
mage of God obtained perfeCtion; which he that hath
not, isnot reckoned of the fpetiesof man, by reafon of the
pravities which are the camfe of alt evils'and ‘thifchief. Te isalf
(as faith Porphyry the op évill fouls are.
— into the natare of Divels, and become as perhiciousas.

; which Chrift confirtted, when lie fpake conctériing fu
: Have not Tetiofen twelve, ahd ofie Of you is
divel? divelstherefore they call advencition, becaife
of mens fouls; they are Become Divets; Whelice thet names ~
of divels are'thie fame, wherlier by thefet We.
call their fouls, an vif Gaal; which have chem the
namesof wicked meft, as if it were their perforis,. Alfo
moth, and the Lewiat fignifie beafts, and divele, Bythefe

examples he that is inquifitive fait fide’ our thé namesof
CHAP. XXIX,

now fpcak of the Charabiers ‘Saal

therefore are fothing elfe

certain unknowable letters and writings, prefervi
crets of the Gott, alld ndmes Of {pirics’ from
reading of prophane men, which the Ancients called Here, <a

glyphicall, or facred becaufe devored® to the fed
crets of the Gods only. Ror they did account it unlavpfull
write the myftéries. of the God wich thofe Chara@érswihh
which profane and-valgar things were wrote,

‘
a

¥
‘
le

d@ilvers Nations, and Setts of, whofe inftitutions.

 Qelivered by Honarius of Thebes, the figures whereof are fuch, .

~~ faith, that the Ancients:were willing. to conceal God,:
and divine vertues by fenfible figures, and by thofe things |
which were vifible, yet fignifying invifible things, asbeing
willing co deliver great.mylteries in facred letters,and-explain.
certain Symbolical figures; as when they dedicated all.
+> gound things to the World, the Sun,.che Moon,hope, and for- :
cure, acircle to the heaven, and pasts ofacircle tothe Moon,
Pyranide and Obelisks to the fire, and Olympian Gods;.a._
Cylindar tothe Sun and Eafth; a mans Yard to generation,
and [uno,, to.whom alfo by reafon of the feminine fex the trie. -
angularfigore. Wherefore thiskind of Charaters hath
ther root befide the pleafure, and authority of the infticutor; <-
of him I fay, who received power of inftituting, and confecrat-_
ifig thefe kind of letters, fach as were. many Prelates amongft.

amie not to us, by reafon that few. of .them were delivered. by |
the Authors {cattéringly, and. by, fragments. Of this kind of .
“CharaGter therefore are chofe which Peter Apponus.notes, 2s -

‘aes

a 4
i.
id
v2
°
rélated to our Alphabet
v >
—

* Book TPE

3 manner of making ar afters, lively

fide more fathions of CharaGters,
whereo ig an Ancient writing
thé Prophets ufed, cheform of which is.not
octhofeletcers whichthey>
ufe at this day, were infticured by E/dras. There isalfoa-

_ mongft them a writing which they call Celeftiall, becaufe they - ©

thew icplaced and figured the Stcars,no.otherwife

other Aftrologers produte of figns from:
lineaments of Stars. ich they: cal

(Malachim, or Mel,

alfo another, which

un Mem ~ Lamed Tod Ti Chtth
Na ‘

Book J Ls.

The* writing called Malachi :

a)

‘aa
Vau Baleth _Gimel eth Aleph
¢
‘a
et Chet Zain

Book FPRE

There is moreover another fathion amongh the Cabalilte, ity
formerly had in great-efteem, but-now it is fo common, if.

is plaged dines,
of the @rews hay dig
very

feven §Chara@ers
Claff
viz, which are the feals or tharks of fimple
numbers, and of -intelietuall things, diftributed into nine
orders of Angels, The fecond. hath marks
of of Celeftial things,in the nineOrbs of the heavens,
The third dther'foar wichthelve finds by’
ordentis: Pay ue whichiase

infetiet things, viz. four fimple Elements, - and of five ki

int

The writing called the

on | >
E
amet Nun «ikem Lemgat Gaph | Ter” Cheth
, 4 r <
an -  Schin i Res Pade Pe
. 3 ad
Nat
Re
fic:

Book

cheba nine Chambers, whereof the firlt is of
intellectual, celeftiat and'elemental : The fecond is

Twos,The thied of Theees,and fo of the reft: Thefe Cham.
by the intetfeétion four paralell fines; ine
_terfeGting ghemfelves into right angles, as isexpreficd in this.

“4

‘into parts, proceed nine pasticu- .

‘=

» —
> b a >
x
é
R

Book OF Occult Philof

(hews the that-Chamber’. if-of
if of three , thethird lecrers -asié-thon wouldelt dhe
CharaGter Michael . that comes forth thus, gxtended

Which then are
to

the points Notariacon:
are wont to be o-
mitted, and then there

Tt

> Gri ote

another fatbion of Chara@ters, commonto

ry
“
¥
x
v
ad
pa
«
‘>
»
tee
va
‘2 et
,_ a>
we

Book EEE,

ogothe? if letters; thename of the Mi-

Tn Greek.

shigfathion sone che ismol received;

OY readily, and clegantly joyne
to st felf, Now you muft know that Angeli-
call {pirits, feeing they are of a "pare intelle&, and altoge-

~ ghet incorporeall,are any marks or Chara-
humane figns; but

ence,or om their names,

works, o ife,according to oi fanties devote and

eonfecrate t figures, and marks , by\which we cannot
way them tous, but by whith rife up to them;

asnot to b¢ kdown by fath Chatacters:, and\figeres, and firft

of all wa dp fer out~fenfes! borteinwar aid» outward,
thién by a certain admiration r reafon we
induced tov’ Religious venefation.of them, and then are

with whole minde into an extatical adoration,and
then with a wondeffoll belief, an undoubt hope, quickening

love we calling ang4tath, by true-names
and Charattersdo that vertue, Or.
| which we re

HAP.

¢
4 a
¥
$s
4¥
a
aor
“4 ’
AF
a
¢ $4

Occult

—

CHAP. XXXI.

There ts yet another fafbion of (haratters, and concerning marks
_ of pirits which arereceived only by revelation,

only,which can be found out no other way : the vertucof
which Characters is from the diety revealing, of whom there

Tost is another kind of Character received by Revelation
are fome fecret works, breathing out a harmony of fome

Divinity: or they are as it were fome certain agreements or
compacts of a league betwixt us and them. Of this kind there
was a mark or fign fhewed to Conftantine , which many did
call the Croffe write upon in Latin letters, hoe vines ise. in
this overcome ; and there was another revealed to Avtiochus
by Sirname Soters in the figure of a pentangle , which figni-
health; for being refolved into letters it fpeakes the word
vylem i.e, Health: in the faith, and vertue of which fignes
both Kings obtain’d.a great victorie againit their enemies. So
Fudas, who by reafon of that was afterward firnamed Macha-
bews,being to fight with the Jews againlt Antiochus Enpator,
received from an Angel that notable fign y9 in-the vertne

of which they firft flew 14000 with an infinite number OF -

Elephants, then again.350o0. of their enemies : For that fign
did reprefent the name #2hovah and wasa memorable emblem
of the name of 72. letters. by.che equality of number, and
the expofition thereof is, 7197 1D Who-is
there amongft the ftrong:as Jehovah? The figures of thefe mes
morable figns are to be framed thus.

q

“|
‘
‘
‘ —
Moreover
°
e

Fhen frankincen{e, myrrh, ftorax mixt with blood —

Book

Occult

- ',. Moreover of thofe figns and Characters Porphyrie {peaks in
book De Re/ponfis , faying that they did fignifie the gods
themfelves , by whom they did enjoy things, and by which

they werécalled forth,and which were to be offered to them:
_Anddid thew the figures of the images what they fhould be ;
and that he perceived thefe things concerning the Oracle of
Proferpima. He faith moreover that Hecatecommanded how
images fhould be conftituted to her, and that they were tobe
cirrounded with wormwood,and that domeftick mice were
to be painted ;&the fineft ornamentsfuch as were moft pleafing
—toher, and fo many mice as:her forms were to be taken ; then
blood, myrrhe , ftorax, and other things were tobe burnt:

- Which things if they were done, fhe would appear, and an-
fwer the worker thereof by dreams..-But we here under-
writethe Oracle of Hecate;forthusthe fpeaks,

(Marke I will teach what ftatue thou foalt make

For me; boughs of the Wwood,and wormWboodtake,
Then garnifh it,on't paint domeftickmice;

Let ornaments be fair, and of great price. — Bis eat

oe MI mice; then fing thou mor as fecr et and good;
thou feel foapes of mine,foonit lay,
many reall mices then sake the bay,

A -
we
‘
A
‘
> >»
yor
ae
by
‘ :
J
¢
z
‘
¥ A
¥

And out of th’ trunk.thereof acafe prepare
T 0 put it in; then fee yt Sa a care,
That tothe Statue thon devoutly pray, |
eAllfo thy debts, and vows take care thou pay ;
If that thefe things that hererequiredbe,
Thou foalt perform, in dreams thou foalt me fee.

Such were in old time the fecret myfteries of the gods and
Demons of the Gentils , by which they did perfwade them.
felves to be compelled, detained; and bound by men. Hence _
famblicus , and Porphyrie teach that he that cals upon facred
Demons nitft obferve them,with their proper honour,and to
diftribute to each what is convenient to cvery one, as thanks,
oblations, gifts, facrificesy with words, Charaéers fatable to
their conditions , and moft like unto them; orelfs he thonld
never obtain the prefence of the Dieties, and Demons, and
the defired effe& ; Moreover if they were called upon; yet
they fhall be conftrained to hurt them efpecially who did it

How good fhirits may be called up andhow evil fpirits
may be overcome by us.

"DY the efficacy of Religion the prefence of {pirits doth rar

DJ difpofe the effet, neither-can any work of wonderfull

efficacy in Religion be done, unlefs fome good {pirit che ruler

and finifher of the work be there prefent. Now goed fpirits, —

if they may be divers wayes called up, yet can by nobonds, ~.

or very hardly be allayed by us, but we muft’by fome facred .

things befeech them ,.as we read in Apaleins , by the Cele~
-ftiall Sears, by the infernalldieties, by che natural

by thefilence of the night, by the increafe ‘of the Country oF

Nilus, by the Memphis and elfewherein Porphyrig:
Thou who art rifen out of the mud, who fitteftin thy place,
who faileft in {hips,who every hour doft change shy

Af
hy

Book

‘artchanged in each fign of the:-Zodiack, But thele, aid

 fike Symbolicall orattons and hymnes, becanfe they are fignes

of Divine vertues, {pirirs did fometimes apply themfelves to
humane ufes : not as being compelled by any kind of neceffity,
but of their-dwn accord , and by akind of caftom did, being
overcome by the prayers of them that called onthem, more
eafily yeeld : whence in Porphyrie in his book De Rejponfis

Ty thy prayers being overcome |

Came thither | |

_ And in another place in che fame book he faith,

Congiuer’d by prayr the Dieties above

on ind future things fore|oew.

_ Alf the divining of fatable things works fo with mans
mind,that good {pirits do affalt us willingly and communicate
their power and vertuetous, dayly helping us with illumi-
nations, infpirations, oracles,prophecyings, dreams,miracles,
prodigies, divinations, and auguries, and working upon and

ating upon our fpirits, as images like to them, by framing

them by their influences, \andmaking them moft like to them-

- felveseven fo far, as that oftentimes our fpirit doth as furely

work wonderfull things as the Celeftiall {pirits are wont to
do.But evil {pirits are overcome by us throngh the affiftance of

4 ‘the good, efpecially when the petitioner is very pious and

dovout, and fings forth facred words, and a horrible {peech,
as by the Divine power by;the venerable names,and
figns of jupernacurall powers;by miracles, by Sacraments, by

Tacred myfteries, and fuch like; which eonjurations, or adju-

rations ,:in as much as.they are done by the name and power
of Religion, and Divine vertue, thofe evil {piritsare aftaid of ;

alfo oftentimes prophane meh do bind or allay by fuch

Kinde of facced conjurations , evil Spirits, nog enduring fuch
Cyprian in his: book. Quod dda nan

ith ; chac (pizits being adjured by the srue God do pre-

°
‘ f
ar

e

ie
4 ard
—
o

Book

dé

poflefted bedies, and either prefently our, or by degrees

vanith, according as the faith of the Patient is helping , or
grace of the fwearerafpices. And Ashasafius.in his book De
Variis Queftionibus faith that there is.no wordimore terrible
and more deftru@ive to. the power of Devils

ercifcd much power in them4out of .whom.the ‘devils were

_caft. Alfo we do oftentimes with threats and revilings bind or
repell evil fpirits, efpecially the leffer, as Haggs, Incubi, and -
fuch like,as We. read ia Lucan Concerning that witeh faying, if

Twill nov call you up by atruename,
The ftygiap dogs Iin the light {apreme

-Wilkleave, and follow you alfa through grave,

From all the Urues in death Iwill you fave, s

T hee O Hecate, untothe gods will fhew,
(To whom t addreffethy felf inotherhew,
Thou Waft ) ixwan, form and without grace,
end thee forbid to change Erebus bis fate.

And.in Philoftratus we read, when” Apollonius, and his
companions were travelling in a bright Moon-fhining night, —
that the Phantafme of a Hagge met them, and fome times
changed it felf into this fhape,& fome times intothat,andfome
times vanifhed,out. of their fight.. Now affoon as:Apollonius

knew what it was, grievoufly reviling it advifed- his: compant-
ons to do. the forhe knew that chat was the beft remedy
againgtfuch invafiens. His companions did ashe advifed,
the Phianta/me peefently with a noife vanithed away likea

dow:For fo fearful! is this kind of fpirirsythat they are-moved,

tremblesand arecompelled by a feigned terrour,and falfeiand
Whence Chereon the oly. féribe. faith

then the begin.
ning of the 68. Pfalm, ArifeiO God, and let thine enemies be

(catrereds For afl oon as that word is fpoken,cthe deyillvanith-
eth away howling, And Origen againk Cel/us faith, chat the
naming the name hath oftentimes caft many devils ag
+ well out of the fouls of men as -their bodies, and hath ex-

—

“
vs.
af
a .2
_—
e
> oud .
e
a*

OF Occult Philofophy. Book

that they
Some’ of them dote upon women, fomen
wre deliphred inthe company of divers 4

| ‘habit Champa
Rivets; the

‘fame alfo take delight in trees

robgoblins , familiars, and ghofts

wat thee ere thofe chines which ef pecially the fpi rite are |

compelled. There is moreover as hath been above a

rertain kiad of fpitits not fo noxious,but moft neer-to men, fo
are even affeGted with humane paffions,and many of
thefe dcliphtia mans fociety, and willingly dwell with them
children, fome
ick and wild
animats , fome inhabit Woods and Parks, fome dwell abour
#fonntains and meadows, So the Fairies , and hobgoblinsin-
nfields ; the Naiades fountains the Petamides
marthes, and ponds : the Orrades monn.

rains the Hwmedes Meadows ; the Drjades and Humadry
wiles the Woods, which alfo Sap and Sylvani inhabic,

brakes,as do the Napre,and
Agapte in flowers : the Dodone in Acorns; the Palee and

- Fenilie in fodder and the Country. He therefore chat will
. call upon them, may eafily doe it in the plates where their

abode is, by alluringthem with fweet fumes , with pleafant

7 founds,and by fachunftroments as are made of the guts of

certain animals.and , adding fongs , veries,
inchantments futable*o it, and that which #efpecially to be
obferved in this, the finglenefS:of the wit , 4 cy of the
, a firmcredality,. and conftant filence ; wherefote they
do often meet children, women , and poorand mean-men.

‘They are afraid of and flie from men of a conftant,bold, and

undaumed mind, beingne way offenfiveto good and pure
fen, betto wicked andimpure , noxions. this kind are
of dead men. Hence Pio-
times faith, that the fouls ‘of men are fometitnes made fpirits
and ‘of men well deferving are made familiars which the

Spirits : bat of ill deferving
when, hags , atid

hobgoblins, which the Greeks call Cacode-
typns. Evil fpirics Bot they may be called ghofts when

ancertain whether they have deferved well or ill. Of thefe
there are divers examples ; fuch was that which
the Janior'makes mention of concerning the houfe ‘of

te Philotepher of Tharfis in. which there ap-

Pi
a
J
‘a
; i
» s
J
i
ar

peared.with a {adden horrible neife rhe gholt: of anold man.
And Phslofiratus tels-of the likeof a
the Philofopher into abeaucifull womanof Corinth,
Apellenius took co be ahobgoblin ; the fame:
at Ephesus the like in| thethape of enold begger who.wasthe
_ canfe of the who therefore being
ftoned, there appeared a maftivedog,-and prefently the pefti,
lence ceafed. We mult know this thar
letually work in evil {pisits, fhall-by the poweraf good fpi-
rits bind them; bur he that hall work enly worldlily, hall:
work to himfelf ndgement and damnation, .

re

Of the bonds of fpirits, and of their adjurations, avd caftings
™He bonds by which fpirits are bound befought, or cafe
out,arethree; Some of them are taken from the ele.
mentaiiwarld , as when we adjure a fpirit by any. inferiour
and naturall things of affinity with or adyerfe¢o them, in as
‘muchas we would calf ppon ar caft: them: out:, as by flowers,
and herbs; ‘by-animals by fiow., by hell, by: fire,
and fuch like, as: thefealfo, ate oftimes mixed with Divine
praifes, and: bleffings and:confecrations, asappeats ia, the
fong of the three Children, and in the P/a/m, Praifeyethe —
Lord from the heavens: and-in: the confeeration: and bief-
fing of the‘Pe/chal taper, -Thisbond.doth work upos the {pi.
rits by an apprehehfive-vertne underthe account of love, -or
hatred , imas much asthe fpirits are ptefene withor favourjor
abhor any thing thatis narurall or againft nature, as thefe
things themfelves love or hate one the other. Hence that of
Proclus, As the Lion fears:acock,efpecially a white cock: fo
doth a {piric appearing in the form of a lion vanilh away at
the fight of acock. The fecond bond is taken from theCele-
ftial world,viz:when we adjure them by che heaven,by Stars,

Memppus Lycius; —

ie.

ar

or

by their motions , rayes; light, beaty, clearnefs; excellency,

‘fortitude; influénce,and wonders,and fact like + and thisbond
<Works upon fpisits by- way of admonition , and example.
Je hathalfo fome Command, efpecially upon the miniftring —
fpiritsy and thofe whovare ‘of the loweft orders.» The third:

bond is fromthe divine ‘world, whichis per-

by réligiony that. istofy, when’ we fwear by theda-

that verfe: of the Pfatm ior. Thon fhale: walk upon the Alpe:

cfafnenits, iby che miracles, by the divine names, by the {acted 4

Seals andother'myfteries of Religion ; wherefore this bond.

isthe higheft of all'and the {trongeft, working upon the {pirits:
by Command and power But this isto be obferved, that:

as after the univerfal providence, there isa particular one;

and after the oniverfal foul, particular foules ; fo in che fir
place we Invocate by the: fuperior bonds, and by the names.

and powers which role the things, then by the inferior, and-

the things themfelves.; muft know further, that by thefe:
bonds -not only Spirits, but alfo all creatures are bound;.as. .
Tempefts, burnings, flouds, plagues, difeafes, forte of armes,

and ‘every: animal , by affaming ‘them ,. either. by the

mafinerof Adjuration,' or by the way of deprecation or be-
nediction ; asin the charming of Serpents, befides the natus
ralland celeftial, by rehearfing out‘of the mylterics and Reli«
gion; the curfe of the Serpent in rerreftial Paradife, ‘the lift-
ing up of. the Serpent in the wildernefs;moreover by afluming

and the Bafiliske; and thale tread upon the Lion and Dragon:

‘Superftition alfo very much prevaileth in'thefe, by the rranfla;

ting of fome Sacramental rites to chat which we Intend to.

bind.or hitder,asyof Excommunitation;butial or exequies for
driving away of ‘difeafes,: Wormes;
which thing we read to have-bin thusdene in deverfe. places,

and-it is wontto bedone evenas yet.

age
on
we
‘
nal
t
o
¥
Ps

f Occult Phi
Occult Philofophy.

be A i. ~ r*

Of the Animafticallorder and the Heroess

Fer the Quires of the bleffed {pirits, the Animaftical
order is the next, which the Hebrew Theologians call
Iffim, that is, ftrong and mighty men; the’ Magicians ofthe
Gentiles,call Heroes and Dems: gods; or gods half mens whom
Fulgentius, an Author notto be contemned, fuppofeth were
fo called, either becaufe that for the meannefs of their defert
they are not judged worthy of Heaven, nor yet are accounted
Terreftrical for the reverence of ‘Grace ; of this kindinold
time were Priapus, Hippo, Vertumnus ; or becaufe they being
eminent inthis life for divine vertues, and benefits for mans
kinde, after this mortal man pur off,
quire of the bleffed gods; alwayes providing for mortabmen -
the fame.ertues and benefits which they long fince had in this

life: or becaufe they were procreated fromthe fecrerfeedof

the fuperiors,.whom they think were begotten by the mixture
of Gods or Angels with men, & therefore obtaining:a certain
middle nature, fo as they ate neither Angels nor'men + which
opinion Laéantins alfo followeth.; and there areeven at this
time who have commerce ‘and conjugall mixture with {pirits;
and all now believe thac a Beitith Prophet, wasthe —
fon of a Spirit, and born of a-virgin:: and alfothey imagined,
that Plato the. Prince:of
pregnated by a pharitafine of 4pollo. ivis delivercdin

Hiftories, Women ofthe Gorbes ( which they calf
Alrnmna ) for beaucy aud ingennity, long fince
at Filimireor{ avothers fay at Idanrbrefie, going forth out
of the tentsof the King of che Gorhes; wandred: inthe delarts
of bey ond the.Marthes of Afeotes, and there
by Fanxivand Saryres, brought forth the
fir over P/éllus is the Author, that Spitits
Sometimes forth feed, fromthe whichcer taim little creay

«

¢
e
sy

é

»

Of Occult Philofophy. I,

—

tures arife ; Therefore thefe Heroes have no lefs, power in dif-
pofing and ruling thefe inferior things, than the Gods and an-
gels, and have both their offices and their dignities.diftribu-
-gedto them: and therefore to them no otherwife than to the
Gods themfelves wete Temples, Images, Altarsy Sacrifices,
Vows, and other myfteries of religion dedicated. And their
hashes invocated had divine and :magical vertues for the ac-
complifhing of fome.miracles.:; which thing Ex/ebiue decla-
- geth that many tried by the invocation of the name of Apol-
donius of Tyana ; and more of this kinde we read of, both in
the Poets, and alfo in the Hifforiansand Phs/ofophers, concer-
ning Hercules, and. the other Heroes of the
Gentiles ; but thefe are the follies of the Gentiles ; but as con-
cerning our holy Herees we beleve that they excel in divine
ower, and that the foul of the AZe/chibe doth rule over them
(as the: Theologians of the fews alfo teltify ) that is Jefus
Chrift, whoby divers of his Saints, as it were by members
fitted for this purpofe, doth adminifter. and diftribute divers

_ gifts ofhis grace in thefe.inferior parts, and every one of the
Saints do enjoy a peculiar gift of working. Whence they being
implored by, us with divers prayers and fupplications accor-
ding to the manifold diftribution of graces, every one doth
 gnoft freely beltow their gifts,benefits; and. graces onus much
_ more readily,troly,8&alfo. more abundantly than the Angelical
powers, by how-mueh they are nigher tous, and more allyed

asthey who if times palt were both men, and

 faffered humane affetions and infirmities ; and their names,
isgrees and.officesdre more kno'yn unto us; Therefore out
the number'of thefe almoft Infinite, there are twelve chief,
thecwelve Apoltlesef who (as the evangelical
faith twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of lfrael,: wik@ip the Revelations are diftributed:upon twelve
foundations, at he twelve gates of the heavenly City, who
rule the,twelve;Signs ,and are fealed in the twelve pretious

Stones, andthe whole world is:diftributed to them; but their

mamesyare thefe ; the fir ‘O25 Symehon Hacephi,
Peter. The leconds we call Andrew.

“a ~-

The third this is the?
fourth Polspos whom we call Philip. The

rachiah,this is BartholomeW. Fhe fixt 4451 Fohdnab,whom we

name John. The feventh is bamni,whom wecall Thomas,

The eighth is called for whom we fay Matthew.

The ninth is Fa this is James the lefs. The’ tenchis
Catepha, this is T: “hadeus. the eleventh oxow Samam,
who is Simon the Canaanite. The twélfth CMatattiah,
who is called (Matthias, After thefe are the feventy two dif
ciples of Chrift, who alfo themfelvesdo rule fo many Quina-
ries of Heaven, & Tribes, People,Nations and Tongues, After
whom is an Innnumerable multitude of Saints, who alfo
themfelves have received divers Offices, Places, Nations and
_ People into their protection and patronage, whole moltap.
parent miracles at the faithfull of thofe,

them, we and confe

CHAP.

N the mortall Gods, whom in like man
ner alfouwve call Heroes, and Téerréftrial gods;or Compa,
nions of the fuperiour viz, Princes, and Priefts,

by whom this governed) ‘and dtpofed by fedby their Laws,
therefore receive, Worfhip and reverence, |
because God hinslelf hath fiffeted his to communica- —
tedto them, and proper denomination hath confirmed it
to them,calling' chemi gods; even ashe {pake to faying,

I have made thee a'God to: Phar dub; and ‘elfewhere he hath
faying, Thou fon

of the Honfé fhalbapply fro the Gods ahd ¢ Pfalmift

faith, The princes of the people were git chered t toge with

the God'o eAbrakam becatife that might

Ge

4a 4 =

q
é
An
»~

the of the. gods, but in the he eth she
gods; and a lictle after, T have faid ye are all gods, fons of
¢ moft high; moreover he hath commanded concerni
he worthipping and reverencing of them,decreeing tithes an
firth fruits for them, and giving them the power of the {word,

and forbidding any to curfe them, and commanding obedi-

ence to be yiel ed tothem, though wicked. Hence all Anti-
quity,called their princes gods, and worlhipped them as di-
powers, as in in his firlt book of
“When ‘earth of Gods was potent, I hid raign

And dieties mix'd) were with Yeats humane,

Plato in his third book de. appointed
that princes both alive and dead. (hould- be celebrated with
divine honors,which Inftitution hath ben received amongft all

Nations, even from the firft age, vizsto déify their princes
- __-with divine honours, and co. confecrate them with eternall
memory ; Hence they didimpofe their never dying names on
Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, Ilands and Seas;
dedicated ‘with great pomp, Piramides Co-
Jofles, triumphal. Arches, Trophies, Statues; Plays,
Feafts sand alfo called che Heavens,Scars, Dyaenand Mofiths
by their, names. Favuary from Fanus, from
Fours which..cnftome we tead-was

not only hy the, Romans, but

allo by-the. barbarous. people, :as.Gethes, Danes and

nce. Saxo Grammaticué being-witnefs, what day
Dies docall Orhinet dayawhat
mame from, chef call from

Kings of Gots

and Denmark;
ther reafon called that
gether cl go d Got. Hence allo
ied. hecante they the god AZars;
Tens en

a

Book Of Occult Philofophy,

alfo called Afercury:
be Juft ) companions of the gods, and endowed with thelike —
power, Hence they cure difeafes by-their touch and
fometimes command the times and the Heavens, as Virgil

Therefore. are Kings and Prielts(ifthep

fang of Angufis,
‘Tt rains all night, th’ morn the raies return, re be
Cafar With Jove divided hath thethrones

And the Scripture ceftifieth of fofouah, who fighting in
Gibeon, commanded the Sun and AZoon, faying, Sanftand
in Gibeon and thou AZoon in the Valley of Ajalon; and the Sux
and the AZoon ftood {till arhis command, neither did the Sux
fet inthe {pace of one day,untill he had revenged himfelf of his
Enemies, and the Lord obeyed the voyce of man ; Alfo AZofes
divided the red Sea, and Fojfbda fordan, and led the people
dry fhod ; The like did Alexander the Macedonian,
ding forth his Army ; Sometimes alfo they are endowed with ae
a prophetick fpirit, as we read of ¢ baiaphas in the holy Scrip-
ture, chat he prophefied, for that he was High’ Prieft thar
year : Seeing therefore it is fo that the Lord of the Earth
- would.that Kings and Priefts be called gods by communicati-
on of ame and power, furely we onght alfo to deferve well
of them, and to prefer their Judgments before ours, and fim-
ply co abey, fupplicate and adore, and worfhip with ail kinde
ofworhip and reverence themofthighGodinthem,

Of adam, bow be Wascreated after the ImageofGed.

mot abundant God ( as Trifmegiftus faith hath
pb Images like the world and man,
thar) in one ofthefe he might fport himfelf wich certaim
wonderfull operations : but in the other,
joy his delights, who fecinghe is one, hath created the wo

one, fecingsthat he isinfinite, hath created the world round

be af

le
I

}

out of any foregoing matter,but out of nothing ;and feeing he
Tack embrad his word,which isthe firft Idea

fabricated this.externall world after the example of the In.
Ideal! world, yét fending forth nothing of the ef
Fy tthe Jdeas, but created of nothing that which he had
from eternity by the Idea: God alfo created man after his I-
~ mage ;. for as the world is the Image of God, fo man is the I-
~ mage of the world. Hence fome think that itis fpoken, that
-manisnot created fimply the Image of God, but after the ©
‘TImage,or the Image ofthe Image; therefore he is called AZ.
crocofme,hat is the leffer world; The world is a Rationall crea-
ture ,Immortall*; manin like manner ts rationali but mortal,
that is, diflolvable ; for ( as Hermes faith ) oe, the world i¢
felf is immortall,ic is Impoffible chat any part of it can perith. ge
Therefore to dye, isa vain name, and even as Vacavm is no

where; fo, alfo Death; Therefore we fay a man dicth) when -

his Soul and body are feparated, not that any thing of them
perifheth or is turned into nothing. Notwithftanding the
true Image of, God is his word.. The wifdome, life, light and
Truth exiftinggby himfelf, of which Image mans foul is the I-
mage, in regatd of which we arefaid to be made after the I-

_. ~mage of God,not after the Image of the world,or of the crea-

alone; fo mans minde comprehendeth it ¢yen in

tures; for as‘God cannot be touched, ‘nor perceived by the
cars, nor feen with the.eyes; fo the foul of man can neither
bee feen, heatd.nor touched. And as God ‘himfcifis infihige,
nd cannot be‘compelled'by any, fo alfo the minde Of manis

free, and capnot be enforced or bounded. Further, 4s God

prchendeth this whole world,.and whatfoever it his

and that which is peculiar co him alone with

‘
‘

| and everlafting: fecing he is Immenfe, he hath created the
world the greatelt of all things; feeing he is the chiefeft life jhe
; hath adorned rhe world with vitall feeds, begetting all things
out of himfelf and feeing he is omnipotent, by his will alone,
-of nature,he hath created che world, not
of allthings, with his choifeft will, and effentialllove,hehath

God moveth and governeth all this world by his beck alone, -
fo mans minde rulethand governeth his body. There foreit -

was neceffary ,; that the minde of man thus fealed by the wor

of God, fhould put on the corporeal after
moft compleat example of the world: Therefore man is called
the other world, and the other Image of God, becanfe he
hath in himfelf All that is contained in the greater world, fo
that there remaineth nothing which is not found even truly
and really in man himfelf, and all thefe things do perform the
fame duties in him, asin the great world: There are in him

the four Elements, with the moft true proprietitsof théinna-

ture, andinhim an ethereal body, the Chariot of the foul in

proportion correfponding to the Heaven: There are fwhim*

the vegetative life «of Plants, the fenfes of animals, of celeftial
fpirits, the Angelical reafon, and the Divine underitanding

and the true conjun@tion, and divine poffeffion of all thee

things flowing together into one. Hence in facred Letters
man iscalled every creature, and not onely man being made
another world doth comprehend all the parts thereof in him-

felf.but alfo doth receive and contain even God himfelf.Hence. —

Xyfius. the Pythagorian, faith, that the foul of man is. the

temple.of God : which thing alfo more clearly expreffed,
faying,ye are the Temple of God;& thie fame the facredSctip-

ture teftifiechin many places :- Theref ore man is the moft ex-
prefs Image of God,feitig manconteineth in himfelf all things
which are in God: but God by a certain eminency conteineth

all things chrough his power, & fimply,as the caufe and begin-

ning of all chings; but he hath given this power to man,that he

fhould in like:manner contein all things, ‘but by certain at
& compofition,as the knot, tye,and bond ofall things: There-

foreman only rejoycethinthishonor, that he hatha fimili-
tude with all,operation withall,and converfation with all: He
Symbolizeth with the matter in a proper fubje@t ; withthe
Elements ina fourfold body; with Plants in a vegetative.

in an Etherial fpirit, and influx of the faperior the

ome;

inferiour : with the Angelsin underitanding and wil vith

vertites with animals in a fenfitive faculty ; with the Heavens

4 S59

ook CCu 4110/0

with God,in conteining all chings : He is preferved with God,
q and the Intelligences,by faith and wifdome : with the heavens.
i. and heavenly things, by reafon and difcourfe’: with all Inferi.
our things, fenfe and Dominion : and a¢teth with all; and

‘hath power on all, even on God himfelf, by knowing and jo.

‘ving him;and as God knowethall things,fo allo man can know
all things Intelligible, feeing he hath for an adequate Obje@,

Ens in general, or(as others fay) Truth it felf ; neither is there

‘any thing found in man, nor any difpofition, in which fome.
thing of divinity may not fhine forth;neither is there any thing —

God, which may not alfobe reprefented in man : Whofo-

ever therefore fhall know himfelf, fhall know all things in

himfelf ; efpecially he thalfknow God , according to whofe

Image he was made; he fhall know rhe world, the refem-

~ ‘plance of which he beareth; he fhall know all creatures, with

which he Symbolizeth; and what comfort he can have and ob.

tain, from Stones, Plants, Animals, Elements, Heavens, from

Spirits, Angels,and every thing, and how all things may be fit-

ted for all chings, in their time, place, order,meafure, proporti-

~on and Harmony, and can draw and bring to himfelf, even as

_ Loadftone Iron; AndGeber in his fumm of Alchimyteacheth, tt
‘that-‘no man can come to the perfection of this art, who thall. .
not know the principles of it in himfelf; but by how much the #1
more eyery one fhall know himfelf, by fo much he obtaineth

the greater power of attraéting ic, and by fo muttroperateth 2
‘greater and more wonderfull things, and will afcendto fo
“great perfection, that he ismade the Son of God,andistran{- —
formed into that Image which is God, and is united with him,
‘which is not graunced to Angels, the world,or any creature,
bnt'to.man only, viz. tuhave power to be made the Sonof —
God, and to be united to him: but man being united to
God, all things which are in man, are united, efpecially his
minde, then his fpirits and animal powers, and vegetative fa-
-caley, and. the Elements are to the macter, drawing with it
felfeven the body, whofe formit hath been, leading it forth
into 4_better condition, and an heavenly nature, even until
glorified into Immortality. And this which we have

oe
t

kenis the peeuliar gift of man, to’ whom this dignityofthe
divine image is proper, andcommon other creature:
But there are.fome Theologians. who make thofe powers
of mans memoty, underitanding , wilh, the image of. the
Divine trinity; and chere are. who going further, do place this
image not only in-thefe which they call firlta@s, —
but alfo in the fecond acts; And as the:memory reprefenteth

the father,the underftanding the fon,the will.che Holy Ghoft

So alfo the ‘word produced from-our underftanding, and love
flowing from our will ; and che underltanding it felf having.a

prefent obje&iand producing. iv , do fer forth che fon; .{pirit
and ‘father and the more. myftetious: Theologians: teach: that

moreover.allour: members do reprefent fomething inGod _
whofe image they bear ; and that even in our paffions weires
prefent God, but by acertain Analogy : forin the holy,word .. .

we read of the wrath, fury, repentaace, complacency, lovey
hatred, ple

and fuch like; and we :have:above {poken.
members'of God , which may be congruent here; Alfo: Ader~

curius Trifmegifinus confefling the divine Trinity, deferiberh
it underftanding, life and brightnels, which elfewhere. he:
calleth the word,the mindé and che fpirit,. and faiththanmany
made after the image of God,dorh reprefent the fame-Tsinity

for there is in him.an underitanding minde, a verifying words:

and a {pitit ,-asic were a Divine’ brightnefs diffofing: ic felf on}
every fide:, replenifhing’ allthings, moving..and ;knitting:
them together : but this is noc, to. be underltood, of: thei,
naturall:: fpiric: the:;middle the, the:
foul is.anited ‘withothe the
the body divech aéteth,: and».one, member! workerh on.
another, of: the which -fpirit we have fpoken inthe firtbook.

But we here {peak of thé maturall fpirit, which yetin fome

fort. is -alfo corporeall , .notwithitanding, it, hath nog
agrofie body, tangible and: vifible,, bocadolt fubtilebody,
and eafie ro be united withthemind ther foperiounand

Divine one whichisiin us; neither, let any one wonder,
fay that the rationall.foul isehat fpirit, anda. corpereall things

afure , dele&ation, of God, .
ométhing: of the:

ot

an

orthavit either hath orfavoureth fomething of corporiey
_whileit is inthe body andufeth it as an inftrument , if fo be
that ye fhaltunderftand , what, amongit the Platonifts, that

Etheriall body of the foul, and.chariotof the fame may. be;
therefore Plotine and all the Piztomifts, aftee in
place three things inman, which they calkthe Su-
loweft and: middle : The Supreme ts that Divine thing
which they call che mind,or fuperiour portion, or illuminated

Afofes in Genefis calleth it the breath of life, viz.

breathfrom God orhis fpirit infpiced mto us; The loweltisthe

Senfitive foul which they alfo caltan Image Paid the Apottle

famethit the Animal] man. The middle is the reafonable {pisit

| knitting and tying together both extreams, viz. the Animal —

foul-with the mind favouring of the nature of both extreama:;
yet iedifferech from that Supream: which is called the
gated intelleét, the mind, light and fupream portion ; it dif
_ fereth alfo from the Animall foul, from the which, the Apofil,
teacheth us, that we ought to feparate it,by the powed of the

wotd of God, faying the word of God ts lively and powerfull,

_ more penctrating then a twoedged {word , peircing even to

the dividing of the foul and fpirit : for as that fupream por-

tion:never finneth, never confenteth toevil, and alwayes re-

Gfteth errourand exhorteth to the belt things; fo that inferior

foul ig alwayes overwhelmed inevil, ia
fin and ‘concupifcence , and-draweth to the worlt things ,.of
the which Paw faith, I fee another Law in my members, lead-
ing me captive ro the:law of fin: The minde therefore the
fapream: portion is never damned ; but when its companions
are to be punifhed,

| yeocth away unhurt incoits Originall: But

the fpirit which by Plotinn? iscalled thereafonable foul, {ee-

ing icis by its nature, free; and can according co his pleafure

adhere'to either of them, if it conftantly adhere to the-f-

perionr portion, isatlength united and beautified with tr,

into God’: ifét adhere unto the inferior foul,

_ depraved, and becomes vitious, untill ir be made a wicked

Bue thas pinch concernimg the mind and fpirit now, let

we fee concerning fpecch or word. AZercarins thinketh

é
¢
BE

— —

Book 114.

of the fame value for immortality : for {peech or word ds
that without which nothing isdone or can be done» foritis
the expreffion of the expreflor and of the thing-expreffed -
and the {peaking of the fpeaker, and that which fpcaketh,
fpeech or word : and the conception of the conceiver
and thac which ‘conceiveth, is the word: and the writ-
ing of the writer and that which wrieeth, isthe word: -
and the forming of ‘the former.and that which formeth, tithe —
 word;and the-creation of the Creator, and that which createth
isthe word : the doing of the doer, and that whichis
- done isthe word: and the knowledge of him that knoweth .
and the thing knowen is the werd; and every thing that
can be fpoken és but a word,and its called equality: for it car-
rieth it felf equally towards all; feeing that tt isnot-one'thing -
more then another,equatly beftowimg on ali, that they may
be,that which they are,neither more nor lefle ; and ic-felfbeing _
fenfible, doth make it felf and all things fenfible, astishema-_
keth it felf & all things vifible;therefore the word is called by.
Mercurius the bright fon of the mind ; for the conception by -
the which the mind conceiveth tt'felf, is the imtrinfecall word .
generated from the mind viz. the knowledge of it felf:
But the extrinfecall and vocallword,ts the of-fpring and mani-
feftation of that word , and ‘a fpirit proceeding out ef the -
mouth with found and veice, fignifying femethingsbutcvee
ry voice of ours, {peech and word unicfleit beformedbythe
voice of God, is mingled with the air and-vanifiech the
fpirit and word of the Lord remaineth, lifeandfenfe accom-
panying it. Therefore allourfpeech, words, Spirit and voice.
have no power they be formed by the divine.
word: & Aréftorle himfelf in his Metoors,and in'the end of his.
Ethicksconfeffeth rhat there isnot any vertac either nateral or
morall,untefs through’God ; & in his fecret tenents,he affiem-.-
eth chat our underftanding being good and found can do very |
much on the fecrets of nature if fo'bethat the thfluence of the —
Divine power beprefent, otherwife nothing atall:'So alfo
our words.can-de very many miracles , if they be formed ‘by.

the word.of God, in whichalfo our univerlall generations:

C f A ==
J
§
Wig

x

»

_conceived,as women, rightly conceive by the. countenance of

their husbands,and have brought forch fpiric. Hicherinfome

belongeth that which is delivered by the Cymnofophifts

Of the Indians, viz. that Budda a prince of this opinion,
-bronght -forth.a virgin out of his fide; and amongft the
_bumetans there is.a conitant opinion, that many , whom in

their tongues. they. call Nefe/obli , are born. by a certain. oc-

manner of. Divine difpenfation without carnall copulati-
on, whofe life. is therefore wonderfull.and impaffible

happy be that knows his worthand how
He equall s unto the gods above!

it were Angelical and all. togethers fupernaturall ; bur

_triffles we leave; only.the King AZeffias, the word of the fa-

ther; made ficth, Chrift Jefus hath revealed shis fecret ; and

- will further manifeft ic ac a certain fulnefs of time : therefore
“amind very like to himfelf (as Lazarillus fang in Crater of
God gave manreafon that like dicties

r

_ He might bring forth gods With capucity. |

repreffe dangers make difeafes fie,
give prefages, andfrommifery

Deliver men,rewardthe good,anail
_ Chaftife, and fo the will of God fulfill ;x

Dhefe.are Difciples, andthe fonsof God

__. Who are not born of the will of ficth, or of ‘man,-or of

anenftruous woman, but of God : but it is an univerfall gene-
ration in which the Son is like the Father in all manner of

fimilieude, andin the which, that whichis begor is the fame
in {pecie withthe begetter ; and this is the power of the word
formed by the mind, and received into a fubje@ rightly:dif-

pofed , as feed into the matrix for the generation ; but J fay

_ difpofed & rightly received; becaufe that allare nor partakers
_ Of theword after the fame manner,but others otherwile ; and
thefe are che molt hidden {ecrets of nature which ought not to

OF Occult Philofophy. BookAtd.
perfected, as Z/ay faith, by thy countenance’ Lord we-haye

CHAP.

é
o
»*
a

Book ILI.

ae

OF Occult Philofophy.

XKXVIE

/ Of mans foul and through what nseans it is joyned to the body.

foul of man is acertain divine Light, created after the
A image of the word, the caufe of caufesand firlt ¢xample,

and the fubftance of God, figured by afeal whofe Chata@er is

the erernall word; alfo'the foulof man is a certain divine fab.
tance , individual! and wholly prefent in every part of the
body, fo produced by: an incorporeall Author, that it de-
pendeth by the power of the Agent only, not by the bofome

of the matter: The foul is a fubftantiall number ; uniform,

converfive unto it felf, and rationall, very far excelling all
bodies and materiall things ; the partition of whichis not ac--
cording to the matter, nor proceeding from inferiour and.

grofler things , but from the efficient caufe: For itisnota

quantitative number, but removed [from allicorporeall Laws,
whence it is not divided nor maltiplyed by parts. Therefore.
the foul of man is a certain divine fubftance,fowing from a di=*”

vine fountain, carrying along with it felf number: nor that di-

vine one by the which the creator hath difpofed all things, but.

arational number by the which feeing it hath a proportionto
all chings,it can un derftand all chings: Therefore mans foul be-

ing fuch,according to the opinion of the P/atomifts,immediate~
ly proceeding fromGod,isjoyned by competent means to this
( of all in its defcent,it'is involved in-a
Celeftiall and aeriall body, which they call the celeftiall vehicle.
of the foul others the chariot of the foul: Through this middle
thing, by the command of God who is the center of ‘the

groffer body; whence fir

world, itis firft infufed into the middlepoint of the heart,
which isthe center of mans body, and from thence itis dif- -

fufed through all the parts and members of his body, whenit
joyneth his chariot to che naturall heat, being afpirit generat-
ed fromthe heart by heat ; by this ic plungech it felf into the
the which it inhereth in all che members, andro
made equally the nighe, althoughit bediffuled
HR throuhg

humours, by
all chefe is:

d ‘
>» -
«
e
‘
d
A

through one to another ; even as the heat of fire adhereth moft ©
"nigh ro the air and water,althopgh ic be transferred by the air
to the water ; thus it is manifeft, how the immortal foul , by
animmortall body, viz. an Etheriall vehicle , is included in a
grofie and mortal! body , but when by a difeafe or fome mif-
chief, thefe midiechings are diflolved or fail, then the foul.
ic felf by thefe middle things recolleétech it felf , and floweth
back into the heart which was the firft'receptacle of the foul;
but the fpirit of the heart failing, and heat being extin@, it
leaveth him, and man dieth,and che foul flieth away with this
Celeftiall vehicle, and the Genius his keeper and. the Demon
follow.it being gone forth, and carry it to the Judge, where
fentence being pronounced , God quietly leadeth forth the
good fouls to.glory ; the evil the fierce devill draggeth to

~_punifhment.

w
What Divine gifts man receiveth from above, from the feverall
Orders of the Intelligences and the heavens,

DY the feven Planets as it were by inftsuments, al! powers
Mare diffufed into man from the Supream fountain of |
‘good: by Saturn a f{ublime contemplation & profound under-
itanding,folidicy of judgement, firm {peculatiom, ftability and.
an immoveable refolution : by fupiter, an unfhaken prudence,
temperance, benignity, piety, modefty, Juftice, Faith,Grace,

Religion, equity, clemency, royalty; by (Mars, truth;
notto be terrified, conftant courage and fortitude , a fer-
vent defire of animofity,the power of adting and the practice,
and an inconvertible vehemency of the mind. By the Sun,
nobility of mind, perfp:cuity of imagination, the nature of
knowledge and opinion , maturity, counfell, zeal, light of
juftice,reafon and judgement diftinguifhing right trom wrong,’
porging from the darknefs of ignorance, the glory of
truth found ont,and charity the Queen of all vertuessby Venus

t
»
«
ae

Book III. Ot Occult Philofophy. “467

afervent love, moft fweet hope, the motion of defire. order. _
concupifcence , ps » {weetnefs , defire of encreating and
propagation of it felf; by Adercury a piercing faith and be.

ief, clear reafoning , the vigour of interpreting and pro.
nouncing, gravity of fpeech, acutenefs of wit. of
reafon, and che fwift motions of the fenfes: by the Afoon —~

a peace making confonancy, fecundicy,the power of genera. _

ting and of growing greater, of increafing and decreafing,

and a moderate temperance, and faith which being conver. “
fant in manifeft and occult things. yeeldeth direétion to alfsalfe
motion to the cilling of the earth for the manner.of life and Arx-~ A
giving growth to it-felf and oghers ; but thefe influences are
principally drawn from thofe feven intelligences, who ftand
before the face of God, who difpofe the foul the feat of thefe oe. .
vertues but the planets difpofe the body only giving a

ble complexion proportionated and tempered for every. aah

good thing , and they .are as it were the inftruments of the yr
Intelligences ; but God as the primary caufe doth yeeld both ey ;
the influence&increafe to all, hey therefore who have fought

out the vertues and diverfe difpoficions of the foul , do judge,
that they obtain diverfe natures, by reafon of the diverfity of
means , by the which they have a paflage to us, and that thefe
fouls are not joyned with the bodies themfelves unlefs they.be
proportioned by thefe Stars ; So in a body brought to ateme-
perament by 7apster,they think chat the foul infafed is cempe-
rated by the power and intelligence of 7upiter, and fo of the —
reft. According to which difpofition if the foul work wellin ©
this body , when its purged and expiated;it rerornethto thar =
divine power and Manfion,from whence it defcended.Farthers
more from the Angelicall orders man is ftrengthened with
wonderfull vertues,viz.from the angels,chat he may bea mel-
fenger of the divine will and an interpreter’of the mind of
God ; fromthe Archangels, that he may rule over all beafts of

the field, fith of the fea, and fowls of the air; over the which
command is given him ; from the Principalities, chat all things

be fubdued co him.he comprehending the powers of all,

ma
sid drawing all powers to himfelf by @ certain force moe.

e
P's >

®

ad

feeree and fuperceleftiall ; From the Vertues, it: receivech
power, by the which ic conftantly fighting is ftrengthen.
the reward of which —
we ron a tace in this life ; from the powers’ againit the |

apainkt the énemies of truth, for

enemies of chis earthly Tabernacle : from the Domminati-

ftick' enemy we carry along with us, afd can obtain ont

defired end. From the Thrones, we are knit together, and
being collected intorour felves ,- we fix our memory on thofe

gtemall viftons: From the Chérabins, is light of mind, power
wifdom, very high plantafies and figures,by thewhich we

ate able to contemplate even the divine things ; From the

Seraphins, that by the perfect flame of love we may at length
inherein them : Thefe are the degrees, thefe the ladders, by
powers by acer- |

the which men eafily afcend to afl kinds of,
¥ain naturallconnexion and chariot , according co the diverfe

fpofition of body and tmind,and by the favour of the Stars,
in the difpofing of the body, and of the Coen em ruling

thei, the nature of which rhe foul initsdefcenfe puttethon,
even as fiphe the colonr of the glafle, throogh which it paffeth;

the fupream power of the Creator favouring, from whom is
‘all good, and without which no good nor perfec thing can be
obrained ; Therefore all thofe do labour in vain, who cruft-

ing only of the courfe of narure, end the power and favour of _

inferiour things, do think to attain to divine things ; and theft

who faining to have afoot inthe heavens, do endeavour to

things from the favour of the heavens, which
Ought’ tobe recetved from God alone; for thefe inferiours

to the heaven ; but the heaven from the Intell
gences; but thefe from God , in whom all things pre-exift in.

the grtateft- power; as in man the little world there is
‘fot a member.-which hath not correfponderce with fome
element,plant, imrelligence, and ‘with fome meafore and nume-
| R in he Archetype we have fhewenbefore,

‘

ons, ithath help by the which we can fubje@ any dome —

Za
alt
3 ‘i mean anima ones, metals, thet
a? =
v }
fi

ceed, nor

‘7

How the fuperior Infinences, feing they dre goad by nature,
depravedin thefe inferior things, and art made caufes of evil,

C EEing every power and vettne is frorti above, froin God,
J trom the Inrelligences and who can heithet not
do evill, it isneceffacy, thar all evill, and-whatfoeverisfound
difugrecing and diffonant in chefe inferiour’ things, do pro-
tonrche malite'of rhe Thflactice, but from the evil
difpofition of thé receiver; thts Chy Appas rightly fang}
When as their folly biirts themfeluts———
Hence Pupiter callitig to minde the cafe of flain,
by Oreftes, by Homer in the counfel ofthe Gods, faith,
Us Gods do wien accufe (what vicew tha?
Lobe the canfe, fountainof what's amifs, |

»

When they themfelves by their own wickeduelt
Rian ito danger

rfity of the faubjeG ceceivech the

Intelligences and the heavens, even till they fhall come tothe

recived after diverfe manners, ad by ‘th

ao”

Influences of the perverle,or its debility endure the effi.
cacy, of the fuperiors, then bY thé Influence of the heavens
thus received into a matter full of difcords, doth tefulc fome-

thing diffonant, deformed and evill ; yet the celeftiall powers
remain good, which while ie

rd fron) the siver of disht have their ce'b the holy
Moon, their Innuence 18 200d, 45

but chen‘ whet? it ts received. ya viler is Vil hed 4

t in refpect of the d ‘pature oF the recipient ic is

é qualities difagree-

ing

OF Occult Philofophy. Book

ing inthe fame fubje& amongft themfelves,it alfo is varied and |
patiently fuffreth in the fabject ; whence from all comprehen.

ded in the fubje&, at length fome other thing doth refule chan
that the Superiors fend down; therefore the hurtfull quality
in. thefe Inferiors, is far different from the influx of the hea-

vens; and therefore asthe diftemperof the blear-eyed, is not
tobe, impated to the light, nor burnings to the fire, nor

wounds to the {word ,aor fetters and Prifons to the Judge,but_
to theevill difpofed and offenders ; fo neither is the fault o
wicked ones to be caft on the celeftial Influences: Therefore

we being well difpofed,the celeltial influences cooperate all

things for good; bur being evill difpofed, and having for our
fins, that divine good, which was in us, departed from us, all

things.work for evill : therefore the caufe of all-our evills.is

-finne, which isthe diforder and diftemper of our foul ; from

the which then, thus evilly. governing, or falling down or

declining from that which the celeftial influences require, all

things rebel, andare diltempered for our deftruction: rhen
in. mans body otherwife moft temperate and compofed with
mot fweet Harmony, the diftemper of the’ Elements begin-
neth, evill humors. arife: and even the good being difordered
and fevered from one another, by a certain viciffitude both
vex and torment the body: then is a moft ‘vehement diffo-
nance perceived, either by fiperfluiry or diminution, or fome
intrinferal accident, or by fuperfluous meat, whence fuperflu-

-_ onshumorsare generated, and by the fame canfe. infirmities

follow ;yeathe animal fpirits,the bridle being broken, do fall

- to contention. Then the celeftial influences, otherwife of
‘themfelves good, are made hartfull corns, even as the light of
the fon to eyesill difpofed : Then Saturn darteth down. an-
paifh, tedioufnes, melancholy, madnes, fadnes, obftinacy, ri-

gidnes, blafphemy , defperation, lying, Apparations,affright-

ments, walkings of the dead, ftirrings of Divels : ?upiter then

fendeth down covetoufnes, evil! occafions to get wealch,and
tyranny : ALars, fucious. wrath; prophane arrogancy, violent

boldnets, fierce ftubbornnes : “bot the Swx imperious pride,
_ andinfatiable ambitions Venus, the deceits of concupiftence,

Tafcivious

e

ae
wy
ia
ue
aa

Jafcivious loves and: filthy lufts : ALercury deceits, coufenages,

Syes, fubtile defires of evill, propenfity tofin; The cAteon the

inconftant progrefs of .all things, and. whatfoever is contrary

to mans nature:and by this means man himfelf by reafonof his

unlikenefs with the heavenly things receiveth hurt, whence he

onght to reap benefic:by reafon of the famediffonancy with —

the heavenly things ( as Prec/us faith ) men alfo are fabje@ted
even to wicked {pirits who as the officers of God do difcharge
themfelves in punifhing them: Then do they fuffer grievances
by evill fpirits, even untill they are againexpiated by.due
gations, and man returneth to a divine natare: therefore anex-
cellent Magitian can prohibite manymifchifes about to fall on

him from the difpofition of the Stars, whem he foreknoweth ©

their nature by preventing,taking heed, and defending, {ealt
they fhould meet him, and leaft an ill difpofed fubj2@, asiwe

T hat on every man adivine Charatter is imprinted, by the ver.
tue of which man can attain the Working of miracles, =.

Y no {mall experience it is found that 2 certain power of
ruling and predominating is implanted in man by nature;
for ( Pliny ceftifieth ) that an Elephant meeting aman wan-
dring inadefart, isreported to thew himfelf gentle and cour-
teous,and to fhew the way to him; and the fame creature alfo
is faid, before he feeth man,to tremble, to ftand {till, to look

about, to quake at the fteps of man, for feariof treachery: in

like manner the Tiger the molt fierce of all beafts, at rhe fight

of man doth remove her yong ones;and more of thiskinde we _

read in divers authors, who have writ great volumes of crea-
tures; but from whence do thefe animals know, that manis

to be feared, whom they never faw : and if they havefeen:

and known, whence do.they fear,him fecing they do excell him
in greatnefs, force and fwiftnefs ? what is chis nature of man,

friking this terror on wild bealts? all che Hiftoriogra-

Hh4

have faid,fhould reoeive hurt whence it ought to reap benefie.

oe
B k | | | 2
°
C H A P, L.

-phersofanimals dofinde out:andgrant this, but have left to
others: to teach and prove it.Concerning this therefore Apollo.
niucTyaneus ( as weread in Philoftartus ) feeing a child dead-_
ing an hoge Elephant, anfwered asking him, whence
«came that obedience of fo huge a Creature to the litcle- child:
That it was froma certain aAtive terror, implanted in man by
hig creator, which toferiour creatures and all animals perce
_.ying do fear and reverence man, which is as ic were a
ang Charaéter, and afeal' of God imprinted on man, by the
which every. thing is fubjeR ta and acknowledges him
 faperior, whither it be fervant or animal. For otherwife nei-
ther coulda child rule his herd and Elephants, neither could
a King terrify his people; nor the Judge the guilty. There-
isimprinted-on man from the diving Idea
which. the Cabalifts of the Hebrew-call and. the
kefehand orfword of God: farthermore man hath not only a
feal by.the which he is feared, but alfo by the which heis be
loved,the Jdea of which ih the divine numerations is called
Hefed 3p which fignifieth Clemency ,& the right hand and —
cepter of God’: from thefe divine numerations, by thein-’
telligences.and:Stars, Seals and: Characters: are imprinted on
‘Us teevery one according to his capacity and purity: which —
fignes the firft man created, without doubt did all
integricyand fulnefs, when alt creaturés being attraéte
fecret gentienes, and fubje&ted by terror, came to himast6
their lord, that he might give them names: buvafter the fin
_ ofprevarication he fell fromthat dignity with all hispofte-
rity ; yet thac Charateris noc all together extin@ in us. But
by how. much every one is Jaden with fin, by fo much hes
farther off from thefe divine Chara@ters and receiveth lefsof
them; and whence he ongtie to receive frendfhip and reve-
sence, he falleth into the flavery and terror of others, both
of animals and alfo men and devils: which-Cain percei-
feared, fayingto God, every one who findeth me, will
 killmes forhe feared beafts and dewi>, not only men, who
Mere very but inche'old times; many men who lived
snecently, avery-good life, as yet did:

F ~
“a
P
a
ad

ook

B

ae

and power, as David and Daniel over the Ey.
foa over the Beat, Pawl over the: Viper’; and-many

rites lwed in the deferts, in Caves and Dens of wild beafts,
not hurt for as:by; fin that divine
Character is red, {o fim being, purged and expiated, ita.
gain more and more fhinethforth,.

| CRAP.

What concerning man-after death, diverfe
N generall it is appointed for all men once todyesideathis —
fatal co alle buo one: ismatarall, another violent; another
voluntarily: received, another. inflicted :by humane: lawesi for
offences, or by God for fins that. they:
dred a due co ‘nature, but apunifbment for finsi; whichi(as
the Hebrew: Matters faith ) Godremicteth toinone ; Whence
the Affembly delivered: to: that: after the houfe'of
the Sanétuary was pulled down; alchough' there remained not
any order of judiciary execution, yet there: fhould:befafour,
fold kindof punthhmene by «the which they:mightbe cori
‘demned,, that. fhould efeape without
retaliation; for he which had:deferved to be {toned co: death;
was, God: difpenfing. either calt headlong from the
honfe, or trodden -impeeces by wild beats, or overwhelmed
by ruibeor he whichhad: deferved:tobe burned;
was either confumed by busnings,. or finifhed_his life cithes
by venemous bitings; or ftingsof a ferpent,orby poyfon; but
he whieh fhauld dye by: che {word ;was killed eitherby the vio.
lence. of the jurifdiGion, by the tumule ofthe pecple ‘on
fation, or by: the treachery-of thieves; hethatiouphrtobe —
hanged, was ‘fuffocated either in: the waters, orexangnifhed
by fome orherRtrangling punihmenr; and-byxche ground 06.

this doéttine , that grear\Origen fuppofed} ihe Gofpeliefh

Chriftino the fword fhall percth bys

P

“3
a

_ted and revolved into a brutifh body ; of thefe things Plotinus

of thiskinde i$ Adraftia;viz. an inevitable power
_ Of divine laws, by the which.in courfes to come, is recompen-

fed to every one‘according to the reafon and merits of his
_ omer lifes fo !ashe who uniultly raled in the former life, inthe

other life fhould relapfe into a fervile {tace;he which hath pol-
luced his hands with blood, fhould be compelled to undergo ©
retaliation ; he that lived a brutith life, fhould be precipita-

writeth in his book of cheproperGewins of every one; fay.
ing, whofoever have kept hamane*propricty, do again arife
men : -but whofoever have ufedfenfe only, do return brute

animals: yet fo, as thefe who ule fenfe efpecially together

with wrath, do arife wild beafts ; buc whofoever ufe fenfe by

-concupifcence and pleafure, do return leacherous and glntte-

mous bealts but if they thall live, not by fenfe together with

_ depraved in other things, are born again mufical animals; an

them,fo much as by the degeneration of fenfe,plants grow up —
again with chem;for the vitals only, or chiefly, are living all
their care was that they might be turned into plants. Buc they

which have lived being 00 much allured by mafick, not being

they which have raigned without reafon, become Eagles,unles
they havebeen tainted with any wickednefs. But he which

«eq, bath lived civilly and vertuoufly,returnesa man. And Solomon

“Aimfelf in the Proverbs calls man’ fometimes a Lion, Tiger;
Bear; a Boare. . Sometimes.a Hare, ahunting dog, a Cony;

fometiines.a Pifmire,aHedghog, aSerpent, aSpider ; fome-

timesan Eaple,a Stork, a Cock, or any other bird, and many

fuch as thefe.’ Bur the Cabalifts of che Hebrews do not admit

that fouls are: curned into brutes: Yeguthey do not deny but

that they that have wholly loft cheitpeafon, fhallin an other
life be left co a brutith affetion..and imagination ; they affert
alfo that foulsiare ré¢volved hither*thrice, and no more; be-
éaufe this number feems fufficiently to faffice for the pargati-

00 of fins, according to that of 7ob, He bath delivered'my
foulthat ic fhoald not proceed to death; burt thould live, and

and fee the light Behold all thefe things doth God worktheee

Gmies chrough each, that he might reduce. cheir fouls from

‘
‘ a
+}
‘
Ne
 «
be
ef
ae at
i
e
}

BookI Of OcculePhilofopby,
ruption, and illuminate them with the light of the living. . Bi
let us fee what ‘the is) ied
dead. When man dies, his body returnes into rhe earth, from.
which it-was taken : the fpirit retarnésto thé heavens, from.
whence,it defcended, as faith the Preacher, The body retarnes:
to the earth from whence it was,& the {pirit returnes to God.
that gave it ; which Lacretsus hath expreffed in chele verles;.

What came from earth to earth retwrnes again;
What came fromGod, returnes from whence itcame.

» rhe a

Four things of man there are; Spirit, Soul,Ghoft ,Flefo;
Thefe four four places keep and.do poffefs.

The earth covers flefh, the Ghoft hovers the grave,
Orcus bath the, foul, Stars do the (pirit crave;

The fieth. being forfaken, & the body being life,is:
called a dead Carkals; Which as fay che divines.of che Hebrews,

is lefcin the power of the Demon Zdze/, of whom it is faid’
in the Scripture, .. Jhalt, eat-dujt all thy daies; andels-~
Z be duft-o earth,is bis bread. Now man. was
created of, the dulof theyeacth, whence -alfothat Demon is:
called:chelord of flefh, and. blood,, whileft. the body is not’.
expiated and fanctified with due folemnities, Hence not with~
out caufe the Ascients ordained expiations of Carkafles, that
that which was unclean might be {prinkled with:haly. water,
perfumed with incenfe, be conjured with facred orations,
have lights fer -by, as long.as it wasabove ground, and.chen
at length be buried ina holy place. Hence E/penorin Homer,
I befeech thee ( faith he ) Odyffer, be mindful of meey;and
leave mee not unburied, left being unburied I become an ob=
Of the Gods wrath, Bat the fpiritiOf a.man,.whichisofa
facred nature, and divine offipring ; becau(c ic is alwais faule-
lefs, becomes uncapable Of any punifhmenc; Bur the foul if
ithath done well, rejoyceth together with the {pirit, and go=

iteAetial Chatiot. pailleth freelvxo thequires

a5
»
°
is

God. Thisimage. therefore of thie fouf etitersinto'the

the fpirit judgeth it, and Jeaves it to the
and the fad foul wanders about Hell like an

of the Herses, ot heaven, whee it, thidys
fenfes; and powers, ‘a ‘perpetual ‘bieffed: Felitity
of allthings, as alfo the divine vifion, and poffefii-

_ gnoof the kingdom of heaven, and being made patcaker of
divine

power beftows freely divets gifts upon theft in-
itwere an immortal God. But if it hath done ill,

pleafure of the divel,

feriors, asi

image, as Dide complaines

Andnow the great ingge aller

Wherefore then this fou! being of an
“fence, and being left ro the p

power of «furious is
ever fubje@ted by the tormicht qualities; Kiow-
ing that it isby the jut judgement.of God, for ever deprived ©
of thé divine vifion ( ro which it Was created icsfins : the
which divine vifion, as the Scripture ceftifies; isthe
groundofallevils, andthe moft greivous punifhment ofall,
_ wihich che: Scripture calis: the pouring down of the wrath
as an eLerial body, with’ which doth fome-

‘mes advidefreinds stemics, as Dido threat:

the foul i¢ the body, rhe
hations of che meniory fexemain. The Platonifts fay,
thacche fouls, ‘efpecially of them, that are flain, firup ene-
mans indignation fe much, doing ss the divine
and. fotefeting, ‘and’ permitting OF ;
the Naborh? as che malters of ihe Hebrew interpret
) becaufein the end ‘of ics life ic went. with a déefire of

revenge, wag.madeé, to execute reven§

: 3 e »
cs
‘
oa”
if
b
A
a

allthe prophets, untill itmadé 90 unto Ramo.
Gilead. And Virgil himfelfe together with the Plaines
and Platoniffs, to whom alfo affents confeffeth
that feparated fouls retain the frefh memory of thofe things
which they did in this life, and their will,whence hefings,

what care they Living hadof hirfet brave
eAnd Arms, the fame doth follow them to th’

And Agaxe/in his book De Scientia Diving, and othét
Arabians , atid Mahumatifts which were’ Philofophers, think
that the operations of the foul, being common to the con-
 joyned body, impreffe upon the foul a Chara@er of ule “and
exercife , which it being feparated will ufe,being &rongly im-

reffed to the like operations and paffions which were not de-
hroved in lifetime, And afthough che body and orgattbe
cortupted, yer che operatid will not'ceafe, bat like affections
and difpofitions will remain. And chefe fouls the ancients call
witha common name ALanes, whereof thofe that were in this
life innocent , and purifyed by morall vertues, were very
happy ; Aud of chem as Virgil fings,

——T hat did for Pheir country die,
With priefts Who in their lives vow'd chaftity,.
eAnd facred Poets, who pleaf'd Phoebus
Or byinvented arts manslifeafifl,
their. memories renowned, ——~

Although they departed this life-wichout the juftification of
faith , and grace, as may Divinesthink , yet their fouls were
carryed without any faffering into happy pleafant fields ; and

T hey went to places and to pleafant greens,
And pleafant feats the pleafams groves between.

Where they enjoy cértain wonderfull pleafuses, as alfo :

al
f

¥
é.
t
o*

fenfitive , intellectualt and revealed knowledge ; alfo per-

haps they may be indoétrinated concerning faith, and jultifi.

-- cation , as thofe fpirits long fince to whom Chrilt preached
the Gofpel in prifon:For as it is certain that none can be faved
‘without the faith of Chrift, fo icis probable chat this faith

is preached to many Pagans and Saracens after this fife, in

thofe receptacles of fouls unto falvation, and that they are

kept in thofe receptacles, as ina common prifon, untill the
time comes when the great Judge flall examine our adi.
ons. To which opinion Laéantius, Ireneus, Clemens, Ter-
tullian, Auftin, Ambrofe, and many more Chriftian writers
do affent. But thofe fouls which are impure, incontinent,
depart wicked, do not enjoy fuch happy dreams, but wander

fall of moft hideous Phantafmes, and in worler places, en-
 joying no free knowledge but what is obtained by concef-
fion, or manifeftation, and with a continuall fiefhly defire

are fubjefted by reafon of their corporeal! corruption to the
fenfe of pain, and fear fwords, and knives. Thefe without
doubt Homer feemed to be fenfible of, when in the eleventh

_ book of his Ody(fes he brings in che mocher of U/y/fes being

dead,ftanding neer to him offering facrifice,but neither know-
ing him.or {peaking cohim,whilft he with his {word drawmdid
keep off ghofts from the blood of the facrifice. But after that
Tyrefia the prophetefs advifing of her, the had} tafted of
the facrifice , and had drunk the blood , fhe prefently knew
her fon, and crying fpake to him. But che foul of Tyrefs

the propheteffe, norwithftanding the drawn {word, ber
fore fhe calted the bloud, knew U/) ffes,and fpake to him, and

-Ahewed him the ghoft of bis mother ftanding neer to him.
~Whatfoever vices therefore fouls have commited in the bo-.
"dies unexpiated in this \ife,they are conftrained carrying che
- habits of them along with them,to purge themfelves of them
‘imthell, and to undergo. punifhment for them ; which che

»
‘wa
o
h
a
5 f
; b
»
as

_ Then doth not leave them all their mifery,
They having not repented of their crimes,
Mauft now be punifh d for their mifpent times.

For as the manners and habits of men are in this life, fach
. affections for the moft part follow the foul after death, which.
then calls to mind thofe things which ic did formerly doin its
life, and chen more intently chinks on them, for as much as
then che divers offices of life ceafe, as thofe of nourifhing,
growing, generating, and various occupations of fenfes , and
humane affairs,and comforts,and obftacles of a groflerbody.
Then are reprefented to the plantaftick reafon thofe;fpecies,
which are fo much the more turbulent.and furious, by how —
much tn fuch fouls there lies hid an intelle€tuall {park more or.
lefle covered or altogether extinét.into which are then by evil
fpirits conveyed {pecies either moft falfe, or terrible: whence —
now itis tormented in the concupilcile faculty, by the concu-
pifcence of an imaginary-good, or of thofe things whichitdid ..
formerly affe@in its life time, being deprived of the power
of enjoying them ,: although it may feem to it felf fome.
times almolt ro obtain its delights,but to be driven from them
by the evil fpirits into bitter torments , asin the. Poets, Fan-
talus from a banquet , Sardanupalus from embraces, . Adidas
from gold, Si/yphus from power ; and they called thefe fouls
— hobgoblins, whereof if any taking care of houfhold affairs
lives and inhabits quietly in the houfe, it is called a houfhold —
god , or familiar. But they are moft cruelly corcured in the
irafcible faculty wich the hatred of an imaginary evil, incothe
perturbations whereof, as alfo falfe. fulpitions , and: molt
horrible Phantafmes they then fall , and there are reprefented..
to them fad reprefentations ; fometime3.of the heaven
falling upon their head , fometimes of being. confumed
by the violence of flames, fometimes of being drowned ima. See a
sulfe, fometimes of being fwallowed up into theearth,fome- .
times of being changed into divers kinds of bealts,fometimes
being torn and devoured by ugly moniters,

J

: a
a,
fe
e

(ss OE Philofophy. Book ill.
a being carried abroad, through woods {cas, fire;air,and through.
fearful infernall places, and fometimes of being taken, and

therrime in groffer,in the tha

 fters,, whofe conditions ‘they had ingheir life time , as fings

Or doth from fire a dre.

priton, and fenfible inftrament by a certain divine Law , doth .
init fuffer cold, and heat, and whatfocver annoys the body,

tormented by devils. All which we conctive happens cto them |
after death no otherwile then inthis life to thofe who are
taken with a phrenfie, and fome other melancholy diftemper,
of to thofe who areaffrighted with horrible things feen in

dreams , and are thereby tormented , as if’thefe things did

really happen tothem , which crucly are not reall, but only
{pecies of them apprehendedfin imagination : even fo do hot-
rible reprefentations of fins terrifie thofe fouls after deathas
if they were in a dream, and the guilt of wickednefs drives

them headlong through divers places; which therefore Orpheus
calisthe'people of dreams, faying, the gates of Pluto cannot

beunlocked ; within isa people of dreams ; fuch wicked fouls

therefore enjoying no good places , when wandring in an
Aeriall body.they reprefent any form to our fight , arecalled

hags,and goblins, inoffenfive to them that. are good,but hurt-

fullto the wicked,appearing one while in chinner bodies,ano-
pe of divers animals, and mon-

Then divers forms,and foapes of brutes appear;
be becomes atyver, [wine, andgear,
'skalie dragon, andationeffe, |

ed dreadfull noife expreffe;
Hedoth trax{mute bhimfelf to divers looks,
To fire, wild beafts,and into running brooks.

For the impure foul of a man, who in this life contradted
too great a habirtoits body, doth by a certain inward af-
fection of the elementall body frame another body ro it {elf

of the vapours of the clements,refrefhing as it were froman

eafie matter as i¢ were with a fuck, thar body. which ts con-
tinually vanifhing ; to which being moreover enflaved as toa

Apirit,

—
: Poe
A
4 ‘
be
i

pirit, and fenie, as itinks, howltogs, wailings, gnafhing of the

—— And therefore for theircrimes’

They muft be punifh'd, and for mifpent times.
Muft tortures feel ; fome in the Winds arehung,
Others to clean{e their fhotted finsareflang
Into vaft gulfes,or purg'd in fire——-

And in Homer in his Necyomancy Alcinous makes this ais :

Of Tytius the dear darling of the earth,
We low the body ftretch dnine furlongs forth
end on each fide of Whom avultur great

Thefe fouls fometimes do inhabit not thefe kinds of bodies.
only, buc by a coo great affection of ficth and blond trane
mute themfelves into other animals , and feife upon the bo-.
dies of creeping things, and brutes, entering into them, Ber
what kind foever wy be of, pofleffiog them like Demons. .
Pythagoras is of the fame opinion, and before him Trs/me-.
giftws,affercing that wicked iouls do oftentimes go into creep-
ing things, and into brutes, neither do they-as effentiall forms
vivifie and inform thofe bodies, . but as an inmate dwell there

asina prifon , or ftand neer them by.alocall indiftance asan

internall mover to the thing moved ; or being tyed to them
rs, Syfiphus to a

are tormented,as Ixion.to the wheels of fer
ftone ; neither do they efter into brutes only, bat fometimes
into men, as we have {poken concerning the foul of Nabadth
which wene forth a lying {pirit in the mouth of the Prophets,
Hence fome have afferted chat the lives, or {pirits\of wicked
men going into the bodies of fome men, have difturbed = *
and fometimes flew them. Which is more fortunately granted .

unco bleffed fouls that fike good Angels they fhould dwell in
us, and enlighten uis,as we read of thathe beingtaken

s
G
"De

| A

from men His {piriefelf npom-E and elfswhere we
God took ofthe fpirit which was in A7o/es ,
to 70. men. Here lies a great fecret ,. and nor rafhly to be re-
vealed. Sometimes'‘alfo ( which -yet'is, very ‘tare ) fouls are
driven with fuch 4, they do enter che bodies nor.
only of the livitig. but alfo by a certain hellith power wander
-§nto dead Carkaffes, and Being abit were revived commit
horrid wickedneffes ; as we réaditi Sava Grammaticus, thar
Afuitus and. Afmundus two cerrain men vowed one to the
other, that He Mould live fongeft (hou!d BE buried’ With
- chat was firft dead : at length «4/witus being dead) is
___ biried ina great vault with his dog , and horfe, with whom
alfo eA/mundus by reafon of his oatt. of friendfhip, fuffered
_ ~himfelf to be buried: alive’,, which he fhould fora
long time cat, being brouglit to him; proceffe of time Eri-
King of Suecia paflingby that place with an army, breaking
 upthe tomb of A/mitus ( fuppofing that rhere.was treafute)
Whien'hefaw having ahideousfook, being finéared over with
filthy Which ‘flowed from a green wound ( for’
being révived, in the nights, took: off with ofter
hiv right ear) he ‘him to fell him the
that Wounds which he deelares in thefe veries;

Why,doth my vifage wan yon thas amaze?

be'that lives among ff the dead, the grace
beauty needs mnfi looje; TknoW not yee

“What daring Stigian fend of Bigit
Lhe [pirit [ent from bell, whothere dideat.
borfe, and dog, andbeing withthis meat
Noryet fu c*d, then/et his claWs on
Pall do my cheek.mine ear hence you [ee

ft.

panned bloody face;
monfiroms Wight returned not to his

Without receiv'd revenge; prefentl | b Ais

_ Hs headout off,and with a fake did

¥
az
oof
a .
af
¢

- OF Occult

 Paulanias a unlike ro this, takemout of the
interpreters OF the, Delphi's, vee. that chete Wis

_fernall Demon, whieh the) Called whi
the fleth of dead and devour jc the bones’
fcarce be left. We alfo in the

fans, that the ghofts which they ‘call were Wontto
return back into theit bodies,’ and go

Jie. with them ; for the ayoyding of thatthéymighte
annoy gheir wives nO more.it was provided in the’commen
lawes that the heart of them that'did arifé fhould be thant
thorow witha nail, and their whole catcallébe burnt. Thefe

without doubr.are wonderfull things, and fcarce credibjé, but

that thofe lawes, ahd ancient Hiftories ‘make them credible. a
Neither is ic altogether ftrange in-Chriftian Religion that ma-
ny fouls were reftored to their hodies,before the univerfailre.-
furrection. Moreover, we beleeve that many bythe fingular
favour of God ate together with’ their bodies fectived to -
glory, and hat have

lightening , gapings Of the\earch’, and Where the region is

é recorded-of
the Athtan
Yan

caves, and of the den of many that haye

wo

«

vils caken from the.graves, without dotibt for no other ale then
to be imprifoned,-and tormented in theirhands. Andtothefe
prifons and bonds of their bodies ‘there are added the
poffeffions of moft filthy and abominable places where are
VOIG O Cs ane receives noc. tne rayes 0 ul » ania
knows not the light,of the Stars, but 1s alwayes dark. Whi-
ther ffes is reported in Homer to come,when he fings,
Here peopleare.that be Cymmerian named,
Drown'd in perpetuall darkne/s,it
Whom rifing, nor the fetting fun. doth fee,
But. with perpetuall night oppreffea be.
Neither are thofe ay

teftifying the fame. Allo SaxoGrammaticustells
greater things then thefe of the Pallace of Geruthus, and
of the cave of Ugarthilocus: Alfo Pliny, Solinus, Pythiac,
Clearchus, of the wonderfull prodigies ofthe Northern fea,
which Tacitss alfoin his hiftoty of Dra/us (hewes thatin
_- the German fea there wandred fouldiers by whom divers mi-
. gachlous unheard of things were feen, viz. the force of whirl.
_ pools, unheard of kinds of birds, fea monfterslikemenand _
alts ; and in his book of Germany he tells that thé Heldufi.
ans, and «Axions, who had the face of men, but their other
parts were equall to beafts, did dwell there. Which without all
doube were the works of ghofts and divels. Of thefe alfo Clan.
danas \ong time fince fa

| Inthe extream bounds of Franch there is a place,
Encompaff'd by the fea, Where in bisrace
faith Ulyfles having tafted blood,
fecret people did defcry, Where. loud
And mournfull plaints were heard of wandring fpirits
Which did the country people much affright.

relates of the neer Tialy, thatin
Was a certain tombe, to.which-no man could go fafe
~*. ‘by night; and that there were Cymbals and thrill voyces
certain abfurd lond laughters ; alfo tumults and empty
fonads made,as the inhabitants did ftrongly aver; and that op-
atimeacertain yong man being drunk went thither, and
about night fell afleep. neer the caye of the tombe, and was
after the third day found by them that fought him, and was.
taken up for dead; who being brought forth, the folemnities
_ of the funerall being ready, fuddainly arofe up, and cold in
order, tothe great admiration of all, many chings which he
had feen and foffered. There is alfo in Novergiz acertain
mountain moft dreadfull of all, cirrounded. by the fea, which
.. commonly iscalled Hethelbergius, reprefenting Hell, whence
,.. there are heard great bewailings, howlings, and {critchings a
round about, and overt which great vulters and

x
a“
J ’
a?

Book I

black Crows. fly,'m
any to come neer . Moreover: from hence flow twofouns'

-taines whereof the one is moft,intenfe cold, the

aking moft»horrible noyfes,-whichforbid.

tenfe hot, far exceeding all jorher elements. Thercisalfoin.

the fame countsy cowatdche Southera corner thereof a Pro.
montory called Nadhegrin, where, the Demons ofthe place —

are feem by all, inanaeriallbody. .Thereis,alfoin Scotland.
the Mountain Dolorofus., trom whence are heard dreadful -
lamentations: and in Thwringia there isa mountain. called
Horrifonus, where dwele Spvani, and. Satyrs,as fame and
experience teacheth, and faithfall writers; teltifice.. There are

in divers Countries and Provinces {uch like miracles as thefe,

I will not relate here thofe things which Dhave feen with mine .

eyes, and felt with mine hands, leaft by the wonderfull admi..
rablenes & {trangenefs of themI fhouldby-theincredplonsbe,
accounted a lyar. Neither. it dit-co pals. by. whar .

‘many of our age think concerning the receptacles of fouls, nor.

much differing from thefe which we have now {poken of; of -
which Tertullian. in, his fourth book againft che of
Marcion {aithy, It is apparent. co evey.wile man, whichhath: ~
ever heard of the E/pfanfieldsthat there is fomelocalldeter-.
mination, ( which is called edbrabams.bofome,)forthere..
ceiving of the fouls of his fons,and that that region is.motce-.

higher then hell,where the fouls of the jolt

the confummation of, refurretion-of all
things with: fulnes. of reward. Allo Peter the Apoltle faithto:,

Clemens asking him of thefe things, thou doft conitrain mee O.

Clemens to publith fomething concerning things unucterable-,

Yet as far as I may, I will. Chrift,who from rhe beginging,
alwaies was, was alwaies through each generation, though, =
fecretly, prefent with, the. godly,, with thofe efpecially by; -
whom he was delired, and to.whomshe did molt often appear.

Bur it wasnot time, that the bodies then being refolved, there.
(hould be a refurreétion.s> bat this rather feemed.aremunc-.
ration from God, that he thatrwas fonndjalt, {honidgemain,

longer ina, body, or chat the Lord him

we fee clearly-relaced im the feripeuse of Some-cemain iu,

Ts
a 4
om
‘
oil
e

<a

»

Occult Book I [ &

the like examnp le God deate with others, who
pleafed him well,and falling his will were being tranflited
pi Paradife referved for 2 kingdome. But of thofe who could
not fallfill the rule of juftice, but had fome relique of wicked-
nefs intheit fleth; the bodyes indeed arcrefolved,but foulsare
kept it and plcafant regionis, that in the refurre@tion of
che dead, when they fhall receive their bodies,being now purg-
ed b refolucion, they may enjoy an eternall inheritance for

tRirigewhich tlicy have done well. Jreneus alfo in the end

of his bookwhich he wrot againft the Herefics of the Valentini-
and, Whereas the Lord went in the middle ,of the fha-
dow of death, where the fouls of the dead were, and after rofe —
after refurrection was taken up,it is ma-
nifeft that the fouls of his difeiples( for whom he worked thefe

) thould fome place,appoynred by God,
‘atid there tarry untill the refurtection, afterwards receiving
theit bodyes, and rifing again perfedtly,s e.corporeally, asthe —
Lord arofe; fo thalf they come into the prefence of ; for
no difciple is above his mafter ; But every one (halt be perfee
as his Mafter. Therefore even as our Matter did’ not prefent-
ly fly and-go'away, but expetted the time of his reforrettion
determined by the father, which isalfo manifefted by Jona,
after three daies arifing he is takernup ; So alfo ought we
expegt the time of our refutreAion determined by God, fore-
told by the Prophets; and fo rifing again we fhail be taken up,
aS thany a¢ che Lord fliall accoant worthy of this‘ honor; -
Lattamius Fitmianns agreeth co this, in that book of
Divine inflitattons,whofe citle is of Divine reward ; Saying,
manthiok, that the fouls after death are prefently jndg-
eas for they areall derainedin one common cuftody, untill
rime cométh which the great Jud de-
ferts;. then they whole rig be approved, fhalf
receive the reward of birt ‘they fins and
wickednesate detected, fhall not rife asain, ‘but being deRti-
‘fated for cerrain punifhment, be fhut'tip with the wicked

els'inco the fame darkses* ofthe Opmion are Affine,

é
x
«
x
a
’
on
é

Baok JI.
-isinterpofed betwixt the death of manand.t

on, containeth the foul in feeret receptactes ; aseve
worthy oftreft or,

STY

ned whilft it lived in theflelh sbat Ambro/ein hisbookcon-

cerning the benghts of death, faith; The writing of E/dres

meting with the complaints of man(becaufethat the Jult who
have gone before, may feem, even tothe day of Jadgemenc
viz. for along time, to be wonderfully defrauded of cheir.

callech the habitations of the  fonls, {tore houles; which be

recompente of reward ) doth liken the day ofjadgmene

toa garland ; for the day of reward isexpected of all, that

Occult Philofaphy,
hejla

in che mean time-both the conquered may beathamed, and

the conquerors may attain the palme of victory ; therefore
while the fulnes of ttmes ts expetted the fouls. expe their dye
recompente ; punifhment remaining .for fome,. glory for,o-

thers; and in the fame place the callech,Hella place.whichis ;

not feen, which the: fouls goto! being feparated fromthe bo-
dies; And in his fecond bookof (aim and Abel,he faith, the
foul is loofed ;from thebody, and afcer the end of-thisiife, is

even as yet in fufpence;ibeing doubefull.of the judgementto
come ; To thefe affenteth that evangelical faying, concer-

ning the Jaft indgmenr,Chrilt-faying in Adatthew,; Many foal

fay to mee in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophefied in thy

name, andin thy namé caft ont Devils? And then fhall con-
fefsto- them, that I never knew.them ; by which fpecch it fec-

meth to be clear, that even untill this day they weseunegrrain —
concerning their fentence,- and_by the confidence of miracles

which they had performed inthename of Jefus, whilft th
lived,to have bin in fome hope of falvation; Therefore becanfe

the judgement. of foulsiiadefersed

only the Juftified, but alfo the damned, before the appoynted
day of iudgment.) So Trajanthe Empero |
Hell by Saine Gregory, aad Juttified to
think that he wasnov freed: from the guilt ofpunifiment,, but

the Juftice of ipunifbmeat was prorogucduntill the day.of

judgment; BuciZ: infecmeth me

oe

ugsill che laltday, many
Theologians think that not

«
a
v2

Off f Occ Philp.

“bable, chat ‘By: ithe ‘intet ceffions of Gre
and obcained a ‘power by the which he was

- freed from'the panifimient and guilt of fin ; and there are fome
‘Theologians who think , that by the Diriges for the dead nei-
“ther the punifhment nor-the: guile is taken away or detracted,
“pur'that only fome'tafe and affwagement of the pains is pro-
‘cured’: atid this by the fimilitude of 'a fweating porter, who
the fpritikling of fome-water feemeth to be eafed of the

of his burthen, orhelped to carry it more eafi ily, al.

though noching of che barthen be'taken off : ‘Yet the common

“opinion of Théologians'denyeth that prayers or funerall Di-
“figes do” favour for the-gnilcy Within the gates of
but feeing all thefe'things are of an_incomprehenfible
‘many have vainly whet their witsin them: There-
- fore we holding to the opinion of Axuftine, as he faith inthe
book on Genefis , do°afirm, That it is better do doube

things, then to contend abour uncertain

* things ; for I-doubt not bac that that rich man is tobe under-
| inthe flames of pains, and, that poor man in the re-

_ © frefbment'of joyes ; but how chat flame of hell , that bofom

OF Abrabam that ‘tongue‘of thé rich man, chat: torment of
that drop of cooling; are to beundetftood it is hard-

ay found ‘out by the mode fearcher, butby the contentious

‘mever ; but thefe things being for this prefent omitted, we. .

‘the: things have ith is
manifeft fouls after. death do. as yet love their

body- which they left, °as thofe fouls do. whofe‘ bodies want
burialt ‘or. lefe:their bodies iby -wiolent’death, and

4 Fs
ad
te
a4
é
te
- one

Book EIN, Of

fpirit, being as it were allured by fomething that hath an af.

times palt they were joyned to.cheir bodies, they may eafily be
_ called forth & allured by the like vapours liquots aad eg |
certain artificial lights being alfo uled, fongs, founds and
like, which do. move tte imaginative and fpiricuall Harmony
of the foul ; alfo facred invocations, and fuch like, which be-
long to Religion, ought not to be neglected,, by reafon of the:

witch ts faid to have called up Samuel, andthe Thelfalian

Hence we readin Poets, and thofe who relate thefe things,
that the fouls of the dead cannot becalled. up without blood —
and acarkaffe but cheir fhadowes tobe eafily allured by the
fumigations of thefe things; egges being alfo ufed , and milk,
honey, oil, wine, water, flowre, asit were yeelding a fit me-
dicine for the fouls to reaflume their bodies, as you may fee in
Homer , where Circe at lacge initruteth ; yet they
think, that thefe things can be done in thofe places.only where
thefe kinds of fouls are known to.be molt converfant, either
by reafon of fome affinity, as their dead body alluting them,
or by reafon of fome affection imprinted in their life,drawing
the foul it felf to certain places, or by reafon of fomehellifh
nature of the place; and therefore fit for the punifhing or -
purging of fouls: places of this kind are belt known by the
meeting Of noéturnall viftons and incutfions, and fuch like
Phantafmes ; Some are fufficiently known by themfeélves, as
buriall places and places of execution, and whegf publike
flaughtérs have lately been made, or whete the cagkafles of ©
the flain, not as.yet expiated , nor rightly buried, were fome
yeers (ince put into the ground ; for expiation and exor-
-cifacion of any place, and alfo the holy right of bariall be-
ing duely performed to the bodies, oftentimes prohibiteth
the fouls chemfelves to come up, and driveth them farther off

becaufe it worketh on the bodies of the dead, and giveth an-
_{wers by the ghotts and apparitions of the dead, and. fubter-

finity with. them ; the means being known by the which in

portion of the rationall foul, whichis above naturé:Sothe

phetefle in: Lwcan, to have caufed acarcafletoftand

the places of judgement. ;.Hence Necromancy hath itsname, —

ae.
wets
“
at]
—

x

~ —

for

the witch whorealled ‘ap the dead. who fore.

deadly factifices, and wicked oblations; fach we readin Lucan

all the event of the Phar/aliak War:
ivalia acity Of eAPeadia, certain

There were alfo in P.

cians, priefts moft skilful in facred rites, 8 raifers up of the fouls

the dead anid the holy feriprores teftifiesthat a certain-wo-
a witch called up Samuels foul: Even fo truely the fouls.

of the. faints do love their bodies, and hear more readily

‘there, where the pledges of ‘their reliqnes are preferved::
- ‘bat there are two kinds of Necromancy, the one called

WNecyomancy, raifing the carkafles, which is not done without

The other’ Scéomancy, in which the calling up of
“thadow only fafficeth: to conclude;it worketh all its experi-
“ments by the cafkafes of the flain , and their bones'and mem.

‘bers, and what is from them, becaufe there is in thefe things

eget power friendly to them. Therefore they eafily allare

“the flowing down of wicked fpirits ; being by reafon of the

fimilliende and propriety vety familiar: by whom the

J

mancer {tretigthened by their help can'do very mach in

‘mane and cerreftriall things, and kindte unlawfull lufts, .canfe

dreams, difeafes, hatred and fach like paffions, tothe whichalfo
* “they can confer the powers of thefe fouls, which as yetbeing
in a moift and turbide fpirir , and wandering abont
their cat bodies, can do che fame things that the wieked fpi-
Fits commit;fecing therfore they experimentally fiad that rhe
/ ~ wicked and impure fouls violently plucked from their bodies,
- and of men not expiated ; and whi. buriall, do ftay,abont
"their carcafes, and-are drawn to them by affinity, the witches
ay abufe them for the effecting of their witchcrafts,aluritig
thete

unhappy fouls by the appofition of their body or.by the

taking of ‘fome part thereof,arid compelling ‘them by-eheir
~ devillith charmes, by entreating them by the deformed car-
 kafes difperfed through the wide fields, atid'the wandering
_fhadowes of chofe that want burials, and by, che ghofts fene
back from Acheron, and the guélts of hell, whom

oe

on, en

o

®
‘
—
x
x
a
a a
i,
A
™
be

— OF Occult Philofophy.

death hath precipitated into Hell ; and by the horrible delees

of the damned, and proud devils revengers of wickednedes,.

But he which would reftore the fouls truely to their bodies,

muft firft know what. is the proper nature of the foul from.
whence it went forth, with how.many and how great degrees

of perfetion it is replenifhed, with what intelligence ic is
ftrengthened, by what means diffaled into the by what

harmony ic fhall be compated with it ,:what-affiniy it hath’

with God, with the intelligences, with the heavens, elements

and all other things whofe image and refemblance ic holdech,

To conclude , by what influences the body may be knit
ther again for-che railing of the dead,requireth all thefe hing:

which belong not to men but: to God only, and to whom he |

will communicate them, as to E4hai who raifed up the fon of

the Shuxamite ; fo allo Alceftss it reported-to have been raifed

by Hercules, and tohave lived-long after; and Apollonins Ty-
anenfis reftored a dead maidto life, And hereistobe noted
that fometimes it happeneth to men, that their vivifying fpiric:
is retracted in them , and they appear as dead and wichour
fenfe, when as yet the intelleQual nature remaineth united co
the body, and ic hach the fame form, and remaineth che fame

intelle@tual nature ;_ yet it eeafech not to be; and alchough

that man may truly be faid to be dead, inafmuch as deathisa; _

want of a vivifying {pirit, yet is i¢ not truly feparaced ; and

that body can be wakened again and five ; and thus many mi-—

racles appear in thefe ; and of this kind many have been feen

of which is that-which Piaro reciteth in his tenth book. de

away and laid co the fire two dayes, he revived and told many

wonderfull things which he had {een in the time of his death; —

—and-concerning chefe things'we have:(poken partly in the firlt

book ; and thalf yet fpeak-furcher anon where we (hall {peak
ina Rapture, Egeafic, andin

Oracles which come forth

the Agony of dyingmen, CHAP,

° *
a

body, alchough the power of vivifyng-extendeth not it felf —
it a@aally , but remaineth retracted in the union withthe

Repabl. viz, that one Pherewt.of Pampbilia \ay ven dayes —
amonglt the flail in’ batrle , and aftes that he had been taken

at

amoneft the Gentiles and Jewes informer ages;inthe namber

WN
ies
©
« “3
‘
y
4 J
he
me

| Ot Occult Philo 0 O |

al, iathe mind, reafon nae
Of the power of mans foul, th

2a)

foat-confifteth of a mind, .reafon-and imagination;
ter reafon floweth into the.
imagination: Allis one foul. Reafon: unlefs it be illuminated,
. bythemind,, isnot free from-errour bur the mind giveth not,
light reafon, uniefs God enlighten, viz. the firlt light ; for
firhdight isimGod, far exceeding all underftanding ;,
be called anintelligible light; but this.
whenit is infufed incothe mind, ie and can:
; thenwhen it is.infufed bythe. mind to the:
-  geafon,.it ismade: rationall,, and cannot only be underftood’
allo: confidered:; then. whenit,is infufed the reafon,
igto-the-phantafie of the foul , it is madenet only cogitable;
‘bur alfo imaginable.; yet. it is-not as yet corporeall-; -but:
 owhen.from:hence-it: goeth into the Celeftiall vehicle of the)
foul; icis frltmadecorporeall, yet not manifeltly fenfibleitill.
hath pafled-intocheelementall body; either fimple and Ae-:
compoundin the whieh the light is made manifeftly.wi-'
fible tothe eye ;. TheGhaldean Philofophers confidering this;
~~ progreffeof-light, declare a certain wonderfull power of- out.
ind it may come to paffe,that our mind beingfirmly,
fixed.on:God may be filled with the divine power;and being:
replenifhed wach-light, ics beams belng diffuled through all
even. to dark, heavy,mortall body, it,
endow.it with abundance of light, and make it like the.
Sars, and equally thining , and alfo by the plenty’ of
beams and. Jighenels lift ic on high , as ftraw lifted up by the;
“flame of fire, and can-prefently carry the body. as a {pirit into
parts. So wercad of Philip inthe A@sof the Apo.
. ftles, who baptizing the Zynuchin India, was prefently found,
Agotm, The like we read of Hubacuc in Daniel fo others:
through the: doors being (hut,.cleaped borhsthele

°

‘s
@* a

keepers and imprifonment.s readMof Peter the Apoftle
of Peter the ExorciftisiHe may-the wonder.at this,
who hath thofe famous melancholick mien,: who walk-in.
their fleepes and paffe through’ placeS uopaffible, and af
_cend even unacceffible places,and exercifethe worksof thofe
that are awake, which they chemfelves being awake could
not do;of the wh‘ch thingsithere. is no othet reafon in nature,
than a ftrong and exalted smagination ;' but this power is\in
every man,& it isin the foul'of man from of his Crea-
tion ; bur itis varied in diverfe men, in ftrength and weaknefs,
and is encreafed and diminifhed according to his exercife and
ufe, by the which itis drawn. forth from- power into. a@,
which thing he chat rightly knoweth,: can afcend by hisknow-
ledge, even untill histmaginative faculcy doth tranfcend andis
joyned with the univerfall power, which. A/chindus, Bacon,
and Gulielmus Parifienfis do call the fenfe. of nature; Vir-
gil, the Etheriallfenfe, and Plato the {enfe.of the vehicle:
and his imagination ts: made moft{trong , when that.Etheriall =
and Celeftiall power is poured out upon it, by whofe bright
ne(sit is comforted, uncillit apprehend rhefpecies, notions
and knowledge of true things, fo that thacwhichhethought =
inhis mind , cometh to paffe even as he thought, and it ob-
taineth fo great power, that it can plunge; joyn and infinuate
it felf into the minds of men, and make them certain of his
thoughts , and of his-willandidefire , even thorow large
remote {paces , asif they perceived a. prefent object by their: —
fenfes; and it can in little time do many things, as if they .
were done without time ; yet thefe things-are not.granted to: . “Fo,
all, but to thofe whofe imaginative and.cogitative power is
moft {trong and hath arrived.co the ¢nd of fpeculation ; .and
he is fitted.co apprehend. and manifclt all things, bythe , =
fplendour of the univerfall power? or intelligence and:
{pirituall apprehenfion which isabove-him: and thisistMat
neceflary. power , which every one: ought, to follow and. =
| obey, who followeth. the..eruth ;#if therefore now. the:
power.of the imagination is fo great, that it can ini- a
nuate it felfunto whom.itpleafeth, beingneitherhindredmot

Book III. &€

Phére. doubt the power of the? minds

, if atanytimeiefhall obtaimits proper nature, and
‘being no'way oppreffedby the-allurements of the fenfes,thall.
perfevere both incorrupred and like ic-felf ;.but now: for ex-

Sears, “and hence , avery great a bundanceof tight.

ince their bodies fo AZo/es faceidid thine ; that

the children of J/rue/ could not behold him: by reaion of the

‘brightnefs of his countenance; thus Socrares-was transfigured,

we'read, that in phe he overcame thelaciferous wheels of

“thé Sans So Zorveaftes traristigured his ‘body was takenup,

and Enoebalcended'to heaven in a certain fiery cha.

“Pot; fapt np intothe third heaven So out-badies
 “afterthe jadgenient of the world,fhall becalled Glorifiedjand
- jn fike-‘manner' be vapt ‘np; and we may fay by this »means,

 fhalf thine'ag the Sumand Moon ; which thing:that ic is:pof-
formerly been'done , Avicebron the Moore,
“and? Avicen the e4rubian atid Hippocrates of and all the
OF the atid confirm :4More.
in Atories that the great be-
citcumiventtéd and in great danger in India did-fo-burnin
feémed the light; the
of Fheddoritus alfois reported tohave-caft forch {parks
fire through hits whole bedy;) the fame thing a
delivered? himfelf that © fparkling
did bréeak® forth “here atid there even’ with a noite ;

neithet is thispower of the foul‘fonndin men only, but fome-
evenitr as in thehorfé of Tiberius who'feemed

"to fend forth flames out'of hismouth:’ Barthe mind ‘is above
ofaréin peavidence > therefore isnot affeGed either wieh che

the heavenly bodies , or: the qualities: of
4 ~'tuealfthings can only’ cure it's bur the
*"fenfitivenefs of the isin fate, above mature; which
manner the knot of the'body and ‘foul,and undet fate,
the body tris changed ‘by “the: indies ol

va
a
i
é

~ Re ee « * —"
Philo |

Book

—

the heaventy bodies, and affeed by the qualities of:

thar vivifying and rectifying

foul: the otter which of natareeF the whith:
witehe
craft. Man therefore'by the'nataré of his body is

we have fpoken’, whete! we mesei

the foul of man, by the fénfitivenefS inoveth Face;

but by the mind is above fate,in the order of providence; yet

reafon is free at its own choice ; therefore the foul by reafon
afcendeth into the mind , wherelicisréplenifhed with divine

light ; fometimes it defcendeth into fenfitivenefS and is af-

fected: by the influences.of the heavenly bodies, qualities
of naturall things , and isdiftraéted by the paffions and the
encotintring of fenfible objects: fometimes-the foul revolveth
it felfe' wholly arching our other chingseither by
difcoarfe’,.or by contemplating it-felf:7 for thar

that part of-the realgn-) which che Peripatérivks pods
fible Intelieét , may be browght-co this ie may freely
difcourfe and operate without convéerfion to-his Phantafmes:

for fo great is the command: of this reafon, that as ‘oftshias
any thing ineurreth efeher into the wind, or nto-the fenftive-

nefs,orinto nature, of into the bedy it cannoe-palle ince

the foul{tintefs reafon it felf to ix “by this meansthe font

perceivechit felF neither to fc, norhear, nerfeel; not thavic

fuftreth any things by che externall fenfes , untill: cogirative
reafon appr eheadeclvic-when it is ag

ehend ; burst appr
heafate! foe when gapech-after anocker thing, °as

we fee by the fe whe heed not tholethac they. meet;
when they more fe:ioafty think on-fome thing elfe. Know

thereforethat neither‘the fapertons influences, nor natucall

 affeétions

power of the body, che original!
of the fenfes;the foul it felfdoth manifekt in-chisbadyitsieng
tive powets and ‘perceiver corporeal things by the-bodpand!:
locally moyeth the bedy governeth ‘his
pal powers predomunate; one whictris calledthe Phantalyy
or imaginative or cogitative faculty, of whole power we have.
already fpoken, we ‘have'handled the rhe:

‘
é
»
a

e
¥
A
’ «

for palfionscither of ‘the mindor
-mor any fenfible thing whatfoever , can work or,pe.
netrate into the foul unlefs the Judgement of reafon ic if,
Therefore by its a, not .by any! extrinfecall violence, can
the fout be either affeGted or difturbed.,,. which ching even in-
namerable: A4artyrs have, proved. by theic Martyrdom,;
eAnafarchus 2 Philofopher of »-who., who. by the
the command of Nicocreontes a tyrant of Cyprus, being caft
‘into aconcave {tone negleting the pains of his body » While
he was pounded with iron is reported to have faid;
: the, thell of thon nothing
Aunafarchus himéelf :. “The. ytanc. commanded his
tongne to be cat off,but he with his own tecth ad bite it of, |
did it in the face the

fle inde, becaufe it is ‘from, God! ‘or from the intelli-
yao gible world, is therefore i or and eternal ; but rea-
ont is-long. lived by the benefit of its celeftial ori inal from
the Heaveo ; but fenficive becaule itis from the bofome of

theomatter and dependeth on nature, is fubjekt to.
_defienétion and corruption therefore the foul by itsminde
is immortall, by its Reafon long lived in its etherial vehicle,
but nefetvable nolefs it be. reltored circuit of itsnew_

body;thes¢fore itis not immortal,unleG ic be united co an im-

mind:therefore the fenfitiyenes of the foul or the fenfi.
tive or animal foul, becaufe it is produced out of the bofome
ofa eorporcal matter, the body being refolved,pexifheth
gether withit, or the fhadow thereof. ot longs iD,
the. vapours-of its refoived body partaking
tality, ,,unlefs: ic. be-alfo, united ro amore fublimed, power;
therefore the foul which is united ro the , is called the.

3 ; bacall men not this minde,
becanfe

= z
ay |
‘>
i
f
»
A
af

—becaufe ( as Hermes faith ) God would propound it
were a prize and reward ‘of the fouls,'which they that
negic@, being'without minde, {potted with corporeal
and made liketo allotredtothefame
deftrnétion with them, as Ecclefiaftes faith: thereisthe fame
deftruétion ofman and’ Beafts, and the condition ofbothis
equall.; -as man dieth; foglfo they dye, yeatheyhaveallone -
breath, fo that:man hathino preeminence thes -
far he. ‘Hence many Theologiansthink,; thatthe foulsOfmen —
of thiskinde bave'no immortality:after:they have léf their
body, but an hope:of the refurredtion only, whenallmen
fhallbe-reltored. was thesherefie
ofthe Arabians, who: affiemed ‘that the!fouls perifheditoge-
ther with their bodies; an@4n the.day.ofjodgement did arife
again with them ; whofegyer_ therefore being upheld by the
divine grace have obtained a mind, thefe accordingtothe —
proportion of their works become immortal(as- Hermes faith)
having comprebended alighings by their underltanding,which
_are in the eatth, andincthe fea,apd inthe Heayens;-and if there
be any thing. befides thefe above heaven; fo thanshey: behold
goodnefsit felf:: butthey who-havelived a middie ‘life,
though chey have not-obtained thedivine: intelligence; bur a.
certamvationall intelligenceof it ;thelemensfouls;whenthey
fhallidepare from theirbedies, are
receptacles, where they-areaftected with fenfitive powers, —
are exercifedin acertain kindof at; and by imagination,
andthe irafcible & concupifcible vertnées; docither-extreamly
-Tejoyce, or greivoufly lament. Of which-opinion Saint
alforwas,imhis book which
wife-then Ohaldeamcbave
delivered, that this foul fuperviveth much donger then itsbo-
yet thac: it is. not «made altogerherimmorealy wnle by
-Tranfmigration, Buti one Zhealogsans do: philotophize faro-
therwife concerning there bethe
bf
chebereatos) with divers adegrets:; fot

only accidehtall; ‘buc alle jnorinfecatly founded in’ theirvery

one foul -differeth from another, by that

proper to at felf, -which opinion Scots alfo.

droideth, and che Parifian'T heo
 @oticless ‘Hence the wife man faith, 1 was an ingenuous child,

Talents; ‘co-another two, toanother one, to every one

the Minibry, for the buildmg up o
are:( faith
are: thofe thi

and weaith;anotherhath even little or nothing,&:
givéntochim that hath ; and this is the’ divine juitice in the di-
fttibation ef gifts, that they may correfpond tothe vertacsof
every receiver, to whom ‘alfo.rewards:are givenaccordi

ahd of defetesto deferts, there

oathed

ye

pworld foradmirable fol excellent, fo wonderfull, which the foul

—
ail
f

logsans have fo-decreed én their

and obtained a good foul, viz, a better then many others;

-andatcording to thisthequaliry of fouls, every one is capable
gree; oftheir charges. avhich ‘gift is freely given
by God,. mthe Gofpel , chat he gave co: ont

rtohis vertac, and the Apoftle faith, he hath given,
fome Prophets, fome Evangelifis and
‘ Doftors, for the confummation of eer the work of
of the body of 'Chrift’ 3 for
Origen) certain wnvilibie perfections, to the
which are difpenfed here

_ inwhichthereis no fmall difference, asalfo is te-

— the men; wheretore fome one attaineth the highett
degree of wifdome and dignity ; another litcle differeth
feeding beafts is made balfia beaft;another aboundeth

-@fteatimes thar little which he hath is taken away from him, &

hg'to
‘proportion: there ts, of gifts to gifts,
be the fame proportion
rewards; to-conclade, we mult know this, that
everynoble foul hath a fourfold operation ; Firk divine, by
mage of the divine propricty ; the fecond intelleCual, by
_ formality of Participauon with the intelligences ; the third
ational, by the perfeRion ofits proper effencial eflence; the

phew ‘works : that what

fourth animal natural; by communion with the body and

things ; So that. there isno workin this

man, | being. aflociated:to his image of divinity,
ians calla foul,

which the
ling, cannot accom-

c=
“>

fore the form of all Ma
ftanding and not falling.

— power is from the foul of man

CHAP, XLV,
that which the priefts or others were: ftrick-
en withall, and:difcerned thecaufesofthings,andforeaw
future things,viz. when Oracles and Spirits defcend from the
Gods or from Demons upomthem,and are delivered bythem;
which defcendings the Platonifis call the
perior foulson our fouls ;:and
fes of the Demons, andthe fpiritsof Demons. Ofwhichforts ==
of Demons the Ancients called Exridez, and Pythons, who,
asthe Ancients believed, were wont to-enteriato the bodies
ofmen, andmakenfe of thevoyces, anditongues forthepres
diGion of thingsto come; of which Piutarch allo made men-
tion m his dialogue of the caufes ofdefe@ of Oracles: Bur
Cicero following the Stoicks, affirms. that theforcknowingof
future things belongs only tothe-Gods; and Prolomietht
Aftrologer faith, that they only that are infpised witha:diesy 7
foretell: particularthings«: Tothefe»Peter the Apottlecom
-fents, faying, Prophecying isnot made acccording tothe will
of man, but holy men fpakeas they were moved bythe holy
ghoft. Nor thatthe foretellings of thingstocomeareprape>
ly che fallingsdownofithe Gods.
tell unto us thofe things that are coming’
them, “Burthefekinds offallingsdowo, =
or fenfes,:come not into°ourfeuls when they atemoreat- |
tently bufied aboutany they pafsintothem,
when they vacant. ‘Now there arcthreckindsofthisva- |

»

‘4

a *

“= ° ‘
a
ay
“>

Ofte ff kindof pene fom te Mufes.

ryHrenfie 4 is an iHloftration of the foul coming from the |
‘Gods, or Demons Whence, this Ovid,

this. by alienation; ‘forsheab:
ftgatts from thofe by whith the corporeal fenfes are Ritred up,

and being eftratiged: froman: animal mani, adheres! toa diety
from whom ir receives thofe things which. ic cannot fearch ins

power ;. for when the minde is free, and at
betty; she rcinesofthe body being lobfed, and going forth as
clofe prifon;tian{cendsthebonds of the members;and

-wothing hindring of it, ‘being: ftiored: up-by own inftigati-
andinitigated by a divine fpirir,
afid-forecelis fucure things: Now there are four kinds of divine
~phrenfie proceeding from feveral dieties, viz..ifromthe
From Dionysus, from eA pollo, and The
therefore. from ther Mules; ftirs upsaad
tempers the mind, and, itidivine by diawing-fuperior
things to inferior things-by things natural,’ Now Mufes are
the foulsof the celeftial fpheres, according: to which there are
‘found feveral degrees;-by which there is:amateraction of {u-
‘petior: things.co inferior... :-The inferior of refembling
the fphear of the. thofe things which are:frém
syegetables, as plants; fruits of ceeesy:roots, ‘and sthofe which
Yaretirom: harder mattets,.as Scones; Metals; their.alligations, —
Se itis faid-that che ftone
Rone ofthe: Civet-cat .canfe divination ; alfo
Vervain, and the Hearb Theangelis caufe foothfaying;::as hath |
been ‘above faid, ‘The fecond degree refembling Afercury,
thofe animals, and which ate

4 ‘
°
“>
ow
¢
x
é
«
of
j
ad
¥ ~
as
A

Book If Of Occult Philofophy.
compounded.of the mixtion of divers natural things tose. :
ther, as Cups, and Meats ; upor this account the’ fecsee ofa
Mole, fany one eat it whileft itis warm, and panting,
conduceth,as it is faid,to the foretelling of future events, And
Rabbi Afofes in his commentaries upon Leviticus tells, that
there is an animal called Fedua, having a humane (bape,

in the midle of whofe navel comes forth a {tring,by which itis

faftned to the ground likea gourd, and as far as the length of

that ftring reacheth, it devours and confumes all that is green

about it, and deceiving the fight, cannot be taken, unlefs chat

ftring be cut off by theftroke ofa dart, which being cut off,

it prefently dies. Nowthe bones of this animal being after

acertain manner laid upon the mouth, prefently he whofe

mouth they are laid: on, is taken with a phrenfie, and footh-

faying. The third degree anfwers tothe {phear of Venus; This

poffeffeth fubtile powders, vapours, and odours, and oynt-

ments, and fuffumigations, which are madeofthefe of which

‘wehave {poke above. The fourth degree belongs to the {phear
ofthe Sun; this poffeffeth voyces, words, fingings, and flar-
monical founds, bythe fweet confonancy whereof it drives ‘-
forth of the minde any troublefomenefs therein, andchears = =
it up. Whence Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, advile us to com-
pofe a difcontented minde, and chear it.up by finging and ~

_ harmony. So Timotheus is faid to have with founds {ftirred up
King Alexander toa phrenfie : fo the Prieft Calame ( Aure-
lins Augufius being witnefS ) was wont athispleafurebya
certain fhrill harmony co call. himfelf forth out of his body
into a rapture, and extafie; of thefe alfo we have before
fpoken. The firft degree is anfwerable to Adars: this pof-

feffeth vehement imaginations, and affe@ionsofcheminge,
conceits alfo, and motions thereof, of allwhiclibefore. The
fixth degree an(wers to Pupiter : this poffeffeth the difcourfes
of reafon, deliberations, confuleations, and. morakpurgati- =
ons: of thefe- we have fpoken in part above, andfurther we =

thall foeak afterwards; Ie poffeffeth alfo admirations, and
at the aftonifhment of which, che phanrafic, and
reafon are fometimes fo reftrained, thar they fuddenly lee -

all their own adtions: ‘whence then the minde it felf be-
‘ing free, and expofed to a diety ont: whether to any God, :
Demon, doth receive fupernal, and divine inflaencies, viz,
thofe concerning which it did deliberate before. Sowe
that the Sybils, and the Priclts of Pyrhia were wont tore.
ceive oracles in the caves of Pupiter, and Apollo. The feventh ©
~degtee rcefembles Saturn: this poffefleth the more fecret in-
telligencies, and quiet contemplations of the minde. I call
Ke here, the contemplation, the free perfpicacity of the minde,
Rides fafpended with admiration upon the beholding of wifdom.For
that excogitation which is made by riddles,and images,is acer-
tain kind of fpecolation, or difcourfe belonging to Pupiter,
and notacontemplation. The cighth degree refembles the
ftatry heaven ; this obferves the fituation, motion, raies, and
light of the celeftial bodies: it poflefleth alfo images, rings,
and fuch like, which are made after the rule of celeftials, as we
have above fpoken. The ninth degree anfwers to the primum
mobile, viz. the ninth {phear, as the very univerfe : this pof-
fefeth things more formal, as Numbers, Figures, Chara€ters,
and obferves the occult influencies of the intelligences of the
heaven, and other myfteries, which becaufe they bear the effi-
gies of celeftial dieties, and invocated fpirits, eafily aflures
them, and compelieth them being forced by acertain necefii-
ty of conformity to.come to one, and detains chem, chat'they
fhafl not eafily go back, of which we read in the Oracles in
Ceale now at length, (pare words, to life giveref,
Diffolue, and leave old fhapes( Ithee requeft )
Difbape the members, and the winding: fheet
_ &ndinanovherplaceinthe fame book,
© YeGarlands loofethe feet, with water clean
det shem be [prinkled, and the Laurel green
Be taken off frow th hands, and every line
Charatter be blotted out

Pes

t
‘ ae;
»
j

Of thele we have fuffictently treated already, and thall
afterwards treat furcherofthem,

—

MENU.

icond kinde from Dionylings a

N Ow the fecond phrenfie proceeds from Dionyfiws: this

doth by expiations exterior, and“interior, and by con~

jurations, by myfteries, by folemnities, rites, temples, and

obfervations divere the foul into the mind, the fupreampare

of it felf, and makes it afic and. pure temple of the Gods, ia

which the divine fpirits may dwell, which the foul chen pof-

{cffing as the affociate of life, is filled by them withelicity,

wifdom, and oracles,not in figns, and marks, or conjectares,

buc i a certain concitation of the mind, and free motion:

So Bacchus did foothfay tothe Beotsans, and Epimenidesta

the people of Cows, and the Sybil Erithea tothe Trojaus,

Sometimes this phrenfie happens throughaclearvifion, fome-

times by an exprefs voyce : So Socrates was governed by his ee

Demon,whofe counfel he did diligently obey,'whofe voyce he

did often hear with his ears, towhomalfo thefhapeofaDe- 3

mon did often appear. Many prophecying fpirits allowere = *

wont tofhew themfelves, and be affociacs with the fouls of -

them that were purified ; examples of which there are many tn ©

facred Writ, as in Abraham, and his bond maid Hugar, in fa-

cob, Gideou, Elias, Tobias, Daniel, and many mere. So Adam

had familiarity with the Angel Razse/. Shem the fon of Xeah-

with fophiel ; Abraham with Zadkiel: Tfaac. and Jacob with

Peliel ; Iofeph, Iofowa and Daniel with Gabriel; Mofeswith -

Metattron; Elias with Malbiel ; Tobias the yonger with Ka- —

phal; David with Cerniel Maunoah with Phadael

with Cerrel; Ezekiel with Hafmael ; Efdras with Upiels

Solomon with Michael. Sometimesthe fpirics by vertue ofche

fouls enter into, and feifeupon organical bodies, whether of

brutes or men, and fouls thereof as the bafis, utter

| the.

ad

a
aod
we
¥
Ee
‘
“>

thos 5

Phebean fulgor charmed, did from on high

Come down, and through pure.air was filently

‘Conveyed ; Came sato fouls well purified
a fonorous breath, a voyce uttered

“Through a nortal throat —

5 Of the third kind of phrenfie from Apofto.

% | Ow the third kind of phrenfie proceeds from Apollo,
viz. from the mind of the This doth by certain
facred myfteries, vows, facrifices,adorations, invocations, & cer-
. tain facred arts, or certain fecret confe@tions,by which the fpi-
 gits-of their God did infafe vertve,make the foul rife above the.
eg mind, by joyning it with dieties, and Demons : fo we read
concerning the Ephod,which being applied, they did prefently
‘prophecie : fo we read in the books of the Senats in the chap-
ters of Eleaxar , that Rabbi Ifrael made certain cakes , writ
upon with certain divine and angelicallnaines, and fo confe-
erated, which they that did eat with faith, hope, ‘aad charitie,
. . did prefently break forch with a fpirit of prophecie. We read
fame place that Rabbi Fohena the fon of Pochahad did af-
‘ter that manner enlighten acertain rude countryman, called
Eleazar, beifg altogether illiterate, that being compafled
about with a fadden brightnefs, did unexpectedly preach fach
myfteries of the Law toan affembly of wife men, that he
did even aftonifh all thac were neer him. And itis reported .
of acertain mancalled Hervifcus an -Agyptian, that he was
- endowed with fuch a divine nature , that at the very fight -
» Of images that had any diety in them, he-Was forthwith ftirred

voyces t ough organical inftraments, as is manifelt in Bas.

4 lams Afes, and in Saal, on whom the {pirit of the Lord fell,

4 Pro Of thefe Apollo in hi in Porphyry

.. and Prophecyed. thefe Apollo in his anfwers in Porphyry

505°

ture, that wheo Sand, was amonglt the Prophets ,. the. fpiric
of the Lord came upon him, and he propheciedand when he
went forth from the aflembly.of the Prophets, he ceated to

rophefie ; the fame happened to thofe officers. which

ent to catch David; who when they faiw the company of the —

Prophets, and Samse/ {anding in the midft of them, received
the {pirit of the Losd.onshem, and prophefied alfoi So
is the abounding of divine light, oftentimes in the prophets,
taken with a divine phreafie , thar it alfo feifeth on.them that
are neer them, and makes them have the fame Spirit of phren-
fie: It is not therefore incredible, that an.ignorane man {hould
prefently .be made. wife; and:again that a.wife man. become
ignorant for there certain to.few,) of in-
forming,adorning,& pure mind fo tharc.it thould
refently be recovered out of the darknefs of ignorance, an
rought to the light of wifdom : and on the contrary,there is
a way by certain hid fecrets,to. make them that haye unclean,

and unbelieving mindsto Become

for the prefent they are learned and wifé.;,Mans min

efpecially that whichis fimple, and pure,may (Apulemsbeing

 -witnefs by fome facred, and myfterious recreation. and ap-
peafing,be fo broughtinroafleep, and aftonied, , that ic may
forget things:prefent fo utterly,as to be brought intoits divine

nature, and fo be enlightnéd with the divine light ,-and in-

fpired with a divine phrenfie chat it may foretell things-to

come, and withall receive the vertue of fome wonderfull

effeéts. Whence famblicus faith, when the prophets are in-
{pired with adiety, they fear nothing, for they go through

wayes unpaffable, and are carried into. the fire without any

hurt, and paffe over rivers. So we read of certain Caves, as

of eApollo, Trophonius , the three footed ftools, deis,foun-
tains, lakes, and fuch like, chat were confecrated to thegods
after this manner, or made by that myfterie, that from thence
the priefts might draw che {pirit of prophteying, as famblicus
in Porphyrie: The Sybid (faith he -) ta. De/phi was wont to re~

ceive God after two wayes: cither by a fabrill fpiric, and fire,

4 = “ -
up Wi hire Ve read alfo i
‘
©
°

ad

Of Occule Philofophy: Book LL
which did break forth fomewhere. ont’ of the mouth of the |
eaye , where fhe ficritg in the entrance upon a brazen three
footed ftoofdedicated to a'diery,, was divinely infpired , and
did utter prophecyings ; ora great fire flying ont of the cave
did cirround this prophecefs, {tirring her up, being filled with
a diety, to prohhefie , which infpiration alfo fhe received ©
 asthefateuponaconfecrated feat, breaking forth prefently .
‘Into preditions. Moreover there was a prophetefs in
Branchi which fate upon an extree, and cither held a wand in
her hand givento her by fome diety , or wafhed her feet, and
fometimes the hem of her garment in the waters, or drew the.
- vapour of fire from the waters. By alf thefe the was filled
_ with divine fpléndour , ‘and ‘did'onfold many Oracles. We
read that in the Country Of Thracia there was a certain
paflage confecrated to Bacchus, from whence predictions,and
Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors of whofe temples
having drank wine abundantly did do ftrange things. Amongft
. the Clariansalfo , where the temple of Clarins Apollo was, to
whom it was pwen to utter divine things , they having drank
much wine did ftrange things. There was alfo a propheticall
fountain of Father Achaia, conftituted before the temple of
Ceres , where they that did enquire of the event of the fick did _
a glafs by degrees ticd to 2 {mall cord, to the top
of the water, and certam fupplications and fumes being
made, the event of the thing did appear inthe glafs. There
_ was allo not far from Epidaurus a City of Laconiaa deep Fer,
which was called the water of into which cakes of corn
being caft, anfwers were given, fortunate, if the waters did
quietly rerain what wascaltin; but unhappy, if they did as
‘it were {corning of them, caft thein back. like they fay
dothe caves of , into which monger facrifices
fhew the fame prefage of good or ill, by, being retained, or
rejected. The like things reports Diox in his Romane Hiftory,
in a place which they call the Nymphs : where Frankincenfe
being caft into the ames , Oracles were“received concerning .
things which he did defire ro know , efpecially con-.
‘cerning death, and chofe things which belonged to marri- |

ages,

ta
a
{4
x
> le
e
“owes

Book IT, OF Occult Philo fophy.

jo7

ages. Wonderfall alfo is that which Arifotse woleea Of a cer.
tain fountain of the Palifoansof Sicilia which

did take an oath did go, and whatever they did afirmipon

oath writ it upon tables,which they caft into the fountain. If

thofe things were true, the tables would fwim if falfe, fink

then fire coming fuddenly forth burned ‘himthat was perjured
into afhes. There was alfo in the City Dodona an’ Oxk, which

alloon as any one entered in to: receive an did'forth-

with move, and make a found ; there was alfoa ftatue holding
awand , which did firike a bafon, whereby the bafon made.
an{wer by moderated ftrokes. W
of Aufinns to Paulinut,

Anfwers did give the Dodonean Buss,
With moderated ftrokes ; fo docile t was,
Of the fourth kinde of Phrenfie, from Venus: |

N and it doth by a fervent Jove:convert , and tranfmure.
the mind to God , and: makesit altogether like to God,as it-

hence itis read in the Epiftle

Ow the fourth kind of Phrenfie proceeds from Venus,.

were the proper image of God; Whence Hermes faith, O»

A/fclepius \ Man is a great miracle, an animal to be honoured:

and adored; for he pafleth into the nature of God whereby he
becomes God : He knowsthe rife of Demons’; andhe-knows- .

himfelf to have his originall with them, defpifing the part

of his humane nature tn himfelf, having a fire confidence.

of the divinity @f the other; The foul therefore'being con-

verted, and made liketo God , is'fo formed of God, that

doth above alll intellect, know all-things by acertain effential

contract of Divinisy : therefore Orpheus deloribes love to
be without eyes, becaufe it is above the intelle@, Now. then

the foul being fo converted into'God by love, and fablimated . —

above the inteHe@uall fpear, doch betide that it hath by its in-

>»

wv

tegrity Obtain'd the fpisit of prophecie; femetimes

t 7 « *

—
‘
. ow
¢
¥
wa
. »
a
a
»

and’ gréater then the nature of the world

can-do, Which works aré called miracles. For as the heaven |

“by its image slight,’ and heat, doth thofe things, which the

force ofthe fire cannot do by. its‘maturall quality ( whichin~
eAlchymic ismoft known by experience) {fo alfo doth God by

the image and light of do thofe things , which the

world cannot do by its innate vertue.” Now the image of |

God isman, at leaft fuch-a man that by a phrenfic from Venus

is made like ro God,and lives by the mind only; and receives
God into himfelf. Yet the foul of man according. to the
Hebrew Doors and Cabalifts, is defined to be the light of
ps God", and Created after the image of the word , che caufe
canfes, the fir example, and the fubftance of God figured
a feal whofe Chara@ter is the eternal! word. Which
Trifmegifius confidering,faith, chat fuch a man is
“more excellent then they that are in heaven, or at leaft equal
tothem.

“CHAP,

hich are taken with the falling ‘or with a or
AS is an ahienation, and an illus
‘a tration of the foul proceeding from God, by which
iz Gad doth again retract the foul being fallen from above to

from hellto heaven: The caufe of this is in us conti-
-puall contemplation of fublime things, which as far as ition-
Joyns with amoft profoundintenfdn of the mind,the foul ro
ncorporcalwifdom,doth fo far fEcallit felf with ics vehement
agitations from things {fenfible and the body., and (as‘P/ate
faith)in foch a manner fometimes, , thapic even out of the

body, and feemeth as.ic were diffolved : even as Awrelins
seporteth concerning a Priclt of Calamia;(of whom

% wwe have mention hetay (Qith moft

to a dead man, ; and-when he Was
fire and wounded , he fele’ it hot ; [0 great therefore is the
command of the out; when it hath obtained itt’ a
naturé, and is nog by the alfaréments of ‘the nies

that by its own power it fuddenly afcendeth, ‘hor Onely

maining. in thé body, but even laoled from its fem
cers,and fiyeth forth of the body to the foperceleltiatl Habicas
tions , where now it High, a nd moft hike God,
and made the rece table “diving fil with t
divine Li ight and | races, ‘Whence Zoroaffes aich, thou
afcend 0. the. lig be it, felt, and the beams ‘of the’ Fachet,
whence thy foul fent thee, clothed with very. ‘Shuch inind

tho

and Trilmeg faith itis heceffary tha;

the heavens,and'| Fromehe¢ wire. of thavo
ras faith, thou-by ‘leaving th
cious heavens, how hale, an We: read
that ermes, S ocrates Xx enocrates Plato, ‘ Plotine’ Hea:
clitus, thagoras and Z or oaftes were ‘wont. to abftrad
felves by rapture, and fo Jearn | ‘the’ ‘many
thingstalfo read in, Herodotus, that here vas in Proconvéft

whole foul fometinies went ont of ‘the and-after the
vification of placesfat remote retagied\again’ inetd the body

more learned: Pliny reporteth tt fame thing,that the foulof
Harman was ‘Wont’ ‘Wander

being left, and ro bring trie tidings. of things vety*far of:
and there are even to chis day in Norway af ‘Laptanid” very
many who can abltraét chemielves threeWhole dayes from
their body, and being returned. declare many things which
are afar off ; ahd in the mean it, ig, neeeflaty
them , thar” not any living creature come upon, them Of tone
them; otherwifé chey report thac they eanfot
their body. Therefore know, that (according to
doftrine of the yptians, ) eeing rhe foul ts a
ritall light when is lodfed ‘from body, it

hendech évéry place and , infuch mariner in-
na which being open, fe felt

ji
©
aa”
Ss
af
J
a.
2”

>»
p

Book

¥

Fatieth HOt ny where, for every where,and

in his book of Divination faith, ‘nei-

fool of mati ac time divine, when it is fo’

foofed that iehath indeed little'or nothing to do wich the bo-
dy when therefore it‘fhall attaittto chat ftace, which is the

fapream degree of contemplative perfection , theniris rape

but by the infpéion of the Ideas, abd it knoweth’

things. by the light of che ‘Ideas: of which light Plate
faith few men are parcakers ia this life; bute in the hands of
the gods. d
falling ficknefs, doin fome manner {mitate ar

Under the glaffie gulf the sarsdia fears

the darknefsof the body and mortality, buc after death

from all created (pecies, and underftandeth not by acquired

°

all: alfo they whoare troubled with the fyncope
ure,
‘and io’ thete fomerimes as rapture do bring

forth’ prophefie, in which kind of ‘proptiefying we read that

many Arabians were very excellent.and there are
ertain kinds of foothlayings, which are a middie betwixt the

confines of naturall predictions and fupernaturall Oracles, viz.
which declare. things co. comé from fome excels of ‘paffion,
4s. too much love, torrow,, or amo OF In
f:death,as in the mocher of Achilles;
ot) bes without parentsdear

Or amonatt frequent ‘fights, or in
thea ny of d th,

For there is in our, minds a certain perfbicuons
‘and,capable of all things, ,bnt encumbred and hindred“b

having acquixed immortality, , and, being freed from the body
tc hath, a fulland perfe& knowledge. Hence it cometh to
fe, chat they who are .nigh co death, and weakened by old

fomewhat of an unaccuftomed light, be-
canfe,the foul hindsed by che fenfes, underftandeth
Nery acutely, and being

is not altogether fubject to the being 48

cing now.as it were alittle relaxed from

it were nigher to the place, cothe, which it is about ta

perceiveth, revelations, which, being mixed with its.
then offered to ic; whence Ambrofe.in his
book.of th

the

belief of che refurrection, faich, Which being free

‘ ‘
—
oa
«
a
ak ar
ot
PS a
-° - a

in the ‘aerial: not:
whence

| ys

were burted, do tohigher chings,
declare body ‘things yea even of

TOw! call that’a dream; which
the fpirit of che phanralie and intellect oniced 'tbgether,
or by the illuftration:of che Agent intcliecbabove ouriouls,
or by rtherree revelation of fome divine: power in aquictand
pied nnd forby this Our fol |
ndantly yieldeth prophefies to us: for imdteams we feem
both to learn to read and find’chem out;alfo
many dowbefull chings, many Policies, many things unknown,
unwithed for, by our-minds,are mani-
feffed to us in: Dreams’: reprefem
places appeaty and:che Imagesof men ‘bothaliveand dead,
and of things cocome are foretold); and alfo things whichac
any times have d,.are: revealed, which we kaewinor
by aay ‘report’; andithiete dreams need inter-
pretation, thole of which we trave-ipoken im the book,
which to divinacionmec fore-knowledge sand it com-.
meth to pats chacchey whodee thefe dreams, forthe molt. —
re underftand net ; fot ( as Arabian
ath ) asto/feedreams; 4s from she firength of:imagnation, —
wnderftand chemise: che ftrengtiy ofuaderitanding
wholeintelle byjchetoo mach

ations of unkaovwn

or ics imaginative or =
~phantaltich

ty
wis
“aa
A
—
a,
‘
fm
eg
x

Philofophy. B ok: LIT

iphantattick fpirit 1s tao-dall.and unpolifhed,chat ‘it cannot re-
fpecies and reprefentations which: flow from the'fo-
and: recain them when received , this man

4 altopether tnfit for the foothfaying by dreams. Therefore
he whowould receive true dreams,fhould

undifturbed, and an undifquieted imaginative
fo compofe i, thatic may be made worthy of

the knowledge and gdvernment by the mind.and underitan-

a e “ding: for fach afpirit is moftfit for prophefying, and ( as.

Simefiea faith) moft clear glafs of all the Images which flow

everywhere from all things: when therefore we are found in
nor diftorbed: in mind, not dulled by meat or drink, nor
nor provoked by any vice of luft or
bur chaltly going co bed, fallafleep, then our pure and
foul being loofed from all hurtful! choughrs, and
dreaming, is‘ endowed. with this divine {pirit
atid doth receive thofe beams and repre{én-

swhithfard darted down, ‘and thine, forth fromthe
minds elf; and were ina deifying
far, morei certainly, clearly; and efficacionfly behold
them by: the Vulgar enquiry of che intellect, and
 ..  @by-che difcourfe of s¢afon;: the divine power inftrudting the
thetr feciery by: the oportunity che
fnether will char be wanting
Bherefore' doth; by quiet and religious meditacion, .and
according to nature, |pre-
his fpiric price; himfelf,, that by
divine, and! knowing all chings; but
on dothitenguith witha phantaltick

Sfasthe divine fight; by redfon ofits weaknels, Judgerhconfu-
andalfo when:welate overcome. with

rinkénnels than cour being oppreffed: with
 diwere forns dulky for whith caule

pbiarus the: Prophet {as We. stad

ax -

as
j
a
rey
‘

A

OF Occult it
ed thiol, “who would

Book

day from meat, ae ays from wine-that the foul could
not rightly ‘prop! fie it were free-from»wine;.and
meat ; for to: fober and :religionseminds,, on: the
divine worfhip, the "Gods arewont to give whence

And them infpire with knowledge
Hence it was a enftome

fhould receive certain facred expiations. and jacri-

fices being firlt celebrated," and divine worthip ended, did-
tcligioufly yiy'dowd even ina confecrated chamberjorat

on the skins of the factifices of —

a

a

mention in thefe verles;*

Anfwers todoubts ; when-gifts the prieffs

Andunder flent night prepares.to flee. shes
‘And little after he fingeth, Hs

add the rulers: arthe CiceroAaith were
wont to lye the Templeat Pafphae, thatthey might -
dream. The fame'was done inthe Temple

true dreams were thoupht-robefent iAndthe
Calabrians conlulting Podalyrim the fon of did

‘fleep neer his Sepulchre’ in ‘lambes skins; for fodoing they.
were told in’their dreams’ whatfoever they defired to |

Pw
a
é
A
fet
ld
A

| and meridian errours,
; wcither doth fear {trike theminde, nor

adhereto the
wf Senatours daith. )founkinds of dreams :

o@urnall vifion:: rhe fourth, which fs

moft Tare; which ts concerning

Casi,

the thoughes'tremble, and ‘che minde - moft.quiet, doth

Deity;for there are,(as i-fobenan

the firft Matutine, whith is made betwixtfleep anda waking
the fecond, which @memeeth concerning another: the think
‘whofe interpretation isethewen ‘to the dreamer in the
repeated to fame
dreamer, according to that whith Pofeph faith to Pharoub, But
that thou haft feen:che dream tothe fame thing
the ‘feeond time, ‘it isa ; but that dream
thofe things which one did
“nedirate of, and revolve imhis minde,when hegoeth to bed,
‘Thou O King think upon thy bed, what
become Of thele ;- but itis, aecefary, chat he
whichinterpreteth other mens thath the. knowledge
by the which he can diftinguith and difcern the fimilitudes of
allthings, and. know the cuftomesof all nations, according
tothe laws which they have received from’God and ‘his An-
£ farther this malt be ‘known, ‘that ‘there is fearce any
am without fomeé vanity; as no grain of corn without his

Sghaffe, which thing even the dreanrof. the Patriarch

; which his father Jasob interpreted , faying ;

meaneth this dream, that thou-haft feen2 what (hall
thy mother, and down and worthip
thee? which. effe& conecrniag hismorher, who thouly after

died, followed. nor, Rabbi Fohenan sin the foracited
book; faith thefe things ; and alfo Rabés Levi affirmeth, that
bee kopt back from his.cffeCt longer
year ofthis which was accomplifhed in the thirty ninth
yeubofihie age ; cthesdlore- whofoever would. divine
bewell difpofedin body; his brain from.
wapoursindhis mind from permrbations,and let him that d
from’ him dsink that which will

aed

e a oe
“
“
wt
»
va.
“2
€
»
“y
‘

Lh

v 4

«J

cized and confeceated i the whicha

he fhall cafily obtain the gift of oracles and-dreams,;

—

‘
J

Lots and marks poffelfing the powerof Oracles

being before for by-catneft prayer,and fometimes com~
-manded by himfelf co ‘bedone, as issreadin Leviticus:
concerning a goat to beofferedto ‘the Lord, andaf the fcape:

goat;and in the bookof Numbers of the rods ofthe Tribes of
of the Lord divide che fandt, and inhericancesto che tribes of
Hrael according to the: command of God.' The Apoftlesof
Chrit, prayers goingbefore, did by locchoole ALatthiasina
the place of fudas thettaitor. fonas the Prophet when
fying from the prefence of God did fail to Tharfus, adange-
raifed, was-by lot foand out-by the Mariners
Cala reports © |
tempeft feafed. repo Provillus
ly burnt; or referved co another”
difafe.: There was formerly-at Bara;
le:of Hercules confticared by achelt’-—
bord, where he confulcof anything; after hehad>
prayed,calt feur,dice, vas Prophet obferving..

rous ftorm being»

ing taken by his ‘enemies, concerning
whether he fhoald be prefent
time, thatby lothe efeape
a Town of Achaia,an ovat

‘

Ta re are alfo-certain Lots having a divine power
Oracles, were Indexes: of' divine: judgement,

temples anoynted, things canting: dreams being. put:onvhis
fingers, and the reprefentation oft treavens.bemg pur undér 7

his head and paper being confetrated ie prayersbeing faid;let
to know : So he fhall fee moft. cruc.and certain: dreams with

the true. illumination of his intelle&:. whofoever therefore

(hall know to joyn together thofesthings which her¢ and

there we have this matter in thefe books,

be

“$16 Of Occu 0 ‘Book PPE

_ > @id find written in the:cheftboard what fhould come to pafs -
Now: all fach dice were: made of the bones of facrifices, Now
muft:know, thac the “Ancients were not wont upon
every flight. ¢aufe co.caft lots; buteither upon neceffity, or for
fome advantagiousénd,.and that not buc with great devotion,
reverence, expiations, falting, Purity, prayers, invocations,
yowes, facrifices, confecrations, and fuch-tke facred myfteries
“@f religion. For thefe facred;ordinances were wont co gobe-
forecour. works, e{pecially. co: proeuré» the divine good-will,
and pleafare, andthe prefence of the divine fpirits, by. whofe
@ifpenfation the lor being direéted; we may receive a true
ee judgement of the things fought for. Every one therefore that

works by lots; maft go about ic witha mind well difpofed,
troubled, nor diftracted, and witha ftrong defire, firm

of knowing that which

{hall be defired. Moreover he mult being qualified with purity,
> thaftity;and holinefs cowards God,and the celeftials, with an

gndeubted hope, firm faith, and. facred:orations, invocate

“them, that hemay.be made worthy, of receiving the divine fpi-'

‘its, and “knowing: the divine pleafire;-for if thou hale

qualified; they will difcover t@thee moft great fecretsiby ver-,
tue of lots, and thou fhalt become a trne Prophet, and able:
to fpeak truth concerning things paft,. prefent, and to come,
of which-thou fhale be demanded. Now what we have fpoken:
here concerning lots, is alfoto be obferved in the anguries of
all difcernings,viz.when with fear,yet with a firm expectation.
we prefixto our fouls for the fake of prophecying fome ¢cer-

tain. works, or require a fign, as Eleafar, Abrahams countty-
Gideow Judge in I/rael are read: tohave done. There was:
~onee at Pharwa City of Achaia in the midle of the marker a:

of CAZercury, where he chat went receive any omen, :
didjfeankincenfe being fumed,and candles being lighted, which.
were fetbeforeit, and that conatry coin being offered.onthe,

Sight Wang: of the ftatue,, whilper into, the-right the».

. |. > Statue, wilatfoever’ he would demand,, prefently, his:

being topped with both his, hands,,did make halt away!
fgom che market place ,which when he was paft, did

i

¢ °°
on
«4
o
‘
an

any man fora certain Ofacle given to him. Although
fore thefe kinds of lots feem tothe ignofant ro he
fortuitous, and tohavenothing oF reafon inthem, yee

are difpofed by God, and the higher vettues by certain re,-
do fall befide incension of

fons. neither they.
moderates them. Was not the lot in choofing Sau/ to be

King of J/rael, thought tofall upon him cafually, and forty.

itoufly ? Yet he was before appointed by the Lord to be King,

CHAP,

he that will receive Oracles difpofe himfalf»

_ Supream ftate of the foul,goech to receive. oracles,

muft go to them being chaltly and devoutly difpoled;: being

pure and, clean. go.to them, fo that his foul be pollaced wi

no filthinefs:,. |
his mind and body as much as he may from all difeafes, and
paffions, and allicrationallconditions, which adhere to.it as
ruft.co iron, by rightly eompofing and difpo thofe. things
which -belong, to che tranquillity of the mun

N ingsthe mind.is purged , and reduced intog-
ow by what things the For

neither wifdom without Religion, nor Religion withoug

wifdom isto, be approved off For wildom (as faith Solomon).

is che tree of Jife hold on

God,or the breathingsof God,

divine purity , we. mult learn by Religi

faith chat it is of

and annointed by the Prophet Samue/. And God thar ap- ONS “2
inted him King,difpoféd of the Lot

free from all guilt. He alfolo purifie

for by. this a
means he thal! receive. the sruer andWnore efficacious Oracles.

»

‘ e

his ears being opened, obferve the firft voice he did hear from

é
L
“Wy
. ¢
i
—
‘a
t
Ra
oe ~
Pts
«

famosis Memmius Gad be, 210!

prince of life, ‘who reafon; which allwe
wifdom, firft found out, and whoby art

tife from troubles , dar fet apart

underltendeth ‘gh be! 2 divine
Democritus thinketh that there are no men wife but
they that are @ruck with fome divine as was
that Cretenlian, whom they. report learned all things of
piter , whence he had uent with God in the
-mount Jda : fo alfo the report that JZelofagora
_ Blenfinne wes taught by the Nymphs ; fo-alfo we read, that
Behe when he was a Shepherd in Beotia , and kept his flock
meer the mountain Helicon,had fome péns given him by the
which havin received, he prefently became a Poet,

which become fo fodainly was nor of man, 4 divine

ainfpiration ; for God conveying himfelf into holy fouls,makes
Prophets and workets of miracles , being swerfull
and {peceh, as Plato and WMercurins affiem; and alfo
ae Pyshagerian faying that fach a ian is the
Ged , and thar: is ‘his whom affents our Pant;

man: sonable Of God’; ‘and'in another place {peak/
T can do alt things in him that frengtheneth me;
for he isouf power, withoue which (‘as he faith ) wecan do
and Et 5 fay | there fs no Vertue’ whether

all ‘Or morati and tn his fecters he faith
and: can do nothive in the feercts of
influence of divine vertue.Now wereccive
8 ‘Ghiginfleence then only , when we do acquit our felves fron

 burdesfoste impediments’, and from carnafl and Terrene

pork ‘and from afl agitation; ncither

or jmpare-eye behold things too fight): ‘neither cathe
-geceive divine who is ignorant of the pagifying

Now to | of mind by
neither

‘
Wwe
wail
»

BookI TI. . Of Occult

neither can any one that isinigiated newly unto thofe myfte- |
ries prefently comprehend all cleerthimas;but his mind mutt be
accuftomed by degrees, untill che incélle@& becomes moreen. ~
lightened,and applying it felf co divine light bemixed withir,
A humane foul thetefore when it fhafl be rightly purged.and
_expiated, doth then, being loofed from) all impunity, break
- forth with a liberall, motion , and afcends upwards, reegives
“divine things. , ic (elf, ‘when happily it feems to be
inftru@led from elswhere ; neither dothic then need ahy -
membrance, or demonftration by reafon. of the induftry of
it felf, as by irs mind which is.che. head and the-pilotiof the
foul, . it its own nacure the angels, attdinto
it deéfires, noc: by facceffion or time,butina moment.
For David when he had not,learning,was of a Shepherd made
a Prophet, and. molt. éxpert of divine things, Solamon in the
dream of one night , was. filled with the knowledge of aif
things aboveand below. So J/asah,. Exekjel,..Daniel and the
other Prophets, and Apoftles were, taught, For the foul
\ ( which isthe commen opitiion of the Pythogeriani,.and
Platonif's)can by way of purification, without ay other findy, —
or feasching only by anmeafie , and. adventitions. collatingon
_thefe intelligibles received. from above, acquire the perfect
knowledge of all things knowable. It camalfo by
-_callexpiation atrainto this , ‘underitand all things In-
vifibly by) its fabftanciall. form. For the. mind. is purged,
and expiated by eleanfing , by abftinence’, by, penitency,, by
almes.: and then alfodo thereunto conduce.certain an-
ftitutions , as thalf afterward. be difcovered,. For, the fonhis

tobe cured by chefiudy of Religions, and, indeed chele which

commonly called occulr, that being rclbored 16, ics found-
nefs, confirmed by truth » and forused b divine graces,may
not fear any rifing (hakings,

iw Seu te

er
A
én
enn
y

‘
ve
rw

Beok HL

and bow to be |

E therefore firit obfetve in fond
“works, in affeGions ; and to put away all filchinefs,
“and perturbations of the mind,and whacfoever fenfe or fpitit
~ that offends, and whatfoever things are in mind ualike tothe
heavens , not only if they be in mind and fpiric, but alfoif
“ghey be inthe body ,- or abour the body : for fuch an externall
“qleannefs iseleeved not to help a little co the purity of the
For this caufe che Py Philofophers being taken

the defire of Oracles, ‘divine praifes’ being cele rated,

wath themfelves in'a river asin a bath, & did pat on whice

"gayment and linen ; ‘for’ they did account wooll a prophane
clothing being the excrements of bealts, and they did inhabic

io chamber , and alcogether unfported, Th like man-

per che Br rmauni the wife men. of the Indians were wont to
wath themlelves naked in a’fountain, which is called Dirce-in

Beoriaxheir ‘heads being annointed with amber drops,

- and odours fit for that seile' ; then after they were accord-
“ipg'to caftome fufficiently clean, they were to go forth about
, clothed ia white linen ‘with a white attire having
ings ion cheif'fingers'and ftavesin their hands. In like man-
A ner amongft thie Gymnofophifts it was acuftom to wath them-
_ “'felvesthrice in aday, and twice in the night in cold water, be-.
entred into the holy places. They did alfo every ‘day

“gfelinen' garments every day newly wafhed.’ We read alfo of
this kind-of wathing i in refed in his books of:

None dire with bands unWafbed:
Wine forth, nor unto the gods
- Fors

tee be “ry

a<
‘
2! g- ‘
™
ry
‘
AS maith 4
we

Ping il, Dido, wh did petformany:

Spiritual, ‘ands
-whileft fie. tninifters to God with a clean. body.,. and

When wicked men the riversdo om

As them to handle after fo great fights bad

It was alfo acuftome amongit the Gentiles , when the
were wont to perform any holy ferviceste the gods.to
their bodies. by and when were to conte
with the infernall gods, {prinkling only did falfice. Hence i

Come, and my belly

And in another place where. brought in

them prinkle—— ay

ted for che, fight.¢

‘
€
a
r
’
4 a
3°

the: cleannefs of all which even pris air, and
the moft pure of cc rand divi
aad allures che’ God, good ‘Deitions

pandilh Demons} ‘as the
s kind of

he

aha of

sity forthe: defend the

‘obfervers thereof againft vices , and evil Demons, ‘and

 Jnakes the wind of of God to
For nothingdork more. to healch,.

of the complexion, then not to heap.together: fuper-

nities cxcecd the bounds of neceflary food.

taketrthat istoo ftrong for nature,

et (tronger then the meat,as.fome. affirm

“Of Chrilt,chat he took meat in that proportoin chat ic fhould

breed any excrement of the third concoétion. Many others

takin meat fparingly, enjoyed thereby health and ag

lity of as Moles, and Evias; f ‘fortie’day cs:

his face thined,,and ‘fic lifted up, could eafil

his bedy-as if it were‘a fpitic, For Map and,

affirm ‘that our fpific is not as'a thing, or bod

— by nutriment received through tertain Orgatis

meat, and drink, buc ja pat

“Therefore they ‘thc

olle

ne body ‘with t

x, | 4
“AEs
aw
ty
4 «
é
te.
=a’

make it , ad leaf by. the

and bring it to a pure and thin: finefs. We mult therefore in
taking of meats be pyresand abBinent:, asthe Pyrhecorian
holy asd fobervable, did pro»

mour is:bréd
foul oftentimes dreaimog,ang fomeninitis watching,is alwapes,

fabjedte Moteoves sheoP haga.

ans, if any.one death every:
motion of the mind, and body, promife perpetual! health
of both, and langilife.,
their colledge,: but thafechar. were

from wine, from

fieth, and vices, fayin
they that emulate him by a.divine.conye Which :alfo
Phraotes in Philoftrates taught the lower Indians. Moreover

we mutt aliftain from all ehple things whigh infeReighor she

mind, of (pirit,as from covet
maids co as Hermes Qigh) enforcing the mind,aadthe

thing. the psiclts, af

are calle
they. mighs live more chaltlp their, facrcd employments,

and enight fallow cheir wees
cefteare themfelyes by dyinking.ot hemlock, Moseoverthe

Orpheus teacheth ia.the, hymncof ali che. gods,)a

petuall ceaple of God, Alfowe muft abitain, fromalbmplsi
tudeand of
fach like, which hurs.chem nd.and pervert the,

envious, ambitions, (
hele She nefles,of gh

‘

in has

ich may: doll the phanrafie, niakes,,

¢ dundertand.God,.ouc

did admit. nang to

ly .fe¢.in the, dafcivions

Xe

the {pirit fhould either become thick,or befuffocated, let them,
preferve the body clean by lotions, friGtions , exercifes, and |

clothings , end corroborate Spirits by lightss and fames,

Higrophansa (ag, thee

a
—

i
»
of
—
‘ ‘ «%
ry
‘

x

a

| paffions,chey y eld.a ‘may fave. This

ferousdifeates thereof. But.
madnefs, wherehe fings, The

in Eéclefafticns, there:are

4n-fomething. “Whence it is

number of fodle, “Pherefpre the Stoicks deny that;

onsare incident co'a wife ‘man fuch paffions, which.
the. fenfitive appreheafion for tational, and mental:
opinion did Boes:
tins feem to. be where the fin fings that fome. paffions are to)
‘be afidein the inguifition o thefe

right path, then from thee quit

fear; grief, bope expel; for where aye

“We therefore’ acquit and” our minds from

miiltieudes, and fach like paffions; that we may attainto the
fimple ‘truth; >which in@eed’ many Philofophers are faid to
have attained toi im the folitude ofa long time.. For the mind.
by folitude being loofed from all ‘care’ of Ahuitiane
leafure; of the celeftiahdie=
fies. SOUMO/fes iver to the Hebrews,and the greareft
of prophers; | “in all che knowledge ‘of
Egyptians, when he’ would himfelf ‘from
Kettles; went o-the'vatt: ‘wildernefles of Erbiopin, wherealt
homari¢-affaites being afide,tie applied his mind to the fole
of divine things, in which thing he fo pleated
t chat: he fiffered him to fee him faceto

hima wondrows power of ‘miracles, asfa.
fim. So Zervaffes the father aod prince
the Magiciins, 1s faid to accain'te the knowledge of all na:
and divine thingsby the folirude of when

a
a
™>
j
‘
a

OF

—

‘writings:

divining, and The ‘fike Vhings do

of Orpheus to Mufeus declate him to have donein theides:

ferts of Thracia So wetead that Epimendes of Crerepbecaufe:

learned by a very flcep, for they fayrhat he flepe
years,é. e. to have hay hid fodong Fythaporas alfo ih ike
nerto have layen hid ten years, and: Heraclie#j, ‘and
rus for the fame caufe weredelighted with folitarineRp Bot:
by how much the more wevhave the animalandthe humane:
life, byfo much the angels) andsGod, tor
which being conjoyned; and brought ifto:a beter condition)!
we have power over all things; ruling over all. Nowhow

our mind is to be feparated from an aninial life, and from all

multitude, and to beeretted) untill i¢afcend cothat very one,
good, true, and perfect, through each degree of things know-

able, and his Commentaries

upon Alcibiades, {hewing how that firft fenfible thiags areto
be fhunned, that we to:an’ incorporealveffence,

where we mtuft.exceed: the ordemof: fouls yet malciplied by.

divers rules, habitudes, and maridnsip bonds;
and amanifold variety offorcesy and an intel.

let, and intelligible -and:to congémplate: how:
far better thefe.are thén foulsi: Moreover! we bear an in-.

telleCtual mulcitude , although: united;:and individiallpand

come to the fuperintelic@ual: and effential unity ,abfolure:
from.all mulritude,. ofigood):and
Tn dike manner we muft avoid) albknowledge that: dothany

waies diftract, and deceive, that.we may “obtain the molt:
fimple truth. The muilcitude, therefore of affeRions; fenies,
imaginations, and opinions is to. be-lefty

different; as fome chings.ate conttary to ochersin ny fibjecty

and we mult afcend £6: fcienees; in-which'alrhough there bey!
various multitude, yeothere is nocontrariéty. Bor alt are knit?
one tothe.other, and:do ferve one the other; andes
other, untill chey comeso-one, prefuppofed by:all,.an
‘pofing nese beyoud it; dt thexeft

Love Thenefore All eompolicion, divifions

red.s yer: thagis aps cop! of.

‘
de
we
fs
i
a
x
‘
«f
a
a “
@. a

Book
being laid-afide, tothe,
intelle@ual. life, and fimple fight, behald the oxclightect.,
“fence with individual:and fimple precepts, thaz.we may ‘attain:
gg ithe Being of the foul, by ‘which, we are one, and:
our culticude is uniced: Therefore let us attain
fick unity, from whem these is a union in all chings,
theaingh that onc which is-as the fower of ovr effence : which
then:at: length. we attainsto, when avoyding all multitude.

Nica part’ Of purgationsis peni-
tency for Fu

for(asfaith Seneca inThyefe)he whom
éxpiasion,

ingsto-delightgand porgeth oucofthe foul d
- and gives textain pecoliarpower, reducingusto the things
Mattytdome: ofthe fouls. whick with the:
itis fidesmotuhed Novwrhe (word!
word God: whence the

Prophes faith, a alic, Paul; writing tothe Ephefians;

Sedtebe that With boldeth bis (wordfrom blood;and the
~ of nour tind; ‘and: aibevils? chat from our’
 ~— heartand: mouth, miftibemecered-to rhe prieft in‘confeffion,
shat) he may: according -ro:the -word' of God. thofe

being witht, -may paritic, &-purge them, 87

hain

* ia
a
a
a
2A
bad
te 3

There is ds yet another ofexpiation,

ing, Of THave 'readqeryditelein Phit
fying, Give ve
_almes, all chings thallbe clean toyou
cus itis: reads us iguifheth fire
and Daniel canghe, the King fhould si
his fin by almes ; and the Angel Raphael, to ;
becaufe alms ftees from death, and is that‘which pur;
and make us find fife!
pray tothe'Father, Forgive'as we
givero others’; of which
receive ‘an hundred fold, and He fall
when he‘comes'té judge’ the quick che dead ; the
wicked abeve alfthings for cheir of bai
ofmetcy, wher he Twas hungry; and -thisity.;
ye ave me neither “anh in janoshes place

we

aks of the poor’; whaty

of, wher he bring ing”
par! he halt deftroy thee if God be in heayen; ‘for the

‘themfels tc gets sod

the whole ‘world,’ ovéredmming "Cities; and btholding whe

er | being

tt delivered ‘by'themahat are shil

‘
¥
ad
WZ
t
. e
r
r
‘
«
~y

certain , atid

facrament
bapieifmes, adjurations,.

by facrifices,: AS,
fectations, {prinklings of by
, not confecrated tO this, as having a naturall

to-be

Cis

‘worthy Author 7ofephus
‘of a root Of Basras,focalled from a lace neer

‘tha’ an'olive arce.p

thes odo this accosint, falp hur harh a place in

co ill, Demons the faut thereok,. An
in Batgations; hence cggsate

ings. were wom

iscamd bitpmen, or. the of fea water:

fulphar

‘Red gueifes-by the thacpnels.of its odour , and fea

cafor-of its fiery. partsJn | like-manner the hearb
ted by..an
withers, In like m:

valerian

pos

b

the

werkt Ap th

‘well ill {pitits., be bewitchirigs : 4

being fumed, drives away Phanta/met.
snd bat that. grave and
biftory, oF

"Town of Judea, being Of 4 yellow colour;that-inthe nightic

, and washardygo;be taken, chat it, did oftentimes
“deceive the hands of chem that went t to takeit, and go out of

ret
pulled up without dangerbut fiddain als ‘

arth

¢
AS
a
as
a
w
wk
wer
—
igh,
F
Pe
‘
j

A

—

the root toa dog by acord, and brelently de depart}.at
the dog with a great deal of pains drawes up the root,.

ic were fupplying the place of his malter prefently dies, sfeet
which any one may handle the root without dangers the
power of which is much excellent in expiations, ‘axis nianifett
for the delivery of thofe that are vexed with ‘tiridleah f ae
now that thefe kind of waters (hould aé&t apon fpiritiall fab.
{tances by putting chem to flight , or by alluring them, of -
mitigating them, or by inciting them, they are of no other ©

opinion then that oe fire of § Sicilia as upon fouls: which —
( William of Paris being witnels:) ‘not the bodics,
doth moft intolerably: torment’ the foals of- them’ ‘hat
neer. But of thole in we before,

agi

Dorations, and vowes, facrifices, and ate
tain degrees in ay to things find out God, and thofe _ ;

things whith ig the ‘divine pleafure, and |
procufe.a faceed: olvible commutiion OF Godavith
fouls ; £6? which -we ‘titter with trae and
words, y, and nd obtain a great power,

when by: the oft them to any diety we dofofar 4
move it, that he may-dired? his {peck and anfwer*by
divine ways: by
then, but occulcly chat. very~ perceive it. But often..."
times that King and Prophet David petteivesi¢; when he.
faich, will hear what-che Lord will {peak'in me.
therefare being «long time:continued, and often frequen
che <intelleée and makes'the'foul more
receiving of divine tights, divine love
faith, hope. and facred: putifieth the foal froma
contrariety , and whas és say away advérfe: co and: doth.
repe divers evils
Out, “Hence Ovia M

§

which ( faicly Diony ft?) God Speaks with:

| —
“
—
‘
a
se
rs
C H A F | | St
wg
»
‘
£4
"ae
—
a,
r
‘
y

oui prayers, by whith coming.
he atth slate in )topohories yiand enters

feeds npon

fopplicase often tehim who.
ine is noe uctered in words;

oWith, 4 and fineese cogitation |
ct shataphish with the-voice of che'mind
an Of the worldiis offered:co him. Nowa”

is an affection of achaft mind given up to God,
which by vowing wifheth that which feems'good. This

on (as famblicus and Proclus teftifie) doth fo j joyn the foulto
God, that the operation ef God is one ; viz,
fer ere as an attificer, of the mind asa divine inftrument:
are cured, :hompeltsare diverted: and
ap excellent, eridwiteig

| Mediumes.ir mulk beoworlhippeds for there
Heroes
co the-Atchetype Goto

J
ts némlcives érs,anat a
=. ¢ 5
ae
ado
nor
all
e ~<

spate and pious mind be

are as it to that. ve
ddoratione and vowed mult’

rincipally made to that one od, the highelt father,
King the god: be-
fore to the inferiour gods, let the} intention of the admini-
{tration be terminated imthem ; therefore toradotarions and
, wher they be diredted:co Ze.

Orpheus chougtse ficeleg chat ard

majefty, of the fupream God; they) malt

Hermes%o Fatins ; This faith he ) islike to facriledge when
thou kindle frankigven{e;and
fachdike ( faith Parphy orphyrie ) they are:
piety.Forthere mareriallthmg can befound which |
to .the unclean. Thetelore neither is |
-thap prayer-which is uttered by words wgreeableto Hith, mér

vice p Second ly theres ‘allo: required’ cereain affimilacion of
our hife to the divine life’) impurity) and-holines,
witha lawfull-defire of char which wewith for} forbyithis
means: weefpecially- sebtain the divine benevolenceyand ate
fabjeted theqWivine Bounty for-anieffe wes havin
minds p be! worthy-t0 beheard; and alfolehore al
which we defire:s! be worthy ‘done;
the gods will not hearken whetice divine
faith, chat God cannot be-bound b
unjuft things; therefore fer us defirenoehing of God) which
think aneomely to with for by only: dhe’ fee
that. very -many-are Frufttated of their prayers and vowés be.
caufe that neither’ they themfelves dre -Reéligioully difpp
| nor are their prayers “made ‘for’ thofe
which ‘are: wel: pleating gto God neither dotheyBnowto
difeern i what-ordér they ought pray end: through What
mediarouts they ought to God; the gnorance Of whith
dothvery oft reduce ourptay
and our defires and <0] be denied.

®

charaéters (hould be ufed > Buc when theizate erected
which alfo Hermes , até forbith be done.\Wherte

ad ~

ye
D
Ly
z
ag”
‘Wee
is
Ay
“a
vy
a *
anh
«
ks

fie for obtaining peace, others pra

ofthe foul from the body, and not of che body

all and principally code, offered.up
‘God sbutwhen. they are to be divine

aM <

“of wd sblasions and their kind manners.

i is an which is both holy by offering,
fan&tifieth and maketh Holy cbdsofterer, unlefs

he

seither Tereverénce or -fome other fin be at impediment -to
chim’; therefore thefe. facrifices and oblations do yeld us much

e “hope, and make us of the family of God, and do repel from

many evils hanging over our heads, which the doors of
Hebrews do efpecially confirm, by this thar. we kill
living creatures, and, diffipare ove wealth by facriice,; we

mifchiefes which do hang over us: forias this mor-
wall prie

facrificeth inthis inferior world the foul ofirra-—

_ tional creatures to'God, by the feparating of the body from
the foul : fo (Michael the A

rchangel-the: prieft of che higher
world, facrificech the fouls of men; -and this the feparation
fromthe foul,
-anlefs perchance, asit happeneth in fury, Rapture, Extafie and
Sleep, and foch like vacations of the which’ the
-brews call che death of the body. But-facttfices &oblations are
t the moft high

spowers; this onghc to be done even as we have fpoken con-

€erting prayersand vows : but there! are many kinds of fa-

 Gratulatory, for divine worlhip and shank but fome
 fgerifiees are made neither tor the Go
good will, of which fore was that amongft the Hebrews,called

etifiees +: one kind called a burnt offering, when the thing

facrificed .was, confamed by fire ; another, is ati offering for
ion of blood moreover there are falutiferous
¢$ which are made for the opuiene ofhealch, others paci-

ing for the freeing from.
feme evil}, and for che beftowing of fome good thing ; others

of

¥
A
é
»
f
2 43 J
H
yo
Ww
“oS
a6
* j z
‘

of occult adultery. There was in-times palt amonoft the

tiles the facrifice of expiation, by thewhich
from famine, peftilence,or fome hortible calamity; whole ntes
were to fearch out the moft wicked man in that city, and to
lead him to the place appointed carrying in his handsa cheefe
and wafers and dry figs ; afterwards to whip him feyen times
with Rods, and then to burn him toafhes with the fa
and co caft the afhes into the fea; ofthefe Lycophrom and Hip-

ponax make mention; neither doth Philoffratus relate things
much different.from thefe, concerning e4poloninus of Tiana
while he chafed away the Peftilence from Ephe/us. Moreover
there were many kind of facrifices and offeringsas ¢-4zomalia,

Dapfa, F arreationes,
fanualia, Lucalia, Lupercalia, Munychia, Novendinalia, ‘N}-

{tiluca, Palatialia, Paftillaria, Popularia, Protervia, Scenope-

gia, Solitaurilia, Stata, Rubigalia, Fontanalia,Ormia,Paren-
talia, Inferia, ( Lampteria, Amburbia, Ambarvalja,
Vivalia,T hyia, Holocauftomata, Orgia, Latialia, Dianetaurica,

Bacchanalia, Trieterica, Liberalia, (, ocytia, (erealia,

phoria, Adonia, T conta, Laurentalia, Opalia,Palilia, Duirinae

lias Vertumnalia, Gynacia, Panathenea, Duinguatria, Diapalia,

merods,

Diafia, Horma, Hormea, Nemea, Mytriaca, Palogygia, And’

the offerings of thefe'were proper and diverfe; fora Goat and

an Afs were facrificed to Bacchus, a, Sow,to Ceres, an

horfetothe anhart and dogsto Diana, an Alsto-Pria-
apus, a Goofe to fs, a dunghil-cock to the Night, a the-
Goate to Fannus,a Bull co a the- Goate to Afinerva;

Hercules’ Gnidius with {coulding and railings there were
alfo diverle orders of Priefts,1s high priefts, F /amines, Archifla-’

aBull co Hercules, a. child to Saturn, a Sow with piggsto.
(Maja, a Cock to moreover they did facriiceto

mines ,Phylades, Salians,Hierophantes diverfe namesof religi-

ons,and fuperfticion on
tions, dedications, vowes, devotions,¢xpiations, oathes, offety
ings,(atisfa@tory works; by the which the gentiles did.

facrifice to falfe Gods and devils; but.che trug facrificey which

-purgeth any‘man, and unit

be

sand

ethhim to Ged, istwofolds one

of ~
—
zt
»
er
on
—>
- J
o
Re
A
ent
F

OF Occult Philofophy. Book
‘which the high priett Chrilt offered forthe remiffion of fins,
* parifying all things by the blood of his crafs; the orher, by

‘the which a man offereth up himfelfclean unfported, fora

- fiving facrificeto God, as Chrift the high prieft offered him-
“and taught us cobe offered together with him, as he was
“offered, faying of the facrament of hisbody, and blood, Do
_ <ghis in temembrance of me; ‘wiz, that we fhould offer our
-“felves together, being mortified by the paffion of his mortal
je. - “body, and quickned in fpirit ; of the which Porphyry faith,

: ‘Let us labor coofferup holines of life for a facrifice ; for no
“man can be-a good prieftof but he whick bringeth

forth himfelf fora facrifice, and buildeth up his own foul, as ic
Swere for an Image, and doth confticute both his mind, and

i ‘pnderiftanding fora Temple in the which he may receive the
“divine light ; ‘bac eternal facrifices ( as Heraclitus faith ) are,
the foul, inftitured by che moft High Phyfician;
“forthe evifipiric poffeffeth a man(as Procias faith untill
. he be expiated by facrifices ; therefore facrifices are required to
“pacifie God and the Heavenly and to expiate a man,
- ..  *Who beareth the Image bork of God and the world; But. our
“Lord Tefus Chrift the true high -prieft concluded all facrificesin
—  . *bread and-wine only, as in the primary fubftance of mans
‘meat, needing further*the ‘offering up of no animals, nor
‘other things, orthe effufion of blood, in which we may be
.» being perfetly cleanféd in hisblood. There were
among{t the gyptians fixhundred fixty fix kinds of factt-
“fees; for they did appoync divine honors, and holy facrifices
- “to each ftar; and planet; becaufe they were divine animals
“partaking of anintellectual foul divine mind ; whence
Pz they fay thacthe ftars being humbly prayed onto, do hear our
meta prayer, and beftow celeftial gifts, not fo much by any-nataral
@preement, as by theirown free will. And thisis that which
“damblicus faith, that’ celeftial bodies, and the dieties of the

_ - world have certain divine and fiperior powers in themfelves,

affo natural and ‘inferior, whith Orpheus calls the keyes.
and-fhue ; and chat by” thofe we are'bound ro the .
influenci¢s, but by thefe to foofe us from fate. Whence

* ¢
° - nd
‘
bs
J %

Book OF Occule Philofaphy.

—
ifany misfortune hang over an
(Mar, the Magicians that he muftnoe forthwith
Wy to Jupiter, or Venus, but to. Saturx ot Adars themfelves,
So that Apuleian P{yche who was perfecuted by Venus for e-
ualling her in beauty, was forcedto importune for favor, not

fom (eres, or june, but from Venus ber lf, Now they did -

facrifice to each ftar with things belonging to them ; tothe
Sun with folary things, and its animals, asa Laurel tree a

Cock, a Swan, a Bull; to Venns with her animals, as a Dove,

or turtle, and by her-plants,as Vervain ; asVirgi/fings, =

——Wraterbringost
With garlands foft,the altap round about

Compafs,and burn fat boughs and frankincenfe ‘

Moreover the Magicians. when they made any confe@tion

cither natural, or arcificial, belonging to any ftar, this did

—

one from Satars, orfrom

they afterward religioufly offer, and factificetothe fameftar,

receiving not fo much a natural vectue from the influence

thereof being opportunly received,as by that religious oblati-

onreceiving it divinely confirmed and ftronger.For the oblati- —

on of any thing, when it is offered toGod after aright manner,
that thing is fantified by God by the oblation ass a facrifice,

and is made part thereof. Moreovertothe celeftialandethe- -

rial Gods white facrifices were offered ; but tothe terreftial
orinfernal, black: butto the cerreftial upon the altars, but.

to the infernal in ditches; to the aerial and watery flyin
things: Butcothefe white, tothefe black. Finally, toall'the

Gods and Demons befides terreftial and infernal, flying |

things were offered, butto thofe only four- footed animals,
for like rejoyceth in like, Of chefe only which were offered

to the celeftial, andethe
parts being referved, for-©

| | Mm Be

rial, it.is lawfollco cat, the extream..
od, but of the other not. Now

all thefe che Oracle of ¢4pollo hath exprefied in chefeveries,

d é
~_ at a » »

~~»
Bs
“4s
t
r
—
La
a,
j
a
~ a
~ zx
Ny
°
- ps
™
a
€
a
i,
~ ‘
4 L
z

‘be'flain for them; for them below —
but black, for them ; withall
open altars Gods celeftiall
Are taken, when th infernal Gods require $0.
Pits embru dwith black blood, and fill a with mire;
And are not ad but with a facrifice
That's buried; but of th aire the dieties

Delight in honey, in Wines moff clear, aps
And that.on altars kindled be the fire,

_ Require, With flying facrifice, andwhite: ©
But of the earth the dietiesdelight

That earthly bodres fhorsld with frankin{ enfe
Andwafers offered bein reverence. wet
for the Gods thatrule the feathou
Andon the waves caft the ged animal.
But-to the dieties ce

ive th extream then with fies,

“What thenremains thou maift if thon defire

Eat up, and let the air with vapors thick

And Sweet drop- |

Thefe doth Porphyry mention of his book of
: wers, to whom the reftaflent. For they fay that thefe facti-

fices are certain natural Mediums betwixt the Gods andmen.;
which Ariffotle afirming faith, that -to facrificc to God is ia.

naturally. They are therefore they fay; Mediums,which.
favor of the natare of both, and teprefent divine things ana-

ae rogically, and-have with the di¢ty to whom they are offered,
€ettain comyeniént anlogies, bur fo occulr that amansunder-
can fcarce conceive of them, which God, and the
require in particular for our expiation with which the
eeleftiar vertues are pleafed, and withhold themfelves from.

_ executiofrof the punifhment which our fins deferve. And thefe

as bss which open the pate.

t
7 a
rt
a
» tz
¢
>»
an
+ ° /
‘
£
iF
“i
ate
ly
Ld

—

BookI II. Of Philofophy,. 337
the elements and the heavens, thae.by them
afcend to the fuperceleftials:; and the
vens, and the’demons of the elements may defcend’to him,
Now men that are perfect ;:and truly Religious need
not, but only they’, who ( fairh Trifmegiftys ) being fallen
inte-diforder, are made the fervants of the heavens and creas
cures ; who becaufe they are fubjected to the heavens’: there.
fore think they may be corroborated by the favour of ithe
celeftiall vertue , ‘untill they flying higher be acquitted:'from
their prefidency,and become more fublimethenthey;:

What imprecations, and rites the ancients Were Wont to ufein

Sacrifices, and oblations,

rr

N Ow let us fee what imprecations they didjoyn toobla-
tions, and facrifices; For he that did offer any facrifice
to God, did tay thefe, orthe like things : I thy fervant do
offer and facrifice thefe things to thee ; I confeffethat thouart- \
the avthor of all fancticy, and! call. upontheeto fan@ifiethis-
oblation , that. chou wouldft pour upon it the
high and excellent {pirit , that by 1c we may obtain what
we ask for. Moreover alfoas-this-ching prefene by
lations is made thine , astolive; ordieto theey ler
me be made thine who by this oblation , and communion, by)
this thing which I come to offer, to) thee,
_-profefste be one of thy family, and worthippers. ‘Befidessin!
Offerings it was faid; As that animal: fs'in my powerltobe. ~
flain, if I pleafed ; orto. be faved: foicisin thy powerto:;
take away in wrath, orto give in love that
Laftly, when for expiation, or the. avoyding of
any facrifice was to be made, it was faid,/As that animalidies,
inmy hand, fo die all viceinme, alfo or,
fo ler die and beannihilated fuch or fuchamevil., ormdifey
commodity. Alfo,:Asthe blood ofthis

Ont
c= B

¢
J
J

be

fo let all vice and uncleanne& flow ont from.
medn fatvifiees laid onthe altarto be barnt, ic was faid, as this
-oblation isconfamed by this prefent fre, fo that nothing re-
gains Of it ; fo let all evil be confumedin me, orlec fach or -
fach an evil which we would and avoyd be confumed:
wasalfo a eaftom when imprecation was made,to touch the
~ alas with the hands of all chofe for whom fuch a facrifice was
‘made,or of them:who did defire to be partakers of ir, becaufe
 prayér'only cannot prevail,unlefs. roucherh the

Thole that in thefe pray, and altar
the altars, and the middle firey
And the Dieties

‘ ae

precation , invocation, are differenced thus, viz. either
aS oo they ave. made to God.only., or to inferiour dieties,
Stars, Heroes. In thefe therefore fuch rules are to
om 9 Ret that when any prayer isto be offered to God
ghoneforche obtaining’ of any effeA, ic mult be done with

; a the commemoration of fome work , miracle, facrament, or
‘taken fomewhere out of fcripture ; as if there be a
made. for the’ deftruétion of enemies, let it be

that God! deftroyed the Giants in the deluge
and: the builders of Babel in the-confalioh. of

, Sodem:, 200 Gomorrha in taining of fire,-theho

a

concerning

{
‘
ake

fome malediétion out of the P/a/ms; or fuch'as maybe oa.
thered out of other placesof {cripture-’ In like
we are to deprecare dativers oF fet us comme-
morate the faving of Zeab in the flood ; the callie
of the children of through the RedJea , and Chrifh
walking drythod the ‘watets; and feving a fhip from
fhipwrack, commariding the wirds ard wayes, and
Peter finkeng: in the watetsof the fea) andfich like. Burk

if a prayer be neceflary for obfaining Oracles , or dreames,
whether it be to God, Angels, ‘or Heroes, there are many’

Old teltament, where God ts

is faid cocalk with men, promifing in my places Pree

fages, aad Revelations, befides the of

facob, tofeph, Pharoah , Daniel , Nebuchad-nezzer ; mrthe

old Teftament, and the Revelation of Jobs , Paal, in the

new; alfo of holy Magicians, as Helen, Conflantine and —

Charles; alfo of later Peophers,as Afetbedins, Cyrillns, Foa-

chim, Merlin, Brigitta, Mechtindis, Hildegardis, the dieties —

of whom being pioufly invocated, render us oftentimes ‘par-

takers of divine Revelations. Moreover we muft inyocate

the facred. names of God, bat rhofe efpecially; which “are~

fignificative of the thing defired, or any way applicable to-

ir’; as for the deftruétion of enemies we muftinvocate the =

hame of Gods’ wrath’ , of the revenge of God, fear of = |

God, juftice of, God;fortitude of God : butfortheavoiding:

of any danger we moftinvocate che names of pity, defence, -

falvation , goodhefs , and the like. Moreoverwe mult'peti; @

tion forand to the effeéters of the ching defired,

Angel, Sear or Heroe or whom that office lies; Dur
that our invocation on'them moft be made with due number,“

weight, and meafure., and according tothe rules delivered

-#nchanements. For betwixt thefe there isno-dif-

ference,but thatinchantments arefuch'as affet oprmind, dif,
the Paffions thereof into“a conformity to-certain
bat prayersiare fach asate éxhibiced to any diety byway

of worfbipjand venetation;an@ ftom fame alfo mage

ghemanner of: conferations be taken, of whith

Pia
fe
rt
—
z

— — —_ — — —
i

a iting np of experiments, by which a.
. pfpirirwall foul, being. drawn

formity,is infafed into the matter of our works according to

the cradition of btly and Jawfully prepared,,

and Our. work is vivi by the wit of underftanding. The.
efficacy of confecrations is perfe&ed by two things efpecially,
--- >  vertue of the prayer it felf. In the perfon himfelf is required
hofineffe of fife. and.
nature “and defert perform; the latter is acquired by imita-
dignification of which-we have {poken elfewhere.
| ~~. Then itis neceflary that he that facrificeth muft know this ver-
ue and: power in himfelf, with a firm and undoubted faith.
Bes. Now what things are required in prayer,are thefe. There is,

ks

- befo ordained of God for this or that very thing ( of which
fort we read of many imthe holy writ ) or infticuted to this
 .orthatthing , by rhe vertue of the holy ghoft, according co
eo. the ordigation of rhe Church, of which fort are many every
where extant or this holinefisin theprayer it felfe , nor by

things’, as of facred letters, hiftories miracles, works, cf-
promifes, facraments and fuch facramentall
which fhalil {cem to cohere: with: the thing to be con-

aerated, ather properly, or im properly or-analogically. And
hele we thall now give fome examples, by which a way

{t
ei

tfon himfelf confecrating , and the.

may be laid open toche whole coplideration of it. So.

power to confecrate; the former, —

alfoacertain power of fanttifying placedin ic by’God, asif ic

-yertue of inftitution , but.of the commemoration of facred

proportion and con-;

Of Water thicre this commemoration
made:, viz, becaufe God placed the firmament in the middl,
; becaule inthe middle of the earthly paradife he
at Che middle oF ¢ paradife he
= __ made 4 holy fountain, from which thtough four rivers:the
is watered becaule he
nis jultice , inthe deftradion of the G by

‘4

Book 111. Philofophy.
the generall deluge over andsin thedellry.
of the Army-of fea and
led che peopl the-middle of cheRedfea,
middle@r Jordan,.and becaule be brought

€
and through the
water miraculoufly a rock of she

brought forth a. Jiving.waser out.of the.jaw. bone
Of an afle at the prayers OF appoint-
ed the waters a5 pity, andotfalyaion
for remiffion of fins: and -becaule Chrilf beme-baptized.in —
Jordan ,- purified and. fan@ified the. waters.;.and.thelike
when God is called a living fountain... living. waters, aliying == 4
river. pnfectarion ef fires ler therebe a
commemoration, that, God: created. she be
ment of his juftice for-punifhment;revenge, pyrgation of fins,
and when he comes to judge. the world wil command burn-
ing to go before; and be appeared to a bucning.bulh,
mande inextinguibaule fice =
nacle of the Govenant, & kept fire unextinguithed under the a
water. Alfo we mut wlefach divine namesasofferthemielyes,.
as becaule God i¢ a, confuming =
fuch as afe proper, to theles.as the fhining of God, thelightof
God, the brightnefs of Godyand:fuch like,
‘tion‘of oil fach folemoities mult be commemorated a
to thele,as in Exodus the oil of anion
facred names futable ro thele,fuch asisthe name. { §
fignifies.annoinced, arid(ych.as thi, inthe Apocalyps
concerning the two, olive crees diftilling.
lamps burning in the pretence of God. So
of places Jer chere be commemoration mad¢e.of mount, diay
of the Tabernacle of the Covenant,of the =
the temple of the fanGtification of the hill Gly
tha through the myftery,of the pafiion of
held which was bought withithe,price,of
mount Taber,where the transfiguration and.aftent ihto heaven
Was Sacred names alfo being uled as of the place of 9 |

“a
w

divine profeffion of Religion fortix

whith We thon

atid Ser promeilsare

ave BEER? reall conte.

BERG AOS may cally be Bu

factaitichit is tira anothe

apttfine; finer all; atid faich 12.

4 Aw

by

A |

—

—
x —
J
Pa
{
> ar
ae
A
4 AG
—
by

J6

what things may be called confecr fe

become o betwixt us.an fa

Ow thine are ma h
-Tmay fay ) dedicated to us this
account we call holy wels,
name often {aid to bear, When in
is iP him: acsed. Fo dF

a myftery is that which hath? ‘af occult vertue, a

favour given by the gods or De

high God himfelf thote
, which have been abeve $d

led holy and myfterious , being by paifion of

Jefus Chrift. Hence alfo certain pray ers are oy ie holy, and .
myfticall which are not infticuced b y thédéyotioh of man, .

but by divine tion, as we in Gofpel
efpecial bbeans! of his Vi Tas
sand aidinting with ds th is fin,
a facred’ foanenin ,- ahd dint There is alfo.an

~™

SOC
f
ex
ud
rw
‘
fe =
A
a
“«
»
a
’
a
J 4

Images,
Godsior dédicated to them, are called facred, even as oe.
= in his by to ‘Lycian Venus,

The thidftaine that the Sacred things

of

with hesfers blood did

ig like manner ‘the seprefentations,. sefemblances, Idole.
PiGtures, made after. the fimilicudes of the

‘Hence divide Plate his eleven

minded the facced Images; and, Scacues, of the Gods.
thould, be ‘honoured, nor. for. themfelves, but. beeaufe they
the Gods to us, even as the: ancieatsdid worlhip
bares the of a man, was{igmified chat he is amind
which produceth all,
ed'tofic, that his imum
; he hath upper-parts bare an
~“manifeft co che intelligences and the fuperiors ; but the lower

parts are becaufe heishid from the inferior creatures:
he holdeth a

the body the moft fpititna
For the Creator: of the intel
Apicit of the world ; butin his ri

é of ie thus interpreting it: for-in that he

naked, becauife he is

fcepter in his. in hele parts
of. life.is found?

King andthe vi

right he holdet

4 ‘ > ox

4 a
‘2
»
‘
of
P
aw
é
Fay
‘
o
od

Book
allthe Gods, asthe Eagle is of other birds ;"the other. be.
caufe all chings. are fubje@ to like manner we
revererice the Image of a Lamb, becaufe ir fepsefenteth Chri}
and the picture of a Dove, becaule it fignifieth the holy Cho
and the forms of a Lion, “Oxe, Eagle, and a mah, fignifying
the Evangelifts, and fuch like things, whith we find expref-~
‘fed in the Revelations of the Prophets, and in diyers places of
the holy Scripture:moreover thole things confer to the like re-
velations and dreams,and therefore are called facted pictures }
there are facred rirés and holy obfervations, which are
made for the reverencing of the Gods, and religion, viz. dé
wout geftures, genvflexions, uncovetings of the head, wath-
ings, fprinklings of Holy water, perfumes, exterior. ex iati-
‘ons, humble proceffions, and esetior Ornaments for divine
ifes, as mufical Harmony ; burning of Wax candles a
praifes, V3 Of Wax cafidles and
lights, ringing of bells, the adorning of Temples, Altars and
Images, in all which there is required afinpteam and fpecial
reverence and comelinefs ; wherefore. there areufed for thefe
things, the molt excellent, beautifull and pretious things,
as gold, filvet,pretious ftgnes, arid fath like which réverences
and exterior rites are ab it were leffons and’inyitationsto fpiri-
tual facred things, for the obtaining the bounty of the Gods ;
concerning which Pre/erpiva bearcth withels inthele verfes,
Who ever did the brasen: fatwe! he
Theyellow gifts of gold, or filver white,
would not wonder, and not fay that thefe

priefts alfo lake talled’ facted, oftbe
divine powers,and Gods,and they themfelves being confecra
ted do both adminifter all the holy things, and allo,conies

rate them, whence Lucan,

a

> ‘

obedie

Thole holy ire as ‘i¢ écttain be-
ods ani bs, exhibited with praife, reverence of
y the sicatis of which wevery ofc obrain fomé
wonderfall vertue from that divine power, On whom fuch
verence beftowéds fo there-are facred Hymns,
Exorcifmes, anid words, which ate compounded

gad dedicared for the'prailts, and divine fervices of th eGeds,

ina compoled for the ftars, faith.
With words, now on the Gods

thie primitive Church ufé certain incantations

dileales and tempelts , we either. prohotince,

to. Tome di pp powers, allo fometimes
ema long vith us,written ‘banged onourneck, orbound

tous, we obtain a oft forme power from fuch a Saint,
which men v uch admire ; by this means alfo there are
facred names, shes, ney feals, which contempla-
‘tive men, in purity of mind, for their fecrée vows, have de-
.-yored, dedicated. atid. confecraréd tothe worthip of God ;
which things truly, if any mah afterward thafl

with the fame purity of mind, with the which they were firtt
iofticuced,. he fhall in like manner.do miracles ; alfo,
the ihatiner and rules délivéted by the firlt inftitiror be

here, for. they who are ignorant of thefe things, loofe

“thetr and work in vain; Thus not’ only by ‘barbatods
words, but alfo by Hebrew, fyptian, Grek, 1 atine, and

ghe names of languages, being devoted to God, and at-
“asibuted and dedicat

His effetice. power! Gr dp ation,
“we fometimes do wonders; fach names there

P
‘
eA
¢
»
sd
A
«
ind
‘

Plato anit ainorptt the dr, 16 the G teeksc att
upiter Which co live he wi verh
ife to all things;in like manner whichGgnifiech throuphbe.
caufethrough him are aff things made;fo figni.
fieth Immortal; foamonght the Lariaeshe'is called Pupicer asic
were in adjuvant father, ‘and fucti like,
are devoted to men, as Sofa,
profperous, fervant, dearto God. In like: mantier® certain
material! things receive little and vertue by conte.
cration, efpecially if done by a prick we fee thole waxen
feals, in which are imprinicéd ‘the figure-of Lambs;rorereive
vertue by the benediction OP the Romane -Hiph priét; apainkt
lightningsand tempefts; that they cannor harochofe who carty
them, for a divinevertue is infpired intoTmages thos corfterac-
ed, and is contained in them, asit were ita certain facted
Letter, which hath the Image of God: thelikewertne thofe
holy waxed lights teceive ac Baer} and ar the fealtofithe yi
rification of the virgins ; in. like manne? belleby confetration
and benedi@tion receive vertue, that they drive away didre-
ftrain lightnings and thac they hartinot inithofe
places where their founds’are heard’; in
water, by chéir benédittions'attd ¢xercifines reecive power to
chafé and drive: away ‘evill Ipirits? atid thitstn things ofthis.
kind, chere are alfo facred times alwates obferved by the ha
cions of every religion with very great whiehate
either commanded thar we thontd fanctify by the'Gods tham- |
felves, or are dedicated to them by ont
ders, for the commemoration. of fome benefit received of the
Gods, and for a perpetual Thankigiving. Thus the Hebrews
have received their» Sabbaths,.and the’ Heathens their holy»

daics, and wethe folemn — of our holy rites, alwaies to
reverenced withthe Hig helt folemnity; therearealle tities
contrary tothele, which they call penitential,,and
dayes, becanfe that in thofe daics the commonwealthhathfuf-
fered fome notable Hlow,and calainiey,of which fore amonght
the Romans: was the day before’ the fourth

i

¥

bodies, defcendeth from the intelligible and fupercelefti

“Book

at ‘lies Battle: of Canna.’ like manner Poftriduan
are-called black dayes; becaufe: that moft commonly battles
Sueceeded: ill. ori shefe dayes: So amongft the Jews the black.
dayes.ate the fevenreénth day of June, becaiife on that day
Mofes the. Fables, Adanaffes erected an‘ Idol in. the
Sanktorum,& the: walls.of ferufalem are fuppofed to
have been polled down by their Enemies ; likewife the ninth of
fulyis ablack day with them; becaufe on that day the de-
itru@ions of both the Temples happened, by ehis reafon they

eres recalled. dayes, inthe, time obferved by the

yptians,and every; Nation by this way may.eafily make a
like calenlation.of days fortunate or. unfortunate them, and
the Magicians command that thefe hol and religions dai¢s
obferved: nolefs then the planetary daies, and the celeftial-
difpofitions; for. they affirm are far. more efficaci-
ous, efpecially co:obtain Spiritual and divine vertues, becaufe
vertue-is},not. from. the Elements .and
world,and being helped bythe common foffrages of the Saints, .
‘ismot inftinged by any adverfe difpofition of. the heavenly
bodies, nor fruftraced by, the .corruptible contagion of he.
‘Elements; if,fobe shar firmbelicf and: religious worlhip be
Mot wanting, that is,joyned with fear. and trembling for re-
Jigion: properly, holdeth forth thus much; Hence thofe daiés.
arecalled religious,: which to yiolate is afin, which if we care-
fully; observe, ,we fear not any great mifchicf, which we

r

-Holoeyer therefore thou art, who dif Operate
inthis in, the. firlt implore God the

be one ofhis. -
dvour,.

har

Ba
’
»
* ‘
ie?
fe,
Vanes by

—

Of Occult 549.
favout, be clean, within and without, in acleanplace. be.
caufe it is written in Leviticus, Everyman who thalf ay
proach thofe things which ate confectated; ia whom there is.
before the Lord; ‘Therefore wath.
your felves oft,a at the {daies: appoinced, according the.
myfteries of number, put on clean clothes,and abftain from all —
uncleannefs,: pollution, and laht;: for the Gods will nothear .
that man (as Porphyry faith ) whohathnot abftained many
dayes from venercons Be not thou coupled toapollie -
or menftruous woman, neither co her who hath the

morhoides,touch.not an unclean thing; nor a Carkafs, whence.
Porphyry faith, whofoever (hall touch a déad man, may not.
approach the Oracles,perhaps, becaufe that by a certain affini-
of the funeral ill odour, the mind is cormupced and-made un...
fit to receive diving influences ;° Thowfhalt wath, andanoynr,,
and perfume they felfyand thal offer facrifices ; for God acs -
cepreth for a moft fweet odour thofe things whicli are offered
to him by a man purified and well difpofed, and togethér
with that perfume condefcendethtoyourprayerand oblation,
as the Pfalmift fingeth ; Lee wy prayer, O Lord, be diretted to
thee, a6 incenfe in tby fight ; Moreover; thefoulbeingtheoff--
‘Spring and Image ot God himfelf, is.delighted in thefe per-
fumes and odours, receiving them by thofe noftrils, by the >
which it {If alfo entred into thiscorporeal man, and by rhe:
which ( as, Pod teftifiech )the moft lively fpirits are fome-: —
‘times forth, which canmot be retained in mans heart, 8
-boyling either through choler, or labor; whence fome think
that the faculty of {melling isthe moft lively and fpiritual of
all the fenfes. Further, perfumes, facrifice, and unction pene-
trate all chings, and open the gates of the Blements and of
the Heavens, that through them a man. cao fee the fecrets of;
of God, Heavenly things, and thofechings which areabove
the Heavens, and alfo chofe which defcend from the Heavens,
as -Angels,and fpirics of deep pits,and profoand places,appara-
tions of defart places, and doth make them tocometoyou,to
appear vifibly,and obey you; and they pacify all fpirits,and
attract them as the Loadftone Iron, ad joyn'them with the

N
‘

Ste

d
= “2

the fpirice sume bodies + for truly the
fpisitudll body is very much incraffated by them, and made
more prot? for liveth by vapours, perfomesand the odours

© ait and: hearty delice; that che
of the "Heavens and hheavenly*bodies may favour thee,
favour thou more cafily obtain, the
of che place 5 time’, profeffion,, ciltome , dier,
habite, exercift and name alfodo wonderfully conduce for.

by thicle the powet of! nature is nor ‘only changed; bur allo
for a foreanate place condaccth much to favour
néither-widvoot caufe did the Lord ‘fpexk to Abraham that he
land which he would thew him;
went tie th, wherethe fowed & pathered
fold; and waxed very rich bucwhat place is.
compruous to-each one’, soft be fonnd-our by his nativity,
which thing he chat knoweth nor, lechim obferve where his:
Spitits are efpectally recreated, where his'fenfes are more live-—
a Ty, where theshealth of hisibody and his firengeh is moft
oat, where bis ‘bufineffes fuedeed belt,where moft favour
- . wherethischemies overdhtown let him know chat
‘This Place ‘is ‘Preordained’/by God andhis Angels
him ;°and is alfe well difpofed, and prepared by the
Heavens. Therefore reveretice this place, and change ‘it
acoordisg to your time’ and ‘bufinels, but .alwayes ‘fie an
unfortumace “place: fortunate: names alfo make things
more fortunate ; ‘but unfortunate , unhibpy ; Hence the
Romans in lifting their ‘fouldiers wete wary, leaft that the
any meafure unfortunate ;
and multrmps of their Armies and
Colonies,they did chule'Gen/ovrs with good pames. More-

they believed, chat if unfortunate names were changed

fortunate , what the fortune: of things would alfo ‘be

hanged inco’berter:; Nealtvharfea-men going

| for the fame-caufethey called

y=

~~ w >
ond
ri
«
‘wl

ood'to call , Lucrinus for the goodnefs af the-pame be-
the moft happy place-of all: make eleGtion hairs
and dayes for thy operations, for not without caufeloug Sayi-.
our fpake, Are there noe-twelve hours im the day,andfo forth?
‘forthe: ogersteacht that times can give: a cortaim:fortude
 toourb ineffes; the Magicians likewile have obferved;and

very great concernment;thac in what moment of tine,and dif-

fition of the heavens, ever
Beal hath received its b

this. world;for they have deli-

, that ehe hath'fo preappower.,:thab atthe
courfe of forttine depéndeth thereon,and mayefarerald
thereby , andin ke manner, by ‘the facceffes ob theforcihe —
every they both firmly believed jand-experience alfo ~

teftificth , that the begitining'of any thing «may cherebyibe

found ont; éven as Sulla che Aftrologian
“certam: deftmétion | approached Culignla, who-asked hised-
vice concerning his nature;' ‘the Aftrologer iforefqw
the calamity of the warswhich ‘happened ‘afterwardito the

Athenians expedition agaluitthe Syracufaus.:.t0

~‘the about Sidilic, Afefon' dae: ogerfosc-

“old eat tempeft! by! she’ knowiedgeofthe

On dayes a-erear ftone thould:fall

fromthe Sun ; as'afterwatds

Thracia ; onthe cont Tarnucins Firnsianusby cheats

a nativiey 5 the fatten found alfote nativioyof che
City’of Rovre ; by smdkitig the of dhac
City: So Maternus repatteth , that the begioning and Crea-

even of this was found outbythe-eventsof things:
times can do’ very: much things ,

invert thett feaves’s as che Peiplae?Eim,

- corielude, aff the ancient wife mien confent inchis,thatérig oF
thingywhether

Qifters do inereate, the Maot:inereafing, and when the Moon

»

4 ¥.
at
e®
—
x
bal
z

a

Beak Ti.

ithe: motions. and times of the Moon ; and Evuripus

| powsed, down from

~jn Exbea, dothic not feven.times with manderfull {wiftnefs
~ebbe and flow ? and threedayesin every moneth,viz.the 7. 8.
-and giday ofthe Moon it ftandeth itil] ; and amongft the

Froplorides: there is'alake, which thrice ina day is made

»bitreriand fale andeagain {weet ; moreover,.in. the winter

when all withex,and dry, Penyroyall flourifheth :
the fame day; they. fay, that blown bladders do break,and

that the leaves of Sallows,and Pomegranats .are. turned and
forced abont:;: anditsknown ,.chat which I have feen

-ibéch i Fraice and know alfothefowing thereof,
dry all the year , jon the

ofsSaint: Johns, day produce both leaves,
flowres,and ripe frits and this doth wholly confilt

the obfervation-of -the.cime, of ‘its fowing ; moreover that

-octimeszean yield fome wonderfull power to artificiall things,
SighesAfrtologers 30 books of Images do
-beonftantly.affirm thie means. we sead. in’ Plutarch,

there was an: tinage ‘amongtt, the. Peleneans madewith

--fachvatr, thar what-wey foever st did, look, it did ftrike all
and. very great perturbation, fo that no.

things with terrour:
odurftrhsongh behold weifead in, the!

thar che Magicians of Babylex hadtied xo the,reo
‘ ogheirhoufe golden fowls, :which.they called the tongues
opfiche:gods;and thar they had. power, co reconcile the minds
the to theslove and obedience of the King. In the
odland pf Diana placed on high whofe
appeared, fad shoe which in, bur. co
that, chearfull;.In facyi-
ofices Which were left about the Image of AZinerva did nor pa-
“trifle sin the temple of Venus at: Paphos,it neyer rained inthe
+, any: was caken forth of Anthe-
ven shat |
cavas digeed up int, its plage the tomb of
Brbria of did arile a Lanrell, which if:apy
break a braneh and carry. i¢ on fhipboard, quarrels

out = ‘ .
a
»
. dome
Pa
a
x
a
ow
Aus
Ay
d
“a
e

Borifthenes, no bird di@ haute’ the houle of AchilérzatRome
“neither flie ‘nor dég did'enter into the Palaceiof
the oxe market. In of ‘Thracia there waga place,
‘into the which if a Beétle"had fallen; it could-not get forth,
but weiching ic felf every way it bri —

7 >’ bring even.in-
numerable examples,’ anid>far ‘more: wonderfull: then-thele,
which Antigaity repotréth ‘to have ‘becn.done :by the. Attiof
images, and by the obfervation of times=but leafeany.one
-fhould chink them Jong fintejobfolere; and-repure them for —
fables, will bring more new things; and:fuchasremain.even
this time in fome'plaées,and I wilhjoyn to.chele.fome arti-
fall wonders’; for they fay;that: bythe Art: of images.ic
‘cometh to chat at Ryzantine Serpents hurt not, and thas mo
Jackdaws fie not Over within the wats chat in Crete there
“are no night Owls’, that about Naples Grathoppersare never /7
that at Venice, nokind of fie doth enter-the publike .“
bonfes of Barbérs, thatin’ 7 inthe publike fhambles,one
Ohly Alc is feen alltthe year longjof ;-and
in the foregoing book have declared already. both the
fathions andtimes, by the obfervationof which, chefethings
fath like may be done; moreover you ought efpeciallyto
obferve the vertue of fpeeches and-words,for by thele thefoul
fpread forth ‘into ‘infetiour fabftances intoftones;metals,
animals and’ al’ naturall: things:imprinting. divers
figures.and paffions on them, inforcing
ing and drawing then certain affection :
“thar weary Oxen are'refrefhed by words, andalfothatby
prayers Telus, thatitipro-
duce unufuall trees’; trees alfo may by this means beentreaged oe
to pafs over to another place, and co growin anothergrounds
f they be entreated whentheyare.

Ra row the greater, 1
| be beneficial! ‘to them, their family, and neighbours ;

the Pea.uckalfo being commended, prefently extends hiss
feathers: but on the contrary , it is found by experiencethat
eothe-tigarb Bafill; "being fown with curlings and railings, iss

akind of Lobfter doth cure bormings

‘more flourifhing ;
ings. i f be that’in she mean time hisname benor-.

— a

OF

mowbith; ale By
doburt fown.Corn and childsen: mote-
“over shan fo.great\power.in mans exécrati-
ns, tharthep chafeand wicked (pirits ; Bulebins
that*by this:means Seraps among!t. the gyptiant,
de y:the which devils swere expelled,
doc how -devils having. aflumed, the forms.of
men; Toconclade, in‘all |
forit is written in Denicronome,
| you fisall ord your God, you fhaJl-find, him.
WWhence'we read in, j ‘That hat whatever ye fhall defire
ahd pray forjbelieving mat You thall re 1 4C
iC u;and in Adattbew,| have aith as a grain
feed; ‘nothing ¢hall-be impoffible for you; alfo the
fervencprager of -acighteous man prevaileth much, for Elias
James ) was a man likeunto us, fubjed unto pafii-
706 5 and he prayed carnelftly, that it might not rain upon the
and strained not in. three yeers.and fix moneths; and
he: and he heaven gaye rain, and the earth
but tale heed ‘in your. prayers, dealt
thateyon (hodild delice fome vain thing, or that which is againlt
Gols fot Ged would,have all things, good : nei-
ther (hale thou ale the nae of thy God in vain, for he
-abftemious‘and forthe Angel Gith to Z-cbiah, pray-

gamed:
gamed:

yt

is
‘a
»
A™ A,
in t

r

C

Lik®

err

Tbe Cauclafion of the whole

are the thi
Ma

in

—

defperation : You therefore fons of wifdom and learning,
fearch diligently in this book;gathering together ourdifperfed: ©
intentions, which in divers places we have propounded, and °
what is hid in one place , we make manifeft in another , thatit -
may appear to you wife men ; for,for you only have we writ-
ten, whofe mind is not corrupted, but regulated accordingto
the right order of living, who in chaftity, and honefty, andin
found faith fear and reverence God : whofe hands are free - . at
from fin and wickednefs , whofe manners are gentle, fober, ~~ |
~ and modeft,you only -thall findiout this knowledge which is
referved for you, and the fecrets which are hid by many-
‘Boise cannot be perceived but by a profound intelleé, .
which when you fhall obtain, the whote-fetenee-of-the-a-
vincible magicall difcipline will infinuate it felf into you: and :_
thofe vertues will appear to you, which in times palt Hermes,’.
Zoroaftes, Apollonius, andthe others, who wroughe miracles,
obtained. But ye, envious, caluminators, fons of bafeignd- -

gance,and foolith lewdnefs, come-not nighour-writings, for

ancients, and diverily compiladin thisbeok , ia wards, .
yer fufficient| for .fome thee, |
in onder :fome withons otder, fome, things
are delivered: by Fragmierits fome' chingsiare even-bid apd
loft forthe fearch ‘of the intebligent who mere acuelyicon-
fearching , may obtain 4
call Arc,and alfo infallible experiments : for we have de |
this Art in fuch a manner, that it may not be hid from the -
prudent and intelligent, and yet may not admit wicked and -
incredulous men to the myfteries of thefe fecrets, but leave |
them deftiture and aftonifhed, in the thade of ignorance and :

— ‘are your enemies, and ftand on a precipice, that ye may |
wage’ Be Fall head-long inco mifery:if: any therefore through his
or dalinefs of intellect, doth not obtain his defire,
hin Ror impate the faule of his to ihe, or fay that
[haveerred.or purpofely written falfly and lied, but lethim

obfcute,and covered with divers mylteriesjby the which it
that many’ may erre and loofe their fenfe ;:
gherefore no: man be angry;with me, if we have folded
up the truth of this fcience with many Enigmaes,and defperfed
indivers places ,“for we have’noc hidden it from che wife,
htt from “the ‘wicked: and: ungodly, and have delivered it in
words which neceffarily blind the foolifh, and eafily may

admit the wife'ro the un
> e ="

«

himfelf who underftandech not our writings ; For they

I
o
“se.
¢
“aa

Fo the Reverend Father, and Doctor of Divinity
Aurelius de Aquapendente, AuftinFryar; Henry

Cornelis Agrippa fendech greeting.

BY thot letters (-mokt reverend:Father ) which
you .fent me fince ‘the fecond of chisnronth,
cowards me, and

whom I may improve my gifts ; And now ( this‘hand: wticing
being my witnels,) Ireckon “you amongtt the cheifelt of my

friends. But oh, who are your leaders that you follow, dare-
ing to enter into the:houfe of Dedalws, from whence is. no’

ing

-yeturn ;.aod-of moft:dreadfull. and daring go.
throngh the watches, andeommit your felf co the filters of

deftiny}?; Who are matters that you ar¢iconverfant about
fach huge things, daring to, attempt to smake a wandring dic.

ty, table, perhidions, faithful; andthe moft Fagatiousof allithe
Gods tobe more conftant-then eddraftia; “Take heed thar
ou be not deceived by them that are deceived.Nejther can the.

great reading of booksdirettyoushere; fince they as
“power of.the Magical Art, of the prodigious Images of Altro-
of the monftrous -tranfmurations of

 dogerts,
that biefled ftone, by which, A/ydae-like, all metals chat were

e—-

¥ great learning, and the vcurious fearchs
ing after thefe things which lye:hid in:darknef

prefently rejoyce, and do blefsmy felf

that Ihave entred into acquaintance with fuch a friend, with’

touched.

‘
q
rw
By
‘
i

are prefently tranfmuted into Gold, ot Silver, all
which are found vain, fictitious, aud falle, |

whole tredisons, who dare fay are

seaming then what is in Serters ard thet vaifed with
myfteries, and as-yet cleatly-cxplamed by tone Of the
| os _. “Mafters, and which I believe no mancan attain to by readi
“‘of books only, without a skilfull, and faitkfull mafter, un!
he be'divinely illuminated, as very feware. Therefore it is
a phege for any man that fearcheth into the fecrets of nature,

| to give himfelf to bare reading. Fer they that thus do, are,
Be being enfnared in the gins of the exterior {pirits,to whom it is
iven to rule, made dangerous flaves, not knowing rhem-

lves, -and go back into the foorfteps of their flocks, feekin
ridowntiiemtchecs what they have tn themfelve ‘And this i
jat,which 1 would have you know, becaufe in'us ig:the ope-
rator of all wonderfull effets, who knows how to difcern,and
» ar-eheR;-and that without any: fin or offence to God, whatfo-
ever the monftrous AZathemuricians, the prodigious Aduzici-
be im the enviowse bewitching con

St
dot,
fe
thefe. tobe written; infafedby
afew facred ‘words, and with face to face }
thalbhaply fee’ you, Now as:concerming -chofe books which
= Of me, fome of them were fometime in my cultody,
are not. Bat'as for‘ thole-books which you have of
mine which were made in my youth, being incituled, OF Oc-
Philofophy, ofthem. were dificienc in
Many. things, the third is wholy: im ,and-contains but.a

of.

‘ ~

ferving the key thereof for moft intimate friendsonly, one
whereof yon ne¢d fot at all queftion but chatd reckon yon, -
Fatewelland profper. Lyonrthe X V. of Seprem-

ber, Annoq; Domini. XVIE

faite Mah.

Y your courteous letters reverend Father} }Phave
)feen,as in a glafs, your whole mind, which I heatcily em:
brate,& I would have yon know that youthall be weleome to
me beyond expreffion, and that you are feated deeply in my
affections, and that I am fachan one I write this out of dhe
abundance of my Heart ) as'am mot wont: ppon ang
to forfaké my friends. Wherefore that you -:may obtaia the
defives, which are no lefs chen mite; I-will toconete
you. When we {hall come face co face; hear andfpeak .
with: one the other, I know our: friendfhip will be indiffo..—
hiblend endure for¢tver. Butrnow concerning that Phylf-
phy which you require to know, I would have y ouknow, that
it isto know God hiinfelf,the worker of all chings, and to pats
into him by a whole image of likenefs (as by an effential con-
tract, and -) thou be transformed, and
midéas God, asthe: bord fpake concerning AZofes,; {ayifig
Behold, I hive made'thée the ‘God of Pharoah. Thises that
true, high
thereof is che intellé&: forby how much ‘higher things we
undérftand, with fo machthe fublimer vertues are we endow-

fy; and efficactoufly.. Bot: éur ‘intellect being included inthe:
coriuptible fieth, unlefs' ie -thalt exdeed the way of chie fleth,
and obtain a proper nature, cannot be uniced to vertués.

‘of God, and nature, alcogether inefficacious ; forit isnd éafy-
ching for usto afcend to the heavens. For. how fhall he thar

r

fet forth the whole work, being made entire, and reviled, re pi

of wonderfull works, Thekéy

ed, and fo much greater \thingé dowwork, and chat more 3

(for like to ) and: is\fo incothéle

“hath loft himfelf in mortal duft, and: afhes,

™ 4
A
«a
¢
~*~»
e
4 ot
e,

apprehend fpirithal ‘things that is {wallowed: up im

— |

fief anid blood ?: Can man. fee God, and live?) What fruic
‘fhalla gtain of corn bear ifit be not dead For we maft
dye, dye to the'world, and tothe fieth; andallfenfes;
_ ‘and.to the whole man animal, who would enter into thefe
clofets of fecrets, not becaufe the body is feparated from the —
*. foul, but becaufe the*foul leaves the body: of which death
_ wroteto the Colloffians.: Yeare dead, and your life 1s bid
with Chrift ; And elfswhere he {peaks more clearly of himfelf.
[know aman, whether. in the body, or ont of the body I cannot
tell, GodknoWs, caught wp untothe third heaven, &c, I fay by
this death, pretious:in the fight of God, we muft dye, which ©
happens to few , and perhaps fet alwaies. For very few
 awhom-Ged lovesjand are:vertnous, are madefohappy. And
fil chofe that: are-born; not of fiefhard blood; but of God.
Secondly thofe that ate <dignified'to it:by the bieffing of na-
. gure, and the heavens at their birth. The reftendeavour by
. . merits, and art, of which more fully when I fee you. But this
Jwwilladyif you,. that. you be not:deccived concerning me,
lat any time having received
Peaftofchemco you; orfhould arrégate any foch thing to niy
er could hope to have them granted’ to. .me, who hither-
xo have been a fonldier,con{ecrated with mahs blood, having

almoftalwaies belonging to the KingsCourt,bound toa

*F
re
ri *
4 x
’
f «fe
. a a,

 moftdear- wife by che bond of ficili, expottd:to. alt the blaft of
fortune, and,being crofléd-in‘my inthe

and worldly. affairs; ‘and ‘thereforé ‘could not obtain

the fublime gifts of the-immortal But Iwouldbeac-

jeounted-asa direCtor, who waiting alwayes atthe dores,fhews
- others which way they. malt go.’ :Butas formy love ro you,
-you-areshdeed a little deceived +I dotiot feehowiyouare my,

debtor, feeing I hayé beftowed nothing upon you, onlyI am
geady,when occafion ferves: to.beftow afl things, So farewell
and profper, . From Lyons XI X. Nevemsb, Anne Dom. M.

d
—
“a
t
a

at

ony Cato ng fie nd

Te Ancients wont to. notorious
this proverb, viz.To bring Owles toedibens : butitis.
nota part of lefs folly, but of molt "grear impiety’ to fend’
divels ro hell, “You know what Teall tell) vie! that oF
wickedneffes, which much di(pleafure have “elfwhere®
ih ics colours notorioufly thewed the Court tobe. Bue there”
was never fo juft an occafion of writing and “of indignation :
given as now, if ic weré fawfull to treat of the whole bufinee”
as fhould, cannot’ concein buc give you an argument of!
it.Now thing both foolith and itapious: there!
was fent for out ofGermang with ho fmall charges a cercain’
tnafter of ‘pirits,thanis a Necromancer.who poffeffect’a pows
erover fpirics, chat gs Pameéfand Jambres cefilted Mofes, fo
he fhould oppofe were’ 'periwaded bythe’
father ‘of lies,’ that fé'codldforerel all thingsto come,
difclofe all fecret counifels} and? manifeft) even che'thoughts
moreoverthac he was endowed -with-fo great power; that‘he’
could bring back the Kings children through’the aire, “even as:

we read with his pulle was.carryed co chedéenof

Lions, and that he could’do as did’ being befieged’in’
Dotbam, fhew mountains fall-of horfemen and fiery Charis’

ahd fetch up: the creafures of the earth, and compel wharma-
riages and affections he pleafed; to. break them’ off, andieure>
all defperate difeafes, by a Stygian medicine, as a confirined:

Hettick, a tadicated in: bones bs

‘ALS

who Can K notty gout cure,

‘See where their placed, whiere thet hope is
who endeavour to {nbje@ the Elements, Heaven, Na ~.
tne, God, and to the. command: ofione:

¥

ots, anda very preat Army ; moreover chac he could

. A
q
ag
‘
on
ms
a? . ?
»
re

“hae

fore his
King being

feck for the

wilk the enemies of poblike.prefervation ;. faying in cheir
with Ochoxsas,there is not a God in us go

 confule Beelzebub the God of Achron;and-as Sauf{peaking to
thewitch faith,the fight againit me, & Godhath de-

and. willnot hearme,therefore.am Icome toyon.
Vhat de they fo. much. defpait of God they pave
it reqnilite; to.defirg aid of the) Divels.2 moe this aceore.
ding. to the Peter; <0 Godand lefus
Chsilt out Logd..and, Saviour who. kath. us; andro
aponthemfelves fwift not treafure
upforthemfelyes. the fierce wrath of che Lord wis will fend ic
evill {pisicsrace they, nos de livered.over to
probate: fenfe,whe defire the:certaiaty, of fecrec counfels from:

fromthe Losdiof Hoalts?-and further this addeth boldnefs to-
this shominable worker of Idojatiy, and Sacniledge, that the
very. much favopr thofe shings,and:the.

wed,out of the facted pence ;, the Pillars.o
Bithops and, Cardinals, at, yea furthering
work: and. the wicked Noblesa e.this.
@pcrstion of lmpiety,. as she the worksot.the Wolf.
wickednels have Pharash, Balack, Saul, Ahab:
withbis lesabel;. Ochanias, Nebuchadwexar, Balthaxar, Sena-
tbe other worthippers of Balaam, committed

convi@ied the third plague, confefled the finger of God
obftunate through the.cen plagues perifh~
ed in Balack the, Moabsee. fent forth

Sorcerer that he thould corfe J/rael, bur God himfelf turned

the curfe intoa ble

fieg; Balack is curfed;what did the anfwers

OF Samuel or the witch profit.  was- he, not flainin-the
mountain Gilboah? Abab and Jezabel-being wickedly ma-

together, did: confide, inithe prophets of Baal, and as-

the: word, ofthe Lord,a lying fpisit went forth inte.

of a kingdom from:

chedavel shetashen of lies,and hope for victory. eliewhere than.

of hes: molt is, accomodated,

magitians again they being.

ere
Xs

that in bes be adr the Lordy bat AW
uniftedto theskill of his phyfstial net they icommucted
agreacer fin, whoileave:Gio the and thewholclome
in-cimes paft, therefore Heard om'the p thiebord, —
Thow thale not fromehy bed ont which thon arc,» Dee
certainly: dy Let the-feries of the other :unrightcors
Bi be run ane of Se Gentiles.»
winers, who falfly tainee ty:
redaced: to nothing, and did they: not wickedly
theiwfins! are ungodly: follyes wont to
him to be grauges
‘of thre Davebferit find vend bo pronounce
‘pruticonce ching thol& chinigs hang over 3
and froarheaven y-and to
shings which excoed the vf 4

foot ;: the: Lions Jayi

mach:

and léarmédin-chelaw of God) for their faichsfake,and what-
-feeverthey asketheythall receive: fo the Ravens fed Ekah,
his prayers the'earth withheld her fruits,the Heaven de- .
 myedorain,and down firéupon the wicked:So the Ra-
vensferved Elifoa,che Angels fought for him; rivers are ‘pat
their hunger, fawn aniel, ‘andthe hot
nace: the children. ‘Thefe are hot the:
Necromancers and Sorcerers,nor of Devils, but of faithfull and
godly meni; :for:not the Divels, bue the. {pirit of God doth
-affift chemis: perhaps many
| — e;Whoare very wile; a onderfult knowledge,
.and of acpare converfation,. moft/prudent,
age and ft that they can very
ofit the Commonwealth by their counfel and operatt-
«ons; but yonr courtiers contemn thefe menyas thofe who ate
‘wety fap from, their! puopofe, who for awifdome: havémalice,
and craft for know-
she place: vof-relivio gion, and Gods: blafphented in:a
and whatifaith ¢ as faiththe Apoltle.) is perfected in
they-run‘to-the invorapibas of evil {pirits.
mam cis mo¢kedbanby: crifieris
aierime praife rewards
for:-foolithnefs and- © fools, and
wicked; who, by. thefe arts would eftablith a king dome, ‘by
Empires fallen, and have
Regn peterly OF whonwiinwas truly fpokenby
\ovre-Grown ‘id: fallen, we have
owhich mightymer’ be fo tfuly:as fitly. applyed
to.you. For truly, that. the numenal letters being ga-
-thered-together M,G-V. T. expreffeth the year M. D. XXIV.
Dydmot ye fee:thefe things, ab them, which
proud, ‘in: your affliction. You def

J
ith
o-
a
»
vee
aS

Whither of Sorat
hanters, and withthe multitude of your Sorcerics, iE hap.
Vill not

male and prevail againlt the, wrath of che
Lord, and deliver you: fromevil ?.No, ye wicked, Nos unlefs
the Lord hall build, and keep,the Cities, add Kingdom, all
the keepers thereof labor.and wateh im vain, Iris che work
of God alone, Devils, aot of fufpend or
your tear hig mercy, and will change yout
wickedne(s, then you may be freed from evil, aswas Nepueud-
nezar, WhO by the. connfel of Dayiel. redeeming hisfinsby
almes, and his injquities taking pitty on the poor,’
ded the imminent wrath of God fora time,.uncih inthe
Court at Babylom be witha proud fpecch: recalled itbackto
him(elf again. mokt impious, with his Jexebel,to.whom
the Lord threatned death-by Eisas, was, becanfe-heturnedto —
God,made again the word of the Lord to &liah. Begaule 4-
chab feared my face Lwill.not bring the. cvill in his daies. The
Ninevites, becaufe by she Bdi@t ofthe King and Pyincesthey
repented at the preaching of Jomas, were totally freedfrom
the imminent punifhment. chis featence to
-Exechias, that he thould fet his houfe in order, becaufe he
fhould dy ; He praied and wept, and was healed, and fifteen
years added to his life; for thus the Lord{paketothe fame
man by the fame Prophet, I have feen thy teats, andheard thy _
prayers,behold I will add to thy daies fifteen years; moreover
{ will deliver thee from the hand of the King of Affyria & this
City,and prote@ it ; So much could the converfion and prayer -
of this pious Kingdo, who though he peers for himfelfalonc,
yet obtained not only for himfelf, but alfo for the City and

‘Soples Ir isthe Lord only who preferteth the King.and who
giveth wifdome vo the Kings Son ;. they ought co fly co this:

wal 4 go
d
‘VE
\ ‘
¢

mie, who feek vation, and not to Magicians arid Sor-
teouifriefs and fear the Lord, you who de.
fire perity’ if the'ftability of a Kingdom be fought for ;
itis writeen , the juft (hall inherit’the Land , the jult-thalt be
had inieverlatting remembrance, ‘he fhall not be moved for
ever’: if fecutity be fought for ; They that fear the Lord thal

not be afraid for tidings,’ but {hell fcorn af their enemies,

Jf honour, ‘and wealth be fought for; -In his houfe are glory,
‘and. tiches.. If pfaife The generation of the
rightéous thal be bleffed : If power ; He“thall be powerfull
earth,and his feed alfo. "His firen li be exalted in
‘glory’: If marriage, “and'p of ‘wedlock ; His wife
fhall be asa vine re On she his chil-

“veri as‘ olive” branches.“If health of body and
‘the Lord will not fuffer his holy one to fee corruption.

bleffed is the all things chat fears the who
i$ unfpote

ed in the way, who goes not into the counfel| of the

‘Wwicked:who takes pitty‘on the poor,’ and needy. For in an
day che Lord thall'deliver and thalf'not deliver

him into the hands of his ‘enemies. ‘All the wicked thall fee,
‘and be vexed , ‘and frail gtiafh their teeth and pine away,their

thall perifh. ‘Let this faffice for' admonition. For I will.
more curioufly profecute this matter left haply the evil-
the fhould provoke*mé to write more then is.

Pars, .of February, Anno. M.
x i the Romane a account.

7 Fe
‘3

a
a
at \
ee
ad
>»

“Cerning Magi ick, after bus. of
ond excellency of the Word

2 Magick, in BY

{6 nett joyned to, and of affinity with Aftrologie,in, fo
mutch that he char ar profelfeth Magick without Aftrologie, doth

nothing , but “alcogether:isin.an errours:, Swidasis of the
opififon ‘that Magick had irs:name,, ahd originall from che
Magifeans. Ie isthe common opinion, that is a Perfiag

name , byry , and Apmleins alent , and that in
Aignifies a prieft, wife map, or Philofopher.

that tongtie
Ma all Philofophy, naturall,and

the powers of Religions to them. H
alfo contain in them: Goetia, and Theurgia, betta |

they

chat natural | Magick. is is celle. but the

higheft power-of naturall Sciences,

fed ‘ike heighe -of

confirmation’ theféo belo.
dattiyalf Philofoptiy ; yuthe Matura
from opportune application of ther, brings
fotth: Admiration. »which, Magick
‘the thiopians:, and Indians :ofpecially did yfe,, qwhere the
“vertue of herbsjandftones, and ocher things looking cowards
whete he Apollemins she Fyanean was
Magician, ‘Ot Philofophterjas alfo che Pyrbagorians of this
Were which came to. worlhip, rit

when*heowasborn , which. che interpreters of the

»

—

‘

“~

wy
—
v.

Chaldeans expound the Plolopben of the Chaldeans fuch as

‘were Fiiarchas dmongltthe Bragmanni, .Tefpion amionett the
Baddeamonglt the Babylonians, Numa Pom-

pilius among{t the Romans, Zamolxiaes amongit the Thraci-
ans, Abbaris amongt the Hyperboreans, Hermes amongft the
cEgygtians, Zeroafter the fon of, amongtt the Per-
For the Indians, thiopians, Chaldeans, aad Perfians
chiefly did’ excell in this: Magick, With which cherefore-¢ as
Plato relates in eicibiadet) the fons of the Perfian Kings
were infini@ed, thac-they mighc to adminifter, and
the commonwealth of the world,
‘abd the commpnw and [Cicero faith in: his
‘of divinacion , that ahere wasnone amonglt the Persians di
enjey che Kingdom ; ‘bat he! that firft had learned -Magick.
Nataralf Magick therefore that which Contemplaces the
‘of ccleftiall things, apd fearching curi-
into their Sy idonh predute powers
publietie View, fo couphiag things asa
tenes to the gifts of foperiour things, by their mutual!
application, that from thence arife wonderfull . miracles,
not fo much by arr as by nature, to which art becomes
anaffiftanc whileft it wotks thef:thin ge,For Magicians,as the
moft curious fearchers of natare, making ufe of thofe things
‘which are prepared by nature by applying, aCtive things
ive’, ‘produce oftentimes effets befareche time ordained
fratare., which the vulgar chink ate-micacles,- which | indeed
igre the prevention of the-time, only coming

“OF March, ‘and sipe Grapes, or
icloiids) rains,,ithandess ,,and animals of
Roper Boaltnd phat he did do by sacer.ns-
Magick, Ottthe mockstherbof >
King Arabia; toe Bubglonian,,
Bocas, extaron; Almadal

»
iy
“
«

meon, Apollonius, and many others,, many of whole
works are yet entire , Ped many fragments are yet extant,
and have come to my men ‘have-alfo

wrote of natural! Magick ,. bur: they, but a few things, as
Arnoldus dé villd nova Raimundus Lullie,

topéthe

Here are moreover witty emulators of°na-

care and moft wold promile.chey can

by the influences | ined. all
vertues, but only. Mashematicall
which:

like to thofe of

selace: {mall. chi hit imitate the
rts I think chat we:

of.a

Mare hita which.drd- fie, “and
know, hard things , amd thew. miracics):
Serpens hilterh, bids, y ang ch know

qiences
emulate ar

bewitching whith ie done by ‘cups, to
otions , arid dives medicaments of Sorcerers : ‘On which
rt Democritus is faid co make fome , whereby good, happy,
and-fortunate fotis may. another whereby
we may rightly voyces Philox
ratus and P a Apollgnins:
ing of cer certain. sfaithy

hiding from fooler:

Api

chen,

@e
tsa

cated theearrals of boy thac was
wolfe: by xeafon of which
wolfe; Aufti that thename

ti wheit chéy hal carvied

hurdens ch éftorelt them fit men aghinyand
Happened to brtaih Father called Pr

“Bur ahy ont Thotid there things be bic

ute. Webs the Kite,

‘Ne was tuted an Ox} Plived Tevén’ yeers hay,

Teththed tHe incrcy oF God aah

Va
s

‘as aprey tothe Vulcers,-leaft he fhould again-rife from.the.
 dead,who returned from a beaft into aman sand moreof this
kind doth Exodus relate of the Magicians of “Pharaoh. But
Solomon {peaks of the fame, whether Magicians; or Sorcerers,
when he faith, Thou -haft termfied them © God ! becaufe they

have done horrible deeds by inchantments. Moreover, this I
iwould have:you know; that thefe Magicians do not fearch into.
~naturall things ‘only , jthofe-chings which dowctom-

, andattere manntr-putit of
bers, figures, founds; voyces; concents, lights, affections of
-the mind, & words So the P/yii,and A4ar fi.called together fer-
_pents , and others by other things depreffing them,
to flight. So Orpbexs repreffed the tempelt of the Argonante
ahymn ; and Homer, rsclates.to,. C/ipfes thatvhis blood
was rettrained with words,And.in the,law. of ‘the twelve ta-

bles punifhment was ordained for..them, who. cachagted the
corn : that without ‘all doube the Magicians did produce
wonderfull effets by words only, -affections,and noc
upon themfelves, but-alfo upon.extraneous things which
other things, draw them co them, or.expell chem.
them, or any otherwife affecting of them, no otherwife
then the Load{tone. draws; Iron, or Jeat-Chaff, or a Diamond

Garlick bind chem, fo that by this graduall, and concate-
Sympathy.of things,not only, naturall, and. ccleftiall
gifts,but alfo intelle€tuall, and divine may,,.as Zamblicus, Pro-
and Syxefinse confirm by the opinion of Magicians. .be

-geceived from above; which Proclus.in his book of facrifice,
and That/by,the confenc of thelc kinds
things ,. the. Magicians were wont,to,call up the. dictics
To. fach .a height of .madaels fome. of them ate
grown, that of the Stars, through
bintervals.of gimes,, and acertain rule Foportions being
dscan with 4 beck»
» receive the, fpirit sife » dip give an anfwer
them tbat ask couofell of and. reveal she of
Hence itis manifelt chat this daturaj! Magick is fonge-

d agai

»-
a*

tos ‘ahd Theargia , entangled in the

wicked curiofities, unlaw-

“By Of kinde ate thofe which
vers, and Witches.

Ode; even ut their Will

of order, toe poles for to force,

‘Which che the Ancidtits balled who enchant

the Ora “anid
rits, as'we reg of Socrutes
is fad which they feign
_themfelves to “pro ‘Bnd ali the fe ‘proceed
endeavout to call conipell evil!
‘by in Power, oF ivinetiames; for fe-
My Creare feats and the
thadeit, tio marvel if Gortians, Mews:
Gent, and ‘men of every prophane and do bind
_ that ‘MOR tiny that fobthit themifetses

wh

| nd! id¢re'them, theteby become

Jd)

d
ie,

"guilty of Idolatry, andthe bafeft abalement :to

the former:are not obnoxious, ‘they expofe thémfelves.

to manifeft dangers. For even compelled divels alwaiesde-
ceive us whitherfoever we go. Now from the. fee of the

Goetians have. proceeded all thofe’ books’ of -

which V#/pianus the Lawyer calls books difallowed'to be tead,
and forthwith appointed thenrto be deftroyed, ‘ofwhich fort

the firlt is Zabulus reported to invent, who was

lawfull arts, then Barnabas'actrtain Cyprian; and now in thefe
dayes. there are carryed about books with feigned titles,
under the names of e4dam, Abel, Enoch, Abrabam, Solomon,
alfo Paul, Honorius,Cyprianus, Albertus, Phomas -Hitrome,
and of a certaimman of Yorke, whofe toies Alphonfus King of
 Caftile, Robert an Englifh man, Bacon,

many other men ofa deplored wit. have foolifhly followed.
Moreover they have not made men only and Saints,and Patri-

by Razsél, and Ruphaelthe Angels of Adam and
Whictr books openly betray themfelvesto him that looks nar-

Apponus, and

arkes, and the angels of God, the authors of. fuch-execrable
opinions, but they boaftjalfo: thar thofe-books were diliver-

rowly into them, to be a rule, rite, andcuftome of theirpre+

cepts; :and a: kind of words, and characters, -an order of ex=.

trudtian, an empty phrafe, and

toyes;:and impoftures, and to be made'in lacter-timesby' men

ignorant. of all: ancient Magick, and forlorn artifts of perniti-

ons art, of prophane. obfervations’ mixed with the ceremoniés:
our religion, with ‘many unknown names, and feals

 jorermixed, ethad thereby they may- terrifieand- aftonifh, the
fimple

,.and ignorant: Moreover? i¢doth notyet appéar that
chefe'arts are fables: fortnlefs there’ were fuch indeed, and.
by them many. wonderfull, and ‘bortful things done, there
would not be fuch ftridt, divine, and humane: made

concerning them, for. the exterminating of them.
why do the Goetsanenfe: thofe evilb fpirits only, but be-

caufe good: Angels.will hardly appear expecting the com-
mand of God, andcomé not but to men pure in heart, and

holy in life: bue the evill ace cafily called

4A

}
wus
an
t
a >.
“7

him thacisfalle, and caunterfeicing holinefs are almaics ready
with ebeis craft, char they may be werthipped, and
beeaule women are moftdefirous of feerers, and
cautious,and prone to foperftitipn,they are the more caftly” ab
deceived,and therefore be up themfelvesthe more readily to —

them,and.do great prodigies. The poets fing of Circe, Afeden,’

sand orhess of this fort ; tcero, Plin , Adfinand m tai
others as-well Philofophers as Catholike and

ttians, alfothe Scriptuesteftifie the like, Forimthe booksof *!
galled. op Of Samuel the Prophet, manyinter-
pres.icnotto be the foal evil fpiric,
whiehttook upon him his thape. .Yerthe Hebrew
phat Auflinto Simplicianss doth not deny but it might-be the
Bue fpiric of Samael, which might eafily be calied up fromits
before.a. compleat. year after hisdeparrure, zsalfothe
Gostions teach. Allo Alagician Necromancers fuppofe: that
powers andbeonds,

sight. be done-by certain: natural:

have feid-in our books of Occalt Philofophy. Therefove the

anetent. skilfull. of fpinitual things, did’ nor-without y'
thatthe bedies, of the dead fhould be buried

place; andbe: accompanied with lights; andfprinkled

Rvith-hely- water, and, be. perfumed: and

gente, and 3

above-ground, For asthe Malters ofthe Hebrews fay, Albour

and, carnaliAnimal;, aad apon
of the fichh being ilhdifpofediis lefcfor meatzo the
j- Serpent, and as
flefa. and blopd, andi the: Princé of this. world,.-andis |

Genefis; Thom foals: eat alkthe dutesvof thylife. Andin
thy tread | i.e. oarbody created of the dultof

» ofcarhaljaccording cothe word
of Pan, faying, that which is: fowediacarnal, (hall arife'a
and All-indeed sife; all fiallinor

»
‘ .
‘ 'y
at
ot ~~
we
a
ad

be changed becanfe many thalt remain for ever as meat of che:
Serpent. ‘Thisfilchy and horrid mattér of the flefh nd
of the Serpent we therefore caft off by death; changing it for
abetter and fpirttuall , which (half be in the refurreQion of
the dead’; and ts already in thofé, who have
the firft fruits of the refarrection, and many have alteady at~
dined to | by the vertuc of the. divine fpitic «itr this Irte,-as
Enoch, Ehab, and Mofés, wiole Bodies werechahwed int?
a {piricuall mature,and have fot feen cortuption neither are
their carkaffes left to the power of thé Sérpene. And thie.
was that difpate of the devill with the -
concerning the body of Mo/fes, of which Fade Makes
inhis Epiftle. But of Goetia, and 2ecronany let thefe fuffice..

tie ——

Of Theurgia.
many think thét Theurgia isttot avif-chie

yet oftentimes it isundér the names of God , and the ‘fallacies
of evil Angels obftringed by the wicked fallacies of the des ~~
vils. For we do procnré, and attra@ not by nacurall power
only, but alfo by ecereain rites, and ceremonies , celeftialg,
and by them divine vertues tovoor felves ; OF whith
with many che ancierit did if many:
volumes. But the parc. of af

obferving cleannefs, and purity , firft of the mind, theirof’ -
the body, and of thofe things which are about the body,
in the'skin, tm garments, in habitations, in veffels , trenfils,
oblations, faerifices, che purity’ of which difpofeth to che
qmaintance with and beholding of divine things, 2nd is very”

 Nibe goverited by good Angels,and a divine diery, where

leéremonies confitts id |

moch required in facred things, according to the word of

Tfaial, be ye wathed and made clean, and takeaway
evilof yourthoaghts: Now impurity, becanfe if
infeéts the ait} and mam, difturbes that moftpure-inflaence of

Cefeftiall and divine thrngy,amd chafeth'away the pare fpirits

—
a
e
-¢
«
‘
«
a
a
ra
e
«
or
‘

4 ar ‘= . >

—

¥ \.

that ches be worthipped and.adored for, gods require alfo

(this purity. Thereforehere is: great need of caution , as we

lately difeourfedsat lange in our books of Occulc Philo-
fophy. Bat. of this Theurgia, or Magick, of divine things
Porphyrie difputing at large, at length conclides chat’ by
$heurgicall confecrations che foulof man may be fitted to

geceive and Angels, and co. fee God : but he, alcoge.

ghee demies that we'can by this-art recurn co God. OF his
 $chool therefore is the Art elmadel the Notary art, the
. ‘Pauline Act , the art of Revelations , and many fuch like fa-
+... . perftigions., which are fo much the more pernicious, by how.

r

A the words of Pliny come into mymind , who faith
fatto Of Magick depends upon and Lutopea;
Jews; which words put mein mind of che Cabalic of
| Bie the Jews, which. the Hebrews. are of opinion was delivered
Afofes by God -himfelf on mounc Sinai, and: then by
grees of facceflion without the monuments of letters was un- ,

thee tes OF delivered.to.others by word of mouth, |
Only as the’ Pythagorian optnions were formerly delivered by
 echippus,-and Ly fians,who had Schools at. hebes in Greece,
the Scholess keeping the precepts.of their mafters ,
fe theigmemoric, did ulethesr wir, and memorie:inftead of,
 «books.: So certain Jews defpifing literature, placed’ this in.
memoric, and obfervations, and yocall traditions ,, whence ;
Cabalie was by the Hebrews. called as it were the) reception ,
any thing from.another,only by hearing. That arc (as it.,
Reported ) is:very ancient , bucthe name: was known but of

fake times amongft Chriftians: They, eliver~a- double {cience,

* explaining the powersof things created, naturall, and
expounding the fecrets.of the Law and Bible by

aa

on
a

cafons ; which trulyupon this account, differs

«
a
x
s

nothing at all from naturall Magick,in which we believe
tomon excelied..Forit ts réad in the facred Hiftories of. the He-
brews,that he was skilledin ailthings, even from the Cedar of
Lebanontothe Hyflop that the wal-alfo.in cattle,
e Magical vertnes of nature. AZo/es:tht e-Egyptian, among
thedater wniters: followed after chisin

‘

Pentacles; many more Talwmdifts. ‘They call the.other

Science thereof of A4ercarajwhich isconcerning the fub-
Jimé contemplations.of divine & Angelick vertnes,;& offacted

lettersnumbers, fignres,things, & names, and cops of elements,
‘and ‘lines,points,and accents, are all fig
found things, &great fecrets. This again they divide into
‘mancy,uiz. that which is called otariacon, treating Of Angeli- -
cal vertues,names, & feals,alfo of the conditions ol: {piticssand
into. 7 beomancy,which featcheth into themyfteries of
divine majefty,as the emanations thereof, é facred namesjand
 ‘Pentacles,whichhe that knows may excell with wonderfulver-
‘cues ; as that when he pleaferh, he may fore- know all future |
-things,& command whole nature, have power
“Anpels,and do miracles. By:this they fappofe, that AZo/es.did
fhew fo many figns,aod-tursed the rod iste aSerpent, and the
‘watersinto blood,and that he fent Frogs, Flies, Lice; Loeults,
Carerpiilars,fire with hail ,botches and boyls on the Egyptians,
and flew every firlt-born of mamand beaft ; and: tharhe-open-
ed the Seas, -and‘carryed his thorew, and browght: fountains

fiames, and feals, being acéertain
hificative of molt pro-

it

over devils;and

clouds and lightnings»by day, apillarof fire-bymight,

called down from:Heavea: the of che living God to.
the people, and did {trike she: hanghty

with fire,andthofe;

that! murmured withthe-Leprofic; and. omcheall.delerving =

brought faddain.deften@ion; rhe carch gaping and {wallowing
; further he fed the people with- heavenly foods

pacified Serpents ,. cured the envenomed ,
gherous mulcirude from infirmity Sccheir garments from
out,écmade them vidtors over theit,

this art of miracles

¢

~~».
by
= « >.
J
re
uf
wh
Ba
Ry
«

filly ated fie Foote Heaven mpoti/hisenemics;
deadvhilderolife; Desiel opt the mouths of
fang fongs in the fiery Oven;

this aft te incerdulous ‘Jevis affirm; that cven

fo many miracles; very well

knew this-are,. and délivered.charms againft devils, and their

Sbondsjand the manner of conjurations and agai intk difeates; a8.
bat.as fdoubenoe: but that God. revealed

- Moses many fecrets;contained bark of the words

| Law, which were not:tobe tevealed to the prophane
‘So: Packnowledge that this: Cabalifticall art, which
thetebrews brag and:i-fomerimes diligently and labo-

tough after, is nothing elfe-than a mecr rapfody of

o, and Theurgicall but if it pro-
God (asthe Jews boaft) and conducerh to che
‘perfeGion of life; health of men, tovhe of God, and
; chat fpirit of truthy which
Synagopue, aid come to teach us all truth,would
itérom ‘this Church even untill thefe laft
g

which indeed knowethi all ythar-are of God, whofe
and other-mylteries of falvation are re-
vealed and pertegted. in tongue. ; for every: tongue hath
quail power, if folbe thutithere be thefame equal
kent: ‘either in heaven‘or earth; by
we mult be faved; and by. which we work miracles,
Oe: name which all things \are recapicu-
‘Hence! itis; charche Jews, who are
afittg che God) can operaceiliteleor
Ohrilt, ag cheirancient fathers did bur chac
Syexperienve “find, and: fee, that-by the revolution this
(asthey Jenvences, full
om wie boty Scriptures; this is
elle then’ a'certain playing “upon. Which
which chis-tongue dnd:the cuftome of writingdo. -

ee »

can
ing

by the delineations of the fi ticles and pi
fome  facred' ‘m yiterie,, rep the

che things painre®;
ftom prophahe wri as Eve
read the (‘antones of Valeria Prova , compoled out Of th
verles of Virgil, concerning Chirift ; All this
working of miraclés,chere is none of fuppo | {0 fo
lifh-an underftanding, wihto believeth chat they haye any

fcience of them; therefore this Cabala Of the is nothing
elfe chan a moft pernitious fapédtticion, by the which they ga-
ther at’ their dividé words, names an

‘ters, (Catcering and by
ofie of they diffolve rhe conned

truth, inductions parables, and hi
chere conitriiing them by" their own

the words of God to’ their follies, défaming the Scr

and faying thaprheir have foundation on the
calumniate. the Law of God, and by the octets

words, fyllables, letters, numbers impudently extorred, they

affay to bring violent and blafphemousproofs for their unbe-

lief. Befides,they being puft up by thefe trifles , do boaft that ;

finde and fearch out the unfpeakable myfteries of God,
fecrets, which are above the Scriptiifes, by the which alfo

shay impudently affirm, and without blufhing , that they

_ can even prophecy,and do miracles and wonders ; but ithap-.

-peneth to chem,as to Dog, who leaving his bread,and

g: aping after the (hadow, lofthis food; fo this perfidious and

necked people , being always bufied in the fhadows me

the Scriptures, and about their own vanities, and doing vio-

-Jence by their artificiall , but faperfticious Cabala; do

bread of life, and being fed'with vain

—

with certain pictures which being rad

one may know, who hath

. ‘
* *, ra
J
ac
¥
»
a

We
‘

“geftro

taught, that without thefc letters. & numbers;

and chat they who hear, might nor.

propounded rothe blind and efroneous, accor

notby by word of mouth,and that this isthatAl-

the word. of aicall ferm
Cabalifticall: fapertticion proceeded fuppofe ) the
eanc, Gnoltican, arid Valentinian: Hereticks., who. together,
with cheir difciples,fained a certain Greek Cabala, perverting
che myfteries of the Chriftian faith, and by cheir heretical.
corraption wrefting them to. the Greek letters and numbers,

bythe which they ¢ confticuted ; body of truth (as they callic),

“

coutd not befoand Golpel, becaufe thatthe;
thcreof ace various, and fometimes repugnant to.

themfclves,atid fall of parables; tharthey who fee, might not.

hear, and. that they.

and that are,
ding totheca-
city of their blindnef$'and error. Buc that the fincere trath

hid under thefe things, iscommitted.co the only,

who underitand, might nor uaderftand

phebetary an Arithinetical Theology. which Chrift in private
atifefted ‘to his 5. and Paul Ipeaketh to.
the perfect only ;. for feeing thas chefe are the higheft myfte-

rors therefore they are not written, nor ought fo to be, but-to .

be kept in fecret amongft wife men ; but no man is a wife man.

them,who knoweth not to refrain mone

«

ad
J
=”
ee.
a > =

ra
al
- +e ©
‘
= : ‘

‘Ut let us return to that Magick, ‘pare Of
jugglings (¢. +.) delufions, whith are made: actordine th.
appearance only, by which Magicians fhew phantafities and
_ play many miracles by circulatory | frauds, and ‘caufé dreams.
which they do not fo much by Geotick inthantments,and ify.
-precations , and deceits of devils, as by certain ‘vapors, pers
ames, lights, love- medicines,collyries, alligations, and fulpert.
fons, alfo by rings, images, glaffes, and {uch like drugs and
of art, daily: by Celeftiall
power. Alfo many things are done daily: by flieght of hand,
Pe which fort we fee fome are done daily by Rage pl
Yporters which we call Chirofophers (e. i.) skilful
- ofhand. There are extant concerning this art; booksof the
Legerdemain of Hermes,and fome othets. Weread alfo of a
certain man called ‘Pafeton, a moft notable juglar, that was
wont .to fhew a banquet to guefts, and when he pleafed:to
make it vanifh away again, all rifing with hunger, and thirft,
being deluded. Weread that uma Pompilinsdidufethefe
kinds of jugglings, and alfo that moft learned Pythagoras

did fometimes do this toy, that what — he pleafed;: he |

would write in a glafs, which being {et againit the fall Moon,
he would thew to any one that ftood Behind it, thofe-things
reprefented in the Globe of the Moon; Hither belongs :
whatfoever Poets fing of the tranfmutations of men, which
alfo is delivered. by Hiftorians, and by fome Chriftian Di-

vines, and alfo is recorded in the Scripture. Somentayaps

pear like Affes, orhorfes, or other Animals with <faftinated
“eyes,or a troubled medium,and that by a naturall are. Somes
times thefeare done by good and evil {pirits, orby Godhint?
felf at the requeft of fome good men, asin che Scripraré we

read of the Prophet befer by an Army of she’ King for

tifying Dotham. Dut to pure eyes, andfuch as be opened by-
God,thofecannor deceive;fo that

bea kind of cattle,did feem t

oman which was judgedga
oHilario tobe not any fuch thingy

x
a
r
‘
ee,
a:
x,
—
—
V4
¥
A-
om
aw
te!
er

therefore which aredone accord. ~@
 ingto only, arecalledjugelers.
* “Bue thofe things whichare done by the Art of tranfmuting,.
vortranflating, as of Nebychadmezar, or of.;Corn carryed fo
~ another field, we have fpoke of before; but of chis. art of
 gugaling, thos faith Pumblicus,-Thefle things which are fup-
poled to.ve juggled or bewitched, befidesimagination,
no truth of action effence. end.of thefe is.butto.
hold forth things ro the imagination according to appear-
ance , of which there prefently remains no foorfteps or figns.
Now by what hath been faid, itis manifeft chat Magick is no-
sthing-elfe bat a collection of Idolatry, Aftrology, and faper-
“Ritious medicines; And now there is by Magicians raifed a
‘great company. of. hereticks inthe Church, who as Fannes and
pe res refilted AZofes, doin the like maoner refilt the Apo-
Mtolicalltruth. The chief of thefe was Simon the Samaritan,on
whom: by reafon of this art was beltowéd at Rome.in Claudius
Cefarstime,a Statue, with this Infcription, Zo Simon the holy. -
God. OF hisblafphemies (lemens Eufebius, and Ireneus make
mention. From. this Simon,as from a Seminary of all Herefies
‘proceeded .by -fucceffions the monftrous Ophites, the filchy
Gnolticks, the impious. Valentinians,Cerdonians,Marcionifts,
ce Montanians, and ‘many other Hereticks, lying againft God.
gain: and glory, “ding no good to men, but de-
€iving them,and drawing them into deftruction and error,to:
ee whom they that give credit fhall be confounded in the judge-
ment. of God. But of Magick I-wrote -whileft' Iwas very
three large books, which I called Of Occult. Phila/o-
~ ply, in which what was then through the curiofity of my youth
€fkoneous, I now being more advifed,.am willing to have
teatted; by this recantation; I formerly fpent. much time and.
 Coltsinthefe vanities. “At Igrew fo wifes to be able to.
_ diflwade others from this deftru€tion ; For whofoever do not.
ithe truth, nor .in the power of God, but inthe deceirs of.
» . *Miyels,according to the operation of wicked fpirits prefame

£0 divine andprophecy, and practifing chrough Magicall va-

pe
e

a

oF

«

Incantions and other oniacall works
«
é

we
a a .

and deceits of of of ng of delufions,

ing, can do miracles,I hele
all with Fannes, and Pamores, ead Simon Mages, be

of eternal! Fire.

nated to the torments
of the Occult Philef phy of Cornelins 4
FINIS.
Anno M.D. X XXILTI. In the

«4
Pad
be
~ ¥
P
Shey
nd
g
al
aa
~ ‘
a= *
y

a

ig

=i

j ¥ at 3 >

«
a

ea 4
—
«
ad
»
wf

f
‘
»
a |
‘
“i
A

°
te
a?
°
>. bead
| Q
«~
oe
why
z = ~

rt |
= a
ca
an
best
Pu,
tot

a,
ad
A
«
‘
| °
pat
te

