Agrippa (attrib.), Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy (1655)
=============================================================
Henry Cornelius Agrippa his Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy; Of Geomancy; Magical Elements of Peter de Abano; Arbatel of Magick — the 1655 London collection translated by Robert Turner, the English vehicle for geomancy and the Arbatel's spirit-olympiad. Text: 1655 first English edition. Raw OCR via Internet Archive; print artifacts removed. Public Domain.

i

- gn
c Ree Tne

See
“=S 5 oe ET ee

Se gh
Re ela ae

Henry Pie eff a
HITS
Fourth BO O K

| Occult Philofophy.
Of Gromancy.,.

Mactcat ELemEnts of Peter de}

eA bano.
: A tieducaicht Gromaney.
The Narurg of Srrairs,
eArbatel of Maatcx.

Tranflated: into Englifh meet Robert Taner,

Printed by F.C. for ohn Hicvifon. at the Lamb
: at the Eaft-end of Pauls. 1655:

ST ee Pe ea ere eae

7 a

a ae

The PREFACE
To she unprejndiced Reader.

9S the fall of man made himfelfe and ali
other creatures fubjeQ to vanity ; fo,by
LAWNS  reafon thereof, the moft noble and ex.
cellent Arts wherewith the Rational
AW foul was indued, are by the rufty canker
| ¢ brongheunto Corruption. For Magick
 atfelfe, which the ancients did fo divinely contem-
| _ plate, is fcandalized with bearing the badg of all di-
abolical forceries: which Art (faith Mirandule) Pays
si-totelliguns, multi veprehendunt, cy ficut canes denotes
femper alistrant: Few underftand many reprehend,and
as dogges barke at thofe they know nor: fo doe ma.
ny condemne and hate the things they unde:ftand
not. Many men there are, that abhor the very name
and word Magws, beeaufe of Simon Megus, who bein
indeed not Magus, but Goes, that is, familiar with
evill Spirits, ufurped that Title. But Magieke and
Witchcraft are far differing Sciences ; whereof Pliny
being ignorane,{coffeth thereat: for Neve (faith Pliny) Plin.tib,30.
who had the moft excellfear Magicians of the Raft NH.
fent him by Tyridates king’ of Armenia, who held that
kingdome by him’, foundthe Arc aftet long ftudy
and labour alrogether ridiculous: Now Witchcrafe
and Sorcery, are workes done meerely by the devill,
which with refpe@ unto'fome covenant made with
man, he aétech by men his inftrutnents,to accomplith
his evillends: of thefe, che hiftories of al] ages,
people and countries, as alfothe holy Scriptures. af-
ford us fundry examples. 9 3 :
But Magus'isa Perfiag a ptimitively, whereby:

. = C 4 Sei ar 5, _
Pea Wa
, ' aia ’ wee oe 0
I — =e . :
: — re .

*

js expreft {uch a one as is altogether converfant in
things divine's and a$ ‘Plato affirmech;, theart of Ma-
gickis the art of worfhipping God: and the Per-
fians called their gods Meyi<* hence Apollonius. faith,
char Mzzus iseitherdwe eWay Ors, ‘OF Secamuns Oear®
that is, chat Magus is a name fometime, of him that
isa god by nature, & fomrimes of him thatis in the
fervice of God: in which latter fence itis takenin
Matth.2.1,2. when the wife men came co woifh’p:
Jefus, and this is the firftand higheft kinde, whichis;
called divine Magick 5 and thefe the Latines did: in-
title (apientes, or wife men: for the feare and worfhip
of God, is che beginning of knowledge. Thefe wife-
men the Greeks call Ph:lofophers 3 and amongft the E-
oyptians they_were termed Prie/s:theHebrews term-.
éd them Cabaliftos, Prophets, Scribes and Pharifees 3.
and amongtt the Babylonians they were differenced.
by the name of Caldeans,& by the Perfiansthey were
called Magicians ;and one {peaking of Seftbenes,one of
. the ancient Magicians, ufeth chefe words 3 Et verum
Deum merita majeftate profequitur , cr angelos minsftros
Dei, fed veri ejus vener ations novit a[sifteresidem damonas
predit terrenos,Vages, Yumanitatis inimicos ,. Softhenesat-
cribeth the due Majefty to the true God, & a:know-
ledgeth that his Angels are minifters and meflengers.
which attend.che worthip of the true God; he alfo
hath delivered,cthat there are devils.carthly and-wan-
dring,and enemies co mankind. |

. So chat the word Magus of iC

felf imports. a Con-
templator of divine & heavenly Sciences; buc under
- the name. of Magick, are all unlawful Arts compres,
hended ; as Necromancy and Witchcraft, and fuch,
Arts which are effe@ed by combination withthe de-
vil, and whereof he is a party. ~ Thefe

Fhe Preface) sw
Thefe Witches and Necromancers are alfo called”
Malefici or venefcd 5 forcerers or poifoners ; of which
name witches are rightly called, who withour the
Art’ of ‘Magicke’do indeed ufe the helpe of the’
devill hinfelfe to'do’ mifchiefe , practifing ro mix
che powder of déad' bodies with other things by
the help of the devill prepared 5 and at other times
tomake pi@ures of wax, clay , or otherwife (as ic
were (acraméentaliter) to effect thofethings which the
devil by other means bringeth to pafs. * Such were,
atid to this day partly, if not aleogether, are the cor-
ruptions ‘which have:made odious the'very name of
Magick,havine chiefty foughe,as'the maner of all im-
poflures-is,to counterfeit the higheft and moft noble
patt of it. . ts
A fecond kind of Magick isA ftrologte, which judg-
eth of the evenrs'of things to come, natural and hu-
mane by the marions'and infldences of rhe ftars upon
thefelower elements, by chem obferv'’d &underftood
Philo Judeweafirmeth, that by this part of Ma-
sick or Aftrologie, together with the motions of the
Stars and other heavenly bodies, Abraham found out
the kiiowlddge of the true‘God while he lived inCal-"’
dea, Qui Contemplatione Creaturarum,cognovit Createrem
( faith Daniafcén ) who knew the Creatorby the con:
remplation of the crearures Fef¢phms reportech of”
Abrabaw chavhe intraged the Egyptians ia Arichs:
metick and Aftronomy;who. before ‘Abr ahzin’s come’
ifi@ unto them, knew'none’of chefe'Sciences,
Abraham fanctitate & (apientia omnium pr aft anti Cimus,
primum Galdeos , deinde Pha vices, demum Eeyptias Sa-
cévdites, Afroisgia cy Divina docuertt, Abraham the
“holieft and wifeft of men, did firft teach the-Calde-
PANS ans

oN es een

atts ne RRA nae

acai ene qn CES aE TPS LS 5

oa

, - a TT aye Yep inns. aioe ek -

7 — pores ; et ie eerie ama lili GT PE TTS SR a as 7

Eo NT ee :
a 7 # ¥.

The P. veface.:

~ -ans,then the Pheenicians,la(tly the Egyptian Priefts,

ftrologie and Divine knowledge.

Wichout doubr, Hermses 7; rifmegiftes . that divine
Magician and Philofopher, who (as fome fay) lived
long before Noab, attained co. much Divine knowled;
of the Creator through the ftudie of Magick and
Aftrologie , as his Writings, co this day extant a-
mong us, teftifie. |

The third kinde of Magick containeth the whole
Philofophy of Natures: which bringeth co light the
inmoft vercues, and extra@eth them outof Natures
hidden bofome co humane ule: Firtates in centro centré
latenses  Vertues hidden inthe centre of the Centre,
according tothe Chymifts: of this fort were Alber
$06, Arnoldus de villa nova, Raymond, Bacon, and others,

The Magick thefe men profefs'd,is thus defined: Ata
Sis eff connexioa viro (<piente agentinm per naturameum
patientibas bi, congruenter vefpexdentibus , ut inde opera.
prodeant, non fine corum admiratione qui caufam ignorant,
Magick is the connexion of natural agents. and pa.
tients, anfwerable each to other, wrought by a wife
man,to the Bringing forth of fuch effe@s.as are won. -
derful co thofe that know.nor their caufes..- i

In all chefe, Zoroaster was well learned, efpecially
in the firft and the highett 3. for in his Oracles he.
confeffeth God to be the firftand the higheft, -he
believeth of the Trinity, which he would notinvee
ftigate by any natural Knowledge : he: {peaketh. of
Angels, and of Paradife - approvech: the immorta.
Jity-of che foul, ceachech. Truth, Faith, Hope, and
Love.,. difcourfing of the abftinence and charity of.

the CHagi,

Of

| The Preface.

Of this Zoroafter, Ewfebivs in the Theologie of the
Pheenicians, ufing Zérosfer’s own words: Hee ad”
werbum feribit faith Ewfebrus) Dems primis, incorrapti-
bilinm , [empiternus, ingenitws, expers parsinm, fibiipfi fim
milliesse., bonorum omnium auriga, munera non expeltans,
optimus, prudenti[simmes, pater juris ,. fine doctrina jaftsti-
am perdoctus, natura perfectue, fapicns, [acre-natura sni-
cus inventors So Thus, faith: Zéroafter 5 word: for
word: Godthe firft, incorruptible, everlatting, un-
begorten, without parcs, moft like himfelf, the guide
of all good, expecting no reward, che beft,the wifett,
che father of ‘right’, having learned juftice without
reaching,perfec, wife by nacure, tle onely inventor ©
thereof.

So.hat a.Magician-is no other butd/vinorumcultor
dy inserpres', a ftudious\ obferver and expounder of
divine things ;. and the Arvic felf 1sinone orher qaam
Naturalis Philofophieabfoluta con{ummarte, then the ab-
folute perfe@ion of Natural Philofophy. Never-
thelefs there is a mixture in all chings, of good with
evil, of falfhood wich truth,.of corruption with pu-
rity. The good,thecruth,che purity,in ewery:kinde,

- may well beembraced : Asinthe-ancient worfhip-

ping.of God by Sacrifice,chere was no man'knowing
God’among the Elders, that'did forbear to worfhitp
the God ofall power, ‘or condemn: that’ kinde of
Worhhip, becaufe the“devil ‘was {0° adored in the
Image of Baal , Dagon, Aflaroth, Chemofb, Fupiter,
Apollo, and the like, 4.5.04. . 6) +.

Neither.did thejabufe of Aftrology terrifie dbrabans,
(if we believe che moft ancient and religious Writers)
from‘ obferving the motions and‘natutes of the -hea-
yenly bodies. Neither can it dehort wile and learned
men

EERE ae OEE LAR OTT a
—, - ' .

The, Preface.
_ men in-thefe days from attributing thofe vercues, in-
‘fluences, and inclinations, to the Stars and other
Lights of heaven, which God hath given tochole his

Slorious creatures,

“T mult expect fome calumnies and obtreétations againft this,
“from the malicious prejudiced man; and the lazie aftecters of Ig-
‘norafice, of Wwhorh this 49e (warns +’ bite the'voicéand fotind of
the Snake'and the Goofe,is all'dnes! Buc ous ‘ftomacks® dre “net
now fo:queazie and tender y afterfo long time feeding upon folid
Divinity ; nor we fo umbragious and ftarling, having been 'folon
enlightned.in Gods path, chat we fhould relapfe into chat childifh —
Age, in which Ariffotles Metaphyficks, in a-Councelin'Fraxce,
was forbid to be tead. ‘ a Rg ae aay
Bur Tincite the Reader to 4 charitable opinion hereof, with a
Chriftian Proteftation of an innocent purpofe therein ; and intreat
the‘Reader to follow this advice of Tabans, Qui litigant, fine
ambo in confpettu tuo mali ‘ey vei And if there be any ‘{eandal
in thisenterprife-of mine; it is taken not given. : And this:comfort
' J: haye.in chat Axiome of Trifosegifins, Qui pine of, fumme
philofophatur. And therefore | prefenc it without difguile, and
object it to all of candor and indifferencie : and of Réaders, of
whom there be fotir forte, as one obferves: § punges which actract
all' without diftinguifhing Hour-elaffes, which receive,and-pout
Out as falt 5 \Bags, Which retain Onély the dregs of Spices, and let
“the Winecfca pes and’ Sieves; which recain the belt onely. © Somé
«there are Of ithe laft fort, and to them I prelent this Occalr Phi-
fafopby, knowing that’they my reap.good thereby. And they who
yare fevere againft ir, they fhall pardon this my Opinion, that fuch
their feverity proceeds from Self-guilrinels.s and give me leave to
“apply that of Exswoding, that it is the nature of Self. wickednels,co
‘think thac of others,-which' themfelves deferve. And itis all the
comfort which the guilty have, Not co find any innocent. Bur that
‘among Mothers this may find fomeacceptation, is the dere of

LondonilivAug.t 6 54. | t |  R. Turner.
| To

LARISA BUGRG SHG EBL
To his fpecial frend Mr. R. Turner, on

his judicious Tranflation of

Corn. eAgrippa.

S one that just out of aTrance appears,
Amaz’d with ranger fights, whofe fecret fears
Are [carcely past, but doubt{ul whether be
May credit’s eyes, remaineth fledfaftly
Fix'd on thofe objests 5 just like bim I ftana,
Ropt in amaXement to behold that can
By art come neer the gods , that far excel
The Angels that in thofe bright Spheres do dwell,
Behold Agrippa wounting th lofty skies,
Talking with gods , and then anon be prics
Ins’ earths deep cabinet, as ¢’ Mercury,
All kindes of Spirits willing (ubjects be,
And more thenthis his book fupplies : bat we
Blinde mortals , no ways could be led to fee
That light withont ataper : then thou to ss
cMuft be Agrippa and an Oedipus.
Agrippa once again appears, by thee
Pull’d onto sh’ afhes of Antiquity.
Let [quint-ey'd envie pine away, whilft thon
Wear'{t crowns of Praife on shy deferving brow.

I.P.B. Cantabrigiz.

To

oly 0th. obs o}
BID pis

ETERS TGIES, See See ee ew

0. his ingenious friend Mr. Turner,
upon his Tranflation.

ane erreels Soul? renowsd Epitome »

. Of Learning azd Occule Philofophse s

That unkuows Geomancte deft apart,

With profound Secrets of that abftrale Art's

d” expound Natural Magick is thy task:

Not hell-born Necromancie tonimak,;

Expofing My fleries to publike VIEW,

That heretofore were known to wery few,

Thou doft not keep thy Knowledge to thy (elf,

(As bafe-covetous Mifers do thetr petf

Whofe numerous bags of ruft-eaten Sold,

Profits none, till them/elves are laid in mold)

But fiudious of Publike £00d, doft make

AL of th’ fruits of thy labours topartake.’ .
Therefore tf fome captious C ritick blame

Thy Writings, firey then bis judgements lame.

Art bath uo hater but an empty pate,

Which cau far better Car ps then imitate.

Nay Loilus or Momus wil kot dare

Blame thy Tranflation, without compare

Excellext. So that if az huvdred tongues

Dame Nature had bcftow'd, and brazen lungs ;

Vet rightly to ebnecinate thy praifes,

I fhould want firength, as well as polite phrafes.

But if the gods will grant whart do Crave, -

Then Enoch’s Tranflation halt thou haves

W.P. S. John’s Cambr.

——— TS TIS, 5 rp 0 ho cl ae

OTE I STE

Rite awretway ES eT

cbrrboebrsbersocbrche Srbehrte eer.
Lo his friend the eA utbor , on this bts
T ranflation. :

| Hat not a Sibyl or Caffandra lefe? i
| Apollo ceasd ? Has fharp-fang'd Time berets
Usef the Oracles ? Is Dodan’s grove
Cut down ? Dees ne'er a word proceed from Jove
Intothe ears 6f mortals that inbertt
Tirefias foul, or the great. alcha's {piri ?

What is become o' th’ Auguts that foretold
Nature’sintents ? Areth Magi dead, that could
Tell whet was done in every Sphere ? Shall we
Not know what's done intheremot {i Country ——
Without great travel ? Can't we belowe defery
The mindeo’ sh’ gods above? All’s cone by thee,
Agrippa; all their Arts lie couch'd in thee.

Th Art that before in divers heads did lie,

1s now collect int one Monopoly.

But al’sin vain, we lack’d an Oedipus,

Who fhould isterpret's meaning anto ws

This thon effec? [t with (ach dexterity,

Adding perhaps what th’ Author ne'er ded [ee ;
That we may (ay, Thon dost the Art renew :

To thee the greater half of th’ praife # due

J.B. Cantabrigia.
b 2 To

¢ 4
(a
ede
t
j
‘
#
is
¥
R

Be oe aTERS SARS ee tor ys

SBrbr beberbe brtnbetetrtrt,

Lo the eAuthor , on his Tranflation of
Cornelius Agrippa.

P \llas of Learning th’ art, if Godde/s nami d ,
Which Prototype thy knowledge bath explain'd ,

Which Nature alfo firiving to combines,

Scitnce and Learning, inthis Form of thine,

To ws not darkly , but dosh clearly fhew

Knowledge of Myfleries as the |hrine i you.

By thy permi(sion’tis, we have accefs

Into Geomancy 5 which yer, unless

Thou hadft unmask'd, a myflery't had lain,

A task too hard for mortals to explain,

Which fince then haft from the Lethzan floods

Preferv'd, we'll confecrate the Lawrel buds

To thee (Phoebus difmiffed) shine [ball be

The Oracle, to which all men foall flee

In time of danger 5 shy predictions foal,

Towhatfoever thou command [t, inthral

Our willing hearts ; yea, show {halt be

Sole Prophet, we obedient to thee.

ee See “. vee oes
SSS Se =

acannon

eberberbrtnBerbe betebecbecte keke

To the Author, on his Tranflation of
| ‘Cornelius Agrippa. |

Oth Phoebus ceafe to. anfwer ¢° our demands 3

Or will he not accept at mortals bands
A (ad Bidental ? And ts Sibyls cave
Inhabicable ? Or may Tirelias have
No fucceffor nor rival? How (hall we
Then Ocdipus to th’ world dirett ? If be
Do Inceft adde to Parricide, th’ are dumb,
That could preditt what things (hould furely come :
And they are filent that knew when t' apply
T’ our bedy Politick, Purge and Phleéotomy.
How will bold thieves our treafures rob, who fhak
Loft goods regain , or by his Charms recat
The nocent ? Th’ Art 2 by thee repriv’d :
In thee the Magi feem to be reviv'd.
Phoebus & not brain-fick, Joves doves not dead,
Th Oracles not ceas’d : Agrippa’s bed
(Like the Arabian birds felf builded ueft,
which firft her Uru proves, then her quickning ref
Hath thee produo’d more thew hie equal {ure,
Elfe bad this Art as yet remain’d obfcares
A miracle to vulgars, well known to none;
Scarce read by decpeft apprebenfion.
Then D’H conclude, Since thou doft him explain,
That th’ youuger brother hath the better brain.

John Tomlinfon,
of St.John’s i Cambridge.

Te

. . ; . ; : ee OP oanetarae side 5

Dubebtetattte feted wrt

Lo his good friend the Author , . on bis
~ Lranflation of Occult Philofophy
did ‘Geomance.

Off noble undertakings ! at if Art
And Prudence [bould a bargain make, t° ‘impart
Refulgent lafres Jou fend forth a ray :

Which nobleft Patrons never could difplay.
Well may Diana love you, and infpire
Your nobleft Genius with calefttal fire,
Whofe Sparkling Fancte with wore power can qucb,
“ind fooner Conquer, then a Magick Spelt. 3
TheeA author thought not, (when he pen'’d the Baok )
To be furmounted by abigher look ,
Or be o’ertopt b a more triumphant rein,
Which honld exalt be then-moft pleafaut vein.
But feeing thar a later progeny
Hath {natch’d bes honour from obfcurity,
Both thal revive, and make Spetators byow
The beft defervers of the Lawrel boy,
Nature and cArt here frrive, the urttory
Toget: and though toyeeld be doth deny,
Th haft Lot the flare ; though be treumph $9. pratfe,
Let may bus Ivie wait “pon your Bays,

M. S.

C antabrigia.

i t
i |
| | Bie
AY
Ne
ra if
b
‘
!
G
hy
%
bi
h

To

Srbabedrbestrbe br deabebrbestet
To the Author, on this his ingenious

TL ranflation of
Corneltus Agrippa.

WW Hat w ‘si view? Agrippa made 0 wear
As Englilh habit ?. Sure'tis fomething vare.
or are bis Romane garments, by thy Wit,
Tranflated so an Englifh garb fo fit
T illuftrate him ? for that thou haft, we fee,
Enlightned his obfcure Philofophic ;
And that which did [0 intricate remain,
Thow hast expos d to ev'ry vulgar brain.
If then thy beams through fuch dark works fhine clear,
How |plendent will they in thine own appear !
Then gothou on, brave fowl, to [pread {ach rays
Of Learning through the world, may (peak thy praife.
And fear no Criticks : for thon, by 4 Spell,
Canft force sheir tongues within their teeth to dwell.

Jo. Tabor,
of St.John’s #* Cambridge

i
’
i

Henry Cornelius Agrippa,

of Geomancy.

Eomancry isan Art of Divination, whet-
by the judgement may be rendred by lot;
or deftiny , toevery queftion of every
thing whatfoever, but the Art hereof cone ©
fifteth efpecially in certain points where-
of certain figures are deducted according
to the reafon or rule of equality or iné-
quality, likeneffe or unlikeneffe; which:
Figures are alfo reduced to the C celeftiall

Figures, afluming their natures and proprieties , according to the
courfe and forms ef the Signes and Planets ; notwith{tanding this.
in the firft place we are toconfider, that whereas this kinde of Are
can declare or fhew forth nothing of veriry , unlefs it fhall be radi-
call in fome fablime vertue, and this rhe Authours of chis Science
have demonftrated to be two-fold the one whereof confifts in Re-
ligion and Ceremonies ; and therefore they will have the Project=
ings of the points of this Art to bee made with fignes in the Earth,
wherefore this Art is appropriated to this Elemente cf Earth, even
as Pyromancy to the fire, and Hydromancy tothe Element of Wa-
ter: Then whereas they judged the hand of the Projector or Wor-
ker to be molt powerfully moved, and directed tothe terreftriall
fpirits.; and therefore they firft ufed certaine holy incantations and
B dcprecations,

ee Y
cy

<\

‘

Fe a"

ie

B+

2B ae *
Es es ¥
r _

° eae
as Py
oP i.
vt 03

Henry Corneligs Agrippas

deprecations, with other rites and obfervations, pi, aking and allu-
ring (pixitgof chisnature hereunto.

Anothe® power there is that doth direct and rule this Lot or Fos:
tine, Which ts in the very foule it felfe of the Proje@or, when he is
carried to this work with.fome great egrcfie of his owne defire, for
this Att hath a‘nacurall obedience tothe foule it felfe, and of necef-
fity hath ¢fficacy and is moved to rhgt which the foule ic {elf defires,
and this way is by far more true and pure; neicher matters it where
or KoW thefé points ave projected ; therefore'this Ate hath the fame
Radix with the Art of Aftrologicall Queftions: which alfo can.
no otherwife bee verified , -unlefle. with aconftanr and exceffive
aff-Gion of the Querent himfelfe “: “New ‘then that wee may”
proceed to the Praxis of this'Art : firft t is to be knowne, chat ail
Figures upon which this whole Art fs founded are onely fixteen , as.
inthis following Table you shall fee noted, with their names:

eee

% Vener,
Xo 9

ey

Albus, i
| ¥ x Mercurit,
| aah. m *K | g ‘
| Rubeus, |
| * * | Marit.
| * ii ¥ F.

rifiztiae | :
| nf x | =Saturnt
| Het oe

| ee eee R

| iT Wiles | Wekae avert sree

|  Dragons\\s Dragons

| head. tatle.

ke * ¥

Menry Cornelius Agrippa,

Now we proceed to declare with what Planets thefe Figuresare
diftributed ; for hereupon all the propriety and nature of Figures”
- and the judgement of the whole Artdependeth: Theretore the
Greater and leffer Fortune are afcribed to the Suns; bue che firftor
greater Fortuneis when the Sun is dinrnall, and pofited in his dig-
nities; the other, orleffer Fortune is when the Sun is nocturiall,
or placed in leffe dignities : Via, and Popwims (that is, the Way, .
and People) are refértedto the Moone ;_ the firft from her begin-
ning andencreafing, the fecond from her full wht and quarter de-
creafing ; edcquifrio; and Letitia (-which-is Gaine, Profit ; Joy
and Gladnefs).are of Jupiter: But the firft hath Jupiter the erea-
ter Fortune, the fecond the lefle, but without detriment: Paella, -
and Amiffioarcot Venus; the firft forrunate, the orher (as it were)
retrograde, or combuit: (onjueifio.and Albus.are both Figures of
(Mercury , and are both geod ; burthe firft che more Fortunate:
Puer, and Rubems are Figures afcribed tot Mars ; the firft whereof:
hath C¥ars benevolent , the fecond malevolent: (arcer, and
Triffitia are both Figures of Sat#rx, and both evill; but che firlt of -
the greater detriment: the Dragons head, and‘Dragons tayle doe
follow their owne natures. : | "

And thefe are.the infallible comparifons of the Figures’, and.
From thefe wee may cafily difcerne the equality of their fignes ;
therefore the greater and leffer Fortunes have the fignes of Leo,
which is the Honfe of the Sun: Va and Populus have the figne of
Cancer, which is the Houfe of the Moone :’ Acquifitso hath for his
figne Pifces; and Letitia Sagitary, which are both the Honfes of -
jupiter: Paella hath the figne of Tasrus, and edmiffioot Libra,
which are the Houfes of Verus: Conjunttte hath for its figne Virgo, .
and Albus the figne Gemini, the Houfes of AZercury : Puchaand
Raubeus have for their'figne Scorpio, the Houle of Mars: Carcer
hath the figne Capricorne , and Triffitia eAowary , the Hou-
fes of Saturne: The Dragons head and taile are thus divided , the
head to Caprécorne , and the Dragons taile adhereth to Scorpio, |
and from hence you may eafily obtaine the triplicicies of thefe figns

afcer the manner of the triplicities of the fignes of the Zodiack:

Per therefore, both Fortunes, and Letttza do govern the fiery tri=-
plicity ; Pacla, Cénjunttio, Carcer, and the Dragons head the
: | | earthly .

of Geomancy. ~~ 5.
earthly triplicity: e</bxs, Amitia, and Triftitia, doe make the
Airy triplicity : and Ysa, Populus, and Rabews, with the Dragons
taile, and «4equifitio do rule the watry ttiplicity , and this order is”
taken according to the courfe or manner of the fignes.
Bur ifany one will conftitute thefe triplicities according to the
natnres of the Planets, and Figures themfelves, let him obferve this
Rule, that Fortaxa major, Rubews, Puer, and Ami ffie doe make
the fiery triplicity + Fortuxe minor, Puella, Latitia,and Conjunttio
triplicity of the-Ayre! :/eacgatfitio, the Dragons taile, Vsa, and
Populus doe governe the watry triplicity ; andthe earthly eripli-
city istuled by Carcer, Triftitsa, eAlbus, aad the Dragons head.
And this ‘way is rather to be obferved then the firft which we have
fet forth ; becaufe inis conftimuted according'to the Rule and man-
ner of the fignes. 4.9)»;
This order is-alfo far more trneand rational then that which vul-
garly is ufed, which isdefcribed after this manner: of the Fiery
triplicity are, Cauda, Fortunaminor, Amiffio, and Rubexs : of the
Airy triplicity are, Acquiftio, Letitia, Puer, and Conjunttio: of
the watry triplicity are, Populus, Via, albus, and Paela: And
Caput, Fortunamajor, Carcer, and Triftisia are of the earthly tri-
icity. Le ) mie 8
P They doe likewife diftribure thefe Figures to’ the twelve fignes
ofthe Zodiack, after thismanner, Acqwifitio is giver to Aries;
Fortuna, both major and minor to T auras ; Letitia to the figne
Gemini. Puella and Rubeasco Cancer ; Albus is affigned to Leo,
Viato Virgo; the Dragonshead, and Conjunttioto Libra; Pwer
is fubmitted to Scorpio; Triftitiaand ef mm {fio are affigned to Sa-
gitary; the Dragons taile to Capricorne ; Populus to Aquarins’;
and (arcer is affigned thefigne Ps/ces..
And now wecome to fpeake of che manner of projecting or fete
ting downe thefe Figures), whichis thus s that we fecdowne the
points according to their courfe in four lines , from the right band
rowardsthe left, and thisin foure courfes: . There will cherefcre
refalt unto us foure Fisures made in foure feverall lines, according, ge ~*
to the even or uneven marking. every feverallline ; which foure Fi= iz
gures are wont tobe called (Matres : which doe’ bring forch che
reft; filling up.and compleating the whole Figure of-Jadgement,..
SOs at ait

: Henry Cornelim Agrippa,
sn, example whereot-you may {ce sheere following.

Of thefe foure Afatredare alfo produced foure other fecondary
Figutcey which they call Fi/ie, or Succedents , which-are gathe-
red together afterthismanner ; that isto fay, by. making the foure
Adatres according to their order, placing them by courfe one after
another « « gehen chee which thal refale our of every line, maketh
the Figure of Fide, che, order whereof is by-difcending from the
foperior points through both medisnes to the lowelt: asin this exe

of Geomancy.

And thefe 8 Figures do make 8 Honfes of Heaven, afer this man~
ner, by placing the Figures trom the lett ;hand! towards the right :
as the foure Adatres do make the fourefirlt Houfes:, fo ithe: foure
Filie. doe make the fouré’ following Houfes 5» which are the fifts
fixt; feaventh, and eighth : and.the-reft of the Honfes are foynd af
rer this manner ; that isto fay, out of the firft and fecond is derived
the ninth; out of the’third and fourth the tenth; otic of the fifth and
Gxth the eléventh;and out of the feventh and eighth the twelfth: By
the combiriation or joyhing together of two Figures according to
the tale! of the even:or uneven’number in the remaining points of
each Figure. After the fame manner there are produced out of the
laft foure Figures; thatis to fay, of the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and
twelfth, two F gures: whieh they.call Coadjutrices, or Teffes s out
of which twocis alfoone conftituted., -which is called the Index of
the'whole Figure, or thing Queficéd:30%s appeareth in this‘exam-
ple following. fiicwtsat

A: Theme of Geomaney,

Filize ie | : . Mattes
eS pope
free pon fare pa a

be) adh to oot i q

Ltn bomiecs) ! ey

Jus tig pe

ol

+ SRE Se Rao 8 TA TR RNa en TARO EET OS Gera TH eT oe
: — = - = = — ine SS = “wos . ‘ 9 arin nn i

g Henry Cornelivs: Agrippay

And this which we have declared is the common manner obferved
by Geomancersy which we donot altogether reje@ neither extol;
thereforeithis is alfoto be confidered in ont judgements :: Now.
therefore d hall give anto you the true Figure of Geomancy ,» ac-
cording to the right tonftitution of Aftrclogicall reafon, which is
thas. | Roe

hb As.the former A4atres doe make the foure Angles of an Honfe ;
the fitft maketh the'firft'Angle, the fecond the fecond Angles. the
third: maketh the third Angle; andthe fourch the fourth Angle; fo
the foure Fite -arifing fromthe Adatves, doe conftiture the foure
fuccedent Honfes ; the firft maketh the fecond Houfe, thefecond
the-eleventh, the third the eighth ,» and the fourth maketh the firft
Honfe:; the reft of the Houfes , :which are Gadents ate to be calcu-
lated acterding|to thé Rule of their tripliciey:;: that isto fay}, by
making the ninth out of the fourthand fitth, and the Gath out ofthe
tenth and fecond, of the feventh, and eleventh the third, and of the
fourth and eighth thetwelfth> 2. soc0¢ ts :

And now you have the whole Figure of true judgement contti-
tuted according to true and efficatious reafons, whereby I thal fhew
how yoo fhall compleat it : the Figure which hall bee in the firft
Honfe (Ball give you the figne afcending , which; the firt Figure |)
theweth ; which being done, you hall attribute their fignestotha =}
reft of their Houfes, according tothe order of the fignes s—then in.
every Houle you ‘thall note the Planets according to the hature of
the Figure: then froiall thefe you (all build your Judgement ac-
cording to thie fignification of the Planets inthe fignes and Honfes
wherein they hall be found, and according to their afpects among
themfelyes, and to the place of the querent and thing quefited ;
and you fhall judge according to the naturesof the fignes afcending
an their Houfes, and according to tke natures! and proprieties of
the Figures which they-have placed in the feverall Houfes, and ac-
cotd'ng to the commifture of jother Figures afpecting them: The
Index of the Pigure which the Géomancers for the moft part have
made, how ic is found’in the former Figure.

Bat here we fhalgive you the fecrét of the whole Art, to find out
the Index in the fiubfequenr Figure, which is thus’: chat you num-
ber all the points which are contained in the lines of the baie
| an

ra ms DPT le re a na oa
our
i ?
- — . eeenentn
Gate * = —

if OE LE ETE
= soon : nome re ae I RR a
® ote ae i » pb
i > R om er a - '
> das ne a anni a RE, I ID “a
PS te ee Eo an 2 Wes 5 Ps ns .

of Geomancieé. 9

and this yon fhall divide by twelve: and chat which remain-
eth project from the Afcendent by the feyeral Houles , and
upon which Honfe there fallech a final unity, that Figure
eiveth you acomperent Judgement of the thing quefited ;
and this together with the fignifications of the Judgements
aforefaid. . Bur if oneither pare they fhall be equal , or am-
bignous, then the Index alone fhall certifie you of the ching
quefired, The Example of this Figure is here placed,

Thereremains owt
Z. lof the divifion of the

plist Loietetoe 6 points 3

wherefore} upiter zz
the 6 Houle (hew-
eth the Index,

It remaineth now, that we declare, of what thing and to
what Houfe.a Queftion doth appertain, Then, what every
rents dorh thew or fignifie concerning all Queftions in every

oufe. |
| Firft therefore we fhall handle the fignifications of the
| ..Honfes ; which are thefe.

The fir Houfe fheweth the perfon of the Querent , as
eG often

ENE PRL IA RT, ARON WHR ae ET it
Henry Cornelius Agrippa, |
often as. a Queftion fhall be propofed concerning himfelf‘of
his own matters,or any thing appertaining to him. And this
Houle declareth the Judgement of the life, form, ftate, con--
dition, habit, difpoficion, form and figure, and of che colour:
of men. The fecond Honfe. containeth the Judgement: of
fubftance, riches, poverty, gain and lofs ; good fortune and -
evil fortune: and of accidents in fubftance ; as theft, jofs or
neglicence. ThethirdHoufe fignifeth brethren, fitters, and
Collaterals in blood: It judgeth of {mall journeys, and fide-
lities of men. The fourth Houle fignifies fathers and grand--
fathers ,. patrimony. and inheritance.,. pofleflions, buidings, ,
fields, trealure, and things hidden: Irgiveth alfo the delcri--
ption of thofe who want any thing by thefr, lofing, or negli-
cence, The fifth Honfe giveth judgement of Legars, Mef-
fencers, Rumours, News ;.0f Honour, and of accidents after
death: and of Queftions that may be propounded concern-
ning women with childe, orcreatures pregnant, Thefixth
Honfe giveth Judgement of infirmities, and medicines ; of
familiars and fervants;of catcel and domeftick animals. The
feventh Houle fignifies: wedlock, whoredom,and fornication ;
rendreth Judgement of: friends , ftrites , and-controverties ;
and of matters ated before Judges, The eighth hath figri-
fication of death, and of thofe things which come by death
of Legats, and hereditaments’; of the dowry or portionof 7)
awife. The ninth Houle fheweth journeys, faich,and con-. 7)
ftancie ; dreams, divine Sciences, and Religion. Thetenth |
Honfe hach fignification of Honours, amd of Magilterial Of-
fices, The eleventh Houle fignifies friends, and the fub-
Rance of Princes, The twelfch Houfe fignifies enemies,fer-
yants, imprifonment,and misfortune, and whatfoever evil can
happen befides death and ficknefs, the Judgements whereof
gre to be required in thefixth Houle, and in the eighth.

Ic refts now , that we thew. you what every Figure before ~
‘ae ha of fignifiech in thefe places; which we fhall now un- |
xe) * P d

‘

a
if

ean is
‘

2 eer:
ae

OW or ene
ane: oe

Fortusa | at

_ of Geomancie. 11
 - Fortaxa major being found in the fir Houle, giveth long 7p, pred
dife, and freeth from the molettation of Difeales: it demon- ,.. Foy.
| ftraceth a marco benoble, magnanimous, of good manners, syye,
mean of flacare, complexion ruddy, hair curling, and his fu-
periour members greater then his inferioug In the fecond
Houtle, he fignifies manifeft riches and manifeft gain,good for-
tune,and the gaining of any thing loft or mif-laid ; the taking
of a chief,and recovery of things ftollen. In the third Houle,
he fienifies brethren and kinimen, Nobles, and perfons of
good converfation ; journeys to be profperous and gainful
with honour: ic demonftrareth men co be faithful, and their
' friendthip to be unfeigned, In the fourch Houle, he repre-
fents.a father to be noble,and of good reputation,and known
by many people: He enlargeth pofleffions in Cities, increa-
feth Pacrimonies, and difcovereth hidden treafures, ° In:chis
place he likewile fignifies theft, and recovers every thing loft,
In the fifth Houfe, he g1:eth joy by children, and caufech
them to attain to great Honours: Embaffages he rendereth
profperous ; but they ate purchafed with pains,and prayers:
He noreth rumours to be true : he beftoweth :publike Ho-
nours,and cauieth:a man to be very famous after death’: fores
fheweth. a woman with chiide to. bring forth a man-childe,
Tn the fixch Houfe , he freeth from diteafes ; fheweth thofe
that ha: eamfrmities fhall ina fhort time recover ; fignifieth
a Phyfirianito be faithful and honeft to adminiiter good Phy!’
fick, of which there ought to, be had no {ufpicion; houfhold=. *
fervants and:minifters to be faithful : ‘and of animals, he
chiefly fignifies Horfes. . In the feventh Honfe,, he giveth 3
wife rich, honeft, and of good manners ; loving and’ plea-
fant : he overcometh ftrifesandcontenrions, But if the Que-
{tion be concerning them), he fignifieth the ad:erfaries to be
very potent, and erearfavourites.. Inthe eighth Houle, ifia
Quettion be propofediof the death of any one, it fionifies
“he thalllive: the kinde of death he fheweth to beeood and
natial ;.an honeft: burial, and honourable Funerals‘: He
forefheweth a wife to have arich dowry, legaciés and inheri+
tance, Jn the ninthHoufe, he fignifies.journeys tobe pro-
pati C2 {pe-

ora a v oT TT a mo WAR teva, Ss ere peer et ede Sei Nox =
; LE SE SS SS eave Re Pe - ST ile ee = eae eet OARS, ee - :
POLY RE le — ie - : tye ea ‘ aa aS SE epg =.

ou a e. ~

Tiwee
We Mee Se
tet aati el

a
sais

The -leffer

Fertunc.

12 Henry Cornelius Agrippa,

‘{perows ; and by land on horfeback, rather then on foot, to

be long, and not foon accomplifhed: He fheweth the return
of thole thar are abfenr ; fignifies men to be of good faith,
and conftant in their intentions ; and religious ; and that
never change or diger their faith: Dreams he prefageth to be

true; fignifieth true and-perfe& Sciences. In the tenth:

Houle, he forefhewech greatHonours; beftoweth publike
Offices, Magultracie, and Judgements ; and honours in the
Courts of Princes: fignifieth Judges to be jutt, and nor cor-

rupted wich gifts : bringeth a Canie to be-eafily and foon ex-:

pedited.: fheweth King; to be porenty fortumare, and yigto-
rious: denoreth Victory to be certain: fignifieth:a mother

to be noble, and of long life. Inthe elevench houfe, he Bg. .

nifies true friends, and profitable; a Prince rich and liberal ;
maketh a man forrunate,and beloved of his Prince; |: In the
twelfth: Honle, if a Queftion . be propofed of ithe quality of
enemies, 1t demonttrateth themto be potent!and noble, and
hardly to be refitted: Bur if: a Queftion fhall be concerning
any other condition or refpeé to che enemies, he will deli-
ver from ther treacheries.. It Genifieth faithfulfervants ; re-
duceth fugitives ;: hath fignification of:animals, as horfes, li-
ons, and bulls ; freech from mnprifonments ; and: eminent
dangers he. either mitigateth or raketh away,

Fortuna minor in the firlt houfe, giveth long life, but incum-
bred with divers moleftations and ficknefles : ic fignifiech’ a
perfon of fhorr fiature, a lean body’, having amold or mark
imhisforeheadior right eye. Inthe fecond Houle, he fieni-
fies {ubftance, and rnat to be confumed with too much prodi<
galicy: hideth athief; anda ching ftoln is fearcely robe re-
covered,bur with grear labour, . In the third ‘Houle; he cau-
feth difcord among{t brethren and kinsfolks ;) threatneth
danger to be in a sourney, but efcapethic: rendreth mento
be of good fairh, but of clofe and hidden mindes, © In che
fourth Houfe, he prejudicech Pacrimonies and Inhetirances ;
concealeth treafuries ; and things loft cannot be regained, but
with great difficulty :. He fignifieth:a father tobe honeft, bur
a fpender. of his eltare through prodigalicy,lea ving mall por-

CiONS.

sii

ee oe eine = -

So a NAP ie lite

ae

ee ee

-- of Geomancie, 12
tiens to his children, Fertwaa minor in the fifth Houle?
giveth few children; a woman wich childe he figiifies thal]
have a woman-childe ;_fignifies Embaflages to be honou-
rable, but lirtle proficable jeraifech comean honours: givech
agood fame after death, but not much divulged tior:of ‘Jatt-
ingmemory. Ifthe fixth Houte, he fgmites difeafes, both
Sanguine and Cholerick ; fheweth the fick perion to bein
great danger; bur fhall recover : fignifes fairhfal fervantsjout
tlochful :and:unprofirable: And the fame of other animals;
In the feventh’Honfe, he’giveth awite of a goods progenie
deicended ;: but you shall beincumbred with: many troubles
with her: caufeth love to be anxious & unconttant: prolong-
eth contentions, and maketh ones adveriary vo circum-ent
him with many-cavillacions 5 butin procefs-of time he eiveth
viStory. “Inithe eighth Houles'he fheweth the kind of death
ro begood and:honelt; but-obicure, or'in a ftrange place, or
pilgrimage: dilcoveréth Legacies and Poffeffions ; buetobe
obtained with {uit and difficulty: denoteth Funerals and
Buryings'to-be obfcure 3 the portion. of a wife'to: be hardly
sotten, buteafily fpene:'') In-the? siinth Houfe, he maketh
journeys to be dangerous! and’ a party abfent flowly to.res
murn:caufech mento be occupied in offices of Religionshew-
eth Sciences’to be'unaccomplifhed 5" bur ‘keepeth conitancy
in faith and Religion: Inthe! tenth Houle,’ hefignifierh
Kings and Princes ‘to be’ porenie; buc-r6i gain their power
with warand vidlen¢e }' banifhed memhe(hewerh thall toon
return: it likewite diicovereth Honors, great Offices and be-
nefits ; but for which you fhall continually labour and fttive,
and wherein you fhall have no ftable-conrinuance: A Jadse
fhall not favour you’: Suics and éonrencions hé prolongeth :
A facher‘and mother he fheweth fhall foon die, and always
to be affeS&ted with many difealés.. In the elevenrh Houle,
he maketh many friends ; but fuch as are poor and unprohi- .
table, andnot able corelieve'chy necefiities : ir ingraciates
you with Princes, and giverlt great’ hopes, but {mall gains ;
neither long to continue -in.any benefice or offices beltowed
bya Prince, Inthe twelfth Houle:, he (heweth enemies -

RRA ORT aa

Henry Cornelias Agrippa,
be crafty, fubril, and fraudulent, and Qudying to circumpenc
you with many fecretfaGtions: ficnifies one. in prifon: to be
long detained , - but! at length to be-delivered : Animals he
fheweth ro be unfruirful, and feryancs mprofitable ; andthe
changes of fortune to be frequent, from goodto evil, and
from bad to good,

Via in the firlt Houle , beltowetha long and profperons
hte ; giveth fignificarion of a ftranger; lean of body,and call ;
of ftature; fair of complexion, having a {mall beard : a per-
fon liberal and pleafant,.; -but flowe, and little addi@ed ro
Jabour. In rhe fecond, he increafeth fubitance and riches;
recovereth any thing thar is ftolen or-loft; but fignifies the
thief. ro be deparcediwichcurthe City., In:the chird, he
multiplies brethren and kinsfoiks :;, fignifies-conrinual jour-
neys, and profperous ;.men that are publikely, known, ho-
net, and of good: converfacion, 4a in the’ fourch Houle,
fignifies the facher ro be honett ; increafeth the Patrimony
and Inheritance; produceth wealthy fields ; ‘fheweth trea-
lure to be in the place-enquired after 5 recovereth-any thing
lofty In the fifth, he iacreafech rhe company of male-chil-
dren; fheweth a.woman with childe to bfingforch a males
childe ;.fendeth Embaflages to ftrange and remote parts:
increafeth -publike honours; fignifierh. an honelt kinde of
death. and to be known thorow, many Provinces. In the
fixth Honfe!, Via prelerveth;from-ficknels 3: fienifies the. difz
eafed {peedily co recover; eiveth proficablefervants, and
animals fruicful and profitable, Inthe feventh Honfe,he be-
ftoweth.a wite fair and-pleafant, with whom you hall enjoy
perpetual feliciry :..cauferh {trifes, and controverlies molt
ipeedily ro. be determined ;,adveriaries to be eafily overcome, »
and thar fhall willingly {ubmic. their controverfies.co-the Aral
 bitration of good men; Inthe eighth Houfe,he fhewerh che
kinde of death to proceed trom Phlegmatick difeafes ; ro be
~ honelft,and of good report : difcovereth great Legacies, and
rich Inhericances robe obtained by rhe dead : And, if any
one hath been reporcedto,be dead, it fheweth him to, be: a +
live, In the ninth Houle ysacaufeth long journeys by w 1

efpe-

of Geomancie, 18.

efpecially by Sea’, and portendeth very great gains to be ac-
quired thereby : he denoteth Priefthoods, and proits from
Ecclefiaftical employments ; maketh men of good Religion,
upright, and conftant of faith ; fheweth dreams to be true,
whole fienification fhall fuddenly appear: increafeth Philo-
fophical and Grammatical Sciences , and thofe things which |
appertain to the infrudtion and bringing up of children, In ity
the tench Houle if za be found, he maketh Kings and: Prin- i
ces happie and fortunare, and fuch as fha}i maincam)continu- ie
al peace with their Allies ; and thacthey fhali require amity
ssa friendfhip among(t many Princes by their feveral Embat- Hy)
{ages ; promoteth publike Honours, Offices, and Magiftracie a
amoneft che vulgar.and:common people ; or abont things
pertaining ro the water, journeys, or about gathering Taxes
and Affeiments » fheweth Judges to be juft and merciful, and
chat, thal quickly difpacch Caufes depending before them :
and denotes a mother to be of good repute, healthy, and of
long life. In the eleventh Houle, -he-raifeth many wealrhy } Lin
friends, ahd acquireth faithful friends in forraign Provinces |
afid Countries , and thar fhall willingly relieve bim that re-
quires them, wich all help and diligence :. Ir ingratiates per-
fons with profit and truft amongft Princes, employing him in
fuch Offices, as he fhall be incumbred wich continual travels,
Via in che twelfth Houfe, caufeth many enemies, buttuch as
of whom little hurt-or: danger -is:to. be feared : fignifies fer-
vatits and animals tobe profitable: whofoever is. n:prilon,
to be efcaped, or fpeedily ro be delivered fromthence: and
prelervech a man from the evil‘accidents of. Fortune, |
Populus being found in_she-firft Houle, if a Queftion be Peap/e,
propounded alsereatild that Hone, fhewerha mean life,of a
middie age, bur ificonftant, wich divers ficknefles, and vari-
ous fucceffes of Fortune: fignifiesa man of a middle ftacure,
a grofs body, well fet in his members ; perhaps fome mold
or ma@about his left eye. Buc if a Quettion hall be Prag
pounded concerning the figure of a man, and ro this figu
if chere be joyned any of the figures of Saturn ot Rabes, tt
fhe ech the man to be monftroufly deformed ; and char de-
gesin formity

ay

>

ae
EC. 5s ere aa
en ee \. ae
es SS Tas ’

FO a OS

i —

Ene

i

- tcarcély reco

16 Henry Cornelius Agrippa,

formity he fignifies to proceed from his birth: bur if in the
fifth Houle , if he be encompaffed with malevolent Afpe@s,
chen that monfroufnefs.is:'to come. In the fecond Houfe,
Populus (heweth a mean {ubltance, and that to be gorcen with
ereat difficulty : maketh a man alfo alwaysfenfible of labo-
rious toy! : things ftoln are never regained: wharis loftfhall
never be wholly récovered:that which 1s hidden fhall not be
found. Bur if the Queltion beof a thief, 1c declarech him
sor yet co be fled away , burto lielurking within the City.
Inthe third Houle, Populus raileth few friends, either of bre-
thren or kindred’: forefheweth journeys, bue with labour -
and trouble ; notwithftanding fome profit. may accrue by

them: denotes’a man unftable in his faith , and’ canfech a

man often to be deceived by bis‘companions?’ In the fourth -
Honfe, it fignifies'a father to be fickly, and ofta laborious life;
and his earchly poffeflion’s and uiheritances ro be taken away:
fheweth profit ro be gained by water: fheweth treafure not
to be hid 3 or if cheré be any hidden, that. at fhall-nor “be
found ; A patrimony tobe preleryed withigreat labour. In

_ the fifth Hontes he fheweth no 'honelt: opt ‘bur either

maketh ‘the me@engérs'to' be Porters, or*publike Carryers :
he divulgeth fale rumours, which notwichftanding have the
likeniefs of fome‘trath , avid feem co have their. original from
truch, which isnot reported.as it iscdone : ‘Ic fignities a wo-
manto be barren 5 and cabfech fuch as°are great with childe
ro be abortives Pappointetif an inglorious Funeral) and ill
reporr after death. In thier fixth’ Houle,” Popu/ae theweth
cold ficknéfféss ‘aitd ‘chiefly -affe eth rhe lower parts of che
body; A Phylician’is declared to ‘be carelefs and negligent
in adminifiting Phyfick'to the-fick’,' and fignifes chofe that
are aff Dedmevith fickiiels to'be it danger of death ; and

eOver ac all it ores the decitfulnefsof fervants,
and detriment of catch Ti'rhe fevench Houle, irfhewerh 4

Gite co be fair’ andpleafant,” but one chat (hall be folliviced

with rhe love of stany wooers': fignifies her loves. tobe

-Feigtied arid diflembling: maketh weak and impotent ad ver-

faries don to defertprotecuting, /TH che‘eighth Honle,it de-
. ‘ notes

notes fudden death without any long ficknefs or anouifh, and

oftentimes fheweth death by the water ; giveth no inheri-

tance, poffeffion or legicy from the dead ; and if any be, they
fhall be lo:t by tome intervening contention, or ether dit-
cord ; he fignifies the dowry of a.wife to be litle or none,
Populus in the ninth Houte,fhewerh falie dreams, perfonates
a man of rude Wit,wichout any learning or {cience ; In reli-

‘gion he fignihes infericur Offices, uch as ferve either to

cleante the Chug@h,.or ring the bells ; and he fignifies a man
little curious or fiudious in relizion, neither one that is
troubled with much conicience, In the renth Houfe he fig-
nifies {uch Kinys and Princes,as for the moft part are expulled
out of cheir Rule and Dominions., .or either {uffer continual
trouble and detriment abour.them : he fignifies Offices and
Magutracy which appertain.to matters concerning thewarers,
as about the Navy, bridges, fithings,fhores,meadows,& things
of the like fort ; maketh Judges to be variable and flowe in
expediting of Caules before them ; declaretha Mother robe
fickly , andof a fhorr life, Ince eleventh Houfe he giveth
few friends 5 and many flacterers ; and with Princes giveth
neither favour nor fortune. In the twelfth Houfe he thew-
eth weak andignoble enemies ; declareth one in prifon not
to be delivered ; difcovereth dangers in watersyand watry
places. |

Acqnijitie found in the firt Houle, giveth a long life and aims

proiperous old age ; fignifies a man of a middle ftature y and
2 great head, a countenance very well tobe diltinonithed or
known, a long nofe, much beard, hair curling, and fair eyes,
free of his meat avd drink, but inall things elfe {paring and
not liberal. Inthe fecond Héule,he fignifies very 2 riches,

apprehenderhall theeyes, and cauleth wharocvailit lol to

be recovered. In the chird Houle,many brechréfyand they - f

tobe wealthy ; ‘many gainful journies ; fignifesaman of
good faith. In the fourth is fieniSed aPacrimony of much
fiches , many poffeffions of copious fruits ; he Gon ifiech that

> Lrealure hidin/any place hall be found 3; andfheweh a Father
to.be rich, but cavecous, , In the fifth Houle, dcquifirie figni-
Ie die ad D

fies

of Geomancie. 17

18 Hehry Cornelius Agripps,

fies many-children of both Sexes , but more Males the Fe-
males ; faeweth a woman to be wich child}.and that fhe fhall-
be delivered without danger: and if a queltion be propound-
ed concerning any Sex,, he fignifies ic to be Mafculine ;- en-
creafeth gainful profitable Embaffages and Meffages, but ex-
rendéth fame ner far after death, yet caufech a man to be in-
herited of his own, and fignifieth rumours to be true, In
rhe fixth Houfe he fignifies many and grievens ficknefles, and —
jong ro continue,maketh the fick to be in danger of deach,and
often to die : yerhe declareth a Phyfitian to be learned and
honelt ; givech many fervants and chatrel, and gains ro be:ac-
quired froin them, Inthe feventh Houte he fignifies a wife to
be rich,but either a widow,or a woman_of a well-grown age;
fignifies {nics and contentions to be great and durable , and.
that love and wedlock thall be effeted bylot. In the eighth
Honfe, if aman he enquiredafter,ic fhew eth himrobe dead,
fionifiech the kinde of death to be thore,. and ficknefs to laft
but a few dayes ; difcovereth very profitable legacies andin-
herirances, and fignifieth a wife ro havea rich dowry. Inthe
ninth Houle he fignifies long and'profitable journeys ; fhew-
eth if any one be abfent he Thall foon return ; caufeth gain
to’ be obtained from Religions and Ecclefiaftical Perfons of
Scholars 3. and fignifies a man of a true and:perfe& Science.
Yn the tenth Houle,he maketh Princes to inlarge their Do-
- minions; a Judge favourable, but‘one that'mutt be contanu-
ally prefenced with gifts ; caufeth Offices and Magiftracy
co be very gainful ; fienifiech a Mocher rich and happy. In
che eleventh Houle, Acqwifreie multiplieth friends, and bring-

eth profic fromrhem, and increafech favour with Princes, ~ ]

powerffieror ‘potent enemies ; reduceth and bringeth home:
fervants

In the ee Houle he Gegnifieth aman fhall have many

d away, and cattel ftrayed ; and fignifies he chat
is in prifon fhall. nor be delivered. 3
Letitia in the: firkt Houle fignifies long life with profperity,
arid much joy and’ gladnefs, and caufeth'a man to out-live and
be more “victorious then all his brethrei;' fignifies'a man of
atall ftaturc, fair members,a broadforchead, having a and
f

ead.

won irons ba =

of Geomancie. ¥9

broad teeth ; and that harh a face comely and,well coloured.
In the fecondHoule it fignifies riches and many gains, but
great expences and various mutations of ones ftate and con~
dition ; theft and anything loft 1s recovered and returned :
bur if the Queftion be of atheef, ic declareth him co be fled
away. Inthe third HouleLetitia (heweth brethren to be of
2 good converfation, but of fhort life ; journeys pleafant and
comfortable ; men of good credit and faith. In the fourch
he fignifies happy Patrimonies and pofleflions, a Father robe

» noble,and honoured withthe dignity of fome princely office;

fheweth treafure to be in the place enquired after,hut of leis
worth and value then is fuppofed,and caufeth it ro be found,
In the fifth Houle he giveth obedient children, endued with
good manners, and in whomt fhall be had the greatelt joy and
comfort of old age ; fignifiesa woman with child to bring

forth a daughter ; fheweth honourable Embaflages, and de-

clares rumours and news to be alcogether true , andleaveth

agood and ample fame after death, In the fixth Houfeit
fheweth the fick fhall recover, denoteth good fervants, g00d
and profitable cartel and animals, In the seventh Houle.

Letitid givech a wife fair, beautiful and young ; overcometh
firifes and contentions, and rendereth the fuccefs thereof to
be love, Lepitia in the eighth Howe giveth Legacies.and
poffeffions , and a commendable portion witha wife = if:
Queftion be propofed concerning the condition of any man,
it fignifies him ro be alive, and declares an honeft, quiet, and
meek kinde of death. In the ninth Houle Letitia fignthes
very few journies, and thofe chac do apply chowicnad to
cravail, their journyes either are about the Meffages and Em-
baffages of Princes,or Pilgrimages ro fulfil holy vows ; fhew=
eth a man to be ofa good religion,of indifferent knowledge,

and who eafily apprehendeth all things with naturalinge

muity, In the renth Houfe,ic raifeth Kings and Princes to ho-

‘

nour and grear renown; maketh them famous by maintaining
peace during their times; fignifies Judges co be cruel & fevere;

honeft, Offices and Magiftracy ; fignifies thofe things which

areexetcifed either about Ecclefiattical affairs, {Chools, of ue
D 2 ad-

I
A
: oh .
: G
i
ey
te

ee ee
an a ee
agrees eae SE TE

RET Ur SD. tr ye

Henry Cornelius Agrippa, |
adminiltration of juftice ; fheweth a mother if fe bea widow,
thatfhe fhall be married again. In the eleventh Houle Le-
titia increafeth favour with Princes , and muliuplies friends,
And in the twelfth Houle Lesstia giveth the victory. over e-
nemizs ;_caufeth good fervants and families, delivereth from
impri onment, and:prefervech from fucure.evils, |

Puella in the firft Houle fgnifies a perion of afhort life,
weak conftirusion of body, middle ftacure, little far, bur fair,
effeminate and luxurious , and. one who will incur many
troubles and dangers in his ife-rime for the love of women,
In the fecond Houle, it neither encreafeth riches, nor dimi-
nifheth poverty ; fignifies a theef not to be departedfrom
the City, and a thing ftollen to be alienated and made away : _
if a Queition be of rreafure ina place, it is teiolved there is
none, In the third Houle Puella fignifies more fitters then
brethren, and encreafeth and continueth good friendfhip
and amity amoneft them ; denoreth journies to be pleafane
and joyous, and men of good converlations. Inthe fourth
Houle Pxella fignifies'a very {mall patrimony,and a Facher not
to live long , bute maketh the fields ferctle wich good fruits, .
In the fifth Houfe’ a woman with child is fienified ro bring
forth a woman-child; denores no Embaflages, caufeth much
commerce. with women, and fome office to be obtained from:

them,’ Puella in the fixth Houle fignifies much weaknels.of

the fick, but cauferh che fick fhortly to recover; and fheweth
_ aPhyfitian ro be both unlearned and -unskilful , bur one

who is much efteemed of in the opinion of ghe vulgar people;

giveth good fervants, handmaids, catcel and ammmals. In the
feventh Houle Puella giveth’a wife fair,beauriful and pleafant,
leading a peaceable and quiet converfation with her husband,
notwithftanding one-thac (hall burn much wih luft,, and be
covered and luited after of many ten; denoreth no fuics or
controverfies , ‘which thall depend before a Judge, but fome
jatres and wranglines wich che common people one amonglt
another, which thall be eafily diffolved and ended, Inthe.
eighth Houle, if a Queftion be of one'reputed tobe dead,

Puella declareth him to be alive : giveth afmall portion with
eeecety

"giveth: many friends, and encrealeth favour with women,

through the inrerceffion of friends,

fheweth the Father to be poor, and Son ro die: Amiffio in

of Geomancie. a4

a wife, but that which contenrech her husband. In the
nitith Houfe Pxellzfienities very few: journeys,fneweth aman
of good religion, indifferent skill or knowledge in tciences,
uniefs happily Matick, afivel vocal as inffrumental. In the
renth Houle Pxellz fignifies Princes not to be very potent,
buc norwirhftanding they thal) govern peaceably within cheir |
Dominions , and fhall be beloved of their Neighbours and ha
Subjects ; it cauferh them ro be affable,milde and-courteous, ie
and that they fhall -aiwayes exerciie themiclves with conti ie
nual mirth, plays, and huntings ; maketh: Judges to be good,
godly and merciful ; giveth Offices about women, one{pe- i)
cially from noble women, In the eleventh Houle Puella |

Tn the twelfth Houle Puellafigmifies few enemies, but conten-
tion with women ; and delivereth Priloness out of prion

Amiffio in the fir Houte fignifies the fick nor tolive long, 7, fi
and fhewerh a thorrlife ; fignifies aman of difproportioned - ~.”
members of his body, and one of.a wicked life and coverla-
tion, and who.is marked with {ome notorious and remarka-
ble defe& infome part of his body,as either lame,or maimed,
orthe like, © Amiffia in the fecond Houle conlumert all tub-:
ftance,, and maketh one co fuffer and undergo the:burden of,
miferable poverty;neicher theef,nor rhe ching ftollen thall be

found ; fignifies treafure not to be in the place fought after, | ; :
and to‘ be foughr for with lofs and damage. Inthethird.” > a
Houle Amiffic fignifies death of brethren , or the wantof, | Hl)
chemjand of kindred’and friends; fignifieth no journeys,and. | | | :
cauteth one to be’ deceived of many. In che fourth Honfe i ny.

Amiffio Genifies the uccer deltrudtion: of ones Patrimony,
the fifth Houle fheweth death of children, and affli€ts a man
with divers forrows ; fignifiech a woman not to be with
child,6r elfero have milcarried ; railech no fame or honours,
atid difperfeth falfe rumors. In the fixch Houle Amsiffia fignt-
fies the fick'to’be'tecovered,or that he fhall foon recover ; but :
cauifeth lofs and damage by fervants and cattels, Inthe .
vent

ia
s fi
et
(a
ie
ki
es
S| le
‘
A
1h
ns
ve
J

Woe Tee
IS OT SY ye,

seit dee gabe nag supe rarer Ae a Sere
EE ee
TE ; ataties MPN TEN TE RIT a ec
i
seria : penne
A j y

ee Conjun-

‘ttion,

, Henry Cornelius Agripps,
venth Houle Amiffio giveth an adulterous wife,and contraty=
ing her husband with “continual contention ; neverrhelefs
fhe fhall nor live long; and ic cauferh contentions to be
ended. In the eighth Houfe Amiffio fignifies a man to be
dead, confumethgshe dowry of a wife ; beftowerhor fend-
ethno inheritances or legacies, Inthe ninth Houle Amiffiio
cauferh nojournies, but fuch as fhall be compaffed with very
creat lofs ; fignifies men to be inconftant in Religion,
ahd often changing their opinion fromone fed to another,

and altogether ignorant of learning, Inthe tenth Houfe 4-

Oo

wiffie rendereth Princes to bemott unfortunate , and fhew-

eth that they thall be compelled to end cheir lives in exile
aud banifhment ; Judges to be wicked ; and fignifies Offices
and Magiftracy to be damageable, and fhewerh the death
of a Mother. In the eleventh Houle Amiffio fignifies few
friends, and cauleth them co be eafily loft, and curmed to be-
come enemies; and canfeth a man to have no favour with
his Prince, unlefs ic be hureful to him. ‘In the cwelfth Houfe
Amiffio defiroyeth all enemies, detaineth long in prifon, bur,
preferveth from dangers. |

Conjunttio in the firtt Houfe maketh a profperous life, and
fignifies a man of a middle ftarure,not lean nor fat, long face,
plain hair, a liccle beard, long fingers and thighs, liberal, ami<

ableand a friend to many people, Inthe fecond Houle Con-

junttio doch not fignifie any riches to be gotten, but preferv-
eth a man-fecure and free from the calamities of poverty ;

~-dere&eth both rhe theef andthe thing ftolen, and acquireth

hidden treafure. In the third Houtfe he giveth various jour-

“neys with various fucce(s, and fignifieth good faich and cons

flancy, In the fourth Houfe Corfunttio fhewerh a mean Pa-
trimony ; caufecha Father to-honeft, of good report, and of
oood underftanding. In the fifth Houfe he giveth Children of
fubtile ingenuity’and wit, fheweth a woman pregnant ¢0
havea malechild’, and raifeth men to honours by their ows,
meer proper iit arid ingenuiry, and difperfech their fame.and

-credir far abroad’; and alfofignifies news and'rumonrs tobe

ere, In the Gxth Houle Conjunttio fignifes ficknefles to he ea
| ious

ef Geomascie. 9:2

dious and of long continuance; but forefheweth the Phyfirian
ro be learned and well experienced ; and fhewerh feryants to
be faithful and blamelefs, and animals prottable Inthe
feventh Houle he giveth a wife very obedient, conformable,
and dutiful to her husband ,.and one of agood wit and in-
senuity ; caufeth difficulr fairs and conrroverties, and crafty,
fubtil and malicious adyerfaries. In che eighthHoute,him of
whom.a Queftion is propounded, . Conjunttio hgnifies him co
be dead,& pretendeth fome gain to be acquired by his death;
fhewerh a wife fhajl not be very rich. Inthe ninth Houle he
giveth a few journeys,bur long and tedious,and fheweth one
thar is abfenc fhall after along feafon return, Conjunflio in
this Houfe increafech divers Arts, Sciences, and Mylteries of
Religion; and giveth a quick,per{picuous,and efficacious wit.
Inthe renth Houle’ Coxjunttio maketh Princes liberal, affable
and benevolent ,. and who are much delighted and affected
with divers Sciences, and fecret Arts, and with men learned
therein ; caufeth Judges to be juft, and {uch who witha
piercing and fubril {peculation, do eafily difcern caufes in con-
troverfie before them; enlargeth Offices which are concern-
ed about Letters, Learning, found Do&trines and Sciences ;
and fignifies a Mother to be honett, of good ingenuity and
wit, and alfo one of a profperous life. Imthe eleventh Houle

~ Conjnnttio fignifies great encreale of friends ; and very much:
procureth the grace and'favour of Princes, powetful and:no-

ble Men, Inthetwelfth HouleComuxttio hgnifies wary and
quick-witted enemies ; canfeth fuch as are in prifoh to remain
and continue fo very long, and caufeth aman co elchew very
many dangers in his life. Se

Albusin the firtt Houfe fignifies a life vexed with continual phe,

ficknefs and gteivous difeafes ; fignifies a man of a fhort fta-
cure, broad breft, andigrols arms, having curled or criiped
hair , one of abroad fall mouth, a:great talker-and babler,

given much to-ufe vain and unprofitable ditcourle, but one

rhat ismerry, joyous and jocond’, and much pleafing ro men.
In the fecond Houle A/bus enlargech and augmenteth fub-
ftaince gained by {ports playes, vile and bafe arts and exer-

> ° cules,

Child.

Henry Cornelius Agripya,
cifes, ‘but fuch vas are pleafing and delightful ; as by playes,
paftimes, dancings and laughters : he -difcovererh both the
theef, and che chete or ching ttollen, and hideth andcenceal-
ech treajure,. In the chird Houte Albus fignifies very few

‘brethren 3 giveth nor many,but tedious and wearifome jour-
nyes, and figniftes all deceivers, In thefourch Houfe he

fheweth very {mall or no Patrimony, and the Father ro be a
man much known ; bur declareth him to be a manof fome
bale and inferiour Office and Imploymentr. Inthe fifth Houfe
Albu: civeth no chi-dren, or if any, that they-fhall foon die;
declareth awemanro befervile, and caufeth fuch as are with
young comifcarry, or elfero bring forth Monfters ; deno-
<eth all rumours’ro be fale, and raifethtonohonour, In
the fixth Houlecd/be: caufeth very tedious fickneffes and
difeate; ; diicovereth the fraud, deceit and wickednefs of
fervants , and fignifies difeafes and infirmities of cartel tobe
mortal , and makerh'the Phyfirian to be fnfpected of the fick
Patient. A/bus in che feventh Honfe givech a barren wife,
but one that is fairand beauciful; few fuics or controverfies,
but fuchas fhall be of. very long continuance, Inthe eighth
Houfe if a queilion be propounded of any one, 4/bm fhews
the parcy to be dead ; oiveth lictle portion or dowry with
wife, and caufeth chat to be much ftrived and contended for.
Yn the ninth Houle d/éus denoteth fome journyes to. be ac-
complifhed, bute with mean profit ; hindereth him that is ab=

~~ fentjand fignifies he fhall nex rerurn 5 and declareth aman to

be fuperflitious in Religion, and given to falfe and deceitful
Sciences. <In the renth Ax caufeth Princes and Judges

‘26 be malevolent;fheweth vile and bate Offices and Magiltra-
vies 3 fignifies a Mother to be aawhore,or one much fulpected

for adulcery. In che eleventh Houfe Albus maketh diffem-
bling and falie friends ; caufeth love and favour to:be incon-
Rant, oA lbas'in the twelfth Houfe denotreth vile, impotent
and ruftical enemies ; fhewech fuch as.are in prifon thall nor

efcape, and fignifies a great many and various troubles and

difcommodities of ones life,

Pyer in the firt Houle givech an indifferent long life... but
&

= oe or

of Geomancie. ‘ a5
laborions;raifeth men to gréatfame through military dignity;
fignifiesa perion of ‘a ftrong body, ruddy complexion, a fair
countenance, and black hair, © In the fecond Houte Pwer ins
crealech ‘iubitance, obtained by other mens goods, by plun-
derings,rapines, conffcations, military Laws, and tuch \jke ;
he concealeth borh che theef and the thing ftolen, but dif-
coverethnotrealure. Inthe third Honte Paer raiiech aman
to, honour above his brethren, :andto be feared of thems;
fignifiesjournies to be dangerous ,:and denoreth perions of
good credit, “In the:fourch Houle Per fignifies dubious:int
heritances and poffeihons , and fignifies a-Father to atrain
to his: fubftance :and eftare chrough violence. . In che fifth
Houle Pwer fheweth good children,and duchvas fhall attain to
honors and dignities ; he Genifies 4 womanto have amale+
child.,, and fhewerh honors to be acquired by military difci
pline,and great and full fame, In the fixth Honfe Puercanfeth
violent dileafes.and infirmities, as wounds, falls; concufions,
bruifes, bur éafily délivereth the fick ,. and fheweth rhe Phy

“fitian and Chirurgionto‘be good ; denoreth fervants and:a+
‘mimals to be good, ftrongand profitable. Inthe feverrh

‘Houte Pyer cauleth a wife to be a virago, of a ftont Spirit,-of
good fidélity; and one chat loverh to bear the Rule and Go-

vernment.of ajhoule; maketh cruel fttifes and contentiong,

and fuch adyerfati¢s, asthall {carcely be reftrain’d by Jultice,

Per in theeighth Houlethewerh himirhar isftippoled to:be
dead to-live,ignifierh rhe kinde of death not to be painful, or
daborions, burro -proceed:from {ome hor humour, or by iron,
ot, the {we Mor from fome.orher caule of rhe like-kinde;thew-

yeth_a man ro-have fio legacies or other inhericance.) > Inrhe
ninth) Houle Pyer -fhewerh ‘journeys nor ‘to be under:one
withous'peril and-danget of life’, yet neverrhelels declareth

them.to be accomplithed protperoufly and fafely ; fheweth

petions of -litrle Religion, ‘and ning litrle coniciénce » fior-

-withanding giveth the, knowledge: of natural phitofopliy
and phyficksand many orher-liberal and exiellentArcs, Pwer
dn-the tenchHoule fignifies, Princes to be powerful, glorious,
and famous in warlike atchievements , but they flall be un-

E con-

rea
ea eeceahine Setups eri Tart see ea
cis x pon ae ata

aan

_ ae
$

Se Sn
aL et

on

——

ne oe SS OL TT =
. - . =

BaD APTANA TT, DRS i 3 eS >
ae ae i
‘. ‘ >
aon Sacre =
aS x a -

RR Fo OSES WR eT

Henry Cornelius Agvipps,

conftant and unchangeable, by reafon ofthe mutable and va.
rious fuccels of. vistory.. Pxer inthis Houfe caufeth Judges
to.crrel and unmercifil ; incréafech offizes in warlike affairs ;-
fenifies Magiliracy to be exerciled by fire andiword ; hurt:
eth a Mother, and endangereth: her life. Inthe eleventh
Houfe Pucr fheweth Noble friends, and Nobie-:men, and inch
as fall much frequent the Courts of Princes, and follow af
ter warfare; and -caufeth many toadhere to cruel men ::ne+
verthelefs he caufeth much efteem with Princes ; buc rheir
favour isto be fufpected. Pwer inthe. twelfth Houfe caufeth
Enemies to be crueland pesnicious ; thofe thar are in Prifon
fhall efcape, and maketh them to e(chew mahy dangers,

Rubews. in the. firft Houte, fignifes a fhort life,and-anevit,
end; fignifies amanto be filchy,. unprofitable ,. and of an
evil, cruel and malicious counsenance, having fome remark+
able and norable.figne or {car infome part-of hisbody. In
the fecond Houle Rubem fignifies poverry , and maketh
theeves: and robbers, andfuch "aegis as fhall acquire:and
feck: after their maintenance and livelihoods by. ufing falfe,
wicked, andevil’, and unlawful Arcs ; -prefetveth theeves,
and concealeth chefe ; and fignifies no treaiure to be hid nor
found,» In thé:third Houle Rebess renders brethren and
kinfmento be full of hatred, and odious one ro another, and

fhewerh chemo be. of evil manners,écill difpoficion ; caufeth
“Journeys to be very dangerous, and forefheweth falle faich

- =< and treachery, Inthe fourth Honfe he deftroyeth and con-
~fameth Patrimoniés, and difperfech and>waftech inhere-

cances, cauferh rhem to come to-mothing ; déQroyerh che
fruits of the field by tempeftuous feafons,and malignancy of
the earth ; and bringeth che Father to a ‘quick and fudden
death. Rebens in the fifth Houle giveth many children, but
either they fhall be wicked and dilobedient , or elfe hall af-
fi& their Parents with grief, diigrace and infamy, © In the
fixch Houle Rubews caufeth mortal wounds, fickneffes and dif-
eafes ; him chat is fick hall die sthe Phyfitian thall erre, fer.

_vants prove falfe aud creacherous,.catcel and bealts fhall ie
sa

duce hurt and danger,. In the feventh Houle Rube fignt :
| | - wife

of Geomancie. *F

- wifeito be infamous, publickly adulterare, and contentious ;
deceitful and treacherous adverfaries:, who Shall endeavour:
to overcome you, by crafty and fubril wiles and circumven-
tions of the Law. Inthe eighth Houfe Rubee fionifies a vis

olenc death co be inflited, by che execution of publike Ju-
Rice ¢ and fignifies;if any one be enquired after,char he is cers
tainly dead ; and a wifeto- have no portion or dowry. \ Rr=
heus in the ninth Houte fhewerh journeys to bz evil and dan-
-gerous , and chat aman (hall be in danger either to bedpoil-
ed by theeves and robbers, or to be taken by plunderers and
robbers ; declareth mento be of moftwicked: opinions ti
Religion, and of evil faich-, and {uch as wiil often-eafly be
jnduced’to deny: and go from theirfairh for every {mall oc
cation ; denoteth Sciences to be'falfeand deceitful, and the
profeffors thereof to beignoranr, In che tetith Houfe Rw
bens fignifies Princes co be cruel and tyrannical,ind that cheir
power fhall cometo an evibend ; ‘as thac either they (hall be
cruelly! murdered and:deltroyed by theirown Subjects, 6x
dtiat they thall’be ‘taken. captive by their conquerers ,/ iad

pur tO an ignontinious and cruel death, or fhall miferably end

their’ lives ‘in hardimprifonment ; fignifies Judges and Of
ficers'te be falfe, theevith, and fuch as fhallbe addi&tedto tt

tae

fityes Theweth that a mother thall {oon die, andidenoreth
her'to ‘be blemifhe withian evil fame aind reporr. | Inthe ¢+
Jeverith Houle Rubew civerhno true, nor any fairhful friends’:
faewerh men tobe of wicked lives arid converfations 5. ‘atid
eainléchiia man to be rejected and caft our from all fociery ahd
converfition with good" and ‘noble perions,) Rubexsuvthe
twelfth Honle maketlcnemies to be cruel and traicerous, of
whom we Ought ‘ciraimipedly to beware’; fiynifiesfuchas
#fe'ity prifon fhall‘come'to an evil end 5 and fhewerh aeteat
many inconveniences and’ miichiefs to happen ania mas
life, / | | Bi Pad
wiCarcerin the irk Houfe being’ oficedygicéch acthotr lite; Préfons
fionifies mento be moit wiekedh OF 4 filthy:and.cntel tincican
ficure and fhape, ‘and fuch as até haced and detpifed of all
aién.< * Carder in the fecond Houle canfert) mott cruel and
meals , Es mife-

retin ction da nen sai stateiaprmarantant rane

inate taping thei aetna rae lignan hte htm an oreo

$ arrow

LT réfieia dx che fie Houle doth nov.abbseviace lies be

Henry Cornelius Azvippa;
miserable poverty: ;. fignifies. both the theef and thing:
ftollen co be taken and regained ; and fheweth notreafure to:
be.hid, ‘In che third Houle Carcer fignifiech hatred‘and dit,
fention amonelt brethren evil journeys, moft wicked. faich:
and converfation, Career in: the. fourth Houle fiznifieth a
manto have no poffeffions or inhericances, a Father to be
molt wicked, and to die a {udden and‘evil death, In the fifth
Houle Carcer giveth many children ; fheweth a woman not to
be with child,and provoketh rhofe that are with child ro mif-.
carty of their own confent,.or flayeth the child ; fignifieth no.
honours and*difperfeth moft falferumours, In the fixth
Houfe Carcer caufeth. che difeafed co undergo long ficknefs ;
fienifieth fervants to be wicked, rather unprofitable. Phyfiti-.
ans ionoram, -Inthe:feventh Houle €arcer fheweth the wife.
fall be-hared of -her-husband, andifienihies fuits and-conten-
tions to be ill ended and determined: . In the eighth Honfe-
Career declareth the kinde of deathto-be by fome fall, mi/-
chance, or falfe accufarion, orthat men fhall be condemned ©
imprifon,or‘in publike judgement ,: and fhewerh themo be :
pucto.dearh’, orchatthey thall often lay violentand deadly
handsupon-themfelves ; - denieth aiwifeto have'any portion.
and legacies.) Carcer-inthe ninth Houle, fheweth he that is.
abfenrfhall'nor return, And fignifieth fome evil hall happen:
ro hinran his journey: 5 -a¢ denotes: perions'of no Relision,.a
wicked confcience, and ignorant of earning. - Inthe cench
Houle Carcer caufeth Princes to be véry wacked, and weegchs.

‘edly to petifh, -becaufe when they are eftablifhed intheie

power, they will wholly addi& chemfelves-to every volup«
tuousluft; pleafure,and tyranny ; caulech Judges coibe unguft
and falfe-;~deéclarerh che Mother to be cruel, and infamous .
and noted with the-badge of aduleery ; giveth no Officesiner-
Maoiliracies, burfuch as are gotten and ebcained either by ly--
ing, or through theft, and bafe and cruel robbery. In thees.

. leventh Honfe Carcer caulerh no friends, nor love, nor fayour

ta)

emoneft men, In the cwelfth Houle ic raifeth, enemies, dea
tainerh in prifon, and anfliteth many evils, ,

ie os

eof Geomancie.

afliGtechariwith many moieftatioks : fignifiech a perfon of,
good manners and carriage, but-one chatus folitary,and flow
in albhis bufinefs and ogcafions ; one that. is Solitary, melan-
chally; feldomlaughing ;, but mott covetous after all things,
Im the fecond Houle it-giverh mach jubftance and riches, but
they that have them,(hall not enjoy themsbucthall rather hide
them,and fhall fcarce afford to themfelves food or duttenince
chetefrom; treafure’fhall not be found, neither fhall che
cheefinor the theft,’ Triftsti« iu.the third Houfe fignifieth a
man to have few brethren ,| but fheweth that-he fhall .outlive
them-all ; ‘cauferh unhappy journeys 5 burgiveth good faith.
In the fourth Houle Triftitia confumeth and deftroyerh,fieldss
poffeffions and snheritahces:; caulerh a Farher to be old and
of Jong life, anda very coverous hoosder up of ‘money... J
che fifth Houle ic fignifies no‘children;.or that shee dhaal foon
die ; fheywetha woman wath child:to bring forth a worman-
child,’ giveth nofamenorhonors, Jn thefixth Houle Trijfti-
sia heweth that the fickfhall die ; fervants thall. be good, but
lothful-:. and Ggnifies cartel fisall be of afinall price of value.
In the feventh. Houle Trititia fhewerh. that the wife fhalh
foon diesand declareth fuits and contentions to be very hart-
firl,-and:determining againft_you, ’ In the eighth Houle it fie-
nifies, the kinde -of death ro:be with long and gtievons fick
els, and-mich dolourand pain 5 gweth legacies andanin=:
heticance, and indoweth 4 wife witha portion. - Trifitiain
the ninth'Hounfe, fhewerh, that he chat is abfent fhall-perifh
injhis journey ; OF fignifies chat, {ome evil mifchance thall
happen unto him ; caufeth journeys to be very unfortunate,
bitr declarech meniro be-of good Religion devout, and: pro-:
found Scholars; In phe renth Houle Triffitia fignifies Princes:
to befevere , but-very good lovers of juice ; ic;cauferh jut.
Judges ,\;but-fuch as are cediousiand flow in decermining of;
gaufes ; bringeth a Motherto.a good old age, with inceariry
and vhonefty ‘of life, | but paixe wich divers difcommodities
and mil-fortunes’; .it-raifech to greae Offices, but chey thal}
nor belong enjoyed: nor perfeveted in; i¢fignifies {uch Of-
fices as do appertain to the waters OF tillage, and manuring
se i of

a

Dragors
head.

; Dragons
wt tas!,

Henry Cornelius Agrivps,

of che Earth, or fitch as areto be imployed abour matrets of
Religion and wifdom, © Inthe eleventh Houle Triftitia figs
mifes tcarcity of friends , and the death of friends ; and als
fo fienifies Siete love or favour,- “In'the ewelfth Hone it
fheweth no enemies ; wretchedly condemneth the imprifon-
ed; and canfeth many difcommodities and difprofits:to’ hap=
penin-ones hfe, - .

Caput Draconis in the firt Houle augmenreth life and for-
tune, “In the fecond Houfe he increafeth riches ‘and diah-
ftance ; favech and concealeth atheef: and figniies treafure
«6 be hid. Inthe chird‘Honfe Caput Dracenis giveth:many
brethren»; caufeth ‘journe sy kinfmen, and: good ‘faith and
credit. In che fourth Honfe he eivech wealthy-inheritances ;
cauleth the Father sto attain co old age): Inthefifth Houle
Capar Dracanit giveth many children } Genifies women with
child to bring forth women-children, and oftentimes to have
twins ; ic fhewerh great honours'and-fame 5 and fignifies
news-and Tumours tobe tne, Caput Draconis in che fixch
Houle increatéch fickrieles‘and'dileates ; fignifiech che Phy-
fitian to’ be-leartied ; and givech very many Jecvanesand chats
cel, Inthe fevench Houle he fignifiech'a man (hall have ma=
ny wives ; multipiies’ and ftirreth up many adverfaries and:
fits.) Invthedieht Houle he théweeh ‘the death co be cers
tain, mcfeafcrh ‘Legacies and inheritances, and giveth:a eood
portion wath awife, Inthe ninth Houfe CAput Draconn fige
Hines Mahy journeys, many Sciences;and good Religion; and
fheweth that thole chat’are abfent thall foon return Inthe
tenth Houle’ he fignifies « glorious ‘Princes’, ‘great and ‘mage
nificent’ Judses, eréat' Offices and Saintul Magitracy, Th the:
eleventh Houle he cauiech many friend: 5 ‘and'to bebeloved
of all menoIn che cwelfth Houte Caja Draconis fignifiechanen
to have many enemies, andmany women ; detainerh che im-
priloned; andevilly punitherh chem, 5 39g 1 SUS

Cauda D-aconis, in all and fingular the tef pedtive Houles a=
forelaid,civeth the contraty judeemerir to Ciipur, And hele
are the natures of the figures:of Geomancy; and theit judgs
m nts, in” all and finsolar cheir'Hou'es' 5: uponall maner o¢
: Queflions

ad SET hye : an eR wi AS Ss pee ener Dp Cet gery ye

of Geomancie.... . 2%

Queftions to be propounded , of or concerning any marter
orthing whatloever:

Buc now.in the maner of proceeding to judgement ,° this
you afe efpecially to obferve ; Thar wnenfoever.any Quelti-
on fhall be propofed:to you, which is conraimed in any of
theHonfes, thar you fhall not onely anfwerthereunto by
the figure contained 'ih fuch a Houfe ; bur beho'ding and di-
ligently relpeting all chefigures, and the Index it {elf in two
Houfes, you hall ground the face of judgement. You fhall
therefore confider the figure of the thing quefired or enqni-
red after, if he fhall multiply himfelf by the other places of
the figure, that you.may ¢an'ethemalioto be partakers in
your jiideement : as for example, if a Queftion fhall be pro-
pounded of the fecond Houfeconcerninga theef,, et the
ficure of the second Houfe thall be found inthe ‘fixth,
ic déclarech the-theef- ro be-fome of ones own houfhold or
fervants : and after this maner*fhall. you judge and conf-
der of the reft ; for this whole Are confittech in the Commix-
tures of the figures, and che natures thereof; which who-
foever doth rightly praétice, he fhall alwases declare, moft
true andicertaim judgements ‘pom every particular thing
whatfoever,

Sop RRR ETS a a eee ee

ye a eee

132 Henry Cornelina Agrippa,

i | OfOccurtPuHirosoriy, |
| } | i OR AOE |
, OfMacicarCeremMonuies:

4 : ~ The Fourth Book.

RES SOT Reece

4 Written by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, |

ah N our Booksof Occult Philofovhy, we |
a , have not fo compendioufly, as copiou!- |}
mi ly , declared the principles, grounds, —
f | and reafons of Magick it felf, and after |
ay what maner the experiments thereof —_|
nie are to be chofen, elected, andcom- |
ak pounded, to.produce many wonderful iz
at effe&s ; but becaufe in thofe books
3 they are treated ofjrather Theorically,
| then PraGtically’; and fome alfo are not handled compleatly
; and fully, and others very figuratively , andas ir were Enig- |
iM matically and ob{cure Riddles, as being thofe which we have |

attained unto withgreat ftudy., diligence, and very. curious
fearching and exploration , and are heretofore fet forth in a
| more

The fourth books. © 33
more rude and unfafhionedmaner, Therefore inthis book;
which we have. compo‘ed).and, made as it. were aComp!e-
ment and Key of ovr ocher books:of Occult Phiiofophy, and
ofall Magical Operations 5 we will give unco rheethe dos
cumenrs of holy -and undefiled verity 5 and Inexpnenable
and Unreliltable Magical Dilcipiine , and the moltpleasane
and delectable experiments of thefacred Deities. So that
as by the.reading of tour other books of Occult Philefophy,
thou mailt earneltly covet the knowledge.of thefe things’s e+
ven fo. with readingithis book, thou fhalt truely criumplt:
Wheréfore ler filence hide-thele things within the fecret
clofecs of thy reitgious breaft, andconceal them with con:
{tant Taciturnity.
-/ This chereforeisto be known, Thar the names of the'in-
relligent ‘prefidents ef: every one of the Planets.are conttitus
ted. after this-maner -:<that is ro fay, Bi-collecting together
the letters our ofthe figure of the world, fromthe riaay of
the body.of the Planer , according to the fucceffion:of the
Signes through the feveral degrees ; and out of the feveral de:
yrees, fromthe afpe&s of the Planer himielf che-calculation
being made from the degree of rhe afcendants In the: ike m2-
ner areconitituced che names of the Princes of the evil {piries;
they are cakenunder all the Planets cf the prefidents in’2
retrograde order, the projection being made contrary.to:the
ducecthen-of che: fighes 5 -from the beginning of-thefevénth
-Hbufe, Now the,namelof:the fupreme & higheft inrelligence,
»which many do fuppoléro bethe foul of the world, iscolle t-
ed ont of thefourCar<inal/poincs of che figure of te world,
Afercheimaner already deli ered :.& by the oppofice and:con-
-trary; Way , ais known ithename of ‘rhe grear Deo, drievil
Apiritsapon-the four-cadert Angles.) (In the like maner thalt
thou. underftand. the, names-of the grear prefidencial {pirits

ruling..in, the. Air... “fromthe four Angles of the iuceedahe
Weoules, : fo, that.as-to,obrain.- the names of: the good {pirits,

the {calculation-is tobe made according ro the fuccefliomof
erhefignes, begining from the degree.ofithe afcendant + and
co attain to the names of the evil {pirics 5 by workme'the
aye tT ; F con-

Le ne a ee =a SRAM ae ap mg

of occult Philofophy,

contraty way. | , ;
| | You muit alfo obferve, that che names of the evil {piries |
| | are extrasted, afwel fromthe names of the good fpirits, as |)
| | of the evil : fo no:withftanding, that af we enter the table:
| with the name of a good {pirit of che'fecond order, the name I]
| of the evil {pirit fhall be extracted from the order of the ——
) Princes and Governours ; buc if we enrer the rable with
~ « ghe mame ‘of ‘a good {piric of che third order, or with the ~ |
Tt i name of an evil {piric a Governour, after what maner foever |
i | they are extraSted, whether by this table’, or from a celeftial
| | heure , the names which do proceed from hence, thall be
the names of the evil fpirits, the Minifters of the inferiour

| | order, | |
1 i It as furcher to be noted, That as oftenaswe'enterthis |
i ae table with the good fpirits of thefecond order, the names
al extracted are of the fecond order : and if under them we €x-
Pe tra&t che name of an evilfpirit, he is of the fuperiour order

i i of the Governours. |The fame order is, if we ener with |
Oe the name of an evil {piric of the fuperiour order. “Wfthere- |
ie fore we enter this cable wich che names of the fpirits of the |
7. third order 5 or wich the names-of theaminiftringfpirits,af- ||
ef wel of the good fpirics, as of theevil, thenamesextrafed |
fhalibe che names-of the miniftring {pirits'of the iifetiour
‘Ey order. | ,
: | But many Magicians, men Of no {mall Authority; will have
| the tables of this kinde tobe extended wich Latine letters:
fo chat by the fame tables allo, out of themame of any- office -
i or effe&, might be found outthe nameof any fpitit, aiwel
ae eood:as evil, bythe fame maner whichis above delivered,
AR 3 by takingthe name of the officeor of ‘the effe& 5 antheco-
on lumne of leerers;in their own lineyunder theit Gwar tar.
| And of this practice Trifmeviftes is agteat Author; “who
deliveredthiskinde of calculation in Egyprian leccers : net
| unproperly allo may they bereferredro‘orher letters of other
ae “tongues, for the reafons affigned to the fies ; for-craly fie
: only isexcant of all men, ‘who hayetreated concerning the
attaining ro che names of fpirics. ne
| There-

ee ay Ad ee Se heal ad AES Se SL:

Therefore the force, fecrecy and power, in what maner
the facred ‘names of fpirits are ttuly and tightly found our,
confiftetl in’ the ‘dilpofing of vowels j “which do make the
name of afpiric, and wherewith is confticured the true name,
and right word, ‘Now this arc is thus perfected:and brought
fo pais: firlt, we are’ ro take’ heed of ‘che placing the vowels
of the'letrers, which are found by the calculation of thece-
leftial figuré 5 to’findé’the names of the fpirits: of the fecond
order, Prefidents and Govetnours? ° And this in the good
fpitits , is thus brought to effet’, “by confidering the ftars
which do ¢onftitute and’ make theletters, and by placing
them accotding to their order: ‘firlt, ‘let the degree of ‘the
eleventh Honfe be fubitraéted ‘from’ the degree. of chat ftar
which is firft in order; and that which remaineth thereof, let
it be projeted from the degree of the afcendenr, and where
that number’endeth ; there is-pare of the vowel of the firft
letter : ‘begin therefore to calculate the vowels of thete let
ters, according co their number and order ; and the-vowal
which falleth ‘in the place'of-the ftar 5 which is the firftam
order, thé fame awe is attribuiced roche firft lecrer: Then
afterwards ‘thou fhalr finde che part of the fecond letter, by
fubfracting the deerée “of a ftar which is the’ fecondsan
order from the firltftar'y and chat whicl remaineth, catt from
thie afcendaht. © And this is che parc fromywhich chou fhale
beoin the calculation of the vowels ;° and that vowel which
falleth upon the fecond ftat, che fame is the vowel of the fe-
cotid letter. » And fo confequenrly maift chou fearch out the
vowels'of the following letrers/alwaies, ‘by fubitracting the
desrée of the following far, fromthe degree of the ftar
next’ preceding and going before: ‘And fo allo all calculations
and numerations in the names of the good fpirics, ought to
be mide according co the fucceffion of the fignes. » And in
calewlaring che names of the evil{pirics, where in the names
of the good Ipirits istaken the degree’of the eleventh Honfe,
in thele’oughr to’ betaken the degree of the twelfth Honte:
‘And ‘all numerarions and calculations may, be made with the
fuccefion of the’ fiones',~ by cakine che beginning front rhe
eg F 2 deoree

The fourth book, 35°

HORS Sia ine > Pee RAE UAE RL Se
a ‘x molest : a I a ane AA ETE om

ey

26 of Occule Philofopby,
deerce of the tenth Heule.. Ng de nan ge
But in-all extra&tions by tables,the vowels are placed after
-anothermaner. In the firlt place therefore is taken rhe cet-
tainnumber of letters making the namejit felf, | andiis thus
numbred: from the bezinning of the columne of the firftlet-
teryor whereupon the name.is extrated,; .and rhe lerter on
which this number falleth, 1s referred.to the firft letter of the
hame., extracted by taking the. diltanee of che onefrom the
orher , according ro the order,of. the Alphabet... Bur the
number of thar difiance is proje&ted from the beginning of
his columné; and where it endeth,,shere is part of rhe firlt
vowel: from thence-th:refore thoudhalt calculate the vowels
themfelves, intheir own numberand order, ..inthe fame co-
hamne; and the vowel which thal fall upon the firlt lecrer.of
a name,the fame flial] be atcribured'te that name. Now. thou
faalt finde the following vowels, by taking.che diitance from
the precedent vowel to:the following ::and fy.confequenrly
according to the fucceflion.of the Alphabet, . And.the num,
ber-of chat diftance. is tobe numbered from the beginning
of his own columne ; ahd where he fhall ceale; thereisthe
part of the vowelsought afeer.., Fromthence therefore mult
you calculate the’ vowels, .as we hace aboyelard ;.. and chofe
vow els which fhall fall upon their-own letters, are co be ac
tribured. unro them: if thereforeany vowel fhall happen.to
fall upon vowel, the formet mutt give place to the latter +
and this you.are to underftand only of the good {pisits.. In
rhe evil allo you may proceed in the Jame way ; exceptonly,
thar you make the numerations after acontrary «and back-
ward order, contrary-to the fucceflion of the Alphaber, and
contrary to che order of che columnes. (that is cofay ) imaf-
cending, |
The name of good Angéls ,and-of every man, which we
have taught ‘how 'to finde ont,in our chird book of Ocaule
'Philofophy,according torhatmaner,ts of no litle Authority,
nor of a meanfoundation, Burno.v we wilkgive unto thee
fome other ways,illuttraced with.no vain realons,One where-
of is, by taking inche figure of the nativity, chefive places

q i
5 tk
a ih
‘ ¥
ii
7 ir
t "
‘7
ii
\ ae
| oa
i i
H ie:
(foe ;
(| aaa
a ie.
mm Week.
x
rae ©
a. Boker?
te
ie \ ¥
y
f
¥
| t

ae ee

Ci eA EPR SEE ORL MSIL BRI BP

The fouribbook. 29
of\Hylech®: which being noted, the characters of che letters
are projected ‘intheir order and number from the beginning
of Ariéss; and: thole letcers which fall upon the degrees. of
the faid places, according to theirorder and dignity dilpoted
and.afpeSted, do make the name of an Angel. There is. aifo
another way 5 wherein they do take Almutel , which 1s the
ruling and governing ftars over the aforelaid five places ; and
the. projeStionis to be made fromthe, degree of. the aicen-
dant ; which'is. done by gathering.together the letrers
falling upon Almutel ; which being, placed: in order 4.. accor-
ding to their diznity, do make the name of an Angel, There
is furthermore another way uled y..and very much had inob-
fervation from theEgyp.ians ,. by making their calculation
from the deeree of the afcendant, and by gathering together
the letters according to rhe Almurtel of che eleventh Heule ;
which Honie they calla good:Demon: which being paced, ac-
cording to their dignities,-che names of the Angels are con-
ituced. Now the names of the evil Angels are known after
the like maner, except only thatthe projections muit be per-
farmed contrary tothe courfe and orderof the tucceflion of
rhe fignes , fo thar whereas in feeking the ames of good tpi
rits, we areto calculate from the beginning of A-iem;-con- Jo,
rrariwife, in attaining rhe names of the evil, We ought tOac- *
count from the beginning of Libra, And whereas inthe |
ood fpirits we number fromthe degree of the aicendant ; *:
contratily,in the évil; we- mutt calcware from the degree of

‘the feventh Houle, Bur according to the Egyptians, the: :
name‘of an Angel is colleSted according to the Almutel of the
ewelfth-Houles which they callan eyilipiric, “Now all chole*:
rites, which are elfewhere already: by us dilivered in our third ©
book of Occult Philofophy 5 may be made by thecharactets
6f-any language. In all which (as we have abovefaid).chere
isa myftical, and divine number, order and flours 3from
Whence it cometh to pais, that the fame {piric may be ealled
by diversnames, Bur others are difcovered from the same
of the fpirit himielf, of the good orevil, by cables formed
to this purpofe,  ~ | | |
ss. ata Now

INSTR te ST IS EL ATE A ee

38 of Occuls Philofophy, —

Now thefe celeftial chara&ters do confit of lines and: heads:
the heads are fix, according ¢o the fixmagnicudes of the
_ftarsy whereunto che planers alfo are reduced; - The fir .
magmiende holdeth a Star, with the Sunjora€rols, ~The fes
cond with Jupicer a circular point, The third holdech wich
Saturn, a femicircle,a triangle,either crookedjround,or acute,
‘The fonrth with Mars, a little froke penetrating the line, ei-
ther fquare y {traight, or oblique.- The fifthywith Venus and
Mercury, a litcle ttroke or point with a raib , afcending or de+
‘icending, The fixch with the Moon , -a/point made black
All which you may fee in the enfuingrable. The heads then
being pofited according to the fite of the Stars in the figure
Of Heaven, then che Jines ase ro be drawnout , according
to the conztuency or agréemient of cheir narures. Andthis
you are to underftand of the fixed Scars, Burin che erefiing |
Of che Planets, the lines are drawn out, the heads being “By a |
poficed according to their courfeand nacure amongtt them+ ~~~)

é |

(i. ee

i EP, LS PORES CERT SS ae tS eee _
: ones es cis —-
Se i — ’

on = 3
‘y

- = = ~

Poatex ct — = ~

ss
eee
=e

Sar

- felves<

Stars, Heads. Lines joyned to the Heads,

0 OH Ue +
WT-2/ Oo doe O
Uh oc 4 Sm OS eee
TW Be Do poet
VIED 8 yee
7 Mee When liereFote a charadtes ly to befemalog any st
Image

: aoe

ee?

Fintan eR
XN na agen same” STUT

Dé
Pa

ae gn nes
Pca) reer ae

pa Or aac i ae
Se EE TOGO EAD 0 SIRO S.A PRI ION CLOSETS IIE FIO IEE ie esis
eo P ? -

aa en ct re rat “Kae eng ‘fe F- As see we — ah eal fen TITS ; ey pee, POOL ¥ Be

The fourth bok. | 39:
Image afcending in any degree or face of a figne ,.. which do
coniit ef Stars of the fame magnitude andnature § then the
number of thele Stars being pofited according to their place
and order, heiimes are drawn atter the fimilitude of the I-
mage fignified,as copionfly as the:fame can:be done,

Bur the Chara&ers which ate extratted according to the
name of a {pirit , are compoted by the table followinz , by
giving toevery letcer thar name which agreerh unro him, our
of the rable ; which alchough 1t may appear eafie go thofe thar
apprehend ir, yer chere istiérein no {mall difficulty ; To wir
when the_letrer ofa-name fallech upon the line of letters
or figures, that we may know-which figure or which letter is
to betaken, And this may bethus known: fox if a letter
falleth upon the line of letters,-cophder of what number this
lectét may be in the order of the name; as the fecond, or the
third ; chen how many letters char name containeth ;_ as five
orfeven’; and multiply rhefe numbers one after another by

themielvesjand treble the produSt : thén caft the whole (be-
"Ing added rogether) from rhe beginning of the letrers, accor-
ding co the fucceffion of the Alphabet: and che letrer upen
which thatsmotber fhall happen cofall, ought to be placed
for the character of chat fpirit.. . But if any letter of a name
fall on the line of fieures , itis thusto be wrought. -Take
the number how many this’letter is in rhe ordervof rhe
name, and let ic be multiplied by chat number of which this
letter isin the order of the Alphaber’;and being added to-
gethers.divide it by niné, and the remainder fheweth the
foure or number to be: placed. in the chara&ter: and chis
may be put either in a Geomerrical or Arichmerical figure of
numbet ; which notwichftanding ought norco exceed the
number of nine,or nine Aneles,

ei till ernment as ora

TEED see oj gd TI I et TF

‘4o Of Occult Philefophs,

The Characters of good Spiriss.
Afimple point, -.. Round. ... ‘Starry,

& OO %*

Straight Randing line. | Oblique,

I sy ~

‘Line crooked like a abow. “Like waves. . Toothed.
f* Anta ANKE |

Interfection right. Inherent, Adhering fepatate.” |

a eee ay
‘Obliq; interfeQionfimple, ‘“Mixt. Manifold.’ « :
_Perpendicular right dexter. Sinifter:. ‘Neuter,

A whole figure. Broken,

Oe ae

. # letter inhering. Adhering, Separate.

oe. AS ae

stipe en

SS

Ra cing te
are

Ht
é

> aa

n es Ga EO OY —

Cha-

amici” 5 BPO anise mei eat rs Zip ra 5 <=
Smee ARNT 2. Ss ee arr eeY as
gt pe Lae ante a i a =
d 8 pe Se if
a ’ 7 .
= pa = Ls Si. i =
ae oe eR ~- — ~ re
= - - ane

ees Peer
TP SS EE IIE eae ea | . ee ie Te

The fourth book.

4t
The Charadters of evil Spirits.
A right line, | Crooked, Reflexed.
pened. Va Wee ers
| A fimple figure, Penetratre,
aes
A right letter, Retroorade, Invers’d.
on

Winde,

A ferpent,
RFS

A foor,

= ma y ——s

ee
inh

tan Ie ERS! TERE ES TR SG

LI OEE DLT EAT DIELS

LEE POEM = PR mt aca peanatie EERSTE = RR
ia « 2 ° é epee
. ER FM Yall ay

ee eee

of ecculs Philofepby,
A fcepter. A tword. A fcourge.

But che Chara&ters which areunderftood by the revelation
of Spirits, take their vertue from thence ; becaufe they are,
as it were, certain hidden .feals, making the harmony of {ome
divinity : either they are fignes of a Covenant entred into,
and of promifed and plighted faith, or of obedience, And
thofe Charagéters cannot by any other means be fearched
out, |
Moreover;befides thefe Characters, there are certain fami-
liar Figures & Images of evil Spirics, under which forms they
are wont tO appear, and yield obedience to chem that invoke
them, And all thefe Characters or Images may be feen by
the rable following , according to the courte of the letrers
conftituting the names of Spiritsithemielves: fo char if inany
lerter chere is found more therithename of one Spitir, his
Image‘holdeth che pre-eminence, the others imparting their
own otder_;, fo that they which are the firft orders, co them
is atrribured the head,che upper part of the body, according
to their own-fioure : thofe which are the loweft, do poffefs
the thighs and feer ; fo alforhe middle letters do attribure
like rothemielves the middle parts of the body , or give the
parts that fie.: “Bur if there happen any concratiety, chat let-
ter which is the flronger in che number fhall bear rule :' and
if they-are equal, chey all impare equal chings, Purchermors,
if any name fhall obtain any notable Charaster or Inftrument
out of the Table, he fhall likewile have the fame chara&ter in
the Image. :

We may alfoatrain ro the knowlédge ofthe dignities of the
evil Spirics;by the fame Tables of Charagters and Images: for
upon what {pirit foever there falleth any excellent figne or i+

firument.out of rhe Table ofChara&ters,he poffeffech that diz-
nity. As if chere fhall be Crown, it fheweth a Kingly dignity ;
if aCreft or Plume,a Dukedome;if a Horn,a County ; if with

eur

= = Se & 2 -§. *

I 5s itege atin it a) SRR ATI. a ANE EG EL LAST OOM ae

ae The fourth book. 43
out thefe there be a Scepter, Sword, or forked Inftrumenr, it
| fhewech Rule and Authority. * Likewife out of the Table of
| Images you fhall finde them which bear the chief Kingly
| dignity: from the Crown judge dignity ; and from rhe In-
| | fttuments, Rule and Authority, Laftly, they which bear an

humane fhape and figure , have greater dignity thenrhofe

which appear under the Forms and Images of Bealts ; they
| alfo whe ride, do.excel chemwhich appear on foor, And

thus accofding to all their commixtures, you may judge the
| dignity and excellency of Spirits, one before another, More-
| over,you mult underftand, thar the Spirits of the inferiour or-
| | det, of what dignity foever they be,are alwaies fubjed to the
| Spirits of rhe fupetiour order : fo alio, chat ic is net incongru- a
| | enc for their Kings and Dukes to be Subject and Minilter to iy!
_ the prefidenrs of the juperiour order.

The fhapes familiar to the Spirits of Saturss,

b
Te appear for the moft part with a tall,lean, and flender 1

body , with an angry countenance, having four faces $ otk
one in the hinder part of thé@head, one on the former parr of val
| che head,and on each fide nofed or beaked:there’likewife ap- it
peareth.a face on each knee, of a black fhining colour: their Oa
| motion is ‘the moving ‘of the winde, with a kinde of earth-
| Quake: cheir figne is white earth whiter chen any Snow.

~

The particular forms ares

ll

, © > A King having a beard, riding on a Dragon.
| An Old man with‘a beard, |
| An Old woman leaning on a ftaffe. ©
A Hog, :
| A Dragon,
| AnoOwl,
A black Garment,
A Hooke or Sickle,
A Juniper-tree, The

of Occuls Philofopby,

The familiar forms to the Spirits of Jupiter.

yy .

He Spirits of Jupicer do appear with a body fanonine

and cholerick, of a middle famre, witcha horrible

fearful motion ; but withamilde countenance, a centle

fpeech, and of the colour of. Iron, ;The motion of thenn is

. flafhings of Lightning and Thunder ; their figne is, there will

appear men about the circle, who fhall feem tobe devoured
of Lions,

Their particular forms ares

A King wich a Sword drawn, riding on a Stag,
Homo ‘A Man wearing a Mitre in long rayment.
mitratus, A Maid with a Lanrel-Crown adorned with Flowers,

A Peacock.

An azure Garment.
A Sword.

A Box-tree..

oe

ee ae eee,

woah

Aer

Se
«
Ae ere TY

The fawsiliar firms off the Spirit $0 if May i

T Hey appear in atall body, cholerick, a filthy counte-
nance,.of colour brown, {warthy or red, having horns
like Harts horns , and Griphins claws, bellowing like wilde ,
Bulls, Their Mocion is like fire burning; their igne Thun-
der and Lightning about rhe Circle. ~ 3 :

BE pf FL OEE IND TSN EAE ETE A

Their particular (hapes are y

A King armed riding npen 3 Wolf,
A Man armed,

‘
a |
é ee
o G + ‘
tj ‘i
ia
3 (eid
‘
: te Z
IG Lt
; i
} f i}
Pi tad
it ht
7 bri y $
. y wy
if Ve
7 iar
Allyed
y af
5 ¥ |
k
f A
i H
{ ts -
ight ‘
Ls
oy
2 ir
{ fare
: f
“
? 7
iH
ist
: at)
: v9
j
' y
PES f
g
ir} a
af
‘CH he
p f j
£ if
a !
‘
*
3S ;
MS
a) &
u
S,

Leg? as OTN SU Sp RSE IRE CEEOL PO er

| he fourth book. AS
A Woman holding a buckler onher thizh.
| A Hee-goat, j
| A Horte. |
| | A Stag.
| | A red Garment.
| Wool. ci
| | A Cheeflip. a H
Muli“ g
Shapes f.miliar to the Spirits of the Sun. ceps. !
i © Uk

He Spirits of che Sun do for the moft part appear in a large,
| ‘full and vreat body fanguine and grofs, ina gold colour,
) | with the tin&ture of blood, Theirmotion is as the Lightning
» of Heaven ; theirfiene isto movethe périon ro {weat that
| callsthem. Buetheir-particular forms are , -

A King having aScepter riding on a Lion, |
| A King crowned. : : {
| A Queen with aScepter. ir
| A Bird. : Hal
| ALion. a
| ACock, oa \
| Avyellow or golden Garment. an
#6—sSA Scepter.
Caudatus.

Familiar foapes of the Spirits of Venus,

?

“[ Bey do appear witha fair body, of middle ftature , with
an amiable and pleafant counrenance , of colour white
| orgreen, rhe upper part golden, . The motion of them is as
| it wereamoftclear Star, For their figne, there will feem to
| be maids playing withoue the Circle,which will provoke and
allure him’ chat calleth chem co play. >; But their parcicular
forms are ,

: A,

ECP ag SE PRLS SEE ee we

of occuls Philofophy,

A King wich a Sceprer riding upon a Camel, -
A Maid clothed and drefled beautifully.
A Maid naked, a

A Shee-goar, ©

A Camel,

A Dove.

A white or green Garment,
Flowers,

The herb Savine,

>
ee a Sate F Hi
me * ae > iy ae
ea STR a aoe 2

ee es

The fausiliar forms of the Spirits of Mercury.
gis

[Be Spirics Of Aercury will appear for the moft part in’a

body of amiddle ftature, cold; liquid and moift, fair,and
With an affable {peech ; ina humane fhape and form, like unto
a Knight armed ; of colour clear and bright. - The motion
of chem is as it were filver-coloured ‘clouds. For their figne,
they caufe and bring horror and fear unto himthat calls chena,
-But their parcicular fhapes are,

a as

ERT re ee

fl, ar ee en ea ee ee Se

Dota eS HS SY,

‘A King riding upona Bear.

A fair Youth,

‘A Woman holding a dittaffe.

A:Dog,

A Shee-bear,

A Magpie.

A Garment of fundry changeable colours,
A Rod. :

A little ftaffe.

pave

~ ET pf tO FS I a Ft

The forms familiar to the Spirits of the Moon,

? D |
T Hey will forthe moft part appear'in agrear andfull body;
foft and phlegmatique, of colour like a black prin
CLhOUds

i
; tei
Puget
¢ 4
al +
i y
Wile |
‘ ut :
‘
ata §
ie
BY
Ai
K _
i if
i j
aS
' Ff
; pA)
v4
>. 1
é
-f $
b
ti
~, phy
- t
iy i
ry |
ee hy
ig cite
ic) ie {
&
%
rf .
S,

rs

we haye above called holy.

A at a ac ea eI ins AEA FLA I ORT

a

The fourth book. 49

clond,havirig a fw elling countenance, with eyes red and full
of water, a bald head, and reeth like a wiide boar.) Their
motion is asit were an-exceeding great rempeft of the Sea,
For theirfigne , there will appear an exceeding great rain a
bout the Circle. And their particular fhapesare,

“A King like an Ascher riding upon a-Doe,
A. little Boy.

A Woman-hunter wich abow-and arrows,
A Cow.

A. licle Doe,

A. Goofe,

A Garment green or filver-colonred.

An Arrow. | |
A Creature having many feet.

Bur we now come to fpeak of the holy and {acred Penra-
cles and Sigils. Now thefe pentacles, are as ic were certain
holy fignes preferving us from evil chances and events, and
helping and affilting us to binde,exterminate, and drive away
evil {pirits , and. alluring the good fpirits, and reconciling
chem unto us;.. And thefe pentacles do confit either of Cha-

racters of the good fpirics of the fuperiour order, or of fa-

cred pictures of holy-lecters or revelations , with apt and fir
verEcles, which are compofed either of Geometrical figures
and holy names of God,according to the.courie an / maner of
many of them; or they are compounded of all of them, or
very many of them mixc. . And che CharaSters which are ufe-
ful for us to'contticute and.make the pentacles, they are che
CharaGters.cf the good Spirits , e{pecially and chiefly of the
good fpirits of the firft and fecond order, and fometimes alfo
of the. third order. Andchis kinde of Chara&ers are efpe-
cially to be named holy ; and then chofe Chara&ters which
What Chara&er toever there-
fore of this kinde isto be infticured , we mutt draw about
him: a: double. circle ;.. wherein we mutt write the
name of his Angel.; and if we will adde fome divine name
cols

roan,

—

ra a
eset a eileen a

—

ae NE a SY ea.

ere 2

eee

eS” 5 POMERAT

Se ee a

—

a |
y |

oa

a a aaa
Se err Ta
eer

es
ee ee
es «

- Fg, 6K

“popul:

Of Occult Philofophy,

congruent with his Spirit and Office, it will be of the greater
force and efficacy. And if we will draw about him any an-
gular figure, according to rhe maner of his numbers 5 chat
alio fhall be lawful to be done, Bur the holy pi&tures which
do make the pentacles, arethey which everywhere are deli-
-yéred unto us in the Prophets and facred Writings , as well
of the o.d as of thenew [eltament, Even as the fizure of
The © the Serpent hanging on the crofs,anduch-like ; whereof very.
many may be found out of che vifions’ of the Prophets, as of #4 §
Efaias, Daniel, Efdras and others , and alfo out of the tevela- to: $4
Wee ih i tion of the Apocalypfe. And wehave fpoken of thentin our |
the wil. thitd book of Occult Philofophy, where we have made men-
Bas. Oe of holy things. Therefore when any piture is pofited fo! $4,
‘of any of chefe holy Images , letahe circle be drawn round au

about it oneach fide thereof; wherein let there be writren

fome divine name,’ that. is apt and conformed to the

effect of that figure, or elfe there may be written about

ic forme verlicle taken out of pare of the body of holy

Scripture, which may defire to afcertain or deprecate the de-

fired effect, As, if a pentacle were to be made to gain vis

brazen

ferpent

I) Pec!/s/z. ory or revenge againtt ones enemies, alwel vifible as inviG-
Gg/s/é ble, Theficure may be taken out of the fecond book of the

_ Macchabees : thatis to fay, a hand holdinga golden Sword
: be “P* drawn , about which lee there be wricten the verficle there
£14610 concained ; To Wit, Take the holy Sword,the cift of God, where=

Santlun, aisbeahiis jalt flay ihe adver[aries of my people Tfrael, Or alfo

mun 4 there may be written about it a verlicle of the fifth Pfalm:

Deo. 5° 5, his ss the fecenge of thy arm: before thy face there is death;or
9 #? COM tome ‘orher fuch-like verficle, Bur if you will write any di-
cides ad- vine name about the foure., then let fome name be taken’ i
ver farios char fenifies‘Pear,a Sword, Wrath, the Revenge of God, or a#- 5. j
fome tuch-like name congruent and agreeing withthe effet’ 44 ©
dered,» And if there fhall be written any Angular figure, —~—
yer: hin be taken according to thereafon andrule ofthe $2
numbers, as we have caughtin our fecond book-of ‘Occult 44-8)

Philojophy,where we have treated of che numbersand of the 194

like nperationsy* And of chis forechere are two pentacles of “|

| Seas .

weil fy TA
e/.

IEEE SE SS ae antes i Mill Nel al ie

The fourth book. : 49
fublime vertue and great power, very tifeful and-neceffary ta _. ste
be nfed in the confecration of experiments and Spirits ::one | Pople |:
whereof 1s that in the firft chaprer of Apocalypfe 3 To wits We
a figure of the Mayelty of God fitting upon a Throne, having 8.20; 2514.49 | i
in his, mouch a two-edged Sword, as there it is Written, abouc |
which let there be written, 1am Alpha & Ometasthe beginning 5:

tay Ego fam
aud theendywhich rsyand which was, cnd which isto come, the Al- primus &

it
mighty 1 am the firft and the laftwho am livingyand was deadyand gine i ;
bebold I live for ever and ever ; and Ihave the keysiof death and 7 £ } f

. : : ‘ Mi mort wus.
bell, Then there fhall be written about! itthefe three verficles, ecée fins

WIVCHS 12

Manda Deus virtuti the, &C. fecula ferns
: lorum 5 &
eee babcoclaves
Give commandment, O God, to thy firength. mortis Oo
Confirm, Oh Gods thy work in ss, inferni.

Let them be asiduft before-the face of thé winde, «:Andler the (9.70: 2/5
Angel of the Lord featter them. :. Let all their wayes. be darknefs
ang uncertain, And let the Angel of the Lord perfecure them. °

Moreover,, let there be.writeen about it the:tenigeneral |
Names, which ate, Ef, Elohim, Elohes Zebaaths Elion; Efcerchie, |
| Adonay, fahy T etragrammaton, Saday, 3 i i
| There.is another pentacle, the figure whereof. is like unto: 4: 270. /97 |
| a Lamsbe flainy having [even eyes, and fevenchornss and under thiss sc
| feet.a book, fealed, with fever [eals,as itis in the jchap. Of therK 1g 6 inn d¥
Apocalypfe.. Whereabout let»there bewritteri this verficle’s) °°" 2.7
| Behold the Lion hathovercome of the Tribe of Judah; the root
\— of David... F will openthe.booksand unloofe the fewen fenls. thereof, (
|} And one orher.yerGcle:l far Satan like lghtning fal down from |
19 heaven, . ‘Beholdy I have given you powerto tread upon Serpents
and Scorpions, and.over, allthe power of your enemiesy and nothing it
B fhall be ableto hut yous. .Andilerthere be alfo written about: il
| “1¢ theten general names yas. dfore(aid), - . oy bin ite
But shoe Penracles. Whi: tr are thusmade of figures and
B wames., lethem keep, this oder: for when‘anyfigute is

Pofiieds cauformable,to any fucaben; to-préduce:any'certain
efect or semis aneremutt bewtitcen thereupon 5: ial the
iad : H ah feveral

wt > ee
: <P a gort dite é
ie ee oe Wf ww fab CA

a) AY Ae ee ae
PGK:

f
GLP AF?

JI
EPLALL ALI

Lrf fit VY,
CHA SL 2

7 ¢

2 f y 2 b

50 of octuls Philofepby,

feveral Angles; ome Divihe name, obtainitig the forcé'and

efficacie of the thing defired : .yet fo nevérthelefs, that the
name which is of this fort do confit of juft fo many letcers,
as the Figure may contfticute a numer ; or of fo many letters
of aname, as joyned together amonglt themfelves,may make
the number of a Figure ; or by any number which may be
divided wichout any fuperfluicy or diminution, ‘Now fuch
a name being found, whether it be onely one name or more,
or divers names, it is to be written in all the feveral Angles
in the Figure: but in the middle of’ the Figure let the revo-
lution-of the name be whole and torally placed, or at leaft
principally, Bay

Oftentimes alfo we conftiture Pentacles, by making the
revolution of fome kinde. of. name,. in afqnare Table, and
by drawing about it a fingle or double Circle,and by writing
therein fome Holy Verficle competent and’ befitting this
mamé sor from which that name is extra&ed, And this
is the way of ‘making the Pentacles, according to cheir
feveral diflin&® forms and fafhions, which we may as we

pleate eicher multiply or commix ‘together by courfe among 79

themfelvés, ro work the gre-ter-efficacie, and extention an
enlargement of force and vertue.

As , if adeprecation fhould be made for che overthrow
and deftru@ion of ones enemies, thenwe are to-minde and
call toremembrance how God deftroyed the whole face of

7:24 the eatth in the deluge of waters ; and the deftrudtion of

Sodom and Gomortha, by raining dowmfire and brimitone ;

Sie Td, 7 ikewile, how God overthrew Pharaoh and his‘ hoft in che

Red-Sea:.and to call to minde if any other maledidion or
curfe be found in holy Writ.~ And thus in things of che like

geno> /feore,. $0 likewile int deprecating and praying againit pers

PT 915
Sea VeISGUB:
LP fB 2G."

YO ROS $7

and dangers of watets, we ought to call to reinembrance the
faving of Noah in the deluge'of warets “the paffing of the
children of Ifrael thorow the Red-fea ; and: alfo we are €o
minde how Chriftw alked upon the waters, and ‘faved the
fhipin danger co be catt away with the cempelt; and how he

commanded the windegand the waves, and ‘dhey — |
| ims

‘

a PE EI NE MAIL LAE ISI LO LEO Me

ae annllatgie a

The fourth book. Si

him; andalfo, that he drew Peter out of the water, being WaA-w 4/Ae
in danger of drowning: and the like. “And laftlywithchele 9.°2730-7770 NR
we invoke and call upon {ome certain holy names of God, :; Fe
God ; to wir, ‘fuch’as ‘are fignificative to accomplifh out Ai
defire, and‘accommodated to the defired effe@ sas, 1f it be.
to overthrow enemies4 we are to invoke and call upon: the
names of wrath, revence, fear, julticesand fortitude of God :
ahd if we would avoid’and etcape any evil or danger, we
then call upon che names’of mercy, defence, falvation, for- _
titude, goodnels, and-fuch-like names‘of God.» When alfo 4 A224+>-
we pray unto God that he ‘would grant unto us our defires, fe
we are likewile to intermix therewith the name of fome
cood fpiit, whether one onely; ormore, whole office it is to
éxécute our defires’: and fometimes:alfo we require fome
evil {piric to reftrain.or compel, whofe name likewile we in-
cérmingle ;° and rhat rightly efpecially , if ac be to execute
any evikwork ;'as revenge, punishment, or deftru&tion,

Furthermore, if there’be any Verficleia the Pialmsi,. of 18272 49° 7
afiy other part of tiely Scriprurey that fhall feemcongritentt 4,54. Zmul 4h
and agreeable rovour defire, the famenis to be mingled with ,.3 77-4734) 1M
our prayers. ' Now after Prayerhath been made untoGod, ~~ a
it is expedient afterwards to make an Oration co that exe- ey42%cn—) 10
cutioher Whom‘it our ‘precedent prayer unto God we havé ay
déGred fhould adminifter untous, whether oneor'more’, or 1)
whether hébe'an ‘Angel, or Sear, or Soul,or any of the no-
ble Angels, Bur'thiskinde of Oration ought to be compoled .
accordirie'to the Rules which we’ have delivered in the fecond /<. :/z.’
book of OccultPhilofophy , whete we have treated of the

“manner of the'compofirion of Inchantmients;!: 1/0:

You may: know farchet, that thefe’ kinde of bonds havea
threefold difference’: forthe firft’bond is; when weconjare
by Natural things: the fecond is compounded ‘of Religions
miyltériess by Sacraments; Miracles),and things: of” rhis*tort’:
and thé thitd'isconftitured by Divinernames, and holy:Sigils’
And by thefekinde ofbonds , «we may bindeaor oheliy {pi- .
rits, bur alfo all ocher creatures wharlodvet 3 as animalsjeait a lad,
pefts, “burnities; floodmofwaterss andithe force: aitd sae Malik

oe H 2 ae @)

ce itt IS Ln RE ca F oi pe RS LIF BF ite. TESS NT Siiisenscittaaraten pumsongeayns . ‘
Ry pa nn ee - a a

52 of Occult Philofopby,
of Arms... Oftentimes allo we ufe thele bonds aforefaid, nor
onely by Conjuration, but fometimes alfo ufing the means of
Deprecation and Benediction... Moreover ,. it conduceth
mauch to this ete , to joyn fome fentence of holy Scri-
gen efer, $y PEs if any fhall be found: convenient hereunto: as, in the
A oy? **Conjuration of Serpents ,. by commemorating the curfe of
| the Serpent in the earthly Paradife, and thejetting up.of the
lem bess 24-(z$erpent in the wilderneis ; and further.adding chat Verficles.
“SF super af. Thou foalt walk upon the Af and the Baflisk., &c.  Superlti- /0fh,
pidem & tion alio isiof much prevalency herein, by che tranflation of 7-75,
Ae 4. tome Sacramental Rites , to binde that which we intend to:
ae, Minder; as, the Rites of:Excommunication, of Sepulchres,
Funerals, Buryings, and the like.
And-now we come tortreat of the Confecrations which
men ought ro make upon all infiruments and clings necef-
fary to be ufed in this Are : andche verme of this Confecra-
tion moltchiefly confifts intwo things; to wit, in the power
of the perfon confecrating , and by the verte of che prayer
by which the Confecrationismade. For in.che perfon con-
fecrating, there is required holinefs of Life, and power of
fantifying : both which are acquired by Dignificarion-and
Initiation, . And thac che perfon himfelf {ould wich a firm
and undonbted:faich believe the verre, power,.and efticacie,
hereof, - And then in che Prayer it: felf, by which chis Con-
fecration is madeythere is required the like holinels ; which
eicher folely confiiteth in the prayet it feif, :as,if ic be-by di-’
tine infpiration ordained to this purpofe, duchas we have ia
many places-of the holy Bible ;. or thar ic be hereunto tolii-
cuted through the power of che Holy Spiric ,.in the ordina-
tion of the:Church, Orherwile there is.in the Prayer aSan-
&imony, which is not onely by ic {elf bur-by che comatemo-
-rationof hély things ; as, the commemoracion of holy Scri~
ptures, Hiftories, Works, Miracles, Effects, sraces, Promules,
Sacraments arid Sacramental chings, atid the like, - Which:
things, by a certain fimilicade, do feem properly or impro-
at rly to appertainto chething-confecrated. |
|) ATocafioe— Theteis ufed alfo the invocation of fome Divine names,

SS IIT Tne sven ic
=a De os aaa = _ eee
See ook, z

Behave - =

(Con Bahon—

age

in 4 a OT SO

eee
see te

NOL ee eae SE

nti h* APTI arte ee. aE > Es oa es
f - Sot eee :
LIE SRE STR ORONO Sete
Poe « ;
‘ . TIA a cars. 4
= == S sae = 5

ete as SIRO Rig AEE RD SOAP TLR ILO NGO

7 be fourth bosk, 53

with the confignarion of holy Seals, and things of the like
| fort, which do conduce'tolanatification aid expiation; {uch
| as are the Sprinkling with Holy-Water, Un-tions with holy
| Oyl; and odoriferous Suffumigations appertaining to holy |
Worlhip.” And therefore in’ every Coniecration there is) |
chiefly uled the Benediction and Conilecratiory of Water, ' a
Oy],Fire, and Fumigarions nied everywhere with holy Wax- 1 a
_ fights or Lamps burning: for without Lights no Sacrament is ne
'§ rightly performed, This therefore 1s to be known, and ve
a | firmly obferved, Thac if any Confecration be to be made of |
chings’profane , in which there is any-pollution or defile- ,
| ment, then an exorcifing and expiation of thote things ought
| to precede the'coniecration, Which things being 1o made
| pure, are more apt to receive the inflttences of the Divine.
- vertues, We ate alfo to obferve , that in the end of every
Coniecration, after that the prayer is rightly performed, the
etfon confecrating ought to blefs che thing confecrared , by
‘ feathing out fome words, with divine vertue and power of
| | the:prefent Confecration , with the commemoration ‘of his

|. wertue‘aind authority, rhatit may be‘ rhe more duely perfor~
) med, and with an-earneft and intentive minde, And rhere~
) fore we willhere lay down fome examples hereof,’ whereby |
| the way to the whole perfection hereof may the. more eafily '
| _. be made to appearunto yon. | | oe
| So thet, inthe confetrarion of water, we ought to come (777.4% 700"
| memorate How that’ God’ hath placed’ the'firmament in the 777°"
| midft of che waters, and in what maner that God placed the

| fountain OF waters im the earthly Paradife , from whence
| fprang‘ four holy rivers | which watered the whole earelr.
Likewife we are to call to remembrance in whar manners God
|  miade the water co be the inftrument ‘of ‘executing his juftice
iti the deftruction of the Gyants in che general deluge over
| all the earth, and in the overthrow-of the hoft of Pharaoh
inthe Redfea ; alfo', how-God led his own people thorow
|. the mid@ of the Sea on dry ground ,: and through the:
mid ¢ of the river of Jordan:; arid likewife how marvel-
oufly he. drew forth: water oncof the tony rockin the wil’
HN desnefs ;

ME aces Fea ae bes att lt
Hie EER = TRENT oS TRI mee :
asi Fi :
j “

ne gt ee aS ORM 5 ces

Of Occult Philofophy,

dernels ; and how acthe prayer of Samfon, he caufeda foun-
tain of tunning water to flow. our. of che cheek-rooth. of

the jaw-bone of an als: andlikewile, how God harh made

waters the inftrument of .his mercy, and of falyaticn, for the
expiation of Original fin: alfo, how, Chritt was baptized.in
Jordan, and hath hereby fanStifed:and cleanfed the waters.
Moreco.er, certain divine names,are to be invecated., which
are conformable hereunto ; as, chat God is a:living fountain,
living water, the fountain of, mercy ; and namés of the like
kinde,

And likewife in the confecration of fire, we are to com-
memorate -how.thac God: hath. created the fre to be anin-
{trument to execute his juftice, for punifhmenc, vengeance,
and for the.expiation of fins: alfo, when God thall come to

‘Judge the-wor.d, he will command.a conflagration of fire co

°0 before him. And we are to call ro remembrance in what

‘Manner God appeared to Motes in the burning -bufh.s and

iy odess9; (kK And. likewile.in..the.confecration of Oyl.and-Perfumes,.

Wry Sas 1s
J. LID +A» Sf

alfo, how he went before the children of Ifrael in a pulag

' -of fire; and that nothing can be duely offered, facrificed, or
‘fandtified without.fire ;.and how, thac God infticured, fire

to be kept continually burning :in the Tabernacle: of the Co-
venant ;, and how miraculoufly he.re-kindled the fame, being
-exting , and preserved it ellewhere.from going. out, being,
hidden under the waters : and things of chis. fort. -.Like-
wile the Names of God, are to. be called upon which are
confonant. hereunto, as, wis redd in the Law.and the Pro-
phers, that God is.a confuming fire: and if there be any of
the Divine names. which Aignifies fire, or fuch-like names ;- as,

the glory of God, the light of God, the {plendor and bright-

nels of God,

we are rojcall to. remembrance. {uch holy.things.as are petri

nent to this, purpofe, which, we,tead:in Exodus of the:holy,
anoyntine oyl, and divine Hemneofgpilicaae hereunto, fuch,as:

isthenameChrilt, which.fignifies, anoynreds, and what,
myfteries there. are hereof,;. as thas.in the Revelationyof the
two. Oliye-trees ditlilling holy oy! into. che, lamps, that pee
is 1 : before

before the face of God: and the like.

_Chaytof God, the Tabernacle of God, the Altar of God, the

Rn a EAM EE AA Scala REO ELLA REN I we

Si IN TTI FI

The fourth book. 55

And the bleffing of the lights, war, andlamps., is taken
from thefire, and thealrar which containeth the fubftance of
the fame’:'and: what other fach fimilitudes as are in myfte-
ties ; as that »of the feven candlelticks and lamps burning
before the face of God. |

Thefe therefore are the Confecrations which firft of all hat
are neceflary to be ufed in'every kinde of devorion,and ought: hi
to precede it 5:and without which nothing in holy Rites can it
be duely petformed,: « | | |

In the next place now we fhall fhew unto youthe confe-
cration of Piaszes, Inftruments, and fuch-like things, ne?
Therefore when you would confecrate any Place or Cire / 71294 5/4
cle, you ought to take the prayer of Solomon ufed in the de- Ui 22.
dication‘of the Tempe: and moreover ,.you mut biets the
place with the {prinkling of Holy-water, and wath Fumigati-
ons ; by commemorating in the benedi&ion holy myfteries;
fuch-asitheléare = The fan&ificacion of rhe throne of \God,.
of mount Sinai, of che Tabernacle of the Covenant, of the aa
Holy of holies, of the temple of Jernfalem. Alfo,.the dan- sanéum aly
Gification‘of mount Golgotha, by the crucifying of Chrift ; fanttorum. WE
the fandctificarion of rhe Temple:of Chritt; of mount Tabor, ,
by the transfigurarion and afcenfion of Chrift: andthe like, —
And by dinvocaring divine names whichiare fignificane here-
unto ; fuch asthe Place of God ythe Throne of God , the

Habitation of God , and fuch-like divine names of this {orr,
which are to be writcenaboutthe Circleror place tobe con-
fecrated. je POLIFIVGIN? Oo, 1S ve" : % Au

And inthe confécrasions:of inftruments, and of all other f/A:/4or-4 A
things whatfoever thatareferviceable to this Art , you fhali a
proceed after the fame manner, byfprinkling the fame wich
Holy waters perfumirnig the fame wiclvholy Fumizations, an-
oynting it with holy Oy}; {ealing ic with fome holy Sigil; and
bleffing it yrith prayer ;:and by commemorating holy chings
out.of the facred Scriptnres, Religion, and Divine names
ak which

Con fectatial tl G

pages ete

5 Se

SS Se

Ek TES 3
ae

Pot OS ME ON. PR,
ae
bs

eee

Sey ORT RA Aa

TRS OS yy

ae poe ee teh
fA NT A EET TN IE ee PR Ie ETE) ee TS ES een se Se EET =
. - — - a u . 1 vy

fonabion 1g we)
pS SINT 8S PRE aR ETN EEN ITE TT AE EY —
id Z ; baat’
i = IE a ac FRI

NTE ne TTT a

ef Occult Philofophy,

which fhall be found agreeable to the thing that.is to be'con-
fecrated : .as fot examples fake, in confecrating afword 5 “we
Qu' kabet are to.call ro-remembrance, that inthe Gofpel.,.:e thirhath
aus tH yo coats, Bcc, and that place imthe Second of the Wacchabeess
#6 %ce Thar a fword was. divinely. and miraculoufly fent to Judai
Macchabew, And.if there be any thing of thelike in the
Prophets ; asthac place,:Take-wnto you two-edged Swords, 8c.
in like maner you fhall confecrate'experimentsiand books;
and whatfoeverofcheilike naturesasisicontained intwricings,
pictures, and the like, by {prinkling, pérfuming,y anointing,
jealing, and bleffing with holy commemorations, and calling
tO. remembrance sthe ‘fan ctifications of myfteries: ; Asjthe
fan&tifying of therFables of che ten Commandments, which
were deliveredto aZafes by Godin Mount Sinai’;
&tification of rhe Teftaments.of God, the Old and New 3
The fantification of the Law, and of the Prophets,and Scrip-
tures, which are promulgated bythe haly Ghoft.: : Moreover;
there isto be commemorated fuch divine names as ‘are fit
and convenient hereunto:;;.asthefeare: The Teftament of
God, The book of God, The-book of life, The knowledge of
God, The wifdom cf God °;-and the like? And-with duch
kinde of Rites is the perfonal confecration performed.

There isfurthermore, befides thefe, another Rite of con-
fecration’, of wondetful:power’; landmuchrefficacy :5::And
this is out of che kindes of {uperititions : Thatistofayywhen
the Rire of confecration”’or colleftion of any Sacrament:in
the Church 1s transferredto that thing which we would con-
fecrate. \ | fit -eow! 10)

-cIt isto be knowncalfo,’ chat Vowes 31, Oblationss:and Sa-
crifice, have the power of confecration , afwel real as perfo2
nal; andithey areas iv were cerrainigoyehants and: conven-
tions bet ween thofe names-wirh which:they are made», and
us Who make them, {trongly cleaving to:onr defire|and with:
ed effe&+: Ass when we dedicate 5) offer;:andfacrifices. with
Certain names ormbings 5 as;; Fumigarionss Undctions, Rings,
Images, Looking=glafles ; and hings jefs material; as Deities,
Sizilsy Pentatles, InchanemientsyOrations, Pidtures, and

Scrip-

Accipte
voor gladi-
os bis ach-
TOS.

The {fan- -

RO hem OE

ee ea aE a i a al ie tae

The foarth book. 57
Scripeures.: of which we have largely fpoken in our chird’ “72: Lae ee
book of Occult Philofophy, |
There-is extant amoneft thofe Magicians (who do moft ufe
the miniftery of evil {pirits ) a certain Rite of inyocating
{pitits by a Book to be confecrated before to that purpofe ;
which is properly called, eA book, of Spir.ts ; whereof we ‘vibes spi-
hall now ipeak a few words. For this bookis to be confe- vitaum.
crated, a book of -e-il {pirirs ceremonioufly to be compofed,

in their name and order :- whereunto they binde with a cer-

tain holy Oath, the ready and pretence obedience of thé {pi-

rit therein wricten,

Now this book is tobe made of moft pure and clean pa-
per, that hath never been ufed before 3 which many do call
Virgin-paper, And this book mult be inicribed after this
maner: that is co fay, Ler chere be placed on the left fide
the image of the fpiric, and on the right fide his character,
with the Oath above ir, containing the name of the {pirir,

- and his dignity and place, with his office and power. Yet
very many do compofe this book otherwite, omitting the
charaéters or image: bur it is more efficacious not ro negle&
any thing which conduceth ro it,

Moreover, there is to be obferyed the circumftances of
places, times,hours, according to the Scars which thefe fpirits
are under, andarefeentoagree unto, their fite, rice, and
order being applied. : :
. «Which book being fo written, and well bound, is to be a-
dorned,garnifhed, and kept fecure,with Regifters-and Seals,
left ic fhould happen after the confecration to ‘opert in fome
place not intented,and indanger che operator. Furthermore,
this book ought to be kept as reverently as may be: for irre-
verence of.minde caufeth ir to lofeiits vertue,with pollucion’
and profanation. ; i 3 oe

. Now this facred book being-chus:compofed according to
the maner already delivered, weare then to proceed: to rhe
conlecration, thereof after:a twofold way : one whereof is,
That alland fingular the {pirics who are written in the book,
bejcalled to;the Circle 5’ according ro: the: Rices and® Order

) I which

Tape ee

i acne re Ee
ae,

: ccna eens ee
eee a a ee
aia : « — FS A “ ;

ot .- eeeee

£2R.2%
Se Ae. SO i a
EE Ey TS =< ee a :
nea * 2 caiaieeeiacion " = : aa
5 ee + .

ie

ses

i t Pee yo é i ay Raat 45 Sa a esis) bee al all
x — ae NGC i ETI bnsatniebinhemnaiih ~
= aa aa a a i : il

Pn. ” . Sw net
Be, RS CAR ET

58 Of Océuls Philofephy,

which we have before taught ; and the’ book that isto be

confecrated, lec it be placed without rhe Circle in a trianole,
And in the firft place, let there be read in che prefence of
the {pirits all the Oaches which are written in that book _

- and then-the book to be confecrated being placed without

the Circle in a triangle there drawn > ier all the fpirits
be compelled to impofe their hands where their images and
characters are drawn, and to confirm and confecrate the
{ame with a ipecial and-common @ath,- Which being done,
let the book be.taken and. fhut, and preferved as we have
before Spoken, and let the {piries be licenfed to depart, ac-
cording to due rite and order,

There is another maner of confecrating a book of {pirics,
whichis more eafie, and of much efficacie to produce every
effet , except that inopening this book the fpirics do nor
always come vifible. And this wayis thus: Let there be
made a book of fpirits as we have before before fet forch ;
bur inthe end thereof Jet there be written Invocations and
Bonds, and {trong Conjurations, wherewith every {piric may
be bound. Then this book mutt-be:bound between two
Tables or Lamens , and in the infide thereof let there be
drawn the holy Pentacles of the Divine Majeftie, which we
have before fet forth and-defcribed out of rhe Apocalypfe :
then ler the firlt of chem be placed in the beginning of the
book , and the fecond at the end of the fame, This book

being perfeSted after this maner, let it be broughe ina clear

and fair time, to a Circle prepared in acrofs way , according
to. the Art which’ we have before delivered ; and there in
the firtt place the book being opened, let it be confecrared
to the rites and ways which we have before declared concer-
Ning Confecration. Which being done; let all the {pirits be
Called which are written in the book,in their own order and
Place , by conjuring chem thrice by the bonds deletibed in
the book, chat they come unto that place within the {pace of
three days, to aflure their obedience, and confirm'the fame,
to the book fo to be confecrared. Then lec the book “be
Wrapped up in clean linen, and)buried in the middle of the

_Cig-

roe

TI A ile Se A NRE Se” NG RPA PEEL SE TINY ORO ms
=i eae , eur: = — I ETI, 9 TET =

| The fourth book. | By

Circle, and there fait topped up: and then the Circle being
deftroyed, after the fpirits are licenfed, depart before the.
rifing of the fun: and on the thitd day , about the midd.e
of the night, recurn, and new make the Circle , and with
bended knees make prayer and giving thanks unto God, and
let a precious perftime be made, and open the hole, and take : .
out the book ; and fo let ic bekepr, not Opening the fame. |
Then you fhall licenfe che fpirics intheir order, and deltroy- |
ing the Circle, depart before the fun rifz, And this is the
la{t rire and manet of confecraring, profirable to whatfoevet
writings and experiments, which do diteé to Spirits placing
the fame between two holy Lamens or Pentacles, as before
is fhewn, :

But the Operaror,when he would work by the book rhus
confecrared, let him do it in a fair atid clear feafon, when the
fpirics are leaft troubled ; and let him place himielf towards
the region of the fpirirs. Then let him open the book un-
der a due Regifter ; ler him invoke the fpirits by their Oath |
there defcribed and confirmed , and by che name of cheir : 1

ie a Ey ae eae RE

charaéter and image; tothar purpofe which you defire: and, |
| if there be need, conjure chem by the bonds laced in the .
| end of the book, And having attained your defired effect, |

) then you fhall licentfe the {pirits to depart.

| And now we fhall come to {peak concerning the invocati-

| on of fpirics, as well of the good fpirics as of che bad, -
| The good {pirics may be invocated of us , divers ways,
| and ‘in fundry manners do offer themielves unto
‘us. For they do openly {peak to thofe that watch , and do
D offer themfelves to outfight, or do inform us in dreams by
oracle of rhofe things which are defired. Wholoever there-
fore would call any good {piric, co {peak or appear in fight,
Bit behoverh them elpecially to obferve ewo things? one
) whereof is about the dilpofirion of the invocant ; the other
about thofe things which are outwardly to be adhibited to
the invocation, for che conformity of chefpirics to be called.
It behoveth therefore that the tnvocant’ himfelf be relig'-
| 1.2 oufly

| Of Occuls Philofopby,

oully dilpofed for many days ro fuch.a myftery. In the firQ
place.therefore, he ought. ro be confefted and contrire,, borh
inwardly and outwardly, and rightly expiated,by daily wath-
ing himieif with holy water. Morzover, the invocant.onght
to conferve himfelf all thefe days, chalte, abflinenr , and to
Separate himfelf as much as may be Gone, from all perturba-
tion of minde, and from all maner of forraign and fecular
bufinels.. Alfo, he fhall obfer.e faftinys all thefe days, as
much.as fhall feem convenient to him.to be done, Alfo, let
him daily berween fun-rifing and fun-fetting , being clothed
with a holy linen garment, feven times call upon God, and
make a deprecation ro the Anvels to be called accordine to
the rule which we have before tanehr. Now the number of
days.of fa{ting and preparation , is commonly the time of a
whole Lunation.. These is alfo anothernumber obferved a-
mong{t the Cabaliifts, which is fourty days, .

Now concerning thofe things which do appertain to this
Rite of Invocation, the firft is, That‘a place be chofen,
clean, pure, clofé; quiet , free from.all maner of noife, and
not {ubjeSt co any ftrangers fight. This place. muft firlt be
exorciied and confecrared:.and lec there be atable or altar’
placed therein, covered with clean white linen, and fet to-
wards the eaft: and on each fide thereof, let there be fet two
coniecrated wax-lights burning, the flame whereof ought not
to go out all thefe days. In che middie of the alcar,let there
be placed Lamens, or the holy paper which we have before
defcribed, covered with pure fine linen ;_ which isnot tobe
opened until the end of thefe days, of the Confecration,
You {hall alfo have in readinels a precious perfiime, and pure
anointing oyl ; and ler them be both kept confecrared,
There muft alfo a Cenfer be feron the head of the alear,
Wherein you fhall kindle rhe’holy fire, and make a perfume
every day that you fhall pray. Yon. fhall alfo-have a long
garment of white linen, clofe before and behjyde, which
may co; er the whole body and the feet, and girg abour- you
Wich 2 gitdie. Youfhall alfo have a yeil of pure clean linen,

3 and

<a

STO ala AI NAM RI SET a Ti NE CP LO ERE EN RG WH

hme EO ES.

The fouvib book... | Gr.

and in the fore-parc thereof lee there be fixed golden:or gil-
ded. Lamens, with the infcription of the-name Tetragramma-
ton 3-all which things are to be fan&itied and confecrated in’
|  order., Bar you muft not enter inco the holy place , un‘ets
; ic be firlt wafhed, and.arayed with aholy garment ;-and then
® . you fhall enter into it with your feet naked,» And when you Wik
“enter therein,. you thall fprinkle ic with holy water: then ae
_you fhall make a perfume upon the altar,and afterwards with ey
| ~— bended knees pray before the alear.as we have direQeds |
Bur inthe end-of thele days, on thelatt dayyyou shall fat |

a)

| more ftriGtly.:, and falting on the day following, at the rifing

? ha,

of the fun, youmay encer into the holy place , uling the ce-
remonies before fpoken of, firft by {prinkling your felf, then i
with making a perfume, you fhall figne your feif with holy ! ig
oyl in the forehead , and anoint your eyes 3» ufing: prayer ie
in all.thefe-Contecrations, . Then you fhall: open the holy
~Lamen, and pray before thealrar upon your knees, as above-
faid : and then an inyocation being made ro the Angels.they
will. appear unto you , which you defirey; which you Shalt
enrertain;With.a benign and-chafte comm#hication , and |-
cenfe chem co depart. . | |

:—-

Ts lies Seen

Charter Sakon

Now the Lamen which isto-be ufed to invoke any good
{pirit, you fhall make after thismaner ; eicher in metal con
formable, or in-new: wax, mixe, with ipectes and colours con~
formable : orit may be made ineclean paper, wath conven
ent colours: andthe outward form:or figure rhereof may be
{guare, circular, ortriangular, or of the like fore , according
to-rhe. rule of cthenumbers ; in which there mutbe writren
the. divinenames , 4s well the general names.as the {pecial,
And-in the'centre of the Lamen, let there be drawn a chara- “.
| &ter of fix corners ;-in the middle whereof, lec there be Hexzaconus
| written the name and. character of the Star, or of che Spirit
| his governour., co,whom che good fpirit that is to be called
isinbjye@., gncdabour this chara&er, let there be-placed fo
many.charaéters of five corners, as the {pirits we would call: Peutaz exis
togeuperat once, And it we fhall call onely one fpiric , ne-

atc
ee oe

a

a, —

af ver-
*

*

eS I trea
; — 7 ———

SSS

a

Rina. cio: 2 ech... . dame ea eee
e i a / cone aati incememaaae — . ——— =
A ry spon shey PRC TE Pe RTL $5

Srp

Of Occuls Philofapby,

‘ verthelefs there fhall bemade'four Pentagones, wherein the
- name of che fpirit or {pirits, with their characters, is to be

written, Nowthis table ought co be compofed when the
Moon is increafing , on thete days and hours which thena-
greetothe Spiric, And if we takea formate {tar herewith,

it will be the better. Which Table being made in this man= .

ner, itis to be coniecraced according to the rules above de-
livered, | |

And this is the way of making che genetal Table, fervinig
for the invocation of all good fpirits wharfoever, Neverthe-
les we may make {pecial Tables congruenc to every fpirit,by
the rule which we have abo,e fpoken'of concerning holy
Pencacles. ,

And now we will declare unto you another Rite more
eafie co perform this thins + thar.is co fay, Let the man that

‘is tO receive any Oracle from rhe good ipirits, be chatfte,
‘pure, and confefs‘d, Then a place being prepared pure and

Clean , and covered everywhere-with white linen’, on the
Lords day in the Rew of the ntoon ler him enter ito thac
place, clothed with clean. white garments’; and Jet him ex-
orcize the place, and blefs ir, and make a Circle therein with
atandctified cole ; and let chere be writen ‘in the uttermott
parc of rhe Circle the names of the Angelsjand in the inner
part thereof let there ‘be written the mighty names of God:
and let-him place within theCircle,at the four angles of the
world, the Céners for che perfumes. Then lec himenter
the place fafting, and -wafhed:, and let hint begin to pray to-
wards the.eaftthis whole Pfalm : Beatiimwmaculati in via,Bc.

Bleffed are the undefiled in the way 5 tc. by. perfuming ; and

in the end deprecating thé Angels, by the faid’ divine names,
that they wiil dation to difcover and reveal thae which’he
defireth : and shat let him do fix days, continuing wafhed
and fafting, And on the feventh day, which is the Sabbath,
Jet him, being:-wafhed and fafting, enrer che Circle, and per-
fume ir, and anoine himfelf with holy anointing oyl, by ai-
ointing his forehead, and tpon both his eyes, andinthe

| | palms

RR a a

s
TE ES a Te TE a cI

ST aetna aa MEME ae AEE le RAE AAD EOS ELROD

| The fourth book, © 63

palmg¢ ofthis hands, and.upon his feet. ‘Then upon his knees

Jet him fay-the Pfalm aforefaid , with Divine and Angelical
names, Which being faid, let him arife , and lec him begin
to walk about itvacircuic within che {aid Circle from the eatt
tothe weft,until he is wearied with a dizzinets of his brain: —
let him fall down in the Circle, and there he may reft:; and
forthwich he fhall be wrapt up in an-edttafie, avd a tpiric
will appear unto him , which wall inform him of all things,
We mutt obferve alfo, rhat in the Circle there onght to be
four holy candles burhing at the fotr parts of the world,
which ought nor co want light for the pace of a whoie week.
And the maner of fafting muft be fuch , that he abitain from
all chings having a life of Senfe,and from thofe things which
do proceed from them : and-let him onely drink pure run-
ning water : neither let him cake any food ull the going
down of the fun, And let the perfume and the hoiy anoint-
ing oyl be made, as is fer forth in Exxodweand the other holy
books of the Bible. It is alfo to be obferved , that always
as often as he enters intothe Circle, he have upon his fore-
head a golden Lamen, upon which theremutt be writren the
name Tetragrammaton, as we have before fpoken.

Bur natural chings, and their commistures, do alio belong .
unto us, and are conducing to receive Oracles from-any ipirit

ii 5 es
ne . @
ti y

by.a-dream : which are either Perfumes, Undtions, and 16
Méats or Drinks : which you may underftand in our firlt book Z7/ to: bt 1
of Occult Philofophy. 442: Gime Hhem Ho yous tL: p40 / 22. 7 . de

But he thar is willing always and readily to receive the (74:/-for>- iF
Oracles of a Dream, lec ‘him make unto himfelfa Ringof -- 94
the Sumor of Sarurn forthis:purpofe. There is alfio an Image .~
ro be made , of excellenr efficacie. and power to work this”
effaa& ; which bene ee under his head'whea he goethto /1 - 2
a

ee Cane ape re

fleep, doth effeAually give true dreams of what things fecver . a
the minde hath before determined or confulcedom: The f%> oz, Ff
Tables of. Numbers: do likewile confer toreceive an Oracle, ~~ |
being duly formed: under cheir own Conttellations. And

thefe things thou mayft know in the third book of Occult

Philofophy. Holy

_ SS RN ornare IRC oe TIS “SERRE “tee

a } ; we

64 Of Occult Philofopby,

‘Holy Tables and Papers do alfo ferve to this effet s be-
ing {pecially compofed and confecrated:: {uch as is the Al-
madeliof Solomon, and the Table«of the Revolution of the
name Tetragrammaton, ‘And thole things which-are of ‘this
kinde,.and written unto thefe things; out of divers figures,
numbers, boly pidures wich the infcriptions of rhe holy aa
names of God and cf Angels; the compofition whereof is |
taken out of divers placesof the holy Scriptures;Pialms,and © ~ 9
Veriicles, and other certain promifes of the divine Revelati-
on and Prophecies, 3 | |
To the tame effet do conduce holy prayers anid impreca~
G_7 tions,as well unto God, as to che holy Angels and Heroes : |
Pee the imprecations of which prayers are to be compofed as we i |
“o. g-73 ‘have before fhewn, according tofome religious fimilitude of 74 |
+ Jopeph eeMitacles, Graces, and the like, making mentiénof thofe 4/4 |
Beni f9-(h things which weantend to do: as, out of the Old Tefta-<anu
\AS/%__ ment, of the dream of Faceb, Fofeph, Phar'ash, Danie], and Ty
bucka? *Nebuchadnexzar : if our of the New Teftamenr > of che —ay
(2/4 7-/dream of Fofeph che husband of the bleffed virgin Mary ; of
Zeneli™ che dream of the three Wile-men ; Of John’ the Evangelitt

8 fu Sy f

idten neers

sa ea ra
came a

Eh eh eae

I

we eeping upon the breft of our Lord: and whacfoeverof the

© ~°" — \ikekinde can be found in Religion, Miracles, and Revela-

tions ; as, the revelation of che Crofs.co Helen, the revéla-
tions of :Conftantine and Charles tae Great, the revelations of -

Bri lget, Cyril, Methedeusy Mechtild, Joa-him, Merhir, and

tuch-like, According ro which, lec the deprecations be com:

poled, if when he goeth to fleep.it be with a firm'inrention =

and the reft well difpofing themfelves lerthem pray devour-

Jy, and without doubt they will afford a powerful efe@,

Now he'that:knoweth how.cocompofethofe things which

we have now fpoken of, hethall receive the moft true Ora-

cles of dreams. ~Andthis hethall do : obferve thofe things

which in the fecond book of Qccult'Philofophy are dirested

concerning this thing. He that ‘is defirous therefore to-ret

‘ceive an Oracle, let him abftain from {upper and from drink,
and be otherwile welledilpofed; ‘his bram-being free from
turbulene vapours:;/ler’him alfo have chis bed-chamber far
cand

pion

ss _ a
TEE SOS Tee *

Se ae

TE TE
“, Cacti ict pec my

we wht AY 5h ve KS SE Tht
- , = ARR RSE TE ETN TEN LP tet —— _
Fain . -
as dames 5 - Mabepramee cnn a
: ys rs ¥ a ‘

so

| Thefourth books me

and clean,exorcifed and conecrared if he will sthenlechim

erfume the fame wich fome con-enicnt fumigatton ; and
a him anoint his remples with tome unguent efficacious
hereunto, and put a ring upon his finger, of che things above
fpoken of : let him take either fome image, or holy tab'e, ot

_ holy piper, and place the fame under his head’: chen having
» Made a devout prayer, let him go unto his bed, and medi-
» ¥ating upon chat ching which he defireth to know, 'et him io

fleep ; tor fo fhall he receive a mott cercain and undoubted
eracle by a dream, when the Moon goeth through tha fiene
which was in the ninth Hone of his nacivie’, andalfo when
fhe goeth through the figne of che ninch Houfe of the Revo-
lution of his nati.ity 3 and when the is in the ninth figne from
the figne of perfeétion. And this is the way and means
whereby we may obtain all Sciences'and Arts whatioever,.
faddenly and perfe@ly, wich a true Illumination of our un--
Beefanntine ; alchough all inferiour familiar <Spirirs what-
foever do cond.ice to this effe& ; ‘and fometimes alto evil:
Spitics fenfibly informing us Intrinfecally or Excrinfecally,

But if we would call any evil Spiric to the Circle, ie firft

behoveth us to confider, and to know his nature, to which of»

the Planets ic agreeth , and what Offices are diftributed to
him: from thar P.aner ; which beine known, lec there be
fonght our. place fie and proper for his invocation, . accor-
ding tothe nature of the Planet, and the quality of rhe Of-
fices of the faid Spirit, as nearas the fame may he done: as,
if their power be “over the Sea, Rivers or Flouds’, then let
the place be chofeninthe:Shore and fo of the reft. © Tien

ler there be chofena convenient time,borh for the quality of

the Air, ferene, clear, qnier’ and‘fircing for the Spirits to-af-
fume bodies ; as alo of the quality and nature of the Planer,
anid of the Spirir,” as ro wit, on his day, or the time wherein
he rulerh: he may be fortunate or inforrurate,fometimes of
the day, and'fometimes of the night, asthe Scars and Spirirs

require,’ Thefe‘chings being confidered , Jet therebe a

Circle fratned in the place eleQed , afwel forthe defence of |

the Invocant, as for ghe confirmation of the Spirit, And be
A K the

EN TINTS REIS Re ie ME CIT HE NEE I SAN SE

PR ta IO ET

= —_——

= ee
a

in es

OL ROE

ay : " .
. * ‘ awe ~
> = ee. an SEI te
’ =v iy ren:
“‘e 1 i 4
wer f rar.
@ ge
¥ a
Sy ; oi
i
E i
t :
Bf ve
Hy 1%
i he
if - -
' oi |
y 2
i i
j i
Hy
; i
bi
y
i}
‘ BY |
H 2) ;
i} i
Ki {
4 he
| H
4 i Vie Sat
+4 ima
a ‘ r t
V1
TRH Fa
$ Nain Clee vai!
*Y
1 at
vy]
¥ i" r \
q if
i }
: >| ioe
ee
fl i 5 G id
i* ey
{ m
if Pete vir
f ¥ 3 tS
8 [ : 7
“y ie
i “tet
MD AHL
‘ be
y 2
' Hee ea.)
7 ad i
i
' %
| h #
. o- iy
i
y
f ;
i
7 : >
7 4 f
& i
a - ¥
i f
q -* {
S Me tj
&
ay
) f
ey .
& f
ia
/ 4 ‘ $
2) i
f . :
&
%
BS
i i

aes
iA

Of OcculePhilofephy,

he Circle ic. felf there are ro be written'the divine géneral

nam¢s,and thole things which-do yeild defenee unto us; and
With them, thole divine names which do rule this Planet,
and the Offices of the Spirit -himielf: ; there fhallalfobe
written cherein,, the names of rhe good Spirits which bear

tule, and.are able to binde and conftrain chat Spirie which

We intend:ca.call. And if we will any more fortifieand
firengthen our Circle, we may adde Characters and Pentas.
cles agreeing co the work .;.chen alfo if we will, we may ei
ther within or without the Circle, frame an angu/ar fignre,
W1i:h the inicription of luch convenient numbers,)as are con-
gruent amongit rhemielves to our works which are alloro
be known, .according to maner of numbers and fioures:. of
which. in.the fecond book of. Occule Philolephy itis fufhci-
ently {poken. . Further, Heis to he provided of lights, pers
fumes . unguents and medi-ines , compounded according to
the nacure of the Puanec and Spirit ; which do partly agree
withthe Spint.,. by:reaion of their natural atid corhetiial vers
tue 3, and partly are exhibiced co the Spirit for religions ‘and
duperiticioys worfhip,. .Then he.mut be furnifhed wich holy’
and contecrated, things, neceffary afwel for the defence of
the Inyocart.,. and his fellows ,. as alfoterving for bonds to
binde and contirain the Spirits; juchas are either holy Papers;
Lamens , Pictures; .Pentaclesy Swords, Sceprers, Garments
of-conenient matter and colour, <and, things of the like —
fort,. Then whenall thete-things-are provided,’ and the
Mafter,and his fel-ows being inthe Gircle , inrhe ‘rf place
lér him confecrare the Circle, and all-thofe things which he
ulech-; which -being performed -with,a-conyenient. gefture
and countenance., slet himibeein co pray-with alond voices
after.this manner, .. Firli lechim make an OrarionunroGody
and.chen jer him intreat rhe good Spirits: and if he widlread:
any, Prayers, Pialms, or Gotpels for:his. defenses they oueht
totake che firlt place. . Afres,thele:Prayets and) Orarjons are
faid,, chen.lec him. begin ro.invocate-the Spirit w' 1: h-hede=
fire:h, with a genrle and Joying Inchanrment, toall:ché coatts)
of the,World; wich'the commemoration of his,own Autho=
| | rity

I ite Hin Bie BS AAV ROLE EGET Deis LEB RR IIE ALR OOD

a a .

« The fourth book, - %%

fity and power. “And then lethim reft alittle, looking a-
bout him, co fee if any Spirit do appear ; ‘which if he deiay,
then let him repeat his invocation, as abovelaid, unti:-he hath
done it threetimes;and ifthe Spirit be perrinacious,obitinare,
and will not appear, ‘then let him begin to conjure witn di-
vite power’; {0 alfo chat the conjuracions and ali his commeé-
moritions-do-agree with the Nature an /Offies of the Sciric
hintelf, and reiterare che fame thfeetimes, from {tron ‘er ro
Arong-rjnfingObjurgarions,Contume .te¢,Curfings, & Punifh-
mentsjand lulpenfion from his Oitic : and power,an: the itke.
And after all che courles are fnifhed, then ceale a ‘itcle;
and if any §. iri {hall appear , lec tte Invovanr rurn himteif
cowards the Spirit,and courteoufly receive him,.nd earne!:ly
intreating him, lec him firttrequire his pame , andif hebe
called by any orher name: and then proceeding furtver, let
bimiask him whactoever he will: and if 1n any ching the Spr-
ric fhall thew himielf obftinate or lying, lec hime bound
by. covenicnr conjurations : and if-you donbr of any lye,
mike withour the Circle with the confecrared Sword, the f-
oute of a triangle or * Pentagone, andcompei the Spirtc to en- * a Cha-
ter inco it + and if chow receiveft any promife wht-h thon rage: with
wouldit have to be confirmed with an Orth, let him ttretch five cor-
| -thefword out of the Circle, and {Wear the Spirir, by layi-g ™™
'~ his hand upon the Sword. Then ha:ing obtained of the ,
Spiric thar woith you defire, or are orherwile contented, li-
cenfe him co dépare wich courreous word * giving command
untohim, thar he do no burt : and if he wiil nor depart, com-
pel him by powerful conjurations; and it need require,expel
him by Exorcifmes,and 5y makinz contrary fumigition:. And
when he itdepatred, go not our of the Circle, bie mtkea
flay, making prayer and gt: ing of thanks unto Ged ind the
good Angels, and alfo'pra ing for yourd-fence and comers
vation : and. chen all tiofe things being orderly performed,
you may depart.
me Bur if your hove be frutrared, and no Spirics will apeag, .
yer for chis dy not defpair; bur lea ing che Circle, return 2-
gain at other tim.s, doing as before. Andif-you fhall pnt 22
K 2 that

eli eee a al

a

DF 9h SEA TTS

Of Octuls Philsfopby,

-tharyouhave erred in any thing, rhen.chac you.fhalk amend,

by adding or diminihing ; forche conttancy of Reiteration
doth cften increafe your authorityand powers. and firikerh
terror into the Spirus,and humblech them co obey, |
And therefore. {ome nfé to make a Gare “in. the Circle,
whereby they may go in and out, which they open and thir
as they. pleate, and forrifte ic -with holy Names and Pen-
tacies,
This alio we are to take notice of , That when no Spirics
willappear, bur the Mafter being wearied hath determined
to ceale and give over; let him not therefore depart wichour
licenfing the Spirits ; for they chat. do negle& this , are ver
greatly in dangerjexcepr they are fortified with fome fublime
defence, | ot |
Often-imes alfo the Spirits do come, although they appear
not vitble, (for to canfe terror to him that calls them) either
inthe thing: which he weth, or in the operation itfelf, Bur
this kinde of licenfing is not giveniimply, bur by akinde of
di‘peniation with fufpenfion, until in the fo!lowing rerms th
thall. render. themfelves obedient,» Alfo. without 4 Circle
thele Spirirs. may. be'called to appear, accerdine.to the way
which 1s. above delivered abour the confecration of a book,
But when wedo intend to execure any-cfFe@ by evil Spis
rics, where.an Apparition is nor needful’; then that is to be
done, .by makingand forming that thing which isto be aire
us as aninttrument; orlubjet ofthe experiment it feif 5 asy
whether it he an Image, or a Ring, or a Writing, or amy’ Chas
rater, Candie, or Sacrifice, or any thing of the like fort s then
the name of the spiric isto. be written therein, with his Cha-
racter, according rothe exigency of che'experiment y either
by writing 3c with fome b ood, ‘or. otherwile uGng.a perfume
agreeableto the Spirit, Oftentimes alfo making Prayers and
Orations. to God. and the good-Ancels. before we invocate
the evil Spirit,conjuring him by the divine power, |
+ There is another kinde of “pirits; which we havé fpoken
of in ous third hook of Ocul: Philofophy vor fo hit fulyand
Acercil unto.men ; fo alloythat they are Feed with humane
habe ‘eo. | paflions |

TTS, airmen aT a tI RS SRE TD Deh Ae AS TP I 1 i

ne are wo ad
" Be

Fhe fonrih book. &9

pafions 5! and do-joy inthe converiation of ‘men, and freely

| doanhabie with them:and:others do dwell in the Woods and

| Delartss&orhers.delight in the company, of divers domettique

Animals. and wilde Bealts §, and.otherfome doinhabie aboii¢

| Fountains and Meadows. Whotoever ‘therefore woulld'call

| up. theftikinde-of ‘Spurits.,:in the place where chey abide,

it ought to bedone with odoriferous perfumes, -and’ with
fweet founds and iaftniments of Mafick,. {pecially compoled
for the bufinels,wirh ufing of Songs » ‘Inchancments arid'plea-
fant Verfes, wich praifes and promifes. hast 9.3
Buc: tho’ewhicmareobitimace to! yeild ro thele things}are

to be compelled with Threatningsy ‘Comminations;.- Cur-
fings, Delufions, Contumelies , atdefpecially. by chreatning
them >ro‘¢xpel:them :from thote placeswhere they ate con~
verlant. 3 |

| oo Burches 51 ifneed be; chow matit berake cheetoinfé Exor-
| cilmés 5. buriche schiefett: ching thac ought toobeobferied,

is, contancy.of minde , sand boldnets 5 free, andalienated
from feats slog: enim!is Sormiiis toi 2 sash |

poLaitly wher you: would invocate’ thefekinde of Spities, | a
youloughitito-ptepare a ibable im the place oftinvocationy co- ; 3
vered withiclean linen} ; »whereuponyou thall fec new bread; |
. | and running waterormilk innew earthen veffels:, (and new vy
,§ kmives,! ocAnd you hall make aire, * wherdipon’a'petfame oan
, 0 thalbbe made, - Buriler thedpvocancdd unro-the'head of the 1 be
Table, and round abou irlet rhere be teats placed for che tal
+ Spirirs, as you pieale:; iandithe Spirits beimgealledy you hall a
|) invice them ro idrinkiand ear; Bue df ‘perchance you fhiall
fear ‘any evil Spirit 5. :them draw 2 Circle-abour it,’ ‘andlet
» 0 cthas-pare of ithe Table: ac-which che Isvocant firs 5 “be witti<
| inthe Citcle, and the rett of the Table without ehe-Circtes

<P ha C0 >

-Im ‘our third-book of Occult Philotophy, we have ranelic:
Rowand by whacmean:s the Soul 1s joyned'to the Body ; and,
wharhdpenerhicothe Sonliatter deavh.s of ©. eromigel

2 Bhow! maitiknowefurther, TharthofeSouls dorttill love
their: shingnifhed Bodies after:death 5--as'm were a ome

rite , 3 arity: +

——

tie Aa
Sea eae ,
i . Bae
_ . a ~ - \. ~
* a

I, ae

oeeauie

= Fg eR en i eres GT

Of Occuls Phi lofop by,

affinity alluring thems fuch as are the Souls of noxiousimen;
which have vio.ently re:mquithed their Bodies ‘and Souls
wanting a due burial, which do (iil wander ina liquid and
turbulent Spirit'about: their dead carkafles ; for thele Souls
by che, known meansi:b» which hererdofore they were con
joyhedco their Bodies;by the like vapors,liquors,and:day ours,
are.eafily drawn unto them, !

From hence itis ,. thatthe Souls of rhe deadarenot to be

called up; without biood,, or by the:application of fome part:

of their re:ist Body.

In-thé railing up-of thefe fhadow sswe arco perfume with
new Blood, :with:the:Bones of the dead’, and with Fieth,

Egges; Milk 5 Honey and Oile, sand'fuch-like chingsy which

do satttioure ro ‘the Souls a meaits:apt itowreceive their Bos

dies. oe
Ir-isalfo co-be uriderftood, That thofe who are defGirous to
raile-up any Souls:of the dead, they ought to do it in thole
places, wherein thefe kinde of Souls are moit known to be
converfanr, or for tome alliance alluring thofe fouls inro
their forfaken, Body 5': or'for {ome kinde’of affection in tines
palt, impreffed.in them in theirilife, drawing thedaid Soul to
céreain places, things, or perfons ;-or forthe forcible nature
of fome place firced and. prepared for'to: purge or punith
thele Souls, Which places for the moft-parrareto be known

bythe experience-of; vifions, mighty incurficns, and apparici-:

ons, andiuch-like-prodicies feen.+) * 1)

Therefore the-places moft fitting for-thefe things; are’
Church-yards. And better then them ),+ are thote’ places:
- Wherein there isthe ¢xecuriomof criminal jadgemenrs, «And
better then thefe, care! rhofe placesy:in whichiof date veers:
there-have beenfome pi ike flinghters of men; 9Rurthersi

more, thar place 1s better then thele, where fome dead car-

kals » thac came by'a-violent death’, “is not yetexpiated, ror |

ritely buried , ‘and'was lately buried. ;:-forthe expiation of

thofe places , is alfo a holy Rite duly to be adhibited: tothe:

burial of the bodies 5 and oftentimes ‘prehi’ icerh ithe: fouls

to come unto their bodies,’ and expelieth them: far off unto}

the places of judgement, And

Pi GNM AE TARO UNG ATE TS AN DS IIL LL ID LE

a =: x

| The fourth bok, 71

And froma hence it ts, Thar the Souls of the dead are not
eafily ro be railed up, except it be che Souls of chem whom
we know to be evil, orco have perifhed bya violent death,
and whole bodies do wan a right and due burial, |

Now although we have {poken concerning fuch places of
this kinde , it will not be fafe or commodious. to go unto
them ; bur ic behoverh us to cake to what pace foever ts to

_be chofen, fome principal part of the body thacts reli&, and
therewith co make a perfume in due maner, and to perform
other comperent Rites.

Ic isalforo be known , That becaufe the Souls are cerrain
{piricual lights, therefore arcificial lights, efpe-ia.ly if chey be
framed out of certain competent things, componnded accor-
ding to acrue rule, wich congruent in{criptions of Names
and Seals , do very much avail to the railing up of departed
Souls. :

Moreover, thefe chings which now arefpoken of , are nor
alwaies iufficient ro raile up Souls , be-aufe of an extranacu-
tal portion of underitanding and reaion, which is above, and
known onely to the Heaven and Deltinies,and their power.

We ought rherefore to allure the faid Souls , by tuperna-
tural and coeleitial powers duely adminiiired, even by hole
things which.do move the very harmony of the Soul, afwel
imaginative, as rational and intellectual ; as are Voices,Songs,
Sounds, Inchanementcs : and Religious things ; as Pra ers,
Conjurations, Exorciimes, and other holy Rites, which may
very commodioufly be adminiiired hereunto,

tnt eed

The end of the fourth baok of Agrippa.

Ra es ene a a nt EE EN, yee ap

Fleptameron,

x ¥ 4 ~ AW, ee a 7 es
Basan ce lg ace ld viet lid cine td

Of Peter dé Mbane;

H eptameron :

OR,

-MAGICAL ELEMENTS |
. PzrterdeAsano al
; PHILOSOPHER. : Wal

= N the former book,which. is the fourth
book of Agrippayit is infficiently fpoken
concerning Magical Ceremonies, and

iE Ipitiations. |
| | ‘ But becaufe-he feemeth to have writ= A
| Se =, ten ro the learned.) atid well-experm i
| -enced'in this Art; becaufe he dorhinot 1 A
{pecially creat of, che Ceremonies): bur —
4 rather. {peakech' of them: in general,

it was therefore choughr good to adde: hereunto the Magi-
cal Elem ents of Peter.deedbano & that thole whovare hither-
| L

to

1 Pa a tears te RROD a Tne oH ‘ Wane iierbige: ' pr TT

l

‘a 7h Magi¢al Elements,»
id toicnorant , and have not tafted of Magical Superftitions,
: may. have. chemin readinefs.,. how they may exercife them-
felves therein. For we fee in this book, as ir were a certain
introduction of, Magical vanicy;and as if they were in prefent
exercife,they may behold the diftin& functions of fpirits,how
they may be drawn to difcourfe and communication ; what
is to be done every day, and every hour ; and how they fhall
be read, as if they were defcribed fillable by fillable. |
In brief, in this book are kept the principles of Magical =|
conveyances, Bur becaufe rhe greateft powers artributed —
co the Circles; ( For they are cercain fortreffes to defend
the operators {afe from the evil Spirits;) Inthe firft place we —
will treat concerning the compofition of a Circle,

ee)
Sa ce ——_—
Dare = — Nc s — ne 2

Of the Circle, , and the compojition
thereof. |

He form of Circles is not alwaies one and rhe fame 5
_ but wfeth ro be changed, according to the order of the
Spirics that are to be called, ‘their places, rimes, daies and —
hours, For in makinga Circle, it ought to be confidered in
what time of the year, what day , and what hour, char you
make the Circle ; what Spirits you would call, towhat Star — 9} °
and Region they do belong, and what funétions they have.
Therefore ler there be made'three Circles of the laticude of
nine foot , and ler them be diftant one from another a hands
breadth; and in the middle Circle, firft, write the name of
the hour wherein you do. the work, Inthe lecond place,
Write the name‘of the Angel of the hour, In thechird
place, The Sigil‘of the Angel of the hour. Fourthly, The
“fame of the Angel that ralech that day wherein youdothe —
work,and the names of his minifters. Inthe fifth place, The _
name of the prefent time. Sixthly , The name of the Spi- —
rirs ruling in that pare of rime,and their Prefidents. Seventh-
Jy, The name ‘of the head of the Signe ruling in'that part of
rime |

a TR i a aba ale Bi
pte ie eg er Res eae ad ——-

SC OES Rs

, of Peter de Abawb. v5
time wherein you work. -Eighthly , The name ofthe earch,
accordin co thar pare of time wherein you work. Ninehly, -

~ and forrhe complearing of thé'middle Circle, Wrice the name

P of the Sun and of the Moon, accordingto the dard rule of

time; for as the time is chariged,fo the names are ro'bealre=

3 red. And in the outermoftGircle, lec chere be drawn in che ol

|. four Angles’, the names of ‘the prefidential Angels of che i iv

Air, thac day wherein: you Would do this work-} to wit, che cg
name of the King and his three Minitters./ Without the Cir- |
cle, in four Angles’, let Pentagones be'made, / Th the inner Le

Circle let there be written four’divine names wich croffes in- Vn

cerpofed in the middle of the Circle ; to witstowatds the Ealt

let there be writren A/pha, and towards the'Welt lec there
bewricten Omega;and let a crofs divide the middle of che Cir
cle. Whenthe Circle is thus finifhed, accordingto the rule

now before written, you fhall proceed,

Of the names of thebours,and the Angels

ruling their’: %

Lo re feet one 1a oe iad hes

Cte

T is alfo to be known, that the Angels do rule thé hotirs

in a fucceffive order,according to rhe courfe of the heavens,
and Planets unto which they are {ubjeé&t ; fo chat chat Spiric
which governeth the day,rulerh alfo the firft hour of the day
the fecond from this governerh the fecond hour; the third,
the third hour, at fd -comfequently’> atid: when feven
Planets and houts have made rheir revoliition, it,returneth
again to rhe firt which ruleth the day. Therefore we fhalt

firtt {peak of the names of the hours,

if | Hours of the day. Honts of ‘the night,

: D1. Yayn, i. Beron.

iq | 2, Fanor, 2. Barol,

“gd INafsia, ga Thani,

% | 4, Sallie 4, Athits

i is L 2 5 Ske

EI ys

er ee

“ ere aemeneemereeniiet
Oe ae ay

4 For —}

- SEE sin eae Rea LAAT Sincanencrecatatannal Sata js

96 | leit Elements,

§: Sadedali, - | » Mathon,
6. Thamur, | s Rana.
q« Ourere 7. Netos.
8. Lhamic, ‘bie ge 8, Tafrac.
9. Neron. - | -. 9, Saffur.
to, Jayon..- 1 tito. Al,
11. Abzi- L1. Calerva.
12, Waracaree 7 bsI ee Salam,

OF the names of i anole and their Sigils,. it’ {hall be
fooken in their proper places, Now let us. take ia veiw
of the names of the times,” A year therefore is fourfold,
and is divided into the Spring aMen Hacer rag Wincer 5
the names whereof are rheks (een Ch-rieaiaie

The Spring, Talvi.

Tae Summer, '* Cafmaran.

Avcumne, | Sn. te
Winter, SQY DAM _TARG! Parlag.\ i; LSMAAK aw a 3

Cm 4

The Ave of the. Spiiag) OM

C CE:
Core.
Amatiels.
coms

“The ncey sit the Signe of the ie Sing

Spuglignel, - ene

"tf

Thename of the earth in the Spring,

Amadai,

Bi inna biases Nels A aMiba sn snsaeis gett, viet dt citi ol

ano ek OS ORRIN a nn: ace

”

of Peter de Abano,

The names of theSun and Moon in the Spring,
B| The Sun, -~ , yt «7The Moon,
i Abraym | » Agufita.

me The Angels of the Summer.
 Gargatel,

Tariel,
| Gaviel,
j

The head of che Signe of the Summer,

; | Tubiel, | | ‘3 if | ‘

| : The name ue fa dab in Summier. :

| | ie

| | Feftativi. | : ; |

| The names of che SinandMooninSummer. | | ‘
| The Sun. Pe The Moon, won } a
) ) Athemay.  Armatna, ¥ i ' 1

ls ’ . , oe,
BY ahh i Theva Agelsof Aucumnes ss \e5.) 9A

i ! Tarqaen...

| | Guabarel.

| | re wi ae > he head of the fisne of Autumine,. Vv
; Fi 3 :

The name of che earch in Aucumne,
Rabiantra

ee -
hee corr" SS Nae ay = era ~— ans one ce. we
“ r ge
tie ee : aa —— ? z= —
Mu . : es PTMGE. e Se Sai PEER GM Pn I ee TT
porcriers aes ac gape ter “ : oro

Lhe Confecrations and Benedittions:and

Magical Elements,

- The nantes of the Sun and Moon in Autumne,

The Sun, *-* S° "The Moon,
Abragini. SS Matafignatse

The Angels of thie Winer.

Amabael.
Crarari.

The head of the fign of Winter.

Altarib.

“The name of che Earth in Winter,
Geremiah.
The names of the Sun and:Mooa in Winter, oy |

The Sun. _. he Moon, ) |
‘Commutaff. . Affacrim sia

firft of the Benedtétion of the Circles. |

VW Hen rheCircle ‘is -titely perfected, {ptinkle the fame
with holy or purgino water, and {ay , “Thou [hale purge

me with hylop,O Lord, and I fhallbe clean + Thou [bali walh mes,

andl hallbe whiter then{now. bed ick

a rE

The

Cex? os —— ania ni _

ee

eesti a Rea SEIN RAEN 2 RIE es nl GE Si Ret I LOM ESI RE RNB Bee

CR I EE OER eee

Of Peter de Abanoe\ ily 79

The Benedittion of perfumes.

He God of Abraham, God of Ifaac, God of Jacob, blePhere

the creatures of thefe kindes, that they may fill wp the power

and vertue of their odours.s fo that neither-the enemys nor any

falle imagination, may be able to enter. into them: through our

Lord Fefus Chrift,.8ec, Then let them be {prinkled with holy
water, - ey a |

The Exorcifme of the fire upon which the

perfumes are to be put.

He fire which is to be ufed for fuffumigations., isto be
ina new veflel of earth or iron ; and let it be exorcilfed
aftersthis manner. ‘J exorcife thee, O thou creature of fire, by

him by whem all things are mades that forthwith thou caft away

every phanta[me from thee ,: that it {hall not be able to do any hurt
in any thing.. Then fay, Has O Lord, this-creature of firey and
fanthifie it , that it may be bleffed to fet forth the praife of chy holy

name, that ne hurt-wmdy come tothe. Exercifers or Spettators :

“through our Lord FefneChrift, &C.

Of the Garment and Pentacle...

F Etit beaPriefts Garmentr,ific can be: but if. ic cannor be

had, let it be of linen,and:clean, Then-take this Pentacle
made iti the day and hour of Afercery, the Moon increafing,
written in parchment made of'a kids skin, Bur firtt lec there
be faid over it the Mafs of the holy Ghoft, . and lee it‘be
fprinkled with water of baptiim,.

An

Ye eT Sha, Se ie

Magical Elements, ©

An Oration to be fad; when the Vesture

| is put on.

[ A. Neory Ansacor, Amidess: Theadoniat, Anitor, by the merits |
of thy, Angelt,OLord., I will put-on the Garment.of Sal=

‘ation 5 that-this which Ldefire Imay bring to effett : through » |
‘shee the oft holy Adonay whofe kingdom.endurethfor ever and

ever. Amen - . | ;

V2 2 ye g207 $e2rikles LA?PHED PTE By hicavh Wha 7. faye adh nag)

" She oh pte af” Prisy foibielatigre aoe “ff lecl cores al a tie

Shebicde 0 es 1 , 0® PO Meal ft ae ae f, Pe |
‘DP 2 iad Ce Fe 00 72f pce 22 heal, Piel prot prit+ cH fheern |
af pects pepe gaad Pree. f3 PERG Lifror7 Pherre fete byapre af {
ep Ap bi che Pieprr Cratie Loved le Copafre Pe “dl

oD pic th IIAP Joe COC# 7G EF Mh eeed Le

i!

engl
ioe d

AD LASt CO LEFT AL
eo

pT i eae a OOD AEE NO ie NR BGI SELLA OTE TIE OE ES

OC RE: ian ng PD

of Peter de cA bane, 8:

Of the manner of working.

I ie the Moon be increafing and equal, if ic may then be
done, and let her nor be combnft, :
The Operator ought to be clean and purified by the tpace of
nine daies before the beginning of the work, 2nd to be con-
fefled,and receive the holy Communion, Let him have ready
the perfume appropriated to the day wherein he would per-
form the work. He ought alfoco have holy water froma
Prieit, anda new earthen veffel with fire, a Vélture and Pen-
tacle ; and let all chefethings be rightly and duly confecrated
and prepared. Let one of the feryanrs carry the earthen
veffe] ful! of fire, and the perfumes, and let another bear the
book, another the Garment:and Pentacle, and ler the matter
carry the Sword ; over which rhere mutt be {aid one mais of
the Holy Ghoft ; and onthe middle of the Sword, -let there
be written this name e4e/z +, and on the other fidertheteof,
this name ¢ On +. And as hegoeth to the confectated
place, let himcontinually read Letanies , the fervarits ari-
Swering. And when hecometh to the place where he will
ere& the Circle, ler him draw the lines of the Circle, as we
have before taught :and-after he hath madeir, lec him
Sprinkle the Circle with holy water, faying , Ajperges me Dee wii, me
mine, BC. . O Lord,
The Matter therefore ought to be purified with falting, &.
chaftiry , and abftinency. from all luxury the {pace of three
whole dayes before the day of the operation. : ». And on the
day rhar he would do the work, being clothed with pure pgar-
ments, and furnifhed with Pentacles, Perfumes, and-other
things neceflary hereunto, let him enter the Circle, ‘and call
“the Angels fromthe four parts of the world, whichido go>
vernthe. Jeven Planets the feven: dayes of the week, Colours
and Metals ; whofe name you fhall fee in their places; “And
with bended: knees invocaring the faid Angels pasticiilarly,
Tet. him fay, O Angeli idee se adjistares wed pon |

i

ee

eee

ca

—=. bad

<=

Be tye tS REEF PT

Magical Elements,

& in adjutorinm mihiyin mews rebui © peritionibus, :

Then ler him call the Angels from the four parts of the
world , that rule the Air the fame day wherein he doth the
work or experiment. And having implored {pecially all the
Names and Spirits written in the Circle, let him fay , O vos
onne:,adjuvo atque conteftor per [edem Adonay, per Hagios,é The-
as, I[chyrosy Athanatos, Paracletos, Alpha @ Omega, @. per hac
tria nomindfecreta, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, quod hodie de-
beatis adimplere quod cupia.

Thete things being performed, let him read the Conjurati-
on affigned for the day wherein he maketh the experiment,as
we have before fpoken;but if they fhall be partinacious and
refractory, and will nor yeild themlelves obedient , neither
to the Conjuration affigned to the day,nor to the prayers be-
fore'made, then ufe the Conjurations and Exorcifmes fol-

lowing, — , :

An Exorci{me of the S pirits of the Air.

Os fath: 2d imaginem Dei, dotati potentia Dei, & ejus fatti
\. voluntate per potentiffimum & cerroboratum nomen Dei

El, forte & admirabile vos exorcizamus (here he fhall name -

the Spirics he would have appear, of what crder foever they
be) & imperamus per eum qui dixit, & fallum eft, & per omnia

nomina Dei, & per nomen Adonay, El, Elohim, Elohe, Zebzoth, -

Elion,Ecerchie,fah,Tetragrammaton,Sadai,Dominus Densyxcel-
Jus exorcixamus Vos, atque potenter imperamus . ut Appareatis
fiatim nobis hic juxta Circulum in pulchra formasvidelicet bama-
nay fine deformirate @ tortuofitate aliqua.. Venste vos omnes
tales, quia vobrs imperamuus, per nomen Y OV auod Adam andi-~
Vity O locutus eft : & per nomen Dei Agia, quod Loth audivit,,
© fattus falous cum (ua familia: © per nemen FJorh, quod Faevb
audivit ab Angelo fecums luttantes,ce liber atwe eft de manu fratris
fui Efau: and by the name Anephexeton, quod Aaron andivit,
© loquens, © fapiens fatlus eft 2 per'nomen Zebaoth , . quod
Mofesnominavity & emma fiumina & paludes de terra oe
| werfa

a

Tg TR Em

pee

To Siar el ican gk TOI Pie Sar Ey Cele eae

of Peter de Abano.

vor(e faernnt in [anguinem « O per nomen Ecerchie Orson; quod
Mofesnominavit, & omnes fluvii ebullierunt rinas, Afcende-
runt indomos AL cyptiorumpmnia deftruentes.: © per nomen E-
lion, quod Moles nominavit, & fit grando talis y qualis von fuit
abinitiomundi: & per nomen Adonay quad Mojes nominavit,
& fuerunt locufte , & apparuerunt fuper terram A gyptiorum,
 comederunt qua refidua erant grandint: OC per nomen Sche-
mes amathiay quod Fofua vocavit, & remoratus eft Solcur{um :
& per nomen Alpha h Omega, quod Daniel nominavit, de-
firuxit Beel, & Draconem tnterfezit : & innomine Emmunucl,
quod tres.ruer’,Sidrach, Mifach & Abdenago in camino ignis
Ardentis, cantaverunt, © liber ati fuerunt »@ per nomen Hagios,
& fedem Adonay, & per 5 Theos, Ifcytos, Athasatos,Paracletws 5
& per hae triafecreta nomina, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, ad-
JUN %, conteftor, & per hac nom na, Cr per alia nomina Donuni
noftri Dei Onsxivoten'ts 5 vivi & veri, vas qui veftra culpt de
Caclis ejects fuiftis ufque ad infernum locum, exorcizamins, 7 vi-
viliter imperamur, per eum quidixit, C fattum oft , cui omnes
obediunt creature, & per illud tremendum Dei judicium: & per
“wiare omuibus incertum, vitreum, quod eft ante con[pettumdivi-
ne taajeftatis gradiens, & potentiale : & per quatuor divina anim
milia ‘Ti anze fedem divine majefta is gradientsa, & oculos ante
retro habentia : Oper ignem ante eu thronum circum|tan-
tems: & per fantto's Angelos Celorum, To per eam que Eccle-
iid Dei nominatur’ sO per [ambmam fapientiam Omnipotent Dei
Divil'ter exorcizamus's ut nobis hic ante Circulum aypareatts, ut
| ‘faciendam noftram valuntatem, in omnibus prout placuerit 2970s:
| per 'fedem Baldachie , & per hoc nomen Primeumaton y quod
Moles nominavit, Gin cavernis abyffi fuerunt profundati vel
abforptt, Datan, C orah & Abiron:>& in vu rtute iftins: aiminis
Primeamaton, tora Celi militia combpelleare’y wsaledicimus Vos,

| <privamsus vos omni oificio,loco & catdio vero, ufque in profum
dum abyffiy: & 4 que ad altimum diem jn tics v95 pontmusy Ore
legamus inignem aternum, inftagnumignis O falphuris,

wifi fRatim appareatis hiccorag nobisyinte Girculam,al taciendane
voluntatem noftranss In onmnibusvenitencr hac nominas Adonay
Zebaoth, Adonay Amioram, Kenitejveniteyimperatvobjs sAde=

2 nay

!
i
i}

Su il RC pane it aren ante reiehae ea ene ae a le —

$4 Magical Elements, |

way, Saday, Rex regum porentiffimus & tremendiffimusy cujusvi-
res nulla fubterfugere poteft creatura vobw pertinaciffimes futu-
ris nifi obedicritis , G appareatis ante hunc Circulum , affabiles
{ubito , tandem ruina fisbilis miferabili{quer & ignis perpetuum
inexctinguibilis vos manet, Venite ergo innomine Adonay Zeba-
oth, Adonay Amioram: venite, Venite, quid tardatis? festinate
imperat vobis Adonay, Saday, Rex regum, El, Aty, Titeip, A-
xia, Hyn, Fen, Minofel, Achadan : VayJ aa,Ey,HaaEye,Exeyaykl,
El, Ek, ay Hy, Hau, Hau, Hau,Va, VA, Vay Va,

eA Prayer to God, to be aid in the four
parts of the world, in.the Circle.

 Morule, Tanehay Latiften, Raburs] aneha, Latisten, E[chay
\ Aladia, Alpha ce» Omega,LeyfteOrifton, Adonay:O my moft
merce'ul heavenlyF ather, have mercy upon me, although a fin-
aer ; make appear the arm of thy power in me this day ( although
thy unworthy child) againft thefe obftinate and pernicious Spirits,
that I by thy, will may be made a contemplator.of thy divine
works, ana may be illn(irated with all wifdom , And alwaies wor-
fhip and glorifie thy name, I humbly implore and befeech thee,
that thefe Spirits which I call by thy judgement 4 may be. bound
and conftrained to come, and give true, and perfetl an{wers.tothefe
things which I(hall ask them, and that they may declare and fhew
unto us thofe things which by me or us (ball be commanded themy
wot hurting any creature, neither injuring nor terrifying me or my
fellowssnor hurting any other crea:ure,tnd affrighting no man; but
let them be obedient to my requeftsyin all thefe things which I com-
mand them. Then let him ftand in the middle of the Circle,
and hold his hand cowards the Penracle, and fay, Per Penta
culum Salomonis advocavi, dent mihi re[pon{um verum. |
Then let him fay., Beralanenfis, Baldachienlis 5 Panmachiz
G Apologize fedesy per Reges poteftate(4, maguanimas., Ac princi-
pes preporentess geniog Liachidds mirniftri tartarea fedes : Anions,
i¢

dee,
a fA a a
1 iv
¥ 4 oe 7
we 4
< i
s
‘
>
nF
oa .
7 i 40 ty
- « $i
i
: i
7 a
) y
j :
' - f
i
h 4
{ oe
, ie
j ; e
} t at
E
M }
na | |
as i
‘
ia |
t
fs }
ay
it
4s S i
, if
eo
. ‘
us Lea |
: fre
\ ta
Cae ae
i I;
5 f
Sy oH
| Ly ef
1 ‘ 4
it P
iY im ae t
irae
5 | Na
i" i"
. hy
Be iw
3 iy
h B
- q ii
z :
{ 34 A
i‘ Wy
¥ : :
i ¢ :
| f
t
x
i

a at a te a RT Ere ee ARMIES ST LEAL EOE Fe
ne an as a — Tee

SE ap RT = RD ee Cha

of Peter de Abana; 83.

bie prindeps [edis Apologie nona cohorte.: Ege vos inveco, &
invocande Vos conjure, atg, {uperna Majeftatis munitus virtute,
potenster impero, per eum gut dixity & fattum eft » & cui obediunt
omnes.creatura:: O per hocnomenineffabile , \Tetragrammaten
maim Jehovah; in.guo eft plafmatum omnefeculum, gus audito
elementacorruunt,aér concutiturymare rétregraditur,iguicextin-
guitur, terra tremit, omne(g,exercites CocleftinmyT erreftriam, &
 Infernorum tremunt,turbantur & corruumt : quatenus cito &
fine mora & omni occafione remota, ab univer sis mundi partibus
veniatis, @& rationabiliter de omnibus quatungue interrogaveroy
re[pondeatis vos, & venidtis pacifice, vifibiles, T affabiles : nunc
fine mora manifef-antes-quod cupimus: conjurati per nomen
aterni vivi & veri Dei Helioven, e& mandata noftra perficientes,
perfiftentes femper ufq, ad finem, & intentionem meam , vii biles
n0b155& affabiles, clara voce nobis, intelligrbiles & fine omni am-
bi g Uita'e. :

A eet ae ret ‘

- Vifions and eA pparitions.

Shag rite perattisyapparebunt infinite viftanesyc phantalmata
pullantia organa & omnis generis inftrumenta mufica, idg,
fit a {piritibusyat terrore compulft (ocii abeant a Circulo, quia nihil
adver{us magiftrum poffunt. Poft hee videbis infinitos fagittrarios
cum infinita multiudine beftiarum horvibilem : quaitafe com-
ponunt 5 ac fi. vellent devorare focios : e.tamen nil timeant.
Tune Sacerdes i've Magifter adhibens manum Pentaculcy dicat :
Fugrat hinc iniqnitas veftray wviriute vexill: Deiz Et tunc
Spirites obedire magiftra coguutur so focii wil zn lius u-debunt.
Then let che Exorcift fay , {tretching ourhis hand. roche
Pentacle) Eane:Pentanulum:S alomonis., .qued ante veftram ad-
duxiprefentiam:ecce perfanam-exorcizatoris in medio Exoreil-
esi, qui eff optime a Deo munitus, intrepidus, vrevidus , qui viri-
bus potens vos exorcizandoinvocavit & vocat, .Wenite ergo. cum
feftinatione in virtute nominum iftorum, Aye Saraye, AyeSaraye,
Aye Sar aye, ne differatis venire 4 per nomina aterna Dei vivi &
veri Eloy, Archima, Rabur ; & per hoc prefens Pentaculum,quod

{sper

Se er par Fre I

ET IS MI i er ee SE

TT atte ae

OO ROTI INS ET Te EVERETT ’ meta -

é
oe
i
i
I Ne i
vel -

ie
AE

+See

St

86 Magical Elements,
fupervios potemrerimperut':'\G per virtatem corleftinns Spirituum
ominorum veftrorum: @ per perfonam exorcizatorissconfu tat,
feftinati venire & obedive preceptor: veftro 5: qui vecarur Otlinos
moss His peratliss fibiles ” quatnor angulis mundi: Et videbis
imspediite mignos morris etn viderisylicass: Quid rardatis ?
quis moramini? qua fatHis? pra varate vos. co obedite preceptori
velirc, in nomine Domini Bathat, vel Vachat fuper Abracruensy
fuperveniensy Abeor {uper Aberer: :
* Tuncimmediale venient in fuafirma propria. Et quando vi-
debis cosjnxraCirtulum, oftende itis Pentxculum coopertums fir~
done facresey difcooperiatur, > dicat: Ecce conclufionem veftram,
nolite fier: 1ecbedientes, Er fubito videbis eos in pacifica forma:
ey dicént tibi,Pete quid visyyuia nos [umus parats complere omnia
mandaatir, quia dominusad hag nos {ubjugavit..... Com autem
apparderint Spiritus, tune dicas, Bene.veneritisS piritus, vel
reges nobilfimiy quia vos vocavi per illum cui omne gen, flecti-
tur,celeftium, terreftrinm c infernorum : cujusin mani omnia
regnaregum {unt 5 nec.eft qui {ua conivariuselfe poffit MAaeftati.
Qustenus conftringo vo’, ut bic ante circulum vifibiles , affabiles
permanetis, tamdrutamdg, conftantes, nec [int litentia meareceda-
tis, donec meam fine fallacia aligua & veredice perficiatis Volun-
tatem, per potentia thins virtutem, quimare pofuit terminum [u-
Hid, quem preterire non poteft, ce Vere illics porentiay non per.rane
fet fines [uos, Dei {cilicet altiffimi,recu,domin', qui'cuntta crea
vit; Amen, Then command what you willand at ‘fhall-be
done.’ Afterwards licenie themthus > Jz nomine Parris,
T Fil & + Speritis fantli,ite inpace ad locaveftra sh paxfit
inter nos CP V0S5 paratt fitts venire vocati,
“Thefe are the things which Peter de Abzno hath fpokencon-
cerning Magical‘Elements; © « (8!) toes: SA Ei
But ‘thar you iaycthe® betrer know théimanner of’ com-
pohte'a Circle, T will fet dow ofie'Schemey fo thar if any
one would make a’ Circle in Sprino-time for rhe firtt hourof—
Lords day; irmutt bé in che fame manner as is the figure fol-

) lowing.

PE LORS OLE NIE EE OS EN ELE GO LMG ALI IE EOD Ht
Sa aS hd oes = meme ios en ee ee SEE. 00 IN noe ee ,

of Perende Abanos 87

| The figure of a Grcle for the frft hour of
| the Lords day, in Spring-time. :

J Icremaineth now, That we explain the week, the feyeral
| dayes thereof: and firit of the Lords day. Ws a

ae
La
ie a
re ue
. mB

AoA ORE Se: 3 = ma
cn roy Sa ob eyes

mer
mn: Tae OAT

TL TE AN I I EN ET

« r - ——

wo PEED " Pt net geneen ; -
, 3 sme aso 2 ee

Se ae ms é : :

F . sce Rint CIR? ROTTEN OR 0, — eA
é

Magical Elements;

Confiderations of the Lords, day.

6 ane Angel of the Lords day; his Sigil ). Planer, Signe of

the Planer, and the name of the fourth heaven,

‘Wicked. adi NN,
ZR Hachon

The chee of the Lords day.

{nlejped eo DardielyHyuratapal. —

The Angels of che Air suling on the Lords day.

Vorc amy King.

| His Minifters.
Tus, Andas,C ymabal.
The winde which,che Angeles of the Air abovelaid are Pade

The North-winde.

The Angel of the fourth heaven, ruling on the Lords days
which 1 ought to beccalled from the four { parts of the world.——=

At the Eaft.

Samael. Baciel. Atel.
Gabriel, Vienatraba.

ST ae ila eS GRR i FI ON SA MIST A ORE TERE EN Be aS

a ov tae

Of Peser de Abano, 89
At the Weft, |

Anael, ~  Pabel. Uftael,
Burchit. Sxceratos, Capabili,

Atthe North.

Aiel, Aniel,vel Aquiel, Mafgabviel,
Sapiel, Matuyel, 3

At che South,

| .Ha'udiel, Machafiel. Charfrel,
Rriél, * Naromiel, als

The perfume of the Lords day.

Red Wheat.

The Con juration of the: Lords day.

Onjuro & confirmo fuper vos Angeli fortes Dei, & fantt’,
in nomine Adonay, Eye,Eye,Eyz, quicftille, qrifuity eft
cr erity Eye, Abraged Glin wsmine Sad, 449s, Cados, Cadory
alte (endentis, fuper Cherubn, c& per nomenmagnumipfius Dei
fortis c& potentis, exalrarique (uzeromucs.coelosyE je, S arayes plaf~
wi boris {eculorum, qui creavit mundum, elum, terram, mare,
& omnia qua inets [un-in primo,dies > figillav t edfanttonomine
fus Phaa : & per nomina fanttorun Angelorum, qui dom'n u-
turin quarto exercitu, & ferv ant coram patentiffiiao, Sulamiay
_ Angels magna c& honor sto: & per x-men ftella, qua eft Sal, F
| per fignum, * per immenf{um nom! n Det viv, > per nomina omnia
proditta, conjurs te Michael anvele magne, q%' es prapof us De
Dominica: & ter nomen Adona),DeiLrael,quivcread't. munkuns «
co 4isqnid in eoelt, y20d pro melaborss, & ad myleas omrem me-
Sat peiitionem, Juxta menns velle ey voium meus in negotio &
caula

F aN IS A tyro I PRN TEN Po TT es Coo
nm Wl ay te tg SM A a sr ET

Se

. + a
or ] ve
iP

-< SRE Siena Nae == SA Nenana RONNIE Te TONSAT ONCE
He! e ee
a go Magical Elegsgnts,
t- Wa canfames. And here thowfhale declare thy canfe and bufi-
| | nefs, and for what thing thou makelt this Conjuration,

The Spirits of the Air of the Lords day, ate under the
North-winde ; their nature is to procure Gold, Gemmes,
Carbuncles,Riches ; to caufe one to-obtain favour and bene-
volence; to diffolve theenmities of men; to raile men to ho-
nors; to carry or take away infirmicies, But in what manner
they appear,it’s fpoken already in the former book of Magical
Ceremonies. |

 Confiderations of Munday.

“H¥6 Arivel of Munday, his Sigil, Planer, the Signé of the

goa. «Planet, and name of the firlt heaven,

2 See ae
ae ae ao <

PE FR
ER RA a =

ee a

r _ eee # er = =
ne, :
RS a PO ge
em Sere ite SES

DP eer
x SF, ge URNS IT ETN
SF SS ge

The Angels of Munday, -

PR cr nema OR
nego eneea

Gabriel, Michael. Samael.
The Angels of the Air ruling.on Munday,
oArtan, King. oe
: His Minfters,
Bile, Mifabu,  Abnxahde »:

PNR ee ET ONS Fae ET OI IIE OOS LAE ELI RN GOP Be

Of Peter de A bane. gee

The winde which the faid Augels of the Air are fubje& to.
The West-winde. | —

The Angels of the firlt heaven, ruling on Munday, which
ought to be called from the four parts of the world.

From the Eaft.

Gabriel, Gabrael, Madiel,
Deamiel, fanael.

From che Weft,

Sachiel. Zaniel; Habaiel, -
Bachanael, Corabael.

Fromm the North,

Mael, Voael, Valium.
Baliel.. Balay,. Humaftraw, -

From the South,

~ Curaniel, Dabriel, Darquiel. ry
Hanan,“ Anayle. Vetuel.

The Perfume of Manday.
Aloes.
The Conjuration of Munday...
* & confirmo fuper vos Angeli fortes & boniyin nomie

we Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eie, Eie, Eig, Cados 5 (aaosy
N 2. | AA0S,

oe Byars : _ : . > Gene OER ra ae
otk SRE Rage TR ehh ena AERA aReT ——
aie Te SITE ET

93 Magical Elements,

Cados, Achim, Achim, Fa, F.1, Fortis, Fs 4 apparuit monte Si-
Aly C#m lorificatione regss eAdonay, Sad ‘py Lebaoth, Anathay,
Vay Vay Ya, Marinara, Abim, Jeia, qui maria creavit flagnaey
omnes aquas in fecundo die, qualdam {uper coclos, qualdam in
terra. Sigillavit mre in alio momine uo, & terminum >» gum
fib: pofuit, non preter bit: @& per nomina Angelorum , qui-domi-
nAnLUP in Limo exercttity.qui ferviunt Orphaniel Angelo magno,
preciofe @ honorato: ¢& per nomen Stelle, qua eft Luna: c& per
nomina predstla, [uper te coujuro, {cilicet Gabriel . 94i es prapoli~
ius die), Lune fecundo quod pro me labores & adivapleas, &C.
As inthe Conjuration of Sunday.

The™pirics.of the Air of Munday, are {ubje& to the Weft-
Winde, which is the winde ofthe Moon: their nature 1s to
give filver;co convey things from place to place;to make horfes
Swift, and to difclofe thetecrets of perfons borh prefent and
future: but in whac manner they appear, you may fee in'the
former book.

sine On/tderations of Tuefday.

He Angel of Tuefday , his figil, his Planet, the Sicne
governing that Planer, and the name of the fifth hea, en,

Bimal = ens ae

The Angels of Tuefday, _-

Samael, Satcel; Amabiel,

The

OE Ee BO ET NTR Re

ST A SN TET TE a

oat ERT GRC SGA

“SR a a WIPER IG SE RS ANTE TILT TO SED Be

of Peter de Aband. * 93

The Angels of the Air ruling on Tue {day.
Samax, King. ;
His Minifters.
Carma.  I{molie Paffran, -
THe winde to which the faid Angels are fubjec.

The Eaft-winde.

The Angels of the fifth. heavens tulingon Tuefday , which
ought to-be called from the four parts of the world, —

At the Eaft,

Friagne.’ G unel. Damael,
Calzas, - <Arragon.
| : At the Weft,
Lama, °Aftagna, Lobquin.
“Soncas, -Jaxel Tfiaele,
Trel,

ActheNorth, . «,

Rahumel. “Hyniel. Rayel.
Seraphiel, | Marhiel,' Fraciel, .

Acthe Sonch,

Sacriel, Faniel. Galdel,
Ofael,  Vianuel, Zaliel.

SUSU isc sssaih'us Sutan sn. eeDadnlbdn s.dlon/s., sae sides tatahaghdallet ase nails nilldmemetoeat ine cane

i es

“4 Magical Elements;

) The Perfume of Tuelday.
Pepper.

The Conjuration of Tuefday. P

SSL I ae

ese & confirmo [uper vos, Angeli fortes & fantli-, per
nomen Yas Yas Yas He} HegHe, Vay Hy, H 'Yy Ha, Ha, Ha,
V ay Ve AyV ay Any An, An, Hie, Aie, Aie, El, AjyEkibra, Eloim,
Eloim: ep per nomina ipfius alti Dei, qui fecit aquam aridam ap-
PAVE e G& Vocavit terram, & produxit arbores 4 & herbas de Cf,
iw figillavit fuper cams cuns prectofesponorato,imetuerde fastto
nomine {uo : & per nomentangelorans donsinantim in quinto ex=
ercitte , qui ferviunt Acimoy Angelo magno, fortis potenti, @
honorato : & per nomen Stella; qua eft Mats: & per nomina
prad:tta conjure fuper te Samael, Angele magne, qui prapofitus
es diei (Marti .: @& per nomina Atonay,Dei ivi veri, quod
‘pre melabores's Cr Adimpleas » &c, As inahe Cobjuration of
Sunday. | ae
_ The Spirits of the Ait’ Of Tuefday are under the Eat
‘winde: their nature is to caufe wars , ‘mortality, death and
combuftions ; and to give two rhoufand Souldiers at arimes
to bring death , infirmities or health. \ The maniter of their
“appearing you may fee in theformer book, Tyee

Confiderations of W ednefday.

THe ne of Wednefday, his Sigil, Planes ithe Signe go.
verning chat Planet, and the name of che fecond heaven,

Ra-

Foes

» +
it
f t
¥ :
if]
t iy
{ tin
; oa |
i
i ra
’ t
% if
Risky - i
ee ;
| Es &
f . :
S eee
i
Ch ae
po RY
P
f By
» is
io
{ i
b :
H :
( i
t

re

a a a a eR OT ee Le rcs leas iB Si

Of Peter dé Abano, 95

Raphael ‘ yok or hy,
+0} Ok Ragquie.
| “The Angels of -Wednefday. -
Raphael. Miel, Seraphiel,

The Angels of the Air ruling on Wednefday. :
‘ Mediat or Modiat, Rex.

Minifters,
-Suquinos, * Sallales.

“The winde+o which the faid Arieels of the Air are {nbjedt,
The S outhwestewinde, |

The Angels, of the. fecond heaven governing Wednefday,
which ought co be called from che four parts. of che wosld,

Atthe Eaft,
Mathlas, Tarmmel: Baraberat,

Atthe Wel,
Jerefene, Mitrdton,

st ae Riete . sitet bin hia sane ocbalcmpliniicaeiae hindi nconiaaaalias aaeitaametnttine comet

96 Mt agical Elements,

Atshe North,

Thiele: ..Raels~ F-riabel,
Venahel.  Velel. eAbuiori..:
Hcirnuel, | NE

At the South.

Milliel. Nelapa. Babel.
Caluel, Vel. Laquel.

The Fumigation of Wednefday.
Maftick, ity: )

~

The Conjuration of W ednefe day.

Ci. & confirmo vos angeli fortes, fanthi & potentes, i
‘y \pomine fortis, meruendifi mal ober: ditt, Jay eAdona yy! E-
loim., Saday, Saday; Sada), Eie, Ere, Ere, eA amie, eAfaraie :
ei in nomine eAdonay Det Lfrael, qui creavitlum'narea magna,
ad diffinguendum diem a notte : -% per nomen omn um eA ngelo-
rim defervientiim iwexercith feoundeccram Terra Angelo ‘ma
forts aG, foris: potent © O* per nomen Scele, Gue'eft Mertu-
riws: ex per nomen Sisill', qa figillatur a Deo fort fimo & ho-
norata: per omnis pradittaipaper. reRarhael Angele magne, con-

- furo, qui es prapoliius diei quarta- @& per no” en lantlum quod e=

ra: {eripium in fronte eAaron facerdotish!: fimirereatorsss per
womina eAngelorum 4 qui in gratiam Salvatoris covfirmati [unt:
@ per nomen [edu eA nimal vin’; ibabentium [enas clas, quod

pro me lalovet &c. AS in che’< onjuration of Sunday. |
The Spirits of te Air of Wednefdapare bj e&tothe
Souch-welt-winde : cheir nacure 1s to cive all Metals ; to re-
veal all earthly things palt, prefent and.io come; co pacifie
judges,to give victories in war, CO re-edifie, anJj teach expi ri-
neents and all decayed Sviences, and co change bodizs mi nce
e=

FRR RRO EM, HART Sige SMO MSOE eS PS LS

Of Peter de Abano, 97
Elements conditionally out of one inro another; to give in”
firmicies or healch ; ro raife che poor,and calt down che high
ones; to binde or lofe Spirits; to open locks or bolts: fuch-
kinde of Spirics have the operation of others , but not in
their perfe power, bucin virtue or knowledge. In what
manner they appear, it is before fpoken.: .

(onfiderations of Thurfday.

a Angel of Thurfday,his Sigil, Planer,the Signe of the
Planet, and the name of the fixth heaven.

‘cabal IC

The Angels of Thurfday.

Sachiel, Caftiel, Afafiel,. .

The Angels of the Air governing Thuriday.
Suth, Rex, -
| Minifters,
Maguth, Cutriix: see
~The winde whichthe faid Angels of che Airare andes’
The S hand. | <

But becaule-chere are-no Angels of che Air to.be found 2-
| ! O bove

nah Sie, Shek ik salen 9 = Sali Ne oe eee
Seen ae Stay Peery 3 a Fa FT oe oe RS ee OO ET We eT eee —— = -

S 4 ams Age £ a. ne

98 Magical Elements,
bove tlie fifth heaven , therefore'on Thunfday fay: rhe prayers
followirig'in the four parts of the world. iene

Smears — ae “

| | eas | At the Eaft. : |
O Dew? migne & excelle, & hanorate, perinfinita feculs, _ ff

By _ Arthe Welt, | iw

rogo%e piiffime Pater , quod mean fetsiionens ’s quod "cums OPUS,
j , ia :
& meum laborem hodie debeamcomplere, oc perfelleintelligere,
Tn qui vivis & regnas per infinita fecula feculorum, Amen,
ss:

Atthe North,
O Deus potens, fortis, & fine principio.
AttheSouth, "~

O'Dews porents Gt mifericors,

The Perfume of -Thirfday.. .

Saffron.

O Deus [apiens, & clare, & jufte ac divina clementia > Ege

The Conjuration of Thur{day.

Onjuro & #oafirmo [uper vosy Angeli fantkiy per nowen, Ca-

dosy Cada‘, Cados, Efchereie, Efcherere, Efcheree \\ Fiatim
YA y fortis firmator feculorum, Cantinc, faynty Janic, Anic, Cal-
bars SabbacyBerifay, Alnajnd! Griper nomen: Adonayy qiicre-
AU:t pifces reptilia in Aquis ) CO aves [acer faciem terra , val Antes
uer(us coelss die quinto: & per nimina Angeloruis [eroentium
in fexto exercitu corams paftore Angelo antto & mazno & potenti
principe > & per nowsen (Pella, qs eff Fuspivers'& per nomen Sigil

[unis

em preamps WTR EER TR EE RITE OS LEE ee re RY

Of Peter des A bane, 99
fui: & per nomen Adonay, fummi Det, omnium crentoris :
per nornes omrivns frellarum yo. per wits CF wirtetemeariém - as
per nomina praditta,conura te Sachiel Angele MBAgney quies te
prapofitus diei fours, ut pro me labores,&c, Asin the Conjura- H
tionof the Lords day,

The Spirits .of the Air of Thurfday 5 are fubje& tothe a
South-winde's rheirmarure is to procure chelove.ofwomen ; WS
to caufe men co be merry and joyful ; to pacifie ttrife and |
contentions ; to appeafe.cnemies 3 to heal the difeafed, and a
to dileafe the whole ; and procureth loffes, or taketh them tl
away. Their manner of: appearing is fpoken of already,

Confiderations of Friday.

| £9 He Angel of Friday,his Sigil,his Planet,the Signe coverh,

= O-=

ing chat Planet, and nampof che third heaven,

x

| st
¥ al . eee a
tAtiadl: 2 . Sep a . i

The Angels of Friday,

i
eS

| Anael, Rachiel. Sachiel,

The Angels of the Air reigning on Fridays
Sarabotes, Kine,
.. sae x Minifters,

adtihials \bledy. Abalidoth, Flach, vena
én mee O 2 The

“ '. Cee aie . = - ve. a o~ 2 $
ERE On Ripa OEE Re a RER PRI ORNL Se
Sg sae meena Tein ei : 9 Fan eee Se ane ein ee Te

OMS ame aoe. hat Sener eae = ne eS .

10% Magical Elements,

The winde which the faid Angels of the Air are under,’ |

eh
_ oni aines Pe
\ . ea
i ae - . ’
a - Se

The Wesk-winde,

_ Angels of the third heaven, ‘ruling on Friday, which are to
be.called from che four parts of the world.

At the Eaft,.

Setchiel;. Che dufitaniel, Corat,
Tamael. Tenaciel,

At the Welt. .

Turiel. -Coniél,’-. Babiel,
Kadie. Maltiel, Huphaltiel,

PO eee nT Spe eae anes
. ee
is Seis at Se oes eee has To =
ee . pane oe en :

Di AS eR OR NOL
Wap eer sso See

At the North.

1h
i ls

Peniel. ~--Penael,. Penat.
Raphael, Raniel,~ Doremiel,

eae
7 rae oe

At the South,

Porna, S7chiel. Chermiel,
Samaels San:anael, Famiel,

The Perfume of Fiiday,

Pepperwort.

The Conjitagen of Friday.

Oxjuro o confirms fuper vos Angeli fortes , fantti ata, po-
sentes 5 in nomine On, Heyy Heya, Jay Jey AdonayySaday,
| o

Gas Roe ae Set ee "Fs Coat
Se ee .
Ae % alien ia i ne ns Sle soe hota
i = ‘ TO ney ame ; ¢ arp =
: ; , 3 r
—S = a ence S SSE HSS ico > [eS eS
a a -

ean, ;

ESTO NE nyc Ne GP at

ee es

= a

a a Nagi

Coffiel,. Machatan, Uriel.’

rE i a RR LET OT AE ROE i lel ISIE GLEE TE ION OIE We

Of Peter de Abante.: loz

O in nomine Sady,qui creavit quadrupedia & anamaliareptilicy

ec homines.in [exto-diey. &, Ada dedit poteftatem {uper.omnia ani-
wealia : unde Lenedittum fit nomen creaioris in locu{uo: CF per
nomina eAngelorum fervientinm in tetio exer citu, coram Dagi-
el Angelo magno, ,rincipe forti aty, potent: : & per nomen Stel-
le qua eft Venus: & per Ssgillum ejus, quod quidem cft fantlum :
ey per nomina preditta conjuro fuper te Anael, qui es prapofi-
sus diei [exte, ut pro me labores, &C. As before.in the Conjura-
tion of Sunday.

The Spirits of the Airof Friday are fubje& to the Welt-
winde ; their nacure 1s to give filver ; to excite men, and in-
cline them to luxury ; toreconciie enemies through luxury ;
and to make marriages ; to aliure mento love women; to
caufe, ortake away infirmilies ; andto do all things which
have motion,.

* Confiderations of Saturday, or the Sab-

bath day..

THe Angel of Saturday, his Seal, his Planet, and the Signe
governing the. Pianet. . |

Ca Biel: t SS ee
oe? a

_ The Aneels'of Sacurday. .

_ The

jt

Bacireeet 5s 2 pesisigi a sch DCE

“103 Magical Elements,»

~The Angels of the Air ruling on Saturday.

Maymon, K ing.
Minifters:

Abnmalith. eAfaibi. Balidete . \ 00% Alsat

“The winde which ‘the faid ‘Angels'of che Air aforefaid ate
. under, , : OUT

The Southwest-winde.
The Fumigation of Saturday.

Sulphur. ‘ |
Ic is already declared in the Comfideration of Thutldafy .
That there are no Angels ruling the Air, above the\fifch hea-
ven : therefore inthe four Angles of the world, ufe rhofe
Orations which you {ee applied to thac purpofe on Thuriday,

The Conjuration of Saturday:

Wzjuve_&-.confirpio [uper vas Caphriel vel Caffiels Lacha-
Dror, & Seraquiel-Angeli fortes G potentes - & per nomen
Adonay, Adonays Adin), Eie, Eie, Eiey Aci; Acim, Ac my! a
dos, Cados, Ina vel Imas1ma, Saclay, 4, Sar , Domini form :to-
vis feculorum, qui in feptimo diequievt : & per illiem qui in be-
meplacito (uo filisAfrael IP hey elisatem,eblervandum dedit, ut
cum firm ter cuftodirert, o fantlificarent, ad haberdcm :nde bo-
nam in alio feculo remunerationem: Ox per noming Ar felcrum
ferviemium in exercitu feptimo Bovel Angelo magno & ovens
princinl: & per nomen fielle qua eft Saturnum : & per fanttum Si-
illum ejuis: & per nomina praditta conjure faper ie Caphriel, qui
prapo-

a EE A ALA ‘

PNW RN EEL EIEN LAO ee OE Be

Of Peterde Abano, 102
prapofitus es diei feptimayqua off dies Sabbatisquod pro me labores,
&c. As isfet down in the Conjuration of the Lords day.

~The Spirits of the Airiof Saturday are fubje& to the South-
welt-winde: the nature of them is-to fow difcords, hatred,
evil thoughts and Cogitations;to give leave freely, to-flay and
kill every one,and co lame or maim every member, Their man-
her of appearing is declared in che former book.

Sheesbesbetectcds tebeste be tebe

Tables.of the Angels of the Hours, ace

cording to the courfe of ‘the days.

SUNDAY,
Hours of the Anes ofthe Hours of the Angels of the
day. ours, day. hours,
1. Taye.  , . Michael, - %..:Onrer, Samael,
2, Janor. Anal, 8 Tunic, Michael,
3. Nalnia. Raphael, ° 9. INeron. Anzel,

4. Sala... Gabriele... 10,3 Favor... », Raphael,
j- Sadedals.. >, Caffieho. > 11. Abaye. . Gabriel,
6. Thamur.. >, Sachiely .- 12, Natalexs.. Caffiel,

Hours ofthe. Ancels ofitbe Heursofthe Angels.cfthe
night: “hours, »  nightacts) bheugs.

1. Beran. Sachiel,, qf 7, Netos, Caffiel, |

2, Baral.) S mzely 8, Ta‘rae, Sachie/,

3. Tha thes: Michael 9, Salffan. al S-maizel, - a
4. Athir,\. yi Anael,. So pg TO Aglo, . Michagk: ae
5. Mathuns:. R phazk.> « 11.Calerna,, Angel,
6: Rani. Gabriel, 32, Sabian, Raphael.

| Munday, -

“ = not oe - - 2
a — -—- = 7 “
- ee — << Laas ae a .
oe FRR BRR eee we ° fd bone - Soe eS i. .
no Br ia Sn ni alee ea ey aap Mr Roe ee Tones Be all ~

i Spent

asec Aiea
ai oa iii We cc,
= pare oe PRS fo, We err Se
“ 9 —— art: an pee -

cae oer
Eg Sa :

SS ee —
— wa = Fe RS OE ES

ee

be a

=< ees pete SA) mera TET : 5

Hours of the

satis #5

a

Magical Elements,

“Mun Da-Y...

‘Angels‘of the Hours of the

day. hours. night.
1. Yayn. Gabriel. 1, Beronm.
2. Janer, Caffiel, 2, Barol.
3..Nafnia, .. Sachiel. 3. \Thaun.
a. Salla. ‘Samael, 4. Athir.
5. Sadedali, Michael. 5. Mathen,
6. Thamur,  Anael. 6, Rana.
9° Ourer. Raphael. . 7. Netos..
8. Tanic. Gubriels . %. Tefrac.
9. Neron. Cffiel.” *: 9, Salfur.
10. Jayon. Suchiel, 10. Aglo.
11. dba. S amzel, a1.Calerno.
12, Natalon. Michael. 12, Salam.
Tuespay.
‘Hours of the Angels ofthe Hours of che
day. hours. night.
1. Tayn. Samsel, 1. Beron.
2. Janor. Michae). 2. Barol,
3. Nefnia. Anael. 3. Thanu.
4. Salla, Raphael, 4. Ahir.
§. Sadedali. . Gabriel. . 5. Mathon;
6. Thamur, , Caffel. 6, Rana.
7. Ourer. Sazhiel. 97. Neto’.
8. Tanit. Samze), 8, T-frac.
9, Nevon Michael, 9. Sulfur.
to. Javon. Anael. ‘210. Agh,
11, bay, Raphael,“ “g1.Calerna.

12,. Natalon. Gabriel,

12, Salaw.

Angels of ‘the

“hours.

Anzel,

Raphae l,
Gabriel.

Cefftel.
Sachiel.
Samael,
Michael.
Anaels
Raphael,
Gabriel.
Caffiel,
Sachiel.

Angels of che
hours.

Coffiel,

Sachiel,
Samael,

Michael,

* Anaels

Rap ael.
Gabrie',
Caffiel.
Sachiel.
Samael,
M.chael.
Andel > -

“Wednel-

ane eae apa nein tes Beata. neta

a"

day,

i. Yayn,
2. jamor.
3. Naluza,
4. Salla.
5. Sadedali,
6. Thamur,
7. Ourer.
8. Tanic,
9. Neron,
Lo. Fajen,
Ir. Abay,
12, Neron.

ESS S=

Hours of rhe

| 2. Faner.

36 Nafniz,

Bm - 4, Salle, !
| §. Sadedali,
| 6. Thawiur,
Bn 7. Oxrer.
| 68, Tunic,
| | 9. Neron.

| 10. fayon,
11. db,”

Hours of the

_ Caffiel,

day, I Pat

12, Natalon, _&

Of Peter de Abano,

WEDNESDAY,

Angels of the Hours of the
‘hours,

Raphael.
Gabriel.

 Caffiel,
Sachiely

Samael,
Michael,
Anael,
Raphael, .
Gabriel...

SAC. hiel.
S ae

night,

Ss Berom,
.2. Barol,

o 3-6 Thants.. |

Ae Athir..

5+ Mathoy,

6, Randy.

7 Neves,

OP De
> ae Safar.
: _I10. Agi.

IX. Calernd,.
Y2, Salam.

THURSDay,

. Anael,

Angels. of the. Hours.of rhe.
hours, od night,,
.. Sachiel, 1..Beron.
Samael. "2. Barol.
. Michael, oo 30: Thank.
ay Aching
Raphael, ‘5, Maton,
Gabriel, 6, Rana.
~— Caffiel, 7. Netos.
Sachiel, 8, Tafrac.
Samael, 9. Saffur.
Michael, 10, Aglo,
A za), 11,Calerza, .
aphacl, °° 42, Salam.

P

EE RE AAEM ELE LIE LL LIE LS

Angels of. the

hours,

» Michael,
Anzel,..

.e Raphael. A

Gabriel, .
Caffiel.
Sachiel,.
Samael...
Michael,
Anael.,.

: Raphael,

Gubriel..
Caffiels

Angels.of the:

Ours, .

Gabriel,
Cafiel,
Sachiel,
Samael,
Michael
Anael,.
Raphael,
Gabriel, .
Caffiel,
Sachiel,
Samzel..

Michael.

Friday,

ET i ee Oe

day.’

1, Yayn.
2, Janor:

3. Nafnia,

4. Salla.

5. Sadedali,
6. Tharsur.
7, Ourer.
8. Tanic:
9. Neron,
10. jJayon.
11. bay,

nnn tll anne mien ii oebencidlsilichaae noice:

Magical Elements,
FRIDAY.
Hoiirs‘of the “Afigels ofthe Hours of the Afgels of the
hours. night. hours,
““Anaels* ‘1, Beron.  . ’ Samael.
“Raphael. ““ 2, Barol, Michael.
‘Gabriel, 3. Thana, >” Anael,
“Caffiel; ‘14, Ahir. Raphael,
Sachiel, ‘5, Maton, ~~ Gabriel,
Samael: °° 64 Rana.” Caffiel.
- Michael. “9, Netos.’ S achiel,
Anael: 8. Tafrac. ‘Samael,
‘Raphael. “19. Saffur. “Michael,
Gabriel. "10. Agloy Aneel,
Caffiel. ' ¥1.Calerna, Raphael,
Sachiel, ‘12, Salam. Gabriel,

12, Natalon.

Hours ‘of the
day.

1. Yayn.°

2. Janor.
3. Nafuia.
4. Salla,

5. Sadedali,
6. Thamur.
7. Onrer,
8. Janie:
9. Neron,
10. Fayon,
11, Abay,
12, Natalon,

a. HUH 3
SATURDAY,

Angels of the ‘Hours of rhe
hours;

| Caffiel:
Sachiel;

Samael,

Michael,
“Anael.

Raphael.
Gabriel.
Caffiel.
Sashiel.
Samaelé
Michael,
Arael,

night.

1. Beron..
‘2. Barol,

3.- Thanu. |

4. Athir.
5. Maton,
6, Rana,
7. Neto
8. Tafrac.
9. Sulfur.
10. Agh,

11. Calerna.

12, Salam,

Angels of.the
hours.

Raphael, :
Gabriel,
Caffiel,
Sachiel,
Samael.
Michael,
Andel,
Raphae!.
Gabrie!,
(affiel.
Sachiel.

‘Samael,

ets ae

a TNR NA AOI IL RO ee ONE GLARE ATE IO ERIE De

nee _ Of Peter de Abano. 107
But this is to be obferved by the way, that the firft hour of

che day, of every Country; and in every feafon whatioever,
is to beaffigned to the Sun-rifing , whemhe firtt appeareth a-
rifling in the horizon : and the fir(t hour of che night is to be
the thirteenth hour, from the firft hour of the day. But of thefe
things it is fufficiently fpokem,

Bestatestrbe bite bebete tsbetr

FINIS.

Zz
‘
LU
f
ral
| ar
i
{ ee
oi i
| | ait
ot ae
t a \4
hc ae
i q ‘
ee *
es
ipa]
i
& 4)
, , en
*)
i - 3
{ tery
io oe
"i Pad
i hoy
| i
t bet
1 ae
| £
}) vA
si
[oe
i
a
yf
j
i
ee
a
THe
l “a
ql
a
Ke
Ft
<&
x

Se aa SE TT

eee eee ae tio I Exe Se — Seite _ —

aire a Pigs PAE a FS
Se ene te RES ti tilemacasaenendll va -

Of the Nature of Spirits.

pie ei ie tne.

= a ae
bs i ae
———

_ ISAGOGE: |
Ain Introductory Difcourfe of the na-

tureof, fuch Spirits. .as.are exercifed in the
lublunary Bounds; their Original; Names.Of- ’
fices Illufions, Power, Prophefies, Miracles ; and how i
they may be expelled and driven awa y: if

eT

en SIE IES
er Ss See SS

Bs

By Geo, Pittorins Villinganus Dr. in Phyfick:
. 3 t

| ii Qasro Rand Potr ux,

Mes ane He Greeks do reporrsthat Caftor CY Pole |
, bax have both proceeded
mye. but this I icarcely. credit,by reafon of

Caitor, Principally, Pallas,

Sees - s — ‘ F / = < = sie : 2 2 = — ‘ ea T, OF

1id A Difcourfe,

Pollex, But it ig not to be fuppofed, that the Greeks are
vain in all things ; but as many others, when they {peak our
ofa three-footed thing ; whereof alfo. the Poet Ovid. {peaks
In verle ,. %

at
neh a Nec fingunt omnia Graci.

RTs _

it noms to. sCaiter..In this proverb I ptotelt they are mofktrae, with-
mini Deus. OUL any exception, rhati1s, 2:8 ewae dr Opame Susuonty. that Js,
One manto another 1 a devil. “ae ge
Pélhéw: Wherefore believeft thou this to be molt true,
Castor 2
Homobe CBtOr. ‘Truely, that man to man is a devil and a ravening
wolf, daily events do mott certainly prove, if we do but

mini diabo- : i :
lus. nore the treacheries that one man invents daily. againft

—

Sn

GS Te ee

deceits, adulreries , and an hundred.vipers of this nature;
the fathers pecfecure the fon,with a ferpentine and poifonous
biting one friend feeks to devour another neither. canthe
euelt be fafe wich his hoft.

Pollux, Vconfels it is truth thowfpeakeft ; but for ought I
hear, thou doft mif underftand the Etymologie of the word.
compared in this Proverb ; for Demon here is not an horrible:
or odious name , butthe name of one that doth adminifter

Plin.lib.2 help or faccor unto another,and whom Piiny callerh a God.
hh (Castor. Therefore doft thou affirm the word Demon in

mers pee at ees re ype
Sa ae

this Proverb tofionifie any other then cunning and malici-

ous acculer ?
Polluse, Thou hat not fhotbelides che mark: for,that there

ate more Densons then that fublunaty one which thou under -
flandett,every one may eafily ‘perceive , who kath not negli-
gently read the opinions of the moft excellent Plate.
.... Castor. I defire therefore 5 that thou would!t not coriceal
fach his writings’; bur chat I may apprehend the marrow

thereof. ory :
Pollux, Ywillembrace fuch thy defire, for truely I do de=

foreyand give attention,

ali
ia bberies, thefts, plunderings, rapes, flaugh |
| another, the robberies, thefts, plunderings, rapes, Maugiterss - |

light to treat with thee concerning this fabjeQ’; mark there-
Th. g We eee

- = FGF EO EE OE
Siac kil ic ee Sn aa ak al A ek e

-Of the Nature of Spirits? tI
Plate divided the orders of Devils or Spirits into three’ Three de-
degrees y. which as they are diftin in the greatnets of their eects
| dignity ,fo alfo they are different in the diflance and holding P""*
, | of their places. . And the firit order he aicribeth to thofe Spi- The fir
§) «fits whofe bodies are nourifhed of thé mott pureclement of degree,
i Ait, wrought and joyned together, in amanner, asit were of Spirits.
| —_-with iplendid threeds, not having fo much reference to the ia
§ = clement of fire, chat they may be perfpicuous to the fight ; a
) neither do they fo much participate. of the earth’, char they a)
| may be rouched or felt ;. and they:do: inhabit the Ceeleftial
) Theater,attending and Waiting on their Prince, not to be de-
; clared by any humane tongue, or beyond the commands of
-@ - the moft wife: God.
| But the other desree is derived fromthofe Spirits which Thefecond
Apuleius termeth rational animals, -paffive in their minde,and ¢egtec.
erernal in their time, underftanding che apoltate Spirits {pread
abroad from the bounds and borders of the Moon, unto ug
under the dominion of their Prince Beelzebub , which be-
fore the fall of Luciferhad pure clarified bodies ; and now,
like unto the former, do wander up and down, after cheir
tranfereffion; in rhe form of an aiery quality, |
Cater, Theleldo not: conceive are underftood in the
Greek Proverb : for thefe do hurtsand are the accufers and be-
trayers of men, But proceed; |

Pollux, The third degree of Spirits is of a divine deities tie thieg
which Is called by Hermesy A divine miracle to man, if he do degree,
not degenerare from the Kingly habit of his firit form ; whom

ig
therefore of this kinde the Greeks and Plato have‘called De- } | a

= ~ >
BP CR RR RO TE OO ne ,

mons, thatis, God ;.and that. man may belike unto God, and .
) @) profitable and commodions oné to another 3; and i{oalio (the | jG
+ &) Syrian being witnels ) we. have known Platohimlelf ‘tohave?s) ale at
 beencalled Demon, becaule he had fet forth very many things fd dew wm, de
| @ Of Very hich matters 5 for rhe good of the Commonwealth; and diiffo- i
«3nd fo likewiie ArifPotle > becanfe he very latgely difputed of“:
| Sublunaries , and all iich things as.are fubjest to motion.and™. |
| Cuce. Homer calleth,God and. evil Spiries, Demons y withoue™ aie
| Pucune a diicrimination, vit

Ci Astor.

a ES ee :

f fs

i
‘
‘
i
y
% +
is
oh
+ $f
7 $
? R
‘ fe
te
& q
#
vf ie
Bete
7 ita
Bae
i
‘

a ——— mR. a

REP
~

E geeers T-2%

= ‘ Ss
ne ee

SRI SS i Ripe SRR OTR! hae SMM TRS, SS

=: Ps —
ee aes

mz A Difcourfe,

Castor. Thou haft committed the'fhip to the waves,Pollax ;
therefore ceafenot:to.proceed, aid declare fomethins' more
concerning the Office and imployment of thete Spirits, to
whom Paro attributeth the fecond decree, and calléth them
Lunaties, 1 edict Doe, 2928 3

\oPollax. What fhall I fay ? . ae

(aster. Inthe:firit place, declare wherefore thou halt be-
fore cermed thete Spirits cunning’ and: ‘math’ knowing ‘Ac-
culers. | pasha

Why the pH: Saint: Auguffineunfoldech this difficuley, ahd faithy

devil is

faid to

have much gpd agreeable femsinal permixtures of elements, he doth

know-

Jedge.

That.4 Dewi doth fo fer fiqnifie the cunning und much knowing.
quickneRand vivacity of bis deceitful. wit 5 that by the me fee

0 know
the fecrets ana unknown vertucs of men, asthofe things ap
may bereffetted and wraught bythemfelves{uccelfively and leifure-
Lj according to the courfe oj nature, he by a'fpeedy hafting or for-
cing of the works of waturesor by his own arty fooner brinzeth the
fame topaf, « An/example hereof he giveth'in che wife men of

_ Pharadl-who immediately brought forth frogs.and ferpents at

the commandment of the King’; which nature’more flowly:.
and lejfurely procreaterhyis 19 oniw ob (temitol 943 OIG ON
Castor, Thou hatt excellently anfwered tothe queftion,
Pollux; but ddde fome thing concerning the original of thole_
Spirits which do refitt and refule verre ; for oftentimes
doubting , I have been perfwaded-that fiich Efynines as are~
from Ged, donor appearonr of rhe earth.) 4 Re
Pollux, The Ecclefiattical Scripwure*everywhere maketh
mention of che rifing of chem; ‘but Iiwill unfo'd fuch a donbt: ©
and there do.arife many and various opinions ‘of wricer’,but
more, common'y Perer Lombardus in his book of Sentences, ~
draweth his Allegations out of St. sAwgufine npon Gevefiss
to wit, That the Divel wasbeforehis fall an Archan-eh, and had

fine tender body, compofed by God, out of theferéntry and prigft

matter of the Skie and Air 3) bucthen aver his fill from an Arch
angel y be was wade cn Apoftatel, ard ly body no more fine ard

fubril. 5 but his body: was.madeithat i micks faffer heefekof a’

wore £r0f fubfiance.from the quality of the were objcureparkyand

riffions

FT OE RN EES TEE AOS LOE

Of the Nature of Spirits. 11}
fpiffieut' Aur, which body alfo was ftricken andl aftonifhed with the
raging madnef? of pride, did draw away very many which were
then Angels with him inrolisfervice-and bondage, that they might
be made Devils, who for him mm this trouble[ome world da exercife
their fervile courfes for him, and they da comtel the inhabitants
therein, or rather entice thems and to this purpofe they undertake ln
S)  Warivus endeavours, and do attempt various and manifold horrible An
| fiwdres , that are abominable unto God, and they ferve in flavery a
and thraldom to Beelzebub their Prince, and are held in wo {t nM
frrong captivity. a

Castor. What ? Have we the fall of this Archangel no-
Where ele in holy writ, but in che writings of St. Auzaftine 2

Pollux, We have alfo the fall of ocher Angels. The fall of
“Castor, Where ? ; | “3 Leeifer an

tet ey}

’
SS

an Evangeli(trather then ‘a Prophet, becaute he fo fully and
| plainly forecold of Chritt and his kingdom: he ‘makerh men- .)
tion hereof in:his 14 Chapter, «And we have ‘them alfo ie
. fpoken of bythe Apottle’ Peter, when he faith, God {pared not i
bis cAngels which finned, 2 Epitt. 2.
Caster. Have the Devils 'atele& p:ace appoirired them by q.
God, which rhey inhabit ? , :

“Pollax, Peter che head of the Churchy:m rhe place before War
© quoted, affirmeth them to be caft hezdlowg mo hell, referved in paaain) aN
the chain’ of bel, from whence (as Corcetins faich) they sever v0 pp uBred .
‘Dont, puleR it beto tempt, provoke and delude men. But St. eAu-
2) guftine the Champion of Chrilt; in his book of The Agony of | j 4
JB a ( briftianéacheth, That thefekinde of Spirits doinhabit in the | q
@ febharyregion And his ‘49 Epilt. he fets forth, “That i ¢.
@) the’ mf dark: and obfcure pari of the Ar 5 is prede[Pinared unto AE
| ) theni'asdpriftn, that they my the more neerly caft their-nets of in
 enucing and detaining. | FB i
| Castor. Origen hath taught, Thatthe puvijbmten:s ofthe Dex The tot- ie }
Dil are ditointed for at me 5 what failt chow this? 6 + | int ntwof ;
. Pollex:’ What fhall Vfay 2?! unlefs 1 fhould bewail and de- ox pe .

plote the opinion offogreat amin, « |
(ator, Whereforé fhouidtt thou'do fo? Hl
vote Q. Pot- HW

lifting,

DR ER RIEL SERIE IT an ona vai
canals — er hia a ‘ an

Lee = “ on

FO TREES ; - .
© ne “ . a ~ - ~ « oe . tn —— of

rg A Diftourfe,.

Pol.: Truely if they have hardened themfelves in wicked}

nefs , time.cannot purge nor cleanfe them ;-or if they never
fo much defire ic, they can never be able ro accompiifh ics
for there is no{pace of repentance, nor time-to recal that
which is paft,civen.unto them, |

_ Cofter. Thou halt now. declared that the: Archangel chat
became an apoftare, did draw away very many other Angels
with him in his fall, chac they might become Devils: could

not he of his own proper infeparate malice after his fall fuffie-

ciently rule over his own Province, without the Angels chat
fell with him? : 3

Why the Pel, He. could: but being allured by that.pride ,. whickt

Devil hath made him fo arrogantly affect the Majelty.of God, he did fo

ame's"§ far frive to be like unto God » that he chofe very many Mis

nifters unto himfelf, co which in general be doth -not commit

all things he would have effectédsbuc.diverte things to divers

Miniflers,as may be gathered from the Hebrew Aftronomers,.

Demons Thole which we call Fou, & Antemeridianii, which are falfe

Joviior Gods, that is, lyers, which defire to be efteemed and adored
dntemerid. f+ Gods , and they are appointed as Servants and flaves to:
| the Devil their Prince, that they might allure the people of
the earch into acommon love of themfelves,which Peto faich,
Is the fountain of allwickedne(e,..that they may afpire to authority
and greatnel, covet to be-gorgeou|ly clothed 5 to be called Me-
narchs of the earth in perpetual power 5. andGods upon earth, Ie.
‘otat.,, 48 faid, That ic was one of thele.chat {poke ro our Saviour,
~ fhewing him all the Kingdoms of the. earch, faying, All thefe.
things will I give thee, sf then wilt fall down and worfhip me,
Caftor, Certainly thefe Aferidsani,I have almoft declared to
aoe appear amadnefs in Libicu, Sappho,and Dioclefianthe Em-
Spirits, | Perour,who accounted,the urmolt degree of bleffednefs WAS, ,
oe to be reputed for Gods. Wie 3
Libicys, - Pol. Truely, this is acertain' natural foolifhnefs of the

Saphoand minde,and of humane nature: he began, having taken certain.

Dietlefan, little birds to teach them by liccle and little to pronounce
ods.

The Com. numane words, & fay, u¢yas tds ¥400r, that is, Sapho ts a great

meme of God, Which brids when they could pronounce the words

Sapbe. pet-

a REOPENS RE BT Ne lel Re OS LR ORT I RI

Of the Nature of Spirits. ¥I5

perfectly, he fent them abroad for this end and purpole, rhae
flying everywhere abroad , they mighe repeat thofe words ;
and the people which were ignorant of his deceitful inven.
tion, Were drawn co believe, that thofe words were {poken
by divine inttin&, and thereupon adore and w orfhip him for
a God. The orher would compel his Subjeéts hereunto,that
roftrating themfelves down, and lifting up their hands, they
ould worfhip him as Almighty, |

Caffor, Butare not they the caprives of the Devil » who
ftir up wars, which are called bloody men in Scripture ? Pielee ss.

Pol. The Martialifts of the North part of che world,arecal- +,. S pi-
led Executioners of vengeance, Authors of devaftationsyand rits of the
lowers of evil, working and executing judgement with A/mo- North.
dews, for their King Abaddon or Apoltyonwhom St. Fohx in his
Revelationmentionech to be banithed and expelled; for thele

Spirits have commicted to them rapines,hatred,envy, robbe-. Merid'an

ries, wrath, anger, the excitements and provocations to fin, Spirit.
war and fury;fometimes making rhe Meridional Spirits their :
Meffengers. And -Arioch the Spirit of vengeance, whofe work rectus. 39.
Is tocaute difcord among brethren’, to break wedlock, and a8,
diffolve conjugal love, that it’s impoffible ro be renewed ; of

thele mention is made in. the 39 Chapter of Ecelefiafticus,

And Efasa: the heavenly Prophet {peaketh of other Spirits

fent from God to the e&gyptians to make them erre,

which were Spirits of darkne(s,that is,of lyes ; and this kinde Spirits of
of Spirit they call Bolichins. | _darknefs.

Caftor. Is unlawful venery, and exceffive gluttony, alfo co
beimputed to the Devils? :

Pol. Yes chiefly ; for La ublichus doth affcre,Thatthe. Spirits, Occidene
of the water, of the wefternpart of the world, and [ome meridionad.sal Spirits,
Spirits y are predeffinated to this purpofe ; {ach as Netrach aad
Kellen, that do fo frame and contrive unlawful love's which pro-
duce {hame and d:{honeffy , revellings and furmandixings, fur-

_ fetings with exceffive drunkenn: {5 wanton dances, ol uttony and.
- vomiting: they wander about Lakes, fib-ponds, and rivers, and
which ave the worft , foul and moft fraudulent kindeof S pirits

and by Alcinach an occidental S pirits he cauferh [hipwracks, tem-
= Q. 2

pelt sy.

eT ae eT ears =
Cae ae ee a
* seats -- SINE Cer
Yarn ee

rr ap Se Sipe em

CHS at Rane RS ta et ine IAT TT EMD

176 A Difcéurfe, ee
peftsyearthgwakes, hail, rain , and frequently [ubver eth and o-

verturneth (hips and if he wth appear vifible, he azp-areth and -

The {piri % feenin the (bape of a woman, Tue Hebrew Afttonomers before

of che air
do infe&
the air,

Ephef.2.

Behic ot déciare'and maintain That there are Spirits of the fiery element,

fire,

Spirits of
ths earth.

Subrerra-
nean 9 pi-
FHS,.

{poken of,'do fay, That the Spirits of the Air do caufe thunders ,
lightnings and thunderbolts, that fo they msight corrupt and infect
the Air, 12d produce peftilence and deftruttion, OF Such kinde
of Spirics St. John makes mention in the 9 Chapter of the
Revelation, having Mecevs for their eurelar, which isa Spiric
caufing: heat in the rime of noon, © St. Pas/calleth him,
The Prince of the power of the Air, and the Spirit that rule:h in
the ch:ldren of difo'edience, )
Caftor, Are there {o many monfters in Phlece. on, Pollux ?
Fo!, Andmany more ; forthe fame Hebrew Affertors do:

raging about like the fierce Panthers, which are converfant under
the lunary YELIONS that wat foever. is Committed to thems 5 they
forthwith execute the fame. cAnd there are'Sprrits of the earths,

which inhabit in groves woods and wildernelfesy end are tle plague

and milchief of hunters; and (cmetin. es they frequent open frelssy
endeavouring to fedwre travellers and vaffengers out of tee agp
ey.

waysor to deceive them with falle and wicked illdfionss or elje t

feekto afflict men with a hurtful melancholy,to make them furicus

or mad, that they may hurt them, and fometinses almoft kill tem.
The'chief of thefe are Sanyaab and Achimael, which Are oriental
Spirits,’ kinde unapt for wickednel, by reafon of the conftancy of.
their difpofitions. There are alfo fub:erranean Spirits, which do
inbab-tin dens and cavernes of the earth, and in remote concavi-
ties of mountaines, that they might invade deep pits, and the
bowels of the earth ; thefe do dig'#p metals, and keep treafures,
“whith: oftentimes they do tranfport from one place to anathery,
left'any wb tn (hould mae ule th:reof: they fir wp windes with flah-
ing’ flames of fire they (mite the foundations of building 5,
atting frightful daunces inthe night, from which rey [uddenly

van away, withmaking a noife and |: ards of bells, thereby cauf—

ing fear in the beholders ; aud fometimes difftmblin: and faining
thensfelueiro be the Souls of the dead : notwirkfanding they are
ignorantin compalfing their deceits # on women 5 of wiich compa-

ny

POL NINN PG AEE LS OE el ORO S LEA IT IER LEE

| Meridtan Sp rits.

-gekielcalleththem, veffels of death and destrution, Fhe Ne- | 4 |

Of the Nature of Spirits. ney
ny the Negromancers do fay, 18 Gazae/, Fegor and Anarazo!?

Caftor. How warily ouglit aman to walk, Pollzx, amonolt iB
fo many ginnes and {nares : hile: |
Pol. A min never Walketh fafely, unlefs he fortife and a manne-
ftrenechen himfelf with the armour of Ged,which is; Thag lis ver wals- |
loynes be girt about with truth and having on the breft-plate of © ie ng ie
righteon(ne(®, lec bins walk with his feet [bod with the preparation of *”°" . rat
the Gofpel of peaceyand let him take the (heild of faith,and the he>  :
met of [alvation , whereby he {hall dah in peices ali the darts of brs :
adverfary, But hear furcher:T here are allo befides thele,orher
lying Spirit's (alrhongh hey are all lyers) yet thefe are more
apt co lye; they are called Pyebous; from wsence Apollo ts cal- i
led Pythius. They havea Prince,of whom mention is made y x-nfi5, We
in che book of the’ Kingsywhere it 1s aid, [will be a lying Spi-
rit in the mouth of all thy Prophers ; from whom the Spirits of
iniquity do bur alictle differ, which alfo‘are called veflels of 3
wrath. Belia/,whom they have incerpreted'to‘be without any. oe
equal, and Pax/ calleth him aii ‘A poltare of tranierefforsis fil-
thily. infervient for*the worlt'invettions. ?P/0afirmerh
Theut to have been {uch a’one,’ who was che fir thac found
out and mvenred Piayes and Dice #*to whom we will joyne
the Monk , who invented rhe ufe of Gunpowder, in his En! paler t
pins of war.’ Of thele Fzcob' makes mention in Gene fs, Where yi,
he. bieffeth this Sons :* hé taich, Simeon and Levi arebloody G 2.49. }
Veffels of iniquity ; Ob my foul, come not thod into their counfels, a
The Pfalmif termech thele-Spiries, veffels of deaths Efaias cal... ig ; 4
lech chem, weffels of fury 3 Jeremiah, veffels of wrath 5 and “Ex Pfa'.7 : } j
ne
gromancers do ‘call the laid’ BeliahChodar , ‘aw orient +1 S pirits ie
which ath under him alfo thé’Spirits of Fuglers's who do insitare }
and endeavour to alt miracles, that they may feduce talfe Ma gi~ 7 a iF
cians and’ wicked perfons, Tt is apparently manifelt, rhat the hap
Yerpent which deceived Eve, was uch a feducer, and Svatis
is his Prince, of wiemric'is {poken in rhe Revelation, that he
foculd deceive the' whole world, And fuch aone was he,that at
Tubinga,in the fignt of many people devoured a whole Chas 5
riot and {ome horfes, Caffor, Hie

1:8 A Difcourfe, |
‘ Caftor. ‘Atid.what fhall be rhe endof thefe falfe Prophets,
and workers of wickednefs ? I can icarce believe that rhereis
any angle or corner in the whole fabrick of che world, tharis
free from them, |
Pol. Scarce che fmalleft mire chat may be feen,
The world Cafor. Therefore doft thou truely call: che.world the re-
isthere- Ceptacle of thofe-falfe lights,
cepracleof Po}, If it were not moft fafely.purged with the Sword of
the word. of God, ic would forchwich be worlé,
Caftor, Waichour:doubr. 7
Pol, Neverthelefs I have feen many-that remain,.whom I
have not yet in{crided in his frantique Catalogue,
devils,falfe- Caffor, Whoare.they ? ae
accufers;  “Po/, Falfecacculers and {pies, obedient to Aftarethwho is
and tpics.» called a Devil among the Greeks; and John callech him the ac-
culer of the brethren.  Alfo there are tempters and. de@eivers
that lie in wait to deceive, who are prefent with every man,
and thele we rerm evil Angels,which have Ammon for cheir
King,:& they do affe& men with an infatiable avarice 8 chir-
{ty defire after authority and dominion, ;Thereare others
Pista. called Lucifugi,which fly from che-light, neverappearing in
fliers fiom the day, bur delighting in darknefs, malicioutly.vexing and
the light, troubling men, and-fometimes by Gods permiflion, either
by fome rouching, breathing orin{piration,do-hurt tothem ;
but truely they area kind whichyare unapt for to do much
wickednefs, becaufe they efchew &Aly from any communica-
tion wich men. ‘Pliny the fecond relates, that there was [uch a
A horrible eve at Athens, ix 4 certain {paciousboufe, which Anthenodorus
apparition thé Phitofopher haipened to purchafe. And Suetonius in his fixth
of a Spirit book of Cefarsmakes mention of another co have long con-
see tinued in the gatden of Lansianss. ‘ !
Antheno. ~ CAftor.\ delire,if ic be nor too irkfome ro thee,declare unto
dorus, Me what P42y {peakech-concerning this Spirit of eAntheno-
dorus, hors’ }
Pol. The ftory is fomerhing long and prolixious 5 yet it
fhall nor much trouble me.co relare ir. . Ieis thus: Péinzy in

the feventh book of his Epsstles writeth Of a certain tS
é pam

bet atacand bettie iad a ra a a eS

Of she Nature of Spirits. Lio
Spactone honfe at Athens, whichno body would inhabit by rea son of
the notturnal incur fions of Spirstsywbich-were fo fermidable to the
inhabitants, that fometimes inthe da y-time , and when they were
watching they would éaft them into dreams, fo alwayess that the
_ fhapes. & forms which they then [awswere ever prefent in their me- |
‘ mory. Where at length acertain Philofopher named Anthenodo< it
Hs happened-to purchale thar houfey- and prepared and furnifbed Nam
the fame for himfelf to dwellin 3 and becaufeal men had an evil og
fufpition of that houfe ,. he forthwith commanded hisferoants to 8
provide him abed and tables , that after he had compleated and fi- a.
nilhed bys ftudy he might £0 to bed. He therefore(faith Pliny) when at
he went. in (in the | evening) and applied himlelf to his fiudy,: ta
frddenly heard the locks to [hake openyand thechains to be moved :
neverthele(s he-did-not lift uphiseyes, ror flirred from lis book ,.
but- flopped his-ears with bis fingers y left-that furious tumslp
might work.a vain fear upon him + but the noife {till approaching:
neerer~unto himyat length he looked Up, and faw an effigies like
unto a finger beckoning and calling unto him, whichhe Lttle re.-
garded, anil it had touched himthreetimes > 4nd the noife drew
weer unto the tables and then-he looked up; and took a light, znd;
beheld the Spirit, as it were an old many worn away with withered
leannel and deformitys his beard hanging down long, horrible and:
deformed hair , his. legs and feet were .as it were laden with chains
and fetters : he went tewards a gatewhich was bolted, and thire:
left the Phi!ofopher, and vanilhed away, .

Caftor. What fearful things thon relateft,Pollax ) but what :
was the event-of this fad freétacle ?- .

Pol, The next day he related the whole matter ro:the Ma-::
giftrates in order, as he had {feenthe fame,admonifhing them
that they fhould dig dilizently about the threfhold of the -
) door ; for there it was probable they mighr.finde fomething,
which might caufe the houfe to be quiet and habitable,
Coffer, What did they finde ?. |

Pol, Having digced up the earth , Pliny faich,- They found

| adead carcaf, bound and intangled in chains and fetrers’s bis
. flefh besng confumzd with devouring time , which withour delay
LD they canfed to be buried, According to the Chriftian ceremonies.

: (after.

420 we A Difooar[e, oo >

\ Cafter. Bue this. being porformed, did thehoule afterwards
become qniec and habitable? |
Poly.Yesy very well, : ,
heyace . Caffor,. What madnefs therefore:poflefleth them whio pro-
policed phane and deltroy Church+yards.. where rhedacred Oreans
wich Mad’ Of the holy and bleffed Spitic do reft; and do give the bo
nefe,thar . Of the holy:an pitic do reft ; o give the bones
deftroy  Ofthedead:for meat to the Spirit Zaze/a,of whom mention
sturch- 18 made.in the glof the.Kiags 3 and weread in Papfanias, 2-
Ss mongit the Hiltories of ‘Delphos that he was called Exryne-
Phe Spirit nina | , hoe
Pol. Thou thale finde, chat che Governours of Cities that
were.of the opinion and judgementof Chriftiansidid fubverr,
deftrey and prophane thete holy places, that herein the youch
mishe dancetheir mocking interindessafter the furious {ound
of the drum or taber, and{ing, Jo pean’; ‘or, theréthe poor ins *
feriour old: wometrdid fell bale: crumpety or lupines'which®
God would have to be purged wich holy prayefs; for the fal-*
vation of fouls, or breaking:of breadto the hungry. ge
(aftors Bucitis an impious and heathenifh thine'fote have
rouched the anointed.of God) g SIGE. Ie SS
Pol. And«worte then heathenifh®+ forthe heathens did
The Cere- highly efteem-the Rites and Ceremonies of ‘bitrials', as E/pi-
Ser of nor is Witnefs in Homer , where he yei'deth up his life; and
in grcar ec in Honer hefpeaketh to Aipifes, Tintreat thee, O Lyfe, to be .
fteem a= mindesi wl of me and sot: depart away hence and leave me unin=-
moneftthe rerreds left that, vot being ritely bavied, T (babe made the wrath -
Heathens. of the Gods. And Arclita thePhilofepher in Flaccys rhs’
Speaketh toirhe Mariner © OTS ort |

i Rr
Z.xalus &

Ese YUOTHHS.

®

—

aren. see ea
er : ——e eens
we ss ea oa

a a
ect =:

pn ar

Aimy ene

r a ‘%
fit ;

% -
ts

“book of ns Hyrtaie Notus obruitiundis, ae
VErlese | Attu Nauta vagéne parce malignus harents
Offitus & capiti inbumato; 2 stir ies
Particulam dare; fic qnitungue minabitur Enrms
Flathibus HefperitzV Cnupine 8% 6
“Plettantur.filaastefofjite mulragive merce’
Unde poteft sibi deflwat equo, sa

Horace ry: Me guoqne divexi Rapidis comes rionis |’

| , | 1K,

; i

, i )

E ne a

{ f

au a F

a fe ee
A i hea
} t '
f }

ta

in

b 5

Sowa

-and duly by them buried,

ToS aH NO an UA PEPE Se RE ASS ate ia Re TE oO ORS

of the Nature of Spirits.
Ab Fove Neptune, facri Cultede Tarentis
Neglicu immeritis nocituvare y
Pof modo te natis frandem consmittere : fors c y
: Debits Jura vicel4, juperba
Te manent ipfum pracibns non linguar multis
Ted, piacula nulla refalvent,

And Palinurus to o£neas in the fixth book of Virgils A=

welds.

Nine we fluctus habent ver{anta, in littore venti,
Quodte per Coli jucundurs lumen & att as

Per geniterem ore, per [pem furgentis Juli.
Ervipe me his invitte mealis, ant tu mihs terrane

Injice nama, potes.

(astor. Have the Gentiles fo greatly efteemed the ceremo- The vain

ny of burials? eligi
ortne

Pollux. Yes, very tnuchs.forcheir Religion did hold thac ©

3 : = d ~. Gentiles,
che Soul of a body which was uninterred,was void of any in-
téllizible effence, andleft co the power andcommand of a
raging furious phanfie, and {ubject to the torment and afii&i-

on of corporal qualities ; fo that it being an aiery body, fom-
times the-departed Ahadow. would {peak unto his remaining

friends, and fomtimes evilly. vex.and.corment his enemies

wich revenge, as inthe Poet, Dido threatneth «Zneac, faying,

Omnibus umbralocis adero dabis improbe penat. Aincid.a.

Suctoninsyas.we have fhown before, addeth the like con- The Hifta-

‘eefning the dead’ body of ¢. Caligula the Emperour.in the *y of ¢.C2-

ra

Garden of Lamianus,being not duly buried ; for this body, ligula.

becanle it was onely coveredwith a light curff, did very much
edifquierand;trouble theipoffefforsof the Garden, with vio-

JenvihcnrGons in chemight ; until by, his fiters,who were,rc-
curned from banifhment’, } it was taken up again and ritely

‘R hs " < Castor

(a te SE ES

COS 7 ere

A Difeowrfe,

“The hou'e Caftor, And thehonfe whereinthe fame Empérour died,

of Cal:gula could by no other way of means be freed from the fury of
se °* chele fhadows or fpirits, as Hittory makes mention, but by
theSpirits, burmingthereof, |
Or Pollux, eAriftotle {peaking of miracles, mentioneth a cer-
fain of q,.t29 Mountain in Norway, named Hechelberg, environed a-
éhloive, ,kour with the Sea, that coniinually fent forth fuch lamenta-

~~ ble voices,like the yel ing & howling of infernal devils,info-
much that che noile 8 clamour of their terrible roaring might
be heard almolta mile ; and theflocking together of great
Ravens.anj Vuitures neerit , © did prohibit any accefs there-
unto.And he reporteth that in Lypporz neer about the e£o/-
an \ilandsythere was a certain Hill trom whence inthe night
there was heard Cym‘sals,.and founds of tink:ing inftruments
of brafs, with certain fecret & hidden tcreechings, laughings
and roarings of Spirits.But-even now,Castor,thou did! make
mention of Zazelus, whom alfo thou didttafferr to have
been called Exryn2mus by Paufania; \ defire thee tofhew me
Jomching more largely concerning this Spirir,

ABHCbin
by. ara.

Zaxius —"* Castor, ‘They’ do-declare'thar' he lives alrogether by the
jivethby “Beth of the dead ; fo as fometimes he doth nor-leave the

tlic flesh o

the dead,

bones.

Pollax. The Saxon Grammarians, in'the fifth book of the
Danilo History,domott rruely subscribe theiriconfents and a-
preements to this thy Affercion 3 for chere chey fer before
our eyes an amirable Hiftory of one A/uitus and Afmundus,
which eafily proveth all thy fayings.

Castor, 1 beleech thee declare this unto mesPollex,
Awonder-_ Pollax, Give attention ; icis thus : Afustus and Afmundus
ful Hiftory had fworn with mucual vows eachto other,’ that-he which
of Afutes fhouid sive longeft of rhem,would entomb himlelf alive:Now _
ap a fickne(s did confume away Afiritas before Afmmundus ; whete-

“upon Afmundus for his Oath of friendthip fakes wich his dog

& his horfe entombed himfelFalivein a valtideep den; having
carried with him tome meat ,‘ whereupon along timehe fed,
And at .ength Ericas the King of Swecia'came into thar place
with an Army, and broke open the tombe of Afeitns; cep
| | POMBE

Sr NRTA SIR A STARTS RE AT i RRR Ty LORE OREN NN GR

Of the Nature of Spirits. 423
poling there had been treafure hid therein ). but when the
cave was opetied, he drew our Afmundus, and brought him
into the light, who was covered with a detormed (harp coun-
tenance, a deadly deformity, and gored with blood flowing
from his frefh wounds,

Castor. Buc this {tory pertaineth not to our purpofe,

Pollux. Truely it doth, it you diligently mark thefe verfes,
which fet forth the caute of his wounds,

(aftor. Shew me thefe verfes, if thou haft them.

Pollux, They are thele- which follow,

Quid flupetis qui relittum me Colore cernitis? Almund us
Obfole{ 1 mempe vivus omnts inter moriuss 5 reports of
Ne{cio quo Stygit numinu auli, himfelf, _

sb ; ee Cans thata Spi-
Miffus ab inferis-S piritns affinie :

: F ‘ : Fit Cat up
Sevis alipedem dentibus edit, ie bikie:
Infandog, Canem prebuit ori, & his dog,
Nox contentus equs vel canis efit, and after-
Mox in me rapidos tranfiulit unguess aay Pe
Difciffag, gena fuftelit AUTEM ; your him
Hic laceri vultus horret image, & that he
Emicat ing, fero vulnere fanguis beat and
Hand impune tamen monftrifer egit 5 ikea:

! irit.
Nam ferro fervi mox caput ejns y 5
Perfodig, nocens fripite Corps,

CaStor, I obferve here, that Afmundiys did.cut the head of
the Spirit Zzzelus or Eurynomus, and {truck and pier ed his
body withacius ; what? have Spirits bodies, that may be
feenand handled bymen?, 9 | ;
Pollux. (0 tehus doch not-deny, but thar their natures may The devils
receie the habit and covering of vegetable bodies, andbé have bo-
transformed in feveral kindes of fhapes , whereby chey.can 4.
the more craftilv and jubtilly delude and-deceive the impro-
¥vident wits of men, Rafilius Magnzs allo, refiifieth the fame,
and wi‘ neflerh ,; that, they have bodies appropriate to. them-
felves , as likewile allo haveche pure Angels, P/ellus.a Ne-
cromancer doth alio teport the fame; and he alfo teacheth,
: R 2 That

Sh i ee Ee a en ee ook

124 A Difceurfe,
That fometimes they fleep or reft, and do charge their places,
and fhew themfel és vilible ro the fences of men, Socrates
afferteth, That a Spirit did lpeak with him, which alfo fome-
times he faw and feit :, but theit bodies Cannot be cilcerned
The Spi. £0 be different infex, Bur Marcus (verronefus, an excellent
rits canner ‘earcher into the natures of Spirits, writech, Thar they have
be dilcern- Gmple bodies & that there doth belong a difference of fexto
ed by ‘ex. compound bodies : yet their bodies are eafily drawn to mo-
tion. and flexibility, and naturally apt to receive every con-
figuration. For, {aithhe » even as the clouds do {hew forth the
apparition and refemblance [omct:mes of men, and fometimes of e-
very thing you conceive ; fa likewife do the bodies of Spirits re-
€@:ve various lb <pes as they pleafe, by vealon whereof they trans-
forme themfelve: into the forms fometzmes of men, and fometimes
All Spirits of women, Neverthele[? his is not free to them all, bat onely to
cannot se- the fiery and aiery Spirits, For he teacheth, That the Spirirs
ecive ieve’ of the water have more flow andlefs ative bodies, which b
fal hapcs: reaton of the flownels and foftnets of chat elemenr, they
do moft efpecially re'emle birds and women * ‘cf-which
kinde the Naiades and Nereides are, ce:ebrated- by the Poets,
Trimetinsteltifies, That the Devils do delire to - [fume ‘he fhapes
of men rather then an yy ether form ; but when they cannot finde tle
matter of the air convenient and befitting for that purpefe. And
he faith, That they framse {uch inde «f a-p-rences to themselves,
as the contrary humeur or vap ur will afford ; and fo they cre feex
fometimes in the form and fhape of a Lion, aWolfe,2 Sewyan MS a
Centaure, of a Man horned, having feet like aGo-t: {uch as it is
reported were feen in rhe mountain of Th; ¢ ngiaywhere there
was heard a terrible roaring, ) |
Castor. Porphyr'usin Eu{eb‘us, in his fourth book of Evan.
§cltcal Preparatien:teacherh, That Some of thefe are. good S pix
Tits anid fome bid ; but T,have counted them to be all ‘evil,
Polly. ’ |
Pollex, Then it feém-th that thou arr’nor fecuced with the
affertions either of Porphiyristy or Apulens, oF Prochi, or of
fome other Plantonicks , which are Mentioned in “t, Ag-

guftines book of The City of Gedy 1,2, and 3 Chapter , Hs

eo oa
EE a «

Se
ena

io
“iresinnoe

iE eA ORS 5 ST: =~
aS UM yee ee .

aia ea
my

mi f or NG 5G eae 3
ae: a .
= 5 aT rate EET. mS RE Sears aio = ca ae ctin RR

ZEST
“ ng

ape pe
ri

pr eae

54 TT AE TE A

Sage

SO

ane

i

ee os as
C— RE IN NS eee eR aR am REE i oe Ai cemrg ee
ai « — he te Dttnaesmetpy gusta
se ’ . S

feb alae
Se chain de ae as 2 roe :
ilk dsl a a candi sa tcak Malla ie Sa

Of ihe Nature of Spirtis. 125
“alfo do affirm that there are fome of thefe Spirits eood:; for
Exfebins in the {aid book and 6 Chapter ; andSt. e4uzuftine
concerning the {ame in his book of The (ity of Gad the 9
Chapter and the 8, with very great and tirong Arguments do
convince the Platonicks, that none of thefe Demons are good, There is
bur all evil;and that we doaifo aprrove of from their names, "0 Dewon
which are every where fet forch in holy Scripture ; for rhe Hip 1 1
Devil is called Diabolus, thar is, lowing downwards: that he why he is jal
which fwelling wich “pride determined to reign in high called De-
‘a places; fell flowing dawn wards to the lowett parts; dike the “ ali.
_ “torrent of a violent ftream,a8'Caffiodoriss wriceth, Andhe ts
| called Sathan,chat 1s,2n ad verfar gwho as StuJerome cellittethty op-nar, 1}
7 ‘by reafonof the corruption of his own malice, he continu- — i
ally refaftech,and is an adverfary again’t God, wio is the
; chiefe't dood. ? He is called Behemoth in the: 40 Caapter of 5 op mosh
. Fob, which fignifieth aa Ox 5 foreven as an Ox delirerh hay, genes:
; fo he with the teeth of his fuggeliions, covereth ro deitroy
; the upright lives of fpiricual’ men; And Leviathan in the Leviathan. ia

i. fame place, which fisnihes an addition, becaufe the Devil al-
i waies endezvours to addé evil to evil; and puniliment co |
, 3 » #s alfo-called'in Revela er
pnnifhment. He lf -call evilation t§ i Apollyony Apollyon,

| fisnifying'a rooter our, for he rooteth out the vercues walks
| God plantech inthe Soul." Heats called a Serpent inthe 12 4 Serpent...
of the Revelation, by reaion of his disulency.s os ALion inthe |
1 Epilt,Peter and the lalt Chaprerywhichroareth about feek-
“inz whom he may devour. Heis called acunning Workman
IJa.5.5.becaule by his malice the veffels thar are elected and
appro ved, He 1s called, Ifa. 34. Onocentsurus: Eryn, Pilofitsy
Syren, Lamia, U lula, Struthio. Andiby David in the 90 Pfal.
. ‘an Ajpe, Bafliske and Dragon. In the Golpel ALamamon, the
| Prince of this world, and Ruler of dar>ne[s,
| Cator. Why therfore havethe Diwines declared»: That
: the Almizhty hath-eiven two kindes of Spirits unto men ;
the one good, the keeper and preferver of thetr lives. che
other.evil, refilting the'edod:: ifthey are all evil?
Poll#xe.The holy Do tors dounderttand by the good Spiric a
good Angel,fuch as we rea ARaphael was toT obiasywho bound :
the.

Rito, eRBas SRR ep? Noes ia te a a Rae GE

"156 A D.fcsurfe,
the evil Spirit Afodeus in the wilderneds of the furtheft parts
of Egypt, chac he might be the more fafe,

~Cagter. Ic had been more tafe for every man to have been
without the evil Spirits ; what therefore was the will of the
heavenly Father concerningthem? |»

Pollux, That by che afliftance of the good Spirits, we might
coutagionfly wage continual war againtt the evil Spirits ; bur
being clothed with the harnels of righteoufnels, like -valianc
fouldiers we may gird our loyns with truth, and withthe

‘ftheild'of faith refiftand feht againft all his darts,

Castor. If we condefcend unto this warfare of Spirits, it
feemeth good to inquire whether the Devils have power of
doing hurt, granred unto them by God or whether of them-
felves they can hure afmuch as they pleafe ?

The devils Pollwx, If the lait were true, who could compare the end
arethe _Of their hurting? butic is very manifeft, chat cheir authority
ae “i from‘on high is of fo great exiftency, ‘that Johe the Evange-
mer ERIE alt aay ee Mor'to name the Devils the Princes of the
earth, py ey

Castor. In what manner therefore do they hurt ?

Pollux. Althoueh they be motft mighty and powerful Spirits,
yet they. can dono hurr mnleis ic be by permiffion ; or,a- Da-
miafcenus aich,By difpenfation, And Chry{ostome laithyT hey have
4 limited power ; for truely without the will of Ged, they cannot
touch ahair of any mans head, The Devil could not have de-
ceived the Prophets of Ababy it he had not received power
from God ; neither could he Have brought any detriment
upon Fobjeither unto his body or-his goods,but by the power
God had given him. Inthe 7 of Exodus the Magicians made
Frogs and Serpents by the power ofthe Devil permifiively ;

‘but Lice they could not bring forchyhy reafon.of the greater
power, of Ged. prohibicing-them. Neither 4n the.Golpel
ace the Devils hur che Swine until: Chritthad given them

leave. 15
Castor, Therdfore che Devilis not fo. muchto be feared,
butithe Lord our God, thaceither,he would-not fuffcr him
rofage againit us 5 -or if at any time by his own determinate
counfel

SE ete ome ei ns Sa
= , > aay

gaa ERR Pee AIR ER IT
SS — nig SS oo
Ti a te io aoe
rs

2 Fag ORE EME, wg a
eee Dee artes Ee ee

tree

a, i é
re i
{ i
> a
i
qj
G | ‘
ro {
f ie
5 H
§ ,
1G
3: ns a4 |
v } yA
4 eS
. Pi ey
We any
t “} )
ae vt
P [as ale)
t :
2 * - -
‘ : :
i im \ |
‘
t . erg : }
& if } .
hs ;
i \
R { - \"
‘i \
ale | i i
in!
4 ¢ bah oe i
y. be |
A ‘
i
ye - t +
4 Hl !
s ri
‘ iJ
. t
2 f
“
‘

sn ee pm ae el

Sin as ht hin anche bil ke Se OT aE a

Of the Nature of Spirits:
counfel he let loofehis chains; that rhenhe would defend
and mercifully preferve us.

Pollax. Thou ateft well ; for even as a wilde boare is nor
to be feared if he be bound, and held with a ftrong chain
by a powerful {trong man, and whois able by his ftrenerh to
reltrain the fiercenels of the boare ; but the man isto be
feared, and requelied,that he would not let loofethe bore:
Soialio Saeae is not to be feared) being bound with the cords
of the Almighty; but the Aimighty rather, who holdech him
with a'cord, left at any time he fhould let loote his cord, for
to execure his will againi? ns, |

(ator, We know thatthe Devils,after incarnation of the
Word; were calied rie Lords of theearth 3 but I wonder,
where\.the Word is nor yer incarnare, » whether they have
power alfo.overmen. ». |

Pollax. Vf 1 pleafeth God, they have very much; bur take
a demonfiration thereof, (astar, from the (zldeans, amongit
whem the Devil raged: with fomuch power.and dominion,
thanchey madeno.etteem:of the true God j but worthipped.
the elements. » There: needeth nor a demonftration of the
Greeks ; forthe futy 6f the Devil did fo much reign amonett

129°

The devils.

feducermacn
where. the
word is

not known,

them, thar by his Arguments, they accounted Saturz fora’
very great God; devouring their own proper Chi'dren » and
Jupiter an adulterer-and fatber of all fiirhine(s'; they named °
to: bethe father of\Gods and men ; Bacchus, the molt wicked
example of all fervirude and bondage, » they called a free fa: -
ther; Venus a ftrumpet, they termed.a pure virgin ; and they ~
worlhipped F/ora an harlor,as a type or cxample of virginicy. -
There is noman hac is ignorant, that the’Eg yptianc have been
worfe tchen'the Grecks, whenthey made peculiar Gods to":

themfelves, hy the inanimate perfwafions of the Devil. ; for
one worlhipped a fheep, another a goat, another a calfe, very

many did’ orfhip hoggs 5 crows, hawkes, vultures, eagles, .

crocodiles, cats; dogs, wolves; affec, dragons ; and things
growing alfo, as onyons, garlick, and chornes; as everyone
that is covetons of reading, {hall finde in Damafcem, in his

Hiftory of Fofzphar and Bar/aa, and in Exfebims, inthe fourch

book «.

So,

Bf AO TI NEALE ATE

EE Erna TR OR ISAT gt et ok

The devils

do forerel

things-to
come,

128 A. Difconx{e,
book, and firit Chapteriof Evangelical Preparations ; neither
do I account the Hebrews (who glory in being rhe off-fpring
of sheir fachet Abraham.) to have been better thenthe for-
mer, when alto by che inttin& of the devil,after their coming
up out of Egypr,with cruel hands they violently affaulted the
Prophets and holy men of God, whom at length they alfo
flew ;° that Imay hold nty peace,-how diligently they have
brought into their Religion the Gods,or rather Devils of the
Géntiles. |

_ «CaStar. I perceive by thele thy affertions, rhat one Devil,
and another Devil, hath been adored for Gods ;*forthon
haft'now faid,. That the Greeks, by the madneis wherewith
the'Deval poffeffed them, have made unto themfelves,Sarurn,

Jupiters Bacchus, Venusand F lora,for Gods; which Lattansing

in his fourch book De vera Sapientia, alto accounteth for
Devils. |
Pollax. Declare} pray, thee the words of Lanttantius,
CaStor., Mark them they:are thus :\The fame:Devils are the
pods of the Gentiles, 5 bur éfuny one willnot believe thelethingsof
me; then let him credit Homer, whe joyueth the great Jupiter to
the great Devils; and the otler Poets and Philofophers do calithens
fometimes Gos and fometimes Devils wheres} there isone true;
and another talle:: forthe moft wicked Spirits when theyvre cons
juvedy doconfeethemfelves to be Devils 5 bar where they.are wore
JPipped', they declare themfelves to be Godt rxhat' rhey: mi
thruft mew into errors ,°acd'draw them fromthe warfhipiof the
trueGod; through whom alone eternal deuthican be elcaped. :
Pollux, It 1s,expedient; forme. now tobe more inquilitive
anthis ditcourfe ; ‘whether rhere be power givento the De-
vils'to foretell things: to come? coricerning whith:thing
hitherto Lhave nor beenoable to dart at the right mark ;
for chi8 queftion feemerh {ufficiently doubtful unro me, |
Castors: StieAngustine uvhis book De Natura Demonuasy,
diffolveth this Gordoveus Knory-and faith, That the dammed Spie
vith, ‘being filed full of allamanner of impieryand wrekednel’, de
fometimes challeuge to themfelves power of forefeeing things to
come; becaufe in the [enfeof their Aiery bodies , theybave afar

Wb0rE

—

se pA deiniaa cian gia tilk REI is certian ~

———

2 Pa ARTE Nae WARE ISAT IE SS WR AR ELE KSLA EAL LIES

Of the Nature of Spirits. £29
more ferong and prevalent power of fore-knowing , then:men -of
earibly bodies can have ; or becanfe of the incomparable fmiftne
of their aiery bodies, which wonderfully exceedeth uot onely'the
celerity of men-and wilde beafts 5 but alfo the flying of birds by
which means, they are able to declare things long before they come
to be known 3 which we, by realou of the earthly flownes of our
fenle, ceale not to wonder at and admire: or becaufe of the benefit
of their continual life, they obtain this wonderful experience of
things 5 which we cannot attain to, becanfe of the fhortnefs of ‘our
moment aneous life, which 1 but a it were a bubble.
Poll, This latt affertion of $. Augu/fine teemeth unto me
co be more crtie then rhe reft, becaufe the Series of many
yeets doth caute gteat experience.
~ Caff, If any one fhall deny thefe opinions of: Augu/tine,as
erroneous , Damajcenus fecteth a greater witheis of thefe
things, without all exception, before our eyes 5 who in-his
fecond book of Orthodox Faith iaich thus : That the devils The devils
cannot foreknow things to come, for that belongs onely unto God : of them-
but fo much as they are ableto know, they have from the difpofition | letees

) . ; 10t fere=
of the celeftial and inferiour bodies. Lincs
Poll. Why. therefore .do ‘the devils: fo’ willingly. and of ching: to

theit own accofd undertake Prophecies, and to aniwer Ora-‘come-

cles ? What benefie have they from hence?

Caft, Nothing, but that hereby they feek to get greatelti- why the
mation, and covet ro be counted worthy of admiration, and devils: de-
ro be adored in {tead of Gods, AAG anita

Poll, We know that che devil-is the father of lyes, Cajfor: Raa I he
from whence we are pioufly to believe, thar thole things

“which he foretelleth, he extra&eth from his ownlyes.

Caf, Furthermore , the Prophet Efaias faith thus: Shew tfai.41.
the things that are to come hereafter, and tellus, that we may vow
that-ye are gods. . And thé Apottle Peter alfo faith, The prophe- » Pet. 1.
cie came not in.old time by the will of man , but holy men of God
fpake as they were moved by theholy Ghost.

Poll.. No man therefore will deny that they do fometimes
foretel rhings to.come.

Cat. No man, certainly: bute for‘what caufe hac is ae

$ ne

Sleeapaiee:

esis iat
; ’ oh: Me mee > i

Se gt Ey AS i ™ ° =
—— a ee oe
: i a rT St a ae + ici eet —— a ——— 2
aaa: HAS aera. BUA. keene ee ¢ Py ies 2
— ol Fig ST eng cetaren on pears rete, Sa eee a

Penn

ete erat Seen a at

ey

; *
: ‘\ 4
Y
y j
} i
bat ees
Ht) ;
‘ /
Aeiainn ited
i
¢
j
ts W,
¢ ; H
t nt
ey
ie FH
‘ an
; thy
5 J
) daaae
t i
ee | Tie fl
ae de
ahi
\ : iI
tae
te
ead |
wie
I jt
but i;
eae ks
eee
ft
ad
Pia |

Sas

I nage eS

Td its SCI sls sclneiile clhob ee span ccecindonanaiapennsnditaianaan adie aad iealeietincarten
130 A Difcourfe,
ned to, (hry foftome doth moft clearly teach, in thefe words :
Te is grantedyhelaich, that fometimes the devil doth fpeak truth,
that he might commend his own lying with rare verity : whereas,
Why che gf he (hould never tell the truth , he could decerve no many weither
fish nah would his lying fuffice hins to tenspt with, Thus far Chryfoftome.
cuty,  Norwithttanding, if he underftand chat he hath nor grace
sranted unto him of himfeif to foretel the truth, he foretel-
leth things neyerthelefs, but /o ob/curelyy faith S. eAuguftine,
Note ale that he always layeth the blame of the things by him foforetold, up-
lesile are 07 the interpreter thereof, Porphyriws, in his book of Oracles,
uncertain, although he be the greateft maintainer of devils, and the
moft expert teacher of diabo.ical Arts , neverthelefs he faith
with the aforefaid DoStors, that the foreknowledge of things to
come, ts not onely intricate to men, but alfo uncertain to the gods ;
and full of many ob{curities, |
Poll, Thou hatt faid, that the, predi&tions of the devils are
done in this maner, thac they may gain authority to them-
felyes amonett the credulous people ,. and. be worlhipped in
ftead of Gods: for what end do the evil {pirics work Mira-
cles ?
Caf, What is a Miracle, Pollux ?
what a Poll, A new and unwonted accident., which cometh to
eet: pais contrary co its courfe and cuftome,, and drawerh men
cork yt, dnito admiration thereof,
racles. Caft, But do they work. Miracles 2 ,
Poll. They do: for whereby doft thon believe that e2/cx-
Japius was honoured‘in his Confecration for a god, but onely
-by the means of a Miracle, when he conveyed a Serpent from
Epidaurus to Rome ? What gave fo great authority to Jung,
but onely the working of a Miracle ? when her Image of
wood was asked by Furius Camillus whether it would be car-
tied to Reme,and it anfwered with a humane voice, Jt would,
Alo, from thence Fortune was made agoddefs , becaufe her
Statua, in the way to Larinm,in the hearing of many people,
not once,but oftentimes fpoke with ahumane voice, In the
$ Chapter of the Aés of the Apoftles, we read of Miracles

done by Simon the fon of Rachel ; and in Exod, 8. of the
Macict-

The Or2-

a ete—

Siento

é CENNGRENE ne CRA a ee

i ti ced ancl AR SRAM A a EA Riel a a Pa

Of the Nature of Spirits. 131

Magicians of Pharaoh, who in the fight of many people

brought forth frogs and ferpents, and turned the waters into

blood. e/pu/ews doth teitifie the power of men to be fo

great in Inchanrments , that the devils do not onely work

Miracles by the means of men, but they are able alio to fub-

vert Nature, and, with a Demoniacal Incantation,makevio- ‘The In.
lent ftreams co ftay their courfe, Torn che windes, To chant-
make the fun ftand (till, To break the courfe of the moon, To eee of.
lay impediments upon the ftars, To prolong the day, and co 9°. (ou
fhorten the night ; as Lrecanus excellently theweth, Nature. ,
(effavere vices rerum, dilatag, longay

Hafit notte dies, legi non paruit ether

Torruit & preceps audito Carmine mundus.

And Tsbullus of a certain Demoniacal. Charnt,

Hane ego de colo ducentem [ydera vidi,
F luminis ac rapidi Carmine vertst ster,

Hac cantu funditg, folum mane{q, fepulchris
Elicits & tepido devorat offarogo.

‘Cums liber hac trifti depellit lumina colo,
(um liber eftive convocat orbe nives.

Caf. I do not any more wonder that AZofes: called God
Wonderful, that he doth fo connive at this fink of wickednefs,
and moft wicked feducers ,. that he granteth them power to
a&-tuch things fo freely.

Poll. Firmsianus excellently fheweth why God doth fo, ,10
his laft book but one of she works of God, De opificio Dei + bedi Oo
for he faich, chat vertuejis nor yertue, uniefs it havefome fe gevits
like, in_ ruling, wherecf -ic.,may thew.,and exercife Its to work
power: forhe faith, As Viltory cannot fiand without Vertuey Miracles,
fo neither canVeriue (nbfE without,an Enemy ; which vertue
no fooner hal the Almighty indued. manwithal, but he forth-
with added unto him an enemy ,\ left that vertuefhould lofe its naz
ture, being ftmpificd withidlencf, He faith, that «man ted

S$ 2 ether

ese eae ae LETHE PA EDI BE

13% A Difcearfe, | :
otherwife attain to the higheft flep, unlefhe have always un ative
hand ; and'that he{hall eftablih and build up his [alvation with a
Continual warfare and contention : for God wih uot that mortal
men|hall come to. immortal bleffednef with an eafie journey, but he
waft wreftle and frrive with fayls and oars avainft the aathor und
inventor of: all evils and errours 5 who caufeth and worketh exe-
rable things and miracles, :
Somum<s © Caf?; But lometimes ir cometh ro pals, chat by reafon of
sa thay Hetubtilfmares and f{tratagems of the devil , which he fo
tne devi? ctaftily. prepaech! againit’ as “and efpécially avaintt imple
cannot be Perions, whom he intangleth with vain Religions, jo that we
rehfted. cannot refilt him ; orif we fuppofe our {elves rb‘be very able
to withftand him, yet fieverthelefs"we fhall be very much de-
ceived by him; as'we'read'He oftentimes did to tht ‘vood,but
almott-foolifh Pallor,ef whom Tritemins maketh mention.
Poll. Bur what’ happened ‘to this sood Paftor's and Whom
thou termefi fimple ? ,
an ecms Caffe Tritemsius lath, “Infomich thar ‘he was not [trong in
fe at faith, therefore he mademore acvoint ofsihe name of Sain Blaze,
er: and attributed more power ana cuftddy into it,then ante the ame
of God,the beft and grearef goods * : 65 jes
Poll, In what maner? Fo igs ab “tb ag
Cat, He had in his walkine-taf> 6t Paftoral' Crook, a
Schedule in‘cribed with the name of St.Blazes byr'¢ power
and-vertne of whichifiaff, he did’ beweVE His Wine Were Yafe-
by 'defendéd fromthe ravehiis' of the wolves sand he'did
attribiite slo ‘étéat @'D ity totharSchedle , that“he would
leave his herd of {wine to feed in rhe fields‘aloné! horwith=
, 2) vi ftanding, a’ ceftaii\'time! coming when’ rhe pallor was abfenc
dso sien» from his‘flovk Sand a’ ceftait mah cominvin'thémeaw time,
alivsh od: faWehe devil kéepihe theth ;a8d hé'adke dhimewhar he'kepe
wow o Here who ds thé worltpetledhcér of thefalvati6h 6f met’?
een He aniwered; Tkeep\shele' (niche. The orhet replied, By whole
commind? The devvtairh'p By the foo':{b confidénce of the pa
fiat’ for he ineladediacertaiaSebedale inthis aff, aurowPich Be
| Mferiberh divine covtne vor’ tot be GH cr on'of Pe name of SP.
Blaze sand now, conivary'to bisvwn law ¥ be believeth dag his
vite oo ogs

An adini-

ce st Ain lah da SR CR a a Le te Rie a aD Sie

Of the Nature of-Spirits. 133
hogs ‘are thereby defended fron the injury. of wolves 3 inhering to
me with afalle [upenftition;::where when he hah been by-me called
again andagsiny and bath net appeared, I have taken this-cuftedy
upon myjelf, in fread of 5. Blazer for Ldlways freely fLand-in'
-ftead of God and his Saints» fo alfo-now;,moft freely dot ke:p his
(wine for St. Blaze, \that Imay.magefie and confirm the fool{b |
man in bis vain confidence sand thereby 1 may {eance him fo, that Ae
he mayefteem of this Schedule mar? them Goa. el
Polls: Ehis-is:a) piealanctiory.: but Ido noe wonder that lie
-the: devil ‘fhould ampole ic: much ‘upon tfo fimp!e'a Paftor, |
when he doth in many things prevail over the: more wile,
if they do fic chemlelves; to-hissopportunicies»; which the
Church contraditech. i
Pol, Bucvarevallscuimgs wrought; and, btought to pals-by i@
- means of ithe:devil which memn-call Miracles ? son bres |
Cafi. No: fonwe mult give unco Nature char which feem- Some mi-
eth ro belongunto het, whos faid vo be: the greateft worker ‘°ls 25° '
of Miracles; as that which we haveexpertenced.in:the ftone aie as if
Asbestos, which, as Selinzs witneflech,ibeing onceletton fre,
cannot bequéeliched :,and.the soot Buayas, defcribed by Ju- |
fephus on the hittory.of feru/alem, which, he vettifieth to be ii
of. the colourof:aflamierof fire, {plendeat and fhining inthe dt
night 3) bucto difficuitiro-be taken that it always flies from |
under the hand of;himchatiwould take it, and deceiveth his
eyesfoddng, unulds be {prinkled-withiche urine ofa men-
ftruous:. woman : «afd when it isretained by thismeahs.,.it
may iiotbe gachered or plucked up without danger ; for-pre- {
fence. deatlvfollowerh him; that garhererh-or plucketh ic up, bi

lO ty OL La APTS

i 22) ivi PE a

unleishe fhall be fortified with a Pretervative abour his neck, ‘
wof thetameronr,, Forwhich caule,:they whowant'the dame a i
-root,-do kariltererouad about;. andhayingbeund the foor | ‘ae
: about witha bon1, there the lame toa dog, ard ‘uddenly 7 |
| . Ndeparvaway;: Whereupon,the\ dog, too much endea: ouring
votollow afrer him, draweth up the'roors ;and, as afiche doo
§ bwere coperformthe wen of his matter, be forthwith dies;and .
oufterwards thelamerootmaybeiraken and handled without
cany idanver to any man, i sAndthefame Fofephusteacherh,that
the

134 A Difcourfe,

the fame root 1s of iuch prefent force for expiations, chat al-
to thofe who are vexed and tormented wich unclean {pirits,
are immediately delivered, if they carry this root abour

Art fore: them, Nowwithftanding there is. nothing hindereth , bur
tach Na tac Arc alfo may imitate\Nature in the working of Mira-
ture in Cles 3 asawe may read in Ariffotle » of the Greek fire thar >
working would burnin water: of which the faid: Author,in his fingu-
Miracles, Jar Treatife concerning this, hath defcribed very many com-

pofitions, And concerning ithe fire which is extinguifhed
with oyl, and kindied with cold water, when it is beiprink-
Jed over therewith, :

Poll, Wc {ometimes happeneth that the devils do clothe
themielyes, fometimes in more flender, and fometimes in
more grofs habits, that thereby chey may very much affrichr
and moleft men with horrible phantrafies, and terrible fights ;
wich Ghoflts appearing in divers and feveral fhapes and a-
{fpe&ts, What,cannot we be fortified with any thing to force
and compel them ‘0 flie from us ?

How the. C4fts Orrgensin his book againtt Celfis, faith, that there ss
devils are 29 way more certain, then the naming of JESUS the true God.
to be dri- For he faith he harh oftentimes feen innumerable fpirits fo
ven away. driven away, both from the fouls and bodies of men, St.4=

thanafius , inhis book de variis Quafficn, cellifiech, that the
mott prefent remedy againft the infultation of evil {pirics, is
the beginning of the 67 Pfalm, Let God arife, and let hts ene-
mies be fcattered, Cyprian,in his book Quod idola dit non fint,
commanderh that the devils fhould be conjured away by the
trueGod, Some men have declared, thac Fire, which is che
moft holy of all elements, and che Creed,and alfo the inira-
ment whereon the fire was carried, were very profirable for
this purpofe :from whence,in their facrifices about the fepul-
chres of rhe dead, chey diligently obierved the ufe of lights :
or elfe from thence thac {Pythagoras did decermine , that

| God could be in no wile truely worfhipved. without lights

The Spi- burning, Some others do binde fwords for this intent and

Tits fear“ purpole, raking che fameout.of rhe 11 Ode of Home , where
Swords. he writech, chac # lyfesy when he offered a facrifice to his a
‘ther,

ic ie ela ical ge Ri Sa a ee et Saad

Of the Nature of Spirits, 135
ther, had a {word drawn prefent by him, wherewith he ex-
pelled and drove away the fpirits from the blood of his {a-

H  ctifice, And in the fixth of Virgil, when the Sybil led £-
| »eas into hell, the faith thus : :

ol

; Procul, O procul cfte rofani, ae
Tq, invade viam, vag inad, eripe ferrum, Wl

Philoftratus writech, that he compelled 4;olsntus, a {pirir, i.
ebvious to him and his companions, co flight, with contu-
melies and direful imprecations ; that the vifion making a
| motile, and with ereat horrour vanifhed away from them,
_ Very many do much commend a Perfume of Calamint, Pio-
ny, Minr, Palma Chri(ti, and Parfley, to be ufed in this cafe,

| Many do keep prefent with them Red Coral, Mitewort, Hy-
9} pericon, Rue, or Vervin, fot this purpofe. Some do ufe for
~~ this bufinefs the tinkling of keys , founding of confecrated :)
® bells, or che terrible ratling of Armour. 1

Poll, Ihave {ometimes heard from our Elders, that. they Chara- i
made them Sigils infcribed with-Pentagones by vertite ers do i.
whereof, the fpirits might be expelled and driven away. iN ates a
What {fayft thon ro thefe? heh i
\ Caf, Averrois writing againtt Algazefus , affirmeth fuch Chara- i

things to. be almoft nothing worth, unlefs to chem.that have ters avail |
confederated with the {pirirs. If therefore Averros faith the 2°
ipa how then can the devils kingdom fland, divided again
it felf? :

Poll, But we read that Solomon, a finoular man with God,
| did'make fnch Sigils. )

Caft, We do read truely that Solomon did make them: bat
' 3) ie was. at fuck time when he worthipped Idols, ahd not
‘when he was in the flate of falvation. “Tertullian offereth a
| More. certain Antidote then all the former , and exhorteth
| Us, as Job, the moft {trong champion of God, to fight againft
| all che affaules of temptations : he admonifheth us to be
| ~ clothed with the filken garment of Honetty, the purple robe
of Modetty and Shamefac’dnels , and the cloak of Patience:

and

yr reen beg Stee arias

SOUTH SR

Fp SE TEI A OEE ET
‘ ‘

PRS arie Rinne Bea aa RIT TRE IG

136 ane NCI meine

and he,petfivadeth us to meditate upon all thofe things
a which the deyil doth devile and invent 5, to overthrow our
it intéericy ; that his falling*may be: proved the glory of out

ie conftancy , and that we be willing conffantly to war againft
|. all machinationss which are permitted by God for this end.
| | And the Prophet Jeremiah reacheth the fame, in thefe words:
Mh The Lord of hofts is the'approder of the'yuft.

Hi D; Maximus, in his book de.charitate 5 commandeth, us. to
ih binde and kill the devils, . He faith wé do then binde them,

when by diligént obfervation of rhe Commandments ofGod,
we do diminifh and;quath thofe affections that, do boyFup
in-ns: And we are faid tokill them, when.we fo truely mor-
tifie Our lufts, chat we currhim off from all occafions of ac-
cnfing ; faying with the Propet, Depart, O homicide, the Lord
the firong warricur is with me; thowlb lt fall, and {halt be van-
quilhed-from me for ever... Olympiadorms, 10 cap. when he in-
cerprétech rhe Eccleftaftical hiltory,faich, chat all fen{ual appe-
tites are-to be (but. out, and extluded, [o that the devil may, not
be admitted, neither by the allucements of the eyes, gor byitching

at ears , nor bythe petulancie and frowardnes of 4 hurtful tongue -
Rea | for this he accounteth to be the moft.abfolute seal agaimlt the
fe ‘ i 4 2 ay power'of che devils, Some do admonifh' us , in our going
be re ne forth to war againit the devil, ro le two forts of Weapons:
in i} devil with the one 1s pure Prayer,which may raile up our affections un-
a wo forts to heaven ; and rrue and -perfect Knowledge > which, may
Hy of anmors Communicate and fill ovr underftandings with wholefome
a do&trines ,, and may fugcelt unto.us what we are ro pray for,
pi! that we may pray ardently, according to St, James, and not
i oe doubtingly. In the Prophecie of J/aiah, aud Epiftles of St.
Bile e Paul, we may-finde the fame things ; J/ai.59, Eph.6, and
a we 1 Theff,§. which may be as a remedy again{t vain Ghofts, thac
Ml they May be expelled, oy hie ig: ROR
| Poll, For a remedy ayaint{t Ghofts ? Doft thou conceive
z | thar a Gholkis diverfe and different froma {pifity -)) %
ie Cait. T know nor truely what J’may chink hereof): for
ik flowingin fo {pacions 2 fea of many opinions, 1am foledin

1 doubt, that I cannot éafily atrain to a cerrain Port of judge-
Tig ment :

MUA

REE WE EER SE aT ied RP RMEC ISLA SE ATTEN ROD 0

Of the Nature of Spirits. 137
ment : for there are {ome which do fuppofe chat thefe Ghotts
are devils, by reafon of the great fear and te:rour wherewith
they ragingly moleftmen by night in their houfes ; and fome-
tumeés for their innate nature dodo hurr. There are others
that do believe thefe Spirits are deceirful fantafies, deceiving
thofe that are of evil belief ; who by cheir fallacious viGons
and imaginations do deceive and frighten the inhabitancs in
their houfes : and do deny that they are Spirirs indeed, be-
caufe the Spirits have a body withour hands and feet ; where-
fore chey can hurc no man, nor make any tumult : being ig-
norant that che Angel ( who alfo hath a body without hands
and feet) did carry Habakkuk with his whole dinner, by the
hair of his head, into Babylon, and afterwards brought him
back again, and fet him in his own place ; neither conider-
ine chat the Spiric of che Lord, alfo without a body,{narched
up Philip, andcatried himto Azorws: thac I may forbear to
Speak concerning a certain incorporeal Spirit , which did fe
difquiet the houfe of my Grandfather , that by the {pace of
almoftthirty yeers'he canfed ‘it to be uninhabitable, unlefs ic
were when'a:Lamp was burning therein ; neither did thac
then fifficiently quiet the fame : for going out of the houle,.
they did fo moleft them with {tones from above in the ftreets;
that chey. would caft out-of their hands the hearts of Pine~
trees, which they:uted for torches,. Concerning the Ghoft
thac haunted the honfe of sAuthencdorus the Philofopher, and
‘the cumultuous fpirit of (. Caligula, there may more be

|. Spoken: but thou hatt underttood the relations of them al-
|. xeady in the foregoing difcourfe. 1 From: all which, we may
| eafily convince the opinions of chofe, who deny thar the
Spirits ‘can walk’; ormake:any motion ; buc:of how. much
truchy we may-hold the affertions.of chem, who do fuppofe
thar thefe rumulenous: Spitics ate:neicher devils: nor phan-
tafms, but the fouls of the dead, now hearken unto, |
‘9 Pols *Arettherechey who:ate of that :bpinion? .)/ \\.4
Caf, There are: they ‘whoare. of both) opiuntons'::-fort
i, | theyido declare:that thefe ‘ate the fouls.of chem who havé
departed from their bodies laden and clogged in their dey
* # . : . T whi

- : a a — ~~
Ea Se ee

spe a — " 3
het — mn ~
ae Se 5 =a >
ee
= ooh

MO gO a Oe ATTY
wan Ne

ot

OS OR em: | ERS NN
% DA gery TaeT
PRES?
‘

SRI ET fa Nae RE ES

A Difcourfe,

which are therefore heard to be more or lefs.tirbulent in
houles, according as they have any fen{ble ardent fpark of
that fai more: orlefs; fo that except in the mean time they
are.expeied, and driven away from thence, or expiatediby
Alms or Interceffionssthey:are compelled to a certain bonnd

} of liberty, wandering thereabouts in expeétation of the laft
i \ : judgement, |

Poll. Wherefore ? cao | at
Lattant. of ~. Caf, ;Becanfe 1 believe that the fouls of chem which flzep
the fouls jy Christ, do live with:Chritt, and.donot wander abous the
ie "© earch; ”and the fouls: of them who are oppreffed and: burs
"dened with the grievous weight of their fins, fince they are
che members of Saran, ate bound, withSatanin thei chains; of
darknels, expediing judgemenvin hells. ad

Polly. ButoH irmianus 5 @ Writer! ef) Ho, mean gadgement,
thinketh the contrary ,: ubis Book which he bath, written
de Div no: premio. loqiop dh mesioo § ga bee

(aft. How dsichat 2». Tove Yo sith rein
i fe are In *. ; Pee Ee
The opini- ° Pal, Thete are ins words siLen not, any. man conceiventhat
on of Fir- the fowls of thedend. aregudged immediately after death: fort

eon manus.  gyeall detuineditn cneicommon custody;iuntil the time {hall comes
cr fe sherein the Almighty Judge {ball make; examsitdtion and inquaps
ab tioniof their deeds, ) Then they whofhall.-be fourd:righteosts, fhall
i ih | receive the'rewara of immortality; byt they: whofe {tus and nite
1 il) kednof (hall thea be-derettedy frall not arife agningrur{balibeineles

ea | fed with the: wicked in darkytf, and defined ta:etermalipwrtifis
Ey méploe{. 10 enholiiss booilisbrusiied colsaud Teapnodt
ul Cafty Stdagaftine fublcribeth1oLaitantndnhis Enchivis

di:ajfaying | Tharthe time which acinterpofed betmeen she death
i of muankinde andthe loft wefarxetkionycomtaineshi the fouls inifes
' : éverdidden receptacles iy: wheneeuery foul réceirerh condirnt ref

ee or miferyy for thegaod onevit whichhe dadiathe tod prwtriles be

lived, vosuinorlLwom dbgob ccs to oiTledy ind germies
Poll. Neither:doth SuixAmbrofe difagreetrom this ;\iehis
‘ fecond:book of Gasachtith Abel, hevairhy chat thefowl avoofed

ny from thebodys andsafter the eof this lifes is-fufperdd edsto the

a annbiguon tine of whetast jadgementi!.o 021: 9h
E Pe | : 7 Ca (ff,

ra CRD, ery eS
Cr ses ETRE ES ER SS RE ITE See ee ee Ee
EES SPHERES, ae eee

Of the Nature of Spdrits. 139
Caft. So alfo fome have declared, that che foul of Trajannus
Cefar did.wander abouts but the foul of St. George was freed
| — from fuch fuffrage, :
| Pok, Thou hait even now fpoke,'and chat truely, that {pa-
cions is the fea of varions opinions concertiing rhefe Spirits ; |
for fo indeed it is + but whar Port thou touchelt ar, I defire Onn
| thee ic may not feem tronblefome to thee ro rell me :-for I | i
am not as yet farisfied of the certainty herecf by our dif- ae

courfe,

Cast. That which thou defirett » Iconceive ro be this: I
hold that thefe rumuleuous Spirits are meer images Of Satan Lf
which are nor to be feared , ne'ther is there any credit to be
given tocheir aniwers : and.are in no wile the fouls of the

dead, which either live wich Chritt, if they have done well ;

|. or, elfe are-bound in chains with Satan, if they have done

K
i
Poll, Te remaineth thar we fift ont this, (zffor: for it hap-

peneth now fometimes,thac my father appeareth co me in my.
' fleep ; perhaps that may alfo feem unto thee to be a Spirit, an
Cast. Temay feém fo: but I will not jn any thing conrta- i;
dist thee beyond Reaton: of my felf Iwill adde nothing;but’
ac-lealtwie I will annihilate thy opinion with the affertions
|) ef St. Aveuftine. -
, a Poll, What affertions are thoe > .
batt. In bis 11 book, which he intitulech De mortiuorug
cura , he offereth them as a means 9 laying, Humane infir
mity doth fobclieve of hinsfelf, thar when he feeth any one that is
deadyin-his leep 5 he {uppoferh thar he feeth the foul of that dead
) |) perfou:s bre when he dreameth of any one that is alive, le then is
i) omt.of doube 5 that neither his foul nor his bod ly, but the limilitude
) of thewman Appeared untolim: As if they could be ignorant sthat ua
» 9) the fouls of dead mendonor appear unto thems in dreams, but one- ug

| Ly the fimilitudes of the serfons deceafed, And he Proverh both

siete ith a

igs eae git das ae cea si
= =. es al . Peinets
—— oe ree a . RR BO
= R bein os x vi 7 To ae

| thete to be done, by nwo examples: which wefe'ar ¢Afedin/4-
| nus.;, whereof thie firth he fheweth to hare been

| the image
| of: a certain father tharwas dead, who appeared to his fon,
| admonifhing him: thathe fhould not pay again a debe to an
| T2

unyjut

ng ERS a RS OER OE RIT NET EET TE

ATs Tn eR ena

140 A Difceur{e,
unjuft Crediter,which the farher had paid hin before : forhe
1a) faith the Cafe was rhus: The father had paid a debt to a cer-
ia _ tain Creditor , which after the death of the father, the Cre-
. Un ditor endeavoured by force to recover the fame again of his
ea fon, who.was ignoranc of the payment thereof: to whont }
Hi the image of his father appeared when he was fleeping, and
Ve fhewed him where the Writing was hid, . Whereupon, the
i fon awaking from his fleep, fought forthe Paper in the place
fai he was diredted, and found it, and thereby overthrew the
| malice of his deceitful Creditor. ‘The fecond' example 1s,
whereby the fame Se. Asguftine fheweth that the living do
appear to the living, in their fleep : for he faith, that Ezro-
fogiss the Rherorician, profeffing the Rhetorick of Cicero at |
Carthage 5 he found a difficult and obfcure place that was’) 7)
not declared to-him.; fo that waking and fleeping he'vexed |
him(elf by reafon of his ignorance: bur, in a certain night,
the imace of e4urelins Augustine appeared to him, and
eaeht him in what maner the dark and difficult place was to
be underltood, | |
Poll. Auguftine doth therefore conclude, without doubt,
that they are not fouls, tise
Cast. He doth foconclude: and rhe greaterto ftrengchen
fuch his judgement, he addeth, That if the fouls of the
dead have any intefe(t or counfel in the affairs of the living,
he undoubtedly knew, thar bis. own pious'mother did not
défert him, not for one night, bur when fhe was living, fol-
lowed him both by fea and land: neirher did he at any time
fuilain arly anguifh of heart, bur comforted his forrows.

a

Se REE SR eS ET

acct =

ae =) ae ae
a SSS i a a a a Se

j
And that this may not feem coo hard a fpeech, the prefident
of Chrift ceacheth , that they do not erre , who affirm that
rhe good Angels, by the appoinrment of God, and Divine | /
difpenfation, do fometimes come to, and vifit men, both hi- 4) |
ving’and fleeping, and fometimes to the place wherefouls 9) ‘
endure punishment : notwithftanding, it is nor unto all, bur’
onely unto thofe who are fo lived, that God fhall judge them ©
worthy of this mercy; or unto thofe upon whom, wichour’ 7

any refpe& unto cheis deferts, God will be pleafed to ee
: e

NEN RE OOM SS AES TONE SER OE ee GRE ae

Of the Natare of Spirits. | 141
rifie his urifpeakable mercy ; that by the prayers of the living
they may obtain pardon of their fins,and deliverance from
che prifon of torments,

Poll, 1 havefometimes read, that the fame St. Augu/tine
did wrice,chat ic is becter for aman to doubr of fecret things,
then co contend about things uncertain, i

Cast, That is certainly crue ; neither doth he declare
himfelf to be an offence to. thofe. who do leaye all rhefe

_things,to the unfearchable judgements. of God, and labour

not co finde out the fecrets thereof,

Poll. Becaute I have eafily underltood thy anfwers hither- Whethet
co, I will not defift rill chon haft fully retolved me conces- ba le
ning this fubje&. 1 defire therefore to know whether all ractes_re-
Miracles. which che devils perform, are done really, or ima- ally , or
inary phantafies. | 7 7 not.
Cat, That they perform many things.really , and many
things onely feemingly , we have already manifetted out of
the Writings of St. Auguftine.. For thar great Prelate of the
Chriftian Church , wriceth , in che sr Chapter of his book

de Trinitate, That it 1 a very cate thing for the wicked Spirits,

throsgh the aéry fubjtance of their bodies, to performs many things
which feem wonderful ( to the fouls that are oppreffed with earth-
ty bodies) tobedone, Healfofaih, That earthly bodies may
be fo qualified with art and exer-ife, that 1 publihe Theaters
they may. perform {uch wonderful things, , that thofe who never
have feen them will not belseve them, , but that they mere done. by
the affiftance.of the devil and his minifters y to. make. their bodies
of {uch an céry elements that the fleh.wonders at. -Or.elle,

-which is.much, he faith alfo, That they do contrive with occult

infpirationsy forn:'y And fantafies of images to. delude: humane

fenfe 3 wherewith making or fleeping y. they may be, deceived,
Thus far daguffine. |, But, if thou wilt, I will produce alfa.

another witne's without exception, Pollux...
Poll, 1 would have thee teli me who chat is. em
Cait. Abbas Triremin, in histhird Queltion.co Se. AZaxi

mus Emilianus', wich is {poken.of before., faichichus :. The
devils, amongst unfaithful people,.do feem toraife upthe dead. to

lifes.

T8423 A Difcourfe, ee
“The devils fe, “and'to fhew miracles to curious men, shat they Mitht as is
1a it “ cite were [wallow thens tp with errour in fread of miraclés 3 and are
ae pie deat altogether pertinactows and obftinate : but they cannot truely and
Ai realy rate 'upthe dead . but do varicully decerwe the jerfes of
A i mth . [bering them feigned refemblances of the dead. For it ts
Hi certainly manjfeff , that the devils cum do all things, but onely in a
a falfe fimititude o° holy mir-eles in truth, |
nt Poll, Some {ay that the devils are obedient to wicked |}
dio men, becanie of the fimilitude’of their thalice:. Howdeem-
a eth chat to thee? : | |

Cat. Tt feemeth'to me) ‘that they-are obedient to-evil
| mefi, bur nor to all men,

| Poll, But to whom?
| Cat« Torhofe certainly with whom they have contra&ed
and made compaéts and covenants ; as thofe women which
they call PychouiSts aré accounted , who have vowed them-
felves by promife unto him.

Poll, But‘alchough they are-compelled to be'fo ferviceable
‘unto them, yetiis this fervice true or feigned ?
¢ SOast: This féigned, certainly : ‘for rhey are tubfervienc un-
toomen of ‘their ownaccord and genuine work, charthey
may deceive them,and allure them to rhemfelves, Alchough
ae. we' donot deny that their fervice 1s fomecimes true, but
ihe) ‘onely towardsichofe men, whole faith in the Lord Jefus
ABE BR ‘Chrift, by the merit of his ho'inefsy hath caufed chem: to ‘be
at acceptable; and'friends unto *bimy* And that Lattaprinealfo
pie " . eefifies, in'thefe'words , ‘in his fecond*book De*origine Er-
rordss anid 16 Chapter That the devils:do fear they ultschar
4s, thofe thar wotfhip God’s'in whofe Name:théy are conju-
red'to depart oft of bodies , ‘and*with ‘whole words ‘they
arebearen‘as it were with {courges * and:cthey do nor onely
ie corifefs'thatthey are devils'$. butedo’ declare their names :
e neither can they lye‘irocthe full.’ ? And ‘the fame Lait antins ~
in his fourth book De vera Sapientia ,’Chap. 27. faich, That
it*is neéeffary that'they who are of the true Chritiian Reli-
sion, fhould ‘know ‘thé courfe and order of the devils, ‘and = ©
inderftandtheir{ubtilty , and reftrain their forcejsandcon-
7 quer

~

I RENE RNA INE RSS EG ET i REE DIE LIE EL LORIE Ba

Of the Nature of Spirits, 153°

quer and fubdue them with fpiritual weapons,and force them:
to obey him, :

Poll, 1 am now by thee {ufficiently informed of all things
which I have hitherto defired to know; wherefore 1 thal]
not any further trouble thee with my Quelftions, or rather
Riddles, but leave thee to thy own occafions.

Cast. Neither have I counted my felf idle in an{wering

‘thee: but let he ufe chereof yeeld us each to other an equal
recompence, Farewel therefore, :

Poll, And thee alfo, .

dileSehestaste dbs brsbrsbesteate tod

“St et AS NOE AA ane + Ea a Fe

Gerard

a

Aa re I  .

Gerarp CrREMONENSIS
ates CoN sieht a,
ASTRONOMICAL GEOMANCY.

yy Ecaufe Aftronomy is fo tranicedent and fwhril
an Artinitielf, that thereina man ought to
y have reipect untofo many things before he can
attalne ro truejudyment thereby, becanie the

eye of the underltanding will not pierce unto -
the half thereof, and few DoStors of our later
time have been found fo-experienced therein that they know
fufficiently how to judge thereby;Therefore I have compoled
this work,which 1 will have ro be named, Astronomscal Gco-
mancy ; wherein, ] wall lufficiently ‘teach how ro Judge with
lets labonrand ttudy.©°For inthisprefenc {cience it is not re-
quite co.be hold:neither the Afcendane, northe hour ina

Table, asic is.1n Aftrolopyss 8.8 98 Se
Ieis expedient therefore; t6makefonr unecual lings , by
the poitts cafually fer down ; and ro joyne together thote
points; and out of.che points which are not joyned together,
which do remain in the heads of the lines, (as itis done in
Geomancie y extract one figure ; and rhe-fizne of the Zeds-
acke that aniwereth to-that houre, put for che Adtendenr, for
the words dake." If Acqwijftio arife from the heads of hole Acquifition,
: adic é iene ieeiias four

Rep a EE Se FP RAEI REL,

1§6 Gerard Cr morenfis,

fou: Lines, let Aries be p.aced inthe Afcendent ; {€ Letizia,
or the leffer Fornme put aa ws inthe Afcendent;if Paer or
Rubew,p ace Gemini if Albw,Cancersif ViasLeo ; if Conjunttio
or the Dragens J eads¥ rgo 3 it PuellaLibrasif Amiffio ot Trifti-
tiaScor pio; he Dragons TaslSagictary;it Populus,( aprécorn ; if.
Fortuna mapor,eAqu ry 3if Carcerghen put Ps{cesfor the Af
cendent, Afterward: in the fecond Houfe, let that figne be
placed which immediately fusceeds the other,’ Inthe third
Houle che third.Sione, and do placerhe reft.in order until
7 come unto the end of the Signes ; and make one fquare

gure diyided into. twelve equal parcs, and therein place the
Siones in order ,.as it is in Altrology, andas you may finde
them in this figure : neicher are we here ro regard the * wit- .
nefles, or * Judge, or any other thing which belongs to Ge- |
omancie; but onely the fixteen Fioures, that by them we
may have the twelve Signes, to which they agree ; and ob-
ferve the maner of the Figure as it is here placed,

Lookhow thetwelvé

ey Signes ave placed in
the figure, and [o may

any otber Signe be af-
cending in his turtty a

Aries # here.

oF REN REE FETT RRS ES OS ea RIE SIRE OE

of Afronomical Cromancie. 157
Afterwards it is requifite to make four Lines by conrfe for
every Pianer, by points caftially pticked down ; and likewile

for th Dragons Head, as youhave doné forthe Afcendent,

and divide thofé points by twelve ¢ and that which remainech
above twelve, or the twelfth ix ielf, it a erearer number doch
not remain, reraine, and che Planet for which the projeaion
was made; place in that Houle of which the fuperabounding
number fhall be ; chat is 5 ifthere femaintwelye, ler the
Pianeér be placed in the rwelfttf Honte; if ten, in the renth
Houle ; if one,in che firlt Houle; if rwo,in che fecond Houle;
and fo of the reft. And you ought alwayes to begin from
the Sum, and afterwards from thé AZoon, then from Venus and
Mercuy,and from Saturn, Jupiter ind Mars, and the Dragons
Head and Drayons Tail 3 but you mit alivayes take heed,
thac you do not make a queltioti in’ a rainy 5 cloudy,’ or a
very Windy feafon, or when thou att angty, of chy minde bu-
fed with many affairs ; or for témprers or detiders neither
that yon may rehéw and feiréface rhe fame Queftion agaifi
under the fame figure ot foritie 5 for chat is error,

Qyeftions of the fir Houfe.

F you are defirous to know coneérnitie the life of any mah
| whether it fhall be long ot fhofts behold the Lord of the
Afcgndent who if he be in (trofis"A rislestic fisnities lone life ;
in fuccedents,a inliddle avé; ahd in tadenr Houfes, a fhore
life; and if he be inftrong Anglésshe fignifies eteater years ;
if in Succedentsnedner years; if in Cadents,leffer years. The:
leffer. years of Satura arerhisty ,” the thieaner ate forty four
years,andthe createrfifty'eisht: The lelfer years.of Jupiter
are twelve, the meaheryear$ forty, and the greater accor=
dingly are forty feven, “The effet yeats of Afirs are fifteen,
his meane ‘years forey 5 arid the ‘greater years forcy feven,
The leffer yeans of the Suw#are aré niheréthss ‘his mean years
forty five, and his greater years eighty two,  Theleff@r years
of Venus are eight, het mean years forty five, and het creater
years eighty two, ALeréwr)’s \cfle# Yeats aré twenty , his

Viz mean

Gerard Cremonenifis.
mean years forty Hine, and his preater years eighty, The
leffer -ears of the (Moow are fifteen, her-mean years thirty
. hine, and her ercater years ahundred andfeven.. And alio
i loc kif. CAL. rs ot Sasurn fhall be in the firtt Houte, andthe
| Lord of the eaghcl with them ; and if cheSz» fhall be in the
He elghth,the Querent fhali nor live: likewife if rhe Lord of the
ye A{_endent thalj happen to,be void of courfe, and AZars be in
1h the eighthythe Querent fhall nor liye; but if the Sewn and the
hy (Moon fhall be in conjunftion.in the feyenth Houle, and /e-
i zusin the fecond, he flialk ive well.
The accidents of the nativity are likwife co be conGdered,
Ik you finde Sturn or Mercsry in the firft, *-he is foolith and
talkative ; if it be Afars and ALereuryshe will not-be fervile,
but a wrangler and {coffer ; if the San and Adercury , he will |
ea fpeaker of truth ;.and.1‘ the Suz be in Aries, he will ap- i
ply himtelf to learn whatioever he thall hear: if Véeww be in |
the fevench, he will be luxurious ; and if Saturn, Mercury
and Verses bein their fall, he will be a Sodomite; if the Syy
and Venus be in the renth, and the cMoow in thefirtt, he will
be very liberal; if Venss,Adercury and the Dragons Head be in
the firtt, he will becovetous ’; if che Afoon and Mars bein
—- the firft, he will be fuyje co great bondage ; andif Mars be
Lord of the nativicy, he will be rich, and an evil {fpeaker, and
litigious ;.and aft the S#n bein the firtts “he willbe envious,
having a fair body.not,very lean, nor very fat); and if Venus be
in the firft.; he will be white and fair ;. if Mercury be inthe
firlt, he will nor be ftable,bur alwayesin motion; burif the
Moon be found there, it denores-himo-havea eraceful face):
breft and arms ; if Sater be thereythe man will be black and
filthy ; if Faprtery he will have-asound face, afair foreheadsa
ruddy complexion mixt with a lirclewhite. » If you would:
know his office, or art: if the Adgon be inthedeventh with
Saturn, ot in the fourth, or in the renthy or in the firkt, air is
not good for himio build any houfe in a:Citvs nor ro build a
fhip., neither is it good forhimto beattilleroftland, orto? .
| drejs .ines, or planr trees ;, but tobe imployed about {ome
te ofice belonging to the water, or concerning mariages , » or:
iit tO

ee

Oh, OR

accent ee 3 = eat :

— eS Sa eee e

a
ee eee 3
n

- x *

ee °

= ee
ee ——s

sass =
eee ”
Ls

Pe eee.

a Sa — = oes os
FE are SO, sical if ss
RAS POT A ND 0 Ae EI IO TT I EIT Dr mans
ig ‘ — : ott phy ome > aa "
e - ink - SS
po <2 - 5 oe a eer

7 Sn acai re ex hail ia EL RE EOS LAE IE LE ROE

Of AstronomicalGeomaxey.  eey

to bea Poft ora Meflenger; neither ler him arply himfeif
much co his matter, becaute he fhall gain no repute from him:
if the Afoon be in the fifth or chird,it will be good to him;in
the tecond, eighth, fixel-and ¢welfthyneicher sood nor ey il,

> Jupiter ignites Bithops; Prelates,: Nobles, 'Potenrates,
Judges, Wile men, Merchants and Ufbrers,

(Mars fienifies Warriors, Incendiaties,;Homicides,Phyfiri-
ans, Barbers,Hangmen,Gold-imiths,Cooks,furnaces, and all
fireworks. Andif AZars‘be in ftrong Signes, he willbe poor
and die in-captivicy,unlefs he put himlelf'in arms with{ome
fouldier or-vaffal, |

The Suz fignifiech Emperors, Kinos, Princes, Nobles,
Lords and ‘Judges. |

Venus fonifies Queens and Ladies, Marriages ,- Communi-
cations, Friendfhip, A pothecaries, Taylors, aind firch as make
Ornanients for playes, fellers'of Cloth, 'Jelterss Vintners,
Players ac dice, Whores'and Robbers,

Mercury iznifies Clerks, Philofophers, Attrologérs, Geoe
nietficians, Arithmericians, Latine writers, and Painters,
ard'all'fubril Arete, as well men as Women, and theif Arts;

Concerning the intention of'the Querént, look unco the
Sistie afcefiding,and his Lord; and where yout finde che Lord
of the Aicendenr, he'comes to inquire about fomérhing per-
taining to that Houle; and if the Szz be Lofd ‘of the ‘Aicen-
denty his'Quettion is concerning fearwhich he is ia of fome
man ; it Venus, he enquireth of ‘Arts, that-he'may kniowfome
proper Aits’}) or he-enquiterh concerning thiies belonging
towomen.” If Afercury be Lotd of the Aiéendenr, he {eek-
after Something that is lof, or enguireth concerning tome in
firmity.-° Whe! Adosns he feckerh‘alfo for fomerhing 164,* or
ifiquireth aboutficknefé, or fome difeafe in his éyes.'* If 5.0
torn be Lord of the Afcéndénary “he enquirerh about fome
fickhels, or’ concerning a‘Prince; and keepeth filence {@ bar
latlftome gréat stief or enguifh mmbhis heart. If Jupter be
Lord of tie Aendent, his Queltiom is coticernifig forme In?
firmirys or reflicution, or for tome office which he defireth ro
have’. If Afars, he enquirech for fome fear, or of an enemys,
death, ficknefs, riches, or fubfance, — Quelions

160 Gerard Cremonenfis,

| a | mys 4 : Bd ae iw
| | | i q | Lueftions of the fecond Houfe.
i

i F you would bedniformed concerning the fubftance of any
ay | man wether He fhall be rich or nots beho'd che Lord of
a | the fecond,which if he fhali be wich agood Planetyéz a good
al Planet iikewile in the decond, he fhall be rich. ; bucaf the
I | Lord of the ‘econs be jo-ned with evi Pianetss and an evil
| Pianet fhall be in the fecondy he fhalk be poor, | Fr,
If youwou.d know, whether you fhall have again athing =
We Jent, or nct, !ook it there be an evil Planet in the fecond,and |
. dilagreeing with his Lord; chen he that dérainerh the ching b
lent, wil not willingly render back the fame: Burif there 4
ae be a good Planet: in the fecond, and agreeing with his Lord,
a it fhall eafily be recovered _; and if the Lord of, the fecond be
ave (4 exalted and be evil, or if an evil Planet.be-with him in the
| econd , orif the Lord of rhefecond be exalted, hewhich
| keepeth the ching. depofired , will not willingly reftore the |
fame, but he fhall do ic whether hewillornot. Andifane- 9) |
ni vil Planet be in the fecond, it’sto be recovered : Bur if Mere 7 :
ae cury be, in the fecond fo that he.be-his Lord, and bringerh a |
contrariety, then it fhall be recovered; andifagood Pianer =|
Fey | be in the fecond Houte, he fignifies recovery, although he be. | ,
een | 1 the Lord thereof. | x

ei _ Mark sherefore ‘the. concord and.dilterd of the Planetss 9)
A HIRED the Moon and JH piter are friends 3 the Moon and Mars ené- » a) fe
mies; Mercury and the Sun ate friends, Mer:uryandVenus

enemies ; Venus and Jupiter are friendsyfupiter.and the-Aloomn 9,

are enemies, sete

_ The Planets are faid to be friends, when they apree in:one.
nature and quality, as AZirs andthe Suz, bécaufe both-their |
natures.is hoc and:dry ; Venus andthe Atson do agree incold fr

and moifture : or when Planets do agree in fubftanceand, I sh

| nature, as Fupiter and Venus are friends : or when the Honfe: Sy ie
1 of. oneis.the exalrarion of anosher, or on the conerary, a,
Wetieh sn com eiy4 5 dpreeiee as os

pie Pe

a

< Of Astronomical Geomantie.

Queftiens of the third Hone.

cininine:but Aferenry is promifcu-

and fomerimes feminine ; he is

joyned to maiculine Pianets or when

he is in. a mafeuline quarter of the Lodiacke's and héis feemi

nine, when he is joyned tofaminine Planets, or when he is
ina feminine quarter-efthe Zodliacke,

Queftions of the fourth Hone,

[F thou weuldé# know whetherit be good for thee'to Ray in
any Land, City, Village, Territory, or Houle, or not, be-
hold the Lord of the Afendent of the fourth, and of the fe-
venth ; and if the Lord of the fourth be in the feventh,and be
geod, and the Lords ofthe firlk and the venth Houle be
good, and.with-good Pianets, then it is ood for thee to con-
tinue in-that place wherein thou are. And'if theLord of the
seventh be with.agood Planet » and the’Lord of the fourth
with an evil Planer’, -then it is not 60d for thee ro abide
there, becaufe if thou dott contiriue theresthon thik fuffer' ma:
ny, loffes,8 havelevil reperrs railed:on thee i chat Country.
But af thou would know when ‘any ‘one that is abfent
wall return, behold the Lord of the Afcendent 3. andif you
finde, him in any one of thef ur Angles x he will réturn in
| thacryear and if-he benovin an Ariole; then fee how far
| he 1: diflant from the firt Angle |; forfo long he will flay,

| and {o many years as there be Houfes, sapien
| If yon would be informed of the dearth orplenty of things,
| beho.dithe rong Honiles , the Succedents and the ae :
or

5 RS Sie Ra AE se et ARNE MREETP TP as RS

17.2 Gerard Cremonerfis. ©

forthe {trong Houles fignife dearth and icarciry , the Succe-
dents a moderate feation, neithert oo dear, nor too cheap, the
Cadents fignitie plenry and profitabienefs of things. Con-
fiderailotheP.aners, andtheis paces, OoWHh if they bein
(trong Houfes, the things whicli arévignified by thofePia-
nets will be fare sand nore, TharSwinra doth tisnitie hel dé
vines, and'in.irnmerits to work inifieids, and leacher} ‘and of
ITDIE 5 COXN, ACCEN Sy Qak-app.er, @ ldipomesranar es?! Jupiter
hathsoll, honey, aik-wormes; ciorhyswWine ss'dnd orafs jy and
things that are odoriferols. | CAZzrofignifies wine, and fleth}
and.elpecially hogs 5 .wars, and: armour § and duct things
as, belonz rhereuntes.and red garments, «The Swzhath ties
niication of wheat, and wine 50 purplencolouts j'ahdUéch:
and ali rhings that are: affimulated umtoigold , Hotfes and
birds, fuch as hawks and falcons» Venus doth fienifie farnefy
and grapes, figs and dares, fifh and paitimes, Mere wry hath
barley, millet, graitymoney, and quickfilver, The (Moon
tignifies oats, miik, cheele, fire and falt,cows, rams, hens,and

filvery and accordingly plenry and fvarcityiof them,
Queftions of the fifth Honfe.

LF. you;would know, whetheral woman be wich Child 3°68
 oWhether {het wail -haverary, chitdrén; ornoty otk if the
Lord.of. the Aicendent beanithe feventh; orthe Lord ofthe
ftth in the firft, onthe;Lord of the fittt mthe fifth, °“or iP the
Lord of the fifth bein-chefeventhy ‘or if che Lord of the fee
venth be in'rhe fifth, or the AZsomavirh vhem 3 or if good Pia-
nets bem the firlt,.or chelfifth, orwvirlt the Lord ofthe fifth}
or*R + 1n-Angles 9° the is'with childjiormay have Hil"ten ;
buc.if- you .finde none of > chem!, « buc ‘evil -Plafiers! if
the,. fame: iplaces , > fhe, neither is! with childeé neither
will fle haye any-children ¢jand if there be both cood atid
evil Planers, in! tHe {aid-places’, {then happily fhe may have
children, but they will noplive:sobucifCancer yScorbioot
Pifcesthali be inthe firft or fifth Honfe $: fhe maychacedhl-
dren; but if Lea andro bethere,fhelisnor with child, nei-
| ther

eX

ne calico Rae ea
iia Sk. Pe ee ate ES

pee ear

f } ‘
q ¢ ,
t t j
: i :
i } {
t
. ‘ iW hue)
* Fj a ! }
it {
if it) td
‘ee }
U1 r { f
Bs ia Van S|
¥ Wa bu
| Et |
. i i
hi ; r
f Wig &
: oe
q : 4 b) 1
, J
i |
1} Z \ {
4 a
2 “et }
i +7 i
“ane
7 * i
t
2 v
i
A > }
t
x
s
Re
R { i
” )
: . j
a ;
; fe 1
4 bah a |
fi
’
¢ |
~ Z
te t
MW
7\ ©

d i

ae . 2 . = 22a “4 4 a
a da ex ahaa cn ait OT aT hs
rm . * Oa eae

Of Aftronomical Geomancie \ 63
ther fhall fhe ever have any children; or. if che Lord of the
fifth fhall be inrchem Honfes. ee

And if you would know, within how many years fhe fhall
havechildren, look where you finde rhe Lord of the fifth ;
for inthat year fhe fhall have iffue; if he be in the firlt, in the
firlt year ; if inthe {econd, inthe fecond year; and {o you
may number unto thetwelfch Houle. And if mean Signes
be inthe Aicendent, fhe that is wich child hath twins in
her wombe, which will live, if a good Planet be inthe firit
and if an eval Planer, they will die; and if there be one good
and anotherevil, one fhall live, and another die ; and if
amean Signe fhall be afcending, and Adars in that Signe, the
mother fhall die, and-not thechilde; if Sarzrn,both the mo-
ther and child fhall die ; and if the Dragons Tailbe there,
its poflible they, will boch die ;- buc che infant fhall not e-
{cape ; and if che Dragons Tailbe fo inthe firlt, and the tenth
Houle fallen : the mother flhall die; likewife if AZars and the
¢ Moon, or (Mars and Saturn be inthe firlt, feventh or tenth,
the mother fhail die. | #

Whether che party with child fhall milcarry, or not. Con-
fider if a moveable Signe be alcending, becaufe if 1t be fo, fhe
BEE LMIRBEDY, Fb! ft63.., 75 }

If you would know whether a woman fhall bring forth a
‘man-child, or.awoman-child ; behold the Afcendent and
his Lord, which if he be mafculine, and in a mafculine Signe,
or in a mafculine quarcer of che Figure, -it is a male-childe ;
-bur-if the Lord.of the. Afcendent be feminine, and in a femt-

nine,Signe, or in a feminine quarter of the Circle, ic willbe a
-woman-child ; ,and {0 you fhall confider alfo of the Moen,
-Gonfider.alfo.if, more; ‘of. rhe Planets be in matculise
Sione:, then it will be a male-child’; ‘and if many Planets be

yy

in feminine Signes, then it is-a female-childe. .

And. if you wuld know waether the child be legitimate
oradulterate; fee if Sarurn, Mars or the Dragons Tail be in
. the fifth,-or.with the: Lord.of the fifth; becaute if ic be fo, ic

ae ois id bh Peletall Lt VED A EER sh hie SSC BET Fee aR at,
_ is adulterare, ;, bucif. a. good Planet {lall'be there’, “ir isJe-
_-gitimate : andeif the Lord of the fir, ‘bein the fifth ,, or
on ee Nn ere =. Ree nearer “with

es

Ga 7

! i

i ‘ |

if i

a,
ty

Nf }

yt

j |

a Ne a a a a cae

164 _ Gérard Cremonenfis,
with his Lord, itis legitimate ; and fo likewife if che Lord
of the fifth be found in the firft, or with the Lord of the firft,

If you defire to know whether rumours be true or falfe, fee
if you finde Saturn, Mars or the Dragons Tail, in the Afcen-
dent; becanfe if they be fo, then the rumours are falfe; -buc
if you finde the Ssn, Jupiter or the Dragons Head there, then
they are true ; and if there be mafculine Planers inmajfculine
Signes, & feminine Planets in feminine Signes,chen they are
true;and if both good and evil Planets be there,then they are
partly true and partly falle ; and if chere-be a good Signe with
the Planer, ir teftifies che truth ; and if che Planet fall with
an evil Signe, chen it is falle ; likewile if Mercury be in the
firit , rhe news is falfe'’: bucif the «Woon be in the firftina
feminine Sizne ,- or joyned wich che Lord of the Afcendent
ina feminine Signe, then the rumours are true ; alfo if good
Planets be in the firft, fifth or ninth,and feminine Signes, they
are true; but if ocherwife, they are not. ;

If you would know whether any one thar ts abfenc will
rerurn, and when; fee the Lord of the Afcendent and rhe
firft , which if you finderhem together , for certain he will
come, and is now beginning his Journey. Likewile if the
Lord. of the fifth be in che firft, or wich the Lord of the firft,
and if he be in his fall, che meffenger is fick in his way ; but
if che Lord of the fifch be exalted, thenhe cometh joyfully,
And if he be in a cadent Signe, he fhallbe grievoufly afflifted
with ficknefs, or fhall die.

If you would know if he bringech that with him for

which he went,or not,behold the Lord of the feventh; which

‘if he be good,he bringeth that which he fought for; and if he .

be in his fall, or an evil Planet be there, he bringeth nothing

Questions of the fixth Houle,

; WV Hether the fick fhall recover his health, or die, If the

Quelftion be concerning his ficknefs., feeif Saturz, or

“Mars, of the Dragons Tail bein che fist, and hei ie .
ord.

| i — 7 c~, =o”

—_—sy

pe Ee wee |

ees Stihl As ce cachesspelit Tiree aria MEN nn ae ae HAAS.

Of Aftronomical Geomancie. £65
Lord be joyned with anevil Planer, then he thall diefoon,
And if the Lordof the firtt be good, and evil Planets be in
the firft with his Lord,or likewife in che firftor the eighth, for
certain he willdie: But if che Lord of the firft be in the
eighth, or with the Lord of the eighth ; or the Lord of the
eighth in the firft, or with the Lord of che fir(t, there is doubt
of his death. Andif evil Planets do poffefs the Angles, evil
and deftru&tign is threatned to the fick, But if good Planers
fhall bein the firft , fixth and-eighth, and likewife in the An-
gles, and the Lord of the firlt be from the eighth & his Lord,
then the fick perfon fha]] live and recover his health.

Tf. you defire to know whether he will be cured by medi-
Cines , give the firlt Houfe co the Phyfitian, the tench to the
fick, the feventh to his difeafes, andthe fourch rothe medi-
cines, . If evill Planets be in the firlt,che Phyfitian thall pro-
fic him nothing ; bur they teftifie char chis will be worfe for
the difeafed: buc the Fortunes do fignifie, that he fhall be
profitable tohim, And if evil Planets do occupy the tenth
Houfe, the fick perfon is the caufe; for they teftifie, thar he
himfelf is the caufe of his own difeafe : but the Fortunes be-
ing there, fignifiethe contrary. But if evil Planers be in the

tenth Houfe , they change the condition of the fick out of

one difeafe into another ; but the Fortunes being there, do
deliver him without the ‘help of Phyfitians or medicines,
Alfo evil Planets being inthe fourth, doteftifie, thacrhe
medicines do augment his grief; & the Forrunes being chee,
do mitigate and heal him,

If thou wouldft know if thou shalt go unto the perfon and
heal him ; confider the place then : for if he fhall be wich
Saturn, Mars , or the Dragons Tail,or *R* with the Sux, 0
not unto him ; bue if Jupiter, Venus or the Dragons Head be
in the firft or inthe feventh, go, for ic will be good : andif
there be the (Moon with agood Planet , go, and give him
phyfick ; but if the fhall be with an evil Planet, and efpecial-
ly in the feventh Houle, then thon fhale nor go; becaufe thon
fhale profic him nothing : and if chere be good Planets
there, go.and look dilizently.to him, where or in what ae

X 3 ers

Gerard Cremonenfis,

bers he fuffers ; becaufe Aries hath the head, Taurns the neck,
Cancer the brealt and lungs, Leo the heart and ftomack, Vir-
go the belly and inteftines, Libra the reins and loyns, Scorpio
the fecret members, Sagittary the thighs, Capricernthe knees,

ye

Aquary the legs, and Pifces the feet.
Questions of the feventh Houje.

Or theft, look unto the Lord of the Seventh’: which if

he be in the firft,che theft thall’be reftored again ; but if

» the Lord of the firft be in the feventh,» ic fhall bea long rime
© joughte after, and at length fhall be found: but if the Woon
_» bein the firitjor wich his Lord, it fhall be found ; if the AZgon
~ ‘be intheffth, or with the Lord of the firft, or * R * inthe
firft, icthay be found ; bur if cheSan and the A4von be inthe
fifth, and if the Lord of the eighth be-with the Lord of the
firftin che firft, ic fhall be found s but if the Lord of the fe-
cond be in the eighth, it fhall not be found.’ And if Saturn,

or Mars, or the Dragons Tail be in the fecofid, it thal} not be
found, nor be altogether loft, And if the Lord of the fecond
bein the firft, the thing thar is loft fhall be found ; but it fhall
not be known from whence it came.. If the Lord of ‘the
fittt be in the fecond,ir may be found after much labour.’ And

if the Lord of rhe fecond be in his fall, ic will never be found:
but if he be exalted, ir fhall be found very well 's bur the {e-
vench Houle fheweth the thief, veohie
Bur if you would know what it is that is ftollen , behold

the Lord of the fecond ; which if he be Saturnjit is lead, iron,

a kertie, a trivet, a garment, or fome-black thing, or leacher.

If he be fupiter, then it is {ome white thing,’as tin, filver, or
mixt with white & yellow veins. The Suz fignifies cold and
precious pearles, Mars fignifies things belonging'to the fire,
Ven fiomifies things belonging to women, as gloves, rings,
and fair-ornaments, | The Aeon, bealts, {uch as hotles, mules,
Ge. perfumes and wars, Mercury fighifies money, books,
Writings, pictures, or garments of diverséololirs.)

If you would know how’ many thieves there were, fee

) | _ the

ne mre a Pa

Fe a aa “cqccnnaseasr amet amet eam = em aa aie oP asi
= BET Woe sree : nae ad
—

ee eee

Peers

Seihinds aX naira Leal
mete: “—- i we, yin
+ ane: OAS ite eats

* tis Ease

PREIS
‘

fT I A FREES

=~ emer,

FETAL ARTES

1) id
AK }
hay
} . 1 »
and
pal Pas a
P ;
a
; ht
f i
; i]
g i
| it
S|
ote
i 4)
i
< : !
F yee
‘ } if
al ih
4 li Z
ie a
i 1/1 Gly
it
} i
¢ ;
H nk
i 8 BES
- Aq i th
: ‘ j if
; ; i
: a ik
ee #
wet /
be) |
| * 5h }
ia ah | tt
t | ay ;
ij
} f :
t Se
a a
ie * |
j
: TP dig!
i
; : i
ayy * ‘
4 i |
tf { u ,
. ih {
€ \
it i
‘. i SH
t a
| - | ee be
e } > ‘
Se ry 5
> ’
i
if » Aeaid |
\ \ is
' : i
2% \

of Astronomical Geomaney. 167

the Lord of the fixch ; which if he'‘be in che fecond, or with
rhe Lord of the fecond, there were many thieves ; and if they
be in rhe third, the brerhren or kinfmen of rhe Querent have
committed the theft.

If you would know whether the thief do yet remain in
che Town :if chey be in fuccedent Houles,he 1s not gone far ;
off; but if they’ bein cadent Houles, he is far remote,

If you defire to know towards what Country the thief
is fled ,, feesim what Signe the Lord of ‘the feventh is 5 for if
the be in Aries’, hé is in the middle ofthe Baft parc. If in

- Tanrws, in the South towards the Eaft, If in Gemini, in the
Welt towards theSouth, If in’Cancer, ful North. If in
Leo, in che Eaft towards the North, If in Virgo, in the South
rowardsthe Welt. If in Libra, full Welt.” If in Scorpio, in
the North-neer tlie Welt. If in Sagitiary y inthe Haft nigh
the Norch: If in‘ Capricorn, full South. If'in Aquary, 10
the Welt towards the North. Andif in Pifces, in the Norch
towards the Welt. :

‘If you Would know whether the thief hath carried all the
things ftollenaway with him, fee the Lord of the’ feventh
andthe eighth;and if the Lord of the féyenth bein an Aneleé,
he had adefire to carry away the fame with him, bue could,
note If the Lord of the eighth be in 2 mean Houle,or ina ca-
dent Honfé, and the Lordof the fecondin'a ftrong Houle; he
hath carryed the cheft wholly with him,” “And if the Lord of
the feventh and rhe eighth be borh in cadent Hoiifes, ‘He nét-
ther carryed it'away, norhath ir, See by the feventh who
is his companion, and what is‘his gain. : Sooyse

If you would know. the: deiceric or nobility of aman OF
woman ,' look unco the Lord of thefeventh; _ whichif you
finde bim ih Anelés, and'the Lord of the brit in Succe dents
ot cadents , the woman is morenoble then the man, ‘Bucit
rhe Lord of the Afcéndent bein an Angle,& the Lord of the
feyenth in afuccedént or cadent Houle, rfie’man Is more no~
ble thenthe woman; And after the {afhe manner thou matt
judge of two companions, or of any Other perlons whatfoe-

| Yer. Andif the Lérd of the'fevénth We inthe ninth Houte,ne
wilftake a wife out of a forreigne Country. if

ork
- 7 - eu,
wy ej fags
OD) ahs ;
- wg di af
} f rf
k , 5 &
S ¢ !
Gite:
¥
ii 4
it |
ne i
4 (ie |
My
| I4y
1 idee}
: | !
bi
ts } }
¥ Bh
é hia
ie
d }
i
¢
i
N if Le
He i Hs
y | TRI)
i
s (Hat
‘ -
if
i
q \
f a

Fi SG NT RTE

arene =e

= —
“i Hy
aennsetnioraermaeden

RE Gah Fo SO e pre
~ ~ I ee tener NRE SO.
A EOS OLIN LE | ORIN AE ARR RE IN EEN STI TIN SET er RN A AIT reer ae
- — capa Ulta eo ~ eRe s reer

rreitt. Hee creas

2 SSO aes

ne en Shee

eee
Pd, GTM

_ =

— =

268, Gerard Cremonenfis,. -
If you:defire to know whether an intended marriage fhal]
take effect, or nor, look to the Afcendent and his Lord, and
the Acon, for the Querent ; and the feventh Houfe, and his
Lord, forthe woman, And if the Lord of the Afcendent or
the A4oon be joyned to the Lord of the feventh,or be in rhe
feventh, the marriage will be effected ; or if che Lordof the
feventh be inthe firtt, or with the Lord of the firft, it will
cafily be brought to pafs ; and the woman is more defirous

thereof, then the man, ;
If you would know whether thy wife or friend hath any o-
ther lover or not, look if Afars bein the feventh y-fo that he
be nor in his own Honfe » for then fhe hath not any orher
lover. And if Saturn be there, fhe loveth another; buche
lieth not with her. And if the Dragons Tail be in the feventh,
he lieth wichher. _ And if Jupiter be there, the hardly con-
taineth her felf chafte, If Venus » fhe is merry, and much
given to play and lauehter , by teafon whereof, fhe may be
accounted a whore, and is not{fo. If Mercury be in the fee
venth, fhe had.a Jover, buc now hath none, Bur if the Afoo
be in the feventh, the hath had no lover as yet, but will have
one, and willbe common,. Burif the Sz# or the Dragons
Head be there, the is chafte, And after the fame manner

* Thidem May you judge in the * ninth + ‘concerning friends or lovers,

forte. If you would know which of them thal] liye longeft, fee

the Lord of the firft and of the feventh, which of them thal]
be in the ftronger and better place, or joyned to the ftroneeft
Planets ; and chat. perfon who is moft free and remore from
the Lord of the eighth and his participation, towhom the

Lord of his Houfe anfwereth, thall live longett,
~Af you defire to make a fociety or alliance, and would know
whether ic fhall be brought to pafs or not yor what thal]
happen thereupon. {fee if there be good Planets in the {e-
venth and the firlt:and if fo, che fellowfhip will be made,
and good will come thereof; and youmay judge it to con-
tinue{o many years, months.or dayes , as the Lord of the {e-

-venth hath fignification of, }.,. )
If you would know when. fuch fociety fhall be, look
whac

what Planet is im the feventh pfor if he be good,it fhall come
to pafs that fame year: ‘or wedlock, * R * if the Queftion be
thereof, |
If you would know whether they will well agree, fee the
firft and his Lord, which is the fienifier of the Querent; and
the feventh Houle and his Lord, which isthe Honfe of com-
panions, wives and concubines; which if they be concordant
amongft themfelves,there will be peace and union between
chem, and rhey/fhall profic = but if the Planets be in difcord;
ue will be ftrife between chem, and the fociery will not
rofic, yer
; If you would. know’ ‘which of them thall gain molt, fee
che firlt. and his Lord ,'!and the feverith atidvhis Lord 3 and
which ‘of them ftandeth bef}; or if they be evi) which of them
falleth : and hethat falleth fhall lofe, .and’he that is exalted
fhallgain, Orotherwife;-and which is berter, fee the fecond
and bis Lord., ‘and the eighth andhis Lord; and in which
Houfeis rhe better Planer, or his Lord thar thall be found in
the berter placejor yoyned with the berrer Planets he thall be
the greater gainer. “The fecond Houfe and his Lord fignifies
the gain of the Querenc: and the eighth Houfe anid his Lord
fignities the gain of his fellow, or his part: andif they be
both good, they fliallbcoth gain ; and if:both evil, they fhall
both lofe s+ and if one be good and the ‘other evil, she whofe
ier ape 1s good; fhall gain ; and he whofe is evil; thall
ole, BoP. a.
And if you would know if ewo fellows fhall love 6ne‘ano-
ther,look if the Lords ‘of ‘the firtt and the feventh be friends

and agreeing,then they willdove one to another ; but ifthey

be enemies and difagree,then they will nor, ie
If you ‘déefire to know who fhall overcome in any caule,

matter orcontroverfie, behold the Lords of the fir and the

Seventh, which if they be in Angles, neitherof them thall'o-
vercome; and fee which of them is joyned with an evil Pla
net, becaufe he fhall overcome ;' and if ‘the Planetibe evil
from them both, the vigor thal] kill the conquered ; if one
of them ‘be ftrong, and the other weak,’ ‘and the gee,
which

Of Astronomical Geomancie. > 16g":

(ae GE AE TE pe
oe 2 i ee ee ee — : Z
eT GSES eG ee ee =e ae
¢ . nao 3 * ~ Poe — aur, ae ois _ “ere Ss = = *
oho ag PRESS a Rn re oe : ; ee > iene
xs = es oss ve QS > ai i a ae cw mea Soe = oer —

a

i
ey ar
NTAiR WA na mia es

=>
sit f

MSR EMEA ETT sg

SN ET TE Te

Gerard Cremonenfis,

which is in the trong Hotlealo rior fall, ‘nor hath not an evil
Planet wich him ; and if he whichis weak-be not in his own
Houle, nor in his exalrari6n, nor with a good Planet, ~ he
whofe:Planet is in the trong Honfe, fhall overcome; like-
wile he whole figniticarofils:in a mean Houle, fhall have great

fearand doubt in his hearr, becaufe fometimes he thal] hope

to conquer, and otherwhiles fear to be overcome; And note,
that-inaQuekion concerning war and kingdom,inis taidthat
here is: more power and efiicacie., ior fortitude'in the.exal-
tation of-a Planet, then in his Houle ; bur inall ocher Quetti-
_ons the contrary,

Tf yous guld béinformed concerning any cne being that
is. gone.to any:,fightywherher hes fhall. return fafe ,. fee the
Lord of thie Aicendent:; if he-be goody 'thatis 5 with good
Planets; anda godd Planes in the firlt:, he ‘will return fafe;
but ifthe Saz be with the Lord of the firft,in any part of the

ueftion,ler.bim, not go,becaufe the Sx burnech him,: And

if the Lord of ithe fevenrh beiwith agoed Planer, and rhe
Lord of. the firft with aligned Planet~likewife,he fhall have
fome impediment,.in the'way 3 but-‘he will not die. 1And

i¢ an evilRlaner be withthe Lord of: the-firft, and a good
Planet: in che firlt,. if he goeth he thal] duffer great damage,

but notideaths nevetthelels he.may be orievoufly wounded.

Andif Saturebe.in che firitjor with the Lord of the firft, let
him not go.j becaule,fome impediment will happen unto
him by fome man tharhe will meet. And if there be an e+
vil Planet with che Lord of the firtt, or Satara be inithe firtt,
or-with the Lord of the-firlt, he willbe wounded with wood
or witha ftone... If. A4ars.and che Dragons Taitbe inthe firtt,
or with the Lord:of: the firft:; - or if. chere be:evil Planetsin
the firlt,-or'with the Lord of: the firft, ‘he will fuffer wounds

- or.death,, Seelikewilfe iftthere be anievil Planerimthe eighth,

becaufe-then death is-to be feared; And if the Sznbewith
tbe Lord of the fevench, orinthe eighth ¢ -1t; fenifiesthat it
is illo go. «The like judgement 4s ‘of: the feventh andthe
tenth. 7 oft Ltd Hella fly sd ota

And. if a Queftio, be: propofed concerning the event of

war

as OS Stes

TOES. ae

ee ee a at

4 Cs rt i ty,

SS a a ann : <se Se

Of Astronomical Ceomancie, 71
War, fee the feventh and rhe firft, and their Lords’: for the
firft Houfe andhis Lord fignifies the-Querent ; and the fe-
venth Houfe and his Lord the adverfary. So chat if there
be good Planets inthe firft, and evil in the feventh ; and if
the Lord of the firft and feventh be evil 9 the Querent hall
overcome : but if there-be an evil Planer with the Lord of
the firft, and an evil Planet in the firft, and the Lord of the
feyenth good, or *R.* inthe feventh, the Querent fhall be
Overcome, or taken, or flain, “And if the Lords of them
both be inthe fir, and there be good Planets from rhe part
of the firt Houfe, unco rhe end of the Houle which is the
middle of the Quettion; and if evil Planets do poffefs the
other half of the Queflion, chat is to fay, from the feyenth
unto the end of thetwelfth houte, thé adverfary thall over-
come. . Bur if both the Lords thall be in the Afcendent, and
if they be good from the part of the firft, and eyil from the
part of the feventh,they thall both fuffer great lofs ; bur rhe
Querent fhall have the better in the end. But if the Lord of
the Afcendent be in the feventh, or in his Queftion, it figni-
fies fortitude of the adverfary : and if the Lord of the fe-
venth be in the firft, or in his Oueltion > it fignifies fortitude
of the agtor. And if the Lord of the Afcendent be in the
eighth , or with the Lord of the eighth; or the Lord of the
| eighth in che firt, orwich the Lord of the firlt,ic fonifies rhe
j) death of the-Querent, And if the Lord of the feventh be
| in che fecond, or with his Lord 3; Of the'Lord of the fecond
| in the feventh, or withthe Lord of the fevénth 5 “ir ficnifies:
| the death:of the enemy.
_ If youwould know-whether War thall continue long or
| Not, If mean ormeanly ; if the Lords of the firft and the te-
venth do agree, the parties thall ‘be pacified after the
| War. } idee
| If thou wouldett depart from the place wherein thon
| att , and remove thy felf to fome other place ; and if thou
| wouldeft know whether it be better forthee to fay or go:
of concerning two bufineffes, if thou defirelt to know which
| Of them is moft expedient for thee to undertake, confider

the

is —

ae aaa oe atalacia ican pean en ace OR I — ;

172 Gerard Cremonenfis,
the Lords of the firft and thefecond , for thofe places to:
| which chou.wouldeft go, the place wherein thou arr, and
ale the gain which thou getteft here. ; and the feventh and the
a eighth,.and their Lords, for the place to which thou wouldeft
Wet | 0, and the gain which thon mayft gec there. :. and :thofe
hi places chute, whofe Lords are the better, or joyned ‘to rhe i
ae beiter.Planets,’. Or orherwife: beholdtheLord of the Af}
ee : cendenr, and the Moon ;- which if they be feparated from
Oa evil Planets, and joyned to good and fortunate Planets, -it is

| better for thee to go from the place where thou art, then to-
{tay there, and co do what bufinefs foever thom haftin chy —
minde. And if the Lord cf the Afcendent and the Moon®
be feparared from the Fortunes, and joyned to evil Planets,
then it is not good for.thee to removerthy felf, nor to:do thy
bufinefs.. Orthus:. Seeche Moon; and ifthe Planet from
which fhe is. feparated be better then that: ro whom fhe is”
joyned, do norremove: and if the Planet which fhe is joyn- /
ed to,. be better chen that from-whith. the is feparated,:, 9
then go, : |

Qucstions of the: eighth’ Houfe.

Concerning any manor weman, if you would know what’
kinde of death they fhall die, fee if Leo, Scorpio, or TR.F
Mars, be in the.eighth, the parry fhall die by a beaft, And‘
if Satura be in the eighth, or with-the Lord of the eighth in ‘
Scorpio, Cancer,ot Pifces, he {hall die inwater, And if'an’
evil Planet be in the eighth,or with the Lord of the eighth ;
or if A¢ars or the Dragons Tayl be there, he fhall die by fire,
iron, or.of afever. And. if'there.be a:good Planet in: the
eighth,.or with che Lord.of the eighth, he fhall die a-good’ |
death.. | .

Que

———
SPOS

Of Aftronomical Geimancic.

Quecftions of the ninth Houfe.

Oncerning long journeys, fee if the Lord of che eighth
have good Planers with him : and if Saturn be in the
ninth, and exalted in the tenth, fothat he be not in his
own Houfe, do not go: for thou wilt meet with many obfta-
cles, and War. _ And:if an evil Planet be in the ninth > Or
with the Lord of the ninth, and the Lord of che ninth in his
fall, he‘hall fuffer great damage in the way : for if he goeth
by water, he fhall {uffer thipwrack ; and if by Land,he thal]
have misfortunes, be taken ,.or die, If Satery be in the
ninth, or with his Lord, go fecurely. And if a good Planet
be in the ninth, or wich the Lord of the ninth, che way is
good and fecure. And if Mars be in the ninth, chou mayett
not go : for thou wilt meet with mortal enemies in the
way. Aud if the Lord of che ninth be with an evil + Planer,
or the Sun, it fignifies ill: but he fhall not be taken. And
if the Lord of the ninth have a good Planet neer him, he
fhall efcape: but if evil, he fhall be taken. If Venus be in
the ninth, or withthe Lord of the ninth, the way will be
good, becaufe he thall have comfort from women. © And if
Mercury be inthe ninth, and the Lord of the ninth wich
good Planets, the way will be very good: andif he be with
evil-Planets, ic will be evil. And the fame is {aid of the
Moon,as of Mercury. IF the Dragons Ta iyi be in the ninth,
he will meet with theeves, or fome evil people. And if

the Dragons Head be in the ninth; the way will be 20d, be-

caufe he. fhall be accompanied with Noble-men, - And in
this:maner may you judge in che third Houle concerning
fhorujourneys. 29>) 2.2) 7) | |

If-youwould know ‘when the journey hall be accom=
plithed, fee che Lord of theninth, and according to-his for-
ticude or debility judge , becaufe according to,the place
wherein he is , is fignified yeersy months, or days : and fo

" you fhall judge concerning his ftay, about.what time he will

g ier. come,

Fe SEEN HT EE RT EL EE ENS LOS EE Oe OY Fe

Soe

A ae, la EEE = — =
(i hl eT RRS RI, ,

mer #
ae

ey |

a ge TL Ree,
id ee ea 2 a el ES

- Sy ne
ae nese) —_

a a ee Mee BE fe BITE ET I Te DARE TE
_ a . ite Di i i

‘ TE RS as ORR ce hen SURE IE EE
a I a erg sass Se,

i sal ae i Nl

aes ss

Te Gerard Cremonenfis,
come’, by turning the yeers of the Lord of the ninth imo:
days; becanie fo many days he fhall tarry, as the Planet fig-
nifes in the place where he is.. Or otherwiie: weak An-
oles finite a fpeedy journey, mean Angles a mean journey ;
and the Lord of the ninth likewile, according to the place
wherein hes found, -
And this I fay concerning his return, eta
If you would know whether he :fhall remrn from: his
journey with an imperfe& voyage or ‘not, fee if the Moon
bé joyned wichthe Lord of che firft, the third, or the pinthy.
and the Planet thereof be in his fall; becaufe if it bei, he
{hail renirn with an'intperfe& voyage. And if the Moon.
be in heréxairation, che journey fhall {peedily be effected:
And if there be two {tronz Planets, and one cademt., the
journey fhall, be made ; andif one be ftrong, and another
in his fall, he final] rerare back, | 413

Questions of the tenth Houle.

E-thou wouldett know whether thou fhalt/have -any hoe
nour or benefit from a King, Bifhop, or Lord,or, not, look
-ntothe firt Houle, and the ninth, andtheir Lords: and if
the Lord of the firft be in the ninth, or wich the Lord of the
ninth , or with any other good Planet 5 "or if the Lord of
the ninth be in the fitft , or with rhe Lord of the firlti, ior
with any other good Planet. as Venus, Jupiter, onthe Dra
gons Head; or if anyof thembethe Lord of the ninth, of
*R.* of the firt, he thall receive honour-and benefits from
them. tue.
And if you would know whether he fhall-have at in -bis
own Country, or ina forraign Country, look if the Lord,of
the ninth be in angles, ther ic fhall bein his own Country :
and if in fuccedentsyit thal] beineer ; but if in cacent Houles;,
very far off,

Que-

—— ae

cake cial ea eR SO re Rl aa ld

SN

Of Aflronomical Geomancie. 175

Q uestions of the eleventh Houfe,

Zz

F you would know when it is good to fet fortt'a Ship to

Sea, fee the Afcendent ; which if it be {table, che Ship will

be ponderous ; but if the Lord thereof be with a good Pla-
net, fhe will fuftain a great weight. And if che Afcendent
be inftable, and with a good Planet, the Ship wall be fwift,
and carry agood burden, And meanly-, if rhe Afcendent
be mean. And after chis maner may you judge concerning
an Horie, if a Queftion be thereof,

And if any unitable Signe be alcending, and his Lord be
in his exaltation, or. otherwile fortunate y and the Moon.
behold him with a lowring Aipe@, or Sextile s let the Ship
be applied to the water, becanfe the will be very {wift,
And if any evil be impofed upon her, or chat the be like to
be drawn into ic; chen fet her out when a {table Signe is "
aicending , or whenthe Moon is in the chird, fifth, eighth,. 7
ninth, or tenth houfe or manfion,

If you would know what winde fle fhall have » behold’
the Aicendent and his Lord, whether he be with good or evil
Planets,.and in what place, and accordingly judge.

And if you would have a fttong winde, {pread forth your
Sayls at the rifing of Aquary : if a {mall winde, {pread your:
Canvas when Libra is aicending :: If a moderate winde, then-
dire& your Sayls under Gemini.

Ppp:

Queftions of the twelfih Houfe.

| 7 Or Imprilonment,confider the twelfth and the firt ; and’
| F if the Lord of the twelfth be in the fir, or with the-
| Lord.of the firtt, cc,

ef RBATEL of MAGICK:

_ as well Wife-men of the people of God,

EES MORI TIE RN AE ERAS LAE MIE LG

ER

Sea e eer ee

Er

| INNA re
Of the MAGICK of the Aricients,
The greateft Studie of Wifdom.

In all things >. ask counfel of the Lord : |
and do not thon think, fpeak, or do |
any thing, wherein God: is not thy iF
counfellor. ,

Proverbs rr.
He that walketh fraudulently , vevealeth fe-
crets : but he that is of a faithful fpirit,

concealeth the matter.

OR,
Thefpiricual Wifdom of the Ancients;

as*MAGI of the Gentiles : for che illuftra-
tion of the gloryof-God'; and’ his:
love to Mankinde.

Now firft of all prodaced ont of darknefs mro the livhr,
again{t all caco-Magicians, and‘ contemners of the eifts:
of God’; for the profit and dele@rion of all thofe,
who do truely and pioufly:love:the creatutes of God,:
and do ufe them wich thankigiving, to the honour of

God, and profit of themtelyes and their neighbours,

Cone

=e
i) Pane 2
< 2 > 5 a”,
: i
: f Ve
\ t
tf 24
i ?
¢ j
ats
I y '
nm ci
>) ADE i
of \)
L
j
} Seah |
he ea an
H as,
im oe
am Bh
? }
d pias
ti \
‘
a
nig SEF i}
eI
Q i Vey pa |
x * ea
: i
5 eid
9 : if
i }
a ii
, i:
Bay

nie

aE eT pa
ME vy a Z =
= ae :

ATONE MOR SIN
petra
ns is Sema ne”
x a A ‘ «
aa

es he Degen a ee ae ? Ts
: ESS IE 1G RR DMN ARE gnc etme . =
A pian me , ee ae v
.. : oe se ERE . meer! =
y ~ i protege ~ é sah Scpethre—ee >

anton i sic peas phan Sal TEE eRe TINGE

ee

ee oe ae ath a
a i a

Arbatel of om agicke

Containing nine Tomes, and [even Septenaries of
OO  SAPHORIS MS,

The firft 1s called I/azoge , or, A Book of the Infticutions
of Magick': or, ¢ vduanxhs « which in fotrcy and nine A-
phoriims comprehendeth the moft general Precepts of the
whole Art. ° | Hey Gla

The fecond is Microcofmical Magick, what ALicrocofmus
harh cfteéted Magically , by his Spirit and Genius addicted
ro him from his Nativity,that is, {piricual wifdom: and how
the fame is effe&ted. A)

The third 1s Olympick Magick, in what maner aman may
do and fuffer by the {pirits of Olympus.

The fourth is Hefiodiaca], and Homegical Magick , which
teacheth the operations by the Spirits called ( acodamones,
as it were hot adverfaries to mankinde, :

The fifth is Romane or Sibylline Magick , which:a&eth
and operates with Tutelar Spirits and Lords , to whom the
whole Orb of the earchis diftribuced, This is valde infignis
Magia; To this alfo is the dodtrine of the Druids reter-

red,

The fixth is Pythagorical Magick, which onely acteth
with Spirits to whom is given thedo@rine of Arts, as Phy-
fick, Medicines, Mathematicks, Alchymie and fuch kinde
of Arts, :

The feventh is the Magick of Apollonius, and the like, and
apreeth with rhe Romane and Microcofmical Magick: onely
ic hath this thing peculiar, chat ir hath power over the holtile
fpirits of mankinde.

The eighth is Hermetical, that is, gyptiacal Magick; and
differeth not much from Divine, Magick,

The ninth is that wifdom which dependeth folely upon
che Word of ‘God; arid-this isxalled Propherical Magick.

The 4 |

The firft Tome of the Book of

Arbatel of Magick,

-CALLED

er ter sc do bn ge

ning the greateft Secrets which are la
and to ufe them without offence'unto God, Amen,

/-. The'fteR Septenaey of Aphorifnis.

The fie eAphorifon, "

Wholoever would know Secrets sclec him-kriow- howto

keep fecret things fecretly.; and r@ reveal thofe things char’
are to be revealed oat

d.to feal chéle things which are to be
fealed : and sot to £rve holy things toidog sy:nar caft pearls before
Z.

fine.

rn ST AE

186 Arbatel of Magick.
fwine. Observe this Law, and the eyes of thy Underftand-

‘ing (hall be opened, to underftand fecret things ; and thou

fhalt have whatfoever thy minde defireth to be divinely re-
vealed unto thee, Thou fhalr have alfo the Angels and Spi-

rics of God promptand ready in cheir nature to. minifter un-
co thee, as much as any humane minde can defire.

, \ @Alphor.2 +
In all chines, call pon the Name of the Lord : and with-

out. prayer unco Ged'through his onely-begorten Son, do
not thou underrake to do or think any thing, And-ufe the

Spirits given and artributed unto thee, as Minifters, without —

rathnefs and prefumption, as the meflengers of God ; having
a due reverence towards the Lord of Spirits. And the re-
mainder of thy life do thou accomplifh , demeaning thy felf
peaceably , ro the honour of God, and the profit cf chy felf
and thy neighbour, | as

3 eAphor.3.

" Live to thy felf, and the Mufes: avoid the friendthip of
the Multitude: be thou covetous of time, beneficial co all
men; Ufe'thy'Gifts, be vigilant'in thy Calling ; and tet the
Word of God never depart from thy mouth." < — sob tes
hee Aphor:4.

Be obedient to.good Admonitions.: -avoid)all procsafti-

nation: accuttom thy felf to.Conitancie and Gravity, both

in thy words and decds, Refilt the temprations of the
_ Tempter, by the Word of God. lee from carthly things 5

feek after heavenly things, Put no confidence in chy own *

witdom + but‘look unto God in all things, according ro that
fentence of the'Scriprure? When we' know not what we {ball do,
untorhee,O God, do we lift mp our eyes, and from thee we. expect

Wi

onrhelp. For whereall humane refuges do forfake us, se 4

a

Arbatel of crtagick. 181
will the help of God thine forth 9 ¢ccording to the faying of
Philo, :

eAphar, 5.
Thom (halt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with

_ all thy flrength , and thy neighbour as thy felf: And the Lord

will keep thee as the apple’ of hiseye , and will del
from all evil , and will replenifh thee with all
nothing thall thy foul defire , but chon thalr be

therewith, fo chat it be contingent to the faly
foul and body,

iver thee
good ; and
fully endued
ation of thy

Apher, 6,

Whatfoever thou halt learned 9 frequently repear, and fix
the fame inthy minde: andlearn much,but not many things,
ecaufe a humane underftandine Catinot be alite capablein
all things,anlefs it be fch a one that isdivinely fegenerated:
unto hun’ nothing is fo difficult or thanifold, which he may
not be able equally to attain to,

cA; phor. Fi

Call upon me in the ddy of trosble > And I will heay thee, and

thou (halt glorifie me, faith the Lord, ' Forall Ignorance is tri.
bulation of the mindé ; therefo
ignorance, and he will hear thee
give honour unto sod, and fay with the Palmitt 9 Not inte
ty Lord, not unto us, bur uuto thy Name &ive the glory,

re call upon the Lord in th
« And remember thar thoi

~ The fecond Septenary.

1 ; : Aphor. 86 ee ;

Even ag the Scti pure teftifies, that God appointeth namies
| Z 2

to

See wae

Par Wee apie ane ——

nat tiple alapiipataini

Depa

a

Arbatel of cMagick.
to things or perfons 5 :and-alfo, with them hath diftribuced
certain powers and offices out of his trea(ures : fo the Cha-
raéters and Names of Stars have not any power by reafon of
their figure or pronunciations but by reafon of the vertue or
office which God hath ordained by nacure either to {uch a
Name ior Charaster, For there is no power either-in heaven
ot in éarth,/or-hell,which doth not deicend from. God; and
without his petiniffion , they:canneither oive or. draw. forth
iitonapy-adionyasy thing they have. RZ ENY

, .,eAphor. 2
That is the chiefeft wiidom, which is from God ; and

next, thar which is in {pirical creatures ; afterwards, in cot=

poral creatures ; fourthly,in Nature,and natural things, The
Spirits chat are apoftase, and referved:co the laft judgement,

do follow thele, afterja, long ancerval, Sixthly, the minifters: ,
of punifhmencs inheiland-rhe obedient unto God.Seventh-,
lysthe Piomies. do. net,poflels the lowelt, place, and they. who,
inhabir in elements and elementary things. . It is conve-,,

nient therefore 0 know and.diicern. all differences of tle,
wiidom of the Creator and the Creatures , that ir may be
certainly manifeft unto us, what we ought to aflume to our
ule of every thing, and that we may know in cruth how and
in what maner har may,be done,, For, truely every creature

is ordained for ome profrable end ro humane nature, and:

for the fervice thereof; as the holy,Scriptures, Realon, and |

Experience, do tellifie, |
3 eA phor. 1.0... cai eee

God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth,
and of all things vifible and invifible’, inthe holy Scrip:ures

propofeth himielf to have aneye over us ; and as a tender

farher which loveth his children,he teacheth ns what is pro-

~

firable, and what not ; what we are to avoid, and what we

are to embrace; then he alluseth usto obedience with great
promiles

* RS
——r

promifes of corporal and eternal benefits, and deterreth ug
(with threatnine of punifhmenrs) from thofe things which
are not profitable for us. Turn over therefore with thy
hand, both night and day, thofe holy Writings, that thou
maylt be happie in things prefent,and bleffed to all eternity.

Do this ;..and thou fhalt liye, which the holy Books have.

taught thee,

eAphor.t I,

‘A number of Four is Pythagorical, and the firft Quadrate;..
therefore here let us place the foundarion of all wildom, af-
ter'the wifdom of God revealed in the holy Scriprntes, and’

Appoint therefore to him who folely. dependeth upon
God, the wifdom.of every creature to ferve and obey him,
nolens volens, willing or unwilling, And in this,. the Omni-
potency'of God fhineth forth, Tet confiteth therefore: in
this, chat we will difcern che creatures which fetve us, from
thofe that are unwilling ; and that we may learn héw to ac-
commdate the wifdom and offices of every ctéature unto
out elves... This Artis nor delivered, bur divinely, Unto
wnom God will, he revealeth his fecrets ; but to whom he”
will not beltow any thing ont of his tfeafuries . ‘thit perfon
fhall attain to norhing without the will of God,

Therefore we ought truely ro defité 1d mtuanil Soyhs
from God alone, which will mercifully imparc thefe things

co the Confiderations propofed in Nature,

funto us. Forhe wio, hath eiven us his Son, and command-~
ed us to. pray for his holy Spirit... How. much moré will he.”

{fnbyjec& nnto us the whole cfeature. and thine: vidblé ‘and.
J * , thy oe : . e, ? over
invilible 2° Woat[oever, ye.ask, yefball receive, Beware that

ye do not abufe the gifts of God, andall chings fhall work

together unto you for youMalvation,” And before all things, ”
be watchful in.this, That your.names be written in heaven : ”

thus is more light, That the fpirits bé obedient unto you, as’
Chrift admonifheth, | 4a : Heck 07 Oo TR
f eAphor;

Arbatel of agick. 183.

ETT Re SS *.
2 2 ° CE) Figg aD S SAARI Taine a renee
ae = = a a a mg =
ee, oe <1 =* Sener seeaee =

Arbatel of Magick.

eA; hor. 2.

In the Aéts of she Apoffles, the Spirit faich unco Peter after

athe Vifion,Go down, and doubt not but Ihave fent them, when

he was fenc for from Cornelius the Centurion. After this
manier, in vocal words, are all difciplines delivered, by the
holy Angels of God,as ira pearecth out of the Monuments
of the Lgyptians, And thefe things afterwards were vitiated
and corrupted with humane opinions ; and by the inftigarion
of evil {pirits , who fow tares amongit the children of difo-
bedience, as it is manifeflt out of St. Pax], and Hermes Trif-
megiftnus, There is no other maner of reftoring thefe Arcs,

then by the doétrine of the holy Spirits of God ; becaufe

true faith cometh by hearing. ‘But becaufe thou mayft be cer-
tain of the truth, and maylt not doubt whether the fpirirs
chat fpeak with thee, do declare things true or falfe, let ir
onely depend upon thy faich in God; that thou mayft fay
with Pasl, Iknow on whom I trust. If no {parrow can fall
co the ground without the will of the Father which is in

heaven, How much more will not God fuffer thee to be de-

ceived, O thon of little faith, if thou dependeft wholly up-
on God, and adhereft onely to him ?

eApbor. 13.
The Lord liveth ; and all things which live, do live in

him, And he is truely 71172, who hach given unto all
things , that they be chac which they are: and by his word

alone, through his Son, hath produced all things out of no-

ching, which are in being, He calleth all the fars,and all the
hoft of heaven bytheir names. He therefore knoweth the
true ftrength and nature of things, the order and policie of

every creature vifible and invifible, to whom God hath re-.

vealed che names of his creatures. Jtremaineth alfo, that

he receive power from God, ro extrac the verrues in nature, ©

and hidden fecrets of the creature ; and ro produce cheir
power

2 sn ITY

Arbatel of Magick. 8s?
power into action, out of darknefs into light, _ Thy {cope
therefore ought to be, rhat chou have the nates of the Spi-
, . fits, that is, their powers and offices » and how they are fub-
(a jeted and.appointed by God to minifter unto thee ; even
as Raphael was tent co Tobias » that he fhould heal his father, 4
and deliver his fon from dangers , and bring him to a wife, = |
So (Michael, the fortitude of God governeth che people of | i
; God : Gabriel, the meflenger of God, was fent to Daniel, ie
, itr Mary, and Zacharythe father of John Baptif:. And he. thall t
| be'given to thee thar defireft him, who will reach thee what- a
2 | foever thy foul thall defire, in the nature of things, His mis if
| niftery thou fhalt ule with trembling and fear of thy Creator,
| Redeemer, and Sanétifier; that is to fay, the Father, Son, and:

holy Ghaft: and do not thon ler flip-any occafion of lear-

ning, atrd be vigilant in chy calling, and thou fhale want no-.

| + thing that is neceffary for thee,
A

Aphor.1'4,.

Thy foul liveth forever’, rhrough him that: hath ‘created 7 e
| thee : call cherefore upon the Lord thy God, and him onely i
| fhalt chou ferve. This thon fhale do, if chou wile perfornr
| thar end for which rhou art ordained of God, and what thon. ©
| owelt to God and rothy neighbour, God requireth of thee

| a mindey that thon fhouldeft honour his Son, and keep the

| words of his Sonin thyhearr ‘: if thou honour him, chon.
| hait done the will of thy Father which is in heaven, To th

| neighbour thou owelt offices of humanity, and ‘that thou
| draw all men that ‘come ro thee 3 fohononr the Son, This

is the Law and the Prophets. Th temporal things, thon

oughreft ro-call upon God as afacher, thar he would give
unto thee all neceflaries ‘of this life: and. thou oughteft to
| heip thy neighbour with the gifts which God beftowerh up-

| enthee, whether they-be fpiricual or corporal, . |

Aphor,.

or

Tie te -
ae
- ae = periecmeinra

ae

hinge ==

f=

on

Ss

x > s

Sra Nt ee =
lini Spat

e ‘ ———

- — ann hee PP neo cine - ="

Ni \
“th | |
i fit || {
ie H
mL
i i a
ft }
at :
te
Bes
phi sy
Fy
it ,
i
‘f

486 = Arbatel of Magick

Therefore thou fhalt pray thus: :

AON Lord’ of heaven and earth, Creator and: Maker of alt
things vifible and invifiblers I, though anworthy, by thy
affiftance call upon thee y chrough thy onely-begotten Son Fefus
Chrifkour Lord, that thou wilt give unto ‘me thy holy Spirit y te
dirett me inithy truth unvoall goody Amen,? ¢»
Becau'e Learneftly defire perfectly. to know'the Arts, of this
life, and fuchthings a are necegary for Us which are fo over=
whelmed in darkuel, and pollured with infixite humane opinions,

that Tof my own power can attain tomo hvowledce in iherms unlefs

thou.rench it'me =. Grant'me theref anecone'of ithy {pirits, Pe msay
teach meithofe things.avhich thou wouldet have me trxnon Ane

<

dearn's to thy :praife and: glory, ana 'ahre: profit af -ontr meigize
Give me alfo an apt and teachable hearty that Lemay eafiiy nae
fland thofe things which thon |pait teach me 5 and may hide them
in my.underftanding , that I may bring them forih as out of tay
inexhauftible trea{ures, to all neceffary ufes. And give me or ¢0es
thar ed mizy ufo fuch thy gifts biamsbiys with feurand: trembling
through our Lord FefusChrift, with thy holy Spirdts Atasn

The third Septenaty.. 1.0.
Aphorisisys'2 ni mos

They ate called Olympick, {piris y which do-inhabir in the
frmamentjand urthettars of the Crmament:. andthe othce
of thele {pirits iscodeciare Deftiniessandro,adminiiter Fatal
Charms ¥fo-far fotts.as Gad pleafech to permic tem + for

nothing. neither evil {piri nor evi! Deftins, fhall be able to

hurt him who-harh the mott Hizh for his-refnge. If cherer °

fore any of rhe Olymp:ck, {oirits (hail. reach or declare that
which his {tar co which he is appointed portendeth, never-
theiets he can brine forth nothing into action, uniels he be
p-rmitted by che Divine power, Jt is God aione who giveth
them power to effect it, Unto God the maker of all chings,

arte

| Of Berher.; and it
| 430. To whom fagceeded Pha/ gy until the 920 yeer, Then
es A

Univerfe, wh
power : all

But in this place it is to.be explained, in what maner thefe
Princes and Powers may be drawn into co
Aratron appeareth in the firft hour of Saturday, and very
truely yiveth anfwers concerning his Provinces and Provin-
cials, Solikewile do the ret appear in order in cheir days

and hours, pe every one of them ruleth 490 yeers. The
beginning of theit imple 4zomaly,in the 60 yeer beforethe

ecinnomenerees se

ee Naa i

are obedient all chings celeftial , fublunar
Therefore reft in this: Let God be th
which thou undertakeft,and all things thal! atraintoa happie
and_defired end ; even as the hittory of the whole world
teftifieth, and daily experience fheweth, There is peace to
the godly : there is no peace tothe wicked, {aith the Lord,

Aphor, 16,

There are feyen different governments of the Spirits of

Olympus, by whom God hath appointed the whole frame and
univerfé of this world to be governed : and their vifible
ftars are ARATRON, BETHOR, PHALEG » Ocx, Ha-
GITH,OPHIEL, Puut, after the Olympick {peech, Every

one of thefe hath under him a mighty AGéitia in che firma-
ment, :

ARATRON ruleth vifble Provinces XLIX.
Betwor, XXXII.

PHALEG ,-XXXYV.
Ocu, XXVIII.
AGITH, XXI,
OBE 1:5. X TTT).
‘Puar,- Vi.

So thar there are 186 Olympick Provinces, in the whole
erein; the feven Governours do exercife heir
which are elegantly fee forth in Altronomy,

mmunication,

ativiry of Chrilt, was che beginning of the adminiftration
lafted until the yeer of our Lord Chrilt

La began |

Arbatel of catagick. 187

Y> and infernal,
y guide in all things

steeds ne

eae eee 7 ea oe ies <oe i” aa Ril Aisin eat
i a linens ~~ ui —_ -
Fens ian ae oD SNM as Ni a tie

- *?; Rises “s — .* ma
— Sahl Aalig cadena lhe gesagt
Fa eS vgn ec Tr Nee ee ray ene es a tm

ig) | 185° Aibatel of Magick. |
| . i | beean Och,atid continued untill the year 14.10. and thence=" a

forth Hagieh roleth untill the yeat 1908.

{| f Aphor. 47 «

I Magically che Princes of the feven Governors ate called |
fimply, in that time, day, and hour wherein they rule vifibly |
a or invidbly, by their Names and Offices which God hath . @}
3) civen usto them ; and by propofing their Chara&ter which |
they have given or confirmed. Be
The Governour Aratron hath in his power thofe things’

which he doth naturally, thar is,afrerthe fame manner a
fubje& as thofe things which in Aftronomy are alcribed to
the power of Saturn. :

Thole things which he doth of his own free will, are,

1, That he can convert any thingincoaftoneinamoment, — © |
eee animal or plant, retaining the fame object to the |
ight;

o

2. He converteth
treafure. ‘

3, He giveth familiars with a definite power.

4, Heteacheth Alchymy, Magick, and Phyfick.

5. He reconcileth the fubterranean fpirits co men; makech
hairy men,

6, He canfeth one to bee invifible.

7. The barren he maketh fruirful,and giveth long life.

——————
7 ° re = Sige <a cm ae eer ceca eee eee
ae aan ee es
Sn Le a — = = :

creafures into coles ,“ and colesinto

Has charatter.

et

i = a
Stennett 5

-,*

Se

Arbatel of «magick.

He hath under him-49 Kings, 42 Princes, 35 Pref
B . dents, 28 Dukes, 21 Minifters, ftanding beforehim; 1

familiars, feven meflengers : he commandeth 3 6000 lesions
of {pirics ; the numberof a legion is 490.

| Bether governeth chofe things which are afcribed to Fupi-
| ter : he {oon cometh being called, He that is dignified ‘with
his character she raifeth to very great dignities, to caft open
treafures: he réconcileth che fpirits of the aire, thar they give |

| true anfwers : they tranfport precious ftones from place to 1
| place,and they make medicines to work miraculonfly in cheir 't
| effects: he giveth alfothe familiars of the firmament » and |
prolongeth life to 760 yeares if God will

His charatter.

He hath under him 42 Kings, 35 Princes, 28 Dukes, 21
Coun(ellors,14 Minifters, 7 Meflengers, 29000 legions of
Spirits, ;

Phalec tuleth thofe things Which are attribuced to Mars,
the Prince of peace; He thae-hath his character, he raifeth
to great honouts in warlike affaires,

eee iren

sg OE ep ertiiaitn > Ay RAI ASM
Pee a ee pen a

nafs eae gene I nab en i

Arbatel of Magick.

Has charatter .

Och governeth folar things ; he giveth 600 yeares , with i
perfe& health ; he beftowerh great wifdom, giveth themoft  — 4)
excellent Spirits, reacheth perfect Medicines : he converteth |
all things into moft pure gold and precious ftones: he giveth |
gold, and a purie {pringing with gold. He that is dignified
with his Chara&ter, he maketh him to be worthipped as @
Deity, by the Kings of the whole world,

The Charatter,

Se _
4 27 Ba 5 eR

He hath. under him 3 6536 Legions : he adminiftreth all
‘things alone : and all his Spirits ferye him by cencuries.

Hagith

Arbacel of «Magick.

Hagith governeth Venercous things. He that is dignified
with his Chara&ter, he makerh very fairy and to be adorned
| with all beaucy. He conyerceth copper into gold, ina mo-
| ment,and gold into copper: he giveth Spirits which do faith-
i fully ferve thofe to whom they are addi&ted,

Hs Charatter,

fand he ordaineth Kings for their appointed féafons,

Ophiel is the govetnour of fuch things as are attribuced ro
Mercury: his CharaGer is this,

" He hath 4000 Legions of Spitics, and over every thou: -

Fae ey — ae

s =

pees

LA eine OT,

ee

ore

a
Zeer S

eye inaaaempisiiemanieiim ii Sle ee ee pee SSS eT

ra Met | ere

SENS OLE NS A ONT, PRS CS CE IEA IEE CE ATE . =

oe % - . SCI nese CF tence NPE
pies + a : sone -

' —
aoe

me MS

ign

asda

eS

et ne

Rate ee has 9 OTE ey epeone:
. pes Sa in Pui ha ed =
; "Gainarvioe wi Conese" aoaae

Se TPO AR CNR a RR
ee tt, tee rome oR eh ect bmn en
renee =a ~ as ;

Arbatel of Magick.

His Spirits are 100000 Legions : he eafily giveth Famill-

ar Spirits: he reacherh all Arcs : and he that is dignified with

_ his Chara&terjhe maketh him robe able ta moment to con-
vert Quickfilver into the Philolophers ftone,

Phul hath thes Character.

He chaneeth all metals into filver, in word and deed ; kon
verneth Lunary things ; healeth the dropfie: he giveth fpirits

of the water ,. who do ferve mén.in a corporeal and vifible

form ; and maketh men to live 300 yeers.

The nsoft general Precepts of this Secret. |

x. Every Governour a&ethwich all his Spirits,either nacu-
‘rally, to wit, always afterthe fame maner ; or otherwife of

their own free-will, if God»hinder them not.

2. Every Governour is able, t6 do all things which are
done naturally ina long time: out of matter before prepa-
red; and alfoto'do them {uddenly,our of matter not before
prepared, As Oab, the Prince of Solar things, prepareth
_gold in the mountains in along time ;:1n a lefs time, by the

Chymical Arcs; and Magically, in a moment.

3. The true and divine, Magiciayi may ufe all the creatures
of God, and offices of the Governours of the world, at his
own will, for that the Governours of the world are obedi-
ent unco chem, and come-when they are called, and do exe=

cute

Al

NE os Ne nr ER

Arbatel of om agick.

Johua caufed the Sun to fland till in heaven,

They fend fome of their Spirits to the mean Magicians,
which do obey them onely in fome determinate bufine(s -
but they hear not the falfe Magicians, but expofe them to
the deceits of the devilsy.and caf them ino divers dangers,
by the command of God ; asthe Prophet feremiah teltifi-
eth, in his eighth Chapter, concerning the Jews,

4. In‘all the elements: there are the feven Governoiits
with their hofts, who:domove with the equal motion of the

firmament and the'infetiours do always depend upon the ~

fipetiours, as itis tanght in Philofophy.

j. Aman chat is a true Magician, is brought forth a-Magi-
cian from his mothers womb : others, who-do give chem-
felves to this office, are unhappiey This isithat which Johy
the Baprilt fpeaketh of: No man can do any thing. of himfelf,
except it be crven him from above. ide

Every CharaGter given from a Spirits fdr whac caufe foever,
hath his efficacie inthis bufinefs, for witich it is given,in.the
time prefixed : Bur itis to be ufed the fame day and Plane-
tary hour wherein it is viven,

7+ God liveth, and thy foul liveth : keep thy Covenant, .
and thow haft whatfoever the Spirit hall reveal unto thee in -
God, becaufe all things thall be done whichthe Spirit pro-°-
mifeth untorhee,: « : |

Aphor.1 8.

There are other names of the Olmpck {pirits delivered
by others ; but they onely are effedtua » Which are delivered
to any one , by the Spiric the revealer,.vifible or invitble:
and they are deliveredro every one as they are predéftinareds:
therefore they are called Conitellacions 3; and they feldome
have any efficacie above 40 yeers, Therefore it is moft fafe
for che young pra¢tiférs of Art, that they work by the offices
of the Spirits alone; without their names 3 and uf they are

pre-ordained to attain the Arc of Magick, the other parts of
the Art will offer themfelves unto them of their own accord,

Pray

 19F?
cute their commands : but Godis the Auchor thereof ; as :

‘
oes See ie ee
Jee SS a ae
as e a a ae, es Ss

e trist —; Pou:
tS

ie eas =

= ona
ae"

Se Rte OEE
ee es oe

Se ee aes
Sealine sangeet nS ey aden ail al

194 Arbatel of magick.
pray therefore for a conftane faich 5 and God will bring to
pafs all things in due feafon.

Aphor.19.

Olyn.pus and the inhabitants thereof, do of rheir own ac-

cord offer. themfelves to men in the forms of Spirits ; and
wherher they

are ready to perform their Offices forthem ,

will ornot: by how much the rather will they attend you, if
they aredefired? > Buc there do appear alfo evil Spirics, and
deftroyers , which is caufed by the envy and malice of che

devil ; and becaufe menrdo allure and draw them unto them-

felves with their fins, as a punishment due to finners, Who-

foever thereforey defireth familiarly to have a conver-
{ation with Spirits, ‘let hum keep himfelf from all enormious
fins, and diligently pray to the moft High to be his keeper 3
and he hall break chrough all rhednares and.impediments of-
the devil: and let him apply himfelf -to the fervice of God,

and he will give hum an increafein wiidom.

Aphor.20.

co them that believe rhem, and are
willing to receive thems but to theinctedulous.and unwil-
ling,all things are unpoffible : there 1s no greater hinderance
then a wavering minde , levity, unconttancy, foolifh bab-
bling, drunkennefs, lufts,and difobedience to the word of
God. A Magirian therefore ought to bea man chat 1s. god-
ly, honeft ; conttant in his words and deeds having a firm
faith towards God, pruderit, and covetous of nothing but. of

witdom about divine things.

eAphor.21.

Pa

All things are pofible

When you would callany:of the Oympick Spurs 5 ob:

fhe Sunthat day and. of what nature the
ng the prayer followings
| Om-

feve che rifling © Yo
Spiric ‘is which you defire ; and {ays
your defies fhall be perfected,

Arbatel of cAtagick. 195
Omnipotent and eternal Gody who haft ordained the whole cre=-
ation for thy praife and glory, and for the falvation of man, Ibe-
feech thee that thou wouldft fend thy Spirit N,N. of the folar
order, who {hall inform, and teach me.thofe things which I fhall
ask of him ; or, that he may. bring me medicine againft the drap-
fie, 8c, Neverthele@ not my willbe done, but thine, through Fre
[us Cbrift thy onely begotten Son, our Lord. Amen,
_ But thou fhaic nor detain che Spiric above a full hour,
nnlefs he be familiarly addi&ed unto thee. |
Fora{much as thou cameft in peace, and quietly. and haft an-
fwered unto my petitions; I give thanks untoGod, in-whofe
Name thos cameft : and, now thou mayft depart in-peace unto thy:
orders; and return to me again when when I (hall call thee by thy
name, or by thy order, or by thy office. which is granted from the
Creator, Amen. +

- Ecclefiaft, Chap. 5, Be not rah withthy mouth, neither let
thy heart be hafty to utter any vhing before God ; for God_ts in
Heaven, and thouinearth = Therefore let thy words be few ;
for adream comeththrough the multitude of bufinefs, |

t

The third Septenary.

eA phor. 22,

We call that a fecret,which no man can attain unto by hu-

“mane induftry without revelation ; which Science liech ob-

{cured, hidden by God in the creature ; which neverthelefs
he doth permit to bé revealed by Spirits, to a due ule of
thethingir felf, .. And thefe fecrets are either concerning
things divine, natural or humane, But chou mayft examine
‘afew, and themoft fele&, which chon wilt commend with
many more, a

Bb Aphor.

7. PRS ns rp Ra Oy ‘ere ea a, 7a erfag Ne te AREER
De Sat cy nn RE ce An nA

Arbatel of cmtagick.

eA phor.23.

i | Make the bezinning of the nature of the fecret, either by !
Na | a Spirit inthe form of a perfon, or by vertues feparate, either |
a) in humane Organs, or by what manner foever the fame may
i be effected ; and this being known, — require of a Spirir
, which knowerh that art, that he would briefly declare unto
La thee wharfoever chat fecret is : and prayunto God, tharhe =)
a | would inipire thee with his.grace, whereby thou mailt bring |
| | che fecrét to the end rhon defireft, for the praife and glory of }

God, and the profit of thy neigbour.
a Ne, este ‘ eAphor. 24.

/ 1. Thefirft isthe curing of all difeafes in the fpace of feven
uy dayes; eithet by characters, or by natural things, orby the
pin fuperior Spirits with che divine affiftance. DATES
Tah 2, The fecond is,to be able to prolong life to whatfoever
| | ace we pleafe: I{ay,a.corporal and:naturallife.
| 3. Therhird is,to have the obedience of the creatures in
it _in the elements which are inthe forms of perfonal Spirits 5
* spirits of alfo of Pigmies, * Sagani, Nymphes} Dryades, and Spirits of
the four ele- the woods, |
wiki Pa-~" 44, The fourth is, to be able: ro difconrfe with-knowledge
mes" and underftanding of all things vifible atid inyifible , and'to
-underftand' the power of every, thing, andtowharit be-
longeth.
5. Thefifth is, chat a man be ableto-govern himfelf ac-
cordine to that end for which God hath appointed him, _
abs 6. The fixth1s, to know God, andChrilt, and‘hisholy
. 7 Spirit : this is the petfe@tion of the AGicrocofmus.
Pgs 7.. Thefevencth, to be regenerate,as Henochius the King 0
; the inferiour world,
Thefe feven fecrets a. man of an honeft and conftanr
| minde

| | . The greatest fecrets arein number feven.
i}

ASE ere aa
ee eee eae ot y “4

wait: APOTTIIE aibmese Cm nen Bu — ES _
~ COMES FENN: RN A LR CIEE ENN TOIT A TIT Bh ie
ye 3 $ z. eR ee oa
Z Sic Saag ag a = cae
Sue:
Pps Soe —

Anan

Fn ns na a ee eae fa

Arbatel of eAtagick. 197
ane may learn of the Spirits, without any’ offence unto
od, | .

The mean Secrets are likewife fevenin number,

i| 1. Thefirft is, the tranfmutation of Metals, which is vul-
7 gatly called Alchymy 3 which certainly is civen to very few,
| and not but of {pecial grace,

2. The fecond is, the curing of -difeafes with Metals, | Ee
either by the magnetick verrues of precious ftones, or by the
: ule of the Philofophers ftone,and the like,
| 3. The third. is, ro be able to perform Aftronomical and
‘Mathematical miracles, fuch as are Hydraulick-engines , to
adminilter bufinefs by the influence of Heaven, and things
which are of the like dort,
4. The fourth is,to perform the worksof natural Magick, |
of what fort foever they be, iF
5. The fifth issto know all Phyfical fecrets, E
6. The fixth is, ro know che foundation of all Arts which
are exercifed with the hands and offices of the body...» -
7- The feventh is, to know the foundation of all Arts
which are exerciled by the angelical nature of man,

i ee

The leffer fecrets are feven.

1. The firftis, to do a thing diligently, and co gather to-
gether much money, : :

2. The fecond.is,to afcend froma mean {tate to dignities
and honours, and to eftablith'a newer family, whichmay be
illuftrious and do great things, - > 9 | yet]

3. The third is,to excel in military affairs; and happily co
atchievetozreatthings ,. and to-be an head of the head of
Kings and. Princes, | > te as

4. To bea good honfe-keeper both in the Country and.
City. MOLE RY | ‘

5. The fifth issto be ab induftious and fortunate Mer-

‘
PO gt ois El ic a rane
> Y, ncn Be

ee ee ee
ent ieee aaa — ==

ee ae

chante, ce |
Bbh2 6. lo

SES Stan Repeat are NT?
OLED Np ALT SE I SSE ee
a eS ee Se i a

| 198 | Arbatelof Magick.

it 6. To be a Philofopher ,* Mathematician, and Phyfitian, -
it according to eAristotle, Plato, Prolomy, Euclides, Hippocrates

) ‘ and Galen.

a iI | 7. To bea Divine according tothe Bible and Schooles,
a which all writers of divinity both oldand new have taught.

Lk eAphor.25..

vat We' have already declared what’a fecret is, the kindes and
| ipecies ‘thereof: it remaineth now to fhew how wé may at-
rain to know thofe rhings which we defire.
The true and ‘onely way to all fecrets,is to have recourfe
unto God the Author of all good ; and as Chrift reacheth,
| Is th: firft place [eek ye the kingdoms of God and his righteon{neley
and all thefe things {hallbe added unto you.
| | 2. Alfo fee that your hearts be not burthened with furfering, and ~
pany drunkenne(%, and the cares of this life.
a) ae 3. Allo commit your cares unto the Lord, and he willds it.
| | 4. Alfo Ithe Lord thy God do teach teach thee, what things

it | a are profitable for thee, and do guide thee inthe way wherein thou
| it hi : walkeft,
: i 4 5. And I will give thee underftanding, and will teach thee in |
ae the way wherein thou (halt go, and I will guide thee mith my eye. |
I) h ) 6. Alfo if you which are evilsknow how to give good thingsto - |
a His your children, how much more {hall your Father which ts in |
ie a heaven give his holy Spirit to them that ask him ? :
Bia 7. If you will do the will of my Father which is imheaven, ye
Ae are truely my difciples, and we will come unto you 5-and make our
e abode with you
ate If you dee thefe feven places of Scriprure from the lerter .
| unto the Spirit, or into a@tion, thou canf{t not erre, but thale |
attain to the defired bound ; thou fhalt not érre fromthe
mark, andGod himfelf by his holy Spiric will ceach thee
fy . true and profitable things : he will givealfo his miniftring
eg) 3 Angels untothee, to be chy companions, helpers, and teach-
f | ers of all the fecrets of che world’, and he will command e-
1B very creature to be obedient unto thee , fo that cheerfully

~h

Arbarel of «atagick.
rejoycing thou.maift fay with the Apoftles,. That the Spirits
are obedient untothee ; forhacat length thou fhalr be cer-
rain of the egreateft ching of all, That thy name is written in
Heaven.. - :

Aphor, 25,

There is another way which is:morecommon, that {e-
crets may be revealedunro thee alfo, when thou art unwit-
ting thereof, either by God, or by-Spirits which have fecrets
in their power; or by dreams, or by {trong imaginations
andimpreffions , or by theconftellation of a nativity by ce=
leftial knowledge. After chis manner are made heroick
men, fuch as there are very many, and all learned men in the
world , Plato, eAriftotle, Hippocrates, Galen, Euclides, Archi-
medes, Hermes Trifmegistus the father of fecrets, with The-
ephrastus,Raracel{us ; all which men had in themfelves all the
vertues of fecrets. Hithertoallo are referred, Homer, He-
fod, Orphews, Pytagoras ; but thefe had not {uch gifts of fe-
ctetsastheformer,. To this are teferred, the Nymphes,
and fons of ~Melufina,and Gods of the Gentiles ,. Achilles,
Enea, Hercules: allo,Cyrus, Alexander the great, Fulins Ce-
far, Lucullus, Sylia, Marius.

Itisacanon, That every one know his own Angel, -and
that he obey him according tothe Word of God; and lee
him beware. of the {nares.of the evil Angel, lefthe be in-
volved in the calamities of Brute and Afarcus Antonis. To
this refer the book of Jovianus “Pontanus of Fortune,and his
Eutichus. ;

Thethird way is, diligent and hard labor, without which
no great thing can be obrained from the divine Deity wor-
thy.admiration , as it is faid,

Tu nihil invita dices faciéfve Minerva. .
Nothing can% thon do or fay againft Aizerva's will.

We

ea ea
oa al on

a OL. Se FS

itaepeiaiatie iN ae sas qenslet icine - a mo poe
rs : Ere Neamt a0: Fea SS Sa 7
ae. “ ee Se ite

Pie _—

ewe Sey

Vic. om

$5 Sr op eR OG
as heck tee Smee ne eet ow fe
ute) .

SP nT ARIES 4

' Arbatel of Magick,
We do deteft all evil Masitians, who make themfelves at

« fociates with the devils with their unlawful fuperftitions,

and do obtain and effe& fome things which God permitteth
to be done,inftead of the-punifhment of the devils, So alfo
they do other evil a&ts,the devil being theanthoryas the Scri-
ptures teltifie of Judas. Totrhele are referred all idolaters of

old, and of our age, and abufers of Fortune, fuch as the hea-

thensare full of. And to thefe do appertain all Charontick
évocation of Spirics 5 as the work of Saz/ with the woman,
atid Lucanus prophetic of che decealed fouldier, concerning
the event of the Pharfalian war, and the like,

cAphor.2 +,

Make a Circle with a center A, «whichis BC. D, E, At
the Eaft let there be B. C.a fquare. Attrhe Norch,C.D, At
the Wefl,D. E,. And at theSouth,E.D, Dividethe feveral
quadrants inrofeven parts, that there may be in the whole
28 parts : and let them beagain divided into four parts, that
there may be 112 pattsof the Circle: and fo many ate the
crue fecrets ro be revealed. And this Circle inthis maner dis
vided,is the feal of the fecréts of the world, which they draw
from the onely center A, that is, from the invilible God, un-
to the whole creature, ThePrince of the Oriental fécrets
is refident inthe middle; and hath three Nobles on eicher
fide, every one whereof hath four under him, andthe Prince
himielf hath four appertaining unto him, Andin chis man-
ner the other Princes and Nobles ‘have their quadrants of
fecrets, with cheir four fecrets. But the Orienral fecretis the
ftudy of ail wifdom ;"The Welt, of treneth ;° The South, of
tillace ; The ‘North, of more rigid life, Sorhat'the EaRern
jecrets are commended to be the beft ;_ the Meridianro be
mean; and the Eaft and North co be leffer, “The ufe of
this feal of fecretsis, that thereby thou mailt know whence
theSpitirs or Angels are produced, which may teach the
fecrets delivered unto them from God, Bur they have
names taken from their offices. and powers, according to oc

| oift

als oad 2
9 SS ge te oe ae
f ‘a <

ArbareloficAiagick Sepp
gift which God hath feverally diftributed: to every one of
them, One hath the power.of the {word 3. another, of the
peftilence; and another,of infli&ting famine upon the people,
as itis ordained by God, Some are deftroyers of Cities, as
thofe two were, whowerefent’to ovetthrow Sodom andi
Gomrrha, and the places adjacent , examples whereof the
the holy Seriprure wirneffeth. Some are the Watch-men
over Kingdoms. others,the keepersof privare perfons 3 atid
from thence, anyone may eafily form their names in his own
language! : {0' chat he: which will, may ask a phyfical Angels.
mathematical, or philofophical, or an Angel of civil wiidom,,
or of furpetnacurab of natural wifdomy or for any thing what-
foever ; and lec hirmask ferioufly, witha great defire of his
itiinde’s. and with faith and'conftancy’s and without doubry.
tha€ which. he asketh he fhall receive from theFather and:
God of -all Spirits) :° This faich furmountech all feals 5» and)

bringech them into: fubje@ion cothewill of man, The Cha-
racteriltical maner of callinzAneles fiucceedeth this faich,:
which dépendetlr onely oMdivive'révelation;; Buc without

the faid faith preceding tt,ie lieglr inobicurivy; Neverrhelefs;
if any one will ufechem for a memorial, and no otherwife,
and as a thing fimply created. by God to. this purpofe, to’

whith fuch a {pirical power or effence is bound ; he may ule

them without any offence unto God, — But let him beware,
left that he fall into idolatryy:and the {nares of the devi',
who with his cunning forceries, eafily deceiveth the unwary,
And he:is not taken but onely bythe finger of God’, and is
appoinred to the fervice of mary; fo’ thar they unwillingly
ferve the godly’; bur not without témprations and tribula-
tiohs,becaufe thé commatrdment hath ity That ‘he fhall bruife
the Heel of ‘Chritt, thefeed of chewoman; We are there-
fore'co exercife our felvs about fpiritual things, with fear anid

crembling, aid with grear reverence towards God, andto

be converlant-in {piricual effernces: with eravicy and juttice,

And he which medieth wichtuch thities , lee himbeware of

all levity, pride, covetoufnels, vanity, envy and inso dlinefe,

unlefs he wil miferably perifh, | %

Aphor,

= en Sen ee —_ “
nate Sch ec ee =P war! Yo et

SR RRS or, A OO Rigen ort ee '
0 = » into» Shon Bee Sec ce AMC EE 2 ln se htt in A a a ae aoe.

202 — Arbatel of Magick.

i aA phor, 28.

Becaule all good is from God, -who is onely good , thote
things which we would obtain of him,we ought to feek them
by prayer in Spirit and Truth,and a fimple heart, The conclu-
Gon of the tecret of fecrersis, That every one exercife him-
felfin prayer, for thofe things which he defires, and he fhall
“notfuffer arepulfe. Let nor any one:defpife:prayer ; fomby
whom God Is prayed unto, to him‘he-both.can ahd will give,
Now let us acknowledge bim the Author, from whom let us
humbly feek for our defires, A merciful & good Farher,loveth
the fons of defires,as Daniel; and fooner heareth us,then.we
are able ro overcome the hardnefs of our hearts to pray, Bue,
he will not that we give holy things to dogs, nor defpile and
contemn the gifts of histreafury, Therefore diligently and
ofren read over.and over the firit Septenary of fecrets,--and
ouide and dire& thy lifeand all thy thoughts according to
thofe precepts ; andall things. fhall yield tothe defires of thy
mirde in the Lord, ro whom chon truftett, | ,

The fitch Septenary.. .
rs _Aphor. 29). | *

As our ftudy of Magick proceedeth in order from general
Rules premifed, let us now come toa particular explicati-
on thereof, Spirits either are divine minifters of the word,
and of the Church and the members thereof; or elle they
are {ervient to the Creatures in corporal things, partly forthe
falyation of the foul and body, and partly for its deftruction.
And there is nothing done, whether good or evil, without a
certain and determinate order and government, - He that
feeketh after'a good end, let him follow it ; and: hethat de-
fires an evil end, purineth that alfo , and chat earneftly, from
divine punifhment , and curning away from the dna

: There-

Arbatel of Alagick. 2037
Therefore ler every one compare his ends with the word of
God, andas a touchftone chat will judge between good and
evil ; and let him propofe unto him{elf what is to be avoided,
and what is to be foughe after; and that which he confti-
cuteth and determineth unto himéelf, ler him follow diligent-
ly, not procraftinatime or delayingy until he artain to his
appointed bound, | |

3 eAphor.30.

They which defire riches, glory of this world, Magiftracy ,
honours,dignities,cyrannies, (and that magically) if they en-
deavour diligently after them, they fhall obtain them, every
One according to hisdettiny, induftry, and magical Sciences,
as the Hiftory of A/e/efina witneffeth , and the Magitians
thereof,who ordained,That none of che Italian nation fhould
for ever obtain the Rule or Kingdom of Naples ; and brought
it to pafs , thar he who reigned in his age , tobe thrown
down from his feat  {o great is the power of the guardian or
encelar Angels of the Kingdoms of the world,

eAphor. 31.

Call the Prince of the Kingdom, and lay a command pon
him,and command what thou wilr,and it fhall be done,if that.
Prince benot again abfolved from his obedience by a fucceed-
ing Magician, Therefore the Kingdom of Naples may be again:
reftored to the Italians,if any Magician fhall call him who in-
fticuted this order,and compel him to recal his deed ; he may
be compelled alfo,co reftore the lecret powers taken from the
treafury of Magick ; A Book, aGemme, and magical Horn,
which being had, any one may eafily, if he will, make himfelf
the Monarch of theworld, But Fudeus chufed rather to live
among Gods, until the judgement, before thetranfitory good

ef this world; and his heart is fo blinde , that he under-

ftandeth nothing of the God of heaven and earth, or think-
eth more , bur enjoyeth the-delights of things immertal, to
: Cc | his

204 _ Aybatel of Categick. |
his own erernal deftru@tion. “And he maybe eafier called
up, then the Angel of P/orinus in the Temple of Tffs.

Kf eAphor.3 2.

Inlike mannet alfo, the Romans wei tatight by the Sibyls
books ; and by that means made themlelves the Lords of
the world,as Hittories wicnefs. But the Lotds of the Prince

of a Kingdom do beftow the leffér Magiftracies, He there-

fore that defireth ro havea lefler office, or dignity 5 ler him _

maoically call a Noble of che Prince, and his defire fhall be
fuliiled., | | 7

Aplor. 33.

But he who coveteth conremprible:digniries, as riches a-
lone, let him call the Prince of riches) or one of his Lords,
and he fhall obtain his defire in thac kinde’, whereby he
would grow rich, either, in earthly goods, or merchandize;
or with the gifts’ of Princes,or by the itudy of Merals,or Chy-
miftry : as.he produceth any prefident of growing rich by
thefe means, he fhall obrain his defire therein.

eAphor.3.4.

AlP manner of evocation i8 of the fame kinde arid-form,
and this way was familiar of old rime to the Sibyls and chief
Priefts: This in-ourtime,througly iencrance and impiety, 1s
totally lof; and that which remaineth, is depraved with in-
finice lyes and fuperltitions, ee :

Aphor.35:.

The humane underflanding is the onely eftecter of all
wonderful wo'ks. , fo that itbe joyniedro any Spirit 3 and
beine joyned, fhe prodnceth what fhe will, Tuerefore we
are carefully to proceed in Magick, left that Syrens and other
mon-

| Arbatel of Atagick,

monfters deceive ns, which likewile:-dodefire the fociety of
the humane foul, Let the Magirian carefully, hide himielf
alwaies under the wings. of the.mott High, letthe offer
himfelf to.be devoured of the roaring Lion ;. for they who

acti earthly chings, dovery hardly-eicape the {nares of the
evil, ‘

The'fixth Septenary.
| Aber. 36.

Care is to be taken, chat experiments be not mixed with
experiments; but that every one be onely fimple and feveral:
for God and Nature have ordained all things to a certain and
appeinced end; fo thar for examples. fake, they. who per
form cures with che moft imple herbs.and.roots, do.cure
the mott happily of all... And in this manner, in Conftellari-
ons, Wotds and Characters, Stones,and {uch like, do lie hid
the greareft influences or vertues in deed, whichare in
ftead of a miracle, :

So alfo are words, which being pronounced, do forthwith
caufe, creatures both vifible and invifblero yield-obedience,
alyel creatures of this.our, world, as of the watry, aéry, fub-
terrancan, and Olympick, fuperceleftial and infernal, and al-
fo.the divine, | | a :

‘Therefore fimplicicy- is chieflyro. be, ftudied, and the
knowledge of {uch fimples is ro‘be fought for from God ;:0-

therwale by.no other means of experience they.can be found
QUE + fe yisnal ~ dom ofa Peony ren of

: eAphor. 374 i

»/And let alllors have sheirplace.decently Order, Realon
and’ Means; are the three,things, which do ealily. render all
learning.a{well. ofthe yiable as inviibleicreatures.... This is .
the courfe of Order.) That. fomeicreatures are ERASER
ie © cha. the

205 ra

rs
—~

per
<a>

SOIR tr OR CN
wm SX, Ghee Ny

. _—
5 ES Ser :
RT en a Ba

= er
=—— ss =
ru ee od a

RRS Sn i Re earn De PEE
se at MI OT arm oe aetna am
tires smn = a P ”

vate —— — STE er SI aa

Se

206 Arbatel of Magick:

-the light ; others, of darknefs : thefe are fubje& to vanity,

Pid

becaufe rhey run headlong into darknefs , and inchral rhem-

felyes in erernal punifhments for their rebellion. “Their:
Kinedom’ is partly very beautiful in cranGtory and corrup-
tible things on the onepart , becaufe it.cannot confit with-
out fome yertue and great gifts of God ; and partly moft
filthy and horrid to be fpoken of, becaufe ic abounderh with

all wickednefs and fin, idolatry, contempt of God, _blafphe-
mies againit che true God and his works, worthipping of
devils, difobedience rowards Magiftrates, feditions , homi-
cides ,. robberies y tyranny, adulteries, wicked lults, rapes,
thefts, lyes,perjuries, pride, andacovetous defire of rule ;
in this mixcure confittech the kingdom ‘of darknefs : but the
creacures of che light, are filled with eternal truth, and with
the grace of God’, and are Lords of the whole world, and’
do reign’ over the Lords of darknels , as the members of
Chrift,” Between thefe and the other, there is a continual
war 5 uticil God fhall put an endo their ftrife ,- by his laft-
judgement,

Aphor, 38.

» Therefore Magick is twofold in its firftdivifion ; rhe one
is of God, which he beltoweth on the creatures of light; the
orher'alio is of God,bur icis che/gift which he giveth unto the
creatures of darknefs: and this is alfo rwo-fold: the oneis

toa good end, as when the Princes-of datknefs are compel- -

led‘to do good unto the creatures 5 God enforcing thems
the orherts foran evil end, when God permitteth fuch to

punith evil perfons , that magically they are deceived to de~-

frution ; or, alfo he commandeth fuch ro be caft out into
deftruction.

The fecond divifion of Magick is , that it bringeth to pafs-

fome works with vifible inftruments, through yifible
things; and ic effe&Xech other works wich invfible infiru-
ments by invifible things ; and it a&tech orher things, alwel
with mixed means, ag inftcuments and effects.

The

Arbatel of cwaegick. 207

The third divfion is, There are fome things which are
brought to pafs by invocation of God alone : this is partly
Prophetical, and Philofophical ; and partly, as it were The-
ophrattical. |

Other things there are, which by reafon of the igno-
rance of the true God, are done with the Princes of Spirits, :
that his defires may be fulfilled ; fuch is che work of the Mer- 1
curialitts, sarin |

The fourth divifion is, That fome exercile their Magick Bi
withthe. good Angels in ftead of God, as it were de- \
{cending down from che moft high God ¢ fuch was the Ma- 1.
gick of Baalim. 1

Another Magick is,thac which exercilech their a@ions
with the chief of the evil Spirits ; fuch were they who
wrought by the minor Gods of the heathens,

The fifth divifion is, That fome do a& with Spirits openly,
| and face to face; which is givento few : othersdo work |
| by. dreams and other figns; which the ancients tookfrom: 7
| their auguries and {acrifices, |
a The fixth divifion is, That fome work by immortal creatures, -

others by mortal creatures,as Nymphs, Saryrs, and fuch-like
inhabitants of other elements, Pigmies, cc.
The feventh divifion is, That the Spirits do ferve fome of
| their own accordgwithout art ; others they will fcarce attend,
being ‘called by art.

Among thefe fpecies of Magick, ».chat 1s the moft excel-

lent of all, which dependeth upon Godalone, . The fecond,,

: Themr whom the Spirits do ferve faichfully of their. own ac-

| cord. The chirdis, that which is the property of Chrifti-

| ans, which dependeth onthe power of Chrift which he hath.
in heaven and easth..

Apher.

ee OR kit Lr ee Wel fe eles aoe

<tc Fak eat CONS OFT AT HO METS
we te RE sen a a ee

Arbatel of «Wazicke
Apher. 39»

tat 4 There isa feven-fold preparation to learn the
Magicr ert.

| The firlt is,to meditate day and night how to.attain to the
sat true knowledge of God, both by hisword revealed ‘from
Paiat the foundation of the world ; as alfo by the feal of the cre-
fa) ation, and of the creatures.; andiby the wonderful effects
ba which the viGble and invifible creatures of God do fhew
ie forth,
: Secondly, ic is requifire,thara man deicend down into him-
| felf, and chiefly ftudy to know himfelf; what mortal part he
Rt hath in him, and what immortal ; and what part is proper to |
14 himleif) and what diverte. iil
iy Thirdly, That he learn by the immortal pare. of himfelf,to |
‘ worfhip, love and fear the eternal God, and to adore him
in Spirit and Truth; and with his mortal pare, «to. do thofe ‘|

i | | things ‘which he knoweth to be acceptable ro God, and pro-

ea fitable to his neighbours.

Na i an Thefe are the three firft and chiefeft precepts of Magick,

i a a: whetewith'ler’ every one prepare himfelf that covets to ob-

) i fay taifi ttue Magick or divine wifdom,rhat heimay-be accounted
ean worthy thereof, and one towhom the Angelical creatures,

a i rie willingly do fervice, not occultly onely, but alfo maniteltly,

a \ | and as it were face to face,

Fourthly , Whereas‘ every mar isto be vigilant to fee to
what kinde life he fhall be called from his morhers wombe,>
chat every ore may know whether he be born’ tooMagick,
and to what {pecies thereof, which every one may perceive
eafily chat réadeth thefe things, and by experience may
have fuccefs therein ; for {uch things and fuch gifts are not :

- given but onely to the low and humble. :
In. the fifth place weare to take care, that we under-

UM ftand when the Spirits are affifting us, in undertaking the ma
ali oreateft bufinefs ; and he that underftands this, it4s mant- i
tae ! , feft, a”

Le 1 ARTEL aa Se ce =
se « =
> a) li *

ania

Pe i TETRIS, RIGO LED LL ITE LOI Fo

Arbatel of (tagick. 6g
felt, that he fhall be made a Magician of the Ordination of
God; thatis, fucha perfon who ufeth the miniltery of the
Spirits to bring excellent things to pats, Here,as for the moft
parescthey fA, either through neglicence , ignorance, Of con-
tempt, Or by too much fiiperftition ; they offend alf by in-
gratitude towards God, whetedy many famous men have af-
terwards drawn upon themlelves deftru@ion: they fin alfo by
rafhnefs and obitinacy ; andalfo when they do not ufe their
gifts for char honor of (Sod which is required, and do prefer

AU pipya to rpuy

sixthly, The Magician hath need of faithand taciturnity,
efpecially , thathe difclofe no fecret which the Spiric hath
forbidhim, 2s he commanded Danie! to fealfome things,
that is, not-to declare them in publick ; fo as it was not law-
ful for Paulto {peak openly of all things which he faw ina
vifion, ‘ Nomanwill believe how much is contained tn th};
One precept,

Seventhly , In him that would be a Magician, there is re-
quired the greateftjuttice, that he undertake nothing thar is
ungodly, wicked or unjatt > Hor to ler it once come ip his
minde ; and fohe fhall be divinely defended from all evil.

Apher, 40.

When the Magician derermineth with him€lf to do any
incoporeal thing either with any exterionr or interiour lenfe,
then let him: 90; ern himfelf according to thefé feven fubie-
quent laws,to accomplith his Magical end,

The firit Law is this,- That he know that fach-a Spirit
is ordained unto him from God; and let him medirare chat
God is the beholder of allhis thoughts and a@ions:therefore
let him dire& all the courfe of his life according to che rule

prefertsed in the word of God,

Secondly, Alwaies pray with David, Take not thy baly
Spirit from me; and Strengthen me with thy free Snirits and lead

“i

ws not inte temptation, but deliver w from evil: I befeech theey O

heavenly Father, do nor give power unto any lying Spirit, as thou

didff

ae not Sayre

<P Ss, 2s IS

OLA

nS Hae,

as — rate E
Ie SS aecsin m z
tha" DE PR ae AA ie at Ei ta

came gre
ren a ss <n

b= ie eae

fh eine a i ae

BF fl AED DO eT TO ETE: ae 2

st Arbatel of Magick.

didft over Ahab that he perifhed ; but keep me inthy truth, A-
men,

Thirdly , Let him ac-uftome himfelf to try the Spirits, as

the Scripture admonifheth ; for grapes cannot be gatheted
of thorns : lec us cry allchings, and hold faft that which is
good and landable , that we may avoid every thing chat is re-
pugnant tothe divine power. |

‘The fourth is, To be remote and cleer from all manner
of fuperftition ; for this is fuperftition,to ateribute divinity in
this place to things, wherein there is nothing at all divine ; or
to chufe or frame to our felves , to worfhip God with fome
kinde of worfhip which he hath nor commanded: fitch are the
Magical ceremonies of Satan,whereby he impudently offererh
himfelf to be worthipped as God,
» The fifth thing to be efchewed,jis all worfhip of Idols,which
bindeth any divine power to idols or other things of their
own proper motion , where they are not placed by the Cre-
ator, or by the order of Nature : which things many falfe and
wicked Magitians faign.

Sixthly, All the deceitful imitations and affe&tions of
the -devil are alforo be avoided , whereby he imirateth the
power of the creation, and of the Creator, thathe may fo
produe things with a word, that they may nor be what
they are, Which belongeth onely to the Omnipotency of
God, and is not communicable to the creature,

Seventhly , -Let us cleave faft tothe gifts of God, and
of his holy Spirit, chac we may know chem, and diligently
embrace them with our whole heart, and all our ftrength,

Aphir. 41. -
We come now tothe nine la{t Aphoriimes of this whole

Tome ; wherewith we will, the divine mercy affitting us,
conclude this whole Magical //agoge.

Therefore in the firft place it is tobe obferved, what we .

under{tand by Magirian in this work.
Him then we count to be aMagitian, to whom bythe
grace

a LEI RE HE
FA RR PORE AERTS AS ge ONS SIE ES ¥

| Arbarelof «Atagick. 214
grace of God , the {piricual effences do {erve to manifet the
knowledge of the whole univerle, & of the fecrers of Nature
contained therein, whether they are vilible or invifible, This.
defcription of a Magirian plainly appeareth, and is univer(a).
An evil Magician is he, whom by the divine permiffion 1.
| the evil Spirits do ferve,to his temporal and eternal dee! At
ftruction and perdition, to deceive men,and draw them away - ae
! from God; fuch was Simson (Magusof whom mention is made
| in the ets of the eApoftless and in Clemens ; whom Saint
i ‘Peter commanded. to be>thrown down upon the earth,
| ~*whenas he had commanded himfelf, as it were aGod; tobe
| raifed up into the air by the nnclean Spirits.
Vas Unto this order arealfo to be teferred all thofe who are
| noted in the two-Fables of the Law; andare fet forth with:
| their evil deeds, | |
_ The fubdivifions and {pecies of both kindes of Macick,we
. will nore in che Tomes following. “In this place it hall {uf
fice, thar we diftingnith the Sciences, which is good, and
which is evil::. Whereas man fought to obtain chem both at

H i
firft , to hisown ruine and deftruftion,as Afofesand Hermes io
do demonftrare, /

eee Ga) aH

eAphor. 42.

Secondly, we are.to know, That.a Magician is a perfon
predettinated to this work from his: mochers Wombe ; nei-
ther let him aflume any fuch great things to himfelf » unlefs,
he be called divinely by grace hereunto, for fome good end;
to a bad endiis,cthat, the Scripture might be firfilled,/t muff be”
that offences will come ; but wo be to that man through whom they -
come, _ Therefore,as we have befote oftentimes admonifhed,
With fear and trembling we mutt live in this world,

Notwithftanding I will not deny, but that fome men
) may with; ftudy and diligence obtain lome {pecies of
¢ §) bothkindesof. Magick, if- it may be admitted, But he

| fhall never afpire to.the: highelt kindes thereof ; vetif he
covet to. aflail them. he fhal] ones offend both in foul

and

ny Lea

os

a — a ;
» Witz tes Page as : Pgs pe Ray hy eRe PA AG IT ETT

“at Arbatel of Magice.
-and body. Such are they, who by the opetations of falfe
“Magicians, are fometimes carried co Mount Horeb, or infome

wildernefs, or deiarts ; or they are maimed in fome member,
orare imply rormin pieces’, or are deprived of their under-
ftanding;even as many fuchthings happen by the ufe thereof,
where men are forfaken by God,and delivered to-rhe power
of Satan, ; ) :

The feventh Septenary.

eAphor. 43.

‘The Lordliveth, andthe works of God do live im him by
his appoincment,whereby he willech chem tobe, forhe wil
thave them to ufe cheir liberty in obedience ro his commands,
or difobedience: thereof, ‘To the obedient, he hath pro-
-pofed their rewards; to the difobedienche hath propounded
their deferved punifhment, Therefore chefe Spities of cheir
freewil, through their pride and contempt of the Son of
God,have revolted from God their Creator,and are referved
‘unto the day of wrath ; and rhere is left in them a very great
power in the creation ; burnorwithftanding ir is limited and
they are confined to their bounds with the bridle of God.
Therefore the Magitian of God,whiclt fignifies 4 wife man of
God, or one informed of God , is ledforth by the rand of
God unroall everlafting good, both mean things. and alto-
the chiefeft corporal things. 7 |
Great is the power of Satan, by reafon of the great fins
of men. Therefore alfo the Magicians of Satamdo perform

oreat things, and grearer then any man would believe = al-

choneh they do fubfitt in cheir own limits, neverthelefs they
are above all humane avprehenfion ,, as co the corporal and
tranfitory things of this life; which many ancient Miftories,
and daily Examples do teftifie, Both kindes of Magick are
different. ‘one from the other in their ends : the one

leadet to eternal good. and nfech temporal things with
? 3 thankf-

cpg VET Ee

Arbatel of Magick. 24
thank(giving ; the other is a little follicitous about eternal
things; but wholly exercifech himfelf about corporal things,

thar he. may freely enjoy all his Infts and delights in cons
tempt of God and his anger,

Apbor, 44,

The paflage from the common life of man unto 2 Magical
life, is no orher but afleep, from thatlife :

and ana-
waking cothis life; for thofe things which happen'to igno-

fant and unwile men in their common life » the fame things
happen tothe willingand Knowing Magitian,

The Magitian underttandeth when she minde doth medi-
tate of himfelf; he deliberateth, reafoneth, conttieuterh and
determinerh-what is ro be done; he obfervech when his co-
gitations do proceed from a divine feparate effence , and he.
provech of what order thae divine feparate effence is:

Bur the man char is ignorant of Magick, - is carried to.
atid fro., as it were in war with his affe@tions ; he knoweth
hot when they iffiie one of his own minde, or are im-
prefled.by. the afldting effence; and he know eth not how to
overthrow thecountels of his enemies by the word'of God

i
of £0 keep himfelf from the {mares and déceits of. the
teapeer..

Apher.4: Se:

The greareft Precept of Mavick is
man ought to receive for his ule from the affitting Spirit, and
what to-refule: whichhe may learn of the PYalmi(t , faying,
Hheremithfhall a Yong wan cleanle his way 2 ix keeping thy word,
Oh Lard. --To keep the word of Go > fo thar the evil one
foatch it not ont of che hearr » is the chiefett precept of wif-
dom, Ic is lawful to admit of, and exercie other lugeeftions
which are not contrary tothe glory of God, and charity to-
wards our neishbours 9 DOr Inquirine from what Spirir fuck
ugeeftions ‘proceed y But We ough to take heed, that we
oh Soe 2 Ddz: ; - ore

y CORtiow what every

re : Arbatel of Magick

ey ST ee ay rapa Dehn TE NI TY
ce man E meas =»

are not roo much bufied about unrieceflary things, atcordine
ro the admonition: of Chrilt' ;-CWMarthe, Martha; thou art
troubled about. mény things; bar Mary hath crofen the better
partywhich (hall not be taken fromher.. Therefore let-usalwaies |

have regard unto the faying of Chrift, Seek ye firft the kingdoms

of God and his righteou[na{ey —and ‘all thefe things (hall be Cie
unto you, All other things, that is, all things which are due
to the mortal Microcoime, as food, raiment, and the neceffa-
ry arts of chisilife, esily 19 + ey

eAphor.46:

There is nothing fo much becomethra man , as conftancy
in his words and deeds, and when the like rejoycerh in his
like ; chere are none‘more happy then fuch, bécauie thd holy
Angels are coyerlantaboutituch, andi poffefsthe cuftody'of
them: onthe Contrary, men that are unconftant are lighter
then nothing, and rotten leaves.’ We chufe'the'46 Apho-
rilme. from thefe. . Even! as every one governech himielf,
fo he. allurech. ainrohiméelf ‘Spirits of his nature’and con-
dition ;.,-bue, one: very cruely.advifeth’,: tharno.manthould
catry himfelf beyond his own calling,» left chat he draw un-
ro himfelf fome malignant Spiric ‘from rhe uteérmolt parts of
the earth, by whom either he fhall be infatuated‘and de-
ceived, or brought to final deftruGtion, This precept appear-
eth mott plainly : for Aide, when he would convert all
things into gold, drew up fuch a Spirit unto himfelf, which
was ableo perform this 3 and beingdeceived by'him, he:
had been brought to death by famine ; -ifthis foolifhnefs had
not been corre&ted by the mercyof God. The ‘fame thing
happened. ro a certain womanabour Fanrkfordat Odera’y°in
our times, Wio would {efape together 8 devour mony of any
thing., Would-that men-would diligently weigh this precepr,
and not accouns the Hiftories.of A4idas , and the like; for fa-
bles ; they would bemuch more diligene.in moderating their
thonghts.and affegtions-» neither would theyKe fo perpe-
tually vexed.wigh rhe Spirits ofrthe‘eolden mountains oF 2
topia, Therefore we ought moft diligently to oblerve , that

fuch 9)

a

BENNER TTI

- Arbatel of cvtagick. 215
fuch-prefumptions fhould,be caft out,of the minde, by the
word, while chey.are new ; neither, lec them have any habic
in cheidle minde, thatis-empty of the divine word, - .

Aphor. 47.

He char is faithfully converfant in his vocation, fhall have |

alfo che Spirits conftanc companions of his defires, who will
fucceffiyely {upply him in all chings.But if he have any know-
ledge in-Magick, they-will not-be unwilling rofhew him, and
familiarly to converle with him,and to ferve himin thote feve-
ral minifteries, unto which they are addixed ; the good Spi-
rits in good things,unro falvation |; theevil Spirits in every
evil ching, to deftrution: .\Examples. are not wanting inthe
Hittories of che: whole World); and do daily happen in the
world. Theodofius before the victory of.e4rbogastusy As an
example of the good ; Brute before he was {lain ,... was an
example of the:evil Spirits, when-he was,perfecured.of | the
Spirit of Cefar , and expofed to ;punifhment ,, that he; flew
himéelf, who had flain his own Father, and che-Father of his
Country. | bow)

Aphor. 43.2%

- All Magick: is.q. revelation, of Spirits-of that kinde., of
which fortthe Magick is ; fo chat,the nine Mates are called,
in, Hefiod, the ninch Magick, as he manifellly re(tities.of him=
felf-in. Theogony, In; Homer,the genius of Hly/Jes in Phi gioca-
gia, Hermes, the Spirits of thé more fub;ime.parts of the
minde. ‘God: revealed himielf. to. Aofesin the bufh,. Fhe
thtee wife men: who.came.to seek Chrilt.at Jerufalem, the.
Anvel of the Lord..was, their leader, .. The Angels of. the,
Lord. directed Dazie/. .. Therefore there is nothing whereof
any one may.glory ; F or, it ts not untoseim that.willeth, nor unto,
hinathat runuerh; butte whom God.will have mercys.ot of fome,
other {piricual fate. .,.From hence tpringeth all Magick,.and,
thither, again ic.will revolye,whether it be good or evil, a

Be bald ine Ahhh een GAR we »  ALULS3

FSS eats ~via. care EET

416 Arbatel of Magick,

this manner Tages the firft ceacher of the Magick of ‘the Ro-
‘manes, gufhed out of che earth. Dian of the Ephefians
fhewed het worfhip, as if ic had been fent from heaven. So
alto eApollo. And all the Religion of the Heathens is taken
from the {ame Spirits; neither are che opinions of che Sad-
duces, humane inventions,

Aphor. 49.

The conelufion therefore of this Hagage is the fame which -
we have above already fpoken of, That even as there is one
God, from whence is all good ; and one finyto wit, difo-
bedience, againft the willof the commanding God, from
whence comes al evil; fo that the fear of God ss the beginnin
of ‘all wifdons, and the profic of all Maeick ; for obedienceto
the will of God, followeth the fear of God 3 and after this,
do follow the prefence of Ged and of the holy Spirit,and the
miniftery of the holy Angels, atid all 2004 things our of he
inexhauttible rreafures of God, | |

But unprofitable and damnable Mayick arifech from this} —
where we lofe the fear of God out of our hearts, and faffer
{m co feign in us, there the Prince of chis world, the God of
this world beginnech, a?d fercech up his kinedom in Read of
holy things, in fuch ag he findeth profitable for his kingdom ;
there,even as the fpider taketh the flye which fallech intohis
web, fo Satan fpreadeth abroad his nets,and taketh men with
the {nares of covetoufhefs, until he fucketh him; and draw~
ech bim to eternal fire: thefe he cheritheth and advancech
on high, that their falkmay be the greater. .

Courteous Reader, apply thy ¢yes and minde to the facred!
and profane Hittories,8 co thofe things which chou feeftdaily:
to be done in the world, and cliou tha t finde all chings full of
Magick,according to a two-fold Science,cood andevil, whic
that they may be the betrer difterned, we will puc here chem
divifion and fubdivifion, for the conclufion of the Tfagoges's
wherein every one may conremplate,whar is'to be followed: -
and which to be avoided, and how far it is tobe labored for
by every one,to a competent end of life and living, Sci-

= apy cee

i |
j
t

en a
= SSS eee -
Ra ag na i.
Oe ee a a ee a Oa REE Sa ape ser ee np
ene 2 — omen =a : as ee - 4 Sees
ee - oe - a — re oo = “ae = . i a |
= : ao. — an nae = « bs = = Sa eaten ee Sie ok

oe
>

So ww ~~ ~~ =e
were Se

~ Sher ee gg

PRET OT a ET ORL T

Lng OLS 1A RTTENL ale ON . co ahs
= a ee See : : aaa ae =
- , BE i * ae se as
“ ~ =r <= = ——
pinta - a 5

A

RRC TLS RN FST OE EE

Arbatel of Magick. _ iF

(Knowledge of the Word of
|. God, and ruling ones life ac-
cording to the word of God.
(Theolo-_! Knowledge of the government
phy < of God y Angels, which the _
Scripture calleth watchmen ;
and to underftand the myftery
] U of Angels,
(Good
| Aachro- Knowledge of natural
fophy —) chings,
givento bs ae in humane
man things,

(Contempt of the word of God,
| and co live after he will of the
| devil,

Ignorance of the government
( Cakoto

of God by Angels,
3 [ phy

To contemne the cuftody of
the Angels, and tha: their
companions are of the devil,

; Idolatry.

L Evil LAtheiime,

Sciences }

(The knowledge of poifons if
| pe and ‘0 ufe chem,
1, | Wildom in all evil arts, tothe
Ctcods. | dettrution of mankinde, and
PY | to ufe them in contempt of
God, and for the lofs and de-
L ftru@ion of men,

FINIS.

j
i

ye
x

%
r

a a ce

a7

EPI DE EL RS

