The Great Airship Wave of 1896-1897: Contemporary American Press Accounts (Various newspapers, 1897)
Public domain. Sourced from the Library of Congress, Chronicling America: Historic American Newspapers (https://www.loc.gov/newspapers/). Every account below is a verbatim transcription of a newspaper article or editorial published in 1896 or 1897, and therefore in the public domain in the United States. A documentary compilation of the first great American "mystery airship" wave: the California sightings of November 1896, the Midwest wave of spring 1897, the inventor claims, the press debate, and the first attempts at explanation.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COMPILER'S NOTE. Between November 1896 and May 1897, thousands of Americans reported a brilliantly lighted airship cruising the night skies -- years before any powered airship could plausibly have done so. The wave began over Sacramento, California, on the night of November 17, 1896, spread through the Bay Area, and erupted across the Midwest in April 1897, from Kansas City to Chicago to Omaha. Newspapers gave the story its own department; inventors claimed the craft; scientists blamed Venus and the star Alpha Orionis; photographers claimed pictures. The accounts are reproduced as printed, OCR warts and all, with light cleanup only. Spelling and punctuation follow the originals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[1] SAW THE MYSTIC FLYING LIGHT
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 22, 1896, p. 13
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-22/ed-1/?sp=13
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE SAN FRANCISCO CALL, SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1896.
SAW THE MYSTIC
FLYING LIGHT
Oaklanders Who Believe
an Airship Hovered
Over Them.
Say That They Saw a Dark
Body Above the
It Was Headed for San Francisco
and Seemed About to Come
to Earth.
OAKtAND Office San Francisco Call
908 Broadway, Nov. 21. 'f
Some one must be operating an airship
in this portion of the State. Twice within
the past six weeks it has been seen by re
liable residents of Oakland, and on each
occasion it has presented the same ap
pearance.
Six weeks aeo a young lady was riding a
wheel on Telegraph avenue, when she saw
a strange-looKing object in the sky. It
The Mysterious Flying; Light That Hovered Over St. Mary's
College, Oakland, and Then Started for San Francisco.
It Is Exactly Like That Described by Sacramentans, and
Similar to the Cut Published a Few Days Ago in "The
Call" From a Description Furnished by One "Who Saw It.
carried a powerful headlight, sufficiently
strong to send out long bright rays into
the darkness. It appeared to be going in
a westerly direction and teemed to be
gradually descending as t disappeared
over St. Mary's College. She reported the
affair to her brother, wbo is a motorman
on the cemetery branch of the Piedmont
road.
Last night a little after 5 o'clock, as a
crowded car was going out toward Pied
mont, tbe attention of the passengers was
attracted to a peculiar-looking contrivance
high up in the sky. The most peculiar
feature of it was a powerful headlight and
another light which seemed to be in the
bottom of the machine and to shine
directly on the earth. It came into view
from the direction of East Oakland, passed
over Piedmont, and according to the story
of the passengers neemed to descend in
such a manner as to indicate that it would
land somewhere in ban Francisco.
Many of the passengers tooK up their
morning newspapers tn-day expecting to
see a full description of the peculiar object
that they bad seen so plainly, and were
surprised and disappointed to find no re
port whatever of it.
They were so convinced that it must
have landed across the bay that some of
them telephoned to San Francisco last
night and made inquiries regarding it.
As nothing was known f it it is presume i
that it mutt have changed its couise and
landed somewhere else, for nothing can
persuade those who saw it that ii was not
a genuine airship under full control.
All those who saw this strange object
agree in its description and declare that it
closely resembles the illustration that ap
peared in The Call last Thursday of the
airs-hip that scores of people witnessed as
it passed over Sacramento last Wednesday
niebt. Borne of tbt-m dis:inctly saw the
propelling arras and declare that they
vfere in motion, but all are positive that
the machine was brilliantly lighted, and
that the lower light shed a Urge arc on
the earth as it pushed over, while the
headlignt could be seen for a great dis
tance ahead of the machine.
One of the most mystified observers of
the airship was Charles H. Eliis, the ar
more' of Companies A and F. Mr. Eilis
is a middle-aged man and very deliberate
in his manner of expression, and one not
likely to be easily deceived. He declared
this evening that he was as skeptical as a
man could be when he first read about the
Sacramento airship. He also declares that
be had no alternative bat to believe his
own eyesi ht.
"I was going home to my dinner about
hall-pasts last night," ha said, "and was
in tbe neighborhood of Twenty-fourth
street and New Broadway, when I saw a
strange-looking thing ir the sky. It was
coming from tne eastward and at first I
could see nothing but a bright light
When I first saw it the two lights appeared
to be one and 1 thought it was a brilliant
meteor. It was getting dusk, but the sky
was clouded and just dark enough to per
mit anyone to see plainly. The sky was
sufficiently dark to mate a background
which would render any such object
visible.
"As it came nearer 1 could see that
there was some dark object along with the
light. When it was nearly overhead I
could clearly distinguish that it borne
what resembled a balloon traveling end
on, witb a bright Heht ahead, another one
beneath it, and witu what uppeared to be
wings both before and behind tbe light.
It was at a great height above 'the earth*
probably a thousand feet, but not so high
as to make it impossible to distinguish
what it was. I did not want to believe
that it was an airship, as I bad regarded
the previtUß report of one in the light of
a joke. This time, however, I had no al
ternative. 1 had to believe what I saw.
"As soon as it passed over Bt. Mary's
College, it appeared to descend gradually,
but regularly, as though under perfect
control, and it disappeared in the direc
tion of San Francisco. Of course it was
too dark and the machine was too far
away to distinguish anything like people
or to hear any sounds such as were heard
in Sacramento. But there is no doubt in
my mind that it was an airship supplied
witb electric lignts and well manned."
Another witness to the visit of the air
ship is Selby Yost, a motorman of the
Piedmont road and a member of the Oak
land Guard. He was a little behind time
and was taking bis car toward Piedmont,
trying to recover the few minutes he was
behind. As he pass.'d Thirtieth street, a
11; tie boy stood in the road ana cried,
"Jee whiz, what's that?" The passengers
heard it and immediately looked at tbe
direction in the sky toward which the boy
was pointing. They nad no difficulty in
6eeinc the airship.
■'When I looked ahead," said Mr. Yost
to-day, "I was mystified, and I may as
well confess I was. I didn't like to admit
to myself that I had suddenly pone crazy,
but really for a moment I did wonder if
my senses had deserted me. The passen
gers all reached out to look overhead, and
tho~e inside wanted to s>ee what those out
side were gazing at; so when they re
quested me to stop the car that they raieht
all look I was practically forced to oblige
them. They got out in the road and
looked up at the airship, the most sur
prised crowd lever saw in my life. There
it was, sure enough, ripht overhead, and
traveling on at a good rate, with its light
blazing away, and the most uucanny
looking thing I ever caw.
"Airship or anything else, it was the
mo=t remarkable-looking object, and I am
at a loss now to convince myself that I
actually saw iv It was altogether a won
derful sight, and nobody could have ever
made me believe that I would ever see
such a thing. It was perfectly clear, and
not only I but all the passengers saw it
and watched it till it disappeared. I
thought it must have landed across the
bay, and I was somewhat surprised this
morning to see that no mention was made
of it in the papers. 1 would really like to
have that thing found, so that I could sat
isfy myself as to how it worked, for a more
interesting thing I have never Been."
Miss Hagstrom, who resides on Tele
graph avenue, saw the same object about
six weeks ago. The feature that impressed
her most was the bright light which she
distinctly saw. On returning home, she
told her brother of whit she had seen, but
nothing more was thought of it until she
read recently that a similar object had
been seen in anoiner part of the State.
Charles Uagstrom, the brother of trie
young lady who witnessed this queer
object in the sky, is also in the employ of
the Piedmont and Mountain View Rail
ways.
'•When my sister first told me what she
bad seen I treated it as a joke," he said
tnis evening, "and place i little credence
in her stury, believing that she had seen
nothing more mysterious than a falling
star or me cor. Wlien I heard tbe same
thing had been seen elsewhere, last Week,
and heard again last night of wnat was
seen in this Dart of town, I am now con
vinced that my sister saw the same 'bing.4
I have talKed to several people to-day who
witnessed the object last night, and they
are all confident that it was nothing more
nor less than a genuine airship."
W. J. Roada and his wif whe reside at
a grocery store at 2042 Broadway, were
al'-o witnesses to the strange aerial visitor.
'•When we tirst saw it," aid Mrs. Rodda
to-night, "we thought it was a balloon,
and if it were not tor the bright light I
should stiU bn inclined to think it was a
peculiarly snaked bailoon, but I never
knew of a balloon to carry bright lights
and travel at nighttime the way that did.
I could not see any fans myself, but others
say that they most undoubtedly saw tUe
propellers which sent tbe thing along.
As it passed over it angied downward,
and if it kept on in the same direction it
should have landed somewhere across tne
bay. lat once concluded tliat it was the
same machine that had been seen in Sac
ramento. 1 believe that airships will be
brought to perfection, and I wouldn't be
the least bit surprised to hear that some
one had already built a practical machine
of that kind and was operating with it in
tins neighborhood."
Many of the passengers on Yo9t's car
live out at Piedmont, and all are of the
opinion that they saw a real air-hip.
An Oakland artist who crosses to San
Francisco every day said this evening
that tbe airship was seen irom Golden
Gate Park yesterday afternoon. I was
coming home last night," he said, "in
company with a friend who had been out
to Golden Gate Park. He told me that he
and others bad seen an airship during; the
evening and that it closely resembled the
P'cture of the one published in The Call.
He said that tney tried to explain it by
all kinds of means, but they came to the
conclusion that it was the same machine.
It was dusk when they aaw it and the re
markaole brilliancy of tie lights on it a
tructed their attntion. I shouldn't have
thought any more of it, but to-day in this
city I heard several paopie discussing it."
It is tbe prevalent opinion that some
one in Alameda or neighboring counties
has solved the problem of flying in the
air, and has been for some weeks putting

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[2] SACRAMENTANS STARTLED -- Thousands View the Great Airship With Wonder
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SACRAMENTANS STARTLED
Thousands View the Great Airship
With Wonder.
SACRAMENTO, Cal., Nov. 22— The en
tire city is in a fever of excitement, and
all that can be heard on every side is air
ship, airship, airship. The mysterious
aerial traveler paid this city another visit
this evening, and this time it passed
directly over the downtown portion of the
city and exhibited to wondering thousands
of the citizens its magnificent searchlight.
There could be no possible mistake, tor
there in plain view of all, moving slowly
along with a slight wavering motion, was
a large electric light, fully twice the
candle-power of an ordinary arc ligiit.
The light was at an enormous height and
still plainly visible, as the heavens were
entirely obscured by a mass of dark clouds,
which every moment threatened to burst
into a drenching rain, and in consequence
the mysterious light was thrown into in
tense relief against their dark background.
The light first made its appearance over
the lower portion of the city, and was
moving slowly into the wind in a south
westerly direction. One ot the first to see
it was Isaac Gough on Second and X
streets. As soon as he became fully satis
tied that it was the much-talked-of aerial
visitant he gave notice to all in the sur
rounding stores and hotels, and within a
few minutes the streets were black with
masses of excited people, all gazing
heavenward.
As the news spread the housetops be
came black with people, and frantic men
rushed wildly into telephonic communi
cation with their homes in order to in
form their wives and families that high up
in the heavens human beings were gayly
sailing through the air toward San Fran
cisco. The streetcars were an important
factor also in spreading the information
aa the motormen shouted the news to the
bystanders as their cars rapidly threaded
their nay through the crowded thorough
fares, and it needed but a wave of the
hand skyward to draw the attention of all
to the heavens.
Jacob Zemansky, the well-known down
town cigar man, obtained a powerful tele
scope and watched the light until it faded
into Dotbinznesß in the distance. In
speaking of it he said: "It simply passes
my understanding. If that was not an
electric arc light of intense power then I
never saw one. Looking at it with the
naked eye it seemed to move in a straight
line, but seen through the glass it rose
and fell like a boat on a gently swelling
tide. I could not distinguish any posi
tive shape, only a dare mass of mistlike
substance to which the light seemed to be
attached."
Mr. Car rag bar of the Saddlerock Restau
rant also gives a similar description of the
light and its movement!, and states that
in his opinion it was attached to an air
vessel of some description, and after being
in plain sight for over twenty minutes it
faded away in the distance.
Of the thousands who viewed the mys
terious visitant this evening, the vast ma
jority had been among the ranks of the
most pronounced skeptics ever since the
hrst publication of the subject in Tues
day's Call, for the reason that they are
living in the lower part of the city and
had failed to catch a glimpse of the light
on its previous appearance, and in conse
quence its reappearance descended upon
them like a clap of thunder out of a clear
sky. For over a week they had laughed
and jeered and treated the subject with
scorn and derision, but here before their
very eyes was the self-same vision which
had greeted their friends and neighbors
in the eastern portion of the city, and they
were forced by the evidence ol their own
eyes to abandon their unbelief.
As soon as it became fully evident to
all that the light was no meteor or ?tar, a
thousand stories were related of what
people had heard and seen on its previous
visitation.
Mr. Johnson, foreman of the Haegin
ranch, in company with another gentle
man, was driving across the bare plains
adjacent to the city last Tuesday nignt
whea they plainly heard a merry chorus
of human voices. The thing was un
canny and unreal. They were entirely
alone; on all tides stretched bare fields
without a bush or fence, no human being
was visible, nor was there a possibility of
secretion, and yet the merry chorus rang
out distinct, but faint. They stopped

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[3] OTHERS WHO SAW IT -- Stories That Corroborate the Fact of the Invention
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OTHERS WHO SAW IT.
Stories That Corroborate the Fact
of the Invention.
The following letter from San Rafael
explains a phase of tne story that has not
yet come to light:
Ban Rafael, Nov. 22, 1896.
Editor Call: The mysterious light mentioned
in your valuable Daper this morning as seen
by several citizens in different parts of the
State, and which seems to mystify yourself as
well as your readers, is nothing more than an
airship, and of this fact I am perfectly cogni
zant. I think now that I am released of my
obligation of .secrecy, which I have kept for
nearly three months, as the experiment in
aerial navigation is a fixed fact and the public
or a few of the public at least have seen its
workings in the air.
In the latter part of last August I was hunt
ing in the Tamnlpais range of mountains, be
tween the hit k peak and Boliuas Bay. I
wounded a deer, and in chasing it I ran onto
a circular brushpile about ten feet in height in
a part of the mountain seldom visited even by
hunters.
I was somewhat astonished, and my curi
osity prompted me to approach it, when I en
countered a man who sang out: "What are
you doing here and what do you want?" I re
plied that "I had wounded a deer and was
chasing It." He said "that they had been
camping here for a month or so and had not
seen a deer, but if you think your deer is in
the neighborhood I will assist you in finding
it as we need a little meat in cam p." This mau
vent with me and in less than 500 yards
found my deer. We carried it into the brush
corral. And what a sight— a perfect machine
shop and an almost completed ship. I was
sworn to secrecy and have kept it till thi3 mo
ment. Six men were at work on the "aerial
Hhip." It is this ship that a few people have
seen at night on its trial trip. It returns to its
home before daylight and will continue to do
so until perfected. Yours, William Jordon.
E. A. Lamkin of 305 Larkin street says
he saw the airship at an early hour last
night making its way toward Sacramento
and soon fading away in the distance like
a falling meteor.
Walter Malloy, deputy sheriff and com
missary at the County Jail, says the light
of the airship was seen in San Francisco
Tuesday evening. His statement is as
follows:
"When I left the jail on Tuesday night
I happened to look in the direction of
Berkeley and I saw an unusual sight. It
was a strong white light, seemingly
moving. I thought at first it was a bal
loon with a lantern attached, but on a
closer observation I thought I recognized
a dark body immediately over the light,
somewhat of a different shape from a
balloon. The more I observed it the more
puzzled I became as to what it was.
Finally I dismissed it from my mind until
next mornine, wnen reading The Cali. I
saw that others had noticed the strange
light. Now I am fully convinced that
what I saw was the airship seen by others
who were nearer to it than I was. Yet
from my position on Kearny and Broad
way I had a good view of it and I am
ready to indorse what others have said re
garding its appearance."
Max Roberts, an employe of the West
ern Union Telegraph Company, engaged
in the capacity of a night watchman, says
he saw the airship about 11:50 o'clock
Wednesday night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[4] AN EXPERT'S OPINION -- Lieutenant George N. Chase, U.S.A., Talks of the Wonderful Discovery
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AN EXPERT'S OPINION.
Lieutenant George N. Chase,
U. S. A., Talks of the Won
derful Discovery.
Lieutenant George N. Chase, U. S. A.,
the inventor of an "aerodromic system of
transportation," was seen yesterday on
the subject at his residence ir. Oakland.
Mr. Chase has spent many years in in
vestigating the subject of aerial naviga
tion, and is thoroughly conversant with
the practical and theoretical difficulties
in its way. He has written a pamphlet
setting forth his ideas, and outlining a
sort of compromise between aerial navi
gation and the present system of trans
portation, which many engineers have
accepted as in the highest sense practical.
He said yesterday: "I have read some
of the accounts of the alleged 'airship.'
One in a morning paper yesterday was
rather confusing. The attorney for the
inventor in his statement say i that it is
150 feet Jong, and that the inventor
'moved some of the mechanism,' and
thereafter he saw it rise, the vings flap
ping to a height of about 90 f e« t, making
a series of circles, and descenU, etc He
says also: 'There was no mot ye power,
so far as I could see.' For a ptitent attor
ney who made the application for the
patent and drew up the specifications
this is a remarkable statement. He says
that his client has 'forsaken the ideas of
Maxim and Langley,' and yet states that
'it is built on the aeroplane system,' the
only system ever advocated by either— a
system which I showed in my monograph
published in St. Louis in 1894 was the
only possible one. As I said then:
Experiment has demonstrated the fact that
it Is possible to construct a vehicle possessing
the ability to arise in the air, carrying a con
siderable load, and capable ol being propelled.
The obstacles that have so far bt ffled mans
ingenuity are his ability to control the ma
chine even under the most favorable circum
stances and his failure to provide energy
enough to propel it to any considerable dis
tance. This latter difficulty cannot be over
come by any Known method of storing up po
tential energy in a structure which Is designed j
to sever all connection with terra fitma and
In which levity becomes of primal import
ance. Flight is not a function of
levity but o( weight and power. Man if he
ever fly must closely imitate the flight of
birds. The fledgeling, after one or two abor
tive attempts, adjusts its motions successfully
and naturally to the accomplishment of per
fect flight. The rate of vibration of its wings
and the inclination of their surfaces to the
varying direction of the wind to the line oi
flight are instinctively changed wlih th« ra
pidity of lightning. Giueu a machine which
is capable of performing all the essential
functions of a bird in flight it is extremely
doubtful if the coolest human intellect could
ever be trained to control it safely under all
the conditions and circumstances whichjit
must inevitably encounter.
£While I said," continued Mr. Chsse,
"that the conditions seem too many, or,
rather the unknown quantities are at
present too few, lor a satisfactory solution
of this problem pure and simple, still it
must be conceded that considerable
progress has been made since that was
Much
Distress is caused by ipat disagreeable disease,
catarrh in the head, which can be cured only
by purifying the biood. Remember
Hood's
Sarsaparilla
Is the Pest— in fact the One True Blood Purifier.
HOOCI'S Pills e nause indigestion,
11UUU lia biliousness. 25 cents.
written toward the scientific solution ol
this great problem by Professor Langley,
Maxim in England, Chanute in Chicago
and Herr Lilienthal. I must say, how
ever, that if it has quietly Deen solved
upon a commercial basis in one of our
back counties it is very surprising, and the
secret has been remarkably well kept.
"One thing is certain he is a rash man
who in these days asserts the impossibility
of anything in engineering.*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[5] PASSED OVER SAN JOSE -- Experimenters Near Oroville
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PASSED OVER SAN JOSE.
The Air Craft Said to Have Been
Seen Sailing Toward Mount
Hamilton.
SAN JOSE. Cal., Nov. 22. Frank
Everett, a young man residing in this
city, claims to have seen the mysterious
airship seen by the residents of Sacra
mento and elsewhere pass over the eastern
portion of this city about 11 o'clock to
night.
Everett said he was standing on Santa
Clara street, near East San Jose, wnen be
distinctly saw the airsnip high up in the
heavens. He claims that several persons
who were in that vicinity also saw the
ship, and that others whose attention wa3
called to it saw the flashlight of the craft
rapidly disappear. The ship was said to
be going in a southeasterly direction, to
ward Mount Hamilton.
H. Erlich drove up while the crowd was
standing gazing skyward and saw the
light disappearing. To him some of the
people said they distinctly saw the ship.
Neither he nor Everett knew the names of
any persons in the crowd, most of whom
were in carriages.
Experimenters Near Oroville.
OROVILLE, Cal., Nov. 22.— There seems
to be some foundation that the airship
which recently passed over Sacramento
was built in this neighborhood, but no in
formation can be obtained as to who the
builder could be. Rumor has it that two
parties were recently experimenting with
new and light gas which they expected
would outdo anything yet introduced for
balloon purposes. It is also asserted by
others that three or four comparatively
unknown parties of wealth have been for
several weeks experimenting with various
gases and feel confident of 3olving aerial

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[6] MR. COLLINS' STORY -- The Inventor's Attorney Speaks
The Record-Union (Sacramento, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 4
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn82015104/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MR. COLLINS' STORY.
The mystery of the airship which has
been ana using the State and puzzling
acme worthy citizens of Sacramento has
made a change of base, and now there
are plenty of reputable people in and
about San Francisco ready to make
oath that they have seen the strange
thiag ln the heavens, and that in ap
pearance and motion it was identical
■with the shi© lights and buzzing ma
chinery which menaced a church spire
st the capital.
More than that, there is a San Fran
cisco attorney, George D. Collins, who
asserts that the airship exists, that the
inventor fs his client; that the strange
craft sailed without mishap from Oro
ville to San Francisco; that tt did pass
over Sacramento on its way to the Bay,
and that within a few days this inven
tion, which Is the exkltntlon of one of the
world's oldest and toughest problems,
will be navigated ia daylight, so that all
San Francisco may 1L and that it
Wdl circle and rise and sink over the
eentrai part of the city.
And yet there are wicked skeptics who
chuckle and make rude Jests about an
*Ti«Vrm*o of humbug:, and who poke all
miner of fun at the good people who
ttdnk they saw an airship in the sky.
Attorney Collins, who occupies offices
oii the second floor of the Crocker build
ing, was seen about the matter at
BBS home Ln Alameda last night- He
•aid:
"It is perfectly true that there is a:
la?ft a sue ensful airship in existence,
and that California will have the honor
Of bringing It before the world. I hay»
known of the affair for some time and
am acting as attorney for the lnrentor.
He is a very wealthy man, who has been
Studying the subject of flying machines
for fifteen years, and who came here
a (Van years ago from the State of
Maine in order to bo üble to perfect his
Ideas away from the eyes of other in
totm During the last) five years he
has spent at least fIOO,OOO on his work.
Be has not yet secured his patent, but
hie a ppli cation is now in Washington. I
OSJ tKtt SSjr much about the machine he
has perfected, because he is my client.
I estdSS he fears that the application
be stolen from the Patent Office If
people come to know that his Inven
tion is practicable.
"I saw the machine one night last
week at the inventor's invitation. It is
made of mental, is about lf»0 feet long
and is built to carry fifteen persons.
There is no motive power as far a I
mid see; certainly no steanx
It Is built on the aeroplane system
avA has two csnvaa Wl
feet wide, and a rudder shaped like a
bird's tail. The Inventor climbed into
the machine, and after he had been
moving some of the mechanism for a
moment I saw the thing besrin to as
cend from the earth very gently. The
wings flapped slowly as it rose and
then a little faster as it began to move
against the wind. The machine was
under perfect control all the time.
"When it got to a bight of about
ninety feet the inventor shouted to ate
that he was going to make a aerl i sf
circles and then descend. He im medi
ately did so, beginning by making a
circle About W yard? ir diameter, and
DAILY EECORD-TTNIOtf, MOOT)AT, tfOVEMBEB 23, 1806.
gradually narrowing in till the machine,
got within thirty feet of the ground.
It then fell straight down, very grace
fully, touching the earth as lightly as
a falling leaf.
"The reports from Sacramento the
other night were true. It was my
client's airship that the people saw.
Pt started from Oroville, in Butte
County, that evening and flew sixty
iive miles in a straight line directly
over Sacramento. After running up and
down once or twice over the Capital my
friend came right on, a distance of an
other seventy miles and landed at a
spot on this side of the bay, where the
machine now lies, guarded by three
men. The inventor found during this
trial trip that his ship had a wave-like
motion that made him seasick. It is
this defect that he is now remedying.
"In another six days the trouble will
be done away with and it is then his
intention to immediately give the peo
ple of San Francisco a chance to see his
machine. He will fly right over the
city and cross Market street a dozen
times. I cannot tell you where he is
housing the ship or what his name is,
as I am under a pledge of secrecy, but
it Is a fact that the machine does its
work perfectly and will astound the
world and revolutionize travel when it

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[7] SAILED OVERHEAD -- Seen Near Tulare and Folsom; Again Over Oakland
The Record-Union (Sacramento, Cal.), November 23, 1896, p. 4
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn82015104/1896-11-23/ed-1/?sp=4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SAILED OVERHEAD.
Some Kind of a Craft Seen by a Man
Near Tuiare.
TULARE, Nov. 21.—That airship is
cavorting through the atmosphere that
overhangs this vicinity. D. H. Risdon,
who was working In an orchard near
Tagus, four miles north of this place,
sighted a mysteilous object passing over
at a considerable elevation yesterday
afternoon.
A tramp was near *Jt the time, and re
marked that he never saw a balloon sail
against the wind. But while the object
overhead seemed to be sailing into the
teeth o<f the wind, It may have found an
opposite current in an upper stratum.
It was passing to Phe northwest and
Rtadftß declares it was lilte an immense
■beet spread out in 'the air. It soon
paased out of sight. Risdon had not
previously read or heard of trie strange
visitor said to have been seen at Sacra
mento, and as his reputation for verac
ity ls excellent his story is generally be
lieved.
AT FOLSOM ALSO.
The Aerial Tourists Took a Shy at
the Big Dam.
A telephone message from Folsom last
evening stated that the air-ship also
passed near that town between U and 7
o'clock, going in a southerly direction.
Afterward it tacked to th southeast and
disappeared in a dense cloud.
When seen at FVdsom it seemed to be
only a few hundred feet above the earth,
but the night was so dark that the body
Qticura
WORKS
Wonders
In curing torturing, disfiguring,
humiliating humors off the Skin.
Scalp, and Blood when all else fails.
Sold throughout the wer'.d. Prfe*, CraovmA, «fc|
So*,r, 2ici Ruoltkkt. 80c. and »J. Poma Cut
a»p Cat*. Co**., Sou Prop*., Boston.
177-" How to Cur* Krery DUflcurtnir Bmaor," fro*.
of the ship could not be distinguished—
nothing butt one bright light
AGAIN OVER OAKLAND.
It Passed There About 9 O'clock Last
Night.
It was long after 7 o'clock last night
when the air-ship became lost to view
here, but a message from Oakland said
ft passed over there a few minutes after
9 o'clock. The people there plainly saw
the headlight and several smaller ones
behind it.
The air-ship seemed to those who saw
it at Oakland to go gently down across
the bay in San Francisco, but ft prob
ably passed behind the hills of that city,

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[8] A HIGH-SPEED WORM -- W. J. Kenney Furnished One for an Airship, He Thinks
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 25, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-25/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is no one among the watchers for the mysterious moving light in the sky
who scans the skies with more interest
1
than does William J. Kenney of Kenney
Payton. model-makers and bicycle deal
ers, 519 Valencia street. The raason for
Mr. Kenney's interest is that he believes
he is the maker of some part of the aerial
wonder.
Mr. Kenney's skill is responsible for a
contrivance known as a "ball- bearing
worm."
"A man about 45 years of age, wearing
a gray mustache and appearing to be a
professional man, called on me about three
or four weeks ago,' r said Mr. Kenney last
evening, "and laid before me his pans
for an unusually large and high-speed
'worm.' I immediately concluded that
he was intent on making an improvement
on the cyclometer, a bicycle run by a
small gasoline motor, and proceeded to
nil his order.
•'He explained that be wished the worm
and gear to be practically frictionless, and
I suggested that the journals of the piece
of mechanism be fitted with ball bearings.
He acquiesced and gave me the measure
ments, and we went to work. For two
weeks we labored on the worm and finally
completed it.
"Tne party who gave us the order failed
to give us his name, but appeared to have
plenty of money and paid one bill, $143,
without a question. He was very anxious
to have the piece of machinery completed,
and when it was finally done he took it
and left the store in a hurry.
"We have not seen him since, and until
all this talk of an airship thought nothing
more of the matter.
*'When the aerial wanderer was finally
seen, however, it dawned upon me that
the man who bought the worm was inter
ested in this airship and that my produc
tion was a part of it.
"To strengthen mv belief I had many
mechanical problems beore me. First,
the gear of the arm was too high for a
cyclometer and it wa? ju>t the thing to
compress air or run a small dynamo.
"In view of the terrific speed it would
produce it was worthless for any other
use. Lastly, the peculiar actions of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[9] EVOLUTIONS IN MIDAIR -- Peculiar Performance of the Aerial Visitor Above Oakland
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 25, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-25/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EVOLUTIONS IN MIDAIR.
Peculiar Performance of the Aerial
Visitor Above Oakland.
OAKLAND. Cal., Nov. 24.— Oakland
was beside itself to-night with excitement.
For over two hours a large light attached
to something was seen cruising over the
city toward San Francisco and backacain.
About 7 o'clock the report was started
that the airship was to be seen, and peo
ple at once began to congregate in the
streets and gaze at the heavens.
The excitement commenced when the
6:30 train from San Francisco arrived at
Broadway. While crossing the bay the
passengers had observed the strange
thing in the sky, and the interest in
creased with the number of beholders.
They watched the movable hsht, which
alternated between remaining stationary
and taking flights in the sky.
Of course many were skeptical and de
clared it was a brilliant star or possibly a
planet, but when they received visible
proof that it did not remain many minutes
in any one particular constellation they
joined the majority and agreed that, they
were looking at a veritable airship.
Soon after the arrival of the train the
strange thing was seen over Oakland,
south of Sixth street, and as it passed
across Broadway the street was crowded.
One of the most noticeable features of it
was the frequency witii which the light
was put out and made to shine again.
This was afterward explained by one of
the spectators who watched it with a
powerful plass and stated that he could
see the machine performing evolutions
which caused the light to shine in differ
ent directions. It did not appear to move
rapidly, but it was at a ereat height above
the earth and was somewhat unsteady in
i.s motion, which somewhat resembled
that of a ship in a seaway.
As it passed over the city thousands of
people saw it and were anxious to add
their testimony that it was a genuine air
vessel. Among them were Colonel Gar
rity. City Elestrician Carleton, George
Hatton, managing editor of the Tribune;
Melvin Holmes, ex-deputy Superintend
ent of Streets, and scores of others.
The mystery of the skies was watched
every foot of its coarse by curious thou
sands.
The aerial rover appeared to cross the
bay and hover over San Francisco for a
time and then return. While passing
over the city ttie light disappeared tor a
time and when it was aj;ain visible the
machine was over East Oakland. As soon
as it crossed Thirteenth avenue Deputy
Constable Robinson announced its ap
proach and as it went by fully 5000 people
turned out to see it.
"I am willing to make an affidavit that
I saw the airship," said Deputy Robinson
to-night. "There was no fake about it
and we could plainly see that it had a
motion like a ship. It wheeled around
overAlameda and then seemed to cross
over San Leandro toward Piedmont." By
the time it was headed for Piedmont the
excitement was intense. Proprietors and
clerks came to the shop doors; bartenders
left their beer pump*; ladies stopped
walking and directed their attention
heavenward; cable and electric cars
slacked up *o that passengers might peep
at the wondrous light.
At the Galindo Hotel the windows were
thrown open and guests appeared with all
manner of spyglassss and looked at the
traveling light. Sometimes they declared
that there were aeveral smaller lights
visible and that they could see a dark
object, but it was too high in the air for
any of them to detect the nature of its
wings or tail, if it had any.
At Fourteenth and Broadway a large
crowd gathered and grew excited as the
remarkable light cruised around and occa
sionally disappeared. The play of lights
causes many to think that the party who
was directing the thing of the night was
signaling to some one o$ the earth.
Everybody agreed that no tricks with
kites or balloons couid account for what
they saw, for the light was so brilliant
and powerful that to produce it a dynamo
of no mean capacity must be carried.
Melvin Holmes, ex-Deputy Superintend
ent of Streets and a man well known in
Oakland, leveled a glass at it and declared
it is an air traveler of some desc; lotion.
George Carleton, the City Electrician,
who is better known than almost any man
in this city, knows the name of the in
ventor. Carleton was taken into con
fidence by a friend of the inventor, and
be vouches for the honesty of his in
formant. Anybody who will doubt George
Carleton when he says a thing is true does
not know the man. Carleton told his
story this morning, but He kept all names
to himself.
("I( "I was pledged not to divulge them, and
I'd saw my leg off first," he replied to all
questions touching identity. "1 heard the
story l&<t night from a friend of mine, who
is also a member of my lodge of Masons.
It was he who talked with the man who
saw the machine, and I was told the name
of the inventor by my friend. As I under
stand it, the ship was made near Oroville.
The »nventor made an ascension of several
Hundred feet, flew off four or five miles,
circled around a few times and landed as
nicely as could be. This my frieud's
friend saw. Both men are reliable, and
neither of them have figured in the matter
before."
FredGattee of 85S Broadway, as soon as
lie heard that the machine was over Oak
land, rushed for his telescope and declares
that he distinctly saw the machine per
form conic evolutions in the air. While
he could not see the details he ir positive
that he saw it maneuvering.
Manager Jese Halsted of the Oakland
Theater watched the machine cross over
Oakland, and with a pair of opera-glasses
aa-tisfaed himself that he saw an airship.
The mysterious light of the heavens was
also seen last evening by Mis. E. H. Craw
ford and Miss Kate N. Bassett, a teacher
at the Harrison-street School. The ladies
after some hesitation told their experi
ences. "I went to my south window about
10:30 last evening," said Mrs. Crawford,
"to see if it was raining. I noticed a light
off in the south, and watched it because it
was the only light visible. In a few mo
ments it disappeared, and later came to
view asrain. It looked like the search
lights I have seen at the World's Fair and
in New York City. I called Miss Bassett,
and we both watched it for fully nfieen
minutes and until it finally disappeared.
"When first seen it appeared to be
moving away from us and gradually sank
until out of our sight. Miss Bassett said
it must be an electric liirht with a tree
waving in front of it, but t bis was not the
case, as it was too hizh, and then I looked
this morning, but there was no tree any
where near where we saw the light.
Neither of us saw an airship, but we did
see lights that we do not understand, and
shall take much interest in watching this
evening and for some time to come to see
whether the lignt is to be seen any more.
"Before I went to bed, about 11:15. I
agaiu went to the window and the licht
had returned and was moving eastward
slowly, but steadily. I could not tell how
far away the light was or anything about
it, but having read the account in the
papers concluded that the light must be
the same as seen by others in this
vicinity."
Dr. J. H. Buteau was another who
stood amazed as he viewed the strange
visitor passing through the heavens. "1
was at Seventh and Market streets this
evening," said he, "when I noticed a.very
strong clear light down near the horizon,
moving along in the face of the wind.
The movement was very steady, and it
made good time, although we watched it
for fully ten minutes. As it receded it ap
peared to go lpwer. but that would be
natural ir it was moving on a level. lam
at a loss to account for the display, as I
am incredulous regarding the talk that it
is an airship. It might be a light at
tached to a balloon moving in an upper
stratum of air. We could see it go behind
buildings and emerge later on the other
side as we watched its movements."
The mysterious mnchine finally disap
peared over toward Contra Costa County,
and before midnight all Oakland was

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[10] DISPATCHES -- Faith in Sonoma; Santa Rosa Excited; San Jose Startled
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), November 25, 1896, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-11-25/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FAITH IN SONOMA.
J. B. Loser Saw a Mysterious
Rapidly Movlntr Brilliant Light.
SEBASTOPOL, Cal., Nov. 24.— The re
port that an airship has been observed
floating around in various sections of the
State has created widespread interest in
Sonoma County, and it now transpires
that several citizens whose integrity is
unquestionable have noticed the mys
terious cralt flying through the air at
night with a headlight as brilliant as an
electric flush.
J. B. Loser, proprietor of the Analv
Hotel at this plac\ gives a graphic
description of the vessel, and his story is
corroborated by the testimony of numerous
citizens both here and nt Santa Ro3a. He
says that while driving to the county seat
a few evenings ago he observed what
appeared to be a brilliant light in the
heavens. A few moments later the
dazzling object seemed to be less than a
mile away and then it gradually wended
its way in an eastern direction and finally
disappeared. Mr. Loser says that it was a
phenomenon such as he had never seen
before, and he thinks that the strange ob
ject was nothing more nor lesa ihan the
mysterious craft that hai been seen in
other sections, as it tallies exactly with
the description given in the papers.
SIGHTED TRIPLE LIGHTS.
A Rapid Aerial Traveler Observed
In Placer County.
BOWMAN, Placer County, Cal., Nov.
24.— The articles published in The Call
and other papers in reference to the ob
served mystical aerial traveler have
aroused great interest here. Several per
sons in this locality have been favored
with a view of the strange visitor.
C. T. Musso, a fruit rancher, and sev
eral members of his family affirm that
about four weeks ago and shortly after
dark they saw a singular sipht, which they
are now convinced could have been noth
ing else tban the much-discussed airship.
Mr. Musso says he saw "the prettiest sight
that his eyes ever viewed." It appeared
to be three very bright lights moving
NEW TO-DAY.
"APENTA'
THE BEST NATURAL APERIENT WATER*
Bottled at the UJ HUNYADI Springs, Buda Pest, Hungary,
Under the absolute control of the Royal Hungarian Chemical Institute
(Ministry of Agriculture), Buda Pest.
"We know of no Spring which shows ,so great richness in Mineral Salts or which"'
combines such advantages, as this water. wu 1
%-At "Professor Dr. R. C. Tichborn, LL.D., F.GS., F.1.C., Dublin."
"V,- This Water is richer in Mineral Salts than "N d j fj
all Continental Bitter Waters, and its efficacy is to /f V 0 Aft,
great that even the smallest dose secure* the v _' uL-'W
best results." ■■.y.y.rfr s r: :¥*r
Sworn Chemist in Buda Fes*,
Prices: 15 cents and 25 cents per bottle
'OP ALL DRUGGISTS AND MINERAL WATER DEALERS
F An lySlB n additional Testimony and information supplied
by CHS. GRAEF CO., 32. Beaver Street, New York, Sole Agents
THE APOLLINARIS COMPANY, LIMITED.
.-I SEE that the Label bears the well-known Red Diamond Mark of
The Apollinaris Company. Limited.
EMPLOYED at the City and County Hospital, California
Women's /.German Hospital, St. Luke s Hospital etc. and
at the Leadi:#j Hospitals of ENGLAND.
horizontally and easterly at a rate of pei
haps 100 miles an hour.
A. H. Thompson, a painter, states that
at about the same time he 'saw a similar
sight, which he describes as being three
very bright and large lights appearing
about ei-ht feet apart, and the forward
one as being larger and brisnter than the
rest, and moving horizontally eastward
rapidly and gracefully.
Professor S. D. Musso states that about
two weeks ago he and his wife saw a simi
lar sight moving in the same direction
and with about the same velocity. He
feels quite confident that it was not a
meteor, as ihere were three lights appear
ing about seven feet from each other in a
direct line, the forward one being larger
than the other two. Tiie licht, he state?,
was different from meteoric light, ihe
velocity was too slow for a meteor, and it
was traveling horizontally as long as it
was seen, which was for several minutes.
SANTA ROSA EXCITED.
People Willing to Swear the Light
Hhd Huge Wlngrs.
SANTA ROSA, Cal., Nov. 24.— The ex
citement over the airship has reached
Santa Rosa, and the presence of a bright
light in the heavens to night at 7:30 set
hundreds of people star-gazing. The light
appeared to be moving in a.i easterly di
rection, occasionally disappearing entirely
from view with a dult red glow, only to
reanpear more radiant after a lew sec
onds. It was impossible to see anything
beyond the light, owing to tbe distance,
but when it finally disappeared there were
many people willing to swear that the ob
ject beyond the liuht hod huge winga.
This licht to-night revived the rumors
of an airship invented by a man at Mark
West that was said to have been entirely
successful as f sir as the upward and on
ward direction was concerned, but it per
sisted in going off at an angle without
warning.
On Saturday night, just before midnight,
several reputable gentlemen of this city
reported seeing a bright light moving in a
southwesterly direction. It was first
observed about two miles southeast of
town, just above Taylor Mountain, and
seemed to come from toward the Sacra
mento Valley. It moved quite swiftly and
disappeared in the direction of Alarueda
County. This is vouched for by Charles
Winters, a well-known merchant, and
William Rohrer of the firm of Rohrer,
Einoorne Co.
John Stump of Orr Stump, a would- be
wag, and several otaers sent up a small
balloon with a lantern attached this even
ing, but the presence of the big light in
the east made his fake fade into insignifi
cance.
While it is just possible that the light
seen to-night was the work of some bold
aeronaut there was nothing visible to
show a balloon, and there are hundreds
who believe it to be the famous airship
that startled Sacramento.
SAN JOSE STARTLED.
Several Persons Claim They Saw
the Airship Traveling in
That Vicinity.
SAN JOSE, Cal., Nov. 24.-People in
this city were startled to-night about 11
o'clock, on beholding a bright light mov
ing rapidly in the heavens, and they are
convinced that they beheld the famous
airship. It was seen moving in the direc
tion of Gilroy, as was testified by Eugene
Barre, Dan Manning and Jerre Sullivan,
who are employes of the Sunset Telephone
Company. The light was of such a char
acter that the parties are convinced that
it was none of the ordinary lichta in tne
sky. About one nour afterward others
saw the same mysterious light moving
northeasterly very rapidly, as if it were
returning from the direction of Gilroy.
These parties, James Stanley and M. J.
O'Brien, are also positive that they beheld
the rapidly moving light of the airship.
DEATH OF EDWARD EDDY
tfaa One of the Heat Known Millionaire
Mining Mmn of Colorado.
DENVER, Colo.. Nov. 24. Edward
Eddy, millionaire, aied this evening. He

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[11] THE GREAT CALIFORNIA AIRSHIP -- The New York Journal and the San Francisco Examiner in Parallel Columns
The San Francisco Call (San Francisco, Cal.), December 5, 1896, p. 1
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85066387/1896-12-05/ed-1/?sp=1
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following parallel columns concern
ing the airship, tatten from Mr. Hearst's
two papers, give a fair idea of how little
one may depend upon anything seen in
either paper:
AN AIRSHIP SEEN. PROBABLY DTTE TO
(N. Y. Journal, Nov. 28) I LIQUOR.
(S.F.Examlner, Nov. 23)
SAN FRANCISCO,
Nov. 27.— The bigges.l Thee are men who
problem of tbe age has see queer things when
been solved. Man has 'they don't have a, gun,
won what seemed to j and others who en
be his hardest battle. counter wonder, of an
with nature. A suc-jearly morn or even at
cessful airship has been 'dewy eve when it has
built. Scientists ml been more dewy than
over the world are tre-lthe law allows,
mendously interested
by the stories which
have been telegraphed
from here nearly
everybody on the Pa
cific Coast is widely ex
cited over the matter.
The story sounds like
one of the romauces of
Jules Verne, but its
truth Is testified to by
so many reputaDle cit
zens that there seems
to be no reason what
ever to question its ac
curacy.
EVIDENCE FIRST CLASS. THE RESULT OF BEER
(N. Y. Journal, Nov. 28) (S.F.Examlner, N0v.23)
A WORKING AIRSHIP At Sacramento a man
SEEN ON THE PA- wandering in th« im-
CIHC COAST— UN- i mediate viuiaity of a
DER PERFECT (ON- Drewery saw a great
TKOL— IT CARRIESilight and a dark mass
FIFTEEN MEN ANi>: moving up and down
A SEARCHLIGHT, the sky.
The Pacific Coast j
newspapers are full of
stories about an air
ship seen hovering
above Sacramento and
other towns. The tes
timony concerning it
seems to be unim
peachable, but certain
details are lacking
which make Eastern
inventors and scien
tists doubt the accu
racy of tho statements
of alleged eye- vit
uesses.
IT WAS A REALITY. IT COULD NOT BC.
(N. Y. Journal, Nov. 28) (Examiner, Nov. 2a)
It swiftly drew near What this thing is
the city, sailing evenly nobody knows. That
to tbe southwest. it is an airship capa-
Then it dro ppe dble of carrying human
nearer the earth, but freight seems inipos
suddenlv shot, up into sib c of belief, in view
the air again, as if the of the record of failure
force that whirled it in tbe past. If some
through space were joker has turned loose
sensible to the dang -r a fire balloon to per
of collision with ob-lplex and mystify that
jects on the earth. might account for the
That much hundredsiairship on an imellig
of prominent residents ible basis.
of Sacrameutosaw, and
it caused consterna
tion in all parts of the
city, where groans
gathered at the cor
ners until far into the
night listening to the
tale of those that had
seen it.
ONLY A DELrSION. SURELY AIT AIRSHIP.
a F. Examiner, Nov. 24. N. Y. Journal, Nov. 28.
The man who has not For purposes of gelf
an airship in his back protection during the
yard in these days isjpendency of hid ap
poor indeed. The maoi plication tor letters
who hits not ueen a j patent, ti.e inveutor
fleet of airships man- has not disclosed all
euvering in the skies; the details of his con
has left California trivance. Enough,how
ashamed of himself, 'ever, has been dis-
He is like the man who covered to show that
fell out of the balloon.! he has found the true
He is not in it. They! principle of aerial
come not in single navigation. The ex
ships, but in bat-jcitement here has ns
talions. The county or sumed the form of a
town in the State i tremendous sensation,
which cannot produce It is the one topic of
a machinery bird or conversation in every
two is hiding its head village, town and city
in shame. In the State. In Cali
fornia the prevailing
question to-day is:
"Have you seen the
airship?" That there
is reason for that ques
tion the following
facts strongly demon
strate
The strange thing about the positions of
ttie two papers is the fact that the de
scriptions that appeared in the Eastern
paper were probably written in the
Examiner cffiLe. They doubtless repre
sent tlie San Francisco editor's real views,
while the light vein pursued here ha*
doubtless been because the paper pooh
pooned the real news the first day and
was driven to eive it later, after the
chagrin of being beaten by The Call tb*

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[12] THIS DO SETTLE IT -- Everest, Kansas, Sees the Famous Airship; Kansas City's April-Fool Joke
The Kansas City Journal (Kansas City, Mo.), April 2, 1897, p. 1
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn86063615/1897-04-02/ed-1/?sp=1
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THIS DO SETTLE IT.
EVEnEyr, kas., has seev the
FAMOUS AIRSHIP
AND SAYS IT IS NOT VENUS.
VENt'S "SPOTTED" ALL THE T13IE
THE AIRSHIP WAS IN SIGHT.
Fljlng Machine in A'Icvr for Mure
Than an Hour Has Four Huge
"Wings nnd a Cnnoe-Sbnpcil
Car "Seen" In Kansas
City, Too.
Everest, Kas.. April L (Special.) Ever
est has seen the airship or thinks she has.
It was All Fools' day and when, at i 03
to-night, someone sang out: "There's the
airship," half of those who heard It would
not even glance at the heavens and the
other half looked toward the west to see
what new capers "A'enus" was cutting up.
Bui it soon became evident that if the air
ship was a Joke it was a joke on an ex
ceedingly elaborate scale, for, bearing
down upon the citj- from the southsrcst
came a huge green llaht beside which
Venus were as a tallow dip to an arc elec
tric light.
In five minutes the entire population was
out to see, and In five more every man.
weman and child was willing to take oath
and declare that what most of them had
believed to be a mj th was a floating, mov
ing, grand reality and those of them who
did not sit up all night in the hope of get
ting another glimpse ot the aerial steed
went to bed to dream of the not distant
day when they may breakfast in Kansas,
dine In Chicago and take supper the same
daj- In New York, the Journey having been
made on the wings of the wind in just
such an airship as they saw or thought
thej- saw to-night.
The airship or something was in view
for an hour and twentj- minutes. Once It
came within a few hundred feet of the
earth, and a shout went up: "Oh. it's go
ing to light here." but the ship fooled tho
people a trip, for just as the crowd was
looking for someone to appear at the edge
of the car with "Ahoy! there! Standby to
make fast the line!" the huge machine bore
awaj- to tne right and in a few mlnutea
waa almost lost to view. But It came
back and sailed majestically over and
around the town, while hundreds looked
on and wondered.
The ship moved about so erratically that
an accurate description of it could not be
obtained. Those who had the best view of
it, however, assert that the floating power
seemed to be in a mammoth bag, suppos-edlj-
filled with gas. To this wero attached
four light wings of triangular form, two on
either side, and from the great bag was
suspended a cage or car. This car was;
canoe shaped and appeared to be from
twenty-five to thirtj- feet long. A few de
clared that the ship had red lights hung:
over the edges of the car presumably as
a precaution against collision with seme
one of the other numerous ship3 of rimllar
character that have- been observed In this
vicinity recently- by people wTio have a
facultj- for "seeln' things.'
As proof positive for tho skeptical that
Everest's mjsterious visitor was not Ve
nus. It might be mentioned that three ot
the most reputable citizens of the town,
themselves skeptical at first, "got a sight
on" Venus, old girl, shortly after the air
ship put In an appearance, and never re
moved their eyes from that giddy planet
until the airship had done with its ma
neuvers and gone, and thej- are willing to
swear that A'enus never moved, except
as was proper and seemly for a planet,
and that A'enus and the airship are not
one and the same. "I had A'enus down fine
en a dead line with the door of the depot
and the top of that old poplar tree j-on-der,"
said one of them, "and she stayed
there all the time, while tho blamed air
ship went cavorting around abov e the pop
lar tree, and to the left and right of it;
so that airship ain't A'enus, and I know it."
The ship finally passed under a cloud to
the east, then reappeared, nnd, starting off;
due north, was soon lost to view, after en
tertaining tho people of Everest for an
hour more-than they have been-entertained
before since "Uncle Tom's Cabin" was,
here.
If thero still be doubters, let them read
this:
"This is to certify that we, the under
signed, saw and watched for some time
to-night the movements of large and bril
liant lights that traveled at various heights
over this city, and what we believe to bo
the same as seen at various other points,
and bellved to be an airship.
"J. E. Gunn, proprietor Commercial ho
tel. "E. E. Mason, roller mills.
"A. L. Stout, capitalist.
"Cleve McGregar. with Lyons Bros.
"Thomas Emlngton."
There are manj- things ot a strange na
ture that take place on tho first day of
April, but for the first time in her history
Kansas City had an airship April foot joke
played yesterdaj", and the most amusing
part of it was that It caught a great many
people.
About S o'clock last evening the evening
star shone forth In the AVest with unusual
brllliancj-. The atmospheric conditions
wero exceptionally fino and the star's bril
liancy was much greater than usual. For
tho purposes of a joke someone at the
Coates House made a remark about the
airship and called attention to the star.
Tho crow el looked, and one credulous man
who had been celebrating the daj- declared
It was the electric headlight of an airship.
Possibly the same one recentlj- seen at
Belleville. Kas., or at Omaha or at To
pek.u Possibly It was the aerial crew of
the engineering corps of Governor Leedj-'s
South Pole Aurora Borealis Railroad
Company.
AVord of the airship was telephoned about
the city, and soon the guests nt the hotels
were all out watching it and discussing
what it was. The crowd nt tho Savoy was
so dense that it almost rtlleel the street
In front of the plac. and Interfered with
the running of tho Ninth street cars. Over
at the Midland tho guests were where tha
smoke from the packing bouses Interfered,
and as each puff of smoke passed athwart
tho view, some believer in aerial naviga
tion would declare the boat was shifting
about. It was tho samo in all the crowd,
a few believ eel thej- were watching the air
ship, but tho large number knew it was

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[13] THE OMAHA AIRSHIP -- Inventor John Preast and the Nebraska Lights
The Evening Times (Washington, D.C.), April 5, 1897, p. 5
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn84024441/1897-04-05/ed-1/?sp=5
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Omaha, .Nebr., April 4. The supposed
airship that has been floating around in
the lieavcns above Nebraska for the last
four months is causing the most ani
mated discussion just at .present. There
is no disputing the fact that either there
have been some very unusual atmospheric
disturbances visible 'throughout Nebraska
or olse a number of artificial lights con
trolled by a human-agency have been ex
hibited Jrom time U time in the sky at
oiight.
The opiriion Is 'becoming quite general
that some Inventor of a real airship is
experimenting with his machine in this
vicinity at night Jor the purpose of avoid
ing detection until the invention Is per
fected. Too many people have witnessed
those .peculiar lights and vague outlines of
a roreign body of .gigantic proportions in
the heavens to attribute them to the
distorted imagination or the befogged
fancies of people who have been 1 in bit
ing too freely.
For three anonths these Teports came
from the interior of the State. They all
agreed with reference to the size ot
the lights, the manner in which tliej
were carried swiftly tluotigh space, and
other details that Indicated that the same
object was attracting the attention of
many people. Then these lights were
seen in Omaha by several people, and
now the belief is quite gcneial that an
airship really has been invented.
The iuventoi ot the -mysterious vessel
is by most, people supposed to be John
Pieast, who lives three miles north of
the limits of the city of Omaha. Preast,
however, denies that he has anything to
do with this mysterious light, though ne
admits having experimented for years
on airships, and his 1 ouse Is filled with
all kinds of models of monsters of the
air which are expected to develop power
to carrj them through space swiftlv.
Preatis a highly educated German, who
has resided nlone at his present home
for twenty years. .Many? look opon him
a-s a crank, bec-uise-iie lus given his time
wholly to the study orniahanics as applied
to vessels that may kail through space. So
well kuown has he become on account or
bis hobby, wul so '-interesting is his col
lection or airship m'odels, that he has of
late years charged a ihnairudmission fee to
his place. His alrshljis htc or every con
ceivable design, but Preast declares that
he has no practical invention. But every
time thoughts have been Heenlntheheavens
around Omaha they! have disappeared dl-reetiy-
over the old PrVast homestead.
Only the most vague description of the
vessel carrying the lights'can be secured
in Omaha, because 'while many say they
saw the lights,- "-whldunt that they saw
anything else. '.-'TJniary-rre accounted for
on the theory .thii evejrr time the lights of
the tTupiioted shlpJiavc been seen it has
been on a very dark night. This Is given
as another reason for hollering in the new
invention, because the author would select
such a night to fly a machine which he
wanted to keep a secret.
On the night of March 14 the lights
were Keen in South Omaha. The "thing"
flushed into view about 9:30 o'clock. It
appeared to be aiming fiom the south
east. It had the appearance ot a big
engine headlight, and floated orr toward
the west and the north,, and finally dis
appeared behind some buildings. It was
in fight hair an hour. Among those who
saw the strange object was J. J. Copen
harvc, who Is a compositor, and who lives
at Twenty-sixth nnd H streets, South
Omaha. Mr. Copenharve was going home
rrom church at the time. He, with several
others, saw the object very distinctly, and
could not be mistaken.
-We thought at first that it was a
balloon," said Mr. Copenharve. "If there
is such a thing as an airship, however,
I believe now that it was one There
wasa brightlight,abouta footindiameter,
and some or us wbo-saw it thought wc
could distinguish some dark body below
the light, but we might have lieen mis
taken in that."
Mr. Copenharve and his friends are not
the only people in South Omaha who saw
the stranger. Some Tailroad men -working
in the north end of the railroad yard
near the Burlington switch shanty saw it.
It bad then altered its course and was
sailing toward the northeast. The men
watched it until it disappeared. That was
the second time that the visitor had ap
peared in South Omaha. The thing showed
itself a couple of weeks before. All that
could be secii was a big light that burned
very steadily. Nothing more definite could
be distinguished. On the occasion of that
visitation the object caused a good deal of
speculation.
Last Sunday night the ship again ap
peared and was seen by a number of
Omaha's reputable citizens. It came in
sight a bout the time that church was over,
and in half an bour had traversed the
lieavcns and had once more disappeared.
It was seen by people in all parts of the
city. This time the airship came into
view in the southeastern portion of the
horizon.
It was in the shape of a big red light,
too big for a balloon, and glowed steadily.
It sailed over the cijty po the tiorthwest
and then disappeared behind the bluffs.
It moved very slowly and seemed to be
quite near the earth. Nothing but the
lighl Tvas visible. A blgWowd of people
watched the trip of the visitor at Twenty
fourth and Lake streets1, and speculated
upon it. In this crowd Jtas Herman Mat
ties, an employe of the JJee, who is quite
positive that the tiling was not a star,
i

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[14] THE AIRSHIP COMING -- Chicago Sees the Mystery; McCann's Photographs; Alpha Orionis
The Evening Times (Washington, D.C.), April 13, 1897, p. 5
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn84024441/1897-04-13/ed-1/?sp=5
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE AIRSHIP COMING
illysterious Western Flying Mar
chine En Route to This City.
TO TOUCH BAHTfl AT LAST
air. KtiMimr, of Chicago, Dewcrlbes
the Aortal Waiideier und Tells
People to "Wait Snaps Shots of
the Craft While Flying. Through
Space Secuicd.
Chicago 1 April 13. An airship was dis
covered in the mind of a Sacramento, Cal.,
c-01 respondent three months or moie ago.
Corroborative detail was the .strong actor
or the story. The appearance of the ship
by night over Sacramento, its journey
witti bird-like speed, 'from Orovllle, its
lights of dif fere ut colors, voices descending
to earth from the heavens, aud reputable
eye-witnesses galore were given minutely.
Within h week after the story's appear
ance in print tlie ship was seen -at no less
than teiidlffeieut parts of the State. The
airship was .next seen near Omaha, about
a fortnight ago. There other people jsaw
in the heavens what they bejieved to be a
flying machine, and their hallucinations
weie all duly chronicled aud sent broad
cast over the country. At last the ship
was seen in Kansas City, and there no
less a. pxsou than Gov. Leedy averred
that be had beheld the monstrous thing.
The newspapers in Chicago gradually
filled up with airship new, which finally
increased until it took a department by it
self and a special editor. Several points
in Indiana aud Michigaujsupplied oueulr
jihtp story each night, and from the town of
Crown Point, Ind., a correspondent, made
Jealous by the space-workers at adjacent
places, wired his Cldcago newspaper:
Airship will he seen here tonight. Shall
I tend stor?"
Meanwhile the people of Chicago had be
come violently interested in tlie airship,
un 1 thoUNinds of them swept tlie lieaens
every night with the naked eye, opera
gLivcs or telescopes Their gaze encoun
tered high up in the sky a brilliant white
light, which Jihlmmercd and waered, mov
ing with a perceptible motion Friday
night from 10 o'clock until after midnight
not less than ten thousand persons were
upon the streets, looking- ut the slowly
moving light, and speculating at tlicajight-
Ing of the airship
Attorney Max L. Kasmar, secretary of
the Chicago Aeronautical Society, now
comes forth with his official sanction, und
insists that the airiship is no dream.
"We received word from San Franolsco
three weeks ago," says Kasuiar, "that a
party had. started from there in an air
ship, anl that they would stop in Chicago
for the purpose of registration The end
of the trip is to be ut Washington, D. C,
where the ship will be brought to the
eartli an 1 given up to inspectors Tlie car
contains three persons, and I know one of
them.
"The ship is not of steel, as f one spec
tators in the Wet have declared, but of
paper. There is the customary inflated
gas reservoir, but the invcntois have dis-c-oer'd
the secret of practical piopulsion.
The only new feature of the proptileion is
the fact that the posterior of the propellor
is flexible and elastic, while the anterior
is rigid. The fans have a rcculiar twist
ing motion. President Octave Chanute.
with other wealthy men, have furnished
the money for the venture."
Not a few take stock in 3tr. Kapniafs
story, and a fair portion of Chicago's pop
ulation teally believe that an airship Jias
been hovering over the city for tlie past
thic nights However, the scientists of
the Chicago and Northwestern universities
will have none of it. Instead of the
strange light in the heavens being a flying
machine, they insist it is a ticmp star, by
name Alpha Ononis. George W- Hough,
professor of astronomy at tlie Xoithwest
Univcrsity, said last night
"Thestar'snppearance of flight is due to
the fact that it lies comparatively close to
tliehoii7oii,aud tl eartli in its rapid axial
movement creates tlie optical illusion that
the star is in motion, as it constantly
changes its position in the 1 eavens. The
maikca peculiarity of this star lies in its
colors. The lower section Is blue, above
that a pronounced reddish hue, and atiove
thelatterjiue merges into a lustrous whie.
This variation of colors and their apparent
shirtings give rise to the impression of
different lights, butallcome from the same
star."
The act that the much-taiked-of airship
is a reality, and not a phantom, is, appar
ently, attested by two remarkable photo
graphs, now In Chicago, which, itis alleged,
were taken while the machine was in motion-Walter
McCann, of Rogers Park, a town
twenty-eight miles north of here, took two
suapp shots with his camera at what he
believed to -be the airship, .and secured two
excellent negatives. It was early in the
.morning, and the vessel was scudding along
at a rapid rati, but the pictures he secured
are very good ones.
The work of Mr. McCann dispels any
thought or an optical illusion. Three wit
nesses assert that they saw him take the
photographs, which wen. obtained Sunday
morning about 5:30 o'clock.
Mr. McCann is a newsdealer in Rogers
Park. Itis his custom to get up very early
In Xhe morning, particularly on Sunday, to
deliver the Chicago papers. In nis store he
has a small camera, the property of his
young son. When McCann sighted the
strange object in the sky early Sunday
morning he at once came to the conclusion
it was thealrshinf which there had been
so much talk, and which had set so many
people to thinking. Haru3hedinto hisstore,
seized the camera and Becured a good plc
tureof it. G.A. Oversocker, who was also
looking at the ship, suggested a second
snap shot, and the result was a much better
negative.
The pictures developed from these plates
were tested by acids, and were pronounced
genuine productions of an object in the
air, and not tlie creations of a studio.
"William Hoodlces and E. L. Osborn, the
latter an operator iu the telegraph office
of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway
Company, In Ttogers Park, saw McCann
and Oversocker at the hour named, and
assert that they not only witnessed the
photographing of the object in the air, but
saw the vessel.
The eraft, according to the statement
of all thee witnesses. Is an invention
without wings or sails. All agree that
the outlines of a man could also be seen.
Through a glass they were of the opinion
they could ee the man in motion, as
though he were engaged in steering the
vessel.
The upper part of the ship apparently
consisted of a cigar-shaped silken bag, at
tached U which was a lightly constructed
framework. In the center of this frame
work the man was located. A .propeller
or rudder was attached to the frame
work, tlie latter being shaped like the hull
of a ship, except that It was sharp at
both ends. Apparently thefrnmework was
composed of white metal.
llr. McCann told his story at his store
on Greenleaf avenue.
"I had read for some days about the
airship,' said he, "but thought it must be
a Take- Sunday morning, about 5:fl0 -j
o'clock, I was attending to my usual du
ties -wlien 1 saw a strange looking object 1 1
in the sky coniing-from the south. It
looked like a big higrJlt ctune ueurcr,
and then I saw it was certainly nota bal
loon. Then 1 thoi(ght of the airship aud
ran for the camera. At the corner of
Greenleaf avenue and .Market street I
took the first shot,' While a Jew minutes
later I took another urther up the rail
road tracks. It was BOOjor 600 feet from
mo when 1 photographed it, and I saw it
plainly, It went north a'Ulstance and then

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[15] PRESS NOTES -- Chicago and Kansas
The Daily Ardmoreite (Ardmore, Okla.), April 15, 1897, p. 1
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn85042303/1897-04-15/ed-1/?sp=1
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Two short items from the same page. In the scan the column text is interleaved with market reports; the airship passages are here disentangled, with obvious OCR misreadings corrected.]

Chicago, April 14. -- All the papers contain long accounts of a brilliant sight in the heavens last night, which was viewed by thousands of people and was thought to be the much talked of airship. But it has been identified as a fast traveling star, well known but never before as brilliant as it has been of late. A local paper says: When Alpha Orionis, a star of the first magnitude, appeared in the eastern heavens last night, many residents of Chicago and suburbs thought the Kansas airship was paying them a visit. Professor Hough of the Northwestern university solved the mystery, however, by proving scientifically [the passage breaks off in the scan].

[Second item, dateline indistinct:] ...green light which hung in the firmament in the Northeast was the searchlight of the airship which began its nightly tours in the arid clime of Kansas. While thousands of people were still watching the mysterious double point of green light [the passage breaks off in the scan].

[16] AIRSHIPS -- What Are They? and From Whence Do They Emanate [Editorial]
The Ohio Democrat (Logan, Ohio), April 20, 1897, p. 2
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn87075048/1897-04-20/ed-1/?sp=2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AIRSHIPS
What Aro Tiioy? and From
Whence do Tiioy Em
animate.
A llrllllaiit Editorial on This Subject.
Logon ltccolves a Visitation From
This Ariol Monstrosity.
ac-bo
Anil Tlius It Came to I'nss.
Cincinnati Enquirer.
There wus a titno when Thomas
B. Heed was i In dictatorial com
mand over WUllum McKinloy; but
now Mr. Heed is acting under Mc
Klnley's orders. Tho Speaker may
have to "husllo" after the Admin
istration gets well settled and has
no further uso for him.
That Samo Oltl "ir.
Juckson Herald.
If Russia had a Napoleon tho
map of Europe would bo speedily
revised. Sun.
Yes, and if tho United States had
a President, tho condition of hor
people would bo changed too. Lots
in tiiose ifs.
Hocking County Is Noted for Its slick
to" (Junlltlcs.
Columbus Press
Ell West and Ollle Evans will bo
found lo bo heavy weights about
Mr. Bushnell's neck this fall when
ho Is racing for first place in the
contest forgovernor. But the gov
ernor has been warned.
Discovered Something.
Chicago Ilccord.J
Gen. Weyier thus Into in tho day
discovered that whiio it Is true
that it takes the efforts of two par
ties to start a fight it also takos tho
efforts of two parties to declure
that the fight Is ended.
Tlio Farmer ami the Tickliug Machine.
Jackson Herald
"You ticklo me and I'il tickle
you," seems to bo the ruling idea
in forming (he new tariff, till It
comes to letting tho farmer in, and
he seems to not bo of tho claps that
Is intended to bo tickled.
A DoiiKh-Natloii.
I'luln Denier.)
It is stated that a millionaire
yeast manufacturer recontly bought
a horsu for tho president. This
would indicate that the animal was
raised ull right.
Experience le a Rood Teacher.
I.nuca'itcr Eagle.
Some Republicans about this
tlmo are beginning to think that
probably it is better to havo fiO
cent dollars than not to havo any
dollars at all.
Spoclal low rules to Now York
and return, on account of Grant
Monumental Ceremonial. For this
occasion, which will occur April 27,
18D7, tho B. O. 8. W. IVy, will
give a special low ruto lor tho round
trip, tickets good going April 25 to
20, good for return until May 4th,
For further. Information consult
ugenta B. Jc O. S-W By.
Columbus Press,
It would bo a strango thing if all
tho reports now current about the
"air-ship" proved in tho end to bo
truo. But It would not bo a strange
thing if they proved to bo altogeth
er faiso. Tho latter fact is account
ed for on tho ground that modern
Jodrnalism, appreciating tho fever
ish desiro of tho world for tho solu
tion of tho problem of aerial navi
gation, is inclined to givo credence
to whatever promises or Indicates
that that solution Is at hand.
Thcro is no doubt that, if tho air
ship is u fact, the world stands upon
tho threshold of a new existence.
What wonder, there-fore, if nows
papordom tho interpreter of the
world's thou ght anticipates the
discovery It is so anxious to an
nounce?
Perhaps an editorial considera
tion of tho airship wilt beconstrucd
by many minds nsadeparturo from
editorial dignity. But, perhaps,
editorial dignity is at best a very
doubtful quantity-over-ratcd,some-times,
and always to bo regarded
from different points of view. And
perhaps tho airship has more dig
nity than tho most conservative
columns in tho world. Certainly
it has, If It can fly. Conservative
columns, as a rule, do not fly. Poets
do. Editors do not. They grovel.
But why not fly with tho airship
if we can There Is some Inter
esting recent history in connection
with tho sky tram p. It first obtain
ed prominence through tho kind
ness, of tho San Francisco Call,
which some months ugo devoted
an extraordinary amount of space
to a vision which was said to have
hovered over Oakland. Muny
"prominent citizens" testified to
the reality of tho apparition, and
ono "eminent lawyer" went so fur
as to declare with tho privilege
of an affidavit reserved that he
had for somo time been the legal
representative of the airship's in
ventor and know positively thai
the vehicle was a soaring, if not a
howling, success. Tho Cull was
very genutous in Its treatment of
this miracle. Its best artists and
most iinagiuatlvo writers were em
ployed to exploit tho wonders of
tho marvelous visitor. Serlouly,
however, our San Francisco con
temporary offered somo striking
cvidenco to provo that the airship
was not a dream -that It was, as a
matter of fact, a substantial
triumph of invontivc genius.
Those accounts drew tho atten
tion of tho newspaper world long
beforo tho scientific hud any In
terest in them. Tho Now York
Journal ond Now York World re
produced tho Cull's illustrations,
rovised its text and published
glowing special features original,
of course doscrlptivo of tho Cali
fornia air monster. That wus
making decided progress for the
airship, whether It were fuko or
fact. At this tho telegraph news
bureaus pricked up their ears, and
presently tho country was regulcd
with startling accounts, sworn to
by reputable American citizens, of
the appearance of tho wanderer in
various parti of tho country. Here
It was seen three hundred foot
from tho earth; now it was plug
ging away against tho wind, now
flashing search-lights by night or
emitting a hissing sound by duy;ut
this tlmo scaring innocent cattle,
or at that time shaking tho boots
from an awestruck farmer; dis
appearing thore, until the devil
only know what tho fuss wus till
about.
Things had come to such a pass
that the airship department was an
absoluto necessity of every well-
conducted newspaper.
Perhaps all this Is a liiijo Joke.
Perhaps In this matter tho press
associations, tho correspondents
and tho witnesses they hivo quot
ed havo proceeded on Mr. Burnum's
hypothosls that "tho American
people lovo to bo humbugged."
Hut if that bo truo, it is tho best
swindle ever porpetrato.l upon a
confiding public. For look you,
the evidences of tho airship's pxis
tonco aro this day better founded
thun any evidences of miracles In
profane or sacred history. Men
have been hung in this enlightened
ano upon testimony loss trust
worthy, and In other ages drawn
and quartered, or dofiod or canonlz
od with fewor roas-ins than those
which prompt belief In tho roallty
of this nineteenth century wonder.
If tho airship Is a Joke, It is un
exceedingly good one; but, ponding
tho sottlomont of that quostlon, It
is a dream of wonderful Imagina
tive pleasure to hollevo that the
,wundoror is Man's greatest inven
tive creation and his noblest tri
bute ta tho providence of Uod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[17] MAXIM'S NEW AIRSHIP -- Inventor Says He Has Crossed America With It
The San Antonio Daily Light (San Antonio, Tex.), December 27, 1897, p. 8
Scanned page: https://www.loc.gov/resource/sn86090439/1897-12-27/ed-1/?sp=8
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MAXIM’S NEW AIRSHIP.
Inventor Says Ho Has Crossed
America with It.
Announces, in Addition, That nt l.nut
He Ua» Perfected an Aerial Craft
Caliable of Traveling 100
Miles nn Hour.
'4 I-
Aerial navigation is said to be an ac
complished fact. Hiram S. Maxim, in
ventor of the Maxim gun, who hasspent
years On the indention of an airship.
Ijas built one'of New Kensington alumi
num. Ue si >y s *hat he has traveled
across the continent and. back in his.
Strange vessel,.and has speeded "it to tod
miles ap,hour. f
I .Spine month's ggtf i,was anfiounctif'
thattbiel’ittsburghßeduction cdSpany'
had received a large order from tne Xt;
laptic and Pacific Aerial Navigation,
company. The order was for a large
number of aluminum sheets, to be one
hundredth of an inch thick, two feet
wide and sixteen Leet in length. T
bars, rjvets and various other pieces of
the same material were ordered at the
same time. Not. long after this the
order was duplicated. To show that the
company meant business, the cash,
amounting to several thousand dollars,
was sent with each order.
Recently the reduction company re
ceived another order for aluminum
from the Atlantic and Pacific Aerial
Navigation company. This time it. was
printed or the company’s letterhead,'
with thejiames of the officersand a cut
of the strange craft. Hiram S. Maxinl,
Ilie world-renowned inventor, is su
perintendent of construction for the
company; C. A. Smith is president and
M. A. Terry secretary. These two are
well-known men in business and finan
cial circles of San Francisco.
Mr. Maxim furnishes the following
description of his vessel to the Chica
go Record. The dimensions are:
Cylinder, 38 feet 2 inches in diameter
and 90 feet in length; length of for
ward cone, 50 feet; length of aftercone,
45 feet; total length. 158 feet. It oc
cupies 106,000 cubic feet of space. The
propelling power is a 105 horse power
naphtha engine. The cylinder, engine
and every part of the machine, so far as
practicable, is made of aluminum,
which was purchased of the reduction
company here. The ship will weigh
about 5.000 pounds and will carry more
than a ton of provisions and passengers.,
The naphtha for the engine will be
MAXIM’S NEW AIRSHIP.
(It Is Said to Have Traveled from San
Francisco to Cleveland, O.)
stored in cases which hold enough to
drive the ship around the earth without
replenishing the tanks. The skin of the
ship is double and filled with hydrogen
gas. It will'be confined in separate
compartments, and will be in the upper
part of the vessel and in the cones.
The tall that proj’ects upward from
the stern of the ship directs it up or
down as a bird directs its movements
with its tail. The rudder changes the
course from right to left. Motive pow
er is secured by the big aeroplane at the
stern, which is driven by the naphtha
engine. A speed of 100 miles an hour
has been attained without difficulty. At
this rate the trip across the continent
would be a 24 hours’ journey, while
Jules Verne is outdone, as Mr. Maxim is
able to make a tour of the world in ten
days instead of 80.
Mr. Maxim is not prepared to say
what his company proposes to do in the
airship line. A trip to the Klondike will
be made in a short time, and he doesn’t
see that there is anything in the road
of him going to the pole if he feels Iba
way. He has passed the stage where be
uses the doubtful “if” in speaking <>f
the. success of his invention. Repeated
trials, he says, show that it is a com
plete success. His company proposes
to go into the business in earnest. With
an abundance of capital behind it, the
corporation proposes to construct a
large number of, these vessels of all
sizes. They will be used for carrying
passengers and fast freight, principal
ly of tbe character of express goods, as
the limit of weight will necessarily be
reached somewhere. The machine Mr.
Maxim has constructed costs $15,000.
Last summer great excitement was
caused in Denver, St. Louis, Chicago and
other western cities by the appearance
of what was said to be an airship, float
ing over these cities by night. Ail that
could be seen was red and green lights,
such as a steamboat carries. No fur
ther information was gained about the
nocturnal visitor until some months
had elapsed. Then it was learned that
the Atlantic and Pacific Aerial Naviga
tion company had built sn airship. It
U asserted that it traveled from San
Francisco as far east as Cleveland, 0..
making the round-trip journey in three
