Source note (Tower of Babel staging): al-Baladhuri, The Origins of the Islamic State (Kitab Futuh al-Buldan), Part I, translated by Philip Khuri Hitti (New York: Columbia University, 1916). The primary Arabic account of the early Islamic conquests. Text from Internet Archive item originsofislamic01albauoft (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

STUDIES  IN  HISTORY,  ECONOMICS  AND  PUBLIC  LAW

EDITED  BY  THE  FACULTY  OF  POLITICAL  SCIENCE  OF
COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY

Volume  LXVIII]  [Whole  Number  163


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


BEING  A  TRANSLATION FROM THE  ARABIC

ACCOMPANIED  WITH ANNOTATIONS
GEOGRAPHIC  AND HISTORIC NOTES  OF THE

kitAb  futuh  al-buldAn

OF

alrlmdm  abu-1  'Abbas  Ahmad  ibn-Jabir  al-Baladhuri

nx\rr\c\

\ >

BY

PHILIP  KHURI  HITTI,  Ph.D.

On  the  permanent  staff  of  the  Syrian  Protestant  College,  Beirut,  Syria
Gustav  Oottheil  Lecturer  in  Columbia  University

Vol,. I


$ta  Dork
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

LONGMANS,  GREEN  &  CO.,  AGENTS

London  :  P.  S.  King  &  Son,  Ltd.

I9l6


FOREWORD

Interest  in  the  Nearer  East  has  increased  our  desire  to
know  as  accurately  as  is  possible  the  beginnings  of  the  faith
and  of  the  various  states  that  have  played  so  important  a
part  in  its  history.  The  Arabs  themselves  have  had,  from
the  earliest  times,  a  keen  sense  for  historical  tradition  and
an  equally  keen  desire  to  preserve  that  tradition  in  writing.
There  is,  perhaps,  no  people  of  earlier  times  that  has  left  us
so  large  an  amount  of  documentary  evidence  as  to  its  be-
ginnings as  they  have.  The  evidence,  of  course,  needs  sift-
ing and  sorting  according  to  the  canons  of  criticism  we
have  learned  to  employ  in  all  such  cases.  But,  this  work
cannot  be  done  by  Oriental  scholars  alone,  whose  time  is
often  taken  up  largely  with  the  philological  and  literary
examination  of  the  texts  that  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is,
therefore,  eminently  a  part  of  their  duty  to  render  these
texts  accessible  to  students  of  history  who  are  not  masters
of  the  Arabic  language.

Dr.  Hitti  has  undertaken  this  task  in  connection  with  the
record  of  one  of  the  earliest  Arab  historians  whose  work
has  been  preserved.  Since  its  publication  in  1866  by  Pro-
fessor de  Goeje,  al-Baladhuri's  "  Futuh  al-Buldan "  has
been  recognized  as  one  of  our  chief  authorities  for  the
period  during  which  the  Arab  state  was  in  process  of  for-
mation. This  task  of  translating  has  not  been  a  simple  one :
proof  is  that  the  attempt  has  not  been  made  before  this.
The  style  of  al-Baladhuri  is  often  cryptic  and  unintelligible.
This  is  perhaps  due  to  the  fact  that  the  work,  as  it  has
reached  us,  is  a  shortened  edition  of  a  much  larger  one


vj  FOREWORD

which,  though  existent  up  to  the  seventeenth  century,  has
not  been  found  in  any  of  the  collections  of  manuscripts  to
which  we  have  access.  In  its  present  form,  the  work  men-
tions often  men  and  matters  that  probably  were  treated  of
in  the  longer  recension,  but  of  which  now  we  know  nothing.
Dr.  Hitti's  translation  is,  therefore,  in  a  certain  sense  also,
a  commentary  and  an  exposition.  As  such,  I  trust  that  it
will  be  found  useful  to  Orientalists  as  well  as  to  students  of
history.  His  fine  sense  for  the  niceties  of  Arabic  expres-
sion has  often  enabled  him  to  get  through  a  thicket  that  is
impenetrable  to  us  Westerners.

Richard  Gottheil.
Columbia  University,  January,  1916.


CONTENTS

PAGE

Foreword

Introduction

Arabic  Historiography  with  Special  Reference  to  al-Baladhuri. i

PART  I— ARABIA
Chapter  I

AI-Madinah 15

Chapter  II

The  Possessions  of  the  banu-an-Nadir 34

Chapter  III

The  Possessions  of  the  banu-Kuraizah 40

Chapter  IV

Khaibar 42

Chapter  V

Fadak So

Chapter  VI

Wadi-1-Kura  and  Taima'  57

Chapter  VII

Makkah 6b

Chapter  VIII

The  Wells  of  Makkah 77

Chapter  IX

The  Floods  in  Makkah 82

Chapter  X

At-Ta'if 85

Chapter  XI

Tabalah  and  Jurash 91

Chapter  XII

Tabuk,  Ailah,  Adhruh,  Makna  and  al-Jarba'  92

Chapter  XIII

Dumat  al-Jandal 95

vii


viii  CONTENTS

PAGE

Chapter  XIV

The  Capitulation  of  Naj  ran  98

Chapter  XV

Al-Yaman  106

Chapter  XVI

'Uman 116

Chapter  XVII

Al-Bahrain 120

Chapter  XVIII

Al-Yamamah 132

Chapter  XIX

The  Apostasy  of  the  Arabs  in  the  Caliphate  of  abu-Bakr  as-
Siddik 143

Chapter  XX

The  Apostasy  of  the  banu-Wali'ah  and  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  ibn-

Ma'dikarib  ibn-Mu'awiyah-1-Kindi  153

Chapter  XXI

Al-Aswad  al-'Ansi  and  those  in  al-Yaman  who  Apostatized
with  him  159

PART  II— SYRIA
Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Syria 165

Chapter  II

The  Advance  of  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  on  Syria  and  the  Places

he  Reduced  on  his  Way 169

Chapter  III

The  Conquest  of  Busra 173

Chapter  IV

The  Battle  of  Ajnadin  (or  Ajnadain) 174

Chapter  V

The  Battle  of  Fihl  in  the  Province  of  the  Jordan  176

Chapter  VI

The  Province  of  the  Jordan  178

Chapter  VII

The  Battle  of  Marj  as-Suffar 182

Chapter  VIII

The  Conquest  of  Damascus  and  its  Province 186

Chapter  IX

tfims 200


CONTENTS  ix

PAGE

Chapter  X

The  Battle  of  al-Yarmuk  207

Chapter  XI

Palestine 213

Chapter  XII

The  Province  of  Kinnasrin  and  the  Cities  called  al-'Awasim. . .  223

Chapter  XIII

Cyprus 235

Chapter  XIV

The Samaritans 244

Chapter  XV

Al-Jarajimah 246

Chapter  XVI

The  Frontier  Fortresses  of  Syria 253

PART  III— MESOPOTAMIA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Mesopotamia  [al-Jazirah] 269

Chapter  II

The  Christians  of  the  banu-Taghlib  ibn- Wa'il 284

Chapter  III

The  Fortifications  of  the  Mesopotamian  Frontier 287

Chapter  IV

Arabic  made  the  Language  of  the  State  Registers  301

PART  IV— ARMENIA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Armenia 3<>5

PART  V— NORTHERN  AFRICA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Egypt  and  al-Maghrib  [Mauritania]  335

Chapter  II

The  Conquest  of  Alexandria 34^

Chapter  III

The  Conquest  of  Barkah  and  Zawilah 352

Chapter  IV

The  Conquest  of  Tripoli  355


x  CONTENTS

PAGE

Chapter  V

The  Conquest  of  Ifrikiyah  356

Chapter  VI

The  Conquest  of  Tanjah  [Tangiers]  362


PART  VI— ANDALUSIA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Andalusia 3^5


PART  VII— ISLANDS  IN  THE  SEA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  Certain  Islands  in  the  Sea 375


PART  VIII— NUBIA

Chapter  I

Terms  made  with  Nubia 379

Chapter  II

The  Karatis  383

PART  IX— AL-TRAK  AND  PERSIA

Chapter  I

The  Conquest  of  as-Sawad 387

The  Caliphate  of  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik.

Chapter  II

The  Caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab 401

Chapter  III

The  Battle  of  Kuss  an-Natif,  or  the  Battle  of  al-Jisr 403

Chapter  IV

The  Battle  of  Mihran  or  an-Nukhailah  4°5

Chapter  V

The  Battle  of  al-Kadisiyah  409

Chapter  VI

The  Conquest  of  al-Mada'in 4X7

Chapter  VII

The  Battle  of  Jaliila'  420

Chapter  VIII

The  Founding  of  al-Kiifah  434


CONTENTS


XI

PAGE


Chapter  IX

Wasit  al-'Irak  449

Chapter  X

Al-Bata'ih 453

Chapter  XI

Madinat  as-Salam 457

Chapter  XII

Arabic  made  the  Language  of  the  Register 465

PART  X— MEDIA  [AL-JIBAL]
Chapter  I

IJulwan 469

Chapter  II

The  Conquest  of  Nihawand  471

Chapter  III

Ad-Dinawar,  Masabadhan  and  Mihrijankadhaf 478

Chapter  IV

The  Conquest  of  Hamadhan  481

Chapter  V

Kumm,  Kashan  and  Isbahan  485

Chapter  VI

The  Death  of  Yazdajird  ibn-Shahriyar  ibn-Kisra  ibn-Abarwiz
ibn-Hurmuz  ibn-Anushirwan  490

Index  495

Errata 517


INTRODUCTION

Arabic  Historiography  with  Special  Reference  to

al-Baladhuri

Although  rudimentary  elements  of  historiography  can
be  traced  back  to  the  description  of  the  "  days  ",  i.  e.,  the
battles  between  the  tribes,  and  such  stories  as  the  "  Ma'rib
dam  ",  "  the  owners  of  the  elephant  "  and  the  digging  of  the
"  Zamzam  well  " — all  of  pre-Islamic  antiquity — ,  yet  Arabic
historical  writing,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  is  a  branch
of  Islamic  literature.  Interest  in  Muhammad  necessitated
the  compilation  of  traditions  (Ar.  hadith)  relating  to  the
life  and  campaigns  of  the  Prophet  and  his  companions.  The
communistic  theocracy  of  warriors  under  the  early  caliphs,
and  particularly  'Umar's  system  of  assigning  state  pensions
to  Moslems  according  to  their  kinship  to  the  Prophet,  gave
impetus  to  the  study  of  genealogy  in  which  even  pagan
Arabs,  who  attached  special  importance  to  descent,  were
interested.  The  elucidation  of  passages  in  poetry,  one  of
the  earliest  and  most  fully-developed  modes  of  expression
among  the  Arabs,  and  the  necessity  of  determining  persons
and  places  referred  to  in  their  religious  literature  made  phil-
ologists apply  themselves  to  historical  research.  The  three
sources  of  Arabian  history  therefore  are :  ( I )  pre-Islamic
stories,  (2)  traditions  relative  to  the  life  and  campaigns  of
the  Prophet  and  the  companions,  and  (3)  genealogical  lists
and  poetical  compositions.  The  earliest  books  of  history
are:  biography  (sirah),  books  of  campaigns  {maghazi),
and  books  of  genealogy  and  classes (ansab  wa-tabakdt) .


2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  domains  of  theology,  law  and  history  in  their  early  rise
overlap  and  are  not  sharply  defined  from  one  another.

No  student  of  Arabic  literature  fails  to  be  impressed  with
the  fact  that  the  bearers  of  the  torch  of  learning  among  the
Arabs  were  in  most  cases  of  foreign  and  particularly  of  Per-
sian stock.  This  is  to  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  public
opinion  considered  it  contemptible  for  the  Arab  to  busy
himself  with  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  to  the  neglect  of  the
noble  art  of  warring.  To  this  general  tendency,  however,
studying  anecdotes,  transmitting  traditions,  and  remember-
ing stories — especially  if  they  commemorated  the  deeds  of
heroes,  orators  and  poets,  formed  a  conspicuous  example.
We  read  in  al-Mas'udi  '  that  Mu'awiyah  the  founder  of  the
Umaiyad  dynasty  "  devoted  one-third  of  the  night  to  the
reading  of  the  news  and  battles  of  the  Arabs  and  non-
Arabs."  We  also  read  in  al-Baydn  2  that  al-Mansur  the
Abbasid  caliph  after  long  hesitation  decided  to  put  abu-Mus-
lim  al-Khurasani  to  death  as  a  result  of  hearing  an  anec-
dote about  Sapor  the  Persian  king.  One  of  the  favorite
sayings  in  early  Islam  was  the  following  found  in
al-'Ikd  al-Farid  z :  "  For  kings  the  study  of  genealogy  and
histories,  for  warriors  the  study  of  battles  and  biography,
and  for  merchants  the  study  of  writing  and  arithmetic."

The  chief  source  from  which  history  writing  flowed  was
tradition  (hadith).  It  was  a  pious  custom  that  when  Mos-
lems met,  one  should  ask  for  news  {hadith),  and  the  other
should  relate  a  saying  or  anecdote  of  Muhammad.  Each
event  is  related  in  words  of  eyewitnesses  or  contemporaries
and  transmitted  to  the  final  narrator  through  a  chain  of  in-
termediate reporters. The  authenticity  of  the  reported  fact

1  Vol.  v,  p.  77,  Paris,  1869.

'al-Jahiz,  vol.  ii,  pp.  154-155,  Cairo,  1313  A.  H.

3  Vol.  i,  p.  198,  Cairo,  1293  A.  H.


ARABIC  HISTORIOGRAPHY  .

depends  on  ( i )  the  continuity  of  the  chain  and  (2)  the  con-
fidence in  each  reporter.  Thus  would  al-Baladhuri  start
his  narrative  regarding  the  campaign  of  the  Prophet  against
Najran:  *  "  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  related  to  me,  that  'Ab-
dallah  ibn-Salih  related  to  him,  on  the  authority  of  al-Laith
ibn-Sa'd,  on  the  authority  of  Yunus  ibn-Ziyad  al-Aili,  on
the  authority  of  az-Zuhri,  who  said.  .  .  ."

This  form  of  historic  composition  is  unique  in  the  case
of  the  Arabs  and  meets  the  most  essential  requirements  of
modern  historiography,  namely,  "  back  to  the  source  "  and
"  trace  the  line  of  authorities."  The  system,  however,  has
its  drawbacks  in  that  it  crystallized  the  record  of  events  and
rendered  deviation  from  the  trodden  path  sacrilegious.
Aside  from  the  use  of  judgment  in  the  choice  of  isndd —
the  series  of  authorities — the  Arabian  authors  exercised
very  little  power  of  analysis,  criticism,  comparison  or  infer-
ence, their  golden  rule  being  "  what  has  been  once  well  said
need  not  be  told  again."  At-Tabari,  in  the  introduction  to
his  great  work,  gives  expression  to  that  principle,  where,
conscious  of  the  exception  that  many  of  his  readers  might
take  to  some  of  his  reports,  he  pleads,2  "  We  only  transmit
to  others  what  has  been  transmitted  to  us."

Another  way  of  handling  traditions  is  that  in  which  the
compiler  combines  different  traditions  into  one  continuous
whole,  prefixing  a  statement  of  his  authorities  or  contenting
himself  by  interrupting  the  narrative,  wherever  need  may
be,  by  citing  the  particular  authority.  While  al-Baladhuri
is  an  exponent  of  the  former  type  and  spares  no  pains  in
basing  every  fact,  whenever  possible,  on  an  independent
isndd,  yet  he  sometimes  resorts  to  the  other  method  as  he
himself  acknowledges  in  the  first  lines  of  his  Futuh  (p.  15)  :

1  Futuh  al-Bulddn,  p.  98.

'Vol.  i,  p.  7,  ed.  De  Goeje,  Leiden.  1879-1881.


4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

"  I  have  been  informed  by  certain  men  learned  in  tradition,
biography  and  the  conquest  of  the  lands  whose  narratives  I
transmitted,  abridged  and  pieced  up  together  into  one
whole,"  etc.  Where  his  store  of  authorities  fails  him,  al-
Baladhuri  introduces  his  narratives  by  "  they  said,"  or  "he
said,"  or  "  it  was  said."

On  a  geographical  basis,  Moslem  tradition  may  be  grouped
into  two  categories :  ( I )  that  of  al-Madinah  as  represented
by  Muhammad  ibn-Ishak  and  al-YVakidi,  and  (2)  that  of
al-Trak.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  al-Baladhuri  lived
in  Baghdad,  the  tradition  of  al-Madinah,  which  for  obvious
reasons  is  more  reliable  than  that  of  al-'Irak,  forms  the
basis  of  his  works.

History,  whose  domain  in  the  time  of  the  first  four
caliphs  was  not  sharply  denned,  made  its  full  appearance,
and  was  recorded  for  the  first  time  under  the  sway  of  the
Umaiyads.  According  to  al-Fihrist,1  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-
Sufyan  2  summoned  from  al-Yaman  one,  'Abid  ibn-Shar-
yah,  and  asked  him  about  past  events,  histories  of  the  Arabs
and  foreign  kings  and  "  ordered  that  the  answers  be  re-
corded." This  "  book  of  the  kings  and  past  events,"  how-
ever, is  lost.

The  early  favorite  forms  of  writing  history  were  biog-
raphy, genealogy  and  description  of  campaigns.  The  oldest
biography  is  Sirat  Rasul  Allah  written  for  al-Mansur  by
ibn-Ishak  (d.  151/767).  This  we  do  not  possess  in  its
original  form  but  only  in  the  recension  of  ibn-Hisham
(d.  213/834).  Genealogy  borders  on  biography  and,  call-
ing for  elucidation,  both  lead  on  to  history.  Genealogical
books  were  first  written  in  the  Umaiyad  period.  The  genea-
logical list  served  as  an  army  roll. The  study  of  tradition

1  p.  89,  ed.  Fliigel.  *  caliph  41-60/661-680.


ARABIC  HISTORIOGRAPHY  5

necessitated  the  study  of  the  life  and  character  of  the  re-
porter on  whom  the  authenticity  of  the  report  depends.
Thus  the  reporters  were  classified  into  classes  (tabakdt),.
The  most  famous  writer  of  tabakdt  was  ibn-Sa'd  (d.  230),
the  secretary  of  al-Wakidi  and  the  compiler  of  Kitdb  at-
Tabakdt  al-Kablr.

Campaigns  playing  an  important  role  in  the  life  of  Mu-
hammad and  the  early  caliphs  soon  began  to  assert  their
claim  for  special  attention  and  were  treated  in  special  books.
Besides,  the  necessity  of  recording  and  studying  the  cam-
paigns arose  from  the  fact  that  in  levying  a  tax  (khardj)  on
the  conquered  land,  those  in  authority  were  first  confronted
with  the  task  of  determining  whether  it  was  taken  "  by
peace  ",  "  by  capitulation  ",  or  "  by  force  ",  and  what  the
terms  in  each  case  were.  This  gave  rise  to  many  books  on
campaigns  (maghdzi),  one  of  the  oldest  of  which  is  al-
Wakidi's  (d.  207/822).  Some  books  were  issued  treating
of  the  conquest  of  one  city,  most  of  which  books  have  been
lost.  Given  a  number  of  books  on  the  conquest  of  different
cities,  the  next  step  would  be  to  compile  them  into  one  whole.
That  step  was  taken  by  al-Baladhuri — the  last  great  his-
torian of  Moslem  campaigns.

Before  the  Abbasid  period  no  books  on  general  history
were  attempted.  In  the  golden  age  of  the  Abbasid  caliphate
and  under  Persian  influence,  historiography  flourished  and
developed  a  new  form  of  composition.  The  translation  of
such  books  as  the  Pehlevi  Khuday-Nama  by  ibn-al-Mu-
kaffa'  into  the  Arabic  Kitdb  al-Muluk,  coupled  with  the  fact
that  the  Moslem  commonwealth  was  now  richly  recruited
by  Persian  converts,  made  the  idea  of  chronological  collo-
cation of  events,  for  which  the  school  of  al-Madinah  had
paved  the  way,  develop  to  the  plan  of  a  complete  series  of
annals.  The  first  to  undertake  such  a  history  was  at-Tabari.
Thus  the  historian  who  at  the  rise  of  Islam  was  a  tradition-


6  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

ist  or  reporter  becomes  now  a  chronicler.  The  annalistic
method  of  at-Tabari  was  followed  by  ibn-al-Athir  and  abu-
l-Fida.

Al-Mas'udi  inaugurated  a  new  system  of  writing  history.
Instead  of  grouping  events  around  years  as  center,  he
grouped  them  around  kings,  dynasties  and  races.  His  sys-
tem was  followed  among  others  by  ibn-Khaldun,  but  did
not  win  so  much  favor  as  that  of  at-Tabari.

The  first  record  we  have  regarding  the  life  of  al-Balad-
huri  is  that  of  al-Fihrist.1  Other  sources  for  his  life  are
Yakut,  Mu'jam  al-Udaba,  (pp.  127-132),2  and  al-Kutubi,
Fawdt  al-Wafaydt  (Vol.  I,  pp.  8-9,  Bulak,  1283).  Ibn-
Khallikan  refers  to  him  on  more  than  one  occasion  but  does
not  give  his  biography.3  From  these  sources  we  learn  that
Ahmad  ibn-Yahya  ibn-Jabir  al-Baladhuri  was  a  native  of
Baghdad  descended  from  Persian  stock.  His  grandfather,
Jabir,  was  secretary  to  al-Khasib,  minister  of  the  finances  of
Egypt  under  the  caliph  ar-Rashid.  Ahmad  was  an  intimate
friend  of  the  caliphs  al-Mutawakkil  and  al-Musta'in  and
tutored  'Abdallah,  the  brilliant  son  of  al-Mu'tazz.  He  dis-
tinguished himself  in  poetry — especially  satires,  tradition  and
genealogy.  The  year  279/892  saw  his  death,  mentally  de-
ranged as  a  result  of  drinking  the  juice  of  the  anacardia
(balddhur)  ;  hence  his  surname  al-Baladhuri.  Besides  writing
Futiih  al-Bulddn,  which  is  a  digest  of  a  larger  work  that
has  been  lost,  he  wrote  Ansdb  al-Ashrdf,*  of  which  only  two
volumes  are  preserved,  one  in  the  Schefer  collection  of  the

'p.  113,  ed.  Fliigel.

1  Leiden,  1907,  ed.  Margoliouth.

•See  also de  Goeje's introduction to al-Baladhuri; and Hamaker,
Specimen  Catalugi,  p.  7  seq.

*  Lineage  of  Nobles. See  Hajji  Khalifah,  vol.  i,  pp.  455  and  274,  ed.
Fliigel,  Leipzig,  1835.


ARABIC  HISTORIOGRAPHY  j

Bibliotheque  Nationale,1  and  the  other  has  been  autographed
by  Ahlwardt.2  Al-Mas'udi 3  quotes  al-Baladhuri's  ar-Radd-
'ala  ash-Shu' ubiyah  (Refutation  of  ash-Shu'ubiyah),4  which
book  is  also  lost.

Of  the  works  of  al-Baladhuri  the  one  that  claims  our
special  attention  is  Futiih  al-Buldan.5  The  book  shares  with
other  books  of  Arabic  history  the  advantage  of  tracing
the  report  back  to  the  source.  Being  a  synopsis  of  a  larger
work,  its  style  is  characterized  by  condensation  whereby  it
gains  in  conciseness  but  loses  in  artistic  effect  and  clear-
ness. Certain  passages  are  mutilated  and  ambiguous.  It
is  free  from  exaggeration  and  the  flaws  of  imagination.
Throughout  the  work  the  sincere  attempt  of  the  author  to
get  to  the  fact  as  it  happened  and  to  record  it  as  it  reached
him  is  felt.  The  chapters  on  colonization,  soldier's  pay,
land  tax.  coinage  and  the  like  make  it  especially  valuable.

The  book  does  not  escape  the  weaknesses  common  to
Arabian  histories.  The  "  ipse  dixit "  which  was  a  source
of  strength  was  also  a  source  of  weakness.  Once  the  words
supposed  to  have  been  uttered  by  a  contemporary  or  eye-
witness are  ascertained,  the  author  feels  his  duty  fulfilled,
and  his  function  as  a  historian  degenerates  into  that  of  a
reporter.  The  personal  equation  is  not  only  reduced  but
the  personality  of  the  author  is  almost  eliminated,  appear-
ing only  as  a  recipient  of  a  tradition.  Scarcely  an  opinion
or  remark  is  made.  The  intellect  is  not  brought  to  bear  on
the  data.

>De  Goeje,  ZDMG,  XXXVIII,  382-406.

2Greifswald,  1883. Cf.  Noldeke,  GGA,  1883,  P-  1006  seq.;  Thorbecke,
Lbl.  Or.  Phil.,  vol.  i,  pp.  155-156.

'Vol.  iii,  pp.  109-110.

*  Goldziher,  Muhammedanische  Studien,  vol.  i,  p.  166.

5  ed.  De  Goeje,  Leiden,  1866. See  Noldeke,  GGA,  1863,  1341-1349.


8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

A  weak  characteristic  of  Arabic  historians  is  their  utter
disregard  of  the  social  side  of  national  life.  Political  his-
tory to  them  is  history  par  excellence.  It  should,  however,
be  said,  to  the  credit  of  al-Baladhuri,  that  while  from  a
modern  standpoint  he  is  defective  in  that  respect,  still  he
stands  superior  to  other  historians.

As  one  reads  Futuh  al-Bulddn  and  is  struck  by  the  fact
that  a  long  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  "  digging  of  the  wells
of  Makkah  "/  whereas  the  conquest  of  Tripoli,  Africa,  is
dismissed  with  a  few  words,2  he  cannot  help  feeling  his  sense
of  proportion  suffer.  Most  of  the  two  chapters  entitled
"  The  Founding  of  al-Kufah  "  z  and  "  of  al-Basrah  "  4  are
devoted  to  the  explanation  of  the  names  given  to  baths,
canals  and  castles  and  only  a  small  part  relates  to  actual
colonization.

One  might  also  add  that  Arabic  historians  were  not
very  sensitive  on  the  question  of  indecency  of  language.
In  general  the  language  of  Futuh  is  clean,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  case  of  al-Mughirah,  the  governor  of  al-Basrah
under  'Umar."

According  to  Haji  Khalfa,6  the  first  writers  on  biography
and  campaigns  were,  among  others,  'Urwah  ibn-az-Zubair
( d.  93)  and  Wahb  ibn-Munabbih  (d.  114)  ;  and  we  read7
that  Muhammad  ibn-Muslim  az-Zuhri  wrote  a  book  of  cam-
paigns. These  works  are  all  lost  and  the  first  biography
we  have  is  that  of  ibn-Hisham  (d.  213)  based  on  ibn-
Uhak  (d.  151).  Az-Zubair  and  az-Zuhri,  as  well  as  ibn -
Ishak,  are  among  the  sources  of  al-Baladhuri.

That  in  most  cases  the  same  tradition  that  underlies  the

1  pp.  77-82.  2  pp.  355-


8  pp.  344-345  in  De  Goeje's  edition.  "Vol.  v,  p.  646.
1  In  vol.  v,  pp.  154  and  647.


ARABIC  HISTORIOGRAPHY  g

life  of  Muhammad  according  to  ibn-Hisham  is  made  use
of  by  al-Baladhuri  in  the  first  chapters  of  his  Futuh  is  made
evident  by  a  comparison  of  the  chapters  on  the  banu-an-
Nadir,  Khaibar  and  Tabuk.  *  Al-Baladhuri  makes  no  mention
of  ibn-Hisham  but  quotes  ibn-Ishak  eleven  times.  The  isndd
in  Baladhuri  being  longer,  it  might  be  conjectured  that  he
did  not  get  his  material  at  first  hand  from  ibn-Ishak's  work
but  through  subsequent  reporters.  Al-Mada'ini  lived  from
135-215  (753-830).  He  wrote  a  "  history  of  the  caliphs  "
and  a  book  of  "  campaigns  ",  both  of  which  are  lost  and
are  known  only  by  excerpts  through  al-Baladhuri,  at-Tabari
and  Yakut.  Of  these,  al-Baladhuri  alone  has  over  forty
citations  from  him.

Al-Wakidi  (d.  207/823)  wrote  28  books  recorded  in  al-
Fihrist,2  only  a  few  of  which  have  come  down  to  us.  Hav-
ing lived  at  Baghdad  his  works  were  certainly  accessible  to
al-Baladhuri,  who  quotes  him  on  80  different  occasions  and
more  than  any  other  source.  Most  of  the  quotations  are
made  through  ibn-Sa'd,  the  secretary  of  al-Wakidi,  and  one
of  al-Baladhuri 's  teachers.  A  comparison  between  the  cam-
paigns against  banu-an-Nadir  s  and  banu-Kuraizah  4  in  al-
Baladhuri,  and  the  corresponding  ones  in  al-Wakidi's
Kitdb  al-Maghazi?  shows  many  points  of  contact  but  no
absolute  interdependence.

Ibn-Sa'd  (d.  230)  being  the  disciple  of  al-Wakidi  and  the
professor  of  al-Baladhuri  acted  as  a  connecting  link  between
the  two.  In  his  Futuh,  al-Baladhuri  has  48  citations  from
him,  many  of  which  were  communicated  by  word  of  mouth
and  were  recorded  verbatim  by  al-Baladhuri. In  his  book

1  Cf.  Hisham,  p.  652  and  Baladhuri,  p.  34;  Hisham,  p.  779  and  Balad-
huri, p.  42.

2  p.  99-  3  P-  34-
4  p.  40.

3  PP-  353  and  371,  ed.  von  Kremer,  Calcutta,  1856.


I0  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

at-Tabakat  (the  Book  of  Classes),  many  striking  similari-
ties to  the  traditions  of  al-Baladhuri  are  noticed.

Ad-Dinawari  (d.  282/896)  was  another  contemporary  of
al-Baladhuri.  He  wrote  a  number  of  books  of  which  only
one  of  importance  has  come  down  to  us,  i.  e.,  al-Akhbar  at-
Tiwal.1  Contrary  to  al-Baladhuri,  al-'Irak  tradition  is  the
basis  of  his  work.  It  is  probable  that  neither  of  the  two
authors  was  familiar  with  the  work  of  the  other.

In  addition  to  these,  al-Baladhuri  quotes  many  other  au-
thorities of  whom  the  most  favorite  ones  are :  Hammad
ibn-Salamah,  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham,  'Amir  ash-Sha'bi,  Suf-
yan  ibn-Sa'id  ath-Thauri,  'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  an-Nakid
and  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi,  most  of  whose  works  are  either
unknown  to  us  or  have  entirely  disappeared.

The  most  illustrious  writer  on  history  after  al-Baladhuri
was  at-Tabari  (d.  310).  According  to  al-Fihrist  and  ibn-
Khallikan.  he  traveled  in  Egypt,  Syria  and  al-'Irak  in  quest
of  learning  and  died  in  Baghdad.  At-Tabari  makes  no
mention  of  al-Baladhuri.

In  the  introduction  to  his  remarkable  work,  Muruj  adh-
Dhahab,  al-Mas'udi  (d.  346)  cites  scores  of  books  from
which  he  drew  his  material,  and  among  which  he  mentions
al-Baladhuri's  paying  it  a  high  tribute  in  these  words.  "  We
know  of  no  better  work  on  the  history  of  the  Moslem
conquests  ".2

Not  only  did  later  historians  draw  freely  from  al-Bala-
dhuri but  subsequent  geographers  used  him  extensively  as  a
source.  The  remarkable  work  of  Yakut,  Mu'jam  al-BuI-
ddn,  reproduces  a  great  part  of  the  book.  Mukaddasi  quotes
him,3  and  so  al-Hamadhani,4  and  al-Mas'udi.8

1  ed.  Vladimir  Guirgass,  Leiden,  1888.

'al-Mas'udi,  p.  14,  Paris,  1861.

3  Ahsan  at-Takas'im,  313.

*  Kitab  a!-BuIddn,  303,  321.  s  Kitab  at-Tonbih,  358,  360.


ARABIC  HISTORIOGRAPHY  x  j

The  above-sketched  attempt  to  view  al-Baladhuri  in  his
historic  setting  warrants  the  conclusion  that  the  tradition
recorded  by  him  was  mostly  communicated  to  him  by  word
of  mouth  and  partly  through  books  that  have  mostly  been
lost,  and  that  it  was  a  source  for  al-Mas'udi  and  Yakut,  and
through  them  for  many  subsequent  Arabic  historians  and
geographers.


PART  I
ARABIA


CHAPTER  I
Al-Madinah

In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the
merciful,  whose  help  i  solicit!

The  Prophet  in  al-Madinah.  Says  Ahmad  ibn-Yahya
ibn-Jabir : —

1  have  been  informed  by  certain  men  learned  in  tradition,
biography,  and  the  conquest  of  the  lands,  whose  narratives
I  transmitted,  abridged  and  pieced  up  together  into  one
whole,  that  when  the  Messenger  of  Allah  emigrated  from
Makkah  to  al-Madinah  he  was  entertained  as  the  guest  of
Kalthum  ibn-Hidm  ibn-Amru'i-1-Kais  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-
Zaid  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-Umaiyah  ibn-Zaid  ibn-Malik  ibn-'Auf
ibn-'Amr  ibn-'Auf  ibn-Malik  ibn-al-Aus  1  in  Kuba'.2  So
much,  however,  of  his  discourse  was  carried  on  in  the  home
of  Sa'd  ibn-Khaithamah  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-Malik  of  [the
tribe  of]  banu-as-Salim  ibn-Amru'i-1-Kais  ibn-Malik  ibn-al-
Aus  that  some  thought  he  was  the  guest  of  the  latter.3

Kuba'  Mosque.  Of  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet,  the
early  Emigrants  together  with  those  of  the  Ansdr  *  who
had  joined  him  had  already  built  a  mosque  at  Kuba'  to  pray
in,  prayer  at  that  time  being  directed  towards  Bait-al-
Makdis  [Jerusalem]. Now,  when  the  Prophet  arrived  in

J-Ibn-Hajar,  Kitdb  al-Isabah,  vol.  iii,  pp.  613-614.

2  A  suburb  of  al-Madinah;  see  Yakut,  Mu'jam  al-Buldan,  vol.  iv,
pp.  23-24.

3  Ibn-Hisham,  Sirat  Rasul  Allah,  p.  334.

*The  Helpers — originally  applied  to  the  early  converts  of  al-Madinah.

15


j6  the  origins  of  the  islamic  state

Kuba',  he  led  them  in  prayer  in  it.  That  is  why  the  people
of  Kuba'  say  that  it  is  the  one  meant  by  Allah  when  he
says :  "  There  is  a  mosque  founded  from  its  first  day  in
piety.  More  worthy  that  thou  enter  therein."  *  Others
report  that  the  "  mosque  founded  in  piety  "  is  that  of  the
Prophet  [in  al-Madinah].

Abu- Amir  ar-Rdhib.  'AfTan  ibn-Muslim  as-Saffar  from
'Urwah  3  who  gave  the  following  explanation  to  the  text :
"  There  are  some  who  have  built  a  mosque  for  mischief  and
for  infidelity,  and  to  disunite  the  '  Believers,'  and  in  ex-
pectation of  him  who,  in  time  past,  warred  against  Allah
and  his  Messenger  " : — The  mosque  of  Kuba'  was  built  by
Sa'd  ibn-Khaithamah  and  its  site  was  owned  by  Labbah  z
where  she  used  to  tie  up  her  donkey.  The  dissenters  there-
fore said :  "  Should  we  pray  on  a  spot  where  Labbah  used
to  tie  up  her  donkey  ?  Never.  Rather  shall  we  select  for  our-
selves some  other  place  for  prayer  until  abu-'Amir  *  comes
and  leads  our  service."  Now,  abu-'Amir  had  fled  from  the
face  of  Allah  and  his  Prophet  to  Makkah  and  thence  to
Syria  where  he  was  converted  to  Christianity.  Hence  the
text  revealed  by  Allah :  "  There  are  some  who  have  built  a
mosque  for  mischief  and  for  infidelity  and  to  disunite  the
'  Believers,'  and  in  expectation  of  him  who,  in  time  past,
warred  against  Allah  and  his  Messenger  " — referring  to
abu-'Amir.

Rauh  ibn-'Abd-al-Mu'min  al-Makri  from  Sa'id  ibn-
Jubair  : — Banu-'Amr  ibn-'Auf  erected  a  mosque  in  which  the

1  Koran,  9:  109.

1  The  series  of  authorities  introducing  a  tradition  have  1  een  cut
short  throughout  the  translation,  only  the  first  and  last  authorities
being  mentioned.

s"Lajja"  in  F.  Wustenfeld,  Geshichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  131.

*  Ibn-Hisham,  pp.  561-562;  and  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  53.


AL-MADINAH  jy

Prophet  led  them  in  prayer.  This  aroused  the  jealousy  of
their  brothers  banu-Ghanm  ibn-'Auf  who  said,  "  If  we,
too,  could  erect  a  mosque  and  invite  the  Prophet  to  pray  in
is  as  he  prayed  in  our  friends' !  Abu-'Amir,  too,  may  pass
here  on  his  way  from  Syria  and  lead  us  in  prayer."  Ac-
cordingly, they  erected  a  mosque  and  sent  an  invitation  to
the  Prophet  to  come  and  pray  in  it.  But  no  sooner  had
the  Prophet  got  up  to  start,  than  the  following  text  was
revealed  to  him :  "  There  are  some  who  have  built  a  mosque
for  mischief  and  for  infidelity  and  to  disunite  the  'Believers,'
and  in  expectation  of  him  who,  in  time  past,  warred  against
Allah  and  his  Messenger,"  the  one  meant  being  abu-'Amir,
"  never  set  thou  foot  in  it.  There  is  a  mosque  founded
from  its  first  day  in  piety.  More  worthy  it  is  that  thou
enter  therein.  Therein  are  men  who  aspire  to  purity  and
Allah  loveth  the  purified.  Which  of  the  two  is  best?  He
who  hath  founded  his  building  on  the  fear  of  Allah  and  the
desire  to  please  him,"  etc.,  referring  to  the  mosque  of  Kuba'.

Muhammad  ibn-Hatim  ibn-Maimun  from  al-Hasan : —
When  the  text,  "  Therein  are  men  who  aspire  to  purity"
was  revealed,  the  Prophet  communicated  with  those  who
prayed  in  the  mosque  of  Kuba'  asking  about  the  meaning  of
the  purity  mentioned  in  connection  with  their  name,  and
they  replied,  "  We,  Prophet  of  Allah,  wash  after  voiding
excrement  and  urine."

'  The  mosque  founded  in  piety?'  Muhammad  ibn-
Hatim  from  'Amir : — Some  of  the  people  of  Kuba'  used  to
wash  with  water  the  place  of  exit  of  the  excrement.1  Hence
the  text,  "  They  aspire  to  purity."

'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  an-Nakid  and  Ahmad  ibn-Hisham
from  Sahl  ibn-Sa'd : — Two  men  in  the  time  of  the  Prophet
disagreed  regarding  the  "  mosque  founded  in  piety,"  the  one

1  Cf.  az-Zamakhshari,  Kashshaf,  vol.  i,  p.  564  (ed.  Lees).


iS  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

contending  it  was  the  Prophet's  mosque,  the  other,  the
Kuba'  mosque.  They  finally  came  and  asked  the  Prophet
to  which  he  replied,  "  It  is  this  mosque  of  mine."  *

'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  from  ibn-'Umar : — The  "  mosque
founded  in  piety  "  is  the  mosque  of  the  Prophet.

Muhammad  ibn-Hatim  from  Ubai  ibn-Ka'b : — In  answer
to  a  question  directed  to  the  Prophet  regarding  the  "  mosque
founded  in  piety,"  the  Prophet  replied :  "  It  is  this  my
mosque."

Hudbah  ibn-Khalid  from  Sa'id  ibn-al-Musaivib  who  said
regarding  the  "  mosque  founded  in  piety  "  that  the  great
mosque  of  the  Prophet  is  the  one  meant.

A  tradition  to  the  same  effect  is  reported  by  'Ali  ibn-
'Abdallah  al-Madini  on  the  authority  of  Kharijah  ibn-Zaid
ibn-Thabit  and  by  'Affan  on  the  authority  of  Sa'id  ibn-al-
Musaiyib,  and  by  Muhammad  ibn-Hatim  ibn-Maimun  as-
Samin  on  the  authority  of  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-abi-Sa'id
al-Khudri's  father.

Kuba'  mosque  was  later  enlarged  and  added  to.  When
'Abdallah  ibn-'Umar  entered  it  for  prayer,  he  always  turned
his  face  to  the  "  polished  column  "  2 ;  and  that  was  the  place
where  the  Prophet  always  prayed.

The  Prophet  arrives  at  al-Madinah.  The  Prophet  spent
in  Kuba'  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and  Thursday,
riding  away  on  Friday  for  al-Madinah.  Friday  prayer  he
performed  in  a  mosque  erected  by  banu-Salim  ibn-'Auf  ibn-
'Amr  ibn-'Auf  ibn-al-Khazraj,  that  being  the  first  Friday  on
which  he  led  public  prayer.  Then  the  Prophet  passed  by
the  houses  of  the  Ansar  one  by  one  3  and  each  one  of  them
offered  to  entertain  him. He  kept  his  way,  however,  until

1  Baidawi,  Anwar  at-Tanzll,  vol.  i,  p.  401.
2Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  65.
3  Ibn-Hisham,  p.  336.


AL-MAD1NAH  jg

he  arrived  at  the  site  of  his  mosque  in  al-Madinah  where  his
camel  knelt.1  He  dismounted.  Then  came  abu-Aiyub
Khalid  ibn-Zaid  .  .  . 2  ibn-al-Khazraj  who  took  off  the  saddle
of  the  Prophet's  camel.  The  Prophet  took  up  his  abode  at
abu-Aiyub's.3  Certain  Khazrajis  invited  the  Prophet,  but
he  retorted,  "  Man  is  where  his  camel's  saddle  is."  He  re-
mained at  abu-Aiyub's  for  seven  months.  He  took  up  his
residence  there  after  [Friday-]  prayer,  one  month  since  his
departure  [from  Makkah].  The  Ansar  presented  to  the
Prophet  all  the  unoccupied  parts  of  their  lands,  saying,  "  O
Prophet  of  Allah,  take  our  own  dwellings  if  thou  wish."
But  he  said,  "No!"

The  mosque  of  the  Prophet.  Abu-Umamah  4  As'ad  ibn-
Zurarah  ibn-'Udas  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-Thaiabah  ibn-Ghanm
ibn-Malik  ibn-an-Najjar,  A/aHfr-in-chief,5  used  to  conduct
Friday  prayers  for  his  Moslem  followers  in  a  mosque  of  his
own  in  which  the  Prophet,  too,  used  to  pray.  The  Prophet,
thereafter,  requested  As'ad  to  sell  him  a  piece  of  land  con-
tiguous to  this  mosque.  The  land  was  in  the  hands  of  As'ad
but  belonged  to  two  orphans  in  his  custody  whose  names
were  Sahl  and  Suhail  sons  of  Rafi'  ibn-abi-'Amr  ibn-'A'idh
ibn-Tha'labah  ibn-Ghanm.6  As'ad  proposed  to  offer  it  to
the  Prophet  and  to  pay  its  price  to  the  orphans  himself.
But  the  Prophet  refused  and  paid  for  its  price  ten  dinars,7

1  Ibn-Sa'd,  Kitdb  at-Tabakat,  vol.  i1,  p.  160.

3  In  this  and  in  other  cases  to  come,  the  genealogical  table  has  been
cut  short  in  the  translation.

3  Ad-Diyarbakri,  al-Khamis,  vol.  i,  p.  386.

4  Ceschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  60.

5  Kakib  is  the  superintendent  of  a  people  who  takes  cognizance  of
their  actions  and  is  responsible  for  them;  ibn-Hajar,  vol.  i,  pp.  61-63.

6  Ibn-Hisham,  p.  503.

7  A  gold  coin  worth  about  ten  shillings.


20  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

which  money  he  secured  from  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik.  By  the
Prophet's  orders,  bricks  were  prepared  and  used  for  build-
ing the  mosque.  Its  foundations  were  laid  with  stones;
its  roof  was  covered  with  palm  branches;  and  its  columns
were  made  of  trunks  of  trees.1  When  abu-Bakr  became
caliph  he  introduced  no  changes  in  the  mosque.  When
'Umar  was  made  caliph  he  enlarged  it  and  asked  al-' Abbas
ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  to  sell  his  house  that  he  might  add  it
to  the  mosque.  A1-' Abbas  offered  the  house  as  a  gift  to
Allah  and  the  Moslems ;  and  'Umar  added  it  to  the  mosque.
In  his  caliphate,  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  reconstructed  the
mosque  with  stone  and  gypsum,  making  its  columns  of  stone,
and  its  roof  of  teak-wood.  'Uthman  also  added  to  the
mosque  and  carried  to  it  small  pebbles  from  al-'Akik.2  The
first  caliph  to  plant  in  it  maksurah  3  was  Marwan  ibn-al-
Hakam  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah  who  made  his  maksurah
of  carved  stones.  No  change  was  thereafter  introduced  in
the  mosque  until  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan
succeeded  his  father.  This  al-Walid  wrote  to  his  'amil  [lieu-
tenant, governor]  in  al-Madinah,  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz,
ordering  him  to  destroy  the  mosque  and  reconstruct  it.
Meanwhile,  he  forwarded  to  him  money,  mosaic,  marble,  and
eighty  Greek  and  Coptic  artisans  from  Syria  and  Egypt.
Accordingly,  the  'amil  rebuilt  it  and  added  to  it,  entrusting
the  supervision  of  its  work  and  the  expenditure  for  it  to
Salih  ibn-Kaisan,  a  freedman  of  Su'da,  a  freedmaid  of  the
family  of  Mu'aikib  ibn-abi-Fatimah  ad-Dausi.  This  took
place  in  the  year  87,  some  say  88. 4 After  this,  no  caliph

1  Al-Hamadliani,  Kitab  al-Buldan,  p.  24.

2  Hamadhani,  Kitab  al-Buldan,  p.  25.

3  See  JAOS.,  vol.  xxvii,  pp.  273-274,  Gottheil,  "a  distinguished  fam-
ily of  Fatimite  Cadis";  and  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  71.

*  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  73.


AL-MAD1NAH  21

made  changes  in  the  mosque  down  to  the  time  of  al-Mahdi's
caliphate.

According  to  al-Wakidi,  al-Mahdi  sent  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Shabib  al-Ghassani  and  another1  descended  from  'Umar
ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  to  al-Madinah  to  reconstruct  its  mosque
and  increase  it  in  size.  The  governor  of  al-Madinah  was
at  that  time  Ja'far  ibn-Sulaiman  ibn-'Ali.  It  took  these
two  one  year  to  carry  out  the  undertaking.  One  hundred
cubits  [Ar.  dhira']  were  added  to  the  rear,  making  its  length
300  cubits  and  its  width  200.

According  to  'Ali  ibn- Muhammad  al-Mada'ini,  al-Mahdi
appointed  Ja'far  ibn-  Sulaiman  to  the  governorship  of
Makkah,  al-Madinah  and  al-Yamamah.  Ja'far  enlarged  the
mosques  of  Makkah  and  al-Madinah,  the  work  in  the  latter
being  completed  in  the  year  162.  Al-Mahdi  had  visited
Makkah  before  the  pilgrimage  season,  in  the  year  [  1  ]6o,  and
ordered  that  the  mak surah  be  supplanted  and  that  it  be
put  on  the  same  level  with  the  mosque.

In  the  year  246,  caliph  Ja'far  al-Mutawakkil  ordered  that
the  mosque  of  al-Madinah  be  repaired.  Much  mosaic  was
subsequently  carried  to  it;  and  the  year  247  marked  the
completion  of  the  work.

'Amr  ibn-Hammad  ibn-abi-Hanifah  from  'A'ishah  : — The
Prophet  said :  "All  districts  or  cities  were  conquered  by
force,  but  al-Madinah  was  conquered  by  the  Koran."

The  inviolability  of  al-Madinah.  Shaiban  ibn-abi-
Shaibah-1-Ubulli  from  al-Hasan : —  The  Prophet  said:
"  Every  prophet  can  make  a  place  inviolable,  so  I  have  made
al-Madinah  inviolable  as  Abraham  had  made  Makkah.  Be-
tween its  two  Harrahs,2  its  herbage  shall  not  be  cut,  its  trees 8

1  'Abdallah  ibn-'Asim;  De  Goeje's  edition  of  Baladhuri,  p.  7,  note  b.

2  The  word  means  tracts  of  black  stones,  i.  e.,  the  volcanic  region  in
the  vicinity  of  al-Madinah.


22  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

shall  not  be  felled,1  nor  should  weapons  be  carried  in  it  for
fight.  He,  therefore,  who  does  that  or  harbors  in  his  home
one  who  has  done  so,  may  be  cursed  of  Allah  and  his
angels  and  all  men.  From  him  no  repentance  or  ransom
shall  be  accepted."

Rauh  ibn-'Abd-al-Mu'min  al-Basri-1-Makri  from  abu-
Hurairah  : — The  Prophet  said  :  "My  Lord,  Abraham  was  thy
servant  and  messenger,  and  so  am  I  thy  servant  and  mes-
senger. And  I  have  made  inviolable  all  that  lies  between
its  two  stony  tracts  as  Abraham  had  made  Makkah  inviol-
able." Abu-Hurairah  used  to  say:  "By  him  who  holds  my
life  in  his  hands,  even  if  I  should  find  the  deer  in  Batihan  2
I  would  not  care  for  them."

Shaiban  ibn-abi-Shaibah  from  Muhammad  ibn-Ziyad's
grandfather  (a  freedman  of  'Uthman  ibn-Maz'un  and  the
holder  of  a  piece  of  land  belonging  to  the  Maz'un  family  in
Harrah)  who  said: — "  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  with  his  robe
on  his  head  would  sometimes  call  on  me  at  midnight,
take  a  seat  and  converse  with  me.  I  would  then  bring  him
cucumbers  and  vegetables.  But  one  day  he  said :  '  Go  not :
I  have  made  thee  superintendent  of  this  place.  Let  no  one
beat  a  tree  with  a  stick  [that  its  leaves  may  fall]  or  cut  off
a  tree  (referring  to  the  trees  of  al-Madinah)  ;  and  if  thou
find  anyone  doing  it,  take  away  his  rope  and  ax.'  When
I  asked  him, '  Shall  I  take  his  robe?'  he  answered,  '  No  '."

Abu-Mas'ud  ibn-al-Kattat  from  Ja'far  ibn-Muhammad's
father : — The  Prophet  declared  inviolable  all  trees  growing
between  Uhud  and  'Air,  allowing  [only]  the  driver  of  the
water-carrying  camel  to  cut  al-ghada  a  trees  and  use  them
for  repairing  his  ploughs  and  carts.

1  Al-Bukhari,  al-Iami'  as-Sahih,  vol.  i,  p.  40.

2  Also  Bathan  or  Buthan ;  see  al-Hamdani,  Sifat  Jasirat  al-Arab,  p.
124,  line  Q.

3  "  Of  the  genus  Euphorbia  with  a  woody  stem,  often  5  or  6  ft.  in
height,  and  innumerable  round  green  twigs "— Palgrave's  Travels,
vol.  i,  p.  38.


AL-MAD1NAH  23

Hima  ar-Rabadhah.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  Zaid  ibn-
Aslam's  father  who  said : — "  I  heard  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab
say  to  one1  whom  he  placed  in  charge  of  Hima2  ar-Rabadhah
and  whose  name  Bakr  forgot,  'Stretch  not  thy  wing3  to  any
Moslem.  Beware  the  cry  of  the  oppressed,  for  it  is  an-
swered. Admit  [to  the  Hima]  the  owner  of  the  small  herd
of  camels  and  sheep  but  keep  off  the  cattle  of  ibn-'Affan
and  ibn-'Auf ;  for  if  their  cattle  should  perish  they  resort  to
sowing,  whereas  if  the  cattle  of  this  poor  man  perish,  he
comes  to  me  crying,  "  O,  commander  of  the  believers!  O,
commander  of  the  believers!"  To  offer  grass  is  easier  for
the  Moslems  than  to  offer  money  in  gold  and  silver.4  By
Allah,  this  is  their  land  for  which  they  fought  in  pre-
Islamic  time  and  which  was  included  in  their  terms  when
they  became  Moslem.  They  would,  therefore,  certainly  feel
that  I  oppress  them;  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  cattle
[secured  by  declaring  a  place  Hima]  to  be  used  in  the  cause
of  Allah,  I  would  never  make  a  part  of  a  people's  land
Hima'."

Hima  an-Naklc.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  abu-'Ubaid  from
ibn-'Umar: — The  Prophet  declared  an-Naki'  hima  and  re-
served it  for  the  Moslem  cavalry.5  Abu-'Ubaid  told  me
that  it  is  an  an-Naki'  [and  not  al-Baki',  as  some  have  it]
and  that  the  handakiik  plant  [sweet  trefoil]  grows  in  it.

Mus'ab ibn-'Abdallah az-Zubairi from Sa'd ibn-abi-

1  Whose  name  was  Hunai ;  Bukhari,  vol.  ii,  p.  263.

*  Reservation,  pasture  land  reserved  for  the  public  use  of  a  com-
munity or  tribe  to  the  exclusion  of  everyone  else.  Rabadhah  was  a
district  and  a  village  5  miles  from  al-Madinah.

3  Treat  leniently,  see  ibn-al-Athir,  an-Nihayah,  vol.  iii,  p.  26.

4  i.  e.,  it  is  easier  to  let  the  owner  of  the  little  herd  feed  his  flock  on
the  Hima  than  to  give  him  money  for  sustaining  his  children.

5  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  155;  Wakidi,  Kitab  al-Maghdsi,  pp.
183-184. Naki'  lay  20  parasangs  from  Madinah.


24  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Wakkas : — The  latter  once  found  a  young  servant  felling
trees  in  the  hima  [reserved  land].  He  beat  the  servant
and  took  his  ax.  The  servant's  mistress,  or  a  woman  of
his  kin,  went  to  'Umar  and  accused  Sa'd.  'Umar  ordered
that  the  ax  and  the  clothes  be  returned.  But  Sa'd  refused
saying,  "  I  will  not  give  up  spoils  given  me  by  the  Prophet
whom  I  heard  say,  '  Whomever  ye  find  cutting  trees  in  the
hima,  ye  should  beat  and  deprive  of  what  he  has.'  "  From
the  ax  Sa'd  made  a  shovel  which  he  used  in  his  property
to  the  end  of  his  life.

Al-Ghabah.  Abu-1-Hasan  al-Mada'ini  from  ibn-Ju'dubah
and  abu-Ma'shar  : — When  the  Prophet  was  at  Zuraib  (prob-
ably on  his  return  from  the  expedition  of  dhu-Kard)  banu-
Harithah  of  the  Ansar  said  to  him  referring  to  the  site  of
al-Ghabah  [forest],  "This  is  the  place  for  our  camels  to
go  loose,  and  for  our  sheep  to  graze,  and  for  our  women
to  go  out."  The  Prophet  then  ordered  that  he  who  had
cut  off  a  tree  should  replace  it  by  planting  a  small  shoot.
Thus  was  al-Ghabah  planted  with  trees.

Wadi-Mahzur.  'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-Hammad  an-Narsi  from
abu-Malik  ibn-Tha'labah's  father: — The  Prophet  decreed  in  10
the  case  of  Wadi-Mahzur  1  that  the  water  be  shut  off  on  the
the  surface  until  it  rises  to  the  two  ankles,  at  which  it  should
be  conducted  to  the  other  place,  thus  preventing  the  owner
of  the  higher  property  from  holding  the  water  from  the
owner  of  the  lower  one.

Ishak  ibn-abi-Isra'il  from  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-al-
Harith : — The  Prophet  decreed  in  the  case  of  the  Mahzur
torrent  that  the  owner  of  the  higher  property  should  hold
the  water  until  it  rises  to  the  two  ankles,  at  which  he  must
let  it  go  to  the  holder  of  the  lower  land.

1  One  of  the  valleys  of  Madinah,  see  al-Bakri,  Kitab  Mu'jam  Ma-s-
ta'jam,  vol.  ii,  p.  562.


AL-MADtNAH  25

'Amr  ibn-Hammad  ibn-abi-Hanifah  from  'Abdallah  ibn-
abi-Bakr  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Hazm  al-Ansari's
father : — The  Prophet  decreed  in  the  case  of  Mahzur  torrent
and  Mudhainib  *  that  the  water  be  shut  in  until  it  reaches
the  two  ankles,  then  the  upper  supplies  the  lower.  Accord-
ing to  Malik,  the  Prophet  passed  a  similar  judgment  in  the
case  of  Batihan  torrent.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  al-Tjli  from  abu-Malik  ibn-
Tha'labah  ibn-abi-Malik's  father : — The  Prophet  was  called
upon  to  decide  in  the  case  of  Mahzur,  the  valley  of  banu-
Kuraizah,  upon  which  he  decreed  that  water  rising  above
the  two  ankles  cannot  be  shut  in  by  the  higher  owner  from
the  lower  owner.

Al-Husain  from  Ja'far  ibn-Muhammad's  father : — The
Prophet  decreed  in  the  case  of  Mahzur  torrent  that  the
owners  of  palm  trees  have  right  to  the  ankle-high  water,
sowers  have  right  to  the  water  as  high  as  the  two  straps  of
the  sandal,  after  which  the  water  is  sent  to  the  lower  owners.

Haf  s  ibn-'Umar  ad-Duri from  'Urwah : — The  Prophet 1 1
said :  "  Batihan  is  one  of  the  channels  of  Paradise."

'Ali  ibn-Muhammad  al-Mada'ini  abu-1-Hasan  from  Ju'-
dubah  and  others :  —  In  the  caliphate  of  'Uthman,  al-
Madinah  was  threatened  with  destruction  by  the  Mahzur
torrent,  which  necessitated  the  erection  of  a  dam  by
'Uthman.  Abu-1-Hasan  added  that  in  the  year  156  the  tor-
rent brought  a  terrifying  volume  of  water.  The  governor
at  that  time.  'Abd-as-Samad  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-
al-'Abbas,  sent  'Ubaidallah  ibn-abi-Salamah-l-'Umri  who,
with  a  big  crowd,  started  after  the  afternoon  prayer  to  see
the  torrent  which  had,  by  that  time,  covered  the  sadakah-
lands  2  of  the  Prophet. An  old  woman  from  al-'Aliyah-

1 "  Mudhainib  "  in  al-Bakri,  pp.  518,  562.

2  Mawardi,  al-Ahkam  as-Sultdmyah,  p.  292.  Sadakah  is  a  portion
which  a  man  gives  from  his  property  to  the  poor  by  way  of  propitia-
tion. It  is  primarily  superogatory,  whereas  sakat  is  obligatory.


26  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

region  *  pointed  out  to  them  a  spot  to  which  she  had  often
heard  people  refer.  There  they  dug  and  the  water  found
exit  through  which  it  passed  to  IVddi-Batihkn.  From
Mahzur  to  Mudhainib  is  a  water-course  which  empties  its
water  in  it.

The  Prophet  calls  al-Madinah  Taybah.  Muhammad  ibn-
Aban  al-Wasiti  from  al-Hasan :  —  The  Prophet  invoked
Allah's  blessing  on  al-Madinah  and  its  inhabitants  calling
it  Taybah.2

Abu-'Umar  Hafs  ibn-'Umar  ad-Duri  from  'A'ishah,  the
mother  of  the  believers: — When  the  Prophet  emigrated  to
al-Madinah,  a  disease  spread  among  the  Moslems  in  it.
Among  those  taken  seriously  ill  were  abu-Bakr,  Bilal  and
'Amir  ibn-Fuhairah.  During  his  illness,  abu-Bakr  often  re-
peated the  following  verse : 3

"  One  in  the  morning  may  lie  amidst  his  family

and  death  may  be  nearer  to  him  than  his  sandal's  strap."  4

Bilal  often  repeated  the  following:

"  O,  would  I  that  I  spent  a  night

at  Fakh  where  idhkhir  and  jalil  5  plants  surround  me!
And  would  that  I  some  day  visit  Majannah-water  to  drink  it,
and  see  Shamah  and  Jafil  [Mts.]  !"

'Amir  ibn-Fuhairah  used  to  repeat  the  following :

"I  have  found  death  before  I  tasted  it,  12

verily  the  death  of  the  coward  comes  from  above.6
[Man  struggles  according  to  his  own  ability,]
like  the  bull  that  protects  his  skin  with  his  horn."  7

1  Yakut,  s.V.  'Aliyah.

2  Al-Hamadhani,  Kitab  al-Buldan,  p.  23;  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,
p.  10.

s  Hisham,  p.  414;  Azraki,  Akhbar  Makkah,  p.  383.
*Cf.  Freytag,  Arabum  Proverbia,  vol.  i,  p.  492,  no.  63.

5  Idhkhir  a  small  plant  of  sweet  smell  used  for  roofing  houses.  Jalil
a  weak  plant  with  which  the  interstices  of  houses  are  stopped  up.

6  Freytag,  Proverbia,  vol.  i,  p.  7,  no.  10.

7  Az-Zamakhshari,  al-Fa'ik,  vol.  ii,  pp.  5-6.


AL-MAD1NAH  2y

This  was  reported  to  the  Prophet  and  he  prayed :  "  Make
al-Madinah,  O  Allah,  wholesome  for  us  as  thou  hast  made
Makkah  for  us,  and  bless  for  us  its  sa'  and  mudd  1  [grain
measures]  !"

The  water-course  of  al-Harrah.  Al-Walid  ibn-Salih
from  'Urwah : — One  of  the  Ansar  had  a  dispute  with  az-
Zubair  ibn-al-'Auwam  regarding  the  water-courses  that  run
from  al-Harrah  to  the  plain.  The  Prophet  said,  "  Zubair,
use  the  water,  then  turn  it  to  thy  neighbor."  2

Al-'Akik  as  fief.  Husain  ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-Aswad  al-Tjli
from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah's  father : — As  'Umar  was  par-
celling al-'Akik  into  fiefs,  he  came  to  a  part  of  it  regarding
which  he  remarked,  "  I  never  gave  such  a  land  in  fief."  To
this  Khauwat  ibn-Jubair  replied,  "  Give  it  out  to  me."  And
'Umar  did.

Al-Husain  from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah's  father : — 'Umar
gave  al-'Akik  in  fief  from  its  upper  to  its  lower  end.

Al-Husain  from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah : — 'Umar  accom-
panied by  az-Zubair  set  out  to  distribute  fiefs,  and  as
'Umar  was  giving  them  out,  he  passed  by  al-'Akik  and  said :
"  Where  are  the  seekers  of  fiefs  ?  I  have  not  yet  today
passed  by  a  more  fertile  land."  Az-Zubair  said :  "  Give
it  out  to  me." And  'Umar  did.

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  by  al-Husain  from
Hisham  ibn-'Urwah's  father.  13

Khalaf  ibn-Hisham  al-Bazzar  from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah's
father  who  said : — "Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  gave  out  as  fief  to
Khauwat  ibn-Jubair  al-Ansari  a  piece  of  dead  land.  This
we  bought  from  him."

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  al-Husain
ibn-al-Aswad  on  the  authority  of  Hisham's  father.

1  Wakidi,  al-Maghazi,  p.  14;  al-Azraki,  p.  382.

1  One  tradition  occurring  here  and  defining  certain  terms  in  the  pre-
vious tradition  has  been  omitted  in  the  translation.  Evidently  it  is  a
gloss.


28  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Other  fiefs.  Al-Husain  from  'Urwah: — Abu-Bakr  gave
out  as  fief  to  az-Zubair  the  land  lying  between  al-Jurf  *  and
Kanah.2 Abu-1-Hasan  al-Mada  ini  told  me  that  Kanah  is

•  •  •

a  valley  stretching  from  at-Ta'if  to  al-Arhadiyah  and
Karkarat  al-Kudr  and  thence  it  comes  to  Sudd-Ma'unah
from  which  it  runs  by  the  end  of  al-Kadum  and  ends  at  the
head  of  Kabur  ash-Shuliada [martyrs'  tombs]  at  Uhud.

Abu-'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  certain  learned
men : — The  Prophet  gave  out  as  fief  to  Bilal  ibn-al-Harith
al-Muzani  certain  mines  s  in  the  Furu'  district.

'Amr  an-Nakid  and  ibn-Sahm  al-Antaki  from  abu-
Tkrimah  the  freedman  of  Bilal  ibn-al-Harith  al-Muzani : —
The  Prophet  gave  out  as  fief  to  Bilal  a  piece  of  land  having
a  mountain  and  mines.  The  sons  of  Bilal  sold  a  part  of  it
to  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  in  which  one  mineral  (or  he
may  have  said  two)  appeared.  The  sons  of  Bilal  there-
upon said :  "  What  we  sold  thee  is  not  the  minerals  but  the
tillable  land."  Then  they  brought  forth  a  statement  written
for  them  by  the  Prophet  on  a  palm  leaf  which  'Umar  kissed
and  with  which  he  rubbed  his  eye  saying  to  his  steward :
"  Find  out  what  the  income  and  the  expenses  are,  retain
what  thou  hast  expended,  and  give  them  back  the  balance."

Abu-'Ubaid  from  Bilal  ibn-al-Harith  : — The  Prophet  gave
out  all  al-'Akik  as  fief  to  Bilal.

The  zakat  on  the  metals. Mus'ab  az-Zubairi  from  Malik
ibn-Anas : — The  Prophet  assigned  as  fief  to  Bilal  ibn-al-
Harith  certain  mines  in  the  Furu' district. On  this, all 14
our  learned  men  agree. Nor  do  I  know  of  any  disagree-

1  Called  'Arsat  al-Bakal  in  al-Wakidi's  days,  see  Wakidi,  tr.  Well-
hausen,  pp.  103-104.

2 A  valley  near  Mount  Thaib,  one  day's  journey  from  Madinah.

■''■  The  mines  of  al-Kabaliyah,  see  al-Mutarrizi,  Kitab  a',-Mughrib,
vol.  ii,  p.  108.


AL-MAD1NAH  2g

ment  among  our  followers  regarding  the  fact  that  in  the
case  of  mines  the  zakdt  is  one-fourth  of  the  tithe.  It  is  re-
ported that  az-Zuhri  often  repeated  that  in  the  case  of
mines  zakat  is  binding.  It  is  moreover  reported  that  he
said  that  the  zakat  is  one-fifth.  That  is  what  the  people  of
al-Trak  say  who  at  present  impose  on  the  mines  of  al-Furu',
Naj ran,  dhu-1-Warwah,  Wadi-1-Kura  and  others  one-fifth  in
accordance  with  the  view  of  Sufyan  ath-Thauri.  abu-
Hanifah,  abu-Yusuf  and  the  school  of  al-'Irak.1

'Ali's  fiefs.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Ja'far  ibn-
Muhammad  : — The  Prophet  assigned  to  'Ali  as  fief  four
pieces  of  land,  i.  e..  the  two  Fukairs,  Bi'r-Kais,  and
ash-Shajarah.2

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  al-Husain
on  the  authority  of  Ja'far  ibn-Muhammad.

'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  an-Nakid  from  Ja'far  ibn-Muham-
mad's  father : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  assigned  to  'Ali  as  fief
Yanbu',3  and  another  piece  was  added  to  it.

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  al-Husain
on  the  authority  of  Ja'far  ibn-Muhammad's  father.

The  well  of  'Urwah,  the  reservoir  of  'Amr  and  the  canal

of  Banat-Nailah,  etc.  The  next  tradition  was  communi-
cated to  me  by  one  in  whom  I  trust  on  the  authority  of
Mus'ab  ibn'Abdallah  az-Zubairi : — The  well  of  'Urwah  ibn-
az-Zubair  is  named  after  'Urwah  ibn-az-Zubair ;  the  'Amr
reservoir  is  named  after  'Amr  ibn-az-Zubair;  the  canal  of
Banat-Na'ilah  is  named  after  children  of  Na'ilah,  daughter
of  al-Farafisah-1-Kalbiyah  and  wife  of  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan
('Uthman  had  taken  possession  of  this  canal  and  conveyed

1  Malik  ibn-Anas,  al-Mudauwanah,  vol.  ii,  p.  47;  ash-Shafi'i,  Kitab
al-Umm,  vol.  ii2,  p.  36.

2  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  pp.  260-261.

3  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  1038-1039.


3°


THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


its  water  to  a  piece  of  land  at  al-'Arsah  x  which  he  culti-
vated and  worked)  ;  the  land  of  abu-Hurairah  is  ascribed
to  abu-Hurairah  ad-Dausi ;  and  as-Sahwah  in  Mt.  Juhainah
is  the  sadakah  of  'Abdallah  ibn-'Abbas.

Kasr-Nafls.  It  is  said  that  the  Nafis  castle  is  ascribed  to
Nafis  at-Tajir  [the  merchant]  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-Zaid
ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-al-Mu'alla  ibn-Laudhan  ibn-Harithah  ibn-
Zaid  of  al-Khazraj,  the  allies  of  banu-Zuraik  ibn-'Abd-
Harithah  of  al-Khazraj.  This  castle  stands  in  Harrat-
Wakim  at  al-Madinah.  'Ubaid  ibn-al-Mu'alla  died  as  martyr  1 5
in  the  battle  of  Uhud.  Others  say  it  is  Xafis  ibn-Muham-
mad ibn-Zaid  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-Murrah,  Mu'alla's  freedman.
This  'Ubaid  and  his  father  were  among  the  captives  of
'Ain  at-Tamr.  'Ubaid  ibn-Murrah  died  in  the  battles  of
al-Harrah. His  surname  was  abu-'Abdallah.

'A'ishah  well.  The  'A'ishah  well  is  ascribed  to  'A'ishah
ibn-Xumair  ibn-Wakif,  'A'ishah  being  a  man's  name  of
al-Aus.

Al-Muttalib  well  and  al-Murtaft  well.  Al-Muttalib  well
on  the  'Irak  road  is  ascribed  to  al-Muttalib  ibn-' Abdallah
ibn-Hantab  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-'Umar  ibn-Makh-
zum.  Ibn-al-Murtafi'  well  is  ascribed  to  Muhammad  ibn-
al-Murtafi'  ibn-an-Xadir  al-'Abdari.

The  Suk  in  al-Madinah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from
'Ata  ibn-Yasar,  the  freedman  of  Maimunah.  daughter  of
al-Harith  ibn-Hazn  ibn-Bujair  of  al-Hilal  tribe : — When
the  Prophet  wanted  to  found  a  market  in  al-Madinah  he
said:  "  This  is  your  market  and  no  kharaj  will  be  assessed
on  it."

The  'A rim  dam.  Al-'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi  from
his  grandfather  and  Sharki  ibn-al-Kutami-1-Kalbi : — When
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem,2 expelled of the

1  See  Yakut,  al-Mushtarik,  p.  159.

2  Bait al-Makdis or al-Bait al-Mukaddas. See ibn-Khurdadhbih,
Kitab  a!-Masa!ik,  pp.  "8  and  79.


AL-MADINAH  3I

Israelites  those  whom  he  expelled,  and  carried  away  those
whom  he  carried  into  captivity,  some  Israelites  fled  away  to
al-Hijaz  and  settled  in  Wadi-1-Kura,  Taima',  and  Yathrib.
At  that  time  there  lived  in  Yathrib  a  tribe  of  Jurhum  and  a
remnant  of  al-'Amalik  who  lived  on  date-planting  and  wheat-
growing.  Among  these,  the  Israelites  settled  and  asso-
ciated with  them,  and  kept  increasing  in  number,  as  Jurhum
and  al-'Amalik  were  decreasing,  until  the  former  drove  the
latter  from  Yathrib  and  established  their  authority  over  it,
taking  possession  of  their  cultivated  and  pasture  lands.
This  was  their  condition  for  a  long  time.  Then  it  came  to
pass  that  those  of  the  people  of  al-Yaman  descended  from
Saba  ibn-Yashjub  ibn-Ya'rub  ibn-Kahtan  were  filled  with
the  spirit  of  oppression  and  tyranny  and  ignored  the  grace
of  their  God  in  regards  to  the  fertility  and  luxury  he  be-
stowed on  them.  Consequently,  Allah  created  rats  that  began
to  bore  the  dam,  which  stood  between  two  mountains  and
had  pipes  which  the  people  could  open  when  they  wished
and  get  as  much  water  as  they  wanted.  This  is  the  'Arim
dam.1  The  rats  went  on  working  on  the  dam  until  it  was  16
broken. through.  Thus  did  Allah  let  their  gardens  sink  and
their  trees  disappear,  changing  them  into  khamt,2  tamarisk
and  some  few  jujube  trees.3

The  wanderings  of  al-Azd.  Seeing  what  happened,
Muzaikiyah  i.  e.  'Amr  ibn-'Amir  .  .  .  ibn-Amru'i-1-Kais
.  .  .  ibn-Ya'rub  ibn-Kahtan  sold  all  the  property  and  cattle
he  possessed,  summoned  the  Azd  and  started  together  to  the
land  of  the  tribe  of  'Akk.  There  they  settled.  'Amr  re-
marked :  "  To  seek  herbage  before  knowledge  is  weakness."
The  tribe  of  'Akk  were  distressed  at  the  fall  of  their  best

1  Koran,  34:  15.

2  A  tree  with  bitter  fruit.

3  GGA,  1863,  p.  1348.


22  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

lands  into  the  hands  of  al-Azd  and  asked  the  latter  to  evacu-
ate the  land.  Thereupon  a  one-eyed  and  deaf  man  of  al-
Azd,  named  Jidh',  made  an  attack  on  a  'Akk  party  and  de-
stroyed them.  This  resulted  in  a  war  between  al-Azd  and
'Akk.  The  Azd,  after  being  defeated,  returned  and  charged,
in  reference  to  which  Jidh'  composed  the  following  verse :

"•  We  are  the  descendants  of  Mazin — there  is  no  doubt,
the  Ghassan  of  Ghassan  versus  the  'Akk  of  'Akk,

and  they  shall  see  whether  we  or  they  are  the  weaker."

(Previous  to  this  al-Azd  had  settled  near  a  spring  called
Ghassan.  Hence  their  name,  Ghassan.)1  Al-Azd  now  set
off  until  they  arrived  in  the  land  of  Hakam  ibn-Sa'd  al-
'Ashirah  .  .  .  ibn  Ya'rub  ibn-Kahtan.  There  they  fought
and  won  the  victory  over  Hakam.  But  it  occurred  to  them
to  move,  and  they  did,  leaving  a  small  band  behind.  The
next  place  they  came  to  was  Najran.  Here  they  met  re-
sistance from  the  inhabitants  of  the  place  but  finally  won
the  victory.  After  settling  in  Najran  they  departed  with
the  exception  of  a  few  who  had  special  reasons  to  stay.
Al-Azd  then  arrived  in  Makkah  which  was  populated  with
the  Jurhum  tribe.  They  made  their  abode  in  Batn-Marr.
Tha'labah  the  son  of  'Amr  Muzaikiya  demanded  of  Jurhum
that  the  plain  of  Makkah  be  given  to  his  people.  This  re-
quest having  been  refused,  a  battle  ensued  in  which  Tha'labah
got  control  of  the  plain.  Tha'labah  and  his  people,  how-
ever, realized  after  this  that  the  place  was  unwholesome,  and
found  it  hard  to  make  their  living  in  it ;  so  they  dispersed,
one  band  of  them  leaving  for  'Uman,  another  for  as-Sarat,
another  for  al-Anbar  and  al-Hirah,  another  for  Syria  and  \y
one  band  chose  Makkah  for  abode.  This  made  Jidh'  sav :
"  Every  time  ye  go  to  a  place,  ye  al-Azd, some  of  you

1  Near  Sudd-Ma'rib  in  al-Yaman ;  Hisham,  p.  6.


AL-MAD1NAH  33

detach  1  themselves  from  the  rest.  Ye  are  on  the  point  of
becoming  the  tail  among  the  Arabs."  That  is  why  those
who  settled  in  Makkah  were  called  Khuza'ah.2  Then  came
Tha'labah  ibn-'Amr  Muzaikiya  with  his  son  and  followers
to  Yathrib  whose  people  were  Jews.  They  settled  outside
the  city  where  they  grew  and  increased  in  number  and  be-
came so  strong  as  to  drive  the  Jews  from  Yathrib.  Thus
they  came  to  live  inside  the  city  and  the  Jews  outside  of  it.

Al-Aus  and  al-Khazraj.  Al-Aus  and  al-Khazraj  are  the
sons  of  Harithah  ibn-Tha'labah  3  ibn-'Amr  Muzaikiya  ibn-
'Amir,  and  their  mother  was  Kailah,  daughter  of  al-Arkam.
Some  say  she  was  a  Ghassanide  of  al-Azd  tribe,  others  say
she  was  of  'Udhrah  tribe.

In  pre-Islamic  times,  the  Aus  and  the  Khazraj  saw  many
battles  which  made  them  trained  in  warfare.  They  became
so  used  to  fighting  that  their  valor  spread  far,  their  cour-
age became  well  known,  their  bravery  was  often  cited  and
their  name  became  a  source  of  terror  in  the  hearts  of  the
Arabs,  who  feared  them.  Their  possessions  were  well
guarded  against  encroachment,  and  their  neighbor  was  well
protected;  and  all  that  was  preparatory  to  the  fact  that
Allah  wanted  to  have  them  support  his  Prophet  and  to  honor
them  by  lending  him  aid.

It  is  reported  that  at  the  arrival  of  the  Prophet  in  al-
Madinah  he  wrote  an  agreement  and  made  a  covenant  with
the  Jews  of  Yathrib.4  The  Jews  of  Kainuka',  however,
were  the  first  to  violate  the  covenant,  and  the  Prophet  ex-
pelled them  from  al-Madinah.  The  first  land  that  the
Prophet  conquered  was  that  of  the  banu-an- Nadir.

'-  Ar.  inkhasa'a,  see  an-Nihayah  under  khaza'a.
2Azraki,  p.  55.

3  Hisham,  p.  140;  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  56.

4  One  of  the  names  of  Madinah.


CHAPTER  II
The  Possessions  of  the  banu-an-Nadir

Banu-an-Nadir  besieged.  The  Prophet  once  accompanied
by  abu-Bakr,  'Umar  and  Usaid  ibn-Hudair  came  to  the  banu-
an-Nadir  who  were  Jews  and  solicited  their  aid  for  raising
the  bloodwit  of  two  men  of  the  banu-Kilab  ibn-Rabi'ah  who
had  made  peace  with  him  and  who  were  killed  by  'Amr  ibn-
Umaiyah  ad-Damn.1  The  Jews  intended  to  drop  a  stone  on
him  but  the  Prophet  left  them  and  sent  them  word  ordering  ig
them  to  evacuate  his  city  [Yathrib]  because  of  their  perfidy
and  violation  of  covenant.  The  Jews  refused  to  comply,
and  announced  hostility.2  Upon  this  the  Prophet  marched
and  besieged  them  for  fifteen  days,  at  the  close  of  which
they  capitulated,  agreeing  to  evacuate  his  town  and  to  be
entitled  to  whatever  the  camels  could  carry  with  the  ex-
ception of  coats  of  mail  and  armor,  the  Prophet  taking  their
land,  palm-trees,  coats  of  mail  and  other  arms.  Thus  did
all  the  possessions  of  the  banu-an-Nadir  become  the  property
of  the  Prophet.  The  Prophet  used  to  sow  their  land  planted
with  palm-trees  and  thus  provided  for  his  family  and  wives
for  one  year.  With  what  could  not  be  consumed,  he  bought
horses  and  arms.

Fiefs  assigned. Of  the  land  of  banu-an-Nadir,  the  Prophet,
gave  fiefs to abu-Bakr, 'Abd-ar- Rahman ibn-'Auf, abu-

1  Hisham,  p.  652; Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  ii2,  p.  40; Al-Wakidi,  a\-Maghazi,
P-  353-
a  Al-Ya'kubi,  Ta'rikh,  vol.  ii,  p.  49.

34


THE  POSSESSIONS  OF  THE  BANU-AN-NADIR or

Dujanah  1  Simak  ibn-Kharashah  as-Sa'idi  and  others.  This
occurred  in  the  year  4  of  the  Hegira.

Mukhairtk.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  one  of  the  banu-an-
Nadir,  Mukhairik,  was  a  learned  rabbi  and  he  believed  in  the
Prophet  and  offered  him  all  that  he  possessed,  which  was
seven  palm-gardens  surrounded  with  walls.  This  the  Pro-
phet set  apart  as  sadakah-land.  The  seven  gardens  are :
al-Mithab,  as-Safiyah,  ad-Dalal,  Husna,2  Barkah,  al-A'waf,
Mashrabat  umm-Ibrahim,3  Ibrahim  being  the  son  of  the
Prophet  and  his  mother  being  Mariyah,  the  Copt.

Other  versions  of  the  conquest.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam
from  az-Zuhri : — The  attack  on  the  banu-an-Nadir,  the  Jews,
took  place  six  months  after  the  battle  of  Uhud.  The  Prophet
pressed  the  siege  until  they  agreed  to  evacuate  the  city
stipulating  that  they  take  with  them  whatever  utensils  their
camels  could  carry  with  the  exclusion  of  the  coats  of  mail.
Hence  the  text  revealed  by  Allah  :  "All  that  is  in  the  heavens
and  all  that  is  on  the  earth  praiseth  Allah!  And  He  is
the  mighty,  the  wise !  He  it  is  who  caused  the  unbelievers
among  the  people  of  the  Book  ",  etc.,4  to  "  put  the  wicked
to  shame."

The  next  tradition  was  communicated  to  us  by  al-Husain
ibn-al-Aswad  on  the  authority  of  Muhammad  ibn-Ishak  5
regarding  the  above  text  which  Allah  hath  revealed  to  his
Messenger: — Those  referred  to  are  banu-an-Nadir.  By
"  Ye  pressed  not  towards  it  with  horse  or  camel.  But  Allah
giveth  his  Messengers  authority  over  whomsoever  He  will-
eth  ",6 Allah showed that it is wholly assigned to the

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  50.

2  "Al-JHIasna "  in  Geschichte  der  Stadt  Medina,  p.  150.
8  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  p.  166.

4  Koran,  59:  1.

5  Hisham,  pp.  654  and  655.

6  Baidawi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  322-323.


36  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Prophet  and  to  no  one  else.  The  Prophet  then  parcelled  19
out  the  land  among  the  Emigrants.  But  when  Sahl  ibn-
Hunaif  and  abu-Dujanah  mentioned  their  poverty,  he  gave
them  a  share.  As  for  the  text:  "  The  spoil  taken  from  the
people  of  the  villages  and  assigned  by  Allah  to  his  Mes-
senger, it  belongeth  to  Allah  and  to  the  Messenger,"  etc.,
to  the  end  of  the  text,  it  means  that  Allah  made  another
division  among  the  Moslems.

According  to  a  tradition  I  received  from  Muhammad
ibn-Hatim  as-Samin  on  the  authority  of  ibn-'Umar,  the
Prophet  burnt  and  cut  down  the  palm-trees  of  the  banu-an-
Nadir  in  reference  to  which  Hassan  ibn-Thabit  says :

"  The  leading  men  of  the  banu-Lu'ai  would  have  regarded  it  easy,
to  bring  about  the  great  fire  at  Buwairah."  1

According  to  ibn-Juraij,  it  was  in  this  connection  that
Allah  revealed  the  text :  "  Whatever  palm-trees  ye  have  cut
down  or  left  standing  on  their  stems  was  by  Allah's  per-
mission and  to  put  the  wicked  to  shame."

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  us  by  abu-'Ubaid
on  the  authority  of  ibn-'Umar.

Abu-'Amr  ash-Shaibani,  among  other  reporters,  holds
that  the  above-quoted  verse  was  composed  by  abu-Sufyan
ibn-al-Harith  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  and  that  its  wording  is
as  follows :

"  The  leading  men  of  the  banu-Lu'ai  would  have  regarded  it  hard,
to  bring  about  the  great  conflagration  of  Buwairah."

(According  to  other  reports  it  is  Buwailah  [and  not
Buwairah]).2  Hassan  ibn-Thabit  in  answer  to  that  wrote
the  following:

i-Bakri,  under  Buwairah;  Ibn-Hisham,  pp.  712-713.
*  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  765.


THE  POSSESSIONS  OF  THE  BANU-AN-NAD1R


37


"  May  Allah  perpetuate  the  conflagration
and  make  the  fire  rage  in  its  parts.

They  were  given  the  Book  but  they  lost  it.

Thus  with  respect  to  the  Taurat  they  are  blind  and  erring."  1

The  Prophet's  special  share.  'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  an-
Nakid  from  Malik  ibn-Aus  ibn-al-Hadathan  : — It  was  stated
by  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  that  the  possessions  of  the  banu-an-
Nadir  were  assigned  by  Allah  to  the  Prophet,  the  Moslems
having  not  "  pressed  toward  them  with  horse  or  camel."  20
Thus  they  were  wholly  his  property.  The  Prophet  used
to  spend  their  annual  income  on  his  family  and  invest  what
was  left  in  horses  and  arms  to  be  used  in  the  cause  of  Allah.

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  ad-Dimashki  from  Malik  ibn-Aus
ibn-al-Hadathan: — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  told  him  [Malik]
that  the  Prophet  had  three  special  shares  which  he  appro-
priated for  himself ;  namely,  the  possessions  of  the  banu-an-
Nadir,  Khaibar  and  Fadak.  The  possessions  of  the  banu-an-
Nadir  he  reserved  for  use  in  case  of  misfortunes  that  might
befall  him.  Those  of  Fadak  were  reserved  for  wayfarers.
Those  of  Khaibar  he  divided  into  three  portions,  two  of
which  he  divided  among  the  Moslems  and  the  third  he  re-
served for  his  and  his  family's  expenses,  distributing  what
was  left  after  the  expenses  to  the  needy  among  the
Emigrants.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  az-Zuhri : — The  possessions
of  the  banu-an-Nadir  were  among  the  things  that  Allah  as-
signed to  his  Prophet.  The  Moslems  "  pressed  not  towards
them  with  horse  or  camel."  They  were  therefore  wholly  the
property  of  the  Prophet;  and  he  divided  them  among  the
Emigrants,  giving  nothing  of  them  to  the  Ansar  with  the
exception  of  two  persons  who  were  needy,  i.  e.,  Simak  ibn-
Kharashah  abu-Dujanah,  and  Sahl  ibn-Hunaif.

1  Cf.  Hassan  ibn-Thabit,  Diwan,  p.  46.


38  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Al-Husain  from  al-Kalbi : — When  the  Prophet  secured  the
possessions  of  thebanu-an-Nadir,  who  were  the  first  he  made
to  evacuate  the  land,  Allah  said :  "  He  it  is  who  caused  the
unbelievers  among  the  '  People  of  the  Book  '  to  quit  their
homes  and  join  those  who  had  evacuated  previously."  *
Thus  these  possessions  were  among  the  spoils  towards  which
the  Moslems  '  pressed  not  with  horse  or  camel."  The
Prophet  then  said  to  the  Ansdr:  "  Your  brethren,  the  Emi-
grants have  no  possessions.  If  ye  therefore  desire,  I  will
divide  these  [newly  acquired  possessions]  and  what  ye  al-
ready possess  among  you  and  the  Emigrants.  But  if  ye
desire,  keep  ye  your  possessions  and  I  will  divide  these
[newly  acquired  ones]  among  the  Emigrants  alone."  To
this  the  Ansdr  replied  :  "  Divide  these  among  them  and  give
them  from  our  possessions  whatever  thou  wishest."  Be-
cause of  this  the  text  was  revealed :  "  They  prefer  them  be-
fore themselves,  though  poverty  be  their  own  lot."  2  There-
upon abu-Bakr  said :  "  May  Allah  give  you  the  good  recom-
pense, ye  Ansdrs  your  case  and  ours  is  like  that  referred
to  by  al-Ghanawi  where  he  said,

'  Ma}-  Allah  recompense  in  our  behalf  the  Ja'far.  2  I

who  when  our  feet  slipped  in  al-Wat'atain  and  we  fell,

took  ungrudging  care  of  us
although  our  mothers  would  have  murmured  if  they  were  in  their
place.

The  rich  are  many  and  every  hungry  man
goes  to  places  kept  warm  and  sheltered.'  "

The  fief  of  az-Zubair.  Al-Husain  from  Hisham  ibn-
'Urwah's  father : — The  Prophet  assigned  as  fief  to  az-Zubair
ibn-'Auwam  a  piece  of  the  banu-an-Xadir's  land  planted
with  palm-trees.

Al-Husain  from  Hisham  ibn-'L'rwah's  father: — The  Pro-

1  Koran.  59 :  2.  2  Kor.,  59 :  9.


THE  POSSESSIONS  OF  THE  BANU-AN-NADIR  39

phet  gave  out  of  the  land  of  the  banu-an- Nadir  in  fief  and  he
gave  a  fief  to  az-Zubair.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd,1  the  secretary  of  al-Wakidi,  from
Anas  ibn-'Iyad,  and  'Abdallah  ibn-Numair  from  Hisham
ibn-'Urwah's  father : — The  Prophet  assigned  as  fief  to  az-
Zubair  a  piece  of  the  banu-an-Nadir's  land  planted  with  palm-
trees.  Abu-Bakr  assigned  to  az-Zubair  as  fief  al-Jurf.
Anas  in  his  tradition  says  the  land  was  dead.  'Abdallah
ibn-Numair  says  in  his  tradition  that  'Umar  gave  az-Zubair
as  fief  all  of  al-'Akik.

"Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  ii2,  p.  41.


CHAPTER  III
The  Possessions  of  the  banu-Kuraizah

The  subjection  of  the  banu-Kuraizah.  The  Prophet  be-
sieged banu-Kuraizah  for  a  few  days  in  dhu-1-Ka'dah,  and  a
few  days  in  dhu-1-Hijjah,  of  the  year  5,  the  whole  time  being
fifteen  days.1  These  banu-Kuraizah  were  among  those  who
had  assisted  in  the  fight  against  the  Prophet  in  the  battle
of  al-Khandak  [the  moat]  also  called  battle  of  al-Ahzab
[the  confederates].  Finally  they  surrendered  and  he  in-
stalled Sa'd  ibn-Mu'adh  al-Ausi  as  their  ruler.  The  latter
decreed  that  every  adult 2  be  executed,  that  women  and
children  be  carried  as  captives  and  that  all  that  they  pos-
sessed be  divided  among  the  Moslems.3  The  Prophet  ap-
proved of  the  decree  saying :  "  What  thou  hast  decreed  is
in  accordance  with  the  decree  of  Allah  and  his  Prophet."

Gabriel  appears  to  the  Prophet.  'Abd-al-Wahid  ibn-
Ghiyath  from  'A'ishah : — When  the  Prophet  was  done  with  22
the  battle  of  al-Ahzab,  he  went  into  the  wash-room  in  order
to  wash.  There  Gabriel  appeared  to  him  and  said,  "  Mu-
hammad, thou  hast  laid  down  thy  arms;  but  we  have  not
yet.  Hasten  against  the  banu-Kuraizah."  'A'ishah  upon  this
said  to  the  Prophet :  "  O  Prophet  of  Allah,  I  have  seen  him
[Gabriel]  through  a  hole  in  the  door  with  the  dust  around
his  head!"4

1  Dhu-l-Ka'dah 23— dhu-1-Hijj  ah 0; cf. Wakidi, tr. Wellhausen, p.
210;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1487.

2 Literally  "every  one  on  whose  beard  the  razor  could  be  used."

3  Wakidi,  Maghasi,  p.  373.

*  Wakidi,  Maghasi,  p.  371 ;  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  ii1,  p.  55;  Ibn-Hisham,  p.  684.
40


THE  POSSESSIONS  OF  THE  BANU-KURAIZAH 4I

The  adults  executed.  'Abd-al- Wahid  ibn-Ghiyath  from
Kathir  ibn-as-Saib : — Banu-Kuraizah  were  presented  to  the
Prophet  with  the  result  that  those  of  them  who  had  at-
tained to  puberty  *  were  executed  and  those  who  had  not
attained  to  puberty  were  spared.

Huyai  ibn-Akhtab  put  to  death  with  his  son.  Wahb  ibn-
Bakiyah  from  al-Hasan: — Huyai  ibn-Akhtab  made  a  cove-
nant with  the  Prophet  agreeing  never  to  assist  anyone  against
him  and  mentioned  Allah  as  surety  for  the  covenant.  When
he  and  his  son  were  brought  before  the  Prophet  on  the  day
of  Kuraizah,  the  Prophet  remarked :  "  The  one  mentioned
as  surety  has  done  his  part."  By  the  order  of  the  Prophet
the  heads  of  the  man  and  his  son  were  cut  off.2

The  division  of  the  booty.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
Ma'mar  who  said  : — I  once  asked  az-Zuhri  whether  the  banu-
Kuraizah  had  any  lands,  to  which  he  replied  directly,  "  The
Prophet  divided  it  among  the  Moslems  into  different
shares."

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ibn-' Abbas  : — The  Prophet
divided  the  possessions  of  the  banu-Kuraizah  and  Khaibar
among  the  Moslems.3

The  conquest  according  to  az-Zuhri.  Abu-'Ubaid  al-
Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  az-Zuhri : — The  Prophet  pressed  the
siege  against  banu-Kuraizah  until  they  surrendered  to  Sa'd
ibn-Mu'adh  who  decreed  that  their  men  be  executed,  their
children  be  taken  as  captives  and  their  possessions  be
divided.  Accordingly,  a  certain  number  of  men  were  put
to  death  on  that  day.

1  Literally  every  one  who  "  had  the  dreams and hair "  that  mark
adolescence.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1494.

3  Wakidi,  Wellhausen,  pp.  220-221.


CHAPTER  IV

Khaibar  23

The  capitulation  of  Khaibar.  The  Prophet  invaded
Khaibar  *  in  the  year  7.  Its  people  contended  with  him,
delayed  him  and  resisted  the  Moslems.  So  the  Prophet  be-
sieged them  for  about  one  month.2  They  then  capitulated
on  the  terms  that  their  blood  would  not  be  shed,  and  their
children  be  spared,  provided  that  they  evacuate  the  land,
which  he  permitted  the  Moslems  to  take  together  with  the
gold  and  silver  and  arms — except  what  was  on  the  person  of
the  banu-Khaibar,  and  that  they  keep  nothing  secret  from  the
Prophet.  They  then  told  the  Prophet,  "  We  have  special
experience  in  cultivation  and  planting  palm-trees."  and  asked
to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  land.  The  Prophet  granted
them  their  request  and  allowed  them  one-half  of  the  fruits
and  grains  produced  saying:  "I  shall  keep  you  settled  so
long  as  Allah  keeps  you."

'Umar  expels  the  people  of  Khaibar.  During  the  cali-
phate of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  a  pestilence  spread  among
them  and  they  mistreated  the  Moslems.  'Umar,  thereupon,
made  them  evacuate  the  land,  dividing  what  they  had  among
those  of  the  Moslems  who  already  had  a  share  in  it.

The  terms  made.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Muham-
mad ibn-Ishak  who  said : — "  I  once  asked  ibn-Shihab  about
Khaibar  and  he  told  me  that  he  was  informed  that  the  •

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  503.

2  Diyarbakri. Ta'r'ikh  al-Khamis,  vol.  ii,  p.  47.

4-2


KHAIBAR  43

Prophet  captured  it  by  force  after  a  fight,  and  that  it  was
included  among  the  spoils  which  Allah  assigned  to  his
Prophet.  The  Prophet  took  its  fifth  and  divided  the  land
among  the  Moslems.  Those  of  its  people  who  surrendered
did  *  so  on  condition  that  they  leave  the  land ;  but  the  Pro-
phet asked  them  to  enter  into  a  treaty,  which  they  did."

Huyai  hides  a  bag  full  of  money.  'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-
Hammad  an-Narsi  from  ibn-'Umar  : — The  Prophet  came  to
the  people  of  Khaibar  and  fought  them  until  he  drove  them
to  their  castle  and  captured  their  land  and  palm-trees.  They
then  capitulated  on  the  terms  that  their  blood  be  not  shed,
that  they  evacuate  the  land  and  be  entitled  to  all  that  their
camels  could  carry,  and  that  the  Prophet  be  entitled  to  the
gold  and  silver  and  arms.2  The  Prophet  made  it  a  condi-
tion for  them  that  they  hold  nothing  secret  or  hidden  from
him,  otherwise  they  are  no  more  within  his  protection  or
covenant.  They,  however,  hid  a  leather  bag  in  which  were
kept  money  and  jewels  belonging  to  Huyai  ibn-Akhtab.
This  bag  Huyai  had  brought  to  Khaibar  on  the  occasion  24
of  the  expulsion  of  the  banu-an-Nadir.  The  Prophet  asked
Sa'yah  ibn-'Amr  saying,  "What  has  become  of  the  bag  which
Huyai  brought  from  the  banu-an-Nadir?"  To  this  Sa'yah
answered,  "  Wars  and  expenses  have  emptied  it."  But  the
Prophet  remarked,  "  It  was  a  short  time  and  a  big  sum  of
money.  Moreover,  Huyai  was  killed  before  that."  The
Prophet  then  turned  Sa'yah  over  to  az-Zubair  and  the  latter
put  him  to  the  torture.  At  last  Sa'yah  said :  "  I  saw  Huyai
roaming  about  in  a  deserted  place  yonder."  Search  was
made  in  the  deserted  place  and  the  bag  was  found.  The
Prophet,  thereupon,  put  the  two  sons  of  abu-1-Hukaik  to
death,  one  of  whom  was  the  husband  of  Saf  iyah,3  the  daugh-

1  Hisham,  p.  779.  2  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  ii2,  pp.  79-80.

3  who became one of the wives of Muhammad, see an-Nawawi,
Tahdhib  al-Asma',  pp.  846-847.


44


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


ter  of  Huyai  ibn-Akhtab.  Moreover,  he  captivated  their
children  and  women  and  divided  their  possessions  because
of  their  breach  of  faith.

'Abdalldh  ibn-Razvahah  estimates  the  produce.  The  Pro-
phet also  wanted  to  expel  the  banu-Khaibar  from  the  land  but
they  said,  "  Let  us  stay  in  the  land  to  repair  it  and  manage
it."  The  Prophet  and  his  companions  having  no  slaves  to
manage  it,  and  they  having  no  time  to  do  it  themselves,  he
gave  them  Khaibar  on  condition  that  they  have  one-half  of
every  palm-tree  or  plant ...  x  as  it  occurred  to  the  Prophet.
'Abdallah  ibn-Rawahah  used  to  come  every  year  and  esti-
mate by  conjecture  the  quantity  of  dates  upon  the  palm-trees
and  rent  them  one-half.  Banu-Khaibar  accused  him  to  the
Prophet  charging  him  with  partiality  in  estimation  and  of-
fered to  bribe  him.  To  this  he  ['Abdallah]  replied  saying,
"Do  ye  enemies  of  Allah  mean  to  give  me  unlawful  money?  2
By  Allah,  I  have  been  sent  to  you  by  one  whom  of  all  men  I
love  best.  As  for  you,  I  hate  you  more  than  monkeys  and
pigs.  My  hatred  to  you  and  love  to  him,  however,  shall
never  stand  in  the  way  of  my  being  just  to  you."  They
then  said,  "  Through  this  [justice]  have  heavens  and  earth
been  established !"

The  green  spot  in  the  eye  of  Safiyah,  the  Prophet's  ivifc.
Once  the  Prophet,  noticing  a  green  spot  in  the  eye  of
Safiyah,  daughter  of  Huyai,  asked  her  about  it.  and  she  said,
"As  my  head  lay  in  the  lap  of  ibn-abi-1-Hukaik,  I  saw  in
my  sleep  as  if  a  moon  fell  in  my  lap.  When  I  told  him  of
what  I  saw  he  gave  me  a  blow  saying,  'Art  thou  wishing  to
have  the  king  of  Yathrib?'  "  3  Safiyah  added,  "  Of  all  men
the  Prophet  was  the  one  I  disliked  most,  for  he  had  killed

1  Text  not  clear.

2  Kor.,  5  :  67  and  68.
3Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1582.


KHAIBAR


45


my  husband,  father  and  brother.  But  he  kept  on  saying,
'  Thy  father  excited  the  Arabs  to  unite  against  me  and  he
did  this  and  that,'  until  all  hatred  was  gone  away  from  me."

The  Prophet  used  to  give  annually  each  of  his  wives  80 25
camel-loads  of  dates  and  80  loads  of  barley  from  Khaibar.

'Umar  divides  Khaibar.  It  was  stated  by  Na.fi'  that  dur-
ing the  caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  the  people  of
Khaibar  mistreated  the  Moslems  and  deceived  them  and
broke  the  hands  of  the  son  of  'Umar  1  by  hurling  him  from
the  roof  of  a  house.  Consequently,  'Umar  divided  the
land  among  those  of  the  people  of  Hudaibiyah  who  had
taken  part  in  the  battle  of  Khaibar.

The  forts  of  Khaibar.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from
'Abdallah  ibn-abi-Bakr  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-'Amr  ibn-
Hazm : — The  Prophet  besieged  the  people  of  Khaibar  in
their  two  fortresses — al-Watih  and  Sulalim.  When  they  felt
that  their  destruction  was  sure,  they  requested  the  Prophet
to  let  them  off  and  spare  their  lives.  This  he  did.  The
Prophet  had  already  taken  possession  of  all  their  property 2
including  ash-Shikk,  an-Natat  and  al-Katibah  together  with
all  their  forts  except  what  was  in  the  above-mentioned  two.

"Speedy  victory."  The  following  tradition  regarding
the  text : 3  "And  rewarded  them  with  a  speedy  victory  "  was
transmitted  by  al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  on  the  authority  of
'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-abi-Laila : — Khaibar  and  another  are
meant  who  could  not  be  subdued  by  the  Persians  and  Greeks.

The  division  of  Khaibar.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Bushair
ibn-Yasar: — The  Prophet  divided  Khaibar  into  thirty-six
shares  and  each  share  into  a  hundred  lots.  One-half  of
the  shares  he  reserved  for  himself  to  be  used  in  case  of

1  Hisham,  p.  780.

2  Six  fortresses  mentioned  by  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  56.
3Kor.,  48:18.


40  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

accident  or  what  might  befall  him.  and  the  other  half  he
distributed  among  the  Moslems.  According  to  this,  the
Prophet's  share  included  ash-Shikk  with  an-Xatat  and
whatever  was  included  within  them.  Among  the  lands
turned  into  icakf  '  were  al-Katibah  and  Sulalim.  When
the  Prophet  laid  his  hands  on  these  possessions,  he  found
that  he  had  not  enough  'omils  2  for  the  land.  He  therefore
turned  it  over  to  the  Jews  on  condition  that  they  use  the
land  and  keep  only  one-half  of  its  produce.  This  arrange-
ment lasted  throughout  the  life  of  the  Prophet  and  abu-Bakr.
But  when  'Umar  was  made  caliph,  and  as  the  money  be-
came abundant  in  the  lands  of  the  Moslems,  and  the
Moslems  became  numerous  enough  to  cultivate  the  land.
'Umar  expelled  the  Jews  to  Syria  and  divided  the  property  26
among  the  Moslems.

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  az-Zuhri : — When  the  Prophet
conquered  Khaibar  the  fifth  share  of  it  [reserved  for  him-
self] was  al-Katibah;  as  for  ash-Shikk,  an-Natat.  Sulalim
and  al-Watih  thev  were  given  to  the  Moslems.  The  Pro-
phet  left  the  land  in  the  hands  of  the  Jews  on  condition  that
they  give  him  one-half  of  the  produce.  Thus  the  part  of  the
produce  assigned  by  Allah  to  the  Moslems  was  divided
among  the  Moslems  until  the  time  of  'Umar  who  divided
the  land  itself  among  them  according  to  their  shares.

Abu-'Ubaid  from  Maimun  ibn-Mihran  : — The  Prophet  be-
sieged the  inhabitants  of  Khaibar  between  twenty  and  thirty
day-.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Bushair  ibn-Yasar : — The

Prophet  divided Khaibar  into  thirty-six shares — eighteen

the  Prophet  to  meet  the  expenses  of  accidents,  visitors.

1  Unalienable  legacy  to  the  Moslem  general  community.

-  '  Governors  whose  chief  function  it  was  to  collect  taxes  and  conquer
more  lands.


KHAIBAR


47


and delegates, and the remaining  eighteen shares to  be
divided  each  among  one  hundred  men.1

Al-Husain  from  Bushair  ibn-Yasar : — Khaibar  was  divided
into  thirty-six  shares,  each  one  of  which  was  subdivided
into  one  hundred  lots.  Eighteen  of  these  shares  were
divided  among  the  Moslems  including  the  Prophet,  who  had
in  addition  eighteen  shares  to  meet  the  expenses  of  visitors
and  delegates  and  accidents  that  might  befall  him.

'Abdalldh  ibn-Rawahah  estimates  the  produce.  'Amr
an-Nakid  and  al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ibn-'Umar: —
The  Prophet  sent  ibn-Rawahah  to  Khaibar  who  made  a
conjectural  estimation  of  the  palm-trees  and  gave  the  people
their  choice  to  accept  or  refuse,  to  which  they  replied  :  "  This
is  justice;  and  upon  justice  have  heaven  and  earth  been
established."

The  sons  of  abu-l-Hukaik  put  to  death. Ishak  ibn-abi-
Israil  from  an  inhabitant  of  al-Madinah : — The  Prophet 27
made  terms  with  the  sons  of  abu-l-Hukaik  stipulating  that
they  conceal  no  treasure. But  they  did  conceal;  and  the
Prophet  considered  it  lawful  to  shed  their  blood.

Abu-'Ubaid  from  Maimun  ibn-Mihran : — The  people  of
Khaibar  were  promised  security  on  their  lives  and  children
on  condition  that  the  Prophet  get  all  that  was  in  the  fort.
In  that  fort  were  the  members  of  a  family  strongly  opposed
to  the  Prophet.  To  them  the  Prophet  said :  "I  am  aware
of  your  enmity  to  Allah  and  to  his  Prophet,  but  this  is  not
to  hold  me  from  granting  you  what  I  granted  your  com-
panions. Ye,  however,  have  promised  me  that  if  ye  conceal
a  thing  your  blood  will  become  lawful  to  me.  What  has  be-
come of  your  utensils  ?"  "  They  were  all  " — they  replied,
"  used  up  during  the  fight." The  Prophet  then  gave  word  to

lCf.  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  p.  285;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1588;  Athir,
vol.  ii,  p.  171.


48  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

his  Companions  to  go  to  the  place  where  the  utensils  were.
The  vessels  were  disinterred  and  the  Prophet  struck  off
their  heads.

'Abdalldh  ibn-Rawahah.  'Amr  an-Nakid  and  Muham-
mad ibn-as-Sabbah  from  ibn-' Abbas  : — The  Prophet  turned
Khaibar  over  with  its  soil  and  palm-trees  to  its  inhabitants
allowing  them  half  of  the  produce.

Muhammad  ibn-as-Sabbah  from  ash-Sha'bi : — The  Pro-
phet turned  Khaibar  over  to  its  inhabitants  for  one-half
of  the  produce  and  sent  'Abdallah  ibn-Rawahah  to  estimate
the  dates  (or  perhaps  he  said  the  palm-trees).  This  he
estimated  and  divided  into  two  halves  and  asked  them  to
choose  whichever  one  they  wanted.  Upon  this  they  said,
"  It  is  by  this  that  heavens  and  earth  have  been  established."

A  certain  friend  of  abu-Yusuf  from  Anas : — 'Abdallah
ibn-Rawahah  said  to  the  people  of  Khaibar,  "If  ye  wish,
J  will  estimate  and  let  you  choose;  otherwise,  ye  estimate
and  let  me  choose."  Upon  this  they  said,  "  It  is  by  this  that
heavens  and  earth  have  been  established."

The  division  of  Khaibar.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from
az-Zuhri : — The  Prophet  took  Khaibar  by  force  as  a  result
of  a  fight;  and  after  taking  away  one-fifth,  he  divided  the
remaining  four-fifths  among  the  Moslems.

The  Jews  of  Khaibar  expelled.  'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-  2g
Hammad  an-Xarsi  from  ibn-Shihab : — The  Prophet  said :
"  There  can  be  no  two  religions  at  the  same  time  in  the
Arabian  peninsula."  1  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  investigated
until  he  found  it  certain  and  assured  that  the  Prophet  had
said,  "  There  can  be  no  two  religions  at  the  same  time  in
the  Arabian  peninsula."  Accordingly,  he  expelled  the  Jews
of  Khaibar.

1  Gottheil,  "  Dhimmis  and  Moslems  in  Egypt,"  in  0.  T.  and  Semitic
Studies,  vol.  ii,  p.  351.


KHAIBAR  49

The  Prophet  gives  his  share.  Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from
al-Wakidi's  sheikhs: — The  Prophet  assigned  his  share  in
Khaibar  as  a  means  of  subsistence,  bestowing  on  each  one
of  his  wives  80  camel-loads  of  dates  and  20  loads  of
barley;  on  his  uncle  al-' Abbas  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  200
loads;  and  on  abu-Bakr,  'Umar,  al-Hassan,  al-Husain  and
others  including  the  banu-al-Muttalib  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  a
certain  number  of  loads.  To  this  end,  he  drew  up  for  them
a  document.

Al-Walid  from  Aflah  ibn-Humaid's  father  who  said  : — "  I
was  made  by  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  governor  of  al-
Karibah ;  and  we  used  to  give  the  heirs  of  the  recipients  of
the  Prophet's  bestowals  their  due,  those  heirs  being  num-
bered and  recorded  by  us.

'Umar  divides  Khaibar.  Muhammad  ibn-Hatim  as-
Samin  from  Nafi' : — The  Prophet  turned  Khaibar  over  to  the
hands  of  its  people  on  condition  that  they  give  him  one-half
of  the  produce.  Thus  they  held  it  during  the  life  of  the
Prophet,  abu-Bakr  and  the  early  part  of  the  caliphate  of
'Umar.  Then  'Abdallah  ibn-'Umar  visited  them  for  some
purpose  and  they  attacked  him  in  the  night.  He  ['Umar],
therefore,  turned  them  out  of  Khaibar  and  divided  it  among
those  of  the  Moslems  who  were  present  [in  its  battle]  giv-
ing a  share  to  the  Prophet's  wives.  To  the  latter  he  said,
"  Whichever  of  you  likes  to  have  the  fruit  can  have  it,  and
whichever  likes  the  estate  can  have  it,  and  whatever  ye
choose  will  be  yours  and  your  heirs'  after  you."

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ibn-'  Abbas : — Khaibar  was
divided  into  1580  shares.  The  Moslems  were  1580  men,
of  whom  1 540  had  taken  part  in  the  battle  of  al-Hudaibiyah
and  forty  were  with  Ja'far  ibn-abi-Talib  in  Abyssinia.

The  fief  of  az-Zubair. Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from
ibn-'Urwah's  father : — The  Prophet  gave  as  fief  to  az-Zubair 29
lands  in  Khaibar  planted  with  palm-  and  other  trees.


CHAPTER  V
Fadak

The  capitulation  of  Fadak.  As  the  Prophet  departed
from  Khaibar,  he  sent  to  the  people  of  Fadak  *  Muhaiyisah
ibn-Mas'ud  al-Ansari  inviting  them  to  Islam.  Their  chief
was  one  of  their  number  named  Yusha'  ibn-Nun  the  Jew.
They  made  terms  with  the  Prophet,  agreeing  to  give  up  one-
half  of  the  land  with  its  soil.2  The  Prophet  accepted.
Thus  one-half  was  assigned  wholly  to  the  Prophet  because
the  Moslems  "  pressed  not  against  it  with  horse  or  camel."  3
The  Prophet  used  to  spend  the  income  on  the  wayfarers.

(Umar  expels  the  inhabitants.  The  inhabitants  of  Fadak
remained  in  it  until  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  became  caliph  and
expelled  the  Jews  of  al-Hijaz.  On  that  occasion  he  sent
abu-1-Haitham  Malik  ibn-at-Taiyihan  (some  say  an-
Naiyihan),  Sahl  ibn-abi-Haithamah  al-Ansari,  and  Zaid  ibn-
Thabit  al-Ansari,  who  estimated  justly  the  value  of  one-
half  of  its  soil.  This  value  'Umar  paid  to  the  Jews  and
expelled  them  to  Syria.

Sa'id  ibn-Sulaiman  from  Yahya  ibn-Sa'id : — The  people
of  Fadak  made  terms  with  the  Prophet  agreeing  to  give
one-half  of  the  land  and  the  palm-trees.  When  'Umar  ex-
pelled them,  he  sent  some  one  to  estimate  their  share  in  land
and  palm-trees  and  he  gave  them  their  value.

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  pp.  856-857-

2  Not  only  the  produce.

3  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  171 ;  Mas'udi,  Kitab  at-Tanbih,  p.  258.

50


FADAK  $j

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  az-Zuhri : — 'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  gave  the  people  of  Fadak  the  price  of  one-half  of
their  land  and  palm-trees.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  az-Zuhri,  'Abdallah  ibn-
abi-Bakr  and  certain  sons  of  Muhammad  ibn-Maslamah : —
Only  a  remnant  of  the  Khaibar  was  spared.  They  betook
themselves  to  the  fortifications  and  asked  the  Prophet  to
save  their  lives  and  let  them  go  off.  The  people  of  Fadak
having  heard  of  that  surrendered  on  the  same  conditions.1
Thus  Fadak  became  the  special  share  of  the  Prophet,  for  the  30
Moslems  "  pressed  not  against  it  with  horse  and  camel."

A  similar  tradition  was  transmitted  to  us  by  al-Husain
from  'Abdallah  ibn-abi-Bakr,  with  one  addition,  that  among
those  who  were  intermediary  between  the  two  parties  was
Muhaiyisah  ibn-Mas'ud.

Al-Husain  from  'Umar : — The  Prophet  had  three  portions
appropriated  to  himself  exclusive  of  his  men :  the  land  of
banu-an-Nadir  which  was  unalienable  and  to  meet  the  ex-
penses of  the  accidents  that  might  befall  him,  Khaibar  which
he  divided  into  three  parts,  and  Fadak  the  income  of  which
was  reserved  for  wayfarers.

The  wives  of  the  Prophet  demand  an  inheritance.  'Abdal-
lah ibn-Salih  al-Tjli  from  'Urwah  ibn-az-Zubair : — The
wives  of  the  Prophet  delegated  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  to  ask
abu-Bakr  to  give  them  their  inheritance  from  the  share  of
the  Prophet  in  Khaibar  and  Fadak.  But  'A'ishah  said  to
them,  "  Do  ye  not  fear  Allah  ?  and  have  ye  not  heard  the
Prophet  say — '  What  we  leave  as  sadakah  cannot  be  in-
herited?' This  property  therefore  is  the  property  of  the
people  of  Muhammad  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  accidents
and  guests,  and  when  I  die  it  goes  to  the  one  in  authority
after  me."  On  hearing  this,  the  other  wives  desisted  from
their  request.

1  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  pp.  57  and  64.


52  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  us  by  Ahmad
ibn-Ibrahim  ad-Dauraki  on  the  authority  of  'Urwah.

The  banu-Umaiyah  confiscate  Fadak.  Ibrahim  ibn-
Muhammad  ibn-'Ar'arah  from  al-Kalbi :  —  The  banu-
Umaiyah  confiscated  Fadak  and  violated  the  law  of  the
Prophet  in  regard  to  it.  But  when  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz
became  caliph,  he  reinstated  the  land  in  its  old  condition.

Fatimah  demands  Fadak.  'Abdallah  ibn-Maimun  al-
Mukattib  from  Malik  ibn-Ja'wanah's  father : — Fatimah  said
to  abu-Bakr,  "  The  Prophet  assigned  to  me  Fadak ;  thou
shouldst  therefore  give  it  to  me."  x  'Ali  ibn-Abi-Talib
acted  as  a  witness  in  her  favor.  But  abu-Bakr  asked  for
another  witness;  and  umm-Aiman  testified  in  her  favor.
Abu-Bakr,  thereupon,  said  "  Thou,  daughter  of  Allah's  Pro-  31
phet,  knowest  that  no  evidence  can  be  accepted  unless  it  is
rendered  by  two  men  or  a  man  and  two  women."  Upon
this  she  departed.

Rauh  al-Karabisi  from  one  supposed  by  Rauh  to  have
been  Ja'far  ibn-Muhammad : — Fatimah  said  to  abu-Bakr,
"  Give  me  Fadak,  the  Prophet  has  assigned  it  to  me."  Abu-
Bakr  called  for  evidence  and  she  presented  umm-Aiman
and  Rabah,  the  Prophet's  freedman,  both  of  whom  testified
in  her  favor.  But  abu-Bakr  said,  "  In  such  a  case  no  evi-
dence could  be  accepted  unless  it  be  rendered  by  a  man  and
two  women."

Ibn-'A'ishah  at-Taimi  from  umm-Hani : — Fatimah,  the
Prophet's  daughter,  called  on  abu-Bakr  and  asked :  "  Who
will  inherit  thee  when  thou  art  dead?"  to  which  he  replied,
"  My  son  and  family."  "  Why  then,"  asked  she.  "  hast  thou
— and  not  we — inherited  the  Prophet's  possessions?"
"  Daughter  of  Allah's  Prophet,"  answered  abu-Bakr,  "  by
Allah,  I  have  inherited  from  thy  father  neither  gold  nor

1  Bukhari,  vol.  iii,  p.  131.


FADAK


53


silver,  neither  this  nor  that."  "  But,"  said  she,  "  thou  hast
inherited  our  share  in  Khaibar  and  our  sadakah  in  Fadak."
To  this  abu-Bakr  replied,  "  Daughter  of  Allah's  Prophet,  I
heard  Allah's  Prophet  say,  '  This  is  but  something  assigned
by  Allah  as  a  means  of  subsistence  to  use  during  my  life;
on  my  death  it  should  be  turned  over  to  the  Moslems.'

'Uthman  ibn-abi-Shaibah  from  Mughirah : — 'Umar  ibn-
'Abd-al-'Aziz  once  summoned  the  banu-Umaiyah  and  ad-
dressed them  saying :  "  Fadak  belonged  to  the  Prophet  and
by  the  income  from  it  he  met  his  own  expenses,  supplied  the
needy  among  the  banu-Hashim  and  helped  the  unmarried
among  them  to  marry.  Fatimah  asked  him  to  bestow  it  on
her,  but  he  refused.  After  the  Prophet's  death,  abu-Bakr
used  it  in  the  same  way.  And  so  did  'Umar  when  he  be-
came caliph.  And  now  I  am  going  to  put  it  back  to  its
original  use;  and  ye  will  be  my  witnesses."

Kura  'Arabiyah.  The  following  tradition  was  trans-
mitted to  us  by  Suraij  ibn-Yunus  from  az-Zuhri  in  explana-
tion of  the  text,  "Against  which  ye  pressed  not  with  horse
or  camel  "  : 1 — The  places  referred  to  are  Kura  'Arabiyah  2
that  belong  to  the  Prophet,  i.  e.,  Fadak,  and  this  and  that.

'Umar  expels  the  Jews  of  Fadak.  Abu-'Ubaid  from  az-  32
Zuhri  or  someone  else : — 'Umar  expelled  the  Jews  of  Khaibar
and  they  evacuated  the  place.  As  for  the  Jews  of  Fadak,
they  retained  half  the  fruits  [produced]  and  half  the  soil,
in  accordance  with  the  conditions  on  which  they  made  terms
with  the  Prophet.  'Umar  paid  them  the  price  of  half  the
products  and  half  the  soil  in  gold,  silver  and  pack-saddles,
and  then  expelled  them.

The khutbah of 'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz. 'Amr  an-
Nakid  from  abu-Burkan : — The  following  is  taken  from  the


1  Kor.,  59 :  6.

2  Bakri,  pp.  657-658 ;  Wakidi,  Maghazi,  p.  374.


54


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


speech  of  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  on  his  installment  in
the  caliphate :  "  Fadak  was  among  the  spoils  that  Allah
assigned  the  Prophet  and  the  '  Moslems  pressed  not  against
it  with  horse  and  camel.'  When  Fatimah  asked  him  to  give
her  the  land,  he  said,  '  Thou  hast  nothing  to  demand  from
me,  and  I  have  nothing  to  give  thee.'  The  Prophet  used
to  spend  the  income  from  it  on  wayfarers.  Then  came  abu-
Bakr,  'Umar,  'Uthman  and  'Ali  who  put  it  to  the  same  use
as  the  Prophet.  But  when  Mu'awiyah  became  caliph  he
gave  it  as  fief  to  Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam ;  and  the  latter
bestowed  it  on  my  father  and  on  'Abd-al-Malik.  Thus  it
was  handed  down  to  al-Walid,  Sulaiman  and  myself.  When
al-Walid  became  caliph,  I  asked  him  to  give  me  his  share,
which  he  did.  In  like  manner,  I  asked  Sulaiman  for  his  share
and  he  gave  it.  Thus  I  brought  it  into  one  whole  again.
And  nothing  that  I  possess  is  dearer  to  me  than  it !  Be  ye
therefore  my  witnesses,  that  I  have  restored  it  to  what
it  was."

Al-Ma'miin  gives  Fadak  to  the  descendants  of  Fatimah.
In  the  year  210,  the  commander  of  the  believers  al-Ma'mun
'Abdallah  ibn-Harun  ar-Rashid  ordered  that  Fadak  be  de-
livered to  the  children  of  Fatimah.  To  that  effect  he  wrote
to  his  'amil  in  al-Madinah,  Kutham  ibn-Ta'far,  saying,
"  Greetings ! — The  commander  of  the  believers,  in  his
position  in  the  religion  of  Allah  and  as  caliph  [successor]
of  his  Prophet  and  a  near  relative  to  him,  has  the  first  right
to  enforce  the  Prophet's  regulations  and  carry  out  his  or-
ders and  deliver  to  him,  whom  the  Prophet  granted  some-
thing or  gave  it  as  sadakah,  the  thing  granted  or  given  as
such.  In  Allah  alone  does  the  success  as  well  as  the  strength
of  the  commander  of  the  believers  lie,  and  to  do  what  makes
him  win  His  favor  is  his  [the  commander's]  chief  desire.

The  Prophet  had  given  Fatimah,  his  daughter,  Fadak  and
bestowed  it  as  sadakah  on  her. That  was  an  evident  and


FADAK


55


well-known  fact  on  which  there  was  no  disagreement  among  33
the  relatives  of  the  Prophet,  who  do  not  cease  to  lay  claim
on  what  was  given  to  Fatimah  as  sadakah  and  to  which  she
is  entitled.  Consequently,  the  commander  of  the  believers
has  deemed  it  right  to  return  it  to  the  heirs  of  Fatimah  and
deliver  it  to  them,  seeking  thereby  to  win  the  favor  of  Allah
by  establishing  his  right  and  justice,  and  of  Allah's  Prophet
by  carrying  out  his  command  and  his  wish  regarding  his
sadakah.  This  the  commander  of  the  believers  ordered  re-
corded in  his  registers  and  sent  in  writing  to  his  'dmils.
And  since,  after  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  it  has  been  cus-
tomary on  every  mausim  1  to  have  any  person  claim  a  grant,
or  sadakah  or  promise,2  and  to  have  his  claim  accepted,  then
Fatimah' s  claim  on  what  the  Prophet  has  bestowed  on  her
should — above  that  of  every  one  else — be  accepted  as  true.

The  commander  of  the  believers  has  written  to  al-
Mubarik  at-Tabari,  his  freedman,  ordering  him  to  give
Fadak  back  to  the  heirs  of  Fatimah,  the  Prophet's  daugh-
ter, with  all  its  boundaries  and  the  rights  attached  to  it,  and
including  its  slaves  and  products  and  other  things,  all  to  be
delivered  to  Muhammad  ibn-Yahya  ibn-al-Husain  ibn-Zaid
ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-Husain  ibn-'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib  and  to  Muham-
mad ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-Husain  ibn-
'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib,  both  of  whom  the  commander  of  the
believers  has  put  in  charge  of  the  land  in  behalf  of  its
owners.

Know  therefore  that  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  commander
of  the  believers  and  what  Allah  has  inspired  him  to  do  as
His  will,  and  what  He  has  enabled  him  to  do  in  the  way  of
winning  His  favor  and  His  Prophet's  favor.  Let  those
under thee know it; and treat Muhammad ibn-Yahya

1  Meeting  time  of  the  pilgrims,  see  an-Nihdyah,  vol.  iv,  p.  211,  and
Mutarrizi,  al-Mughrib,  vol.  ii,  p.  250.

2  Ar.  'idat,  see  Bukhari,  vol.  ii,  p.  285;  vol.  iii,  p.  168.


56  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

and  Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah  as  thou  hast  treated  al-
Mubarik  at-Tabari;  and  help  them  in  any  way  that  makes
for  the  fertility,  interest  and  productivity  of  the  land.  May
it  be  Allah's  will,  and  peace  be  unto  thee.

Written  on  Wednesday,  two  days  after  the  beginning  of
dhu-1-Ka'dah,  year  210."

Al-Mutawakkil  restores  Fadak  to  its  old  condition.  When
al-Mutawakkil,  however,  became  caliph,  he  ordered  that
the  land  be  reinstated  in  the  condition  in  which  it  had  been
before  al-Ma'mun.


CHAPTER  VI
Wadi-l-Kura  and  Taima'

Wadi-l-Kura  taken  by  assault.  When  the  Prophet  de-
parted from  Khaibar,  he  came  to  Wadi-l-Kura  *  and  invited
its  people  to  Islam.  They  refused  and  started  hostilities.  34
The  Prophet  reduced  the  place  by  force;  and  Allah  gave
him  as  booty  the  possessions  of  its  inhabitants.  To  the  lot
of  the  Moslems  fell  pieces  of  furniture  and  other  commodi-
ties of  which  the  Prophet  took  away  one-fifth.  The  Pro-
phet left  the  land  with  its  palm-trees  in  the  hands  of  certain
Jews  on  the  same  rent  terms  which  he  had  made  with  the
people  of  Khaibar.2  Some  say  that  'Umar  expelled  its
Jews  and  divided  it  among  those  who  fought  for  its  con-
quest. Others,  however,  say  that  'Umar  did  not  expel  them,
for  it  is  not  included  in  al-Hijaz.  Today  it  is  annexed  to
the  administrative  district  of  al-Madinah  and  is  included
among  its  suburbs.

Mid'am  condemned  to  Hre.  I  was  informed  by  certain
scholars  that  the  Prophet  had  a  slave,  named  Mid'am,  whom
Rifa'ah  ibn-Zaid  al-Judhami  had  presented  to  him.  Dur-
ing the  invasion  of  Wadi-l-Kura,  Mid'am  was  shot  by  an
arrow  from  an  unknown  quarter  as  he  was  putting  down
the  saddle  of  the  Prophet's  camel.  When  someone  re-
marked, "  Blessed,  O  prophet  of  Allah,  is  thy  slave,  for  he
was  shot  by  an  arrow  and  suffered  martyrdom,"  the  Pro-

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  678.

2  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  p.  292.

57


58


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


phet  replied,  "  Nay,  the  mantle  he  took  from  the  spoils  on
the  day  of  Khaibar  shall  verily  burn  on  him  like  fire."  1

Shaiban  ibn-Farrukh  from  al-Hasan : — Someone  remarked
to  the  Prophet,  "  Thy  lad,  so  and  so,  has  suffered  martyr-
dom," to  which  the  Prophet  replied,  "  Rather  he  is  dragged
to  fire  in  a  mantle  he  unlawfully  took  from  the  spoils."

'Abd-al-Wahid  ibn-Ghiyath  from  al-Hasan: — Some  one
remarked  to  the  Prophet,  "  Happy  art  thou,  for  thy  lad,  so
and  so,  has  suffered  martyrdom!"  to  which  he  replied,
"  Rather  he  is  dragged  to  fire  in  a  mantle  he  unlawfully
took  from  the  spoils."  2

Taima  capitulates.  When  the  people  of  Taima'  heard
how  the  Prophet  had  subjugated  the  people  of  Wadi-1-
Kura,  they  made  terms  with  him,  agreeing  to  pay  poll-tax,
and  they  settled  in  their  homes  with  their  lands  in  their
possession.3  The  Prophet  assigned  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-
al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah  as  governor  to  Wadi-1-Kura,  and  as-
signed Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  after  its  conquest,  the  latter
having  become  Moslem  on  the  day  of  the  conquest  of
laima  .

'Umar  expels  the  inhabitants. 'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-Ham-
mad  an-Xarsi  from  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz : — 'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab expelled the people of Fadak, Taima' and 35
Khaibar. The  fight  between  the  Prophet  and  the  people
of  Wadi-1-Kura  took  place  in  Jumada  II,  year  7.

The  fief  of  Hamzah  ibn-an-Nu'mdn.  Al-'Abbas  ibn-
Hisham  al-Kalbi  from  his  grandfather: — The  Prophet  gave
as  fief  to  Hamzah  ibn-an-Xu'man  ibn-Haudhah-l-'Udhri
his  whip's  throw  4  in  Wadi-1-Kura. This  Hamzah  was  the

1  Hisham,  p.  765.

2  Bukhari,  vol.  iii,  pp.  129-130.

3  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  65.
*  Mawardi,  p.  330.


WADI-L-KURA  AND  TAIMA'  $g

chief  of  the  banu-'Udhrah  and  the  first  of  the  people  of  al-
Hijaz  to  offer  the  Prophet  the  sadakah  of  banu-'Udhrah.

The  fief  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwdn.  'Ali  ibn-Muham-
mad  from  al-' Abbas  ibn-'Amir's  uncle : — 'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
Marwan  called  on  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah  and  said,  "O  com-
mander of  the  believers,  Mu'awiyah  in  his  caliphate  bought
from  certain  Jews  a  piece  of  land  in  Wadi-1-Kura  and  made
many  improvements  in  it.  Thou  hast  let  that  land  fall
into  negligence.  It  is  therefore  lost,  and  its  income  has  de-
creased. Give  it  therefore  as  fief  to  me,  and  I  shall  take  care
of  it."  To  this  Yazid  replied :  "  We  are  not  stingy  in  big
things,  nor  can  a  trifling  escape  our  eye."  'Abd-al-Malik
then  said,  "  Its  income  is  so  much  ...  "  Thou  canst
have  it,"  said  Yazid.1  When  'Abd-al-Malik  departed  Yazid
remarked,  "It  is  said  that  this  is  the  man  that  will  rule
after  us.  If  that  is  right,  we  would  have  done  him  favor
and  expect  to  receive  something  in  repay;  if  it  is  false,  we
have  granted  him  a  gift."

1  L.  Caetani,  Annali  dell  Islam,  vol.  ii,  p.  50,  note  7.


CHAPTER  VII

Makkah

The  cause  of  its  invasion.  When  the  Prophet  made  ar-
rangements with  the  Kuraish  in  the  year  of  al-Hudaibiyah
and  wrote  down  the  statement  of  the  truce1  to  the  effect  that
he  who  desires  to  make  a  covenant  with  Muhammad  can  do
so,  and  he  who  desires  to  make  a  covenant  with  Kuraish
can  do  so;  and  that  he  of  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet
who  comes  to  Kuraish  should  not  be  returned,  and  he  of
the  banu-Kuraish  or  their  allies  who  comes  to  the  Prophet
should  be  returned,  then  those  of  Kinanah  who  were  present
rose  and  said,  "  We  will  enter  into  a  covenant  with  Kuraish,
and  accept  their  terms  "  ;  but  Khuza'ah  said,  "  We  will  enter
into  the  covenant  of  Muhammad  and  his  contract."  Since
between  'Abd-al-Muttalib  and  Khuza'ah  an  old  alliance
existed,  'Amr  ibn-Salim  ibn-Hasirah-1-Khuza'i  composed
the  following  verse :

"  O  Allah !  I  am  seeking  from  Muhammad  o^

the  hereditary  alliance  of  our  father  and  his."  2

One  of  the  clan  of  Khuza'ah  hearing  one  of  the  clan  of
Kinanah  sing  a  poem  satirizing  the  Prophet,  attacked  him
and  crushed  his  head.  This  incident  provoked  evil  and
fighting  between  the  two  parties.  Kuraish  reinforced  banu-
Kinanah  and  together  they  attacked  Khuza'ah  in  the  night
time,  thus  violating  the  covenant  and  the  arrangement.

1  Wakidi,  Maghazx,  p.  387;  Hisham,  pp.  746-747,  803.
J  Hisham,  p.  806;  Wakidi,  Maghazx,  p.  402;  Fakihi,  p.  42.
60


MAKKAH  6 1

Thereupon,  'Amr  ibn-Salim  ibn-Hasirah-1-Khuza'i  came
to  the  Prophet  and  solicited  his  aid.  This  led  the  Prophet
to  invade  Makkah.

The  following  is  taken  from  a  long  tradition  communi-
cated to  us  by  abu-'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  on  the  au-
thority of  'Urwah : — Kuraish  made  terms  with  the  Pro-
phet, stipulating  that  both  parties  promise  each  other  secur-
ity against  treachery  and  stealth,1  so  that  a  man  coming  on
pilgrimage  to  Makkah  or  to  visit  there,  or  passing  on  his
way  between  al-Yaman  and  at-Ta'if  is  safe;  and  he  of  the
"  polytheists  "  who  passes  through  al-Madinah  on  his  way
to  Syria  and  the  East  is  safe.  In  this  covenant  the  Prophet
included  banu-Ka'b ;  and  Kuraish  included  in  their  covenant
their  allies  of  the  banu-Kinanah.

Abu-Sufyan  as  an  envoy.  'Abd-al- Wahid  ibn-Ghiyath
from  'Ikrimah : — The  banu-Bakr  of  Kinanah  were  included
in  the  peace  terms  of  Kuraish,  and  the  Khuza'ah  were  in-
cluded in  the  peace  terms  of  the  Prophet.  But  a  fight  took  37
place  between  the  banu-Bakr  and  Khuza'ah  at  'Arafah.2
Kuraish  provided  banu-Bakr  with  arms,  and  gave  them
water  to  drink,  and  shelter.  Some  of  the  Kuraish  objected
saying,  '  Ye  have  violated  the  covenant,"  yet  the  others
replied,  "  We  have  not.  By  Allah,  we  did  not  fight.  We
only  gave  them  provision,  water,  and  shelter."

They,  thereupon,  said  to  abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb,  "  Go  and
renew  the  alliance  and  reconcile  the  parties  "  Abu-Sufyan
proceeded  to  al-Madinah  where  he  met  abu-Bakr  and  said
to  him,  "Abu-Bakr,  renew  the  alliance  and  reconcile  the
parties."

Abu-Bakr  asked  him  to  see  'Umar.  Accordingly  he  met
'Umar  and  said, "  Renew  the  alliance  and  reconcile  the

1Hisham,  p.  747;  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  106;  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  p.
257,  note  1 ;  and  Fa'ik,  vol.  ii,  p.  114.

2Hisham,  p.  803;  Fakihi,  pp.  49  and  144-145;  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  646.


62  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

parties,"  to  which  'Umar  replied,  "  May  Allah  cut  off  the
alliance  what  is  still  connected  and  wear  out  what  is  still
new."  Abu-Sufyan  then  said,  "  By  Allah  I  never  saw  a
worse  head  of  a  tribe  than  thou!"  Thence  he  went  to
Fatimah  who  asked  him  to  meet  'Ali.  This  he  did  and
made  the  same  request.  'Ali  replied,  "  Thou  art  the  sheikh
of  Kuraish  and  its  chief.  Renew  therefore  the  alliance  and
reconcile  the  parties."  Abu-Sufyan  then  clapped  his  right
hand  against  the  left  saying,  "  I  have  renewed  the  alliance
and  reconciled  the  parties."

He  then  left  and  came  to  Makkah.  The  Prophet  had
said,  "Abu-Sufyan  is  coming.  He  returns  satisfied  without
having  effected  any  result."  When  he  returned  to  the  people
of  Makkah  he  told  them  what  had  happened  and  they  said,
"  By  Allah  we  know  none  more  foolish  than  thou.  Thou
dost  bring  us  neither  war  that  we  may  be  warned,  nor  peace
that  we  may  feel  safe."

Khuza'ah  then  came  to  the  Prophet  and  complained  of
what  had  befallen  them.  The  Prophet  said,  "  I  was  ordered
to  secure  one  of  the  two  towns  Makkah  or  at-Ta'if."
Thereupon,  the  Prophet  ordered  that  the  march  be  com-
menced. Thus  he  set  out  with  the  Companions  saying,  "  O
Allah,  strike  upon  their  ears  [with  deafness]  that  they  may
not  hear,1  so  that  we  may  take  them  by  surprise!"  The
Prophet  pressed  the  march  until  he  camped  at  Marr  az-
Zahran.  Kuraish  had  asked  abu-Sufyan  to  return.  When
he  [abu-Sufyan]  got  to  Marr  az-Zahran  and  saw  the  fires
and  the  tents  he  said,  "  What  is  the  matter  with  the  people  ?
They  seem  like  the  people  celebrating  the  night  of  'Arafah."
Saying  this,  he  was  surrounded  by  the  Prophet's  horsemen,
who  took  him  prisoner ;  and  he  was  brought  before  the  Pro-
phet. 'Umar  came  and  wanted  to  execute  him,  but  al-

1  Cf.  Kor.,  18 :  10.


MAKKAH


63


'Abbas  prevented  him  and  he  [abu-Sufyan]  embraced  Islam
and  presented  himself  before  the  Prophet.  When  the  time
for  morning  prayer  came,  the  Moslems  bestirred  themselves
for  ablution  before  prayer.  "What  is  the  matter?"  said
abu-Sufyan  to  al-'Abbas  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib,  "  Do  they  38
mean  to  kill  me?"  "  No,"  answered  al-'Abbas,  "  they  have
risen  for  prayer."  As  they  began  to  pray,  abu-Sufyan
noticed  that  when  the  Prophet  knelt  they  knelt;  when  he
prostrated  himself,  they  prostrated  themselves ;  upon  which
he  remarked,  "  By  Allah  I  never  saw,  as  I  did  to-day,  the
submissiveness  of  a  people  coming  from  here  and  there —
not  even  in  the  case  of  the  noble  Persians,  or  the  Greeks
who  have  long  fore-locks."  1

Al-'Abbas  asked  the  Prophet  saying,  "  Send  me  to  the
people  of  Makkah  that  I  may  invite  them  to  Islam."  No
sooner  had  the  Prophet  sent  him  than  he  called  him  back
saying,  "  Bring  my  uncle  back  to  me,  that  the  '  polytheists  '
may  not  kill  him."  Al-'Abbas,  however,  refused  to  return
until  he  came  to  Makkah  and  made  the  following  statement :
'  O  ye  people,  embrace  Islam  and  ye  shall  be  safe.  Ye
have  been  surrounded  on  all  sides.  Ye  are  confronted  by
a  hard  case  that  is  beyond  your  power.2  Here  is  Khalid
in  the  lower  part  of  Makkah,  there  is  az-Zubair  in  the  upper
part  of  it,  and  there  is  the  Prophet  of  Allah  at  the  head
of  the  Emigrants,  Ansdr  and  Khuza'ah."  To  this  Kuraish
replied,  "And  what  are  Khuza'ah  with  their  mutilated
noses !"

The  entrance  into  Makkah.  'Abd-al-Wahid  ibn-Ghiyath
from  abu-Hurairah  : — The  spokesman  of  Khuza'ah  repeated
the  following  verse  before  the  Prophet :

xFakihi,  p.  155;  Wakidi,  Maghasi,  p.  405.
2  Fakihi,  p.  150 ;  Fa'ik,  vol.  i,  p.  338.


64  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

"  O  Lord,  I  am  seeking  from  Muhammad

the  hereditary  alliance  between  our  father  and  his.
Reinforce  therefore,  with  Allah's  guidance,  a  mighty  victory,

and  summon  the  worshippers  of  Allah,  and  they  will  come  for  help."  *

Hammad  states  on  the  authority  of  'Ikrimah  that
Khuza'ah  called  the  Prophet  as  he  was  washing  himself,  and
the  Prophet  replied,  "  Here  I  am!"

According  to  al-Wakidi  among  others,  a  band  of  Kuraish
took  up  arms  on  the  day  of  the  conquest  [of  Makkah]
saying,  "  Never  shall  Muhammad  enter  the  city  except  by
force."  Accordingly,  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  led  the  fight
against  them  and  was  the  first  to  receive  the  order  of  the
Prophet  to  enter.2  So  he  killed  twenty-four  men  from  [the
tribe  of]  Kuraish  and  four  from  [the  tribe  of]  Hudhail.
Others  state  that  twenty-three  men  from  Kuraish  were
killed  on  that  day  and  the  rest  took  to  flight  seeking  refuge  39
in  the  mountain  heights  which  they  climbed.  Of  the  Com-
panions of  the  Prophet,  Kurz  ibn-Jabir  al-Fihri,  and
Khalid  al-Ash'ar  al-Ka'bi  suffered  martyrdom  on  that  day.
According  to  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi,  however,  the  latter  of
the  martyrs  was  Hubaish  al-Ash'ar  ibn-Khalid  al-Ka'bi 3  of
the  tribe  of  Khuza'ah.

Abu-Hurairah  describes  the  conquest.  Shaiban  ibn-abi-
Shaibah-1-Ubulli  from  'Abdallah  ibn-Rabah  : — A  number  of
deputations  came  to  call  on  Mu'awiyah.  It  was  in  Ramadan,
and  we  used  to  prepare  food  for  one  another.  Abu-
Hurairah  was  one  of  those  who  often  invited  us  to  his  dwel-
ling-place. I  [ibn-Rabah]  therefore  prepared  a  meal  and
invited  them.  Then  abu-Hurairah  asked.  "  Shall  I,  O
Ansar,  amuse  you  with  a  narrative  concerning  you?"  and

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  1621-1622.

3  Fakihi,  p. 153,  seq.

"'Khunais  ibn-Khalid"  in  Hisham,  p.  817.


MAKKAH  6-

he  went  on  to  describe  the  conquest  of  Makkah  as  follows :
"  The  Prophet  advanced  until  he  came  to  Makkah.  At  the
head  of  one  of  the  two  wings  of  the  army,  he  sent  az-Zubair,
at  the  head  of  the  other,  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid,  and  of  the
infantry  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah.  The  way  they  took
was  through  the  bottom  of  the  valley.  The  Prophet  was
at  the  head  of  his  cavalry  detachment.  On  seeing  me  the
Prophet  called,  'Abu-Hurairah,'  and  I  replied,  '  Here  I  am,
Prophet  of  Allah.'  'Summon  the  Ansdr,'  said  he,  'and  let  no
one  come  but  my  Ansdr.'  I  summoned  them  and  they  came
around.  In  the  meantime,  Kuraish  had  gathered  their  mob
and  followers  saying,  '  Let  us  send  these  ahead.  If  they
win,  we  will  join  them ;  and  if  defeated,  we  shall  give  what-
ever is  demanded.'  '  Do  ye  see '  said  the  Prophet,  '  the
mob  of  Kuraish?'  'We  do,'  answered  the  Ansdr.  He
then  made  a  sign  with  one  hand  over  the  other  as  if  to  say,
'  kill  them.'  To  this  the  Prophet  added,  '  Meet  me  at
as-Safa.'  Accordingly  we  set  out,  each  man  killing  whom-
ever he  wanted  to  kill,  until  abu-Sufyan  came  to  the  Pro-
phet saying,  '  O  Prophet  of  Allah,  the  majority  of  Kuraish
is  annihilated.  There  is  no  more  Kuraish  after  this  day.' x
The  Prophet  thereupon  announced,  'He  who  enters  the  house
of  abu-Sufyan  is  safe,  he  who  closes  his  own  door  is  safe,  40
and  he  who  lays  down  his  arms  is  safe.'  On  this  the  Ansdr
remarked  one  to  the  other,  'The  man  is  moved  by  love  to  his
relatives  and  compassion  on  his  clan.'  The  Prophet  at  this
received  the  inspiration  which  we  never  failed  to  observe
whenever  it  came.  He  therefore  said :  '  O  ye  Ansdr,  ye
have  said  so  and  so  ...  '  '  We  have,  Prophet  of  Allah,'
replied  the  Ansdr.  '  Nay,'  said  the  Prophet,  '  I  am  the
slave  of  Allah  and  his  Prophet.  I  have  immigrated  to  .Allah
and  to  you. '  My  life  is  your  life ;  my  death  is  your  death !'

1  Fakihi,  p.  154.


66  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Hearing  this,  the  Ansar  began  to  weep  saying,  4By  Allah,  we
said  what  we  said  only  in  our  anxiety  to  spare  the  Prophet
of  Allah.'  The  people  then  crowded  to  the  house  of  abu-
Sufyan  and  closed  its  doors  laying  down  their  arms.  The
Prophet  proceeded  to  the  '  stone  '  and  laid  hold  of  it.  He
then  made  the  circuit  of  the  '  House  '  and  came,  with  a  bow
in  his  hand  held  at  its  curved  part,  to  an  idol  at  the  side  of
the  Ka'bah.  He  began  to  stab  the  eye  of  the  idol  saying,
'Truth  has  come  and  falsehood  has  vanished,  it  is  the  prop-
erty of  vanity  to  vanish.'  1  When  the  circuit  was  done,  he
came  to  as-Safa,  climbed  it  until  he  could  see  the  '  House,'
and  he  raised  his  hand  praising  Allah  and  praying."

The  Prophet's  orders.  Muhammad  ibn-as-Sabbah  from
'Ubaidallah  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-'Utbah : — On  the  occasion  of
the  conquest  of  Makkah,  the  Prophet  made  the  following
statement,  "  Slay  no  wounded  person,  pursue  no  fugitive,
execute  no  prisoner;  and  whosoever  closes  his  door  is  safe."

Ibn-Khatal  proscribed.  Al-Wakidi  states  that  the  in-
vasion in  which  the  conquest  was  effected  was  carried  on  in
the  month  of  Ramadan  in  the  year  8.  On  that  occasion
the  Prophet  remained  in  Makkah  to  the  time  of  the  festival
at  the  end  of  Ramadan,  after  which  he  proceeded  to  invade
Hunain.  To  the  governorship  of  Makkah  he  assigned  'Attab
ibn-Asid  ibn-abi-l-'ts  ibn-Umaiyah,  and  ordered  the  de-
molishing of  the  idols  and  the  effacement  of  the  pictures  that
stood  in  the  Ka'bah.  He  also  said,  "Put  ibn-Khatal  to  death,
even  if  ye  find  him  holding  the  curtains  of  the  Ka'bah."  Ac-
cordingly, abu-Barzalr-1-Aslami  put  him  to  death.  Accord-  41
ing  to  abu-al-Yakzan,  however,  the  name  of  ibn-Khatal
was  Kais,  and  the  one  who  put  him  to  death  was  abu-
Shiryab  al-Ansari. This  ibn-Khatal  had  two  female  slave-

iKor.,  17:83.

2  Al-Wakidi, p. 414, calls him abu-Bardah ; cf. ibn-Duraid, Kitab
al-Ishtikdk,  p.  66;  Nawawi,  Tahdhib  al-Asma',  p.  788;  Hisham,  p.  819.


MAKKAH  67

singers  who  always  sang  poems  satirizing  the  Prophet.  One
of  them  was  killed,  and  the  other  lived  to  the  time  of
'Uthman  when  a  rib  of  hers  was  broken  and  caused  her
death.

Mikyas  ibn-Subdbah  proscribed.  Numailah  ibn-'Abdal-
lah  al-Kinani  killed  Mikyas  ibn-Subabah-1-Kinani,  the  Pro-
phet having  announced  that  whosoever  finds  him  may  kill
him.  The  Prophet  did  this  for  the  following  reason:
Mikyas  had  a  brother,  Hashim  ibn-Subabah  ibn-Hazn,  who
embraced  Islam  and  witnessed  with  the  Prophet  the  invasion
made  on  al-Muraisi'.  Hashim  was  mistaken  by  one  of  the
Ansdr  for  a  "  polytheist  "  and  killed.  Mikyas  thereupon
came  to  the  Prophet  and  the  Prophet  decreed  that  the  rela-
tives of  the  slayer  responsible  for  the  bloodwit  should  pay
it.  Mikyas  received  the  bloodwit  and  became  Moslem.
Later  he  attacked  his  brother's  slayer,  slew  him  and  took
to  flight,  after  which  he  apostatised  from  Islam  and  said :

"  My  soul  has  been  healed  by  having  him  lie,

deep  in  the  blood  flowing  from  his  veins  his  clothes  soaked,
I  took  revenge  on  him  by  force  leaving  it,

for the leaders of banu-an-Najjar, the high in rank, to pay his
bloodwit,
thereby  I  attained  my  ambition,  and  satisfied  my  vengeance,

and  I  was  the  first  to  forsake  Islam."  1

Al-Huwairith  proscribed.  'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib  killed  al-
Huwairith  ibn-Nukaidh  ibn-Bujair  2  ibn-'Abd  ibn-Kusai,  the
Prophet  having  declared  that  whosoever  finds  him  may  kill
him.

Ibn-Khatal's  slave-singers.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
al-Kalbi : — A  female  slave-singer  owned  by  Hilal  ibn-'Abdal-
lah,  i.  e.,  ibn-Khatal  al-Adrami  of  the  banu-Taim,  came  to
the  Prophet  in  disguise. She  embraced  Islam  and  acknowl-

1  Mawardi,  pp.  229-230.

2  Hisham,  p.  819.


68  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

edged  the  Prophet  as  chief.  Not  knowing  who  she  was,
the  Prophet  did  not  molest  her.  The  other  singer  of  Hilal
was  killed.  Both  singers,  however,  used  to  sing  satires
against  the  Prophet.

Ibn-az-Ziba'ra  embraces  Islam. Ibn-az-Ziba'ra  as-Sahmi
embraced  Islam  before  the  Moslems  had  chance  to  kill  him,
and  sang  poems  in  praise  of  the  Prophet. On  the  day  of 42
the  conquest  of  Makkah  the  Prophet  declared  his  blood  law-
ful, but  he  was  not  molested.

The  Prophet's  khutbah.  Muhammad  ibn-as-Sabbah  al-
Bazzaz  from  al-Kasim  ibn-Rabi'ah : — On  the  day  of  the  battle
of  Makkah  the  Prophet  delivered  the  following  khutbah
[speech]  :  "  Praise  be  to  Allah  who  made  his  promise  true,
and  gave  his  army  victory 1  and  all  alone  defeated  the
'  confederates.'  Verily  every  privilege  of  pre-Islamic  time
and  every  blood  and  every  claim  lie  under  my  feet  with  the
exception  of  the  custody  of  the  '  House  ' 2  and  the  provid-
ing of  the  Pilgrims  with  beverage."

Khalaf  al-Bazzar  from  'Abdallah  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman's
sheikhs : — On  the  day  of  the  conquest  of  Makkah  the  Prophet
asked  Kuraish,  "  What  think  ye?"  3  to  which  they  replied,
"  What  we  think  is  good,  and  what  we  say  is  good.  A  noble
brother  thou  art,  and  the  son  of  a  noble  brother.  Thou
hast  succeeded."  The  Prophet  then  said,  "  My  answer  is
that  given  by  my  brother  Joseph,4  '  No  blame  be  on  you  this
day.  Allah  will  forgive  you;  for  he  is  the  most  merciful
of  the  merciful.'  Verily  every  debt,  possession,  and  privi-
lege of  pre-Islam  lie  under  my  feet  with  the  exception  of
the  custody  of  the  '  House  '  and  providing  the  pilgrims
with  beverage."

1  Hisham,  p.  821.

2  The  sanctuary  at  Makkah;  Azraki,  p.  17  seq.
!Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1642.

4  Kor.. 12  :  92.


MAKKAH  ■  69

Shaiban  from  'Abdallah  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-'Umair : — The
Prophet  said  in  his  khutbah,  "  Yea,  all  Makkah  is  inviolable.
What  is  between  its  two  rugged  mountains  was  not  lawful
for  any  one  before  me,  nor  will  it  be  made  for  any  after
me.  To  me  it  was  made  lawful  for  only  one  hour  on  one
day.  Its  fresh  herbage  shall  not  be  cut,  its  thorny  trees
shall  not  be  felled,  its  game  shall  not  be  chased,  what  is
found  x  in  it  shall  not  be  kept  unless  previous  announce-
ment has  been  made  of  the  find."  A1-' Abbas  said,  "  From
this  should  be  excluded  the  idhkhir  plant 2  to  be  used  by  our
jewelers,  blacksmiths  and  as  a  means  of  cleansing  a  our
houses."  The  Prophet  then  added,  "  The  idhkhir  is  ex-
cluded."

Yusuf  ibn-Musa-1-Kattan  from  ibn-' Abbas : — The  Prophet
said,  "  The  fresh  herbage  of  Makkah  shall  not  be  cut,  its
trees  shall  not  be  felled."  "  With  the  exception  of  the  43
idhkhir  plant,"  remarked  al-'Abbas,  "  which  is  for  the  black-
smiths 4  and  for  the  cleansing  of  the  houses."  This  the
Prophet  allowed.

'Umar  advised  not  to  confiscate  the  treasure.  Shaiban
from  al-Hasan : — 'Umar  wanted  to  seize  the  treasure  of  the
Ka'bah  to  use  it  in  the  cause  of  Allah.  But  Ubai  ibn-Ka'b
al-Ansari  turned  to  him  and  said  :  "Before  thee,  'Commander
of  the  Believers  '  came  thy  two  companions ; 5  who  would
have  surely  done  so,  if  it  were  an  act  of  virtue."  6

Makkah  inviolable. 'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Mujahid : T —

1  Abu-Ishak  ash-Shirazi,  at-Tanbih,  p.  156.

1 A  sweet  rush  resembling  papyrus  used  for  roofing  houses.

3  Ar.  tuhiir,  according  to  other  readings  zuhur  "  and  for  the  roofs."
See  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  pp.  338-339-

4  Ar.  kuyun ;  Azraki,  p.  85,  has  kubur  "  graves  ".
6  Muhammad  and  abu-Bakr.

6Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  129,  note  1.
7ibn-Jabr;  see  an-Nawawi,  p.  540.


;o


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


"  Makkah  is  inviolable,"  said  the  Prophet.  "  It  is  not  legal
either  to  sell  its  dwellings  or  to  rent  its  houses."

The  dwelling  places  of  Makkah  not  to  be  rented.
Muhammad  ibn-Hatim  al-Marwazi  from  'A'ishah  who  said,
"  Once  I  said  to  the  Prophet,  '  Build  for  thee.  Prophet  of
Allah,  a  house  in  Makkah  that  will  protect  thee  against  the
sun,'  to  which  he  replied,  '  Makkah  is  the  dwelling  place
only  of  those  who  are  already  in  it.'  "

Khalaf  ibn-Hisham  al-Bazzar  from  ibn-Juraij  who  said,
"  I  have  read  a  letter  written  by  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz
in  which  the  renting  of  houses  in  Makkah  is  prohibited."

Abu-'Ubaid  from  ibn-'Umar : — The  latter  said  :  "  The
whole  of  al-Haram  is  a  place  of  worship."  1

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-abi-Sulaiman :
—A  message  written  by  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  to  the
chief  of  Makkah  reads :  "  Let  not  the  inhabitants  of  Makkah
receive  rent  for  their  houses  because  it  is  not  legal  for  them."

The  following  tradition  regarding  the  text,  "Alike  for
those  who  abide  therein  and  for  the  stranger  2  "  was  com-
municated to  lis  by  'Uthman  ibn-abi-Shaibah  from  'Abd-ar-
Rahman  ibn-Sabit : — By  the  stranger  is  meant  the  pilgrims
and  visitors  who  go  there  and  who  have  equal  right  in  the
buildings,  being  entitled  to  live  wherever  they  want,  pro-
vided none  of  the  natives  of  Makkah  goes  out  of  his  home.

The  following  tradition  regarding  the  same  text  was
communicated  to  us  by  'Uthman  on  the  authority  of
Mujahid  : — The  inhabitants  of  Makkah  and  other  people  are
alike  so  far  as  the  dwellings  are  concerned.

'Uthman  and  'Amr  from  Mujahid  : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab 44
once  said  to  the  people  of  Makkah,  "  Make  no  doors  for
your  houses  that  the  stranger  may  live  wherever  he  wants."

'Azraki,  p.  5  seq.
7  Kor„  22  :  25.


MARK  AH  7I

'Uthman  ibn-abi-Shaibah  and  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
abu-Hasin. — The  latter  said,  "  I  once  told  Sa'id  ibn-Jubair
in  Makkah  that  I  wanted  to  'abide  therein  '  to  which  he  re-
plied, '  Thou  art  already  abiding  therein  '  and  he  read,
'Alike  for  those  who  abide  therein  and  for  the  stranger.'  "

The  following  tradition  in  explanation  of  the  same  text
was  communicated  to  us  by  'Uthman  on  the  authority  of
Sa'id  ibn-Jubair : — All  people  in  it  are  alike  whether  they
are  the  inhabitants  of  Makkah  or  of  some  other  place.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi : — Many  cases  were
brought  before  abu-Bakr  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-'Amr  ibn-
Hazm  regarding  the  rents  of  the  houses  of  Makkah,  and
abu-Bakr  in  each  case  judged  against  the  tenant.  This  too
is  the  view  of  Malik  and  ibn-abi-Dhi'b.  But  according  to
Rabi'ah  and  abu-az-Zinad.  there  is  no  harm  in  taking  money
for  renting  houses  or  for  selling  dwellings  in  Makkah.1

Al-Wakidi  said,  "  I  saw  ibn-abi-Dhi'b  receiving  the  rent
of  his  house  in  Makkah  between  as-Safa  and  al-Marwah."

It  was  said  by  al-Laith  ibn-Sa'd,  "  Whatever  has  the
form  of  a  house  its  rent  is  legal  for  its  proprietor.  As
for  the  halls,  the  roads,  the  courts,  and  the  abodes  that
are  in  a  state  of  ruins,  he  who  comes  to  them  first  can
have  them  first  without  rent."

A  tradition  to  the  same  effect  was  transmitted  to  me  by
abu-'Abd-ar-Rahman  al-Awdi  on  the  authority  of  ash-
Shafi'i.

Said  Sufyan  ibn-Sa'id  ath-Thauri :  "  To  rent  a  house  in
Makkah  is  illegal  " ;  and  he  insisted  on  that.

According  to  al-Auza'i,  ibn-abi-Laila  and  abu-Hanifah,
if  the  rent  is  made  during  the  nights  of  the  Pilgrimage  it
is  void,  but  if  it  is  in  other  nights,  whether  the  one  who
hires  is  a  neighbor  or  not,  it  is  all  right.

1  Cf.  Kutb-ad-Din,  al-I'lam,  p.  17.


72  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

According  to  certain  followers  of  abu-Yusuf,  its  rent  is
absolutely  legal.  The  one  "  abiding  therein "  and  the
"  stranger  "  are  alike  only  as  regards  making  the  circuit  of
the  "  House."

The  plants  of  the  Haram.  Al-Husain  ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-
Aswad  from  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-al-Aswad : — The  latter
found  no  harm  in  gathering  vegetables,  cutting,  eating  or
making  any  other  use  of  anything  else  planted  by  man  in  45
Makkah  be  it  palm-trees  or  otherwise.  He  only  disapproved
of  this  being  done  with  trees  and  plants  that  grow  of  their
own  accord  without  the  agency  of  man.  From  this  cate-
gory al-idhkhir  was  excluded.  According  to  al-Hasan  ibn-
Salih,  'Abd-ar-Rahman  allowed  it  in  the  case  of  rotten  trees
that  have  decayed  and  fallen  to  pieces.

According  to  the  view  of  Malik  and  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  as
stated  by  Muhammad  ibn-'Umar  al-Wakidi,  regarding  the
legality  or  illegality  of  felling  a  tree  of  the  Haram,  it  is  wrong
at  all  events;  but  if  the  man  who  does  it  is  ignorant  he
should  be  taught  and  receive  no  penalty;  if  he  knows  but
is  impious,  he  should  be  punished  without  paying  the  value
of  the  trees.  He  who  cuts  it  may  have  it  for  his  use.
According  to  abu-Sufyan  ath-Thauri  and  abu-Yusuf,  he
should  pay  the  value  of  the  tree  he  cuts  and  cannot  have
the  wood  for  his  use.  The  same  view  is  held  by  abu-
Hanifah.

According  to  Malik  ibn-Anas  and  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  there  is
no  harm  in  cutting  the  branches  of  the  thumdm  plant  and
the  ends  of  the  senna  plant  from  the  Haram  to  be  used  as
medicine  or  tooth-picks.

According  to  Sufyan  ibn-Sa'id,  abu-Hanifah,  and  abu-
Yusuf,  whatever  in  the  Haram  is  grown  by  man  or  was
grown  by  him  can  be  cut  with  impunity :  whatever  is  grown
without  the  agency  of  man,  its  cutter  should  be  responsible
for  its  value.


MAKKAH  73

"  I  once,"  said  al-Wakidi,"  asked  ath-Thauri  and  abu-
Yusuf  regarding  the  case  of  one  who  plants  in  the  Haram
something  that  is  not  ordinarily  grown  and  which  he  tends
until  it  grows  high,  would  it  be  right  for  him  to  cut  it.
They  answered  in  the  affirmative.  Then  I  asked  about  the
case  of  a  tree  that  may  grow  of  its  own  accord  in  his  garden
and  that  does  not  belong  to  the  category  of  trees  planted
by  man,  and  they  said,  '  He  can  do  with  it  whatever  he
likes.'  "

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi : — The  latter  said,
'  It  has  been  reported  to  us  that  ibn-'Umar  used  to  eat  in
Makkah  vegetables  grown  in  the  Haram."

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Mu'adh  ibn-Muhammad : —
The  latter  said,  "  I  have  seen  on  the  table  of  az-Zuhri  vege-
tables grown  in  the  Haram."

"  No  pilgrim  or  visitor  of  the  Haram,"  said  abu-Hanifah,
"  shall  have  his  camel  graze  in  the  Haram,  nor  shall  he  cut
grass  for  it."  The  same  view  is  held  by  Zufar.  But  Malik,
ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  Sufyan,  abu-Yusuf  and  ibn-abi-Sabrah  are
of  the  opinion  that  there  is  no  harm  in  having  the  animals
graze,  but  the  man  should  not  cut  the  grass  for  them.  Ibn-
abi-Laila,  however,  holds  that  there  is  no  harm  in  having
someone  cut  the  grass.

'Affan  and  al'Abbas  ibn-al-Walid  an-Narsi  from  Laith : — 46
'Ata'  found  no  harm  in  using  the  vegetables  of  the  Haram  as
well  as  what  is  planted  therein  including  the  branches  and
the  tooth-picks,  but  Mujahid  disapproved  of  it.

The  history  of  the  Haram-mosque.  The  Haram-mosque
at  the  time  of  the  Prophet  and  abu-Bakr  had  no  wall  to  sur-
round it.  When  'Umar,  however,  became  caliph  and  the
number  of  the  Moslems  increased,  he  enlarged  the  mosque
and  bought  certain  houses  which  he  demolished  to  increase
its  size.  Certain  neighbors  of  the  mosque  refused  to  sell
their  houses  and  'Umar  had  to  demolish  their  houses,  the


74


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


prices  of  which  he  deposited  in  the  treasury  of  al-Ka'bah
until  they  took  them  later.1  Moreover  he  raised  around
the  mosque  a  low  wall  not  higher  than  a  man's  stature.  On
this  wall  the  lamps  were  put.  When  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan
became  caliph,  he  purchased  certain  dwellings  and  thereby
enlarged  the  mosque.  Certain  people  whose  dwellings  he
seized  after  depositing  their  prices,  met  him  near  the
"House"  with  loud  protests,  upon  which  'Uthman  addressed
them  as  follows :  "  It  is  only  my  compassion  on  you  and
my  leniency  in  dealing  with  you  that  made  you  venture  to
do  this  against  me.  'Umar  did  exactly  what  I  am  doing
but  ye  kept  silent  and  were  satisfied."  He  then  ordered
them  to  jail  where  they  remained  until  'Abdallah  ibn-Khalid
ibn-Asid  2  ibn-abi-l-'Is  spoke  to  him  on  their  behalf  and
they  were  released.

It  is  reported  that  'Uthman  was  the  first  to  erect  the
porches  of  the  mosque,  which  he  did  on  the  occasion  of
enlarging  it.

In  the  days  of  Abraham,  Jurhum  and  the  'Amalik,  the
bottom  of  the  door  of  the  Ka'bah  was  level  with  the  ground
until  it  was  built  by  Kuraish,  at  which  time  abu-Hudhaifah
ibn-al-Mughirah  said,  "Raise,  people,  the  door  of  the  Ka'bah.
so  that  no  one  may  enter  without  a  ladder.  Then  would  no
man  whom  ye  do  not  want  to  enter  be  able  to  do  so.  In
case  some  one  ye  hate  should  come,  ye  may  throw  him  down,
and  he  will  fall  injuring  those  behind."  The  suggestion
was  followed  by  Kuraish.

When  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair  ibn-al-' Auwam  fortified
himself  in  the  Haram-mosque,  taking  refuge  in  it  against
al-Husain  ibn-Numair  as-Sakuni  who  was  fighting  with  a
Syrian  army,  one  of  'Abdallah's  followers  carried  one  day

1  Azraki,  p.  307.

2  or  Usaid;  see  Azraki,  p.  307.


MAKKAH  75

burning  fibres  of  a  palm-tree  on  the  top  of  a  lance.  The
wind  being  violent,  a  spark  flew  and  attached  itself  to  the
curtains  of  the  Ka'bah  and  burnt  them.  As  a  result,  the
walls  were  cracked,  and  turned  black.  This  took  place  in
the  year  64.  After  the  death  of  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah  and
the  departure  of  al-Husain  ibn-Numair  to  Syria,  ibn-az-
Zubair  ordered  that  the  stones  that  had  been  thrown  into  it 1
be  removed,  and  they  were  removed.  He  then  demolished  the
Ka'bah,  and  rebuilt  it  on  its  old  foundation,  using  stones  in
the  building.  He  opened  two  doors  on  the  ground,  one  to
the  east,  and  the  other  to  the  west ;  one  for  entrance  and  the
other  for  exit.  In  building  it  he  found  that  the  founda-
tion was  laid  on  al-Hijr.2  His  object  was  to  give  it  the
shape  it  had  in  the  days  of  Abraham,  as  it  had  been  de-
scribed to  him  by  'A'ishah,  the  mother  of  the  believers,  on
the  authority  of  the  Prophet.3  The  doors  of  the  Ka'bah,
ibn-az-Zubair  plated  with  gold,  and  its  keys  he  made  of
gold.  When  al-Hajjaj  ibn-Yusuf  fought  on  behalf  of
'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  and  killed  ibn-az-Zubair,  'Abd-
al-Malik  wrote  to  al-Hajjaj  ordering  him  to  rebuild  the
Ka'bah  and  the  Haram-mosque,  the  stones  hurled  at  it  hav-
ing made  cracks  in  the  walls.  Accordingly,  al-Hajjaj  pulled
the  Ka'bah  down  and  rebuilt  it  according  to  the  shape  given
it  by  Kuraish,  removing  all  stones  thereof.  After  this
'Abd-al-Malik  often  repeated,  "  I  wish  I  had  made  ibn-az-
Zubair  do  with  the  Ka'bah  and  its  structure  what  he  volun-
tarily undertook  to  do !"  4

The  cover  of  the  Ka'bah. In  pre-Islamic  times  the  cover

1  Cf.  Kutb-ad-Din,  p.  81.

2  The  space  comprised  by  the  curved  wall  al-Hatim,  which  encom-
passes the  Ka'bah  on  the  north-west  side.

s  Kutb-ad-Din,  p.  81.

4  Ibid.,  p.  84.


47


76  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

of  the  Ka'bah  consisted  of  pieces  of  leather  and  ma'aUr  1
cloth.  The  Prophet  covered  it  with  Yamanite  cloths,
'Umar  and  'Uthman  clothed  it  in  Coptic  cloths,  and  Yazid
ibn-Mu'awiyah  clothed  it  in  Khusruwani  silk.2  After  Yazid,
ibn-az-Zubair  and  al-Hajjaj  clothed  it  in  silk.  The
Umaiyads  during  a  certain  part  of  their  rule,  clothed  it  in
robes  offered  as  tribute  by  the  people  of  Najran.  The
Umaiyads  used  to  strip  3  the  Ka'bah  of  its  old  covers  when
the  cloths  of  silk  were  put  on.  At  last  came  al-Walid  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  who  amplified  the  Haram-mosque  and  con-
veyed to  it  columns  of  stone  and  marble,  and  mosaic.  Ac-
cording to  al-Wakidi,  al-Mansur  added  to  the  mosque  dur-
ing his  caliphate  and  rebuilt  it.  This  took  place  in  the
year  139.

The  reconstruction  of  the  two  mosques.  It  has  been
stated  by  'All  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Mada'ini,
that  Ja'far  ibn-Sulaiman  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-
'  Abbas  was  made  by  al-Mahdi  governor  over  Makkah,  al-
Madinah  and  al-Yamamah.  Ja'far  enlarged  the  two  mos-
ques of  Makkah  and  al-Madinah  and  rebuilt  them.

Al-Mutawakkil — Ja'far  ibn-abi-Ishak  al-Mu'tasim-Billah 48
ibn-ar-Rashid  Harun  ibn-al-Mahdi — renewed  the  marble  of
the  Ka'bah,  made  a  belt  of  silver  around  it.  plated  its  walls
and  ceiling  with  gold — which  act  was  unprecedented — ,  and
clothed  its  pillars  with  silk.4

1  A  tribe  in  al-Yaman. See  Nihayah,  vol.  iii,  p.  109;  and  cf.  Yakut,
vol.  iv,  p.  282.
1  Cf.  Azraki.  p.  176;  Kutb-ad-Din,  p.  68.
sAzraki,  p.  180.
4  Kutb-ad-Din,  p.  54.


CHAPTER  VIII
The  Wells  of  Makkah

Before  Kusai  brought  Kuraish  together,  and  before  they
entered  Makkah,  they  used  for  drinking  purposes  reservoirs,
rain-water  tanks  on  mountain  tops,  a  well  called  al-
Yusairah  dug  by  Lu'ai  ibn-Ghalib  outside  the  Haram  and
another  well  called  ar-Rawa  dug  by  Murrah  ibn-Ka'b  and
which  lay  just  beyond  'Arafah.  Later,  Kilab  ibn-Murrah  1
dug  outside  of  Makkah  three  wells  Khumm,  Rumm  and
Jafr;  and  Kusai  ibn-Kilab  dug  another  which  he  called
al-'Ajul  and  prepared  a  drinking  place  in  connection  with  it.2

After  the  death  of  Kusai  a  certain  man  of  the  banu-Nasr
ibn-Mu'awiyah  fell  into  al-'Ajul  well  and  it  was  no  more
used.

Badhdhar  was  a  well  dug  by  Hashim  ibn-'Abd-Manaf.
It  lies  close  to  Khandamah  at  the  mouth  of  abu-Talib's
water-course.  This  Hashim  also  dug  Sajlah  3  which  Asad
ibn-Hashim  gave  to  'Adi  ibn-Naufal  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  abu-
1-Mut'im.  It  is  asserted  by  some,  however,  that  he  sold
it  to  him,  and  by  others  that  it  was  'Abd-al-Muttalib  who
gave  it  to  him  when  he  dug  Zamzam  and  the  water  became
abundant  in  Makkah.  This  Sajlah  was  later  included  in  49
the  Mosque.

'Abd-Shams  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  dug  out  at-Tawi  which  lay
in  the  upper  part  of  Makkah. He  dug  out  another  for  his

1  Azraki,  pp.  436,  439,  496 ;  Hisham,  p.  95.

2  A  few  verses  composed  in  regard  to  this  and  other  wells  have  been
omitted  from  the  translation.

5  Bakri,  p.  766;  Fakihi,  p.  120.

77


jg  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

special  use  called  al-Jafr.  Maimun  ibn-al-Hadram,  an  ally
of  the  banu-'Abd-Shams  ibn-'Abd-Manaf,  dug  his  own  well
which  was  the  last  to  be  dug  in  Makkah  during  the  pre-
Islamic  period.  Near  by  this  well,  lies  the  tomb  of  al-
Mansur  the  "  Commander  of  the  Believers."  The  first
name  of  al-Haclrami  was  'Abdallah  ibn-Tmad.1  Besides,
'Abd-Shams  dug  two  wells  which  he  called  Khumm  and
Rumm  2  after  Kilab  ibn-Murrah's  wells.  Khumm  lay  near
the  dam,  and  Rumm  near  Khadijah's  house.

Banu-Asad  ibn-'Abd-al-'Uzza  ibn-Kusai  dug  a  well  called
Shufiyah,  the  well  of  the  banu-Asad.3

Umm-Ahrad  was  one  dug  by  the  banu-'Abd-ad-Dar  ibn-
Kusai.

Banu-Jumah  dug  as-Sunbulah  well  which  is  the  same  as 50
the  well  of  Khalaf  ibn-Wahb  al-Jumahi.

Banu-Sahm  dug  the  well  called  al-Ghamr  which  is  the
well  of  al-'Asi  ibn- Wa'il.

Banu-'Adi  dug  al-Hafir.

Banu-Makhzum  dug  as-Sukya,  the  well  of  Hisham  ibn-
al-Mughirah  ibn-' Abdallah  ibn-'Umar  ibn-Makhzum.

Banu-Taim  dug  ath-Thuraiya  which  is  the  well  of
'Abdallah  ibn-Jud'an  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Taim.

The  banu-'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai  dug  an-Nak*.

Jubair  ibn-Mut'im  had  a  well — the  banu-Naufal  well,
which  has  lately  been  included  in  Dar  al-Kawarir  erected  by
Hammad  al-Barbari  in  the  caliphate  of  Harun  ar-Rashid.4

In  the  pre-Islamic  period,  'Akil  ibn-abi-Talib  had  dug  a
well  which  is  now  included  in  the  house  of  ibn-Yusuf .5

Al-Aswad  ibn-abi-1-Bakhtari  ibn-Hashim  ibn-al-Harith
ibn-Asad  ibn-'Abd-al-'Uzza  had  at  al-Aswad  gate  near  by  al-

1  Nawawi,  p.  432.  2  Bakri,  pp.  318,  437-438.

*  Azraki,  p.  438.  4  Azraki,  p.  437.

6  Azraki,  p.  441.


THE  WELLS  OF  MAKKAH


79


Hannatin  [embalmers']  a  well  that  was  later  added  into  the
Mosque.

'Ikrimah  well  was  named  after  'Ikrimah  ibn-Khalid  ibn-
al-'Asi  ibn-Hashim  ibn-al-Mughirah ;  'Amr  well,  as  well  as
'Amr  water-course,  after  'Amr  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-Safwan
ibn-Umaiyah  ibn-Khalaf  al-Jumahi.  At-Talub,  which  lay
in  the  lower  part  of  Makkah,  was  the  property  of  'Abdallah
ibn-Safwan.  Huwaitib  well  was  named  after  Huwaitib
ibn-'Abd-al-'Uzza  ibn-abi-Kais  of  banu-'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai,  and  5 1
it  lay  in  the  court  of  his  house  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley.
Abu-Musa  well  belonged  to  abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  and  lay  at
al-Ma'lat.  Shaudhab  well  was  named  after  Shaudhab,
Mu'awiyah's  freedman,  and  was  later  added  to  the  Mosque.
Some  say  that  this  Shaudhab  was  the  freedman  of  Tarik
ibn-'Alkamah  ibn-'Uraij  ibn-Jadhimah-1-Kinani,  others  that
he  was  the  freedman  of  Nan'  ibn-'Alkamah  ibn-Safwan
ibn-Umaiyah  .  .  .  ibn-Shikk  al-Kinani,  a  maternal  uncle  of
Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah.  Bakkar
well  was  named  after  a  man  from  al-'Irak  who  lived  in
Makkah,  and  it  lay  in  dhu-Tuwa;  Wardan  well  after
Wardan,  a  freedman  of  as-Sa'ib  *  ibn-abi- Wada'ah  ibn-
Dubairah  as-Sahmi.  Siraj  drinking  place  lay  in  Fakh
and  belonged  to  Siraj,  a  freedman  of  the  banu-Hashim.
Al-Aswad  well  was  named  after  al-Aswad  ibn-Sufyan  .  .  .
ibn-Makhzum  and  lay  near  the  well  of  Khalisah,  a  freed-
maid  of  al-Mahdi  the  "  Commander  of  the  Believers."  Al-
Barud  which  lay  in  Fakh  belonged  to  Mukhtarish  2  al-Ka'bi
of  [the  tribe  of]  Khuza'ah.

Certain  houses  and  gardens  in  Makkah.  According  to
ibn-al-Kalbi,  the  owner  of  ibn-'Alkamah  house  in  Makkah
was  Tarik  ibn-'Alkamah  ibn-'Uraij  ibn-Jadhimah-1-Kinani.

1  Azraki,  p.  442,  gives  al-Muttalib ;  cf.  Hisham,  p.  462.

2  Azraki,  p.  442,  gives  Khirash.


80  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

According  to  abu-'Ubaidah  Ma'mar  ibn-al-Muthanna,  'Abd-
al-Malik  ibn-Kuraib  al-Asma'i  and  others,  ibn-'Amir  garden
was  the  property  of  'Umar  ibn-'Ubaidallah  .  .  .  ibn-Lu'ai
and  was  by  mistake  called  ibn-'Amir  or  the  banu-'Amir
garden.  In  reality,  it  is  ibn-Ma'mar's  garden.  Others  say
that  it  was  so  called  after  ibn-'Amir  al-Hadrami ;  still  others,
after  ibn-'Amir  ibn-Kuraiz,  and  all  that  is  mere  guessing.

I  was  told  by  Mus'ab  ibn-' Abdallah  az-Zubairi  that
Makkah  in  pre-Islamic  times  was  called  Salah.

Ibn-Siba  jail.  The  following  was  told  to  me  by  al-' Abbas  52
ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi : — A  certain  Kindi  inquired  in  writing
from  my  father  about  the  one  after  whom  ibn-Siba'  jail
of  al-Madinah  was  named,  about  the  story  of  Dar  an-
Nadwah,  Dar  al-'Ajalah,  and  Dar  al-Kawarir  in  Makkah.
My  father  wrote  back  the  following  answer :  "As  for  ibn-
Siba'  jail,  it  was  a  house  for  'Abdallah  ibn-Siba'  ibn-'Abd-
al-'Uzza  ibn-Nadlah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Ghubshan  al-Khuza'i.
Siba'  was  surnamed  abu-Xiyar  and  his  mother  was  a  midwife
in  Makkah.  In  the  battle  of  Uhud,  he  was  challenged  by
Hamzah  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  who  cried,  '  Come,  thou  son
of  the  female  circumciser ! '  1  and  killed  him.  As  Hamzah
stooped  on  his  victim  to  take  his  armor,  he  was  thrust  with
a  spear  by  Wahshi.  The  mother  of  the  poet  Turaih  ibn-
Isma'il  ath-Thakan  was  the  daughter  of  'Abdallah  ibn-Siba',
an  ally  of  the  banu-Zuhrah.

Dar  an-Nadwah.  As  f or  an-Nadwah  [council-chamber],
it  was  built  by  Kusai  ibn-Kilab,  and  people  used  to  meet
in  it  and  have  the  cases  decided.2  Later,  Kuraish  used  to
assemble  in  it  to  consult  about  war  and  general  affairs,  to
assign  the  standard-bearers  and  to  contract  marriages.  This
was  the  first  house  established  in  Makkah  by  Kuraish.

1  "  An  expression  of  contumely  used  by  the  Arabs  whether  the  mother
is  really  a  female  circumciser  or  not." (Taj  al-'Arus.)

2  Azraki,  pp.  65,  66;  Diyarbakri.  vol.  i,  p.  175:  Tabari.  vol,  i,  p.  1098;
Istakhri,  p.  16.


THE  WELLS  OF  MAKKAH  8 1

Ddr  al-'Ajalah.  Then  comes  Dar  al-'Ajalah  which  belonged
to  Sa'id  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Sahm.  The  banu-Sahm  claim  that
it  was  built  before  an-Nadwah;  but  this  is  a  false  claim.
An-Nadwah  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  banu-'Abd-ad-Dar
ibn-Kusai  until  it  was  sold  by  Tkrimah  ibn-Hashim  ibn-
'Abd-Manaf  ibn-'Abd-ad-Dar  ibn-Kusai  to  Mu'awiyah  ibn-
abi-Sufyan,  and  the  latter  converted  it  into  a  governor's
house.

Ddr  al-Kawdrir.  Dar  al-Kawarir  belonged  to  'Utbah  ibn-
Rabi'ah  ibn-'Abd-Shams  ibn-'Abd-Manaf,  then  to  al-' Ab-
bas ibn-'Utbah  ibn-'Abd-Shams  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib,  and
later  to  Ja'far's  mother,  Zubaidah,  daughter  of  abu-1-Fadl
ibn-al-Mansur  the  "  Commander  of  the  Believers."  Be-
cause earthen  jars  were  partly  used  in  making  its  pavement
and  walls,  the  hall  was  called  al-Kawarir  [the  jar  build-
ing]. It  was  built  by  Hammad  al-Barbari  in  the  caliphate  53
of  ar-Rashid.

Ku'aiki'dn  and  Ajydd.  It  was  related  by  Hisham  ibn-
Muhammad  al-Kalbi  that  'Amr  ibn-Mudad  al-Jurhumi
fought  with  another  Jurhum  man  named  as-Sumaida'.
'Amr  appeared  carrying  arms  that  were  rattling.  Hence
Ku'aiki'an  [rattling]  the  name  of  the  place  from  which  he
appeared.  As-Sumaida'  appeared  with  bells  covering  his
horses'  necks.  Hence  Ajyad  [necks]  the  name  of  the  place
whence  he  appeared.  According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi,  it  was
said  that  he  appeared  with  horses  that  were  marked,  hence
the  name  Ajyad  [steeds].  The  common  people  of  Makkah,
however,  call  it  "  Jiyad  as-Saghir  "  and  "  Jiyad  al-Kabir."

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from'  Kathir  ibn-'Abdallah's  grand-
father, who  said  : — "We  accompanied  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab
on  his  visit  in  the  year  17,  and  on  the  way  were  met  by  the
owners  of  the  wells,  who  asked  'Umar  for  permission  tobuiH
dwelling  places  between  Makkah  and  al-Madinah  where,  up
to  that  time,  no  houses  stood.  'Umar  granted  them  per-
mission, but  imposed  the  condition  that  the  wayfarer  should
have  the  first  claim  on  the  water  and  shade."


CHAPTER  IX
The  Floods  in  Makkah

Umm-Nahshal  flood.  Al-'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  from  ibn-
Kharrabudh  al-Makki  and  others : — Makkah  was  visited  by
four  floods.  One  was  umm-Nahshal  flood  which  took  place
in  the  days  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.1  This  flood  rose  so
high  that  it  penetrated  into  the  Mosque  from  the  highest
part  of  Makkah.  'Umar  therefore  made  two  dams,  the
higher  of  which  extended  between  the  house  of  Babbah
(so  called  by  its  occupants,  the  house  being  that  of  'Abdallah
ibn-al-Harith  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  who
ruled  al-Basrah  at  the  time  of  the  insurrection  of  ibn-az-
Zubair)  and  the  house  of  Aban  ibn-'Uthman  ibn-'Affan.
The  lower  dam  lay  at  al-Hammarin ;  and  it  is  the  one  known
as  Al-Asid  dam.  Thus  was  the  flood  kept  back  from  the
Haram  mosque.  According  to  the  same  tradition  umm-
Nahshal,  the  daughter  of  'Ubaidah  2  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi
ibn-Umaiyah,  was  carried  away  by  the  flood  from  the  higher  54
part  of  Makkah  and  therefore  was  the  flood  named  after  her.

Al-Juhaf  w-al-Juraf.  Another  flood  was  that  of  al-
Juhaf  w-al-Juraf  which  took  place  in  the  year  80  in  the  time
of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan.  It  overtook  the  pilgrims  on
a  Monday  morning  and  carried  them  away  together  with
their  baggage,  and  surrounded  the  Ka'bah.  About  this  the
poet  said :

1Azraki,  pp.  394-398.
s  Azraki,  pp.  394-395  :  "  'Ubaid  ".
82


THE  FLOODS  IN  MAKKAH


83


"  Ghassan  never  saw  a  day  like  Monday,

when  so  many  were  saddened  and  so  many  eyes  wept;

and  when  the  flood  carried  away  the  people  of  al-Misrain  1
and  made  the  secluded  women  run  astray  climbing  the  mountains."  2

On  this  occasion,  'Abd-al-Malik  wrote  to  his  'dmil  in
Makkah,  'Abdallah  ibn-Sufyan  al-Makhzumi —  others  say
that  the  poet  al-Harith  ibn-Khalid  al-Makhzumi  was  his
'dmil — ordering  him  to  build  walls  without  clay  around  the
houses  that  bordered  on  the  valley,  and  around  the  Mosque,
and  to  erect  dams  at  the  openings  of  the  roads,  so  that  the
houses  should  be  secure.  To  this  effect,  he  sent  a  Christian
who  made  the  walls  and  set  up  the  dam  known  as  the  banu-
Kurad's  or  banu-Jumah's.  Other  dams  were  constructed
in  lower  Makkah. A  poet  says :

"  One  drop  of  tears  I  shall  keep,  the  other  I  shall  pour  forth,
if  I  pass  the  dam  of  the  banu-Kurad."

Al-Mukhabbil.  Another  flood  was  the  one  called  al-
Mukhabbil.  When  it  came,  many  were  afflicted  with  a
disease  in  their  body  and  palsy  in  their  tongues.  Hence  the
name  al-Mukhabbil  [rendering  some  limb  crippled].

Abu-Shdkir.  Still  another  flood  came  later  in  the  cali-
phate of  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  in  the  year  120.  It  is
known  as  abu-Shakir  flood  after  Maslamah  ibn-Hisham,
who  in  that  year  had  charge  of  the  fair  [of  the  pilgrims].

Wddi-Makkah.  The  flood  of  Wadi-Makkah  comes  from
a  place  known  as  Sidrat  'Attab  ibn-Asid  ibn-abi-1-ls.

The  Hood  in  the  caliphate  of  ar-Rashid.  It  was  reported
by  'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  that  a  great  flood  took  place  in  the
caliphate  of  al-Ma'mum  'Abdallah  ibn-ar-Rashid ;  and  its
water  rose  almost  as  high  as  the  "  stone."  8

1  Al-Basrah  and  al-Kufah.

2  Cf.  Azraki,  p.  396.

3  The  "black  stone"  of  al-Ka'bah;  Azraki,  p.  397.


84  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  limits  of  al-Haram.  A1-' Abbas  from  'Ikrimah  : — A
part  of  the  limits  set  to  al-Haram  having  been  obliterated  in
the  days  of  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan,  he  wrote  to  Marwan  c$
ibn-al-Hakam,  his  'dmil  in  al-Madinah,  ordering  him  to  ask
Kurz  ibn-'Alkamah-l-Khuza'i,  if  he  were  still  alive,  to  es-
tablish the  limits  of  al-Haram,  since  he  was  familiar  with
them.  Kurz  was  still  alive;  and  he  established  the  limits
which  are  today  the  marks  of  al-Haram.  According  to  al-
Kalbi,  this  was  Kurz  ibn-'Alkamah  ibn-Hilal  ibn-Juraibah
ibn-'Abd-Nuhm  ibn-Hulail  ibn-Hubshiyah-1-Khuza'i,  the  one
who  followed  the  steps  of  the  Prophet  to  the  cave  in  which
the  Prophet,  accompanied  by  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik,  had  dis-
appeared, when  he  wanted  to  take  the  Hegira  to  al-
Madinah.  Kurz  saw  on  the  cave  a  spider  web,  and  below  it.
the  Prophet's  foot-print  which  he  recognized  saying,  "  This
is  the  Prophet's  foot,  but  here  the  track  is  lost."


CHAPTER  X
At-Ta'if

The  Prophet  lays  siege  to  at-Ta'if.  When  the  Hawazin  were
defeated  in  the  battle  of  Hunain,  and  Duraid  ibn-as-Simmah
was  slain,  the  surviving  remnant  came  to  Awtas.  The  Pro-
phet sent  them  abu-'Amir  al-Ash'ari  who  was  put  to  death.
Then  abu-Musa  'Abdallah  ibn-Kais  al-Ash'ari  took  the  com-
mand and  the  Moslems  advanced  on  Awtas.  Seeing  that,
the  chief  of  the  Hawazin  at  that  time,  Malik  ibn-'Auf  ibn-
Sa'd  of  banu-Duhman  ibn-Nasr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-Bakr  ibn-
Hawazin,  fled  to  at-Ta'if,  whose  people  he  found  ready  for
the  siege  with  their  fortress  repaired  and  the  provisions
gathered  therein.  Here  he  settled.  The  Prophet  led  the
Moslems  until  they  got  to  at-Ta'if.  Thakif  hurled  stones
and  arrows  on  the  Moslems,  and  the  Prophet  set  a  ballista
on  the  fortress.  The  Moslems  had  a  mantelet 1  made  of
cows'  skins  on  which  Thakif  threw  hot  iron  bars  and  burnt
it,  killing  the  Moslems  underneath.  The  siege  of  at-Ta'if
by  the  Prophet  lasted  for  fifteen  days,2  the  invasion  having
begun  in  Shauwal,  in  the  year  8.

Certain  slaves  surrender.  Certain  slaves  from  at-Ta'if
presented  themselves  before  the  Prophet.  Among  them
were  abu-Bakrah  ibn-Masruh, — [later]  the  Prophet's  freed- c6

1  Ar.  dabbabah — a  machine  made  of  skins  and  wool,  men  enter  into
it  and  it  is  propelled  to  the  lower  part  of  a  fortress  where  the  men,
protected  from  what  is  thrown  upon  them,  try  to  make  a  breach.  See
Zaidan,  Ta'rikh  at-Tamaddun  al-Islami,  vol.  i,  p.  143.

3  Cf.  Hisham.  p.  872.

85


86  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

man,  and  whose  [first]  name  was  Nufai' — ,  and  al-Azrak —
after  whom  the  Azarikah  were  named,  who  was  a  Greek
blacksmith  and  slave,  and  whose  [full]  name  was  abu-Nafi'
ibn-al-Azrak  al-Khariji.  For  doing  so,  these  slaves  were
set  free.1  It  is  claimed  by  others,  however,  that  Nafi'  ibn-
Azrak  al-Khariji  was  of  the  banu-Hanifah  and  that  the  al-
Azrak  who  came  from  at-Ta'if  was  another  man.

The  terms  of  capitulation.  Then  the  Prophet  left  for  al-
Ji'ranah  to  divide  the  captives  and  the  booty  of  Hunain.2
Thakif,  fearing  lest  he  should  return,  sent  a  deputation  with
whom  he  made  terms  stipulating  that  they  become  Moslem,
and  keep  what  they  possess  in  the  form  of  money  or  buried
treasures.3  The  Prophet  imposed  a  condition  on  them  that
they  would  neither  practise  usury  nor  drink  wine.  They
were  addicted  to  usury.  To  this  end.  he  wrote  them  a
statement.

The  old  name  of  at-Ta'if  was  Wajj.  When  it  was  for-
tified and  surrounded  by  a  wall  it  was  called  at-Ta'if.

The  Jews  in  at-Ta'if.  Al-Mada'ini  from  certain  sheikhs
from  at-Ta'if : — In  the  district  of  at-Ta'if  lived  some  Tews
driven  from  al-Yaman  and  Yathrib,  who  had  settled
there  for  trade.  On  them  poll-tax  was  imposed.  It  was
from  some  of  them  that  Mu'awiyah  bought  his  possessions
in  at-Ta'if.

The  land  of  at-Ta'if  is  included  in  the  district  of  Makkah.
A1-' Abbas  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  had  a  piece  of  land  in
at-Ta'if  from  which  grapes  were  taken  and  made  into  the
beverage  used  for  the  Pilgrims.  The  men  of  Kuraish
had possessions in at-Ta'if to which they came from

1  Cf.  Hi  sham,  p.  874.

2  Tabari, vol. i, p. 1670; abu-1-Fida, al-Mukhtasar, vol. i, p. 147
(Cairo,  1325)-

s  Ar.  ar-rikdz,  treasures  buried  in  pre-Islamic  days;  Bukhari,  vol.  i,  p.
381  ;  Mawardi,  p.  207.


AT-TA'IF  87

Makkah  to  repair.  The  conquest  of  Makkah  and  the  con-
version of  its  people  to  Islam  made  Thakif  covet  and  lay-
hold  on  these  possessions,  but  with  the  conquest  of  at-Ta'if,
they  were  again  put  in  the  hands  of  the  Makkans,  and  in
fact  all  the  land  of  at-Ta'if  became  one  of  the  districts  of
Makkah.

Abn-Sufydn  loses  his  eye.  It  was  in  the  battle  of  at-
Ta'if  that  abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb  lost  his  eye.1

The  zakat  from  Thakif  on  grapes  and  dates.  Al-Walid
ibn-Salih  from  'Attab  ibn-Asid : — The  Prophet  ordered  that
the  vine-trees  of  Thakif  be  estimated  as  in  the  case  of  dates
and  that  the  zakat  [legal  alms]  be  taken  in  the  form  of
raisins,  as  in  the  case  of  dates.

According  to  al-Wakidi,  abu-Hanifah  says :  "  The  vine-
trees  are  not  estimated,  but  when  the  produce,  whether  large 57
or  small,  is  gathered  the  zakat  is  taken."

According  to  Ya'kub:  "  If  the  produce  is  gathered  and
the  weight  of  it  is  five  wasks  [loads]  then  its  zakat  is  one-
tenth  or  half  of  one-tenth."  The  same  view  is  held  by
Sufyan  ibn-Sa'id  ath-Thauri. The  wask  is  equal  to  60  sa's.2

Malik  ibn-Anas  and  ibn-abi-Dhi'b  state  that  according  to
the  commended  practice  [Ar.  sunnah]  the  zakat  on  grape  is
taken  by  estimation  as  in  the  case  of  dates.3

The  zakat  on  honey.  Shaiban  ibn-abi-Shaibah  from
'Amr  ibn-Shu'aib : — A  'amil  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  in  at-
Ta'if  wrote  to  'Umar,  "  Those  who  own  honey  fail  to  con-
tribute to  us  what  they  used  to  contribute  to  the  Prophet,
i.  e.,  one  vase  out  of  each  ten."  'Umar  wrote  back  to  him,
"If  they  would  contribute,  thou  shouldst  protect  their  val-
leys, otherwise  do  not."

1  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  124.
%  Yahya  ibn-Adam,  Kitdb  al-Kliaraj,  p.  100.

3  Malik  ibn-Anas,  al-Muwatta,  pp.  116-117;  and  cf.  Shafi'i,  Kitab  al-
ii nun,  vol.  ii2,  p.  27.


88  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'Amr  ibn-Muhammad  an-Nakid  from  'Abd-ar- Rahman
ibn-Ishak's  grandfather : — 'Umar  assessed  one-tenth  in  the
case  of  honey.

Da'ud  ibn-'Abd-al-Hamid  the  kadi  of  ar-Rakkah  from
Khasif  : — 'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  wrote  to  his  'amils  in
Makkah  and  at-Ta'if,  "  There  is  sadakah  on  the  bee-hives.
Therefore,  take  it  thereof."  According  to  al-Wakidi,  it  has
been  reported  that  ibn-'Umar  said,  "  There  is  no  sadakah  on
hives."  According  to  Malik  and  ath-Thauri,  no  zakat  is
taken  on  honey  though  it  may  be  in  great  quantities.1  The
same  is  the  view  of  ash-Shafi'i.2  According  to  abu-Hanifah,
if  the  honey  is  raised  in  a  tithe-land  the  tithe  is  taken  whether
the  honey  is  much  or  little;  but  if  it  is  raised  in  the  kharaj-
land,  nothing  is  to  be  taken,  because  both  zakat  and  kharaj
cannot  be  taken  from  one  and  the  same  man.

Al-Wakidi  states  that  he  was  told  by  al-Kasim  ibn-Ma'n
and  Ya'kub  that  abu-Hanifah  said:  "  If  honey  is  raised  in
the  land  of  a  dhimmi  there  is  no  tithe  on  it,  but  there  is
kharaj  on  the  land.  And  if  it  is  produced  in  the  land  of  a
Taghlabi 3  one-fifth  is  taken  thereof."  The  same  view  is
held  by  Zufar.  According  to  abu-Yusuf,4  if  the  honey  is
produced  in  the  khardj-land,  it  is  exempt  of  everything;  but
if  in  the  tithe  land,  one  rati 5  is  taken  out  of  ten.

According  to  Muhammad  ibn-al-Hasan,  no  sadakah  what- 58
ever  is  taken  on  what  is  less  than  five  faraks.6 The  same
view  is  held  by  ibn-abi-Dhi'b.

1  Muwatta,  p.  121.

2  Umm,  vol.  ii:,  p.  33.

3  Banu-Taghlib  were  Christian  Arabs  on  whom  'Umar-ibn  al-Khattab
doubled  the  tax. See  abu-Yfisuf,  Kitdb  al-Kharaj.  p.  68.

*  Yusuf,  p.  40.

5  A  rati  is  about  5  pounds.

9  A  farak  is  16  rails. Nihayah,  vol.  iii,  p.  106.


AT- T A' IF  89

It  was  reported  by  Khalid  ibn-'Abdallah  at-Tahhan  that
ibn-abi-Laila  said,  "  Whether  it  is  produced  in  the  tithe-
or  khardj-land,  one  rati  is  due  on  every  ten.  The  same  view-
is  held  by  al-Hasan  ibn-Salih  ibn-Hai.

A  tradition  reported  to  me  by  abu-'Ubaid  on  the  authority
of  az-Zuhri  states  that  the  latter  held  that  one  vase
[Ar.  sikk]  x  is  due  on  every  ten.

The  tithe  on  fruits  and  grains.  Yahya  ibn-Adam  from
Bishr  ibn-'Asim  and  'Uthman  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-Aus : — 1
Sufyan  ibn-'Abdallah  ath-Thakafi  wrote  to  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab,  whose  'amil  he  was  in  at-Ta'if ,  stating  that  before
him  was  the  case  of  a  garden  in  which  vine-trees  grow,  as
well  as  plum  and  pomegranate  trees  and  other  things  that
are  many  folds  more  productive  than  vines,  and  soliciting
'Umar's  orders  regarding  the  taking  of  its  tithe.  But
'Umar  wrote  back,  "  No  tithes  on  it."

It  was  stated  by  Yahya  ibn-Adam  that  he  heard  Sufyan
ibn-Sa'id  (whose  view  is  the  following)  say: — "There  is  no
sadakah  except  on  four  of  the  products  of  the  soil,  i.  e.,
wheat,  barley,  dates  and  raisins,  provided  the  product  meas-
ures five  wasks." 2  But  abu-Hani  fan's  view  is  that  whatever
the  tithe-land  produces  is  subject  to  the  tithe,  though  it  be  a
bundle  of  vegetables.  The  same  view  is  held  by  Zufar.
But  according  to  the  view  of  Malik,  ibn-abi-Dhi'b  and
Ya'kub,  vegetables  and  the  like  are  not  subject  to  sadakah.
Nor  is  there  sadakah  on  what  is  less  than  five  wasks  of
wheat,  barley,  maize,  husked  barley,  tare,  dates,  raisins,  rice,
sesame,  peas  and  the  grains  that  can  be  measured  and  stored,
including  lentils,  beans,  Indian  peas  and  millet.  If  any  of
these  measure  five  wasks,  then  it  is  subject  to  sadakah.  The
same  view,  according  to  al-Wakidi,  is  held  by  Rabi'ah  ibn-

1  A  receptacle  of  skin  for  holding  wine  and  the  like.

2  Yahya  ibn-'Adam,  Kitab  a'-Kharaj,  pp.  100-110.


go  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

abi-'Abd-ar-Rahman.  According  to  az-Zuhri  all  spices  and
pulse  *  is  subject  to  zakat.  Malik  holds  that  no  sadakah
is  due  on  pears,  plums,  pomegranates  or  the  rest  of  the  fresh
fruits.  The  same  view  is  held  by  ibn-abi-Laila.  Accord-
ing to  abu-Yusuf,  there  is  no  sadakah  except  on  what  can  59
be  measured  by  al-kafiz.2  Abu-az-Zinad  ibn-abi-Dhi'b  and
ibn-abi-Sabrah  hold  that  no  sadakah  is  taken  on  vegetables
and  fruits,  but  there  is  sadakah  on  their  prices  the  moment
they  are  sold.

A  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  'Abbas  ibn-
Hisham  on  the  authority  of  his  grandfather  to  the  effect
that  the  Prophet  assigned  'Uthman  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ath-Thakafi
as  his  'amil  in  at-Ta'if.

1  Seed  of  a  leguminous  plant  that  is  cooked.

2  Adam,  p.  101.


CHAPTER  XI

Tabalah  and  Jurash

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  az-Zuhri : — The  people  of
Tabalah  and  Jurash  x  accepted  Islam  without  resistance.2
The  Prophet  left  them  on  the  terms  agreed  upon  when  they
became  Moslems,  imposing  on  every  adult  of  the  "  People
of  the  book  "  3  among  them  one  dinar,  and  making  it  a
condition  on  them  to  provide  the  Moslem  wayfarers  with
board  and  lodging.  Abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb  was  assigned
by  the  Prophet  as  the  governor  of  Jurash.

1  Cities  in  al-Yaman;  Bakri,  pp.  191  and  238;  Hamdani,  Jazirat  al-
'Arab,  p.  127,  line  19;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  817  and  vol.  ii,  p.  60.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1730.
1  Jews  and  Christians.

91


CHAPTER  XII
Tabuk,  Ailah,  Adhruh,  Makna  and  al-Jarba'

Tabuk  makes  terms.  When  in  the  year  9  the  Prophet
marched  to  Tabuk  in  Syria  for  the  invasion  of  those  of  the
Greeks,  'Amilah,  Lakhm,  Judham  and  others  whom  he
learnt  had  assembled  against  him,  he  met  no  resistance.1
So  he  spent  a  few  days  in  Tabuk,  whose  inhabitants  made
terms  with  him  agreeing  to  pay  poll-tax.

Ailah  makes  terms.  During  his  stay  at  Tabuk,  there  came
to  him  Yuhanna  ibn-Ru'bah,  the  chief  of  Ailah,  and  made
terms,  agreeing  to  pay  on  every  adult  in  his  land  one  dinar
per  annum  making  it  300  dinars  in  all.  The  Prophet  made  it
a  condition  on  them  that  they  provide  with  board  and  lodg-
ing whomsoever  of  the  Moslems  may  pass  by  them.  To
this  effect  he  wrote  them  a  statement 2  that  they  may  be
kept  safe  and  protected.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Talhah-1-Aili : — 'Umar  ibn-
'Abd-al-'Aziz  never  raised  the  tax  of  the  people  of  Ailah
above  300  dinars}

AdJiruh  makes  terms.  The  Prophet  made  terms  with  the
people  of  Adhruh  *  stipulating  that  they  pay  100  dinars  in
Rajab  of  every  year.

Al-Jarba makes  terms. The  people  of  al-Jarba'  '  made

1  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  ii1,  p.  118;  Hisham,  p.  893;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1692.
3  Hisham,  p.  902.

*  Wellhausen,  Das  Arabische  Reich,  p.  173.

*  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  174;  Istakhri,  p.  58;  Mukaddasi,  p.  54.
5  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  46.

92


TABOK,  AILAH,  ADHRUIi,  MAKNA  AND  AL-JARBA' 93

terms  and  agreed  to  pay  poll-tax. To  this  effect  the  Prophet
wrote  them  a  statement.

Makna  makes  terms.  The  people  of  Makna  made  terms  60
with  the  Prophet,  agreeing  to  offer  one-fourth  of  what  they
fish  and  spin,  one-fourth  of  their  horses  and  coats  of  mail,
and  one-fourth  of  their  fruits.  The  inhabitants  of  Makna
were  Jews.1  An  Egyptian  told  me  that  he  saw  with  his
own  eye  the  statement  that  the  Prophet  wrote  them  on  a  red
parchment,  the  writing  on  which  was  partly  effaced,  and
which  he  copied  and  dictated  to  me  as  follows :

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
From  Muhammad,  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  to  the  banu-
Habibah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Makna :  peace  be  with  you.
It  has  been  revealed  unto  me  from  above  that  ye  are  to
return  to  your  village.  From  the  time  this  my  letter  reaches
you,  ye  shall  be  safe ;  and  ye  have  the  assurance  of  security
from  Allah  and  from  his  Messenger.  Verily,  the  Messen-
ger of  Allah  has  forgiven  you  your  sins  and  all  blood  for
which  ye  have  been  pursued.  In  your  village,  ye  shall  have
no  partner  but  the  Messenger  of  Allah  or  the  Messenger's
messenger.  There  shall  be  no  oppression  on  you  nor  hostility
against  you.  Against  whatever  the  Prophet  of  Allah  protects
himself,  he  will  protect  you.  Only  to  the  Prophet  of  Allah
shall  belong  your  cloth-stuff,  slaves,  horses  2  and  coats  of
mail,  save  what  the  Prophet  or  the  Prophet's  messenger  shall
exempt.  Besides  that,  ye  shall  give  one-fourth  of  what
"your  palm-trees  produce,  one-fourth  of  the  product  of  your
nets,  and  one-fourth  of  what  is  spun  by  your  women;  but
all  else  shall  be  your  own ;  and  God's  Prophet  has  exempted
you  from  all  further  poll-tax  or  forced  labor. Now,  if  ye

1  Wakidi,  tr.  Wellhausen,  p.  405.

3  Ar.  kara',  see  Nihayah,  vol.  iv,  p.  16;  and  Mutarrizi,  vol.  ii,  p.  148;
Margoliouth  translates  "camp-followers"  in  Zaidan's  Umayyads  and
Abbasids,  p.  121.


94


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


hear  and  obey,  it  will  be  for  the  Prophet  to  do  honor  to  the
honorable  among  you  and  pardon  those  among  you  who  do
the  wrong.  Whosoever  of  the  banu-Habibah  and  the  in-
habitants of  Makna  bethinks  himself  to  do  well  to  the
Moslems,  it  shall  be  well  for  him;  and  whosoever  means
mischief  to  them,  mischief  shall  befall  him.  Ye  are  to  have
no  ruler  save  of  your  number  of  the  family  of  the  Prophet.
Written  by  'Ali-ibn-abu-Talib  *  in  the  year  9."

1  Sic!  Being  genitive,  it  should  be  "  abi ". See  note  in  De  Goeje's
edition,  p.  60.


CHAPTER  XIII

DUMAT  AL-jANDAL

Khdlid  ibn-al-W alid  captures  Ukaidir.  The  Prophet  61
sent  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  ibn-al-Mughirah-1-Makhzumi  to
Ukaidir  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  al-Kindi,  later  as-Sakuni,  at
Dumat  al-Jandal.1  Khalid  took  him  captive,  killed  his
brother,  robbed  him  of  a  silk  cloak  2  interwoven  with  gold,
and  brought  Ukaidir  before  the  Prophet.  Ukaidir  accepted
Islam,3  upon  which  the  Prophet  wrote  for  him  and  the
people  of  Dumat  the  following  statement : —

"  This  is  a  statement  from  Muhammad,  the  Prophet  of
Allah,  to  Ukaidir  as  he  accepted  Islam  and  forsook  the
objects  of  worship  and  idols,  and  to  the  people  of  Dumat : —
To  us  shall  belong  the  water-places  outside  the  city,  the  un-
tilled  lands,  the  deserts  and  waste  lands,  as  well  as  the  de-
fensive and  offensive  weapons,  the  horses,  and  the  fortress ;
and  to  you  shall  belong  the  palm-trees  within  the  city,  and
the  running  water.  Your  cattle  which  are  pasturing  shall
not,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  the  sadakah,  be  brought  to-
gether [but  shall  be  numbered  on  the  pasture-land],  and
what  is  above  the  fixed  number  of  animals  from  which  a
sadakah  is  required  shall  not  be  taken  into  consideration.4
Your  herds  shall  graze  wherever  ye  want,  and  ye  shall  ob-

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  625.
*  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  1702-1703.
s  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  142;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  214.
4  Cf. Sprenger,  Das  Leben  und  die  Lehre  des  Mohammad,  vol.  iii,
p.  419.

95


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

serve  prayer  in  its  time,  and  pay  the  zakat  as  it  is  due.  To
this  effect,  I  give  you  the  covenant  of  Allah  and  his  promise,
and  ye  are  entitled  to  our  sincerity  as  regards  the  fulfillment
of  the  terms.  Witnessed  by  Allah  and  those  of  the  Moslems
who  are  present."

Ukaidir  violates  the  covenant.  Al-' Abbas  ibn-Hisham  62
al-Kalbi  from  his  grandfather : — The  Prophet  sent  Khalid
ibn-al-Walid  to  Ukaidir.  Ukaidir  was  brought  by  Khalid
before  the  Prophet;  he  became  a  Moslem,  and  the  Prophet
wrote  him  a  statement.  But  no  sooner  had  the  Prophet
been  dead,  than  Ukaidir  stopped  the  payment  of  the  sadakah,
violated  the  covenant  and  left  Dumat  al-Jandal  for  al-Hirah,
where  he  erected  a  building  and  called  it  Dumat  after
Dumat  al-Jandal.  His  brother,  however.  Huraith  1  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  embraced  Islam  and  thereby  entered  into  pos-
session of  the  property  held  by  his  brother.2

Huraith's  daughter  marries.  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah
married  the  daughter  of  Huraith,  Ukaidir's  brother.

Abu-Bakr  sends  Khalid  against  Ukaidir.  Al-' Abbas  from
'Awanah  ibn-al-Hakam : — Abu-Bakr  wrote  to  Khalid  ibn-al-
Walid,  when  the  latter  was  at  'Ain  at-Tamr,  ordering  him
to  go  against  Ukaidir,  which  he  did,  killing  Ukaidir  and
capturing  Dumat.  After  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  Ukaidir
left  Dumat  and  then  returned  to  it.  Having  killed  him,
Khalid  went  to  Syria.

Laila  daughter  of  al-Judi  a  captive.  According  to  al-
Wakidi,  on  Khalid's  way  from  al-'Irak  to  Syria,  he  passed
through  Dumat  al-Jandal,  which  he  captured,  carrying  away
many  captives,  among  whom  were  Laila,  the  daughter  of
al-Judi-1-Ghassani.  Others  say  Laila  was  carried  away  by
Khalid's  horsemen  from  a  Ghassan  settlement  stationed  by 63

1  Ibn-Hajar,  vol.  i.  p.  773,  by  mistake  gives  "  Huraib  ".
1  One  verse  omitted.


DOMAT  AL-JANDAL  gy

a  watering-place  [hddir].  It  was  this  daughter  of  al-Judi
whom  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-abi-Bakr  as-Siddik  had  fallen
in  love  with,  and  the  one  whom  he  meant  when  he  said :

"I  thought  of  Laila  with  as-Samawah  l  intervening  between;
and  what  has  the  daughter  of  al-Judi  to  do  with  me?"

Thus  did  he  win  her  hand  and  marry  her.  But  such  a  hold
had  she  on  him  that  he  gave  up  all  his  other  wives.  At
last,  however,  she  was  affected  with  such  a  severe  disease
that  her  looks  were  changed  and  he  no  more  liked  her.  He
was  advised  to  give  her  what  is  usually  given  at  divorce  2
and  send  her  to  her  own  people,  which  he  did.

Al-Wakidi's  version  of  the  conquest.  According  to  al-
Wakidi,  the  Prophet  led  the  invasion  against  Dumat  al-
Jandal  in  the  year  5  and  met  no  resistance.  In  Shauwal,
year  9,  he  sent  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  to  Ukaidir,  twenty
months  after  the  former  had  embraced  Islam.

The  reconstruction  of  Dumat  al-Jandal.  I  heard  it  said
by  someone  from  al-Hirah  that  Ukaidir  and  his  brothers
used  to  go  to  Dumat  al-Hirah  and  visit  their  uncles  of  the
Kalb  tribe  and  spend  some  time  with  them.  One  day  as  they
were  together  on  a  hunting  trip,  there  arose  before  their
view  a  city  in  ruins  with  only  few  walls  standing.  The
city  was  built  of  stones  [  Ar.  jandal] .  This  city  they  rebuilt,
planted  in  it  olive-  and  other  trees,  and  called  it  Dumat
al-Jandal  in  distinction  from  Dumat  al-Hirah.3

Az-Zuhri's  version  of  the  conquest.  'Amr  ibn-Muham-
mad  an-Nakid  from  az-Zuhri : — The  Prophet  sent  Khalid
ibn-al-Walid  ibn-al-Mughirah  to  the  people  of  Dumat  al-
Jandal  who  were  some  of  the  Christians  of  al-Kufah.
Khalid  captured  Ukaidir,  their  chief,  and  arranged  to  re-
ceive poll-tax  from  him.

1  A  desert  from  Dumat  to  'Ain  at-Tamr ;  Istakhri,  p.  23.

*  Ar.  mut'ah. Muwatta,  p.  208.  s  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  263.


CHAPTER  XIV

The  Capitulation  of  Najran

The  terms  agreed  upon.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  az-  64
Zuhri : — There  came  to  the  Prophet  the  military  chief  and
the  civil  chief,1  delegated  by  the  people  of  Najran  in  al-
Yaman,  and  asked  for  terms  which  they  made  on  behalf  of
the  people  of  Najran,  agreeing  to  offer  two  thousand  robes
— one  thousand  in  Safar  and  one  thousand  in  Rajab — each
one  of  which  should  have  the  value  of  one  ounce  [aukiyah],
the  ounce  weighing  40  dirhams.  In  case  the  price  of  the
robe  delivered  should  be  more  than  one  ounce,  the  surplus
would  be  taken  into  consideration ;  and  if  it  were  less,  the  de-
ficiency should  be  made  up.  And  whatever  weapons,  horses,
camels  or  goods  they  offered,  should  be  accepted  instead  of
the  robes,  if  they  are  the  same  value.  Another  condition
was  made  that  they  provide  board  and  lodging  for  the  Pro-
phet's messengers  for  a  month  or  less,  and  not  detain  them
for  more  than  a  month.  Still  another  condition  was  that
in  case  of  war  in  al-Yaman,  they  are  bound  to  offer  as  loan
thirty  coats  of  mail,  thirty  mares  and  thirty  camels,  and
whatever  of  these  animals  perish,  the  messengers  [of  the
Prophet]  guarantee  to  make  up  for  them.  To  this  effect,  the
Prophet  gave  them  Allah's  covenant  and  his  promise.  An-
other condition  was  that  they  be  not  allured  to  change  their
religion  or  the  rank  they  hold  in  it,  nor  should  they  be  called
upon  for  military  service  or  made  to  pay  the  tithe.2 The

1  Hisham,  p.  401.  2  Cf.  Yusuf,  pp.  4041.

98


THE  CAPITULATION  OF  NAJRAN  ^

Prophet  made  it  a  condition  on  them  that  they  neither  take
nor  give  usury.

The  two  monks  of  Najran  and  the  Prophet.  Al-Husain
ibn-al-Aswad  from  al-Hasan : — There  came  to  the  Prophet
two  monks  from  Najran.1  The  Prophet  proposed  Islam
to  them,  and  they  replied,  "We  embraced  Islam  before  thou
didst."  To  this  the  Prophet  replied,  "  Ye  have  told  a  lie.
Three  things  keep  you  from  Islam :  pork  eating,  cross-wor-
ship and  the  claim  that  Allah  has  a  son."  "  Well  then,"  said
they,  "  who  is  'Isa's  father?"  Al-Hasan  adds  that  the  Pro-
phet was  never  too  quick  but  always  waited  for  Allah's  com-
mand. Hence  the  text  revealed  by  his  Lord : 2  "  These
signs  and  this  wise  warning  do  we  rehearse  to  thee.  Verily,
Jesus  is  as  Adam  in  the  sight  of  Allah.  He  created  him  of
dust :  He  then  said  to  him,  '  Be  ' — and  he  was,"  etc.  to  "  on
those  who  lie."

This  the  Prophet  repeated  to  them  and  then  asked  them
to  join  with  him  in  imprecating  the  curse  of  Allah  upon
whichever  of  them  was  wrong,3  taking  hold  of  the  hands  of
Fatimah,  al-Hasan  and  al-Husain.  At  this,  one  of  the  two
monks  said  to  the  other,  "  Climb  the  mountain  and  do  not
join  with  him  in  imprecating  the  curse,  for  if  thou  shouldst,
thou  wouldst  return  with  the  curse  on  thee."  "  What  shall
we  do  then?"  asked  the  other.  "  I  believe,"  said  the  former,
'  we  had  better  give  him  the  kharaj  rather  than  join  with
him  in  imprecating  the  curse."  4

A  statement  of  the  treaty. Al-Husain  from  Yahya  ibn-
Adam  who  said : — "  I  copied  the  statement  of  the  Prophet 65
to  the  people  of  Najran  from  that  of  a  man  who  took  it  from
al-Hasan  ibn-Salih. These  are  the  words :

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  751-757.


4  mubdhalah. Bukhari,  vol.  iii,  pp.  167-168;  abu-1-Faraj,  Aghdni,  vol.
x,  p.  144.


lOO  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
The  following  is  what  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  Muhammad,
wrote  to  Xajran,  at  whose  disposal *  were  all  their  fruits,
their  gold,  silver  and  domestic  utensils,  and  their  slaves,  but
which  he  benevolently  left  for  them,  assessing  on  them  two
thousand  robes  each  having  the  value  of  one  aukiyah,  one
thousand  to  be  delivered  in  Rajab  of  every  year,  and  one
thousand  in  Safar  of  every  year.  Each  robe  shall  be  one
aukiyah;  and  whatever  robes  cost  more  or  less  than  one
aukiyah,  their  overcost  or  deficiency  shall  be  taken  into  con-
sideration; and  whatever  coats  of  mail,  horses,  camels  or
goods  they  substitute  for  the  robes  shall  be  taken  into  con-
sideration. It  is  binding  on  Najran  to  provide  board  and
lodging  for  my  messengers  2  for  one  month  or  less,  and
never  to  detain  them  for  more  than  a  month.  It  is  also
binding  on  them  to  offer  as  loan  thirty  coats  of  mail,  thirty
mares  and  thirty  camels,  in  case  of  war  in  al-Yaman  due  to
their  rebelling.  Whatever  perishes  of  the  horses  or  camels,
lent  to  my  messengers,  is  guaranteed  by  my  messengers  and
is  returned  by  them.  Najran  and  their  followers  3  are  en-
titled to  the  protection  of  Allah  and  to  the  security  of
Muhammad  the  Prophet,  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  which  se-
curity shall  involve  their  persons,  religion,  lands  and  posses-
sions, including  those  of  them  who  are  absent  as  well  as  those
who  are  present,  their  camels,  messengers  and  images.4  The
state  they  previously  held  shall  not  be  changed,  nor  shall
any  of  their  religious  services  or  images  be  changed.  No
attempt  shall  be  made  to  turn  a  bishop  from  his  office  as
a  bishop,  a  monk  from  his  ofnce  as  a  monk,  nor  the  sexton

'The  text  here  is  probably  corrupt; cf. Wellhausen, Sklzsen und
Vorarbeiten,  vol.  iv,  pp.  25  and  132;  Yusuf,  p.  41.
2  Sent  to  bring  the  kharaj.

s  Ar.  hashiyah  z=  Jews. Sprenger,  vol.  iii,  p.  502.
*  amthilah  —  crosses  and  pictures  used  in  churches.


THE  CAPITULATION  OF  NAJRAN  IOi

of  a  church  from  his  office,  whether  what  is  under  the  con-
trol of  each  is  great  or  little.  They  shall  not  be  held  re-
sponsible for  any  wrong  deed  or  blood  shed  in  pre-Islamic
time.  They  shall  neither  be  called  to  military  service  nor
compelled  to  pay  the  tithe.  No  army  shall  tread  on  their
land.  If  some  one  demands  of  them  some  right,  then  the
case  is  decided  with  equity  without  giving  the  people  of
Najran  the  advantage  over  the  other  party,  or  giving  the
other  party  the  advantage  over  them.  But  whosoever  of
them  has  up  till  now  x  received  usury,  I  am  clear  of  the
responsibility  of  his  protection.2  None  of  them,  however,
shall  be  held  responsible  for  the  guilt  of  the  other.  And  as
a  guarantee  to  what  is  recorded  in  this  document,  they  are
entitled  to  the  right  of  protection  from  Allah,  and  to  the
security  of  Muhammad  the  Prophet,  until  Allah's  order  is
issued,  and  so  long  as  they  give  the  right  counsel  [to  Mos-
lems] and  render  whatever  dues  are  bound  on  them,  pro-
vided they  are  not  asked  to  do  anything  unjust.  Witnessed
by  abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb,  Ghailan  ibn-'Amr,  Malik  ibn-'Auf  66
of  banu-Nasr,  al-Akra'  ibn-Habis  al-Hanzali  and  al-Mug-
hirah. Written  by —  '  "  3

Yaha  ibn-Adam  adds,  "  I  have  seen  in  the  hands  of  the
people  of  Najran  another  statement  whose  reading  is  similar
to  that  of  this  copy,  but  at  the  close  of  it  the  following
words  occur :  Written  by  'Ali  ibn-abu-Talib.'  4  Concern-
ing this  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  say."

'Umar  expels  them.  When  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik  became
caliph  he  enforced  the  terms  agreed  upon  and  issued  an-
other statement  similar  to  that  given  by  the  Prophet. When

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  62,  has  "  after  this  year  ".

2  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  352;  Sprenger,  vol.  iii,  p.  502;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  223.

3 'Abdallah  ibn-abi-Bakr ;  abu-Yusuf,  p.  4;  see  H.  Lammens'  com-
ment on  this  protocol,  Melanges  de  la  Faculte  Orientate,  vol.  v2,  p.  346.

* And  not  "  abi "  as  required  by  the  rules  of  the  Arabic  grammar.


102  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  became  caliph,  they  began  to  practise
usury,  and  became  so  numerous  as  to  be  considered  by  him
a  menace  to  Islam.  He  therefore  expelled  them  and  wrote
to  them  the  following  statement :

"  Greetings !  Whomever  of  the  people  of  Syria  and  al-
'  I  rak  they  happen  to  come  across,  let  him  clear  for  them
tillable  land;  and  whatever  land  they  work,  becomes  theirs
in  place  of  their  land  in  al-Yaman."  Thus  the  people  of
Najran  were  dispersed,  some  settling  in  Syria  and  others
in  an-Najraniyah  in  the  district  of  al-Kufah,  after  whom  it
was  so  named.  The  Jews  of  Najran  were  included  with
the  Christians  in  the  terms  and  went  with  them  as  their
f  <  illowers.

The  Najranites  under  'Uthman.  When  'Uthman  ibn-
'Affan  became  caliph,  he  wrote  to  his  'dmil  in  al-Kufah,  al-
Walid  ibn-'Ukbah  ibn-abi-Mu'ait,  as  follows :

'  Greetings!  The  civil  ruler,  the  bishop  and  the  nobles
of  Najran  have  presented  to  me  the  written  statement  of
the  Prophet  and  showed  me  the  recommendation  :  of  'Umar.
Having  made  inquiry  regarding  their  case  from  'Uthman
ibn-Hunaif,  I  learned  that  he  had  investigated  their  state
and  found  it  injurious  to  the  great  landlords 2  whom
they  prevented  from  possessing  their  land.  I  have,  there-
fore, reduced  their  taxation  by  200  robes — for  the  sake  of
\llah  and  in  place  of  their  old  lands.  I  recommend  them
to  thee  as  they  are  included  among  the  people  entitled  to
<»ur  protection."

Another  source  for  'Umars  statement.  I  heard  it  said
by  one  of  the  learned  that  'Umar  wrote  them  the  following
statement: — "Greetings!  Whomsoever  of  the  people  of
Syria  or  al-Trak  they  pass  by,  let  him  clear  for  them  tillable
land  ". Another  I  heard  say,  "  waste  land  ".

1  Lammens.  MFO,  vol.  v2,  p.  677.

2  dihkiins;  Arlam,  pp.  42-43.


THE  CAPITULATION  OF  NAIRAN  10$

One  reason  for  their  expulsion.  'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-Ham-
mad  an-Narsi  from  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  :  —  The  Pro-
phet said  during  his  illness,  "  There  shall  not  remain  two
religions  in  the  land  of  Arabia."  Consequently,  when
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  became  caliph,  he  expelled  the  people
of  Najran  to  an-Najraniyah  and  bought  their  properties  and  67
possessions.

Al-'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi  from  his  grandfather: —
The  Najran  of  al-Yaman  received  their  name  from  Najran
ibn-Zaid  ibn-Saba  ibn-Yashjub  ibn-Ya'rub  ibn-Kahtan.

'Umar  and  'Ali  refuse  to  reinstate  them  in  the  land.  Al-
Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Salim  ibn-abi-1-Ja'd : — The  peo-
ple of  Najran  having  increased  in  number  to  40,000,  became
jealous  of  one  another  and  came  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab
saying,  "  Transplant  us  from  the  land  ".  'Umar  had  con-
sidered them  a  menace  to  the  Moslems,  so  he  took  this  op-
portunity and  expelled  them  from  the  land.  Later,  how-
ever, they  repented,  and  returning  to  'Umar  said,  "  Rein-
state us  in  the  land  ",  but  'Umar  refused.  When  'Ali  ibn-
abi-Talib  became  caliph,  they  came  to  him  and  said,  "  We
plead  with  thee  by  thy  right-hand  writing  and  thy  inter-
mediacy  on  our  behalf  with  thy  Prophet  that  thou  mayst
reinstate  us  in  the  land."  To  this  'Ali  replied  :  '  'Umar  was
a  man  of  sound  judgment,  and  I  hate  to  act  differently."  *

The  number  of  robes  received  by  Mu'awiyah.  Abu-
Mas'ud  al-Kufi  from  al-Kalbi: — The  chief  of  an-Najrani-
yah at  al-Kufah  used  to  send  his  messengers  to  all  the  people
of  Najran  who  were  in  Syria  and  other  districts  and  to
gather  money  assessed  evenly  on  them  for  raising  the  required
robes.  When  Mu'awiyah  (or  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah)  came
to  power,  they  complained  to  him  because  of  their  dispersion,
the  death  of  some  of  them,  and  the  conversion  to  Islam  of

1  Adam,  p.  9.


io4


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


others.  They  also  presented  the  statement  issued  by
'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  for  the  reduction  of  the  number  of
robes.  To  this  they  added.  "And  now  we  have  still  more
decreased,  and  become  weaker."  He  then  reduced  the  num-
ber by  another  200  robes,  thus  reducing  the  original  number
by  four  hundred.

Al-Hajjaj  restores  the  number.  When  al-Hajjaj  ibn-
Yusuf  was  made  governor  of  al-Trak  and  ibn-al-Ash'ath
revolted  against  him,  the  former  charged  the  non-Arab
landlords  and  the  people  of  Xajran  with  siding  with  the
latter,  and,  therefore,  he  raised  the  number  to  1,800  robes,
and  ordered  that  the  robes  be  of  the  kind  adorned  with
figures.

'Umar  ibn-  Abd-alJ Aziz  reduces  the  number.  When
'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  came  to  power,  they  complained  to
him  that  they  were  in  danger  of  extinction,  that  they  were
decreasing  in  number,  that  the  continuous  raids  of  the  Arabs
overburdened  them  with  heavy  taxes  for  revictualling  them,
and  that  they  suffered  from  the  unjust  treatment  of  al-
Hajjaj.  By  'Umar's  orders  their  census  was  taken,  and  it
was  found  that  they  were  reduced  to  one-tenth  of  their
original  number,  upon  which  'Umar  said,  "  I  consider  that
the  terms  of  this  capitulation  impose  a  tax  on  their  heads
and  not  on  their  lands.  The  poll-tax  of  the  dead  and  the
Moslems,  however,  is  annulled."  He  therefore  held  them
responsible  for  200  robes  of  the  value  of  8,000  dirhams.

Yusuf  ibn-' Umar  restores  the  original  tax. In  the  time
of  al-Walid  ibn-Yazid,  when  Yusuf  ibn-' Umar  was  made 68
governor  of  al-Trak,  he  [Yusuf],  moved  with  partisanship
to  al-Hajjaj,  charged  them  the  original  tax.

Abu-l- Abbas  reduces  the  number  of  robes.  When  abu-
1-' Abbas  was  proclaimed  caliph,  they  met  him  on  the  way
as  he  appeared  in  al-Kufah  and  strewed  myrtle  branches  on
the  road  and  threw  some  on  him  as  lie  was  g<  >ing  home  from


THE  CAPITULATION  OF  NAJRAN


105


the  mosque.  With  this  the  caliph  was  greatly  pleased.
Later  they  brought  their  case  before  him  and  told  him  of
their  paucity  in  number  and  of  their  treatment  by  'Umar
ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  and  Yusuf  ibn-'Umar.  To  this  they
added,  "We  are  somehow  related  to  thy  uncles  (on  the
mother's  side),  the  banu-1-Harith  ibn-Ka'b."  'Abdallah  ibn-
ar-Rabi'  al-Harithi  spoke  in  their  favor;  and  al-Hajjaj  ibn-
Artat  confirmed  what  they  claimed.  Therefore,  abu-1-
'  Abbas  held  them  responsible  only  for  the  200  robes  pre-
viously given  by  them,  having  a  value  of  8,000  dirhams.

Ar-Rashid  writes  them  a  favorable  statement.  Abu-
Mas'ud  said,  "  When  ar-Rashid  Harun  became  caliph  and
started  for  al-Kufah  on  his  way  to  the  Pilgrimage,  they
brought  their  case  before  him  and  complained  of  the  harsh
treatment  of  the  'amlls.  By  the  caliph's  orders  there  was
written  to  them  a  statement  fixing  the  number  at  200  robes.
The  statement  I  myself  saw.  Moreover  the  caliph  ordered
that  they  be  freed  from  dealing  with  the  'amils,  and  that
they  pay  the  dues  directly  to  the  treasury."

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  ibn-Shihab  az-Zuhri : — The  following
text  was  revealed  against  the  unbelievers  among  the  Kuraish
and  the  Arabs,1  "  Fight  therefore  against  them  until  there
is  no  more  civil  discord,  and  the  only  worship  be  that  of
Allah,"  and  the  following  against  the  "People  of  the  Book."2
"  Make  war  upon  such  of  those  to  whom  the  Book  has  been
given  as  believe  not  in  Allah,  or  in  the  last  day,  and  who
forbid  not  that  which  Allah  and  his  Messenger  have  for-
bidden, and  who  profess  not  the  profession  of  the  truth,"
etc.  to  "  humbled."  Thus  the  first  among  the  "People  of  the
Book"  to  pay  poll-tax,  so  far  as  we  know,  were  the  people
of  Najran  who  were  Christian.  Then,  the  people  of  Ailah,
Adhruh  and  Adhri'at  paid  it  in  the  battle  of  Tabuk.

1  Kor.,  2 :  189.  *  Kor.,  9 :  29.


CHAPTER  XV

Al-Yaman

The  people  of  al-Yaman  embrace  Islam.  When  the  news
of  the  rise  of  the  Prophet  and  the  success  of  his  righteous
cause  reached  the  people  of  al-Yaman,  they  sent  their  envoys,
and  the  Prophet  gave  them  a  written  statement  confirming  69
them  in  the  possession  of  whatever  property,  lands,  and
buried  treasures  were  included  in  their  terms  when  they  be-
came Aloslems.  Thus  they  accepted  Islam ;  and  the  Prophet
sent  them  his  messengers  and  'amils  to  acquaint  them  with
the  laws  of  Islam  and  its  institutes  and  to  receive  their
sadakah  and  the  poll-tax  of  those  among  them  who  still  held
to  Christianity,  Judaism  or  Magianism.

The  Prophet's  letter.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  al-
Hasan : — The  Prophet  wrote  to  the  people  of  al-Yaman.
"  Whosoever  repeats  our  prayer,  turns  his  face  to  the
kiblah  as  we  do,1  and  eat  what  we  slaughter,  such  a  one  is  a
Moslem  and  has  the  security  of  Allah  and  the  security  of  his
Prophet.  But  whosoever  refuses  to  do  so,  tax  is  binding
upon  him."

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  Hudbah
on  the  authority  of  al-Hasan.

The  governor  of  San'a'.  It  is  reported  by  al-Wakidi
that  the  Prophet  sent  Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  as  a  com-
mander over  San'a'  and  its  land.  Al-Wakidi  adds  that
some  say  that  the  Prophet  assigned  al-Muhajir  ibn-abi-
Umaiyah  ibn-al-Mughirah-1-Makhzumi  to  be  governor  of
San'a,  in  which  position  he  died. Still  others  say,  according

1  Turning  the  face  towards  Makkah  during  prayer.
106


AL-YAMAN  i0y

to  al-Wakidi,  that  the  one  who  made  al-Muhajir  governor
over  San'a'  was  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik,  who  also  assigned
Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  over  the  provinces  of  upper  al-Yaman.

Al-Muhajir  as  governor  of  Kindah  and  as-Sadif.  Ac-
cording to  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi  and  Haitham  ibn-'Adi  the
Prophet  assigned  al-Muhajir  over  Kindah  and  as-Sadif.
On  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  abu-Bakr  wrote  to  Ziyad  ibn-
Labid  al-Bayadi-1-Ansari  assigning  to  him  the  governorship
of  Kindah,  as-Sadif  and  other  places  in  addition  to  what  he
already  ruled  over  in  Hadramaut.  Al-Muhajir  he  assigned
over  San'a'  and  later  asked  him  in  writing  to  reinforce
Ziyad  ibn-Labid,  without  dismissing  him  from  the  governor-
ship of  San'a'.

Ziyad,  governor  of  Hadramaut.  It  is  agreed  by  all  that
the  Prophet  assigned  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  to  Hadramaut.

The  governors  of  Zabid,  Rimd ' ,  cAdan,  al-Janad  and
Najran  appointed.  The  Prophet  assigned  abu-Musa-1-
Ash'ari  to  Zabid,  Rima',  'Adan  and  the  coast  region,  and
assigned  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal  to  al-Janad,  made  him  kadi  and
charged  him  with  collecting  sadakah  in  al-Yaman.  He  then
assigned  to  Najran  'Amr  ibn-Hazm  al-Ansari ;  and,  accord-
ing to  other  reports,  he  assigned  abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb  to
Najran  after  'Amr  ibn-Hazm.

The  letter  of  the  Prophet  to  Zur'ah  sent  with  Mu'adh.
'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  al-Mukri'  from  'Urwah  ibn-az-Zubair :
— The  Prophet  wrote  to  Zur'ah  ibn-dhi-Yazan  as  follows : 7°

"  Greetings !  On  the  arrival  of  my  messenger  Mu'adh
ibn-Jabal  and  his  companions,  gather  all  your  sadakah  and
poll-tax  and  deliver  them  to  him.  Mu'adh  is  the  chief  of
my  messengers,  and  one  of  the  righteous  among  my  im-
mediate companions.  I  have  been  informed  by  Malik
ibn-Murarah  *  ar-Rahawi  that  thou  wert  the  first  to  desert

1  Hisham,  p.  956,  gives  "  Murrah  " ;  and  Nawawi,  p.  539,  "Mararah  ".


I08  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Himyar  and  embrace  Islam.  Therefore,  good  times  lie  be-
fore thee.  And  I  order  you,  all  Himyar,1  not  to  exhibit
perfidy  or  deviation,  for  verily  is  the  Prophet  of  Allah  the
lord  of  both  the  rich  and  the  poor  among  you.  As  for  the
sadakah,  it  is  not  legal  for  Muhammad  or  any  of  his  rela-
tives to  take;  it  is  rather  sakat  through  which  ye  are
purified,  and  which  goes  to  the  poor  among  the  Moslems
and  the  Believers.  It  was  Malik  that  conveyed  the  infor-
mation and  kept  the  secret.  As  for  Mu'adh,  he  is  one  of
the  righteous  among  my  immediate  companions  and  one  of
their  coreligionists.  I,  therefore,  order  you  to  treat  him
well,  for  he  is  highly  esteemed. And  peace  be  unto  you !"

The  Prophet  orders  Mu'adh  to  take  the  tithe.  Al-Husain
ibn-al-Aswad  from  Musa  ibn-T alhah : — The  Prophet  sent
Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal 3  to  collect  the  sadakah  of  al-Yaman  or-
dering him  to  take  on  dates,  wheat,  barley  and  grapes
(perhaps  he  said  raisins)  one-tenth  and  one-half  of  a
tenth.

Instructions  to  'Amr  ibn-Hazm.  Al-Husain  from
Muhammad  ibn-Ishak: — The  Prophet  wrote  the  following
to  'Amr  ibn-Hazm  when  he  sent  him  to  al-Yaman :

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  declaration  from  Allah  and  his  Prophet.  All  ye
that  have  believed !  be  faithful  to  your  compacts : 4  this
is  an  ordinance  from  the  Prophet  Muhammad,  the  Mes-
senger of  Allah,  to  'Amr  ibn-Hazm  when  he  delegated  him  to
al-Yaman.  He  ordered  him  to  fear  Allah  in  whatever  he
performs,  and  to  take  from  the  spoils  the  fifth  that  belongs
to  Allah  as  well  as  what  is  prescribed  as  sadakah  on  the
property  of  the  Believers  which  is  one-tenth  in  case  it  is

1  llisham,  p.  957.

2  Cf.  Tabari.  vol.  i,  p.  1719.

3  Bukhari,  vol.  iii,  p.  156;  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  158.
*  Kor.,  5:  1.


AL-YAMAN  IOq

watered  by  flowing  water  or  rain,  and  one-half  of  a  tenth
if  it  is  watered  by  means  of  the  bucket."  1

The  Prophet's  letter  to  the  kings  of  Himyar.  Al-Husain
from  Muhammad  ibn-Ishak : — The  following  is  what  the
Prophet  wrote  to  the  kings  of  Himyar :

'  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
From  the  Prophet  Muhammad,  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  to  71
al-Harith  ibn-'Abd-Kulal,  Nu'aim  ibn-'Abd-Kulal,  and
Sharh  ibn-'Abd-Kulal,  to  an-Nu'man  Kail  dhi-Ru'ain,
Ma'afir  and  Hamdan.  Greetings!  Allah  will  guide  you
by  his  own  guidance,  if  ye  act  well,  obey  Allah  and  his
Prophet,  observe  the  prayer,  pay  the  sakdt,  give  out  of  the
spoils  the  fifth  that  belongs  to  Allah,  the  share  of  his  Pro-
phet, and  the  portion  which  belongs  to  him  as  chief  exclusive
of  his  companions,  and  deliver  what  is  prescribed  by  Allah
to  the  Believers  in  the  form  of  sadakah  on  the  property,
which  is  one-tenth,  in  case  the  land  is  watered  by  spring,
or  rain  water,  and  half  of  the  tenth  if  watered  by  means  of
the  bucket."  2

According  to  Hisham  ibn-Muhammad  al-Kalbi  the  letter
of  the  Prophet  was  addressed  to  'Arib  and  al-Harith,  the
sons  of  'Abd-Kulal  ibn-'Arib  ibn-Liyashrah.s

The  Prophet's  letter  to  Mu'adh.  Yusuf  ibn-Musa-1-
Kattan  from  al-Hakam: — The  Prophet  wrote  to  Mu'adh
ibn-Jabal,  when  the  latter  was  in  al-Yaman,  stating  that  one-
tenth  is  to  be  assessed  on  what  is  watered  by  rain  or  flowing
water,  and  half  of  a  tenth  on  what  is  watered  by  means
of  the  bucket  and  water-wheel;  that  on  every  adult  one
dinar  or  its  equivalent  in  clothes  is  to  be  assessed ;  and  that
no  Jew  is  to  be  enticed  to  leave  Judaism.4

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1727.

2  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1718.

s  Ibn-Duraid, al-Ishtikak,  p. 308: "  Yalyashrah " ; see ZDMG, vol.
xx,  p.  237.

4  Here  is  omitted  the  explanation  of  certain  words  in  the  tradition.


I IO  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  instructions  given  to  Mu'ddh.  Abu-'Ubaid  from
Masruk : — The  Prophet  delegated  Mu'adh  to  al-Yaman  giv-
ing him  orders  to  take  a  one-year-old  cow  out  of  every
thirty  cows;  one  full-grown  cow,  of  every  forty;  and  one
dinar,  or  its  equivalent  in  clothes,  from  every  adult.

The  Magians  taxed.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  al-
Hasan : — The  Prophet  collected  poll-tax  from  the  Magians
of  Hajar  and  the  Magians  of  al-Yaman,  and  assessed  one
dinar  or  its  equivalent  in  clothes  on  every  adult  or  female
from  the  Magians  of  al-Yaman.

The  people  of  al-Yaman  taxed. 'Amr  an-Nakid  from 72
'Amr  ibn-Shu'aib's  grandfather  :  —  The  Prophet  assessed
one dinar  as tax on every adult among  the people of
al-Yaman.

Shaiban  ibn-abi-Shaibah-1-Ubulli  from  Yahya  ibn-Saifi
or  from  ibn-' Abbas : — When  the  Prophet  delegated  Mu'adh
ibn-Jabal  to  al-Yaman  he  said,  "  When  thou  comest  to  any
of  the  '  People  of  the  Book,'  tell  them,  'Allah  made  it
obligatory  on  you  to  pray  five  times  per  day  and  night '.
If  they  obey,  tell  them,  'Allah  made  it  obligatory  on  you
to  fast  during  the  month  of  Ramadan  of  every  year  '.  If
they  obey,  tell  them,  'Allah  made  it  obligatory  on  him  of
you  who  can  afford  it  to  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  Makkah  '.
If  they  obey,  tell  them,  'Allah  has  made  it  obligatory  on
you  to  offer  sadakah  on  your  possessions  to  be  taken  from
the  rich  among  you  and  turned  over  to  the  poor  among
you.'  If  they  obey,  then  avoid  their  choice  possessions
and  beware  of  the  imprecation  of  the  oppressed,  for  between
his  imprecation  and  Allah  there  is  no  veil  or  screen."  *

/  'rod nets  subject  to  sadakah.  Shaiban  from  al-Mughirah
ibn-'Abdallah  : — Al-Hajjaj  said,  "Give  sadakah  on  every
leguminous  plant." Regarding  this  abu-Burdah ibn-abi-

1  Bukhari,  vol.  iii,  p.  157.


AL-YAMAN  riI

Musa  said,  "  He  is  right ",  which  made  Musa  ibn-Talhah
say  to  abu-Burdah,  "  This  man  [al-Hajjaj  ?]  now  claims
that  his  father  was  among  the  Prophet's  Companions.  The
Prophet  sent  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal  to  al-Yaman  and  gave  him
instructions  to  collect  sadakah  on  dates,  wheat,  barley  and
raisins."

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Musa  ibn-Talhah  ibn-'Ubaidallah
who  said : — "  I  have  read  the  letter  of  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal
when  the  Prophet  sent  him  to  al-Yaman,  and  there  oc-
curred in  it  the  following  statement,  '  Take  sadakah  on
wheat,  barley,  dates  and  corn.'  "  73

Why  more  tax  on  the  Syrians.  'AH  ibn-'Abdallah  al-
Madini  from  ibn-abi-Najih  who  said,  "  I  once  asked
Mujahid,  '  Why  did  'Umar  levy  on  the  people  of  Syria
a  heavier  poll-tax  than  on  the  people  of  al-Yaman  ?'  and  he
replied,  '  Because  they  were  people  of  means.'  "

Nothing  on  al-awkds.  Al-Husain  ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-Aswad
from  Ta'us: — When  Mu'adh  arrived  in  al-Yaman,  there
was  brought  before  him  a  medial  number  of  cows  and  a
medial  amount x  of  honey,  on  which  he  said,  "  I  have  no
instructions  to  take  anything  on  this."

The  salt  of  Ma' rib.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Abyad
ibn-Hammal: — The  latter  asked  the  Prophet  to  give  him
as  fief  the  salt  in  Ma' rib ;  but  hearing  someone  say,  "  It  is
like  perennial  water,"  2  the  Prophet  refused  to  assign  it.

A  tradition  to  the  same  effect  was  communicated  to  me
by  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  and  others  on  the  authority  of
Abyad  ibn-Hammal.

The  Prophet  gives  a  fief  in  Hadramaut. According  to  a

1  Ar.  awkas  =  what  is  between  one  faridah  and  the  next ;  as,  for  in-
stance when  camels  amount  in  number  to  five,  one  sheep  or  goat  is  to
be  given  for  them ;  and  nothing  is  to  be  given  for  such  as  exceed  that
number  until  they  amount  to  ten ;  thus  what  is  between  the  five  and  ten
is  termed  waks,  pi.  awkas.

2  Having  an  unfailing  and  continuous  output.


II2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

tradition  communicated  to  me  by  Ahmad  ibn-Ibrahim  ad-
Dauraki  on  the  authority  of  'Alkamah  ibn-Wa'il  al-
Hadrami's  father,  the  Prophet  gave  out  as  fief  to  the  latter
['Alkamah's  father]  a  piece  of  land  in  Hadramaut.

Muhammad  ibn-Yusuf  severe  on  al-Yaman.  'Ali  ibn-
Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-abi-Saif,  a  freedman  of
Kuraish,  from  Maslamah  ibn-Muharib : — When  Muham-
mad ibn-Yusuf,  the  brother  of  al-Hajjaj  ibn-Yusuf,  was  the
governor  of  al-Yaman,  he  misbehaved,  oppressed  the  people
and  took  pieces  of  land  from  certain  men  without  paying
their  prices.  Among  the  lands  he  thus  wrested  was  al-
Harajah.  Morever  he  levied  on  the  people  of  al-Yaman
a  khardj  which  he  gave  the  form  of  an  assessed  rate  of
land-tax.  When  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  came  to  power,
he  wrote  to  his  'a/mil  instructing  him  to  abolish  that  assessed
land-tax  and  take  nothing  more  than  the  tithe  saying,
"  Though  I  may  not  get  from  al-Yaman  more  than  a  hand-
ful of  katam,1  I  would  rather  have  that  than  the  passing
of  such  a  tax."  However,  when  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik
came  to  power  he  reinstated  it.

Sadakah  on  plants,  grains  and  vegetables.  Al-Husain
ibn-Muhammad  az-Za'farani  from  abu-'Abd-ar-Rahman
Hisham  ibn-Yusuf,  the  kadi  of  San'a' : — The  people  of  74
Khufash  presented  a  statement  from  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik  on
a  parchment  ordering  them  to  pay  sadakah  on  a  piece  of
land  planted  with  zvarsr

According  to  Malik.  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  all  the  canonists  of
al-Hijaz,  Sufyan  ath-Thauri  and  abu-Yusuf  there  is  no
zakat  on  zvars,  wasmah,*  kirt*  katam.  hi  una*  and  roses.

1  A  plant  product  used  for  dyeing  the  hair  black.
1  A  certain plant  like  sesame existing  in al-Yaman only,  used for
dyeing.
s  A  plant  with  the  leaves  of  which  one  tinges  or  dyes.
*  A  kind  of  leek.  5  A  plant  used  for  dyeing  the  hands  and  feet.


AL-YAMAN  n^

Abu-Hanifah,  however,  holds  that  there  is  zakat  on  these,
whether  in  large  or  small  quantities.  Malik  holds  that  the
zakat  on  saffron  is  five  dirhams,  if  its  price  amounts  to  200
dirhams  and  if  it  is  sold.  The  same  is  the  view  of  abu-az-
Zinad  who  is  reported  by  others  to  have  said,  "  Nothing  on
saffron."  According  to  abu-Hanifah  and  Zufar  there  is
sakat  on  it  whether  it  is  in  large  or  small  quantities.  Abu-
Yusuf  and  Muhammad  ibn-al-Hasan  claim,  "  If  its  price
amounts  to  the  lowest  price  for  which  five  masks  of  dates,
wheat,  barley,  corn  or  any  other  kind  of  grains  sell,  then
there  is  sadakah  on  it."  According  to  ibn-abi-Laila,  there  is
nothing  on  vegetables.  The  same  view  is  held  by  ash-Sha'bi.1
According  to  'Ata'  and  Ibrahim  an-Nakha'i,  whatever  the
tithe-land  produces,  be  it  in  great  or  small  quantities,  is
subject  to  the  tithe  or  half  the  tithe.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ibn-abi-Raja'  al-'Utaridi
who  said  : — "  In  al-Basrah,  ibn-al-' Abbas  used  to  collect  our
sadakahs  even  from  the  bundles  of  leek."

Al-Husain  from  Ta'us  and  'Ikrimah : — The  latter  as-
serted that  there  is  no  zakat  on  wars  and  cotton.

The  tax  on  the  dhimmis.  The  following  is  the  view  of
abu-Hanifah  and  Bishr : — In  case  of  the  dhimmis  who  are
in  possession  of  lands  included  in  the  tithe-land,  like  for
instance  al-Yaman  whose  people  accepted  Islam  and  made
terms  on  their  lands,  al-Basrah  which  was  cultivated  by  the
Moslems,  and  other  lands  given  out  as  fiefs  by  the  caliphs
to  which  no  Moslem  or  "  man  of  the  covenant "  has  claim,
it  is  binding  on  these  people  to  pay  tax  on  their  person
and  kharaj  on  their  lands  according  to  what  their  lands  can
bear.  Whatever  is  received  from  them  follows  the  course
of  the  money  received  as  kharaj.  If,  however,  any  one  of
them  becomes  Moslem,  he  is  exempt  from  the  poll-tax  but

1  Yahya  ibn-Adam,  p.  107.


II4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

remains  always  subject  to  the  kharaj  on  his  land,  as  it  is
the  case  in  as-Sawad.  The  same  view  is  held  by  ibn-abi-
Laila.  According  to  ibn-Shubrumah  and  abu-Yusuf,  tax  is  75
levied  on  their  heads,  and  they  should  pay  double  what  the
Moslems  pay  on  their  lands,  which  would  be  a  fifth  or
a  tenth.  This  they  said  on  the  analogy  of  the  case  of  the
Christian  banu-Taghlib.  Abu-Yusuf  added  that  whatever
is  taken  from  them  should  follow  the  course  of  the  money
received  as  kharaj.  In  case  a  dhimmi  becomes  Moslem
or  his  land  goes  to  a  Moslem,  then  it  becomes  tithe-land.
The  same  view  is  reported  to  have  been  held  by  'Ata'  and
al-Hasan.

According  to  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  ibn-abi-Sabrah,  Sharik  ibn-
'Abdallah  an-Nakha'i,  and  ash-Shafi'i,  there  is  tax  on  their
heads,  but  no  kharaj  or  tithe  on  their  land,  because  they  are
not  included  in  those  on  whom  sakdt  is  binding,  nor  is  their
land  a  khardj-land.  The  same  opinion  is  held  by  al-Hasan
ibn-Salih  ibn-Hai-1-Mamdani.

According  to  Sufyan  ath-Thauri  and  Muhammad  ibn-al-
Hasan,  there  is  tithe  on  them  but  not  in  a  doubled  form,
because  that  which  counts  is  the  land,  and  the  possessor  is
not  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  According  to  al-Auza'i
and  Sharik  ibn-'Abdallah,  if  they  are  dhimmis  like  the
Jews  of  al-Yaman,  whose  people  became  Moslem  while  they
were  still  in  the  land,  then  nothing  is  taken  but  the  poll-tax,
and  you  should  not  let  the  dhimmi  buy  the  tithe-land  or
possess  it.

The  case  of  a  Jew  who  holds  tithe-land.  Al-Wakidi  said,
"  I  once  asked  Malik  about  the  case  of  a  Jew  from  al-Hijaz
who  buys  land  in  al-Jurf  and  plants  it.  Malik  said,  '  The
tithe  is  taken  from  him  \  J  then  replied,  '  Didst  thou  not
claim  that  there  is  no  tithe  on  the  land  of  a  dhimmi  if  he
acquires  it  from  the  tithe-land  ?' That ',  said  Malik,  '  holds


AL-YAMAN  XI^

true,  if  he  stays  in  his  own  country;  but  in  case  he  leaves  his
country,  then  that  becomes  a  question  of  trade.'  "  1

A  man  of  the  banu-Taghlib  who  uses  a  tithe-land.  Abu-
az-Zinad,  Malik  ibn-Anas,  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  ath-Thauri,  abu-
Hanifah  and  Ya'kub  said  regarding  the  case  of  one  of  the
banu-Taghlib  who  plants  a  piece  of  the  tithe-land  that  he
should  pay  a  double-tithe.  If  he  rents  a  tithe- farm  then —
according  to  Malik,  ath-Thauri,  ibn-abi-Dhi'b  and  Ya'kub —
the  one  who  plants  the  farms  should  pay  the  tithe.  Abu-
Hanifah,  however,  maintains  that  the  owner  of  the  land
should  pay  it;  and  Zufar  shares  the  same  view.

The  case  of  one  who  is  behind  in  payment  of  the  tithe.
According  to  abu-Hanifah,  in  case  a  man  fails  to  pay  the
tithe  for  two  years,  then  the  authorities  [Ar.  sultan]  take
only  one  tithe  as  he  begins  again  to  pay.  The  same  is  true
of  the  khardj-land.  But  abu-Shimr  holds  that  the  authori-
ties take  the  arrears,  because  it  is  justly  due  to  them.

1  Cf.  abu-Yusuf,  p.  69.


CHAPTER  XVI

'Uman

The  Prophet  sends  abu-Zaid  al-Ansdri  to  'Uman.  The  al-  76
Azd  were  in  ascendency  in  'Uman,1  although  it  had  in  its
deserts  2  many  other  peoples.  In  the  early  part  of  the  year
8,  the  Prophet  delegated  to  them  abu-Zaid  al-Ansari  of  al-
Khazraj,  who  was  one  of  those  who  compiled  the  Koran
in  the  time  of  the  Prophet.  His  [full]  name,  according  to
al-Kalbi,  was  Kais  ibn-Sakan  ibn-Zaid 3  ibn-Haram ;  ac-
cording to  some  Basrah  philologists,  his  name  was  'Amr  ibn-
Akhtab.  the  grandfather  of  'Urwah  ibn-Thabit  ibn-'Amr  ibn-
Akhtab;  and  according  to  Sa'id  ibn-Aus  al-Ansari,  it  was
Thabit  ibn-Zaid.  The  Prophet  also  sent  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi
as-Sahmi  with  a  letter  to  'Abd  4  and  Jaifar,  the  two  sons  of
al-Julanda,  calling  them  to  Islam.5  The  Prophet  said,  "  If
these  people  accept  the  witness  of  truth  and  pledge  obedi-
ence to  Allah  and  his  Prophet,  'Amr  will  be  the  commander
and  abu-Zaid  will  officiate  in  prayer,  propagate  Islam,  and
teach  the  Koran  and  the  institutes  of  the  Prophet."

On  the  arrival  of  abu-Zaid  and  'Amr  at  'Uman,  they
found  that  'Abd  and  Jaifar  were  at  Suhar  on  the  sea-coast.
They  carried  the  letter  of  the  Prophet  to  them,  and  they

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  717.

2  Ar.  badiyah ;  see  MFO,  vol.  iv,  p.  98.

s  Hisham,  p.  504,  gives  "Kais  ibn-Za'ura"  for  Zaid.

4  Hisham,  p.  971 :  "  'Iyadh" ;  adh-Dhahabi,  al-Mushtabih,  p.  133 :  "  'Ab-
bad";  cf.  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  177.

5  Ya'kubi.  vol.  ii,  p.  85;  Sprenger,  vol.  iii,  p.  382.

116


'UMAN


117


both  accepted  Islam  and  invited  the  Arabs  to  it.  The  Arabs
then  responded  and  showed  special  interest  in  it.  'Amr
and  abu-Zaid  stayed  in  'Uman  until  the  death  of  the  Pro-
phet. It  is  said  by  some,  however,  that  abu-Zaid  returned
to  al-Madinah  before  that.

Al-Azd  and  other  tribes  apostatise.  Consequent  upon  the
death  of  the  Prophet,  al-Azd  apostatized  from  Islam  under
the  leadership  of  Lakit  ibn-Malik  dhu-at-Taj  and  left  for
Dabba  1  (some  say  for  Damma  in  Dabba),  Abu-Bakr,  there-
upon, dispatched  against  them  Hudhaifah  ibn-Mihsan  al-
Makhzumi,  who  in  a  battle  with  Lakit  and  his  companions
killed  him  and  took  from  the  people  of  Dabba  many  captives
whom  they  sent  to  abu-Bakr.  At  this,  al-Azd  returned  to
Islam.  Other  clans  from  'Uman,  however,  apostatized  and  yy
went  as  far  as  ash-Shihr.  These  'Ikrimah  followed  and
overpowered,  carrying  away  a  large  booty  and  killing  many
of  their  number.  Then  some  of  the  tribe  of  Mahrah  ibn-
Haidan  ibn-'Amr  ibn  al-Hafi  ibn-Kuda'ah  massed  a  body
of  men,  against  whom  'Ikrimah  came;  but  they  offered  no
resistance  and  paid  sadakah.

Hudhaifah  made  governor.  Abu-Bakr  assigned  Hu-
dhaifah ibn-Mihsan  as  governor  over  'Uman.  When  abu-
Bakr  died,  Hudhaifah  was  still  over  it;  but  he  was  later
dismissed  and  sent  to  al-Yaman.

'Isa  ibn-] a  jar  abuses  the  people.  The  state  of  'Uman
continued  in  a  fair  way,  its  people  paying  sadakah  on  their
property,  and  poll-tax  being  taken  from  those  among  them
who  were  dhimmis  until  the  caliphate  of  ar-Rashid  who
made  'Isa  ibn-Ja'far  ibn-Sulaiman  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah
ibn-al-'Abbas  its  ruler.  The  latter  left  for  'Uman  with  some
troops  from  al-Basrah,  who  began  to  violate  women,  and  rob

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1981 :  "  Daba  ".


!  j8  the  origins  of  the  islamic  state

the  people,  and  make  public  use  of  musical  instruments.1
The  people  of  'Uman,  who  were  mostly  Shurat,2  having
learned  that,  fought  against  him  and  held  him  back  from
entering  the  city.  Finally,  they  succeeded  in  killing  and
crucifying  him.  Then  they  broke  with  the  caliph 3  and
refused  to  do  him  homage,  making  one  of  their  own  their
ruler.

Some  assert  that  the  Prophet  sent  abu-Zaid  carrying  his
letter  to  *Abd  and  Jaifar,  the  two  sons  of  al-Julanda  of  al-
Azd,  in  the  year  6,  and  sent  'Amr  in  the  year  8,  a  short  time
after  his  conversion  to  Islam,  which  took  place,  together
with  the  conversion  of  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  and  'Uthman
ibn-Talhah-l-'Abdi  in  Safar,  year  8.  'Amr  had  come  from
Abyssinia  to  the  Prophet.4  The  Prophet  said  to  abu-Zaid,
"  From  the  Moslems,  take  sadakah;  but  from  the  Magians,
take  poll-tax."

The  letter  of  eUmar  ibn-' Abd-al-' Aziz  to  'Adi.  Abu-1-
Hasan  al-Mada'ini  from  al-Mubarak  ibn-Fudalah  :  —  The
following  is  what  'Umar  ibn-' Abd-al-' Aziz  wrote  to  'Adi
ibn-Artat  al-Fazari,  his  'amil  in  al-Basrah :

"  Greetings !  I  have  previously  written  to  'Amr  ibn-
Wbdallah  asking  him  to  distribute  whatever  he  received  in
'Uman  as  date  or  grain  tithes  among  the  poor  of  its  in-
habitants, the  nomadic  people  who  may  descend  on  it  and
those  whom  need,  poverty,  or  obstruction  of  the  way  may
compel  to  stay  in  it.  Regarding  this,  he  wrote  to  me  that
having  asked  thy  representative  who  came  before  him  to
'Uman  about  those  articles  of  food  and  dates,  he  was  told 78

1  Cf.  Salil  ibn-Razik.  History  of  Imams  and  Seyyids  of  Oman,  tr.
Badger,  p. 11.

2  Schismatics  commonly  known  as  Kliawarij.  They  say  that  they
owe  their  name  to  Koran,  2:  203.

•:  The  word  used  is  sultan.
4  Hisham,  pp.  716-717.


'UMAN  ng

that  thy  representative  had  sold  them  and  delivered  the  price
to  thee.  Return  to  'Amr,  therefore,  what  thy  representative
in  'Uman  had  carried  to  thee  as  the  price  of  dates  and
grains,  that  'Amr  may  invest  it  where  I  instructed  him,  and
spend  it  as  I  told  him.  May  this  be  the  will  of  Allah,
and  peace  be  unto  thee!"


\


CHAPTER  XVII
Al-Bahrain

Al-Mundhir  ibn-Sawa,  governor  of  al-Bahrain.  The
land  of  al-Bahrain  formed  a  part  of  the  Persian  kingdom.
In  its  desert  lived  a  great  many  Arabs  from  the  tribes  of
'Abd-al-Kais,  Bakr  ibn-Wail  and  Tamim.  At  the  time  of
the  Prophet,  the  one  who  ruled  the  Arabs  in  it  in  the  name
of  the  Persians  was  al-Mundhir  ibn-Sawa  *  one  of  the  sons
of  'Abdallah  ibn-Zaid  ibn-' Abdallah  ibn-Darim  ibn-Malik
ibn-Hanzalah.  This  'Abdallah  ibn-Zaid  was  surnamed  al-
Asbadhi  after  a  village  in  Hajar  called  al-Asbadh.  Others
claim  that  he  was  named  after  the  al-Asbadhi  people,  who
were  worshippers  of  horses  in  al-Bahrain.

Al-Ala  delegated  by  the  Prophet.  At  the  beginning  of
the  year  8.  the  Prophet  delegated  al-'Ala  ibn-'  Abdallah  ibn-
Tmad  al-Hadrami.  an  ally  of  the  banu-'Abd- Shams,  to  al-
Bahrain,  giving  its  people  the  choice  between  following
Islam  or  paying  tax.  With  him,  the  Prophet  sent  a  letter
to  al-Mundhir  ibn-Sawa  and  Sibukht  the  satrap  '  of  Hajar/
giving  them  the  choice  between  following  Islam  or  paying
tax.  They  both  were  converted  and.  together  with  them,
all  the  Arabs  living  there  and  a  few  Persians.  The  rest
:he  population,  however,  including  Magians.  Jews  and

1  rjajar,  vol.  iii,  p.  043.

1  marzubdn;  Ibn-Hajar,  vol.  i,  p.  213,  in  quoting  al-Baladhuri  gives
his  name  thus:  "  Usaikhit  <  Usaikhib)  ";  cf.  Ibn-Sa'd  in  Wellhausen.
Skiz3en,  vol.  iv,  p.  15 ;  Yakut,  vol.  i.  p.  508.

'Another name for Bahrain, hence the Greek: Gerrha: Caetani.
vol.  ii.  p.  194.
120


AL-BA&RAIA  2,

Christians  made  terms  with  al-'Ala'  and  this  is  a  copy  of  the
statement  written  between  the  two  parti es

'  In  the  name  :  Allah,  the  compassionate.  the  merciful.
The-r  irr  the  terms  agreed  upon  between  al-*Ala'  ibn-ai-
rTadrami  and  the  people  of  al-Bahraim  It  is  a.gr-zi.  mat
they  wiD  save  as  me  Moslems]  the  :r:uble  of  work,  and
fc  with  os  the  lates;  and  wb  soever  :  them  fails  to
keep  this  may  the  corse  :  Allah,  the  angels,  and  the  world
altogether  be  upon  him."  As  :  r  the  poll-: ;•:■:  al-'Ala'
isses  -ed  one  .  ever.-  adult.  -

The  letter  of  the  Prop?.-::. 'Abbas ibn-Hisham from

ibn-' Abbas: — This  is  what  the  Prophe:  wrote  ::  the  people

:'  al-Bahrain :

"Greetings [f  ye  observe  prayer g .  so ra  .  val

I Allah  and  his  Pr  phet,  pay  the  time f  the  dates  and  half

the  tithe :f  the  grains,  and  Ac  not  bring  up  your  ch -

agians I  -  will i  treated  according  t die  ter -

agreed  upon  when e .-;ame  M dem :  .  the
of  the  hre-temple  thai  is  ::  be  deliverei  :: Allah  and
r  phet If,  however,  ye  refuse,  then  tax  will  be  incumbent
d  yen."
The  Magions  and  Jews : -  The  Magians  and

Jews,  however,  refused  Islam  and  preferred  the  payment
:  : .'.-::.x. Upon  this,  the  hypocrites  am  ng  the  Arabs  re-
'  The  Prophe:  preten ted  that  he  would  accept  poll-
:r  m  none  ootside  the  'People :'  the  Book',  but,  he
he  is iccej  ting  H  from  the  Mag -  ajar  who  are  ::  :

'People ::' the  Or. this xcasion the text was

---: — -  ye  that  have  believed!  take  heed  to  yourselves
who  erreth  shall  not  hurt  v  a  when  ye  have  the  raid-
According  tc xrtain rec its the  Prophe: sent
la at  the  time  he  sent  his  em  jys  : the  kings  in the
year  6  ;

' " 5 :  --  '' ■


122  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Al-'Ala  as  a  wall  between  them.  Muhammad  ibn-
Musaffa  al-Himsi  from  al-'Ala'  ibn-al- Had  rami  who  said :
"  The  Prophet  sent  me  to  al-Bahrain  (or  perhaps  he  said
'  Hajar  ' )  and  I  used  to  come  as  a  wall  between  brothers
[i.  e.  try  to  create  discord]  some  of  whom  have  been  con-
verted. From  the  Moslem  among  them,  I  would  take  the
tithe,  and  from  the  '  polytheist'  kharaj."  1

The  Prophet's  letter.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  'Urwah
ibn-az-Zubair : — The  Prophet  wrote  to  the  people  of  Hajar
as  follows  : — 2

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
From  Muhammad  the  Prophet  to  the  people  of  Hajar :  ye
are  in  peace.  I  praise  Allah  on  your  behalf,  beside  whom
there  is  no  god.  Then  I  admonish  you  by  Allah  and  by
yourselves  that  ye  do  not  go  astray  after  having  been  guided,
nor  be  misled  after  having  the  right  pointed  out  to  you.
What  ye  have  done  has  reached  me,  and  now  the  offense  of
the  guilty  shall  not  be  charged  to  him  among  you  who
behaves  himself.  When  my  commanders  come  to  you  obey
them,  reinforce  them  and  help  them  in  carrying  out  Allah's  80
plan  and  his  cause,  for  whosoever  among  you  does  the
good  deed,  his  deed  shall  not  be  lost  before  Allah  or  before
me.  Your  delegation  has  come  to  me,  and  I  did  nothing  for
them  but  what  was  pleasing  to  them;  although  if  I  were  to
enforce  all  my  right  on  you,  I  would  expel  you  from  Hajar.
Thus  did  I  accept  intercession  for  the  absent  among  you,
and  bestow  favor  on  the  present.  Remember  the  grace  of
Allah  upon  you."

The  tax  imposed  on  al-Bahrain.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad
from  Katadah : — In  the  time  of  the  Prophet,  no  fight  took
place  in  al-Bahrain,  for  some  of  the  people  accepted  Islam.

1  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  509;  Hajar,  vol.  iii,  p.  943;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  202.
'-'  Wellhausen,  Skissen,  vol.  iv,  pp.  15-16.


AL-BAHRAIN


123


and  others  made  terms  with  al-'Ala',  agreeing  to  give  half
the  grains  and  dates.

Al-Husain  from  az-Zuhri : — The  Prophet  took  poll-tax
from  the  Magians  of  Hajar.

What  the  Prophet  wrote  to  the  Magians.  Al-Husain
from  al-Hasan  ibn-Muhammad : — The  Prophet  wrote  to  the
Magians  of  Hajar,  inviting  them  to  Islam  and  providing  that
if  they  are  converted,  they  will  have  the  rights  we  have,
and  be  under  the  obligations  we  are  under;  but  those  who
refuse  Islam  will  have  to  pay  the  tax,  and  we  will  not  eat
what  they  slaughter  nor  marry  their  women.

Al-Husain  from  Sa'id  ibn-al-Musaiyib :  * — The  Prophet
exacted  tax  from  the  Magians  of  Hajar,  'Umar  exacted  it
from  those  of  Persia,  and  Uthman  from  the  Berbers.

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  by  al-Husain  on  the
authority  of  az-Zuhri.

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Musa  ibn-'Ukbah : — The  Prophet
wrote  to  Mundhir  ibn-Sawa  as  follows : —

"  From  Muhammad  the  Prophet  to  Mundhir  ibn-Sawa :
— thou  art  at  peace.  I  praise  Allah  in  thy  behalf,  beside
whom  there  is  no  god.  Thy  letter  I  received,  and  its  con-
tents I  heard.  Whosoever  repeats  our  prayer,  faces  the  81
kiblah  as  we  do  [in  prayer]  and  eats  what  we  slaughter,
such  one  is  a  Moslem;  but  whosoever  refuses  will  have  to
pay  tax."

'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi  from  ibn-' Abbas : —  The
Prophet  having  written  to  al-Mundhir  ibn-Sawa,  the  latter
accepted  Islam  and  called  the  people  of  Hajar  to  it,  some
of  whom  accepted  and  others  did  not.  As  for  the  Arabs,
they  became  Moslems,  but  the  Magians  and  Jews  accepted
the  tax  and  it  was  exacted  from  them.

Al-Ala'  sends  80,000  dirhams.  Shaiban  ibn-Farrukh
from Humaid ibn-Hilal :— Al-'Ala' ibn-al-Hadrami sent

1  Duraid,  p.  62 :  "  Musaiyab  ".


124  THE  0RIGINS  0F  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

from  al-Bahrain  to  the  Prophet  a  sum  of  money  amounting
to  80,000  [dirhams],  more  than  which  sum  the  Prophet
never  received  either  before  or  after.  The  Prophet  gave  a
part  of  it  to  his  uncle  al-'Abbas.

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  from  'Abd-al-'Aziz  ibn-'Ubaidallah  :
— The  Prophet  communicated  with  those  in  Ha  jar  whom
Kisra  had  settled  there  as  hostages  [wadai'],  but  they  re-
fused Islam  and  tax  was  laid  on  them,  one  dinar  on  every
man.

.  I  ban  ibn-Sa'id  made  governor  and  succeeded  by  abu-
Hurairah.  The  Prophet  dismissed  al-'Ala'  and  assigned  to
al-Bahrain  Aban  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah.  Ac-
cording to  other  reports.  al-'Ala'  was  assigned  to  one  district
of  al-Bahrain,  a  part  of  which  was  al-Katif,  and  Aban  to
another  in  which  lay  al-Khatt.  The  former  report,  how-
ever, is  the  more  authentic.  On  the  death  of  the  Prophet,
Aban  left  al-Bahrain  and  came  to  al-Madinah.  The  people
of  al-Bahrain,  thereupon,  asked  abu-Bakr  to  send  al-'Ala'
back  to  them.  This  he  did.  Thus,  according  to  this  re-
port, al-'Ala'  held  the  governorship  of  al-Bahrain  until  he
died  in  the  year  20.  Then  'Umar  assigned  to  his  place  abu-
!  iurairah  ad-Dausi.  Others  say  that  'Umar  assigned  abu-
Hurairah  before  the  death  of  al-'Ala',  who,  thereupon,  left
for  Tauwaj  in  Persia,  intending  to  settle  in  it.  Later,  how-
ever, he  returned  to  al-Bahrain  where  he  died.  Abu-
Hurairah  often  repeated.  "After  we  buried  al-'Ala',  we
wanted  to  lift  a  brick  from  the  tomb.  On  lifting  it  we
found  al-'Ala'  missing  from  the  coffin."

'Uthman  ibn-abi-l-Asi  made  governor.  Abu-Mikhnaf
asserted  that  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wrote  to  al-'Ala'  ibn-
al-Hadrami,  his  'dmil  in  al-Bahrain.  calling  him  back,  and
assigned  'Uthman  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ath-Thakafi  to  al-Bahrain
and  'Uman.  On  the  arrival  of  al-'Ala'  in  al-Madinah,  he
was  assigned  by  'Umar  to  the  governorship  of  al-Basrah.  in 82


AL-BAHRAIN


125


the  place  of  'Utbah  ibn-Ghazwan.  No  sooner  had  he  ar-
rived there,  than  he  died.  This  took  place  in  the  year  14,
or  the  beginning  of  15.  Then  'Umar  assigned  Kudamah
ibn-Maz'un  al-Jumahi  for  the  collection  of  taxes  from  al-
Bahrain,  and  gave  abu-Hurairah  authority  over  the  military
guard  and  charge  of  the  conduct  of  prayer.  Later  he  dis-
missed Kudamah.  inflicted  on  him  the  legal  punishment  for
drinking  wine,1  and  gave  abu-Hurairah  authority  over  the
military  guard  and  charged  him  with  the  conduct  of  prayer.
At  last,  he  dismissed  abu-Hurairah  and  confiscated  a  part
of  his  wealth.  Then  he  assigned  Uthman  ibn-abi-l-'Asi
to  al-Bahrain  and  'Uman.

Abu-Hurairah  made  governor  after  Kudamah.  Al-
'Umari 2  from  al-Haitham : — Kudamah  ibn-Maz'un  had
charge  of  tax-collecting  and  the  military  guard,  and  abu-
Hurairah  acted  as  leader  of  prayer  and  kadi.  The  latter
gave  witness  against  Kudamah,  and  'Umar  assigned  him
to  al-Bahrain  after  Kudamah.  Later  'Umar  dismissed  him.
confiscated  a  part  of  what  he  possessed  and  ordered  him
to  return.  This  he  refused  to  do.  'Umar,  thereupon,  as-
signed 'Uthman  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  as  governor,  who  still  held
the  office  at  the  death  of  'Umar.  When  'Uthman  was  in
Persia,  his  substitute  over  'Uman  and  al-Bahrain  was  his
brother,  Mughirah  ibn-abi-l-'Asi,  others  say  Hafs  ibn-abi-
l-'Asi.

'Umar  confiscates  abu-Hurairah' s  wealth.  Shaiban  ibn-
Farrukh  from  abu-Hurairah  who  said : — "  'Umar  made  me
his  'amil  over  al-Bahrain.  There  I  gathered  12,000  [dir-
hams] .  On  my  return  to  'Umar,  he  addressed  me  saying :
1  O  thou  the  enemy  of  Allah  and  of  the  Moslems  (he  may
have  said  '  and  of  his  Book  '),  thou  hast  stolen  the  money
of  Allah !' To  this  I  replied,  '  Neither  am  I  the  enemy  of

1  Flogging  with  80  stripes ;  see  Mnwatta,  p.  357.
7  i.  e.,  abu-'Umar  Hafs  ibn-'Umar  ad-Duri.


I26  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Allah,  nor  of  the  Moslems,  (he  may  have  said  '  nor  of  his
Book')  ;  rather  am  I  the  enemy  of  him  who  has  enmity
against  them.  The  money,  I  have  got  from  horses  that
multiplied  in  number  and  from  different  shares  that  mounted
up.'  'Umar  then  took  from  me  12,000.  In  my  morning
prayer  I  repeated,  '  Lord  forgive  'Umar.'  After  this,  'Umar
used  to  take  from  the  people  of  al-Bahrain  and  give  them
back  more  than  what  he  would  take.  At  last  'Umar  asked
me,  '  Wouldst  thou  not  act  as  'amil,  abu-Hurairah  ?'  and  I
replied  '  No,'  to  which  he  answered,  'And  why  not?  Better
men  than  thou  were  made  'amils,  for  instance  Joseph,1
who  said,  "  Set  me  over  the  granaries  of  the  land."  To
this  I  replied,  '  Joseph  was  a  prophet  and  the  son  of  a
prophet,  whereas  I  am  abu-Hurairah,  son  of  Umaimah.
and  I  am  afraid  of  three  things  and  of  two  things  that
thou  mayest  bring  upon  me.'  'And  why,'  said  'Umar,  '  didst
thou  not  say  five  ?'  '  I  fear  that  thou  dost  whip  my  back,
defame  my  honor,  and  take  my  money ;  and  I  hate  to  speak
without  meekness  and  to  rule  without  knowledge.'  83

Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  and  Rauh  ibn-'Abd-al-Mu'min  from
abu-Hurairah  :  —  When  abu-Hurairah  returned  from  al-
Bahrain,  'Umar  said  to  him,  "  O  thou  enemy  of  Allah  and
enemy  of  his  Book;  hast  thou  stolen  the  money  of  Allah?"
"Neither  am  I",  replied  abu-Hurairah,  "the  enemy  of  Allah,
nor  of  his  Book;  rather  am  I  the  enemy  of  him  who  has
enmity  against  them.  I  did  not  steal  the  money  of  Allah."
'How  then,"  said  'Umar,  "did  10,000  dirhams  come  t<>
thee?"  'Through  horses"  said  abu-Hurairah,  "that  re-
produced and  stipends  that  came  in  successions  and  shares
that  mounted  up."  'Umar  took  the  money  from  him.  The
rest  of  the  tradition  is  similar  to  what  is  reported  by  abu-
Hilal.2

1  Kor.,  12:55.

*  One  of  the  intermediate  authorities  of  the  preceding  tradition  whose
final  authority  i^  abu-Hurairah  himself.


AL-BAIiRAIN  12y

The  apostasy  of  al-Hutam. On  the  death  of  al-Mundhir


ibn-Sawa,  a  little  after  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  those  in
al-Bahrain  descended  from  Kais  ibn-Tha'labah  ibn-'Ukabah
apostatized  under  al-Hutam  from  Islam.  This  al-Hutam
was  Shuraih  ibn-Dubai'ah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Marthad,  one  of
the  sons  of  Kais  ibn-Tha'labah.  He  was  nicknamed  Hutam
for  saying,

'  The  night  found  her  in  the  company  of  a  strong  driver  who  does  not
drive  gently  [Ar.  hutam]  ".  *

Together  with  these  there  apostatized  from  Islam  in  al-
Bahrain  all  the  Rabi'ah  tribe  with  the  exception  of  al-
Jarud,  i.  e.  Bishr  ibn-'Amr  al-'Abdi 2  and  those  of  his  people
who  followed  him.  For  a  leader,  they  chose  a  son  of  an-
Nu'man  ibn-al-Mundhir,  named  al-Mundhir.  Al-Hutam
followed  the  Rabi'ah  and  joined  them  with  his  men.  Having
received  this  information,  al-'Ala'  ibn-al-Hadrami  marched
at  the  head  of  the  Moslems  until  he  came  to  Juwatha,  which
was  the  fortification  of  al-Bahrain.  As  Rabi'ah  advanced
towards  him,  he  set  out  towards  them  with  his  Arabs  and
non- Arabs  and  led  a  heavy  fight  against  them.  Then  the
Moslems  took  refuge  in  the  fortification  where  they  were
besieged  by  the  enemy.  It  was  in  reference  to  this  occasion
that  'Abdallah  ibn-Hadhaf  al-Kilabi  said :

"  Wilt  thou  carry  this  message

to  abu-Bakr  and  all  the  youths  of  al-Madinah?

Hasten  to  the  aid  of  some  young  men  of  your  number,
who  are  invested  as  captives  in  Juwatha."  3

At  last  al-'Ala'  made  a  sally  with  the  Moslems  and  fell
upon  the  Rabi'ah  during  the  night.  A  fierce  battle  ensued
in  which  al-Hutam  was  killed.

1  Tabrizi,  Hamasah,  vol.  i,  p.  173.

*  Hisham,  p.  944;  Duraid,  pp.  186  and  197.

3  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1962.


84


j 28  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

According  to  other  authorities,  al-Hutam  came  to  the
Rabi'ah  as  they  were  in  Juwatha,  whose  inhabitants  had
all  forsaken  Islam,  and  had  chosen  for  leader  al-Mundhir
ibn-an-Nu'man.  Al-Hutam  took  up  his  abode  with  them.
Al-'Ala'  pressed  the  siege  until  he  reduced  Juwatha  and  dis-
persed the  crowd,  killing  al-Hutam.  Of  the  two  reports,
however,  the  former  is  more  authentic.  Describing  the
death  of  al-Hutam,  Malik  ibn-Tha'labah-l-'Abdi  says :

"  We  left  Shuraih  with  the  blood  covering  him
like  the  fringe  of  a  spotted  Yamanite  garment.

It  was  we  that  deprived  unum-Ghadban  of  her  son,
and  broke  our  lance  in  Ilabtar's  eye.

It  was  we  that  left  Misma'  prostrate  on  the  ground,
at  the  mercy  of  hyenas  and  eagles  that  will  attack  him."

Al-Mundhir  ibn-an-Nuemdn.  It  is  reported  that  al-
Mundhir  ibn-an-Nu'man  was  nicknamed  al-Gharur,  but
when  the  Moslems  won  the  victory  he  said,  "  I  am  not  al-
Gharur  1  [the  deceitful]  but  al-Maghrur  [the  deceited]."
This  al-Mundhir  went  with  the  remnant  of  Rabi'ah  as  far  as
al-Khatt,  which  al-'Ala'  moved  against  and  conquered,  kill-
ing al-Mundhir  and  those  in  his  company.  According  to
others,  al-Mundhir  escaped,  entered  al-Mushakkar  and
let  in  the  water  around  him,  making  it  impossible  to  be
reached.  Finally  he  made  terms,  agreeing  to  leave  the  city,
which  he  did.  He  then  joined  Musailimah  with  whom  he
was  killed.  Some  claim  that  al-Mundhir  was  killed  in  the
battle  of  Juwatha;  others  that  he  surrendered  and  then  fled
away  but  was  pursued  and  put  to  death.  Al-'Ala'  having
written  to  abu-Bakr  for  reinforcement,  the  latter  wrote  to
Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  ordering  him  to  hasten  from  al-
Yamamah  to  the reinforcement  of  al-'Ala'. Al-Hutam,

1  Ilisham,  p.  945;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1970;  Hajar,  vol.  iii,  p.  385;  Athir,
vol.  ii.  p.  281.


AL-BAHRAIN


129


however,  was  killed  1  before  the  arrival  of  Khalid.  So
Khalid  with  al-'Ala'  laid  siege  to  al-Khatt.  Later,  Khalid
received  a  letter  from  abu-Bakr  ordering  him  to  leave  for
al-Trak,  to  which  he  started  from  al-Bahrain,  in  the  year  12.

Al-Wakidi  says,  "According  to  our  companions,  Khalid
came  first  to  al-Madinah,  whence  he  started  for  al-'Irak."

'Abdallah  ibn-Suhail  suffers  martyrdom.  'Abdallah  ibn-  85
Suhail  ibn-'Amr  of  the  banu-'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai,  whose
surname  was  abu-Suhail  and  whose  mother  was  Fakhitah
daughter  of  'Amir  ibn-Naufal  ibn-'Abd-Manaf,  suffered
martyrdom  at  Juwatha.  This  'Abdallah  was  one  of
those  who  came  with  the  '  infidels "  to  the  battle
of  Badr,  but  then  he  joined  the  Moslem  side  and  em-
braced Islam.  He  took  part  with  the  Prophet  in  the
battle  of  Badr.  On  the  receipt  of  the  news  of  his
death,  his  father,  Suhail  ibn-'Amr,  said,  "  I  expect  Allah's
remuneration  for  his  loss."  On  a  pilgrimage  to  Makkah
Suhail  was  met  by  abu-Bakr  who  consoled  him,  and  Suhail
replied,  "  I  am  informed  that  the  Prophet  said,  'A  martyr
can  intercede  for  seventy  of  his  relatives,'  and  it  is  my  hope
that  my  son  will  begin  with  no  one  before  me."  When
'Abdallah  suffered  martyrdom,  he  was  38  years  of  age.

'Abdallah  ibn-' Abdallah  suffers  martyrdom.  Another
martyr  of  the  battle  of  Juwatha  was  'Abdallah  ibn-Abdallah
ibn-Ubai.  According  to  others  than  al-Wakidi,  his  martyr-
dom took  place  during  the  battle  of  al-Yamamah.

Al-'Ala'  reduces  az-Zdrah,  as-Sdbun  and  Darin.  Al-
Muka'bar  al-Farisi,2  who  was  the  friend  of  Kisra  and  was
once  sent  by  him  to  annihilate  the  banu-Tamim  for  interfer-
ing with  his  camels  (and  whose  full  name  was  Fairuz  ibn-
Jushaish3). fortified  himself  in  az-Zarah. There, many

1  Aghani,  vol.  xiv.  p.  48.

2  Noldeke,  Geschichte  der  Perser  und  Araber,  pp.  259  seq.

3  Perhaps  Jushnas,  see  Skizzen,  vol.  vi.  p.  33,  note  2;  Noldeke,  Per-
ser, p.  no,  note  3;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  256.


13o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Magians  who  had  assembled  in  al-Katif  1  and  had  refused
to  pay  tax  joined  him.  Al-'Ala'  invested  az-Zarah  but  failed
to  reduce  it  in  the  caliphate  of  abu-Bakr.  In  the  early  part
of  the  caliphate  of  'Umar,  however,  he  reduced  it.  In  the
course  of  the  caliphate  of  'Umar,  al-'Ala'  conquered  by
force  as-Sabun  2  and  Darin  where  there  is  [today]  a  spot
known  as  Khandak  al-'Ala'  [the  trench  of  al-'Ala'].

According  to  Ma'mar  ibn-al-Muthanna,  al-'Ala'  with
'Abd-al-Kais  invaded,  in  the  caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab,  certain  villages  in  as-Sabun  and  reduced  them.
He  then  invaded  the  city  of  al-Ghabah  and  killed  those  in  it
who  were  Persians.  Thence  he  moved  to  az-Zarah  in  which
al-Muka'bar  stayed,  and  besieged  him.  The  satrap  of  az-
Zarah  challenged  him  to  a  duel,  and  Bara'  ibn-Malik  ac-
cepted the  challenge  and  killed  him,  taking  spoils  from
him  which  amounted  to  40,000  [dirhams] .  Under  safe  con-
duct, one  of  the  people  of  az-Zarah  came  forth  to  point  out
the  drinking  water,  and  showed  al-'Ala'  the  spring  that
issues  from  az-Zarah.  This  spring  al-'Ala'  filled  up.  The
people  seeing  that,  came  to  terms,  agreeing  to  offer  him
one-third  of  the  city  and  one-third  of  the  gold  and  silver  86
in  it,  together  with  one-half  of  what  they  owned  outside
the  city.  Then  came  al-Akhnas  al-'Amiri  to  al-'Ala'  and
said,  "  They  have  not  made  terms  regarding  their  children
who  are  now  in  Darin."  Karraz  an-Nukri  pointed  out  to
al-'Ala'  the  ford  by  which  he  could  cross  over  to  them.
Thus  did  al-'Ala'  with  a  band  of  Moslems  plunge  into  the
sea ;  and  the  first  thing  the  people  of  Darin  knew  of  was  the
exclamation,  "Allah  is  great!"  The  people  of  Darin  sallied
forth  and  attacked  them  from  three  sides,  but  the  Moslems
killed  their  fighters  and  gained  possession  of  the  children

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  143.
'  Yakut  gives  "  as-Sabiir  ".


AL-BAHRAIN  I^1

and  captives. Seeing  that,  al-Muka'bar  became  Moslem.
On  this  occasion  Karraz  said :

"  Al-'Ala'  feared  the  basin  of  the  sea  as  he  plunged  into  it,
but  I  have  of  old  crossed  it  over  to  the  '  unbelievers '  of  Darin."

Khalaf  al-Bazzar  and  'Affan  from  Muhammad  ibn-Sirin :
— In  the  duel  between  Bara'  ibn-Malik  and  the  satrap  of
az-Zarah,  the  former  stabbed  the  latter  above  his  spine,
and  he  fell  dead.  Then  Bara'  went  down  and  cut  off  his
hands  and  took  his  bracelets,  a  furred  coat  he  had  on,  and
a  belt.  This  booty,  being  so  large,  'Umar  took  one-fifth
of  it.  It  was  the  first  booty  in  Islam  of  which  the  fifth
was  taken.


CHAPTER  XVIII

Al-Yamamah

The  origin  of  the  name.  Al-Yamamah  was  first  called
Jau  but  was  later  named  after  a  woman.  al-Yamamah,
daughter  of  Murr  [from  the  tribe]  of  Jadi,  who  was  cruci-
fied at  its  gate. Allah  knows  whether  this  is  true.

The  envoys  to  the  Prophet.  When  the  Prophet  wrote  to
the  kings  of  the  world  in  the  year  7  (or  6  as  it  is  said),
he  wrote  to  Haudhah  ibn-'Ali-l-Hanafi  and  the  people  of  al-
Yamamah  summoning  them  to  Islam.  His  letter  to  this  effect
he  forwarded  with  Salit  ibn-Kais  ibn-'Amr  al-Ansari  1  (later
al-Khazraji).  The  people  of  al-Yamamah,  thereupon,  sent
to  the  Prophet  their  delegation,  one  of  whom  was  Mujja'ah  87
ibn-Murarah.  To  Mujja'ah  and  in  accordance  with  his  re-
quest, the  Prophet  gave  out  as  fief  a  piece  of  unutilized  land.
Another  delegate  was  ar-Rajjal 2  ibn-'Unfuwah  who  be-
came Moslem  and  read  the  "  Siirah  of  the  Cow  "  and  other
Surahs  of  the  Koran.  He,  however,  apostatized  from  Islam
after  a  time.  Among  the  delegates  was  one,  Musailimah,  the
false  Prophet,"  Thumamah  ibn-Kabir  ibn-Habib,4  who  said
to  the  Prophet,  "  If  it  be  thy  will,  we  will  leave  all  author-
ity in  thy  hand  and  swear  allegiance  to  thee,  with  the  un-
derstanding that  after  thee,  all  will  return  to  us  [Musaili-

1  Cf.  Hisham.  p.  971.

2  Rahhal,  see  ibn-Sa'd  in  Skizzen,  vol.  iv,  p.  46.

3  Bukhari,  vol.  iii.  p.  167.

4  Ibn-Duraid,  p.  209;  Nawawi,  p.  554;  Hisham.  p.  045.

132


AL-YAMAMAH  ^3

mah]."  "  No,"  said  the  Prophet,  "  by  no  means,  and  may
Allah  smite  thee!"  Previous  to  this,  Haudhah  ibn-'Ali-l-
Hanafi  had  written  to  the  Prophet  asking  that  after  the
Prophet,  the  authority  might  be  delegated  to  himself,  and
promising  to  become  Moslem  and  come  to  the  reinforce-
ment of  the  Prophet.  "  No;  nor  anything  else,"  answered
the  Prophet,  "and  may  Allah  let  me  get  rid  of  him!"
Before  long  Haudhah  was  dead.

Musailimah,  the  false  Prophet.  When  the  delegation  of
the  banu-Hanifah  returned  to  al-Yamamah,  Musailimah,  the
false  Prophet,1  asserted  his  claim  as  a  prophet,  and  ar-
Rajjal  ibn-'Unfuwah  testified  that  the  Prophet  gave  him
[Musailimah]  a  share  in  the  authority  with  him.2  Banu-
Hanifah  and  others  in  al-Yamamah  followed  him.  He  then
wrote  the  following  message  to  the  Prophet  and  forwarded
it  through  'Ubadah  ibn-al-Harith  of  the  banu-'Amir  ibn-
Hanifah,  whose  surname  was  ibn-an-Nauwahah,3  and  who
was  [later]  killed  in  al-Kufah  by  'Abdallah  ibn-Mas'ud  who
heard  that  he  and  his  companions  believed  in  the  false  claims
of  Musailimah :

'  From  Musailimah,  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  to  Muham-
mad, the  Messenger  of  Allah.  Greetings!  To  us  half  the
land  belongs,  and  to  Kuraish  the  other  half,  but  Kuraish
do  not  act  equitably;  and  peace  be  unto  thee.  Written  by
'Amr  ibn-al-Jarud  al-Hanafi."

To  this  the  Prophet  replied :

'  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
From  Muhammad,  the  Prophet,  to  Musailimah.  the  false
Prophet.  Greetings !  '  For  the  earth  is  Allah's :  to  such
of  his  servants  as  he  pleaseth  doth  he  give  it  as  a  heritage' 4 ;

1  Ar.  al-Kadhdhab,  the  impostor.

2  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  175.


I34  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

and peace be to those who follow the true guidance!
Written  by  Ubai  ibn-Ka'b."  *

Khalid  ibn-al-W  alid  goes  against  Musailimah.  When,  at  88
the  death  of  the  Prophet,  abu-Bakr  was  proclaimed  caliph
and,  in  a  few  months,  destroyed  those  of  the  people  of  Najd
and  its  environs  who  apostatized  from  Islam.  abu-Bakr
sent  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  ibn-al-Mughirah-1-Makhzumi  to  al-
Yamamah  giving  him  orders  to  fight  against  Musailimah,  the
false  Prophet.  As  Khalid  came  within  sight  of  al-Yamamah,
he  met  a  group  of  the  banu-Hanifah  among  whom
was  Mujja'ah  ibn-Murarah  ibn-Sulmi.2  He  killed  them
and  spared  Mujja'ah  whom  he  carried  off  in  chains.  Khalid
put  up  his  camp  one  mile  from  al-Yamamah.  Banu-Hanifah
came  out  to  him,  and  among  them  were  ar-Rajjal  and
Muhakkim  ibn-at-Tufail  ibn-Subai',  nicknamed  the  Mukak-
kim  al-Yamamah.  Khalid,  seeing  something  glittering
among  them,  turned  to  his  men  and  said,  "Know  ye  Moslems
that  Allah  has  spared  you  the  trouble  of  your  enemy.  Do  ye
not  see  how  they  have  drawn  the  swords  one  against  the
other?  I  suppose  there  is  discord  among  them,  and  their
force  will  be  used  on  themselves."  Mujja'ah,  fettered  in
his  chains,  shouted,  "  No,  these  are  Indian  swords  which
they,  for  fear  of  being  broken,  hold  up  to  the  sun  in  order
to  render  the  blades  flexible."  They  then  met.  The  first
to  meet  the  Moslems  was  ar-Rajjal  ibn-'Unfuwah,  who  was
immediately  killed  by  Allah's  help.  Many  of  the  distin-
guished men  and  "  Koran-readers  "  among  the  Moslems  fell
martyrs.  The  Moslems  then  returned  and  went  back,  but
Allah  favored  them  with  a  victory  and  made  the  people  of
al-Yamamah  take  to  flight. The  Moslems  pursued  them,

1  Cf.  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  146;  ibn-Sa'd  in  Skizzen,  vol.  iv,  pp.  13-14;
Athir,  vol.  ii,  pp.  228-229;  Sprenger,  vol.  iii,  p.  306.

8  Cf.  Ibn-Duraid,  p.  23.


AL-YAMAMAH  ^5

inflicting  horrible  death  on  them.  Muhakkim  was  hit  by
an  arrow  shot  by  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-abi-Bakr  as-Siddik,
the  brother  of  'A'ishah  through  her  father,  and  he  fell  dead.
The  "  infidels  "  took  refuge  in  al-Hadikah  which  was  since
that  day  called  "  Hadikat  al-Maut."  1  In  al-Hadikah,
Musailimah  was  killed  by  Allah's  help.  Banu-'Amr  ibn-
Lu'ai  ibn-Ghalib  said  that  he  was  killed  by  Khidash  ibn-
Bashir  ibn-al-Asamm  of  the  banu-Ma'is  ibn-'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai ;
but  certain  Ansdr  say  that  he  was  killed  by  'Abdallah  ibn-
Zaid  ibn-Tha'labah  of  the  banu-1-Harith  ibn-al-Khazraj,  who
was  shown  a  vision  of  the  call  for  prayer.2  Still  others
assert  that  he  was  killed  by  abu-Dujanah  Simak  ibn-
Kharashah  who  later  fell  as  martyr;  and  others,  by  'Abd-
allah ibn-Zaid  ibn-'Asim,  a  brother  of  Habib  ibn-Zaid  of  the  89
banu-Mabdhul  of  the  banu-an-Najjar.  This  Habib  had  his
hands  and  feet  once  cut  off  by  Musailimah.  Wahshi  ibn-
Harb  al-Habashi,  the  murderer  of  Hamzah,  claimed  that  he
was  the  one  who  killed  Musailimah,  and  used  to  say,  "  I
killed  the  best  of  all  people  and  the  worst  of  all  people."
Some  believe  that  all  those  mentioned  above  took  part  in
killing  Musailimah.  Among  those  who  claimed  having
killed  Musailimah,  was  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan  and  the
banu-Umaiyah  credited  him  for  it.

Abu-Haf s  ad-Dimashki  quotes  from  one  who  was  present
when  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  asked  a  man  of  the  banu-
Hanifah  who  witnessed  the  battle  of  al-Yamamah  as  to  who
was  the  one  who  killed  Musailimah,  to  which  the  latter  replied,
"  He  was  killed  by  one  whose  description  is  as  follows : — "
"  By  Allah  ",  exclaimed  'Abd-al-Malik,  "  thou  hast  decided
the  question  of  his  killing  in  favor  of  Mu'awiyah."

According  to  a  report,  when  the  false  Prophet  was  seized

1  "  The  park  of  death."

2  Hisham.  p.  308 ;  ibn-Duraid,  pp.  268-269.


,  36  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  ST  A  TE

by  the  throat,  he  shouted,  "  0  banu-Hanifah.  fight  for  your
relatives !"  which  he  repeated  until  Allah  brought  about
his  death.

\Abd-al- Wahid  ibn-Ghiyath  from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah's
father : — The  Arabs  forsook  the  true  faith,  and  abu-Bakr
sent  Khalid  ibn-al-\Valid  who  met  them  and  said,  '  By
Allah,  I  shall  never  cease  until  I  come  face  to  face  with
Musailimah!"  The  Ansar  objected  saying,  "This  idea  is
of  your  own  and  was  not  given  out  by  abu-Bakr:  take  us
back  to  al-Madinah  that  we  may  give  rest  to  our  horses."
"  I  shall,  by  Allah,  never  cease,"  repeated  Khalid,"  until
L  come  face  to  face  with  Musailimah!"  Consequently,  the
Ansar  left  him.  They  then  said  to  themselves,  "  What  is
this  that  we  have  done?  If  our  friends  win  the  victory,
we  will  be  reviled ;  and  if  they  are  defeated,  we  would  be  the
cause  of  their  defeat."  Thus  they  returned  and  joined
Khalid.  The  Moslems  and  the  "  polythesists  "  met.  and
the  former  took  to  flight  until  they  got  to  their  place  of
abode  where  as-Sa'ib  ibn-al-'Auwam  stood  up  and  addressed
them  saying,  "  Ye  have  reached,  O  people,  your  place  of
abode :  and  after  his  own  place  of  abode,  man  has  no  place
to  flee  to!"  Finally,  Allah  caused  the  defeat  of  the
'  polytheists,"  and  Musailimah  was  killed.  Their  watch-
word on  that  occasion  was  "  O  people  of  the  'Surah  of  the
Cow  ' !  "

I  was  told  by  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  al-Yamamah  that
some  one,  who  was  under  the  protection  of  the  banu-
Hanifah,  repeated  the  following  verse  when  Muhakkim  was
killed  :

"  If  1  escape  from  it.  I  escape  from  that  which  is  a  calamity;
otherwise  out  of  the  same  vessel  I  shall  drink."

Mujja'ah  makes  terms. By  this  time,  the  Moslems  were

1  An Arabic  proverb.


90


AL-YAMAMAH  j^y

worn  out  by  war  and  entirely  exhausted.  But  Mujja'ah
said  to  Khalid,  "  Most  of  the  people  of  al-Yamamah  did  not
go  out  to  fight  you,  and  what  ye  have  killed  is  only  the
small  minority.  In  spite  of  that  they  have  exhausted  your
utmost  effort  as  I  see.  Nevertheless  I  am  ready  to  make
terms  with  you  on  their  behalf."  Accordingly,  he  made
terms  with  Khalid,  agreeing  to  give  one-half  of  the  captives,
gold,  silver,  coats  of  mail  and  horses.  Having  trusted  him,
Khalid  sent  him  back  to  his  men.  As  soon  as  he  entered
al-Yamamah  he  ordered  the  boys,  women  and  aged  men  of
al-Yamamah  to  put  on  their  arms  and  hold  the  forts.  As
Khalid  and  the  Moslems  looked  toward  them,  they  enter-
tained no  doubt  that  they  were  fighters,  and  they  said,
"Mujja'ah  has  told  us  the  truth."  Then  Mujja'ah  came
out  to  the  Moslems'  camp  and  said,  "  The  people  refused
the  terms  which  I  made  with  you,  and  there  are  the  forti-
fications of  al-Trd  manned  to  their  fullest  capacity.  But
I  kept  urging  them  until  they  agreed  to  make  terms  on  one-
fourth  of  the  captives  and  one-half  of  the  gold,  silver,  coats
of  mail  and  horses."  Both  parties  agreed  on  these  terms,
and  Khalid  accepted  them  and  signed  his  name.  Mujja'ah
then  came  with  Khalid  to  al-Yamamah.  Seeing  those  left
in  it,  Khalid  turned  to  Mujja'ah  and  said,  "  Thou  hast
cheated  me,  Mujja'ah."  The  people  of  al-Yamamah  at  last
accepted  Islam,  and  the  sadakah  was  taken  from  them.

Khalid  reinforces  al-'Ala.  Khalid  received  the  message
of  abu-Bakr  directing  him  to  reinforce  al-'AIa'  ibn-al-
Hadrami.  Accordingly,  he  started  for  al-Bahrain  and  left
in  his  place  over  al-Yamamah  Samurah  ibn-'Amr  al-'Anbari.
The  conquest  of  al-Yamamah  was  effected  in  the  year  12.

A  description  of  Musailimah.  I  was  told  by  abu-Rabah
al-Yamami,  on  the  authority  of  certain  sheikhs  from  al-
Yamamah,  that  Musailimah,  the  false  Prophet,  was  short,
exceedingly  pale,  with  a  camois  and  flat  nose. He  was


138


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


nicknamed  abu-Thumamah,  and  according  to  others,  abu-
Thumalah.  His  muezzin  1  was  one,  Hujair,  who  in  calling
to  prayer  used  to  chant,  "  I  testify  that  Musailimah  claims
to  be  the  Prophet  of  Allah."  Remarking  on  this,  some  one
said,  "  Hujair  has  expressed  it  eloquently,"  which  phrase
has  since  become  a  proverb.

Those  who  fell  martyrs  in  al-Yamdmah.  Among  those
who  suffered  martyrdom  in  al-Yamamah  were  abu-Hu-
dhaifah  ibn-'Utbah  ibn-Rabi'ah  ibn-'Abd-Shams,  whose  first
name  was  Hushaim,  and  some  say  Mihsham ;  2  Salim,  a
freedman  of  abu-Hudhaifah  surnamed  abu-Abdallah,  and
who  was  a  freedman3  of  Thubaitah  daughter  of  Ya'ar4  of  91
the  Ansdr  (and  others  say  Nubaithah  who  was  a  woman)  ;
Khalid  ibn-Asid  ibn-abi-l-'Is  ibn-Umaiyah;  'Abdallah,  i.  e.,
Al-Hakam  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah,  who,  accord-
ing to  others,  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Mu'tah;  Shuja'
ibn-Wahb  al-Asadi,  an  ally  of  the  banu-Umaiyah,  whose  sur-
name was  abu-Wahb ;  at-Tuf  ail  ibn-'Amr  ad-Dausi  of  al-Azd ;
Yazid  ibn-Rukaish  al-Asadi,  an  ally  of  the  banu-Umaiyah :
Makhramah  ibn-Shuraih  al-Hadrami,  an  ally  of  the  banu-
Umaiyah.  as-Sa'ib  ibn-al-'Auwam,  a  brother  of  az-Zubair
ibn-al-' Auwam ;  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-Shams  ibn-al-Mughirah-
1-Makhzumi;  as-Sa'ib  ibn-'Uthman  ibn-Maz'un  al-Jumahi ;
and  Zaid  ibn-al-Khattab  ibn-Nufail.  a  brother  of  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab,  who,  according  to  some,  was  killed  by  abu-
Maryam  al-Hanafi  whose  proper  name  was  Subaih  ibn-
Muliarrish.  According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi,  Zaid  was  killed  by
Labid  ibn-Burghuth  al-'Ijli,  who  later  came  to  'Umar  and
'Umar  said  to  him,  "  Thou  art  the  sacks  "  ( his  name,  T-abid,

1  The  chanter  who  calls  to  prayer  from  the  minaret.

2  Hisham,  p.  165.

3  Hisham,  pp.  422  and  486.
*  Ibid.,  p.  322.


AL-YAMAMAH  I39

meaning  sacks).  The  surname  of  Zaid  was  abu-'Abd-ar-
Rahman,  and  he  was  the  senior  of  'Umar.  According  to
some,  the  proper  name  of  abu-Maryam  was  Iyas  ibn-Subaih
and  he  was  the  first  in  the  time  of  'Umar  to  hold  the
position  of  kadi  in  al-Basrah.  He  died  in  Sanbil  which  lies
in  al-Ahwaz.  Other  martyrs  were  abu-Kais  ibn-al-Harith
ibn-'Adi  ibn-Sahm;  'Abdallah  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-Kais;
Salit  ibn-'Amr,  a  brother  of  Suhail  ibn-'Amr  of  the  banu-
'Amr  ibn-Lu'ai ;  and  Iyas  ibn-al-Bukair  al-Kinani.  Among
the  Ansar,  the  following  suffered  martyrdom :  'Abbad  ibn-
al-Harith  ibn-'Adi  of  the  banu-Jahjaba  of  al-Aus;  'Abbad
ibn-Bishr  ibn-Waksh  al-Ashhali  of  al-Aus,  surnamed  abu-ar-
Rabi',  and  according  to  others,  abu-Bishr;  Malik  ibn-Aus
ibn-'Atik  al-Ashhali ;  abu-'Akil  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-Tha'labah
ibn-Baihan  al-Balawi,  an  ally  of  the  banu-Jahjaba,  and
whose  proper  name  was  'Abd-al-'Uzza,  but  who  was  called
by  the  Prophet  "  'Abd-ar-Rahman  the  enemy  of  the  idols  " ;  92
Surakah  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-' Abd-al-'Uzza  an-Najjari  of  al-
Khazraj ;  'Umarah  ibn-Hazm  ibn-Zaid  ibn-Laudhan  an-
Najjari  (who  is  supposed  by  others  to  have  died  in  the  time
of  Mu'awiyah)  ;  Habib  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Mihsan  an-Najjari ;
Ma'n  ibn-'Adi  ibn-al-Jadd  ibn-al-'Ajlan  al-Balawi  of  the
Kuda'ah,  and  an  ally  of  the  Ansar;  Thabit  ibn-Kais  ibn-
Shammas  ibn-abi-Zuhair  the  khatib  of  the  Prophet  and  who
was  of  the  banu-1-Harith  ibn-al-Khazraj  (whose  surname  was
abu-Muhammad,  and  who  at  that  time  was  the  commander
of  the  Ansar)  ;  abu-Hannah  ibn-Ghuzaiyah  ibn-'Amr  one
of  the  banu-Mazin  ibn-an-Najjar;  al-'Asi  ibn-Tha'labah  ad-
Dausi  of  al-Azd,  an  ally  of  the  Ansar;  abu-Dujanah  Simak
ibn-Aus  ibn-Kharashah  ibn-Laudhan  as-Sa'idi  of  al-
Khazraj ;  abu-Usaid  Malik  ibn-Rabi'ah  as-Sa'idi  (others  say
he  died  in  al-Madinah,  year  60)  ;  'Abdallah  ibn-'Abdallah
ibn-Ubai  ibn-Malik  (whose  first  name  was  al-Hubab  but
who  was  given  by  the  Prophet  his father's  name. His


140


THE  0RIG1XS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


father  played  the  hypocrite  in  religion.  He  is  the  one  called
ibn-Ubai  ibn-Salul,  Salul  being  the  mother  of  Ubai  and  of
[the  clan  of]  Khuza'ah,  and  he  bears  her  name.  His  father
was  Malik  ibn-al-Harith  of  the  banu-1-Khazraj  (others  say  he
suffered  martyrdom  in  the  battle  of  Juwatha  at  al-Bahrain)  ;
'I'kbah  ibn-'Amir  ibn-Nabi'  of  the  banu-Salimah  of  al-
Khazraj ;  and  al-Harith  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-'Amr  of  the  banu-an-
Najjar.  The  Prophet  had  sent  Habib  ibn-Zaid  ibn-Asim  of
the  banu-Mabdhul  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Ghanm  ibn-Mazin  ibn-an-
Najjar,  together  with  'Abdallah  ibn-Wahb  al-Aslami  to
Musailimah.  Musailimah  did  not  molest  'Abdallah.  but  cut
off  the  hands  and  feet  of  Habib.  The  mother  of  Habib  was
Nusaibah.  daughter  of  Ka'b.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  the
two  men  [sent  by  the  Prophet]  came  from  'Uman  in  the
company  of  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi.  Musailimah  drove  them  back.
'Amr  and  all  those  in  his  company  escaped,  with  the  excep-
tion of  these  two  who  were  captured.  In  the  battle  of  al-
Yamamah,  Nusaibah  took  part  in  the  fight  and  returned  with
a  number  of  wounds  inflicted  on  her.  She  is  the  mother  of
Habib  and  'Abdallah,  the  sons  of  Zaid.  She  also  took  part  in
the  battle  of  Uhud,  and  was  one  of  the  two  women  who  03
"  swore  allegiance "  in  the  day  of  al-'Akabah.1  Other
martyrs  of  the  battle  of  al-Yamamah  were  'A'idh  ibn-Ma'is
az-Zuraki  of  al-Khazraj  and  Yazid  ibn-Thabit  al-Khazraji.
a  brother  of  Zaid  ibn-Thabit.  the  authority  on  "  The  Laws
of  Heritage."  J

Regarding  the  number  of  those  that  fell  as  martyrs  in
al-Yamamah,  there  is  no  agreement.  The  minimum  esti-
mate mentioned  is  700,  the  maximum  1,700,  while  others
assert  that  they  were  1.200.

1  I  Ii.sham,  pp.  312  seq.

1  Hajar,  vol.  ii.  pp.  40  scq.\  Ibn-Khallikan,  Wafayat  al-A'yan,  vol.  i.
p.  372,  note  2.


AL-YAMAMAH  14I

Mujjaah  is  assigned  al-Ghiirah  and  other  fiefs.  Al-
Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  Hisham  ibn-Isma'il : — There  came
to  the  Prophet  Mujja'ah-1-Yamami  to  whom  the  Prophet
gave  a  fief  and  wrote  the  following  statement :  "  In  the  name
of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.  This  statement
is  written  by  Muhammad,  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  to
Mujja'ah  ibn-Murarah  ibn-Sulmi.  I  give  thee  as  fief  al-
Ghurah,  Ghurabah.1  and  al-Hubal.  If  any  one  objects,  re-
fer him  to  me."  (Al-Ghurah  is  the  chief  village  of  al-
Ghurabat  and  is  close  to  Karat).  After  the  death  of  the
Prophet,  Mujja'ah  came  to  abu-Bakr,  who  assigned  him  as
fief  al-Khidrimah.  Later  he  came  to  'Umar,  who  assigned
to  him  ar-Raiya.  After  that  he  came  to  'Uthman,  who  as-
signed to  him  another  fief  "  the  name  of  which,"  says  al-
Harith,2  "  I  do  not  remember."

Furdt  ibn-Haiydn  gets  a  fief.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam
from  'Adi  ibn-Hatim : — The  Prophet  assigned  to  Furat  ibn-
Haiyan  al-Tjli  a  piece  of  land  in  al-Yamamah.

The  ''park  of  death."  Muhammad  ibn-Thumal  al-
Yamami  from  certain  sheikhs : — The  Hadikah  was  called
Hadikat  al-Maut  [the  park  of  death]  because  of  the  great
number  of  people  that  were  slain  in  it.  In  the  time  of  al-
Ma'mun,  Ishak  ibn-abi-Khamisah,  a  f  reedman  of  Kais,  built
in  it  a  cathedral  mosque.  The  Hadikah  before  that  time
was  known  as  Ubad.

According  to  Muhammad  ibn-Thumal,  the  Kasr  al-Ward  ::
was  named  after  al-Ward  ibn-as-Samin  ibn-'Ubaid  al-
Hanafi.  According  to  another,  the  fortification  was  called
Mu'tik  [i.  e..  emancipator]  because  of  its  strength,  indicat- 94

1  Bakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  703  :  "  'Awanah  ".

3  Ibn-Murrah-1-Hanafi,  one  of  the  intermediary  reporters  of  this  tra-
dition.

'  Yakut,  Marasid,  under  Ward.


142


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


ing  thereby  that  he  who  takes  refuge  in  it  is  safe  from  his
enemy.

Ar-Raiya  spring.  Ar-Raiya  was  a  spring  from  which
the  as-Sa'fukah,  as  well  as  al-Khuyaibah  and  al-Khidrimah,
got  their  drinking  water,  as-Sa'fukah  1  being  a  crown-land
thus  called  after  one  of  the  agents  over  it,  whose  name  was
Sa'fuk.

1  Bakri,  p.  607.


CHAPTER  XIX
The  Apostasy  of  the  Arabs  in  the  Caliphate  of

ABU-BAKR AS-SlDDlK

• •  •

Abu-Bakr  threatens  those  who  withhold  sadakah.  When
abu-Bakr  was  proclaimed  caliph,  certain  Arab  tribes  apos-
tatized from  Islam  and  withheld  the  sadakah.  Some  of
them,  however,  said,  "  We  shall  observe  prayer  but  not  pay
zakat."  In  reference  to  that  abu-Bakr  said,  "  If  they  refuse
me  a  one-year  sadakah,1  I  shall  surely  fight  against  them."
According  to  other  reports  he  said,  "  If  they  refuse  me  a
two-year  sadakah."

'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  al-'Ijli  from  ash-Sha'bi :— 'Abdallah
ibn-Mas'ud  said,  "After  the  death  of  the  Prophet  we  found
ourselves  in  a  state  in  which  we  would  have  perished  had  not
Allah  favored  us  with  abu-Bakr.  By  the  consensus  of
opinion,  we  agreed  not  to  fight  on  a  female  camel  that
had  entered  on  its  second  year  or  a  male  camel  that  had
entered  on  its  third  year,  but  appropriate  for  ourselves
the  income  of  Kura  'Arabiyah 2  and  worship  Allah  un-
til the  right  course  is  revealed  unto  us."  Allah  gave
orders  to  abu-Bakr  to  fight  them.  Then,  by  Allah,  abu-
Bakr  was  not  satisfied  by  anything  but  one  of  two :  —
a  humiliating  plan  or  an  evacuating  war.  As  for  the  humi-
liating plan,  it  was  that  they  acknowledge  that  those  of  their
number  who  were  killed  went  to  hell,  and  that  our  property
that  fell  into  their  hands  should  be  returned  to  us ;  and  the
evacuating  war  was  that  they  leave  their  homes.

1  Ar.  'ikal,  see  an-Nasa'i,  Sunan,  vol.  i,  p.  335.
1  Yahya  ibn-Adam,  p.  122;  Bakri,  p.  657.

143


I44  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  delegation  of  Buzakhah.  Ibrahim  ibn- Muhammad
fr'-m  Tarik  ibn-Shihab: —  A  delegation  from  Buzakhah
came  to  abu-Bakr  and  he  gave  them  their  choice  between  95
"the  evacuating  war"  or  "the  humiliating  peace".  To
this  they  replied,  "  '  The  evacuating  war  '  we  have  known
what  it  is,  what  is  then  '  the  humiliating  peace?'  '  It  is,"
said  abu-Bakr,  "  that  we  deprive  you  of  the  coats  of  mail
and  horses,  and  keep  the  booty  we  took  from  you;  and  that
ye  return  the  booty  ye  took  from  us,  pay  blood  wit  for  those
of  us  who  were  slain  and  consider  those  of  you  who  were
slain  to  be  in  hell-fire."

Shuja'  ibn-Mukhallad  al-Fallas  from  'A'ishah  the  "mother
of  the  Believers  "  : — The  latter  said.  "After  the  death  of  the
Prophet,  what  befell  my  father  *  would  have  softened  the
firm  mountains  if  it  had  befallen  them.  Hypocrisy  in  al-
Madinah  exalted  itself,  and  the  Arabs  apostatized  from  their
faith.  By  Allah,  not  a  point  they  disagreed  upon,  which  my
father  did  not  cause  to  disappear  as  something  without
which  Islam  could  do  [  ?]."

Ibu-Bakr  dispatches  an  army.  Abu-Bakr  set  out  to  al-
Kassah  2  in  the  land  which  belongs  to  Muharib  in  order  to
direct  the  armies  marching  against  the  apostates.  He  was
accompanied  by  the  Moslems.  Those  who  went  against
the  Moslems  were  Kharijah  ibn-Hisn  ibn-Hudhaifah  ibn-
Badr  al-Fazari 8  and  Manzur  ibn-Zabban  ibn-Saiyar  al-
Fazari  of  the  banu-l-'Ushara',  who  were  joined  with  the
tribe  of  Ghatafan.  The  fight  raged  fiercely  but  the  "  poly-
theists  "  were  put  to  flight,  and  abu-Bakr  sent  Talhah  ibn-
'Ubaidallah  at-Taimi  in  their  pursuit.  Talhah  fell  upon
them  at  the  lower  part  of  Thanaya  'Ausajah  where  he  killed

1  Abu-Bakr.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1870:  "  dhu-1-Kassah."
•  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  iii1,  p.  37.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  ARABS  I4q

only  one  of  them,  all  the  rest  having  fled  away,  and  he  could
not  catch  up  with  them.  This  made  Kharijah  ibn-Hisn
repeat,  "  Woe  to  the  Arabs  because  of  ibn-abi-Kuhafah  [i.
e.  abu-Bakr]."

While  abu-Bakr  was  at  al-Kassah,  he  set  Khalid  ibn-al-
Walid  ibn-al-Mughirah  al-Makhzumi  in  command  over  the
people,1  and  sent  over  the  Ansdr  Thabit  ibn-Kais  ibn-
Shammas  al-Ansari,  who  was  one  of  those  that  [later]
suffered  martyrdom  in  the  battle  of  al-Yamamah.  Thabit,
however,  was  subordinate  to  Khalid.  Abu-Bakr  ordered
Khalid  to  direct  his  course  towards  Tulaihah  ibn-Khuwailid
al-Asadi,  who  had  claimed  to  be  a  prophet 2  and  was  then  at
Buzakhah.  This  Buzakhah  is  a  spring  belonging  to  the
banu-Asad  ibn-Khuzaimah.  Khalid  set  out  against  him  and
sent  before  him  'Ukkashah  ibn-Mihsan  al-Asadi,  an  ally  of  96
the  banu-'Abd-Shams,  together  with  Thabit  ibn-Akram  al-
Balawi,  an  ally  of  the  Ansdr.  Hibal  ibn-Khuwailid  3  met
them  and  was  slain  by  them.  Having  heard  the  news,
Tulaihah  with  his  brother,  Salamah,  set  out  and,  meeting
'Ukkashah  and  Thabit,  slew  them  both.  Regarding  this
event  Tulaihah  sang :

"  As  I  saw  their  faces  I  thought  of  my  brother  Hibal
and  was  sure  that  I  was  going  to  avenge  his  death.

It  was  on  the  evening  of  that  day  that  I  left  ibn-Akram  in  his  grave,
together  with  'Ukkashah  al-Ghanmi,  by  the  battlefield."

The  Moslems  and  their  enemy  at  last  met  and  a  fierce
battle  was  fought.  With  Tulaihah  in  the  fight  was  'Uyainah
ibn-Hisn  ibn-Hudhaifah  ibn-Badr  at  the  head  of  700  men
of  the  banu-Fazarah.  When  'Uyainah  saw  the  swords  of  the

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  145.

2  He  imitated  Muhammad  by  composing  saj'  or  rhyming  prose,  see
Tabari,  vol.  i,  p. 1738;  and  Goldziher,  Muhammedanische  Studien,
vol.  ii,  p.  4001.

3  Hisham,  p.  453.


I46  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Moslems  butchering  the  "  polytheists,"  he  came  to  Tulaihah
asking,  "  Canst  thou  not  see  what  the  army  of  abu-1-Fasil *
is  doing,  and  did  not  Gabriel  bring  thee  any  message?"
"  Yes  "  said  Tulaihah,  "  Gabriel  came  to  me  and  said  '  Thou
wilt  have  a  grinding  stone  as  he  has,  and  a  day  that  thou
wilt  never  forget !'  "  2  "  By  Allah,"  cried  'Uyainah,  "  I  be-
lieve that  thou  wilt  have  a  day  which  thou  wilt  never  forget.
O  banu-Fazarah,  this  is  a  false  prophet."  Saying  this,  he
left  Tulaihah's  army  which  was  soon  after  defeated.  The
Moslems  were  victorious.  'Uyainah  ibn-Hisn  was  taken
captive  and  brought  to  al-Madinah.  Abu-Bakr  spared  his
life  and  set  him  free.  Tulaihah  ibn-Khuwailid  took  to
flight  and  entered  a  tent  of  his,  where  he  took  a  bath  and
went  out.  Then  he  rode  on  his  horse,  intending  to  visit
the  sacred  places,  and  came  to  Makkah,  then  to  al-Madinah
professing  Islam.  According  to  others,  he  came  to  Syria,
was  taken  hold  of  by  those  of  the  Moslems  who  were  on  a
campaign,  and  sent  to  abu-Bakr  in  al-Madinah.  where  he
became  Moslem.  Later,  he  distinguished  himself  in  the
conquest  of  al-Trak  and  Nihawand.  One  day,  'Umar  said
to  him,  "  Didst  thou  kill  the  faithful  servant  'Ukkashah
ibn-Mihsan?"  And  he  replied,  "  I  have  been  the  means  of
bringing  about  the  welfare  of  'Ukkashah  ibn-Mihsan ;  and
he  has  been  the  means  of  bringing  about 8  my  misery.  I
beg  Allah's  pardon  upon  me."

Da'ud  ibn-Hibal  al-Asadi  told  me  on  the  authority  of
certain sheikhs among his people that 'Umar ibn-al- 97
Khattab  said  to  Tulaihah,  "  Thou  didst  lie  before  Allah
when  thou  didst  claim  that  he  revealed  to  thee  the  text,
'  Allah  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  dust  on  your  faces  and

1  Khalid's  surname  was  abu-Sulaiman,  see  Nawawi,  p.  224;  and  ibn-
Kutaibah,  Kitab  al-Ma'drif,  p.  90.

*  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1807;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  264.

3  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1898.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  ARABS  1^y

the  ugliness  of  your  hinder  parts.  When  ye  therefore
mention  Allah,  be  abstemious  and  stand  upright,  for,  verily,
froth  is  on  the  surface  of  what  is  pure.'  "  *  "  '  Commander
of  the  Believers  '  ",  replied  Tulaihah,  "  this  is  one  of  the
corruptions  of  unbelief  which  has  altogether  been  destroyed
by  Islam.  I  am  not,  therefore,  to  be  scolded  for  holding  a
part  of  it." 'Umar  remained  silent.

Khdlid  in  Ramman  and  Abdnain.  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid
came  to  Ramman  2  and  Abanain  3  where  the  remnant  of  the
army  of  Buzakhah  stood.  They  refrained  from  fighting
against  him  and  swore  allegiance  before  him  to  abu-Bakr.

B ami-' Amir  ibn-Sasaah  embrace  Islam.  Khalid  ibn-al-
Walid  sent  Hisham  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Wa'il  as-Sahmi,  a  brother
of  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,  one  of  the  early  Moslems  and  one  of  the
Emigrants  to  Abyssinia,  to  the  banu-'Amir  ibn  Sa'sa'ah.
Banu-'Amir  did  not  resist  him  and  professed  Islam  and
practised  the  call  to  prayer. So  he  left  them.

Kurrah's  life  spared.  Kurrah  ibn-Hubairah-1-Kushairi,
having  refused  to  pay  sadakah  and  reinforced  Tulaihah,
was  taken  by  Hisham  ibn-al-'Asi  to  Khalid.  The  latter
carried  him  to  abu-Bakr  to  whom  Kurrah  said,  "  By  Allah
I  never  forsook  my  faith  since  I  became  a  believer.  As
'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  on  his  way  back  from  'Uman  passed
by  me,  I  treated  him  hospitably  and  was  loyal  to  him."
'Amr  was  questioned  by  abu-Bakr  regarding  that,  and  he
corroborated  the  statement.  Consequently,  abu-Bakr  spared
Kurrah's  life.

Others  assert  that  Khalid  advanced  to  the  land  of  the
banu-'Amir,  took  Kurrah  captive  and  sent  him  to  abu-Bakr.

The  battle  of  al-Ghamr. Then  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  ad-

1  Freytag,  Prov.,  vol.  i,  p.  174,  no.  80,  and  p.  731,  no.  63.

*  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  815 ;  Bakri,  p.  412.

3  or  Abanan ;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  75 ;  Bakri,  p.  63.


I48  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

vanced  to  al-Ghamr  1  where  a  band  of  the  banu-Asad,
Ghatafan  and  others  had  gathered  under  the  leadership  of
Kharijah  ibn-Hisn  ibn-Hudhaifah.  According  to  others,
they  had  on  different  days  different  leaders,  and  each  party
had  its  own  leader  drawn  from  its  own  ranks.  They  fought
against  Khalid  and  the  Moslems,  with  the  result  that  some
of  them  were  killed  and  the  others  took  to  flight.  With  re-
ference to  the  battle  of  al-Ghamr  says  al-Hutai'ah-l-'Absi :

"  Yea,  may  all  short  and  humble  lances  be  sacrificed,
in  favor  of  the  horsemen's  lances  at  al-Ghamr !  "  2

Khalid  meets  abu-Shajarah.  Thence  Khalid  moved  to
Jau  Kurakir.3  Others  say  he  moved  to  an-Nukrah.  There
a  crowd  was  gathered  by  the  banu-Sulaim  and  put  under  the  98
leadership  of  abu-Shajarah  'Amr  ibn-'Abd-al-'Uzza  as-
Sulami  whose  mother  was  al-Khansa'.  They  fought  against
Khalid,  and  one  of  the  Moslems  fell  a  martyr.  By  Allah's
help  at  last,  the  "  polytheists'  "  troops  were  dispersed,  and
Khalid  had  on  that  day  the  apostates  burned.  When  abu-
Bakr  was  told  about  it,  he  said,  "  I  shall  not  sheathe  a  sword
that  Allah  had  unsheathed  against  the  '  unbelievers.' :  Abu-
Shajarah  accepted  Islam,  and  coming  to  'Umar  found  him
distributing  alms  among  the  poor,  so  he  begged  for  some.
'Umar  asked  him,  "Art  thou  not  the  one  who  said  :

1  I  quenched  my  lance's  thirst  on  Khalid' s  troops,
and  I  hope  after  this  that  my  life  will  be  prolonged'?"

Saying  this,  he  lashed  him  with  the  whip.4  "  Islam,  O
*  Commander  of  the  Believers,'  "  replied  abu-Shajarah.  "  has
blotted  all  this  out."

1  Skizsen,  vol,  vi,  p.  n,  note  1.
1  Bakri,  p.  606,  and  p.  718,  line  12.

*  Cf.  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  161,  lines  12-13.

*  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1007.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  ARABS  i^g

Al-Fuja'ah  put  to  death  by  fire.  There  came  to  abu-Bakr
one,  al-Fuja'ah,  whose  proper  name  was  Bujair  ibn-Iyas
ibn-'Abdallah  as-Sulami,  and  said  to  him,  "  Give  me  horse
and  arms  that  I  may  fight  against  the  apostates."  Abu-
Bakr  gave  him  horse  and  arms.  Al-Fuja'ah  began  to  molest
the  people,  killing  both  Moslems  and  apostates.  He,  more-
over, gathered  a  large  body  of  men.  Abu-Bakr  wrote  to
Turaifah  ibn-Hajizah,  a  brother  of  Ma'n  ibn-Hajizah,
ordering  him  to  go  against  him.  This,  ibn-Hajizah  did
and  captured  him.  He  then  sent  him  to  abu-Bakr,  who  or-
dered him  burned  in  the  neighborhood  of  al-Musalla  [place
of  prayer] .  Others  say  that  abu-Bakr  wrote  to  Ma'n  con-
cerning al-Fuja'ah,  and  Ma'n  directed  against  him  his
brother,  Turaifah,  who  captured  him.

Khdlid  in  al-Butah  and  al-Ba'udah.  Later,  Khalid  set
out  against  those  of  the  banu-Tamim  who  were  in  al-Butah  x
and  al-Ba'udah.  They  fought  against  him,  but  he  dis-
persed them 2  killing  Malik  ibn-Nuwairah,  a  brother  of
Mutammam  ibn-Nuwairah.  This  Malik  was  the  Prophet's
'amil  for  the  sadakahs  of  the  banu-Hanzalah.  When  the
Prophet  died  Malik  held  whatever  was  in  his  keeping  and
said  to  banu-Hanzalah,  "  Keep  your  own  money."

Malik  beheaded.  According  to  other  reports,  Khalid
met  nobody  in  either  al-Butah  or  al-Ba'udah,  but  he  sent
detachments  among  the  banu-Tamim,  one  of  which  was  under
Dirar  ibn-al-Azwar  al-Asadi.  Dirar  met  Malik  and,  as  a
result  of  the  conflict  which  ensued,  Dirar  took  Malik  and
some  others  captive,  and  brought  them  before  Khalid.
In  accordance  with  Khalid's  orders,  their  heads  were  cut  off,3
Dirar  with  his  own  hand  cutting  off  that  of  Malik. Ac-

1  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  661.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1924.

3  Cf.  Hajar,  vol.  iii,  p.  722;  abu-1-Fida,  al-Mukhtasar,  vol.  i,  p.  158,
(Cairo,  1325).


15°


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


cording  to  certain  reports,  Malik  said  to  Khalid,  '  By
Allah,  I  did  not  apostatize!"  And  abu-Katadah-1-Ansari
gave  witness  that  the  banu-Hanzalah  had  laid  down  their
arms  and  made  the  public  call  to  prayer.  Hearing  this,  'Umar  99
ibn-al-Khattab  said  to  abu-Bakr,  "  Thou  hast  sent  a  man
who  kills  Moslems  and  tortures  by  fire!"

It  is  reported  that  Mutammam  ibn-Nuwairah  once  came
to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  who  asked  him,  "  How  far  did  thy
sorrow  over  they  brother,  Malik,  carry  thee?"  "I  wept
over  him  for  one  year,"  said  Mutammam,  "  until  my  sound
eye  envied  the  one  that  had  gone;  and  never  did  I  see  fire
without  feeling  as  if  my  grief  was  strong  enough  to  kill
me,  because  he  always  left  his  fire  burning  till  the  morning,
lest  a  guest  should  come  and  fail  to  locate  his  place."
'Umar  then  asked  for  a  description  of  him,  and  Muttamam
said,  "  He  used  to  ride  a  restive  steed  and  lead  a  slow-paced
camel,  while  he  would  be  between  two  water  bags  exuding
water  in  the  chilly  night,  wrapped  up  in  a  loose  garment,
and  armed  with  a  long  lance.  Thus  would  he  go  through
the  night  until  the  morn.  His  face  was  a  fragment  of  a
moon."  *  "  Sing  me,"  said  'Umar,  "  some  of  what  thou
hast  composed  regarding  him."  And  Mutammam  repeated
the  elegy  in  which  he  said :

"  For  a  long  time  we  were  boon  companions  like  the  two  fellow-drink-
ers of  Jadhimah,
that  people  said,  '  They  will  never  be  separated  !'  "  2

"  If  I  could  write  good  poetry  "  remarked  'Umar,  "  I  would
have  written  an  elegy  on  my  brother,  Zaid."  "  It  is  not  a
parallel  case,  '  Commander  of  the  Believers  '  ",  answered
Mutammam,  "  had  my  brother  met  the  same  death  that  thy
brother  has  met,  I would  not  have  mourned  over  him."

1  Cf.  De  Slane,  Ibn-Khallikan,  vol.  iii,  pp.  651-652.
*  Aghani,  vol.  xiv,  pp.  70-71.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  ARABS


151


"  Nobody  did  ever  console  me,"  said  'Umar,  "  as  well  as
thou  didst."  1

Sajah  the  Prophetess.  Umm-Sadir  Sajah,  daughter  of
Aus  ibn-Hikk  ibn-Usamah  ibn-al-Ghaniz  ibn-Yarbu'  ibn-
Hanzalah  ibn-Malik  ibn-Zaid  Manat  ibn-Tamim  (others
say  she  was  Sajah,  daughter  of  al-Harith  ibn-'Ukfan  ibn-
Suwaid  ibn-Khalid  ibn-Usamah),  claimed  to  be  a  prophetess
and  a  soothsayer.2  She  was  followed  by  some  of  the  banu-
Tamim  and  some  of  her  uncles  on  her  mother's  side  of  the
banu-Taghlib.  One  day  she  composed  the  following  rhyming
sentences :  "  The  Lord  of  heavens  orders  you  to  carry  out
against  ar-Ribab  3  invasions."  She  invaded  them  but  was
defeated  by  them,  they  being  the  only  ones  who  fought
against  her.4  She  then  came  to  Musailimah-1-Kadhdhab
[the  false  Prophet]  at  Hajar  and  married  him,5  making  her
religion  one  with  his.  When  he  was  killed,  she  returned  100
to  her  brethren  and  there  she  died.  According  to  ibn-al-
Kalbi,  however,  Sajah  accepted  Islam  and  emigrated  to
al-Basrah  and  remained  a  good  Moslem.  'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-
Hammad  an-Narsi  heard  it  said  by  certain  sheikhs  of  al-
Basrah  that  Samurah  ibn-Jundab  al-Fazari  led  her  funeral
service  as  he  was  the  governor  of  al-Basrah  under
Mu'awiyah  before  the  arrival  of  'Abdallah  ibn-Ziyad  from
Khurasan  to  assume  the  office  of  governor  of  al-Basrah.
Ibn-al-Kalbi  added  that  the  muezzin  of  Sajah  was  al-
Janabah 6  ibn-Tarik  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haut  ar-Riyahi,  and
others  say  7  it  was  Shabath  ibn-Rib'i  ar-Riyahi.

1  Ibn-Kutaibah,  Kitab  ash-Shi'r,  pp.  193-194.

3  Ar.  kahin;  see  Skissen,  vol.  iii,  p.  130;  Goldziher,  Abhandlungen
zur  Arabischen  Philologie,  vol.  i,  pp.  107-108;  Zaidan.  vol.  iii,  pp.  16-18;
J.  G.  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,  vol.  i,  p.  230.

8  The  confederate  tribes  of  Tai,  'Adi  and  'Ukl.

4  Skizsen,  vol.  vi,  p.  14.

5  Aghdni,  vol.  xii,  p.  157;  abu-1-Fida,  vol.  i,  p.  157  (Cairo,  1325)-

6  Dhahabi,  Mushtabih,  p.  141.  7  Duraid,  p.  137.


152  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  insurrection  of  Khaulan.  Khaulan  in  al-Yaman  hav-
ing apostatized,  'Umar  sent  against  them  Ya'la  ibn-Munyah
(Munyah,  his  mother,  was  of  the  banu-Mazin  ibn-Mansur
ibn-'Ikrimah  ibn-Khasafah  ibn-Kais  ibn-'Ailan  ibn-Mudar,
and  his  father  was  Umaiyah  ibn-abi-'Ubaidah,  one  of  the  sons
of  Malik  ibn-Hanzalah  ibn-Aialik,  an  ally  of  thebanu-Naufal
ibn-'Abd-Manaf)  who  won  a  great  victory  over  them  and
carried  away  booty  and  captives.  According  to  others,
however,  he  met  no  resistance,  and  all  of  them  returned  to
Islam.


CHAPTER  XX

The  Apostasy  of  the  banu-Wali'ah  and  al-Ash'ath
ibn-Ma'dikarib  ibn-Mu'awiyah-l-Kindi

The  cause  of  the  insurrection  of  Kindah.  The  Prophet
sent  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  al-Bayacli  of  the  Ansar  as  governor  to
Hadramaut;  later  extending  his  power  over  the  Kindah.
According  to  others,  it  was  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik  who  ex-
tended his  power  over  the  Kindah.  This  Ziyad  ibn-Labid
was  a  resolute  and  sturdy  man,  and  took  young  she-camels
as  sadakah  from  a  certain  man  of  the  banu-Kindah.  The
Kindah  man  asked  him  to  return  them  and  take  something
else,  but  having  marked  them  with  the  sadakah  brand,  Labid
refused  his  request.  Labid  was  approached  by  al-Ash'ath
ibn-Kais,  but  still  he  refused  saying,  "  Never  will  I  return  a
thing  that  has  been  branded  with  the  mark."  This  caused
an  uprising  of  all  Kindah  against  him  with  the  exception  of
as-Sakun  who  still  adhered  to  his  side.  Hence  the  verse  of
their  poet :

"  It  was  we  that  came  to  the  rescue  of  the  faith,  IOI

when  our  people  miserably  went  astray  and  we  supported  ibn-umm-
Ziyad.

From  the  right  claim  of  al-Bayadi  we  sought  not  to  deviate,
and  the  piety  of  Allah  was  our  best  provision."

Banu-'Amr  gathered  against  Labid.  Against  Labid
were  assembled  the  banu-'Amr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-al-Harith
al-Kindi.  Labid,  at  the  head  of  the  Moslems,  attacked  them
during  the  night  time  and  killed  many,  among  whom  were
Mikhwas,  Mishrah,  Jamad  and  Abda'ah  the  sons  of  Ma'di-
karib  ibn-Wali'ah  ibn-Shurahbil  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-Hujr

iS3


i-4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

al-Karid  (Karid  in  their  dialect  means  horse)  ibn-al-
Harith  al-Walladah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-al-Harith.
These  four  brothers  were  in  possession  of  so  many  valleys
that  they  were  called  the  "  four  kings."  Previous  to  this,
they  had  presented  themselves  before  the  Prophet,  but  later
on  they  apostatized.  Their  sister,  al-'Amarradah,  was  killed
by  one  who  mistook  her  for  a  man.

Ziyad  fights  against  al-Ash'ath. As  Ziyad  returned  with
captives  and  booty,  he  passed  by  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  and
his  people. Seeing  him,  the  women  and  children  began  to
cry  x  which  made  al-Ash'ath  burn  with  indignation,  and  set
out  with  a  band  of  his  men.2 He  fell  upon  Ziyad  and  his
companions,  and  many  Moslems  were  lost. The  Moslems
were  then  defeated,  and  all  the  great  men  of  Kindah  rallied
to  the  support  of  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais. Seeing  this,  Ziyad
wrote  to  abu-Bakr  asking  for  reinforcement. Abu-Bakr
wrote  to  al-Muhajir  ibn-abi-Umaiyah,  ordering  him  to  rein-
force Ziyad. Ziyad  and  al-Muhajir,  at  the  head  of  the  Mos-
lems, met  al-Ash'ath  and  dispelled  his  men,  and  attacking
his  companions, made  a fearful slaughter  among  them.
Thence  al-Ash'ath's  men  took  refuge  in  a  fortification  of
theirs,  an-Nujair,  where  the  Moslems  besieged  them. The
siege  was  pressed  until  they  were  exhausted  and  al-Ash'ath
sought  safety  for  a  certain  number  of  his  men. He  did  not
include  himself  in  that  number  because  al-Jifshish  3  al-Kindi,
whose name was Ma'dan ibn-al-Aswad ibn-Ma'dikarib.
holding  him  by  the  waist,  said,  "  Include  me  in  that  num-
ber." 4 Thus  al-Ash'ath  excluded  himself  in  favor  of  al-
Jifshish. Al-Ash'ath  presented  himself  before  Ziyad  ibn-

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2005.

2  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii.  p.  149.

5  Jafshish  in  Fairuzabadi,  al-KCimus,  vol.  ii,  p.  276.
*  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2009.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  BANU-WALVAH


155


Labid  and  al-Muhajir  who  sent  him  to  abu-Bakr.  The
latter  favored  him  by  giving  to  him  in  marriage  his  sister
umm-Farwah,1  daughter  of  abu-Kuhafah,  who  later  gave
birth  to  Muhammad,  Ishak,  Kuraibah,  Hubabah  and  102
Ja'dah.  According  to  others,  abu-Bakr  gave  him  in  mar-
riage his  sister  Kuraibah ;  and  when  he  married  her,  he  came
to  the  market,  and  every  slaughtered  camel  he  saw,  he  cut
its  two  heel-tendons,  paid  its  price  and  gave  it  to  the  people
to  eat.  After  living  in  al-Madinah,  he  set  out  on  a  razzia  to
Syria  and  al-'Irak.  His  death  took  place  at  al-Kufah  where
his  funeral  service  was  conducted  by  al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  ibn-
abi-Talib,  after  the  latter  had  been  reconciled  with
Mu'awiyah.  This  al-Ash'ath  was  surnamed  abu-Muham-
mad  and  nicknamed  "  'Urf  an-Nar  "  [the  fire-crest].

The  insurrection  of  the  banu-W all  ah  and  al-Ash'ath.  Ac-
cording to  other  reports,  the  banu- Wali'ah  apostatized  before
the  Prophet's  death.  When  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  heard  of  his
death,  he  called  the  people  to  swear  allegiance  to  abu-Bakr,
which  they  all  did  vith  the  exception  of  the  banu- Wall 'ah.
Ziyad  fell  upon  them  in  the  night  time  and  killed  them.
Al-Ash'ath  apostatized  and  fortified  himself  in  an-Nujair
where  he  was  besieged  by  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  and  al-Muhajir
who  joined  hands  against  him.  Abu-Bakr  sent  Tkrimah
ibn-abi-Jahl,  after  his  departure  from  'Uman,  to  reinforce
them;  but  on  his  arrival,  an-Nujair  was  already  reduced.
Abu-Bakr  requested  the  Moslems  to  share  the  booty  with
him,  which  they  did.

Ath-Thabja  and  Hind  severely  punished.  It  is  reported
that  certain  women  at  an-Nujair  having  rejoiced  at  the
death  of  the  Prophet,  abu-Bakr  wrote  ordering  that  their
hands  and  feet  be  cut  off.  Among  these  women  were  ath-
Thabja'  al-Hadramiyah,  and  Hind,  daughter  of  Yamin,
the  Jewess.

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2012.


I56  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  Prophet  assigns  governors  to  Saria ,  Kindah,  Hadra-
maut  and  as-Sadif.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  certain
sheikhs  of  al-Yaman : — The  Prophet  made  Khalid  ibn-
Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  governor  of  San'a',  but  he  was  driven  out
of  it  by  al-'Ansi,  the  false  Prophet.  Over  the  Kindah,  he  as-
signed al-Muhajir  ibn-abi-Umaiyah ;  over  Hadramaut  and
as-Sadif,  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  al-Ansari.  As-Sadif  were  the
descendants  of  Malik  ibn-Muratti'  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-
Kindah.1  They  were  called  Sadif  because  Muratti'  married
a  woman  from  Hadramaut  and  made  it  a  condition  that  she
would  take  up  her  abode  with  him,  and  in  case  she  bore  a
child  he  would  not  force  her  to  remain  away  from  her
people's  home.  She  did  bear  a  child,  Malik,  and  the  judge
decided  that  Murratti'  should  send  her  back  to  her  people.
When  Malik  left  him  with  her,  Murratti'  said,  "  Malik
turned  away  [Ar.-sadafa]  from  me."  Hence  the  name  as-
Sadif.

The  insurrection  of  the  banu-'Amr.  'Abd-ar-Razzak  said
that  he  was  told  by  certain  sheikhs  from  al-Yaman  that  103
abu-Bakr  wrote  to  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  and  to  al-Muhajir  ibn-
abi-Umaiyah-1-Makhzumi  who  was  then  over  Kindah,  order-
ing them  to  come  together  and  work  hand  in  hand  and
with  one  accord  in  order  to  secure  for  him  the  caliphate
and  fight  against  him  who  refrains  from  paying  sadakah,
and  that  they  should  get  the  help  of  the  Believers  against
the  Unbelievers  and  of  the  obedient  against  the  disobedient
and  transgressors.  Once  they  took  as  sadakah  from  a
Kindah  man  a  youthful  she-camel.  He  asked  them  to
change  it  for  another.  Al-Muhajir  allowed  it,  but  Ziyad
insisted  on  keeping  the  camel  saying.  "  Never  will  I  return
it  after  being  stamped  with  the  sadakah  brand."  Therefore,
the  banu-'Amr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  gathered  a  large  body  of  men.

1  Khallikin,  vol.  iv,  pp.  595-506.


THE  APOSTASY  OF  THE  BANU-WAWAH  ^7

Then  said  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  to  al-Muhajir,  "  Thou  dost  see
this  crowd.  It  is  not  wise  to  have  us  all  leave  our  position.
Separate,  therefore,  thyself  with  a  band  of  men  from  the
main  army,  and  that  will  keep  our  plans  concealed.  Then
I  will  attack  these  '  unbelievers  '  in  their  homes  at  night."
Ziyad  was  resolute  and  sturdy.  He  went  against  the  banu-
'Amr  and,  under  the  cover  of  the  night,  fell  upon  them  and
some  of  them  began  to  kill  the  others.  At  last  Ziyad  and
al-Muhajir  met  accompanied  by  the  captives  and  prisoners.
They  were  intercepted  by  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  and  the  lead-
ing men  of  Kindah,  who  fought  a  fierce  battle  against  them.
At  last  the  Kindis  fortified  themselves  in  an-Nujair,  where
the  siege  was  pressed  against  them  until  they  were  exhausted
and  greatly  damaged  and  al-Ash'ath  surrendered.  Some
say  that  the  Hadramaut  had  come  to  reinforce  the  Kindah
but  were  met  by  Ziyad  and  al-Muhajir  who  defeated  them.

The  apostasy  of  Khauldn.  Now  Khaulan  apostatized,
and  abu-Bakr  directed  against  them  Ya'la  ibn-Munyah
who  fought  against  them  until  they  yielded  and  agreed  to
give  sadakah.  Then  al-Muhajir  received  abu-Bakr's  letter
conferring  on  him  the  governorship  of  San'a  and  its  ad-
joining districts,  making  his  province  border  on  what  Ziyad
already  held.1  Thus  was  al-Yaman  divided  among  three:
al-Muhajir,  Ziyad  and  Ya'la.  The  land  between  the  ex-
treme limit  of  al-Hijaz  and  the  extreme  limit  of  Najran
was  assigned  to  abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb.

The  story  of  al-Ash'ath.  Abu-Nasr  at-Tammar  from
Ibrahim  an-Nakha'i :  —  Al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  al-Kindi,  to-
gether with  some  of  the  Kindah  tribe,  apostatized  and  were  104
besieged.  Al-Ash'ath  secured  safety  for  70  of  his  men  but
did  not  include  himself  among  them.  He  was  therefore
brought  before  abu-Bakr  who  said  to  him,  "  We  shall  cer-

1  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  804.


I58  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

tainly  kill  thee,  as  thou  art  under  no  safe  conduct,  having
excluded  thyself  from  that  group."  "  Nay,"  answered  al-
Ash'ath,  "  Thou,  successor  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  wilt
rather  favor  me  with  a  wife."  This  abu-Bakr  did.  giving
him  his  own  sister  in  marriage.

Three  things  abu-Bakr  wished  he  had  done.  Al-Kasim
ibn-Sallam  abu-'Ubaid  1  from  abu-Bakr  as-Siddik  : — The
latter  said,  "  I  wish  I  had  done  three  things  that  I  did  not  do :
— I  wish  I  had  cut  off  the  head  of  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  when
he  was  brought  before  me,  because  it  seemed  to  me  there  was
no  sort  of  evil  to  be  done  which  he  would  not  attempt  to  do
or  help  to  bring  about ;  I  wish  I  had  killed  rather  than  burnt
al-Fuja'ah  when  he  was  brought  before  me ;  and  I  wish  I  had
directed  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  to  al-Trak  as  I  had  directed
Khalid  to  Syria,  and  thus  would  have  extended  both  my
right  and  left  arms  in  the  cause  of  Allah."  2

The  captives  of  an-Nujair  ransomed.  'Abdallah  ibn-
Salih  al-Tjli  from  ash-Sha'bi :  —  Abu-Bakr  returned  the
captives  of  an-Nujair  by  ransom  receiving  400  dirhams  for
each  head.  In  order  to  pay  for  them,  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais
had  to  borrow  from  the  merchants  of  al-Madinah.  After
paying  the  ransom  of  the  captives,  he  returned  the  loan.
Al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  wrote  the  following  elegy  for  Bashir
ibn-al-Audah,  who  was  one  of  the  delegates  to  the  Prophet
and  who  later  apostatized,  Yazid  ibn-Amanat  and  those  slain
in  the  battle  of  an-Nujair : —

"  By  my  life — and  life  is  not  an  insignificant  thing  to  me —

I  had  the  greatest  right  to  hold  tenaciously  to  those  who  fell  dead.
There  is  no  wonder  except  when  they  divide  their  captives;

and  the  world  after  them  is  not  safe  for  me.
1  am  like  the  camel  that  lost  her  young  and  her  milk  flows,

when  she  longs  for  them  and  comes  to  the  bag,  stuffed  with  straw.
Let  the  tears  of  my  eyes,  therefore,  flow

for  the  loss  of  the  noble  ibn-Amanat  and  the  generous  Bashir."

1  Bakri,  p.  747,  line  14.

1  Ya'kiibi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  155-156;  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  pp.  184-185.


CHAPTER  XXI

Al-Aswad  al-'Ansi  and  those  in  al-Yaman  who 105
apostatized  with  him

Al-Aswad  al-'Ansi  claims  to  be  a  prophet.  Al-Aswad
ibn-Ka'b  ibn-'Auf  al-'Ansi  played  the  soothsayer  [Ar.
kdhin]  and  claimed  to  be  a  prophet.  He  was  followed  by
the  'Ans  tribe  which  was  named  after  Zaid  ibn-Malik  ibn-
Udad  ibn-Yashjub  ibn-'Arib x  ibn-Zaid  ibn-Kahlan  ibn-
Saba,  who  was  the  brother  of  Murad  ibn-Malik,  Khalid
ibn-Malik  and  Sa'd  al-'Ashirah  ibn-Malik,  together  with
others  outside  the  'Ans  tribe.  Al-Aswad  took  for  himself
the  name  of  "  Rahman  [the  merciful  of]  al-Yaman,"  as
Musailimah  had  taken  the  name  of  "  Rahman  al-
Yamamah."  2  He  had  a  trained  donkey  that  would  bow  on
hearing  his  injunction,  "  Bow  before  thy  Lord,"  and  that
would  kneel  on  hearing  "  Kneel  ".  Therefore,  al-Aswad
was  called  "dhu-1-Himar3  [he  of  the  donkey].  Others  say  he
was  called  "  dhu-1-Khimar  "  [the  veiled  one]  because  he
always  appeared  with  a  veil  and  turban.4  I  was  told  by
others  from  al-Yaman  that  he  was  called  al-Aswad  because
the  color  of  his  face  was  black,  his  proper  name  being
'Aihalah.

The  Prophet  invites  him  to  Islam.  In  the  year  in  which
the  Prophet  died,  he  sent  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali,  who

1  Wiistenfeld,  Register,  p.  86.

2  Hishani,  p.  200,  line  3.

3  Mas'udi,  at-Tanbih,  pp.  276-277.

4  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  173.

159


!6o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

had  in  that  same  year  accepted  Islam,  against  al-Aswad,  in-
viting him  to  Islam.  But  al-Aswad  refused.  Other  reports
deny  that  the  Prophet  sent  Jarir  to  al-Yaman.

Al-Aswad  as  governor  of  San' a'.  Al-Aswad  moved
against  San'a'  and  reduced  it,  driving  Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-
al-'Asi  from  it.  Others  say  he  rather  drove  al-Muhajir  ibn-
abi-Umaiyah,  and  took  quarters  with  Ziyad  ibn-Labid  al-
Bayadi,  with  whom  he  remained  until  he  received  a  message
from  abu-Bakr  ordering  him  to  go  to  the  aid  of  Ziyad.
When  the  work  of  Ziyad  and  al-Aswad  was  done,  abu-
Bakr  conferred  on  the  latter  the  governorship  of  San'a'  and
its  provinces.  Al-Aswad,  however,  was  haughty  and  he
oppressed  al-Abna',  i.  e.,  the  descendants  of  the  Persians  who
were  originally  sent  to  al-Yaman  by  Kisra  in  the  company
of  ibn-dhi-Yazan  and  under  the  leadership  of  Wahriz.  Al-
Aswad  made  them  serve  him  and  compelled  them  to  do
things  against  their  will.  Moreover,  he  married  al-Marzu-
banah,  the  wife  of  Badham  their  king,  who  was  their  gov-
ernor under  Abarwiz.1  This  made  the  Prophet  direct
against  him  Kais  ibn-Hubairah-1-Makshuh  al-Muradi
(called  al-Makshuh  because  he  was  cauterized  on  his  side  on
account  of  a  disease)  instructing  him  to  win  over  to  his  side
al-Abna'.  With  al-Makshuh,  the  Prophet  sent  Farwah  ibn-  106
Musaik  al-Muradi.  No  sooner  had  they  arrived  at  al-
Yaman,  than  the  news  of  the  death  of  the  Prophet  reached
them.  Kais  left  on  al-Aswad  the  impression  that  he  con-
corded  with  his  opinion,  and  so  he  got  his  consent  to  enter
San'a'.  Accordingly,  Kais  entered  San'a'  with  a  group  of
men  including  among  others  men  of  [the  clan  of]  Madhhij
and  some  from  Hamdan.  He  then  won  over  to  his  side  one
of  al-Abna',  Fairuz  ibn-ad-Dailami,  who  had  accepted  Islam.
Kais  and  Fairuz  then  brought  the  chief  of  al-Abna'  (whose

1  "  Barvviz  "  in  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  400.


AL-ASWAD  AL-'ANSI  ifa

name  according  to  some  was  Badham,  and  according  to
others,  Badham  was  dead  by  this  time  and  his  successor
was  one  Dadhawaih.1  The  latter  view  is  more  authentic).
Dadhawaih  accepted  Islam.

Al-Aswad  slain.  Kais  met  That  ibn-dhi-1-Hirrah  2-l-
Himyari  and  won  him  over  to  his  side.  Many  missionaries
were  sent  by  Dadhawaih  among  al-Abna'  who  accepted
Islam  and  conspired  to  take  al-Aswad  unawares  and  slay
him.  They  plotted  with  his  wife  who  hated  him,  and  she
pointed  out  a  gutter  leading  to  his  place.  Through  this
they  entered  before  daybreak.  Some  say  they  dug  a  hole
through  the  wall  of  his  house,  through  a  crack,3  and  found
him  sleeping  under  the  influence  of  drink.  Kais  slew  him
and  he  began  to  bellow  like  a  bull,  so  much  so  that  his  guard
scared  by  the  noise  asked,  "  What  is  the  matter  with
Rahman al-Yaman?'  "The inspiration," answered

his  wife,  "  is  upon  him."  Thus  they  were  quieted.  Kais
severed  his  head,  and,  early  in  the  morning,  climbed  the  city
wall  and  shouted,  "Allah  is  great!  Allah  is  great!  I
testify  that  there  is  no  god  but  Allah  and  that  Muhammad
is  the  Prophet  of  Allah,  and  that  al-Aswad,  the  false  Pro-
phet, is  the  enemy  of  Allah !"  As  the  followers  of  al-Aswad
gathered,  Kais  cast  the  head  to  them  and  they  dispersed  with
the  exception  of  a  few.  At  this  the  men  of  Kais  opened  the
door  and  put  the  rest  of  the  followers  of  al-'Ansi  to  the
sword,  and  none  escaped  except  those  who  accepted  Islam.

According  to  some  reports,  however,  it  was  Fairuz  ibn-
ad-Dailami  who  killed  al-Aswad,  Kais  only  giving  the  last
stroke  and  severing  his  head. Certain  scholars  assert  that

1  "  Dadhuwaih  "  in  Nawawi,  p.  232.

2Hajar,  vol.  i,  p.  345:  "Bab  ibn-dhi-1-Jirrah".

3  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  683;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1865;  Fida,  vol.  i,  p.  155;
Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  173.


1&2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

the  death  of  Kais  took  place  five  days  before  the  expiration
of  the  Prophet,  who  on  his  death-bed  said:  "Allah  has
brought  about  the  death  of  al-Aswad  al-'Ansi  through
the  righteous  man  Fairuz  ibn-ad-Dailami,"  and  that  the
news  of  the  conquest  came  to  abu-Bakr  ten  days  after  107
he  had  been  proclaimed  caliph.

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  an-Nu'man  ibn-Burzuj,  one
of  al-Abna' : — The  Prophet's  'dmil,  whom  al-Aswad  drove
out  of  San'a',  was  Aban  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi ;  and  the  one
who  killed  al-Aswad  was  Fairuz  ibn-ad-Dailami.1  When
both  Kais  and  Fairuz  at  al-Madinah  claimed  having  killed
him,  'Umar  pointed  to  Fairuz  saying,  "  It  was  this  lion  who
killed  him!"

Kais  suspected  of  the  murder  of  Dadhawaih .  Kais  was
charged  with  having  killed  Dadhawaih,  and  abu-Bakr  re-
ceived the  information  that  he  was  intent  on  expelling
al-Abna'  from  San'a'.  Abu-Bakr's  anger  was  thereby
aroused,  and  he  wrote  to  al-Muhajir  ibn-abi-Umaiyah  at
his  entry  to  San'a'  as  abu-Bakr's  'dmil,  instructing  him  to
bring  Kais  before  him.  When  Kais  was  brought  before
abu-Bakr,  he  was  requested  by  him  to  swear  fifty  oaths  near
the  Prophet's  pulpit  that  he  did  not  kill  Dadhawaih.  This
he  did.  and  was  consequently  set  free  by  abu-Bakr,  who
directed  him  to  Syria  with  those  of  the  Moslems  summoned
for  the  invasion  of  the  Greeks.2

1  Mirkhondi,  Raudat  as-Safa,  vol.  ii,  p.  679.

2  Ar.  ar-Rum  =  the  East  Romans,  the  Byzantines.


PART  II

SYRIA


CHAPTER  I

The  Conquest  of  Syria

The  "  tying  of  the  three  banners."  When  abu-Bakr  was
done  with  the  case  of  those  who  apostatized,  he  saw  fit *
to  direct  his  troops  against  Syria.  To  this  effect  he  wrote
to  the  people  of  Makkah,  at-Ta'if,  al-Yaman,  and  all  the
Arabs  in  Najd  and  al-Hijaz  calling  them  for  a  "  holy  war  "
and  arousing  their  desire  in  it  and  in  the  obtainable  booty
from  the  Greeks.  Accordingly,  people,  including  those  ac-
tuated by  greed  as  well  as  those  actuated  by  the  hope  of
divine  remuneration,  hastened  to  abu-Bakr  from  all  quarters,
and  flocked  to  al-Madinah.  Abu-Bakr  gave  three  banners  2
to  three  men  [appointed  them  commanders]  namely :
Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah,  Shurahbil  ibn-
Hasanah,  an  ally  of  the  banu-Jumah  and  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi
ibn-Wa'il  as-Sahmi.  (Shurahbil,  according  to  al-Wakidi,
was  the  son  of  'Abdallah  ibn-al-Muta'  al-Kindi,  Hasanah
being  his  mother  and  a  freedmaid  of  Ma'mar  ibn-Habib
ibn-Wahb  ibn-Hudhafah  ibn-Jumah.  But  according  to  al-
Kalbi,  Shurahbil  was  the  son  of  Rabi'ah  ibn-al-Muta'
descended  from  Sufah,  i.  e.,  al-Ghauth  ibn-Murr  ibn-Udd
ibn-Tabikhah. ) 3  The  tying  of  these  banners  took  place  on  108
Thursday  the  first  of  Safar,  year  13,  after  the  troops
had  camped  at  al-Jurf  throughout  the  month  of  Muharram
with  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah  leading  their  prayers.  Abu-

1  Cf.  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  149.

2  Zaidan,  vol.  i,  pp.  135-136.
'  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2079.

165


!66  the  origins  of  the  islamic  state

Bakr  wanted  to  give  a  banner  to  abu-'Ubaidah ;  but  the  latter
begged  to  be  relieved.  Others  claim  that  he  did  give  one
to  him,  but  that  report  is  not  confirmed.  The  fact  is  that
when  'Umar  became  caliph,  he  conferred  on  him  the  gov-
ernorship of  all  Syria.

Abu-'Ubaidah  commander-in-chief .  Abu-Mikhnaf  states
that  'Umar  said  to  the  commanders,  "  If  ye  altogether  are
to  lead  a  fight,  your  commander  will  be  abu-'Ubaidah  'Amir
ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-Jarrah  al-Fihri,  otherwise  Yazid  ibn-
abi-Sufyan."  x  Others  assert  that  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  acted
only  as  a  'reinforcement  for  the  Moslems  and  commanded
only  those  who  joined  him.

Abu-Bakr  replaces  Khalid  by  Arwa.  The  assignment  of
Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  by  abu-Bakr  to  the  leadership  displeased
'Umar  who  approached  abu-Bakr  with  a  view  to  dismissing
him,  charging  him  with  being  "  a  vain-seeking  man  who
tries  to  make  his  way  through  dispute  and  bigotry."  2  Ac-
cordingly abu-Bakr  dismissed  Khalid  and  directed  abu-
Arwa  ad-Dausi  to  take  the  banner  from  his  hand.  Abu-
Arwa  met  him  at  dhu-1-Marwah  where  he  received  the
banner  from  him  and  carried  it  back  to  abu-Bakr.  Abu-
Bakr  handed  it  to  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  3  who  left,  with  his
brother  Mu'awiyah  carrying  the  banner  before  him.  Others
say  that  the  banner  was  delivered  to  Yazid  at  dhu-1-Marwah
whence  he  started  at  the  head  of  Khalid's  army.  Khalid
went  with  the  army  of  Shurahbil  for  the  divine  re-
muneration.4

Abu-Bakr  gives  instructions  to  the  commanders. Abu-
Bakr  instructed  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  to  follow  the  way  of  Ailah

1  Abu-Isma'il al-Basri, Futfth ash-Shav:, p. 5; Hajar, vol. iii, pp.
T352-I353-
»  Skizzcn,  vol.  vi,  p.  62,  note  1 ;  Yaktibi.  vol.  ii,  p.  149.
s  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  pp.  186-187.
*  As  a  volunteer.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  SYRIA  167

with  Palestine  x  for  objective.  Yazid  he  instructed  to  fol-
low the  way  of  Tabuk.  To  Shurahbil,  he  wrote  to  follow
the  way  of  Tabuk,  too.  At  the  outset  each  one  of  the  com-
manders had  three  thousand  men  under  his  leadership,  but
abu-Bakr  kept  on  sending  reinforcements  until  each  one  had
7,500. Later  the  total  was  increased  to  24,000.

It  is  reported  on  the  authority  of  al-Wakidi  that  abu-
Bakr  assigned  'Amr  to  Palestine,  Shurahbil  to  the  Jordan,
and  Yazid  to  Damascus  saying,  "  When  ye  all  fight  together,
your  commander  is  the  one  in  whose  province  ye  are  fight-
ing." It  is  also  reported  that  to  'Amr  he  gave  oral  instruc-
tions to  lead  the  prayers  in  case  the  armies  are  united,  and
to  have  each  commander  lead  the  prayer  of  his  own  army  109
when  the  armies  are  separate.  Abu-Bakr  ordered  the  com-
manders to  see  that  each  tribe  flies  a  banner  of  its  own.

Abu-Bakr  directs  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  to  Syria.  On
his  arrival  in  the  first  district  of  Palestine,  'Amr  ibn-al-
'Asi  sent  a  message  to  abu-Bakr  informing  him  of  the  great
number  of  the  enemy,  their  great  armament,  the  wide  ex-
tent of  their  land  and  the  enthusiasm  of  their  troops.  Abu-
Bakr,  thereupon,  wrote  to  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  ibn-al-
Mughirah-1-Makhzumi — who  was  at  that  time  in  al-'Irak —
directing  him  to  go  to  Syria.  According  to  some,  he  thereby
made  him  a  commander  over  the  commanders  in  the  war.
According  to  others,  Khalid  only  commanded  his  men  who
accompanied  him;  but  whenever  the  Moslems  met  for  a
battle,  the  commanders  would  choose  him  as  their  chief  for
his  valor  and  strategy  and  the  auspiciousness  of  his  counsel.
The  battle  of  Ddthin.  The  first  conflict  between  the
Moslems  and  the  enemy  took  place  in  Dathin,2  one  of  the

1  Ar.  Philastin.  For  a  description  of  these  provinces  see  al-Ya'kubi
Kitdb  al-Buldan,  p.  325  seq.;  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  913.

2Tabari,  vol.  i.  p.  2108:  "  ad-Dathinah,  and  some  say  ad-Dathin  " ;  cf.
Caetani,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1138-1139.


!68  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

villages  of  Ghazzah,  which  lay  on  the  way  between  the
Moslems  and  the  residence  of  the  patrician  1  of  Ghazzah.
Here  the  battle  raged  furiously,  but  at  last  Allah  gave
victory  to  his  friends  and  defeat  to  his  enemies  whom  he
dispersed.  All  this  took  place  before  the  arrival  of  Khalid
ibn-al- Walid  in  Syria.

The  battle  of  al-'Arabah.  Thence  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan
went  in  quest  of  the  partrician,  but  hearing  that  a  large
host  of  Greeks  were  gathered  in  al-'Arabah,  which  lay  in
Palestine,  he  directed  against  them  abu-Umamah  as-Sudai
ibn-'Ajlan  al-Bahili,  who,  falling  upon  them,  put  most  of
them  to  the  sword  and  went  his  way.  Regarding  this
battle  of  al-'Arabah,  abu-Mikhnaf  reports  that  six  of  the
Greek  leaders  at  the  head  of  3,000  men  camped  at  al-
'Arabah  when  abu-Umamah  with  a  body  of  Moslems  ad-
vanced against  them  and  defeated  them,  killing  one  of  their
leaders.  Thence  he  pursued  them  to  ad-Dubbiyah  (i.  e.
ad-Dabiyah)  2  where  he  inflicted  another  defeat  on  them,
and  the  Moslems  carried  off  a  large  booty.

According  to  a  tradition  communicated  by  abu-Haf  s  ash-
Shami  on  the  authority  of  certain  sheikhs  from  Syria,  the
first  conflict  of  the  Moslems  was  the  Battle  of  al-'Arabah
before  which  no  fighting  at  all  took  place  since  they  left
al-Hijaz.  In  no  place  between  al-Hijaz  and  al-'Arabah  did
they  pass  without  establishing  their  authority  and  taking
possession  of  it  without  resistance.

1A  leader  of  an  army,  from  the  Latin  "  patricius".

2  De  Goeje,  Memoxre  sur  la  Conquete  de  la  Syrie,  p.  31.


CHAPTER  II

The  Advance  of  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  on  Syria  and iio
the  Places  he  reduced  on  his  Way

Khalid  takes  (Ain  at-Tamr  and  Sandaudd'  by  force.
When  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  received  abu-Bakr's  letter  at  al-
Hirah,  he  left  in  his  place  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  ash-
Shaibani  over  the  district  of  al-Kufah,  and  set  out  at  the
head  of  800  men  in  Rabi'  II,  year  13.  (Some  give  600  and
others  500  as  the  number  of  men.)  On  his  way,  he  passed
through  'Ain  at-Tamr  and  reduced  it  by  force.  (Accord-
ing to  others,  he  received  abu-Bakr's  message  in  'Ain  at-
Tamr  after  having  subdued  it.)  From  'Ain  at-Tamr
Khalid  made  his  way  to  Sandauda'  x  in  which  lived  some
of  the  Kindah  and  Iyad  tribes  and  non-Arabs.2  These
people  fought  against  him ;  but  Khalid  won  the  victory  and
left  in  the  city  Sa'd  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haram  al-Ansari  whose
descendants  still  live  in  it.  Khalid,  having  learnt  that  a
body  of  the  banu-Taghlib  ibn-Wa'il  at  al-Mudaiyah  and  al-
Husaid  had  apostatized  and  were  led  by  Rabi'ah  ibn-Bujair,
made  his  way  to  them.  They  fought  against  him;  but  he
put  them  to  flight  and  took  captives  and  booty.  The  cap-
tives he  sent  to  abu-Bakr,  and  among  them  was  umm-
Habib  as-Sahba',  daughter  of  Habib  ibn-Bujair,  and  [later]
the  mother  of  'Umar  ibn-'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib.

Khalid  crosses  the  desert  to  Suwa.  Then  Khalid  made
an  incursion  on  Kurakir  which  was  a  spring  belonging  to  the

^•Basri,  p.  59:  "Sandawa";  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2109.

3  Ar.  'A  jam  ;  see  Muh.  Stud.,  p.  10 1  seq.

169


I  jo  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Kalb  tribe,  and  thence  crossed  the  desert  to  Suwa1  which  was
also  a  spring  held  conjointly  by  the  Kalb  and  some  men  of
the  Bahra'.  Here  Khalid  killed  Hurkus  ibn-an-Nu'man
al-Bahrani  of  the  Kuda'ah  tribe  and  swept  off  all  their  pos-
sessions. When  Khalid  wanted  to  cross  the  desert,  he  gave
the  camels  all  the  water  they  could  drink  and  then  thrust  into
the  camels'  lips  spears,  which  he  left  for  them  to  drag,2  lest
they  should  ruminate  and  get  thirsty  again.  The  quantity
of  water  he  carried  along,  though  big,  was  exhausted  on
the  way.  So  Khalid  had  to  slay  the  camels  one  after  the
other  and  drink  with  his  men  the  water  from  their  bellies.
Khalid  had  a  guide  named  Ran'  ibn-'Umair  at-Ta'i  whom
the  poet  meant  when  he  said :

"  How  wonderful  has  Rifi'  been,
who  succeeded  in  finding  the  way  from  Kurakir  to  Suwa,

to  the  water  from  which  the  coward  who  attempts  to  reach  it  re-
turns before  attaining  it.
No  human  being  before  thee  ever  did  that!"

When  the  Moslems  arrived  in  Suwa  they  found  Hurkus
and  a  band  of  men  drinking  and  singing.  Hurkus  himself
was  saying :

"Again  give  me  to  drink  before  abu-Bakr's  army  is  on,
our  death  may  be  at  hand  while  we  are  unaware."  3

As  the  Moslems  killed  him,  his  blood  flowed  into  the  basin
from  which  he  had  been  drinking;  and  some  report  that  his
head,  too,  fell  therein.  It  is  claimed  by  others,4  however,  that
the  one  who  sang  this  verse  was  one  of  those  of  the  banu-
Taghlib  whom  Khalid  had  attacked  with  Rabi'ah  ibn-Bujair.

1  Basri,  p.  63  :  "  Shuwa  ".

2Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2123:  "He  muzzled  their  mouths",  and  so  Diyar-
bakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  257;  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  1196.

3  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2124;  Mcmoire,  p.  46;  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  25.

4  Basri,  p.  62  seq.


I  I  I


THE  ADVANCE  OF  KHALI D  ON  SYRIA  Yyi

Khalid  in  Karkisiya.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  Khalid
started  from  Suwa  to  al-Kawathil  thence  to  Karkisiya
whose  chief  met  him  with  a  large  host.  Khalid  left  him
alone,  turned  to  the  mainland  and  went  his  way.

Arakah  makes  terms.  Another  place  to  which  Khalid
came  was  Arakah  x  (i.  e.  Arak)  whose  people  he  attacked
and  besieged.  The  city  surrendered  and  made  terms,  offer-
ing a  certain  sum  for  the  Moslems.

Diimat  al-Jandal,  Kusam,  Tadmur  and  al-Karyatain
taken.  Dumat  al-Jandal 2  he  then  reached  and  conquered.
Then  he  came  to  Kusam  in  which  the  banu-Mashja'ah  ibn-at-
Taim  ibn-an-Namir  ibn-Wabarah  ibn-Taghlib  ibn-Hulwan
ibn-Tmran  ibn-al-Hafi  ibn-Kuda'ah  came  to  terms  with  him.
Khalid  wrote  them  a  promise  of  security  and  advanced  to
Tadmur a  [Palmyra].  Tadmur's  inhabitants  held  out
against  him  and  took  to  their  fortifications.  At  last  they
sought  to  surrender  and  he  wrote  them  a  statement  guaran-
teeing their  safety  on  condition  that  they  be  considered
dhimmah  people,4  that  they  entertain  Moslems  and  that  they
submit  to  them.  Khalid  then  pushed  to  al-Karyatain,  112
whose  people  resisted  him  but  were  defeated,  losing  a  large
booty.

Huwarin  reduced.  Khalid  proceeded  to  Huwarin  5  in
Sanir  and  made  a  raid  on  its  cattle.  Its  inhabitants,  having
been  reinforced  by  the  inhabitants  of  Ba'labakk  and  of
Busra  (the  capital  of  Hauran)  stood  out  against  him.  The
victory  was  won  by  Khalid  who  took  some  as  captives  and
killed  others.

1  Basri,  p.  67;  Tabari,  vol.  i.  p.  2109;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  21.

2  Baladhuri,  part  I,  chap.  XIII.

s  Guy  Le  Strange,  Palestine  under  the  Moslems,  pp.  540-542.
*  Christians,  Jews  and  Sabians  with  whom  a  covenant  has  been  made,
who  pay  a  poll  tax  and  for  whose  security  Moslems  are  responsible.
5  Basri,  p.  68.


1 72  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Ghassdn  attacked.  Thence  he  came  to  Marj  Rahit  and
led  an  incursion  against  Ghassan  on  their  Easter  day — they
being  Christians. He  took  some  captive  and  killed  others.

Thaniyat  al-'Ukab.  Khalid  then  directed  Busr  ibn-abi-
Artat  al-'Amiri  of  the  Kuraish  and  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-
Fihri  to  the  Ghutah  x  of  Damascus  where  they  attacked
many  villages.  Khalid  arrived  at  Thaniyat  in  Damascus,  the
Thaniyat  al-'Ukab  of  to-day,  and  stood  there  for  one  hour,
spreading  his  banner.  This  banner  was  the  one  the  Prophet
used,  and  was  black  in  color;  and  because  the  Arabs  call  a
banner  "  'ukab,"  the  Thaniyat  was  known  since  as  Thaniyat
al-'Ukab.  Others  say  that  it  was  thus  called  because  a  vul-
ture [Ar.  'ukab]  happened  to  descend  on  it  at  that  time.
But  the  first  explanation  is  more  reliable.  I  heard  it  said
by  some  that  at  that  place  stood  a  stone  image  of  a  vulture.
But  there  is  no  truth  in  that  statement.

Khalid  meets  abu-Ubaidah.  Khalid  camped  at  the  East
[Sharki]  gate  of  Damascus;  and  according  to  others,  at  the
Jabiyah  gate.  The  bishop  of  Damascus  offered  him  gifts
and  homage  and  said  to  Khalid,  "  Keep  this  covenant 2  for
me."  Khalid  promised  to  do  so.  Then  Khalid  went  until
he  met  the  Moslems  who  were  at  Kanat  Busra.  According
to  others,  however,  he  came  to  the  Jabiyah  where  abu-
'Ubaidah  was  with  a  band  of  Moslems.  Here  they  met  and
went  together  to  Busra.

1  A  place  in  Damascus  noted  for  its  orchards;  ibn-Jubair,  Rihlah,  p.
261 ;  Le  Strange,  p.  33.

2  What  covenant  is  meant  is  not  clear.  This  tradition  may  have  been
confused  with  one  that  comes  later  and  speaks  of  the  agreement  be-
tween Khalid  and  the  bishop. Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1204-1205.


CHAPTER  III
The  Conquest  of  Busra

Busra  comes  to  terms.  When  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  at
the  head  of  the  Moslems  arrived  in  Busra,1  all  the  Moslems
gathered  against  it  and  put  Khalid  in  chief  command.  113
They  drew  close  to  it  and  fought  its  patrician  until  he  was
driven  with  his  armed  men  inside  the  town.  Others  assert
that  since  Busra  lay  within  the  district  of  Damascus  and,
consequently  under  the  rule  and  commandership  of  Yazid
ibn-abi-Sufyan,  it  was  he  who  held  the  chief  command.  At
last  its  people  came  to  terms  stipulating  that  their  lives,
property  and  children  be  safe,  and  agreeing  to  pay  the  poll-
tax.  According  to  some  reporters,  the  inhabitants  of
Busra  made  terms  agreeing  to  pay  for  each  adult  one  dinar
and  one  jarib  2  of  wheat.

Thus  the  Moslems  conquered  all  the  region  of  Hauran
[Auranitis]  and  subdued  it.

Ma'db  surrenders.  Abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah,  at  the
head  of  a  heavy  detachment  composed  of  the  commanders'
troops  that  had  joined  him,  led  the  way  to  Ma'ab  [Moab]
in  the  district  of  al-Balka'  where  the  enemy  was  massed.
Ma'ab  surrendered  and  made  terms  similar  to  those  made  by
Busra.  According  to  others,  however,  the  conquest  of
Ma'ab  was  effected  before  that  of  Busra.  Still  others  assert
that  abu-'Ubaidah  conquered  Ma'ab  when  he  was  the  com-
mander of  all  the  Moslem  forces  in  Syria  in  the  days  of
'Umar.

1  Eski-Sham  or  Old  Damascus;  Baedeker,  Palestine  and  Syria,  p.  201
(ed.  1894).

2  Mawardi,  p.  265,  says  that  al-jarib  is  a  measure  of  land  10  x  10  rods.
It  is  also  a  measure  of  wheat  that  varies  in  different  localities.

173


CHAPTER  IV
The  Battle  of  Ajnadin  (or  Ajnadain)

The  enemy  routed.  The  battle  of  Ajnadin  *  ensued.  In
this  battle  about  100,000  Greeks  took  part,  the  majority  of
whom  were  massed  one  band  after  the  other  by  Heraclius
[Hirakl],  the  rest  having  come  from  the  neighboring  dis-
tricts. On  that  day,  Heraclius  was  in  Hims  [Emesa].
Against  this  army,  the  Moslems  fought  a  violent  battle,  and
Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  particularly  distinguished  himself.  At
last,  by  Allah's  help,  the  enemies  of  Allah  were  routed  and
shattered  into  pieces,  a  great  many  being  slaughtered.

The  martyrs.  Those  who  suffered  martyrdom  on  that
day  were  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  ibn-
Hashim,  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah,  his
brother  Aban  ibn-Sa'id  (according  to  the  most  authentic  re-
port. Others,  however,  claim  that  Aban  died  in  the  year
29),  Tulaib  ibn-'Umair  ibn-Wahb  ibn-'Abd  ibn-Kusai  (who
fought  a  duel  with  an  "  unbeliever  "  who  gave  him  a  blow
that  severed  his  right  hand  making  his  sword  fall  down  with
the  palm.  In  this  condition  he  was  surrounded  and  killed  114
by  the  Greeks.  His  mother  Arwa,  daughter  of  'Abd-al-
Muttalib,  was  the  Prophet's  aunt.  His  surname  was  abu-
'Adi),  and  Salamah  ibn-Hisham  ibn-al-Mughirah.  Accord-
ing to  others,  Salamah  was  killed  at  Marj  as-Suffar.  Other
martyrs  were:  'Ikrimah  ibn-abi-Jahl  ibn-Hisham  al-Makh-
zumi,  Habbar  ibn-Sufyan  ibn-'Abd-al-Asad  al-Makhzumi
(who, according  to others, was killed in the  battle of

1  Memoire,  p.  50  seq. ;  Skiesen,  vol.  vi,  p.  54.
174


THE  BATTLE  OF  AJNAD1N  ^

Mu'tah),  Nu'aim  ibn-'Abdallah  an-Nahham  al-'Adawi
(who,  according  to  others,  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  al-
Yarmuk),  Hisham  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Wa'il  as-Sahmi  (who  is
also  supposed  by  others  to  have  been  slain  in  the  battle  of
al-Yarmuk),  Jundub  ibn-'Amr  ad-Dausi,  Sa'id  ibn-al-
Harith,  al-Harith  ibn-al-Harith,  and  al-Hajjaj  ibn-al-
Harith  ibn-Kais  ibn-'Adi  as-Sahmi.  According  to  Hisham
ibn-Muhammad  al-Kalbi,  an-Nahham  was  killed  in  the  battle
of  Mu'tah.

Sa'id  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-Kais  was  slain  in  the  battle  of  al-
Yarmuk;  Tamim  ibn-al-Harith,  in  the  battle  of  Ajnadin;  his
brother,  'Ubaidallah  ibn  'Abd-al-Asad,  in  al-Yarmuk;  and
al-Harith  ibn-Hisham  ibn-al-Mughirah,  in  Ajnadin.

Heraclius  flees  to  Antioch.  When  the  news  of  this  battle
came  to  Heraclius,  his  heart  was  filled  with  cowardice  and  he
was  confounded.  Consequently,  he  took  to  flight  to  Antioch
[Antakiyah]  from  Hims  [Emesa].  It  was  mentioned  by
someone  that  his  flight  from  Hims  to  Antioch  coincided  with
the  advance  of  the  Moslems  to  Syria.  This  battle  of
Ajnadin  took  place  on  Monday  twelve  days  before  the  end
of  Jumada  I,  year  13.  Some,  however,  say  two  days  after
the  beginning  of  Jumada  II,  and  others  two  days  before
its  end.

After  that,  the  Greeks  massed  an  army  at  Yakusah  which
was  a  valley  with  al-Fauwarah  at  its  mouth.  There  the
Moslems  met  them,  dispelled  them  and  put  them  to  flight
with  a  great  slaughter.  Their  remnants  fled  to  the  cities  of
Syria.  The  death  of  abu-Bakr  took  place  in  Jumada  II,
year  13,  and  the  Moslems  received  the  news  in  al- Yakusah.1

1  Mimoire,  p.  64.


CHAPTER  V  115

The  Battle  of  Fihl  in  the  Province  of  the  Jordan

Abu-'Ubaidah  commander-in-chief .  The  battle  of  Fihl 1
in  the  province  of  the  Jordan  was  fought  two  days  before
the  end  of  dhu-1-Ka'dah  and  five  months  after  the  proclama-
tion of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  as  caliph.  The  commander-
in-chief  was  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah,  to  whom  'Umar  had
sent  a  letter  with  'Amir  ibn-abi-Wakkas,  a  brother  of  Sa'd
ibn-abi-Wakkas,  conferring  on  him  the  governorship  of
Syria  and  the  chief  command.2

Some  say  that  the  appointment  of  abu-'Ubaidah  to  the
governorship  of  Syria  was  received  when  Damascus  was
under  siege.  Khalid  being  the  chief  commander  in  time
of  war,  abu-'Ubaidah  concealed  the  appointment  from  him
for  many  days.3  When  asked  by  Khalid  for  the  reason,
abu-'Ubaidah  said,  "  I  hated  to  dishearten  thee  and  weaken
thy  position  as  thou  stoodst  facing  an  enemy."

Terms  made  after  the  victory.  The  way  this  battle  came
about  was  that  when  Heraclius  came  to  Antioch  he  sum-
moned the  Greeks  and  the  inhabitants  of  Mesopotamia  to
go  forth  to  war,  putting  them  under  the  command  of  one
of  his  men  in  whom  he  trusted.  These  met  the  Moslems  at
Fihl  in  the  province  of  the  Jordan  and  a  most  fierce  and
bloody  battle  ensued,  which  ended,  by  Allah's  help,  in  the
victory  of  the  Moslems. The  Greek  patrician  with  about

1  Fahl  or  Fihl,  ancient  Pella;  Mimoire,  p.  73.
3  J  bid.,  p.  106.

5  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2146  and  2147.
176


THE  BATTLE  OF  FIHL  !77

10,000  men  was  slaughtered,  and  the  rest  of  the  army  dis-
tributed themselves  in  the  cities  of  Syria,  some  of  them  join-
ing Heraclius.  The  inhabitants  of  Fihl  took  to  the  forti-
fications where  they  were  besieged  by  the  Moslems  until  they
sought  to  surrender,  agreeing  to  pay  tax  on  their  heads  and
kharaj  on  their  lands.  The  Moslems  promised  them  the
security  of  life  and  property,  agreeing  not  to  demolish  their
walls.  The  contract  was  made  by  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-
Jarrah,  but  according  to  others,  by  Shurahbil  ibn-Hasanah.


CHAPTER  VI

The  Province  of  the  Jordan

Tiberias  makes  terms. Hafs  ibn-'Umar  al-'Umari  from
al-Haitham  ibn-'Adi : — Shurahbil  conquered  all  the  province 1 16
of  the  Jordan  [al-Urdunn]  by  force,  with  the  exception  of
Tiberias,  whose  inhabitants  came  to  terms,  agreeing  to  give
up  one-half  of  their  homes  and  churches.1

'Amr  ibn-al-Asi  and  then  abu-'Ubaidah  in  chief  command.
Abu-Haf s  ad-Dimashki  from  abu-Bishr  —  the  muezzin  of
the  mosque  at  Damascus — and  others : — When  the  Mos-
lems arrived  in  Damascus,  each  commander  used  to  direct
his  forces  to  a  special  region  which  he  would  make  the
object  of  his  incursions.  Thus  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  used  to  go
against  Palestine,  Shurahbil  against  the  Jordan  province  and
Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  against  the  province  of  Damascus.
In  case  the  enemy  was  massed  in  one  group,  they  would  all
combine  against  him,  each  [commander]  hastening  to  the
support  and  the  reinforcement  of  the  other.  In  the  early
days  of  abu-Bakr,  when  they  would  join  forces,  the  com-
mander-in-chief would  be  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi.  This  was  the
case  until  the  arrival  of  Khalid  ibn-al-\\'alid.  who  became
the  commander  of  the  Moslems  in  every  battle.  Abu-
'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah  later  assumed  the  chief  command  in
the  whole  of  Syria,  and  the  commanders  acknowledged  him
as  their  chief  for  war  and  peace  in  behalf  of  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab. This  was  brought  about when 'Umar  was

1  'j'abari,  vol.  i,  p.  ^159.
178


THE  PROVINCE  OF  THE  JORDAN  tyg

*

proclaimed  caliph  and  wrote  to  Khalid  dismissing  him  and
assigning  abu-'Ubaidah.

Shurahbil  and  then  'Amr  seizes  Tiberias.  Shurahbil
ibn-Hasanah  took  Tiberias  [Tabaraiyah]  by  capitulation
after  a  siege  of  some  days.  He  guaranteed  for  the  inhabi-
tants the  safety  of  their  lives,  possessions,  children,  churches
and  houses  with  the  exception  of  what  they  should  evacuate
and  desert,  setting  aside  a  special  spot  for  a  Moslem  mosque.
Later,  in  the  caliphate  of  'Umar,  the  people  of  Tiberias  vio-
lated the  covenant  and  were  joined  by  many  Greeks  and
others.  Abu-'Ubaidah  ordered  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  to  attack
them,  so  he  marched  against  them  at  the  head  of  4,000  men.
'Amr  took  the  city  by  capitulation,  the  terms  being  similar
to  those  of  Shurahbil.  According  to  others,  however,  it  was
Shurahbil  also  who  conquered  it  the  second  time.

Shurahbil  subdues  all  the  Jordan  province.  In  addition  to
that,  Shurahbil  took  easy  possession  of  all  the  cities  of  the
Jordan  with  their  fortifications,  which,  with  no  resistance,
capitulated  on  terms  similar  to  those  of  Tiberias.  Thus  did
he  take  possession  of  Baisan,  [Bethshean,  Scythopolis]
Susiyah,  Afik,  Jarash,  Bait-Ras,  Kadas,  and  al-Jaulan,  and
subdue  the  district  of  the  Jordan  and  all  its  land.

According  to  abu-Hafs  on  the  authority  of  al-Wadin
ibn-'Ata',  Shurahbil  conquered  Acre,  Tyre  and  Saffuriyah.

The  sea-coasts  reduced.  It  is  stated  by  abu-Bishr,  the
muezzin,  that  abu-'Ubaidah  directed  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  to  117
the  sea-coasts  of  the  province  of  the  Jordan.  There  the
Greeks  became  too  numerous  for  him  being  recruited  by  men
from  the  district  under  Heraclius  who  was  then  at  Constan-
tinople. 'Amr,  therefore,  wrote  to  abu-'Ubaidah  asking  for
reinforcements.  The  latter  sent  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  who
went  forth,  having  his  brother,  Mu'awiyah,  in  the  van  of  the
army.  The  littoral  of  the  Jordan  was  conquered  by  Yazid
and  'Amr  to  whom  abu-'Ubaidah  wrote  regarding  its  con-


!8o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

quest.  In  that  campaign  Mu'awiyah  distinguished  himself
and  left  a  great  impression.

Mu'awiyah  transplants  people.  Abu-Alyasa'  al-Antaki
from  certain  sheikhs  from  Antioch  and  the  Jordan: — A
body  of  Persians  were  transplanted  in  the  year  42  by
Mu'awiyah  from  Ba'labakk,  Hims  and  Antioch  to  the  sea-
coasts  of  the  Jordan,  i.  e.,  Tyre,  Acre  and  other  places;  and
he  transplanted  in  the  same  year,  or  one  year  before  or  after,
certain  Asawirah  x  from  al-Basrah  and  al-Kufah  and  certain
Persians  from  Ba'labakk  and  Hims  to  Antioch.  One  of
the  Persian  leaders  was  Muslim  ibn-'Abdallah,  grandfather
of  'Abdallah  ibn-Habib  ibn-an-Nu'man  ibn-Muslim  al-An-
taki.

Mu'awiyah  makes  repairs  in  Acre  and  Tyre.  Accord-
ing to  a  tradition  communicated  to  me  by  Muhammad  ibn-
Sa'd  on  the  authority  of  al-Wakidi,  and  by  Hisham  ibn-
al-Laith  as-Suri  on  the  authority  of  certain  sheikhs  from
Syria,  when  Mu'awiyah  came  to  sail  from  Acre  to  Cyprus
he  made  repairs  in  Acre  ['Akka]  and  in  Tyre  [Sur] .  Later
both  cities  were  rebuilt  by  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan,  after
having  fallen  into  ruins.

Hisham  ibn-al-Laith  from  our  sheikhs  who  said,  "  When
we  took  up  our  abode  in  Tyre  and  the  littoral,  there  were
Arab  troops  and  many  Greeks  already  there.  Later,  people
from  other  regions  came  and  settled  with  us,  and  that  was
the  case  with  all  the  sea-coast  of  Syria."

Artisans  settled  along  the  sea-coast.  Muhammad  ibn-
Sahm  al-Antaki  from  contemporaneous  sheikhs : — In  the
year  49  the  Greeks  left  for  the  sea-coast.  Industry  at  that
time  was  confined  to  Egypt.  Consequently,  and  in  accord-
ance with  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan's  orders,  certain
artisans  and  carpenters  were  gathered  and  settled  along
the  coast.  As  for  the  industry  of  the  Jordan  province  it  was
all  confined  to  Acre.

1  Persian  armed  cavalry.


THE  PROVINCE  OF  THE  JORDAN  IgI

Hishdm  moves  the  industry  to  Tyre.  Abu-1-Khattab
al-Azdi  mentioned  the  case  of  a  descendant  of  abu-Mu'ait
who  lived  in  Acre  and  ran  mills  and  workshops.  Hisham
ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  wanted  him  to  sell  them  to  him ;  but  the
man  refused.  Hisham  therefore  moved  the  industry  *  to
Tyre  where  he  ran  an  inn  and  a  workshop.  118

Tyre  a  naval  base.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  the  ships
used  to  be  in  Acre  until  the  time  of  the  banu-Marwan  who
moved  them  to  Tyre,  where  they  are  until  to-day.2  In  the
year  247,  al-Mutawakkil  gave  orders  that  the  ships  be
stationed  in  Acre  and  all  along  the  coast,  and  he  manned
them  with  fighters.

1  Ar.  sina'ah ;  Ya'ktibi,  p.  327 :  "  dar  as-sind'ah "  which  means  ar-
senal. The  reference  may  be  to  the  industry  of  making  ships.  Cf.
Le  Strange,  p.  342  seq.

2  Ibn-Jubair,  p.  305.


CHAPTER  VII
The  Battle  of  Marj  as-Suffar

The  '''  unbelievers ''  put  to  flight.  The  Greeks  met  in
great  numbers  and  were  reinforced  by  Heraclius.  The
Moslems  encountered  them  at  Marj  as-Suffar  on  their  way
to  Damascus  on  the  first  of  Muharram,  year  14.1  The  battle
that  ensued  was  so  violent  that  blood  flowed  along  with
water  and  turned  the  wheels  of  the  mill.  Of  the  Moslems
about  4,000  were  wounded.  At  last  the  "  unbelievers  "  took
to  flight  and  were  dispersed,  disregarding  everything  until
they  came  to  Damascus  and  Jerusalem.  On  that  day,
Khalid  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah  (surnamed  abu-
Sa'id)  fell  a  martyr.  In  the  evening  previous  to  the  day
in  the  morning  of  which  the  battle  was  fought,  he  was
married  to  umm-Hakim,  the  daughter  of  al-Harith  ibn-
Hisham  al-Makhzumi.  and  the  wife  of  Tkrimah  ibn-abi-
Jahl.2  Hearing  the  news  of  his  death,  umm-Hakim  pulled
out  the  post  of  the  tent  and  fought  with  it.  On  that  day,
according  to  some  report,  she  killed  seven  and  had  her  face
still  covered  with  the  ointment  perfumed  with  saffron a
[with  which  women  anointed  themselves  on  the  first  night
of  matrimony].

According  to  the  report  of  abu-Mikhnaf,  this  battle  of
Marj  took  place  twenty  days  after  the  battle  of  Ajnadin;

1  Memoire,  pp.  79-80.

2  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  iv\  p.  71.

3  1  abari,  vol.  i,  p.  3169;  Aghani,  vol.  vi,  pp.  6-7;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  322.

182


THE  BATTLE  OF  MARJ  AS-SUFFAR  zg3

the  conquest  of  Damascus  followed  it,  and  after  the  con-
quest of  Damascus  the  battle  of  Fihl  took  place.  The  report
of  al-Wakidi,  however,  is  more  authentic.

It  was  regarding  the  battle  of  Marj  that  Khalid  ibn-Sa'id
ibn-al-'Asi  said :

"  Isn't  there  a  horseman  who,  tired  of  stabbing,
would  lend  me  his  lance  for  the  battle  of  Marj  as-Suffar?"

Referring  to  this  battle,  'Abdallah  ibn-Kamil  ibn-Habib  ibn-
'Amirah  ibn-Khufaf  ibn-Amru'i-1-Kais  ibn-Buhthah  ibn-
Sulaim  said :

"  The  tribes  of  Malik  took  part,  but  'Amirah  disappeared
from  my  sight  in  the  battle  of  Marj  as-Suffar,"

meaning  Malik  ibn-Khufaf.  119

The  story  of  the  Samsamah  szvord.  According  to  Hisham
ibn-Muhammad  al-Kalbi,  in  the  battle  of  Marj,  Khalid  ibn-
Sa'id  suffered  martyrdom  with  his  sword  as-Samsamah
hanging  down  from  his  neck.  The  Prophet  had  sent  him
as  'amil  to  al-Yaman,  and  on  his  way  he  passed  by  the
kindred  of  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  az-Zubaidi  of  Madhhij
and  attacked  them,  taking  as  captives  the  wife  of  'Amr  and
other  kinsmen.  'Amr  proposed  that  Khalid  grants  them
their  liberty  and  they  would  accept  Islam.  And  so  it  was.
'Amr  offered  Khalid  his  own  sword,  as-Samsamah,1  saying:

"  A  friend  whom  I  offered  as  present  not  because  of  any  hatred
but  because  presents  are  for  those  of  noble  birth.

A  friend  whom  I  did  not  betray  and  who  did  not  betray  me,
and  so  my  qualities  and  fellow-drinkers  did  not.

I  bestowed  it  on  a  nobleman  of  Kuraish
who  was  pleased  with  it  and  by  which  he  was  protected  against  the
evil  men."

This  sword  Mu'awiyah  took  from  the  neck  of  Khalid  when

1  Aghani,  vol.  xiv,  pp.  27.  31,  32.


!84  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

he  fell  martyr  in  the  battle  of  Marj.  Mu'awiyah  kept  it,  but
its  possession  was  later  disputed  by  Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-
Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah.  'Uthman  decided  the  case
in  favor  of  the  latter,  who  kept  it  until  the  battle  of  ad-Dar
in  which  Marwan  was  struck  on  the  nape  of  the  neck  and
Sa'id  fell  unconscious  by  a  blow.  A  Juhainah  man  took  the
Samsamah.  The  Juhainah  man  kept  it,  and  one  day  he
gave  it  to  a  polisher  to  polish  it.  The  polisher  could  not
believe  that  one  of  the  Juhainah  could  possess  such  a  sword,
so  he  took  it  to  Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam,  the  governor  of  al-
Madinah,  who  asked  the  Juhainah  man  for  an  explanation,
and  he  told  its  story.  "  By  Allah,"  exclaimed  Marwan,
"  in  the  battle  of  ad-Dar,  my  sword  was  stolen  from  me,  and
so  was  that  of  Sa'id  ibn-ai-'Asi."  Then  came  Sa'id  and
recognizing  his  sword  took  it,  carved  his  name  on  it,  and  sent
it  to  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id  al-Ashdak,  the  governor  of  Makkah.
Sa'id  perished,  and  the  sword  was  left  with  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id.
When  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id  was  killed  at  Damascus  and  his  be-
longings were  stolen,  his  brother  on  the  father's  side,
Muhammad  ibn-Sa'id,  took  the  sword,  which  later  passed
to  Yahya  ibn-Sa'id.  At  the  death  of  Yahya,  it  passed  to  120
'Anbasah  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  and  then  to  Sa'id  ibn-'Amr
ibn-Sa'id.  When  the  last  perished,  the  sword  went  to
Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'id  whose  descendants  live
now  in  Barik.  Then  it  went  to  Aban  ibn- Yahya  ibn-Sa'id
who  decked  it  with  an  ornament  of  gold  and  kept  it  with
the  mother  of  a  child  [concubine]  of  his.  At  last  Aiyub
ibn-abi-Aiyub  ibn-Sa'id  sold  it  to  al-Mahdi  the  "Commander
of  the  Believers"  for  over  80,000  [dirhams].  Al-Mahdi
put  the  ornament  of  gold  back  on  it.  When  it  came  finally
into  the  possession  of  Musa-1-Hadi,  the  "Commander  of  the
Believers,"  he  admired  it  and  ordered  the  poet  abu-1-Haul
to  describe  it,  upon  which  the  latter  said  :


THE  BATTLE  OF  MARJ  AS-SUFFAR


185


"  He  who  acquired  the  Samsamah  of  Amr  az-Zubaidi

is  the  best  of  all  men — Musa-1-Amin.
It  is  the  sword  of  'Amr  which  as  we  know

is  the  best  that  a  scabbard  ever  sheathed.
Green  in  color  between  the  edges  of  which  is  a  garment

of  poison  in  which  death  is  clad.
If  one  unsheathes  it,  its  brilliancy  dazzles

that  of  the  sun,  so  that  the  sun  would  scarcely  be  seen.
When  the  one  to  be  smitten  is  at  hand,

it  does  not  matter  whether  the  left  or  the  right  hand  applies  it.
What  a  good  sword  it  is  for  him,  who  wants  to  defend  his  honor,

to  smite  with  in  the  battle,  and  what  a  good  companion !  "  x

Later  on,  al-Wathik-Billah,  the  "  Commander  of  the  Be-
lievers," called  a  polisher  and  ordered  him  to  temper  it.  On
doing  so,  the  sword  was  changed.

1  Cf.  De  Slane,  ibn-Khallikan,  vol.  iii,  p.  637.


CHAPTER  VIII

The  Conquest  of  Damascus  and  its  Province

The  positions  taken  by  the  different  generals.  When  the
Moslems  were  done  with  the  fight  against  those  who  were
gathered  at  al-Marj,  they  stayed  there  for  fifteen  days  at
the  end  of  which  they  returned  [sic]  to  Damascus
[Dimashk].  This  took  place  fourteen  days  before  the  end
of  Muharram,  year  14.  Al-Ghutah  and  its  churches  the
Moslems  took  by  force.  The  inhabitants  of  Damascus  be-
took themselves  to  the  fortifications  and  closed  the  gate  of
the  city.  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  at  the  head  of  some  5,000
men  whom  abu-'Ubaidah  had  put  under  his  command,  121
camped  at  al-Bab  ash-Sharki  [the  east  gate].  Some  assert
that  Khalid  was  the  chief  commander  but  was  dismissed
when  Damascus  was  under  siege.  The  convent  by  which
Khalid  camped  was  called  Dair  Khalid.1  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi
camped  at  the  Tuma  gate;  Shurahbil,  at  the  Faradis  gate,
abu-'Ubaidah  at  the  Jabiyah  gate,  and  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan
from  the  Saghir  gate  to  the  one  known  as  Kaisan  gate.2
Abu-ad-Darda'  appointed  'Uwaimir  ibn-'Amir  al-Khazraji
commander  of  a  frontier  garrison  settled  in  the  fortification  8
at  Barzah.4

The  statement  written  by  Khalid. The  bishop  6  who  had

1  Diyarbakri,  vol.  ii,  p.  259.

2  H.  Lammens,  MFO,  vol.  iii1,  p.  256;  Kremer,  Topographic  von  Da-
maskus,  the  chart  next  to  page  36.

8  Memoire,  p.  90.

4Jubair,  p.  274;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  563.
8  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  364,  note  2.
186


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  ^7

provided  Khalid  with  food  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege
was  wont  to  stand  on  the  wall.  Once  Khalid  called  him,
and  when  he  came,  Khalid  greeted  him  and  talked  with  him.
The  bishop  one  day  said  to  him,  "Abu-Sulaiman,  thy  case
is  prospering  and  thou  hast  a  promise  to  fulfil  for  me;  let
us  make  terms  for  this  city."  Thereupon,  Khalid  called  for
an  inkhorn  and  parchment  and  wrote : —

'  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  what  Khalid  would  grant  to  the  inhabitants  of
Damascus,  if  he  enters  therein:  he  promises  to  give  them
security  for  their  lives,  property  and  churches.  Their  city-
wall  shall  not  be  demolished;  neither  shall  any  Moslem  be
quartered  in  their  houses.  Thereunto  we  give  to  them  the
pact  of  Allah  and  the  protection  of  his  Prophet,  the  caliphs
and  the  '  Believers  '.  So  long  as  they  pay  the  poll-tax,  noth-
ing but  good  shall  befall  them."

The  Moslems  enter  the  city.  One  night,  a  friend  of  the
bishop  came  to  Khalid  and  informed  him  of  the  fact  that
it  was  the  night  of  a  feast 1  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,
that  they  were  all  busy  and  that  they  had  blocked  the  Sharki
gate  with  stones  and  left  it  unguarded.  He  then  suggested
that  Khalid  should  procure  a  ladder.  Certain  occupants
of  the  convent,  by  which  Khalid's  army  camped,  brought
him  two  ladders  on  which  some  Moslems  climbed  to  the
highest  part  of  the  wall,  and  descended  to  the  gate  which
was  guarded  only  by  one  or  two  men.  The  Moslems  co-
operated and  opened  the  door. This  took  place  at  sunrise.

In  the  meantime,  abu-'Ubaidah  had  managed  to  open
the  Jabiyah  gate  and  sent  certain  Moslems  over  its  wall.
This  made  the  Greek  fighters  pour  to  his  side  and  lead  a
violent  fight  against  the  Moslems.  At  last,  however,  the
Greeks  took  to  flight. Then  abu-'Ubaidah  at  the  head  of

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2152.


iSS  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

the  Moslems  opened  the  Jabiyah  gate  by  force  and  made
their  entrance  through  it. Abu-'Ubaidah  and  Khalid  ibn- 122
al-Walid  met  at  al-Maksalat  which  was  the  quarter  of  the
coppersmiths  in  Damascus. The  same  spot  is  mentioned  in
a  poem  by  Hassan  ibn-Thabit  under  the  name  of  al-Baris :

"  He  who  calls  at  al-Baris  for  a  drink,
[is  given  the  water  of  Barada  mixed  with  dainty  wine]."  l

According  to  other  reports,  one  night  the  Greeks  carried
out  through  the  Jabiyah  gate  a  corpse.  A  number  of  their
brave  and  armed  men  accompanied  the  funeral.  The  rest
of  them  stood  at  the  gate  to  prevent  the  Moslems  from
opening  it  and  entering  until  their  Greek  comrades  should
have  returned  from  the  burial  of  the  dead  man,  thus  taking
advantage  of  the  Moslems'  state  of  unmindfulness.  But
the  Moslems  knew  of  them  and  fought  with  them  at  the
gate  a  most  fierce  and  bloody  conflict  which  ended  in  the
opening  of  the  gate  by  the  Moslems  at  sunrise.  Seeing  that
abu-'Ubaidah  was  on  the  point  of  entering  the  city,  the
bishop  hurried  to  Khalid  and  capitulated.  He  then  opened
the  Sharki  gate  and  entered  with  Khalid,  with  the  state-
ment which  Khalid  had  written  him  unfolded  in  his  hand.
Regarding  that,  certain  Moslems  remarked,  "  By  Allah,
Khalid  is  not  the  commander.  How  could  his  terms  then
be  binding?"  To  this,  abu-'Ubaidah  replied,  "  Even  the
lowest  of  the  Moslems  can  make  binding  terms  on  their  be-
half." And  sanctioning  the  capitulation  made  by  Khalid,
he  signed  it,  not  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  a  part  of
the  city  was  taken  by  force.2  Thus  all  Damascus  was  con-
sidered as  having  capitulated.  Abu-'Ubaidah  wrote  to
'Umar  regarding  that  and  forwarded  the  message. Then

1  Hassan,  Diwdn,  p.  17.

3  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  159;  I.ammens,  MFO,  vol.  iii1,  p.  ^50.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  jgn

the  gates  of  the  city  were  opened  and  all  the  Moslems  met
within.

According  to  the report of abu-Mikhnaf and others,
Khalid  entered  the  city  by  assault,  whereas  abu-'Ubaidah  en-
tered it  by  capitulation,  and  they  both  met  at  the  Zaiyatin 123
[market  of  oil-dealers]. The  former  report  however,  is
more  authentic.

Al-Haitham  ibn-'Adi  claimed  that  the  people  of  Damascus
capitulated  agreeing  to  give  up  one-half  of  their  homes  and
churches.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  reported  that  abu-'Abdal-
lah  al-Wakidi  said,  "  I  have  read  the  statement  issued  by
Khalid  ibn-al- Walid  to  the  people  of  Damascus  and  found
no  mention  in  it  of  'half  the  homes  and  churches'.  I  do  not
know  where  the  one  who  reported  it  got  his  information.
The  fact  is  that  when  Damascus  was  taken  possession  of,  a
great  number  of  its  inhabitants  fled  to  Heraclius  who  was
then  at  Antioch,  leaving  many  vacant  dwellings  behind  that
were  later  occupied  by  the  Moslems."

Some  one  reported  that  it  was  abu-'Ubaidah  who  had  his
quarters  at  the  Sharki  gate,  and  Khalid  at  the  Jabiyah  gate ;
but  this  view  is  erroneous.

The  date  of  the  conquest.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  the
conquest  of  Damascus  was  effected  in  Rajab,  year  14, x  but
the  date  which  Khalid's  statement  of  capitulation  bears  was
Rabi'  II,  year  15.  The  explanation  is  that  Khalid  wrote  the
statement  with  no  date,  but  when  the  Moslems  were  prepar-
ing to  set  out  against  those  gathered  for  their  fight  in  al-
Yarmuk,  the  bishop  came  to  Khalid  asking  him  to  renew
the  statement  and  add  as  witnesses  abu-'Ubaidah  and  the
Moslems.  Khalid  granted  the  request  and  inserted  the
names  of  abu-'Ubaidah,  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan,  Shurahbil
ibn-Hasanah  and  others  as  witnesses.  The  date  he  put  was
the  one  in  which  the  statement  was  renewed.

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  159-


igo  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  city  considered  as  having  capitulated. Al-Kasim
ibn-Sallam from Sa'id ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz at-Tanukhi : — 124
Yazid  entered  Damascus  by  capitulation  through  the  Sharki
gate. At  al-Maksalat  the  two  Moslem  commanders  met,
and  the  whole  city  was  considered  as  having  capitulated.

The  siege  conducted  for  four  months.  Al-Kasim  from
abu-1-Ash'ath  as-San'ani  or  abu-'Uthman  as-San'ani : —
Abu-'Ubaidah  spent  at  the  Jabiyah  gate  four  months  1  con-
ducting the  siege.

The  case  of  a  church.  Abu-'Ubaid  from  Raja'  ibn-abi-
Salamah  : — Hassan  ibn-Malik  presented  to  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-
al-'Aziz  the  case  of  a  church  that  one  of  the  commanders
had  bestowed  on  him  as  fief,  and  the  possession  of  which
was  contested  by  the  non-Arabs  of  Damascus.  Regarding
that,  'Umar  said,  "If  it  is  included  in  the  fifteen  churches
mentioned  in  their  covenant,  thou  hast  no  claim  on  it."

The  following  was  stated  by  Damrah  on  the  authority  of
'Ali  ibn-abi-Hamalah,  "  The  non-Arabs  of  Damascus  dis-
puted with  us  the  right  to  a  church  at  Damascus  that  was
assigned  by  someone  as  fief  to  the  banu-Nasr,  and  the  case
was  presented  to  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  who  took  the
church  from  us  and  returned  it  to  the  Christians.  When
Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  however,  came  to  power  he  gave
it  back  to  the  banu-Nasr."

The  poll-tax.  Abu-'Ubaid  from  al-Auza'i  who  said : —
"At  the  outset,  the  poll-tax  in  Syria  consisted  of  one  jar'ib
and  one  dhidr  per  head.  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  made  it  four
dinars  on  those  who  had  gold  and  forty  dirJiams  on  those
who  had  silver,  arranging  them  in  ranks  according  to  the
wealth  of  the  rich,  the  poverty  of  the  poor  and  the  medium
possessions  of  the  middle  class."

Hisham  heard  it  said  by  our  sheikhs  that  the  Jews  were

Ya'kubi,  Bu'.dan,  p.  325  :  "  one  year  ".


*y


>.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  igi

for  the  Christians  as  dhimmis  paying  kharaj  to  them,  and
were,  therefore,  included  in  the  capitulation.

According  to  certain  reports,  one  of  the  terms  imposed  by
Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  on  the  inhabitants  of  Damascus,  when
they  capitulated,  was  that  every  man  should  give  as  poll-
tax  one  dinar  and  one  jarlb  of  wheat,  together  with  vinegar
and  oil  for  feeding  the  Moslems.

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Aslam,  the  freedman  of  'Umar  ibn-  125
al-Khattab : — 'Umar  wrote  to  the  commanders  of  the  prov-
inces of  Syria  [Ar.  ajndd]  instructing  them  to  levy  a  tax
on  every  adult,  making  it  forty  dirhams  on  those  who  pos-
sessed silver,  and  four  dinars  on  those  who  possessed  gold.
Morever,  he  ordered  that  in  the  way  of  providing  the  Mos-
lems with  wheat  and  oil,  they  have  to  give  every  Moslem
in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  [Ar.  al-Jazirah]  two  modii 1  of
wheat  and  three  kists  x  of  oil  per  month.  He  also  assessed
on  them  grease  and  honey,  the  quantity  of  which  I  do  not
know;  and  for  every  Moslem  in  Egypt  per  month  one
irdabb  1  [of  wheat],  clothing,  and  the  right  of  being  enter-
tained as  guest  for  three  days.

'Amr  ibn-Hammad  ibn-abi-Hanifah  from  Aslam :  —
'Umar  assessed  as  poll-tax  four  dinars  on  those  who  pos-
sessed gold,  and  forty  dirhams  on  those  who  possessed  sil-
ver, in  addition  to  offering  the  Moslems  a  subsistence  tribute
and  providing  them  with  three-days'  entertainment.

A  similar  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  Mus'ab
on  the  authority  of  Aslam.

The  cathedral  of  St.  John.  It  is  reported  that  when
Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan  came  to  power,  he  desired  to  add
the  church  of  St.  John  to  the  mosque  2  in  Damascus ;  but  the

1  Ar.  mudi,  Latin  modius,  is  17  sa's;  a  kist  is  half  a  sa' ;  an  irdabb  is
24  sa's.

*  Al-Makkari,  Nafh  at-Tib,  vol.  i,  p.  368.


ig2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Christians  refused.  So  he  refrained.  Later,  when  'Abd-
al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  was  in  power,  he  made  the  same  re-
quest for  the  enlargement  of  the  mosque  offering  them
money  in  exchange ;  but  they  refused  to  deliver  the  church
to  him.  In  his  turn,  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  called  the
Christians  and  offered  them  large  sums  for  the  church,  and
when  they  refused,  he  threatened  them  saying,  "  If  ye  do
not  agree,  I  will  surely  tear  it  down."  To  this  someone
replied,  "  He,  '  Commander  of  the  Believers  ',  who  tears
down  a  church  will  lose  his  wits  and  be  affected  with  some
blight."  Al-Walid,  being  angered  at  what  was  said,  or-
dered that  a  spade  be  brought  and  began  demolishing  the
walls  with  his  own  hand,  while  he  had  a  robe  of  yellow
silk  on  him.  He  then  called  workmen  and  house-razers  and
they  pulled  the  church  down.  Thus  it  was  included  in  the
mosque.  When  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  became  caliph,  the
Christians  complained  of  what  al-Walid  had  down  for  their
church.  'Umar  wrote  to  his  'amil  ordering  him  to  return
to  the  Christians  that  part  which  he  had  added  to  the
mosque  from  their  church.  The  people  of  Damascus  dis-
liked the  idea  saying,  "  Shall  we  destroy  our  mosque  after
we  have  called  to  prayer  and  held  service  in  it  ?  And  can  a
Christian  church  be  returned  [to  its  former  owners]  ?"
Among  the  Moslems  were  at  that  time  Sulaiman  ibn-Habib
al-Muharibi  and  other  canonists.  They  then  came  to  the
Christians  and  proposed  to  turn  over  to  them  all  the  churches
of  al-Ghutah  that  had  been  taken  by  force  and  were  in  the
hands  of  the  Moslems,  provided  they  give  up  the  church
of  St.  John  and  cease  to  assert  their  claim  on  it.  The  126
Christians  rather  seemed  to  favor  the  proposition  and  con-
sented to  it.  'Umar's  'amil  communicated  the  news  to  'Umar
who  was  pleased  and  signed  the  agreement.  Next  to  the
tower  of  the  Mosque  of  Damascus  at  the  southern  porch
stands  an  inscription  on  marble  near  the  roof  which  was


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  193

part  of  that  which  was  built  by  the  order  of  al-Walid  the
"  Commander  of  the  Believers  "  in  the  year  86.

The  wall  of  Damascus.  I  myself  heard  Hisham  ibn-
'Ammar  say,  "  The  wall  around  the  city  of  Damascus  re-
mained standing  until  it  was  demolished  by  'Abdallah  ibn-
'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-' Abbas  after  the  question  between
Marwan  and  the  banu-Umaiyah  had  been  settled."

Busra,  Adhri'dt,  al-Bathaniyah  and  other  places  reduced.
Abu-Hafs  ad-Dimashki  from  the  muezzin  of  the  Damascus
Mosque  and  other  men : — At  the  arrival  of  Khalid,  the  Mos-
lems gathered  their  forces  against  Busra,  and  it  capitulated.
They  then  were  dispersed  throughout  all  Hauran  which
they  subdued.  The  chief  of  Adhri'at  came  to  them  offering
to  capitulate  on  the  same  terms  on  which  the  people  of
Busra  had  capitulated  and  agreeing  to  make  all  the  land  of
al-Bathaniyah  l  a  khardj  land.  The  request  was  granted,  and
Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  entered  the  city  and  made  a  covenant
with  its  people.  Thus  the  two  districts  of  Hauran  and  al-
Bathaniyah  came  under  the  full  control  of  the  Moslems.
Thence  they  came  to  Palestine  and  the  Jordan,  invading  what
had  not  yet  been  reduced.  Yazid  marched  against  'Amman
and  made  an  easy  conquest  of  it,  making  terms  of  capitula-
tion similar  to  those  of  Busra.  Besides,  he  effected  the
complete  conquest  of  the  province  of  al-Balka'.  When  abu-
'Ubaidah  came  to  power,  all  that  was  already  conquered.
At  the  conquest  of  Damascus,  abu-'Ubaidah  was  the  com-
mander-in-chief;  but  the  terms  of  capitulation  were  made
by  Khalid,  abu-'Ubaidah  concurring.

'Arandal,  ash-Sharat  and  the  sea-coast  reduced.  During
the  governorship  of  abu-'Ubaidah,  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan
went  and  took  possession  of  'Arandal 2  by  capitulation. He

1  Modern  Nukrah  in  Hauran.

2  The  correct  form  is  Gharandal;  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  326;  Baedeker,
p.  150.


194


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


also  subdued  the  province  of  ash-Sharat  with  its  moun-
tains. It  is  stated  by  Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  on  the  au-
thority of  al-Wadin  that  after  the  [second]  conquest  of
Damascus  Yazid  came  to  Sidon,  'Irkah,1  Jubail,  and  Bierut
(which  lie  on  the  sea-coast)  2  with  his  brother,  Mu'awiyah,
leading  the  van  of  the  army.  These  cities  he  conquered  with
great  facility,  expelling  many  of  their  inhabitants.  The
conquest  of  'Irkah  was  effected  by  Mu'awiyah  himself  when
Yazid  was  governor.  Toward  the  close  of  the  caliphate  of  127
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  or  the  beginning  of  the  caliphate  of
'Uthman  ibn-'Affan,  the  Greeks  restored  some  of  these  coast-
towns,  and  Mu'awiyah  again  marched  against  those  towns
and  conquered  them.  He  then  made  repairs  in  them  and
stationed  garrisons  in  them  among  whom  he  distributed
the  fiefs.

Tripoli  captured.  When  'Uthman  was  made  caliph  and
Mu'awiyah  became  governor  of  Syria,  the  latter  directed
Sufyan  ibn-Mujib  al-Azdi  to  Tripoli  [Atrabulus]  which  was
a  combination  of  three  cities.3  Sufyan  erected  on  a  plain
a  few  miles  from  the  city  a  fort  which  was  called  Hisn
Sufyan  [Sufyan  fort],  intercepted  the  recruits  from  the  sea
as  well  as  from  the  land  and  laid  siege  to  the  city.  When
the  siege  was  pressed  hard  against  them,  the  inhabitants  of
Tripoli  met  in  one  of  the  three  fortifications  and  wrote  to
the  king  of  the  Greeks  asking  for  relief  through  reinforce-
ment or  ships  on  which  they  might  escape  and  flee  to  him.
Accordingly,  the  king  sent  them  many  ships  which  they
boarded  in  the  night  time  and  fled  away.  When  Sufyan
arose  in  the  morning — he  having  been  accustomed  to  sleep

1<"Arkah"  in  Hamadhani.  Buldan,  p.  105;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  801;
"  Correggi :  'Arqaq  ".

1  Journal  Asiatique,  1859,  vol.  i,  p.  120,  note  1.

s  As  its  Greek  name  designates.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  IQ^

every  night  in  his  fort,  and  fortify  the  Moslems  in  it,  and  to
rise  up  in  the  morning  against  the  enemy — he  discovered
that  the  fortification  in  which  the  people  of  Tripoli  were
was  vacant.  Immediately  he  entered  it  and  sent  the  news  of
the  conquest  to  Mu'awiyah.  Mu'awiyah  made  it  a  dwelling-
place  for  a  large  body  of  Jews.  It  is  this  fortification  in
which  the  harbor  of  the  city  is  to-day.  Later  'Abd-al-Malik
built  it  and  made  it  stronger.

Mu'awiyah  used  to  send  every  year  to  Tripoli  a  large
body  of  troops  to  guard  the  city  and  used  to  assign  it  to  a
different  'dmil;  but  in  case  the  sea  was  closed,  the  'a/mil
with  a  small  band  would  stay  and  the  rest  would  return.
This  state  of  affairs  lasted  until  'Abd-al-Malik  began  to  rule.
In  the  days  of  the  latter,  one  of  the  Greek  patricians  with  a
large  body  of  men  came  to  the  city  and  asked  for  a  promise
of  safety,  agreeing  to  settle  therein  and  pay  khardj.  His
request  was  granted.  He  had  not  been  there  two  years  or
two  years  and  a  few  months  when  he  took  advantage  of  the
absence  of  the  troops  from  the  city,  shut  its  gate  and  killed
the  'dmil,  taking  his  soldiers  and  many  Jews  as  captives.
He  then  made  his  way  together  with  his  followers  to  the
land  of  the  Greeks  [Asia  Minor].  Later  the  Moslems
caught  him  on  the  sea  going  to  a  Moslem  coast-town  with
a  large  number  of  ships,  and  killed  him.  Others  say  they
took  him  captive  and  sent  him  to  'Abd-al-Malik  who  killed
and  crucified  him.  I  heard  someone  say  that  'Abd-al-Malik
sent  someone  who  besieged  him  in  Tripoli  until  he  surren-  128
dered  and  was  carried  before  'Abd-al-Malik  who  killed  and
crucified  him.  Some  of  his  followers  took  to  flight  and
got  as  far  as  the  land  of  the  Greeks.

'AH  ibn-Muhammad  al-Mada'ini  related  on  the  authority
of  'Attab  ibn-Ibrahim  that  Tripoli  was  conquered  by  Sufyan
ibn-Mujib,  that  its  inhabitants  violated  the  covenant  in  the
days  of  'Abd-al-Malik  and  that  it  was  reduced  by  al-Walid
ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  in  his  reign.


IO/6  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  Mediterranean  littoral  reduced.  Abu-Hafs  ash-
Shami  from  al-Wadin : — At  first  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  di-
rected Mu'awiyah  against  the  littoral  of  the  province  of
Damascus  excluding  Tripoli  whose  possession  he  did  not
covet.  Mu'awiyah  sometimes  spent  on  the  reduction  of  the
fort  a  few  days — two  or  more — in  the  course  of  which  he
was  resisted  either  slightly  or  strongly  before  he  could  take
it.

When  the  Moslems  conquered  a  city,  whether  so  situated
as  to  overlook  a  wide  territory  or  on  the  coast,  they  would
station  in  it  whatever  number  of  Moslems  was  necessary;
and  if  the  enemy  in  it  should  start  a  revolt  the  Moslems
would  flock  to  it  for  reinforcement.  But  when  'Uthman
ibn-'Affan  became  caliph  he  wrote  to  Mu'awiyah  instructing
him  to  fortify  the  coast-cities  and  man  them,  and  to  give
fiefs  to  those  whom  he  settled  in  them.  Mu'awiyah  did
accordingly.

Abu-Hafs  from  Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  who  said : — "  I
heard  it  said  by  some  that  after  the  death  of  his  brother
Yazid,  Mu'awiyah  wrote  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  describing
the  condition  of  the  coast-towns.  'Umar  wrote  back  order-
ing that  their  fortifications  be  repaired,  that  garrisons  be
stationed  in  them,  that  watchmen  be  posted  on  their  towers
and  that  means  be  taken  for  lighting  the  fire  on  the  towers  to
announce  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  'Umar  gave
Mu'awiyah  no  permission  to  carry  out  a  naval  campaign.
But  Mu'awiyah  insisted  so  much  that  'Uthman  allowed  him
to  carry  out  a  sea  expedition  and  instructed  him  to  keep
ready  in  the  coast-cities  troops  in  addition  to  those  already
in  them,  whether  he  wanted  to  set  out  on  the  campaign  in
person  or  send  some  one  else  on  it.  He  also  instructed  him
to  give  the  garrison  lands  and  distribute  among  them  what-
ever houses  had  been  evacuated,  and  to  establish  new
mosques  and  enlarge  those  that  had  been  established  before
his  caliphate."


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  ^y

According  to  al-Wadin,  after  that,  men  from  all  quarters
moved  to  the  coast  cities.

'Alkamah  nominated  governor  of  Haurdn.  A1-' Abbas
ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi  from  Ja'far  ibn-Kilab  al-Kilabi : —
'Alkamah  ibn-'Ulathah  ibn-'Auf  ibn-al-Ahwas  ibn- Ja'far
ibn-Kilab  was  assigned  by  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  to  the  gov-
ernorship of  Hauran  and  he  was  made  responsible  to  Mu'a-  129
wiyah.  This  position  he  held  until  his  death.  Before  his
death  he  heard  that  al-Hutai'ah-l-'Absi  was  coming  to  visit
him ;  so  'Alkamah  bequeathed  to  him  in  his  will  a  share  equal
to  one  of  his  sons'  shares.  Hence  the  poem  of  al-Hu-
tai'ah : x

"  Between  me  and  becoming  rich — had  I  only  reached  thee,  when  thou
wert  still  living —
there  would  have  been  an  interval  of  only  a  few  nights."

Kubbash  farm.  I  was  told  by  certain  learned  men
among  whom  was  a  neighbor  of  Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  that
abu-Sufyan  ibn-Harb  possessed  in  the  pre-Islamic  period,
in  which  he  carried  on  trade  with  Syria,  a  village  in  al-
Balka'  called  Kubbash.  This  village  passed  into  the  pos-
session of  Mu'awiyah  and  his  son,  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  [Abbasid]  dynasty,  it  was  confiscated  and  possessed  by
certain  sons  of  al-Mahdi,  the  "Commander  of  the  Believ-
ers." Then  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  certain  oil-sellers
of  al-Kufah  known  as  the  banu-Nu'aim.

The  Prophet  gives  fief  to  Tamim  and  Nu'aim.  'Abbas
ibn-Hisham  from  his  grandfather : — Once  came  Tamim  ibn-
Aus  of  the  banu-ad-Dar  ibn-Hani'  ibn-Habib  of  [the  tribe
of]  Lakhm,  surnamed  abu-Rukaiyah,  with  his  brother  Nu'-
aim ibn-Aus,  to  the  Prophet  who  gave  them  as  fief  Hibra,
Bait-'Ainun  2  and  Mas j id  Ibrahim,  and  to  that  end  he  wrote

1  Goldziher:  "  Der  Diwan  des  Garwal  b.  Aus  al-Hutej'a"  in  ZDMG,
vol.  xlvi,  p.  30.

2  Ibn-Duraid,  p.  226.


198


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


a  statement.  When  Syria  was  subdued,  all  that  was  restored
to  them.  When  Sulaiman  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  used  to  pass
near  this  land  he  would  not  stop  in  it  saying,  "  I  am  afraid
the  curse  of  the  Prophet  will  follow  me."

'Umar  gives  stipends  to  diseased  Christians.  Hisham
ibn-'Ammar  told  me  he  heard  it  said  by  certain  sheikhs
that  on  his  way  to  al-Jabiyah  in  the  province  of  Damascus,
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  passed  by  certain  Christians  smitten
with  elephentiasis  *  and  he  ordered  that  they  be  given  some-
thing out  of  the  sadakahs  and  that  food  stipends  be  assigned
to  them.

Dair  Khalid.  Hisham  reported  that  he  heard  it  said  by
al-Walid  ibn-Muslim  that  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  made  a  con-
dition in  favor  of  the  convent  known  as  Dair  Khalid,  when
its  occupants  offered  him  a  ladder  to  climb  to  the  city  wall,
to  the  effect  that  their  kharaj  be  reduced.  The  condition
was  enforced  by  abu-'Ubaidah.

The  terms  with  Ba'labakk.  When  abu-'Ubaidah  was
done  with  Damascus,  he  advanced  to  Hims.  On  his  way,  130
he  passed  through  Ba'labakk  whose  inhabitants  sought  to
secure  safety  and  capitulate.  Abu-'Ubaidah  made  terms
guaranteeing  the  safety  of  their  lives,  possessions  and
churches. To  that  end  he  wrote  the  following  statement :

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  statement  of  security  to  so  and  so,  son  of  so  and
so,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Ba'labakk — Greeks,  Persians
and  Arabs — for  their  lives,  possessions,  churches  and  houses,
inside  and  outside  the  city  and  also  for  their  mills.  The
Greeks  are  entitled  to  give  pasture  to  their  cattle  within  a
space  of  15  miles,  yet  are  not  to  abide  in  any  inhabited  town.
After  Rabi'  and  Jumada  I  shall  have  passed,  they  are  at

1  Ar.  mujadhdhamln,  see  Kamus,  Taj  al- Arus  and  Nihdyah;  Caetani,
vol.  iii,  p.  933,  translates :  "  mutilati ".


THE  CONQUEST  OF  DAMASCUS  199

liberty  to  go  where  they  will.  Whosoever  of  them  adopts
Islam,  shall  have  the  same  rights  as  we  and  be  bound  by
the  same  obligations ;  and  their  merchants  are  entitled  to  go
whither  they  will  in  the  countries  that  have  become  ours
through  capitulation.  Those  of  them  who  do  not  adopt
Islam  1  are  bound  to  pay  poll-tax  and  kharaj.  Allah  is  wit-
ness and  his  witness  is  sufficient."

1  Cf.  Zaidan,  vol.  iv,  p.  122,  Margoliouth's  translation.


CHAPTER  IX

HlMS

The  inhabitants  capitulate.  'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  from
abu-Mikhnaf :  —  When  abu-'Ubaidah  was  through  with
Damascus,  he  sent  ahead  of  him  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  and
Milhan  ibn-Zaiyar  at-Ta'i  and  then  he  followed  them.
When  they  met  in  Hims  [Emesa],1  the  people  of  the  city
resisted  them,  but  finally  sought  refuge  in  the  city  and  asked
for  safety  and  capitulation.  They  capitulated  to  abu-'Ubai-
dah  agreeing  to  pay  170,000  dinars.2

As-Simt  captures  Hims.  According  to  al-Wakidi  and
others,  as  the  Moslems  stood  at  the  gates  of  Damascus  there
appeared  a  dense  band  of  the  enemy's  horsemen.  The  troops
of  the  Moslems  set  out  and  met  them  between  Bait-Lihya
and  ath-Thaniyah.  The  enemy  was  defeated  and  took  to
flight  in  the  direction  of  Hims  via  Kara.  The  Moslems
pursued  them  to  Hims  but  found  that  they  had  turned  away
from  it.  The  people  of  Hims  saw  the  Moslems  and,  being
scared  because  Heraclius  had  run  away  from  them  and  be-
cause of  what  they  heard  regarding  the  Moslems'  power,
valor  and  victory,  they  submitted  and  hastened  to  seek  the  131
promise  of  security.  The  Moslems  guaranteed  their  safety
and  refrained  from  killing  them.  The  people  of  Hims
offered  them  food  for  their  animals  and  for  themselves  and
the  Moslems  camped  on  the  Orontes  [al-Urunt,  or  al-
Urund] (the  river  which  empties  its  water  in  the  sea  near

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  335 ;  Skizzen,  vol.  vi,  p.  60.
'  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  160.
200


HIMS  2QI

Antioch).  The  commander  of  the  Moslems  at  that  time
was  as-Simt  ibn-al-Aswad  al-Kindi.

When  abu-'Ubaidah  was  through  with  Damascus,  he  left
over  it  in  his  place  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan,  came  to  Hims
via  Ba'labakk,  and  encamped  at  the  Rastan  gate.  The  people
of  Hims  capitulated,  and  he  guaranteed  the  safety  of  their
lives,  possessions,  city-wall,  churches,  and  wells  excluding
one-fourth  of  St.  John's  Church  which  was  to  be  turned
into  a  mosque.  He  made  it  a  condition  on  those  of  them
who  would  not  embrace  Islam  to  pay  khardj}

According  to  certain  reports,  it  was  as-Simt  ibn-al-Aswad
al-Kindi  who  made  the  terms  with  the  people  of  Hims.
When  abu-'Ubaidah  arrived,  he  caused  the  terms  to  take  ef-
fect. As-Simt  divided  the  city  into  lots,  each  marked  for
one  Moslem  to  build  his  house.  He  also  made  them  settle
in  every  place  whose  occupants  had  evacuated  it  and  in
every  yard  that  was  deserted.

The  terms  with  Hanidh,  Shaizar,  Fdmiyah  and  other
places.  Abu-Hafs  ad-Dimashki  from  Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-
'Aziz  :■ — When  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah  effected  the  con-
quest of  Damascus,  he  left  over  it  as  his  lieutenant  Yazid
ibn-abi-Sufyan;  over  the  province  of  Palestine,  'Amr  ibn-
al-'Asi;  and  over  the  province  of  the  Jordan,  Shurahbil.
He  then  advanced  to  Hims  whose  people  capitulated  on  the
same  terms  as  those  of  Ba'labakk.  Leaving  over  Hims
'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit  al-Ansari,  he  pushed  towards  Hamah
[Epiphania]  whose  people  met  him  offering  their  submis-
sion. He  made  terms  with  them,  stipulating  that  they  pay
tax  on  their  heads  and  khardj  on  their  land.  Thence  he
proceeded  towards  Shaizar.  The  people  of  Shaizar
[Larissa]  went  out  to  meet  him  bowing  2  before  him  and

1  Noldeke,  ZDMG,  vol.  xxix,  p.  76  seq;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  432,  note  2.
2Ar.  kaffara;  see  GGA,  1863,  p.  1348;  Kashshaf,  vol.  i,  p.  22.


202  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

accompanied  by  players  on  the  tambourines  and  singers.
They  agreed  to  terms  similar  to  those  made  with  the  peo-
ple of  Hamah.  Abu-'Ubaidah's  horsemen  reached  as  far  as
az-Zarra'ah  and  al-Kastal.  He  then  passed  through  Ma'-
arrat  Hims  [Ma'arrat  an-Nu'man]  which  was  named  after
an-Nu'man  ibn-Bashir.1  Its  people  came  out  playing  on  tam-
bourines and  singing  before  him.  Thence  he  came  to
Famiyah  whose  people  met  him  in  the  same  way  and  con-
sented to  pay  poll-tax  and  kharaj.  Thus  was  the  question
of  Hims  brought  to  an  end,  and  Hims  and  Kinnasrin  be-
came  parts  of  one  whole.2

The  "  Junds  "  and  "  'Awasim." There  is  a  disagreement
regarding  the  name  "  Jund  "  3  [as  applied  to  the  military
districts  of  Syria]. According  to  some,  Palestine  was  called 132
"  Jund  "  by  the  Moslems  because  it  was  a  collection  of  many
provinces,  and  so  was  each  of  Damascus,  Jordan,  Hims
and  Kinnasrin. According  to  others,  each  district  which
had  an  army  that  received  its  monthly  allowance  in  it  was
called  "Jund." Thus  Mesopotamia  belonged  to  Kinnasrin;
but  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  made  it  a  separate  "  Jund,"
that  is,  made  its  army  take  its  allowance  from  its  kharaj.
'Abd-al-Malik was asked to do so  by Muhammad ibn-
Marwan. Down to the time  of Yazid ibn-Mu'awiyah,
Kinnasrin  and  its  districts  were  included  in  the  province  of
Hims;  but  Yazid  constituted  Kinnasrin,  Antioch,  Manbij
and  their  districts  as  one  "  Jund." When  ar-Rashid  Ha-
run  ibn-al-Mahdi  was  made  caliph,  he  set  Kinnasrin  apart
and  made  of  it  and  its  districts  one  "  Jund." He  also
separated Manbij, Duluk, Ra'ban. Kurus, Antioch and
Tizin  and  called  them  "  al-' Awasim  "  *  because  these  were

1  Yakut,  al-Mushtarik,  p.  401.

8  Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  790,  line  7.

3  The  same  word  is  commonly  used  for  "  troops  ".

4  Zaidan,  vol.  i,  p.  153;  the  word  means  "  those  that  give  protection."


HIMS


203


the  cities  to  which  the  Moslems  resorted  after  making  an  in-
vasion and  leaving  the  frontier  cities,  and  where  they  were
safe  and  protected.  The  chief  city  of  "  al-'Awasim  "  he
made  Manbij  [Hierapolis].  In  this  city  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Salih  ibn-'Ali  lived  in  the  year  173  and  erected  many
buildings.

Al-Lddhikiyah  entered.  Abu-Hafs  ad-Dimashki  from
Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz,  and  Musa  ibn-Ibrahim  at-Tanukhi
from  certain  sheikhs  of  Hims : — Abu-'Ubaidah  appointed  in
his  place  over  Hims  'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit  al-Ansari  who
left  for  al-Ladhikiyah.1  Its  people  resisted  him  and  the
city  had  a  massive  gate  that  could  be  opened  only  by  a
number  of  men.  Seeing  how  difficult  it  was  to  reduce  the
city,  'Ubadah  encamped  at  a  distance  from  it  and  or-
dered that  trenches  like  canals  be  dug,  each  one  large  enough
to  conceal  a  man  with  his  horse.  The  Moslems  made
special  effort  and  got  the  work  done.  They  then  pretended
to  be  returning  to  Hims ;  but  no  sooner  had  the  night  fallen
with  its  darkness,  than  they  returned  to  their  camp  and
trenches,  while  the  people  of  al-Ladhikiyah  were  negligent
of  them  being  under  the  impression  that  the  Moslems  had  133
left  them.  Early  in  the  morning,  they  opened  their  gate  and
drove  forth  their  cattle ;  but  how  terrified  they  were  to  meet
the  Moslems  and  see  them  enter  through  the  gate!  Thus
was  the  city  taken  by  force.  'Ubadah  entered  the  fort  and
then  climbed  its  wall  and  called  "  Allah  is  great "  etc.  Cer-
tain Christians  of  al-Ladhikiyah  fled  to  al-Yusaiyid,  and
later  sought  to  surrender,  agreeing  to  return  to  their  lands.
They  were  assigned  to  lands,  and  a  fixed  khardj  2  was  as-
sessed to  be  paid  by  them  every  year  whether  they  should  in-
crease or  decrease  in  number. Their  church  was  left  for

1  Laodicea;  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  338.

2  Khardj  mukata'ah. See  Berchem,  La  Propriete  Territoriale,  p.  45.


204


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


them.  The  Moslems,  following  the  order  of  'Ubadah,
erected  in  al-Ladhikiyah  a  cathedral  mosque  that  was  later
enlarged.

Al-Ladhikiyah  destroyed  and  rebuilt.  In  the  year  ioo,
when  'Abd-al-'Aziz  was  caliph,  the  Greeks  made  a  descent
by  sea  on  the  coast  of  al-Ladhikiyah.  They  destroyed  the
city  and  took  its  inhabitants  prisoners.  'Umar  ordered
that  it  be  rebuilt  and  fortified  and  asked  the  [Greek]
:i  tyrant  "  1  to  accept  ransom  for  the  Moslem  prisoners.
But  this  was  not  carried  out  till  after  his  death  in  the  year
101.  The  city  was  completed  and  garrisoned  by  the  order
of  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik.

According  to  a  tradition  communicated  by  one  from  al-
Ladhikiyah,  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  fortified  the  city  and
finished  its  work  before  he  died.  All  what  Yazid  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  did  was  to  repair  the  city  and  increase  its
garrison.

Baldah  taken  by  assault.  Abu-Hafs  ad-Dimashki  from
Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  and  Sa'id  ibn-Sulaiman  al-Himsi : —
'Ubadah  with  the  Moslems  appeared  at  the  coast  and  took
by  assault  a  city  called  Baldah  lying  two  parasangs  from
Jabalah.  The  city  was  later  destroyed  and  its  inhabitants
evacuated  it.  Jabalah,  which  was  a  fortification  for  the
Greeks  and  was  deserted  by  them  when  the  Moslems  con-
quered Hims,  was  established  by  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan
and  guarded  by  a  garrison.

The  fort  of  Jabalah.  Sufyan  ibn-Muhammad  al-
Bahrani  from  certain  sheikhs : — Mu'awiyah  erected  for
Jabalah  -  a  fort  outside  the  older  Greek  fort  which  was
now  inhabited  by  monks  and  others  devoted  to  religious
exercises.

1  Ar.  taghiyah,  an  appellation  of  the  Byzantine  emperor  used  by  the
Arabian  writers.

2  Gabala,  Gibellus  Major,  or  Zibel ;  Le  Strange,  pp.  459-460.


HIMS  205

Antartus  reduced.  Sufyan  ibn-Muhammad  from  his
father  and  sheikhs : — 'Ubadah  with  the  Moslems  conquered
Antartus  [Tortosa]  which  was  a  fortified  town  and  which
was  evacuated  by  its  holders.  Mu'awiyah  built  Antartus
and  fortified  it l  giving  the  fiefs  to  the  holders  of  the  fort.
The  same  thing  he  did  with  Marakiyah  and  Bulunyas.

Guards  stationed  in  the  littoral  towns.  Abu-Hafs  ad-  134
Dimashki  from  his  sheikhs :  —  Abu-'Ubaidah  effected  the
conquest  of  al-Ladhikiyah,  Jabalah  and  Antartus  through
'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit  and  used  to  put  them  in  charge  of  a
guard  until  the  time  in  which  the  sea  was  closed.2  When
Mu'awiyah  stationed  garrisons  in  the  coast  cities  and  forti-
fied them,  he  put  garrisons  in,  and  fortified  these  cities,
too,  and  treated  them  as  the  other  littoral  towns.

Salamyah.  It  was  reported  to  me  by  a  sheikh  from
Hims  that  close  to  Salamyah  [Salaminias]  lay  a  city  called
Mu'takifah  which  one  day  was  completely  destroyed  by  an
earthquake  and  only  one  hundred  of  its  inhabitants  survived.
The  survivors  erected  one  hundred  houses  and  lived  in  them.
This  new  settlement  was  called  Sihn  Mi  ah  3  which  name
was  corrupted  into  Salamyah.  Later  there  came  to  this  place
Salih  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-'Abbas,  fortified  it  and  lived
in  it  with  his  sons.  Many  of  his  descendants  still  have
their  abode  in  it.  According  to  ibn-Sahm  al-Antaki.  how-
ever, Salamyah  is  an  ancient  Greek  name.

Marwdn  destroys  the  wall  of  Hints.  I  was  told  by
Muhammad  ibn-Musaffa-1-Himsi  that  the  wall  of  Hims
was  destroyed  by  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad,  because  in  his
retreat  before  the  people  of  Khurasan,  he  passed  by  the

1  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  388.

2  Ihe  guard  was  posted  in  them  so  long  as  the  sea  was  open  for  navi-
gation, i.  e.,  until  winter  time.

s  "  The  safety  of  one  hundred."


206  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

people  of  Hims,  who  had  broken  off  from  their  allegiance,
and  they  carried  away  some  of  his  baggage,  property  and
armories.

Al-Fadl  ibn-Karin  and  Musa  ibn-Bugha  as  governors  of
Hims.  The  city  of  Hims  had  stones  for  pavement.  In  the
days  of  Ahmad  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-abi-Ishak  al-Mu'tasim-
Billah,  the  people  rose  against  his  'dmil  over  them,  al-Fadl
ibn-Karin  at-Tabari,  a  brother  of  Mayazdiyar  ibn-Karin,1
and  in  accordance  with  his  orders  the  pavement  was  re-
moved. They  rebelled  again,  repaved  the  city  and  fought
against  al-Fadl  ibn-Karin  until  they  worsted  him.  After
robbing  him  of  his  money  and  wives,  they  put  him  to  death
and  crucified  him.  Al-Mu'tasim  directed  against  them  Musa
ibn-Bugha-1-Kabir  [the  Elder]  his  freedman,  and  the  in-
habitants including  a  large  number  of  Christians  and  Jews,
fought  against  him.  After  a  fearful  slaughter,  Musa  put
the  survivors  to  flight,  pursued  them  to  the  city  and  entered
it  by  force. This  took  place  in  the  year  250.

Hims  is  the  seat  of  a  large  granary  that  receives  wheat
and  oil  from  the  cities  of  the  coast  and  other  places  that
were  given  out  as  fiefs  for  their  holders  and  recorded  for
them  as  such  in  special  record  books.

1  Cf.  Athir,  vol.  vii,  p.  88.


CHAPTER  X  135

The  Battle  of  al-Yarmuk

A  description  of  the  battle.  Heraclius  gathered  large
bodies  of  Greeks,  Syrians,  Mesopotamians  and  Armenians
numbering  about  200,000/  This  army  he  put  under  the
command  of  one  of  his  choice  men  2  and  sent  as  a  van-
guard Jabalah  ibn-al-Aiham  al-Ghassani  at  the  head  of  the
'  naturalized  "  Arabs  [musta'ribah]  of  Syria  of  the  tribes
of  Lakhm,  Judham  and  others,  resolving  to  fight  the  Mos-
lems so  that  he  might  either  win  or  withdraw  to  the  land
of  the  Greeks  3  and  live  in  Constantinople.  The  Moslems
gathered  together  and  the  Greek  army  marched  against
them.  The  battle  they  fought  at  al-Yarmuk  was  of  the
fiercest  and  bloodiest  kind.4  Al-Yarmuk  [Hieromax]  is  a
river.  In  this  battle  24,000  Moslems  took  part.  The  Greeks
and  their  followers  in  this  battle  tied  themselves  to  each
other  by  chains,  so  that  no  one  might  set  his  hope  on  flight.
By  Allah's  help,  some  70,000  of  them  were  put  to  death,  and
their  remnants  took  to  flight,  reaching  as  far  as  Palestine,
Antioch,  Aleppo,  Mesopotamia  and  Armenia.  In  the  battle
of  al-Yarmuk  certain  Moslem  women  took  part  and  fought
violently. Among  them  was  Hind,  daughter  of  'Utbah  and

1  De  Goeje,  Memoire  sur  la  Conquete  de  la  Syrie,  p.  107.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2347.

9  i.  e.,  Asia  Minor;  Arabic — Bildd  ar-Rum.

*  Al-Basri,  Futuh  ash-Sham,  p.  130  seq. ;  Pseudo- Wakidi,  Futuh  ash-
Sham,  vol.  ii,  pp.  32-35.

207


2o8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

mother  of  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan,  who  repeatedly  ex-
claimed, "  Cut  the  arms  of  these  '  uncircumcised  '  with  your
swords !"  Her  husband  abu-Sufyan  had  come  to  Syria  as  a
volunteer  desiring  to  see  his  sons,  and  so  he  brought  his  wife
with  him.  He  then  returned  to  al-Madinah  where  he  died,
year  31,  at  the  age  of  88.  Others  say  he  died  in  Syria.  When
the  news  of  his  death  was  carried  to  his  daughter,  umm-
Habibah,  she  waited  until  the  third  day  on  which  she  or-
dered some  yellow  paint  and  covered  with  it  her  arms  and
face  saying,  "  I  would  not  have  done  that,  had  I  not  heard
the  Prophet  say,  'A  woman  should  not  be  in  mourning  for
more  than  three  days  over  anyone  except  her  husband.'
It  is  stated  that  she  did  likewise  when  she  received  the  news
of  her  brother  Yazid's  death. But  Allah  knows  best.

Those  who  lost  an  eye  or  suffered  martyrdom.  Abu-
Sufyan  ibn-Harb  was  one-eyed.  He  had  lost  his  eye  in  the
battle  of  at-Ta'if.  In  the  battle  of  al-Yarmuk,  however,
al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais,  Hashim  ibn-'Utbah  ibn-abi-YYakkas
az-Zuhri  (i.  e.  al-Mirkal)  and  Kais  ibn-Makshuh,  each  lost  136
an  eye.  In  this  battle  'Amir  ibn-abi-\Yakkas  az-Zuhri
fell  a  martyr.  It  is  this  'Amir  who  once  carried  the  letter
of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  assigning  abu-'Ubaidah  to  the  gov-
ernorship of  Syria.  Others  say  he  was  a  victim  of  the
plague ;  still  others  report  that  he  suffered  martyrdom  in  the
battle  of  Ajnadin :  but  all  that  is  not  true.

Hab'ib  ibn-Maslamah  pursues  the  fugitives.  Abu-
'Ubaidah  put  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  at  the  head  of  a
cavalry  detachment  charged  with  pursuing  the  fugitive
enemy,1  and  Habib  set  out  killing  every  man  whom  he  could
reach.

The  story  of  Jabalah.  Jabalah  ibn-al-Aiham  sided  with
the  Ansar  saying,  "Ye  are  our  brethren  and  the  sons  of  our

1  Athir,  vol.  i,  p.  179-


THE  BATTLE  OF  AL-YARMOK  209

fathers,"  and  professed  Islam.  After  the  arrival  of  'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab  in  Syria,  year  17,  Jabalah  had  a  dispute  with
one  of  the  Muzainah  and  knocked  out  his  eye.  'Umar  or-
dered that  he  be  punished,  upon  which  Jabalah  said,  "  Is  his
eye  like  mine?  Never,  by  Allah,  shall  I  abide  in  a  town
where  I  am  under  authority."  He  then  apostatized  and
went  to  the  land  of  the  Greeks.  This  Jabalah  was  the  king
of  Ghassan  x  and  the  successor  of  al-Harith  ibn-abi-Shimr.

According  to  another  report,  when  Jabalah  came  to  'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab,  he  was  still  a  Christian.  'Umar  asked  him
to  accept  Islam  and  pay  sadakah;  but  he  refused  saying,
"  I  shall  keep  my  faith  and  pay  sadakah."  'Umar's  answer
was,  "  If  thou  keepest  thy  faith,  thou  hast  to  pay  poll-tax."
The  man  refused,  and  'Umar  added,  "  We  have  only  three
alternatives  for  thee :  Islam,  tax  or  going  whither  thou  wili-
est." Accordingly,  Jabalah  left  with  30,000  men  to  the  land
of  the  Greeks  [Asia  Minor].  'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit  gently
reproved  'Umar  saying,  "If  thou  hadst  accepted  sadakah
from  him  and  treated  him  in  a  friendly  way,  he  would  have
become  Moslem."

In  the  year  21,  'Umar  directed  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  al-
Ansari  at  the  head  of  a  great  army  against  the  land  of  the
Greeks,  and  put  him  in  command  of  the  summer  expedition2
which  was  the  first  of  its  kind.  'Umar  instructed  him  to
treat  Jabalah  ibn-al-Aiham  very  kindly  and  to  try  and  appeal
to  him  through  the  blood  relationship  between  them,  so  that
he  should  come  back  to  the  land  of  the  Moslems  with  the
understanding  that  he  would  keep  his  own  faith  and  pay  the
amount  of  sadakah  he  had  agreed  to  pay.  'Umair  marched
until  he  came  to  the  land  of  the  Greeks  and  proposed  to

1N61deke:  "Die  Ghassanischen  Fiirsten"  in  Abhandlungen  der  Konig-
lichen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  (Berlin),  1887,  No.  II,  p.  45  seq.

2  Zaidan,  vol.  i,  p.  155 ;  Kudamah,  Kitab  al-Khardj  in  ibn-Khur-
dadhbih,  Kitab  al-Masdlik,  p.  259.


2io  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Jabalah  what  he  was  ordered  by  'Umar  to  propose;  but
Jabalah  refused  the  offer  and  insisted  on  staying  in  the  land
of  the  Greeks.  'Umair  then  came  into  a  place  called  al-
Himar — a  valley — which  he  destroyed  putting  its  inhabi-  137
tants  to  the  sword.  Hence  the  proverb,  "  In  a  more  ruined
state  than  the  hollow  of  Himar."  1

Heraclius'  adieu  to  Syria.  When  Heraclius  received  the
news  about  the  troops  in  al-Yarmuk  and  the  destruction
of  his  army  by  the  Moslems,  he  fled  from  Antioch  to  Con-
stantinople, and  as  he  passed  ad-Darb  2  he  turned  and  said,
"  Peace  unto  thee,  O  Syria,  and  what  an  excellent  country
this  is  for  the  enemy!"3 — referring  to  the  numerous  pas-
tures in  Syria.

The  battle  of  al-Yarmuk  took  place  in  Rajab,  year  15.4
Hubdsh  loses  his  leg.  According  to  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi,
among  those  who  witnessed  the  battle  of  al-Yarmuk  was
Hubash  ibn-Kais  al-Kushairi,  who  killed  many  of  the  '  un-
circumcised  "  and  lost  his  leg  without  feeling  it.  At  last
he  began  to  look  for  it.  Hence  the  verse  of  Sauwar  ibn-
Aufa:

"Among  us  were  ibn-'Attab  and  the  one  who  went  seeking  his  leg;
and  among  us  was  one  who  offered  protection  to  the  quarter,"

— referring  to  dhu-1-Rukaibah.5

Christians  and  Jews  prefer  Moslem  rule.  Abu-Hafs
ad-Dimashki  from  Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz : — When  Her-
aclius massed  his  troops  against  the  Moslems  and  the  Mos-

1  Bakri,  vol.  i,  p.  254. Freytag,  Proverbia,  vol.  i,  p.  231,  no.  66.

a  The  pass  of  Taurus.

s  Tabari vol.  i,  pp.  2395  and  2396.

*  The  date  of  the  Yarmuk  is  confused  by  some  Arabian  historians
with  that  of  Ajnadin,  Jumada  ii,  year  13;  see  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  315.

6  Kamiis:  "his  name  was  Malik".


THE  BATTLE  OF  AL-YARMOK  2II

lems  heard  that  they  were  coming  to  meet  them  at  al-
Yarmuk,  the  Moslems  refunded  to  the  inhabitants  of  Hims
the  khardj  x  they  had  taken  from  them  saying,  "We  are  too
busy  to  support  and  protect  you.  Take  care  of  yourselves."
But  the  people  of  Hims  replied,  "  We  like  your  rule  and
justice  far  better  than  the  state  of  oppression  and  tyranny  2
in  which  we  were.  The  army  of  Heraclius  we  shall  indeed,
with  your  'amil's  help,  repulse  from  the  city."  The  Jews
rose  and  said,  "  We  swear  by  the  Thorah,  no  governor  of
Heraclius  shall  enter  the  city  of  Hims  unless  we  are  first
vanquished  and  exhausted!"  Saying  this,  they  closed  the
gates  of  the  city  and  guarded  them.  The  inhabitants  of
the  other  cities — Christian  and  Jew — that  had  capitulated  to
the  Moslems,  did  the  same,  saying,  "  If  Heraclius  and  his
followers  win  over  the  Moslems  we  would  return  to  our
previous  condition,  otherwise  we  shall  retain  our  present
state  so  long  as  numbers  are  with  the  Moslems."  When
by  Allah's  help  the  "  unbelievers  "  were  defeated  and  the
Moslems  won,  they  opened  the  gates  of  their  cities,  went
out  with  the  singers  and  music  players  who  began  to  play,
and  paid  the  khardj.

Abu-'Ubaidah  reduces  Kinnasnn  and  Antioch.  Abu-
'Ubaidah  marched  against  the  province  of  Kinnasrin  and
Antioch  and  reduced  it.

Shurahbil  transferred  to  Hims.  AX-  Abbas  ibn-Hisham
al-Kalbi  from  his  grandfather : — As-Simt  ibn-al-Aswad  al-
Kindi  distinguished  himself  as  a  fighter  in  the  battle  of  138
al-Yarmuk  and  particularly  in  Syria  and  Hims.  It  was  he
who  divided  the  houses  of  Hims  among  its  people.  His
son  Shurahbil  was  in  al-Kufah  disputing  the  leadership  over
the  Kindah  tribe  with  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  al-Kindi. Now,

1  Yusuf,  p.  81.

a  Barhebraeus,  Chron.  Eccles.,  vol.  i,  p.  274.


212  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

as-Simt  appeared  before  'Umar  saying,  "  '  Commander  of
the  Believers  ',  I  see  thou  dost  not  separate  even  captives
from  one  another,  yet  thou  hast  separated  me  from  my  son.
Change  his  position,  if  thou  pleasest,  to  Syria,  or  mine  to  al-
Kufah."  "  Well,"  said  'Umar,  "  I  shall  change  his  position
to  Syria."  Accordingly,  Shurahbil  took  up  his  abode  in
Hims  with  his  father.


CHAPTER  XI
Palestine

Places  conquered  by  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi.  Abu-Hafs  ad-
Dimashki  from  learned  sheikhs : — The  first  conflict  between
Moslems  and  Greeks  took  place  in  the  caliphate  of  abu-Bakr
in  the  province  of  Palestine,  the  one  in  chief  command  over
the  Moslems  being  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi.  Later  on  in  the  cali-
phate of  abu-Bakr,  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  effected  the  conquest
of  Ghazzah,  then  Sabastiyah  l  and  Nabulus  [Neapolis]  with
the  stipulation  that  he  guaranteed  to  the  inhabitants  the
safety  of  their  lives,  their  possessions  and  their  houses  on
condition  that  they  pay  poll-tax,  and  kharaj  on  their  land.
He  then  conquered  Ludd  [Lydda]  and  its  district,  and  then
Yubna  [Jabneh  or  Jabneel],  'Amawas  [Emmaus]  and  Bait-
Jabrin  2  [Eleutheropolis]  where  he  took  for  himself  an  es-
tate 3  which  he  named  'Ajlan  after  a  freedman  of  his.  He
then  conquered  Yafa  [Jaffa]  which  according  to  others  was
conquered  by  Mu'awiyah.  'Amr  also  conquered  Rafah  and
made  similar  terms  with  it.

The  conquest  of  Jerusalem.  As  'Amr  was  besieging
Iliya',  i.  e.,  Jerusalem  in  the  year  16,  abu-'Ubaidah  after
reducing  Kinnasrin  and  its  environs,  came  to  him,  and  ac-
cording to  a  report,  sent  him  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch
whose  people  had  violated  the  covenant. 'Amr  reduced  the

1  i.  e.,  Samaria ;  abu-1-Fida,  vol.  i,  p.  160.

2  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  300.

3  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  :g,  line  12.

213


214


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


city  and  returned  [to  Jerusalem].  Only  two  or  three  days
after  his  return,  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  asked  to
capitulate  to  abu-'Ubaidah  on  the  same  terms  as  those  of
the  cities  of  Syria  as  regards  tax  and  kharaj,  and  to  have  139
the  same  treatment  as  their  equals  elsewhere,  provided  the
one  to  make  the  contract  be  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  in  person,
Abu-'Ubaidah  communicated  this  in  writing  to  'Umar  who
came  first  to  al-Jabiyah  in  Damascus  and  then  to  Jerusalem.
He  made  the  terms  of  capitulation  with  the  people  of  Jeru-
salem to  take  effect  and  gave  them  a  written  statement.
The  conquest  of  Jerusalem  took  place  in  the  year  17.

A  different  account  has  been  reported  regarding  the  con-
quest of  Jerusalem.

Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : —
Khalid  ibn-Thabit  al-Fahmi  was  sent  by  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab,  who  was  at  that  time  in  al-Jabiyah,  at  the  head  of
an  army  to  Jerusalem.  After  fighting  with  the  inhabitants,
they  agreed  to  pay  something  on  what  was  within  their
fortified  city  and  to  deliver  to  the  Moslems  all  what  was
outside.  'Umar  came  and  concurred,  after  which  he  re-
turned to  al-Madinah.1

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  from  al-Auza'i :  —  Abu-'Ubaidah
reduced  Kinnasrin  and  its  districts  in  the  year  16;  after
which  he  came  to  Palestine  and  camped  in  Jerusalem,  whose
people  asked  him  to  make  terms  with  them,  which  he  did
in  the  year  1 7,  with  the  stipulation  that  'Umar  would  come
in  person,  put  the  terms  into  effect  and  write  a  statement  of
them  to  the  people.

'Umar  welcomed  by  the  people  of  Adhri'at.  Hisham
ibn-'Ammar  from  'Abdallah  ibn-Kais : — The  latter  said,  "  I
was  one  of  those  who  went  with  abu-'Ubaidah  to  meet
'Umar  as  he  was  coming  to  Syria. As  'Umar  was  passing,

Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2360.


PALESTINE  215

he  was  met  by  the  singers  and  tambourine  players  of  the  in-
habitants of  Adhri'at x  with  swords  and  myrtle.  Seeing
that,  'Umar  shouted  '  Keep  still !  Stop  them !  '  But  abu-
'Ubaidah  replied,  '  This  is  their  custom  (or  some  other
word  like  it),  "  Commander  of  the  Believers,"  and  if  thou
shouldst  stop  them  from  doing  it,  they  would  take  that  as
indicating  thy  intention  to  violate  their  covenant.'  '  Well,
then,  said  'Umar,  '  let  them  go  on.'  "

The  plague  of  'Amawas.  The  plague  of  'Amawas
[Emmaus]  occurred  in  the  year  18.  To  it  a  great  many
Moslems  fell  victim,  among  whom  was  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-
al-Jarrah  (who  was  58  years  old  and  a  commander  in  the
army)  and  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal  of  the  banu-Salimah  of  al-
Khazraj  who  was  surnamed  abu-'Abd-ar-Rahman  and  who
died  in  the  district  of  al-Ukhuwanah  in  the  province  of  the
Jordan,  aged  38.  This  Muadh,  abu-'Ubaidah  on  his  death-
bed had  appointed  as  his  successor.  According  to  others  he
appointed  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  al-Fihri.  Some  others  say  he
appointed  'Amr  ibn-al-Asi  who  appointed  his  own  son  as  140
successor  and  departed  for  Egypt.  Al-Fadl  ibn-al-'Abbas
ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib,  surnamed  abu-Muhammad,  fell,  ac-
cording to  some,  as  martyr  in  Ajnadin;  but  the  fact  is  that
he  was  a  victim  to  the  plague  at  'Amawas.  Other  victims
were  Shurahbil  ibn-Hasanah,  surnamed  abu-'Abdallah
(who  died  69  years  old)  ;  Suhail  ibn-'Amr  of  the  banu-
'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai,  surnamed  abu-Yazid;  and  al-Harith  ibn-
Hisham  ibn-al-Mughirah-1-Makhzumi  (who,  according  to
others,  fell  a  martyr  in  the  battle  of  Ajnadin).

Yazxd  ibn-abi-Sufydn  governor  of  Syria.  When  'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab  received  the  news  of  the  death  of  abu-
'Ubaidah,  he  wrote  to  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  appointing  him
in  his  place  as  governor  of  Syria,  and  ordering  him  to

1  Edrei  of  Numbers  xxi :  33.


216  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

invade  Kaisariyah  [Caesarea].  According  to  others,  how-
ever, Yazid  was  appointed  by  'Umar  as  governor  of  the
Jordan  and  Palestine;  abu-ad-Darda',  of  Damascus;  and
'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit,  of  Hims.

The  conquest  of  Kaisariyah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  al-Wakidi : — There  is  difference  of  opinion  regarding
the  conquest  of  Kaisariyah  [Caesarea].  Some  say
Mu'awiyah  subdued  it;  others,  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm,  after  the
death  of  abu-'Ubaidah  whose  successor  he  was;  and  still
others  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi.  According  to  some.  'Amr  ibn-
al-'Asi  left  for  Egypt  and  appointed  his  son  'Abdallah  to
succeed  him.  The  truth  in  all  that,  on  which  scholars  agree,
is  that  the  first  to  lay  siege  to  the  city  was  'Amr  ibn-al-
'Asi  who  made  his  descent  on  it  in  Jumada  I,  year  13.  'Amr
would  camp  around  it  as  long  as  he  could,  and  whenever  the
Moslem  forces  wanted  to  combine  against  their  enemy,  he
would  go  to  them.  Thus  he  witnessed  the  battles  of
Ajnadin,  Fihl,  al-Marj.  Damascus  and  al-Yarmuk.  He  then
returned  to  Palestine  and  after  taking  Jerusalem  laid  siege
to  Kaisariyah.  From  Kaisariyah  he  left  for  Egypt.  After
abu-'Ubaidah,  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  became  governor  of
Syria,  and  he  appointed  his  brother  to  press  the  siege.
Smitten  by  the  plague,  Yazid  returned  to  Damascus  where
he  died.

Other  than  al-Wakidi  state  that  'Umar  appointed  Yazid
ibn-abi-Sufyan  to  the  governorship  of  Palestine  together
with  the  other  provinces  of  Syria  and  ordered  him  to  in-
vade Kaisariyah  which  had  already  been  besieged.  Yazid
went  against  it  with  17,000  men.  Its  people  resisted;  and  141
he  laid  the  siege.  In  the  last  part  of  the  year  18.  he  fell  ill
and  departed  for  Damascus  leaving  his  brother  Mu'awiyah
in  his  place  at  Kaisariyah. Mu'awiyah  reduced  the  city  1

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  172.


PALESTINE  2ly

and  wrote  to  Yazid  to  that  effect,  and  the  latter  communi-
cated the  news  to  'Umar.

Mu'awiyah  nominated  governor  of  Syria.  At  the  death
of  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan,  'Umar  wrote  to  Mu'awiyah  mak-
ing him  governor  in  his  [Yazid's]  place,  upon  which  abu-
Sufyan  thanked  'Umar  saying,  "  May  the  tie  of  relationship
be  made  stronger  by  thy  kind  behavior !"

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  from  Tamim  ibn-'Atiyah: — 'Umar
made  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan  governor  of  Syria  after
Yazid,  and  appointed  with  him  two  men  of  the  Prophet's
Companions  for  conducting  prayer  and  performing  the
duties  of  kadi :  abu-ad-Darda'  to  act  as  kadi  and  to  conduct
prayer  at  Damascus  and  the  Jordan,  and  'Ubadah  to  act  as
kadi  and  conduct  prayer  at  Hims  and  Kinnasrin.

Mu'awiyah  besieges  Kaisdriyah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  al-Wakidi :  —  When  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  made
Mu'awiyah  governor  of  Syria,  the  latter  besieged  Kaisari-
yah  until  he  reduced  it,  the  city  having  been  under  siege  for
seven  years. Its  conquest  took  place  in  Shauwal,  year  19.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'Abdallah  ibn-'Amir : —
Mu'awiyah  besieged  Kaisariyah  until  he  lost  all  hope  of  re-
ducing it.  Previous  to  this,  the  city  had  been  besieged  by
'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  and  his  son.  When  Mu'awiyah  at  last
took  it  by  storm,  he  found  in  it  700,000  [sic!]  soldiers  with
fixed  stipends,  30,000  Samaritans  and  20,000  Jews.  He
found  in  the  city  300  markets,  all  in  good  shape.  It  was
guarded  every  night  by  100,000  men  stationed  on  its  wall.
The  city  was  reduced  in  the  following  way : — A  Jew  named
Yusuf  came  to  the  Moslems  at  night  and  pointed  out  to
them  a  road  through  a  tunnel  the  water  in  which  would
reach  a  man's  waist ;  in  consideration  for  which  informa-
tion, safety  was  guaranteed  him  and  his  relatives.  Mu'awi-
yah sanctioned  the  conditions  [made  to  Yusuf]  and  the
Moslems  entered  the  city  by  night,  calling  "Allah  is  great !"


2i8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  Greeks  seeking  to  flee  through  the  tunnel  found  it  oc-
cupied by  Moslems.  The  Moslems  opened  the  city  gate  and
Mu'awiyah  with  his  men  went  in.  Many  Arabs  were  in
the  city  [as  prisoners?].  One  of  them  was  a  woman,
Shakra',  whom  Hassan  ibn-Thabit  referred  to  when  he
said:

"  Shakra  says,  '  If  thou  shouldst  relinquish  wine,
thou  wouldst  become  rich  in  number.' 1  "

Others  say  her  name  was  Sha'tha'.  142

The  captives  from  Kaisariyah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  al-Wakidi :  —  The  prisoners  from  Kaisariyah
[Caesarea]  amounted  to  4,000.  When  Mu'awiyah  sent
them  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  the  latter  gave  orders  that
they  be  settled  in  al-Jurf.  They  were  then  distributed
among  the  orphans  of  the  Ansdr,  and  some  were  used  as
clerks  and  manual  laborers  for  the  Moslems.  The  daugh-
ters of  abu-Umamah  As'ad  ibn-Zurarah,  having  been  given
by  abu-Bakr  two  servants  from  the  prisoners  of  'Ain  at-
Tamr  who  were  now  dead,  'Umar  assigned  to  the  daughters
two  of  the  captives  of  Kaisariyah  to  take  the  place  of  the
two  dead  servants.

Mu'awiyah  forwarded  two  men  of  the  Judham  to  carry
the  news  of  the  conquest  to  'Umar.  Fearing  that  they
might  not  hasten  enough,  he  forwarded  a  man  of  the
Khath'am  who  exerted  all  effort  in  walking  by  day  and  by
night  repeating :

"  The  two  brothers  of  Judham  have  brought  insomnia  on  me,

the  brother  of  Hishm  and  the  brother  of  Haram.
How  can  I  sleep  so  long  as  they  are  ahead  of  me?

They  are  going  along  and  the  midday  heat  is  becoming  vehement."*'

At  last  he  got  ahead  of  them  and  presented  himself  before

1  Cf.  Hassan  ibn-Thabit,  Dhvart,  p.  61  ;  al-Mubarrad,  al-Kamil,  p.  148.

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2397.


PALESTINE


219


'Umar  who,  hearing  the  news  of  the  conquest,  exclaimed
"Allah  is  great!"

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  from  one  whose  name  I  do  not  re-
member : — Kaisariyah  was  taken  by  storm  in  the  year  19.
Hearing  the  news  of  its  capture,  'Umar  exclaimed,
"  Kaisariyah  is  taken  by  storm.  Allah  is  great!"  and  so  did
the  rest  of  the  Moslems.  The  city  was  besieged  for  seven
years  and  was  finally  reduced  by  Mu'awiyah.

The  death  of  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  took  place  at  the  end
of  the  year  18,  in  Damascus.

The  date  of  the  conquest  of  Kaisariyah.  Those  who
claim  that  Mu'awiyah  reduced  Kaisariyah  in  the  days  of  his
brother  believe  that  it  was  not  reduced  before  the  end  of  the
year  18;  but  those  who  claim  that  it  was  reduced  while  he
was  governor  of  Syria  believe  that  it  was  reduced  in  the
year  19.  Of  the  two  views,  the  latter  is  the  tenable  one.
According  to  still  other  reports,  the  city  was  reduced  in
the  early  part  of  the  year  20.

'Askalan  reduced.  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wrote  to
Mu'awiyah  instructing  him  to  follow  up  the  conquest  of
what  was  left  in  Palestine.  Accordingly,  Mu'awiyah  con-
quered 'Askalan  [Ascalon]  which  capitulated  after  some
resistance.  According  to  others,  however,  it  was  'Amr  ibn-
al-'Asi  who  first  conquered  the  city.  Later,  its  inhabitants
violated  the  covenant  and  were  reinforced  by  the  Greeks.
It  was  then  that  Mu'awiyah  reduced  it,  settled  garrisons  of
cavalry  in  it  and  put  it  in  charge  of  a  guard.  143

'Abd-al-Malik  makes  repairs  in  ' Askalan,  Kaisariyah  and
other  places.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  certain  sheikhs
of  'Askalan : — The  Greeks  destroyed  'Askalan  and  expelled
its  inhabitants  in  the  days  of  ibn-az-Zubair.  When  'Abd-
al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  became  ruler,  he  rebuilt  the  city  and
fortified  it,  and  made  repairs  in  Kaisariyah,  too.

Muhammad  ibn-Musaffa  from  abu-Sulaiman  ar-Ramli's


220  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

father: — In  the  clays  of  ibn-az-Zubair  the  Greeks  went  out
against  Kaisariyah  and  devastated  it  and  razed  its  mosque
to  the  ground.  When  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  was
settled  in  his  rule,  he  made  repairs  in  Kaisariyah,  restored
its  mosque  and  left  a  garrison  in  it.  Moreover,  he  built
Tyre  and  outer  Acre  which  had  shared  the  same  fate  as
Kaisariyah.

Sulaiman  ibn- Abd-al-Malik  builds  ar-Ramlah.  The
following  tradition  was  communicated  to  me  by  certain  men
well  versed  in  the  conditions  of  Syria : — Al-Walid  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  made  Sulaiman  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  governor
of  the  province  of  Palestine.  Sulaiman  took  up  his  abode
in  Ludd  and  then  founded  the  city  of  ar-Ramlah  and
fortified  it.1  The  first  thing  he  built  in  it  was  his  palace
and  the  house  known  as  Dar  as-Sabbaghin  [the  house  of
the  dyers]  in  the  middle  of  which  he  made  a  cistern.  He
then  planned  the  mosque  and  began  its  construction,  but  he
became  caliph  before  its  completion.  After  becoming
caliph,  he  continued  its  construction  which  was  completed
by  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  who  reduced  the  original  plan,
saying,  '  The  inhabitants  of  ar-Ramlah  should  be  satisfied
with  the  size  thereof  to  which  I  have  reduced  it."

After  having  erected  a  house  for  himself,  Sulaiman  per-
mitted the  people  to  build  their  houses,  which  they  did.
He  dug  for  the  inhabitants  of  ar-Ramlah  their  canal  which
is  called  Baradah,  and  he  dug  also  wells.  The  one  he
appointed  to  oversee  the  expenses  of  his  palace  in  ar-Ramlah
and  of  the  cathedral  mosque 2  was  one  of  his  clerks,  a
certain  Christian  of  Ludd  named  al-Batrik  ibn-an-Naka.s

1  Ar.  massara — "  to  make  a  city  a  boundary  line  between  two  things ;"
see  an-Nihayah;  Le  Strange,  p.  303,  translates:  "made  it  his  capital."

2  Mukaddasi,  p.  164.

1  "  Ibn-Baka"  in  Hamadhani,  Bulddn,  p.  102.


PALESTINE  221

Before  Sulaiman  there  was  no  such  city  as  ar-Ramlah,  and
its  site  was  sand  [Ar.  rami].

The  Dar  as-Sabbaghin  passed  to  the  hands  of  the  heirs  of
Salih  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-Abbas,  because  it  was
confiscated  with  the  possessions  of  the  banu-Umaiyah.

The  expenses  of  the  wells  and  canal  of  ar-Ramlah,  after
the  time  of  Sulaiman  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  were  met  by  the
banu-Umaiyah.  But  when  the  banu-1-Abbas  assumed  the
caliphate,  they  paid  the  expenses.  The  order  for  these  ex-  144
penses  was  issued  yearly  by  every  caliph ;  but  when  al-Mu'-
tasim  became  caliph,  he  gave  a  permanent  decree  for  these
expenses,  thereby  doing  away  with  the  necessity  of  issuing
an  order  every  time  by  the  caliph.  It  became  thereafter  a
current  expense  which  the  'dmils  paid  and  kept  an  ac-
count of.

"  Reduction  "  and  "  restoration  "  in  the  kharaj.  There
are  in  Palestine  special  places  containing  documents  from
the  caliphs,  set  aside  from  the  records  of  the  kharaj  of  the
common  people  and  containing  a  statement  of  the  "  reduc-
tion "  and  "  restoration  ",  the  explanation  of  which  is  the
following: — Certain  estates  having  been  abandoned  in  the
caliphate  of  ar-Rashid  and  deserted  by  their  occupants,
ar-Rashid  sent  Harthamah  ibn-A'yan  to  cultivate  them.
Harthamah  asked  some  of  their  old  tenants  and  farmers  to
go  back  to  them  with  the  understanding  that  he  would
reduce  their  kharaj  and  would  deal  with  them  more  leniently.
Those  who  went  back  are  those  to  whom  the  "  reductions  "
were  made.  Others  came  after  that  and  their  old  lands  were
restored  to  them.  These  are  the  ones  to  whom  the  "  re-
storations "  were  made.

Fiefs  in  'Askalan.  The  following  tradition  was  related
to  me  by  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham : — "  I  met  a  man  of  the
Arabs  in  'Askalan  who  said  that  his  grandfather  was  one
of  those  settled  in  'Askalan  by  'Abd-al-Malik  and  was  given


222  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

a  fief  in  it  as  one  of  the  garrison  of  cavalry  to  whom  fiefs
were  assigned.  He  also  showed  me  a  piece  of  land,  saying,
'This  is  one  of  the  fiefs  given  by  'Uthman  ibn-'Afran'.  I
heard  Muhammad  ibn-Yusuf  al-Faryabi 1  say : — '  Here  in
'Askalan  are  fiefs  which  were  given  out  by  the  orders  of
'Umar  and  'Uthman,  and  it  matters  not  who  takes  possession
of  them.'  "

1  "  Firyabi "  in  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  2557.


CHAPTER  XII

The  Province  of  Kinnasrin  and  the  cities  called

al-'Awasim

Kinnasrin  capitulates.  Abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah,
after  being  through  with  al-Yarmuk,  went  to  the  province
of  Hims  and  passed  from  one  place  to  the  other  examining
it.1  Then  he  went  to  Kinnasrin  [Chalcis]  with  Khalid
ibn-al-Walid  commanding  the  van  of  his  army.2  The  in-
habitants of  the  city  of  Kinnasrin  resisted  at  first,  then  they
sought  refuge  in  their  stronghold  and  asked  to  capitulate.
Abu-'Ubaidah  made  terms  with  them  similar  to  those  of
Hims.  Thus  the  Moslems  effected  the  conquest  of  the  land
of  Kinnasrin  with  its  villages.  The  Hadir3  Kinnasrin
had  been  settled  by  the  Tanukh  tribe  since  they  came  to
Syria  and  pitched  their  tents  in  it.  They  later  built  their  145
houses  in  it.  These,  abu-'Ubaidah  summoned  to  Islam.
Some  of  them  accepted  it,  but  the  banu-Salih  ibn-Hulwan
ibn-Tmran  ibn-al-Hafi  ibn-Kuda'ah  remained  Christian.4

Certain  sons  of  Yazid  ibn-Hunain  at-Ta'i-1-Antaki  from

•  • •

their  sheikhs: — A  group  of  men  from  this  Hadir  Kin-
nasrin embraced  Islam  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi  who
inscribed  on  their  hands  in  green  color  the  word  "  Kin-


nasrin."


1  Ar.  istakraha,  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  700,  translates :  "  rinovo  con  gli
abitanti  il  primitive  trattato."

8  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2393.

s  "  A  place  where  people  alight  and  take  up  their  abode  by  a  constant
source  of  water,"  T.  'A. Cf.  Wakidi,  Futilh,  vol.  ii,  pp.  35-39.

4  Cf.  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  184.

223


224  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Kinnasrin  violates  the  covenant.  Thence  abu-'Ubaidah
departed  bent  upon  Aleppo  [Halab],  but  hearing  that  the
people  of  Kinnasrin  had  violated  the  covenant  and  proved
perfidious,  he  directed  against  them  as-Simt  ibn-al-Aswad
al-Kindi  who  reduced  the  city  after  besieging  them.

Hisham  ibn-'Ammar  ad-Dimashki  from  'Abd-ar-Rahman
ibn-Ghanm  : — "  We  kept  our  post  against  Kinnasrin  with
as-Simt  (or,  perhaps  he  said  Shurahbil  ibn-as-Simt)  as  our
leader.  When  he  reduced  the  city,  he  carried  off  cows  and
sheep  as  booty.  One  part  of  the  booty  he  distributed  among
us  and  the  remaining  part  was  treated  according  to  the  laws
governing  the  spoils  [Ar.  maghnam  1]."

The  Hadir  Taiyi'.  The  Hadir  Taiyi'  2  was  of  old
origin.  It  dates  back  to  the  disastrous  war  termed  Harb
al-Fasad  3  which  tore  up  the  tribe  of  Taiyi'  some  of  whom
then  came  and  established  themselves  on  the  two  mountains
[al-Jabalain,  i.  e.,  Aja  and  Salma].  Under  these  circum-
stances a  large  body  of  the  Taiyi'  were  dispersed  over  the
country  and  some  came  and  settled  [near  Kinnasrin].
When  abu-'Ubaidah  came  to  them,  some  became  Moslems
and  many  made  terms  agreeing  to  pay  poll-tax,  a  little  after
which  they  all  accepted  Islam  with  the  exception  of  a  few.

The  Hadir  of  Aleppo.  Close  by  the  city  of  Aleppo  stood
a  settlement  called  the  Hadir  Halab  in  which  different
Arab  tribes  including  Tanukh  lived.  Abu-'Ubaidah  made
terms  with  them  in  which  they  agreed  to  pay  poll-tax.  Later
they  embraced  Islam  and  lived  with  their  descendants  in  the
same  place  until  a  little  after  the  death  of  ar-Rashid.  The
inhabitants  of  this  Hadir  once  fought  against  the  people  of

1  Mawardi,  p.  240  seq.

2  Mushtarik,  p.  118.

8  In  which  many  atrocities  were  committed  by  both  parties. See  "  An-
notations on  al-Kamus,"  by  Muhammad  ibn-at-Taiyib  al-Fasi.


KINNASRTN  AND  AL-'AWASIM


225


the  city  of  Aleppo  and  tried  to  drive  them  out  of  their  city.
The  Hashim  tribe  of  the  people  of  Aleppo  wrote  to  all  the
Arab  tribes  of  the  vicinity  asking  for  help.  The  first  to
come  to  their  support  and  aid  was  al-' Abbas  ibn-Zufar
ibn-'Asim  al-Hilali  (according  to  his  maternal  pedigree,  be-
cause umm-'Abdallah  ibn-al-' Abbas  was  Lubabah,  daughter  146
of  al-Harith  ibn-Hazn  ibn-Bujair  ibn-al-Huzam  of  the
Hilal  tribe).  The  people  of  that  Hadir  could  not  resist
this  al-'Abbas  and  his  men.  They  were  therefore  expelled
from  their  Hadir,  and  that  at  the  time  of  the  insurrection
of  Muhammad  ibn-ar-Rashid ;  and  their  Hadir  was  de-
stroyed. They  moved  to  Kinnasrin  whose  people  met  them
with  food  and  clothing.  No  sooner  had  they  entered  the
city,  than  they  attempted  to  subjugate  it  and  were  there-
fore driven  out.  Thus  they  were  dispersed  over  the  land,
some  settling  in  Takrit  (whom  I  myself  have  seen)  and
others  in  Armenia  and  various  other  regions.

Al-'Abbas  ibn-Zufar  in  Aleppo.  I  was  told  by  al-Muta-
wakkil  that  he  heard  a  sheikh  of  the  banu-Salih  ibn-'Ali  ibn-
'Abdallah  ibn-' Abbas  say  to  al-Mu'tasim,  in  the  year  in
which  the  latter  invaded  '  Ammuriyah '/  that  when  al-
'Abbas  ibn-Zufar  al-Hilali  arrived  in  Aleppo  for  the  support
of  the  Hashimites,  some  of  their  women  called  him  saying,
"  Our  hope,  uncle,  is  in  Allah  and  in  thee !"  To  this  al-
'Abbas  answered,  "  There  is  no  danger,  if  it  be  the  will  of
Allah ;  may  Allah  disappoint  me,  if  I  should  disappoint  you !"

Hiydr  bani-l-Ka' ka  .  Hiyar  bani-1-Ka'ka'  was  a  well-
known  town  in  pre-Islamic  time.  In  it  was  the  stopping
place  of  al-Mundhir  ibn-Ma'  as-Sama'  al-Lakhmi,  the  king
of  al-Hirah.  It  was  also  settled  by  the  banu-1-Ka'ka'  ibn-
Khulaid  .  .  .  ibn-Baghid,  who  chose  it  for  their  abode  and
after  whom  it  was  thus  called.

1  Mushtarik,  p.  317;  Yakut,  vol.  Hi,  p.  730.


226  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  had  given  to  al-Ka'ka'  a  part
of  this  Hiyar  as  fief,  and  to  al-Ka'ka's  uncle,  al-'Abbas
ibn-Jaz'  ibn-al-Harith  other  fiefs  which  he  exempted  from
the  kharaj  x  and  assessed  it  on  al-Yaman.  They  were
also  exempt  after  he  died.  All  or  most  of  them  were
waste  land.  The  daughter  of  this  al-'Abbas,  Walladah,
lived  with  'Abd-al-Malik  and  brought  forth  al-Walid  and
Sulaiman.

Abu-' Ub  aid  ah  reduces  Aleppo.  Abu-'Ubaidah  set  out  for
Aleppo  sending  before  him  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  al-Fihri.
(The  name  of  the  latter's  father  was  'Abd-Ghanm;  but
when  Tyad  accepted  Islam,  he  hated  to  be  called  'Abd-
Ghanm,2  so  he  said,  "I  am  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm").  Abu-
'Ubaidah,  finding  the  people  in  a  fortified  position,  camped
around  the  city;  but  no  sooner  had  he  done  so,  than  they
sought  to  capitulate  and  make  terms  regarding  the  safety  147
of  their  lives,  their  possessions,  city  wall,  churches,  homes
and  the  fort.  All  this  was  granted  them  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  site  for  the  mosque.  The  one  to  make  the
terms  was  Tyad;  and  abu-'Ubaidah  sanctioned  them.

Some  reporters  claim  that  they  capitulated,  agreeing  to
share  with  the  Moslems  half  of  their  homes  and  churches
provided  their  lives  be  spared.  Others  assert  that  abu-
'Ubaidah  found  nobody  in  Aleppo,  its  inhabitants  having
moved  to  Antioch.  From  there  they  agreed  in  writing  with
abu-'Ubaidah  on  the  terms  of  peace.  When  the  terms
were  concluded,  they  returned  to  Aleppo.

Antioch  reduced  by  abu-'Ubaidah.  Abu-'Ubaidah  set
out  from  Aleppo  for  Antioch  [Antakiyah]  in  which  a  large
body  of  men  from  the  province  of  Kinnasrin  had  fortified
themselves. On  his  arrival  at  Mahrubah,  which  lay  about

1  Ar.  aughara. See  Zaidan,  vol.  ii,  p.  133.
J  One  of  the  pre-Islamic  gods.


KINNASRIN  AND  AL-'AWASIM  22J

two  parasangs  from  Antioch,  the  troops  of  the  enemy  met
him ;  and  he  dispersed  them  and  forced  them  to  seek  refuge
in  the  city.  Abu-'Ubaidah  invested  the  city  at  all  its  gates,
most  of  the  army  being  at  the  Bab  Faris  and  Bab  al-Bahr
[sea  gate].  At  last  they  capitulated,  agreeing  to  pay  poll-
tax  or  evacuate  the  place.  Some  of  them  did  leave;  but
others  remained,  and  to  the  latter  abu-'Ubaidah  guaran-
teed safety,  assessing  one  dinar  and  one  jarib  [of
wheat]  on  every  adult.  Later,  they  violated  the  con-
tract, which  made  abu-'Ubaidah  send  against  them  'Iyad
ibn-Ghanm  and  Habib  ibn-Maslamah,  who  reduced  the  city
and  made  terms  identical  with  the  previous  ones.  Some
say,  however,  that  they  violated  the  contract  after  abu-
'Ubaidah's  return  to  Palestine.  So  he  sent  from  Jerusalem
'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  who  reduced  it  and  returned  to  Jerusalem
whose  people,  after  a  short  time,  sought  to  capitulate  and
make  peace.

A  garrison  stationed  in  Antioch.  Muhammad  ibn-Sahm
al-Antaki  from  certain  sheikhs  of  the  frontier  cities : —
Antioch  was  highly  esteemed  by  'Umar  and  'Uthman.
When  it  was  therefore  reduced,  'Umar  wrote  to  abu-
'Ubaidah  saying,  "Station  in  Antioch  Moslems  of  strong
determination  and  good  management.  Let  them  be  its  garri-
son, and  never  stop  their  allowances."  When  he  made
Mu'awiyah  governor,  'Umar  wrote  to  him  something  to  that  148
effect.  Later  'Uthman  instructed  Mu'awiyah  to  station  in
it  troops  that  would  never  leave  and  to  assign  them  fiefs,
which  Mu'awiyah  did.  The  following  was  said  by  abu-
Sahm,  "  As  a  child,  while  I  was  standing  on  the  bridge  of
Antioch  spanning  the  Orontes  [Ar.  al-Urunt]  I  heard  an
aged  man  of  Antioch  say,  '  This  piece  of  land  is  a  fief  from
'Uthman  to  certain  men  that  were  in  the  army  sent  by  abu-
'Ubaidah.  It  was  allotted  them  in  the  time  in  which  Mu'a-
wiyah was,  according  to  'Uthman's  assignment,  the  gover-
nor of  Syria/  "


228  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Muslim  ibn-'  Abdallah  loses  his  life.  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-
Sufyan  transplanted  to  Antioch  in  the  year  42  some  Per-
sians and  others  from  Ba'labakk,  Hims,  al-Basrah  and  al-
Kufah.1  One  of  those  transplanted  was  Muslim  ibn-
' Abdallah,  the  grandfather  of  'Abdallah  ibn-Habib  ibn-
an-Nu'man  ibn-Muslim  al-Antaki.  This  Muslim  was  killed
at  one  of  the  gates  of  Antioch  which  is  known  to-day  as
Bab  Muslim.  His  death  was  brought  about  when  the
Greeks  started  from  the  coast  and  set  up  their  camp  against
Antioch  and  one  of  the  "  uncircumcised  "  threw  a  stone  on
Muslim,  who  was  then  on  the  city  wall,  and  killed  him.

Seleucia  given  as  fief.  According  to  a  tradition  communi-
cated to  me  by  certain  sheikhs  from  Antioch,  among  whom
was  ibn-Burd  al-Fakih,  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  gave
as  fief  to  some  of  the  troops  of  Antioch  the  land  of
Seleucia  [Ar.  Salukiyah]  lying  at  the  sea-coast.  Moreover,
he  fixed  the  tax  on  a  filthur  (i.  e.,  jarib)  one  dinar  and  one
modius  2  of  wheat.  They  cultivated  the  land ;  and  the  terms
were  carried  into  effect. He  also  built  the  fort  of  Seleucia.

Baghras.  The  land  of  Baghras  [Pagrae]  belonged  to
Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  who  gave  it  as  an  unalienable
legacy  3  to  be  used  in  the  cause  of  righteousness.  The  same
man  owned  'Ain  as-Sallaur  with  its  lake  and  al-Iskandariyah
[Alexandria]  which  latter  passed  as  fief  into  the  hands  of
Raja',  a  freedman  of  al-Mahdi,  to  be  inherited  by  his
[al-Mahdi]  sons  Mansur  and  Ibrahim,  later  to  Ibrahim  ibn-
Sa'id  al-Jauhari,  then  by  purchase  to  Ahmad  ibn-abi-Duwad
al-Iyadi,  and  lastly  to  al-Mutawakkil,  "  the  Commander  of
the  Believers."

1  "  Misran  "  used  for  the  last  two  localities.

2  De  Goeje,  gloss,  to  Biblio.  Geog.  Arab.,  vol.  iv,  pp.  352-353;  C.  H.
Becker,  Papyri  Schott-Reinhardt,  vol.  i,  p.  31.

3  Ar.  wakf.


KINNASRIN  AND  AL-'AWASIM  22g

Maslamah  gives  fiefs  to  Rabl'ah.  According  to  a  tradi-
tion communicated  to  me  by  ibn-Burd  al-Antaki  and  others,
certain  men  of  the  Rabi'ah  tribe  were  assigned  fiefs  by
Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  which  were  later  confiscated,
passed  to  al-Ma'mun  and  put  in  charge  of  Salih  al-Khazin,
the  proprietor  of  the  "  Dar [-Salih]"  in  Antioch.

Abu-'Ubaidah  reduces  Ma'arrat  Misrin  and  other  places.
Abu-'Ubaidah,  hearing  that  a  large  body  of  Greeks  were  149
assembled  between  Ma'arrat  Misrin  *  and  Aleppo,  met  them
and  killed  many  patricians,  dispersing  the  whole  army  and
carrying  away  captives  and  booty.  Thus  he  effected  the
conquest  of  Ma'arrat  Misrin  and  made  terms  similar  to
the  terms  of  Aleppo.  His  cavalry  roamed  about  until  they
got  to  Buka  and  reduced  the  villages  of  al-Jumah,  Sarmin,2
Martahwan  3  and  Tizin.4  The  occupants  of  the  convents
of  Tabaya  5  and  al-Fasilah  capitulated,  agreeing  to  entertain
whomever  of  the  Moslems  passed  by  them.  The  Khu-
nasirah  Christians,  too,  came  to  abu-'Ubaidah  and  made
terms.  Thus  did  all  the  land  of  Kinnasrin  and  Antioch
fall  into  the  hands  of  abu-'Ubaidah.  I  learnt  from  al-
'  Abbas  ibn-Hisham  on  the  authority  of  his  father  that  the
Khunasirah  were  thus  called  after  one,  Khunasir  ibn-'Amr
ibn-al-Harith  al-Kalbi  —  later  al-Kinani  —  who  was  their
chief.

Butnan  Habib  was  so  called  after  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-
Fihri  who  was  sent  from  Aleppo  either  by  abu-'Ubaidah  or
Iyad  ibn-Ghanm  to  Butnan,  where  he  reduced  a  fort  that
later  bore  his  name.

1  Known  also  as  Ma'arrat  Kinnasrin  and  Ma'arrat  Nasrin. Yakut,  vol.
Jv,  p.  574-

2  Ibid.,  vol.  iii,  p.  83.

s  Lammens,  MFO,  vol.  i,  p.  242 ;  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  487.
*  or  Tuzin. Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  907.
5  ?  No  diacritical  points.


230


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


The  treaty  with  Kurus.  Abu-'Ubaidah  set  out  bent  upon
Kurus  *  [Cyrrhus],  sending  at  the  head  of  the  vanguard
Tyad.  The  latter  was  met  by  one  of  the  monks  of  Kurus,
who  asked  to  capitulate  on  behalf  of  its  people.  'Iyad  sent
the  monk  to  abu-'Ubaidah,  who  was  now  between  Jabrin  2
and  Tall  A'zaz.3  Abu-'Ubaidah  accepted  the  capitulation
and  proceeded  to  Kurus  where  he  signed  a  covenant  with  its
people,  granting  them  the  same  rights  granted  to  the  people
of  Antioch.  To  the  monk,  he  wrote  a  special  statement  re-
garding a  village  that  he  owned  called  Sharkina.4  He  then
distributed  his  cavalry  and  subdued  all  the  province  of
Kurus  to  the  end  of  the  frontier  of  Nikabulus  (Nicepholis).

Kurus  a  frontier  garrison  for  Antioch.  Kurus  was  for
Antioch  the  seat  of  a  garrison  that  kept  watch  on  the
enemy.  To  it  came  every  year  a  detachment 5  from  the
Antioch  army  to  act  as  garrison.  Later,  one  of  the  four
divisions  into  which  the  army  of  Antioch  was  divided  c  was
moved  to  it;  and  the  periodical  detachments  were  no  more
sent  there.

Salman  fort.  Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah-1-Bahili  was  in  the
army  of  abu-'Ubaidah,  together  with  abu-Umamah  as-Sudai
ibn-'Ajlan,  a  Companion  of  the  Prophet.  This  Salman
occupied  a  fort  in  Kurus  which  was  called  after  him  Hisn
[fort]  Salman.  He  then  returned  from  Syria,  together
with  others,  to  reinforce  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  in  al-'Irak.  150
According  to  others,  Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah  had  led  an  invasion

1  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  363;  Rustah,  p.  107.

s  Jibrin  or  Jibrin  Kurastaya. Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  19.

3  or  Tall  'Aziz. Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  667.

4  The word is uncertain, cf. "  Sorqanie, Surkanya " in Lammens,
"  Villages  Yezidis,"  MFO,  vol.  ii,  p.  382.

8  Ar. tali' ah, 1,500-2,000  men who  came  in spring  and returned  in
winter.

6  Zaidan,  vol.  i,  p.  120.


KINNASR1N  AND  AL-'AWASIM  23 1

against  the  Greeks  after  the  conquest  of  al-Trak  and  be-
fore he  started  for  Armenia.  On  setting  out  from  the  dis-
trict of  Mar'ash,  he  encamped  near  this  fort  and  it  was  called
after  him.  This  Salman  together  with  Ziyad  1  were  among
the  Slavs  whom  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  stationed  in  the
frontier  fortresses.2  I  heard  someone  say  that  this  Salman
was  a  Slav  and  that  the  fort  was  named  after  him.

Manbij,  Duluk  and  Ra'ban  make  terms.  Abu-'Ubaidah
advanced  to  Halab  as-Sajur3  and  sent  before  him  Tyad  to
Manbij  [Hierapolis].  When  abu-'Ubaidah  came  up  to
'Iyad,  he  found  that  the  people  of  Manbij  had  capitulated
on  terms  similar  to  those  of  Antioch.  Abu-'Ubaidah
carried  the  terms  into  effect  and  sent  'Iyad  ibn-Ghanm  to
the  region  of  Duluk  and  Ra'ban,  whose  inhabitants  capitu-
lated on  terms  similar  to  those  of  Manbij.  One  condition
imposed  on  them  was  that  they  search  for  news  regarding
the  Greeks  and  forward  it  in  writing  to  the  Moslems.  To
every  district  abu-'Ubaidah  conquered,  he  assigned  a  'amil
and  sent  with  him  some  Moslems.  But  in  the  dangerous
places  he  posted  garrisons.

Balis  and  Kasirin  captured.  Abu-'Ubaidah  proceeded
until  he  got  to  'Arajin.4  The  van  of  the  army  he  sent  to
Balis  [Barbalissus] ;  and  to  Kasirin  he  sent  an  army  under
Habib  ibn-Maslamah.  Balis  and  Kasirin  2  belonged  to  two
brothers  of  the  Greek  nobility  to  whom  were  given  as  fiefs
the  adjacent  villages  and  who  were  made  guardians  of  the
Greek  towns  of  Syria  that  lay  between  Balis  and  Kasirin.
When  the  Moslem  armies  reached  these  towns,  their  inhabi-

1  The  one  after  whom  Plisn  Ziyad  was  named ;  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  276.

2  Ar  thughur;  Zaidan,  vol.  i,  pp.  153-155.
s  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  315;  Mushtarik,  p.  142.

4  Sometimes  'Arshin ;  Lammens,  MFO,  vol.  i,  p.  240,  note  3.

5  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  16.


232


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


tants  capitulated,  agreeing  to  pay  poll-tax  or  evacuate  the
places.  Most  of  them  left  for  the  Byzantine  Empire,
Mesopotamia  and  the  village  of  Jisr  Manbij  [or  Kal'at
an-Najm].  At  this  time  there  was  no  bridge  [Ar.  jisr}.
It  was  first  put  up  for  the  summer  expeditions  in  the  days
of  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan. Others  claim  that  it  is  of  ancient


origin.


Abu-'Ubaidah  stationed  in  Balis  a  body  of  fighting  men
and  settled  in  the  city  some  Arabs,  who  were  in  Syria  and
who,  after  the  advent  of  the  Moslems  to  Syria,  had  accepted
Islam,  together  with  others  who  were  not  among  the  forces
sent  to  the  frontiers,  but  who  had  emigrated  from  the  deserts
and  belonged  to  the  Kais  tribe.  In  Kasirin,  he  settled
others  who,  either  themselves  or  their  descendants,  refused
to  stay  in  it.  Abu-'Ubaidah  reached  as  far  as  the  Euphrates
and  then  returned  to  Palestine.  151

Maslamah  canal.  Balis  and  the  villages  attached  to  it  on
its  upper,  middle,  and  lower  extremities  were  tithe-lands
watered  only  by  rain.  When  Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Marwan  led  an  expedition  against  the  Greeks  from  the
side  of  the  Mesopotamian  frontier  fortresses,  he  camped
at  Balis  whose  inhabitants,  together  with  those  of  Buwailis,
Kasirin,  'Abidin,  and  Siffin  (which  were  villages  attached
to  Balis)  came  to  him,  together  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
upper  extremity,  and  they  all  asked  him  to  dig  for  them  a
canal  from  the  Euphrates  to  irrigate  their  land,  agreeing  to
offer  him  one-third  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  after  taking
away  the  usual  tithe  for  the  government.1  Maslamah  con-
sented and  dug  the  canal  called  Nahr  Maslamah :  and  the
people  lived  up  to  their  promise.  Moreover,  Maslamah  re-
paired and  strengthened  the  city  wall.  According  to  others,
Maslamah  himself  started  the  idea  and  proposed  the  terms.

1  Ar.  Sultan.


KINNASRIN  AND  AL-'AWASIM  233

Balis  and  its  villages  as  fief.  At  the  death  of  Maslamah,
Balis  with  its  villages  passed  into  the  hands  of  his  heirs,  who
held  them  until  the  appearance  of  the  "  blessed  dynasty  "
[Abbasid],  at  which  time  'Abdallah  ibn-'Ali  confiscated  the
possessions  of  the  banu-Umaiyah,  including  Balis  and  its
villages.  Abu-l-'Abbas  the  "  Commander  of  the  Believers,"
assigned  Balis  and  its  villages  as  fief  to  Sulaiman  ibn-'Ali
ibn-' Abdallah  ibn-al-'Abbas,  from  whom  they  passed  to  his
son,  Muhammad  ibn-Sulaiman.  Muhammad's  brother,  Ja'-
far  ibn-Sulaiman,  repeatedly  calumniated  his  brother  to  ar-
Rashid,  the  "Commander  of  the  Believers,"  stating  that  he
used  to  spend  many  times  the  income  of  the  possessions  and
[crown-]  domains  he  held,  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  his
ambition,1  and  upon  the  slaves  and  other  dependents  he  kept.
He  added  that  it  was  legal  for  the  "  Commander  of  the  Be-
lievers "  to  appropriate  the  money  of  his  brother.  These
letters  ar-Rashid  ordered  preserved.  Now,  when  Muham-
mad died,  Ja'far's  letters  were  brought  out  and  used  as  an
argument  against  him.  Muhammad  had  no  other  brother
from  his  father  and  mother  than  Ja'far.  The  latter  ac-
knowledged that  they  were  his  letters;  and  so  the  pos-
sessions passed  to  ar-Rashid,  who  gave  Balis  and  its  villages
as  fief  to  al-Ma'mun,  after  whom  they  passed  to  his  son.

Mu'ddh  advises  against  the  division  of  the  land.  Hisham
ibn-'Ammar  from  'Abdallah  ibn-Kais  al-Hamdani : — When
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  came  to  al-Jabiyah  and  wanted  to
divide  the  land  among  the  Moslems,  on  the  ground  that  it
was  taken  by  force,  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal  objected  saying,
'  By  Allah,  if  thou  dividest  the  land,  the  result  will  cer-
tainly be  unfavorable.  The  great  part  will  be  in  the  hands
of  these  people,  who  will  pass  away,  and  the  whole  will  152
become  the  possession  of  one  man. Others  will  come  after

1  The  caliphate;  Athir,  vol.  vi,  p.  82.


234  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

them,  who  will  bravely  defend  Islam,  but  find  nothing  left.
Seek  therefore  some  plan  that  suits  those  who  come  first
as  well  as  those  who  come  last."  'Umar  acted  according
to  the  suggestion  of  Mu'adh.

The  chief  of  Busy  a  tells  a  lie  regarding  the  tax.  Al-
Husain  ibn-'Ali  ibn-al-Aswad  al-'Ijli  from  Salamah-1-
Juhani's  uncle : — The  chief  of  Busra  recounted  that  he  had
capitulated  to  the  Moslems,  agreeing  to  offer  food,  oil  and
vinegar.  'Umar  asked  that  a  statement  be  written  down  to
that  effect ;  but  abu-'Ubaidah  showed  that  the  chief  of  Busra
was  telling  an  untruth  and  said,  "  The  fact  is  that  we  made
terms  by  which  certain  things  should  be  sent  to  the  winter
quarters  of  the  Moslems."  Then  'Umar  decreed  that  a  poll-
tax  be  assessed  graded  according  to  the  various  classes,1
and  that  kharaj  be  imposed  upon  the  land.

'Umar  fixes  the  tax.  Al-Husain  from  Aslam,  a  f reed-
man  of  'Umar : — 'Umar  wrote  to  the  tax-collectors  instruct-
ing them  to  levy  poll-tax  only  on  those  who  were  adult,
and  he  fixed  it  at  four  dinars  on  those  who  possessed  gold.
He  also  assessed  on  them  a  subsistence  tax  by  which  each
Moslem  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  would  receive  two
modii  of  wheat,  and  three  kists  of  oil,  and  the  right  to
be  entertained  as  a  guest  for  three  days.

The  tithe-lands  of  Syria.  Abu-Hafs  ash-Shami  from
Makhul 2 : — Every  piece  of  "  tithe-land  "  in  Syria  is  one
whose  people  had  evacuated  it,  and  which  had  been  given  as
fief  to  the  Moslems,  who,  by  the  permission  of  the  govern-
ors, cultivated  it  after  it  had  lain  as  waste  land  claimed  by
no  one.

1  De  Goeje,  Memoire,  p.  150.

2  Hajar,  vol.  iii,  p.  935-


CHAPTER  XIII

Cyprus

The  first  conquest  of  Cyprus.  According  to  al-Wakidi
and  others,  the  first  expedition  against  Cyprus  was  led  in
sea  by  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan.  This  was  the  first  time
the  Moslems  sailed  in  the  Mediterranean.  Mu'awiyah  had
asked  'Umar's  permission  to  lead  a  naval  expedition,  but
'Umar  refused.1  When  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  became  caliph,
Mu'awiyah  wrote  again  asking  permission  to  invade  Cyprus,
informing  him  about  its  proximity  and  the  ease  of  acquiring
it.  In  answer  to  this,  'Uthman  wrote,  "  I  have  seen  the
answer  'Umar  gave  when  thou  madest  the  request  from  him  153
to  lead  a  sea-expedition."  In  the  year  27,  Mu'awiyah  again
wrote  to  'Uthman,  referring  to  the  ease  with  which  the  sea
could  be  crossed  to  Cyprus.  'Uthman  wrote  back  this  time
saying,  "If  thou  sailest  with  thy  wife,  we  allow  thee  to  do
so;  otherwise,  not."  Accordingly,  Mu'awiyah  embarked
from  Acre  with  a  large  number  of  ships,  accompanied  by
his  wife  Fakhitah  daughter  of  Karazah  2  ibn-'Abd-'Amr
ibn-Naufal  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  ibn-Kusai.  Likewise,  'Ubadah
ibn-as-Samit  took  his  wife  umm-Haram  of  the  Ansdr,
daughter  of  Milhan.  This  took  place  in  the  year  28,  after
the  cessation  of  the  rainy  season ;  others  say,  in  the  year  29.
When  the  Moslems  arrived  in  Cyprus  and  landed  on  its
shore (Cyprus being an island 80x80 parasangs), its

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2820-2821.

2  Duraid,  p.  55.

235


236  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Archon  [Urkun]  demanded  to  make  terms  of  capitulation,
which  was  considered  unavoidable  by  the  people.
Mu'awiyah  made  terms  with  them  on  7,200  dinars  to  be
paid  annually  by  them.  Similar  terms  had  been  made  with
them  by  the  Greeks.  Thus  the  people  of  Cyprus  pay  two
tributes.  It  was  made  a  condition  that  the  Moslems  would
not  prevent  them  from  paying  the  tribute  to  the  Greeks;
on  the  other  hand  the  Moslems  made  it  a  condition  that
they  would  not  right 1  those  who  may  come  after  them  to
subjugate  the  Cyprians,  and  that  the  Cyprians  would  keep
the  Moslems  informed  regarding  the  movement  of  their
enemy — the  Greeks.  Thus  when  the  Moslems  used  to  un-
dertake an  expedition  by  sea,  they  did  not  molest  the
Cyprians.  They  were  not  supported  by  the  Cyprians;
nor  did  the  Cyprians  support  any  one  against  them.

The  second  invasion  by  Mu'awiyah.  In  the  year  32,  how-
ever, the  Cyprians  offered  ships  as  an  aid  to  the  Greeks  in
an  expedition  in  the  sea.  Consequently,  Mu'awiyah  in-
vaded them  in  the  year  33  with  500  ships.  He  took  Cyprus
by  force,  slaughtering  and  taking  prisoners.  He  then  con-
firmed them  in  the  terms  that  were  previously  made,  and
sent  to  the  island  12,000  men  of  those  whose  names  were
recorded  in  the  register  [Ar.  diwdn]  2  and  erected  mosques
in  it.  Moreover,  Mu'awiyah  transplanted  from  Ba'labakk
a  group  of  men,  and  erected  a  city  on  the  island,  whose
inhabitants  were  assigned  special  stipends  until  the  death
of  Mu'awiyah.  His  son  Yazid,  who  succeeded  him,  sent
the  troops  back  and  ordered  the  city  destroyed.

According  to  other  reports,  the  second  invasion  of  Cyprus
by  Mu'awiyah  was  carried  out  in  the  year  35.

Why  Yazid  withdrew  the  troops.  Muhammad  ibn-
Musaffa-1-.I.Iimsi fn>m alWalid: — Yazid ibn-Mu'awiyah

1  Athir,  vol.  iii,  p.  74.

8  And  theretore  received  stipends;  al-Mutarrizi,  al-Mughrib,  p.  187.


CYPRUS  237

was  offered  a  large  and  considerable  sum  of  money  as 154
bribe;  and  that  was  why  he  withdrew  the  troops from
Cyprus,  upon  which  the  Cyprians  destroyed  their  city  and
Mosques.

Umm-Hardm  dies  in  Cyprus.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  'Abd-as-Salam  ibn-Musa's  father  : — When  Cyprus  was
invaded  for  the  first  time,  umm-Haram,  daughter  of  Milhan,
sailed  with  her  husband,  'Ubadah  ibn-as-Samit.  On  their
arrival  in  Cyprus,  she  disembarked  and  was  offered  a  mule
to  ride  upon.  As  she  was  riding,  the  mule  stumbled;  and
she  was  killed.  Her  tomb  in  Cyprus  is  called  "  the  Tomb
of  the  Righteous  Woman."  *

Some  of  those  who  took  part  in  the  campaign.  Among
those  who  joined  the  campaign  with  Mu'awiyah  were  the
following :  —  Abu-Aiyub  Khalid  ibn-Zaid  ibn-Kulaib  al-
Ansari,  abu-ad-Darda,  abu-Dharr  al-Ghifari,  'Ubadah  ibn-
as-Samit,  Fadalah  ibn-'Ubaid  al-Ansari,  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd
ibn-'Ubaid  al-Ansari,  Wathilah  ibn-al-Aska'  al-Kinani,
'Abdallah  ibn-Bishr  al-Mazini,  Shaddad  ibn-Aus  ibn-Thabit
(a  nephew  of  Hassan  ibn-Thabit),  al-Mikdad,  Ka'b  al-
Habr  ibn-Mati' 2  and  Jubair  ibn-Nufair  al-Hadrami.

Mu'awiyah  makes  permanent  peace.  Hisham  ibn-
'Ammar  ad-Dimashki  from  Safwan  ibn-'Amr : — Mu'awiyah
ibn-abi-Sufyan  personally  carried  out  the  invasion  of  Cyprus
and  was  accompanied  by  his  wife.  Its  conquest,  effected
by  Allah,  was  complete;  and  the  booty  he  brought  to  the
Moslems  was  great.  The  raids  of  the  Moslems  were  re-
peated until  Mu'awiyah  in  his  caliphate  concluded  permanent
terms  with  the  Cyprians  to  the  effect  that  they  pay  7,000
dinars  and  give  advice  and  warnings  to  the  Moslems  re-
garding their  enemy,  the  Greeks.  This  or  something  like
it  was  agreed  upon.

1  JRAS,  1897,  PP.  81-101.

2  Nawawi,  p.  523;  ibn-Kutaibah,  Kitab  al-Ma'arif,  p.  215.


238


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


The  Cyprians  expelled  and  returned.  Al-Walid  ibn-
Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  expelled  many  of  the  Cyprians  to
Syria,  because  of  a  charge  of  suspicion  brought  against
them.  When  the  Moslems  disapproved  of  the  act,  Yazid
ibn-al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  returned  them  to  their  home.
In  the  caliphate  of  ar-Rashid,  an  invasion  was  led  against
them  by  Humaid  ibn-Ma'yuf  al-Hamdani  because  of  a  re-
bellion they  had  started;  and  many  were  carried  off  as
prisoners.  Later  they  behaved  properly  towards  the  Mos-
lems; and,  by  ar-Rashid's  orders,  their  prisoners  were  re-
turned.

The  tax  increased.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-
Wakidi : — The  terms  between  Mu'awiyah  and  the  Cyprians
were  kept  in  force  until  the  time  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
Marwan  who  added  1,000  dinars  to  their  tax.  That  was  the
case  until  the  caliphate  of  'Uraar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  who
cancelled  the  addition.  When  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  155
however,  came  to  power,  he  restored  it ;  and  it  was  kept  until
the  caliphate  of  abu-Ja'far  al-Mansur,  who  expressed  him-
self as  follows:  "  We  shall,  above  everyone  else,  do  justice
to  them,  and  not  enrich  ourselves  by  oppressing  them."
Accordingly,  he  restored  the  terms  made  by  Mu'awiyah.

' Abd-al-M alik  wants  to  annul  the  treaty.  The  following
was  communicated  to  me  by  certain  Syrian  scholars  and
abu-'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  : — During  the  governorship
of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Salih  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-'Abbas
over  the  frontier  cities  [Ar.  thughur],  the  Cyprians  started
a  rebellion ;  and  he,  therefore,  desired  to  break  the  covenant
made  with  them.  The  canonists  were  numerous,  among
whom  were  the  following  whose  opinions  he  sought :  al-
Laith  ibn-Sa'd,  Malik  ibn-Anas,  Sufyan  ibn-'Uyainah,
Musa  ibn-A'yan,  Isma'il  ibn-'Aiyash,  Yahya  ibn-Hamzah,
abu-Ishak  al-Fazari,  and  Makhlad  ibn-al-Husain.  They  all
answered  him.


CYPRUS  239

The  opinion  of  al-Laith.  The  following  is  a  quotation
from  the  letter  of  al-Laith  ibn-Sa'd :  "  The  Cyprians  are
being  constantly  charged  by  us  with  infidelity  to  Moslems
and  loyalty  to  Allah's  enemies,  the  Greeks.  Allah  himself
has  said :  x  '  Or  if  thou  fear  treachery  from  any  people,  cast
off  their  treaty  in  like  manner.'  He  did  not  say,  'cast  not  off
their  treaty  until  thou  art  sure  of  their  treachery.'  I,  there-
fore, consider  it  best  that  thou  castest  off  their  treaty  and
givest  them  a  respite  of  one  year  for  enforcing  the  law.
Those  of  them  who  desire  to  go  and  settle  in  a  Moslem
land  and  become  dhimmis,  paying  the  khardj,  may  do  so;
those  who  desire  to  emigrate  to  the  land  of  the  Greeks  may
do  so ;  and  those  who  desire  to  remain  in  Cyprus,  with  the
understanding  they  are  hostile,  may  do  so  and  be  considered
an  enemy  to  be  fought  and  attacked.  To  give  them  a  re-
spite of  one  year  would  be  enough  to  refute  any  protest
they  may  make,  and  to  prove  our  loyalty  to  the  covenant."

The  opinion  of  Malik.  The  following  statement  was
written  by  Malik  ibn-Anas  : — "  Our  peace  with  the  Cyprians
is  of  old  standing  and  carefully  observed  [  ?  Ar.  mutasahar]
by  the  governors  placed  over  them,  because  they  considered
the  terms  a  humiliation  and  belittlement  to  the  Cyprians,
and  a  source  of  strength  to  the  Moslems,  in  view  of  the
tax  paid  to  them  and  the  chance  they  had  of  attacking  their
enemy.  Yet  I  know  of  no  governor  who  broke  their  terms
or  expelled  them  from  their  city.  I,  therefore,  consider  it
best  to  hesitate  in  breaking  their  covenant  and  casting  off
their  treaty  until  the  evidence  [of  disloyalty]  is  well  estab-
lished against  them,  for  Allah  says : 2  '  Observe,  therefore,
the  engagement  with  them  through  the  whole  time  of
their  treaty.'  If,  after  that,  they  do  not  behave  properly  and  156
abandon  their  deceit,  and  thou  art  convinced  of  their  perfidy,

1Kor.,  8:60.  *  Kor.,  9:4.


240  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

then  thou  mayest  attack  them.  In  that  case,  the  attack
would  be  justified  and  would  be  crowned  with  success;  and
they  would  suffer  humiliation  and  disgrace,  by  Allah's  will."

The  opinion  of  Sufyan  ibn-Uyainah.  This  is  what
Sufyan  ibn-'Uyainah  wrote :  "  We  know  of  no  one  who
made  a  covenant  with  the  Prophet  and  violated  it,  without
having  the  Prophet  consider  it  legal  to  put  him  to  death,
except  the  people  of  Makkah.  Their  case  was  a  favor  on
the  part  of  the  Prophet.  Their  violation  consisted  in  ren-
dering aid  to  their  allies  against  the  Khuza'ah,  the  Prophet's
allies.  One  of  the  terms  stipulated  against  the  people  of
Najran  was  not  to  practise  usury;  but  when  they  did  prac-
tise it,  'Umar  decreed  that  they  be  expelled.  Thus  by  '  the
consensus  of  opinion  '  [Ar.  ijmd'],  he  who  violates  a  cove-
nant forfeits  the  right  of  being  entitled  to  security."

The  opinion  of  Musa  ibn-A'yan.  Musa  ibn-A'yan
wrote : — "  Similar  cases  took  place  in  the  past,  but  in  each
case  the  governors  would  grant  a  period  of  respite ;  and  so
far  as  I  know,  none  of  the  early  men  ever  broke  a  covenant
with  the  Cyprians  or  any  other  people.  It  may  be  that
the  common  people  and  the  mass  among  the  Cyprians  had
no  hand  in  what  their  leaders  did.  I,  therefore,  consider
it  best  to  abide  by  the  covenant  and  fulfil  the  conditions
thereof,  in  spite  of  what  they  have  done.  I  have  heard
al-Auza'i  say  regarding  the  case  of  some,  who,  after  mak-
ing terms  with  the  Moslems,  conveyed  information  about
their  secret  things  and  pointed  them  out  to  the  'unbelievers' :
'  If  they  are  dhimmis,  they  have  thereby  violated  their  cove-
nant and  forfeited  their  claim  on  security,  making  it  right
for  the  governor  to  kill  or  crucify  them,  if  he  so  desires;
but  if  they  had  been  taken  by  capitulation  and  are  not  en-
titled to  the  Moslem's  security,  then  the  govern.  >r  would  cast
off  their  treaty,  for  Allah  loveth  not  the  machinations  of  the
deceivers.' *  "

1  Cf.  Kor.,  12 :  52.


CYPRUS  24I

Ismail  ibn-Aiydsh's  opinion.  The  following  is  what
Isma'il  ibn-'Aiyash  wrote :  "  The  people  of  Cyprus  are  humi-
liated and  oppressed  and  they  are  subjugated,  together  with
their  wives,  by  the  Greeks.  It  is  therefore  proper  for  us  to
defend  and  protect  them.  In  the  covenant  of  the  people  of
Taflis,  Habib  ibn-MasIamah  wrote,  '  In  case  something
should  arise  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  Moslems  from
you  and  some  enemy  should  subjugate  you,  that  would  not
be  a  violation  of  your  covenant,  so  long  as  ye  keep  loyal  to
the  Moslems.'  I,  therefore,  consider  it  best  that  they  be  left
on  their  covenant  and  the  security  promised  them,  especially
because  when  al-Walid  ibn-Yazid  expelled  them  to  Syria,  the
Moslems  considered  the  act  outrageous,  and  the  canonists
disapproved  of  it;  so  much  so  that  when  Yazid  ibn-al-Walid
ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  came  to  power,  he  restored  them  to
Cyprus,  which  act  was  approved  of  by  the  Moslems  and
considered  just."

Yahya  ibn-Hamzatis  opinion.  The  following  was  the
statement  issued  by  Yahya  ibn-Hamzah :  "  The  case  of
Cyprus  is  parallel  to  that  of  'Arbassus  1  in  which  it  has  a  157
good  example  and  a  precedent  to  be  followed.  This  is  the
case  of  'Arbassus  :  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  once  came  to  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  saying,  '  There  lies  between  us  and  the  Greeks  a
city  called  'Arbassus,  whose  people  disclose  to  our  enemy
our  secrets,  but  do  not  disclose  to  us  our  enemy's.'  'Umar
replied,  '  When  thou  goest  there,  propose  to  give  them  for
every  ewe  they  possess  two;  for  every  cow,  two;  and  for
everything,  two.  If  they  consent,  give  that  to  them,  expel
them  from  the  city  and  raze  it  to  the  ground.  But  if  they
refuse,  then  cast  off  their  treaty  to  them  and  give  them
one  year  at  the  expiration  of  which  thou  mayest  destroy  the
city.' 'Umair  went  to  the  city;  and  its  people  refused  the

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  633.


242  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

offer.  He,  therefore,  gave  them  one  year  at  the  expiration
of  which  he  destroyed  it.  The  people  of  'Arbassus  had  a
covenant  similar  to  that  of  the  people  of  Cyprus.  To  leave
the  Cyprians  on  the  terms  made  with  them  and  to  have  the
Moslems  use  in  their  own  cause  what  they  receive  [as  tax]
from  the  Cyprians  is  preferable.  All  holders  of  covenant,
for  the  sake  of  whom  the  Moslems  are  not  supposed  to  fight
and  on  whom  the  Moslem  regulations  are  not  binding,  are
not  dhimmis  but '  people  of  tribute  '  l  to  be  spared  so  long  as
they  are  worthy,  to  be  treated  according  to  the  covenant  so
long  as  they  abide  by  it  and  consent  to  it,  and  to  be  forgiven
so  long  as  they  pay  their  dues.  It  is  reported  that  Mu'adh
ibn-Jabal  always  hated  to  have  the  enemy  capitulate  on  defi-
nite terms  unless  the  Moslems  were  by  the  force  of  circum-
stances compelled  to  make  terms,  because  no  one  could  tell
whether  such  capitulation  would  be  of  value  and  strength
for  the  Moslems."

The  opinion  of  abu-Ishdk  and  Makhlad.  Abu-Ishak  al-
Fazari  and  Makhlad  ibn-al-Husain  wrote  as  follows : —
"  We  can  find  nothing  more  similar  to  the  case  of  Cyprus
than  the  case  of  'Arbassus  and  the  decision  of  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  regarding  it.  'I  mar  gave  them  two  alterna-
tives to  choose  from :  a  double  fold  of  what  they  possessed
and  the  evacuation  of  the  city,  or  a  respite  of  one  year  after
casting  off  their  treaty.  Having  rejected  the  former  propo-
sition, they  were  given  one  year  at  the  end  of  which  the
city  was  destroyed.  Al-Auza'i  repeated  a  tradition  to  the
effect  that  when  Cyprus  was  conquered,  the  status  quo  of
the  people  was  kept,  and  terms  were  made  on  14,000  din
of  which  7,000  should  go  to  the  Moslems  and  7,000  to  the
Greeks;  and  it  was  stipulated  that  the  Cyprian  lid  not

1  Ar.  ah!  fid  yah,  who  are  governed  by  their  own  laws  and  pay  some-
thing to  be  let  alone. For  fidyah  see  at-Tahanawi,  Kashf  Istilahat  al-

I'liiu'ni.  vol.  ii,  p.  1 157.


CYPRUS  243

disclose  to  the  Greeks  the  condition  of  the  Moslems.1  Al-
Auza'i  used  to  say,  '  The  Cyprians  did  not  abide  by  the
terms  they  made  with  us.'  But  we  consider  them  as
'  people  bound  to  us  by  covenant,'  whose  terms  of  peace
involve  rights  to  them  and  obligations  on  them,  and  the  158
violation  of  which  is  legal  only  if  they  do  some  thing  that
shows  their  perfidy  and  treachery."

1  Evidently  there  is  a  mistake  in  the  text. The  negative  particle  "la"
is  superfluous.


CHAPTER  XIV

The  Samaritans

The  terms  made  by  abu-'Ubaidah.  Hisham  ibn-'Ammar
from  Saf  wan  ibn-'Amr :  —  Abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah
made  terms  with  the  Samaritans  in  the  provinces  of  the
Jordan  and  Palestine,  who  acted  as  spies  and  guides  for  the
Moslems,  stipulating  that  they  pay  tax  on  their  persons  but
nothing  on  their  lands.  When  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah,  how-
ever, assumed  power  he  assessed  kharaj  on  their  lands.

The  tax  imposed  by  Yazid.  I  was  informed  by  certain
men  well  versed  in  the  conditions  of  the  Jordan  and
Palestine  that  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah  assessed  kharaj  on  the
lands  of  the  Samaritans  in  the  Jordan,  and  levied  on  every
man  two  dinars  as  poll-tax.  He  also  assessed  kharaj  on
their  lands  in  Palestine  and  levied  five  dinars  on  every  man.

Sects.  The  Samaritans  are  Jews  and  are  divided  into
two  classes,  one  is  called  ad-Dustan  [Dositheans]  and  the
other  al-Kushan.1

Their  lands  become  crown-land.  There  was  in  Palestine
in  the  early  part  of  the  caliphate  of  ar-Rashid  a  devastating
plague  which  in  some  cases  would  attack  all  the  members  of
a  household.  As  a  result,  their  land  was  rendered  waste  and
useless.  Ar-Rashid  put  it  in  charge  of  some  who  culti-
vated it  and  [by  gifts]  attracted  the  farmers  and  tenants
into  it.  thus  making  it  crown  domains. In  these  places  the

1  Cf.  Al-Makrizi,  al-Khitaf,  vol.  iv,  p.  371  ;  The  Jewish  Encyclopaedia,
s.  v.  "Samaritans"; J.  A. Montgomery,  History of  the  Samaritans.
p.  2$?,  sea.:  De  Sacy,  Chrestom.,  vol.  i.  pp.  30?.  341-344.
244


THE  SAMARITANS  245

Samaritans  lived.  One  of  those  villages  called  Bait-
Mama,  which  lay  in  the  district  of  Nabulus  and  whose  in-
habitants were  Samaritans,  made  a  complaint  in  the  year  246
to  the  effect  that  they  were  poor  and  unable  to  pay  the
five-dinar  kharaj,  upon  which  al-Mutawakkil  gave  orders
that  it  be  reduced  again  to  three.

Mu'awiyah  spares  the  hostages.  Hisham  ibn-'Ammar
from  Saf wan  ibn-' Amr  and  Sa'id  ibn-' Abd-al-' Aziz  : —  1 59
The  Greeks  made  peace  with  Mu'awiyah  with  the  stipula-
tion that  he  pay  them  a  certain  sum  of  money.  Mu'awiyah
took  hostages  from  them  and  held  them  in  Ba'labakk.
The  Greeks  proved  perfidious  to  Mu'awiyah,  but  still  the
Moslems  did  not  consider  it  legal  to  put  the  hostages  in
their  hands  to  death;  and  so  they  set  them  free,  saying,
'  Loyalty  against  perfidy  is  better  than  perfidy  against  per-
fidy." According  to  Hisham,  al-Auza'i,  among  other  au-
thorities, maintains  the  same  view.


CHAPTER  XV

Al-Jarajimah

The  treaty  with  al-Jarajimah.  I  am  informed  by  certain
sheikhs  from  Antioch  that  al-Jarajimah  '  were  the  inhabi-
tants of  a  town  called  al-Jurjumah  2  lying  between  Baiyas
and  Buka  on  mount  al-Lukam  [Amanus]  near  Ma'din  az-
Zaj  [vitriol  pit].  While  the  Greeks  held  the  authority  over
Syria  and  Antioch,  the  Jarajimah  were  under  the  rule  of  the
patrician  and  governor  of  Antioch.  When  abu-'Ubaidah
came  and  reduced  Antioch,  they  confined  themselves  to  their
city  and,  in  their  anxiety  to  save  their  lives,  they  tried  to
go  and  join  the  Greeks.  The  Moslems  took  no  note  of  them.
nor  did  any  one  call  their  attention  to  them.  When  later
the  people  of  Antioch  violated  their  covenant  and  acted
treacherously,  abu-'Ubaidah  sent  and  conquered  Antioch
once  more,  after  which  he  made  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-
Fihri  its  governor.  Habib  attacked  al-Jurjumah.  whose
people  did  not  resist  but  immediately  sought  for  peace  and
capitulation.  Terms  were  made  providing  that  al-Jarajimah
would  act  as  helpers  to  the  Moslems,  and  as  spies  and
frontier  garrison  in  Mount  al-Lukam.  On  the  other  hand
it  was  stipulated  that  they  pay  no  tax,  and  that  they  keep
for  themselves  the  booty  3  they  take  from  the  enemy  in
case  they  fight  with  the  Moslems. In  these  term^  were  in-

1  Less  correctly  Jurajimah. They  are  identical  with  the  Mardaites;
Ummens,  MFO,  vol.  i,  p.  17.

*  Encyclopaedia  of  Islam,  vol.  i,  j.  v.,  "  Djaradjima  ".
8  Ar.  nafl. See  Mutarrizi,  p.  80.
246


AL-JARAJIMAH  247

eluded  besides  the  Jarajimah  all  those  who  lived  in  their  city,
as  well  as  the  merchants,  employees  and  dependents,  whether
Nabateans  or  not,  together  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
villages.  These  were  called  "  ar-Rawadif  "  x  because  they
were  included  in  the  terms  with  the  Jarajimah  though  not
of  their  number.  Others  say  they  were  so  called  because
they  came  riding  behind  al- Jarajimah  when  the  latter  pre-
sented themselves  in  the  Moslem  camp.  On  certain  occa-
sions, al- Jarajimah  acted  properly  with  respect  to  the
[Moslem]  governors;  but  on  others,  they  deviated  from
the  right  path  and  held  friendly  communications  with  the  160
Greeks.

'Abd-al-Malik  agrees  to  pay  them  a  certain  sum.  In  the
days  of  ibn-az-Zubair,  when  Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam  died
and  'Abd-al-Malik,  who  was  appointed  by  Marwan  as  heir-
apparent,  wished  to  succeed  Marwan  in  the  caliphate  and
was  ready  to  leave  for  al-'Irak  to  fight  against  al-Mus'ab
ibn-az-Zubair,  certain  Greek  horsemen  went  forth  to  Mt.  al-
Lukam  under  a  Greek  leader  and  started  for  the  Lebanon,
after  having  been  joined  by  a  large  body  of  al- Jarajimah,
Nabateans,  and  runaway  slaves  once  possessed  by  the  Mos-
lems. Under  these  conditions,  'Abd-al-Malik  had  to  make
terms  with  them,  agreeing  to  pay  1.000  dinars  per  week.
He  also  made  terms  with  the  Greek  "  tyrant,"  agreeing  to
pay  him  a  sum  of  money,  because  'Abd-al-Malik  was  too
busy  to  fight  against  him,  and  because  he  feared  that  in  case
the  "  tyrant ';  came  to  Syria,  he  might  overpower  him.
In  this,  he  followed  the  precedent  of  Mu'awiyah  who,  being
engaged  in  the  fight  in  al-'Irak,  agreed  to  pay  something  to
them  [the  Greeks],  and  took  hostages  from  them,  whom
he  held  in  Ba'labakk.  All  this  synchronized  with  the  attempt
made  by  'Amr  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  to  secure  the  caliphate

1  Followers,  dependents.


248  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

and  his  closing  the  gates  of  Damascus  immediately  after
'Abd-al-Malik  had  left  the  city,  which  made  (Abd-al-Malik
still  more  busy. This  took  place  in  the  year  70.

Suhaim  slays  the  Greek  general.  After  that,  Abd-al-
Malik  sent  to  the  Greek  leader  Suhaim  ibn-al-Muhajir
who,  in  disguise  and  through  gentle  behavior,  succeeded  in
reaching  him.  Suhaim  played  the  act  of  a  friend  and  won
the  favor  of  the  leader  by  censuring  'Abd-al-Malik,  curs-
ing him  and  dwelling  on  his  weak  points;  so  much  so  that
the  leader  put  full  confidence  in  Suhaim  and  was  wholly
deceived.  At  the  favorable  moment,  however,  Suhaim  fell
upon  him  with  a  band  of  troops  and  freedmen  of  'Abd-al-
Malik,  who  had  been  previously  prepared  for  the  attack  and
stationed  in  a  convenient  place,  and  killed  him  together  with
the  Greeks  who  were  with  him.  Suhaim  thereupon  an-
nounced publicly  a  promise  of  security  to  those  who  had
joined  the  Greek  leader.  Accordingly,  the  Jarajimah  were
partly  scattered  among  the  villages  of  Hims  and  Damascus :
but  the  majority  returned  to  their  city  on  al-Lukam.  In
like  manner,  the  Nabateans  returned  to  their  villages,  and
the  slaves  to  their  masters.

Maimun  al-Jurjumani.  One  of  these  slaves  was  Maimun
al-Jurjumani,  a  Greek  slave,  who  belonged  to  the  banu-umm-
al-Hakam  (umm-al-Hakam  being  the  sister  of  Mu'awiyah
ibn-abi-Sufyan)  who  were  of  the  tribe  of  Thakif.  The
slave  was  named  after  al- Jarajimah.  because  he  mixed  with
them  and  rebelled  with  them  in  Mt.  Lebanon.  Hearing  161
of  his  strength  and  valor,  'Abd-al-Malik  asked  his  master^
to  set  him  free,  which  they  did.  He  was  then  put  by  Abd-
al-Malik  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of  troops  and  stationed
at  Antioch.  With  1,000  men  from  Antioch,  he  and  Masla-
mah ibn- Abd-al-Malik led an invasion to at-Tuwanah.1

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  554.


AL-JARAJIMAH  249

After  fighting  valiantly  and  standing  gallantly,  he  fell  a
martyr.  This  so  much  grieved  'Abd-al-Malik  that  he  sent
a  large  army  against  the  Greeks  to  avenge  his  death.

Al-WaUd  makes  terms  with  them.  In  the  year  89,  al-
Jarajimah  gathered  themselves  into  their  city  and  were
joined  by  a  host  of  Greeks  from  Alexandretta  [Iskan-
darunah]  and  Rusis.1  Consequently,  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-
al-Malik  sent  against  them  Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,
who  fell  upon  them  with  a  host  of  Moslems  and  reduced
their  city  on  the  following  terms :  Al-Jarajimah  may  settle
wherever  they  wished  in  Syria,  each  one  of  them  receiving
eight  dinars,  and  each  family  receiving  the  fixed  provisions
of  wheat  and  oil,  i.  e.,  two  modii  of  wheat  and  two  kists
of  oil;  neither  they  nor  any  of  their  children  or  women
should  be  compelled  to  leave  Christianity ;  they  may  put  on
Moslem  dress;  and  no  poll-tax  may  be  assessed  on  them,
their  children  or  women.  On  the  other  hand,  they  should
take  part  in  the  Moslem  campaigns  and  be  allowed  to  keep
for  themselves  the  booty  from  those  whom  they  kill  in  a
duel;  and  the  same  amount  taken  from  the  possession  of
the  Moslems  should  be  taken  [as  tax]  from  their  articles  of
trade  and  from  the  possessions  of  the  wealthy  among  them.
Then  Maslamah  destroyed  their  city  and  settled  them  in  Mt.
al-Huwar,  Sunh  al-Lulun  [  ?]  and  'Amk  Tizin.  Some  of
them  left  for  Hims.  The  patrician  of  al-Jurjumah  accom-
panied by  a  body  of  men,  after  taking  up  his  abode  in  An-
tioch  fled  to  the  Byzantine  Empire.

Al-Wathik  cancels  the  poll-tax.  When  a  certain  'amil
held  al-Jarajimah  of  Antioch  responsible  for  poll-tax,  they
brought  their  case  before  al-Wathik-Billah  at  the  time  of
his  caliphate,  and  he  ordered  it  cancelled.

Al-Mutawakkil  levies  tax. I  was  informed  by  a  writer

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  840.


250  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

in  whom  I  have  full  confidence  that  al-Mutawakkil  ordered
that  poll-tax  be  levied  on  these  Jarajimah  and  that  the  regu-
lar allowance  for  food  be  given  them,  because,  among  other
things,  they  were  of  value  in  the  frontier  garrisons.

Al- Jarajimah  molest  the  summer  expeditious.  It  is
claimed  by  abu-1-Khattab  al-Azdi  that  in  the  days  of  'Abd-
al-Malik,  the  people  of  al-Jurjumah  used  to  make  razzias
against  the  villages  of  Antioch  and  al-'Amk;  and  whenever  162
the  summer  expedition  was  carried  out,  al- Jarajimah  would
cut  off  those  who  lagged  behind  or  followed,  together  with
any  whom  they  could  cut  off  at  the  rear  of  the  army.  They
went  so  far  against  the  Moslems  that,  by  'Abd-al-Malik's
orders,  certain  people  from  Antioch  and  some  Nabateans
were  given  stipends,  placed  as  garrisons  and  set  behind
the  armies  of  the  summer  expeditions  in  order  to  repel  al-
Jarajimah  from  the  rear.  Therefore  those  set  behind  the
armies  of  the  summer  expedition  were  called  rawadif,  i.  e..
followers,  and  to  every  one  of  them  eight  dinars  were  as-
signed. The  former  account  is  more  authentic.

Az-Zutt.  Abu-Hafs  ash-Shami  from  Makhul : —
Mu'awiyah  transplanted  in  the  year  49  or  50  to  the  sea-
coast  some  of  the  Zutt  and  Sayabijah  '  of  al-Basrah,  and
made  some  of  them  settle  in  Antioch.  According  to  abu-
Hafs,  there  is  in  Antioch  a  quarter  known  by  the  name  of
az-Zutt.  Some  of  their  descendants  are  in  Buka  in  the  pro-
vince of  Antioch  and  are  known  by  the  name  of  az-Zutt.

Some  of  the  Zutt  of  as-Sind2  were  carried  by  Muhammad
ibn-al-Kasim  to  al-Hajjaj,  who  sent  them  to  Syria,  and  were
later  transplanted  by  al-YValid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  to  Antioch.

Lebanon  rebels. Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi : —

1  Kami!,  p.  41,  line  3;  p.  82,  line  17;  De  Goeje.  Mcmoircs  sur  les  Mi-
grations des  Tsiganes,  pp.  1-32,  86-';!.

2  Haukal,  p.  226.


AL-JARAJIMAH  2cj

Some  people  in  Lebanon  rebelled,  complaining  of  the  col-
lector of  the  kharaj  of  Ba'labakk.  This  made  Salih  ibn-
'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-' Abbas  send  against  them  troops  who
destroyed  their  fighting  power,  and  the  rest  were  allowed  to
retain  their  [Christian]  faith.  Salih  sent  the  latter  back  to
their  villages  and  expelled  some  of  the  natives  of  Lebanon.
Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  related  to  me  on  the  authority  of  Mu-
hammad ibn-Kathir  that  Salih  received  a  long  communica-
tion from  al-Auza'i,  of  which  the  following  extract  has  been
preserved :  "  Thou  hast  heard  of  the  expulsion  of  the  dhim-
mis  from  Mt.  Lebanon,  although  they  did  not  side  with
those  who  rebelled,  and  of  whom  many  were  killed  by  thee
and  the  rest  returned  to  their  villages.  How  didst  thou  then
punish  the  many  for  the  fault  of  the  few  and  make  them
leave  their  homes  and  possessions  in  spite  of  Allah's  de-
cree :  1  '  Nor  shall  any  sinning  one  bear  the  burden  of  an-
other,' which  is  the  most  rightful  thing  to  abide  by  and  fol-
low !  The  command  worthy  of  the  strictest  observance  and
obedience  is  that  of  the  Prophet  who  says,  Tf  one  oppresses
a  man  bound  to  us  by  covenant  and  charges  him  with  more
than  he  can  do,  I  am  the  one  to  overcome  him  by  argu-
ments.' "  2 To  this  he  added  other  citations.

The  frontier  and  littoral  towns  fortified.  Muhammad
ibn-Sahm  al-Antaki  from  abu-Ishak  al-Fazari : — The  banu-  163
Umaiyah  used  to  direct  their  summer  and  winter  campaigns
against  the  Greeks  beyond  the  frontier  cities  of  Syria  and
Mesopotamia  by  means  of  Syrians  and  Mesopotamians,  and
they  used  to  station  the  ships  for  the  invasion  and  to  post  the
guard  on  the  coast,  giving  up  or  delaying  the  invasion  at  the
time  in  which  the  enemy  was  strong  and  wide  awake  [  ?] .
When  abu-Ja'far  al-Mansur  began  his  rule,  he  examined  the

1  Kor.,  6 :  164.

-  As-Suyuti,  Kanz  al-'Ummal,  I,  270.


252  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

forts  and  cities  of  the  coast,  peopled  and  fortified  them,  and
rebuilt  those  of  them  that  were  in  need  of  being  rebuilt.
The  same  thing  he  did  with  the  frontier  cities.  When  al-
Mahdi  became  caliph,  he  carried  the  work  in  the  remaining
cities  and  forts  to  completion  and  strengthened  the  garrisons.
Mu'awiyah  ibn-'Amr  states,  "  What  we  saw  of  the  efforts
of  Harun  the  '  Commander  of  the  Believers  '  in  conducting
invasions,  and  of  his  penetrating  insight  in  carrying  on  the
holy  war  was  really  great.  The  industries  he  established
were  not  established  heretofore.  He  distributed  possessions
in  the  frontier  and  coast  cities.  He  brought  distress  on  the
Greeks  and  humiliated  them."  Caliph  al-Mutawakkil  or-
dered in  the  year  247  that  ships  be  stationed  on  all  the  sea-
coast  and  that  garrisons  be  posted  on  it.


CHAPTER  XVI
The  Frontier  Fortresses  x  of  Syria

Moslem  razzias  beyond  the  frontiers.  I  was  informed
by  certain  sheikhs  from  Antioch  and  by  others  that  in  the
days  of  'Umar  and  'Uthman,  and  after  their  time,  the
frontier  cities  of  Syria  included  Antioch  and  other  cities
called  later  al-'Awasim  by  ar-Rashid.  The  Moslems  used
to  lead  their  raids  beyond  these  cities  as  they  now  raid  what
is  beyond  Tarsus.  Between  Alexandretta  and  Tarsus  lay
Greek  forts  and  frontier  garrisons,  similar  to  those  through
which  the  Moslems  now  pass,  and  the  inhabitants  of  which
would  sometimes,  because  of  fear,  leave  them  and  flee  to  the
Byzantine  Empire,  and  sometimes,  Byzantine  fighters
would  be  brought  and  stationed  in  them.  It  is  said  that
when  Heraclius  left  Antioch,  he  joined  to  himself  the  peo-
ple of  these  towns,  so  that  the  Moslems  might  not  be  able  to
go  between  Antioch  and  the  land  of  the  Byzantines  through
a  cultivated  land.

Ibn-Taibun  2  al-Baghrasi  from  certain  sheikhs  : — The  lat-
ter said,  "  What  is  known  to  us  is  that  Heraclius  moved  the  164
men  from  these  forts,  which  he  shattered.  So,  when  the
Moslems  made  their  raids,  they  found  them  vacant.  In
certain  cases  the  Greeks  would  make  an  ambush  by  these
forts  and  take  by  surprise  those  of  the  army  who  were  held
back  or  cut  off.  Thus  the  leaders  of  the  summer  and  win-
ter campaigns,  on  entering  the  Greek  land,  would  leave
heavy  troops  in  these  forts  until  their  return."

1  Ar.  thughur;  see  Istakhri,  pp.  55-56.

2  ?  Lacking  in  diacritical  points.

253


^54


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


The  first  to  pass  through  ad-Darb.  Regarding  the  first
one  to  cross  ad-Darb,1  i.  e.,  Darb  Baghras  ~  there  is  a  dis-
agreement. Some  assert  that  the  first  was  Maisarah  ibn-
Masruk  al-'Absi  who  was  despatched  by  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-
al-Jarrah  and  who  met  a  host  of  Greeks  accompanied  by  the
"  naturalized  "  [musta'ribah]  Arabs  of  the  Ghassan,  Ta-
nukh  and  Iyad,  trying  to  follow  Heraclius  [in  Asia  Minor].
Maisarah  fell  upon  them  and  wrought  a  bloody  massacre
among  them.  He  was  later  joined  by  Malik  al-Ashtar  an-
Nakha'i  sent  as  a  reinforcement  by  abu-'Ubaidah  from  An-
tioch.

According  to  others,  the  first  to  cross  ad-Darb  was
'Umar  ibn-Sa'd  al-Ansari,  when  he  was  sent  in  connection
with  the  case  of  Jabalah  ibn-al-Aiham.

According  to  abu-1-Khattab  al-Azdi,  abu-'Ubaidah  him-
self led  the  summer  expedition  passing  through  al-Massi-
sah  and  then  through  Tarsus  whose  people,  together  with
those  of  the  fortified  cities  lying  beyond,  had  evacuated
their  places.  Thus  abu-'Ubaidah  entered  the  land  of  the
[Greek]  enemy  and  carried  his  campaign  as  far  as  Zandah.
According  to  others,  abu-'Ubaidah  did  not  himself  go,  but
sent  Maisarah  ibn-Masruk,  who  reached  as  far  as  Zandah.

Mu'dwiyah  and  the  forts.  Abu-Salih  al-Farra'  from  one
supposed  by  him  to  have  been  'Ubadah  ibn-Nusai : — When
Mu'awiyah  in  the  year  25  invaded  'Ammuriyah  [Amo-
rium],  he  found  the  forts  between  Antioch  and  Tarsus  all
vacant.  He  therefore  left  in  those  forts  some  men  from
Syria,  Mesopotamia  and  Kinnasrin  until  he  had  finished
his  expedition.  One  or  two  years  later,  he  sent  Yazid  ibn-
al-Hurr  al-'Absi  at  the  head  of  the  summer  expedition  and

1  "  Gr.  Derbc  near  the  Cilician  gates  which  were  the  chief  mountain
pass  from  the  direction  of  the  countries  occupied  by  the  Arabs  into  the
territory  of  the  Greeks" — Lane. See  Caetani.  vol.  iii,  p.  805.

2  Perhaps  Bailan  pass  of  to-day.


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  255

instructed  him  to  do  the  same  thing,  which  Yazid  did. All
the  governors  used  to  do  the  same.

The  same  authority  says,  <l  I  read  in  the  book  of  Ma-
ghazi  Mu'dwiyah  [Mu'awiyah's  campaigns]  that  Mu-
'awiyah  in  the  year  31  led  an  invasion  setting  out  from  near
al-Massisah  and  penetrating  as  far  as  Darauliyah.  On  his
return,  he  destroyed  all  the  fortresses  [belonging  to  the  165
Greeks]  between  the  latter  place  and  Antioch.

Al-Massisah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi  and
others : — in  the  year  84,  'Abdallah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
Marwan  led  the  summer  campaign,  entered  through  the
Darb  Antakiyah  and  reached  al-Massisah  [Mopsuestia],
where  he  rebuilt  the  fort  on  its  old  foundations.  In  this  city,
he  caused  troops  to  settle,  among  whom  were  300  chosen
from  those  known  to  be  among  the  most  valorous  and
strong.  The  Moslems  had  never  lived  in  this  town  before.
He  also  built  a  mosque  in  it  over  Tall  al-Hisn  [the  hill  of
the  fort],  and  then  led  his  army  to  the  invasion  of  Sinan
fort,  which  he  reduced.  He  then  sent  Yazid  ibn-Hunain
at-Ta'i-1-Antaki  who  led  an  incursion  and  returned.

Abu-1-Khattab  al-Azdi  holds  that  the  first  Moslem  to
build  the  fort  of  al-Massisah 1  was  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
Marwan  through  his  son  'Abdallah  in  the  year  84  on  its
old  foundation.  Its  building  and  manning  were  completed
in  the  year  85.  In  this  fortified  town  stood  a  church  which
was  converted  into  a  granary.  The  troops  [Ar.  tawdli]
from  Antioch,  numbering  1,500-2,000,  used  to  go  up  to  it
every  year  and  spend  the  winter  in  it,  at  the  end  of  which
they  would  leave.

When  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  came  to  the  granary  of
al-Massisah,  he  wanted  to  destroy  the  town  together  with
the  forts  that  lay  between  it  and  Antioch  saying,  "  I  hate

1  Hainadhani,  p.  T12.


256  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

to  see  the  Greeks  besieging  its  people."  When  he,  how-
ever, learned  that  the  town  was  built  to  check  the  Greek  ad-
vance on  Antioch,  and  that,  in  case  it  was  destroyed,  noth-
ing would  remain  to  stop  the  enemy  from  taking  Antioch,
he  desisted  and  erected  for  its  people  a  cathedral  mosque
in  the  Kafarbaiya  quarter.  In  the  mosque,  he  made  a  cis-
tern whereon  his  name  was  inscribed.  In  the  caliphate  of
al-Mu'tasim-Billah,  the  mosque,  which  was  called  Masjid
al-Hisn  [the  fort  mosque],  fell  into  ruins.

Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  built  the  part  outside  the  city
wall  [Ar.  rabad]  ;  and  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  built,  to  the
east  of  Jaihan,1  al-Khusus  [wood  houses],  around  which
he  erected  a  wall  with  a  wooden  gate,  and  dug  a  moat.

When  abu-l-'Abbas  became  caliph,  he  assigned  stipends
for  400  men  to  be  added  to  the  garrison  at  al-Massisah,  and
distributed  fiefs  among  them.  When  al-Mansur  became  166
caliph,  he  assigned  stipends  for  400  men  at  al-Massisah.
In  the  year  139,  al-Mansur  ordered  that  the  city  of
al-Massisah,  the  wall  of  which  had  become  shattered
by  earthquakes  and  whose  population  within  the  walls  had
become  few  in  number,  be  well  populated.  Accordingly,  in
the  year  140,  he  built  the  wall  of  the  city,  made  its  inhabi-
tants settle  in  it  and  called  it  al-Ma'murah.  Moreover,  al-
Mansur  erected  a  cathedral  mosque  in  it  on  the  site  of  a
heathen  temple,  and  made  it  many  times  the  size  of  the
mosque  of  'Umar.  Al-Ma'mun  enlarged  the  mosque  in  the
governorship  of  'Abdallah  ibn-Tahir  ibn-al-Husain  over  al-
Maghrib.  Al-Mansur  assigned  stipends  for  1,000  men
of  its  inhabitants.  Besides,  he  transplanted  [into  it]  the
inhabitants  of  al-Khusus.  who  were  Persians,  Slavs  and
Christian  Nabateans — all  of  whom  were  settled  in  al-
Khusus  by  Marwan — gave  them  in  it  lots  marked  for  dwell-

1  Pyramus  river.


THE  FRO X TIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  2$J

ings  in  exchange  for  and  of  the  same  measure  as  their
old  homes,  pulled  down  their  old  dwellings  and  helped  them
to  build  the  new  ones.  To  these  soldiers,  who  received  sti-
pends, al-Mansur  gave  fiefs  and  dwellings.

When  al-Mahdi  became  caliph,  he  assigned  stipends  for
2,000  men  at  al-Massisah  but  gave  them  no  fiefs,  because
the  city  was  already  manned  with  troops  and  volunteers.
The  periodical  contingents  [tcrn/aW]  used  to  come  from
Antioch  every  year  until  the  city  was  governed  by  Salim
al-Barallusi,  who  assigned  in  their  place  *  stipends  for  500
fighters,  making  a  special  rate  of  10  dinars  for  each.  Thus
the  people  of  the  city  were  multiplied  and  strengthened.
This  took  place  when  al-Mahdi  held  the  caliphate.

Muhammad  ibn-Sahm  from  the  sheikhs  of  the  frontier
region  : — In  the  days  of  the  "  blessed  dynasty  ",  the  Greeks
pressed  the  inhabitants  of  al-Massisah  so  hard  that  they  left
the  city.  After  that  Salih  ibn-'Ali  sent  to  it  Jabril  ibn-
Yahya-1-Bajali  who  peopled  it  and  made  Moslems  settle  in
it  in  the  year  140.  Ar-Rashid  -  built  Kafarbaiya:  but  ac-
cording to  others  it  was  begun  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi,
and  ar-Rashid  changed  the  plan  of  its  construction  and  for-
tified it  with  a  moat.  Its  inhabitants  complained  to  al-
Ma'mun  concerning  the  rent 3  paid  for  the  houses  therein,
and  he  abolished  it.  The  houses  were  like  inns.  By  order
of  al-Ma'mun,  a  wall  was  commenced  around  the  city  and
raised  high,  but  not  completed  before  his  death.  Al-Mu-
'tasim-Billah  ordered  that  the  wall  be  finished  and  raised  to
its  proper  height.

Al-Muthakkab. Al-Muthakkab  4  was  fortified  by  Hisham

1  Read  maudi'aha  in  place  of  maudi'ahu.

2  Mas'udi,  vol.  viii.  p.  295.

s  Ar  ghallah,  i.  e.,  rent  due  for  houses  built  on  the  state  property.
4  Istakhri,  p.  63;  IJaukal,  p.  121.


258  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  who  entrusted  the  work  to  Hassan  ibn-
Mahawaih  al-Antaki.  As  the  moat  was  being  dug,  a  leg-
bone  of  extraordinary  length  was  found  and  sent  to  Hi-
sham.  167

Katarghash,  M  ft  rah  and  Baghras.  Hisham  also  had
Katarghash  fort  built  by  'Abd-al-'Aziz  ibn-Haiyan  al-
Antaki.  He  also  had  Murah  fort  erected  by  a  man  from
Antioch.  This  last  fort  was  built  because  the  Greeks  had
interfered  with  one  of  his  messengers  at  i)arb  al-Lukam
near  al-'Akabah-l-Baida.  In  this  fort,  he  stationed  forty
men  and  a  body  of  al-Jarajimah.  in  Baghras  [Pagraej.  he
established  a  garrison  of  fifty  men  and  built  a  fort  for  it.
Hisham,  moreover,  built  the  Buka  fort  in  the  province  of
Antioch,  which  was  recently  renewed  and  repaired.

After  the  Greeks  had  made  a  raid  on  the  litt<  »ral  f  the
province  of  Antioch  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mu'tasim-Billah,
a  fort  was  built  on  that  littoral  by  Muhammad  ibn-Yusuf
al-Marwazi,  surnamed  abu-Sa'id.

'Umar  intends  to  destroy  al-Massisah.  Da'ud  ibn-'Abd-
al-Hamid.  the  kadi  of  ar-Rakkah.  from  a  grandfather  of
his: — 'Umar  ibn-' Abd-al-'Aziz  intended  to  destroy  al-Mas-
sisah and  move  its  inhabitants  because  they  suffered
much  from  the  Greeks ;  but  he  died  before  he  could  accom-
plish it.

'Akabat  ai-Msa'.  I  was  informed  by  certain  men  from
Antioch  and  Baghras  that  when  Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-
Malik  invaded  'Ammuriyah,  he  took  his  wives  with  him;
and  other  men  in  his  army  did  the  same.  The  banu-Umaiyah
used  to  do  that  in  order  to  infuse  enthusiasm  in  the  army
by  making  them  jealous  for  their  harem.  ^s  Maslamah
was  passing  through  'Akabat  '  Baghras  on  a  narrow  road
that  bordered  on  a  valley,  a  stretcher  in  which  a  woman  was
carried  fell  down  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain. This  made

1 \  place  difficult  of  ascent.


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  2$g

Maslamah  order  that  all  women  should  go  on  foot.  So
they  did;  and  that  'Akabat  was,  therefore,  called  "  'Aka-
bat  an-Nisa' '  [the  women's  'Akabat].  Previous  to  this,
al-Mu'tasim  had  built  on  the  edge  of  that  road  a  low  stone
wall.

The  roads  of  Antioch  cleared  of  lions  by  means  of
buffaloes.  It  was  stated  by  abu-an-Nu'man  al-Antaki  that
the  road  between  Antioch  and  al-Massisah  was  frequented
by  lions  which  molested  the  passers-by.  When  al-Walid
ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  came  to  rule,  the  complaint  was  made  to
him,  and  he  sent  4,000  buffaloes  by  which  the  required  re-
sult was  attained  through  Allah's  help.

Muhammad  ibn-al-Kasim  ath-Thakafi,  the  'anvil  of  al-
Hajjaj  over  as-Sind,  had  sent  from  as-Sind  thousands  of
buffaloes  to  al-Hajjaj,  who  gave  al-Walid  4,000  of  them,  168
and  left  the  rest  in  the  jungles  of  Kaskar.1  When  Yazid
ibn-al-Muhallab  was  deposed  and  killed,  and  the  possessions
of  the  banu-1-Muhallab  were  confiscated  by  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-
al-Malik,  the  latter  carried  away  4,000  buffaloes,  which  were
in  the  districts  of  Dijlah  2  and  Kaskar.  These,  too,  Yazid
sent  to  al-Massisah  together  with  az-Zutt  sent  there.  Thus
the  buffaloes  at  al-Massisah  were  originally  8,000.  At  the
time  of  the  insurrection  of  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-
Marwan  the  people  of  Antioch  and  Kinnasrin  brought
under  their  control  and  took  possession  of  many  of  these
animals ;  but  when  al-Mansur  became  caliph  he  ordered  that
they  be  restored  to  al-Massisah.  As  for  the  buffaloes  of
Antioch,  they  were  first  brought  by  az-Zutt,  and  so  were  the
first  ones  of  Buka.

Jisr  al-Walid.  According  to  abu-1-Khattab,  the  bridge  on
the  road  of  Adhanah  [Adana] from  al-Massisah  lay  nine

1  Hamadhani,  Buldan,  p.  196;  ibn-Khurdadhhih,  p.  7.

2  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  745.


26o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

miles  from  the  latter,  was  built  in  the  year  125,  and  was
called  Jisr  al-Walid  after  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  who
was  slain.

Adhanah.  According  to  abu-an-Nu'man  al-Antaki  and
others,  Adhanah  was  built  in  the  year  141  or  142  as  the
Khurasan  troops  under  Maslamah  ibn-Yahya-1-Bajali,  and
the  Syrian  troops  under  Malik  ibn-Adham  al-Bahili  (all
sent  by  Salih  ibn-'Ali)  were  camping  in  it.

Saihan  castle.  In  the  year  165,  al-Mahdi  sent  his  son
Harun  ar-Rashid  on  an  expedition  to  the  Greek  Empire.
After  camping  at  al-Khalij,  ar-Rashid  went  forth  and  re-
paired al-Massisah  and  its  mosque,  increasing  its  garrison
and  arming  its  inhabitants.  He  also  built  the  castle  which
lay  by  Saihan  [Sarus  river]  near  Adhanah  bridge.  Pre-
vious to  this,  al-Mansur  had  sent  Salih  ibn-'Ali  on  an  in-
vasion to  the  Greek  Empire,  and  the  latter  sent  Hilal  ibn-
Daigham,  at  the  head  of  a  group  of  men  from  Damascus,
the  Jordan  and  other  places,  who  built  this  castle;  but  the
structure  not  being  firm,  ar-Rashid  dismantled  the  castle
and  rebuilt  it.

Abu-Sulaim  rebuilds  Adhanah.  In  the  year  194  '  abu-
Sulaim  Faraj  al-Khadim  built  Adhanah  well  and  strong,
fortified  it,  and  chose  men  from  Khurasan  and  others  to  live
in  it,  giving  them  an  increase  of  stipends.  All  that  was
done  by  the  order  of  Muhammad  ibn-ar-Rashid.  He  also
made  repairs  in  Kasr  Saihan.  When  ar-Rashid  died  in
the  year  193,  his  'amil  for  collecting  tithes  from  the  fron-
tier fortresses  was  abu-Sulaim  who  was  now  confirmed  in
his  position  by  Muhammad  [ibn-ar-Rashid].  To  this  abu-
Sulaim  belonged  the  residence  in  Antioch  [that  bears  his  169
name].

Tarsus  and  al-Hadath. Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd from  al-

1  "  193  "  in  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  179,  line  19.


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  26l

Wakidi: — In  the  year  162,  al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah  at-Ta'i
invaded  the  land  of  the  Greeks  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  the
people  of  Khurasan,  Mausil,1  and  Syria,  reinforced  by  men
from  al-Yaman  and  volunteers  from  al-'Irak  and  al-Hijaz.
He  started  near  Tarsus  and  called  the  attention  of  al-Mahdi
to  the  great  troubles  spared  to  Islam,  and  the  good  chance
it  afforded  to  frustrate  and  avert  the  enemies'  intrigues  and
plans  by  building  Tarsus,  fortifying  it  and  stationing  a  gar-
rison in  it.  In  that  campaign,  al-Hasan  distinguished  him-
self and  subdued  the  land  of  the  Greeks,  and  was  therefore
called  ash-Shaitan  [the  devil].  Among  his  men  in  the  in-
vasion were  Mandal  al-'Anazi — the  traditionist  of  the
school  of  al-Kufah — and  Mu'tamir  ibn-Sulaiman  al-Basri.
Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Sa'd  ibn-al-Hasan : — When
al-Hasan  left  the  land  of  the  Greeks,  he  camped  at  Marj
[plain  of]  Tarsus  from  which  he  rode  to  the  city,  which
was  then  in  ruins.  After  examining  it,  he  went  around  it
in  all  directions  and  estimated  that  it  could  be  inhabited  by
one  hundred  thousand.2  When  he  appeared  before  al-
Mahdi,  he  described  the  condition  of  the  city  and  referred  to
the  strength  that  Islam  and  the  Moslems  would  acquire,  and
to  the  anger  and  disappointment  that  will  ensue  to  the  en-
emy, if  the  city  were  rebuilt  and  manned  with  a  garrison.  He
also  told  al-Mahdi  something  about  al-Hadath  that  encour-
aged him  to  build  it.  Accordingly,  al-Mahdi  ordered  him
to  build  Tarsus  and  start  with  al-Hadath,  which  was  imme-
diately built.  Al-Mahdi  then  ordered  that  Tarsus  be  built.
In  the  year  171,  ar-Rashid  heard  that  the  Greeks  had  en-
joined one  another  to  set  forth  to  Tarsus  in  order  to  for-
tify it  and  station  troops  in  it.  He  therefore  sent  in  the
year  171  Harthamah  ibn-A'yan  as  commander  of  the  sum-
mer campaign  and  ordered  him  to  build  Tarsus,  settle  people

Hamadhani,  Buldan,  pp.  26-27,  128.  a Ibid.,  p.  113.


262  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

in  it  and  make  it  a  fortified  boundary  town  l  between  the
two  countries.  Harthamah  did  so,  putting  the  work,  in  ac-
cordance with  ar-Rashid's  orders,  in  charge  of  Faraj  ibn-
Sulaim  al-Khadim.  Faraj  put  someone  in  charge,  went  to
Madinat  as-Salam  2  and  sent  the  first  garrison,  numbering
3,000,  whom  he  chose  from  among  the  people  of  Khurasan.
The  garrison  came  to  Tarsus.  He  then  sent  the  second  gar-
rison that  numbered  2.000  men,  1,000  of  whom  were  from
al-Massisah  and  1,000  from  Antioch,  promising  each  man
an  increment  of  ten  dinars  on  his  original  stipend.  The  170
second  garrison  camped  with  the  first  at  al-Mada'in  near
Bab  al- Jihad,  from  the  beginning  of  Muharram  in  the  year
172,  until  the  construction  of  the  city  of  Tarsus  with  its
fortification  and  mosque  was  completed.  I^araj  measured
the  land  between  the  two  rivers  and  found  it  to  be  4,000
lots,  each  lot  being  twenty  dhiras  square.  These  lots  he
gave  as  fiefs  to  the  inhabitants  of  Tarsus.  In  Rabi'  II,  172,
the  two  garrisons  settled  in  the  city.

Yazxd  ibn-Makhlad  governor  of  Tarsus.  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Salih  appointed  Yazid  ibn-Makhlad  al-Fazari  as  amil
over  Tarsus.  Those  of  the  inhabitants  who  came  from
Khurasan  were  afraid  of  him,  because  he  belonged  to  the
clan  of  al-Hubairiyah,  and  drove  him  from  the  city.  He
appointed  abu-1-Fawaris  to  succeed  him  and  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Salih  confirmed  abu-1-Fawaris  in  his  position.  This
took  place  in  the  year  173.

Sisiyah.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-\Yakidi : — In  the
year  194  or  193.  the  inhabitants  of  Sisiyah  [or  Sis.  later
Little  Armenia]  evacuated  their  homes  and  went  as  far  as
the  mountainous  region  of  the  Greeks.3 This  Sisiyah  was

1  Ar.  misr.

'  City  of  peace,  i.  e.,  Baghdad.

8  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  217.  gives  the  date  93  or  94  and  reads  a'ali  ar-Ruin
instead  of  a'la  ar-Rurn.


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  263

the  city  of  Tall  'Ain-Zarbah  and  was  rebuilt  in  the  caliphate
of  al-Mutawakkil  by  'Ali  ibn-Yahya-1-Armani  [the  Ar-
menian] . It  was  later  ruined  by  the  Greeks.

Antioch  burnt.  The  one  who  burnt  Antioch — condemned
as  it  was  to  burning  l — in  the  land  of  the  Greeks  was  'Ab-
bas ibn-al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-  al-Malik.

Tall  Jubair.  Tall  Jubair  was  so  called  after  a  Persian
from  Antioch  who  fought  a  battle  in  it.  The  Tall  lies  less
than  10  miles  from  Tarsus.

Dhu-l-Kilfr.  The  name  of  the  fort  known  as  dhu-1-
Kila'  is  really  a  corruption  of  dhu-1-Kila'  [the  fort  of  the
castles],  which  name  was  given  to  it  because  it  was  made  up
of  three  castles.  The  explanation  of  its  name  in  the  Greek
tongue  is  "  the  fortress  with  the  stars."

Kanisat  as-Sulh.  Kanisat  as-Sulh  [the  church  of  peace]
was  so  called  because  when  the  Greeks  came  to  ar-Rashid
to  capitulate,  they  made  it  their  headquarters.

Marj  Husain.  Marj  Husain  was  named  after  Husain
ibn-Muslim  al-Antaki  who  fought  a  battle  in  it  and  de-
feated the  enemy.

Damalu.  In  the  year  163,  al-Mahdi  sent  on  a  campaign
his  son,  Harun  ar-Rashid,  who  laid  siege  to  Damalu  (collo-
quial Samalu).  Its  people  asked  a  promise  of  security  for
ten  of  their  nobility  including  the  Comes.2  Ar-Rashid  con-
sented. One  of  their  terms  stipulated  that  they  be  never
separated  from  one  another.  Therefore  they  were  settled
in  Baghdadh  near  Bab  ash-Shammasiyah.3 Their  quarter

1  Hamadhani,  Buldan,  p.  37:  Said  Makhul,  "Four  cities  are  of  the
cities  of  Paradise;  Makkah,  al-Madinah,  Iliya'  [Jerusalem]  and  Da-
mascus; and  four  of  the  cities  of  fire:  Antioch,  at-Tuwanah,  Constan-
tinople and  San'a'."

2Ar.  al-Kumis  =  a  leader  of  two  hundred:  Zaidan,  vol.  i.  p.  118;
Kudamah,  pp.  255-256.

3  Le  Strange,  Baghdad,  p.  202.


264  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

they  called  Samalu,  and  it  is  still  known  as  such.  Others  say
that  they  surrendered  to  al-Mahdi  who  spared  their  lives
and  gathered  them  in  that  place,  ordering  that  it  be  called 171
Samalu. According  to  ar-Rashid's  orders,  those  who  were
left  in  the  fort  were  sold  publicly.

One  Abyssinian,  who  was  heard  cursing  ar-Rashid  and
the  Moslems,  was  crucified  on  one  of  the  towers  of  the  fort.

'Ain  Zarbah  and  al-Hariiniyah.  Ahmad  ibn-al-Harith
al-Wasiti  from  al-Wakidi : — In  the  year  180,  ar-Rashid  or-
dered that  the  city  of  'Ain  Zarbah  [Anazarbus]  be  built  and
fortified.  He  summoned  to  it  a  regiment  from  Khurasan
and  others,  to  whom  he  gave  houses  as  fiefs.  In  the  year
183,  he  ordered  al-Haruniyah  built.  It  was  accordingly
built  and  manned  with  a  garrison  and  with  volunteers  that
emigrated  to  it.  The  city  was  named  after  him.  Others
say  that  Harun  started  its  erection  in  the  caliphate  of  al-
Mahdi,  but  completed  it  in  his  own  caliphate.

Kanhat  as-Sanda.  The  city  of  Kanisat  as-Sauda'  [black
church]  had  been  built  by  the  Greeks  of  black  stone  since
the  earliest  of  days,  and  had  an  old  fort  that  was  destroyed
in  the  general  havoc.  Ar-Rashid  ordered  that  this  city  be
rebuilt  and  fortified.  He  also  summoned  to  it  troops,  al-
ing  them  larger  stipends.  I  was  told  by  'Azzun  ibn-
Sa'd,  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  frontier  region,  that  the
Greeks  once  invaded  it — as  al-Kasim  ibn-ar-Rashid  was
staying  in  Dabik — and  carried  away  its  cattle  and  a  num-
ber of  prisoners.  They  were  pursued  by  the  people  of  al-
Massisah  and  its  volunteers,  who  saved  all  that  had  been
carried  away  and  killed  many  of  the  Greeks,  sending  the
rest  of  them  back  in  distress  and  disorder.  Then  al-Kasim
<;ent  some  one  to  fortify  the  city,  make  repairs  in  it  and  in-
crease its  garrison.  For  this  purpose  some  of  az-Zutt,  pre-
viously transplanted  by  al-Mu'tasim  to  'Ain  Zarbah  and  its
environs  from  al-Bataih.  which  lay  between  Wasil  and  al-
Basrah,  and  which  they  had  conquered,  were  available.


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESSES  OF  SYRIA  265

Abu-Ishdk  al-Fazari's  opinion  on  the  land  of  ath-Thaghr.
I  was  informed  by  abu-Salih  al-Antaki  that  abu-Ishak  al-
Fazari  hated  to  buy  land  in  the  frontier  region  [ath-Thaghr]
because  he  said,  "  Those  who  first  wrested  this  land  from
the  Greeks  did  not  divide  it  among  themselves,  and  it  later
passed  to  others.  Thus  it  had  been  transmitted  to  others
and  attached  to  itself  a  suspicion  that  the  wise  man  would
do  well  to  avoid."

Tithe-exemptions  annulled  by  al-Mutawakkil.  In  ath-
Thaghr,  so  many  pieces  of  land  were  exempt  from  the  tithe
that  the  total  income  of  tithes  was  diminished  to  such  an
extent  that  it  could  not  meet  the  expenses.  By  al-Mutawak-
wil's  orders,  therefore,  all  these  exemptions  were  in  the
year  243  abolished.


PART  III
MESOPOTAMIA


CHAPTER  I
The  Conquest  of  Mesopotamia  [al-Jazirah]  172

cIyad  its  governor.  Da/ud  ibn-'Abd-al-Hamid  the  kadi
of  ar-Rakkah  from  Maimun  ibn-Mihran : — All  of  Meso-
potamia was  conquered  by  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  who,  after  the
death  of  abu-'Ubaidah,  was  made  its  ruler  by  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab.  Abu-'Ubaidah  had  appointed  Tyad  to  be  his
successor  over  Syria,  but  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  appointed
first  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  then  Mu'awiyah  over  Syria,  and
ordered  Tyad  *  to  invade  Mesopotamia.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Sulaiman  ibn-'Ata'  al-
Kurashi : — Abu-'Ubaidah  sent  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  to  Meso-
potamia, and  died  while  Tyad  was  still  there.  'Umar  then
assigned  'Iyad  after  abu-'Ubaidah  as  governor  of  Mesopo-
tamia.

The  terms  with  ar-Ruha.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
Sulaiman  ibn-'Ata' : — When  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm,  who  was
sent  by  abu-'Ubaidah,  reduced  ar-Ruha  2  [Edessa,  modern
Urfa],  he  stood  at  its  gate  riding  on  a  brown  horse;  and
the  inhabitants  made  terms  stipulating  that  they  should  keep
their  cathedral  and  the  buildings  around  it,  and  agreeing
not  to  start  a  new  church  other  than  what  they  already  had,
to  give  succor  to  the  Moslems  against  their  enemy,  and  to
forfeit  their  right  of  protection  in  case  they  fail  to  keep
any  of  these  conditions.  Similar  terms  to  those  of  ar-Ruha
were  made  by  the  people  of  Mesopotamia.

1  R.  Duval,  "  Histoire  d'Edesse."  in  Journal  Asiatique,  Juillet-Aout,
1891,  pp.  106  seq.

-  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2505.

269


270  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  version  of  al-Wakidi.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  states
on  the  authority  of  al-Wakidi  that  the  most  authentic  report
he  heard  regarding  'Iyad  was  that  abu-' Ubaidah,  in  the  year
1 8,  fell  victim  to  the  plague  of  Emmaus  ['Amawas]  after
appointing  'Iyad  as  his  successor  [over  Syria].  'Iyad  re-
ceived a  letter  from  'Umar,  conferring  upon  him  the  gov-
ernorship of  Hims,  Kinnasrin  and  Mesopotamia.  On
Thursday  the  middle  of  Sha'ban,  year  18,  he  marched  to
Mesopotamia  at  the  head  of  5,000  men,  the  van  of  the  army
being  led  by  Maisarah  ibn-Masruk  al-'Absi,  the  right  wing
by  Sa'id  ibn-'Amir  ibn-Hidhyam  al-Jumahi  and  the  left  by
Safwan  ibn-al-Mu'attal  as-Sulami.  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid
was  on  the  left  wing.  Others  assert  that  after  Abu-'Ubai-
dah,  Khalid  never  marched  under  any  man's  flag  but  re-  173
mained  in  Hims,  where  he  died  in  the  year  21  after  desig-
nating 'Umar  to  execute  his  will.1  Some  claim  that  he  died  •
in  al-Madinah ;  but  that  he  died  in  Hims  is  the  more  authen-
tic report.2

The  terms  with  ar-Rakkah.  The  van  of  Tyad's  army  ar-
rived in  ar-Rakkah  :i  and  made  a  raid  on  its  environs,  where
Beduin  Arabs  were  encamped  with  a  group  of  peasants,
carrying  off  much  booty.  Those  who  escaped  took  to  flight
and  entered  the  city  of  ar-Rakkah.  'Iyad  advanced  with
his  troops  until  he  arrived,  with  his  troops  in  military  ar-
ray,4 at  Bab  ar-Ruha — one  of  the  gates  of  the  city.  For
an  hour  the  Moslems  were  shot  at,  and  some  of  them  were
wounded.  In  order  to  escape  the  enemy's  stones  and  ar-
rows, Tyad  withdrew,  and,  after  going  round  the  city  on

1  Hajar,  vol.  i,  pp.  853-854.

2  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  pp.  74-/5-

3  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  439-

4Ar.  ta'bi'ah. See  Wustenfeld,  "Die  Taktik  des  Aelianus,"  in  Ab-
handlungen  des  Gcsellschaft  der  IVissenschaftcn.  Gottingen.  1880.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  2Jl

horseback,  he  stationed  horse-guards  at  its  gates.  He  then
returned  to  the  main  army  and  sent  bands  of  soldiers  1  who
went  around,  bringing  back  with  them  prisoners  from  the
villages  and  large  quantities  of  food.  It  was  the  proper
time  for  reaping  the  harvest.  This  condition  having  lasted
for  five  or  six  days  the  patrician  of  the  city  asked  for  peace
from  Tyad,  who  made  terms  with  him,  guaranteeing  for
the  population  the  security  of  their  lives,  children,  posses-
sions and  city.  Tyad  said,  "  The  land  is  ours ;  we  have  sub-
dued and  secured  it  ".  However,  he  left  it  in  their  hands
on  the  kharaj  basis.  That  part  of  the  land  which  was  not
wanted  and  rejected  by  the  dhimmis,  he  turned  over  to  the
Moslems  on  the  tithe  basis.  Moreover,  'Iyad  assessed  poll-
tax  to  the  amount  of  one  dinar  per  annum  on  every  man,
holding  women  and  boys  exempt.  In  addition  to  the  dinar,
he  levied  on  them  kafizes  *•  of  wheat,  and  some  oil,  vine-
gar and  honey.  When  Mu'awiyah  came  to  power,  he  laid
that  as  a  regular  tax  upon  them.  The  people  then  opened
the  city  gates  and  established  a  market  for  the  Moslems  at
the  Ruha  gate.  The  following  is  the  statement  issued  by
Tyad:

'  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  what  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  gave  to  the  people  of  ar-
Rakkah  when  he  entered  the  city.  He  gave  them  security
for  their  lives  and  possessions.  Their  churches  shall  not
be  destroyed  or  occupied,  so  long  as  they  pay  the  tax  as-
sessed on  them  and  enter  in  no  intrigue.  It  is  stipulated
that  they  build  no  new  church  or  place  of  worship,  or  pub-

1  Ar.  sardya  who,  according  to  al-Mas'udi.  Kitab  at-Tanbih,  p.  279,
were  bands  of  soldiers  varying  between  3  and  500  persons,  that  go
forth  at  night.

2  A  measure  of  capacity  consisting  of  ten  makkuks;  cf.  Mawardi,  p.

265.


272  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

licly  strike  clappers,1  or  openly  celebrate  Easter  Monday  '
or  show  the  cross  in  public.  Thereunto,  Allah  is  witness
and  Allah  is  a  sufficient  witness.  Signed  by  Tyad's  own
signature."

Others  report  that  Tyad  assessed  four  dinars  on  every
adult  of  ar-Rakkah;  but  the  fact  is  that  'Umar  wrote  after 174
this  to  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd,  his  governor,  instructing  him  to
assess  four  dinars  on  ever}'  man.  as  it  was  the  case  with
those  who  possessed  gold.

The  terms  with  ar-Ruha.  'iyad  then  advanced  against
Harran  and  encamped  at  Bajuddah.  whence  he  sent  forth
the  van  of  the  army.  The  people  of  Harran  closed  the
city  gates,  shutting  the  troops  out.  Tyad  followed  up  the
van  and  when  he  camped  at  Harran.  the  Harnaniyah  from
among  its  inhabitants  sent  him  a  word  saying  that  they  had
under  their  control  a  part  of  the  city  and  asking  him  to  go
to  ar-Ruha,  promising  to  accept  whatever  terms  he  may
make  with  it,  and  leaving  him  free  to  negotiate  with  the
Christians  of  Harran.  Hearing  that,  the  Christians  sent
him  word,  consenting  to  what  had  been  proposed  and  of-
fered by  al-Harnaniyah.  Accordingly,  Tyad  advanced  to
ar-Ruha  whose  people  gathered  against  and  shot  at  the  Mos-
lems for  an  hour.  The  fighters  made  a  sally,  but  the  Mos-
lems put  them  to  flight  and  forced  them  to  seek  refuge  in
the  city.  No  sooner  had  that  taken  place  than  they  of-
fered to  capitulate  and  make  peace.  To  this,  Tyad  con-
sented and  wrote  them  the  following  statement :

"  In  the  name  1  f Ulah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.

'Ar.  nakus.

!  Ar  ba'uth.  used  to-day  for  the  Christian  festival  of  Monday  after
Easter,  is  defined  by  Kaviiis,  Taj  a!-' Arils  and  Lisan  al-'Arab  as  cor-
responding to  the  Moslem  prayer  in  which  a  petition  tor  rain  is  offered.
Cf.  S.  Fraenkel,  Die  Aramaischen  Fremdworter  im  Arabischen,  p.  277.

1  Cf.  Yusuf.  p.  23.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  273

This  is  a  statement  from  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  to  the  bishop  of
ar-Ruha.  If  ye  open  before  me  the  city  gate  and  agree  to
offer  to  me  for  every  man  one  dinar  and  two  modii  of
wheat,  then  I  grant  you  safety  for  your  persons,  possessions
and  those  dependent  on  you.  It  is  incumbent  on  you  to
guide  the  one  who  goes  astray,  to  repair  the  bridges  and
roads,  and  give  good  counsel  to  the  Moslems.  Thereunto,
Allah  is  witness;  and  he  is  sufficient."

Da'ud  ibn-'Abd-al-Hamid  from  a  grandfather  of  his :
—The  statement  of  Tyad  to  the  inhabitants  of  ar-Ruha  ran
as  follows : —

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  statement  from  Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  and  his  accom-
panying Moslems  to  the  inhabitants  of  ar-Ruha.  I  have
granted  them  security  for  their  lives,  possessions,  offspring,
women,  city  and  mills,  so  long  as  they  give  what  they
rightly  owe.  They  are  bound  to  repair  our  bridges,  and
guide  those  of  us  who  go  astray.  Thereunto,  Allah  and  his
angels  and  the  Moslems  are  witnesses."

Harran  and  Sumaisat  capitulate.  Tyad  then  came  to
Harran  and  directed  Safwan  ibn-al-Mu'attal  and  Habib
ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  to  Sumaisat.1  With  the  people  of
ITarran,  he  made  terms  similar  to  those  of  ar-Ruha.  Its
inhabitants  opened  the  city  gates  for  him,  and  he  assigned
a  governor  over  it.  He  then  came  to  Sumaisat  and  found
Safwan  ibn-al-Mu'attal  and  Habib  ibn-Maslamah  direct-
ing their  operations  against  it,  after  having  reduced  many  175
of  its  villages  and  forts.  The  people  of  Sumaisat  made
terms  similar  to  those  of  ar-Ruha.  Tyad  used  to  make  in-
cursions from  ar-Ruha  and  return  to  it.

All  Mesopotamia  reduced  by  'Iyad. Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  az-Zuhri : — In  the  days  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  not

4  Samosata;  Istakhri.  p.  62.


2/4


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


a  foot  was  left  in  Mesopotamia  unsubdued  by  'Iyad  ibn-
Ghanm  who  reduced  Harran,  ar-Ruha,  ar-Rakkah,  Kar-
kisiya  [Circesium]  Nasibin  [Nisibis]  and  Sinjar.

Muhammad  [ibn-Sa'd]  from  Thabit  ibn-al-Hajjaj : —
'Iyad  effected  the  conquest  of  ar-Rakkah,  Harran,  ar-Ruha,
Nasibin,  Maiyafarikin,  Karkisiya,  and  all  the  villages  and
towns  of  the  Euphrates  by  capitulation;  but  all  the  open
fields  by  force.

Muhammad  [ibn-Sa'd]  from  Rashid  ibn-Sa'd: — 'Iyad
effected  the  conquest  of  Mesopotamia  and  its  towns  by
capitulation ;  but  its  land,  by  force.

The  terms  with  Harran.  Someone  reported  that  when
'Iyad  came  to  Harran  from  ar-Rakkah,  he  found  it  de-
serted, its  inhabitants  having  moved  to  ar-Ruha.  When
ar-Ruha  was  captured,  the  people  of  Harran  in  it  made
terms  regarding  their  city  similar  to  those  of  ar-Ruha.

Saruj  and  other  places  subdued  by  'Iyad.  Abu-Aiyub
ar-Rakki-1-Mu'addab  from  al-Hajjaj  ibn-abi-Mani'  ar-
Rusafi's 1  grandfather: — 'iyad  captured  ar-Rakkah,  then
ar-Ruha.  then  Harran,  and  then  Sumaisat  on  the  same
terms  of  capitulation.  Thence  he  came  to  Saruj,2  Ras-
kifa:!  and  al-Ard  al-Baida',  subdued  their  land,  and  made
terms  with  the  holders  of  their  forts  similar  to  tih
of  ar-Ruha.  The  people  of  Sumaisat  after  that  rebelled,
which  made  him,  on  hearing  it,  return  and  besiege  the
city  until  he  reduced  it.  Having  heard  that  the  inhabi-
tants of  ar-Ruha  had  1  >r<  ken  their  covenant,  he  camped
around  the  city,  upon  which  they  opened  their  city  gates.
He  entered  the  city  and  left  in  it  his  'amil  with  a  small  band.
Thence  he  came  to  the  villages  of  the  Euphrates  4  which  are

xDhahcibi,  Mushtabih,  p.  225;  Mushtarik,  p.  206.

1  Bafnan ;  see  ZDMG,  vol.  xxx,  p.  354.

5  R.  Payne  Smith,  Thesaurus  Syriacus,  eols.  3002  and  2910.

4  Kuroiyat  or  Karyat  al-Furat;  cf.  Hamadhani,  Buldan,  p.  136.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  2y$

Jisr  Manbij  and  its  dependents,  which  he  reduced  on  simi-
lar terms.  'Ain  al-Wardah  or  Ra's  al-'Ain  x  to  which  he
came  next  held  out  against  him;  so  he  left  it.  He  then
came  to  Tall  Mauzin  2  and  took  it  on  the  same  terms  as  ar-  176
Ruha.  That  took  place  in  the  year  19.  Against  Karkisiya,
Tyad  directed  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  who  took  the
city  by  a  capitulation  similar  to  that  of  ar-Rakkah.  Tyad
captured  Amid  without  fighting  and  on  terms  similar  to
those  of  ar-Ruha.  He  captured  Maiyafarikin  on  the  same
terms.  He  also  reduced  the  fort  of  Kafartutha.3  After  a
conflict,  he  reduced  Nasibin  and  the  terms  concluded  were
similar  to  those  of  ar-Ruha.  Tur  'Abdin,4  Hisn  Maridin
and  Dara  5  he  took  on  the  same  terms.  Karda  and  Bazabda
he  conquered  on  the  same  terms  as  those  of  Nasibin.  The
patrician  of  az-Zawazan  came  to  Tyad  and  made  terms  re-
garding his  lands,  agreeing  to  pay  tax.  All  that  took  place
in  the  year  19  and  in  a  part  of  Muharram,  year  20.  He
then  advanced  to  Arzan  and  took  possession  of  it  on  terms
similar  to  those  of  Nasibin.  He  then  passed  through  ad-
Darb  into  Badlis  which  he  left  for  Khilat  with  whose  patri-
cian he  made  terms.  Finally,  he  got  to  al-'Ain  al-Hamidah
in  Armenia  beyond  which  he  did  not  go.  On  his  way  back,
he  made  the  chief  of  Badlis  responsible  for  the  khardj  of
Khilat  with  its  poll-tax  and  what  was  due  on  its  patrician.
He  then  proceeded  to  ar-Rakkah,  and  on  to  Hims  whose
governorship  had  been  entrusted  to  him  by  'Umar.  In  the
year  20,  he  died.  'Umar  after  that  appointed  Sa'id  ibn-
'Amir  ibn-Hidhyam,  who  died  after  a  short  time. 'Umar

1  Hoffman,  Syrische  Akten  Persischer  Mdrtyrer,  p.  183.

2  Hoffman,  op.  at.,  p.  224,  note  1778.
8  R.  Payne  Smith,  op.  cit.,  col.  1801.

*  R.  Payne  Smith,  op.  cit.,  col.  1451.
6  Hoffman,  op.  cit.,  p.  46.


276  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

then  appointed  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  al-Ansari,  who  succeeded
in  capturing  'Ain  al-Wardah  after  a  severe  conflict.

'Ain  al-Wardah  or  Ra's  al-'Ain  captured.  Al-Wakidi
from  abu-Wahb  al-Jaishani  Dailam  ibn-al-Muwassa' : —
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wrote  to  Tyad  instructing  him  to
send  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  to  'Ain  al-Wardah.  This  he  did.
The  van  of  the  army  went  ahead,  assailed  a  group  of  peas-
ants and  carried  away  some  of  the  enemy's  cattle  as  booty.
The  inhabitants  of  the  city  closed  their  gates  and  set  up
the  mangonels  1  on  them.  Many  Moslems  were  killed  by-
stones  and  arrows.  Then  one  of  the  patricians  of  the  city
appeared  and  cursed  the  Moslems  saying,  "  We  are  differ-
ent from  what  ye  have  met  heretofore!"  At  last  the  city
was  taken  by  capitulation.

Amr  ibn- Muhammad  from  a  grandfather  of  al-Hajjaj
ibn-abi-Mani' : — Ra's  al-'Ain2  held  out  against  Tyad  ibn-
Ghanm;  but  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd,  who  was  'Umar's  governor

er  Mesopotamia,  reduced  it  after  a  fierce  resistance  on  lyy
the  part  of  its  inhabitants.  The  Moslems  entered  by  force ;
but  terms  of  capitulation  were  drawn  up  stipulating  that  the
land  be  held  by  them  and  the  tax  be  imposed  on  their  per-
sons to  the  amount  of  four  dinars  per  head.  Their  women
and  children  were  not  taken  as  captives.

The  following  statement  was  made  by  al-Hajjaj :  "  i
heard  it  said  by  certain  sheikhs  from  Ra's  al-'Ain  that  when
'Umair  entered  the  city  he  shouted,  'Never  mind;  never
mind:  [come]  to  me!  [come]  to  me!'  and  that  constituted
a  guarantee  of  security  for  them."

It  is  claimed  by  al-Haitham  ibn-'Adi  that  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  sent  abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  to  'Ain  al-Wardah.  which

!  \r.  'arradah see  Hamasah  (ed.  Kreytag),  p.  307.

'l  Another  name  for  'Ain-al-Wardah. See  al-Mas'udi, Tanbih,  p.  54;
Yakut,  vol.  iii.  p.  764.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  2yy

he  invaded  with  the  troops  of  Mesopotamia  after  the  death
of  Tyad.  The  fact  is  that  'Umair  captured  it  by  force  and
did  not  take  any  captives.  He  only  imposed  khardj  and
poll-tax.  The  view  of  Haitham  is  not  shared  by  any  other
authority.

According  to  al-Hajjaj  ibn-abi-Mani',  a  part  of  the  in-
habitants of  Ra's  al-'Ain  having  vacated  it,  the  Moslems
utilized  their  lands  and  cultivated  them  according  to  the
fief  system.

Sinjdr  captured.  Muhammad  ibn-al-Mufaddal  al-
Mausili  from  certain  sheikhs  of  Sinjar: — Sinjar1  was  held
by  the  Greeks.  Kisra — [Chosroes]  known  as  Abarwiz —
wanted  to  put  to  death  one  hundred  Persians  who  were
brought  before  him  because  of  rebellion  and  disobedience.
Someone  having  interceded  in  their  behalf,  he  ordered  them
sent  to  Sinjar,  which  he  was  then  attempting  to  reduce.
Two  of  them  died,  and  98  arrived  there,  joined  the  troops
who  were  encamped  against  the  city,  and  were  the  first  to
capture  it.  There  they  settled  and  multiplied.  When  'Iyad
was  through  with  Khilat  and  was  going  to  Mesopotamia,
he  sent  an  expedition  to  Sinjar.  took  the  city  by  capitula-
tion, and  settled  it  with  Arabs.

Mansil.  Some  reports  claim  that  Tyad  reduced  one  of  the
forts  of  Mausil,  but  that  is  not  confirmed.

According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi,  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd,  the  'amil  of
'Umar  is  identical  with  'Umar  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Shuhaid  ibn-
'Amr  one  of  al-Aus;  but  according  to  al-Wakidi,  he  is
'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-'Ubaid  whose  father,  Sa'd,  was  killed
in  the  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah.  This  Sa'd.  according  to  the
Kufite  school,  is  one  of  those  who  compiled  the  Koran  in  the
time  of  the  Prophet.

Khdlid  dismissed. Al-Wakidi  states  that  some  reports

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  158.


278  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

claim  that  Khalid  ibn-al-Walicl  ruled  in  'Umar's  name  a
part  of  Mesopotamia;  and  once  as  he  was  in  a  bath,  at  Amid
[Diyarbakr],  or  at  some  other  place,  he  daubed  himself 178
with  a  substance  containing  wine,  which  made  'Umar  dis-
miss him. This,  however,  is  not  confirmed.

The  tax  on  Mesopotamia.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Maimun
ibn-Mihran : — For  some  time,  oil  and  vinegar  and  food
were  taken  for  the  benefit  of  the  Moslems  in  Mesopotamia,
which  tax  was  later  reduced  through  the  sympathy  of
'Umar  and  fixed  at  48,  24,  and  12  dirhams.  In  addition  to
the  poll-tax,  every  one  had  to  provide  two  mudds  of  wheat
two  kists  of  oil  and  two  kists  of  vinegar.

• •  • •  o

Mosques  erected.  I  was  informed  by  a  number  of  the  in-
habitants of  ar-Rakkah  that  when  Tyad  died  and  Sa'id  ibn-
'Amir  ibn-Jriidhyam  became  governor  of  Mesopotamia,  the
latter  erected  the  mosque  of  ar-Rakkah  and  that  of  ar-
Ruha,  after  which  he  died.  The  mosques  in  Diyar  Mudar
and  Diyar  Rabi'ah  were  erected  by  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd.

Mu'awiyah  settles  Arab  tribes.  When  Mu'awiyah  ruled
over  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  in  the  name  of  'Uthman  ibn-
'Affan,  he  was  instructed  by  him  to  settle  the  Arabs  in
places  far  from  the  cities  and  villages,  and  allow  them  to
utilize  the  lands  unpossessed  by  anyone.  Accordingly,  he
caused  the  banu-Tamim  to  settle  at  ar-Rabiyah ;  and  a  pro-
miscuous multitude  of  Kais  and  Asad  and  others,  in  al-
Mazihin  and  al-Mudaibir.1  The  same  thing  he  did  in  Diyar
Mudar.  In  like  manner,  he  stationed  the  Rabi'ah  in  their
Diyar.  The  cities  and  villages  and  frontier  garrisons  he  put
in  charge  of  some,  who  received  stipends  in  order  to  guard
them  and  protect  them,  and  whom  he  put  there  with  his
'Gmils.

Scorpions  in  Nasibin. Abu-Hafs  ash-Shami  from  Ham

1  Kudamah,  p.  246.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  2yg

mad  ibn-'Amr  an-Nasibi : — The  'amil  of  Nasibin  wrote  to
Mu'awiyah,  'Uthman's  governor  over  Syria  and  Mesopota-
mia, complaining  that  seme  of  the  Moslems  in  his  company
had  fallen  victim  to  the  scorpions.  Mu'awiyah  wrote  back  in-
structing him  to  demand  of  the  inhabitants  in  each  quarter
of  the  city  a  fixed  number  of  scorpions  to  be  brought  every
evening.  This  he  did.  They  used  to  bring  the  scorpions
before  him,  and  he  would  order  that  they  be  killed.

Karkisiya,  the  Euphrates  forts  and  other  places  reduced.
Abu-Aiyub  al-Mu'addab  ar-Rakki  from  abu-'Abdallah  al-
Karkasani's  sheikhs : — When  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  captured
Ra's  al-'Ain  he  made  his  way  across  and  beyond  al-Kha.-
bur  x  to  Karkisiya  whose  people  had  violated  the  covenant.
With  them  he  made  terms  similar  to  those  made  before,  179
and  then  advanced  against  the  forts  along  the  course  of  the
Euphrates  one  after  the  other,  which  he  reduced  all  on  the
same  terms  as  Karkisiya.  In  none  of  them  did  he  meet
severe  resistance.  Some  of  them  would  sometimes  throw
stones  at  him.  When  he  was  through  with  Talbas  2  and
'Anat,3  he  came  to  an-Na'usah,  Alusah  4  and  Hit  where  he
found  out  that  'Ammar  ibn-Yasir,  the  'amil  of  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  over  al-Kuf ah,  had  sent  an  army  for  the  invasion
of  the  region  above  al-Anbar,  under  the  leadership  of  Sa'd
ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haram  al-Ansari.  The  holders  of  these  forts
had  come  to  Sa'd  and  demanded  peace,  which  he  arranged
with  them,  retaining  one-half  of  the  church  of  Hit.  'Umair,
therefore,  kept  on  his  way  to  ar-Rakkah.

I  learned  from  certain  scholars  that  the  one  who  went
against  Hit  and  the  forts  beyond  in  al-Kufah  was  Midlaj

1  A  tributary  of  the  Euphrates ;  Tanbih,  p.  54.

*  Vowels  uncertain ;  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  222.
3  Hoffman,  op.  cit.,  p.  137,  note  1162.

*  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  65.


280  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

ibn-'Amr  as-Sulami,  an  ally  of  the  banu-'Abd-Shams  and
one  of  the  Companions,  who  effected  their  capture.  This
Midlaj  built  al-Hadithah  on  the  Euphrates.  His  descendants
were  at  Hit.  The  memory  of  one  of  them,  surnamed  abu-
Harun,  still  lives  there.  Others  assert  that  Midlaj  was  sent
by  Sa'd  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haram ;  but  Allah  knows  best.

Nahr  Sa'id.  In  the  place  of  Nahr  Sa'id — the  canal  named
after  Sa'id  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  (who  was  nick-
named Sa'id  al-Khair  and  who  practised  asceticism) — once
stood  a  jungle  frequented  by  lions.  Al-\Yalid  gave  it  to
him  [Sa'id]  as  fief,  and  he  dug  out  the  canal  and  erected  the
buildings  that  stand  there.  According  to  others,  it  was
'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  who  gave  it  as  fief.

Ar-Rafikah.  There  is  no  trace  that  ar-Rafikah  is  an  old
city.  It  was  built  by  al-Mansur  the  "  Commander  of  the
Believers  "  in  the  year  155,  according  to  the  plan  of  his  city
in  Baghdadh.  Al-Mansur  stationed  in  it  an  army  of  the
people  of  Khurasan  and  entrusted  it  to  al-Mahdi,  who  was
at  that  time  the  heir-apparent.  Later,  ar-Rashid  built  its
castles.  Between  ar-Rakkah  and  ar-Rafikah  lay  a  wide
tract  of  sown  land  to  which  'Ali  ibn-Sulaiman  ibn-'Ali
moved  the  markets  of  ar-Rakkah  when  he  came  as  governor
to  Mesopotamia.  Previous  to  this,  the  greatest  market  of
ar-Rakkah  was  called  Suk  Hisham  al-'Atik  [the  old  market
of  Hisham].  When  ar-Rashid  visited  ar-Rakkah,  he  in-
creased the  number  of  these  markets,  whose  inci  ime  t<
gether  with  that  from  the  confiscated  towns,  is  still  c<
lected  to-day.

Rusafat  Hisham  and  al-Hani  wa-l-Ma/ri. As  for  Eat

ifisham,1  it  was  built  by  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik wh 180
previous  to  its  building,  used  to  stop  at  az-Zaitunah. Hi

1  or  ar-Ru?afat  bi-ash-Sham ;  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  784.  Rusafat  means
causeway.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  28l

sham  dug  out  al-Hani  wa-1-Mari  [canals],  thus  making  the
crown-land  known  as  al-Hani- wa-1-Mari  tillable  land.  He.
founded  in  it  Wasit  ar-Rakkah.1  This  same  land  was  con-
fiscated at  the  beginning  of  the  [Abbasid]  dynasty  and
passed  into  the  hands  of  umm-Ja'far  Zubaidah,  daughter  of
Ja'far  ibn-al-Mansur,  who  built  in  it  the  fief  house  that
bears  her  name,  and  settled  more  people  in  it.

Ar-Rahbah.  There  is  no  trace  that  ar-Rahbah,  which  lies
below  Karkisiya,  is  an  old  city,  it  having  been  built  by
Malik  ibn-Tauk  ibn-'Attab 2  at-Taghlabi  in  the  caliphate
of  al-Ma'mun.

Adhramah.  Adhramah  in  Diyar  Rabi'ah  was  an  old  vil-
lage which  al-Hasan  ibn-'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  at-Taghlabi
took  from  its  chief  and  in  which  he  built  a  castle,  thus  for-
tifying it.

Kafartutha.  Kafartutha  3  was  an  old  fort  that  was  occu-
pied by  the  offspring  of  abu-Rimthah,  who  made  a  town  of
it  and  foritfied  it.

Diyar  Rabi'ah  and  al-Barrlyah.  Mu'afa  ibn-Ta'us  from
his  father : — The  latter  said,  "  I  asked  certain  sheikhs  re-
garding the  tithes  of  Balad  and  Diyar  Rabi'ah  and  al-
Barriyah  4  and  was  told  that  they  were  the  tithes  of  lands
held  by  the  Arabs  when  they  embraced  Islam,  or  reclaimed
by  them  from  waste  lands  unpossessed  by  any  one  or  given
up  by  the  Christians,  and  which  have  consequently  become
waste  and  covered  with  brushwood.  These  lands  were
given  to  the  Arabs  as  fiefs."

'Ain  ar-Rumiyah.  Abu-'Affan  ar-Rakki  from  certain
sheikhs  of  the  writers  of  ar-Rakkah  and  others : — 'Ain  ar-

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  889.

2  Cf.  Mahasin,  vol.  ii,  p.  34-

3  R.  Payne  Smith,  col.  1801.

*  The  desert  part  of  Mesopotamia. Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  001  ;  Bakri,  p.  566-


282  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Rumiyah  together  with  its  spring  belonged  to  al-Walid  ibn-
'Ukbah  ibn-abi-Mu'ait  who  gave  it  to  abu-Zubaid  at-Ta'i
from  whom  it  passed  to  abu-1-' Abbas  the  "  Commander  of
the  Believers. "  Abu-l-'Abbas  gave  it  as  fief  to  Maimun
ibn-Hamzah,  the  freedman  of  'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-' Ab-
bas, from  whose  heirs  ar-Rashid  bought  it.  It  lies  in  the
district  of  ar-Rakkah.

Ghdbat  ibn-Hubairah.  Ghabat  ibn-Hubairah  [the  forest
of  ibn-Hubairah]  was  first  given  as  fief  to  ibn-Hubairah,
but  later  confiscated  and  assigned  as  fief  to  Bishr  ibn-Mai-
mun,  the  builder  of  at-Takat 1  [archways  or  arcades]  at
Baghdadh  in  the  vicinity  of  Bab  ash-Sham  [the  Syrian
gate].  This  Ghabat  was  later  bought  by  ar-Rashid.  It  lies
in  the  province  of  Saruj.

'A'ishah  fief.  The  fief  which  was  given  by  Hisham  to
his  daughter,  'A'ishah,  at  Raskifa  and  which  bore  her  name
was  also  confiscated.

Sala'us  and  Kafarjadda. 'Abd-al-Malik and Hisham
owned  a  village  called  Sala'us  and  half  of  another  called 181
Kafarjadda  which  lay  in  the  province  of  ar-Ruha.

Tall'Afra',  Tall  Madhaba,  al-Musalla  and  Rabad  Harrdn.
In  Harran,  al-Ghamr  ibn-Yazid  owned  Tall  'Afra',  the  land
of  Tall  Madhaba,2  and  Ard  al-Musalla  [place  of  prayer],
together  with  the  confiscated  lands  and  the  workshops  in
Rabad  Harran.

Marj  'Abd-al-Wahid.  Before  al-Hadath  and  Zibatrah
were  built,  Marj  3  'Abd-al-Wahid  was  a  pasturing  place
reserved  for  the  Moslems  * ;  but  when  these  two  were  built,
the  Moslems  could  do  without  the  Marj,  which  was  peopled

1  Cf.  Le  Strange,  Baghdad  during  the  Abbasid  Caliphate,  p.  130.

J  Lacking  in  diacritical  points.

8  The  word  means  meadow.

4  Ar.  hiitio:  see  Mawardi.  p.  324.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  MESOPOTAMIA  283

and  later  added  by  al-Husain  al-Khadim  in  the  caliphate  of
ar-Rashid  to  al-Ahwaz.  After  that,  some  people  unjustly
took  possession  of  it  and  of  its  farms,  in  which  condition  it
remained  until  'Abdallah  ibn-Tahir  came  to  Syria  and  re-
turned it  to  the  crown-lands.  Abu-Aiyub  ar-Rakki  heard
it  said  that  'Abd-al-Wahid,  after  whom  the  Marj  was
named,  was  ' Abd-al-Wahid  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-al-Hakam
ibn-abi-l-'Asi,  a  cousin  of  'Abd-al-Malik.  He  owned  the
Marj,  but  turned  it  into  a  pasture  land  exclusively  for  the
Moslems. He  is  the  one  whom  al-Katami  lauded,  saying :

"  If  fate  would  overlook  only  'Abd-al-Wahid,
let  not  the  case  of  all  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  city  grieve  thee."


CHAPTER  II
The  Christians  of  the  banu-Taghlib  ibn-Wa'il

'Umar  doubles  their  sadakah.  Shaiban  ibn-Farrukh  from
as-Saffah  ash-Shaibani : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wanted  to
collect  the  poll-tax  from  the  Christian  tribe,  banu-Taghlib :
but  they  took  to  flight  and  some  of  them  went  to  a  distant
land.  An-Nu'man  ibn-Zur'ah  (or  Zur'ah  ibn-an-Nu'man)
addressed  'Umar  saying:  "  I  plead  in  Allah's  name  for  the
banu-Taghlib.  They  are  a  body  of  Arabs  too  proud  to  pay
poll-tax,  but  severe  in  warfare.  Let  not  thy  enemy,  there-
fore, be  enriched  by  them  to  thy  disadvantage."  There-
upon 'Umar  called  them  back  and  doubled  the  sadakah  laid
on  them.

Neither  Moslems,  nor  of  the  '  people  of  the  Book"
Shaiban  from  ibn-' Abbas: — The  latter  said,  "What  is
slaughtered  by  the  Christians  of  the  banu-Taghlib  shall  not
be  eaten,  and  their  women  shall  not  be  taken  as  wives  [by  182
us].  They  are  neither  of  us  nor  of  the  'people  of  the
Book.'  "

'Umair  consults  ' ('mar.  'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  from  'Awa-
nah  ibn-al-Hakam  and  abu-Mikhnaf : — 'Umair  ibn-Sa'd
wrote  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  informing  him  that  he  had
come  to  the  regions  on  the  Syrian  slope  of  the  Euphrates
and  captured  'An at  and  the  other  forts  of  [/.  along  the
course  of]  the  Euphrates ;  and  that  when  he  wished  to  con-
strain the  banu-Taghlib  of  that  region  to  accept  Islam,  they
refused  and  were  on  the  point  of  leaving  for  some  Byzan-
tine territory ;  no  one  on  the  Syrian  slope  of  the  Euphrates
whom  he  wished  to  constrain  to  Islam  had  before  the  banu-

1  Cf.  Yusuf.  p.  68.
284


THE  CHRISTIANS  OF  THE  BANU-TAGHLIB  285

Taghlib  showed  such  tenacity  and  asked  permission  to  emi-
grate. 'Umair  asked  'Umar's  advice  on  this  matter.
'Umar  wrote  back  ordering  him  to  double  on  all  their  pas-
turing cattle  1  and  land  the  amount  of  sadakah  ordinarily
taken  from  Moslems ;  and  if  they  should  refuse  to  pay  that,
he  ought  to  war  with  them  until  he  annihilates  them  or  they
accept  Islam.  They  accepted  to  pay  a  double  sadakah  2
saying,  "  So  long  as  it  is  not  the  tax  of  the  '  uncircum-
cized,'  we  shall  pay  it  and  retain  our  faith."  a

The  terms  with  the  banu-Taghlib.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from
Da'ud  ibn-Kurdus : — After  having  crossed  the  Euphrates
and  decided  to  leave  for  the  land  of  the  Greeks,  the  banu-
Taghlib  made  terms  with  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  agreeing
not  to  immerse  [baptize]  a  child  or  compel  him  to  accept
their  faith,  and  to  pay  a  double  sadakah.  Da'ud  ibn-Kur-
dus used  to  repeat  that  they  had  no  claim  to  security
[dhimmah],  because  they  used  immersion  in  their  ritual —
referring  to  baptism.

Only  they  pay  double  sadakah.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad
from  az-Zuhri : — None  of  the  "  people  of  the  Book  "  pay
sadakah  on  their  cattle  except  the  Christian  banu-Taghlib
or — he  perhaps  said — the  Christian  Arabs,  whose  whole
possessions  consist  of  cattle.  These  pay  twice  what  the
Moslems  pay.

Zurah  intercedes  in  their  behalf.  Sa'id  ibn-Sulaiman
Sa'dawaih  from  Zur'ah  ibn-an-Nu'man : — The  latter  inter-
ceded with  'Umar  in  favor  of  the  Christians  of  the  banu-
Taghlib,  saying.  They  are  Arabs  too  proud  to  pay  the
poll-tax.  and  are  possessors  of  tillable  land  and  cattle."
'Umar  had  decided  to  take  tax  from  them  and  they  became
dispersed  in  the  whole  country. At  last,  'Umar  made  terms

1  Cf.  Yusuf,  p.  68.

2  Cf.  ibn-Anas,  al-Mudauwanah-l-Kubra,  vol.  ii,  p.  42.
8  MFO.  vol.  iii.  pp.  159,  162.


286  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

with  them,  stipulating  that  they  pay  double  what  the  Mos- 183
lems  pay  in  the  form  of  sadakah  on  the  land  and  cattle,  and
that  they  do  not  christen  their  children.

What  'Ali  would  do.  According  to  Mughirah,  'Ali  used
to  repeat,  "  If  I  should  have  the  time  to  deal  with  the  banu-
Taghlib,  I  would  have  my  own  way  with  them.  Their
fighters  I  would  surely  put  to  death,  and  their  children  I
would  take  as  captives,  because  by  christening  their  chil-
dren they  violated  the  covenant  and  are  no  more  in  our
trust  [dhimmah]."

What  Ziyad  said.  Abu-Nasr  at-Tammar  from  Ziyad
ibn-Hudair  al-Asadi : — The  latter  said,  "  I  was  sent  by
'Umar  to  the  Christians  of  the  banu-Taghlib  in  order  to  col-
lect from  them  half  the  tithe  on  their  possessions,  and  was
warned  against  collecting  tithes  from  a  Moslem,  or  from  a
dhimmi  that  pays  khardj."

'Uthman  withdraws  his  word.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd
from  Muhammad  ibn-Ibrahim  ibn-al-Harith : — 'Uthman
gave  orders  that  nothing  be  accepted  from  the  banu-Tagh-
lib as  tax  except  the  tithe  on  gold  and  silver.  Having,  how-
ever, learned  the  fact  that  'Umar  took  from  them  a  double
sadakah,  he  withdrew  his  word.

The  tax  on  banu-Taghlib.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  it  is
said  by  Sufyan  ath-Thauri,  al-Auza'i,  Malik  ibn-Anas,  ibn-
abi-Lailah,  ibn-abi-Dhi'b,  abu-Hanifah  and  abu-Yusuf  that
from  one  of  the  banu-Taghlib  is  collected  double  what  is
collected  fr;>m  a  Moslem,  on  land,  cattle  and  possessions.
But  if  he  is  a  child  or  idiot,  a  double  sadakah — according
to  the  school  of  al-Trak — is  taken  on  his  land,  and  nothing
on  his  cattle ;  and  according  to  the  school  of  al-Hijaz,  a
double  sadakah  is  taken  on  his  cattle  and  his  land.  They
all,  however,  agree  that  what  is  taken  from  the  banu-Tagh-
lib should  be  spent  in  the  same  way  as  khardj,  because  it  is
a  substitute  for  tax.


CHAPTER  III
The  Fortifications  of  the  Mesopotamian  Frontier

Shimshat.  When  'Uthman  ibn-'Aftan  became  caliph,  he
wrote  to  Mu'awiyah  conferring  on  him  the  governorship  of
Syria,  and  assigned  'Umair  ibn-Sa'd  al-Ansari  as  governor
of  Mesopotamia.  Later  he  dismissed  the  latter  and  com-
bined both  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  including  their  frontier  184
fortifications  [thughur]  under  Mu'awiyah,  in  the  meantime
ordering  Mu'awiyah  to  invade  or  send  someone  to  invade
Shimshat,1  i.  e.,  Armenia  IV.  Accordingly,  Mu'awiyah
sent  thereto  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  and  Safwan  ibn-
Mu'attal  as-Sulami  who,  after  a  few  days  of  camping
around  it,  reduced  it  and  made  terms  similar  to  those  of  ar-
Ruha.  Safwan  took  up  his  abode  in  Armenia  until  his
death  towards  the  end  of  Mu'awiyah's  caliphate.  It  is  held
by  others  that  Mu'awiyah  himself  led  the  invasion  with
these  two  in  his  company,  that  he  then  conferred  its  gov-
ernorship on  Safwan,  who  lived  in  it  until  his  death.  After
stopping  in  Malatyah  in  the  year  133,  Constantine  the
"  tyrant  "  camped  around  Shimshat  with  hostile  intentions,
but  effected  nothing.  After  making  a  raid  on  the  surround-
ing places,  he  departed.  Shimshat  was  included  in  the
kharaj-\dj\d  until  the  time  of  al-Mutawakkil  who  changed
it  into  a  tithe-land,  putting  it  on  the  same  level  with  the
other  frontier  fortresses.

Kamkh. After  the  conquest  of  Shimshat,  Habib  ibn-

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  319.

287


288  THE  ORIGLXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Maslamah  attacked  Hisn  Kamkh  l  but  failed  to  reduce  it.
Safwan  too  attacked  it  and  failed.  In  the  year  59 — the
year  in  which  he  died — Safwan  made  another  attempt  on
it,  at  which  time  he  was  accompanied  by  'Umair  ibn-al-
Hubab  "  as-Sulami,  who  climbed  the  wall  and  kept  strug-
gling single-handed  until  the  Greeks  gave  way  and  the  Mos-
lems climbed  up.  Thus  the  reduction  of  Kamkh  was  due  to
'Umair  ibn-al-Hubab  and  was  the  thing  in  which  he  boasted
and  others  boasted  for  him.  Later,  however,  the  Greeks
succeeded  in  taking  it;  but  it  was  recaptured  by  Maslamah
ibn-'Abd-al-Malik.  Thus  the  fort  passed  back  and  forth
from  the  hands  of  the  Moslems  to  the  hands  of  the  Greeks
until  the  year  149  in  which  al-Mansur  left  Baghdadh  for
Hadithat  al-Mausil  from  which  he  sent  al-Hasan  ibn-
Kahtabah  and  after  him  Muhammad  ibn-al-Ash'ath,  both
under  the  leadership  of  al-'Abbas  ibn- Muhammad,  for  the
invasion  of  Kamkh.  Muhammad  ibn-al-Ash'ath  died  at
Amid/'  A1-' Abbas  and  al-Hasan  advanced  to  Malatyah  '
from  which  they  took  provisions,  and  then  camped  around
Kamkh.  Al-'' Abbas  ordered  that  mangonels  be  set  upon  the
fort. The  holders  of  the  fort  covered  it  with  cypress  w

protect  it  against  the  mangonel  stones,  and  killed  by  the
stones  they  hurled  two  hundred  Moslems.  The  Moslems
then  set  their  mantel  ts  and  fought  severely  until  they  185
captured  it.  Among  those  in  the  company  of  al-' Abbas  ibn-
Muhammad  ibn-'Ali  in  this  campaign  was  Matar  al-YVar-
rak.  Once  more  the  Greeks  took  Kamkh  fort,  and  in  the
year  177  an  attack  against  it  was  led  by  Muhammad  ibn-

1  Haukal,  pp.  129,  130.

1  Cf.  Mahasin.  vol.  i.  p.  204:  Duraid,  p.  187.

1  Diyarbakr.

♦  Vakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  633-634.

\r.  dabbdbah :  Zaidan.  vol.  i.  p.  143.


THE  M  ESQ  POT  AM  I  AN  FRONTIER  289

'Abdallah  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-abi-'Amrah-l-Ansari,  the
'dmil  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Salih  over  Shimshat,  which  re-
sulted in  its  reduction.  The  fort  was  entered  on  the  14th
of  Rabi'  II,  177,  and  was  held  by  the  Moslems  until  the  time
of  the  civil  war  led  by  Muhammad  ibn-ar-Rashid,  at  which
time  its  holders  fled  away  and  the  Greeks  took  possession
of  it.  Some  hold  that  the  fort  was  delivered  to  the  Greeks
by  'Ubaidallah  ibn-al-Akta'  who,  thereby,  saved  his  son
who  was  held  by  them  as  prisoner.  In  the  caliphate  of  al-
Ma'mun,  'Abdallah  ibn-Tahir  reduced  it;  and  it  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Moslems  until  certain  Christians  from  Shim-
shat, Kalikala  together  with  Bikrat  ibn-Ashut,  the  patrician
of  Khilat,  succeeded  by  subtle  means  in  transferring  it  to
the  Greeks,  and  in  this  wise  winning  their  favor  which  the
Christians  desired  because  they  held  crown-lands  in  the
province  of  Shimshat.

Malatyah.  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  was  sent  by
Tyad  ibn-Ghanm  from  Shimshat  to  Malatyah  x  whose  con-
quest he  effected.  The  city  was  later  lost  to  the  Moslems.
When  Mu'awiyah  became  governor  of  Syria  and  Mesopo-
tamia, he  sent  again  Habib  ibn-Maslamah  who  took  it  by
force  and  stationed  in  it  a  Moslem  company  of  horsemen
to  keep  post  on  the  frontier  and  a  'dmil.  When  Mu'awiyah
visited  it  on  his  way  to  the  land  of  the  Greeks,  he  stationed
in  it  a  garrison  from  Syria,  Mesopotamia  and  other  places.
It  became  one  of  the  headquarters  for  the  summer  expedi-
tions. In  the  days  of  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair,  its  inhabi-
tants having  left  it,  the  Greeks  came  and  devastated  it;  but
they  scon  after  evacuated  it,  and  it  was  occupied  by  Arme-
nian and  Nabatean  [Aramean]  Christians.

Turandah. Muhammad ibn-Sa'd from al-Wakidi : —
After  its  invasion  by  'Abdallah  ibn-' Abd-al-Malik  in  the

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  633-634.


290  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

year  83,  the  Moslems  settled  in  Turandah  1  and  built  their
houses  in  it.  This  Turandah  is  three  days'  journey  from
Malatyah  and  lies  in  the  interior  of  the  Byzantine  Empire.
Malatyah  at  this  time  was  in  ruins  and  inhabited  by  only  a
few  Armenian  dhimmis  and  others.  In  summer,  a  detach-
ment of  troops  from  Mesopotamia  would  come  and  stay
in  it  until  the  rain  and  snow  began  to  fall,  at  which  time
they  would  return.  When  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  became  186
caliph,  he  made  the  inhabitants  of  Turandah,  against  their
will,  evacuate  it,  because  he  feared  a  raid  of  the  enemy
upon  them.  As  they  left,  they  carried  away  everything  on
their  backs,  leaving  nothing  behind  and  breaking  even  the
jars  of  oil  and  vinegar.  'Umar  settled  them  in  Malatyah
and  destroyed  Turandah,  making  Ja'wanah  ibn-al-Harith
of  the  banu-'Amir  ibn-Sa'sa'ah  the  governor  of  Malatyah.

The  Greeks  descend  upon  Malatyah.  In  the  year  123,
some  20,000  Greeks  made  a  descent  on  Malatyah.  Its  in-
habitants closed  the  gates;  and  the  women  appeared  on  the
wall  with  turbans  on  their  heads  and  took  part  in  the  fight.
The  people  of  Malatyah  then  sent  a  messenger  to  appeal
for  help.  He  rode  on  a  post-mule  and  came  to  Hisham  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  who  was  then  at  ar-Rusafah.  Hisham  sum-
moned the  Moslems  to  the  help  of  Malatyah,  but  hearing
that  the  Greeks  had  withdrawn  from  it,  he  communicated
the  news  to  the  messenger  and  sent  him  with  horsemen  to
remain  at  the  frontier  in  readiness  for  the  enemy.  Hisham
led  an  expedition  in  person,  after  which  he  alighted  in
Malatyah  where  he  lay  encamped  until  it  was  built.  On
his  way,  he  passed  through  ar-Rakkah  which  he  entered
with  his  sword  at  his  side.  This  was  the  first  time  in  his
rule  in  which  he  carried  his  sword.

It  is  reported  by  al-Wakidi  that  in  the  year  133,  Constan-

'  Yakut,  vol.  iii.  p.  534-


THE  MESOPOTAMIAN  FRONTIER  2gi

tine  the  "  tyrant  "  directed  his  march  to  Malatyah.  Kamkh
at  that  time  was  in  Moslem  hands;  and  its  governor  was
one  of  the  banu-Sulaim.  The  people  of  Kamkh  having  sent
a  call  to  the  people  of  Malatyah  for  succor,  800  horsemen
sallied  forth  from  it  to  meet  the  Greeks.  The  Greek  cavalry
defeated  them  after  a  battle,  and  Constantine  camped
around  Malatyah  and  invested  it.  At  this  time,  Mesopo-
tamia was  the  scene  of  a  civil  war  and  its  'dmil  Musa  ibn-
Ka'b  was  at  Harran.  Therefore,  when  the  people  of  Ma-
latyah sent  a  messenger  soliciting  aid,  nobody  came.  Hear-
ing that,  Constantine  addressed  the  people  of  Malatyah
saying,  "  O  people  of  Malatyah,  I  would  not  have  come  to
you  had  I  not  realized  your  state  and  the  fact  that  your
authorities  [sultan]  are  too  busy  to  help  you.  Make  peace
therefore  with  me  and  leave  the  city  that  I  may  destroy  it
and  go  my  way."  The  people  did  not  comply  with  his  de-
mand; so  he  set  the  mangonels.  The  siege  was  pressed
so  hard  and  the  inhabitants  were  so  exhausted  that  they
asked  Constantine  for  safe-conduct,  which  request  he  ac-
cepted. As  they  prepared  to  leave,  they  carried  every  light
thing  they  could  and  threw  what  was  too  heavy  into  wells
and  hiding  places.  As  they  made  their  way  out,  all  the
Greeks  stood  in  two  rows  from  the  city  gates  to  the  end
of  the  line,  with  their  swords  unsheathed  and  the  point  of
the  one  sword  on  the  point  of  the  one  opposite  to  it,  thus  187
making  an  arch.  The  Greeks  saw  them  off  until  they  got
to  their  place  of  safety,  upon  which  they  turned  toward
Mesopotamia  where  they  settled  in  various  places.  Malat-
yah was  then  razed  to  the  ground  by  the  Greeks,  who  left
nothing  but  a  granary  of  which  only  one  side  was  dam-
aged. Hisn  Kaludhiyah  was  also  destroyed  by  them.

Malatyah  rebuilt.  In  the  year  139,  al-Mansur  wrote  to
Salih  ibn-'Ali  ordering  him  to  rebuild  and  fortify  Malat-
vah. He  then  deemed  it  best  to  send  'Abd-al-Wahhab  ibn-


292  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Ibrahim  al-Imam  as  governor  over  Mesopotamia  and  its
frontier  fortresses.  Accordingly,  'Abd-al-Wahhab  started
in  the  year  140  at  the  head  of  troops  from  Khurasan  and
was  accompanied  by  al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah.  He  ordered
the  people  of  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  to  furnish  contin-
gents of  troops,  which  they  did  to  the  number  of  70,000.
With  these,  he  marched  to  the  site  of  Malatyah,  gathered
workmen  from  various  places  and  started  the  construction.
Al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah  himself  would  sometimes  carry  a
stone  and  hand  it  over  to  the  mason.  He  would  also  pro-
vide the  workers  with  dinners  and  suppers  at  his  own  ex-
pense, opening  his  kitchens  to  the  public.  'Abd-al-Wahhab
was  displeased  at  this  and  wrote  to  abu-Ja'far  stating  that
he  ['Abd-al-Wahhab]  gave  food  to  the  people,  but  al-Hasan
distributed  many  times  more,  his  aim  being  to  contend  with
him  for  superiority  in  beneficence,  to  spoil  what  he  did,  and
to  disparage  him  by  means  of  extravagance  and  hypocrisy :
and  that  al-Hasan  had  special  heralds  to  go  round  calling
people  to  his  meals.  To  this,  abu-Ja'far  replied,  "Boy,
al-Hasan  feeds  people  on  his  own  account:  and  thou  feed-
est  them  on  mine.  What  thou  hast  written  was  due  to  thy
ignominy,  deficient  energy  and  base-mindedness."  In  the
meantime,  he  wrote  to  al-Hasan :  "  Feed  the  people,  but  do
not  use  a  herald."  Al-Hasan  used  to  announce  to  the  work-
men that  he  who,  in  building  a  wall,  got  first  to  the  crown
of  a  cornice  would  receive  so  much."  This  made  them  nut
forth  special  effort  to  finish  the  work;  and  thus  was  Malat-
yah with  its  mosque  rebuilt  in  6  months.  For  every  group
of  ten  to  fifteen  troops  in  the  army,  he  built  a  house  of  two
rooms  below  and  two  rooms  above  and  a  stable.  At  a  dis-
tance of  thirty  miles  from  the  city,  he  built  a  frontier  castle
and  another  on  a  rivulet  called  Kubakib  that  empties  its
water  into  the  Euphrates.  Al-Mansur  settled  in  Malatyah
4,000  fighters  from  Mesopotamia,  Malatyah  being  one  of


THE  MESOPOTAMIAN  FRONTIER  293

the  Mesopotamian  frontier  towns,  adding  to  each  man's  sti-
pend ten  dinars,  and  giving  to  each  a  bounty  of  one  hundred
dinars,  in  addition  to  the  pay  allotted  to  the  different  tribes. 188
He  stationed  in  the  town  the  necessary  garrison,  assigned
farms  to  the  troops  as  fief  and  built  the  Kaludhiyah  fort.

Constantine  desists  from  Jaihan.  Constantine  the
"tyrant",  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  more  than  100,000
men,  came  to  Jaihan;  but  hearing  of  the  great  number  of
the  Arabs,  he  desisted  from  it.

Nasr  ibn-Malik  and  Nasr  ibn-Sacd  accompany  'Abd-al-
Wahhab.  I  heard  it  said  that  'Abd-al-Wahhab  was  accom-
panied in  the  expedition  mentioned  above  by  Nasr  ibn-
Malik  al-Khuza'i  and  Nasr  ibn-Sa'd  al-Katib,  a  freedman
of  al-Ansar. Hence  the  poet's  words :

"  Thou  hadst  on  thy  sides  two  Nasrs :  Nasr  ibn-Malik  and  Nasr  ibn-
Sa'd,
may  thy  victory  [Ar.  nasr]  be  unparallelled !"

Muhammad  ibn-Ibrahim  goes  against  Malatyah.  In  the
year  141,  Muhammad  ibn-Ibrahim  was  sent  to  invade
Malatyah  at  the  head  of  an  army  from  the  people  of
Khurasan,  with  al-Musaiyab  ibn-Zuhair  leading  the  choice
men  of  the  army.  He  posted  a  body  of  horsemen  in  Malat-
yah so  that  the  enemy  should  not  covet  its  possession.  Those
of  its  old  inhabitants  who  survived  returned  to  it.

Ar-Rashid  humiliates  the  Greeks.  In  the  days  of  ar-
Rashid,  the  Greeks  attempted  the  conquest  of  Malatyah
but  to  no  avail.  Ar-Rashid  led  an  invasion,  overcame  and
humiliated  them.

Mar' ash.  When  abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah  was  in
Manbij,  he  sent  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  to  the  region  of  Mar-
'ash  ]  whose  fort  Khalid  seized  on  the  condition  that  its

1  Germanicia. Mas'iidi,  vol.  viii,  p.  295 ;  Haukal,  p.  62.


2,>4  THE  0R1  >l-  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

holders  be  allowed  to  emigrate  to  another  place,  after  which
he  d  ed  it. When  Sufyan  ibn-'Auf  al-Ghamidi  made

an  expedition  against  the  Greeks  in  the  year  30,  he  started
from  I  h  and  made  a  tour  in  the  land  of  the  Greeks,

-'ash  was  built  by  Mu'awiyah  and  populated  by  him  with
tps.  After  the  death  of  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah,  the
Greeks  reiterated  their  attacks  on  the  city  and  so  the  in-
habitants had  to  desert  it.  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn  an,  after
the  death  of  his  father,  Marwan  ibn-al-IJakam,  and  after
:rting  his  claim  upon  the  caliphate,  made  terms  with  the
Greeks,  agreeing  to  pay  them  a  certain  sum.  But  in  the
year  74,  Muhammad  ibn-Marwan  attacked  the  Greeks,  and
thus  the  peace  was  broken.

In  the  year  7" Muhammad  ibn  more  led

the  summer  campaign,  and  the  Gt  vent  forth  in  Ju-

mada  I  It  ar'ash  to  al-A'mak  [valleys]. The  Moslems

marched against them under  n ibn-al-Walid ibn-

bah ibn-abi-Mu'ait  accompanied by Dinar  ibn-,
a  freedman  of  '  'alik  ibn-  n  and  a  gover:

,\ Kinnasrin  and it^  distri<  The  two  armies  met  in

1  valley  I  h  where  a  fierce  battle

iii  the  defeat  of  tin

In  •  ar,  Dinar

-hra  about
ten  miles  from  nat,  and  routed  them. Later  al-'Ab-

ibn-al-Walid  ibn-'  alik  came  to  Mar';  ilt

it.  i  i  it.  n.  >\t  into  it  and  erected  in  it  a  cat'

dral  mosque, lie  imposed  upon  the  people  of  Kirm.\
• t  of  troops  to  be  sent  to  Mar'ash.

rwan  ibn-Muhammad  during  his  caliphate  v.
;  fighting  t  Hii  came  aj  tr-

h  and  invested  it  until  its  inhabitant  e  terms  to  ev

uate  it. \ccordi  ith  their  familie

for  tamia  and  the di  f  Kin:  ion  which


die  Greeks  destroyed  the  i  n  \  II  u-  '•inn  I  "i  Marwan  ovei
the  city  was  at  thai  time  al  Kauthai  ibn-Zufai  ibn-al
l.l.ii  iih  al  Kilabi  and  iii<-  "  tyrant  "  was  Constantine  ion  oi
I  eon  When  Marwan  was  through  wiiii  liims  and  had
destroyed  its  wall,  ii<-  sent  an  arm)  to  rebuild  viar'ash  it
v\.i  rebuilt  and  made  into  s  i  it)  .  but  the  ( .reeks  led  an  in
.in  i  c(  1 1 •  ii  and  dest  ■  i  >\  ed  ii

in  the  <  aliphate  oi  abu  fa'  fai  .ii  Man  in  !  iAlih  ibn  '  Mi
rebuilt  Mai  'at  h  and  fortified  it  He  in\  ited  men  t<  i  ettli  in
it,  pri  iih  ling  to  in-  reasi  theii itipends 1 i<-  wa su<  i  eeded

b) al  Vlahdi u  ho  im  reased it gai  1 1 m  and  ai I the

i>c  iple


|  Michael  |  set  out fri  im  I  >ai  b  a!  I  ladath  at  the  head  ot

ooo  men  and  i  ami  i '  \  1 1 » i Mai  a  ih,  I  illing,  bin  ning  and

I  '■ I.*  lem  as  captivei i  hem  <•  he  ad\  am  <>\

i- 1  the  gate  oj  the  cit)  ot vlai  .r  h  in  w  hi<  ii  thei e  w  • I i

ibn \  ii  w  ho  in  that  \  eai  was  <  m  an  exp<  diti<  m I  he  fre<  I

mi  ii  "i  '  i  .i  i ithi  ■  w  ith  the  inhabitant ot  the  <  it and

theii  ii " allii  d  i nil  again  i  M ii  hael  and  Bhi iwered  on
him  theii I  m<  el and  arr<  >w  • M  ichael  gavi waj be  I
ih- in  and  the) followed  him  until  thc> were  outside  the

cit)  rangi it  which  he  turned  upon  ii ,  killing  eight >l

i 1 1  eedmen  and  <  hai  ing  the  •  i  s<  bai  I  to  the  cit) Ha

in n(  in  iii-  \  •  Ii H  ed  ii gat  i and  'i ii  h  u  I,  aftei  invi t

ing  the  city,  depai  i-  d  and topped  al  faih&n \  hi  n  i  huml

in.ili  1 1 -I i  al  v.  'i  'i  al  '  Vbsi,  who  was  thi Uabil  and  who

in  the  ; eai  "'i  led  the  summ<  i  -  pedit ii  m,  hi  ard  ol  that .  he
d(  pati  hi  'I  again  i  M ii  ha<  I  a  stri mg  d<  ta<  lun<  nt  ot  i  i'  all  •
in-  ■  it  -  -i  v\  hi  m  lost  their  li1  I  his  u -  »ui  ed  the  angei  i il

al  Mahdi  v\  Iv  •  began  pi  epai  ation foi ending  il  1 1  a  an  ibn
l\  .ihi ,i! -.ih  -  -n  .- ii  - pedition  in  the  following  year,  i  . i ' -  ■

•  Al I.  'I i.M.lm Ibfl M\  nn  II- fl  II III  ■■- Ol I  If  i  .n  Im

M.ili.i-  iii vol i,  p  '•'  i . \thlr,  vol ii.  p in


296  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Hisn  al-Hadath  and  Darb  al-Hadath.  Hisn  al-Hadath
was  one  of  the  places  reduced  in  the  days  of  'Umar  by
Habib  ibn-Maslamah  who  was  sent  by  'Iyad  ibn-Ghanm.
After  that,  Mu'awiyah  used  to  pay  frequent  attention  to  it.
Darb  al-Hadath  was  ominously  called  by  the  banu-Umaiyah  190
"  as-Salamah J;  [safety]  because  they  suffered  a  great
calamity  in  it,  the  calamity  being,  according  to  some,  the
occurrence  implied  in  the  term  Hadath  [which  means  oc-
currence]. Others  assert  that  the  Moslems  met  on  the  way
a  youth  who  fought  against  them  with  his  companions,
hence  the  name  Darb  al-Hadath.1

At  the  time  of  the  insurrection  of  Marwan  ibn-Muham-
mad,  the  Greeks  went  and  destroyed  the  city  of  al-Hadath
and  drove  its  people  out  as  they  had  done  in  the  case  of
Malatyah.

In  the  year  161,  Michael  went  out  to  'Amk  Mar'ash,  and
al-Mahdi  directed  al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah  to  make  a  tour
in  the  Byzantine  Empire.  Al-Hasan' s  hand  lay  so  heavily
upon  the  people  that  they  put  his  picture  in  their  churches.
His  entrance  to  the  land  of  the  Greeks  [Asia  Minor]  was
through  Darb  al-Hadath  where  he  examined  the  site  of  its
city  [al-Hadath]  which  he  was  told  was  evacuated  by
Michael.  Al-Hasan  chose  that  site  for  his  city,  and  when
he  departed  he  spoke  to  al-Mahdi  regarding  the  reconstruc-
tion of  this  city  as  well  as  that  of  Tarsus.  Al-Mahdi  gave
orders  that  al-Hadath  be  built  first.  \nv>ng  the  compan-
ions of  al-Hasan  in  this  campaign  were  Mandal  al-'Anazi 2
— the  Kufite  traditionist.  and  Mu'tamir  ibn-Sulaiman  al-
Basri.  Al-Hadath  was  rebuilt  by  '.Mi  ibn-Sulaiman
ibn-'Ali,  the  governor  of  Mesopotamia  and  Kinnasrin,  and
called al-Muhammadiyah. The death of al-Mahdi

1  "  The  pass  of  the  youth."

''.  Dhahabi.  Mushtabih,  p.  377-


THE  MESOPOTAMIAN  FRONTIER  2gy

coincided  with  the  completion  of  its  building,  so  it  is  really
al-Mahdiyah  as  well  as  al-Muhammadiyah.  Brick  was  the
material  used  in  its  construction.  The  death  of  al-Mahdi
fell  in  the  year  169.

Al-Mahdi  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Musa-1-Hadi  who
dismissed  'Ali  ibn-Sulaiman  and  conferred  the  governor-
ship of  Mesopotamia  and  Kinnasrin  upon  Muhammad  ibn-
Ibrahim  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-'Ali.  Since  'Ali  ibn-Sulaiman
had  by  this  time  completed  the  building  of  the  city  of  al-
Hadath,  Muhammad  assigned  to  it  troops  from  Syria,
Mesopotamia  and  Khurasan,  fixing  forty  dinars  as  the  sti-
pend of  each  soldier.  To  these  he  assigned  the  houses  as
fiefs,  and  bestowed  three  hundred  dirhams  on  every  one  of
them. The  city  was  completed  in  169.

According  to  abu-1-Khattab,  'Ali  ibn-Sulaiman  assigned
4,000  paid  troops  to  al-Hadath  and  settled  them  in  it,
transferring  2,000  men  into  it  from  Malatyah,  Shimshat,
Sumaisat,  Kaisum,  Duluk  and  Ra'ban.

It  was  stated  by  al-Wakidi  that  when  the  building  of  al-
Hadath  was  completed,  winter  set  in  and  rain  and  snow  fell
in  great  quantities.  The  houses  of  the  city,  not  being  191
strongly  built  or  provided  with  the  necessary  precautions,
had  their  walls  soon  covered  with  cracks  and  fell  to  pieces.
The  Greeks  then  occupied  it  and  the  troops  together  with
the  people  that  were  in  it  were  scattered.  Hearing  that,
Musa  conscripted  a  contingent  of  troops  headed  by  al-Mu-
saiyab  [not  al-Musaiyib]  ibn-Zuhair,  another  by  Rauh  ibn-
Hatim  and  still  another  by  Hamzah  ibn-Malik.  Musa,
however,  died  before  they  were  sent  out.

After  that,  ar-Rashid  became  caliph,  and  he  gave  orders
to  rebuild  the  city,  fortify  it,  station  a  garrison  in  it  and
assign  to  its  fighters  dwellings  and  lands  as  fiefs.

It  was  stated  by  others  than  al-Wakidi  that  when  al-Ha-
dath was  built,  one  of  the  great  patricians  of  the  Greeks


298 the  origins  of  the  islamic  state

made  a  descent  upon  it  with  a  strong  host.  The  city  was
built  with  bricks,  one  placed  on  top  of  the  other,  without
mortar  intervening  and  which  were  damaged  by  the  snow.
The  'amil  with  all  those  in  the  city  took  to  flight,  and  the
enemy  entered  it,  putting  its  mosque  to  flames,  destroying
the  city  and  carrying  away  the  movable  possessions  of  the
people. When  ar-Rashid  became  caliph,  he  rebuilt  it.

I  was  informed  by  one  from  Manbij  that  ar-Rashid
wrote  to  Muhammad  ibn-Ibrahim  confirming  -  him  in  the
work  he  was  doing.  Thus  the  erection  of  the  city  of  al-
Hadath  and  its  peopling  were  carried  out  by  him  on  behalf
of  ar-Rashid.  Later,  Muhammad  was  dismissed  by  ar-
Rashid.

Rahwat  Malik.  In  the  year  46,  Malik  ibn-'Abdallah  al-
Khath'ami,  nicknamed  Malik  as-Sawa'if  [summer  expe-
ditions] and  who  was  a  Palestinian,  made  an  expedition  to
the  Byzantine  territory  and  returned  with  great  booty.  On
his  way  back  he  stopped  at  a  place  called  ar-Rahwat,  fifteen
miles  from  Darb  al-Hadath.  There  he  spent  three  days
during  which  he  sold  the  booty  and  divided  its  shares.
Therefore  the  place  was  called  Rahwat  Malik.

Marj  'Abd-al  .'. Marj  'Abd-al-Wahid  was  a  pas-

ture-land devoted  t<>  the  exclusive  use  of  the  Moslem  cav-
alry, which  after  the  erection  of  al-Hadath  and  Zibatrah
was  of  no  more  use  and  therefore  was  changed  into  a  sown
land.

Zibatrah.  Zibatrah  was  an  old  Greek  fort  that  was  re-
duced  together  with  the  old  Hadath  *  fort  by  Habib  ibn-
Maslamah-1-Fihri.  The  fort  stood  until  it  was  destroyed
by  the  Greeks  in  the  flays  of  al-Walid  ibn-Yazid.  It  was
then  rebuilt,  but  not  so  strongly,  therefore  the  Greeks  made
another  attack  on  it  at  the  time  of  the  insurrection  of  Mar-

1  Cactani.  vol.  iv.  p.  60,  note  1.


THE  MESOPOTAMIAN  FRONTIER


299


wan  ibn-Muhammad  and  destroyed  it.  Al-Mansur  built
it  again  and  it  was  once  more  torn  into  pieces  by  the  Greeks.
It  was  then  rebuilt  by  ar-Rashid  under  the  supervision  of
Muhammad  ibn-Ibrahim  who  stationed  a  garrison  in  it.
When  al-Ma'mun  became  caliph,  the  Greeks  made  another  192
descent  on  it  and  tore  it  into  pieces,  after  which  they  made
a  raid  on  the  pasturing  cattle  of  its  holders  and  carried
away  some  cattle.  Al-Ma'mun  gave  orders  for  repairing
and  fortifying  it.  In  the  year  210,  the  deputies  of  the
Greek  "  tyrant "  came  asking  for  peace,  which  al-Ma'-
mun refused.  In  pursuance  of  his  orders,  his  'dmils  [lieu-
tenants] in  the  frontier  fortresses  made  tours  in  Asia
Minor  where  they  wrought  heavy  slaughter,  subdued  the
land  and  won  many  brilliant  victories.  One  misfortune
was  the  loss  of  the  life  of  Yakzan  ibn-'Abd-al-A'la  ibn-
Ahmad  ibn-Yazid  ibn-Asid  as-Sulami.

In  the  days  of  al-Mu'tasim-Billah  abu-Ishak  ibn-ar-
Rashid,  the  Greeks  made  a  sally  against  Zibatrah  x  in  the
course  of  which  they  killed  the  men,  captured  the  women
and  destroyed  the  city.  This  greatly  aroused  the  anger  of
al-Mu'tasim  who  chased  them  as  far  as  'Ammuriyah,  de-
stroying many  forts  on  the  way.  He  camped  against  'Am-
muriyah until  he  reduced  it,  putting  its  fighters  to  death  and
carrying  off  the  women  and  children  as  prisoners.  He  then
destroyed  'Ammuriyah,  and  ordered  that  Zibatrah  be  re-
built. He  also  fortified  and  garrisoned  it.  The  Greeks
after  that  tried  to  reduce  it  but  failed.

Him  Mansur.  According  to  abu-'Amr  al-Bahili  and
others  the  Mansur  fort  was  named  after  Mansur  ibn-Ja'-
wanah  ibn-al-Harith  al-'Amiri  of  Kais  who  had  charge  of
building  and  repairing  it,  and  who  occupied  it  in  the  days
of  Marwan  with  a  large  host  of  the  troops  of  Syria  and
Mesopotamia  in  order  to  repulse  the  enemy.

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  914-


300  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

This  same  Mansur  was  governor  of  ar-Ruha  when  its
inhabitants  rebelled  in  the  early  part  of  the  [Abbasid]
dynasty  and  were  besieged  by  al-Mansur,  the  'amil  of  abu-
l-'Abbas  over  Mesopotamia  and  Armenia.  When  al-Man-
sur captured  the  city,  Mansur  took  to  flight;  but  when  he
was  later  given  safe-conduct,  he  appeared  on  the  scene.
When  'Abdallah  ibn-'Ali  dismissed  abu-Ja'far  al-Mansur,
'Abdallah  made  Mansur  the  chief  of  the  guard  in  his  dis-
trict. When  'Abdallah  fled  to  al-Basrah,  Mansur  disap-
peared but  was  discovered  in  the  year  141  and  brought
before  al-Mansur,  who,  on  his  way  from  Jerusalem,  put
him  to  death  at  ar-Rakkah.  According  to  others,  Mansur
was  given  safe-conduct  and  appeared  after  the  flight  of
[Abdallah]  ibn-'Ali.  After  this  there  were  found  letters
on  him  directed  to  the  Greeks  and  betraying  Islam.  When
al-Mansur,  in  the  year  141,  arrived  at  ar-Rakkah  from
Jerusalem,  he  sent  someone  who  brought  him;  and  he  was
beheaded  at  ar-Rakkah.  Al-Mansur  then  departed  for  al-
Hashimiyah  x  at  al-Kufah.

In  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi.  ar-Rashid  built  the  Man-
sur fort  and  stationed  a  garrison  in  it.

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv.  p.  946:  Baghdad  under  the  Abbasid  Caliphate,  p.  5.


CHAPTER  IV
Arabic  made  the  Language  of  the  State  Registers 193.

Greek  remained  the  language  of  the  state  registers  *
until  the  reign  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan,  who  in  the
year  81  ordered  it  changed.  The  reason  was  that  a  Greek
clerk  desiring  to  write  something  and  rinding  no  ink  urined
in  the  inkstand.  Hearing  this,  'Abd-al-Malik  punished  the
man  and  gave  orders  to  Sulaiman  ibn-Sa'd  to  change  the
language  of  the  registers.  Sulaiman  requested  'Abd-al-
Malik  to  give  him  as  subsidy  the  khardj  of  the  Jordan  prov-
ince for  one  year.  'Abd-al-Malik  granted  his  request  and
assigned  him  to  the  governorship  of  the  Jordan.  No  sooner
had  the  year  ended,  than  the  change  of  the  language  was
finished  and  Sulaiman  brought  the  registers  to  'Abd-al-
Malik.  The  latter  called  Sarjun  [Sergius]  and  presented
to  him  the  new  plan.  Sarjun  was  greatly  chagrined  and  left
'Abd-al-Malik  sorrowful.  Meeting  certain  Greek  clerks,  he
said  to  them,  "  Seek  your  livelihood  in  any  other  profession
than  this,  for  God  has  cut  it  off  from  you."

The  total  tax  of  the  Jordan  which  was  thus  assigned  as
subsidy  2  was  180,000  dinars,  that  of  Palestine  was  350,000;
that  of  Damascus  400,000;  that  of  Hims  with  Kinnasrin
and  the  regions  called  to-day  al-'Awasim,  800,000,  and  ac-
cording to  others  700,000.

1  Ar.  dtwan  which  may  also  be  used  in  the  sense  of  office  or  bureau.

'-'  Ar.  ma'unah;  see  Mubarrad,  Kamil,  p.  76,  last  line.

301


PART IV
ARMENIA


CHAPTER  I
The  Conquest  of  Armenia

Traditions  have  been  communicated  to  me  by  Muham-
mad ibn-Isma'il  of  Bardha'ah  and  others  on  the  authority
of  abu-Bara'  'Anbasah  ibn-Bahr  al- Armani;  by  Muham-
mad ibn-Bishr  al-Kali  on  the  authority  of  his  sheikhs;  by
Barmak  ibn-'Abdallah  ad-Dabili,  Muhammad  ibn-al-Mu-
khaiyis  al-Khilati  and  others  on  the  authority  of  some  well
versed  in  the  affairs  of  Armenia.  These  traditions  I  here-
with transmit,  having  pieced  them  up  together  into  one
whole,  to  wit: —

The  four  provinces.  Shimshat,  Kalikala,  Khilat  Arjish
and  Bajunais  constituted  Armenia  IV;  the  district  of  al-  194
Busfurraja.11  [Waspurakan],  Dabil  [Dwin],  Siraj  Tair  and
Baghrawand  constituted  Armenia  III;  Jurzan  [Georgia]
constituted  Armenia  II;  as-Sisajan  and  Arran  constituted
Armenia  I.1  According  to  others,  Shimshat  alone  consti-
tuted Armenia  IV;  Kalikala,  Khilat,  Arjish  and  Bajunais,
Armenia  III;  Siraj  Tair,  Baghrawand,  Dabil,  and  al-Bus-
furrajan,  Armenia  II;  and  as-Sisajan,  Arran  [Albania],
and  Taflis,  Armenia  I.2  Jurzan  and  Arran  were  held  by  the
Khazar,  while  the  rest  of  Armenia  was  held  by  the  Greeks
under  the  governorship  of  "  the  Lord  of  Armaniyakus  ".

Kubddh  ibn-Fairus  builds  many  cities.  Al-Khazar  used
from  time  to  time  to  make  raids  and  reach  as  far  as  ad-
Dinawar. Because  of it, Kubadh ibn-Fairuz al-Malik 3

1  The  Encyclopaedia  of  Islam,  vol.  i,  p.  444.

8  Khurdadhbih,  pp.  122-123.

s  *.  e.,  the  king. He  belonged  to  the  Sassanian  Dynasty.

305


-06  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

despatched  one  of  his  great  generals  at  the  head  of  12,000
men,  who  ravaged  the  land  of  Arran  and  conquered  the
region  lying  between  ar-Rass  river  and  Sharwan.  Ku-
badh  then  followed  him  and  built  in  Arran  the  city  of  al-
Bailakan,  the  city  of  Bardha'ah — which  is  the  capital  of  the
whole  frontier  region,  and  the  city  of  Kabalah,  i.  e.,  al-
Khazar.  After  that  he  erected  Sudd  al-Libn  [brick  dam]
lying  between  the  land  of  Sharwan  and  al-Lan  gate.  Along
this  Sudd,  he  established  360  cities  which  fell  into  ruins
after  the  erection  of  the  city  of  al-Bab  wa-1-Abwab.

Aniishinvan  builds  other  cities.  Kubadh  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Anushirwan  Kisra  who  built  the  cities  of  ash-
Shabiran  and  Maskat,  and  later  al-Bab  wa-1- Abwab  1  which
was  called  Abwab  because  it  was  built  on  a  road  in  the
mountain.  He  settled  in  the  places  he  built  a  people
whom  he  called  as-Siyasijun.2  In  the  land  of  Arran,  he  es-
tablished Abwab  Shakkan,3  al-Kamibaran,  and  Abwab  ad-
Dudaniyah.  Ad-Dudaniyah  are  a  tribe  who  claim  to  be
descended  from  the  banu-Dudan  ibn-Asad  ibn-Khuzaimah.  195
He  also  built  ad-Durdhukiyah  *  which  consisted  of  twelve
gates,5  each  one  of  which  was  a  castle  of  stone.  In  the  land
of  Jurzan  he  established  a  city,  Sughdabil,  which  he  popu-
lated with  a  body  of  as-Sughd  [Sogdians]  and  Persians,
making  it  a  fortified  town.  Next  to  the  Greek  lands  in  the
region  of  Jurzan,  he  built  a  castle  and  called  it  Bab  Fairuzi-
kubadh;  another  called  Bab  Ladhikah;  still  another  Bab

1  Derbend. See  Mcynard,  Dictionnaire  de  la  Perse,  p.  68; Hama-
dhani,  pp.  286-288;  Haukal,  pp.  241-242.

2  Cf.  St.  Martin,  Memoires  sur  VArmenie,  vol.  i,  pp.  207-214.

aHamadhani,  p.  288,  "Shakka";  Yakut,  "  Shaka " ;  Haukal,  p.  254.
"Shakka".
<  Hamadhani,  p.  288,  "  ad-Durztikiyah  " ;  St.  Martin,  vol.  ii.  p.  189.
5  Cf.  Hamadhani,  p.  288.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  -p-

Barikah  which  lies  on  the  Tarabazundah  sea  [Black  Sea].
He  also  erected  Bab  al-Lan,  Bab  Samsakhi,1  al-Jardaman
fort,  and  Samshulda  fort.  Moreover,  Anushirwan  conquered
all  the  forts  of  Armenia  held  by  the  Greeks,  built  and  forti-
fied the  city  of  Dabil,  built  an-Nashawa — the  capital  of  the
al-Busfurrajan  district,  the  fort  of  Wais  and  other  castles
in  the  land  of  as-Sisajan  including  al-Kilab  and  Sahyunis
castles.  In  the  forts  and  castles,  he  stationed  Siyasijiyah
men  noted  for  valor  and  efficiency  in  warfare.

Anushirwan  builds  a  wall  between  his  domain  and  that  of
the  Turks.  Anushirwan  then  wrote  to  the  king  of  the
Turks  asking  for  reconciliation  and  peace  and  for  action  in
unison.  In  order  to  assure  him  of  his  friendliness,  Anu-
shirwan sought  his  daughter's  hand  and  expressed  a  desire
to  be  his  son-in-law.  Meanwhile,  he  sent  him  a  maid  of
his,  who  was  adopted  by  one  of  his  wives,  and  said  she  was
his  daughter.  Consequently,  the  Turk  presented  his  daugh-
ter to  Anushirwan  and  came  to  see  him.  The  two  met  at
al-Barshaliyah  where  they  caroused  together  for  some  days,
and  each  felt  the  other  was  friendly  to  him  and  expressed
his  loyalty.  Anushirwan  ordered  some  of  his  friends  in
whom  he  confided  to  wait  for  nightfall  and  set  fire  to  a
part  of  the  Turkish  camp,  which  they  did.  In  the  morning,
the  Turkish  king  complained  to  Anushirwan ;  but  the  latter
denied  having  ordered  it  or  known  that  his  men  had  done  it.
After  a  few  nights,  Anushirwan  gave  his  orders  to  repeat
the  act,  and  his  men  did.  The  Turk  grumbled  so  much  at
the  act  that  Anushirwan  had  to  show  sympathy  for  him  196
and  apologized  to  him,  upon  which  he  was  appeased.  By
order  of  Anushirwan,  fire  was  set  in  a  corner  of  his  own
camp  where  nothing  but  cottages  of  straw  and  twigs  stood.
In  the  morning,  Anushirwan  grumbled  to  the  Turk,  saying,

1  Brosset,  Histoire  de  la  Georgie,  vol.  i,  p.  238.


308  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'  Thy  men  were  on  the  point  of  destroying  my  camp ;  and
thou  rewardest  me  by  throwing  suspicion  upon  me ! ,:  The
Turk  swore  that  he  knew  no  reason  for  the  act,  upon  which
Anushirwan  addressed  him,  saying,  "  Brother,  thy  troops
and  mine  look  with  disfavor  on  the  peace  we  made,  because
they  have  thereby  lost  the  booty  depending  on  razzias  and
wars  that  might  be  carried  out  between  us.  I  fear  they  un-
dertake things  to  corrupt  our  hearts  after  our  mutual  agree-
ment of  sincerity,  so  that  we  may  once  more  have  recourse
to  enmity  after  our  new  blood  relationship  and  our  friend-
ship. I  deem  it  wise,  therefore,  that  thou  allowest  me  to
build  a  wall  between  thee  and  me  with  one  gate  through
which  none  from  us  will  go  to  you  and  from  you  to  us,  ex-
cept the  ones  thou  wishest  and  we  wish."  The  Turk  ac-
cepted the  proposal  and  left  for  his  own  land.

Anushirwan  commenced  building  the  wall.  He  built  the
side  of  it  that  faced  the  sea  with  rock  and  lead.  Its  width
he  made  300  dhird's,  and  its  height  reached  the  mountain
heights.  He  ordered  that  stones  be  carried  in  boats  and
dropped  into  the  sea,  so  that  when  they  appeared  above  the
surface,  he  could  build  on  them.  The  wall  extended  over  a
distance  of  three  miles  in  the  sea.  When  the  construction
was  completed,  he  fixed  on  its  entrance  iron  gates  and  en-
trusted it  to  one  hundred  horsemen  to  guard  it.  Before
this,  it  took  50,000  troops  to  guard  the  place.  On  this  wall
he  also  set  a  mantelet.  The  Khakan  x  was  later  told.  "Anu-
shirwan has  deceived  thee  and  given  thee  for  wife  one  who
is  not  his  daughter  and  fortified  himself  against  thee  " ;  but
Khakan  was  no  match  for  such  wiles.

Anushirwan  assigns  kings.  Anushirwan  assigned  kings,
stationed  them  in  different  districts,  and  conferred  on  each
one  of  them  the  governorship  [made  him  Shah]  of  one  dis-

1  The  Turkish  king.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^09

trict.  One  of  these  was  "  Khakan  al-Jabal  "  [lord  of  the
mountain]  who  bore  the  title  "  Sahib  as-Sarir  "  1  [holder
of  the  throne]  and  was  named  Wahrarzan-shah.  Another
was  the  king  of  Filan  surnamed  Filan-shah.  Others  were
Tabarsaran-shah,  the  king  of  al-Lakz — surnamed  Jar-
shan-shah — the  king  of  Maskat  (whose  kingship  has  been
abolished),  the  king  of  Liran — surnamed  Liran-shah — and
the  king  of  Sharwan  called  Sharwan-shah.  He  also  made  197
the  chief  of  Bukh  2  its  king,  and  the  chief  of  Zirikiran  its
king.  The  kings  of  Jabal  al-Kabak  3  he  left  over  their  king-
doms and  made  terms  with  them,  stipulating  that  they  pay
an  annual  tribute.

Thus  Armenia  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Persians  until  the
appearance  of  Islam,  at  which  time  many  Siyasijun  aban-
doned their  forts  and  cities  which  fell  into  ruins.  The  Kha-
zar  and  Greeks  thus  got  possession  of  what  was  once  in
their  hands.

Kalikala.  At  a  certain  period,  the  Greek  princes  were
scattered  about  and  some  of  them  became  like  Muluk  at-
Tawa'if,4  and  one  ruled  over  Armanivakus.  After  the
death  of  the  latter,  his  wife  succeeded  him  and  her  name
was  Kali.5  She  built  the  city  of  Kalikala  6  which  she  named
Kalikalah.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  "  the  benevolence
of  Kali."  She  set  her  picture  on  one  of  the  city  gates.  The
Arabs  arabicized  Kalikalah  into  Kalikala.

Kalikala  reduced.  When  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  became
caliph,  he  wrote  to  Mu'awiyah,  his  'dmil  over  Syria  and

1  Istakhri,  p.  191,  note  f ;  Mas'udi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  41-42.

2  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  76.

3  Cf.  Meynard,  p.  437,  "  Qabq  (Caucase)  ".

*  Petty  kings  among  whom  the  Persian  kingdom  was  divided  after
Alexander. Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  704-713.

5  Hamadhani,  p.  292.

6  Armen.  Karin,  modern  Erzerum.


310  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Mesopotamia  together  with  their  frontier  cities,  ordering
him  to  send  Habib  ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri  into  Armenia.1
Habib  had  left  a  good  impression  in  connection  with  the
conquest  of  Syria  and  the  invasion  of  the  Greeks.  This  fact
was  fully  realized  by  'Umar,  by  'Uthman  and  by  'Uthman' s
successor.  Others  say  that  'Uthman  wrote  [directly]  to
Habib  ordering  him  to  make  an  expedition  against  Ar-
menia. The  former  view  is  more  authentic.  Accordingly,
Habib  went  against  it  at  the  head  of  6,000,  but  according  to
another  estimate,  8,000,  of  the  people  of  Syria  and  Meso-
potamia. Arriving  in  Kalikala,  he  camped  around  it;  and
when  its  people  came  out  against  him,  he  fought  them  and
drove  them  to  the  city.  They  then  asked  for  peace,  agree-
ing to  evacuate  the  place  and  pay  the  tax.  Many  of  them
left  the  city  and  went  as  far  as  Asia  Minor.  Habib  re-
mained in  the  city  with  his  men  for  a  few  months.  He  then
learned  that  the  patrician  of  Armaniyakus  had  massed  a
large  army  against  the  Moslems  and  was  reinforced  by
troops  from  al-Lan,  Afkhaz  and  from  Samandar  in  al-
Khazar.  Therefore,  he  wrote  to  'Uthman  asking  for  rein-
forcement. 'Uthman  wrote  to  Mu'awiyah  asking  him  to
send  to  Habib  a  body  of  men  from  Syria  and  Mesopotamia
interested  in  the  "holy  war"  and  booty.  Accordingly,  Mu-
'awiyah sent  2,000  men  who  were  settled  in  Kalikala,  given
fiefs  and  stationed  as  horsemen  guard  to  keep  post  in  it.  [98
At  the  receipt  of  Habib's  request,  'Uthman  also  wrote  to
Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-al-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah,  his
'amil  over  al-Kufah,  ordering  him  to  reinforce  Habib  with
an  army  headed  by  Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah-1-Bahili  who  bore
the  title  "Salman  al-Khail"  [the  Salman  of  horsemen]  and
who  was  generous,  benevolent  and  of  a  warlike  nature.
Salman  set  out  at  the  head  of  6,000  Kufites. The  Greeks

1  Miiller,  Der  Islam  in  Morgen-  und  Abend'.and,  pp.  259-260.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  311

and  their  followers  had  already  arrived  and  encamped  on
the  Euphrates,  before  Habib  received  the  reinforcement.
Taking  advantage  of  the  night,  the  Moslems  swept  over
them  and  killed  their  chief.  That  evening  Habib's  wife,
umm-'Abdallah,  daughter  of  Yazid  of  the  Kalb  tribe,  asked
Habib,  "Where  shall  I  meet  thee?"  To  this,  Habib  re-
plied, "  Either  at  the  tents  of  the  '  tyrant ', x  or  in  Para-
dise !" When  he  got  to  those  tents  he  found  her  there.

When  the  Moslems  were  done  with  their  enemy,  Salman
returned.  The  Kufite  troops  wanted  to  have  a  share  in  the
booty  but  were  refused,  which  led  into  a  verbal  dispute
between  Habib  and  Salman.  Some  Moslems  threatened
Salman  with  death,  regarding  which  the  poet  said :

"  If  ye  kill  Salman,  we  kill  your  Habib;
and  if  ye  depart  towards  ibn-'Affan,  we  would  also  depart."  2

'Uthman  was  communicated  with,  and  he  wrote  back,  "  The
spoils  belong  wholly  to  the  Syrians  by  right."  Meanwhile,
he  wrote  to  Salman  ordering  him  to  invade  x\rran.

It  is  reported  by  others  that  in  the  caliphate  of  'Uthman,
Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah  went  to  Armenia,  made  captives  and
plundered,  returning  in  the  year  25  to  al-Walid  ibn-'Ukbah
at  Hadithat  al-Mausil.  Al-Walid  received  a  letter  from
'Uthman  informing  him  that  Mu'awiyah  had  written  him
to  the  effect  that  the  Greeks  were  gathered  against  the  Mos-
lems in  great  numbers,  and  that  the  Moslems  wanted  rein-
forcements, and  ordering  him  to  send  8,000  men.3  Accord-
ingly, al-Walid  sent  8,000  men  under  Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah-
1-Bahili.  Mu'awiyah  sent  an  equal  number  under  Habib
ibn-Maslamah-1-Fihri. The two leaders reduced many

1  Referring  to  the  Greek  general.
*  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2893-2894.
3  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  pp.  2807-2808.


312


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


forts,  carried  away  many  prisoners  and  fell  to  dispute  re-
garding the  general  leadership.  The  Syrians  wanted  to  kill
Salman,  hence  the  verse  quoted  above.  The  former  report,
however,  is  more  authentic  and  was  orally  communicated
to  me  by  many  from  Kalikala  and  in  writing  by  al-'Attaf
ibn-Sufyan  abu-1-Asbagh,  the  kadi  of  Kalikala.

Habib  kills  al-Mauriyan.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  199
Wbd-al-Hamid  ibn-Ja'far's  father: — Habib  ibn-Maslamah
besieged  the  inhabitants  of  Dabil  and  camped  around  the
city.  Al-Mauriyan  ar-Rumi 1  came  against  him;  but  under
the  cover  of  the  night,  Habib  killed  him  and  plundered
what  was  in  his  camp.  Salman  then  joined  Habib.  The
authorities  of  this  tradition  believe  that  Habib  fell  upon  the
Greek  at  Kalikala.

Kusan  subdues  Kalikala.  Muhammad  ibn-Bishr  al-Kali
and  ibn-Warz  al-Kali  from  the  sheikhs  of  Kalikala : —
Ever  since  its  conquest,  the  city  of  Kalikala  held  out  against
attacks  until  the  year  133  in  which  "  the  tyrant  "  set  out.
besieged  Malatyah,  destroyed  its  wall  and  expelled  the
Moslems  that  were  in  it  to  Mesopotamia,  after  which  he
encamped  at  Marj  al-Hasa  whence  he  directed  Kusan  al-
Armani  against  Kalikala.  Kusan  came  and  invested  the
city,  whose  inhabitants  at  that  time  were  few  and  whose
'amil  was  abu-Karimah.  In  the  course  of  the  siege,  two
Armenian  brothers  who  lived  in  the  city  made  a  breach
through  a  rampart  in  its  wall,  went  out  to  Kusan  and
brought  him  in  to  the  city.  Thus  Kusan  subdued  the  city .
killed  [many],  took  captives  and  razed  it  to  the  ground,
carrying  off  what  he  plundered  to  "  the  tyrant  ".  The  cap-
tives he  distributed  among  his  companions.

Al-Mansur  rebuilds  and  al-Mu'tasim  fortifies  Kalikala.

1  Patrician  of  Armaniyakus  which  province  is  listed  in  De  Goeje's
edition  of  Baladhuri  as  a  name  of  person.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  313

According  to  al-Wakidi,  in  the  year  139  al-Mansur  gave
ransom  1  for  those  of  the  captives  of  Kalikala  who  sur-
vived; and  he  rebuilt  Kalikala,  populated  it,  and  returned
them  into  it.  He  also  invited  to  it  troops  from  Mesopo-
tamia and  other  places  to  live  in  it.  In  the  caliphate  of  al-
Mu'tasim-Billah,  the  Greek  "  tyrant "  came  to  Kalikala
and  threw  projectiles  on  its  wall  until  it  was  on  the  point
of  falling.  Thereupon  al-Mu'tasim  had  to  spend  500,000
dirhams  to  make  the  city  strong  again.

The  patricians  of  Khilat  and  Muks.  After  having  cap-
tured Kalikala,  Habib  marched  to  Mirbala  where  the  pa-
trician of  Khilat  brought  him  a  statement  written  by  Tyad
ibn-Ghanm,  who  had  guaranteed  to  the  patrician  the  secur-
ity of  his  life,  possessions  and  country  and  had  concluded
a  treaty  with  him  stipulating  that  the  patrician  should  pay
tax.  Habib  sanctioned  the  terms  of  the  statement.  He  then
occupied  a  house  between  al-Harak  2  and  Dasht  al- Warak.
The  patrician  of  Khilat  brought  him  the  money  he  owed
and  offered  a  present  which  Habib  refused  to  accept.  Ha-
bib then  visited  Khilat  and  passed  to  as-Sababah  [  ?]  3
where  he  was  met  by  the  chief  of  Muks,4  one  of  the  dis-
tricts of  al-Busfurrajan.  Habib  made  peace  with  him  in
exchange  for  an  annual  tax  to  be  paid  for  his  land,  sent  a  200
man  with  him  and  wrote  him  a  statement  of  peace  and
safety.

Arjish,  Bajunais  and  at-Tirrikh.  To  the  villages  of
Arjish  and  Bajunais,  Habib  sent  a  body  of  men  who  sub-
dued them  and  laid  poll-tax  on  them.  The  leading  men  of
these  villages  came  to  Habib  and  made  a  treaty  agreeing  to

1  Ar.  fada  bihim;  see  Mawardi,  pp.  82  and  232.

2  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  101.
s  Original  not  clear.

*  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  175.


314  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

pay  the  kharaj  on  their  lands.  As  for  at-Tirrikh  lake,  he
did  not  interfere  with  it,  and  it  was  used  by  the  public  until
Muhammad  ibn-Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam  became  governor
of  Mesopotamia  and  Armenia,  upon  which  he  took  posses-
sion of  its  fish  and  sold  them,  making  an  income  out  of  it.
The  lake  after  that  became  the  property  of  Marwan  ibn-
Muhammad  and  was  thus  lost  to  Muhammad.

Dabil  and  other  towns  sue  for  peace.  Habib  now  came
to  Azdisat,1  the  chief  village  of  al-Hurmuz,2  crossed  Nahr
al-Akrad  and  encamped  at  Marj  Dabil.  Thence  he  sent  the
cavalry  against  Dabil  and  marched  until  he  reached  its  gate.
The  people  took  to  the  fortifications  and  threw  projectiles
on  him.  Habib  set  a  mangonel  against  the  city  and  used  it
until  they  sued  for  peace  and  capitulation.  This  he  granted
them.  His  cavalry  wandered  around,  occupied  Jurna,*5
reached  as  far  as  Ashush,  dhat-al-Lujum,  al-Jabal  Kuntah  4
and  Wadi-1-Ahrar  and  subdued  all  the  villages  of  Dabil.
He  also  despatched  a  force  against  Siraj  Tair  and  against
Baghrawand  whose  patrician  came  and  made  terms,  agree-
ing to  pay  an  annual  tribute,  to  be  loyal  to  the  Moslems,  to
entertain  them,  and  to  aid  them  against  the  enemy.  The
text  of  the  treaty  with  Dabil  ran  as  follows :

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  treaty  of  Habib  ibn-Maslamah  with  the  Chris-
tians, Magians  and  Jews  of  Dabil.  including  those  present
and  absent.  I  have  granted  you  safety  for  your  lives,  pos-
sessions, churches,  places  of  worship,  and  city  wall.  Thus
ye  are  safe  and  we  are  bound  to  fulfil  our  covenant,  so  long
as  ye  fulfil  yours  and  pay  poll-tax  and  kharaj. Thereunto

1  "  Aschdischad," St. Martin, vol.  i, p. 101 ; Yakut, vol. i. p. 109.
"Ardashat".

2  Baladhuri  reads  "  Kirmiz,"  which  is  a  clerical  error.

3  Marasid,  vol.  i,  p.  25.
1  '  )ri<nnal  not  clear.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^1$

Allah  is  witness;  and  it  suffices  to  have  him  for  witness.
Signed  by  Habib  ibn-Maslamah."

An-Nashazva  and  al-Busfurrajdn.  Habib  after  this  pro-
ceeded to  an-Nashawa  and  took  possession  of  it  on  terms
similar  to  those  of  Dabil.  The  patrician  of  al-Busfurrajan
came  and  made  terms  regarding  all  of  his  country  together
with  the  land  of  Hasatiltah  1  [  ?]  and  Afaristah  [  ?],  agree-
ing to  pay  a  certain  tax  every  year.

As-Sisajan. Habib  then  moved  to  as-Sisajan 2  whose
people  resisted  him  but  were  defeated. He  also  conquered
Wais;  and  made  terms  with  the  holders  of  the  forts  at  as- 201
Sisajan  to  the  effect  that  they  pay  tax. He  then  proceeded
to  Jurzan.

Dhat-al-Lujum.  I  was  informed  by  certain  sheikhs  from
Dabil,  among  whom  was  Barmak  ibn-'Abdallah,  that  Habib
ibn-Maslamah  marched  with  his  men  bent  on  Jurzan.  When
they  got  to  dhat-al-Lujum,  they  left  some  of  their  horses
and  mules  to  graze,  leaving  their  bridles  together  in  one
place.  Suddenly,  a  band  of  the  "uncircumcised"  fell  upon
them  before  they  could  bridle  their  animals.  In  the  fight
that  ensued,  the  "  uncircumcised ':  drove  the  Moslems
away  and  seized  the  bridles  together  with  as  many  horses
and  mules  as  they  could.  Later,  the  Moslems  returned  to
them,  massacred  them  and  took  back  what  has  been  carried
away  from  them.  That  is  why  this  spot  was  called  "  dhat-
al-Lujum  "  [the  place  of  the  bridles].

As  Habib  was  advancing  against  the  patrician  of  Jur-
zan, he  was  met  by  a  messenger  of  the  patrician  and  the  in-
habitants of  the  town,  who  presented  a  written  message  and
asked  for  a  treaty  of  peace  and  security.  Accordingly,
Habib  wrote  to  them : —


1  Certain  diacritical  points  missing.

2  Meynard,  p.  335.


316  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

"  Your  messenger,  Nukla,1  came  to  me  and  my  compan-
ions '  the  Believers  '  saying  on  your  behalf  that  we  are  a
nation  whom  Allah  has  honored  and  given  superiority,
which  Allah  did,  great  praise  be  to  Allah,  and  prayer  and
peace  be  on  Muhammad  his  Prophet  and  noblest  creature!
Ye  also  stated  that  ye  would  like  to  make  peace  with  us.
As  for  your  present,  I  have  estimated  its  value  and  consid-
ered it  a  part  of  your  tax.  I  have  made  a  treaty  of  peace
with  you  and  inserted  one  condition  in  it.  If  ye  accept  the
condition  and  live  up  to  it,  well  and  good.  Otherwise  '  an-
nounce ye  a  war  waged  by  Allah  and  his  Prophet 2 '.  Peace
be  to  those  who  follow  the  proper  guidance."

The  treaty  with  the  people  of  Taflis.  Habib  thence  pro-
ceeded to  Taflis  [Tiflis]  and  made  the  following  statement
of  peace  to  its  people : —

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  statement  from  Habib  ibn-Maslamah  to  the  inhabi-
tants of  Taflis  which  lies  in  Manjalis  3  at  Jurzan  al-Hur-
muz,4  securing  them  safety  for  their  lives,  churches,  con-
vents, religious  services  and  faith,  provided  they  acknowl-
edge their  humiliation  and  pay  tax  to  the  amount  of  one
dinar  on  every  household.  Ye  are  not  to  combine  more
than  one  household  into  one  in  order  to  reduce  the  tax,  nor
are  we  to  divide  the  same  household  into  more  than  one  in
order  to  increase  it.  Ye  owe  us  counsel  and  support  against
the  enemies  of  Allah  and  his  Prophet  to  the  utmost  of  your
ability,  and  are  bound  to  entertain  the  needy  Moslem  for
one  night  and  provide  him  with  that  food  used  by  '  the  peo-
ple of  the  Book  '  and  which  it  is  legal  for  us  to  partake  of.

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2674.

3  Kor.,  2  :  279.

8  Brosset,  vol.  i,  pp.  245,  248.

4  and  not  "  Kirmiz  "  as  Baladhuri  has  it. See  Tabari.  vol.  i.  p.  2674-


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^17

If  a  Moslem  is  cut  off  from  his  companions  and  falls  into
your  hands,  ye  are  bound  to  deliver  him  to  the  nearest  body
of  the  '  Believers  ',  unless  something  stands  in  the  way.  202
If  ye  return  to  the  obedience  1  of  Allah  and  observe  prayer,
ye  are  our  brethren  in  faith,  otherwise  poll-tax  is  incum-
bent on  you.  In  case  an  enemy  of  yours  attacks  and  sub-
jugates you  while  the  Moslems  are  too  busy  to  come  to  your
aid,  the  Moslems  are  not  held  responsible,  nor  is  it  a  vio-
lation of  the  covenant  with  you.  The  above  are  your  rights
and  obligations  to  which  Allah  and  his  angels  are  witness
and  it  is  sufficient  to  have  Allah  for  witness."

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  treaty  made  by  al-Jarrah
ibn-'Abdallah-l-Hakami  with  the  people  of  Taflis :

"  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful.
This  is  a  treaty  made  by  al-Jarrah  ibn-'Abdallah  with  the
inhabitants  of  Taflis  in  the  district  of  Manjalis  and  the
province  of  Jurzan.  They  have  shown  me  the  treaty  made
with  them  by  Habib  ibn-Maslamah  to  the  effect  that  they
accept  the  humiliation  of  the  tax,  and  that  he  made  terms
with  them  regarding  lands  belonging  to  them,  vineyards,
and  mills,  called  Awara  and  Sabina  in  the  district  of  Man-
jalis, and  regarding  Ta'am  and  Diduna  in  the  district  of
Kuhuwit  in  the  province  of  Jurzan,  stipulating  that  they
pay  on  these  mills  and  vineyards  a  tax  of  100  dirhams  per
annum  without  repeating  it.  These  terms  of  peace  and  se-
curity I  put  into  effect  and  ordered  that  the  sum  be  never
increased  on  them.  Let  no  one,  therefore,  to  whom  this  my
treaty  is  read  increase  the  tax  on  them;  so  Allah  wills.
Written  by—."

Various  places  conquered  by  Habib.  Habib  conquered
Hawarih,  Kasf aryabs  [  ?]  ,2  Kisal,  Khunan,  Samsakhi,  al-

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2675  :  "  become  Moslem  ".

2  Lacking  in  diacritical  points.


<5l8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Jardaman,  Kastasji,1  Shaushit,2  and  Bazalit,3  which  capitu-
lated on  the  terms  that  the  lives  of  the  inhabitants  be  spared,
that  places  of  worship  and  their  walls  be  not  molested  and
that  they  pay  annual  tribute  on  their  lands  and  persons.
The  people  of  Kalarjit,  Tharyalit,4  Khakhit,5  Khukhit,6  203
Artahal,7  and  Bab  al-Lal 8  also  made  terms  with  Habib.
As-Sanariyah  and  ad-Dudaniyah  made  terms,  agreeing  to
pay  an  annual  tax.

Al-Bailakan.  By  order  of  'Uthman,  Salman  ibn-
Rabi'ah-1-Bahili  proceeded  to  Arran.  Here  he  conquered
the  city  of  al-Bailakan  which  capitulated  on  terms  stipu-
lating that  he  guarantee  the  safety  of  their  lives,  posses-
sions and  city  walls,  and  that  they  pay  poll-tax  and  khardj.

Bardha'ah  and  other  places.  Thence  Salman  advanced  to
Bardha'ah  and  camped  on  ath-Thurthur  9  river  which  flows
at  a  distance  of  less  than  one  parasang  from  the  city.  The
inhabitants  closed  their  city  gates  against  him ;  and  he  made
an  attempt  on  it  for  many  days,  making  raids  on  its  vil-
lages. It  was  the  time  for  reaping  the  harvest.  At  last,
its  people  made  terms  similar  to  those  of  al-Bailakan  and
opened  their  gates.  Thus  he  made  his  entrance  and  occu-
pied the  city.  Salman  then  sent  his  cavalry  which  con-
quered Shifshin,  al-Misfawan,  "Odh,  al-Misryan.10  al-Hur-

1  Brosset,  vol.  i,  p.  512.

2  St.  Martin:  "  Schauscheth" ;  cf.  Kazwini,  vol.  ii,  p.  413,  line  20.

3  Brosset,  vol.  i,  pp.  45,  86.

*  "  Thrialeth,"  Brosset,  vol.  i,  pp.  248,  285.

5  "  Kakheth  "  in  Brosset,  /.  /.

8  "Kukhet,"  Brosset,  vol.  i,  pp.  315,  349;  St.  Martin,  vol.  ii,  p.  198.

7  Brosset,  vol.  i,  p.  39.

8  St.  Martin,  vol.  ii,  p.  227.

9  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  87.

10  Text  not  clear.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^jg

hilyan  and  Tabar,  all  of  which  are  districts.  Other  places
in  Arran  were  reduced.  The  Kurds  of  al-Balasajan  1  he  sum-
moned to  Islam ;  but  they  fought  against  him  and  were  sub-
jugated. Some  were  made  to  pay  tax  and  others  sadakah;
but  the  latter  were  few.

Shamkiir.  I  was  informed  by  some  people  from
Bardha'ah  that  Shamkur  was  an  ancient  city  to  which
Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah  sent  someone  who  reduced  it.  It  was
well  populated  and  flourishing  until  it  was  destroyed  by
as-Sawardiyah,  who  after  the  departure  of  Yazid  ibn-
Usaid  from  Armenia  came  together  and  became  a  source  of
trouble  and  misfortune.  In  the  year  240,  the  city  was  re-
built by  Bugha,  the  freedman  of  al-Mu'tasim  and  the  gov-
ernor of  Armenia,  Adharbaijan  and  Shimshat.  He  settled
in  it  people  from  al-Khazar  who,  because  of  their  interest  in
Islam  came,  and  sought  security.  He  also  transplanted
merchants  to  it  from  Bardha'ah  and  called  it  al-Mutawak-
kiliyah.

Kabalah  and  other  places.  Salman  thence  advanced  to
the  junction  of  ar-Rass  and  al-Kurr  behind  Bardij.  Cross-
ing al-Kurr  he  reduced  Kabalah ;  and  the  chief  of  Shakkan
and  al-Kamibaran  capitulated,  agreeing  to  pay  annual  tax.
In  like  manner  did  the  people  of  Khaizan,2  the  king  of  204
Sharwan  and  the  other  kings  of  al-Jibal,  the  people  of  Mas-
kat,  ash-Shabiran  and  the  city  of  al-Bab  capitulate.  The
city  of  al-Bab  was  closed  after  him.  Khakan  with  his  cav-
alry met  Salman  beyond  al-Balanjar  river.  The  latter  was
killed  with  4,000  Moslems  who  in  that  critical  position  were
heard  shouting  "  Allah  is  great!  "  3

3  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  173,  and  vol.  ii,  p.  780.

2  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  pp.  175  seq.;  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  507:  "Khaizar";
Mas'udi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  39-40;  Meynard,  p.  35°-

3  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  194.


320  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Salman  the  first  kadi  of  al-Kufah.  This  Salman  ibn-
Rabi'ah  was  the  first  to  hold  the  position  of  kadi  in  al-
Kufah,1  where  he  spent  forty  days  without  hearing  a  case.
He  transmitted  traditions  on  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab's  au-
thority. Says  ibn-Jumanah-1-Bahili  referring  to  Salman
and  Kutaibah  ibn-Muslim :

"  We  have  two  tombs  one  at  Balanjar

and  another  at  Sin-Istan  [China]  and  what  a  tomb  that  is!
The  one  who  lies  in  China  has  brought  about  conquests  in  all  places ;

and  the  merits  of  the  other  cause  abundant  rain  to  fall."  2

Among  the  companions  of  Salman  at  Balanjar  was  Kar-
zah  ibn-Ka'b  al-Ansari.  It  was  he  who  carried  the  news  of
Salman's  death  to  'Uthman.

Habib  put  by  'Uthman  in  charge  of  the  frontier  fortresses.
Having  made  these  conquests  in  Armenia,  Habib  re-
ported his  success  to  'Uthman  ibn-'AfTan  who  received  his
letter  immediately  after  the  news  of  Salman's  death.  'Uth-
man was  on  the  point  of  assigning  Habib  over  all  Armenia ;
but  he  then  deemed  it  best  to  put  him  in  charge  of  the  cam-
paigns on  the  frontiers  of  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  because
of  his  efficiency  in  doing  what  he  intended  to  do.  'Uthman
conferred  on  Hudhaifah  ibn-al-Yaman  al-'Absi  the  gover-
norship of  the  frontier  fortresses  of  Armenia;  and  the
latter  left  for  Bardha'ah  and  sent  his  'dmils  to  the  places
that  lay  between  it  and  Kalikala  and  up  to  Khaizan.  He
then  received  'Uthman  s  message  instructing  him  to  depart
and  leave  in  his  place  Silah  ibn-Zufar  al-'Absi  who  was  in
his  company. Hudhaifah  assigned  Silah  as  his  successor.

Habib  returned  to  Syria  and  began  his  campaigns  against
the  Greeks.  He  settled  in  Hims,  but  Mu'awiyah  moved  him
to  Damascus,  where  he  died  in  the  year  42,  aged  35. Once

1  Gottheil,  Egyptian  Cadis,  page  VI.

3  For  an  explanation  see  ibn-Kutaibah,  Kitab  al-Ma'arif,  p.  221.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^2l

when  'Uthman  was  besieged,  Mu'awiyah  sent  this  Habib
at  the  head  of  an  army  to  his  relief. Having  arrived  in
Wadi-1-Kura,  Habib  heard  of  the  death  of  'Uthman  and 205
took  his  way  back.1

Various  governors  of  Adharbaijan  and  Armenia.
'Uthman  appointed  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah  governor  of
Adharbaijan  2  and  Armenia,  but  dismissed  him  later,  and
appointed  al-Kasim  ibn-Rabi'ah  ibn-Umaiyah  ibn-abi-as-
Salt  ath-Thakafi  governor  of  Armenia.  Others  say  he  ap-
pointed 'Amr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-al-Muntafik  al-'Ukaili
governor  of  Armenia;  and  still  others  say  that  for  15  years
after  al-Mughirah,  one  of  the  banu-Kilab  ruled  over  Arme-
nia, and  that  he  was  succeeded  by  al-'Ukaili.  Under  'Ali
ibn-abi-Talib,  al-Ash'ath  ibn  Kais  ruled  over  Armenia  and
Adharbaijan.  He  was  followed  by  'Abdallah  ibn-Hatim
ibn-an-Nu'man  ibn-'Amr  al-Bahili  who  ruled  over  it  in  the
name  of  Mu'awiyah.  'Abdallah  died  in  it  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  brother  'Abd-al-'Aziz  ibn-Hatim  ibn-an-Nu'-
man, who  built  the  city  of  Dabil,  fortified  it  and  enlarged  its
mosque.  He  also  built  the  city  of  an-Nashawa  and  repaired
the  city  of  Bardha'ah.  Others  say  he  rebuilt  Bardha'ah
and  deepened  the  trenches  around  it.  He  also  rebuilt  the
city  of  al-Bailakan.  These  cities  were  dilapidated  and
ready  to  fall  into  ruins.  According  to  others,  it  was  Mu-
hammad ibn-Marwan  who  in  the  days  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
Marwan  rebuilt  Bardha'ah.  Al-Wakidi  states  that  'Abd-al-
Malik  built  Bardha'ah  under  the  supervision  of  Hatim  ibn-
an-Nu'man  al-Bahili  or  his  son.  This  'Abd-al-Malik  ap-
pointed 'Uthman  ibn-al- Walid  ibn-'Ukbah  ibn-abi-Mu'ait  to
the  governorship  of  Armenia.

1  Ghazarian,  "Armenien  unter  der  Arab  Herrschaft,"  Zeitschrift  fur
Armen.  Philol.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  177-182  (Marburg,  1904).

2  Meynard,  pp.  14-17.


322  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Armenia  rebels.  During  the  insurrection  of  ibn-az-
Zubair,  Armenia  rose  and  its  nobles  x  with  their  followers
threw  off  their  allegiance.  When  Muhammad  ibn-Marwan
held  under  his  brother  'Abd-al-Malik  the  governorship  of
Armenia,  he  led  the  fight  against  them  and  won  the  victory,
slaughtering  and  taking  captives.  Thus,  he  subdued  the
land.  He  promised  those  who  survived  higher  stipends  than
the  ordinary  soldiers'  pay.  For  that  purpose  they  assem-
bled in  churches  in  the  province  of  Khilat  where  he  locked
them  in  and  put  guards  on  the  door,  and  then  he  frightened
them.  In  this  campaign  umm-Yazid  ibn-Usaid  was  taken
captive  from  as-Sisajan,  she  being  the  daughter  of  as-Sisa-
jan's  patrician.

'Adi  governor  of  Armenia.  Sulaiman  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik
made  'Adi  ibn-'Adi  ibn-'Amirah  2-l-Kindi  governor  of  Ar-
menia. 'Adi  ibn-'Amirah  was  one  of  those  who  had  left
'AH  ibn-abi-Talib  and  settled  in  ar-Rakkah.  He  was  later
made  the  governor  of  Armenia  by  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz.
This  'Adi  was  the  one  after  whom  the  Xahr  'Adi  at  al-
Bailakan  was  named.  According  to  others,  the  'aniil  of
'Umar  was  Hatim  ibn-an-Nu'man,  but  that  is  not  con-
firmed. 206

Mi'lak  and  al-Harith  as  governors.  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-
Malik  conferred  the  governorship  on  Mi'lak  ibn-Saffar  al-
Bahrani,  but  he  later  dismissed  him  and  assigned  al-Harith
ibn-'Amr  at-Ta'i,  who  made  an  incursion  against  the  in-
habitants of  al-Lakz  ::  conquering  the  district  of  Hasma-
dan.4

Al-Jarrah  as  governor. When  al-Jarrah  ibn-'Abdallah

1  Ar.  ahrar,  the class that constituted the aristocracy  of Armenia
before  the  Persian  rule;  see  Yakut,  vol.  i,  pp.  222,  438.

2  Tabari,  vol.  ii,  p.  887 :  *'  'Umairah  ".
1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  364.

*  "  Jashmadan,"  Istakhri,  p.  187.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  323

al-Hakami  of  Madhhij  became  governor  of  Armenia,  he
stopped  at  Bardha'ah  where  his  attention  was  called  to  the
different  measures  and  weights  used  by  the  people  and
which  he  fixed  according  to  the  standards  of  justice  and
honesty  introducing  a  new  measure,  called  al-Jarrahi,  with
which  they  deal  until  to-day.  After  crossing  al-Kurr,1  he
marched  until  he  went  over  the  river  known  by  the  name  of
as-Samur  and  came  to  al-Khazar,  among  whom  he  wrought
a  great  slaughter.  He  also  fought  against  the  inhabitants
of  the  land  of  Hamzin  2  and  made  terms  with  them  stipu-
lating that  they  be  transplanted  to  the  district  of  Khaizan
where  he  gave  them  two  villages.  He  then  attacked  the
people  of  Ghumik  3  and  captured  some  of  them.  Turning
back,  he  came  to  Shakka,  and  his  army  spent  the  winter  at
Bardha'ah  and  al-Bailakan.  Al-Khazar  assembled  their
troops  and  crossed  ar-Rass.4  He  fought  against  them  in
Sahra'  [desert]  Warthan,  and  when  they  withdrew  to  the
region  of  Ardabil 5  he  engaged  them  in  battle  at  a  distance
of  four  parasangs  from  Armenia.  After  a  three  days'
battle,  he  suffered  martyrdom  together  with  his  men,  and
therefore  was  the  river  called  Nahr  al-Jarrah.  A  bridge
spanning  it  also  bore  the  same  name.

Maslamah  as  governor.  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  after
that  appointed  Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  to  the  gover-
norship of  Armenia,  put  at  the  head  of  the  van  of  his  [Mas-
lamah's]  army  Sa'id  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Aswad  al-Jurashi,  and
accompanied  him  by  Ishak  ibn-Muslim  al-'Ukaili  with  his
brothers,  Ja'wanah  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-Khalid  of  the  banu-

1  Istakhri,  p.  187.

2  "  Hamrin,"  Mahasin,  vol.  i,  p.  318.

3  "Ghumik,"  Istakhri,  p.  185;  cf.  Mas'udi,  vol.  ii,  p.  40;  '"Araik"  in
Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  438.

4  Istakhri,  p.  187;  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  779-

5  Meynard,  pp.  21-22.


324  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Rabi'ah  ibn-'Amir  ibn-Sa'sa'ah,  Dhufafah  and  Khalid —
the  two  sons  of  'Umair  ibn-al-Hubab  as-Sulami — al-Furat
ibn-Salman  al-Bahili,  and  al-Walid  ibn-al-Ka'ka'  al-'Absi.
Sa'id  engaged  in  conflict  with  al-Khazar  who  were  at  this
time  besieging  Warthan,  and  forced  them  to  withdraw,
putting  them  to  flight.  Al-Khazar  came  to  Maimadh  in
Adharbaijan;  and  as  Sa'id  was  preparing  for  the  conflict
with  them,  he  received  a  message  from  Maslamah  ibn-
'Abd-al-Malik  blaming  him  for  attacking  al-Khazar
before  his  [Maslamah's]  arrival,  and  informing  him  that
he  had  assigned  in  his  place  over  the  army  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Muslim  al-'Ukaili.  As  soon  as  Sa'id  turned  over  the
army  to  his  successor,  he  was  arrested  by  Maslamah's  mes-
senger who  fettered  him  and  carried  him  to  Bardha'ah
where  he  was  thrown  into  its  prison.  Al-Khazar  left  and  207
Maslamah  followed  them.  When  Maslamah  communicated
the  news  to  Hisham,  Hisham  wrote  back :

"  Dost  thou  leave  them  at  Maimadh  where  thou  canst  see  them.

and  then  seek  them  beyond  the  limit  of  soil  [where  sand  begins]  ?"

Thereupon  Hisham  ordered  that  al-Jurashi  be  released  from
prison.

Maslamah  made  peace  with  the  people  of  Khaizan,  and
by  his  order,  its  fort  was  dismantled.  He  appropriated  in
it  estates  for  himself.  It  is  known  to-day  by  the  name  of
Hauz  Khaizan.  The  kings  of  al-Jibal  also  made  peace  with
him.  The  Shahs  of  Sharwan,  Liran,  Tabarsaran,  Filan
and  Jarshan  presented  themselves  before  him:  and  so  did
the  chief  of  Maskat.  Maslamah,  thereupon,  betook  himself
to  the  city  of  al-Bab,  which  he  reduced.  In  its  castle  were
a  thousand  families  of  al-Khazar  whom  he  besieged  and
against  whom  he  hurled  stones  and  then  pieces  of  iron
shaped  like  stones.  All  that,  however,  was  of  no  avail.  He,
therefore,  resorted  to  the  spring,  the  water  of  which  Anu-


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  325

shirwan  had  conducted  into  their  cistern,  and  slew  on  it
cows  and  sheep  throwing  the  contents  of  their  stomachs  and
some  assafoetida  into  the  water.  It  did  not  take  the  water
more  than  one  night  before  it  bred  worms,  became  vitiated
and  corrupted.  Therefore,  the  holders  of  the  castle  fled
under  the  cover  of  the  night  and  vacated  the  castle.  In  the
city  of  al-Bab  wa-1-Abwab,  24,000  Syrians  were  settled  by
Maslamah  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  and  assigned  stipends.  Ac-
cordingly, the  inhabitants  of  al-Bab  to-day  do  not  allow  any
'amil  to  enter  their  city  unless  he  has  money  to  distribute
among  them.  He,  moreover,  built  a  granary  for  food,  an-
other for  barley,  and  an  armory.  He  ordered  that  the  cis-
tern be  filled  with  earth,  repaired  the  city,  and  provided  it
with  embattlements.  In  the  company  of  Maslamah  was
Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  who  took  part  in  the  attack  against
al-Khazar  and  distinguished  himself  in  fighting.  After
Maslamah,  Hisham  appointed  Sa'id  al-Jurashi  who  spent
two  years  in  the  frontier  region.

Marwan  as  governor.  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  x  then  be-
came the  ruler  of  the  frontier  and  took  up  his  abode  at
Kisal.  Marwan  was  the  one  who  built  the  city  of  Kisal.
This  city  lies  40  parasangs  from  Bardha'ah  and  20  from
Taflis.  Marwan  then  entered  the  country  of  al-Khazar
next  to  Bab  al-Lan  and  made  Asid  2  ibn-Zafir  as-Sulami
abu-Yazid,  accompanied  by  the  kings  of  al-Jibal,  enter  it
from  the  side  of  al-Bab  wa-1-Abwab.  Then  Marwan  made
an  incursion  on  the  Slavs  who  were  in  the  land  of  al-Kha-  208
zar  and  captured  20,000  families  whom  he  settled  in  Kha-
khit.  When  they  later  put  their  commander  to  death  and
took  to  flight,  Marwan  pursued  and  slaughtered  them.

When  the  chief  of  al-Khazar  learned  of  the  great  num-

1  Brosset,  vol.  i,  pp.  238  seq.

2"Usaid"  in  Duraid,  p.  187,  line  before  last.


326  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

ber  of  men  with  whom  Marwan  had  swept  over  his  land  and
of  their  equipment  and  strength,  his  heart  was  filled  with
cowardice  and  fear.  When  Marwan  came  close  to  him,
he  sent  him  a  messenger  inviting  him  to  "  Islam  or  war  ",
to  which  he  replied,  "  I  have  accepted  Islam.  Send  there-
fore someone  to  present  it  to  me."  Marwan  did  so.  The
chief  professed  Islam  and  made  a  treaty  with  Marwan  ac-
cording to  which  Marwan  confirmed  him  as  ruler  of  his
kingdom.  Marwan  with  a  host  of  al-Khazar  accompanied
the  chief;  and  al-Khazar  were  made  to  settle  in  the  plain
of  the  province  of  al-Lakz  between  as-Samur  and  ash-Sha-
biran.

The  land  of  as-Sarir.  After  that,  Marwan  made  his
entrance  to  the  land  of  as-Sarir,  slaughtered  its  inhabitants,
and  reduced  certain  forts  in  it.  Its  king  offered  him  sub-
mission and  allegiance  and  made  terms,  agreeing  to  give
every  year  1,000  youths — 500  lads  and  500  maids — with
black  hair  and  eyebrows  and  with  long  eyelashes,  together
with  100,000  modii 1  to  be  poured  in  the  granaries  of  al-
Bab. Marwan  took  from  him  a  pledge.

The  people  of  Tuman  made  terms  with  Marwan,  agree-
ing to  give  every  year  100  youths — 50  maids  and  50  lads —
each  5  spans  in  height,  with  black  hair  and  eyebrows  and
with  long  eyelashes,  together  with  20,000  modii  for  the
granaries.

The  land  of  Zirikirdn.  He  then  entered  the  land  of
Zirikiran,"  whose  king  made  terms,  agreeing  to  offer  fifty
youths,  and  10,000  modii  for  the  granaries  every  year.
Thence  he  proceeded  to  the  land  of  Hamzin  which  refused
to  make  terms  and  whose  fort,  after  an  investment  of  one
month,  he  reduced. He  then  set  fire  to  the  fort  and  de-

1  Wheat  measure.

2  Original  not  clear.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  ^2J

stroyed  it.  The  terms  agreed  upon  were  that  they  give  500
youths  only  once  and  not  to  be  responsible  for  such  a  gift
any  more,  and  that  they  carry  30,000  modii  every  year  to
the  granaries  of  al-Bab.  Then  he  advanced  to  Sindan,1
which  capitulated  on  condition  that  it  offer  100  youths  to  be
given  by  its  chief  only  once  and  not  to  be  responsible  for
such  a  gift  in  the  future,  together  with  5,000  modii  to  be
carried  every  year  to  the  granaries  of  al-Bab.  On  the  fol-
lowers of  the  Shah  of  Tabarsaran,  Marwan  assessed  10,000
modii  to  be  carried  per  annum  to  the  granaries  of  al-Bab;
but  on  the  Shah  of  Filan  he  did  not  assess  anything,  because  209
of  his  distinction  in  warfare,  ability  in  conflict  and  the
praiseworthiness  of  his  cause.

Al-Lakz,  Khirsh  and  other  places.  Marwan  thence  made
a  descent  on  al-Lakz  castle  [whose  chief]  had  refused  to
pay  anything  of  what  was  assessed,  had  set  out  to  meet  the
chief  of  al-Khazar  and  was  killed  by  a  shepherd  who  shot
an  arrow  at  him  without  knowing  him.  The  people  of  al-
Lakz  then  made  terms,  agreeing  to  give  20,000  modii  to  be
carried  to  the  granaries.  Having  appointed  Khashram  as-
Sulami  as  their  ruler,  Marwan  came  to  the  castle  of  the
chief  of  Sharwan  which  was  called  Khirsh  and  which  lay
on  the  sea  shore.  The  chief  rendered  submission  and  agreed
to  leave  the  height.2  Marwan  imposed  10,000  modii  on  the
people  of  Sharwan  per  annum,  and  made  it  a  condition  on
their  chief  to  be  in  the  van  of  the  army  when  the  Moslems
start  the  attack  against  al-Khazar,  and  in  the  rear  when
they  return ;  and  on  the  Shah  of  Filan  that  he  should  only
take  part  in  the  attack ;  on  the  Shah  of  Tabarsaran  that  he
be  in  the  rear  when  the  Moslems  start,  and  in  the  van  when
they  return.

1  Lacking  in  diacritical  points.  d'Ohsson,  p.  68;  "Misdar"  in  Mahasin,
vol.  i,  p.  318.

2  Surrender  the  castle.


328  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Thdbit  rebels.  Marwan  then  advanced  to  ad-Dudaniyah
and  slaughtered  its  people.  The  news  of  the  death  of  al-
Walid  ibn-Yazid  then  came  to  him,  and  Thabit  ibn-Nu'aim
al-Judhami  rose  against  him.1  Musafir  al-Kassab,  who
was  one  of  those  established  in  al-Bab  by  ad-Dahhak  al-
Khariji  [the  rebel],  now  came  to  Thabit,  espoused  his
cause  and  was  made  by  him  governor  over  Armenia  and
Adharbaijan.  Musafir  then  came  to  Ardabil  in  disguise,
where  he  was  joined  by  a  group  of  the  ash-Shurat  and  they
all  came  to  Bajarwan2  in  which  they  found  people  with  sim-
ilar views  and  were  joined  by  them.  Thence  they  came  to
Warthan  from  whose  inhabitants  a  large  body  of  men,
who  held  similar  views,  joined  them;  and  they  all  crossed
over  to  al-Bailakan  where  they  were  joined  by  a  large
crowd  holding  similar  views.  Marwan  then  came  to  Yu-
nan.3  Ishak  ibn-Muslim  was  made  governor  of  Armenia  by

Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  and  never  ceased  to  fight  against
Musafir  who  was  at  al-Kilab  castle  in  as-Sisajan.

When  the  "  blessed  dynasty  "  appeared  and  abu-Ja'far
al-Mansur  was  made  ruler  of  Mesopotamia  and  Armenia  in
the  caliphate  of  as-Saffah  abu-1-' Abbas,  he  sent  against
Musafir  and  his  followers  a  general  from  Khurasan,  who
fought  them  until  he  overpowered  them  and  slew  Musafir.
The  inhabitants  of  al-Bailakan,  who  had  fortified  them-
selves in  al-Kilab  castle  under  the  leadership  of  Kadad  ibn-
Asfar  al-Bailakani,  surrendered.

The  governorship  of  Yazxd.  When  al-Mansur  became
caliph,  he  made  Yazid  ibn-Usaid  as-Sulami  governor  of
Armenia. The  latter  reduced  Bab  al-Lan  and  stationed  in 210

1  fabari,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1892  seq.

2  Meynard,  p.  74.

8  First  syllable  mutilated  in  the  original;  cf.  Tstakhri,  p.  192;  Haukal,
p.  251.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  329

it  a  cavalry  guard  with  stipends.  He  also  subdued  as-Sa-
nariyah,  whose  inhabitants  paid  kharaj.  In  compliance
with  al-Mansur's  orders,  he  married  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  al-Khazar.  She  gave  birth  to  a  child  which  did  not
live;  she  herself  died  in  child-birth.  Yazid  sent  someone  to
the  naphtha  and  salt  mines  of  the  land  of  Sharwan  and
levied  tax  on  them.  He  put  someone  in  charge  of  them.
He  also  built  the  city  of  Arjil  as-Sughra  [the  Less]  and
Arjil  al-Kubra  [the  Great],  and  settled  people  from  Pales-
tine in  them.

Ash-Shamakhiyah.  Muhammad  ibn-Isma'il  from  certain
sheikhs  from  Bardha'ah : — Ash-Shamakhiyah  1  which  lay
in  the  province  of  Sharwan  was  thus  called  after  ash-Sha-
makh  ibn-Shuja',  who  was  the  king  of  Sharwan  during  the
rule  of  Sa'id  ibn-Salim  2  al-Bahili  over  Armenia.

Al-Hasan  suppresses  the  revolt.  Muhammad  ibn-Isma'il
from  certain  sheikhs : — After  the  dismissal  of  ibn-Usaid
and  Bakkar  ibn-Muslim  al-'Ukaili,  and  during  the  gover-
norship of  al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah  at-Ta'i,  the  Armenians
broke  off  their  allegiance  under  their  chief  Musha'il 3  al-
Armani.  Al-Mansur  sent  reinforcements  under  'Amir  ibn-
Isma'il.  Al-Hasan  engaged  himself  in  fight  with  Musha'il
and  killed  him,  dispersing  his  troops.  Things  went  on
well  with  al-Hasan.  The  Nahr  al-Hasan  in  al-Bailakan  is
named  after  this  al-Hasan ;  and  so  are  the  Bagh  4  at  Bar-
dha'ah named  Bagh  al-Hasan,  and  the  crown-lands  known
as  al-Hasaniyah.

Different  governors  of  Armenia.  'Uthman  ibn-'Umarah
ibn-Khuraim  succeeded  al-Hasan  ibn-Kahtabah,  and  then

1  Mukaddasi,  p.  276 ;  Istakhri,  p.  192 ;  Meynard,  p.  353 :  "  Shamakhi."

*  "  Salm,"  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  305.

3  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  342;  Brosset,  vol.  i,  p.  159.

*  Persian — garden,  vineyard.


33<D  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

came  Rauh  ibn-Hatim  al-Muhallabi,  Khuzaimah  ibn-Kha-
zim,  Yazid  ibn-Mazyad  ash-Shaibani,  'Ubaidallah  ibn-
al-Mahdi,  al-Fadl  ibn-Yahya,  Sa'id  ibn-Salim,  and  Muham-
mad ibn- Yazid  ibn-Mazyad.  Of  these  rulers,  Khuzaimah
was  the  severest.  It  was  he  who  introduced  the  system  by
which  Dabil  and  an-Nashawa  paid  land  tax  according  to
the  area,  not  the  produce.  The  Armenian  patricians  did
not  cease  to  hold  their  lands  as  usual,  each  trying  to  protect
his  own  region ;  and  whenever  a  'dmil  came  to  the  frontier
they  would  coax  him;  and  if  they  found  in  him  purity  and
severity,  as  well  as  force  and  equipment,  they  would  give
the  kharaj  and  render  submission,  otherwise  they  would  211
deem  him  weak  and  look  down  upon  him.

The  governorship  of  Khalid  ibn-Yazid.  In  the  caliphate
of  al-Ma'mun,  the  Armenian  patricians  were  under  the  rule
of  Khalid  ibn- Yazid  ibn-Mazyad,  who  accepted  their  pres-
ents and  associated  personally  with  them.  This  corrupted
them  and  encouraged  them  against  the  'a mils  of  al-Ma'-
mun who  came  after  him.

Al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  over  the  frontier  region.  Al-Mu'tasim-
Billah  appointed  to  the  governorship  of  the  frontier  region
al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali-l-Badhaghisi,  better  known  as  al-Ma'-
muni,  who  let  its  patricians  and  nobles  go  their  way,  and
dealt  so  leniently  with  them  that  they  became  more  disloyal
to  the  Sultan  and  mure  severe  on  the  people  who  came
under  their  rule.  Jurzan  was  subdued  by  Ishak  ibn-Isma'il
ibn-Shu'aib.  a  freedman  of  the  banu-Umaiyah.  Sahl  ibn-
Sanbat,  the  patrician,  rose  against  the  'dmil  of  Haidar  ibn-
Kawus  al-Afshin  over  Armenia  and  killed  his  secretary  and
had  a  narrow  escape  by  flight.  Armenia  after  this  was
ruled  by  'dmils  who  would  remit  to  its  people  what  was
due  from  them,  and  accept  whatever  khardj  could  be  of-
fered.

The  governorship  of  Yusuf  ibn-Mnhammad. Two  years


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ARMENIA  33 1

after  al-Mutawakkil  became  caliph,  he  conferred  the  gov-
ernorship of  Armenia  upon  Yusuf  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-
Yusuf  al-Marwazi.  As  he  passed  through  Khilat,  Yusuf
seized  its  patrician  Bukrat  ibn-Ashut  and  carried  him  off  to
Surra-man-ra'a,  which  act  greatly  offended  the  patricians,
nobles  and  feudal  lords  [Ar.  mutaghallibah] .  Later  a  'dmil
of  his,  named  al-'Ala  ibn- Ahmad,  went  to  a  convent  at  as-
Sisajan,  called  Dair  al-Akdah,  which  was  highly  respected
and  richly  endowed  with  gifts  by  the  Armenian  Christians,
and  carried  away  all  what  was  in  it  and  oppressed  its  occu-
pants. This  act  was  too  much  for  the  patricians,  who  held
communication  with  each  other  and  urged  each  other  to
throw  off  their  allegiance  and  rise  in  revolt.  They  insti-
gated al-Khuwaithiyah,1  who  were  "  uncircumcised  "  and
were  known  by  the  name  of  al-Artan,  to  fall  upon  Yusuf,
and  urged  them  against  him  in  revenge  for  the  carrying-
away  of  their  patrician  Bukrat.  Meanwhile,  every  one  of
the  patricians  and  feudal  lords  sent  them  horses  and  men  to
help  them  bring  that  about.  Accordingly,  they  fell  upon
Yusuf  at  Tarun,  after  he  had  distributed  his  followers  in
the  villages,  and  slew  him,  carrying  away  all  that  his  camp
contained.

The  governorship  of  Bugha  the  Elder.  Al-Mutawakkil
assigned  to  the  governorship  of  Armenia  Bugha-1-Kabir
[the  Elder]  who,  arriving  in  Badlis,  seized  Musa  ibn-Zura-  212
rah  who,  in  revenge  for  Bukrat,  had  favored  and  taken  part
in  killing  Yusuf.  Bugha  warred  against  al-Khuwaithiyah,
slaughtering  a  great  number,  and  carrying  many  away  as
captives.  He  then  invested  Ashut  ibn-Hamzah  ibn-Jajik,
the  patrician  of  al-Busfurrajan,  at  al-Bak,2  compelled  him
to  surrender  his  castle  and  carried  him  as  captive  to  Surra-

1  St.  Martin,  vol.  i,  p.  100.

2  Khurdadhbih,  p.  123,  line  11 ;  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  1410,  line  3.


332  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

man-ra'a.  He  then  advanced  to  Jurzan  and  succeeded  in
laying  hold  on  Ishak  ibn-Isma'il,  whom  he  kept  in  confine-
ment until  his  death.  Bugha  reduced  Jurzan,  and  carried
away  those  Christians  and  non-Christians  of  Arran,  of  the
elevated  region  of  Armenia,1  and  of  as-Sisajan,  who  be-
longed to  the  revolutionary  party.  Thus  the  political  state
of  affairs  in  that  frontier  region  became  so  quiet  as  never
before. In  the  year  241,  he  came  to  Surra-man-ra'a.

1  Text  corrupt.


PART V
NORTHERN  AFRICA


CHAPTER  I

The  Conquest  of  Egypt  and  al-Maghrib  [Mauri-
tania]

cAmr  moves  against  Egypt.  After  the  battle  of  al-Yar-
muk,  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  laid  siege  to  Caesarea  [Kaisariyah].
When  Yazid  ibn-abi-Sufyan  assumed  power,  'Amr  left  his
son  in  his  place  at  Caesarea  and  led,  all  of  his  own  accord,
an  army  of  3,500  to  Egypt.  'Umar  was  angry  because  of  it
and  wrote  to  him,  rebuking  and  reprimanding  him  for  fol-
lowing his  own  opinion,  without  consulting  'Umar,  and  or-
dering him  to  return  home  in  case  the  message  was  received
before  his  arrival  in  Egypt.  'Amr,  however,  received  the
message  in  al-'Arish.1  It  is  asserted  by  others  that  'Umar
wrote  to  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,  ordering  him  to  proceed  to
Egypt.  'Amr  received  the  message  as  he  was  besieging
Caesarea.  The  one  who  delivered  the  message  was  Sharik
ibn-'Abdah,  to  whom  'Amr  gave  1 ,000  dinars,  which  Sharik
refused  to  accept.  'Amr  asked  him  to  conceal  the  matter
and  not  disclose  it  to  'Umar.

Al-Fustdt.  The  advance  of  'Amr  against  Egypt  took
place  in  the  year  19.  He  first  stopped  at  al-'Arish  and  then
proceeded  to  al-Farama',2  in  which  were  troops  ready  for
the  fight.  'Amr  fought  and  defeated  them,  taking  posses-
sion of  their  camp. Thence  he  advanced  straight  on  to  al-

1  Ai-Makrizi,  al-Khitat,  vol.  ii,  p.  63  (Cairo,  1325)  :  "Rafj";  Zaidan,
Ta'rikh  Misr  al-Hadith,  vol.  i,  p.  77;  "  Rafh  .  .  .  modern  Raf,  ten
hours'  journey  from  al-'Arish."

2  Pelusium. Mahasin,  vol.  i,  p.  8.

335


336  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Fustat  and  camped  at  the  myrtle  gardens,  as  the  people  of  213
al-Fustat  had  dug  moats.  The  name  of  the  city  was  Alyu-
nah,1  but  the  Moslems  called  it  Fustat  because  they  said,
"  This  is  the  meeting  place  [Ar.  fustat]  of  the  people,  and
the  place  where  they  assemble.'"  Others  say  that  'Amr
pitched  a  tent  [also  fustat]  in  it,  and  it  bore  its  name  from
it.2

As  'Amr  ibn-al-Asi  was  besieging  al-Fustat,  he  was
joined  by  az-Zubair  ibn-al-'Auwam  ibn-Khuwailid  at  the
head  of  10,000 — others  say  12,000  men — among  whom  were
Kharijah  ibn-Hudhafah-l-'Adawi  and  'Umair  ibn-Wahb  al-
Jumahi.  Az-Zubair  was  on  the  point  of  leading  an  incur-
sion and  wanted  to  go  to  Antioch;  but  'Umar  said  to  him,
"  Abu-'Abdallah,  wouldst  thou  like  to  take  the  governor-
ship of  Egypt? ':  To  this  az-Zubair  replied,  "I  do  not
care  for  it,  but  would  like  to  go  there  on  a  holy  war  and  co-
operate with  the  Moslems.  If  I  find  that  'Amr  has  already
reduced  it,  I  would  not  interfere  with  his  affairs,  but  would
go  to  some  sea-coast  and  keep  post  at  it;  but  if  I  find  him  in
the  struggle,  I  shall  fight  on  his  side."  With  this  under-
standing, he  left.

Az-Zubair  led  the  attack  on  one  side,  and  'Amr  ibn-al-
'Asi  on  the  other.  Finally  az-Zubair  brought  a  ladder  and
climbed  on  it  until,  with  his  sword  unsheathed,  he  looked
down  upon  the  fort  and  exclaimed,  "  Allah  is  great!  "  and
so  did  the  Moslems  exclaim  and  follow  him  up.  Thus  he
took  the  fort  by  assault,  and  the  Moslems  considered  it  legal
to  take  all  that  was  in  it.  'Amr  made  its  holders  d hi 'mm  is.
imposed  a  poll-tax  on  their  person  and  kharaj  on  their  land,
and  communicated  that  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  who  en-
dorsed it. Az-Zubair  marked  certain  lots  in Misr [Old

1  Yakut,  vol.  i,  pp.  355,  450.

2  Makrizi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  75-76.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  AND  AL-MAGHRIB 337

Cairo]  for  himself  [ikJitatta]  and  built  a  well-known  man-
sion in  which  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair  resided  when  he  in-
vaded Ifrikiyah  x  in  the  company  of  ibn-abi-Sarh.  The  lad-
der which  az-Zubair  used  is  still  in  Misr.

'Affan  ibn-Muslim  from  Hisham  ibn-'Urwah : — Az-
Zubair  was  sent  to  Misr ;  and  when  he  was  told  there  were
in  it  warfare  and  pest,  he  replied,  "  We  have  come  here  only
for  warfare  and  pest."  The  Moslems  put  ladders  up  and
climbed  on  them.

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — 'Amr  ibn-
al-'Asi  entered  Egypt  with  3,500  men.  When  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  heard  about  the  situation  in  Egypt,  he  was  af-
fected with  solicitude  and  fear  and  despatched  az-Zubair
ibn-al-'Auwam  at  the  head  of  12,000  men.  Az-Zubair  214
took  part  in  the  conquest  of  Misr  and  marked  out  in  it  cer-
tain lots.2

The  division  of  the  land.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Sufyan
ibn-Wahb  al-Khaulani : — WThen  we  conquered  Misr  with-
out making  a  covenant  with  it,  az-Zubair  rose  and  said  to
'Amr,  "  Divide  it  " ;  but  'Amr  refused.  Then  az-Zubair
said,  "  By  Allah,  thou  shouldst  divide  it  as  the  Prophet
divided  Khaibar."  'Amr  wrote  that  to  'Umar  who  wrote
back,  saying,  "  Leave  it  as  it  is.  so  that  the  descendants  of
the  descendants  3  may  profit  by  it."

A  tradition  to  the  same  effect  was  communicated  to  me
by  'Abdallah  ibn-Wahb  on  the  authority  of  Sufyan  ibn-
Wahb.

'Amr  and  az-Zubair  conquer  Egypt.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sal-
lam  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — 'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  entered

1  Africa  =  Tunis. Ibn-'Adhari,  al-Bayan  al-Mughrib,  vol.  i,  pp.  3
seq.

2  Ar.  khitat. See  Makrizi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  76  seq.

3  Ar.  habal  al-habalah. See  Mutarrizi,  p.  105;  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  247;
Makrizi,  vol.  ii,  p.  72.  line  23 :  p.  73,  line  25 ;  an-Nihdyah,  vol.  i,  p.  198.


338  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Egypt  at  the  head  of  3,500  men.  Just  before  that,  'Umar
was  affected  with  solicitude  and  fear  and  sent  az-Zubair  ibn-
al-'Auwam  at  the  head  of  12,000  men.  Az-Zubair  took  part
with  'Amr  in  the  conquest  of  Egypt  and  marked  out  for
himself  two  lots  in  Misr  and  Alexandria.

Ibrahim  ibn-Muslim  al-Khawarizmi  from  'Abdallah  ibn-
'Arar  ibn-al-'Asi : — The  latter  said,  "There  is  a  disagree-
ment regarding  the  conquest  of  Misr :  some  say  it  was
conquered  by  force,  and  others  by  capitulation.  The  fact
is  that  my  father  ['Amr  ibn-al-'Asi]  arrived  in  it  and  was
resisted  by  the  people  of  Alyunah.  He  finally  took  posses-
sion of  it  by  force  and  led  the  Moslems  in.  Az-Zubair  was
the  first  to  climb  its  fort.  The  chief  of  Misr  said  to  my
father,  '  We  have  heard  of  what  ye  did  in  Syria  and  how  ye
assessed  poll-tax  on  the  Christians  and  Jews,  leaving  the
land  in  the  hands  of  its  owners  to  utilize  it  and  pay  its
kharaj.  If  ye  treat  us  the  same  way,  it  would  do  you  more
good  than  to  kill,  capture  and  expel  us.'  My  father  con-
sulted with  the  Moslems  and  they  all  advised  him  to  accept
the  terms,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  men  who  asked  him
to  divide  the  land  among  them.  Accordingly,  he  assessed
on  every  adult,  excepting  the  poor,  two  dinars  as  poll-tax,
and  on  every  land-owner,  in  addition  to  the  two  dinars,  215
three  irdabbs  of  wheat,  two  kists  of  oil,  two  kists  of  honey
and  two  kists  of  vinegar,  to  be  given  as  a  subsistence  allow-
ance to  the  Moslems,  and  gathered  in  the  public  house  of
provision  [ddr-ar-rizk] ,  where  it  is  divided  among  them.  A
census  was  taken  of  the  Moslems,  and  the  inhabitants  of
Misr  were  required  to  provide  every  one  of  the  Moslems
with  a  woolen  upper  gown,  an  upper  cloak  or  turban,
breeches  and  a  pair  of  shoes  1  per  annum.  Instead  of  the
woolen  gown,  a  Coptic  robe  would  do. To  this  end,  a  state-

1  Dozy,  Noms  des  Vctcments.  s.  v.  jubbah,  burnus,  'amamah,  sirwal
and  khuff.


J/


THE  CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  AND  AL-MAGHRIB ^39

ment  was  written,  in  which  it  was  stipulated  that  so  long  as
they  lived  up  to  these  terms,  their  women  and  children
would  neither  be  sold  nor  taken  captives,  and  their  posses-
sions and  treasures  would  be  kept  in  their  hands.1  The
statement  was  submitted  to  'Umar,  the  '  Commander  of  the
Believers,'  who  endorsed  it.  Thus,  the  whole  land  became
k hard] '-land.  Because,  however,  'Amr  signed  the  contract
and  the  statement,  some  people  thought  that  Misr  was  taken
by  capitulation."  2

After  the  king  of  Alyunah  had  made  arrangements  for
himself  and  for  the  people  in  his  city,  he  made  terms  on  be-
half of  all  the  Egyptians  similar  to  the  terms  of  Alyunah.
The  Egyptians  consented,  saying,  "  If  those  of  us  who  are
protected  by  fortifications  have  accepted  such  terms,  and
were  content  with  them,  how  much  more  should  we  be
content  who  are  weak  and  have  no  power  of  resistance."
Khardj  was  assessed  on  the  land  of  Egypt  to  the  amount  of
one  dinar  and  three  irdabbs  of  wheat  on  every  jarib,  and
two  dinars  on  every  adult.  The  statement  was  submitted  to
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.

The  terms  made  with  (Amr.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Yazid
ibn-abi-Habib : — Al-Mukaukis 3  made  terms  with  'Amr
ibn-al-'Asi,  stipulating  that  'Amr  should  let  those  of  the
Greeks  go  who  wanted  to  leave,  and  keep  those  who  wanted
to  stay,  on  certain  conditions,  which  he  specified,  and  that
he  would  assess  on  the  Copts,  two  dinars  per  head.  Hear-
ing this,  the  king  of  the  Greeks  was  enraged  and  sent  his

1  Gottheil,  "  Dhimmis  and  Moslems  in  Egypt ",  O.  T.  and  Semitic
Studies,  vol.  ii,  p.  363.

2  Makrizi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  72-74.

s  Ibn-Kurkub  al-Yunani — perhaps  Cyrus,  the  viceroy  and  archbishop
of  Alexandria  under  Heraclius.  See  Butler,  The  Arab  Conquest  of
Egypt,  pp.  508,  521;  Bysant.  Zeitschrift,  year  1903,  p.  1606;  Casanova,
Mohammed  et  la  Fin  du  Monde,  p.  26.


x^


J


340  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

troops,  who,  closing  the  gates  of  Alexandria,  announced
to  'Umar  their  readiness  for  war.  Al-Mukaukis  presented
himself  before  'Amr  and  said,  "  I  have  three  requests  to
make :  do  not  offer  to  the  Greeks  the  same  terms  thou  hast
offered  me,  because  they  have  distrusted  me;  do  not  vio-
late the  terms  made  with  the  Copts,  for  the  violation  was
not  started  by  them ;  and  when  I  die,  give  orders  that  I  be
buried  in  a  church  at  Alexandria  (which  he  named)."
'Amr  answered,  "  The  last  is  the  easiest x  for  me."

Bilhit,  al-Khais,  Sultais  and  Alexandria.  Certain  villages
in  Egypt  resisted  the  advance  of  the  Moslems,  and  'Amr
carried  away  some  of  their  inhabitants  as  prisoners.  These
were  the  following :  Bilhit,2  al-Khais,8  and  Sultais.4  Their
captives  were  carried  away  to  al-Madinah.  'Umar  ibn-al-  216
Khattab  sent  them  back  and  made  them,  together  with  the
Coptic  community,  dhimmis.  The  covenant  they  had,  they
did  not  violate.  The  following  is  the  report  of  the  conquest
of  Alexandria  made  by  'Amr  to  'Umar :  "  Allah  has  given
to  us  the  possession  of  Alexandria  by  force  and  against  its
will,  without  covenant  or  contract  ".  According  to  Yazid
ibn-abi-Habib,  however,  the  city  was  taken  by  capitulation.

The  tax  of  Egypt.  Abu-Aiyub  ar-Rakki  from  Yazid  ibn-
abi-Habib  : — The  kJiaraj  and  poll-tax  which  'Amr  raised
from  Egypt  amounted  to  2,000,000  dinars;  but  that  raised
by  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Abi-Sarh,  4,000,000.  When
'Uthman  remarked  to  'Amr,  saying,  "  After  thee  the  milch
camels  have  yielded  more  milk  ",  'Amr  replied.  "  This  is
because  ye  have  emaciated  their  young  ".5

In  the  year  21,  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wrote  to  'Amr  ibn-

1  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  263.

2  Cf.  "  Balhib  "  in  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  733-

s  Butler,  p. 289,  and  note;  ibn-Dukmak,  Kitab  al-Intisar  li-Wdsitat  'Ikd
al-Amsar,  vol.  v,  p.  118  (Bulak,  1893).
*  Cf.  Dukmak,  vol.  v,  pp.  118-119.  5  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  159.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  AND  AL-MAGHRIB ^l

al-'Asi  informing  him  of  the  straits  in  which  the  inhabi-
tants of  al-Madinah  were,  and  ordering  him  to  transport
by  sea  to  al-Madinah  all  the  food  he  had  collected  as  kharaj.
Accordingly,  the  food  with  the  oil  was  carried  there;  and
when  it  reached  al-Jar,1  it  was  received  by  Sa'd  al-Jar.2
Later  it  was  kept  in  a  special  house  at  al-Madinah  and  dis-
tributed among  the  Moslems  by  measure.  At  the  time  of
the  first  insurrection,  the  supply  was  cut  off.  In  the  days  of
Mu'awiyah  and  Yazid,  it  was  again  carried  to  al-Madi-
nah. Then  it  was  cut  off  until  the  time  of  'Abd-al-Malik
ibn-Marwan,  after  which  it  was  carried  until  the  caliphate
of  abu-Ja'far,  or  a  little  previous  to  that.

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — After
the  first  peace  was  made,  the  tax-payers  in  Egypt  made  new
terms  in  the  caliphate  of  'Umar,  stipulating  that  instead  of
the  wheat,  oil,  honey  and  vinegar  they  offered,  they  would
pay  two  dinars  in  addition  to  the  other  two  dinars.  Each
one  thus  was  bound  to  pay  four  dinars ;  and  they  consented
to  that  and  preferred  it.

'Ain  Shams,  al-Faiyum  and  other  places  reduced.  Abu-
Aiyub  ar-Rakki  from  al-Jaishani : — The  latter  said,  "  I
heard  it  stated  by  a  number  of  those  who  witnessed  the  con-
quest of  Egypt  that  when  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  reduced  al-
Fustat,  he  despatched  to  'Ain  Shams  3  'Abdallah  ibn-Hu-
dhafah  as-Sahmi,  who  took  possession  of  its  land  and  made  217
terms  with  the  inhabitants  of  its  villages  similar  to  those
of  al-Fustat.  Likewise  'Amr  despatched  Kharijah  ibn-
Hudhafah al-'Adawi to al-Faiyum,4 al-Ushmunain,  Tkh-

1  Hamdani,  Sifat  Jazirat  al-'Arab,  p.  47,  line  17  (ed.  Midler).
-  Sa'd  al-Jari  mentioned  in  Dhahabi,  al-Mushtabih,  p.  81 ;  cj.  ibn-Sa'd,
vol.  Hi1,  p.  240;  Yakut,  vol.  ii.  p.  6.

8  Heliopolis;  confused  by  some  historians  with  Bab  Alyunah  (Baby-
lon) ;  Butler,  p.  212,  note.

4  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  pp.  402-403.


342  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

mim,  al-Basharudat  *  and  the  villages  of  upper  Egypt,
which  he  reduced  on  the  same  terms.  'Amr  also  sent
'Umair  ibn-Wahb  al-Jumahi  to  Tinnis,  Dimyat,  Tunah,
Damirah,  Shata,  Dikahlah,2  Bana  and  Busir,  which  he  re-
duced on  the  same  terms.  'Amr  also  sent  'Ukbah  ibn-
'Amir  al-Juhani  (others  say  'Amr's  freedman,  Wardan
after  whom  Suk  [market]  Wardan  in  Egypt  is  named)
to  the  rest  of  the  villages  in  the  lower  part  of  the  country;
and  he  did  the  same.  Thus  did  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  effect  the
conquest  of  all  Egypt  and  make  its  land  khardj '-land."

The  Copts  have  no  covenant.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam
from  Aiyub  ibn-abi-l-'Aliyah's  father : — The  latter  said,
"  I  heard  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  say  from  the  pulpit,  '  I  have
occupied  this  position  and  am  bound  to  none  of  the  Egyp-
tian Copts  by  covenant  or  contract.  If  I  want,  I  can  kill;
if  I  want,  I  can  take  one-fifth  of  the  possessions;  if  I  want,
I  can  sell  captives.  The  people  of  Antabulus  are  excluded
because  they  have  a  covenant  which  must  be  kept '."

Al-Maghrib  and  Egypt  taken  by  force.  Al-Kasim  ibn-
Sallam  from  Musa  ibn-'Ali  ibn-Rabah  al-Lakhmi's  father:
— All  al-Maghrib  was  taken  by  force.

Abu-'Ubaid  from  as-Salt  ibn-abi-'Asim,  the  secretary  of
Haiyan  ibn-Shuraih  : — The  latter  said  that  he  read  the  letter
of  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  to  Haiyan,  his  'dmil  over  Egypt,
stating  that  Egypt  was  taken  by  force,  with  no  covenant  or
contract.

Poll-tax  of  the  Copts  not  to  be  increased.  Abu-'Ubaid
from  'Ubaidallah  ibn-abi-Ja'far : — Mu'awiyah  wrote  to
Wardan,  a  freedman  of  'Amr,  ordering  him  to  increase  the
poll-tax  of  every  Copt  by  one  kirat,  but  Wardan  wrote  back,
"  How  can  I  increase  it  while  it  is  stated  in  their  covenant
that  their  tax  should  not  be  increased  ?"

1  Cf.  Bakri,  vol.  i,  p.  166.  2  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  581.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  AND  AL-MAGHRIB 343

Egyptians  overtaxed.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'Abd-
al-Hamid  ibn-Ja'far's  father: — The  latter  heard  'Urwah
ibn-az-Zubair  say,  "  I  spent  seven  years  in  Egypt  and  was
married  in  it.  I  found  its  people  exhausted,  being  burdened
with  more  than  they  could  bear.  The  country  was  con-
quered by  'Amr  through  capitulation,  covenant  and  some-  218
thing  assessed  on  the  inhabitants."

The  statement  of  'Amr.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
'Ukbah  ibn-'Amir  al-Juhani : — The  Egyptians  had  a  cove-
nant and  a  contract.  'Amr  gave  them  a  statement  to  the
effect  that  they  were  secure  with  respect  to  their  posses-
sions, lives  and  children,  and  that  none  of  them  would  be
sold  as  slaves.  He  imposed  on  them  a  khardj  not  to  be  in-
creased, and  promised  to  expel  all  fear  of  attack  by  an  en-
emy. 'Ukbah  added,  "  And  I  was  a  witness  thereunto  ".

The  division  of  the  land.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from
Sufyan  ibn- Wahb  al-Khaulani : — The  latter  said,  "  At  the
conquest  of  Misr  by  us,  which  was  effected  without  cove-
nant, az-Zubair  ibn-al-'Auwam  rose  and  said,  '  'Amr,  divide
it  between  us !'  'Amr  replied,  'By  Allah,  I  will  not  divide  it
before  I  consult  'Umar.'  He  wrote  to  'Umar,  and  the  latter
wrote  back,  'Leave  it  as  it  is,  so  that  the  descendants  of  the
descendants  may  profit  by  it.'  "

Its  khardj.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Usamah  ibn-Zaid
ibn-Aslam's  grandfather : — In  the  year  20,  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,
accompanied  by  az-Zubair,  subdued  Egypt.  When  Egypt
was  conquered,  the  people  made  terms,  agreeing  to  pay
something  he  imposed  on  them,  which  was  two  dinars  on  -
every  man,  excluding  women  and  boys.  The  khardj  of
Egypt  during  his  governorship  amounted  to  2,000,000
dinars ;  but  later  it  reached  4,000,000.

Two  dinars  on  each  Copt.  Abu-'Ubaid  from  Yazid  ibn-
abi-Habib : — Al-Mukaukis,  the  chief  of  Egypt,  made  terms
with  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,  stipulating  that  each  Copt  pays  two


jj


344  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

dinars.  Hearing  this,  Heraclius,  the  chief  of  the  Greeks,
was  enraged  with  anger  and  sent  the  troops  to  Alexandria
and  closed  its  gates ;  but  'Amr  reduced  the  city  by  force.

The  poll-tax  of  the  native  village  of  umm-Ibrakim  an-
nulled. Ibn-al-Kattat,  i.  e.,  abu-Mas'ud,  from  ash-Sha'bi :
— 'Ali  ibn-al-Husain,  or  al-Husain  himself,  interceded  with
Mu'awiyah  regarding  the  poll-tax  of  the  fellow-villagers  in  219
Egypt  of  the  mother  of  Ibrahim,1  the  Prophet's  son ;  and  it
was  cancelled.  The  Prophet  himself  used  to  recommend
that  the  Copts  be  favorably  treated.

The  Prophet  recommends  the  Copts.  'Amr  from  Malik,
and  al-Laith  from  a  son  of  Ka'b  ibn-Malik : — The  Prophet
said.  "  If  ye  conquer  Egypt,  treat  the  Copts  favorably,  be-
cause they  have  dhimmah  and  blood-relationship."  It  is
stated  by  al-Laith  that  umm-Isma'il 2  was  a  Copt.

'Umar  confiscates  ' Amr's  possessions.  Abu-1-Hasan  al-
Mada'ini  from  'Abdallah  ibn-al-Mubarak : — 'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  used  to  record  the  possessions  of  his  'aniils  at  the
time  of  their  appointment ;  and  whatsoever  was  later  added
was  partly  or  wholly  confiscated  by  him.  He  once  wrote  to
'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,  "  It  has  become  revealed  that  thou  ownest
commodities,  slaves,  vases  and  animals  which  thou  didst  not
possess  when  thou  wert  made  governor  of  Egypt."  'Amr
wrote  back,  "  Our  land  is  a  land  of  agriculture  and  trade ;
we,  therefore,  get  as  income  more  than  what  is  necessary  for
our  expenses."  To  this,  'Umar  replied,  "  I  have  had  enough
experience  with  the  wicked  'amils.  Thy  letter  is  the  letter
of  one  disturbed  because  justice  has  been  meted  out  to  him.
Therefore,  my  suspicion  has  been  aroused  against  thee,  and
[have  sent  to  thee  Muhammad  ibn-Maslamah  with  a  view  to
dividing  with  thee  what  thou  hast. Reveal  to  him  thy  secret,

1  Mariyah,  the  Copt;  Nawawi.  p.  853.
a  The  reference  is  to  Hagar.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  EGYPT  AND  AL-MAGHRIB 345

and  give  out  whatever  he  demands  of  thee;  thereby  thou
wouldst  be  spared  his  severity.  What  is  concealed  has  been
revealed.1 ':  Thus  were  'Amr's  possessions  confiscated  by
'Umar.

Al-Mada'ini  from  'Isa  ibn-Yazid : — When  Muhammad
ibn-Maslamah  divided  with  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  his  possessions,
'Amr  made  this  remark,  "  An  age  in  which  the  son  of  Han-
tamah  2  treats  us  in  this  manner  is  certainly  an  evil  age.  Al-
'Asi  used  to  put  on  silk  garments  with  brocade  borders ! '
"  Hush,"  said  Muhammad,  "  had  it  not  been  for  this  age  of
ibn-Hantamah  which  thou  hatest,  thou  wouldst  be  found
bending  in  the  court-yard  of  thy  house,  at  the  feet  of  a  goat,
whose  abundance  of  milk  would  please  thee  and  scarcity
would  displease  thee."  3  "  I  beg  thee  by  Allah,"  exclaimed
'Amr,  "  report  not  what  I  have  just  uttered  to  'Umar.  A
conversation  is  always  confidential."  Muhammad  replied,
"  So  long  as  'Umar  lives,  I  shall  not  mention  anything  that
took  place  between  us."

Egypt  taken  by  force. 'Amr  an-Nakid  from  'Abdallah
ibn-Hubairah  : — Egypt  was  taken  by  force.

'Amr  from  ibn-An'am's  grandfather  (who  witnessed  the 220
conquest  of  Egypt)  : — Egypt  was  taken  by  force  without
covenant  or  contract.

1  Freytag,  Prov.,  vol.  i,  p.  160,  number  33.

2  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab's  mother ;  Nawawi,  p.  447.

3  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  pp.  618-619.


CHAPTER  II
The  Conquest  of  Alexandria

The  battle  of  al-Kiryaun.  When  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  con-
quered Misr,  he  settled  in  it  and  wrote  to  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  soliciting  his  orders  to  march  against  Alexandria
[al-Iskandariyah].1  'Umar  wrote  and  ordered  him  to  do
so;  so  'Amr  marched  against  it  in  the  year  21,  leaving  as  his
substitute  [lieutenant]  over  Misr  Kharijah  ibn-Hudhafah
ibn-Ghanim  ibn-'Amir  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-'Awij
ibn-'Adi  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-Lu'ai  ibn-Ghalib.  In  the  meantime,
those  Greeks  and  Copts  who  lived  below  Alexandria  had
gathered  and  said,  "  Let  us  attack  him  in  al-Fustat  before
he  reaches  here  and  makes  an  attempt  on  Alexandria."
'Amr  met  them  at  al-Kiryaun  2  and  defeated  them  with  a
great  slaughter.  In  their  ranks  were  men  from  Sakha,  Bil-
hit,  al-Khais  and  Sultais,  and  others  who  came  to  their  as-
sistance and  support.

Alexandria  reduced.  'Amr  kept  his  way  until  he  arrived
in  Alexandria,  whose  inhabitants  he  found  ready  to  resist
him,  but  the  Copts  in  it  preferred  peace.  Al-Mukaukis
communicated  with  'Amr  and  asked  him  for  peace  and  a
truce  for  a  time;  but  'Amr  refused.  Al-Mukaukis  then  or-
dered that  the  women  stand  on  the  wall  with  their  faces
turned  towards  the  city,  and  that  the  men  stand  armed,  with
their  faces  towards  the  Moslems,  thus  hoping  to  scare  them

1  Dukmak,  vol.  v,  p.  121.

2  Chaereum,  Butler,  pp.  288-289;  al-Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  as-Suduu.
Misr  w-al-Andalus,  p.  160.

346


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ALEXANDRIA  347

[Moslems].  'Amr  sent  word,  saying,  "  We  see  what  thou
hast  done.  It  was  not  by  mere  numbers  that  we  conquered
those  we  have  conquered.  We  have  met  your  king  Her-
aclius,  and  there  befell  him  what  has  befallen  him."  Hear-
ing this,  al-Mukaukis  said  to  his  followers,  "  These  people
are  telling  the  truth.  They  have  chased  our  king  from  his
kingdom  as  far  as  Constantinople.  It  is  much  more  prefer-
able, therefore,  that  we  submit."  His  followers,  however,
spoke  harshly  to  him  and  insisted  on  fighting.  The  Mos-
lems fought  fiercely  against  them  and  invested  them  for
three  months.  At  last,  'Amr  reduced  the  city1  by  the  sword
and  plundered  all  that  was  in  it,  sparing  its  inhabitants  of  221
whom  none  was  killed  or  taken  captive.  He  reduced  them
to  the  position  of  dhimmis  like  the  people  of  Alyunah.  He
communicated  the  news  of  the  victory  to  'Umar  through
Mu'awiyah  ibn-Hudaij  al-Kindi  (later  as-Sakuni)  and  sent
with  him  the  [usual]  fifth.

Some  state  that  al-Mukaukis  made  terms  with  'Amr  to
the  effect  that  he  should  pay  13,000  dinars,  that  those  who
prefer  to  leave  Alexandria  should  leave,  and  those  who  pre-
fer to  stay  should  stay,  and  that  two  dinars  be  assessed  on
every  adult  Copt.  To  this  end,  'Amr  wrote  a  statement.
He  then  left  in  his  place  over  Alexandria  'Abdallah  ibn-
Hudhafah  ibn-Kais  ibn-'Adi  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Sahm  ibn-'Amr
ibn-Husais  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-Lu'ai  at  the  head  of  a  cavalry
guard  of  the  Moslems,  and  departed  for  al-Fustat.2

Manuwil  captures  Alexandria.  The  Greeks  wrote  to
Constantine,  son  of  Heraclius,  who  was  their  king  at  that
time,  telling  him  how  few  the  Moslems  in  Alexandria  were,
and  how  humiliating  the  Greeks'  condition  was,  and  how  they
had  to  pay  poll-tax. Constantine  sent  one  of  his  men,  called

1  Cf.  ibn-Iyas,  Ta'rikh  Misr,  vol.  I,  p.  22.
3  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  pp.  263  seq.


J


348  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Manuwil x  [Manuel],  with  three  hundred  ships  full  of  fight-
ers. Manuwil  entered  Alexandria  and  killed  all  the  guard
that  was  in  it,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  who  by  the  use
of  subtle  means  took  to  flight  and  escaped.  This  took  place
in  the  year  25.  Hearing  the  news,  'Amr  set  out  at  the  head
of  15,000  men  and  found  the  Greek  fighters  doing  mischief
in  the  Egyptian  villages  next  to  Alexandria.  The  Moslems
met  them  and  for  one  hour  were  subjected  to  a  shower  of
arrows,  during  which  they  were  covered  by  their  shields.
They  then  advanced  boldly  and  the  battle  raged  with  great
ferocity  until  the  "  polytheists  "  were  routed ;  and  nothing
could  divert  or  stop  them  before  they  reached  Alexandria.
Here  they  fortified  themselves  and  set  mangonels.  'Amr
made  a  heavy  assault,  set  the  ballistae  and  destroyed  the
walls  of  the  city.  He  pressed  the  fight  so  hard  until  he  en-
tered the  city  by  assault,  killed  the  fighters  and  carried  away
the  children  as  captives.  Some  of  its  Greek  inhabitants  left
to  join  the  Greeks  somewhere  else;  and  Allah's  enemy,  Ma-
nuwil, was  killed.  'Amr  and  the  Moslems  destroyed  the  wall
of  Alexandria  in  pursuance  of  a  vow  that  'Amr  had  made
to  that  effect,  in  case  he  reduced  the  city.

According  to  certain  reports,  this  invasion  took  place  in
the  year  23 ;  and  according  to  others,  the  insurrection  took
place  in  the  years  23  and  25 ;  but  Allah  knows  best. 'Amr 222
assessed  on  the  land  of  Alexandria  kharaj;  and  on  its  peo-
ple, poll-tax.

Al-Mukaukis.  Some  report  that  al-Mukaukis  forsook
the  people  of  Alexandria  when  they  violated  the  covenant,
but  'Amr  reinstated  him  with  his  people  on  the  terms  of
their  first  capitulation.  Others  assert  that  he  died  before
this  invasion.

Alexandria  taken  by  capitulation. Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd

1  Butler,  pp.  468-475.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ALEXANDRIA  349

from  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz : — The  latter  said,  "  Not  a
town  in  al-Maghrib  did  we  take  by  capitulation  except
three:  Alexandria,  Kafartis  and  Sultais.  'Umar  used  to
say,  '  Whosoever  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  places  accepts
Islam  will  be  set  free  together  with  his  possessions  \"

How  the  dwellings  were  divided.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from
Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib: — 'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  conquered  Alex-
andria, and  some  Moslems  took  up  their  abode  in  it  as  a
cavalry  guard.  Later,  they  withdrew,  after  which  they
made  an  assault  and  hastened  to  secure  dwellings.  Some
of  them  would  come  to  the  houses  they  once  occupied  and
find  them  already  held  by  a  fellow  Moslem.  Regarding  this,
'Amr  remarked,  "  I  am  afraid  the  dwellings  would  fall
into  ruins  if  different  ones  of  you  should  occupy  them  in
turn."  Consequently,  when  the  invasion  was  made  and  the
Moslems  arrived  in  al-Kiryaun,  he  said,  "  Go  with  Allah's
blessing.  Whosoever  of  you  sticks  his  lancet  into  a  house,
that  house  is  his  and  his  father's  sons'."  Thus,  the  Moslem
would  enter  a  house  and  stick  his  lancet  into  some  apart-
ment of  it;  then  another  would  come  and  stand  his  lancet
in  the  same  house.  The  same  house  would  thereby  be  in
the  possession  of  two  or  three  persons,1  which  they  would
occupy  until  their  withdrawal,  at  which  the  Greeks  would
come  and  occupy  it.

Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib  used  to  say,  "  No  money  from  the
rent  of  these  houses  is  legal.2  They  can  neither  be  sold  nor
bequeathed,  but  they  are  dwelling-places  for  the  Moslems
during  the  time  they  hold  their  post  as  guard."

The  second  conflict.  During  the  second  conflict  with
Alexandria,  when  Manuwil,  the  Greek  eunuch,  came,  the
people  closed  the  gates ;  but  'Amr  reduced  it  and  destroyed
its  wall.

1  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  269:  "tribes".  i  Dukmak,  vol.  v,  p.  118.


350  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

f Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  replaces  'Amr.  No  sooner  had  'Amr
returned  to  al-Fustat  after  assigning  his  freedman,  War-
dan,  as  governor  of  Alexandria,  than  he  was  dismissed.  In
the  place  of  'Amr,  'Uthman  appointed  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd
ibn-abi-Sarh  ibn-al-Harith  of  the  banu-'Amr  ibn-Lu'ai,1
'Uthman's  foster-brother. That  took  place  in  the  year  25.

According  to  others,  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  was  in  charge  of  223
the  kharaj  of  Egypt  in  behalf  of  'Uthman.  Between  'Ab-
dallah and  'Amr,  a  verbal  dispute  arose  and  'Abdallah
wrote  and  accused  'Amr.  'Amr  was  dismissed  by  'Uthman,
who  assigned  'Abdallah  to  both  functions,  and  wrote  him
saying  that  Alexandria  was  taken  once  by  force  and  re-
volted two  times,  and  ordering  him  to  station  in  it  a  cavalry
guard  that  would  never  depart  from  it,  and  to  assign  abun-
dant subsistence  allowances  to  the  guard,  and  change  its
personnel  once  in  every  six  months.2

Ibn-Hurmus.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi : —
ibn-Hurmuz  al-A'raj  al-Kari  [the  lame  "  reader  "]  used  to
say,  "  Your  best  coast,  from  the  standpoint  of  guard,  is
Alexandria."  At  last  he  left  al-Madinah  and  joined  the
guard  stationed  in  Alexandria,  where  he  died  in  the  year
117.

The  capitation  tax.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  Musa
ibn-'Ali's  father: — The  capitation  tax  from  Alexandria
was  18,000  dinars;  but  when  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik
became  caliph,  it  amounted  to  36,ooo.3

e Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  made  governor.  'Amr  from  Yazid
ibn-abi-JHLabib : — 'Uthman  dismissed  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  from
Egypt  and  assigned  in  his  place  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd.  But
when  the  Greeks  occupied  Alexandria,  the  Egyptians  asked

1  Nawavvi,  pp.  345-347-
'  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  270.
s  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  269.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ALEXANDRIA  ^1

'Uthman  to  keep  'Amr  until  he  was  through  with  the  fight
against  the  Greeks,  because  he  had  special  knowledge  of
warfare  and  inspired  awe  in  the  enemy.  'Uthman  did  so;
and  'Amr  defeated  the  Greeks.  'Uthman  then  wanted  'Amr
to  be  in  charge  of  the  army,  and  'Abdallah  in  charge  of  the
khardj ;  but  'Amr  refused,  saying,  "  My  case  is  that  of  one
who  holds  the  horns  of  the  cow  while  the  chief  milks  it."
'Uthman  then  appointed  ibn-Sa'd  to  the  governorship  of
Egypt.

The  Abyssinians  of  al-Bima.  For  seven  years  after  the
conquest  of  Egypt,  the  Abyssinians  of  al-Bima  *  kept  up
their  resistance,  and  could  not  be  subjugated  because  of
the  water  with  which  they  flooded  their  thickets.

The  second  conquest  of  Alexandria.  'Abdallah  ibn-Wahb
from  Musa  ibn-'Ali's  father : — 'Amr  conquered  Alexandria
for  the  second  time  by  capitulation,  which  conquest  took
place  in  the  caliphate  of  'Uthman  after  the  death  of  'Umar.

1  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  1106.


CHAPTER  III
The  Conquest  of  Barkah  and  Zawilah  224

Barkah  makes  terms.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'Abdal-
lah ibn-Hubairah : — After  reducing  Alexandria,  'Amr  ibn-
al-'Asi  led  his  army  intent  upon  the  conquest  of  al-Magh-
rib  [Mauritania]  until  he  arrived  in  Barkah,  the  chief
city  of  Antabulus,1  whose  inhabitants  made  terms  on  a
poll-tax  of  13,000  dinars  to  be  raised  as  the  price  of  those
of  their  children  whom  they  desired  to  sell.2

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  ' Abdallah  ibn-Hubairah : —
After  investing  and  fighting  the  people  of  Antabulus  and
its  city,  Barkah,3  which  lay  between  Egypt  and  Ifrikiyah
[Africa  =  Tunis],  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  made  terms  with  them,
stipulating  that  they  pay  a  poll-tax  which  might  include  the
price  of  those  of  their  children  whom  they  desired  to  sell.
'Amr  wrote  a  statement  to  that  effect.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Ishak  ibn-' Abdallah  ibn-abi-
Farwah : — The  inhabitants  of  Barkah  used  to  send  their
khardj  to  the  governor  of  Egypt  without  having  anyone
come  to  urge  them  for  it.4  Their  land  was  the  most  fertile
land  of  al-Maghrib,  and  it  never  saw  an  insurrection.

Al-Wakidi  states  that  'Abdallah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi
used  to  say,  "  Had  it  not  been  for  my  possessions  in  al-

1  Pentapolis.  Khurdadhbih,  p.  91. Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  534.

2  Caetani  in  vol.  iv,  p.  533,  nota,  thinks  it  must  have  meant  the  right
to  offer  to  the  Moslems  their  children  as  slaves  according  to  a  fixed
price.

3  Barca. Butler,  p.  429.

4  As-Suyuti,  Husn  al-Muhadarah,  vol.  i,  p.  86.

352


THE  CONQUEST  OF  BARKAH  AND  ZAWlLAH 353

Hijaz,  I  would  live  in  Barkah,  because  I  know  of  no  place
that  is  more  safe  or  isolated  than  it."

'Amr's  report  to  'Umar.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from
Mu'awiyah  ibn-Salih : — 'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  wrote  to  'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab  informing  him  that  he  had  appointed  'Ukbah
ibn-Nafi'  al-Fihri  governor  of  al-Maghrib  and  that  the
latter  had  reached  as  far  as  Zawilah.  He  also  informed
him  that  peace  prevailed  among  all  between  Zawilah  *  and
Barkah,  that  their  allegiance  was  strong  and  that  the  Mos-
lems among  them  had  paid  sadakah  and  the  "  people  of  the
covenant  "  acknowledged  the  poll-tax  imposed.  'Amr  also
wrote  that  he  had  assessed  on  the  inhabitants  of  Zawilah
and  on  those  living  in  the  region  between  his  town  and  Za-
wilah, what  he  saw  would  be  tolerated  by  them,  and  or-
dered all  his  'dmils  to  collect  sadakah  from  the  rich  to  be  225
distributed  among  the  poor,  and  poll-tax  from  the  dhimmis
to  be  carried  to  'Amr  in  Egypt,  and  to  raise  from  Mos-
lem lands  the  tithe  and  half  the  tithe,  and  from  those  who
capitulated,  what  had  been  agreed  upon.

The  origin  of  the  Berbers.  Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  once
told  me,  "  I  asked  'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  regarding  the  Ber-
bers,2 and  he  said,  '  They  claim  to  be  the  descendants  of
Barr  ibn-Kais;  but  Kais  had  no  son  with  the  name,  Barr.
In  fact  they  are  descended  from  the  race  of  the  giants
[Philistines]  against  whom  David  fought.  In  ancient  times,
their  home  was  Palestine;  and  they  were  tent-dwellers.
Later  on,  they  came  to  al-Maghrib,  where  they  multiplied'."

The  Berbers  of  Luwdtah.  Abu-'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sal-
lam  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — 'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  made
this  a  condition  on  the  Berber  inhabitants  of  Luwatah  3  at

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2646.

!  See  article  on  Berbers  in  the  Encyclopedia  of  Islam.

3  Butler,  p.  430.


Jl


3^4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Barkah.  "  Ye  have  to  sell  your  children  and  wives  in  order
to  pay  the  poll-tax  on  you."  Commenting  on  this,  al-Laith
said,  "  If  they  were  slaves,  that  would  not  be  a  legal  thing
for  them  to  do."

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — 'Umar
ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  wrote  regarding  the  Luwatah  women,
"  Whoever  has  a  Luwatah  woman,  let  him  either  be  en-
gaged to  her  through  her  father,  or  return  her  to  her  peo-
ple." Luwatah  1  is  a  village  inhabited  by  Berbers  who  had
a  covenant.

1  Cf. Khurdadhbih, pp.  oo  and  91 ; ibn-Khaldun,  Kitab  al-'Ibar  H-
Aiyam  al-'Arab  w-al-'Ajam  w-al-Barbar,  vol.  ii2,  p.  128  (Bulak,  1284).


CHAPTER  IV
The  Conquest  of  Tripoli

Bakr  ibn-al-Haitham  from  'Ali  ibn-abi-Talhah : — In
the  year  22/  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  advanced  to  Tripoli.2  He
met  resistance  but  reduced  the  place  by  force,  carrying
away  many  loads  of  fine  silk  brocade  from  its  merchants.
This  booty  he  sold  and  divided  its  price  among  the  Mos-
lems. He  wrote  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  "  We  have  ar-
rived in  Tripoli  which  lies  nine  days  from  Ifrikiyah.
If  the  '  Commander  of  the  Believers  '  thinks  it  best  to  allow
us  to  invade  the  latter,  it  will  be  well."  'Umar  wrote  back,  226
ordering  him  not  to  go,  saying,  "  This  should  not  be  called
Ifrikiyah,  but  Mufarrikah,3  which  is  treacherous  to  others,
and  to  which  others  are  treacherous."  'Umar  wrote  that
because  its  inhabitants  used  to  pay  something  to  the  king  of
the  Greeks  and  often  treated  him  treacherously,  while  the
king  of  al-Andalus,  who  had  made  terms  with  them,
treated  them  treacherously.  These  facts  were  known  to
'Umar.

According  to  a  tradition  communicated  to  me  by  'Amr
an-Nakid  on  the  authority  of  certain  sheikhs,  Tripoli  was
taken  by  'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  through  a  covenant  made  by  him.

1  Weil,  Geschichte  der  Chalifen,  vol.  i,  p.  124  note :  "  year  23  ".

2Tripolis;  Ar.  Atrabulus. Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  309;  Ya'kubi,  Bulddn,  p.
346.

3  Pun  on  words. Mufarrikah  means  causing  deviation  from  the  right
course.

355


CHAPTER  V
The  Conquest  of  Ifrikiyah

'Uthmdn  reinforces  ibn-Sa'd.  When  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd
ibn-abi-Sarh  was  appointed  governor  over  Egypt  and  al-
Maghrib,  he  sent  out  the  Moslems  in  cavalry  detachments,
and  they  plundered  as  far  as  the  extremities  of  Ifrikiyah
[modern  Tunis].  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  first  hesitated  to  at-
tack Ifrikiyah;  but  after  consultation,  he  made  up  his  mind
to  do  so,  and  wrote  to  'Abdallah  in  the  year  27  (others  say
28,  still  others  29),  ordering  him  to  lead  the  attack,  and  re-
inforced him  with  a  large  army  in  which  were  Ma'bad
ibn-al-' Abbas  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib,  Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam
ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ibn-Umaiyah  and  his  brother  al-Harith  ibn-
al-Hakam,  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair  ibn-al-'Auwam,  al-
Miswar  ibn-Makhramah  ibn-Naufal  ibn-Uhaib  ibn-'Abd-
Manaf  ibn-Zuhrah  ibn-Kilab.  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-Zaid
ibn-al-Khattab,  'Abdallah  ibn-'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.  'Asim
ibn-'Umar,  'Ubaidallah  ibn-'Umar,  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-
abi-Bakr,  'Abdallah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi,  Busr  ibn-Abi-
Artah  ibn-'Uwaimir  al-'Amiri,  and  abu-Dhu'aib  Khuwailid
ibn-Khfdid  al-Hudhali,  the  poet.  Abu-Dhu'aib  died  in  this
campaign  and  ibn-az-Zubair  had  charge  of  the  burial.  In
this  campaign,  a  great  host  of  the  Arabs  from  the  environs
of  al-Madinah  took  part.

The  magnates  of  Ifrikiyah  make  terms  with  'Abdallah.
Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'Abdallah  ibn-az-Zubair : — The
latter  said : — "  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  sent  us  on  an  expedition 227
against  Ifrikiyah,  whose  patrician  exercised  authority  from
356


THE  CONQUEST  OF  IFRIKIYAH  357

Tripoli  to  Tanjah  [Tangiers].  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-abi-
Sarh  marched  against  him  and  occupied  'Akubah.  After  a
few  days'  fight,  I  was  enabled  to  kill,  by  Allah's  help,  the
patrician.  His  army  took  to  flight  and  was  torn  to  pieces.
Ibn-abi-Sarh  sent  detachments  and  scattered  them  all  over
the  country ;  and  they  carried  away  a  large  booty  and  drove
before  them  all  the  cattle  they  could.  Seeing  that,  the  great
men  of  Ifrikiyah  met  together  and  offered  'Abdallah  ibn-
Sa'd  300  quintals  x  of  gold  provided  he  would  let  them
alone  and  leave  their  land. Their  request  was  granted."

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  ibn-Ka'b: — 'Abdallah  ibn-
Sa'd  ibn-abi-Sarh  made  terms  with  the  patrician  of  Ifriki-
yah, stipulating  that  the  latter  should  pay  2,500,000  dinars.

'Ukbah  ibn-Ndff.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Musa
ibn-Damrah-1-Mazini's  father :— When  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd
made  terms  with  the  patrician  of  Ifrikiyah,  he  returned  to
Egypt  without  appointing  anyone  to  the  governorship  of
Ifrikiyah,  which  at  that  time  had  no  meeting-place  2  or  cen-
tral town.  When  'Uthman  was  murdered  and  Muhammad
ibn-abi-Hudhaifah  ibn-'Utbah  ibn-Rabi'ah  ruled  over
Egypt,  he  sent  nobody  to  Ifrikiyah;  but  when  Mu'awiyah
ibn-abi-Sufyan  came  to  power,  he  assigned  over  Egypt  Mu-
'awiyah ibn-Hudaij  as-Sakuni  who,  in  the  year  20,  sent
'Ukbah  ibn-Nafi'  ibn-'Abd-Kais  ibn-Lakit  al-Fihri  to  Ifriki-
yah. 'Ukbah  invaded  it  and  parceled  it  out  into  lots  among
the  Moslems.

'Ukbah  sent  Busr  ibn-abi-Artah  3  to  a  castle  in  al-Kaira-
wan,  which  he  reduced,  killing  and  capturing  many.  It  is
now  known  as  Kal'at  Busr  and  lies  near  a  city  called  Maj  ja-
nah,  near  the  silver  mine.

1  Ar.  kintar  =  "  1,200  dinars,  and  in  the  language  of  Barbar  =  1,000

mithkals  of  gold  or  silver";  T.'A.

2  Ar.  kairawan. See  De  Goeje's  edition  of  Baladhuri,  gloss.,  pp.  92-93.
s  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  272,  does  not  have  "  abi "  in  the  name.


358  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

I  heard  it  said  that  Musa  ibn-Nusair  sent  Busr,  who  was
then  82  years  old,  to  this  castle;  and  the  latter  reduced  it.
This  Busr  was  born  two  years  before  the  Prophet's  death.  228
Others  than  al-Wakidi  claim  that  Busr  was  one  of  those  who
transmitted  traditions  from  the  Prophet;  but  Allah  knows
better.

Various  governors.  It  was  stated  by  al-Wakidi  that  'Ab-
dallah  ibn-Sa'd  held  the  governorship  until  Muhammad  ibn-
abi-Hudhaifah  assumed  authority  over  Egypt,  which  he  had
made  to  rise  in  rebellion  against  'Uthman.  Later  on,  'Ali
assigned  Kais  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-'Ubadah-l-Ansari  as  governor
of  Egypt,  after  which  he  dismissed  him  and  chose  Muham-
mad ibn-abi-Bakr  as-Siddik.  The  latter  he  also  dismissed
and  assigned  Malik  al-Ashtar,  who  was  taken  sick x  at
al-Kulzum  [Suez].  'Ali  once  more  assigned  Muhammad
ibn-abi-Bakr,  who  was  later  killed  by  Mu'awiyah  ibn-Hu-
daij  and  burned  in  a  donkey's  belly.2

'Amr  ibn-al-'Asi  ruled  in  the  name  of  Mu'awiyah  ibn-
abi-Sufyan.  He  died  in  Egypt  on  the  feast  of  the  breaking
of  the  fast  of  Ramadan  [al-fitr]  in  the  year  42  (others  say
43),  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  'Abdallah  whom  Mu-
'awiyah dismissed.  Mu'awiyah  assigned  ibn-Hudaij,  who
spent  four  years  in  Egypt ;  at  the  close  of  which  he  made  a
razzia  and  plundered.  After  that  he  returned  to  Egypt  and
sent  there  'Ukbah  ibn-Nafi'  al-Fihri.  Others  say  that
'Ukbah  was  appointed  by  Mu'awiyah  over  al-Maghrib ;  and
so  he  invaded  Ifrikiyah  at  the  head  of  10,000  Moslems  and
reduced  it.  He  parceled  out  its  Kairawan  3  in  lots  among
the  Moslems,  the  site  being  a  thicket  covered  with  tamarisk
and  other  trees  and  which  nobody  could  attempt  because  of

1  Mahasin,  vol.  i,  pp.  116-117.

1  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  125 ;  Khaldun,  vol.  ii2,  p.  182.

8  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  12.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  IFRIKIYAH  359

the  beasts,  snakes  and  deadly  scorpions.  This  ibn-Nafi'  was
a  righteous  man  whose  prayer  was  answered.  He  prayed
to  his  Lord,  who  made  the  scorpions  disappear;  even  the
beasts  had  to  carry  their  young  and  run  away.

Al-Wakidi  says,  "  I  once  said  to  Musa  ibn-'Ali,  '  Thou
hast  seen  the  buildings  in  Ifrikiyah  that  are  connected  to-
gether and  that  we  still  see  to-day.  Who  was  it  that  built
them?  '  And  Musa  replied,  '  The  first  one  was  'Ukbah  ibn-
Nafi'  al-Fihri  who  marked  out  the  plans  for  the  buildings,
himself  built  a  home,  and  the  Moslems  at  the  same  time
built  houses  and  dwelling-places.  He  also  built  the  cathe-
dral mosque  that  is  in  Ifrikiyah.'  "

It  was  in  Ifrikiyah  that  Ma'bad  ibn-al-' Abbas  fell  a  mar-
tyr in  the  campaign  of  ibn-abi-Sarh  during  the  caliphate  of
'Uthman.  Others  say  he  met  natural  death  during  the
war;  but  that  he  fell  a  martyr  is  the  more  authentic  report.

According  to  al-Wakidi  and  others,  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-
Sufyan  dismissed  Mu'awiyah  ibn-Hudaij  x  and  conferred
the  governorship  of  Egypt  and  al-Maghrib  on  Maslamah
ibn-Mukhallad  al-Ansari,2  who  appointed  his  freedman,
abu-1-Muhajir,  governor  of  al-Maghrib.  When  Yazid  ibn-
Mu'awiyah,  however,  came  to  power,  he  reinstated  'Ukbah
ibn-Nafi'  in  his  position,  and  the  latter  invaded  as-Sus  al-  229
Adna,3  which  lay  behind  Tanjah.  There  he  went  about
without  being  molested  or  fought  by  anybody.  At  last  he
departed.

Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah  died  and  his  son  Mu'awiyah  ibn-
Yazid,  surnamed  abu-Laila,  was  proclaimed  caliph.  Mu-
'awiyah called  a  general  public  prayer  meeting,  and  resigned
the  caliphate. He  retired  to  his  home  where  he  died  after

1  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  14.

*  Suyuti,  ITusn,  vol.  ii,  7.

3  i.  e.,  the  nearer  (=  Dar'ah)  in  distinction  from  al-Aksa — the  far-
ther ;  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  pp.  359-360.


360  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

two  months.  Later  came  the  rule  of  Marwan  ibn-al-Hakam
and  the  insurrection  of  ibn-az-Zubair.

Then  came  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  to  power ;  and
everything  went  smoothly  with  him.  He  assigned  as  'dmil
over  Egypt  his  brother  'Abd-al-'Aziz  who  put  over  Ifrikiyah
Zuhair  ibn-Kais  al-Balawi.1  Zuhair  conquered  Tunis  and
left  for  Barkah.  Hearing  that  a  band  of  Greeks  had  landed
from  their  ships  and  were  doing  mischief,  he  went  against
them  with  a  cavalry  detachment.  On  meeting  them,  he  fell
a  martyr  with  his  companions.  His  tomb  is  still  there.
His  and  his  companions'  tombs  are  called  Kubur  ash-Sliu-
hada [the  martyrs'  tombs].

Then  Hassan  ibn-an-Nu'man  al-Ghassani L>  became  ruler.
He  made  an  incursion  against  al-Kahinah,3  the  queen  of
the  Berbers.  He  was  defeated  by  her  and  came  and  occu-
pied certain  castles  within  the  territory  of  Barkah.  These
castles  were  included  within  one  whose  roof  was  an  arched
structure  upon  which  one  could  cross  over.  Since  then,
these  castles  were  called  Kusur  Hassan.4

Hassan  made  another  incursion,  killed  the  queen  and
carried  into  captivity  many  Berbers  whom  he  sent  to  'Abd-
al-'Aziz.  Regarding  these  captives,  the  poet,  abu-Mihjan
Nusaib,  used  to  say,  "  I  have  seen  in  'Abd-al-' Aziz's  home
Berber  captives  who  have  faces  more  beautiful  than  which
I  never  saw."

According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi,  Hisham  assigned  Kulthum
ibn-Tyad  ibn-Wahwah  al-Kushairi  to  the  governorship  of
Ifrikiyah,  whose  people  rebelled  and  put  him  to  death.  Ibn-
al-Kalbi also states that Ifrikiyah was subdued in pre-

1  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  16.

2  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  pp.  18  seq.

s  Fern,  of  kahin  =  soothsayer.
4  'Adhari,  vol.  i.  p.  21.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  IFRIKIYAH  36 r

Islamic  times  by  Ifrikis  ibn-Kais  ibn-Saifi-1-Himyari  and
was  named  after  him.  He  killed  Jurjir  l  [Gregory]  its  king
and  said  regarding  the  Berbers,  "How  barbarous  they  are!"
Hence  the  name,  Berbers.

Al-Kairawan.  According  to  a  tradition  communicated
to  me  by  certain  inhabitants  of  Ifrikiyah  on  the  authority
of  their  sheikhs,  when  'Ukbah  ibn-Nafi'  al-Fihri  wanted  to
build  al-Kairawan,2  he  began  to  think  regarding  the  site  of
the  mosque,  and  he  saw  in  a  dream  as  if  a  man  called  to
prayer  at  a  certain  spot  where  he  later  erected  the  minaret.
When  he  awoke,  he  started  to  erect  the  boundary  marks  230
where  he  had  seen  the  man  stand,  after  which  he  built  the
mosque.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi : — Muhammad  ibn-
al-Ash'ath  al-Khuza'fi  ruled  over  Ifrikiyah  in  the  name  of
abu-1-' Abbas  "  the  Commander  of  the  Believers  ",  and  re-
paired the  city  of  al-Kairawan  with  its  mosque.  He  was
later  dismissed  by  al-Mansur,  who  assigned  'Umar  ibn-
Hafs  Hizarmard  3  in  his  place.

1  Cf.  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  pp.  5-6.

i  Istakhri,  pp.  39-40.

3  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  64.  "  'Amr  ibn-Hafs  ibn-Kabisah."


CHAPTER  VI

The  Conquest  of  Tanjah  [Tangiers]

According  to  al-Wakidi,  'Abd-al-'Aziz  ibn-Marwan
made  Musa  ibn-Nusair,1  a  freedman  of  the  banu-Umaiyah
and  who  came  originally  from  'Ain  at-Tamr  (some  say  he
belonged  to  the  clan  of  Arashah,  a  branch  of  the  Bali ;  others
say,  to  the  clan  of  Lakhm)  governor  over  Ifrikiyah.  Ac-
cording to  others,  Musa  ruled  over  it  in  the  time  of  al-
Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik,  in  the  year  89.  He  reduced  Tan-
jah and  occupied  it,  he  being  the  first  to  occupy  and  mark
it  in  lots  for  the  Moslems.  His  horsemen  went  as  far  as
as-Sus  al-Adna,2  which  was  over  twenty  days'  journey  from
as-Sus  al-Aksa  [the  farther  as-Sus  =  modern  Morocco].
Thus  he  subjugated  as-Sus  al-Aksa,  carrying  many  captives
from  the  inhabitants  and  receiving  homage.  His  'dmil  col-
lected from  them  sadakah.  Later  he  assigned  Tank  ibn-
Ziyad,  his  freedman,  over  it  [Tanjah  and  environs]  and
departed  to  Kairawan  Ifrikiyah.

1  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  pp.  24  seq.

*  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  27.
362


PART  VI

ANDALUSIA


CHAPTER  I

The  Conquest  of  Andalusia

Tarik  crosses  the  Straits.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  the
first  to  invade  Andalusia  *  was  Tarik  ibn-Ziyad,2  the  'dmil
of  Musa  ibn-Nusair,  and  that  was  in  the  year  92.  Tarik
was  met  by  Ulyan,  the  commander  of  the  Majaz  3  al-Anda-
lus,  whom  he  promised  safety  provided  he  would  trans-
port him  with  his  companions  to  Andalusia  in  his  ships.
When  he  arrived  there,  Tarik  was  resisted  by  the  people,  but
he  effected  the  conquest  of  the  land  in  the  year  92.*  The
king  of  Andalusia,  it  is  claimed,  belonged  to  the  Ashban
[Spanish]  people  whose  origin  was  from  Isbahan.5  Musa
ibn-Nusair  wrote  Tarik  a  severe  letter  for  risking  the  lives  231
of  the  Moslems  and  following  his  own  opinion  without  con-
sulting Musa  as  regards  the  campaign.  In  the  meantime,  he
ordered  him  not  to  go  beyond  Cordova  [Ar.  Kurtubah].6
Musa  himself  proceeded  to  Cordova  in  Andalusia;  and
Tarik  sought  and  was  reinstated  in  his  favor.  Tarik  then
reduced  the  city  of  Tulaitulah,7  the  capital  of  the  kingdom

1  Al-Andalus,  Spain. Ya'kubi,  Bulddn,  pp.  353-355.
J'Adhari,  vol.  ii,  pp.  11  seq.

s"The  straits  separating  Morocco  from  Andalusia,"  al-Marakishi,
al-Mu'jib  fi-Talkhis  Akhbar  al-Maghrib,  p.  6.

4  'Adhari,  vol.  ii,  pp.  5  seq.

5  Ispahan  of  Persia.  The  Arabs  were  misled  to  this  conclusion  by
the  accidental  similarity  between  the  two  names.  See  Mas'udi,  vol.  ii,
pp.  326-327-

6  Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  pp.  208-214.

7  Toledo. Mukaddasi,  p.  235;  Khurdadhbih,  p.  89.

365


366  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

of  Andalusia  and  which  lies  next  to  France  [Ar.  Faranjah].
Here  he  carried  off  a  wonderful  table  1  which  Musa  ibn-
Nusair,  on  his  return  in  the  year  96,  offered  as  a  present  to
al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  in  Damascus,  who  was  sick  at
that  time.  When  Sulaiman  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  came  to
power,  he  demanded  100,000  dinars  from  Musa  ibn-Nusair;
but  when  Yazid  ibn-al-Muhallab  interceded  in  Musa's  be-
half, he  was  spared.

Ismail  governor  of  al-Maghrib.  When  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-
al-'Aziz  became  caliph,  he  appointed  over  al-Maghrib
Isma'il  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-abi-1-Muhajir,  a  freedman  of  the
banu-Makhzum,  who  behaved  according  to  the  best  stan-
dards and  invited  the  Berbers  to  Islam.  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-
'Aziz  also  wrote  them  letters  to  that  effect,  which  were
read  to  them  in  the  different  districts  by  Isma'il.  Thus  did
Islam  prevail  over  al-Maghrib.

Yazid  as  governor.  When  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  as-
sumed power,  he  appointed  Yazid  ibn-abi-Muslim.  a  freed-
man of  al-Hajjaj  ibn-Yusuf,  over  Ifrikiyah  and  al-Magh-
rib. The  latter  arrived  in  Ifrikiyah  in  the  year  102,  and  had
his  guard  of  Berbers.  On  the  hand  of  every  guard,  he  in-
scribed the  word  "  Guard  ",2  which  act  displeased  them  and
made  them  impatient  with  him.  Some  of  them  entered
into  a  conspiracy  and  agreed  to  kill  him.  One  evening,  he
went  out  for  the  sunset  prayer,  and  they  killed  him  in  his
place  of  worship.  Yazid  then  appointed  Bishr  ibn-Saf-
wan  al-Kalbi.  Bishr  beheaded  'Abdallah  ibn-Musa  ibn-
Nusair  in  revenge  for  Yazid  [ibn-abi-Muslim]  on  the
ground  that  he  was  suspected  of  killing  him  and  arousing
people  against  him.

Bishr  and  other  governors. Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik

1  "  Once  owned  by  king  Solomon  ".  Marakishi,  p.  8.

2  Ar.  harasi. 'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  34.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ANDALUSIA  ^6y

again  appointed  Bishr  ibn-Safwan.1  The  latter  died  in  al-
Kairawan  in  the  year  109.  Hisham  appointed  in  his  place
'Ubaidah  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman  al-Kaisi,2  after  whom  Hi-
sham  appointed  'Abdallah  3  ibn-al-Habhab,  a  f reedman  of
the  banu-Salul.  'Abdallah  sent  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-
Habib  ibn-abi-'Ubaidah  ibn-'Ukbah  ibn-Nafi'  al-Fihri  to
the  invasion  of  as-Sus  4  and  the  land  of  as-Sudan.  The
victories  won  by  'Abd-ar-Rahman  were  unparalleled,  and  232
among  the  booty  he  carried  away  were  two  of  the  women
slaves  of  that  region,  each  with  one  bosom.  These  people
are  known  by  the  name  of  Tar  a  j  an.

After  ibn-al-Habhab,  Hisham  appointed  Kulthum  ibn-
Tyad  al-Kushairi  who  arrived  in  Ifrikiyah  in  the  year  23  5
and  was  killed  in  it.  Hisham  appointed  after  Kulthum,
Hanzalah  ibn-Safwan  al-Kalbi,c  a  brother  of  Bishr,  who
fought  against  the  Kharijites  7  and  died  there  while  he  held
the  governorship.

When  al-Walid  ibn-Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  assumed
power,  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-Habib  al-Fihri  rose  against
him.  'Abd-ar-Rahman  was  in  good  favor  with  the  inhabi-
tants of  this  frontier  region  [northern  Africa  and  al-Magh-
rib],  because  of  the  good  deeds  done  in  it  by  his  grand-
father 'Ukbah  ibn-Nafi'.  Consequently,  'Abd-ar-Rahman
subdued  this  region ;  and  Hanzalah  departed,  leaving  'Abd-
ar-Rahman  over  it.

1  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  35.

2  Ibid.,  vol.  i.  p.  36:  "  as-Sulami ".

3  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  38:  "  'Ubaidallah  " ;  cf.  Mahasin.  vol.  i,  p.  319.

*  Idrisi,  Si  fat  al-Maghrib,  p.  165.

*  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  41.

SA1-Kindi,  Kitab  al-Wulat  w-al-Kudat,  pp.  71-72,  80-82  (ed.  Guest).

7  Al-Khawarij. Rebels  led  by  the  heretic  'Ukkashah  as-Sufri; see
'Adhari,  vol.  i,  pp.  45-47.


368  THF-  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

When  Yazid  ibn-al-Walid  assumed  the  caliphate,  he  did
not  send  to  al-Maghrib  any  'amil.

Then  came  Marwan  ibn-Muhammad  to  power.  'Abd-
ar-Rahman  ibn-Habib  communicated  with  him  and  pro-
fessed homage  and  sent  him  presents.  Marwan  had  a  sec-
retary, Khalid  ibn-Rabi'ah-1-Ifriki,  who  was  a  special
friend  of  'Abd-al-Hamid  ibn-Yahya  and  kept  up  a  corres-
pondence with  him.  Marwan  confirmed  'Abd-ar-Rahman  as
governor  of  the  region,  and  appointed  after  him  Ilyas  ibn-
Habib,  and  after  that,  Habib  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman.  After
this,  the  Ibadites  *  and  the  Berbers  of  the  Kharijites  had
the  upper  hand.

Towards  the  end  of  abu-1-' Abbas'  caliphate,  Muhammad
ibn-al-Ash'ath  al-Khuza'i  came  to  Ifrikiyah  as  its  ruler  at
the  head  of  70,000  men,  according  to  others,  40,000.  His
rule  lasted  for  four  years,  during  which  he  repaired  the  city
of  al-Kairawan.  At  last,  the  troops  of  the  city  rose  against
him  together  with  others.  I  heard  it  reported  that  the  in-
habitants of  the  town  and  the  troops  that  were  in  it  rose
against  him  and  he  held  out  against  them  in  his  castle  for
40  days,  during  which  his  followers  from  Khurasan,  and
others  who  owed  him  allegiance,  came  to  his  help.  Conse-
quently, he  succeeded  in  laying  hold  on  those  who  fought
against  him.  He  then  went  over  the  names  and  put  to
death  every  one  whose  name  was  Mu'awiyah,  Sufyan.
Marwan  or  any  other  name  that  is  borne  by  anyone  of  the
banu-Umaiyah,  sparing  only  those  who  had  different  names.
He  was  thereupon  dismissed  by  al-Mansur.

'Umar  ibn-Hafs  ibn-'Uthman  ibn-Kabisah  ibn-abi-Suf-

•  .  •  •  •

rah-l-'Ataki,  known  as  Hizarmard,  was  then  made  governor
by  al-Mansur,  who  had  great  admiration  for  him.  'Umar
entered  Ifrikiyah  and  launched  in  it  a  campaign  that  carried

1  Ash-Shahrastani,  Kitdb  al-Milal  w-on-Nihol,  p.  100  (ed.  Cureton).


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ANDALUSIA  ^69

him  to  the  extremity  of  the  land  of  the  Berbers,  where  he
built  a  city  which  he  called  al-'Abbasiyah.  Abu-Ha-  233
tim  as-Saddarati-1-Ibadi  (one  of  the  inhabitants  of  Sad-
daratah  and  a  freedman  of  the  Kindah)  fought  against
Hizarmard;  and  the  latter  suffered  martyrdom  together
with  some  members  of  his  family.  The  frontier  region
broke  out  in  revolt,  and  the  city  he  had  established  was  de-
stroyed.

Hizarmard  was  succeeded  by  Yazid  ibn-Hatim  ibn-Ka-
bisah  ibn-al-Muhallab,1  who  rebelled  at  the  head  of  50,000
men  and  was  accompanied  to  Jerusalem  by  abu-Ja'far  al-
Mansur  who  spent  large  sums  of  money  on  him.  Yazid  ad-
vanced until  he  met  abu-Hatim  in  Tripoli  [Ar.  Atrabulus].
He  killed  him  and  made  his  entrance  to  Ifrikiyah,  where
everything  went  smoothly  with  him.

Yazid  ibn-Hatim  was  succeeded  by  Rauh  ibn-Hatim,  and
the  latter  by  al-Fadl  ibn-Rauh,  who  was  slain  by  the  troops
that  rose  up  against  him.

I  was  informed  by  Ahmad  ibn-Nakid,  a  freedman  of
the  banu-1-Aghlab,  that  al-Aghlab  ibn-Salim  at-Tamimi,2  of
Maru  ar-Rudh,3  was  among  those  who  came  from  Khura-
san with  al-Musauwidah.4  Al-Aghlab  was  appointed  by
Musa-1-Hadi  governor  of  al-Maghrib.  When  al-Aghlab
came  to  Kairawan  Ifrikiyah.  Harish,  who  was  once  in
the  army  of  the  frontier  region  of  Tunis,  gathered  a  body
of  men,  with  whom  he  marched  against  him  and  besieged
him.  Al-Aghlab  later  made  a  sortie,  and  in  the  battle  which
followed  was  hit  by  an  arrow  and  fell  dead.  Neither  his
followers  nor  those  of  Harish  knew  of  it. At  last  Harish

1  Kindi,  pp.  111-117.

2  Ibid.,  p.  1 10.

3  Hamadhani,  Buldan,  pp.  319-322.

4  The  partisans  of  the  Abbasid  dynasty,  so  called  because  they  wore
black  clothes.


370  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

was  defeated  with  his  army  and  were  pursued  by  the  men
of  al-Aghlab  for  three  days,  during  which  many  were  killed,
including  Harish  himself,  who  fell  in  a  place  called  Suk  al-
Ahad.  Al-Aghlab  after  this  was  called  "  the  martyr ''
[ash-Shahid].

Ibrahim  ibn-al-Aghlab,  one  of  the  leading  men  of  the
Egyptian  army,  arose  one  day  with  twelve  men  and  carried
away  from  the  treasury  the  exact  value  of  their  subsistence
allowances  and  no  more.  They  ran  away  to  a  place  called  az-
Zab  which  lay  at  a  distance  of  more  than  ten  days  from  al-
Kairawan.  The  'dmil  of  this  frontier  region,  at  that  time
under  ar-Rashid  Harun,  was  Harthamah  ibn-A'yan.1  Ib-
rahim ibn-al-Aghlab  assumed  the  commandership  of  the
troops  that  were  in  that  region  and  offered  presents  to
Harthamah,  showing  him  kindness  and  telling  him  in  writ-
ing that  he  did  not  rebel  or  disobey,  but  was  rather  forced  234
to  what  he  did  by  urgency  and  necessity.  Harthamah  as-
signed him  to  be  governor  of  the  region  and  intrusted  to
him  its  affairs.

When  Harthamah's  resignation  from  the  governorship
of  this  region  [Ifrikiyah]  was  accepted,  he  was  succeeded
by  ibn-al-'Akki,2  whose  rule  was  so  bad  that  the  people  rose
up  against  him.  Ar-Rashid  consulted  Harthamah  regarding
a  man  whom  he  could  assign  to  that  post  and  intrust  to  him
its  management,  and  Harthamah  advised  him  that  Ibrahim
be  reconciled,  won  over  and  appointed  over  the  region.  Ac-
cordingly, ar-Rashid  wrote  to  Ibrahim,  stating  that  he
had  forgiven  him  his  crime,  excused  his  fault  and  thought
it  wise  to  assign  him  to  the  governorship  of  al-Maghrib  as
an  act  of  favor,  expecting  to  receive  from  him  loyalty  and
good  counsel.  Ibrahim  became  ruler  of  the  region  and
managed  its  affairs  thoroughly.

1  Kindi,  p.  136.  '  'Adhari,  vol.  i.  p.  80.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ANDALUSIA  ^l

One  of  the  city  troops  named  Tmran  ibn-Mujalid  rose  in
a  revolt  and  was  joined  by  the  army  of  the  region,  who  de-
manded that  their  subsistence  allowances  be  given  them,  and
laid  siege  to  Ibrahim  in  al-Kairawan.  Soon  after  that,
those  who  pay  allowances  and  stipends  came  bringing
money  from  the  kharaj  of  Egypt;  and  when  the  dues  were
given,  they  [the  rebels]  dispersed  themselves.  Ibrahim  built
al-Kasr  al-Abyad  [the  white  citadel]  two  miles  to  the  kib-
lah  of  al-Kairawan,  and  parceled  out  the  land  around  it
among  the  Moslems,  who  established  themselves  and  their
residences  there.  Thus  did  that  section  become  populated.
Ibrahim  also  built  a  cathedral  mosque  with  gypsum  and
brick  and  marble  columns,  and  covered  it  with  cedar  wood,
making  it  200  dhira's  in  length  and  almost  200  dhird's  in
width.  He  bought  slaves  to  the  number  of  5,000,  emanci-
pated them  and  made  them  settle  around  it.  This  city  he
called  al-'Abbasiyah,  which  is  still  flourishing  to-day.

Al-'Abbasiyah.  Muhammad  ibn-al-Aghlab  ibn-Ibrahim
ibn-al-Aghlab  *  built  in  the  year  239  a  city  near  Tahart 2
and  named  it  al-'Abbasiyah,  too.  This  city  was  de-
stroyed by  Aflah  ibn-'Abd-al-Wahhab  al-Ibadi,  who  wrote
to  the  Umaiyad  chief  of  Andalusia,  infcrming  him  of  his
act  in  order  to  win  his  favor.  The  Umaiyad  chief  sent
him  100,000  dirhams.

Bdrah.  There  lies  in  al-Maghrib  a  land  known  as  al-
Ard  al-Kabirah  3  [the  big  land],  situated  at  a  distance  of
15  days,  more  or  less,  from  Barkah.  In  it  lies  a  city  on  the
coast,  called  Barah,  whose  inhabitants  were  Christians,  but
not  Greeks. This  city  was  invaded  by  Hablah,4  the  freed-

1  'Adhari,  vol.  i,  p.  107.
*  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  562.

3  Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  p.  56.

4  "  Hayah  "  in  Athir,  vol.  vi,  p.  370.


372


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


man  of  al-Aghlab,  who  failed  to  reduce  it. It  was  later  in-
vaded by  Khalfun  al-Barbari (supposed  to  have  been  a
freedman  of  the  Rabi'ah)  who  reduced  it  in  the  early  part 235
of  al-Mutawakkil's  caliphate.

Al-Mufarraj  ibn-Sallam.  After  Khalfun  there  arose  one
called  al-Mufarraj  ibn-Sallam  who  conquered  and  brought
under  his  control  24  forts.  He  then  forwarded  the  news  of
the  situation  to  the  Master  of  the  post x  in  Egypt,  and  told
him  that  he  and  his  followers  could  conduct  no  [public]
prayer  unless  the  imam  confirms  him  over  his  district  and
makes  him  its  ruler,  so  that  he  may  not  be  included  in  the
category  of  usurpers.  Al-Mufarraj  erected  a  cathedral
mosque.  Finally  his  men  rose  up  against  him  and  killed
him.

Suran.  He  was  followed  by  Suran  who  sent  his  messen-
ger to  al-Mutawakkil,  the  "  Commander  of  the  Believers,"
asking  for  a  confirmation  and  a  letter  of  appointment  to  a
governorship.  Al-Mutawakkil,  however,  died  before  his
messenger  departed  with  the  message  to  Suran.

Al-Muntasir-Billah  died  after  holding  the  caliphate  for
six  months.  Then  came  al-Musta'in-Billah  Ahmad  ibn-Mu-
hammad  ibn-al-Mu'tasim  who  ordered  his  'arnil  over  al-
Maghrib,  "Dtamish,  a  freedman  of  the  "  Commander  of  the
Believers  ",  to  confirm  Suran ;  but  no  sooner  had  the  mes-
senger started  from  Surra-man-ra'a,  than  Otamish  was
slain.2  That  region  was  after  that  governed  by  Wasif,  a
freedman  of  the  caliph,  who  confirmed  Suran  in  his  position.

1  Sahib  al-barid. Ibn-at-Tiktaka,  al-Fakhri,  p.  129.
'Tabari,  vol.  iii,  pp.  1512,  1513.


PART  VII
ISLANDS  IN  THE  SEA


CHAPTER  I
The  Conquest  of  Certain  Islands  in  the  Sea

Sicily.  The  first  to  invade  Sicily  l  was  Mu'awiyah  ibn-
Hudaij  al-Kindi 2  in  the  days  of  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan.
It  was  continually  invaded  after  that.  The  descendants
of  al-Aghlab  ibn-Salim  al-Ifriki  conquered  more  than  20
cities  in  it,  which  are  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Moslems.  In
the  caliphate  of  al-Mutawakkil,  Ahmad  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-
al-Aghlab  reduced  in  it  the  Yanah  castle  and  Ghalyanah  3
fortress.

It  is  stated  by  al-Wakidi  that  'Abdallah  ibn-Kais  ibn-
Makhlad  ad-Dizaki  plundered  Sicily  and  carried  off  idols  of
gold  and  silver  studded  with  pearls,  which  he  sent  to  Mu'a-
wiyah. Mu'awiyah  sent  them  to  al-Basrah  to  be  carried
into  India  and  sold  there  with  a  view  to  getting  a  higher
price  for  them.

Rhodes.  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan  sent  expeditions  by
sea  and  by  land.  He  sent  to  Rhodes  *  Junadah  ibn-abi-  236
Umaiyah-1-Azdi.  Junadah  was  one  of  those  on  whose  au-
thority traditions  were  reported.  He  had  chance  to  meet
abu-Bakr,  'Umar  and  Mu'adh  ibn-Jabal,  and  died  in  the
year  80.  Junadah  took  Rhodes  by  force.  Rhodes  was  a
thicket  in  the  sea.  In  pursuance  of  Mu'awiyah's  order,
Junadah  caused  Moslems  to  settle  in  it.  This  took  place  in
the  year  52.

1  Ar. Sikilliyah. Idrisi,  "  Italy ",  in  Nuzhat  al-Mushtak fi-Ikhtirak
al-Afak,  pp.  57-58  (Rome,  1878).

"Kindi,  pp.  17-19,  27-30.

*  Cf.  Idrisi,  "Italy",  p.  49;  Amari,  Bibliotheca  Arabo-Sicula,  p.  60.

4  Rudis. See  Kindi.  p.  38.

375


376  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Rhodes  is  one  of  the  most  fertile  of  all  islands,  and  is
about  sixty  miles  in  size.  It  is  rich  in  olive  trees,  vineyards,
fruits  and  fresh  water.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  al-Wakidi  and  others : — The
Moslems  occupied  Rhodes  for  seven  years,  living  in  a  fort
made  for  them.  At  the  death  of  Mu'awiyah,  Yazid  wrote
to  Junadah  ordering  him  to  destroy  the  fort  and  return.
Mu'awiyah  used  to  alternate  its  occupants,  making  them
live  there  in  turns.  Mujahid  ibn-Jabr x  lived  in  it  and
taught  the  Koran.

Arwad.  In  the  year  54,  Junadah  ibn-abi-Umaiyah  re-
duced Arwad,2  and  Mu'awiyah  made  the  Moslems  settle
in  it.  Among  those  who  took  part  in  conquering  it  was  Mu-
jahid and  Tubai',3  a  son  of  Ka'b  al-Ahbar's  4  wife.  It  was
here  that  Mujahid  taught  Tubai'  the  Koran.  Others  say
that  he  did  it  in  Rhodes.  This  Arwad  is  an  island  lying
near  Constantinople  [al-Kustantiniyah].

Crete.  Junadah  led  a  razzia  against  Crete  [Ikritish],6
a  part  of  which  he  conquered  at  the  time  of  al-Walid.  Later,
the  island  was  lost  to  the  Moslems.  In  the  caliphate  of  ar-
Rashid  it  was  invaded  again  by  Humaid  ibn-Ma'yuk  al-
Hamdani,  who  reduced  a  part  of  it.  In  the  caliphate  of  al-
Ma'mun,  it  was  invaded  by  abu-Hafs  'Umar  ibn-'Isa-l-An-
dalusi,  known  by  the  name  of  al-Ikritishi,  who  first  reduced
one  fort  and  occupied  it.  Then  he  kept  on  reducing  one
part  after  another  until  none  of  the  Greeks  were  left.  He
also  dismantled  their  forts.

1  Kindi,  p.  39.

2  Tabari,  vol.  ii,  p.  163.

3  Tabari,  vol.  ii,  p.  163;  Dhahabi,  p.  69.

*  A  Jewish  rabbi  of  Himyar  converted  to  Islam  in  the  time  of  'Umar.
Muir,  Annals,  p.  236,  note  1.

5  Idrisi,  "Italy",  p.  19;  Rustah.  p.  85;  "  Ikritiyah  ".


PART  VIII
NUBIA


CHAPTER  I

Terms  made  with  Nubia

lUkbah  leads  the  attack.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  abu-
1-Khair : — When  the  Moslems  subdued  Egypt,  'Amr  ibn-al-
'Asi  sent  to  the  surrounding  villages,  in  order  to  overrun
and  pillage  them,  a  detachment  of  cavalry  under  'Ukbah  ibn-
Nafi'  al-Fihri  (Nafi'  being  a  brother  of  al-Asi  on  his
mother's  side).  The  cavalry  entered  the  land  of  Nubia  x  as  237
the  summer  expeditions  of  the  Greeks  do.  The  Moslems
met  in  Nubia  determined  resistance.  They  were  subjected
to  such  severe  showers  of  arrows  until  most  of  them  were
wounded  and  had  to  return  with  many  wounds  and  blinded
eyes.  Therefore  were  the  Nubians  called  the  "  archers  of
the  eyes  ".

The  terms  made.  This  state  of  affairs  continued  until
'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-abi-Sarh  ruled  over  Egypt.  The
Nubians  asked  for  peace  and  conciliation  from  'Abdallah,
who  granted  their  request,  the  terms  being  that  they  pay  no
tax  but  offer  as  a  present  three  hundred  slaves  per  annum ;
and  that  the  Moslems  offer  them  as  a  present  food  equiva-
lent to  the  value  of  the  slaves.

The  Nubians  as  archers.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  a
sheikh  of  the  tribe  of  Himyar : — The  latter  said,  "  I  have
been  to  Nubia  twice  during  the  caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab,  and  I  never  saw  a  people  who  are  sharper  in  war-
fare than  they.  I  heard  one  of  them  say  to  the  Moslem,
'  Where  do  you  want  me  to  hit  you  with  my  arrow  ?'  and

1  An-Nubah. See  Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  p.  19.

379


380  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

in  case  the  Moslem  would  disdainfully  say,  '  In  such  a  spot ',
the  Nubian  would  never  miss  it.  They  were  fond  of
fighting  with  arrows;  but  their  arrows  would  scarcely
ever  hit  on  the  ground.1  One  day,  they  arrayed  themselves
against  us  and  we  were  desirous  to  carry  the  conflict  with
the  sword ;  but  they  were  too  quick  for  us  and  shot  their  ar-
rows, putting  out  our  eyes.  The  eyes  that  were  put  out
numbered  150,  We  at  last  thought  that  the  best  thing  to
do  with  such  a  people  was  to  make  peace.  We  could  carry
very  little  booty  away  from  them;  and  their  ability  to  in-
flict injury  was  great.  'Amr,  however,  refused  to  make
peace  with  them  and  went  on  contending  against  them  until
he  was  dismissed  and  was  succeeded  by  'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd
ibn-abi-Sarh,  who  concluded  peace  with  them."

According  to  al-Wakidi,  Mu'awiyah  ibn-Hudaij  al-Kindi
lost  his  eye  in  Nubia  and  thus  became  one-eyed.

The  legality  of  selling  their  children  as  slaves.  Abu-
'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : —
The  latter  said,  "Between  us  and  the  black  tribes  [Ar.  asa-
wid],  no  treaty  or  covenant  exists.  Only  a  truce  was  ar-
ranged between  us,  according  to  which  we  agreed  to  give
them  some  wheat  and  lentils,  and  they  to  give  us  slaves.  It
is  all  right  to  buy  their  slaves  from  them  or  from  others."

Abu-'Ubaid  from  al-Laith  ibn-Sa'd : — The  latter  said,
"  The  terms  we  made  with  the  Nubians  stipulated  only  that
we  neither  fight  against  them  nor  they  against  us,  that  they  238
give  slaves  and  we  give  them  their  value  in  terms  of  food.
If  they  desire,  therefore,  to  sell  their  wives  or  children,
there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  be  bought."

In  a  report  of  abu-1-Bukhturi  and  others,  it  is  stated  that
'Abdallah  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-abi-Sarh  made  terms  with  the  Nu-
bians to  the  effect  that  they  give  four  hundred  slaves  per

1  i.  e.  they  scarcely  ever  missed  their  aim.


TERMS  MADE  WITH  NUBIA  381

year,  whom  they  shall  bring  forth  and  for  whom  they  shall
receive  food  in  exchange.

The  caliph  al-Mahdi  ordered  that  Nubia  be  held  respon-
sible every  year  for  360  slaves  and  one  giraffe,  and  that
they  be  given  wheat,  vinegar,  wine,  clothes  and  mattresses
or  the  value  thereof.

The  Nubians  recently  claimed  that  the  tribute  *  is  not
due  on  them  every  year,  and  that  it  was  demanded  from
them  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi,  at  which  time  they  told
the  caliph  that  the  tribute  was  a  part  of  what  they  took  as
slaves  from  their  enemies  and  therefore  they  had,  if  they
could  not  get  enough  slaves,  to  use  their  own  children  and
offer  them.  Al-Mahdi  ordered  that  they  be  tolerated,  and
that  the  tribute  of  one  year  be  considered  as  if  for  three.
No  confirmation,  however,  could  be  found  in  the  registers
of  al-Hadrah ; 2  but  it  was  found  in  the  register  in  Egypt.

Al-Kummi  in  al-Bujah.  Al-Mutawakkil  ordered  one,
Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah,  known  as  al-Kummi,  to  be
sent  and  put  in  charge  of  al-Ma'din  3  in  Egypt.  He  also
put  him  in  charge  of  al-Kulzum  [Suez],  the  road  of
al-Hijaz,  and  the  furnishing  of  guides  to  the  Egyptians
when  on  holy  pilgrimage.  Arriving  in  al-Ma'din,  he  con-
veyed provisions  in  ships  from  al-Kulzum  to  the  land  of  al-
Bujah.  He  then  proceeded  to  a  sea-coast,  called  'Aidhab,4
where  the  ships  met  him.  With  these  provisions,  he  and  his
followers  were  strengthened  and  fed  until  they  came  to  the
castle  of  the  king  of  al-Bujah. Al-Kummi  attacked  him  in

1  Ar.  bakt,  Quatremere,  Memoires  Geographiques  et  Historiques  sur
I'Egypte,  vol.  ii,  pp.  42,  53-

2  Perhaps  al-Khadra'.  See  Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  p.  84;  Hama-
dhani,  Bulddn,  pp.  79-80.

3  The  mine  land.  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  pp.  313,  318;  Mas'udi,  Tanb'ih,  p.
330.

4  Idrisi,  Sifat  al-Maghrib,  p.  27.


382  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

small  force,  and  the  king  of  al-Bujah  made  a  sally  with
his  numerous  men  on  camels  fastened  with  girths.  Al-
Kummi  brought  bells  and  put  them  on  his  horses.  As  soon
as  the  camels  heard  the  bell  sounds,  they  ran  away  with  the
al-Bujah  men  over  hills  and  valleys.  The  chief  of  al-Bujah
was  killed  and  was  succeeded  by  his  sister's  son,1  whose
father  was  one  of  the  kings  of  al-Bujah.  He  sued  for  a
truce,  which  al-Mutawakkil  granted  only  on  condition  that  239
he  [the  chief]  should  tread  on  his  [al-Mutawakkil's]  carpet.
Accordingly,  he  came  to  Surra-man-ra'a  and  made  terms
in  the  year  241,  agreeing  to  pay  tribute  in  money  and  slaves.
He  was  then  sent  back  with  al-Kummi.  Thus,  the  people
of  al-Bujah  are  in  a  state  of  truce  in  which  they  pay  tax  240
and  do  not  prevent  the  Moslems  from  working  in  the  gold
mine,  which  terms  are  mentioned  in  the  conditions  im-
posed upon  their  chief.

1  Makrizi,  vol.  i,  p.  317:  "his  brother's  son"; cf.  Quatremere,  op.
cit.,  vol.  ii,  p.  136.


CHAPTER  II
The  Karatis  x

The  Greeks  used  to  get  the  karatis  from  Egypt,2  and  the
Arabs  used  to  get  the  dinars  from  the  Greeks.  'Abd-al-
Malik  ibn-Marwan  was  the  first  to  inscribe  on  the  upper
part  of  these  fabrics  3  such  phrases  as  "  Declare :  Allah  is
one !  "  and  others  with  the  name  of  Allah.  One  day,  he  re-
ceived from  the  Byzantine  king  a  message,  saying,  "  You
have  recently  introduced  upon  your  karatis  some  inscription
that  we  hate.  If  you  leave  that  out,  well  and  good ;  otherwise,
you  shall  see  on  the  dinars  the  name  of  your  Prophet  asso-
ciated with  things  you  hate."  This  was  too  much  for  'Abd-
al-Malik,  who  hated  to  abolish  a  worthy  law  that  he  had  es-
tablished. He  thereupon  sent  for  Khalid  ibn-Yazid  ibn-
Mu'awiyah  and  said  to  him,  "  O  abu-Hashim !  It  is  a
calamity ! '  Khalid  replied,  "  Be  free  from  your  fright,
'  Commander  of  the  Believers ' ;  declare  the  use  of  their
dinars  illegal ;  strike  new  coinage  in  place  of  them,  and  let
not  these  infidels  be  free  from  what  they  hate  to  see  on  the
fabrics."  "  Thou  hast  eased  my  mind,"  said  'Abd-al-Ma-
lik,  "  may  Allah  give  thee  ease !  "  He  then  struck  the
dinars.

According  to  'Awanah  ibn-al-Hakam,  the  Copts  used  to

1  Rolls  of  papyrus  for  writing;  also,  cloth  of  Egyptian  fabric  used  for
carrying  vases  or  clothes.  Zaidan,  Ta'rikh  at-Tamaddun,  vol.  i,  p.  103;
Zeitschrift  fur  Assyrologie,  pp.  187-190,  yr.  1908.

2A1-Kindi,  Fada'il  Misr,  p.  209,  lines  9-10  (ed.  Oestrup).
3  Ar.  tawamir. Fraenkel,  op.  cit.,  p.  251.

383


384  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

inscribe  the  word  "  Christ  "  at  the  top  part  of  the  kardtis,
and  to  ascribe  divinity  to  him  (may  Allah  be  highly  exalted
above  that!) ;  and  they  used  to  put  the  sign  of  the  cross  in
place  of  "  In  the  name  of  Allah,  the  compassionate,  the
merciful  ".  That  is  why  the  Byzantine  king  was  disgusted
and  his  anger  was  aroused  with  the  change  that  'Abd-al-
Malik  introduced.

According  to  al-Mada'ini,  it  was  stated  by  Maslamah
ibn-Muharib  that  Khalid  ibn-Yazid  advised  'Abd-al-Malik
to  declare  the  use  of  the  Greek  dinars  illegal,  to  prohibit
their  circulation  and  to  stop  the  sending  of  the  kardtis  to
the  Byzantine  empire.  Accordingly,  no  kardtis  were  carried
there  for  some  time.


PART  IX
AL-'IRAK  AND  PERSIA


CHAPTER  I
The  Conquest  of  as-Sawad  241

the caliphate  of  abu-bakr  as-siddlk

Al-Muthanna  invades  as-Sawad.  Al-Muthanna  ibn-Ha-
rithah  ibn-Salamah  ibn-Damdam  ash-Shaibani  used  to  lead
incursions  with  some  of  his  men  against  as-Sawad.1  Hav-
ing heard  of  it,  abu-Bakr  made  inquiries  regarding  him  and
learned  from  Kais  ibn-'Asim  ibn-Sinan  al-Minkari  that  that
was  not  a  man  with  no  reputation,  or  of  unknown  origin,
or  of  no  support;  but  it  was  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  ash-
Shaibani.  Later,  al-Muthanna  presented  himself  before
abu-Bakr  and  said  to  him,  "  Caliph  of  the  Prophet  of  Allah,
make  me  your  lieutenant  over  those  of  my  people  who  have
accepted  Islam,  that  I  may  fight  against  those  foreigners,
the  Persians."  Abu-Bakr  wrote  him  a  covenant  to  that  ef-
fect. Al-Muthanna  proceeded  till  he  came  to  Khaffan ;  and
inviting  his  people  to  Islam,  they  accepted  it.

K  ha  lid  in  al-Ubullah.  Abu-Bakr  then  wrote  to  Khalid
ibn-al- Walid  al-Makhzumi,  ordering  him  to  go  against  al-
'Irak.  Others  say  that  he  sent  him  from  al-Madinah.  In
the  meantime,  abu-Bakr  wrote  to  al-Muthanna  ibn-Ha-
rithah  ordering  him  to  receive  Khalid  and  obey  his  word.

Previous  to  this,  Madh'ur  ibn-'Adi-l-'Ijli  had  written  to
abu-Bakr  presenting  his  case  and  the  case  of  his  people,
and  asking  to  be  put  in  charge  of  the  campaign  against  the
Persians.  Now,  abu-Bakr  wrote  and  ordered  him  to  join
Khalid,  stop  with  him  when  he  stopped  and  move  with  him

1  'Irak,  the  region  west  of  the  Tigris. Rustah,  p.  104.

387


388  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

when  he  moved.  On  the  arrival  of  Khalid  in  an-Nibaj,1
he  was  met  by  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah.  Thence  Khalid
proceeded  to  al-Basrah  in  which  there  was  at  this  time
Suwaid  ibn-Kutbah  adh-Dhuhli  (others  than  abu-Mikhnaf
say  that  there  was  in  it  Kutbah  ibn-Katadah  adh-Dhuhli)
of  the  tribe  of  Bakr  ibn-Wa'il,  accompanied  by  a  band  of
followers.  Suwaid  had  designs  regarding  al-Basrah  simi-
lar to  those  of  al-Muthanna  regarding  al-Kufah,  which  at
that  time  was  not  called  al-Kufah  but  al-Hirah.  Suwaid
said  to  Khalid,  "  The  inhabitants  of  al-Ubullah  had  assem-
bled against  me  but  failed  to  make  the  attack  simply  because
of  thy  presence,  as  I  believe."  "  If  that  is  so,"  answered
Khalid  "  the  advisable  thing  for  me  would  be  to  leave  al-
Basrah  in  the  day  time  and  return  in  the  night,  at  which
time  my  companions  would  enter  thy  camp  and  we  will
fight  together."  Accordingly,  Khalid  left  in  the  direction  242
of  al-Hirah  and  when  darkness  fell,  he  turned  back  until  he
got  to  the  camp  of  Suwaid,  which  he  entered  with  his  men.
In  the  morning,  the  inhabitants  of  al-Ubullah,  hearing  that
Khalid  had  left  al-Basrah,  advanced  towards  Suwaid.
Seeing  the  great  number  of  men  in  his  army,  they  were  con-
founded and  turned  back.  Thereupon,  Khalid  shouted,  "On
them!  I  see  in  them  the  looks  of  a  people  whose  hearts
Allah  has  filled  with  terror!"  Then  the  Moslems  charged
them,  put  them  to  flight,  and  by  Allah's  help,  killed  a  great
number  and  caused  others  to  drown  in  Dijlat  al-Basrah.2
Thence  Khalid  passed  through  al-Khuraibah,3  reduced  it
and  carried  its  inhabitants  away  into  captivity.  He  left  over
it  in  his  place — as  it  is  reported  by  al-Kalbi — Shuraih  ibn-

1  Khurdadhbih,  pp.  146,  147.

3  or  Dijlat  al-'Aura  =  the  united  course  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Eu-
phrates before  they  empty  into  the  Persian  Gulf. Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  745.

8  Hamadhani,  Buldan,  p. 189.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  ^go

'Amir  ibn-Kain  x  of  the  banu-Sa'd  ibn-Bakr  ibn-Hawazin.
The  city  was  a  fortified  frontier  town  for  the  Persians.

Nahr  al-Marah.  It  is  also  reported  that  Khalid  came  to
the  river  known  as  al-Mar'ah  2  river,  with  whose  people  he
made  terms.  He  then  fought  against  a  body  of  men  as-
sembled at  al-Madhar.3

Khalid  proceeds  to  al-Hirah.  Khalid  then  proceeded  to
al-Hirah,4  and  left  Suwaid  ibn-Kutbah  to  rule  over  his  dis-
trict, saying,  ' '  We  have  crushed  the  Persians  in  thy  dis-
trict in  a  way  that  will  humiliate  them  before  thee."

Others  report  that  when  Khalid  was  in  the  district  of  al-
Yamamah,  he  wrote  to  abu-Bakr  for  reinforcements;  and
abu-Bakr  sent  him  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali.  Jarir
met  Khalid  as  the  latter  was  on  his  way  out  of  al-Yamamah,
joined  him  and  attacked  the  al-Madhar's  chief  by  Khalid's
orders. Allah  knows  if  that  is  so.

Al- Wakidi  states,  "  Our  friends  in  al-Hijaz  maintain
that  Khalid  left  for  al-Trak,  passing  by  Faid  5  and  ath-
Tha'labiyah,6  after  which  he  came  to  al-Hirah.

Zandaward,  Duma  and  other  places  reduced  by  Khalid.
Khalid  ibn-al- Walid  passed  through  Zandaward  in  Kaskar
and  reduced  it;  he  also  reduced  Durna  and  its  territory,
which  capitulated  after  one  hour's  shooting  by  the  people
of  Zandaward  on  the  Moslems.

He  then  proceeded  to  Hurmuzjarad,  to  the  inhabitants
of  which  he  made  a  promise  of  security.  The  city  itself
was  taken. Khalid  then  came  to  Ullais. Jaban,7  the  chief

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2382.

8  i.  e.,  the  woman's  river ;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2026.

8  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  468;  Hamadhani,  p.  211.

*  Irlaukal,  p.  163.

5  A  town  in  central  Najd.  Mukaddasi,  p.  254.

*  On  the  west  bank  of  the  Euphrates. Kuhrdadhbih,  p.  127.
7  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2018.


390  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

of  the  Persians,  set  out  against  him  and  Khalid  sent  ahead
al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  ash-Shaibani  who  met  Jaban  at
Nahr  ad-Damm  [sanguine  canal].  Khalid  made  terms
with  the  inhabitants  of  Ullais,  stipulating  that  they  act  as
spies,  guides  and  helpers  to  the  Moslems  against  the  Per-
sians.

Khalid  in  al-Hirah.  Khalid  then  proceeded  to  Mujtama'
al-Anhar  x  [confluence  of  canals],  where  he  was  met  by
Azadhbih,  the  holder  of  the  frontier  fortifications  of  Kisra
that  lay  between  the  Persian  and  the  Arab  territories.  The  243
Moslems  fought  against  him  and  defeated  him.  Then
Khalid  came  and  stopped  at  Khaffan.  Others  say  he  pro-
ceeded directly  to  al-Hirah,  where  he  was  met  by  'Abd-al-
Masih  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Kais  ibn-Haiyan  ibn-Bukailah2  (Bukai-
lah's  proper  name  being  al-Harith)  of  the  Azd,  Hani'  ibn-
Kabisah  ibn-Mas'ud  ash-Shaibani  and  Iyas  ibn-Kabisah  at-
Ta'i  (others  say  Farwah  ibn-Iyas),  Iyas  being  the  'ami!  of
Kisra  Abarwiz  over  al-Hirah  after  an-Nu'man  ibn-al-
Mundhir.  These  men  made  terms  with  Khalid,  stipulating
that  they  pay  100,000  dirhams  per  year,  others  say  80,000
per  year,  that  they  act  as  spies  for  the  Moslems  against  the
Persians,  and  that  Khalid  would  not  destroy  any  of  their
churches  or  citadels.

It  was  reported  by  abu-Mikhnaf ,  on  the  authority  of  abu-
1-Muthannah-l-Walid  ibn-al-Katami,  who  is  the  same  as
ash-Sharki  ibn-al-Katami-1-Kalbi,  that  'Abd-al-Masih,  who
was  an  aged  man,  appeared  before  Khalid  who  asked  him.
'Where  dost  thou  come  from,  old  man?"  And  he  re-
plied, "  From  my  father's  back." — "  What  didst  thou  come
out  from?" — "From  my  mother's  womb." — "Woe  unto
thee! Where  art  thou  now?  " — "  In  my  clothes." — "  Woe

1  Wellhausen,  Skizzen,  vol.  vi,  p.  42;  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  937.

2  Duraid,  p.  285;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2019;  Mas'udi,  vol.  i,  p.  217.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  39  j

to  thee !  Where  dost  thou  stand  now ?" — "On  the  ground."
— "  Dost  thou  have  reason  [Ar.  ta'kul]  ?" — "  Yes,  I  can
bind  [a'kul]  and  tie  up  [a  camel]."1 — "Woe  to  thee!  I
am  speaking  to  thee  like  a  man!" — "  And  I  am  answering
thee  like  a  man." — "  Art  thou  for  peace  or  for  war?  " —
"  For  peace." — "  What  are  these  forts  then?" — "  We  built
them  for  the  rogue  until  the  meek  comes."  2  The  two  then
discussed  the  question  of  peace  and  it  was  agreed  that  100-
000  [dirhams]  be  offered  the  Moslems  every  year.  The
money  taken  from  these  people  was  the  first  sum  carried  to
al-Madinah  from  al-Trak.  It  was  also  stipulated  that  they
seek  no  evil  for  the  Moslems  and  that  they  act  as  spies
against  the  Persians. All  that  took  place  in  the  year  12.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Yahya  ibn-Adam: — The
latter  said :  "  I  heard  it  said  that  the  people  of  al-Hirah  were
6,000  men,  on  each  one  of  whom  14  dirhams,  each  having
the  weight  of  5  kirdts,  were  assessed,  making  84,000  dir-
hams in  all,  of  5  kirdts  each,  or  60,000  of  7  each.  To  that
end,  he  [Khalid]  wrote  them  a  statement  which  I  myself
have  read."  244

It  is  reported  that  Yazid  ibn-Nubaishah-l-'Amiri  said,
'  We  came  to  al-Trak  with  Khalid  and  went  as  far  as  the
frontier  fort  of  al-'Udhaib.  We  then  came  to  al-Hirah
whose  people  had  fortified  themselves  in  al-Kasr  al-Abyad
[white  citadel],  Kasr  ibn-Bukailah  and  Kasr  al-'Adasiyin.
We  went  around  on  horseback  in  the  open  spaces  among
their  buildings,  after  which  they  made  terms  with  us."  (Ac-
cording to  ibn-al-Kalbi  al-'Adasiyin  were  a  branch  of  the
Kalb,  and  were  named  after  their  mother  who  was  also  of
the  Kalb  tribe.)

1  Pun  on  words.  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  657  takes  it  to  mean,  "  I  am
rich  enough  to  pay  the  blood-wit  ['akl]  and  to  retaliate  by  killing
[kawad]  ".

1  Cf.  Mas'udi,  vol.  i,  p.  218;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2019;  Caetani,  vol.  iv.
P-  657.


392  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi  from  ash-Sha'bi : — Khuraim  1  ibn-
Aus  ibn-Harithah  ibn-Lam  at-Ta'i  said  to  the  Prophet,
"If  Allah  enables  thee  to  reduce  al-Hirah,  I  shall  ask  thee
to  give  me  Bukailah's  daughter."  When  Khalid  wanted  to
make  terms  with  the  inhabitants  of  al-Hirah,  Khuraim  said
to  him,  "  The  Prophet  has  given  me  Bukailah's  daughter.
She  should  not  therefore  be  included  in  thy  terms."  This
was  testified  to  by  Bashir  ibn-Sa'd  and  Muhammad  ibn-
Maslamah  of  the  Ansdr;  and  therefore,  Khalid  did  not  in-
clude her  in  the  terms,  but  turned  her  over  to  Khuraim.
She  was  then  bought  from  Khuraim  for  1,000  dirhams,  she
being  too  old  for  Khuraim  to  marry  her.  Some  one  re-
marked to  Khuraim,  "  She  was  sold  very  cheap.  Her  peo-
ple would  have  paid  thee  many  times  the  price  thou  hast
charged."  And  he  replied,  "  I  never  thought  there  was  a
number  above  ten  hundred."

Another  tradition  has  it  that  the  one  who  asked  the  Pro-
phet to  give  him  Bukailah's  daughter  was  one  of  the
Rabi'ah. The  former  view,  however,  is  more  authentic.

Bdnikiya  taken.  Khalid  ibn-al-Walid  despatched  Bashir
ibn-Sa'd  abu-an-Nu'man  ibn-Bashir  of  the  Ansdr  to  Bani-
kiya.2  Bashir  was  met  by  the  Persian  horsemen  headed  by
Farrukhbundadh.  Bashir's  men  were  shot  with  arrows :  but
he  led  the  charge  and  put  the  enemy  to  flight,  killing  Far-
rukhbundadh. He  then  returned  with  a  wound  which  be-
came recrudescent,  when  he  came  to  'Ain  at-Tamr,  and
caused  his  death.  Others  say  that  Khalid  himself,  accom-
panied by  Bashir,  met  Farrukhbundadh.

Khalid  then  sent  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali  to  the  peo-
ple of  Banikiya.  Jarir  was  met  by  Busbuhra  ibn-Saluba,
who  refused  to  fight  and  proposed  to  make  peace. Jarir

1  Mawardi,  p.  333;  Tabari.  vol.  i,  pp.  2047-2048.
J  Hamadhani,  p.  165.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  393

made  terms  with  him  on  100,000  dirhams  and  one  mantle.1
Others  say  that  ibn-Saluba  came  to  Khalid  and,  refusing  to
right,  made  those  terms.  After  the  battle  of  an-Nukhailah  245
and  the  death  of  Mihran,  Jarir  came  and  received  from  ibn-
Saluba's  people  and  from  the  people  of  al-Hirah  the  sum
agreed  upon,  and  wrote  them  a  receipt.  Others  deny  that
Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  ever  came  to  al-Trak  except  in  the
caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.  Abu-Mikhnaf  and  al-
Wakidi,  however,  repeat  that  he  went  there  twice.

Khalid  wrote  a  statement  to  Busbuhra  ibn-Saluba  and
sent  the  mantle  to  abu-Bakr  together  with  the  money  from
al-Hirah  and  the  thousand  dirhams.  Abu-Bakr  offered  the
mantle  as  a  present  to  al-Husain  ibn-'Ali.

Abu-Nasr  at-Tammar  from.  'Abdallah  ibn-Mughaffal 2  al-
Muzani : — No  part  of  al-'Irak  made  covenant  [with  the
Moslems]  except  al-Hirah,  Ullais  and  Banikiya.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ibn-Mughaffal : — No  land
below  al-Jabal 3  is  fit  for  sale  except  the  land  of  the  banu-
Saluba  and  the  land  of  al-Hirah.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  al-Aswad  ibn-Kais's
father : — The  latter  said,  "  We  arrived  in  al-Hirah  and
made  terms  on  so  much  money  and  a  camel's  saddle."  In
answer  to  my  question,  "  What  did  ye  do  with  the  saddle?"
he  replied,  "  One  of  us  had  no  saddle  and  we  gave  it  to
him."

Abu-'Ubaid  from  Humaid  ibn-Hilal : — When  Khalid  ar-
rived in  al-Hirah,  its  inhabitants  made  terms  without  of-
fering any  resistance.  The  following  verse  was  written  by
Dirar  ibn-al-Azwar  al-Asadi :

1  Ar.  tailasdn  =  Persian  apparel  of  dark  wool.  Dozy,  Vetements,  pp.
278-280.

2  Mughaffal  and  not  Mughaffil  as  Baladhuri  has  it.  See  Dhahabi,  p.
477-

3  Al-J abal  or  al-Jibal  =  Media. Hamadhani,  pp.  209  seq.


394


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


*'  I  had  insomnia  in  Banikiya  and  whosoever  receives
what  I  received  there — a  wound,  would  certainly  have  insomnia."

Al-Wakidi  states,  "  Our  companions  agree  that  this  Dirar
was  slain  in  al-Yamamah."

Al-Falalij  and  Tustar.  From  Banikiya,  Khalid  came  to
al-Falalij,1  in  which  was  massed  a  host  of  Greeks.  They
were  soon  dispersed,  and  Khalid,  meeting  no  resistance,  re-  246
turned  to  al-Hirah.  Hearing  that  Jaban  was  at  the  head  of
a  great  army  in  Tustar,2  Khalid  sent  against  him  al-Mu-
thanna  ibn-Harithah  ash-Shaibani  and  Hanzalah  ibn-ar-
Rabi' 3  ibn-Rabah  al-Usaidi  of  the  banu-Tamim  (he  is  the
one  called  Hanzalah-1-Katib[the  scribe]).  No  sooner  had
these  two  come  to  the  place  where  Jaban  was,  than  he  fled.

Siik  Baghdad  and  al-Anbdr.  Khalid  proceeded  to  al-
Anbar  4  whose  people  betook  themselves  to  their  fortifica-
tions. Here  some  one  came  to  Khalid  and  pointed  out  to
him  Suk  [market]  Baghdadh,5  which  later  [after  Baghdadh
was  founded]  was  called  as-Suk  al-'Atik  [the  old  market]
and  which  lay  near  Karn  as-Sarat.6  Khalid  sent  al-Mu-
thanna  who  made  a  raid  on  this  market,  and  the  Moslems
filled  their  hands  with  gold  and  silver  and  commodities  light
to  carry.  They  spent  the  night  at  as-Sailahin,  and  then
came  to  al-Anbar  where  Khalid  was.  The  Moslems  then
invested  the  inhabitants  of  al-Anbar  and  set  fire  to  places  in
its  district.  Al-Anbar  was  thus  called  because  the  Persian
granaries  Mere  in  it  and  the  friends  and  proteges  of  an-Nu'

1  PI.  of  Fallujah. Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  908.

2  Haukal,  p.  172.

3"Rabi'ah"  in  Duraid,  p.  127;  and  "  Rabi'ah  ibn-Saifi  "  in  Kutaibah,
Ma'drif,  p.  153.

4  Lstakhri.  p.  77.

s  Le  Strange,  Baghdad  during  the  Abbasid  Caliphate,  p.  12.

6  As-Sarat  Point,  where  as-Sarat  canal  disembogued  to  the  Tigris.
See  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  235.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  395

man  used  to  get  their  subsistence  allowances  from  it.  See-
ing what  had  befallen  them,  the  inhabitants  of  al-Anbar
made  terms  which  satisfied  Khalid,  and  so  he  left  them  in
their  homes.

Others  assert  that  Khalid  sent  al-Muthanna  before  him
to  Baghdadh  and  then  followed  him  and  directed  the  raid
against  it,  after  which  he  returned  to  al-Anbar.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  authentic.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ash-Sha'bi : — The  people
of  al-Anbar  have  a  covenant  [with  the  Moslems].

A  tradition  communicated  to  me  by  certain  sheikhs  from
al-Anbar  states  that  terms  were  concluded  with  the  people
of  al-Anbar  in  the  caliphate  of  'Umar  in  which  it  was  stipu-
lated that  they  pay  for  their  canton  [tassiij]  400,000  dir-
hams  and  1 ,000  cloaks  fabricated  in  Katawan,  per  year.  The
terms  were  made  by  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali.  Others
say  that  the  sum  was  80,000 ;  but  Allah  knows  best.

Jarir  reduced  Bawazij  al-Anbar  in  which  are  to-day  many
of  his  freedmen.

According  to  a  report  there  came  to  Khalid  ibn-al- Walid
someone  who  pointed  out  to  him  a  market  above  al-Anbar
in  which  the  Kalb,  Bakr  ibn-Wail  and  others  from  the
tribe  of  Kuda'ah  used  to  meet.  Khalid  despatched  against
this  place  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  who  made  a  raid
against  it,  carried  as  booty  what  there  was  in  it,  slaughtered
and  took  captives.

'Ain  at-Tamr.  Thence  Khalid  advanced  to  'Am  at-
Tamr  x  and  invested  its  fort  in  which  a  great  frontier  guard
of  Persians  was  stationed.  The  holders  of  the  fort  made  a
sally  and  fought,  but  after  that,  they  confined  themselves  to
their  fort,  where  Khalid  and  the  Moslems  besieged  them  247
until  they  sued  for  peace. Khalid  refused  to  give  them

1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  759.


396  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

promise  of  security  and  reduced  the  fort  by  force,  slaugh-
tering and  carrying  away  captives.  Here  he  found  certain
persons  in  a  church  whom  he  took  captives.  Among  these
captives  was  ( i  )  Humran  ibn-Aban  ibn-Khalid  at-Tamri.
Others  say  his  father's  name  was  Abba.  This  Humran  was
the  freedman  of  'Uthman.  He  first  belonged  to  al-Musai-
yab  ibn-Najabah-1-Fazari  from  whom  'Uthman  bought
him,  and  then  released  him.  'Uthman  later  sent  him  to  al-
Kufah  to  make  inquiry  regarding  the  conduct  of  his  'amii
there,  on  which  occasion  Humran  did  not  tell  the  truth.  So
'Uthman  denied  him  the  rights  of  protection  [Ar.  jiwdr]
and  Humran  went  and  settled  in  al-Basrah.  Among  other
captives  were  (2)  Sirin,  father  of  Muhammad  ibn-Sirin,1
whose  brothers  were  Yahya  ibn-Sirin,  Anas  ibn-Sirin,  and
Ma'bad  ibn-Sirin,  Muhammad  being  the  eldest  brother,  and
all  being  the  f reedmen  of  Anas  ibn-Malik  al-Ansari ;  ( 3 )
abu-'Amrah,  a  grandfather  of  'Abdallah  ibn-'Abd-al-A'la,
the  poet;  (4)  Yasar,  a  grandfather  of  Muhammad  ibn-
Ishak — the  author  of  as-Snah  2 — and  a  freedman  of  Kais
ibn-Makhramah  ibn-al-Muttalib  ibn-'Abd-Manaf ;  (5)
Murrah  abu-'Ubaid,  a  grandfather  of  Muhammad  ibn-Zaid
ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-Murrah  (Nafis  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-Zaid
ibn-'Ubaid  ibn-Murrah,  the  owner  of  the  citadel  [kasr]
near  al-Harrah  [volcanic  tract  of  al-Madinah]  was  a  son
of  this  Muhammad.  His  descendants  give  the  name  of
their  ancestor  as  'Ubaid  ibn-Murrah  ibn-al-Mu'alla-1-An-
sari  and  later  az-Zuraki)  ;  (6)  Nusair,  the  father  of  Musa
ibn-Nusair,  the  governor  of  al-Maghrib.  This  Nusair  was
a  freedman  of  the  banu-Umaiyah,  as  it  is  asserted  by  f reed-
men in  the  frontier  towns  descended  from  slaves  whom  he

1  Bakri,  p.  199.

2  The biography of the Prophet from which ibn-Hisham's was
abridged.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  ^gy

had  released.  Ibn-al-Kalbi  says  that  abu-Farwah  'Abd  ar-
Rahman  ibn-al-Aswad  and  Nusair  abu-Musa  ibn-Nusair
were  both  Arabs  of  [the  clan  of]  Arashah  of  [the  tribe  of]
Bali  and  that  they  were  taken  captives  from  Jabal  al-Jalil
[Mt.  Galilee]  in  Syria  during  the  caliphate  of  abu-Bakr.
Nusair's  name  was  originally  Nasr  which  was  later  used  in
the  diminutive  form — Nusair.  Some  one  of  the  banu-
Umaiyah  gave  him  his  liberty;  and  he  returned  to  Syria
where  in  a  village  called  Kafarmara  x  his  son  Musa  was
born.  Musa  was  lame.  Al-Kalbi  adds  that  some  one  said
that  the  two  [Nusair  and  abu-Farwah]  were  brothers  taken
captives  from  'Ain  at-Tamr.  and  that  they  owed  their  lib-
erty to  the  banu-Dabbah.

According  to  'Ali  ibn-Muhammad  al-Mada'ini,  it  is  stated
by  someone  that  abu-Farwah  and  Nusair  were  of  the  cap-
tives of  'Ain  at-Tamr.  Abu-Farwah  was  bought  by  Na'im
al-Asadi  who  sold  him  later  to  'Uthman  who  used  him  for
digging  graves.  When  the  people  rose  up  against  'Uthman,  248
abu-Farwah  joined  them  and  said  to  'Uthman,  "  Restore
what  thou  hast  wrongfully  taken  from  others !  "  To  this
'Uthman  replied,  "  Thou  representest  the  first  thing.  I
bought  thee  out  of  the  sad  a  k  ah  funds  that  thou  mayest  dig
the  tombs;  but  thou  hast  left  that."  His  son  'Abdallah  ibn-
abi-Farwah  was  one  of  the  illustrious  freedmen.  One  of
his  descendants  2  was  ar-Rabi'  ibn-Yunus  ibn-Muhammad
ibn-abi-Farwah,  a  companion  of  al-Mansur.  Abu-Farwah
was  thus  called  because  of  a  furred  garment  [Ar.  farwah]
which  he  had  on  when  he  was  taken  captive.3

According  to  certain  reports,  Khalid  made  terms  with  the

1 "  Kaf  armathra  "  in  Marasid,  vol.  ii,  p.  504.

'  Caetani,  vol.  ii,  p.  945.

8  Aghani,  vol.  iii,  p.  127,  adds  Kaisan,  one  of  the  ancestors  of  abu-1-
'Atahiyah,  to  the  list  of  captives.


398  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

holders  of  'Ain  at-Tamr  fort  and  these  captives  [mentioned
above]  were  found  in  a  church  in  a  certain  canton.1  Some
say  that  Sirin  was  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jarjaraya  and
that  he  came  there  on  a  visit  to  a  relative  of  his  and  was
taken  captive  together  with  those  in  the  church.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Yahya  ibn-Adam  from
ash-Sha'bi : — Khalid  ibn-al- Walid  made  terms  with  the  peo-
ple of  al-Hirah  and  'Ain  at-Tamr,  and  stated  them  in  a
letter  to  abu-Bakr,  which  the  latter  endorsed.  Yahya  adds,
'  I  asked  al-Hasan  ibn-Salih,2  '  Have  the  people  of  'Ain  at-
Tamr,  like  those  of  al-Hirah,  to  pay  something  for  their
lands,  but  nothing  for  their  persons  ?  '  To  this  al-Hasan
replied,  '  Yes.'  "

It  is  stated  by  someone  that  there  was  at  'Ain  at-Tamr
at  the  head  of  the  an-Namir  ibn-Kasit  tribe,  Hilal  ibn-'Ak-
kah  ibn-Kais  ibn-al-Bishr  an-Namiri."'  who  gathered  an
army  and  fought  against  Khalid.  He  was  defeated,  killed
and  crucified.  According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi,  there  was  at  the
head  of  the  an-Namir  at  that  time  'Akkah  ibn-Kais  ibn-al-
Bishr  himself.

The  wound  of  Bashir  ibn-Sa'd  al-Ansari  became  recru-
descent  and  caused  his  death.  He  was  buried  at  'Ain  at-
Tamr.  By  his  side  was  buried  'Umair  ibn-Ri'ab  ibn-Mu-
hashshim  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-Sahm  ibn-'Amr,  who  was  hit  by  an
arrow  at  'Ain  at-Tamr  and  fell  a  martyr.

The  razzias  of  an-Nusair  ibn-Daisam.  When  Khalid
ibn-al-Walid  was  at  'Ain  at-Tamr  he  sent  an-Nusair  ibn-
Daisam  ibn-Thaur  to  a  spring  of  water  by  which  were  set-
tled the  banu-Taghlib,  whom  he  surprised  by  night,  killing
and  carrying  away  many  captives. One  of  the  prisoners

1  tassuj. Noldeke,  ZDMG,  1874,  vol.  xxviii,  p.  94,  note.

2  One  of  the  intermediate  authorities  of  this  tradition.

3  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2122 :  "  an-Namari ".


THE  CONQUEST  OF  ASS  AW  AD  399

asked  Khalid  to  release  him,  promising  to  point  out  to  him
a  quarter  inhabited  by  the  banu-Rabi'ah.  Khalid  did  so
and  an-Nusair  came  to  the  Rabi'ah  quarter,  where  he  fell
upon  them  in  the  night-time  and  carried  away  booty  and
captives.  He  then  proceeded  inland  towards  Takrit.  Thus
did  the  Moslems  enrich  themselves  with  booty.  249

According  to  a  tradition  communicated  to  me  by  abu-
Mas'ud  al-Kufi,  on  the  authority  of  Muhammad  ibn-Mar-
wan,  an-Nusair  came  to  'Ukbara'  and  gave  promise  of  se-
curity to  its  inhabitants,  who  brought  forth  food  for  his
men  and  their  animals.  He  then  passed  through  al-Bara-
dan,  whose  people  hurried  to  present  themselves  before  the
Moslems.  An-Nusair  said,  "  Never  mind !" ;  which  was
enough  to  guarantee  their  safety.

Thence  an-Nusair  advanced  to  al-Mukharrim  which  ac-
cording to  abu-Mas'ud  was  not  called  then  Mukharrim,1  but
was  so  called  after  being  occupied  by  a  certain  descendant
of  Mukharrim  ibn-Hazn  ibn-Ziyad  ibn-Anas  ibn-ad-Daiyan
al-Harithi,  as  it  is  mentioned  by  Hisham  ibn-Muhammad
al-Kalbi.

The  Moslems  then  crossed  a  bridge  lying  near  Kasr
[castle]  Sabur,  known  to-day  by  the  name  of  Kasr  'tsa  ibn-
'Ali.  The  bridge  was  in  charge  of  Khurzad  ibn-Mahibun-
dadh  who  went  out  against  the  Moslems,  but  was  fought
and  defeated  by  them.  The  Moslems  then  retreated  to
'Ain  at-Tamr,

An-Nusair  and  Hudhaifah.  It  is  stated  by  al-Wakidi
that  after  the  battle  of  al-Jisr  [bridge]  and  after  making
the  Moslems  withdraw  to  Khaffan,  al-Muthanna  ibn-Ha-
rithah  sent  in  the  caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  an-
Nusair  and  Hudhaifah  ibn-Mihsan  at  the  head  of  a  body
of  horsemen,  who  destroyed  a  band  of  the  banu-Taghlib

1  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  253.


400


THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE


and  crossed  over  to  Takrit  from  which  they  carried  away
camels  and  goats.

"  One  of  the  things  told  me  by  abu-Mas'ud,"  said  'Attab
ibn-Ibrahim,  "  was  that  an-Nusair  and  Hudhaifah  promised
security  to  the  people  of  Takrit  and  wrote  a  statement
which  was  carried  out  by  'Utbah  ibn-Farkad  as-Sulami
when  he  reduced  at-Tirhan  [or  Tirahan]  and  al-Mausil.
He  also  mentioned  the  fact  that  an-Nusair,  directed  by
Khalid  ibn-al-Walid,  made  a  raid  against  villages  in  Maskin
and  Katrabbul  [or  Kutrubbul]  from  which  he  carried  off
large  booty."

From  'Ain  at-Tamr,  Khalid  advanced  to  Syria  and  said
to  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah,  "  Return  [to  al-Hirah?] —
may  Allah  have  mercy  on  thee — to  thy  Sultan,  untired  and
unfailing."  x

The  departure  of  Khalid  for  Syria  took  place  in  Rabi'  II,  250
according  to  others,  Rabi'  I,  year  13.  It  is  claimed  by
some  that  Khalid  came  from  'Ain  at-Tamr  to  Dumah,2
which  he  reduced,  and  after  that  he  proceeded  to  al-Hirah
and  thence  to  Syria.  That  he  departed  for  Syria  from
'Ain  at-Tamr,  is,  however,  more  reliable.

1  Certain  verses  describing  the  battles  referred  to  above  are  here
omitted  from  the  translation. This  was  done  in  a  few  other  cases.

*  Skizzen,  vol.  iv,  p.  47,  n.  3.  De  Goeje,  Memoire,  p.  15,  takes  this  to
be  Dumah  al-Hirah  and  not  al-Jandal.  Cf.  Miiller,  Der  Islam,  vol.  i.
p.  229,  note.


CHAPTER  II
The  Caliphate  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab

Abu-'Ubaid  chief  commander.  When  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  was  proclaimed  caliph,  he  directed  abu-'Ubaid  ibn-
Mas'ud  ibn-'Amr  ibn-'Umair  ibn-'Auf  ibn-'Ukdah  ibn-Ghi-
yarah  ibn-'Auf  ibn-Thakif  (who  is  identical  with  abu-1-
Mukhtar  ibn-abi-'Ubaid)  to  al-'Irak  with  1,000  men.
Meanwhile,  he  wrote  to  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah,  order-
ing him  to  receive  abu-'Ubaid  and  obey  his  word.  In  the
company  of  abu-'Ubaid,  he  sent  Salit  ibn-Kais  ibn-'Amr  al-
al-Ansari,  saying  to  him.  "  Had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that
thou  art  too  hasty,  I  would  have  put  thee  in  chief  com-
mand. But  warfare  is  a  stubborn  thing,  and  only  the  cau-
tious man  is  fit  for  it."

Abu-'Ubaid  defeats  Jaban,  al-Jalinus  and  other  Persian
chiefs.  Abu-'Ubaid  marched  forward  and  left  no  Aral)
tribe  by  which  he  passed  without  arousing  its  interest  in
the  "  holy  war  "  and  plunder.  Thus,  he  was  joined  by  a
large  host.  On  arriving  in  al-'Udhaib,  he  heard  that  Jaban,
the  Persian,  was  at  Tustar  with  a  laige  body  of  men.  Abu-  251
'Ubaid  met  Jaban  and  put  his  troops  to  flight,  taking  some
of  them  captive.

Thence  abu-'Ubaid  proceeded  to  Durna  l  in  which  there
was  assembled  a  body  of  Persians.  These  abu-'Ubaid
chased  to  Kaskar. He  then  advanced  to  meet  al-Jalinus,2

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2169:  "Durtha";  cf.  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  pp.  565,  569;
Bakri,  p.  345.

*  "Jalinus",  in  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2170.

401


402  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

who  was  at  Barusma  [or  Marusma] ;  but  ibn-al-Andarz-
'azz  *  made  terms  with  him,  agreeing  to  pay  four  dirhams
on  every  person,  provided  abu-'Ubaid  should  keep  his  way.
Abu-'Ubaid  sent  al-Muthanna  to  Zandaward,2  and  find-
ing that  its  inhabitants  had  violated  their  covenant,  al-Mu-
thanna fought  against  them,  won  the  victory  and  carried
away  [many]  captives.  Abu-'Ubaid  also  sent  'Urwah  ibn-
Zaid-al-Khail  at-Ta'i  to  az-Zawabi,  with  whose  chief  [dih-
kdn]  me  made  terms  similar  to  those  made  with  Barusma.

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2029  seq.

2  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  pp.  951-952.


CHAPTER  III
The  Battle  of  Kuss  an-Natif,  or  the  Battle  of  al-Jisr

Dhu-l-Hdjib.  Hearing  that  the  Arabs  were  massing  their
forces,  the  Persians  sent  dhu-1-Hajib  [the  eye-browed]
Mardanshah  who  was  nicknamed  by  Anushirwan  "  Bah-
man  "  [potent,  endowed  with  great  means]  because  he  au-
gured good  from  him.1  He  was  called  dhu-1-Hajib  because,
in  his  pride,  he  tied  up  his  brows,  to  lift  them  above  his
eyes. His  name,  it  is  said,  was  Rustam.2

The  elephant.  Abu-'Ubaid  ordered  that  the  bridge  [on
the  Euphrates]  be  erected;  and  it  was,  the  people  of  Bani-
kiya  helping  in  the  construction.  It  is  said  that  this  bridge
once  belonged  to  the  people  of  al-Hirah  on  which  they
crossed  over  to  their  farms.  Being  in  ruins,  abu-'Ubaid  or-
dered it  repaired.  Over  this  bridge,  abu-'Ubaid  and  the
Moslems  crossed  from  al-Marwahah  3  and  met  dhu-1-Hajib
who  was  accompanied  by  4,000  men  armed  from  head  to
foot,  and  one  elephant — others  say  many  elephants.  A
fierce  fight  ensued,  in  the  course  of  which  many  wounds
were  inflicted  on  the  Moslems.  At  this,  Salit  ibn-Kais  said
to  abu-'Ubaid,  "  I  have  warned  thee  against  crossing  this
bridge  and  advised  thee  to  withdraw  to  some  quarter  and
write  for  reinforcements  to  the  '  Commander  of  the  Be-
lievers ';  but  thou  hast  refused."  Salit  fought  until  he  was
killed.  Abu-'Ubaid  asked,  "  Which  is  the  vulnerable  point
in  this  creature?"  and  he  was  told  that  it  was  its  trunk,  252
upon  which  he  made  a  rush  and  struck  the  trunk  of  the  ele-

1  Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  148.  *  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  161.

3  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  505.

4P3


404  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

phant.  Abu-Mihjan  ibn-Habib  ath-Thakafi  also  charged
the  elephant  and  struck  and  broke  its  leg.  The  "  polythe-
ists  ",  thereupon,  made  an  attack  which  resulted  in  the
death  of  abu-'Ubaid.  Others  say  that  the  elephant  threw
its  weight  upon  him  and  crushed  him.1

The  Moslems  who  fell.  After  abu-'Ubaid,  the  flag  was
carried  by  his  brother,  al-Hakam,  who  was  then  killed,  and
the  flag  passed  to  the  hands  of  his  son,  Jabr,  who  also  fell.
Al-Muthanna  2  ibn-Harithah  carried  it  for  one  hour,  after
which  he  withdrew  his  men  as  some  of  them  defended  the
others.  On  this  occasion,  'Urwah  ibn-Zaid  al-Khail  fought
so  fiercely  that  his  action  was  estimated  to  be  equivalent  to
that  of  a  whole  group  of  men.

Among  those  who  took  part  in  the  defense  of  the  Mos-
lems on  the  west  bank  of  the  river,  was  the  poet  abu-Zubaid
at-Ta'i,  who  happened  to  be  at  al-Hirah  on  some  personal
business. Abu-Zubaid  was  a  Christian.

Al-Muthanna  came  and  occupied  Ullais  and  communi-
cated the  news  in  a  letter  to  '  Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  sent  with
'Urwah  ibn-Zaid.

Among  those  killed  in  the  battle  of  al-Jisr  [the  bridge],
according  to  abu-Mikhnaf,  was  abu-Zaid  al-Ansari,  one  of
those  who  compiled  the  Koran  in  the  days  of  the  Prophet.

The  battle  of  al-Jisr  was  fought  on  Saturday  at  the  end
of  Ramadan,  year  13.

Abu-'Ubaid  al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  Kais  ibn-abi-
Hazim : — As  abu-'Ubaid  was  crossing  Banikiya  with  a  band
of  followers,  the  "  polytheists  "  cut  the  bridge  and  many
of  his  men  lost  their  lives.  Isma'il  ibn-abi-Khalid  adds  that
abu-'Amr  ash-Shaibani  stated  that  the  battle  of  Mihran  was
fought  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and  al-Kadisiyah  at  the
end  of  it.

1  Tabari.  vol.  i,  pp.  2178-2179;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  pp.  332-333-

2  Dinawari,  p.  119.


CHAPTER  IV
The  Battle  of  Mihran  or  an-Nukhailah  253

Jar ir  ibn-' Abdalldh' s  campaign  in  al-'Irak.  According
to  abu-Mikhnaf  and  others,  for  one  year  after  the  calamity
that  befell  abu-'Ubaid  and  Salit,  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  re-
frained from  the  mention  of  the  name  of  al-Trak.  In  the
meantime,  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  was  staying  in  the
region  of  Ullais  summoning  the  Arabs  to  the  "  holy  war  ".
At  last  'Umar  invited  the  Moslems  to  an  expedition  to  al-
Trak,  but  they  kept  aloof  and  hesitated  to  go  there,  so  much
so  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  carrying  the  expedition  in
person.  Now,  a  body  of  al-Azd  came  to  'Umar  intent  on
the  invasion  of  Syria;  but  he  asked  them  to  go  to  al-Trak
and  aroused  their  interest  in  the  spoils  to  be  taken  from  the
Kisra  family.  They  left  it  for  him  to  choose  for  them,  and
he  ordered  them  to  start  [for  al-Trak].

Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  came  from  as-Sarah  at  the  head  of  the
Bajilah  x  tribe,  and  offered  to  go  to  al-Trak,  provided  one-
quarter  of  what  they  took  possession  of  be  allotted  to  him
and  his  men.  'Umar  accepted  the  offer  and  Jarir  started
towards  al-Trak.  Some  claim  that  he  went  via  al-Basrah
and  had  a  conflict  with  the  satrap  [Marzuban]  of  al-Ma-
dhar,  whom  he  defeated.  Others  claim  that  the  conflict  with
the  Marzuban  took  place  when  Jarir  was  in  the  company  of
Khalid  ibn-al-Walid.  Still  others  assert  that  Jarir  took  the
road  to  al-'Udhaib,  passing  through  Paid  and  ath-Tha'-
labiyah.

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2186;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  155.

405


*\


4o6  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'Affan  ibn-Muslim  from  ash-Sha'bi : — After  the  death  of
abu-'Ubaid,  who  was  the  first  to  be  directed  by  'Umar  to
al-Kufah,  'Umar  directed  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  there,  saying,
"  Wouldst  thou  go  to  al-Trak  if  I  allow  thee  one-third  of
the  spoils  after  the  [usual]  fifth  has  been  taken?"  and
Jarir  said,  "  I  will."

Dair  Hind.  The  Moslems  assembled  in  Dair  Hind  *  in
the  year  14  immediately  after  the  death  of  Shirawaih,  and
the  succession  of  Buran,  daughter  of  Kisra,  who  was  to  rule
until  Yazdajird  ibn-Shahriyar  came  of  age.  Yazdajird  2
sent  against  them  Mihran  ibn-Mihribundadh  al-Hamadhani
at  the  head  of  12,000  men.  The  Moslems  offered  no  resist-
ance until  he  crossed  the  bridge  on  the  Euphrates  and  ar-
rived next  to  Dair  al-A'war.3

The  battle  of  al-Buwaib.  It  is  reported  by  Saif  that
Mihran,  after  crossing  al-Jisr  [the  bridge],  came  to  a  place
called  al-Buwaib.4 It  was  in  this  place  that  he  was  killed.

Someone  has  said  that  the  irregularities  in  the  land  of
al-Buwaib  were  filled  up  with  bones  in  the  time  of  the  civil  254
war,5  made  level  with  the  surface  and  covered  with  pow-
dered soil  [and  that  whenever  the  soil  was  removed  the
bones  were  seen].6  The  spot  lay  between  as-Sakun  [canal]
and  the  banu-Sulaim  [canal].7  This  was  the  place  in  which
the  water  of  the  Euphrates  sank  in  the  time  of  the  Kisras
and  from  which  it  poured  into  al-Jauf.8

*A  convent  near  al-Hirah. Hamadhani,  Buldau,  p.  183; Bakri,  pp.
362-364;  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  pp.  707-709.

2  Cf.  Dinawari,  p.  125 ;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2163.

3  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  644.
*  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  764.

5  The reference  is, perhaps,  to the  insurrection of Mus'ab  ibn-az-
Zubair.
8  The  text  is  corrupt.  7  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2191.

8  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  2187,  lines  12-13;  cj.  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  pp.  256-257.


THE  BATTLE  OF  MIHRAN


407


The  Moslems  camped  at  an-Nukhailah  1  and  were  led,  ac-
cording to  the  Bajilah,  by  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah,  and,  accord-
ing to  the  Rabi'ah,  by  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah.  Others
affirm  that  the  Moslems  were  commanded  in  turn  by  the
heads  of  the  various  tribes.  The  Moslems  met  their  enemy,
and  Shurahbil  ibn-as-Simt  al-Kindi  distinguished  himself
in  the  fight  that  ensued.  Mas'ud  ibn-Harithah  was  slain.
So  al-Muthanna  said,  "  Fear  not,  Moslems,  because  my
brother  is  killed.  Such  is  the  fate  of  the  best  among  you."
Upon  this,  the  Moslems  charged,  as  if  they  were  one  body,
with  confidence  and  patience  which  resulted,  by  Allah's
help,  in  the  death  of  Mihran  and  the  defeat  of  the  "  infi-
dels ".2  The  Moslems  pursued  them  with  slaughter;  and
few  were  those  who  escaped.  On  this  day,  Kurt  ibn-Jam-
mali  al-'Abdi  applied  his  sword  until  its  edge  was  bent.
When  the  night  fell,  they  returned  to  their  camp.  This  took
place  in  the  year  14.

The  death  of  Mihran  was  effected  by  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah
and  al-Mundhir  ibn-Hassan  ibn-Dirar  ad-Dabbi,  each  one
of  whom  claimed  that  he  had  killed  him,  which  led  to  a
fierce  dispute.3  At  last,  al-Mundhir  carried  away  Mihran' s
belt;  and  Jarir,  the  rest  of  the  spoils  from  him.  Some  as-
sert that  among  those  who  killed  him  was  al-Hisn  ibn-Ma'-
bad  ibn-Zurarah  ibn-'Udas  at-Tamimi.

Moslem  raids.  After  this  victory,  the  Moslems  did  not
cease  to  make  raids  in  the  regions  between  al-Hirah  and
Kaskar,  Sura,  Barbisma  [  ?]  and  Sarat 4  Jamasib  and
between al-Fallujatain, an-Nahrain and 'Ain-at-Tamr.5

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  771-772.

2  Cf.  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  pp.  205-206.
^*  Yusuf,  p.  16,  lines  16-17.

4  Cf.  Dinawari,  p.  121.

5  See  Le  Strange,  The  Lands  of  the  Eastern  Caliphate,  p.  25,  map.


4o8  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  Moslems  also  attacked  Hisn  Malikiya,  which  was
a  watching  post,  and  reduced  it.  They  drove  the  Persians
from  other  watching  posts  at  at-Taff,  the  Persians  by  this
time  having  become  emaciated  and  having  become  weak  and
feeble  in  power.  Certain  Moslems  crossed  Nahr  [canal]
Sura  and  came  to  Kutha,  Nahr  al-Malik  and  Baduraiya;
some  reaching  as  far  as  Kalwadha.  The  Arabs  in  these  raz-  255
zias  lived  on  what  they  plundered.

There  are  those  who  say  that  between  the  battles  of  Mih-
ran  and  al-Kadisiyah,  18  months  elapsed.


CHAPTER  V
The  Battle  of  al-KadisIyah

'Umar  sends  Sa'd  ibn-abi-W akkas.  The  Moslems  wrote
to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  telling  him  of  the  great  number
of  the  Persians  massing  against  them,  and  asked  for  rein-
forcements. 'Umar  desired  to  lead  the  razzia  in  person
and  collected  an  army  for  that  purpose;  but  he  was  ad-
vised by  al-'Abbas  ibn-'Abd-al-Muttalib  and  other  sheikhs
from  among  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  to  stay  at
home  and  send  out  the  forces  and  troops;  and  'Umar  did
that.  'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib  advised  him  to  go  himself;  but
'Umar  replied,  "  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  stay."  'Umar
proposed  to  'Ali  the  idea  of  going;  but  the  latter  refused,
upon  which  'Umar  wanted  Sa'id  ibn-Zaid  ibn-'Amr  ibn-
Nufail  al-'Adawi  to  go.  Finally,  it  occurred  to  him  to  send
Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas,  which  he  did.  The  name  of  abu-
Wakkas  was  Malik  ibn-Uhaib  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  ibn-Zuh-
rah  ibn-Kilab.  Sa'd  was  a  man  of  valor  and  a  good  shot.
Others  say  that  at  this  time  Sa'id  ibn-Zaid  ibn-'Amr  was
on  an  expedition  in  Syria.

Sa'd  proceeded  to  al-Trak  and  stayed  at  ath-Tha'labiyah
for  three  months,  in  the  course  of  which  all  the  troops  over-
took him.  Thence  he  came,  in  the  year  15,  to  al-'Udhaib.
Al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah  happened  to  be  ill  at  that  time,
and  he  advised  Sa'd  to  meet  the  enemy  between  al-Kadisi-
yah  and  al-'Udhaib.  His  case  soon  became  serious  and  he
was  carried  to  his  clan  among  whom  he  died.  Sa'd  mar-
ried his  wife.

409


4i o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Rustam.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  al-Muthanna  died  be-
fore Rustam  came  to  al-Kadisiyah.  This  Rustam,  who
was  from  ar-Rai — or  from  Hamadhan  as  others  say — came
and  occupied  Burs  from  which  he  left  for  a  place  between
al-Hirah  and  as-Sailahin,  where  he  stayed  for  four  months
without  trying  measures  or  fighting  with  the  Moslems.  The
Moslems,  in  the  meantime,  lay  camped  between  al-'Udhaib
and  al-Kadisiyah.  Rustam  sent  ahead  of  him  dhu-l-Ha-
jib,  who  camped  at  Tizanabadh.  The  "  polytheists  "  num-
bered about  120,000,  and  were  accompanied  by  thirty  ele-
phants, and  had  a  great  banner  called  Diraf sh  Kabiyan ;  l
while  the  Moslems,  taken  together,  numbered  between  9,000  256
and  10,000.  When  the  Moslems  were  in  need  of  fodder
or  food,  they  sent  horsemen  into  the  interior  of  the  land
who  would  make  raids  along  the  lower  course  of  the  Eu-
phrates. From  al-Madinah,  'Umar  used  to  send  them
sheep  and  camels  for  slaughter.

Al-Mughirah  reinforces  Sa'd.  Al-Basrah  was  built  some-
time between  the  battle  of  an-Nukhailah  and  al-Kadisiyah
by  'Utbah  ibn-Ghazwan.  When  'Utbah  asked  leave  for  a
pilgrimage,  he  assigned  as  successor  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'-
bah,  who  was  confirmed  in  his  position  by  a  letter  from
'Umar.  Before  long,  the  charge  2  that  was  brought  against
al-Mughirah  was  brought  against  him,  and  'Umar  ap-
pointed abu-Musa  governor  of  al-Basrah  and  recalled  al-
Mughirah  to  al-Madinah.  Later,  'Umar  sent  al-Mughirah
back  to  al-Basrah  together  with  those  who  gave  witness
against  him.  Now,  on  the  day  of  the  battle  of  al-Kadisi-
yah, 'Umar  wrote  to  abu-Musa,  ordering  him  to  reinforce

1  or  Diraf  shikabiyan.  In  Persian :  dirafsh-i-Kawiyan  =  the  royal
standard  of  the  Sassanians ;  see  Vullers'  Persian  Dictionary;  Tabari,
vol.  i,  p.  2175.

*  Of  having  immoral  relations  with  umm-Jamil,  which  is  discussed
later  by  al-Baladhuri. See  abu-1-Fida,  vol.  i,  p.  163.


THE  BATTLE  OF  AL-KADISIYAH  4II

Sa'd;  upon  which  abu-Musa  sent  al-Mughirah  with  800
(others  say  400)  men.  Having  taken  part  in  the  battle,  al-
Mughirah  returned  to  al-Madinah.

Kais  reinforces  Sa'd.  In  the  meantime,  'Umar  wrote  to
abu-'Ubaidah  ibn-al-Jarrah,  and  he  sent  to  the  reinforce-
ment of  Sa'd  Kais  ibn-Hubairah  ibn-al-Makshuh  al-Mu-
radi,  who  according  to  some,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  al-
Kadisiyah,  and  according  to  others,  did  not  arrive  until  the
battle  was  over. Kais  commanded  700  men.

The  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah  took  place  at  the  end  of  the
year  16.  Some  say  that  it  was  'Utbah  ibn-Ghazwan  who
sent  al-Mughirah  to  the  reinforcement  of  Sa'd,  that  al-
Mughirah  was  assigned  governor  of  al-Basrah  only  after  he
returned  from  al-Kadisiyah  and  that  'Umar,  after  calling
al-Mughirah  back  to  al-Madinah  because  of  the  charge
brought  against  him,  never  sent  him  out  of  al-Madinah  ex-
cept when  he  assigned  him  governor  of  al-Kufah.

A1-' Abbas  ibn-al-Walid  an-Narsi  from  ash-Sha'bi : —
'Umar  wrote  to  abu-'Ubaidah,  "  Send  to  al-Kadisiyah  Kais
ibn-Makshuh  at  the  head  of  the  men  he  invites  to  join  him."
Kais  summoned  a  body  of  men  and  arrived,  at  the  head  of
700  of  them,  to  find  the  victory  already  won  by  Sa'd.  Kais's
men  asked  for  a  share  in  the  booty.  Sa'd  wrote  to  'Umar,
who  wrote  back,  "  If  Kais  arrived  before  the  burial  of
those  that  were  killed,  then  thou  shouldst  give  him  his
share."

Al-Mughirah's  interview  with  Rustam.  Rustam  asked
Sa'd  to  send  some  companions  of  his  to  consult  with  him.
Sa'd  delegated  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah.  Al-Mughirah
betook  himself  towards  Rustam's  throne,  in  order  to  sit  by
him,  but  was  not  allowed  to  do  so  by  the  Persian  cavalry
guard  [asdwirah].  Rustam  said  many  things,  among
which  was  the  following,  "  I  have  learned  that  ye  were
forced  to  what  ye  are  doing  by  nothing  but  the  narrow 257


4I2  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

means  of  livelihood  and  by  poverty.  We  are  ready  to  give
you  what  will  satisfy  you,  and  to  see  you  leave  with  certain
things  that  ye  choose."  x  Al-Mughirah  answered,  "  Allah
has  sent  us  his  Prophet  by  following  and  obeying  whom
we  were  made  prosperous,  and  he  has  ordered  us  to  fight
those  who  differ  from  our  faith  '  Until  they  pay  tribute
out  of  hand  and  in  a  humbled  state  '.2  We,  therefore,  call
thee  to  the  worship  of  Allah  alone  and  the  belief  in  his  Pro-
phet, which  if  thou  shouldst  do,  well  and  good ;  otherwise,
the  sword  will  decide  between  us."  Rustam,  snorting  with
anger,  said,  "  By  the  sun  and  by  the  moon,  the  day  will  not
break  to-morrow  before  we  kill  you  all."  "  No  strength
and  no  force  but  in  Allah,"  answered  al-Mughirah,  and  de-
parted riding  a  lean  horse  with  a  sword  broken  at  its  edge
and  wrapped  up  in  rags.3

'Amr  and  al-Ash'ath  interview  Rustam.  'Umar  wrote
to  Sa'd  instructing  him  to  send  to  the  magnate  of  the  Per-
sians a  delegation  to  invite  him  to  Islam.  Accordingly,
Sa'd  sent  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  az-Zubaidi  and  al-Ash'ath
ibn-Kais  al-Kindi  at  the  head  of  a  delegation.  They  passed
by  Rustam,  and  on  being  brought  before  him,  he  asked
them,  "To  whom  are  ye  going?"  to  which  they  replied,
"  To  your  chief."  A  long  conversation  followed  in  which
they  said,  "  Our  Prophet  has  promised  us  the  conquest  of
your  land."  upon  which  Rustam  called  for  a  palm-leaf
basket  full  of  soil  and  said,  "  This  is  for  you  from  our
land !"  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  immediately  arose,  spread  his
cloak  and  departed,  carrying  in  it  some  of  the  soil.  When
he  was  asked  later,  "  Why  didst  thou  do  that  ?  ".  'Amr  re-
plied, "  Because  I  considered  it  a  good  omen,  indicating  that

1  Dinawari,  p.  127;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2271.

2  Koran,  9:29.

3  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2270.


THE  BATTLE  OF  AL-KADIS1YAH  4^3

their  land  will  one  day  be  ours,  and  we  will  take  possession
of  it."  Finally,  they  presented  themselves  before  the  king
and  invited  him  to  Islam.  The  king  became  angry  and  or-
dered them  to  leave,  saying,  "  Had  ye  not  been  envoys,  I
would  have  put  you  to  death !"  He  also  wrote  and  rebuked
Rustam  for  sending  them  to  him.

A  Moslem  forage  expedition.  Later,  a  forage  expedi-
tion 1  of  the  Moslems,  headed  by  Zuhrah  ibn-Hawiyah  ibn-
'Abdallah  ibn-Katadah  at-Tamimi — later  as-Sa'di — (others
say  it  was  headed  by  Katadah  ibn-Hawiyah2 ) ,  came  across
some  Persian  cavalry,  which  was  the  occasion  for  the  final
conflict.  The  Persians  rallied  to  the  succor  of  their  cavalry,  258
and  the  Moslems  to  those  on  their  expedition ;  and  a  fierce
battle  raged  between  the  two.  The  time  was  an  afternoon.
'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  az-Zubaidi  rushed  forward  and,  seiz-
ing a  Persian  chief  by  the  neck,  lifted  him  to  the  saddle  in
front  of  him,  saying  [to  his  men] ,  "I  am  abu-Thaur !  Do  ye
as  I  do !  '  He  then  stabbed  the  nose  of  one  of  the  elephants,
saying,  "  Apply  your  swords  to  their  trunks ;  the  vulnerable
point  in  the  elephant  is  his  trunk."

Sa'd  slaps  his  wife.  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  had,  for  a
special  reason,  appointed  Khalid  ibn-'Urfutah-l-'Udhri,  an
ally  of  the  banu-Zuhrah,  to  be  commander  of  the  army  and
director  of  the  affairs  of  the  Moslems.  Sa'd  lived  in  Kasr
[tower]  al-'Udhaib.  His  wife,  Salma,  daughter  of  Hafsah
of  the  tribe  of  the  banu-Taimallah  ibn-Tha'labah,  and  for-
merly the  wife  of  al-Muthanna  ibn-Harithah,  often  re-
peated, "  O,  Muthanna !  But  there  is  no  more  Muthanna
to  aid  the  cavalry !"  Hearing  that,  Sa'd  slapped  her  on  the
face;  upon  which  she  said,  "Is  it  jealousy  or  cowardice,
Sa'd?"

1  Ar.  'allafah.

2  Hajar,  vol.  ii,  p.  23.


4I4  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Abu-Mihjan  in  prison.  Abu-Mihjan  ath-Thakan 1  was
alienated  to  Badi' 2  by  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  in  punishment
for  his  being  addicted  to  wine.  He  somehow  managed  to-
run  away  and  followed  Sa'd;  he,  according  to  al-Wakidi,
not  being  one  of  those  who  had  started  with  Sa'd.  In  the
army  of  Sa'd,  abu-Mihjan  again  drank  wine  on  account  of
which  Sa'd  flogged  and  imprisoned  him  in  al-'Udhaib  tower.
Here  he  asked  Zabra',  a  concubine  of  Sa'd,  to  release  him
that  he  might  take  part  in  the  fight,  promising  to  return  to
his  fetters.3  She  made  him  swear  by  Allah  that  he  would
do  so  if  released.  Riding  on  Sa'd's  mare,  he  rushed  on  the
Persians,  pierced  through  their  line  and  thrust  his  sword
into  the  nose  of  the  white  elephant.  Sa'd  who  was  watch-
ing him,  said,  "  The  mare  is  mine;  but  the  charge  is  that  of
abu-Mihjan."  Abu-Mihjan  then  returned  to  his  fetters.
Others  say  that  it  was  Salma,  daughter  of  Hafsah.  who
gave  him  the  mare;  but  the  former  report  is  more  authentic.
When  the  question  of  Rustam  was  settled,  Sa'd  said  to  abu-
Mihjan.  "  By  Allah,  I  shall  never  punish  thee  for  wine
after  seeing  what  I  saw  of  thee."  "  As  for  me,"  an-
swered abu-Mihjan,  "  by  Allah,  I  shall  never  drink  it
again.

The  slayer  of  Rustam.  On  that  day,  Tulaihah  ibn-Khu-
wailid  al-Asadi  distinguished  himself  in  fighting,  and  with
a  blow,  cut  the  under-helmet  of  al-Jalinus,  but  did  not  in-
jure his  head.  On  the  same  occasion,  Kais  ibn-Makshuh
turned  to  the  people  and  said,  "  To  be  killed  is  the  fate  of
the  noble. Let  not  those  '  uncircumcised  '  have  more  pa-

1  Yiisuf,  pp.  17-18;  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  pp.  213-219;  al-'Ikd  al-Farid,
vol.  iii,  p.  407.

2Hamdani,  p.  133,  1.  22;  p.  41,  1.  7:  "Nasi"';  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  471;
Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2480.

8  Dinawari,  p.  129.

4  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  p.  219;  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  369-


THE  BATTLE  OF  AL-KADISIYAH  4Ie

tience  or  be  more  anxious  to  die  than  yourselves."  Saying
this,  he  rushed  and  fought  fiercely.  By  Allah's  help,  Rus-  259
tarn  was  slain  and  his  body  was  found  covered  with  so  many
blows  and  stabs  that  the  one  who  gave  the  fatal  blow  could
not  be  determined.  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib,  Tulaihah  ibn-
Khuwailid  al-Asadi,  Kurt  ibn-Jammah  al-'Abdi  and  Dirar
ibn-al-Azwar  al-Asadi  had  all  rushed  at  him.  This  Dirar,  ac-
cording to  al-Wakidi,  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  al-Yama-
mah.  Some  say  that  Rustam  was  killed  by  Zuhair  ibn-
' Abd-Shams  al-Bajali ;  others,  by  'Auwam  ibn-'Abd-Shams ;
and  still  others  by  Hilal  ibn-'Ullafah  at-Taimi.1

This  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah  was  fought  on  Thursday,
Friday  and  the  night  of  Saturday,  which  last  was  since
called  "  Lailat  al-Harir  ".2  The  night  of  the  battle  of  Sif-
f  in  was  also  thus  called.

Some  say  that  Kais  ibn-Makshuh  took  no  part  in  the  fight
at  al-Kadisiyah,  having  arrived  there  after  the  Moslems
had  been  through  with  the  fighting.

Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah's  part.  Ahmad  ibn-Salman  al-Ba-
hili  from  certain  sheikhs: — Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah  invaded
Syria  in  the  company  of  abu-Umamah  as-Sudai  ibn-' A j Ian
al-Bahili,  and  took  part  in  the  battles  fought  by  the  Moslems
there.  He  then  went  forth  to  al-'Irak  together  with  those
who,  under  great  urgency,  hastened  to  al-Kadisiyah  as  a
reinforcement,  and  took  part  in  the  decisive  conflict.  He
settled  at  al-Kufah  and  was  killed  in  Balanjar.

According  to  al-Wakidi,  a  group  of  Persians,  planting
their  banner  firmly  in  the  ground,  said,  "  We  shall  not  leave
our  position  until  we  die;"  upon  which  Salman  ibn-Rabi'ah-
1-Bahili  made  an  attack  and  killed  them,  carrying  their  ban-
ner away.

1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  165.

2  The  night  of  yells  of  pain. Caetani,  vol.  iii,  pp.  643,  675 ;  Skizzen,
vol.  vi,  p.  75 ;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2327.


4I6  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Khalid  ibn-'Urf Utah's  part.  Sa'd  sent  Khalid  ibn-'Urfu-
tah  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  charged  with  pursuing  the
enemy.  Khalid  and  his  men  killed  every  one  they  over-
took until  they  arrived  in  Burs.  Here  Khalid  was  the  guest
of  one,  Bistam,  who  treated  him  with  kindness  and  loyalty.
A  canal  that  ran  there  was  called  Nahr  Bistam.  Khalid
then  passed  through  as-Sarah  [canal]  and  caught  up  with
Jalinus.  Kathir  ibn-Shihab  al-Harithi  charged  Jalinus  and
stabbed  him,  and  according  to  others,  killed  him.  Ibn-al-
Kalbi  says  that  it  was  Zuhrah  ibn-Hawiyah  as-Sa'di  who
killed  him. The  former  report  is  more  authentic.

The  Persians  fled  to  al-Mada'in,  following  Yazdajird
[their  king].  Sa'd  immediately  communicated  with  'Umar,
announcing  the  victory  and  giving  the  names  of  those  who
had  fallen.

The  Persian  arrows.  Abu-Raja'  al-Farisi  from  his
grandfather: — The  latter  said:  "I  took  part  in  the  battle
of  al-Kadisiyah  when  I  was  still  a  Magian.  When  the
Arabs  sent  their  arrows  against  us,  we  began  to  shout.  260
'  duk !  duk !'  l  by  which  we  meant,  spindles.  These  spindles,
however,  continued  to  shower  upon  us,  until  we  were  over-
whelmed. Our  archer  would  send  the  arrow  from  his  Na-
wakiyah  bow,  but  it  would  not  do  more  than  attach  itself
to  the  garment  of  an  Arab ;  whereas  their  arrow  would  tear
the  coat  of  mail  and  the  double  cuirass  that  we  had  on."

According  to  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi.  the  first  to  kill  a  Per-
sian in  the  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah  was  Rabi'ah  ibn-'Uth-
man  ibn-Rabi'ah  of  the  banu-Nasr  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-
Bakr  ibn-Hawazin  ibn-Mansur.

In  this  battle,  Sa'd  ibn-'Ubaid  al-Ansari  fell  a  martyr. 262
His  death  afflicted  'Umar  so  much  that  he  said,  "  His  death
almost  marred  the  joy  of  the  victory  for  me."

>Yusuf,  p.  16:  "dus!" Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i.  p.  2236.


CHAPTER  VI
The  Conquest  of  al-Mada'in

An-Nakhirkhan  slain  by  Zuhair.  After  the  battle  of  al-
Kadisiyah,  the  Moslems  started  off,  and  after  passing  Dair
[monastery]  Ka'b  [?],*  they  were  met  by  an-Nakhir-
khan,2 who  appeared  at  the  head  of  a  large  body  of  men  from
al-Mada'in.3  In  the  conflict  that  ensued,  Zuhair  ibn-Sulaim
al-Azdi  seized  an-Nakhirkhan  by  the  neck;  and  they  both
fell  to  the  ground.  Zuhair  took  a  dagger  that  was  in  the
other  man's  belt  and  cut  open  his  abdomen,  thereby  putting
him  to  death.

Balmrasir.  Sa'd  and  the  Moslems  went  and  occupied
Sabat.  They  then  assembled  in  the  city  of  Bahurasir,4
which  lay  in  the  Shikk  al-Kufah  [western  bank  of  the
Tigris],  where  they  spent  nine  months  (others  say  18),5
during  which  they  ate  fresh  dates  for  two  seasons.  The
inhabitants  of  that  city  fought  against  them  until  they  could
offer  no  more  resistance,  at  which  the  Moslems  entered  the
city.  When  the  city  was  thus  reduced,  Yazdajird  ibn-Shah-
riyar,  the  Persian  king,  resolved  to  flee  and  was  suspended
in  a  basket  from  the  wall  of  al-Abyad  fort  in  al-Mada'in
and  was  therefore  called  by  the  Nabateans  Barzabil [the 263

1  Yusuf,  p.  17,  1.  8:  "Dair  al-Masalih  "  (?).

2  Tabari,  in  Noldeke,  Geschichte  der  Perser,  pp.  152-153.

3  Seleucia-Ctesiphon. Meynard,  Dictionnaire  de  la  Perse,  p.  518.

4  Noldeke,  Perser,  p.  16,  n.  4.

5  Dinawari,  p.  133.

4U


4i8  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

son  of  the  basket].  Yazdajird  thence  left  for  Hulwan  a  with
the  principal  dignitaries  of  his  kingdom,  and  carried  with
him  the  treasury  of  the  kingdom,  his  precious  but  light 2
pieces  of  furniture,  private  treasury,  wives  and  children.
In  the  year  in  which  he  fled,  plague  and  famine  ravaged  all
Persia.  The  Moslems  then  crossed  [the  Tigris]  through  a
ford,  and  took  possession  of  the  city  on  the  eastern  bank
of  the  river.

The  Arabs  cross  the  Tigris.  'Affan  ibn-Muslim  from  abu-
Wa'il : — The  latter  said,  "  When  the  Persians  were  put  to
flight  at  al-Kadisiyah,  we  pursued  them.  They  reunited
at  Kutha 3  and  we  pursued  them  until  we  reached  the
Tigris,  at  which  the  Moslems  said,  'Why  do  you  gaze  at  this
small  body  of  water?  Let  us  wade  through.'4  Accord-
ingly, we  waded  through,  and  once  more  put  the  enemy  to
flight."

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Aban  ibn-Salih : — When  they
were  defeated  at  al-Kadisiyah.  the  fugitive  Persians  came
to  al-Mada  in.  The  Moslems  having  arrived  at  the  Tigris,
whose  water  was  flowing  higher  than  ever,  found  that  the
Persians  had  removed  the  ships  and  ferry-boats  to  the  east-
ern bank  and  burned  the  bridge.  Sa'd  and  the  Moslems  find-
ing no  way  to  cross  over  were  greatly  afflicted.  At  last,  Sa'd
chose  one  of  the  Moslems  who  swam  across  on  horseback.
Likewise,  the  other  Moslems  crossed  on  horseback  and,  on
landing,  made  the  owners  of  the  ships  transport  the  bag-
gage. Seeing  that,  the  Persians  said,  "  By  Allah,  those  we
are  fighting  are  nothing  less  than  demons  [jinn]  !"  and  they
took  to  flight.

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  312.

*  Ar.  khiff ;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  724,  takes  it  to  be  khaffa  and  stretches
the  meaning  into  "  ma  abbandonando  in  gran  parte  le  sue  masserizie  ".
Cf.  Dinawari,  p.  133.

3  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  318.

4  Text  not  clear. Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  723.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  AL-MADATN  419

Sabat  and  ar-Rumiyah.  'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  from
'Awanah  ibn-al-Hakam,  and  abu-'Ubaidah  Ma'mar  ibn-al-
Muthanna  from  abu-'Amr  ibn-al-'Ala  : — Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wak-
kas  sent  at  the  head  of  the  van  of  his  army  Khalid  ibn-'Ur-
futah,  who  succeeded  in  reducing  Sabat 1  before  Sa'd's  ar-
rival. Khalid  proceeded  and  camped  at  ar-Rumiyah  2  until
its  people  made  terms,  agreeing  to  have  those  of  them  who
wanted  to  leave,  do  so,  and  those  who  wanted  to  stay,  stay,
on  condition  that  they  offer  homage  and  give  counsel,  pay
kharaj ,  and  act  as  guides  for  the  Moslems,  without  enter-
taining any  treachery  against  them.  Sa'd  [in  crossing  the
river]  found  no  ferry-boats,  but  was  shown  a  ferry  near
as-Saiyadin  village.  The  horses  waded  through  while  the
Persians  shot  them  with  their  arrows.  All  the  Moslems,
however,  escaped,  and  only  one  of  them  from  the  tribe  of  264
Taiyi',  whose  full  name  was  Salil  ibn-Yazid  ibn-Malik  as-
Sinbisi,  was  killed.

Kisra's  concubines.  'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  from  ash-
Sha'bi :— The  latter  said,  "  In  the  battle  of  al-Mada  in,  the
Moslems  carried  away  many  of  Kisra's  maids  [concubines]
who  had  been  brought  from  all  quarters  of  the  world  and
lavishly  adorned  for  him.  My  mother  was  one  of  them.
On  that  day,  too,  the  Moslems  found  camphor  and,  taking
it  for  salt,  put  it  in  their  cooking-pans."  3

According  to  al-Wakidi,  Sa'd  was  all  done  with  the  con-
quest of  al-Mada'in  and  Jalula'  in  the  year  16.

1  Sometimes  called1  Sabat  Kisra. Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  3 ;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,
p.  724,  1.  4.
1  Perhaps  a  suburb  of  Mada'in. Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  867.
3  Dinawari,  p.  134;  Yiisuf,  p.  17.


CHAPTER  VII

The  Battle  of  Jalula'

A  description  of  the  battle.  After  spending  several  days
in  al-Mada'in,  the  Moslems  received  word  that  Yazdajird
had  massed  a  great  host,  which  was  then  at  Jalula',  and  had
directed  it  against  them.  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  thereupon
dispatched  Hashim  ibn-'Utbah  ibn-abi-Wakkas  at  the  head
of  12,000  men  to  meet  them.  The  Moslems  found  that  the
Persians,  having  left  their  families  and  heavy  baggage  at
Khanikin,1  had  dug  trenches  and  fortified  themselves,  bind-
ing themselves  with  a  pledge  never  to  flee.  Reinforcements
were  coming  to  them  all  the  time  from  Hulwan  and  al-Jibal
[the  mountains,  i.  e.,  Media].  The  Moslems,  thinking  it
best  to  hasten  the  attack  before  the  reinforcements  became
too  strong,  met  them  with  Hujr  ibn-'Adi-l-Kindi  command-
ing the  right  wing,  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  commanding  the
cavalry  and  Tulaihah  ibn-Khuwailid  commanding  the  in-
fantry. The  Persians  were  on  this  occasion  led  by  Khur-
razad,  a  brother  of  Rustam.  The  fight  that  ensued  was  the
fiercest  they  ever  had,  in  which  arrows  and  lances  were  used
until  broken  to  pieces,  and  swords  were  applied  until  they
were  bent.  Finally  the  Moslems  altogether  made  one  on-
slaught and  drove  the  Persians  from  their  position,
putting  them  to  flight.  The  Persians  fled  away  and  the
Moslems  kept  pursuing  them  at  their  very  heels  with  fear-
ful slaughter  until  darkness  intervened  and  they  had  to  re-
turn to  their  camp.

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  393-
420


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALQLA'  421

Hashim ibn-'Utbah  left  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  in  Jalula'
with  a  heavy  force  of  cavalry  to  act  as  a  check  between  the
Moslems  and  their  enemy. Yazdajird  thereupon  left  Hul- 265
wan.

Mahrudh.  The  Moslems  carried  on  many  raids  in  the  re-
gions of  as-Sawad  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Tigris.  Com-
ing to  Mahrudh,1  Hashim  made  terms  with  its  dihkdn,
stipulating  that  the  latter  should  pay  a  jarib  of  dirhams  [  ?]
and  the  former  should  not  kill  any  of  the  men.

Ad-Daskarah.  On  a  charge  of  treachery,  against  the
Moslems,  Hashim  put  the  dihkdn  of  ad-Daskarah  2  to  death.

Al-Bandanijain.  Hashim  then  proceeded  to  al-Bandani-
jain,3  whose  inhabitants  sued  for  peace,  agreeing  to  pay  tax
and  khardj.  Consequently,  Hashim  promised  them  security.

Khdnikin.  At  Khanikin  there  was  a  small  remnant  of
the  Persians  against  whom  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  now
marched  and  whom  he  put  to  death.  Thus  was  no  region
of  the  Sawad  Dijlah  left  unconquered  by  the  Moslems  or
unpossessed  by  them.

According  to  Hisham  ibn-al-Kalbi,  the  leader  of  the
army  in  the  battle  of  Jalula'  in  behalf  of  Sa'd  was  'Amr
ibn-'Utbah  ibn-Naufal  ibn-Uhaib  ibn-'Abd-Manaf  ibn-
Zuhrah  whose  mother  was  'Atikah,  daughter  of  abu-Wak-
kas.

After  the  battle  of  Jalula',  Sa'd  left  for  al-Mada'in  where
he  gathered  a  host  of  men,  and  then  kept  on  his  way  to  the
region  of  al-Hirah.

The  battle  of  Jalula'  took  place  at  the  close  of  the  year  16.

The  converts. Those  who  embraced  Islam  were  among

others,  Busbuhra — the  dihkdn  of  al-Falalij  and  an-Nahrain,

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  700.

2  Ibid.,  vol.  ii,  p.  575;  Noldeke,  Perser,  p.  295,  n.  1.

3  Persian :  Bandanikan ;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  745.


422  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Bistam  ibn-Narsi — the  dihkdn  of  Babil  and  Khutarni-
yah,1  ar-Rufail — the  dihkdn  of  al-'Al,2  and  Fairuz — the
dihkdn  of  Nahr  al-Malik 3  and  Kutha.  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  did  not  interfere  with  them  but  left  their  lands  in
their  own  hands  and  annulled  the  poll-tax  they  paid.

Hdshim's  campaign.  Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi  from  'Awa-
nah's  father : — Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  dispatched  Hashim
ibn-'Utbah  ibn-abi-Wakkas  accompanied  by  al-Ash'ath  ibn-
Kais  al-Kindi.  Hashim  passed  through  ar-Radhanat i  and
visited  Dakuka  and  Khanijar,  conquering  all  that  region
together  with  all  the  district  of  Bajarma.  Hashim  pene-
trated towards  Sinn  Barimma  5  and  Bawazij  al-Mulk  as  far
as  the  border  of  Shahrazur.

'U mar's  message  to  Sa'd.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from
Yazid  ibn-abi-Habib : — When  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  com-
pleted the  conquest  of  as-Sawad,  he  received  the  following
letter  from  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab :

"  I  have  received  thy  letter  in  which  thou  statest  that  thy
men  have  asked  thee  to  divide  among  them  whatever  spoils  266
Allah  has  assigned  them.  At  the  receipt  of  my  letter,  find
out  what  possessions  and  horses  the  troops  on  '  horses  and
camels  '  6  have  acquired  and  divide  that  among  them,  after
taking  away  one-fifth.  As  for  the  land  and  camels,  leave
them  in  the  hands  of  those  men  who  work  them,  so  that
they  may  be  included  in  the  stipends  [pensions]  of  the  Mos-
lems. If  thou  dividest  them  among  those  present,  nothing
will  be  left  for  those  who  come  after  them."

1  Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  453-
1  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  59-2.
s  Ibid.,  vol.  iv,  p.  846.
*  Ibid.,  vol.  ii,  p.  729.
'  Ibid.,  vol.  iii,  p.  169.
«Kor„  59:6.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALVLA'  423

How  the  land  and  the  inhabitants  of  as-Sawad  should  be
considered.  Al-Husain  from  'Abdallah  ibn-Hazim  : — The
latter  said,  "  I  once  asked  Mujahid  regarding  the  land  of
as-Sawad  and  he  answered,  '  It  can  neither  be  bought  nor
sold.'  This  is  because  it  was  taken  by  force  and  was  not
divided. It  belongs  to  all  the  Moslems."

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from  Sulaiman  ibn-Yasar : — 'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab  left  as-Sawad  for  those  who  were  still  in
men's  loins  and  mothers'  wombs  [i.  c.,  posterity] ,  consider-
ing the  inhabitants  dhimmis  from  whom  tax  should  be
taken  on  their  person,  and  kharaj  on  their  land.  They  are
therefore  dhimmis  and  cannot  be  sold  as  slaves.

The  following  statement  was  made  by  Sulaiman :  "  Al-
Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  wanted  to  consider  the  inhabitants
of  as-Sawad  as  having  been  acquired  without  fighting  [Ar.
fai']  ;  but  when  I  told  him  of  the  position  'Umar  took  re-
garding them,  Allah  prevented  him  from  doing  so."

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Harithah  ibn-Mudarrib :

•  •  •

— 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.  desiring  to  divide  as-Sawad
among  the  Moslems,  ordered  that  they  be  counted.  Each
Moslem  had  three  peasants  for  his  share.  'Umar  took  the
advice  of  the  Prophet's  Companions,  and  'Ali  said,  "  Leave
them  that  they  may  become  a  source  of  revenue  and  aid  x
for  the  Moslems."  Accordingly,  'Umar  sent  'Uthman  ibn-
Hunaif  al-Ansari  who  assessed  on  each  man  48,  24,  or  12
[dirhams].

Abu-Nasr  at-Tammar  from  'Ali : — The  latter  said,  "  If
ye  were  not  to  strike  one  another  on  the  face  [have  civil
war]  I  would  divide  as-Sawad  among  you."

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  'Amir : — The  people  of
as-Sawad  have  no  covenant,  rather  they  came  under  our
control  by  surrender.

1  Ar.  maddah;  see  an-Nih&yah,  vol.  iv,  p.  84.


424  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Al-Husain from ash-Sha'bi : — The latter was asked 267
whether  the  people  of  as-Sawad  had  a  covenant,  to  which
he  replied,  "At  first,  they  had  none;  but  when  the  Mos-
lems consented  to  take  kharaj  from  them,  then  they  came  to
have  one."

Al-Husain  from  'Amir : — The  latter  said,  "  The  people
of  as-Sawad  have  no  covenant."

The  Magians.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Ja'far  ibn-Muham-
mad's  father : — The  Emigrants  had  a  sitting  place  in  the
mosque  in  which  'Umar  used  to  discuss  with  them  the  news
he  received  from  the  different  regions.  One  day  he  said,  "I
know  not  how  to  treat  the  Magians;"  upon  which  'Abd-
ar-Rahman  ibn-'Auf  rose  and  said,  "  I  bear  witness  that  the
Prophet  said,  '  Treat  them  according  to  the  same  law  with
which  ye  treat  the  People  of  the  Book  '."

The  Bajttatis  share  in  as-Scm'dd.  Muhammad  ibn-as-
Sabbah  al-Bazzaz  from  Kais  ibn-abi-Hazim : — The  Baji-
lah  tribe  constituted  one-fourth  of  the  Moslems  in  the  battle
of  al-Kadisiyah.  and  'Umar  had  allotted  them  one-fourth
of  as-Sawad.  Once  when  Jarir  [ibn-'Abdallah]  called  on
'Umar,  the  latter  said,  "  Had  I  not  been  responsible  for
what  I  divide,  I  would  leave  to  you  the  share  already  given;
but  I  see  that  the  Moslems  have  multiplied,  so  ye  have  to
restore  what  ye  have  taken."  Jarir  and  the  others  did  as
'Umar  said;  and  'Umar  offered  Jarir  a  present  of  80
dinars.1

A  woman  of  the  tribe  of  Bajilah,  called  umm-Kurz,  came
to  'Umar  and  said,  "  My  father  died  and  his  share  in  as-
Sawad  holds  good.  I  shall  never  deliver  it !"  'Umar  turned
to  her  and  said,  "  But,  umm-Kurz,  thy  people  have  all  con-
sented to  do  so."  "  I  shall  never  consent,"  said  she,  "  un-
less thou  carry  me  on  a  submissive  she-camel  covered  with

1  Yusuf,  p.  18.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALVLA'


425


a  red  nappy  mantle  [Ar.  katifah]  and  fill  both  of  my  hands
with  gold,"  which  'Umar  did.

Al-Husain  from  Jarir : — 'Umar  gave  to  the  Bajilah  one-
quarter  of  as-Sawad  which  they  held  for  three  years.

Kais  said : — "  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  accompanied  by  'Am-
mar  ibn-Yasir  called  on  'Umar  who  said,  '  Had  I  not  been  268
held  responsible  for  what  I  divide,  I  would  leave  to  you  the
shares  already  given ;  but  I  see  now  that  ye  ought  to  restore
what  ye  have  taken.'  And  they  did,  upon  which  'Umar  of-
fered a  present  of  80  dinars  to  Jarir."  x

According  to  a  tradition  communicated  by  al-Hasan  2
ibn-'Uthman  az-Ziyadi  on  the  authority  of  Kais,  'Umar
gave  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  400  dinars.

Humaid  ibn-ar-Rabi'  from  al-Hasan  ibn-Salih : — 'Umar
gave  the  Bajilah,  in  exchange  for  the  fourth  of  as-Sawad
they  held,  a  stipend  of  2,000  dirhams.

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from  Jarir  ibn-Yazid  ibn- Jarir  ibn-
'Abdallah' s  grandfather : — 'Umar  allotted  to  Jarir  and  his
men  one-quarter  of  what  they  had  conquered  in  as-Sawad.
When  the  spoils  of  Jalula'  were  brought  together,  Jarir  de-
manded his  quarter.  Sa'd  communicated  the  demand  to
'Umar  who  wrote  back  as  follows :  "  If  Jarir  wants  him-
self considered  as  having  with  his  men,  fought  for  a  pay
similar  to  the  pay  of  al-Mu'allafah  Kulubuhum?  then  ye
may  give  them  their  pay.  If,  however,  they  have  fought
in  Allah's  cause  and  will  accept  his  remuneration,  then  they
are  part  of  the  Moslems,  having  their  rights  and  their  ob-
ligations." Hearing  that,  Jarir  said,  "  Truly  and  honestly
has  the  '  Commander  of  the  Believers  '  spoken.  We  do
not  want  our  quarter."

1  Yahya  ibn- Adam,  pp.  29  seq.

2  Dhahabi,  p.  244.

8  Those  whose  hearts  are  won  to Islam  by  special  gifts. See  De
Goeje,  Memoire,  p.  51;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  1679;  Kor.,  9:60.


426  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Al-Husain  from  Ibrahim  an-Nakha'i : — Someone  came
to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  saying,  "  I  have  accepted  Islam
and  ask  thee  to  exempt  my  piece  from  the  land- k  I  lardj,"
to  which  'Umar  replied,  "  Thy  land  has  been  taken  by
force."

Khalaf  ibn-Hisham  al-Bazzar  from  Ibrahim  at-Taimi :
— When  'Umar  conquered  as-Sawad,  the  troops  said  to  him,
"  Divide  it  among  us  because  we  have  reduced  it  by  force
through  our  swords."  But  'Umar  refused,  saying,  "  What
will  then  be  left  for  those  Moslems  who  come  after  you?
Moreover,  I  am  afraid  that  if  I  divide  it,  ye  may  come  to
be  at  variance  with  one  another  on  account  of  its  water."
'Umar,  therefore,  left  the  people  of  as-Sawad  in  possession
of  their  lands,  assessing  a  tax  on  their  person  and  a  fixed
tax  1  on  their  lands  which  he  did  not  divide.

A  survey  of  as-Sawad.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  ash-  269
Sha'bi : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  sent  'Uthman  ibn-Hunaif
al-Ansari  to  make  a  survey  [yamsah]  of  as-Sawad,  which
he  found  to  be  36,000,000  jaribs,  on  every  jarib  of  which  he
assessed  one  dirJiam  and  one  kafi.z.  Al-Kasim  adds.  "  I
heard  that  the  kafiz  was  a  measure  of  theirs  also  called  ash-
sMburkdn."  ~  According  to  Yahya  ibn-Adam,  it  is  equiva-
lent to  al-makhtum  al-Hajjdji*

The  tax  assessed.  'Amr  an-Nakid  from  Muhammad  ibn-
'Abdallah  ath-Thakafi : — 'Umar  assessed  on  every  jarib  in
as-Sawad,  whether  cultivated  or  uncultivated,  provided  it
was  accessible  to  water,  one  dirham  and  one  kafia.  on  every
jarib  of  ratbah  [trefoil  or  clover]  five  dirhams  and  five
kafizes,  and  on  every  jarib  of  trees  ten  dirhams  and  ten  ka-

1  Ar.  task  or  tisk.  J.  Wellhausen,  Das  Arabische  Reich,  pp.  172-173,
Noldeke,  Perser,  p.  241,  n.  1 ;  Caetani,  vol.  ii.  p.  9.30,  n.  6.

3  Mawardi,  pp.  272,  304.

s  Introduced  through  al-Hajjaj  ibn-Yusuf  who  died  in  the  year  90
A.  H.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALOLA'  427

fines  (palm  trees  not  mentioned).  On  every  man,  he  as-
sessed 48,  24,  or  12  dirhams  as  poll-tax.

Al-Kasim  ibn-Saliam  from  abu-Mijlaz  Lahik  ibn-Hu-
maid : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  assigned  'Ammar  ibn-Yasir
to  act  as  religious  head  '  for  the  people  of  al-Kufah  and  to
command  their  militia.  'Abdallah  ibn-Mas'ud  to  be  their
kadi  and  treasurer,  and  'Uthman  ibn-Hunaif  to  measure  the

• •  •

land.  To  these  three,  he  assigned  each  day  one  goat,  one-
half  of  which,  together  with  the  appendages  2  to  be  taken
by  'Ammar  and  the  other  half  to  be  divided  between  the
other  two.  'Uthman  ibn-Hunaif  measured  the  land  and
assessed  on  each  jarib  of  palm  trees.  10  dirhams:  of  vine
trees,  10  dirhams;  of  sugar-cane,  6  dirhams;  of  wheat,  4
dirhams;  and  of  barley,  2  dirhams.  To  this  end,  he  wrote
to  'Umar,  who  endorsed  the  assessments.

Al-Husain ibn-al-Aswad from 'Amr ibn-Maimun : —
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab sent Hudhaifah ibn-al-Yaman  be-
yond the  Tigris,  and  'Uthman  ibn-Hunaif  below  the  Tigris;  7
and  they  assessed  on  every  jarib  one  kaftz  and  one  dirham.  {

Al-Husain  from  Muhammad  ibn-'Abdallah  ath-Tha-  270
kafi : — When  al-Mughirab  ibn-Shu'bah  was  governor  of  as-
Sawad,  he  wrote,  "  We  find  here  other  products  than  wheat
and  barley,"  and  mentioned  Indian  peas,  grapes,  clover 3
and  sesame,  upon  each  of  which  he  assessed  8  dirhams  and
excluded  palm-trees.4

Khalaf  al-Bazzar  from  al-'Aizar  ibn-Huraith : — 'Umar
ibn-al-Khattab  assessed  on  one  janb  of  wheat  two  dirhams
and  two  jaribs;  on  one  jarib  of  barley,  one  dirham,  and

1  Ar.  a!a  as-salah ;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  756,  translates :  "  l'autorita
civile."

1  Ar.  sawdkit. Yusuf,  p.  20:  "  batn  "  =  belly.

s  Ar.  ratbah  or  rutbah  may  also  be  applied  to  cucumber,  melon  and
the  like;  see  Caetani,  vol.  v,  pp.  370  and  371 ;  Yusuf,  pp.  20-22.

4  Cf.  Adam,  p.  98.


428  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

one  jarib ;  and  on  every  two  jaribs  in  the  uncultivated  land
that  can  be  sown,  one  dirham.

Khalaf  al-Bazzar  from  al-'Aizar  ibn-Huraith: — 'Umar
assessed  on  one  jarib  of  vine-trees  10  dirhams,  on  one  jarib
of  clover,  10;  of  cotton,  5;  on  one  Farisi  palm-tree,  one
dirham  and  if  of  inferior  quality,  one  dirham  on  two  trees.

'Amr  an-Nakid  from  abu-Mijlaz : — 'Umar  assessed  on  a
jarib  of  palm-trees  8  dirhams.

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  ash-Sha'bi : — 'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  sent  'Uthman  ibn-Hunaif  *  who  assessed  on  the
people  of  as-Sawad  5  dirhams  on  one  jarib  of  clover,  and
10  dirhams  on  one  jarib  of  vine-trees;  but  he  assessed  no
tax  on  what  was  grown  among  the  vines.

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from  al-Miswar  ibn-Rifa'ah: —
'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  said  that  the  khardj  of  as-Sawad
in  the  time  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  was  100,000,000  dir-
hams; but  in  the  time  of  al-Hajjaj,  it  amounted  to  40,-
000,000.

Al-Walid from Aiyub ibn-abi-Umamah ibn-Sahl ibn-
Hunaif  's father. — 'Uthman ibn-Hunaif  put  seals  around 271
the  necks 2  of 550,000  of  the "uncircumcised", and  the
kharaj  during  his  governorship  amounted  to  100,000,000.

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from  Mus'ab  ibn-Yazid  abu-Zaid  al-
Ansari's  father : — The  latter  said,  "  'Ali-ibn-abi-Talib  sent
me  to  the  land  irrigated  by  the  Euphrates,  mentioning  dif-
ferent cantons  and  villages,  and  naming  Nahr  al-Malik  3
Kutha,  Bahurasir,  ar-Rumakan,  Nahr  Jaubar,  Nahr  Durkit
and  al-Bihkubadhat.  He  ordered  me  to  assess  on  every
jarib  of  wheat,  if  thickly  sown,  one  dirham  and  a  half  and
one  sd' ';  if  thinly  sown,  two-thirds  of  a  dirham  and  if  not  so


1  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  pp.  173-175-

3  Yusuf,  p.  73,  1.  12-16;  Caetani,  vol.  v,  pp.  371-3/2.

3  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  846.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALVLA'


429


thickly  or  thinly  sown  one  dirham ;  and  on  barley,  one-half
of  that.  He  also  ordered  me  to  assess  on  the  gardens  that
include  palm-trees  and  other  kinds,  10  dirhams  per  jarib;
on  one  jarib  of  vine-trees,  if  its  trees  had  been  planted  for
three  full  years  and  a  part  of  the  fourth,  and  if  it  bears
fruit,  ten  dirhams,  with  nothing  on  palm-trees  that  are  out-
side the  villages  and  the  fruits  of  which  are  eaten  by  the
passers-by.  On  vegetables,  including  cucumbers,  grains,
sesame  and  cotton,  he  ordered  me  not  to  assess  anything.
On  those  landlords  [dihkdns]  who  ride  mules  and  wear
rings  of  gold  around  their  feet,  he  ordered  me  to  assess  48
dirhams  each ;  and  on  those  of  them  who  are  merchants  of
medium  means,  24  dirhams  per  annum  each;  but  on  the
farmers  and  the  rest  of  them,  12  dirhams  each."

Humaid ibn-ar-Rabi' from al-Hasan ibn-Salih : — The

•  •  •  •

latter  said,  "  I  asked  al-Hasan,  '  What  are  those  different
rates  of  assessed  land-tax  [task]  ? '  And  he  replied,  '  They,
one  after  the  other,  have  been  assessed  according  to  the
nearness  and  distance  of  the  land  from  the  markets  x  and
the  drinking  places  in  the  river  [fiirad].'  Yahya  ibn-  272
Adam  says,  '  The  Moslems  of  as-Sawad  asked  al-Mansur
towards  the  end  of  his  caliphate  to  introduce  the  system  by
which  they  turn  over  to  the  authorities  as  tax  a  part  of  the
produce  of  the  land ; 2  but  he  died  before  the  system  was
introduced.  Later,  by  al-Mahdi's  orders,  the  system  was
introduced  in  all  places  with  the  exception  of  'Akabat
Hulwan.'  "

iMawardi,  p.  306,  1.  12.

2  Ar.  mukasamah,  as  contrasted  with  misahah,  is  the  system  of  land
tenure  by  which  the  kharaj  is  levied  on  the  produce  and  not  the  area,
and  is  from  one-tenth  to  one-half  of  the  produce  of  the  lands.  Cf.
Mawardi,  p.  260;  De  Goeje's  Baladhuri  "  Glossarium ",  pp.  86-87;
ibn-Tiktaka,  p.  215,  1.  16,  p.  260,  1.  5;  Berchem.  La  Proprietc  Territoriale,
P.  45*


430  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  survey  of  Hudhaifah.  'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  al-'Ijli
from  certain  authorities: — Hudhaifah  who  measured  the
surface  of  the  land  irrigated  by  the  Tigris,  died  at  al-Ma-
da'in.  The  Kanatir  Hudhaifah  [arches  of  Hudhaifah]  are
named  after  him,  because  he  camped  near  them ;  but  others
say  because  he  renewed  them.  His  cubit  [Ar.  dJiira],  like
that  of  ibn-Hunaif,  is  the  length  of  a  man's  arm,  hand  and
thumb,  stretched  out.  When  the  inhabitants  of  as-Sawad
had  the  system  of  kJiardj  proportioned  to  the  produce  of  the
land,  after  they  had  that  based  on  the  area  [misdhah],  one
of  the  officials  said :  "  The  tithe  levied  on  the  fiefs  was  a
tenth  which  was  not  equivalent  [  ?]  to  one-fifth  of  the  half
levied  on  the  istdns  [administrative  districts].  Therefore,
it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  levied  on  the  jarib  of
the  fiefs  subject  to  the  area  [misdhah]  system  of  khardj
also  one-fifth  of  what  is  levied  on  the  jarib  of  the  is-
tdns [  ?]."  1 Such  was  the  case.

Abu-'Ubaid  from  Maimun  ibn-Mihran : — 'Umar  sent
Hudhaifah  and  ibn-Hunaif  to  Khanikin,  which  was  one  of
the  first  places  they  conquered ;  and  after  they  attached  seals
to  the  necks  of  the  dhimmis,  they  collected  its  khardj.

Lands  confiscated  by  'Umar.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad
from  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-abi-Hurrah's  father: — The  latter
said,  "  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  confiscated  for  himself  ten
pieces  of  land  in  as-Sawad  of  which  I  remember  seven,  the
remaining  three  having  slipped  me.  The  lands  he  confis-
cated were  (i)  a  piece  covered  with  woods;  (2)  one  cov-
ered with  marshes;  (3)  one  belonging  to  king  Kisra;  (4)
all  of  Dair  Yazid ; 2  (5)  the  land  of  those  who  were  killed
during  the  war;  (6)  the  land  of  those  who  fled  the  country.

1  Caetani,  vol.  v,  p.  374; Mukaddasi,  p.  13.3.

1  Caetani,  vol.  v,  p.  2>7?>,  gives  it  "dayr  mubad (  ?  nel  testo :  barid)".
Cf.  Yiisuf,  p.  Z2,  1.  20.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALVLA'  ^l

This  state  of  affairs  lasted  until  the  register  was  burned  in

the  days  of  al-Hajjaj  ibn-Yusuf,  upon  which  the  people 273

seized  the  [domanial]  land  bordering  on  their  property."  1

Abu-'Abd-ar-Rahman  al-Ju'fi  from  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-
abi-Hurrah's  father : — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  confiscated  in
as-Sawad  the  land  of  those  who  were  killed  during  the  war,
the  land  of  those  who  fled  the  country,  all  the  land  of  king
Kisra,  all  the  land  belonging  to  Kisra's  family,  every
swampy  place,  all  Dair  Yazid  and  all  the  land  that  was  ap-
propriated by  Kisra  for  himself.  Thus,  the  value  of  what
'Umar  took  amounted  to  7,000,000  dirhams.  In  the  battle
of  [Dair]  al-Jamajim,  the  people  burnt  the  register  and
every  one  of  them  seized  what  bordered  on  his  land.

Fiefs  assigned  by  'Uthmdn.  Al-Husain  and  'Amr  an-
Nakid  from  Musa  ibn-Talhah: — 'Uthman  assigned  as  fief
to  'Abdallah  ibn-Mas'ud  a  piece  of  land  in  an-Nahrain ;  to
'Ammar  ibn-Yasir,  Asbina ;  2  to  Khabbab  ibn-al-Aratt,  Sa'-
naba;  and  to  Sa'd  [ibn-abi-Wakkas]  the  village  of  Hur-
muz.

'Abdallah  ibn-Salih  al-Tjli  from  ash-Sha'bi : — 'Uthman
ibn-'Affan  assigned  as  fief  to  Talhah  ibn-'Ubaidallah  an-
Nashastaj  ;3  and  to  Usamah  ibn-Zaid,  a  piece  of  land  which
he  later  sold.

Shaiban  ibn-Farrukh  from  Musa  ibn-Talhah: — 'Uth-
man ibn-'Affan  gave  fiefs  to  five  of  the  Companions  of  the
Prophet:  'Abdallah  ibn-Mas'ud,  Sa'd  ibn-Malik  az-Zuhri,
az-Zubair  ibn-al-'Auwam,4  Khabbab  ibn-al-Aratt  and  Usa-
mah ibn-Zaid.5 Musa  ibn-Talhah  adds,  "I  noticed  that  ibn-

1  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  407;  Adam,  pp.  45-46.

2  Yusuf,  p.  25,  1.  9:  "  Istiniya."
s  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  783.

4  Ibn-Sa'd,  vol.  Hi1,  pp.  75-77.

5  Cf.  Ya'kubi,  vol.  ii,  p.  202,  1.  4.


432  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Mas'ud  and  Sa'd,  who  were  my  neighbors,  used  to  cultivate
their  lands  for  one-third  and  one-fourth  [of  the  produce]."

Al-Walid  ibn-Salih  from  Musa  ibn-Talhah : — The  first
one  to  give  out  al-Trak  in  fiefs  was  'Uthman  ibn-'Affan
who  gave  out  pieces  of  land  appropriated  by  Kisra,  and
others  evacuated  by  their  owners.  Thus,  he  assigned  to
Talhah  as  fief  an-Nashastaj ;  to  Wail  ibn-Hujr  al-Had-  274
rami,  the  land  bordering  on  Zurarah's;  to  Khabbab  ibn-al-
Aratt,  Asbina;  to  'Adi  ibn-Hatim  at-Ta'i,  ar-Rauha',  to
Khalid  ibn-'Urfutah,  a  piece  of  land  near  Hammam  [bath]
A'yan;  to  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  al-Kindi,  Tizanabadh;  and
to  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali,  his  land  on  the  bank  of  the
Euphrates.

Ajamat  Burs.  Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  al-Hasan
ibn-Salih : — The  latter  said,  "  I  was  informed  that  'AH
assessed  on  the  owners  of  Ajamat  [forest]  Burs  4,000  dir-
hams;  and  to  that  end,  he  wrote  them  a  statement  on  a
piece  of  parchment.1

I  was  told  by  Ahmad  ibn-Hammad  al-Kufi  that  Ajamat
Burs  lies  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Namrudh  [Nimrod]  palace
in  Babil  [Babylon].  In  this  forest,  there  is  a  precipice  of
great  depth,  which,  according  to  some,  is  a  well  from  the
soil  of  which  the  bricks  of  the  palace  were  made,  and
which,  according  to  others,  is  a  landslide.

Nahr  Sa'd.  I  learnt  from  abu-Mas'ud  and  others  that
the  landlords  [dilikdns]  of  al-Anbar  asked  Sa'd  ibn-abi-
Wakkas  to  dig  for  them  a  canal  which  they  had  previously
asked  the  Persian  magnate  [king]  to  dig  2  for  them.  Sa'd
wrote  to  Sa'd  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haram,  ordering  him  to  dig
the  canal  for  them.  Accordingly,  they  dug  until  they
reached  a  mountain  which  they  could  not  cut  through,  upon

1  Adam,  p.  18.

2  Cf.  Mas'udi,  vol.  i,  p.  225.


THE  BATTLE  OF  JALOLA'  403

which  they  gave  it  up.  But  when  al-Hajjaj  became  gov-
ernor of  al-Trak,  he  gathered  workmen  from  all  regions,
and  said  to  his  superintendents,  "  Take  note  of  what  one  of
the  diggers  eats  per  day.  If  it  is  the  weight  of  what  he  digs
out,  then  continue  the  work."  Thus,  they  spent  money  1
on  it  until  it  was  completed.  The  mountain  excavated  was
therefore  named  after  al-Hajjaj ;  but  the  canal,  after  Sa'd
ibn-'Amr  ibn-Haram.2

Nahr  Mahdud.  Al-Khaizuran,  the  mother  of  the  caliphs,
[umm-al-khulafa]  ordered  that  the  canal  known  by  the
name  of  Mahdud  be  dug;  and  she  gave  it  the  name  of  ar-
Raiyan.3  Her  superintendent  over  the  work  had  divided
it  into  sections,  put  limits  for  every  section,  and  put  it  in
charge  of  a  group  of  men  to  dig ;  hence  the  name  Mahdud
[t.  e.,  limited].

Nahr  Shaila.  As  for  the  canal  known  by  the  name  of
Shaila,  it  is  claimed  by  the  banu-Shaila  ibn-Farrukhzadan
al-Marwazi  that  Sabur  [Persian  king]  had  dug  it  out  for
their  grandfather  when  he  sent  him  to  guard  the  frontier
of  the  dominion  at  Nighya  in  the  canton  of  al-Anbar.  Ac-
cording to  others,  however,  the  canal  was  so  called  after  275
one,  Shaila,  who  made  a  contract  for  digging  the  canal  in
the  days  of  the  caliph  al-Mansur;  the  canal  being  old  but
buried,  al-Mansur  ordered  that  it  be  excavated.  Before  the
work  was  brought  to  an  end,  al-Mansur  died  and  the  work
was  completed  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi.  According  to
others,  al-Mansur  ordered  that  a  mouth  [only]  be  dug  for
the  canal  above  its  old  mouth ;  but  he  did  not  complete  the
work. Al-Mahdi  completed  it.

1  Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  Hi,  p.  864.

2  Cf.  Marasid.  vol.  iii,  p.  248.

3  Marasid,  vol.  iii.  p.  48:  "  al-Marban/*


CHAPTER  VIII
The  Founding  of  al-Kufah

Al-Kufah  chosen.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'Abd-al-
Hamid  ibn-Ja'far  and  others: — 'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab
wrote  to  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  ordering  him  to  adopt  for
the  Moslems  a  place  to  which  they  could  emigrate,  and
which  they  could  use  as  a  meeting  place  [kaircKvan],  pro-
vided that  between  him  ['Umar]  and  the  Moslems,  no  sea
should  intervene.  Accordingly,  Sa'd  came  to  al-Anbar  l
with  the  idea  of  occupying  it.  Here,  however,  flies  were  so
numerous,  that  Sa'd  had  to  move  to  another  place,  which
proved  to  be  unsatisfactory,  and  therefore  he  moved  to  al-
Kufah  which  he  divided  into  lots,  giving  the  houses  as
fiefs  and  settling  the  different  tribes  in  their  quarters.  He
also  erected  its  mosque. All  this  took  place  in  the  year  17.

Suk  Hakamah.  The  following  was  communicated  to  me
by  'Ali  ibn-al-Mughirah-1-Athram.  on  the  authority  of
sheikhs  from  al-Kufah : — When  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  was
through  with  the  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah,  he  went  to  al-Ma-
da'in,  made  terms  with  the  inhabitants  of  ar-Rumiyah  and
Bahurasir.  reduced  al-Mada'in,2  Asbanbur  2  and  Kurdban-
dadh  3  and  settled  his  troops  in  them.  The  troops  occupied
these  places.  Subsequently,  Sa'd  was  ordered  [by  'Umar]
to  remove  them;  and  so  he  removed  them  to  Suk  Haka-
mah, others  say  to  Ku  waif  ah  on  this  side  of  al-Kufah. Ac-

1  Dinawari,  p.  131.

2  The  Arabic  and  Persian  names  of  Ctesiphon ;  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  237.

3  Perhaps  a  quarter  in  Ctesiphon ;  Caetani,  vol.  iii,  p.  84P.

434


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH  ^S

cording  to  al-Athram,  the  word  takauwuf  1  means  "  the  re-
union of  people  ".  Others  say  that  circular  places  when
sandy  are  called  kufah ;  and  still  others  call  the  land  rich  in
pebbles,  mud  and  sand,  kufah.

Mosquitoes  in  al-Madd'in.  It  is  stated  that  when  the
Moslems  in  al-Mada'in  were  attacked  by  the  mosquitoes,
Sa'd  wrote  to  'Umar  telling  him  that  they  were  badly  af-
fected by  them;  in  answer  to  which  'Umar  wrote  back,  276
"  Arabs  are  like  camels;  whatever  is  good  for  the  camels  is
good  for  them.  Choose  for  them,  therefore,  a  habitable
place;  and  let  no  sea  intervene  between  them  and  me."
The  determining  of  the  dwelling-place  was  entrusted  to  abu-
1-Haiyaj  al-Asadi  'Amr  ibn-Malik  ibn-Junadah.

Al-Kufah  founded.  Then  'Abd  al-Masih  ibn-Bukailah
presented  himself  before  Sa'd  and  said  to  him,  "  I  can  point
out  to  thee  a  site  which  is  outside  the  waterless  desert,  and
higher  than  the  muddy  places  where  mosquitoes  abound."  2
Saying  this,  he  pointed  out  the  site  of  al-Kufah  which  was
then  called  Suristan.  When  Sa'd  arrived  on  the  spot  des-
tined to  be  the  site  of  the  mosque,  a  man  shot,  by  his  orders,
an  arrow  towards  the  kiblah,  another  towards  the  north,
another  to  the  south,  a  fourth  to  the  east,  and  marked  the
spots  where  the  arrows  fell.  Sa'd  then  established  the
mosque  and  the  governor's  residence  on  the  spot  where  the
man  who  shot  the  arrows  had  stood,  fencing  in  all  the  space
around  that  spot.  He  then  drew  lots  with  two  arrows  be-
tween the  tribe  of  Nizar  and  the  tribes  of  al-Yaman,  prom-
ising the  left  side,  which  was  the  better  of  the  two,  to  the
one  whose  arrow  was  drawn  first.  The  people  of  al-Yaman
had  theirs  first ;  and  they  were,  therefore,  allotted  the  pieces
on  the  east  side. The  pieces  allotted  to  the  Nizar  fell  on

1  From  which  noun  Kufah  comes.

2  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2389.


4^6  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

the  west  side  beyond  the  boundaries  fixed  for  the  mosque,
leaving  what  was  fenced  in  within  the  marks  for  the
mosque  and  the  governor's  residence.  Later,  al-Mughirah
ibn-Shu'bah  enlarged  the  mosque;  and  Ziyad  1  [ibn-Abihi]
rebuilt  it  strongly  and  rebuilt  the  governor's  residence.
Ziyad  often  repeated,  "  On  every  one  of  the  pillars  of  the
mosque  at  al-Kufah,  I  spent  1,800  [dirhams]."  Another
building  was  established  by  'Amr  ibn-Huraith  al-Makh-
zumi,  whom  Ziyad  used  to  leave  in  his  place  over  al-Ku-
fah whenever  he  absented  himself  in  al-Basrah.  Ziyad's
agents  erected  many  buildings  which  made  the  place
crowded  and  thickly  set."

The  lane  called  Kukak  'Amr  in  al-Kufah  takes  its  name
from  the  banu-'Amr  ibn-Huraith  ibn-'Amr  ibn-'Uthman
ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-'Umar  ibn-Makhzum  ibn-Yakazah.

The  Yamanites.  Wahb  ibn-Bakiyah-1-Wasiti  from  ash-
Sha'bi: — The  latter  said,  "We  (the  Yamanites)  were
12,000  men;  the  Nizar  were  8,000;  from  which  you  can
easily  see  that  we  constituted  the  majority  of  the  settlers  277
of  al-Kufah.  Our  arrow  went  to  the  east  side  of  the
mosque. That  is  why  we  hold  the  pieces  we  now  hold."

The  mosque.  'Ali  ibn-Muhammad  al-Mada'ini  from  Mas-
lamah  ibn-Muharib  and  others  : — Al-Mughirah  enlarged  the
mosque  :t  of  al-Kufah  and  rebuilt  it.  Ziyad  later  enlarged
it  still  more.  Pebbles  were  spread  in  this  mosque  and  in
that  of  al-Basrah,  because  when  people  prayed  their  hands
were  covered  with  dust,  which  they  used  to  remove  by  clap-
ping their  hands.  This  made  Ziyad  say,  "  I  am  afraid  that
in  course  of  time,  the  clapping  of  hands  will  be  taken  for  a
part  of  the  religious  ceremony." When  he,  therefore,  en-

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  323-324-
1  Athir,  vol.  ii,  pp.  410  seq.
1  Hamadhani,  pp.  173-174.


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KUFAH


437


larged  the  mosque  and  added  to  it,  he  ordered  that  pebbles
be  strewn  in  the  courtyard  of  the  mosque.  The  overseers
of  the  work  used  to  oppress  those  who  gathered  the  peb-
bles, saying,  "  Bring  us  only  this  kind  which  we  show  you",
choosing  special  samples,  and  asking  for  similar  ones.  By
such  means,  they  enriched  themselves.  Hence,  the  saying,
"It  is  good  to  be  in  authority  even  over  stones."  *  This  say-
ing, however,  is,  according  to  al-Athram,  explained  by  abu-
'Ubaidah  by  the  fact  that  al-Hajjaj  ibn-'Atik  ath-Thakafi,
or  his  son,  had  charge  of  cutting  the  pillars  for  the  al-Bas-
rah  mosque  from  Jabal  al-Ahwaz  where  he  discovered  a
mine.  This  gave  rise  to  the  expression :  "  It  is  good  to  be
in  authority  even  over  stones."

Abu-'Ubaidah  states  that  the  colonization  of  al-Kufah
took  place  in  the  year  18.

Ziyad  took  for  himself  in  the  al-Kufah  mosque  a  maksu-
rah  which  afterwards  was  renewed  by  Khalid  ibn-'Abdallah
al-Kasri.

The  version  of  al-Haitham.  Hafs  ibn-'Umar  al-'Umari
from  al-Haitham  ibn-'Adi  at-Ta'i : — After  having  settled
in  al-Mada'in,  planned  it  out  and  established  a  mosque,  the
Moslems  found  the  place  too  dirty  and  productive  of  pesti-
lence. Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  communicated  the  fact  to
'Umar  who  wrote  back  that  they  should  move  westward.
Sa'd  came  to  Kuwaifah  ibn-'Umar,  but  finding  the  water
all  around  it,  the  Moslems  left  it  and  came  to  the  site  on
which  al-Kufah  now  stands.  They  hit  on  the  ridge  called
Khadd  al-'Adhra'  [the  virgin's  cheek]  on  which  lavender,
daisies,  broom-plants  [shih  and  kaisum]  and  poppies  grew.
On  this  site,  they  established  themselves.

I  was  told  by  a  Kufite  sheikh  that  the  region  between
al-Kufah  and  al-Hirah  was  known  by  the  name of al- 278
Miltat.

1  Freytag,  vol.  ii,  p.  917,  n.  47.


438  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  house  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-'Umair  was  used  for
entertaining  guests,  'Umar  having  ordered  that  some  house
be  put  to  that  use  for  those  who  came  from  the  different
provinces.

Charges  against  Sa'd.  Al-'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi
from  Muhammad  ibn-Ishak : — Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  made
a  wooden  door  for  his  mansion  which  he  surrounded  with
a  fence  of  reeds.  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  sent  Muhammad
ibn-Maslamah-1-Ansari  who  set  fire  to  the  door  and  fence,
and  made  Sa'd  leader  in  the  mosques  of  al-Kufah  where
nothing  but  good  was  spoken  of  him.

Al-'Abbas  ibn-al-Walid  an-Narsi  and  Ibrahim  al-'Allaf
al-Basri  from  Jabir  ibn-Samurah  : — The  people  of  al-Kufah
reported  Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas  to  'Umar  on  the  ground
that  he  did  not  lead  properly  in  prayers.  In  answer  to  the
charge,  Sa'd  said,  "  As  for  me,  I  have  always  followed  the
prayer  of  the  Prophet  and  never  deviated  from  it.  In  the
first  two  [prostrations]  I  repeat  prayer  slowly,  in  the  last
two,  quickly."  *  "That  was  what  was  thought  of  thee,  abu-
Ishak,"  said  'Umar.  'Umar  then  sent  certain  men  to  in-
quire in  al-Kufah  regarding  Sa'd,  about  whom  nothing  but
good  was  told  in  the  different  mosques,  until  they  came  to
the  mosque  of  the  banu-'Abs.  Here  someone  called  abu-
Sa'dah  said,  "  As  for  Sa'd,  he  does  not  divide  shares
equally,  nor  judge  cases  justly."  Hearing  this,  Sa'd  ex-
claimed, "  O  God,  if  he  is  telling  a  lie,  make  his  age  long,
perpetuate  his  poverty,  take  away  his  eyesight  and  expose
him  to  troubles !  '  'Abd-al-Malik  said,  "  I  later  saw  abu-
Sa'dah  intercepting  the  way  of  the  maids  in  the  streets;
and  when  somebody  asked  him,  '  How  are  you,  abu-Sa'-
dah?'  he  always  replied,  '  I  am  old  and  crazed,  being  af-
flicted with  the  curse  of  Sa'd  '."

1  Bukhari,  vol.  i,  p.  195:  Zamakhshari,  Paik,  vol.  i,  p.  212.


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH


439


In  another  tradition  transmitted  by  al-' Abbas  an-Narsi,
Sa'd  made  the  following  petition,  regarding  the  people  of
al-Kufah :  "  O  God,  let  no  ruler  be  satisfied  with  them,  and
let  them  be  never  satisfied  with  a  ruler!  '

I  was  informed  by  al-' Abbas  an-Narsi  that  al-Mukhtar
ibn-abi-'Ubaid,  or  someone  else,  said,  "  To  love  the  people
of  al-Kufah  is  honor;  and  to  hate  them  is  destruction."

Al-Hasan  ibn-'Uthman  az-Ziyadi  from  ash-Sha'bi : —
After  the  victory  of  al-Kadisiyah,  'Amr  ibn-Ma'dikarib  279
visited  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  and  was  asked  by  him  about
Sa'd  and  whether  the  people  were  satisfied  with  him.  'Amr
gave  the  following  answer,  "  I  left  him  laying  up  for  them
as  an  ant  lays  up,  having  as  much  sympathy  with  them  as
a  kind  mother.  In  his  love  of  dates,  he  is  an  Arab ;  in  the
collection  of  taxes,  he  is  Nabatean.  He  divides  shares
equitably,  judges  cases  justly  and  leads  the  bands  success-
fully." "  It  looks,"  said  'Umar,  "as  if  ye  both  have  agreed
to  compensate  each  other  with  praise  (Sa'd  having  before
written  to  'Umar  in  commendation  of  'Amr)."  "No,
'  Commander  of  the  Believers  ',"  answered  'Amr,  "  I  rather
said  what  I  knew."  "  Well,  'Amr,"  said  'Umar,  "  describe
war."  "  It  is  bitter  in  taste  when  waged.  He,  who  perse-
veres in  it,  becomes  known;  but  he  who  grows  weak,  per-
ishes."— "  Describe  the  arms." — "  Ask  me  about  which-
ever thou  wantest." — "The  lancet?" — "It  is  a  brother
which  may  betray  thee." — "  The  arrows?  " — "  Arrows  are
messengers  of  death  which  either  err  or  hit." — "  The
shield?" — "  That  is  the  defense  which  has  most  to  suffer."
— "  The  coat  of  mail?" — "  Something  that  keeps  the  horse-
man busy ;  a  nuisance  for  the  footman ;  but  in  all  cases,  a
strong  protection." — "  The  sword?" — "  May  it  be  the  cause
of  thy  death !"— "  Thy  death !"— "  The  fever  has  abased
me  to  thee."  x

1  A  proverb  applied  to  the  case  of  abasement  on  the  occasion  of  need.
Lane's  "  Dictionary  "  j.  v.  adra'a.


440  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

'llmar  appoints  'Ammar  and  then  al-Mughirah.  At  last,
'Umar  dismissed  Sa'd  and  appointed  'Ammar  ibn-Yasir.  A
complaint  was  made  against  'Ammar  to  the  effect  that  he
was  weak  and  knew  nothing  about  politics.  He  was  there-
fore dismissed  after  holding  the  office  of  governor  over  al-
Kufah  for  one  year  and  nine  months.  In  this  connection,
'Umar  remarked,  "  What  am  I  to  do  with  the  people  of  al-
Kufah?  If  I  appoint  a  strong  man  over  them,  they  at-
tribute transgression  to  him;  and  if  a  weak  man,  they  de-
spise him."  x  Calling  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah,  he  asked
him,  "  Wouldst  thou  commit  again  what  thou  didst  once
commit,  if  I  should  assign  thee  over  al-Kufah?  "  And  al-
Mughirah  answered,  "  No."  Al-Mughirah  went  to  al-
Madinah,  after  the  conquest  of  al-Kadisiyah,  and  was  ap-
pointed by  'Umar  over  al-Kufah,  which  position  he  held
until  'Umar's  death.

Sa'd,  then  al-Walid,  then  Saul  as  governors.  Then  came
'Uthman  ibn-'Affan  and  appointed  over  al-Kufah  Sa'd;
but  later  dismissed  him  and  appointed  al-Walid  ibn-'Ukbah
ibn-abi-Mu'ait  ibn-abi-'Amr  ibn-Umaiyah.  When  al-Walid
visited  Sa'd,  the  latter  said,  "  Either  thou  hast  become  in-
telligent after  me,  or  I  have  become  foolish  after  thee."  Al-
Walid  was  later  dismissed  and  Sa'id  ibn-al-Asi  ibn-Sa'id  280
ibn-al-Asi  ibn-Umaiyah  was  nominated  to  his  place.

Persians  unite  with  the  Arabs.  Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi
from  Mis'ar  ibn-Kidam : — In  the  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah,
Rustam  led  4,000  men  called  Jund  [army]  Shahanshah,
who  asked  for  peace  provided  they  be  allowed  to  settle
wherever  they  wanted,  be  confederates  with  whomever  they
wanted  and  receive  soldiers'  stipends.  Their  request  hav-
ing been  granted,  they  united  in  a  confederacy  with  Zuhrah

l'Ikd,  vol.  iii.  p.  .360; Hamadhani.  p. 184;  Kazwini,  Athar  al-BUad,
p.  167.


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH  44  r

ibn-Hawiyah  as-Sa'di  of  the  banu-Tamim.  Sa'd  [ibn-abi-
Wakkas]  allowed  them  to  settle  where  they  chose,  and  as-
signed 1,000,000  dirhams  for  stipends.  Their  chief  [na-
kib~\  was  one  of  them  called  Dailam; 1  hence  the  name  of
the  place  Hamra'  Dailam.  Later  Ziyad  [ibn-Abihi],  fol-
lowing the  orders  of  Mu'awiyah,  sent  some  of  them  to
Syria  where  they  are  called  al-Furs  [Persians],  others  to
al-Basrah  where  they  were  combined  with  the  Asawirah
[Persian  cavalry].

According  to  abu-Mas'ud,  the  Arabs  call  the  non-Arabs
Hamra'  [the  red],  and  would  say,  "  I  came  from  Hamra'
Dailam,"  as  they  would  say,  "  I  came  from  Juhainah  "  or
some  other  place.  Abu-Mas'ud  adds,  "  I  heard  someone
say  that  these  Asawirah  lived  near  ad-Dailam  and  when
they  were  attacked  by  the  Moslems  in  Kazwin,  they  ac-
cepted Islam  on  the  same  terms  as  the  Asawirah  of  al-Bas-
rah. Then  they  came  to  al-Kufah  and  settled  in  it."

According  to  al-Mada'ini,  Abarwiz  brought  from  ad-
Dailam  4,000  men  who  acted  as  his  servants  and  escort,
which  position  they  held  until  the  Arab  invasion.  They
then  took  part  in  the  battle  of  al-Kadisiyah  under  Rus-
tam.  When  Rustam  was  killed  and  the  Magians  were  de-
feated, they  withdrew,  saying,  '  We  are  different  from
those  others  [i.  e.,  Arabs]  ;  we  have  no  refuge,  and  have  al-
ready left  a  bad  impression  on  the  Moslems.  Let  us  then
adopt  their  faith,  and  we  will  be  strengthened  by  them."
Having  deserted  to  the  Moslem  camp,  Sa'd  wanted  to  know
the  cause;  and  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah  asked  them  about
it.  Thus,  they  presented  their  case,  saying,  "We  will  adopt
your  faith."  Al-Mughirah  came  back  to  Sa'd  and  told
him  about  it.  Sa'd  promised  them  security;  and  they  ac-
cepted Islam. They witnessed the conquest of al-Ma-

1  "  Dilam  "  in  Persian.


442  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

da'in  under  Sa'd  and  the  conquest  of  Jalula ;  after  which
they  returned  to  al-Kufah  where  they  settled  with  the
Moslems.

Places  of  interest  and  the  persons  after  whom  they  are
named.1'  The  Jabbanat  [cemetery]  as-Sabi',  after  a  son  of
as-Sabi'  ibn-Sabu'  ibn-Sa'b  al-Hamdani.

The  Sahra  [desert] Uthair,"  after  Uthair  of  the  banu- 281
Asad.

The  Dukkan  [shop]  'Abd-al-Hamid,  after  'Abd-al-Ha-
mid  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-Zaid  ibn-al-Khattab,  the
'dmil  of  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-'Aziz  over  al-Kufah.

The  Sahra  bani-Kirar  after  the  banu-Kirar  ibn-Tha'-
labah.  .  . .  ibn-Nizar.

Dar  ar-Rumiyin  was  a  dunghill  where  the  inhabitants  of
al-Kufah  cast  their  rubbish  and  which  was  taken  as  fief
from  Yazid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  by  'Anbasah  ibn-Sa'id  ibn-
al-Asi,  who  removed  the  soil  in  it  for  150,000  dirhams.

The  Suk  [market]  Yusuf  in  al-Hirah,  after  Yusuf  ibn-
'Umar  .  .  .  ath-Thakafi.

Hammam  [bath]  A'yan,  after  A'yan,  a  freedman  of  Sa'd
ibn-abi-Wakkas.

Bi'at  [church]  bani-Mazin  in  al-Hirah,  after  some  of  al-
Azd  of  Ghassan.

Hammam  'Umar,  after  'Umar  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-abi-Wakkas.

Shaharsuj  Bajilah  in  al-Kufah,  after  the  banu-Bajlah.3

Jabbanat  'Arzam,  after  a  certain  'Arzam,  who  used  to 282
shake  in  it  milk  in  a  skin  [so  that  its  butter  might  come
forth].

Jabbanat  Bishr,  after  Bishr  ibn-Rabi'ah  .  .  .  ibn-Ku-
mair  al-Khuth'ami.

Zurarah,  after  Zurarah  ibn-Yazid  .  .  .  ibn-Sa'sa'ah.

1  The  following  list  is  a  shortened  form  of  the  original.

2  Dhahabi,  pp.  5-6.

3  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  338;  Hamadhani,  p.  182;  Marasid,  vol.  ii,  p.  135.


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH  443

Dar  [house]  Hukaim  in  al-Kufah,  after  Hukaim  ibn-
Sa'd  ibn-Thaur  al-Buka'i.

Kasr  [castle]  Mukatil,  after  Mukatil  ibn-Hassan x  .  .  .
of  the  banu-Amru'i-1-Kais.

As-Sawadiyah  2  in  al-Kufah,  after  Sawad  ibn-Zaid  ibn- 283
'Adi.  .  .  .

Ivaryat  [village]  abi-Salabah  on  the  Euphrates,  after
Salabah  ibn-Malik  ibn-Tarik.  .  .  .

•  •  •

Aksas  Malik,  after  Malik  ibn-Kais  .  .  .  ibn-Nizar.

Dair  [monastery]  al-A'war,  after  one  of  the  Iyad  of  the
banu-Umaiyah.

Dair  Kurrah  after  Kurrah  of  the  banu-Umaiyah  ibn-
Hudhafah.

Dair  as-Sawa,  after  the  same  banu-Umaiyah.

Dair  al-Jamajim,  after  the  Iyad  tribe  who  in  a  battle  with
the  banu-Bahra  and  the  banu-1-Kain  lost  many  who  were
buried  there  and  whose  skulls  [jamdjim]  were  later  ex-
cavated as  one  was  digging  in  the  ground.

Dair  Ka'b,  after  the  Iyad.

Dair  Hind,  after  the  mother  of  'Amr  ibn-Hind.

Dar  Kumam,  after  the  daughter  of  al-Harith  ibn-Ha- 284
ni'  al-Kindi.

Bi'at  bani-'Adi,  after  the  banu-'Adi  ibn-adh-Dhumail
of  the  Lakhm.

Tizanabadh,  after  ad-Daizan  ibn-Mu'awiyah  ibn-al-'Abid
as-Salihi.

Masjid  [mosque]  Simak  in  al-Kufah,  after  Simak  ibn-
Makhramah  ibn-Humain  al-Asadi.  .  .  .

Mahallat  [quarter]  bani-Shaitan,  after  Shaitan  ibn-Zu-
hair 3  .  .  .  ibn-Tamim.

1  Kdmiis,  vol.  iv,  p.  36,  1.  22 :  "  Haiyan."

2  "  Sauwariyah  "  in  Hamadhani,  p. 182; cf. Taj  al-'Arits,  vol.  ii,  p.
390;  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  180.

3"Zubair"  in  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  356,  1.  12;  cf.  Hajar,  vol.  i,  p.  585.


444  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

The  site  of  Dar  'Isa  ibn-Musa  belonged  to  al-'Ala'  ibn-
'Abd-ar-Rahman  .  .  .  ibn-'Abd-Manaf.  285

There  is  a  path  in  al-Kufah  named  after  'Amirah  ibn-
Shihab. . . .

Sahra'  Shabath,  after  Shabath  ibn-Rib'i  ar-Riyahi  of  the
banu-Tamim.

Dar  Hujair  in  al-Kufah,  after  Hujair  ibn-al-Ja'd  al-Ju-
mahi.

Bi'r  [well]  al-Mubarik  [Mubarak  ?],  after  al-Mubarik
[Mubarak  ?]  ibn-Tkrimah  ibn-Humairi  [Himyari  ?]-l-Ju'fi.

Raha  [hand-mill]  'Umarah,  after  'Umarah  ibn-'Ukbah
.  .  .  ibn-Umaiyah.

Jabbanat  Salim,  after  Salim  ibn-'Ammar  .  .  .  ibn-Ha-
\vazin.

Sahra'  Albardakht.  after  the  poet  Albardakht  ad-Dabbi.

Masjid  bani-'Anz,  after  the  banu-'Anz  ibn-Wa'il  ibn-
Kasit.

Masjid  bani-Jadhimah.  after  the  banu-Tadhimah  ibn-Ma.-
lik  ibn-Nasr  .  .  .  ibn-Asad.

There  is  a  mosque  in  al-Kufah  named  after  the  banu-1-
Makasif.

Masjid  bani-Bahdalah,  after  the  banu-Bahdalah  ibn-al-
Mithl  ibn-Mu'awiyah  of  the  Kindah.

Bi'r  al-Ja'd  in  al-Kufah,  after  al-Ja'd,  a  freedman  of
Hamdan.  286

Dar  abi-Artat,  after  Artat  ibn-Malik  al-Bajali.

Dar  al-Mukatta',  after  al-Mukatta*  ibn-Sunain  al-Kalbi.

Kasr  al-'Adasiyin  at  the  extremity  of  al-Hirah,  after  the
banu-'Ammar  ibn-'Abd-al-Masih.  .  .  .

The  cathedral  mosque  in  al-Kufah  was  built  with  ma-
terial taken  from  the  ruins  of  the  castles  in  al-Hirah  that
belonged  to  the  al-Mundhir  clan,  the  price  of  that  material
constituting;  a  part  of  the  tax  paid  by  the  people  of  al-Hirah.

Sikkat al-Barid [post-office] in al-Kufah was once a


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH  445

church  built  by  Khalid  ibn-'Abdallah  ...  of  the  Bajilah
for  his  mother,  who  was  a  Christian.

Khalid  built  shops,  dug  the  canal  called  al-Jami',  and
erected  the  Kasr  Khalid.

Suk  Asad,  after  Asad  ibn-'Abdallah,  Khalid's  brother.

Kantarat  [arch]  al-Kufah  was  built  by  'Umar  ibn-Hu-
bairah,  and  later  repaired  by  Khalid  and  others.

Al-HdsliimiyaJi.  The  following  tradition  wTas  trans-  287
mitted  to  me  by  abu-Mas'ud  and  others  : — Yazid  ibn-'Umar
ibn-Hubairah  laid  out  a  city  in  al-Kufah  on  the  Euphrates
and  occupied  it  before  it  was  fully  completed.  He  then  re-
ceived a  letter  from  Marwan,  ordering  him  to  avoid  the
neighborhood  of  the  people  of  al-Kufah;  and  he,  therefore,
left  it  and  built  the  castle  known  by  the  name  of  Kasr  ibn-
Hubairah  near  the  Sura  bridge.

When  caliph  abu-l-'Abbas  came  to  power,  he  occupied
this  city,  completed  the  erection  of  certain  mansions  [mak-
surahs]  defended  by  walls  in  it,  established  new  buildings
and  called  it  al-Hashimiyah.  People  in  general  called  it  by
its  old  name  after  ibn-Hubairah;  and  abu-l-'Abbas  making
the  remark,  "  I  see  that  the  name  of  ibn-Hubairah  will
always  cling  to  it  ",  gave  it  up  and  established  on  a  site
opposite  to  it  another  city  by  the  name  of  al-Hashimiyah.
After  residing  there  for  some  time,  he  decided  to  settle  in
al-Anbar,  where  he  built  his  well-known  city  *  in  which  he
was  buried.

Madinat  as-Saldm.  When  abu-Ja'far  al-Mansur  became
caliph,  he  occupied  the  city  of  al-Hashimiyah  in  al-Kufah
after  completing  its  erection,  enlarging  it  and  preparing  it
according  to  his  own  idea.  Later,  he  abandoned  it  in  favor
of  Baghdadh,  where  he  built  his  city.  He  founded  Bagh-
dadh and  called  it  Madinat  as-Salam,2  and  repaired  its  old

1  Le  Strange,  Baghdad,  pp.  5-6.

*  "  The  city  of  peace." Le  Strange,  p.  10.


4^.6  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

wall which begins at the Tigris and ends at as-Sarat
[canal].

It  was  in  this  al-Hashimiyah  that  al-Mansur  imprisoned
'Abdallah  ibn-Hasan  ibn-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib  be-
cause of  his  two  sons  Muhammad  and  Ibrahim ;  and  it  was
here  that  he  was  buried.

Ar-Rusafah.  Al-Mansur  built  in  al-Kufah  ar-Rusafah
[causeway]  and  by  his  orders,  his  freedman  abu-1-Khasib
Marzuk  built  for  him  on  an  old  foundation  the  castle  that
bears  his  name :  abu-1-Khasib.  Others  say  "that  abu-1-Kha-
sib  built  the  castle  for  himself ;  and  al-Mansur  used  to  visit
him  in  it.

Al-Khawarnak.  As  for  al-Khawarnak,  it  was  an  old
Persian  castle  built  by  an-Nu'man  ibn-Amru'i-1-Kais
(whose  mother  was  ash-Shakikah,  daughter  of  abu-Rabi'ah
ibn-Dhuhl  ibn-Shaiban)  for  Bahram  Jur  ibn-Yazdajird  ibn-
Bahram  ibn-Sabur  dhu-1-Aktaf,  who  was  brought  up  in  the
home  of  an-Nu'man.1  It  was  this  same  an-Nu'man  who
left  his  kingdom  and  traveled  around,  as  mentioned  by
'Adi  ibn-Zaid  al-'Ibadi  in  his  poem.  When  the  "  blessed
dynasty"  appeared,  al-Khawarnak  was  given  as  fief  to  Ibra-
him ibn-Salamah,  one  of  their  propagandists  in  Khurasan
and  a  grandfather  of  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-Ishak  al-  288
Kadi.  During  the  caliphate  of  al-Ma'mun  and  al-Mu'tasim,
Ibrahim  lived  in  Madinat  as-Salam  and  was  a  freedman  of
ar-Ribab.  In  the  caliphate  of  abu-l-'Abbas,  he  erected  the
dome  of  al-Khawarnak  which  did  not  exist  before.

Bab  al-FU.  Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi  from  certain  sheikhs
of  al-Kufah : — When  the  Moslems  conquered  al-Mada'in,
they  captured  an  elephant ;  all  the  other  elephants  they  came
across  before  having  been  killed  by  them. They  wrote  to

1  Tha'alibi,  Muluk  al-Furs,  pp.  530-540  (ed.  Zotenberg)  ;  Hamadhani,
pp.  178-179.


THE  FOUNDING  OF  AL-KOFAH  447

'Umar  about  it  and  he  told  them  to  sell  it  if  possible.  The
elephant  was  bought  by  a  man  from  al-Hirah  who  used  to
cover  its  back  with  a  cloak  and  go  round  the  villages  ex-
hibiting it.  Sometime  after  that,  umm-Aiyub,  daughter  of
'Umarah  ibn-'Ukbah  ibn-abi-Mu'ait  (who  was  the  wife  of
al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah  and  later  of  Ziyad)  wanted  to  see
the  elephant  as  she  was  in  her  father's  home.  The  elephant
was  brought  before  her  and  stood  at  the  door  of  the  mosque
which  is  now  termed  Bab  al-Fil.  After  looking  at  it,  she
gave  its  owner  something  and  dismissed  him.  But  no  sooner
had  the  elephant  taken  a  few  strides,  than  it  fell  dead.  That
is  why  the  door  was  called  Bab  al-Fil.1  Some  say  that  the
one  who  looked  at  it  was  the  wife  of  al-Walid  ibn-'Ukbah
ibn-abi-Mu'ait ;  others  that  it  was  a  sorcerer  who  made  the
people  see  an  elephant  appearing  from  the  door  riding  on
a  donkey;  still  others  that  the  trough  of  the  mosque  was
brought  on  an  elephant  and  passed  through  this  door,  which
was  for  that  reason  called  Bab  al-Fil.  These  explanations
are  false.  There  are  those  who  claim  that  the  trough  of  the
mosque  was  carried  on  an  elephant  and  brought  in  through
this  door.  Others  think  that  an  elephant  owned  by  one  of
the  governors  once  rushed  against  this  door  which  was  later
called  after  it.  The  first  explanation,  however,  is  the  most
authentic.

Jabbdnat  Maimun.  According  to  abu-Mas'ud.  the  Mai-
mun cemetery  at  al-Kufah  was  named  after  Maimun,  a
freedman  of  Muhammad  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah,  surnamed
abu-Bishr,  who  built  at-Takat2  in  Baghdadh  near  Bab  ash-
Sham.  3

1  "  The  elephant  door  " ;  cf.  Tabari,  vol.  ii,  p.  27.

2  Archways  or  arcades. Cf.  Le  Strange,  Baghdad,  p.  130.

s "  The Syrian gate", Le Strange, pp. 17-18; Hamadhani, p. 184;
Ya'ktibi,  pp.  240-242.


448  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Sahra  umm-Salamah.  The  umm-Salamah  desert  was  so
called  after  umm-Salamah,  daughter  of  Ya'kub  ibn-Sala-
mah  .  .  .  ibn-Makhzum  and  the  wife  of  abu-1-' Abbas.  289

Al-Kufah  moat.  I  was  told  by  abu-Mas'ud  that  al-Man-
sur  held  the  people  of  al-Kufah  responsible  for  its  moat  and
that  he  imposed  on  every  one  of  them  forty  dirhams  to
meet  its  expenses,  he  being  displeased  with  them  on  account
of  their  tendencies  toward  the  Talibite  party  and  their
spreading  false  news  regarding  the  sultan  [the  chief  au-
thority].

The  inhabitants  of  al-Kufah  commended.  Al-Husain
ibn-al-Aswad  from  'Amir: — 'Umar  writing  to  the  people  of
al-Kufah  called  them  "  the  head  of  the  Arabs."

Al-Husain  from  Nafi'  ibn-Jubair  ibn-Mut'im : — 'Umar
said,  "  In  al-Kufah  are  the  most  distinguished  men."

Al-Husain  and  Ibrahim  ibn-Muslim  al-Khawarizmi  from
ash-Sha'bi : — 'Umar  in  addressing  the  people  of  al-Kufah
wrote,  "  To  the  head  of  Islam."

Al-Husain  ibn-al-Aswad  from  Shamir  ibn-'Atiyah : —
'Umar  said  regarding  the  people  of  al-Kufah,  "  They  are
the  lance  of  Allah,  the  treasure  of  the  faith,  the  cranium  of
the  Arabs,  who  protect  their  own  frontier  forts  and  rein-
force other  Arabs."

Abu-Nasr  at-Tammar  from  Salman : — The  latter  said :
— "  Al-Kufah  is  the  dome  of  Islam.  There  will  be  a  time
in  which  every  l>eliever  will  either  be  in  it  or  will  have  his
heart  set  upon  it."


CHAPTER  IX
Wasit  al-Trak

The  first  cathedral  mosques.  'Abd-al-Hamid  ibn-Wasi'
al-Khatli-1-Hasib  from  al-Hasan  ibn-Salih : — The  first
cathedral  mosque  *  built  in  as-Sawad  was  that  of  al-Ma-
da'in  built  by  Sa'd  and  his  companions.  It  was  later  made
larger  and  stronger  under  the  supervision  of  Hudhaifah
ibn-al-Yaman  who  died  at  al-Mada'in  in  the  year  36.
After  that,  Sa'd  established  the  mosque  of  al-Kufah  and  290
that  of  al-Anbar.

Wasit  built  by  al-Haj  jaj.  The  city  of  Wasit  was  built
in  the  year  83  or  84  by  al-Haj  jaj  who  also  built  its  mosque,
castle  and  Kubbat  al-Khadra.s  The  site  of  Wasit  having
been  covered  with  reeds  [kasab],  the  city  acquired  the  name
of  Wasit  al-Kasab.  This  city  is  equidistant  from  al-
Ahwaz,  al-Basrah  and  al-Kufah.  Ibn-al-Kirriyah  remarks,
'  He  [al-Haj jaj]  has  built  it  but  not  in  his  town,  and  shall
leave  it  but  not  for  his  son."

One  of  the  sheikhs  of  Wasit  from  other  sheikhs : — When
al-Hajjaj  completed  the  erection  of  Wasit,  he  wrote  to
'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan,  "  I  have  built  a  city  in  a  hol-
low of  the  ground  [kirsh]  between  al-Jabal  and  al-Misrain,
and  called  it  Wasit  [lying  halfway  between].''  That  is  why
the  people  of  Wasit  were  called  the  Kirshiyun.3 Before  he

1  Masjid  jami'  =  the  chief  mosque  of  the  city  in  which  people  as-
semble on  Friday  for  prayer  and  the  khutbah.

2  i.  e.,  "  the  green  dome."  It  was  later  occupied  by  al-Mansur  and
called  Bab  adh-Dhahab.  Le  Strange,  31  seq. :  Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  683;
Ya'kubi,  Bid  dan,  p.  240,  and  Ta'rikh,  vol.  ii,  p.  450;  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.
326.

s  Taj  al-'Arus,  s.  v.  kirsh.

449


450  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

erected  Wasit,  al-Hajjaj  had  the  idea  of  taking  up  his
abode  in  as-Sin  of  Kaskar.  He,  therefore,  dug  Nahr
[canal]  as-Sin  and  ordered  that  the  workmen  be  chained  to-
gether so  that  none  of  them  might  run  away  as  a  deserter.
After  that  it  occurred  to  him  to  establish  Wasit 1  which  he
later  occupied,  then  he  dug  out  an-Nil 2  and  az-Zabi  canals.
The  latter  was  so  called  because  it  branched  off  from  the
old  Zabi.  He  thus  reclaimed  the  land  around  these  two
canals  and  erected  the  city  called  an-Nil 3  and  populated  it.
He  then  turned  his  attention  to  certain  crown-domains
which  'Abdallah  ibn-Darraj,  a  freedman  of  Mu'awiyah  ibn-
abi-Sufyan,  had  reclaimed  (when  with  al-Mughirah  ibn-
Shu'bah  he  had  charge  of  the  khardj  of  al-Kufah)  for  Mu-
'awiyah. These  domains  included  waste  lands,  swamps,
ditches  and  thickets.  Al-Hajjaj  built  dams  4  in  these  do-
mains; uprooted  the  reeds  in  them  and  added  them  to  the
domains  of  'Abd-al-Malik  ibn-Marwan  after  populating
them.

To  his  castle  and  the  cathedral  mosque  in  Wasit,  al-
Hajjaj  brought  doors  from  Zandaward,5  ad-Daukarah,  Da-
rusat,  Dair  Masirjasan  6  and  Sharabit,  whose  people  pro-
tested, saying,  "  We  have  been  guaranteed  the  security  of
our  cities  and  possessions;"  but  he  did  not  mind  what  they
said.

Al-Mubarak.  Al-Mubarak7  canal  was  dug  by  Khaiid
ibn-'Abdallah-l-Kasri  al-Mubarak  and  commemorated  by
al-Farazdak  in  certain  verses.

1  Kazwini,  pp.  320-321 ;  Haukal,  pp.  162-163.

2  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  322.

3  Tanbih,  p.  52.

4  musannayat;  TCij  al-'Arus,  s.  v.  saniya;  Mawardi,  p.  311.
■  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  321.

*  Marasid,  vol.  i,  p.  439.

'  Tabari,  vol.  iii.  pp.  1981,  1985.


WASIT  AL-'IRAK  45I

Khalid's  bridge.  Muhammad  ibn-Khalid  ibn-'Abdallah  291
at-Tahhan  from  his  sheikhs: — Khalid  ibn-'Abdallah  al-
Kasri  wrote  to  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  asking  for  per-
mission to  make  an  arch  over  the  Tigris.  Hisham  wrote
back,  "  If  this  were  possible,  the  Persians  would  have  done
it."  Khalid  wrote  again;  and  Hisham  answered:  "  If  thou
art  sure  that  it  is  feasible,  thou  mayst  do  it."  Khalid  built
the  arch  at  a  great  expense;  but  it  was  soon  destroyed  by
the  water.  Hisham  made  Khalid  pay  the  expenses  out  of
his  own  pocket.

Al-Bazzak.  The  canal  known  by  the  name  of  al-Baz-
zak  was  an  old  one  of  which  the  Nabatean  form  is  al-Bas-
sak,  which  means  that  which  cuts  the  water  off  from  what
comes  after  it  and  takes  it  over  to  itself.  In  this  canal  the
superfluous  water  from  as-Sib  jungles  and  some  water  of
the  Euphrates  gather.  This  name  was  corrupted  into  al-
Bazzak.

Al-Maimun.  As  for  al-Maimun  x  it  was  first  dug  out  by
Sa'id  ibn-Zaid,  an  agent  of  umm-Ja'far  Zubaidah,  daughter
of  Ja'far  ibn-al-Mansur.  The  mouth  of  al-Maimun  was
near  a  village  called  Maimun.  In  the  time  of  al-Wathik-
Billah,  the  position  of  the  mouth  was  shifted  by  'Umar  ibn-
Faraj  ar-Rukhkhaji,  but  the  river  kept  its  old  name  al-Mai-
mun [the  auspicious],  lest  the  idea  of  auspiciousness  be  dis-
sociated from  it.

I  was  informed  by  Muhammad  ibn-Khalid  that  by  the
order  of  caliph  al-Mahdi,  Nahr  as-Silah  was  dug  out  and
the  lands  around  it  were  entrusted  to  farmers.  The  income
thereof  was  used  as  stipends  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  sacred
territories  of  Makkah  and  al-Madinah  [ahl  al-Haramain]
and  for  other  expenses  there.  It  was  stipulated  on  the  ten-
ants who  came  to  those  lands  that  they  should  yield  two-

1  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  1760:  "Nahr  Maimun."


452  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

fifths  [  ?]  of  the  produce,  with  the  understanding  that  after
holding  their  share  for  fifty  years,  they  should  yield  as  tax
one-half  of  its  produce. This  stipulation  is  still  in  force.1

Al-Amir. As  regards  Nahr  al-Amir,  it  was  ascribed  to 292
'Isa  ibn-'Ali  and  lay  in  his  fief.

Mashra'at  al-F'il.  We  were  informed  by  Muhammad  ibn-
Khalid  that  Muhammad  ibn-al-Kasim  presented  to  al-Haj-
jaj  an  elephant  from  as-Sind 2  which  was  transported
through  al-Bata'ih  [the  great  swamp]  on  a  ship  and  was
landed  at  a  watering  place,  which  has  since  been  called
Mashra'at  al-Fil  or  Furdat 3  al-Fil.

1  Cf.  Kudamah,  pp.  241-242.

2  A  country  bordering  upon  India,  Karman  and  Sijistan; Meynard,

P-  324.

3  mashra'at  =  wharf;  furdat  =  harbor.


CHAPTER  X
Al-Bata'ih

Al-Anra.  I  was  informed  by  certain  learned  men  that
the  Persians  often  discussed  the  future  fall  of  their  king-
dom and  thought  that  earthquakes  and  floods  would  be  the
sign  thereof.  Now,  the  Tigris  emptied  its  water  into  Dijlat
al-Basrah,  also  called  al-'Aura.',1  by  means  of  branching
streams  which  drew  their  water  from  the  main  stream
which  carried  the  rest  of  the  water  and  looked  like  one  of
those  streams.

The  formation  of  al-Bataih.  In  the  days  of  Kubadh  ibn-
Fairuz,2  the  water  at  the  lower  part  of  Kaskar  broke
through  a  great  breach  which  was  neglected  until  its  waters
drowned  large,  flourishing  tracts  of  land.  Kubadh  was  a
feeble  man  and  cared  little  for  the  breach.  But  when  his
son  Anushirwan  came  to  rule,  he  ordered  that  dams  be  made
and  thus  the  water  was  stopped  and  some  of  the  lands  flour-
ished again.

When  the  year  came  in  which  the  Prophet  sent  'Abdallah
ibn-Hudhafah  as-Sahmi  to  Kisra  Abarwiz,  which  was  the
year  7  A.  H.  (others  say  6) ,  the  waters  of  the  Tigris  and  the
Euphrates  rose  to  a  height  never  reached  before  or  since,
causing  many  great  breaches.  Abarwiz  made  special  effort
to  stop  the  breaches;  but  the  water  had  the  better  of  him,

1  The  united  course  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  before  they  empty
into  the  Persian  Gulf. Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  745.

2  Tha'alibi,  pp.  586-603.

453


454  THE  ORIGIXS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

turned  towards  al-Bata'ih  1  and  overflowed  the  buildings
and  plants,  drowning  many  cantons  that  were  there.
Kisra  2  rode  out  in  person  to  block  the  breaches ;  he  scat-
tered money  right  and  left,  put  many  workmen  to  death
and,  according  to  a  report,  crucified  on  certain  breaches
forty  dam  builders  in  one  day;  but  all  that  was  of  no  avail
against  the  force  of  water.3

With  the  advent  of  the  Arabs  into  al-'Irak,  the  Persians 293
were  kept  too  busy  fighting  to  mind  the  breaches  which
would  burst  and  no  one  would  mind  them;  and  the  feudal
lords [dihkdns] failed  to  block  them. Consequently,  al-
Batihah  was  made  wider  and  more  extensive.4

'Abdallah  ibn-Darraj.  When  Mu'awiyah  ibn-abi-Sufyan
became  ruler,  he  appointed  'Abdallah  ibn-Darraj,  his  f reed-
man,  over  the  khardj  of  al-'Irak.  'Abdallah,  by  cutting
down  the  reeds  and  stopping  the  water  by  dams,  reclaimed
for  his  master  lands  in  al-Bata'ih.  the  income  of  which
amounted  to  5,000.000  [dirhams].

Hassan  an-Nabati.  Then  came  Hassan  an-Nabati,  the
freedman  of  the  banu-Dabbah.  the  builder  of  Haud  [reser-
voir] Hassan  in  al-Basrah  and  the  one  after  whom  Mana-
rat  [light-house]  Hassan  in  al-Bata'ih  is  named.  Hassan
reclaimed  certain  lands  in  al-Bata'ih  for  al-Hajjaj  in  the
days  of  al-Walid  and  for  Hisham  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik.5

Al-Janb  canal.  Before  al-Bata'ih  was  formed,  there  was
at  Kaskar  a  canal  called  al-Janb,  along  the  south  bank  of
which  ran  the  post-road  to  Maisan,  Dastumaisan  and  al-
Ahwaz. When  al-Bata'ih  was  formed,  that  part  of  the

1  The  great  swamp  in  which  water  overflowing  from  the  Tigris  and
Euphrates  disappeared. Rustah,  p.  04.

2  Anushirwan  ;  Tha'alibi,  p.  603.
s  Mas'udi,  vol.  i,  p.  225.

*  Kudamah,  p.  240.
5  Cf.  Kudamah,  p.  240.


AL-BATA'IH  455

post-road  which  became  a  thicket  was  called  A  jam  al-
Barid;  and  the  other  part  was  called  A  jam  i\ghmarbathi l
in  which  the  great  thickets  lie.  The  canal  is  now  seen  in
the  al-Jdmidah  [solid]  lands  that  have  recently  been  re-
claimed and  rendered  fit  for  use.

The  version  of  abu-Mas'ud.  Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi  from
his  sheikhs: — Al-Bataih  was  formed  after  the  "flight"
of  the  Prophet  and  during  the  reign  of  Abarwiz  over  the
Persians.  Many  great  fissures  were  formed  which  Kisra
was  unable  to  block,  thus  making  the  rivers  overflow  and
producing  al-Bata'ih.  At  the  time  of  the  Moslem  wars  with
the  Persians,  the  water  overflowed  and  no  one  took  the
trouble  to  block  the  fissures.  This  enlarged  the  Batihah
and  made  it  wider.  The  banu-Umaiyah  had  reclaimed  a
part  of  the  Batihah,  which  part  was  again  sunk  in  the  time
of  al-Hajjaj  when  new  breaches  appeared  which  al-Hajjaj
did  not  care  to  block,  trying  thereby  to  injure  the  Persian
feudal  lords  whom  he  suspected  to  be  on  the  side  of  ibn-al-
Ash'ath  who  had  broken  off  his  allegiance  to  al-Hajjaj.
Hassan  an-Nabati  reclaimed  for  Hisham  certain  tracts  of
the  Batihah  land.

Abu-l-Asad. Abu-1-Asad,  from  whom  Nahr  abu-1-Asad
takes  its  name,  was  one  of  the  generals  of  the  caliph  al-
Mansur,  and  one  of  those  sent  to  al-Basrah  when  'Adballah 294
ibn-'Ali  resided  in  it. It  was  this  abu-1-Asad  who  made
'Abdallah  ibn-'Ali  enter  al-Kufah.

I  was  told  by  'Umar  ibn-Bukair  that  al-Mansur  dis-
patched his  freedman  abu-1-Asad,  who  pitched  his  camp
between  al-Mansur  and  the  army  of  'tsa  ibn-Musa  as  al-
Mansur  was  fighting  against  Ibrahim  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-
Hasan  ibn-al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib.  The  same  abu-
1-Asad  dug  the  canal  near  al-Batihah  which  bears  his  name.

1  "A  Nabatean  word  which  means  the  great  thickets ;"  Kudamah,  p.
241.


456  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Others  say  that  abu-1-Asad,  reaching  the  mouth  of  the
canal  and  finding  it  too  narrow  for  the  ships,  widened  it;
and,  therefore,  it  was  named  after  him.

It  is  stated  by  abu-Mas'ud  that  in  the  time  of  the  "blessed
dynasty  "  certain  breaches  were  formed  which  made  al-
Bata'ih  larger.  Because  of  the  water  of  the  Euphrates,
many  thickets  grew,  of  which  some  were  reclaimed  and
made  tillable  land.

Maslamah  reclaims  nezv  lands.  Abu-Mas'ud  from  'Awa-
nah: — In  the  days  of  al-Hajjaj,  new  breaches  were  made.
Al-Hajjaj  wrote  to  al-Walid  ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  stating  that
he  estimated  that  3,000,000  dirhams  would  be  required  for
blocking  them.  Al-Walid  thought  that  too  much.  Masla-
mah ibn-'Abd-al-Malik  said  to  al-Walid,  "I  offer  to  pay  the
expenses  provided  thou  givest  me  as  fief  the  depressed  tracts
in  which  the  water  remains,  after  spending  3,000.000  dir-
hams, which  sum  shall  be  spent  under  the  direct  supervision
of  thy  counsellor  and  trusted  man,  al-Hajjaj.*'  Al-Walid
accepted  the  offer.  Maslamah  gained  possession  of  lands
that  had  many  cantons  close  together.  He  dug  as-Sibain  x
and  induced  the  farmers  and  tenants  to  come  and  hold  land.
Thus  the  land  flourished ;  and  in  order  to  secure  his  protec-
tion, many  landowners  voluntarily  turned  their  farms  over
to  him,  and  then  held  them  from  him  as  fief.  When  the
"  blessed  dynasty  "  came  and  the  possessions  of  the  banu-
Umaiyah  were  confiscated,  all  as-Sibain  was  assigned  as
fief  to  Da'ud  ibn-'Ali  ibn-'Abdallah  ibn-al-'Abbas,  from
whose  heirs  it  was  bought  with  its  rights  and  boundaries
and  was  included  in  the  crown-domains  [diyd'  al-khil-afah].

1  The  dual  form  of  as-Sib.


CHAPTER  XI
Mad'inat  as-Salam

Built  by  al-Mansur.  Baghdadh  1  was  an  ancient  city,
but  al-Mansur  colonized  it,  and  added  a  city  to  it 2  which  295
he  began  in  the  year  145.  Hearing  that  Muhammad  and
Ibrahim,  the  sons  of  'Abdallah  ibn-Hasan  ibn-Hasan,  had
thrown  off  their  allegiance  to  him,  al-Mansur  returned  to
al-Kufah.  In  the  year  146,  he  transferred  the  public
treasures  [buyiit  al-mal],  repositories,  and  registers  from
al-Kufah  to  Baghdadh,  and  called  it  Madinat  as-Salam  [the
city  of  peace].  In  the  year  147,  the  wall  of  this  city,  with
everything  else  connected  with  it,  and  the  wall  of  ancient
Baghdadh  were  completed.  Al-Mansur  died  in  Makkah
in  the  year  158  and  was  buried  near  the  well  of  Maimun
ibn-al-Hadrami,  an  ally  of  the  banu-Umaiyah.

Ar-Rusafah.  Ar-Rusafah  3  was  built  for  al-Mahdi  by
al-Mansur  on  the  east  side  of  Baghdadh.  This  side  was
called  'Askar  [camp]  al-Mahdi 4  because  al-Mahdi  camped
in  it  on  his  way  to  ar-Rai.  When  he  returned  from  ar-Rai,
he  settled  in  ar-Rusafah,  although  it  had  occurred  to  al-
Mansur  to  direct  him  to  settle  in  Khurasan.  This  took
place  in  the  year  151. Before  al-Mahdi  had  occupied  the

1  A  Persian  word  meaning  the  city  "  founded  by  God,"  see  Le
Strange,  Baghdad,  pp.  10-11.

2  Haukal,  p.  164.

3  i.  e.,  causeway,  the  eastern  suburb  of  Baghdad.  Istakhri,  pp.  83,  84;
Tanblh,  p.  360.

4  Ya'kubi,  Buldan,  p.  251.

457


458  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

east  side,  a  palace  was  built  for  him  by  al-Mansur's  order;
the  one  variously  known  as  Kasr  al-Waddah,  Kasr  al-
Mahdi  and  ash-Sharkiyah.1  It  lay  on  the  other  side  of  Bab
al-Karkh.  Al-Waddah,  after  whom  it  is  sometimes  called,
was  a  man  from  al-Anbar  who  had  charge  of  the  expenses.

Al-Mansur  as  a  builder.  Al-Mansur  built  the  two  mos-
ques of  Madinat  as-Salam  and  the  new  bridge  over  as-
Sarat  [canal].  The  site  of  the  city  he  bought  from  the
owners  of  the  villages  of  Baduraiya,  Katrabbul  [or  Kut-
rubbul],  Nahr  Buk  and  Nahr  Bin.  He  gave  the  city  as
fief  to  members  of  his  household,  his  generals,  soldiers,
companions  and  secretaries.  He  made  the  meeting  place  of
the  streets  at  al-Karkh,  and  ordered  the  merchants  to  build
their  shops  and  held  them  responsible  for  the  rent.2

Places  of  interest  in  Baghdad:'  The  al-Mukharrim  quar-
ter 4  in  Baghdadh  takes  its  name  from  Mukharrim  ibn-Shu-
raih  B  ibn-Hazn  al-Harithi.

The  Kantarat  al-Baradan  quarter,  from  as-Sari  ibn-al-
Hutaim,8  the  builder  of  al-Hutamiyah.

As-Salihiyah,  from  Salih  ibn-al-Mansur.

Al-Harbiyah, from  Harb  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Balkhi,7  the
commander  of  the  guard  in  al-Mausil  under  Ja'far  ibn-abi- 296
Ja'far.

Az-Zuhairiyah  or  Bab  at-Tibn,  from  Zuhair  ibn-Muham-
mad  of  the  inhabitants  of  Abiward.

1  i.  e.,  "  the  oriental  palace  ". Ya'kubi,  p.  245.

2  Ar.  ghallah  =  rent  paid  for  buildings  standing  on  the  property  of
the  state.

1  The  following  list  is  an  abridged  form  of  the  original.

4  Le  Strange,  pp.  217-230.

4  Duraid,  p.  238,  omits  "  ibn-Shuraih  ".

•  XIarasid,  vol.  ii,  p.  453 :  "  as-Surai  ibn-al-Hutam  ".

7  Cf.  Mahasin,  vol.  i,  p.  307.


MAD  IN  AT  AS-SALAM  459

'Isabadh,  from  'Isa  ibn-al-Mahdi.1

Kasr  'Abdawaih  standing  opposite  Baratha,  from  'Abda-
waih,  a  notable  of  the  Azd.

Al-Mansur  assigned  as  fief  to  Sulaiman  ibn-Mujalid  the
site  of  his  home ;  to  Muhalhil  ibn-Saf  wan,  after  whom  Darb
Muhalhil  is  named,  a  special  fief ;  to  'Umarah  ibn-Hamzah,
the  quarter  that  bears  his  name;  to  Maimun  abu-Bishr  after
whom  Takat  Bishr  are  named,  a  special  lief  near  Bustan  al-
Kass;2  to  Shubail,  his  freedman,  a  fief  near  Dar  Yaktin;
to  umm-'Ubaidah,  a  freedmaid  of  Muhammad  ibn-'Ali,  a
fief;  to  Munirah,  a  freedmaid  of  Muhammad  ibn-'Ali  and
after  whom  Darb  Munirah  and  Khan  [inn]  Munirah  are
named,  a  special  fief ;  and  to  Raisanah  3  a  spot  known  by  the
name  of  Masjid  bani-Raghban.4

Darb [path] Mihrawaih  takes its  name from Mihra- 297
waih  ar-Razi  who  was  one  of  the  captives  of  Sinfadh  and
was  set  free  by  al-Mahdi.

The  city  a  residence  for  the  caliphs.  Al-Mansur  lived  in
Madinat  as-Salam  to  the  last  days  of  his  caliphate.  He
made  a  pilgrimage  from  it  and  died  in  Makkah.  The  city
was  then  occupied  by  the  caliph  al-Mahdi.  Later,  al-Mahdi
left  for  Masabadhan,  where  he  died.  Most  of  the  time  he
spent  in  Madinat  as-Salam  was  passed  in  palaces  he  built
at  'Isabadh.

Madinat  as-Salam  was  then  occupied  by  al-Hadi  Musa
ibn-al-Mahdi,  who  died  in  it.  Ar-Rashid  Harun  also  re-
sided in  it,  and  later  left  it  for  ar-Rafikah  where  he  stayed
for  a  while  and  then  departed  for  Khurasan,  and  died  at
Tus.  The  city  became  after  that  the  residence  of  Muham-
mad ibn-ar-Rashid,  who  was  slain  in  it.

1  Tattbih,  pp.  343-344-

*  Ya'kubi,  p.  247.

'  Marasid,  vol.  ii,  p.  433.

4  Dhahabi,  p.  227 ;  Ya'kubi,  pp.  244-245.


46o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Al-Ma'mun  'Abdallah  ibn-ar-Rashid  came  to  the  city
from  Khurasan  and  took  up  his  abode  in  it.  He  then  left
on  an  expedition  during  which  he  died  at  al-Fadhandun  and
was  buried  at  Tarsus.

Surra-man-ra'a,  a  residence  for  the  caliphs.  Caliph  al-
Mu'tasim-Billah  made  his  residence  in  it  and  then  left  it  for
al-Katul *  where  he  occupied  the  Kasr  ar-Rashid  which  was
built  when  ar-Rashid  dug  out  Katulah  [canal]  and  called
it  abu-1-Jund  [the  father  of  the  army]  because  the  land
watered  by  it  produced  enough  provisions  for  the  army.
Al-Mu'tasim  erected  in  al-Katul  a  building  which  he  occu-
pied, and  offered  the  Kasr  to  Ashnas  at-Turki  [the  Turk],
his  freedman.  He  started  to  colonize  that  region  and  after
beginning  a  new  city,  he  gave  it  up  and  built  the  city  of
Surra-man-ra'a.2  He  transplanted  people  to  it  and  made  it
his  residence.  At  the  meeting  point  of  the  streets,  he  built
a  cathedral  mosque,  and  called  the  city  Surra-man-ra'a.  Al-
Mu'tasim  made  his  freedman,  Ashnas,  together  with  the
other  generals  who  had  joined  him  [Ashnas],  settle  at
Karkh  Fairuz.  Other  generals  were  given  the  houses
called  al-'Arabaya.3  Al-Mu'tasim  died  in  Surra-man-ra'a
in  the  year  227.

Harun  al-Wathik-Billah  lived  to  the  last  day  of  his  life  in
a  house  which  he  built  at  Surra-man-ra'a  and  called  al-Ha-
runi.

When  in  dhu-1-Hijjah.  year  232,  the  caliph  Ja'far  al-Mu-
tawakkil-'Alallah  was  installed,  he  made  al-Haruni  his  resi-
dence. He  erected  many  buildings  and  assigned  to  different
men  fiefs in a place back of Surra-man-ra'a called al- 298

1  Tanbth,  pp.  356-357-

2  Ya'kubi, pp. 256-257; Yakut, vol. iii, p. 14; Tabari, vol. iii, pp.
1179-1180.

1  Marasid,  vol.  v,  p.  501,  n.;  Mushtarik,  p.  183.


MADlNAT  AS-SALAM  ^fa

Ha'ir  l  in  which  al-Mu'tasim  had  put  him  in  confinement,
thus  giving  more  space  for  the  inhabitants.  Al-Mutawak-
kil  also  built  a  great  cathedral  mosque  and  lavished  enor-
mous sums  of  money  on  it,  making  the  minaret  so  high  that
the  voices  of  the  muezzins  could  be  easily  heard,  and  the
minaret  could  be  seen  at  a  distance  of  many  parasangs.
The  Moslems  gave  up  the  first  mosque  and  held  Friday
prayers  in  it.

Al-Mntawakkiliyah.  Al-Mutawakkil  founded  a  city
which  he  called  al-Mutawakkiliyah.  He  built  it  between  al-
Karkh,  known  by  the  name  of  Fairuz,  and  al-Katul,  known
by  the  name  of  Kisra,  chose  it  for  his  abode  and  gave  fiefs
in  it.  The  houses  and  the  villages  known  as  al-Mahuzah  2
were  included  in  it.  Al-Mutawakkil  built  in  this  city  a
cathedral  mosque.  From  the  time  he  started  the  city  to  the
time  he  occupied  it,  only  a  few  months  elapsed,  the  occupa-
tion having  taken  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  246.
Here  he  died  in  Shauwal,  [2]  47.

In  the  same  night  on  which  he  died,  al-Muntasir-Billah
was  proclaimed  caliph;  and  on  Tuesday  the  10th  of  Shau-
wal, he  left  al-Mutawakkiliyah  for  Surra-man-ra'a.  where
he  died.

eUyun  at-Taff.  'Uyun  [springs]  at-Taff3  which  include
'Ain  as-Said,  al-Kutkutanah,  ar-Ruhaimah,  'Ain  Jamal  and
the  lands  that  belonged  to  them,  were  held  by  the  garri-
sons that  guarded  the  frontier  forts  beyond  as-Sawad.
These  springs  lay  near  Khandak  [trench]  Sabur,  which
Sabur  had  dug  between  him  and  the  Arabs  who  guarded
the  frontier  and  the  other  Arabs  who  lived  there.  Sabur
allowed  them  the  use  of  the  land  as  fief  without  collecting
kharaj  from  them.

1  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  752,  and  Ya'kubi,  p.  258 :  "  al-Hair  ". Cf.  Yakut,
vol.  ii,  p.  189.

2  Athir,  vol.  vii,  pp.  56,  68:  "  al-Makhurah  ".

3  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  539;  Hamadhani,  p.  187.


462  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

In  the  battle  of  dhu-Kar  in  which  Allah  through  his
Prophet  gave  the  Arabs  the  victory,  the  Arabs  gained  pos-
session of  some  of  these  springs,  the  rest  remaining  in  the
hands  of  the  Persians.  When  the  Arabs  advanced  to  al-
Hirah,  the  Persians  took  to  flight  after  covering  over  with
earth  all  the  springs  in  their  lands.  The  Arabs  who  held
the  remaining  springs  embraced  Islam;  and  the  land  which
they  cultivated  became  tithe-land.

After  the  battles  of  al-Kadisiyah  and  al  Mada'in,  the
lands  whose  owners  had  evacuated  them,  were  turned  over
to  the  Moslems  and  given  out  as  fiefs,  thus  becoming  tithe-
lands.  Such  was  the  case  with  'Uyun  at-Taff  whose  lands
are  treated  like  the  villages  in  the  valley  of  al-Madinah  and  299
the  villages  of  Najd,  all  the  sadakah  thereof  being  given  to
■  the  'dmils  of  al-Madinah.

When  Ishak  ibn-Ibrahim  ibn-Mus'ab  ruled  over  as-Sa-
wad  in  the  name  of  al-Mutawakkil.  he  added  these  'Uyun
and  their  lands  to  what  he  already  controlled;  and  he  col-
lected their  tithe,  treating  them  as  any  other  land  in  as-Sa-
wad,  which  status  they  still  retain.  The  Moslems  later  dug
out  many  other  springs  which  irrigate  lands  that  are  treated
in  a  similar  way.

'Ain  al-Jamal.  I  was  told  by  a  sheikh  that  Win  al-
Jamal  l  was  so  called  because  a  camel  [Ar.  jamal]  died  near
it. Others  say  that  the  one  who  dug  it  out  was  called  Jamal.

'Ain  as-Said.  'Ain  as-Said2  [fishing  spring]  was  so
called  because  fish  gathered  in  it.  I  was  told  by  certain
Kuraiziyun  [  ?]  that  this  spring  was  one  of  those  covered
with  earth.  As  one  of  the  Moslems  was  passing  there,  the
legs  of  his  horse  sank  in  the  mud.  He  dismounted  and  dug
in  the  ground;  and  the  water  appeared. With  the  help  of

1  Rustah,  p.  180:  '"Ain  Jamal".

2  Ibid.,  p.  180:  '"Ain  Said";  cf.  Khurdadhbih,  p.  146.


MADlNAT  AS-SALAM  463

certain  men  he  called,  the  earth  and  soil  were  removed,  the
course  was  opened  and  the  water  issued  as  before.  The
spring  then  passed  to  the  hands  of  'Isa  ibn-'Ali,  who  bought
it  from  a  son  of  Hasan  ibn-Hasan  ibn-'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib.
One  of  'Isa's  wives  was  umm-Kalthum,  daughter  of  Hasan
ibn-Hasan.  Mu'awiyah  in  exchange  for  the  caliphate,  as-
signed, together  with  other  things,  'Ain  as-Said  as  fief  to
al-Hasan  ibn-'Ali.

'Ain  ar-Rahbah.  'Ain  ar-Rahbah  was  also  one  of  the
springs  buried  of  old.  A  pilgrim  from  Karman  once  saw
it  leaking;  and  when  he  returned  from  his  pilgrimage,  he
advised  'Isa  ibn-Musa  regarding  it  and  pointed  it  out  to
him.  This  Karman  man  took  it  as  fief  with  its  land  and
dug  it  out.  He  cultivated  the  lands  around  it  and  planted
the  palm-trees  which  stand  on  al-'Udhaib  road.

'Uyun  al-'Irk.  A  few  parasangs  from  Hit  lie  certain
springs  called  al-Trk  which  are  similar  to  'Uyun  at-Taff,
and  whose  tithes  are  taken  by  the  chief  of  Hit.

The  meaning  of  Sazvad.  Al-Athram  from  abu-'Amr  ibn-
al-'Ala' : — When  the  Arabs  saw  the  great  number  of  vil-
lages, palm  and  other  trees,  they  exclaimed,  "Never  did  we
see  a  greater  number  of  sawadl"  i.  e.,  objects.  Hence  the
name  of  the  country  as-Sawad.

The  market  compared  to  the  place  of  worship.  Al-
Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  Muhammad  ibn-abi-Musa : — One
day  'AH  went  out  to  the  market  and  saw  that  his  relatives  300
had  secured  special  places,  upon  which  he  remarked,  "  That
can  not  be.  For  the  Moslems,  the  market  is  similar  to  the
place  of  worship :  he  who  arrives  first  can  hold  his  seat  all
day  until  he  leaves  it."

Abu-'Ubaid  from  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-'Ubaid's  father :
— The  latter  said,  "In  the  time  of  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah,
we  used  to  go  early  into  the  market;  and  when  one  sat  in
a  place,  he  had  claim  on  it  until  the  nightfall. But  when


464  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Ziyad  came,  he  ordered  that  he  who  sat  in  a  place,  could
claim  it  so  long  as  he  occupied  it."

According  to  Mar  wan,  al-Mughirah  held  the  governor-
ship of  al-Kufah  twice :  once  for  'Umar  and  another  time
for  Mu'awiyah.


CHAPTER  XII
Arabic  Made  the  Language  of  the  Register

Al-Mada'ini  'Ali  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-abi-Saif  from  his
sheikhs : — Persian  was  the  language  of  the  register  of  the
khardj  of  as-Sawad  and  the  rest  of  al-'Irak.  When  al-
Hajjaj  became  ruler  of  al-'Irak  he  chose  Zadan  Farrukh
ibn-Yabra  for  secretary,  and  the  latter  was  assisted  by
Salih  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman,  a  freedman  of  the  banu-Ta-
mim,  who  knew  both  Arabic  and  Persian.  Salih's  father
was  one  of  the  captives  of  Sijistan.  Through  Zadan  Far-
rukh, Salih  was  acquainted  with  al-Hajjaj,  who  found  him
acceptable.  One  day  Salih  said  to  Zadan,  "  Thou  art  the
means  by  which  I  became  acquainted  with  the  governor;
and  I  see  that  he  has  found  me  acceptable.  I,  therefore,
do  not  wonder  if  he  should  promote  me  over  thee,  in  which
case  thou  wouldst  fall."  "  Never  believe  that,"  answered
Zadan;  "he  has  more  use  for  me  than  I  for  him,  because
none  but  myself  can  be  found  to  keep  his  books."  "  By
Allah,"  retorted  Salih,  "  if  thou  so  desire,  I  could  change
the  accounts  into  Arabic."  "  Try  a  part  of  it,"  said  Zadan,
"  and  I  will  see."  Salih  having  done  that,  Zadan  asked
him  to  feign  illness,  which  he  did.  Al-Hajjaj  sent  his  own
physician,  but  found  nothing  wrong  with  Salih.  Hearing
that,  Zadan  ordered  him  to  appear.

In  the  days  of  'Abd-ar-Rahman  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-al-
Ash'ath  al-Kindi,  Zadan  Farrukh  was  killed  on  his  way
from  some  house  to  his  own  home,  or  some  other  man's
home. Thereupon,  al-Hajjaj  made  Salih  secretary  in  the

465


466  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

place  of  Zadan.  Salih  reported  to  al-Hajjaj  the  con-
versation that  took  place  between  him  and  Zadan  relative
to  the  change  of  the  language  of  the  register.  Al-Hajjaj  301
immediately  made  up  his  mind  to  adopt  Arabic  as  the  lan-
guage of  the  register  and  charged  Salih  with  the  task.
Mardanshah  ibn-Zadan  Farrukh  asked  Salih,  "  What
wouldst  thou  do  with  dahwiyah  and  shashwiyah?  ':  To
this,  Salih  replied,  "  I  shall  use  instead  'ushr  [tenth]  and
nusfushr  x  [half -tenth]."—"  And  what  about  wid?  "— "  I
shall  use  aidan  "  {wid  means  excess).2  Hearing  that,  Mar-
danshah  said,  "  May  God  efface  thy  trace  from  the  world
as  thou  hast  effaced  the  trace  of  the  Persian ! '  Salih  was
later  offered  100,000  dirhams  in  order  to  show  that  it  was
impossible  to  change  the  language  of  the  register  and  to  re-
frain from  doing  it;  but  he  refused  and  carried  out  the
plan.  'Abd-al-Hamid  ibn-Yahya,  the  secretary  of  Marwan
ibn-Muhammad  used  to  say,  "  Great  is  Salih,  and  great  is
the  favor  he  has  bestowed  upon  the  secretaries ! '

'Umar  ibn-Shabbah  from  Sahl  ibn-abi-as-Salt : — Al-
Hajjaj  assigned  for  Salih  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman  a  certain
period  in  which  to  change  the  language  of  the  register.3

1  These  are  the  Arabic  equivalent  of  the  Persian  terms  dahwiyah  and
shashzviyah;  shash  means  six.

2  wid  or  waid  is  used  to-day  in Persian  in  the  sense  of  "  little ".
Ar.  aidan  corresponds  to  ditto.

8  Cf.  Mawardi,  p.  350.


PART  X
MEDIA [AL-JIBAL]


CHAPTER  I

HULWAN

«

Hulwan  capitulates.  After  the  decisive  battle  of  Jalula'
had  been  won  by  the  Moslems,  Hashim  ibn-'Utbah  ibn-abi-
Wakkas  added  to  the  forces  of  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Ba-
jali  a  heavy  detachment  of  cavalry  and  stationed  him  at
Jalula'  between  the  Moslems  and  their  enemy  [the  Per-
sians].

Later  on,  Sa'd  sent  Jarir  about  3,000  Moslems  and  or-
dered him  to  advance  with  them  and  his  forces  to  Hulwan.1
No  sooner  had  Jarir  approached  Hulwan  than  Yazdajird
fled  away  in  the  direction  of  Isbahan.  Hulwan  capitulated ;
and  Jarir  promised  to  spare  the  people  and  guarantee  their
lives  and  possessions  without  interfering  with  those  who
preferred  to  flee  the  land.

Karmasin.  Leaving  in  Hulwan  a  part  of  his  forces  [  ?]
with  'Azrah  ibn-Kais  ibn-Ghaziyah-1-Bajali,  Jarir  pushed
towards  ad-Dinawar,  which  he  failed  to  reduce.  He,  how-
ever, reduced  Karmasin  2  on  the  same  terms  as  Hulwan.
He  then  returned  to  Hulwan  and  held  its  governorship  until
the  arrival  of  'Ammar  ibn-Yasir  in  al-Kufah.  'Ammar
wrote  to  Jarir  that  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  wanted  him  to  re-
inforce abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  [inTustar].  Accordingly,  Jarir
left  'Azrah  ibn-Kais  over  Hulwan,  and  in  the  year  19  made  302
his  way  to  join  abu-Musa.

Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  'A'ishah,  daughter  of  Sa'd  ibn-

1  Rustah,  pp.  164-165.

1  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  68.

469


470  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

abi-Wakkas : — The  latter  said,  "  When  Mu'awiyah  put
Hujr  ibn-'Adi-l-Kindi 1  to  death,  my  father  made  the  fol-
lowing remark,  '  If  Mu'awiyah  had  seen  the  part  Hujr  had
taken  '  in  the  reduction  of  Hulwan,  he  would  have  realized
of  what  great  value  he  was  to  Islam  '."

According  to  al-Wakidi,  certain  sons  of  Jarir  ibn-Abdal-
lah  settled  in  Hulwan,  where  their  descendants  are  still
living.

1  Aghcmi,  vol.  xvi,  pp.  3-4 ;  Athir,  vol.  iii,  pp.  392  seq. ;  Mas'udi,  vol.
v,  pp.  15  seq.

2  Text  not  clear. Cf.  yajar,  vol.  i,  p.  645.


CHAPTER  II

The  Conquest  of  Nihawand

An-Nu'man  in  chief  command.  In  the  year  19,  when
Yazdajird  fled  away  from  Hulwan,  the  Persians  and  the
people  of  ar-Rai,  Kumis,1  Isbahan,  Hamadhan  and  al-Ma-
hain  communicated  with  one  another  and,  in  the  year  20,
joined  Yazdajird.  The  latter  put  at  their  head  Mardanshah
dhu-1-Hajib  and  they  unfurled  their  flag  ad-Dirafshikabi-
yan.  These  "polytheists"  numbered  60,000,  and  according
to  other  estimates,  100,000.  When  'Ammar  ibn-Yasir  com-
municated this  news  to  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab,  the  latter  was
on  the  point  of  leading  an  expedition  in  person  against
them,  but  desisted  lest  the  Arabs  should  then  prevail  over
Najd  and  other  places.  The  advice  to  let  the  Syrians  lead
the  attack  from  Syria  and  the  Yamanites  from  al-Yaman
was  also  discarded,  lest  the  Greeks  should  return  to  their
home,  and  the  Abyssinians  should  subjugate  what  was  next
to  them.  Consequently,  he  wrote  to  the  people  of  al-Kufah
ordering  that  two-thirds  of  them  should  set  out  and  one-
third  should  stay  for  the  defense  of  their  homes  and  coun-
try. From  the  people  of  al-Basrah,  he  also  sent  a  group  of
men.  He  then  said,  "  I  shall  use  over  the  army  someone
who  shall  be  the  first  to  expose  himself  to  the  spears."  2
Accordingly,  'Umar  wrote  to  an-Nu'man  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Mu-
karrin  al-Muzani,  who  was  at  that  time  with  as-Sa'ib  ibn-al-

1  In  Tabaristan. Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  203 ;  Meynard,  pp.  464-465.
*  The  original  is  obscure. Cf.  Dinawari,  p.  142 ;  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.
315,  n.  1.

471


472  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Akra'  ath-Thakafi,  assigning  him  to  the  leadership  of  the
army,  saying,  "  In  case  thou  art  killed,  Hudhaifah  ibn-al-
Yaman  shall  be  the  leader;  if  he  should  be  killed,  then  Jarir  303
ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali;  if  he  should  be  killed,  then  al-Mu-
ghirah  ibn-Shu'bah;  and  if  he  should  be  killed,  al-Ash'ath
ibn-Kais."  This  an-Nu'man  was  at  that  time  the  'amil
over  Kaskar  and  its  territory.  Others  say  he  was  in  al-Ma-
dinah,  and  when  he  received  his  appointment  over  this  army
from  'Umar  by  word  of  mouth,  he  started  from  it.

Shaiban  from  Ma'kil  ibn-Yasar : — When  'Umar  ibn-al-
Khattab  sought  the  advice  of  al-Hurmuzan,  saying,  "  Shall
we  begin  with  Isbahan  or  Adharbaijan  [Atrapatakan]  ?"
al-Hurmuzan  replied,  "  Isbahan  is  the  head,  and  Adharbai-
jan the  wings.  Cut  off  the  head,  and  the  wings  will  fall  off
together  with  it/'  1

Al-Mugh'irah  as  envoy.  When  'Umar  entered  the  mosque
[in  al-Madinah],  his  eyes  fell  on  an-Nu'man  ibn-Mu-
karrin;  so  he  took  a  seat  by  his  side.  When  he  was
through  with  his  prayer,  'Umar  said,  "  I  want  thee  to  be
my  'amil  [lieutenant]  ".  An-Nu'man  replied,  "  If  a  col-
lecting-'a?m7,  no;  but  if  an  invading-' amil,  yes."  "An  in-
vading one,"  said  'Umar.  Thus  'Umar  sent  an-Nu'man  and
wrote  to  the  people  of  al-Kufah  to  reinforce  him,  which
they  did,  sending  among  others  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah.
An-Nu'man  sent  al-Mughirah  to  dhu-1-Hajibain,2  the  Per-
sian chief  at  Nihawand.3  Al-Mughirah  [reaching  the  Per-
sian camp]  drew  his  sword  and  began  cutting  the  rugs  to
pieces  until  he  presented  himself  before  the  chief,  upon
which  he  took  his  seat  on  the  throne. By  dhu-1-Hajib's

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2600-2601 ;  Mas'udi,  vol.  iv,  p.  230.

2  He  is  also  called  dhu-1-Hajib  Mardanshah.

s  or  Nahawand. Muller,  vol.  i,  p.  245;  Meynard,  pp.  573-576;  Yakut,
vol.  iv,  pp.  406,  827.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  NIHAWAND  473

order,  al-Mughirah  was  dragged  out. So  he  exclaimed :
"  [Remember  that]  I  am  an  envoy!  "

The  battle  fought.  When  the  Moslems  met  the  "  poly-
theists  ",  they  found  them  fastened  in  chains,  in  tens  and
fives,  so  that  they  might  not  flee.  Before  the  fight  started
they  shot  their  arrows  and  wounded  some  of  the  Moslems.
Then  an-Nu'man  said,  "  I  noticed  that  when  the  Prophet
did  not  carry  on  the  fight  in  the  morning,  he  would  wait
until  the  sun  set  and  the  wind  blew ;  then  the  victory
would  be  assured."  1  An-Nu'man  added,  "  I  shall  now
shake  the  standard  I  carry  three  times.  After  the  first
shake,  let  each  perform  the  ablutions  and  satisfy  his
natural  wants.  After  the  second  shake,  let  each  turn  to  his
sword  (he  may  have  said  sandal-thong)  and  get  ready,
putting  everything  in  order.  When  the  third  shake  is,  by
Allah's  will,  made,  then  rush  and  let  none  of  you  heed  the
other."  Saying  this,  an-Nu'man  shook  the  standard  and
they  did  as  he  had  ordered  them.  His  coat  of  mail  was  too  304
heavy  for  him;  but  he  fought  and  his  men  fought;  and  he
was  the  first  Moslem  to  be  killed.

The  Persian  [dhu-1-Hajib]  fell  from  his  mule  and  his
belly  was  cut  open.

Ma'kil  ibn-Yasar  [the  narrator  of  this  tradition]  adds,
"  Coming  to  an-Nu'man  and  finding  that  life  had  not  yet
fully  departed  from  him,  I  washed  his  face  with  some  water
I  carried  in  a  vessel;  upon  which  he  asked,  'Who  art  thou?'
— '  Ma'kil.' — '  How  did  the  Moslems  fare?' — '  I  have  glad
tidings;  Allah  has  given  us  conquest  and  victory!' — '  Praise
be  to  Allah! Write  and  tell  'Umar  about  it.'  "

The  news  carried  to  'Umar.  Shaiban  from  abu-'Uth-
man  an-Nahdi : — The  latter  said,  "  I  myself  carried  the
glad  news  to  'Umar  who  asked,  '  And  what  about  an-Nu'-

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2603.


474  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

man  ?'  '  He  was  killed,'  said  I.  '  We  are  Allah's,'  re-
marked 'Umar,  '  and  to  Allah  we  return.'  Saying  this,  he
began  to  cry.  I  then  said,  '  By  Allah,  he  was  killed  with
others  whom  I  know  not.'  '  But  whom  Allah  knows,'  said
he."  I

Ahmad  ibn-Ibrahim  from  abu-'Uthman  an-Nahdi : — The
latter  said,  "  When  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  received  the  news
of  the  death  of  an-Nu'man  ibn-Mukarrin,  he  covered  his
face  with  his  hands  and  began  to  cry."

The  version  of  as-Saib.  Al-Kasim  ibn-Sallam  from  as-
Sa'ib  ibn-al-Akra' : — The  latter  said,  "  An  army,  the  similar
to  which  was  never  seen  before,  marched  against  the  Mos-
lems." He  then  cited  the  tradition  regarding  'Umar's  in-
tention to  lead  the  expedition  in  person,  his  appointment  of
an-Nu'man  ibn-Mukarrin,  the  forwarding  with  as-Sa'ib
(whom  'Umar  put  in  charge  of  the  booty)  of  the  appoint-
ment in  which  these  words  occur :  "  Bring  no  false  case  to
my  attention,  and  never  hold  justice  from  anyone."  x  The
tradition  then  gives  an  account  of  the  battle  and  mentions
that  an-Nu'man  was  the  first  to  be  killed  in  the  battle  of
Nihawand,  upon  which  Hudhaifah  carried  the  standard  and
Allah  gave  them  [the  Arabs]  victory.  As-Sa'ib  adds,  "  I
gathered  the  booty  and  divided  it.  After  that  there  came
to  me  a  spy,2  saying,  'The  treasure  of  an-Nakhirkhan  3  is  in  305
the  castle.'  When  I  climbed  up  there,  I  found  two  chests
containing  pearls,  the  similar  to  which  I  never  saw  before.
I  then  made  my  way  to  'Umar  who,  having  not  yet  received
the  news,  was  roaming  in  the  streets  [of  al-Madinah]  and
making  inquiries.  Seeing  me,  'Umar  exclaimed,  'Oh!  what
news?' I  gave  him  an  account  of  the  battle  and  the  death

1  Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2597.

'  Cf.  Dinawari,  p.  145.

•Ibid.,  p.  145:  "Nukharijan".


THE  CONQUEST  OF  NIHAWAND  475

of  an-Nu'man  and  mentioned  the  case  of  the  two  chests.
'Umar  said  '  Go  and  sell  the  chests  and  divide  the  price
among  the  Moslems.'  Accordingly,  I  took  them  to  al-Ku-
fah,  where  I  met  a  young  man  of  the  Kuraish,  '  Amr  ibn-
Huraith,  by  name,  who  paid  their  price  from  the  stipends
of  [his  own]  family  and  the  warriors  of  its  members.  One
chest  he  took  to  al-Hirah,  where  he  sold  it  for  the  same
price  he  had  paid  me  for  both ;  and  the  other  he  kept.  This
was  the  first  part  of  the  fortune  'Amr  amassed."

Other  versions.  A  certain  biographer  reports  that  the
battle  of  Nihawand  was  fought  on  Wednesday  and  Thurs-
day and,  after  a  short  cessation,  fighting  was  continued  on
Friday.  He  reports  in  describing  the  battle  a  similar  tradi-
tion to  that  reported  by  Hammad  ibn-Salamah.

Ibn-al-Kalbi  from  abu-Mikhnaf : — An-Nu'man  camped
at  al-Isbidhahar 1  with  al-Ash'ath  ibn-Kais  commanding
his  right  wing  and  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah,  the  left  wing.
In  the  fight  that  ensued,  an-Nu'man  was  killed.  At  last  the
Moslems  won  the  victory;  and  that  conquest  was  termed
"  the  victory  of  victories."  The  conquest  of  Nihawand
took  place  on  Wednesday,  year  19,  and  according  to  others,
20.

Ar-Rifa'i  from  al-Hasan  and  Muhammad : — The  battle
of  Nihawand  took  place  in  the  year  21.  A  similar  tradi-
tion was  communicated  to  me  by  ar-Rifa'i  on  the  authority
of  Muhammad  ibn-Ka'b.2

Dinar  makes  terms  for  the  city.  Others  report  that  after
the  defeat  of  the  Persian  army  and  the  victory  of  the  Mos-
lems, Hudhaifah,  who  was  at  that  time  the  leader,  laid  siege
to  Nihawand,  whose  inhabitants  made  sorties  but  were  de-

1  Hamadhani,  pp.  211,  259,  and  Dinawari,  p. 143:  "  al-Isfidhahan " ;
Yakut,  vol.  i,  p.  239 :  "  Isbidhahan  ".

1  Cf.  Weil,  vol.  i,  pp.  88-94;  Muir,  Annals,  pp.  255-258;  Muir,  Cali-
phate, pp.  178-180;  Wellhausen,  Skiszen,  vol.  vi,  p.  97.


476  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

feated.  One  day  Simak  ibn-'Ubaid  al-'Absi  chased  a  Per-
sian who  was  accompanied  by  8  horsemen.  Simak  killed
all  eight,  as  each  of  them  in  turn  turned  against  him.  See-  306
ing  that  he  was  left  alone,  the  man  chased  yielded  and  laid
down  his  arms.  Simak  took  him  as  prisoner ;  but  as  he  spoke
Persian,  Simak  called  someone  who  understood  him  and
translated  what  he  said,  which  was,  "  I  shall  go  to  your
leader  that  I  may  make  terms  with  him  on  this  land,  pay
him  poll-tax,  and  give  thee  for  taking  me  as  prisoner  what-
ever thou  requestest.  To  thee  I  owe  a  great  deal  because
thou  didst  spare  my  life."  Simak  asked,  "  What  is  thy
name?"  and  he  replied,  "  Dinar  ".  Simak  led  him  to  Hu-
dhaifah  who  made  terms  with  him,  stipulating  that  the
kharaj  and  poll-tax  be  paid,  and  that  the  safety  of  the  pos-
sessions, walls  and  dwellings  of  the  inhabitants  of  his  city,
Nihawand,  be  guaranteed.  Nihawand  was  thereafter  called
Mah  Dinar.  Dinar  often  came  after  that  to.  Simak,  offer-
ing him  presents  and  showing  his  loyalty.

Mah  al-Basrah  and  Mah  al-Kufah.  Abu-Mas'ud  al-Kufi
from  al-Mubarak  ibn-Sa'd's  father : — Nihawand  was  one
of  the  places  conquered  by  the  people  of  al-Kufah,  whereas
ad-Dinawar  was  one  of  those  conquered  by  the  people  of
al-Basrah.  The  increase  of  the  Moslems  at  al-Kufah  made
it  necessary  that  the  lands  the  kharaj  of  which  was  divided
among  them  be  increased.  Consequently,  [the  district  of]
ad-Dinawar  was  given  them,  in  exchange  for  which  the
people  of  al-Basrah  were  given  [the  district  of]  Nihawand
which  formed  a  part  of  [the  province  of]  Isbahan.  The
excess  of  the  kharaj  of  ad-Dinawar  over  that  of  Nihawand
was  therefore  a  gain  for  the  people  of  al-Kufah.1  Niha-
wand was  thereafter  called  Mah  al-Basrah ;  and  ad-Dina-
war, Mah  al-Kufah.  All  this  took  place  during  the  cali-
phate of  Mu'awiyah.

1  Cf.  Caetani,  vol.  iv,  p.  502.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  NIHAWAND  477

The  meaning  of  "  al-Yamdn  ".  I  have  been  informed  by
certain  men  of  learning  that  Hudhaifah  ibn-al-Yaman  was
the  son  of  Husail  [Hisl]  ibn-Jabir  al-'Absi.  He  was  an
ally  of  the  banu-'Abd-al-Ashhal  of  al-Ansdr;  and  his  mother
was  ar-Rabab,  daughter  of  Ka'b  ibn-'Adi  of  the  'Abd-al-
Ashhal  tribe.  His  father  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Uhud
by  'Abdallah  ibn-Mas'ud  al-Hudhali,  who  killed  him  by
mistake,  taking  him  for  an  "  unbeliever  ".  In  accordance
with  the  Prophet's  order,  the  blood  money  was  paid;  but
Hudhaifah  distributed  it  among  the  Moslems.  According
to  al-Wakidi,  Husail  was  nicknamed  al-Yaman  because  he
had  commercial  interests  in  al-Yaman ;  and  whenever  he  ar-
rived in  al-Madinah,  people  would  say,  "  Here  comes  al-
Yamani  [of  which  al-Yaman  is  a  shortened  form]."  Ac-
cording to  al-Kalbi,  however,  Hudhaifah  was  the  son  of
Husail  ibn-Jabir  ibn-Rabi'ah  ibn-'Amr  ibn-Jurwah,  Jurwah
being  the  one  nicknamed  al-Yamani  after  whom  Hudhaifah
was  so  called,  although  between  the  two  many  generations
intervened.  Jurwah,  in  pre-Islamic  times,  killed  someone  307
and  fled  to  al-Madinah,  where  he  became  an  ally  of  the
banu-'Abd-al-xA.shhal.  His  people  called  him  al-Yamani
because  he  made  an  alliance  with  the  Yamanites.


CHAPTER  III
Ad-Dinawar,  Masabadhan  and  Mihrijankadhaf

Ad-Dinawar  makes  terms.  Abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  left  Ni-
hawand,  to  which  he  had  come  with  the  army  of  al-Basrah
for  the  reinforcement  of  an-Nu'man  ibn-Mukarrin.  On
his  way,  he  passed  by  ad-Dinawar  where  he  camped  for
rive  days,  in  which  he  was  offered  resistance  for  only  one
day.  The  people  of  ad-Dinawar  then  agreed  to  pay  tax
and  kharaj,  and  sought  safety  for  their  lives,  possessions
and  children.  Abu-Musa  granted  their  request  and  left
over  the  city  his  'dmil,  together  with  some  horsemen,  and
proceeded  to  Masabadhan,  whose  people  offered  no  resist-
ance.1

As-Sirawdn  makes  terms.  The  people  of  as-Sirawan
made  terms  similar  to  those  of  ad-Dinawar,  agreeing  to
pay  poll-tax  and  kharaj ;  and  abu-Musa  sent  detachments
and  conquered  all  the  lands  of  ad-Dinawar.  Others  assert
that  abu-Musa  conquered  Masabadhan  before  the  battle  of
Nihawand.

As-Saimarah  capitulates.  Abu-Musa  'Abdallah  ibn-
Kais  al-Ash'ari  sent  as-Sa'ib  ibn-al-Akra'  ath-Thakafi — who
was  his  son-in-law  through  his  daughter  umm-Muhammad
ibn-as-Sa'ib — to  as-Saimarah  the  chief  city  of  Mihrijan-
kadhaf. The  city  capitulated;  and  it  was  agreed  that  the
lives  of  the  inhabitants  be  spared,  that  no  captives  be  taken,
and  that  no  pieces  of  gold  or  silver  be  carried  away,  pro-

1  Cf.  Athir,  vol.  ii,  p.  409;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2477;  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.

393-

478


AD-D1NAWAR,  MASABADHAN  AND  MIHRIJANKADHAF  479

vided  the  inhabitants  paid  poll-tax  and  khardj  on  the  land.
As-Sa'ib  reduced  all  the  districts  of  Mihrijankadhaf.  The
more  reliable  report  is  that  abu-Musa  dispatched  as-Sa'ib
from  al-Ahwaz;  and  the  latter  reduced  Mihrijankadhaf.

Sinn  Sumairah.  Muhammad  ibn-'Ukbah  ibn-Musrim  l
ad-Dabbi  from  certain  sheikhs  of  al-Kufah : — When  the
Moslems  invaded  al-Jibal,  they  passed  by  the  eastern  summit
called  Sinn  Sumairah,  Sumairah  being  a  woman  of  the
Dabbah  [a  branch]  of  the  banu-Mu'awiyah  ibn-Ka'b  ibn-
Tha'labah  ibn-Sa'd  ibn-Dabbah  and  one  of  the  Emigrants.
Sumairah  had  a  tooth  [sinn  protruding  beyond  the  308
others] ; 2  hence  the  name  of  the  peak  Sinn  Sumairah.

Kanatir  an-Nu'man.  Kanatir  [arches]  an-Nu'man,  ac-
cording to  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi,  were  named  after  an-Nu'-
man ibn-'Amr  ibn-Mukarrin  al-Muzani,  who  camped  by
these  Kanatir,  which  had  been  standing  from  ancient  time.

Kathir  ibn-Shihab.  Al-'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  al-Kalbi  from
'Awanah: — Kathir  ibn-Shihab  ibn-al-Husain  ibn-dhi-1-
Ghussah-1-Harithi  belonged  to  the  'Uthman  party  and  often
spoke  evil  of  'Ali  ibn-abi-Talib,  and  dissuaded  men  from
following  al-Husain.  He  died  either  before  or  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  rebellion  of  al-Mukhtar  ibn-abi-'Ubaid.  Al-
Mukhtar  ibn-abi-'Ubaid  referred  to  him  when  he  said :  "By
the  Lord  of  heavens,  the  severe  in  punishment,  the  revealer
of  the  Book,  I  shall  surely  dig  the  grave  of  Kathir  ibn-Shi-
hab, the  transgressor,  the  liar."  Mu'awiyah  gave  him  for
some  time  the  governorship  of  ar-Rai  and  Dastaba,  which
he  held  on  behalf  of  Mu'awiyah  and  his  two  'amils,  Ziyad
and  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah.  After  that,  he  incurred  Mu-
'awiyah's  anger  and  was  flogged  and  imprisoned  by  him  in

1  Cf.  Mahasin,  vol.  i,  p.  700,  and  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2458:  " 'Ukbah
ibn-Mukram  ".

2  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2648.


48o  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

Damascus.  Shuraih  ibn-Hani'  al-Muradi  interceded  in  favor
of  Kathir;  and  he  was  released.  Yazid  ibn-Mu'awiyah,  for
selfish  reasons,  approved  of  following  Kathir  and  sid-
ing with  him,  and  wrote  to  'Ubaidallah  ibn-Ziyad,  asking
him  to  appoint  Kathir  over  Masabadhan,  Mihrijankadhaf,
Hulwan  and  al-Mahain  [the  two  Mahs],  which  he  did,  giv-
ing Kathir  many  villages  of  the  crown-domains  in  al-Jabal x
as  fief.  Here  Kathir  built  the  castle  which  bears  his  name
and  which  lies  in  ad-Dinawar.  Zuhrah  ibn-al-Harith  ibn-
Mansur  ibn-Kais  ibn-Kathir  ibn-Shihab  had  secured  many
crown-villages  at  Masabadhan.

Al-Khasharimah.  I  learned  from  a  descendant  of
Khashram  ibn-Malik  ibn-Hubairah-1-Asadi  that  the  Kha-
sharimah  came  first  to  Masabadhan  towards  the  end  of  the
Umaiyad  dynasty,  their  grandfather  being  an  emigrant
from  al-Kufah.

Kathir  made  governor.  Al-'Umari  from  al-Haitham  ibn-
'Adi : — Ziyad  was  one  day  on  a  trip  when  the  belt  of  his
robe  became  loose.  Kathir  ibn-Shihab  immediately  drew  a
needle,  that  was  stuck  in  his  cap,  and  a  thread  and  mended
the  belt.  Seeing  that,  Ziyad  said,  "  Thou  art  a  man  of  dis-
cretion; and  such  a  one  should  never  go  without  an  office."
Saying  this,  he  appointed  him  governor  over  a  part  of  al-
Jabal.

2or  al-Jibal  =  Persian  'Irak  or  Media. Meynard,  p.  151 ;  Kazwini.
p.  228;  Hamadhani,  p.  209;  Rustah,  p.  106.


CHAPTER  IV
The  Conquest  of  Hamadhan  309

Jarir  reduces  Hamadhan.  In  the  year  23  A.  H.,  al-Mu-
ghirah  ibn-Shu'bah  who,  after  the  dismissal  of  'Ammar  ibn-
Yasir,  was  the  'dmil  of  'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab  over  al-Ku-
fah,  dispatched  Jarir  ibn-'Abdallah  al-Bajali  to  Hama-
dhan.1 The  inhabitants  of  Hamadhan  offered  resistance
and  repelled  his  attacks,  in  the  course  of  which  Jarir  re-
ceived an  arrow  in  his  eye ;  and  he  remarked,  "  I  give  up
my  eye,  seeking  recompense  from  Allah  who  decorated  with
it  my  face  and  provided  me  by  means  of  it  with  light,  so
long  as  he  willed,  and  then  deprived  me  of  it  as  I  was  in  his
cause!"  After  that  he  reduced  Hamadhan,  which  made
terms  similar  to  those  of  Nihawand.  This  took  place
toward  the  close  of  the  year  23.  Its  inhabitants,  having
later  rebelled,  drove  Jarir  back;  but  he  finally  took  their
land  by  force.2

Other  versions.  According  to  al-Wakidi,  Jarir  reduced
Nihawand  in  the  year  24,  six  months  after  the  death  of
'Umar  ibn-al-Khattab.

It  is  reported  by  others  that  al-Mughirah  ibn-Shu'bah,
with  Jarir  leading  the  vanguard,  marched  against  Hama-
dhan and,  after  reducing  it,  put  it  in  charge  of  Kathir  ibn-
Shihab  al-Harithi.

The  terms  with  al-'Ala.  'Abbas  ibn-Hisham  from  his
grandfather  and  'Awanah  ibn-al-Hakam : — When  Sa'd  ibn-

1  Ecbatana. See  Meynard,  pp.  597-608.

*  Cf.  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  981 ;  Athir,  vol.  in,  p.  16.

481


482  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

abi- Wakkas  ruled  over  al-Kufah  in  behalf  of  'Uthman  ibn-
'Affan,  he  assigned  over  Mah  and  Hamadhan  al-'Ala'  ibn-
Wahb  ibn-'Abd  ibn-Wahban  of  the  banu-'Amir  ibn-Lu'ai.
The  people  of  Hamadhan  acted  treacherously  and  violated
the  covenant,  on  account  of  which  al-'Ala'  fought  against
them  until  they  surrendered.  The  terms  he  made  with
them  stipulated  that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  should  pay
khardj  on  their  land  and  tax  on  their  person  and  deliver  to
him  100,000  dirhams  for  the  Moslems;  and  that,  on  the
other  hand,  he  should  not  interfere  with  their  possessions,
inviolable  rights  and  children.

Mddharan.  According  to  ibn-al-Kalbi.  the  castle  known
by  the  name  of  Madharan  was  so  called  after  as-Sari  ibn-
Nusair  *  ibn-Thaur  al-Tjli,  who  camped  around  it  until  he
reduced  it.

Sisar.  Ziyad  ibn-'Abd-ar-Rahman  al-Balkhi  from  cer-  310
tain  sheikhs  of  Sisar : — Sisar  was  so  called  because  it  lay  in
a  depression  surrounded  by  thirty  hills.  Hence  its  other
name  "  Thalathun  Ra's ':  [thirty  summits].  It  was  also
called  Sisar  Sadkhaniyah  which  means  thirty  summits  and
a  hundred  springs,  because  it  has  as  many  as  one  hundred
springs.

Sisar  and  the  adjoining  region  were  pasture-lands  for  the
Kurds  and  others.  It  also  had  meadows  for  the  beasts  of  bur-
den and  the  cattle  of  caliph  al-Mahdi,  and  was  entrusted  to
a  freedman  of  his  called  Sulaiman  ibn-Kirat — whose  name
Sahra'  Kirat  in  Madinat  as-Salam  bears — and  to  a  partner
of  his,  Sallam  at-Taifuri,  Taifur  having  been  a  freedman
of  abu-Ja'far  al-Mansur  and  having  been  given  by  him  as
present  to  al-Mahdi.  When  in  the  caliphate  of  al-Mahdi  the
destitute  [sa'dlik]  and  villain  became  numerous  and  spread
over  al-Jabal,  they  chose  this  region  for  their  refuge  and

1  Cf.  Marasid,  vol.  iii,  p.  27.


THE  CONQUEST  OF  HAMADHAN  483

stronghold,  to  which  they  resorted  after  acting  as  highway-
men, and  from  which  they  could  not  be  called  back,  be-
cause it  was  a  boundary  line  between  Hamadhan,  ad-Dina-
war  and  Adharbaijan.  Sulaiman  and  his  colleague  wrote
to  al-Mahdi,  reporting  the  case  of  those  who  interfered
with  their  beasts  and  cattle.  Thereupon,  al-Mahdi  directed
against  them  a  great  army  and  wrote  to  Sulaiman  and  Sal-
lam,  ordering  them  to  build  a  city  and  occupy  it  with  their
associates  and  shepherds  and  use  it  as  a  refuge  for  their
beasts  and  cattle  against  those  who  threatened  them.  Ac-
cordingly, they  built  the  city  of  Sisar,  fortified  it,  and  made
people  settle  in  it.  The  district  [rustdk]  of  Mayanharaj  1
in  ad-Dinawar,  and  that  of  al-Judhamah  in  Adharbaijan
which  is  a  part  of  the  province  of  Barzah,  together  with
Rustuf 2  and  Khabanjar  were  added  to  Sisar ;  and  the
whole  was  made  into  one  district  that  was  put  under  one
'dtnil  to  whom  its  kharaj  was  paid.3

Later,  in  the  caliphate  of  ar-Rashid,  this  band  of  desti-
tute multiplied  and  badly  damaged  Sisar.  Ar-Rashid
ordered  that  it  be  repaired  and  fortified,  stationing  in  it
1,000  of  the  men  of  Khakan  al-Khadim  as-Sughdi,  whose
descendants  are  still  in  it.  Towards  the  end  of  his  cali-  31  r
phate,  ar-Rashid  appointed  Murrah  ibn-abi-Murrah  ar-Ru-
daini-l-'Ijli  over  Sisar.  'Uthman  al-Audi  attempted  to
wrest  it  from  his  hands,  but  failed,  succeeding4  only  in
wresting  all  or  most  of  what  Murrah  already  held  at
Adharbaijan.  Until  the  time  of  the  insurrection,  Murrah
ibn-ar-Rudaini  did  not  cease  in  the  days  of  Muhammad  ibn-
ar-Rashid  to  pay  the  fixed  kharaj  of  Sisar  which  he  had

!  Khurdadhbih,  p.  120. Hamadhani,  p.  240 :  "  Mayanmaraj  ".
4  ?  perhaps  rustdk ;  cf.  Yakut,  vol.  iii,  p.  216.

3  T-TamarlTipni nn oici-OACi


3  Hamadhani,  pp.  239-240.

4  According  to  Hamadhani,  p.  240,  he  failed  in  that,  too.


484  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

agreed  to  pay  annually.1  In  the  caliphate  of  al-Ma'mun,
Sisar  was  taken  from  the  hand  of  'Asim  ibn-Murrah  and
once  more  added  to  the  crown-domains  [diya  al-khildfah].

Al-Mafazah.  I  was  told  by  certain  sheikhs  from  al-Ma-
fazah, which  is  situated  near  Sisar,  that  when  al-Jurashi 2
ruled  over  al-Jabal  the  inhabitants  of  al-Mafazah  evacu-
ated their  town.  Al-Jurashi  had  a  general,  Hammam  ibn-
Hani'  al-'Abdi,  to  whom  most  of  the  people  of  al-Mafazah
yielded  their  villages  and  held  them  as  tenants  in  order  to
enjoy  his  protection.  Hammam  appropriated  the  villages
to  himself  and  used  to  pay  the  treasury  what  was  due  on
them  until  he  died.  His  sons  were  too  weak  to  hold  them.
After  the  death  of  Muhammad  ibn-Zubaidah,  when  al-Ma'-
mun was  on  his  way  from  Khurasan  to  Madinat  as-Sa-
lam,  he  was  met  by  certain  sons  of  Hammam  and  a  man
from  al-Mafazah  named  Muhammad  ibn-al-' Abbas,  who
told  him  the  story  of  the  place  and  informed  him  of  the  de-
sire of  all  the  people  to  give  up  their  lands  to  him  and  act  as
his  tenants  in  it  provided  they  be  protected  and  strength-
ened against  the  destitute  bands  and  others.  Al-Ma'mun  ac-
cepted their  offer  and  ordered  that  they  be  reinforced  and
strengthened  in  order  to  cultivate  the  lands  and  repair  them.
Thus  these  lands  were  added  to  the  crown-domains.

Laila-l-Akhyallyah.  According  to  a  tradition  communi-
cated to  me  by  al-Mada'ini,  Laila-1-Akhyaliyah  paid  a  visit
to  al-Hajjaj.  He  gave  her  a  present,  and  she  requested  him
to  write  and  recommend  her  to  his  'dmil  at  ar-Rai.  On  her
way  back,  Laila  died  at  Sawah,  where  she  was  buried.

1  Ar.  mukata'ah ;  M.  V.  Berchcm,  La  Propriete  Territorial  et  I'Impdt
Fonder  sous  les  Premiers  Calif es,  p.  45.

*  Cf.  "  al-Harashi  "  in  Ya'kubi,  p.  253.


CHAPTER  V
Kumm,  Kashan  and  Isbahan  312

Kumm  and  Kashan  reduced.  Leaving  Nihawand,  abu-
Musa  'Abdallah  ibn-Kais  al-Ash'ari  came  to  al-Ahwaz,  and
after  passing  through  it,  stopped  at  Kumm  which  he
reduced  after  a  few  days'  fight.  He  then  directed  al-Ah-
naf  ibn-Kais,  whose  name  was  ad-Dahhak  ibn-Kais  at-
Tamimi  to  Kashan,  which  he  took  by  force.  Abu-Musa
then  overtook  him.1

Jai  and  al-Yahiidiyah  capitulate.  In  the  year  23,  'Umar
ibn^al-Khattab  directed  'Abdallah  ibn-Budail  ibn-Warka'
al-Khuza'i  to  Isbahan.  Others  assert  that  'Umar  wrote  to
abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  ordering  him  to  direct  'Abdallah  at  the
head  of  an  army  to  Isbahan,  which  abu-Musa  did.  'Ab-
dallah ibn-Budail  conquered  Jai,2  which  capitulated  after
a  fight,  agreeing  to  pay  kharaj  and  poll-tax,  provided  the
population  be  guaranteed  the  safety  of  their  lives  and  all
possessions  with  the  exception  of  the  arms  in  their  hands.

'Abdallah  ibn-Budail  then  directed  al-Ahnaf  ibn-Kais,
who  was  in  his  army,  to  al-Yahudiyah,3  whose  inhabitants
made  terms  similar  to  those  of  Jai.

Thus  ibn-Budail  effected  the  conquest  of  the  territory
of  Isbahan  with  its  districts  over  which  he  acted  as  'amil  to

1  Cf.  Yakut,  vol.  iv,  pp.  15,  175.

*  A  part  of  Isbahan. Istakhri,  p.  198,  note  « ;  IJaukal,  p.  261 ;  Yakut,
vol.  ii,  p.  181 ;  Meynard,  pp.  188-189.
8  Another  suburb  of  Isbahan. Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  1045.

485


486  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

the  end  of  the  first  year  of  'Uthman's  caliphate,  at  which
time  'Uthman  appointed  as-Sa  ib  ibn-al-Akra'.

Bashir's  version.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd,  a  freedman  of
the  banu-Hashim,  from  Bashir  ibn-abi-Umaiyah : — Al-
Ash'ari  camped  at  Isbahan  and  proposed  to  the  people  the
idea  of  Islam,  which  they  refused.  He  then  proposed  that
they  pay  tax,  upon  which  they  made  terms  agreeing  to  pay
it.  The  very  next  morning  they  rebelled;  and  he  fought
against  them  and,  by  Allah's  help,  defeated  them.  Mu-
hammad ibn-Sa'd,  however,  adds,  "  In  my  view  this  refers
to  the  inhabitants  of  Kumm."

The  satrap  of  Isbahan.  Muhammad  ibn-Sa'd  from  Mu-
hammad ibn-Ishak: — 'Umar  sent  ibn-Budail  al-Khuza'i  to
Isbahan,  whose  satrap  [marzubdn]  was  an  aged  man  called
al-Fadusafan.1  Ibn-Budail  besieged  the  city  and  wrote  to
the  people  inciting  them  to  forsake  him.  Seeing  the  luke-  313
warmness  of  his  men,  al-Fadusafan  chose  thirty  archers,
in  whose  courage  and  obedience  he  confided,  and  fled  away
from  the  city  towards  Karman  with  a  view  to  joining  Yaz-
dajird.  As  soon  as  'Abdallah  knew  of  it,  he  sent  after
him  a  heavy  detachment  of  cavalry.  As  the  Persian
reached  a  high  place,  he  looked  behind  and  said  to  'Ab-
dallah, "  Take  heed  for  thyself,  no  arrow  of  ours  misses  its
mark.  If  thou  charge,  we  shoot;  and  if  thou  fight  a  duel,
we  will  fight!  "  A  duel  followed  in  the  course  of  which
the  Persian  gave  'Abdallah 2  a  blow  [with  the  sword]
which,  falling  on  the  pommel  of  his  saddle,  broke  it  and  cut
the  breast-girth  [of  the  horse].  The  Persian  then  said  to
'Abdallah,  "  I  hate  to  kill  thee  because  I  see  thou  art  wise
and  brave.  Wouldst  thou  let  me  go  back  with  thee  that  I
may  arrange  terms  with  thee  and  pay  tax  for  my  towns-

1Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2639:  "  al-Fadhusafan  ".

2  Caetani,  vol.  v,  p.  10,  takes  'Abdallah  to  be  the  one  who  delivered
the  Wow. Cf.  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2639.


KUMM,  KASHAN  AND  ISBAHAN  487

men,  of  whom  those  who  stay  will  be  considered  dhimmis,
and  those  who  flee  will  not  be  interfered  with?  The  city
I  will  turn  over  to  thee."  Ibn-Budail  returned  with  him
and  took  Jai ;  and  the  Persian  fulfilled  his  promise,  saying,
"  I  saw  that  ye,  people  of  Isbahan,  are  mean  and  disunited.
Ye,  therefore,  deserve  what  I  did  with  you."

The  territory  of  Isbahan  pays  kharaj.  Ibn-Budail  then
passed  through  the  plains  and  mountains  of  the  territory
of  Isbahan,  all  of  which  he  conquered,  treating  them  as  re-
gards kharaj  as  he  had  treated  the  people  of  al-Ahwaz.

Some  say  that  the  conquest  of  Isbahan  and  its  territory
was  effected  partly  in  the  year  23  and  partly  in  the  year  24.

Other  versions.  It  is  reported  by  others  that  'Umar  ibn-
al-Khattab  sent  at  the  head  of  an  army  'Abdallah  ibn-Bu-
dail,  who  met  abu-Musa,  after  the  latter  had  conquered
Kumm  and  Kashan.  They  both  now  led  the  attack  against
Isbahan  with  al-Ahnaf  ibn-Kais  commanding  the  van  of
abu-Musa's  army.  Thus  they  subjugated  all  al-Yahudiyah
as  described  above.  Ibn-Budail,  after  that,  reduced  Jai;
and  they  both  marched  through  the  territory  of  Isbahan
and  reduced  it.  The  most  reliable  account,  however,  is  that
Kumm  and  Kashan  were  conquered  by  abu-Musa ;  whereas
Jai  and  al-Yahudiyah,  by  'Abdallah  ibn-Budail.

Abu-Hassan  az-Ziyadi  from  a  Thakif  man : — In  Isbahan
stands  the  sanctuary  1  of  'Uthman  ibn-abi-l-'Asi  ath-Tha-
kafi.

Persian  nobility  embrace  Islam. Muhammad  ibn-Yahya
at-Tamimi  from  his  sheikhs : —  To  the  nobility  of  Isbahan
belonged  various  strongholds  in  Jafrabad  in  the  district  of 314
ath-Thaimarah  2-l-Kubra,  in  Bihjawarsan  3  and  in  the  fort

1  Ar.  mashhad — a  place  where  a  martyr  died  or  is  buried.

2  Ya'kubi,  p.  275 :  "  at-Taimara  " ;  cf.  Rustah,  p.  154,  & ;  Yakut,  vol.  i,
p.  908.

3  or  Kahjawarsan,  Pers.  Gah  Gawarsan. Yakut,  vol.  ii,  p.  II.


488  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

of  Marabin.1  When  Jai  was  reduced,  these  nobles  offered
homage,  agreeing  to  pay  the  kharaj;  and  because  they  dis-
dained to  pay  poll-tax,  they  became  Moslems.

Al-'Anbari  in  Isbahdn.  It  is  stated  by  al-Kalbi  and  abu-
1-Yakzan  that  after  al-Hudhail  ibn-Kais  al-'Anbari  was
appointed  governor  of  Isbahan  in  the  time  of  Marwan,  the
'Anbari  clan  moved  there.

Idris  ibn-Ma'kil  imprisoned.  The  grandfather  of  abu-
Dulaf  (abu-Dulaf  being  al-Kasim  ibn-'Isa  ibn-Idris  ibn-
Ma'kil  al-Tjli),  whose  occupation  consisted  in  preparing
perfumes  and  trading  in  sheep,  came  to  al-Jabal  with  a
number  of  his  relatives  and  occupied  a  village  at  Hama-
dhan  called  Mass.  They  became  wealthy  and  came  to  own
many  [crown]  villages.  One  day  Idris  ibn-Ma'kil  attacked
a  merchant  who  owed  him  money  and  choked  him.  Others
say  he  choked  him  and  took  his  money.  Therefore,  he  was
carried  away  to  al-Kufah,  where  he  was  imprisoned.  This
took  place  when  Yusuf  ibn-'Umar  ath-Thakafi  ruled  over
al-Trak  in  the  days  of  Hisham  ibn-Abd-al-Malik.

Al-Karaj  rebuilt.  After  that,  'tsa  ibn-Idris  came  to  al-
Karaj,2  which  he  reduced  and  whose  fort,  which  was  dilapi-
dated, he  rebuilt.  Abu-Dulaf  al-Kasim  ibn-'tsa  strength-
ened his  position  and  rose  into  eminence  in  the  eyes  of  the
sultan.  He  enlarged  that  fort  and  built  the  city  of  al-Ka-
raj  which  was  for  that  reason  called  after  him  Karaj  abi-
Dulaf. Al-Karaj  to-day  forms  a  district  by  itself.

Kumm's  rebellion  suppressed.  The  inhabitants  of  Kumm
threw  off  their  allegiance  and  withheld  the  kharaj.  Al-Ma'-
mun  directed  against  them  'AH  ibn-Hisham  al-Marwazi,
recruiting  him  with  troops  3  and  ordering  him  to  wage  war

1  Cf. Mukaddasi,  p.  402  : "  Sarimin  " ; Ya'kubi,  p.  275  : "  Mirabin  "  :
Yakut,  vol.  iv,  p.  382:  "  Marabanan  " ;  Hamadhani,  p.  263.

*  Meynard,  pp.  478-479.

s  Tabari,  vol.  iii,  p.  1093,


KUMM,  KASHAN  AND  ISBAHAN  489

against  them.  'Ali  did  so,  killed  their  chief,  Yahya  ibn-
'Imran,  razed  the  city  wall  to  the  ground  and  collected  over
7,000,000  dirhams  as  tax,  although  previous  to  this  they
used  to  complain  that  2,000,000  were  too  much  for  them  to
pay.

In  the  caliphate  of  abu-'Abdallah  al-Mu'tazz-Billah  ibn-
al-Mutawakkil-'Alallah,  they  once  more  threw  off  their  al-
legiance, upon  which  al-Mu'tazz  directed  against  them
Musa  ibn-Bugha,  his  'amil  over  al-Jabal,  who  was  conduct-
ing the  war  against  the  Talibites  who  appeared  in  Taba-
ristan.  Kumm  was  reduced  by  force  and  a  large  number  of
its  inhabitants  was  slaughtered.  Al-Mu'tazz  wrote  that  a
group  of  its  leading  men  should  be  deported.


CHAPTER  VI

The  Death  of  Yazdajird  ibn-Shahriyar  ibn-Kisra 315
Abarwiz  ibn-Hurmuz  ibn-Anushirwan

The  flight  of  Yazdajird.  Yazdajird  fled  from  al-Ma-
da'in  to  Hulwan  and  thence  to  Isbahan.  When  the  Mos-
lems were  done  with  Nihawand,  he  fled  from  Isbahan  to
Istakhr,  where  he  was  pursued,  after  the  conquest  of  Isba-
han, by  'Abdallah  ibn-Budail  ibn-Warka',  but  to  no  avail.
Abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari  came  to  Istakhr  and  attempted  its  con-
quest, but  did  not  succeed,  and  likewise  did  'Uthman  ibn-
abi-l-'Asi  ath-Thakafi  try  it  and  fail.

In  the  year  29  when  all  Persia  with  the  exception  of  Is-
takhr and  Jur  x  was  already  reduced,  'Abdallah  ibn-'Amir
ibn-Kuraiz  proceeded  to  al-Basrah.  Yazdajird  was  on  the
point  of  leaving  for  Tabaristan,  whose  satrap  had  invited
him,  when  Yazdajird  was  still  in  Isbahan,  to  come  to  Ta-
baristan which  he  told  him  was  well  fortified.  It  then
occurred  to  Yazdajird  to  flee  to  Karman,  to  which  ibn-
'Amir  sent  after  him  Mujashi'  ibn-Mas'ud  as-Sulami  and
Harim  ibn-Haiyan  al-'Abdi.  Mujashi'  came  and  stopped  at
Biyamand  in  Karman,  where  his  army  was  caught  by  a
snow  storm  and  nearly  annihilated,  few  only  surviving.
The  castle  in  which  he  resided  was  called  after  him  Kasr
Mujashi'. Mujashi'  then  took  his  way  back  to  ibn-'Amir.

As  Yazdajird  was  one  day  sitting  in  Karman.  its  mar-
cuban  came  in;  but  Yazdajird  felt  too  haughty  to  speak  to

1  Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.  2863 :  "which  is  Ardashir  Khurrah". Cf.  Meynard,

P-  23.

400


THE  DEATH  OF  YAZDAIIRD  4™

him,  and  the  marzuban  ordered  that  he  be  driven  out,  say-
ing, "Not  only  art  thou  unworthy  of  a  kingdom  but  even  of
a  governorship  of  a  village ;  and  if  Allah  had  seen  any  good
in  thee,  he  would  not  have  put  thee  in  such  condition!  "

Yazdajird  left  for  Sijistan  x  whose  king  showed  regard
for  him  and  exalted  him.  After  a  few  days  Yazdajird
asked  about  the  khardj  which  made  the  king  change  his  atti-
tude towards  him.

Seeing  that,  Yazdajird  left  for  Khurasan.  When  he
reached  the  boundary  line  of  Maru  he  was  met  by  its  satrap
[marzuban]  Mahawaih  2  with  great  honor  and  pomp.  Here
he  was  also  met  by  Nizak  Tarkhan  who  offered  him  some-
thing to  ride  upon,  gave  him  presents  and  entertained  him
bountifully.  Nizak  spent  one  month  with  Yazdajird,  after
which  he  left  him.  He  then  wrote  Yazdajird  asking  for  the
hand  of  his  daughter.  This  aroused  the  anger  of  Yazda-
jird, who  said,  "  Write  and  tell  him  '  Thou  art  nothing  but
one  of  my  slaves ;  how  darest  thou  then  ask  for  my  daugh-
ter's hand?  '  "  Yazdajird  also  ordered  that  Mahawaih,  the
satrap  of  Maru,  give  an  account  and  be  asked  about  the  316
money  he  had  collected.  Mahawaih  wrote  to  Nizak,  insti-
gating him  against  Yazdajird  and  saying,  "  This  is  the  one
who  came  here  as  a  runaway  fugitive.  Thou  hast  helped
him  in  order  to  have  his  kingdom  restored  to  him ;  but  see
what  he  wrote  to  thee!  "  They  both  then  agreed  to  put
him  to  death.

Yazdajird  slain.  Nizak  led  the  Turks  to  al-Junabidh  s
where  he  met  the  enemy.  At  first  the  Turks  retreated,
but  then  the  tide  turned  against  Yazdajird,  his  followers

1  Cf.  Michel  le  Syrien,  Chronique,  vol.  ii,  p.  424  (ed.  Chabot).

"Tha'alibi,  p.  743:  "Mahawait".

3  Yunabidh,  Yunawid  or  Kunabidh. Istakhri,  p.  273;  Qaukal,  p.  324;
Mukaddasi,  p.  321.


492  THE  ORIGINS  OF  THE  ISLAMIC  STATE

were  killed,  his  camp  was  plundered,  and  he  fled  to  the  city
of  Maru.  The  city  refused  to  open  its  gates ;  so  he  had  to
dismount  at  a  miller's  house  standing  on  the  bank  of  al-
Mirghab.1  Some  say  that  having  heard  of  that,  Mahawaih
sent  his  messenger  who  killed  him  in  the  miller's  house.
Others  assert  that  Mahawaih  incited  the  miller  and,  by  his
orders,  the  miller  killed  Yazdajird,  after  which  Mahawaih
said,  "  No  slayer  of  a  king  should  be  kept  alive  ",  and  he
ordered  that  the  miller  himself  be  put  to  death.  Still  others
claim  that  the  miller  offered  Yazdajird  food,  which  he  ate,
and  drink,  which  intoxicated  him.  In  the  evening,  Yazda-
jird took  out  his  crown  and  put  it  on  his  head.  Seeing  that,
the  miller  coveted  the  possession  of  the  crown,  and  raising
a  mill-stone  dropped  it  on  Yazdajird.  After  killing  him,
he  took  his  crown  and  clothes  and  threw  the  body  into  the
water.  When  the  news  came  to  Mahawaih,  he  put  the
miller  and  his  family  to  death  and  took  the  crown  and
clothes.  According  to  another  story,  Yazdajird  was  warned
against  the  messengers  of  Mahawaih  and  fled  away,  jump-
ing into  the  water.  When  the  miller  was  asked  about  him,
he  said,  "  The  man  has  left  my  house."  They  found  Yaz-
dajird in  the  water,  and  he  said,  "  If  ye  spare  me  I  will  give
you  my  belt,  ring  and  crown."  He  asked  them  for  some
money  with  which  he  could  buy  bread,  and  one  of  them  gave
him  4  dirhams.  Seeing  that,  Yazdajird  laughingly  said,
"  I  was  told  that  I  will  some  day  feel  the  need  of  4  dir-
hamsl '  Later  he  was  attacked  by  certain  men  sent  after
him  by  Mahawaih,  and  he  said,  "  Kill  me  not;  rather  carry
me  to  the  king  of  the  Arabs,  and  I  will  make  terms  with
him  on  your  and  my  behalf,  and  thus  ye  will  be  safe."
They  refused  and  choked  him  by  means  of  a  bow-string.

1  or  Marghab  or  Murghab,  also  called  Nahr  Maru. Tabari,  vol.  i,  p.
2872;  Haukal,  p.  315.


THE  DEATH  OF  YAZDAJIRD


493


His  clothes  they  carried  away  in  a  pouch;  and  his  body
they  threw  away  into  the  water.1

Fairiiz  taken  away  by  the  Turks.  It  is  claimed  that  Fai-
ruz  ibn-Yazdajird  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Turks,  who
gave  him  one  of  their  women  in  marriage;  and  he  settled
among  them.

1  Cf.  Tha'alibi,  pp.  746-747;  Tabari,  vol.  i,  pp.  2879-2881.


INDEX


Aban  b.  Sa'id,  124,  162,  174

Aban  b.  'Uthman,  82

Aban  b.  al-Walid,  294

Aban  b.  Yahya,  184

Abanain,  147

Abarwiz, 160,  277, 390,  441,  453,

455
'Abbas  b.  al-Walid,  263,  294
abu-l-'Abbas as-Saffah, 104, 233,

256,  282,  300,  328,  361,  368,  445,

446
al-'Abbas  b.  'Abd-al-Muttalib,  20,

49,  63,  69,  86,  124,  409
al-'Abbas  b.  Jaz',  226
al-'Abbas  b.  Muhammad,  288
al-'Abbas  b.  Zuf  ar,  225
al-'Abbasiyah,  371
al-'Abbasiyah (built by Hizar-

mard),  369
'Abd-al-'Aziz  b.  Haiyan,  258
Abd-al-'Aziz  b.  Hatim,  321
'Abd-al-'Aziz  b.  Marwan,  360,  362
'Abd-al-Hamid  b.  Yahya,  368,  466
'Abd  b.  al-Julanda,  116,  118
'Abd-al-Kais,  120,  130
'Abd-al-Malik  b.  Marwan,  54,  59,

75,  82,  83,  135,  180,  192,  195,  202,

219,  220,  221,  226,  238,  247,  248,

249,  250,  255,  282,  283,  294,  301,

321,  322,  341,  36o,  383-385,  449,

45o
'Abd-al-Malik  b.  Muslim,  324
Abd-al-Malik  b. Salih,  203,  238,

262,  289
'Abd-ai-Malik  b.  Shabib,  21
'Abd-al-Masih  b.  Amr,  390
'Abd-al-Masih  b.  Bukailah,  435
'Abd-al-Muttalib,  60,  77


'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  'Auf,  34,  424
'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  abi-Bakr,  135,

356
'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  Ghanm,  224
'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  Ilabib,  367, 368
'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  Ishak,  446
'Abd-ar-Rahman b. Muhammad,

104,  455,  465
'Abd-ar-Rahman  b.  Zaid,  356
'Abd-as-Samad  b.  'Ali,  25
'Abd-al-Wahhab  b. Ibrahim,  291-

292,  293
'Abd-al- Wahid  b.  al-Harith,  283
banu-'Abd-ad-Dar,  78,  81
'Abdallah  b.  'Abbas,  30
'Abdallah  b.  Abd-al-A'la,  396
'Abdallah b. 'Abd-al-Malik, 255,

289
'Abdallah  b.  'Abdallah,  129,  139
'Abdallah b. 'Ali, 193, 233, 300,

455
'Abdallah  b.  'Amir,  490
'Abdallah  b.  'Amr,  216,  217,  338,

352,  356,  358
'Abdallah  b.  Bishr,  237
'Abdallah  b.  Budail,  485-487,  490
'Abdallah  b.  Darraj,  450,  454
'Abdallah  b.  abi-Farwah,  397
'Abdallah  b.  al-Habhab,  367
'Abdallah  b.  Hadhaf,  127
'Abdallah  b.  al-Harith  b.  Kais,  139
'Abdallah  b.  al-Harith  b.*Naufal,

82
'Abdallah  b.  Hasan,  446
'Abdallah  b.  Hatim,  321
'Abdallah  b.  Hudhafah,  341,  347,

453
'Abdallah  b.  Kais,  375

495


496


INDEX


'Abdallah  b.  Khalid,  74
'Abdallah  b.  Mas'ud,  133.  H3,  427,

431-432,  477
'Abdallah  b.  Musa,  366
•Abdallah  b.  ar-Rabi',  105
'Abdallah  b.  Rawahah,  44,  47,  48
'Abdallah b. Sa'd,  337,  340, 350-

351,  356-359,  379-380
'Abdallah  b.  Siba',  80
•Abdallah  b.  Sufyan,  83
'Abdallah  b.  Suhail,  129
'Abdallah  b.  Tahir,  256,  283,  289
'Abdallah  b.  'Umar,  see  b.  'Umar
•Abdallah  b.  Wahb,  140
'Abdallah  b.  Zaid  b.  'Abdallah,  120
'Abdallah  b.  Zaid  b.  'Asim,  135,  140
'Abdallah  b.  Zaid  b.  Tha'labah,  135
'Abdallah b. az-Zubair b. al-

'Auwam,  74,  75,  76,  82,  219,  220,

247,  289,  322,  337,  356,  360
'Abdallah  b.  az-Zubair  b.  'Abd-al-

Muttalib,  174
umm-'Abdallah,  311
'Abidin,  232
al-Abna',  160-162
Abyssinia  (al-Habashah),  49,  118
Acre  f'Akka],  179,  180,  181,  220
'Adan,  107
Adhanah,  260
Adharbaijan, 319, 321. 324, 328,

472,  483
Adhramah,  281
Adhri'at,  105,  193,  214-215
Adhruh,  92-94,  105
'Adi  b.  'Adi,  322  "
'Adi  b.  Artat,  118
'Adi  b.  Hatim,  141,  432
'Adi  b.  Zaid,  446
Aflah  b.  'Abd-al-Wahhab,  371
al-Aghlab  b.  Salim,  369-370,  375
Ahmad  b.  Muhammad,  375
al-Ahnaf  b.  Kais,  485,  487
al-Ahwaz,  139,  449,  455,  479,  487
al-Ahwaz,  283,  485


Allah,  92-94,  105,  166

'Ain  al-Jamal,  461,  462

'Ain  ar-Rahbah,  463

'Ain  ar-Rumiyah,  281-282

'Ain  as-Said,  461,  462-463

'Ain  as-Sallaur,  228

'Ain  Shams,  341

392,  394-400,  407

'Ain  al-Wardah,  s.  v.  Ra's  al-'Ain

'Ain  Zarbah,  264

al-'Ain  al-Hamidah,  275

'A'ishah,  daughter  of  Hisham,  282

'A'ishah  ("the  Mother  of  the  Be-
lievers"), 21,  26.  40,  51,  70,  75.
135,  144

'A'ishah  b.  Numair,  30

Aiyub  b.  abi-Aiyub,  184

abu-Aiyub  Khalid,  19,  237

umm-Aiyub,  447

Ajamat  Burs,  432

Ajnadin  (Ajnadain),  174-175-  183.
208,  215,  216

Ajyad,  81

'Akabat  Baghras,  258

'Akabat  an-Nisa',  258-259

al-'Akik,  20,  27,  28,  39

'Akk,  31,  32

b.  al-'Akki,  370
. "Akubah,  357

al-'Ala'  b.  'Abdallah,  120,  121,  122,
123,  124.  127,  128,  129,  130,  131,

137

. al-'Ala'  b.  Ahmad,  331
al-'Ala'  b.  Wahb,  481-482
Aleppo  [lialab],  207,  224-226,  229

; Alexandretta  [Iskandarunah],  249,

253
I Alexandria  [al-Iskandariyah],  228,

338,  340,  344,  346-351,  352
'All  b.  Hisham.  488-489
' Ali  b.  al-Husain,  344
•Ali  b.  Sulaiman,  280,  206,  297


.


INDEX


497


'AH  b.  abi-Talib,  29,  52,  54,  62,  67,
94,  101,  103,  286,  321,  322,  358,
409,  423,  428,  432,  463,  479
'Ali  b.  Yahya,  263
'Alkamah  b.  'Ulathah,  197
Alusah,  279

Alyunah,  336,  338,  339,  347
'Amawas  [Emmaus],  213,  215,  270
Amid,  275,  278,  288
Amir  b.  Fuhairah,  26
Amir  b.  abi-Wakkas,  176,  208
abu-Amir  al-Ash'ari,  85
abu-Amir  ar-Rahib,  16,  17
banu-Amir  b.  Sa'sa'ah,  147
'Amk  Mar'ash,  294,  295,  296
'Amk  Tizin,  249,  250
'Ammar  b.  Yasir,  279,  425,  427,  431,

440,  469,  471,  481
'Ammuriyah,  225,  254,  258,  299
'Amr  b.  'Abdallih,  118,  119
147, 165-167, 178, 179, 186,  201,
213,  215,  216,  217,  219,  335-345,

346-351, 352-353. 355, 358, 379,

380
'Amr  b.  Hazm,  107,  108
'Amr  b.  Iluraith,  436,  476
'Amr  b.  al-Jarud,  133
'Amr  b.  Ma'dikarib,  183,  185,  412,

413,  415,  420,  439
Amr  b.  Mu'awiyah,  321
'Amr  b.  Mud  ad,  81
'Amr  b.  Sa'id  al-Ashdak,  184
'Amr  b.  Sa'id  b.  al-Asi,  58, 174,

247
'Amr  b.  Salim,  60,  61
'Amr  b.  Umaiyah,  34
'Amr  b.  'Utbah,  421
'Amr  b.  az-Zubair,  29
banu-'Amr  b.  'Auf,  16
banu-Amr  b.  Lu'ai,  135
banu-'Amr  b.  Mu'awiyah,  153,  150-

157
abu-'Amrah,  396


Anas  b.  Malik,  48,  396

Anas  b.  Sirin,  396

Anat,  279,  284

434,  445,  449,  488

'Anbasah  b.  Sa'id,  184,  442

al-Andalus  [Andalusia],  355,  365-
372

b.  al-Andarz'azz,  402

Ans,  159

Antabulus,  342,  352

Antartus,  205

Antioch  [Antakiyah],  175,  176,
180,  189,  202,  207,  209,  211,  213,
226-231,  246,  248,  249,  250,  253,
254,  255,  256,  257,  258,  259,  263,
336

Anushirwan,  306-308,  324-325,  4°3,

453,  454
al-'Arabah,  168
al-'Arabaya,  460
Arabia,  13,  103
'Arafah,  61,  62,  77
'Arajin,  231
Arakah  (Arak),  171
'Arandal,  193

Arashah,  of  the  Bali,  362,  397
'Arbassus,  241,  242
Ardabil,  323,  328
al-Arhadiyah,  28
'Arib  b.  ''Abd-Kulal,  109
al-'Arim,  j.  v.  Sudd
al-'Arish,  335
Arjil  al-Kubra,  329
Arjil  as-Sughra,  329
Arjish,  305,  313
Armaniyakus,  305,  309,  310
al-'Arsah,  30
Artahal,  318
Arwa,  daughter  of  'Abd-al-Mutta-

lib,  174
abu-Arwa  ad-Dausi,  166


498


INDEX


Arwad,  376

Arzan,  275

Asad  b.  'Abdallah,  445

abu-1-Asad,  455,  456

banu-Asad  b.  Khuzaimah,  145,  148,
278

al-Asbadhi,  120

Asbanbur,  434

Asbina,  431.  432

al-Ash'ath  b.  Kais  b.  Ma'dikarib,
153-158,  208,  211,  321,  412,  422,
432,  472,  475

b.  al-Ash'ath,  104

al-Ashban  [Spaniards],  365

Ashnas,  460

Ashush,  314

Ashut  b.  Hamzah,  331

Asia  Minor  [Bilad  ar-Rum,  By-
zantine Empire],  195,  207,  209,
232,  239,  253,  254,  260,  261,  263,
284,  285,  289,  290,  294,  296,  298,
299,  310,  384

Asid  b.  Zafir,  325

'Asim  b.  Murrah,  484

'Asim  b.  'Umar,  356

'Askalan,  219,  221-222

al-Aswad  al-'Ansi,  156,  159-162

•Attab  b.  Asid,  66,  87

al-Aus,  33
Autas,  85

'Auwam  b.  'Abd-Shams,  415


242,  243,  286
al-'Awasim,  202-203,  223-234,  253,

301
Azadbih,  390

405,  442
Azdisat,  314
'Azrah  b.  Kais,  469

Bab  Barikah,  306-307
Bab  al-Fil,  446-447
Bab  al-Lal,  318


Bab  al-Lan,  306,  307,  325,  328

Bab  Samsakhi,  307

Bab  ash- Sham,  282,  447

al-Bab  wa-1-Abwab,  306,  319,  324,

325,  327,  328
al-Bab ash-Sharki, 186, 187, 189,

190
Babil,  422,  432
Badham,  161
Badi',  414
Badlis,  275,  331
Badr,  129

Baduraiya,  408,  458
Baghdad (Baghdadh,  or  Madinat


28S,  395,  445.  446,  447,  457-464.

482,  484
Baghras,  228,  258
Baghrawand,  305
al-Bahrain,  120- 131,  140
Bahram  Jur,  446
Bahurasir,  417,  428,  434

328,  329
Baisan,  179
Bait  'Ainun,  197
Bait  Jabrin,  213
Bait  Lihya,  200
Bait  Mama,  245
Bait  Ras,  179
Bajarma,  422
Bajarwan,  328
Bajilah,  405,  407.  424-425
Bajuddah,  272
Bajunais,  305,  313
al-Bak,  331

Bakkar  b.  Muslim,  329
Bakr  b.  Wa'il,  120,  388,  395
abu-Bakr  b.  Muhammad,  71
abu-Bakr  as-Siddik,  20,  26,  28,  34,

38,  39,  46,  49,  5i,  52,  53.  54,  61,

73,  84,  96,  101,  107,  112,  117,  124,
127,  128,  129,  130,  134,  136,  137,
141, 143-150, 153-155, 160, 162,


INDEX


499


165-167,  169,  175,  213,  218,  375,

387,  389,  393,  397,  398
banu-Bakr,  61
abu-Bakrah  b.  Masruh,  85
Baiabakk,  171,  180,  198,  201,  228,

236,  245,  247,  251
al-Balanjar,  319.  320,  415
al-Balasajan,  319
Baldah,  204
Balis,  231-233
al-Balka',  173,  193,  197
Bana,  342
al-Bandanijain,  421
Banikiya,  392-394,  403,  404
Bara'  b.  Malik,  130,  131
al-Baradan,  399
Barah,  371
Bardha'ah,  305,  318,  319,  320,  321,

322,  324,  325,  329
Barik,  184
Barkah (in  Africa),  352-354,  360.

371
Barr  b.  Kais,  353
al-Barriyah,  281
al-Barshaliyah,  307
Barusma,  402
Barzah,  186

abu-Barzah-1-Aslami,  66
al-Basharudat,  342
Bashir  b.  al-Audah,  158
Bashir  b.  Sa'd,  392,  398

124,  139,  151,  180,  228,  264,  300,

375,  388,  396.  405,  410,  411,  436,

437,  441,  449,  455,  471,  476,  490
al-Bata'ih,  264,  452,  453-456
al-Bathaniyah,  193
Batihan,  Bathan  or  Buthan,  22,  25,

Wadi— 26
Batn  Marr,  32
al-Batrik  b.  an-Naka,  220
al-Ba'udah,  149
Bawazij  al-Anbar,  395


Bawazij  al-Mulk,  422

Bazabda,  275

Bazalit,  318

al-Bazzak,  451

Beirut,  194


368,  369
Bihjawarsan,  487
al-Bihkubadhat,  428
Bikrat  b.  Ashut,  289
Bilal,  26
Bilhit,  340
al-Bima,  351

Bishr  b.  Maimun,  282,  459
Bishr  b.  Safwan,  366,  367
Bistam,  416
Bistam  b.  Narsi,  422
Biyamand,  490
Bugha  (a  freedman  of  al-Mu'ta-

sim),  319
Bugha-1-Kabir,  33*-332
al-Bujah,  381,  382
Buka,  229,  246,  250,  259
Bukailah,  392
Bukh,  309

Bukrat  b.  Ashut,  331
Bulunyas,  205
Biiran,  406
Burs,  410,  416

Busbuhra  b.  Saluba,  392-393,  421
al-Busfurrajan,  305,  307,  313,  315,

331
Bushair  b.  Yasar,  45,  46,  47
Busir,  342

Busr  b.  abi-Artat,  172,  356,  357,  358
Busra,  171,  172,  173,  193,  234
al-Butah.  149
Butnan  Habib.  229
al-Buwaib,  406
Buwailis,  232
al-Bu\vairah,  36
Buzakhah,  144,  145,  147
Byzantine  Empire,  J.  V.  Asia  Minor


5oo


INDEX


Constantine  [Kustantin  b.  Alyun],

287,  290-291,  293,  299
Constantine,  son  of  Heraclius,  347
Constantinople,  179,  207,  209,  347,

376

347,  383
Cordova  [Kurtubah],  365

Crete  [Ikritish],  376

Cyprus  [Kubrus],  180,  235-243

Dabba,  117
banu-Dabbah,  397
Dabik,  264,  295

Dabil,  305,  312,  314-315,  32i,  330
Dadhawaih,  161,  162
ad-Dahhak  b.  Kais,  s.  v.  al-Ahnaf
ad-Dahhak  al-Khariji,  328
Dailam,  441
ad-Dailam,  441
Dair  al-A'war,  406,  443
Dair  Hind,  406,  443
Dair  al-Jamajim,  431,  443
Dair  Ka'b,  417,  443
Dair  Khalid,  186,  198
Dakuka,  422
Damalu,  263-264

Damascus [Dimashk], 167, 172,
173, 176, 178, 182, 183, 186-199,

200, 20I, 202, 2l6, 217, 219, 301,

320,  366,  480

D  ami  rah,  342

Dar  al-'Ajalah,  80-81

Dar  al-Kawarir,  78,  80-81

Dar  an-Nadwah,  80-81

Dara,  275

Darauliyah,  255

Darb  al-Hadath,  295,  296,  298

ad-Darb  (Darb  Baghras),  210,  254

abu-ad-Darda'  'Uwaimir,  186,  216,

217
Darin,  129,  130
Darusat,  450
Dasht  al-Warak,  313


ad-Daskarah,  421

Dastaba,  479

Dastumaisan,  454

Dathin,  167

Da'ud  b.'Ali,  456

ad-Daukarah,  450

abu-Dharr  al-Ghifari,  237

abu-Dhu'aib  Khuwailid,  356

Dhufafah  b.  'Umair,  324

Diduna,  317

Dijlah  (district),  259

Dijlah,  see  Tigris

Dijlat  al-Basrah,  388,  453

Dikahlah,  342

Dimyat,  342

Dinar,  475-476

Dinar  b.  Dinar,  294


480,  483
Dirar  b.  al-Azwar, 149,  393,  394,

415
Diyar  Mudar,  278
Diyar  Rabi'ah,  278,  281
ad-Dubbiyah  (ad-Dabiyah),  168
banu-Dudan,  306
ad-Dudaniyah,  306,  318,  328
abu-Dujanah Simak, 35, 36, 37,

135,  139
abu-Dulaf  al-Kasim,  488
Duluk,  202,  231,  297
Dumat  al-Hirah,  96,  97,  400
Dumat  al-Jandal,  95-97,  I71
Duraid  b.  as-Simmah,  85
ad-Durdhukiyah,  306
Durna,  389,  401
ad-Dustan,  244

Egypt  (Misr),  20,  180,  191.  215,
216,  335-345,  35i,  352,  353,  356,
358,  359,  360,  37i,  372,  379,  381,

383
Euphrates  [al-Furat],  232,279,284,
285,  293,  311,  403,  406,  410,  428,
432,  443,  445,  45i,  453,  456


INDEX


;oi


Fadak,  37,  50-56,  58

Fadalah  b.  'Ubaid,  237

al-Fadhandun,  460

al-Fadl  b.  al-'Abbas,  215

al-Fadl  b.  Karin,  206

al-Fadl  b.  Rauh,  369

al-Fadl  b.  Yahya,  330

al-Fadusafan,  486

Faid,  389.  405

Fairuz  (dihkan),  422

Fairuz  b.  ad-Dailami,  160-162

Fairuz  b.  Jushaish,  129

Fairuz  b.  Yazdajird,  493

al-Faiyum,  341

Fakh,  79

Fakhitah,  daughter  of  'Amir,  129

Fakhitah, daughter of Karazah,

235
al-Falalij,  394,  421
al-Fallujatain,  407
Famiyah,  201-202
al-Farafisah-1-Kalbiyah,  29
Faraj  b.  Sulaim,  s.  v.  abu-Sulaim
Faranjah  [France],  366
al-Farazdak,  450
al-Farma',  335
Farrukhbundadh,  392
Farwah  b.  Iyas,  390
Farwah  b.  Musaik,  160
abu-Farwah  'Abd-ar-Rahman,  397
umm-Farwah,  155
al-Fasilah,  229

Fatimah,  52,  53,  54,  55,  61,  99
al-Fauwarah,  175
abu-1-Fawaris,  262
banu-Fazarah,  146
Fihl,  176-177,  216
Filan,  309,  324,  327
al-Fuja'ah,  149,  158
Fukair,  29

Furat  b.  Haiyan,  141
al-Furu',  28,  29
al-Fustat,  335,  336,  341,  347,  350


al-Ghabah,  24

al-Ghabah  (the  city  of),  130
Ghabat  b.  Hubairah,  282
umm-Ghadban,  128
al-Ghamr,  147-148
al-Ghamr  b.  Yazid,  282
banu-Ghanm  b.  'Auf,  17

442
Ghatafan,  144,  148
Ghazzah,  168,  213
Ghumik,  323
Ghurabah,  141
Ghurah,  141

Habbar  b.  Sufyan,  174

Habib  b.  'Abd-ar-Rahman,  368

Habib  b.  Maslamah,  208,  227,  229,
231,  241,  246,  273,  275,  287,  289,
296,  298,  309,  311-318,  320-321

Habib  b.  Zaid,  135,  140

umm-Habib  as-Sahba',  169

banu-Habibah,  93,  94

umm-Habibah,  208

Habtar,  128

al-Hadi,  s.  v.  Musa

al-Hadikah,  135,  141

IJadir  IJalab,  224-225

Hadir  Kinnasrin,  223

Hadir  Taiyi',  224-225

al-Hadithah,  280

Hadithat  al-Mausil,  288,  311

al-Hadrah,  381

Hadramaut,  107,  112,  153,  156,  157

Hafs  b.  abi-l-'Asi,  125

abu-Hafs  'Umar  b.  'Isa,  376

Haidar  b.  Kawus,  330

al-Ha'ir,  460

abu-1-Haitham  Malik,  50

abu-1-Haiyaj  al-Asadi,  435

Hajar,  no,  120,  121,  122,  123,  124

Hajar,  151

al-Hajjaj  b.  'Atik,  437

al-Hajjaj  b.  al-Harith,  175


502


INDEX


al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf, 75, 76, 104,
no,  112,  250,  259,  366,  428,  431,

433,  449-450,  452,  454,  455,  456,

465,  466,  484
Hakam  b.  Sa'd  al-'Ashirah,  32
al-Hakam  b.  Mas'ud,  404
umm-Hakim,  182
Halab  as-Sajur,  231
Hamadhan,  410,  471,  481-484,  488
Ham  ah,  201-202
Hamdan,  109,  160,  444
Hammad  al-Barbari,  78,  81
al-Hammarin,  82
Hamra'  Dailam,  441
Hamzah b. 'Abd-al-Muttalib, 80,

135
Hamzah  b.  Malik,  297
Hamzah  b.  an-Nu'man,  58
Hamzin,  323,  326
Hani'  b.  Kabisah,  390
al-Hani  wa-1-Mari,  280-281
umm-Hani',  52

banu-Hanifah,  133,  134,  135,  136
Hanzalah,  b.  ar-Rabi',  394
Hanzalah,  b.  Safwan,  367
banu-Hanzalah,  149,  150
al-Harajah,  112
al-Harak,  313

82,84
umm-Haram,  235,  237
Harim  b.  Haiyan,  490
Harish,  369-370
al-Harith  b.  'Abd-Kulal,  109
al-Harith  b.  'Amr,  322
al-Harith  b.  al-Hakam,  356
al-Harith  b.  Hani',  443
al-Harith  b.  al-Harith,  175
al-Harith  b.  Hisham,  175,  215
al-Harith  b.  Khalid,  83  *
al-Harith  b.  abi-Shimr,  209
Harithah  b.  Tha'labah,  33
banu-Harithah,  24
al-H'irnaniyah,  272


al-Harrah,  21,  22,  27,  30,  396

Harran,  272-274,  282,  291

Harthamah  b.  A'yan,  221,  261,  262,
370

Harim  ar-Rashid,  78,  81,  83,  105,
117,  202,  221,  224,  233,  238,  244,
252,  257,  260,  261,  263,  264,  280,
282,  283,  293,  297-298,  299,  300,
370,  376,  459,  460,  483

abu-Harun  as-Sulami,  280

al-Haruniyah,  264

Hasan  b.  Hasan  b.  'Ali,  463

al-Hasan  b.  'Ali,  49,  99,  155

al-Hasan  b.  'Ali-1-Badhaghisi,  330

al-Hasan  b.  Kahtabah,  261,  288,
292,  295,  296,  329

al-Hasan  b.  'Umar,  281

Hashim  b.  Subabah,  67

Hashim b. 'Utbah, 208, 420-422,

469
al-Hashimiyah,  300,  445-446
Hasmadan,  322
Hassan  b.  Mahawaih,  258
Hassan  b.  Malik,  190
Hassan  an-Nabati,  454,  455
Hassan  b.  an-Nu'man,  360
Hassan  b.  Thabit,  36,  188,  218
Hatim  b.  an-Nu'man,  321,  322
abu-Hatim  as-Saddarati,  369
Haudhah  b.  'Ali,  132,  133
abu-1-Haul,  184
Hauran,  173,  193,  197
Hawarih,  317
Havvazin,  85
Heraclius [Hirakl],  174,  175,  176,


2ii,  253,  254,  344
Hibal  b.  Khuwailid,  145
Hibra,  197

157,  165,  168,  261,  286,  353,  381,

389
Hilal  b.  'Akkah,  308
Hilal  b.  Daigham,  260


INDEX


503


Hilal  b.  'Ullafah,  415

Hima  an-Naki',  23

Hima  ar-Rabadhah,  23

al-Himar,  210,  379

Hims  [Emesa],  174,  US,  180,  198,
200-206,  2li,  212,  216,  217,  223,
228,  270,  275,  294,  295,  301,  320

Himyar,  108,  109

Hind,  daughter  of  'Utbah,  207

Hind,  daughter  of  Yamin,  155

390,  39i,  392,  393,  394,  398,  400,
403,  404,  407,  410,  421,  437,  442,
444,  447,  462,  475

Hisham  b.  'Abd-al-Malik,  83,  181,
238,  256,  258,  280,  282,  290,  323,
324,  325,  350,  360,  366,  367,  451,

454,  488
Hisham  b.  al-'Asi,  147,  173
Hisn  al-Hadath,  260,  282,  296-297
Hisn  Kaludhiyah,  291,  293
Hisn  Kamkh,  287-288,  291
Hisn  Malikiya,  408
Hisn  Mansur,  299-300
Hisn  Maridin,  275
Hisn  Salman,  230
al-Hisn  b.  Ma'bad,  407
Hit,  279,  280,  463
Hiyar  bani-1-Ka'ka.',  225-226
Hubabah,  155
al-Hubal,  141
Hubash  b.  Kais,  210
al-Hudaibiyah,  45,  49,  60
Hudhaifah  b.  Mihsan,  117,  399-400
Hudhaifah  b.  al-Yaman,  320,  427,

430,  449,  472,  474,  475,  4/6,  477
abu-Hudhaifah  b.  al-Mughirah,  74
abu-Hudhaifah  b.  'Utbah,  138
al-Hudhail  b.  Kais,  488
Hujair,  138
Hujr  b.  'Adi,  420,  470
abu-1-Hukaik,  43,  47
Hukaim  b.  Sa'd,  443

480,  490


Humaid  b.  Ma'yuf,  238,  376
Humran  b.  Aban,  396
Hunain,  66,  85,  86
abu-Hurairah (ad-Dausi),  22,  30,

63,  64,  124,  125,  126
Huraith  b.  'Abd-al-Malik,  96
Hurkus  b.  an-Nu'man,  170
Hurmuz  (village),  431
al-Hurmuz,  314
b.  Hurmuz  al-A'raj,  350
al-Hurmuzan,  472
Hurmuzjarad,  389
al-Husaid,  169
Husail  [Hisl]  b.  Jabir,  477
Husain  b.  Muslim,  263
al-Husain  b.  'Ali,  49,  99,  344,  393-

479
al-Husain  al-Khadim,  283
al-Husain  b.  Muhammad,  112
al-Husain  b.  Numair,  74,  75
al-Hutam,  127,  128
al-Huwairith  b.  Nukaidh,  67
Huwarin,  171
Huyai  b.  Akhtab,  41,  43,  44

Ibrahim  (son  of  the  Prophet),  35-

344

Ibrahim  b.  'Abdallah,  446,  455,  457

Ibrahim  b.  al-Aghlab,  370,  371

Ibrahim  b.  al-Mahdi,  228

Ibrahim  b.  Sa'id,  228

Ibrahim  b.  Salamah,  446

Idris  b.  Ma'kil,  488

Ifrikiyah,  337,  352,  355,  356-361,
362,  366,  367,  368,  369,  370

Ikhmim,  340-341

'Ikrimah  b.  abi-Jahl,  117,  155,  174

Ilyas  b.  Habib,  368

'Imran  b.  Mujalid,  371

146,  155,  158,  167,  230,  231,  247,
261,  286,  387,  389,  391,  393,  401,
405,  406,  409,  415,  432,  433,  454.
465,  488

'Irkah,  194


504


INDEX


'Isa  b.  'Ali,  295,  452,  463

'Isa  b.  Idris,  488

'Isa  b.  Ja'far,  117


490
al-Isbidhahar,  475
Ishak  b.  Ibrahim,  462
Ishak  b.  Isma'il,  330,  332
Ishak  b.  Muslim,  323,  328
Isma'il  b.  'Abdallah,  366
Istakhr,  490
Iyad,  169,  254,  443

229,  230,  231,  269-278,  289,  296,

313

Iyas  b.  Kabisah,  390

al-Jabal,  J.  v.  al-Jibal

Jabal  al-Ahwaz,  437

Jabal  al-Kabak,  309

Jabalah,  204,  205

Jabalah  b.  al-Aiham,  207-210,  254

Jaban,  389-390,  394,  401


190,  198,  214,  233
Jabr  b.  abi-'Ubaid,  404
Jabril  b.  Yahya,  257
Jabrin,  230
Jadhimah,  150
Ja'far,  38

Ja'far  b.  Sulaiman,  21,  76,  233
abu- Ja'far,  s.  v.  al-Mansur
umm-Ja'far Zubaidah, s. v. Zu-

baidah
Jafrabad,  487
Jai,  485,  487,  488
Jaifar,  b.  al-Julanda,  116,  118
Jaihan,  256,  293,  295
al-Jalinus,  401,  414,  416
Jalula',  419,  420-433,  469
Jamil  b.  Busbuhra,  421
al-Janad,  107
al-Janb,  454
al-Jar,  341


al-Jarajimah,  246-252,  258

Jarash,  179

al-Jarba',  92-94

al-Jardaman,  307,  318

Jarir  b. 'Abdallah, 159, 160,  389,

392,  393,  395,  405-407,  421,  424,
425,  432,  469,  470,  472,  481

Jarjaraya,  398

al-Jarrah b. 'Abdallah, 317, 322-

323

Jarshan,  309,  324
Jau  Kurakir,  148
al-Jaulan,  179

Ja'wanah  b.  al-Harith,  290,  323
al-Jazirah,  j.  v.  Mesopotamia
Jerusalem [Bait al-Mukaddas,

Iliya'],  15,  30,  182,  213-214,  217,

227,  300,  369
al-Jibal  or  al-Jabal,  319,  324,  325,

393,  420,  449,  480,  482,  484,  488,
489

Jidh',  32

al-Jifshish  al-Kindi,  154

Jisr  Manbij,  232,  275

Jisr  al-Walid,  259-260

al-Jisr,  399, 403-404, 406. Cf.  Kuss

an-Natif
Jordan  [al-Urdunn],  167,  176,  178-

181,  193,  201,  202,  216,  217,  244,

301
Jubail,  194
Judham,  92,  207,  218
al-Juhaf  w-al-Juraf,  82
Juhainah,  184,  441
al-Junabidh,  491

Junadah  b.  abi-Umaiyah,  375-376
Jurash,  91

al-Jurf,  28,  39,  114,  165,  218
Jurhum,  31,  32,  74
al-Jurjumah,  247,  249,  250
Jurna,  314

Jurwah  al-Yamami,  477

332


INDEX


505


Juwatha,  127,  128,  129,  140

Ka'b  al-Habr,  237

Kabalah,  306,  319

Kadas,  179

al-Kadisiyah, 277, 404, 408, 409-

416,  417-418,  424,  434,  439,  440,

441,  462
Kafarbaiya,  256,  257
Kafarjadda,  282
Kafarmara,  397
Kafartis,  349
Kafartutha,  281
al-Kahinah,  360
Kainuka',  33

367,  368,  369,  37o,  37i
Kais  b.  Hubairah,  160-162,  411
Kais  b.  Makhramah,  396
Kais  b.  Makshuh,  208,  414,  415
Kais  b.  Sa'd,  358
Kais  b.  Sakan,  116
Kaisariyah,  216-220,  335
banu-1-Ka'ka',  225-226
Kalarjit,  318
Kalb,  170,  391,  395

313,  320
Kalthum  b.  Hidm,  15
Kalwadha,  408
al-Kamibaran,  306,  319
Kanatir  an-Nu'man,  479
Kanisat  as-Sulh,  263
al-Kanisat  as-Sauda',  264
dhu-Kar,  462
al-Karaj,  488
Karda,  275

Karkh  Fairuz,  460,  461
Karkisiya,  171,  274,  275,  279,  281
Karman,  463,  486,  490
Karmasin,  469
Karraz  an-Nukri,  130,  131
Karyat  abi-Salabah,  443
al-Karyatain,  171


Kashan,  485-489

al-Kasim  b.  Rabi'ah,  321

Kasirin,  231-232


454,  472
Kasr  al-'Adasiyin,  391,  444
al-Kasr  al-Abyad,  371,  391
al-Kassah,  144,  145
Kastasji,  318
Katarghash,  258

Kathir  b.  Shihab,  416,  479,  480,  481
al-Katibah,  45,  46,  49
al-Katif,  124,  129

Katrabbul (or Kutrubbul), 400,
'458

Katul  Kisra,  461
al-Katul,  460
Katulah,  460
Kazwin,  441
Khabanjar,  483
Khabbab  b.  al-Aratt,  431,  432
al-Khabur,  279
Khaffan,  387,  390,  399

57,  58,  337
al-Khais,  340

Khaizan,  319,  320,  323,  324
al-Khaizuran,  433
Khakan,  308,  319
Khakan  al-Khadim,  483
Khakhit,  318.  325
Khalfun  al-Barbari,  372
Khalid  b.  'Abdallah,  437,  445,  450-

451
Khalid  b.  Malik,  159
Khalid  b.  Sa'id,  106,  107,  156,  160,

165,  166,  182,  183
Khalid  b.  Thabit,  214
Khalid  b.  'Umair,  324
Khalid  b.  'Urfutah,  413,  416,  419,

432
Khalid  b.  al-Walid,  63,  64,  65,  95,

96, 97, 118, 128, 129, 134, 136,

137, 145, 147-150, 158, 167-168,


506


INDEX


169-172. 173,  174. 176, 178,  179,
186-191,  193,  198,  200,  223,  270,
277-278,  293,  387-400,  405
Khalid  b.  Yazid  b.  Mazyad,  330
Khalid  b.  Yazid  b.  Mu'awiyah,  383
Khalij  Banat  Na'ilah,  29
Khanijar,  422
Khanikin,  420,  421,  430
Kharijah  b.  Hisn,  144,  145,  148
Khar ij ah b. Hudhafah, 336, 341,

346
al-Khasharimah,  480
Khashram  b.  Malik,  480
Khashram  as-Sulami,  327
b.  Khatal  al-Adrami,  66,  67
al-Khatt,  124,  129
Khaulan,  152,  157
Khauwat  b.  Jubair,  27
al-Khavvarnak,  446
al-Khazar,  305,  306,  309,  310,  319,

323,  324-327,  329
al-Khazraj,  19,  33
al-Khidrimah,  141
Khufash,  112
Khukhit,  318
Khumm,  77,  78
Khunan,  317
Khunasir  b.  'Amr,  229
Khunasirah,  229
al-Khuraibah,  388
Khuraim  b.  Aus,  392
Khurasan,  151,  205,  261,  262,  280,

292,  293,  297,  328,  368,  369,  446,

457,  459,  460,  484,  491
Khurrazad,  420

Khurzad  b.  Mahibundadh,  399
al-Khusus,  256
Khutarniyah,  422

Khuzaimah  b.  Khazim,  330
dhu-1-Kila',  263
al-Kilab,  307,  324
banu-Kilab,  34


Kinanah,  60,  61


169,  211,  369
Kinnasrin,  202,  211,  213,  214,  217,

223-234,  254,  259,  270,  294,  296,

297.  301
al-Kiryaun,  346,  349
Kisal,  317,  325

419,  430,  431,  432
Ku'aiki'an,  81

•

Kuba',  15,  16,  17,  18

Kubadh  b.  Fairuz,  305-306,  453

Kubakib,  292

Kubbash,  197

Kudamah  b.  Maz'un,  125

al-Kufah,  97,  102,  103,  104,  105,
133,  155,  169,  180,  211,  212,  228,
279.  300,  310,  320,  388,  306,  405,
411,  415,  427,  434-448,  449,  450,
455,  457,  464,  469,  471,  472,  475,
476,  479,  480,  481,  482,  488

Kuhuwit,  317

Kulthum  b.  'Iyad,  360,  367

al-Kulzum,  358,  381

Kumis,  471

Kumm,  485-489

Kura  'Arabiyah,  53,  143

74,  75,  77,  80,  86,  105,  112,  133,

475
banu-Kuraizah,  25,  40-41
Kurakir,  169,  170
Kurdbandadh,  434
Kurds,  319,  482
al-Kurr,  319,  323
Kurrah  b.  Hubairah,  147
Kurt  b.  Jammah,  407,  415
Kurtubah,  see  Cordova

•

Kurus,  202,  230
Kurz  b.  'Alkamah,  84
umm-Kurz,  424
Kusai  b.  Kilab,  77,  80
Kusam,  171


INDEX


507


Kusan  al-Armani,  312
al-Kushan,  244
Kuss  an-Natif,  403-404
Kutha,  408,  418,  422,  428
Kutham  b.  Ja'far,  54
al-Kutkutanah,  461
Kuwaifah,  434,  437

Labbah,  16

al-Ladhikiyah,  203-205

Laila  (daughter  of  al-Judi),  96-97

Laila-1-Akhyaliyah,  484


286
al-Laith  b.  Sa'd,  238
Lakhm,  92,  207,  362,  443
Lakit  b.  Malik,  117
al-Lakz,  309,  322,  326,  327
Liran,  309,  324
Ludd  [Lydda],  213,  220
dhat-al-Lujum,  314-315
Luwatah,  353-354

Ma'ab,  173
Ma'arrat  Misrin,  229
Ma'arrat  an-Nu'man,  202
Ma'bad  b.  al-' Abbas,  356,  359
al-Mada'in,  262,  416,  417-419,  420,

421,  430,  434,  435,  437,  441-442,
446,  449,  462,  490

al-Madhar,  389,  405

Madharan,  482

Madhhij,  160,  183,  323

Madh'ur  b.  'Adi,  387

al-Ma'din,  381

61,  80,  81,  84,  117,  124,  127,  129,
136,  144,  146,  155,  158,  162,  165,
184,  208,  214,  270,  341,  350,  356,
387,  391,  410,  411,  440,  451,  462,
472,  477

Madinat  as-Salam,  s.  v.  Baghdad

al-Mafazah,  484

al-Maghrib,  256,  335-345,  349,  352-


353,  356,  358,  359,  366,  367,  368,

369,  370,  37i,  372,  396

130,  314,  424,  44i
Mah  al-Basrah [Nihawand],  476,

482
Mah  Dinar,  476

Mah  al-Kufah  [ad-Dinawar],  476
al-Mahain,  471,  480
Mahawaih,  491,  492

257,  260,  261,  263,  264,  280,  295,

296,  297,  300,  381,  429,  433,  451,

457,  459,  482,  483

al-Mahdiyah,  297

Mahrdbah,  226

Mahrudh,  421

al-Mahuzah,  461

Maimadh,  324

Maimun  (village),  451

Maimun  b.  Hamzah,  282

Maimun  al-Jurjumani,  248

al-Maimun  (canal),  451

Maisarah  b.  Masruk,  254,  270

Maiyafarikin,  275

Majaz  al-Andalus,  365

Ma'kil  b.  Yasar,  472,  473

47,  60-76,  77-8i,  82-83,  86,  87,
88,  129,  146,  165,  184,  240,  451,

457,  459
Makna,  92-94
al-Maksalat,  188,  190
Malatyah,  287,  288,  289-293, 297,

312
Malik  b.  'Abdallah,  298
Malik  b.  Anas,  238
Malik  al-Ashtar,  254,  358
Malik  b.  'Auf,  85,  101
Malik  b.  Murarah,  107,  108
Malik  b.  Nuwairah,  149-150

233,  256,  257,  281,  289,  299,  330,

376,  446,  460,  484,  488


5o8


INDEX


Manbij,  202,  203,  231,  293,  298

Mandal  al-'Anazi,  261,  296

Manjalis,  316,  317

Mansur  b.  Ja'wanah,  299-300

Mansur  b.  al-Mahdi,  228

al-Mansur,  76,  78,  238,  251,  256,
257,  259,  260,  280,  288,  291,  292,
295,  299,  300,  312-313,  328,  329,
341,  360,  368,  369,  397,  429,  433,
445,  446,  448,  455,  457-459,  482

Manuwil,  347-348

Manzur  b.  Zabban,  144

Marabin,  488

Marakiyah,  205

Mar'ash,  231,  293-295

Mardanshah,  403,  410,  471,  472,  473

Mardanshah  b.  Zadan,  466

Ma'rib,  in

Marj  'Abd-al- Wahid,  282-283,  208

Marj  Dabil,  314

Marj  al-Hasa,  312

Marj  Husain,  263

Marj  'Rahit,  172

Marj  as-Suffar,  174,  182-185,  186,
216

Marj  Tarsus,  261

Martahwan,  229

Maru,  491,  492

Maru  ar-Rudh,  369

al-Marwah,  71

dhu-1-Marwah,  29,  166

al-Marwahah,  403

Marwan  b.  al-rlakam,  20,  54,  79,
84,  184,  294,  356,  360

Marwan  b.  Muhammad,  103,  205,
231,  256,  259,  294-295,  296,  299,
3H,  325-328,  368,  445,  466,  488

al-Marzubanah,  Badham's  wife,
160

Masabadhan,  459,  478-480

banu-Mashja'ah,  171

Mashra'at  (or  Furdat)  al-Fil,  452

Maskat,  306,  309,  319,  324

Maskin,  400


Maslamah  b.  'Abd-al-Malik,  228-
229,  232,  233,  248,  249,  258,  288,

323-325,  456

Maslamah  b.  Mukhallad,  359

Mass,  488

al-Massisah,  254,  255-259,  260,  264

al-Mauriyan  ar-Rumi,  312

al-Mausil,  261,  277,  400,  458

Mayanharaj,  483

Mayazdiyar  b.  Karin,  206

al-Mazihin,  278

Mesopotamia  [al-Jazirah],  176,
191,  202,  207,  251,  254,  269-283,
287,  289,  290,  291,  292,  294,  296,
297,  299,  300,  309,  312,  313,  314,
320,  328

Mid'am,  57

Midlaj  b.  'Amr,  279-280

abu-Mihjan  b.  Habib,  404,  414

Mihran,  393,  405-408

Mihrijankadhaf,  478-480

Mikha'il,  295,  296

Mikyas  b.  Subabah,  67

Mi'lak  b.  Saffar,  322

Milhan  b.  Zaiyar,  200

Mirbala,  313

al-Misrain,  83,  449

Mt.  Lebanon,  248,  250-251

Mt.  al-Lukam  [Amanus],  246,  247

Mu'adh  b.  Jabal,  107,  108,  109,  no,
in,  215.  233-234,  242,  375

Mu'awiyah b. Hudaij, 347, 357,

358,  359,  375,  380
Mu'awiyah  b.  abi-Sufyan,  54,  59,

64,  79,  84,  86,  103,  135,  151,  155.
179,  180,  183,  184,  191,  194-197,
204,  205,  213,  216-219,  227,  228,
235-238,  250,  255,  269,  271,  278-
279,  287,  289,  293,  309.  3io.  311.
320,  321,  341,  342,  344,  357,  358,

359,  375,  376,  441,  450,  454,  463,
464,  470,  476,  479

Mu'awiyah  b.  Yazid,  359
al-Mubarak  at-Tabari,  55,  56


INDEX


509


Mudhainib,  25,  26
al-Muffarraj  b.  Sallam,  372
al-Mughirah  b.  abi-l-'Asi,  125
al-Mughirah  b.  Shu'bah,  101,  321,

410-412,  427,  436,  440,  44i,  447,

450,  463,  464,  472,  473,  475,  479,

481
Muhaiyisah  b.  Mas'ud,  50,  51
abu-1-Muhajir,  359
al-Muhajir b. abi-Umaiyah, 106,

107,  IS4-I57,  160,  162
Muhakkim  [Muhakkam]  al-Yama-

mah,  I34-J36
Muhammad  b.  al-'Abbas,  484
Muhammad  b.  'Abdallah  b.  'Abd-

ar-Rahman,  288-289
Muhammad  b.  'Abdallah  b.  Hasan,

446,  457
Muhammad b. 'Abdallah b. al-

Hasan  b.  'Ali,  55,  56
Muhammad b. 'Abdallah al-

Kummi,  381-382
Muhammad  b.  'Abdallah  b.  Sa'id,

184
Muhammad  b.  al-Aghlab,  371
Muhammad  b.  al-Ash'ath,  155,  288,

361,  368
Muhammad  b.  abi-Bakr,  358
Muhammad  b.  abi-Hudhaifah,  357,

358
Muhammad  b.  Ibrahim,  293,  297,

298,  299
Muhammad  b.  Ishak,  396
Muhammad  b.  al-Kasim,  250,  259,

452
Muhammad  b.  Marwan,  202,  294,

314,  321,  322,  399
Muhammad  b.  Maslamah,  51,  344-

345,  392,  438
Muhammad  b.  al-Murtafi',  30
Muhammad  b.  Sa'id,  184
Muhammad  b.  Yahya,  55
Muhammad  b.  Yazid,  330


Muhammad  b.  Yusuf  ath-Thakafi,

112
al-Muhammadiyah,  296
Mujahid  b.  Jabr,  376
Mujashi'  b.  Mas'ud,  490
Mujja'ah b. Murarah, 132, 134,

136-137,  141
al-Muka'bar  al-Farisi,  129,  130,  131
al-Mukaukis,  339,  340,  343,  346-348
al-Mukhabbil,  83
Mukhairik,  35
Mukharrim  b.  Hazn,  399
al-Mukhtar  b.  abi-'Ubaid,  439,  479
Muks,  313

Muluk  at-Tawa'if,  309
al-Mundhir  b.  Hassan,  407
al-Mundhir  b.  Ma'  as-Sama',  225
al-Mundhir  b.  an-Nu'man,  127,  128
al-Mundhir  b.  Sawa,  120,  123,  127
al-Muntasir,  372
Murah,  258

Murrah  b.  abi-Murrah,  483
Musa  b.  Bugha,  206,  489

459
Musa  b.  Nusair,  358,  362,  365-366,

306,  397
abu-Musa-1-Ash'ari, 79, 85, 107,

267,  410,  411,  469,  478,  479,  485,

487,  490
al-Mus'ab  b.  az-Zubair,  247
al-Musafir  al-Kassab,  328
Musailimah  al-Kadhdhab,  128,  132-

140,  151,  159
al-Musaiyab  b.  Zuhair,  293,  297
Musha'il  al-Armani,  329
Muslim  b.  'Abdallah,  180,  228
al-Musta'in,  372
Mu'tah,  138,  195
Mu'tamir  b.  Sulaiman,  261,  296
Mutammam  b.  Nuwairah,  149-150

258,  259,  264,  299,  312-313,  446,

460,  461


5io


INDEX


al-Mutawakkil,  21,  56,  76,  81,  225,
229,  245,  249-250,  252,  263,  265,
287,  33i,  372,  375,  381-382,  460,
461

al-Mutawakkiliyah,  319,  461

al-Mu'tazz,  489

al-Muthanna  b.  Harithah,  169,  387-
388,  390,  394,  395,  399,  400,  401-
402,  404,  409-410,  413

Muzaikiya,  31

Nabateans,  247,  248,  250,  289,  417

Nabulus,  213,  245

banu-an-Nadir,  33,  34"39,  43,  51

Nafis  b.  Muhammad,  30,  396

Nahr  al-Amir,  452

Nahr  ad-Damm,  390

Nahr  Durkit,  428

Nahr  Mahdud,  433

Nahr  al-Malik,  408,  422,  428

Nahr  al-Mar'ah,  389

Nahr  Maslamah,  232

Nahr  Sa'd,  432

Nahr  Said,  280

Nahr  Shaila,  433

Nahr  as-Silah,  451

Nahr  as- Sin,  450

an-Nahrain,  407,  421,  431

umm-Nahshal,  82

Najd,  134,  165,  462


157,  240
an-Najraniyah,  102,  103
an-Nakhirkhan,  417,  474
an-Namir  b.  Kasit,  398
an-Nashastaj,  431,  432
an-Nashawa,  307,  3^5,  321,  330
Nasibin,  274-275,  278-279
Nasr  b.  Malik,  293
Nasr  b.  Sa'd,  293
an-Natat,  45,  46
Nihawand, 146,  471-477,  478,  481,

485,  490
Nikabulus,  230


an-Nil,  450

Nizak  Tarkhan,  491

Nizar,  435,  436

Nu'aim  b.  'Abd-Kulal,  109

Nu'aim  b.  Aus,  197

Nubia,  379-3S2

an-Nujair,  154,  155,  157.  158

an-Nukhailah,  393,  405-408,  410

an-Nu'man  Kail  dhi-Ru'ain,  109

an-Nu'man b. al-Mundhir, 127,

390,  394-395
an-Nu'man  b.  Zur'ah,  284
Nusair  abu-Musa,  396,  397
an-Nusair  b.  Daisam,  398-400

Orontes [al-Urunt  or  al-Urund],
200,  227

Palestine  [Filastin],  167,  168,  178,

193,  201,  202,  207,  213-222,  227,
232,  244,  301,  329,  353

Persies  (Furs),  45,  63,  120,  123,

180,  306,  387,  389,  390,  39i,  396,

401,  403,  407,  408,  409,  413,  414,

415,  416,  418,  419,  420,  421,  440,

441,  45i,  453,  454,  455,  462,  471

Rabad  Harran,  282

Ra'ban,  202,  231,  297


399,  407
Rabi'ah  b.  Bujair,  169,  170
Rafah,  213
ar-Rafikah,  280,  459
ar-Rahbah,  281
Rahwat  Malik,  298
ar-Rai,  410,  457,  471,  479,  484
ar-Raiya,  141,  142
ar-Rajjal [Rahhal] b. 'Unfuwah,

132,  133.  134
ar-Rakkah,  270-272,  274,  275,  278,

280,  281,  282,  290,  300,  322
ar-Ramlah,  220-221
Ramman,  147


INDEX


511


Ra's  al-'Ain,  275-277,  279

Raskifa,  274,  282

ar-Rass,  306,  319,  323

Rauh  b.  tlatim,  297,  330,  36Q

"  ar-Rawadif,"  247,  250

Rhodes  [Rudis],  375-376

ar-Ribab,  151,  446


287,  300
ar-Rumiyah,  419,  434
ar-Rusafah,  446,  457
Rusafat  Hisham,  280,  290
Rustam,  410-415,  420,  440,  441

Sabastiyah,  213

Sabat,  417,  419

as-Sabun,  129

Sabur,  433,  461


Sa'd  b.  Khaithamah,  15,  16

Sa'd  b.  Malik,  431,  432

Sa'd  b.  Mu'adh,  40,  41

Sa'd  b.  abi-Wakkas,  23,  24,  176,
230,  409-414,  416,  417,  418,  419,
420,  421,  422,  425,  431,  432,  434,

435,  437-442,  449,  469,  481-482
as-Sadif,  107,  156
as-Safa,  65,  71
Safiyah,  43-44
as-Sa'fukah,  142

Safwan b. al-Mu'attal, 270, 273,
'  287,  288

Sahl  b.  Hunaif,  36,  37
Sahl  b.  Sanbat,  330
as-Sa'ib  b.  al-Akra',  471-472,  474,

478,  479,  486
as-Sa'ib  b.  al-'Auwam,  136,  138
Sa'id  b.  'Amir,  270,  275,  278
Sa'id  b.  'Amr  b.  Aswad,  323-325,

484
Sa'id  b.  'Amr  b.  Sa'id,  184
Sa'id  b.  al-'Asi,  184,  310,  440
Sa'id al-Khair b. 'Abd-al-Malik,

280


Sa'id  b.  Sa'd,  81

Sa'id  b.  Salim,  329,  330

as-Sailahin,  394,  410

as-Saimarah,  478

Sajah,  151

as-Sakun,  153,  406

Salamyah,  205

Sala'us,  282

Salih  b.  'Abd-ar-Rahman,  465,  466


260,  291,  295
Salit  b.  Kais,  132,  401,  403,  405
Sallam  at-Taifuri,  482,  483
Salma,  413,  414
Salman b. Rabi'ah, 230-231, 310-

312,  318-320,  415
Samaritans,  217,  244-245
as-Samsamah  sword,  183-185
as-Samur,  323,  326
San'a',  106-107,  112,  156,  160,  162
as-Sanariyah,  318,  329
as-Sarah  (canal),  396,  416,  446,  458
as-Sarat,  32,  405
as-Sarir,  326
Sarjun  [Sergius],  301
Saruj,  274,  282
as-Sawad, 114,  387-400,  421,  422-

431,  449,  461,  462,  463,  465
as-Sawardiyah,  319,  443
as-Sayabijah,  250
Sa'yah  b.  'Amr,  43
Seleucia  [Salukiyah],  228
Shabath  b.  Rib'i,  151,  444
ash-Shabiran,  306,  319,  326
Shaila,  433
Shaizar,  201

abu-Shajarah  'Amr,  148
Shakkan,  319
abu-Shakir,  83
ash-Shamakhiyah,  329
Shamkur,  319
ash-Sharat,  193-194
Sharwan,  306,  309,  319,  324,  327,

329


512


INDEX


ash-Shikk,  45,  46

Shimshat,  287,  289,  294,  297,  305,

319

Shirawaih,  406

Shurahbil b. Hasanah, 165-167,

177,  178,  179,  186,  190,  201,  215
Shurahbil  b.  as-Simt,  211-212,  406
Shuraih  b.  'Amir,  388-389
Shurat,  118,  328
Sicily  [Sikilliyah],  375
Sidon  [Saida'J,  194
Siffin,  232,  415
Sijistan,  465,  491
Simak b. Kharashah, s. v. abu-

Dujanah
Simak  b.  'Ubaid,  476
asiSimt  b.  al-Aswad,  200-201,  211,

212,  224
Sinan,  255
as-Sind,  250,  252
Sinjar,  274,  276
Sinn  Sumairah,  479
Siraj  Tair,  305,  314
as-Sirawan,  478
Sirin  abu-Muhammad,  396,  398

33i,  332
Sisar,  482-484
Sisiyah  (Sis),  262
as-Siyasijun,  306,  307,  309
Slavs  [Sakalibah],  231,  325
St.  John's  Cathedral,  191-192
as-Sudd  al-'Arim,  30,  31
Sufyan  b.  'Abdallah,  89
Sufyan  b.  'Auf,  294
Sufyan  b.  Mujib,  194,  195
Sufyan  b.  'Uyainah,  238,  240
abu-Sufyan  b.  Harb,  61,  62,  63,  66.

87,  91,  101,  107,  157,  197,  208
Sughdabil,  306
Suhail  b.  'Amr,  129,  215
Suhaim  b.  al-Muhajir,  248
abu-Sulaim  Faraj  al-Khadim,  260,

262


banu-Sulaim,  148,  291

Sulaiman  b.  'Abd-al- Malik,  54,  198,

220,  222,  366
Sulaiman  b.  Kirat,  482,  483
Sulaiman  b.  Sa'd,  301
Sulalim,  45,  46
Sultais,  340,  349
Sumaisat,  273-274,  297
Suran,  372
Surra-man-ra'a,  330,  332,  372,  382,

460-461
as-Sus  al-Adna,  359,  362
as-Sus  al-Aksa,  362
Suwa,  169-170
Suwaid  b.  Kutbah,  38S,  389
Syria  (ash-Sham),  16,  17,  20,  32,

46,  50,  61,  75,  92,  96, 102, 103,


169,  173,  I7S,  176,  177,  180,  190,
191,  194,  198,  208,  209,  210,  211,
212,  214,  215,  216,  217,  219,  220,
223,  230,  231,  232,  234,  238,  241,
246,  247,  249,  250,  251,  254,  261,
269,  278,  279,  283,  287,  289,  202,
297,  299,  309,  310,  320,  338,  397,
400,  405,  409,  415,  471

Tabalah,  91

Tabaristan,  489,  490

Tabarsaran,  309,  324,  327

Tabuk,  92-94,  105,  167

Tadmur,  171

Taflis,  241,  305,  316-317.  325


170,  284-286,  398,  399
Taima',  31,  57-59

Taiyi',  224,  419

Takat  Bishr,  282,  447,  459

Takrit,  225,  399,  400

Talhah  b.  'Ubaidallah,  144,431,432

Tall  'Afra',  282

Tall  A'zaz  [or  'Azaz],  230

Tall  Jubair,  263


INDEX


513


Tall  Madhaba,  282

Tall  Mauzin,  275

Tamim  b.  Aus,  197

banu-Tamim,  120,  129,  149,  151,
278,  394

Tanjah  [Tangiers],  357,  359,  362

Tantikh,  223,  224,  254

Tarik  b.  Ziyad,  362,  365

460

Thabit  b.  Kais,  139,  145

Thabit  b.  Nu'aim,  328

ath-Thabja'  al-Hadramiyah,  155

Thakif,  85,  86,  87/248,  487

Tha'labah  b.  'Amr,  32,  33

ath-Tha'labiyah,  389,  405,  409

Thaniyat  al-'Ukab,  172,  200

That  b.  dhi-1-IIirrah,  161

ath-Thughur  al-Jazariyah  [Meso-
potamian  Frontier  Fortifica-
tions], 287-300

ath-Thughur  ash-Shamiyah  [Fron-
tier Fortresses  of  Syria],  253-
265

Thumamah  b.  al-Walid,  295

Tiberias  [Tabaraiyah],  178-179

45i,  453

at-Tirrikh,  313-314

Tizanabadh,  410,  432,  443

Tizin,  202,  229

Tripoli  [Atrabulus],  194-196

Tripoli  (Atrabulus)  in  Africa,  355,
357,  369

Tulaihah  b.  Khuwailid,  145,  146,
147,  414,  415,  420

Tulaitulah  [Toledo],  365

Ttiman,  326

Tunis,  360,  369

Turaifah  b.  Hajizah,  149

Turandah,  289-290

Turks,  307,  49i,  493

Tustar,  394,  401

Tyre  [Stir],  179,  180,  181,  220


'Ubadah  b.  al-yarith,  133
'Ubadah  b.  as-Samit,  201,  203-205,

209,  216,  217,  235,  237
Ubai  b.  Ka'b,  18,  69,  135
'Ubaid  b.  Murrah,  30,  396
abu-'Ubaid b. Mas'tid, 401-402.

403-404,  405,  406
'Ubaidah  b.  'Abd-ar-Rahman,  367
abu-'Ubaidah  b.  al-Jarrah,  65,  165-
166,  172,  173,  176,  177,  178,  1/9,
186-190,  193,  198,  200,  203,  205,
208,  2ii,  213-216,  223-224,  226-
232,  234,  244,  246,  254,  269,  270,

293,  411
'Ubaidallah  b.  al-Mahdi,  330
'Ubaidallah  b.  Ziyad,  151,  480
al-Ubullah,  388

413,  414,  463
Ukaidir  b.  'Abd-al- Malik,  95-97
'Ukbah  b.  'Amir,  342,  343

361,  367,  379
'Ukbara',  399

'Ukkashah  b.  Mihsan,  145,  146
Ullais,  389-390,  393,  404,  4©5
'Umair  b.  al-Hubab,  288
'Umair  b.  Sa'd,  209-210,  237,  241,

254, 272,  276-277, 279,  284-285,

287
'Umair  b.  Wahb,  336,  342
banu-Umaiyah, 52, 53, 135, 193,

221,  233,  251,  258,  296,  330,  368,

306,  397,  443,  455,  456
abu-Umamah  As'ad,  19,  218
abu-Umamah as-Sudai, 168, 230,

415
'Uman,  32,  116- 119,  124,  140,  147,

155
'Umar  b.  'Abd-al- 'Aziz,  20,  21,  28,
49,  52,  53,  54,  58,  70,  88,  92,  103,
104,  105,  112,  118,  100,  192,  204,


5H


INDEX


220,  238,  255,  258,  280,  290,  322,
342,  349,  354,  366,  428,  442
'Umar b. Hafs Hizarmard, 361,

368-369

'Umar  b.  Hubairah,  282,  445

'Umar  b.  al-Khattab,  20,  22,  23,  24,
27,  29,  34,  37,  42,  45,  46,  48,  49,
50,  51,  53,  54,  57,  58,  61,  62,  69,
70,  73,  74,  76,  81,  82,  87,  88,  89,
102,  103,  in,  123,  124,  125,  126,
130,  131,  138,  139,  Hi,  146,  147,
148,  150,  151,  152,  158,  162,  166,
173,  176,  179,  188,  190,  191,  194,
196,  197,  198,  208,  209,  210,  212,
214-219,  222,  227,  233-234,  235,
240,  241,  242,  253,  269,  270,  272,
273,  275,  276,  277-278,  279,  284-
286,  296,  310,  320,  335,  336,  337,
338,  339,  340,  34i,  343,  344,  345,
346,  347,  35i,  353-  355,  375,  379,
393,  395,  399,  401-402,  404,  405,
406,  409-412,  414,  416,  422-428,
430,  431,  434,  435,  438,  439,  440,
446,  448,  464,  469,  471-475,  481,
485,  487

73,  88,  356

al-Urdunn,  s.  v.  Jordan

'Urwah  b.  Zaid,  402-404

'Urwah  b.  az-Zubair,  29,  51,  107,
122,  343

'Utbah  b.  Ghazwan,  125,  410-41 1

'Utbah  b.  Rabi'ah,  81

'Uthman  b.  'Affan,  20,  25,  29,  51,
54,  67,  74,  76,  102,  104,  123,  141,
184,  194,  196,  222,  227,  232,  235,
253,  278,  279,  286,  287,  309,  3io,
311,  318,  320,  321,  340,  350,  35i,
356,  357,  358,  359,  396,  397,  43i,
432,  440,  482,  486

'Uthman  b.  abi-l-'Asi,  90,  124,  125,
487,  490

'Uthman  al-Audi,  483


'Uthman  b.  Hunaif,  102,  423,  426,

427,  428,  430
'Uyainah  b.  Hisn,  145,  146
'Uyun  al-'Irk,  463
'Uyun  at-Taff.  461-463

Wadi-1-Kura,  29,  31,  37-39,  32i

Wadi  Mahzur,  24,  25,  26

Wahshi  b.  Harb,  80,  135

Wais,  307,  315

banu-Wali'ah,  153-158

al-Walid  b.  'Abd-al-Malik,  20,  54,
76,  192,  193,  195,  220,  249,  250,
259,  260,  280,  362,  366,  376,  423,

454,  456
al-Walid  b.  'Ukbah,  102,  282,  311,

440,  447
al-Walid  b.  Yazid, 104,  238,  241,

298,  328,  367
Wardan,  342,  350
Warthan,  323,  324,  328
Wasit,  264,  449-452
Wasit  ar-Rakkah,  281
al-Wathik,  185,  249,  451,  460
al-Watih,  45,  46

Yafa  [Jaffa],  213

al-Yahudiyah,  485,  487

Yahya  b.  'Imran,  489

Yahya  b.  Sa'id,  50,  184

al-Yakusah,  175

Ya'la  b.  Munyah,  152,  157

al-Yamamah,  21,  76,  129,  132-142.

389,  394,  415

103, 106-115, 152, 156, 159-162,

165,  183,  226,  261,  435,  471,  477
al-Yarmuk,  175,  188,  207-211,  216,

223,  335
Yathrib (al-Madinah),  3h  33,  34.

44,86
Yazdajird  b.  Shahriyar,  406,  416,

417,  418,  420,  421,  469,  471,  486,

490-493


INDEX


515


Yazid  b.  'Abd-al-Malik, 112, 190,

204,  322,  366,  442
Yazid  b.  Hatim,  369
Yazid  b.  al-IJurr,  254
Yazid  b.  Makhlad,  262
Yazid  b.  Mu'awiyah,  59,  75,  76,  96,

103,  202,  236,  244,  245,  294,  359.

376,  480
Yazid  b.  al-Muhallab,  259,  366
Yazid  b.  abi-Muslim,  366
Yazid  b.  abi-Sufyan,  58, 166-168,

173,  178,  179,  186,  189,  190,  193,

194,  196,  201,  208,  215-217,  219,

269,  335,  341
Yazid  b.  'Umar,  445
Yazid  b.  Usaid,  319,  328-329
Yazid  b.  al-Walid,  238,  241,  368
Yuhanna  b.  Ru'bah,  92
Yusha'  b.  Nun  al-Yahudi,  50
Yusuf  b.  Muhammad,  330-331
Yusuf  b.  'Umar,  104,  105,  442.  488

az-Zab,  370
Zabid,  107

Zadan  Farrukh,  465-466
Zaid  b.  al-Khattab,  138,  139,  150
abu-Zaid  al-Ansari,  116,  117.  1 18.
404


Zamzam,  77

Zandaward,  389,  402,  450

az-Zarah,  129,  130,  131

az-Zawazan,  275

Zawilah,  352-354

b.  az-Ziba'ra  as-Sahmi,  68

Zibatrah,  282,  298-299

Zirikiran,  309,  326

Ziyad  b.  Abihi.  436,  437,  441,  447.

464,  479
Ziyad  b.  Labid,  107,  1 53-157,  160
abu-Zubaid  at-Ta'i,,282,  404
Zubaidah,  daughter  of  abu-1-Fadl.

81,  281,  451
az-Zubair  b.  al-'Auwam,  27,  28,  38.

39,  43,  49,  63,  65, 138,  336-338.

343,  431
Zuhair  b.  Kais,  360
Zuhair  b.  Sulaim,  417
Zuhrah  b.  IJawiyah,  413,  416,  440-

441
banu-Zuhrah,  80,  413
Zur'ah  b.  dhi-Yazan,  T07
Zuraib,  24
Zurarah,  432,  442
az-Zutt,  250,  251,  259,  264


ERRATA

Page 17,

line  4, for

■  "  is  ", read

"it".

25,

21,

"Ju'dubah",

"  ibn-Ju'dubah  ".

25,

28,

"'Umri",

'"Umari".

29,

7,

"  Warwah  ",

"  Marwah  ".

31,

3,

"Taima"',

"  Taima' ".

33,

11,

"  al-Arkam  ",

"  al-Arkam  ibn-'Amr  ".

36,

14  and  26,

"  Buwairah  ",

"  al-Buwairah  ".

45,

11,

"  tfudaibiyah  ■

"  al-tfudaibiyah  ".

49,

6,

"  al-IIassan  ",

"  al-yasan  ".

55,

17,

"al-Mubarik",

"al-Mubarak".

56,

2,

"al-Mubarik",

"al- Mubarak".

7%,

2,

"Sa'id",

"  Sa'id  ".

78,

1,

"  Hadram  ",

• • *

"  tfadrami ".

78,

9,

"Khadijah",

"  Khadijah  daughter  of
Khuwailid  ".

78,

11,

"  Shufiyah  ",

"  Shufaiyah  ".

80,

8.

"Mus'ab",

"  Mus'ab  ".

83,

29,

"  Ma'mum  ",

"  Ma'mun  ".

"3,

17,

"  al-'Abbas  ".

"  'Abbas  ".

"5,

4,

"  Zinad  ",

"  Zinad  ".

"7,

II,

"  al-Makhzumi ",

"  and  'Ikrimah  ibn-abi-Jahl
al-Makhzumi ".

142,

7,

"Sa'fuk",

"Sa'fuk".

150,

15,

"  Muttamam  ",

"  Mutammam  ".

151,

23,

"  'Abdallah  ",

'"Ubaidallah".

153,

4,

"  Bayadi ",

"  Bayadi ".

153,

11,12,22,24,

"Labid",

"  ibn-Labid  ".

155,

32,

"  Yamin  ",

"  Yamin  ".

160,

8,

"  Bayadi ",

"  Bayadi ".

166,

13,

"Arwa",

"  abu-Arwa  ".

175,

24,

"Yakusah",

"  al- Yakusah  ".

186

18,

"  Abu-ad-Darda*

"  Yazid  appointed  abu-ad-

appointed  ",

Darda' ".

194,

4,

"Bierut",

"Beirut".

197,

12,

"  tfutai'ah  ",

"  ^tai'ah  ".

204,

5,

"  'Abd-al-*Aziz  ",

"  'Umar  ibn-'Abd-al-
•Aziz  ".

206,

8,

"  Mayazdiyar  ",

"  Mayazdiyar  ".

517

5i8


ERRATA


Page  220,  line

29,

for  "  Batrik  ", read

"  Batrik  ".

221

8.

"  Abbas  ",

'"Abbas".

227,

28,

"abu-  ",

"  ibn-  ".

250,

20,

"Hafs",

"Eafs".

260,

32.

"  Hadath  ",

"  hadath  ".

276,

15,

"  Amr  ",

"  'Amr  ".

277,

26,

"  TJmar  ibn-  ",

'"Umair  ibn-".

282,

22,

"  'Af  ra' ",

"  'Afra' ".

282,

33,

"  Mawardi ",

"Mawardi".

287,

13,

"  Armenia  ",

"Armenia  IV".

305.

11,

"Bajunais".

"BLjunais".

306,

20,

"  Durdhukiyah  ",

"  Durdhukiyah  ".

328,

9,

"  ash-Shurat ",

"ash-Shurat".

361,

15,

"  Khuza'fi  ",

"  Khuza'i ".

375,

19,

"  Mu'adh  ",

"  Mu'adh  ".

376,

21,

"Ma'yuk",

"  Ma'yuf  ".

392,

32,

"  Mawardi ",

"  Mawardi ".

401,

1.

"  Khattab  ",

"Khattab".

421,

30,

"  Busbuhra  ",

"  Jamil  ibn-Busbuhra

428,

23,

"Mus'ab",

"Mus'ab".

432,

8,

"  Zurarah's  ",

"  Zurarah  ".
