ASSEMBLIES  OF  AL  HARIRI


THE


ASSEMBLIES  OF  AL  HAEIRI,

TEAHSLATED  FEOM  THE  AEABIC,

WITH  AH  IHTEODUCTIOH,

AND

NOTES

HISTOEICAL  AND  GRAMM'A'MCAJj.-


BY

THOMAS  CHENEEY  M.A.,

OF  Lincoln’s  inn,  bareister-at-law.


VOL.  I.

CONTAINING  THE  FIBST  TWENTT-SIX  ASSEMBLIES.


WILLIAMS  AND  NORGATE,

14,  HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN,  LONDON;

AND

20,  SOUTH  FREDERICK  STREET,  EDINBURGH.


1  8  6  7.


HEHTFOIiD

PRINTED  BT  SIlPHRIT  ADSTIN.


TMlEFAdE.


In  giving  to  the  woiid,  ut  the  cost  of  much  time  ami
labour,  this,  the  first  volume  of  a  compbdc  |  ruusIation  of
the  MuhAiofit  of  A1  Uariri,  it  is  lUMicssary  that  I  should
say  a  few  words  on  tlui  ohi('<ds  of  the.  Avork,  ami  flu;
principles  on  which  it  lias  iiiieu  evccufed.  The  iti-
ostiraahlc  value  of  the  Aralhc  langimge  is  admitted  by
every  scholar  and  by  every  practical  Oriental  linguisf.
It  is  the  most  perfeef  ami  (daborate  speech  of  the  family
to  which  it  belongs;  its  copiousness,  its  varied  iuid  deli¬
cate  inflexion,  the  bairned  ami  abtruso  grammar  that
has  been  built  upon  if,  give-  it  the  highost  importance
in  the  scientific  study  of  language.  It  is,  moreover,
the  sacred  and  classic  tongue  of  all  the  Mohammedan
peoples,  and  the  study  of  it  is  tlus  key  to  a  knowledge
of  the  thoughts,  habits,  ami  tcndmieies  of  tins  great
section  of  the  human  race.  A  vast  and  comprehensive
literature  rewards  the  pains  of  any  one  who  [lersever-
ingly  applies  himself  to  it.  Furthermore,  if  is  indis¬
pensable  to  a  real  knowledge  of  other  languages  which


VI


PREFACE.


have  great  historical  or  political  importance.  Por  the
full  tmdei'standing  of  its  sisters,  the  Hebrew  and  the
Syriac,  and  its  vassals,  the  Persian  and  the  Turkish,
the  language  of  the  Arabian  Peninsula  must  he  studied.
These  latter  modem  tongues,  especially,  can  only  be
known  inadequately  and  superficially  by  one  who  is
not  well  grounded  in  Arabic.  The  great  epic  poet
of  the  Persians  does,  indeed,  use  the  pure  speech  of
Iran ;  hut  succeeding  ages  brought  in  a  flood  of  Arabic
words  and  idioms,  until  the  literary  Persian  assumed
the  composite  diction  which  now  confuses  our  Indian
learners.  The  literary  Turkish  is  even  more  largely
commingled.  It  borrowed  both  directly  from  the  Arabs
and  indirectly  through  the  Persians.  Without  a  know¬
ledge  of  Arabic  it  is  difficult  to  read  intelligently  the
Odes  of  Baki,  and  still  more  the  historical  and  official
writings  of  the  modern  Osmanlis.  Por  though  the
polyglot  dictionaries  of  the  East  may  give  the  student
a  vague  knowlege  of  individual  Arabic  words  as  they
appear  in  other  languages,  yet,  without  a  grammatical
knowledge,  as  for  instance,  of  the  structure  of  the  verb,
and  the  mechanism  of  what  are  called  the  broken
plurals,  even  .the  vocabulary  must  be  misty  to  his  eyes ;
while  of  the  references  and  allusions  to  Arabic  litera¬
ture,  and  the  perpetual  iktibds  or  quotation  of  the  Koran,
he  must  remain  wholly  ignorant.


PREFACE.


Vll


The  difficulty  of  the  Arabic  language  has,  however,
confined  the  thorough  study  of  it  to  very  few,  to  the
detriment  of  all  Oriental  learning.  It  is  with  the
desire  to  smooth  the  path  of  the  student  that  I  have
undertaken  to  translate  and  annotate  the  work  of  the
most  learned  and  eloquent  of  the  Arabic  authors.  A
translation  may  have  two  objects ;  it  may  be  cither
intended  to  display  the  ti-anslator’s  felicity  of  diction,
as  when  scholars  produce  English  versions  of  Anacreon
or  Horace  for  the  amusement  of  those  who  arc  well
acquainted  with  the  originals,  a  piirsuit  for  which  I
cannot  say  that  I  have  any  high  esteem;  or  it  may
be  intended  to  fae-ilitato  th(>  study  of  a  difficult  original,
while  it  gives  the  translator’s  countrymen  generally
some  acquaintance  witli  a  foreign  author  who  deserves
to  bo  known  by  them,  thougli  they  cannot  hope  to  learn
his  language.  Tlu^  latter  has  been  the  object  proposed
in  the  present  translation.  It  is  a  lit(n-al  prose  render¬
ing  of  tlio  Makamat,  intended  primarily  to  help  the
student  in  Arabic,  and  with  this  view  I  have  always
guard(id  mysdf  from  being  seducod  into  paraphrase  by
th(^  desir(!  of  elegance.  The  text  of  the  author  has  been
rendered  throughout  as  closely  as  is  consistent  with
intelligibility;  but  the  translation  will,  I  believe,  liave
lost  nothing  thereby,  for  readers  of  true  taste  will  prefer
that  the  idiom  of  the  original,  strange  and  uncouth  as


Tin


PREFACE.


it  sometimes  may  be,  should  pierce  through  the  version,
rather  than  that  Hariri’s  diction  should  be,  as  it  were,
melted  down  and  remoulded  into  the  current  English  of
the  nineteenth  century.

In  this  version  there  is  no  attempt  to  imitate  the
plays  on  words,  or  the  rhyme  of  the  original.  Such  a
resemblance  in  form  could  only  be  attained  by  the
abandonment  of  all  accuracy,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the
chief  object  for  which  the  translation  has  been  under¬
taken.  But  the  parallelistic  rhythm  of  the  original  has
been  sufB.ciently  preserved,  and  on  the  whole  the  reader
will  be  able  to  gain  from  this  version  a  fair  idea  of  the
form  in  which  Hariri  cast  his  thoughts.  If  I  have
adopted  at  times  a  somewhat  antiquated  diction  it  has
been  naturally  suggested  by  the  work  itself.  One  of
the  earliest  students  of  the  Assemblies,  the  learned  and
critical  Albert  Schultens,  perceived  the  essential  cha¬
racter  of  Hariri’s  style.  He  says,  ^‘Hm  faces  quicquid
tenebrarum  stilus  Haririi  grandisonus  ac  mille  floribus
figurisque  variegatus  offundebat  diseussere,  laborem
quern  in  eo,  a  eapite  ad  calcem,  describendo  impen-
debam  compensante  summa  animi  voluptate ;  eo  quod
hoe  ia  scriptore  reperirem  id  quod  spe  atque  cogitatione
prseceperam,  eminentem  et  expressam  imaginem  priscrn
illius  grandiloquentiee  Orientalis,  qu4  liber  Jobi  exaratus
est,  qu^que  in  Psalmis,  in  Proverbiis,  in  rcliquo  cor-


FREFACE.


IX


pore  Bibliorum,  poetico  prsesertim,  ac  propTietico,  tarn
magnifice  tamque  insignite  se  exerit.”

The  notes  haye  been  primarily  designed  for  the
student,  but  care  has  been  taken  that  the  allusions  in
the  text  shall  be  sufficiently  explained  for  the  general
reader.  The  legends  of  the  heroic  warriors  of  the  Ig¬
norance,  Apa^iat  apeiov  avdoi,  their  proverbial  utterances,
their  genealogies,  their  feuds,  their  Days  or  battles,
their  usages  and  habits  of  life,  are  illustrated  from
many  sources,  and  references  are  given  which  will
further  aid  the  student.  As  this  pagan  antiquity  was
one  of  the  chief  studies  of  the  learned,  and  its  influence
largely  pervades  the  Assemblies,  some  knowledge  of  it
is  necessary  to  a  reader  of  Ilariri.  In  the  grammatical
notes  I  have  throughout  followed  the  system  of  the
Arabs,  being  convinced  of  the  futility  of  the  efforts
which  have  been  made  by  European  scholars  to  remould
the  Arabic  grammar  on  the  principles  of  the  Latin;  to
say  nothing  of  the  necessity  that  the  student  should
understand  the  grammatical  and  rhetorical  terms  of  the
native  writers,  without  a  knowledge  of  which  their
commentaries  and  explanations  are  unintelligible.  In
some  of  the  notes,  as  those  to  the  Twenty-fourth  Assem¬
bly,  rather  abstruse  questions  are  discussed,  but  they
will  have  no  exceeding  difficulty  to  any  one  who  has
taken  the  right  road  in  learning  the  languagi'.


X


PREFACE.


In  writing  Arabic  names  and  words  with.  European
letters  I  have  desired  to  combine  sufficient  accuracy
with  such  a  representation  of  the  word  as  shall  not  be
pedantic  or  uncouth.  The  Arabic  scholar  will  soon
perceive  the  system  that  has  been  adopted.  Fetliah  is
represented  by  a  or  e,  and  dammah  by  o  or  m,  hesreh
being  represented  by  i.  The  long  syllables  are  indi¬
cated  by  o,  u.  In  non-Arabic  names  I  have  generally
followed  the  popular  spelling,  as  it  is  to  be  found  in
European  books ;  some  well-known  names  also,  as  Basra,
Elufa,  Medina,  Mecca,  are  written  in  the  same  manner.
Following  high  authority  I  have  paid  no  attention  to
the  i‘rdb  in  composite  Arabic  names.  Notwithstanding
all  the  care  that  has  been  bestowed  on  the  proofs,  it
will  be  found  that  the  subscribed  points  and  other  signs
by  which  the  Arabic  letters  are  indicated  in  English  type
have  been  occasionally  omitted  or  misplaced.  These  in¬
accuracies  are,  however,  few  and  trifling.

The  present  volume  contains  a  long  Introduction,
which  dispenses  with  the  necessity  of  saying  more  in
this  place  ;  it  contains  also  the  opening  Address  of
Hariri,  and  the  first  twenty-six  Assemblies.  With  the
second  volume  there  will  be  published  an  Index  to  the
entire  work.


Page  12,  line  12,  for  mezduj  read  muzdawij.

Page  41,  line  28,  and  page  86,  line  15,  for  Muzaykiah  read  Muzaykiyd.
Page  101, line  2%  for  Laudian  read’Loxd^  Almoner's.

Pago  472,  line  22,  after  any  other  read  than  a.


INTRODUCTION.


Between  the  civilizations  of  Christendom  and  Islam
there  is  a  gulf  which  no  human  genius,  no  concourse
of  events,  can  entirely  bridge  over.  The  most  celebrated
Orientals,  whether  in  war  or  policy,  in  literature  or
learning,  are  little  more  than  names  for  Europeans.  A
student  here  and  there,  weary  of  the  beaten  track  of
Greek  and  Roman  antiqixity,  may  wander  into  the  paths
of  Eastern  knowledge,  but  to  the  great  number  of
educated  men  they  appear  but  an  impassable  jungle,
into  which  it  is  wearisome  and  useless  to  penetrate.
The  transcendant  difficulty  of  the  chief  language '  of
the  Mohammedan  world,  and  the  belief  that  it  repre¬
sents  only  an  arrested  civilization  and  a  decaying  re¬
ligion,  arc  sufficient  to  turn  the  intelligence  of  the
West  to  what  appear  to  be  more  open  and  more  profit¬
able  ficldsv,  Eor  these  reasons  it  is  necessary  that
even  the  most  esteemed  and  famous  of  Arabic  writers
should  be  introduced  by  an  English  translator  as  if
they  wore  almost  unknown  to  his  countrymen.  I
may  assume  without  danger  that  this  is  the  case  with
A1  Hariri,  of  Basra.  This  eminent  man  of  letters


2


INTRODUCTIOm


has  been  rewarded  with,  a  fame  such  as  few  have  ever
obtained.  For  more  than  seven  centuries  his  work
has  been  esteemed  as,  next  to  the  Eloran,  the  chief
treasure  of  the  Arabic  tongue.  Contemporaries  and
posterity  have  vied  in  their  praises  of  him.  His  ‘‘As¬
semblies  ”  have  been  commented  with  infinite  learning
and  labour  in  Andalusia,  and  on  the  banks  of  the
Oxus.  His  poetry  has  been  sung  at  the  feasts  of
the  great,  and  by  the  camel-drivers  in  the  desert.
To  appreciate  his  marvellous  eloquence,  to  fathom  his
profound  learning,  to  understand  his  varied  and  end¬
less  allusions,  have  always  been  the  highest  object  of
the  literary,  not  only  among  the  Arabic-speaking  peo¬
ples,  but  wherever  the  Arabic  language  has  been  scien¬
tifically  studied.  But  the  very  qualities  which  have
procured  him  this  extraordinary  reputation  among  big
countrymen  and  co-religionists,  have  hindered  the  exten¬
sion  of  it  elsewhere.  His  genius  is,  by  its  nature,  so
bound  up  with  the  structure  and  traditions  of  the  Arabic
language,  of  which  his  chief  work  may  be  said  to  be  a
compendium,  that  the  Orientalists  of  Europe  have
shrunk  from  the  diflB.culties  of  translation,  and  have
even  been  unwilling  to  dwell  upon  merits  which  it  is
impossible  that  those  whom  they  addressed  should
ever  understand.  One  important  exception  is,  however,
to  be  noticed.  German  literature  has  been  enriched  with
a  brilliant  imitation  of  the  Assemblies,  by  the  gifted
Eiickert.  But  in  spite  of  this  great  service  to  Hariri’s
reputation,  he  may  be  said  to  be  almost  unknown  to  the
Western  world.  I  propose,  therefore,  ta  devote  a  few
pages  to  his  life  and  times,  to  the  character  of  the  work
which  I  have  undertaken  to  translate,  and  annotate,  and


INTRODUCTION.


3


to  tlie  class  of  literature  of  which  it  is  the  most  emineut
example.'

Ahu  Mohammed  al  Kasim  ibu  'Ali  ibn  Mohammed
ibn  'Othman  al  Hariri  was  born  at  Basra,  in  the  year
446  of  the  Hijra  (a.®.  1054  or  1055),  and  he  died  in
515  (1121-2),  or  516  (1122-3),  in  his  native  city.  His
life  was,  therefore,  contemporary  with  the  first  Crusade,
and  the  irruptions  of  the  Christian  hosts  added  much  to
the  political  troubles  amid  which  his  lot  was  cast.  The
whole  aspect  of  the  Mohammedan  world  had  changed
since  the  days  when  Basra,  with  its  sister  and  rival
city  Kufa,  had  been  founded  by  the  victorious  Arabs  of
'Omar’s  Khalifate.  Power  had  passed  away  from  the  Arab
race  in  Syria  and  Irak ;  military  enterprise  had  decayed,
or  existed  only  in  the  primitive  form  of  the  gJiazw  or
foray.  The  intellectual  vigour,  as  well  as  the  political  su¬
premacy,  of  the  Arabs  was  waning  in  those  regions.  The
Abbasside  Khalifs  of  the  eleventh  century  were  almost
as  much  the  shadows  of  former  power  as  the  Emperors
of  the  East ;  they  retained  little  more  than  their  reli¬
gious  supremacy.  In  the  boyhood  of  Hariri,  ToghrU
Beg,  the  grandson  of  Seljuk,  had  been  confirmed  by  the
powerless  Khalif  Al  Za  ’im  bi-amr  allah,  in  all  his  con¬
quests,  loaded  with  honours,  saluted  as  Zing  of  the
East  and  West,  and  endowed  with  the  hand  of  the
Zhalif’s  daughter.  In  the  next  reign,  that  of  Al
Muktadi,  the  Seljuk  Turks  captured  Jerusalem,  and  by
their  outrages  against  the  Christian  pilgrims,  excited  the
Western  nations  to  the  Crusade.  At  the  time  when  the

*  In  treating  of  the  life  of  Hariri,  I  have,  availed  myself  largely
of  the  facts  brought  together  by  M.M.  Eeinaud  and  Derenbourg,
in  their  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  De  Sacy’s  Hariri.


4


INTRODUCTION.


young  Hariri  was  imbuing  his  mind  with  the  learning  of
his  forefathers,  his  race  had  in  Irak  and  Syria  been
subjected  to  a  foreign  domination,  and  the  power  of  the
Turks  had  been  extended  from  the  Bosphorus  to  the
Persian  Grtilf  and  the  Indus.

The  lot  of  the  Arabs  subjected  to  Turkish  domination
does  not,  however,  seem  to  have  been  a  hard  one.  The
rulers  felt 'their  own  barbarism,  and  had  some  reverence
for  the  genius  and  learning  of  those  they  governed.
These  had  not  been  conquered,  in  the  military  sense  of
the  term.  Their  government  had  fallen  to  Turkoman  ad¬
ministrators,  through  the  weakness  of  the  successors  of
the  Prophet ;  but  the  sanctity  of  the  Khalif  was  still  felt,
and  his  supremacy  nominally  acknowledged.  The  influ¬
ence  of  religion  maintained  for  the  Arab-speaking  in¬
habitants  of  Irak  a  su£S.cient,  and  even  an  excessive,
respect.  The  Koran,  the  revealed  word  of  God  himself,
had  existed  from  eternity  in  the  Arabic  language,  and  to
understand  and  explain  it  was  the  privilege  of  those  only
who  were  versed  in  the  mysteries  of  Arabie'grammar  and
divinity.  While  to  the  boldest  soldier  of  the  dominant
race  the  sacred  book  was  unintelligible,  and  served  only
as  an  amulet  to  keep  off  Jinn  and  Ghuls,  and  the  like
supernatural  enemies,  the  poorest  Bedouin  who  wan¬
dered  in  from  the  desert  could  appreciate  its  doctrine
and  precepts,  its  lofty  diction,  its  refined  and  learned
grammar,  its  entrancing  rhythm,  and  feel  the  full  assur¬
ance  that  such  a  masterpiece  of  language  could  only
have  been  communicated  from  on  high.  In  accepting
Islam,  the  Turks  had  also  accepted  the  authority  of  the
Koran,  in  religious  and  civil  matters,  and  that .  authority
could  be  expounded  only  by  Fukalid^  or  jurisconsults,


INTR  OB  ZrCTIOW.


5

■who  had  studied  the  Arabic  text,  by  Mutelcellimun^  or
scholastic  divines,  or  by  the  follo-wers  of  the  great
Imams,  ■who  had  fixed  the  rites  of  public  ■worship.  Hor
vas  the  influence  of  the  learned  Arabs  merely  religious.
Their  literature  and  science  'were  dominant  in  the  East,
and  their  vocabulary  leavened  the  languages  of  the
races  with  whom  they  came  in  contact.  The  extent  of
this  influence  may  be  perceived  by  comparip.g  the  Per¬
sian  of  Eirdousi  with  that  of  Sa'di.  The  language  of  the
former,  who  flourished  in  the  early  part  of  our  eleventh
century,  is  tolerably  pure,  while  the  Gulistan,  which  was
produced  some  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  is  in
some  places  little  more  than  a  piecing  together  of  Arabic
words  with  a  cement  of  the  original  tongue.  It  is  to  be
noticed,  also,  that  the  latter  author  introduces  continually
Arabic  verses,  as  the  highest  ornaments  of  his  work,  and
assumes  that  his  readers  are  acquainted  with  this  classic
and  sacred  tongue.  In  the  time  of  Hariri  this  influence
was  in  full  poAver :  nor  Avas  the  political  supremacy  of  the
Arabs  at  an  end.  Though  the  lOialifate  of  Bagdad  had
fallen  on  evil  days,  yet  the  Arab  rule  was  still
vigorous  in  Spain,  and  the  wide-spread  race  still
asserted  a  high  place  in  arms  and  government,  as  well
as  in  letters.  In  Asia  the  Arabs  were  to  the  northern
invaders  all,  and  more  than  all,  that  the  Greeks  were  to
the  Homans.  Melck  Shah,  the  son  and  sxtccessor  of
Alp  Arslan,  was,  under  the  guidance  of  hisWazir,  Nizam
al  Mulk,  a  patriotic  prince.  The  finances  were  restored,
oppressive  taxes  were  taken  off,  commerce  was  facili¬
tated  by  the  construction  of  roads,  canals,  and  market¬
places  ;  person  and  property  were  made  secure'  ;

^  Weil,  Gcscliicto  der  Clialifen,  vol.  III.,  p.  122.


6


INTROBUOTION'.


palaces,  mosques,  hospitals,  and  observatories  ■were  built
or  maintained.  But  Ms  greatest ‘work  "was  the  establish¬
ment  of  a  new  system  of  education,  formerly  the  in¬
struction  under  the  Khalifate  had  been  mainly  ecclesias¬
tical.  After  the  hoy  quitted  the  schoolmaster,  a  per¬
sonage  ridiculous  from  his  poverty  and  ignorance,  and
the  butt  of  every  satirist,  he  ■was  taken  to  the  mosque,
where  a  higher  class  of  teachers  were  supposed  to  in¬
struct  him.  The  teaching  was,  we  may  assume,  pretty
mucb  what  it  has  asjain  became  in  Mohammedan  coun-
tries.  The  master  sat  leaning  against  a  column,  and  his
pupils  were  indoctrinated  orally  ■with  orthodox  views  on
religion.  They  were  taught  the  names,  the  periods,  and,
to  some  extent,  the  productions  of  the  multitudinous
poets,  the  traditions  of  the  Prophet  and  his  Companions,
the  deformed  and  contradictory  annals  of  the  Khalifate,
and,  perhaps,  some  legendary  lore  concerning  the  Pagan
Arabs — their  genealogies,  their  “  days,”  or  battles,  their
proverbs,  and  their  extempore  recitations.  Nizam  al
Mulk  superseded  these  institutions  by  colleges,  built  and
endowed  by  the  State,  in  which  the  instruction  was  of  a
higher  order,  though  the  cMef  object  of  the  scholar  was
still  to  comprehend  and  to  maintain  the  doctrines  of  the
faith.  One  of  these  schools  was  celebrated  for  ages  as
the  Nizamiyeh,  at  Bagdad ;  another  was  founded  at
Basra.

There  was,  therefore,  nothing  in  the  state  of  society
in  Hariri’s  native  city,  to  hinder  the  employment  of  such
talents  as  he  possessed.  After  the  foundation  of  Bag¬
dad,  it  had  partially  decayed,  and  Hariri,  in  Ms  last
Assembly  says,  in  exaggerated  phrase,  that  there
remains  but  a  border  of  it.  But  it  was  still  a  rich  and


INTEODVCTION.


7


popTiloiis,  and,  compared  -with,  many  others  in  those  trou¬
bled  times,  a  secure  place.  Political  revolutions,  and  the
incursions  of  the  wandering  Arabs  from  the  neighbour¬
hood,  sometimes  harassed  it ;  buOEe’Tnhabitants,  who
considered  themselves  the  most  cultivated  of  the  Arabs,
were  not  debarred  from  their  accustomed  pursuits, — one
of  the  chief  of  which  was  the  indulgence  of  a  kind  of
Athenian  disputatiousness  on  all  matters  of  literature
and  criticism.  The  grammatical  school  of  Basra  was,
from  early  times,  the  most  famous  in  the  Arabic  world.
In  its  disputes  with  the  rival  school  of  Elufa,  the  verdict
of  succeeding  philologers  has  generally  proclaimed  that
it  was  in  the  right.  The  elaborate  science  of  Arabic
grammar  was,  indeed,  founded  within  the  walls  of
Basra,  and  was  there  developed  into  the  most  original
and  philosophical  product  of  the  mind  of  the  race.  In
his  last  Assembly,  Hariri,  celebrating  the  praises  of
his  native  city,  says:  “Of  your  number  was  he  who
originated  grammar  (or  syntax*),  and  fixed  it;  and  he
who  devised  the  measure  of  poetry,  and  invented  it.”
The  former  of  these  was  Abu  ’1  Aswad  ad  Du’li,  who  lived
in  the  first  century  of  the  Hijra,  was  a  partisan  of  'Ali,
and  is  said  to  have  been  present  at  the  battle  of  Siffin.
This  person  was,  according  to  the  biographer  Ibn  Khal-
likan,  led  to  undertake  the  grammatical  fixing  of  the
language,  by  observing  the  errors  and  solecisms  into
which  the  new  generation  had  fallen,  through  its  inter¬
mixture  with  foreigners.  Moreover,  he  was  shocked  at

*  ysT  is  defined  as  the  knowledge  of  the  rules  which  teach  the
composition  of  discourse  in  the  Arabic  language,  such  as  the
or  desinential  syntax,  the  indeclinahility,  and  the  like.  Tarifatof
Joijani.


8


INTRODUCTION.


the  mistaken  enunciation  of  the  Koran,  by  those  who
were  ignorant  of  the  Arab  desinences,  and  who  conse¬
quently  perverted  its  meaning.  He  applied  himself,
therefore,  to  study  scientifically  the  idiom  of  Koraysh,
and  reduced  to  a  system  the  rules  which  the  most
eloquent  of  the  Arabs  had  habitually  and  unconsciously
observed.  The  other  of  these  worthies  was  A1  Khalil  ihn
Ahmed,  the  founder  of  the  elaborate  and  artificial  system
of  Arabic  prosody.  A1  Khalil  was  not  only  a  grammarian,
hut  a  poet  of  eminence,  an  eloquent  preacher,  and  well
versed  in  what  then  was  the  only  history,  the  genealo¬
gies  and  “Days”  of  the  Arabs.  Without  doubt  he  was
a  man  of  powerful  and  original  mind.  Before  him  no
one  had  thought  of  subjecting  the  versification  of  the  old
poets  of  the  Ignorance  to  rules.  Poetry  had  existed  for
generations  before  prosody,  as  we  may  conceive  that
Homer  knew  not  the  difference  between  a  dactyl  and  a
spondee.  Khalil  discovered  the  relations  between  the
various  metres,  and  by  a  masterly  analysis,  fixed  the
primitive  and  secondary  feet,  dissected  them  into  their
constituent  parts,  and  arranged  the  whole  of  the  known
metres  into  the  five  Circles  which  have  ever  since  been
taken  as  the  basis  of  versification.  The  infiuence  of  these
men,  and  others  of  similar  intelligence  and  originality,
gave  the  educated  class  of  Basra  an  inclination  to  liter¬
ary  pursuits,  which  in  course  of  time  was  largely  mixed
with  pedantry.  Kowhere  were  there  so  many  commen¬
tators,  rhetoricians,  grammarians, — each  seeking  to  sur¬
pass  the  other  in  subtlety  of  analysis  ;  poets,  poetasters,
anagrammatists,  enigmatists,  and  all  the  race  of  those
who  set  learning  above  genius,  and  take  difficulty  of
execution  for  merit.  The  Assemblies  of  Hariri  are


INTRODUCTIOIT.


9


themselves,  the  best  picture  of  the  society  of  the  city.
Wherever  he  may  place  the  scene  of  the  adventure,  it  is
always  Basra  that  he  has  in  his  mind,  and  the  dilettanti
of  Basra  whose  taste  he  shares  or  reproves.  Though
the  city  had  no  longer  the  political  importance  which  it
possessed  in  the  early  days  of  Islam,  when  it  was  the
chief  focxis  of  intrigue  and  revolution,  it  was  yet,  from  its
geographical  position,  a  place  of  wealth  and  refinement.
In  the  above-mentioned  Assembly,  the  author  lauds  it
as  the  spot  where  the  ship  and  the  camel  meet,  the  sea
fish  and  the  lizard,  the  camel-leader  and  the .  sailor,  the
fisher  and  the  tiller.  In  other  words  it  was  the  port  and
emporium  for  all  the .  lands  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,
and  its  trade  with  the  coasts  of  Arabia,  with  India,  and
even  with  Africa,  enriched  it  in  the  worst  of  times.
Ample  provision  seems  to  have  been  made  for  literary
pursuits.  Several  libraries  had  been  founded,  and  were
open  to  the  public.  One  of  these,  established  in  the
previous  century,  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  that  had
been  placed  in  walcf,  or  mortmain,  since  Islam.  Into
these  libraries  the  learned  and  the  tasteful  flocked,  to
read  or  to  discuss  the  merits  of  this  or  that  writer.
Hariri,  in  the  second  Assembly,  gives  us  a  picture  of
one  of  these  meetings,  in  which  the  poorest  conceits  of  a
poet  meet  with  high  admiration.  The  habits  and  tastes
of  the  Basrians  had,  therefore,  doubtless,  a  great  share
in  directing  the  genius  of  their  townsman.

Hariri  was  of  good  Arab  blood.  He  is  said  to  have
descended  from  Eabi'at  al  Earas,  the  son  of  Hizar,  the
son  of  Ma'add,  the  son  of '  Adnan,  and  to  have  boasted  of
this  lofty  ancestry.  The  sons  of  Babi'ah  inhabited
Hijaz  for  some  generations,  paying  tribute  to'  the


10


INTRODUCTIOK


soyereigns  of  Yemen.  But  in  course  of  time  they  rose
against  their  lords,  and  in  their  various  tribes  carried  on
a  long  and  bloody  war.  At  last  they  passed  under  the
authority  of  the  kings  of  Hira.  At  a  later  period  Bekr
and  Taghlib,  two  of  the  chief  branches  of  the  race  of
Eabiah,  quitted  their  homes  in  central  Arabia,  and
migrated  to  Irak  and  Bahrayn.  After  Islam  they
settled  in  the  country  known  still  as  Biyar  Babf  ah.  In
some  verses,  addressed  to  Hariri  by  an  admiring  young
poet,  he  is  described  as  a  descendant  of  Hhindaf,  and  the
glory  of  the  tribe  of  Temim.  The  name  of  Ehindaf,  the
wife  of  Alyas,  son  of  Modar,  is  applied  to  all  the  de¬
scendants  of  Modar,  through  Alyas,  and  the  mention  of
Temim,  who  undoirbtedly  descended  from  Alyas,  would
seem  to  make  some  discrepancy  in  the  author’s  pedigree.
It  seems,  however, ,  reasonable  to  conclude  that  Hariri
was  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  races  issuing  from  Babi'ah,
and  that  he  represented  the  old  Arab  settlers  in  Irak.
He  was  born,  according  to  Ibn  Hhallikan,  in  the  street
of  the  Benu  Haram,  so  called  from  a  tribe  of  Arabs  who
had  established  themselves  there.  His  name  of  A1
Hariri  was  derived,  according  to  the  same  biographer,
from  his  having  traded  in  silk  (Jiarir).  It  is  more  pro¬
bable  that  it  was  given  him  on  account  of  his  father  being
engaged  in  this  commerce,  for  our  author  does  not  appear
to  have  had  at  any  time  other  than  official  and  literary
pursuits.  He  was  possessed  of  a  competence,  and  his
family  owned  several  thousand  palm  trees  at  Meshan,
some  distance  to  the  north  of  Basra,  He  received  a
good  education,  according  to  the  fashion  of  his  age  and
city,  and  was  well  versed  in  grammar,  receiving  in  this
scieiice  the  teaching  of  A1  Fadl  al  Kasbani,  one  of  the


INTRODUCTION.


11


most  celebrated  meu  of  tbe  time.  The  young  Hariri
cbose  tbe  profession  -wbicb  was  then  most  in  favour  with
those  who  combined  literary  tastes  with  political  ambi¬
tion.  He  became  a  Munsbi,  or  ofdcial  writer,  and
according  to  'Imad  ad  din,  secretary  to  tbe  Sultan
Salab  ad  din  (Saladin),  whose  book,  tbe  KJiaridat  al
Kasfy  furnishes  many  particulars  of  bis  life,  be  was
early  employed  in  public  duties,  and  had  tbe  official  title
of  Sahib  al  Kbabar.  From  this  it  would  seem  that  bis
office  was  to  inquire  into  and  report  upon  the  affairs  of
tbe  province  for  tbe  information  of  tbe  central  govern¬
ment.  The  high  position  to  wbicb  official  persons  might
rise,  and  tbe  estimation  in  wbicb  they  were  held  may  be
learnt  from  tbe  author’s  twenty-second  Assembly,  in
wbicb  be  compares  secretaries  of  correspondence  with
secretaries  of  finance  ;  and  after  praising  both  biglily,
refrains  from  placing  either  above  tbe  other.  Hariri’s
official  position  not  only  gave  him  tbe  acquaintance  of
tbe  great,  but  also,  probably,  served  him  in  tbe  troubles
of  which  Basra  was  for  some  time  the  scene.  Several
specimens  of  bis  coiTcspondence  have  been  preserved,
and  they  display  tbe  qualities  wbicb  arc  remarkable  in
tbe  Assemblies, — great  power  over  tbe  language,  and
felicity  of  expression,  but  a  fondness  for  far-fetched
images,  metaphorical  phraseology,  and  those  plays  on
words,  which  were  looked  upon  as  among  the  chief
ornaments  of  style.  He  must,  however,  have  devoted
himself  steadfastly  to  general  literature,  and  have  laid,
at  an  early  period,  the  foundation  of  tbe  extensive  and
minute  knowledge  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  Assem¬
blies.

Tbe  great  object  of  his  literary  life  became  to  explore


12


INTRODUCTION.


and  expound  tlie  niceties  of  the  Arab  language  and
history.  His  mind,  though  it  united  poetical  with  cri¬
tical  power,  was  narrow;  his  intellectual  yision  had
little  range.  He  spied  out  defects  with  the  microscopic
eye  of  an  insect,  but  the  merits  which  he  prized  were
nice  and  contracted  also.  His  chief  works,  after  the
Assemblies,  are  two  treatises  on  Grammar,  one  called
“  The  Beauties  of  the  I'rab  (or  desinential  syntax),”  the
other  ‘‘The  Pearl  of  the  Diver.”  A  portion  of  these
has  been  published  by  De  Sacy  in  his  “Anthologie
Grammaticale  Arabe.”  The  former  is  in  verse  of  the
metre  called  rejez,  and  is  also  mezduj,  or  methnawi;  that
is,  the  second  hemistich  of  each  verse  rhymes  with  the
first.  This  metre  was  also  adopted  by  Ibn  Malik  for
his  “  Alfiyeh,”  the  mosft  complete  and  celebrated  of  the
Arabic  grammatical  poems.  Hariri  in  this  work  com¬
ments  on  his  own  lines,  and  treats  questions  of  syntax
with  extraordinary  subtlety.  But  a  still  more  charac¬
teristic  work  is  “The  Pearl  of  the  Diver,”  in  which  the
author  points  out  the  faults  made  by  people  of  education
in  the  use  of  words  and  phrases.  The  observation,  judg¬
ment,  and  taste  displayed  in  this  book  are  remarkable,
and  the  extract  in  the  “  Anthologie  ”  will  be  frequently
referred  to  in  my  notes.  Every  sentence  is  like  a  drop
of  grammatical  gold ;  moreover  the  authority  of  the  author
is  so  high,  that  his  dicta  have  never  been  disputed,  and
all  subsequent  writers  have  avoided  the  faults  which  he
points  out.  But  neither  in  these  books,  nor  iu  the
Assembhes  themselves,  is  there  any  sign  of  original
conceptions,  or  of  the  strength  to  break  loose  from  the
traditions  of  learning  which  the  author  had  received.
His  works  are  in  some  respects  the  more  valuable  for


INTRODUCTION-.


13


this,  since  he  represents  in  its  most  exquisite  and  refined
form  the  culture  of  his  age.  He  was  content  to  do  best
what  others  were  also  doing,  and  to  gain  the  admiration
of  his  countrymen  by  excellence  in  forms  of  composition
with  which  they  were  well  acquainted.

As  I  have  not  space  for  a  full  biography  of  Hariri,  I
shall  not  dwell  on  those  political  troubles  which  un¬
settled  the  tenor  of  his  life.  He  was  already  of  middle
age  when  the  Crusaders  marched  through  Asia  Minor
into  Syria.  Basra  had  suffered  like  the  whole  East  from
the  convulsions  of  the  Moslem  world,  but  it  was  at  least
spared  an  incursion  of  the  Christian  Franks.  Yet  it  is
to  the  campaign  of  Baldwin  in  Syria  that  the  compo¬
sition  of  the  Assemblies  is  possibly  due.  The  hero  of
them  is  represented  as  an  inhabitant  of  Seruj,  a  place  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Edessa,  and  as  having  been  driven
into  exile  by  the  infidels  who  had  destroyed  the  city
and  Idllcd  or  despoiled  all  the  Unifiers  of  God.  But
before  I  relate  the  anecdotes,  which  have  been  handed
down  concerning  the  origin  of  our  author’s  great  work,
it  will  be  well  to  describe  what  the  Makamah  or  AssemUy
really  is,  and  how  such  a  form  of  composition  took  its
place  in  literature.

The  first  person  who  composed  an  AssemUy  is  allowed
to  have  been  Abu  ’1  Fadl  Ahmad  ibn  al  Hasan  al  Hama-
dani,  commonly  known  as  Badi'  az  Zeman,  or  ‘‘The
Wonder  of  the  Time.”  A  short  sketch  of  his  life  is


given  in  a  note  to  Hariri’s  preface.  It  is  only  necessary
to  state  here  that  he  was  one  of  those  literary  prodigies


whom  it  was  the  fashiqnref'h.Ts  age  and  people  to  admire.
TheArnbs  haiLhm^ ceased  to  appreciate  the  fresh  and  pure
spirit  of  true  poetry.  The  simple  grandeur  of  the  poets


14


INTRODUCTION'.


of  the  Ignorance  no  longer  satisfied  their  tastes.  They
did,  indeed,  place  these  poets  above  any  that  had  snc-
ceeded  them,  hut  it  was  principally  as  authorities  on
words,  phrases,  and  grammar,  that  they  valued  them,
since  such  ancient  poets  were  held  to  have  possessed  the
true  and  chaste  language  of  the  Arabs,  which  had  been
lost  in  succeeding  ages  by  literary  corruptions  and  by
admixture  with  foreign  peoples.  But  in  their  hearts  the
educated  class  in  Irak  and  Syria  preferred  the  conceits
of  A1  Bohtori,  A1  Mutenebbi,  and  Abu  ’1  'Ala,  to  the
noble  strains  of  Imr  al  Kays  and  Tarafeh.  He  was  the
most  successful  man  of  letters,  the  most  likely  to  receive
rich  presents  from  princes  and  governors,  and  to  be  en¬
circled  by  admiring  listeners,  who  could  show  his  wit  by
some  far-fetched  comparison,  or  his  learning  by  the  reci¬
tation  of  an  enormous  number  of  lines.  Some  men  could
repeat  hundreds  of  kasidehs  or  poems,  others  could  quote
verses  descriptive  of  every  part  of  the  camel  or  horse,  or
in  praise  or  dispraise  of  the  multitudinous  tribes.  Others
professed  to  tell  the  origin  of  all  the  innumerable  pro¬
verbs  and  sayings  which  had  been  handed  down,  what
hero  of  the  Igiiorance  had  uttered  each,  and  on  what
occasion,  and  the  issue  of  the  adventure.  A  complete
acquaintance  with  the  Koran  was,  of  course,  highly  ho¬
noured,  and  a  felicity  in  applying  passages  of  it  in  a
new  and  surprising  manner  to  the  ordinary  concerns
of  life  was  looked  upon  as  legitimate  wit  The  tradi¬
tions  of  the  founder  of  Islam,  his  Companions,  and  im¬
mediate  followers,  formed  ,-a---depaTtment  of  knowledge,
without  which  the  education  of  the  polite  was  not  com¬
plete.  Alleged  sayings  of  Mohammed,  'Ayeshah,  Abu
Bekr,  'Omar,  'Ali,  *Abd  allah  ibn  'Abbas,  and  others,  in-


mmoBUCTiom


15


creased  in  number  yearly,  and  the  learned  in  these  things
pretended  to  test  their  authenticity,  to  examine  the  tes¬
timony  in  favour  of  each,  and  even  to  decide  on  the  very
words  and  grammatical  forms  in  which  each  had  been
uttered.  Lexicography  was  studied  with  an  intentness  1
which  probably  no  other  people  has  devoted  to  its  own  '
language,  and  the  consequence  was  a  sort  of  literary
consciousness  in  everything  that  was  written,  a  looking
to  the  form,  rather  than  the  substance,  which  gave  an
artificial  and  pedantic  character  to  the  productions  of
the  time.

This  tendency  began  soon  after  the  establishment  of
the  Klialifate.  In  the  earlier  periods  of  Islam,  before
divinity  and  grammar  had  been  developed  so  much  as
to  form  a  large  part  of  the  most  learned  man’s  stores,
the  prodigious  memories  of  the  Arabs  were  exercised  on
the  productions  of  the  poets,  which,  though  individually
short,  formed,  as  a  whole,  a  mass  of  literature  of  incon¬
ceivable  magnitude.  In  the  century  preceding  Moham¬
med  almost  every  eminent  Arab  had  been  a  deelaimer  of
verse,  and  of  these  -compositions  many  had  merit,  while
all  were  thought  worthy  of  being  retained  as  the  u.tter-
ances  of  remarkable  persons,  and  as  monuments  of  a
chaste  diction  which  men  feared  was  irrecoverably  lost.
Hence  the  (rawi),  or  redter,"was  in  high  favour,
and  his  acceSnpIShments  were  looked"  ijpim  as  almost
equal  in  value  to  the  genius  of  the  poets  whom  he
handed  down.  The  Kawi  was  indeed  the  primitive  type
of  the  Arab  man  of  learning,  and  it  was  to  the  impres¬
sion  which  he  made  on.  the  people  that  the  tendency
of  the  educated  to  the  accumulation  of  vast  stores  of
curious  learning  is  for  the  most  part  to  be  attributed.


16


INTRODUCTION.


"Writing  vas  almost  nnknown  among  the  Arabs  of  the
Ignorance  at  the  time  when  their  poetical  rigour  was  at
its  height.  The  story  of  the  death  of  Tarafeh,  the
author  of  one  of  the  Mo'allakat,  the  most  highly  prized
of  the  early  poems,  shows  that  neither  he  nor  his  uncle
Mutelemmis,  also  a  poet,  could  read.  It  is  doubtful
whether  Imr  al  Kays  could  read,  though  he  is  placed  by
unanimous  consent  at  the  head  of  all  the  early  poets, —
though  the  Prophet  declared,  in  a  complimentary  maledic¬
tion,  that  he  would  he  the  leader  of  the  poets  to  hell, "and
though  the  Khalif  'Omar,  speaking  of  poets,  said,  “  Imr
al  Kays  is  he  who  has  precedence  of  them ;  he  has  made
the  fountain  of  poetry  to  well  forth  to  them.”  The
general  opinion  is  that  Mohammed  could  not  read,  al¬
though  the  diction  of  the  Koran  was  held  even  by  the
unbelieving  Koraysh  to  he  the  work  of  magic,  and
though  a  modern  critic  must  allow  that  the  author  of
the  earlier  and  more  impassioned  Suras  was  a  great  lyric
poet.

Much  more,  then,  were  the  multitude  unable  to  dis¬
pense  with  the  services  of  the  EaAvi,  who  was  their
living  library,  their  only  means  of  communicating  with
the  great  spirits  of  their  own  time  or  of '  the  past.  The
Eawi  devoted  his  life  to  learning  poetry  by  heart,  and  to
informing  himself  of  the  lives  of  the  poets  and  the  in¬
cidents  to  which  their  compositions  referred.  Sometimes
a  Eawi  attached  himself  to  a  single  poet  and  travelled
about  reciting  his  verses  and  spreading  his  fame  among
the  tribes.  But  after  Islam,  when  a  great  monarchy  took
the  place  of  the  little  autonomies  of  the  desert,  and  the
Court  of  Damascus  supplanted  the  fair  of  'Okaz;  when  also,
in  the  opinion  of  many,  the  canon  of  pure  Arabic  poetry


INTRODUCTION.


17


was  closed,  the  Eawi  was  transformed  into  the  student
of  a  capital,  and  often  undertook  to  master  the  whole
body  of  ancient  literature.  .  One  of  these  marvels  of  me¬
mory  was  Ahu  d  Kasim  Hammad,  who  flourished  about
a  century  after  the  Hijra,  and  enjoyed  the  favour  of  the
Khalifs  "Welid  ibn  'Abd  el  Melik  and  Hisham.  The
house  of  Omayyeh  has  seldom  a  good  word  from  Moslem
writers,  but  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  services  to  liter¬
ature  of  these  great  Khalifs,  particularly  in  preserving
the  compositions  of  the  past,  which  were  in  danger  of
being  lost  through  the  fall  of  so  many  of  the  reciters
in  the  ceaseless  wars.  Much  did  indeed  perish,  and  had
it  not  been  for  men  like  Hammad,  and  his  patrons,  we
should  now  probably  be  without  a  single  specimen  of  the
pre-islamic  poetry.  Welid  asked  Hammad  on  one  oc¬
casion  how  much  poetry  he  knew:  Hammad  replied
that  for  each  letter  of  the  alphabet  he  could  recite  one
hundred  long  poems  rhyming  with  that  letter,  all  com¬
posed  by  poets  of  the  Ignorance.  Welid  resolved  to  try
whether  or  no  this  was  an  idle  boast,  and  bade  him  begin
his  recitation.  Hammad  began  and  went  on  until  the
Khalif  was  worn  out  with  listening,  and  withdrew,  leav¬
ing  a  trusty  person  to  hear  Hammad  to  the  last.  At
that  sitting  he  recited  two  thousand  nine  hundred  kasi-
dehs,  being  one  hundred  for  every  letter  of  the  alphabet,
all  of  which  had  been  composed  by  poets  who  flourished
before  Mohammed.

It  was  not  only  by  repeating  great  quantities  of  verse
that  the  Eawi  must  seek  for  reputation :  he  was  bound
to  remember  apposite  verses  in  every  conceivable  circum¬
stance.  Many  of  these  feats  are  recorded,  and,  though
we  may  doubt  whether  they  were  performed  impromptu,

2


18


INTROBFCTION.


it  is  certain  that  the  Eawi  would  on  occasions  deliyer
himself  of  an  immense  number  of  passages  illustrative  of
a  single  idea.  There  is  a  composition  extant  in  which  a
stranger  is  represented  as  knocking  at  a  door,  which  is
opened  by  a  girl.  The  stranger  demands  hospitality,
and  the  girl  asks  him  the  name  of  his  tribe.  He  gives  it,
and  the  girl  at  once  replies  with  some  satirical  verses
from  a  poet  on  that  tribe.  The  man  abashed  exclaims,
“  Ho,  I  spoke  falsely,”  and  mentions  another  tribe, .  on
which  the  girl  repeats  satirical  verses  on  that  tribe  also.
The  man  then  mentions  another,  and  another,  until  the
girl  has  satirized  all  the  tribes  of  the  Arabs  by  quota¬
tions  from  the  poets.  This  composition  is,  of  course,  an
exercitation  by  some  Eawi,  or  some  man  of  letters  formed
after  the  same  type.  The  celebrated  Asma'i,  who  sprung,
like  so  many  learned  man,  from  Basra,  but  lived  at  Bag¬
dad  in  the  time  of  Harun  ar  Eeshid,  not  only  knew
sixteen  thousand  pieces  of  verse  in  the  metre  called
rejez^  but  performed  astonishing  feats  of  quotation,  so
that  there  was  scarcely  an  object  in  nature  that  he  could
not  illustrate  by  verses  from  the  ancients.  So  profound
was  his  learning  that,  when  in  old  age  he  returned  to
Basra,  the  Khalit  A1  Ma’mun  used  to  draw  up  questions
on  doubtful  points  of  literature  and  send  them  to  him
to  be  solved.

A1  Hamadani  was  a  sage  of  this  school,  but  he  had  in
addition  originality  and  wit  approaching  to  genius.  Like
many  of  the  most  illustrious  of  the  Arabic  writers,  he
lived  far  from  the  Arabic  peninsula,  and  may  even  have
been  of  foreign  origin.  He  was  born  at  Hamadan,  hence
his  name,  but  his  life  appears  to  have  been  passed  and
to  have  closed  at  Herat.  He  died  in  the  398th  year  of


IFTROBUOTIOlSr.


19


tlie  Hijra,  a.d.  1008.  A1  Hamadani  was  celebrated  for
bis  wonderful  memory  and  for  bis  powers  of  improvisa¬
tion.  He  could  repeat,  says  one  biographer,  a  lengthy
production  which  he  had  heard  but  once,  compose  poems
impromptu,  turn  prose  into  verse  or  verse  into  prose
with  equal  facility,  he  could  make  verses  to  any  given
rhymes  and  extemporize  in  any  given  metre.  Had  he
done  only  this  he  would  not  have  been  superior  to  num¬
bers  of  others,  who  were  admired  in  their  own  circle  but
failed  to  attain  a  wide  reputation.  But  Hamadani  de¬
vised  a  new  form  of  composition  eminently  fitted  to  dis¬
play  the  powers  that  he  possessed.  It  was  an  advance
to  the  dramatic  style  which  had  always  been  wanting  to
Arab  literature.  He  imagined  a  witty,  unscrupulous  im¬
proviser,  wandering  from  place  to  place  and  living  on  the
presents  which  the  display  of  his  gifts  produced  from  the
generous  and  tasteful,  and  a  kind  of  Eawi  or  narrator,
who  should  be  continually  meeting  with  the  other,  should
relate  his  adventures  and  repeat  his  excellent  composi¬
tions.  To  these  he  gave  the  name  of  Makamat,  or  “  As¬
semblies,”  because  the  Improviser  was  always  introduced
as  making  his  appearance  in  some  company  of  strangers
among  whom  the  narrator  happened  to  be,  and  as  aston¬
ishing  them  by  his  rhetoric  and  poetry.  To  the  nar
rator  he  gave  the  name  of  Tsa  ibn  Hisham,  and  to  the
Improviser  that  of  Abu  ’1  Fath  al  Iskenderi,  and  he  is
said  to  have  produced  four  hundred  compositions  of  this
sort.  They  were  of  various  lengths,  some  of  them  con¬
taining  a  long  adventure  or  composition,  others  consisting
of  only  a  few  lines.  In  some  of  them  it  appears  that  the
two  persons  of  the  drama  are  not  introduced,  and  the
author  speaks  in  his  own  character.  It  will  be  readily


20


INTRODTTCTIOF.


understood  that  the  rhetorician  and  the  Eawi  are  only
put  forward  to  give  liveliness  to  the  composition,  and
that  the  object  of  the  author  is  to  display  his  eloquence,
his  poetical  power,  and  his  learning.  The  setting,  if  it
may  he  called  so,  of  the  Makamah  is  xmimportant,  the
adventure  related  is  often  trivial,  the  diction  is  all  in  all.
Both  the  personages  strive  to  exhaust  the  beauties  of
the  Arabic  tongue,  and  the  Improviser  especially  is  made
a  master  of  eloquence.  But  it  may  be  remarked  here
that  Hamadani  is  much  less  rhetorical  than  his  imitator
Hariri ;  he  has  less  artifice,  if  less  genius,  and  in  his
Assemblies  the  story  or  adventure  is  more  dwelt
upon  and  less  sacrificed  to  the  display  of  style.  The
lapse  of  a  century  had  spread  the  fame  of  A1  Hamadani
through  the  Arabic  world,  and  he  had  before  Hariri’s
time  fotmd  imitators.  The  learned  were  pleased  with  a
class  of  composition  which  lent  itself  so  readily  to  the
rhetorical  diction  they  admired,  and  the  people  loved  to
Usten  to  the  mingled  rhythmical  prose  and  verse  as  they
were  half  chanted  by  the  reciter.  A1  Hamadani  was
honoured  with  the  title  of  Badi'  az  Zcman,  ‘‘  the  "Wonder
of  the  Time,”  an  appellation  which  almost  supplanted
his  name.

The  influence  of  Hamadani  could  not  but  be  powerful
on  the  learned  and  refined  Hariri.  The  life  of  the  latter
had  been  passed  in  scholarship,  but  he  was  approaching
his  fiftieth  year  before  he  devoted  himself  to  the  work
on  which  his  fame  rests.  The  origin  of  the  Assem¬
blies  was,  according  to  the  general  tradition,  as  follows.
The  armies  of  the  Crusade  had  forced  their  way  into
Syria,  and  carried  on  a  remorseless  war  against  the
Moslems.  Baldwin,  brother  of  Godfrey,  took  possession


INTRODUCTION.


21


of  Edessa,  'whieli  had  heen  siirrendered  to  him  by  the
mhabitants,  who  were  mostly  of  the  Armenian  race.
According  to  an  Eastern  chronicler  the  following  event
took  place  in  the  year  494  (a.d.  1101).  A  Turkish  chief
named  Sokman  collected,  in  the  neighbouring  city  of
Seruj,  a  body  of  Turkomans  and  prepared  to  march  against
the  Franks.  The  latter  advanced  to  meet  him,  and  the
army  of  Sokman  was  put  to  flight.  The  Franks  advanced
against  Seruj,  laid  siege  to  it,  took  it,  and  put  to  the
sword  the  men  capable  of  bearing  arms.  The  women
were  made  slaves,  the  place  was  plundered,  and  only
those  of  the  inhabitants  escaped  who  sought  safety  in
flight.

Some  time  after,  Hariri,  being  in  the  mosque  of  the
Benu  Haram,  in  the  quarter  of  Basra  where  he  lived,
observed  an  old  man  enter  in  worn  garments,  and  with
all  the  marks  of  poverty.  He  had  the  wallet  of  a  foot
traveller,  and  had  evidently  come  from  afar.  Abu’l
Kasim  'Abdallah,  the  son  of  Hariri,  who  tells  the  story,
says,  “  The  company  asked  him  whence  he  came ;  he
answered,  ‘  From  Seruj :  ’  asked  concerning  his  kinyeh  or
byename,  he  answered  that  it  was  Abu  Zayd.”  This
wanderer  had  excited  the  curiosity  of  the  company  by
the  fluency  and  eloquence  of  his  address,  in  which  he
had  related  the  destruction  of  his  city,  the  loss  of  his
daughter,  and  his  own  exile  and  beggary.  Hariri  went
home  and  wrote  what  is  now  the  forty-eighth  Assembly,
in  which  he  describes  this  incident.  In  this  Assembly,
which  bears  the  name  of  Ilaramiyeh,  the  usual  order  of
narration  is  reversed ;  for  Abfl  Zayd  is  his  own  Eawi,
and  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  is  introduced  incidentally.
Abli  Zayd  is  made  to  say  that  he  had  long  wished  to


22


INTRODUCTION.


visit  Basra,  the  city  of  learning  and  piety,  of  mosques
and  shrines,  and  that,  at  last,  when  fortune  had  brought
him  to  it,  he  had  made  his  way  one  evening  to  the  mosque,
where  the  people  were  engaged  in  a  grammatical  dis¬
cussion  on  the  JjJl  interchangeable  letters.

He  had  entered  to  ask  their  bounty,  not  to  learn  their
opinions  on  grammar )  but,  before  he  had  time  to  test
their  liberality,  the  hoiu’  of  prayer  arrived,  and  the
people  began  their  devotions.  When  these  were  over,  a
man  of  noble  mien  and  great  eloquence  stood  forth  and
made  a  pious  address  to  the  worshippers,  who  asked  the
reason  of  his  zeal,  and  were  informed  by  him  that  he
was  a  backslider,  who  had  fallen  from  the  practice  of  piety
into  debauchery,  and  had  broken  the  vow  which  he  had
made  never  to  drink  wine.  The  stranger  concluded  by
asking  the  faithful  if  they  knew  of  any  due  atonement.
The  dialogue  between  the  repentant  sinner  and  the
people  is  of  course  recited  at  length  by  Abh  Zayd,  who
then  relates  that  he  had  started  forward  and  told  the
stranger  that  there  was  an  effectual  method  of  wiping
away  his  guilt,  and  that  was  by  bestowing  alms  on  him,
Abh  Zayd,  for  that  he  had  fallen  from  high  estate  to
bitter  poverty.  In  plaintive  verse  Abu  Zayd  described
that  he  was  of  the  -dwellers  in  Seruj,  a  people  of  religion
and  right  guidance ;  that  there  he  had  been  wealthy  and
liberal,  his  mansion  the  gathering  place  of  guests,  and
his  substance  freely  given  up  to  them;  that  like  the
Arabs  of  old  he  had  kindled  his  fire  on  the  height  to
attract  the  traveller,  when  the  niggard  let  his  fire  burn
low-  This  prosperity  had  now  passed  away,  for  God  had
brought  the  people  of  Eum  (so  the  Arabs  call  the
Byzantines,  whom  Abu  Zayd  here  confounds  with  the


mTRODZrCTION.


23


Franks)  on  tke  land,  and  these  had  spoiled  the  home  of
every  Unifier  of  God,  that  is,  every  Moslem.  He,  him¬
self,  had  been  driven  forth  to  exile  and  poverty,  -while
his  daughter  remained  a  captive  in  their  hands,  and  he
had  not  where-mth  to  ransom  her.  If,  then,  the  stranger
would  pity  and  relieve  him  he  would  find  pardon  from
God  for  the  fault  which  he  deplored.  Ah-u  Zayd  then
goes  on  to  relate  that  the  stranger  had  given  him  money
and  promised  him  more,  and  that  A1  Harith,  son  of
Hammam,  had  complimented  him  on  his  eloquence  and
skill  in  opening  men’s  purses.  But,  says  Ab-a  Zayd :  I
laughed  exceedingly,  and  recited  without  hesitation  : —

Live  by  beguiling,  for  tbou  art  in  a  world  (or  time)  whose  sons
are  as  the  lions  of  Bisbeb.

And  turn  on  the  stream  of  craft,  so  mayest  tbou  make  tbe  mill
of  livelibood  go  round.

Hunt  after  tbe  eagle,  but  if  tbe  cbase  fail,  be  content  if  tbou  but
strike  off  a  feather.

Seek  to  pluck  tbe  fruit,  but  if  that  escape  tbee,  be  satisfied  with
tbe  leaves.

Ease  tby  heart  from  distracting  care  if  fortune  be  adverse  ;

Eor  tbe  changing  of  events  gives  notice  to  man  of  life’s  uncer¬
tainty.”

Every  subsequent  Assembly  composed  by  Hariri
is  but  a  variation  on  this  theme.  His  hero,  Abu  Zayd,
is  always  the  same  ill-dressed,  crafty  old  man,  full  of
genius  and  learning,  unscrupulous  of  the  artifices  which
he  uses  to  effect  his  purpose,  reckless  in  spending  in
forbidden  indulgences  the  money  he  has  obtained  by
his  wit  or  deceit,  but  with  veins  of  true  feeling  in  him,
and  ever  yielding  to  unfeigned  emotion  when  he  re¬
members  his  devastated  home  and  his  captive  child-
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hariri  intends  to  represent


24


INTRODUCTION.


the  grotmdwork  of  Abu  Zayd’s  history  as  true,  however
much  the  vagabond  improviser  may  romance  on  other
matters.  But  it  may  be  as  well  to  mention  here  a
supplement  to  the  tradition  concerning  the  origin  of  the
character.  The  commentator,  Ar  Bazi,  cited  by  Be  Sacy
in  his  commentary  to  the  forty-eighth  Assembly,  re¬
lates  as  follows :  “I  was  told  by  the  Imam  A1  Hafiz
al  Bendehi,  who  had  it  from  Abu  Bekr  al  Berathini,
who  had  it  from  Al  Hariri,  that  the  Seruji  was  a  fluent
old  man,  full  of  eloquence  and  cleverness,  who  visited
us  in  Basra,  and,  standing  in  the  mosque  of  the  Benu
Haram,  conversed  with  the  people  and  asked  alms  of
them.  One  or  more  of  the  magistrates  was  there,  and
the  mosque  was  crowded  with  people  of  eminence,
whom  he  pleased  with  the  fluency  and  beauty  of  his
language,  describing  how  his  daughter  had  been  made
captive  by  the  men  of  Bum,  as  is  mentioned  in  the
Assembly  called  Al  Haramiyeh.  “That  evening,”
continued  Hariri,  “  there  were  assembled  at  my  house
some  people  of  eminence  and  learning  in  the  city,  and
I  related  to  them  what  I  had  witnessed,  describing  the
eloquence  of  this  mendicant,  and  his  art  in  effecting  his
purpose,  tijjon  which  each  one  of  them  told  how  he  had
heard  the  same  man  discourse  in  a  different  mosque,  and
on  a  different  subject,  still  more  excellently;  for  he  had
changed  his  dress  and  figure  in  every  mosque,  and
showed  his  wit  by  a  variety  of  artifices.  I  was  filled
with  wonder,  and  began  that  same  night  the  composi¬
tion  of  the  Assembly  Al  Haramiyeh,  imitating  his  style  ;
and  when  it  was  finished  I  read  it  to  a  company  of  the
chief  people,  who  admired  it  exceedingly,  and  brought
it  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Wazir,  Sheref  ad  Din


INTRODUCTION.


25


Aniisliirwaii  ibn.  Kbalid.  He  pressed  me  to  compose
others  like  it,  and  I  complied.”

There  is  no  reason  to  donht  the  truth  of  this  adven¬
ture.  The  talent  for  rhetorical  and  poetical  improvisation
■which  had  al-ways  distinguished  the -Arabs,  even  in  the
most  barbarous  times,  had  been  so  much  exercised  by
the  literary  fashions  of  the  age,  that  it  •was  no  uncoinmon
thing  to  find  even  an  obscure  and  needy  person  who
could  pronounce  a  Tchotlah  or  moral  address  in  rhymed
prose,  or  could  versify  on  a  given  theme.  The  Abu’l
Path  of  Hamadani,  and  the  Abu  Zayd  of  Hariri,
were  not  imaginary  types,  and  though  we  may  well
suppose  that  the  themes  of  such  strollers  were  often
common-place,  and-  their  style  unpolished,  yet  they
served  to  give  more  gifted  persons  the  idea  of  a  new
form  of  composition. '  It  may  even  be  that  the  Assem¬
blies  of  Hamadani  had  inspired,  here  and  there,  a  poor
man  of  letters  with  the  ambition  of  playing  the  part  of
Abu’l  Path,  and  that  Abu  Zayd  was  one  of  these.
However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  Hariri’s  first
essay  in  this  kind  of  ■writing  was  received  with  un¬
bounded  applause.  The  tradition  which  makes  Sheref
ad  Din  Abu  Hasr  Anushirwan  al  Isfahan!  the  patron
of  Hariri  is  probably  correct.  He  was  a  man  of  ability
and  taste,  and  became  in  later  years  "Wazir  to  the  Khalif
Mustarshid  billah,  and  to  the  Sultan  Mas'ud.  In  his  Pre¬
face  Hariri  says  that  the  composition  of  his  Assemblies
was  at  the  dictation  of  one  whose  hint  was  a  command,
and  to  obey  whom  was  a  pleasure  and  advantage.  This
is  generally  supposed  to  refer  to  Anushirwan,  though
Ibn  Khallikan,  in  his  life  of  the  author,  says,  that  being
at  Cairo,  in  the  year  656,  he  had  seen  a  copy  of  several


26


INTRODUCTION.


of  the  Assemblies  written  by  the  hand  of  Hariri,  and
on  the  cover  of  them  a  declaration  that  he  had  composed
them  for  the  "Wazir  Jelal  ad  Din  'Amid  ad  Dowlat  ibn
Sadakah,  who  was  also  Wazir  of  Mustarshid.  But  this,
which  rests  only  on  the  doubtful  genuineness  of  a  hand¬
writing,  cannot  outweigh  the  general  tradition  that  is
opposed  to  it,  and  Ibn  Elhallikan  himself  seems  to  feel
this,  for  he  adds,  Grod  knows  the  truth.’’  It  is  reason¬
able  then  to  conclude  that  Anushirwan,  having  read  the
first  composed  Assembly,  and  perceiving  that  Hariri  had
rivalled  in  it  his  predecessor,  Badl*  az  Zeman,  urged  the
author  to  add  others  -to  it,  and  that  Hariri  obeyed,  with
less  unwillingness  and  modesty  than  he  pretends.  The
tradition  is,  that  he  composed,  from  time  to  time,  forty
Assemblies,  each  of  them,  as  we  see,  recounting  an  ad¬
venture  of  Abd  Zayd,  but  without  any  connection  with
any  other.  His  performances  obtained  for  him  the
friendship  of  Anushirwan,  and  he  frequently  visited
Bagdad  and  payed  his  court  to  his  patron.  Erom  a  copy
of  verses  preserved  by  'Imad  ad  Din,  it  would  seem  that
the  author  was  somewhat  importunate  in  his  devotion,
for  he  complains  not  only  of  his  separation  from  Anu¬
shirwan,  but  also  of  the  latter’s  neglect  in  not  answering
his  letters.  But  such  was  the  style  of  the  poets  of  the
time,  who  carried  the  besetting  sins  of  servility  and
adulation  further  than  any  of  their  race  before  or  since.

The  friendship  of  Anushirwan  could  not,  however,
prevent  Hariri  from  being  endangered  both  in  life  and
property  by  the  calamities  which  came  upon  his  city.
Wars,  predatory  inroads  of  the  neighbouring  Arabs,
political  revolutions,  followed  by  merciless  executions  of
men  in  high  position,  disturbed  many  years  of  the  author’s


INTRODUCTION.


27


life.  But  ids  Assemblies  were  still  giren  to  tbe  ■world
from  time  to  time.  As  soon  as  be  bad  composed  some
ingenious  exercise,  be  fitted  it  to  an  adventure  of  Abb
Zayd,  named  it  after  some  city  of  Islam,  and  repairing
to  tbe  portico  of  tbe  mosque,  read  it  to  tbe  admiring
cro'wd.  Tbe  learned  criticized;  some  in  a  friendly  spirit,
others  ■with  less  good  will,  and  Hariri  never  hesitated  to
correct  bis  work  if  be  found  in  it  an  inelegant  expression,
a  word  used  without  authority,  a  solecism  in  grammar,
a  phrase  of  tbe  Koran  or  a  tradition  misapplied,  or  a
proverb  wrongly  quoted.  On  tbe  other  band,  be  main¬
tained  bis  opinion  when  convinced  that  be  was  in  tbe
right,  explaining  bis  meaning,  and  refuting  bis  adver¬
saries  in  commentaries  by  bis  own  band,  or  in  lectures
to  bis  pupils,  whom  be  instructed  in  tbe  full  meaning  of
bis  compositions.  His  reputation  soon  surpassed  that  of
tbe  “  "W onder  of  tbe  Time  ”  himself.  JSTotbing  so  witty,  so
ingenious,  and,  what  an  Arab  savant  valued  above  all,  so
diOSleult,  bad  ever  been  produced.  A1  Hamadani’s  most
esteemed  compositions  were  tame  when  compared  -with
tbe  marvellous  rhetoric  of  his  successor.  Tbe  Assem¬
blies,  banded  about  singly  or  in  groups,  made  their  way
to  all  tbe  cities  of  tbe  East,  and  were  destined,  before
tbe  death  of  tbeb  author,  to  be  perused  from  tbe  Indus
to  tbe  Guadalquivir.

Yet  Hariri  was  not  without  bis  literary  mortifications.
One  of  these  affected  him  extremely.  Having  written
no  less  than  forty  Assemblies,  be  collected  them  into  a
single  volume,  and  repau'ed  to  Bagdad,  to  enjoy  tbe
triumph  which  ought  to  await  tbe  first  man  of  letters  of
tbe  time.  But  en'vy  and  misrepresentation  bad  preceded
him  thither.  His  opponents  were  not  content  with


28


rnTROBFCTIOm


asserting  that  the  'work  was  full  of  faults,  they  also
affected  to  believe  that  it  was  not  his  own.  A1  Ha-
madani  had  been  a  real  improviser,  as  has  been  men¬
tioned  ;  he  could  compose  extempore  in  prose  or  verse,
and  in  public,  at  the  request  of  any  bystander.  But
Hariri  was  not  an  Abu’l  Fath,  or  an  Abu  Zayd.  He
was  a  slow  and  painstaking  writer,  and  his  exquisite
compositions  required  time  and  solitude.  A  part  of  the
public  seems  to  have  assumed  the  principle,  that  he  who
describes  an  improviser  must  himself  be  able  to  im¬
provise,  and  finding  that  Hariri  did  not  possess  this
faculty,  to  have  argued  conversely  that  he  was  not  the
author  of  the  Assemblies.  When  Hariri  came  to  Bagdad
he  found  that  his  ability  and  his  honesty  were  doubted.
The  adventure  which  followed  is  thus  related  by  Ibn
Khallikan.  “  Hariri  at  first  composed  only  forty  Assem¬
blies.  Coming  from  Basra  to  Bagdad,  he  presented
them  as  his  work,  but  a  number  of  the  literary  at
Bagdad  would  not  believe  that  he  was  the  author,  and
said  that  the  book  was  the  work  of  a  rhetorician  of  the
Maghrib  (Western  Africa)  who  had  died  at  Bagdad,
and  whose  papers  had  fallen  into  Hariri’s  hands.  The
Wazir  sent  for  Hariri  to  the  Diwan,  and  asked  him
what  was  his  profession ;  he  replied  that  he  was  a  munshi
(an  official  writer  and  composer)  :  the  Wazir  then  bade
him  compose  a  risdleh  (a  kind  of  ornate  letter  or  address)
on  a  subject  which  he  named.  Hariri  retired  with  ink
and  paper  to  a  corner  of  the  hall,  and  remained  long,
but  God  inspired  him  with  nothing,  and  he  rose  up
ashamed.”  On  this  occasion,  one  of  the  doubters,  Abu’l
Kasim  *Ali  ibn  Afiah,  or,  as  others  say,  another  poet
among  his  opponents,  made  a  satirical  couplet  on  him:


INTROBJJCTIOK^


29


have  a  Sliaykli,  descended  from  Eabi*at  al  Faras,  who
plucks  the  hairs  from  his  beard  in  his  perplexity :

May  God  send  him  an  ntterance  at  Meshan,  as  he  has  struck  him
with  dumbness  at  comi:.”

The  point  of  this  lies  in  the  circumstance  that  Meshan
was  a  place  of  exile  for  those  who  displeased  the  govern¬
ment  at  Bagdad,  while  it  was  also  the  site  of  Hariri’s
estate,  and  the  district  in  which  he  had  discharged
official  duties.  According  to  Ihn  Khallikan  it  was  very
unhealthy.  It  appears,  also,  that  Hariri  was  accustomed
to  boast  of  his  descent  from  Eabfah,  and  that  when
engaged  in  thought  he  plucked  at  his  beard.  “  On  his
return  to  Basra  he  composed  ten  more  Assemblies,  and
sent  them  to  Bagdad,  excusing  himself  for  his  former
incapacity,  by  alleging  his  reverential  fear  in  the  Wazir’s
presence.”  The  number  of  the  Assemblies  was  thus
raised  to  fifty.

From  Hariri’s  preface,  from  various  indications  in  the
Assemblies  themselves,  and  from  traditions  handed
down  by  the  commentators,  we  can  perceive  that  the
author  had  to  meet  other  objections  to  his  work.  If  not
a  plagiary,  he  was  in  the  opinion  of  some  an  incorrect
writer;  in  the  opinion  of  others  a  person  of  doubtful
piety.  The  critics  spied  out  defects  in  his  learning  or
diction ;  the  rigid  inveighed  against  the  lightness  of  his
narratives.  Long  after  the  Assemblies  were  completed,
the  author  in  his  Preface  speaks  of  their  origin,  and
probably  referring  his  present  feeling  to  the  epoch  when
he  began  to  compose,  says  that  he  had  sought  to  excuse
himself  with  his  patron  from  such  a  work,  since  he  knew
the  envy  and  opposition  that  are  excited  by  authorship.
He  says  that  he  had  reminded  him  of  the  proverb  concern-


30


mTROBUCTIOm


ing  the  man  who  puts  together  hut  two  words,  or  indites
merely  a  couplet  of  verses,  namely,  that  if  he  succeeds
he  is  exposed  to  envy,  and  if  he  fails  he  is  brought  into
contempt.  He  ^anticipates  any  objections  of  plagiarism,
by  stating  that  in  his  whole  book  only  four  lines  of
poetry  are  taken  from  the  writings  of  others,  and  that
these  are  introduced  avowedly  as  quotations.  The  rest,
he  says,  is  his  own,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  He
speaks  with  a  modesty  which  was,  perhaps,  hardly  sin¬
cere,  of  the  superiority  of  A1  Hamadani,  inasmuch  as
the  latter  had  originated  what  he,  Hariri,  could  only
imitate.  But  his  chief  endeavour  is  to  defend  himself
from  the  charge  of  frivolity,  and  of  giving  to  the  world
idle  compositions  of  a  kind  reproved  by  the  Koran.
The  strict  Moslems  had  always  held  works  of  fiction  to
be,  if  not  blameable,  at  least  unworthy  to  be  written  or
perused  by  serious  believers.  The  people  had,  indeed,
always  delighted  in  the  narratives  of  the  story-teller,
and  yet,  with  the  inconsistency  of  the  multitude,  they
were  inclined  to  join  with  those  who  denounced  them  as
disreputable.  The  Koran  undoubtedly  gave  a  sufidcient
pretext  for  bigotry.  Mohammed’s  anger  was  often  roused
by  the  satires  which  were  directed  against  him  by  poets,
as  well  as  by  the  histories  and  tales  which  Koraysh
preferred  to  his  own  revelation.  The  zeal  of  the  re¬
former  was,  perhaps,  largely  mingled  with  the  jealousy
of  the  author.  In  later  years,  when  he  had  become  a
powerful  prince,  he  showed  a  more  tolerant  disposition ;
he  listened  to  and  praised  the  verses  of  A1  Khansa,
lamented  that  he  had  never  looked  upon  the  warrior-
poet  'Antarah,  and  even  presided  at  a  mufdJcharah,  or
poetical  contest,  as  to  superior  worth  and  valour,  between


INTRODUCTION.


31


tlie  poets  of  his  party  and  those  of  Temim,  an  incident
■which  led  to  the  conyersion  of  that  tribe.  But  in  the
Eoran  and  the  Traditions  there  was  enough  to  justify
those  who  denounced  such  vanities.  In  the  thirty-first
Sura  it  is  written,  ‘‘  There  is  one  who  will  buy  idle
stories  to  make  men  wander  from  the  way  of  God
without  knowledge,  and  who  takes  them  for  an  amuse¬
ment.  To  such  a  one  is  a  debasing  punishment.  If  our
ordinances  be  recited  to  him  he  turns  away  proudly  as
though  he  heard  them  not,  as  though  a  weight  were  on
his  'Oars  :  announce  to  him  a  dolorous  pimishment.”
This  passage  had  descended  from  on  high  as  a
denunciation  of  hTadr  ibn  A1  Harith,  who  had  bought
books  of  the  Persians,  and  told  stories  out  of  them  to
the  Eoraysh  (see  Baydawi  in  loeo),  and  had  said,  “  If
Mohammed  tells  you  of  'Ad  and  Thamud  (the  ■wicked
tribes  destroyed  by  God),  I  will  tell  you  of  Eustem  and
Isfendiar  and  the  Chosroes.”  This  same  Nadr  had  also
incited  the  Jews  to  pose  Mohammed  with  questions
concerning  the  Seven  Sleepers  and  Thud  Karnayn,  and
had  brought  on  him  a  temporary  humiliation,  when  the
Prophet  had  undertaken  to  answer  without  having  added
“  If  it  please  God,”  and  had  been  therefore  left  without
inspiration,  until  after  a  time  Gabriel  descended  and
revealed  the  eighteenth  Sura,  called  the  “  Cavern.”
hTadr  had  been  afterwards  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of
Bedr  and  beheaded  by  the  hand  of  'Ali.  As  there  could
be  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  any  believer  concerning
Eadr’s  fate  in  the  next  world,  his  career  was  a  terrible
warning  to  future  story-tellers,  who  should  put  the
untrue  on  a  level  with  the  true.  God  had  also  de¬
nounced  (Suraxxiii,  v.  68-69)  that  idle  “night- talking,”


32


INTROBUCTIOir.


in  ’wHcIl  liis  messages  had.  been  ridiculed,  and  to  wbieb
Hariri’s  Assemblies  bore  a  suspicious  resemblance.

The  author  did  not  escape  annoyance  on  this  subject.
It  is  related  that  one  Abu  Tahir,  who  afterwards
commented  the  Assemblies,  came  to  Basra,  attracted
by  the  reputation  of  Hariri.  He  repaired  to  the  mosque
to  see  him,  and  as  at  that  moment  several  learned  men
were  there,  each  surrounded  by  his  circle  of  listeners,  he
asked  which  was  Hariri.  There  he  is,”  said  one,

“  spreading  his  follies  among  the  people.”  Abu  Tahir,
surprised  to  find  so  distinguished  a  man  unpopular
among  his  own  people,  retired  without  another  word.

In  the  Preface,  Hariri  takes  pains  to  answer  these
objections.  He  says,  that  though  the  ignorant  and
prejudiced  might  detract  from  him  on  account  of  what
he  had  published,  and  represent  it  as  belonging  to  a
class  of  writings  prohibited  by  the  law,  yet  whoever
looked  at  the  matter  intelligently,  and  with  a  due  regard
to  principles,  would  place  the  Assemblies  in  the  list  of
useful  writings,  like  the  fables  which  introduce  beasts,
or  inanimate  objects,  as  discoursing.  Por  the  Assem¬
blies,  he  argues,  have  like  these  a  moral  purpose ;  they
are  for  instruction,  not  for  display,  and  the  fictitious
story  tends  to  the  improvement  of  the  listener.  So  that,
if  good  or  ill  desert  are  to  be  measured  by  intentions,  he
is  not  only  blameless,  but  may  claim  the  merit  of  a
moral  and  religious  teacher.  This  defence  was  well
adapted  to  satisfy  reasonable  theologians,  since  very  few
ventured  to  condemn  the  fable  and  the  parable,  a  style
of  composition  immemorial  among  Eastern  nations,  sanc¬
tioned  by  the  Hebrew  and  Christian  Scriptures,  and
singularly  pleasing  to  the  popular  taste.  The  fables  of


INTRODUCTION.


33


JEsop  tad  been  kno'wn  to  the  Arabs  of  a  very  early  age,
and  been  attributed  to  Lokman  the  Wise,  a  mythical
personage  ■whom  some  made  contemporary  with  King
David.  The  Sanscrit  ‘‘ Hitopadesa”  had  passed  into
Arabic  literature  through  a  Pehlvi  translation  under
the  name  of  ‘‘  Kalileh  wa  Dimneh,”  otherwise  known  as
the  Fables  of  Bidpai.  It  was  one  of  the  most  esteemed
works  in  the  literature,  for  the  translator  'Abd  allah  ibn
al  Mokaffa',  though  a  Persian  by  birth  and  a  Magian  dur¬
ing  the  greater  part  of  his  life,  was  so  excellent  a  writer
of  Arabic  that  he  even  affected  to  surpass  the  style  of  the
Koran,  a  piece  of  blasphemous  vanity  which  shocked
the  public.  'Abd  allah  was  horribly  murdered  by  order  of
the  Khalif  Mansur,  about  the  year  140,  but  “  Kalileh  wa
Dimneh”  had  been  in  Ilariri’s  time  one  of  the  most
popular  books  in  the  language  for  more  than  tlrree
centuries.  It  maybe  observed  that  the  Persian  “Anwari
Sohayli  ’’  is  another  version  of  the  same  work.  These
stories  and  others  of  their  kind  had  been  generally
looked  upon  as  harmless  and  even  profitable.  The
liberal  minded  might  even  quote  the  Koran  ii.  24,  “  God
is  not  ashamed  to  use  a  gnat  or  what  is  little  larger,
as  a  similitude.”

We  must  not  deny,  however,  that  those  inclined  to
strictness  had  some  ground  for  their  censures.  Hariri  is
not,  indeed,  an  irreligious  or,  in  any  way,  an  immoral
writer.  In  the  whole  of  the  Assemblies,  there  is  not
a  phrase  which  can  justify  a  suspicion  of  free- thinking.
His  mind  and  temper  were  not  those  of  a  sceptic,  still
less  of  one  who  would  endanger  fortune  and  position  by
questioning  the  prevalent  theology.  Indeed  the  habit
of  speculation  was  at  this  time  on  the  wane  in  Irak.


3


34


INTRODUCTION.


The  wealiness  of  the  Ehalifate,  and  the  troubles  of
the  time,  had  made  the  learned  shrink  from  anything
which  might  bring  them  into  disfavour,  either  with
the  local  authority  or  with  the  multitude.  The  new
ideas  which,  under  the  reign  of  Ar  Eeshid  and  A1
Ma’mhn,  had  penetrated  into  Islam,  through  Persian
infidels  and  Syrian  Christians,  were  now  stifled,  and
Bagdad  no  longer  represented  the  revolt  of  a  civilized
and  intellectual  society  against  the  narrow  formularies
of  the  Koran.  The  Arab  intellect  was  indeed  busy,
and  some  of  its  greatest  masters  of  philosophy  were
yet  to  flourish.  But  this  activity  was  chiefly  in  Spain,
amid  a  community  which  had  taken  up  the  tradition
of  a  higher  culture,  when  it  was  passing  away  in  the
East.  Though  Andalusia  had  had  its  troubles,  though
Cordova  had  been  sacked,  the  palace  of  the  Khalifs  over¬
thrown,  the  remains  of  the  library  of  Hakim  destroyed,
yet,  in  the  time  of  Hariri,  philosophical  studies  had
regained  their  former  sway.  It  was  not  so  in  Irak,  and
least  of  all  in  Basra,  which  was  eminently  the  Moslem
city,  and  devoted  to  a  strictly  orthodox  culture.  So
far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  Assemblies,  Hariri  was
utterly  ignorant  of  Greek  letters.  He  may,  for  what  we
know,  have  held  the  prevalent  opinion  that  they  were
dangerous,  and  their  patrons,  like  the  Khalif  A1
Ma’mun,  hardly  good  Moslems.  He  was  versed  in
the  niceties  of  doctrine  and  discipline.  The  thirty-
second  Assembly,  of  which  a  sketch  will  be  found
further  on,  shows  his  knowledge  of  the  Shafl'i  rite,
to  which  he  belonged,  and  at  every  turn  the  Koran
and  the  Traditions  are  quoted.  Eurthermore,  there  is
a  real  moral  excellence  in  much  that  he  writes.  Many


INTRODUCTION.


35


of  Ms  discourses  and  liis  verses,  thougli  ill  placed  in
the  mouth  of  Ahh  Zayd,  are  without  a  blemish.  But
undoubtedly  the  spirit  of  the  whole  composition  might
well  have  offended  the  more  scrupulous.  Abii  Zayd,
with  his  dishonesty  and  dissoluteness,  is  made  too  at¬
tractive,  and  it  is  plain  that  in  the  mind  of  the  author
his  genius  more  than  compensates  for  all  his  faults.
Hariri  depicts  too  favourably  the  witty  and  cynical
improviser  with  his  two  wives — one  old  and  weather¬
beaten,  like  himself ;  the  other  a  handsome,  impudent
young  jade,  the  ready  instrument  in  her  husband’s
knaveries.  He  has  too  much  partiality  for  the  beautiful
and  graceless  son  whom  Abu  Zayd  is  bringing  up  to
his  own  wicked  ways,  for  his  descriptions  altogether
to  escape  censure.  Then  the  appending  of  discourses,
filled  with  the  most  lofty  devotion,  to  the  adventures
of  a  profligate,  the  mingling  of  the  sermon  with  the
jest,  of  the  psalm  with  the  Bacchanalian  song,  will  find
objectors  at  all  times.  It  may  be  argued  in  defence
of  the  author  that  the  style  of  composition  had  been
fixed  by  his  predecessor,  A1  Hamadani,  and  that  in  so
artificial  a  work  the  characters  must  not  be  judged  by
the  laws  of  matter-of-fact  morality.  Abti  Zayd  and  his
family  are  but  the  setting  of  the  pearls  of  poetry  and
rhetoric  which  the  author  lavishes  on  the  world.

Some  of  the  Assemblies,  though  very  few  of  them,
are  not  without  a  graver  fault.  Whatever  be  the  age  or
country  of  a  writer,  he  cannot  but  lose  in  reputation
by  indecency.  Hariri  has  but  very  little  to  answer
for  on  this  head:  almost  everything  he  has  written
may  be  read  in  any  assemblage,  and  this  comparative
purity  has  done  much  to  maintain  his  book  as  an  in-


36


INTRODUCTIOW.


strument  of  education.  Only  one  Assembly  is  founded
on  a  trick  absolutely  indecent.  In  others  there  are  here
and  there  questionable  phrases,  •which  may  be  rendered
by  euphemisms,  without  danger  to  the  sense.  When¬
ever  the  author  is  led  from  the  path  of  decorum,  it  is
by  his  desire  to  show  his  wit  in  the  management  of
doulle-entente.  This  figure,  if  I  may  call  it  so,  was
looked  upon  by  the  literary  of  the  time  as  a  sort  of
philological  exercise  ;  and  Hariri,  however  grave  and
sober  might  be  his  own  character,  addressed  himself  to
it  as  he  would  to  any  other  branch  of  scholarship.  To
produce  a  series  of  sentences  which,  to  the  duller
listeners,  should  be  common-place,  but  should  excite  a
smile  of  admiration  from  the  quick-witted,  was  an
achievement  which  Hariri  had  not  the  moderation  to
forego.  He  also  mingled  sacred  things  with  something
like  ribaldry,  in  a  manner  that  must  have  given  deep
offence  to  strict  professors.  In  his  description  of  his
dead  warrior,  in  the  twentieth  Assembly,  he  quotes
the  Koran ;  and  in  the  forty -fifth,  the  ceremonies  of
the  Pilgrimage — the  most  sacred  act  of  Moslem  wor¬
ship — are  treated  with  a  licence  still  more  audacious.
But  I  must  repeat  that  these  faults  are  few  and  far
between,  that  they  hardly  appear,  except  to  the  Arabic
student,  and  detract  little  from  the  merit  of  Hariri’s
work.

The  composition  and  correction  of  the  Assemblies
occupied  the  last  twenty  years  of  the  author’s  life.  As
has  been  mentioned,  he  died  about  the  year  1122  of  our
era,  at  the  age  of  68.  The  arrangement  of  the  work,
as  we  now  have  it,  is  by  himself,  and  to  several  of
the  Assemblies  explanatory  notes  are  added  by  his


INTRODUCTION.


37


own  hand.  As  the  adventures  of  Ahh  Zayd  have  little
connection  with  each  other,  there  is  hardly  a  trace  of
order  in  the  sequence  of  the  compositions.  The  scene  is
shifted  from  one  city  of  the  Moslem  world  to  another  far
remote  from  it,  and  the  hero  appears  alone  or  with  his
family,  in  poverty  or  wealth,  without  any  attempt  to
form  a  consistent  history.  The  Haramiyeh,  which  was
the  first  composed,  is  placed  forty-eighth  in  order.  Only
the  first  and  the  last  two  have  any  special  claim  to
the  place  they  occupy.  In  the  first,  Harith  is  repre¬
sented  as  unacquainted  with  Ahu  Zayd.  In  the  forty-
ninth,  Abu  Zayd,  being  in  the  decline  of  life,  urges
his  son  to  live  by  the  noble  and  profitable  art  of  beg¬
ging,  and  in  the  fiftieth  he  is  shown  as  a  penitent,
redeeming,  by  a  religious  life,  the  errors  of  his  past
ways,  and  parting  from  Harith  for  ever.  At  the  end
of  the  Assemblies  is  a  paragraph  by  the  author,  in
the  spirit  of  his  apology  in  the  preface.  He  says  that
the  composition  was  a  task  beyond  his  strength,  and
undertaken  unwillingly — alluding  to  the  instances  of
his  patron,  Anushirwan.  He  admits  the  little  merit
of  his  work,  and  affects  to  believe  that  it  has  had  but
small  success.  He  asks  pardon  of  God  for  whatever
it  contains  that  is  frivolous  and  unedifying,  and  throws
himself  on  the  divine  mercy.  This  literary  modesty  we
may  assume  to  be  hardly  sincere.  Hariri  had  really
a  very  high  opinion  of  his  own  powers,  and  Abu
Zayd’s  boasts  only  represent  the  author’s  estimate  of
the  compositions  which  he  places  in  the  mouth  of  his
hero.  Although  in  the  preface  he  speaks  reverentially
of  A1  Hamadani,  we  cannot  hut  see  that  he  believed
himself  to  have  surpassed  his  model.  In  the  forty-


38


INTRODUCTION.


seTenth  Assembly  Abu  Zayd  is  made  to  say  : — “If  tbe
Alexandrian  (that  is  A1  Hamadani’s  hero  Abu’l  Fath),
did  go  before  me,  know  that  the  light  rain  precedes
the  shower,  yet  the  excellency  is  with  the  shower.”
Indeed  the  praises  which  Hariri  received  were  enough
to  exalt  him  in  his  own  opiuion,  and  to  make  him
careless  of  unfriendly  critics.  Complimentary  poems,
and  still  more  solid  proofs  of  esteem  reached  him  from
his  admirers.  Mention  has  been  made  of  the  verses
of  Hejm  ad  Dowleh,  celebrating  Hariri’s  merits,  and
lauding  him  as  the  glory  of  the  tribe  of  Temim.  In
the  thirty-ninth  Assembly,  Hariri  had  mentioned  in
terms  of  honour  the  Amir  Dobays,  the  Asadi,  son  of
Sayf  ad  Dowleh  Sadakah,  the  Arab  prince  of  Hilleh,  and
in  the  commentary  of  Sherishi  it  is  related  that  Dobays
was  so  delighted  with  the  compliment  that  he  sent
him  presents  of  the  most  costly  kind.

More  happy  than  this  benefactor,  who  was  put  to
death  by  the  Seljuk  Sultan  Mas‘ud,  or,  according  to
another  account,  was  driven  out  of  the  country,  and
joined  the  Christian  crusaders  in  Syria,  the  author  of  the
Assemblies  ended  his  days  in  peace.  He  left  three  sons,
who  followed  the  profession  of  their  father,  and  appear
to  have  been  men  of  ability  and  learning.  One  of  them,
‘Obayd  allah,  became  chief  Kadi  of  Basra ;  another,
Abu’l  Kasim  ‘Abd  allah,  was  an  official  at  Bagdad ;  the
third,  Abu  ’1  'Abbas  Mohammed,  succeeded  his  father  in
his  post  at  Meshan.  They  had  been  well  instructed
by  Hariri  in  the  Assemblies,  in  order  that  they  might
teach  them  after  his  death,  and  explain  their  difficulties
to  the  numerous  students.  Of  Abu’l  ‘Abbas  it  is  said
that  he  was  a  learned  and  eloquent  man,  especially


INTRODTJQTION.


39


yersed  in  the  Assemblies  and  ready  with  the  best  expla¬
nations.  From  these  and  other  pupils  the  first  com¬
mentators  derived  their  materials.  Among  the  contem¬
poraries  of  the  author,  who  admired  and  studied  his
work,  the  first  place  is  due  to  Zamakhshari.  He  will
he  found  frequently  mentioned  by  the  commentators,
under  this  name  or  that  of  Jar  allah  ‘‘the  neighbour
of  God,”  which  he  received  from  having  passed  several
years  at  Mecca.  In  learning  he  was  not  inferior  to
Hariri,  and  he  was  especially  one  of  the  acutest  gram¬
marians  of  the  age.  But  it  is  as  a  commentator  on
the  Horan  that  he  is  chiefly  famous.  His  great  work,  of
which  an  excellent  edition  has  been  published  at  Calcutta,
is  the  foundation  of  the  more  commonly  used  commen¬
tary  of  Baydawi,  who  has  borrowed  from  it  largely.
But  as  Zamakhshari  was  tainted  with  the  doctrines  of
the  Mu‘tazilun,  his  work  has  never  been  held  as  a  sound
guide,  while  Baydawi  represents  the  strictest  Sunni
orthodoxy.  Zamakhshari  read  the  Assemblies  with
admiration,  and  placed  them  on  a  level  with  the  Mo'al-
lakat.  Two  verses  which  he  composed  upon  them  have
often  been  prefixed  to  the  manuscript  copies,  and  will
be  found  on  the  title-page  of  Be  Sacy’s  edition ; —

“  I  swear  by  God  and  his  wonders,  by  the  place  of  the  pilgrimage
and  its  rite,

Hariri  is  worthy  that  his  Assemblies  should  be*wiitten  in  letters
of  gold.”

Such  was  the  judgment  of  contemporaries ;  of  his
posthumous  fame  I  shall  have  to  speak  in  connection
with  his  imitators  and  commentators.

Ibn  Khallikan  tells  us  that  Hariri  was  of  moan  aspect,
and  extremely  ugly.  A  stranger  who  came  to  visit  him.


40


INTR0DJ7GTI0W.


and  to  study  under  him,  did  not  sufficiently  conceal  his
dislike  of  the  master’s  appearance.  Hariri  addressed  him
in  some  verses,  the  purport  of  which  was  that, —

I  am  a  man  to  be  beard  of,  not  to  be  seen.”

The  reader  will  have  already  gathered  that  the  Assembly
4s  a  kind  of  dramatic  anecdote  in  the  telling  of  which  the
author’s  object  is  to  display  his  poetry,  his  eloquence,  or
his  learning,  and  that  with  this  view  the  subject  is  con¬
tinually  subordinated  to  the  treatment  of  it,  the  substance
to  the  form.  But  a  full  understanding  of  these  composi¬
tions  and  of  the  two  elements  of  which  they  consist,
namely  the  rhymed  prose  and  the  verse,  cannot  be  ob¬
tained  without  a  consideration  of  the  earlier  Arabic  liter¬
ature.  The  origin  of  poetry  among  the  Arabs,  as  among
other  peoples,  is  lost  in  obscurity ;  but  there  is  a  general
consent  that  in  primitive  times  there  was  no.  poetry  save
the  verses  which  each  man  uttered  as  he  had  occasion.
A  singular  aptitude  for  poetical  expression,  and  an  im¬
pulse  towards  it,  distinguished  both  sexes  from  the  earliest
ages.  The  feelings  of  love  or  hate,  of  pride,  defiance,
ridicule,  or  pity,  found  utterance  in  verse,  and  this  faculty
of  improvisation  was,  it  would  seem,  cultivated  assiduously
even  by  the  most  barbarous  tribes.  The  warrior  defying
his  opponent  in  the  field,  the  lover  imploring  his  mistress,
the  herald  in  presence  of  a  hostile  band,  would  declaim  a
distich,  or  more ;  and  these  utterances,  if  they  contained
some  striking  thought  or  phrase,  were  handed  down,  and
inseparably  associated  with  his  name.  This  was  the  origin
of  Arab  poetry,  and  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  its  chief
characteristic,  for  it  is  one  which  runs  through  the  litera¬
ture  from  first  to  last.  From  the  earliest  recorded  versicles


INTROBUCTION.


41


down  to  tlie  artificial  pastiches  produced  at  Cairo  or
Beyrout  in  the  present  day,  the  form  of  the  Arab  poem
is  that  of  an  allocution.  The  dramatic  and  the  epic
elements  are  almost  wanting.  It  is  the  poet  who  addresses
his  friend,  or  his  patron,  or  the  world,  and  makes  known
the  feelings  of  his  own  soul,  just  as  did  the  unlettered
chieftain  of  pagan  Arabia.  His  personality  always  pierces
through  the  composition,  as  also  does  for  the  most  part
the  personality  of  him  who  is  addressed.  The  poet  never
effaces  himself,  he  is  always  present,  telling  us  what  he
thinks  and  feels,  and  bidding  us  notice  that  it  is  his
panegyric,  and  his  satire,  and  his  moral  observations  that
we  are  reading.

It  is  worth  while  to  give  some  specimens  of  these
traditionary  versicles  in  order  that  the  reader  may
view  the  earliest  and  least  developed  form,  the  pala3-
ozoic  life,  of  Arabic  poetry.  Bor  the  purpose  of  illus¬
tration  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  lines  were  ac¬
tually  spoken  by  the  legendary  personages  to  whom
they  are  attributed :  in  some  cases  we  know  this  to
be  impossible,  in  most  it  is  very  doubtful.  But  it  is
certain  that  the  verses  are  of  considerable  antiquity,
that  they  have  come  down  from  days  when  the  regular
poem,  the  kasideh,  had  not  yet  been  developed,  and
that  they  do  actually  represent  that. hind  of  improvised
poetical  utterance  to  which  each  man  had  recourse  on
occasion.

Zarifeh,  the  wife  of  'Amr  ibn  'Amir  Muzaykiyah,  had
a  dream  which  presaged  the  breaking  of  the  dyke  of
Mareb,  the  event  known  in  Arab  tradition  as  the  Sayl  al
'Arim  (see  note  to  17th  Assembly).  Horror-stricken  she
addressed  her  husband, —


42


INTRODUCTION.


Hoiiglit  liave  I  seen,  0  king,  like  to-day :  ^

I  kave  seen  a  cloud  that  banished  sleep,

A  cloud  that  lightened  long,

That  thundered  and  its  bolt  burst  forth.

It  set  in  flames  all  on  which  it  fell,

Nor  remained  ought  but  it  was  o’erwhelmed.’’

To  the  questions  of  her  husband  Zaiifeh  returns  poetical
answers  of  the  same  kind,  and  succeeds  in  persuading
'Amr  to  quit  the  country.  Of  a  similar  character  is  the
dialogue  between  Jathimet  al  Ahrash,  king  of  Hira,  and
his  sister  Uakash,  when  the  latter  hastily  married  'Adi
ihn  Nasr,  after  the  king’s  consent  had  been  obtained
during  a  fit  of  drunkenness, —

“  Tell  me,  0  Eakush,  and  deceive  me  not,

Hast  thou  given  thyself  to  a  free  man,  or  to  a  base  born  ?

Or  to  one  lower,  for  thou  art  fit  for  one  lower  ?

Or  to  a  slave,  for  thou  art  fit  for  a  slave  ?  ”

Eakasli  answer ed, —

Thou  gavest  me  in  marriage,  and  I  knew  it  not
Till  the  women  came  to  adorn  me.

This  is  from  thy  drinking  the  strong  unmixed  wine,

And  thy  continuing  in  thy  folly.”

The  early  legends  are  full  of  such  lines,  which,  whether
or  not  we  admit  their  authenticity  in  each  case,  hear
testimony  to  the  habit  of  the  Arabs  to  use  such  poetical
discourse.  Xow  there  are  two  fonns-which  the  poetical
diction  of  the  race  has  taken  for  itself.  The  fiirst  of  these
is  the  rhymed  prose,  such  as  makes  up  the  greater  part
of  the  Assemblies  of  Hariri,  the  other  is  metrical  verse
such  as  Abu  Zayd  declaims  here  and  there.  It  is  worth
while  to  consider  the  origin  of  these  two  dissimilar  forms
of  poetical  expression,  and  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  each

'  Extract  from  Mas^'udi  given  by  De  Sacy  in  his  ^^Memoires  sur
Fhistoire  des  Arabes  avant  Mahomet,”  Yols.  47  and  48  of  Memoires
de  TAcademie  Eoyale  des  Inscriptions  et  belles  lettres.”


INTRODUCTION.


43


should  have  so  permanent  a  popularity,  and  be  united
with  the  other  in  the  same  composition.

It  is  impossible  to  become  acquainted  with  Arabic
literature  without  perceiving  that  there  is  a  fundamental
relationship  between  the  poetry  of  the  Hebrew  and  that
of  the  desert  tribes,  whose  intellect  was  first  awakened
fifteen  hundred  years  later.  On  the  resemblance,  or  we
might  rather  say  the  identity,  of  the  vocabulary  of  the
two  languages  it  is  needless  to  speak.  It  is  said  that  six-
sevenths  of  the  Hebrew  roots  are  to  be  found  in  the
Arabic  Lexicon,-  and  whole  classes  of  the  most  familiar
words,  such  for  instance  as  the  parts  of  the  body,  are  the
same  in  both  languages.  Such  a  radical  identity  of
speech  not  only  proves  a  community  of  race,  but  justifies
us  in  believing  that  the  intellectual  tendencies  and  the
forms  in  which  they  would  arrange  themselves  would  be
similar.  Both  the  Hebrew  and  the  Arabic  poetical  litera¬
ture  were  built  up,  we  may  assume,  on  the  common
foundation  of  the  Semitic  life,  and  they  certainly  amid  all  \
their  diversity,  bear  traces  of  this  primitive  union.  On
this  point  it  is  interesting  to  compare  the  versicles  which
we  find  attributed  to  the  early  heroes  and  heroines  of
Arabia  with  those  which  are  imbedded  in  the  most  ancient
narratives  of  the  Old  Testament.  Of  these  the  one  which
comes  to  us  as  absolutely  primeval,  and  which  probably
has  a  very  high  antiquity,  is  the  address  of  Lamech  to  his
two  wives,  which  in  our  version  runs  as  follows : —

“  Adah  and  Zillali,  hear  my  •voice,

Ye  wives  of  Lainccli,  hearken  unto  my  speecli :

For  I  have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding,

And  a  young  man  to  my  hurt.

If  Cain  shall  he  avenged  sevenfold,

Truly  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold.”


44


INTRODUCTION.


The  origin  and  meaning  of  this  strange  composition
are  lost  to  ns.  But  to  whomsoever  it  is  to  be  attributed,
it  undoubtedly  belongs  to  that  kind  of  poetical  utterance
on  occasion  which  existed  among  the  early  Arabs.  It
may  be  noticed  here  that  the  first  four  lines  of  Lamech’s
song  have  a  species  of  rhyme  in  the  uniform  desinence  of
the  affixed  pronoun.  The  curse  and  blessing  of  Hoah  on
his  sons,  though  less  poetical  in  form,  may  be  considered
as  belonging  to  the  same  class.  Compare  also  the  answer
of  Jehovah  to  Eebekah  when  she  inquires  concerning  the
struggling  of  the  children  in  her  womb,  and  the  blessings
of  Isaac  upon  Jacob  and  Esau.  Compare  also  the  bless¬
ings  pronounced  upon  Israel  by  Balaam,  the  curse .  on
Moab  at  Numbers  xxi.  27,  and  the  song  of  Israel  at  the
digging  of  the  well,  verse  17.  With  the  age  in  which
these  compositions  were  produced  we  are  not  concerned.
It  may  be  that  some  of  them  express  the  patriotic  pride  of
Israel  after  the  triumphant  establishment  of  the  tribes  in
Canaan.  But  neither  the  popular  tradition  nor  the  histor¬
ical  compilation  would  have  attributed  such  a  diction  to
patriarchal  times  unless  the  habit  of  poetical  expression
in  important  circumstances  of  life  had  been  known  among
the  people.  In  fact,  the  original  type  of  Hebrew  poetry  is
ever  the  ode,  or  song,  inspired  by  some  great  event,  and
showing  forth  the  joy  or  sorrow,  the  thankfulness  or
supplications,  of  the  poet.  Such  are  the  songs  of  Moses
in  Exodus  and  Deuteronomy,  the  song  of  Deborah,  the
lamentation  of  David  over  Jonathan,  and  the  Book  of
Psalms  generally.  Like  the  Arab  poetry,  they  are  the
expression  of  individual  feeling  in  which  the  personality
of  the  bard  is  never  lost,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  believe
that  the  original  type  of  them  was  a  species  of  impro-


IFTR0DT7CTI0N.


45


vised  utterance  common  to  both  these  branches  of  the
Semitic  race.

A  further  similarity  is  to  be  found  in  the  form  of
Hebrew  poetry.  The  reader  of  the  English  translation  of
the  Bible  can  comprehend,  as  well  as  the  scholar,  the  pre-
vaihng  characteristic  of  a  great  part  of  its  poetical  lan¬
guage.  This  is  what  is  called  parallelism,  which  consists
in  making  the  second  clause  of  a  sentence  answer  to  the
first,  either  in  the  way  of  antithesis,  or  by  the  expression
of  the  same  idea  in  different  words,  or  by  the  amplification
of  the  idea.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  rhyme  of  the  sense,  and  not
of  the  sound.  This  peculiar  structure  of  Hebrew  poetry
has  rendered  it  especially  fitted  for  translation,  since
it  is  independent  of  the  tongue  in  which  it  is  expressed,
and  can  only  be  destroyed  by  gross  want  of  taste  in  the
interpreter.  Whoever  will  content  himself  with  a  literal
rendering  of  those  sublime  thoughts,  may  transfer  the
Bible  to  his  own  language  essentially  unharmed.  The
loose  paraphraser  may  dissipate  the  spirit  of  the  Psalms,
or  the  Book  of  Job ;  nothing  that  is  grand  or  beautiful
can  survive  his  incapacity ;  but  the  experience  of  ages
has  proved  that  the  power  of  the  Hebrew  writers  has
been  hardly  diminished  in  the  translations  which  have
made  them  known  to  the  Christian  world.  This  parallelism
is  the  chief  though  not  the  only  formal  rule  of  Hebrew
poetry.  Where  it  is  absent  we  find  its  place  supplied  by
strophic  arrangements  of  the  versicles,  by  refrains  of
words,  by  alhteration,  and  to  some  extent  even  by  rhyme.
But  whatever  rhythmical  aids  the  Hebrew  poetry  may
have  adopted,  we  must  hold  as  established  that  it  was
not  subjected  to  the  laws  of  what  we  call  prosody.  For
centuries  this  has  been  doubted,  and  writers  of  succeeding


46


INTROBUCTION.


ages,  botlx  Jews  and  Christians,  have  sought  to  discover
in  the  poetical  books  of  the  Bible  certain  rules  of  versifi¬
cation.  The  vain  efforts  of  European  scholars  have  been
mainly  incited  by  the  declarations  of  Josephus.  That  so
famous  and  so  learned  a  writer  should  have  erred,  is  not  to
be  admitted  without  manifest  proof,  yet  the  barrenness  of
the  labours  of  so  many  ingenious  men  seems  to  leave  no
doubt  that  the  author  of  the  Antiquities  of  the  Jews  mis¬
understood  or  misrepresented  the  genius  of  what  had  in
his  time  already  become  an  archaic  language.  Desirous,
apparently,  to  give  the  Hebrew  literatxire  importance  by
showing  that  it  was  formed  on  models  similar  to  those  of
Greece  and  Eome,  Josephus  speaks  of  the  hexameter,
pentameter,  and  trimeter  measures  that  are  to  be  found
in  the  Bible.  Of  the  song  of  Exodus  xv.  he  says ;  Kai

M(av<rfj<;  diSrjv  rbv  0eov,  ijKbbiMov  re  /cal  evfji,ev€la<;  ev'Xfipicr-
T-iav  irepleypvcrav,  ev  e^afierpcp  Tova  cryvnOtjai.  Jewish  ^Anti¬
quities,  Book  II.,  c.  16.  Similarly  in  Book  lY.,  c.  8,  he
speaks  of  the  second  song  of  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  as
irotqa-i'i  e^dpuerpo^.  In  Book  YII.,  c.  12,  he  says  that  David,
having  overcome  his  enemies,  and  given  peace  to  the  land,

tt)8a9  et?  Tov  6ebv  /cai  vp,vov<;  cvverd^aTO  psTpov  voikCKov.  Toik
pev  jap  Tpiperpov^,  rov;  Se  'Trevraperpovi  eiroiTjae.  It  is  fair  to
Josephus  to  suggest  that  he  possibly  meant  that  these
ancient  compositions  were  of  a  kind  which  in  the  classic
languages  would  have  taken  the  form  of  heroic,  or  elegiac,
or  lyric  verse.  But  modern  writers  have  not  so  under¬
stood  him,  and  the  notion  that  the  Psalms  and  the  Book
of  Job  could  be  separated  into  spondees  and  iambuses,
dactyls  and  anapaests,  has  haunted  Hebraists  from  the
times  of  the  early  fathers  down  to  our  own  day.  Even  so
eminent  an  Orientalist  as  Sir  William  Jones  has  sought


INTRODUCTION.


47


to  apply  tlie  Arabic  prosody  to  tbe  Book  of  Job.  Tbe
malediction  of  tbe  patriarch  on  bis  natal  day  at  chapter  iii.,
he  divides  into  long  and  short  syllables  after  a  method  of
his  own;  but,  when  all  is  done,  he  entirely  fails  in  proving
to  us  that  there  is  any  metre  at  all.  The  more  searching
criticism  of  modern  scholars  has  given  sufficient  negative
proof  that  metre,  as  it  exists  in  the  classic  languages  and
in  Arabic,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  sacred  poets  of  the
Bible.

Nor  ought  the  Arabic  scholar  to  wonder  at  its  absence  _
Josephus  and  Jerome  were  prepossessed  by  the  analogy  of
the  classic  languages ;  the  scholars  of  modern  Europe,  who
came  to  the  study  of  Hebrew  with  tastes  formed  on  classic
canons,  may  have  thought  poetry  without  metre  to  be
impossible,  and  hoped  that  the  key  which  should  unlock
the  secrets  of  Hebrew  prosody  would  be  yielded  to  per¬
severing  ingenuity.  But  the  Arabic  scholar  is  aware  that
the  most  ancient,  the  most  popular,  the  most  sublime,  and
powerful  order  of  poetry  in  the  Arabic  language  is  as  little
metrical  as  Isaiah  or  Job.  Among  both  races  the  original
and  primeval  type  of  poetry  is  the  old  Semitic  unmetrieal
accordance.  Among  both  the  simplest  element  of  poetical
speech,  the  primitive  literary  unit,  is  the  Versicle,  a  short
and  serried  sentence  vigorously  expressing  a  single  idea,
and  detached  from  what  goes  before  and  comes  after  it.
This,  in  its  original  form,  as  it  exists  in  Hebrew  and  in  a
large  department  of  Arabic  poetry,  is  without  metre.  All
poeftry  in  both  languages  is  luade  up  by  the  agglutination
of  these  versicles  to  one  another;  but  the  Arab  type
differs  from  the  Hebrew  in  this,  that  whereas  the  Hebrew
chiefly  confines  itself  to  parallelism,  that  is  to  a  polarity
or  dualism  between  two  versicles,  the  Arabic  possesses


48


mmoDucTioN.


this  dualism,  combined  mth  the  principle  of  continuity.
The  dualism  appears  in  the  parallelistic  speech,  as  it  was
uttered  hy  the  orators  of  the  desert,  and  as  it  exists  in  the
Assemblies  of  Hariri.  The  continuity  is  more  conspicuous
in  the  semi-metrical  verse,  called  rejes,  while  both  are
combined  in  those  compositions  of  a  stricter  prosody
which  alone  the  Arabs  dignify  with  the  name  of  poetry.

"When  we  examine  the  most  ancient  legends  that  have
come  down  to  us  we  find  that  they  contain  poetical
utterances  in  the  unmetrical  form.  Zarifeh,  of  whom
we  have  already  spoken,  prophesies  the  bursting  of  the
dyke  of  Mareb  in  rhymed  prose : —

By  tlie  light  and  the  dark ;  hy  the  earth  and  the  heaven  ;

Surely  the  trees  shall  perish ;  and  the  waters  shall  return  as  in  the
time  of  old.”

In  each  of  these  lines  the  first  and  second  parts  rhyme
in  their  last  word,  while  the  whole  is  unmetrical.  In  the
ensuing  dialogue  the  answers  of  Zarifeh  are  in  a  similar
strain  and  rhythm,  and  whoever  may  have  been  the  author
of  them,  they  undoubtedly  represent  the  oldest  form
of  Arab  poetical  speech.

I  would,  therefore,  place  the  rhymed  prose  of  the
Arabs  as  the  analogue  of  the  Hebrew  poetry,  and  refer
the  origin  of  both  to  the  primeval  ages  of  the  Semitic
race.  To  utter  one  versicle,  and  attach  to  it  another
with  an  antithetic  correspondence  in  sense  or  sound,
formed  the  germ  of  all  poetical  composition.  This
parallelism,  which  among  the  Pagan  Arabs  was  gen¬
erally  applied  to  a  discourse  in  this  style,  perhaps
existed  before  rhyme  was  introduced,  for  it  is  said  that
in  ancient  times  the  IchoflaJi,  or  oratorical  address,  was
not  rhymed.  But  rhyme  was  at  a  later  period  universal.


mmoBucTioN.


49


and  the  rhymed  prose  to  which  the  Arabs  gave  the  name
of  from  a  fancied  resemblance  between  its  rhythm
and  the  cooing  of  a  dove,  is  the  peculiar  diction  of  the
race.  It  may  almost  be  said  that  there  can  be  no
narration  or  oratory  of  the  highest  order  except  in
rhymed  prose..  It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  it  was  cul¬
tivated  among  the  tribes  long  before  regular  poetry  was
known,  and  was  used  almost  in  common  conversation.
Whenever  the  speaker  wished  to  be  emphatic  and  im¬
pressive  he  supplemented  the  proposition  he  uttered  by
another  of  similar  tenor,  which  should  rhyme  with  it  in
the  last  word.  This  will  be  sufficiently  comprehended
by  whoever  reads  the  present  translation  of  the  Assem¬
blies.  'Women  and  even  children  learned  to  throw  their
thoughts  into  this  rhythmical  form,  which  gave  an
epigrammatic  piquancy  to  their  addresses  or  retorts.
The  rhymed  diction  of  ordinary  life  was  doubtless  of
the  most  simple  kind,  consisting  of  but  two  or  three
short  sentences  of  similar  desinence ;  but  on  greater
occasions  long  orations  in  this  style  were  uttered.  The
chief  of  a  tribe  addressing  his  followers,  the  herald
claiming  satisfaction  or  hurling  defiance,  the  plaintiff
before  the  judge,  the  rivals  contending  for  superiority
of  pedigree  or  achievements  spoke  with  rhyme.  Elo¬
quence  was  looked  upon  as  tame  and  powerless  without
this  symbol  of  elevated  style.  The  history  of  rhymed
prose  is  the  history  of  the  Arabic  literature.  It  was  the
earliest,  and  has  been  the  most  enduring  form  of  poetical
eloquence.  From  the  orators  of  the  Ignorance  it  was
adopted  by  the  preachers  of  Islam,  and  the  name  aJaA
was  applied  to  the  weekly  exhortations  of  the  mosque,
which  are  commonly  in  rhymed  prose.  Works  of  the


4


50


INTRODUCTION.


highest  character  hare  been  ■written  thro'ughout  with
rhyme,  among  which  I  may  mention,  on  account  of  its
extraordinary  merits,  the  History  of  Timur  or  Tamer¬
lane  by  Ibn  'Arabshah.  This  composition,  which
approaches  nearer  to  the  epic  poem  than  anything  in
the  language,  is  one  of  the  latest  productions  of  the
great  ages  of  Arabian  literature.  Sir  W.  Jones  bears
■witness  to  the  genius  of  the  author.  “  Equidem  inter
poemata  heroica  Timuri  Mstoriam,  quam  composuit  scrip-
tor  admirabilis  Ebn  Arabshah,  non  vereor  recensere ;  ita
pulchris  enim  abundat  imaginibus,  ita  jucundis  narra-
tionibus,  et  descriptionibus  naturae,  morum,  affeetuum ;
ita  magnificis  illuminatur  figuris,  tarn  dulci  numerorum
varietate,  tanta  elegantiarum  copia  conspergitur  ut  nihil
cogitari  possit  accommodatius  ad  lectorem  vel  delectan-
dum,  vel  docendum,.vel  etiam  permovendum.  (Poeseos
Asiaticae  Comentarii.)”

In  this  work  rhyme  and  assonance  abound  ■with  a
luxuriance  that  almost  oppresses  the  reader,  and  the  em¬
ployment  of  such  a  style  by  an  author  of  originality
and  genius,  who  had  before  him  the  greatest  productions
of  his  predecessors,  shows  how  deeply  rooted  in  the
nature-  of  the  people  was  the  sentiment  for  unmetrical
cadence.  In  almost  all  Arabic  works  the  Invocation
and  Preface  with  which  the  book  begins  are  also  in
rhymed  sentences:  in  the  ordinary  prose  of  the  most
sober  narratives  rhyme  continually  appears  when  the
writer  is  describing  anything  which  excites  admiration
or  astonishment.  So  independent  of  ajnetrical  prosody
is  poetry  among  the  Arabs.

The  reasons  for  the  prevalence  of  rhyme,  and  for  the
undoubted  fact  that  it  has  existed  anterior  to  and  in-


INTROBVCTION.


51


dependent  of  metre,  may  be  found  in  tbe  structure  of
tbe  Arabic  language,  and  the  mathematical  precision  of
its  forms.  If  the  root  letters  of  a  word  be  represented
by  white  counters,  and  the  ten  augmentative  letters —
those  contained  in  the  words  — ^be  represented

by  coloured  counters,  every  strictly  Arabic  word,  whether
primitive  or  derived,  can  be  expressed  to  the  mind  so
that  we  can  say  whether  the  counters  mean  that  the
action  indicated  by  the  root  is  past  or  present,  is  per¬
formed  by'  male  or  female,  or  whether  they  signify  him
who  does  the  action,  or  who  suffers  it,  or  who  is  of  a
capacity  to  do  it,  and  so  on  of  a  multitude  of  notions
related  to  the  root.  The  derivative  idea  is  always
expressed  by  the  same  derivative  form,  and  a  form  of
one  root  is  necessarily  assonant  to  the  same  form  of
another.  Here  then  is  a  connexion  between  the  sound
and  the  signification  of  words  which  would  naturally
suggest  the  use  of  rhyme :  and  we  may  conclude  that
it  made  its  appearance  not  merely  in  obedience  to  a
rhythmical  impulse  of  the  soul,  but  as  representing
a  real  connexion  and  responsion  of  ideas.

I  have  said  that  the  Arab  poetical  speech  not  only

makes  use  of  parallelism  as  in  the  simplest  form  of
rhymed  prose,  but  also  expresses  itself  in  a  sequence  of
corresponding  versicles.  These,  whether  metrical  or
not,  have  a  continuous  rhyme,  and  such  a  sequence  of
continuously  rhymed  periods  is  the  germ  of  the  Arabic
poem.  The  unmetrical  sequence  is  to  be  found  in  its
highest  perfection  in  the  earlier  and  more  poetical  Suras
of  the  Koran,  when  Mohammed,  first  touched  with  the
prophetic  afflatus,  poured  forth  his  warnings  and  denun¬
ciations  among  the  Koraysh.  It  is  related  of  Mohammed


52


INTRODUCTION.


that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  versification,  as  they
were  employed  by  the  great  poets  of  the  century  which
preceded  him ;  and  that  when  by  chance  he  quoted  n
verse  he  often  destroyed  the  metre  by  changing  the
order  of  the  words.  Thus,  when  'Abbas,  son  of  Merdas,
and  of  Khansa,  the  poetess,  dissatisfied  with  a  division
of  spoil,  addressed  the  Prophet  in .  some  verses,  among
which  was  the  line : —

“  My  booty  and  tbe  booty  of  my  torse  '  Obayd  tas  been  given  to
'Onaynab  and  A1  Akra'.”

Mohammed  quoting  the  line  said,  “A1  Akra'  and  'Onay-
nah,”  which  destroyed  the  metre.  Abu  Bekr  corrected
him,  and  observed,  ‘‘  Truly  has  God  said  in  the  Koran,
‘"We  have  not  taught  him  poetry  and  it  suits  him  not,’  ”
Koran,  xxxvi.  69.  But  Mohammed  had  a  poetic  style
of  his  own,  which  was  consonant  with  the  deepest  feelings
of  his  race.  In  his  transports  of  zeal  or  devotion  he
uttered  his  unmetrical  rhythms  and  awed  even  his  most
determined  enemies.  The  shortest  and  simplest,  but  not
the  least  powerful  of  these,  are  the  Suras  which  are
placed  at  the  end  of  the  Koran,  and  consist  of  but  a
few  versicles,  as  the  Ikhlas,  in  which  he  clears  or  quits
himself  of  believing  in  any  but  God;  the  Suras  called
A1  Palak  and  An  Kas,  in  which  he  invokes  the  divine
assistance  against  calamity ;  and  that  in  which  he  curses
Abu  Lahab  and  his  wife.  The  most  poetical  Suras  are
somewhat  longer,  but  present  the  same  characteristics.
According  to  tradition,  the  first  revelation  received  by
the  Prophet  was  the  96th  Sura,  called  A1  'Alak.  In
this  the  rhyme  is  four  times  changed,  the  versicles  of
each  paragraph  being  marked  by  a  different  desinence.
The  two  first  versicles  have  one  desinence,  the  three


INTRODUCTION-


next  another,  the  nine  next  a  third,  the  four  next  a
fourth,  while  the  last,  according  to  a  caprice  which  is  to
he  met  with  more  than  once,  rhymes  to  no  other.

One  of  the  noblest  compositions  in  the  Koran  is  the
81st  Sura,  called  At  Tekwir,  descriptive  of  the  day  of
judgment.  It  begins  as  follows  : —

When  the  snn  shall  be  enwrapped ;

When  the  stars  shall  shoot  down  ;

When  the  mountains  shall  be  moved ;

When  the  brood  camels  shall  be  abandoned ;

When  the  wild  beasts  shall  troop  together  ;

When  the  seas  shall  boil ;

When  the  souls  shall  join  the  bodies  ;

When  the  maid  buried  alive  shall  be  asked

For  what  crime  she  was  slain ;

When  the  leaves  of  the  Book  shall  be  opened ;

When  the  heaven  shall  be  drawn  aside ;

When  the  blaze  of  hell  shall  be  kindled ;

When  the  Garden  shall  be  brought  near.

The  soul  shall  know  its  work.”

These  fourteen  versicles  have  the  same  desinence ;  then
the  Prophet  takes  another,  to  which  he  gives  four
versicles ;  and  lastly,  a  third,  to  which  he  gives  eleven.
This  last  paragraph  is  marked  by  the  peculiarity  that  in
the  rhyme  it  makes  no  distinction  between  the  letters
Mim  and  Kun,  owing,  doubtless,  to  the  close  relation
between  their  sounds.  I  might  multiply  examples,  but
shall  content  myself  with  drawing  the  student’s  atten¬
tion  to  the  87th  and  92nd  Suras,  which  have  a  continuous
rhyme  throughout,  one  of  nineteen  and  the  other  of
twenty-one  verses,  and  requesting  him  to  compare  them
with  the  20  th  Sura,  in  which  the  same  rule  is  observed
with  longer  and  more  prosaic  sentences.

These  rhymed  but  unmetrical  utterances  of  Moham¬
med  make  a  nearer  approach  to  versification  than  the


54


INTRODUCTION


ordinary  rhymed  prose,  which  consists  of  but  two  kari-
netdn,  or  corresponding  sentences,  rhyming  with  each
other,  inasmuch  as  the  former  have  the  continuous
rhyme,  which  is  a  chief  characteristic  of  the  regular
poetry.  But  a  still  further  advance  is  represented  by
the  semi-metrical  rejes.  This  is  the  oldest  and  simplest
form  of  versification  known  among  the  Arabs,  and  vast
numbers  of  lines  belonging  to  it  were  handed  down  from
the  pre-Tslamic  period.  It  was  the  favourite  vehicle  for
the  poetical  or  sententious  utterances  of  chiefs  and  war¬
riors,  sages  and  diviners.  When  poetry  was  more
seriously  cultivated,  its  composers  aspired  to  a  more
harmonious  and  dignified  measure,  and  placed  them¬
selves  under  the  restrictions  of  a  more  elaborate  prosody;
but  the  early  declaimers,  who  improvised  in  obedience
to  the  feelings  of  the  moment,  and  were  probably  un¬
conscious  that  they  were  uttering  poetry  at  all,  contented
themselves  with  the  rude  measure  which  reminded  the
hearer  of  the  weak  and  trembling  trot  of  the  sickly
she-camel.  The  rejes  in  its  normal  form  consists  of  a  foot,

- w  — ,  twice  or  three  times  repeated,  but  as  each

of  the  first  three  syllables  may  be  made  long  or  short,
the  structure  is  simple  to  baldness,  and  the  tone  un¬
dignified.  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed,  though  he  gave  the  rejes
a  place  in  his  Circles,  would  not  admit  that  lines
composed  in  it  were  or  poetry,  since  they  wanted
the  peculiar  property  of  the  Arabic  or  verse,  which
consists  invariably  of  two  hemistiches.  Yet  the  rejes,
though  superseded  in  ambitious  compositions  by  more
perfect  metres,  has  never  been  neglected  by  the  literary.
It  has  always  received  a  kind  of  respect  as  a  primitive
form  of  versification,  descended  from  the  heroic  ages,


mmoDUOTiON.


55


and  still  adapted  to  short  and  pithy  compositions.  Hariri
makes  much  use  of  it  in  his  work,  and  for  excellent
specimens  of  it  the  student  may  he  referred  to  the  Third
and  Fifth  Assemblies,  The  Arabic  prosodists  seem  to
have  detected  the  relationship  of  the  rejez  to  rhymed
prose,  for  A1  Akhfash  held  that  the  two-footed  rejez  was
only  prose.  The  first  who  composed  a  regular  poem,  or
kasideh,  in  rejez ^  is  said  to  have  been  A1  Aghlab  al  'Ajili;
in  the  time  of  Mohammed.  After  him  came  Al  ‘Ajaj  ] '  but
I  believe  that  no  long  poem  of  conspicuous  merit  has  been
written  in  this  measure.  The  grammatical  treatise,  called
the  Alfiyeh,  by  Ibn  Malik,  which  is  often  cited  in  the
notes  to  this  translation,  is  in  rejez  muzdawij;  that  is,  the
second  hemistich  of  each  verse  rhymes  with  the  fi.rst,
and  each  rhyme  is  limited  to  a  single  verse.  So  also  are
the  “Beauties  of  Syntax,”  by  Hariri.

Verse,  or  poetry  proper,  was  a  development  of  rejez.
As  poetical  culture  was  extended,  the  Arabs  felt  the  want
of  niore  harmonious  and  stately  measures,  and  gradually
formed  for  themselves  a  more  varied  and  yet  a  more
severe  versification.  Throughout  the  Arab  prosody  ive
may,  however,  trace  the  primitive  and  rudimentary  rejez
in  the  iambic  and  anapmstic  character  of  the  lines.  The
taste  and  scholarship  of  Hariri  have  enabled  him  to
diversify  his  work  by  introducing  most  the  metres  which
were  in  use  in  his  time ;  but  among  the  older  poets  only
four  or  five  of  these  were  commonly  employed.  In  the
celebrated  collection  of  Arab  verses,  called  the  Hamaseh
of  Abu  Temmam,  more  than  five  hundred  of  the  pieces
are  in  the  metre  tawil;  the  hdmil,  wdjir^  and  hasit  follow
at  a  great  distance,  each  having  less  than  a  hundred,
while  the  others  are  but  sparingly  used.  Of  the  seven


56


IFTROBUCTION.


MoallaMt,  as  generally  given,  those  of  Imr  al  Kays,
Tarafeh,  and  Zohayr  ibn  Abi  Sultne  are  of  the  metre  tawil^
those  of  Lebid  and  'Antarah  are  Jcdmil,  that  of  'Amr  ibn
Kulthum  is  wdfir^  and  that  of  Harith  ibn  Hillizeh  is
Tchafif.  The  favourite  metre  of  the  early  poets,  the  tawll,
is  remarkable  for  its  grave  and  sonorous  character — it
may  be  called  the  heroic  measure  of  the  Arabs.  In  some
verses,  addressed  by  Abh  ’1  ‘Ala  to  a  man  of  letters,  the
poet,  excusing  his  own  deficiencies,  says,  by  way  of
illustration,  “  Do  you  not  know  that  the  metre  which  is
the  most  complete  of  metres,  is  sometimes  modified  by  a
weak  letter.”  This  epithet  of  “  complete  ”  is  explained
to  refer  to  the  tawil,  because  a  verse  of  this  metre  may
consist  of  forty-eight  letters,  while  in  the  medid  and  hasit
the  longest  verse  can  only  contain  forty-two.  This  property
from  which  it  takes  its  name,  and  also  the  prevalence  of
long  syllables,  made  it  especially  suitable  to  the  loftier
class  of  poetry,  whether  descriptive  or  elegiac.  The  Mmil
is  in  its  structure  the  most  closely  related  to  the  rejez.
Indeed,  a  Icdmil  line  may  become  pure  rejez  by  the  employ¬
ment  of  permissible  licences,  though  if  the  peculiarity  of
the  Mmil,  the  use  of  two  short  syllables  at  the  beginning
of  the  foot  appear  even  once,  the  poem  is  considered  to  be
in  Mmil,  and  not  in  rejez.  It  would,  therefore,  seem  that
Icamil  and  the  closely  related  metre  wdfir  represent  the
first  developments  of  the  rejez,  and  mark  the  transition  to
a  more  elaborate  versification.

Hariri,  one  of  whose  aims  was  to  exhibit  the  classic
metres,  uses  for  the  most  part  those  for  which  there  is
high  authority ;  but,  long  before  his  time,  the  poets  of
Islam  had  added  to  the  number  which  had  be^n  known
during  the  Ignorance.  Although  the  metres  of  the  old


INTRODUCTION.


57


time  were  looked  upon  as  the  best  and  noblest,  and
justly  so,  since  they  sprang  from  the  original  poetical  life
of  the  people,  yet  the  craving  for  variety,  and,  perhaps,
the  intercourse  with  other  nations,  led  poets  to  seek  new
forms  of  versification.  One  of  the  first  who  did  this
was  the  celebrated  Habib  ibn  ‘Ows,  commonly  known
as  Abu  Temmam.  He  was  born  about  the  year  190
(A.D.  805),  near  Damascus,  and  is  placed  with  his  country¬
man  Muteaebbi  in  the  first  rank  of  the  later  poets.  His
profound  knowledge  of  the  Arabic  literature  is  proved  by
the  collection  of  poetical  pieces,  called  the  Ramaseh,  which
he  made,  and  which  is  only  one  of  three  similar  compila¬
tions;  the  other  two  being  the  Fohul  ash  Shuara  (the
Heroes  of  the  Poets),  and  the  Ilchfiyarat,  or  Selections.
He  is  said  to  have  known  by  heart  fourteen  thousand
pieces  of  the  metre  rejez^  besides  Kasidehs,  and  fragments.
Hor  were  his  own  compositions  few.  His  poems  in  all  the
various  classes  of  eulogy,  satire,  elegy,  and  the  rest,  are
said  to  number  484,  and  to  contain  7707  verses.  Two
or  three  new  metres  are  ascribed  to  him,  and  as  he  had
an  unbounded  popularity  in  his  own  age,  it  is  probable
that  the  poets  who  imitated  him  considered  his  authority
for  their  use  as  equal  to  that  of  the  ancients.  But  the
best  writers  restricted  themselves  generally  to  the  sixteen
metres  described  by  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed,  the  systematize!’
of  the  national  prosody;  and  even  of  these  some  have
always  been  but  little  used.  The  Persians,  who  adopted
the  Arabic  versification,  have  formed  for  themselves  other
metres,  such  as  harih,  jedtd,  and  mushdJdl.^  and  have
invented  circles  to  explain  the  metamorphoses  of  the
Ruldiy  or  quatrain,  which  they  orignated.  But  in
Hariri,  the  forms  of  the  original  Arabic  poetry  will  be


58


WTRODUCTION.


found  almost  unperverted.  His  work  resumes  all  that
was  most  classical  and  of  the  higiiest  autkority  in  tke
writings  of  Lis  predecessors,  and  no  better  aid  to  the
study  of  the  laws  of  Khalil  can  be  found  than  the  diverse
improvisations  of  Abu  Zayd.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  in  the  Assemblies  the  highest
literary  forms  of  the  language  are  united.  Abu  Zayd’s
harangues  and  sermons  are  those  of  the  pagan  orator
or  the  Moslem  preacher ;  Harith’s  descriptions  are  in  the
rhetorical  style  which  the  most  accomplished  writers
imitated  from  them ;  the  diversified  poetry  of  the  Arabs,
from  the  simple  rejez  to  the  most  ornate  diction  of  the
kasideh,  is  represented  in  Abu  Zayd’s  verses,  and  we  have
a  compendium  of  all  that  had  established  itself  in  popular
favour  dmdng  many  centuries.  European  readers  will
perhaps  wonder  that  the  author,  who  was. master  of  such
resources,  should  have  restricted  himself  to  two  or  three
characters,  and  to  such  a  monotony  of  adventure.  He
has  evidently  fancy  and  originality :  how  is  it  then  that,
having  advanced  so  far  to  the  dramatic  form,  he  should
not  have  been  led  to  improve  on  his  type,  to  place  Abu
Zayd  in  more  varied  circumstances,  and  surround  him
with  more  interesting  people  ?  We  have  all  through  the
same  adventurer,  making  gain  by  tricks  which  resemble,
each  other ;  we  have  always  the  circle  of  dilettanti,  or  the
Kadi  generous,  or  foolish,  or  stingy,  as  the  case  may  be.
Yet  the  author,  whatever  may  be  his  apprehensions  of
other  demerits,  never  escuses  himself  for  his  repetitions.
One  explanation  of  this  is  that  the  adventure  is  always
treated  as  subordinate  to  the  poetical  or  rhetorical  dis¬
play,  that  the  audience  did  not  care  how  Abu  Zayd
was  brought  on  the  stage  so  long  as  he  discoursed  with


INTRODUCTION.


59.


sentiment  and  wit.  But  it  must  also  be  observed  that
this  uniformity  of  type  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of
Arabic  literature.  The  East  has  never  been  studious  of
novelty,  and  if  a  thing  was  good,  an  audience  would  not
weary  of  it  any  more  than  of  the  striped  mantle,  or  the
turban  which  had  been  worn  from  time  immemorial.  We
modern  followers  of  fashion,  who  cannot  read  the  same
authors,  follow  the  same  amusements,  or  wear  the  same
shaped  clothes  two  years  together,  have  an  impatience  of
monotony  unknown  even  to  our  own  European  race  in
former  ages.  The  comedy  of  the  ancients  ,  had  but  a
limited  range  of  character  and  incident.  The  two  old
men,  and  the  “  cultus  adulter,  stultus  vir,  callida  nupta  ”
were  reproduced  in  a  manner  which  in  modern  times
would  weary  the  most  indulgent  audience.  The  popular
Italian  comedy  with  its  harlequin  and  scaramouch  carried
sameness  to  the  extreme.  The  people  in  its  unsopMsti-
cated  state  loves  to  recur  to  familiar  types,  as  a  child  will
sooner  hear  Jack  the  Giant  Killer,  or  Tom  Thumb,  for
the  tenth  time  than  be  told  a  new  story.  This  clinging
to  established  forms  is  especially  remarkable  among  the
people  of  the  Semitic  race.  Successive  generations  of
writers  are  content  to  produce  variations  upon  a  single
theme.  To  fear  the  reproach  of  imitation  never  enters
the  mind  of  those  to  whom  the  prevalent  usage  has  al¬
most  the  sanctity  of  a  law.  J’hey  follow  the  manner,
and  even  repeat  the  phrases  of  compositions  conse¬
crated  by  antiquity,  or  popular  esteem ;  for  their  country¬
men,  far  from  desiring  originality  of  style,  would  pro¬
bably  resent  it.  So  we  find  some  of  the  later  Hebrew
Psalms  to  be  almost  a  repetition  of  those  of  an  earlier  age,
and  as  if  pieced  together  from  their  fragments.  The


60


INTRODUCTION.


diction  of  prophecy  is  fixed  by  Joel,  or  by  some  pre¬
decessor  whose  compositions  have  not  reached  us,  and
through  five  centuries  the  strain  of  promise  and  maledic¬
tion  never  varies.  The  spirit,  the  style,  the  images,  the
rhetoric,  are  everywhere  identical.  We  can  see  that  each
prophet  is  inspired,  not  only  by  his  own  fervent  genius,
hut  by  the  utterances  of  those  who  have  gone  before,  and
that  he  adopts  instinctively  and,  it  may  be,  unconsciously,
the  traditional  sacred  language  of  his  order.  We  have
even  direct  imitations  of  particular  passages,  as,  for  in¬
stance,  the  prophecy  against  Moab  at  Jeremiah  xlviii.,
which  is  plainly  taken  from  Isaiah  xv.  and  xvi. ;  also  the
curse  of  Jeremiah  on  his  birth  at  xx.  14,  which  is  identi¬
cal  with  the  opening  verses  of  the  third  chapter  of  Job.

In  Arabic  literature  the  same  character  is  manifest.
The  poet  never  hesitates  to  fashion  his  composition  after
a  prevailing  type,  and  to  repeat  this  continually  without
any  striving  for  originality.  To  mould  his  production
on  any  other  than  the  traditional  form  would  be  to
expose  himself  to  the  charge  of  bad  taste,  and  what  was
worse,  of  want  of  learning.  The  kasideh,  the  finished
poem  of  the  Arabs,  was  subjected  to  arbitrary  laws,
which,  though  perfectly  needless,  were  observed  by
numberless  writers  as  if  sacred  and  inviolable.  The
first  kasideh  is  attributed  to  Mohalhil  Ibn  Eabf  ah,  who
composed  it  on  his  brother  £olayb~Wa'ir,  one  of  the
most  celebrated  persons  of  antiquity;  but  the  poet  who
impressed  on  the  kasideh  the  type  which  it  retained  for
ages  was  the  celebrated  Imr  al  Kays,  the  son  of  Mohal-
hil’s  sister  Eatimeh.  The  judgment  of  Mohammed  and
'Omar  upon  this  prince  of  Arab  bards  has  been  already
mentioned.  The  Khalif  'Ali,  a  man  of  taste  and  cul-


INTROBUOTION.


61


ture,  was  also  full  of  admiration  for  the  great  poet  of
the  Ignorance.  These  three  founders  of  Islam  only
followed  the  opinion  of  the  most  illustrious  people  of
their  age,  and  transmitted  it  to  posterity.  Im,r  al  Kays
had  introduced,  or  first  made  popular,  a  certain  opening
of  the  kasideh,  which  consisted  of  an  address  of  the  poet
to  two  friends,  who  were  supposed  to  have  halted  with
him  at  a  spot  where  at  some  past  time  the  tribe  of  the
poet’s  mistress  had  dwelt.  The  poet  points  out  the  traces
of  the  encampment,  the  ashes  of  the  extinguished  fires,
the  deserted  pen  of  the  camels,  entertains  them  with  the
story  of  his  loves,  and  then  passes,  by  an  abrupt  transi¬
tion,  to  the  proper  subject  of  his  poem.  This  capricious
overture  caught  the  fancy  of  contemporary  poets,  and
to  introduce  a  subject  by  the  two  boon  companions,  the
mistress,  and  the  deserted  encampment,  became  a  favourite
device.  Each  of  the  seven  Mo'allakat  opens  in  this
manner,  and  what  was  originally  only  the  caprice  of  a
single  poet  became  an  almost  inviolable  law.  Even
Harith,  son  of  Hillizeh,  who  was  a  hundred  years  old
when  he  improvised  his  Mo'allakah  before  'Amr  ibn  Hind,
and  so  leprous  that  he  stood  behind  a  veil  till  the  king,
delighted  with  his  poetry,  bade  him  come  forth  and  sit
by  his  side,  laments  his  separation  from  an  imaginary
beauty.  Succeeding  poets  followed  the  same  fashion.
Whatever  the  occasion  of  the  kasideh^  the  writer  intro¬
duced  his  mistress,  praising  her  beauty,  and  lamenting
her  absence,  before  he  turned  to  his  subject,  which  was
generally  the  eulogy  of  some  great  man,  Mutenebbi’s
mistress  figures  in  some  of  his  poems,  but  he  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  to  have  discontinued  this  nasih^  or
mention  of  the  beloved  one,  and  to  have  begun  with  the


62


INTRODUCTIOm


eulogy  of  tlie  patron.  Such,  a  poem  was,  however,  not
judged  to  be  complete  according  to  poetical  laws,  and
was  described  by  the  words  j:j>  and  as  if  docted

or  truncated.  It  is  needless  to  dwell  upon  the  general
uniformity  of  the  Arab  kasidehs  in  other  respects.  The
poet  praises  himself,  his  race,  his  camel,  his  horse,  his
martial  exploits,  his  sword  and  spear,  and,  in  later  times,
the  prince  whose  favour  he  desires  to  win.  For  cen¬
turies  every  composition  of  this  class  was  constructed  on
the  same  type,  and  limited  to  the  same  narrow  range  of
ideas.  The  poet’s  merits  were  judged  by  the  skill  with
which  he  reproduced  and  varied  the  thoughts  of  antiquity.
We  need  not  wonder,  then,  that  Hariri  neglected  to
change  the  character  of  the  Assemblies  as  received  by
him  from  Hamadani.  Not  only  did  the  traditional  im¬
proviser  and  rdwi  suffice  for  his  contemporaries,  but  even
succeeding  imitators  have  never  thought  it  necessary  to
add  to  the  persons  of  the  drama.  The  Assemblies  of
Nasif  al  Tazaji,  composed  within  the  last  few  years,  are
as  rigidly  simple  in  their  structure  as  the  productions  of
eight  hundred  years  ago.^

It  now  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  those  qualities
of  Hariri’s  work  which  give  it  so  great  a  linguistic
value,  and  have  made  it,  wherever  the  Arabic  language

'  An  analogous  instance  of  permanence  of  a  fashion  in  composition
is  to  be  found  in  the  Persian  ghazal,  which,  by  a  law  as  capricious  as
that  I  hawe  mentioned,  must  contain  the  poet’s  name  in  its  closing
lines,  as  a  sort  of  signature.  The  poet  Ka'b  ibn  Zohayr  began  his
kasideh  in  honour  of  Mohammed  with  the  words  ‘‘  Su  ad  has  departed,”
and  such  was  the  influence  of  poetical  fashion  that,  according  to
Suydti,  the  Arabs  in  after  times  had  no  less  than  900  poems  begin¬
ning  with  Su'ad  has  departed.”  Su*ad  thus  became  the  name
generally  used  to  signify  a  cruel  and  capricious  mistress.  (See
Trench  note  at  Vol.  II,  p.  195,  of  De  Sacy’s  Hariri).


INTRODUCTION-.


63


is  studied,  the  text-book  of  those  who  would  obtain
a  profound  and  scientific  knowledge.  It  is  not  too
much  to  say  that  whoever  has  read  the  Assemblies
and  their  commentators,  will  have  formed  a  notion  of
every  department  of  purely  Arabic  and  Moslem
culture.  Grammar,  lexicography,  rhetoric,  poetry,
history,  antiquities,  biography,  popular  customs  and
sayings,  theology,  religious  traditions,  civil  and  eccle¬
siastical  law, — all  enter  into  the  work  ;  which  is,  as
it  were,  a  compendium  of  “  leading  cases,”  in  all  sorts  of
studies.  The  student  is  placed  on  the  track  of  almost
every  kind  of  learning,  and  if  he  follows  the  indications
of  the  author,  and  seeks,  with  the  help  of  the  commen¬
tators,  to  explain  his  allusions,  penetrate  his  intentional
obscurities,  overcome  his  cunningly-devised  difficulties,
verify  his  endless  quotations,  and  keep  in  memory  the
multifarious  information  on  language  and  grammar,  he
will  have  been  initiated  into  all  the  learning  of  the
author’s  age,  and  in  his  subsequent  studies  will  have
only  to  build  on  a  foundation  which  has  been  solidly  and
securely  laid.

The  first  peculiarity  of  the  Assemblies  is  the  use  of
words  which  are  rare  but  ancient,  classical,  and  remark¬
able  in  the  eyes  of  the  learned,  from  their  having  been
found  in  some  esteemed  composition,  and  become  the
subject  of  doubt  or  contention.  In  the  time  of  the
author  the  language  was  much  corrupted  among  the
people,  by  long  intermixture  with  foreign  races.  The
Arabs  had  always  held  the  belief  that  seclusion  from  the
rest  of  mankind  was  necessary  to  preserve  the  purity  of
their  language.  The  undefiled  speech  of  the  race  was
only  to  be  found  among  those  tribes  of  Hijaz  or  Kejd


64


rnTRODUCTIOK


■whicli  had  lived  remote  from  Persian  or  Grreek  influence,
and  developed  the  Semitic  tongue  into  the  matchless
idiom  of  the  Mo'allakat  and  the  Koran.  Ibn  Khaldun,
an  acute  and  reflecting  writer,  and  in  critical  power
above  most  of  his  countrymen,  speaks  in  a  well-known
passage  of  the  corruption  of  the  Arab  language.  He  says
that  the  descendants  of  Modar,  who  used  the  classical  lan¬
guage,  lost  the  faculty  of  speaking  it  in  purity  by  dwell¬
ing  among  people  of  other  races,  since  they  borrowed  of
them  forms  and  words.  And  for  this  reason,  he  con¬
tinues,  the  speech  of  Koraysh  was  the  most  eloquent
and  pure,  since  they  were  most  remote  from  the  abodes
of  foreigners.  Next  in  excellence  was  the  speech  of
Thakif  and  Hotiiayl  and  Khoza'ah,  and  the  Benu
Kinaneh  and  Ghatafin  and  the  Benu  Asad,  and  the
Benu  Temim.  But  as  for  the  tribes  more  remote  from
Koraysh — as  Eabi'ah,  and  Lakham,  and  Jo^am,  and
Ghassan,  and  lyyad,  and  Koda'ah,  and  the  Arabs  of
Temen,  their  speech  was  imperfect,  through  their  mix¬
ture  with  the  Persians  and  the  Abyssinians ;  and  thus,
in  the  opinion  of  Arabic  linguists,  the  greater  or  less
distance  of  a  tribe  from  Koraysh  was  the  measure  of  its
deflection  from  the  pure  language  of  Modar.  It  may  be
noticed  here  that  this  opinion  concerning  the  conserva¬
tion  of  the  language  in  the  heart  of  the  peninsula  has
acquired  an  irresistible  argument  from  the  travels  of  Mr.
Palgrave,  who  has  satisfied  scholars  that  the  language  of
the  Koran,  with  all  its  inflections  and  syntax,  is  still  the
dialect  of  the  secluded  Hejd.  But  in  the  days  of  Hariri,
and  in  the  city  of  Basra,  the  chaste  speech  of  the  Arabs
was  the  possession  of  only  a  few.  The  unlettered
Bedouin,  who  came  with  camels  or  horses  from  the


INTRODUCTION.


65


desert  was,  for  the  use  of  words  and  their  precise  pro¬
nunciation,  a  greater  authority  than  the  most  learned
grammarian.  Eor  the  corruption  that  had  set  in  imme¬
diately  after  the  first  conquests  of  Islam,  had  so  trans¬
formed  the  speech  of  Irak  and  Syria,  that  the  classic
language,  in  its  refinement,  was  obsolescent,  and  had
become  the  artificial  study  of  the  lecture-room  and  the
mosque.  Even  so  early  as  the  close  of  the  first  century
of  the  Hijra,  the  great  Khalif,  Welid  ibn  ‘Abd  el  Melik,
spoke  so  corrupt  a  dialect  that  he  could  not  make  himself
understood  by  the  Arabs  of  the  desert.^  Great  scholars
like  Sibawayh  and  Zamakhshari,  are  said  to  have
possessed  in  perfection  the  idiom  of  Modar,  though  not
even  of  Arab  blood,  but  Ibn  Khaldun  relates  that  they
had  acquired  this  by  mingling  from  infancy  with  men  of
the  tribes  who  spoke  a  chaste  language.  To  the  great
'  number,  even  of  the  educated,  the  speech  of  Koraysh  and
of  the  great  poets  was  almost  a  dead  language,  not  only
as  regarded  its  desinences  and  constructions,  but  even  as
to  the  use  of  individual  words.  Now  this  ancient
speech,  which  every  day  became  less  understood  of  the
people,  was  the  principal  study  of  the  learned.  Gram¬
matical  researches  began  in  the  first  century  of  Islam,
through  the  necessity  of  explaining  doubtful  passages  of
the  Koran.  It  was  then  that  the  diacritical  points  were
added  to  certain  letters,  the  Arabs  having  originally,  in
the  httle  that  they  wrote,  expressed  more  than  one
sound  by  the  game  character, — a  practice  which  filled
the  sacred  text  with  ambiguity.  The  tyrant  Hajjaj  ibn
Yusuf  was,  according  to  Ibn  Khallikan,  the  first  who
attempted  to  remedy  this  defect,  but  his  system  differed
^  Lane.  Preface  to  Lexicon,  p.  viii.


5


66


mmoDzrcTioif.


from  that  which  was  afterwards  iutroduced  by  Abu  ’1
Aswad.  As  the  vocabulary  of  the  language  increased,
through  a  sort  of  fusion  of  the  dialects  of  the  tribes,
which  took  place  in  the  non- Arabian  provinces ;  as
various  forms  of  the  same  word,  of  greater  or  less
authority,  came  to  be  indiscriminately  used ;  and  as  the
multitude  borrowed  from  the  Persian,  the  Syriac,  or  the
Greek,  so  much  more  did  the  learned  think  it  incumbent
upon  them  to  separate  the  chaste  idiom  from  the  corrupt,
to  show  what  was  Arab  and  what  was  A  jami  or  foreign;
to  determine  the  most  genuine  form  of  any  word  that
was  spelt  or  pronounced  in  more  than  one  manner,  to
declare  whether  or  b  or  ^  or  ^  or  4  was
correct,  to  decide  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  Jiamzeh,
and  to  fulfil  for  the  people  the  functions  of  an  Academy
of  Letters.

Theirs  was  no  easy  task.  The  European,  who  launches
out  into  the  vast  ocean  of  the  Arabic  language,  knows
how  long  and  weary  is  the  voyage,  and  yet  he  has  to
guide  him  the  grammatical  luminaries  of  a  thousand
years.  The  doctor  of  Basra  or  Kufa  did,  indeed,  speak
the  language  which  he  commented,  but  this  very  fami¬
liarity  in  some  respects  increased  his  difficulties.  He
dwelt  amid  a  Babel  of  conflicting  forms  and  vocables,  and
had  to  decide — from  a  Koran  of  imperfect  orthography,
from  poems  which,  for  the  most  part,  were  only  orally
transmitted,  or  from  the  diverse  utterances  of  various
tribes— what  was  the  pure  Arabic  form  of  this  or  that  noun
or  verb.  It  is  impossible  for  one  who  has  not  perused
the  writings  of  these  acute  and  indefatigable  scholars
to  imagine  the  labour  they  expended  in  the  determination
of  the  classic  tongue.  For  the  proper  form  and  signifi-


INTRODUCTION.


67


cation  of  a  word  they  looked  primarily  to  the  Eoran  as
the  absolutely  perfect  standard  of  speech,  and  then  to  the
productions  of  the  early  poets.  In  this  they  had  the
sanction  of  the  Prophet  himself,  who,  according  to  a  tra¬
dition,  had  said,  that  when  a  man  was  in  doubt  as  to  the
language  of  Grod’s  word,  he  would  do  well  to  take  the
poets  to  counsel.  Poetry  was  especially  fitted  to  fix  the
form  of  a  word,  since  the  sacnsion  of  a  line  would  depend
on  the  Towelling  and  on  the  inflection  of  the  words  of
which  it  was  composed,  and  thus  insure  an  approximation
tO'  exactness.  The  shawahid,  or  proofs  of  lexicography
and  grammar,  were  therefore  chiefly  verses  of  the  poets,
and  these  are  to  be  found  imbedded  in  endless  numbers
in  all  commentaries  and  grammatical  treatises.  But  only
the  earlier  poets  were  of  high  authority.  Within  a  cen¬
tury  of  Mohammed’s  flight  from  Mecca,  the  Moslem
empire  stretched  from  Kashgar  and  Moultan  to  Morocco
and  the  Pyrenees,  and  the  Arab  man  of  letters  was  exposed
to  the  corrupting  propinquity  of  men  of  many  different
races.  Only  a  poet  of  the  Ignorance,  that  is,  one  who
had  died  before  the  preaching  of  Islam;,  or  a  MuJchadram^
that  is,  one  who  was  contemporary  with  it,  was  looked
upon  as  of  paramount  and  unquestionable  authority.  An
IsMmi,  that  is  one  who  was  born  after  the  rise  of  Islam,
was  of  less  consideration,  and  after  the  first  century,  the
poets  are  called  Muwellediin,  and  are  only  quoted  for
their  literary  beauties,  and  not  as  authorities  for  the
Arab  tongue.

It  was  among  the  designs  of  Hariri  to  exhibit  in  their
right  form,  or  signification,  a  number  of  these  words  about
which  there  was,  or  had  been,  doubt.  With  this  view  he
introduces  them  into  verses  in  such  places  that  the  metre


68


INTROBIICTION.


determines  their  structure,  or  the  rhyme  their  orthography.
Where  two  similar  forms  may  both  he  correctly  used,  he
contrives  to  bring  them  together,  and  to  make  it  evident
from  the  sense  that  they  have  the  same  meaning.  Where
two  words  are  derivatives  from  the  same  root,  but  differ
in  form,  or  where  they  are  identical  in  orthography,  but
are  derived  from  different  roots,  or  where  they  have  the
same  letters,  but  a  different  vowelling,  the  juxtaposition
serves  also  to  awaken  the  reader  to  a  nice  discrimination
between  them.  It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  from
this  that  Hariri’s  intention  was  strictly  to  write  a  philo¬
logical  treatise.  That  is  a  notion  which  has  prevailed
among  some  critics,  who  would  make  the  Assemblies
merely  an  ingenious  and  pedantic  puzzle,  but  no  real
Arabic  scholar  will  hold  such  an  opinion.  The  As¬
semblies  were  written,  primarily,  to  amuse  and  entertain,
and  they  were  listened  to  with  pleasure  by  numbers  who
cared  nothing  for  their  hidden  learning.  But  the  author,
having  been  accustomed  to  philological  discussions  all  his
life,  and  having  audiences  equally  zealous,  was  led  na¬
turally  and  almost  imconsciously  to  insinuate  into  his
work  the  subtleties  which  were  uppermost  in  his  mind.

In  the  same  way  the  use  of  rare  expressions,  which
forms  one  of  the  chief  difidculties  of  the  work,  may  be
conceived  to  be  more  spontaneous  than  it  at  first  sight
appears.  The  doubtful  words  and  phrases  of  the  early
time,  and  particularly  those  derived  from  the  Koran,  had
been  often  the  subjects  of  debate  for  generations,  and  the
author  might  well  be  tempted  to  rouse  the  attention  of
his  audience  by  throwing  among  them  one  of  these  apples
of  discord.  In  a  translation  the  learned  vocabulary  of
Hariri  is  lost,  and  yet  it  will  be  perceived  that  his  com-


INTRODUCTION.


69


positions  do  not  lack  vigour  or  pathos.  May  we  not  then
acquit  him  of  having  merely  digested  an  antiquarian
glossary  into  a  dramatic  form.

The  Assemhhes,  indeed,  are  far  from  restricted  to
antique  words  and  phrases;  on  the  contrary,  they  are
in  some  respects  extremely  unclassical,  inasmuch  as  the
author  delights  to  introduce  the  provincial  expressions,
and  to  refer  to  the  manners  of  Irak.  There  is  a  singular
mixture  of  old  and  new  in  the  work ;  strange  and
obsolete  words,  rough  with  gutturals,  such  as  are  met
with  in  the  proverbs  of  Maydani,  or  in  the  earliest
poets,  stand  side  by  side  with  others  that  have  been
borrowed  from  the  Persians  and  the  Greeks.  There  is
more  of  this  foreign  element  than  the  purist  quite
approves.  "Words  of  exotic  origin  are  indeed  to  be
found  even  in  the  Koran,  as

but  strict  Moslems  have  made  excuses  for  them,  even
to  the  point  of  denying  their  foreign  extraction,  and  of
asserting  thait  they  are  common  to  Arabic  and  to  other
languages.  Their  dictum  was  plausible,  since  undoubt¬
edly  they  could  show  that  those  words  and  many  others
had  existed  in  Arabic  speech  before  the  advent  of  Islam ;
nor  can  it  fairly  be  denied  that  terms  which  were  in  use
among  the  Arabic-speaking  Jews,  such  as

might  be  fairly  taken  to  be  Arabic.  But
Hariri’s  employment  of  non-Arabic  words  is  capricious
and  sometimes  excessive:  they  are  introduced  unne¬
cessarily,  as  if  his  purpose  were  to  give  liveliness  to
his  composition,  and  to  suit  himself  to  a  popular  whim.
The  Andalusian  Sherishi  is  obliged  to  confess  his  ig¬
norance  of  some  of  them,  and  as  we  are  told  that  even
in  the  author’s  own  time  and  city  he  was  accused  of


70


IFTROBUCTION.


incorrect  expression,  we  may  assume  that  some  of  the
learned  in  Irak  objected  to  his  too  liberal  vocabulary.

The  use  of  rare  phrases,  the  origin  and  meaning  of
which  were  doubtful,  is  of  constant  occurrence  in  this
work.  The  explanation  of  these,  according  to  the  best
lights  I  have  been  able  to  obtain,  makes  up  a  large  part
of  the  notes  which  are  appended  to  this  translation.
Some  of  them  are  interpreted  by  the  author  himself,
in  short  commentaries  which  he  has  added  to  some  of
the  Assemblies,  others  are  left  unnoticed  ;  but  Hariri
lectured  on  them  to  his  sons  and  pupils,  and  his  judg¬
ments  are  recorded  by  the  commentators.  An  immense
number  of  sayings,  proverbs,  and  idiomatic  phrases  were
current,  all  supposed  to  have  originated  with  the  eloquent
Arabs  of  the  desert,  and  consecrated  in  the  eyes  of  the
scholars  of  the  time.  Some  joi  these  had  become  the
trivial  expressions  of  the  vulgar,  and  it  is  difiS.cult  for
Englishmen  to  understand  the  literary  taste  which
attached  such  importance  to  them.  It  is  as  if  in  this
country  the  most  intellectual  and  learned  men  of  the
day  devoted  themselves  to  elucidating  such  phrases  as
he  cut  his  stick,’’  “  he  kicked  the  bucket,”  “  he  hopped
the  twig,”  “mind  your  P’s  and  Q,’s,”  “we  were  all  at
sixes  and  sevens,’’  “no  mistake;’’  and  as  if  the  most
gifted  author  of  the  time  were  to  produce  a  composition
containing  all  these  expressions,  and  append  an  inter¬
pretation  to  the  effect  that  “he  cut  his  stick”  was  a
phrase  derived  from  the  backwoods,  and  signified  to
depart,  since  a  man  in  the  forest  when  about  to  go  on  a
journey  cut  a  stick  from  a  tree  to  aid  him  in  walking ;
that  to  “  kick  the  bucket  ”  and  “  hop  the  twig  ”  were
seamen’s  phrases,  signifying  to  commit  suicide  by  hang-


WTROBVCTION'.


71


ing,  or  by  jumping  from  the  yard  arm;  that  “mind  your
P’s  and  Q’s  ”  was  originally  a  theatrical  phrase,  “mind
your  cues,”  the  addition  of  “P’s”  being  an  unintelligent
corruption;  that  “no  mistake”  had  its  origin  in  the
answer  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  Mr,  Huskisson:
“There  is  no  mistake,  there  can  be  no  mistake;’’  and
that  as  for  the  phrase  “  sixes  and  sevens,”  God  alone
knew  what  it  meant.  This  is  scarcely  an  exaggeration
of  the  purport  of  much  of  the  Assemblies,  with  the
difference  that  the  phrases  which  Hariri  embodies  in  his
writings  were  supposed  to  be  idioms  of  a  classic  tongue,
and  to  have  first  passed  from  the  lips  of  a  heroic  race.
The  favour  with  which  such  compositions  were  received,
bears  witness  to  the  zeal  and  almost  Massoretic  diligence
with  which  the  educated  class  studied  the  records  of
their  language  and  history.

The  grammatical  questions  are  of  hardly  less  import¬
ance  in  the  author’s  eyes.  His  other  works  show  the
subtlety  of  his  intellect  and  the  fastidiousness  of  his
taste,  and  many  of  the  precepts  which  he  utters  in  them
he  enforces  by  examples  in  the  Assemblies.  Yet  there
is  a  peculiarity  in  his  art  which  is  worth  noticing.
Where  a  question  is  doubtful,  and  two  men  of  eminence
whose  opinions  are  probable,  have  differed,  Hariri  will
make  use  of  a  form  which  there  is  reason  to  believe  he
disapproves,  as  if  his  object  were  rather  to  continue  the
controversy  than  decide  it.  A  conspicuous  instance  of
this  occurs  in  the  thirty-fifth  Assembly,  in  the  phrase
ys  UU,  of  which  the  nearest  rendering  in  English  is
“  Behold  he  was  him !  ”  that  is,  the  person  I  looked  at
was  Abfi  Zayd.  How  a  controversy  had  been  carried  on
between  the  schools  of  Basra  and  Kufa  on  this  matter  •


72


INTROBUOTIOIT.


the  Basrians  held  the  phrase  to  he  incorrect,  and  that
one  ought  to  say  yt.  y>  ^jli,  “  Behold  he  was  he.”  The
grammatical  question  is  discussed  in  the  notes  to  the
twenty-fourth  Assembly,  and  need  not  be  dwelt  upon
here ;  but  a  commentator  expresses  his  wonder  that
Hariri,  who  was  a  Basrian,  should  use  a  ph.rase  con¬
demned  by  the  grammarians  of  his  city,  and  one  which
most  people  looked  upon  as  faulty.  This  controversy,  how¬
ever,  was  classic,  inasmuch  as  it  had  been  originated  by
one  of  the  greatest  of  the  grammarians,  Sibawayh,  and
was  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  his  death.  The  story
is  as  follows : — Sibawayh  was  one  day  in  the  presence  of
Harun  ar  Eeshid,  or  as  others  say  of  Tahya  ibn  Khalid
the  Bermeki,  when  they  were  discussing  grammatical
questions,  and  he  asked  A1  Eisa’i,  which  is  right,  “I
thought  that  the  scorpion  was  different  from  the  zeubhr,
and  behold  ys  ja,”  or  ‘‘behold  ys.”  “The  latter,”  said
A1  Eis^’i.  Sibawayh  contradicted  him,  and  the  Ehalif
resolved  to  refer  to  some  native  Arabs.  A1  Eisa’i  then
contrived  that  he  should  refer  to  a  tribe  who  were  not  of
pure  speech,  and  these  said  that  Sibawayh  was  in  the
wrong.  The  great  grammarian  angrily  departed  from
court,  and  retired  to  Ehorasan,  where  he  soon  died.
Hariri  seeks  to  awaken  in  his  hearers  the  memory  of
this  anecdote  by  using  the  condemned  form,  which  would
bring  to  their  minds  the  celebrated  controversy.  So  in  the
thirty-seventh  Assembly  the  expression  yjj  A
imitated  from  Eoran  vii.  148,  gives  to  the  imper¬
sonal  verb  of  the  original  a  faulty  construction,  though
Hariri  has  himself  noticed  this  very  error  in  his  book
called  the  Pearl.”  But  a  controversy  had  taken  place
on  this  subject  involving  even  the  proper  reading  of  the


INTRODUCTION.


73


verb  in  tbe  Eoran ;  and  Hariri,  by  making  use  of  wbat
be  does  not  approve,  shows  that  he  is  not  ignorant  of  the
discussion.  Several  instances  of  a  similar  kind  will  be
found  in  the  notes,  and  I  will  notice  but  one  more.  In
the  thirty-sixth  Assembly  jy  Hs  used  where,  from  Hariri’s
own  explanation  in  the  “  Pearl,”  it  is  plain  that  accuracy
requires  ^1)1  The  author’s  design  may  have  been

to  claim  for  this  particular  word  a  licence  derived  from
popular  use.

Prom  these  examples  the  reader  will  be  able  to  judge
how  intimate  a  knowledge  of  the  niceties  of  the  tongue
may  be  obtained  from  the  study  of  Hariri  and  his  com¬
mentators.  An  acquaintance  with  the  pagan  antiquity
also  necessarily  follows  an  examination  of  his  incessant
allusions.  These,  for  the  most  part,  occur  in  the  form  of
proverbs,  and  of  such  popular  sayings  as  have  been
already  mentioned.  The  Arabic  word  Jty*  does  indeed
comprise  any  phrase  current  among  the  people,  or  any
sententious  utterance  of  the  past  time,  and  is  not  con¬
fined  to  moral  apophthegms.  The  Arabs,  in  imitation  of
the  Greeks,  began  at  an  early  time  to  make  collections  of
the  multudinous  proverbs  of  their  language.  The  collec¬
tion  of  Maydani  is  invaluable,  as  preserving  for  us  some  of
the  oldest  forms  of  Arab  speech, — perhaps  the  most  primi¬
tive  utterances  of  the  race.  There  is  hardly  a  celebrated
occurrence  in  early  Arab  story  that  is  not  illustrated  by
one  or  more  of  these  phrases,  which  were  attributed
to  the  heroes  and  heroines  of  the  old  time ;  and  whether
authentic  or  not  have,  undoubtedly,  for  the  most  part,
come  down  from  the  times  of  purely  oral  tradition.  A
whole  series  of  proverbs  connects  itself  with  the
history  of  Ja^imet  al  Abrash,  Queen  Zebba,  and  Kosayr.


74


INTROBTJCTION.


Anotlier  "belongs  to  tb.e  story  of  Kolayb  Wa’il  and  the
"war  of  Basus,  When  the  poet  'Obayd  ibn  al  Abras
was  sacrificed  by  the  king  of  Hira  at  the  tomb  of  his
boon  companions,  'Obayd  nttered  sentences  which  be¬
came  proTerbial,  Many  of  these  proverbs  indicate  an
archaic  state  of  the  language,  and  the  combinations  of
letters  are  less  euphonious  than  in  the  dialect  of  Koraysh.
Every  page  of  Hariri’s  work  contains  some  of  these
relies  of  a  past  time,  and  they  are  imbedded  in  the
Assemblies  like  the  stones  of  a  Eoman  ruin  in  the
walls  of  a  modern  Italian  villa.  Whole  passages  are  but
a  cento  of  primeval  phrases,  mingled  with  sentences
of  the  Koran  or  the  Traditions,  and  remarkable  idioms
from  poets  of  repute.  The  proverb  served  to  call  the
hearer’s  attention  to  the  incident  from  which  it  was  said
to  have  arisen ;  and  if  he  were  a  pupil,  he  that  recited  the
composition  to  him  would  take  care  to  examine  him
respecting  the  origin  of  the  saying,  and  the  precise  form
in  which  it  had  been  most  authoritatively  handed  down.
An  instance  of  the  exactitude  with  which  the  purists
required  these  proverbs  to  be  used  is  given  in  the
work  of  Maydani,  where  it  is  said  that  the  proverb
A  :  Thou  (a  woman)  didst  lose  the
milk  in  the  summer,”  should  be  used  in  the  feminine
singular,  even  though  it  be  addressed  to  a  male  or  to
more  than  one  person,  since  it  was  first  uttered  by  'Amr
ibn  *Odas  to  his  wife  Dakhtenus.”  ^

The  Koran  is  exemplified  by  continual  quotations,
and  these  are  full  of  instruction  for  the  foreign  scholar.
But  the  sacred  book  was  so  well  known  to  those  for
whom  the  Assemblies  were  composed,  that  I  cannot
^  Ar.  Prov.  II.;  197,  and  De  Sacy’s  Hariri  II.,  577.


mTROBTTCTION.


75


t.hin'k  the  author  had  in  view  the  inculcation  of  any
special  knowledge.  Moreover  he  does  not  appear  to
quote  difficult  passages,  or  those  which  require  special
interpretation ;  he  rather  endeavours  to  show  his  wit  hy
the  use  of  it  in  a  strange  and  unexpected  manner,  as,
for  instance,  at  the  end  of  the  third  Assembly.

Before  proceeding  to  consider  other  peculiarities  of  this
work,  and  especially  the  artificial  character  of  so  many
of  the  pieces,  it  will  be  as  well  to  give  a  short  summary
of  the  Assemblies  which  do  not  appear  in  this  volume,
so  that  the  book  may  be  considered  as  a  whole.  The
preface  and  the  first  twenty-six  are  here  translated,
and  as  each  has  a  short  argument  or  introduction,  there
needs  no  further  mention  of  them.  The  remaining
twenty-four  are  not  inferior  in  merit,  though  the  repe¬
tition  of  similar  adventures  and  similar  rhetoric  becomes
monotonous.  They  are  also,  if  possible,  more  elaborate
than  those  which  are  placed  earlier  in  the  work,  and  two
or  three  of  them  are  of  exceeding  difficulty.  In  the
twenty-eighth  and  twenty-ninth,  the  author  produces
compositions  resembling  those  of  the  sixth  and  twenty-
sixth.  In  the  sixth  is  given  an  address,  the  words  of
which  are  alternately  with  and  without  pointed  letters.
In  the  twenty-sixth  the  artifice  is  varied,  and  each
alternate  letter  is  pointed,  the  others  being  unpointed.
In  the  twenty-eighth  and  twenty-ninth  the  ortho¬
graphical  feat  is  again  changed,  for  they  contain  compo¬
sitions  in  which  every  letter  is  destitute  of  points.  In
the  former,  Abfi  Zayd  preaches  an  eloquent  sermon
on  the  certainty  and  the  terrors  of  death ;  in  the  latter,
after  describing  a  loaf  of  bread  and  a  flint  in  enigmatical
language,  somewhat  after  the  style  of  the  eighth,  he


76


INTRODUCTION.


indites  a  benediction  at  a  "wedding,  into  wbicb.  lie  bad
inreigled  Haritb.  Both  of  these  addresses  are  composed
of  letters  without  a  single  point.  The  thirtieth  is
remarkable  for  the  use  of  what  are  called  Sasani  phrases,
that  is,  the  cant  of  beggars,  mountebanks,  prestigiators,
and  the  like.  Harith  enters  by  chance  into  a  house
hung  with  rags,  which  he  discovers  to  be  a  place  of  call
for  such  people.  A  wedding  is  going  on,  and  the  beggar
bridegroom,  in  gaudy  apparel,  takes  his  seat  with  the
dignity  of  king  Mun&ir  ibn  Ma  as  Serna.  Then  steps
forward  an  old  man,  who,  of  course,  turns  out  to  be  Abu
Zayd,  and  delivers  himself  of  a  wedding  sermon,  with
the  regular  exordium  of  the  mosque.  In  this  address
the  Koran  is  mixed  up  with  the  metaphorical  jargon  of
vagabonds  after  the  strangest  fashion,  and  at  the  close
Abu  Zayd  performs  the  marriage  ceremony.  This  argot
appears  to  have  been  thought  not  unworthy  of  study,  for
one  Abu  Dulaf  wrote  a  Ttafideh  in  it,  setting  forth  the
habits  and  ways  of  life  of  such  people,  and  their  singular
dialect.^

The  thirty-first  Assembly  is  a  composition  of  exquisite
beauty.  Harith  makes  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and
there  finds  Abu  Zayd,  who  addresses  the  worshippers
first  in  the  usual  rhymed  prose,  and  then  in  verse,  on  the
duties  of  true  religion.  The  Hajj,  he  tells  them,  does

^  This  Abu  Dulaf  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  Abd.  Dulaf  al
‘Ajili,  the  celebrated  general  of  tbe  Kbalifs  Ma’indn  and  Mo^tasim,
and  tbe  founder  or  extender  of  tbe  city  of  Kerej,  from  wbicb  tbe
twenty-fiftb  Assembly  takes  its  name.  Tbis  mistake  bas  been  made
even  by  Motarrezi  (see  Fr.  note,  p.  145  of  Vol.  11.  of  De  Sacy’s
Hariri).  Tbe  great  Abd  Dulaf  was  certainly  a  writer  as  well  as  a
warrior,  but  tbe  Abu  Dulaf  wbo  wrote  tbe  poem  in  question  was  a
different  person,  and  is  known  as  Al  Kbazraji.


INTROBVCTION.


77


not  consist  in  hastening  on  camels  to  the  holy  city,  or
•wearying  the  body,  or  parting  from  home  and  children,
but  in  adding  to  these  performances  abstinence  from  sin,
purity  of  intention,  and  the  practice  of  virtue;  for
“  washing  in  fonts  cleanses  not  from  immersion  in  sins,
the  baring  of  the  body  compensates  not  for  the  laying  up
of  guilt,  nor  will  the  donning  of  the  pilgrim’s  garb  avail
him  who  clothes  himself  with  the  forbidden.”  The
verses  which  follow  are  inspired  by  the  loftiest  morality.
■When  he  has  concluded  Harith  approaches  him,  but  Abu
Zayd  declares  that  he  has  a  vow  not  to  associate  with  any
one  during  his  pilgrimage,  nor  to  make  gain,  nor  to
recite  his  pedigree,  nor  to  ask  alms.  As  the  pilgrims
pass  by  on  their  journey  he  again  addresses  them  in
edifying  verse.

The  thirty-second  is  of  a  very  different  character,  and
is,  perhaps,  the  strangest  and  most  difficult  in  the  work.
Indeed,  without  plentiful  commentary,  it  would  be  per¬
fectly  unintelligible.  It  is  that  which  the  author  alludes
to  in  the  preface  when  he  speaks  of  “legal  decisions
dependent  on  the  use  of  words.”  Abu  Zayd  is  discovered
playing  the  part  of  a  mufti,  or  jurisconsult,  amid  a  tribe  of
Arabs,  and  bidding  them  ask  questions  of  him.  One  of  them
steps  forward,  and  says  that  he  has  gathered  a  hundred
questions  from  people  learned  in  the  law,  and  he  pro¬
pounds  them  one  by  one  to  Abu  Zayd.  The  peculiarity
of  these  questions  is  that  each  contains  a  word  which  may
be  understood  in  two  senses,  the  design  of  the  questioner
being  to  test  not  only  Abu  Zayd’s  knowledge  of  the
Moslem  canon  law,  but  also  his  acquaintance  with  the
niceties  of  the  language.  Abu  Zayd  is  represented  as
discerning  the  hidden  meaning  of  each  question,  and  as


78


INTRODTJCTION.


returning  an  answer  which,  while  directly  contrary  to
that  which  might  be  expected,  is  yet  correct  if  the  ambi¬
guous  word  be  taken  in  its  less  popular  signification.
For  instance,  it  is  asked,  “  Does  a  man  ill  who  neglects
to  wash  his  (hatchet)  ?  ”  Abu  Zayd  replies,  “  Yes,
it  is  as  though  he  washed  not  his  head :  ”  for  signi¬
fies  not  only  a  hatchet,  but  also  the  upper  part  of  the
back  of  the  head.  Again,  it  is  asked,  “May  a  man  say
his  prayers  after  he  has  been  carrying  (puppies)?”
which  are  unclean  animals.  The  answer  is,  “  Yes ;  it  is
no  more  than  if  he  had  carried  beans.”  signifies  a
puppy,  or  the  whelp  of  a  beast  of  prey,  and  also  the  young
cucumber,  or  the  pomegranate.  And  so  of  the  whole
hundred  questions.  Similar  puzzles  were  not  unknown
in  Europe,  as  the  question,  “ETum  peceatum  est  occidere
patrem  suum,”  where  not  “  one’s  own  father,”  but  “  the
father  of  swine,”  is  meant.  This  Assembly  is  an  elabo¬
rate  exercise  on  the  synonyms  of  the  language.  It
may  be  noticed  that  the  decisions  are  according  to  the
rite  of  Ash  Shafi'i,  to  which  Hariri  belonged.

The  thirty-third  presents  nothing  worthy  of  especial
notice.  Abu  Zayd,  feigning  to  be  palsied,  recites  yerses
which  obtain  for  him  the  alms  of  the  people,  and  when
discovered  by  Harith,  confesses  his  imposture.  In  the
thirty-fourth,  Abfi  Zayd  sells  his  son  to  Harith  as  a  slave,
taking  care,  however,  that  the  boy  shall  exclaim  to  him,
“I  am  Joseph,  I  am  Joseph,”  words  taken  from  Koran
xii,  90.  Harith  thinks  that  the  boy  is  only  telling
his  name,  whereas  he  was  indicating  that  he  was  free
born,  and  ought  not  to  be  sold  any  more  than  Joseph,
the  son  of  Jacob,  ought  to  have  been  sold  by  his  brethren.
The  boy  obtains  his  liberty,  and  Harith  loses  his  money.


INTROBWCTION.


79


The  thirty-fifth  is  a  composition  in  the  style  of  the  eighth,
and  the  earlier  part  of  the  twenty-ninth.  Ahfi  Zayd
describes  a  wine-cask  metaphorically  under  the  name  of
a  maiden,  for  whom,  as  he  tells  the  people,  he  desires  to
purchase  wedding  attire.  They  give  him  money,  and
it  turns  out  that  by  the  wedding  attire  is  meant  a  flagon
and  a  cup,  which  were  necessary  to  wed,  as  it  were,  the
wine-cask  to  the  drinker.

The  thirty-sixth  contains  twenty  conundrums,  all  of  the
same  form :  “  What  word  signifies  so  and  so  ?  ”  Tor
instance,  what  word  signifies  ‘‘Eeceive  a  thousand  de¬
nars.”  The  answer  is,  (OaU  (she  that  guides  aright):
for  U  means  “take,”  and  is  the  fine  or  blood- wit
for  killing  a  man,  which  was  fixed  at  a  thousand  denars.
It  is  needless  to  give  any  further  specimens  of  the  author’s
ingenuity.  The  answers  to  these  conundrums,  and  to  the-
legal  questions  in  the  thirty-second,  are  given  by  Hariri
himself,  at  the  end  of  the  respective  Assemblies.

The  thirty-seventh  exhibits  Abfi  Zayd  and  his  son  be¬
fore  the  Eadi  of  Sa'dah,  obtaining  money  from  him,  as
usual,  by  trickery.  The  father  accuses  the  son  of  dis¬
obedience,  and  the  son  declares  that  his  father  had  sought
to  degrade  him  by  making  him  a  beggar.  The  son  recites
some  lines  against  beggary  which  he  says  his  father  had
once  taught  him,  and  which  justified  him  in  disobeying
the  paternal  commands;  and  the  father  retorts  with  others,
which  the  son  had  recited  to  him,  in  praise  of  making  gain
in  every  way  possible.  The  dialogue  is  kept  up  with
great  spirit,  and  the  adventure  ends  by  the  Kadi  bestow¬
ing  his  bounty  on  both.

In  the  thirty-eighth,  Abu  Zayd  addresses  the  governor
of  a  town  in  some  fine  verses  in  praise  of  liberality  to  men


80


INTROBUCTIOK


of  genius,  and  is  rewarded  as  usual.  In  the  thirty-ninth,
the  adventure  is  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  the  twelfth.
Harith  is  on  ship-board,  about  to  make  a  voyage,  when  a
voice  is  heard  from  the  shore,  in  the  darkness,  begging  a
passage.  The  stranger  is  taken  on  board,  and  soon  in¬
forms  the  travellers  that  he  has  a  talisman,  a  form  of
words  handed  down  from  the  prophets,  which  would  guard
them  from  all  dangers.  He  repeats  it,  and  they  think  it
futile ;  but,  at  a  port  whither  they  are  forced  to  put  in
through  a  storm  that  overtakes  them,  Abu  Zayd  finds
great  lamentation  among  the  servants  of  a  noble  family
on  account  of  the  long  labour  of  their  mistress  in  child¬
birth,  and  he  writes  for  them  a  copy  of  verses  in  which
the  child  is  warned  of  the  miseries  of  the  world,  and
recommended  not  to  come  into  it.  This,  which  seems  the
very  contrary  of  what  the  lady’s  case  demanded,  is  hung
round  her  neck,  and  her  safe  delivery  follows.  Abfi  Zayd
is  handsomely  rewarded.

The  fortieth  is  a  quarrel  between  Abu  Zayd  and  his
handsome  young  wife,  who  go  before  the  stingy  judge  of
Tebriz,  he  to  complain  of  her  contumacy,  she  of  his  abuse
of  his  conjugal  rights.  The  contention  is  remarkable,
not  only  for  the  fury  with  which  they  rail  at  each  other,
but  for  the  learning  they  display.  “I  married  thee,”
says  Abu  Zayd,  “  and  found  thee  all  that  was  bad.  But
I  concealed  thy  faults,  though  if  Shlrin  had  given  thee
her  beauty,  and  Zobaydeh  her  riches,  and  Billds  her
throne,  and  Buran  her  bed,  and  Az  Zebba  her  kingdom,
and  E4br ah  her  piety,  and  Khindaf  her  glory,  and  A1
Ehansa  her  poetry  on  her  Sakhr,  I  would  have  hated
thee  to  be  my  wife.”  She  answers,  “  0  thou  baser  than
Madir,  with  more  vices  than  Abu  Dulameh’s  mule,  know


INTRODUCTION.


81


ttat  if  thou  wert  A1  Hasan  in  utterance  and  admonition,
Ash  Sha'bi  in  learning  and  memory,  A1  Khalil  in  prosody
and  grammar,  Jerir  in  love  song  and  satire,  Koss  in  purity
of  speech  and  in  discoursing,  ‘Ahd  al  Hamid  in  eloquence
and  writing,  Ahd  'Amr  in  Koran-reading  and  inflection,
Ibn  Korayb  in  recitations  from  the  Arabs,  I  would  not
keep  thee.”  The  quarrel  is,  of  course,  a  feigned  one,  and
the  wife’s  address  supplied  by  Abu  Zayd  himself.  The
rest  of  the  adventure  is  of  the  usual  kind.

The  forty-flrst  contains  a  sermon  of  Abfl  Zayd,  by
means  of  which  he  and  his  son  extract  money  from  the
public.  The  forty-second  contains  riddles,  not  necessarily
dependent  like  the  conundrums  of  the  thirty-sixth  on  the
play  of  words,  but  indicating  a  thing  by  the  description
of  it,  as : —

What  is  he;  who  weds  two  sisters,  both  openly  and  secretly,  but
none  accuses  him  for  it  ?

WTien  he  visits  the  one,  he  visits  also  the  other ;  and  though  hus¬
bands  may  be  partial,  he  is  not  so.

He  increases  his  visits  as  his  wives  grow  gray :  now,  this  is  an
affection  rare  among  husbands.

The  answer  to  this  is,  the  pencil  used  to  place  the  IcoJil.,
or  ointment,  on  the  eyes :  the  two  eyelids  are  the  wives^
each  of  which  it  anoints  at  the  same  time,  without  par¬
tiality,  and  as  they  grow  old,  the  necessity  for  anointing
them  increases.

The  forty-third  has  an  adventure  too  long  to  relate,
and  bears  the  name  of  the  “  Virgin  and  Matron,”  because
it  contains  the  reasons  for  and  against  marrying  either
of  these  classes  of  ladies.  The  forty-fourth  introduces
us  to  more  riddles,  which  this  time,  however,  depend
for  their  solution,  like  the  legal  questions  of  the  thirty-

B


82


INTEODUCTIOF.


second,  on  the  various  significations  of  the  same  word.
Thus

“  I  Lave  seen  Arabs  in  a  barren  year  roast  a  rag  for  food,  and  it  satis¬
fied  them.”  which  signifies  a  rag,  signifies  also  a  swarm  of

locusts.

“  I  have  seen  scribes,  whose  fingers  never  wrote  a  letter,  and  who
read  not  what  is  written  in  books.”  which  signifies  scribes,

signifies  also  cobblers.

The  forty-fifth  like  the  fortieth  is  a  quarrel  between  Abu
Zayd  and  his  wife,  before  a  judge,  with  the  intention  of
attracting  his  bounty.  The  forty-sixth  is  one  of  the  most
elaborate  in  the  work.  Harith  being  at  ffims  (Emessa),
a  place  noted  for  the  stupidity  of  its  inhabitants,  like
Abdera  among  the  Greeks,  sees  a  schoolmaster,  one  of  a
class  especially  famous  for  their  dulness,  instructing  his
pupils ;  he  approaches,  thinking  to  be  entertained  by  the
poor  man’s  blunders,  but  finds  to  his  astonishment  that
the  children  were  able  to  accomplish  the  most  surprising
feats.  One  of  them  recites  a  poem  consisting  entirely  of
unpointed  letters;  the  next  writes  out  some  which  not
only  have  every  letter  pointed,  but  are  full  of  assonances
and  alliterations;  a  third  produces  lines  of  which  the
words  consist  alternately  of  pointed  and  unpointed  letters;
a  fourth  gives  verses  in  which  there  is  tejnis  or  homo¬
geneity  in  sound  or  in  letters  between  each  two  suc¬
cessive  words ;  the  next  produces  a  couplet,  each  line  of
which  begins  and  ends  with  the  same  syllables.  Then
the  nature  of  the  exercises  changes,  and  some  lines  are
given  containing  words  which  ought  to  be  written  with
the  letter  but  about  which  some  Arabs  are  doubtful.
Then  come  the  words  which  should  be  written  with
then  those  that  may  be  written  with  either.  At  last  one


INTRODUCTION.


83


pupil  gives  in  verse  the  rules  for  -writing  the  verb  -whose
last  letter  is  -weak.  Another  repeats  a  poem  comprising
all  the  -words  in  the  language  -which  contain  Ij ;  this
table  is  especially  useful,  since  a  common  mistake  among
the  Arabs  -was  to  confound  Is  -with  ^ ;  the  old  Semitic
language  having  a  less  variety  of  sounds  than  the  culti¬
vated  Arabic,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  comparison  -with  the
Hebrew.  It  need  not  be  said  that  the  schoolmaster  is
Abu  Zayd.  In  the  forty-seventh,  Abu  Zayd  is  dis¬
covered  following  the  despised  calling  of  a  cupper  or
bleeder,  but  the  adventure  does  not  call  for  notice.  The
forty-eighth,  called  Haramiyeh,  the  first  composed,  has
been  already  described.  In  the  forty-ninth,  Abu  Zayd,
in  his  old  age,  lauds  the  name  and  calling  of  Sasan,
the  prince  of  the  beggars,  and  urges  his  son  to  follow  the
noble  and  lucrative  art  of  mendicancy.  This  Assembly
is  one  of  the  finest  pieces  of  rhetoric  in  the  work.  But
perhaps  the  first  place  in  regard  of  merit  should  be
given  to  the  fiftieth  and  last  Assembly,  called  “of
Basra.”  In  this  composition,  to  -which  I  have  already
referred,  Harith  exhibits  his  hero  as  penitent  and  re¬
formed.  In  it  is  introduced  a  most  eloquent  eulogium
of  the  city  of  Basra;  the  hymn  of  Abu  Zayd  breathes
the  purest  spirit  of  devotion.  Harith  weeps  in  sym¬
pathy  with  his  repentance,  as  he  had  formerly  wept
for  his  misdeeds,  and  in  the  end  they  part  to  meet
no  more.

It  remains  that  I  should  say  something  concerning  the
style  of  this  singular  work,  which,  as  the  reader  is  now
aware,  is  a  continuous  display  of  rhetorical  artifices,  and
is  full,  from  beginning  to  end,  of  alliteration,  assonance,
rhyme,  paronomasia,  and  what  Europeans  are  apt  to  con-


84


INTRODUCTION.


sider  merely  verbal  conceits.  These  caprices,  so  alien  from
our  taste,  have  since  pervaded  not  only  the  Arabic  litera¬
ture,  but  the  literatures  -which,  like  the  Persian,  the  Hin¬
dustani,  and  the  Turkish,  have  accepted  the  rhetoric  of  the
Arab  scholars,  and  have  followed  their  canons.  We  find
the  authors,  not  of  one  age  and  nation,  but  of  aU  the
Moslem  world,  for  many  centuries,  delighting  in  what
seem  to  us  the  poorest  artifices  of  composition,  cursed
by  a  vitiated  and  pestilent  taste,  and  degrading  their
genius  by  mingling  the  loftiest  themes  with  displays
of  verbal  cleverness,  in  no  way  above  the  level  of  the
pun  and  the  conundrum.  If  the  Persians  borrowed  their
conceits  from  the  Arabs,  they  bettered  the  instruction,
and  the  reaction  of  their  literary  infiuence  tended  to  con¬
firm  the  taste  of  their  masters.  But  it  would  be  a
narrow  view  of  the  subject  to  regard  such  compositions  as
the  Assemblies  as  the  result  of  literary  fashion  or  scho¬
lastic  pedantry.  The  Arabic  student  cannot  but  perceive
that  the  language  lends  itself  with  singular  readiness
to  responsiveness  and  parallelism  of  sound,  and  that
assonance  and  paronomasia  offer  themselves  almost
unbidden.  The  triliterity  of  the  root,  and  the  ramifica¬
tion  from  it  of  a  vast  number  of  forms,  each  of  which  has
an  accordance  of  sound  with  the  same  form  of  other
roots,  give  a  natural  and  inevitable  similitude  to  Arabic
words,  which  forces  itself  on  the  attention  of  the  orator
/and  his  audience.  Then  the  development  of  almost
/  every  abstract  idea  from  a  root  which  signifies  a  strictly
I  material  action ;  the  primitive  meaning  being  ever  dimly
■risible  to  the  mind’s  eye  of  the  people  behind  the  deriva¬
tive  meaning,  and  not,  as  in  our  words  of  Latin  and
Greek  provenance,  wholly  lost,  tended  to  suggest  com-


INTROJDWCTION.


85


parisons  between  the  multitudinous  ideas  associated  with
a  single  root,  -wlLicli  gaye  an  involuntary  impulse  towards
paronomasia.  We  do,  indeed,  find  a  tendency  towards
tbese  rhetorical  figures  in  the  very  earliest  productions
of  the  Semitic  race.  The  alliterations,  the  assonances,
the  antitheses  of  sound,  the  evident  paronomasia,  and,
above  all,  the  strange  etymologies  of  the  Bible,  bear  wit¬
ness  that,  even  in  the  most  remote  times,  the  most  simple
and  noble  of  composers  were  not  without  a  kind  of
verbal  consciousness ;  repressed,  indeed,  in  them  by  the
pure  and  classic  spirit  of  their  genius,  but  still  the  germ
from  which  in  later  times  were  developed  the  puerilities
of  the  Eabbins  and  the  artificial  rhetoric  of  the  Arabic
authors.

The  instinct  to  gratify  the  ear — or  something  deeper
than  the  ear — by  accordance  of  words,  and  to  create  a  si¬
militude  between  the  sound  and  the  sense,  is  common  to
every  race,  and,  if  regarded  philosophically,  will  not  be
found  worthy  of  contempt  or  reprobation.  It  has  been
especially  strong  in  our  Teutonic  branch  of  the  human
family,  which  not  only  has  had  an  alliterative  and  asso¬
nant  poetry  in  former  ages,  but  still  fondly  clinges  to
phrases  and  proverbs  which  recal  the  ancient  rhythm.
No  one  would  wish  such  expressions  as  “to  have  and  to
hold,”  “  bed  and  board,”  “  kith  and  kin,”  “  last  not
least,”  to  be  banished  by  a  pseudo-classic  taste  from  the
use  of  the  nation.  In  Hebrew  such  combinations  appear
with  frequency,  and  the  alliterative  accordance  which
they  exemplify  appears  to  have  almost  stood  in  the  place
of  metre  as  a  poetical  instrument.  Brom  these  to  paro¬
nomasia,  and  play  on  words,  there  is  but  a  step.  Of  this
figure,  a  few  examples  may  be  given.  At  Psalm  xl.  3,


86


INTRODUCTION.


and  lii.  6,  according  to  the  numbering  of  our  version,
there  is  a  play  on  words  between  “  see  ”  aud  “  fear,”
which  occurs  also  elsewhere.  Compare  also  Isaiah  v.  7,
Ivii.  6,  and  Isi.  3 ;  also  on  the  same  word  as  this  last
Job  XXX.  19,  and  xlii.  6;  also  Psalm  xviii.  7,  Ecclesiastes,
vii.  6.  To  these  may  be  added  the  chant  of  Samson  at
Judges  XV.  16,  and  perhaps  the  account  of  the  sons  of
Jair  at  x.  4.

But  it  is  in  connection  with  proper  names  that  this  ten¬
dency  is  most  manifest.  We  may  either  see  in  the  etymo¬
logies  of  the  Pentateuch  the  ingenious  labours  of  Hebrew
priests  and  scholars,  anxious  to  give  an  applicability  to
names  the  origin  of  which  was  lost,  just  as  Ya'roh  is
made  by  the  Arabs  to  have  been  the  first  man  who  spoke
Arabic,  and  Muzaykiyah  is  said  to  have  been  so  called
because  he  tore  up  his  clothes  every  evening ;  or  we  may
suppose  that  the  etymologies  were  framed  at  a  very  early
period,  almost  unconsciously,  by  the  people  themselves,
who,  being  accustomed  to  name  their  children,  their
habitations,  and  remarkable  places  by  apposite  terms,  and
being  hardly  able  to  conceive  an  appellation  without  a
meaning,  instinctively  sought  the  signification  of  the
patriarchal  names,  and  sometimes  moulded  the  legend  in
accordance  with  the  supposed  etymology.  It  is  reasonable
to  conclude  that  both  these  sources  have  contributed  to
the  large  stock  of  derivations  which  we  find  in  the  Pen¬
tateuch.  Some  of  them  seem  too  artificial  to  have  arisen
spontaneously  among  the  people :  they  resemble  rather
the  laboured  comparisons  of  scholars  than  the  similarities
which  would  strike  the  popular  ear.  But  the  greater  part
are  probably  derived  from  remote  and  unlettered  tradition-
It  is  unreasonable  to  doubt  the  antiquity  of  the  speech  of


INTRODUCTION'.


87


Lamech.,  at  Genesis  v.  29,  'wMcli  contains  a  play  upon
the  name  of  Noah ;  or  of  Noah’s  curse  and  blessing,  at
ix.  25,  in  which  the  name  of  Japhet  is  similarly  treated*
furthermore,  the  name  in  some  cases  has  evidently  in¬
fluenced  the  narrative,  as  where  Abraham  and  Sarah  suc¬
cessively  laugh  in  connection  with  the  birth  of  Isaac,
(Genesis  xvii.  17,  and  xviii.  12  ;  compare  also  xxi.  6.)  ;
as  also  in  the  unholy  ancestry  attributed  by  Israel  to
its  enemies,  Moab  and  Ammon.  We  may  also  fairly
allow  a  popular  origin  to  the  etymology  of  the  word
Manna,  suggested  at  Exodus  xvi.  15.  But  whether
originating  with  the  people  or  the  learned,  we  find
at  a  very  early  period  in  Hebrew  history  a  tendency,
which  cannot  be  mistaken,  to  reflect  upon  names  and
significations,  to  play  and  refine  upon  them.  In  the
later  writers,  this  spirit  is  still  more  manifest.  A  proper
name  frequently  suggests  paronomasia,  and  the  instinc¬
tive  tendency  towards  this  figure  throws  a  light  on  the
formation  of  the  etymologies  of  which  I  have  spoken.
Compare  Isaiah  xxi.  2,  with  regard  to  the  name  of  Elam ;
Jer.  vi.  1,  with  regard  to  Tekoah;  Ezekiel  xxv.  16,  to
Cherithim;  Jer.  xlviii.  2,  to  Heshbon;  Nehemiah  ix,  24,
to  Canaan.  A  number  of  others  may  be  discovered  by
an  attentive  reading  of  the  prophetical  books.  But  enough
has  been  said  to  show  that  the  germ  of  those  literary
tendencies,  which  were  in  after  ages  developed  in  the
Arabic  literature,  existed  &om  the  earliest  times  among
their  Semitic  brethren.

A  still  more  striking  example  of  artificiality  in  compo¬
sition  is  afforded  by  those  alphabetical  pieces,  which  have
raised  so  much  curiosity  and  discussion  among  scholars.
The  Hebrew  hterature  did  not  escape  the  fate  which  con-


88


INTRODUCTION.


demns  nations  to  lose  much,  of  their  poetical  yigour  and
spontaneity  by  a  long  continued  culture,  especially  'when
they  restrict  themselves,  as  did  the  ancient  nations  for  the
most  part,  to  a  traditional  range  of  ideas.  From  Athens  to
Alexandria,  from  Alexandria  to  Constantinople,  we  may
trace  the  decline  of  Greek  letters — ever  more  learned,  ever
more  laborious,  and  ever  more  feeble.  The  later  ages  of
the  Hebrew  literature  were,  indeed,  illustrated  by  compo¬
sitions  of  surpassing  grandeur  and  beauty,  such  as  the
pieces  appended  to  the  Book  of  Isaiah  (chapter  xl.  to  the
end) ;  the  Lamentations,  of  which  the  greater  part  are  in
the  alphabetical  form;  and  the  Book  of  Daniel,  which,
composed  probably  as  late  as  the  second  century  before
Christ,  opened  the  magnificent  series  of  apocalyptic  writ¬
ings,  the  germ  of  which  may  be  found  in  the  prophecies
of  Ezekiel.  But  it  is  not  the  less  evident  that,  even  be¬
fore  the  Captivity,  composition  had  become  more  the  task
of  a  literary  class,  prone  to  imitate  rather  than  originate,
and  to  look  for  inspiration  in  the  works  of  its  predecessors
rather  than  in  nature  and  human  life.  Among  these  arose
the  alphabetical  poem,  in  which  the  compiler  seems  to
have  sought  to  add  freshness  to  his  groupings  of  ancient
thoughts  by  a  new  and  striking  literary  device.  The
success  of  this  kind  of  composition  bears  -witness  to  the
taste  of  the  J ews  and  the  nations  related  to  them.  Similar
compositions  appeared  among  the  Syrians  and  the  Samari¬
tans,  and  the  neo-Hebrew,  or  Eabbinical  literature,  is  full
of  them.^  The  Biblical  poems,  which  belong  to  this  order,
are  Psalms  xxv.,  xxxiv.,  xxxvii.,  cxi.,  cxii.,  cxix.,  cxlv. ;
the  description  of  the  -virtuous  woman,  at  Proverbs  xxxi.
10—31,  and  the  Book  of  Lamentations,  -with  the  exception
"  Ew-iiD,  Dichter  des  Alten  Bundes,  p.  202.  Ed.  1866.


INTRODUCTION.


89


of  tte  last  chapter.  In  Psalms  cxi.  and  cxii.  the  artifice
is  carried  so  far  that  not  each  verse,  hut  each  member  of
the  verse,  is  alphabetical.  In  Lamentations  iii.,  the
verses  are  divided  into  twenty-two  triplets,  the  verses  of
the  triplets  beginning  with  the  twenty -two  letters  of  the
alphabet  in  succession.  The  hundred  and  nineteenth
Psalm  shows  a  still  further  elaboration  of  the  same  idea,
and  in  its  structure  and  purport  bears  a  visible  analogy  to
such  productions  as  the  Assemblies  of  Hariri.  In  this
lengthy  composition  the  hundred  and  seventy-six  verses
are  divided  into  twenty-two  groups  of  eight  verses  each,
and  the  verses  of  the  groups  begin  with  the  twenty-two
letters  in  alphabetical  succession ;  that  is,  the  eight  verses
of  the  first  group  begin  with  Aleph,  the  eight  of  the
second  group  with  Beth,  the  eight  of  the  third  group  with
Gimel,  and  so  on.  This  Psalm  has,  however,  a  more
remarkable  peculiarity,  inasmuch  as  the  author  strives  in
the  true  spirit  of  an  Eastern  scholar  to  attract  the  fancy
to  his  theme,  by  introducing  into  every  verse,  without
exception,  a  synonym  for  the  word  or  commandment  of
God.

Before  quitting  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  will  venture
to  suggest  a  comparison  between  the  gnomic  and  senten¬
tious  character  of  the  Arabic  poetry,  as  exhibited  in  the
Assemblies,  and  some  portions  of  the  Old  Testament —
as  the  books  of  Job  and  Ecclesiastes — in  which  the  pure
Semitic  spirit  breathes,  uncontrolled  by  national  patriot¬
ism  or  Mosaic  traditions.  This,  however,  is  a  matter
which  must  be  left  to  the  preception  of  the  reader.  Yet
I  cannot  but  think  that  in  the  figurative  description  of
old  age,  in  the  last  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes,  I  recognise  a
tendency  to  obscure  poetical  metaphor,  which,  trans-


90


INTRODUCTION.


mitted  througli  many  generations,  darkens  tke  vork  of
the  learned  Basrian.

How  far  suck  a  work  as  tke  Assemblies  is  to  be
ascribed  to  any  influence  of  Byzantine  scbolarsbip  is  a
question  of  some  difSeulty.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe
that  Hariri  took  directly  any  ideas  from  the  Greeks.
He  probably  knew  no  language  but  bis  own,  and  all
that  be  produced  is  to  be  traced  to  exclusively  Arabic,
or,  at  least,  Moslem  sources.  But  indirectly  be,  and  the
rest  of  bis  countrymen,  could  not  fail  to  be  influenced  by
the  pedantry  of  Constantinople,  which  came  to  coirfirm
and  increase  their  own.  In  almost  every  age  of  the
world  we  find  a  certain  similarity  between  the  pursuits  of
existing  nations,  as  if  the  same  informing  spirit  possessed
them  all,  in  spite  of  diversities  of  race,  position,  and  his¬
tory.  In  the  time  of  Hariri,  Greek,  Jew,  Syrian  and  Arab
bad  become  grammarians,  lexicographers,  archaeologists ;
the  race  of  translators  and  commentators  abounded  in
the  east,  and  to  the  furthest  limits  of  the  Moslem  west.
Each  race,  except  perhaps  the  haughty  and  exclusive
Greeks,  did  indeed  learn  something  from  the  others.
The  Syrians  took  their  notions  of  grammar  from  the
Greeks.  All  that  the  Arabs  knew  of  Greek  philosophy
and  science  was  from  translations  made  into  their  lan¬
guage  by  Syrians,  either  from  the  Greek  originals,  or  from
former  Syriac  translations.  On  the  other  hand  the  Jews,
iu  the  tenth  century,  founded  or  re-cast  their  grammar
under  Arab  influence,  and  even  adopted  the  word
J*j  as  their  paradigm,  though,  from  its  containing  a
medial  guttural,  it  insufiiciently  expresses  the  changes
of  the  Hebrew  verb.  "We  find  the  philologers  of  the
various  languages  vying  with  each  other  in  industry;


INTRODUCTION.


91


we  find  Mayd4ni,  the  contemporary  of  Hariri,  collecting
and  explaining  the  national  proverbs  precisely  in  tbe
manner  of  Snidas.  Ho  one  can  pretend  to  say  that  such
an  infiuence  as  tbis  may  not  have  extended  from  Con¬
stantinople  to  Basra,  but  of  direct  imitation  of  Greek
authors  there  is  nothing.  The  work  with  which  the
Assemblies  will  be  most  readily  compared  is  the  Cassan¬
dra,  or  Alexandra,  of  Lycophron.  That  was  a  poem  com¬
posed  in  an  age  when  the  demon  of  pedantry  had  entered
into  poets  and  orators ;  when  even  the  exquisite  genius
of  Theocritus  did  not  disdain  to  produce  a  poem  in  the
form  of  a  Syrinx.  The  Cassandra  is  an  iambic  poem  of
fourteen  hundred  and  seventy  lines,  very  famous  in  anti¬
quity,  though  utterly  neglected  now.  It  is  an  almost
unintelligible  rhapsody,  supposed  to  be  uttered  by  the
prophetical  daughter  of  Priam,  who  from  the  top  of  a
tower,  where  she  is  confined  by  her  father’s  order,  sees
the  fleet  of  Paris  depart,  and  knows  that  it  is  to  bring
destruction  on  Troy.  In  her  sacred  fury,  she  pours  forth
a  torrent  of  obscure  and  oracular  verse.  The  epithets  are
gigantic  and  monstrous  compounds,  the  language  is  ran¬
sacked  for  rare  words,  metaphor  is  heaped  on  metaphor,
every  person  and  every  place  are  described,  not  by  their
ordiuary  names,  but  by  some  accidental  relation,  or  by
allusion  to  some  obscure  event ;  the  prophetess  passes
from  calamity  to  calamity  with  a  Pythian  enthusiasm
which  scorns  the  distinctions  of  paragraphs,  and  ends  by
lamenting  that  mankind  will  not  believe  the  predictions
she  has  uttered.  This  poem,  if  it  can  be  called  so,  is  but
a  linguistic  and  geographical  puzzle.  The  war  of  Troy,
the  return  of  the  Greek  heroes,  their  dispersion  over  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  planting  of  Greek  and


92


INTROBVCTION.


Trojan  colonies,  the  settlement  of  ^neas  in  Italy,  the
foundation  of  Eome,  the  wars  between  Europe  and  Asia,
the  expedition  of  Xerxes,  and  the  conquests  of  Alexander,
the  descendant  of  ^acus  and  Dardanus,  give  opportunity
for  the  display  of  boundless  but  useless  learning.  This
production,  which  gained  for  the  author  the  epithet  of
the  ‘‘  dark  ”  Lycophron  from  the  despairing  scholars  of
antiquity,  was  not  fully  elucidated  till  the  time  of  the
brothers  Tzetzes,*  whose  labours  on  it  are  a  remarkable
proof  of  the  learning  and  industry  of  the  Byzantines.
Except  in  the  display  of  erudition,  there  is  no  resem¬
blance  between  Lycophron  and  il^riri,  nor  do  we  find
in  the  latter  that  impenetrable  and  perverse  obscurity
which  distinguished  the  Greek.  But  it  is  possible  that
the  fame  of  this  work,  at  which  successive  generations
of  schoolboys  had  been  made  to  labour,  may  have
reached  Arabic  writers,  and  encouraged  their  tendency
to  learned  display.

If  we  allow  some  share  in  the  formation  of  such  a  taste
to  the  predispositions  of  race  and  language,  and  some¬
thing  to  the  influence  of  foreign  culture,  we  must  also
trace  some  elements  of  it  to  the  pecuhar  studies  of  Islam.
A  strange  feature  in  Hariri’s  work  is  the  number  of  com¬
positions  in  which  the  merit  is  supposed  to  consist  in  the
alternation  of  pointed  and  impointed  letters,  or  the  ex¬
clusive  use  of  one  of  these  two  kinds.  It  is  not  difficult
to  see  how  any  tendency  to  these  caprices  which  may
have  been  innate  in  the  learned  Arabs  must  have  been
increased  by  the  long  controversies  which  had  been  held ,
on  the  orthography  of  the  Koran.  On  the  proper  use  of

^  The  Commentary  is  attributed  to  Isaac,  but  it  is  almost  certain
that  John  had  a  large  share  in  the  work.


INTROBUCTIOIT.


93


the  diacritical  points,  on  the  question  whether  a  letter
should  be  with  or  without  a  point,  whether  it  should  he
pointed  above  or  below,  depended  the  meaning  of  many
passages  of  G-od’s  word.  The  early  copies  of  the  Koran
were  in  a  character  singularly  incomplete.  There  was
hardly  a  chapter  in  which  doubts  were  not  raised  as  to  the
meaning  of  important  passages.  In  the  lifetime  of  the
Prophet,  when  the  sacred  fragments  were  read  publicly
at  Medina  by  those  who  knew  their  purport  accurately,
and  were  committed  to  memory  by  numbers  of  the  faith¬
ful,  these  deficiencies  were  unnoticed ;  but  as  early  as  the
time  of  Abu  Bekr  many  of  those  who  knew  the  Koran
by  heart  were  slain  in  the  campaign  against  Musaylimeh
the  Liar,  and  'Omar  counselled  the  Khalif  to  cause  a  stan¬
dard  copy  to  be  written.

This  task  was  executed  by  Zayd  ibn  Thabit,  who  first
collected  the  Koran  into  a  book.  But  great  varieties  of
readings  made  the  sense  doubtful,  and  in  the  year  30
the  Khalif  ‘Othman  undertook  the  recension  which  has
ever  since  been  the  sacred  text  of  the  Moslems.  He  com¬
mitted  the  work  to  Zayd  ibn  Thabit,  ‘Abd  Allah  ibn  Az
Zobayr,  and  other  distinguished  persons,  with  orders  to
choose  the  best  reading  of  each  passage,  and  not  to  give
the  various  conflicting  readings,  as  appears  to  have  been
done  in  the  first  edition.  All  who  could  throw  any  light
on  the  Prophet’s  meaning  were  consulted,  and  'Ayisheh
in  particular  had  great  influence  in  determining  the  text ;
her  testimony  as  to  the  Prophet’s  oral  recitations  being
respectfully  received  as  conclusive.  The  Koran  was
brought  more  completely  into  accord  with  the  dialect  of
Koraysh,  since  the  Elhalif  commanded  that  in  doubtful
cases  the  language  of  the  Prophet’s  family  and  country-


94


INTRODUCTION.


men  should  be  preferred.  Hence  there  remain  very  few
dialectical  peculiarities  in  the  present  Koran.  But,  when
all  was  done,  the  text  still  remained  very  uncertain  ;  and
the  difi&culties  of  the  Moslems  were  increased  by  the
sudden  corruption  of  the  pure  Arabic  speech  after  the
first  conquests.  Koraysh  or  Temim  might  have  been
able  to  detect  the  precise  form  and  pronunciation  of  a
word  under  its  obscure  orthography,  but  the  settlers  of
the  conquered  lands,  who  in  fifty  years  after  the  Hijra  had
almost  lost  the  use  of  the  classic  desinences,  required  a
clearer  guidance.  The  efforts  of  Hajjaj  ibn  Yusuf  to
settle  the  text  of  the  Koran  have  been  already  referred
to.  Ibn  Khallikan,  in  his  life  of  the  enlightened  tyrant,
says  that  the  people  used  'Othman’s  copy  for  forty  years,
but  in  the  days  of  'Abd  al  Melik  ibn  Merwan  erroneous
readings  had  become  numerous  in  Irak,  so  that  Hajjaj
bade  his  scribes  set  distinctive  marks  on  the  words  of
uncertain  pronunciation,  and  Nasr  ibn  'Asim  placed
single  or  double  dots  to  certain  words.  But  as  this  did
not  give  sufficient  accuracy,  the  or  system  of

diacritical  pointing  now  in  use,  was  invented.  The
honour  of  giving  fixity  of  meaning  to  the  Koran  belongs
chiefly  to  Abu  ’1  Aswad  and  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed,  though
the  latter  is  said  to  have  superseded  the  system  of  point¬
ing  adopted  by  his  predecessor,  as  well  as  that  of  the
scribes  of  Hajjaj.*  Abu  ’1  Aswad  is  said  to  have  marked
the  vowels  and  the  tanwin,  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed  the  hamzeh
and  teshdid,  the  rowm  and  ishmam.  Thus  the  science  of
pointing.,  or  determining  which  of  two  or  more  letters,
similarly  formed  in  ancient  writing,  was  to  be  preferred,

^  See  note  to  McGuckin  de  Slane’s  translation  of  Ibn  Kballikan.
Vol.  I,  p.  364.


INTRODUCTION.


95


became  of  tbe  highest  interest.  In  our  languages  such
accuracy  is  not  needed,  but  in  the  Arabic,  where  every
letter  has  and  must  have  a  value,  where  a  change  in
a  root  letter  is  sufficient  to  transform  one  word  into
another,  and  a  change  in  an  augmentative  letter  may
affect  gender,  number,  and  the  other  accidents  of  the  root,
the  scholar  was  obliged  to  employ  himself  on  the  primary
elements  of  speech.  The  formation  of  passives  and  plurals
by  internal  vowel  change,  unexpressed  in  the  usual  ortho¬
graphy,  must  have  tended  still  further  to  promote  this
minute  scholarship.  The  compositions  of  pointed  or
unpointed  letters,  such  as  Hariri  delights  in,  may  have
been  suggested,  or  at  least  encouraged,  by  a  desire  to
embody  the  correct  orthography  of  doubtful  words.  The
author  would  fix  them  with  their  right  pointing  in  a
poem  or  address,  of  which  the  artifi.ce  would  insure  that
they  should  not  be  misspelt.

There  was,  furthermore,  a  religious  sanction  for  this
careful  study  of  the  alphabet.  One  of  the  most  mysterious
attributes  of  the  Horan  was  its  essential  and  eternal  con¬
nection  with  the  Arabic  language.  In  that  language  it
had  not  only  been  revealed,  but  had  existed  before  the
world  and  time.  “  This  (the  Koran),”  said  Mohammed,
“is  a  clear  Arab  tongue.”  Koran  xvi.  105  (compare
xxvi.  195).  If  a  confirmation  of  this  unity  of  the  sacred
book  and  the  sacred  language  were  needed,  it  would  be
found  in  the  prefixion  to  some  of  the  Suras  of  isolated
letters,  whose  meaning  no  man  knew,  but  which  had  un¬
doubtedly  a  divine  quality.  If  Arabic  words,  which  have^
equivalents  in  foreign  tongues,  had  alone  been  revealed,
it  might  be  held  that  there  was  no  essential  connection
between  the  revelation  and  the  language ;  but  when  sepa-


96


INTRODUCTION.


rate  letters,  having  no  idea  afldxed  to  them,  vrere  brought
down  from  on  high,  it  could  not  he  doubted  that  the
ineffable  sanctity  of  the  Arabic  language  was  thereby
figured.  In  course  of  time  a  mystic  interpretation  was
given  to  these  letters,  which  is  carried  to  the  extreme
in  the  commentary  of  Baydawi.  At  the  beginning
of  the  second  Sura  he  comments  the  letters  elif,  Idm^
mim,  which  are  prefixed  to  it,  and  takes  occasion  to  show
that  the  presence  of  these  monograms  in  the  Eoran  is
plainly  miraculous.  He  points  out  that  the  letters  are  used
in  such  a  manner  as  to  indicate  a  profound  knowledge  of
scientific  grammar.  As  Mohammed  was  uninstructed,
such  a  knowledge  could  only  have  come  from  Glod  him¬
self.  Bor  instance,  there  are  fourteen  letters  thus  pre¬
fixed  to  Suras  of  the  Koran,  and  fourteen  is  just  the  half
of  twenty-eight,  the  total  of  the  letters  when  elif  is
not  distinguished  from  hamzeh.  These  fourteen  let¬
ters,  moreover,  are  to  he  found  in  twenty-nine  Suras^
which  is  just  the  whole  number  of  letters  in  the  al¬
phabet,  if  elif  be  reckoned.  Again,  the  half  of  each
of  the  different  classes  of  letters  are  thus  employed.  Of
the  ten  weakly  articulated  letters,  namely  those  which
make  up  the  words  five  are  to  be  found

in  these  monograms;  while  of  the  other  eighteen,  which  are
strongly  articulated,  nine  are  to  be  so  found.  The  gram¬
matical  forms  which  take  an  augment  never  exceed  in
length  the  number  of  seven  letters,  hence  the  Almighty
has  introduced  into  these  monograms  seven  out  of  the  ten
augmentative  letters.  These  are  but  a  few  of  the  dis¬
coveries  which  in  the  time  of  Baydawi  had  been  made
concerning  the  monograms  of  the  Koran,  and  which  the
orthodox  commentator  explains  with  undoubting  faith.


INTROBVGTION.


97


In  the  age  of  Hariri  these  interpretations  were  in  high
favour ;  indeed,  Baydawi  does  little  hut  reproduce  the
comments  of  Zamakhshari  in  the  Keshshaf,  who  himself
followed  other  doctors  of  an  earlier  time.  Zamakhshari
tells  us  in  his  preface  that  being  asked  by  his  admirers  to
produce  a  commentary  on  the  Koran,  his  first  care  was  to
write  something  on  these  monograms,  as  a  specimen  of
the  loftiness  and  the  difficulty  of  the  enterprise.  It  will
thus  easily  be  perceived  that  exercises  in  the  arrange¬
ment  of  letters  had  not  among  the  Arabs  that  character
of  futility  which  they  bear  with  us.

The  imitations  of  Hariri  have  been  numerous.  Syl-
vestre  de  Sacy  gives,  in  his  edition,  a  Hebrew  version
of  the  third  Assembly  by  the  Eabbin  Jehuda,  son  of
A1  Khdriji,  and  mentions  in  his  Introduction  that  Jehuda
also  wrote  an  independent  work  in  the  same  style.  It  is
curious  to  see  the  sober  majesty  of  the  Hebrew  tongue
condescend  to  such  an  imitation,  and  to  observe  that  the
Bible  takes  the  place  of  the  Koran  in  the  allusions  with
which  the  piece  abounds.  De  Sacy  also  mentions  an
imitation  in  Arabic,  composed  by  Abli  't  Tahir  ibn
Mohammed  ibn  Yusuf  of  Cordova.  The  writer  produced
fifty  Assemblies  to  correspond  with  his  model,  and  in  the
title  to  the  work  lays  stress  upon  the  pains  they  cost
him  (Chrest;  Arabe  iii.  180).  An  imitation  was  also
produced  in  Syriac  towards  the  close  of  the  thirteenth
century.  The  limpid,  richly  vowelled,  and  graceful
Arabic  must,  however,  have  been  indifferently  repre¬
sented  in  the  clumsy  and  rugged  dialect  of  the  north.

Yet  the  influence  of  Hariri  is  not  to  be  measured
merely  by  the  number  of  professed  imitations  that  have
been  produced.  His  style  has  more  or  less  modified  the


98


INTRODUCTIOir.


style  of  all  tlie  more  ambitious  writing  tbat  has  appeared
in  tbe  Arabic  language  since  bis  time.  In  the  Timur  of
Ibn.  'Arabsbah,  wbo  wrote  in  tbe  first  balf  of  tbe  fifteenth
century,  we  find  the  influence  of  Hariri  as  strong  as  it
bad  been  in  bis  own  age,  and  among  bis  own  people.
Hor  does  it  even  now  show  any  sign  of  extinction.
Every  man  in  tbe  East  wbo  seeks  tbe  reputation  of  a
scholar  and  a  gentleman  endeavours  to  understand  tbe
Assemblies.  Among  the  few  works  of  merit  which  men
of  Arab  tongue  have  produced  in  recent  times  are  tbe
Assemblies  of  Hasif  al  Tazaji  of  Beyrout,  which  are
here  and  there  cited  in  my  notes.  This  book  is  a  perfect
imitation  of  Hariri,  whose  diction  and  manner  are  repro¬
duced  with  surprising  skill.  Hasif  certainly  has  little
of  tbe  poetical  power  of  bis  great  original,  but  in  curious
learning  be  almost  equals  him.  As,  perhaps,  tbe  chief  -
living  representative  of  tbe  ancient  culture  this  author
deserves  our  notice.  He  is  a  native  of  tbe  Lebanon,  has
never  quitted  his  own  country,  knows  no  language  but
bis  own,  and  is  said  to  contemn  European  knowledge  as
worthless.  Though  a  Christian  be  has  devoted  his  life
to  a  profound  study  of  the  language,  history,  literature,
and  grammar  of  the  Arabs.  Many  years  ago  he  pub¬
lished  a  letter  to  He  Sacy  on  some  minute  faults  which
he  discovered  in  that  learned  orientalist’s  Commentary
on  Hariri,  He  is  the  author  of  a  treatise  on  grammar
on  the  model  of  the  Alfiyeh  of  Ibn  Malik.  It  consists  of
more  than  a  thousand  verses  of  rejez  muzdawij,  in  which
the  whole  system  of  the  Arab  grammarians  is  condensed
with  wonderful  ability,  and  it  is  accompanied  by  a
commentary  written  by  himself.  Ho  more  complete
exposition  of  the  subject  has  ever  been  brought  into  a


mmODTTCTION.


99


volume  of  the  same  size.  The  labours  of  his  prede¬
cessors  during  many  centuries  have  given  the  author
the  means  of  producing  a  treatise  at  once  comprehensive
and  minute,  and  for  the  advanced  student  who  has
mastered  the  commentary  of  Ibn  'Akil  on  Ibn  Malik,
there  is,  I  think,  no  work  that  might  be  more  profitably
taken  in  hand  than  the  grammar  of  Nasif  al  Tazaji.*
Another  work  of  this  author  is  a  concise  treatise  on
rhetoric,  on  the  system  of  the  Talkhis  al  Miftah  of  Jelal
ad  din  Mohammed,  as  commented  by  Sa'd  at  Taftaz4ni.
The  work  of  iN’asif  seems  to  be  in  a  great  measure  an
abstract  of  the  Mukhtasar,  or  shorter  commentary  of  the
last  named  author,  which  has  been  printed  at  Calcutta,
and  it  carries  concision  to  such  a  point  as  to  be  almost  un¬
intelligible  without  the  help  of  some  more  detailed  and
explanatory  treatise.  But  as  a  manual  to  aid  the  memory,
it  is,  no  doubt,  excellent.  The  most  important  work  of
Nasif,  is,  however,  undoubtedly  the  volume  of  Assemblies.
The  hero  is  called  Maymfin  ibn  Khizam  and  the  rdwi  is
Sohayl  ibn  'Abbad ;  the  work  itself  bears  the  title  Mejma*
al  Ba^ayn,  the  confluence  of  the  two  seas^  an  allusion  to
an  obscure  passage  at  Eoran  xviii.  59,  which  it  is  useless
to  discuss  here.  The  Assemblies  of  Easif  are  even  more
full  of  proverbs  and  traditionary  sayings  than  those  of
Hariri,  which  they  have  been  written  to  supplement.
The  author,  living  entirely  in  the  past,  has  brought  to¬
gether  an  immense  number  of  phrases  illustrative  of
Arabic  life  and  language,  both  before  and  after  Islam.
But  the  original  feature  in  his  compositions  is  the  intro¬
duction  of  Arab  art  and  science,  and  the  treatment  of

The  title  of  this  work  is  <—

a  fanciful  appellation  which  need  not  he  explained  here.


100


INTRODUCTION.


every  subject  with  a  direct  scholastic  purpose.  It  need
hardly  be  said  that  the  author  never  profanes  his  text
by  admitting  a  Frankish  idea,  or  accepts  any  scientific
principle  that  is  not  recommended  by  the  orthodox  tradi¬
tion  of  centuries.  Thus  in  the  fourth  Assembly  we  have
a  medical  question  concerning  the  proportion  of  the  four
blU-l,  or  humours  of  man,  and  are  told  that  in  properly
constituted  bodies  the  phlegm  is  a  sixth  of  the  blood,
the  yellow  gaU  a  sixth  of  the  phlegm,  and  the  black  gall
three-fourths  of  the  yellow.  The  sixth  Assembly  is  full
of  curious  information  concerning  the  special  names  of
banquets  according  to  their  occasion,  as  a  birth,  a  circum¬
cision,  a  wedding :  the  fires  that  were  traditional  among
the  pagan  Arabs,  as  the  fire  by  which  they  conjured  rain,
the  fire  by  which  they  swore  confederacy,  the  fire  which
they  lighted  when  one  hated  by  them  departed  as  an  en¬
chantment  against  his  return.  It  must  be  remembered
that  these  compositions  are  intended  to  be  read  with  a
master,  or  to  be  copiously  commented,  so  that  every  line
may  be  made  the  subject  of  a  lecture  on  antiquities.  The
traditional  names  for  the  hours  of  the  day  and  night,  for
the  winds,  the  epithets  applied  to  horses,  according  to
their  order  in  a  race,  are  collected  in  pithy  verses  intended
to  be  committed  to  memory.  The  eleventh  contains  an
exposition  of  the  Arabic  prosody,  the  twenty-eighth  treats
of  astronomy.  In  the  fifteenth  is  a  copy  of  verses  in  which
no  letter  is  pointed,  and  then  one  in  which  every  letter
is  pointed,  also  verses  in  which  the  alternate  letters,  or
the  alternate  words,  have  points.  The  twentieth  has
verses  which  are  the  same  whether  read  forward  or
backward,  and  others  which  when  read  one  way  are
laudatory,  but,  when  read  the  other  way,  are  satirical.


INTRODUCTION.


101


In  short,  all  Hariri’s  artifices  are  imitated,  and  even
surpassed,  by  bis  laborious  imitator.  The  Assemblies
of  Hasif  should  not  be  neglected  by  the  Arabic  student,
for  they  are  full  of  instruction ;  all  that  they  require  is
a  fuller  commentary  to  explain  their  ambiguities  and
their  references  to  obscure  traditions.  This  could  best
be  supplied  by  the  author  himself.  My  best  thanks  are
due  to  Professor  Ameuney,  of  King’s  College,  London,
for  calling  my  attention  to  the  works  of  this  remarkable
contemporary  scholar,  as  well  as  for  many  other  inesti¬
mable  services.

Prom  the  time  of  Schultens,  versions  of  parts  of  Hariri’s
work  have  been  made  into  Latin  or  modern  European
tongues  with  more  or  less  success.  Schultens  translated
six  Assemblies ;  He  Sacy  in  his  Chrestomathie  has  given
two  with  his  usual  accuracy.  Other  partial  attempts  have
been  made  by  different  scholars,  but  the  renderings  are
said  to  be  extremely  defective.  A  Latin  version  of  the
greater  part  of  the  work  was  published  by  C.  E.  S.  Peiper,
in  1832,  but  the  translator  was  either  not  fully  com¬
petent  for  his  task,  or  else  did  not  take  the  pains  to
obtain  and  study  the  best  edition  of  the  original,  for  his
book  abounds  with  errors.  It  is,  moreover,  written  in  the
worst  style  of  professorial  Latin,  and  conveys  in  its  form
and  spirit  no  idea  of  the  original.  A  more  worthy
rendering  is  that  of  Mr.  Preston,  Laudian  Professor  of
Arabic  at  Cambridge,  who  has  published  an  English
version  of  twenty  of  the  Assemblies.  Mr.  Preston’s  trans¬
lation  is  throughout  accurate  and  scholarly,  and  its  only
fault  is  excessive  amplification,  in  which  the  rhythm
and  diction  of  Hariri  are  almost  dissipated.  The  book
which  is  now  offered  to  the  public  is,  I  believe,  the


102


INTRODUCTION.


first  attempt  at  a  complete  translation  of  Hariri’s
■work  with,  such  annotations  as  shall  both  instruct
the  general  reader  and  aid  the  student  to  acquire  a
knowledge  of  the  original.  How  far  the  object  has
been  achieved,  it  is  for  others  than  myself  to  deter¬


mine.


lOS


THE  PEEFACE  OF  AL  HAEIET.

IN  THE  NAME  OE  GOD  IHE  MEECIFDL,  MOST  MEECIFDL.

Said  th.e  Excellent,  tlie  Incomparable,  Abu  Mohammed
al  Kasim  ibn  'Ali  ibn  Mohammed  ibn  ‘Othman  A1  Hariri
of  Basrah  (God  cool  his  resting-place).

0  God,  we  praise  thee  for  what  perspicuity  thou  hast
taught,  and  what  enunciation  thou  hast  iuspired ;  as  we
praise  thee  for  what  bounty  thou  hast  enlarged,  what
mercy  thou  hast  diffused; — And  we  take  refuge  with
thee  from  the  yehemence  of  fluency  and  the  immodera¬
tion  of  talkativeness,  as  we  take  refuge  with  thee  from
the  vice  of  inarticulateness  and  the  shame  of  hesitation. —
And  by  thee  we  seek  to  be  kept  from  temptation  through
the  flattery  of  the  praiser  and  the  connivance  of  the
favourer,  as  we  seek  to  be  kept  from  exposure  to  the
defaming  of  the  slanderer  and  the  betrayal  of  the  in¬
former. — And  we  ask  pardon  of  thee  if  our  desires  carry
us  into  the  region  of  ambiguities,  as  we  ask  pardon  if
our  steps  advance  to  the  domain  of  errors. — And  we  ask
of  thee  succour  which  shall  lead  us  aright,  and  a
heart  turning  with  justice,  and  a  tongue  adorned  with
truth,  and  a  speech  strengthened  with  demonstration,
and  accuracy  that  shall  keep  us  from  mistake,  and  reso¬
lution  that  shall  concjner  caprice,  and  perception  by


104


PREFACE  OF  AL  SARIBL


which,  we  may  estimate  duly; — And  that  thou  wilt  help
us  by  thy  guidance  to  conceive,  and  enable  us  by  thy  as¬
sistance  to  express  ; — That  thou  wilt  guard  us  from  error
in  narration,  and  turn  us  from  unseemliness  in  jesting ; —
That  we  may  be  secure  from  slanders  of  the  tongue;
that  we  may  be  free  from  the  ill  of  tinselled  speech; —
That  we  walk  not  in  the  road  of  sin,  nor  stand  in  the
place  of  repentance : — That  we  be  not  pursued  by  suit  or
censure,  nor  need  to  flee  from  hastiness  to  excuse. — 0
God,  fulfil  to  us  this  wish;  give  us  to  attain  to  this
desire;  put  us  not  forth  of  thy  large  shadow,  make  us
not  a  morsel  for  the  devourer. — Eor  now  we  stretch
forth  to  thee  the  hand  of  entreaty;  we  are  thorough
in  humiliation  to  thee  and  abasement. — And  we  call
down  thy  abundant  grace  and  thy  bounty  that  is  over
all,  with  humbleness  of  seeking  and  with  the  venture
of  hope. — Also  approaching  thee  through  the  merits  of
Mohammed,  Lord  of  men,  the  Intercessor  whose  inter¬
cession  shall  be  received  at  the  congregation  of  judg¬
ment. — By  whom  thou  hast  set  the  seal  to  the  prophets,
and  whose  degree  thou  hast  exalted  to  the  highest
heaven ; — ^Whom  thou  hast  described  in  thy  clear-speak¬
ing  Book,  and  hast  said  (and  thou  art  the  most  truthful
of  sayers)  ;  “It  is  the  word  of  a  noble  envoy,  of  him
who  is  mighty  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  throne,
having  authority,  obeyed,  yea,  faithful.” — 0  God,  send
thy  blessing  on  him  and  his  House  who  guide  aright,
and  his  companions  who  built  up  the  faith;  and  make
us  followers  of  his  guidance  and  theirs,  and  profit  us  all
by  the  loving  of  him  and  them ;  for  thou  art  Almighty,
and  one  meet  to  answer  prayer.

And  now ;  In  a  meeting  devoted  to  that  learning


PREFACE  OF  AL  SARIRL  ?U05

'i,  -C.

whose  breeze  has  stilled  in  this  age,  whose  lights  are  ’
nigh  gone  out — There  ran  a  mention  of  the  Assemblies
which  had  been  invented  by  Badi'  az  Zeman,  the  sage
of  Hamadan  (Grod  shew  him  mercy) ; — In  which  he  had
referred  the  composition  to  Abul  Bath  of  Alexandria  and
the  relation  to  'Isa,  son  of  Hisham. — And  both  these
are  persons  obscure,  not  known;  vague,  not  to  be  re¬
cognized. — Then  suggested  to  me  one  whose  suggestion
is  as  a  decree,  and  obedience  to  whom  is  as  a  prize, — That
I  should  compose  Assemblies,  following  in  them  the
method  of  Badi'  (although  the  lame  steed  attains  not  to
outrun  like  the  stout  one). — Then  I  reminded  him  of
what  is  said  concerning  him  who  joins  even  two  words,
or  strings  together  one  or  two  verses  : — And  deprecated
this  position  in  which  the  rmderstanding  is  bewildered,
and  the  fancy  misses  aim,  and  the  depth  of  the  intelli¬
gence  is  probed,  and  a  man’s  real  value  is  made  mani¬
fest: — And  in  which  one  is  forced  to  be  as  a  wood-gatherer
by  night,  or  as  he  who  musters  footmen  and  horsemen
together: — Considering,  too,  that  the  voluble  man  is
seldom  secure  or  pardoned  if  he  trips. — But  when  he
consented  not  to  forbearance,  and  freed  me  not  from  his
demand,  I  assented  to  his  invitation  with  the  assenting
of  the  obedient,  and  displayed  in  according  with  him
all  my  endeavour ; — And  composed,  in  spite  of  what  I
suffered  from  frozen  genius,  and  dimmed  intelligence,
and  failing  judgment,  and  afflicting  cares, — Fifty  Assem¬
blies,  comprising  what  is  serious  in  language  and  lively,
what  is  delicate  in  expression  and  dignified ;  the  bril-
.  liancies  of  eloquence  and  its  pearls,  the  beauties  of
scholarship  and  its  rarities : — Besides  what  I  have
adorned  them  with  of  verses  of  the  Koran  and  goodly


106


PREFACE  OF  AL  MARIRL


metonymies,  and  studded  tliem  with,  of  Arab  proverbs,
and  scholarly  elegancies,  and  grammatical  riddles,  and
decisions  dependent  on  the  meaning  of  words,  and  original
addresses,  and  ornate  orations,  and  tear-moving  exhorta¬
tions,  and  amusing  jests : — ^AU  of  which  I  have  indited
as  by  the  tongue  of  Abu  Zayd  of  Seruj,  while  I  bave
attributed  the  relating  of  them  to  AI  Harith  son  of
Hammam,  of  Basra. — And  whenever  I  change  the  pasture
I  have  no  purpose  but  to  inspirit  the  reader,  and  to
increase  the  number  of  those  who  shall  seek  my  book. —
And  of  the  poetry  of  others  I  have  introduced  nothing
but  two  single  verses,  on  which  I  have  based  the  fabric
of  the  Assembly  of  Holwan ;  and  two  others,  in  a
couplet,  which  I  have  inserted  at  the  conclusion  of  the
Assembly  of  KereJ. — And,  as  for  the  rest,  my  own  mind
is  the  father  of  its  virginity,  the  author  of  its  sweet
and  its  bitter. — ^Tet  I  acknowledge  withal  that  Badf
(God  shew  him  mercy)  is  a  mighty  passer  of  goals,  a
worker  of  wonders ; — ^And  that  he  who  assays  after  him
to  the  composition  of  an  Assembly,  even  though  he  be
gifted  with  the  eloquence  of  Kodameh, — Does  but  scoop
up  of  his  overflow,  and  travels  that  path  only  by  his
guidance. — And  excellently  said  one  : —

If  before  it  mourned,  I  bad  mourned  my  love  for  Su‘da,  then
should  I  have  healed  my  soul,  nor  had  afterwards  to  repent.

But  it  mourned  before  me,  and  its  mourning  excited  mine,  and  I
said,  '^The  superiority  is  to  the  one  that  is  first.

Now  I  hope  I  shall  not  be,  in  respect  of  the  playful
style  that  I  display,  and  the  source  that  I  repair  to,  like
the  beast  that  scratched  up  its  death  with  its  hoof,  or  he
who  cut  off  his  nose  with  his  own  hand; — So  as  to  be
joined  to  those  who  are  “most  of  all  losers  in  their


PREFACE  OF  AL  SARIRL


107


■works,  wliose  coiorse  on  eartk  has  been  in  vain,  while
they  count  that  they  have  done  fair  deeds.” — Since  I
know  that  although  he  who  is  intelligent  and  liberal
■will  connive  at  me,  and  he  who  is  friendly  and  partial
may  defend  me, — I  can  hardly  escape  from  the  simpleton
who  is  ignorant,  or  the  spiteful  man  who  feigns  ignor¬
ance; — ^Who  ■will  detract  from  me  on  account  of  this  com¬
position,  and  ■will  give  out  that  it  is  among  the  things
forbidden  of  the  law.— But  yet,  whoever  scans  matters
■with  the  eye  of  intelligence,  and  makes  good  his  insight
into  principles — ^Will  rank  these  Assemblies  in  the  order
of  useful  ■writings,  and  class  them  with  the  fables  that
relate  to  brutes  and  Hfeless  objects. — ]I7ow  none  was  ever
heard  of  whose  hearing  shrank  from  such  tales,  or  who
held  as  sinful  those  who  related  them  at  ordinary  times. —
Moreover,  since  deeds  depend  on  intentions,  and  in  these
lies  the  effectiveness  of  religious  obligations, — ^What
fault  is  there  in  one  who  composes  stories  for  instruction
not  for  display,  and  whose  purpose  in  them  is  the  educa¬
tion  and  not  the  fablings  ? — 17ay,  is  he  not  in  the  posi¬
tion  of  one  who  assents  to  doctrine,  and  “  guides  to  the
right  path  ?”

Yet  am  I  content  if  I  may  carry  my  caprice,  and  then  be  quit
of  it,  without  any  debt  against  me  or  to  me.

And  of  God  I  seek  to  be  helped  in  what  I  purpose,
and  to  be  kept  from  that  which  makes  defective,  and  to
be  led  to  that  which  leads  aright. — Por  there  is  no
refuge  but  to  Him,  and  no  seeking  of  succour  but  in
TTim,  and  no  prospering  but  from  Him,  and  no  sanctuary
but  He. — On  Him  I  rely,  and  to  Him  I  have  recourse.


108


TKE  FIEST  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED  ‘‘OF  SAFA.”

In  this  Assembly  A1  Harith  arrives  in  the  town  of  San'a  in
Yemen,  in  great  poverty;  and,  while  seeking  relief,  encounters  a
crowd,  which  is  gathered  about  a  preacher.  The  discourse  is  a  stem
warning  against  self-indulgence,  and  an  exhortation  to  repentance.
Harith,  wishing  to  learn  who  the  preacher  is,  follows  him  to  a  cave,
and  there  finds  him  enjoying  himself  with  good  food,  and  even  with
wine.  He  begins  to  rebuke  him,  but  the  preacher,  throwing  off  dis¬
guise,  extemporizes  some  lines,  confessing  that  his  preaching  was
only  a  device  to  obtain  charity.  Harith  asks  the  attendant  the  name
of  the  preacher,  and  is  told  that  he  is  Abu  Zayd,  of  Serfij.  This  As¬
sembly  is  placed  first  because  in  it  Harith  is  represented  as  un¬
acquainted  with  Abti  Zayd,  though  the  first  Assembly  composed  by
Hariri  is  said  to  be  that  called  AI  Haramiyeh,  which  is  placed  forty-
eighth  in  the  collection.

A1  HaritL,  son  of  Hammam,  related  : — ^When  I
mounted  tiie  Lump  of  exile,  and  misery  removed  me
from  my  fellows,  the  shocks  of  the  time  cast  me  to
San'a  of  Yemen. — And  I  entered  it  with  wallets  empty,
manifest  in  my  need ;  I  had  not  a  meal ;  I  found  not  in
my  sack  a  mouthful. — Then  began  I  to  traverse  its  ways
like  one  crazed,  and  to  roam  in  its  depths  as  roams
the  thirsting  bird. — And  wherever  ranged  my  glances,
wherever  ran  my  goiags  at  morn  or  even, — I  sought
some  generous  man  before  whom  I  might  fray  the  tissue
of  my  countenance,  to  whom  I  might  be  open  concerning
my  need Or  one  well  bred,  whose  aspect  might  dispel
my  pain,  whose  anecdote  might  relieve  my  thirsting. —
Until  the  close  of  my  circxut  brought  me,  and  the  over¬
ture  of  courtesy  guided  me,  to  a  wide  place  of  concourse,
in  which  was  a  throng  and  a  wailing. — Then  I  entered
the  thicket  of  the  crowd  to  exiplore  what  was  drawing
forth  tears. — And  I  saw  in  the  middle  of  the  ring  a


FIRST  ASSEMBLY.


109


person  slender  of  make ; — Upon  Mm  was  the  equipment
of  pilgrimage,  and  lie  had  the  yoice  of  lamentation. —
And  he  was  studding  cadences  with  the  jewels  of
his  wording,  and  striking  hearings  with  the  reproofs
of  his  admonition. — And  now  the  medley  of  the  crowds
had  surrounded  him,  as  the  halo  surrounds  the  moon,  or
the  shell  the  fruit. — So  I  crept  towards  him,  that  I
might  catch  of  his  profitable  sayings,  and  gather  up  of
his  gems. — ^And  I  heard  him  say,  as  he  coursed  along
in  his  career,  and  the  throat  of  Ms  improvisation  made
utterance : —  '

0  thou  reckless  in  petulance,  trailing  the  garment  of
vanity !  0  thou  headstrong  in  follies,  turning  aside  to

idle  tales ! — How  long  wilt  thou  persevere  in  thine
error,  and  eat  sweetly  of  the  pasture  of  thy  wrong  ? —
How  far  wilt  thou  be  extreme  in  thy  pride,  and  not
abstain  from  thy  wantoimess  ? — Thou  provokest  by  thy
rebellion  the  Master  of  thy  forelock ;  in  the  foulness  of
thy  behaving  thou  goest  boldly  against  the  Knower  of
thy  secret. — Thou  hidest  thyself  from  thy  neighbour,
but  thou  art  in  the  sight  of  thy  Watcher ;  thou  conceal-
est  from  thy  slave,  but  no  Mdden  thing  is  hidden  from
thy  Euler. — Thinkest  thou  that  thy  state  will  profit  thee
when  thy  departure  draweth  near  ?  or  that  thy  wealth
will  deliver  thee  when  thy  deeds  destroy  thee  ?  or  that
thy  repentance  will  sufdce  for  thee  when  thy  foot  slip-
peth?  or  that  thy  kindred  will  lean  to  thee  in  the
day  that  thy  judgment  place  gathereth  thee? — How
is  it  thou  hast  not  walked  in  the  high-road  of  guidance,
and  hastened  the  treatment  of  thy  disease,  and  blunted
the  edge  of  thine  iniquity,  and  restrained  thyself — thy
chief  enemy?  Is  not  death  thy  doom?  What  then


110


FIRST  ASSEMBLY.


is  thy  preparation?  Is  not  grey  hair  thy  -warning?
What  then  is  thy  excuse  ?  And  in  the  graye’s  niche
thy  sleeping  place  ?  What  dost  thou  say  ?  And  to
Grod  thy  going  ?  and  who  shall  be  thy  defender  ? — Oft
hath  the  time  awakened  thee,  hut  thou  hast  set  thyself
to  slumber;  and  admonition  hath  dra-wn  thee,  but  thou
hast  strained  against  it ;  and  warnings  have  been  mani¬
fest  to  thee,  but  thou  hast  made  thyself  blind ;  and
truth  hath  been  established  to  thee,  but  thou  hast  dis¬
puted  it ;  and  death  hath  hid  thee  remember,  but  thou
hast  sought  to  forget ;  and  it  hath  been  in  thy  power
to  impart  of  good,  but  thou  hast  not  imparted. — Thou
preferrest  money  which  thou  mayest  hoard  before  piety
which  thou  mayest  keep  in  mind :  thou  choosest  a  castle
thou  mayest  rear  rather  than  bounty  thou  mayest  con¬
fer. — Thou  inclinest  from  the  guide  from  whom  thou
mightest  get  guidance,  to  the  pelf  thou  mayest  gain  as  a
gift ;  thou  lettest  the  love  of  the  raiment  thou  covetest
overcome  the  recompence  thou  mightest  earn. — ^The
rubies  of  gifts  cling  to  thy  heart  more  than  the  seasons
of  prayer ;  and  the  heightening  of  dowries  is  preferred
with  thee  to  continuance  in  almsgivings. — The  dishes
of  many  meats  are  more  desired  of  thee  than  the  leaves
of  doctrines :  the  jesting  of  comrades  is  more  cheerful  to
thee  than  the  reading  of  the  Koran. — Thou  commandest
to  righteousness,  but  violatest  its  sanctuary :  thou  for-
biddest  from  deceit,  but  refrainest  not  thyself :  thou
turnest  men  from  oppression,  and  then  thou  drawest  near
to  it ;  thou  fearest  mankind,  but  God  is  more  worthy
that  thou  shouldest  fear  him.  Then  he  recited —

,  Woe  to  him  who  seeks  the  world,  and  turns  to  it  his  careering  :

And  recovers  not  from  his  greediness  for  it,  and  the  excess  of  his
love.


FIRST  ASSFMBLT.


Ill


Oh.,  if  he  -were  wise,  but  a  drop  of  what  he  seeks  would  coutent
him.

Then  he  laid  his  dust,  and  let  his  spittle  subside  ;  and
put  his  bottle  on  his  arm,  and  his  staff  under  his  arm-
pit. — ^And  vhen  the  company  gazed  on  his  uprising,
and  saw  that  he  equipped  himseK  to  move  away  from  the
midst — Each  of  them  put  his  hand  into  his  bosom,  and
filled  for  him  a  bucket  from  his  stream ; — And  said,
“IJse  this  for  thy  spending,  or  divide  it  among  thy
friends.” — And  he  received  it  with  half-closed  eyes,  and
turned  away  from  them,  giving  thanks ; — ^And  began  to
take  leave  of  whoever  would  escort  him,  that  his  road
might  be  hidden  from  them;  and  to  dismiss  whoever
would  follow  him,  that  his  dwelling  might  be  un¬
known.— Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hamman :  Now  I
went  after  him,  concealing  from  him  my  person ;  and
followed  on  his  track  from  where  he  could  not  see  me ; —
TJntil  he  came  to  a  cave,  and  slipped  into  it  suddenly. —
So  I  waited  for  him  till  he  put  off  his  sandals  and
washed  his  feet,  and  then  I  ran  in  upon  him; — And
found  him  sitting  opposite  an  attendant,  at  some  white
bread  and  a  roast  kid,  and  over  against  them  was  a
jar  of  date  wine. — And  I  said  to  him,  “Sirrah,  was
that  thy  story,  and  is  this  thy  reality  — But  he  puffed
the  puff  of  .heat  and  went  near  to  burst  with  rage ;  and
ceased  not  to  stare  at  me  till  I  thought  he  would  leap
upon  me. — But  when  his  fire  was  allayed,  and  his  flame
hid  itself,  he  recited  : —

I  don  the  black  robe  to  seek  my  meal,  and  I  fix  my  book  in  the
hardest  prey  :

And  of  my  preaching  I  make  a  noose,  and.  steal  with  it  against  the
chaser  and  the  chased.

Fortune  has  forced  me  to  make  way  even  to  the  lion  of  the  thicket
by  the  subtlety  of  my  beguiling.


112


SECOm  ASSEMBLY.


Yet  do  I  not  fear  its  cliange,  nor  does  my  loin  quiver  at  it :

Nor  does  a  covetous  mind  lead  me  to  water  at  any  well  that  will
soil  my  honour.

Now  if  Fortune  were  just  in  its  decree  it  would  not  empower  the
worthless  with  authority.

Tlien  lie  said  to  me,  Come  and  eat ;  or,  if  tlion  wilt,
rise  and  tell.’’ — But  I  turned  to  his  attendant,  and  said,

I  conjure  thee,  by  Him  through  whom  harm  is  depre¬
cated,  that  thou  tell  me  who  is  this.” — He  said,  This  is
Abu  Zayd,  of  Seruj,  the  Light  of  Foreigners,  the  Crown
of  the  Learned.” — Then  I  turned  hack  to  whence  I  came,
and  was  extreme  in  wonder  at  what  I  saw.


THE  SECOND  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
OF  HOLWAN.”

In  this  Assembly  the  author  displays  more  than  his  usual  rhetor¬
ical  subtlety,  and  while  there  is  none  more  admired  by  those  whose
taste  has  been  formed  on  Eastern  models,  there  is  none  which
appears  more  extravagant  to  the  European  student.  Alliterations,
verbal  caprices,  far-fetched:  expressions,  and  the  puerile  conceits
which  were  usual  among  poets  of  the  age,  so  abound,  that  we  may
almost  imagine  the  author  to  be  desirous  of  satirizing  what  he  pro¬
fesses  to  imitate.  The  subject  is  as  follows  : — Harith  in  his  passion
for  the  society  of  literary  persons  makes  his  way  to  Holwan,  a  town
in  Irak,  on  the  mountains  east  of  Bagdad,  and  a  resort  of  the  higher
classes  from  the  heat  of  the  capital.  Here  he  meets  with  Abh  Zayd,
who  is  pursuing  his  calling  of  improvisatore  and  mendicant  under
various  disguises,  and  enjoys  for  a  long  time  his  company  and  liter¬
ary  guidance.  Abu  Zayd,  however,  disappears,  and  Harith  returns
to  his  native  place,  Basra,  where  after  a  time  he  again  meets  Abti
Zayd  in  the  public  library,  among  a  crowd  of  dilettanti  who  are
discussing  the  betiuties  of  the  popular  poets.  The  admiration  of
one  is  especially  excited  by  a  line  in  which  the  teeth  of  a  lady  are
compared  to  pearls  and  hailstones,  and  the  white  petals  of  a  flower  ;
and  Abh  Zayd  instantly  produces  a  number  of  comparisons  in  the
same  style,  which  give  him  a  high  place  in  the  esteem  of  those
present,  when  they  are  assured  that  he  is  really  the  author  of  them.


SECOJSTD  ASSEMBLY.


113


They  reward  him,  and  the  Assembly  concludes  by  his  recitiag  to
Harith,  who  had  recognised  him,  some  lines  on  the  fickleness  of
foxtime.

A1  Haxith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  Ever  since  my
amnlets  were  doffed  and  my  turbans  were  donned,  I  was
eager  to  visit  learning’s  seat  and  to  jade  to  it  tlie  camels
of  seeking. — ^Tbat  through  it  I  might  cleave  to  what
would  he  my  ornament  among  men,  my  rain-cloud  in
thirst. — ^And  through  the  excess  of  my  longing  to  kindle
at  it,  and  my  desire  to  robe  myself  in  its  raiment, — I
discussed  with  every  one,  great  and  small,  and  sought
my  draught  both  of  the  rain-flood  and  the  dew,  and
solaced  myself  with  hope  and  desire. — ^Now  when  I  de¬
scended  at  Holwan,  and  had  already  tried  the  brethren,
and  tested  their  values,  and  proved  what  was  worthless
or  fine  foimd  there  Abu  Zayd  of  Seruj,  shifting
among  the  varieties  of  pedigree,  beating  about  in  various
courses  of  gain-getting ; — Eor  at  one  time  he  claimed  to
be  of  the  race  of  Sasan,  and  at  another  he  made  himself
kin  to  the  princes  of  Ghassan ;  and  now  he  salKed  forth
in  the  vesture  of  poets ;  and  anon  he  put  on  the  pride  of
nobles. — And  yet  with  all  this  diversifying  of  his  con¬
dition,  and  this  display  of  contradiction, — He  is  adorned
with  grace  and  information,  and  courtesy  and  knowledge,
and  astonishing  eloquence,  and  obedient  improvisation,
and  excelling  accomplishments,  and  a  foot  that  mounts
the  hills  of  the  sciences. — ^Now,  through  his  goodly  at¬
tainments  he  is  associated  with  in  spite  of  his  faults ;  and
through  the  largeness  of  his  information  there  is  a  fond¬
ness  for  the  sight  of  him ;  and  through  the  blandishment
of  his  fair-speaking  men  are  loath  to  oppose  him;  and
through  the  sweetness  of  Ms  address  he  is  helped  to  his


8


114


SECOND  ASSEMBLY.


desire. — Then.  I  clung  to  his  skirts  for  the  sake  of  his
peculiar  accomplishments,  and  valued  highly  his  affec¬
tion  by  reason  of  his  precious  qualities.

Witli  Hm  I  wijped  away  my  cares,  and  belield  my  fortune  dis¬
played  to  me,  open  of  face,  gleaming  with  light.

I  looked  upon  his  nearness  to  me  as  kinship,  his  abiding  as
wealth,  his  aspect  as  a  full  draught,  his  life  as  rain.

Thus  we  remained  a  long  season ;  he  produced  for  me
daily  some  pleasantness,  and  drove  some  doubt  from  my
heart, — Until  the  hand  of  want  mixed  for  him  the  cup'
of  parting,  and  the  lack  of  a  meal  urged  him  to  abandon
Irak ; — ^And  the  failures  of  supply  cast  him  into  desert
regions,  and  the  waving  of  the  banner  of  distress  ranged
him  in  the  line  of  travellers ; — And  he  sharpened  for
departure  the  edge  of  determination,  and  journeyed
away,  drawing  my  heart  -with  his  leading  cord.

After  he  was  goue  none  pleased  me  who  kept  by  me,  none  filled
me  with  affection  by  urging  me  to  intimacy.

Since  he  strayed  away  none  has  appeared  to  me  his  like  in  excel¬
lence  ;  no  friend  has  gotten  the  equal  of  his  qualities.

So  he  was  hidden  from  me  a  season :  I  knew  not  his
lair ;  I  found  none  to  tell  of  him  j — But  when  I  had
returned  from  my  wandering  to  the  place  where  my
branch  had  sprouted, — I  was  once  present  iu  the  town
library,  which  is  the  council-hall  of  scholars,  the  meet¬
ing  place  of  residents  and  strangers : — Then  there  entered
one  with  a  thick  beard  and  a  squalid  aspect, — And  he
saluted  those  who  sat,  and  took  seat  in  the  last  rows  of
the  people. — Then  began  he  to  produce  what  was  iu  his
wallet,  and  to  astonish  those  present  by  the  sagacity  of
his  judgment, — ^And  he  said  to  the  man  who  was  next
him,  “  What  is  the  book  into  which  thou  lookest?” — He
said,  “  The  poems  of  Abu  ‘Obadeh ;  him  of  whose  ex-


SECONB  ASSEMBLY.


115


cellence  men  bear  witness.” — He  said,  “In  what  thou
hast  seen  hast  thou  hit  on  any  fine  thing  which  thou
admirest  ?” — He  said,  “  Yes ;  the  line

As  thougli  she  smiled  from  strung  pearls  or  hailstones,  or  camo¬
mile  flowers.

For  it  is  original  in  the  use  of  similitude  which  it  con-
taius.” — He  said  to  him,  “Here  is  a  wonder  !  here  is  a
lack  of  taste, — Sir,  thou  hast  taken  for  fat  what  is  only
swollen,  thou  hast  blown  on  that  which  is  no  fuel: —
Where  art  thou  in  comparison  with  the  rare  verse  which
unites  the  similitudes  of  the  teeth  ?

My  life  a  ransom  for  those  teeth  whose  beauty  charms,  and  which
a  purity  adorns  sufficing  thee  for  all  other.

She  parts  her  lips  from  fresh  pearls,  and  from  hail-stones,  and
from  camomile  flowers,  and  from  the  palm  shoot,  and  from  bubbles.

Then  each  one  approved  the  couplet  and  admired
it,  and  bade  him  repeat  it  and  dictate  it. — And  he  was
asked,  “  Whose  is  this  verse,  and  is  its  author  living
or  dead  ?” — He  said,  “  By  Allah,  Eight  is  most  worthy
to  be  followed,  and  truth  is  most  fitting  to  be  listened
to : — ^Know,  Mends,  that  it  is  his  who  talks  with  you  to¬
day.” — Said  A1  Harith :  How  it  was  as  though  the
company  doubted  of  his  fathering,  and  were  unwilling  to
give  credit  to  his  claim. — And  he  perceived  what  had
fallen  into  their  thoughts,  and  was  aware  of  their  inward
unbelief; — And  was  afraid  that  blame  might  chance  to
him,  or  ill-fame  reach  him; — So  he  quoted  from  the
Koran,  “  Some  suspicions  are  a  sin.” — Then  he  said,  “  0
ye  reciters  of  verse,  physicians  of  sickly  phrase  ! — Truly
the  purity  of  the  gem  is  shown  by  the  testing,  and
the  hand  of  truth  rends  the  cloak  of  doubt. — How  it  was
said  aforetime  that  by  trial  is  a  man  honoured  or  eoU'


116


SECOm)  ASSEMBLY.  '


temned. — So  come!  I  now  expose  my  Mdden  store  to
the  proving,  I  offer  my  saddle-hag  for  comparison.” —
Then  hastened  one  who  was  there  and  said  :  “I  know  a
verse  such  that  there  is  no  weaving  on  its  beam,  such
that  no  genius  can  supply  one  after  its  image. — ITow,  if
thou  wish  to  draw  our  hearts  to  thee,  compose  after  this
style : —

Slie  rained  pearls  from  the  daffodil,  and  watered  the  rose,  and  bit
upon  the  'unn§,b  with  hailstone.

And  it  was  but  the  glance  of  an  eye,  or  less,  before  he
recited  rarely  :r—

I  asked  her  when  she  met  me  to  put  off  her  crimson  veil,  and  to
endow  my  hearing  with  the  sweetest  of  tidings :

And  she  removed  the  ruddy  light  which  covered  the  brightness
of  her  moon,  and  she  dropped  pearls  from  a  perfumed  ring.

Then  all  present  were  astonished  at  his  readiness,  and
acknowledged  his  honesty. — ^And  when  he  perceived  that
they  approved  his  diction,  and  were  hastening  into  the
path  of  honouring  him, — He  looked  down  the  twinkling
of  an  eye ;  then  he  said,  “  Here  are  two  other  verses  for
you  and  recited  : —

She  came  on  the  day  when  departure  afSicted,  in  black  robes,
biting  her  fingers  like  one  regretful,  confounded  :

And  night  lowered  on  her  morn,  and  a  branch  supported  them
both,  and  she  bit  into  crystal  with  pearls.

Then  did  the  company  set  high  his  value,  and  deem
that  his  steady  rain  was  a  plenteous  one  ; — And  they
made  pleasant  their  converse  with  him,  and  gave  bim
goodly  clothing. — Said  the  teller  of  this  story:  How
when  I  saw  the  blazing  of  his  firebrand,  and  the  gleam
of  his  unveiled  brightness,  I  fixed  a  long  look  to  guess
at  him,  and  made  my  eye  to  stray  over  his  countenance.
— And  lo  I  he  was  our  Shaykh  of  Seruj  ;  but  now  his


TEIRB  ASSEMBLY.


117


dark  niglit  was  moon-lit. — Tken  I  congratulated  myself
on  his  coming  thither,  and  hastened  to  kiss  his  hand  ; —
And  said  to  him,  ‘‘What  has  changed  thy  appearance,
so  that  I  could  not  recognise  thee  ?  what  has  made  thy
heard  gray,  so  that  I  knew  not  thy  countenance  ?” —
And  he  indited  and  said  : —

The  stroke  of  calamities  makes  iis  hoary,  and  fortune  to  men  is  a
changer.

If  it  yields  to-day  to  any,  to-morrow  it  overcomes  him.

•  Trust  not  the  gleam  of  its  lightning,  for  it  is  a  deceitful  gleam.

But  be  patient  if  it  hounds  calamities  against  thee,  and  drives  them
on.

For  there  is  no  disgrace  on  the,  pure  gold  when  it  is  turned  about
in  the  fire.

Then  he  rose  and  departed  from  his  place,  and  carried
away  our  hearts  with  him.


THE  THIED  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
KAYLAH.’^

Harith  is  in  a  circle  of  scholars,  when  a  lame  man  makes  his
appearance,  and  after  saluting  them  describes  his  former  affluence
and  present  penury  in  a  very  poetical  and  figurative  style.  Harith
perceiving  liis  genius,  and  pitying  his  distress,  offers  him  a  denar,  on
condition  that  he  will  improvise  some  lines  in  praise  of  it.  This  the
lame  man  at  once  does,  and  on  Harith  offering  him  another  denar  on
condition  of  his  blaming  it,  he  recites  another  composition  in  dis¬
praise  of  money.  Harith  then  recognizes  in  the  lame  man  Abti
Zayd,  and  rebukes  him  for  his  imposture.  Abti  Zayd  defends  him¬
self  in  some  new  verses.  The  opening  address  of  Abti  Zayd  is  in
imitation  of  a  style  said  to  be  common  among  the  Arabs  of  the  desert.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related  :  I  was  set  with
some  comrades  in  a  company  wherein  he  that  made
appeal  was  never  bootless,  and  the  rubbing  of  the  fire-
shafts  never  failed,  and  the  flame  of  contention  never


118


miRB  ASSEMBLY.


blazed. — And  wliile  we  were  catching  from  each  other
the  ones  of  recitations,  and  betaking  onrselves  to  novel¬
ties  of  anecdote, — Behold  there  stood  by  ns  one  on
whom  was  a  worn  garment,  and  in  whose  walk  was  a
limp.  —And  he  said,  0  ye  best  of  treasures,  joys  of  your
kindred:  Health  to  you  this  morning;  may  ye  enjoy
your  morning  draught. — Look  on  one  who  was  erewhile
master  of  guest-room  and  largess,  wealth  and  bounty,
land  and  villages,  dishes  and  feasting. — But  the  frowning
of  calamities  ceased  not  from  him,  and  the  warrings  of
sorrows,  and  the  flre-flakes  of  the  malice  of  the  envious,
and  the  succession  of  dark  befallings, — Until  the  court
was  empty,  and  the  yard  was  bare,  and  the  fountain
sank,  and  the  dwelling  was  desolate,  and  the  haU  was
void,  and  the  chamber  stone-strewed. — And  fortune
shifted  so  that  the  household  wailed;  and  the  stalls
were  vacant,  so  that  the  rival  had  compassion ;  and  the
cattle  and  the  goods  they  perished,  so  that  the  envious
and  malignant  pitied. — And  to  such  a  pass  did  we  come,
through  assailing  fortune  and  prostrating  need, — That
we  were  shod  with  soreness,  and  fed  on  choking,  and
filled  our  bellies  with  ache,  and  wrapped  our  entrails
upon  hunger,  and  anointed  our  eyes  with  watching,  and
made  pits  our  home,  and  deemed  thorns  a  smooth  bed,
and  came  to  forget  our  saddles,  and  thought  destroying
death  to  be  sweet,  and  the  ordained  day  to  be  tardy. —
And  now  is  there  any  one  generous  to  heal,  bountiful
to  bestow? — For  by  Him  who  made  me  to  spring  from
Kaylah,  surely  I  am  now  a  brother  of  penury,  I  have
not  a  nights’  victual.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam  :  How  I  pitied  his
distresses,  and  inclined  to  the  eliciting  of  his  rhymes. —


TRIRB  ASSEMBLY.


119


So  I  drew  forth  for  him  a  denar,  and  said  to  him,  to
prove  him,  “  If  then  praise  it  in  verse  it  is  thine,  full
surely.” — And  he  hetook  himself  to  recite  on  the  spot,
borrowing  nothing : —

How  noble  is  that  yellow  one,  whose  yellowness  is  pure,

Which  traverses  the  regions,  and  whose  journeying  is  afar.

Told  abroad  are  its  fame  and  repute :

Its  hues  are  set  as  the  secret  sign  of  wealth  ;

Its  march  is  coupled  with  the  success  of  endeavours ;

•  Its  bright  look  is  loved  by  mankind  ;

As  though  its  ore  had  been  molten  of  their  hearts.

By  its  aid  whoever  has  gotten  it  in  his  purse  assails  boldly.

Though  kindred  be  perished,  or  tardy  to  help.

Oh  charming  are  its  purity  and  brightness ;

Charming  are  its  sufficiency  and  help.

How  many  a  ruler  is  there  whose  rule  has  been  perfected  by  it  1
How  many  a  sumptuous  one  is  there  whose  grief,  but  for  it,  would
be  endless !

How  many  a  host  of  cares  has  one  charge  of  it  put  to  flight  1
How  many  a  full  moon  has  a  sum  of  it  brought  down !

How  many  a  one  burning  with  rage,  whose  coal  is  flaming,

Has  it  been  secretly  whispered  to,  and  then  his  anger  has  softened.
How  many  a  prisoner,  whom  his  kin  had  yielded.

Has  it  delivered,  so  that  his  gladness  has  been  unmingled,

Now  by  the  Truth  of  the  Lord  whose  creation  brought  it  forth,

Were  it  not  for  His  fear,  I  should  say  its  power  is  supreme.

Tlien  lie  stretched  forth  his  hand  after  his  recitation,
and  said,  The  hononrahle  man  performs  what  he
promises,  and  the  rain-clond  ponrs  if  it  has  thnndered.’’
— rSo  I  threw  him  the  denar,  and  said,  Take  it ;  no
grndging  goes  with  it.’’ — And  he  pnt  it  in  his  month
and  said,  ^^God  bless  it.” — Then  he  girt  up  his  skirts
for  departure,  after  that  he  had  paid  his  thanks. — But
there  arose  in  me,  through  his  pleasantry,  a  giddiness  of
desire  which  made  me  ready  to  incur  indebtedness.— So
I  bared  another  denar,  and  said,  ^^Does  it  suit  thee  to


120


TEim  ASSEMBLY.


blame  this,  and  then  gather  it?” — And  he  recited  ira-
promptn,  and  sang  with  speed  : —

Euin  on  it  for  a  deceiver  and  insincere,

The  yellow  one  with,  two  faces  like  a  hypocrite  I

It  shows  forth  with  two  qualities  to  the  eye  of  him  that  looks  on  it,

The  adornment  of  the  loved  one,  the  colour  of  the  lover.

Affection  for  it,  think  they  who  judge  truly,

Tempts  men  to  commit  that  which  shall  anger  their  Maker.

But  for  it  no  thief’s  right  hand  were  cut  off ;

Nor  would  tyranny  he  displayed  by  the  impious  ;

Nor  would  the  niggard  shrink  from  the  night-farer ;

Nor  would  the  delayed  claimant  mourn  the  delay  of  him  that  with¬
holds  ;

Nor  would  men  call  to  God  from  the  envious  who  casts  at  them.
Moreover,  the  worst  quality  that  it  possesses
Is  that  it  helps  thee  not  in  straits.

Save  by  fleeing  from  thee  like  a  runaway  slave.

Well  done  he  who  casts  it  away  from  a  hill-top,

And  who,  when  it  whispers  to  him  with  the  whispering  of  a  lover,
Says  to  it  in  the  words  of  the  truth-speaking,  the  veracious,

I  have  no  mind  for  intimacy  with  thee, — ^begone  !  ”

Then  said  I  to  Mm,  “How  abundant  is  tby  sbower!”
He  said,  “  Agreement  binds  strongest,” — So  I  tossed
Mm  tbe  second  denar  and  said,  “  Consecrate  them  both
with  tbe  Twice-read  Cbapter.” — He  cast  it  into  Ms  month
and  joined  it  with  its  twin, — ^And  turned  away  blessing
Ms  morning’s  walk,  praising  tbe  assembly  and  its  bormty.
— Said  AI  Haritb,  son  of  Hammam:  How  my  heart
wMspered  me  that  be  was  Abb  Zayd,  and  that  bis  going
lame  was  for  a  trick ; — So  I  called  Mm  back  and  said  to
Mm,  “Thou  art  recognised  by  tby  eloquence,  so  straighten
tby  walk.” — ^He  said,  “  If  thou  be  tbe  son  of  Hammam,
be  thou  greeted  with  honour  and  live  long  among  tbe
honourable.” — said,  “I  am  Haritb;  but  what  is  tby
condition  amid  all  tby  fortunes.” — He  said,  “  I  change
between  two  conditions,  distress  and  ease;  and  I  veer


FO  URTK  ASSEMBL  T.


121


with,  two  winds,  the  tempest  and  the  breeze.” — I  said,
“  And  how  hast  thou  pretended  lameness  ?  the  like  of
thee  plays  not  buffoon.” — ^Then  his  cheerfulness,  which
had  shone  forth,  waned;  but  he  recited  as  he  moved
away : —

I  have  feigned  to  be  lame,  not  from  love  of  lameness,  but  that
I  may  knock  at  the  gate  of  relief.

Por  my  cord  is  thrown  on  my  neck,  and  I  go  as  one  who  ranges
freely.

Now  if  men  blame  me  I  say,  Excuse  me :  sure  there  is  no  guilt
on  the  lame.”


THE  FOUETH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
^^OF  DAMIETTA.’’

Harith  is  journeying  in  a  caravan  to  Damietta,  and  during  one  of
the  night-halts  he  hears  two  men  conversing  on  duty  towards  a
neighbour.  The  younger  being  asked  for  his  opinion  replies  in
a  spirit  of  charity  and  generosity,  upon  which  the  other  rebukes
him,  and  sets  forth  the  fitting  conduct  of  a  man  to  his  neighbour
in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  selfishness  and  worldly  wisdom.
These  addresses,  especially  that  of  the  elder  man,  are  expressed  in  a
highly  rhetorical  diction,  which  captivates  the  literary  Harith,  and
the  next  morning  he  looks  for  them,  and  discovers  them  to  be  Abfi
Zayd  and  his  son.  He  invites  them  to  his  own  quarters,  introduces
them  to  his  friends,  and  procures  for  them  valuable  presents.  Abil
Zayd  then  asks  permission  to  go  to  a  neighbouring  village  and  take
a  bath,  promising  to  return  speedily.  They  consent,  and  he  goes  off
with  his  son.  After  waiting  the  greater  paii:  of  the  day  they  find
that  he  has  deceived  them,  and  prepare  to  continue  their  journey ;
Harith,  when  making  ready  his  camel,  finds  some  lines  written  on  the
saddle,  which  allude  to  a  precept  in  the  Koran  in  favour  of  separa¬
ting  after  q,  meal.  The  plays  on  words  in  this  Assembly  are  exceed¬
ingly  ingenious  and  elaborate,  and  the  opening  description  has  much
poetical  beauty.

A1  Haritb,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  journeyed  to
Damietta  in  a  year  of  much  conoiag  and  going,— And  in


122


FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.


those  days  was  I  glanced  after  for  my  affluence,  desired
in  friendship : — I  trained  the  bordered  robes  of  wealth
and  looked  upon  the  features  of  joy. — And  I  was  travel¬
ling  with  companions  who  had  broken  the  staff  of  dissen¬
sion,  who  were  suckled  on  the  milk-fLows  of  concord, — So
that  they  showed  like  the  teeth  of  a  comb  in  uniformity,
and  like  one  soul  in  agreement  of  desires; — But  we
coursed  on  withal  apace,  and  not  one  of  us  but  had
saddled  a  fleet  she-camel; — And  if  we  alighted  at  a  ,
station  or  went  aside  to  a  spring,  we  snatched  the  halt
and  lengthened  not  the  staying. '

Now  it  happened  that  we  were  urging  our  camels  on  a
night  youthful  in  prime,  raven-locked  of  complexion ; —
And  we  journeyed  until  the  night-season  had  put  off  its
prime,  and  the  morning  had  wiped  away  the  dye  of
the  dark; — But  when  we  wearied  of  the  march  and
inclined  to  drowsiness,  we  came  upon  a  ground  with
dew-moistened  hillocks,  and  a  faint  east  breeze ; — ^And
we  chose  it  as  a  resting-place  for  the  white  camels,  an
abode  for  the  night-halt. — ^Now  when  the  caravan  had
descended  there,  and  the  groan  and  the  roar  of  the  beasts
were  still, — I  heard  a  loud-voiced  man  say  to  his  talk-
fellow  in  the  camp,  “"What  is  the  rule  of  thy  conduct
with  thy  people  and  neighbours  ?” — The  other  answered,

I  am  duteous  to  my  neighbour  though  he  wrong  me;
and  give  my  fellowship  even  to  the  violent ;  and  bear
with  a  partner  though  he  disorder  my  affairs;  and
love  my  friend  even  though  he  drench  me  with  a  tepid
draught ;  and  prefer  my  well-wisher  above  my  brother ;
and  fulfil  to  my  comrade  even  though  he  requite  me  not
with  a  tenth ;  and  think  little  of  much  if  it  be  for  my
guest;  and  whelm  my  companion  with  my  kindness;


FO  UR  TE  ASSFMBL  Y.


123


and  put  my  talk-fellow  in  the  place  of  my  prince ;  and
kold  my  intimate  to  ke  as  my  chief ;  and  commit  my
gifts  to  my  acquaintance;  and  confer  my  comforts  on
my  associate ;  and  soften  my  speech  to  him  that  hates
me;  and  continue  to  ask  after  him  that  disregards  me;
and  am  pleased  with  hut  the  crumhs  of  my  due ;  and  am
content  with  hut  the  least  portion  of  my  reward;  and
complain  not  of  wrong  even  when  I  am  wronged ;  and
revenge  not,  even  though  a  viper  sting  me.

Then  said  his  companion  to  him,  Alas !  my  hoy,  only
he  who  clings  should  he  clung  to  ;  only  he  who  is
valuable  should  he  prized. — ^As  for  me  I  give  only  to
him  who  will  requite ;  I  distinguish  not  the  insolent  hy
my  regard ;  nor  will  I  he  of  pure  affection  to  one  who
refuses  me  fair-dealing ;  nor  treat  as  a  brother  one  who
would  undo  my  tethering  rope ;  nor  aid  one  who  would
baulk  my  hopes ;  nor  care  for  one  who  would  cut  my
cords ;  nor  he  courteous  to  him  who  ignores  my  value  ;
nor  give  my  leading  rope  to  one  who  breaks  my  covenant ;
nor  he  free  of  my  love  to  my  adversaries ;  nor  lay  aside
my  menace  to  the  hostile ;  nor  plant  my  benefits  on  the
land  of  my  enemies ;  nor  he  willing  to  impart  to  him
who  rejoices  at  my  ills;  nor  show  my  regard  to  him
who  will  exult  at  my  death  ;  nor  favour  with  my  gifts
any  hut  my  friends ;  nor  call  to  the  curing  of  my  sick¬
ness  any  hut  those  who  love  me ;  nor  confer  my  friend¬
ship  on  him  who  will  not  stop  my  breach ;  nor  make  my
purpose  sincere  to  him  who  wishes  my  decease ;  nor  he
earnest  in  prayer  for  him  who  will  not  fill  my  wallet ;
nor  pour  out  my  praise  on  him  who  empties  my  jar. —
Tor  who  has  adjudged  that  I  should  he  lavish  and  thou
shouldest  hoard,  that  I  should  be  soft  and  thou  rough,  that


124


FOURTH  ASSEMBLY,


I  sL-Onld  melt  and  thou  freeze,  that  I  should  blaze  and  thou
smoulder  ? — No,  by  Allah,  but  let  us  balance  in  speech
as  coin,  and  match  in  deed  as  sandals. — That  each  to
each  we  may  be  safe  from  fraud  and  free  from  hatred. —
For  else,  why  should  I  give  thee  full  water  and  thou
stint  me  ?  why  should  I  bear  with  thee  and  thou  con¬
temn  me  ?  why  should  I  gain  for  thee  and  thou  wound
me  ?  why  should  I  advance  to  thee  and  thou  repel  me  ?
For  how  should  fair-dealing  be  attracted  by  injury  ?  how
can  the  sun  rise  clear  with  cloud  ? — And  when  did  love
follow  docilely  after '.wrong  ?  and  what  man  of  honour
consents  to  a  state  of  abasement  ? — For  excellently  said
thy  father : —

Whoso  attaches  his  affection  to  me,  I  repay  him  as  one  who
builds  on  his  foundation :

And  I  mete  to  a  friend  as  he  metes  to  me,  according  to  the  fullness
of  his  meting  or  its  defect.

I  make  him  not  a  loser !  for  the  worst  of  men  is  he  whose  to-day
falls  short  of  his  yesterday.

Whoever  seeks  fruit  of  me  gets  only  the  fruit  of  his  own  planting.

I  seek  not  to  defraud,  but  I  will  not  come  off  with  the  bargain  of
one  who  is  weak  in  his  reason.

I  hold  not  truth  binding  on  mo  towards  a  man  who  holds  it  not
binding  on  himself.

There  may  be  some  one  insincere  in  love  who  fancies  that  I
am  true  in  my  friendship  for  him,  while  he  is  false ;

And  knows  not  in  his  ignorance  that  I  pay  my  creditor  his  debt
after  its  kind.

Sunder,  with  the  sundering  of  hate,  from  one  who  would  make  thee
a  fool,  and  hold  him  as  one  entombed  in  his  grave.

And  towards  him  in  whose  intercourse  there"^  is  aught  doubtful
put  on  the  garb  of  one  who  shrinks  from  his  intimacy.

And  hope  not  for  affection  from  any  who  sees  that  thou  art  in
want  of  his  money.

Said  A1  Haritli,  son  of  Hammam :  Now,  when  I  had
gathered  what  passed  between  them,  I  longed  to  know
them  hi  person. — And  when  the  sun  shone  forth,  and


FO  TTRTE  ASSEMBL  Y.


125


robed  tbe  sky  -with  light,  I  ■went  forth  before  the  camels
had  risen,  and  with  an  earliness  beyond  the  earliness
of  the  crow, — And  began  to  follow  the  direction  of
that  night-voice,  and  to  examine  the  faces  with  a  search¬
ing  glance : — Until  I  caught  sight  of  Abti  Zayd  and  his
son  talking  together,  and  upon  them  were  two  worn
mantles. — ^Then  I  knew  that  they  were  my  two  talkers
of  the  night,  the  authors  of  my  recitation.—  So  I  ap¬
proached  them  as  one  enamoured  of  their  refinement,
pitying  their  shabbiness ; — ^And  offered  them  a  removal
to  my  lodging,  and  the  disposal  of  my  much  and  my
little  ; — And  began  to  tell  abroad  their  worth  among  the
travellers,  and  to  shake  for  them  the  fruited  branches; —
Until  they  were  whelmed  ■with  gifts,  and  taken  as
friends. — Now  we  were  in  a  night-camp,  whence  we
could  discern  the  build  of  the  villages,  and  spy  the  fires
of  hospitaKty. — And  when  Abu  Zayd  saw  that  his  purse
was  full,  and  his  distress  removed,  he  said  to  me,  “  Truly
my  body  is  dirty,  and  my  filth  has  caked : — "Wilt  thou
permit  me  to  go  to  a  village,  and  bathe,  and  fulfil  this
urgent  need  ?” — I  said,  “  If  thou  wilt ;  but  quick  1
return  I” — He  said,  “  Thou  shalt  find  me  appear  again
to  thee,  quicker  than  the  glancing  of  thine  eye.” — Then
he  coursed  a^way,  as  courses  the  good  steed  in  the  traia-
ing-ground,  and  said  to  his  son,  “  Haste  !  haste !  ” — And
we  imagined  qot  that  he  was  deceiving,  or  seeking  to
escape. — So  we  stayed  and  watched  for  him  as  men
watch  for  the  new  moons  of  feasts,  and  made  search
for  him  by  spies  and  scouts. — Until  the  sunlight  was
weak  with  age,  and  the  wasted  bank  of  the  day  had
nigh  crumbled  in. — Then,  when  the  term  of  waiting  had
been  prolonged,  and  the  sun  showed  in  faded  garb —


126


FIFTE  ASSEMBL  F.


I  said  to  my  companions,  “We  have  gone  to  the
extreme  in  delay,  and  have  been  long  in  the  setting
forth; — So  that  we  have  lost  time,  and  it  is  plain  that
the  man  was  lying. — Now,  therefore,  prepare  for  the
journey,  and  turn  not  aside  to  the  greenness  of  dung
heaps.” — Then  I  rose  to  equip  my  camel  and  lade  for  the
departure  ;  and  found  that  Abu  Zayd  had  written  on  the
pack  saddle : —

Oh  thou,  who  wast  to  me  an  arm  and  a  helper,  above  all
mankind !

Beckon  not  that  I  have  left  thee  through  impatience  or  ingra¬
titude  :

For  since  I  was  born  I  have  been  of  those  who  when  they  have
eaten  separate.

Said  A1  Harith :  “  Then  I  made  the  company  read  the
words  of  the  Koran  that  were  on  the  pack  saddle,  so  that
he  who  had  blamed  him  might  excuse  him. — ^And  they
admired  his  witticism,  but  commended  themselves  from
his  mischief. — Then  we  set  forth,  nor  could  we  learn
whose  company  he  had  gotten  in  our  place.


THE  FIFTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED  “OF  KUFA.”

The  following  Assembly,  remarkable  for  the  poetical  beauty  of  its
language,  and  the  delicacy  of  its  versification,  describes  an  adventure
in  which  Abfi  Zayd  obtains  a  sum  of  money  from  a  company  of
generous  scholars.  Harith  is  engaged  with  some  friends  in  a  night
conversation  at  Kufa,  one  of  the  chief  seats  of  Arabian  learning,
when  a  stranger  knocks  at  the  door,  and  addresses  the  inmates  in
verses  describuig  his  want  and  weariness,  his  excellent  disposition,
and  his  gratitude  for  the  favours  he  may  receive.  Struck  with
his  poetical  powers  the  company  admit  him,  and  give  him  a  supper.
The  lamp  being  brought,  Harith  discovers  that  the  guest  is  Abfi
Zayd,  and  informs  the  company  of  his  merits.  They  then  ask  him
for  a  story,  and  he  relates  that  he  had  that  evening  met  with  a  long


FIFTE  ASSEMBLY.


127


lost  son,  whom  he  would  he  glad  to  take  charge  of,  did  not  his
poverty  hinder  him.  As  ho  had  taken  care  to  mention  in  the
narrative  that  he  was  of  the  royal  race  of  Ghasstin,  the  company  aro
moved  by  his  misfortunes,  and  at  once  raise  a  large  sum  of  money  to
enable  him  to  support  his  boy.  Abu  Zayd  delights  them  with
his  conversation,  but  as  soon  as  daylight  appears  he  calls  away
Harith,  to  assist  him  in  cashing  the  cheques  or  orders  which  ho  had
received.  The  simple  Ilarith,  who  liad  been  delighted  with  the
verses  which  the  father  had  put  into  the  mouth  of  his  son,  desires  to
see  so  eloquent  a  youth;  upon  which  Abil  Zayd  laughs  heartily,
tells  his  friend,  in  some  ex(|uisitc  verses,  that  such  a  desire  is  the
following  of  a  mirage,  that  he,  Abu  Zayd,  had  neither  wife  nor  son,
and  that  the  story  was  only  a  trick  to  obtain  money.  lie  then
departs,  leaving  Harith  mortified  at  the  adventure.

A1  Harith,  sou  of  Hammam,  related :  I  was  convers¬
ing  at  Eufa,  in  a  night  whose  complexion  was  of  a  two¬
fold  hue,  whose  moon  was  as  an  amulet  of  silver — ^With
companions  who  had  been  nourished  on  the  millc  of
eloquence,  who  might  draw  the  train  of  oblivion  over
Sahban. — Each  was  a  man  to  remember  from,  and  not  to
guard  against;  each  was  one  whom  his  friend  would
incline  to,  and  not  avoid. — And  the  night  talk  fascinated
us  until  the  moon  had  sot,  and  the  watching  overcame
us. — How  when  night’s  xinmmgled  dark  had  spread
its  awning,  and  there  was  nought  but  nodding  among
us — Wo  heard  from  the  gate  the  faint  sound  of  a  way¬
farer,  rousing  the  dogs ;  then  followed  the  knock  of
one  bidding  to  open.— Wo  said,  “Who  is  it  that  comes
in  the  dark  night  Then  the  traveller  answered ; —

0  people  of  tho  TOansion,  bo  yo  guarded  from  ill  I
Meet  not  barm  as  long  as  yo  live  I
Lo  I  tlio  night  which  glooms  has  driven
To  yoxir  abode  ono  dishovellod,  dust  laden,

A  brother  of  journeying,  that  lias  boon  longthonod,  oxtoiulod,

Till  ho  has  bocomo  bont  and  yellow

Like  tho  new  moon  of  tho  horizon  when  it  smiles.


128


FIFTH  ASSEMBLY.


And  now  lie  approaches  your  court-yard,  begging  boldly,

And  repairs  to  you  before  ail  people  else.

To  seek  from  you  food  and  a  lodging.

Ye  have  in  him  a  guest  contented,  ingenuous.

One  pleased  with  all,  whether  sweet  or  bitter.

One  who  will  withdraw  from  you,  publishing  your  bounty.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  ifTow  "when  we  were
caught  by  the  sweetness  of  his  utterance,  and  knew
what  was  behind  his  Hghtning, — ^We  hastened  to  open
the  gate,  and  met  him  with  welcome ; — And  said  to  the  .
hoy  “Quick,  quick !  bring  what  is  ready  !” — Then  said
our  guest,  “  Now,  by  Him  who  has  set  me  down  at  your
abode,  I  will  not  roll  my  tongue  over  your  food, — ^Unless
ye  pledge  me  that  ye  will  not  make  me  a  burden,  that  ye
will  not,  for  my  sake,  task  yourselves  with  a  meal. — For
sometimes  a  morsel  aches  the  eater,  and  forbids  him
his  repasts. — And  the  worst  of  guests  is  he  who  imposes
trouble  and  annoys  his  host, — And  especially  with  a
harm  that  aflPeets  the  body  and  tends  to  sickness. — For,
by  that  proverb,  which  is  widely  current,  ‘The  best
suppers  are  those  that  are  clearly  seen.’ — Is  only  meant
that  supper-time  should  be  hastened,  and  eating  by
night,  which  dims  the  sight,  avoided. — Unless,  by  Allah,
the  fire  of  hunger  kindle  and  stand  in  the  way  of  sleep.”

’ — Said  A1  Harith :  Now  it  was  as  though  he  had  got
sight  of  our  desire,  and  so  had  shot  with  the  bow  of  our
conviction. — Accordingly  we  gratified  him  by  agreeing
to  the  condition,  and  commended  him  for  his  easy
temper. — And  when  the  boy  brought  what  was  to  be
had,  and  lighted  the  candle  in  the  midst  of  us,  I  looked
close  at  him,  and  lo  !  it  was  Abu  Zayd. — So  I  said  to  my
company,  “  Joy  to  you  of  the  guest  who  has  come !  Nay,
but  the  spoil  is  lightly  won  ! — For  if  the  moon  of  Suius


FIFTE  AS8EMBZY.


129


has  gone  do'wii,  truly  the  moon  of  poetry  has  risen: —
Or  if  the  full  moon  of  the  Lion  has  waned,  the  full  moon
of  eloquence  shines  forth.” — Then  ran  through  them  the
wine-glow  of  joy,  and  sleep  flew  away  from  their  eye-
corners. — And  they  refused  the  rest  which  they  had
purposed,  and  returned  to  the  spreading  out  of  plea¬
santry,  after  they  had  folded  it. — But  Ahu  Zayd  kept
intent  upon  plying  his  hands ;  however,  when  what  was
^before  him  might  he  removed — I  said  to  him,  “  Present
us  with  one  of  the  rare  stories  from  thy  night  talkings,
or  some  wonder  from  among  the  wonders  of  thy  jour¬
neys.” — ^He  said,  “  Of  wonders  I  have  met  with  sixch  as
no  seers  have  seen,  no  tellers  have  told. — ^But  among  the
most  wondrous  was  that  which  I  beheld  to-night,  a  little
before  my  visit  to  you  and  my  coming  to  your  gate.” —
Then  we  bade  him  tell  us  of  this  new  thing  which  he
had  seen  in  the  field  of  his  night-faring. — He  said,
Truly  the  hurlings  of  exile  have  thrown  me  to  this
land: — And  I  was  in  hunger  and  distress,  with  a  scrip
like  the  heart  of  the  mother  of  Moses. — ^How,  as  soon  as
the  dark  had  settled,  I  arose,  in  spite  of  all  my  footsore¬
ness,  to  seek  a  host  ,or  to  gain  a  loaf. — Then  the  driver
hunger,  and  Fate,  which  is  bye-named  tlie  Father  of
Wonders,  urged  mo  on,  till  I  stood  at  the  door  of  a
house,  and  spoke,  improvising : —

Hail  people  of  tins  dwelling,

May  ye  live  in  the  oaiao  of  a  plenteous  life  I

What  have  ye  for  a  son  of  the  road,  one  crushed  to  the  sand,

Worn  with  journeys,  stumbling  in  the  night-dark  night,

Aching  in  entrails,  which  inclose  nought  but  hunger  ?

Hor  two  days  ho  has  not  tasted  the  savour  of  a  meal  :

In  your  land  there  is  no  refuge  for  him.

And  already  the  van  of  the  drooping  darkness  has  gloomed ;

And  through  bewilderment  ho  is  in  restlessness.


9


130


FIFTH  ASSEMBLY.


2Tow  in  this  abode  is  there  any  one,  sweet  of  spring,

"Who  will  say  to  me,  “  Throw  away  thy  staff  and  enter  :

Eejoice  in  a  cheerful  welcome  and  a  ready  meal  ?  ”

Then,  came  forth  to  me  a  lad  in  a  tunic,  and  an¬
swered  : —

Now  by  the  sanctity  of  the  Sbaykb.  wbo  ordained  hospitality,

And  founded  the  House  of  Pilgrimage  in  the  Mother  of  cities.

We  have  nought  for  the  night-farer  when  he  visits  us
But  conversation  and  a  lodging  in  our  hall.

For  how  should  he  entertain  whom  hinders  from  sleepfulness
Hunger  which  peels  his  bones  when  it  assails  him  ?

Now  what  thinkest  thou  of  my  tale  ?  what  thinkest  thou  ?

I  said,  “  What  shall  I  do  with  an  empty  house,  and  a
host  the  ally  of  penury? — But  teU  me,  youth,  what  is
thy  name,  for  thy  understanding  has  charmed  me.” — He
said,  “  My  name  is  Zayd,  and  my  birth-place  Fayd :  and
I  came  to  this  city  yesterday  with  my  mother’s  kindred
of  the  Benu  'Abs.” — I  said  to  him,  “  Show  me  further,
so  mayest  thou  live  and  be  raised  when  thou  fullest !

He  said,  “My  mother  Barrah  told  me  (and  she  is  like
her  name,  ‘  pious  ’)  that  she  married  in  the  year  of  the
foray  on  Mawan  a  man  of  the  nobles  of  Seruj  and
Ghassan; — ^But  when  he  was  aware  of  her  pregnancy
(for  he  was  a  crafty  bird,  it  is  said)  he  made  off  from  her
by  stealth,  and.  away  he  has  stayed, — ^Hor  is  it  known
whether  he  is  alive  and  to  be  looked  for,  or  whether  he
has  been  laid  in  the  lonely  tomb.” — Said  Abh  Zayd,
“How  I  knew  by  sure  signs  that  he  was  my  child;  but
the  emptiness  of  my  hand  turned  me  from  making
known  to  him, — So  I  parted  from  him  with  heart
crushed  and  tears  unsealed. — ^And  now,  ye  men  of  un¬
derstanding,  have  ye  heard  aught  more  wondrous  than
this  wonder?” — We  said,  “Ho,  by  Him  who  has  know¬
ledge  of  the  Book.” — He  said,  “  Eecord  it  among  the


FIFTH  ASSEMBLY.


131


wonders  of  chance ;  bid  it  abide  for  ever  in  tbe  hearts
of  scrolls ;  for  nothing  like  it  has  been  told  abroad  in
the  world.” — Then  we  bade  bring  the  ink-flask,  and  its
snake-like  reeds,  and  we  wrote  the  story  elegantly  as  he
worded  it ;  —  After  which  we  sought  to  draw  from  him
his  wish  about  receiving  his  boy. — He  said,  “If  my
purse  were  heavy,  then  to  take  charge  of  my  son  would
he  light.” — We  said,  “  If  a  nisdb  of  money  would  suffice
thee,  we  will  collect  it  for  thee  at  once.” — He  said,
“  And  how  should  a  nisdh  not  content  me  ?  would  any
hut  a  madman  despise  such  a  sum  ?” — Said  the  narrator.
Then  each  of  us  undertook  a  share  of  it,  and  wrote  for
him  an  order  for  it. — Whereupon  he  gave  thanks  for  th(^
kindness,  and  exhausted  the  plenfeousncss  of  praise ;
until  we  thought  his  speech  long,  or  our  merit  little. —
And  then  he  spread  out  such  a  bright  mantle  of  talk  as
might  shame  the  stuff's  of  Yemen, — Until  the  dawn  ap¬
peared  and  the  light-bearing  morn  went  forth. — So  we
spent  a  night  of  which  the  mixed  hues  had  departed,
until  its  hind-locks  grew  gray  in  the  dawn  And  whose
lucky  stars  were  sovereign  until  its  branch  budded  into
light. — But  when  the  limb  of  the  sun  peeped  forth,  he
leaped  up  as  leaps  the  gazelle, — And  said,  “Eise  up,
that  we  may  take  hold  on  the  gifts  and  draw  payment
of  the  cheques : — For  the  clefts  of  my  heart  are  widen¬
ing  through  yearning  after  my  child.” — So  I  went  with
him,  hand  in  hand,  to  make  easy  his  success. — But  as
soon  as  he  had  secured  the  coin  in  his  pur^e  the  marks
of  his  joy  flashed  forth, — And  ho  said,  “  Be  thou  re¬
warded  for  the  steps  of  thy  feet !  be  God  my  substitute
towards  thee !  ” — I  said,  “  I  wish  to  follow  thee  that  I
may  behold  thy  noble  child,  and  speak  with  him  lhat  he


132


SIXTE  ASSEMBLY.


may  answer  eloquently.” — Then  looked  he  at  me  as  looks
the  deceiver  on  the  deceived,  and  laughed  till  his  eye-
halls  gushed  with  tears ;  and  he  recited : —

0  thou  who  didst  fancy  the  mirage  to  be  water  when  I  quoted
to  thee  what  I  quoted  !

I  thought  not  that  my  guile  would  be  hidden,  or  that  it  would  be
doubtful  what  I  meant.

By  Allah,  I  have  no  Barrah  for  a  spouse ;  I  have  no  son  from
whom  to  take  a  bye-name.

Nothing  is  mine  but  divers  kinds  of  magic,  in  which  I  am  original
and  copy  no  one  :

They  are  such  as  A1  Asma*i  tells  not  of  in  what  he  has  told ;  such
as  A1  Komayt  never  wove.

These  I  use  when  I  will  to  reach  whatever  my  hand  would  pluck  :

And  were  I  to  abandon  them,  changed  would  be  my  state,  nor
should  I  gain  what  I  now  gain.

So  allow  my  excuse ;  nay,  pardon  me,  if  I  have  done  wrong  or
crime.

Then  he  took  leave,  of  me  and  passed  away,  and
set  coals  of  the  ghada  in  my  breast.


THE  SIXTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED  »  OF  MEEA-
GHAH,”  OE  “THE  DIVEESIFIED.”

This  Assembly  is  the  first  of  a  remarkable  series  of  compositions ,
which,  though  they  may  be  set  down  by  Europeans  as  merely  exam¬
ples  of  laborious  trifling,  are  highly  esteemed  by  the  Orientals  as
works  of  ingenuity  and  scholarship,  and  have  found  in  every  suc¬
ceeding  age  numerous  imitators.  The  incident  is  that  Harith,
being  once  on  a  visit  to  Meraghah,  in  Azerbijan,  the  north-west
province  of  the  present  Persian  monarchy,  found  a  number  of
literary  men  lamenting  the  decline  of  learning,  and  depreciating
all  contemporary  authors  in  comparison  with  their  predecessors.
Sitting  in  a  humble  place  in  the  outskirts  of  the  company  was  an
elderly  man,  who  showed  by  his  glances  and  scornful  gestures  that
he  did  not  value  highly  the  opinions  of  these  critics.  When  they
paused  in  their  fault-finding  he  took  up  the  conversation,  and  declared
that  one  person,  at  least,  of  the  present  age  was  capable  of  rivalling


SIXTH  ASSHMBLT,


133


any  who  had  gone  before  in  scholarship  and  the  arts  of  composition.
He  is  asked  who  is  this  genius,  and  answers  that  it  is  himself.  The
company  are  sceptical,  but  as  the  stranger  persists  in  asserting  his
great  ability,  they  determine  to  test  him,  and  one  of  them  proposes
to  him  a  most  difficult  task.  He  tells  the  company  that  he  is  a  pro¬
fessional  writer  attached  to  the  GoTemor,  who  though  a  man  of
generosity,  had  declared  that  he  would  help  him  no  further,  till  he
had  composed  an  address  in  which  the  alternate  words  should
consist  entirely  of  pointed  and  unpointed  letters;  that  is,  that
the  first,  third,  fifth  words,  and  so  forth,  should  consist  of  letters
without  a  point,  while  the  second,  fourth,  sixth,  and  so  forth,
♦should  have  only  pointed  letters.  He  adds  that  he  had  been  striving
a  whole  year  to  produce  such  a  composition,  or  to  find  some  one  who
could  produce  it.  The  stranger,  on  hearing  this,  accepts  the  task
with  alacrity,  and  instantly  dictates  an  address  in  praise  of  the
Governor,  fulfilling  the  conditions  that  had  been  imposed.  The
company  are  delighted,  and  inquire  his  family  and  abode :  he  an¬
swers  in  some  plaintive  verses  that  he  is  of  the  tribe  of  Ghass^n,
and  the  city  of  Seruj.  His  fame  having  reached  the  Governor,  he
is  offered  the  place  of  a  public  writer,  but  declines  it.  Harith,  who
had  discovered  that  he  was  Abti  Zayd,  asks  him  the  reason  of  this
unwillingness  to  accept  office.  Abu  Zayd  again  replies  in  verse,
and  tells  his  friend  that  a  life  of  freedom  and  poverty  is  better  than
dependence  on  the  great.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related  :  I  was  present  in
the  Court  of  Supervision  at  Meraghah  when  the  talk
ran  of  eloquence. — Then  agreed  all  who  were  there  of
the  knights  of  the  pen,  and  the  lords  of  genius ; — That
there  remained  no  one  who  could  select  his  diction,  or
use  himself  freely  in  it  as  he  willed : — And  that  since  the
men  of  old  were  gone,  there  was  none  now  left  who  could
originate  a  brilliant  method,  or  open  a  virgin  style. —
And  that  even  one  marvellous  among  the  writers  of  this
age,  and  holding  in  his  grasp  the  cords  of  eloquence,
is  but  a  dependent  on  the  ancients,  even  though  he
possess  the  fluency  of  Sahban  Wa’il. — How  there  was  in
the  assembly  an  elderly  man,  sitting  on  the  outskirts,  in


134


SIXTE  ASSEMBL  t.


the  places  of  the  attendants : — And  as  often  as  the  com¬
pany  overran  in  their  career,  and  scattered  fruit,  good
and  bad,  from  their  store, — The  side-glance  of  his  eye
and  the  up-turning  of  his  nose  showed  that  he  was
one  silent  to  spring,  one  crouching  who  would  extend
his  stride: — That  he  was  a  twanger  of  the  bow  who
shapes  his  arrows,  one  who  sits  in  wait  desiring  the
conflict. — ^But  when  the  quivers  were  empty,  and  quiet
returned;  when  the  storms  had  fallen,  and  the  disputer-
was  stayed, — He  turned  to  the  company  and  said.  Ye
have  uttered  a  grievous  thing,  ye  have  wandered  much
from  the  way: — For  ye  have  magnified  mouldering
bones,  ye  have  been  excessive  in  your  leaning  to  those
who  are  gone;  ye  have  contemned  your  generation,
among  whom  ye  were  born,  and  with  whom  your
friendships  are  established. — ^Have  ye  forgotten,  ye  skil¬
ful  in  testing,  ye  sages  of  loosing  and  binding, — How
much  new  springs  have  given  forth  ;  how  the  colt  has
surpassed  the  full-grown  steed ; — In  refined  expressions,
and  delightful  metaphors,  and  ornate  addresses,  and
admired  cadences  ? — And,  if  any  one  here  will  look
diligently,  is  there  in  the  ancients  aught  but  ideas  whose
paths  are  worn,  whose  ranges  are  restricted ;  which  have
been  handed  down  from  them  through  the  priority  of
their  birth,  not  from  any  superiority  in  him  who  draws
first  at  the  well  over  him  who  comes  after? — How  truly
know  I  one  who  when  he  composes  colours  richly ;  and
when  he  expresses,  embellishes ;  and  when  he  is  lengthy,
finds  golden  thoughts;  and  when  he  is  brief,  baffles
his  imitator ;  and  when  he  improvises,  astonishes ;  and
when  he  creates,  cuts  the  envious.

Then  said  to  him  the  President  of  the  Court,  the  Eye


sixtjb:  assembly.


135


of  those  Eyes :  “  Who  is  it  that  strikes  on  this  rock,  that
is  the  hero  of  these  qualities  ?” — He  said,  “It  is  the
adversary  of  this  thy  skirmish,  the  partner  of  thy  dispu¬
tation:  How,  if  thou  wilt,  rein  a  good  steed,  call  forth
one  who  will  answer,  so  shalt  thou  see  a  wonder.” — He
said  to  him,  “  Stranger,  the  chough  in  our  land  is
not  taken  for  an  eagle,  and  with  us  it  is  easy  to  discern
between  silver  and  shingle. — ^Rare  is  he  who  exposes
.  himself  to  the  conflict,  and  then  escapes  the  mortal
hurt ;  or  who  stirs  up  the  dust  of  trial,  and  then  catches
not  the  mote  of  contempt. — So  offer  not  thy  honour
to  shame,  turn  not  from  the  counsel  of  the  counsellor.” —
He  answered,  “  Each  man  knows  best  the  mark  of  his
arrow,  and  he  sure  the  night  shall  disclose  its  morn.”— ^
Then  whispered  the  company  as  to  how  his  well  should
be  fathomed,  and  his  proving  undertaken. — Said  one  of
them,  “  Leave  him  to  my  share,  that  I  may  pelt  him
with  the  stone  of  my  story ;  for  it  is  the  tightest  of
knots,  the  touch-stone  of  testing.” — Then  they  invested
him  with  the  command  in  this  business  as  the  Rebels
invested  Ahu  Ha'ameh. — Whereupon  he  turned  to  the
elder  and  said,  Hnow  that  I  am  attached  to  this
Governor  and  maintain  my  condition  by  ornamental  elo¬
quence. — How,  in  my  country,  I  could  rely  for  the
straightening  of  my  crookedness  on  the  sufficiency  of  my
means,  coupled  with  the  smallness  of  my  family. — But
when  my  hack  was  weighted,  and  my  thin  rain  failed,
I  repaired  to  him  from  my  home  with  hope,  and  besought
him  to  restore  my  comeliness  and  my  competence. — And
he  looked  pleasantly  on  my  coming,  and  was  gracious,
and  served  me  morn  and  even. — ^But  when  I  sought  per¬
mission  from  him  to  depart  to  my  abode,  on  the  shoulder


136


SIXTH  ASSEMBLY.


of  Cheerfulness, — He  said,  “I. have  determined  that  I  will
not  provide  thee  with  supplies,  I  will  bring  together  for
thee  no  scattered  means ; — ^Unless,  before  thy  departure,
thou  compose  an  address,  setting  in  it  an  exposition
of  thy  state  ; — Such,  that  the  letters  of  one  of  every  two
words  shall  all  have  dots,  while  the  letters  of  the  other
shall  not  he  pointed  at  all.” — ^And  now  have  I  waited  for
my  eloquence  a  twelvemonth,  hut  it  has  returned  me  not
a  word ;  and  I  have  roused  my  wit  for  a  year,  but  only  ^
my  sluggishness  has  increased. — And  I  have  sought
aid  among  the  gathering  of  the  scribes,  but  eaeh  of  them
has  frowned  and  drawn  back. — ^How,  if  thou  hast  dis¬
closed  thy  character  with  accuracy.  Come  with  a  sign  if
thou  le  of  the  truthful.

Then  answered  the  elder,  “  Thou  hast  put  a  good  steed
to  the  pace ;  thou  hast  sought  water  at  a  full  stream ;
thou  hast  given  the  bow  to  him  who  fashioned  it ;  thou
hast  lodged  in  the  house  him  who  built  it.” — And
he  thought  a  while  till  he  had  let  his  flow  of  wit
collect,  his  milch  camel  fill  her  udder : — And  then  he
said  :  Wool  thy  ink-flask,  and  take  thy  implements  and
write : —

Generosity  (may  God  establish  the  host  of  thy  suc¬
cesses),  adorns;  but  meanness  (may  fortune  cast  down
the  eye-lid  of  thy  enviers),  dishonours ;  the  noble  re¬
wards,  but  the  base  disappoints ;  the  princely  entertains,
hut  the  niggard  frights  away ;  the  liberal  nourishes,  but
the  churl  pains ;  giving  relieves,  but  deferring  torments  ;
blessing  protects,  and  praise  purifies ;  the  honourable  re¬
pays,  for  repudiation  abases ;  the  rejection  of  him  who
should  be  respected  is  error ;  a  denial  to  the  sons  of  hope
is  outrage ;  and  none  is  miserly  but  the  fool,  and  none  is


SIXTS:  ASSEMBLY.


137


foolish  but  the  miser ;  and  none  boards  but  the  wretched  ;
for  the  pious  clenches  not  his  palms.

But  thy  promise  ceases  not  to  fulfil ;  thy  sentiments
cease  not  to  relieve  ;  nor  thy  clemency  to  indulge ;  nor
thy  new  moon  to  illumine ;  nor  thy  bounty  to  enrich ;
nor  thy  enemies  to  praise  thee ;  nor  thy  blade  to  destroy ;
nor  thy  princeship  to  build  up ;  nor  thy  suitor  to  gain ;
nor  thy  praiser  to  win  ;  nor  thy  kindness  to  succour ;  nor
^  thy  heaven  to  rain ;  nor  thy  milk-flow  to  abound ;  nor
thy  refusal  to  be  rare. — ^Now  he  who  hopes  in  thee  is  an
old  man  like  a  shadow,  one  to  whom  nothing  remains. —
He  seeks  thee  with  a  persuasion  whose  eagerness  leaps
onward ;  he  praises  thee  in  choice  phrases,  which  merit
their  dowries. — His  demand  is  a  light  one,  his  claims  are-
clear ;  his  praise  is  striven  for,  his  blame  is  shunned. —
And  behind  him  is  a  household  whom  misery  has
touched,  whom  wrong  has  stripped,  whom  squalor
involves. — And  he  is  ever  in  tears  that  come  at  call,  and
trouble  that  melts  him,  and  care  that  is  as  a  guest,
and  growing  sadness  ; — On  account  of  hope  that  has  dis¬
appointed  him,  and  loss  that  has  made  him  hoary,  and
the  enemy  that  has  fixed  tooth  in  him,  and  the  quiet  that
is  gone. — ^And  yet  his  love  has  not  swerved,  that  there
should  be  anger  at  him  ;  nor  is  his  wood  rotten,  that  he
should  be  lopped  away ;  nor  has  his  breast  spit  foulness
that  he  should  be  shaken  off;  nor  has  his  intercourse
been  froward  that  he  should  be  hated. — How  thy  honour
admits  not  the  rejection  of  his  claim,  so  whiten  his  hope
by  the  lightening  of  his  distress :  then  will  he  publish
thy  praise  throughout  the  world. — So  mayest  thou  live  to
avert  misfortune,  and  to  bestow  wealth ;  to  heal  grief
and  to  care  for  the  aged : — Attended  by  affluence  and


138


SIXTH  ASSEMBLY,


fresh,  joyousness ;  as  long  as  the  hall  of  the  rich  is
visited,  or  the  delusion  of  the  selfish  is  feared.  And  so
Peace.

Now  when  he  had  ceased  from  the  dictation  of  his
address,  and  showed  forth  his  prowess  in  the  strife  of
eloquence — The  company  gratified  him  both  by  word  and
deed,  and  made  large  to  him  their  courtesy  and  their
bounty. — Then  was  he  asked  from  what  tribe  was  his
origin,  and  in  what  valley  was  his  lair ;  and  he  answered : ,

G-hassan  is  my  noble  kindred,  and  Seruj  my  ancient  land  :

There  my  home  was  like  the  sun  in  splendour  and  mighty  rank ;

And  my  dwelling  was  as  Paradise  in  sweetness  and  pleasantness
and  worth.

Oh,  excellent  were  the  life  I  led  there  and  the  plenteous  delights,

In  the  day  that  I  drew  my  broidered  robe  in  its  meadow,  sharp  of
purpose.

I  walked  proudly  in  the  mantle  of  youth  and  looked  upon  goodly
pleasures ;

Fearing  not  the  visitations  of  time  and  its  evil  haps.

Now  if  grief  could  kill,  surely  I  should  perish  from  my  abiding
griefs ;

Or  if  past  life  could  be  redeemed  my  good  heart’s  blood  should
redeem  it.

For  death  is  better  for  a  man  than  to  live  the  life  of  a  beast,

When  the  ring  of  subjection  leads  him  to  mighty  trouble  and
outrage,

And  he  sees  lions  whom  the  paws  of  assailing  hyaenas  seize.

But  the  fault  is  in  the  time :  but  for  its  ill  luck  character  would
not  miss  its  place  :

If  the  time  were  upright,  then  would  the  conditions  of  men  be
upright  in  it.

After  this  his  story  reached  the  Governor,  who  filled
his  mouth  with  pearls, — And  hade  him  join  himself  to  his
followers,  and  preside  over  his  court  of  public  writing.—
But  the  gifts  sufl&ced  him,  and  unwillingness  restrained
him  from  office. — Said  the  narrator :  Now  I  had  recog¬
nized  the  wood  of  his  tree  before  the  ripening  of  his  fruit :


SEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.


139


— And  I  had  nigh  roused  the  people  to  the  loftiness  of  his
worth  before  that  his  full  moon  shone  forth. — But  he
hinted  to  me  by  a  twinkle  of  his  eyelid  that  I  should  not
bare  his  sword  from  its  sheath. — And  when  he  was  going
forth,  full  of  purse,  and  parting  from  us,  having  gotten
victory, — I  escorted  him,  performing  the  duty  of  respect,
and  chiding  him  for  his  refusal  of  office. — But  he  turned
away  with  a  smile  and  recited  with  a  chant :

•  Sure  to  traverse  tlie  lands  in  poverty  is  dearer  to  me  tlian  rank :

For  in  rulers  there  is  caprice  and  fault-finding,  Oli  what  fault¬
finding  !

There  is  none  of  them  who  completes  his  good  work,  or  who  builds
up  where  has  laid  foundation.

So  let  not  the  glare  of  the  mirage  beguile  thee ;  imdertake  not
that  which  is  dou].)tful :

For  how  many  a  dreamer  has  his  dream  made  joyful ;  but  fear  has
come  upon  him  when  he  waked.


THE  SEVENTH  ASSEMBLY  CALLED
''OE  BAEKAID.’’

This  Assembly  is  well  known  to  students,  having  been  published
with  a  translation  and  valuable  notes  by  De  Sacy  in  his  Chrestomathie
Arabe.  Harith  is  at  Barka  Id,  a  place  which  is  described  as  the  chief
town  of  thoDiyar  Kahfah,  at  the  distance  of  seventeen  parasangs  from
Mow§il.  The  feast  at  the  end  of  Kamadan  is  approaching,  and  being
desirous  of  joining  in  tliis  solemnity  ho  goes  to  the  public  prayer  in
his  best  attire.  When  the  congregation  has  formed  itself  into  rows,
after  the  manner  of  Moslem  worship,  he  espies  an  old  man  with  his
eyes  closed  accompanied  by  an  old  woman.  The  man  takes  out  of  a
bag  a  number  of  papers  curiously  written  or  illuminated  in  variously
coloured  inks  ;  and  the  old  woman,  going  through  the  rows,  presents
them  to  those  whom  she  guesses  from  their  appearance  to  bo  charitably
disposed.  One  of  them  falls  to  the  lot  of  Harith,  who  finds  on  it
some  strange  verses  full  of  aRiterations  and  plays  on  words.  He
keeps  it,  and  when  the  old  woman,  being  disappointed  in  her  appeal,
returns  to  reclaim  it,  he  offers  her  a  dirhem  on  the  condition  that


140


SEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.


she  ■will  tell  him  the  name  of  the  author.  She  informs  him  that  the
old  man  had  composed  the  verses,  and  that  he  was  a  native  of  Seruj.
Harith  then  guesses  that  he  must  be  Abu  Zayd,  and  is  much  con¬
cerned  to  find  that  he  has  become  blind.  When  the  prayer  is  over
he  goes  up  to  him  and  discovers  that  he  is  indeed  Abu  Zayd,  where¬
upon  he  presents  him  with  a  garment  and  in'vites  him  to  his  house.
No  sooner  are  they  in  private  than  Abu  Zayd  opens  his  eyes,  which
are  perfectly  sound,  and  Harith  discovers  that  his  pretended  blind¬
ness  was  a  trick  to  excite  pity.  Abu  Zayd  makes  a  good  meal,  and
after  he  has  had  enough  sends  Harith  to  the  closet  to  fetch  alkali  to
wash  his  hands  after  eating,  and  a  toothpick.  When  the  host  returns
the  old  man  and  his  companion  are  gone ;  Abu  Zayd  having  as  usual  -
made  his  escape,  to  avoid  a  lecture  on  his  hypocrisy  and  the  solicita¬
tion  of  his  friend  that  he  would  abandon  his  vagrant  life.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  had  determined
on  journeying  from  Barka‘id  ;  hut  now  I  noted  the  signs
of  the  coming  feast, — ^And  I  disliked  to  set  forth  from  the
city  until  I  had  witnessed  there  the  day  of  adornment. —
So  when  it  came  on  with  its  rites,  hounden  or  of  free  will,
and  brought  up  its  horsemen  and  footmen, — followed  the
tradition  in  new  apparel,  and  went  forth  with  the  people
to  keep  festival. — ^How  when  the  congregation  of  the
prayer  court  was  gathered  and  ranged,  and  the  crowding
took  men’s  breath, — ^There  appeared  an  old  man  in  a  pair
of  cloaks,  and  his  eyes  were  closed : — And  he  bore  on  his
arm  what  was  like  a  horse-hag,  and  had  for  a  guide  an  old
woman  like  a  goblin. — ^Then  he  stopped,  as  stops  one  tot¬
tering  to  sink,  and  greeted  with  the  greeting  of  him  whose
voice  is  feeble. — ^And  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  his
salutation  he  circled  his  five  fingers  in  his  wallet, — And
brought  forth  scraps  of  paper  that  had  been  written  on
with  colours  of  dyes  in  the  season  of  leisure, — And  gave
them  to  his  old  beldame,  bidding  her  to  detect  each  simple
one. — So  whenever  she  perceived  of  any  that  his  hand  was
moist  in  bounty,  she  cast  one  of  the  papers  before  him.


SEVJENTS  ASSEMBLY.


141


— Said  A1  Harith;  Now  cursed  fate  allotted  to  me  a
scrap  wliereon  was  written  : —

Sure  I  liaYe  become  crushed  with  pains  and  fears  ;

Tried  by  the  proud  one,  the  crafty,  the  assailer.

By  the  traitor  among  my  brethren,  who  hates  me  for  my  need,

By  jading  from  those  who  work  to  undo  my  toils.

.  How  oft  do  I  bum  through  spites  and  penury  and  wandering ;

How  oft  do  I  tramp  in  shabby  garb,  thought  of  by  none.

Oh,  would  that  fortune  when  it  wronged  me  had  slain  my  babes  !

For  were  not  my  cubs  torments  to  me  and  ills,

I  would  not  have  addressed  my  hopes  to  kin  or  lord :

Nor  would  I  draw  my  skirts  along  the  track  of  abasement.

For  my  garret  would  be  more  seemly  for  me,  and  my  rags  more
honourable.

Now  is  there  a  generous  man  who  will  see  that  the  lightening  of
my  loads  must  be  by  a  denar ;

Or  will  quench  the  heat  of  my  anxiety  by  a  shirt  and  trousers.

Said  A1  Harith.,  son  of  Hammam :  Now  when  I  had
looked  on  the  garh  of  the  verses,  I  longed  for  a  know¬
ledge  of  him  who  wove  it,  the  hroiderer  of  its  pattern. —
And  my  thought  whispered  to  me  that  the  way  to  him
was  through  the  old  woman,  and  advised  me  that  a  fee
to  an  informer  is  lawful. — So  I  watched  her,  and  she  was
wending  through  the  rows,  row  by  row,  begging  a  dole
of  the  hands,  hand  by  hand. — But  not  at  all  did  the
trouble  prosper  her ;  no  purse  shed  aught  upon  her  palm.

■ — ^Wherefore  when  her  soliciting  was  baffled,  and  her  cir¬
cuit  wearied  her, — She  commended  herself  to  God  with  the
“  Eeturn,”  and  addressed  herself  to  collect  the  scraps  of
paper. — ^But  the  Devil  made  her  forget  the  scrap  that  I
held,  and  she  turned  not  aside  to  my  spot : — ^But  went  back
to  the  old  man  weeping  at  the  denial,  complaining  of  the
oppression  of  the  time. — And  he  said,  “  In  God’s  hands
I  am,  to  God  I  commit  my  case ;  there  is  no  strength  or
power  but  by  God,”  then  he  recited : —


142


SEVENTE  ASSEMBLY.


Tliere  remains  not  any  pure,  not  any  sincere ;  not  a  spring,
not  a  helper:

But  of  basenesses  there  is  one  level;  not  any  is  trusty,  not  any
of  worth.

Then  said  lie  to  her,  “  Cheer  thy  soul  and  promise  it
good;  collect  the  papers  and  count  them.” — She  said,
“  Truly  I  counted  them  when  I  asked  them  back,  and  1
found  that  one  of  them  the  hand  of  loss  had  seized.” —
He  said,  “  Perdition  on  thee, .  Wretch  ;  shall  we  be
hindered,  alas,  both  of  the  prey  and  the  net,  both  of
the  brand  and  the  wick  ?  surely  this  is  a  new  handful  to
the  load.” — ^Then  did  the  old  woman  hasten  back,  re¬
tracing  her  path  to  seek  her  scroll ;  and  when  she  drew
near  to  me  I  put  with  the  paper  a  dirhem  and  a  mite :
— ^And  said  to  her,  “If  thou  hast  a  fondness  for  the
polished,  the  engraved  (and  I  pointed  to  the  dirhem)
shew  me  the  secret,  the  obscure; — ^But  if  thou  wiliest
not  to  explain,  take  then  the  mite  and  begone.” — ^Then
she  inclined  to  the  getting  of  that  whole  full  moon,
the  bright-faced,  the  large. — So  she  said,  “  Quit  con¬
tention  and  ask  what  thou  wilt.” — ^Whereupon  I  asked
her  of  the  old  man  and  his  country,  of  the  poem,  and
of  him  who  wove  its  mantle. — She  said,  “  Truly,  the  old
man  is  of  the  people  of  Seruj,  and  he  it  was  who
broidered  that  woven  poem.” — ^Then  she  snatched  the
dirhem  with  the  snatch  of  a  hawk,  and  shot  away  as
shoots  the  darting  arrow. — ^But  it  troubled  my  heart  that
perchance  it  was  Abu  Zayd  who  was  indicated,  and  my
grief  kindled  at  his  mishap  with  his  eyes. — ^And  I  should
have  preferred  to  have  gone  suddenly  on  him  and  talked
to  him,  that  I  might  test  the  quality  of  my  discernment
upon  him. — ^But  I  was  unable  to  come  to  him  save  by
treading  on  the  necks  of  the  congregation,  a  thing  for-


SEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.


143


bidden  in  tlie  law : — And,  moreover,  I  was  unwilling  that
people  should  be  annoyed  by  me,  or  that  blame  should
arrive  to  me. — So  I  cleaved  to  my  place,  but  made  his
form  the  fetter  of  my  sight,  until  the  sermon  was  ended,
and  to  leap  to  him  was  lawful. — Then  I  went  briskly
to  him  and  examined  him  in  spite  of  the  closing  of  his
eyelids. — ^And,  lo  !  my  shrewdness  was  as  the  shrewdness
of  Ibn  'Abbas,  and  my  discernment  as  the  discernment  of
lyas. — So  at  once  I  made  myself  known,  and  presented
him  with  one  of  my  tunics,  and  bade  him  to  my  bread. —
And  he  was  joyful  at  my  bounty  and  recognition,  and
acceded  to  the  call  to  my  loaves ; — ^And  he  set  forth,
and  my  hand  was  his  leading  cord,  my  shadow  his
conductor ; — ^And  the  old  woman  was  the  third  prop  of
the  pot ;  yes,  by  the  Watcher  from  whom  no  secret
is  hidden ! — ^Now,  when  he  had  taken  seat  in  my  nest,
and  I  had  set  before  him  what  hasty  meal  was  in  my
power,  he  said,  “  Ilarith,  is  there  with  us  a  third  ?” —
I  said,  “  There  is  none  but  the  old  woman.” — ^He  said,
“From  her  no  secret  is  withheld.” — Then  he  opened
his  eyes  and  stared  round  with  the  twin  balls,  and,  lo !
the  two  lights  of  his  face  kindled  like  the  Farkadan. —
And  I  was  joyful  at  the  safety  of  his  sight,  but  mar¬
velled  at  the  strangeness  of  his  ways. — ^Nor  did  quiet
possess  me,  nor  did  patience  fit  with  me,  until  I  asked
him,  “What  led  thee  to  feign  blindness;  thou,  with
thy  journeying  in  desolate  places,  and  thy  traversing
of  wildernesses,  and  thy  pushing  into  far  lands  ?  ” — But
he  made  show  as  if  his  mouth  were  full,  and  kept  as
though  busied  with  his  meal : — ^TJntil  when  he  had  ful¬
filled  his  need,  he  sharpened  his  look  upon  me  and
recited :


144


SJSrmTE  ASSEMBLY,


Since  Time  (and  ke  is  tlie  father  of  mankind)  makes  himself
blind  to  the  right  in  his  purposes  and  aims,

I  too  have  assumed  blindness,  so  as  to  be  called  a  brother  of
it ; — ^what  wonder  that  one  should  match  himself  with  his  father !

Then  said  he  to  me,  Eise,  and  go  to  the  closet,  and
fetch  me  alkali  that  may  clear  the  eye,  and  clean  the
hand,  and  soften  the  skin,  and  perfume  the  breath,  and
brace  the  gums,  and  strengthen  the  stomach ; — And  let
it  be  clean  of  box,  fragrant  of  odour,  new  of  pounding,
delicate  of  powdering ; — So  that  one  touching  it  shall'
count  it  to  be  eye  paint,  and  one  smelling  it  shall  fancy
it  to  be  camphor. — And  join  with  it  a  toothpick  choice
in  material,  delightful  in  use,  goodly  in  shape,  that
invites  to  the  repast : — And  let  it  have  the  slimness  of  a
lover,  and  the  polish  of  a  sword,  and  the  sharpness  of'
the  lance  of  war,  and  the  pliancy  of  a  green  bough. —
Said  A1  Harith :  Then  I  rose  to  do  what  he  bade  that
I  might  rid  him  of  the  trace  of  his  food : — And  thought
not  that  he  purposed  to  deceive  by  sending  me  into  the
closet ;  nor  suspected  that  he  was  mocking  of  his  mes¬
senger  when  he  called  for  the  alkali  and  toothpick. — But
when  I  returned  with  what  was  asked  for,  in  less  than  the
drawing  of  a  breath,  I  found  that  the  hall  was  empty,
and  that  the  old  man  and  woman  had  sped  away. — Then
was  I  extreme  in  anger  at  his  deceit,  and  I  pressed  on
his  track  in  search  of  him ; — But  he  was  as  one  who
is  sunk  in  the  sea,  or  has  been  borne  aloft  to  the  clouds
of  heaven.


EIGHTE  ASSEMBLY,


145


THE  EIGHTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED

maaeeah;’

This  Assembly,  like  several  others  that  will  be  met  with  in
the  course  of  the  work,  is  so  essentially  Arabic  as  almost  to  forbid
intelligible  translation.  Two  suitors,  an  old  man  and  a  youth,
appear  before  the  Kadi  of  Ma'arrah.  The  former  narrates  to  the
Kadi  that  he  had  possessed  a  beautiful  and  attractive,  yet  obedient
and  active,  slave  girl ;  that  the  youth  had  borrowed  her,  treated  her
roughly,  and  then  returned  her  in  an  infirm  state.  The  youth
•udmits  the  charge,  but  declares  that  he  had  offered  sufficient  com¬
pensation  ;  and  then  complains  that  the  old  man  detained  as  a
pledge  a  male  slave  of  his,  who  was  of  good  origin  and  qualities,
and  highly  serviceable  to  his  master.  The  Kadi  perceives  from  the
style  of  these  addresses  that  the  language  is  enigmatical,  and  bids  the
litigants  speak  plainly.  The  youth  then  improvises  some  verses
to  explain  that  by  a  slave  girl  the  old  man  meant  a  needle  which
the  youth  had  borrowed,  and  the  eye  of  which  ho  had  broken  by
accident  as  he  was  drawing  the  thread  through  it ;  the  male  slave
which  the  old  man  detained  was  a  pencil  or  stylus  for  the  applica¬
tion  of  hohl,  the  dark  pigment  with  which  Orientals  anoint  the
eyelid  to  heighten  by  contrast  the  lustre  of  the  eye.  The  old  man
in  his  turn  admits  the  truth  of  this,  but  pleads  in  mournful  verse
his  poverty  and  his  inability  to  bear  the  loss  even  of  a  needle.  The
Kadi,  touched  with  pity,  bestows  a  trifle  on  both,  and  they  depart
joyously.  But  almost  immediately  ho  suspects  that  he  has  been
deceived,  and  sends  an  attendant  after  them  to  bring  them  back.
When  they  are  again  in  the  court,  the  Kadi  charges  them  with  deceit.
The  boy  is  abashed,  but  the  old  man  steps  forward  boldly  and  con¬
fesses  that  ho  is  the  noted  impostor  of  Soruj,  and  that  the  boy  is  his
son;  that  they  never  had  either  needle  or  kohl  pencil,  but  had
devised  the  story  to  excite  pity.  The  Kadi,  charmed  with  their
literary  skill,  pardons  their  offence  and  dismisses  them  with  a
caution.  The  chief  feature  in  the  composition  is  the  enigmatical
description  of  the  needle  and  pencil,  which  depends  on  the  double
meanings  of  the  words  and  phrases  contained  in  it.  Some  of  these
are  so  subtle  that  even  the  native  commentators  are  undecided  about
them;  and  we  may  assume  that  the  double-entente  of  passages  like
this,  and  the  similar  address  in  the  Thirteenth  Assembly,  was  among
the  lessons  which  Hariri  is  said  to  have  taught  to  his  pupils.  The
commentators,  who  are  often  profuse  of  interpretation  where  there


10


146


EIGETH  ASSEMBLY.


is  no  difficulty,  are  soraewhat  brief  wben  they  have  to  deal  with
these  dark  compositions.  Even  the  loquacious  Sherishi,  -who  some¬
times  gives  ■whole  pages  of  anecdote  and  poetical  quotation  to
illustrate  a  single  word,  passes  over  in  silence  phrases  where  there
evidently  lurks  a  second  and  hidden  sense.  The  present  transla¬
tion  is,  it  is  hoped,  an  adequate  interpretation  of  the  author’s
meaning.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related;  Among  the
•wonders  of  time,  I  saw  that  two  suitors  came  before
the  Kadi  of  Ma'arrat  an  Ko'man From  the  one  of  them
the  two  excellencies  of  life  had  departed,  while  the  other
was  as  a  hough  of  the  ben  tree. — And  the  old  man  said  :
God  strengthen  the  judge,  as  by  him  He  strengthens
whoever  seeks  judgment. — ^Behold  I  had  a  slave  girl,
elegant  of  shape,  smooth  of  cheek,  patient  to  labour  j —
At  one  time  she  ambled  like  a  good  steed,  at  another
she  slept  quietly  in  her  bed  :  even  in  July  thou  wouldst
feel  her  touch  to  be  cool. — She  had  understanding  and
discretion,  sharpness  and  wit,  a  hand  with  fingers,  hut  a
mouth  without  teeth :  yet  did  she  pique  as  with  tongue
of  snake,  and  saunter  in  training  robe;  and  she  was
displayed  in  blackness  and  whiteness  ;  and  she  drank,
but  not  from  cisterns. — She  was  now  truth-telling  now
beguiling ;  now  hiding,  now  peeping  forth ;  yet  fitted  for
employment,  obedient  in  poverty  and  in  wealth :  if  thou
didst  spurn  she  showed  affection,  but  if  thou  didst  put
her  from  thee,  she  remained  quietly  apart. — Generally
would  she  serve  thee,  and  be  courteous  to  thee,  though
sometimes  she  might  be  fcoward  to  thee  and  pain  thee,
and  trouble  thee.^ — ^Now  this  youth  asked  her  service  of

^  The  meaning  of  this  passage,  when  applied  to  a  needle,  is  as  fol¬
lows  : — I  had  a  needle,  straight  of  shape  and  smooth  of  side,
lasting  for  work  ;  that  sometimes  moved  quickly  in  the  sewer’s
hands,  and  sometimes  rested  in  the  needle -box ;  it  was  sometimes


EIGETE  ASSEMBLY.


147


me  for  a  purpose  of  his  own,  and  I  made  her  his  servant,
without  reward ; — On  the  condition  that  he  should  enjoy
the  use  of  her,  hut  not  burden  her  with  more  than  she
could  hear. — ^But  he  forced  on  her  too  hard  a  work,  and
exacted  of  her  long  labour ; — Then  returned  her  to  me
broken  in  health,  offering  a  compensation  which  I  accept
not.

Then  said  the  youth :  Sure  the  old  man  is  more  truth¬
ful  than  the  Kata :  but  as  for  my  hurting  her  it  fell  out
by  mistake. — And  now  have  I  pledged  to  him  in  pay¬
ment  of  his  damage,  a  slave’  of  mine,  of  equal  birth

filed  in  July,  it  had  strength,  to  hold  with  its  rein  of  thread,  it  had
sharpness  and  point:  it  hemmed  the  garment  by  the  aid  of  the
sewer’s  fingers;  it  had  a  month  (eye)  without  teeth;  it  sometimes
pricked  with  its  point,  as  it  was  driven  through  the  cloth ;  it  carried
a  long  thread  after  it ;  it  had  sometimes  a  black  and  sometimes
a  white  thread ;  it  was  bedewed  only  with  the  sweat  of  the  sewer’s
hand ;  it  sewed  the  cloth  or  lined  it ;  it  now  hid  itself  behind  the
cloth,  and  now  appeared  again ;  it  was  adapted  for  use ;  it  went
easily  into  any  orifice,  small  or  large ;  if  thou  didst  rend  anything
it  joined  it,  but  if  thou  didst  lay  it  aside  in  the  needle-box,  it  re¬
mained  where  it  was  put ;  mostly  did  it  serve  thee  and  adorn  thee
by  its  work,  but  sometimes  it  would  prick  thee,  and  pain  thee  and
trouble  thee.

^  The  meaning  of  this  passage,  when  applied  to  a  kohl  pencil,  is  as
follows :  I  had  a  kohl  pencil,  the  same  at  both  ends,  tracing  its
origin  to  the  cutler,  free  from  rust  and  defect;  often  brought  near
the  apple  of  the  eye  ;  it  conferred  beauty  and  produced  admiration ;
it  fed  the  pupil  of  the  eye  with  ointment,  but  went  not  near  the
tongue ;  when  it  was  blackened  with  the  ointment  it  was  liberal  of
it,  when  it  marked  the  eye  it  beautified  it ;  when  it  was  supplied  with
ointment  it  supplied  the  eye  with  it,  and  when  more  was  required  it
added  more.  It  remained  not  always  in  its  case,  and  seldom  anointed
except  two  eyes  at  a  time  ^  it  gave  plentifully  of  the  kohl  that  was  on
it,  and  was  lifted  up  to  the  eye  for  the  purpose ;  it  was  constantly
attached  to  the  kohl  case,  although  the  two  might  be  of  a  different
material  (that  is,  the  pencil  might  be  of  gold  and  the  case  of  glass  or
silver) ;  though  it  was  used  for  adorning  it  was  not  of  a  soft  substance
but  of  metal.


148


eights:  assembly.


as  regards  either  kin,  tracing  his  lineage  to  A1  Kayn,  free
from  stain  and  disgrace,  whose  place  was  the  apple  of  his
master’s  eye. — He  shewed  forth  kindness,  and  called  up
admiration ;  he  nourished  mankind,  and  set  guard  on  his
tongue. — If  he  was  placed  in  power  he  was  generous,  if
he  marked  aught  for  his  own  he  was  noble  with  it ;  if  he
was  supplied  he  gaye  of  his  supply,  and  when  he  was
asked  for  more  he  added. — He  stayed  not  in  the  house,
and  rarely  visited  his  wives,  save  two  by  two. — He  was
generous  with  his  possession,  he  was  lofty  in  his  bounty ;
he  kept  with  his  spouse  although  she  was  not  of  his  own
clay ;  and  there  was  pleasure  in  his  comeliness,  although
he  was  not  desired  for  his  effeminacy.

Then  said  to  them  the  Hadi,  “  How  either  explain  or
depart.”  Then  pressed  forward  the  lad,  and  said ;

He  lent  me  a  needle  to  dam  my  rags,  whicli  use  has  wom  and
blackened

And  its  eye  broke  in  my  hand  by  chance,  as  I  drew  the  thread
through  it.

But  the  old  man  would  not  forgive  me  the  paying  for  it  when  he
saw  that  it  was  spoiled ;

But  said,  “  Give  mo  a  needle  like  it,  or  a  price,  after  thou  hast
mended  it.”

And  he  keeps  my  koU  pencil  by  him  as  a  pledge  :  oh,  the  shame
that  he  has  gotten  by  so  doing :

Bor  my  eye  is  dry  through  giving  him  this  pledge ;  my  hand  fails
to  ransom  its  anointer.

Now  by  this  statement  fathom  the  depth  of  my  misery  and  pity
one  unused  to  bear  it.

Then  turned  the  Kadi  to  the  old  man,  and  said,

Come,  speak  without  glozing,”  and  he  said —

I  swear  by  the  holy  place  of  sacrifice,  and  the  devout  whom  the
slope  of  Mina  brings  together ;

If  the  time  had  been  my  helper,  thou  wouldst  not  have  seen  me
taking  in  pledge  the  pencil  which  he  has  pledged  to  me.


jsigete:  assembly.


149


Nor  wonld  I  bring  myself  to  seek  a  substitute  for  a  needle  that  he
had  spoiled,  no  nor  the  price  of  it.

But  the  bow  of  calamities  shoots  at  me  with  deadly  arrows  from
here  and  there :

And  to  know  my  condition  is  to  know  his ;  misery,  and  distress,
and  exile,  and  sickness.

Fortune  has  put  us  on  a  level :  I  am  his  like  in  misery,  and  he  is
as  I.

He  cannot  ransom  his  pencil  now  that  it  lies  pledged  in  my  hand  :

And,  through  the  narrowness  of  my  own  means,  it  is  not  within
my  bounds  to  forgive  him  his  offending.

^  Now  this  is  my  tale  and  his  :  so  look  upon  us,  and  judge  between
us,  and  pity  us.

Now  when  the  Kadi  had  learnt  their  stories,  and  was
aware  of  their  penury  and  their  distinction, — He  took
out  for  them  a  denar  from  under  his  prayer  cushion,  and
said,  “  With  this  end  and  decide  your  contention.” — ^But
the  old  man  caught  it  before  the  youth,  and  claimed  the
whole  of  it  in  earnest,  not  in  jest ; — Saying  to  the  youth,
“  Half  is  mine  as  my  share  of  the  bounty,  and  thy  share
is  mine,  in  payment  for  my  needle : — ^Nor  do  I  swerve
from  justice,  so  come  and  take  thy  pencil.” — ^Now  there
fell  on  the  youth,  at  the  words  of  the  old  man,  a  sadness
at  which  the  heart  of  the  Kadi  grew  sullen,  stirring  its
sorrow  for  the  lost  denar. — ^Tet  did  he  cheer  the  concern
of  the  youth  and  his  anguish  by  a  few  dirhems  which  he
doled  to  him. — Then  he  said  to  the  two,  “  Avoid  transac¬
tions,  and  put  away  disputes,  and  come  not  before  me
with  wranglings,  for  I  have  no  purse  of  fine-money  for
you.” — ^And  they  rose  to  go  out  from  him,  rejoicing  at
his  gift,  fluent  in  his  praise. — ^But  as  for  the  Kadi,  his
ill-humour  subsided  not  after  his  stone  had  dripped  ;  his
sad  look  cleared  not  away  after  his  rock  had  oozed. — ^But
when  he  recovered  from  his  fit  he  turned  to  his  attend¬
ants, — ^And  said,  “  My  perception  is  imbued  with  the


150


EIGHTS  ASSEMBLY.


tliouglit,  and  my  guess  announces  to  me,  that  these
are  practisers  of  craft,  not  suitors  in  a  claim  : — ^But  what
is  the  way  to  fathom  them,  and  to  draw  forth  their
secret  ?” — ^Then  said  to  him  the  Knowing  One  of  his
assemblage,  the  Light  of  his  following : — ‘‘  Surely  the  dis¬
covery  of  what  they  hide  must  he  through  themselves.” —
So  he  bade  an  attendant  follow  them  and  bring  them
hack ;  and  when  they  stood  before  him  he  said  to  them,
“Tell  me  truly  your  camel’s  age  ;  so  shall  ye  be  secure
from  the  consequence  of  your  deceit.” — Then  did  the  lad
shrink  back  and  ask  for  pardon;  hut  the  old  man  stepped
forward  and  said:

I  am  the  Seruji  and  this  is  my  son ;  and  the  cub  at  the  proving  is
like  the  lion.

Now  never  has  his  hand  nor  mine  done  wrong  in  matter  of  needle
or  pencil :

But  only  fortune,  the  harming,  the  hostile,  has  brought  us  to  this,
that  we  came  forth  to  beg

Of  each  one  whose  palm  is  moist,  whose  spring  is  sweet ;  of  each
whose  palm  is  close,  whose  hand  is  fettered ;

By  every  art,  and  with  every  aim :  by  earnest,  if  it  prosper,  and
if  not,  by  jest.

That  we  may  draw  forth  a  drop  for  our  thirsty  lot,  and  consume
our  life  in  wretched  victual.

And  afterward  Death  is  on  the  watch  for  us  :  if  he  fall  not  on  us
to-day  he  will  fall  to-morrow.

Then  said  the  Kadi  to  him,  “  Oh  rare !  how  admirable
are  the  breathings  of  thy  mouth ;  well  done  !  should  I
say  of  thee,  were  it  not  for  the  guile  that  is  in  thee. —
Kow  know  that  I  am  of  those  that  warn  thee,  and  will
beware  of  thee. — So  act  not  again  deceitfully  with  judges,
hut  fear  the  might  of  those  who  hear  rule. — For  not
every  minister  will  excuse,  and  not  at  every  season  will
speech  be  listened  to.” — Then  the  old  man  promised  to
follow  his  counsel,  and  to  abstain  from  disguising  his


JsrmTir  assembz  t.


151


character, — And  he  departed  from  the  Kadi’s  presence,
while  the  guile  beamed  from  his  forehead. — Said  A1
Harith,  son  of  Hammam  :  Now  I  never  saw  aught  more
wonderful  than  these  things  in  the  changes  of  my  jour¬
neys,  nor  read  aught  like  them  in  the  records  of  hooks.


THE  NINTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
ALEXANDEIA.”

This  is  one  of  the  two  Assemblies  of  Hariri  which  have  been
translated  and  annotated  by  De  Sacy  in’  his  Chrestomathy.  Harith
in  his  wanderings  comes  to  Alexandria,  and,  in  accordance  with  his
custom,  makes  the  acquaintance  of  the  Kadi,  who,  as  appears  in  the
sequel,  is  a  good-natured  and  benevolent  man.  One  evening,  in
winter,  the  Kadi  is  distributing  the  public  alms,  when  an  ill-looking
old  man  is  brought  in  by  a  young  and  handsome  woman  who  ac¬
cuses  him  of  having  married  her  on  false  pretences.  She  declares
that  he  had  deceived  her  father  by  giving  out  that  he  had  an  ex¬
cellent  trade  as  a  pearl-merchant;  that  ho  had  been  incautiously
accepted,  and  that  now,  when  it  was  too  late,  she  had  discovered
that  he  had  no  business  at  all.  Moreover,  ho  had  taken  all  her
dress  and  furniture,  piece  by  piece,  and  sold  it  to  keep  himself  in
idleness,  leaving  her  and  her  child  to  starve.  The  Kadi  is  indignant,
and  threatens  to  send  the  husband  to  prison,  unless  he  can  clear
himself  of  the  charge.  The  defendant  is  in  no  way  disconcerted,
but  at  once  improvises  some  elegant  verses,  in  which  he  admits  his
poverty,  and  that  he  had  sold  his  wife's  effects,  but  denies  that  he
had  deceived  her  in  calling  himself  a  ‘‘pearl-stringer,"  for  the  pearls
which  he  meant  were  the  pearls  of  thought,  by  stringing  which  into
elegant  poems  he  had  been  accustomed  to  make  a  large  income  from
the  liberality  of  the  rich  and  noble.  Now,  however,  times  were
changed;  war  and  trouble  had  come  upon  the  earth,  and  a  race
of  niggards  had  succeeded  the  generous  patrons  of  the  old  days.
The  Kadi  accepts  the  excuse,  bids  the  woman  submit  herself  to  her
husband,  and  gives  them  some  of  the  alms  money ;  on  receiving
which  the  old  man  triumphantly  carries  off  his  wife.  Harith  had
discovered  that  it  was  Abd  Zayd,  but  was  afraid  to  tell  the  Kadi,
because  in  that  case  he  might  have  declined  to  relieve  such  an  im-


152


NINTE  ASSEMBLY.


poster.  But  when  he  is  gone,  cannot  forbear  suggesting  that

he  should  be  followed  and  some  news  of  him  brought  back.  A
messenger  is  sent  and  returns  quickly  to  say  that  he  found  Abu  Zayd
dancing  and  singing  in  joy  at  his  success.  The  Kadi  treats  the
affair  as  a  good  jest ;  and  declares  that  if  he  had  known  who  he  was
he  would  have  been  still  more  liberal.  This  is  the  first  appearance
of  Abu  Zayd’s  young  wife,  who  in  the  fortieth  Assembly  is  made
to  rival  her  husband  in  wit,  learning,  and  volubility.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  The  liveliness  of
youth  and  the  desire  of  gain  sped  me  on  until  I  had  tra-.
versed  all  that  is  between  Farghanah  and  Ohanah. — And
I  dived  into  depths  to  gather  fruits,  and  plunged  into
perils  to  reach  my  needs. — Now  I  had  caught  from  the
lips  of  the  learned,  and  understood  from  the  command¬
ments  of  the  wise — That  it  behoves  the  well-bred,  the
sagacious,  when  he  enters  a  strange  city,  to  conciliate  its
Kadi  and  possess  himself  of  his  favour : — That  his  back
may  be  strengthened  in  litigation,  that  he  may  be  secure
in  a  strange  land  from  the  wrong  of  the  powerful. — So  I
took  this  doctrine  as  my  guide  and  made  it  the  leading-
cord  to  my  advantages. — And  I  entered  not  a  city,  I
went  not  into  a  lair,  but  I  mingled  myself  with  its  judge/
as  water  is  mingled  with  wine,  and  strengthened  myself
by  his  patronage  as  bodies  are  strengthened  by  souls. —
Now  while  I  was  in  presence  of  the  judge  of  Alexandria
one  cold  evening,  and  he  had  brought  out  the  alms-
money  to  divide  it  among  the  needy, — Behold  there
entered  an  ill-looking  old  man  whom  a  young  matron
dragged  along. — And  she  said :  God  strengthen  the  Kadi
and  through  him  make  concord  to  be  lasting : — Know
that  I  am  a  woman  of  stock  the  most  noble,  of  root  the
most  pure,  of  mother’s  and  father’s  kin  the  most  honour¬
able  : — My  character  is  moderation,  my  disposition  is


JSriNTE  ASSEMBLY.


153


contentment ;  my  nature  is  to  be  a  goodly  help-meet ;  be¬
tween  me  and  my  neighbours  is  a  wide  difference. — ^Now
whenever  there  wooed  me  any  who  had  built  up  honour
or  were  lords  of  wealth — ^My  father  silenced  and  chid
them  and  misliked  their  suit  and  their  gift: — Making
plea  that  he  had  covenanted  with  God  Most  High  that
he  would  not  ally  himself  save  with  the  master  of  a
handicraft. — Then  did  Providence  destine  for  my  cala-
.  mity  and  pain  that  this  deceiver  should  present  himself
in  my  father’s  hall ; — ^And  swear  among  his  people  that
he  fulfilled  his  condition  : — ^Asserting  that  long  time  he
had  strung  pearl  to  pearl  and  sold  them  for  great  price.
— ^Then  was  my  father  deceived  by  the  gilding  of  his
falsehood,  and  married  me  to  him  before  proving  his
condition. — And  when  he  had  drawn  me  forth  from  my
covert,  and  carried  me  away  from  my  people,  and  re¬
moved  me  to  his  habitation,  and  brought  me  under  his
bond, — I  found  him  slothful,  a  sluggard;  I  discovered
him  to  be  a  lie-a-bed,  a  slumberer. — ^Now  I  had  come  to
him  with  apparel  and  goodly  show,  with  furniture  and
afduence. — ^But  he  ceased  not  to  sell  it  in  a  losing
market  and  to  squander  the  price  in  greedy  feeding, —
Until  he  had  altogether  destroyed  whatever  was  mine,
and  spent  my  property  on  his  need. — So  when  he  had
made  to  me  to  forget  the  taste  of  rest  and  left  my  house
bleaner  than  my  hand’s  palm ; — I  said  to  him,  ‘‘  Sir,  know
tmt  there  is  no  concealment  after  distress,  no  perfume
aftW  the  wedding. — ^Eise  up  then  to  gain  something  by
thv  trade,  to  gather  the  fruit  of  thy  skill.” — ^But  he  de¬
cided  that  his  trade  had  been  struck  with  slackness
through  the  violence  that  was  abroad  in  the  earth. —
Also  I  have  a  boy  by  him,  thin  as  a  toothpick :  neither


154


NINTH  ASSEMBLY.


of  us  gets  a  fill  by  film,  and  through  hunger  our  weeping
to  him  ceases  not. — So  I  hare  brought  him  to  thee  and
set  him  before  thee,  that  thou  mayest  test  the  substance
of  his  assertion,  and  decide  between  us  as  God  shall
show  thee.

Then  turned  the  Xadi  to  him  and  said :  “  Thou  hast
heard  thy  wife’s  story ;  now  testify  of  thyself:  else  will
I  discover  thy  deceit  and  bid  thy  imprisonment.” — ^But
he  looked  down  as  looks  the  serpent ;  then  girt  up  his
garment  for  a  long  strife,  and  said :

Hear  my  story,  for  it  is  a  wonder;  there  is  laughter  in  its  tale,
and  there  is  waiting.

I  am  a  man  on  whose  qualities  there  is  no  blame,  neither  is  there
suspicion  on  his  glory.

Serdj  is  my  home  where  I  was  bom,  and  my  stock  is  Ghassan
when  I  trace  my  lineage  :

And  study  is  my  business  ;  to  dive  deep  in  learning  is  my  pursuit ;
and,  oh  I  how  excellent  a  seeking.

And  my  capital  is  the  magic  of  speech,  out  of  which  are  moulded
both  verse  and  prose.

I  dive  into  the  deep  of  eloquence,  and  from  it  I  choose  the  pearls
and  select  them :

I  cull  of  speech  the  ripe  fruit  and  the  new ;  while  another  gathers
but  firing  of  the  wood :

I  take  the  phrase  of  silver,  and  when  I  have  moulded  it  men  say
that  it  is  gold.

ITow  formerly  I  drew  forth  wealth  by  the  learning  I  had  gotten  ;
I  milked  by  it :

And  my  foot’s  sole  in  its  dignity  mounted  to  ranges  above  which
were  no  higher  steps.

Oft  were  the  presents  brought  in  pomp  to  my  dwelling,  but.  I
accepted  not  everyone  who  gave.

But  to-day  learning  is  the  chattel  of  slackest  sale  in  the  market  of
him  on  whom  hope  depends.

The  honour  of  its  sons  is  not  respected ;  neither  are  relationship
and  alliance  with  them  regarded.

It  is  as  though  they  were  corpses  in  their  courtyards,. from  whose
stench  men  withdraw  and  turn  aside.


mJSTTE  ASSEMBLY.


155


Now  my  heart  is  confonnded  through  my  trial  by  the  times ; —
strange  is  their  changing.

The  stretch  of  my  arm  is  straitened  through  the  straitness  of  my
hand’s  means  ;  cares  and  grief  assail  me.

And  my  fortune,  the  blameworthy,  has  led  me  to  the  paths  of  that
which  honour  deems  base.

For  I  sold  until  there  remained  to  me  not  a  mat  nor  household
goods  to  which  I  might  turn.

So  I  indebted  myself  until  I  had  burdened  my  neck  by  the  carry¬
ing  of  a  debt  such  that  ruin  had  been  lighter.

Then  five  days  I  wrapped  my  entrails  upon  hunger ;  but  when
^  the  hunger  scorched  me,

I  could  see  no  goods  except  her  outfit,  in  the  selling  of  which  I
might  go  about  and  bestir  myself.

So  I  went  about  with  it ;  but  my  soul  was  loathing,  and  my  eye
tearful,  and  my  heart  saddened.

But  when  I  made  free  with  it,  I  passed  not  the  bound  of  her  con¬
sent,  that  her  wrath  should  rise  against  me.

And  if  what  angers  her  be  her  fancying  that  it  was  my  fingers  that
should  make  gain  by  stringing ;

Or  that  when  I  purposed  to  woo  her  I  tinseled  my  speech  that
my  need  might  prosper  :

I  swear  by  Him  to  whoso  Ka'beh  the  companies  journey  when  the
fleet  camels  speed  them  onward.

That  deceit  towards  chaste  ladies  is  not  of  my  nature,  nor  are
glozing  and  lying  my  badge.

Since  I  was  reared  nought  has  attached  to  my  hand  save  the
swiftly-moving  reeds  and  the  books  :

For  it  is  my  wit  that  strings  necklaces,  not  my  hand;  what  is
strung  is  my  poetry  and  not  chaplets.

And  this  is  the  craft  I  meant  as  that  by  which  I  gathered  and
gained.

So  give  ear  to  my  explaining,  as  thou  hast  given  ear  to  her ;  and
show  respect  to  neither,  but  judge  as  is  due.

Now  when  lie  had  completed  the  structure  of  his
story  and  perfected  his  recitation,  the  Xadi  turned  to
the  young  woman,  being  heart  struck  at  the  verses  : —
And  said,  Enow  that  it  is  settled  among  all  judges
and  those  who  bear  authority — That  the  race  of  the
generous  is  perished,  and  that  the  times  incline  to  the


156


NINTH  AS8NMBLY.


niggardly. — Now  I  imagine  that  thy  husband  is  truthful
in  his  speech,  free  from  blame. — Eor  lo  !  he  has  acknow¬
ledged  the  debt  to  thee,  and  spoken  the  clear  truth ;  he
has  given  proof  that  he  can  string  verses,  and  it  is  plain
that  he  is  bared  to  the  bone. — Now  to  vex  him  who
shows  excuse  is  baseness,  to  imprison  the  destitute  is
a  sin :  to  conceal  poverty  is  self-denial,  to  await  relief
with  patience  is  devotion. — So  return  to  thy  chamber
and  pardon  the  master  of  thy  virginity: — ^Eefrain  from
thy  sharpness  of  tongue  and  submit  to  the  will  of  thy
Lord. — Then  in  the  almsgiving  he  assigned  them  a
portion,  and  of  the  dirhems  he  gave  them  a  pinch ;  and
said  to  them,  “  Beguile  yourselves  with  this  drop,
moisten  yourselves  with  this  driblet And  endure
against  the  fraud  and  the  trouble  of  the  time,  for  ‘  it
may  be  that  Grod  will  bring  victory  or  some  ordinance
from  himself.’  ” — Then  they  arose  to  go,  and  on  the  old
man  was  the  joy  of  one  loosed  from  the  bond,  and  the
exulting  of  one  who  is  in  aflduence  after  need.

Said  the  narrator:  Now  I  knew  that  he  was  Abh
Zayd  in  the  hour  that  his  sun  peeped  forth  and  his
spouse  reviled  him: — And  I  went  near  to  declare  his
versatility  and  the  fruiting  of  his  divers  branches. — ^But
then  I  was  afraid  that  the  Kadi  would  hit  on  his  false¬
hood  and  the  lackering  of  his  tongue,  and  not  see
fit,  when  he  knew  him,  to  train  him  to  his  bounty. —
So  I  forebore  from  speech  with  the  forbearing  of  one
who  doubts, 'and  I  folded  up  mention  of  him  as  the
roll  is  folded  over  the  writing; — Save  that  when  he
had  departed  and  had  come  whither  he  was  to  come, —
I  said,  “If  there  were  one  who  would  set  out  on  his
track,  he  might  bring  us  the  kernel  of  his  story,  and


NINTS  ASSEMBLY.


157


what  tissues  he  is  spreading  forth. — Then  the  Kadi  sent
one  of  his  trusty  ones  after  him  and  hade  him  to  spy
out  of  his  tidings. — ^But  he  delayed  not  to  return  hound¬
ing  in,  and  to  come  hack  loudly  laughing. — Said  the
Kadi  to  him,  “Well,  Abu  Maryam  ! — He  said,  “I  have
seen  a  wonder ;  I  have  heard  what  gives  me  a  thrill.” —
Said  the  Kadi  to  him,  “  What  hast  thou  seen,  and  what
is  it  thou  hast  learnt  ?” — He  said,  “  Since  the  old  man
,  went  forth  he  has  not  ceased  to  clap  with  his  hands  and
to  caper  with  his  feet  and  to  sing  with  the  full  of  his
cheeks :

I  was  near  falling  into  trouble  through  an  impudent  jade ;

And  should  have  gone  to  prison  but  for  the  Kadi  of  Alexandria.”

Then  the  Kadi  laughed  till  his  hat  fell  off,  and  his
composure  was  lost: — ^But  when  he  returned  to  gravity
and  had  followed  excess  by  prayer  for  pardon, — He  said,
“  0  God,  by  the  sanctity  of  thy  most  honoured  servants,
forbid  that  I  should  imprison  men  of  letters.” — Then  said
he  to  that  trusty  one,  “  Hither  with  him !”  and  he  set
forth  earnest  in  the  search ;  but  returned  after  a  while,
telling  that  the  man  was  gone. — ^Then  said  the  Kadi,
“Know  that  if  he  had  been  here  he  should  have  had
no  cause  to  fear, — For  I  would  have  imparted  to  biTp
as  he  deserves ;  I  would  have  shown  him  that  the  latter
state  is  letter  for  him  than  the  former.''^ — Said  A1  Harith,
son  of  Hammam,  Now,  when  I  saw  the  leaning  of
the  Kadi  towards  him,  and  that  yet  the  fruit  of  the
Kadi’s  notice  was  lost  to  him, — There  came  on  me  the
repentance  of  A1  Farazdak  when  he  put  away  Nawar,
or  of  A1  Kosa'i  when  the  daylight  appeared.


158


imm  A  SSEMBL  T.


THE  TENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“  OE  EAlpAH.”

In  tKis  Assembly  Abu  Zayd  is  found  making  gain  by  bis  usual
questionable  arts.  At  Eabbab,  on  tbe  Euphrates,  Harith  beholds  a
crowd  following  an  elderly  man  who  is  dragging  along  a  hand¬
some  youth.  The  former  accuses  the  boy  of  having  killed  his  son,
and  it  is  agreed  to  go  before  the  Governor.  The  purpose  of  the
elder,  who  proves  in  the  end  to  be  Abd  Zayd,  is  simply  to  induce  the
Governor  to  buy  off  so  handsome  a  youth  from  punishment,  with  the  *
view  of  taking  him  into  his  own  household.  When  they  are  in
court  the  old  man  makes  his  charge,  and  as  he  has  no  witnesses
the  boy  is  allowed  to  clear  himself  by  an  oath.  But  the  old  man
dictates  an  oath  in  which  he  enumerates  all  the  beauties  of  the  boy,
and  invokes  destruction  on  them  if  truth  be  not  spoken.  The  boy
refuses  to  swear  by  such  an  oath  ;  and  the  Governor,  who  desires  to
take  him  out  of  the  power  of  the  old  man,  then  makes  up  a  purse  to
satisfy  the  prosecutor.  A  hundred  denars  are  promised  ;  but  as  the
whole  cannot  be  collected  at  once  the  old  man  says  tliat  he  will  not  give
up  the  boy,  but  will  watch  Mm  all  night.  The  Governor  consents,  and
soon  the  two  are  left  together  in  the  courtyard.  Harith  then  accosts
Abu  Zayd,  and  asks  who  is  the  boy.  Abu  Zayd  replies,  that  he  is
his  son,  and  his  assistant  in  his  tricks ;  and  that  they  intend  to
make  their  escape  early  in  the  morning,  and  leave  the  Governor  to
Ms  disappointment.  This  they  do,  and  before  setting  forth  Abu
Zayd  delivers  to  Harith  a  sealed  paper  to  be  presented  to  the  out¬
witted  magistrate.  Harith,  dreading  to  present  it,  opens  it  and  finds
it  to  contain  a  copy  of  satirical  verses  on  the  Governor.  He  tears
the  paper  to  pieces,  regardless  of  his  promise  to  his  friend.  This
Assembly  is  exceedingly  elaborate  in  its  diction,  and  tbe  terms  of
the  oath  dictated  by  Abii  Zayd  have  much  poetical  beauty.  It  has
been  imitated  with  great  felicity  by  Eiickert,  whose  version  has
almost  the  spirit  of  the  original.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related ; — The  snmmon-
ing  of  desire  called  me  to  Eahbah,  the  city  of  Malik,
son  of  Towk, — And  I  obeyed  it,  mounted  on  a  fleet
camel,  and  unsheathing  an  active  purpose. — ^Now  when
I  had  cast  my  anchors  there,  and  fastened  my  ropes.


TENTH  ASSEMBLY.


159


and  liad  gone  forth  from  the  hath  after  shaving  my
head, — I  saw  a  boy  cast  in  the  mould  of  comeliness,  and
clothed  by  beauty  in  the  garb  of  perfection; — ^And  an
old  man  was  holding  on  to  his  sleeve,  asserting  that  he
had  slain  his  son ; — But  the  boy  denied  knowledge
of  him  and  was  horror-struck  at  his  suspicion ; — And
the  contention  belAveen  them  scattered  its  sparks,  and
the  crowding  upon  them  was  made  up  of  good  and
bad. — ^Now  after  their  quarrelling  had  been  excessive,
tkey  agreed  to  refer  to  the  Governor  of  the  town ; —
So  they  hastened  to  his  court  with  the  speed  of  Sulayk
in  his  career ; — ^And  when  they  were  there  the  old  man
renewed  his  charge  and  claimed  help. — So  the  Governor
made  the  boy  speak,  for  the  boy  had  already  fascinated
him  by  the  graces  of  his  bright  brow,  and  cloven  his
understanding  by  the  disposition  of  his  forelocks. — ^And
the  boy  said,  “  It  is  the  lie  of  a  great  liar  against  one
who  is  no  blood-shedder,  and  the  slander  of  a  knave
against  one  who  is  not  an  assassin. — Then  said  the
Governor  to  the  old  man,  “  If  two  just  Moslems  testify
for  thee,  well ;  if  not,  demand  of  him  the  oath.” — Said
the  old  man,  “Surely  he  struck  him  down  remote
from  men,  and  shed  his  blood  when  alone; — ^And  how
can  I  have  a  witness,  when  on  the  spot  there  was  no
beholder  ? — But  empower  me  to  dictate  an  oath  that  it
may  appear  to  thee  whether  he  speaks  true  or  lies.” —
He  said  to  him,  “Thou  hast  authority  for  that;  thou
with  thy  vehement  grief  for  thy  slain  son.” — ^Then  said
the  old  man  to  the  boy :  Say,  I  swear  by  Him  who  hath
adorned  foreheads  with  forelocks,  and  eyes  with  their
black  and  white,  and  eyebrows  with  separation,  and
smiling  teeth  with  regularity,  and  eyelids  with  languor.


160


TENTH  ASSEMBLY.


and  noses  with,  straightness,  and  cheeks  with  flame,  and
months  with  purity,  and  fingers  with  softness,  and  waists
with  slenderness,  that  I  have  not  killed  thy  son  hy
negligence,  nor  of  wilfulness,  nor  made  his  head  a
sheath  to  my  sword; — If  it  be  otherwise,  may  God
strike  my  eyelid  with  soreness,  and  my  cheek  with
freckles,  and  my  forelocks  with  droj^ing,  and  my  palm
shoot  with  greenness,  and  my  rose  with  the  ox-eye,
and  my  musk  with  a  foul  steam,  and  my  full  moon
with  waning,  and  my  silver  with  tarnishing,  and  my'
rays  with  the  dark.

Then  said  the  boy,  “The  scorching  of  affliction  he
my  lot  rather  than  to  take  such  an  oath !  let  me  yield
to  vengeance  rather  than  swear  as  no  one  has  ever
sworn!” — ^But  the  old  man  would  nought  but  make
him  swallow  the  oath  which  he  had  framed  for  him,
and  the  draughts  which  he  had  bittered. — And  the
dispute  ceased  not  to  blaze  between  them,  and  the  road
of  concord  to  be  rugged. — ^hTow  the  boy,  while  thus
resisting,  xcaptivated  the  Governor  by  his  motions,  and
made  him  covet  that  he  should  belong  to  him;  until
love  subdued  his  heart  and  fixed  in  his  breast ; — And
the  passion  which  enslaved  him,  and  the  desire  which
he  had  imagined  tempted  him  to  liberate  the  boy  and
then  get  possession  of  him,  to  free  him  from  the  noose
of  the  old  man,  and  then  catch  him  himself. — So  he
said  to  the  old  man,  “  Hast  thou  a  mind  for  that  which
is  more  seemly  in  the  stronger  and  nearer  to  god¬
fearing  ?  ” — He  said,  “  Whither  art  thou  pointing  that
I  should  follow  and  not  delay?” — He  said,  “I  tbink
it  well  that  thou  cease  from  altercation  and  be  content
with  a  hundred  denars, — On  condition  that  I  take  on.


TENTS  ASSEMBLY.


161


myself  part  of  it,  and  collect  the  rest  as  may  he.” — Said
the  old  man,  “  I  refuse  not ;  but  let  there  be  no  failure
to  thy  promise.” — Then  the  Grovernor  paid  him  down
twenty  and  assigned  among  his  attendants  the  making
up  of  fifty. — ^Bnt  the  robe  of  evening  grew  dim,  and
from  this  cause  the  rain  of  collection  was  cut  short.
— Then  he  said,  “Take  what  is  ready  and  leave  disput¬
ing;  and  on  me  be  it  to-moiffow  to  accomplish  that  the
rest  he  doled  to  thee  and  reach  thee.” — Said  the  old
*man,  “  I  will  do  this  on  the  condition  that  I  keep  close
to  him  to-night,  that  the  pupil  of  my  eye  guard  him, —
Until  when  on  the  dawning  of  the  morn  he  has  made
up  what  remains  of  the  sum  of  reconciliation, — Shell
may  get  clear  of  chick,  and  he  may  go  guiltless  as  the
wolf  went  guiltless  of  the  blood  of  the  son  of  Jacob.” —
Then  said  to  him  the  Governor,  “I  think  that  thou
dost  not  impose  what  is  immoderate  or  ask  what  is
excessive.”

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam:  How  when  I
perceived  that  the  pleadings  of  the  old  man  were  as  the
pleadings  of  Ibn  Surayj,  I  knew  him  to  be  the  Glory
of  the  Seriijis; — And  I  delayed  until  the  stars  of  the
darkness  glittered,  and  the  knots  of  the  crowd  dis¬
persed: — ^And  then  I  sought  the  Governor’s  court-yard  ;
and  lo !  the  old  man  guarding  the  youth. — ^And  I
adjured  him  by  God  to  say  whether  he  was  Abu  Zayd :
he  said,  “  Yes,  by  Him  who  hath  permitted  the  chase.” —
I  said,  “  Who  is  this  boy,  after  whom  the  understanding
darts  ?” — ^He  said,  “  In  kin  he  is  my  chick,  and  in  making
gain  my  springe.” — said,  “  Wilt  thou  not  be  satisfied
with  the  graces  of  his  make,  and  spare  the  Governor
temptation  by  his  forelock.’’ — He  said,  “  Were  it  not  that


u


162


TENTE  ASSEMBLY.


his  forehead  put  forth  its  ringlets,  I  should  not  have
snatched  the  fifty.” — Then  he  said,  “  Pass  the  night
near  me  that  we  may  quench  the  fire  of  grief,  and
give  enjoyment  its  turn  after  separation. — Por  I  have
resolved  to  slip  away  at  dawn,  and  to  burn  the  Governor’s
heart  with  the  flame  of  regret.” — Said  A1  Harith,  Then
I  spent  the  night  with  him  in  conversation  more
pleasant  than  a  garden  of  flowers,  or  a  woodland  of
trees  t — ^Until  when  the  Wolf’s  Tail  lighted  the  horizon,
and  the  brightening  of  the  day-break  came  on  in  its  time,
— ^He  mounted  the  back  of  the  highway,  and  left  the
Governor  to  taste  burning  torment. — ^And  he  committed
to  me,  in  the  hour  of  his  departure  a  paper  fiLrmly
closed, — ^And  said,  “  Hand  it  to  the  Governor  when  he
has  been  bereft  of  composure,  when  he  has  convinced
himself  of  our  flight.” — ^But  I  broke  the  seal  as  one  who
would  free  himself  from  a  letter  of  Mutelemmis,  and
behold  there  was  written  in  it :


Tell  the  Goyemor  whom  I  haye  left,  after  my  departure,  repenting,
grieying,  biting  his  hands,

That  the  old  man  has  stolen  his  money  and  the  young  one
his  heart ;  and  he  is  scorched  in  the  flame  of  a  double  regret.

He  was  generous  with  his  coin  when  loye  blinded  his  eye

(^^},  and  he  has  ended  with  losing  either

Calm  thy  grief,  0  afflicted,  for  it  profits  not  to  seek  the  traces
after  the  substance  is  gone.

But  if  what  has  befallen  thee  is  terrible  to  thee  as  the  ill-fate  of
A1  Hosayn  is  terrible  to  the  Moslems  ;

Yet  hast  thou  gotten  in  exchange  for  it  understanding  and  cau¬
tion  ;  and  the  wise  man,  the  prudent,  wishes  for  these.

So  henceforth  resist  desires,  and  know  that  the  chasing  of  gazelles
is  not  easy  ;

No,  nor  does  every  bird  enter  the  springe,  even  though  it  be  sur¬
rounded  by  silver.

And  how  many  a  one  who  seeks  to  make  a  prey  becomes  a  prey
himself,  and  meets  with  nought  but  the  shoes  of  Honayn !


ELEVENTH  ASSEMBLY,


163


Now  consider  well,  and  forecast  not  every  tliimdercloxid :  many
a  thundercloud  may  have  in  it  the  bolts  of  death :

And  cast  down  thine  eye,  that  thou  mayest  rest  from  a  passion
by  which  thou  wouldest  clothe  thyself  with  the  garment  of  infamy
and  disgrace.

For  the  trouble  of  man  is  the  following  of  the  soul’s  desire ;  and
the  seed  of  desire  is  the  longing  look  of  the  eye.

Said  the  narrator, — ^But  I  tore  the  paper  piece-meal,
and  cared  not  whether  he  blamed  or  pardoned  me.


THE  ELEYENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED

SAWEH;’

This  and  the  following  Assembly  are  justly  reckoned  among  the
master-pieces  of  the  author.  To  pass  suddenly  from  the  most  solemn
subjects  to  pleasantry,  to  place  in  the  mouth  of  a  clever  impostor
the  most  serious  warnings  that  can  be  addressed  to  mankind  may  be
morally  objectionable ;  but  in  the  Moslem-  world,  where  religion
is  mixed  up  with  all  the  concerns  of  life,  and  pious  discourse  and
phrases  abound,  it  excites  little  repugnance.  The  design  of  the
author  in  the  present  composition  was  to  produce  an  elaborate  sermon
in  rhymed  prose  and  in  verse,  and  his  genius  takes  a  higher  flight
than  usual.  The  incident  on  which  the  Assembly  is  founded  is
simple.  Harith,  in  a  fit  of  religious  zeal,  betakes  himself  to  the
public  burial  ground  of  the  city  of  Saweh,  for  the  purpose  of  contem¬
plation.  He  finds  a  funeral  in  progress,  and  when  it  is  over,  an  old
man,  with  his  face  muffied  in  a  cloak,  takes  his  stand  on  a  hillock,
and  pours  forth  a  discourse  on  the  certainty  of  death  and  judgment  j
rebuking  his  hearers  for  their  worldly  selfishness,  and  warning  them
that  wealth  and  power  are  of  little  avail  against  the  general  leveller.
He  then  rises  into  poetry  and  declaims  a  piece  which  is  one  of  the
noblest  productions  of  Arabic  literature.  In  lofty  morality,  in  reli¬
gious  fervour,  in  beauty  of  language,  in  power  and  grace  of  metre,  this
magnificent  hymn  is  unsurpassed.  From  this,,  and  other  similar
compositions  of  Hariri,  a  better  idea  of  what  is  noblest  and  purest
in  Islam  will  be  gained,  than  from  all  the  works  of  the  most
orthodox  doctors.  Harith,  like  the  others  who  are*  present,  is  much
affected ;  but  he  is  indignant  when  he  finds  that  the  preacher  is  re-


164


ELEVEN TK  ASSEMBLY.


ceiving  abundant  alms,  and  that  beyond  a  doubt  he  is  Abu  Zayd.
He  taxes  him  with  his  hypocrisy,  and  receives  an  impudent  reply.
They  then  separate  angrily.  In  this  Assembly  a  view  of  moral
duties  and  future  judgment  is  exhibited  which  differs  little  from
that  of  Christians.  The  enlightened  and  polished  man  of  letters
of  the  fifth  century  was  not  likely  to  teach  the  coarse  doctrines  of  a
sensual  paradise,  to  be  secured  by  hard  fighting,  which  roused  the
ignorant  warriors  of  Arabia  in  the  first  days  of  Islam.  In  all
the  work  of  Hariri,  there  is  not  a  trace  of  this  theology,  which  the
West  erroneously  attributes  to  every  Moslem.  Self-denial  and  bene¬
volence  are  with  him  the  duties  of  every  man ;  and  by  them  each
may  hope  to  obtain  everlasting  happiness,  but  on  the  nature  of  both
future  rewards  and  punishments  he  is  discreetly  silent.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  was  aware  of
hardness  of  heart  while  I  sojourned  at  Saweh. — So  I
betook  myself  to  the  Tradition  handed  down,  that  its  cure
is  by  visiting  the  tombs. — And  when  I  had  reached
the  mansion  of  the  dead,  the  storehouse  of  mouldering
remains,  I  saw  an  assemblage  over  a  grave  that  had
been  dug,  and  a  corpse  that  was  being  buried. —  So  I
drew  aside  to  them,  meditating  on  the  end  of  man,
and.  calling  to  mind  those  of  my  people  who  were  gone. —
And  when  they  had  sepulchred  the  dead,  and  the  crying
of  Alas!  was  over,  an  old  man  stood  forth  on  high,
from  a  hillock,  leaning  on  a  staff. —  And  he  had  veiled
his  face  with  his  cloak,  and  disguised  his  form  for  crafti¬
ness. — And  he  said :  Let  those  who  work,  work  for  an
end  like  this. — ^Xow  take  thought,  0  ye  negligent,
and  gird  yourselves,  ye  slothful,  and  look  well,  ye
observers. — How  is  it  with  you  that  the  burying  of  your
fellows  grieves  yon  not,  and  that  the  pouring  in  of  the
mould  frightens  you  not;  that  ye  heed  not  the  Visita¬
tions  of  misfortune;  that  ye  prepare  not  for  the  going
down  to  your  graves;  that  ye  are  not  moved  to  tears
at  the  eye  that  weeps ;  that  ye  take  not  warning  at  the


ELEVENTS  ASSEMBLY.


165


death-message  when  it  is  heard;  that  ye  are  not
affrighted  when  an  intimate  is  lost ;  that  ye  are  not
saddened  when  the  mourning  assembly  is  gathered? —
One  of  you  follows  home  the  dead  man’s  bier,  biit
his  heart  is  set  towards  his  house ; — ^And  he  is  present
at  the  burying  of  his  kinsman,  but  his  thought  is  of
securing  his  portion. — He  leaves  his  loved  friend  with
the  worms,  then  retires  alone  with  his  pipes  and  lutes. —
Ye  have  sorrowed  over  your  riches,  if  but  a  grain  were
notched  away,  yet  have  ye  been  forgetful  of  the  cutting
off  of  your  friends : — And  ye  have  been  cast  down  at  the
befalling  of  adversity,  but  have  made  little  of  the  perish¬
ing  of  your  kindred. — ^Ye  have  laughed  at  a  funeral
as  ye  laughed  not  in  the  hour  of  dancing ;  ye  have
walked  wantonly  behind  biers,  as  ye  walked  not  in
the  day  that  ye  grasped  gifts. — ^Ye  have  turned  from  the
recital  of  the  mourning  women  to  the  preparing  of
banquets  ;  and  from  the  anguish  of  the  bereaved  to
daintiness  in  feastings. — ^Ye  care  not  for  him  who  moul¬
ders,  and  ye  move  not  the  thought  of  death  in  your
mind. — So  that  it  is  as  if  ye  were  joined  to  Death  by
clientship,  or  had  gotten  security  from  Time,  or  were
confident  of  your  own  safety,  or  had  made  sure  of  a  peace
with  the  Destroyer  of  delights. — ^No  !  it  is  an  ill  thing
that  ye  imagine. — Again,  no !  surely  ye  shall  learn.
Then  he  recited :

0  thou  who  claimest  understanding ;  how  long,  0  brother  of  delu¬
sion,  wilt  thou  marshal  sin  and  blame,  and  err  exceeding  error  ?

Is  not  the  sliaine  plain  to  tlice  ?  doth  not  hoariness  warn  thee  ?
(and  in  its  counsel  thoro  is  no  doubtfulness)  ;  nor  hath  thy  hear¬
ing  become  deaf.

Is  not  Death  calling  thee  ?  doth  he  not  make  thee  hear  his  voice  ?
dost  thou  not  fear  thy  passing  away,  so  as  to  be  wary  and  anxious  ?

How  long  wilt  thou  be  bewildered  in  carelessness,  and  walk


166


ELEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.


proudly  in  vanity,  and  go  eagerly  to  diversion,  as  if  death  were  not
for  all  ?

Till  when  will  last  thy  swerving,  and  thy  delaying  to  mend  habits
that  unite  in  thee  vices  whose  every  sort  shall  be  collected  in  thee  ?

If  thou  anger  thy  Master  thou  art  not  disquieted  at  it ;  but  if  thy
scheme  be  bootless  thou  burnest  with  vexation.

If  the  gTaving  of  the  yellow  one  gleam  to  thee  thou  art  joyful ;
but  it  the  bier  pass  by  thee  thou  feignest  grief,  and  there  is  no  grief.

Thou  resistest  him  who  counselleth  righteousness ;  thou  art  hard
in  understanding ;  thou  swervest  aside :  but  thou  foUowest  the  guid¬
ing  of  him  who  deceiveth,  who  lieth,  who  defameth.

Thou  walkest  in  the  desire  of  thy  soul ;  thou  schemest  after
money ;  but  thou  forgettest  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and  remem-
berest  not  what  is  there.

But  if  true  happiness  had  looked  upon  thee,  thy  own  look  would
not  have  led  thee  amiss ;  nor  wouldest  thou  be  saddened  when  the
preaching  wipeth  away  griefs.

Thou  shalt  weep  blood,  not  tears,  when  thou  perceivest  that  no
company  can  protect  thee  in  the  Court  of  Assembling ;  no  kinsman
of  mother  or  father.

It  is  as  though  I  could  see  thee  when  thou  goest  down  to  the
vault  and  divest  deep ;  when  thy  kinsmen  have  committed  thee  to  a
place  narrower  than  a  needle’s  eye.

There  is  the  body  stretched  out  that  the  worms  may  devour  it,
until  the  coffin-wood  is  bored  through  and  the  bones  moulder.

And  afterward  there  is  no  escape  from  that  review  of  souls  :  since
Sirat  is  prepared ;  its  bridge  is  stretched  over  the  fire  to  every  one
who  cometh  thither.

And  how  many  a  guide  shall  go  astray !  and  how  many  a  great
one  shall  be  vile !  and  how  many  a  learned  one  shall  slip  and  say

The  business  surpasseth.”

Therefore  hasten,  0  simple  one,  to  that  by  which  the  bitter  is
made'  sweet ;  for  thy  life  is  now  near  to  decay  and  thou  hast  not
withdrawn  thyself  from  blame.

And  rely  not  on  fortune  though  it  be  soft,  though  it  be  gay  :  for
so  wilt  thou  be  found  like  one  deceived  by  a  viper  that  spitteth
venom.

And  lower  thyself  from  thy  loftiness ;  for  death  is  meeting  thee
and  reaching  at  thy  collar ;  and  he  is  one  who  shrinketh  not  back
when  he  hath  purposed.

And  avoid  proud  turning  away  of  the  cheek  if  fortune  have  pros¬
pered  thee  :  bridle  thy  speech  if  it  would  run  astray ;  for  how  happy
is  he  who  bridleth  it  1


ELEVJENTH  ASSEMBLY.


167


And  relieve  the  brother  of  sorrow,  and  believe  him  when  he
speaketh ;  and  mend  thy  ragged  conduct ;  for  he  hath  prospered
who  mendeth  it.

And  plume  him  whose  plumage  hath  fallen  in  calamity  great  or
small ;  and  sorrow  not  at  the  loss,  and  be  not  covetous  in  amassing.

And  resist  thy  base  nature,  and  accustom  thy  hand  to  liberality,
and  listen  not  to  blame  for  it,  and  keep  thy  hand  from  hoarding.

And  make  provision  of  good  for  thy  soul,  and  leave  that  which
will  bring  on  ill,  and  prepare  the  ship  for  thy  journey,  and  dread  the
deep  of  the  sea.

Thus  have  I  given  my  precepts,  friend,  and  shown  as  one  who
.showeth  clearly  :  and  happy  the  man  who  walketh  by  my  doctrines
and  maketh  them  his  example.

Then  he  drew  hack  his  sleeve  from  an  arm  strong  of
sinew,  on  which  he  had  fastened  the  splints  of  deceit  not
of  fracture; — ^Presenting  himself  to  beg  in  the  garb  of
impudence : — And  by  it  he  beguiled  those  people  until
his  sleeve  was  brimmed  and  full ; — Then  he  came  down
from  the  hillock  merry  at  the  gift. — Said  the  narrator:
But  I  pulled  him  from  behind  by  the  hem  of  his  cloak;
and  he  turned  to  me  submissively,  and  faced  me,  salut¬
ing  me: — And  lo!  it  was  our  old  Abu  Zayd,  in  his
very  self,  and  in  all  his  deceit :  and  I  said  to  him,

How  many,  Abu  Zayd,  will  be  tbe  varieties  of  tby  cunning  to
drive* tbe  prey  to  tby  net?  and  wilt  tbou  not  care  wbo  censures?

And  he  answered  without  shame  and  without  hesi¬
tation  :

Look  ■well,  and  leave  thy  blaming ;  for,  tell  me,  hast  thou  ever
loiown  a  time  -when  a  man  -would  not  win  of  the  world  when  the
game  was  in.  his  hands.

Then  I  said  to  him :  Away  with  thee,  Old  Shaykh  of
Hell,  laden  with  infamy ! — For  there  is  nothing  like
thee  for  the  fairness  of  thy  seeming  and  the  foulness  of
thy  purpose ;  except  silvered  dung  or  a  whited  sewer. —
Then  we  parted ;  and  I  went  away  to  the  right,  and  he


168


TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.


went  away  to  the  left ;  and  I  set  myself  to  the  quarter  of
the  southj  and  he  set  himself  to  the  quarter  of  the  north.


THE  TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
^^OF  DAMASCUS.’’

Harith,  being  in  affluence,  crosses  from  Irak  to  Damascus  to  enjoy
the  luxury  of  that  city.  After  he  has  had  his  fill  of  pleasure  h^
bethinks  himself  of  returning  homeward,  and  joins  a  caravan  that  is
about  to  cross  the  Semaweh,  the  desert  which  lies  between  Syria  and
the  Euphrates.  The  travellers  are  ready  to  depart,  but  are  delayed
by  their  inability  to  find  an  escort,  which  they  think  indispensable
for  their  protection  against  robbers.  While  they  are  consulting  they
are  watched  by  a  dervish,  who  at  last  announces  to  them  that  he  has
the  means  of  keeping  them  safe  from  harm ;  and,  on  their  inquiring
further,  tells  them  that  his  safeguard  is  a  magic  form  of  words
revealed  to  him  in  a  dream.  They  are  at  first  incredulous,  but  at
length  consent  to  take  him  with  them,  and  to  use  his  incantation.
He  then  repeats  it,  and  it  proves  to  be  a  prayer  full  of  assonances
and  rhymes,  beseeching  the  general  protection  of  the  Almighty.
They  all  learn  it  by  heart  and  then  set  forth,  repeating  it  twice  a
day  on  their  journey.  As  they  are  not  molested  on  the  road  they
judge  the  charm  to  have  been  successful ;  and  when  they  come  in
sight  of  'Anah,  the  first  town  on  the  other  side  of  the  desert,  they
reward  him  richly  with  what  he  likes  best,  gold  and  jewels.  When
he  has  taken  all  he  can  get,  he  makes  his  escape,  and  the  next  thing
they  hear  of  him  is  that  he  is  drinking  in  the  taverns  of  Anah,  a
city  celebrated  for  its  wine.  Harith,  shocked  at  this  enormity  in  a
pious  dervish,  determines  to  seek  him  out,  and  soon  finds  him  revel-  -
ling  amid  wine  and  music  in  the  guest  chamber  of  a  wine-shop.  He
taxes  him  with  his  wickedness,  and  then  the  old  man  improvises  a
Bacchanalian  chant,  which  is  one  of  the  finest  pieces  in  Hariri’s
work.  In  form  this  poem  resembles  that  which  is  introduced  into  the
last  Assembly,  though  the  metre  is  more  light  and  lively,  as  Hariri,
no  doubt,  desired  to  display  his  genius  by  the  contrast.  Hdrith,
chainned  with  the  verses,  asks  who  the  old  man  is ;  and  from  his
answer  discovers  that  he  is  Abu  Zayd.  He  makes  an  ineffectual
attempt  to  reclaim  him,  and  then  quits  the  wine-shop,  repentant  at
having  set  foot  in  such  a  place.  This  Assembly  is  one  of  the  most


TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.  1^9

admired  productions  of  the  author,  who  has  lavished  on  it  all  the
resources  of  his  marvellous  rhetoric.  It  has  been  imitated  with
great  skill  by  Eiickert ;  who,  however,  wanders  very  far  from  the
original.

A1  Haritli,  son  of  Hamm&m,  related : — I  journeyed
from  Irak  to  the  Ghutah ;  and  then  was  I  master  of
haltered  steeds  and  envied  wealth. — Freedom  of  arm
called  me  to  diversion,  fullness  of  store  led  me  to  pride.
— And  when  I  had  reached  the  place  after  toil  of  soul,
after  making  lean  my  camel, — I  found  it  such  as  tongues
describe  it;  and  in  it  was  whatever  souls  long  for  or
eyes  delight  in.^ — So  I  thanked  the  bounty  of  travel  and
ran  a  heat  with  pleasure : — ^And  began  there  to  break
the  seals  of  desires  and  gather  the  clusters  of  delights. —
Untn  some  travellers  were  making  ready  for  the  journey
to  Irak,  and  I  had  so  recovered  from  my  drowning,  that
regret  visited  me  in  calling  to  mind  my  home  and  long¬
ing  after  my  fold. — Then  I  struck  the  tents  of  exile  and
saddled  the  steeds  of  return. — And  when  the  company
had  equipped  themselves  and  agreement  was  completed,
we  shrank  from  setting  forth  without  taking  with  us  a
guard. — ^And  we  sought  one  from  every  tribe  and  used  a
thousand  devices  to  obtain  him. —  But  to  find  him  in
the  clans  failed,  so  that  we  thought  he  was  not  among
the  living. — And  for  the  want  of  such  a  one  the  resolves
of  the  travellers  were  bewildered,  and  they  assembled  at
the  gate  of  Jayrfin  to  take  counsel. — ^And  they  ceased
not  tying  and  untying,  and  plaiting  and  twining,  until
raggestion  was  es^austed  and  the  hoper  despaired. —
But  opposite  them  was  a  person  whose  demeanour  was
as  the  demeanour  of  the  youthful,  and  his  garb  as  the
garb  of  monks,  and  in  his  hand  was  the  rosary  of  women,
and  in  his  eyes  the  mark  of  giddiness  from  watchings. —


170


TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.


And  he  had  fastened  his  gaze  on  the  assemblage  and
sharpened  his  ear  to  steal  a  hearing. — ^And  when  it  was
the  time  of  their  turning  homeward  and  their  secret
was  manifest  to  him, — He  said  to  them,  “  0  people,  let
your  care  relieve  itself,  let  your  mind  he  tranquil  ;  for
I  will  guard  you  with  that  which  shall  put  off  your  fear
and  show  itself  in  accord  with  you.” — Said  the  narrator :
Then  we  asked  him  to  show  us  concerning  his  safe  con¬
duct,  and  promised  him  a  higher  wage  for  it  than  for  an
embassy. — And  he  declared  it  to  be  some  words  which
he  had  been  taught  in  a  dream,  whereby  to  guard  him¬
self  from  the  malice  of  mankind. — Then  began  one  to
steal  a  look  at  another,  and  to  move  his  eyes  between
glances  sideward  and  downward. — So  that  it  was  plain
to  him  that  we  thought  meanly  of  his  story,  and  conceived
it  to  he  futile. — ^Whereupon  he  said.  How  is  it  that  ye  take
my  earnest  for  jest,  and  treat  my  gold  as  dross  ? — ^How,
by  Allah,  oft  have  I  gone  through  fearful  tracts  and
entered  among  deadly  dangers  : — And  with  this  I  have
needed  not  the  companying  of  a  guard  or  to  take  with
me  a  quiver. — Besides,  I  will  remove  what,  gives  you
doubt,  I  will  draw  away  the  distrust  that  has  come  on
you, — In  that  I  will  consent  with  you  in  the  desert  and
accompany  you  on  the  Semaweh. — ^Then,  if  my  promise
has  spoken  you  true,  do  ye  renew  my  weal  and  prosper
my  fortune : — ^But  if  my  mouth  has  lied  to  you,  then
rend  my  skin  and  pour  out  my  blood.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  Then  we  were  in¬
spired  to  heheve  his  vision  and  take  as  true  what  he
had  related; — So  we  ceased  from  disputing  with  him
and  cast  lots  for  carrying  him. — And  at  his  word  we  cut
the  loops  of  hindrance,  and  put  away  fear  of  harm  or


TWELFTS  ASSEMBLY.


171


stay ; — And  when  the  pack  saddles  were  fastened  on
and  the  setting  forth  was  near,  we  sought  to  learn
from  him  the  magic  words  that  we  might  make  them  a
lasting  safeguard. — ^He  said  :  Let  each  of  you  repeat  the
Mother  of  the  Koran  as  often  as  day.  or  night  comes  on ;
— Then  let  him  say  with  lowly  tongue  and  humble  voice,
— 0  God !  0  thou  who  givest  life  to  the  mouldering
dead  !  0  thou  who  avertest  harms  !  0  thou  who  guardest
.  from  terrors !  0  thou  generous  in  rewarding !  0  thou
the  refuge  of  suppliants  !  0  thou  the  Lord  of  pardon  and
protection  !  Send  thy  blessing  on  Mohammed,  the  Seal
of  thy  prophets,  the  Bringer  of  thy  messages,  and  on
the  Lights  of  his  kindred,  the  Keys  of  his  victory ; —
And  give  me  refuge,  0  God,  from  the  mischiefs  of  devils
and  the  assaults  of  princes;  from  the  vexing  of  the
wrongers,  and  from  suffering  through  the  tyrannous ;
from  the  enmity  of  transgressors,  and  from  the  trans¬
gression  of  enemies ;  from  the  conquest  of  conquerors,
from  the  spoiling  of  spoilers,  from  the  crafts  of  the
crafty,  from  the  treacheries  of  the  treacherous; — ^And
deliver  me,  0  God,  from  the  wrongfulness  of  neighbours
and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  wrongful; — ^And  keep
from  me  the  hands  of  the  harmful ;  bring  me  forth  from
the  darkness  of  the  oppressors  ;  place  me  by  thy  mercy
among  thy  servants  who  do  aright. — 0  God,  keep  me  in
my  own  land  and’ in  my  journeying,  in  my  exile  and  my
coming  homeward,  in  my  foraging  and  my  return  from
it,  in  my  traflicking  and  my  success  from  it,  in  my
adventuring  and  my  withdrawing  from  it. — ^And  guard
me  in  myself  and  my  property,  in  my  honour  and  my
goods,  in  my  family  and  my  means,  in  my  household
and  my  dwelling,  in  my  strength  and  my  fortune,  in


172


TWELFTH  AS  SEME  L  Y.


my  riches  and  my  death. — ^Bring  not  on  me  reverse ;
make  not  the  invader  lord  over  me,  but  give  me  from
thyself  helping  power. — 0  God,  watch  over  me  with  thy
eye  and  thy  aid,  distinguish  me  hy  thy  safeguard  and
thy  bounty,  befriend  me  with  thy  election  and  thy  good,
and  consign  me  not  to  the  keeping  of  any  hut  thee.—
But  grant  to  me  health  that  weareth  not  away,  and
allot  to  me  comfort  that  perisheth  not ;  and  free  me  from
the  terrors  of  misfortune,  and  shelter  me  with  the  cover¬
ings  of  thy  boons;  make  not  the  talons  of  enemies  to
prevail  against  me,  for  thou  art  He  that  heareth  prayer.

Then  he  looked  down,  and  he  turned  not  a  glance,  he
answered  not  a  word: — So  that  we  said,  “A  fear  has
confounded  him  or  a  stupor  struck  him  dumb.” — Then  he
raised  his  head  and  drew  his  breath,  and  said,  I  swear
by  the  heaven  with  its  constellations,  and  the  earth  with
its  plains,  and  the  pouring  flood,  and  the  blazing  sun,
and  the  sounding  sea,  and  the  wind  and  the  dust-storm, —
That  this  is  the  most  sure  of  charms,  one  that  will  best
suffice  you  for  the  wearers  of  the  helmet. — He  who
repeats  it  at  the  smiling  of  the  dawn  has  no  alarm  of
danger  to  the  red  of  eve ; — ^And  he  who  whispers  it  to  the
vanguard  of  the  dark  is  safe  the  night  long  from  plunder.

Said  the  narrator :  So  we  learned  it  till  we  knew  it
thoroughly,  and  rehearsed  it  together  that  we  might  not
forget  it. — Then  we  set  forth,  urging  the  beasts  by
prayers,  not  by  the  song  of  drivers ;  and  guarding  the
loads  by  words,  not  hy  warriors. — And  our  companion
frequented  us  evening  and  morning,  but  required  not
of  us  our  promises  : — Till  when  we  spied  the  house-tops
of  'Anah,  he  said  to  us,  “  Now,  your  help,  your  help!” —
Then  we  set  before  him  the  exposed  and  the  hidden,  and


TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.


173


showed  him  the  corded  and  the  sealed. — ^And  said  to  him,
“  Decide  as  thou  wilt,  for  thou  wilt  find  among  us  none
but  will  consent.” — But  nothing  enlivened  him  but  the
light,  the  adorning  ;  nothing  was  comely  in  his  eye  but
the  coin. — So  of  those  he  loaded  on  his  burden,  and
rose  up  with  enough  to  repair  his  poverty. — Then  he
dodged  us  as  dodges  the  cut-purse,  and  slipped,  away  from
us  as  slips  quicksilver. — And  his  departure  saddened  us,
his  shooting  away  astonished  us  : — And  we  ceased  not  to
seek  him  in  every  assembly,  and  to  ask  news  of  him
from  each  that  might  mislead  or  guide. — ^Until  it  was
said,  “  Since  he  entered  'Anah  he  has  not  quitted  the
tavern.” — Then  the  foulness  of  this  report  set  me  on  to
test  it,  and  to  walk  in  a  path  to  which  I  belonged  not. —
So  I  went  by  night  to  the  wine-hall  in  disguised  habit ;
and  there  was  the  old  man  in  a  gay-coloured  dress
amid  casks  and  wine  vats ; — And  about  him  were  cup¬
bearers  surpassing  in  beauty,  and  lights  that  glittered,
and  the  myrtle  and  the  jasmine,  and  the  pipe  and  the
lute. — And  at  one  time  he  bade  broach  the  wine  casks,
and  at  another  he  called  the  lutes  to  give  utterance ;  and
now  he  inhaled  the  perfumes,  and  now  he  courted  the
gazelles. — ^But  when  I  had  thus  stumbled  on  his  hypo¬
crisy,  and  the  differing  of  his  to-day  from  his  yester¬
day  ; — I  said  to  him.  Woe  to  thee,  accursed  !  hast
thou  forgotten  the  day  at  the  Jayrdn? — ^But  he  laughed
heartily,  and  then  indited  charmingly:

I  cling  to  journoying,  I  cross  deserts,  I  loathe  pride  that  I  may  eull

joy:

And  I  plunge  into  floods,  and  tamo  steeds  that  I  may  draw  the
trains  of  pleasure  and  delight.

And  I  throw  away  staidness,  and  sell  my  land,  for  the  sipping  of
wine,  for  the  quaffing  of  cups.


174


TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.


And  were  it  not  for  longing  after  the  drinking  of  wine  my  month
would  not  utter  its  elegancies  ;

Nor  would  my  craft  have  lured  the  travellers  to  the  land  of  Irak,
through  my  carrying  of  rosaries.

Now  be  not  angry,  nor  cry  aloud,  nor  chide,  for  my  excuse  is
plain :

And  wonder  not  at  an  old  man  who  settles  himself  in  a  well-
filled  house  by  a  wine  cask  that  is  brimming.

For  truly  wine  strengthens  the  bones  and  heals  sickness  and
drives  away  grief.

And  the  purest  of  joy  is  when  the  grave  man  throws  off  the  veils
of  shame  and  flings  them  aside  :

And  the  sweetest  of  passion  is  when  the  love-crazed  ceases  from"
the  concealing  of  his  love,  and  shows  it  openly.

Then  avow  thy  love  and  cool  thy  heart :  or  else  the  fire-staff
of  thy  grief  will  rub  a  spark  on  it ;

And  heal  thy  wounds,  and  draw  out  thy  cares  by  the  daughter  of
the  vine,  her  the  desired :

And  assign  to  thy  evening  draught  a  cup-bearer  who  will  stir  the
torment  of  desire  when  she  gazes ;

And  a  singer  who  will  raise  such  a  voice  that  the  mountains
of  iron  shall  thrill  at  it  when  she  chants.

And  rebel  against  the  adviser  who  will  not  permit  thee  to  approach
a  beauty  when  she  consents.

And  range  in  thy  cunning  even  to  perverseness ;  and  care  not
what  is  said  of  thee,  and  catch  what  suits  thee  :

And  leave  thy  father  if  he  refuse  thee,  and  spread  thy  nets  and
hunt  who  comes  by  thee.

But  be  sincere  with  thy  friend,  and  avoid  the  niggardly,  and
bestow  kindness,  and  be  constant  in  gifts  ;

And  take  refuge  in  repentance  before  thy  departure ;  for  whoso
knocks  at  the  door  of  the  Merciful  causes  it  to  open.

Then  I  said  to  hirrij  0  rare  thy  recitation,  but  fie  on
thy  misconduct ! — ^Now,  by  Allah,  tell  me  from  what
thicket  is  thy  root,  for  thy  puzzle  Texes  me.’’ — He  said
I  love  not  to  disclose  myself ;  yet  I  will  intimate  it :

I  am  the  novelty  of  the  time,  the  wonder  of  nations  ;

1  am  the  wily  one,  who  plays  his  wiles  among  Arabs  and
foreigners ;

But  not  the  less  a  brother  of  need,  whom  fortune  vexes  and


wrongs.


twelfth:  assembly.


175


And  the  father  of  children  who  lie  out  lilce  meat  on  the  tray  :

Now  the  brother  of  want,  who  has  a  household,  is  not  blamed  if
he  be  wily.

Said  the  narrator:  Then  I  knew  that  it  was  Abu
Zayd,  the  man  of  ill-fame  and  disgrace,  he  that  blackens
the  face  of  his  hoariness. — ^And  the  greatness  of  his
contumacy  offended  me,  and  the  foulness  of  the  path
of  his  resorting: — So  I  said  to  him  with  the  tongue
of  indignation  and  the  confidence  of  acquaintance :  Is
it  not  time,  old  man,  that  thou  withdraw  from  debauch¬
ery?” — ^But  he  was  angry,  and  growled,  and  his  coun¬
tenance  changed,  and  he  thought  a  while: — And  then
he  said,  “It  is  a  night  for  merriment,  not  for  rebuke,
an  occasion  for  drinking  wine,  not  for  contention ;  so
leave  speaking  thy  thought  until  we  meet  to-morrow.”
— Then  I  left  him,  through  fear  of  his  dninken  hu¬
mour,  not  through  dependence  on  his  promise; — And
I  passed  my  night  clothed  in  the  mourning  of  re¬
pentance,  at  having  advanced  the  steps  of  my  foot  to
the  daughter  of  the  vine,  not  of  grace. — ^And  I  made
a  vow  to  God  Almighty  that  I  would  never  again
enter  the  tavern  of  a  liquor-seller,  even  that  I
might  be  endowed  with  the  dominion  of  Bagdad ; — ^And
that  I  would  not  look  upon  the  vats  of  wine,  even  that
the  season  of  youth  might  be  restored  to  me. — ^Then  we
saddled  the  white  camels  in  the  last  darkness  of  night,
and  left  together  those  two  old  ones,  Abu  Zayd  and  Iblis.


176


THimEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


THE  THIETEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“OF  BAGDAD.”

This  Assembly  is  remarkable  for  an  enigmatical  address,  which
is  difficult  to  be  understood,  even  by  one  acquainted  with  the
original.  Harith  is  conversing  with  some  poets,  when  an  old
woman,  followed  by  some  lean  and  feeble  children,  -  makes  her
appearance.  She  at  once  begins  to  solicit  alms,  and  sets  forth  her
former  prosperity  and  her  present  distress  in  a  composition  the
peculiarity  of  which  is  that  she  introduces  into  it  the  names  of  parts
of  the  human  body,  each  of  which  is  to  be  taken,  and  is  intelligible
only  when  taken,  in  another  sense.  Thus  the  word  which
means  eye-hall,  means  also  he  who  holes  upon  one  with  respect,  and
must  be  understood  in  this  second  sense  ;  the  word  has  the

meanings  of  eye-lrow  and  attendant,  the  latter  of  which  must  be
imderstood.  The  passage,  though  not  much  in  accordance  with
European  tastes,  belongs  to  an  order  of  composition  which  the  Arabs,
seduced  by  the  extraordinary  richness  of  their  language,  have  much
affected.  The  close  of  the  address  introduces,  in  an  equally  artificial
manner,  the  names  of  colours.  The  old  woman  afterwards  recites
some  charming  verses,  and  obtains  alms  from  the  people.  She  is
followed  by  Harith,  who  discovers  her  to  be  Abu  Zayd,  the  im¬
postor,  who,  when  alone,  is  heard  to  improvise  some  verses  on  his
own  cleverness.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  was  in  com¬
pany,  on  the  hanks  of  the  Zowra,  with  some  Shaykhs  of
the  poets. — They  were  such  that  no  riyal  would  keep
up  even  with  their  dust,  no  disputant  would  run  with
them  in  the  training-ground. — And  we  flowed  in  a
discourse  that  shamed  the  flowers,  until  we  had  halved
the  day. — How,  when  the  yield  of  our  thoughts  was
failing,  and  our  souls  were  desiring  after  their  nests, —
We  caught  sight  of  an  old  woman,  who  approached  from
afar,  and  trotted  the  trot  of  a  good  steed. — And  she  was
leading  behind  her  some  children,  thinner  than  spindles.


TEIRTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


177


weaker  than  the  young  of  doves. — And  when  she  saw  us,
she  failed  not  to  make  towards  us ; — And  when  she  stood
before  us,  she  said :  Grod  save  the  faces  present,  though
they  are  not  of  my  acquaintance ! — ^Know,  0  ye  who
are  the  refuge  of  the  hoping,  the  stay  of  the  widowed,
that  I  am  of  the  Princes  of  the  tribes,  the  ladies  that
are  kept  jealously : — My  people  and  my  husband  were
wont  to  settle  on  the  Breast,  and  to  journey  at  the
Heart,  to  burden  the  Back,  to  advance  the  Hand ;
but  when  Fortune  destroyed  the  Arms,  and  pained
the  Liver  by  means  of  the  Limbs ;  ancl  turned  about
till  Back  was  Belly;  then  the  Eye-balb grew  dim,  and
the  Eye-brow  restless,  and  the  Eye  went  forth,  and  the
Palm  was  lost,  and  the  Eore-arm  grew  dry,  and  the
Eight  hand  broke,  and  the  Elbows  departed,  and  there
remained  to  us  neither  Front  tooth  nor  Eye  tooth. —
How,  since  the  Green  life  has  become  Dust-coloured,  and
the  Yellow  loved  one  has  been  Tarnished,  my  "White  day
is  made  Black,  and  my  Black  temple  is  made  White,  so
that  the  Blue-eyed  enemy  has  pitied  me,  and  now
welcome  the  Eed  death !  *  And  there  follow  me  those

1  The  explanation  of  this  speech  is  as  follows  : —

My  people  and  my  husband  wore  wont  to  sit  in  the  first  place  in
the  assembly ;  to  march  at  the  centre,  or  head  quarters  of  the  army  ;
they  mounted  their  friends  on  the  backs  of  their  camels ;  they  con¬
ferred  favoui*s :  but  when  Tortuno  destroyed  those  who  helped
them,  and  alEicted  them  by  taking  away  their  children  and  servants,
who  laboured  for  them,  and  brought  them  gain ;  and  when  their
state  was  completely  overthrown ;  then,  whoever  looked  to  them
with  respect  withdrew ;  and  their  attendants  were  insolent ;  and
their  coin  left  them ;  and  their  quiet  was  lost ;  and  their  fire-staff
gave  no  spark  ;  their  power  was  broken ;  their  comforts  and  conve¬
niences  were  scattered  ;  there  remained  not  a  camel,  young  or  aged.
Now,  since  the  life  of  plenty  has  become  barren,  and  the  loved  gold
coin  has  turned  aside  from  me,  my  happy  day  has  been  saddened,


12


THIRTEENTH  ASSEMBLY-


178

of  wliom  ye  see  that  their  look  is  a  safGLcient  examinmg,
that  their  yellowness  is  their  interpreter  ; — The  furthest
desire  of  each  is  a  mess,  the  extreme  of  his  wish  is  a
mantle, — Now  I  had  sworn  that  I  would  not  give  my
cheek  to  shame,  except  before  the  generous,  even  though
I  should  die  of  misery. — But  the  soul  that  dwells  in  me
has  whispered  me  that  succour  will  be  found  with  you,
and  the  discerning  of  my  heart  has  announced  to  me  that
ye  are  the  fountains  of  gifts. — Now  may  God  brighten
him  who  will  make  my  vow  sinless,  and  verify  my  ob¬
serving; — And  who  will  look  on  me  with  an  eye  into
which  parsimony  sets  a  mote,  while  bounty  plucks  it
out.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  Now  we  were
astonished  at  the  excellence  of  her  signifying  and  at
the  beauties  of  her  metaphor. — So  we  said  to  her,  “Thy
prose  has  enchanted  us,  but  how  is  thy  versifying  —
She  said,  “  Without  a  boast,  it  would  make  a  rook  to
gush  forth.” — We  said,  “If  thou  wilt  place  us  among
thy  Eeciters,  we  will  not  be  niggardly  in  imparting  to
thee.” — She  said,  “I  will  first  show  you  my  worn  out
garment,  and  then  give  you  to  recite  my  poems.” — ^Then
she  put  forth  the  sleeve  of  a  well  worn  smock,  and  un¬
veiled  the  look  of  a  crafty  old  woman,  and  indited;

I  complain  to  God,  with  the  complaining  of  the  sick,  against
the  trouble  of  the  unjust,  the  hateful  time.

0  friends,  I  am  of  people  who  prospered  long  time,  while  the
eyelid  of  fortune  was  cast  down  before  them  :

Their  glory  there  was  none  to  forbid,  and  their  fame  was  spread
abroad  among  men.

and  the  black  hair  of  my  temples  has  been  whitened,  so  that  the
blue-eyed  Greek,  my  enemy,  has  pitied  me,  and  now  welcome  death
in  war.


THIRTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


179


When  foraging  failed  in  the  ashy  year  they  were  a  goodly
meadow :

Their  fires  were  kindled  to  the  travellers,  and  they  fed  the  guest
with  fresh  meat :

Their  neighbour  passed  not  his  night  in  hunger,  nor  through  fear
did  he  say,  Choking  hinders  me.”

But  the  changes  of  destruction  have  made  their  seas  of  bounty  to
sink  away  from  them,  which  I  thought  not  would  ever  sink  :

And  put  away  from  among  them,  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,
those  that  were  lions  of  guarding,  healers  of  the  sick.

That  on  which  I  carry  is  now  my  back,  after  being  my  beast,  and
my  home  is  in  the  hollow,  after  being  on  the  height.

My  little  ones  fail  not  to  mourn  their  misery,  of  which  there  is
some  flash  every  day.

When  the  pious  man  prays  to  his  Lord  by  night,  they  also  call
Ham  with  gushing  tears.

0  Thou  who  feedest  the  young  raven  in  the  nest,  and  settest  the
bone  which  is  broken,  and  again  broken  ;

Appoint  to  us,  0  G-od,  one  whose  honour  is  pure  and  washed  from
tlie  filth  of  blame  ;

Who  will  quench  for  us  the  fire  of  hunger,  though  only  with  a
mess  of  the  sour  milk  or  the  butter  milk.

Now  is  there  any  who  will  remove  what  is  come  upon  us,  and
make  prize  of  thanks  long  and  large  ?

For,  by  Him  to  whom  the  forelocks  shall  bow  down  in  the  day
when  the  faces  of  the  assemblage  shall  bo  black  and  white,

Were  it  not  for  these,  my  cheek  would  not  expose  itself,  nor  would
I  assay  to  the  stringing  of  verse.

Said  the  narrator  :  ISTo-w,  by  Allah,  she  cleft  our  hearts
in  pieces  with  her  verses,  and  called  forth  the  gifts  of  our
bosoms : — So  that  he  gave  her  alms  whose  habit  was  to
beg  alms  himself,  and  he  was  brisk  to  bestow  on  her  who
we  thought  would  not  be  so. — ^And  when  her  bosom  was
filled  full  with  gold,  and  each  of  us  had  shown  bounty  to
her, — She  retreated,  the  little  ones  following  her,  and
her  mouth  was  wide  with  thanks. — But  after  she  was
gone,  the  company  were  all  a-stretch  to  fathom  her,  that
they  might  prove  where  their  bounty  had  fallen. — And  I
went  surety  to  them  for  eliciting  the  hinted  secret,  and


180


miBTESNm  ASSEMBLY.


rose  up  and  followed  the  track  of  the  old  woman. — ^Until
she  came  to  a  street  choked  with  people,  exceeding  in  its
crowd. — Then  she  plunged  into  the  throng,  and  slipped
away  from  the  simple  children. — And  she  turned  aside,
with  unconcern  of  mind,  to  a  ruined  mosque,  and  threw
away  her  cloak,  and  drew  off  her  veil. — ^But  I  spied
at  her  through  a  chink  of  the  door,  and  watched  what
strange  thing  she  would  bring  to  pass. — And  when
the  gear  of  modesty  fell  off,  I  saw  the  face  of  Abh  Zayd
dawn  out. — And  I  thought  within  myself  that  I  would
rush  upon  him  and  rebuke  him  for  the  course  he  was
running. — ^But  he  threw  himself  back  with  the  gesture
of  the  contumacious,  and  raised  the  shrill  note  of  singers,
and  broke  forth,  inditing  thus  : —

Ob. !  would  I  knew  wbetber  tbe  time  bad  gotten  a  knowledge
of  my  power :

Wbetber  it  bad  learnt  or  learnt  not  tbe  real  truth  bow  deep  I
go  in  deceiving :

How  many  of  its  sons  I  have  won  of  by  my  wile  and  my  fraud  :

How  oft  I  have  sallied  forth  upon  them  in  my  known  form  and
in  disguise ;

To  catch  one  set  by  preaching,  and  others  by  poetry  ;

To  excite  one  mind  by  vinegar,  and  another  by  wine  ;

Being  at  one  time  Sakbr,  at  another  time  tbe  sister  of  Sakbr.

How  if  I  had  followed  tbe  frequented  path  all  tbe  length  of
my  life,

My  fire  and  my  portion  would  have  failed,  my  need  and  my
loss  would  have  lasted.

So  say  to  him  who  blames,  This  is  my  excuse — ^take  it.”

Said  Al-  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  Now  when  the
clearness  of  his  case  appeared  to  me,  and  the  marvel
of  his  wickedness,  and  the  excuse  which  he  had  tinseled
in  his  verses, — I  knew  that  his  devil  was  a  rebellious
one,  who  would  not  listen  to  rebuke,  and  would  do
nought  but  what  he  willed. — So  I  turned  my  reins  to  my


FO  URTEENTE  ASSEMBL  T.


181


companions,  and  publislied  to  them  "what  my  eye- witness¬
ing  had  established. — Then  they  were  sullen  at  the
loss  of  their  presents,  and  vowed  one  to  another  to
deny  old  women.


THE  FOHETEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“  OF  MECCA.”

This  Assembly  has  little  that  is  remarkable.  Harith  is  on  the
pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and,  after  having  fulfilled  the  usual  rites,  he
and  his  friends  are  diverting  themselves  with  conversation,  in  a  tent,
during  the  heat  of  the  day.  An  old  man  and  a  boy  make  their
appearance,  and  when  they  are  asked  what  they  want,  the  old  man
utters  a  complimentary  speech,  soliciting  relief  for  himself  and  his
son.  They  promise  it,  and  he  then  recites  some  verses,  lamenting
that  his  camel  had  broken  down, and  that  he  should  have  to  return
from  the  pilgrimage  on  foot.  They  promise  him  a  camel,  and  desire
to  know  what  is  his  son’s  request.  The  boy  recites  some  verses,
asking  for  various  kinds  of  food  in  use  among  the  ancient  Arabs.
Both  receive  what  they  desire  from  the  company,  and  Harith
then  asks  whence  they  come.  The  old  man,  who  is  Abu  Zayd,
begins  to  tell  them  in  verse  of  Seruj,  and  its  destruction ;  but  his
tears  hinder  him  from  proceeding,  and  he  departs  abruptly.  In  this
Assembly  Abu  Zayd  and  his  son  arc  not  represented  as  practising
any  kind  of  knavery  ;  and  it  may  bo  assumed  tliat  they  were  really
in  want  of  a  boast  and  food.  This  trait  is  in  keeping  with  the
thirty-first  Assembly,  which  introduces  Abu  Zayd  on  the  pilgrimage
preaching  to  the  assembled  people.  On  that  occasion  he  would  not
ask  or  even  take  alms,  liaving  made  a  vow  of  self-denial.  In  the
present  Assembly,  though  less  strict,  ho  will  not  commit  an  un¬
worthy  action  in  a  sacred  place.  The  lingering  religious  sentiment
and  sense  of  honour  in  Abu  Zayd’s  character  are  always  well
observed  by  the  author.

A1  Harith,  sou  of  Hammam,  related ;  I  rose  up  from
the  City  of  Peace  for  the  pilgrimage  of  Islam  : — And
when,  by  the  help  of  God,  I  had  fulfilled  my  squalor
and  permitted  myself  perfumes  and  indulgence,  there


182


FOURTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


came  upon  the  encampment  of  the  Ehayf  the  hlaze  of
summer ; — ^And  I  made  a  shelter  perforce  of  what  might
ward  off  the  mid-day  heat. — ^Now  when  I  was  under  a
leather  tent  with  a  company  of  the  polite ;  and  the
furnace  of  the  gravel  was  now  hot,  and  the  noon  blinded
the  eye  of  the  chameleon ; — Lo !  there  broke  in  upon
ns  a  tottering  old  man,  whom  followed  a  youth  in  agile
prime. — And  the  old  man  greeted  with  the  greeting  of
the  well-bred,  the  intelligent,  and  answered  with  the
answering  of  a  kinsman,  not  a  stranger. — Then  he
pleased  us  by  what  he  scattered  from  his  chaplet,  and
we  wondered  at  his  unreserve  before  we  had  emboldened
him. — And  we  said  to  him,  “What  art  thou?  and  how
hast  thou  made  way  in,  and  not  asked  leave  ?’’ — ^He  said,
“As  for  me,  I  am  a  suppliant,  a  seeker  of  help;  the
secret  of  my  misery  is  not  hidden,  and  a  look  at  me  is
my  sufficient  intercessor : — And  as  for  my  intrusion,  to
which  suspicion  clings,  why,  it  is  not  wonderful,  seeing
there  can  be  no  veil  over  the  generous.” — Then  we  asked
him  how  he  found  his  way  to  us,  and  by  what  he  got
direction  towards  us. — He  said,  “  Truly  generosity  has
a  fragrance  whose  breathings  steal  forth,  whose  odours
guide  to  its  meadow; — ^And  I  was  led  by  the  exhaling
of  your  perfume  to  the  brightening  of  your  bounty ; —
And  the  fragrant  waving  of  your  myrtle  told  me  glad-
deningly  that  the  return  from  your  presence  would  be
happy.” — ^Then  we  asked  him  concerning  his  want,  that
we  might  undertake  to  aid  him. — He  said,  “  I  have  a
need  and  my  boy  a  request.” — ^We  said,  “  Either  wish
shall  be  fulfilled,  and  each  of  you  shall  surely  be  con¬
tented  : — ^But  the  elder,  the  elder He  said,  “  Certainly ;
by  Him  who  has  spread  out  the  seven  earths.” — Then  he


FOURTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


183


leaped  up  to  speak  like  the  camel  loosed  from  the  foot-
rope,  and  recited ;

I  am  a  man  whose  beast  has  fallen  with  soreness  of  foot  and
weariness ;

My  distance  is  a  far  one,  my  pace  is  unequal  to  it :

With  me  is  not  as  much  as  a  mustard  sefed  of  the  stamped  gold  :

My  contriving  is  closed  up,  my  bewilderment  plays  with  me.

If  I  set  out  on  foot,  I  fear  destructive  haps  ;

And  if  I  lag  behind  the  company  my  way  is  straitened.

My  sighing  is  on  the  heights,  my  tear  is  on  the  slopes.

'•  But  ye  are  the  foraging  ground  of  him  that  hopes,  the  target
of  seeking ;

Your  grist  pours  down  as  pour  not  down  the  clouds :

Your  neighbour  dwells  in  sanctuary,  but  your  wealth  is  open
to  spoiling :

The  terror-stricken  does  not  take  shelter  with  you,  and  then  fear
the  tooth  of  calamities ;

Nor  does  he  that  hopes  seek  the  milk -flow  of  your  gifts,  and  then
fail  to  be  gifted.

So  now  be  yo  moved  by  my  story,  and  prosper  my  retiring  from
you  ;

Bor  if  ye  had  made  trial  of  my  life,  in  its  meat  and  its  drink.

Surely  such  distress  as  mine  would  pain  you,  distress  that  gives
me  up  to  sorrows.

And  if  ye  were  to  learn  my  distinction,  and  my  pedigree,  and
my  path,

And  what  my  knowledge  embraces  of  choice  studios,

No  doubt  would  occur  to  you  but  that  my  breeding  is  iny  malady.

Now,  would  that  I  had  not  sucked  at  the  breast  of  scholarship  !

Bor  its  ill-luck  has  fallen  on  me  j  and  in  this  thing  was  my  father
unduteous  to  mo.


Then  we  said  to  him :  “As  for  thee,  thy  verses  have
now  disclosed  thy  poverty,  and  the  perishing  of  thy  she-
camel ; — -So  we  will  mount  thee  on  that  which  will  bring
thee  to  thy  city ;  and,  now,  what  is  the  need  of  thy  son?”
— He  said  to  him,  “  Rise,  my  hoy,  as  thy  father  rose,
and  speak  what  is  in  thy  mind ;  may  thy  mouth  not  be
harmed  !” — ^Then  he  rose  up  as  rises  the  hero  to  the  sally  -


184


FOURTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


ing  forth,  and  unsheathed  a  tongue  like  a  cutting  blade,
and  recited :

O  ye  Lords,  whose  dwellings  are  built  up  on  high  places  !

Who,  when  danger  befalls,  take  stand  to  ward  off  stratagem ;

To  whom  is  easy  the  bestowing  of  stored  up  treasures ;

I  desire  of  you  a  piece  -of  roast,  and  a  loaf,  and  a  pudding :

But  if  that  be  too  dear,  then  let  it  be  cracknels,  in  which  shall  be
hidden  some  roast  lamb ;

Or  if  there  be  neither  this  nor  that,  then  my  fill  of  tharld :

But  if  these  deny  themselves  altogether,  then  mere  dates  with
their  sauce.

Bring  forth  what  is  easy  for  you,  even  though  it  be  but  shreddings
of  dried  meat ;

And  make  it  ready  quickly,  for  my  soul  is  longing  for  what  is
ready.

[For  there  is  no  doing  without  provision  for  my  far  journey  ;

And  ye  are  the  best  of  kindred  to  be  called  on  in  necessity  ;

Your  hands  every  day  are  full  of  new  bounties  ;

Your  palms  bestow  all  useful  gifts.

Now  my  wish  will  limit  itself  within  the  folds  of  that  which  ye
shall  give.

Through  me  may  reward  be  gotten ;  and  estimable  is  the  conse¬
quence  of  relieving  my  sorrow ;  •

And  mine  are  young  offsprings  of  the  wit  which  put  to  shame
every  poem.

Said  A1  Haritb,  soa  of  Hammam :  Ifow  when  we  saw
that  tke  cub  was  like  the  lion,  we  mounted  the  father
and  provisioned  the  son  ; — And  they  requited  the  kind¬
ness  with  thanks,  which  they  spread  out  as  robes,  and
they  paid  for  it  its  due. — ^And  when  they  were  intent  on
departure,  and  had  fastened  for  the  journey  the  waist-
folds  of  the  skirt, — I  said  to  the  old  man,  ‘‘  Has  our  pro¬
mise  been  like  the  promise  of  ‘Orkub,  or  does  there  re¬
main  a  need  in  the  mind  of  Jacob  ?” — He  said,  “  God
forbid  !  surely  not :  nay,  your  kindness  has  been  mighty
and  manifest.” — I  said  to  him,  ‘‘  Eeward  us  as  we  have
rewarded  thee,  profit  us  as  we  have  profited  thee ! —


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


185


Where  is  thy  cot  ?  for  perplexity  has  possessed  us  con¬
cerning  thee.” — Then  he  sighed  with  the  sighing  of  one
who  calls  to  mind  his  home,  and  recited,  while  sobbing
hindered  his  tongue :

Sertij  is  my  dwelling ;  but  bow  to  make  way  to  it !

Tor  enemies  have  encamped  in  it,  and  marred  it.

Now  by  tbe  House  to  wliicb  I  have  journeyed  to  lay  down  my
sins  in  it,

Nought  has  pleased  my  eye  since  I  have  left  the  boimds  of  Serdj.

’  Then  bis  eyes  were  drowned  with  tears,  and  his  tear-
founts  permitted  their  flowing  : — And  he  was  unwilling
to  let  them  drop,  but  be  could  not  restrain  them. — So  be
cut  short  his  sweet  reciting,  and  was  brief  in  his  farewell
and  withdrew.


THE  FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“  THE  LEGAL.”

This  long  and  elaborate  composition  has  a  very  slight  foundation.
The  author,  desirous  to  amuse  his  readers  with  a  very  ordinary
legal  puzzle,  imagines  a  long  adventure  to  introduce  it.  Harith  is
passing  a  sleepless  night,  and  str^pgly  desires  a  companion  to  con¬
verse  with,  when  a  wanderer  knocks  at  the  door.  Ho  opens,  and
when  the  light  is  brought  he  discovers  the  visitor  to  bo  Abu  Zayd.
Eejoicing  at  so  pleasant  an  encounter  he  offers  him  food,  but  finds
that  Abu  Zayd  will  oat  nothing.  He  is  offended;  but  Abu  Zayd
proceeds  to  explain  liis  want  of  appetite  by  relating  the  adventures
of  the  day.  Ho  had  boon  as  usual  in  destitution,  and  his  hunger
had  been  further  excited  by  the  sight  of  the  dates  and  milk  that
were  exposed  in  the  market.  At  last,  when  almost  exhausted,  ho  had
seen  a  man  weeping.  lie  had  inquired  the  cause  and  found  that  the
stranger  was  deploring  the  decay  of  learning,  inasmuch  as  no  one
was  able  to  solve  for  him  a  puzzle  which  had  come  into  his  posses¬
sion.  This  was  to  explain  how  a  man,  dying  childless,  could  leave
a  brother  perfectly  competent  to  inherit,  and  yet  that  his  property
should  go  to  his  wife’s  brother.  Abti  Zayd  at  once  perceives  the


186


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


answer,  but  demands  a  supper  before  repealing  it.  The  stranger
takes  bim  borne  and  treats  bim  to  dates  and  cream,  wbicb  be  eats
greedily,  and  then  explains  that  tbe  deceased  man  in  tbe  puzzle  bad
bad  a  son  by  a  former  wife,  wbo  bad  married  tbe  mother  of  bis,  tbe
father’s,  second  wife  and  then  died,  leaving  a  son  wbo  would  be
tbe  brother  of  tbe, second  wife,  and  tbe  grandson  of  tbe  deceased
whose  property  was  in  question.  This  child  would  therefore  inherit  in
preference  to  tbe  deceased’s  brother.  Abb  Zayd  relates  that  when
be  bad  given  tbe  stranger  tbe  solution  of  tbe  puzzle,  be  bad  been
turned  out  in  the  rain,  and  bad  wandered  from  bouse  to  bouse
seeking  shelter,  until  chance  bad  taken  bim  to  Haritb.  They  spend
tbe  night  in  conversation,  and  Haritb  parts  with  bim  in  tbe  morning
with  regret.  Sberisbi,  in  bis  commentary,  remarks  with  justice  on
tbe  inordinate  length  of  this  Assembly,  and  gives  one  by  A1
Hamadani,  of  only  a  few  lines,  as  a  contrast  to  it,  observing  that
if  Hariri’s  bad  been  shorter  and  Badi^  az  Zeman’s  longer,  both
would  have  been  better.  ‘‘Abu  Mohammed,”  be  says,  “is  so  long
as  to  weary  tbe  bearer.”

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related:  I  was  wakeful
in  a  certain  night,  that  was  black  of  robe,  lowering  a
massive  cloud,  beyond  the  wakefulness  of  the  lover
who  is  driven  from  the  door,  who  is  tried  by  the  aversion
of  mistresses. — And  thoughts  ceased  not  to  rouse  my
sadness,  and  make  my  imagination  roam  among  fantasies.
— ^TJntil  I  formed  a  wish,  through  the  unease  of  what
I  suffered,  that  I  might  be  granted  a  talk-fellow  from
among  the  estimable,  who  should  shorten  the  tedium
of  my  night-dark  night. — ^Xow  my  wish  was  not  ended,
and  I  had  not  closed  my  eye,  when  a  knocker  knocked
at  the  door,  one  with  an  humble  voice. — ^And  I  said  within
myself,  “Perchance  the  plant  of  wishing  has  now  borne
fruit,  and  the  night  of  luck  is  moonlit.” — ^And  I  rose  up
to  him  in  haste,  and  said,  “  Who  is  it  that  now  walks  by
night?” — He  said,  “A  stranger,  whom  the  night  has
veiled  in  darkness,  whom  the  rain-flood  has  caught ; — ^And
he  desires  a  sheltering,  nothing  else ;  and  when  it  dawns


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


187


he  will  advance  his  journey.” — Said  A1  Harith:  hTow
when  his  rays  indicated  his  sun,  and  his  title  disclosed
the  secret  of  his  page, — knew  that  night-talking  with
him  would  he  a  prize,  and  watching  with  him  a  pleasure.
— So  I  opened  the  door  with  smiling,  and  said,  “  Enter
ye  into  them  with  peace.” — And  there  entered  a  person
whose  lance  time  had  bent,  and  the  rain  had  wet  through
his  mantle. — And  he  greeted  with  a  glib  tongue,  and
a  sweet  eloq[uence. — Then  he  thanked  me  for  responding
to  his  voice,  and  excused  himself  for  night-walking  out
of  season. — ^But  I  put  near  to  him  the  kindled  lantern,
and  contemplated  him  as  one  that  examines  money. —
And  I  found  that  he  was  our  Shaykh  Abu  Zayd,  without
question,  without  the  guess  of  doubt. — So  I  received  him
as  one  who  had  possessed  me  of  my  ixtmost  desire,  and
transported  me  from  the  vexing  of  sorrow  to  the  quiet  of
joy. — Then  he  took  to  complaining  of  weariness,  and  I
took  to  How  ?  and  Where  ? — He  said,  “  Let  me  swallow
down  my  spittle,  for  my  road  has  wearied  me.” — And
I  thought  that  he  had  hunger  in  his  belly,  and  was  slug¬
gish  from  this  cause. — So  I  set  before  him  what  is  set
before  the  guest  who  comes  sudden  in  the  dark  night. —
But  he  shrank  as  shrinks  the  abashed,  and  declined
as  declines  the  overeaten. — And  I  was  evil  in  thought
at  his  refraining,  and  the  change  of  his  nature  angered
me : — Until  I  was  near  to  be  rough  to  him  in  speech,  and
to  sting  him  with  the  venom  of  blame. — Then  he
discerned  from  the  glances  of  my  eye  what  pervaded
my  mind And  he  said,  “  0  weak  of  confidence  in
them  that  love  thee  !  turn  from  that  which  thou  makest
to  stir  thy  heart  and  listen  to  me,  0  thou  base-born  !’’ — I
said,  “  Go  on,  brother  of  empty  talk.” — Then  he  said.


188


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


Know  that  I  passed  yesternight  an  ally  of  want,  a
communer  with  fantasy. — And  when  the  night  had  ful¬
filled  its  vow,  and  the  morn  had  sunk  its  stars,  I  went
forth  at  the  time  of  sunrise  to  one  of  the  markets, — To
assay  against  any  prey  that  might  pass  hy,  any  generous
man  who  might  show  bounty. — And  I  caught  sight  of
dates  whose  ordering  in  rows  was  made  comely,  whose
place  of  summering  had  been  favourable.— And  they  united
in  proof  of  their  goodness  the  purity  of  choice  wine,  and.
the  ruddiness  of  cornelian. — ^And  opposite  them  was  milk
that  showed  forth  like  the  yellow  gold,  and  disclosed
a  saffron  hue, — Which  praised  him  who  cooked  it  with
the  tongue  of  its  perfection,  and  justified  the  judgment  of
the  buyer,  even  though  he  had  paid  down  his  heart’s
core  for  it. — ^Then  appetite  bound  me  with  its  cords,
and  thirst  brought  me  under  its  dominion. — ^And  I
remained  more  bewildered  than  a  lizard,  more  distracted
than  a  lover; — Having  no  means  to  bring  me  to  the
reaching  of  my  wish,  and  the  delight  of  swallowing. —
And  now  my  foot  obeyed  me  not  for  departure  through
the  ardour  of  my  inflaming. — But  greediness  and  its
violence  chid  me  on,  and  hunger  and  its  heat,  to  forage
every  land,  to  be  content  with  a  driblet  from  my  water¬
ing. — And  I  ceased  not  all  the  length  of  that  day  to  let
down  my  bucket  into  rivers ; — But  it  came  not  back  even
with  a  wetting,  and  drew  not  up  a  quenching  for  my
thirst ; — ^XJntil  the  sun  bent  to  the  setting,  and  my  soul
was  weak  with  weariness. — Then  at  eve  I  went  home¬
ward  with  burning  stomach :  I  returned  irresolute,  ad¬
vancing  one  foot,  drawing  back  the  other. — And  while  I
thus  sped  or  stayed,  while  my  breeze  thus  rose  or  fell,
behold,  there  met  me  a  Shaykh,  who  was  lamenting  with


FIFTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


189


the  lamentation  of  the  hereaved,  and  his  eyes  were  flow¬
ing. — Then  not  even  the  Wolf’s  Disease  that  I  was  under,
and  the  emptiness  that  melted  me,  engaged  me  from  the
attempt  to  become  intimate  with  him,  and  from  the  desire
after  deceiving  him. — So  I  said  to  him,  “  0  stranger,  in
thy  weeping  there  is  surely  a  secret,  and  behind  thy
passion  an  ill : — So  shew  me  thy  disorder  and  take  me
among  thy  counsellors ; — ^Por  thou  wilt  find  in  me  a
physician  to  cure  or  a  helper  to  impart.” — Then  he  said,
“  By  Allah  !  my  lamenting  is  not  after  livelihood  that  is
gone,  or  fortune  that  is  insolent ; — But  for  the  perishing
of  science  and  its  blotting  out,  for  the  going  down  of
its  moons  and  its  suns.” — I  said,  “  And  what  mishap  has
appeared  ?  what  question  is  obscure  ?  so  as  to  excite  in
thee  grief  for  the  loss  of  those  who  are  gone.” — Then  he
drew  forth  a  scrap  of  paper  from  his  sleeve,  and  swore
by  his  father  and  mother, — That  he  had  already  laid
it  before  the  chiefs  of  the  schools,  but  they  could  not
distinguish  its  worn-out  way-marks, — And  had  bidden
the  doctors  of  the  ink-flasks  to  speak  on  it,  but  they
were  dumb  beyond  the  dumbness  of  the  tenants  of  the
tombs. — I  said  to  him,  “  Let  me  see  it ;  for  perhaps  I
shall  suffice  for  it,” — He  said,  ‘‘  Thou  art  not  extreme
in  thy  request,  and  oft  a  shot  is  without  a  shooter.” —
Then  he  handed  it  to  me,  and  lo !  there  was  written
on  it :  ,  .

Ho  the  learned,  the  lawyer,  who  surpassest  in  acuteness,  and  there
ip  none  like  thee !

Give  mo  a  decision  on  a  case  which  every  judge  shuns,  at  wliich
every  lawyer  is  bewildered :

A  man  died,  leavmg  a  brother,  both  by  father  and  mother,  who
was  a  Moslem,  free,  pious  ;

And  the  deceased  had  a  wife  who  had,  0  Doctor,  a  brother,  really
her  own,  without  equivocation ;


190


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY-


She  got  her  legal  share,  and  her  brother  took  what  was  left  of  the
inheritance  instead  of  the  deceased’s  brother.

Now  relieve  ns  by  thy  answer  to  what  we  ask ;  this  is  an  ordinance
of  law,  no  fault  can.  be  found  in  it

INow  when  I  had  read  the  verses  on  the  paper  and  per¬
ceived  their  secret,  I  said  to  him,  “  Thou  hast  fallen  on
one  who  is  knowing  in  it,  thou  hast  alighted  near  one  who
is  at  home  in  it ; — But  yet  I  am  burning  in  the  entrails
and  have  need  of  a  supper ;  so  grant  me  to  sojourn  with
thee,  then  listen  to  my  decision.” — ^He  said,  “  Thou  art'
just  in  thy  stipulating  and  hast  shrunk  from  excess; —
So  go  with  me  to  my  dwelling,  that  thou  mayest  get  what
thou  desirest  and  come  off  as  is  fitting.” —  Said  Abu
Zayd :  Then  I  accompanied  him  to  his  habitation  as  God
hath  commanded. — And  he  brought  me  into  a  house  nar¬
rower  than  the  ark  of  Moses,  weaker  than  a  spider’s  web.
— But  not  the  less  did  he  mend  the  straitness  of  his
dwelling  by  the  largeness  of  his  bestowal : — For  he
gave  me  my  choice  of  the  entertainment  and  of  all  the
delicacies  that  are  bought. — And  I  said,  “  I  wish  for  the
proud  rider  on  the  desired  steed,  and  for  the  wholesoine
companion  with  the  hurtful  one  that  is  companied  with.”
— So  he  thought  a  long  time,  and  then  he  said,  “Perchance
thou  meanest  the  daughter  of  the  palm-tree  with  the
first  milk  that  follows  the  kid.” —  I  said  to  him,  “  Just
these  two  I  meant,  and  for  their  sake  I  trouble  myself.”
— And  he  rose  cheerful,  then  sat  down  angry  :  and
said,  “  God  prosper  thee  !  Know  that  truth  is  nobility,
but  lying  a  pest ; — Kor  let  hunger,  which  is  the  gar¬
ment  of  the  prophets  and  the  ornament  of  the  saints,
carry  thee  to  join  thyself  to  him  who  lies,  or  to  put  on
the  nature  of  him  who  swerves  from  faith-keeping. — For


i^IFTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


191


the  free-born  woman  hungers,  but  will  not  eat  by  her
breasts ;  and  she  holds  back  from  baseness  even  though
urged  to  it  by  need. — Besides,  I  am  no  simpleton  for
thee,  nor  one  to  wink  at  a  dupe’s  bargain ; — So  come  !  I
warn  thee  before  the  veil  be  rent,  and  the  feud  estab¬
lished  between  us ; — And  neglect  not  attention  to  my
warning,  and  beware  false  speaking  with  me,  beware  !  ”
—I  said  to  him,  “Now,  by  Him  who  has  forbidden  the
eating  of  usury,  brrt  allowed  the  eating  of  milk,  I
have  not  spoken  with  falsehood,  I  have  not  shown  thee
deceitfully. — Thou  shalt  prove  the  truth  of  the  business,
and  approve  the  giving  of  the  milk  and  dates.” — Then,
he  was  cheerful  with  the  cheerfulness  of  one  who  is
dealt  with  truly,  and  went  off  hastening  to  the  market.
— And  nothing  could  be  speedier  than  his  return,  bend¬
ing  under  them  ;  and  his  face  was  frowning,  and  he  set
them  before  me  as  one  who  would  upbraid  me ; — And
said,  “Press  host  on  host;  so  enjoy  the  delight  of  life.”
— Said  Abu  Zayd,  Then  I  bared  a  glutton’s  arm,  and
charged  as  charges  the  voracious  elephant; — But  he,
he  glanced  at  me  as  glances  the  spiteful,  and  in  his  rage
he  would  that  I  had  choked. — Now  when  I  had  gulped
down  either  kind,  and  left  them  a  trace  after  the  sub¬
stance,  I  was  speechless  through  perplexity  at  the
coming  on  of  night-time,  and  through  thinking  on  the
answer  to  the  verses. — And  he  delayed  not  to  rise  and
set  before  me  the  ink-flask  and  pens. — And  he  said,
“Thou  hast  filled  thy  wallet,  now  dictate  the  answer. —
Otherwise,  prepare,  if  thou  shirk,  to  own  the  debt  for
what  thou  hast  eaten.” — I  said  to  him,  There  is  nothing
but  earnest  with  me,  so  write  (and  the  prospering  be
from  God):


192


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY,


Say  to  him  who  riddles  questions  that  I  am  the  discloser  of  their
secret  which  he  hides.

Know  that  the  deceased,  in  whose  case  the  law  preferred  the
brother  of  his  spouse  to  the  son  of  his  father,

Was  a  man  who,  of  his  free  consent,  gave  his  son  in  marriage  to
his  own  mother-in-law ;  nothing  strange  in  it.

Then  the  son  died,  hut  she  was  already  pregnant  by  him,  and
gave  birth  to  a  son  like  him ;

And  he  was  the  son’s  son  without  dispute,  and  brother  of  the
grandfather’s  spouse  without  equivocation.

But  the  son  of  the  true-born  son  is  nearer  to  the  grandfather,  and
takes  precedence  in  the  inheritance  over  the  brother  ;

And  therefore,  when  he  died,  the  eighth  of  the  inheritance  was
adjudged  to  the  wife  for  her  to  take  possession  ;

And  the  grandson,  who  was  really  her  brother  by  her  mother,
took  the  rest;

And  the  full  brother  was  left  out  of  the  inheritance,  and  we  say
thou  hast  only  to  bewail  him.

This  is  my  decision  which  every  judge  who  judges  will  pattern
by,  every  lawyer.

Said  Abd  Zayd;  Now  wlien  be  bad  understood  tbe
answer  and  verified  its  correctness,  be  said  to  me,
“  Eemember  tby  family  and  tbe  nigbt,  so  gather  up  tby
skirt  and  be  beforehand  with  tbe  rain-flood.” — I  said,
“  I  am  in  tbe  bouse  of  exile,  and  in  sheltering  me  lies  tbe
best  of  offering, — Especially  as  the  van  of  tbe  darkness
has  now  drooped,  and  tbe  thunder  is  lauding  God  in  tbe
cloud.” — He  said,  “Be  off  (may  God  keep  thee)  whither
thou  wilt;  but  desire  not  to  pass  the  nigbt  here.” — I
said,  “Why  is  that,  seeing  the  emptiness  of  tby  habita¬
tion?” — He  said,  “Because  I  looked  well  bow  thou
didst  swallow  what  was  before  thee,  until  thou  didst
leave  and  let  alone  nothing ; — And  I  saw  that  thou  dost
not  look  to  tby  well-being,  nor  take  care  for  tbe  keeping
of  tby  health. — ^Now,  be  that  exceeds  in  what  thou  bast
exceeded,  and  fills  bis  belly  as  thou  bast  filled  it,  escapes


FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


193


not  a  weakening  surfeit  or  a  kilKng  cholera. — So,  by
Allah,  leave  me  alone  and  go  forth  from  me  while  thou
art  still  kept  from  harm  ; — For  by  Him  who  gives  life
and  death  there  is  no  lodging  for  thee  in  my  house.” —
Now,  when  I  had  heard  his  oath,  and  made  proving
of  him,  I  went  forth  from  his  house  perforce,  and  with  a
victualling  of  sadness : — And  the  sky  rained  upon  me,
and  the  darlniess  made  me  to  stumble,  and  the  .dogs
barked  after  me,  and  the  doors  repulsed  me, — ^Until  the
kindness  of  fate  sent  me  to  thee,  and  thanks  to  its
white  hand.

Then  I  said  to  him,  “  Charming  is  this  ordained
meeting  with  thee  to  my  glad  heart.” — And  he  began
to  be  diverse  in  his  stories,  and  to  mix  the  laughable
with  the  mournful;  until  the  first  of  the  morning
dawned,  and  the  caller  of  “Blessing”  made  his  cry.—
Whereupon  he  made  ready  to  respond  to  the  caller,  and
then  turned  to  bid  me  farewell. — But  I  checked  him  from
departure  and  said,  “Hospitality  is  three  days.” — But
he  adjured  God,  and  restricted  himself  by  a  vow ;  then
he  sought  the  outlet,  and  indited  as  ho  lingered :

Visit  liina  tlioii  lovest  in  each  moiitli  only  a  day,  and  exceed  not
that  upon  him ;

For  the  beholding  of  the  now  moon  is  but  one  day  in  the  month,
and  afterward  eyes  look  not  on  it.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam  :  Then  I  took  leave
of  him  with  a  heart  bleeding  of  its ,  wound,  and  wished
that  my  night  had  been  tardy  of  its  morn.


13


194


sixti:ente  assembly.


THE  SIXTEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“OF  THE  WEST.”

The  purpose  of  this  Assembly  is  to  exhibit  Abu  Zayd  in  the  per¬
formance  of  an  extraordinary  feat  of  scholarship,  the  recitation  of  some
lines  of  poetry,  each  of  which  may  be  read  forwards  or  backwards
without  change  of  sense.  Harith  meets  with  four  scholars  in  a
mosque  and  takes  seat  with  them.  The  conyersation  falls  upon  sen¬
tences  which  preserve  their  identity  when  reversed ;  and  some  one  pro¬
poses  that  they  should  try  their  powers  of  composing  them.  This  Is
agreed  to,  and  the  first  man  produces  a  sentence  of  three  words,  the
next  a  sentence  of  four,  the  next  a  sentence  of  five,  the  next  a
sentence  of  six.  It  then  comes  to  the  turn  of  Harith  to  compose  a
sentence  of  seven  words,  which  shall  be  the  same  whether  read
forwards  or  backwards.  This  he  is  unable  to  do ;  but  an  old  man
who  had  joined  them  not  only  performs  the  feat,  but  actually
improvises  five  lines  of  poetry,  each  of  which  has  the  same  extra¬
ordinary  property.  Of  course  this  is  Abu  Zayd,  and  when  Harith
discovers  him,  he  introduces  him  to  his  friends,  who  invite  him  to
spend  the  night  with  them  in  conversation.  He  pleads  that  his
hungry  children  are  expecting  him  ;  but  assures  them  that  if  they
will  let  him  go  and  give  them  a  meal  he  will  return  forthwith.
They  accede  to  this,  and  send  a  servant  with  him  to  carry  his  wallet.
After  some  time  the  servant  comes  back  alone,  and  relates  that  Abu
Zayd  had  refused  to  return,  and  had  dismissed  him  with  some
moral  verses.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related:  I  was  present
at  the  prayer  of  sunset  in  one  of  the  mosques  of  the
"West : — And  when  I  had  performed  it  with  completeness
and  joined  to  it  what  was  optional,  my  eye  fell  on  a
company  who  had  set  themselves  down  aside  and  had
drawn  apart,  friends  pure  in  friendship ; — And  they  were
taking  from  each  other  the  cup  of  talk  and  rubbing  the
fire-staves  of  discussion. — And  I  desired  to  converse  with
them  for  the  sake  of  some  maxim  that  might  be  acquired,
or  of  scholarship  that  might  be  gotten  in  increase; — So


SIXTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


195


I  advanced  to  them  as  one  who  would  play  Tofayl  upon
them, — And  said  to  them,  “Will  ye  receive  a  comer
who  seeks  to  gather  of  night-talkings,  and  seeks  not  the
newly-gathered  of  fruits ;  and  who  desires  the  beauties
of  dialogue,  not  the  choice  of  the  young  camel’s  hump?”
— Then  they  loosed  their  loops  to  me,  and  said,
“Welcome,  Welcome!” — And  I  had  not  sat  longer  than
the  flash  of  the  blinding  lightning  or  the  sip  of  the
timid  bird,  when  there  came  upon  us  a  wanderer;  on
his  shoulder  was  a  wallet ; — And  he  greeted  us  with  the
two  words,  and  he  greeted  the  mosque  with  the  two  saluta¬
tions; — And  he  said,  “0  ye  men  of  understanding  and
choice  excellence  ! — Know  ye  not  that  the  most  precious
of  offerings  is  the  relieving  of  sorrows,  and  the  firmest
cord  of  salvation  is  the  imparting  to  those  who  have
need  ? — ^Kow,  by  Him  who  hath  set  me  down  in  your
precinct,  and  destined  to  me  the  asking  alms  of  you,
truly  I  am  the  stray  of  a  distant  abode,  the  messenger
of  lank-bellied  children; — And  is  there  in  the  company
any  that  will  cool  down  for  us  the  heat  of  hunger?” —
Then  they  said  to  him,  “0  stranger,  thou  hast  come
after  the  even-tide,  and  there  remained  over  only  the
leavings  of  our  supper. — ^But  if  thou  art  content  with
these  thou  wilt  find  among  us  none  to  forbid  thee.” — He
said,  “Surely  the  brother  of  afflictions,  he  is  content
with  the  scraps  of  .tables  and  the  shakings  of  provision
bags.” — Then  each  of  them  bade  his  servant  to  victual
him  with  what  he  had. — And  the  kindness  pleased  him
and  he  thanked  for  it,  and  took  seat  and  watched  what
was  brought  him. — And  we,  we  returned  to  mooting  the
beauties  of  scholarship  and  its  choice  points,  and  drawing
forth  its  rill  from  its  founts, — ^Until  we  engaged  in  the


196  SIXTEEITTE  ASSEMBLY.

subject  of  language  wbicb  does  not  become  absurd  by
being  reversed,  as  the  phrase  (the  pourer  out

of  the  cup). — Then  we  challenged  each  other  that  we
should  make  our  thoughts  yield  an  offspring  in  it,
that  we  should  originate  virgin  phrases  in  it, — On  the
condition  that  he  who  began  should  string  three  beads
on  his  necklace,  and  that  the  additions  should  advance
by  degrees  after  him; — So  that  the  man  on  his  right
should  place  four  in  his  series,  and  his  neighbour  of  the
left  should  place  seven  perforce.

Said  the  narrator :  And  we  were  ranged  to  the  num¬
ber  of  the  hand’s  fingers,  and  we  were  set  together  with
the  union  of  the  men  of  the  Cave. — Then  to  the  great¬
ness  of  my  vexation,  hastened  he  on  my  right,  and
said;  (Blame  him  who  wearies  of  thee).— And

the  one  on  his  right  said :  (Make  great

thy  hope  of  the  recompense  of  thy  Lord). — Said  he  who
was  next :  b  \6\  (He  who  completes  the  kind¬

ness  which  he  renders,  gains  increase.)— Said  the  last ;

p  (pi  3^  i-bXi,  (Silence  every  one  who  blabs  to
thee,  and  thou  wilt  be  wise.)- — Then  the  turn  came  to  me,
and  to  string  a  seve’n-beaded  thread  was  incumbent  on
me. — And  my  thought  ceased  not  to  mould  and  break,  to
be  fertile  and  barren ;  and  all  the  while  I  seek  food  and
find  none  to  feed  me ; — ^Tlntil  my  breeze  fell,  and  my
submission  was  manifest. — And  I  said  to  my  companions
“  If  the  Seruji  were  present  here,  he  would  heal  this
cureless  malady.’’ — They  said,  “  If  this  came  before  lyas
he  would  certainly  stop  in  despair.” — Then  began  we  to
be  profuse  in  declaring  that  it  was  hard,  and  that  its
door  was  shut. — But  that  visitor  who  had  come  upon  us
glanced  at  us  with  the  glance  of  the  contemptuous ;  and


SIXTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


197


he  was  joining  pearls  together,  and  we  knew  it  not.—
And  when  he  had  noticed  our  ignominy,  and  the  drying-
up  of  our  pool,  he  said  “  0  people  !  truly  a  great
trouble  is  it  to  make  the  barren  bring  forth,  or  to  get  a
cure  by  the  sick ;  and  ‘  there  is  One  learned  above  all
the  learned.’  ” — Then  he  turned  to  me  and  said,  I  will
take  thy  place,  and  free  thee  from  what  has  fallen  on
thee : — Now  if  thou  desire  to  speak  in  prose,  and  yet  not
to,  trip,  say,  addressing  him  who  blames  avarice,  and  is
large  in  his  reproach,  p  1  (Take

refuge  with  every  trusty  patron,  who,  when  he  has  col¬
lected  and  possesses,  gives  freely). — But  if  thou  prefer  to
versify,  say  to  him  whom  thou  esteemest :

Bestow  on  tlie  needy  when  he  comes  to  thee,  and  show  regard
eyen  when  a  man  injures  tliee.

Have  dealings  -with  him  that  is  noble,  but  put  afar  from  thee  the
base.

Withdraw  from  the  side  of  the  unjust,  the  mischievous,  when
he  sits  by  thee.

When  contention  rouses  itself  put  it  off  from  thee,  and  cast  it
away  when  it  confirms  itself.

Be  still,  and  thou  shalt  grow  strong ;  for  it  may  be  that  time  that
was  perverse  to  thee  shall  aid  thee.

Said  A1  H4rith  :  Now  when  he  had  bewitched  us
with  his  verses,  and  fatigued  us  by  the  remoteness  of
his  goals — "We  praised  him  until  he  begged  to  be  spared,
and  we  gave  to  him  until  he  said  it  was  enough. — Then
he  gathered  up  his  garment,  and  loaded  on  his  wallet,
and  rose  to  go,  reciting :

Excellent  are  this  company,  who  are  true  of  speech,  princes  in
bounty.

They  surpass  mankind  in  far-famed  virtues,  they  surpass  them
in  their  gifts.

I  have  talked  with  them,  and  found  that  Sahbitn  in  their  presence
would  he  as  Bakil :


198


SIXTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.


And  I  aKghted  among  ttem  begging,  and  met  witb  a  rain  that
poured.

I  swear  that  if  the  generous  are  a  shower  they  are  a  flood.

Then  he  stepped  two  lances’  space,  but  returned  com¬
mending  himself  to  God  from  death, — And  said,  “  0
strength  of  him  that  is  without  kindred,  treasure  of  him
that  is  reft  of  wealth ! — The  glooming  has  now  set  in,
and  the  face  of  the  highway  is  veiled; — And  between
me  and  my  house  is  the  dark  night  and  a  razed  out
path. — And  have  ye  a  lantern  that  will  secure  me  from
stumbling,  and  make  plain  the  tracks  ?” — Said  A1
Harith  :  And  when  there  was  brought  what  was  sought
for,  and  the  light  of  the  brand  disclosed  men’s  faces, — I
saw  that  he  who  hunted  us  was  our  Abu  Zayd ;  and
I  said  to  my  friends,  “  This  is  he  of  whom  I  indicated
that  when  he  speaks  he  hits  the  point,  and  when  he
is  asked  for  rain  he  pours.”  —  And  they  stretched
towards  him  their  necks,  and  they  made  the  blacks
of  their  eyes  surround  him. — And  they  begged  him  that
he  would  pass  his  night  in  talk  with  them,  on  the  condi¬
tion  that  they  should  mend  his  poverty. — He  said,  “  My
desire  is  yours!  "Welcome  to  you  since  ye  have  wel¬
comed  I — ^nevertheless  when  I  came  to  you  my  children
were  writhing  with  hunger,  and  calling  to  me  for  a
quick  return. — And  if  they  find  me  tardy,  distraction
will  possess  them,  and  my  life  will  be  no  more  serene. —
How  suffer  me  to  go  that  I  may  fill  their  emptiness,  and
relieve  their  choke ;  then  return  to  you  straightway,
prepared  for  night-talking  till  the  dawn.” — So  we  said
to  one  of  the  lads,  ‘*Tollow  him  to  his  people,  that  he
may  be  the  quicker  to  come  again.” — ^And  the  boy  set  out
with  him,  carrying  his  wallet  under  his  arm,  hastening


&IXTEENTR  ASSEMBLY.


199


his  return : — ^But  he  delayed  a  delay  exceeding  hounds  ;
then  the  lad  came  back  alone. — ^We  said  to  him,  “  What
story  hast  thou  of  the  knave  ?” — He  said :  He  took  me
along  wearying  ways  and  branching  paths,  until  we
came  to  a  ruined  hut. — ^Then  he  said,  “Here  is  my
station,  the  nest  of  my  chicks.” — And  he  bade  open  to
him  the  door,  and  he  pulled  away  from  me  his  wallet,
and  said,  “  By  my  life !  thou  hast  lightened  a  load  off
nje,  and  deserved  fair  treatment  from  me. — ^Now  here  is
a  cotmsel  for  thee  which  is  among  the  most  precious  of
counsels,  the  seed-plots  of  advantages  then  he  recited :

When  thou  hast  got  the  plucking  of  the  palm,  defer  it  not  to  the
coming  year :

And  if  thou  lightest  on  a  treading-floor,  fill  thy  crop  with
the  ears  that  are  there ;

And  stay  not  when  thou  hast  picked  them  up,  lest  thou  stick  in
the  net  of  the  snarer  ;

And  go  not  far  in  when  thou  swimmest,  for  safety  is  on  the  bank.

Accost  with  Give  now,”  and  answer  with  Bye  and  bye and
sell  what  is  postponed  from  thee  for  what  comes  at  once.

And  exceed  not  upon  a  friend  in  thy  visiting,  for  no  one  was  ever
wearied  of  save  the  clinging  guest.

Then  he  said,  “  Treasure  these  lines  in  thy  heart,  and
follow  them  in  thy  conduct. — And  now  hasten  to  thy
fellows  in  the  keeping  of  thy  Lord ; — And  when  thou
hast  reached  them,  bring  them  my  greeting,  and  re¬
hearse  to  them  my  commandment. — And  say  to  them
from  me  that  full  sure  night-watching  spent  in  tales
is  among  the  greatest  of  harms;  and  that  I  fail  not
to  care  for  myself,  nor  will  bring  dryness  into  my  head
by  vigils.” — Said  the  narrator :  How  when  the  argument
of  his  poem  had  put  us  in  view  of  his  cunning  and
fraud,  we  upbraided  each  other  for  leaving  him,  and  for
deceiving  ourselves  with  his  lie. — Then  we  separated
with  frowning  faces  and  a  losing  bargain.


200


SEVEN TEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


THE  SEYENTEEHTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“THE  REYEESED.”

This  Assembly  closely  resembles  the  last ;  the  difference  between
them  being  that,  whereas  the  feat  accomplished  in  the  last  consisted
in  producing  sentences  or  lines  of  poetry,  the  letters  of  which
should  be  the  same  whether  read  forward  or  backward,  the  pecu¬
liarity  of  the  present  composition  is  that  the  words  themselves  being
reversed  produce  a  perfect  sense.  The  Assembly,  in  other  respects,
shows  no  feature  that  requires  notice.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related  :  In  one  of  tlie
places  wliitlier  my  journeying  cast  me,  to  whose  fairness
my  eye  was  lifted  up,  I  beheld  some  youths,  on  whom
was  the  mark  of  understanding,  and  the  beauty  of  the
stars  of  the  dark. — And  they  were  in  a  debate  that  was
strong  of  blast,  and  a  contention  that  exceeded  in  its
heat. — Then  was  I  roused  to  make  towards  them  by  the
love  of  disputation,  and  by  deeming  the  fruits  of  dis¬
cussion  to  be  sweet. — And  when  I  had  joined  myself
to  their  company,  and  strung  myself  on  their  thread,
they  said,  “  Art  thou  one  who  will  prove  himself  in  the
strife  and  east  in  his  bucket  among  the  buckets?” — I
said,  “Yay,  I  am  but  of  the  lookers  on  at  war,  not  of
the  sons  of  the  stab  and  the  stroke.” — Then  they  broke
off  from  arguing  with  me,  and  gave  themselves  to  put¬
ting  forth  riddles. — And  there  was  in  the  midst  of  their
ring,  and  in  the  circlet  of  their  company,  an  old  man
whom  cares  had  made  lean,  whom  the  hot  wind  had
scorched; — So  that  he  had  come  to  be  thinner  than
a  reed,  dryer  than  the  shears. — And  yet  was  he  uttering
wonders  whenever  he  answered,  and  causing  Sahban


SErUNTEUNTE  ASSEMBLY.


201


to  be  forgotten  as  often  as  he  expounded. — And  I
admired  the  judgment  he  was  gifted  with,  and  his  sur¬
passing  that  assemblage. — And  he  ceased  not  to  make
clear  exery  puzzle,  and  to  lay  low  all  he  aimed  at,
until  the  quivers  were  empty,  and  the  asking  and  the
answering  were  exhausted. — Now  when  he  saw  that  the
company  had  consumed  their  store,  and  were  forced  to
fasting,  he  hinted  at  a  colloquy,  and  asked  leave  for
an  argument. — They  said,  “  Excellent,  but  who  will  be
our  surety  for  it  ?” — He  said,  “  Do  ye  know  a  com¬
position  whose  earth  is  its  heaven,  and  whose  morn  is  its
even;  which  is  woven  on  two  beams,  and  shows  with
two  colours,  and  prays  towards  two  points,  and  goes
forth  with  two  faces  ? — If  it  rises  out  from  its  east  excel¬
lent  is  its  splendour,  and  if  it  mounts,  from  its  west,  then
Oh  its  marvel !”

Said  A1  Harith :  Then  it  was  as  though  the  company
were  struck  with  speechlessness,  or  the  word  “  Silence”
were  incumbent  upon  them. — And  no  man  said  word,
and  the  tongue  of  none  uttered  aught ; — But  when  he
saw  them  dumb  as  cattle,  and  speechless  as  statues,  he
said  to  them,  “  I  have  now  conceded  to  you  the  term  of
grace,  and  made  slack  to  you  the  tether  of  delay : — And
here  is  the  camp  of  gathering,  the  station  of  decision. —
Now  if  your  minds  yield  freely  I  will  praise,  but  if  your
fire-staves  be  baiTen  I  will  rub  the  spark.’- — They  said
to  him,  “  By  Allah,  there  is  no  swimming  for  us  in
the  deep  of-  this  sea,  no  wandering  on  its  shore ;  so
give  rest  to  our  thoughts  from  travail,  and  make  grateful
thy  gift  by  readiness. — And  take  us  as  brethren  who
will  leap  when  thou  leapest,  and  will  recompense  when
thou  seekest  recompensing,” — And  he  looked  down  a


202


SEVENTEENTS  ASSEMBLY.


space;  then  he  said,  I  hear  you  and  obey. — Take  now
this  dictation  from  me  and  hand  it  down  of  me :

Man  is  the  creature  of  kindness ;  and  the  perfecting
of  a  benefit  is  the  deed  of  the  liberal ;  and  the  disposi¬
tion  of  the  generous  is  a  treasure  of  praise;  and  the
gain  of  thanks  is  a  gathering  of  happiness;  and  the
index  of  generosity  is  the  light  of  cheerfulness ;  and
the  practice  of  courtesy  leads  of  needs  to  affection ;
and  the  bond  of  friendship  demands  sincere  counsel ;
and  truth  of  narrative  is  the  ornament  of  the  tongue;
and  eloquence  in  speech  is  witchcraft  to  hearts ;  and  the
net  of  desire  is  the  bane  of  souls;  and  impatience  of
disposition  is  a  dishonour  to  mortals ;  and  evil  desire
consists  not  with  self-restraint;  and  the  clinging  to
prndence  is  the  leading-cord  of  safety;  and  to  seek
occasions  for  blaming  is  the  worst  of  faults ;  and  the
dwelling  upon  failings  overthrows  friendships ;  and
sincerity  of  purpose  is  the  cream  of  a  gift;  and  un¬
grudgingness  in  conferring  is  the  price  due  to  asking;
and  the  undertaking  of  labours  lays  the  way  for  re-
compence;  and  faith  in  God’s  protection  makes  it  easy
to  bestow ;  and  the  excellence  of  the  prince  is  large¬
ness  of  breast;  and  the  ornament  of  rulers  is  hatred
of  defamers;  and  the  reward  of  praiseworthy  deeds  is
a  bestowing  of  gifts;  and  the  dowry  of  conciliation
is  the  obtaining  of  requests;  and  the  cause  of  error  is
extravagance  of  aim ;  and  to  overstep  bounds  blunts
vigour ;  and  transgression  of  politeness  nullifies  ser¬
vices  ;  and  the  forgetting  of  rights  provokes  resistance  ;
and  to  shun  doubtful  deeds  raises  men’s  rank;  and
elevation  of  dignities  is  by  rushing  into  dangers ;  and
the  exalting  of  positions  is  by  the  favour  of  Providence ;


SEVJENTEENm  ABSEMBLT.


203


and  loftiness  in  actions  is  through,  the  limiting  of  desires  ;
and  the  lengthening  of  thought  makes  precision  of
judgment ;  and  the  crown  of  princeliness  is  the  refine¬
ment  of  courtliness ;  and  by  contentiousness  is  lost  what
is  sought  for ;  and  in  perils  is  shown  the  difference
among  men ;  and  in  the  superiority  of  plans  lies  the
distinction  of  men’s  values ;  and  by  the  exaggeration  of
the  envoy  policy  is  weakened  ;  and  through  laxness  of
.powers  do  terrors  appear ;  and  by  the  task  of  patience
is  the  fruit  of  victory  ;  and  the  merit  to  be  praiseworthy
is  in  proportion  to  diligence ;  and  to  repay  regard  is
necessary  to  consideration;  and  affection  in  servants  is
shown  in  visiting  their  masters  ;  and  the  adornment  of
manliness  is  the  guarding  of  trusts  ;  and  the  proving
of  brethren  is  in  their  lightening  one’s  griefs ;  and
the  repulse  of  enemies  is  by  defence  on  the  part  of
friends;  and  the  testing  of  the  intelligent  is  by  as¬
sociating  them  with  the  ignorant;  and  the  looking  to
consequences  gives  security  from  fatalities;  and  the
.  keeping  from  baseness  spreads  reputation ;  and  the  vice
of  boorishness  consists  not  with  excellence ;  and  the
essence  of  the  noble  is  the  guarding  of  secrets.

Then  he  said :  These  are  two  hundred  words  com¬
prising  culture  and  admonition. — If  one  move  them  in
this  direction,  there  is  no  debate,  no  contention;  but
if  one  desire  the  reversing  of  their  mould,  and  the
turning  of  them  backwards,  let  him  say,  “  Secrets
are  trusted  to  the  noble;  and  the  nature  of  excellence
consists  not  with  boorishness ;  and  foulness  of  reputa¬
tion  spreads  disgrace;” — And  so  on  this  track  let  him
trail  them  and  not  fear  error  in  them,  until  there  shall
come  the  close  of  their  couplets  and  the  last  of  their


204


SEVENTEEN TE  ASSEMBLY.


pearls,  namely,  “  and  to  perfect  kindness  is  a  good  deed
of  man.”

Said  the  narrator:  Now  when  he  had  uttered  his
unique  address,  and  his  elegancy  that  was  perfect  of
meaning,  we  knew  how  much  composition  may  he
diverse  in  merit,  and  that  excellence  is  in  the  hand  of
Grod;  He  gives  it  to  whom  he  will. — Then  clung  each
of  us  to  his  skirt,  each  cut  off  for  him  a  portion  from
what  he  possessed. — But  he  declined  to  receive  mine,,
and  said,  “  I  do  not  take  forfeit  of  my  pupils.” — I  said,
“  Be  Abti  Zayd,  even  with  all  this  embrowning  of  thy
figure  and  this  failure  of  the  water  of  thy  cheek.” — He
said,  “  I  am  he,  even  with  all  my  leanness  and  wither¬
ing,  and  the  squalor  of  my  drought.” — Then  I  took  to
chiding  him  for  this  gadding  east  and  west. — But  he
declared  the  Power  of  God  and  our  return  to  Him .
then  he  indited  with  an  aching  heart:

Time  liatli  drawn  Ms  sw-ord  upon  me  to  friglit  me,  and  liatli
sliarpened  Ms  blade  ;

And  hath  stolen  away  from  mine  eyelid  its  slumber,  like  an
adversary ;  and  hath  made  its  tear  flow  down ;

And  caused  me  to  roam  the  world ;  to  go  about  its  east,  to  traverse
its  west :

And  day  after  day  there  is  for  me  in  each  valley  but  a  single
rising  and  setting.

And  so  the  exile’s  figure  is  changed  and  his  destination  is  afar.

Then  he  went  away  trailing  his  gait  and  swinging  his
arms ; — And  we  were  divided  between  turning  to  gaze
on  him  and  hastening  after  him. — Then  we  delayed  not
to  loose  our  loops,  and  we  went  asunder  like  the  bands
of  Saba.

The  following  is  Abd  Zayd’s  composition  read  back¬
wards  :  Secrets  are  trusted  to  the  noble ;  and  the


SEVJENTmNTS  ASSUMBLY.


nature  of  excellence  consists  not  with,  boorishness ;  anft
foulness  of  reputation  spreads  disgrace ;  and  the  guard¬
ing  against  fatalities  secures  from  ill  consequences ;  and
the  discerning  of  the  foolish  is  by  associating  them  with
the  intelligent;  and  the  proving  of  friends  is  in  the
repelling  of  enemies;  and  the  driving  away  of  sorrows
is  by  the  cheering  of  brethren ;  and  the  proof  of  re¬
ligious  beliefs  is  in  the  observance  of  virtue;  and  the
grace  of  subjects  is  the  visiting  their  masters ;  and
sincerity  of  regard  consists  in  the  repaying  of  considera¬
tion  ;  and  the  necessity  of  exertion  is  in  proportion  to
reputation;  and  the  meriting  of  success  is  the  fruit  of
patience ;  and  in  the  duress  of  terrors  is  strength  shown ;
and  by  looseness  of  policy  the  envoy  is  weakened ;  and
through  increase  of  rank  do  purposes  differ  ;  and  accord¬
ing  to  the  eminence  of  men  is  the  magnitude  of  their
perils ;  and  in  poverty  contention  is  useless ;  and  with
courtliness  comes  the  refinement  of  rule ;  and  the  first
thing  in  knowledge  is  clearness  of  thought;  and  to
defer  men’s  hopes  is  a  failure  in  duties  ;  and  loftiness  of
authority  is  by  the  favour  of  Providence ;  and  exaltation
in  dignities  is  by  rushing  into  dangers  ;  and  the  raising
of  rank  raises  distrusts;  and  the  shunning  of  contu¬
macy  produces  regard  for  rights;  and  forgetfulness  of
services  destroys  courtesy  ;  and  to  overstep  bounds  blunts
vigour ;  and  to  go  beyond  the  mark  is  an  excess  of  error;
and  the  obtaining  of  requests  is  by  the  interceding  of
conciliation  ;  and  the  dowry  of  givers  is  the  spreading
of  their  praiseworthy  deeds ;  and  the  reward  of  adminis¬
trators  is  the  hatred  of  rulers ;  and  the  ornament  of  the
prince  is  largeness  of  breast ;  and  the  virtue  of  bestowing
brings  with  it  God’s  protection ;  and  faith  in  recompense


206


HIGBTEEJSfTE  ASSEMBLY.


makes  labours  easy ;  and  tke  katefulness  of  begging  is
tbe  price  paid  for  conferring;  and  ungrudgingness  in  a
gift  is  tbe  ereani  of  intention ;  and  sincerity  in  affection
makes  nought  of  failings  ;  and  the  dwelling  upon  men’s
Tices  is  the  worst  of  faults  ;  and  the  seeking  after  safety
is  the  leading-cord  of  prudence ;  and  the  clinging  to  self-
restraint  keeps  from  desire;  and  evil  of  disposition  is
the  dishonour  of  mortals ;  and  the  weariness  of  souls  is
the  bane  of  love ;  and  the  witchcraft  of  speech  is  a  net
to  hearts;  and  the  eloquence  of  the  tongue  is  the
grace  of  narrative ;  and  truthfulness  of  advice  demands
friendship ;  and  the  bond  of  affection  leads  of  needs  to
courtesy ;  and  the  habit  of  cheerfulness  is  an  earnest  of
nobility ;  and  the  index  of  happiness  is  the  gathering  of
thanks;  and  a  gain  of  praise  is  the  treasure  of  the
generous ;  and  the  nature  of  the  liberal  is  the  doing  of
goodness;  and  the  perfecting  of  kindness  is  a  good
deed  of  man.


THE  EIGHTEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“OF  SINJAR.”

In  tHs  Assembly  Abu  Zayd  is  represented  as  gaming  a  splendid
present  by  the  narrative  of  an  alleged  misfortune.  We  are  left  in
doubt  ■whether  his  story  be  true  or  only  one  of  his  usual  artifices  to  ob¬
tain  the  bounty  of  his  friends.  In  a  journey  from  Damascus  to  Bagdad,
the  caravan,  in  ■which  are  flarith  and  Abu  Zayd,  halts  at  Sinjar,  a
city  of  the  Diyar  Eabi'ah,  ■which  lies  on  the  northern  route  between
Syria  and  Irak.  There  a  merchant  ■was  giving  a  wedding  feast,  to
which,  according  to  the  hospitable  custom  of  the  East,  all  classes
were  in^vitod.  After  the  more  substantial  "viands  have  been  consumed,
a  glass  vase  of  sweetmeats  is  produced,  at  the  sight  of  which  Abii
Zayd  starts  up  and  quits  the  circle  of  guests.  On  being  asked  the
reason  of  this  conduct  he  declares  that  he  is  bound  by  an  oath  not


EIQETHUNTE  ASSEMBLY.


207


to  remain  in  the  •vicinity  of  anything  that  is  transparent  and  betrays
■what  is  inside  it.  The  company  unwillingly  send  away  the  sweet¬
meats,  and  Abu  Zayd  then  tells  his  story,  which  is  that,  being
possessed  of  a  beautiful  and  accomplished  slave  girl,  he  had  revealed
the  secret  to  a  false  friend,  who  had  betrayed  it  to  the  Governor.
This  officer  being  desirous  to  obtain  such  a  paragon  as  a  present  to
his  Prince,  had  taken  the  girl  from  him  by  force ;  on  which  Abu
Zayd  had  vowed  that  he  would  never  remain  in  company  with  any
thing  that  could  not  keep  a  secret :  and  as  glass  has  this  defect  ho
must  decline  to  sit  opposite  to  a  glass  vase.  The  host  respects  this
somewhat  fanciful  scruple,  and  in  the  end  orders  sweetmeats  to  be
brought  in  silver  vases,  and  presents  Abu  Zayd,  not  only  with  the
eontents  of  the  vessels,  but  the  vessels  themselves.  Though  the
conceit  on  which  this  composition  is  founded  is  puerile  enough,  the
Assembly  is  one  of  the  most  poetical  in  Hariri’s  work,  and  a  choice
specimen  of  his  rich  and  elaborate  diction.  Whatever  merits  it
may  possess  are,  however,  diminished  by  the  circumstance  that  it  is
a  close  imitation,  and  in  parts  almost  a  literal  copy,  of  one  by  A1
Hamadani.

A1  E4ritli,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  was  once  on
the  return  journey  from  Damascus,  on  my  way  to  the
City  of  Peace, — ^With  travellers  of  the  Benu  Nomayr,  a
company  of  wealth  and  worth. — And  with  us  was  Abu
Zayd,  of  Seruj,  he  that  is  an  enchainment  to  the  hasty,
and  a  beguiling  to  the  bereaved,  the  wonder  of  the  time,
the  pointed  at  with  the  finger  for  his  eloquence. — Now
our  halting  at  Sinjar  fell  on  a  time  when  one  of  the  mer¬
chants  there  was  making  a  marriage  feast: — And  he
bade  to  his  banquet  the  whole  commonalty,  both  of
settled  land  and  of  desert ;  so  that  his  bidding  extended
to  the  caravan,  and  he  comprised  in  it  both  the  important
and  those  of  no  account. — Now  when  we  had  responded
to  his  bidder,  and  arrived  at  his  hall,  he  set  before  us
viands  of  one  hand  and  two,  whatever  is  sweet  in  the
mouth  or  fair  to  the  eye. — And  after  this  he  brought
forth  a  vase,  which  was  as  though  it  had  been  congealed


208


MGETEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


of  air,  or  condeused  of  sunbeam  motes,  or  moulded  of  the
light  of  the  open  plain,  or  peeled  from  the  white  pearl :
— And  it  had  been  furnished  with  assortments  of  comfits,
and  affused  with  a  pervading  perfume,  and  there  had
been  poured  into  it  a  draught  from  Tesnim,  and  it
disclosed  a  fair  aspect,  and  the  fragrance  of  a  gentle
breeze. — !N'ow  when  our  appetites  were  kindled  at  its
presence,  and  our  palates  were  eager  for  the  trial  of
it;  and  it  was  imminent  that  the  squadrons  should  be
sent  forth  against  its  train,  and  that  we  should  cry  at
the  spoiling  of  it,  Eevenge  ! — Lo  Abu  Zayd  sprang  up
like  a  madman,  and  snndered  from  it  as  far  as  the  lizard
is  sundered  from  the  fish. — Then  we  sought  of  him  that
he  should  return,  and  not  be  as  was  Kodar  among
Thamud. — But  he  said,  “By  Him  who  raises  the  dead
from  their  sepulchres,  I  will  not  return  except  the  vase
be  taken  away. — So  we  found  no  escape  from  humouring
him,  and  acquitting  him  of  his  vow. — And  we  bade
carry  it  away,  and  our  minds  were  carried  after  it  and
our  tears  flowed  concerning  it. — And  when  he  had
returned  to  his  seat,  and  was  free  from  guilt,  we  asked
him  wherefore  he  rose,  and  for  what  reason  he  bade  take
away  the  vase. — He  said,  “  Because  that  glass  is  a  be¬
trayer  ;  and  for  years  I  have  had  an  oath  that  the  same
place  should  not  hold  me  and  one  who  betrays.” — We
said  to  him,  “  What  is  the  cause  of  thy  strict  oath  and
thy  binding  vow  ?” — He  said;  I  had  a  neighbour  whose
tongue  cajoled,  while  his  heart  was  a  scorpion;  whose
speech  was  a  honeycomb  to  refresh,  while  his  hidden
thought  was  a  concentred  venom: — And  through  his
living  near  me  I  was  led  to  converse  with  him,  and
by  his  false  smiling  I  was  deluded  into  consorting  with


MGHTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


209


him : — And  the  fairness  of  his  seeming  infatuated  me  to
companying  with  him,  and  the  guile  of  his  character
drew  me  on  to  intimacy  with  him. — And  I  associated
with  him  in  the  thought  that  he  would  be  to  me  as
a  most  close  neighbour ;  but  it  was  made  manifest  that
he  was  a  swooping  eagle  : — And  I  was  familiar  with  him
in  the  belief  that  he  was  a  familiar  friend,  but  he  showed
that  he  was  a  treacherous  serpent. — And  I  ate  my  salt
with  him,  and  knew  not  that  at  the  testing  he  would  be
of  those  whose  loss  is  rejoiced  at: — And  I  drank  my
wine  with  him,  and  understood  not  that  on  trial  he
would  be  of  those  whose  departure  is  a  delight.

Now  in  my  house  was  a  maiden  to  whom  no  rival  could
be  found  in  perfection. — If  she  unveiled,  the  two  lights
of  heaven  were  shamed,  and  each  heart  was  burned  with
the  fires  of  love. — If  she  smiled,  she  made  the  beads  of
silver  to  be  despised,  and  pearls  would  be  sold  for  what  is
worthless. — If  she  gazed,  she  roused  love-fancies;  she
realized  the  witchcraft  of  Babylon. — If  she  spoke,  she  en¬
chained  the  heart  of  the  wise,  and  called  down  the  wild
goats  from  the  crags. — If  she  read  the  Eoran,  she
would  heal  the  heart-sick,  she  would  give  life  to  one
buried  alive ;  so  that  thou  wouldest  think  her  gifted
with  the  pipes  of  David. — If  she  sang,  Ma'bad  would
become  as  a  slave  to  her,  and  to  Isaac  it  would  be
said,  “Away!  begone  I” — -If  she  piped,  Zonam  would
appear  an  impostor  beside  her ;  although  he  was  a  leader
in  his  generation,  one  confident  in  his  charming. —
If  she  danced,  she  dislodged  the  turbans  from  men’s
heads;  she  would  make  thee  forget  the  dance  of  the
bubbles  in  the  cups. — And  possessed  of  her  I  despised
the  red  camels;  and  with  the  enjoyment  of  her  I


14


210


BIGHTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


adorned  the  neck  of  my  prosperity. — And  I  veiled  her
face  from  the  sun  and  moon;  I  excluded  the  mention  of  her
from  the  paths  of  my  night-talk; — ^Tet  withal  was  I
fearful  lest  a  breeze  by  night  might  bear  her  fragrance,
or  a  Satih  divine  of  her,  or  the  flashing  lightning  betray
her. — -And  it  came  to  pass,  through  the  decay  of  my
minished  fortune,  and  the  malignness  of  my  unlucky
star,  that  the  heat  of  wine  caused  me  to  describe  her
to  my  blabbing  neighbour.— Then  understanding  re¬
turned  after  the  arrow  had  been  shot,  and  I  felt  trouble
and  vexation,  knowing  that  the  thing  was  lost  which
was  committed  to  such  a  sieve. — ^But  yet  I  stipulated
with  him  to  keep  close  what  I  had  uttered,  and  to  guard
my  secret  even  though  I  should  anger  him. — ^And  he
declared  that  he  treasured  secrets  as  the  miser  treasures
the  denar;  and  that  he  would  not  rend  veils  of  con¬
fidence  even  were  he  exposed  to  be  cast  into  fire.

But  not  more  than  a  day  or  two  had  passed  when  it
occurred  to  the  ruler  of  that  town,  and  its  G-overnor
having  authority, — That  he  would  repair  to  the  court
of  his  Prince  to  make  a  new  display  of  his  horsemen,
and  pray  a  rain  from  the  cloud  of  his  bounty ; — And  he
wished  for  a  present  to  take  with  him,  such  as  should
accord  with  the  Prince’s  desire ;  that  he  might  offer  it  in
the  course  of  his  interview. — ^Whereon  he  began  to  be
liberal  in  rewards  to  his  sbouts,  and  to  heighten  the
inducements  to  whoso  should  possess  him  of  his  wish. —
Then  stooped  that  treacherous  neighbour  his  flight  to  the
largess,  and,  putting  on  the  breast-plate  of  infamy,  re¬
belled  against  the  blame  of  the  Warner. — And  he  came  to
the  Governor,  stretching  his  ears,  and  published  what  I
had  told  him  as  a  secret. — And  I  had  no  alarm  till  his  de-


EIGETEJENTK  ASSEMBLY.


211


pendants  rushed  in  to  nae  and  his  servants  swarmed  upon
me,  urging  me  to  prefer  him  with  my  peerless  pearl,
on  the  condition  that  I  should  dictate  to  him  her  price.
— Then  sorrow  overwhelmed  me  as  the  sea  overwhelmed
Pharaoh  and  his  host. — And  I  ceased  not  to  defend
her,  but  defence  availed  not;  and  to  intercede  with
him,  but  intercession  profited  not. — And  as  often  as  he
saw  in  me  an  increase  of  evasion  and  the  desire  of
esQape,  he  shouted,  he  burned  with  rage,  he  gnashed
upon  me  with  his  teeth. — ^But  yet  my  soul  consented  not
to  part  from  its  full  moon,  nor  that  I  should  tear  the
heart  from  my  breast. — But  when  threatening  turned  to
assault,  and  invective  to  beating,  the  fear  of  death  led
me  to  barter  the  black  of  my  eye  for  the  yellow  of
coin ;  but  the  informer  gained  nought  but  guilt  and
ignominy. — And  since  then  I  have  had  a  vow  to  God
Most  High  that  I  would  never  again  keep  in  presence  of
a  betrayer. — How  glass  is  distinguished  by  this  base
quality ;  nay,  its  name  has  been  made  a  proverb  for
treachery; — So  that  the  tenour  of  my  oath  extends
to  it,  and  that  is  the  reason  that  my  hand  stretches
not  forth  to  it.

Now,  siace  I  have  explained,  blame  me  not  that  ye  have  been
hindered  in  the  vintage  of  the  cates ;

For  my  excuse  in  what  I  have  done  is  plain ;  and  I  will  repair
the  rent  I  have  made  by  my  resources,  old  or  new ;

So  that  the  pleasantry  that  I  will  supply  you  with  shall  be  more
delicious  than  sweetmeats  in  the  judgment  of  all  the  intelligent.

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  Then  we  accepted
his  excusing,  and  kissed  his  cheek, — And  said  to  him,
“Long  since  treachery  vexed  the  Best  of  Mankind,  so
that  there  was  declared  concerning  the  woman  that
carried  firewood  that  which  was  declared.” — After  this


212


MQETEENTR  ASSEMBLY.


we  asked  him  of  the  hehaviour  of  this  tell-tale  neigh¬
bour,  this  unregardful  intimate. — After  he  had  feathered
against  him  the  arrow  of  delation,  and  cut  the  cord  of
observance, — He  said,  He  took  to  submission  and  humil¬
iation,  and  to  interceding  with  me  by  people  of  degree.

^ — But  I  had  straitly  charged  myself  that  my  familiarity
should  not  seek  a  return  to  him  until  my  yesterday
should  return  to  me. — And  he  gained  nothing  from  me
but  refusal  and  persistence  in  aversion ;  yet  was  he  not
disheartened  by  repulse,  nor  shamed  from  his  impudence
of  face ;  but  persevered  in  overtures  and  was  urgent  in
requests  ; — And  nought  freed  me  from  his  annoying  and
made  hopeless  to  him  the  gaining  of  his  desire,  save  some
verses  in  which  breathed  the  vengeful  breast  and  the
wounded  spirit. — And  these  proved  a  driving  forth  to  his
devil,  an  imprisoning  of  him  in  his  dwelling. — And  on
their  publication  he  made  an  irrevocable  divorce  with
joy,  and  cried,  Alas !  Perdition ! — ^And  despaired  of  the
resurrection  of  my  buried  friendship  as  the  infidels
despair  of  the  tenants  of  the  tombs. — ^Then  we  conjured
him  to  recite  them,  and  give  us  to  smell  their  fragrance.
— He  said,  “  Be  it  so :  man  is  made  up  of  impatience.”
— So  he  recited,  and  no  bashfulness’  hindered  him,  no
timidity  restrained  him :

There  was  a  companion  to  whom  I  gave  the  pure  milk  of  my
love’s  truth  when  I  fancied  him  true  and  a  friend ;

But  to  whom  I  showed  the  estrangement  of  him  that  hates  when
I  found  him  to  he  foul  as  the  matter  of  a  sore  or  as  tepid  water.

I  fancied  him,  before  he  was  tried,  a  familiar  and  dutiful ;  hut  he
has  shown  himself  a  churl,  one  to  be  censured  :

I  chose  him  as  one  to  converse  with  me,  but  my  heart  is  now
wounded  by  his  wronging ;

I  thought  him  to  be  a  helper  and  compassionate,  hut  I  have  dis¬
covered  Wm  to  he  an  accursed  one,  a  devil  to  be  driven  away  with
stones ;


EIGBTEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


213


I  looked  upon  liim  as  one  devoted  to  me,  but  my  testing  of  him
has  disclosed  bim  as  a  fiend  perverse  and  vile  ;

And  I  judged  that  he  would  blow  a  gentle  breeze,  but  he  would
blow  nought  but  a  simoom.

From  his  serpent-bite  which  baffled  the  enchanter  I  lay  wounded ;
but  he  had  no  hurt  from  me.

On  the  morning  of  our  separation  his  condition  was  erect,  but  my
body  was  sick ;

He  was  not  pleasant  and  abundant  to  me  ;  nay,  by  his  evil-
doing  he  was  terrible  to  me,  and  an  adversary.

I  said,  when  I  had  made  trial  of  him,  Would  that  he  existed  not,
that  he  had  not  been  a  companion  to  me.”

TBy  his  betrayal  he  made  hateful  the  morning  to  my  heart,  since
the  morning  is  found  to  be  a  betrayer ;

And  he  has  brought  me  to  the  love  of  the  night,  since  the  black  of
darkness  is  a  watcher  that  conceals ;

And  enough  of  guilt  and  blame  has  the  informer  in  his  work,  even
though  he  speak  the  truth.

Said  A1  Harith  :  Xow  when  the  master  of  the  house
heard  his  verse  and  his  cadence,  and.  admired  his
encomium  and  his  satire, — He  set  him  on  the  couch  of
his  respect,  and  gave  him  the  first  place  on  his  cushion  of
honour; — Then  he  hade  bring  ten  dishes  of  silver,  on
which  were  sweetmeats  of  candy  and  honey, — And  said
to  him,  ‘‘  The  people  of  the  Fire  are  not  as  the  people  of
the  Garden ;  nor  is  it  lawful  that  the  innocent  should  be
made  as  the  suspected. — How  these  vessels  take  rank
among  the  sinless  in  the  keeping  of  secrets;  so  show
them  not  aversion,  nor  count  Hud  with  'Ad.” — Then  he
bade  his  servant  carry  them  to  his  lodging  that  he  might
do  with  them  as  he  would. — And  Abu  Zayd  turned  to
us  and  said,  “  Eecite  the  Chapter  of  Victory,  and  be
gladsome  at  the  healing  of  your  wound ; — For  now  God
hath  repaired  your  bereavement  and  permitted  your
meal,  and  gathered  you  together  to  sweetmeats ;  and
it  may  be  that  ye  mislike  a  thing,  and  yet  it  is  your


214


NINETEmTE  ASSEMBLY.


good.” — And  when  he  was  thinking  of  departure  he
inclined  to  beg  the  dishes  as  a  present, — And  said  to  the
entertainer,  “Truly  it  is  among  the  marks  of  good
breeding  that  he  who  gives  aught  should  give  the  vessel
that  holds  it.” — Said  the  host,  “  Both  of  them  and  the
boy ;  so  speak  no  more,  but  rise  in  peace.” — And  he
leaped  up  to  the  reply,  and  thanked  the  host  as  the
meadow  thanks  the  rain-cloud. — Then  did  Abu  Zayd
lead  us  to  his  tent  and  give  us  to  dispose  of  his  sweet¬
meats,  and  began  to  pass  round  the  dishes,  and  to  divide
their  contents  among  the  company ; — And  he  said  :  I
know  not  whether  I  should  complaiu  of  that  betrayer  or
thank  him  ;  whether  I  should  forget  his  act  or  remember
it. — For  though  he  was  aggressive  in  his  wrong  and
tinseled  his  treacherous  tale,  yet  from  his  cloud  did
this  plenteous  rain  poxir  down,  and  from  his  sword  did
this  spoil  come  in  to  me. — And  now  it  is  moving  in  my
mind  that  I  should  return  to  my  cubs,  and  be  content
with  what  has  come  thus  easily,  and  not  weary  myself
nor  my  camels. — So  I  will  take  leave  of  you  as  one  that
is  regardful,  and  commend  you  to  the  Best  of  Guardians.
— Then  he  mounted  his  beast  to  return  on  his  track,  to
bend  his  course  to  his  people. — And  when  his  strong
camel  coursed  along  and  his  sociableness  quitted  us,
he  left  us  as  an  assembly  whose  president  is  gone,  or
a  night  whose  moon  has  set.


THE  NINETEENTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“OF  NASiBiN.”


In  this  composition  Hariri  displays  his  knowledge  of  the  Tofayli
jargon.  Among  the  fancies  of  his  £^e  it  was  the  custom  to  give  to


NINETJEENTS  ASSEMBLY.


215


various  kinds  of  food  names  compounded  with  and  such  as  are
attached  to  a  great  number  of  animals  and  inanimate  objects.  As  the
Arabs  of  the  desert  called  a  bird  and  a  she-hyaena ^  \ ;

and  as  the  milky  way  was  called  so  the  Euphuists  of

the  polished,  cities  of  Irak  called  a  dish  of  rice  by  one  Icimjeli,  or
bye-name,  and  a  dish  of  meat  by  another.  To  know  these  seems  to
have  been  considered  a  mark  of  good  breeding;  and  the  learned
author  did  not  think  them  unworthy  of  a  place  in  his  work,  as  one
of  the  characteristics  of  the  Arabic  language.  In  the  same  spirit  he
introduces  into  the  30th  Assembly  a  number  of  the  cant  terms  used
by  the  beggars  of  the  time,  or  as  they  were  called  the  people  of
Sa’^fean.”  The  story  of  the  Assembly  is  of  the  usual  simplicity.  Abu
Zayd  is  pursuing  his  ordinary  course  of  life  at  Nasibin,  in  the  Eiyar
Eabi'ah,  when  he  is  taken  with  a  serious  illness.  His  friends,  hear¬
ing  of  it,  hasten  to  his  house  in  alarm,  but  are  informed  that  he  is
better  and  will  receive  them.  They  find  him  prostrate,  but  as
talkative  as  ever ;  and  after  he  has  entertained  tlicm  with  his  con¬
versation  for  some  time  he  tells  his  son,  in  the  enigmatical  language
of  Tofayl,  to  bring  a  repast  for  them.  They  partake  of  it,  and  leave
him  rejoicing  in  his  recovery,  and  grateful  for  his  hospitality.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  Irak  was  barren
in  a  certain  year  throngh  tbe  failure  of  the  stars  that
briag  the  rain-cloud; — And  the  travellers  told  of  the
tract  of  Hasibin,  and  the  comfort  of  its  wealthy  people.
— ^Then  I  mounted  a  camel  of  Mahrah,  and  fixed  a  lance
of  Samhar, — And  journeyed,  land  sending  me  on  to  land,
and  hill  drawing  me  up  from  dale,  until  I  reached  it,
worn  man  on  worn  beast. — 'Kow  when  I  had  halted  in
its  fertile  dwelling-place,  and  won  a  portion  in  its
pasture,  I  purposed  that  I  would  lay  down  my  neck
in  it,  and  take  its  people  for  my  neighbours, — Until  the
dried  year  should  revive,  and  the  spring-rain  visit  the
land  of  my  family. — How,  by  Allah,  my  eye -ball  had
not  tasted  of  its  sleep,  my  night  had  not  travailed  of  its
day,  ere  I  found  Abfi  Zayd,  the  Seruji,  roaming  the
quarters  of  Nasibin,  now  stumbling  with  the  crazed,


216


NINETEENTR  ASSEMBLY.


now  winning  with  the  fortunate. — ^And  from  his  mouth
vas  he  scattering  pearls,  and  he  milked  the  milk-flow
with  both  his  hands. — Then  I  found  that  my  campaign
had  now  gathered  a  booty,  and  my  single  lot  had  become
two-fold And  I  ceased  not  to  follow  his  shadow  where-
ever  he  sped,  and  to  glean  his  utterance  as  often  as  he
spoke, — ^Until  there  came  on  him  a  sickness  whose  term
was  prolonged,  whose  sharp  knives  bared  his  bone ;  so
that  it  went  near  to  rob  him  of  the  robe  of  life,  to  give
up  to  Abu  Yahya. — Then  did  I  feel  through  the  loss  of
his  presence  and  the  interruption  of  his  teacliing,  as
he  feels  that  is  put  far  from  his  desire,  or  the  suckling  at
the  weaning. — After  this  it  was  rumom'ed  that  his
pledge  was  already  forfeit,  that  the  talon  of  death  was
fixed  in  him.— -And  his  comrades  were  disturbed  at  the
rumouring  of  the  rumourers,  and  they  swarmed  to  his
courtyard,  hurrying  in ;

Bewildered,  their  grief  making  them  to  reel,  as  if  they  had  been
sucking  the  old  wine ;

They  poured  forth  their  tears,  and  they  rent  their  bosoms,  and
they,  beat  their  cheeks,  and  they  wounded  their  heads  ;

And  they  had  been  willing  that  fate  had  made  a  peace  with  him,
and  had  seized  their  possessions  and  themselves.

Said  the  narrator :  Now  I  was  of  those  who  joined  to
his  comrades  and  hastened  to  his  gate. — ^And  when  we
had  arrived  at  his  court-yard  and  assayed  to  scent  the
news  of  him,  his  boy  came  forth  to  us,  his  lips  parted
with  a  smile. — And  we  inquired  concerning  the  Shaykh
as  regarded  his  complaints,  and  the  truth  of  the  strength
of  his  disorders. — ^He  said,  “  He  was  lately  in  the  grasp
of  the  sickness  and  the  wearing  of  the  fever ;  until  the
lingering  disease  wasted  him,  and  the  killing  disease
exhausted  him. — But  afterward  God  was  gracious  in


NINETEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


217


strengthening  his  last  gasp,  and  he  recovered  from  his
trance. — So  return  on  your  paths  and  put  off  your  dis¬
quietude  ;  — Por  he  is  now  one  to  go  out  and  in,  and  to
pledge  you  in  wine.” — Then  we  made  much  of  his  glad
news,  and  urged  that  we  might  see  him  ;  and  he  entered
announcing  us,  then  came  out  permitting  us : — And  we
found  Ahu  Zayd  a  prostrate,  hut  his  tongue  going  freely.
— Then  we  took  seat  about  his  bed,  gazing  on  his  linea¬
ments. — And  he  turned  his  eye  round  the  assemblage ;
then  said.  Look  on  this,  the  offspring  of  the  moment :

God  lias  saved  me,  thanks  be  to  Him,  from  a  siclmess  that  went
near  to  blot  me  out ;

And  has  granted  me  recovery ;  though  it  must  needs  be  that  death
will  one  day  waste  me.

Death  forgets  me  not ;  yet  he  gives  me  a  delay  before  the  end  of
my  feeding.

If  it  be  decreed,  then  will  no  friend  avail,  nay,  not  even  the
guarded  domain  of  Kolayb,  to  guard  me  from  him.

Nor  care  I  if  his  day  be  near,  or  if  death  be  put  ojff  for  a  season.

For  what  boast  is  there  in  life,  in  which  I  behold  afflictions,  nay,
they  wear  me  out  ?

Said  A1  Harith :  Then  we  saluted  him  with  wishes
for  the  lengthening  of  his  term  and  the  withdrawal  of  his
fear; — And  invited  each  other  to  rise  through  fear  of
annoying  him. — But  he  said,  “  Nay,  but  stay  with  me
during  the  light  of  to-day  that  by  your  pleasantry  ye
may  heal  my  sadness  ; — For  your  conversation  is  the  food
of  my  soul,  the  magnet  of  my  friendliness.” — Then  we
aimed  at  contenting  him  and  guarded  from  disobeying
him ;  and  turned  to  discourse,  gathering  its  cream,
throwing  away  its  froth ; — ^TJntil  the  time  of  the  day-
sleep  came  on  and  the  tongues  were  weary  with  talking.
— And  it  was  a  day  hot  with  a  fervent  heat,  ripening  the
orchard. — So  he  said,  “  Surely  drowsiness  is  now  bending


218


NINETEENTE  ASSEMBLY.


down  your  necks  and  seeking  your  eye-corners ;  and
he  is  a  strenuous  adyersary,  a  suitor  not  to  be  repulsed.
— So  make  alliance  with  him  by  a  day-sleep,  and  pattern
in  this  by  the  Traditions  handed  down.” — Said  the  nar¬
rator  :  Then  we  followed  what  he  said,  and  we  slept  and
he  slept ;  and  God  smote  upon  the  ears,  and  poured  out
slumber  on  the  eyelids, — Until  we  passed  from  the
domain  of  Being,  and  by  sleep  were  hindered  from
prayer. — And  we  waked  not  until  the  heat  was  now,
abated  and  the  day  was  old. — ^Whereupon  we  washed
hand  and  foot  for  the  two  mute  prayers,  and  performed
what  loosed  us  of  our  debt. — Then  we  stirred  for  de¬
parture  to  the  place  of  our  camel-saddles. — But  Abu
Zayd  turned  to  his  cub,  who  was  after  his  likeness  and
make,  and  said :  I  fancy  that  the  Father  of  Indwelling
has  now  lighted  a  coal  in  their  stomachs; — So  call  for
the  Father  of  Assembling,  for  he  is  glad  news  for  every
hungry  one  : — And  follow  with  the  Father  of  Pleasant¬
ness,  him  who  is  patient  at  every  wrong; — Then  re¬
inforce  by  the  Father  of  Lovingness,  the  loved  of  every
one  that  is  wise;  him  that  is  turned  about  between
burning  and  torment ; — And  on !  with  the  Father  of
Acuteness,  for  excellent  is  he  as  a  companion; — ^And
ho !  with  the  Father  of  Help,  for  there  is  no  attendant
like  him ; — And  if  thou  bring  on  the  Father  of  Comeli¬
ness,  how  comely  will  he  make  his  comeliness ; — ^And
haste  with  the  Mother  of  Hospitality,  her  who  may
remind  thee  of  Chosroes ; — And  forget  not  the  Mother  of
Strengthening,  for  how  many  are  those  who  tell  of  her ;
—And  call  to  the  Mother  of  Joyfulness;  then  assault
her,  it  is  no  crime; — ^And  end  with  the  Father  of
Dignity,  the  consoler  of  every  sorrowful  one ; — And  if


NINETJEENTS;  ASSEMBLY.


219


thou  join  mtli  Mm  the  Father  of  Loftiness  thou  will  blot
out  thy  name  from  among  the  niggardly. — ^And  beware  of
summoning  the  Two  Eumourers  before  the  rising  of  the
camels  of  departure. — And  when  the  company  have
ceased  from  their  hand-wasMng,  and  have  handled  the
Father  of  Softness, — Then  carry  round  to  them  the
Father  of  Generosity,  for  he  is  the  sign  of  the  generous.

Said  A1  Harith :  Then  his  son  understood  the  deli¬
cacies  of  his  hinting  by  the  subtlety  of  his  discernment.
— And  he  went  round  among  us  with  viands  and  per¬
fume,  until  the  sun  gave  notice  of  the  setting. — ^Now
when  we  had  resolved  on  departure,  we  said  to  him,
‘‘  Seest  thou  not  this  marvellous  day,  how  its  morn
showed  gloomy,  but  its  even  is  brilliant?” — ^And  he
prostrated  himself  long  in  prayer  ;  then  raised  his  head
and  said :

Despair  not  in  calamities  of  a  gladdening  that  shall  wipe  away
thy  sorrows ;

For  how  many  a  simoom  blows.,  then  turns  to  a  gentle  breeze  and
is  changed !

How  many  a  hateful  cloud  arises,  then  passes  away  and  pours
not  forth !

And  the  smoke  of  the  wood,  fear  is  conceived  of  it,  yet  no  blaze
appears  from  it ;

And  oft  sorrow  rises,  and  straightway  sets  again.

So  be  patient  when  fear  assails,  for  time  is  the  father  of  wonders ;

And  hope  from  the  peace  of  God  blessings  not  to  be  reckoned.

Said  A1  Harith :  Then  we  noted  down  his  excellent
verses  and  kept  giving  thanks  to  God  Most  High :  and
we  took  leave  of  him,  glad  at  his  recovery,  overwhelmed
by  his  bounty.


220


TWENTIETH  ASSEMBLY.


THE  TWENTIETH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“  OF  MATTAFAEIEIN.”

In  this  Assembly  Abu  Zayd  laments  the  decay  of  his  strength,
and  his  advancing  age,  under  the  semblance  of  a  mighty  and  valiant
hero,  to  provide  a  shroud  for  whom  he  asks  the  bounty  of  the
company.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related ;  I  was  making
towards  Mayyafarikin  with,  a  company  of  the  well  suited*
men  who  disputed  not  in  familiar  talk,  who  knew  not
the  taste  of  dissembled  hatred. — And  with  them  I  was
as  one  who  quits  not  his  abode,  who  travels  not  from  his
friend  and  neighbour; — ^And  when  we  had  brought  to
their  knees  the  camels  of  journeying,  and  had  passed
from  our  saddles  to  our  nests,  we  commanded  each
other  to  bear  in  mind  companionship,  and  we  forbade
separation  in  a  strange  land. — ^And  we  took  a  chamber
that  we  might  frequent  it  at  the  two  ends  of  day  and
present  each  other  with  the  choice  of  the  news. — Now
while  we  were  there  on  a  certain  day,  and  had  strung
ourselves  on  the  thread  of  union, — Lo  !  there  stood  by
us  one  with  a  bold  tongue  and  a  loud  voice ; — ^And  he
greeted  with  the  greeting  of  a  wizard  who  blows  on
knots ;  jof  one  who  hunts  all,  from  the  lion  to  the  sheep.
— Then  he  said ;

Habeo,  amici,  miram  uarrationem,  ii  qua  exemplum  sibi  sumat
auditor  peritus  et  intelligens.

Vidi  iu  Acre  sstatis  me®  juvenem  fortissimum,  cui  gladii  erat  acies
penetrantis :

In  certamen  irruit  perinde  ac  si  certus  esset  aliqud  audendi,  et
non  pertimuit.

His  prseliis  usque  eo  angustias  dilatavit  ut  id  quod  obstructum
fuerat  pateret.


TWUNTIBIK  ASSEMBLY,


221


Ubi  provocavit  adversarios  nunqnam  rediit  a  pugnse  contentione
sine  spiculo  sanguine  imbuto  :

Nec  unquam  instituit  arcem  oppngnare  arduam,  occlnsam,  formi-
dabilem,  timendam,

Quin  clamatum  sit,  cum  id  instituisset :  Victoria  a  coelo  et  pr^esi-
dium  appropinquat.

Prseterea,  quot  noctes  egit  vestibus  adolescentige  tectus  nitidis  ;

Molles  pnella3  et  dabant  ei  et  receperunt  ab  eo  oscula;  et  ille
ubique  gratus  fiiit  et  jucundus.

Sed  tempns  non  desiit  fortitudinem  illius  et  vires  eripere ;

Donee  anni  ita  eum  afflixerint  ut  ab  illo  conjunctissimi  amici  dece-
^derent.

Debilis  fuit  magus,  nec  morbum  ejus  sanare  potuit,  et  tumultuatus
fuit  medicus  :

Ita  ut  discesserit  a  candidis  puellis,  et  discesserint  ab  eo,  postea
quam  et  ab  eis  responsum  accepisset,  eisque  respondisset.

Evasitque  incurvus  forma,  nam  quicunque  vivit  miseriis  senectutis
est  obnoxius.

Ecce  ilium  liodi^  veste  funebri  involutum !  Et  quis  mortui  pere¬
grin!  curat  reliquias.^

Then  he  broke  openly  into  wailing,  and  wept  with  the
weeping  of  the  lover  over  his  beloved. — ^And  when  his
tear  was  stanched  and  his  passion  cooled,  he  said,  0  ye,
who  are  as  a  pasture  to  the  forage-scouts,  an  example  to
the  generous  ;  by  Allah,  I  have  not  spoken  with  false¬
hood,  I  have  not  told  you  save  from  beholding. — ^Xow  if
there  were  a  thong  to  my  staff,  or  a  thm  shower  to  my
cloud,  I  would  myself  have  done  that  to  which  I  call
you ;  I  would  not  stand  as  one  who  directs  to  it. — ^But
how  can  there  he  flying  without  a  wing,  or  is  it  a  crime
on  one  that  he  is  poor  ?

Said  the  narrator:  Then  began  the  company  to  con¬
sult  of  what  they  should  advise,  and  to  whisper  of  what
they  should  do; — And  he  suspected  that  they  were  in
purpose  to  dismiss  him  with  refusal,  or  to  importune  him

'  The  above  translation  is  that  of  Sir  William  Jones,  with  some

slight  alterations.


222


TWENTIETH  A8SEMB1 Y.


for  proof. — And  it  escaped  Mm  to  say,  0  mirages  of
the  plain,  white  shingle  of  the  hollow !  What  is  this
taking  of  thought  which  shame  reyolts  at? — It  is  as
though  ye  were  tasked  with  a  heavy  labour,  not  with  a
rag;  or  had  been  asked  the  gift  of  a  province,  not  of
a  mantle ;  or  had  been  urged  to  the  clothing  of  the
Ka'beh,  not  to  the  shrouding  of  a  corpse. — Fie  on  bim
whose  rock  is  not  moist,  whose  gravel  oozes  not  !

How  when  the  company  had  perceived  his  glibness
and  the  saltness  of  Ms  savour,  each  one  made  bim  whole
by  a  gift,  and  bore  with  his  light  rain  through  fear  of
his  flood. — Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hamm  am ;  How  tbia
beggar  was  standing  behind  me,  hidden  by  my  back
from  my  eye. — ^But  when  the  company  had  contented
Mm  by  their  out-pouring,  and  it  was  incumbent  on  me
to  take  example  by  them,  I  drew  the  ring  from  my
little  Anger  and  turned  to  him  my  gaze, — ^And  lo  !  he
was  our  Shaykh,  the  Seruji,  without  deception,  without
dispute. — ^Then  I  was  sure  it  was  a  lying  tale  he  had
lied,  and  a  net  that  he  had  laid. — But  not  the  less
did  I  fold  his  cloth  over  its  rent  and  keep  his  splayness
of  tooth  from  inspection, — And  threw  him  the  ring,
and  said,  “Use  it  for  the  cost  of  the  mourning  as¬
sembly.” — He  said,  “Well  done  !  how  burns  thy  flame !
how  noble  is  thy  deed !  ” — Then  he  went  off,  running
straight  forward  and  trotting  his  trot  as  of  old. — But
I  longed  for  a  knowledge  of  his  dead  man,  and  to
examine  his  pretence  to  pious  duty; — So  I  struck  my
leg  and  kindled  the  ardour  of  my  running,  until  I
reached  him  a  how- shot  off,  and  beheld  him  clearly
in  an.  empty  place. — Then  I  caught  him  by  the  joining
of  his  sleeves  and  stopped  him  from  the  career  of  his


TWENTY-FIR&T  ASSEMBLY.


223


race-course, — ^And  said  to  him,  “By  Allah,  thou  hast
no  refuge  from  me,  and  no  escape,  until  thou  show  me  thy
shrouded  corpse. — Whereupon  he  pointed  to  himself;
and  I  said,  “  God  fight  against  thee ;  how  playful  art  thou
in  craft,  how  wily  after  the  grist!”— Then  I  returned
to  my  companions  as  returns  the  scout  who  lies  not
to  his  people,  who  embellishes  not  his  speech. — And  I
told  them  what  I  had  seen;  I  disguised  not,  nor  did
I  dissemble. — And  they  burst  into  laughter  at  the
matter,  and  cursed  that  dead  man.


THE  TWENTT-EIEST  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“  OF  EAYY.”

A1  Harith,  being  at  Eayy,  in  Persia,  finds  the  people  flocking
to  bear  a  preacher  of  great  eloquence  and  sanctity,  and  following
them  to  the  place  of  assembling,  listens  to  a  discourse  from  an
aged  man  in  ecclesiastical  costume'.  When  the  sermon  is  over,  a
suppliant,  wJio  cannot  prevail  on  the  Governor  to  listen  to  his
complaint  against  an  official  who  had  wronged  him,  calls  upon
the  preacher  to  aid  him  by  his  admonitions,  on  which  the  preacher
at  once  indites  another  discourse  in  reproof  of  the  Governor.  The
latter  is  moved  to  repentance,  hastens  to  do  justice,  rewards  the
preacher,  and  solicits  acquaintance  with  him.  ^e  preacher,  who
is  no  other  than  Abd  Zayd,  goes  off  rejoicing  in  the  success
of  his  day’s  work,  having  previously  given  Hilrith  some  moral
counsel.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammim,  related:  Ever  since  I
perfected  my  foretbougbt  and  knew  right  from  wrong,
I  gave  care  to  incline  to  admonishings  and  eschew
angering  words, — That  I  might  be  adorned  with  graces
of  disposition,  and  be  free  from  what  brands  with
shamelessness; — And  I  ceased  not  to  keep  myself  to
this  discipline,  and  to  allay  by  it  the  coals  of  vrrath.


224


TWENTY-FIRST  ASSEMBLY.


until  habituation  in  it  became  nature,  and  application
to  it  a  desire  ■willingly  obeyed. — IS^ow  wben  I  de¬
scended  at  Bayy  (and  I  bad  now  loosed  tbe  loops  of
error,  and  knew  good  from  evil),  I  saw  there  one
morning  crowd  on  tbe  track  of  crowd  ; — And  they
were  spreading  with  tbe  spread  of  locusts,  and  running
with  the  running  of  steeds, — And  describing  one  to
another  a  preacher  to  whom  they  were  tending,  and
they  set  Ibn  Sam'un  below  him. — Then  it  hindered
me  not  from  hearkening  to  the  preachings,  and  making
trial  of  the  preacher,  that  I  must  endure  the  clamorous
and  bear  the  pushing; — So  I  followed  as  follow  the
obedient,  and  slipped  into  the  thread  of  the  throng, —
Until  we  came  to  a  meeting-place,  which  had  united
the  ruler  and  the  ruled,  and  gathered  the  eminent  and
the  obscure ; — And  in  the  midst  of  its  halo,  and  among
its  full  moons,  was  an  old  man,  bowed  and  with  a
breast-hunch,  and  he  wore  the  cap  and  the  cloak; —
And  he  was  breaking  forth  into  a  sermon  to  heal  breasts
and  to  soften  rocks ;  and  I  heard  him  say,  and  men’s
'  minds  were  charmed  by  it :

Son  of  man,  how  thou  cleavest  to  that  which  deceives
thee,  and  clingest  to  that  which  harms  thee ! — How
thou  art  given  to  that  which  seduces  thee ;  how  thou
art  gladdened  at  him  who  flatters  thee  ! — Thou  art
troubled  about  that  which  wearies  thee,  but  art  careless
of  that  which  concerns  thee. — ^Thou  drawest  wide  the
bow  of  thy  transgression  ;  thou  robest  thyself  with
covetousness  which  will  destroy  thee  ! — Thou  art  not
content  with  what  is  enough ;  thou  abstainest  not  from
the  forbidden !  — Thou  hearkenest  not  to  admonishings ;
thou  art  not  deterred  by  threatening ! — It  is  thy  habit


TWENTY-FIRST  ASSEMBLY.


225


to  veer  with  desires ;  thou  stumhlest  with  the  stumbling
of  the  purblind  beast ! — It  is  thy  care  to  labour  in
making  gain,  and  to  gather  an  inheritance  for  thine  heirs  !
— It  pleases  thee  to  increase  what  belongs  to  thee,  but
thou  rememberest  not  what  is  before  thee ! — Thou  art
ever  intent  on  thy  two  caves ;  thou  carest  not  whether
the  account  shall  be  in  thy  favour  or  against  thee ! —
Dost  thou  think  that  thou  shalt  be  left  at  large,  or
that  thou  shalt  not  be  reckoned  with  to-morrow  ? — Or
dost  thou  count  that  Death  will  take  bribes ;  that  he
will  distinguish  between  the  lion  and  the  fawn? — Ho,
by  Allah,  nor  wealth  nor  children  shall  ward  off  death;
and  nought  profits  the  people  of  the  tombs  save  the
accepted  work. — Then  blessing  to  him  who  hears  and
retains  and  makes  good  what  he  claims;  and  with¬
holds  his  soul  from  desire,  and  knows  that  he  who
turns  from  evil  is  a  gainer;. — And  that  man  shall  have
nought  save  his  own  work ;  and  that  this  work  surely
it  shall  be  shown. — Then  he  recited  as  one  who  is
fearful,  but  Avith  a  high-pitched  voice :

By  thy  life  !  mansions  and  wealth  will  not  avail  "v^hon  the  rich
man  dwells  in  the  ground  and  abides  in  it ;

So  be  liberal  with  thy  wealth  in  things  pleasing  to  God,  content
with  what  thou  gainest  of -His  hire  and  reward ;

And  anticipate  by  it  the  change  of  Time,  for  he  seizes  with  his
crooked  talon  and  his  tooth  ;

And  trust  not  treacherous  fortune  and  its  deceit,  for  how  many  a
lowly  one  has  it  marred,  how  many  a  noble  I

But  resist  the  desire  of  the  soul,  which  no  erring  one  ever  obeyed
but  he  fell  from  his  high  places.

And  keep  to  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  dread  of  Him,  that  thou
mayest  escape  from  his  punishment  which  is  to  be  feared.

Neglect  not  to  call  to  mind  thy  sin,  but  weep  for  it  with  tears
that  shall  be  like  the  rain-flood  at  its  pouring  ;

And  figure  to  tliy  mind  Death  and  his  stroke,  and  the  terror  of
his  meeting,  and  the  taste  of  his  wormwood  cup  !


16


226


TWJENTY-FIRST  ASSEMBLY.


For  tlie  end  of  tlie  dwelling  of  tlie  living  is  a  pit,  to  wliicli  he
shall  descend,  brought  down  from  his  towers.

Then  well-done !  the  servant  wliom  the  evil  of  his  deed  grieves,
and  who  shows  amendment  before  the  shutting  of  his  gate.

Said  A1  Harith. :  Then  the  assembly  remained  amid
tears  that  they  shed,  and  repentance  that  they  showed ;
nntil  the  sun  declined,  and  the  day’s  duties  pressed
upon  us. — H^ow  when  the  Yoices  were  low,  and  silence
had  gathered,  and  the  tears  and  the  preachings  had  gone
to  rest, — One  crying  for  help  cried  to  the  Prince  who
was  present,  and  began  to  wail  to  him  of  his  tyrannous
agent.  —  But  the  Prince  leaned  to  the  adversary,
and  was  careless  of  discovering  his  wrong. — And  when
the  suppliant  despaired  of  redress  from  him,  he  called  up
the  preacher  to  admonish  him ; — ^Who  rose  as  rises  the
prompt,  and  recited,  referring  to  the  Prince  :

Wonderful !  a  man  hoping  to  attain  to  rule ;  and  then  when
he  attains  to  his  desire  he  wrongs ;

He  weaves  warp  and  woof  in  tyrannies ;  now  lapping  at  their
well,  now  bidding  others  to  lap.

Nor  cares  he,  when  he  is  following  his  desires  in  them,  whether  ho
maintains  his  religion  or  destroys  it :

Oh  woe  to  him !  if  he  knew  well  that  there  is  no  state  but
changes,  surely  he  would  not  transgress ;

Or  if  he  saw  clearly  what  is  the  re})entance  of  him  who  inclines
his  hearing  to  the  lie  of  informers,  he  would  not  incline  it.

But  obey  thou  him  in  whose  hand  is  the  leading-cord ;  cast  down
thine  eye  if  he  neglect  observance  or  speak  vainly :

And  graze  on  bitter  pasture  when  he  calls  thee  to  the  grazing  on
it,  and  water  at  the  salt  well  when  he  forbids  thee  the  sweet.

And  bear  his  injury  even  though  its  touch  afflicts  thee,  and  pours
out  the  flow  of  thy  tears,  nay  exhausts  it  ;

For  fortune  shall  give  thee  the  laugh  of  him  when  it  departs  from
him,  and  kindles  for  the  ambush  against  him  the  fire  of  war.

And  it  shall  bring  down  on  him  exultation,  when  he  appears
vacant  of  his  office,  emptied  of  it ;

And  thou  shalt  be  pitiful  to  him  when  his  cheek  lies  soiled  on  the
dust  of  shame.


TJrUNTY-FIEST  ASSEMBLY.


227


This  is  his  fate  :  and  then  surely  he  shall  one  day  stand  in  the
place  where  even  the  master  of  eloquence  shall  be  found  a  lisper ;

And  he  shall  be  gathered  to  judgment  viler  than  the  toad-stool  of
the  plain ;  he  shall  be  reckoned  with  for  his  shortcoming  and
excess  :

And  he  shall  be  chastised  for  that  which  he  has  committed,
and  for  him  whom  he  has  chosen ;  he  shall  be  demanded  of  for  what
he  sipped  and  what  he  supped.

And  he  shall  be  reckoned  exactly  with  concerning  small  things,
as  he  was  wont  to  do  with  mankind,  but  more  thoroughly.

So  that  he  shall  bite  his  hand  at  his  governing,  and  wish  that  he
had  not  sought  from  it  what  he  sought.

Then  he  said  :  0  thou  who  art  belted  with  authority,
and  trained  to  rule  ! — Put  away  wantonness  at  thy
dominion,  and  Tain  trusting  in  thy  might : — Por  domi¬
nion  is  a  breeze  that  changes  and  power  is  a  lightning
that  deceives.. — And  truly  the  happiest  of  rulers  is  he
whose  people  are  happy  in  him,  and  the  most  wretched
in  both  worlds  is  he  whose  ruling  is  ill. — Then  be  thou
not  as  one  who  neglects  the  life  to  come  and  disregards
it,  who  loves  the  fleeting  life  and  seeks  it,  who  wrongs
the  people  and  afflicts  them,  and  who,  when  he  bears  rule,
walks  in  the  earth  to  do  violence  in  it. — For,  by  Allah,
the  Judge  shall  not  be  unregarding;  thou  shalt  not  be
left  at  large,  0  man :  but  the  balance  shall  be  set  for
thee,  and  as  thou  rewardest  thou  shalt  be  rewarded. —
Said  A1  Harith  :  Then  the  Governor  was  sullen  at  what
he  heard,  and  his  colour  changed  and  changed : — ^And  he
began  to  groan  concerning  his  rule,  and  to  follow  sigh
with  sigh. — Then  he  attended  to  the  complainer,  and  rid
him  of  his  complaint,  and  to  him  that  was  complained
of,  and  rebuked  him. — And  he  was  courteous  to  the
preacher,  and  gave  him  gifts,  and  urged  him  to  visit  him.
— And  the  wronged  man  departed  victorious,  and  the
wronger  checked. — Then  the  preacher  went  forth  swag-


228


TWENTY-FIRST  ASSEMBL  T.


gering  among  his  comrades,  glorying  in  the  success  of
his  bargain. — But  I  followed  him  up,  and  stepped
crouching,  and  showed  him  a  sharp  glance. — And  when
he  discerned  what  I  hid  from  him,  and  was  aware
of  the  turning  of  my  face  to  him,  he  said,  “The  better
of  two  guides  is  he  who  leads  aright.” — Then  he  came
near  me,  and  recited  :

I  am  lie  wliom  thou  knowest,  Harith,

The  talker  with  kings,  the  wit,  the  intimate.

I  charm  as  charm  not  the  triple-twisted  strings,

At  times  a  brother  of  earnest,  at  times  a  jester.

Events  have  not  changed  me  since  I  met  thee,

Nor  has  vexing  calamity  peeled  my  branch ;

Nor  has  any  splitting  edge  cloven  my  tooth ;

But  my  claw  is  fixed  in  every  prey :

On  each  herd  that  roams  my  wolf  is  ravaging ;

So  that  it  is  as  though  I  were  the  heir  of  all  mankind,
Their  Shem,  their  Ham,  and  their  Japhet.

Said  A1  Haritb,  son  of  Hammam  :  Then  I  said,  “  Bv
Allah,  now  thou  art  surely  Abti  Zayd ;  yet  thou  hast
been  godly  beyond  *Amr  Ibn  ‘Obayd.” — Then  he  was
cheerful  with  the  cheerfulness  of  the  hospitable  when  he
is  visited,  and  said  :  Listen,  my  brother :

Keep  to  truth,  although  it  scorch  thee  with  the  fire  of  threatening  :

And  seek  to  please  God ;  for  the  most  foolish  of  mankind  is  he
who  angers  the  master  and  pleases  the  slave.

Then  he  took  leave  of  his  fellows  and  departed,
trailing  his  sleeves. — And.  we  searched  for  him  after¬
wards  in  Bayy,  and  sought  to  get  news  of  him  by  the
rolls  of  folding. — But  there  was  none  of  us  who  knew  of
his  abode,  or  could  learn  what  locust  had  gone  off  with
him.


TWENTY-SECOND  ASSEMBLY.


229


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
THE  EUPHRATES^’

A1  Harith,  accompanied  by  some  official  writers,  is  in  a  boat
on  the  Euphrates ;  the  party  being  engaged  in  an  inspection  of
the  land  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  the  taxation.  They  meet  with
a  person  in  shabby  garb,  whom  they  treat  with  much  lack  of
courtesy;  until  the  conversation  falling  on  the  comparative  merits
of  secretaries  and  accountants,  the  stranger,  who  is  Abu  Zayd,
shows  his  eloquence  by  a  rhetorical  address  on  the  subject.  They
then  seek  to  conciliate  him;  but  he  quits  them  in  anger,  after  re¬
citing  some  verses  on  the  folly  and  injustice  of  judging  by
appearances.  This  difficult  Assembly  exhibits  a  species  of  composi¬
tion  much  in  favour  among  the  Arabs,  in  which  the  poet  or  orator
first  praises  and  then  blames,  or  first  exalts  the  one  of.  two  rivals
and  then  the  other.  Compare  the  Third  Assembly,  in  which  a  gold
denar  is  thus  treated ;  and  the  addresses  of  Sheddtid  and  Sahil  ibn
Harun,  on  gold  and  glass,  Ar.  Prov.  11.  p.  780.  The  speech  of
Abu  Zayd  on  the  two  orders  of  scribes  is,  throughout,  an  elaborate
display  of  paronomasia.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hamtaam,  related :  I  betook  my¬
self,  during  a  time  of  quiet,  to  tbe  water-lands  of  tke
Euphrates ; — ^And  there  I  met  with  scribes,  more  ex¬
cellent  than  the  sons  of  A1  Furat,  more  pleasant  in
manners  than  the  sweet  waters. — And  I  joined  myself
to  them  for  their  culture,  not  for  their  gold,  and  I  com-
panied  with  them  for  their  scholarship,  not  for  their  ban¬
quets. — And  among  them  I  sat  with  equals  of  A1  Ka'ka ,
son  of  Showr,  and  with  them  I  attained  to  plenty  after
want. — Until  they  made  me  sharer  in  food  and  dwelling,
and  set  me  above  themselves,  as  the  finger-top  is  above
the  finger  : — And  they  took  me  as  the  son  of  their  in¬
timacy  in  time  of  office  and  of  leisure,  and  the  treasurer
of  their  secret  in  earnest  and  jest. — Now  it  happened  on
a  certain  time  that  they  were  caEed  to  visit  in  their


230


TWENTT-SECONB  ASSEMBLY.


order^  the  com  lands  of  the  villages : — Then  they  chose
of  the  lofty-sailed  boats  one  black,  of  unmixed  hue : —
Thou  wouldst  thinlc  it  immovable,  yet  it  fleeted  as  fleet
the  clouds  and  glided  on  the  deep  as  a  serpent.  —Then
they  called  me  to  consenting,  and  invited  me  to  eom-
panying. — And  when  we  had  mounted  our  sable  beast,
and  set  oui’selves  in  our  cushion-saddle  that  moved
on  the  water, — Wq  found  there  an  old  man,  on  whom
was  a  thread-bare  coat  and  a  worn  turban. — ^Then  the
company  loathed  his  presence,  and  found  fault  with
whoever  had  brought  him  ;  and  would  have  purposed  to
put  him  forth  of  the  ship,  but  that  their  calmness  re¬
turned  to  them. — And  when  ho  spied  that  we  deemed
his  shadow  to  be  heavy,  and  his  shower  cold,  he  assayed
to  converse,  but  was  silenced,  and  he  praised  God  after
sneezing,  but  no  one  blessed  him. — Then  was  he  speech¬
less,  looking  at  the  pass  he  had  reached,  and  waiting  for
the  help  which  comes  to  the  wronged. — And  we,  we
roamed  through  the  bye-paths  of  the  serious  and  the
gay ; — Until  there  occurred  a  mention  of  the  two  kinds
of  official  writing,  and  their  excellence,  and  a  distin¬
guishing  of  the  more  excellent. — And  one  said  that  the
scribes  of  Composition  were  the  noblest  of  scribes,  while
another  leaned  to  the  preferring  of  Accountants  : — And
the  arguing  grew  sharp,  and  the  dispute  grew  long.—
Until,  when  there  remained  no  longer  an  arena  for  the
contention,  or  a  field  for  the  debate, — Said  the  old  man :
My  friends,  ye  have  made  much  clamour,  and  adduced
the  true  and  the  mistaken. — But  the  clear  decision  rests
with  me,  so  be  content  with  my  coin,  and  consult  no  one
after  me. — Know  that  the  art  of  Composition  is  the  more
lofty,  though  the  art  of  Account  may  be  the  more  useful.


■  TWENTY-&EGONL  ASSEMBLY.


231


— The  pen  of  correspondence  is  a  choice  orator,  hut  the
pen  of  account-keeping  picks  up  phrases  carelessly  ; —
And  the  fablings  of  eloquence  are  copied  to  be  studied,
but  the  ledgers  of  accounts  are  soon  blotted  out  and
razed. — And  the  Composer  is  the  Johayneh  for  inform¬
ation,  and  the  post-bag  of  secrets,  and  the  confidant  of
the  mighty,  and  great  among  guests. — And  his  pen
is  the  tongue  of  sovereignty,  and  the  knight  of  the
skirmish;  a  Lokman  of  wisdom,  and  the  interpreter  of
purpose :  it  carries  glad  news,  and  it  warns,  it  is  the
intercessor  and  the  envoy. — ^By  it  fortresses  are  won,  and
foes  are  vanquished,  and  the  rebel  is  made  obedient,  and
the  distant  is  brought  near; — And  its  master  is  free
from  suits,  secure  from  the  malice  of  accusers,  praised
in  the  assemblies,  not  exposed  to  the  drawing  up  of
registers.

Now  when,  in  his  judgment,  he  had  arrived  at  this
point,  he  saw  from  the  glances  of  the  company  that
he  had  sowed  love  and  hatred,  that  he  had  pleased  a  part
and  angered  a  part. — So  he  followed  up  his  discourse  by
saying :  Not  but  that  the  art  of  Account  is  based  on
verification,  and  the  art  of  Composing  is  founded  on
fabrication.— For  the  pen  of  the  Accountant  holds  firm,
but  the  pen  of  the  Composer  stumbles : — And  between
taking  tribute  by  the  impost  on  transactions  and  the
reading  of  the  leaves  of  volumes,  is  a  difference  to  which
comparison  cannot  apply,  into  which  doubt  cannot  enter ;
— For  tribute  fills  purses,  but  reading  empties  the  head  ;
and  the  tax  of  the  memorandum-book  enriches  the  over¬
seer,  but  the  interpretation  of  rolls  wearies  the  eye. —
And  then  also  the  Accountants  are  the  guardians  of
wealth,  the  bearers  of  burdens,  the  truthful  relators,  the


232


twi:ntt-second  assembly.


trustwortliy  envoys,  the  guides  in  doing  justice  and
obtaining  it,  the  sufficing  witnesses  in  breach  of  contract.
— And  of  their  number  is  the  Minister  of  Finance,  who
is  the  Hand  of  the  Prince,  the  Pivot  of  the  Council,  the
Palance  of  business,  the  overseer  of  the  agents. — To
him  is  the  reference  in  peace  and  war ;  on  him  is  the
management  in  revenue  and  expenditure ;  by  him  hang
evil  and  advantage ;  in  his  hand  is  the  rein  of  giving
and  denying. — And  were  it  not  for  the  pen  of  Aq,-
countants  the  fruit  of  earning  would  perish,  and  fraud
would  endure  to  the  Day  of  Judgment ;  the  order  of
transactions  would  he  loosened;  the  wound  of  wrongs
would  he  unavenged;  the  neck  of  just-dealing  would
he  fettered  ;  the  sword  of  wrong-dealing  would  he
drawn. — Moreover,  the  pen  of  composition  fables,  hut
the  pen  of  accounting  interprets ;  the  Accountant  is  a
close  scrutinizer ;  the  Composer  is  an  Abu  Barakish ;
— ^Yet  each,  when  he  rises  high,  has  his  venom  until
he  he  met  and  charmed;  and  in  what  each  produces
there  is  vexing  until  he  be  visited  and  bribed:  save
those  that  believe  and  work  righteousness — and  how
few  are  they !

Said  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam :  How  when  be
had  thus  supplied  our  hearings  with  what  was  pnre
and  good,  we  asked  him  of  his  lineage ;  but  he  was
suspicious,  and  shrank  from  telling  it ;  and  if  he  had
found  a  place  of  escaping  he  would  have  escaped. —
Then  from  his  secrecy  was  I  in  sorrow;  but  after  a
time  I  recollected  him, — And  I  said,  “How  by  Him
who  controls  the  rolling  heaven  and  the  voyaging  ships,
surely  I  catch  the  breeze  of  Abu  Zayd,  though  once
I  knew  him  lord  of  comeliness  and  vigour.” — And  he


TWENTY^SECOJSTD  ASSEMBLY.


233


smiled,  laughing  at  my  speech,  and  said,  I  am  he,
though  with  a  change  in  state  and  strength.’^ — ^Where¬
upon  I  said  to  my  companions,  ^^This  is  he,  after
whose  fashioning  none  can  fashion,  whose  sprite  is  not
to  be  vied  with.’’ — Then  they  courted  his  friendship,
and  offered  him  wealth  ;  but  he  declined  from  intimacy,
and  leaned  not  to  the  gift. — And  he  said,  Since  ye
have  hurt  my  honour  on  account  of  my  worn  garment,
and  cast  a  shadow  on  my  soul  for  the  threadbareness  of
my  coat, — I  will  look  upon  you  only  with  a  heated
eye;  ye  shall  have  from  me  only  a  ship’s  companion¬
ship. — Then  he  recited:

Hear,  my  brother,  commandment  from  a  counsellor  who  mingles
not  the  pnrity  of  his  counsel  with  deceit :

Hasten  not  with  a  decisive  judgment  in  the  praise  of  him  whom
thou  hast  not  tried,  nor  in  the  rebuke  of  him  ;

But  stay  thy  judgment  on  him  until  thou  hast  had  a  view  of  his
two  characters  in  his  two  conditions  of  content  and  anger ;

And  until  his  deceiving  flash  be  distinguished  from  his  truthful
one  by  those  who  watch  it,  and  his  flood  from  his  light  rain  ;

And  then  if  thou  perceive  what  dishonours  him,  hide  it  gene¬
rously  ;  but  if  thou  see  what  becomes  him,  publish  it :

And  whoso  deserves  to  be  exalted,  exalt  him;  and  whoso
deserves  abasement,  abase  him  to  the  sewer.

Know  that  the  pure  gold  in  the  vein  of  the  earth  is  hidden  until
it  is  brought  out  by  the  digging :

And  the  worth  of  the  denar,  its  secret  appears  by  scratching  it,
and  not  from  the  beauty  of  the  graving.

It  is  folly  that  thou  shouldst  magnify  the  ignorant  by  reason  of
the  brightness  of  his  dress  or  the  splendour  of  his  adorning ;

Or  that  thou  shouldst  make  little  of  the  man  who  is  refined  in
soul  on  account  of  the  threadbareness  of  his  garb,  or  the  shabbiiiess
of  his  furniture.

For  how  many  an  owner  of  two  tom  mantles  is  reverenced  for
his  worth,  and  he  that  is  striped  in  his  garments  has  ill-fame
through  his  baseness.

For  when  a  man  approaches  not  to  infamy,  then  are  his  rags  only
the  steps  to  his  throne.


234


TWENTY-^THIRJ)  ASSEMBLY.


It  hurts  not  the  sword  that  its  sheath  be  worn,  nor  the  hawk  that
its  nest  be  mean.

Then  he  delayed  not  to  bid  the  sailors  stop,  and  he
ascended  from  the  boat  and  made  oif. — ^Bnt  each  of  ns
repented  in  that  he  had  been  incautious  towards  him,
and  drooped  his  eyelid  over  his  mote, — And  we  vowed
that  we  would  never  slight  a  man  for  the  raggedness
of  his  garment;  that  we  would  not  despise  the  sword
while  hidden  in  the  sheath.


THE  TWENTY-THIED  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
OF  THE  PEECINCT.’’

In  this  Assembly  Abu  Zayd  is  represented  as  showing  his  skill  in
artificial  composition.  He  carries  his  son  before  the  Governor  or
criminal  judge  of  Bagdad,  and  accuses  him  of  theft,  in  having  stolen
two-thirds  of  a  copy  of  verses.  The  boy  had,  he  said,  taken  two-
thirds  of  each  of  several  verses,  and  thus  made  a  poem  of  his  own.
The  Governor  asks  how  this  can  be,  and  bids  him  repeat  both  poems,
when  it  appears  that  Abfi  Zayd  had  constructed  a  poem  with  a
double  rhyme,  one  rhyme  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  and  one  at  the  end
of  the  fourth  foot,  so  that  by  striking  off  the  last  two  feet  of  each
verse  a  new  poem  could  be  formed.  The  boy,  however,  declares
that  he  had  not  taken  his  father’s  verses,  and  that  the  coincidence
was  merely  fortuitous.  The  Governor*  then,  to  test  this,  bids  them
repeat  alternate  verses  on  a  subject  which  he  should  give  them ;  if
the  boy  could  extemporize  as  well  as  his  father,  it  would  be  evident
that  his  defence  was  a  just  one.  This  serves  to  introduce  a  most
elaborate  set  of  verses,  full  of  paronomasia  on  the  subject  of  a  cruel
and  disdainful  beauty.  The  Governor  then  bids  them  be  reconciled;
and  on  the  old  man  pleading  poverty  as  a  reason  for  refusing  to
support  his  son,  the  Governor  relieves  their  necessities.  He  soon  dis¬
covers  that  he  has  been  duped,  and  binds  Harith,  who,  as  usual,  had
witnessed  the  incident,  to  profound  secrecy.

A1  Harith.,  son  of  Hammam,  related: — My  wonted
home  was  irksome  to  me  in  the  prime  of  my  time,


TWENTT-TEIRD  ASSEMBLY.


235


through  a  dreaded  calamity,  through  a  fear  that  came
upon  me  : — ^And  I  poured  out  the  cup  of  drowsiness,  and
put  to  their  pace  the  camels  of  the  night-march. — And  I
traversed  in  my  journey  rough  places  which  no  steps  had
smoothed,  to  which  the  Kata  would  not  find  its  way ; —
ITntil  I  came  .to  the  domain  of  the  Khalifate,  and  the
sanctuary  which  guards  from  fear. — Then  I  put  off
the  sense  of  dread  and  its  conception,  and  robed  myself
in  the  raiment  of  security  and  its  vest ; — And  limited
my  care  to  the  culling  of  delight,  and  the  looking  upon
pleasure. — Kow  I  went  forth  one  day  to  the  Precinct
to  exercise  my  good  steed,  and  to  circle  my  eye  among
its  beauties. — And  behold !  horsemen  who  followed  each
other,  and  men  on  foot  who  swarmed  : — And  eke  an  old  ,
man  long  of  tongue  but  short  of  cloak,  who  held  by  the
collar  a  lad  fresh  in  youth  but  worn  of  tunic. — So  I
spurred  on  the  track  of  the  spectators  until  Ave  arrived
at  the  gate  of  the  Prefecture. — And  there  was  the
Master  of  Protection  sitting  squarely  on  his  cushion,
awing  by  his  deportment. — Then  said  the  old  man  to
him :  “  God  magnify  the  Governor,  and  set  his  foot  on
high  ! — Know  that  I  bred  this  youth  from  a  weanling,
and  brought  him  up  from  an  orphan ;  and  then  failed  not
in  instructing  him. — But  when  he  now  was  shrewd  and
strong,  he  bared  and  brandished  the  sword  of  enmity. —
Though  I  imagined  not  that  he  would  be  perverse  to  me,
and  insolent,  since  by  me  was  he  watered  and  made
fruitful.” — Said  the  lad  to  him :  “  On  what  offenc;.'-
of  mine  hast  thou  hit,  that  thou  publishest  this  foul
thing  of  me  ? — For,  by  Allah,  I  have  not  covered  the  face
of  thy  kindness  ;  I  have  not  rent  the  veil  of  thy  secret ;

I  have  not  broken  the  staff  of  thy  estate ;  I  have  not


236


TTFUNTY^THIRD  ASSEMBLY.


disregarded  the  rehearsing  of  thanks  to  thee.’’ — Then
said  to  him  the  old  man,  ^^Woe  to  thee,  what  guilt
is  fouler  than  thine,  what  yice  more  base  than  thy  vice  ?
— For  thou  hast  claimed  my  magic  and  appropriated  it ;
thou  hast  arrogated  my  poetry  and  stolen  it. — ^ISTow
among  poets  the  stealing  of  poetry  is  more  shameful
than  the  stealing  of  the  white  and  yellow;  and  their
jealousy  over  the  daughters  of  their  wits  is  as  their
jealousy  over  virgin  daughters.”

Said  the  Governor  to  the  old  man,  When  he  stole,
did  he  flay.^  or  transform^  or  copyT‘* — Said  he,  ^ow  by
Him  who  made  poetry  the  register  of  the  Arabs  and
the  interpreter  of  scholarship,  he  did  nought  less  than
dock  the  completeness  of  its  exposition,  and  make  foray
on  two  thirds  of  its  flock.”  Said  the  Governor,  Ee-
cite  the  verses  altogether,  that  it  may  appear  what  ho
took  from  the  sum  of  them.” — Then  he  recited :

0  thou  who  courtcst  the  base  world,  know  that  it  is  a  net  of
destruction,  a  pool  of  impurities ;

A  habitation  which,  when  it  makes  thee  laugh  to-day,  makes  thee
weep  to-morrow :  away  with  such  a  habitation  !

When  its  clouds  overshadow  no  thirst  is  refreshed  by  them  ;  for
they  are  a  dry  cloud  that  deceives.

Its  forays  cease  not,  nor  is  its  prisoner  ransomed  even  by  the
mightiest  of  stakes.

Towards  how  many  a  one  made  wanton  by  false  confidence  in  it,
until  he  has  shown  himself  contumacious,  one  overstepping  his
power,

Has  it  turned  the  back  of  the  shield,  and  made  its  blades  to  lap  of
his  blood,  and  leaped  to  the  taking  of  revenge  !

So  keep  guard  on  thy  life,  lest  it  pass  away  lost  in  the  world,
left  astray  without  any  jjrotection.

And  cut  the  bonds  of  thy  love  for  the  world  and  thy  seeking
of  it ;  so  shalt  thou  find  right  guidance  and  comfort  of  the  inner
parts.

And  when  it  makes  a  truce  from  its  stratagem,  be  thou  on  thy


TWmTY-TRIRB  ASSEMBLY.


237


watcli  against  the  warring  of  enemies,  and  the  assault  of  the
treacherous :

And  know  that  its  calamities  come  suddenly,  even  though  the  goal
he  far,  and  the  journeys  of  the  fates  be  tardy.

Then  said  the  Governor :  And  now  what  did  this
lad  ?’’ — Said  the  old  man,  Of  his  meanness  in  recom¬
pensing  he  made  an  attack  on  my  six-feet  verses,  and
cut  off  two  feet,  and  diminished  from  their  measures  two
measures,  so  that  the  loss  in  them  is  a  double  loss.^’ —
Said  the  Governor,  Shew  what  he  took  and  whence  he
cut.’’ — He  said,  Let  thy  hearing  feed  of  me ;  give  thy
heart  to  understand  me ; — That  thou  mayest  perceive
well  how  he  drew  the  sword  upon  me ;  that  thou  mayest
estimate  the  greatness  of  his  transgression  towards  me.”
Then  he  recited,  and  his  sighs  ascended :

0  thou  wbo  courtest  the  base  world,  know  that  it  is  a  net  of
destruction ;

A  habitation  which,  when  it  makes  thee  laugh  to-daj",  makes  thee
weep  to-morrow;

When  its  clouds  overshadow  no  thirst  is  refreshed  by  them.

Its  forays  cease  not,  nor  is  its  prisoner  ransomed.

Towards  how  many  a  one  made  wanton  by  false  confidence  in  it,
until  he  has  shown  himself  contumacious,

Has  it  turned  the  back  of  the  shield,  and  made  its  blades  to  lap  of
his  blood !

So  keep  guard  on  thy  life  lest  it  pass  away,  lost  in  the  world,  left
astray ;

And  cut  the  bonds  of  thy  love  for  the  world,  and  thy  seeking  of
it,  so  shalt  thou  find  right  guidance.

And  when  it  makes  a  truce  from  its  stratagem,  be  thou  on  thy
watch  against  the  warring  of  enemies  :

And  know  that  its  calamities  come  suddenly  even  though  the  goal
be  far.

Then  turned  the  Governor  to  the  hoy  and  said,  “  Per¬
dition  on  thee  for  a  rebellious  disciple  and  a  thieving
pupil !  ” — ^But  the  lad  said,  “  May  I  remain  aloof  from
scholarship  and  its  sons !  may  I  be  joined  to  whoever


238


TWENTT-TKIRI)  ASSEMBLY.


is  adverse  to  it,  and  iDreaks  down  its  edifices !  if  ever
Ms  verses  came  to  my  knowledge  before  I  connected
my  own  chaplet, — For  it  is  only  that  our  thoughts
have  chanced  to  draw  at  the  same  source  as  the  hoof
oft  falls  on  the  hoof-print.”

Said  A1  Harith :  Now  it  was  as  though  the  Governor
allowed  the  truth  of  his  assertion  and  repented  of  the
hastihess  of  his  blaming. — ^And  he  kept  thinking  on
what  means  would  disclose  to  him  the  truth,  and  how
he  might  distinguish  the  genius  from  the  fool; — And
he  saw  no  way  but  to  set  them  to  a  contest,  and  to
bind  them  together  with  the  cord  of  rivalry. — So  he
said  to  them,  “If  ye  wish  for  the  exposure  of  Mm
that  lacks,  and  for  the  manifesting  of  the  true  from
the  false,  do  ye  now  alternate  in  versifying  and  con¬
tend,  wheel  in  the  race  of  verse-completing  and  run
together : — That  through  clear  proof  he  who  perishes
may  perish,  he  who  lives  may  live.” — They  said  to
him  with  one  tongue  and  an  agreeing  answer,  “We
are  content  with  thy  testing,  so  give  us  thy  command.”
— ^He  said,  “  Of  all  the  kinds  of  eloquence  I  am  fondest
of  tejnis,  and  I  look  upon  it  as  the  chief  of  them. —
So  string  now  ten  verses,  weaving  them  with  its  colour¬
ing,  broidcring  them  with  its  ornament ; — And  put  in
them  the  tale  of  my  condition  in  respect  to  a  mistress
of  mine,  who  is  rare  of  form,  dark  red  of  lip,  graceful
in  undulation,  but  full  of  pride  and  fault-finding,  given
to  feign  forgetfulness  of  agreement,  and  to  prolong
denial,  and  to  break  promise,  while  I  am  as  her  slave.”
— Then  started  forth  the  old  man  as  the  winning  steed,
while  the  youth  followed  Mm  like  the  second  in  the
course. — And  they  raced  together  verse  by  verse  in


TWENTY-THIRD  ASSEMBLY.


239


this  order,  until  the  series  of  verses  was  perfected  and
made  up ;

Old  Man.  There  is  a  ruddy-lipped  one  who  has  compassed  my
enslaving  by  the  delicacy  of  her  utterance,  and  left  me  the  com¬
panion  of  sleeplessness  through  her  perfidy.

Youth.  She  has  assayed  to  slay  me  by  her  aversion :  truly  I
am  in  her  bond,  since  she  has  gotten  my  heart  altogether.

Old  Man.  I  give  faith  to  her  falsehood  for  fear  of  her  turning
from  me ;  I  am  content  to  listen  to  her  folly  through  dread  that
she  should  fly  me.

Youth.  I  deem  her  tormenting  to  be  sweet ;  and  as  often  as  she
renews  my  torment  the  love  of  being  kindly  to  her  is  renewed
in  me.

Old  Man.  She  is  forgetful  of  duty,  and  to  forget  is  a  fault ;  she
angers  my  heart — the  heart  which  guards  her  secret.

Youth.  Wliat  is  most  wonderful  in  her  is  the  glorying  of  her
vanity ;  yet  do  I  make  too  much  of  her  for  me  to  speak  to  her
of  her  pride.

Old  Man.  From  me  she  has  praise  sweet  of  fragrance ;  but  my
lot  from  her  is  ,a  folding  up  of  love  after  its  out-spreading.

Youth.  Oh !  if  she  were  just  she  would  not  be  fault-finding ;  hut
she  wrongs  me  ;  another,  and  not  I,  gathers  the  dew  of  her  mouth.

Old  Man.  Were  it  not  for  her  graceful  motion  I  would  turn  my
rein  in  haste  to  another,  the  light  of  whose  full  moon  I  might
look  upon.

Youth.  But  notwithstanding  the  discordance  between  her  and  me,
I  hold  the  bitter  as  sweet  through  my  docility  to  her  command.

Now  wlLen  in  alternation  they  had  recited  these
verses  to  the  Governor,  he  was  amazed  at  the  wit  of
two  so  justly  balanced, — And  said,  “  I  testify  before
God  that  ye  are  the  Tarkadan  of  heaven,  and  like  a  pair
of  fire-staves  in  their  case. — ^N'ow  surely  this  youth,
he  spends  of  what  God  has  given  him;  through  his
own  wealth  he  is  independent  of  another. — So,  old  man,
repent  of  thy  suspicion  of  him,  and  turn  again  to
honouring  him.” — Said  the  old  .man,  “Far  be  it  that
my  love  should  rej;urn  to  him,  or  my  confidence  cleave
to  him ; — For  I  have  proved  his  ingratitude  for  kind-


240


TWENTY-miRB  ABBJEMBLY,


ness ;  I  have  been  tried  by  him  with  shameful  revolt.’^
— ^Bnt  the  lad  interrupted  him  and  said,  0  friend,
know  that  contention  is  ill  luck,  and  spite  meanness ;
to  hold  suspicion  as  truth  is  a  sin ;  to  vex  the  innocent
is  a  wrong. — And  granted  that  I  have  committed  an
offence  and  wrought  a  crime,  rememberest  thou  not
what  thou  didst  thyself  recite  to  me  in  the  season  of
thy  familiarity?

Pardon  tliy  brotlier  when  he  mingles  his  right  aiming  with  error  ;

And  shrink  from  rebuking  him  if  he  swerve  or  decline  ;

Keep  to  thy  kind  dealing  towards  him  whether  he  thank  the
kindness  or  slight  it :

Be  thou  obedient  when  he  revolts ;  be  thou  lowly  when  he  magni¬
fies  himself ;  draw  near  to  him  when  he  goes  from  thee :

Keep  faith  with  him  even  though  he  fail  in  what  thou  and  he
have  stipulated ;

And  know  that  if  thou  seek  a  perfect  man  thou  desirest  beyond
bounds.

Who  is  there  who  has  never  done  ill  ?  WTio  is  there  whose  deed
is  always  fair  ?

Dost  thou  not  see  the  loved  and  the  hated  linked  together  in  one
class,

As  the  thorn  comes  forth  on  the  branches  with  the  fruit  that  is
gathered.

And  the  delight  of  long  life,  lo !  there  mingles  with  it  the  trouble
of  hoariness.

If  thou  examine  well  the  sons  of  the  time  thou  wilt  find  the  most
of  them  but  refuse.

Then  began  the  old  man  to  dart  his  tongue  as  darts
the  serpent,  and  to  gaze  vith  the  gazing  of  the  towering
hawk. — ^And  he  said,  “By  Him  who  hath  adorned  the
heaven  with  its  fires,  and  sent  down  the  water  from  the
clouds,  truly  my  declining  from  reconciliation  is  but
from  fear  of  ignominy. — For  this  lad  was  accustomed
that  I  should  victual  him,  and  have  regard  to  his  affairs.
— ^And  erewhile  fortune  poured  plenteously,  and  I  was
not  a  niggard. — But  as  for  now,  the  time  is  frowning,


TWENTY-THIRD  ASSEMBLY.


241


the  contents  of  life  are  misery :  so  that  this  my  garb  is
a  loan,  and  my  house  not  a  mouse  approaches  it.” —
Then  the  heart  of  the  Governor  grew  tender  at  their
speech,  and  he  was  pitiful  to  them  because  of  the
changes  of  their  nights. — ^And  he  inclined  to  distinguish
them  by  his  help,  and  he  bade  the  lookers-on  to  with¬
draw. — Said  the  narrator :  Now  I  had  been  gazing  at
the  face  of  the  old  man,  that  perchance  I  might  get
a  knowledge  of  him  when  I  should  spy  his  features. —
But  the  crowding  would  not  discover  him,  nor  open
to  me  that  I  might  approach  him. — ^But  when  the  rows
were  broken,  and  the  bystanders  sped  off,  I  marked
him,  and  behold  he  was  Abu  Zayd,  and  the  lad  was
his  lad,  and  I  knew  then  his  purpose  in  what  he  had
done. — And  I  was  near  swooping  down  on  him,  to  make
myself  known  to  him,  but  he  threw  me  off  with  a  glance
of  his  eye,  and  stopped  me  with  a  sign  of  his  hand. — So
I  kept  my  place,  and  delayed  my  departing:  and  the
Governor  said,  “  What  is  thy  wish,  and  wherefore  is  thy
staying  ?” — Quickly  the  old  man  took  him  up,  and  said,
‘‘He  is  my  friend,  the  owner  of  my  clothes.” — Then  the
Governor  was  pleased  to  be  friendly  with  me,  and  per¬
mitted  me  to  take  seat. — ^And  he  made  largess  to  them
of  two  robes  of  honour  and  presented  them  with  a  sum
in  coin. — And  stipulated  with  them  that  they  should
live  together  in  kindness  until  the  coming  on  of  the  Day
of  Bear. — Then  they  rose  up  from  his  hall,  lifting  their
voices  in  thanks  for  his  benefits. — ^But  I  followed  them
that  I  might  know  their  abode,  that  I  might  sui)ply
myself  of  their  talk. — And  when  we  had  traversed  the
domain  of  the  Governor,  and  had  come  to  the  empty
plain,  one  of  his  guards  overtook  me,  recalling  me  to  his


16


242


TWENTT-TEIRJ)  ASSEMBLY.


court. — So  I  said  to  Abu  Zayd,  ‘‘I  tbiuk  be  does  not
send  for  me  save  tbat  be  may  question  me  :  now  wbat
shall  I  say,  and  in  wbat  valley  shall  I  roam  with  him  ?”
— He  said,  ‘‘  Shew  him  the  folly  of  bis  heart,  and  bow  I
have  played  with  bis  understanding,  tbat  be  may  know
tbat  bis  breeze  has  met  with  a  whirlwind,  tbat  his
streamlet  has  encountered  the  deep.” — I  said,  “  I  fear
tbat  bis  anger  will  be  kindled,  and  so  bis  blaze  scorch
thee ;  or  tbat  bis  caprice  will  quicken,  and  so  bis  vio¬
lence  come  upon  thee.” — He  said,  ‘‘  I  am  now  setting
off  for  Eoba,  and  bow  should  Sobayl  and  Soba  meet
.  together  ?”

How  when  I  was  in  presence  of  the  Governor,  whose
ball  was  by  this  time  empty,  and  whose  austerity  bad
cleared  away,  be  took  to  describing  Abb  Zayd  and  bis
worth,  and  blaming  bis  evil  fortune. — Then  be  said,  “  I
conjure  thee  by  God,  art  thou  not  be  who  lent  him  the
suit  ?”  (dast)— I  said,  Ho,  by  Him  who  has  set  thee  on
that  cushion,  (dast)  I  am  not  the  owner  of  the  suit,
(dast)  but  thou  art  he  against  whom  the  game  (dast)  has
gone.” — Then  bis  eye-balls  went  askance,  and  bis  cheeks
reddened. — ^And  be  said,  “By  Allah,  it  never  baffled
me  yet  to  expose  a  suspicious  person,  or  to  discover  a
knave. — ^But  I  never  beard  of  a  Sbaykh  who  cheated
after  be  donned  the  saintly  cloak ;  yet,  as  for  this  one,
be  has  deceived  to  the  last. — ^How  bow  call  you  tbat
monkey.” — I  said,  “  Abu  Zayd.”  He  said,  “  Abu  Eayd
is  more  fitting  for  him  than  Abu  Zayd :  and  dost  thou
know  where  the  villain  is  strolling  to  ?” — I  said,  “He
dreaded  thee  on  account  of  having  overstepped  bis
bound,  and  be  journeyed  away  from  Bagdad  at  once.” —
He  said,  “  May  God  not  shorten  bis  journey,  or  keep


TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.


243


Mm  where  lie  sojourns ;  for  1  never  dealt  with  aught
sharper  than  his  cunning,  or  tasted  aught  more  hitter
than  Ms  fraud : — And  were  it  not  for  the  sacredness
of  Ms  scholarship,  I  would  urge  on  in  search  of  him,
until  he  came  in  sight  for  me  to  fall  foul  of  him. —
And  now  do  I  loathe  that  what  he  has  done  should  be
spread  abroad  in  the  City  of  Peace ;  so  should  I  be  dis¬
honoured  among  men,  and  my  dignity  come  to  nought  be¬
fore  the  Imam,  and  I  be  made  a  laughing-stock  to  gentle
and  mean.” — ^Then  he  stipulated  with  me  that  I  should
not  speak  of  what  Abu  Zayd  had  done  as  long  as  I
remained  a  sojourner  in  this  city. — Said  A1  Harith,  son
of  Hammam,  And  I  stipulated  with  him  as  one  who  does
not  equivocate,  and  I  kept  faith  with  him  as  Samuel
kept  it.


THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
“OF  THE  PORTION.”

This  Assembly  contains  the  “  grammatical  riddles  ”  of  which  the
author  speaks  in  his  preface.  Abu  Zayd,  falling  into  the  company
of  some  refined  persons  who  are  amusing  themselves  in  the  suburbs
of  Bagdad,  is  at  first  despised  by  them  for  the  shabbiness  of  his  garb.
But  the  recitation  of  a  singer  causes  the  conversation  to  turn  upon  the
famous  and  never-ending  controversy  concerning  the  use  of  the  ra/'
and  the  nash,  or,  in  European  terminology,  the  nominative  and  accu¬
sative  case,  in  certain  Arabic  phrases.  The  company  plunge  into
the  dispute  with  all  the  ardour  which  never  failed  to  be  kindled  by
grammatical  disquisitions ;  and  when  they  can  come  to  no  agree¬
ment,  Abh  Zayd  interposes,  and  gives  his  opinion.  As  they  do  not
accept  it  readily,  and  attempt  to  argue  with  him,  he  at  once  reduces
them  to  submission  by  proposing  twelve  enigmas,  involving  abstruse
and  teehnieal  points  of  Arabic  grammar.  No  one  can  solve  them  ;
and  Abu  Zayd  refuses  to  gratify  their  curiosity  by  giving  an  expla¬
nation  until  each  one  of  them  has  made  him  a  present.  Then  he
leaves  them,  refusing  to  drink  with  them  on  the  ground  that  in  his


244


2  WENTY-FO  URTR  AS8EMBL  Y.


declining  age  lie  had  made  a  vow  against  wine.  The  answers  are
briefly  given  in  an  appendix  from  the  pen  of  Hariri  himself.

'  A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related:  I  was  in  company
in  the  portion  of  Ax  Eahi',  in  the  season  of  spring,  with
youths  whose  faces  were  brighter  than  its  lights,  whose
dispositions  were  more  goodly  than  its  flowers,  whose
utterances  were  more  delicate  than  the  air  of  its  dawns,
— And  through  them  I  looked  upon  what  would  shame
the  flowering  spring  and  suffice  for  the  sounds  of  lutes, —
And  we  had  taken  oath  together  for  the  guarding  of
affection  and  the  forbidding  of  self-seeking ;  and  that
no  one  of  us  should  hold  aloof  in  enjoyment,  or  keep
to  himself  even  the  smallest  pleasure. — Now  we  had
agreed  together  on  a  day  whose  mist  had  risen,  whose
beauty  was  growing,  whose  light  cloud  bade  to  the
morning  draught, — ^That  we  would  amuse  ourselves  by
going  forth  to  one  of  the  meadows,  to  pasture  our  eyes
on  the  shining  plots,  and  polish  our  minds  by  a  fore¬
casting  of  the  rains  ; — So  we  sallied  forth,  and  we  were
as  the  months  in  number,  and  as  the  two  boon-com¬
panions  of  Ja&imeh  in  affection, — ^To  a  garden  which
had  assumed  its  gilding  and  adorned  itself,  whose
flowers  were  various  in  their  kinds  and  hues; — And
with  us  were  the  headstrong  ruddy  wine,  and  cupbearers
like  suns ;  and  the  singer  who  charms  the  hearer  and
delights  him,  who  feasts  each  hearing  with  what  it
covets. — ^Now  when  we  had  fully  taken  seat,  and  the
cups  were  circling  to  us,  there  intruded  on  us  a  sharp
fellow,  on  him  was  an  old  coat: — ^And  we  frowned
on  him  as  frown  the  soft  damsels  on  the  gray-heads,
and  we  felt  that  the  purity  of  our  day  was  now  troubled.
— ^But  he  gi’eeted  with  the  greeting  of  the  intelligent ;


TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.


245


and  taking  seat  lie  opened  perfume-vials  of  prose  and
verse; — ^But  Ave  shrank  from  his  expansion,  and  hastened
to  roll  up  what  he  spread  out ;  until  chanted  our  rare
singer,  our  charming  modulator ;

How  long,  Su'ad,  wilt  thou  not  join  my  cord,  nor  pity  me  for
what  I  meet  with?

I  have  been  patient  with  thee  until  my  patience  is  overcome,  until
my  spirit  has  almost  reached  my  throat.

But  come  !  I  am  resolved  to  do  myself  right,  drinhing  thereby  to
my  mistress  as  she  drinks  to  me ;

Bor  if  union  (ihsj)  please  her — then  union  ( J-uj)  ;  but  if  rupture
— then  rupture  like  a  very  divorce.

Said  A1  Harith:  Then  we  asked  the  player  on  the
double-twisted  strings  why  he  nashed  the  first  and
raf'ecl  the  second. — And  he  swore  by  the  tomb  of  his
parents  that  he  had  spoken  as  Sibawayh  preferred. —
But  the  opinions  of  the  company  were  divided  as  to
the  admissibility  of  the  nash  and  — And  a  section

said,  “The  ra/'  of  both,  that  is  correct;”  and  a  part
said,  “  IS’othing  is  lawful  but  the  state  of  nasb  while  to
the  rest  the  answer  was  impracticable,  and  the  clamour¬
ing  kindled  among  them. — But  that  intruder  showed  the
smilingness  of  one  who  knows  a  matter,  though  he
spoke  not  a  single  word. — However,  when  the  cries
were  still,  and  the  scolded  and  the  scolder  were  silent,
he  said,  “  0  people,  I  will  announce  to  you  its  inter¬
pretation,  I  will  distinguish  the  sound  phrase  from
the  sick. — Verily  the  raf'  and  the  nash  of  each
are  lawful,  and  an  interchange  of  the  inflection  be¬
tween  them; — And  that  is  according  to  what  is  left
understood,  and  to  the  virtual  signification  which  is
elided  in  this  puzzle.” — Then  was  the  company  reck¬
less  in  hastening  to  dispute  with  him,  and  in  gliding


246  .  TWENTY-FOURTE  ASSEMBLY.

into  contention  with  him. — But  he  said :  Well,  since
ye  call  to  me  to  “  Come  down,”  and  ye  gird  yourselves
for  the  war:

What  is  the  word  which,  as  ye  will,  is  a  particle  that
is  loved,  or  the  name  of  that  which  contains  the  slender
mUch-camel  ?

And  what  is  the  noun  which  alternates  between  a
singular  that  binds,  and  a  plural  that  clings?

And  what  is  the  a  which,  when  it  attaches  itself,
takes  away  heaviness  and  loosens  the  bound  ?

And  where  does  the  enter  and  depose  the  regent
without  courtesy  ?

And  what  is  that  which  is  always  mansub  as  a  term  of
circumstance,  while  only  a  particle  makes  it  malchfud?

And  what  is  the  annexed  noun  which  lacks  one  of  the
handles  of  annexion,  and  whose  power  varies  between
evening  and  morning  ?

And  what  is  the  regent  whose  last  joins  his  first,  and
whose  reverse  effects  what  he  effects  ?

And  what  is  the  regent  whose  deputy  is  more  spacious
than  he  in  abode,  and  greater  in  craft,  and  more  fre¬
quent  in  mention  of  Grod  Most  High  ?

And  in  what  place  do  males  put  on  the  veils  of
women,  and  the  ladies  of  the  alcoves  go  forth  with  the
turbans  of  men  ?

And  where  is  the  keeping  of  ranks  necessary  to  the
struck  and  the  striker  ?

And  what  is  the  noun  which  gives  no  sense  except  by
the  addition  to  it  of  two  words,  or  the  shortening  of  it
to  two  letters ;  and  in  the  first  case  there  is  adhesion,
and  in  the  second  compulsion  ?

And  what  is  the  epithet  which,  when  it  is  followed


TWEKTY-FOURTE  ASSEMBLY.


247


by  he  to  ■wbom  it  is  applied  lessens  in.  men’s  eyes,
and  is  set  low  ia  reputation,  and  is  reckoned  among  the
simpletons,  and  exposes  himself  to  dishonour  ?

Now  these  are  twelve  questions  to  match  your  num-
ber,  to  balance  your  disputatiousness ;  if  ye  add,  I  add  ;
if  ye  return,  I  return.

Said  tbe  teller  of  tkis  story :  Now  from  tkese  his
riddles,  which  terrified  as  they  poured,  there  came  on
our  thoughts  bewilderment  and  barrenness. — And  when
it  bafiSed  us  to  swim  in  his  sea,  and  our  talismans  had
yielded  to  his  enchantment, — ^We  changed  from  weari¬
ness  in  looking  at  him  to  the  seeking  of  instruction  from
him,  and  from  the  wrong  of  being  annoyed  by  him
to  the  desire  of  learning  of  him. — But  he  said,  “Now
by  Him  who  has  sent  down  grammar  into  speech  to  be
as  salt  in  food,  and  has  veiled  its  risings  from  the  per¬
ceptions  of  the  vulgar, — I  will  not  give  you  a  wish,
I  will  not  heal  for  you  a  pain,  unless  every  hand  endow
me,  and  each  of  you  distinguish  me  by  a  gift.” — Then  re¬
mained  not  one  in  the  company  but  was  obedient  to  his
command,  and  cast  to  him  the  hidden  treasure  of  his
sleeve. — And  when  he  had  got  it  under  his  wallet-string
he  kindled  the  flame  of  his  genius. — And  then  did  he
disclose  of  the  secrets  of  his  riddles  and  of  the  wonders
of  his  puzzling,  that  wherewith  he  cleared  away  the
rust  from  our  understandings,  that  whose  rising  he
manifested  by  the  light  of  proof. — ^And  we  were  aston¬
ished  when  we  understood,  and  we  wondered  when  we
were  answered,  and  we  repented  over  what  had  escaped
from  us. — And  we  began  to  excuse  ourselves  with  the
excusing  of  the  sagacious;  and  we  offered  to  him  the
quaffing  of  the  wine-cup. — But  he  said,  “  Need  is  not


248


TWJENTY-FOURTR  ASSEMBLY.


courtesy;  and  as  for  drinking,  tliere  remains  in  it  no
sweetness  for  me.” — Then  he  turned  up  his  face  mo¬
rosely,  and  plucked  away  his  side  scornfully,  and  recited :

Gray  liair  forbids  me  tliat  wherein  are  my  joys  ;  how  then  should
I  bring  together  the  wine  and  my  hands’  palms  ?

Is  the  morning  draught  of  the  old  wine  lawful,  now  that  the
hoariness  of  my  head  lights  up  my  morning  ?

I  swear  that  wine  shall  never  again  blend  with  me  as  long  as  my
breath  cleaves  to  my  body,  and  my  words  to  my  speech;

That  my  hand  shall  not  deck  itself  with  the  cups  of  must ;  that  I
will  not  turn  round  my  lot  among  the  goblets ;  *

That  I  will  not  set  my  thought  to  the  mixed  drink ;  that  I  will
not  go  joyfully  to  the  wine  ;

That  I  will  not  gather  myself  to  the  wine  cooled  of  the  north
wind ;  that  I  will  choose  no  companion,  save  the  sober.

Hoariness  blots  out  my  merriment  when  he  writes  upon  my  head ;
hated  be  he  for  a  blotting  scribe !

He  shines  forth  to  blame  my  turning  the  reins  to  pleasure ;  away
with  him  for  one  who  shines  forth  but  to  blame  1

Now  were  I  wanton  while  my  temple  is  hoary,  then  would  my
lamp  be  put  out  among  the  lamps  of  Ghassan,

A  people  whose  disposition  is  the  honouring  of  their  guests  ;  and
gray  hair  is  a  gueSt  to  whom  honour  is  due,  my  friend.

Said  A1  Harith. :  Then  he  slipped  away  as  slips  the
serpent,  and  sped  with  the  speeding  of  the  cloud. — And
I  knew  then  that  he  was  the  light  of  Seruj  ;  the  full
moon  of  scholarship  that  passes  through  the  signs  of
heaven. — ^And  our  end  was  grief  at  his  departure  and
separation  after  he  was  gone.


Explanation  of  the  Arabic  subtleties  and  grammatical
riddles  which  are  contained  in  this  Assembly.

As  for  the  first  part  of  the  last  verse  of  the  song,  namely —
(if  union  please  her,  then  union),  it  is  like

the  phrase  jJLi  Aijo  (Man  is

rewarded  according  to  his  work;  if  good,  good,  if  evil,  evil.)  Now


TWENTY^FOTTRTH  ASSEMBLY.


249


Sibawayh  introduced  this  question  into  his  Booh,  and  allowed
four  modes  of  inflecting  it.  The  first  and  best  is  that  you  should
7iash  the  first and  raf^  the  second,  nasi  the  first  ^  and  raf^  the
second.  Then  would  the  virtual  meaning  be,  If  his  work  be  good
then  his  reward  is  good ;  and  if  his  work  be  evil,  then  his  reward
is  evil for  the  first  is  nasbed  through  being  the  predicate  of
and  the  second  is  raffed  through  being  the  predicate  of  an
elided  inchoative.  And  in  this  mode,  and  its  noun  are  elided,
because  the  conditional  particle  (if)  points  to  their  virtual  pre¬
sence  ;  and  the  inchoative  is  also  elided,  because  the  ( _ 5,  which  is  the

answer  to  the  condition,  points  to  it ;  and  that  is  by  reason  that  an

inchoative  commonly  follows  < _ i.  The  second  mode  is  that  you  should

nash  both  ;  and  then  the  virtual  meaning  of  the  sentence  is,  If  his
wish  be  good,  then  he  is  rewarded  good ;  and  if  his  wish  be  evil,
then  he  is  rewarded  evil.”  Here  the  first  is  nasbed,  because  it  is  the
predicate  of  and  the  second  is  nasbed  as  the  object  of  the  verb’s
action.  The  third  mode  is  that  you  should  raf  both  ;  then  the
virtual  sense  of  the  sentence  is,  ‘-If  there  be  good  in  his  work,
then  his  reward  is  good;  and  the  first^^  is  raf  ed  because  it  is  the
noun  of  and  the  second  is  raf  ed  because  it  is  the  predicate  of
an  elided  inchoative ;  as  was  shown  in  the  exposition  of  the  first
mode.  And  it  may  be  that  the  first^^  is  raf  ed  through  being  the
agent  of  ;  and  that  the  which  receives  a  virtual  power  here,
is  the  complete  attributive  verb,  with  the  meaning  “exists,”  or
“  occurs which  would  need  no  predicate,  as  in  the  phrase  of  God
Most  High,  “  If  he  be  one  in  difficulty.”  Then  the  virtual  mean¬
ing  in  the  example  would  be,  “  If  good  he,  then  the  reward  is
good :”  that  is,  “  If  good  exists,  then  the  reward  is  good.”  The
fourth  and  weakest  mode  is  that  you  should  raf  the  first  on  the
principle  explained  in  the  third  case,  and  nasb  the  second  on  that
which  was  mentioned  in  the  second  case.  Then  the  virtual  meaning
will  be,  “  If  there  be  good  in  his  work,  then  he  is  rewarded  good.’’
According  to  this  interpretation,  and  by  the  use  of  the  viidually
understood  words  which  are  here  elided,  runs  the  inflection  of  the
verse  sung  in  the  Assembly.  And  among  expressions  of  the  same
kind  is  the  sentence,  “  The  man  was  killed  by  what  ho  killed  with ;
if  a  sword,  a  sword  ;  if  a  knife,  a  knife.”


250


TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.


Now  as  to  tlie  word  which  is  a  particle  that  is  loved,  or  the  name
of  that  which  contains  the  slender  milch  camel ;  it  is  .  If  you
use  it  to  admit  the  truth  of  what  is  told  you,  or  to  promise  in
answer  to  a  request,  then  it  is  a  particle  :  but  if  you  mean  by  it
camels,’’  then  it  is  a  noun  :  and  ^  is  masculine  and  feminine,  and
is  a  general  name  for  camels,  and  for  all  cattle  (in  which  last  defini¬
tion  camels  are  comprised.)  And  among  camels  is  comprised  the
;  which  means  a  slender  she-camel.  She  is  called
from  being  likened  to  the  (edge)  of  a  sword.  Eut  it  is  also

said  that  the  word  means  a  stout  she-camel ;  through  the  likening
of  her  to  the  (ridge)  of  a  mountain.  •

As  for  the  noun  which  alternates  between  a  singular  that  binds
and  a  plural  that  clings,  it  is  (trowsers  or  drawers).  Some

say  that  this  is  a  singular  form,  and  that  its  plural  is  ^  ;  and

according  to  this  opinion,  it  is  a  singular ;  and  from  its  being
gathered  round  the  waist,  he  gives  it  the  epithet  of  ‘^binding.”
Others  say,  Nay,  it  is  a  plural,  and  its  singular  form  is
and,  according  to  this  opinion,  it  is  a  plural ;  and  the  meaning
of  the  expression  clings  ”  is,  that  it  is  not  fully  declined.  Now,  the
reason  that  this  kind  of  plural  is  not  fully  declined  (and  it  con¬
sists  of  every  plural  whose  third  letter  is  an  elif  followed  by  a
strengthened  letter,  or  by  two  letters,  or  by  three  letters,  the  middle
one  of  which  is  quiescent),  is  on  account  of  its  heaviness,  and  its
divergence  from  the  other  plurals,  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  form  like
it  among  the  singular  nouns.  And  in  this  riddle  he  gives  the
epithet  clinging  ”  to  that  which  is  not  fully  declined.

As  for  the  a,  which,  when  it  attaches  itself,  takes  away  heaviness,
and  loosens  the  hound ;  it  is  the  ^  which  is  afSxed  to  the  form
of  plural  above  mentioned  ;  as  in  (bankers),  <3^1^  (polishers) ;

for  this  form  of  plural  becomes  fully  declined  when  the  is  affixed
to  it ;  because  the  n  changes  it  to  the  form  of  singular  nouns  like
j  and  ;  and  it  is  thus  lightened,  and  becomes  declinable.

And  in  this  riddle  ho  gives  to  that  which  is  not  fully  declined
the  epithet  of  bound,”  as  in  the  former  he  gave  it  the  epithet
of  clinging.”

As  for  the  which  deposes  the  regent  without  courtesy,  it
is  that  which  is  prefixed  to  the  future  verb,  and  divides  it  from


TWENTY-FOmTS  ASSEMBLY.


‘251


which,  before  the  prefixion,  was  one  of  the  instruments  of  nashing.
The  verb  is  then  raf  ed,  and  the  is  changed  from  being  a  nasler  to
the  verb,  to  being  the  lightened  "^ised  in.  the  place  of  the  heavy.
Thus,  in  the  sentence  of  God,  Praise  be  to  Him,  ^

(He  knows  that  there  shall  be  sick  among  you),  the
virtual  reading  is  43 1  jJlc.

Now  as  to  that  which  is  nasbed,  as  a  term  of  circumstance,  while
only  a  particle  hhafds  it,  it  is  which  is  never  j erred  in  choice
speech,  except  by  ;  for  the  vulgar  expression,
is  a  mistake.

Xs  to  the  annexed  noun,  which  is  deprived  of  one  of  the  handles  of
annexion,  and  whose  power  varies  between  evening  and  morning ;
it  is  Por  this  is  one  of  the  nouns  which  necessarily  require

annexion,  and  whatever  noun  follows  it  is  j  erred  by  it,  except
;  for  the  Arabs  make  this  mansub  after  through  the  fre¬
quency  with  which  they  use  it  in  discourse  :  they  also  nunnatc
it,  that  it  may  fully  appear  that  it  is  mansub^  and  that  it  is  not  one  of
the  class  of  jerred  nouns  which  ai*e  not  fully  declinable.  Among
some  of  the  grammarians,  has  the  same  meaning  as  Jcxr. ;  but  the
correct  view  is  that  there  is  a  delicate  difference  betweei  hem  ;


namely  that  the  meaning  of  applies  to  whatever  is  in  your
possession  or  power,  whether  it  be  near  to  you  or  at  a  distance,
while  applies  only  to  what  is  in  your  presence  and  close  to  you.

And  as  for  the  regent,  whose  last  joins  his  first,  and  whose
reverse  effects  what  he  effects  ;  it  is  h,  the  reverse  of  which  is  ;
and  both  are  among  the  ‘particles  of  calling  :  and  the  effect  of
both  upon  the  noun  of  the  person  called  to  is  the  same,  although
circulates  more  in  discourse,  and  is  of  more  frequent  usage.  Some,
however,  prefer  that  a  person  who  is  near  should  be  called  to  with
onlj',  as  he  is  called  to  with  hamzeli.

As  for  the  regent  whose  deputy  is  more  spacious  than  he  in  abode,
and  greater  in  craft,  and  more  frequent  in  mention  of  God  Most
High,  it  is  the  c— ;  of  swearing.  This  is  the  original  particle
of  swearing ;  as  is  shown  by  its  being  used  when  the  verb  of
swearing  is  expressed,  as  when  you  say  (I  swear  by  God) ;

and  by  its  being  prefixed  also  .to  the  pronoun ;  as  when  you
say  ^,1jo  'I  (By  Thee,  I  will  do  it.)  Afterwards  the  ^


was


252  TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.

substituted  for  it  in  the  oath,  because  they  are  both  labial  letters,
and  also  on  account  of  the  relationship  of  their  meanings  ;  since  the
^  gives  the  sense  of  union,  and  the  that  of  adhesion,  and  the  two
meanings  approach  each  other.  Then  the  which  was  substituted  for
the  became  more  common  in  speech,  and  was  more  largely

applied  in  forms  of  swearing;  and  for  this  reason  he  riddles  that
it  is  more  frequent  in  mention  of  God  Most  High.  Also  the
^  is  larger  in  dwelling  than  the  because  the  is  prefixed  only
to  the  noun,  and  efiPects  nothing  but  the  jerr  ;  while  the  ^  is  prefixed
to  the  noun,  and  the  verb,  and  the  particle,  and  sometimes  it
jerrs  with  the  oath,  and  sometimes  by  understanding  ,  and  it  hs
also  ranked  with  the  nashers  of  the  verb,  and  with  the  instruments  of
conjunction,  and  for  this  reason  he  describes  it  by  spaciousness  of
abode,  arid  greatness  of  cunning.

And  as  for  the  place  where  males  put  on  the  veils  of  women,  and
the  ladies  of  the  alcoves  go  forth  with  the  turbans  of  men  ;  it  is  the
first  degree  of  the  numeral,  when  in  the  state  of  annexion;  namely,
the  numerals  between  three  and  ten,  for  they  have  in  the  masculine,
and  are  without  it  in  the  feminine,  as  in  the  phrase  of  Him  Most
High,  I  rV.'  ^  jy  5^  (He  compelled  it

upon  them  seven  nights  and  eight  days  consecutively) ;  while  every¬
where  else  the  J  is  one  of  the  distinctives  of  the  feminine.  You
see  how  the  rule  of  masculine  and  feminine  is  reversed  in  this  case  ;
so  that  each  turns  to  a  form  that  is  not  its  own,  and  goes  forth
in  the  gar!)  of  the  other.

As  to  the  place  where  the  keeping  of  ranks  is  necessary  to  the
struck  and  the  striker;  it  is  when  there  is  ambiguity  between
the  agent  and  the  patient,  through  the  sign  of  inflection  fliiling  to  be
openly  expressed  in  both  or  one  of  them.  This  takes  place  when
they  are  both  7naksiLr,  like  or  ;  or  belong  to  the  nouns

of  indication,  like  cJlo  and  In  such  cases  it  is  necessary,  for

the  avoiding  of  ambiguity,  that  each  of  the  two  nouns  should  be
kept  in  its  proper  order ;  so  that  the  agent  may  be  known  by
its  coming  first,  and  the  patient  by  its  following  after.

As  for  the  noun  which  gives  no  sense  except  by  the  addition  to  it
of  two  words,  or  the  shortening  of  it  to  two  letters,  it  is  (what¬
ever).  About  this  word  there  are  two  opinions  :  one  that  it  is  com-


TWENTY-FIFTS  ASSEMBLY,


253


pounded  of  wHcli  means  stop,”  and  of  ;  tlie  second,  and  the
correct  one,  is  that  the  root  of  the  word  is  U,  to  which  another

was  added  augmentively,  as  it  is  to  so  that  the  utterance
became  U.  Eut  the  successiou  of  two  words  with  the  same  utter¬
ance  became  troublesome  to  people,  and  they  substituted  ^  for  the  first
elifj  so  that  the  two  became  This  word  is  one  of  the

instruments  of  condition  and  compensation,  and  when  you  utter  it
the  sentence  is  not  completed,  and  the  meaning  is  not  seized,
except  by  the  addition  of  two  words  after  it,  as,  Whatever  you
dp  I  will  do,”  so  that  it  necessarily  adheres  ”  to  a  verb.  But
if  you  shorten  it  to  the  two  letters  meaning  stop,”  then  the
meaning  is  intelligible,  and  in  that  case  you  “  compel  ”  him  you  are
addressing  to  stop.

And  as  for  the  epithet  which,  when  it  is  followed  by  he  to  whom
it  is  applied  lessens  in  men’s  eyes,  and  is  set  low,  and  is  reckoned
among  the  simpletons,  and  exposes  himself  to  dishonour;  it  is
(a  guest),  which,  when  is  added  to  it,  changes  to
which  means  one  who  intrusively  follows  the  guest,  and  who
is  set  down  as  base  coin  when  he  is  tested.


THE  TWENTY-FIFTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED
^^OF  KEEEL^^

There  is  nothing  remarkable  in  this  Assembly.  Harith,  being  in
the  town  of  Kerej,  during  a  severe  winter,  sees  one  day  an  old  man
naked  and  shivering,  who  crouches  on  the  ground.  He  is  sur¬
rounded  by  a  crowd,  and  recites  to  them  some  verses  on  his  un-
happy  state.  The  wealthy,  who  are  standing  around,  pity  him,  and
give  him  their  furs  and  cloaks ;  and  among  them  Harith  parts  with
a  useful  garment.  In  his  speech  the  old  man  had  used  the  plnase
‘‘the  Kdfs  of  winter;”  and  Harith,  when  he  discovers  that  he  is  Abfi
Zayd,  follows  him,  requesting  to  know  its  meaning.  Abu  Zayd
reminds  him  of  a  verso  of  Ibn  Sukkereh,  in  which  seven  things — all
begiiming  with  the  letter  Kdf — are  spoken  of  as  necessary  in  order
that  a  winter  may  be  passed  in  comfort.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  related :  I  was  wintering
at  Xerej,  by  reason  of  a  debt  that  I  was  demanding,  and


254


TWENTY^FIFTH  ASSEMBLY,


a  needful  business  I  was  performing. — And  I  experienced
of  its  fierce  winter  and  its  scorching  cold,  that  which
acquainted  me  with  sorest  torment,  and  kept  me  ever
seeking  warmth. — So  that  I  quitted  not  my  lair,  and  the
kindling-place  of  my  fire,  except  through  some  necessity
that  I  was  urged  to,  or  that  I  might  give  attendance
at  the  congregation. — 'Now  on  a  day  whose  sky  was
frowning,  whose  mist  was  darkling,  I  was  forced  to  sally
from  my  shelter,  through  a  business  that  troubled  m^  :
— ^WTien  lo !  an  old  man,  bare  of  skin,  showing  his
nakedness ;  and  he  was  turbaned  with  a  kerchief,  and
breeched  with  a  napkin. — And  around  him  was  a  crowd,
dense  in  its  throngings ;  and  he  was  reciting,  and  heeded
nought :

0  people,  notlimg  can  announce  to  you  my  poverty
More  truly  than  this,  my  nakedness  in  the  season  of  cold.

So  from  my  outward  misery,  judge  ye

The  inward  of  my  condition,  and  what  is  hidden  of  my  state.

And  beware  a  change  in  the  truce  of  fortune  :

For  know  that  once  I  was  illustrious  in  rank,

I  had  command  of  plenty,  and  of  a  blade  that  severed ;

My  yellow  coins  served  my  friends,  my  lances  destroyed  my  foes  ;
My  humped  camels  mourned  the  morning  that  I  made  the  feast.
But  afterward  the  time  bared  the  swords  of  perfidy,

And  spread  forth  the  squadrons  of  dark  afflictions.

And  ceased  not  to  tear  and  wear  me ;

Until  my  habitation  was  razed,  and  my  milk-flow  decayed,

And  my  price  and  my  song  went  down  among  men.

And  I  became  the  lean  beast  of  poverty  and  need,

Naked  of  back,  stripped  of  my  covering,

As  though  I  were  a  spindle  in  nakedness.

No  warming  is  mine  in  Sinn  and  Sinnabar,

Save  to  stand  in  the  sun,  or  get  a  heat  at  the  coals.  •

Now  is  there  any  who  is  a  deep  sea  of  bounty,  lord  of  an  ample
robe,

Who  will  cloak  me  either  with  embroidered  garment  or  ragged
coat.

Seeking  the  face  of  God,  and  not  my  thanks  ?


TWJENTY-FIFTE  ASSEMBLY.


255


Then  he  said :  0  ye  lords  of  wealth  who  trail  in
furred  robes,  he  that  is  endowed  with  good  let  him
expend ;  he  tliat  is  able  to  bestow,  let  him  bestow. — For
the  world  is  treacherous  and  fortune  trij)S ;  ability  is  the
visit  of  a  vision,  and  opportunity  a  summer  cloud. — For,
by  Allah,  oft  have  I  met  winter  with  its  Kdfs,  and
prepared  its  necessaries  before  its  coming ; — But  to-day.
Sirs,  my  arm  is  my  pillow,  my  skin  is  my  garment,  the
hollow  of  my  hand  is  my  dish. — So  let  him  that  is
wise  consider  my  estate,  and  be  beforehand  with  the
changing  of  the  nights. — For  the  happy  man  is  he  who
takes  warning  by  his  fellow,  and  makes  preparation
for  his  journey.

thereupon  it  was  said  to  him,  ‘‘  Thou  hast  displayed
to  us  thy  scholarship,  now  disclose  to  us  thy  pedi¬
gree.” — He  said,  “  A  curse  on  him  who  boasts  of  mould¬
ering  bones !  there  is  no  glory  but  in  piety  and  choice
scholarship.”  Then  he  recited : —

By  tliy  life,  man  is  but  tlie  eon  of  bis  own  day,  according  as
that  day  displays  itself ;  he  is  not  the  son  of  his  yesterday.

There  is  no  boast  in  rotten  bones  ;  there  is  only  the  glory  of  him
who  seeks  glory  through  himself.

Then  he  sat  down,  bowed  together,  and  shrank  shiver¬
ing. — ^And  said,  “  0  God,  thou  who  whelmest  with  thy
bounty,  and  hast  bidden  us  to  ask  of  thee,  send  thy
blessing  on  Mohammed  and  his  House,  and  help  me
against  the  cold  and  its  terrors; — And  appoint  to  me
some  generous  man  who  prefers  others  even  from  his
straitness,  who  shares  even  though  it  be  but  a  scrap.”
Said  the  narrator  :  How  when  he  had  thus  disclosed  a
soul  like  Tsam’s,  and  elegancies  like  Asma'i’s,  the
glances  of  my  eye  began  to  test  him,  and  the  darts  of


256


TWENTY-FIFTE  ASSEMBLY.


my  side-looks  to  strike  on  him,  until  I  perceived  well
that  he  was  Ahh  Zayd,  and  that  his  going  naked  was  but
a  noose  for  the  prey. — ^But  he  saw  secretly  that  my
recognition  had  overtaken  him,  and  he  mistrusted  that  it
would  expose  him. — So  he  said,  ‘‘I  swear  by  the  shade
of  night  and  the  moon,  by  the  stars  and  the  new  moon¬
light,  that  none  shall  cloak  me  save  one  whose  disposi¬
tion  is  goodly,  whose  face  is  imbued  with  the  dew  of  be¬
nevolence.” — Then  I  understood  what  he  meant,  although
the  company  knew  not  his  meaning. — And  I  was  grieved
at  the  shivering  that  he  suffered,  and  at  the  bristling
of  his  skin. — So  I  took  hold  on  a  fur  coat  that  was
my  plumage  by  day  and  my  bed  by  night;  and  I
stripped  it  off  me,  and  said  “Eeceive  it  from  me.” — And
he  failed  not  to  draw  it  on  while  my  eye  still  looked
at  it. — ^Then  he  recited :

Well  done  L.e  wlio  lias  clotlied  me  witli  a  fur  coat,  wkich.  shall  he
my  protection  from  shivering  t

He  has  clothed  me  with  it,  preserving  my  heart’s  blood ;  may  he
be  preserved  from  the  harm  of  men  and  Jinn !

To-day  he  shall  deck  himself  with  my  praise ;  to-morrow  he  shall
be  decked  with  the  silk  of  Paradise.

Said  A1  Harith:  Now  when  he  had  fascinated  the
hearts  of  the  company  by  his  diversity  in  excellence, —
They  cast  to  him  of  the  lined  furs  and  the  parti-coloured
coats,  so  many  that  their  weight  oppressed  him,  and
scarce  could  he  lift  them. — ^And  he  departed  glad  of
countenance  in  his  joy,  invoking  a  rain  on  Kerej. —
But  I  followed  him  to  a  point  where  his  mistrust  dis¬
appeared,  and  the  heaven  showed  clear;  and  I  said
to  him,  “A  sharp  cold  was  that  which  froze  thee!
But  go  not  naked  again.” — He  said,  “Tie  on  thee!
swiftness  to  blame  belongs  not  to  the  just;  haste  not


TWENTY-FIFTH  ASSEMBLY.


257


in  censuring,  for  it  is  a  wrong ;  prosecute  not  that  of
which  thou  hast  no  knowledge, — Por  by  Him  who  has
given  the  light  of  hoariness,  and  made  sweet  the  tomb
of  Taybeh,  had  I  not  stripped  myself  I  should  have
gone  home  in  failure,  and  in  emptiness  of  wardrobe.”
— Then  was  he  restive  to  take  flight,  and  veiled  himself
in  frowning,  and  said,  “  Knowest  thou  not  that  my
nature  is  to  pass  from  prey  to  prey,  and  to  turn  from
'Amr  to  Zayd? — Yet  I  see  thou  now  checkest  me  and
resistest  me;  thou  makest  me  to  lose  double  of  what
thou  didst  profit  me. — Then  spare  me  (God  save  thee),  from
thy  vain  talk ;  shut  on  me  the  door  of  thy  earnest  and
jest.” — But  I  pulled  him  with  the  pulling  of  playful¬
ness,  and  held  him  fast  to  joke  with  him, — ^And  said
to  him,  “  By  Allah,  had  I  not  concealed  thee  and
covered  thy  imposture,  thou  wouldst  not  have  gotten
a  gift ;  thou  wouldst  not  have  come  off  more  coated
than  an  onion. — So  now  recompense  me  for  my  good¬
ness,  and  for  the  covering  that  I  gave  thee,  and  put
over  thee,  either  by  being  kind  enough  to  restore  my
fur,  or  by  making  known  to  me  the  Kafs  of  winter.”
— Then  he  looked  at  me  with  the  look  of  one  who
wonders,  .and  frowned  with  the  frowning  of  the  angry,
— And  said,  “  As  for  restoring  the  fur  it  is  a  thing
as  impossible  as  the  restoring  of  yesterday  that  is
past,  or  the  dead  man  who  is  gone ; — ^But  as  for  the
Kafs  of  winter,  glory  to  God  who  rusted  thy  mind
and  rent  the  bottle  of  thy  storing, — Since  thou  hast
let  thyself  forget  what  I  recited  to  thee  at  Deskereh
of  the  lines  of  Ibn  Sukkereh:

Winter  comes  and  its  needs  to  me  are  seven,  when  the  rain
confines  me  from  business ;


17


258


TIVENTY-SIXTE  ASSEMBLY.


A  Home,  a  purse,  a  stove,  a  cup  of  wine  after  the  roast  meat,
and  a  pleasant  wife,  and  clothing.

Then  he  said,  “  Sure  an  answer  that  heals  is  better
than  a  cloak  that  warms;  so  be  content  with  what
thou  hast  learnt  and  depart.” — So  I  parted  from  him  ;
and  now  my  fur  coat  was  gone  to  my  sorrow,  and  I
was  in  a  state  of  shivering  all  the  winter.


TSE  TWENTY-SIXTH  ASSEMBLY,  CALLED

^‘THE  spotted;^

This  Assembly  presents  another  of  those  exercises  of  ingenuity
in  which  the  author  delights.  A1  Hiiiith,  being  in  the  town  or
district  of  Ahwaz  in  a  state  of  great  poverty,  determines  to  seek  his
fortune  elsewhere.  On  the  road  he  comes  upon  a  tent  whose
wealthy  owner,  attended  by  his  slaves,  is  reposing  during  a  halt.
The  stranger  invites  him  to  rest  himself,  and  A1  Harith  soon  dis¬
covers  that  he  is  Abu  Zayd.  He  inquires  the  cause  of  this  sudden
prosperity,  and  is  informed  that  it  was  produced  by  the  improvisa¬
tion  of  an  elegant  address  or  composition,  the  merits  of  which  a
great  personage  had  thus  munificently  rewarded.  A1  Harith,  with
his  usual  literary  curiosity,  desires  to  hear  it ;  but  Abu  Zayd  will
consent  only  on  condition  that  his  friend  shall  first  accompany  him
to  Sus,  the  ancient  Susa,  which  is  distant  a  day’s  journey  from
Ahwiiz.  A1  Harith  consents,  and  Abu  Zayd  detains  him  in  the  city
for  a  month  on  various  pretences.  At  last,  when  A1  Harith  will  no
longer  stay,  the  adventurer  tells  how  he  had  been  oppressed  with
debt,  and  been  delivered  from  it,  and  loaded  with  presents,  by  the
Governor  of  Tiis,  in  Khorasan,  in  reward  for  an  eulogistic  compo¬
sition,  in  which  the  alternate  letters  were  pointed  and  unpointed.
He  aSks  A1  Harith  whether  he  would  prefer  a  sum  of  money  or  a
copy  of  this  spotted  ”  composition.  His  friend  chooses  the  latter,
and  Abd  Zayd  dictates  it,  not  failing  to  accompany  it  with  a  present
to  relieve  his  necessities.

A1  Harith,  son  of  Hamm  am,  related  :  I  descended  at
the  two  markets  of  Ahwaz,  clothed  in  the  garb  of  need.
— And  I  delayed  there  a  space  enduring  adversity,


TWEI^TY-SIXTS  ASSEMBLY.


259


passing  sombre  days, — ^Until  I  looked  upon  the  length¬
ening  of  my  stay  as  if  it  were  one  of  the  hurts  of
vengeance, — ^And  I  viewed  the  city  with  the  eye  of  him
that  hates,  and  I  parted  from  it  as  one  parts  from  the
mouldering  camp-ruin. — And  I  set  forth  from  its  stream¬
let,  girded  up  of  skirt,  spurring  to  the  abundant  waters  ;
— ^Until  when  I  had  journeyed  from  it  two  stations,  and
was  distant  the  march  of  two  nights,  there  came  to  my
sight  a  pitched  tent  and  a  kindled  fire. — Then  I  said,  “  I
will  go  to  them ;  perchance  I  may  quench  thirst  or  find
guidance  at  the  fire.” — And  when  I  had  arrived  at  the
shadow  of  the  tent  I  saw  some  fair  boy-servants,  and
furniture  which  thou  wouldest  gaze  at,  and  an  old  man ;
on  him  was  noble  apparel,  and  by  him  was  newly
plucked  fruit, — And  I  greeted  him  and  then  went  aside
from  him. — But  he  laughed  to  me  and  made  kindly
his  answer  towards  me,  and  said,  “Wilt  thou  not  take
seat  by  one  whose  fruit  is  choice,  whose  pleasantr}^
charms  ?  ” — Then  I  took  my  seat  to  get  the  prize  of
conversing  with  him,  not  to  swallow  down  what  was
before  him. — And  as  soon  as  he  unveiled  his  accom¬
plishments  and  bared  his  teeth,  I  knew  that  he  was
Abu  Zayd  by  the  beauty  of  his  choice  sayings,  and  the
ugliness  of  those  yellow  teeth. — ^And  we  knew  each
other  then,  and  two  joys  compassed  me  in  that  hour. —
Nor  could  I  learn  by  which  I  was  purer  in  rejoicing
and  more  perfect  of  delight; — Whether  it  was  at  his
dawning  forth  from  the  darkness  of  his  journeys,  or  at
the  plenty  of  his  dwelling  after  its  dearth. — Then  my
soul  yearned  that  I  should  break  the  seal  of  his  secret
and  enter  into  the  cause  of  his  prosperity. — So  I  said
to  him,  “  Whence  is  thy  returning,  and  whither  is  thy


260


TWENTY-SIXTH  ASSEMBLY.


going  onward,  and  how  have  thy  wardrobes  been  filled?”
— He  said,  “  As  for  my  coming  it  is  from  Tns  5  and  as
for  my  destination,  it  is  Sus ;  and  as  for  the  wealth
which  I  have  reached,  it  is  from  an  Address  which  I
improvised.” — Then  I  begged  him  that  he  would  lay
before  me  his  secret,  and  rehearse  his  Address  to  me. —
He  said,  “  The  war  of  A1  Basfis  was  a  less  thing  than
what  thou  desirest,  unless,  indeed,  thou  wilt  accompany
me  to  Sus.”

So  I  followed  him  thither  perforce,  and  I  attached
myself  to  him  there  a  month. — And  he,  he  watered
me  to  the  full  with  the  cups  of  beguiling  and  made
me  to  bear  the  bridle  of  expectation ; — Until  when
my  breast  was  straitened  and  my  patience  overcome,
I  said  to  him,  There  remains  to  thee  no  pretext,  nor
to  me  aught  that  can  divert  me. — ^To-morrow  I  shall
take  omen  of  the  raven  of  separation,  and  saddle
away  from  thee  with  the  shoes  of  Honayn.” — He  said,
“  God  forbid  that  I  should  break  promise  with  thee
or  thwart  thee !  I  have  not  deferred  to  relate  to  thee
save  that  I  might  make  thee  stay. — But  since  thou  hast
doubted  concerning  my  promise,  and  the  suspicion  of
ill  treatment  urges  thee  to  depart  from  me, — ^Listen  to
the  story  of  my  lengthened  journey,  and  add  it  to  the
Tales  of  Pleasure  after  PainJ’’ — I  said,  ‘‘  Go  on,  how
long  is  thy  tether !  how  various  are  thy  wiles !  ” — He
said;  Know  that  the  frowning  time  cast  me  to  Tus,
and  then  was  I  poor  and  laden ;  I  had  not  the  sprout  or
the  split  of  a  date-stone. — So  the  bareness  of  my  hands
made  me  resort  to  haltering  myself  with  debt; — And
I  took  credit  by  evil  chance  from  one  who  was  hard
of  nature ; — For  I  fancied  it  would  be  easy  to  find


TWENTY-BIXTR  ASSEMBLY.


261


a  market  for  my  poetry,  and  I  enlarged  in  spend¬
ing  ; — ^And  recovered  not  until  that  debt  burdened  me,
■whose  due  attached  to  me,  whose  claimant  beset  me. —
Then  was  I  bewildered  at  my  state,  and  showed  my
creditor  my  difidculty But  he  believed  not  my  poverty
and  drew  not  off  from  worrying  me ; — Nay,  he  was
instant  in  demanding  and  obstinate  in  carrying  me  to
the  Eadi; — ^And  as  often  as  I  humbled  myself  to  him
in  speech,  and  besought  of  him  the  grace  of  the  gene¬
rous, — And  would  dispose  him  to  show  mercy  to  me
by  lenity,  or  to  wait  for  me  till  competence, — He  said,
“  Set  not  thy  desire  on  being  waited  for  while  thou
boldest  fast  the  bright  gold ; — For,  by  thy  existence,
thou  seest  not  the  paths  of  deliverance  ere  thou  show
me  the  meltings  of  the  pure  ore.” — And  when  I  saw
the  sharpening  of  his  contention,  and  that  there  was
no  refuge  to  me  from  his  hand,  I  made  a  quarrel  with
him,  and  then  I  assaulted  him, — That  he  might  carry
me  up  to  the  Governor  having  authority  over  offences,
not  to  the  Judge  of  civil  wrongs. — And  this  was  by  reason
of  what  had  reached  me  of  the  eminence  of  the  Governor
and  his  virtue,  and  the  severity  of  the  Kadi  and  his
meanness. — ^Now  when  we  were  present  at  the  gate  of
the  ruler  of  Tus,  I  perceived  that  I  should  have  nor
hurt  nor  harm. — So  I  called  for  ink-flask  and  paper,
and  composed  for  him  a  Spotted  Address,  and  this  it  it :

The  qualities  of  our  Lord  are  loved,  and  at  his  court¬
yard  there  is  abiding  ; — And  nearness  to  him  is  as  gifts,
and  farness  from  him  as  destruction ; — And  his  friend¬
ship  is  as  pedigree,  and  his  estrangement  as  calamity ; —
His  sword’s  edge  is  sharp,  and  the  stars  of  his  virtue
gleam. — His  continence  adorns,  and  the  rectitude  of


262


twenty-bix.tr  assembly.


liis  road  is  plain. — His  understanding  turns  and  tries,
and  bis  fame  goes  east  and  west.

The  iTiler,  the  intelligent ;  surpassing,  excelling ;  understanding,
ingenious  ;  impatient  of  baseness,  loathing  it ;

Eeplacing,  consuming;  distinguished,  incomparable;  illustrious,
virtuous  ;  quick-witted,  fastidious  ;

Marvellous  when  he  discourses  ;  able  when  the  stir  of  ill  befals,
and  the  dreaded  calamity  grows  mighty.

The  cbaplets  of  bis  honour  are  self-strung,  and  tbe
rain-storm  of  bis  largess  showers ; — Tbe  gift  of  his  band
flows  freely,  while  avarice  from  bis  heart  sinks  away. —
Tbe  teat  of  bis  liberality  is  milked,  and  tbe  gold  of  bis
cbests  is  spoiled. — ^He  whom  his  band  gathers  to  itself
prospers  and  overcomes  ;  the  merchant  of  bis  gate  makes
gain  by  beguiling  him. — He  refrains  from  wronging  the
innocent,  and  is  free  from  the  foulness  of  the  transgressor.
— He  unites  his  gentleness  with  dignity,  and  turns  aside
from  the  path  of  the  niggardly. — ^He  is  not  given  to  leap
at  the  opportunity  of  evil,  but  abstains  with  tbe  abstain¬
ing  of  tbe  righteous.

And  therefore  is  he  loved,  and  his  continence  merits  the  infatuation
he  inspires,  since  its  pure  essence  beguiles  all.

His  qualities  are  bright,  and  gleam ;  and  his  arrow-  is  an  arrow
which  overcomes  when  thou  shootest  against  it.

He  is  gentle,  he  is  cheerful ;  one  who  makes  good  when  his  friend
slips,  nor  is  there  any  doubt  of  his  desert.

Not  miserly,  nay,  but  bountiful ;  open  when  he  is  solicited ;  one
who  goes  forth,  his  gate  keeps  him  not  close.

When  want  bites,  he  breaks  the  edge  of  its  biting  by  his  succour,
and  its  tooth  falls  out.

And  it  is  fitting  that  whoever  is  wise  and  under¬
standing,  whoever  is  near  and  far,  should  stxbmit  himself
to  the  hero  of  the  time,  the  restorer  of  the  palsied. — For
since  he  sucked  the  breast  of  his  fostering,  he  has  been
distinguished  by  the  abundance  of  his  shower. — ^He


TWENTY- &1X.TE  ASSEMBL  Y.


263


raises  the  fallen,  and  comforts  him;  if  he  helps  he
gladdens ;  if  he  contends  in  honour,  he  routs  his  ad¬
versary,  and  returns  with  a  clear  right. — He  prepares
fatigue  for  him  who  shall  rule  after  him ;  he  is  lauded
as  often  as  men  move  him  to  kindness,  or  prove  him
in  deed ;  he  crowns  his  virtues  with  the  love  of  his
suppliants.

May  lie  never  become  void  of  gladness,  may  tbe  sliadow  of  his
prosperity  be  lengthened.

For  he  is  virtuous  in  the  sight  of  whoever^  contemplates  the
shining  of  his  stars.

He  adorns  the  graces  of  his  culture  by  clothing  himself  with  the
fear  of  his  Lord.

And  may  there  pn’osper  my  Lord  his  gain  of  honours,
firmly  rooted  and  large,  and  his  excelling  in  benefits  that
are  perfect,  that  publish  themselves: — And  maj’’  the
helping  of  his  servant  with  a  portion  from  his  abundance
accord  with  the  pious  offerings  of  His  Honour : — For  his
servant  is  a  child  of  the  noble,  though  a  wanderer  from
dearth;  one  wounded  by  calamities  that  have  scarred
him,  who  strings  chaplets  that  voyage  afar. — When  he
surges  to  the  harangue  there  is  found  none  to  speak  like
him;  for  Koss  would  then  be  as  Bakil. — For  when  he
embellishes  thou  wouldstsay,  “  Garments  of  Yemen  have
been  embroidered,”  thou  wouldst  think  that  a  garden
had  sprouted. — This  is  so,  and  then  also  his  draught
is  but  a  draining,  and  his  food  is  borrowed ;  his  dawn  is
the  glooming,  and  his  cloak  is  worn  out. — And  now  does
he  quake  at  the  raging  of  a  tyrannous  creditor,  who
harasses  him  because  of  a  debt  that  attaches  to  him. —
But  if  .  my  Lord  will  mercifully  avert  him  from  me  by
the  gifts  of  his  hand,  he  will  belt  himself  with  glory
that  surpasses,  and  come  off  with  the  reward  of  loosing


2G4  TTFUN'TY-SIXTE  ASSEMBLY.

me  from  the  chain. — ^May  the  qualities  of  his  disposition
never  fail  to  aid  ■whoever  watches  the  promise  of  his
lightning-cloud. — ^By  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  who  is
without  beginning,  who  liveth  now,  and  is  without  end.

Said  Abu  Zayd ;  jN'ow  when  the  Governor  had  dis¬
cerned  the  pearls  of  my  Address,  and  caught  a  glance
of  the  secret  committed  to  it, — ^He  made  sign  at  once  for
the  paying  of  my  debt,  and  decided  what  was  between
my  adversary  and  myself. — ^Then  he  appropriated  me  for
his  ostentation,  and  distinguished  me  by  his  preference.
— ^And  I  remained  a  few  years  prospering  in  guestship
with  him,  and  pasturing  in  the  oasis  of  his  bounty,—
Until,  when  his  gifts  had  overwhelmed  me,  and  his  gold
had  lengthened  my  skirt,  I  contrived  to  depart  in  the
fair  condition  that  thou  seest.

Said  A1  Harith:  Then  I  said  to  him,  “Thanks  to
Him  who  destined  to  thee  the  meeting  with  the  kind
one,  the  noble,  and  delivered  thee  by  him  from  the
pressure  of  thy  creditor.” — He  said,  “  Praise  to  God  for
happiness  of  fortune  and  freedom  from  the  contentious
adversary.” — Then  he  said,  “  Which  is  more  pleasing  to
thee,  that  I  should  share  with  thee  of  the  gift,  or  pi  e-
sent  thee  with  the  Spotted  Address  ?” — I  said,  “  The
dictation  of  the  Address  will  be  more  pleasing  to  me.”
He  said,  “And  that  too,  by  thy  Truth,  is  the  lighter
upon  me :  for  truly  the  gift  of  that  which  goes  in  at
the  ears  is  easier  than  the  gift  of  that  which  comes
out  of  the  sleeves.” — But  then  it  was  as  if  he  scorned  the
meanness,  and  grew  ashamed,  for  he  gave  me  the  Ad¬
dress  and  a  present  together. — Thus  I  gained  from  him
two  lots,  and  parted  from  him  with  two  booties,  and
returned  to  my  home,  cool  of  eye,  through  having  gotten
both  the  Address  and  the  coin.


NOTES  TO  THE  ASSEMBLIES  OF  AL  HAKtRI.


PREFACE.

The  opening  prayer  or  invocation  which,  according  to  the
custom  of  Moslem  authors,  is  prefixed  to  the  hook,  begins  with
an  elaborate  series  of  antitheses,  the  purport  of  which  is  to  ask
deliverance  from  the  opposite  faults  of  redundancy  and  poverty
of  style,  and  the  opposite  dangers  which  arise  from  the  indulgence
or  hostility  of  critics.  This  kind  of  exordium  is  always  composed
with  especial  pains  by  a  writer  who  aspires  to  produce  a  work  of
merit;  and  it  has,  generally,  more  than  the  usual  share  of  the  rhe¬
torical  artifices,  which  are  to  be  met  with  in  Arabic  writings.  The
prayer  and  preface  of  Hariri  are,  pei'haps,  the  most  highly  elabor¬
ated  part  of  his  work,  and  have  always  been  esteemed  as  a  model
of  composition.  Having  supplicated  deliverance  both  from  excess
and  defect  of  diction,  and  from  undue  favour  and  undue  blame,
the  author  asks  to  be  guarded  from  ambiguity  of  expression  as
much  as  from  actual  error ;  a  request  not  unnecessary  in  a  work
which  deals  so  much  with  the  niceties  of  language,  and  seeks
to  exhibit  them  by  plays  on  words  by  contrasting

words  that  differ  only  in  the  diacritical  points  or  in  the

inversion  of  the  order  of  the  letters  (« _ ^3),  or  else  by  bringing

together  the  widely  different  meanings  that  can  be  borne  by
various  forms  of  the  same  root.  After  this  the  author  prays  for
the  moral  qualities  which  shall  assist  him  in  producing  an  excel¬
lent  work,  and  one  which  shall  not  endanger  his  position  by
giving  offence  to  the  powerful.  The  prayer  concludes  by  the
due  invocation  of  a  blessing  upon  the  Prophet  and  his  House.
The  Commentator  whom  I  shall  continually  cite  in  these  notes  is
Abu  H  'Abbas  Ahmed  ibn  'Abd  al  Mii'min  al  Kaysl  ash  Sherishi,
so  called  from  having  been  born  at  Xeres  in  Andalusia.  This


266


NOTES,


Commentator  observes  that  the  particular  form  of  exordium  used
by  Hariri,  with  its  antithetical  clauses,  was  originated  by  'Amr
al  Jahiz,  in  his  book  called  Sherishi  gives  an

extract  from  the  preface  to  this  work,  to  show  the  closeness  of
Hariri’s  imitation.

Perspicidiy -—enunciation, — The  distinction  between  hay  an  and
tihydn  is  -  that  tlie  former  is  applied  to  perspicuity  of  lan¬
guage,  by  which  the  meaning,  when  conceived  by  the  speaker,
is  rendered  clear  to  the  person  addressed ;  while  the  latter,  as
indicated  by  its  form,  is  applied  to  the  mental  process  by  which
ideas  are  separated  and  made  distinct  in  the  intellect  of  the
speaker,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  communication.  The  one,  says
the  Commentator,  is  the  work  of  the  tongue,  the  other  of  the
mind.  Sherishi  says,  “  proceeds  from  •  you  to  another  ;

proceeds  from  you  to  yourself.”  Thus  the  Creator  may
with  propriety  be  supplicated  to  teach”  the  one,  which  is  the
mere  art  of  eloquence  or  perspicuous  expression,  while  he
'^inspires”  the  other.  The  obstacle  to  is  or  ob¬

scurity  of  expression,  which  arises,  according  to  Jorjani  (Ta  rifat,
p.  64,  edition  of  Fliigel,  Leipsic,  1845),  from  a  fault  in  the
disposition  of  words,  through  inversion  or  elision,  or  else  from
the  use  of  words  in  unusual  significations,  without  due  care  to
prepare  the  mind  of  the  hearer.

We  take  refuge  with  thee.— A.  common  form  of  deprecation
among  Moslems  derived  from  the  versicles  wdiich  form  the  last
two  chapters  of  the  Koran. '  I  take  refuge  with  the  Lord  of
Mankind,”  and  I  take  refuge  with  the  Lord  of  the  Dawn.”

Region — domain,— is  literally  the  market  street  of  a  town,

and  plural  of  places  marked  out  for  building,  as  the
of  Kufa  and  Basra.

Succour  or  Divine  Guidance, — is  defined  in  the  Ta’rifat
of  Jorjani  as  the  power  by  which  God  makes  the  actions  of  his
servants  agreeable  to  his  will.

Mistake, — is  the  turning  away  or  deviation  from  the
right  path.  Compare  Koran  iii.  5.


JSrOTES.


267


That  ixe  may  he  secure  from  slanders  of  the  tongue, —
Literally,  that  we  may  be  free  from  the  cuttings  of  tongues/'
IX.  from  what  tongues  may  utter,  and,  as  it  were,  cut  off  and  heap
up  against  us  like  reaped  corn.  In  this  the  author  alludes  to
a  traditional  expression  of  Mohammed.  Says  Sherishi,  ^^He
refers  to  the  Tradition  of  Mu*a^,  son  of  Jebel,  who  relates,  I
said,  0  Apostle  of  God^  are  roe  pimished  for  what  we  speak  ?
And  he  answered,  Thy  mother  he  hereft  of  thee,  Mudtji;  is
there  anything  that  will  prostrate  men  on  their  faces  in  the  fire  of
hell  more  than  the  cuttings  of  their  tongues?''  The  expression
uJoLCj,  it  may  he  observed,  is  a  playful  one,  indicating
good  will  and  fondness,  rather  than  enmity,  thus  resembling

\j\  S  or

Make  us  not  a  morsel  to  the  devour er,  —  One  who  devours
the  honour  or  character  of  another.  Said  the  Prophet :  When
I  was  lifted  up  (to  heaven  in  the  night-journey)  I  passed  by  peo¬
ple  who  had  nails  of  brass,  with  which  they  tore  their  faces  and
breasts.  And  I  said,  ^  Who  are  these,  Gabriel?’  lie  said,  ‘  These
are  they  who  devoured  mankind,  and  assailed  their  honour.’  ”

The  venture  of  Hope, — Hope  is  here  compared  to  the  venture
or  merchandise  with  which  the  favour  of  God  is  sought.

Approaching  thee  through  the  merits, — Por  the  signification
of  see  Baydawi  at  Koran  v.  39.  The  epitliet  of  In¬

tercessor,  applied  to  Mohammed,  seems  in  opposition  to  Koran
vi.  51  and  69  ;  where  it  is  said  that  on  the  Day  of  Judg¬
ment,  man  shall  have  no  Intercessor  but  God.  From  the  influ¬
ence  of  Christian  doctrine  a  character  somewhat  resembling
that  of  the  Messiah  came  to  be  attributed  by  the  Moslems  to
the  founder  of  their  religion.

Set  the  seal  to  the  Prophets,  or  closed  the  series  of  them.
The  twenty-five  principal  prophets,  of  whom  Mohammed  is
the  last  and  greatest,  are  Adam,  Noah,  Enoch,  Abraham,  Ish-
mael,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  Lot,  Hud,  Salih,  Sho'ayb,  Moses,
Aaron,  David,  Solomon,  Job,  Thu  ’1  Kefl,  Jonah,  Elijah,  Joshua,
Zacharias,  John,  Jesus,  Mohammed.


268


NOTES.


For  Hud,  see  Koran  vii.  63 ;  xi.  52 ;  xxvi.  139 :  for  Salih,
vii.  71 ;  xi.  64 ;  xxvi.  142 :  for  Sho'ayb,  who  is  made  the
father-in-law  of  Moses,  vii.  83  ;  xi.  85—98,  etc. ;  for  Thu  1  Kefl,
xxi.  85 ;  xxxviii.  48.  These  twenty-five  are  mentioned  in  the
Koran,  but  many  others  are  acknowledged  to  have  had  the  gift
of  prophecy,  including  the  whole  line  of  the  Hebrew  prophets.
On  the  subject  of.  the  Prophets,  consult  the  Traditions  of  A1
Bokhari,  section  of  ''  The  prophets,”  Vol.  2,  p.  330,  KrehPs
edition.  For  the  prophets  who  were  endowed  with  resolution,”
see  Baydawi  on  Koran  xlvi.  34.

To  the  highest  heaven.  —  On  the  word  there  is  a

diversity  of  opinion.  It  is  variously  said  to  be  the  place
where  the  works  of  the  good  are  gathered  together ;  a  name  of
the  angels ;  the  seventh  Heaven ;  the  right  column  of  the
throne  of  God,  and  the  Lotus-tree  of  Heaven.  The  disputa¬
tions  on  this  subject  have  arisen  from  the  use  of  the  word,
Koran  Ixxxiii.  18,  19.  The  book  of  the  just  is  in  flliyun.
What  shall  teach  thee  what  is  llliyun  ?  It  is  a  look  marked
with  letters.  Those  who  approach  to  God  behold  itT

It  is  the  ocord  of  a  noble  envoy. — In  this  passage  Hariri,
quoting  the  Koran,  erroneously  applies  to  the  Prophet  a
title  which  is  really  given  to  the  Angel  Gabriel.  The  Koran
being  the  word  of  God  revealed  to  the  Prophet  by  Gabriel,  could
not  be  said  to  be  the  word  of  the  Prophet :  indeed  whenever  it  is
quoted,  the  phrase  used  is,  ‘^The  Most  High  has  said.”  Thus,
though  Mohammed’s  chief  title  is  the  Envoy  or  Apostle  of  God,
it  must  here  be  taken  to  apply  to  Gabriel,  as,  indeed,  is  most  in
accordance  with  the  sense  of  the  passage  in  the  Koran,  where  the
Prophet  swears  to  his  fellow-citizens  of  Mecca  that  his  revela¬
tions  proceed  from  on  high.  The  passage  is  in  Sura  Ixxxi.  verse
17.  Hariri,  it  is  said,  being  convinced  of  his  mistake,  afterwards
substituted  a  verse  from  the  21st  Sura  :  ‘‘We  have  sent  thee
only  out  of  mercy  to  the  world,”  words  which  indubitably  refer
to  Mohammed.  As  for  the  phrase  in  the  81st  Sura,  Baydawi
distinctly  declares  that  it  applies  to  Gabriel,  who  spoke  what

he  received  from  God.  He  also  reads  p  rather  than  p.


jsroTus.


269


Cn  kis  House- — The  term  JT  is  applied,  according  to
some,  to  his  followers,  whether  relations  or  not,  or  to  his  rela¬
tions,  whether  followers  or  not;  according  to  others,  to  the  people
of  his  religion.  Ash  Shafi'i  being  asked  who  were  the  JT  of  the
Prophet,  answered  all  pious  persons.”  But  in  a  Tradition,  in
which  it  is  said  that  the  poor-rates  are  prohibited  to  him  and  to
his  JT,  by  this  is  meant  those  to  whom  was  appropriated  the  fifth
m  )  of  the  spoils  instead  of  the  poor-rates,  and  these
were  the  genuine  descendants  of  Hashim,  and  A1  Muttalib.
(Lane) :  whom  also  consult  respecting  the  meaning  and  gram¬
matical  construction  of  the  word.  According  to  Slierishi  there
are  instances  of  its  prefixion  lo  the  pronoun  in  poetry  and
eloquent  discourse.

A7id  now, — At  this  point  the  author  concludes  his  invocation,
and  proceeds  to  the  subject  of  his  discourse.  The  phrase  sx}  j
or  ^  CA,  is  attributed  by  the  Arabs  to  Koss,  Bishop  of  Najran,
an  eloquent  preacher  of  the  time  of  Mohammed;  the  meaning  of
which  tradition  probably  is,  that  .Koss  first  made  popular  this
kind  of  introductory  invocation,  which  would  thus  seem  to  have
been  adopted  by  the  Moslems  from  the  Christian  Church.  The
Arabs,  however,  also  fable  this  usage  to  have  originated  with
David,  >See  commentary  on  phrase  J^,  pages  27  and

446  of  De  Sacy’s  Hariri ;  and  Baydawi  on  Koran  xxxviii.  19.

To  that  learning, — I  have  used  various  words  in  different
places  to  express  the  meaning  of  jh  The  original  meaning
is  Discipline  of  the  mind,  or  Culture  leading  to  moral  excellence
and  good  manners,  but  it  is  conventionally  used  to  express  what
we  should  term  scholarship,  or  literary  skill ;  the  chief  education
of  the  Arabs  being  in  the  use  of  their  own  language,— cor¬
rectness  and  eloquence  in  which  became  the  test  of  politeness
and  gentility.  according  to  Hajji  Khalfeh,  cited  in

Lane’s  Lexicon,  is  the  science  by  which  one  guards  against
error  in  the  language  of  the  Arabs,  with  respect  to  words  and
with  respect  to  writing.”

The  Assemblies. — Of  the  literary  meaning  of  the  word  Ma-


270


NOTES.


kameli,  I  have  spoken  in  the  Introduction.  The  exact  signi¬
fication  is  a  ''  standing,”  or  ''place  of  standing,”  and  it  is  equi¬
valent  to  since  the  people  who  listen  to  the  narrative

"  stand,”  or  "  sit  ”  about  the  speaker.

Badt  az  ZeinCtn, — A  summary  of  what  is  known  of  the
origination  of  the  kind  of  composition  called  the  Makameh  is
given  by  De  Sacy  in  his  notes  -to  the  Makamehs  of  this  author,
which  he  has  inserted  in  his  Chrestomatkie  Arahe.  As  I  have
spoken  of  him  in  the  Introduction,  it  will  be  only  necessary  here
to  mention  the  few  incidents  of  his  life  which  have  been  pre¬
served.  His  name  was  Abu  "1  Fadl  Ahmed  Ibn  al  Hosayn ;  his
life  is  related  by  Ibn  Khallikan,  and  an  account  of  him  by  Abu  1
Mansur  athTha'labi  is  given  in  the  commentary  of  Sherislii.  Ibn
Khallikan  says  "  The  hdfiz,Ahvi  T  Fadl  Ahmed  Ibn  al  Hosayn
Ibn  Yahya  Ibn  Sa*id  al  Hamadani  is  author  of  some  beautiful
epistles  and  excellent  Makamehs,  which  Al  Hariri  took  as  a
model  for  his,  framing  them  on  the  same  plan,  and  imitating  the
manner  of  their  author,  in  whose  footsteps  he  walked.  Al
Hamadani  was  eminent  for  his  knowledge  of  pure  and  correct
Arabic,  in  which  he  cited,  as  his  masters,  Ibn  Faris,  author  of
the  Mupiil,  and  others.  He  dwelt  at  Herat,  a  city  in  the
province  of  Khorasan.”  The  biographer  then  gives  some  speci¬
mens  of  his  style,  abounding  in  conceits  which  are  likely  to
meet  with  less  admiration  from  Europeans  than  from  the  poet’s
countrymen,  as,  for  instance,  the  following,  taken  from  a  long
poem  of  his  composition  : —

The  gush  of  the  shower  were  like  thee  (in  thy  liberality),  did
it,  in  smiling,  pour  forth  gold.  Fortune  were  like  thee,  did  it
not  deceive;  the  sun,  did  he  speak;  the  lion,  were  he  not
hunted ;  the  sea,  were  his  waters  fresh.

"  He  died,”  continues  Ibn  Khallikan,  "of  poison,  at  Herat,
A.H.  398  (a.d.  1008).  I  have  since  found,  however,  th^  follow¬
ing  note,  written  at  the  end  of  his  epistles,  which  have  been  col¬
lected  by  the  hdJdm  Abu  Sa'id  'Abd  ar  Ea^an  Ibn  Moham¬
med  Ibn  Dost,  'The  author  died  at  Herat,  on  Friday,  11th
of  the  second  Jumada  398  (February,  a.l.  1008).’  On  this


NOTES.


271


the  lidlum  observes,  '  I  have  been  assured  by  persons  of  good
authority,  that  he  fell  into  a  lethargy,  and  was  buried  with
precipitation.  He  recovered  when  shut  up  in  the  tomb,  and  his
cries  having  been  heard  that  night,  his  grave  was  opened,  and  he
was  found  dead  from  fright,  with  his  hand  grasping  his  beard.’  ”
In  the  foregoing  extract  from  Ibn  Khallikan  I  have  followed
the  translation  of  M.  McGriickin  de  Slane,  which  I  shall  always
use  when  I  do  not  translate  from  the  original.  It  is  much  to  be
wished  that  this  excellent  translation  were  completed.

i.Ath  Tha'labi,  after  giving  Badf  many  titles  of  admiration,
speaks  of  his  wondrous  memory  and  his  powers  of  improvisa¬
tion.  He  could  repeat,  without  altering  a  letter,  a  lengthy  poem
which  he  had  heard  but  once,  or  four  or  five  leaves  of  a  book  ;
he  could  compose  a  'kaftdek  or  a  risdleh  on  a  given  subject,  or
write  what  was  proposed  to  him,  beginning  with  the  last  verse
and  ending  with  the  first;  he  could  turn  prose  into  verse  or
verse  into  prose ;  when  a  number  of  rhymes  were  given  him  he
could  fit  them  to  verses  ;  he  could  improvise  in  any  given  metre
without  swallowing  his  spittle  or  drawing  his  breath.”  He
came  to.  the  court  of  Sahib  Ibn^AbbM  (see  De  Sacy’s  Obrestoma-
tliie,  Vol.  11.  p.  57),  and  received  great  kindness  from  him.  He
settled  in  Nisabur  in  the  year  382,  and  there  it  was  that  he
composed  400  Makamehs  on  mendicity  and  similar  subjects,  of
which  he  made  Abu  1  Fath,  of  Alexandria,  the  hero.  (I  may
say  that  my  manuscript  gives  the  reading  suggested  by  De

Sacy.  It  may  be  noticed,  however,  that  his  reading  ought
to  be  Ohrest.  Arabe,  III.  259).  The  occasion  of  compos¬
ing-  his  Makamehs  was  as  follows :  A  certain  Abu  Bekr  Ibn

O  •

al  Hosayn  Ibn  Dorayd  had  composed  forty  stories,  of  his  own
invention,  nsing  the  style  of  the  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance,  full  of
rare  and  strange  phrases ;  and  Bad! ,  wishing  to  rival  him,
composed  four  hundred  similar  pieces,  of  w’hich  the  chief  object
■was  to  please  the  listener  by  a  display  of  literary  eloquence  and
learning.  Some  of  these  are  of  considerable  length,  while  others
do  not  reach  ten  lines.  Though  it  is  admitted  that  the  Maka-


272


JSrOTJES.


inehs  of  Hariri  are  artistically  superior,  yet  it  is  claimed  for
Badi  that  he  surpassed  all  the  authors  of  his  own  time,  and  for
this  reason  he  received  the  lakah  or  sobriquet  by  which  he  is
known.  Indeed,  in  the  time  of  Ath  Tha'labi,  the  supremacy
was  doubtful  between  them  ;  for  one  scholar,  being  asked  which
was  the  greater,  replied,  ‘‘Hariri  w’as  never  called  the  Wonder
even  of  a  day ;  how  then  should  he  be  equal  to  the  Wonder  of  the
Time?’’  Another  superiority  claimed  for  A1  Hamadani  is  that
his  compositions  were  really  improvised,  instead  of  being  pro¬
duced  laboriously  and  at  leisure,  like  those  of  Hariri.

A1  Hamadani,  like  other  Eastern  poets,  was  fond  of  wander¬
ing  from  place  to  place.  After  many  travels  he  settled  at  Herat,
where  he  married  the  daughter  of  a  rich  and  powerful  man,
named  Abu  "Ali  Hosayn  al  Khoshnabi,  and  there  he  died  at  the
age  of  forty,  but  whether  under  the  circumstances  mentioned  by
Ibn  Khallikan  may,  perhaps,  be  doubted.

De  Sacy  says,  “  II  y  a  le  plus  grand  rapport  entre  Hamadani
et  Hariri,  soit  pour  le  choix  des  siijets  et  des  pensees,  soit  pour
la  maniere  de  les  exprim^r :  mais  les  seances  de  Hamadani  sont
beaucoup  plus  courtes  que  celles  de  Hariri,  et  par-la  meme  pent
etre  meritent-elles  quelque  preference:  on  y  sent  moinsl’  aflFecta-
tion  d  ’  employer  tout  a  la  fois  toutes  les  richesses  de  la  langue  et
toutes  les  ressources  de  la  rhetorique.  On  ne  pent  nier  cepen-
dant  qu’il  n’y  ait  plus  d’art  dans  celles  de  Hariri.”

Whatever  may  have  been  the  real  merits  of  the  two  writers,
the  taste  of  their  countrymen  has  definitely  decided  in  favour  of
Hariri,  whose  work  has  been  for  seven  hundred  years  the  delight
of  learned  men,  while  that  of  Al  Hamadani  is  now  but  little
known.

In  which  he  had  referred  the  co7nposition  to  Ahu  7  Fath,  of
Alexandria, — Hariri  again  alludes  to  the  priority  of  Badi ,  and
asserts  his  own  superiority  to  him  in  the  Forty-seventh  As¬
sembly,  bj^  putting  into  the  mouth  of  Abu  Zayd :

Have  thy  eyes  e’er  seen  the  like  of  me,

Who  draw  every  bolt  by  my  magic,  and  captivate  every  intellect  by
my  charm  ?


jsroTus.


278-


If  the  Alexandrian  preceded  me,

Know  that  the  dew  precedes  the  shower,  yet  the  shower’s  excellence
belongs  not  to  the  dew.

Obscure^  not  known^  etc. — An  allusion  to  grammatical
terms.  See  Alfiyeli  of  Ibn  Malik,  line  52.

Who  joins  even  troo  words,  etc, — It  is  said  that  be  who
writes  well  exposes  himself  to  envy  and  detraction,  and  he  who
writes  ill  to  ridicule  and  insult.

^5  a  wood-gatherer  by  night. — One  who  gathers  wood  by
night  may  be  bitten  by  a  snake  or  stung  by  a  scorpion ;  so
he  that  is  loquacious,  or  a  voluminous  writer,  may  utter  some¬
thing  that  will  bring  him  trouble.  This  proverb  is  ascribed  to
Aktham  Ibn  Sayfi,  an  elder  of  the  Benu  Temim,  in  the  early
days  of  Mohammed.  A  poet  says : —

Guard  thy  tongue,  0  Man,  lest  it  kill  tbee,  for  it  is  a  serpent.

How  many  an  one  is  there  in  the  grave,  slain  by  his  tongue,  whom
his  rivals  had  shunned  to  meet  in  the  fight !  See  Arabum  Proverbia,  ii.
671,  Frey  tag’s  edition.

Who  musters  footmen  and  horsemen  together, — These  words
are  addressed  to  Iblis  by  God,  Koran  xvii.  66,  with  the  mean¬
ing,  Collect  against  mankind  thy  forces,  or  threaten  them
with  thy  forces,  riding  and  on  foot  f  and  thus  may  be  used
to-  signify  an  impious  or  abortive  effort.  Or  they  may  be  ex¬
plained  as  applying  to  a  confused  and  unsuccessful  production,
since  a  band  of  mixed  horse  and  foot  is  but  a  disorganised  crowd.

Fifty  Assemblies,  etc, — Hariri  here  describes  the  nature  of
his  compositions.  Not  only  are  verses  of  the  Koran  freely
introduced,  but  the  whole  language  is  tinged  with  allusions  to  it
which  are  almost  imperceptible  to  the  European,  but  which  are
readily  caught  by  a  Moslem,  who  knows  the  sacred  work  by
heart.  Metonymy  (4^0  indirect  expressions,  as

though  you  should’ say,  Such  an  one  is  great  in  the  ashes  of  Ms
pot,  meaning  that  he  is  given  to  hospitality,— Ta'rifat,  p.  197.)  Of
the  Arab  proverbs  a  great  number  are  to  be  found  in  Maydani,
and  the  source  and  original  application  of  others  are  given  by
various  commentators.  To  follow  Hariri  in  this  department  of
his  boundless  learning  has  always  been  one  of  the  hardest  tasks

18


274


JSrOTES.


of  those  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  his  work.  References
to  the  most  important  of  them  will  be  found  in  these  notes.
The  scholarly  elegancies  or  subtleties  are  to  be  found  in  the  Sixth,
Twenty-sixth,  Twenty-eighth,  and  Twenty-ninth  Assemblies,
where  the  merit  of  the  composition  consists  in  the  use  of  words
with  or  without  pointed  letters ;  in  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth,
where  phrases  or  a  whole  composition  may  he  read  either  back¬
wards  or  forwards ;  in  the  Twenty-Third,  where  a  part  of  each
verse  may  he  removed,  without  spoiling  sense  or  metre  ;  in  the
Forty-sixth,  where  several  of  these  ingenious  displays  are  united.
The  Grammatical  riddles  are  represented  in  the  Twenty-Fourth,
where  Abu  Zayd  puzzles  his  companions  by  twelve  subtle  ques¬
tions.  The  decisions  dependent  on  the  use  of  a  word  in  two
different  senses  are  instanced  in  the  Thirty-second,  and  akin  to
this  are  the  enigmas  or  conundrums  which  appear  in  some  of
the  other  Assemblies.  The  addresses,  orations,  exhortations,  and
jests  are  too  numerous  to  be  specified.

I  change  the  pasture. — Le.,  I  turn  from  grave  to  gay,  from
dignified  to  lightsome  style.  The  Arabs  divide  the  herbage  on
which  the  camel  feeds  into  which  means  the  sweet  kind,
and  that  in  which  there  is  saltness;  on  the  latter  the

camels  feed  in  the  hot  season,  and  it  makes  them  drink.  If  they
have  it  not  they  become  lean.  The  former  is  called  the  bread  of
the  camel,  and  the  latter  the  fruit ;  and  the  word  is  used  meta¬
phorically,  to  express  the  refreshing  of  the  reader  by  a  change  of
incident  and  discourse.

And  of  the  poetry  of  others,— Assembly  of  Holwan  is
the  Second,  and  that  of  Kerej  the  Twenty-fifth.

The  father  of  its  virginity, — Father  is  here  used  as  we
should  use  Lord :  the  father  of  a  poem's  virginity  is  he  who
first  broaches  or  originates  it.  Compare  Sixth  Assembly,'^  Who
can  deflower  a  virgin  composition;”  also  Sixteenth,  ^^And
deflower  virgins  of  it.”

Of  its  sweet  and  its  hitter, — i,e,,  of  all  of  it.  Compare  a
verse  quoted  at  page  678,  De  Sacy's  Hariri.

Koddmeh.—Lhvi  '1  Faraj  Ibn  Ja'far  Ibn  Koddmet  Ibn  Ziyad,  a


NOTES.


275


scribe  of  Bagdad,  eminent  for  purity  of  composition.  He  is
said  to  have  lived  in  the  time  of  Mnktadir  b’illah.

And  excellently  said  one. — The  author  of  these  lines  was  the
amatory  poet  ‘Adi  Ibn  ar  Kuka .  They  relate  to  a  lover,  who
hears  a  turtledove  lamenting  the  loss  of  its  mate,  upon  which  he
also  laments  the  absence  of  his  mistress.  He  then  addresses
himself  with  the  words  quoted,  the  meaning  of  which  is  that  the
merit  of  his  verses  is  lessened  by  the  dove  having  set  him  the
example.

Although  a  translator  does  not  necessarily  concern  himself
with  the  technicalities  of  the  original  work,  yet  as  this  volume
is  intended  rather  for  the  student  in  Arabic  than  the  general
reader,  I  shall  make  no  apology  for  dwelling  occasionally  in
these  notes  on  a  subject  respecting  which  there  is  little  informa¬
tion  to  be  found  in  commentators ;  I  mean  the  prosody  of  the
verses  introduced  throughout  the  Assemblies.  Of  this  branch
of  learning,  which  has  been  especially  elaborated  by  the  Arab
grammarians,  I  have  made  mention  in  the  Introduction.  An
acquaintance  with  the  metres,  and  the  habit  of  reading  the  lines
in  accordance  with  them,  are  not  only  necessary  for  the  enjoy¬
ment  of  Hariri’s  melodious  and  plaintive  verse,  but  enable  the
student  the  more  readily  to  seize  the  meaning  of  the  numberless
parallel  passages  and  shawdhid  which  are  introduced  into  the
commentary,  and  which  are  often  ill-written  and  insuflBciently
vowelled.  Less  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  subject  by  Euro¬
pean  scholars  than  might  have  been  expected ;  and  the  Arabs,
who  detect  the  metre  at  once  and  do  not  need  artificial  help,
generally  pass  it  by  without  notice.

The  verses  beginning  JJ  are  in  the  the  most

common  of  the  old  metres.  In  the  Hamfi-seh  the  greater  part  of
the  pieces  belong  to  this  metre  or  to  the  and  ;  the

others,  though  known,  not  haYing  been  in  very  common  use  till  a
later  period.  The  Jj^b  belongs  to  the  first  circle
so  called  from  being  composed  of  five-lettered  and  seven-lettered
feet  and  To  this  circle  belong  the  three  metres

and  and  two  others  only  used  by  later


276


NOTES.


authors  ;  the  which  is  the  Jj^L  reversed,  and  the

which  is  the  reversed.  The  first  circle  consists  of  the  first
two  primitive  feet  (that  is  a  -j-  a

and  (that  is  a  twice  re¬

peated,  and  the  original  Jj^  is  of  the  measure.

This  (last  foot  of  first  hemistich)  is,  however,  T  believe,
not  found ;  the  being  invariably  that  is  losing

its  quiescent  fifth  letter,  and  becoming  To  this

there  are  four  or  closes  of  the  second  hemistich.  The

first  is  retaining  the  normal  The  second

suffers  like  the  and  this  is  the  metre  quoted  by

Hariri.  The  other  two  to  this  consist  of  one

to  and  one  to  There  is  also  an

"^se.  (It  must  be  mentioned  that  4-Ja>-
is  the  dropping  of  the  at  the  end  of  a  foot,  and

the  dropping  of  the  last  letter  of  a  ujLirL  at  the  end

of  a  foot,  and  the  making  quiescent  the  moved  letter  before  it).

The  metre  of  the  lines  quoted  is,  accordingly —

But  it  will  be  remai'ked  that  l::— X',  in  these  lines,  is  of  the
measure  ;  that  is,  as  we  should  say,  the  last  syllable  is
short  instead  of  long,  and  the  same  licence  takes  place  twice  in
the  next  line.  This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  licences
allowable  in  Jj^W,  among  which  are,  according  to  the  prosodists,
two  of  the  kind  called  namely,  of  the  kind  which  affects

the  second  letter  of  the  The  first  of  these  licences  is

which  we  have  seen  affects  the  closing  foot  of  each  hemi¬
stich  ;  it  may  also  affect  both  and  whenever  they

occur,  striking  out  the  quiescent  fifth  letter  of  each ;  and  making
the  former  J^,  as  in  the  verses  before  us.  Of  its  effect  on
there  will  be  many  instances  as  we  proceed.  The  other
licence  is  which  is  the  dropping  of  the  quiescent  seventh


NOTm.


277


letter  of  a  foot ;  by  which,  in  this  metre,  becomes

J^U^,  a  licence  very  common  among:  the  old  writers.  It  mnst
be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the  same  foot  cannot  suffer  both
and  ;  thus,  there  can  be  no  such  foot  as  JclL# .  This
exclusion  of  one  licence  by  the  other  is  called  Other

peculiarities  in  this  metre  may  be  noticed,  but  the  foregoing  are
the  most  important.

Scratched  up  its  death  with  its  hoof. — An  Arab  found  a  ram
in  the  desert,  but  had  no  knife  to  kill  it  with.  The  ram,  in
scratching  the  ground,  uncovered  one.  Hence  the  proverb
applied  to  a  man  who  furnishes  the  means  of  his  own  destruction.
Frey  tag’s  Arabum  Proverbia,  ii.  359.

He  who  cut  off  his  nose  with  his  own  This  is,  per¬

haps,  an  allusion  to  Kosayr,  who  thus  avenged  the  death  of  his
master,  Ja&imet  al  Abrash  on  Queen  ZehhL  An  account  of
this  stratagem  will  be  given  in  the  notes  to  the  Twenty-seventh
Assembly,  under  the  words,  It  was  for  a  cause  that  Kosayr  cut
off  his  nose.”  Another  explanation  is  that  it  refers  to  a  man
who,  having  a  razor  in  his  hand,,  wished  to  wipe  his  nose,  and
cut  it  off  by  accident.

The  chief  losers,  etc. — A  quotation  from  Koran,,  xviii.  103.

Fables  which  relate  to  brutes  and  lifeless  objects. — Fables,
like  those  of  jEsop  and  Lokman,  or  the  fables  of  Bidpai,  known
under  the  name  of  Kalileh  wa  Dimneh.  Such  writings,  which
belong  to  an  order  of  great  antiquity  in  the  East,  as  may  be  learnt
even  from  the  Old  Testament,  were  always  highly  esteemed,
even  by  the  strictest  professors  of  religion,  as  conveying  wise
morals,  and  were  distinguished  by  them  from  idle  poetry,  and
stories  of  love  or  adventure.  An  instance  of  the  application  of
this  kind  of  fable  to  the  highest  and  most  mystical  doctrines  is
to  be  found  in  the  Mantik  At  Tayr  of  the  Persian  poet  Farid  ad
Din  'AttS;r,  who  wrote  in  the  age  succeeding  Hariri.  Sherishi
gives  instances  of  the  use  of  fables  by  eminent  men,  one  of  them
being  the  Prophet  himself.  The  beautiful  moral  allegories  of
Azz  ad  Din  al  Mukaddasi,  edited  by  M.  Garcin  de  Tassy,  under


278


NOTES.


the  name  of  Les  Oiseaux.  efc  les  Fleurs,”  are  fine  specimens  of
this  kind  of  composition.

Yet  am  I  content.-— tawil,  as  in  the  preceding  lines.


THE  FIRST  ASSEMBLY.

Al  IJdrithj  son  of  Hammctm. — The  use  of  this  name  and
that  of  Abu  Zayd,  by  the  author,  is  explained  by  Sheri^hi,
who  is  confirmed  by  Ibn  Khallikan,  in  his  life  of  Hariri.  It
is  said  that  H^rith  and  Hammam  are  the  truest,”  that  is
the  most  justly  applicable  of  names.  A  Tradition  of  Moham¬
med,  concerning  the  naming  of  children,  is  recorded,  in  which
it  is  said  The  most  acceptable  names  to  God  are  'Abd  Allah
and  *Abd-ar-Rahman  ;  the  truest  are  Al  H4rith  and  Hammam,
and  the  most  hateful  Harb  and  Murrah.”  (Abu  Murrah  is  a
kinyeh  for  the  devil).  The  reason  for  calling  these  names  the
^Hruest”  is  that  there  is  no  one  who  is  not  a  Harith,  that  is,
who  does  not  labour  after  gain  for  his  living  ;  and  no  one  who
is  not  a  Hammam,  that  is,  who  has  not  his  anxieties.  The  names
were  accordingly  adopted  by  Hariri  to  signify  a  common  ordi¬
nary  mortal,  in  accordance  with  the  precedent  set  by  Badi*  az
Zemdn.  Under  the  name  of  Al  Harith,  son  of  Hammam,  the
author  is  supposed  to  have  signified  himself,  and  for  this  reason
he  makes  Harith  a  native  of  Basra.  The  name  Abu  Zayd  is
either  the  real  name  of  a  personage  whom  Hariri  had  met  with,
or  it  is  taken  to  signify  an  elderly  man  generally ;  Zayd  being
an  ordinary  name,  and  the  Father  of  Zayd  the  ordinary  father  or
elder.  In  confirmation  of  this  view,  it  is  noted  that  Abu  Zayd
is  continually  spoken  of  as  advanced  in  years.  The  use  of  these
allegorical  names  is  common  among  Arabs,  their  own  ordinary
names  having,  generally,  a  meaning.  An  instance  of  such  a  des¬
criptive  name  is  furnished  by  the  philosophical  romance  of  Abu
Ja'far  ibn  Tofayl,  whose  solitary  hero  bears  the  name  of  Hayy
ibn  Yakzan,  the  Living,  Son  of  the  Awakened.  It  may  be


NOTjES,


279


remarked  that  Harith  is  the  Greek  Aretas :  compare  2  Corin¬
thians  xi.  32.

Sand  of  Yemen. — San  a  is  thus  specified  by  the  author  to
distinguish  it  from  another  place  of  the  same  name,  near
Damascus.  San  a  the  capital  of  Yemen,  the  seat  of  the  Himya-
ritic  kings,  called  Tobba',  and  afterwards,  for  a  time,  of  the  Abys¬
sinian  conquerors,  was  one  of  the  most  noted  cities  in  the  early
times  of  Arab  history,  and  preserved  its  importance  as  a  seat  of
trade  and  manufacture  in  the  days  of  Hariri.  A  legend  ascribes
its  ^foundation  to  Shem,  son  of  Noah,  who,  after  his  father  s
death,  journeyed  southward,  until  he  came  to  the  first  climate,
and  found  Yemen  the  most  agreeable  country,  and  the  site  of
San*a  the  most  favoured  district.  He  was  led  by  the  flight  of
a  bird  to  the  place  where  he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  Ghom-
dan,  or  palace  of  San  a.  Descending  to  more  historical  times,
we  find  it  related  that  the  Tababi* ah  established  themselves  succes¬
sively  at  Mareb,  Zafar  and  San*a.  The  Ghomdan,  the  most
magnificent  edifice  in  ancient  Arabia,  was  built,  according  to
Kazwini  (Caussin  de  Perceval — Essai  sur  Thistoire  des  Arabes)
by  Surahbll,  one  of  these  ancient  monarchs.  It  was  an  im¬
mense  building,  with  four  faces,  one  red,  another  white,  a  third
yellow,  and  the  fourth  green.  In  the  midst  was  an  edifice  of
seven  stories,  each  story  forty  cubits  in  height.  The  lowest
formed  a  hall,  entirely  constructed  of  marble,  and  covered  with
a  single  slab  of  marble.  At  the  four  corners  were  figures  of
lions,  hollow,  so  that  when  the  wind  entered  their  mouths,  they
made  noises  like  roarings.  This  great  city  became  afterwards
the  formidable  rival  of  Mecca,  and  if  the  enterprise  of  its  Abys¬
sinian  master,  Abrahet  al  Ashram,  had  succeeded,  the  worship
of  the  Ka  beh  might  have  been  destroyed,  the  Koraysh  subdued
or  scattered,  and  the  advent  of  Islam  prevented.  The  invasion
of  Abraheh  took  place  about  the  time  of  the  birth  of  Mohammed,
in  what  is  called  the  year  of  the  Elephant.'^  San  4  was  tem¬
porarily  wrested  from  the  power  of  Mohammed  by  the  rival
prophet,  Al  Aswad,  who  was  slain  only  two  days  before  the
former’s  death.  Little  historical  interest  attached  to  San*^  in


280


NOTUS.


later  times,  but  it  continued  to  be  the  most  populous  and
thriving  town  in  Yemen.  The  Ghomdan  and  the  temple  which
belonged  to  it  were  destroyed  by  the  Khalif ‘Othman.  San  a  is
said  to  be  an  Abyssinian  term,  meaning  pleasant ''  or  com¬
fortable,’^  and  to  have  been  substituted  for  the  former  name  of
the  city.

W/ien  I  mounted. — When  I  made  it  my  mmture,  my  usual
conveyance.  is  the  part  between  the  hump  and  the  neck.

When  I  made  wandering  my  steed  ”  is  the  idea  intended.

Its  depths. — the  main  part  or  portion  of  a  thing,  asihe
sea,  sand,  or  a  fight;  the  deepest  part  thereof  (Lane).  Hence
it  is  applied  to  the  thick  of  the  city,  and  its  innermost  parts.

Fray  the  tissue  of  my  countenance. — This  metaphor  is  often
repeated  in  the  Assemblies  to  describe  the  shame  of  beggary.
He  who  begs  is  said  to  wear  out  the  tender  skin  of  his  face,  to
harden  it  and  dry  up  its  moisture.  Though  alms-giving  is
enjoined  on  Moslems,  and  beggars  are  sufllciently  numerous
among  them,  yet  mendicity  is  always  spoken  of  as  humiliating
and  disgraceful.  The  Prophet  said,  If  ye  knew  what  was  in
beggary,  not  one  of  you  would  approach  another  to  ask  of  him.”
A  poet  exclaims:

The  water  of  thy  hand  (its  bounty),  whether  it  be  generous  or  niggardly,

Compensates  not  for  the  water  of  my  face,  which  I  spend  in  exchange
for  it.

The  phrase  here  used  occurs  again  in  the  Thirty-seventh
Assembly,  where,  in  some  verses  in  praise  of  patience  under
misfortune,  the  author  says  :

The  man  of  spirit,  if  his  eye  have  a  mote  in  it,  hides  the  mote  of  his
eyelids  even  from  his  eye-ball  (conceals  his  poverty  or  pain)  ;

And  when  the  tissue  of  his  garment  is  worn,  he  wears  not  out  the  two
tissues  of  his  cheeks.

De  Sacy,  in  the  commentary  to  the  Thirty-seventh  Assembly,
quotes  several  passages  on  the  shame  of  beggary.

A  wide  place  of  concourse. — Hariri  remarks  in  the  Durrah
that  a  meeting  place  is  not  called  unless  the  company  are  in
it.  (De  Sacy,  Anthologie  Grammaticale  Arabe,  p.  30,  Arabic


NOTES..


281


Text).  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  this  work  of  Hariri  on  •
the  niceties  of  the  language  has  not  yet  been  printed.  Judging
from  the  portion  given  by  De  Sacy,  it  must  be  an  invaluable
companion  to  the  Assemblies.

Cadences, — applied  originally  to  the  cadence  of
a  dove's  cooing,  and  then  metaphorically  to  the  parallelistic
rhymed  prose,  the  sound  of  which  has  a  certain  resemblance  to
it.  ,  Compare and

To  catch — Literally,  to  take  a  light  or  brand.  This  metaphor,
dej'ived  from  the  custom  of  getting  a  light  at  a  neighbour’s  fire,
is  often  repeated.  From  frequent  use  it  came  to  have  a  special
signification,  so  that  iktibS-s,  in  the  language  of  scholars,  is
applied  to  the  introduction  into  a  composition  of  well-known
phrases  from  another  author,  proverbial  expressions,  or  words  of
the  Koran,  for  the  sake  of  ornament.

As  he  coursed. — For  the  meaning  of  see  Lane.

And  the  throat  of  his  improvisation. — It  is  impossible  to  render
into  English  the  bold  metaphor  here  used.  The  of  the

male  camel  is  the  faucial  bag  or  inner  part  of  the  throat,  which,
when  enraged  or  excited  by  any  cause,  he  thrusts  out  of  his
mouth  with  a  roaring  noise,  called  The  noise  of  the  she-

camel,  as  also  of  the  male  camel  when  he  does  not  thrust  out
this  substance,  is  called  The  is  thus  used  figura¬

tively  to  signify  the  power  of  rapid  and  impetuous  oratory.
Hariri  uses  the  same  metaphor  in  the  Twenty-ninth  Assembly
to  describe  the  flow  of  Abu  Zayd's  speech  (,De  Sacy’s  edition,
p.  354).  In  both  cases  he,  no  doubt,  had  in  mind  the  proverb
used  by  the  Khalif  'Ali,  when  he  was  asked  why  he  had  not
made  his  oration  longer,  LZJf  p  The  shikshikah

roars  and  then  is  silent,  (Arab.  Prov.  I.  673).  The  sermon  of
Abu  Zayd  is  excellently  imitated  by  Kasif  al  Yazaji  in  his  Third
Assembly.

Thyself^  thy  chif  enemy. — A  saying  of  the  Prophet  is,  Thy
greatest  enemy  is  not  he  who,  if  thou  kill  him,  thou  hast  thy  re¬
venge,  or  he  who,  if  he  kill  thee,  thou  enterest  into  paradise ;  but
thy  greatest  enemy  is  thyself  in  thy  own  body”.  Al  Asmal,  on


282


mTJES,


receiving  from  a  man  food  on  his  journey,  said  to  him,  God
confound  all  thy  enemies  except  thyself.”

Woe  to  him  who  seeks  the  world, — These  verses  are  of  the
the  sixth  metre  of  the  fourth  circle,  or
which  is  formed  by  the  primitive  feet

^  ^  t}f

This  circle  contains  the  and

the  measure  of  the  last  being  J

twice  in  each  verse.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  in
is  a  t\jj,  corresponding  to  ^  in  the  original  measure  of
the  circle,  so  that  this  part  of  the  foot  is  not  subject  to  uJUj.
Though  there  are  instances  of  the  being  used  ^b‘,  that  is,

with  its  full  measure,  yet  the  general  use  is  as  here  with
the  and  the  regular  the  measure  being

Of  there  enter  into  this  metre  the  following —

and  J^.  Of  the  first  there  are  instances  in  all  three  of  the
verses;  becoming  and  becoming

The  in  the  rhyme  is  to  be  noticed.

Sherishi  giv.es  instances  of  it  from  other  poets.

Laid  his  dust,  and  let  his  spittle  subside, — These  metaphors
express  the  cessation  from  vehement  utterance.

Gazed  on  his  up-rising is  the  preparation  to  rise ;  the
being  half  upright,  in  an  uneasy  posture,  as  one  who  is  about  to
stand  up  and  depart.

To  move  away  from  the  midst, — To  fly  away,  or  aberrate  from
the  centre.  An  allusion  to  the  scientific  expression.

A  bucket  from  his  stream,— ^]ie  use  of  metaphors  from  the
drawing  of  water,  from  rain  or  dew,  to  express  the  bestowing  of
bounty,  are  continually  to  be  met  with  in  Hariri,  as  in  all
Arabic  poets.  The  ancient  Arabs,  whose  poets  set  fashions
of  literary  diction  which  have  never  been  departed  from,  were


NOTUS.


^  283


natives  of  the  Nejd  and  otliei:  regions  where  the  want  of  water
was  continually  felt,  and  they  spoke  to  a  race  whose  lives  were
passed  in  anxiety  lest  their  corn  and  herbage  should  be  des¬
troyed,  their  homes  made  uninhabitable  by  a  year  of  drought,
and  their  journeys  perilous  by  the  drying  up  of  wells.  Hence
in  poetical  language,  water  and  moisture  are  almost  synony¬
mous  with  benefit ;  to  seek  bounty  is  to  go  to  the  spring,  to
confer  it  is  to  fill  the  bucket  or  the  skin-bag  of  the  suppliant.
It  is  in  accordance  with  this  sentiment  that  cloud  ”  has  in
Arabic  poetry,  a  favourable  signification,  while  unbroken  sun¬
shine  represents  suJffering  and  protracted  misfortune ;  a  use  of
similitude  the  very  opposite  to  our  own.  To  say  A  cloud
gathered  over  my  life^'  would  mean  to  an  Englishman  that
.distress  or  poverty  fell  upon  it ;  to  an  Arab  it  would  mean  that
success,  or  a  wealthy  benefactor  had  raised  the  speaker  to  com¬
petence.  To  forecast  the  rains  by  watching  the  form  of  the
clouds  and  the  lightning,  is  a  phrase  used  in  the  same  meta¬
phorical  manner,  and  you  may  say,  I  watched  the  lightning
of  such  a  one,  with  the  meaning  I  took  notice  of  him  to  learn
whether  he  was  likely  to  confer  a  benefit  on  me.”  Fortune,  or
a  deceitful  friend,  are  described  as  a  cloud  whose  flash  deceives ;
the  prosperous  are  a  well-w'atered  meadow,  and  their  life  is  a
moistened  one.  A  peculiarity  of  the  Semitic  languages  is  the
clearness  with  which  they  show  the  original  material  significa¬
tion  of  words,  under  their  secondary  and  metaphorical  meanings,
and  this  is  nowhere  more  remarkable  than  in  the  constant  asso¬
ciation  of  water  with  comfort,  good  fortune,  bounty,  wealth,  and
similar  ideas.

An  Attendant. — a  word  taken  by  the  Arabs  from  the
Jews  or  Syrians,  Hariri,  in  the  Durrat  al

Ghawwas,  (Anthol.  Arabe,  p.  50,  Arabic  text),  says  that  the  first
letter  must  have  /e^sr,  since  words  of  this  form  are  From

this  he  deduces  that  the  name  of  the  Queen  mentioned  in  the
Koran,  xxvii.  23,  must  be  BilMs,  and  not,  as  often  pronounced,
Balhis.  Learned  men  were  often  waited  on  by  their  pupils.


284  '


NOTES.


Thy  reality. The  real,  intrinsic  state  of  a  thing.  See
the  Thirty-second  Assembly,  page  401,  De  Sacy’s  edition.

But  72; —For  the  use  of  redundant,  after  US,  see  Lane,
Book  I.,  page  105.

I  don  the  black  The  metre  of  these  lines  is  the

the  only  metre  belonging  to  the  fifth  circle,  or  which

A1  Khalil  mentions.  This  circle,  which  consists-  only  of  five-
lettered  feet,  is  formed  by  the  primitive  foot  and  the  com¬
plete  measure  of  the  is

which  is  the  measure  of  these  verses,  being  the  first  of  the
first

The  only  which  enters  into  this  metre  is  by

which  becomes  ;  but  the  chief  peculiarity  of  the  metre
is^  the  intermixture  of  the  by

which  the  may  be  ended  either  by  pr  by  ^  =  Jii.


This  licence  is  so  common  that,  in  many  compositions,  almost
every  line  is  thus  shortened.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  is  the
case  with  all  the  author’s  lines,  except  the  first  and  fourth.

The  khamisak  is  described  as  a  black  square  garment,  having
two  ornamental  borders  ;  if  it  has  not  the  borders  it  is  not
called  by  this  name.  It  is,  however,  evidently  used  here  to
signify  a  garment  worn  by  pilgrims  or  devotees.

My  meal. — Khabisah  is  a  mess  of  khabis,  or  dates  and  butter,
a  common  article  of  food  among  the  poor.

The  lion  of  the  thicket. — As  one  who  seeks  his  prey  in  the
lion’s  lair”  is  a  proverbial  expression  for  the  rushing  into  danger
in  pursuit  of  an  object,  and  is  derived  from  the  verse  of  a  poet :


0  Tayya  of  the  field  and  the  nionntains  ;  he  who  threatens  yon  is  as  one
who  seeks  the  prey  in  the  lion’s  lair.  (Prov.  Arab.  II.  359).


My  loin  quiver  at  it.  —  More  exactly  the  muscles  of  the
shoulders,  the  part  between  the  shoulder  and  the  side.  Compare
Mo'allakah  of  Tarafeh,  v.  103 .

On  the  field  of  battle,  where  man  dreads  death,  where  the  shoulder
muscles  quiver,  wedged  together  in  the  strife.


NOTES,


285


THE  SECOND  ASSEMBLY.

Holwdn, — A  proverbial  expression  is  Longer  in  companion¬
ship  than  the  two  palm-trees  of  Holwan.”  Two  palm-trees,
planted  on  a  hill  near  the  town  in  the  time  of  the  Persians,  had
been  celebrated  by  the  poet  Mo*ti  ibn  lyas,  who  addressed  to
them  a  lamentation  at  his  separation  from  a  slave-girl  whom  he
had  sold,  saying  that  they  too  would  weep  if  they  were  parted.
Fdi*  this  reason  the  Khalif  A1  Mansur  forbade  their  destruction.
But  Harun  ar-Reshid,  passing  that  way,  was  seized  with  a  fever,
and  the  pith  of  a  palm-tree  being  prescribed  to  him,  he  cut
down  one  of  them.  The  other  quickly  withered  away.  This
legend  is  worthy  of  notice,  as  it  has  a  character  of  sentimen¬
tality  somewhat  rare  in  the  East.  (Prov.  Arab.  II.  47).  Hol-
wan  is  four  stations  east  of  Bagdad,  and  was  named  after  its
founder,  Holwan  ibn  'All  ibn  Koda'ah.  It  consists  of  two  towns
divided  by  a  large  river.  It  was  conquered  in  the  time  of  the
Khalif  'Omar  by  SaM  ibn  AM  Wakkas,  after  the  battle  of
Jeluleh.

My  amulets  were  doffed  and  my  turbans  were  donned.—
since  I  came  to  the  age  of  puberty.  Among  the  Arabs  amulets
were  hung  round  children's  necks  to  preserve  them  from  the  evil
eye,  or  the  designs  of  Jinn ;  and  these  were  taken  off  when  the
child  reached  a  certain  age.  When  the  boy  approached  man¬
hood  he  assumed  the  turban  and  girt  on  the  sword.

The  word  temdJhn  signifies  certain  beads  which  the  Arabs  of
the  desert  used  to  hang  upon  their  children  to  repel,  as  they
asserted,  the  evil  eye  or  necklaces,  on  which  amulets  were  put.
Tema'im  were  forbidden  by  the  Prophet,  though  in
which  are  sentences  from  the  Koran,  there  is  no  harm  ;  so  that
Hariri,  in  describing  H^rith  as  wearing  temdUm  in  childhood,
speaks  after  the  manner  of  the  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance,  which  is
allowable  in  poetical  composition,  as  the  attribution  to  moderns
of  classical  customs  and  beliefs  is  allowed  to  European  poets.


286


NOTES.


Of  the  charms  used  among  Moslems  of  the  present  day  an
niteresting  account  may  he  found  in  Mr.  Lane’s  Modern  Egyp¬
tians.  Another  kind  of  charm  to  which  great  power  has  been
attributed  is  that  which  is  called  by  mathematicians  a  Magic
Square,  that  is  the  arrangement  of  numbers  in  certain  orders,
so  that,  whether  counted  horizontally,  perpendicularly,  or  diago¬
nally,  each  row  may  make  up  the  same  sum.  Others  present
more  complicated  relations  of  numbers ;  and  each  has  its  virtue
in  certain  positions  of  the  planetary  bodies.  But  these  latter
were  the  devices  of  astrologers  rather  than  of  theologians ;  and
it  may  be  presumed  that  the  only  amulet  used  by  the  strictest
professors  consisted  of  verses  of  the  Koran,  or  relics  in  sorne
way  connected  with  religion.

Learning's  According  to  the  opinion  of  some  this  was

the  name  of  a  place,  so  called  from  being  the  meeting  place
of  learned  men.

Hope  and  desire. — Literally,  It  may  be*”  and  Perhaps.”
When  he  could  find  no  one  to  instruct  him  sufficiently,  he
passed  his  time  in  hoping  that  such  a  person  would  soon
appear.

Shifting  among  the  varieties  of  pedigree,  etc. — The  Arab  race,
being  made  up  of  many  tribes,  the  members  of  which,  though
continually  roaming  through  the  country  and  taking  up  their
temporary  abode  in  strange  cities,  or  among  neighbouring
tribes,  still  prided  themselves  on  their  allegiance  to  their  own
kinsmen,  and  relied  on  the  protection  which  these  would  give
them,  it  was  the  habit  to  ask  the  name  and  pedigree  of  a
new  comer.  Examples  of  this  occur  frequently  in  the  Assem¬
blies.  When  Abu  Zayd  has  charmed  his  audience  with  one
of  his  displays,  he  is  commonly  asked  what  is  his  home,  and
from  what  stock  he  derives  his  lineage.  In  answer,  he  gene¬
rally  claims  to  be  of  kin  to  the  race  of  Ghassan,  who  reigned  in
Syria  under  the  protection  of  the  Komans,  and  whose  rivalries
with  the  kings  of  Hira,  who  were  under  the  protection  of  the
Persians,  ^make  up  a  great  part  of  ancient  Arab  history.  Thus,
in  the  Sixth  Assembly,  he  says,  Ghassan  is  my  kindred  and


NOTES.


287


Seruj  my  home/’  In  the  present  case  he  is  represented  as
giving  various  accounts  of  himself  as  might  be  most  suitable
to  the  various  disguises  which  he  assumed.

Beating  about.— may  be  here  a  double  signification  to
From  its  primitive  signification  to  beat”  it  is  used
to  express  the  stumbling  of  the  purblind  she-camel,  which  beats
the  ground  with  her  hoof,  not  seeing  whither  she  is  going,  and
is  thence  applied  to  any  one  who  goes  recklessly  to  work  in  any
matter.  Another  signification  is  to  beat  a  tree,  so  as  to  break
ofi*  the  leaves  for  fodder,  whence  the  word  is  metaphorically
applied  to  the  extorting  alms  from  the  benevolent  by  impor¬
tunity.  Either  sense  would  be  applicable  here.  In  the  Nine¬
teenth  Assembly  the  author  purposely  exhibits  the  two  senses  of
the  word  when  he  says  of  Abu  Zayd,^^kLl^

Sdsdn.—^kskn  al  Akbar,  son  of  Bahman,  son  of  Isfendiyar,
son  of  Kusht^sif,  a  Prince  of  Western  Persia,  is  the  reputed
chief  and  patron  of  all  beggars  and  mountebanks.  The  legend  is
that  Bahman,  being  near  his  death,  sent  for  his  daughter  Homaya,
who  was  pregnant,  and  settled  the  succession  on  her  and  her
child,  if  it  should  prove  a  boy,  to  the  exclusion  of  his  own  son
Sasan.  Sasdn,  indignant  at  this,  left  the  court,  and  lived  the
life  of  a  shepherd  among  the  Kurds,  so  that  his  name  passed
into  a  proverb  for  one  who  leads  a  vagabond  life.  Hence  the
people  of  Sasan  the  Kurd  ”  is  a  phrase  signifying  beggars,  presti-
giators,  people  that  go  about  with  dogs  or  monkeys  and  the  like.
These  people  had  a  cant  of  their  own,  which  was  not  thought
unworthy  of  study  and  imitation  by  the  learned.  One  Abii
Dulaf  wrote  a  kaddeh  in  their  language,  which  is  said  to  have
supplied  Hariri  with  many  of  the  terms  used  in  the  Thirtieth
Assembly.  This  Assembly,  which  I  purpose  to  publish  in  my
second  volume,  introduces  Abu  Zayd  making  a  speech  at  a  beg¬
gars’  wedding,  full  of  the  cant  phrases  current  among  them.
In  the  Forty-ninth,  called  the  Assembly  of  Sasan,  one  of  the
masterpieces  of  the  author,  Abu  Zayd  exhorts  his  son  to  follow
a  beggar’s  life,  as  the  happiest  and  most  independent;  and  there
he  speaks  of  Sasan  as  having  laid  the  foundations  of  the  pro-


288


IfOTES,


fession,  and  distinguished  its  kinds,  and  kindled  the  flame  of  it
in  east  and  west.

Slienshi  gives  another  account  of  the  origin  of  this  term.
He  says  that  after  the  Persians  had  been  subdued  in  the  time  of
the  Khalifs  Omar  and  ‘Othman,  they  submitted  peaceably  to
the  conquerors,  adopting  their  manners  and  religion,  and  that
being  a  clever,  artful  people  they  betook  themselves  to  various
ways  of  making  their  living,  one  of  which  was  mendicancy.
Their  way  of  exciting  commiseration  was  to  give  out  that  they
belonged  to  the  royal  house  of  Sasan,  or,  as  we  call  them,  the
Sassanids,  and  to  describe  the  cruel  changes  of  fortune  and  their
fallen  conditon,  so  that  at  last  people  came  to  call  a  beggar  a
Sasani.  This  may  be  the  true  derivation  of  the  word,  but  it
is  evident,  from  the  Forty-ninth  Assembly,  that  Hariri  adopts
the  legend  which  makes  Sasan  a  real  person.

The  Princes  of  Gkassdn, — The  ancestors  of  this  family  issued
from  Yemen  at  that  celebrated  epoch  of  Arab  history,  the  break¬
ing  of  the  dyke  of  Mareb.  The  legend  is  that  Amr  MuzayMyS,,
being  warned  by  his  wife  of  the  approaching  calamity,  sold  his
property  and  emigrated,  being  followed  by  many  other  families,
who  found  the  country  reduced  to  sterility.  (See  the  note  at
the  end  of  the  Seventeenth  Assembly,  to  the  words
went  asunder  like  the  bands  of  Saba’’).  The  part  of  the
community  which  followed  MuzayMya  first  halted  in  the
northern  part  of  Yemen,  by  a  lake  called  Ghassan,  and  here
MuzayMya  died.  His  son  Tha'labeh  migrated  with  his  fol¬
lowers  to  Batn  Marr,  in  the  territory  of  Mecca.  From  this
place  again  tliey  were  obliged  to  depart,  owing  to  feuds  with  the
possessors  of  the  land.  On  these  early  and  vague  portions  of
their  history  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell.  It  was  only  when  they
left  Arabia  proper  and  migrated  to  the  regions  of  Syria  that
they  became  of  importance.  Here  they  were  known  by  the
name  of  Ghassan,  from  the  lake  where  they  first  inhabited ;  or,
according  to  other  authorities,  from  a  lake  of  the  same  name,
between  Hijaz  and  Syria.  At  last  they  arrived  in  the  plains  of
Bozra,  where  the  Benu  Salih  dwelt  under  the  authority  of  the


NOTES,


289


Roman  Empire.  They  were  desired  to  pay  tribute,  and  re¬
fusing,  sustained  a  war  against  the  Benu  Salih,  which  ended  in
their  defeat.  They  then  accepted  the  condition  of  tributaries,
which  they  held  under  successive  Princes,  until  at  an  epoch,
which  M.  Caiissin  de  Perceval  places  a.d.  292,  they,  having
greatly  increased  in  numbers  and  strength,  overthrew  the  House
of  the  Baj'am,  the  reigning  family  of  the  l^cnii  Salih,  and  be¬
came  the  ruling  race  of  the  country.  The  Romans,  who
troubled  themselves  little  ‘concerning  these  revolutions,  accepted
a  Ghassfmide  vassal,  and  Tha'labeh,  son  of  'Amr,  son  of
Mnjalid,  became  the  first  prince  of  his  race.  After  his  deatli
the  crown  passed  to  his  kinsman  Jafiieli,  and  the  family  of
Ghassan  maintained  a  high  position  for  350  years.  It  is  sii])-
posed  that  they  embraced  Christianity  in  the  reign  of  Con¬
stantine.  Though  sometimes,  as  under  iheir  (jneen  Mawiyeh,
rebellious  against  the  Romans,  they  were  generally  faithful
vassals,  and  aided  them  against  the  Persians  and  the  kings  of
Ilira.  Their  last  ruler  was  Jebclct  al  Ayham,  a  prince  of  gene¬
rosity  and  magnificence.  When  tlie  Aloslems  invaded  Hyrin,
under  the  lOialifate  of  Abu  Bekr,  debeleh  supported  the  cause  of
the  Empire  in  the  field ;  but  wlicri  1  leraclius  gave  up  the  contesi ,
Jebeleh  submitted  to  the  Kluilif  Omar  and  embraced  Islam  in
637.  Tims  ended  tlie  princcsliip  of  Ghassan,  but  the  name  of
the  family  remained  as  the  exemplar  ol’  grandeur  and  nobility
of  race ;  and  kinship  with  it  was,  no  doul)t,  often  claimed  by
Syrian  Arabs  who  Iiad  little  right  to  the  distinction.  Of  pro¬
verbs  connected  with  Ghassan,  sec  Prov.  Arab.  I.  421,  “  fihikc
from  Jith'  what  he  gives  thee,’'  and  422,  ‘‘  Take  it,  even  if  thou
give  for  it  the  earrings  of  Mariyeh.''  Althougli  Hariri  inak(‘s
his  hero  a  son  of  Ghassan,  yet  tlie  tribe  are  said  by  Ibn  Khal¬
dun  not  to  have  spoken  pure  Arabic,  since  they  bordered  on
foreigners,  and  tlicreby  tlicir  language  became  corrupted.

At  one  time— at  another^and  now — and  anon. — ^Fliis  use  of
different  words,  to  vary  the  expression  at  times,’'  is  imich
affected  by  tlie  author.  Compare  the  Twelfth,  in  the  descrijition
of  Abu  Zayd  in  the  tavern.


19


290


mrus.


Goodly  attainments,— -'Ey  is  meant  that  by  which  one
works,  an  instrument.  In  the  saying  of  *Ali,  He  makes  use
of  the  <3T  of  religion  in  seeking  the  goods  of  the  present  world/’
science  or  knowledge  is  meant ;  because  thereby  only  is  religion.
The  same  meaning  belongs  to  the  word  in  the  present  passage.
(Lane.)

Valued  Compare  the  use  of  in  the  Twenty-

ninth.

With  him  1  wiped  away.  The  metre  of  these  verses  is
as  already  explained.

Some  doubt  from  my  heart, — Uncertainty  on  points  of  lan¬
guage  and  grammar.

JJnt:d  the  hand  of  want,  etc, — These  extravagant  expressions
are  scarcely  to  be  paralleled  even  in  Hariri.  The  second  clause
of  the  sentence  is  literally  The  want  of  a  bone  urged  him.”
The  word  is  applied  to  setting  on  a  dog,  and  is  therefore  in
keeping  with  the  words  want  of  a  bone.”  When  the  words  of
a  phrase  are  all  in  keeping  with  the  metaphor,  the  metaphor  is

7  ^  w

termed  CV’  otherwise  it  is  See  note  at  page  8,  De  Sacy’s

edition.  It  may  be  noticed  that  Hariri  says  in  the  Durrah  that
can  never  be  applied  to  a  cup  except  when  it  has  liquor  in
it.

After  he  was  gone.—Vho&o^  lines,  in  the  original,  are  a  string
of  assonances,  very  ingenious  and  not  unpleasing.  The  rhymes
of  and  and  of  and  present  instances  of

what  is  called  ;  that  is,  the  insertion  into  the  body

of  a  sentence  or  verse  of  two  rhymed  words,  in  order  to  gratify  the
hearing  by  the  assonance.  The  term  Liljj,  like  LSj^>

is  applied  to  a  poem  where  the  two  hemistiches  of  each  verse
rhyme  together,  and  there  is  no  continuous  rhyme  throughout
the  poem.  A  familiar  instance  of  this  is  the  Alfiyeh  of  Ibn
Malik  ;  in  Persian  literature  it  has  been  preferred  by  the
greatest  poets.  But  in  Arabic  this  coupled”  rhyme  is  more
usually  thrown  in  as  an  ornament  in  the  body  orjA:>-  of  the
verse.  An  Instance  of  it,  probably  accidental,  is  given  from


NOTES.


291


the  Koran,  xxvii.  22,  where  the  bird  says  to  Solomon,
*1^  ^  (I  have  come  to  thee  from  Saba,  with

certain  intelligence) ;  also  in  the  words  of  the  Prophet

P*  62.  Examples  of  it  so  abound  in
Hariri,  that  it  is  needless  to  quote  them.  In  these  verses  there
is  also  an  instance  of  what  is  called  lzj\uc\  or  ^jJj  U  which

consists  in  the  author  making  a  more  laboured  rhyme  at  the  end
of  his  verse  than  he  is  obliged  to  do  by  the  laws  of  prosody.  If
the  author  constrain  himself  to  keep  to  a  certain  rid/ov  dakhU,
or  to  one  particular  letter  or  vowel  before  the  rawi,  he  produces
a  more  perfect  and  melodious  rhyme.  In  this  case  the  termina¬
tion  of  both  lines  with  is  an  instance  of  such  an  elegance.
Here  the  rawi^  which  is  is  preceded  in  both  verses  by  a  dahhil,
namely,  J  with  kesr,  and  the  which  is  b  Furthermore,
each  hemistich  of  each  verse  closes  with

He  was  hidden  from  me. — This  word  is  used  to  signify  tlie
disappearance  of  the  moon  during  the  last  days  of  the  month,
when  it  is  in  conjunction  with  the  sun.

'Where  my  'branch  had  sprouted. — His  native  town  of  Basra.
For  a  similar  expression  see  the  Thirty-third  Assembly,  Make
known  to  us  the  doroliah  (some  large  tree)  of  thy  branch.’’

To  produce  what  was  in  his  wallet. — To  make  a  display  of
his  stores  of  learning.

The  sagacity  of  his  judgment. — The  meaning  of
as  applied  to  David  in  the  Koran,  has  been  the  subject  of  much
controversy.  From  the  context  it  would  seem  to  mean  the
faculty  of  judging  and  settling  disputes,  or  of  perceiving  the
application  to  himself  of  the  case  which  the  angels  put  before
him,  (Koran,  xxxviii,  19).  Bayclawi  says  that  the  of  litiga¬
tion  is  the  discrimination  of  right  from  wrong ;  and  of  discourse
the  use  of  choice  language,  which  gives  the  person  addressed  a
true  conception  of  the  meaning,  and  in  which  the  grammatical
and  rhetorical  distinctions  are  fully  observed.  It  may  be  ob¬
served  that  from  this  passage  in  the  Koran  is  derived  the  strange
idea  of  some  Moslems,  that  the  phrase  tXxj  Cib  practice

of  prefacing  a  discourse  with  an  initiatory  invocation,  was  due  to


292


NOTES.


David,  since  C^lks!\  is  attributed  to  David,  though,  of
course,  as  Baydawi  points  out,  not  in  the  technical  sense  which
the  words  afterwards  assumed.

Aki  ‘  Obddek.  — Welid  ibn  'Obayd  al  Bolitori,  said  by  one  autho¬
rity  to  be  the  seal,  the  last  and  the  chief  of  the  later  poets,  was
born  at  Kufa  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  century  of  the  Hijra,
and  was  of  the  tribe  of  Tay,  as  was  Abu  Temmam  Habib,  the
compiler  of  the  Hamaseh.  Hence  they  seem  to  have  been
called  the  two  Tays  (Anthologie  Gram.  Ar.  p.  131).  His
poems  are  extant,  and  have  still  many  readers.  Abu  1  Fargj  Al
Isfahan!,  cited  by  Sherishi,  says  of  him  that  he  was  versed  in
every  kind  of  poetry,  except  satire ;  though  his  essays  even  in
this  were  successful.  Sherishi  gives  several  anecdotes  of  him,
which  it  would  be  tedious  to  transcribe.  He  died  in  the  year
283.


As  though  she  smiled. — This  verse  is  of  the  metre  called
which  is  of  the  fourth  circle,  already  described.  The  measure  of
the  is


It  has  four  ^ jlcl,  the  first  of  which  has  three  The  first

(for  the  normal  form  of  the  verse  appears  not  to  be  used),


is  :  that  is  the  ci;  of  is  dropped  by

which  is  the  dropping  of  the  last  letter  of  a  at  the  end

of  a  foot,  and  then  the  j  is  dropped  by  which  is  the  dropping
of  the  fourth  quiescent  letter  of  a  foot :  the  after  these  two

changes,  becomes  IxL^  =  The  first  to  this

is  losing  the  ^  by  as  described  and  quiescing

the  ci:  by  wj,  which  is  the  quiescing  of  the  last  letter  of  a
S't  the  end  of  a  verse  :  after  these  two  changes  it

becomes

The  measure  of  the  verse  quoted  from  Al  Bobtori  is,  accord¬
ingly,


The  tanroin  given  in  De  Sacy’s  edition  is  superfluous.


NOTES.


293


Of  uJWj  there  enter  into  the  verse  quoted  and
both  of  which  have  been  explained;  the  first  foot  gives  an
instance  of  the  former,  the  second  foot  of  tlie  latter.

Comparisons  such  as  those  contained  in  this  verse  are  to  bo
found  even  in  the  more  ancient  poets.  Thus  Tarafeh  in  his
Mo'allakah  says  :

She  smiles  from  a  dark  red  lip  as  -wheri  the  white  camomile  flower
shows  itself  from  a  moist  spot  in  the  sand  :  v.  8.

Thou  hast  taken  for  fat^  etc. — These  are  two  proverbial  ex¬
pressions,  introduced  by  Hariri  in  accordance  with  his  practice
of  imitating  the  talk  of  the  desert.  For  llic  second  of  them,  see
Prov.  Arab.  IL  429.

My  life  a  ra.nsom. — These  verses  arc  in  tlic  one  of

the  most  common  and  melodious  of  tlie  ancient  metres,  and
often  dedicated  to  such  themes.  It  is  of  the  first  circle  like
and  consisting  of  five-lettered  and  seven-lettered

feet.  Its  normal  measure  is  :

This,  liowcver,  appears  to  be  rarely  used ;  tlie  most  common
being  with  a  like  itself;  each  hemistich

closing  with  Tliis  is  tlie  measure  in  tlie  present  case.

Of  the  there  enter  into  this  metre  in  and

;  also  and  in  being  the  union

of  and  fffs.  Instances  of  all  these  licences  may  be  seen
in  the  two  verses.

Some  suspicions  arc  a  sin.  Koran  xlix.  12,

My  saddle-hag. — Used  in  the  same  sense  as  ‘Svaliet”  above.
Tlie  is  a  bag  for  provisions  bound  behind  the  traveller  on
the  camel.  For  its  use  in  a  figurative  sense,  by  an  early  poet,
see  the  Diwun  oi‘  Irnr  al  Kays  (Edition  of  McGuckin  de  Slane,
page  49,  line  9)  :

God  is  lie  who  most  gives  me  success  in  what  I  seek,  and  piety  is  a
man’s  best  saddle-bag.

It  may  be  remarked  that  when  an  extravagant  metnphor  or
comparison  occurs  in  I  fariri,  it  may  generally  be  traced  to  sonic
popular  or  archaic  usage,  which  the  author  desires  to  com-


294


FOTJES.


memorate.  The  word  is  again  used  in  the  Thii‘ty-third  Assem¬
bly,  (page  426,  De  Sacy’s  edition.)

^Unndb. — A  red  fruit,  of  an  oval  shape,  about  an  inch  in
length,  and  with  a  large  stone  inside.  It  is  sold  in  the  English
market  under  the  name  of  Chinese  Japonica.’'  Schultens,  in
his  edition  of  the  Six  Assemblies,  is  in  error  when  he  writes
and  translates  “grapes.”  Haririi  Consessus  Sex.  1731,
p.  100.  The  metre  of  this  verse,  and  the  next  four,  is
as  already  described.  The  line  quoted  by  Abu  Zayd’s  antagonist
is  said  to  be  from  Abul  Faraj  Mohammed  ibn  Ahmed  al
Ghassani,  called  Al  Wawa.  The  meaning  is  “  She  dropped  tears
from  her  dark  eyes,  and  watered  her  rosy  cheeks,  and  bit  upon
her  red  lip  with  her  pure  white  teeth.”

I  asked  her  when  she  met  me,  etc. — Abu  Zayd  here  describes
the  parting  between  a  lover  and  his  mistress.  The  meaning  of
the  second  line  is,  “  She  removed  the  red  veil  which  hid  the
lustre  of  her  face,  and  dropped  tears  from  her  eye.”

Night  lowered  on  her  morn,  etc. — He  compares  the  black  hair
which  she  let  down  to  night,  her  face  to  the  morning,  her
slender  waist  to  a  branch,  and  her  teeth  and  fingers  to  pearls  and
crystal.  A  great  number  of  parallel  passages  from  the  poets
are  given  by  the  Commentator,  but  it  would  be  useless  to  refer  to
them.  The  single  verses  quoted  from  Al  Bohtori  and  Abu  ’1
Faraj  al  Waw4  are  those  referred  to  in  the  Preface.

His  dark  night  was  moonlit. — His  hair  had  become  silvered
with  age.

The  stroke  of  calamities. — The  metre  is  miijteth,  like  that  of
the  verses  in  the  First  Assembly.

IVust  not  the  gleam  of  its  lightning. — The  heavy  showers
that  give  life  to  the  parched  plains  are  usually  preceded  by
lightning;  which  sometimes,  however,  fails  to  fulfil  its  indica¬
tions;  the  cloud  passing  away  without  having  discharged  any
rain.  Hence  he  who  deceives  expectations  is  said  to  have
lightened  deceitfully.  These  metaphors,  as  has  been  observed,
are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  author.  Compare,  in  the  next
Assembly,  “  The  rain-cloud  pours  if  it  has  thundered.”


NOTHS.


295


THE  THIRD  ASSEMBLY.

Kaylah.—l^hi^  Assembly  is  called  of  Ivaylali''  because,  iu
the  course  of  it,  Abu  Zayd  exclaims,  ''  By  Him  who  made  me
descend  from  Kaylah.”  Kaylah  is  said  to  liave  been  the  ancestress
of  Ows  and  Khazraj,  who  inhabited  Yathrib  or  Medineh  in  the
time  of  the  Prophet.  She  was  the  daughter  of  A1  Arkam,  the
Ghassani,  so  that  when  Abu  Zayd  claims  descent  from  her,  he
refers  himself  to  the  race  of  Qhassan.  Ows  and  Khazraj,  under
the  leadership  of  Ji|K',  who  was  disappointed  at  not  succeedhig
to  the  princedom  of  Ghassan,  left  the  main  settlement  soon
after  the  foundation  of  the  sovereignty,  and  settled  in  Ilijfi-z,
where  they  became  the  Ansar  of  the  rroi)het.

The  rubbing  of  the  f  re-shqfts,  etc. — These  metapliors  signify
that,  though  there  never  was  wanting  intelligence  to  keep  up
the  conversation,  or  scholarship  to  give  the  answer  to  any
question  that  might  be  propounded,  yet  discussion  never  pro¬
duced  anger  and  rude  contradiction.  The  rubbing  of  the  fire-
shafts  ”  is  an  expression  often  used  to  signify  the  eliciting  the
spark  of  genius  or  learning  that  may  be  iu  a  man.  The  two
sticks  by  which  the  Arabs  produced  fire  were  called — the  one  ouj,
and  the  other  isjj ;  the  former  w'^as  made  of  the  wood  called
jlic,  the  latter  of  these  being  found  the  most  fitted  to  pro¬
duce  a  spark.  The  wood  called  was  also  used.  Compare
Prov.  Arab.  11.  208  and  250.  The  two  arc  called  but  the
plural  form  oUj  is  used  as  a  singular  (Prov,  Arab,  II.  143).

Best  of  treasures.— Vov  a  full  discussion  of  the  form  f[r^\
and  the  use  of  as  a  comparative,  see  Lane’s  Lexicon.

Health  to  you  this  morning. — An  ancient  form  of  salutation,
said  to  have  been  first  addressed  to  kings.  It  is  often  used  in
the  early  poets.  Imr  al  Kays  thus  addresses  the  deserted  habi¬
tation  of  his  mistress  (Diwiin,  p.  20,  1.  1),  Compare  also
Mo'allakah  of  ‘Antarah,  1.  2.

Morning  draught.— Tlia  copiousness  of  the  Arabic  language  is


296


NOTES,


exemplified  in  the  terms  applied  to  draughts  at  the  various  times
of  the  day.  Hariri  says  in  the  Durrah  (Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe,
p.  27,  Arabic  Text)  that  the  drink  of  the  morning  is  called
that  of  the  evening  that  of  mid-day  JJ,  that  of  the  night
that  at  day-break

The  rival  had  compassion — The  envious  pitied. is  he  who
wishes  to  be  in  your  condition  without  depriving  you  of  it ;

is  he  who  wishes  to  pull  you  down  from  it.  The  former,
ambitious  emulation,  is  a  venial  sin.  A  Tradition  cited  by  Lane
(Book  I,  p.  698)  says  that  Mohammed  was  asked,  Does
the  washing  for  a  blessing,  on  condition  that  it  shall  not  become
transferred  from  its  possessor,  injure  him  who  entertains  it?'’  He
replied,  ^^Ho;  save  only  as  the  beating  off  of  the  leaves  injures
the  tree  called  'idMi,”  that  is,  it  only  diminishes  without  annul-
ing  its  authors  recompense,  like  the  beating  off  the  leaves
without  cutting  the  tree  down,  for  the  leaves  will  grow  again.  On
the  Other  hand,  is  a  great  sin,  being  the  first  committed
against  God  in  heaven,  for  Iblis  envied  Adam ;  and  the  first  com¬
mitted  on  earth,  for  Kabil  (Cain)  envied  Habil  (Abel)  and  killed
him.  The  Prophet  said,  Have  compassion  on  three— the  rich
who  has  become  poor ;  the  pow^erful,  who  has  been  abased ;  and
the  wise,  who  is  mocked  by  fools.”

Anointed  our  eyes,—'Ne  were  koheled.  The  or  ointment
of  antimony  was  applied  by  wmmen  to  tlie  lids  of  their  eyes
from  a  very  early  time  ;  a  legend  makes  Zarka  T  Yemameh  the
first  woman  who  used  it.  For  an  account  of  her  and  her  marvel¬
lous  powers  of  eyesight,  which,  according  to  the  story,  were
attributed  by  her  to  the  use  of  kohl,  see  Caussin  de  Perceval,
I.  101,  and  commentary  to  Fiftieth  Assembly ;  also  Prov.  i\rab.  I.
192,  More  keen-sighted  than  Zarka  T  Yemameh.”  The  term  is
here  used  to  express  the  dull  look  which  sleeplessness  would  give
to. the  eyes.

C ame  to  forget  our  saddles :  being  reduced  to  go  on  foot.
Thus  Abu  Zayd,  in  the  character  of  an  old  woman,  in  the  Thir¬
teenth  Assembly,  says,  That  on  which  I  carry  is  now  my  back
after  being  my  beast.”


NOTES.


297


How  noble.— 1\\Q  metre  of  these  verses  is  which  is

often  used  in  improvised  compositions,  being  the  most  simple
and  unconstrained  form  of  metrical  rhythm.  Yet  there  is  none
which  has  somnch  engaged  the  attention  of  prosodists,  and  given
rise  to  so  many  discussions.  In  early  times  there  was  no  such
thing  as  a  regular  poem,  but  verses  were  uttered  by  each
according  to  his  need,  to  express  his  feelings  of  anger,  resent¬
ment,  joy,  or  surprise.  A  great  number  of  these  versicles  have
been  handed  down,  and  whether  we  look  upon  them  as  having
be^n  spoken  by  those  to  whom  they  arc  attributed,  or  composed
by  early  reciters  and  story-tellers,  they  undoiibtcdly  represent
the  oldest  form  of  Arab  metrical  composition.  The  chief  feature
of  these  was  a  continuous  rhyme;  for  tliough  the  verse  was
commonly  made  up  of  a  simple  metrical  loot  of  the  normal  form
this  does  not  seem  to  have  been  originally  essential  to
the  style.  The  records  of  the  Ignorance  have  preserved  a  number
of  metrical  rhymed  verses  of  a  simpler  structure  than  those  of
the  poets  who,  in  the  age  preceding  M'ohammed,  brouglit  Arabic
poetry  to  its  perfection.  The  peculiarhy  which  distinguislics
this  7'ejez  from  other  metres  is  that  in  its  original  form  it  was
apparently  not  divided  into  two  liemistichcs.  For  this  reason  A1
Khalil  ibn  Ahmed  would  not  allow  it  to  be  verse,  and  the  Arabic
writers  alw'ays  make  a  distinction  betwcen^irl^  andj^r'j-
although  they  insist  on  this  difference,  they  have  endeavoured  to
bring  the  under  the  same  metrical  laws  as  other  kinds  of
verse,  and  various  ingenious  theories  have  been  propounded  to
account  for  its  peculiar  structure.  According  to  the  accepted
system,  is  the  second  metre  of  the  third  circle,  or  Sylj
which  is  formed  by  the  primitive  foot  thrice

repeated,  and  the  normal  measure  of  the  is

twice.  This  measure  has  been  used  by  the
poets,  but  is  probably  only  a  development  of  the  simpler  form.
The  measure  of  the  lines  in  this  Assembly  is  that  is,

one  half  of  the  verse  is  thrown  away,  so  that  though  the  verses
are  rhymed  there  is  properly  no  and  no  For  the


298


NOTES.


diversities  of  opinion  on  the  subject  see  Freytag’s  Darstellung  der
Arabischen  Verskunst  p,  234.  The  last  foot  of  the  verse  is
declared  by  one  writer  to  be  an  by  another  a  ;

but  the  most  reasonable  explanation  is  that  the  original  form  of
the  is  simply  an  indivisible  verse,  consisting  of
twice  or  thrice  repeated.

Of  the  uJU>-j,  there  enter  into  this  metre  ^  and
which  have  been  already  explained,  so  that  may  drop

either  the  (j^,  or  the  cJ,  or  both  together.  Hence  the  extreme
simplicity  of  the  verse,  and  its  fitness  for  improvised  and  inatti- ,
ficial  addresses.  The  name  signifies  a  weak,  trembling
metre,  and  is  derived  from  the  eflect  produced  on  the  hearer  by
a  series  of  short  lines  with  a  number  of  short  syllables  and  a  con¬
tinuous  rhyme.  ^\}^j  is  the  she-camel  afflicted  with  a
disease  which  makes  her  haunches  tremble.

Perfected  by  e??.— The  meaning  of  is  it  sifffered  loss  or
diminution,  and  is,  it  became  complete,  and  in  a  right

state,  lit.  it  demanded  loss  or  diminutions^  because  these  some¬
times  follow  completeness.  Or  it  may  be  that  is  a  substi¬
tute  for  the  meaning  being  Lane.

How  many  a  full  moon. — A  person  in  authority,  called  so
from  his  loftiness  and  splendour,  is  applied  to  various

sums  of  money ;  some  say  ten  thousand  dirhems,  some  seven
thousand  denars.  It  is  here  used  to  signify  a  large  sum  of
money,  such  as  would  bribe  a  man  in  power,  and  make  him  des¬
cend  from  his  high  state  to  fulfil  the  seeker's  desire.

By  the  truth  of  the  Lord :  the  necessary  existence  by  His  own
essence.

His  fear, — signifies  fear  of  God,  by  which  one  guards
one's  self  from  sin,  and  from  punishment  in  the  world  to  come.
Compare  Ta'rifat,  p.  68 ;  also  Baydawi,  on  word  at  begin¬
ning  of  the  Second  Sura.

Its  power  is  supreme. — Abu  Zayd's  fear  of  irreverence  is
grounded  on  the  use  of  to  signify  especially  the  greatness
of  the  Deity,  to  whom  this  word  is  generally  applied.


NOTES.


299


means  the  supreme  greatness  and  majesty  of  God,  or  his  abso¬
lute  independence.  Abu  Zayd  asks  pardon  for  saying  that
money  is  Almighty.

The  honourable  'performs  what  he  promises. — This  saying  was
first  uttered  by  A1  Harith  ibn  *Amr  al  Kindi  to  Sakhr  ibn
Nahshal.  Harith  had  said  to  Sakhr,  Shall  I  show  thee
booty,  on  the  condition  that  I  receive  the  fifth  part  of  it'f’
'‘Yes,”  answered  Sakhr.  Harith  had  tlien  directed  him  to  a
caravan  from  Yemen,  which  Sakhr  plundered.  Harith  then
uttered  these  words,  which  passed  into  a  proverb.  The  legend
goes  on  to  relate  that  Sakhr’s  tribe  desired  to  evade  payment  of
the  fifth,  until  he  seized  a  hill  by  which  they  must  pass,  and,
after  a  fight,  compelled  them  to  fulfil  his  agreement  with  Harith.
Prov.  Arab.  II.  747  and  I.  52.

The  rain-cloud  pours  if  it  has  ihundei'cd.—ff:^  are  clouds
which  make  you  think  there  is  rain  in  them.  Thus  the  word
cannot  be  applied  to  a  cloud  after  the  rain  has  come  out  of  it.

He  cast  it  into  his  mouth.---ll\m  superstitious  usage  seems  to
be  common  in  many  parts  of  the  world.

The  adornment  of  the  loved  one,  the  colour  of  the  The

adornment  refers  to  the  impression  of  the  coinage ;  the  colour  to
the  yellowness  of  the  gold.

The  niggard  shrink  from  the  mghtfarcr.--T^o  receive  the
traveller  at  night,  and  to  minister  to  his  needs,  was  one  of  the
most  sacred  duties  of  the  Arabs.  For  this  purpose  the  generous
used  to  pitch  their  tent  near  the  camel-tracks,  that  the  traveller
might  not  miss  it,  or  on  heights  that  ho  might  discern  it  from
afar ;  they  were  accustomed  also  to  light  fires,  that  he  might
find  his  way  to  them  by  night.  Thus  Abu  Zayd,  in  the
Thirteenth  Assembly,  says,  "  Their  fires  were  kindled  for  the  tra¬
vellers,  and  they  fed  the  guest  with  fresh  meat.”  Compare  also  the
beginning  of  the  Forty-fourth :  "  On  a  dark  night  I  spied  a

fire  lighted  on  a  hill  top,  the  sign  of  liberality.”  Compare  also
Hamilseh  I.  p.  693,  where  a  poet  says,  "I  occupy  the  road  with  my
tent  and  its  vestibule;  I  settle  on  the  tops  of  the  hills,  and  dwell
there ;”  and  p.  699,  where  it  is  said  of  one :  "  His  fire  was


300


NOTES,


kindled  on  the  hill  when  the  fires  of  others  were  veiled.  He
was  not  the  richest  of  men,  hut  he  was  the  widest  of  arm  (the
most  generous.)”

Many-  similar  passages  will  be  found  in  the  ; _

The  traveller  often  made  a  noise  to  set  the  dogs  bark¬
ing,  so  as  to  be  guided  to  an  inhabited  place ;  he  was  then  called
:  compare  Fifth  Assembly.  The  niggardly  man  was  as
much  despised  as  the  generous  man  was  admired.  His  pot  was
said  to  be  cold,  and  he  was  compared  with  a  glowworm,  whose  fire
warms  nothing.  A  certain  Madir  was  noted  for  his  meanness  :
see  p.  517,  De  Sacy’s  Hariri;  also  Prov.  Arab.  I.  190.  Kosa'
was  also  proverbial  for  his  stinginess,  since  he  burnt  his  dog’s
throat  to  prevent  him  from  barking,  so  that  travellers  might  not
be  brought  to  his  tent.  Prov.  Arab.  I.  202.  The  early  Arab
poets  are  full  of  the  most  extravagant  praises  of  the  liberality
both  of  themselves  and  those  they  celebrate;  and  this  virtue
appears  to  have  been  carried  to  the  wildest  excesses.  The  history
of  H^tim  Tay,  as  recorded  in  legends  and  proverbs,  is  the  most
conspicuous  instance  of  this.'  Hariri,  in  his  verse,  attributes  the
meanness  which  sometimes  marked  the  reception  of  a  benighted
wayfarer  to  the  corrupting  influence  of  the  denar.

Save  hy  jleeing  from  thee, — The  meaning  is  that  money  can
only  render  service  to  a  man  when  it  quits  him.

How  abundant  is  thy  shower, — The  two  forms  of  admiration
aUil  U  and  Jxil  occur  in  this  Assembly ;  the  latter  at  the
beginning  of  the  first  rejez,  the  former  in  this  passage.  For  a
full  explanation  of  them,  see  Alflyeh  of  Ibn  Malik,  with  com¬
mentary  of  Ibn  'Akil,  p.  228,  edition  of  Dieterici,  or  p.  178
Boulak  edition.  The  theory  concerning  them  which  is  accepted
by  these  grammarians,  is  that,  in  the  case  of  Ijjj  the

U  is  the  inchoative  and  is  or  a  perfect  indeter¬
minate,  that  is  the  past  tense  of  the  verb ;  the  pronoun

hidden  in  it  referring  to  U,  and  being  the  object  of  the
verb.  The  proposition  is  the  of  U,  and  the  virtual  meaning
fjkjj  In  the  second  form,  aj  the  verb  expresses


NOTES.


301


admiration  under  tlie  form  of  the  imperative,  its  agent  being-
the  noun  mejncr  by  and  the  ""u  being  pleonastic.  The  proof
that  is  a  verb  is  that  it  takes  the  ^  before  the  ^  of

the  first  person.  The  question  whether  the  U  is  is  not  of
much  importance ;  the  dictum  of  Sibawayh  is  in  0])position  to
the  opinion  of  A1  Akhfash,  who  makes  it  In  one  case

the  sense  would  be,  '^What  a  thing  makes  Znyd  liaiulsomc!”
or,  “  What  a  making  of  Zayd  handsome  there  is!’’  In  the
other  it  would  be,  That  whicli  makes  Zayd  haiulsonn^,  or  the
mS-king  of  Zayd  handsome,  is  a  wonderful  thing.”  b'cr  the  con¬
ditions  under  which  admiration  can  be  expressed  by  tliese  two
forms  the  student  must  be  referred  to  the  Ali‘iy(di  itse](‘.

Agreement  hinds  str07igcst.—)d'i:0'v.  Arab.  I.  (Kh).  dhie  author
of  this  saying  was  a  judge  of  the  Arabs,  wlio  addressed  it  to  a
dishonest  suitor.

Tossed  /^m.— Tossed  him  gently  ;  the  meaning  of  give  ”  is
secondary.

The  tmce-7'cad  chapter. — Idic  first  chapter  of  tlie  Koran  is
evidently  licre  meant.  It  begins  with  the  words,  “Praise  to
God,  the  Lord  of  the  world,”  and  may  thcrtdbro  be  fitly  used  in
returning  thanks  for  any  blessing.  Tlio  poet  llni  Ivasliik,  (piotod
by  Shenslvi,  says  of  a  beautiiiil  boy  whom  lui  had  been  describ¬
ing,  ^^Say  to  him  who  admires  his  beauty,  Mtepeat  over  liim
the  Sura  of  Praise.’”  The  word  which  occurs  in  the

Koran,  xv.  87,  lias  given  rise  to  much  controversy.  The
passage  runs,  We  have  given  tliee  The  expla¬

nation  of  Laydawi,  whicli  is  commonly  adoj)ted,  is  that  this
refers  to  the  seven  verses  of  the  first  Bum;  lie  gives,  liowever,  a
dictum  which  asserts  that  it  signifies  seven  Buras,  of  wliicli  the
first  is  the  Cow  and  the  last  the  double  cliapLcr,  the  JUil
and  the  hy.  Compare  also  xxxix.  24.  Otlier  signiticalions
are  also  propounded,  for  wliicli  see  Lane.  Ijariri  uses  tlie  word
to  signify  the  first  Sura,  which  is  pronounced  twice  in  every  act
of  prayer  or  rc/cah.

Blessing  his  morning's  walk. — I  have  thus  translated  to  dis-


302


NOTJES.


tinguisli  from  which  follows ;  though  the  distinction
made  by  the  author  is  somewhat  hard  to  seize.  It  is  said  that
is  praise  for  that  which  depends  on  the  will  of  the  person
praised:  so  that  praising  a  pearl  for  its  clearness  is  not
though  it  is  In  the  present  case  would  seem  to  be

more  applicable  to  the  company.  But  also  has  the  signifi¬
cation  of  lowly  and  reverent  praise,  and  may  therefore  refer  to
the  providential  morning’s  walk,  by  which  God  brought  him  to  a
generous  friend.

What  is  thy  condition,— -Yov  see  Alfiyeh,  line  313.^

The  tempest, — A  strong,  hot  wind,  that  strips  and  burns  the
trees.

I  have  feigned  to  he  lame. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is
as  of  those  at  the  end  of  the  First  Assembly,  except
that  here  the  is  The  same  liberty  of  making  the

also  obtains.

There  is  no  guilt  on  the  lame. — An  allusion  to  the  Koran,
xxiv.  60,  where  it  is  said  that  there  is  no  harm  in  the  blind
or  the  lame  sitting  at  mens’  tables.  The  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance
had  a  superstitious  prejudice  on  this  subject,  which  Mohammed
sought  to  remove.  Abu  Zayd  now  takes  the  words  from  the
context,  and  turns  them  into  an  excuse  for  himself.  Or  he  may
allude  to  xlviii.  17,  which  excuses  the  lame  man  from  going  to
war.


THE  FOUKTII  ASSEMBLY.

Looked  upon  the  features  of  joy. — Unveiled  joy  as  a  bride.
The  word  is  applied  to  the  unveiling  and  looking  upon  a

bride  by  the  bridegroom.

Broken  the  staJf.—K  phrase  of  doubtful  origin,  but  meaning
to  depart  from  or  forego.  The  Arabs  said  of  one  who  deserted
his  tribe,  He  breaks  the  staff  f  so  one  breaks  the  staff  of  the
Moslems  by  deserting  the  faith.  Here  the  meaning  merely  is,
they  avoided  or  eschewed  dissension.


NOTES.


303


The  the  milk  which  has  collected  in  the

ndder  between  two  milkings.

Like  the  teeth  of  a  comh—kn  expression  of  the  Prophet ;
''  Men  are  as  (like  each  other  as)  the  teeth  of  a  comb/'  In  a
bad  sense  they  say  as  like  as  the  teeth  of  an  ass.

A  night  youthful  in  prime,  etc.—k  night  in  the  early  part  of
the  month,  when  there  is  no  moon.  The  comparison  between  a
dark  night  and  youth,  and  between  a  moon-lit  night  and  the
silvered  hair  of  age,  is  not  uncommon.  Compare  tlie  Second
Assembly,  A7ul  now  his  dark  night  was  moon-lit ;  also  the  Fifth,
Its  hind  locks  grew  gray  in  the  dawn.

The  white  camels. — signifies  literally,  of  mixed  white
and  red."

The  night-halt.— was  a  halt  for  rest  towards  the  end  of
the  night.

The  groan  and  the  roar. — The  one  is  the  groan  of  tlic  camel
when  its  burden  oppresses  it;  the  other  is  the  hoarse  voice  of  the
male,  when  he  protrudes  liis  shikslnkah.

His  talkfcllow. — All  through  the  Assemblies  we  shall  have
mention  of  these  night-coriversatious.  The  Arabs,  like  the
natives  of  many  hot  climates,  took  a  siesta  in  the  middle  of  the
day,  and  devoted  the  cool  of  the  nights  to  tliosc  long  colloquies
in  whicli  first  their  genius  for  jicnd'-ry,  and  then  their  fancy  for
every  kind  of  rhetorical  subtleties  were  fostered.  The  word
means  the  shade  of  the  moon,  or  that  half  darkness  wliicli  pre¬
vails  during  moonlight  in  a  place  which  the  moon  does  not  shine
upon ;  but  it  is  also  applied  generally  to  the  dark  of  a  moonless
night.  ^  means  I  will  never  do  it."  J5y  a

natural  transition,  it  came  to  signify  the  place  of  conversation,
and  then  the  conversation  itself.  For  a  curious  derived  sense  of
sec  Prov.  Arab.  11.  513.  Compare  also  Jlarirfs  own  re¬
marks  in  his  interpretations  to  tho  Forty-fourth  Assembly.

My  companion.—  is  he  who  rides  with  or  belnrid  one  on
the  same  beast.

is  cither  a  contraction  of  or  an  ejacula¬

tion  expressing  surprise.


304


irOTES.


Only  he  'mho  dings  should  be  dung  to.—k  proverb  referred  to
A1  Aglilab  al  'Ajali.

The  sun  Hariri  says  in  the  Durrah  that  only
applies  to  the  rising  of  the  sun  during  winter.

Excellently  said  thy  father,— phrase  is  interpreted  as

ascribed  be  to  God/'  that  is  fitting  to  God,  through  its  excel¬
lence  is  what  thy  father  said." — Compare  the  common  expression
^11.

Whoso  attaches, — The  metre  of  these  verses,  is  like  that
of  the  verse  quoted  in  the  Second  Assembly ;  but  with  this
difference,  that  the  is  bke  the  \  botli

becoming

These  verses  appear  to  have  been  imitated  from  Imr  al  Kays.
(Dlwan,  p.  49).  The  poet  says : —

I  break  with  him  who  breaks  with  me  ;  I  unite  with  him  who  wuslies
union  with  me.”

And  again—

I  join  my  cord  to  thine,  and  by  the  feathering  of  thy  arrow  I  feather
mine.”

There  may  be  some  one,—'PQv  the  use  of  see  Alfiyeh,
V.  366.

Ihe  sun, — is  said  to  be  a  proper  name,  and  feminine,
and  for  this  reason  imperfectly  declined.

With  an  earliness  beyond  the  earliness  of  the  crow. — The  sub¬
stance  of  the  note  quoted  by  De  Sacy  from  Sherishi  is  as  follows :
When  is  used  in  a  comparison  among  the  Arabs  as  in  this
case,  ''With  an  earliness  not  as  the  earliness  of  tlie  crow,"  the
meaning  is  that  the  thing  compared  is  inferior  to  the  object  of
comparison.  Thus  in  the  proverbial  phrase  (a

man,  but  not  as  Malik)  the  meaning  is  that  the  person  spoken  of
was  not  equal  to  Malik  in  bravery  and  goodness.  But  Hariri
evidently  uses  the  idiom  in  the  opposite  sense,  and  wishes  to  say
that  the  earliness  was  superior  to  the  earliness  of  the  crow.
Sherishi  says  that  this  use,  though  not  pure  Arabic,  was  common
in  Irak,  and  that  it  prevailed  in  the  West  among  the  people  of
Morocco,  though  not  in  Andalusia.  It  is  also  to  be  met  with  in


the  writings  of  modern  authors,  and  notably  in  the  Assemblies
of  A1  Hainadatii.  This  Malik,  whose  name  has  thus  passed
into  a  proverb  (Prov.  Arab.  11.  213),  was  Malik  ibn  Nowayrah,
who  was  treacherously  put  to  death  by  Khalid  ibn  al  Welid,
under  the  Ehalifate  of  Abu  Bekr.  For  the  narrative,  see  Hamaseh,
p.  370,  in  the  commentary  to  some  beautiful  lines  of  Malik's
brother,  Mutemmiin  ibn  Eowayrah,  to  whom  the  proverb  is
attributed.  For  another  proverbial  expression  given  by  Shertshi,
A  meadow,  but  not  as  the  plant  Sa'dan/'  see  Prov.  Arab.  IL
617.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  in  Hariri's  defence,  that  in
both  the  phrases  cited  as  testimony  of  Arabic  usage,  the  object
of  comparison  is  preceded  by  cJ,  which  makes  an  obvious
difference  in  the  sense.  The  idiom  of  llarlri  resembles  that
which  occurs  in  the  Thirty-second  Assembly,  guile,  as  was  not
the  guile  of  Pharaoh  towards  Moses,"  that  is,  greater  tlian  the
guile  of  Pharaoh  ; "  so  here  the  literal  sense  is,  an  earliuess
as  is  not  the  earliness  of  the  crow,"  that  is,  '"unequalled  by  the
earliness  of  the  crow."

Two  worn  onantles, — The  was  an  oblong  cloth,  striped  down
the  sides,  which  was  tlirown  round  the  body.  Mr.  Lane  says,
"The  modern  in  every  case  in  wliich  I  have  seen  it,  I  have
observed  to  be  an  oblong  piece  of  thick  woollen  cloth,  generally
brown,  or  of  a  dark  or  ashy  dust  colour,  eitlicr  plain,  or  having
stripes  so  nanow  and  near  togctlier  as  to  appear,  at  a  little
distance,  of  one  colour  ;  used  both  to  envelope  the  person  by  day
and  as  a  night  covering.'’

To  shako  for  them  the  fruited  branches :  to  procure  for  them
the  bounty  of  the  travellers.

The  tr  caning -ground. — The  place  where  horses  that  were  to
run  in  a  race  were  exercised.

Spies  and  scouts, — Those  who  go  before  an  army  to  spy  out
the  position  of  the  enemy,  and  those  who  go  before  a  caravan  or
tribe  to  find  a  fit  place  for  halting  or  settlement.

And  the  rcasted  hank  of  the  day  had  mgh  crumbled  in, — This
strange  similitude  is  taken  from  the  eating  away  of  the  under
part  of  a  bank  by  a  rapid  stream,  so  that  the  rest  is  ready  to  fall


306


NOTES.


in.  The  meaning  is  that  Abu  Zayd  wasted  their  day  little  by
little,  until  at  last  they  discoTered  that  it  was  evening  and  the
day  gone.  There,  is  probably  an  allusion  to  Koran  ix.  110.
Motarrezi,  cited  by  De  Sacy,  remarks  on  the  incongruity  of  this
metaphor,  not  only  in  itself,  but  in  respect  to  the  former
karinek.

The  greenness  of  dung-heaps :  a  proverbial  expression  for  a
fair  exterior  which  masks  deceit.  The  J  was  the  pen  where
camels  or  sheep  had  been  kept  during  the  sojourning  of  a  tribe
on  a  particular  spot.  When  the  tribe  migrated  the  place  became
covered  with  a  rich  grass,  very  fresh  and  green  to  the  eye,*'but
rank  and  coarse,  and  not  relished  by  the  herd.  The  word  is  used


generally  in  the  same  sense  as  JJAr,  to  signify  the  traces  of  the
encampment  in  the  form  of  ashes  and  other  refuse.  Zohayr,
Mo'allakah,  1.  1 ;  LeMd,  Mo'allakah,  1.  3.  The  Prophet  said
Beware  of  the  green  of  dunghills. It  was  said  to  him,
‘^What  is  that,  O  Apostle  of  God?''  He  said,  '^A  beautiful
woman  of  a  bad  stock."

When  they  have  eaten  separate.— metre  of  these  verses  is
J^l^,  which  is  a  metre  of  the  second  circle,  or  so

called  from  all  its  feet  being  seven-lettered.  This  circle  is
formed  by  the  third  primitive  foot  thrice  repeated,

which  is  the  measure  of  the  one  of  the  two  used  metres  of
this  circle.  The  normal  measure  of  the  is


The  in  these  verses  is  and  the  is  identical  with

it ;  so  that  the  measure  is  the  normal  measure,  minus  one  foot  of
each  hemistich.


Of  the  there  enter  into  this  metre  which  is  the

quiescing  of  the  moved  second  letter  of  a  foot.  By  this  licence
becomes  and  as  it  may  take  place  in  any  part

of  the  verse,  the  may  be  made  identical  with  the
However,  if  the  original  foot  occur  even  once,  you  may  know
that  the  metre  is  Another  licence  is  which  is  the

dropping  of  the  moved  second  letter  of  a  foot.  Thus,


NOTES.


307


becomes  The  third  licence  is  which  is  the  union

of  j\a^\  and  By  this  ^Jx.UiLi  becomes  Instances

of  the  two  former  licences  may  be  found  in  the  verses.

In  the  Koran  (Sura  xxxiii.  53),  it  is  written,  0,  believers,
enter  not  the  house  of  the  Prophet,  unless  ye  be  penmitted  to  eat
there;  but,  if  ye  be  invited,  enter,  and  when  ye  have  eaten,
separate,  and  go  not  familiarly  into  conversation,  etc.'*  Moham¬
med  once  entered  the  house  of  his  freedman  and  adopted  son
Zayd,  and  there,  by  accident,  he  saw  Zayd's  beautiful  wife,
Zaynab.  The  Prophet  instantly  became  enamoured,  and  ex¬
claimed  in  admiration,  Praise  to  God,  who  inclines  men’s
hearts!”  Zaynab  understood  his  language,  and,  possibly  desir¬
ous  of  a  higher  alliance,  reported  it  to  her  husband.  Zayd,  out
of  gratitude  or  respect  to  the  Prophet,  announced  his  purpose  of
repudiating  his  wife,  alleging  as  his  reason  her  haughty  manner
towards  him,  Mohammed  then  resolved  to  marry  her  ;  but  as
a  marriage  with  the  wife  of  an  adopted  son  was  contrary  to  Arab
usage,  a  revelation  was  necessary  to  give  this  liberty  to  the
Prophet  and  his  followers.  The  marriage  was  celebrated  with
great  splendour.  A  number  of  Moslems  were  invited  by  the
Prophet,  and  the  banqueting  lasted  far  into  the  night.  Moham¬
med,  who  was  anxious  to  retire,  became  angry  at  the  tedious
familiarity  of  his  followers,  and  soon  after  the  above  words  were
revealed,  and  established  a  more  respectful  usage  at  the  enter¬
tainments  of  the  Prophet.  Abh  Zayd,  as  in  the  last  Assembly,
quotes  the  Koran  as  an  excuse  for  his  behaviour.

Ills  witticism.— The  moaning  of  is  a  pretty  and  witty
story,  and  the  more  reasonable  etymology  makes  it  to  be  what  is

gathered”  of  the  sweets  of  flowers  or  fruit,  as  by  bees,  and
thus,  by  a  natural  transition,  the  sweets  of  conversation  or  story¬
telling.  Compare  ifcUo  and  But  the  usual  tradition  is,

that  Khoriifeh  was  a  man  of  the  tribe  of  O^rah  and  an  inhabit¬
ant  of  Medina,  who,  being  questioned,  after  a  long  absence,  by
Omar,  related  that  he  had  been  carried  away  by  Jinn,  and  had
married  a  female  of  the  race.  A  war  had  broken  out  between


308


NOTES.


the  believing  and  the  -unbelieving  Jinn,  and  God  had  given  the
victory  to  the  believers.  Khorafeh  had  been  taken  prisoner
with  others,  but  as  soon  as  the  believing  Jinn  heard  that  he  was
a  Moslem  they  had  given  him  his  liberty,  and  permitted  him  to
return  to  mankind.  People  disbelieved  this  story,  and  his  name
passed  into  a  proverb  as  a  teller  of  wonderful  and  impossible
tales  :  so  that  it  was  said,  ‘'Vainer  than  the  tale  of  Khorafeh.'’
Prov.  Arab.  II.  716.  The  Prophet,  however,  is  related  to
have  said  that  the  story  of  Khorafeh  was  true  :  a  tradition  which
countenances  the  belief  in  Jinn.  Shenshi,  in  his  commentary,
relates  at  length  a  tradition  of  ^Ayisheh,  who  testified  that
having  once  asked  the  Prophet  to  tell  her  the  story  of  Khorafeh,
he  had  declared  that  Khorafeh  was  a  good  man,  and  had  then
told  her  how  he  had  been  made  captive  by  Jinn.  The  adventure
contains  a  narrative  of  a  man,  who,  by  drinking  at  a  certain
well,  had  been  changed  into  a  woman,  and  borne  children,  and
who  by  drinking  again,  had  been  changed  back  to  the  male  form,
and  begotten  more  children  ;  of  a  second  man,  who  continually
followed  a  bull  which  he  was  unable  to  overtake,  and  a  third,
who  had  enchanted  horses.  The  stories  are  much  after  the  order  of
the  Arabian  Nights,  and,  if  the  tradition  be  authentic,  it  is  chari¬
table  to  believe  that  Mohammed  related  them  more  to  amuse
his  young  wife  than  to  instruct  her  in  the  truth.  In  the  Six¬
teenth  Assembly,  Hariri  uses  the  word  wuth  the  article  to  signify
the  idle  tales  told  in  a  night-talk.


THE  FIFTH  ASSEMBLY.

Eufa.—Oi  Kufa  in  Irak,  the  rival  in  eloquence  and  learning
to  Basra,  I  have  spoken  in  the  Introduction.

Whose  complexion  was  of  a  twofold  hue,  whose  moon  was  as  an
amulet  of  silver. — The  meaning  of  this  description  is  that  it  was
a  night  of  a  crescent  moon,  which  sets  early  and  leaves  the  earth
in  darkness,  so  that  the  night  is  one  of  two  hues,  the  moonlight


NOTES.


309


and  the  gloom.  The  amulet  to  which  the  moon  is  here  com¬
pared  was  a  crescent-shaped  piece  of  silver  hung  round  the  neck
of  children  to  preserve  them  from  Jinn,  the  evil  eye,  and  other
dangers.  It  was  generally  inscribed  with  verses  of  the  Koran.

Sahban  Wa’il  was  the  most  celebrated  preacher  and
orator  of  the  early  days  of  Islam,  and  his  name  has  become  pro¬
verbial,  like  that  of  Koss,  bishop  of  Najran.  He  was  born  in
the  time  of  Mohammed,  and  died  in  the  year  54  (a.d.  673).  It
is  related  of  him  that  he  could  preach  for  hours,  and  that  he
once  preached  before  the  Khalif  Mu  awiyeh  from  early  morning
to  the  mid-day  prayer.  He  required  to  hold  a  staff  in  his  hand,
and  on  being  told  that  this  was  not  suitable  to  the  presence  of  the
Khalif,  he  defended  himself  by  the  example  of  Moses,  who  held
a  staff  when  delivering  the  messages  of  God.  Koran  xx.  72,
and  xxvi.  31 .  One  of  the  earliest  extant  specimens  of  an  Arab
in  rhymed  prose  is  by  Sahban.  It  contains  the  usual  incentives
to  morality,  founded  on  the  shortness  of  life,  and  the  certainty
of  future  reward  and  punishment.  Some  specimens  of  his  versifi¬
cation  have  been  preserved.  The  family  of  T'alhah,  at  Basra,
was  noted  for  its  generosity.  The  most  illustrious  member  of  it,
called  for  his  munificence  Talhat  at  Talhat,  was  governor  of
Sejestan,  and  Sahban  thus  addressed  him  :

0  Talhah,  most  noblo  in  worth,  most  generous  with  thy  hereditary
wealth ;

Thine  it  is  to  give,  so  give  to  me ;  then  on  me  will  it  be  to  praise  thee
in  the  assemblies.

Talhah  said,  Choose  what  thou  wilt.”  Sahban  answered,
''  Thy  bay  horse,  and  thy  baker  lad,  and  thy  castle  of  Zerenj,
and  ten  thousand  dirhems.”  Talhah  said,  Fie !  thou  hast
asked  of  me  according  to  thy  own  measure,  and  that  of  thy
people  Bahileh,  not  according  to  my  measure ;  thou  art  to  be
blamed  for  asking  so  little  ;  if  thou  hadst  asked  all  my  castles,
slaves,  and  beasts  I  would  have  given  them.”  It  may  be  re¬
marked  that  Bahileh  was  the  least  esteemed  of  the  Arab  tribes.
It  is  related  of  Sahban  that,  on  a  question  of  reconciliation
between  two  tribes,  he  spoke  half  a  day,  without  repeating  a


SIO


NOTES.


single  word.  See  Proy.  Arab.  I.  450.  ^^More  eloquent  than
Sahb^n  Wa  il.”

Each  was  a  man  to  rememher  from  and  not  to  guard  against. —
It  is  impossible  to  avoid  some  awkwardness  in  the  translation  of
this  sentence,  in  whicli  the  word  is  used  in  two  dijfferent
though  cognate  senses.

Fascinated  us,  or  gained  the  mastery  over  us.  A  similar  use
of  the  word  occurs  in  the  Forty-third  Assembly.

Housing  the  dogs. — Literally,  making  them  to  bark.  When  a
traveller  lost  his  way  in  the  darkness,  he  shouted  so  as  to  set
barking  any  dogs  that  might  be  near.  By  these  means  he  was
guided  to  a  habitation.  Compare  Imr  al  Kays,  Diwan,  p.  49,
last  line  of  the  poem.  The  word  is  often  used  by  poets  as
synonymous  with  a  belated  traveller.

0  people  of  the  mansion. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is  j,
like  that  of  the  verses  on  the  denar,  in  the  Third  Assembly,  with
the  exception  that  here  the  last  foot  suffers  which  is  the
dropping  of  the  last  letter  of  a  at  the  end  of  a  foot,

and  the  quiescing  of  the  letter  before  it.  By  this  licence
becomes  It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  here  an  uneven

number  of  verses,  so  that  the  distinction  between  and
cannot  exist.

Eihe  the  new  moon. — He  likens  himself  to  the  new  moon,
because  he  is  thin,  bent  in  shape,  and  pale  or  yellow  in  com¬
plexion.

Begging  boldly. — In  the  Koran,  xxii.  37,  the  believer  is  com¬
manded  to  give  of  his  meat  both  to  the  and  the  ex¬
plained  to  mean  him  who  waits  and  is  content  with  what  is  given
him  without  begging,  or  else  begs  very  humbly,  and  him  who
begs  boldly  and  openly.  Abu  Zayd  uses  both  terms  in  these
verses  as  descriptive  of  himself.

Knew  what  was  behind  his  lightning. — One  of  the  many
figurative  expressions  taken  from  the  rain-cloud,  to  signify  a
knowledge  of  a  man's  real  nature  and  acquirements.  We  knew


NOTES.


311


by  the  verses  which  he  uttered  that  behind  the  sudden  solicita¬
tion  of  the  traveller  was  hidden  a  night’s  amusement  for  us.

1  will  not  roll  my  tongue  over  your  food. — This  word,  which
signifies  to  move  the  tongue  in  the  mouth  over  the  remains  of  a
mouthful,  is  used  in  the  Thirty-seventh  Assembly  in  the  sense  of'
to  taste^  to  get  the  full  savour.  Abu  Zayd’s  son  complains  that
his  father  made  him  taste  the  savour  of  beggary.  Compare
Job,  XX.  12.

In  a  note  to  the  verses  on  the  letter  b,  in  the  Forty-sixth
Assembly,  two  other  forms  of  laJ  are  given,  namely  and
This  variability  of  the  third  radical  is  very  common  in

Arabic,  particularly  in  words  that  express  very  familiar  ideas,
and  are  much  in  the  mouth  of  the  people.  A  certain  weakness^
in  one  of  the  radicals,  generally  the  third,  is  to  be  remarked  both
in  Arabic  and  Hebrew,  and  has  encouraged  the  belief  that  the
original  Semitic  roots  were  biliteral  and  monosyllabic,  and  that
another  letter  was  developed  in  the  course  of  ages,  as  a  larger
variety  of  ideas  required  expression.  M.  Ernest  Eenan  (His-
toire  des  Langues  S’dmitiques,  p.  96)  says,  ^^'On  est  amend  d  se
reprdsenter  chaque  ranine  semitique  comme  essentiellenxent  comr
posde  de  deux  lettres  radicalcs,  auxquelles  s’est  ajoutde  plus  tard
une  troisicme,  qui  ne  fait  que  modifier  par  des  nuances  le  sens
principal,  parfois  meme  ne  sert  qu’a  compldter  le  nombre  temaire.
Les  monosyllabes  bilitcres  obtenus  par  cette  analyse  auraient
servi,  dans  riiypothese'  que  nous  exposons,  de  souche  commune
k  des  groupes  entiers  de  radicaux  triliteres  ofFrant  tons  un  mdme
fond  de  signification.  Oe  seraientM,  en  quelque  sorte,  les  dld-
ments  premiers  et  irrdductibles  des  langues  sdmitiques.  En
effet,  presque  tons  cos  radicaux  bilitcres  sont  formes  par  onoma-
topde.”  The  two  letters  instance,  express  the  idea  of

scratching  or  scraping  which*  is  found  iu  the  verbs  i'lJ,
nnx  m  Snx  D-iJ,  ynx  to  the  two  letters  ns  Mon<-

a  similar  series  of  verbs.  Similarly,  in  Arabic,  we  have  cUy,
lSj^>  Jif*  etc.  Compare  also  AT,
Renan’s  remarks  in  the  same  work  (Book  V,  chap.  2.)  It  has


312


NOTES.


also  been  observed  that  the  etymologies,  or  rather  plays  on
words,  in  the  Pentateuch  often  assume  the  hiliteral  root,
(Genesis  iv.  I,  v.  29.)  The  Arab  authors  have  not  failed  to
observe  this  characteristic  of  their  language.  De  Sacy,  in  his
AnthologUf  page  449,  gives  several  passages  from  Motarrezi,  in
which  that  acute  grammarian,  commenting  upon  Hariri,  re¬
marks  upon  the  ( _ or  letter-formation  of  certain  verbs,  as

expressing  certain  classes  of  ideas.  Baydawi,  in  his  commentary
on  the  first  verses  of  the  second  chapter  of  the  Koran,  says
and  ixl)f  are  of  kin,  and  if  you  go  through  the  v^'bs
which  begin  with  these  two  letters,  ^  and  uJ,  you  will  find  that
they  have  the  signification  of  departing ’’  or  "Agoing  out.”
He  makes  a  similar  observation  on  the  verb  which,
whether  it  be  spelt  with  a  ^  or  a  signifies  the  gaining  of
something  sought  or  ^‘^the  opening  of  the  way  of  success.”  Then
he  adds  that  words  which  resemble  it  in  the  first  two  letters,  such
as  ili  and  express  the  notion  of  ‘‘breaking”  and
‘‘  opening.”  The  interest  which  scholars  feel  in  determining  the
early  structure  of  the  Semitic  languages,  and  their  relations  to
those  called  Aryan,  must  be  my  excuse  for  this  somewhat  irrele¬
vant  note.

And  forbids  him  his  repasts. — Compare  Prov.  Arab.  I.  540,
‘‘Sometimes  one  eating  hinders  several.”

The  best  suppers  are  those  that  are  clearly  seen. — The  full
proverb  is  given,  Prov.  Arab.  I.  442.  “The  -best  morning
meals  are  the  early  ones,  the  best  evening  meals  are  those  that
are  clearly  seen,  or  that  show  their  face,”  that  is,  that  are  taken
before  dark.

Unless,  by  Allah. — On  the  usage  of  see  the  commentary
to  the  Forty-third  Assembly,  p.  563,  De  Sacy’s  edition,  where
also  it  is  explained  that  the  fethah  at  the  end  is  in  substitution
for  the  vocative  particle.  Compare  the  French  note  to  p.  569.
But  the  two  may  be  exceptionally  combined  in  poetry  :  Alfiyeh,
V.  584.  See  also  Baydawi  on  Koran,  hi.  25.  The  peculiar


NOTES.


313


force  of  as  unless  indeed^  unless  possibly,  suggests  a  com¬
parison  with  vYj  A  La  in  Greek.

Shot  with  the  how. — According  to  tlie  author  of  the  Kamus,
cited  in  the  commentary  to  De  Sacy's  Hariri,  p.  447,  has
here  the  meaning  of  and  is  equivalent  to

And,  loJ  it  ?vas  Abu  Zayd. — These  words  seem  not  to  form
part  of  the  karineli,  but  to  he  a  kind  of  exclamation  apart  from
the  regular  movement  of  the  cadence.

For  if  the  moon  of  Sirius  has  gone  down,  etc. ;  if  the  fall  moon
of  the  Lion  has  waned,  etc. — By  Shi  ra  the  Arabs  understand  the
star^  which  we  call  Sirius,  but  they  also  speak  of  Shi'rayfio,
meaning  Siring,  which  they  call  and  Procyon.  The

stations  of  the  moon,  according  to  the  Arab  astronomers,  are
twenty-eight  in  number.  She  passes  through  the  signs  of  the
zodiac  in  every  lunar  year  twelve  times,  and  remains  in  each
station  a  day  and  a  night.  Their  names  are  as  follows  : —

the  two  horns  of  the  Earn.

Bain’s  belly.

^  p

Gjj  the  Pleiads.

Aldebaran.

HxJiib  three  stars  in  the  head  of  Orion.

iixjjb  five  stars  in  Orion’s  shoulder.

^ jii  two  stars  above  the  Twins,
nose  of  the  Lion.

L^Jb  eye  of  the  Lion,
forehead  of  the  Lion.

byj  mane  of  the  Lion,
heart  of  the  Lion,
the  Dog,  five  stars  in  the  Virgin.

Spica  Virginis.

yL  the  stars  (p,  h  ^  in  the  foot  of  the  Virgin.
y\jj  the  horns  of  the  Scorpion.


314


J^OTES.


the  Crown.

the  heart  of  the  Scorpion.

11^  the  Scorpion’s  tail,
stars  in  Pegasus.

ijJj  a  place  were  no  constellation  appears.

djtli  the  Slaughterer’s  Luck,  in  Capricorn.

the  Glutton’s  Luck  (see  Lane,  sub  voce  ^).
the  Luck  of  Lucks,  stars  in  Aquarius.

1x^3  the  Luck  of  the  tents,  stars  in  Aquarius,
the  fore  lip  or  spout  of  the  Urn.
the  hind  lip  of  the  Urn.

L::jyJ\  the  Fishes  belly.

These  twenty-eight  stations  are  divided  into  four  parts,  seven
being  allotted  to  each  of  the  four  seasons ;  thus  ^  is  the  eighth
of  the  number,  and  consequently  the  first  station  of  summer.
The  laborious  Nasif  al  Yazaji  has  united  the  names  of  the  stations
of  the  moon  in  some  verses  which  are  to  be  found  in  his  twenty-
second  Assembly,  page  215,

Miffkt  be  re7noved,’—T]iis  rendering,  which  is  adopted  in  De
Sacy’s  commentary,  is  given  as  more  idiomatic  and  apposite
than  he  bade  take  away.”  Sherishi  allows  either.

The  hurling s  of  Sherishi  gives  uJ  as  a  synonym

of  this  word;  or  it  may  mean  ^‘destinations”  or  “distant  goals.”
See  Schultens’  note,  Harir.  Consess.  Sex.  p.  113.

Like  the  heart  of  the  mother  of  Moses, — In  the  Koran,  xxviii.
9,  it  said,  “  The  heart  of  the  mother  of  Moses  was  empty,”  that
is,  despairing  or  bewildered  at  the  loss  of  her  child.  Another  ex¬
planation  is,  “free  from  care,”  because  she  had  confidence  in
God,  or  believed  that  Pharaoh  would  take  care  of  the  infant.
(Bayd^wi).  From  this  passage  “the  heart  of  the  mother  of
Moses,”  passed  into  a  proverb  as  an  image  of  emptiness.

Fate  which  is  bye-named  the  Father  of  wonders^  i.e.  which  has
this  name  as  a  metonym.  The  of  an  Arab  is  formed  from  the


NOTES.


315


name  of  his  first  or  his  favourite  son,  by  the  prefixion  of  Abu,
To  address  a  man  by  this  fore-name  was  commonly  indicative  of
respect  and  goodwill.  When  his  names  were  written  at  length
it  was  placed  at  the  beginning  of  them ;  thus,  Abu  Mohammed
Kasim  ibn  *Ali  ibn  Mohammed  ibn  *Othman  al  Hariri  al  Basrl,
Kasim  was  the  name  given  at  birth ;  *Ali,  Mohammed,  and
'Othman  were  the  names  of  his  father,  grandfather,  and  great
grandfather;  Hariri  was  a  name  given  him  from  the  trade  of
his  family  ;  and  Basrl  (the  Basrian)  from  the  name  of  his  city.

Tlie  lakab  or  sohriqitet  given  in  praise,  as  Badf  az  Zemiln,  or
in  blame  as  c-iJl  must  be  placed  after  the  name,  but  when  the
Idmjeh  alone  is  used,  the  lakab  may  be  placed  either  before  or
after  it.  The  subject  of  names  is  discussed  in  the  Alfiyeh  and
its  commentary,  section  ^  ;  and  still  more  fully  by  Al  Ashmfini
and  his  Commentator,  As  Sabbun:  Boiilak  edition,  Vol.  i.,p.  164.

Hail,  people  of  this  dwelling. — Metre  rejez.  The  word  Jj&l
is  mansub,  both  as  being  in  a  state  of  annexion,  and  as  not
referring  to  persons  actually  present  to  tlie  caller.

Worn  with  jowmmjs. — is  here  mejrur  after  This

kind  of  annexion  is  called  £lail  or  Alfiyeh,

V.  3S7.

Aching  in  entrails. — is  said  to  be  a  masjdar  used  as  an
epithet.

Throw  away  thy  staff. — A  common  expression  for  settling  or
coming  to  rest.

By  the  sanctity  of  the  Shaykh  who  ordained  hospitality,  and
founded  the  House  of  pilgrimage  in  the  Mother  of  Cities. —
According  to  Moslems,  the  Ka'beh  or  Holy  House  of  Mecca
was  founded  by  Abraham.  A  legend  declares  that  he  was  called

Shaykh  ”  because  he  was  the  first  man  who  became  gray.  On
seeing  his  white  hairs  he  said  to  the  Lord,  What  is  this  ?
The  Lord  answered  that  it  was  the  sign  of  dignified  gravity.
Abraham  said,  Lord,  increase  this  in  me,'^  and  then  he  became
fully  gray,  being  about  150  years  of  age.  lie  ordained  the
rites  of  hospitality,  since  he  was  the  first  who  entertained  guests


316


WOTJES.


and  fed  the  poor.  He  also  entertained  angels  :  Our  mes¬
sengers  came  to  Abraham  with  good  tidings.  They  said,
‘Peace;’  he  answered,  ‘Peace,’  and  delayed  not  to  set  before
them  a  roast  calf.”  Koran  xi.  72.  The  hospitality  of  Abra¬
ham  is  highly  celebrated :  compare  the  well  known  poem  of
Sa  di,  beginning

which  Dr.  Franklin  paraphrased  into  the  style  of  the  Bible.
Abraham  is  held  by  the  Moslems  to  be  the  original  founder
of  their  religion,  which  is  the  worship  of  one  God,  and  complete
submission  to  His  will.  Tradition  goes  farther  and  makes  him
the  author  of  the  rites  of  the  pilgrimage,  and  even  of  the

usages -of  civilized  life.  Thus  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  was

the  first  who  cut  his  moustache,  and  pared  his  nails,  and  rasit
pubem^  and  cleaned  his  teeth,  and  parted  his  hair,  and  wore
a  shirt,  and  cleansed  his  nostrils  by  drawing  up  water  into
them,  and  in  latrind  se  aqzid  mzmdavit.  On  this  subject  see
Tabari.  That  he  was  the  founder  of  the  Ka  beh  is  an  article  of
faith,  since  it  is  expressly  declared  in  the  Koran  (xxii.  27).  For
the  epithet  of  the  Friend  of  God,”  applied  to  Abraham,  see
Baydawi  on  Koran  iv.  124.  Compare  also  ii.  118 ;  iii.  60

and  89 — 91 ;  also  the  beautiful  legend  at  vi.  74.  For  the  ex¬

planation  of  the  name  Bekkeh  at  iii.  90,  see  Kashshaf  of  Zamakh-
shari,  Calcutta  edition,  p.  219,  or  Baydawi.  Traditions  con¬
cerning  Abraham  are  to  be  found  in  A1  Bokhari,  yol.  ii.  p.  338.

Fayd:  a  place  in  the  Nejd,  half  way  between  Mecca  and
Bagdad.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  Mo'allakah  of  Lebid ;  and  the
passage  may  be  profitably  referred  to  since  the  commentary  con¬
tains  a  curious  remark  concerning  the  declinability  of  nouns.

The  Benu  ^ Ahs,  —  The  tribe  of  'Abs  was  one  of  the  most
famous  during  the  Ignorance.  It  descended  from  Ghatafan
through  BagMd,  and  was  close  of  Idn  to  ^obyan,  with  which
it  waged  a  long  war.  This  war,  which  is  one  of  the  most  cele¬
brated  events  of  the  pre-islamitic  period,  is  known  as  the  war  of
DaHs  from  the  name  of  a  horse  belonging  to  Kays,  son  of


JSrOTES.


317


Zohayr,  chief  of  the  'Abs,  which  was  the  cause  of  the  dispute.
It  lasted  forty  years,  that  is,  the  feud  or  vendetta  which  arose
extended  over  that  time;  for  by  the  term  ‘^war’’  among  the
early  Arabs  must  be  only  understood  a  state  of  chronic  hostility,
in  which  each  tribe  endeavoured  to  injure  the  other  by  forays,
ambuscades,  or  single  assassinations.  The  origin  of  the  war  of
Dahis  was  the  treachery  of  a  section  of  the  tribe  of  Thobyan,
who,  when  Dahis  was  matched  against  Ghabra,  a  mare  belong¬
ing  to  a  certain  Hoftayfet  ibn  Bedr,  obtained  the  victory  for  the
latter  by  foul  means.  The  whole  story  may  be  read  in  M.
Oaussin  de  Perceval’s  Essai,  vol.  II.  and  at  the  Proverb  There
has  fallen  out  between  them  a  w’-ar  of  Dahis  and  Ghabra.”  Ar.
Prov.  II.  275.  Compare  also  Ar.  Prov.  1.  210.  Elegiac
verses  by  Kays  on  Iloftayfeh  are  to  be  found  at  Hamaseh,  p.
210.  This  war,  like  the  ^var  of  Basils,  was  celebrated  among
the  Arabs  for  its  calamities ;  hence  the  proverb  More  unlucky
than  Dahis.  (Prov.  Arab.  I.  690).  Several  phrases,  said  to
have  been  uttered  by  Kays  during  the  race,  have  also  become
proverbial.  The  Abs  wore  eventually  driven  from  their  settle¬
ments,  to  which  they  only  returned  after  a  considerable  time ;
at  last  they  were  reconciled  with  Jdiobyan.  The  most  cele¬
brated  personage  of  the  Bonn  *Abs  in  older  times  was  the  war¬
rior  and  poet  'Antarah,  son  of  Sheddad.  He  fought  in  the
war  of  Dahis,  and  was,  moreover,  author  of  one  of  the  Mo'al-
lakiit.  Ilis  poem  was  composed  in  honour  of  his  cousin
Ableh,  whose  hand  lie  succeeded  in  gaining,  against  the  will  of
her  father  and  brother.  'Antarah  was  a  mulatto,  the  son  of
a  negress  slave,  and  therefore  ignoble,  He  w^as  of  so

dark  a  complexion  that,  like  Ta’abbata  Sherran,  another  poet  of
the  early  age,  he  was  nicknamed  crow.”  For  these

reasons  his  alliance  was  long  rejected,  and  he  was  exposed  to
treacherous  schemes  against  his  life.  Yet  his  valour  and  genius
made  him  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  persons  in  a  remarkable
age,  and  he  has  always  been  reckoned  the  chief  hero  of  the  sons
of  Abs.  A  romance  has  been  founded  on  his  adventures,  which
is  still  one  of  the  most  popular  works  in  the  East.  'Abs  ein-


318


jsroTus.


braced  Islam  early,  and  Yihen  tbe  deputies  came  to  Medina  to
make  profession  of  faith  on  the  part  of  their  brethren,  the  Pro¬
phet  told  them  that  the  warrior  he  most  desired  to  have  seen  was
Antarah.  Abs,  with  the  rest  of  the  race  of  Ghatafan,  joined  in
the  revolt  against  Abu  Bekr,  but  were  subdued  by  Khffid  ibn
A1  Walid.  Their  descendants  are  said  still  to  inhabit  their
ancient  regions.

And  he  raised  w/ien  thou  fallest. — When  a  person  tripped  and
fell,  it  was  usual  to  utter  a  pious  exclamation,  equivalent  to
‘^God  raise  thee.’"  The  formula  was  U],  or  U!.  Compare
Thirty-fourth  Assembly,  And  if  thou  trip  he  will  say  U!.”  ""

Barrah  was  a  celebrated  woman’s  name  among  the  Arabs,
having  been  borne  by  one  who  was  sister  of  Temim,  and  an
ancestress  of  Koraysh,  two  families  of  the  highest  repute,  the
one  for  its  nobility  and  generosity,  the  other  for  its  position  a
Mecca,  and  its  kinship  with  the  Prophet.  The  poet  A1  Farazdak
says  of  Koraysh :

They  are  the  sons  of  Barrah,  daughter  of  Morr ;  how  excellent  are  they
in  mother’s  and. father’s  kin  1

Por  there  is  no  progenitor  more  pure-blooded  than  Koraysh,  and  no
maternal  uncle  more  noble  than  Temim,

(De  Sacy’s  Commentary  to  Thirty-seventh  Assembly).

A  crafty  bird,—lxi\:i  is  described  as  a  cautious  bird,  which
looks  to  the  right  and  left  while  drinking,  through  fear  of  the
fowler,  and  does  not  come  to  the  usual  watering-places  where  men
drink,  but  repairs  to  stagnant  pools.  The  name  is  applied  to
any  cunning  and  crafty  person.  Prov.  Arab.  L  162.  For
a  little  further  on,  see  Lane,  Book  L,  p.  399.

Mixed  hues. — The  author  alludes  to  the  mingled  joy  and  care
which  had  preceded  the  advent  of  Abu  Zayd,  and  which  were
now  lost  in  unmingled  pleasure,  as  well  as  to  the  mixed  moon¬
light  and  dark  which  had  been  succeeded  by  a  single  shade.

The  limb  of  the  sun. — illji  is  one  of  the  many  figurative
synonyms  of  the  sun,  and  according  to  Hariri  (in  the  Durrat  al
Ghawwas),  it  is  only  used  of  the  rising  sun,  while  is  only
used  of  the  setting,  Sherishi  gives  ten  of  these  sjmonyms  ;  five


jsroTJss.


319


of  which  have  the  i,  namely  and

hi,  while  five  have  it  not,  *l^i,  and

The  word  h\j^  gives  rise  to  the  63rd  question  in  the  Thirty-
second  Assembly.

0  thou  who  didst  fancy,— metre  of  these  verses  is
which  has  been  explained  in  the  notes  to  the  Second  Assembly.
The  measure  here,  however,  is  that  of  the  third  which  is

;  that  is,  is  dropped  at  the  end  of  each

hemistich,  and  becomes  Its  is  identical

with  it ;  and  both  may  suffer  and  become  Sometimes

and  are  interchanged  in  the  same  poem ;  sometimes
alone  is  used,  and  then  the  measure  is  called  kj-uJl  j-L^,
on  account  of  its  lax  and  tottering  rhythm.  This  last  is  the
measure  in  the  present  case.

Al  AmaL—Ahii  Sa'id  'Abd  al  Melik  ibn  Korayb  al  Asma'l,
the  most  famous  man  of  letters  of  his  time,  and  the  greatest
authority  on  all  points  of  Arabic  learning,  was  born  A.n.  122
(a.d.  740),  and  died  at  Basra  at  the  age  of  eighty-eight  years.
His  life  is  given  by  Ibn  Khallikan,  who  says  that  he  was  a  com¬
plete  master  of  the  Arabic  language  and  grammar,  and  the  chief
of  those  who  transmitted  orally  historical  narratives,  singular
anecdotes,  amusing  stories,  and  rare  expressions  of  the  language.
He  was  a  native  of  Basra,  but  removed  to  Bagdad  in  the  reign
of  Harun  ar  Keshid.  It  is  related  that  Al  Asma'i  said  that  he
knew  sixteen  thousand  pieces  of  verse,  composed  in  the  metre
called  rejez.  These  verses  being  mostly  of  great  antiquity,  and
requiring  a  knowledge  of  the  archaic  words  and  forms  of  the
language,  could  only  be  retained  in  the  memory  of  n  consum¬
mate  scholar.  It  was  said  of  him  that  none  ever  explained
better  than  he  the  idiom  of  the  desert  Arabs.  When  he  was  old
and  had  returned  to  Basra,  the  Khalif  Al  Mahnun  often  invited
him  to  court;  but  as  he  pleaded  feebleness,  Al  Ma’mfin  used  to
draw  up  questions  on  doubtful  points  of  literature  and  send
them  to  him  that  he  might  resolve  them.  Ilis  knowledge  of
pure  Arabic  was  so  great,  that  on  one  occasion  he  named  every


320


mTJEB.


part  of  the  horse  successively,  quoting  the  verses  in  which  the
poets  of  the  desert  had  mentioned  each.  He  composed-  works
on  the  human  frame,  the  species  of  animals,  and  other  subjects
of  natural  history ;  on  the  anwd  or  settings  of  the  stars  which
indicate  rain  (see  Nineteenth  Assembly),  a  work  on  the  liamzeh,
another  on  the  metre  rejez^  another  on  masdars.  He  related  of
himself  that  one  day,  at  the  request  of  Harun  ar  Reshid,  he
extemporized  a  poem  on  the  horse,  in  which  he  introduced
twenty  parts  of  the  horse’s  body  which  have  names  synonymous
with  the  names  of  birds.  The  poem  is  extant,  and  is  a  wonder¬
ful  piece  of  philological  learning,  but  whether  it  was  impro'^ised
by  its  author  may  well  be  doubted.  (Ibn  Khallikan  and  Ham¬
mer  Purgstall).

Al  Komayt, — A1  Komayt  ibn  Zayd  was  the  last  of  three
poets  of  the  same  name.  He  belonged  to  the  first  century  of
Islam,  having  been  born  in  the  year  60.  He  was  learned  in
the  poetry,  the  battle  days,  and  the  proverbs  of  the  Arabs,  and
was  a  man  of  accomplishments  and  generous  character.  His
political  poems,  in  honour  of  the  house  of  Hashim,  brought  on
him  the  anger  of  the  Khalif  Hisham,  and  nearly  cost  him  his
life.  He  took  sanctuary  at  the  grave  of  Mu  ilwiyeh,  the  lately
deceased  son  of  the  Khalif,  and  the  children  of  Mu  awiyeh  inter¬
ceded  for  him.  He  then  replaced  the  offensive  verses  in  his
poem  by  others,  and  was  released.  He  was  afterwards  murdered
by  a  body-guard  of  Yemen  soldiers  in  the  year  126.  The  great
length  of  his  compositions  became  proverbial.  At  his  death  he
had  produced  5289  verses,  an  inordinate  number  in  the  eyes  of
his  countrymen,  for  the  Arab  poets  were  never  voluminous.
Hence  the  expression  of  Abu  Zayd,  ''  Such  as  Al  Komayt  never
wove,”  or  as  we  should  say,  ''  span.”  A  poet  says  :

Thy  stay,  my  brother,  is  so  long,

That  it  is  like  a  poem  of  Al  Komayt.

Some  verses  composed  by  him  in  honour  of  Meslemet  ibn  'Abd
al  Melik,  brother  of  Welid  and  Sulayman,  are  to  be  found  in
Hamaseh,  p.  774.  This  prince  had  fought  with  success  against
the  Greeks,  and  twice  besieged  Constantinople,  There  were


NOTES.


321


three  poets  of  the  name  of  Komayt ;  the  first,  A1  Komayt  ibn
Tha'labeh,  was  a  Jahili ;  the  second,  his  grandson,  A1  Komayt
ibn  Ma'ruf,  was  a  Mukhatom ;  the  third,  the  subject  of  this
notice,  was,  of  course,  an  IsMmi.  The  second  is  said  to  have
had  the  finest  poetical  genius.

Coak  of  the  Ghada.—K  wood  proverbial  for  making  a  power¬
ful  and  lasting  fire.  Hariri,  in  the  Forty-seventh  Assembly,
says :

Oft  is  the  ruby  burnt  in  coals  of  Ghada ;  then  the  coals  are  ex¬
tinguished  and  the  ruby  is  a  ruby  still.

Mr.  Palgrave,  in  his  Travels  (vol.  L,  p.  38),  says,  We  saw
the  Ghada,  a  shrub  peculiar,  I  believe,  to  the  Arabian  Peninsula,
and  often  alluded  to  bj  its  poets.  It  is  of  the  genus  Euphorbia,
with  a  woody  stem,  often  five  or  six  feet  in  height,  and  innumer¬
able  round  green  twigs,  very  slender  and  flexible,  forming  a
large  feathery  tuft,  not  ungraceful  to  the  eye,  while  it  affords
some  kind  of  shelter  to  the  traveller,  and  food  to  his  camels.''


THE  SIXTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  divers^fied,--'T\\(i  original  meaning  of  is  a  horse

which  has  one  of  its  eyes  blue  and  the  other  black ;  the  word  is
then  applied  to  other  kinds  of  diversity  or  variegation.  Thus,
plural  of  signifies  brothers  who  are  sons  of  one

mother,  but  of  different  fathers.  In  the  Forty-sixth  Assembly,
Abu  Zayd  bids  one  of  his  pupils  repeat  ujL^l  which

have  the  same  property  as  those  of  the  present  Assembly.

0/  the  pen, — The  reed-pen,  used  for  writing.  The  word
is  only  used  of  the  reed  after  it  is  shaped  for  writing.

Open  a  virgin  style.— LitemYlj,  deflower  a  virgin  composition,
i.e.,  write  in  a  new  and  untried  style,  without  imitation  of  former
authors.


21


322


NOTES.


Sahbdn  has  been  spoken  of  in  the  notes  to  the  Fifth
Assembly.

Scattered  fruit,  good  and  bad,  from  their  store. — A  meta¬
phorical  phrase,  signifying  the  expression  of  able  or  worthless
criticisms.  In  Sherishi’s  commentary  it  is  said  that  is  not
to  be  found  among  the  names  of  the  Arabs  for  dates ;  and  it  is
suggested  that  it  is  a  provincial  term  peculiar  to  Basra,  which,
being  distinguished  for  its  abundance  of  the  fruit,  had  doubtless
many  local  names  for  it.  It  may  have  been  a  kind  used  only
for  the  feeding  of  animals.  As  for  it  is  applied  at  the

present  day,  I  believe,  to  the  cake  of  pressed  dates  whicli  is
commonly  sold  in  the  London  market.

When  the  quivers  were  empty. — A  common  metaphor  of
Hariri  for  the  exhaustion  of  a  speaker’s  arguments.  Compare
the  Seventeenth  Assembly.

Te  have  uttered  a  grievous  thing. — A  phrase  taken  from  the
Koran,  xix.  91,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  Christians  :  They  say
that  the  Merciful  has  begotten  a  son ;  behold !  ye  have  uttered
a  grievous  (or  abominable)  thing;  one  at  which  the  heavens  go
near  to  cleave  in  sunder,  and  the  earth  to  gape,  and  the  moun¬
tains  to  be  driven  in  ruin.”

SJdlftd  in  testing. — is  the  Arabic  form  of  the  Persian
a  broker,  one  who  makes  bargains  for  others.  Thus  the
literal  meaning  would  be  ye  brokers  of  money-testing,”  ye
who  make  a  profession  of  examining  and  judging  the  merits
of  works.  See,  too,  De  Sacy,  direst.  II.,  328.

Ye  sages  of  loosing  and  binding. — From  signifying  a  priest  of
the  Guebres,  or  fire-worshippers,  the  Persian  was  applied  to
any  sage  or  philosopher,,  and  then  to  a  judge  or  councillor
of  state.

Cuts  the  envious. — Sherishi,  however,  renders  it

President  of  the  Court.— T\\^  diwan  here  mentioned  is  the
Court  of  official  writing  or  inshd\  Sherishi  gives  a  curious
anecdote  which,  as  he  imagines,  accounts  for  the  derivation  of
diwdn.  The  king  of  Persia,  having  ordered  a  laborious  enu¬
meration  to  be  completed  by  his  scribes  in  three  days,  was


JSrOTES.


323


amazed  at  their  rapidity  in  calculation  and  copying,  and  ex¬
claimed,  I  see  devils  ”  \  hence  the  place  of  their  assem¬

bling  was  thenceforth  called  dhvdn.

The  chough  in  our  land,  etc. — For  the  many  meanings
given  to  baghdth,  see  Lane.  This  proverb  was  originally  used
in  a  sense  very  different  to  that  which  it  has  here.  A  hospitable
and  powerful  tribe,  receiving  and  adopting  a  stranger,  boasted
that  ''  With  us  the  chough  becomes  an  eagle  (or  vulture) ;  that
is,  the  poorest  wanderer  by  our  adoption  becomes  a  powerful
per^nage.’’  Ilariri  uses  the  proverb  merely  to  signify  that  the
speaker  will  not  be  deceived  by  the  pretensions  of  an  incapable
person,  so  as  to  look  upon  him  as  a  man  of  eminence.  In  Arab.
Prov.  1.  6,  the  verb  is  in  the  singular  and  the  luUj  is  with
dammah.  The  word  is  used  to  signify  the  weakest  and  poorest
of  birds ;  thus  the  verse  of  a  poet :

The  common  birds  have  the  most  chicks  :

But  the  mother  of  birds  (the  eagle)  liatclies  but  one  ;  she  breeds  little*
It  is  said  that  c1.;Uj  signifies  birds  that  are  preyed  upon ;
birds  that  prey  on  others;  and  birds  that  neither  prey  upon
others  nor  are  preyed  upon  themselves,  as  the  swallow..

Each  man  kno7vs  best  the  mark  of  his  As  allusions  to

the  old  games  of  chance  of  the  pagan  Arabs  are  frequent  in
Hariri,  the  remembrance  of  them  being  preserved  in  verses  of
the  poets,  and  in  popular  proverbs,  it  may  be  as  well  to  give
some  account  of  the  game  called  to  which  the  proverb  in
the  text  refers.  The  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance  were  so  immoder¬
ately  given  to  gambling  that  they  would  sometimes  stake  their
whole  property,  and  when  all  was  lost,  play,  like  the  barbarians
of  Europe,  for  their  own  liberty.  For  this  purpose,  as  well  as
for  divination,  short,  pointless  arrows  were  used,  called
and  the  latter  name  being  more  peculiarly  applied  to  those
employed  in  divination;  though,  according  to  one  interpretation,
it  is  applied  to  gambling  by  arrows  in  Koran,  v.  4.  '^fhe
stake  in  the  was  a  slaughtered  camel,  which  was  divided
into  ten  or  twenty-eight  portions,  according  as  one  of  two


324


NOTES.


slightly  different  games  was  played.  The  arrows  were  short
sticks  of  the  tree  called  and  these,  when  struck  against  each
other,  emitted  a  peculiar  sound,  so  that  an  arrow  of  another
wood  was  easily  discovered,  and  it  may  be  presumed  the  use
of  it  was  unfair.  T/ie  arrow  sounded  ;  it  is  not  one  of  the  right
sorty  became  a  proverbial  expression  in  reference  to  a  false  pre¬
tender  :  the  words  having  been  used  by  'Oniar,  on  the  day  of
Bedr,  in  speaking  of  Welid  ibn  ‘Okbah,  who  had  exclaimed  that
he  was  of  Koraysh  (Arab.  Prov.  1.  341).  The  game  was  played
by  seven  persons,  and  ten  or,  some  say,  eleven  arrows  were  used.
According  to  one  authority  the  ten  were  named  as  follows : —
1,  Aftil ,‘  2,  ]  3,  ;  4,  \  5y  6,  ,*

7,  3  8,  ;  9,  ;  10,  Each  arrow  had  a

mark  on  it  by  which  the  players  might  recognise  to  whom  it
belonged ;  hence  the  proverb  in  the  text.  In  order  that  there
might  be  no  cheating,  each  was  placed  in  a  leathern  case,  and
the  drawer  put  on  a  thick  glove,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for
him  to  tell  by  sight  or  feeling  to  whom  any  arrow  belonged.
It  has  been  said  that  not  more  than  seven  persons  played,  conse¬
quently  three  of  the  arrows,  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth,  belonged
to  no  one,  and  were  only  added  to  give  greater  interest  to  the
game.  The  drawer,  called  drew  from  a  bag,  and  when¬

ever  one  of  the  three  unowned  arrows  came  out,  it  was  put  in
again.  The  principle  of  the  game  was  that  the  third  arrow  won
three  shares,  and  the  seventh  seven  shares,  while  those  whose
arrows  were  drawn  first,  second,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  in  order,
gained  nothing,  but  had  to  pay  for  the  beast.  When  a  player
won,  it  was  said  (see  Nineteenth  Assembly,

near  the  beginning).  A  different  and  somewhat  unintelligible
account  is  given  of  the  game  by  Nowayri  (Freytag ;  Einleitung  in
das  Studium  der  Arabischen  Sprache).  It  seenis,  however,  that  a
second  game  was  played,  in  which  the  animal  was  divided  into
twenty-eight  portions.  In  this  the  first  arrow  gained  one  por¬
tion,  the  second  two,  and  so  on,  the  seventh  gaining  seven  por¬
tions.  This  kind  of  gambling  was  forbidden  by  the  Koran,  so  that


JSfOTJES.


325


whenever  Hartri  uses  phrases  connected  with  it  he  speaks  after
the  fashion  of  the  Ignorance,— a  species  of  classicism  extremely
common  among  the  writers  of  Islam.  The  may  sir  is  forbidden
by  name,  Koran  ii.  216,  and  more  strongly  v.  4  and  92.  The
latter  passage  is  as  follows  :  ''0  believers,  the  may  sir  and  idols
(or  any  stone  or  altar  that  was  the  object  of  superstitious  rever¬
ence),  and  (arrows  for  divination),  are  an  abomination  of  the
work  of  Satan.”  The  Moslems  consider  this  prohibition  to
extend  to  all  games  of  cliance.  The  ^^mark”  on  the  arrow
alli^ded  to  by  Abu  Zayd  was  called

With  respect  to  the  divination  by  arrows,  Bayclawi  in  his
Commentary  to  Koran  v.  4,  taking  the  passage  to  refer  to  divi¬
nation  of  the  future,  says  that  the  Arabs  used  to  place  three
arrows  in  a  bag:  on  one  was  written  My  Lord  bids  me;”  on
the  second  ^^My  Lord  forbids  me ;”  while  the  third  had  no  in¬
scription.  When  they  contemplated  any  enterprise  they  drew
one  of  them :  if  the  first  came  out,  they  persisted  in  wliat  they
purposed ;  if  the  second,  they  abstained  from  it ;  if  the  third,  they
put  it  back  and  drew  again,  until  an  affirmative  or  negative  an¬
swer  was  obtained.  On  a  journey  a  man  would  carry  tliese  ar¬
rows  with  him  and  consult  them  on  any  occasion  of  doubt.  At
Mecca  the  statues  of  Abraham  and  Hobal  are  said  to  have  held
in  their  hand  arrows  for  divination :  these  Mohammed  destroyed.
Pocock  long  since  pointed  out  the  identity  of  this  Arab  practice
with  the  divination  spoken  of  by  Ezekiel,  xxi.  21  :  ‘^For  the
King  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way,  at  the  head  of
the  two  ways,  to  use  divination :  he  made  his  arrows  bright,  he
consulted  with  images  (icrwpldvi),  lie  looked  into  the  liver.  At  his
right  hand  was  the  divination  for  Jerusalem,  to  appoint  captains,
to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter,  to  lift  up  the  voice  with
shouting,  to  appoint  battering  rams  against  the  gates,  to  cast  a
mount  and  to  build  a  fort.”  He  says  (Specimen  Historioe  Ara-
bum,  p.  318,  edition  of  1806)  :  Certe  quse  de  hoc  ^iKoiaavTela<;
genere  vidimus,  multum  conferre  videntur  ad  illustrandurn  locum
istum  Ezek.  xxi.  21.  SUIdt  enim  Hex  Bahylonis  in  biviOy  in  ca-
pite  duanm  viarum  ad  divinandum  dwinaiionem,  tersit  sayittaSy


326


•  mTES.


rogavit  imagines  (yel,  ut  Vulgat.  dwinationem  quaerens,  commis-
cens  sagittas,  interrogavit  Idola,  etc.)  ad  quern  quae  affert  Hiero¬
nymus  mire  concinnunt  cum  iis  quae  de  isto  Arabum  antiquorum
more  traduntur.  Stabit  (inquit)  in  ipso  compito^  et  ritu  gentis
suce  oraculmi  consulet,  ut  mittat  Sagittas  in  pharetram  et  com-
misceat  eas  inscript  as  ^  sivesignatas  nominibus  singidorum,  ut  videat
cujus  sagitta  exeats  et  quam  prius  dvitatem  debeat  expugnare.
Ubi  observare  liceat  vocem  tersit^  polivit,  reddi

solet,  ab  Hieronymo  notione  commiscendi  explicari.  Certe  apud
Arabes  Jili  idem,  valet  ac  commomt^  atque  idem  Me  dj^no-
tare  videtur  quod  apud  ipsos  in  descriptione  sortilegii  sui,

scilicet  commovere  vel  agitare,  ut  confuse  misceri  possent  sortes.

As  the  Rebels  invested  Abu  Nadmeh. — Among  the  bands  of
Separatists,  or  Eebels,  who  arose  after  the  death  of  "Othman  and
disturbed  the  Khalifate  during  many  years,  was  the  sect  of  the
Azarikah,  implacable  enemies  of  the  House  of  Omayyeh.  In
the  68th  year  of  the  Hijra  (a.d.  687)  they  made  an  eruption  out
of  Persia  and  overran  all  Irak  till  they  came  near  Kufa.  A1
Mohallib,  governor  of  Mowsil,  mustered  his  troops  at  Basra
and  met  them  in  battle  :  they  are  said  to  have  fought  for  eight
months  without  intermitting  a  single  day.  Abu  Na'amet  al  Ka-
tari  ibn  al  Fuja’ah  seems  to  have  been  at  the  head  of  these  fierce
sectaries.  His  life  is  given  by  Ibn  Khallik§.n,  who  says  that  he'
commenced  his  revolt  when  Mus'ab  ibn  az  Zobayr  was  governing
Irak  as  lieutenant  of  his  brother  Abdallah.  Mus^ab  was  ap¬
pointed  to  this  post  in  the  year  66,  and  Abu  Na'ameh  continued
for  twenty  years  to  wage  war,  and  to  be  saluted  with  the  title  of
Khalif.  He  was  a  man  of  wonderful  bravery ;  and  unless  the
lines  which  bear  his  name  in  the  Hamaseh  have  been  falsely  at-
tributed  to  him,  he  had  some  poetical  genius.  It  is  related  of
him  that  in  one  of  his  battles  he  rode  forth  from  the  ranks  on  a
lean  horse,  with  a  cudgel  in  his  hand,  and  challenged  the  opposite
party  to  send  out  a  man  to  fight  with  him.  One  of  them  went
forth  to  encounter  him,  but  fled  when  Abu  Na'ameh  removed  the
covering  from  his  face  and  showed  who  he  was.  "Whither  art
thou  going  ?  exclaimed  the  rebel  champion.  No  man  need  be


NOTES.


327


ashamed  of  flying  from  thee,”  returned  his  adversary.  Ibn
Khallik^n  goes  on  to  say  that  Abu  Na'ameh  continued  his  suc¬
cesses  until  Sofyan  ibn  al  Abrad  al  Kelbi  marched  against  him
and  defeated  him  in  the  year  78 ;  and  notices  the  discrepancy
between  this  date  and  the  assertion  that  he  w’^as  saluted  as  Khalif
for  twenty  years  after  his  revolt.

Verses  by  Abu  Na'amet  al  Katari  are  to  be  found  in  the  Ha-
maseh,  Vol.  1.  p.  44.  The  warrior  addresses  his  soul  and  bids  it
to  be  courageous  in  war,  to  remember  the  certainty  of  death,  the
worthlessness  of  life,  and  the  common  fate  which  awaits  all  mor-
tals.  Ibn  Khallikan  says  of  them.  They  would  give  courage  to
the  greatest  coward  God  ever  created  ;  and  I  know  of  nothing
on  the  subject  to  be  compared  with  them :  they  could  only  have
proceeded  from  a  haughty  spiidt  aspiring  after  glory.”  Like
many  of  the  early  Arab  heroes  he  was  also  famous  for  his  pulpit
oratory.  Sherishi  gives  a  Khotbah  by  him  on  the  worthlessness
of  the  world,  and  cites  some  verses  of  his  composition.  He  says
that  he  had  the  Idnyeh  of  Abu  Na  amch  in  war  from  his  mare
Na'ameh  (ostrich),  but  that  in  peace  he  was  called  Abu  Mo¬
hammed.

The  name  of  Khawarij  was  given  to  those  fanatical  followers
of  *Ali  who,  after  the  battle  of  Siffin,  repudiated  his  authority  and
went  into  open  revolt  against  both  tlie  contending  Khalifs.  The
.Azarikah  owed  their  origin  to  Nafi'  ibn  al  Azrak,  a  heretical
leader.  An  account  of  their  tenets  is  given  by  Ash  Shahrestani.
They  held  *Ali  to  be  an  unbeliever,  and  reverenced  his  murderer,
'Abdallah  ibn  Muljiin.  But  with  impartial  hatred  they  damned
Othman,  Talhah,  Zobayr,  'Ayisheh,  'Abdallah  ibn  'Abbas,  and
other  Moslems.  For  a  full  account  of  Abu  Na'ameh,  see  Weil,
GeschieJite  der  Chalifen,  Vol.  I.  p.  395.

The  straightening  of  my  crookedness :  the  deliverance  of  my¬
self  from  embarrassment.

Come  with  a  sign,  etc. — Koran  xxvi.  154.

Wool  thy  inhfask. — Make  it  ready  by  putting  into  it  the  wool
in  which  the  ink  is  kept  absorbed,  to  prevent  it  from  drying  up.

Ghassdn  is  my  noble  kindred. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is


328


FOTUS.


The  has  been  described  in  the  notes  to
the  Fourth  Assembly.  The  present  measure  is  considered  to  be
of  the  third  which  is

which  is  J^,  and  the  metre  is  as  follows  :

On  these  beautiful  verses  Riickert,  who  has  so  well  imitated
them,  remarks  :  “  Dieser  Ton,  den  Abu  Seid  ofter,  und  nie  ohne
zu  riihren,  anstimmt,  ist  gleichsam  der  zuriickgedningte  reine
Grundton  seines  Innern,  der  von  Zeit  zu  Zeit  aus  den  moralischen
Dissonanzen  hervorbricht,  und  sie  in  sich  aufzulosen  strebt.
Ohne  diese  einzige  Wahrheit  in  seinem  aus  Lug  und  Trug
gewebten  Leben  kdnnte  er  gar  keine  poetische  Person  vorstellen.
Diese  elegische  Klage  um  ein  verlorenes  Jugendparadies,  und
diese  Sehnsiicht  nach  einem  theueren  Vaterland,  sind  nicht  er-
dichtet.  Man  fiihlt  das  uberall,  wo  dieser  Ton  anhebt,  aber  voll-
standigen  Aufschluss  daruber  gibt  der  Dichter,  sehr  kunstgerecht,
erst  in  der  ehvorletzten  Makame.  Mann  kann  sagen :  Dieses
gute  Harchen  ,am  grauen  Siinderkopf  ist  es,  woran  der  Himmel
ilm  halt,  um  ihn  zuletzt  aus  der  Irre  zur  Heimat  zuriick  zu
fiihren/’

Filled  Jm  mouth  with  pmrfe.— Conferred  on  him  rich  presents.

Sure  to  traverse  the  —  Metre  See  notes  to

•

First  Assembly.


THE  SEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.

1  noted  the  signs  of  the  coming  Literally  ''  I  had

observed  the  flash  or  lightning  of  the  feast.”  The  metaphor  is
the' one  common  with  Hariri  of  calling  the  index  or  promise  of
anything  its  flash.”  As  has  been  remarked  in  a  note  to  an
earlier  Assembly,  the  allusion  is  to  the  lightning-flash  of  a  cloud,
from  the  aspect  of  which  the  Arabs  prognosticated  rain.  The


NOTJES,


329


name  Barka'id  enables  the  author  to  make  an  indifferent  play  on
words.  The  derivation  of  the  word  given  by  Sherishi  is  that
Adam  was  expelled  from  Paradise ;  but  afterwards  God  relented
towards  him  and  restored  him  on  this  day ;  wliich  was  thence¬
forth  called  because  Adam  was  restored  to  favour

upon  it.

Its  rites,  hounden  or  of  free  will. — According  to  the  commen¬
tators  the  obligatory  rite,  which  no  Moslem  might  neglect,  was
the  giving  of  alms  at  the  end  of  the  fast ;  while  that  which  was
optional,  though  praiseworthy,  was  to  attend  the  public  prayer
on  the  day  of  the  feast.  The  usual  meaning  of  fard  is  an
observance  commanded  in  the  Koran,  or  by  the  most  weighty
tradition ;  while  nef  relates  to  something  recommended  as  be¬
coming  in  a  believer,  and  undertaken  spontaneously  by  him.
For  the  literal  meaning  of  the  latter  word,  see  Tahafat,  p.  2Go.
But  the  limits  of  obligation  varied  according  to  the  interpretation
of  the  Doctors,  and  one  commentator  interprets  the  passage
according  to  the  rite  of  Ash  Shafii*!,  to  which  1  farlri  belonged.

In  new  apparel.  —This  is  a  Tradition  originating  with  Ayisbch,
who  related  that  the  Prophet  had  said,  It  is  incumbent  upon
all  of  you  besides  your  suit  (of  two  garments)  for  common
use,  to.  have  a  suit  for  Friday  and  for  the  Feast.”  Compare
Koran  vii.  29.

Brought  up  its  horsemen  and  its  footmen. — Paraphrased  by
De  Sacy,  accompagne  de  toute  sa  pompe  et  do  tout  son  eclat.”
It  may,  however,  be  here  taken  literally,  though  used  in  a  meta¬
phorical  sense  in  Koran  xvii.  GG.  See  notes  to  Ilarlrfs  Preface.

A  pair  of  cloaks,  or  overalls,  worn  by  beggars,  instead  of  the
usual  j\j\,  or  waist  wrapper,  and  ^\dj,  or  wrapper  for  the  whole
body,  which  made  up  the  or  dress.

Like  a  gol)lin.--l\x^  is  explained  to  be  the  female  of  the  race
of  J^,  the  male  being  called  The  Ghul  is  well  known

from  the  tales  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights.  It  was  a  malig¬
nant  demon,  of  a  nature  akin  to  the  Jinn.  It  would  light  a  fire
to  attract  travellers  in  the  desert,  and  then  assume  various  and


330


NOTES.


horrible  forms,  which  either  killed  the  wanderer  with  fright,  or
made  him  powerless  against  its  attacks.  But  if  his  courage  was
proof  against  these  terrors,  it  would  not  hurt  him,  and  he  sat
and  warmed  himself  by  its  fire.  De  Sacy's  Hariri,  p.  480.
Mohammed  denied  the  existence  of  these  beings,  or  rather  of
their  so  murdering  mankind.  Jinn,  however,  are  expressly  men¬
tioned  in  the  Koran,  and  give  their  name  to  the  72nd  Sura.
When  a  man  was  lost  in  the  desert,  the  belief  was  that  he
had  been  carried  off  by  Ghuls.  Compare  the  proverb.  More
wandeinng  than  Smdn  :  Arab.  Prov.  II.  17.  The  was

akin  to  the  Ghul.  From  the  Arabian  Nights  it  would  appear
that  the  Afrit  was,  in  the  popular  estimation,  a  being  of  superior
nature  and  more  formidable  powers.

Each  dmple  Each  that  appeared  as  if  he  could  be  easily
imposed  upon,  and  cheated  of  his  money  by  the  arts  of  the  men¬
dicant  couple.  A  long  dissertation  on  the  word  is  given  by
De  Sacy  in  the  Chrestomathie.

Sieve  1  have  become  crushedy  etc. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is
the  first  metre  of  the  third  circle  or  ^ \  j.  Its  mea¬
sure  is  twice.  It  is,  however,  rarely

found  complete ;  the  usual  measure  being  that  of  the  present
verses  which  is  Of  the  there  enter  into  this  metre

and  making  and  An  instance  of  the

latter  occurs  in  the  sixth  line.

To  kin  or  lord. — This  rendering  of  J 1  is  authorized  by  Sherishi,
and  seems  the  most  reasonable.  It  is  certainly  better  than  mi¬
serly.”  De  Sacy  translates  les  grands  et  les  puissans.”

The  garb  of  the  vei'ses,  i.e.,  the  elaborate  dress  of  assonance
and  rhyme  in  which  they  were  arrayed.

A  fee  to  an  informer  is  laovful. — To  one  who  is  employed  to
make  a  discovery,  or  to  find  lost  articles.  These  words  have  re¬
ference  to  the  prohibition  of  Mohammed  against  paying  money
to  a  divineress,  to  discover  anything  lost,  or  any  secret,  by
magical  rites.  But  it  was  still  allowable  to  give  a  fee  to  one
who  should  obtain  information  by  legitimate  means.


mTEB,


331


The  Return, — I  have  thus  rendered  the  word  by  which  Mos¬
lems  express  th-e  exclamation  ‘‘We  belong  to  God,  and  to  Him
we  return/'

There  remains  not  any  pure,  —  The  measure  of  these  verses  is
the  third  of  the  which  is  It  is  of  the

variety  called  j-1^.

Not  any  of  worth.  Much  controversy  has  arisen  on  the  law¬
fulness  of  in  this  sense ;  and  Hariri  himself  in  the  Durrah
has  been  cited  as  a  witness  against  it.  But  wlicther  it  be  chaste
Arabic  or  not,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Hariri  has  used  it  both
in  the  Fourth  Assembly  and  here  in  the  sense  of  “  valuable,  of
worth."  De  Sacy,  who  gives  the  passage  from  the  Durrah  in  his
Ohrestomathie,  points  out  that  it  does  not  really  condemn  the  use
of  the  word  in  the  sense  here  attributed  to  it.

Perdition  on  thee^  Wretch, —  jy  is  the  feminine  form  for
blaming,  and  JjO  the  masculine.  The  former  is  indeclinable
with  kesr ;  but  only  as  a  vocative.  De  Sacy's  Hariri,  p.  527.
Compare  also  Alfiyeli,  verse  595.

Both  of  the  prey  and  the  oiety  etc, — By  these  metaphors  Abu
Zayd  means  to  say  “Shall  we  not  only  receive  no  alms  from  this
company,  but  also  lose  the  written  petitions  by  which  we  are  ac¬
customed  to  obtain  them  ? "  A  handf  ul  to  the  load  is  a  proverbial
expression  for  ill  upon  ill,  or  in  an  opposite  sense  luck  %ipon  luck.
The  word  13111  signifies  a  bundle  of  fire-wood  or  dry  herbage ;
hence  a  great  bundle  of  anything,  and  in  this  sense  it  is  used  in
Koran  cv.  3.  “  Hast  thou  not  seen  what  thy  Lord  lias  done  with
the  Men  of  the  Elephant  (the  soldiers  of  Abraheh  the  Abyssinian)  ;
how  he  made  their  stratagems  to  err,  and  sent  upon  them  birds  in
bundles  or  hcapsV  But  Baydawi  says  that  is  here  a

plural  noun  without  a  singular,  meaning  in  heaps.  By  some
Ababil  has  been  erroneously  supposed  to  be  the  name  of  the  birds.

A  mite.—K  small  unstamped  piece  of  metal  used  as  a  coin.

The  polished,  the  engraved, — These  words  are  adopted  from  the
Mo  allakah  of  ^Antarah,  v.  37.  “  After  the  heat  of  the  noon

subsides,  I  drink  of  old  wine  gotten  by  the  polished,  the  eii-


.  332


NOTi;s,


graved/’  ^  The  epithets,  however,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  apply
to  the  goblet,  so  that  the  sense  is  ''  I  drink  of  old  wine  from
the  polished,  the  engraved.”  (Mo'allakat,  edition  of  Fr.  Aug.
Arnold,  page  156).

It  troubled  wy  heart, — The  sentence  is  here  the  jail  to
and  is  the  mej^ul,

I  might  test  the  quality, — Literally,  that  I  might  bite  thercood,
as  an  Arab  bites  a  piece  of  wood  to  test  its  soundness  for  making
an  arrow  or  lance.  In  the  Thirty-seventh  Assembly  it  is  said,
Henceforth  he  not  hasty  in  censure^  nor  plane  the  wood  till  thou
hast  bitten  it ;  that  is,  proceed  not  in  a  charge  until  thou  hast
made  sure  that  it  is  well  founded,  Firdseh  is  originally  skill  in
judging  of  a  faras  ;  and  secondarily,  the  art  of  physiog¬

nomy,  or  of  discovering  the  disposition  of  men  from  their  face
and  form  ;  and  then  discernment  generally.  A  similar  art  was
that  of  ijti,  the  skilful  in  which  discerned  the  tribe  and  pedi¬
gree  of  a  man  by  his  bodily  form  and  features.  Compare  Forty-
ninth  Assembly,  p.  664,  De  Sacy’s  edition ;  and  Ta'rilat,  p.  177.
He  who  divined  the  future  of  a  man  from  bodily  signs  was
called,  according  to  Maydani  (Arab.  Prov.  II.  132),  ;

but  this  is  a  name  for  any  diviner.  The  art  of  Kiydfeh  was
hereditary  in  the  tribe  of  MeMiij :  note  to  Hamaseh,  Vol.  II.,
part  2,  p.  245.

Sare  by  treading  on  the  necks  of  the  congregation,  a  thing  for¬
bidden  in  the  law, — It  is  forbidden  to  break  through  the  rows  of
worshippers,  and,  as  it  were,  to  tread  on  their  necks  while  they
are  making  their  prostrations.  This  prohibition  is  derived  from
the  Prophet,  who  said,  Whoso  treads  on  the  necks  of  the  people
on  the  day  of  Congregation  (Friday)  is  making  for  himself  a
bridge  to  hell.”

Ibn*Ahbds. — *Abd  Allah,  the  son  of  'Abbas,  the  son  of'Abd
al  Muttalib,  the  son  of  Hashim,  of  the  tribe  of  Koraysh,  was
cousin  to  Mohammed,  and  the  most  eminent  doctor  of  the  first
age  of  Islam.  He  was  born  three  years  before  the  Hijra,  and
consequently  was  thirteen  years  old  at  the  death  of  the  Prophet.
The  year  in  w^hich  he  died  is  variously  stated,  the  extremes


NOTES.


333


being  68  and  74  of  the  Hijra  according  to  Slierishi.  Another
account  makes  him  to  have  died  in.  the  year  67,  in  the  81st  year
of  his  age.  He  had  been  blind  from  his  30th  year,  but  pos¬
sessed  great  knowledge  and  acutenessj  and  so  accurate  a  memory
that  he  handed  down  660  Traditions  of  the  Prophet.  He  was  a
man  of  great  physical  beauty,  and  was  so  careful  of  his  appear¬
ance  that  he  dyed  his  hair  with  henna.  One  said  of  him,
When  I  saw  Ibn  'Abbas  I  said,  ^  He  is  the  handsomest  of
men ; '  when  he  spoke  I  said,  ^  the  most  eloquent ; '  when  he
discoursed  I  said,  ^  the  most  learned.’  ”  Ilis  remarkable  sagacity
was  "supposed  to  be  due  to  a  prayer  of  Mohammed  in  his  favour
when  he  was  a  child  :  Teach  him  wisdom,  and  give  him  in¬
crease  of  knowledge  and  science.”  He  was  called  by  the
Moslems  the  ‘^Doctor”  and  the  ^SSea”  (of  learning).  It  is
related  of  him  that  he  saw  the  angel  Gabriel  twice  when  in
company  with  the  Prophet.  On  one  occasion  he  saw  a  man
with  the  Prophet  whom  he  did  not  know,  whereupon  he  asked
who  it  was.  The  Prophet  said,  Hast  thou  seen  him  ?”  Yes,”
replied  Ibn  'Abbas.  That,”  said  Mohammed,  is  Gabriel ;
surely  thou  shalt  lose  thy  sight,”  This  calamity  accordingly
fell  upon  him  while  he  was  still  a  young  man.  He  was  said  to
have  observed  in  verse —

God  has  taken  the  light  from  my  two  eyes.

But  set  their  light  in  niy  tongue  and  my  heart.

Some  of  his  recorded  sayings  have  merit.  He  was  an  advocate
of  change  of  study.  He  said,  When  I  am  tired  of  the  orator
I  take  up  the  poet.”  On  the  accession  of  'Ali  he  gave  him
prudent  advice  as  to  his  treatment  of  Mu'awiyeh,  which,  un¬
fortunately  for  the  new  Khalif,  was  not  taken.  (Ockley).  He
was  the  most  liberal  of  the  early  Moslems,  for  he  lectui*ed  not
only  on  the  Koran  and  law  but  on  grammar,  on  the  Days  of
the  Arabs,  and  on  poetry,  giving  a  day  in  turn  to  each ;  and  to
him  is  especially  due  the  preservation  of  the  early  Arab  poetry.
He  was  for  a  time  governor  of  Basra  under  the  Khalif  'Ali.

1yds. — Abu  Wathilet  lyas  ibn  Muawiyet  ibn  Korrah,  called
Al.Muzani,  was  Kadi  of  Basra  at  the  beginning  of  the  second


334


NOTES.


century  of  the  Hijra.  He  is  celebrated  in  Arabic  tradition  for
his  wonderful  acuteness,  of  which  a  number  of  stories  are  related,
so  that  you  say  of  a  very  clever  person,  More  intelligent  than
lyds  (Arab.  Prov.  I.  593).  Ibn  Khallikan  says  of  him,  He
was  renowned  for  ready  expression  and  for  penetration,  and  the
acuteness  of  his  mind  was  proverbial ;  the  persons  of  merit  who
spoke  their  language  with  elegance  considered  him  as  their
chief;  his  conjectures  were  verified  by  the  events,  and  in  the
management  of  affairs  he  showed  great  dexterity.  It  is  he  to
whom  Hariri  alludes  in  his  Seventh  Assembly.  He  was  ap¬
pointed  Kadi  of  Basra  by  'Omar  ibn  'Abd  al  ‘Aziz,  and  his
grandfather  lyas  was  one  of  the  Companions  of  Mohammed.”
Of  his  acuteness  Ibn  Khallikan  relates  the  following  anecdotes  :
Being  at  a  place  in  which  something  happened  which  caused
alarm,  and  where  three  women,  whom  he  did  not  know,  were
present,  he  said,  One  of  them  is  pregnant,  another  is  nursing,
and  the  third  is  a  virgin.”  On  inquiry  it  was  found  that  he  had
judged  rightly  ;  and  when  he  was  asked  how  he  came  to  know,
he  replied,  In  time  of  danger  persons  lay  their  hands  on  what
they  most  prize  :  now  I  saw  that  the  pregnant  woman,  in
her  fright,  placed  her  hand  on  her  belly,  which  showed  that  she
was  with  child ;  the  nurse  placed  her  hand  on  her  bosom,  by
which  I  knew  that  she  was  suckling ;  and  the  gesture  of  the
third  proved  to  me  that  she  was  a  maid.”  Hearing  a  Jew  ridi¬
cule  the  Moslems  for  believing  that  the  inhabitants  of  Paradise
are  to  eat  food  and  yet  not  pass  it  away,  he  asked  him  if  all  that
he  ate  passed  off  in  that  manner;  and  on  the  Jew  replying  that
God  converted  a  portion  of  it  into  nourishment,  he  said  “  Why
should  not  God  convert  into  nourishment  the  whole  of  the  food
eaten  by  the  inhabitants  of  Paradise  ?”  Being  one  day  in  a  court¬
yard,  he  said  that  there  was  an  animal  under  one  of  the  bricks ;
the  people  having  raised  it  found  a  snake  under  it.  lie  was
asked  how  he  came  to  know  that  it  was  so.  He  said  that  among
all  the  bricks  in  the  pavement  there  were  only  two  under  which
any  dampness  appeared,  so  that  he  knew  there  must  have  been
something  underneath  that  breathed.  Other  anecdotes  of  the


NOTES,


335


same  kind  follow.  Maydanf  tells  of  him  that,  hearing  a  dog  bark,
he  said  the  dog  was  tied  to  the  brink  of  a  well.  When  this  was
found  to  be  the  case,  he  explained  that  he  had  first  heard  the  bark
and  then  the  echo.  Two  men  came  before  him,  of  whom  one  ac¬
cused  the  other  of  not  restoring  some  money  that  he  had  committed
to  him,  while  the  defendant  denied  that  he  had  received  any  at
all.  The  Kadi  asked  the  plaintiff  where  he  had  given  it  to  the
defendant.  He  answered  that  it  was  under  a  certain  tree.  The
Kadi  told  him  to  go  to  the  tree,  so  as  to  refresh  his  memory  by
the  sight  of  it.  While  he  was  gone,  the  Kadi  asked  the  defend¬
ant^  whether  he  thought  his  adversary  had  reached  the  tree.
^'Not  yet,'’  said  the  man  unconsciously,  ^'for  it  is  a  long  way
off."  Thus  his  deceit  was  exposed.  On  one  occasion  he  was
worsted  by  a  witness.  A  man  was  testifying  about  a  garden,
'and  lyas,  having  reason  to  suspect  him,  asked  how  many  trees,
there  were  in  the  garden.  The  man,  in  return,  asked  the  Kadi
how  many  beams  there  were  in  the  roof  of  the  court,  and  the
Kadi  could  not  tell.

His  conductor, — The  conductor,  or  driver  of  the  camels,  is
called  though  he  be  behind  them,  because  he  guides  them.

The  third  prop  of  the  pot. — The  Arabs  of  the  desert  place  two
stones  close  to  the  slope  of  a  rock,  and  on  these  they  rest  the  pot  ;
the  rock  itself  being  the  third  prop.  The  tliird  prop,"  became  a
proverbial  expression,  to  signify  anything  heavy  or  inconvenient ;
and  is  thus  applied  to  the  old  woman  whoso  company  was  un¬
desirable.  It  is  the  more  appropriate  as  she  made  up  the  trio
which  repaired  to  the  house  of  JIarith.  See  De  Sacy,  in
Chrestomathic  Arahe.

Yes,  hy  the  Watcher  fy^oin  whom  no  secret  is  hidden  /—I  have
adopted  this  rendering  on  the  authority  of  Shcrishi;  but  not
without  hesitation.  It  seems,  however,  to  present  fewer  objec¬
tions  than  any  other.  In  the  first  place  ( _ cannot  refer  to

the  old  woman,  but  clearly  refolds  to  God  ;  for  Hariri  would  not
have  been  guilty  of  the  impiety  of  jesting  with  so  solemn  a
phrase  as  the  Watcher  from  whom  no  secret  is  hidden.  If  this  be
so,  we  must  either  accept  the  trivial  idea  that  the  old  woman  and


336


NOTJES.


God  accompanied  them,  or  translate  the  phrase  as  an  oath.  It
is  common  with  Hariri  to  indicate  a  thing  by  alluding  to  some
quality  of  the  Deity  which  is  in  accordance  with  it.  Thus  in
the  Tenth  Assembly  :  I  adjured  him  to  say  whether  he  was
Abu  Zayd,”  “  Yes/'  he  answered,  By  Him  who  has  permitted
the  chase !  ”  meaning,  By  Him  who  permitted  the  chase !  you
have  before  jmu  Abu  Zayd,  the  hunter."  Compare  the  Forty-
first  Assembly,  where  Abu  Zayd,  speaking  of  his  clever  son,
says, '' Yes,  by  Him  who  brings  pearls  from  the  deep!"  in
allusion  to  the  boy's  improvisations.  In  the  present  case  the
mention  of  God,  as  one  from  whom  ho  secret  is  hidden,  indicates
that  the  old  woman  would  be  an  inconvenient  spy  on  their
actions.

The  Farkaddn  are  two  bright  stars  in  the  Little  Bear.  The
four  which  form  the  square  of  either  Bear  are  called  the
Bier;  the  others  are  called  ijLx)  the  Sons  or  Followers  of

the  Bier  ;  being  here  the  plural  of  since  the  word

refers  to  irrational  objects.  The  stars  called  Farkadan  are,  I
believe,  the  two  nearest  the  pole-star.  The  pole-star  is  called
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Great  Bear
is  mentioned  in  the  Book, of  Job  under  the  names  and
;  ix.  9  and  xxxviii.  32.  Our  translation  Canst  thou
guide  Arcturus  with  his  sons?"  would  be  more  properly  “the
Bier  with  its  sons."  See  Thesaurus  of  Gesenius.

As  if  his  mouth  were  full, — Literally,  as  if  he  had  an  impe¬
diment  that  prevented  him  from  speaking.

Since  time^  etc, — Metre  tawil.


THE  EIGHTH  ASSEMBLY.

Maarrat  an  Nomdn,  or  Nomd'rAs  Bane,  is  the  name  of  a
town  in  the  north  of  Syria,  formerly  called  That  al  Kosur.
It  received  its  new  name  from  No*man  ibn  Beshir,  one
of  the  Companions  (of  the  Prophet)  and  governor  of  Himf.


NOTES.


337


(Emesa),  after  lie  had  lost  a  son  there.  In  its  neighbourhood
were  the  tombs  of  Omar,  son  of  ‘Abd  al  Aziz,  and  of  Seth,  son
of  Adam.  It  is  celebrated  as  the  dwelling-place  of  the  poet
Abu  1  *Ala.

The  two  excelle^icies.-T^'moxi^  interpretations  of  this  phrase
are  given,  but  it  is  generally  taken  to  mean  appetite  or  relish  for
food,  and  sexual  desire.

The  ben  This  tree,  which  produces  the  ben  nut  and  oil,
is  of  erect  and  shap)ely  growth,  with  long,  delicate  branches,
and  is  used  by  the  poets  as  a  similitude  for  the  stature  of  youths
and  maidens.  Imr  al  Kays  describes  his  mistress  Ilirr,  “  White,
beautiful,  tender,  like  a  shoot  of  the  ben  tree  breaking  into
leaf.”  Diwan,  p.  43.

Smooth  of  cheek.— 1:^  is  the  cheek  or  part  extending  from
the  circuit  of  the  eye  to  the  part  wdiere  the  beard  grows ;  it  is
used  also  to  signify  the  side  planks  of  the  litter,  and  the  side  of
a  tract  of  high  and  rugged  ground.  (Lane).  Hence,  it  may
possibly  be  applied  here  to  the  side  or  length  of  the  needle.
But  it  is  perhaps  better  to  suppose  that  is  a  ma^dar  witli  the
meaning  to  mark  or  furrow,  and  the  sense  as  regards  the  needle
will  then  be  smooth  and  even  as  to  the  furrows  nddeh  it  makes.
Or  KsU  may  be  a  noun  signifying,  like  the  furrow  itself.

Bayclawi,  Koran  Ixxxv,  4.

Patient  to  labour,— has  not  the  feminine  form,  because  it
is  fditl  with  the  meaningy*d'i/ ;  for  fdal  only  tahes  the  hd  when
it  has  the  meaning  of  mcfid,  like  hfj  applied  to  a  she-camel,  or
to  a  ewe.  '‘Abu  Mohammed  accuses  the  higher  classes  in
Irak  of  speaking  incorrectly  when  they  say  or

for  the  epithets  of  intensity  arc  changed  from  tlieir  natural  form
to  indicate  the  peculiar  sense  in  which  they  are  used;  andj^^

applied  to  a  female  has  a  masculine  form,  as  LAz  and  dAllj
applied  to  a  man  have  a  female  form.”  Shcrislii.  This  is,  I  con¬
ceive,  a  better  explanation  than  that  of  De  Sac}^  wlio  says,  "  11
semble  que  dans  ce  cas  lo  I  ajoute  i  la  fin  de  cos  adjectifs  verbaux
so^'t  destine  a  les  transformer  en  des  noins  d’iudividualito ;  en


338


NOTES.


sorte  que  LAs.  signifieroit  proprement  un  samnt  unique  en  son
genre

Julg.—jyAj,  ]qLd2-  The  use  of  the  Syrian  months  appears
to  have  been  common  among  the  Moslems  of  Irak,  no  doubt  be¬
cause  they  were  more  in  accordance  with  the  seasons.  Moham¬
med  having  abolished  the  or  ancient  Arab  intercalation
shortly  before  his  death,  the  Moslem  year  is  hopelessly  unfitted  for
practical  life.  For  an  account  of  this  intercalation  see  Memoire
sur  V  Histoire  des  Arahes  avant  Mahomet, 'par  M.  Syhestre  de
Sacy,  extracted  from  the  Memoir es  de  VAcademie  Royale^des
Inscriptions  et  Belles  Lettres,  vols.  47  and  48.

Understanding  and  discretion. — Jas  as  applied  to  the  girl  is  a
noun  with  the  meaning  understanding  ;  applied  to  the  needle  it
is  a  masdar  meaning  to  hold  fast.  rein  ”  applies  to  the

discretion  with  which  she  could  rein  her  caprices,  and  to  the
long  rein  ”  or  string  which  the  needle  draws  through  the  cloth.

A  hand  with  Jingers.'^-The  meaning  of  as  applied  to  the
needle,  is  to  hem  the  border  of  anything  after  it  has  been  basted,
^  or  Ja.  Sherishi  says  and  i are  two  well-known
processes  in  tailoring ;  the  latter  appears  to  mean  the  quilting  of
a  garment  by  sewing  between  it  and  the  lining  a  layer  of  cotton.

Piqtie  as  with  tongue  of  snake. — As  applied  to  the  girl  this
probably  means  that  she  was  witty  or  satirical;  as  applied  to  the
needle  it  simply  relates  to  the  pricking  of  the  sewer's  fingers  by
its  point.

She  was  displayed  in  blackness  and  whiteness. — This  refers  to
the  contrast  of  her  black  hair  and  eyebrows  with  the  white  of
her  skin.  In  the  Second  Assembly  it  is  said  of  a  maiden,  Night
lowered  on  the  morn,”  meaning  that  her  black  hair  drooped
over  her  shoulders.  Or  it  may  refer  to  the  contrast  between  the
black  and  white  of  the  eye,  which  when  very  marked  was-
esteemed  a  great  beauty  by  the  Arabs.  Such  a  contrast  is
expressed  by* the  word  which  means  '^intense  whiteness  of
the  white  of  the  eye,  and  intense  blackness  of  the  black  thereof,
with  intense  whiteness  or  fairness  of  the  rest  of  the  person.”


mTJES.


339


Lane.  houn  is  a  maiden  possessing  this  quality.  In  the

Tenth  Assembly  it  is  said,  Swear  by  Him  who  has  adorned  eyes
withj^.,”  i,e,  contrasted  blackness  and  whiteness.

She  drank  ( or  was  watered)  but  not  from  cisterns, — It  is
difficult  to  discover  any  meaning  in  these  words  as  applied  to
the  slave  girl.  As  applied  to  the  needle,  the  words  mean  either
that  it  is  bedewed  with  the  perspiration  of  the  sewer’s  brow  or
hand,  or  that  when  the  cutler  fashioned  it  he  threw  it  red-hot
into  water  to  temper  it.

Nbw  truth'-telling ^  now  beguiling ;  now  hiding,  now  ^peeping
forth, — By  the  description  that  follows  the  author  desires  to
express  the  archness  and  coquetry  of  the  girl,  as  well  as  her
habitual  goodness  and  obedience  to  her  master.  As  referring  to
the  needle  is  a  synonym  of  LU-,  he  sewed;  means

to  double  or  fold  one  part  of  a  garment  or  piece  of  cloth  on
another.”  The  other  plays  on  words  will  be  sufficiently  intelli¬
gible  from  the  double  translation  given  in  the  text.

Forced  on  her  too  hard  a  work — returned  her  to  me  broken
in  health, —

^  ^  SeeLane

sub  voce

A  compensation, — For  the  special  names  applicable  to  various
forms  of  payment,  see  the  commentary  on  the  Seventh  As¬
sembly,  p.  79  of  De  Sacy’s  ITariri.

More  truthful  than  the  Kata, — The  Kata  is  a  bird  about  the
size  of  a  pigeon,  which  flies  in  flocks,  and  utters  but  one  sound,
Kata,  Kata,  whence  its  name.  The  proverb,  More  truthful  than
the  Kata,  is  derived,  according  to  Maydani  (Arab.  Prov.  I.  741),
from  its  constant  repetition  of  one  and  the  same  cry,  which  tells
its  name.  He  cites  a  verse  of  the  poet  Nabighah  to  the  effect
that  if  one  asks  the  Kata  its  name,  it  replies  Kata !  and  is  tljere-
fore  a  truthful  bird.  Another  explanation  is  that  the  Kata  is
never  found  save  where  there  is  good  pasturage  and  water,  so
that  the  sight  of  the  bird  is  an  unerring  indication  to  the  travel-


340


NOTES.


ler  in  the  desert  that  he  is  near  what  he  seeks.  The  former
opinion  is  supported  by  several  verses  from  the  poets.  Komayt  •
says,  ‘"Speak  not  falsely,  for  the  Kata  speaks  truly;  though
each  man,  in  pedigree,  arrogates  what  does  not  belong  to  him.’'
For  the  latter  opinion  the  authority  of  A1  Asma'i  is  given.  The
sureness  of  the  Kata  in  finding  its  way  back  to  its  nest  after  long
flights  is  alluded  to  in  the  beginning  of  the  Twenty-third  As¬
sembly  :  ""  I  crossed  rocky  places,  to  which  the  Kata  would  not
find  its  way."  The  poet  Ash  Shanfara,  in  the  celebrated  kasideh,
called  Lamiyet  al  'Arab,  boasting  of  his  speed  of  foot,  says,  "^The
ash-coloured  Kata,  though  it  fly  to  the  water  all  the  night,  while
its  (wing-beaten)  sides  resound,  does  but  get  my  leavings."  In
the  notes  to  this  passage,  given  in  De  Sacy’s  Chrestomathie,  a
long  account  of  the  Kata  may  be  found.  See  also  ""  Ohalef
elahmar’s  Qasside,"  by  W.  Ahlwardt,  Grreifswald,  1859,  p.  188,
where  the  subject  would  seem  to  be  exhausted.

Of  equal  birth  as  regards  either  /ot.— That  is,  whose  father
and  mother  were  both  of  pure  Arab  blood,  and  whose  birth  was
consequently  most  honourable.  One  who  was  the  son  of  a  free¬
born  Arab  and  a  slave  mother  was  called  As  applied  to

the  pencil,  the  meaning  is  that  the  pencil  could  be  used  at  either
end  to  place  the  kohl  on  the  eye.

Tracing  his  lineage  to  Al  Kayn. — Kayn  was  a  branch  of  the
Benu  Asad.  The  Commentator  tells  us  that  Belkayn  is  a  con¬
traction  of  Benu  '1  Kayn,  like  Belharith  and  Belhojaym.  As
applied  to  the  pencil  Kayn  signifies  a  blacksmith  or  cutler.  The
word  ""  a  smith,"  Syriac  1  o.  is  related  to  the  Hebrew  pp
or  pp,  to  beat,"  hence  to  hammer  iron.  The  word  in
Arabic,  signifies  a  singing  or  playing  female  slave ;  the  deriva¬
tion  of  which,  according  to  Abu  1  Faraj,  is  that  “the  daughters
of  Cain  first  made  musical  instruments  and  sang  to  them  ;
whence,  in  the  Syriac  tongue,  a  song  is  called  tuJ,  with  kesreh^
while  the  Arabs  called  the  singing  girl  with  fethah  (Gese-
nius).  The  plays  on  words  which  Ibllow  are  sufliciently  ex¬
plained  by  the  two  translations  in  the  text.


NOTES.


341

Rarely  visited  his  wives  save  two  by  t7V0.--^\\Q  same  idea  is
expressed  in  one  of  the  riddles  of  the  Forty-second  Assembly  :

What  is  it  that  marries  two  sisters  openly  or  secretly,  and  there  is  no
fault  to  find  with  him  for  it  ?

When  he  visits  one  wife,  he  visits  also  the  other,  and  if  other  husbands
show  their  preferences  he  shows  none.

He  increases  his  attention  and  affection  as  they  grow  gray,  and  this  is
indeed  rare  among  husbands.

The  answer  to  this  is  a  kohl  pencil,  whicli  is  always  used  to
apply  the  pigment  to  both  eyes  at  once,  and  whicli  is  the  more
used  as  the  eyes  grow  older  and  require  a  higher  adornment.
The  VAistom  of  painting  the  lids  of  the  eye,  as  it  exists  in  Egypt
at  the  present  day,  is  described  as  follows  by  Mr.  Lane,  iu
the  first  Chapter  of  his  Modern  Egy p titans '¥syQ.s>  more
beautiful  can  hardly  be  conceived;  tlicir  charming  effect  is
much  heightened  by  the  concealment  of  the  other  features,  and
is  rendered  still  more  striking  by  a  practice  universal  among  the
females  of  the  higher  and  middle  classes,  and  very  common
among  those  of  tlie  lower  orders,  which  is  that  of  blackening
the  edge  of  the  eyelids,  both  above  and  below  the  eye  with  a
black  powder  called  ‘  kohl.’  This  is  a  collyrium  commonly
composed  of  the  smoke-black  which  is  produced  -by  burning  a
kind  of  '  liban,’  an  aromatic  resin.  Kohl  is  akso  prepared  of
the  smoke-black  produced  by  burning  tlie  aliolls  of  almonds.
These  two  .kinds,  though  believed  to  be  l)cneficial  to  tlie  eyes,
are  used  merely  for  ornament ;  but  there  are  several  kinds  used
for  their  real  or  supposed  medical  qualities;  particularly  the
powder  of  several  kinds  of  lead  ore,  to  which  are  often  added
sarcocolla,  long  pepper,  sugar-candy,  fine  dust  of  a  Venetian  sequin,
and  sometimes  powdered  pearls.  Antimony,  it  is  said,  was
formerly  used  for  painting  the  edge  of  the  eyelids.  The  kohl  is
applied  with  a  small  probe  of  wood,  ivory,  or  silver,  tapering
towards  the  end,  but  blunt.  This  is  moistened,  sometimes  with
rose-water,  then  dipped  in  the  powder,  and  drawn  along  the
edges  of  the  eyelids;  it  is  called  'mirwed,’  and  the  glass  vessel
in  which  the  kohl  is  kept,  'mukhulah.’  ”

He^  lent  me  a  needle. verdient  bemerkt  zu  werden,  dasz


342


NOTES.


Hariri  liier,  imd  in  ahnlidien  Fallen,  gerade  da  mit  den  Versen
anhebt,  wo  die  Poeste  des  Gegenstandes  zn  Ende  geht,  gleicbsam
nm  dnrcli  die  nene  nnd  hohere  Form  der  Darstellung  einen  nenen
nnd  bohern  Scbwung  zu  geben.  Obne  diesen  Kunstgriff  wiirde
die  Folgende  Auflosnng  des  Ratbselstreites  hocbst  langweilig
geworden  seyn,  statt  dasz  sie  uns  jetzt  durcb  das  komische  Pathos,
womit  die  Bettlerlumpen  anfgestutzt  werden,  gar  anmnthig
vorkommt.  (Riickert.)

The  metre  of  these  verses  a  metre  belonging  to  the

fourth  circle,  or  iyL',  which  has  been  already  described.

The  measure  in  the  circle  is  twice.

This,  however,  is  rare,  the  more  usual  measure  being  that  of  the
verses  in  the  present  case.  The  is  and  the  is

being  the  elision  of  the  quiescent  fourth  letter  of  a
foot)  :  thus  becomes  which  is  equivalent  to

Of  the  uJUj,  there  enter  into  this  metre  and
and  which  is  the  union  of  the  former  two,  though  it  is

said  that  is  not  permitted  in  this  By  the  second  of

these  licences  the  is  often  made  identical  with  the

I  swear  by  the  holy  place, — Metre  again.

is  the  place  called  Muzdalifeh,  which  is  divided  from
Mina  by  the  Wadi  Mohassir  (see  Baydawi  on  Koran  ii.  194).
It  is  described  as  a  broad  plain  between  mountains,  and  as  sur¬
rounded  by  ancient  cisterns.  It  is  also  called  (without

the  article  like  because  the  people  assemble  there,  or

because  Adam  there  met  with  Eve,  after  their  fall  from
Paradise.  Here  the  pilgrims  remain  one  night,  that  between
Friday  and  Saturday  ;  and  here  most  of  them  collect  the  stones
for  casting,  though  it  is  lawful  to  collect  them  in  the  neighbour¬
hood  of  the  mosque  of  the  Khayf,  at  Mina.  After  hurrying
through  the  Wadi  Mohassir,  they  arrive  at  Mina,  where  they
cast  the  stones,  for  the  first  time,  and  ofi‘er  the  sacrifice.

After  his  stone  had  dripped-- After  his  rock  had  oozed, — The
meaning  of  these  two  phrases  is  nearly  the  same ;  they  refer  to


NOTJES.


343


the  uiD^illing  bestowal  of  a  petty  dole.  To  be  moisty  to  drip,  to
bedew y  and  the  like,  are  metaphors  which  occur  continually  in
the  sense  of  liberality.

My  perception — My  yuess. — is  the  faculty  of  sense,  by
which  anything  is  perceived,  as  a  sound  or  a  motion  :  is

the  forming  of  a  surmise  or  opinion  without  distinct  proof;
a  rapidity  of  passing  from  premises  to  conclusions,  being  the
opposite  to  reflection.  Tarifdt.

The  knowing  one,’—jij=sc.  For  verbs  which  unite  the  two
significations  of  slaughtering  and  of  doing  or  knowing  a  thing
effectively,  energetically,  and  well,  see  js^y  J^,

Compare  Hariri’s  preface,  We  are  thorough  in  humility.”

Hh  following. — The  word  presents  a  double  meaning  ;

one  is  a  live  coal,  or  a  smokeless  burning  fire  ;  of  which  the
intelligent  attendant,  suddenly  making  a  suggestion,  may  be
spoken  of  as  the  spark.  The  other  meaning  is  a  large,  independent
tribe,  not  joined  in  alliance  to  any  other.  The  authorities  given
by  Lane  thus  define  it :  Any  body  of  men  that  have  united
together,  and  become  one  band,  and  that  do  not  form  a  con¬
federacy  with  any  others  ;  or  a  body  of  men  that  congregate  by
themselves  because  of  their  strength  and  their  great  valour.”
The  term  c-jyJ!  was  especially  applied  to  three  tribes,

two  of  which  became  extinct  by  confederating  with  other  tribes,
while  the  third  alone  remained  a  In  the  present  passage

it  would  mean  the  Kadi’s  large  following  or  company.

Tell  me  truly  your  earner s  age. — Arab.  Prov.  I.  710.  The
origin  of  this  proverb  is  thus  related  :  A  man  who  was  about  to
sell  a  camel  assured  the  purchaser  that  it  was  Jjb,  that  is,  that
it  had  cut  its  c-;b  or  tush,  and  had  consequently  entered  its
ninth  year,  and  attained  its  full  strength.  At  this  moment  the
camel  started  away,  and  the  seller  inadvertently  called  out  to  it
the  cry  by  which  young  foals  are  called  back.  The
purchaser  thus  found  that  he  was  being  deceived,  and  exclaimed,

Thou  hast  now  told  me  truly  thy  camel’s  age,”  which  words
passed  into  a  proverb.  For  other  explanations  see  Arab.  Prov.
as  above.


344


NOTES,


1  am  the  Seruji. — The  metre  of  these  lines  is  rejez,  as  in  Third
Assembly,

Oh  rare!  cJjj  <61,  This  very  idiomatic  expression  of  ap¬
proval  signifies,  literally,  To  God  he  ascribed  thy  milk-floiUj  and
was  originally  used  by  the  Arabs  when  they  passed  one  who
was  milking  his  camel.  It  meant  with  them  either  a  pions
wish  that  the  owner  of  the  beast  might  have  an  abundant  yield,
or  a  complimentary  remark  that  she  did  actually  yield  abun¬
dantly.  Afterwards  it  became  a  general  expression  of  admir¬
ation,  answering  to  our  Well  done !  ’’  and  was  commonly  used
to  applaud  literary  compositions.


THE  NINTH  ASSEMBLY.

Between  Farghdnah  and  Ghdnah, — Between  the  two  extremi¬
ties  of  the  Moslem  world.  Farghdnah  is  the  name  of  a  region
and  city  of  Mawarannahr  or  Transoxiana,  and  is  now  contained
in  the  Khanate  of  Kokan,  It  lies  close  to  the  borders  of  the
Chinese  Empire,  between  Kokan  and  Kashgar.  It  was  in  former
times  a  place  of  much  importance,  having  a  or  temple  of
the  Sun,  built  by  the  Persians,  which  the  Khalif  Mo'tasim
destroyed.  It  is  described  as  being  distant  fifty-three  parasangs
from  Samarcand,  on  which  it  was  dependent.  The  building  of
it  is  ascribed  to  the  Persian  monarch  Nushirvan,  who  transported
to  it  people  from  other  cities.  Farghanah  was  conquered  by  the
celebrated  general  Kotaybet  ibn  Muslim  in  the  year  95  (a.d.
713),  towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Welid  ibn  'Abd  al  Melik,
and  here  too  he  was  slain  after  he  had  thrown  off  his  allegiance
to  Sulayman.  Ghdnah,  according  to  the  Arab  geographers,  is
a  city  of  Sudan  and  the  utmost  point  to  which  merchants  travel.
According  to  Sherishi  the  starting  point  is  at.  Sejelmaseh,  on
the  south  of  Mount  Atlas,  and  to  reach  it  requires  three  months’
travel,  although  to  return  from  Ghanah  to  Sejelmaseh  requires
only  a  month  and  a  half,  or  less ;  the  reason  of  this  being  that


NOTES.


345,


the  merchants  trade  to  Ghanali  with  goods  and  heayy  bales  and
return  with  gold ;  and  he  who  journeys  thither  with  thirty  camels
comes  back  with  only  three  or  even  two,  one  to  ride  on,  the
other  to  carry  water.  The  city  has  both  Moslem  and  Pagan
negro  inhabitants,  and  its  merchants  are  a  prosperous  body.
Slierishi  praises  the  beauty  and  good  disposition  of  the  women
in  high  terms,  and  quotes  many  poetical  encomiums  on  negresses.
One  enthusiast,  Ibii  Muslimch,  exclaims,  ''  If  a  mole  be  set  in
an  ugly  cheek  it  endows  it  with  beauty  and  grace ;  how  then
should  the  heart-stricken  be  blamed  for  looking  upon  his  mistress
as  a  mole  all  over

The  well-hredy  the  sagadoits.  —  *  This  is  a

compound  epithet,  denoting  an  intelligent  and  educated  gentle¬
man,  something  like  the  Greek  KaKoicd<ya66^.

An  ill'looldng  old  man. — The  word  'I frit,  so  well  known
to  the  readers  of  the  Arabian  Nights,  appears  originally  to  have
been  associated  with  the  ideas  of  strcngtli,  cunning,  and  malig¬
nity ;  the  etymology  of  the  word,  as  given  by  tlio  (Commentators,
is  very  far-fetched.  Sec  note  in  T)c  Sacy's  ChresUmiathle.  Its
use  in  the  sense  of  a  powerful  and  gigantic  genie  is  derived  from
Koran  xxvii.  39  :  Said  an  ^Ifrit  of  the  Jiim.”  It  is  there  ex¬
plained  as  wicked,  rebellious.  Baydawi.

A  yoicng  matron. — Do  Sacy,  in  his  Chreetomatldc,  says,  On
explique  le  mot  de  deux  inaniercs,  selon  Oebari;  il  pent
signifier  line  femme  gid  a.de  petits  enfam,  on  nne  femme  dont  la
heaute  raint  tone  Ice  camrsT  The  former  translation  has  been
adopted  as  supported  by  more  numerous  autlioritics,  though  the
latter  would  give  the  better  antithesis  to  the  description  of  the
husband.

Among  las  people :  that  is,  among  the  people  of  my  father,
his  male  kindred.  In  the  Durrah,  ITariri  says  that  ^  diflers
from  Jki  in  that  the  former  is  applied  only  to  the  descendants  of
the  same  father.  Anthologie.  Gram.  Arobc.,  p.  42,  Texte
Arabe.  BaydAwi  (Koran  xxvii.  49)  says  that  is  applied  to
a  number  of  men  from  three  or  seven  to  ten,  while  jo  is  from


346


MOTES.


three  to  nine.  It  seems  in  any  case  to  be  applied  only  to  male
persons.

His  kalitation. — The was  originally  the  lower  part  of  the
tent,  an  attached  curtain  which  came  down  to  the  ground.  It
was  then  applied  to  the  side  wall  of  a  house,  and  generally  to
an  abode.

Goodly  shoTV,  etc. — is  the  enhancing  of  beauty  or  grace  by
elegant  dress.  According  to  Sherishi  Csj  is  originally  with
hamzeh  ;  that  is,  it  is  derived  from  the  teshil  and  idghdm
taking  place  that  it  may  correspond  with  the  meaning  being
good  condition,  such  as  is  produced  by  comfort  and  affluence.
According  to  Okbari,  cited  by  De  Sacy,  it  means  a  goodly
aspect  <is  if  bedewed  with  water,  which  expresses  nearly  the
same  idea.

Greedy  feeding. — signifies  to  eat  with  the  back  teeth,  as
when  the  mouth  is  filled  ;  ^  to  eat  with  the  front  teeth,  as  is
done  when  the  food  is  scanty.  The  proverb,  Back-tooth  eating
is  reached  by  front-tooth  eating,’’  (Arab,  ProV.  IL  245)  incul¬
cates  patience  and  contentment  with  moderate  success  at  the  be¬
ginning  of  an  enterprise ;  and  in  a  verse  of  a  poet  is  made  equi¬
valent  with,  Be  content  with  old  clothes  till  you  can  get  new
ones.”  Ibn  Abi  Tarafeh  said,  ‘^An  Arab  of  the  desert  who
came  to  visit  one  of  his  cousins  at  Mecca  said  to  him,  ^  This  is
a  country  where  men  eat  with  front  teeth  and  not  with  back
teeth,’  ”  the  meaning  of  which  probably  is  that  at  Mecca
moderation  of  conduct  must  be  more  regarded  than  in  the  desert.

Altogether  destroyed.— like  signifies  literally

‘^rope  and  all;”  and  is  an  idiomatic  phrase,  derived  from  the
giving  or  selling  of  a  beast.  It  means  entirely  or  altogether.

There  is  no  concealment  after  distress,  no  'perfume  after  the
wedding. — i.e.,  it  is  now  time  for  business,  and  to  make  an  end
of  indolence  and  festivity.  Hariri,  accidentally  or  intentionally,
somewhat  perverts  the  proverb  ^  (Arab.

Prov.  II,  482.)  The  story,  which  may  be  read  there  of  a  woman
having  married  a  man  of  the  name  of  Nowfal,  after  the  death


NOTES.


347


of  her  husband  *Arus,  and  which  De  Sacy  has  given  more  at
length  in  his  Chrestomathy,  and  in  the  commentary  to  his
edition  of  Hariri,  seems  but  a  fabrication  to  explain  a  popular
saying.  At  any  rate,  Hariri  clearly  uses  in  the  sense  of
wedding,  and,  perhaps,  introduce^the  words  of  the  proverb
without  regard  to  its  original  signification.

Through  the  violence  that  was  abroad  in  the  earth. — This  is  an
allusion  to  Koran  ii.  28,  Wilt  thou  set  in  it  (the  earth)  one
who  will  worl^^^olence  in  it  T  It  will  be  remembered  that  Abu
Zayd  represents  his  native  town  to  have  been  ravaged  by  the
Christians  of  the  first  Crusade,  and  the  political  disorders  of
the  time  might  explain  the  little  attention  that  was  paid  to
learning  and  learned  men.

Neither  of  -In  connection  with  the  disquisition  on  K,
given  in  De  Sacy’s  commentary,  the  student  is  referred  to  a
passage  in  the  Durrah  (p.  51,  Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe).  The
essence  of  Hariri's  statement  is  that  K  is  a  singular  noun,  ex¬
pressing  the  idea  of  duality,  like  our  word  each."  You  say  of
two  men  each  was  blind."

He  looked  down  as  looks  the  serpent. — This  phrase  is  taken
from  a  verse  of  Mutelemmis,  He  looked  down  as  looks  down
the  snake,  and  if  he  had  seen  the  chance  to  bite  he  would  have
bitten."  Arab.  Prov.  II.  30.  has  the  meaning  to  look

down  in  silence,  as  if  considering  to  do  or  say  something.  The
expression  occurs  again  in  the  Fortieth  Assembly.

Hear  mg  story,  for  it  is  a  wonder. — The  metre  of  these  verses
is  munsarih,  which  has  been  described  in  the  notes  to  the  last
Assembly.

Honour  deems  base. — is  thus  defined :  Grounds  of  pre¬
tension  to  respect  or  honour  consisting  in  any  qualities  (either  of
one's  self  or  of  one's  ancestors)  which  are  enumerated  or  re¬
counted  as  causes  of  glorifying;"  and  hence  it  signifies  nobility,
rank,  or  quality,  honourableness  or  estimableness,  from  whatever
source  derived.  It  is  said  that  and  may  apply  to

those  who  have  not  celebrated  ancestors,  but  and  only

to  those  who  have.


348


jsroTus,


I  burdened  my  neck. — Compare  the  Twenty-sixth  Assembly,

I  haltered  myself  with  debt.”

1  swear  by  Him  to  whose  Ka  belt  the  companies  journey. —
Eiickert  notices  the  propensity  of  Abu  Zayd  to  swear  on  all
occasions  by  objects  connected  with  Mecca  and  the  pilgrimage,
and  seems  to  regret  this  irreverent  habit  of  the  Arabs.  Hariri,
however,  makes  his  characters  go  much  further  in  speaking
familiarly  of  sacred  things.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  relaxation
of  religious  discipline,  such  verses  as  those  at  the  beginning  of
the  Forty  “fifth  Assembly,  which  I  shall  have  the  task  of  translat¬
ing  and  explaining  in  my  next  volume,  could  never  have  been
produced.  It  is  wonderful,  indeed,  that  they  should  have  been
permitted  in  any  age  of  Islam.

Chaste  ladies.’— 0^  Mary  it  is  said  in  the  Koran  (xxi.  91
and  Ixvi.  12)  Hence  some  read  in  Koran  iv.

29  and  v.  7,  with  kesreh.  In  iv.  28,  the  word  is  read

with  fetliah,  and  has  the  signification  of  '^married.”  In  other
places  it  means  of  free  and  lady-like  condition^  or  continent  and
chaste  of  life.  Technically  has  the  meaning  of  being

kept  legally  and  honourably  in  the  marriage  state.  The  word
corresponds  nearly  with  our  lady.”

1  imagine. — The  anomalous  form  is  always  used  by

Hariri  as  more  chaste.  It  is  said  to  have  been  originally  pecu¬
liar  to  the  tribe  of  Tay,  but  to  have  become  of  such  general  use
that  the  regular  form  was  retained  only  by  the  Benu  Asad.

Thy  chamber.— is  the  curtain  by  which  the  sleeping  place
of  a  woman  is  concealed  in  a  tent  or  room,  and  is  applied
generally  to  a  woman's  chamber ;  a  chamber  has  not  this  name
if  a  woman  be  not  m  it,  says  Hariri  in  the  Durrah.  The  word
is  very  old ;  see  Genesis  xliii.  30 ;  and,  in  the  strict  Arabic  sense.
Judges  XV.  1 ;  xvi.  9,  12;  Song  of  Solomon  i.  4;  hi.  4.

The  master  of  thy  Literally  the  father.  This

phrase  occurs  in  the  Preface,  ''  My  mind  is  the  father  or  lord  of
its  virginity.”  With  respect  to  a.  married  woman,  it  is  applied
to  her  first  husband.

The  will  of  thy  Lord. — Lord  here  means  God  and  not  her


NOTES,


349


husband.  The  word  cLj  by  itself,  and  not  in  connexion  with
another  noun,  is  applied  only  to  the  Deity.  You  may  say,  “  the
lord  of  the  house,’’  or  the  lords  of  eloquence,”  (compare  Sixth
Assembly)  in  the  sense  of ''  possessor but ''  the  Lord,”  or thy
Lord  ”  signifies  God.

It  may  he  that  God  will  bring  victory . — Koran  v.  57.

Abie  Maryam, — Father  of  Mary,”  according  to  Motarrezi,
is  an  expression  peculiar  to  certain  modern  authors,  who  desig¬
nate  under  that  name  the  officers  or  ushers  of  a  Kadi’s  court.
Th§  metre  of  the  two  lines  is  which  is  formed  from  the
third  circle,  or  1 like  the  hezej  and  rejez.  Its  normal

measure  is  twice.  The  present  verses

belong  to  the  second  which  is  second

w

is  and  the  measure  is

Of  the  uJW-j  there  enter  into  tins  metro  and  and
JiLi,  which  is  the  union  of  the  two.  They  have  been  already
explained.

Followed  excess  by  yrayer  for  'p^^^'don, — Tlic  excess  is  the
sinful  immoderation  of  lauglitcr.

The  latter  state  is  better  for  1dm,  etc. — Koran  xciii.  4.

The  repentance  of  Al  Farazdak,  'when  he  put  away  Nawdr,
or  of  Al  Kosdi,  when  the  daylight  appealed, — Those  are  two
proverbial  instances  of  repentance;  though  only  tlie  latter  is
derived  from  the  Arabs  of  the  desert.  Farazdak,  one  of  the  chief
poets  of  the  post-Islamic  period,  was  born  about  the  year  4G  of
the  Hijra,  and  died  about  the  year  110,  under  the  Khalilatc  of
Hisham.  He  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Temim,  to  which  be¬
longed  also  the  great  poets  Jerir  and  Al  Aklital ;  so  that  it  was
said  that  before  Islam  poetry  had  set  its  habitation  among  the
tribe  of  Kays,  but  that  in  Islam  it  had  migrated  to  the  sons  of
Temim.  His  grandfather,  Sa"sa" ah  was  known  by  the  lionoiir-
able  name  of  llcoiver  of  the  maidens  buried

alive)  because  once,  when  he  was  seeking  two  milch  camels


350


NOTES.


whicli  had  strayed,  he  came  to  a  tent  where  a  woman  lay  in  the
pains  of  childbirth,  and  knowing  that  if  she  gave  birth  to  a
female  child  it  would  be  buried  alive,  according  to  the  barbarous
practice  of  the  Arabs,  he  ransomed  it  at  the  price  of  the  two
beasts.  This  act  of  generosity  the  poet  is  said  often  to  have
alluded  to  in  his  compositions.  He  was  eminent  for  his  eulogis¬
tic  and  satirical  verses,  and  was  one  of  the  first  who  introduced
antitheses  and  conceits  into  poetry,  thus  setting  a  bad  example,
which  was  afterwards  only  too  largely  followed.  Farazdak  was
a  nickname  which  he  received  on  account  of  his  dark  com-

o

plesion,  the  word  being,  according  to  De  Sacy,  a  corruption
of  the  Persian  which  means  a  piece  of  burnt  dough.  Like
other  poets  of  the  time,  he  was  a  partisan  of  the  House  of  '  Ali,
and  one  of  his  chief  poems  is  in  praise  of  Zayn  aP  Abidin,  son  of
A1  Hosayn.  For  this  composition  he  was  imprisoned  in  Hij^z  by
Hish^m,  son  of "  Abd  al  Melik.  He  must  have  been  a  dissolute
Moslem,  for  he  gave  rise  to  a  proverb,  a  night  of  Farazdak
and  Halfeh,’’  used  to  signify  a  night  spent  in  debauchery.
With  other  rakes  he  penetrated  into  a  Christian  convent,  and
passed  the  night  with  a  nun  named  Halfeh,  drinking  wine,
eating  pork,  and  dressing  up  in  the  nuns’  habits.  His  adven¬
ture  with  his  wife  Nawar  is  very  celebrated,  but  is  told  by
different  writers  with  certain  discrepancies.  She  was  the
daughter  of  one  "Ayn  ibn  Dobay',  and  Farazdak  had  been  com¬
missioned  to  ask  her  in  marriage ;  but  becoming  enamoured
of  her,  he  took  her  for  himself.  She  afterwards  forced  him
to  divorce  her,  and  he  pronounced  the  necessary  words  in  the
presence  of  witnesses.  When  he  found  that  the  parting  was
irrevocable,  he  exclaimed :

I  feel  a  repentance  like  that  of  Al  Kosa't,  now  that  ISTawS-r  has  been  put
away  by  me- ;

She  was  my  Paradise,  and  I  have  left  her  like  Adam  when  Ad  DMr
drove  him  forth.  (Dirar  is  the  angel  of  Paradise.)

I  have  been  as  one  who  puts  out  his  eyes  wilfully  ;  who  rises  in  the
morning  and  the  sun  shines  not  to  him,  (See  Ar.  Prov.  II.  376.)

In  the  commentary  of  Sherishi  it  is  said  that  in  the  same  year,
110,  died  Al  Farazdak  and  Jerir,  Al  Hasan  al  Basrl  and  Ibn


NOTES.


351


Sirin ;  so  that  Basra  lost  at  once  its  two  great  poets  and  its  two
great  lawyers.

A1  Kosa'i  is  said  by  some  to  have  been  a  man  of  the  tribe
of  Kosa^  in  Yemen,  whose  name  was  Moharib  ibn  Kays ;  by
others  he  is  said  to  have  been  of  the  Benu  Sa'd  ibn  Thobyan,
and  to  have  been  named  'Amir  ibn  Harith.  His  story,  and
all  the  verses  which  he  is  said  to  have  improvised,  are  given
at  length  by  Sherishi,  and  are  translated  from  Motarrezi  in  De
Sacy’s  Chrestomathy.  I  have  space  for  only  a  very  brief  narra¬
tive.  A1  Kosa'i  had  found  a  fine  nahd  tree,  of  which  bows  and
arrt)ws  are  made,  and  had  fashioned  a  bow  for  himself.  He  took
his  stand  in  the  night  to  shoot  wild  asses ;  he  shot  and  pierced
one,  but  the  bow  was  so  strong  and  good  that  the  arrow  went
through  the  body,  and  struck  on  the  rock  behind.  A1  Kosa'i,
hearing  the  sound  in  the  darkness,  thought  he  had  missed  his
aim.  Another  troop  came  by,  and  he  shot  again,  with  the  same
seeming  want  of  success.  At  last,  after  shooting  five  times,
he  broke  the  bow  in  a  rage.  When  morning  dawned  he  saw
that  five  asses  lay  dead,  pierced  with  his  arrows.  His  repent¬
ance  at  having  destroyed  so  excellent  a  bow  passed  into  a
proverb,  and  it  is  said  More  repentant  than  A1  Kosa'i.'’  Ar.
Prov.  II.  '776.  It  would  appear  that  A1  Kosa'i  was  less  prudent
than  Pandarus,  who  only  threatened  that  he  would  burn  his  bow
if  ever  he  returned  home.  Iliad  V.  212.


THE  TENTH  ASSEMBLY.

BaJihaL-^k  town  on  the  Euphrates,  between  'Anah  and
Kakkah.  It  was  restored  and  embellished  by  Malik  ibn  Towk,
who  was  governor  of  A1  Jezireh,  and  died  under  the  Khalifate  of
Mo'tamid,  a.d.  873.  (Oaussin  de  Perceval.  Essai,  Vol.  II.  p.
383.)  This  Malik  was  a  descendant  of  'Amr  ibn  Kulthum,
the  author  of  one  of  the  Mo' allakS-t,  and  had  been  in  youth
an  of&cer  in  the  service  of  Harun  ar  Keshid.


352


NOTES,


Shaving  my  head, — Sherislii  speaks  of  this  practice  as  peculiar
to  the  people  of  the  East  when  they  took  the  bath.  We  may
conclude  that  it  was  not  observed  in  Spain.

Slain  his  son, — The  word  CJ<i3  expresses  exactly  the  meaning
of  our  word  assassinate.  It  is  when  one  comes  suddenly  upon
a  man,  or  lies  in  wait  for  him,  and  kills  him  unawares.

To  refer  to  the  Governor,-— is  commonly  used  in  the  sense
of  referring  to  an  arbitrator  to  decide  priority  in  respect  of
nobilit}^  or  pedigree.

Sulayk  in  his  career, — Sulayk,  a  or  vagrant  robber

of  the  Arabs,  was  famous  for  his  speed  of  foot.  He  was,  like
'Antarah  and  Hhofaf  ibn  Nedbeh,  one  of  the  hj^\  or  mulat-
toes,  his  mother  being  a  black  slave,  named  Sulekeh,  and  his  father
'Amir  ibn  Sinan  of  the  tribe  of  Temim.  His  speed  was  so  great
that  he  could  outrun  horses,  and  -when  the  tribe  of  Bekr  ibn  WiVil
made  an  incursion  on  Temim,  and  saw  Sulayk,  they  said,  If
Sulayk  sees  us  he  will  warn  his  people  they  accordingly
mounted  two  of  their  number- on  fleet  .horses,  to  take  him.  He
fled,  and  they  pursued  him  all  day  without  success ;  but  the
next  morning  they  saw  by  his  traces  that  he  had  fallen  and
broken  his  bow.  They  thought  then  that  probably  he  had  been
exhausted  by  the  first  day’s  course ;  but  as  they  followed  they
found  that  his  footprints  were  still  wide  apart,  and  deep  sunk  in
the  sand,  so  that  he  could  not  be  overcome  with  fatigue.  When
he  reached  his  people  and  warned  them,  they  did  not  believe
him,  for  they  judged  it  impossible  that  he  could  have  run  so
great  a  distance.  Arab.  Trov.  11.  152.  He  was  captain  of
a  band  of  from  thirty  to  forty  vagabonds,  and  made  depredations
on  the  Benu  Eabihih,  and  the  tribes  of  Yemen,  sparing  the
descendants  of  Modar.  During  the  winter  he  is  said  to  have
filled  ostriches’  eggs  with  w^ater,  and  hidden  them  in  the  sand,  so  as
to  have  a  suppl}^  in  time  of  heat.  He  was  at  last  killed  in  one
of  his  incursions  by  a  certain  Asad,  son  of  Mudrik,  shortly
before  the  isld/n  of  his  tribe.  Other  Arabs  have  become  pro¬
verbial  for  their  speed  of  foot,  and  among  them  the  poets


NOTJES.


353


Shanfara  and  Ta’abbata  Sherran,  also  'Amr  son  of  Barrak.
These  three  were  companions,  and  an  exploit  of  theirs,  at  the
expense  of  the  tribe  of  Bajileh,  is  given  in  the  Commentary
of  Sherishi,  but  is  too  long  to  relate  here.  It  may  be  found
in  Be  Sacy  s  Chrestomathie,  Vol.  IL  p.  346.  The  most  cele¬
brated  of  these  vagabond  poets  was  Shanfara,  the  author  of  the
poem  called  Lamiyet  al'Arab.  Shanfara  belonged  to  the  Benu
Azd,  and  led  a  wandering  life  in  the  utmost  misery  and  squalor,
of  which  he  boasts  in  the  above-mentioned  poem.  The  legend  of
his  death  is  a  strange  one.  It  is  said  that  he  vowed  to  kill
one  hundred  men  of  the  Benii  Salaman.  Whenever  he  met  one
of  them  he  exclaimed,  ^^To  thine  eyef’’  and  he  shot  his  arrow
with  such  skill  that  he  always  pierced  the  eye  of  his  foeman.
Thus  he  slew  ninety-nine  ;  but  at  last  Asid  ibn  Jabir,  one  of  the
hostile  tribe,  and  himself  a  famous  runner,  together  with  his
brother’s  son,  Khazim  the  Nokmt,  lay  in  wait  for  him.  The
Benu  Salaman  tortured  and  killed  him  ;  but  some  time  after  one
of  them,  seeing  the  mouldering  body,  gave  the  head  a  kick,  and
a  piece  of  the  skull,  breaking  off,  fixed  in  his  foot,  of  which  wound
he  died.  Thus,  after  death,  Shanfara  slew  his  hundredth  enemy.
See  in  Hamaseli  the  commentary  on  verses  spoken  by  Shanfara
before  death,  p.  242.

Made  the  boy  speak, — is  always  used  by  the  author  in
the  sense  of  eliciting  a  sound  in  order  to  judge  of  it.  The
meaning  here  is  that  he  made  the  boy  speak  to  judge  of  his
voice.  In  the  Twelfth  Assembly  it  is  said,  he  elicited  the
utterances  of  the  lutes.”  The  Governor  did  not  want  to  hear  the
defence  of  the  boy,  but  the  sweetness  of  his  tones.

Adorned  foreheads  ivith  foreloch, — Literally,  with  hair  evenly
disposed  over  the  forehead.  A  girl  would  cut  off  the  ends  of
the  hair  over  her  forehead  and  dispose  the  short  locks  along  the
forehead  so  as  to  leave  a  clear  space  above  the  eyebrows.  According
to  'Ayisheh  the  Prophet  said,  The  Angels  in  heaven  adore  God
by  the  locks  of  women  and  the  beards  of  men ;  and  say,  ^  God  be
praised,  who  adorned  men  with  beards  and  women  with  locks  !’  ”
He  also  said,  If  one  of  you  desire  to  marry  a  wife,  let  him

23


354


NOTES.


have  regard  to  her  hair  as  much  as  he  has  regard  to  her  face.”
I  cannot  refrain  from  giving  Eiickert's  version  of  this  passage,  as
it  not  only  shows  the  extraordinary  genius  of  the  German  poet,
but  also  how  entirely  his  work  is  an  imitation  and  not  a  trans¬
lation  of  the  original :

Da  sprach  der  Alte  dem  Jungling :  Sprich  :  Bei  dem  der  die
Stirne  geschmuckt  rnit  dem  Lockenkranz, — und  die  Augen  mit
dem  dunklen  Glanz, — die  Augenbraunen  mit  der  leisen  Schei-
dung, — und  die  Wimpern  mit  der  Sanmbekleidung, — die  Augen-
]ieder  mit  der  Schwere,— die  Nasenwolbung  mit  der  Hehre, —
die  Wangen  mit  dem  Tagesanbruch, — und  das  Ednn  mit^dem
Jugendanflug, — die  Kndspe  des  Mundes  mit  dem  Aufsprung, —
die  Saiile  des  Halses  mit  dem  Aufschwung, — die  Haltung  des
Hauptes  mit  dem  Sinken, — ^und  das  Lacheln  mit  dem  Zahn-
blinken  ! — ich  habe  deinem  Sohn  nichts  gethan  zu  Leide, — noch
seinen  Busen  gemacht  zu  meines  Schwertes  Scheide. — Wo  nicht,
so  schlage  Gott  mein  Auge  mit  Decken, — ^und  meine  Wange  mit
Flecken, — meine  Schlafe  mit  der  Kahlbeit, — meine  Eose  mit  der
Fahlheit,  —  meine  siisse  Frucht  mit  der  Schaalheit,  —  meine
Stirne  mit  den  Falten, — ^meine  Zahne  mit  den  Spalten, — ^meinen
Odem  mit  dem  Dampfe, — ^meine  Lippen  mit  dem  Krampfe, —
mein  Feuer  mit  dem  Froste, — meinen  Spiegel  mit  dem  Eoste, —
meinen  Mond  mit  dem  Schwinden, — ^meine  Sonne  mit  dem
Erblinden, — das  Silber  meines  Kinns  mit  der  Schwarze, — ^und
das  Elfenbein  meiner  Hiifte  mit  dem  Schmerze  !  With  respect
to  the  of  the  Arabs,  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  refer  to  the
description  of  Herodotus,  Book  III.  8,  KeipovTab  Se  irepiTpoxciXa,
nrepL^vpovvTe^;  rov^  KpoTd(^ov<;y  i.e.,  They  have  their  hair  dipt
round  about.”  This  seems  to  have  been  forbidden  to  the
Israelites,  Levit.  xix.  27.  See  Gesenius  on  Compare

also  Jeremiah  ix.  25  ;  xxv.  23  ;  xlix.  32.

Eye^  with  their  black  and  white. — ^Various  definitions  are  given
of  One  says  that  it  means  intense  blackness  of  the  black
of  the  eye,  with  intense  whiteness  of  the  white  thereof;  another,
that  it  is  the  blackness  of  all  that  appears  of  the  eye,  as  is
found  in  animals,  such  as  gazelles,  meaning,  I  presume,  that


NOTES.


355


when  a  woman  has  the  black  of  her  eye  so  large  that  little  or
no  white  appears  she  possesses  this  quality.  It  is  also  said  that
is  a  woman  beautiful  as  to  the^^^Ui"^,  i.e,  the  parts  below
or  around  the  eyes,  which  appear  when  the  rest  of  the  face  is
veiled;  also  one,  the  white  of  whose  eye  appears  in  contrast
with  the  black  of  the  koU.  The  first  opinion  is  probably  the
soundest,  and  has  been  adopted  in  the  translation.  Sherishi
remarks  that  the  poets  have  been  lavish  in  their  praises  of  black
eyes,  but  that  the  praises  of  a  jj  or  woman  having  blue  or  light-
coloured  eyes  is  rare ;  although  it  is  related  by  '  Ayisheh  of  the
Prophet  that  he  said,  ^'Blue-eyed women  are  of  good  omen.'’  The
Arabs  appear  to  have  associated  softness  and  langour  with  the  word
while  jjj  expressed,  not  only  a  light-coloured,  but  a  glitter¬
ing  and  fierce  eye.  Thus,  when  it  was  said  to  one,  ''  Thou  art
he  answered,  The  hawk  is  Imr  al  Kays  says

(DiwS,n,  p.  34,  Ar.  Test) :

And  there  rushed  on  him  (a  stag)  in  the  morning,  at  the  rising  of  the
sun,  early,  the  dogs  of  Ibn  Morr,  or  the  dogs  of  Ibn  Sinbis,

Hungry,  fierce-eyed  as  if  from  ardour  and  hasting,  their  eyes

had  become  (bright  as)  the  flower  of  the'adras.

The  expression  yb,  Re  is  blue  or  Ught-eyed,  is  used

in  speaking  of  one  who  cherishes  malice,  and  is  to  be  dreaded.
A  common,  but  not  a  satisfactory  explanation,  is  that  the  Greeks,
with  whom  the  Arabs  were  often  at  war,  had  light  eyes,  so  that
a  ‘^light-eyed  man”  came  to  be  synonymous  with  a  deadly
enemy.  Compare  Thirteenth  Assembly,  “  my  light  or  fierce¬
eyed  enemy."  For  a  censure  on  light  eyes  compare  Hamfiseh,
Vol.  I.  p.  622  ;  “  Maidens  not  light-eyed,  not  blear-eyed."

Eyebroios  with  separation. — The  having  a  clear  space  between
the  eyebrows^  so  that  they  are  not  joined,  expresses  to  the  Arabs
the  qualities  of  pleasantness  and  cheerfulness.

Smiling  teeth  with  regularity. is  the  quality  of  having  an
opening  or  space  between  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  given  by  nature.
The  making  an  artificial  space  between  them  by  filing  or  point¬
ing  them  or  is  held  to  be  forbidden  by  Koran  iv.‘  118,
where  it  is  said  to  be  Satan  who  tempts  people  to  “  alter  the


356


NOTES.


creation  of  God.”  According  to  Baydawi  the  prohibition  applies,
among  other  things,  to  the  plucking  out  the  camel-stallion's  eye
(as  was  done  to  avert  the  Nemesis  from  excessive  wealth),  to
tattooing  the  skin,  and  to  filing  the  teeth.

Noses  with  straightness,  or  elevation,  so  that  they  should  not
be  flat,  for  an  elevated  nose  is  among  the  attributes  of  beauty
and  princeliness.

Mouths  with  purity — More  exactly  the  front  teeth,  or,  as  one
might  say,  ''the  mouthful  of  teeth.”  is  sweetness  and

coolness  of  the  mouth  and  teeth.  Motarrezi  says,  I  found  in
the  handwriting  of  my  father  that  Rubeh  was  asked  conceraing
the  meaning  of  this  word,  and  he  took  a  grain  of  pomegranate
and  said,  '  This  is  referring  to  its  purity  and  the

delicacy  of  its  juice."' — Commentary  to  Second  Assembly.

At  the  beginning  of  the  Assembly  Sherishi  expatiates  in  his
commentary  on  beauty  and  its  attributes,  as  described  in  the
terms  of  this  oath,  and  each  passage  he  annotates  as  it  occurs
with  long  quotations  from  the  poets.  These  it  is  unnecessary
to  reproduce ;  but  if  the  student  desires  a  further  acquaintance
with  the  Arab  ideas  concerning  female  beauty  he  may  be  re¬
ferred  to  the  proverb,  What  hast  thou  left  behind  thee, '  Asam?”
(Arab.  Prov,  IL  589).  A1  Harith  ibn ' Amr,  king  of  Kinda,
desired  to  wed  a  young  lady,  of  whose  charms  he  had  heard ;
but  being  a  cautious  prince,  he  first  sent  an  old  woman  named
*Asam  to  learn  from  actual  inspection  whether  she  deserved  her
reputation.  When  she  returned  the  king  questioned  her  in  the
above  words,  and  she  gave  him  a  full  description  of  the  trans¬
cendent  beauties  she  had  seen.

Made  his  head  a  sheath  to  my  sword. — ^The  word  aUU  often
occurs  in  this  sense ;  but  there  may  possibly  be  an  allusion  to
the  belief  of  the  pagan  Arabs  that  a  bird  called  aUU  or
sprang  from  the  head  of  a  murdered  man,  and  cried

Give  me  to  drink,”  until  revenge  was  taken.  This  bird  was
supposed  to  be  the  soul  or  personality  of  the  murdered  man,  so
that*  one  might  translate,  I  have  not  sheathed  my  sword  in  his
life.”  Mohammed  put  an  end  to  this  superstition.  The  Arabs


NOTES,


357


considered  the  head  the  seat  of  life.  It  is^  perhaps,  in  this  sense
that  Shanfara  says  of  his  enemies,  They  bear  away  my  head,
and  in  my  head  is  the  chief  part  of  me,  while  my  body  is  left  on
the  field.’'  Hamaseh,  p.  243.  The  Commentator  observes  that
four  out  of  the  five  senses  have  their  seat  in  the  head.

My  palm  shoot  with  greenness :  my  white  teeth  with  discolour¬
ation.  is  used  as  in  the  Second  Assembly  as  a  similitude
for  tlie  teeth.  ^  is  applied  to  dates  while  they  continue  green
and  small.

My  rose  with  the  ox-eye, — In  Lane’s  Lexicon  is  said  to  be

bitphthalmum  or  ox-eye,”  a  plant  having  a  yellow  flower,
growing  in  spring.  The  meaning  is,  may  my  rosy  cheek  be
smitten  with  yellowness.”

My  musk  with  a  foul  steam, — The  pleasant  odour  of  my  breath  *
with  offensiveness.

My  full  moon  loith  tvaning ;  literally,  tvith  interlune^  the
period  before  the  new  moon,  when  the  moon  does  not  appear  at
all.  The  meaning  here  is  may  my  beauty  decay  and  vanish.”

My  silver  loitli  tarnishing — May  my  white  cheeks  be  blackened
with  the  hairs  of  a  coming  beard !”  The  succeeding  metaphors
have  a  similar  meaning.

Tempted:  or  suggested  to  him.  For  the  use  of  this  word  see
Koran  xlvii.  27.

The  pupil  of  my  eye, — literally  the  man  of  the  eye,”
is  the  image  that  is  seen  reflected  in  the  black  of  the  eye  as  in  a
mirror  :  Hebrew  •  Gescnius  remaiks  that  the  same  figure
is  to  be  found  in  several  languages,  as  in  Persian,  and

;  in  Greek,  icogr],  fcopdaiov;  in  Jjfxtin  pupa,  pupilla  ;  in
Spanish,  la  nma  del  ojo,  etc.

Shell  may  get  clear  of  chick, — A  proverb  attributed  to  an  Arab
of  the  Beml  Asad,  who  acting  as  escort  to  a  merchant  said  to
him,  When  we  have  reached  such  a  place  shell  will  be  clear  of
chick,”  meaning  that  there  would  be  no  more  need  of  his  pro¬
tection.

As  the  tvolf  went  guiltless  of  the  hlood  of  the  son  of  Jacob. —
When  Joseph’s  brethren  sold  him  they  told  his  father  that  he  had


358


jsroTus.


been  devoured  by  a  wolf :  when  their  falsehood  was  discovered
the  wolf  was  held  guiltless.  Koran  xii.,  called  Joseph.

Ihn  Siirayj  was  a  great  doctor  of  the  rite  of  Shafi'i  and  Kadi  of
Shiraz,  in  Persia.  His  full  name  was  Abu  ’1  'Abbas  Ahmed
ibn'Omar  ibn  Surayj ;  for  his  zeal  and  learning  he  was  surnamed
The  Blight  Fire.  His  life  is  given  by  Ibn  Khallikan,  who  says,

''  He  surpassed  in  talent  all  the  pupils  of  Ash  Shafi'i.  The  cata¬
logue  of  his  works  contains  four  hundred  articles.  He  was  an
active  'defender  of  the  sect  of  Ash  Shafi'i,  and  refuted  its  ad¬
versaries  ;  he  wrote  also  observations  on  the  works  of  Moham¬
med  ibn  al  Hasan  al  Hanafi.  The  Shaykh  Abu  Hamid  al
Isfarayni  said  of  him,  In  our  knowledge  of  the  plain  points  of
jurisprudence  we  keep  pace  with  Abu  T 'Abbas,  but  he  surpasses
us  in  the  niceties  of  that  science.’  ”  The  Moslems  had  a  notion
that  every  century  some  great  man  was  raised  up  for  the  defence
of  the  faith,  and  it  was  said  to  him,  God  raised  up 'Omar  ibn
'Abd  al' Aziz  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  after  the  Hijra,
that  he  might  manifest  orthodoxy  and  destroy  innovation ;  then
God,  in  his  mercy,  placed  at  the  opening  of  the  next  century
the  Imam  Ash  Shafi'i,  that  he  might  manifest  orthodoxy  and
force  innovation  to  be  hid  ;  and  God  graciously  conferred  thee
on  the  beginning  of  the  third  century.”  He  wrote  verses,  some
of  which  have  been  preserved,  and  though  a  hot  and  apparently
a  rude  controversialist,  was  not  deficient  in  liberality  to  his  op¬
ponents.  He  died  in  the  year  306,  at  the  age  of  fifty-seven.
Hariri,  it  must  be  remembered,  belonged  to  his  sect.

The  Wolfs  Tail. — This  is  the  name  given  to  a  deceptive  bright¬
ness  which  appears  in  the  heavens  before  the  dawn,  and  then
passes  away:  it  is  called  the false”  or  lying”  dawn.  It
is  not  improbable  that  this  is  the  Zodiacal  light.

A  letter  of  Mutelemmis. — This  phrase,  which  is  equivalent  to
the  classic  literoe  Bellerophontece  had  its  origin  in  one  of  the  most
celebrated  incidents  of  early  Arab  history;  the  treachery  of
'Amr,  King  of  Hira,  which  caused  the  destruction  of  the  young
poet  Tarafeh,  author  of  one  of  the  Mo'allakat,  and  nearly  in¬
volved  in  the  same  fate  Tarafeh’s  uncle  Mutelemmis,  also  a  poet.


JSrOTUB.


359


Tarafeh.  was  tlie  most  perfect  type  of  the  wild  and  dissolute  but
gifted  poets  of  the  Ignorance.  He  was  the  son  of  A1  'Abd,  son
of  Sofyan,  son  of  Harmaleh,  of  the  tribe  of  Bekr  Wa’il,  and  of
the  race  of  Modar.  From  early  youth  his  genius  for  poetry,
and  his  license  of  tongue,  were  remarkable.  One  day,  when  he
was  playing  with  the  children  of  his  age,  his  uncle  Mutelemmis
was  reciting  a  poem  which  described,  as  was  common  among  the
Arabs,  the  rare  qualities  of  a  camel.  He  said —

I  mount  a  dark-red  male-camel,  firm  of  flesli,  or  else  a  sire-camel  of
Himyar,  fleet  in  course,  driving  tlie  pebbles  with  her  hoof  that  crushes
th^.

See  the  he-camel  transformed  into  a  she,’’  exclaimed
Tarafeh,  and  the  phrase  became  proverbial  to  express  a  sudden
and  inelegant  transition.  Arab.  Prov.  II.  246.  Mutelemmis,
much  offended,  told  the  boy  to  put  out  his  tongue.  Tarafeh  did
so ;  it  was  dark  in  colour,  and  Mutelemmis  said,  That  black
tongue  will  be  thy  ruin.”  When  Tarafeh  grew  up,  he  surpassed
all  his  contemporary  poets  in  debauchery,  and  addicted  himseli‘
completely  to  love,  wine,  and  gambling.  Ilis  great  poem  was
composed  on  the  occasion  of  the  loss  of  the  herd  of  camels
belonging  to  himself  and  his  brother,  which  was  carried  off  by  a
hostile  tribe,  while  Tarafeli  was  spending  his  time  in  pleasure.
A  few  verses  from  this  composition  will  give  an  idea  of  liis
character  and  his  genius  :

If  all  my  tribe  were  gathered,  thou  wouldst  find  me  at  the  head  of  a
kin  that  is  generous,  sought  of  suppliants.

My  two  companions  in  wine  are  youths  noble  of  aspect,  and  at  eve
comes  a  singing  girl  to  us,  clad  in  a  bright  robe  or  a  saflron-dyed  tunic.

The  bosom  of  her  dress  is  open ;  she  resists  not  the  caresses  of  the
guests ;  delicate  are  her  naked  breasts.

When  we  say,  “Let  us  hear  thy  melody,”  she  begins  gently,  with  a
soft  gaze  at  us  ;  she  puts  not  forth  her  voice :

But  presently  she  raises  her  song,  so  that  thou  wouldst  thiiik  mothers
be  wailing  over  a  babe  that  is  dead.

My  ever-drinking  of  wine  ceases  not,  nor  my  pleasure,  nor  my  selling
and  spending  my  wealth  inherited  or  gotten  :

Until  all  my  kindred  have  shunned  me  ;  I  am  separated  from  them  as
men  separate  the  sickly  camel.

Yet  do  the  poor,  the  kinless,  not  deny  my  acquaintance  ;  no,  nor  the
lords  of  the  wide-stretched  tent.  (Though  his  own  tribe  have  abandoned


360


NOTHS.


him  for  his  profligacy,  yet  he  always  has  a  friend  among  the  poor  whom
he  relieves,  and  the  rich  who  delight  in  his  society.)

0  thou  who  hlamest  me  for  that  I  seek  the  shout  of  war,  and  give
myself  to  pleasures,  say,  canst  thou  make  me  live  for  ever  1

If  thou  hast  no  power  to  ward  off  fate,  leave  me  to  enjoy  before  it
comes,  though  I  squander  all  I  have.

I  swear  that  but  for  three  things,  which  are  a  man’s  joys,  I  would  not
care  if  the  visitors  turned  away  despairing  from  my  bed  of  death.

The  first  of  these  is  to  elude  the  women  of  my  family,  who  would
censure  me,  and  to  drink  the  dark-red  wine  that  foams  as  the  water
mixes  with  it.

Another  is  to  urge  into  the  fight,  when  one  in  danger  calls  to  me,  a
broad-made  steed,  that  rushes  like  the  wolf  of  the  ghada  wood  which
a  man  rouses  to  flight  as  it  comes  to  drink.  ^

The  third  is  to  while  away  a  dark  dull  day  (for  then  darkness  is  a
pleasure)  with  a  young  beauty,  under  a  lofty-columned  tent.

The  man  of  noble  spirit  drinks  deep  while  he  lives  ;  should  we  both  die
to-morrow,  fault-finder,  thoit  shalt  know  which  of  us  will  thirst.

I  see  that  the  grave  of  him  that  is  careful,  that  hoards  his  wealth,  differs
not  from  the  grave  of  the  dissolute,  the  spendthrift :

A  hillock  of  earth  is  on  each,  with  some  flat  stones  laid  together.

The  young  poet,  at  length,  thoroughly  ruined,  left  his  kindred
and  repaired  to  the  Court  of  "Amr,  son  of  Munthir  III.,  king  of
Hira,  commonly  called  'Amr  son  of  Hind,  from  the  name  of
his  mother.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  uncle  Mutelemmis,
whose  real  name  was  Jerir  son  of  'Abd  al  Masih.  'Amr  ap¬
pointed  them  to  attend  on  his  brother  Kabiis,  according  to  the
Arab  custom  by  which  a  man  had,  generally,  two  boon  com¬
panions.  Kabus  was  a  boorish  prince,  and  treated  the  two  poets
with  great  indignity ;  sometimes  wearying  them  by  forcing
them  to  make  long  excursions  in  attendance  on  him ;  at  others
keeping  them  at  the  door  of  his  tent  while  he  drank  within.  At
last  the  passionate  and  satirical  Tarafeh  made  some  verses  upon
him,  beginning :

Oh  would  that  in  place  of  king  'Amr  we  had  but  a  few  milch-cows  lowing
about  our  tent !

Sure  Kabhs,  son  of  Hind,  will  ruin  his  kingdom  ;  he  is  an  exceeding
fool.

These  verses  were  brought  to  the  ears  of  'Amr  in  the  follow¬
ing  manner  : — A  certain  'Abd 'Amr,  a  favourite  of  the  king,  had
married  a  sister  of  Tarafeh.  The  poet,  however,  had  said  satir¬
ically  of  him,


ITOTJSS,


361


There  is  nought  good  about  him  but  his  money,  and  that  waist  which  is
so  slender  when  he  stands.

The  point  of  this  was  that  'Abd  ^4mr  was  enormously  fat.
■  The  king  was  one  day  rallying  hiln  while  he  was  naked  in  the
hath,  and  said,  Your  brother-in-law  Tarafeh  must  have  seen  you
as  you  now  are  when  he  made  that  verse/’  Tarafeh/’  answered
'Abd'Amr,  “makes  verses  on  you  and  your  brother  as  well  as
on  me he  then  repeated  to  the  king  the  satirical  lines  of  the
poet  on  the  king’s  brother  Kabus.  Now  this  'Amr  ibn  Hind
was  a  most  ferocious  and  vindictive  prince.  He  had  burned
aliv^  ninety-nine  men  and  one  woman  of  the  tribe  of  Temim  in
accordance  with  a  vow  of  vengeance  he  had  made  to  destroy  a
hundred  of  the  race.  This  deed,  which  is  known  in  Arab  his¬
tory  as  the  “  second  Day  of  Owarah,”  had  gained  for  him
the  appellation  of  A1  Moharrik,  the  Bicnier,  Compare  the
proverb,  Ill-fated  is  he  of  the  Barajim  who  approaches.”
Arab.  Prov.  I.  5.  lie  now  determined  to  destroy  both  Tarafeli.
and  Mutelemmis.  Sending  for  them  he  asked  them  if  they
desired  to  leave  his  Court.  They  answered  in  the  affirmative ;
and  he  then  told  them  that  he  would  give  tlicm  letters  to  Abu
Karib,  Governor  of  Ilejer  or  Bahrayn  for  the  king  of  Persia.
Taking  the  letters,  Mutelemmis  and  Tarafeh  set  out.  Mutelem¬
mis  suspected  treachery,  and  as  neither  of  the  poets  could  read,
he  presented  liis  letter  to  a  young  man  in  the  way,  and  asked
him  what  it  contained.  It  was  a  request  to  the  Governor  of
Hejer  to  put  the  bearer  to  death.  Mutelemmis  destroyed  the
letter,  and  implored  Tarafeh  to  fly  with  him  into  Syria.  Tarafeh
obstinately  refused,  continued  his  journey  to  Abu  Kfirib,  who
arrested  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  buried  alive.  Thus  perished
one  of  the  most  gifted  of  the  early  Arab  poets,  when  he  had
scarcely  attained  manhood.  lie  is  often  called  Ihn  al " hhrhi,
the  youth  of  twenty  years,  '  Amr  ibn  Hind  was  afterwards  slain
by  the  poet  warrior  'Amr  ibn  Kulthiim,  author  of  the  Mo"al-
lakah,  in  revenge  for  an  insult  offered  to  his  mother  by  Hind,
the  mother  of '  Amr ;  whence  the  proverb,  “  Quicker  to  slay  than
'Amr  ibn  Kulthum.”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  233.


362


jsroTus.


Tell  the  Governor, — The  verses  are  of  the  which

is  a  metre  of  the  fourth  circle,  or  iyU.  This  circle

consists  of  the  primitive  feet  which  is

the  normal  form  of  the  The  measure  of  the  is

^■L:U  AXky^  twice ;  the  of  the  first  and  third  feet

being  and  that  of  the  second  The  measure  of

the  present  verses  is  or  normal;  being  of  the  first
of  the  first  Of  the  uJ[s>j,  there  enter  into  this  metre

and  and  Jiwi,  which  is  the  union  of  the  two  former.
It  is  evident  that  these  licences  may  affect  any  of  the  feet,  Since
in  the  li  and  the  are  and  also  in

the  and  the  Ji  are  the  ^  being  a  So

that  in  the  the  foot  may  become  cL/'SUi,  and

may  become  ^  Instances  of  these  licences

will  be  found  on  examining  the  verses  in  the  text.

2h  seek  the  traces  after  the  stcbstance, — These  words,  which
have  become  proverbial,  were  first  spoken  by  Malik  ibn  "Amr  al
'  Amili  when  he  slew  the  king  of  Ghassan.  The  story  is  told  in
the  commentary  to  the  proverb :  Arab.  Prov.  I.  221.  The  king,
to  punish  the  tribe  of  'Amileh  had  imprisoned  Alalik  and  his
brother  Simak.  One  day  he  called  them  before  him  and  told
them  that  he  should  put  one  of  them  to  death.  Each  begged  to
be  the  victim,  that  his  brother  might  be  spared.  The  king
selected  Simak,  and  he  was  executed.  While  going  to  his  doom
he  improvised  a  poem,  in  which  was  the  verse  :

I  swear  that  if  they  had  slain  Malik  I  would  have  been  to  them  as  a
snake  that  watches  to  bite,  (Two  more  lines  are  given  by  Sherishi).

One  day  their  mother  heard  a  horseman  reciting  these  lines,
and  she  roused  Malik  to  take  vengence  for  his  brother.  He
watched  the  king  until  he  was  on  a  journey  with  a  small  escort,
and  then  fell  upon  him.  The  attendants  offered  Malik  a  hundred
camels,  the  usual  blood-wit  for  a  murder,  if  he  would  spare  the
king.  He  said,  I  will  not  seek  a  trace  (or,  as  we  should  say,
a  shadow)  after  a  substance,”  and  at  once  killed  the  king.  The
proverb  corresponds  to  ASsop’s  fable  of  the  dog  and  the  bone.


NOTES.


363


The  ill-fate  of  Al  Hosayn.  —  The  misfortunes  and  death  of  A1
Hosayn/  son  of ' Ali,  are  too  well  known  to  require  notice  here.

The  shoes  of  Honayii :  that  is  a  bad  bargain  or  a  bootless
errand.  Honayn  was  a  shoemaker  with  whom  an  Arab  of  the
desert  haggled  about  the  price  of  a  pair  of  shoes.  At  last  the
man  would  not  purchase,  and  they  parted  angrily.  Honayn
resolved  on  revenge ;  so  he  went  forward  on  the  road  by  which
he  knew  the  Arab  must  pass  and  threw  down  one  of  the  shoes.
The  Arab,  when  he  came  up,  said,  How  like  this  is  to  one  of
Honayn’s  shoes ;  if  the  other  were  with  it  I  would  take  them,'’
In '"the  mean  time  ITonayn  had  gone  on  and  thrown  down  the
other  shoe,  and  then  hidden  himself  near.  When  the  Arab
came  to  the  second  shoe  he  repented  that  he  had  not  picked  up
the  first;  and  fastening  his  camel,  he  returned  to  fetch  it.
Honayn  at  once  mounted  and  rode  off,  having  thus  gained  a
camel  in  exchange  for  a  pair  of  shoes.  When  the  Arab  went
back  to  his  tribe  they  said  to  him,  What  hast  thou  brought
from  thy  journey  He  said,  I  have  brought  back  nothing
but  Honayn's  shoes,"  which  became  proverbial  for  a  bootless
errand.  Compare  the  Twenty-sixth  Assembly,  I  will  depart
from  thee  with  the  shoes  of  Honayn."  This  is  the  legend  as
told  by  Sherishi ;  but  two  others  are  given  (Arab.  Prov.  I.  461),
in  the  commentary  on  the  proverb,  More  bootless  than  Honayn.
They  were  all  probably  fabricated  to  explain  a  popular  phrase,
the  origin  of  which  was  lost.

Piece-meal, — Nasif  al  Yazaji,  in  his  letter  to  De  Sacy,  says

■i-  ^

that  the  original  form  is  not  but  j  ;  and

that  the  first  half  is  indeclinable  as  being  part  of  a  word,  and
the  second  as  containing  the  meaning  of  the  elided  conjunction.
Compare  Alfiyeh,  verse  15.

Cared ‘^lot. — For  the  form  see  Lane's  Lexicon,  Book  L,
p.  255.


364


NOTES.


THE  ELEVENTH  ASSEMBLY.

Sdiueh  is  a  town  between  Rayy  and  Hamadan,  at  a  distance  of
twenty-two  parasangs  from  the  former.

By  visitmg  the  tombs. — Said  the  Prophet,  Visiting  the  tombs
makes  men  self-denying  in  this  world  and  mindful  of  the  next.”
An  authoritative  Tradition  of  Anas  says,  Said  the  Prophet  of
God,  ^  I  forbade  you  once  to  visit  the  tombs ;  but  visit  them,  for
they  soften  the  heart,  and  fill  the  ejm  with  tears,  and  bring  to
mind  the  next  world/  This  is  the  Tradition  referred  to  in  the
text.  A  man  said  to'Ayisheh,  Mother  of  the  Faithful,  I  have
a  disease;  hast  thou  a  remedy  for  it?’'  She  said,  What  is
thy  disease  ?  ”  He  said,  Hardness  of  heart/’  She  said,  A
bad  disease  is  thine ;  but  visit  the  sick,  and  attend  funerals,  and
keep  in  mind  death/’  It  was  said  to  'Ali,  ^^Why  dost  thou
dwell  near  the  burying-ground  ?  ”  He  said,  I  find  them  good
neighbours,  and  truthful ;  they  restrain  their  tongues,  and  yet  they
speak  of  the  next  world.”  '  Omar  ibn ' Abd  al  'Aziz  is  related  to  have
visited  the  tombs  of  his  predecessors  of  the  House  of  Omayyeh
and  moralized  on  their  being  brought  thus  low.  '  Omar  ibn  al
Khattab  (the  Khalif)  related,  We  went  forth  with  the  Prophet
and  he  took  seat  at  a  grave,  and  I  was  the  nearest  of  the  people
to  him ;  and  he  wept,  upon  which  we  wept  also.  He  said,  ‘What
makes  you  weep?’  We  said,  ‘Because  thou  weepest.’  He  said,

‘  This  is  the  grave  of  my  mother  Amineh ;  I  asked  leave  of  my
Lord  to  visit  her  and  he  permitted  me :  then  I  asked  leave  that
I  might  pray  forgiveness  for  her  and  he  refused  me  :  and  I  feel
the  pity  of  a  son.’  ”  'Othman  wept  when  he  stood  by  a  tomb.

A  corpse;  literally,  one  enshrouded  or  gathered  ;up  in  his
grave  clothes,  is  a  bier  when  the  corpse  is  on  it ;  other¬

wise  it  is  or

Sepulchred  the  dead. — It  would  be  more  accurate  to  say
niched^  for  is  the  niche  or  compartment  in  the  side  of  the
grave  where  the  corpse  is  placed  in  a  sitting  posture.  On


JSrOTJES.


365


the  subject  of  funerals  there  is  much  interesting  information  in
the  Kitab  aljana'iz  in  the  first  volume  of  A1  Bokhari.

Leaning  on  a  5 Holding  it  in  his  hand  as  a  and

leaning  on  it.  For  this  word,  see  Lane.  A  stall'  was  the  com¬
mon  symbol  of  dignity  carried  by  a  preacher,  and  was  intro-
duced  early  in  Islam  when  it  was  defended  by  the  precedent  of
Moses,  who  carried  a  staff.

Let  those  lolio  ivork,  etc. — Koran  xxxvii.  59.  Truly  this  is
a  mighty  gain  :  let  each  that  works  work  for  the  like  of  this.’'
These  words,  which  refer  to  the  happiness  of  the  next  world,  are
tak^n  by  Abu  Zayd  as  a  sort  of  text.

As  ye  laughed  not . . ,  as  ye  walked  not. — These  are  mansuh  on  the
masclar.  See  note  to  Fourth  Assembly  on  words  an  earliness
beyond  the  earliness  of  the  crow.

Gifts,  usually  applied  to  the  present  which  a  poet  receives
from  a  prince.  (De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  79).  For  the  occurrence
to  which  the  origin  of  the  word  is  attributed,  see  Lane,  Book  I.
p.  485.  The  more  probable  explanation  is  that  it  was  originally
the  supply  of  water  or  provision  with  which  a  man  passed  from
one  place  to  another  in  the  desert;  it  then  came  to  mean  a
supply  of  provision,  such  as  a  host  gave  to  a  traveller  for  his
journey  after  having  entertained  him.  Lastly,  it  was  applied
generally  to  a  voluntary  present  or  largess.

The  preparing  of  banquets.— al  Yazaji,  in  his  Critical
Epistle,  finds  fault  with  De  Sacy  for  explaining  by

He  proceeds  to  mention  the  various  names  of  entertainments
among  the  Arabs,  as  follows  : — If  it  be  a  feast  at  child-birth,  it  is
called  \  if  it  be  for  (the  first  shaving  of)  the  child,  it  is
called  ;  if  at  circumcision,  ;  if  on  the  day  that  the
child  finishes  the  learning  of  the  Koran,  it  is  called  ;  if
on  occasion  of  an  offer  of  marriage,  it  is  cJ'C* ;  if  at  a  wedding,

;  if  on  the  finishing  of  a  house,  if  on  return  from
a  journey,  ;  if  at  beginning  the  month  of  Rejcb,  ;  if
for  a  guest,  ;  if  for  any  other  cause,  It  is  im¬

possible  to  deny  the  critic’s  learning,  and  that  De  Sacy  uses  a
word  that  is  not  synonymous.


366


isroTFS.


Again  no  :  surely  ye  shall  learn. — Koran  cii.  4,

0  thou  who  claimest  understanding, — These  verses  are  of  the
metre  which  belongs,  like  rejez  and  reml,  to  the  third
circle;  the  normal  measure  is  three  times  in  each

hemistich  ;  but  this  is  seldom  used,  the  ordinary  measure  being
the  repetition  of  the  foot  twice  in  each  hemistich,  as  here.  Of
the  there  enter  into  this  measure  and  The

peculiarity  of  the  poem  in  the  text  is  that  the  metre  is  what  is
called  kLu.«.  The  meaning  of  this  word  is  strung  as  heads,
and  it  is  used  to  denote  that  a  certain  constant  rhyme  recurs
throughout,  as  an  emerald  or  a  piece  of  gold  recurs  at  regular
intervals  among  the  beads  of  a  chaplet.  There  are  various  kinds
of  the  verses  called  musammatdt,  and  they  may  be  composed  of
lines  of  any  metre,  but  they  present  always  the  same  feature  of
a  continuous  rhyme  running  through  the  poem.  It  is,  in  fact,
the  variation  and  lightening  of  the  ancient  monotonous,  one-
rhymed  kasideh  of  the  Arabs  by  the  introduction  of  the  stanza,
a  change  to  which  parallels  may  be  found  in  other  litera¬
tures.  The  stanzas  in  the  text  are  made  up  of  two  verses
of  hezej,  of  which  the  three  first  hemistiches  rhyme  together,
and  the  fourth  has  the  recurring  rhyme.  In  analogy  with
ordinary  versification  the  rhyme  of  the  first  triplet  is  iden¬
tical  with  the  recurring  rhyme ;  the  other  triplets  have  each
its  independent  rhyme.  Many  varieties  of  musammatdt  are
to  be  found,  sometimes  the  hemistiches  having  the  varying
rhyme  are  in  fours  or  fives ;  sometimes,  it  is  said,  the  number
changes  in  the  same  poem.  The  recurring  rhyme  is  called
the  prop  of  the  poem.  In  Freytag's  Darstel-
lung  der  AraUschen  Yershtnst,  page  406,  a  specimen  is  given
of  one  of  these  compositions,  into  which  verses  of  an  ancient
poem  of  the  Hamaseh  have  been  introduced.  At  a  later
period  the  fancy  of  the  Arabs  for  variations  of  metre  produced

the  elaborate  poems  called  in  which  the  poets  of

Andalusia  excelled.  In  these  compositions  the  strangest  liberties
are  taken  with  the  old  versification  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  giving


NOTUS.


367


one  rhyme  to  the  first  hemistiches  of  a  series  of  verses,  while
the  second  hemistiches  have  a  different  rhyme  ;  the  mingling  of
various  metres,  or  various  forms  of  the  same  metre,  in  the
poem ;  the  rhyme  of  the  opening  verses  recurring,  like  a  refrain,
at  intervals  throughout  the  poem.  Abu  Bekr  Yahya  ibn  'Abd
ar  Eahman,  who  lived  in  the  sixth  century  of  the  Hijra,  was
highly  esteemed  for  these  compositions.  Seven  of  the  most
celebrated  of  them,  have  been  published,  together

with  some  modern  imitations,  by  the  American  missionaries  at
Beyrout.  For  a  survey  of  these  and  other  metrical  eccentri¬
cities,  the  student  is  referred  to  Freytag’s  DarsteUimg.  A
specimen  of  MicmmmatCit  is  to  be  found  in  the  Hu;^all  Diwan.
They  are  by  Jenuh,  the  sister  of  *Amr  1  kelb.  Faris  Shid-
yak  says  that  they  should  be  read  with  the  kafiyeh  muJadeJu
Aventures  de  Fariac,  p.  13  of  Theneb  al  kitab.

SirdL — This  word  signifies  originally  a  way  or  path,  and  is
used  in  this  sense  in  Koran  i.  5.  Its  special  signification  as  the
path  over  which  men  must  pass  after  death,— a  path  like  a
bridge,  as  narrow  as  a  hair  and  as  sharp  as  a  sword — is  derived
from  a  Tradition  of  Mohammed,  On  the  day  of  resurrec¬
tion  the  people  shall  be  sent  over  the  Path,  and  they  shall
be  scattered  off  it  like  moths  into  the  fire,  but  God  shall
save  whom  he  will/'  Compare  Koran  ci.  .3.  Khadyeh,  and
one  or  two  ‘others  will  be  excused  this  perilous  trial.  On  the
form  of  the  word  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion.  Accord¬
ing  to  Baydawi,  on  Koran  i.,  the  primitive  form  is
from  1^,  he  swallowed,  since  the  road  or  way  may  be  said  to
swallow,  or  devour,  those  who  walk  in  it ;  analogous  to  which  is
But  the  (jw  is  changed  into  that  it  may  correspond
with  the  Lj  which  is  of  the  letters  called  ;  that  is  of  the

letters  formed  by  bringing  the  tongue  in  contact  with  the  roof  of
the  mouth.  These  letters  are  four  in  number—^,  L,  and.Ssf.
(See  his  commentary  on  ^T,  at  the  beginning  of  the  second
Sura).  By  this  the  pronunciation  was  rendered  more  easy.
But  in  order  that  the  original  may  not  be  too  far  departed  from,


368


NOTES.


-  P

the  sound  of  the  ^  is  sometimes  turned  slightly  to  the
sound  of  j,  which  is  between  those  of  ^  and  But  is
according  to  the  dialect  of  Koraysh^  and  is  the  authoritative
reading.  On  the  interchangeability  of  ijjj  and  see  De  Sacy's
Chrest,  Arahe.  vol.  11. ,  p.  230;  Baydawi  on  word  at  xxxi.
19  ;  also  Forty-sixth  Assembly.

Plume  him  whose  plumage  hath  Compare  Forty-first

Assembly  :  Plume  the  wing  of  the  noble  if  his  fortune  have
stripped  it.’^

The  garb  of  impudence. — The  word  in  the  text  is  specially
applied  to  the  dress  in  which  a  slave  is  exposed  for  sale.  •For
strong  of  sinew/"  or  strongly  braced/"  see  Koran  Ixxvi.  28.
How  many,  Abu  Zayd  ?—A  pretty  eiffect  is  produced  by  making
Harith  address  the  impostor  in  verses  like  his  own,  and,  Abu
Zayd  reply  in  the  same  manner.


THE  TWELFTH  ASSEMBLY.

77ie  Ghutah. — This  is  the  fertile  plain  in  which  the  city  of
Damascus  is  situated.  A  ghutah  is  a  low,  well-watered  plain ;
and  the  name  is  applied  especially  to  one  of  the  richest  spots
with  which  the  Arabs  were  acquainted.  Some  writers  have
rather  fancifully  identified  the  of  Job  with  this  place.  (See
Q-esenius,  sicb  voce).  A  commentator  says,  The  Ghutah  of
Damascus  is  reckoned  among  the  gardens  or  paradises  of  the
earth,  which,  according  to  A1  Wahidi,  are  four  in  number;  the
Ghutah  of  Damascus,  the  valley  or  pass  of  Bawwan,  the
Ubulleh  of  Basra,  and  the  Sughd  of  Samarcand.""  To  these  the
Andalusians  would  add  the  Vega  of  Granada.  According  to  A1
Asma'i,  the  beautiful  places  of  the  earth  were  three,  Damascus,
Samarcand,  and  Basra.  Sherishi  compares  Damascus  with
Irem  ftat  al  Hmad,  for  its  beauty  and  splendour.  Irem
with  the  Columns  was  the  city  which  Sheddad,  son  of  'Ad,
built  for  himself  before  his  accursed  race  was  destroyed  by


NOTES,


389


God;  it  is  mentioned  in  Koran Ixxxix.  6.  It  remains  invisible
to  the  eyes  of  mortals  in  the  desert  near  Aden,  though  God
sometimes  permits  it  to  be  seen,  as  was  the  case  in  the  days  of
the  Khalif  Mu'awiyeh,  when  one  Abu  Kilabeh,  crossing  the
deserts  of  Yemen  in  search  of  a  run-away  camel,  came  upon  it,
and  brought  back  some  of  the  jewels  with  which  its  streets  are
strewed.  When  a  place  is  exceedingly  beautiful  and  magnifi¬
cent  it  is  said  to  be  like  Irem  al  "Imad.  It  is  a  Tradition  that
Mohammed,  before  his  death,  held  out  to  his  disciples  the  pos¬
session  of  Damascus  as  the  chief  incentive  to  an  invasion  of
Syri^.  The  Moslem  legend  is  that  the  city  received  its  name
from  its  founder  Dimeshk,  son  of  Nimrod,  son  of  Canaan,  or  as
others  say,  Dimeshk,  son  of  Batir,  son  of  Malik,  son  of
Arphaxad,  son  of  Shem,  son  of  Noah.

Steeds, — Having  short  and  fine  hair,  which  is  one  of  the  signs
of  a  good  breed.

Freedom  of  arm ;  fulness  of  store  :  Literally,  of  udder/'
These  metaphors  are  used  to  signify  ease  of  life  and  affluence.
Compare  Job  xxi,  24  :  His  breasts  are  full  of  milk.''

Agreement  ozas  completed, — it  became  complete  and
in  a  right  state ;  literally,  it  demanded  loss,  or  diminution,  or
destruction;  because  these  sometimes  follow  completeness:  or
the  may  be  substituted  for  the  meaning  being  (Lane).

From  every  tribe, — The  largest  division  or  tribe  of  Arabs
descended  from  a  common  ancestor  was  called  ;  a  part  of
this  was  ;  a  part  of  tliis  again  was  ;  a  part  of  this
was  i fis. ;  a  part  of  this  ;  and,  lastly,  a  part  of  this
The  single  family  was  called

In  the  clans,— aj)pcars  to  be  a  word  of  general  significa¬
tion,  applied  to  the  descendants  of  one  ancestor,  whether  many
or  few.  It  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  sometimes  to

Q-^d  sometimes  to

The  gate  of  Jay  run, — A  gate  of  the  great  mosque  of  Damas¬
cus,  built  by  the  magnificent  Khalif  Welid,  son  of '  Abd  al  Melik,
on  the  site  of  a  church  of  St.  John,  and  still  known  as  the
mosque  of  the  Benu  Omayyeh.  This  celebrated  structure,  which

24


370


jsroTJss.


is  the  exemplar  after  which  so  many  great  works  hare  been
executed,  both  in  the  East  and  in  Spain,  has  been  so  often
described  that  it  is  needless  to  speak  further  of  it  here.  It
occupied  the  Khalif  during  the  ten  years  of  his  reign,  from  86
to  96  ;  but  did  not  prevent  him  from  enriching  Mecca,  Medina,
and  Jerusalem  with  costly  monuments.  In  Mecca  he  adorned
the  Ka'beh  with  gold;  in  Medina  he  enlarged  the  mosque  of
the  Prophet’s  tomb.  Jayrun  is  said  to  be  the  name  of  an
ancient  patriarch,  son  of  the  builder  of  Damascus.  It  was  pro¬
bably  applied  also  to  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city,  for  in  De
Sacy’s  Commentary  we  find,  Jayrun  is  the  name  of  one  of  the
gates  of  Damascus,  on  the  eastern  side,”  and  it  is  more  likely
that  the  travellers  assembled  outside  the  city.

Tying  and  untying^  and  'plaiting  and  tymning. — Metaphorical
expressions,  signifying  the  formation  of  schemes,  complicated  or
simple,  and  the  subsequent  abandonment  of  them.

The  rosary  of  women, — A  string  of  beads,  used  in  wor¬
ship  to  count  the  number  of  prayers  or  ejaculations.  The
use  of  this  rosary  is  described  in  Lane’s  Modern  Egyptians.
The  worshipper,  at  a  certain  period  of  his  devotions,  repeats

The  perfection  of  God ;  ”  Praise  be  to  God ;  ”  and  God  is
most  great,”  each  thirty-three  times,  and  he  counts  these  repe¬
titions  with  a  string  of  beads.  The  beads  are  99,  and  they  have
a  mark  between  each  thirty-three.  They  are  of  aloes,  or  other
odoriferous  or  precious  wood,  or  of  coral,  or  of  certain  fruit-
stones,  or  seeds,  &c.  Chapter  iii.

As  the  garb  of  monks, — Keligious  devotees  in  Islam  assimi¬
lated  their  practices  to  those  of  the  Christian  monks,  in  spite
of  a  celebrated  Tradition  of  the  Prophet ;  “  No  monkery  in
Islam,  and  no  celibacy.”  This  Tradition  is  alluded  to  in  the
Forty-third  Assembly.  The  Prophet  said  to'Akaf  ibn  Wada'ah,

Hast  thou  a  wife  ?”  He  answered,  No.”  Then,”  said  the
Prophet,  thou  belongest  to  the  brotherhood  of  the  devils.  If
thou  wilt  be  one  of  the  Christian  monks,  then  keep  with  them ;
but  if  thou  wilt  be  one  of  us,  know  that  it  is  our  custom  to
marry.”


NOTES.  871

Giddiness  from  Literally,  the  look  of  religious

intoxication  produced  by  watching  and  contemplation.

lo  steal  a  hearing.— ks,  the  devils  do  when  they  approach
heaven  to  listen  to  what  passes  there.  It  is  said,  in-  Koran  xv.
16 :  “  We  have  set  towers  (constellations  of  the  zodiac)  in
heaven,  we  have  made  them  goodly  to  those  who  look  thereon.
— And  we  guard  them  from  every  devil,  cast  at  with  stones  : —
Save  when  one  steals  a  hearing,  and  then  a  flame,  visible  to  all,
follows  him.” — This  is  the  foundation  of  the  belief  that  shootinjr
stars  are  darts  hurled  by  the  angels  against  listening  demons.
Compare  xxxvii.  6.  I  have  seen  it  somewhere  stated  that  a
great  flight  of  shooting  stars,  no  doubt  one  of  those  whose  period
modern  science  has  so  accurately  determined,,  was  seen  in  the
time  of  the  Prophet,  and  gave  rise  to  the  revelations  on  this
subject  in  the  Koran.  Certain  days  on  which  such  phenomena
occurred  were  afterwards  known  as

Their  secret  was  manifest  to  him. — Either  the  state  of  conceal¬
ment  departed  or  ceased^  or  else  what  was  in  a  state  of  conceal¬
ment  became  apparent,  from  meaning  what  is  open  and
apparent  of  land.”  This  is  a  phrase  from  a  traditional  verse  of
Shikk  the  Diviner,  one  of  the  most  famous  personages  of  ancient
Arabia.  As  Shikk  and  Satih  are  often  alluded  to,  and  the  latter
is  spoken  of  in  the  Eighteenth  Assembly,  it  may  be  as  well  to
give  some  account  of  them.  Ibn  Khallikan  says,  in  his  life  of
Khalid  al  Kasri,  one  of  the  offie'ers  of  the  Khalif  Hisham,  Shikk
was  a  son  of  the.  aunt  of  Satih,  the  diviner,  who  foretold  the
coming  of  the  Prophet,  as  is  related  in  the  Sirat  ar  Resul  of  Ibn
Hisham.”  He  then  proceeds  to  describe  them.  We  learn
from  him.,  and  other  authorities,  that  they  were  two  deformed
beings.  Shikk  was  only  half  a  man,  and  for  this  reason  was
called  Shikk  (half).  He  had  but  one  cheek,  one  arm,  and  one
leg.  Satih  was  without  bones  ;  he  was  a  mere  mass  of  flesh,  with
his  face  in  his  stomach,  for  he  had  neither  head  nor  neck.
He  could  not  sit  up  except  when  angry.  He  then  swelled
and  took  a  sitting  posture.  They  received  the  gift  of  pro-


372


NOTJEB.


phecy  from  Zarifeh,  the  same  who  predicted  to  her  hus¬
band,  'Amr  Muzaykiya,  the  bursting  of  the  dyke  of  Mareb.
In  an  extract  from  the  book  called  Kitab  al  Joman,  given
by  De  Sacy  (Memoires  de  TAcademie  Royale,  Vol.  48),
the  following  account  is  given  of  this  occurrence  :  Shikk
had  received  from  God  only  half  the  form  of  a  man.  Satih
was  a  shapeless  mass  of  flesh;  he  had  no  limbs,  and  his
face  was  in  his  breast.  In  their  time  there  was  among  the  Arabs
a  woman  called  Zarifeh,  daughter  of  'Amr  ibn'Amir.  None  of
the  children  of  Adam  had  ever  had  more  intercourse  with  Jinn,
or  was  more  able  to  make  them  speak  by  divination  andr  au¬
guries.  When  she  was  about  to  die  she  sent  for  Shikk  and  Satih,
on  account  of  their  deformity,  and  the  influence  that  demons  had
possessed  upon  them,  and  she  spat  in  their  mouth,  and  be¬
queathed  to  them  her  Jinn,  after  which  she  died,  and  was  buried
at  Al  Johfah.^^  The  narrative  goes  on  to  say  that  they  suc¬
ceeded  her  in  the  functions  of  divination,  and  rose  to  the  highest
degree  of  skill.  Shikk  died  leaving  behind  him  children.  Satih
also  died  about  the  time  Mohammed  was  born ;  each  of  them
having  lived  three  hundred,  or,  as  some  say,  six  hundred  years.
The  prophecy  of  Satih  respecting  the  Prophet  is  told  as  follows
by  the  same  author :  The  Tobbrf  of  Yemen  had  a  troublesome
dream,  the  matter  of  which  he  could  not  remember.  He  sum¬
moned  his  wise  men,  who  declared  themselves  ready  to  interpret
if  he  could  tell  them  what  he  had  dreamed ;  tut  only  Shikk  and
Satih  were  able  to  tell  him  the  dream  itself.  It  was  that  a  dove
had  flown  from  a  holy  place,  and  had  settled  in  the  Tihameh,  the
sea-coast  region  south  of  Mecca ;  and  Satih  interpreted  it  to  mean
that  a  noble  prophet  would  arise  who  would  destroy  idols,  and  teach
the  best  of  religions.  According  to  Tabari,  from  whom  de  Sacy
also  gives  an  extract,  the  two  diviners  predicted  to  Rabi'ah,  son
ofNasr,  a  Jewish  king  of  Yemen,  that  the  Abyssinians  should
conquer  the  country  and  govern  it,  that  they  should  be  expelled,
and  that  afterwards  a  prophet  should  arise  among  the  Arabs,
bringing  a  new  religion,  which  all  men  should  embrace,  and
which  should  endure  in  Yemen  to  the  Day  of  Judgment.  These


NOTES.


373


theological  prophecies  have  obtained  for  the  two  soothsayers
great  celebrity.  The  narrative  in  the  Sirat  ar  Resiil  will  be
found  at  page  9,  Wiistenfeld’s  edition,  Gottingen  1860.  It
relates,  like  that  of  Tabari,  to  Eabfat  ibn  Nasr.  The  Jinn  of
this  Arab  divineress  may  be  compared  with  the  of  the
Israelite  wizards  and  witches  :  Levit.  xx.  27 ;  1  Sam.  xxviii.  8.

Yoitr  care  relieve  itself:  or  get  rid  of  its  cause,  as  the  egg  gets
rid  of  the  chick.  For  a  similar  expression  see  Arab.  Prov.
IL  220.

The  Semdweh. — The  Syrian  desert,  said  to  be  called  so  be¬
cause  of  the  ruins  and  traces  of  the  dwellings  of  Thamud  found
in  it ;  the  word  meaning  the  same  as  shakhs.  European  travel¬
lers  have  fully  confirmed  the  existence  of  these  remarkable  ruins.

For  carrying  him]  literally  for  halanoing  with  him  on  the
same  camel;  one  riding  on  the  right  side  of  the  saddle,  and
the  other  on  the  left.

The  Mother  of  the  Koran  is  the  first  chapter,  and  is  said  to
be  so  called  because  it  contains  the  doctrines  or  principles  of  the
whole  book;  namely,  due  praise  to  God,  exhortations  to  duty  by
bidding  and  forbidding,  promises  and  threats.  At  Koran  ci.  6,  it
is  said  of  him  whose  works  shall  be  light  in  the  balance,  that  his

is  the  Pit  of  Fire.

The  Lights  of  his  kindred,  the  Keys  of  his  victory. — Under
these  symbols  the  Muhajirun  and  the  Ansar  are  supposed  to  be
designated.

Place  me  by  thy  mercy  among  thy  servants  who  do  aright. —
This  is  part  of  the  prayer  of  Solomon,-  which  he  uttered  when  he
heard  the  ant  bid  its  swarm  return  to  the  nest  for  fear  of  being
trodden  by  his  armies.  lioran  xxvii.  19.

Prom  thyself  helping  power. --ILomri  xvii.  82.

The  heaven  with  its  constellaimis. — These  are  the  first  words
of  the  85th  Sura,  called  the  Towers  or  Constellations,

7rvp709,  is  the  name  given  to  the  principal  constellatiojas  which
surround  the  heavens,  as  a  city  is  surrounded  by  its  towers.  The
name  is  applied  to  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  and  also,  it
would  seem,  to  the  twenty-eight  mansions  of  the  moon.  Com-


374


NOTES.


pare  Korah  xv.,  16  ;  and  xxv.  62.  Baydawi,  on  the  85tli  Sura,
derives  the  word  from be  conspicuous,  though  it  is  evident
that  the  verb  is  formed  from  the  noun  ;  and  he  attributes  the  name
to  the  sun  and  moon  seeming  to  rest  in  the  chief  constellations,
and  go  forth  from  them  as  from  towers  or  citadels.  Nasif  al
Yazaji  has  united  the  names  of  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  in  some
verses  :  Makaraat,  p.  215.

T/ie  earth  with  itsplams. — ^  is  a  broad  valley  between  hills,
or  a  path  leading  up  to  or  between  them.  Compare  Koran
Ixxi.  19  and  xxii.  28,  where  it  is  rendered  by  Baydawi,

The  poioring  flood  and  the  blazing  sim. — Koran  Ixxviii.  13.

The  house-tops  oj  "^Anah. — JiL  is  a  common  word  signifying
anything  that  appears  standing  in  the  distance,  particularly  a
building  or  its  ruins.  The  older  poets  often  began  their  song
with  a  lamentation  on  beholding  the  Jll?  of  the  camp  or  habita¬
tion  which  had  been  deserted  by  the  tribe  of  their  mistress.
Here  it  is  applied  to  the  summits  of  the  buildings  of  the  city
appearing  at  a  distance  over  the  desert  plain.  'Anah  on  the
Euphrates  was  at  an  early  period  celebrated  for  its  wine,  which
was  carried  into  the  heart  of  Arabia,  and  inspired  the  wild  and
dissolute  poets  of  the  Ignorance  with  their  impassioned  declam¬
ation.  In  one  of  his  poems,  Imr  al  Kays  says  of  a  place  from
which  one  or  more  of  his  beloved  ones  had  departed, —

“  I  lingered,  amid  the  traces  of  the  camp,  like  one  drunken,  who  has
been  drinking  of  wine  at  early  morn,

“  Of  wine  the  first  of  the  cask,  red  as  the  blood  of  gazelles  ;  old  wine  of
'Allah,  or  of  the  vines  of  Sheb^m/'  Dlw^n,  p.  36,  Arabic  text.

The  exposed  and  the  hidden;  the  corded  and  the  sealed^  i.e.
the  various  kinds  of  goods  they  brought  with  them,  both  what  was
open  to  view  and  what  was  corded  in  bales  or  sealed  up  in
boxes.

The  light,  the  adorning,  i.e.  he  chose  only  the  most  portable,
such  as  ^old  and  silver,  and  such  as  served  for  ornament,  as
jewels.

The  lutes. — From  is  derived  our  word  lute.

J  cling  to  journeying. — The  metre  of  these  verses,  which  are


JsroTiJS,


375


musammatdtj  like  those  in  the  last  Assembly,  is  mutekdriby
which  has  been  already  described.

Pride,— j\sL>  is  literally  the  contention  before  an  umpire  on
the  titles  of  a  man  or  tribe  to  nobility  or  honour  over  others  ;  as
was  the  custom  with  the  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance.  It  was  called  so
because  each  one  said,  after  recounting  his  claims  to  honour,
^  Jcl  iJk  The  most  celebrated  mundfaraJi  of  the  Ignorance
was  that  between 'Amir  ibn  at  Tofayl  ibn  Malik  ibn  Ja'far  and
Alkamat  ibn  'Olathah,  a  descendant  of  the  same  Ja'far,  for  the
leadership  of  the  Benu'Amir  ibn  S^sa'ah.  The  two  chiefs  staked
a  hflndred  camels,  and  applied  to  two  men  of  the  Koraysh,
afterwards  very  celebrated  in  the  history  of  Islam,  Abu  Sofyan
ibn  Harb  and  Abu  Jahl,  to  judge  between  them.  These  declined,
as  did  also  some  others ;  but  at  last  the  task  was  undertaken  by
Haram  ibn  Kotbah,  who  reconciled  the  two  rivals  by  declaring
that  they  were  equal  in  merit.  See  commentary  to  De  Sacy's
Hariri,  p.  316,  and  Caussin  de  Perceval,  Essai,  vol.  II.,  p.  564.
Haram  on  this  occasion  made  use  of  a  phrase  which  has  become
proverbial,  Ye  are  as  equal  as  the  two  knees  of  the  full-grown
tawny  camel  stallion  which  come  to  the  ground  together;”
that  is,  as  the  knees  of  a  good  and  well-trained  camel.  This  is
often  said  of  two  things  that  are  equal.  Compare  Prov.  Arab.
II.  361.  In  the  mitndfarak  between 'Abbad  ibn  Anf  and  Ma' bad
ibn  Nadlah,  the  judge,  Damrah  son  of  Damrah,  took  a  bribe
of  a  hundred  camels  from  the  former  and  decided  for  him  :  the
judge  became  infamous,  as  the  first  before  Islam  who  had  taken
a  bribe.  On  learning  what  had  been  done,  Ma'bad  exclaimed,

There  is  no  leap  left  in  the  wild  ass ;  ”  a  phrase  which  became
proverbial  with  reference  to  any  who  had  had  honourable
qualities  and  had  lost  them.  Prov.  Arab.  II.  603.  Compare
Hamfiseh,  vol.  I.,  p.  115,  where  are  given  certain  verses
addressed  to  Damrah  by  a  man  whom  he  had  upbraided.  A
singular  mundfarah  was  that  between  the  Bend  Fezarah  and
the  Benfi  Hilal  ibn  'Amir,  as  to  which  had  been  the  more
disgraced  by  an  act  of  one  of  their  people.  Among  the  Bend
Kilkl  was  a  man  named  Mokharik,  who  had  received  the  nick-


376


NOTES.


name  of  Madir,  the  Befonler,  because,  being  of  a  morose  and
envious  disposition,  he  had  watered  his  own  camels  at  a  cistern,
and  then  befouled  with  dung  the  little  that  remained  of  the
water  in  order  that  no  others  might  drink.  On  the  other  hand,
a  man  of  the  Fezarah  being  in  company  with  some  who  were
hunting,  ohjectim  est  eum  asini  sylvestris  veretrum  edisse.  The
stake  was  a  hundred  camels,  and  it  was  decided  against  the
Benu  Hilal,  the  deed  of  Madir  being  looked  upon  as  the  more
shameful.  Compare  the  proverb,  ^‘More  sordid  than  MMir;”
Arab.  Prov.  I.  190.  An  idea  of  the  vauntings  that  were  poured
forth  on  these  occasions  may  be  formed  from  the  Mo'allakah  of
Amr  ibn  Kulthum,  who  celebrates  the  exploits  and  virtues
of  his  branch  of  the  race  of  Taghlib.  In  the  mouth  of  Abti  Zayd,
it  simply  means  family  pride,  and  what  we  should  call  keeping
up  a  character.

A  well-Jilled  house :  a  house  filled  with  the  him  of  visitors.
The  word  is  originally  applied  to  a  wooded  place,  in  which  the
wind  whispers  through  the  trees,  or  to  a  place  full  of  grass  in
which  grasshoppers  and  flies  make  a  noise.  is  defined  to  be
the  making  a  sound  in  the  nose,  i,e.  humming.

And  rebel  against  the  adviser. --\mv  al  Kays  says,  “  See,  I  have
oft  repelled  the  obstinate  censurer  concerning  thee;  him  that  is
sincere  in  his  blaming,  not  remiss.’^  Mo'allakah,  v.  43.

Comes  by  thee. — is  applied  to  an  animal  which  turns  its
right  side  to  the  spectator,  passing  by  him  from  his  left  to  his
right  hand.  The  contrary  is  The  former  was  esteemed

lucky,  probably  because  the  animal  passing  in  that  manner  was
more  easy  to  shoot.  But  some.  Arabs  considered  the  lucky,
and  there  was  a  difference  of  belief  in  this  matter  between
Hijaz  and  Nejd.  See  Lane,  Book  I.,  p.  182.

From  rvhat  thicket  is  thy  root :  what  is  thy  origin  and  tribe  ?
There  may  possibly  be  an  allusion  in  the  word  to  the  five

Ayas  of.  Koraysh ;  these  were  five  sons  of'Abd  Shems,  who
had  all  similar  names,  so  that  the  question  might  be  understood,
From  which  of  the  A"yas  is  thy  origin?’'

Arabs  and  foreigners. — The  word  is  applied  to  foreign


NOTES,


377


nations  generally,  but  more  particularly,  it  would  seem,  to  the
Persians.  The  idea  connected  with  it  is  that  of  not  speaking
Arabic  correctly.  The  phrase  ^'Ajam  and  ""Arab  occurs  in  the
verses  which  Abu  Adineh  (or  Odayneh)  addressed  to  his  cousin
A1  Aswad  son  of  Mun;^ir,  king  of  Hira,  urging  him  to  put  to
death  the  captives  he  had  made  from  Ghassan.  They  are  given
by  Schultens,  Monumenta  Vetiistiora  Arabice,  ed.  1740,  p.  57.
These  verses  were  very  celebrated,  and  were  probably  in  the
mind  of  Hariri.

Like  meat  on  the  tray, — An  ancient  proverbial  expression,
signifying  the  being  vile  and  worthless,  or  exposed  to  contempt.
The  proverb,  Women  are  like  meat  on  the  tray/'  is  derived
from  a  saying  of  the  Khalif  'Omar,  quoted  at  Arab.  Prov.  1.  21,
and  means  that  they  are  worthless  creatures  and  soil  men’s
reputations.

The  tavern  of  a  The  word  is  thought  by

some  to  be  derived  from  the  Persian  but  the  more

reasonable  opinion  is  that  it  is  another  form  of  TOiHj

rZaiL,  the  shop  or  vault  of  a  vintner.  At  Jeremiah  xxxvii.  10,
where,  in  the  English  version,  we  read  ''When  Jeremiah  was
entered  into  the  dungeon  and  into  the  cabins,”  the  meaning  of
the  word  is  no  doubt  underground  vaults  or  cells,  and  the
name  must  have  been  afterwards  applied  to  the  cellars  whore
vintners  kept  and  sold  their  wine.  Li;yU.  is  the  shop  of  a
vintner,  and  also  the  vintner  himself;  it  is  also  used  for  any
shop.  The  derivation  from  because  it  destroys  men’s

property  and  wounds  their  honour  is,  of  course,  only  the  guess
of  a  grammarian.

The  white  eameh:  camels  of  a  white  colour  lightly  mixed
with  yellow.

The  last  darkness  of  night, — is  the  setting  forth  on  the
journey  after  the  or  halt  which  is  made  in  the  later  part

of  the  night.  It  takes  place  either  before  dawn,  or  between  the
first  dawn  and  the  rising  of  the  sun.

Left  together  those  two  old  ones,  i.e.  left  the  rcay  or  space  free
between  them;  meaning,  left  the  two  free,  each  to  do  to  the


378


jsroms.


other  as  he  ^pleased  (Lane).  We  left  Abu  Zayd  and  the  Devil
alone  together.

The  Moslem  name  for  the  Devil,  probably  a  cor¬
ruption  of  diaboloSy  though  said  to  be  from  because  he
despairs  of  the  mercy  of  God ;  his  former  name,  before  his  im¬
piety,  having  been  It  is  also  said  to  have  been  A1

H4rith,  and  the  first  child  of  Eve  was  named  'Abd  al  Harith,  in
honour  of  him  :  Tabari,  According  to  Koran  ii.  28,  he  was  of
the  number  of  the  angels,  and  sinned  by  refusing  to  bow  down
to  Adam  when  he  was  created.  God  had  created  the  angels  to
inhabit  heaven,  and  then  purposed  the  creation  of  man  upon
earth.  He  said  to  the  angels,  I  am  about  to  place  a  vicar,
in  the  earth.”  They  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  place  in  it
one  who  will  work  violence  in  it,  and  shed  blood  He  said,
I  know  what  ye  know  not.”  Having  created  Adam,  God  told
him  the  names  of  all  things,  and  then  brought  him  to  the  angels,
and  bade  them  name  them  if  they  could.  When  they  were
unable  to  do  this,  God  bade  Adam  tell  the  names,  and  when
Adam  had  done  so,  God  bade  the  angels  bow  down  to  him.
God  did  this  as  a  trial  of  their  faith,  not  intending  that  they
should  commit  idolatry  by  worshipping  Adam,  but  making
Adam  the  or  point  to  which  the  prostration  should  be
directed,  the  worship  being  received  by  God  himself.  All
obeyed  except  Iblis,  who,  according  to  repeated  narratives  of  the
event  in  the  Koran,  refused  on  the  ground  that  he  was  made  of
fire,  while  Adam  was  only  made  of  earth.  He  then  appears  to
have  been  ejected  from  heaven,  and  to  have  become  the  enemy
of  man,  whom  he  caused  to  be  banished  from  Paradise.  A  diffi¬
cult  question  in  connection  with  Iblis  is  his  relation  to  the  Jinn.
At  Koran  xviii.  48,  it  is  said,  '^We  said  to  the  angels,  ^  Bow
down  before  Adam and  they  all  bowed  down  except  Iblis,  and
he  was  of  the  Jinn.  .  .  .  Will  ye  take  Iblis  and  his  progeny

as  patrons,  instead  of  me  ?  They  are  your  enemies.” ,  Erom
this  it  would  appear  that  Iblis  belonged  at  once  to  the  angels  and
the  Jinn,  though  the  Jinn  are  held  to  be  a  subordinate  and  a
very  different  race  of  beings,  for  the  angels  dwell  in  heaven,  have


NOTES.


379


no  distinction  of  sex,  and  do  not  propagate  their  species ;  while
the  Jinn,  or  at  least  some  kinds  of  them,  as  the  the

and  the  are  both  male  and  female,  and  engender.

Jinn  are  also  both  good  and  bad,  and  will  be  judged  at  the  last
day.  Some  will  go  to  hell,  like  men,  Koran  xi.  120,  and  some
will  be  rewarded.  There  are  also  Jinn  who  are  Moslems,  and
others  who  are  infidels,  for  Khorafeh,  w^ho  was  carried  away  by
Jinn,  related,  when  he  returned,  that  there  had  been  a  war
between  the  Jinn  of  the  two  religions.  Moreover,  we  learn  from
Koran  xlvi.  28,  that  God  assembled  a  number  of  Jinn  to  hear
the  Koran  read,  and  that  then  they  returned  as  apostles  to  their
race.  Also  in  the  Seventy-second  Sura,  called  The  Jmn,  it  is
revealed  that  a  number  of  them  having  listened  to  the  Koran,
believed  in  it,  and  at  once  renounced  idolatry.  On  the  other
hand  there  are  some  that  are  of  an  essentially  wicked  nature,
and  resemble  the  Such  was  the  ""ifrlt  of  the  Jinn

(interpreted  by  Baydawi  as  one  abominable  and  rebellious  among
the  Jinn),  who  offered  to  bring  to  Solomon  the  throne  of  the
Queen  of  Sheba,  Koran  xxvii.  39.  From  this  difference  of
nature  it  is  difficult  to  understand  that  Iblis  was  of  the  Jinn;  for
though  it  is  held  that  the  Jinn,  or,  at  least,  those  of  them  essen¬
tially  wicked  in  their  nature,  are  descended  from  Iblis,  who
propagated  them  in  a  miraculous  manner,  yet  he  must  have
been  himself  originally  of  a  different  nature.  Baydawi,  at
Koran  ii.  32,  treats  this  question  at  length,  and  gives  various
opinions,  one  of  which  is  that  Iblis,  though  an  angel  by  nature,
became  of  the  Jinn  by  act,  that  is,  adopted  their  character,  which
seems  to  be  the  prevalent  opinion,  though  the  high  authority  of
Ibn  *Abbds  is  given  for  the  opinion  that  there  was  an  order  of
angels  which  begat  children,  and  was  called  Jinn,  to  which  order
Iblis  belonged.  He,  like  other  devils,  is  cast  at  with  fiery  darts,
according  to  the  curse  pronounced  upon  him  by  God :  Koran
xxxviii,  78.  It  is  said  that  is  a  foreign  word,  and  that
for  this  reason,  and  also  because  it  is  a  proper  name,  it  is
imperfectly  declined.


380


NOTES.


THE  THIRTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  banks  of  the  Zorcrd. — Zowra  is  a  name  applied  to  the
Tigris  ia  the  neighbourhood  of  Bagdad,  and  to  the  city  itself,  or
the  eastern  part  of  it.  The  general  name  for  the  Tigris  is
the  of  Genesis  ii.  14  and  Daniel  x.  4  ;  being
prefixed  to  signify  the  velocity  of  the  current.  Gesenvus.

Trotted. — With  regard  to  a  horse  it  is  defined  as  rose  in  his
riin7iing.

Some  children.— Vlxxval  of  paucity.

That  are  kept  jealously. — is  the  most  noble  and  precious
part  of  anything.  Compare  Tarafeh,  Mo'allakah,  v.  66, —

death  selects  noble  spirits,  it  also  chooses  and  takes  away  the
most  precious  of  the  miser’s  hoardings.’’

The  word  is  also  used  of  a  she-camel,  at  v.  89.

The  Hearty  i.e.^  the  centre  or  head-quarters  of  the  army.
An  army  had  five  divisions  and

The  Arms.—iX^s:^  is  used  of  the  upper  arm  between  the  elbow
and  shoulder.  By  a  natural  transition  it  came  to  signify  a  helper.
The  genius  of  the  Arabic  language,  like  that  of  the  Hebrew,  is  to
form  new  ideas  by  giving  a  metaphorical  signification  to  material
objects,  and  this  character  is  strongly  marked  throughout  the
present  passage.

The  Limbs. — are  the  members  or  limbs  of  a  man  by
which  gain  is  made,  as  the  hand,  the  foot,  and  the  eye.

Turned  about  till  hack  was  belly. — This  phrase  answers  to  our
topsy-turvy,  and  denotes  confusion ;  but  it  is  also  said,  he
examined  the  matter  '^back  and  belly,’'  that  is,  thoroughly.
Arab.  Prov.  II.  243.

Front-tooth  nor  eye-tooth.— FjA  signifies  one  of  the  front  teeth ;
that  is,  one  of  the  central  incisors,  four  in  number.  As  the
feminine  of  ^  it  signifies  the  she-camel  that  has  shed  the  tooth
called  that  is,  a  camel  in  the  sixth  year.  The  name  is  also
applied  to  a  horse  in  the  fourth,  or  as  is  otherwise  said,  in


NOTES.


381


the  third  year ;  and  to  a  sheep  or  goat,  or  an  animal  of  the
bovine  kind  in  the  third  year  (Lane).  Similarly  signifies
the  canine  tooth,  and  also  an  aged  camel  in  which  this  tooth  is
conspicuous.

Tarnished.— j^j\  is  explained  in  De  Sacy’s  commentary,  as
falling  away  and  being  reft  from  the  possessor.  But  it  is  evident
that  the  series  of  words  are  all  intended  to  express  the  idea  of
colour.  I  have  therefore  translated  as  above.  J^ij]  has  properly
the  signification  of  being  discordant  and  confused  in  colour.

The  Yelloro  loved  one. — Compare  the  Assembly  of  the  Denar.

My  blue-eyed  enemy. — This  is  usually  explained  to  refer  to  the
Greeks,  who  were  the  enemies  of  the  Arabs,  and  a  light-eyed  race.
Thus  also  JLajuS^  having  red  moustaches,  had  the  meaning

of  hostile,  as  being  a  mark  of  the  Greeks.  It  may  be  that  as  the
Byzantine  Court  had  men  of  the  northern  nations  in  its  service,  so
blue  or  light  eyes,  and  red  or  yellow  hair,  might  be  found  opposed
to  the  Arabs  in  the  field.  See  further  a  note  on  the  Tenth  Assem¬
bly.  At  Koran  xx.,  102,  where  it  is  said,  When  the  trumpet
shall  be  sounded,  and  we  shall  gather  together  the  wicked
Baydawi  says  that  the  wicked  are  thus  described  because  this  is
the  most  hateful  colour  of  the  eye  to  the  Arabs,  since  the  Greeks
were  distinguished  by  it ;  and  men  in  describing  an  enemy  said,

Black  of  heart,  ruddy  of  moustache,  blue  of  eye.''  But  it  may
also  be  rendered  staring,"  or  rather  'M^lear-eyed"  with  terror.
It  appears  also  to  describe  a  light,  wild,  glittering  eye,  in  con¬
tradistinction  to  the  soft  and  languid  black  wliich  the  Arabs
admired.  Compare  Arab.  Prov.  II.  848,  and  I.  715.  It  seems
to  have  been  connected  with  the  idea  of  a  piercing  sight  in  the
legend  of 'Anz  al  Yemameh,  commonly  called  Zarka  T  Yemameh,
the  first  woman  who  used  kohl.  She  was  a  woman  of  the  pri¬
meval  tribe  of  Jedis,  and  when  Jedis  had  destroyed  the  tribe  of
Tasm,  all  but  Bibali  ibn  Murrah,  this  solitary  survivor  fled  to
Hassan  ibn  Tobba",  king  of  Yemen,  and  sought  vengeance  on
Jedis.  The  Himyarite  army  set  forth,  and,  in  order  that  its
numbers  might  be  concealed  from  Jedis,  the  king  commanded
that  each  soldier  should  cut  down  the  bough  of  a  tree  and  bear


382


NOTES.


it  before  Mm.  TMs  is,  perhaps,  the  original  of  the  story  in
Macbeth.  Zarka  ascended  an  a  fortress  or  tower,  and,
though  the  army  was  three  days’  inarch  distant,  she  saw  it,  and
called  out,  0  people,  either  trees  or  Himyar  are  coming
against  you.”  They  would  not  believe  her,  and  she  then  ex¬
claimed,  in  the  metre  rejez  : —

I  swear  by  God  that  trees  creep  onward,  or  Himyar  bears  something
which  he  draws  along.

She  then  described  that  she  saw  a  man  mending  his  sandal.

•  The  tribe  still  disbelieved,  and  in  the  end  were  surprised  and
destroyed.  The  legend  is  told  in  various  ways  :  compare
proverb  '^More  keen-sighted  than  Zarka  T  Yemameh;”  Ar.
Prov.  I.  192;  also  De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  commentary  to  Fiftieth
Assembly.  For  another  instance  of  her  keenness  of  sight  see
the  kasideh  of  N^bighah  the  Thobyani,  in  De  Sacy’s  Clu'esto-
mathie.  Queen  Zebba  and  Basus  are  also  described  by  the
Arabs  as  blue-eyed.

Bed  death.—^j  red  death,  death  in  war  is  said  to  be  meant.
Arab,  Prov.  II.  670.  White  death  is  a  natural  and  quiet  death,
with  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  and  black  death  is  a  violent  and  dreadful
death,  as  by  strangling.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  this  address
Hariri  abandons  rhyme  ;  the  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  series  of  the
form’ Jxil,  giving  enough  of  rhythm  to  the  composition.  Com¬
pare  Forty-ninth  Assembly,  where  names  compounded  of  Abu
are  introduced.

Their  look  is  a  sufficient  examining. — The  eye  of  the  horse  is
as  good  as  a  look  in  his  mouth,”  is  a  proverb  used  of  any  one
whose  aspect  plainly  shows  his  real  condition.  In  the  Thirty-
third  Assembly,  Abu  Zayd  says,  To  you  who  are  clear-sighted
the  looking  on  me  suffices  for  a  description.”

A  mess. — is  a  mess  of  crumbled  bread,  moistened  with
broth,  and  generally  having  small  pieces  of  meat  cut  up  in  it, —
a  mess  resembling  'pillaio,  but  made  with  bread  instead  of  rice.
In  the  thirteenth  Assembly  of  Nasif  al  Yazaji  are  some  verses
recording  the  principal  dishes  of  the  Arabs ;  and  in  the  com¬
mentary  to  these  it  is  said  that  tharid  is  made  of  meat’,  milk,  and


jsroTus.


383


bread.  Hasbim,  the  ancestor  of  Mohammed,  received  that
name  because  he  crumbled  the  bread  for  the  tharkl  of  the  pilgrims ;
that  is,  because  he  was  the  first  to  distribute  to  them  necessary
provisions.  When  prepared  luxuriously  with  eggs  and  marrow,
as  was  the  tharkl  of  Ghassan,  it  was  the  food  of  the  wealthy,
and  esteemed  above  every  other.  It  is  said  of 'Ayisheh  that  she
excelled  all  other  women,  as  tharid  excels  other  kinds  of  food.
The  word  is  given  as  synonymous  with  tharid.

The  sold  that  dwells  in  me, — For  a  similar  use  of  com¬
pare  the  Thirty-fourth  Assembly.

^ets  a  mote,  —  The  figure  of  a  mote  in  the  eye  is  used
commonly  to  express  any  trouble  or  humiliation.  In  the  Twenty-
second  Assembly  it  is  said  of  a  company  who  are  convicted  of
behaving  ungenerously,  Each  one  drooped  his  eyelid  over  his
mote.”  So  also  in  the  Thirty-seventh,  ‘^The  noble-minded  man,
if  his  eye  have  caught  a  mote,  conceals  it  even  from  the  pupils
of  his  own  eyes.”  The  metaphor  is  ancient,  for  in.  the  Mo'al-
lakah  of  Harith  it  is  said,  If  ye  will  be  silent  we  will  be  as
those  who  close  the  eye  when  the  motes  are  under  their  eyelids,”
Line  32.

Among  thy  Reciters. — In  the  early  days  of  Arab  poetry,  when
writing  was  almost  unknown,  the  reputation  of  a  poet  depended
on  the  number  of  persons  whom  his  genius  induced  to  commit
his  poems  to  memory,  and  to  recite  them  in  public  gatherings,
or  in  the  houses  of  great  men.  Such  a  reciter  was  called
;  and  many  stories  are  current  of  the  marvellous  powers  of
memory  displayed.  In  these  Assemblies  Harith  is  supposed  to
be  the  Eawi  of  AbCl  Zayd,  as  is  stated  by  Hariri  in  the  Preface.
Sometimes  a  poet  was  the  KS,wi  of  another ;  the  last  who  was  so
is  said  to  have  been  Kothayyir  Salnb'Azza,  or  the  Lover  of
*  Azza,”  who  died  in  the  year  of  the  Hijra  105.  His  life  is  given
by  Ibn  Khallik^n.  One  of  the  most  celebrated  of  these  reciters
was  Abu  T  Kasim  Hammad,  who  flourished  at  tlm  close  of  the
first  and  the  beginning  of  the  second  century,  and  was  in  high
favour  with  Welid  ibn  'Abd  al  Melik  and  Hisham.  He  was
called  Ar  Rawiah  for  the  multiplicity  of  his  knowledge  of


384


ROTES,


Arab  poetry,  anecdotes,  and  traditions.  Ibn  Khallikan  gives  a
life  of  bim,  and  speaks  of  bis  wonderful  powers.  He  is  said  to
have  first  collected  tbe  Seven  Mo'allakafc,  wbicb  probably  owe  to
bim  tbeir  present  form.  Ibn  Khallikan  relates  that  the  Kbalifs
of  tbe  House  of  Omayyeb  treated  bim  with  much  distinction,
and  tells  of  bim  tbe  anecdote  which  will  be  found  in  my
Introduction.  In  tbe  Durrab  of  Hariri  (Antbologie  Gram.
Arabe)  is  the  story  of  bis  being  sent  for  from  Irak  to  Syria  by
tbe  Kbalif  Hisbam  to  inform  him  of  tbe  origin  of  a  verse
of  an  ancient  poet.  Hammad  was  famous  for  bis  knowledge
of  tbe  Days,  or  battles  and  adventures  of  tbe  desert  Ar^bs,
and  all  that  related  to  tbeir  history,  poetry,  genealogy,  and
idioms ;  but  in  tbe  Arabic  language  be  was  not  very  skilful,
for  having  learnt  tbe  Koran  by  heart  from  a  written  copy,
be  mistook  tbe  pronunciation  of  three  hundred  or

words  wbicb  may  be  variously  pronounced.  As  manuscripts
increased  tbe  profession  of  Rawi  declined,  but  it  still  continued
one  of  tbe  chief  accomplishments  of  tbe  learned  to  know  by
heart  vast  quantities  of  verse.  There  is  a  play  on  the  verb
wbicb  I  have  passed  over  in  the  translation.

I  complain  to  Tbe  metre  of  these  lines  is  which

has  been  explained  in  tbe  notes  to  the  Second  Assembly.  This
and  other  similar  Arab  lamentations  seem  to  have  been  suggested
by  the  beautiful  lines  attributed  to  'Amr  ibn  A1  Haritb  ibn
A1  Modad,  prince  of  tbe  Jorbom,  at  tbe  expulsion  of  his  family
from  Mecca.  Scbultens,  Monumenta  VetusUora  Aralice,  p.  1.
I  may  say  that  I  totally  disbelieve  in  the  great  antiquity  of
these  or  any  other  extant  Arabic  verses.

In  the  ashy  year. — A  year  of  drought  and  barrenness,  when
all  vegetation  is  dried  up  to  tbe  appearance  of  ashes.

Choking  hinders  me, — Tbe  full  proverb  is,  Choking  binders
tbe  verse,''  i.e,^  stops  tbe  way  of  the  verse."  In  Arab.  Prov.
I.  340,  two  explanations  of  this  proverb  are  given.  One  is  that
a  father  forbad  a  poetical  son  to  recite,  until  tbe  youth  saddened,
and  fell  into  an  illness.  The  father  then  relented,  but  it  was  too
late,  and  the  son,  in  his  last  moments,  uttered  the  words  of  the


NOTES,


385


proverb.  The  more  popular  tradition  ascribes  the  words  to  the
poet  'Obayd  ibn  A1  Abras.  The  King  of  Hira,  Mim&ir  ibn  Ma'  as
Serna,  had,  in  a  fit  of  drunkenness,  ordered  his  two  boon-com¬
panions,  named  Khalid  and  'Amr  to  be  buried  alive.  When  he
returned  to  his  senses  he  was  filled  with  grief,  and  constructed
two  mausoleums  over  his  friends,  at  which  he  determined  to
spend  two  days  in  mourning  every  year.  He  further  made  a
vow  that  one  day  should  be  called  the  Day  of  Good,  and  the
other  the  Day  of  Evil.  The  first  person  whom  he  should  meet
on  the  Day  of  Good  he  would  present  with  a  hundred  camels,
andothe  first  he  should  meet  on  the  Day  of  Evil  he  would  put  to
death.  Ill  fate  brought  one  year  to  the  spot  the  poet'Obayd,  on
the  morning  of  the  Day  of  Evil.  Mun&ir  told  him  that  he .
must  die,  but  bade  him  first  repeat  his  poem,  beginning  Mal-
hub  has  gone  desertward  from  his  people ;  he  is  gone  to  the
open  plain,  and  returns  not,^^ — a  poem  which  Mun&ir  much
admired.  'Obayd  answered,  ‘'The  choke  stops  the  verse,’'  a
phrase  which  became  proverbial.  The  poet  then  desired  to  have
wine  to  enliven  him  before  death,  and  when  he  had  well  drunk
his  veins  were  opened,  and  the  two  tombs  washed  with  his  blood.
This  horrible  act  is  attributed  to  various  kings  of  Hira,  and,  in
the  Commentary  of  De  Sacy,  to  Ndman,  son  of  Munthir.  The
most  trustworthy  narrative,  however,  is  that  of  the  Kitab  al
Aghani,  which  has  been  translated  by  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval,
Essai,  II.  lOo,  and  to  it  the  reader  may  be  referred.  For  pro¬
verbial  expressions  connected  with  the  legend,  see  Ar.  Prov.  I.
25, 185,  499.  In  the  commentary  on  the  proverb."  To-morrow
he  will  be  near  to  him  who  looks  for  him,”  I.  118,  it  is  said  that
this  kind  of  human  sacrifice  was  abrogated  by  No'man  ibn  al
Munthir,  who  was  converted  to  Christianity  by  the  virtue  and
devotion  of  a  Christian  Arab.  The  tale  is  identical  with  that  of
Damon  and  Pythias.  On  the  proverb  "The  wolf  is  bye-named
Abu  Ja'deh,”  see  De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  662.

The  forelocks  shall  bow  down, — God  is  called  the  Master
of  thy  forelock,  in  the  First  Assembly,  In  Koran  xi.  59,  it  is
said  "  There  is  no  creature  but  he  holds  it  by  the  forelock,”  and


25


386


NOTES,


in  Iv.  41,  ^^The  wicked  shall  be  known  by  their  mark;  they
shall  be  taken  by  the  forelocks  and  the, feet/'  These  expres¬
sions  may  owe  their  origin  to  the  usage  of  the  Arabs,  who
gloried  in  possessing  the  forelocks  of  their  enemies,  as  an
American  Indian  glories  in  his  scalps.  They  were  said  to  cut  off
the  hair  of  prisoners  before  they  released  them,  and  to  carry  it
home  in  their  quivers,  as  a  token  of  their  own  victory  and  the
abasement  of  their  adversaries.  See  the  proverb,  More  unlucky
than  Khowta'ah.^'  Arab.  Prov.  I.  687.  In  the  life  of  Imr  al
Kays,  from  the  Kitab  al  Aghani,  it  is  said  that  when  Hojr,  the
father  of  the  poet,  was  slain,  he  bade  that  his  arms,  camels,  -and
goods  should  be  given  to  the  one  of  his  sons  who  did  not  afflict
himself  at  his  death.  The  messenger  came  to  Nafi',  the  eldest,
and  told  him  what  had  happened,  on  which  Nafi'  threw  dust  on
his  head.  The  messenger  came  then  to  another,  who  did  like¬
wise  ;  and  so  he  came  to  all,  and  found  none  who  did  not  afflict
himself.  At  last  he  came  to  Imr  al  Kays,  the  youngest,  whom
he  found  drinking  and  playing  with  a  friend  at  oj  (probably
dice).  The  messenger  said,  ‘‘  Hojr  is  dead,"  but  Imr  al  Kays  said
to  his  friend,  ^^Play  on ;  "  and  they  played  till  the  game  was
over.  Imr  al  Kays  then  inquired  the  cause  of  his  father's
death,  and,  having  been  told,  exclaimed,  Wine  and  women
are  forbidden  to  me,  till  I  have  slain  a  hundred  of  the  Benu
Asad,  and  cut  off  the  forelocks  of  a  hundred."

The  faces  of  the  assemblage  shall  be  black  and  white _

God  has  said  that  in  the  day  of  judgment  there  shall  be  faces
white  and  black ;  that  is,  the  faces  of  the  believers  shall  be
lighted  with  joy,  and  those  of  the  infidels  black  with  despair.
Koran  hi.  102.

Cleft  OUT  hearts  in  pieces, — Compare  commentary  on  Mo'al-
lakah  of  Imr  al  Kays,  v.  22.

A-stretch,--LlJ\jJ:^  signifies  to  stretch  out  the  neck  as  one
does  when  about  to  drink  water  at  a  stream,  and  then  to  stretch
forth  the  neck  in  expectation  of  anything.  The  word  answers  to
our  a-tip-toe."


notes.  387

Her  cloak, — The  is  a  woman’s  wide  outer  garment,

enveloping  her  whole  body.

Oh  !  would  I  knew. — The  metre  of  these  lines  is  which

has  been  explained  in  the  notes  to  the  First  Assembly.

One  mind  hy  mnegar  and  another  by  wine, — i.e.,  each  mind
in  one  way  or  another. — Compare  Arab.  Prov.  II.  628,  and
Hamaseh  558,  Arab.  Text.  It  may  also  mean  ^'with  good  or
bad/^  since  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  figured  these  two  qualities
by  wine  and  by  vinegar,  which  is  the  corruption  of  wine.

Being  at  one  time  Sakhr,  at  another  time  the  sister  of  Sa^khr,
— The  most  celebrated  female  name  in  Arab  poetry  is  that  of  A1
Khansa,  the  sister  of  the  warriors  Sakhr  and  Mu  awiyeh,  and
famous  for  her  elegies  on  the  two  brothers.  Her  name  was
Tumadir,  and  she  was  the  daughter  of  'Amr,  son  of  Harith,  son  of
Sherid  .....  son  of  Sulaym.  The  name  Khansa,  (having  a
turned-up  nose  like  the  gazelle  or  the  wild  cow),  was  given  her,
as  some  say,  by  Durayd  ibn  As  Simmah,  her  rejected  lover.
Mu'awiyeh  and  Sakhr,  her  brothers,  were  two  of  the  chief  men
of  the  tribe  of  Sulaym.  In  their  childhood  their  father  ^Amr
.had  shown  them  to  the  assembled  Arabs  at  the  fair  of  'Okaz,  and
proclaimed  them,  amid  the  assent  of  all,  to  be  the  two  noblest
boys  of  the  posterity  of  Modar.  Years  after,  Mu' Awiyeh  had  met  at
'Okaz  a  certain  Hashim  son  of  Harmalah,  of  the  tribe  of  Murrah
of  Ghatafan ;  and  a  quarrel  had  arisen  between  them.  When
the  sacred  truce  was  at  an  end,  Mif  awiyeh  determined  to  attack
the  Benu  Murrah.  A  battle  was  fouglit  which  is  known  in
tradition  as  the  first  Day  of  Howra,  and  Mu' awiyeh  was  killed  by
Durayd,  brother  of  Hashim.  Hashim  himself  was  thought  to
have  been  killed,  as  he  had  been  unhorsed  and  his  mare  had
galloped  into  the  ranks  of  the  Benil  Sulaym;  but  Sakhr  having
during  the  ensuing  sacred  month  of  Rejeb  gone  among  the  Benu
Murrah,  discovered  that  he  was  still  alive,  and  was  informed  that
he  and  Durayd  had  killed  Mu' awiyeh.  Have  ye  buried  him
asked  Sakhr.  ^^Yes,”  said  the  brothers,  and  in  costly  stuff
of  Yemen,  which  was  purchased  for  five-and-twenty  young


388


WOTJES,


camels.’^  Show  me  his  tomb/’  said  Sakhr.  When  he*  was
conducted  to  it  he  wept,  so  as  to  excite  the  scorn  of  the  Arabs,
who  held  it  not  good  that  a  hero  should  show  signs  of  sorrow.

I  weep  thus  every  night,”  said  Sakhr,  and  know  no  repose
since  Mu'awiyeh  is  dead.^^  This  passionate  affection  for  each
other  distinguished  the  family.  Khansa  bewailed  her  brother  in
elegies,  and  Sakhr  prepared  to  avenge  him.  When  the  sacred
month  was  over  he  penetrated  into  the  camp  of  the  sons  of
Murrah,  slew  Durayd,  and  then  escaped  by  the  fleetness  of  his
mare,  which  was  that  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  Hashim.
Some  of  Durayd’s  kindred  pursued,  but  were  repulsed  by^'the
Benu  Sulaym.  This  is  called  the  second  Day  of  Howra.  In  the
Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der  Poesie  der  alien  Araber,  of  Theodor
Noldeke,  some  verses  are  to  be  found  composed  by  A1  Khansa
on  the  death  of  Mu'awiyeh.  They  have  all  the  spirit  of  ante-
Islamic  poetry;  and,  as  far  as  can  be  judged  from  such  frag¬
ments,  justify  her  high  reputation.  The.se  events  took  place
about  ten  years  before  the  Hijra,  at  the  time  when  Mohammed
had  just  entered  on  his  religious  career.  Sakhr  did  not  long
survive  his  brother.  Being  at  feud  with  the  Benfl  Asad  ibn
Khozaymeh  he  made  an  incursion  upon  them,  and  carried,  away
a  number  of  their  camels.  The  Benu  Asad  pursued  and  came
up  with  the  spoilers  at  a  place  called  That  al  Athl.  The  com¬
bat  which  took  place  is  called  the  Day  of  That  al  Athl.  The
companions  of  Sakhr  fled  from  him,  and  he  was  wounded  by  a
lance  which  drove  a  ring  of  his  breast  mail  into  his  body.  He
regained  his  people,  but  sickened,  and  lay  long  helpless ;  for
though  the  wound  seemed  to  heal,  yet  the  place  swelled,  and
there  grew  out  a  thing  like  a  wen  upon  it.  How  Sakhr  had  a
wife  named  Ba&ileh  or  Sulayma,  whom  he  had  carried  off  by
force  from  the  Benu  Asad ;  and  one  day  he  overheard  a  woman
ask  her  how  was  her  husband.  She  replied  bitterly,  He  is
neither  a  living  man  to  be  hoped  in,  nor  a  dead  one  to  be  for¬
gotten.'’’  Then  Sakhr  knew  that  she  was  weary  of  him.  But
when  they  asked  his  mother,  he  heard  her  say,  Hope  with  me,
he  will  recover.”  Then  he  improvised  these  verses : —


jsroTUS.


389


The  mother  of  Sakhr  is  not  weary  in  her  attendance  ;  but  Snlayma
is  weary  of  my  bed  and  my  seat ;

Whosoever  esteems  a  wife  as  a  mother,  let  him  not  live  but  in  misery
and  scorn.

Then,  resolved  to  linger  no  longer,  he  bade  them  cut  out  the
ring,  which  they  did,  and  lie  shortly  afterwards  died.

It  was  on  Sakhr  that  the  principal  elegies  of  A1  Khansa  were
composed.  Her  Diwan  is  still  extant,  but  only  in  manuscript.
Fragments  of  it  may  be  found  at  p.  516  of  De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  and
in  Noldeke’s  Beitrage,  The  courage,  generosity,  and  hospitality
of  the  warrior  are  praised  in  impassioned  verse.  With  one
hand  he  was  strong  to  smite,  with  the  other  free  to  bestow/"
When  the  lance-points  crossed  he  handed  rounij  the  cup  of  death,
he  was  a  defence  when  his  people  were  dismayed.  Who  now  is
there  to  entertain  guests  when  the  north-wind  blows,  while  the
echo  replies,  and  the  cold  forces  the  camels  to' seek  the  pens?
Thus  lamented  A1  Khans^  for  many  years;  so  as,  at  last,  to
incur  the  reproaches  of  those  who  thought  her  grief  too  long-
lived.  In  the  eighth  year  of  the  Hijra  the  Benu  Sulaym  made
their  ■  submission  to  the  Prophet,  and  joined  his  forces  to  the
number  of  a  thousand  warriors,  at  the  head  of  whom  was '  AbbS^s
ibn  Merdas,  the  son  of  Khansa.  She  came  with  her  son,  and
was  received  with  great  respect  by  Mohammed,  to  whom  she
recited  her  poetry.  It  now  remains  to  give  some  account  of  the
personal  history  of  this  heroine.  Though  her  poetry  was
elegiac,  she  was,  if  the  Arabs  are  to  be  believed,  proud  and
masculine  in  temper,  and  with  little  delicacy,  even  if  judged  by
the  standard  of  her  own  primitive  age.  At  the  fair  of  'Okaz,
the  poet  An  Nabighat  a^  Thobyani  erected  for  her  a  red  leather
tent  in  token  of  honour ;  and  in  the  contest  of  poetry  gave  her
the  highest  place,  above  all  but  A1  Asha  (Maymun  al  Asha  the
Great,  son  of  Kays).  If  I  had  not  heard  him,”  said  Nabighah
to  her,  I  would  say  that  thou  didst  surpass  every  one  in
poetry.  Yerum  confiteor  te  omnes  mamilUs  prceditas  ( scilicet
foeminas )  superareJ^ .  Cui  ilia  superbissime,  Nec  mimts  omnes
testiculis  prceditos'^  She  was  first  married  to  Eawahat  ibn  'Abd
al  Aziz  of  her  own  tribe  of  Sulaym,  and  afterwards  to  Merdas


390


NOTES.


ibn  ^Amir  of  the  same  tribe.  She  was  probably  a  widow  for  the
second  time  when  she  attracted  the  admiration  of  Durayd  ibn
As  Simmah,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  heroes  and  poets  of  the
time,  and  held  by  the  Arabs  to  be  the  equal  of  ^Antarah  in
genius  and  knightly  prowess.  But  he  was  about  sixty  years  old
when  he  beheld  the  young  poetess  in  a  light  undress  applying
pitch  to  the  sores  of  her  camels.  He  fell  in  love  with  her  at
once,  and  sang —

Greet  ye  Tum^dir,  O  my  companions ;  halt  here  and  dwell ;  your
halting  here  is  all  I  seek.

I  have  ne’er  seen  or  heard  till  to  day  that  one  anointing  scabby  ca&els
*  In  common  garb  should  be  beautiful,  putting  the  pitch  on  the  sore
places ;

With  bare  arms  smearing  the  pitch,  as  the  perfume  is  smeared  on  a
striped  vest  of  Yemen.

Khansa,  how’ever,  was  not  inclined  to  wed  him,  and  refused
him,  after  ascertaining,  by  an  indelicate  expedient,  that  he  had
lost  the  strength  of  youth.  Oaussin  de  Perceval,  Essai,  11.  549.
In  her  later  years,  after  the  establishment  of  Islam,  she  knew
^Omar  and  ^Ayisheh,  who  rebuked  her  for  persisting  in  her
grief  for  Sakhr.  From  an  anecdote  told  of  her  behaviour  at
her  daughter’s  marriage  in  Hammer-Purgstall’s  life  of  her
(Vol.  I.,  p.  550)  she  appears  to  have  been  of  an  imperious  and
unamiable  character  when  advanced  in  years.  It  may  be  noticed
that  the  words  of  Durayd,  ‘^putting  the  pitch  on  the  sore
places,”  became  proverbial  to  express  the  putting  of  anything
in  the  right  place,  or  making  an  apposite  observation  :  compare
Thirty-eighth  Assembly,  near  the  beginning.

In  the  commentary  to-  the  proverb  The  wild  ass  is  stopped
in  his  rush  ”  the  full  legend  of  Sakhr  and  his  wife  is  given.  It
is  there  said,  Alii  referunt  virum  quendam  uxorem  Sachri,  quse
e  marito  tsedium  cepisset,  interrogasse  Num  podex  venditur?
(erat  enim  pulchra  et  magnis  coxis  praedita  mulier)  eamque
respondisse  Certd !  brevi  tempore^''  by  which  she  meant  that
she  was  only  waiting  for  her  husband’s  death  to  marry  again.
When  Sakhr  heard  these  words  he  swore  that  he  would  kill  her;
and  when  she  entered  he  said,  Give  me  my  sword.”  She  gave


NOTUS.


391


it  to  him,  and  he  tried  to  strike  her  with  it,  but  his  strength  failed
him.  He  then  recited  the  verses  of  which  the  first  two  have  been
translated  above.  In  these  verses  occurs  the  phrase  The  wild
ass  is  stopped  in  his  rush  ”  or  leap/’  which  became  proverbial.
Arab.  Prov.  II.  251.  In  the  Forty-fifth  Assembly  Hariri  makes
A1  Khansa  proverbial  for  contentious  eloquence.  The  judge
says  to  Abu  Zayd’s  wife,  If  A1  Khansa  were  to  dispute  with
thee  she  would  be  silenced.’"  Some  eulogistic  words  on  Sakhr  are
given  at  Arab.  Prov.  I.  31.  Some  verses  by  Sakhr  are  to  be
found  at  Hamaseh,  p.  489.


THE  FOURTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  City  of  Peace, — According  to  Sherishi,  A1  Mansur  called
Bagdad  the  City  of  Peace,  because  the  Dijleh  (the  Tigris),  had
been  previously  called  the  Valley  and  River  of  Peace.  In  the
commentary  on  the  Thirteenth  Assembly  he  gives  the  varieties
of  the  name  as  joL  and  and  AL,  and  and

and  and  Ao.  Maghdad  is  also  a  form,  the  letters  B  and
M  being  easily  interchanged  in  pronunciation,  as  Mecca,  Becca  :
Koran  iii.  90.  It  is  said  of  A1  Asma'i,  that  he  always  spoke  of
the  City  of  Peace,  because  it  was  said  in  a  Tradition  that  in
Persian  Bayh  is  an  idol  and  Pdd  is  a  gift,  which  made  an  im¬
pious  or  ill-omened  name.  Gibbon  notices  that  the  Byzantines
adopted  the  name  Eirenopolis.

The  pilgrimage  of  Islam, — This  is  the  Jiajj  which  every
Moslem  ought  to  perform  once  in  his  life,  in  one  of  the  three
months  ShawwM,  Thil  ’1  Ka'dah,  or  Thu  ’1  Hijjah,  the  three  last
months  of  the  Arabian  calendar.  It  is  distinguished  from  the

„  p

or  mere  visit  to  the  holy  places,  which  is  optional  though
meritorious.  The  command  on  the  subject  is  given  decisively,
Koran  ii.  192,  et  seqq,  and  xxii,  27.  The  orthodox  teachers  are
not  unanimous  about  the  exact  days  of  the  three  months.  Ash
Shafi‘1  prescribes  the  two  former  months  with  nine  days  of  Thu  1


392


NOTES,


Hijjah,  while  Abu  Hanifeh  allows  ten  days,  and  Malik  the
whole  of  this  last  month.  But  it  is  in  all  cases  necessary  that
the  pilgrim  should  be  present  at  a  khotlah,  which  is  recited  on
Mount  'Arafat,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  9th  of  the  month  Thu  T
Hijjah.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  describe  here  the  multifa¬
rious  ceremonies  of  the  hajj,  A  suiEcient  account  of  them  will
be  found  in  Freytag’s  Einleitung,  p.  418.  It  is  called  the
Pilgrimage  of  Islam,  because  it  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  the
religion.  Said  the  Prophet,  Islam  is  founded  on  five  things,
and  the  Pilgrimage  is  one  of  them.’^  The  five  are,  according  to
A1  Ghazzali,  (Pocock,  Specimen,  p.  294) :  The  confession  'that
there  is  no  God  but  God,  and  that  Mohammed  is  the  Apostle  of
God ;  Prayer ;  Alms ;  Pilgrimage ;  and  the  Fast  of  Eamadan.
But  another  opinion  is  that  not  the  Shahddeh  or  Confession,  but
Ablution  is  the  first  of  these  five  ;  for  the  Prophet  meant  by  the
foundations  of  Islam  the  things  the  practice  of  which  keeps  men
faithful  to  it,  and  not  the  Confession,  which  is  the  religion  itself.

Ftilfilled  my  squalor,^  is  the  state  of  being  dirty,  and
with  matted  hair,  as  one  is  while  on  the  pilgrimage  during
the  time  that  it  is  forbidden  to.  shave  the  head  or  pitbes,
to  pare  the  nails,  to  clip  the  moustache,  and  to  pluck
out  the  hair  of  the  arm-pits,  all  which  things  are  unlawful
during  the  state  called  ilirdm.  When  the  pilgrims  have  arrived
at  the  spot  where  they  assemble  before  entering  the  sacred
territory,  each  changes  liis  clothes  for  the  pilgrim’s  garment
called  harm,  or  vulgarly  ihrdm,  or  hirdm,  “  This  garment,”  says
Mr.  Lane,  in  his  Modern  Egyptians,  ch.  iii.,  consists  generally
of  two  simple  pieces  of  cotton,  or  linen,  or  woollen  cloth,  without
seam  or  ornament,  one  of  which  is  wrapped  round  the  loins,  and
the  other  thrown  over  the  shoulders ;  the  instep  and  heel  of
each  foot  and  the  head  must  be  bare ;  sandals,  however,  are
allowed.”  From  this  time  until  the  visit  to  Mount  Arafat,  which
follows  the  ceremonies  in  Mecca,  the  prohibitions  mentioned
above  are  enforced.  Furthermore,  it  is  unlawful  to  hunt  any
.  animal  for  food,  during  the  state  of  ihrdm,  tho.ugh  fishing
is  allowed  for  subsistence.  For  the  interpretation  of


NOTES,


393


these  ordinances,  see  Baydawi,  Koran  y,  et  seqq,,  also  95
et  seqq.  When  all  the  rites  of  the  ha^  have  been  performed,  the
pilgrim  quits  the  state  of  ihrdm.  The  doing  so  is  called  ,
and  then  the  head  is  shaved,  the  nails  pared,  and  so  on,  and  the
pilgrim  is  allowed  the  nse  of  perfumes,  and  may  return  to
sexual  intercourse.

The  definition  of  given  above  is  admissible,  but  as  to  the
precise  signification  of  the  word  there  are  different  opinions.  It
occurs  at  Koran  xxii.  30,  where  it  is  said  which

Baj^dawi  interprets,  let  them  put  an  end  to  their  Jilthhiess,  but
whether  the  word  express  the  state  of  filth,  or  the  action  of
doing  away  with  it  by  the  shaving,  etc.,  is  uncertain,  since  the
latter  would  agree  as  .well  with  the  meaning  of  the  verb.  Accord¬
ing  to  some  authorities,  lIJu  signifies  the  performance  of  the
ceremonies  of  the  hajj,  so  that  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  the
Koran  would  be,  when  ye  have  performed  your  ceremonies.'’'
The  notion  of  impurity  is  attached  to  the  Hebrew  nsh.  Job
xvii.  6 ;  the  name  Tophet,  in  Sept,  Ta^kQ,  was  applied  to  a
place  in  the  valley  of  the  children  of  Hiimom  which  was  impure
with  the  blood  of  the  human  sacrifices  to  Moloch,  2  Kings  xxiii.
10;  Jerem.  xix.  It  is,  I  think,  even  possible  that  Mohammed
took  this,  like  so  many  other  words,  from  the  Jews,  and  meant,
‘‘let  them  perform  their  Tophet,"  Lc,  their  great  slaughter  of
sacrifices."  The  reason  of  this  ambiguity  is  that  the  word
is  unknown  except  from  the  Koran.  For  abundant  inform¬
ation  on  the  Ag;J,  see  the  Traditions  of  A1  Bokhari,  vol.  L

Indidgence, — Verbo  coitum  significant,  aut  obscenum

sermonem  quo  ad  coitum  invitatur.

Ehayf,-Tit\\Q  Khayf,  or  slope  of  Mina.  Compare  Tenth
Assembly,  Those  that  the  slope  of  Mina  gathers."

A  leather  tent,—S>yx(Ax  is  the  signification  of  Nasif  al

Yazaji,  in  his  thirteenth  Assembly,  has  united  the  names  of
habitations  among  the  ancient  Arabs  in  some  verses.  It  is  there
said  that  the  is  of  wool ;  the  of  camel’s  or  goat’s  hair ;
the  of  skins ;  the  of  dry  mud ;  the  <u^  of  cotton


394


NOTES.


cloth;  the  that  is  of  horse  hair,  or  other  hair  than

;  the  Zi  of  brick ;  the  of  trees the  uJ\Ja  of  leather.

The  furnace. — For  another  signification  of  (juL-hj  see  Arab.
Prov.  II.  263.  The  term  seems  to  apply  either  to  a  large  stone
with  a  hole  in  it,  in  which  meat  was  put  to  be  baked  by  a  fire
made  round  the  hole;  or  to  stones  which  were  made  hot  and
then  put  into  water  to  boil  it.  When  the  Arabs  had  no  kettle
they  put  water  into  a  skin  and  boiled  it  in  this  manner.

The  chameleon. — signifies  the  male  chameleon,  which
follows  the  sun  with  its  eye  all  day.  It  is  said  proverbially.
Colder  than  the  eye  of  the  chameleon^  because  he  loves  to  gaze
on  the  sun,  Arab.  Prov.  I.  743.  When  the  sun  is  very  hot  he
becomes  active  and  moves  about  in  his  hole.  Hamaseh,  p.  808,
Arab.  Text.  In  the  commentary  to  this  passage  it  is  said  that
when  young  he  is  ash-coloured,  that  afterwards  he  becomes
yellow,  and  that  when  the  sun  is  hot  on  him  he  turns  green.

What  art  thou  ?  instead  of  Who  art  thou  ?  signifies  that  the
speaker  has  no  conception  concerning  the  person  about  whom  he
asks.  Thus  Pharaoh  said,  What  is  the  Lord  of  the  world?”
Koran  xxvi.  22.

The  fragrant  waving  of  your  myrtle. — expresses  the
spreading  of  an  odour  by  the  moving  or  shaking  of  anything.
Thus  Imr  al  Kays  (Mo^allakah  v.  8)  ^‘When  they  (his  two
mistresses)  stood  up,  the  musk  odour  was  diffused  from  them
like  an  air  of  the  east  breeze  which  brings  the  perfume  of  the
pink."^  Compare  also  his  Diwan,  p.  35,  line  11.  The  tree  called
jJj  is  described  as  fragrant  and  growing  in  the  desert.  Al
Asma'l  denies  that  it  is  the  myrtle.

The  elder,  the  elder. — The  repetition  is  for  emphasis,  and
stands  in  place  of  the  verb,  which  though  only  understood  still
makes  the  two  nouns  mansub,  as  though  it  were  said,  Let  the
elder  precede.’’  If  there  be  repetition  the  verb  must  be  left
unexpressed,  but  if  there  be  no  repetition,  the  expression  of  it  is
lawful.  Compare  Fourth  Assembly,  Haste,  haste!”  Analo¬
gously  in  English  one  may  say  ‘'Haste,  haste!”  or  “Make
haste !”  but  not  “  Make  haste,  haste !”


NOTES.


395


Loosed  from  the  foot-rope. — A  proverbial  expression.  Arab.
Prov.  II.  309.  It  is  the  rope  with  which  the  Arabs  when  they
halt  tie  np  one  of  the  fore-feet  of  the  camel  to  the  part  above  the
knee  so  that  he  stands  on  three  legs.  The  meaning  of
is  he  tied  in  a  low,  or  a  knot  that  may  easily  be  slipped,  and
the  Jiamzeh  is  privative.  The  foot-rope  was  fastened  thns  that
it  might  be  slipped  easily  at  the  moment  of  starting.  It  is  said
of  a  man  who  does  not  suddenly  change,  and  whose  friendships
are  constant,  Thy  foot-rope  is  not  with  a  slip-knot,^^  Arab.
Prov.  II.  6^1.  The  metre  of  these  verses  is  rejez.

"whose  least  has  fallen. — Literally,  ^^Who  has  been  broken
down  with;^'  for  the  word  camel  or  beast  is  not  expressed.

is  said  when  the  ridden  camel  stops  in  her  pace
from  fatigue  or  lameness,  as  if  doing  a  new  or  unaccustomed
thing,  and  ^  is  the  ordinary  phrase  to  express  the  losing
a  beast  from  fatigue  and  the  having  to  go  on  foot  during
a  journey.  Sherishi  says  that  a  man  came  to  the  Prophet  and
said,  Give  me  a  mount ;  for  The  construction  is  of

course  impersonal ;  or  in  the  language  of  Arabic  grammarians
ihejdrr  and  mejrur  are  set  in  the  place  of  the  agent.  Com¬
pare  ^  used  by  the  Prophet  in  describing  his  mira¬

culous  journey.

My  sighing,  etc. — A  kind  of  double  meaning  is  probably
intended  here.  It  may  be  taken  literally  that  he  sighs  as  he
mounts  each  hill  and  weeps  as  he  enters  each  dale ;  but  there  is
also  an  allusion  to  the  ascending  of  sighs,  and  the  flowing  down
of  tears.

Your  grist  ;  your  bounty. — The  literal  meaning  i§  the  corn
with  which  the  mill  is  fed.

Dwells  in  sanctuary,  etc. — While  you  befriend  and  protect
your  neighbour,  so  that  he  lives  secure,  you  allow  him,  through
your  generosity,  to  spoil  and  make  use  of  your  wealth.  The
allusion  is  to  the  sacred  places  and  seasons  of  the  old  Arabs,
and  to  the  forays  which  they  made  on  each  other  when  not
restrained  by  these  obligations.

0  ye  Lords. — Metre  mufeth.-^Yi  is  useless  to  enlarge  on  the


396


NOTJES.


precise  nature  of  the  viands  mentioned  in  these  verses,
is  said  to  be  flour  made  consistent  by  boiling;  has  been
already  explained  in  the  notes  to  the  Thirteenth  Assembly;
and  in  the  notes  to  the  Sixth  Assembly;  is  a  sauce

for  dates,  made  by  boiling  to  a  thick  consistency  the  seeds  of  the
colocynth.  The  laborious  Nasif  al  Yazaji  has  introduced  the
names  of  many  dishes  of  the  ancient  Arabs  into  his  thirteenth
Assembly.  In  asking  for  food  at  Mecca  the  boy  may  have
relied  on  the  prayer  of  Abraham  for  the  dwellers  or  visitors  at
the  Holy  Place,  which  is  a  command  to  all  the  faithful,  Dispose
towards  them  the  hearts  of  men,  and  nourish  them  with  earth’s
fruits ;  so  may  they  give  thanks.”  Koran  xiv.  40.

Through  me  may  reward  he  gotten, — It  is  a  Tradition  of  *Abd
Allah  ibn  ‘Amr  ibn  al  "Asi,  that  the  Prophet  said,  Whoever
gives  his  brother  enough  food  to  fill  him  and  enough  water  to
quench  his  thirst,  God  shall  put  seven  moats  between  him  and
hell.’’  This  ‘Abd  Allah  was  of  Koraysh,  and  was  brought  by
his  father  who  was  a  Muh^jir  to  Medina  in  early  childhood.  He
handed  down  seven  hundred  Traditions.  He  was  one  of  the  four
transmitters  of  Traditions  of  the  same  name  in  the  first  century,
who  were  called  the  four  'Abadileli  (Abdallahs) ;  the  others
were  ^Ahd  Allah  ibn  Mas'M,  'Abd  Allah  ibn  'Abbas,  and  'Abd
Allah  ibn  az  Zobayr.

The  want-folds  of  the  skirt, — The  is  the  part  of  the  jljj

(or  waist  wrapper)  where  it  is  tied  round  the  waist,  which  part  is
folded  or  doubled.  The  ancient  dress  of  the  Arabs  consisted  of
a  or  which  were  wrappers  for  the  whole  body,  and
an  j\j\y  which  was  a  wrapper  fastened  round  the  waist  and
hanging  down  to  the  ankles.  The  two  together  composed  a
or  dress.  The  izdr  being  only  fastened  above  the  hips  might  be
pulled  off  or  drop;  thus  it  is  related  of  Jebelet  ibn  al  Ayham,
the  last  king  of  Ghassan,  who  submitted  to  the  Khalif  'Omar
and  entered  Islam  in  the  16th  year  of  the  Hijra,  that  he  made
the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  clothed  according  to  the  command  of
the  Prophet,  with  an  izar,  and  without  serdtvil  or  drawers.  A
man  of  the  Pezarah  put  his  foot  on  the  skirt  of  the  king’s  izdr


NOTHS.


397


and  pulled  it  off,  so  that  his  nakedness  was  exposed.  The  quarrel
that  ensued  ended  in  the  flight  of  Jebeleh  to  Constantinople,  and
his  return  to  the  Christian  religion.  The  jlk}  is  described  as  a
kind  of  izcir  worn  by  women,  girt  round  the  waist  in  such  a
manner  that  the  upper  part  hangs  down  over  the  lower ;  the
upper  part  descending  to  the  knee,  and  the  lower  to  the  feet;  it
has  fastened  by  a  ICJ  or  band,  which  runs  through

the  doubled  upper  part.  The  place  or  part  of  the  izdr  where  it  is
fastened  round  the  waist  is  also  called  On  this  subject  see

De  Sacy’s  Chresto^natliie  Arabe,  vol.  II.,  p.  303,  second  edition.
The  phrase  in  the  text  is  proverbial,  and  means  when  they  were
girding  themselves  or  preparing  for  departure.”

The  promise  of  Orkub. — ^'Orkub  was  a  man  proverbial  among
the  Arabs  for  breaking  his  promises.  He  is  said  by  some  to
have  been  a  Jew  of  Khaybar,  by  others  to  have  been  an  inhabit¬
ant  of  Yathrib  (either  Medina  or  another  Yathrib  or  Yatrib,  near
Hojr,  in  Yemameh),  or  lastly  a  man  of  Amalek.  It  is  said  pro¬
verbially,  More  promise-breaking  than*^  Orkub  \  Arab.  Prov.  I,
4o4.  It  is  related  that  a  brother  of  his  came  to  ask  him  for
something.  Said  ^Orkub,  ^^When  this  palm-tree  shoots  the
shoot  is  thine.”  When  the  shoot  was  out  the  brother  came
again,  and  "Orkub  bade  him  wait  until  the  fruit  was  in  the  state
called  ^  ;  that  is,  until  the  dates  had  formed,  but  were  green
and  small.  When  this  took  place  the  brother  came  again ;  but
‘Orkub  bade  him  wait  until  they  w’^ere  in  the  state  called
that  is  till  the  dates  began  to  redden ;  then  to  wait  until  they

were  i _ -bj,  or  freshly  ripe;  and  then  until  they  were  jXj  or

fully  ripe  and  turning  to  dryness,  and  therefore  fit  to  cut.  When
they  were  in  this  state  'Orkub  went  by  night  and  cut  them,  and
gave  his  brother  nothing.  For  the  names  of  dates  in  their
various  stages  of  growth,  see  Lane,  under and  ^  ;  and  also
the  Kamus  cited  in  Freytag's  Lexicon,  under  That  'Orkub
was  held  in  early  times  to  be  a  man  of  Yathrib  (Medina)  and  of
the  Ows,  appears  from  the  tradition  that  the  mention  of  him  as  a
promise-breaker  by  Ka'b  ibn  Zohayr  in  his  Burdeh,  v.  11,  gave


398


NOTJES.


offence  as  a  slight  to  the  Ansar.  See  note  to  Freytag’s  edition
of  the  poem.

A  need  in  the  mind  of  Jacob, — This  is  an  allusion  to  the  history
of  Joseph.  When  the  sons  of  Jacob  went  a  second  time  into
Egypt,  taking  with  them  Benjamin,  their  father  commanded
them  not  to  enter  at  one  gate,  bnt  at  several.  This  is  explained
to  mean  that  he  feared  on  account  of  their  beauty,  and  comeliness,
and  their  celebrity  in  Egypt  as  enjoying  the  favour  of  the
Governor,  and  thought  that  if  they  entered  together  they  might
be  struck  with  the  evil  eye.  They  entered  the  city  as  their
father  commanded  them,  and  though  this  could  not  have  pro¬
tected  them  against  the  will  of  God,  it  satisfied  a  need  or  loant
that  ^oas  in  the  mind  of  Jacob,  Koran  xii.  67,  68.

Seruj  is  my  dwelling, — These  verses  are  also  of  the  metre
muji'eth.


THE  FIFTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

Black  of  B-obe. — Ta^abbata  Sherran  says  of  crossing  the
desert  in  a  dark  night,  when  the  Ghiil  was  abroad  :

A  moonless  night ;  I  pierced  through  its  robe,  as  the  full-breasted  girl
puts  on  her  frock.  De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  480.

Fantasies, — is  the  evil  whispered  suggestion  of  the
mind,  or  of  Satan,  which  comes  in  loneliness'.  The  verb  is
applied  to  the  temptations  of  Adam  and  Eve  in  Paradise,  Koran
vii.  19  ;  XX.  118;  and  to  the  suggestions  of  a  man’s  own  mind,
1.  15.  Compare  cxiv.

My  night-dark  night, — A  similar  expression  occurs  in  the  Fifth
Assembly.  The  epithet  is  used  of  a  dark,  moonless  night,  such
as  precedes  the  new  moon. .

Entfir  ye  into  them  with  peace, — These  are  words  from  the
Koran,  Sura  xv.  46.  It  will  be  said  to  those  who  are  welcomed  to
the  gardens  and  fountains  of  Paradise,  Enter  ye  into  them  with
peace,  free  from  fear.’^  In  1.  33,  the  pronoun  refers  to  the  same


WOTHS.


399


substantives  understood.  For  this  reason  the  speaker  keeps  to  the
actual  words  of  the  Koran  in  addressing  whoever  knocked  at  the
door.  Compare  the  Forty-first  Assembly,  where  Harith  ad¬
dresses  Abu  Zayd,  Woe  to  thee ;  will  ye  bid  others  to  piety,  but
forget  to  bid  yourselves  ?  where  he  speaks  in  the  plural,  because
these  words  so  occur  in  a  Tradition  of  Mohammed,  who  on  the
night  of  the  onasra  saw  persons  who  had  their  tongues  and  lips
•cut  off  with  shears  of  fire,  and  who,  when  asked  who  they
were,  answered,  We  were  of  those  who  bade  others  to  piety,
but  forgot  ourselves.’’  De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  538.

Without  the  guess  of  doubt;  or,  rather,  without  guessing  at  the
doubtful  or  hidden.  This  expression  is  taken  from  Koran  xviii.
21,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  vain  guesses  made  by  people  as
to  the  number  of  the  Youths  of  the  Cave,  that  is  the  Seven
Sleepers.

I  took  to  How  ?  and  Where  ? — I  took  to  asking  him  of  his
health,  and  where  he  was  dwelling.

Let  me  swallow  down  my  spittle. — This  is  a  most  ancient
phrase  meaning;  Give  me  time  to  rest  and  collect  myself.”  It
is  found  in  the  book  of  Job,  vii.  19,  How  long  wilt  thou  not
depart  from  me,  nor  let  me  alone  till  I  swallow  down  my
spittle?”  When  Ibn  Surayj  disputed  with  Abu  Bekr  Moham¬
med  az  Zahiri,  the  latter  said,  Give  me  time  to  swallow  down
my  spittle.”  Ibn  Surayj  answered,  You  might  swallow  the
Tigris  before  you  answer  me.”  (Ibn  Kballikan,  life  of  Ibn
Surayj.)  This  anecdote  Hammer-Purgstall,  in  liis  life  of  Ibn
Surayj,  has  curiously  perverted.

0  thou  hase-born.--T]i(i  phrase  lL^\  \A  !J  has  given  rise  to
much  controversy.  It  may  be  interpreted,  Thou  who  art
without  a  father,”  that  is,  who  hast  no  known  father,  and  art
base-born,”  as  the  phrase  CSl  1  may  be  rendered,  ''  thou  who
hast  no  mother,  and  art  a  foundling,  picked  up,”  or  ''  who  hast
no  free  mother,  and  art  a  ;  ”  or  it  may  mean,  ''  God  curse,
or  cease  to  preserve,  thy  father !”  But  whatever  its  grammatical
import,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  generally  used  play¬
fully,  and  though  in  form  an  imprecation,  or  an  insult,  it  ex-


400


NOTES.


presses  fondness  and  intimacy,  or  even  admiration,  like  uiljU
“May  God  figlit  against  thee!''  or  “May

thy  mother  be  bereft  of  thee  1"  which  are  nsed  when  a  man  does
anything  worthy  of  admiration,  as  the  reciting  of  some  fine  verses.
Similarly,  it  is  said  in  praise  of  a  good  archer,

“  Let  him  not  be  counted  among  his  people."  —  Anthologie
Gram.  Arabe.  p.  41  Ar.  Text,  where  a  verse  of  Imr  al  Kays  is
quoted.  The  meaning  of  the  first  and  third  of  these  expressions
may  be,  however,  He  is  so  superior  to  every  one  that  no  one
can  fight  against  him,  and  God  alone  must  fight  against  him;’^
and  Let  him  not  be  counted  among  his  people,  for  he  i^far
above  them.'^  Bufc  it  is  more  reasonable  to  take  them  as  a  kind
of  complimentary  imprecation,  as  an  Englishman  might  say.
Confound  the  fellow,  how  clever  he  is !"  An  Arab  of  the  desert
was  even  heard  to  say  to  the  Deity,  in  a  year  of  drought,
“  Send  down  upon  us  rain,  L"  But  Sulayman  ibn  'Abd

al  Melik,  who  heard  him,  put  the  best  construction  upon  his
words,  and  considered  them  to  mean,  “  Thou  hast  no  father
and  that  the  Arab  was  merely  testifying  that  God  had  no  father,
nor  female  companion,  nor  offspring."  (Lane.)  In  the  forty-
seventh  line  of  the  Mo'allakah  of  Zohayr,  the  phrase  is  evidently
a  mere  expletive.  Ci3  \j\  i!  is  said  to  be  for  cJM  the  J  being
redundant.  (See  De  Sacy's  Hariri  p.  464.)  On  this  point,
however,  refer  to  Lane's  Lexicon.

I  was  evil  m  thought  at  his  ref  raining. . — When  an  Arab  finds
that  his  guest  will  not  eat,  he  fears  that  he  meditates  some  evil
against  him,  and  that  he  does  not  desire  to  bind  himself  by
accepting  hospitality.  Thus  when  Abraham  saw  that  the  angels
refused  what  he  set  before  them  he  was  afraid  until  they  re¬
assured,  him.  Koran  xi.  73.

Brother  of  empty  are  originally  small  ways,

branching  off  the  main  road  (Sherishi) ;  and  the  word  must  then
have  been  applied  to  wanderings  or  digressions  of  talk,  and  so  to
vain  and  unprofitable  speech.

Yesternight. — Hariri,  in  the  Durrah  (Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe,
p.  27,  Texte  Arabe),  says  that  it  is  a  mistake  when  one  who  in


NOTJES.


401


the  morning  is  speaking  of  the  preyious  night  calls  it  ;

for  from  the  dawn  to  the  time  when  the  sun  begins  to  decline
he  should  say  l^\,  and  only  during  the  latter  part  of  the  day,
and  during  the  succeeding  night,  should  he  say  It  is

related  in  a  Tradition  of  the  Prophet  that  when  he  had  finished
the  morning  prayer  he  said  to  the  Companions,  Is  there  one  of
you  who  has  seen  a  vision  this  night?”  using  the  word  aLU.
Compare  last  night  ”  and  yesternight  ”  in  English.  The  use
in  the  text  is  correct,  as  the  conversation  takes  place  at  night.

An  ally  of  want, — is  one  who  unites  in  a  confederacj^
with  another.  The  word  is  applied  to  the  confederacies  of  the
tribes*,  as  that  between  Asad  and  Ghatafan,  and  that  between
certain  tribes  of  Koraysh.  It  here  means  one  who  is  a  close
companion  of  want.

Fulfilled  its  vow,  i,e.,  come  to  an  end.”  It  is  said  of  a  man,

he  has  fulfilled  his  vow,”  when  he  dies,  as  if  death  were  in¬
cumbent  upon  him,  as  a  thing  vowed,  and  he  fulfilled  the  vow
by  dying.  The  original  of  this  expression  is  to  be  found  at
Koran  xxxiii.  23,  where  it  is  explained  as  referring  to  those  who
have  fought  in  the  cause  of  Islam  till  they  have  met  martyrdom,
as.Hamzah,  and  Mus^ab  son  of  ^Omayr,  and  Anas  son  of  An  Nadr.
Others  are  spoken  of  in  the  same  passage  as  awaiting”  their
hour,  as  'Othman  and  Talhah.  This  Anas  was  the  uncle  of  Anas
ibn  Malik,  the  transmitter  of  Traditions.

Sunrise. — Hariri  in  the  Durrah  says  that  is  said  of  the
sun  only  in  the  winter.  Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe,  p.  28.

Pass  by. — From  left  to  right,  so  as  to  give  a  good  shot.  The
meaning  is  any  one  who  might  show  himself  a  fit  subject  to  be
practised  upon.

Cornelian. — This  stone  is  recommended  by  the  Prophet.
"Ayisheh  and  ^Ali  relate  that  he  said,  Seal  with  seals  of
cornelian.”

The  yelloro  is  apparently  the  Greek  o/3pv^ov.

More  bewildered  than  a  lizard. — This  is  proverbial;  it  is
said  that  the  lizard  when  he  wanders  away  from  the  stone  under
which  he  lives  cannot  find  his  way  back.


26


402


ITOTUS.


Chid  me  on. — As  the  camel  driver  chides  or  urges  on  his
camels  by  singing  to  them.

A  driblet  from  my  rcatering. — This  is  proverbial,  like
^  signifying  little  from,  or  instead  of,  much.  A  similar
expression  occurs  in  Forty-fourth  Assembly  ;

All  the  length  of  that  day. — Literally,  all  the  cloud  of  that  day,
like  the  shadow  of  that  day  :  compare  Thirty-second  Assembly,

who  resolved  to  pass  the  shadow  of  that  day.”

To  let  down  my  bucket  into  rivers. — To  ask  charity  in  many
places,  or  to  endeavour  to  gain  money.  In  the  Forty-n^nth
Assembly  Abu  Zayd  tells  his  son,  ^^Gast  thy  bucket  into  -every
cistern,”  meaning,  get  gain  wherever  thou  canst.”  Let  down
thy  bucket  among  the  buckets”  (compare  Seventeentli  Assembly),
was  a  proverbial  expression,  meaning,  ^^come  and  labour  and
take  thy  chance  with  the  rest ;  ”  derived  from  the  watering  of
travellers  at  a  well,  when  each  man  let  down  the  bucket  and
drew  for  himself.  Arab.  Prov.  11.  436.

With  burning  stomach. — Literally,  liver.  It  is  said  in  a
Tradition,  For  every  dried  up  liver  there  is  a  recompense;”
meaning,  For  the  giving  of  drink  to  whoever  is  parched  with
intense  thirst  there  is  a  recompense.”  From  this  Tradition
Hariri  probably  took  the  phrase

Advancing  one  foot,  drawing  hack  the  other. — A  proverbial
expression  denoting  indecision,  like  the  one  following,  I  blow
(as  a  wind)  and  am  calm.”

The  Wolf's  disease  is  a  name  for  hunger,  because  the  wolf
is  ravenous  for  his  prey,  or  because  he  bears  hunger  longer  than
any  other  beast.  It  is  a  curse  on  an  enemy  to  say,  God  strike
him  with  the  wolfs  disease  !”

Thy  disorder. — Hcs. y  is  a  fit  or  paroxysm,  either  from  fever  or
from  mental  excitement,  or  from  the  effects  of  inspiration,  which
last  kind  is  known  to  have  affected  the  Prophet.  It  is  here  ap¬
plied  to  the  passion  or  anguish  of  the  stranger.

Its  blotting  out^—A  have  translated  according  to  Sherishi,


NOTUS.


403


who  renders  the  word  by  Another  interpretation  is  the

perishing  of  science  and  its  schools.’’

What  question,  or  proposition.— is  defined  in  the  Ta  rifat
as  something  said  of  which  it  can  be  predicated  that  it  is  true  or
false.

The  chiefs  of  the  Literally,  the  mountain  peaks.

^  is  a  peak  or  a  ridge  of  desert  mountain,  such  as  serves  as
a  guide  to  the  travellers  for  a  great  distance.  He  means  that
he  had  consulted  those  who  were  men  of  great  reputation,  who
were  looked  up  to  as  guides  by  all  who  trod  the  paths  of  learning.

Worn-out  nay-marks. — This  second  signifies  originally

the  marks  in  the  desert  by  which  the  way  was  known.  In  early
times,  or  in  newly- explored  parts,  they  consisted  only  of  the
hoof-prints  and  the  dung  of  the  camels,  and  men  sometimes
found  their  way  by  the  smell  of  the  track.  Thus  of  Hon  ay  f  al
Hanatim,  a  man  of  Taym  Allat  ibn  Thadabeh,  it  is  related  that,
having  been  carried  off  by  Jinn  in  the  region  called  Wabar  which
is  inhabited  by  Jinn,  he  found  his  w^ay  back,  though  blind,  by  the
smell  of  the  track,  so  that  it  is  said  proverbially,  A  better  path¬
finder  than  Honayf  al  Hanatim.  A  negro  slave  called

Do'aymis  of  the  Sands,  is  said  to  have  had  the  same  power.
Arab.  Prov.  I.  492.  For  the  fate  of  the  latter,  see  Freytag’s
Lexicon,  sub  wee.  When  a  way  was  frequented  they  put  up
stones  as  guides  for  travellers,  and  these  received  difl:erent  names
according  to  their  size.  One  of  small  size  was  called  ajlj,
one  larger  one  larger  still  one  larger  still  or

the  general  name  being  (Hamaseh,  vol.  11.  pars

prior,  p.  279).  Thus  to  express  that  a  thing  was  obscure  and
unintelligible  it  was  said  that  its  track-marks  or  road  signs
were  razed  out  or  taken  away.

The  doctors  of  the  mk-fiashs.—j^s>^  is  a  learned  man  of  the
Jews,  or  of  some  religion  other  than  Islam,  but  it  is  here  used
generally  to  signify  one  skilful  in  law.

Oft  a  shot  is  mthout  a  shooter. — Oft  he  who  knows  not  how
to  aim  strikes  the  mark  by  chance.  The  meaning  is,  “Though
the  doctors  have  been  unable  to  explain  this  puzzle,  yet  you  may


404


NOTES.


succeed  by  cbance.^^  The  origin  of  this  proverb  is  thus  related :
The  first  who  used  these  words  was  A1  Hakam  ibn  ^Abd  Yaghfith
the  Mankari,  who  was  the  best  archer  of  his  time ;  and  the  reason
of  it  was  that  he  had  vowed  to  sacrifice  an  antelope  on  the
Q-habghab,  and  hunted  for  days  but  could  strike  nothing.
Having  returned  bootless,  he  went  forth  to  his  people  and  said,
What  do  ye  ?  for  I  am  about  to  kill  myself,  if  I  cannot  get  a  beast
to  sacrifice.”  Then  said  to  him  his  brother  A1  Hosayn  ibn  ^Abd
Taghuth,  '"Slay  in  the  place  of  it  ten  camels,  but  do  not  kill  thy¬
self.""  He  answered,  No,  by  Allat  (or  A1  Lat)  and  A1  'Ozza
I  will  not  harm  the  stumbler  and  leave  the  runaway ;  mearling
that  he  would  not  substitute  a  domestic  beast  of  burden  for  a
wild  animal.  Then  said  to  him  his  son  A1  Mot'im  ibn  A1  Hakam,
"Father,  take  me  with  thee,  and  I  will  help  thee.""  He
answered,  "  I  will  not  take  with  me  a  weakly  trembler.""  But
his  son  constrained  him,  and  they  set  out,  and  soon  they  met
with  an  antelope,  and  A1  Hakam  shot  and  missed ;  then  there
came  by  another,  and  A1  Hakam  missed  again.  Then  said  his
son  to  him,  "  Father,  give  me  the  bow.""  When,  then,  a  third
came  by,  the  boy  shot  and  killed  her.  Then  said  his  father,
"  Oft  a  shot  is  without  a  shooter,""  which  became  proverbial.
The  foregoing  legend  is  remarkable  for  its  connection  with  the
idol-worship  of  the  Ignorance.  The  father  of  A1  Hakam  is  'Abd
al  Yaghuth,  or  the  servant  of  Yaghuth,  who  is  one  of  the  false
gods  mentioned  in  the  Sura,  called  Noah,  Ixxi.  22 :  "  They
said  Abandon  not  your  deities ;  abandon  not  Jj,  and  ^^-3;  and
and  and BaydS,wi  says  in  his  commentary
that  these  were  pious  men  living  between  the  days  of  Adam
and  Noah,  who  were  afterwards  worshipped,  and  that  Yaghuth
was  the  idol  of  the  tribe  of  ^  Its  worship  was  first  celebrated
at  Akameh  in  Yemen,  and  afterwards  at  NajrS,n.  Allat  and  Al
‘Ozza,  by  whom  the  hunter  swears,  were  goddesses.  The  former
appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  ancient  deities,  for  it  is
reasonable  to  conclude  that  it  is  to  her  that  Herodotus  refers,
^  Ovvofid^ovcrc  Se  tov  fiev  ALOVvaov  OvparaK,  t7]v  Se  Ovpavirji'
AXikdr;  and  not  as  Pocock  {Specimen,  p.  110)  says,  to  w'Uni,


NOTUS.


I  405

deities  in  general,  since  Herodotus  is  evidently  speaking  d£^a
single  definite  goddess.  The  tesMid  in  luIW  would  to  a  Greek
ear  be  exactly  like  the  introduction  of  another  syllable.  In

Koran  liii.  19,  and  are  mentioned  together.  It

is  said  that  Allat  was  a  goddess  of  ThaMf  and  Koraysh.  She  had
a  temple  atu^lW,  where  the  worshippers  made  a  circuit  as  round
the  Ka*beh  :  Mohammed  sent  Abu  Sofyan  ibn  Harb  and  A1
Moghayrat  ibn  Sho'beh  to  destroy  it.  A1  Ozza  was  very  widely
worshipped.  An  image  of  her  made  of  the  tree  called  be¬
longing  to  Ghatafan  was  destroyed  by  Khalid  ibn  A1  Welid,
by  command  of  the  Prophet.  On  the  subject  of  these  and  other
idols  consult  Freytag's  Einleitimg,  and  Pocock's  Specimen.
With  regard  to  the  word  it  is  said,  in  the  commentary  to

the  Hamaseh,  p.  486,  Arab,  text :  ‘‘  They  (the  Arabs)  made  use
of  a  stone  to  sacrifice  upon,  and  called  it  or  with

the  *Ain  or  Ghain.”  Some  verses  are  then  quoted  which  speak
of  the  of  A1  "Ozza.  It  is  also  explained,  but  I  think

erroneously,  as  the  name  of  an  idol.

A  man  died,  etc. — Sherishi  says  that  the  composer  of  the
puzzle  speaks  of  a  brother  because  a  stranger  cannot  inherit ;  and
of  a  Moslem,  because  people  of  a  diSerent  religion  cannot  have
mutual  rights  of  inheritance;  and  describes  him  as  free,  because
a  slave  cannot  inherit  from  the  free  man  ;  and  he  adds,  “  I  could
not  find  any  of  our  Shaykhs  who  was  aware  why  the  word
^ pious’  was  introduced,  until  Abu  ’1  ^Abbas  A1  Layti  informed
me  that  there  was  a  subtle  meaning  in  it,  since  he  who  has  killed
anyone  wilfully  loses  his  right  of  inheritance.’'  Hariri,  by  men¬
tioning  these  conditions  as  fulfilled,  means  to  say  that  there  was
no  legal  obstacle  to  the  brother’s  inheriting.

Her  legal  share. — ^ ^  is  applied  to  a  law  which  is  positively
ordained  in  the  Koran :  a  law  that  rests  on  the  Traditions  of  the
Prophet  is  called  ZL.  In  Koran  iv.  14,  the  share  of  the  widow
is  fixed  at  one-fourth  of  the  property  of  her  deceased  husband,  if
he  leaves  no  children ;  but  if  he  leaves  children  she  receives
only  an  eighth.  In  the  answer  to  the  puzzle  it  is  mentioned


•  406


NOTES.


that  the  widow  in  this  case  received  an  eighth,  because  her
deceased  husband  left  a  grandson.

An  ordinance  of  is  a  standard  maxim  or  principle

of  law  which  is  universally  accepted,  and  which  admits  of  no
doubt.  It  is  applied  to  those  propositions  of  the  Koran  of  the
meaning  of  which  there  is  no  dispute.  It  is  defined  in  the
Tah’ifat  as  that  which  admits  of  only  one  meaning,  or  which
does  hot  admit  of  ;  that  is,  which  does  not  req^uire  expound¬
ing,  or  admit  of  figurative  interpretation,  because  it  is  not
dubious.  ^^3,  signifying  to  up  a  thing  as  a  standard  is  set
up,  or  as  a  bride  is  raised  on  a  seat  of  honour,  is  no  doubt  &in
to  the  Hebrew  DJ,  signifying  something  set  up  ;  as  a  banner  or
ensign  on  a  high  hill,  Isaiah  xiii.  2 ;  xxx.  17 ;  or  as  the  pole
on  which  the  brazen  serpent  was  placed,  Numbers  xxi.  8,  9.
The  metre  of  these  verses  is  khafzf

Thou  hast  fallen  on  one  Qvho  i$  knowing  in  it. — This  pro¬
verbial  expression  is  attributed  to  Malik  ibn  Jobayr,  who  was
one  of  the  Khalif  ^Omar’s  generals,  or  else  to  another  Malik,
the  son  of  Jana,  who  was  among  the  sages  of  the  Arabs.  Ac¬
cording  to  Arab.  Prov.  IL  109,  where  he  is  made  the  son  of
Jobayr,  he  made  use  of  this  phraso  when  some  one  questioned  him
as  to  who  was  the  first  man  “for  whom  the  staff  was  struck;
that  is,  whose  garrulity  and  wandering  in  old  age  were  checked
by  his  son’s  striking,  at  his  request,  a  staif  on  tho  ground.
Malik,  who  was  learned  in  the  traditions  of  the  Arabs,  said,
“  Thou  hast  fallen  upon  one  who  is  knowing  in  it,”  which  be¬
came  proverbial.  For  “  striking  the  staff”  see  Forty-ninth
Assembly,  p.  655,  De  Sacy’s  edition;  Arab.  Prov.  II.  543,  and
I.  55.  It  is  also  said  that  the  poet  Farazdak  made  use  of  this
expression  when  he  met  Hosayn,  son  of  'Ali,  who  was  journey¬
ing  to  Irak,  while  the  poet  was  journeying  to  Hijaz.  Hosayn
asked  him  what  was  the  disposition  of  the  people  of  Kufa,  and
Farazdak  answered,  “Thou  hast  fallen  on  one  who  is  knowing
in  it ;  the  hearts  of  the  people  are  with  thee,  but  their  swords
are  with  the  Benu  Omayyeh.”

One  who  is  at  home  in  Literally,  •  ^  the  son  of  its  root,  or


JSrOTJES.


407


foundation/’  that  is,  one  well  acquainted  with  its  essence  and
reality :  a  common  expression  equivalent  to  the  foregoing.

^5  God  hath  commanded.— is  said  in  the  Koran,  xxxiii.  53,

When  ye  are  invited,  enter.”

The  ark  of  Moses,  mentioned  at  Koran  xx.  39.  The  ark  of
the  covenant  is  also  called  Koran  ii.  249,  and  is  said  by

Baydawi  to  have  been  in  size  three  cubits  by  two.  The  word
may  thus  be  a  figure  for  any  very  small  dwelling.  is

used  in  Arabic  for  a  coffin,  or  the  wooden  case  placed  over  a
grave ;  as  was  applied  to  the  large  coffin  or  hearse  in  which
chiefs  were  taken  for  burial  :  see  Commentary  on  Mo'allakah
of  Tarafeh,  line  12.  The  identity  of  these  words  with  the
words  used  in  the  Bible,  the  one  to  designate  the  ark  of  Noah
and  the  ark  in  which  Moses  was  exposed,  and  the  other  the
ark  of  the  covenant,  need  only  be  pointed  out.

Weaker  than  a  spider's  weh  ;  or  house. — This  is  also  an  allusion
to  the  Koran.  In  the  Sura  called  the  Spider  it  is  said  that
those  who  choose  any  protector  but  God  are  like  the  spider  when
she  makes  her  house ;  for  the  weakest  of  houses  is  the  house
of  the  spider.”  It  has  been  objected  to  Hariri,  that  whereas
God  has  said,  the  weakest  of  houses  is  the  house  of  the
spider;  ”  he  speaks  in  this  Assembly  of  a  house  weaker  than
that  of  a  spider,  thus  contradicting  the  sacred  text.  But  it  is
observed  in  his  justification  that  an  exaggeration  in  similitudes
is  not  to  be  taken  literally,  and  that  the  sin  would  consist  in
believing  and  asserting  as  a  positive  truth  that  a  house  could
really  be  weaker  than  the  house  of  a  spider.

The  proud  rider  on  the  desired  steed,  etc.—These  are  enigmatic
phrases  signifying  dates  and  cream.  The  rich-coloured  dates
were  laid  upon  the  cream  and  the  two  were  sold  in  the  markets  ;
thus  the  dates  might  be  called  the  rider  and  the  cream  the  steed.
Similarly,  the  cream  by  itself  would  be  hurtful  to  the  stomach,
but  the  dates  corrected  this  fault,  so  one  is  called  the  wholesome
and  the  other  the  hurtful  companion.  This  kind  of  language,  as
applied  to  various  kinds  of  food,  was  called  Tofayli,  a  word
derived  from  a  celebrated  dinner  hunter  named  Tofayl,  of  whom-


408


NOTES,


an  account  3e  given  in  the  notes  to  the  next  Assembly.
In  the  Nineteenth  Assembly  a  number  of  Tofayli  bye-names,
are  introduced.

The  free-horn  woman  hungers,  hut  will  not  eat  hy  her  breasts,
— ^This  is  a  proverb  directed  against  the  practising  of  any  ignoble
art  for  gain.  The  free-born  woman  will  rather  starve  than
accept  the  occupation  of  a  nurse,  which  belongs  to  slave  women.
This  appears  to  have  been  a  very  ancient  saying,  for  it  is  said  to
have  been  addressed  proverbially  by  A1  Harith  ibn  Sulayk  the
Asadi  to  his  wife  Zebba.  Harith  was  advanced  in  years  when
he  sought  her  in  marriage  of  her  father,  'Alkamat  ibn  Kha-
tafah.  The  maiden  disliked  the  marriage,  but  was  persuaded
by  her  mother;  Harith  giving  150  camels,  a  slave,  and  a
thousand  dirhems.  Some  time  after,  as  a  young  man  of  the
Benu  Asad  passed  by,  Zebba  sighed  deeply,  and  her  husband
asked  the  reason.  “  What  have  I  to  do  with  old  men  ?  ’’  she
replied.  Harith  then  in  his  anger  addressed  her  with  this
proverb,  by  which  he  meant  seemingly  that  she  would  better
have  consulted  her  honour  by  bearing  her  lot  uncomplainingly.
He,  however,  repudiated  her,  and  sent  her  back  to  her  family.
Arab.  Prov.  I.  211.  Sherishi  gives  the  dialogue  between
mother  ^nd  daughter,  and  make  Zebba's  reply  to  her  husband  to
be  ^  bi# ;  he  also

says  that  the  occasion  of  her  sighing  was  her  beholding  a  num¬
ber  of  the  youths  of  Asad  wrestling.

Forbidden  the  eating  of  usury, — It  is  said  (Koran  ii.  276,)

They  who  eat  (devour  the  produce  of)  usury  shall  not  rise  save
as  he  rises  whom  the  devil  prostrates  by  touching  (or  possessing
him.”)  Compare  iii.  125 :  Eat  not  usury,  doubling  and
doubling  the  sum.”  Compare  also  xxx.  38.

Press  host  on  host,^A.  hyperbolical  phrase  quoted  from  a
poet,  and  signifying  here,  Mix  them  together.”

The  zoracious  elephant. — More  voracious  than  the  elephant  ”
is  a  proverbial  phrase.  Arab.  Prov.  I.  133.

Say  to  him. — The  metre  of  the  answer  to  the  puzzle,  as  well
as  of  the  puzzle  itself,  is  khaff  already  described  in  the  notes  to


NOTES,


409


the  Tenth  Assembly.  In  the  second  line  Sherishi  reads  cUjj.

His  observations  are  reproduced  in  the  notes  to  De  Sacy's
edition.

The  van  of  the  darkness. — is  a  part,  or  the  first  part  of
the  night;  or  the  darkness  of  the  night.  In  Hamaseh,  p.  595,
Ar.  Test,  it  may  have  the  last  meaning.  She  is  like  the  full
moon  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  of  a  cold  night.”

The  thunder  is  lauding  God  in  the  Koran  xiii.  .14.

This  passage  gives  the  name  of  Thunder  ”  to  the  Sura.

The  dogs  harked  after  me, — Hariri,  in  the  Durrah,  (Anthologie
Gram.  Arabe,  p.  89,  Teste  Arabe),  observes  that  ^3  governs  an
accusative  immediately,  and  that  it  is  a  vulgarism  to  follow  it  by

A"'

Its  white  hand, — White  hand”  is  used  idiomatically  to
express  an  unasked  or  ungrudged  favour^  as  a  black  hand  ”
expresses  niggardliness  ;  it  also  means  some  great  action  which
cannot  be  rivalled,  so  that  it  is  said,  He  has  a  white  hand  in
this  matter;”  that  is,  *'he  is  most  able  in  it.”  A  tliird  signifi¬
cation  is  an  argument,  or  a  clearly  demonstrated  proof.  These
various  meanings  seem  to  have  arisen  from  the  passage  in  the
Koran,  vii.  105,  where  it  is  said  that  Moses,  before  Pharaoh,
drew  forth  his  hand  from  his  bosom,  and  it  was  white  to  the  eyes
of  those  who  looked  on  it.  The  Moslems  do  not,  like  the  Jews,
interpret  this  as  smitten  with  leprosy,  Exodus  iv.  6 ;  but  as
a  gift  of  supernatural  beauty,  the  former  colour  of  it  having
been  brown  or  red.  The  hand  of  Moses  ”  became  symbolical
of  power  and  ability.

The  first  of  the  morning  dawned, — Literally  the  nose  of  the
morning  sneezed.

The  caller  of  Blessing  is  the  muezzin  who  cries

There  is  here  an  allusion  to  the  practice  of  wishing
people  the  mercy  of  God  when  they  sneeze,  For  a

mention  of  this  usage  see  Twenty-second  Assembly.

Hospitality  is  three  This  is  a  very  celebrated  Tradition,

although  by  it  the  hospitable  practices  of  the  Ignorance  were


410


NOTUS,


only  confirmed.  The  entertainment  of  a  guest  is  three  days,
and  the  viaticum,  is  a  day  and  a  night,  and  what  exceeds

this  is  almsT  The  Tradition  is  thns  explained  in  Lane,  Book  L
p.  486.  The  period  of  the  entertainment  of  a  guest  is  three
days,  during  the  first  of  which  the  host  shall  take  trouble  to  show
him  large  kindness  and  courtesy,  and  on  the  second  and  third  of
which  he  shall  offer  him  what  he  has  at  hand,  not  exceeding  his
usual  custom ;  then  he  shall  give  him  that  wherewith  to  journey
for  the  space  of  a  day  and  a  night,  and  what  is  after  that  shall
be  as  an  alms,  and  an  act  of  favour,  which  he  may  do  if  he  please,
or  neglect  if  he  please.”

Yidt  him  thou  lovest, — Similar  counsels  are  to  be  met  with
continually  in  the  poets.  For  the  proverb,  “  Visit  (only)  at
intervals  ;  thou  shalt  increase  friendship,”  see  Ar.  Prov.  I.  587.


THE  SIXTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  West,—Y>j  this  name  the  people  of  the  East  denote  Africa
from  Tunis  to  Morocco ;  but  not  Andalus  or  Spain.

The  prayer  of  sunset, — This  is  strictly  speaking  the  first
prayer  of  the  day,  which  is  reckoned  from  sunset  to  sunset  ;
though  the  morning  prayer  is  often  called  the  first:  The  time
of  the  prayer  of  sunset  begins  a  few  minutes  after  the  disap¬
pearance  of  the  sun ;  the  second  prayer  time,  begins  when
the  evening  has  closed  in ;  the  third  at  day-break,  or  jjf ;  the

fourth  a  little  after  the^.b,  or  noon ;  and  the  fifth  at  the
or  afternoon,  midway  between  noon  and  dusk.  Slight  differences
respecting  the  time  of  these  devotions  divide  the  four  orthodox
sects  of  Islam,  but  it  is  illegal  to  pray  exactly  at  sunset,  sunrise,
or  noon,  since  this  was  the  practice  of  the  sun-worshippers.

Performed  with  completeness.— is  interpreted  to  mean
that  it  was  performed  in  public,  since  a  prayer  in  public  in  the


MOTHS.


411


mosque  is  more  complete  and  excellent  than  one  performed  in
private :  or  it  may  mean  that  it  was  performed  with  its  full  rite.

Joined  to  it  what  was  optional.'— is,  had  added  to  the
/ardf  or  strictly  incumbent  inclinations,  the  two  sunneh  inclina¬
tions.  The  prayers  consist  of  so  many  or  inclinations,

each  with  its  accompanying  recitations.  The  number  of  incli¬
nations  varies  with  the  different  prayers ;  but  the  prayer  of
sunset  has  three  inclinations  which  are  Jard,  and  two  which  are
sunneh  ;  and  the  meaning  of  the  text  is  that  Harith  accomplished
all  five.

fofayl,  according  to  the  legend,  was  the  father  of  all  intrusive
guests,  who  come  without  being  invited.  According  to  Sherishi
he  was  Tofayl  ibn  Dallal  the  Darimi,  and  according  to  Abu
^Obaydeh,  cited  at  the  proverb  More  intrusive  than  Tofayl,’'
Arab.  Prov.  II.  838,  he  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  'Abd  Allah
ibn  Ghatafan.  He  dwelt  at  Kufa,  and  was  known  by  the  name
of  ^‘Tofayl  of  the  weddings,”  or  '^Tofayl  of  the  brides,”  from
his  presenting  himself  unbidden  at  marriage  feasts.  From  him
every  one  who  is  that  is,  an  intruder  while  people  are

eating,  or  that  is,  an  intruder  while  they  are  drinking,
is  called  a  Tofayli ;  and  from  the  nature  of  Eastern  society  the
race  has  never  failed.  The  satirical  stories  at  the  expense  of
these  people  are  innumerable.  One  of  them  is  supposed  to  sing :

We  are  the  people  who  when  we  are  invited  accept,  and  when  we  are
forgotten  invite  ourselves  :

^^For  we  say,  ^Perhaps  we  were  invited,  but  were  from  home,  and  the
messenger  came  to  us,  but  could  not  find  us.’  ”

Yet  it  is  doubted  whether  Tofayl  'ever  existed,  for  JiL>  signifies  the
coming  on  of  night  upon  day  ;  and  from  this  the  name  Tofayli’
may  be  figuratively  derived,  as  one  who  comes  upon  a  company,
unbidden  and  unwelcome.

Choice  of  the  young  camels  hump. — is  the  flesh  of  the
back  from  the  shoulders  to  the  rump,  including  the  hump.  J\^
is  the  young  camel  till  the  time  that  it  is  weaned.  In  the
Mo'allakah  of  Tarafeh,  v.  93,  we  read,  The  serving  maids
place  the  young  camel  on  the  coals  and  hasten  to  us  with  slices


412


JSrOTJEJS.


of  the  fat  hump/^  Yet  it  is  said,  More  insipid  than  the  flesh
of  the  young  camel.”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  713.

They  loosed  their  loops  to  me,  that  is,  they  rose  up  to  me.
This  phrase  has  its  origin  in  the  peculiar  posture  taken  by  Arabs
when  sitting  at  their  ease.  The  Arabs  in  the  desert  had,  when
sitting,  nothing  to  rest  their  backs  against ;  it  was  their  custom
therefore  to  draw  up  their  knees  to  their  stomachs,  and  then
bind  their  back  to  their  legs  with  a  garment,  or  a  piece  of  cloth,
such  as  a  turban  is  made  of.  The  thing  with  which  this  was
done  was  called  and  the  act  of  doing  it  Or  some¬

times  the  man  raised  his  knees  in  this  manner  and  supported
himself  by  holding  a  sword  in  front  of  his  legs  ;  and  sometimes
he  knit  his  hands  in  front  of  them.  Thus  it  was  said  that
were  the  walls  of  the  Arabs,”  that  is,  the  things  against
which  they  rested  their  backs  when  sitting.  The  word  is  very
insufficiently  translated  ^  loop ;  ”  and,  indeed,  it  is  impossible  to
render  it  in  English.  To  loose  the  naturally  means  to  rise  ;
and  to  hind  them  means  to  sit  down.  To  sit  in  this  manner  is
the  most  easy  posture  among  the  Arabs,  and  would  be  adopted
in  a  long  confabulation.  It  is  forbidden  during  the  sermon  as
tending  to  sleep.

The^  blinding  lightning  that  snatches  away  the  sight.  Compare
Koran  ii.  19.

The  sip  of  the  timid  bird, — In  the  Thirty-ninth  Assembly  a
similar  comparison  is  used :  Not  longer  than  the  tasting  of
the  drinker.”

The  two  words  are  the  ordained  form  of  saluta¬
tion  from  one  Moslem  to  another.  The  men  on  the  or

highest  part  of  the  barrier  which  separates  Paradise  from  Hell,
shall  say  to  the  people  of  Paradise,  ‘‘Peace  be  upon  you,”  Koran
vii.  44.  It  is  not  used  to  a  person  of  another  religion.  The  giving
of  this  salutation  to  a  Moslem  is  not  an  obligatory  diity,/(2r<^,
but  a  precept  of  Tradition,  sunneh.  To  return  it  however  is
obligatory^  since  it  is  said,  Koran  iv.  88,  “If  ye  be  saluted
return  a  still  better  salutation,  or  at  least  return  it.”  The
former  part  of  this  command  leads  strict  professors  to  repeat


jsroTus.


413


the  full  answer,  which  is,  On  thee  be  peace  and  the  mercy  of
God  and  his  blessings ;  ”  or  at  least  as  much  of  this  formula  as
is  necessary  to  make  it  more  complete  than  the  original  salu¬
tation.  The  Tradition  given  by  Baydawi  is  that  a  man  said  to
the  Prophet,  Peace  be  on  thee."^  The  Prophet  replied,  And  on
thee  be  peace  and  the  mercy  of  God.’^  Another  then  said,  Peace
be  on  thee  and  the  mercy  of  God,"'  to  which  the  Prophet  replied,
And  on  thee  be  peace  and  the  mercy  of  God  and  his  blessings."
A  third  man  said,  Peace  be  on  thee  and  the  mercy  of  God  and
his  blessings,"  to  which  the  Prophet  replied,  ^^And  on  thee."
The  man  said,  Thou  hast  fallen  short  to  me."  The  Prophet
answered  that  the  man  had  left  him  nothing  further  to  add,  and
that  he  had  returned  his  wishes  by  saying, And  on  thee."
Thus  this  full  formula  which  unites  all  that  can  be  desired  for  a
man  need  not  be  exceeded  in  the  answer.

The  two  salutations,  or  pronouncings  of  saliim.— Sherishi  says
that  these  are  the  salam  uttered  on  entering  the  mosque,  and
that  uttered  at  the  close  of  the  two  inclinations  with  which  it  is
proper  to  salute  the  mosque ;  or  else  it  is  the  salam  uttered  at
the  prayer  of  sunset,  and  that  uttered  after  the  inclinations.
These  opinions,  no  doubt,  arise  from  the  fact  that  only  one  salS,m
is  necessary  to  the  two  inclinations  with  which  the  mosque
must  be  saluted,  so  that  if  there  were  two  salums  there  would  be
four  inclinations,  which  is  unusual.  But  the  commentator  cited
by  De  Sacy  is  of  opinion  that  Hariri  takes  the  word  in

its  ordinary  sense  as  a  salutation,  so  that  it  would  be  the
same  as  rah  ah.

The  messenger  of  lank-hellied  children. — jj ^  is  originally  a
post-horse  or  mule ;  it  is  then  applied  to  a  messenger  who  rides
on  such  an  animal,  and,  lastly,  to  any  messenger.

Tables. — Hariri,  in  the  Durrah  (Anth.  Gram.  Arabe  p.  29,
Texte  Arabe),  says  that  a  table  is  not  SjoU  until  the  viands  are
placed  on  it ;  that,  in  fact,  it  means  a  table  laid  with  food.  The
disciples  said  to  Jesus,  0  Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  is  thy  Lord  able
to  send  down  to  us  a  table,  ifjoU,  from  heaven?"  where  their
meaning  is  shown  to  be  a  table  laid  with  food,  by  their  adding,


414


mius.


desire  to  eat  of  it.”  Koran  v.  112.  Until  tlie  food  is
upon  it,  says  Hariri,  it  is  called  This  opinion,  howeyer,

is  contrary  to  what  is  stated  in  De  Sacy’s  Commentary,  page
360,  for  there  is  also  said  to  signify  the  table  only  after
the  food  is  on  it.  Both  words  mean  the  small  table,  or  rather
tray,  on  which  food  is  served.

Become  absurd  by  being  reversed. — The  commentators  have
noticed  that  in  the  Koran  instances  of  this  property  may  he

found  as  ulili  ^  xxi.  34;  and  Ixxiv.  3.  The

last  is  introduced  into  the  author’s  second  sentence.  It  need
hardly  be  said  that  in  the  Koran,  they  are  quite  nnintentional.
The  learned  have  discovered  them  as  they  have  discovered  that
there  are  two  verses  which  contain  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,
and  many  matters  of  the  same  kind.

Originate  virgin  2ohrases  in  it. — Literally,  Deflower  virgins  of
it.”  Compare  Sixth  Assembly,

The  men  of  the  (7at;5.—The  history  of  the  Seven  Sleepers,
so  famous  in  the  Middle  Ages,  is  an  article  of  faith  with  the
Moslems,  since  it  forms  the  subject  of  the  earlier  part  of  the
Eighteenth  Sura,  called  the  Cave.  According  to  the  Christian
tradition,  the  Seven  Sleepers  were  young  men  of  Ephesus,  who,
fleeing  from  the  persecution  of  the  Emperor  Decius,  took  refuge
in  a  cave,  and  there  slept  through  a  long  period  of  time.  The
legend,  like  that  of  Endymion  among  the  ancients,  has  singu¬
larly  attracted  the  imagination  wherever  it  has  become  known.
In  Koran  xviii.  8,  it  is  said,  Hast  thou  considered  that  the
men  of  the  Cave  and  Ar  Ealdm  were  of  our  signs,  a  wonder?”
The  meaning  of  Ar  Kaldm  is  the  subject  of  dispute.  It  was
either  the  name  of  the  mountain  or  the  valley  in  which  the  cave
was  situated,  or  of  their  village,  or  the  name  of  their  dog,  which
is  mentioned  at  verse  17  as  sleeping  at  the  entrance  of  the  cave,
or  else  it  is  the  name  of  a  leaden  or  stone  tablet  on  which  their
names  were  engraved  by  their  countrymen,  who  built  a  chapel
on  the  spot  (verse  20);  or  else  '‘the  men  of  Ar  Rakim”  were
distinct  from  the  "men  of  the  Cave,”  who  slept,  for  it  is


jsroTJss.


415


related  that  the  men  oF  Ar  EaMm  were  three,  who  taking
refuge  in  a  cave  from  a  tempest  were  shut  in  by  the  fall  of  a
rock.  Each  of  them  prayed  for  help  through  the  merits  of  a
good  action  which  he  had  performed.  When  the  first  had  thus
adjured  God,  the  mountain  cracked,  so  that  they  could  see  the
light ;  when  the  second  had  spoken,  it  split,  so  that  they  could
distinguish  each  other,  and  when  the  third  had  spoken,  it  opened
and  they  were  delivered. — Baydcmi.  Respecting  the  number  of
the  Companions  of  the  Cave  the  Koran  leaves  us  in  uncertainty.
It  is  said,  Men  will  say  that  they  were  three,  and  the  fourth  was
their  dog ;  that  they  were  five,  and  the  sixth  was  their  dog,  con¬
jecturing  what  is  hidden  ;  and  they  will  say  that  they  were  seven,
.the  eighth  was  their  dog.  Say,  My  Lord  knows  best  their  num¬
ber;  there  are  but  few  who  know  concerning  them.”  Nor  is
the  exact  duration  of  their  sleep  determined,  for  it  is  said,  They
remained  in  their  cave  three  hundred  years,
which  is  explained  by  Bayclawi  to  mean  that  opinions  differ
as  to  whether  they  remained  three  hundred  or  three  hun¬
dred  and  nine  years.  According  to  the  same  Commentator
(verse  21)  the  opinion  that  they  were  seven  in  number  is
the  most  correct ;  the  names  of  six  of  them  and  of  their
dog  are  given  on  the  autliority  of  'Ali  :  the  six  were  royal
counsellors,  and  the  seventh,  whose  name  is  not  given,  was
a  shepherd  who  accompanied  them.  Some  of  the  names  are
seemingly  corruptions  of  Latin  or  Greek.  Ibn  'Abbas,  cited  by
Sherishi,  gives  the  names  differently  ;  the  dog,  however,  in  both
versions  is  lutmir.  This  dog  has  been  reckoned  by  some  among
the  seven  most  celebrated  animals  ;  the  others  being  the  huclhud
or  lapwing  of  Solomon,  which  brought  him  the  news  of  the  Queen
of  Sheba  (Koran  xxvii.  20);  the  camel  of  Salih;  the  cow  of
Moses,  ■  which  gives  a  name  to  the  second  Sura ;  the  fish  of
Jonah;  the  ser[oent  of  Eve  ;  and  the  peacock  of  Paradise.  The
history  of  the  people  of  the  Cave  was  one  of  the  twenty-eight
subjects  on  which  the  Jews  of  Khaybar,  at  the  instigation  of  Abu
Jahl  and  Welid  ibn  Moghayrah,  questioned  the  Prophet.  They
sent  five  learned  men  thus  to  prove  him,  and  Mohammed,  though


416


NOTES.


nothing  had  been  revealed  to  him  on  the  subject,  answered,  in
the  presence  of  the  Koraysh,  that  he  would  give  the  due  replies  ;
trusting  that  Gabriel  would  bring  him  the  explanations  from
God.  But  he  forgot  to  add,  '4f  it  please  God,’"  and,  to  correct
him,  God  left  him  fifteen  days  without  any  divine  help,  so  that
his  enemies  triumphed  over  him.  At  last,  at  the  end  of  the
fifteenth  day,  Gabriel  brought  to  him  the  verses  of  the  Koran
which  answered  the  several  questions ;  but  there  was  also  re¬
vealed  at  the  same  time  the  following,  Say  not  of  anything  ‘  I
will  do  it  to-morrow,’  without  adding,  ^if  God  will  it.’  ”  These
words  occur  in  the  history  of  the  Cave,  Koran  xviii.  23,  and  bear
witness  that  this  history  was  one  on  which  the  Prophet  was
entirely  uninformed,  at  the  time  when  he  rashly  accepted  the
challenge  of  the  Jews.  For  the  history  of  these  questions  see
Tabari.

Blame  him  who  wearies  of  thee.-— It  will  be  observed  that  in
these  sentences  only  the  twenty-eight  letters  are  considered,  and
that  no  account  is  made  of  teshdid  or  tannwn,  or  even  of  the
hamzehy  in  such  a  word  as  although  it  is  essentially  a

letter.

He  who  completes  the  kindness. — On  the  meaning  of
compare  the  verses  at  the  end  of  the  Sixth  Assembly.

To  mould  and  break,  etc.— to  form  sentences,  and  then  to
reject  them,  on  finding  that  they  were  deficient;  to  be  at  one
moment  ready  to  solve  the  difficulty,  and  at  the  next  unable  to
utter  a  word.  »

1  seek  food.—Th^t  is,  I  seek  a  solution  of  the  difficulty  from
those  around.  The  word  is  used  in  a  saying  of  'Ali,  which  is
interpreted  to  mean,  When  the  Imam  seeks  for  a  word  or  an
explanation,  give  him  one.”  You  say  when  the

reader  of  the  Koran  stops  (through  ignorance  what  reading  to
give  to  a  particular  word),  and  you  explain  to  him  and  give  him
an  opinion ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  when  he  solicits  this

help.  A  somewhat  similar  use  of  the  wmrd  occurs  in  the  Thirty-
first  Assembly,  p.  390,  De  Sacy’s  edition :  Their  seeking  to
taste  of  his  speech.”


jsroTJss.


417


My  breeze  felL—ix,^  my  efforts  were  given  np  in  despair.

lyds  has  been  spoken  of  in  the  notes  to  the  Seventh  Assembly.

There  is  One  learned^  etc. — ^These  words  are  from  Koran  xii.  76,
and  refer  to  the  stratagem  suggested  by  God  to  J oseph,  of  hiding
his  cup  in  Benjamin’s  sack.

Bestow  on  the  needy,  —  Metre  rejez.  The  letters  of  these
verses  are  the  same  whether  read  forwards  or  backwards,  though
this  is  effected  by  counting  the  augmentative  which  makes  the
^1^1^  of  the  last  syllable.

Excellent  are  this  company, — Metre  kdmil,  which  has  been  de¬
scribed  at  the  Fourth  Assembly.

Princes  in  bounty — I  have  thus  translated  in  accordance  with
Sherishi,  who  renders  by  making  a  form  of

JJ,  in  use  among  the  people  of  Yemen.  It  is  said  in  the
Twenty-seventh  Assembly,  '‘I  sojourned  with  Arabs  who  were
as  deputies  of  princes  meaning  noble-spirited  men.  The  title
is  explained  at  Assembly  Eighteen.  This  rendering  is  the
mjore  consistent  with  the  sense,  since  Abu  Zayd  praises  the  com¬
pany  both  for  their  cleverness  and  their  liberality.

Sahbdn  would  be  as  Bdkil,  —  For  the  former  of  these  two
persons,  who  is  always  spoken  of  as  the  pattern  of  eloquence,  see
the  Fifth  Assembly.  Bakil  was  a  man  of  Kabfah,  or,  as  it  is
otherwise  said,  of  lyhd.  He  had  an  impediment  in  his  speech  for
which  his  name  became  proverbial,  so  that  it  is  said,  More  tongue-
tied  than  Bakil,  Once,  when  he  had  a  fawn  under  his  arm,
which  he  had  bought  for  eleven  dirhems,  he  was  met  by  people
who  asked  him  how  much  he  had  given ;  he  stretched  out  his
arms  and  opened  his  fingers  to  express  ten,  and  put  out  his
tongue  to  express  one.  The  fawn  which  was  under  his  arm
made  its  escape.  When  censured  for  his  stupidity,  he  is  said  to
have  answered  in  verse  that  a  man  could  not  help  his  own  stu¬
pidity,  and  that  when  afflicted  with  it,  it  was  an  advantage  to  him
not  to  be  able  to  speak  fluently.  Ar.  Prov.  11.  146.

The  glooining  has  now  set  in, — These  words  are  derived  from
the  Sura  called  at  the  end  of  the  Koran,  signifies

to  be  overflowed  or  obscured,  as  the  night  by  darkness  or  clouds,


27


418


NOTES.


or  the  eye  by  tears.  It  is  said  by  some  to  apply  there  to  the
eclipsing  of  the  moon.  (Baydawi.)  Sherishi  also  renders  the  word
by  ‘‘  moon,”  and  quotes  a  Tradition  of 'Ayisheh,  that  the  Prophet
one  night,  looking  at  the  moon,  said  to  her,  Commend  thyself

to  God  from  the  evil  of  this ;  for  this  is  y _ the

moon  which  is  becoming  eclipsed.”  I  have  preferred  to  render
it  glooming;”  but  if  it  refer  to  the  moon  it  may  mean  merely
that  the  moon  had  set.

Between  me  and  my  house. — On  the  repetition  of  when  it
is  joined  to  a  pronoun  so  as  to  form  but  one  word  with  it,
read  the  lucid  explanation  of  Hariri,  in  the  Durrah;  Anthol.
Grammat.  Arabe,  p.  44,  Texte  Arabe.

Distraction. — jQa  is  described  as  fear  and  delirium  caused  by
hunger.  It  is  used  also  to  express  angry  petulance,  or  caprice
of  mind.

Emptiness. — is  a  masdar.

To  his  people. — hi  is  the  reserve  or  support  of  an  army  or
attacking  body ;  a  band  stationed  behind  soldiers  for  them  to
take  refuge  with  in  retreat.

His  return. — which  is  one  of  several  masdars  of
(-jT,  signifies,  according  to  some,  only  the  returning  to  one's
family  at  night.

The  seed-plots  of  advantages :  the  nurseries,  the  place  where
something  is  planted.  This  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  a  bride
from  whom  offspring  is  expected  at  Assembly  Thirty-nine,
unless,  indeed,  we  have  to  read  there  without  the  point.

When  thou  hast  got  the  plucking. — Metre  mictelfirih.

Accost  with  ‘‘  Give  nowf  etc. — The  meaning  of  this  is,  when
you  ask,  endeavour  to  get  the  favour  instantly  granted,  but
when  you  are  solicited,  put  off  the  asker  as  long  as  you  can.”
It  is  said  proverbially, When  he  begs  he  urges,  and  when  he  is
begged  of  he  puts  off.”  Ar.  Prov.  I.  41.  In  the  Thirty-seventh
Assembly  it  is  said  Remains  there  one  who  when  he  is  asked
for  food  says,  '  Take  V  At  p.  509  of  De  Sacy’s  edition,  some
verses  of  A1  Bohtori  are  quoted,  the  last  of  which  expresses  a
similar  idea.


NOTES,


419


What  is  postponed  from  thee, — i.e,,  wliat  is  only  dae  at  some
future  time.  ^  signifies  neither  present  nor  future

wealth.

In  thy  which  is  from  j^\,  is  a  word  of

various  meanings,  but  seems  here  to  signify  the  pericardium ;
the  integument  of  the  heart.  It  is  also  said  to  signify

the  core  of  the  heart  or  the  heart’s  blood.


•  THE  SEVENTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

In  its  heat,—L^^^  \  is  the  ardour  of  the  horse  for  the  gallop,
and  thence  the  gallop  itself.

Cast  in  his  bucket  among  the  buckets, — Ar.  Prov.  II.  436.
See  also  notes  to  Fifteenth  Assembly.  Compare  also  Ar.  Prov.
II.  260.

Thinner  than  a  reed, — Hariri,  in  the  Durrah  (Anthol.  Gram.
Arabe  p.  31,  Texte  Arabe)  says  that  a  reed  is  only  called
when  it  is  cut  for  writing;  so  which  occurs  a  few  lines  back,
means  only  the  thread  or  string  of  a  necklace.

The  Sherishi  reminds  us  that  Hariri,  in  the  Durrah,

censures  the  use  of  and  which,  as  they

signify  instruments  that  are  made  up  of  a  double  blade,  should
be  used  in  the  dual,  as  Yet  Sherishi,  though  acknow¬

ledging  that  the  dual  is  the  more  usual,  and  the  preferable  form,
gives  instances  of  the  use  of  the  singular.  The  shears  are  called
dry  because  they  are  used  but  seldom,  and  lie  rusty  during  the
greater  part  of  the  year.

To  lay  low  all  he  aimed  at, — is  said  of  one  who  strikes
and  kills  the  game  on  the  spot;  of  one  who  strikes  it  so
that  it  escapes,  and  lingers  for  some  time.  To  eat  the  latter  is
forbidden,  since  it  is  held  to  come  under  the  prohibitions  of
Koran  ii.  1 68  and  v.  4.  There  is  also  a  Tradition  of  the  Prophet,

Eat  what  thou  hast  struck  so  that  it  was  killed  at  once,  and
leave  what  thou  hast  strucjj:  so  that  it  lingered.”


420


JSrOTJES,


Until  the  quivers  were  envpty, — This  metaphor  for  the  exhaus¬
tion  of  a  store  of  conversation  has  already  occurred.  According
to  some  there  is  a  difference  between  the  two  names  for  a  quiver,
and  the  former  being  a  large  and  wide  quiver,  with  a
cover  to  it,  intended  for  the  wooden  arrows,  called  which

were  used  by  the  Persians ;  while  the  latter  is  of  leather,  made
to  hold  the  Arab  arrows  of  reed,  Jj.  Other  names  are
which  occurs  in  Assembly  Twelve,  and  is  said  to  mean  a  quiver
of  wood  or  of  skin ;  which  consists  of  two  pieces  of  wood,
joined  together,  and  which  is  a  leathern  bag  for  arrows.

Or  the  7vord  ^  Silence '  were  incumbent  upon  them, — The  s^nse
of  these  words  in  the  original  is  obscure.  The  Commentator
cited  by  De  Sacy  explains  them  by  the  passage  in  the  Koran,

When  the  Koran  is  read  listen  to  it  and  be  silent,^^  vii.  203.
The  meaning  in  that  case  would  be,  They  were  as  speechless
as  if  the  duty  of  listening  to  the  Koran  were  incumbent  upon
them.^’  But  the  phrase  Koran  x.  96,

means  those  on  whom  the  word  of  God  is  established  and  fixed
that  they  should  not  believe”  (Baydawi).  Also  Jyill  jJiJ
Koran  xxxvi,  6,  has  a  similar  meaning.  The  pas¬
sage  in  the  text  may  therefore  be  rendered,  As  if  a  sentence  or
judgment  from  God  of  silence  had  been  established  against  them.

The  term  oj  grace,-  53^1  is  technically  the  term  which
must  elapse  before  a  repudiated  wife  can  be  sent  away :  Koran
Ixv.  1-6.  is  also  used  in  speaking  of  the  time  which

should  elapse  before  she  marries  again.  The  meaning  in  the
text  is  simply,  I  have  given  you  your  full  time.”

The  tether  of  delay. — is  the  long  rope  by  which  animals
are  tied  when  grazing.

I  will  rub  the  spark, — In  De  Sacy’s  Commentary  it  is  said
that  to  give  to  the  sense  of  blame  is  a  mistake ;  but  I  can¬
not  but  think  that  the  ambiguity  was  present  to  Hariri’s  mind,
who  is  fond  of  surprising  the  reader  by  such  plays  of  language.

The  light  ofi  cheerfulness, — The  primitive  meaning  of
is  the  foretokens  or  earnests  of  anything ;  and  it  is  used  in  this
sense  in  the  reversed  reading,  Tl^en  it  was  applied  to  the


NOTES.


421


streaks  of  light  which  the  dawn  makes  in  the  night,  and  which
are  earnests  of  the  coming  morning.  Hence  in  the  text  it
signifies  the  bright  gleams  of  a  cheerful  countenance.

Eloquence  in  speech  is  witchcraft  to  hearts. — This  is  taken
from  a  traditional  utterance  of  Mohammed :  Some  eloquence
(or  exposition)  is  as  witchcraft.'’^  The  occasion  on  which  it  was
spoken  is  giv^en  with  the  proverb.  Arab.  Prov.  I.  1.

Self-restraint. — is  defined  in  the  Ta'rifat  as  the  abstaining
from  what  is  doubtful  for  fear  of  falling  into  what  is  forbidden.

The  ornament  of  rulers  is  hatred  of  defamers.  —  Mohammed
said,  lie  who  defames  his  neighbour  to  the  Prince  injures  his
Prince,  his  neighbour,  and  himself.”

Excellence  is  in  the  hand  of  God;  He  gives  it  to  ivhom  he  loill. —
These  words  are  from  Koran  Ivii.  29,  where  they  are  used  as  a
rebuke  to  the-  people  of  the  Book”  or  of  writing,”  that  is
the  Jews  and  Christians,  who  possessed  Scriptures,  and  despised
the  Prophet’s  revelation,  Harith  consoles  himself  for  his  in-
'feriority  to  Abu  Zayd  by  reflecting  that  literary  gifts  are  in  the
hands  of  God.

I  do  not  take  forfeit  of  my  pupils  :  as  I  do  from  my  unsuc¬
cessful  competitors.  As  Harith  was  only  a  listener,  not  one  of
the  contenders  in  the  strife  of  eloquence,  but  an  humble  learner,
Abu  Zayd  will  not  take  a  present  from  him.

Be  Abu  Zayd.—l^h^t  is,  I  hope  and  believe  that  thou  art  Abu
Zayd.  The  Prophet  seeing  Abu  ^err  al  Ghafari,  at  a  distance,
before  he  could  well  distinguish  him,  said,  Be  Abu  Therf,”
that  is,  ‘‘  I  hope  that  thou  art  he,”  or  God  ordain  that  thou  be
he.”

He  declared  the  Power  of  God  and  our  return  to  Him. —
or  Ji^  signifies  he  ejaculated  SI  S  (There  is  no

strength  and  no  power  but  in  God),  signifies  he  ejacu¬
lated  ^  (We  belong  to,  or  are  in  the  hands  of,

God,  and  to  Him  we  return).  These  are  exclamations  uttered  at
the  befalling  of  calamity.

Time  hath  drawn  his  sword. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is


422


ROTUS.


and  tliey  belong  to  tbe  third  which  is  and  its

first  which  is  the  measure  being

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  each  line  ends  with  taken  in  a
different  sense.

Loose  our  loops :  to  rise  up.  See  Sixteenth  Assembly.

We  went  asunder  like  the  hands  of  Saba. — The  allusion  here
is  to  the  most  famous  event  in  early  Arab  history,  namely,
to  what  is  called  or  the  bursting  of  the  dyke  of  Marib,

in  Yemen,  by  which  the  reputed  descendants  of  Saba  were
scattered  to  the  extremities  of  Arabia,  and  into  Syria,  and  Irak.
The  subject  has  been  almost  exhausted  by  Sylvestre  de  Sacy,
in  the  masterly  essay  which  is  contained  in  Vol.  xlviii.  of  the
Memoir  es  de  I' Aeademie  Roy  ale  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles-lettres.
To  this  work,  and  to  the  Arabio  texts  which  the  learned  author
has  published  with  it,  the  student  who  desires  full  information
on  the  subject  is  referred.  It  will  be  here  necessary  to  give
only  such  a  brief  narrative  as  will  explain  the  allusion  in  the
text.  According  to  Arab  tradition,  there  was  in  Yemen  or
South  Western  Arabia  a  large  and  fertile  country  inhabited  by
the  descendants  of  Saba,  l^*.  Mas'udi  describes  it  as  distin¬
guished  above  all  others  for  its  rich  fields,  its  gardens  and  its
meadows,  its  buildings  and  canals,  its  fine  trees  and  plentiful
rivers.  In  this  happy  country,  which  was  called  the  land  of
Saba,  there  was  situated  a  great  city  called  Marib,  which  was
the  capital  of  its  kings,  a  powerful  race  of  monarchs,  who  had
defeated  all  their  enemies.  But  all  this  prosperity  was  artificial.
The  country  had  been  originally  uninhabitable,  on  account  of  the
frequent  inundations ;  since  the  torrents  rushed  down  from  the
mountains,  sweeping  harvests  and  cattle  before  them.  But
Lokman,  son  of 'Ad,  he  who  is  called  Lokman  of  the  Vultures,^’
and  who  must  not  be  confounded  with  Lokman  al  Hakim,  son  of
Baura,  of  the  children  of  Azar,  who  was  sister^s  son  to  Job,  or,
as  others  say,  son  of  Job’s  maternal  aunt,  and  who  was  a  witness
of  the  power  of  God  in  giving  David  the  skill  to  make  coats  of
mail  (Baydawi  on  Koran  xxxi,  11),  became  king  of  the  country,


NOTES,


423


after  the  destruction  of  the  race  of  ‘'Ad.  For  an  account  of
Lokman  of  the  Vultures/’  see  Tabari,  at  the  history  of  the
prophet  Hud.  This  Lokman  turned  the  channels  of  some  of  the
rivers,  and  gave  them  an  outlet  to  the  sea ;  to  restrain  the  rest,
he  constructed  between  two  high  mountains,  at  the  mouth  of  a
ravine  into  which  the  waters  precipitated  themselves,  a  strong
dyke,  which  caused  the  floods  to  form  a  great  basin  or  reservoir.
In  this  dyke  were  openings  through  which  the  husbandmen
drew  oif  supplies  of  water  for  their  fields,  and  the  country  of  Marib
became  fertile,  populous,  and  rich.  This  prosperity  endured  for
ages.  Lokman  himself  is  said  to  have  lived  three  thousand  five
hundred  years,  having  been  granted  by  God  a  life  equal  in
length  to  the  lives  of  seven  vultures,  each  of  which  lived  five,
hundred  years.  His  life  only  came  to  an  end  when  the  last
vulture,  which  was  named  Lubad  died.  At  last  the  country
came  under  the  government  of  ^'Amr  ibn  *Amir  MuzayMya,  or
the  Tearer,  who  was  so  called  because  he  tore  up,  every  evening,
the  <LL^,  or  pair  of  garments,  which  he  had  worn  during  the
day ;  for  his  pride  was  such  that  he  would  not  wear  them  again,
or  suffer  another  to  wear  them.  A  more  probable  derivation  is
that  he  or  ‘‘tore  away”  the  people  from  their  settle¬
ments.  This'Amr  descended,  according  to  Mas'udi,  from  Saba,
through  Kahlan  and  Azd.  He  had  a  wife  named  Zarifet  al
Khayr,  who  was  a  divineress  of  great  skill,  and  who  at  her
death  left  her  Jinn,  or  familiar  spirits,  to  Shikk  and  Satih;
as  has  been  noticed  already  in  the  history  of  Shikk.  In
his  time  there  arose  a  fear  that  the  dyke  would  give  way.
"Amran,  brother  of  ‘'Amr,  who  was  also  a  diviner,  received
presages  that  the  people  would  be  scattered  into  distant  coun¬
tries.  Zarlfeh  dreamed  that  a  great  cloud  covered  the  country,
out  of  which  came  thunderbolts  that  destroyed  all  they  fell  upon.
She  declaimed  her  dream  to  her  husband  in  prophet!^  rhythm  ;
and  her  frenzy  was  such  that  they  held  her  fast  till  she  grew  calm.
Afterwards,  when  her  husband  was  absent  and  giving  her  cause
lor  jealousy,  she  went  to  seek  him,  but  three  moles  stood  upright
before  her ;  a  tortoise  turned  on  its  back  in  her  path,  and  the


424  •


NOTJES,


trees,  were  agitated  without  a  wind.  She  forced  her  wa}^  into  her
husband^s  presence,  and  in  a  prophetic  frenzy  declaimed,  By
the  light  and  the  darkness  ;  By  the  earth  and  the  heaven ;  Surely
each  tree  shall  perish ;  And  the  waters  shall  return  as  in  the
times  that  are  past.”  Who  hath  told  thee  that  ? said
'Amr.  The  moles,”  she  answered  in  the  same  strain,  ^Miave
shown  me  years  of  calamity,  in  which  the  son  shall  separate
from  the  father.”  In  the  end  she  bade  'Amr  go  and  examine
the  dyke,  and  if  he  found  a  rat  making  holes  in  it,  be  sure
that  the  destruction  would  come  to  pass.  He  went,  and  found
that  it  was  so,  and  told  what  he  had  seen  in  some  verses
of  the  metre  rejez.  "Amr  then  determined  to  quit  the  country ;
.but  being  desirous  to  obtain  a  good  price  for  his  property  he
devised  a  stratagem  which  would  give  him  an  excuse  for  selling
it,  without  telling  his  people  that  it  would  soon  be  worthless.
He  made  a  feast,  and  contrived  that  he  should  be  struck  by  a
youth  who  was  present.  When  he  had  received  the  blow  he
declared  that  he  could  never  bear  such  an  insult,  and  that  he
would  dispose  of  all  he  had  and  depart.  When  he  had  arranged
his  affairs  he  revealed  what  was  to  happen,  and  a  general  emi¬
gration  took  place.  God  then  sent  great  rains  which  burst  the
dyke,  and  ruined  the  country  of  Marib.  Such  is  the  legend.
Before  proceeding  to  discuss  the  historical  event  on  which  it
•rests,  it  will  be  as  well  to  cite  the  passage  in  the  Koran  concern¬
ing  it,  and  the  opinions  of  the  commentators.  At  Sura  xxxiv.
14,  it  is  said,  Saba  had  in  its  dwelling  a  sign  of  our  power  ;
two  gardens,  right  and  left :  we  said  Eat  of  the  gift  of  your  Lord,
and  be  thankful  to  him  :  your  country  is  a  goodly  one,  and  your
Lord  is  forgiving.  But  they  turned  aside  (from  thankfulness)
and  we  sent  on  them  the  Sayl  aLArim,  and  for  their  two  gardens
we  gave  them  two  with  bitter  fruit,  and  the  tamarisk  and  scanty
lotus.”  In  this  passage  is  interpreted  to  be  any  bitter
fruit,  or  to  be  the  fruit  of  the  kind  of  trees  called  With

respect  to  it  is  interpreted  by  Bayd^wi  as  troublesome,”
or  ''  disastrous,”  or  as  a  violent  rain,”  or  a  rat,”  the  word
torrent”  being  put  in  annexion  with  ^rat,’  because  a  rat  bored


NOTES.


425


through  the  dam  which  Bilkis  had  constructed  for  them,  and  by
which  she  kept  in  the  water,  having  left  orifices  according  to  the
wants  of  the  inhabitants  ;  or  else  it  is  a  high  bank,  founded  as  a
dam ;  in  which  last  case  it  is  the  plural  of  which  means
heaped  up  stones  ;  it  is  also  said  to  be  the  name  of  the  valley
from  which  the  torrent  came.  These  discordant  opinions  con¬
duce  to  the  belief  that  was  a  word  of  the  language  of  Yemen,
the  meaning  of  which  was  not  understood  by  Koraysh.  It  is,
however,  the  prevalent  opinion  among  the  learned  that
means  a  dyke,  and  to  this  the  analogy  of  the  Hebrew  lends
weight.  In  the  song  of  Moses,  Exodus  xv.  8,  it  is  said
For  nfi'iy,  a  heap,  see  Cant.  vii.  3  ;  and  Ruth  hi.  7.

Of  the  epoch  of  the  bursting  of  the  dyke  of  Marib  it  is  im¬
possible  to  speak  with  accuracy.  It  took  place  probably  more
than  a  century  after  the  birth  of  Christ.  Marib  is  mentioned
by  Pliny  as  a  flourishing  city  in  his  time;  and.  even  Baydawi,
with  all  his  orthodox  respect  for  tradition,  admits  that  the  ca¬
lamity  occurred  between  the  time  of  Christ  and  Mohammed.
Other  writers  also  speak  of  it  as  having  occurred  in  the
a  name  applied  pre-eminently  to  this  period.  Be  Sacy,  review¬
ing  the  various  narratives  and  genealogies,  places  it  between
150  and  170  a.d.  M.  Caussin  do  Perceval,  Essai,  I.  87,
inclines  to  a  somewhat  earlier  epoch,  the  beginning  of  the
second  century.  But  respecting  the  emigration  which  took
place  we  arc  in  less  doubt.  The  tradition  related  by  Mas'udi
is  that  'Amran,  the  diviner,  indicated  the  direction  that  each
family  should  take  according  to  its  strength  and  courage.
Those  who  followed  *Amr  Muzaykiya  himself  journeyed  to  the
land  of  Akk,  which  is  on  the  sea  coast  in  the  northern  part  of
Yemen,  and  were  received  hospitably  by  the  tribes.  Here  they
established  themselves,  according  to  Mas  udi,  near  a  pool  called
Ghassan,  from  which  they  afterwards  took  their  name ;  and  here
*Amr  died.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Thalabeh,  in  whose
time,  or  soon  after  it,  the  emigrants,  who  were  called  from  their
ancestor  the  Benu  Azd,  came  into  the  district  of  Mecca,  and
either  destroyed  or  greatly  reduced  the  power  of  Jorhom.  Some


426


NOTES.


of  tlie  descendants  of  Azd  settled  in  the  country  of  'Oman.
These  were,  according  to  Mas'udi,  the  men  of  whom  'Amran
said,  Ye  who  have  a  far-reaching  purpose,  and  a  strong  camel,
and  a  new  provision  bag,’’  that  is  the  boldest  and  richest  of
the  people ;  and  they  were  called  afterwards  Azd  of  Oman.
Others,  less  enterprising,  settled  among  the  Kurds  in  the  country
of  Harnadan,  under  Wadi'ah  son  of  'Amr.  They  became  con¬
founded  with  that  people,  and  hence  the  tradition  that  the  Kurds
are  the  descendants  of  Ainr  Muzaykiya.  Others  repaired  to
Mina  in  the  Nejd,  which  is  the  same  as  Sirah.  These  obtained
the  name  of  \  because  of  the  divisions  which  subsequently

reigned  among  them.  After  the  death  of  'Amr  the  emigrant
families  who  went  with  him  divided  and  settled  in  various
countries.  The  family  of  liis  son  Jafuch  established  itself  in
Syria.  Ows  and  Khazraj,  sons  of  Thalabeh,  fixed  them'*
selves  at  Yathrib,  afterwards  called  Medina.  Malik  settled  in
Irak.  The  tribe  of  Tay  went  to  the  Nejd.  The  history  of  these
emigrations  is  very  obscure;  but  it  is  sufficiently  established
that  many  of  the  most  powerful  tribes  of  Arabia  and  the
northern  country,  including  the  royal  race  of  Ghassan  and  the
Khoza  all  at  Mecca,  came  from  Yemen.  It  has  been  conjectured
with  great  probability  that  political  causes,  as  well  as  a  falling
off  in  the  fertility  of  the  country,  may  have  been  the  cause  of
this  celebrated  emigration.

The  Arabic  writers  generally  make  Saba  the  son  of  Yashjob,
the  son  of  YaYob  (who  was  the  first  person  who  spoke  Arabic
or  made  it  clear  by  the  the  son  or  descendant  of

Kahtan.  Saba  had  the  name  of  'Abd  Sliems  (servant  or
worshipper  of  the  sun),  and  he  begat  two  sons,  Himyar  and
Kahlan.  This  genealogy  shows  that  they  consider  the  Him-
yaritic  Arabs  of  the  south  to  be  identical  in  race  with  the
ancient  Saboeans.  The  name  of  Saba  is,  no  doubt,  of
very  great  antiquity,  since  at  Genesis  x.  28,  Sheba  is  made
the  son  of  Joktan,  whom  the  Arabs  identify  with  Kahtan.
There  is  another  Sheba  the  son  of  Kaamah  and  grandson  of
Cush  mentioned  at  verse  7,  with  whom  the  former  must  not  be


iTOTm.


427


confounded.  This  Sheba  son  of  Eaamah  has,  like  Sheba  the
grandson  of  Abraham,  a  brother  called  Dedan,  from  which  it
would  seem  that  two  different  genealogies  have  been  attributed
to  a  single  race.


THE  EIGHTEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

With  travellers. — According  to  some,  is  applied  only  to

thgse  who  are  mounted  on  camels,  and  he  who  is  mounted  on  a
horse  is  called  of  which  the  plural  in  use  is  as  the

owner  of,  or  attendant  on,  mules,  asses,  or  elephants,  or  the  rider
on  one  of  these  animals,  is  called  JlL,jl^,  JCi,  the  plural  being
formed  by  the  addition  of  But  others  deny  this,  and  quote
the  verse  of  Imr  al  Kays —

When  they  mount  their  horses,  and  put  on  their  breast-plates,
the  earth  grows  hot  though  the  day  be  cold  Diwan,  p.  42.
This,  it  is  said,  is  a  proof  that  can  be  applied  to  horses.
But  Sherislii  points  out  that  the  former  opinion  is,  after  all,
correct,  for  the  Arabs,  when  they  use  alone,  apply  it

always  to  the  riding  on  camels ;  and  if  riding  on  any  other
animal  be  intended,  the  name  of  the  animal  is  mentioned,  as  in
the  verse  quoted,  llariri,  in  the  Diirrah  (Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe,
p.  54,  Texte  Arabe),  says  that  ought  not  to  be  used  of  a
mixed  body  or  train  of  animals,  since  it  applies  to  camels  only ;

and  so  v _ S\j  signifies  exclusively  one  who  is  mounted  on  a

camel.  But  he  admits  that  Al  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed  allows  ^
and  ^fj\  to  be  applied  to  people  mounted  on  any  kind  of
beasts,  the  difference  between  the  two  words  being  that  the  latter
is  applied  to  a  more  numerous  company  than  the  former.  In
accordance  with  this  high  authority,  I  have  translated
simply  travellers.

The  Bern  Nomayr. — Nomayr  descended  from  Ghatafan,
through  Khasaf,  Hawazin,  Bekr,  Mu  awiyeh,  Sa  sa  ah  and


428


NOTES.


Amir.  They  dwelt  in  the  plains  beyond  the  mountains  which
separate  Tihameh  from  Nejd^  and  extended  as  far  north  as
Yathrib  /Medina).  The  sons  of  'Amir  were  Ililal,  Ghani,
Rabfah  and  Nomayr  (see  Caussin  de  Percevars  Genealogical
Tables,  No.  X.,  part  A.),  and  the  sons  of  Rabfah  were  Amir  ibn
Eabi'ah,  Kilab,  and  Ka'b.  Though  having  this  celebrated  kindred,
Nomayr  .  refused  to  ally  itself  with  another  tribe,  and  hence  is
known  as  one  of  the  three  The  derivation  of

is  doubtful ;  but  it  is  applied  to  a  tribe  which  is  strong  enough
to  depend  on  itself,  and  will  not  form  alliances  or  confederacies
with  any  other;  so  that  to  say  of  the  sons  of  Such  an  one  fliat
they  are  a  means  that  they  are  strong  and  able  to  defend
themselves.  Shenshi  says,  ''The  Benu  Nomayr  are  a  tribe  of
the  Benu  Sasa'ah,  and  one  of  the  of  the  Arabs,  and  the

most  noble  of  the  families  of  Kays  son  of  Ghaylan  (Ghatafan
issued  from  Moclar  by  Kays  ibn  Ghajdan).  Now  the  Jamrat  of
the  Arabs  are  three,  and  were  called  so  because  they  multiplied
among  themselves  and  no  others  mixed  with  them,  for^^:^  in
the  speech  of  the  Arabs  signifies  collecting  together ;  these  were
the  Benu  Nomayr  and  the  Benu  ’1  Harith  ibn  Ka'b  and  the
Benu  Dabbah  (son  of  Udd  son  of  Tabikhah  son  of  Elyas  son  of
Modar).  Two  of  these  became  extinct,  the  Benu  Dabbah  by
confederating  with  Eibab,  and  the  Benu  ’1  Harith  by  confederat¬
ing  with  MefKhij,  and  Nomayr  alone  remained.  One  of  their
poets  has  said,

‘  Nomayr  are  the  Jamrah  of  the  Arabs ;  they  cease  not  to  burn  in  war.’”
To  understand  this  verse  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
signifies  a  "live  coal''  as  well  as  an  independent  tribe.  Yet
with  all  this  pride  of  race  it  does  not  appear  that  they  played
any  pre-eminently  distinguished  part  in  early  Arab  history.

Wealth  and  worth. — This  is  the  best  rendering  I  can  find  for
this  phrase,  which  belongs  to  the  class  known  as  The

two  words  have  almost  the  same  meaning,  if^^  be  considered
to  be,  like  a  supply  of  anything  which  one  has  acquired.
When  used  negatively  the  phrase  means  that  a  man  is  poor  and
useless,  Arab.  Prov.  II.  634 ;  and  here  the  sense  may  be  that


NOTES.  429

they  were  a  prosperous  and  serviceable  people.  But  Sberishi
gives  to^^  the  metaphorical  sense  of  friendship,  which  is  con¬
sistent  with  the  meaning  of as  a  masdar]  for  the  latter
signifies  the  bringing  in  provision  for  one’s  friends  or  fellow
travellers ;  so  that  the  phrase  may  mean  in  the  text  well-to-do
and  liberal  people.

Making  a  marriage  is  used  especially  in  the  sense

of  a  feast  at  a  wedding ;  compare  a  note  to  Assembly  Eleven.
ii-oU  is  any  feast  to  which  persons  are  invited,  is  the

general  multitude ;  those  who,  as  it  were,  troop  or  hurry  in  to  a
feast  when  they  are  invited.  See  Commentary,  p.  373,  De
Sacy’s  edition.  is  a  general  mvitation  as  opposed  to

a  select  invitation.

Both  of  settled  land  and  of  desert ;  otherwise  called
Jjbl,  the  people  of  mortar^  that  is,  those  living  in  perma¬
nent  houses ;  and  jf\  the  people  of  goats  or  camel's  hair,
that  is,  those  living  in  tents  made  of  such  materials.  Accord¬
ing  to  the  comnaentary  on  a  verse  in  the  HamS^seh,  p.  670,
Arab.  Text,  was  a  man  who  was  of  the  pure  race  of  the
Arabs,  whether  he  lived  in  cities  or  in  the  desert ;  while
were  those  who  dwelt  in  the  desert,  whether  Arabs  by  race  or
not;  and  one  of  the  latter  was  The  Commentator

quotes  a  verse,  They  call  us  but  is  our  name.”

Both  the  hnportant  and  those  of  no  account. — Both  those
whom  it  was  necessary  to  invite,  as  his  own  relatives  and
friends,  and  the  chief  merchants  of  the  caravan ;  and  those  who
might  have  been  neglected,  as  the  servants  and  drivers,  and  the
lower  class  of  people.  This  is  the  explanation  of  Sberishi,  and
is  obviously  more  reasonable  than  the  others  given  in  De  Sacy’s
Commentary.

Of  one  hand  and  two :  What  was  soft  and  might  be  eaten  with
one  hand,  as  tharid,  and  the  like,  and  what  needed  to  be  broken
or  pulled  to  pieces  by  using  both  hands,  as  meat.  This  ex¬
pression  is  ascribed  to  Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  who,  being  blind,
was  at  a  feast  of  the  Ansar  or  Moslems  of  Medina  with  his  son


430


JSrOTES.


Abd  ar  Eahman.  When  the  tharid  was  set  on,  he  said,  My
son,  is  it  of  one  hand  or  two?”  Of  one,^^  answered  his  son,
and  Hassan  put  forth  one  hand  to  eat  it.  When  the  roast  meat
came  he  asked  the  same  question,  and  being  told  that  it  was  of
^'two  hands,”  he  abstained;  thinking,  it  would  seem,  that  he
could  not  cut  or  tear  it  decently  from  the  dish  like  the  others.
Hassan  ibn  Thabit  was  one  of  the  chief  poets  of  the  days  of  the
Prophet,  and  one  of  the  three  who  sang  his  praises  in  opposition
to  the  satirical  poets  on  the  other  side.  The  other  two  were
Kab  ibn  Malik  and  'Abd  Allah  ibn  Eawahah.  He  died  a.h.  54,
at  the  age,  it  is  said,  of  120  years.  Details  concerning  liim
will  be  found  in  Caussin  de  PercevaPs  Essai ;  the  reader  may
also  be  referred  to  Hammer-PurgstalPs  LiteraturgescUchte^  A
great  number  of  his  verses  are  to  be  found  in  the  Sirat  ar  Reml,
and  a  fragment  in  the  Hamaseh,  p.  737,  Ar.  Text.  It  was  to
his  poetical  powers  that  the  conversion  of  the  tribe  of  Temini
was  mainly  due,  since  he  vanquished  their  chief  poet  in  a
mufakharah.  Like  Horace,  he  was  more  eminent  for  his  poetry
than  for  his  courage  on  the  battle  field  ;  and  his  cowardice  lost
him  the  favour  of  the  Prophet,  who  was  also  incensed  against
him  as  one  of  the  calumniators  of  ‘Ayisheh  in  the  afiair  of
Safwan  ibn  al  Mo'attal.  When  'Ayishelf  s  innocence  was  re¬
vealed  to  Mohammed  (Koran,  xxiv.  11)  he  ordered  Hassan  and
some  others  to  receive  each  eighty  strokes  with  a  rod  ;  a  punish¬
ment  which  is  still  infiicted  by  Moslems  on  those  who  falsely
accuse  a  woman  of  adultery.

Tesnzm,  a  fountain  in  Paradise.  At  Koran  Ixxxiii.  27,  it  is
said  that  the  wine  of  the  blessed  shall  be  mixed  with  Tesnim,

a  fountain  at  which  those  who  are  brought  near  (to  God)  shall
drink.”  According  to  Bayd^wi,  it  is  called  Tesnim  from  the
loftiness  of  its  position,  or  the  nobility  of  its  draught.  He,  how¬
ever,  considers  that  a  distinction  is  made  in  the  text  between  the
and  the  rest  of  the  people  of  Paradise  ;  and  that  the
meaning  is  that  the  former  will  drink  of  the  fount  of  Tesnim
unmixed,  and  the  latter  mixed.  In  Freytag's  Lexicon  it  is  said
that  the  fount  of  Tesnim  flows  over  the  place  called  .  It


NOTES.


431


is  elsewhere  defined  as  the  highest  and  noblest  of  the  drinks  of
Paradise.

Its  train.— with  hear  is  a  bevy  or  flock  of  women,  or  of
birds,  like  the  Kata,  or  of  deer ;  and  with  feth  is  a  herd
of  grazing  camels.

Revenge  I — A  cry  of  those  who  call  on  their  fellows  to  take
blood  revenge  for  murder.  A  verse  of  Hassan  ibn  Thabit  is  as
follows :  Speedily  shalt  thou  hear  in  their  dwellings  ‘  God  is
great!  Oh  the  revenges  for  'Otliman;”^  or,  Oh,  ye  avengers
of  'Othman;  that  is,  the  cry  of  those  who  shall  take  revenge
for^'Othman.  Another  reading  of  this  verse  is  cu\j\j\  said  to  be
a  transposition  from  See  Lane,  Book  1.  p.  322.  The
meanipg  of  the  author  is  that  the  guests  prepared  to  set  upon
the  sweetmeats  as  men  rush  to  their  revenge.

As  the  lizard  from  the  fish. — The  lizard  was  supposed  not  to
drink' ;  but,  when  thirsty,  to  open  his  mouth  to  the  wund.  So
the  Arabs  said,  I  will  not  do  so  and  so  until  the  lizard  goes  to
water and  the  phrase  Quenching  thirst  more  easily  than
the  lizard,’'  became  proverbial.  Arab.  Prov.  I.  p.  573.  In  the
Thirty-eighth  Assembly,  it  is  said,  Praise  and  parsimony  can
so  ill  be  united,  that  this  may  be  thought  a  lizard  and  that  a
fish."  In  the  Fiftieth  Assembly  the  author  describes  Basra
from  its  maritime  position  as  a  place  where  ships  and  camels
meet,  where  the  lizards  and  fish  come  together.  Both  and
signify  Ici'Tge fish.

As  Koddr  among  Thamud. — Thamiid  is  many  times  mentioned
in  the  Koran  as  one  of  the  ancient  peoples  who  were  destroyed
for  their  wickedness.  At  ix.  71,  it  is  said,  Have  they  not
heard  of  tliosc  who  went  before  them,  the  people  of  Noah  and
'Ad  and  Tharniid,  and  the  people  of  Abraham  and  the  inhabitants
of  Midian,  and  of  tlic  subverted  cities?"  (the  Cities  of  the  Plain),
Again,  at  1.  12,  Before  them  the  people  of  Noah  and  the  men
of  Rass  (Sec  Baydawi  on  xxv,  40),  and  Thamud,  and  'Ad,  and
Pharaoh,  and  the  brethren  of  Lot,  and  the  people  of  iiSfi  or  ilA
(Midian),  and  the  people  of  Tobba'  (Baydawi  on  xliv,  36)
treated  prophets  as  impostors."  Thamud  are  said  to  have  been


432


NOTJES.


inhabitants  of  A1  Hijr,  in  the  country  between  Hijaz  and  Syria,
where  to  this  day  dwellings  hewn  in  the  stone  are  to  be  found,
which,  according  to  the  Koran  and  to  Moslem  tradition,  be¬
longed  to  Thamud.  Koran  xv.  80.  The  passages  of  the  Koran
on  which  the  tradition  of  the  destruction  of  Thamud  is  based,
are,  firstly,  vii.  71-77,  where  it  is  said  that  God  sent  to
Thamud  their  brother  Salih,  who  gave  them  the  sign  of  a  she-
camel,  which  they  killed,  and  were  themselves  destroyed  by  an
earthquake.  Baydawi,  in  the  commentary  on  this  passage,  makes
Thamud  to  be  the  son  of'Abar,  son  of  Aram,  son  of  Shem,
son  of  Noah  ;  but  he  also  cites  an  opinion  that  the  tribe  received
its  name  from  the  scarcity  of  water,  being  a  scanty  pond
of  water.  The  pedigree  of  Salih  he  gives  as  son  of  'Obayd,
son  of  Asaf,  son  of  Masih,  son  of  'Obayd,  son  of  Hathir,
son  of  Thamud.  Secondly,  Koran  xi.  64-71,  then  xxvii.
46-53,  not  to  mention  other  frequent  references  to  the  story.
An  account  of  the  destruction  of  Thamud,  based  on  these  pas¬
sages  and  on  tradition,  is  given  by  Baydawi  at  vii.  76 ;  but  the
complete  legend  will  be  found  in  Tabari,  whose  narratives  in
this  as  in  so  many  other  cases  subsequent  authors  only  repeat
with  variations.  Thamud  lived  in  the  country  which  had  for¬
merly  been  inhabited  by 'Ad,  and  hollowed  the  rocks  for  their
dwellings.  They  were  idolaters,  and  God  sent  to  them  their
brother  Salih  to  convert  them.  They  challenged  him  to  go
forth  with  them  on  a  feast  day,  and  to  call  upon  his  God,  while
they  called  on  their  idols  ;  and  promised  that  if  he  should  be
answered  while  they  were  unsuccessful,  they  would  worship  his
God.  They  fruitlessly  called  on  their  idols,  and  then  angrily
bade  him  give  them  a  sign.  Thou  art  but  one  of  the

wizards ;  thou  art  but  a  man  like  ourselves ;  bring  a  sign  if
thou  be  of  the  truthtellers.'’^  Koran  xxvi.  153.  Salih  asked
what  sign  they  desired,  and  they  said,  Bring  out  of  that  rock
a  she-camel  and  her  foal,  of  a  red  colour,  which  shall  walk  and
graze.’’  The  rock  opened  and  the  camel  came  forth.  Salih
said  to  them,  “  Do  her  no  harm,  lest  the  punishment  of  the
great  day  take  hold  on  you,”  (xxvi  156).  Now  Thamud


NOTJES.


433


having  but  one  well  were  forced  to  be  careful  of  their  water,  and
whenever  the  she-camel  went  to  drink,  which  was  every  other
day,  she  drank  the  well  dry.  Then  it  was  agreed  that  the  water
should  be  one  day  for  the  camel,  and  the  other  for  the  tribe.  But
it  was  revealed  to  Salih  that  the  camel  should  be  killed  by  one
who  was  not  yet  born,  and  that  he  would  be  a  child  with  red
hair  and  blue  eyes.  The  people  therefore  killed  nine  new-born
children  who  answered  this  description  ;  till  at  last  the  prophet
became  hated,  and  the  nine  fathers  of  the  murdered  children,
who  are  supposed  to  be  alluded  to  at  Koran  xxvii.  49,  saved
th^  tenth  child,  who  was  Kodar,  son  of  a  woman  named
Kodayrah :  his  father’s  name  was  Salif.  Then  they  lay  in  wait
to  kill  Salih,  but  God  caused  a  rock  to  fall  upon  them.  When
Kodar  grew  up  he  became  an  opponent  of  the  prophet,  and
undertook  to  kill  the  she-camel,  which  he  did  by  houghing  her,
whence  he  is  called  ylc  .  The  foal  then  disappeared,  and
God  destroyed  the  people  of  Thamud  by  a  cry  from  heaven.
Kodar  became  proverbial  as  one  who  brought  evil  on  his  race  ;
so  that  it  is  said,  ^^More  unlucky  than  the  hougher  of  the
she-camel;”  More  unlucky  than  the  Bed  Man  of  *Ad;”
'Ad  being  either  confused  with  Thamud  by  mistake,  or  used
because  Thamud  was  related  to  'Ad ;  for  some  of  the  genealo¬
gists  say  that  Thamud  was  the  cousin  of  "Ad.  Baydawi  says
that  their  chief  was  Jondo',  son  of  A.mir,  and  that  he  believed :
and  that  those  who  opposed  SMih  were  Thawwab,  son  of  "Amr,
and  A1  Hobab,  the  keeper  of  their  idols,  and  Eib^b,  son  of  Saghr,
their  diviner.  See  his  commentary  on  Koran  vii.  76,  for  these
and  other  details.

Their  sepulchres :  literally,  their  tomb  mounds ;  the  heaps  of
stones  piled  up  over  a  grave.  In  a  Tradition  ^

signifies,  Do  not  heap  up  stones  over  my  grave,  but  leave  it
level.”

And  was  free  from  guilt, — Having  sworn  that  he  would  not
sit  near  the  vase,  he  could  not  return  without  sin  until  it  was
taken  away.  The  respect  for  vows  of  this  kind  may  be  noticed
in  several  places  in  the  author’s  work.  When  Abu  Zayd’s  host


28


434


NOTES.


in  Assembly  Fifteen  swears  tFat  be  will  not  let  him  lodge  in
the  bouse,  Abu  Zayd  at  once  goes  out  into  tbe  rain,  since  it
would  be  a  sin  to  induce  a  man  to  break  sucb  a  yow.  Also
when  Abu  Zayd  yows  that  be  will  depart,  HS,ritb  does  not  seek
any  further  to  detain  bim..

Glass  is  a  betrayer. — At  tbe^  proYerb  More  diYulging  than
glass,’’  Arab.  ProY.  II.  780,  is  a  composition  wbicb  Hariri
may  have  bad  in  mind.  It  is  an  address  by  a  poet,  Sabi  ibn
Harun,  in  praise  of  glass,  in  opposition  to  another  poet  who  bad
indited  one  in  praise  of  gold.

The  witchcraft  of  Babylon. — Compare  Koran  ii.  96.  For
Harut  and  Marut,  and  their  seduction  by  Zobarab,  see  Baydawi
on  tbe  passage.

Give  life  to  one  buried  alive. — These  words  baYe  reference  to
tbe  practice  of  burying  female  children  aliYe,  wbicb  preYailed
among  tbe  ancient  Arabs.  In  tbe  sublime  Sura  of  tbe  Koran
called (Ixxxi),  it  is  said,  When  tbe  girl  buried  aliYe  shall
be  asked  for  what  sin  she  was  slain and  the  passage  refers  to
tbe  practice  wbicb  still  in  Mohammed’s  time  lingered  among
tbe  tribe  of  Temim,  and  was  only  completely  eradicated  by  tbe
influence  of  Islam.  It  is  probable  that  in  remote  times  it  was
connected  with  tbe  superstitious  rite  of  sacrificing  children  wbicb
was  common  to  all  tbe  Semites,  and  was  practised  by  tbe  Jews
up  to  the  age  of  tbe  GaptiYity,  as  we  learn  from  tbe  denunciations
of  Jeremiah,  Yii.  31 ;  xix.  5.  But  in  later  times  it  was  ascribed
to  tbe  poYerty  of  many  of  the  tribes,  wbicb  made  them  desire  to
baYe  among  them  only  those  who  could  bear  hardship  in  time  of
need,  and  to  their  fear  of  dishonour,  since  women  were  often
carried  off  by  their  enemies  in  forays,  and  made  slaYes  and
concubines  to  strangers.  So  that  at  a  wedding  tbe  wish  to  tbe
newly-married  pair  was  With  concord  and  sons,”

see  Assembly  Twenty-ninth,  p.  364,  De  Sacy’s  edition :  or
With  concord  and  permanence,  with  sons  and  no  daughters.”
So  strong  was  this  feeling,  eYen  in  tbe  time  of  the  Prophet,  that
at  Koran  xvi.  59,  it  is  used  as  an  argument  against  those  Arabs
who,  like  tbe  tribes  of  Kbozaab  and  Kinaneb,  said  that  the


NOTJES.


435


angels  were  the  daughters  of  God.  They  attribute  daughters
to  God,  Glory  be  to  him  is  used  in  the  Koran  when  any

blasphemous  supposition  is  to  be  repelled)  ;  yet  they  wish  them
not  for  themselves.  When  a  female  child  is- announced  to  one  of
them,  his  face  grows  dark,  and  he  is  as  though  he  would  choke.’’
Compare  Koran  xviii  42,  and  xxxvik  153.  The  older  proverbs
show  the  prevalence  of  this  inhumation  of  female  children,  and
the  belief  of  the  Arabs  that  it  was  praiseworthy.  It  was  said
“To  send  women  before  (to  the  other  world)  is  a  benefit.  Ar.
Prov.  I.  228.  Also  ^  ^  J,  The  burying  of

girfs  is  a  generous  deed,”  and^iiSl  The  best  son-in-

law  (or  marriage  relative)  is  the  grave.”  The  little  regard  for
relationship  through  females  among  the  tribes  is  expressed  in
some  verses  attributed  to  Ghassan  ibn  WaTeh,  at  p.  259  of  the
Hamaseh.  In  the  commentary  is  quoted  the  proverb,  “  Our
sons’  sons  are  our  sons,  but  our  daughters’  sons  are  the  sons  of
strangers.”  From  some  verses  of  Ish%  ibn  Khalaf,  page  140
of  the  Hamaseh,  we  perceive  the-  reasons  which  may  have
induced  a  father  to  put  an  end  to  his  daughter’s  days.  The
poet  says  —

Were  it  not  for  Omaymeh,  I  would  not  be  saddened  at  want,,  nor
would  I  endure  the  gloom  in  the  dark  night.

She  makes  me  wish  to  live,  since  I  Imow  how  she  will  be  contemned  as
an  orphan,  when  her  brothers  of  the  womb  are  churlish  to  her.  (Bro¬
thers  by  her  mother  but  not  by  her  father.)

I  fear  that  poverty  may  some  day  I'each  her,  and  tear  away  her  veil,  so
that  she  will  be  as  meat  on  the  tray.  (See  Assembly  Twelve.)

She  desires  my  life,  but  I  long  for  her  death,  through  compassion  on
her  ;  for  to  women  death  is  the  most  generous  guest.

Yet,  with  the  comparative  softening  of  manners  which  took
place  in  the  age  before  Mohammed,  the  inhumation  of  daughters
seems  gradually  to  have  been  abandoned.  It  was  kept  up
longest  in  the  tribe  of  Temtm  (see  the  proverb  “  More  wander¬
ing  than  the  maid  buried  alive;”  Ar.  Prov.  II.  16)  :  an  evil
which  is  attributed  to  Kays  ibn  'Asim,  chief  of  Ternim,  a  hero
praised  by  Mohammed  as  the  noblest  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert :
some  elegiac  verses  on  him  are  to  be  found  at  p.  367  of  the
Hamaseh.  As  Ternim  had  refused  tribute  to  No'man,  king  of


436


NOTES.


Hira,  tlie  latter  liad  sent  his  squadron  of  cavalry,  called  Dowsar,
(for  which  see  the  proverb  More  valorous  than  Dowsar  Ar.
Prov.  L  198)  and  had  carried  off,  among  others,  the  daughter  of
Kays.  Negotiations  were  entered  into  for  the  restoration  of  the
prisoners,  and  the  king  gave  leave  to  all  who  chose  to  depart.
The  daughter  of  Kays,  being  in  love  with  one  of  her  captors,
refused  to  return  to  her  tribe,  and  her  father  swore  to  bury  all
his  future  female  children,  which  he  did  to  the  number  of  ten,
and  thus  re-established  the  usage  among  the  Benu  Temim.
The  story  is  told  differently  by  others  :  see  C.  de  Perceval's  Essai,
II.  574.  Humanity,  however,  revolted  at  the  practice,  and  rich
men  would  buy  the  lives  of  the  female  infants.  The  grandfather  of
the  poet  A1  Farazdak,  named  Sa's^at  ibn  Najiyeh,  thus  rescued
many,  as  has  been  mentioned  in  the  notes  to  Assembly  Nine  ;
compare  also  commentary  at  p.  1 18  of  Hamaseh.  After  the
establishment  of  Islam  the  practice  was  wholly  abrogated,  as
may  be  seen  from  the  verses  of  Jez’  ibn  Kolayb,  at  p.  117  of
Hamaseh,  where  it  is  said,  Since  the  Prophet  arose  men  have
nourished  their  girls.”  On  this  subject,  compare  Pocock,
Specimen,  p.  323.  is,  like  and  ^U-,  a  masculine
form,  as  being  an  epithet  particularly  applicable  to  a  female.
The  Arabs  believe  that  a  charming  voice  would  rouse  the  dead.

The  pipes  of  David. — Of  David  it  is  said  at  Koran  xxxiv.  10,
We  gave  David  a  grace  (the  art  of  singing)  ;  0  ye  mountains
repeat  with  him  the  praises  of  God,  and  ye  birds.”  Compare
also  xxxviii.  16.  The  Prophet  hearing  one  read  the  Koran
harmoniously  said,  He  is  gifted  with  the  pipes  of  David,”  the
pipes  being  a  metaphorical  expression  for  the  voice.  JT  is
pleonastic,  as  in  the  verse  cited  by  De  Sacy ;  compare  Lane,
Book  I.  p.  127..

Ma  lad. — The  life  of  Ma'bad,  the  greatest  musician  and  singer
of  the  early  Khalifate,  is  given  in  the  Kitab  al  Aghani,  p.  29,
edition  of  Kosegarten,  and  to  this  the  student  is  referred.  Ma'bad
ibn  Wahb  or  ibn  Katan  was  a  mulatto  and  a  freedman,

as  some  say,  of  Mu'awiyeh.  He  was  not,  like  some  of  his  con¬
temporary  singers,  of  an  effeminate  and  attractive  person,  for  he


NOTES.


437


was  brown,  tall,  and  squinting.  He  died  at  Damascus  during
the  reign  of  A1  Welid  ibn  Yezid.  A  number  of  anecdotes  are
related  of  him  in  the  Kitab  al  Aghani,  where  his  superiority  to
To  ways  and  Ibn  Surayj,  two  of  his  contemporaries,  is  asserted
on  the  authority  of  a  poet,  p.  31.  But  when  Ma'bad  composed
seven  songs  of  surpassing  merit,  the  musicians  of  Mecca  selected
seven  from  the  works  of  Ibn  Surayj,  which  they  declared  were
equal  to  the  former.  For  an  account  of  these  early  musicians
see  the  Prooemium  to  Kosegarten’s  Kitab  al  Aghani,  cap.  I.  De
dtharcedis  cantricihitsque  Arabibus.  Ma'bad  appears  to  have
be^  a  scientific  musician  of  great  merit.

Isaac. — This  was  Isliak  ibn  Ibrahim,  commonly  known  as
Ibn  an  Nadim  al  Mowsili.  His  father  Ibrahim  was  a  celebrated
musician  of  his  time,  but  was  surpassed  by  his  more  eminent
son,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  paragon  of  accomplishments.
In  the  life  of  him  by  Ibn  Ehallikan  it  is  said  that  he  was  the
companion  of  the  Khalifs,  a  man  of  taste,  and  of  great  talents  as
a  singer.  He  was  also  well  acquainted  with  pure  Arabic  and  the
ancient  poets,  the  history  of  the  poets  and  the  adventures  of  the
tribes.  He  was  born  a.h.  150,  and  died  about  235,  being  thus
contemporary  with  Harun  ar  Eeshid,  Al  Ma'mun,  and  Al  Md  ta-
sim.  Al  Ma’mun  said  of  him  that  were  he  not  known  as  a  musician
he  would  have  given  him  the  place  of  Kadi,  so  large  was  his
knowledge  of  law.  An  anecdote  related  of  him  testifies  to  his
accomplishments.  At  an  entertainment  he  discussed  with  the
theologians  present  and  worsted  them ;  then  treated  on  a  point
of  law  with  success ;  after  which  he  discoursed  on  poetry  and  the
Arabic  language,  surpassing  all  the  company.  He  then,  being
somewhat  elated,  asked  those  present  how  it  was  that  he,  who
could  treat  these  sciences  with  as  much  ability  as  their  professors,
should  be  known  only  as  the  master  of  the  single  art  of  music.
But  some  who  were  there  showed  him  that  though  eminent  in  all
these  sciences  over  the  company  present  there  was  yet  to  be  found
some  one  who  surpassed  him  in  each  singly,  whereas  in  music
he  was  incomparable.  He  wrote  lives  of  his  predecessors  in  the
art,  and  gave  the  highest  place  among  the  earlier  ones  to  Ma'  bad.


438


NOTES.


Sherishi,  who  gives  an  account  of  both  these  personages  in  his
Commentary,  says  that  Ma'bad  was  the  most  gifted  of  the  older,
and  Isaac  of  the  later  singers.

Away,  begone.— ‘ThQ  Arabs  of  the  Ignorance,  when  they  de¬
stined  that  a  man  who  was  on  a  journey  should  not  return,  were
accustomed  to  light  a  fire  and  call  out  This

fire  was  called  j\j.

Zonam  was  flute  player  to  Harun  ar  EesMd,  who  was  so  fond
of  his  performance,  that  he  would  not  drink  without  hearing  it.
According  to  Sherishi  he  invented  a  sort  of  flute  or  fife.

The  red  camels,  i.e.  all  that  is  excellent  and  valuable.  Ac-
cording  to  the  Arabs  the  red  she-camel  could  best  bear  the  mid¬
day  heat,  and  the  best  were  the^^i.^  and  the  ^ or  white-red.
Hence,  the  red  camels  are  used  proverbially  for  wealth.  When
the  head  of  Abu  Jahl  was  brought  to  the  Prophet,  after  the  Day
of  Bedr,  he  exclaimed,  It  is  more  acceptable  to  me  than  a  red
camel.’’

Salih. — Satih  has  been  already  spoken  of.

The  court  of  his  Prince ;  or  bis  Kayl.  The  Hayls  or  petty
princes  of  Himyar  governed  a  great  part  of  southern  Arabia,  as
tributaries,  from  the  earliest  times.  They  are  sometimes  called
because  they  generally  had  names  compounded  with  ^u  as
Thul  Mulk,  Thu  Jadan.  When  the  people  of  Hadramowt
accepted  Islam,  the  principal  Kayl  of  the  country,  Wail  son  of
Hojr,  came  to  make  his  submission  to  Mohammed.  According
to  the  Arabic  grammarians,  is  allied  to  as  one  who
speaks  or  commands  (De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  494),  but  Ibn
Khaldun  condemns  this  etymology  as  fanciful  (Anthol.  Gram.
Arabe,  p.  171  Texte  Arabe),  and  asserts,  with  great  probability,
that  JJ  is  a  word  of  the  language  of  Himyar  which  was  un¬
known  to  the  descendants  of  Modar.

And  I  had  no  alarm,— This  idiom  is  adopted
from  the  Mo'allakah  of 'Antarah,  v.  11.

Pharaoh. — For  the  history  of  Pharaoh  see  Koran  x.  76  ;
xxvi.  9 ;  xxviii. ;  xl.  24,  etc.  He  is  called  j J,  for  the
meaning  of  which  see  Baydawi  on  xxxviii.  11.

He  shouted,  from  the  voice ;  or  he  accused  me,  from


NOTES,


439


The  informer  gained  nought, — signifies  he  became
fortunate  by  suck  a  thing.  According  to  Sherishi,  it  means  he
got  a  that  is,  an  arrow  or  ioty  like  The  meaning,

therefore,  will  be,  he  got  as  his  share  nothing  save y  etc.

Now  since  I  have  explained, — Metre  tawil,

Resourcesy  old  or  new  :  that  is,  inherited  or  acquired.  Com¬
pare  Tarafeh,  Mo  allakah,  v.  53.

Long  since  treachery  vexed  the  Best  of  Mankind y  so  that  there
was  declared  concerning  the  woman  that  carried  firewood  that
which  was  declared. — The  111th  Sura  of  the  Koran  is  entitled
Porishy  from  its  first  word.  It  runs  as  follows  : — Perish  the
two  hands  of  Abu  Lahab,  and  perish  he.  His  riches  shall  not
avail  him,  nor  his  gain  (or  his  works  in  which  he  trusted).  He
shall  be  burned  in  the  flaming  fire  :  And  his  wife,  the  Carrier
of  Pirewood;  Round  her  neck  a  twisted  rope.”  Abu  Lahab
and  his  wife  Umm  Jemil  hold  among  Moslems  the  same  posi¬
tion  as  Judas  Iscariot  among  Christians.  They  are  persons  of
whose  damnation  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever,  since  it  is
positively  announced  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is,  therefore,
usual,  when  they  are  spoken  of,  to  add,  On  them  be  a  curse.”
They  were  closely  connected  with  Mohammed.  Abu  Lahab,
whose  real  name  was^Abd  al'Ozza,  was  his  uncle,  being  a  son
of 'Abd  al  Mottalib ;  his  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Harb,  and  sister
to  Abu  Sofyan.  She  was  consequently  aunt  to  Mrfawiyeh.
This  couple  Avere  among  the  most  fanatical  opponents  of  the
Prophet.  'Abd  al  'Ozza  and  others  befouled  his  house  with
ordure;  and  Umm  Jemil  maligned  him  among  the  Koraysb.
The  carrying  of  firewood  is  explained  either  to  mean  that  she
added  ^^fuel”  to  the  hatred  of  the  Prophet’s  enemies  by  her
calumnies ;  or  that  she  will  carry  wood  to  Hell  for  her  own
tortures.  It  is  also  said  that  she  Avas  in  the  habit  of  literall}^
strewing  thorns  during  the  night  before  the  entrance  of  the
Prophet’s  house,  on  the  path  where  he  must  pass  in  the  morning.
But  it  is  probable  that  this  is  but  a  misunderstanding  of  a
common  figurative  expression.  The  unbelieving  pair  are  always
known  by  the  names  which  were  fixed  upon  them  in  the  above


440


NOTES,


Chapter,  The  Father  of  Flame/^  and  the  Bearer  of  Fuel/'
Abu  Lahab  died  of  the  disease  called  a  kind  of  malignant

pustule,  seven  days  after  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Bedr  reached
Mecca ;  his  end  being  perhaps  hastened  by  a  blow  he  received  in
a  broil  caused  by  his  rage  at  the  event.  Strat  ar  Result  p.  460.
It  is  a  Tradition  that  Abu  Lahab  squinted,  and  that  his  wife  had
but  one  eye :  so  apt  is  the  popular  creed  to  attribute  bodily
defects  and  ugliness  to  the  reprobate.  It  is  also  a  Tradition  that
the  Prophet  said,  Whoso  recites  the  Sura  lh-w',  I  have  hope
that  God  will  not  unite  him  and  Abu  Lahab  in  the  same  abode."

A  driving  forth  to  his  deviL — This  is  an  allusion  to  the  wcTrds
of  God  to  Iblis,  Koran  vii.,  after  the  threat  of  the  latter  to
tempt  and  destroy  man.

He  made  an  irrevocable  divorce  rcith  joy. — fAiW  Liilj  is  said
when  a  man  makes  the  divorce  with  his  wife  to  be  absolutely
separating,  so  as  to  cut  her  off  from  return.  He  cannot  then
marry  her  again  until  another  has  married  her,  and  consum¬
mated  the  marriage,  and  divorced  her.  The  reader  may  re¬
member  the  story  of  'Ala  ad  din  Abu'sh  Sh§.mat  in  the  Thousand
and  One  Nights.

As  the  infidels  despair  of  the  tenants  of  the  tombs. — At  Koran
k.  13,  it  is  said,  Associate  not  with  those  against  whom  God
is  wroth ;  who  despair  of  the  next  world  as  infidels  despair  of  the
tenants  of  the  tombs.

Man  is  made  up  of  impatience. — According  to  the  Tradition  in
Tabari,  the  angel  Gabriel  quoted  these  words  to  Adam  when  the
first  man  sought  to  rise  and  eat  before  the  clay  of  his  body  was
entirely  vivified.  They  are  to  be  found  at  Koran  xxi.  38.  The
angel  is  also  said  to  have  quoted  the  words,  "Man is  impatient,"-
which  occur  at  xvii.  12.  When  these  quotations  from  the  Koran
at  so  early  a  period  in  history  are  recorded,  it  should  be  remem¬
bered  that  the  Koran  has  eternally  existed,  though  it  was  only
revealed  to  mankind  through  Mohammed.

There  was  a  companion. — The  following  lines  are  of  the  metre
khafif.  They  have  little  merit,  except  as  exhibiting  the  author's
power  of  playing  upon  words.


NOTES.


441


A  churl. — For  the  meaning  of  see  Lane.

His  verse. — is  used  only  of  a  poem  that  is  of  some  other
metre  than  rejez.

His  encomium  and  his  The  former  being  the  description

of  the  maiden,  the  latter  of  the  treacherous  friend.  For  the  pe-.
culiar  meaning  of  see  De  Sacy’s  Commentary :  harz  is  ex¬
plained  at  Assembly  Twenty-seven,  under  the  phrase,  ^^The
two  harz  gatherers.”

The  people  of  the  Fire,  etc. — The  inhabitants  of  Hell.  This  is
a  quotation  from  Koran  lix.  20.  The  speaker  means  that  if  a
glstss  vase  had  the  evil  qualities  which  offended  Abu  Zayd,  the
silver  vases  now  produced  were  free  from  them.

Nor  count  Hud  mtli  ’'Ad. — The  destruction  of  the  people  of
'Ad  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  recurring  topics  of  the  Koran ,
where  they  are  commonly  associated  with  Thamud,  as  an  im¬
pious  race,  rebellious  against  God.  The  legend  is  too  long  to  be
given  in  the  already  too  extensive  notes  to  this  Assembly.  But
the  following  references  will  be  useful.  At  Koran  xlvi.  20,  it  is
said,  Call  to  mind  the  brother  of  Ad  (Hud),  when  he  preached
to  his  people  in  the  Ahkaf.”  Hikf  is  a  thin  curving  or  winding
strip  of  sand,  and  according  to  Baydawi  this  was  the  name  of  a
region  on  the  sea  coast  of  Ash  Shihr,  in  Yemen,  that  is  the
country  between  Aden  and  Oman,  otherwise  called  Hadramowt,
In  Mr.  Palgrave’s  map  of  Arabia,  prefixed  to  his  travels,  the
name  is  given  to  a  sandy  region  near  the  Persian  Gulf.  At
Koran  Ixxxix.  5,  they  are  spoken  of  in  connection  with  Irem  of  the
Columns,  the  City  of  Sheddad,  which  remains  invisible  to  mortal
eye  in  the  deserts  of  Yemen.  The  reader  may  also  refer  to
vii.  63 ;  xi.  52  (the  Sura  called  Hiid) ;  to  xxvi.  123  ;  and  liv.
18.  At  Koran  vii.  63,  the  pedigree  of  Hud  is  given  by  Baydawi
as  son  of  *Abd  Allah,  son  of  Ribilli,  son  of  A1  Kholud,  son  of*Ad,
who  was  son  of'OwsC^^^is)  son  of  Aram,  son  of  Shem,  son  of  Noah.
Or,  according  to  another  opinion,  he  was  Hud,  son  of  Shalah,  son
of  Arphaxad,  son  of  Shem,  and  was  the  son  of  the  paternal  uncle
of  Ad’s  father.  The  people  of  'Ad  were  of  great  stature ;  Koran
vii.  67.  The  ordinary  form  of  the  legend  among  the  Moslems,


442


jsroTus.


founded  on  the  scattered  passages  in  the  Koran,  is  to  be  found
in  Tabari,  in  the  History  of  the  Prophet  Hud.”  The  people  of
Ad  would  not  believe  the  preaching  of  Hud,  and  were  destroyed
by  a  hurricane  which  is  described  at  Koran  Ixix.  6,  as
for  the  meaning  of  which  words  see  Baydawi.  Two  of  them,
according  to  the  received  Tradition,  escaped,  having  believed
on  the  true  God.  One  of  these  was  Lokman  of  the  Vultures,
who  afterwards  reigned  over  the  country  of  Saba  :  compare
note  to  Assembly  Seventeen.  Count  not  Hud  rcith  Ad  means

Count  not  the  innocent  with  the  guilty.”

Recite  the  Chai^ter  of  Yictory  ;  that  is  Koran  xlviii.,  which
begins  We  have  aided  thee  to  a  conspicuous  victory.”  This
passage  is  held  to  have  been  revealed  in  promise  of  the  entrance
into  Mecca,  which  is  spoken  of  especially  as  c»r  else  to  refer
to  the  capture  of  Khaybar,  or  to  ‘the  Peace  of  A1  Hodaybiyeh
which  gave  the  Prophet  the  opportunity  of  extending  his  power
over  the  Arabs ;  or  else  it  may  refer  to  the  victory  of  the  people
of  Hum  over  the  Persians,  which  had  been  predicted  by  the  Pro¬
phet  in  Sura  xxx.  The  victories  of  Khosru  Perwez  had  brought
the  Eastern  Empire  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  when  Heraclius,
suddenly  displaying  consummate  military  talents,  turned  the
tide  of  success  in  the  year  625,  and  humiliated  the  Persian
monarch  by  a  series  of  victories.  This  struggle  of  the  two
Empires  for  regions  which  were  soon  to  become  the  spoil  of  a
third  race  was  watched  with  intense  interest  by  Mohammed,
who  is  said  to  have  sympathized  with  the  Christians  as  the
possessors  of  a  revealed  religion,  and  who  was  doubtless  pleased
at  the  fulfilment  of  his  prediction.  The  general  opinion,  however,
is  that  the  opening  of  the  Sura  was  revealed  at  A1  Hodaybiyeh ;
and  it  is  recorded  that  the  Prophet,  when  he  entered  Mecca,
recited  the  Sura  of  Victory.  Abu  Zayd  means  to  say  Rejoice
in  what  ye  have  gained,”  or,  as  we  should  say,  Sing  the  Te
Deumy

It  may  he  that  ye  mislike  a  thing. — Koran  ii.  213.

Both  and  the  boy, — On  the  nasb  after  ^  see  Alfiyeh  of  Ibn
Malik,  V.  315,  and  commentary.  If,  however,  the  reading  be


NOTES.


443


with  Take,”  or  I  give,”  understood,  there  is  a  simple
conjunction.  This  is  a  phrase  expressive  of  prodigal  liberality
in  giving,  derived  from  a  speech  of  Amr,  son  of  Homran,  who,
having  before  him  some  cameTs  hump,  cream  and  dates,  was
asked  by  a  hungry  man  for  some  hump  and  cream,  and  replied,
Both,  and  the  dates,”  which  became  proverbial.  Arab.  Prov.
II.  349  and  880.


•  THE  NINETEENTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  failure  of  the  stars, — The  literal  meaning  of  is  the
setting  in  the  early  morning  of  one  of  the  twenty-eight
Mansions  of  the  moon,  or  while  the  opposite  con¬
stellation,  called  its  or  watcher^  is  rising.  The  Mansions

of  the  moon,  of  which  a  list  has  been  given  in  the  notes  to  a
former  Assembly,  are  constellations  through  which  the  moon
passes  in  her  course,  and  the  raMh  of  each  is  the  fourteenth  from
it;  thus  the  raldb  of  is  ;  the  rakib  of  is

J^Si.  As  in  the  course  of  the  earth's  revolution  round  the  sun
each  of  these  constellations  sets  in  the  morning,  while  the  oppo¬
site  constellation  is  rising  with  the  sun,  the  year  is  divided  into
twenty-eight  to  each  of  which  is  allotted  thirteen  days,
except  to  which  has  fourteen,  thus  making  up  the  365'

days.  The  auroral  settings  of  these  constellations  served  among
the  Arabs  to  denote  the  seasons  of  rain,  wind,  or  heat ;  just  as
among  the  Greeks  and  Latins  the  setting  of  the  Hyads  or  the
rising  of  Sirius  indicated  particular  states  of  the  weather.  Thus
became  almost  synonymous  with  season,  and  the  name  is
applied  to  the  seven  seasons  or  successions  of  weather  or  tem¬
perature  in  the  year,  which  are  as  follows  :  (1)  which  is

said  (Makamat  of  Nasif  al  Yazaji,  p.  217,)  to  range  from  the
9th  of  Aylul  (September)  to  the  18th  of  Tishrin  al  Owwal
(October).  The  y  of  this  period  is  the  setting  of  Al  Faraghan
(the  Fore  and  Hind  Spouts  of  the  Urn)  and  Batn  al  Hut.  (2)


444


]S^OTJES.


which  continues  from  the  end  of  the  former  to  the  9th
of  Kanun  al  Owwal  (December),  and  its  ^  is  the  setting  of  Ash
Sharatan,  and  Al  Butayn,  and  Ath  Thurayya,  and  Ad  Debaran.
(3)  which  lasts  to  the  ISth  of  Msan  (April),  and  whose
is  the  setting  of  Al  Haf'ah,  and  Al  Han*ah,  and  AA  Thira\  and
An  Nathrah,  and  At  Tarf,  and  Al  Jabheh,  and  Az  Zubrah,  and
As  Sarfah,  and  Al  'Awwa,  and  As  Simak.  (4) which  lasts
from  the  end  of  the  former  to  the  9th  of  Haziran  (June).  Its
y  is  the  setting  of  Al  Ghafr,  and  Az  Zubana,  and  Al  Iklil,  and
Al  Kalb.  (5)  which  lasts  from  then  to  the  5th  of  Tem-

muz  (July).  Its  y  is  the  setting  of  Ash  Showleh  and  'An
Na'a’im.  (6)  which  lasts  to  the  13th  of  Ab  (August).

Its  y  is  the  setting  of  Al  Beldeh,  and  Sa‘d  al  Thabih,  and  Sa‘d
al  Bula'.  (7)  which  lasts  till  the  Sth  of  September,

thus  completing  the  year.  Its  y  is  the  setting  of  Sa^'d  as
So'ud  and  Sa'd  al  Akhbiyeh.  The  days  of  the  month  are  to  be
reckoned  according  to  the  Old  Style.  The  three  last  are  periods
of  heat.  Of  Al  Busrl  it  is  said  that  that  is,  it  fails  to
produce  rain  during  its  y.  The  word  is  applied  to  a  hot
wind  which  blows  during  summer,  by  some  described  as  a  north
wind,  by  others  as  a  south  wind  coming  from  Yemen  ;  the  dis¬
crepancy  being  no  doubt  caused  by  the  geographical  position  of
those  who  used  the  word.

As  the  Arabs,  in  their  observations  of  the  seasons,  thought
chiefly  of  the  rain  which  was  to  moisten  their  parched  fields,  the
w^ord  y  became  equivalent  with  i^ain,  and  is  used  in  this  sense
at  p.  713  of  the  Hamaseh.  ‘‘  1  said  to  him,  ^  May  the  cloud
pour  on  thee  with  a  which  shall  moisten  every  pleasant
plant.’  ”  The  Commentator  gives  Jtu*  as  the  equivalent  to  y .
So  in  a  verse  quoted  in  De  Sacy’s  Commentary  it  is  said  :

The  y  of  As  Sim^k  (Spica  Yirginis)  and  of  the  Pleiades  ceased  not  to
ponr  on  ns.

The  influence  of  each  setting  was  held  to  prevail  for  only  a  few
out  of  the  thirteen  days  that  the  setting  continued.  Thus  it  is
said  that  the  *y  of  the  Pleiads  is  five  nights,  and  that  of  Ash
Sharatfi,n  three  nights.  The  y  of  the  Pleiads  was  considered


NOTES.


445


the  most  favourable  ;  and,  according  to  some,  the  name  was
given  them  on  account  of  the  abundance  of  rain.  But  it  is  more
probable  that  this  name  applies  to  the  multitude  of  the  stars
composing  the  constellation.  Compare  the  Hebrew  a

heap  of  stars  (Job  xs.xviii.  31),  where  the  translation  probably  is
‘'Hast  thou  bound  the  knots  of  the  Pleiads?”  It  falls,  as  has
been  stated,  in  the  time  of  the  late  autumn  rain-season  called
Those  which  generally  brought  rain  were  called
stirrers  up  of  the  heaven.  The  belief  of  the  Arabs
of  J:he  Ignorance  that  the  rain  was  produced  by  the  settings  of
stars  was  discouraged  by  the  Moslem  teachers;  and  from  an
anecdote  related  of  'Omar  (see  Lane’s  Lexicon,  article
the  Khalif  seems  to  have  considered  that  the  supply  of  rain

vras  a  sign  that  sins  were  pardoned,  founding  his  opinion  on

Koran  Ixxi.  9.

The  tract  of  Naftbin. — ujbj  is  a  fertile  tract  of  land  in  oppo¬
sition  to  the  unproductive  desert,  whether  the  former  be  on  the
sea-coast  or  on  the  banks  of  a  river.  Of  Nasibln,  the  well-known
city  of  Nisibis,  between  the  upper  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  it  is
only  necessary  to  record  here  that,  according  to  a  Tradition
reported  by  Abu  Hurayrah,  it  was  seen  at  a  distance  by  the
Prophet,  during  the  Night-journey.  The  earth  appeared  afar,
and  I  saw  a  city  that  pleased  me,  and  I  said,  ‘  0  Gabriel,  what
is  this  city  ?  ’  He  said,  ^  Nasibin.’  I  said,  ^  God  hasten  the

conquest  of  it.’  ”  It  was,  accordingly,  one  of  the  first  places

gained  by  the  Moslems,  having  been  taken  in  the  year  18,  under
the  Khalifate  of  "Omar.

A  camel  of  Mahrah. — The  camels  of  the  tribe  of  Mahrat  ibn
Hay  dan,  in  Yemen.  In  the  Hamaseh,  p.  783,  occurs  a  verse  in
which  a  noble  she-camel  is  said  to  be  from  Hadramowt,  and
selected  from  the  camels  of  Mahrah.  The  she-camels  of  Mahrah
are  said  to  have  been  covered  by  about  which  there  are

various  opinions.  Sherishi  says  that  these  were  the  stallions  of
a  race  of  small  wild  camels  between 'Oman  and  Ash  Shihr ;  but
crthers  say  that  they  were  stallions  of  the  camels  of  the  Jinn,


446


NOTES.


wHcli  inhabit  the  desert  country  beyond  the  sands  ofYabrin.
The  race  of  Mahrah,  called  possessed  the  powers

of  this  savage  or  supernatural  breed,  and  were  distinguished  by
their  fleetness  and  endurance.

A  lance  of  SamJiar.—ki  p.  227  of  the  Hamaseh  mention  is
made  of  ‘^a  lance  of  Kodayneh;’’  and  the  commentator  explains
that  Eodayneh  was  the  wife  of  Samhar,  and  that  they  made
lances  and  straightened,  them  for  sale,  and  that  when  Samhar
was  from  home  Eodayneh  sold  them.  They  are  said  to  have
lived  in  Bahrayn.  Samhar,  however,  is  otherwise  said  to  be  a
place  in  Abyssinia,  where  lances  are  made.  Samhar  and
Eodayneh  are  also  said  to  have  been  people  who  made  lances,
but  not  to  have  been  man  and  wife,  since  she  was  the  wife  of
a  man  named  Whatever  may  be  the  truth  on  these

points,  the  names  of  Samhar  and  Eodayneh  are  commonly  used
as  epithets  for  lances.  Imr  al  Kays  speaks  of  a  lance  of
Samhar,”  Diwan,  p.  25,  v.  4,  Ar.  Text,  and  three  lines  further
on  of  a  lance  of  Eodayneh;  with  a  point  made  by  Ka'dab.”
Compare  also  Mo'  allakah  of  Lebid,  v.  50,  where  Samhar  is  said

to  have  lived  at  a  place  called  in  Bahrayn.  This  would
connect  the  lances  of  Samhar  with  those  of  Khatt,  which  are  also
celebrated  by  the  poets.  Hamaseh,  pp.  26  and  231.  In  the
commentary  at  the  former  page  it  is  said  that  ksU  is  the  coast
of  Bal^ayn  and  'Oman,

Hill  drawing  me  itp  from  d;ale»-T^\^  conceit  of  a  gram¬
matical  allusion  need’ only  be  noticed.

Won  a  portion, — This  is  the  technical  term  for  winning  at
the  game  called  which  has  been  explained  in  the  notes

to  a  former  Assembly.  Each  man  turned  or  shuffled  about
the  arrows,  and  when  his  arrow  won  this  phrase  was

used.  Jiii  is  also  used  in  this  sense  by  the  Arabs,  as  in  the
passage  of  Ezekiel  before  referred  to.  See  Lamiyet  al  'Arab,
verse  29.

Lay  down  my  neck  in  it, — The  metaphor  is  from  a  camel
lying  down  to  rest.  is  the  under  part  of  the  neck,  which

the  camel  lays  along  the  ground.


NOTES.


447


StumUing  rcith  the  crazed,  etc. — In  accordance  with,  the
suggestion  of  Sherishi,  I  have  given  a  double  meaning  to
according  to  the  word  to  which  it  refers.  The  primitive  mean¬
ing  of  is  to  beat ;  and  it  is  secondarily  applied  to  the
purblind  she-camel,  which  beats  or  strikes  the  ground  with  her
foot,  and  so  stumbles,  as  well  as  to  him  who  beats  a  tree  for  its
leaves,  to  use  them  as  fodder ;  and,  metaphorically,  to  him  who
gets  money  out  of  people  by  begging.  Thus  the  senses  of
stumbling  or  wandering  recklessly,  and  of  making  gain  by
importunity,  are  united  in  the  same  word.

My  single  lot  had  become  twofold. — Another  allusion  to^^^uu^.
Harith  had  said  that  to  arrive  in  Nasibin  was  one  prize,  and
now  the  presence  of  Abu  Zayd  doubles  it.

Ahu  Yahya  is  a  kinyeh  or  bye-name  of  Death-.  Yahya  is  the
Arabic  equivalent  to  John  (the  Baptist),  but  the  signification
seems  here  to  be  2he  Father  or  Lord  of  the  Living,  from
Death  being  he  who  is  mighty  over  every  one  who  lives.

His  pledge  ivas  forfeit. — As  one  who  had  not  paid  in  time  the
debt  for  which  he  had  pledged  his  property.  This  is  equivalent
to  saying,  his  term  had  run  out.”

Bewildered,  etc. — Metre  mutekdrib.

The  old  wine. — So  Imr  al  Kays  says,  that  when  his  mistress’s
tribe  had  departed,  he  remained  ^^as  one  drunk  with  wine.”
Diwan,  p.  36,  v.  11.

We  took  seat  about  his  bed. — There  are  several  Traditions  of
the  Prophet  concerning  the  visiting  of  the  sick,  as  Whoso
visits  a  vsick  person,  and  sits  with  him  for  an  hour,  God  will  give
him  the  reward  of  a  year’s  good,  works ;  ”  and  He  who  visits  a
sick  person  enters  into  God’s  mercy,  but  if  he  takes  seat  by  him,
he  is  whelmed  by  it.”

Look  on  this,  the  offspring  of  the  moment. — Literally,  Look
on  her,  the  daughter  of  the  hour.”  The  daughter  of  the  hour  ”
is  a  name  for  extemporised  poetry.  Abu  Zayd,  seeing  the
anxiety  of  his  friends,  desires  to  show  them  that  he  is  not  so  ill
as  to  have  lost  his  power  of  improvisation,  and,  calling  on  them
to  take  notice,  proceeds  to  recite  some  excellent  verses.


448


NOTES.


is  used  especially  of  the  looking  of  a  bridegroom  on  liis  un¬
veiled  and  richly  appareled  bride.

God  has  saved  me. — The  metre  of  these  verses  is  which
has  been  explained  in  the  notes  to  Assembly  Two.  But  the
here  is  the  third  of  the  first  and  suffers  the  iLLr

called  which  is  the  dropping  of  a  at  the  end

of  a  foot;  so  that  becomes  The  last  feet  of

the  two  hemistiches  are  consequently  and  respec¬

tively.

Death  forgets  me  not. — Though  the  sentiments  here  expressed
are  common  enough  among  poets  and  moralists,  yet  the  reader
may  compare  the  Mo'allakah  of  Tarafeh,  v.  68,  By  thy  life,
Death,  while  it  fails  to  strike  a  man,  is  only  like  a  slackened
tether  of  which  the  end  is  kept  in  hand  f  i.e,,  however  long  a
tether  Fate  may  give  to  a  man's  life,  he  will  be  one  day  checked.

The  guarded  domain  of  Kolayh. — Wa'il,  commonly  known
as  Kolayb  Wa'il,  was  one  of  the  most  famous  personages  of  Arab
antiquity.  He  descended  from  Wa'il,  through  Taghlib,  and  was
son  of  Eabfah,  who  about  140  years  before  the  Hijra  was
one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Benu  Taghlib.  Besides  Kolayb  Wa'il,
Eabi'ah  had  two  other  children,  the  poet  Mohalhil  and  a
daughter,  Fatimeh,  who  became  the  mother  of  the  poet  Imr  al
Kays.  At  this  time  the  tribes  of  Bekr  and  Taghlib  paid  tribute
to  a  sovereign  of  the  race  of  Himyar,  and  being  unable  or
unwilling  to  continue  the  payment,  prepared  to  revolt.  But  the
rising  being  foreseen  the  people  of  Taghlib  were  attacked,  and
Kolayb  and  his  brother  Mohalhil  made  prisoners.  The  descend¬
ants  of  Ma'add,  who,  though  accustomed  to  fierce  wars  amongst
themselves,  would  unite  against  a  foreign  adversary,  (compare
Arab.  Prov.  II.  198),  were  roused  to  arms  by  Bekr  and  Taghlib,
the  two  brothers  Kolayb  and  Mohalhil  were  delivered,  and  under
the  leadership  of  Eabfah  the  sons  of  Ma'add  defeated  the  people
of  Yemen  in  the  battle  of  Sullan,  and  gained  their  independence.
After  the  death  of  Eabfah,  his  son  Wa'il  succeeded,  and  again
defeated  an  army  of  Yemen,  on  the  Day  of  Khozaza,

Wahl  was  then  raised  to  the  chiefship  of  a  confederacy  of


NOTJES.


449


Arabs,  and  was  the  greatest  potentate  of  the  Nejd.  His  greatness
is  proverbial  among  the  Arabs,  so  that  it  is  said  More  potent
than  Kolayb  Wa’il/^  Arab.  Prov.  II.  146.  The  guarded
domain  was  the  land  which  he  was  accustomed  to  take  for
himself  wherever  he  thought  fit.  The  legend  is  that  he  used
to  lame  a  dog,  and  place  it  in  the  midst  of  any  field  or  meadow
that  pleased  him ;  and  wherever  the  sound  of  the  barking  could
be  heard,  all  others  must  abstain  from  pasturing  their  camels  or
sheep.  From  this  dog  it  is  said  that  he  was  called  Kolayb;
either  because  people  misunderstood  the  story,  or  applied  the
term  Little  dog  to  him  as  a  nickname.  He  set  dogs  on
those  who  used  a  well  before  him ;  no  man  might  cross  the
spot  where  he  sat ;  no  fire  might  be  lighted  near  his  own ;  and  he
imposed  a  strict  game  law,  by  declaring,  whenever  he  chose,  that
'Hhe  game  of  such  a  place  is  under  my  protection,^’  (or  cov¬
enant).  Once,  when  he  was  walking  in  his  domain,  a  lark  flew
away  from  her  eggs  at  his  approach,  upon  which  he  said,  Fear
not ;  thy  eggs  are  under  my  protection.’’  Then  he  improvised  in
rejez :

Oh.  lark  !  the  valley  is  open  to  thee  in  this  pasture  land ;  So  lay  thy
eggs  and  sing  ;

And  peck  what  thou  desirest ;  The  fowler  is  far  from  thee,  so  be  glad  :

Yet  sure  he  will  take  thee  some  day ;  beware  !

For  the  rest  of  the  hi  tory  cf  Kolayb,  his  death,  and  the  war  that
followed,  see  the  Twe.Ay-.'^ixth  Assembly,  at  the  words  the  war
of  A1  Basils.”  Some  lines  by  Mohalhil  on  his  brother  Kolayb
are  to  be  found  at  p.  420  of  the  Hamaseh,  and  in  the  com¬
mentary  is  a  narrative  of  the  events  which  led  to  his  death.
Mohalhil’s  elegy  on  his  brother  is  said  to  have  been  the  first
specimen  of  the  kasldeJiy  or  regular  poem.

The  light  of  to-day, — is  used  here  like  ijUi-'  in
Assembly  Fifteen.

Make  alliance  with  him  by  a  day-sleep, — Literally,  ‘‘join
his  cord  or  rope an  idiom  used  of  forming  an  alliance  with
any  one  by  marrying  a  daughter  to  him.  The  original  idea  is
that  of  attaching  a  camel  to  a  man’s  rope,  that  is,  of  presenting


29


450


FOTJES.


him  with  the  camel.  The  meaning  of  the  text  is,  Give  drowsi¬
ness,  which  is  a  persevering  snitor,  the  day-sleep  that  it
demands.”

The  Traditions  handed  down. — Among  the  Traditions  of  the
Prophet,  recommending  the  day-sleep  or  siesta,  is  the  following,
by  Anas  ibn  Malik,  Help  the  wakeful  devotion  of  night  by
sleep  in  the  day.”  Also  of  the  same  Traditionist :  ^^Take  the
day-sleep,  for  Satan  takes  it  not.”

God  smote  upon  the  ears. — This  is  taken  from  Koran  xviii.
10,  where  it  is  said  of  the  Sleepers  in  the  Cave,  We  smote
upon  their  ears  (with  deafness),  in  the  Cave  a  number  of  years.”

We  washed  hand  and  foot  for  the  two  mute  prayers. — These
expressions  are  explained  by  Hariri  in  the  tefsir  at  the  end  of
the  Assembly.  The  of  an  animal  are  the  thinner  parts
of  the  leg,  above  the  foot,  and  in  man  the  wrists  and  ankles.
The  two  mute  prayers  ”  are  those  of  noon  and  afternoon,
because  the  recitation  at  them  is  under  the  breath.

The  Father  of  Indwelling. — All  these  Tofayli  bye-names
and  Sufi  metonymies  ”  are  explained  by  Hariri  himself  in  the
interpretation  which  he  has  added  to  this  Assembly.  The
Father  of  Indwelling  is  Hunger,  because  he  dwells  in  and  holds
his  seat  in  every  stomach.

The  Father  of  Assembling  is  the  or  round  table  on

which  food  is  brought  in ;  so  called  because  it  gathers  together
the  food  or  the  guests.

The  Father  of  Pleasantness  is  white  bread  as  being  the  most
delicate  food  of  its  kind ;  and  it  is  patient  at  every  lurong  because
it  undergoes  grinding,  kneading,  and  baking.

The  Father  of  Lovingness  is  kid’s  flesh,  called  so  from  its
savouriness  ;  the  burning  and  torment  are  during  the  roasting.

The  Father  of  Acuteness  is  vinegar :  the  Father  of  Help  is
salt,  the  Father  of  Comeliness  signifies  vegetables;  a  play  on
words  being  possibly  intended,  since  means  also  melted

fat,  or  gravy,  which  would  run  from  the  meat  on  to  the  vegeta¬
bles.  The  Mother  of  Hospitality  is  the  food  called  Sikbaj,  so
called  because  it  is  the  principal  dish  given  to  guests.  The
Mother  of  Strengthening  or  Restoration  is  the  food  called  Hariseh,


NOTES.


451


because  it  contains  wheat,  which  is  called  the  Strengthener.  The
Mother  of  Joyfulness  is  the  food  called  Ju&abeh,  apparently  a
kind  of  pie.  The  Father  of  Dignity  is  the  food  Khabis,  and
is  called  so  from  its  high  price.  The  Father  of  Loftiness  is
the  food  called  Faluthaj,  which  is  made  of  honey,  and  has  this
title  also  on  account  of  its  costliness.  The  Two  Rumour ers  are
the  ewer  and  basin,  which,  rattling  as  they  are  brought  along,
rumour  the  close  of  the  entertainment.  The  rising  of  the  camels
is  the  removal  of  the  table.  The  Father  of  Softness  is  alkali,  for
washing.  The  Father  of  Generosity  is  the  perfume  or  incense^
wMch  was  used  at  the  close  of  the  feast.  The  Ghosroes  referred
to  is  Khosru  Perwez  who  is  one  of  the  exemplars  of  magnificence
and  luxury  among  the  Arabs.  It  is  said  by  the  commentators
on  this  passage  that  he  was  the  first  for  whom  sikbaj,  the  Persian
was  cooked,  and  that  none  fed  of  it  without  his  permission.
This  monarch  who,  after  a  career  of  success  against  the  Eastern
Empire,  rivalling  that  of  his  predecessor  Khosru  Nushirvan,
closed  his  reign  in  defeat  and  shame,  deposed  by  an  impious  son,
appears  from  authorities  more  trustworthy  than  Moslem  tradition
to  have  carried  Persian  luxury  to  its  highest  point.  His  wars
being  the  subject  of  a  prophecy  in  the  Koran,  he  has  an  enduring
reputation.  His  splendour  and  his  love  for  the  beautiful  Shirin,
who  was  a  present  to  him  from  Csesar,  are  often  celebrated  by
the  poets,  as  in  the  Shah  Nameh  and  the  odes  of  Hafiz,  and
form  the  subject  of  many  romances.

Further  explanations  of  these  fanciful  names  are  needless  here.
So  far  as  they  can  be  understood  they  are  interpreted  by
Sherishi,  most  of  whose  remarks  have  been  introduced  into  the
text  of  De  Sacy’s  commentary.

Despair  not  in  calamities. — Sir  William  Jones  quotes  these
beautiful  verses  as  a  specimen  of  Eastern  moral  poetry  (Poeseos
Asiaticse  Commentarii,  cap.  xiv.).  The  metre  is  k^mil.


452


ITOTES.


THE  TWENTIETH  ASSEMBLY.

I  was  making  towards.— texts  from  which  derives  its
technical  meaning  of  an  ablution  with  sand  are  Koran  iv.  46  and
V.  9,  which  may  be  rendered,  Have  recourse  to,  or  make
towards,  good  sand  or  earth.’^

Mayydfdrildn  is  a  town  of  Diyar  Bekr,  thirty  parasangs  from
Nasibin.  On  .account  of  its  length  the  adjective  formed  from  it
is  FMM.

Who  blows  on  knots^  i.e.  a  magician.  This  phrase  is  derived
from  the  Surat  al  Falak,  at  the  end  of  the  Koran.  “  I  seek  a
refuge  with  Grod  from  the  malice  of  women  who  blow  on  knots.”
Baydawi  explains  it  as  follows  : — The  malice  of  women  who
are  enchantresses,  and  who  tie  knots  in  strings,  and  blow  on
them  as  an  enchantment,  is  a  blowing  such  that  spittle

comes  from  the  mouth.  It  is  said  that  a  Jew  enchanted  the
Prophet  with  eleven  knots  in  a  cord,  and  hid  it  in  a  well ;  the
Prophet  became  sick,  and  the  (the  Suras  jliJl  and

which  have  eleven  verses  between  them),  descended
from  Heaven,  and  Gabriel  informed  the  Prophet  of  the  place
where  the  enchantment  was  hidden.  The  Prophet  thereupon
sent  ‘Ali,  who  brought  the  cord,  and  the  Prophet  repeated
over  it  the  two  chapters  ;  at  each  verse  that  he  repeated  a
knot  was  unloosed,  and  when  the  whole  were  unloosed  he  was
relieved.’^  Hence,  the  meaning  of  Hariri  may  be  that  Abu
Zayd  had  in  his  bearing  the  malicious  cunning  of  a  wizard.
Baydawi,  however,  gives  another  explanation  of  cljIjII)  as
meaning  women  who  by  their  wiles  loosen  the  determinations
^ind  defeat  the  purposes  of  men ;  and  who,  as  it  were,  spit  on
knots  to  soften  them,  and  make  them  easy  of  unloosing.  If
Hariri  took  the  passage  an  this  sense.,  it  may  mean  that  Abu
Zayd  accosted  with  the  -confidence  of  one  who  can  solve  any
riddle  and  circumvent  any  antagonist.  The  latter  sense  is
perhaps  the  more  apposite.

The  sheep. — was  the  name  of  an  undersized  species  of


JSrOTJES.


453


sheep  in  Bahrayn,  with  an  ngly  face  and  short  legs.  It  is  used
as  a  similitude  for  mean  and  contemptible  persons.  A  poet
satirizing  a  family  of  Temim  says : — 0  Fokaym,  ye  basest  of
Temim  :  if  ye  were  sheep  ye  would  be  nakad ;  if  ye  were  water
ye  would  be  froth ;  if  ye  were  wool  ye  would  be  refuse.’^  See
the  proverb,  More  vile  than  nakad/^  Arab.  Prov.  I.  513.  The
author  means  that  Abu  Zayd  greeted  like  one  accustomed  to
make  his  living  out  of  noble  and  mean.

Haheo,  amici. — The  measure  of  these-  verses  is  the  first
of  the  first  of  the  the  being  ijyLiU

and  the  being  as  in  the  Second  Assembly.

Sir  William  Jones  has  honoured  this  piece,  which  he  had  pro¬
bably  met  with  as  an  extract,  by  comparing  it  with  the  lament
of  David  over  Saul  and  Jonathan.  In  his  specimens  of  Oriental
elegiac  poetry,  he  says,  Bellissimum  est  in  hoc  genere  poema
in  vicesima  Haririi  Mekama,  quod  integrum  subjiciam.''^  He
then  gives  the  translation,  and  proceeds  : — Hsec  elegia  non
admodum  dissimilis  esse  videtur  pulcherrimi  illius  carminis  de
Sauli  et  Jonathani  obitu :  atque  adeo  versus  iste,

*  Ubi  provocavit  adversaries  nunquam  rediit  a  pugnss  conten-
tione  sine  spiculo  sanguine  imbuto
Ex  Hebrseo  reddi  videtur,

^  A  sanguine  occisorum,  a  fortium  virorum  adipe
'  Arcus  Jonathani  non  rediit  irritus.'  ”

Sir  William  may  be  pardoned,  since  the  purpose  of  Hariri  was
to  show  his  wit  by  imitating  the  sublime  elegiac  strains  of  the
ancient  Arabs  and  the  English  Orientalist  was  no  more  de¬
ceived  than  the  company  who  are  represented  as  bestowing  their
charity  on  Abu  Zayd.  Following  Sir  William  Jones’s  example,
I  shall  ask  the  reader  to  compare  Hariri’s  verses  with  those
which  are  attributed  to  Ta’abbata  Sherran  in  the  Hamaseh,
p.  382,  but  which  are  probably  the  composition  of  that  Arabic
Macpherson,  Khalf  al  Akmar.  The  contains  many

passages  of  a  like  import.  The  poem  of  Imr  al  Kays,  beginning
'' Approach,  ye  two,  to  the  old  dwelling  in  'As' as/’  Diwan,
p.  34,  is  also  wmrthy  of  attention.


454


NOTES,


Victoria  a  ccelo^  etc. — Koran  Ixi.  13.  These  words  were  a
battle-cry  of  the  early  Moslems,  being  taken  from  the  above
Sura,  which  is  called  the  Line  of  Battle,’’  and  exhorts  believers
to  the  jihad,  or  war  against  infidels.  They  are  used  in  the
marriage  ceremony  with  the  same  allusion  as  in  the  present
verses.

Grains  Juit, — Was  saluted  with  the  greeting
May  I  be  thy  ransom.

Incurms  forma, — Koran  xxxvi.  68.  A  somewhat  irreverent
allusion.

If  there  7oere  a  thong  to  my  staff, — This  is  a  proverbtal
expression,  equivalent  to  '^If  I  had  power  or  means.”  A  thong
passing  through  a  hole  in  the  handle  of  a  staff  enables  a  man
to  grasp  it  more  securely.

Mirages  of  the  plain,  white  shingle  of  the  holloiv, — That  is,
ye  who  give  a  deceptive  hope  of  bounty  which  is  not  fulfilled,  as
the  mirage  at'  a  distance  makes  the  traveller  believe  that  water  is
near ;  or  as  a  layer  of  white  pebbles  is  taken  for  silver.  For
words  signifying  the  mirage  or  kindred  phenomena,  see
JTj  J^A?,  j-Ul,  The  word  ajtiu  means


a  hollow  relieve  water  collects,  and,  with  the  more  common
and  chaste  form  'i%so,  a  patch  of  ground  or  a  plain,  differing
from  what  is  about  it.  In  the  latter  sense  the  plural  is  said
to  be  A  piece  of  ground  thus  diversified  by  pebbles  is
called

Fold  his  cloth  over  its  rent,  and  keep  his  splayness  of  tooth
from  inspection, — Metaphorical  expressions  signifying  the  con¬
cealment  of  another’s  fault  or  imposture,  Arab.  Prov.  II.  38.

is  the  irregular  growth  of  the  teeth,  or  their  unequal  length.
The  epithet  is  applied  to  an  eagle,  because  the  upper  part  of
its  beak  is  longer  than  the  lower  (De  Sacy’s  Hariri,  p.  243),  also
■  to  a  talon,  because  it  protrudes,  p.  240.

God  fight  against  thee, — A  term  of  playful  imprecation,  which
has  been  already  spoken  of  in  a  former  note.

The  scout  who  lies  not  to  Ms  people,—^''  The  scout  lies  not  to
his  people”  is  a  proverbial  expression.  The  j  was  he  who  was


jsroTus.


455


sent  on  by  a  tribe  on  tbe  march  to  search  for  pasturage  or  water,
and  he  lies  not.  because  his  interests  are  the  same  as  theirs.
Arab.  Prov.  II.  525,  This  proverb  was  used  by  Ndm^n^  son  of
Zowra,  in  the  address  by  which  he  sought  to  induce  the  Benu
Bekr  to  yield  to  Khosru  Perwez.  Oaussin  de  Perceval,  Essai,
Vol.  11.  p.  177.


THE  TWENTY-FIEST  ASSEMBLY.

Biffkt  from  wrong.  —  The  best  explanation  of  the  original
expression  is  that  J^*  is  the  twist  of  a  rope  towards  one’s  self,
and^o  the  twist  away  from  one’s  self;  so  that  it  might  be
translated,  ‘Vhat  to  take  and  what  to  leave.”  Sherishi  renders
it  what  to  turn  to  and  what  to  turn  from.”

Eayy. — The  seat  of  government  of  the  region  known  under
the  Khalifate  as  Daylam  was  a  place  of  much  importance  during
the  most  flourishing  time  of  the  Arab  sovereignty,  and  under  the
House  of  Seljuk.  It  was  called  Eayy  al  Mahdiyeh,  since  the
Khalif  Al  Mahdi  held  his  court  there  for  many  years  during  the
reign  of  Al  Mansur,  and  there  was  Harun  ar  Eeshid  born  in
the  year  145  or  149.  Eayy  was  conquered  under  the  Khalif
'Omar  by  Ka'b  ibn  Kurt,  the  AnsM.  The  derivative  adjective
formed  from  Eayy  is  Eazi,  as  Marwazi,  from  Marw.  This  city
was  the  birth-place  of  Ibn  Paris  ar  Eazi,  the  poet  and  gram¬
marian,  whose  life  is  given  by  Ibn  Khallikan.  It  is  related
of  Ibn  Paris  that  he  was  the  instructor  of  Badi'  az  Zeman,  the
author  of  the  Makamat,  which  Hariri  took  as  his  model.  It  is
further  said  that  he  wrote  a  treatise  on  the  meaning  of  words  and
that  from  it  Hariri  took  the  idea  of  his  Thirty-second  Assembly,
in  which  a  hundred  legal  questions  that  turn  on  the  double
meanings  of  words  are  proposed.  According  to  Tabari  the  city
of  Eayy  was  founded  by  Husheng,  one  of  the  primeval  kings,
and  the  first  who  sawed  wood,  and  made  doors,  and  dug  metals.
See  the  early  part  of  his  Chronicle.


456


NOTES.


Looked  the  loops  of  error ,  i,e,  had  risen  from  it.  as

has  been  before  explained,  is  that  by  which  an  Arab,  sitting  on
the  ground,  draws  up  his  legs  to  his  stomach  so  as  to  support
himself,  though  there  be  nothing  to  lean  against.  See  Sixteenth
Assembly,  ‘'They  loosed  their  loops  to  me,^’  i.e.  they  rose.

Good  from  evil. — This  is  the  virtual  meaning  of  the  phrase
which  so  many  etymologies  are  given  in  the
commentary.  The  expression  belongs  to  the  class  which  the
Arabs  call  and  of  which  they  make  constant  use,  as  may
be  seen  from  many  examples  in  the  present  work.  It  is  ana¬
logous  to  our  helter-slielter  and  namhy-pamhy ,  and  it  may  fairl}^
be  believed  that  in  many  cases  the  second  element  had  no
original  meaning,  but  was  added  as  a  rhyme  to  the  first.  Com¬
pare  j(iA  at  the  end  of  the  Tenth  Assembly  ;  and

a  little  later  in  the  present.  But  the  lexicographers
always  strive  to  give  a  derivation  if  possible.  In  the  present
case  those  propounded  are  all  very  unsatisfactory ;  and  it  is
better  to  consider  it  a  phrase  formed  in  the  mouth  of  the  people,
of  which  no  true  etymology  can  be  given.

One  morning or  the  use  of  the  word  compare  De  Sacy's
Commentary  at  the  beginning  of  the  Nineteenth  Assembly.  It
is  mansub  as  a  zarf.  In  four  cases  the  masculine  1  j  is  used ;
with  some  portions  of  time  it  is  improper  to  use  \3  or  ejL',  but
in  all  cases  it  refers  only  to  past  time,  so  that  it  would  not  be
lawful  in  such  a  phrase  as  "  I  will  go  some  morning''  or  "some
day."

Ihn  Sam’^un. — This  was  a  celebrated  preacher  who  flourished
about  a  century  and  a  half  before  Hariri.  He  was  born  in  the
year  300  of  the  Hijra,  and  died  in  the  year  387.  He  resided  at
Bagdad  in  the  time  of  the  Khalifs  A1  lluti*  I’illah  and  At  Ta’i'
I'illah.  He  was  a  man  of  great  eloquence,  to  judge  from  the
effect  he  produced  on  his  hearers,  but  was  no  ascetic,  for  when
one  asked  him  how  he,  who  exhorted  others  to  piety,  should
feed  delicately  and  wear  fine  clothes,  he  answered  that  if  a  man
felt  himself  at  peace  with  God  while  doing  these  things  they
were  lawful  to  him.  He  appears  to  have  been  endowed  with


NOTES,


457


great  tact,  for  Sherislii  relates  the  following  narrative  of  Abu '  t
Tahir  Mohammed  ibn  'Ali  al  *IIaf :  ''  I  went  to  see  Ibn  Sainun
and  found  him  on  his  chair  in  the  congregation,  and  as  he
preached,  AbuT  Path,  who  was  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  chair,
was  overcome  with  drowsiness  and  fell  asleep.  Then  AbuT
Hasan  (Ibn  Sam'^in)  stopped  for  a  time  until  AbuT  Path  woke
up  and  raised  his  head,  when  he  said  to  him,  ^  Didst  thou  see
the  Apostle  of  God  in  thy  dream?’  ^  Yes,’  said  AbuT  Path.

^  It  was  for  that  reason,’  returned  the  preacher,  ‘  that  I  stayed
my  discourse,  that  I  might  not  interrupt  thee  in  thy  converse.’  ”
ThS  same  commentator  tells  an  anecdote  which  shows  the
clangers  to  which  men  of  note  were  exposed  for  their  political
opinions.  A  servant  of  the  Khalif  At  Ta’f  I’illah  relates  that
the  Khalif  one  day  bade  him  go  and  bring  Ibn  Sam'un  to  the
palace.  I  saw,”  said  he,  that  the  Khalif  was  angry,  and  he
was  much  feared  when  in  that  condition  on  account  of  his
severity,  so  that  I  was  concerned  for  Ibn  SamTin.  When  he
arrived  I  informed  the  Khalif,  who  took  his  seat  in  the  hall,  and
bade  that  he  be  brought  in.  When  he  entered  he  made  saluta¬
tion  and  began  a  discourse.  And  his  first  words  were,  ^  It  is
related  of  the  Commander  of  the  Paithful,  *Ali  son  of  Abii
Talib  (God  accept  him) ;  ’  then  he  mentioned  a  Tradition  of  him,
and  went  on  preaching  on  this  tenor  until  At  T^’f  wept,  and  his
sobs  could  be  heard,  and  the  handkerchief  which  was  to  his  eyes
was  wet  with  tears.  When  Ibn  Sam'un  had  ceased  the  Khalif
I  gave  it  to  him,  and  he  departed.  When  I  returned  to  At  T^’i,
handed  me  a  packet,  with  perfumes  and  other  things  for  him,  and
I  said,  ‘  Master,  I  saw  thee  incensed  against  Ibn  Sam'un,  and
through  his  coming  hither  thou  art  calmed  ;  what  is  the  reason?’
The  Khalif  answered,  ^  Complaint  was  made  that  he  had  spoken
ill  of 'Ali  (whom  God  accept),  and  I  wished  to  be  convinced ;  and
if  the  thing  had  been  true  I  'would  have  killed  him ;  but  when  he
came  before  me  he  opened  his  discourse  with  the  mention  of  *  Ali,
and  by  the  Blessing  on  him,  so  that  I  knew  he  was  innocent.’  ”
It  must  be  remembered  that  it  was  the  traditional  policy  of  the
Abbasides  to  exalt  'Ali  and  his  House  at  the  expense  of  the


458


NOTES.


Omayyides,  and  to  paint  in  the  darkest  colours  not  only
Mu'4wiyeh  and  his  son  Yezid,  and  such  guilty  instruments  of
their  ambition  as  'Obayd  allah  ibn  Ziyad,  but  the  whole  of  the
reigning  House,  and  those  who  served  them.  The  men  of  letters,
as  well  as  the  religious,  joined  in  this  canonization  of  "Ali  and
A1  Hosayn,  and  this  reprobation  of  their  enemies.  Indeed,  it  is
curious  to  find  that,  even  under  the  House  of  Omayyeh,  the
poets  and  scholars  were  in  general  partisans  of  the  son  of  Abu
Talib,  and  the  descendants  of  the  Prophet.  Abu  T  Aswad,  the
founder  of  the  system  of  grammar,  fought  under  ‘Ali  at  Siff'in,
and  is  said  to  have  learned  from  him  the  division  of  the  pa?ts
of  speech  into  the  noun,  the  verb,  and  the  particle  (Ibn
Khallikan).  The  same  side  was  espoused  by  almost  all  his
successors ;  even  those  who  asked  and  received  the  largesses  of
the  victorious  family.  In  later  times  there  is  scarcely  one  of
the  house  of  Omayyeh  whom  the  Moslems  willingly  praise,  ex¬
cept  the  saint  'Omar  ibn'Abd  al  'Aziz,  who  vainly  sought  to  re¬
concile  the  partisans  of  his  own  House  and  of  'Ali.  They  scarcely
do  justice  even  to  so  great  a  sovereign  as  Welidibn  'Abd  al  Meliks
though  in  his  lifetime  he  rewarded  the  genius  and  received
the  praises  of  two  such  highly  esteemed  poets  as  Al  Parazdak
and  Jerir.  It  would  have  been  strange  if  a  popular  preacher  of
the  fourth  century  had  really  slandered  one  who  was  then  the.
chief  hero  of  Islam.  The  life  of  Ibn  Sam'un  is  given  by  Ibn
Khallikan,  who  says  that  no  such  preacher  had  again  appeared.
He  was  the  author  of  a  book  of  Traditions ;  among  the  speci¬
mens  of  his  pulpit  eloquence  is  the  following  :  Exalted  be  God,
who  has  enabled  man  to  speak  by  a  piece  of  flesh  (the  tongue) ;
to  see  by  a  piece  of  fat  (the  eje) ;  and  to  hear  by  a  piece  of
bone  (the  ear.)'’

With  a  breast'lamch. — signifies  the  protrusion  of  the
breast,  together  with  a  hollowness  of  the  back,  and  is  the  oppo¬
site  of  ,  which  is  the  ordinary  hunchbackedness.  In  the
book  of  which  the  French  title  is  La  Vie  et  les  Aventures  de
Fariac,"  written  a  few  years  since  by  Paris  ash  Shidyak,  a
Syrian  possessed  of  an  extraordinary  knowledge  of  the  Arabic


NOTES.


459


vocabulary,  there  will  be  found  at  p.  344  a  list  of  more  than
yOO  names  of  bodily  defects  and  ailments.  This  author,  whose
purpose  is  either  to  instruct  the  reader  or  to  display  his  own
knowledge,  makes  it  a  practice  to  introduce  into  his  compositions
as  many  recondite  words  as  possible,  which,  he  duly  explains
according  to  the  best  authorities.  The  book,  whatever  may  be
thought  of  its  literary  merits,  is  no  doubt  very  useful  to  the
Arabic  student,  and  deserves  to  be  well  known.  I  would  par¬
ticularly  draw  attention  to  the  twelve  pages  of  names  of  gar¬
ments  and  materials  for  clothing  at  p-  307,  as  this  is  a  subject
whfch  has  been  chosen  by  a  European  scholar,  M.  Dozy,  for  a
separate  work.  The  immense  number  of  names,  or  rather
epithets,  for  a  handsome  woman  according  to  her  various  points
of  beauty,  given  at  p.  241,  may  surprise  even  those  who  are
accustomed  to  the  boundless  resources  of  this  extraordinary
language.  For  Faris  gives  the  signification  mentioned

above.  See  p.  348  of  the  book  (Paris,  1855.  Benjamin
Duprat,  Libraire  de  ITnstitut).

The  cap  and  the  cloak. — The  Kalansuweh,  or  high-crowned
cap  of  a  dervish  or  preacher,  and  the  Taylasan  or  cloak  which  he
hung  over  his  shoulders.  Both  were  Persian  garments,  which
are  appropriate,  the  scene  of  the  adventure  being  laid  at  Rayy.
The  taylasan  being  a  foreign  garment,  an  Arab  would  say,
^^Thou  son  of  a  taylasan!”  meaning,  Thou  barbarian.’’  The
dictum  of  Sherishi,  who  lived  at  the  other  end  of  the  world,  that
the  taylasan  was  a  green  garment,  can  hardly  be  relied  upon ;
though  doubtless  green  was  a  favourite  colour.  On  this  word,
see  De  Sacy.  Ohrest.  Arabe,  Yol.  II.  p.  269.

Son  of  man,  or  Adam. — is  'niansuh  through  the  iddfeh.
Bayddwi  at  Koran  ii.  29  says  that  ^  jT  is  a  foreign  word  of  the
measure  of  jjT  and  The  plural  is

The  stumbling  of  the  purblind  beast.  —  This  is  a  proverbial
expression.  Such  an  one  goes  recklessly  like  the  dim-sighted
she-camel  that  beats  the  ground  with  her  fore  foot  as  she  goes
along,  not  guarding  herself  from  anything.  It  is  applied  to  one
who  turns  from  a  thing  as  if  he  were  not  cognizant  of  it,  or  who


460


NOTES.


is  continually  falling  into  a  thing.  (Lane  sub  voce  .)  The
verse  of  Zohayr  there  quoted  is  from  Mo'allakah,  v.  49.

To  Distinguished  from  this  is  which  is  the

ostentation  of  wealth.  Compare  Twenty-sixth  Assembly,  ‘^he
appropriated  me  for  his  ostentation.”

Thy  t?vo  caves.— ^\j\^  like  in  the  Forty-fifth  Assembly

(p.  602  De  Sacy’s  edition),  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  two  aper¬
tures  or  channels  of  the  body  [os  et  imdenda)  by  which  mankind
gratify  the  appetites  of  gluttony  and  lust.  Such  was  the  ex¬
planation  of  the  term  by  Mohammed,  for  when  it  was  said  to
him,  0  Apostle  of  God,  what  is  it  that  most  makes  men  enter
Paradise?”  he  answered,  ^^The  fear  of  God  and  goodness  of
disposition  ;  ”  and  when  it  was  said,  What  sends  them  into
Hell?”  he  answered,  Their  two  caves,  os  et  piidendaT  It  is
less  well  interpreted  as  the  mouth  and  the  belly.  The  Arabs
have  a  curious  fondness  for  thus  classing  things  in  pairs.  Com¬
pare  the  proverb,  Man's  worth  is  according  to  his  two  least
parts,”  i.e.  his  heart  and  tongue.  Arab.  Prov.  II.  p,  653,  and
Assembly  35.

.  Dost  thou  think  thou-  shalt  he  left  at  large^. — Koran  Ixxv.  36  ;

Doth  man  think  that  he  shall  be  left  at  large  ?”  Other  quota¬
tions  from  the  Koran  in  this  sermon  are  Ixxix.  40 ;  and  liii.  40.
The  latter  passage  teaches  the  doctrine  that,  at  the  day  of  judg¬
ment,  a  man  will  have  only  his  own  works  to  rely  upon,  and
that  the  merits  of  others  cannot  be  attributed  to  him.  But  as
the  Traditions  teach  that  alms  and  pilgrimage  performed  by
survivors  are  accepted  for  the  dead,  it  is  held  that  he  who  does
these  good  works  does  them  as  the  substitute  for  the  dead.

Between  the  lion  and  the Between  the  strong  and  the
weak.  Compare  Twentieth  Assembly,  ^^a  hunter  of  the  lion
and  the  dwarf  sheep.”

By  thy  life. — These  verses  are  of  the  metre  tawil,  which  has
been  already  explained.  They  present  a  fine  instance  of  what
is  called  or  S  U  since  in  the  last  foot  of  every

line  there  is  a  k,  and  a  which  is  always  the  letter

w'  with  kesreh.  Furthermore  each  successive  couple  of  verses


NOTES,


461


accord  in  having  the  first  two  syllables  of  the  identical.
The  taste  for  this  more  elaborate  harmony  of  sound,  which
certainly  increases  the  beauty  of  the  versification,  had  become
general  in  Hariri’s  time,  and  had  probably  been  increased  by  the
poetry  of  Abu  l"Ala,  who  composed  Liizum^  or  pieces  in  which
these  stricter  rules  were  observed,  some  of  them  being  doubly,  or
even  triply  rhymed  (Ibn  Khallikan).  It  is  of  very  general
occurrence  in  the  Assemblies,  and  is  elsewhere  mentioned  in  these
notes,  but  the  present  lines  are  unusually  laboured.  Compare
page  484,  De  Sacy’s  edition.

Veath  and  his  stroke, — is,  perhaps,  originally  the
plural  of  It  is  said  to  signify  the  decreed  and  pre¬

destined  time  or  form  of  death.

The  terror  of  his  meeting,  and  the  taste  of  his  nornmood
-Probably,  of  his  colocynth'^  With  respect  to  the  terror
and  the  bitterness  of  death,  the  following  legends  are  related  by
Sherishi: — Abraham  (on  him  be  peace),  said  to  Death,  ^‘Oanst
thou  show  me  the  form  in  which  thou  snatchest  the  spirit  of
the  wicked  man?”  He  answered,  Thou  canst  not  bear
it.”  Abraham  said,  can,  so  turn  aside  and  change.”
Death  did  so,  then  turned  round  again,  and  behold  he  stood
in  the  form  of  a  man,  with  black  hair  erect,  foul  breath,
black  garments,  and  there  came  out  of  his  mouth  and
nostrils  a  flame  of  fire  and  smoke.  Abraham  fainted,  and
when  he  revived.  Death  had  returned  to  his  shape.  Then
Abraham  said,  ''  If  the  wicked  man  in  dying  had  to  meet
nothing  but  thy  shape  it  would  be  horror  enough.”  God  said
to  Abi'aham  How  didst  thou  find  the  taste  of  death,  0  friend?”
(Abraham  is  called  the  or  friend  of  God,  at  Koran  iv.

124,  and  is  generally  spoken  of  by  Moslems  as  J-LsH,  a  name
familiar  to  travellers  from  his  burial  place  at  Hebron).  Abraham
answered,  Like  a  skewer  that  had  been  laid  in  wet  wool.”  By
which,  I  presume,  is  meant  that  it  was  foul  and  loathsome,  as
the  skewer  is  with  rust ;  or  that  it  was  as  painful  as  being
pierced  by  a  rusty  weapon.  God  said,  Have  I  not  made  it
easy  to  thee  ?”  He  also  said  to  Moses  (on  him  be  peace)  How


462


NOTES,


didst  thou  find  death  He  answered,  I  was  as  a  bird  that  is
fried  in  the  pan,  and  cannot  die  and  be  at  rest,  or  escape  and  fly
away/’  Another  version  is,  Like  a  sheep  that  is  flayed  alive.”
The  use  of  colocynth  and  other  plants  as  synonynas  for  the
bitterness  of  calamity  is  common  among  the  Arabs.  A1  Mute-
nebbi,  in  the  first  of  his  poems  to  Sayf  ad  Dowleh,  says,  I  have
pastured  on  evil  until  its  are  sweet  to  me.”  (Dieterici’s  ed.
p.  378.)  In  the  Hamaseh  and  are  used  together,  p.

509  ;  compare  also  p.  166.  The  word  is  said  to  signify  the

colocynth  when  it  is  most  bitter ;  but  what  plant  is  meant  by
appears  doubtful.  I  have  therefore  taken  the  liberty
to  render  it  by  wormwood”  which  is  used  thus  metaphorically
in  English.  The  usual  word  for  colocynth  is

The  day's  duties  pressed  upon  us, — This  is  a  free  translation
of  the  expression  which  is  taken  from  the  law  of

inheritance.  At  Koran  iv.  12,  the  main  principles  of  the
law  of  inheritance  are  laid  down,  and  it  is  defined  what  share
of  a  deceased  person’s  property  shall  belong  to  each  relative.
It  may  be,  however,  that  the  sum  of  the  fractions  is  greater
than  unity ;  and  then  each  inheritor  has  to  give  up  a  part  pro¬
portionate  to  his  inheritance.  This  is  called  Jy:.  For  instance,
if  there  be  three  inheritors,  of  whom  one  has  a  right  to  one  half,
the  second  to  one  third,  and  the  last  to  one  fourth  of  the  inherit¬
ance,  the  united  portions  would  exceed  the  estate  by  one  twelfth,
and  this  deficiency  is  made  good  by  each  foregoing  a  part  of  his
lawful  share.  The  contrary  may  also  take  place.  It  may  be,
for  example,  that  there  are  only  two  inheritors,  of  whom  one  can
only  claim  the  fourth,  and  the  other  the  third  of  the  inheritance,
and  there  remains  an  excess  of  five-twelfths,  which  is  distributed
between  them  proportionately  to  their  legal  shares  :  see  the  note
on  this  passage,  De  Sacy’s  ed.  Vol.  11.  p.  122.  The  day,  in  this
case,  is  compared  to  a  deficient  inheritance,  because  the  people,
in  listening  to  the  preacher,  had  let  one  prayer-time  pass  and
were  approaching  another,  so  that  they  would  have  to  compress
two  prayers  into  the  insufiicient  remainder  of  the  day.  There  is
a  double  signification  given  to  ;~-a  legal  division  of  an  in-


jsroT^s.


463


heritance  and  the  legal  or  incumbent  prayers.  The  diflference
between  and  Jij,  in  respect  of  prayer,  has  been  explained
in  the  notes  to  the  Sixteenth  Assembly,  under  the  phrase  joined
to  it  what  was  optional,'^

Of  the  prompt. — Literally,  of  one  who  draws  or  girds  up  his
garments  in  readiness  to  run.

’Wonderful!  a  man  hoping. metre  of  these  verses  is  the
perfect  kdmil,  according  to  the  Circle,  and  consists  of  six

times  in  each  verse.  This  metre  was  explained  in  the  notes
to  the  Fourth  Assembly,  where  a  less  perfect  specimen  of  it
occurs.

Nor  cares  he. — after  U  is  considered  either  as  redundant
or  corroboratory.  In  a  verse  cited  by  Lane,  ‘‘  And  our  habit
is  not  cowardice,”  it  prevents  the  government  of  U  and  leaves
the  noun  marfic ,  and  is  therefore  held  not  to  be  a  nega¬
tive;  but  in  another  verse,  where  the  noun  becomes  mansfch,
it  is  explained  as  a  negative  corroborative  of  U.  That
itself  can  have  the  force  of  a  negative  may  be  held  as  proved
by  Koran  x.  69  and  Ixxii.  26.

The  fire  of  war. — This  is  an  allusion  to  the  bale-fire  which
the  ancient  Arabs  lighted  on  a  height  to  collect  the  tribe  or
its  allies  for  a  foray.  There  are  various  traditional  fires  cele¬
brated  by  the  poets.  The  fire  of  hospitality,”  ^l3,  was  that
which  a  man  lighted  to  guide  travellers  to  his  tent,  or  to  prepare
food  for  them.  The  ''  fire  of  branding,”  was  that  with

which  the  iron,  was  heated  for  the  branding  of  a  great
personage's  camels,  that  they  might  be  known,  and  allowed
to  drink  at  the  well  before  others.  The  fire  of  treachery,”
jlj,  was  lighted  by  a  man  when  he  had  been  treacherously
injured  by  his  neighbour.  The  wronged  man  solemnly  lighted
a  fire  at  Mina,  during  the  pilgrimage,  and  exclaimed,  ‘'This
be  his  enemy.”  The  “fire  of  safety,”  iULJljl),  was  a  thanks¬
giving  of  a  man's  friends  for  his  safe  return.  On  the  other
hand,  the  ''fire  of  departure”  was  a  solemn  cursing  of  a
man  by  his  enemy  when  he  set  out  on  an  expedition.  The  fire
was  lighted,  and  the  ill-wisher  exclaimed,  "  Away !  begone !  ”


464


NOTES.


Compare  Eighteentli  Assembly:  would  be  said  to  Isaac,

‘Away!  begone!’”  This  was  called  The  “fire  of  the

lion”  was  that  lighted  to  scare  wild  beasts.  The  ^'fire  of  the
snake-bitten,”  was  lighted  for  the  recovery  of  one  who

had  been  so  hurt ;  either  as  a  charm,  or  because  it  helped  him  to
keep  awake,  on  which  his  recovery  depended.  The  fire  of  ransom,”
jlj,  was  lighted  when  women  of  rank,  who  had  been  made
captive,  were  redeemed ;  for  they  were  brought  out  of  the  hostile
camp  by  night,  apparently  to  lessen  their  humiliation.  The
^^fire  of  praying  rain”  was  a  sacrifice  in  time  of  drought.  The
^^fire  of  hunting”  was  lighted  to  blind  or  confuse  the  deer.
The  “fire  of  covenanting,”  was  on  the  occasion  of  some

solemn  alliance  or  agreement  being  made.  See  the  sixth
Assembly  of  Nasif  al  Yazaji.

A  lisper. — One  who  pronounces  the  sin  like  thd,  and  the  rd
like  gliayn.  The  terrors  of  the  day  of  judgment  are  dwelt  upon
continually  in  the  Koran.  Compare  xxii.  1.  The  nurse  shall
abandon  the  child  to  whom  she  gives  suck,  and  every  pregnant
woman  shall  bring  forth  (from  fear),  and  ye  shall  see  the  men
as  drunken.”  Also  xxvii.  89 ;  xxxix.  67,  and  in  the  later  Suras
passim.  With  regard  to  the  word  it  is  clearly  formed  by
onomatopoeia,  the  letters  of  which  it  is  composed  being  those
which  the  speaker  substitutes  in  pronunciation  for  others.  Wasil
ibn  'Ata,  the  founder  of  the  sect  of  the  Mu  tazilun,  had  this
defect,  and  showed  great  cleverness  in  avoiding  the  use  of  words
which  he  could  not  pronounce.  Thus  he  would  say
instead  of^k^  for  rain,  instead  of  {Qt  hlind.^

instead  of  for  bed,  and  so  on.

Yiler  than  the  toad-stool  of  the  plain.-- k  proverbial  expres¬
sion,  Arab.  Prov.  I.  512,  where  a  great  number  of  proverbs
beginning  'Wiler  than”  are  collected.  Thus  it  is  said,  ''Viler
than  the  or  “  dwarf-sheep;”  compare  the  Twentieth  As¬
sembly  :  "Viler  than  the  egg  of  the  earth,”  that  is,  the  ostrich’s
egg,  which  she  lays  and  abandons  in  the  desert  (compare  Job
xxxix.  14),  an  expression  which  was  afterwards  used  to  signify
a  foundling  or  vagabond,  one  who  had  no  known  kin  or  home.


jsroTjss.


465


Wkat  he  Slipped  and  what  he  supped, — Tlie  iniquities  which
he  permitted  himself.

Ee  shall  bite  his  hand,--^o  bite  the  hand  is  significant  of
confusion  and  repentance  :  compare  the  verses  at  the  end  of  the
Tenth  Assembly.  Thus  the  much  discussed  expression  at  Koran
vii.  148,  means  that  the  children  of  Israel  fell  upon  their  handn
and  hit  them,  in  repentance  at  having  worshipped  the  calf.

Belted  with  authority  or  adorned, — The  was  a  broad

belt  or  stomacher  wmrn  by  women.  Sherishi  renders  the  word

Neglects  the  life  to  come,  etc, — Koran  Ixxv.  20.

And  when  he  hears  ride  walks  in  the  earth  to  do  violence  in  it,
— This  is  from  Koran  ii.  201.  Hariri  takes  in  the  sense  of
to  bear  rule/’  though  in  the  original  passage  the  context
shows  that  it  may  be  better  rendered,  when  he  turns  away
and  departs/’  that  is,  as  soon  as  he  has  done  talking  piously,
and  calling  God  to  witness,  he  goes  forth  and  does  evil.”  Bay-
da  wi  adopts  this  interpretation,  but  gives  the  other  also.  Hariri
probably  introduced  the  quotation  because  it  had  furnished
a  subject  for  controversy.

As  thou  rewardest  thou  shalt  he  rewarded, — A  proverbial
expression,  Arab,  Prov.  II.  354;  probably  derived  from  Chris¬
tian  sources,  like  that  at  p.  372.  '^As  thou  sowest  thou  shalt
reap.”  The  proverb  in  the  text  is  given  as  an  instance  of
the  figure  by  which  the  first  of  two  verbs  is  expressed  by  the
second,  the  word  ‘^rewarded”  being  i^sed  instead  of  “  doest,”
for  the  sake  of  accordance  and  congruity  :  as  in  the  verse  of  the
Koran,  xvi.  127,  If  ye  avenge,  avenge  as  ye  have  been  avenged
upon,”  meaning,  ^"as  ye  have  been  offended.”  Compare  Four¬
teenth  Assembly,  Reward  us  as  we  have  rewarded  thee.”

Showed  him  a  sharp  glance, — This  is  a  proverbial  phrase  usually
applied  to  one  who  threatens  or  warns  (Arab.  Prov.  II.  410) ;
also  if  fortune  or  destiny  looks  intently,  or  sharply,  or  sternly
on  one.  Thus  jAi  ^  comes  to  mean  misfortune  or  calamity.
Hariri,  however,  uses  the  phrase  literally,  with  the  meaning


30


466


NOTES.


I  looked  intently  at  Compare  the  use  of  the  phrase  at

Arab.  Prov.  I.  527.

The  hetter  of  two  guides. — Abu  Zayd  means  that  he  can  show
Harith  what  he  is  lookino:  for  better  than  Harith  can  find  it  him-
self ;  that  is,  if  he  is  seeking  to  learn  who  the  preacher  is  Abu
Zayd  can  satisfy  him  at  once  by  revealing  himself,  which  he
straightway  does.

I  am  he  whom  thou  knowest. — Metre  rejez.

Their  Shorn,  their  Ham,  and  their  Japhet. — The  three  sons  of
Noah  who  entered  with  him  into  the  ark;  the  one  who  refused
(Koran  xi.  44)  being  Canaan,  or,  as  is  otherwise  said.  Yam.
The  world  became  the  inheritance  of  Noah’s  three  sons,  the
posterity  of  the  seventy-two  persons  who  accompanied  his  family
into  the  ark  having  become  extinct,  so  that  these  three  might  be
called  the  heirs  of  all  mankind.  Shem  was  the  primate  of  the
earth  after  his  father,  and,  according  to  his  father’s  blessing,
became  the  ancestor  of  the  Prophets,  all  of  whom,  whether
Arabs  or  foreigners,  are  of  the  posterity  of  Shem.  He  went  as
far  as  Yemen  and  founded  San'S;,  and  settled  the  middle  region
of  the  earth  from  Yemen  to  Ash  Sham,  possessing  the  Holy
Place.  From  him  were  descended  'Ad,  and  Thamud,  and  Tasm,
and  Jedis,  and  A1  'AmMik  (Amalek),  and  the  subjects  of  Ya'rob
and  Jorhom  the  Elder,  who  were  called  because

they  were  created  speaking  Arabic  ;  also  the  descendants  of
Ismail,  called  because  they  acquired  the  Arabic

tongue  by  settling  among  the  former ;  also  who  are

defined  as  especially  the -descendants  of  'Adnan;  also  the  Jaba-
bireh  of  Ash  Sham  (the  gigantic  nations  of  Hebrew  tradition),
and  the  Pharaohs  of  Egypt.  It  is  also  said  that  Shem  was  the
father  of  the  Arabs,  and  the  Persians,  and  the  people  of  Rum,
all  of  them  races  in  whom  are  good  qualities.  Japhet  was  the
father  of  the  Sakalib  (Slaves),  and  the  people  of  Burjan  (the
Danubian  Bulgars),  and  the  Chinese,  and  the  Khazars  (a  people
near  the  Caspian,  powerful  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries),
and  Yajuj  and  Majuj  (Gog  and  Magog,  the  races  of  Northern  Asia),
and  the  Turks ;  and  these  have  no  good  qualities.  Of  the  posterity


KOTES.


467


of  Ham  are  Sind,  and  Hind,  and  all  the  races  of  the  Blacks,
like  Kush  and  the  Zenj,  a  people  whose  position  is  very  un¬
intelligibly  described  as  extending  from  Abyssinia  to  the  island
or  country  of  Wakwak  (the  home  of  Ibn  Tofayl’s  Hayy  ibn
Yakzan),  but  who  may  be  taken  to  be  the  people  of  Eastern
Africa ;  Ham  also  begat  the  Abyssinians  and  others.  On  this
subject  refer  to  A1  Mas'udi.  A  useful  work  is  Geographic  du
Moyen  Age  etudide  par  Joachim  Lelewel;  Bruxelles,  1852.

Amr  ibn  ""  Obayd  was  a  celebrated  ascetic  (eeblj)  and  preacher
of  the  time  of  the  Khalif  A1  Mansur.  His  life  is  narrated  by
Ibr?  Khallikan ;  and  Sherishi  gives  a  lengthy  notice  of  him  in
his  Commentary.  He  was  born  A.n.  80  (a.d.  700),  and  died
about  144.  He  was  a  freedman  of  the  Benu  ""Okayl,  and  his
father  had  been  one  of  the  prisoners  taken  at  Oabul.  This
person,  who  was  in  the  police  of  Basra,  was  either  a  man
of  indifferent  character,  or,  from  his  office,  unpopular  with  the
people,  for  they  used  to  say,  when  they  saw  his  son  'Amr  with
him,  There  goes  the  Best  of  men,  the  son  of  the  Worst  of
men.”  Truly,”  returned  the  father,  he  is  Abraham  and  I  am
Azar,”  (Azar  was  the  idolatrous  father  of  Abraham  ;  Koran  vi.
74).  'Amr,  though  he  prayed  so  constantly  that  his  forehead
was  horny  from  prostration,  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
heterodox  sect  of  the  Mfftazilun.  He  had  been  a  pupil  of
A1  Hasan  al  Basri,  but  left  him  for  the  new  tenets.  'Amr
was  one  of  the  chief  cultivators  of  scholastic  theology  and
metaphysics,  and  wrote  a  work  on  the  Kadari  doctrine,  which
attributes  free-will  and  optional  actions  to  man,  that  is,  which
allows  to  man,  in  his  own  actions,  Kadar,  or  determining  power,
such  as  God  possesses  over  the  universe,  Koran  xxxiii.  38 »
and  which  He  uses  in  the  creation  and  government  of  things,
XV.  21 ;  liv.  49.  The  contrary  doctrine,  called  that  of  Jabr,
Constraint,  is  unlimited  predestination,  the  attribution  of
everything  to  God,  and  the  assertion  that  all  human  actions
are  produced  by  Physical  Premotion,  and  are  of  the  nature
of  a  spasm.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  name  Miftazil  was
first  given  to  "Amr  or  to  WS-sil  ibn  ^Ata  al  Ghazzal.  Accord-


468


NOTES.


ing  to  one  account  Wasil  disputed  with  A1  Hasan  on  the
question  whether  one  who  has  committed  deadly  sin  could  be
called  a  believer,  and  in  consequence  took  a  separate  place
in  the  mosque  to  expound  his  doctrine.  A1  Hasan  then  said
to  his  pupils,  He  secedes  from  us and  thus  the  name  took
its  origin.  But,  according  to  another  tradition,  this  phrase
was  first  used  by  Abu  '1  Khattab  Katadeh,  who,  being  blind,
entered  the  mosque  to  hear  A1  Hasan,  but  fell  upon'Amr  and
some  of  his  followers,  who  had  just  left  A1  Hasan’s  circle  and
formed  one  of  their  own.  Finding  from  the  tenets  propounded
that  it  was  not  A1  Hasan’s  circle,  he  exclaimed,  These  are  the
seceders,”  and  at  once  left  them.  From  that  time  they  were
called  Seceders,”  Mu'tazilun ;  see  Ibn  Khallikan,  life  of
Katadeh.  For  information  on  this  powerful  and  intellectual
sect,  of  which  'Amr  became  one  of  the  chief  doctors,  consult
Schmolders,  Ecoles  pkilosophiques  cliez  les  Arabes,  and  Steiner,
Die  Mutaziliten  oder  die  Freidenker  im  Islam  ;  also  Pocock’s
Specimen^  and  Shahrestani,  '  Amr,  by  his  contempt  for  the  things
of  this  world,  obtained  the  admiration  of  his  contemporaries,  and
was  much  esteemed  by  A1  Mansur,  with  whom  he  lived  on  terms  of
intimacy  before  the  latter’s  accession  to  the  sovereignty.  Once,
when  the  Khalif  sent  for  him,  he  preached  a  sermon,  reminding
him  that  as  his  predecessors  had  given  place  to  him,  so  he  must
yield  the  throne  to  others,  bidding  him  prepare  for  the  day
which  should  never  be  followed  by  another  night,  and  warning
him  that  God  might  destroy  his  splendour  as  he  had  destroyed
Irem  ^dt  aVImdd  (the  city  of  SheddM,  see  Koran  Ixxxix.  6.)
He  would  take  no  largess,  and  carried  his  bluntness  to  the
extreme  of  rudeness.  A1  Mansur  asked  him  if  there  was  any¬
thing  he  required,  and'Amr  answered  '^That  thou  do  not  send
for  me  again,  but  wait  till  I  come  to  thee.”  In  that  case,”
said  the  Khalif,  we  shall  never  meet.”  That  is  what  I  desire,”
returned  the  preacher,  and  withdrew.  A1  Mansur  then  uttered
in  verse : —

All  of  you  walk  mincingly ;  All  of  you  seek  your  gain ;  All  except
'  Amr  ibn  ‘Obayd.”


NOTJES.


469


The  Khalif  grieved  much  at  his  death,  and  indited  some  verses
on  the  occasion,  an  unusual  honour  for  a  subject.

Keep  to  truth. --M-eixe  as  before  explained.

The  rolls  of  folding.--JjQiter^  and  writings.

What  locust  had  gone  off  with  him. — A  proverbial  expres¬
sion,  meaning  what  had  become  of  him.^^  The  Arabs  also  say
of  any  one  that  is  lost,  '^The'Anka  has  flown  off  with  him.’’
Arab.  Prov.  II.  25.  The  "Anka,  the  Persian  is  a

fabulous  bird,  which  is  supposed  to  dwell  on  the  Kaf,  or  moun¬
tain  barrier,  which  surrounds  the  world.


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  ASSEMBLY.

A  time  of  quiet. — 'ijut  is  weakness,  langour,  intermission  of
strength,  and  thus  signifies  a  time  when  the  fury  of  war
languishes,  an  interval  of  quiet,  a  truce.  Its  meaning  as  the
interval  between  two  prophets,  as  betwen  Jesus  and  Mohammed,
is  founded  on  Koran  v.  22.  The  frequent  political  disturbances
which  impoverished  Irak  io  Hariri’s  time  have  been  referred  to
in  the  Introduction,  and  will  be  found  more  fully  detailed  in
the  Introduction  to  the  second  edition  of  De  Sacy’s  Hariri.

The  sons  of  Al  Fur  at  were  a  family  highly  distinguished  in  the
civil  service  of  the  Khalifate  during  the  fourth  century.  They
followed  the  profession  of  mslidH  or  official  writing,  and  rose
to  the  highest  posts,  even  to  the  wazirate.  There  were  four
brothers  of  them  who  attained  to  eminence  during  the  reign  of
A1  Muktadir  b  ’illah,  namely  Ahmed  abu  ’1  'Abbas,  and  Abu  1
Hasan  Ali  and  Abu  'Abd  allah  Ja'far  and  Abii  'Isa  Ibrahim.
They  were  the  sons  of  Mohammed  ibn  Musa  ibn  al  Hasan  ibn
al  Purat,  who  was  an  agent  to  Ahmed  ibn  al  Hadib  the  wazir  of
the  Khalif  Al  Muntasir  son  of  Al  Mutewekkil,  a.h.  247.  The
most  celebrated  of  the  family  was  Abu  ’1  Hasan  'Ali,  who  was
three  times  wazir  to  Al  Muktadir.  His  life  is  to  be  found  in


470


MOTHS.


Ibn  Khallikan.  He  was  a  most  gifted  man,  and  an  excellent
administrator,  and,  tbougb  liberal  even  to  extravagance,  amassed
great  wealth.  When  he  was  dismissed  for  the  first  time,  a.h.  299
(a.d.  912),  the  Khalif  had  him  arrested  in  his  palace,  and
seized  on  all  his  wealth.  From  that  time  to  his  reinstatement  in
304  the  produce  of  his  estates  to  the  public  treasury  amounted
to  7,000,000  denars.  On  his  re-appointment  the  Khalif  showed
him  the  highest  favours,  sending  him  seven  cloaks  of  honour
and  300,000  dirhems  to  be  distributed  among  his  attendants.
He  continued  in  place  for  two  years,  but  was  then  arrested  a
second  time,  and  thrown  into  prison.  He  was  restored  to  his
post  for  the  third  time  in  311,  and  marked  his  resumption  of
office  by  acts  which  have  cast  a  stain  on  his  memory.  He
exacted  large  sums  from  many  persons,  and  allowed  his  son
Abu  ’1  Muhassin,  a  violent  young  man,  to  put  to  death  Hamid
ibn  al  'Abb4s,  the  late  wazir.  He  fell  for  the  third  time  the
next  year,  when  it  was  found  that  he  possessed  upwards  of  ten
millions  of  denars,  and  that  his  landed  property  produced  a
million  of  denars  annually.  A  few  days  later  he  and  his  son
Muhassin  were  put  to  death  by  Nazuk,  the  chief  of  the  police.
This  AbuT  Hasan  had  been  a  simple  Mtib^  and  was  first  raised
to  high  posts  together  with  his  brother  AbuT  'Abbas  by  the
Khalif  AI  Mo'taffid  for  drawing  up  a  financial  statement.  This
brother  died  some  years  before  in  291.  The  third  brother,  Ja'far,
was  offered  the  wazirate,  but  declined  it ;  it  w^as  then  given  to
his  son  Abu  T  Fath  ibn  Ja'far  in  320,  but  he  was  not  long  in
power,  for  Al  Muktadir  was  murdered  the  same  year,  and  the
wazir  concealed  himself  through  fear  of  Al  Kahir,  the  new
Khalif.  Abu  T  Fath,  however,  obtained  subsequent!}'^  the  govern¬
ment  of  Syria,  and  after  the  deposition  of  Al  Kahir,  was  ofiered
the  wazirate  by  Ar  Each ;  but  finding  the  State  in  confusion  he
prudently  returned  to  his  government.  The  son  of  Abu  T  Fath
was  AbuT  Fadl  Ja'far  ibn  al  Fadl,  called  like  himself  Al
Hinzaba  from  the  name  of  Abu  1  Fath’s  mother.
means  a  person  or  beast  of  short  and  strong  make).  Tliis  Ibn
Hinzaba,  whose  life  is  also  given  by  Ibn  Khallikan,  admin-


NOTES.


471


istered  Egypt  under  the  clever  and  strong-minded  negro  eunuch
Kafur,  the  patron  and  then  the  enemy  of  A1  Mutenebbi,  and  the
subject  of  his  praise  or  satire  in  some  of  his  most  interesting
poems.  This  family,  distinguished  generation  after  generation
for  official  and  administrative  skill,  might  well  be  spoken  of
as  models  of  excellence  by  one  of  their  own  profession,  like  the
author.  For  more  on  this  subject  see  Weil,  GeschicMe  der
Chalifen,  on  Al  Muktadir  b’illah,  II.  539.  Sherishi  gives  a
specimen  of  AbuT  Hasan's  wit.  Some  of  the  learned  were
maintaining  in  his  presence  the  untenable  doctrine  that  the  letter
may  in  all  cases  be  substituted  for  sad;  that,  in  fact,  the
two  letters  are  interchangeable.  Said  the  wazir,  Do  you  read
in  the  Koran,  ^  There  shall  enter  into  Paradise  ^

as  well  as  ^  Another  story  of  the  same  kind,  given

by  the  commentator,  is  that  An  Nadr  ibn  Shemil  was  sick,
and  a  number  of  his  friends  came  to  see  him,  among  them
a  certain  man  who  was  bye-named  Abu  Salih.  Said  Abu  Siilih
to  the  sick  man  U  You  should  use  the  sad,

not  the  sin/'  said  An  Nadr,  '^for  the  meaning  is,  ‘May  God
cause  the  sickness  to  depart,'  and  the  sad  is  according  to  the
speech  of  the  Arabs."  Abu  Salih  answered  that  the  sin  was
always  interchangeable  with  the  sdd,  and  instanced  1:^]^  and
and  JLi.  “  Are  you  then  Abti  Salih  ? "  said  the  sick
man.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  all  the  words  which  are  spelt
with  either  of  these  letters  indifferently  are  given  in  some  verses
of  the  46th  Assembly.

Al  Ka  kd  ibn  Shoivr,  a  man  of  the  Arabs  famous  for  his
generosity,  and  reckoned  with  Ka'b  ibn  Mameh  and  Hatim.  Of
him  it  is  said,  ''  No  ill-fate  has  he  who  sits  with  Al  Ka'ka',”
Arab.  Prov.  II,  540,  since  it  was  his  custom  to  relieve  all  who
visited  him.  Of  Ka'b  ibn  Mameh  there  are  several  proverbs.
It  is  said,  '^More  generous  than  Ka'b  ibn  Mameh."  His  act  of
generosity  was  the  same  as  that  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney  at
Zutphen.  He  was  in  a  caravan  in  the  desert  when  the  water
ran  short,  so  that  they  took  to  measuring  it  by  the  stone  called


472


NOTES.


;  tliat  is,  a  stone  was  pnt  into  the  cup,  into  which  was  then
poured  water  until  it  covered  the  stone,  so  that  every  one  might
have  an  equal  share.  This  stone  was  called  When

the  turn  came  for  Ka'h  to  drink  he  saw  a  man  of  the  tribe  of
An  Namir  ibn  Kasit  look  wistfully  on  him,  and  he  said  to  him
who  was  distributing,  Give  to  drink  to  thy  brother,’^  meaning
the  man  of  Namir,  and  himself  went  without.  The  next  day
he  saw  the  man  of  Namir  look  on  him  a  second  time,  and  he
gave  up  his  portion  again.  But  when  the  time  came  to  mount
he  could  not  move,  so  they  put  garments  over  him  to  scare  the
•beasts,  and  left  him  to  die.  His  father  indited  some  verses^’to
his  memory.  Hence  the  proverbs,  More  generous  than  Ka"b
ibn  Mameh,^^  Arab.  Prov.  I.  325.  Give  to  drink  to  thy
brother  the  Namiri,’^  608.  Another  proverb  attributed  to  Ka'b,
is  extant,  This  is  my  bleeding,’'  II.  867,  w^hich  he  uttered
when  in  captivity  among  the  tribe  of  'Anazeh,  II.  390.  He
had  been  told  by  the  mistress  of  the  house  to  bleed  the
camel  to  make  blood-puddings  for  the  guests.  Indignant  at
this  stinginess  he  had  killed  it ;  and  when  rated  by  the  honse-
wufe  he  uttered  the  above  saying.  But  this  story  is  also  told  of
Hatim,  with  the  addition  that  the  lady  slapped  his  face.  See
the  proverb,  If  any  other  bracelet-wearer  had  slapped  me,”
11.  465.  The  bleeding  of  the  live  camel  was  only  practised  by
the  hospitable  in  time  of  need.  Compare  Hamaseh,  p.  645,
''  The  noble  man  shuns  perfidy,  even  though  his  food  in  the
evening  be  a  portion  from  the  blood  of  vein-cutting.”  At  Arab.
Prov.  II.  441,  is  the  saying  ^^He  is  not  refused  who  has  the
blood  let  for  him.”  I  cannot  ascertain  whether  this  A1  Ka'ka  is
to  be  identified  with  the  bold  Moslem  warrior  of  the  time  of  the
Prophet  and  the  early  Khalifate,  who  took  Holwan  under  Sa"d
ibn  Abi  Wakkas,  and  negotiated  for  "Ali  with  Talhah  and
Az  Zobayr.

Plenty  after  Compare  the  use  of  this  expression  in

the  Thirty-fourth  Assembly,  near  the  beginning.

As  the  fingerto'p  is  above  the  finger :  a  proverbial  expression.

Lofty-sailed  boats. — The  ordinary  reading  at  Koran  Iv.  24,  is


NOTES.


473


with  the  fethy  though,  according  to  Baydawi,  both
Hamzeh  and  Abu  Bekr  read  with  hesr.  The  meaning,  however,  is
the  same,  whether  the  phrase  be  “  lifted  up  as  to  their  sails,’’  or
‘‘  lifting  up  their  sails.”  Sherishi  renders  the  word  by
which  Baydawi  also  gives  as  an  interpretation.  It  hardly
accords,  however,  with  the  context,  ^'on  the  sea,  like  mountains,”
or  masses  of  rock  that  served  as  way-marks  in  the  deserts.

I'kou  wouldst  think  it  immovable. — These  words  are  from
Koran  xxvii.  90,  Thou  shalt  see  the  mountains  which  thou
wouldst  think  immovable,  fleet  as  the  fleeting  of  the  clouds.”

the  deep. — Compare  Mo'allakah  of  Tarafeh,  v.  5.  It  is
there  explained  as  the  mass  or  bulk  of  the  water.

Out  cushion-saddle. — is  the  cushion  placed  on  the  back  of
the  camel,  under  the  saddle,  to  ease  the  motion.  But  accord¬
ing  to  Sherishi  and  the  commentator  quoted  by  De  Sacy,  there
is  an  allusion  to  the  word  meaning  a  saint  favourite  of
Gody  since  people  say,  Such  a  man  is  a  saint,  he  walks  on  the
water:”  it  being  the  belief  that  the  saints  have  such  a  power.
For  the  definition  of  this  word  see  TCirfdt.

Deemed  his  shadow  to  be  heavyy  etc. — i.e.  considered  his
presence  to  be  disagreeable.  The  is  he  who  wearies  you  by
his  company,  as  in  a  prolonged  visit.  According  to  'Ayisheh  it
was  on  account  of  such  persons  that  the  revelation  was  made,
(Koran  xxxiii.  53),  ‘^When  ye  have  eaten  separate.”  See  note
to  Fourth  Assembly,  near  the  end.  When  Abii  Ilurayrah  saw
one  of  these  he  exclaimed  Allahumma  (0  God),  forgive  him,
and  deliver  us  from  him.”  Also  Jiiliniis  (Galen)  when  asked
why  the  weight  of  a  bore’s  company  was  more  distressing  than
the  weight  of  a  burden  made  answer  that  the  weight  of  the
former  was  on  the  heart  alone,  while  in  bearing  a  material
burden  the  heart  was  aided  by  the  limbs.  There  is  a  disposition
among  Orientals  to  make  Galen  a  sort  of  sage ;  compare  one  of
the  stories  in  the  4th  chapter  of  the  Gulistan.  The  above  anec-
dotes  are  from  Sherishi.

He  praised  God  after  sneezingy  but  no  one  blessed  him. —
This  usage  was  once  common  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  the  East.


474


JSrOTES.


According  to  two  Traditions  the  Prophet  said,  If  when  one
of  you  sneezes  or  eructs  he  utters  the  words  ^  Praise  he  to  God/
he  averts  seventy  diseases,  the  least  of  which  is  (ele¬

phantiasis,  that  species  of  leprosy  which  causes  the  members  to
fall  off;  a  more  terrible  disease  than  haras) He  also  said,  If
one  of  you  sneeze  let  him  utter  ^Praise  be  to  God,’  and  let
those  who  salute  him  in  return  say,  ^  God  have  mercy  on
thee/  and  let  him  then  say,  (make

good  your  condition  in  religion  and  in  the  world  by  propitious
aid  and  strengthening) ;  see  Baydawi  on  Koran  xlvii.  2  and  6.
It  is  related  that  when  God  created  Adam  of  clay  he  ordei^d
the  human  soul  to  enter  his  body.  On  this  the  dry  clay
changed  at  once  into  bones,  flesh,  nerves,  and  the  other  con¬
stituents  of  man’s  body.  Adam,  awakening  to  life,  sneezed,  and
immediately  exclaimed,  Praise  to  God,”  and  Gabriel  answered,

God  have  mercy  on  thee,  Adam”  (Tabari).

The  help  which  comes  to  the  wronged, — Koran  xxii.  59.
Those  who  only  retaliate  according  to  the  injury  received,  will,
if  injured  in  return  for  the  retaliation,  be  assisted  by  God.

The  bye-paths  of  the  serious  and  the  gay, — are  the
tracks  in  a  wadi,  or  mountain  valley,  through  which  winter
torrents  flow.  The  first  who  used  the  expression,  The  tale  has
bye-paths,’'  that  is,  there  is  something  more  to  be  told  of
it,”  was  Dabbat  ibn  Udd  ibn  Tabikhah,  a  descendant  of  Modar.
The  history  is  given  by  llaydani,  Arab.  Prov.  I.  350.  Dabbah
had  two  sons,  Sa'd  and  Su'ayd,  and  when  one  of  his  camels
strayed  during  the  night  he  sent  them  in  search  of  her.  Sa'd
found  her,  and  when  he  brought  her  back  at  night  the  father
saw  a  figure  in  the  dark,  and  exclaimed,  Is  it  Sa'd  or  Sivayd?”
a  saying  that  became  proverbial,  and  is  used  in  the  sense  of
^  Is  it  the  one  or  the  other  ?”  as  when  A1  Hajjaj  asked  Kotaybet
ibn  Muslim,  on  the  latter  marrying  a  wife,  Is  it  Sad  or
Suayd?”  meaning,  Is  it  a  handsome  wife  or  an  ugly  one?”
Arab.  Prov.  I.  COl.  Su'ayd  wandered  in  search  of  the  camel,
and  fell  in  with  A1  Harith  ibn  Ka"b.  The  youth  had  on  two
mantles,  and  Harith  demanded  them;  when  Suayd  would  not


NOTES,


475


part  with  them,  Harith  killed  him  and  took  them.  Sometime
after  Dabbah  made  the  pilgrimage  (pagan)  to  Mecca,  and  came
to  the  fair  of'Okaz,  where  he  met  the  murderer  wearing  his  son’s
two  mantles.  He  recognized  them  and  said,  Wilt  thou  tell  where
thou  gottest  these  two  Harith  answered,  met  a  youth  who
wore  them  and  I  asked  him  for  them,  and  when  he  would  not  give
them  I  killed  him  and  took  them.’"  Dabbah  said,  Was  it  with
this  sword  of  thine  ?”  He  said  Yes.”  Said  Dabbah,  Give
it  me  to  look  at,  for  I  think  it  is  a  sharp  one.”  Harith  gave
it,  and  Dabbah,  brandishing  the  weapon,  exclaimed,  The  tale
has  bye-paths,”  meaning  There  is  something  more  in  it  than
thou  knowest.”  Then  at  once  he  slew  Harith  with  it.  And
when  it  was  said  to  him,  What,  Dabbah,  hast  thou  killed  him
in  the  sacred  month?”  he  answered,  The  sword  has  outstripped
remonstrance,”  which  also  became  proverbial :  Arab.  Prov.  I.  599.
Hariri’s  meaning  is  that  the  conversation  of  the  company  flowed
as  one  subject  suggested  another.

The  pen  of  m^respondencef  etc, — It  is  necessary  here  to  render
the  original  somewhat  freely.  may  be  either  an  orator,

choice  of  speech,  or  a  wooer  who  wins  hearts  by  his  elegant
diction.  is  the  gatherer  of  firewood,  who  puts  into  his

rope  all  tliat  he  can  find,  without  selection ;  and  is  thus  applied
to  one  who  uses  the  first  phrase  that  comes  to  hand  without  taste
or  judgment.  Compare  the  phrase,  One  who  gathers  wood  by
night,”  in  Hariri’s  Preface.

JoJiayneh  for  information — There  is  discrepancy  both  as  to  the
form  of  this  name  and  the  meaning.  It  is  read  not  only  as
above,  but  also  Jofayneh  and  Hofayneh,  the  former  being  on
the  authority  of  A1  Asma'i.  See  Arab.  Prov.  II.  71:  ^^With
Johayneh  is  the  certain  information.”  According  to  one  le¬
gend  he  was  a  wine-seller,  in  whose  tavern  two  men  had  quar¬
reled.  When  a  third  party  had  endeavoured  to  separate  them,
one  of  the  two  had  slain  him.  They  were  both  arrested,  and
when  the  judge  wished  to  learn  which  of  the  two  was  guilty,  he
said,  Bring  Jofayneh,  for  he  has  the  certain  information.”
According  to  Eisham  ibn  al  Kelbi,  the  story  is  as  follows  :  A1


476


NOTES,


Akhnas  ibn  al  Ka'b  was  a  man  of  Jobayneb,  who  for  some
act  that  be  committed  was  obliged  to  flee  from  bis  people.
He  met  with  Hosayn  ibn  ‘  Amr  ibn  Mo'awiat  ibn  Kilab,  or,  as
others  say,  another  Hosayn  of  Ghatafan,  who  bad  also  turned
vagabond ;  and  they  agreed  to  rob  together,  even  the  men  of
their  own  tribes.  The  adventure  which  followed  is  too  long  to
be  narrated  here :  it  will  be  found  in  Maydani  at  the  place
cited.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  man  of  Jobayneh  in  the  end
slew  his  companion,  and  took  all  the  booty.  In  returning  home
to  his  people,  with  the  view  of  reconciling  himself  with  them,  he
passed  two  sub-tribes  of  the  sons  of  Kays,  called  MerSj  and
Anmar,  and  a  woman  came  forth  who  was  seeking  Hosayn.
He  asked  who  she  was,  and  she  answered,  “  I  am  Sakhrah,  the
wife  of  Hosayn.”  He  said,  have  killed  him.''  She  said,
''  Thou  liest ;  such  an  one  as  thou  kills  not  such  an  one  as  he :
if  the  tribe  (or  the  men  of  it)  were  not  away,  thou  durst  not
have  spoken  thus."  Then  he  went  home  and  made  up  matters
with  his  tribe,  and  came  and  stood  where  he  might  be  heard,
and  declaimed  the  following  verses  : —

Of  how  many  a  lion,  tawny,  breaking  the  prey,  the  father  of  two  cubs,
whose  dwelling  is  the  thicket,

And  of  how  many  a  rider,  whom  thou  wonldest  not  despise  if  thine  eyes
were  to  light  where  he  had  fallen,

Have  I  cloven  the  topmost  skull  with  my  sword,  that  he  has  lain
motionless  on  the  plain  ;

And  his  wife  has  sorrowed  for  him,  wailing  in  the  night  without  rest ;

Like  Sakhrah,  when  she  questioned  Mer^j  and  Anm^r,  whose  know¬
ledge  was  only  guessing.

She  asked  each  band  of  travellers  concerning  Hosayn,  but  at  Johayneh
is  the  certain  information.

How  if  any  ask  concerning  him,  know  that  I  can  tell  him  all  clearly.

Johayneh  is  my  tribe,  a  race  of  kings  ;  when  they  seek  lofty  deeds  they
are  not  abased.

Sherishi  quotes  these  verses  differently,  and  makes  Sakhrah
the  sister  of  Hosaj^n.  On  hearing  her  inquiries  Al  Akhnas
utters  the  verses.  The  names  of  the  tribes  are  also  given  as
Merab  and  Jarm.

Lokmdn  of  wisdom, — Lokman  the  Wise,  the  contemporary  of
David,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  Lokman  of 'Ad,  though  some-


NOTES.


47T


times  confounded  with  him  even  by  Arabs.  The  two  have  been
mentioned  in  a  former  note.  Lokman  the  Wise  is  spoken  of
at  Koran  xxxi.  11.  He  was  not  a  prophet,  but  he  instructed
Ms  son  An  am,  or  Ashkam,  or  Mathan  in  the  worship  of  the  one
true  God.  The  descriptions  of  Mm  by  the  Arabs  have  a  great
resemblance  to  those  of  JEsop.  He  is  represented  as  a  black,
very  ugly  in  person,  and  a  slave,  and  it  is  probable  that  the
traditions  concerning  JSsop  were,  like  the  fables,  attributed  to
this  mythical  sage,  unless,  indeed,  we  hold  the  legends  con¬
cerning  iEsop  to  be  themselves  late  inventions,  and  borrowed
frcfm  the  East.

Foes  are  vanquished. — Literally,  the  forelocks  are  mastered.’^
The  Arabs,  when  they  took  prisoners,  were  accustomed  to  cut
off  the  front  hair  and  carry  it  in  their  quivers.  Hence,  at  Koran
xi.  59,  ‘^to  take  by  the  forelock’’  means,  to  have  absolute
authority.  Nobles  also  are  called  the  foi'elochs,  or  chiefs  of  the
people.

Enriches  the  overseer — wearies  the  eye. — This  use  of  in  a
double  sense  is  to  be  found  in  the  opening  address  of  the
Thirteenth.

Fraud  would  endure  to  the  Day  of  Judgment. — This  is  an  allu¬
sion  to  Koran  Ixiv.  9,  where  the  Day  of  Judgment  is  called  the

Day  of  Mutual  Defrauding,”  since  then  men  will  defraud  or
supplant  one  another,  the  just  taking  the  place  that  the  wicked
have  had,  and  conversely.

The  pen  of  accounting  interprets. — JJtj  like  is  the

expounding  of  the  real  essential  meaning  of  a  thing,  that  to
which  it  comes  or  may  be  reduced.

An  Abu  Bardkish.—^hi^  is  a  bird  of  gaudy  and  changing
plumage,  and  is  therefore  used  as  a  similitude  for  a  clever  but
unsteady  writer.  M.  de  Sacy,  in  his  Ohrestomathie  Arabe,
Vol.  III.  p.  499,  sec.  ed.,  says  that  it  is  probably  a  species  of
heron.  He  then  gives  the  following  description  from  Kazwini :

The  Abu  Barakish  is  a  bird  with  a  pleasant  voice ;  its  neck
and  feet  are  long,  its  beak  red,  and  it  is  about  the  size  of  a
stork ;  its  plumage  changes  every  instant  to  the  eye,  showing


478


NOTES.


red,  yellow,  green,  and  blue.  So  that  a  poet  has  said,  ^  He  is
like  the  Abu  Barakish,  he  can  take  all  colours.’^"  In  Lane’s
Lexicon  it  is  said  to  be  a  small  wild  bird,  like  a  lark,  which,
when  it  is  provoked,  ruffles  its  feathers,  and  becomes  variously
changed  in  colour.  The  Abu  Barakish  is  used  figuratively,  like
the  lizard  Abu  Kalamun,  to  express  a  person  of  variable  disposi¬
tion  :  compare  the  Latin  term  sfellionatus,  a  fraud  or  swindle,
from  stelUo.  A  kind  of  shot  silk  also  had  these  names  from  its
changes  of  colour.  Barakish  is  an  ancient  Arab  name.  In  the
proverb,  ‘^Barakish  sins  against  her  people”  (Arab.  Prov.
II.  89),  the  name  is  variously  explained  as  that  of  a  bit/^h,
which  betrayed  the  place  of  a  tribe’s  retreat  by  her  barking  ;  as
the  wife  of  a  king  who  allowed  her  damsels  needlessly  and  in
jest  to  kindle  the  signal-fire  for  the  assembling  of  the  troops  ;
and,  thirdly,  as  a  wife  of  Lokman  of  'Ad  who  persuaded  her
husband  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  camel,  so  that  by  the  voracity
of  himself  and  his  people  the  camels  of  her  own  tribe  were
destroyed.  This  and  numberless  similar  appellations  of  animals
among  the  Arabs  are  of  the  nature  of  proper  names,  and  may
be  compared  with  the  Kenard  the  Fox,  Ysengrin  the  Wolf,
Chantecler  the  Cock,  of  our  medieval  fables.

Save  those  that  believe y  etc. — Koran  xxxviii.  23.  is  a

word  corresponding  with  Xol,  and  signifies  the  making  one’s  self
secure  and  trustful  in  God.  U  is  augmentative  to  express
indefiniteness  or  wonder.

After  a  time  I  recollected  him. — Koran  xii.  45.  For  the
meanings  of  see  Lane.  The  various  readings  and  inter¬
pretations  given  by  Baydawi  at  the  above  passage  of  the  Koran
cannot  apply  to  xi.  11,  where  the  meaning  is  clearly  a  certain  time.

After  whose  fashioning.^krfAy.  Prov.  I.  314.  Compare
Koran,  xix.  28.

Whose  sprite.— place  named  was  a  residence  of  the
Jinn,  so  that  whoever  does  a  thing  wonderfully  or  beautifully  is
said  to  be  'Abkari,  i.e.,  a  sprite  of  'Abkar.  The  Jinn  were
supposed  to  haunt  desolate  regions,  particularly  those  which  had
.been  the  home  of  wicked  races  of  men  destroyed  by  God.  Such


NOTES.


479


was  the  region  called  Yabrin,  and  the  region  called  Wahar,  which
lay  between  it  and  Yemen,  and  was  named  after  Wabar,  son  of
Irem  son  of  Shem.  'Abkar  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  region  of
Yemameh.  The  'Abkar  spoken  of  by  Imr  al  Kays  (Diwan,
p.  26  Ar.  Text),  seems  to  have  no  connection  with  the  home
of  the  Jinn.  The  poet  compares  the  sonnd  of  the  pebbles
scattered  by  the  hoofs  of  his  camel  to  the  sound  of  coin  examined
on  a  table  in  'Abkar.  The  Arabs  used  the  word  Jinn  to  express
the  spirit  or  energy  of  a  man :  compare  Hamaseh,  p.  182,
where  a  poet  says,  ^^My  Jinn  have  not  fled,  my  file  is  not
blunted,  my  birds  have  not  drooped  from  fear/'  In  the  com¬
mentary  to  this  verse  it  is  said  that  according  to  Abu  "Ala
the  Arabs  compare  an  energetic  man  to  a  Jinni  or  a  Shay  tan.
This  and  the  foregoing  expression  are  taken  from  a  Tradition
of  the  Prophet  which  is  given  by  Sherishi  as  follows  ; — Said  the
Prophet,  I  saw  in  a  dream  is  if  I  stood  by  a  well,  and  looked
at  the  people;  then  came  Abu  Bekr,  and  drew  a  bucket  or
two,  and  grew  weak  with  it,  and  God  forgave  him  ;  then  came
'Omar,  and  the  bucket  (c-jy  J)  turned  into  larger  bucket  (^-^)
in  his  hand,  and  I  never  saw  such  an  'Abkari  among  men,
v/orking  as  he  worked,  until  the  people  were  watered  and  at  rest.

(jwUl  ^

The  original  meaning  of  is  a  cut  or  stroke,  as  you  say  of  a
strong  man  who  severs  a  bar  of  wood  with  his  sword,  No  one
can  strike  his  stroke.”

A  heated  eye — a  ship's  companionship. — The  first  of  these
expressions  denotes  anger,  dislike,  or  contempt;  the  second
is  a  modern  phrase,  meaning  a  short-lived  acquaintance,  such  as
is  made  during  a  voyage,  and  ceases  at  the  end  of  it.

The  sewer,  the  latrma. — For  the  various  names  of  this  place
see  what  Sherishi  is  pleased  to  call  a  pretty  story,  in  De  Sacy’s
commentary  to  the  Forty-seventh  Assembly.  The  original
meaning  is  a  garden.  The  metre  of  these  verses  is  hdmiL

Drooped  his  eyelid  over  his  mote.  Was  silent  in  shame  and
repentance.


480


JSWTUS.


THE  TWENTY-THIRD  ASSEMBLY.

The  Kata  would  not  find  its  way. —  It  is  related  of  the  bird
Kata  that  it  will  leave  its  chicks  at  dawn  and  go  to  drink  at  a
place  a  night’s  march  off,  and  will  return,  bringing  water  to  the
chicks,  in  the  forenoon ;  that  again  in  the  early  afternoon  it  will
fly  to  the  place  once  more,  returning  to  bring  water  a  second
time  in  the  evening ;  in  doing  this  it  never  loses  its  way  to  the
nest.

The  domain  of  the  Khalifate. — ^The  original  meaning  of
is  a  place  of  pasture  or  of  water  taken  by  some  chief  or  power¬
ful  person,  and  prohibited  to  others.  Thus  Kolayb  Wa’il,
the  powerful  chief  of  the  Nejd,  had  his  in  the  district

of  Kasim,  and  would  allow  no  cattle  to  be  pastured  where  the
sound  of  his  dog’s  bark  could  be  heard  (see  note  to  Sixteenth
Assembly).  According  to  the  authors  cited  in  Lane’s  Lexicon,
others  did  this :  It  was  a  custom  of  the  noble  among  the
Arabs  in  the  time  of  the  Ignorance,  when  he  alighted  in  a  district
that  pleased  him,  to  incite  a  dog  to  bark,  and  to  prohibit  for  his
own  special  friends  or  dependents  the  space  throughout  which
the  bark  of  the  dog  was  heard,  while  he  shared  with  the  people
in  the  other  places  of  pasture  around  it.  But  the  Prophet  for¬
bade  this  and  said,  ^  There  shall  be  no  except  for  God  and
his  Apostle,’  meaning  except  for  the  horses  employed  in  war
against  the  unbelievers,  and  the  camels  taken  for  the  poor  rate.”
In  the  present  passage  it  signifies  merely  the  Imperial  domain
or  Court,  that  is,  the  city  of  Bagdad.

The  Precinct. — is  an  open  space  round  a  castle,  in  which
horses  are  exercised  and  the  public  meet ;  or  it  may  be  a  space
round  a  city.

Sitting  squarely.  That  is,  he  sat  upon  his  buttocks  with  his
legs  equally  crossed,  which  is  a  dignified  position,  as  distin¬
guished  from  he  sat  with  his  knees  on  the  ground  and  his
buttocks  resting  on  his  heels,  or  on  the  left  foot  bent  sideways
beneath,  which  is  the  position  of  those  who  argue  together,  as


NOTES.


481


the  plaintiff  and  defendant  in  a  suit ;  and  also  as  distiiignislied
from  he  sat  on  his  buttocks,  leaning  back,  and  having  his
feet  on  the  ground  and  his  knees  raised.

Set  his  foot  on  high.Sei  his  or  ankle,  on  high,  so

that  the  lowest  part  of  him  may  be  higher  than  the  highest  part
of  his  companions.  The  word  also  has  received  the  significa¬
tion  of  honour  by  which  a  man  is  established  and  made  firm,  as
on  his  ankle;  thus  it  is  said,  Grod  exalt  his  ka'b,^’  and  The
ka*b  of  the  tribe  is  gone,”  that  is  their  fortune  and  reputation.

Made  fruitful:  fecundated  by  instruction,  as  the  female  palm
tree  is  fecundated  by  the  spadix  of  the  male,  which  is  bruised
and  sprinkled  upon  it,  or  ‘‘by  the  insertion  of  a  stalk  of  a
raceme  of  the  male  tree  into  the  spathe  of  the  female,  after
shaking  off  the  pollen  of  the  former  upon  the  spadix  of  the
female.”  (Lane  on  y}).  But  according  to  Sherishi  it  means

he  drank  the  milk  of  my  that  is,  of  my  milch  camel.”

Broken  the  stajf. — It  was  said  of  one  who  became  a  heretic  or
introduced  discord  that  he  broke  the  staff  of  the  Moslems,”
and  shuhk  al  \sa  became  a  synonym  for  schism.  When  one
quarrelled  with  his  tribe,  and  left  it,  he  was  said  to  break  its
staff.”  Hariri  uses  the  phrase  more  literally  here  in  the  sense
pf  injuring,  since  one  is  injured  when  his  staff,  which  is  his
strength,  is  broken.

The  rcliite  and  yellow  :  silver  and  gold  coin.

Bid  he  flay,  or  transform,  or  copy. — Plagiarism,  forms  a
division  of  the  Arabic  rhetoric,  since  the  critics  have  sought  to
lay  down  rules  strictly  defining  how  far  it’  is  admissible.  A
sufficient  exposition  of  the  subject  is  given  in  the  Mukhtasar  al
Ma'ani  (Calcutta,  1813),  p.  651.  M.  Garcin  de  Tassy's  trans¬
lation  of  the  Persian  treatise  hadd'ik  al  haldghah,  Paris,  1844,
may  also  be  advantageously  consulted.  In  this  and  the  follow¬
ing  notes  I  have  referred  to  the  Mukhtasar,  or  shorter  com¬
mentary,  instead  of  the  Mutawwal,.  or  longer  commentary,  of
which  I  have  a  printed  edition,  because  the  former  is  more
accessible,  and  quite  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  the  student.
Plagiarism  is  divided  into  apparent  and  hidden;  the  former


31


482


NOTJES,


being  that  whicli  one  will  detect  by  baying  tbe  two  passages
before  him,  the  other  that  which  conceals  itself  in  an  apparent
variety  of  thought ;  or,  as  it  is  defined  in  the  Mukhtasar,  the
apparent  is  that  which  borrows  the  whole  meaning,  whether  it
uses  all  the  words  of  the  original  or  not.  When  the  entire
passage  is  taken  without  a  change,  even  in  the  disposition  of  the
words,  this  is  blameable,  for  it  is  pure  stealing,  and  is  called
copying,  or  the  arrogation  to  one's  self  of  another's

yerse.  'Abdallah  ibn  Az  Zobayr  did  this  with  two  verses  of
Man  ibn  Ows,  reciting  them  in  the  presence  of  Mu'awiyeh  ;
but  before  he  had  left  the  Khalifs  presence,  Ma'n  came  in  and
recited  a  kasideh  of  his  composition,  in  which  these  very  verses
occurred.  The  Khalif  turned  to  Abdallah  and  said,  Didst
thou  not  say  that  they  were  thine?"  upon  which  Abdallah  was
forced  to  make  a  weak  excuse.  If  the  plagiary  change  some  or
all  of  the  words  of  a  verse  into  words  of  corresponding  meaning
and  measure,  this  is  also  blameable,  being  still  pure  stealing.
This  act,  according  to  De  Sacy's  commentary,  is  called  ^  or
flaying,  and  the  same  verse  of  A1  Hati'eh  is  quoted  both  in  the
commentary  and  in  the  Mukhtasar;  but,  as  we  shall  see,  the
latter  work  gives  the  definition  of  flaying"  to  the  mere
borrowing  of  the  author's  meaning,  without  any  imitation  of
words.  If  then,  according  to  the  Mukhtasar,  the  plagiary  uses
corresponding  words,  or  if  he  takes  all  the  original  author’s
words,  merely  changing  their  disposition,  or  if  he  takes  some  of
his  words,  this  is  called  making  foray,  or  tTanforma-
lion,  a  word  used  of  metamorphosis  into  a  lower  form,  as  of  a
man  into  a  beast.  In  the  two  latter  cases  it  is  not  essentially
blameable,  and  may  be  atoned  for  if  the  new  verse  be  better  than
the  old  one.  In  the  Mukhtasar  there  follow  examples  from  the
poems  of  Abu  Tenimam,  A1  Bohtori,  and  A1  Mutenebbi.  Finally,
if  the  plagiary  takes  the  meaning  alone,  this  is  occu2oation,
because  he,  as  it  were,  comes  and  takes  possession  of  the  idea ;
or  fl^yi'^gi  because  he  strips  off  the  skin  of  diction  which
clothed  the  idea,  and  gives  it  a  new  one  of  his  own.  Similarly,
this  may  be  excusable  or  blameable,  according  as  a  better  or


NOTES.


483


worse  verse  is  produced.  The  species  of  borrowing  called
which  consists  in  introducing  phrases  of  the  Koran  or
the  Traditions,  which  are  well  known,  is  not  hlameable  ;  nor  is
or  the  insertion  of  verses  or  hemistiches  from  other  poets,
if  it  be  done  honestly,  and  without  an  intention  to  claim  them  as
one’s  own.  I  may  here  observe  that  ^  and  have  a  cor¬
respondence  in  meaning,  which  is  shared  by  and
According  to  Sherishi,  the  first  means  to  change  from  lower  to
higher,  the  second  from  higher  to  lower,  as  the  metamorphosis
of  a  man  into  a  beast ;  the  third  signifies  the  changing  of  an
animal  into  an  inanimate  object,  while  the  fourth  is  absolute
corruption  or  wasting  away.  Of  the  verses  quoted  in  De  Sacy’s
commentary  as  an  instance  of  Faris  ash  Shidyak,  who
criticises  the  work  very  severely,  says  that  the  word  at  the  end
of  the  first  line  should  be  and  at  the  end  of  the  second,
from  J,  he  ate  voraciously.  He  is  probably  right,  though
in  the  Mukhtasar  it  is  written  as  by  De  Sacy.  See
vie  et  les  aventures  de  Fariak,”  p.  16  of  last  chapter.  According
to  Sherishi,  the  divisions  of  plagiarism  mentioned  by  Hariri
are  according  to  the  system  of  Abu  Mohammed  al  Hosayn  ibn
Wakf,  who  wrote  on  the  plagiarisms  of  Al  Mutenebbi,  and
divided  them  into  twenty  classes,  ten  of  which  are  excusable.
These  classes  Sherishi  gives,  with  instances  of  each,  but  the
matter  is  too  long  to  be  treated  in  these  notes.

Poetry  the  reyister  of  the  A7'ads. — This  was  a  saying  of  Ibn
'Abbas,  the  cousin  of  the  Prophet,  and  the  greatest  of  the  early
expounders  of  the  Koran.  He  was  accustomed  to  quote  passages
of  the  ancient  poets  in  support  of  his  explanations,  and  to  say,
When  ye  have  a  difficulty  in  the  Koran,  look  for  its  solution  to
the  poems,  for  these  are  the  registers  of  the  Arabs.’"  It  was  also
attributed  to  Mohammed,  perhaps  by  the  relation  of  Ibn  'Abb^s
himself,  who  desired  to  maintain  the  study  of  poetry  amid  the
early  fanaticism  of  Islam.  It  is  said,  God  distinguished  the
Arabs  by  four  things  :  they  have  turbans  for  crowns,  and
loops,  (see.  16th  Assembly,  'they  loosed  their  loops  to
me’)  for  walls,  that  is  as  supports  for  their  backs;  and  swords


484


JV'OTHS.


for  scarves,  and  poetry  for  their  registers/’  This  was  said  because
they  were  in  the  habit  of  referring  to  poems  when  they  difiered
about  genealogies,  wars,  and  the  like.

Made  Here  Hariri  uses  the  technical  term  of  the

rhetoricians.

0  thou  who  These  verses  are  of  the  second  darb

of  the  first  \rud  of  the  kdmil,  which  is  The  measure  of

the  darb  is  since  the  last  letter  of  the  is

dropped,  and  the  letter  before  it  quiesces,  so  that  the  foot
becomes  J.cU^  =  The  part  of  each  verse  which  the

son  is  accused  of  appropriating  forms  a  verse  in  which  the  ^cs^d
is  and  the  darb  is,  of  the  normal

without  any  change  from  or

Turned  the  hack  of  the  shield  :  became  hostile  after  being
friendly.  This  expression  is  found  again  in  the  Fortieth
Assembly.

To  draw  at  the  same  source, — The  word  dff  is  used  tech¬
nically  by  the  rhetoricians  to  signify  the  chance  agreement  of
two  poets  in  thought  or  words,  when  there  has  been  no  imitation
of  the  first  by  the  second.  This  and  the  following  expression,

as  the  hoof  oft  falls  on  the  hoof-print,’^  are  attributed  to
A1  Mutenebbl,  who,  being  reproached  for  borrowing  from  his
predecessors  said,  Poetry  is  a  hippodrome  and  poets  are  steeds,
and  there  may  be  a  coincidence  of  thought,  as  the  hoof  oft
falls  on  the  hoof-print.”  ■

Terse-completing, — was  in  all  times  a  favourite  intel¬
lectual  exercise  of  the  Arabs,  whose  powers  of  improvisation
were  marvellous.  It  is  when  two  poets  contend  by  one  reciting
a  verse  which  the  other  must  follow  with  another  of  the  same
metre  and  rhyme,  and  with  a  continuous  sense;  the  former
then  has  to  give  a  third,  and  so  on,  till  it  is  shown  which  has
the  greater  imagination  and  promptitude.  Sometimes  one  uttered
half  a  verse,  which  the  other  had  to  complete.  Imr  al  Kays  was
accustomed  to  challenge  those  who  claimed  the  reputation  of
poets  to  compete  with  him.  Once  he  challenged  Tow’am  the
Yeshkeri,  and  said. to  him,  ^^If  thou  be  a  poet  complete  the


NOTES,


485


verses  wMcli  I  shall  utter/’  and  lie  began  Dost  thou  see  the
flash  gleaming  in  the  night  Tow’ am  continued,  “  Like  a
Mage’s  fire  it  blazes  a  blaze.”  ^  Imr  al  Kays  :  I  was  wakeful
to  observe  while  slept  Ab-u  Shorayh.”  Tow’am  :  As  oft  as
I  said  ^  It  now  ceases  ’  it  flashed  abroad.’^  Imr  al  Kays  :  Its
sound  was  as  a  murmur  in  a  place  unseen  Tow’am,  Like  the
she-camels  lowing  wildly  when  they  meet  the  herd.”  The
poem  is  given  in  the  Diwan  of  Imr  al  Kays,  p.  41,  Arab.  Text,
When  the  poet  found  that  he  had  an  equal  he  bound  himself
by  an  oath  never  again  to  contend  in  poetry.  'Akil  ibn  'Ul-
lafeh,  a  poet  of  Koraysh,  and  a  man  in  high  esteem,  since  the
Ehalif  Yezid  ibn  "Abd  al  Melik  married  one  of  his  daughters,
amused  himself  on  a  journey  by  thus  improvising  verses  with  his
son  and  daughter.  He  recited  a  verse,  then  his  son  followed  it  with
another,  and  his  daughter  with  a  third,  all  being  in  the  metre
taiuU.  Unfortunately  one  of  his  daughter  s  verses  was  as  fol¬
lows  :  They  were  giddy,  as  though  drowsiness  had  given  them
to  drink  of  the  wine  Sarkhad,  the  dark  red  wine,  that  (when  thou
drinkest  it)  courses  through  back  and  feet.”  The  father  exclaimed,
By  Allah,  thou  couldst  never  have  so  described  it  unless  thou
hadst  drunk  of  it,”  and  at  once  gave  her  a  flogging.  The  son^
indignant,  shot  at  his  father  with  an  arrow,  and  left  him  wounded
on  the  ground,  taking  away  his  sister.  'Aldl,  however,  was  not
displeased  with  his  children’s  spirit,  and  uttered  some  verses  in
rejezj  which  contain  a  quotation  from  Abu  Akhzam,  a  person  who
was  treated  in  the  same  way  by  a  son.  See  the  proverb,  ‘‘  I  know
the  disposition  is  from  Akhzam.”  Ar.  Prov.  I.,  658,  and  Forty-
fourth  Assembly.  For  the  above  story  of  'Akil  see  p.  646  of  the
Hamaseh,  in  which  several  of  his  verses  are  quoted.  *  Al  Faraz-
dak,  the  poet,  also  practised  this  kind  of  poetical  exercise.

Tejms :  paronomasia  or  alliteration,  or  signi¬

fies,  literally,  the  use  in  a  sentence  of  two  or  more  words  com¬
pletely  or  partially  conformable.  It  belongs  to  the  third  part  of
rhetoric,  which  is  called  the  science  of  the  first  two  parts
being  the  science  of  or  significations,  and  the  science  of

or  exposition.  It  would  be  useless  to  attempt  here  .  an


486


NOTES.


explanation  of  the  various  classes  into  which  tejiiis  is  divided  by
the  rhetoricians,  who  distinguish  between  the  conformity  of  words
which  have  a  common  root  and  the  conformity  of  those  which
have  not ;  between  the  conformity  of  words  according  as  they
do  or  do  not  belong  to  the  same  part  of  speech  ;  between  the
conformity  of  two  words  and  the  conformity  of  one  word  with
another  and  part  of  a  third ;  between  conformity  of  both  sound
and  written  character  and  conformity  of  sound  alone  ;  who,
in  short,  have  analysed  the  art  and  given  names  to  its  every
variety.  Those  who  desire  to  become  acquainted  with  the
subject  will  find  it  fully  treated  in  the  Mukhtasar,  p.  621.  The
science  of  the  third  part  of  rhetoric,  is  concerned  with  the
embellishment  of  discourse,  and  is  divided  into  two  parts,
and  ;  the  first  treating  of  antithesis,  hyperbole,  and  the
like ;  and  the  second  having  to  do  with  words,  and  expounding
not  only  all  that  may  be  included  under  the  head  of  loaronomada,
but  all  the  artifices  of  rhyme  and  orthography  of  which  examples
may  be  found  in  Hartrfs  work.  See  Jj,  Mukh¬
tasar,  p.  631 ;  p.  637  p.  642 ;  p,  644 ;

that  is  the  construction  of  a  poem  in  which  a  part  of  each  verse
may  be  taken  away,  as  in  the  present  Assembly,  p.  645.  In  the
treatise  translated  by  M.  Garcin  de  Tassy  mention  is  made
of  compositions  with  pointed  or  unpointed,  with  joined  or  dis¬
joined  letters.  The  Arabs  have  taken  great  pains  to  record  all
the  instances  of  tejnzs  which  appear  in  the  Koran.  Most  of
these,  however,  are  evidently  spontaneous  and  unconscious,
and  are  far  from  resembling  the  laboured  artifices  of  subsequent
generations.  Among  these  may  be  cited  xxvii.  22;  xxx.  54,
55;  c.  7,  8;  civ.  1.  The  last  is  rather  an  instance  of
The  word  IcSj  is  used  by  the  Governor  in  the  general  sense
of  eloquence ;  but  in  the  technical  language  of  the  rhetoricians
it  signifies  the  first  two  divisions  of  the  art  of  rhetoric,  which
have  for  their  object  the  avoiding  of  error  in  bringing  our  con¬
ceptions  to  the  minds  of  others.  The  treatise  of  Naslf  al  Yazaji,
called  *Akd  al  Juman,  is  a  good  compendium  on  this  subject
from  its  terseness  and  the  clearness  of  its  definitions.


NOTUS.


487


Dark  red  of  lip,  —  A  dark  red,  verging  on  blackness,  in  the
inner  part  of  the  lip  was  looked  upon  as  beautiful  by  the  Arabs.

The  winning  steed—  the  second  in  the  course, — The  horses  in  a
race  had  epithets  according  to  the  order  in  which  they  arrived  at
the  winning-post.  In  the  Hamaseh,  p.  46,  Arab.  Text,  these
names  are  given  in  two  different  ways.  In  one  list  the  first
horse  is  called  sabik  or  mujelU,  because  he  makes  his  owner
illustrious  or  conspicuous ;  the  second  is  calleH  miisalU,  because
his  head  is  on  the  of  the  preceding  horse  ;  the  third,  muselli,
because  he  consoles  his  owner.  The  fourth  is  called  tali ;  the
fiftli,  murtah ;  the  sixth,  the  seventh,  mvJammal ;  the  eighth,
liazi ;  the  ninth,  latim,  because  he  is  driven  away  with  buffets  ;
and  the  tenth,  sickayt.  But,  according  to  other  authorities,
seven  out  of  the  ten  horses  were  entitled  to  a  share  of  the  prize,
in  analogy  with  the  game  of  may  sir ;  and,  the  names  of  the  first
three  remaining  as  in  the  last  list,  the  fourth  was  called  ^dti/,
the  fifth  murtah,  the  sixth  haft,  the  seventh  miHammal,  The
three  horses  which  gained  nothing  were  called  laftm,  wagkd,
and  sukayt,  Sherishi  ascribes  to  A1  Asmah  the  derivation  of
musalli,  which  has  been  given,  and  he  relates  that  a  man  versed
in  the  traditions  of  the  Arabs  explained  the  meanings  of  all  the
terms  to  the  Khalif  Muttald.  He  also  quotes  some  verses  of  Ibn
al  Anbari,  which  unite  all  these  epithets.  They  are  the  same  as
in  the  first  list  of  the  Hamaseh,  except  that  haft  is  placed  before
mu'ammal:  Nasif  al  Yazaji  has  also  united  them  in  some  verses
of  his  sixth  Assembly ;  but  he  makes  the  eighth  horse  khati,
probably  a  misprint.  The  list  in  •  De  Sacy's  commentary  varies
from  these,  and  gives  the  name  of  fskil  to  the  last  horse.

There  is  a  ruddy-lipped  Metre  tawil,  represents

the  same  quality  as  the  having  a  lip  of  a  dark  ruddiness,
approaching  to  blackness.  In  some  lines  quoted  at  p,  425,  De
Sacy’s  ed.,  Al  Bohtori  couples  and  '^dark-lipped,’'

and  "having  eyes  of  strongly  contrasted  black  and  white,”  as
marks  of  beauty.  Tarafeh  (Mo'allakah,  v.  6)  says,  "  In  the
tribe  is  a  dark-lipped  one,  like  a  fawn  that  browses  on  the  fruit
of  the  ardk,  wearing  two  necklaces  of  the  pearl  and  the  topaz.”


488


NOTES.


These  lines,  according  to  the  Governor  s  desire,  are  full  of  plays
on  words  and  alliterations.  In  connection  with  this  kind  of
composition  the  student  is  referred  to  the  poem  of  At  Tantarani
and  De  Sacy's  notes  thereon.  Chrest.  Arabe,  Yol.  11.

Gathers  the  deiv  of  her  is  here  a  masdar,  with

the  sense  of  suckmg  or  draining.  That  the  expression  is  not
to  be  understood  (juite  figuratively  is  shown  by  many  passages  of
the  Arab  poets.

Like  a  pair  of fire-stares  in  their  case. — Hariri  uses  this  proverb
merely  to  express  resemblance  between  the  two,  but  as  commonly
used  it  is  not  significant  of  praise,  but  of  contempt.  See  Arab.
Prov.  1.  585,  A  pair  of  fire-staves  in  a  patched  bag;^’  and  II.
432,  There  is  nothing  in  his  quiver  but  a  pair  of  fire-staves
used  of  weak  and  worthless  persons.  Another  proverbial  expres¬
sion  for  complete  equality  or  resemblance  is,  Ye  are  as  the
two  knees  of  the  male  camel, a  saying  uttered  by  Harim  ibn
Kotbah,  the  Fez^ri,  when  he  was  made  judge  in  the  mundfarah
between  "Amir  ibn  Tofayl  and  "Alkamat  ibn  'Olatheh.  See
De  Sacy’s  commentary  to  Twenty-sixth  Assembly ;  also  Arab.
Prov.  IL  861.  The  subject  has  been  mentioned  in  a  former
note  to  this  volume.  The  calling  the  father  and  son  a  pair
of  fire-staves,”  may  have  reference  to  the  often  repeated  meta¬
phor  of  eliciting  a  spark,  in  the  sense  of  producing  an  original
idea.

Spends  of  what  God  has  given  him. — Koran  Ixv.  7.

Pardon  thy  brother. — Metre  kdmil.

Threw  me  off.—j?^j  is  literally  to  startle  a  bird,  so  that  it  flies
away.  The  j^\j  was  one  who  took  omens  from  the  flight  of
birds,  which  he  frightened  by  making  a  noise  or  throwing  a
stone.

The  Pay  of  Fear. — The  day  of  death  or  resurrection.

Roha.--kr  Eoha  was  the  name  given  by  the  Arab  conquerors
to  the  city  of  Edessa,  in.  northern  Mesopotamia;  a  place  which,
under  various  names,  has  preserved  its  importance  from  the
beginning  of  history  to  the  present  times.  It  is  identified  b}’-
some  with  Ur  of  the  Chaldees;  and  tradition  acribes  its  found-


NOTES.


489


ation  to  Nimrod.  Natural  advantages,  and  particularly  the
large  supply  of  water,  marked  it  at  an  early  period  as  a  fit
spot  for  settlement,  and  it  may  contend  with  Damascus  for*
the  honour  of  being  the  most  ancient  city  in  Western  Asia.
Under  the  Seleucidae  it  was  called  Callirhoe  or  Antiochea.  Its
monarch  Abgarus  is  associated  with  a  well-known  Christian
legend.  The  position  which  it  holds  in  the  history  of  the  early
Christian  Church,  and  of  the  Syriac  language,  needs  only  to
be  alluded  to.  At  one  time  it  is  said  to  have  had  300  monas¬
teries.  It  was  conquered  by  the  Arabs  in  the  first  days  of
the  Khalifate,  and  is  said  by  Sherishi  to  have  received  the  name
of  Ar  Eoha  from  Eoha  ibn  al  Belendi  ibn  Malik,  who  settled
there.  It  was  captured  during  the  first  Crusade,  and  became
a  Christian  principality  under  Baldwin,  brother  of  Godfrey,  who
Tilled  it  from  1097  to  1100,  before  he  became  king  of  Jerusalem.
It  was  thus  in  Frankish  hands  at  the .  time  the  Assemblies
were  composed,  and  there  is  a  propriety  in  making  Abu  Zayd
speak  of  it  as  a  place  of  refuge.  It  was  afterwards,  under
the  reign  of  Joscelin  11. ,  captured  by  the  Sultan  "“Imad  ad
Din,  who  committed  frightful  massacres.  This  calamity  was
the  chief  cause  of  the  next  Crusade.  Yet  in  the  time  of  AbfiT
Faraj  (Barhebrgeus)  it  still  contained  fifteen  churches.  It
was  taken  and  plundered  by  Tamerlane  in  his  campaign  against
Bajazet.  In  the  17th  century  the  Turks  changed  its  name
to  Orfa,  and  it  is  now  one  of  the  most  flourishing  cities  of  the
empire,  having  a  population  of  .40,000  souls,  and  being  the
chief  entrepot  for  the  trade  between  Kurdistan  and  the  coast.
Orfa  contains  a  fine  mosque,  called  the^’dm"  of  Abraham,  and  a
little  lake  near  the  city  is  called  the  Pool  of  Abraham.  The
river  Scirtus,  on  which  Edessa  was  situated,  is  now  called  Daysan.

■Sohayl  and  Soka  meet. — Sohayl  is  the  star  Canopus.  Soha
is  a  star  among  the  Bendt  an  Nash,  I  think  it  is  the  little  star
which  is  close  to  the  second  of  the  three  which  form  the  tail  of
the  Greater  Bear.  As  Sohayl  is  used  to  figure  something  great
and  brilliant,  so  Soha  is  the  example  of  that  which  is  difficult
to  be  discerned.  Compare  the  verse  in  the  Thirty-second


490


NOTjEB.


Assembly  :  ‘‘How  many  riddles,  which  were  like  Soha  in
obscurity,  have  become  suns  by  my  explaining.”  Also  in
Thirty-sixth,  “  We  discerned  both  Soha  and  the  moon ;  ”  that
is,  the  obscure  and  the  evident.  To  perceive  this  star  was
looked  upon  by  the  Arabs  as  the  test  of  a  good  eyesight.  The
proverb,  “  I  show  her  Soha,  and  she  shows  me  the  moon,”
Arab.  Prov.  I.  527,  where  it  is  no  doubt  wrongly  quoted,
was  uttered  by  Ibn  al  Ghazz,  the  Ayadi.  There  was  in  the  time
of  the  Ignorance  a  very  tall  and  beautiful  woman,  who  was
of  such  great  strength  that  she  defied  any  man  to  ravish  her,  for
she  was  a  virgin.  Ibn  al  Ghazz  wagered  with  her  a  hundred
camels  that  he  would  be  able  to  accomplish  this.  When  he
assailed  her  she  found  him  of  irresistible  strength,  and  by
the  time  he  had  won  the  wager  she  was  almost  senseless.  He
said  to  her,  “  How  is  thy  eye-sight ;  dost  thou  see  Soha  and
she  answered,  in  her  confusion,  “  That  is  it,”  pointing  to  the
moon.  He  said  laughing,  “I  show  her  Soha,  and  she  shows
me  the  moon,”  which  became  proverbial.  I  have  endeavoured,
from  the  two  legends  related  by  Maydani,  to  make  a  more
reasonable  explanation  of  the  proverb.

Who  lent  him  the  suit  ( dast), — A  poor  play  on  words  occurs
in  this  sentence  through  the  repetition  of  the  word  dast.  Com¬
pare  the  verses  at  the  end  of  the  Eleventh  Assembly.

Abu  Kayd, — The  Father  of  Deceit.

The  Imam. — The  Khalif  is  thus  called  because  he  is  the
exemplar  of  the  people  or  his  subjects.

Equivocate^  or  gloze. — J^lj  is  the  turning  a  verse  of  the
Koran  from  its  apparent  meaning  to  a  meaning  which  it  bears
or  admits,  when  the  latter  is  agreeable  with  the  Scripture  and
the  Sunneh  ”  (Lane).  Sherishi  defines  it  as  the  making  a
promise  inwardly  in  another  sense  from  what  the  words  express
to  the  hearer,  that  is,  making  a  mental  reservation.

As  Samuel  kept  it. — The  Jew  Samuel  ibn  'Adiya  is  an  ex¬
emplar  of  good  faith  among  the  Arabs,  so  that  it  is  said,  “  More
faithful  than  Samuel,”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  828.  He  was  lord  of  a
castle  called  Al  Ablak  in  Tayma,  a  place  on  the  south-western


NOTES.


491


border  of  the  sandy  desert  which  lies  between  the  Jowf  and
Jebel  Shammar.  The  act  which  has  made  his  name  famous
was  as  follows  :  The  prince  poet  Imral  Kays  was  .  brought  by
his  feud  with  the  Benu  Asad,  on  whom  he  desired  to  avenge
the  death  of  his  father  ITojr,  into  the  condition  of  an  outlaw,
Pursued  by  the  agents  of  Mun&ir  king  of  Hira,  he
took  refuge  among  the  Benu  Tay ;  but  when  discord  broke  out
among  these  on  his  account  he  left  them  and  betook  himself  to
a  man  of  the  Fazarah  named  'Anir  son  of  Jabir.  This  "Amr
told  him  that  the  dwellers  in  tents  could  not  protect  him,  but
tlmt  if  Imr  al  Kays  desired  he  would  conduct  him  to  one  who
would  give  him  a  better  protection  than  Csesar.  Imr  al  Kays
accepted  the  offer,  and  his  host  gave  him  in  charge  to  an¬
other  Faz4ri,  who  brought  him  to  SamueFs  castle  of  Al  Ablak.
Here  he  was  well  received,  and  recited  a  pcem  which  he  had
composed  in  honour  of  his  protector.  He  dwelt  with  him  some
time,  and  Samuel  gave  him  beasts  with  which  to  travel  to  Csesar
(the  emperor  Justinian),  whose  favour  and  aid  against  his
enemies  he  had  resolved  to  implore.  Imr  al  Kays  left  in
SamueFs  keeping  his  daughter  and  all  his  property,  of  which
the  most  valuable  objects  were  five  cuirasses,  or  breast-mails,
having  respectively  the  names  Al  Fadfadah,  ^^the  large;’'  As
Safiyeh,  ^‘the  bright;’"  Al  Muhsineh,  the  protectress;""  Al
Khirrik,  ^^the  goodly  or  excellent;""  and  Umm  aWi  thuyul,
the  skirted;""  that  is,  probably,  having  skirts  of  mail  descend¬
ing.  over  the  hips.  Imr  al  Kays  repaired  to  Constantinople,
where  he  was  well  received  by  the  Emperor.  There  is  reason
to  believe  that  he  is  the  person  spoken  of  by  Procopius  and
Nonnosus  (Oaussin  de  Perceval,  Essai,  Vol.  II.  p.  316).  The
rest  of  his  life  is  but  a  legend.  It  is  related  in  the  Kitab  al
Aghani  (see  the  extract  in  M'Guckin  de  Blane’s  Diwan  of  Imr
al  Kays)  that  a  certain  Arab  of  the  Benu  Asad,  whose  brother
had  been  slain  by  Imr  al  Kays,  came  to  Constantinople,  and
calumniated  the  fugitive,  whom  the  Kaysar  had  placed  at  the
head  of  an  army.  He  said  that  Imr  al  Kays  was  a  debauched
man,  who  had  not  only  seduced  the  Emperor’s  daughter,  but


492


NOTES.


liad  composed  verses  on  the  subject  dishonourable  to  the  Im¬
perial  House.  On  this  the  Emperor  sent  him  a  poisoned  shirt,
which,  as  soon  as  he  put  it  on,  began  to  consume  him,  so  that
his  flesh  fell  from  him.  Hence  he  is  called  Thh  1  Koruh,  '^the
man  with  the  ulcers.”  The  intrigue  with  a  Greek  lady  of  high
station  is  probable ;  and  to  it  the  poet  is  said  to  allude  when  he
describes  his  entry  into  a  married  woman’s  chamber  in  the  first
poem  of  the  Diwan,  p.  20,  Arab.  Text.  According  to  M.  de'  Slane,
the  mistress  of  Imr  al  Kays  was  probably  Arabia,  the  daughter
of  Justin  II.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  Imr  al  Kays  died  at
Ancyra;  probably  of  some  leprous  disease,  which  gave  rise^to
the  legend.  When  his  death  was  known,  the  Ghassani  prince
Harith  resolved  to  possess  himself  of  the  cuirasses  left  in  the
charge  of  Samuel.  He  put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops
and  summoned  Samuel  to  give  them  up.  The  Jewish  chief
shut  himself  up  in  his  castle  and  refused.  But  one  day  an
infant  son  of  Samuel,  being  with  his  nurse  outside  the  castle,
was  seized  by  Harith,  who  then  summoned  Samuel  to  a  parley.
Samuel  appeared  on  the  wall,  and  Harith  repeated  his  demand,
with  the  threat  that  if  it  were  not  complied  with  he  would  put  the
child  to  death.  Samuel  asked  time  for  consideration,  and  it  was
granted.  He  then  called  all  his  people  to  counsel,  and  they
advised  him  to  give  up  the  property  and  save  the  child.  But
when  he  came  again  on  the  wall  he  said,  I  cannot  give  up  the
cuirasses  and  break  faith ;  do  what  thou  wilt  with  the  boy,  for
perfidy  is  a  collar  that  never  wears  out;  this  boy  will  leave
brothers  behind  him.”  Then  Harith  killed  the  child  before  the
father’s  eyes  ;  but  was  forced  after  a  time  to  give  up  the  siege.
When  the  season  of  the  pilgrimage  came  Samuel  took  the
cuirasses  and  delivered  them  to  the  heirs  of  Imr  al  Kays  at  the
fair  of  '  Okaz.  This  Samuel  was,  like  so  many  of  the  noble
Arabs  of  that  age,  a  poet,  and  to  him  are  attributed  some  fine
verses  contained  in  the  Hamaseli,  p.  49.  Eor  other  persons  who
are  exemplars  of  faith-keeping  among  the  Arabs,  see  Arab.  Prov.
II.  830  and  following  pages.  One  of  these  owes  his  reputation,
like  Samuel,  to  good  faith  towards  the  gifted  and  unhappy  Imr


ISrOTJES,


493


al  Kays.  This  is  Abu  Hanbal  at  Ta’l,  who,  when  his  two  wives
solicited  him,  the  one  to  give  up,  and  the  other  to  protect,  the
Prince,  milked  a  two-year-old  ewe,  and,  drinking  the  milk,
exclaimed,  ''  By  God,  I  shall  never  break  faith  as  long  as  this
contents  me.’'  So  that  it  is  said,  More  faith-keeping  than
Abu  Hanbal."


^  THE  TWENTY-FOURTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  portion  of  Ar  RabL—k  large  and  populous  quarter  or
suburb  of  Bagdad  was  known  by  the  name  of  the  Portion  of  Ar
Eabf ,  because  the  ground  had  been  given  by  Al  Mansur  to  his
hdjib  or  chamberlain,  Abh  1  Fadl  ar  Eabf  ibn  Yunus.  The  life
of  this  personage,  who  enjoyed  the  greatest  power  during  the
reigns  of  his  patron  and  of  Al  Mahdi,  is  to  be  found  in  Ibn  Khal-
likan.  He  was  of  low  origin,  though  something  was  known  of  his
pedigree,  since  it  was  said  that  his  ancestor,  Abu  Farwat  al  Hafiar,
had  been  a  slave  of  the  Khalif 'Othman  ibn  ^Affaii,  and,  having
received  his  freedom,  had  become  a  grave-digger,  whence  his
surname.  Ibn  Khallikan  relates  that  Ar  Eabi"  died  towards
the  beginning  of  the  year  170  (a.d.  786),  but  At  Tabari  places
his  death  in  169.  Some  say  that  he  was  poisoned  by  the  Khalif
Al  Hadi."  .  Ar  Eabf  was  an  able  but  unscrupulous  man.  There
is  reason  to  believe  that  he  was  concerned  in  the’  death  of  Al
Mansur’s  nephew,  'Abd  al  Wahhab,  whose  rivalry  the  Khalif
feared  for  his  own  son  Mahdi.  Under  Mahdi’s  reign  Ar  Eabi
showed  himself  a  military  commander  of  ability  in  Asia  Minor,
but  his  treachery  towards  the  wazir  Abu  'Abd  all  ah,  whose
destruction  he  accomplished  by  persuading  the  Khalif  that  the
wazir  had  brought  up  his  son  Mohammed  as  a  zindiJc,  or  free¬
thinker,  shows  him  to  have  been  capable  of  the  worst  means  to
gain  his  ends.  For  a  full  account  of  him,  see  Weil,  Geschichte
der  Ghalifen.


494


jsroTJss.


The  two  boon-companions  of  Jat}Ameh,--^'\As  was  Ja^imet  al
Abrash,  son  of  Malik  the  Azdi,  the  famous  king  of  the  Arabs  of
Irak,  and  celebrated  for  his  pride  and  grandeur  in  the  popular
legends.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  Arabs  to  associate  by  threes
in  their  feastings,  so  that  each  man  had  two  boon-companions.
But  such  was  the  pride  of  Ja^iimeh  that  he  would  drink  with
none  of  mortal  race ;  but  declared  that  the  Farkadan  alone
should  be  his  boon-companions ;  and  to  these  stars  cups  were
filled  whenever  the  king  caroused,  and  the  liquor  was  poured  out
as  if  they  had  indeed  drunk.  But  it  came  to  pass  at  last  that  the
king's  nephew  'Amr  ibn  'Adi  was  lost  in  the  Semaioeh,  ^'or
Syrian  desert.  This  'Amr  was  son  of  'Adi  ibn  Nasr  and
Eakash  the  king’s  sister,  whose  adventure  has  been  mentioned
in  the  Introduction.  It  will  be  remembered  that'Adi,  a  youth
of  princely  blood,  was  one  of  the  king’s  pages,  and  that  he  and
Eakash  having  mutually  fallen  in  love,  she  had  persuaded  him
to  ask  the  king’s  consent  after  he  had  well  drunken,  and  then  to
consummate  the  marriage  at  once.  'Adi  the  next  day  found
Jathimeh  so  angry  at  what  had  passed,  that  he  sought  safety  in
flight.  Eakash  gave  birth  to  a  son  whom  Jathimeh  adopted,
since  he  was  himself  childless.  The  boy  'Amr  used  to  go  out
with  the  king’s  servants  to  gather  mushrooms,  and  it  happened
that  whenever  the  servants  found  fine  mushrooms  they  ate
them,  and  brought  back  only  the  worse  kind  to  the  king.  But
'Amr  brought  back  the  best  he  could  find,  and  one  day  in
presenting  them  he  uttered  this  verse : —

These  are  my  gathering,  and  they  are  the  best,  though  truly  every
gatherer  has  his  hand  to  his  mouth.

These  last,  words  became  proverbial.  At  last 'Amr,  who  was
eight  years  old,  was  lost  in  the  desert.  Some  say  that  he  was
carried  off  by  Jinn,  by  whom  he  was  enchanted  a  long  time.
At  last  two  brothers,  named  Malik  and  'Okayl,  the  sons  of
Karij,  men  of  Balkayn,  who  were  journeying  to  the  king  with
presents,  met  a  young  man  with  his  hair  and  nails  grown
long.  They  said  to  him,  Who  art  thou  ?”  He  said,  A.  son
of  the  Tanukhiyeh.”  (Ja&imeh  reigned  over  the  Taniikhites  of


irOTES.


495


Koda'ah,  who  had  founded  the  city  of  Hira,  under  Malik  ibn
Zohayr).  The  adventure  which  followed  is  not  worth  relating;
it  will  he  found  at  Arab.  Prov.  11.  319,  and  in  De  Sacy’s
commentary  to  the  Thirty-ninth  Assembly.  In  the  end  they
brought  him  to  the  king,  who  offered  them  whatever  reward  they
chose  to  ask.  They  asked  that  Jathimeh  should  take  them
as  his  boon-companions  as  long  as  he  lived.  The  king  con¬
sented,  and  the  three  dwelt  together  for  forty  years,  until  death
separated  them.  'Amr  was  called  'Amr  of  the  Collar,  for  when
he  was  brouaiht  back  his  mother  left  on  him  the  collar  he  had
worn  in  infancy,  on  which  Ja&imeh  said,  ^^'Amr  has  outgrown
the  Collar,”  which  became  proverbial  in  speaking  of  a  thing  that
is  no  longer  fitting.  This  phrase,  ^Hhe  guests  of  Jaftimeh,”  is
taken  by  Hariri  from  some  verses  of  Mutemmim,  son  of
Nuwayrah,  on  his  brother  Malik,  who,  having  espoused  the
cause  of  the  prophetess  SajAh,  at  the  head  of  the  tribe  of  Yarbii ,
was  cruelly  put  to  death  by  order  of  Khalid  ibn  A1  Welid.  For
this  passage  in  early  Moslem  history,  see  the  commentary  to
some  verses  of  Mutemmim,  p.  370  of  Hamhseli.  It  is  to  this
Malik  that  people  allude  when  they  say,  A  man,  but  not
like  Malik  Arab.  Prov.  II.  213.

Assumed  its  gilding  and  adorned  itself, — These  words  are
from  Koran  x.  25.  is  explained  to  be  primitively

by  an  idgketm  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Koran.
Blit  it  is  also  read  with  the  treated  as  a  sound  letter,

and

The  headstrong  ruddy  wine, — is  an  epithet  of  a  horse,
meaning  of  a  dark  bay  colour.”  The  word  therefore,

is  fitly  coupled  with  it.  For  the  former  word  compare  Mo'alla-
kah  of  Tarafeh,  v.  59  :  Of  the  things  that  I  love  one  is  to
be  beforehand  with,  the  women  who  'would  blame  me,  and  to
drink  the  dark-red  wine,  that  foams  when  thou  mix  it  with
water,”

There  intruded  on  us, — At  the  proverb,  ''  More  intrusive  than
Tofayl,”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  838,  Maydani  remarks  that  the
Arabs  of  the  desert  called  him  who  came  unbidden  to  eat


496


NOTES.


and  him  who  came  unbidden  to  drink  Jilj  ;  but  that  the  people
of  towns  called  the  former  also  Hariri,  however,  uses

the  word  here  in  its  legitimate  meaning,  since  the  party  were
engaged  in  drinking.

How  long,  metre  of  these  lines  is^ih,  which  is

a  metre  of  the  second  circle,  or  j,  so  called  because

the  feet  of  all  the  metres  it  contains  are  seven-lettered.  The  two
metres  of  this  circle  which  are  in  use  are  the  wafir  and  MmiL
which  differ  only  by  the  respective  positions  of  the  two  com¬
ponent  parts  of  the  foot,  the  wdfir  having  the  radical  foot
made  up  of  a  followed  by  a  iWli,

while  the  Mmil  has  the  derivative  foot  in  which  the

order  is  reversed.  The  normal  measure  of  the  nidfiT  is
three  times  in  each  hemistich,  but  this  is  seldom  used.  The
measure  of  the  present  verses  belongs  to  the  first  which  is
is^kiU,  and  which  has  one  similar  to  itself.  The  iL

called  consists  in  the  dropping  the
end  of  a  foot,  and  quiescing  the  moved  letter  before  the
so  that  becomes  which  forms  the  last

foot  of  each  hemistich.  Of  the  there  enters  most

frequently  into  this  metre  which  is  the  quiescing  of  the

fifth  moved  letter  of  the  foot,  by  which  becomes

Examples  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  verses.  There  also  enters  ^
Jjb,  which  is  the  dropping  the  fifth  moved  letter,  so  that
becomes  Another  of  these  licenses,  which

is  a  made  up  of  and  is  less  common.

Sifad  is  a  name  applied  by  the  Arabs  to  a  cruel  and
capricious  beauty :  see  a  note  to  the  Introduction.  As  the
metre  shows,  it  is  imperfectly  declined,  the  reason  being  that  it
unites  the  qualities  of  a  proper  name  and  of  feminineness,  and
consists  of  more  than  three  letters  :  see  Alftyeh  of  Ibn  Malik,  v.
664  and  commentary.

As  she  drinks  to  me, — Compare  the  address  of  Abu  Odayneh
to  A1  Aswad  ibn  A1  Mun^ir,  inciting  him  to  slay  the  prisoners
taken  from  Ghassan,v.  3.  Schultens,  Mon.  Yetust,  Arabice,  p.  58.  .

Why  he  nabbed  the  Jirst  Hariri  has,  perhaps,  taken  the


JSrOTJEB,


497


idea  of  this  Assembly  from  an  anecdote  related  of  Abu  *Othman
al  Mazini,  the  grammarian.  One  day  a  slave  girl  happened  to
sing  in  the  presence  of  the  Khalif  Al  Wathik  a  verse,  in  which
it  was  doubtful  whether  a  certain  word  should  be  made  marf  it
or  mansub.  A  discussion  arose  among  the  guests  ;  but  the  girl
declared  that  she  had  the  authority  of  Abu  *Othman  for  the
accusative  case.  The  Khalif  then  sent  for  Abu  *Othman,  and
asked,  somewhat  contemptuously,  of  what  family  he  was.  The
grammarian  replied,  Of  the  Benii  Mazin.^’  Of  which
Mazin?”  said  the  Khalif;  ‘^Is  it  of  Eabfah,  or  Temim,  or
Kays  ''  Of  Rabf  ah  ”  was  the  reply.  Then  the  Khalif,  know¬
ing  that  a  peculiarity  of  this  tribe  was  to  substitute  B  for  M,
and  M  for  B  in  pronunciation,  asked  Abu  Othman  jocularly,
What  is  thy  name?^’  Now  Abu  *Othman’s  name
was  Bekr,  and  if  he  had  answered  according  to  the  pronunciation
with  which  the  Khalif  credited  him,  he  would  have  uttered  the
offensive  word  Mekr,’’  which  means  deceit,  and  have  further¬
more  declared  that  it  was  his  name,  so  he  replied  in  a  marked
manner  ‘‘  Bekr.'’  The  Khalif,  perceiving  his  readiness,  was
much  pleased,  and  repeating  to  him  the  verse  asked  him  his
opinion.  He  answered  that  the  word  must  be  mmmh,  and  sup¬
ported  his  decision  by  satisfactory  arguments.  In  the  end  the
Khalif  dismissed  him  with  a  present  of  one  thousand  denars.
Ibn  Khallikdn ;  life  of  Abfi  ^Othman.  This  anecdote  is  also
related  by  Hariri  in  the  Durrah.

Sihawayh. — Ibn  Khaldun  observes  in  the  Mukaddimeh  fi
't  tarikh,  that  most  of  the  Moslems  learned  in  the  law  and
in  science  were  of  foreign  origin,  and  not  of  Arab  race ;  though
the  Koran,  the  foundation  of  all,  was  an  Arab  book.  Sibawayh
was  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  these  strangers,  who,  prizing  the
knowledge  of  the  Arab  language,  law,  and  religion,  above  all
that  their  own  countries  had  produced,  devoted  themselves  to  the
learning  that  had  its  origin  in  the  schools  of  Basra  and  Kufa.
He  was  a  Persian  by  birth,  and  his  full  name  was  ‘Amr  ibn
'Othman  ibn  Kanbar;  the  name  Sibawayh  being  a  lakab,  or
surname,  which  he  received.  For  the  meaning  of  this  appella-

32


498


NOTES.


tion,  see  Ibn  Kballikan,  who  gives  his  life ;  and  for  its  form,
Anthol.  Gram.  Arahsy  p.  151.  He  was  a  mowla  to  the  Benii
Harith  ibn  Ka'b.  According  to  the  tradition  concerning  him
adopted  by  Sherisbi,  he  was  born  at  Bay  da,  near  Shiraz.  He  early
came  to  Basra  to  study,  and  joined  the  class  of  Hammad  ibn
Selemeh,  who  had  also  instructed  A1  Asma'i  (see  the  latter’s
life  in  Ibn  Khallikan).  Sibawayh  employed  himself  in  copy¬
ing  out  Traditions ;  and  it  would  appear  that  at  this  early
period  of  his  life  he  plunged  into  the  controversy  respecting
raf^  and  nash  ;  for  it  is  related  that  while  writing  from
dictation  some  words  of  the  Prophet,  There  is  not  one  of  pay
companions  Sibawayh  said  that  it  should  be

^\,  since  was  the  of  ^^No,”  said  HammM,

"^you  are  wrong,  for  this  is  only  the  of  exception.”  He
then  left  Hammad  to  obtain  more  perfect  instruction,  and
attached  himself  to  A1  Khalil  ibn  Ahmed.  He  also  studied
under  Isa  ibn  Omar,  and  in  the  life  of  the  latter,  by  Ibn
Khallikan,  it  is  said  that  Sibawayh’s  celebrated  work,  called
preeminently  the  Kitab,  was  founded  upon  'isa’s  work  called
Sibawayh,  according  to  this  account,  interpolated
observations  of  A1  Khalil  into  ‘Isa’s  book,  and,  adding  his  own
remarks,  produced  the  celebrated  compilation  which  was  after¬
words  looked  upon  as  the  standard  work  on  Arabic  Grammar.
See  also  Anthol.  Gram.  Arabe.,  p.  381,  note  I.  Among  his
masters  were  also  Yunus  ibn  Habib  and  Abu  ’1  Khattab,  known
under  the  name  of  A1  Akhfash  the  Elder.  The  discussion  con¬
cerning  the  ro/*  and  nasb,  which  took  place  before  Ar  Eeshid,
and  the  treachery  of  the  Kufian  grammarian,  A1  Kisa’i,  and  his
pupil  A1  Amin,  son  of  Harun,  have  been  already  noticed  in  the
Introduction.  The  anecdote  is  given  by  numerous  writers.
It  is  related  by  Sherishi  that  when  Sibawayh  left  the  Khalif’s
presence  in  despair  he  met  his  friend  A1  Akhfash  the  Younger,
to  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  submitting  his  writings  before
publication,  and  told  him  what  had  occurred.  A1  Akhfash,
indignant,  at  once  sought  out  A1  Kisa’i,  and  put  to  him  a
hundred  grammatical  questions,  accusing  him  of  a  mistake  in


jsroTus.


499


every  answer.  On  this  A1  Kisa'i  asked  him  if  he  were  A1
Akhfash,  and,  on  his  answering  in  the  affirmative,  requested  him
to  undertake  the  education  of  his  children,  to  which  A1  Akhfash
consented.  He  made  the  Kufian  acquainted  with  Sibawayh's
book,  and  in  the  end  A1  Kis4’l  repented  deeply  of  the  artidce
which  had  caused  Sibawayh’s  death.  When  near  his  end  he
exclaimed  to  Ar  EesMd,  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  impose  on
me  the  diyeh  (the  fine  for  involuntary  homicide),  for  I  fear  I  have
had  a  share  in  killing  Sibawayh.”  The  year  and  place  of  the
death  of  Sibawayh  are  both  disputed.  According  to  a  legend
given  by  Sherishi,  he  would  not  return  to  Basra  discredited
after  quitting  Bagdad,  but  repaired  to  Ahwaz,  and  there  made
inquiry  if  there  were  any  prince  with  a  fondness  for  grammar.
He  was  recommended  to  Talhat  ibn  Tahir  of  Khorasan,  and  set
out  for  his  court,  but  was  taken  ill  at  Saweh  and  died.  Some
valuable  extracts  from  the  Kitab  have  been  published  by  De
Sacy  in  his  Anthologie.  The  work  appears  to  have  been  early
used  as  a  text  book.  In  the  life  of  Abu  'Othmitn  al  Mazini,  who
has  been  spoken  of  above,  it  is  related  that  he  refused  to  teach
the  Book  of  Sibawayh  to  a  or  non-Moslem,  although

ofiered  a  hundred  denars  ;  also  that  another  person  having  gone
through  the  Book,  exclaimed,  ^^God  reward  thee,  I  have  not
understood  a  word  of  it.’’

1  will  announce  to  you  its  interpretation, — The  words  of  the
butler  to  Pharaoh  before  he  departs  to  question  Joseph  con¬
cerning  the  king’s  dream.  Koran  xii.  45.

Call  to  me  Come  down'' — Jljj  belongs  to  the  class  called
Words  of  the  form  JUj,  with  the  sense  of  the
imperative,  may  be  formed  from  triliteral  verbs,  and  are  inde¬
clinable  on  the  kesr,  Alfiyeh,  vv.  595  and  627.  The  word
Nizal  ”  was  a  challenge  to  alight  and  fight  on  foot.

What  is  the  word? — The  grammatical  notes  suggested  by
this  Assembly  will  be  found  appended  to  the  author’s  Explanation.

If  ye  return  I  return, — These  words  are  from  the  Koran :  If  ye
(the  unbelievers)  return  to  the  fight  we  (God)  will  return,”  viii.
19.  In  the  Koran  the  muddri  mejzum  is  used,  but  after  ^].  as


500


MOTHS.


a  conditional  particle  the  mddi  has  the  same  future  signification.
Extract  from  Zamakhshari,  Anth.  Gramm.  Arabe,  p.  113,  Arab.
Text.

We  changed  from  weariness. — The  varying  of  the  preposition,
as  in  this  sentence,  is  a  favourite  artifice  of  the  author.  It  has
been  imitated  in  the  translation.

Unless  every  hand  endow  me :  signifies  ^'he  caused  him

to  possess  J ^  gifts  ;  ”  it  is  used  with  a  double  mef  ul.
Koran  vi.  94,  and  xxxix.  11.

The  light  of  proof —kt  Kovon.  iv.  174,  it  is  said,  ''  0  people,
a  proof  has  come  to  you  from  your  Lord,  and  we  have  s€nt
down  to  you  a  clear  light.”

We  were  astonished^  etc. — These  words  give  an  instance  of  the
tejnis  called  which  is  when  one  of  the  two  words

between  which  the  tejnis  subsists  is  shorter  than  the  other,  and
you  make  the  correspondence  complete  by  adding  to  the  shorter
a  part  or  the  whole  of  the  word  next  to  it.  See  De  Sacy’s
commentary  to  the  Twenty-third  Assembly,  at  word  tejnis,  and
Mukhtasar,  p.  624.

Need  is  not  courtesy. — is  the  showing  honour  to  one  by
appearing  glad  at  meeting  him,  and  enquiring  concerning  his
condition.  This  saying  is  to  be  found  at  Arab.  Prov.  II.  690.  It
is  used  when  one  shows  kindness  for  a  purpose  or  necessity  of
his  own,  and  not  out  of  disinterested  courtesy.

Lights  up  my  morning.  —  According  to  Sherlshi  there  is  a
double  meaning  in  the  word  which  also  signifies  ‘^redness

of  the  hair,”  used  by  the  author  like  blackness”  to  typify  youth.
The  colour  according  to  the  Kamus  (cited  by  Freytag),  is
akin  to  that  is  the  colour  of  white  mixed  with  red,  which
was  the  colour  attributed  by  the  Arabs  to  the  hair  of  their
Christian  enemies.  If  this  be  so  the  verse  in  the  text  may  be
also  rendered  whitens  my  fair  hair.”

I  swear  that. — j  after  a  formula  of  swearing  is  often  followed
by  the  mddi  in  a  future  sense :  compare  the  Fifth  Assembly,

I  will  not  taste  of  your  meal.”

Leek  itself  —  Compare  the  Forty-sixth  Assembly  (the  first


NOTJES.


501


set  of  verses),  Who  has  not  decked  or  clothed  his  palms  with
the  cup  of  wine/’

Mixed  Compare  Mo'aUakah  of  'Amr  ibn  Kulthum,  v.2.

Cooled  of  the  north  roind.^l  have  translated  thus  on  the
authority  of  the  commentary  to  v.  82  of  the  Mo  allakah  of
LeMd.  Compare  the  Burdeh  of  Ka'b  ibn  Zohayr,  v.  4.

Gray  hair  is  a  guest  to  whom  honour  is  due. — The  meaning  is
that  if  he  did  not  behave  with  sobriety  in  his  old  age  he  would
not  be  treating  his  own  gray  hair  with  respect,  and  that,  conse¬
quently,  those  who  prided  themselves  on  receiving  their  guests
with  courtesy  would  blame  and  contemn  him.

EXPLANATION.

The  first  and  best  .  ...  If  his  work  be  goody  then  his  reward
is  good;  and  if  his  work  he  evily  then  his  reroard  is  evil.— In  this
case  the  first^^  is  mansuh  through  being  the of  It
is  almost  needless  to  remind  the  student  that  and  its  related
verbs  such  as  Jl?,  preceded  by  U,  and

others,  make  the  marfu  as  their  and  the mansuh )
thus  differing  from  the  substantive  verbs  in  Latin  and  in  the
languages  influenced  by  Latin  grammar.  The  idiom  is  as  if  it
should  be  said  in  Latin,  Cains  est  bonum  virum.”  Alfityeh,
V.  148.  The  converse  is  the  case  with  and  its  sisters,  where
the  idiom  is,  Sane  Caium,  vir  bonus.”  In  the  first  part  of  the
sentence  is  the  ^  of  and  is  the ;  the  former
is  marfu ,  the  latter  mansuh,  in  accordance  with  this  principle.
As  to  the  second it  is  said  that  it  is  marfu  as  the of  an
elided  inchoative,  the  full  proposition  being

This  last  is  called  a  or  nominal  proposition,  of

which  the  property  is  that  the shall  agree  in  with  the

\s:>^y  or  in  other  words,  be  put  in  the  same  case  with  it.  It  is
then  said  by  the  author  that  and  its  noun  are  elided  because
the  conditional  particle  points  to.  their  virtual  presence  or
influence.  For  this  see  Alfiyeh,  v.  155,  where  it  is  said  that
and  its  ism  are  elided  after  and  jS,  while  the  khahar  remains;
as  in  the  verse  uttered  by  No  man  ibn  al  MunMr  to  Rabf  ibn


502


NOTES.


Ziyad,  when  the  latter,  who  was  his  boon-companion,  was  accused
before  him  in  satirical  verse  by  the  poet  LeMd  of  being  leprous,
in  revenge  for  the  ill-will  which  Eabf  had  instilled  into  the  king
towards  the  Benu  Ja'far.

It  is  also  said  that  the  inchoative  is  elided  because  the  t-J,  which
is  the  answer  to  the  condition,  points  to  it ;  since  an  inchoative
generally  follows  cJ.  Grammarians  explain  the  many  abrupt
forms  of  Arabic  speech,  and  the  anomalies  of  the  irdb  by  the
supposed  elision,  of  the  muhtada  or  kkabar,  or  both

together,  and  display  wonderful  ingenuity  and  power  of  analysis
in  thus  accounting  for  idioms  which  arose  among  a  simple  un¬
lettered  race,  which  sought  only  to  express  its  thoughts  as
vigorously  and  emphatically  as  possible.  On  this  subject  con¬
sult  Alflyeh,  136th  and  following  verses  ;  Nasifs  Grammar,
chapter  on p.  71.  Whenever  anything  is  elided,
there  should  be,  if  the  speech  is  to  be  intelligible,  a  JJt),  that  is,
something  which  shows  or  points  to  the  nature  and  meaning  of
what  is  elided;  in  this  case  the  elision  is  called abbrevia¬
tion;  but  otherwise  it  is  called  Thus,  in  the  text  the

author  speaks  of  the  JLhlj  of  and  of  t-J.  To  find  the
the  grammarians  sometimes  resort  to  fanciful  artifices.  With
respect  to  uJ,  which  is  called  E  is  naturally

followed  by  a  muhtada  \  since  it  is  a  disjoining  particle,  and
must  commence  a  new  proposition,  either  fully  or  elliptically
expressed.  Such  a  proposition  has  what  the  grammarians  call  a
place  in  the  i  rdb,  ^  11^,  which  is  the  place  of

jezm,  since  in  such  a  phrase  as  Jxaj*  the  verb  is  mpjzzim.
See  extract  from  Ibn  Hisham ;  Anthol.  Gramm.  Arabe,  p.  74,
Arab.  Text,  and  De  Sacy’s  Grammar,  Vol.  II.  paragraph  1179.
The  muhtada  is  commonly  elided  after  uJ,  as  in  Koran  xli.  46,
that  is,  ^

The  second  mode  is  that  you  should  nasb  both. — In  this  case
the  nasb  of  the  first  requires  no  further  explanation  than  has
been  given  in  the  former  case.  The  or  that  is,


N0TJE8.


503


the  object  of  the  verb’s  action,  is,  according  to  the  Arab  gram¬
marians,  not  only  the  objective  complement  of  the  active  verb,
as  'Amr  in  the  sentence  ‘^Zayd  beat  Amr,”  but  also  that  of  the
passive  verb,  either  absolutely,  as  the  word  beating’’  in  *

the  sentence  ^^Zayd  was  beaten  a  beating,”  or  otherwise,  as
denar”  in  the  sentence,  ‘‘  Zayd  was  given  a  denar.”  It  would
also  be,  I  think,  allowable  to  describe  the  second  in  this
case  as  mansub  by  or  specification ;  since  it  contains  the
signification  of  ^  and  explains  what  goes  before,  as
\j^  See  Alfiyeh,  v.  356.

third  mode  is  that  you  should  raj''  both, — In  this  case
the  first  is  the  ism^  and  ^5  the  khabar  of  the
latter  being  virtually  mansub.  The  second  is  marfu,  as
in  the  first  case,  as  the  khabar  of  the  elided  mubtada.  On
this  agreement  in  the  irdb  between  the  mubtada  and  the
khabar  in  a  proposition,  there  are  various  explanations  among
the  grammarians.  Ibn  Malik’s  verse  on  the  subject  is,  Make
the  mubtada  to  be  marfu  by  its  ibtidd  (or  because  it  commences
the  sentence),  and  make  the  khabar  to  be  marfu  by  the  mub-
tada.  Ibn  Akll  then  says  that  the  teaching  of  Sibawayh  and
the  generality  of  the  Basrians  was  thus ;  and  that  they  declared
the  regent,  J^U,  on  the  mubtada  to  be  logical,  in  that

the  noun  was  without  any  verbal  regent  except  in  a  certain
exceptional  case,  which  it  is  needless  to  dwell  on  here.  On  the
other  hand,  the  regent  on  the  khabar  is  verbal  and  consists  of
the  mubtada.  But  the  teaching  of  others  is  that  the  regent  on
both  the  mubtada  and  the  khabar  is  the  ibtiddy  and  with  respect
to  both  it  is  logical.  Another  opinion  is  that  the  mubtada  is
marfu  by  the  ibtidd,  and  the  khabar  is  marfu  both  by  the
ibtidd  and  the  mubtada.  It  is  also  said  that  there  is  reciprocity
between  them,  and  that  each  makes  the  other  marfu .  The
correct  opinion  is  held  to  be  that  of  Sibawayh.

And  it  may  be  that  the  first  is  raffed  through  being  the
agent  of  ^ ;  and  that  the  ^  which  receives  a  virtual  poroer  here
is  the  complete  attributive  verb. — The  class  of  verbs  known  as
and  its  sisters,”  are  called  iLoSU,  “incomplete  verbs,”


504


NOTJSS.


because  they  do  not,  like  other  verbs,  contain  an  attribute.  But
and  jU  may  be  used  as  attributive  verbs  with  the  significa¬
tion  to  exist,’’  and  then  they  do  not  require  a  khahar.  This
will  be  easily  understood  from  the  text.  Thus  in  English  we
may  say,  God  is,”  in  the  sense  of  God  exists and  in  that
case  ^‘is”  requires  no  word  after  it  to  give  a  complete  sense.

The  fourth  and  roeakest  mode. — This  requires  no  explanation.

As  for  the  noun  that  alternates. — ^This  and  the  following  riddle
bring  us  to  one  of  the  most  important  and  difficult  questions
connected  with  Arabic  grammar ;  a  question  not  suggested  by
the  ingenuity  of  scholars,  but  one  which  every  beginner  miist
attempt  to  understand,  and  which  yet  remains  insoluble  by  the
greatest  masters  of  the  language.  It  is  the  double  form  of
declension  of  Arabic  nouns,  which,  according  to  our  terminology,
are  divided  into  triptots  and  diptots ;  the  latter  having  an  in¬
complete  i  rah  without  tanwin,  and  being  mejrur  with  the  fethak
instead  of  the  kesreh.  It  is  possible  that  this  strange  diversity,
for  which  all  the  theories  of  grammarians  give  no  satisfactory
explanation,  may  have  arisen  from  the  fusion  or  mutual  action
of  two  great  dialects,  one  diptotic,  the  other  triptotic  in  its
declensions.  Even  at  the  present  day  the  incomplete  declension
prevails  over  a  great  part  of  Arabia  (Palgrave,  I.,  p.  464).  But
accepting,  as  a  commentator  of  Hariri  is  bound  to  do,  the  prin¬
ciples  of  the  grammarians,  I  must  dismiss  such  scientific  con¬
siderations,  and  treat  the  subject  in  the  traditional  manner.  It
is  well  worthy  of  attention,  since  it  is  frequently  discussed
by  native  authors,  and  yet  has  received  insufficient  notice,  or  no
notice  at  all,  from  the  European  compilers  of  grammars.

Two  kinds  of  declension  are,  according  to  the  Arabic  gramma¬
rians,  to  be  found  in  the  language ;  the  one  that  proper  to  the
noun,  the  other  that  proper  to  the  verb.  The  noun  is  declined
with  the  tanroin,  the  damm,  the  fethy  and  the  kesr ;  the  verb  with
the  dammy  the  fetJiy  and  i\\ejezm.  Thus  the  tanroin  and  the  kesr
are  proper  to  the  noun,  and  the  jezm  is  proper  to  the  verb.  If
then  a  noun  be  declined  without  the  tanwin  and  the  kesvy
but  with  the  damn  and  Jeth  only,  its  declension  is  assimilated


NOTES.


^4Q5

to  that  of  the  verb.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  class  of  nouns
which  we  are  considering.  If  the  noun  be  fully  declinable,  that

is  with  the  tanwin  and  kesr,  it  is  called  because

■'5

it  possesses  its  full  nominality,  form  as  well

as  meaning.  If  it  be  not  fully  declinable  it  is  called

because  it  does  not  possess  all  the  characteristics  of  a
noun  ill  form,  but  is  assimilated  to  the  character  of  a  verb.
Now,  according  to  all  grammarians,  the  noun  is  fundamental,  or
primitive,  and  the  verb  is  derivative,  or  secondary.  This
of  the  verb  is  two-fold  ;  firstly,  logical,  inasmuch  as

the  noun  gives  a  perfect  sense  in  itself,  while  the  verb  requires  a
noun  to  be  joined  to  it ;  secondly,  formal  or  etymological.
The  schools  of  Basra  and  Kufa  agree  as  to  the  former  cause  of  the
verb’s  secondariness,  but  differ  as  to  the  latter.  The  Basrians  say
that  the  verb  is  derived  from  the  noun,  that  is  from  the  ma^dar,
supporting  their  opinion  partly  on  logical  grounds,  since  they
say  that  the  notion  of  running  or  eating  must  precede  the  notion
he  ran,  or  he  ate,  and  partly  on  actual  linguistic  experience,
since  there  are  numbers  of  verbs  which  have  evidently  been
formed  from  nouns  expressing  even  material  objects,  as  in
English  we  say  “  to  steam,”  to  sail,”  to  post  a  letter.”  This
they  give  as  the  cause  of  the  verb’s  formal  secondariness.  The
Kufians,  on  the  other  hand,  deny  the  derivation  of  the  verb  from
the  noun,  and  make  the  third  person  of  the  preterite  the  root.  But
they  equally  admit  the  formal  secondariness  of  the  verb,  which
they  say  consists  in  terkib  or  composition,  since  any  part  of
the  verb  expresses  a  notion  compounded  of  the  idea  of  the
verb  and  a  subject,  while  the  noun  expresses  only  a  simple
notion,  and  as  the  compounded  is  secondary  to  the  simple,  there¬
fore  the  verb  is  formally  secondary  to  the  noun.  It  is  somewhat
difficult  to  distinguish  this  formal  secondariness  from  the  logical
secondariness.  But  the  distinction  will  be  perceived  if  we
consider  the  logical  secondariness  to  consist  in  the  dependence
of  the  abstract  verb  on  a  noun  (or  pronoun),  for  a  complete
meaning,  and  the  formal  secondariness  to  consist  in  the  actual


506


NOTES.


presence,  real  or  implied,  of  or  pronoun,  in  every  part  of

the  verb.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in  each  tense  and  person
the  ^--4^  is  supposed  to  exist,  either  jjb,  apparent,  or^^iLu^,
hidden.  Thus,  in  and  damir  is  hidden ;  so,

also,  it  is  hidden  in  and  the  td  in  both  cases

being  the  mark  of  the  feminine:  in  some  other  cases  it  is
expressed.  Hence  the  Kufians  might  argue  that  a  verb  actually
uttered  in  language  inevitably  contained  a  compounded  signi¬
fication.  By  the  consent  of  all,  then,  the  verb  has  two  kinds
of  secondariness,  the  one  logical,  the  other  formal  or  in  regard
of  utterance.

Now  the  principle  of  the  grammarians  is  that  the  nouns  which
have  the  imperfect  declension  have  it  because  they  correspond
to  the  verb  in  these  two  respects ;  that  is,  they  combine  the  two
defects  of  logical  and  formal  secondariness.  Thus  a  noun
to  be  imperfectly  declined  must  have  two  defects,  one  of  the
logical  and  one  of  the  formal  kind;  for  if  both  be  logical,
or  both  be  formal,  it  is  not  imperfectly  declined.  These  defects
are  nine  in  number :  the  quality  of  description  or  of

being  an  adjective;  determination  as  a  proper

name;  JaJI,  deviation  of  form  in  a  word,  while  its  meaning
remains  the  same,  as  when^.^U  is  turned  intoj^;
composition ;  the  quality  of  being  a  foreign  word ;

the  plural  number;  the  being  feminine;

the  form  of  the  verb;  and  that

is,  the  addition  of  to  the  root,  as  in  drunken.  Some

writers  add  five  more,  making  up  the  number  to  fourteen;
but  these  last  are  useless  refinements.  These  nine  qualities
give  the  noun  a  character  of  secondariness,  since  the  adjective
is  secondary  to  the  substantive,  the  determinate  noun  to  the
indeterminate,  the  deviate  to  the  original  form,  the  compounded
to  the  simple,  the  foreign  to  the  Arab,  the  plural  to  the  singular,
the  feminine  to  the  masculine,  the  form  of  the  verb  to  the  form
of  the  noun,  the  augmented  word  to  the  unaugmented.  Now,  it
has  been  said  that  the  noun,  to  be  imperfectly  declined,  must


IfOTUS.


507


have  two  of  these  defects,  and,  moreover,  one  of  them  must
be  logical  and  the  other  formal.  The  logical  defects  are  the
first  two — the  quality  of  an  adjective,  and  the  quality  of  a  proper
name ;  the  other  defects  are  formal,  that  is,  affect  the  form
or  utterance  of  the  words  themselves.  Hence  one  of  the  first
two  defects  must  be  united  with  one  of  the  last  seven  to  make
the  noun  imperfectly  declined.  This,  according  to  the  gram¬
marians,  is  consistent  with  reason,  inasmuch  as  the  first,  namely,
the  quality  of  description,  represents  the  adjective,  and  the  second,
the  proper  name,  represents  the  substantive  ;  and  so,  between
them,  all  nouns  are  represented.  These  two  are,  therefore,  the
pillars”  to  which  the  others  are  united.  Each  one  of  the  two
may  be  combined  with  the  deviation,  or  the  form  of  the  verb,  or
the  augmentation.  But  the  proper  name  alone  can  be  combined
with  the  foreign  word,  or  the  compounded,  or  the  td  of  the
feminine,  so  as  to  produce  imperfect  declinability.  In  this  brief
space  only  principles  can  be  enunciated ;  the  full  meaning  of
these  distinctions  can  only  be  understood  from  the  explanations
and  examples  of  Arabic  writers.

There  are  two  cases,  however,  in  which  one  defect  is  counted
as  two.  The  first  concerns  the  defect  of  femininity,  in  the  case
of  a  word  ending  with  the  elif  of  the  feminine.  The  class  of
words  which  are  thus  made  imperfectly  declinable  will  be  found
by  a  reference  to  any  grammar.  The  reason  for  the  double
power  of  femininity  in  this  case  is  that  the  elif  of  the  feminine
adheres  continually  to  such  words  as  if  it  were  part  of  the  root,
which  is  not  the  case  with  the  td  of  the  feminine,  which  only
attaches  inseparably  to  proper  names,  except  in  some  rare
cases.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  these  nouns  it  is  held  that  the
of  the  feminine  gives  them  the  formal  defect  of  femininity,
while  the  feminine  essentiality  which  they  derive  from  the
presence  of  this  elif,  as  a  radical,  gives  them  a  logical  femininity.
They  have,  therefore,  both  formal  and  logical  secondariness,
and  are,  consequently,  imperfectly  declined.

The  second  concerns  the  defect  of  the  quality  of  the  'plural,
and  affects  those  plurals  which  belong  to  what  are  called  the  last


508


NOTES.


forms  of  the  broken  plurals,  which  are  diverse  from  the  form
of  any  singular.  These  are  plurals  of  the  form  or

or  where  the  first  letter  is  meftuk,  and  the  third  letter

is  elif,  followed  by  a  letter  with  teshdid,  or  by  two  moved  letters,
either  juxtaposed  or  divided  by  a  quiescent  letter.  There  are  no
singulars  of  these  forms  in  the  Arabic  language,  and  the  double
secondariness  consists  in  conveying  the  notion  of 'plurality ^  which
is  a  logical  defect,  and  in  diverging  from  the  form  of  the  sin¬
gular,  which  is  a  formal  defect.  The  two  defects,  one  logical
and  the  other  formal,  being  combined,  such  plurals  are  imper¬
fectly  declined.

Hariri  does  not  mention  in  his  tef&ir  that  the  first  letter  of
such  a  plural  should  be  meftuh,  and  the  same  condition  is
omitted  by  other  grammarians,  since  it  always  co-exists  with
the  others  mentioned;  but  it  is  logically  necessary  to  state  it,
since  there  is  a  form  of  the  singular  with  the  first  letter  madmum,

?  p  *

as  the  word  A1  Ashmuni;  Bulak  edition,  Part  II.

p.  461.

Certain  grammarians  hold  that  plurals  of  these  forms  are
imperfectly  declined  because  they  are  really  or  by  supposition
plurals  of  plurals ;  for  the  repeated  plurals  have  these  forms.
Thus,  makes  and  and  ^  makes  and

and  plurals  of  the  form  and  are  held  to

correspond  to  these.  According  to  this  theory  the  logical
secondariness  would  consist  in  the  quality  of  plurality,  and  the
formal  secondariness  would  consist  in  the  assumption  of  the
form  of  the  mukarrar  or  repeated  plural ;  real  in  the  first  in¬
stance,  and  by  supposition  in  the  second.  Other  explanations
are  given  of  less  plausibility.  The  opinion  that  one  of  the
causes  of  imperfect  declinability  is  the  divergence  from  the
forms  of  the  singular  is  the  teaching  of  Abu  'Ali,  and  has  been
generally  adopted.  The  answers  to  the  objections  to  it  are
given  by  A1  Ashmuni,  Part  II.  p.  463.  On  this  subject  see
also  Alflyeh,  and  the  grammar  of  Nasif;  as  well  as  Anthol.
Gram.  Arabe,  p.  95  Ar.  text.  The  sense  in  which  the  words


JSrOTJES.


609


Jij,  and  as  applied  to  this  declension,  are  to  be

taken  will  be  sufficiently  understood  from  the  above.

Some  say  that  this  is  a  singular  form, — In  the  Seventh
Assembly  Hariri  uses  the  singular  form  ;  the  contrary

opinion  appears  to  rest  on  a  Tradition  of  the  Prophet,  who  said
to  his  followers,  (p.  78  De  Sacy’s  edition).

Ibn  Malik  treats  as  a  singular  having  the  form  of  a

plural,  and  therefore  imperfectly  declinable.  Others  think  that
either  declension  is  lawful.  Alfiyeh,  v.  660.  Similar  words  are
a  name  for  the  hyena,  and  a  man’s  name.

As  for  the  ^  rGhich  when  it  attaches  itself, — This  requires
little  explanation.  As  the  formal  secondariness  which  is  neces¬
sary  to  the  imperfect  declension  arises  from  divergence  from  a
singular  form,  the  addition  of  the  2^,  which  gives  the  plural  a
singular  form,  takes  away  this  condition,  and  makes  the  declen¬
sion  perfect.  Alfiyeh,  v.  658.

^5  for  the  ^  which  deposes  the  regent.-^Uhe  particle  is  of
two  kinds.  Firstly,  that  is,  forming  a  proposition

equivalent  to  the  masdar  f  in  this  case  it  combines  with  fche
muddrz  y  which  it  causes  to  be  mansuh  ;  thus  :  jlyb*

•  I  desire  that  thou  stand,  is  equivalent  to  1  desire

thy  standing.  So  in  Koran  ii.  180,

that  ye  fast  is  letter  for  you,  is  equivalent  to  your  fasting.”
In  this  case  is  an  regent,  and  nashs  the  verb.  But

may  also  be  considered  a  contraction  of  in  which  case  it
is  called  Ikijsr*,  because  the  original  form  is  lightened

by  taking  away  the  teshdid.  'If  is  one  of  the  sisters  of  and
not  distinguished  from  it  by  Sibawayh,  who  is  of  opinion  that
the  former  is  originally  The  property  of  and  its  sisters
is  that  they  annul  (^)  the  muhtada,  their  action  being  the
reverse  of  and  its  sisters  ;  for  whereas  the  latter  make  their
ism  marfu  and  their  khabar  mansub,  the  former  make  their  ism
mansuh  and  their  khabar  marfu ,  as  plj  These  par¬

ticles  are  considered  to  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  verb,  and
are  therefore  called  particles  assimilated  to  verbs  J'jeSb


510


jsroTJSs.


This  resemblance  consists,  firstly,  in  their  adhering  to  the  nonn,
since  it  is  their  peculiar  property  to  be  prefixed  to  the  muhtada ;
secondly,  in  a  logical  analogy,  since  they  have  the  signification
of  verbs  in  expressing  emphasis,  like  or  comparison,  like
;  thirdly,  in  a  formal  analogy,  since  they  are  composed  of
three  or  more  letters,  the  last  of  which  is  meftuh.  If  this
resemblance  to  the  verb  be  clearly  perceived,  the  peculiar  action
of  these  particles  on  the  muhtada  and  the  khabar  will  be  readily
understood.

Now  when  it  is  said  that  is  the  lightened  from  the  heavy,
that  is,  a  contraction  of  ^1,  it  is  meant  that  is  used  in  the
signification  of  ^  1 ;  but  this  can  only  happen  under  certain  con-
ditions.  When  is  thus  lightened  it  preserves  its  regency,  ix.
its  grammatical  efiect,  but  its  imi  can  only  be  the
elided  (the  damir  as  shoHn  is  the  affixed  pronoun  is  in  ^1,  for
which  see  the  grammars),  and  the  khabar  can  only  be  a  pro¬
position,  aXii.  Thus  in  the  phrase  pU  Xj  the

is  the  lightened  from  the  heavy,  and  its  ism  is  an  elided  ;  the
virtual  expression  being  This  damir  as  sha!n  is

mansub  as  the  ism  of  while  the  khabar  of.  is  the  pro¬
position  pljj  Xj,  which  is  in  the  position  of  rcf\  In  this  case
the  proposition  is  nominal,  and  does  not  require  a

dividing  particle  between  itself  and  its  khabar,  except  in  the
case  of  a  negative.  But  if  the  proposition  be  verbal,
distinctions  are  made.  In  the  case  of  undeclined  verbs,  as
or  there  is  no  fdsil  or  dividing  particle ;  so  also  where  the
verb  expresses  prayer  or  imprecation.  But  in  other  cases  a
dividing  particle  is  lawful,  and  to  be  preferred.  In  the  case  in
the  text  the  dividing  particle  is  what  is  called
that  is  ^  or  These  particles  are  described  as  of

or  because  they  extend  the  time  from  the  present  to  the

future.  We  are  now  able  to  perceive  the  meaning  of  Hariri’s
riddle.  If  ^w-  be  prefixed  to  the  verbal  proposition  then  is
the  lightened  from  the  heavy ;  and  the  sentence

He  (^God)  knows  that  some  of  you  will  be  sick,


NOTJSS.


511


Koran  Ixxiii.  20,  is  equivalent  to  ;  the  elided  damir  as

shan  is  the  ism  of  and  is  mansuh,  while  etc.  is  the

khahar  of  and  in  the  state  of  But  if  there  were  no

(jw  the  must  be  considered  masdan,  and  a  nddb  of  the  verb.
It  is  hardly  correct  to  say  that  here  has  no  regency,  since  it


nasbs  its  elided  ism  the  damir  as  sha  n,  and  places  the  proposition

though  exercises

a  regency  on  the  proposition  it  does  not  exercise  it  on  the  verb


itself,  which  within  that  proposition  is  grammatically  unaffected,
and  is  therefore  marjit .  Or  it  may  be  that  Hariri  takes  the


v^ew  that  the  entirely  destroys  the  regency  of  that  which


precedes  it  on  that  which  follows  it ;  if  so  we  must  consider  that
governs  an  elided  khabar  as  well  as  an  elided  ism ;  in  that
case  the  takdir  would  be  Compare  Baydawi

on  Koran  v.  75.


That  which  is  nasbed  as  a  term  of  circumstance.-  On  this  ques¬
tion  it  will  be  sufficient  to  quote  Hariri  himself,  who  says  in  the
Durrah  that  when  one  pronounces  j,  he  commits

a  fault,  because  is  mejrur  after  only.  Such  is  the
constant  use  in  the  Koran ;  see  ii.  73,  83,  95,  etc.  The  reason,
according  to  Hariri,  that  ^  has  this  peculiarity  is  that  it  is
the  mother  (the  origin  or  principle)  of  the  particles  which  make
the  noun  mejrur ;  for  in  each  class  of  words  that  which  is
the  original  is  distinguished  by  properties  which  the  others
do  not  possess.  Thus  ^\,  with  the  hesr,  is  distinguished  from  its
sisters  by  the  prefixion  of  J  to  its  khabar ;  thus  alone  admits
a  verb  in  the  preterite  as  its  khabar  \  thus,  in  swearing,  the
particle  alone  can  be  used  when  the  verb,  ‘"I  swear’'  is
expressed,  and  alone  can  be  joined  to  the  pronoun,  as  cIJo.
Whatever  may  be  thought  of  this  reasoning,  the  usage  in  the
Arabic  language  is  certainly  as  the  author  states.

As  to  the  annexed  noun. — The  meaning  of  the  author  is
that  though  its  property  is  to  be  followed  by  a  noun
mejrur,  yet  in  one  case  is  followed  by  a  mansub,  and  therefore
cannot  be  looked  upon  as  in  annexion  to  the  noun  following ;  it
may,  consequently,  be  said  to  have  lost  one  of  its  handles  or


512


NOTES.


links  of  annexion.  The  word  or  ^ belongs  to  the
class  of  nouns  which  are  constantly  annexed.  These  are
divided  into  two  classes ;  firstly,  snch  as  require  annexion  both
logically  and  formally,  and  are  never  used  separately ;  among
them  are  and  Secondly,^  such  as  require  an¬

nexion  logically  though  not  formally,  like  Ji,  and  and  ^^1.
Alfiyeh,  v.  396  :  A1  Ashmuni,  Part  II.  p.  152.  is  made
indeclinable  by  the  generality  of  the  Arabs,  because  it  has  only
one  use,  and  that  an  adverbial  one ;  and  it  only  quits  its  quality
of  zarj,  when  it  is  mejrur  by  ^^^4.  Indeed  it  never  appears
in  the  Koran  except  after  as  at  xi.  1 ;  xviii.  2,  64.  The
tribe  of  Kays  decline  it;  so  that  at  xviii.  2,  it  is  also  read
^3^  The  noun  which  follows  it  is  mejnir,  except  in  the  case
of  which  is  mansich  by  ,  or  specification ;  it  is  also  said
that  in  this  case  the^noun^is  the  khahar  of  an  elided  ^^1^,  the
virtual  sense  being  Yet  the  jerr  is

lawful,  and  is  according  to  rule,  the  nasj)  being  the  more  rare.
The  Kufians  teach  that  may  be  marfu  after  through
elided,  the  takdtr  being  :  Alfiyeh,

V.  409.  'To  understand  the  construction  of  these  sentences  it
must  be  noticed  that  is  one  of  the  nouns  of  annexion  which
may  be  annexed  to  the  proposition,  being,  with  the  exception  of
the  only  zarf  of  place  which  has  this  property.  A1

Ashmuni,  Part  II.  p.  153.  Another  way.  of  accounting  for

the  nash  of  is  that  it  is  assimilated  to  a  mef^'ul  by  reason  of
being  assimilated  to  the  hm  al  fail,  and  the  latter  is  so
assimilated,  since  it  sometimes  has  the  final  and  sometimes
not ;  the  ^  so  far  having  the  nature  of  tanwm.  You  would
then  say  as  you  say  Ujj  There  are  other  explana¬

tions,  but  the  above  are  the  most  satisfactory.

The  regent  whose  *  last  joins  his  frst. — On  the  'particles  of
calling,  sufficient  information  will  be  found  in  the  Alfiyeh,  v.
573,  et  seqq.  A  distinction  must  be  observed  between  hamzeh,
which  is  used  in  calling  one  who  is  near,  and  T  with  'medd,

which  is  used  in  calling  one  who  is  either  distant,  or  in  the

predicament  of  being  distant,  as  when  he  is  inattentive  or  asleep.


NOTJES,


513


^  The  regent  whose  deputy  is  more  spacious  than  he  in  abode, —
Hariri,  in  the  passage  of  the  Durrah,  quoted  above,  explains,  as
he  does  here,  v/hy  is  to  be  considered  the  original  of  the
particles  which  enter  into  formulas  of  swearing,  namely,  that
it  is  used  when  the  verb  ‘'I  swear”  is  expressed,  and  also
that  the  affixed  pronoun  may  be  joined  to  it.  Among  the  Imruf
al  jerr  is  used  only  before  the  name  of  God,  or  his  epithets,
as  and  i^\  Alfiyeh,  v.  366  ;  Nasifs  grammar,

p.  191.  The  usage  of  ^  is  explained  by  Ibn  Hisham,  Anthol.
Gram.  Arabe,  p.  88.  It  is  a  li^^rf  al  jerr  in  two  cases,  namely
where  it  stands  for  CJj  as  many  a  region  ;  and  where

it  is  the  j  of  the  oath,  as  swear)  by  the  jig  tree

and  the  olive  tree:  Koran  xcv.  1.  Zamakhshafi  says  (Anthol.
Gram.  Arabe,  p.  lOO)  that  the  primitive  signification  of  is
adhesion,  so  that  when  you  say  swear  you  mean  ^'My
oath  adheres  to  the  word  God.”  He  says,  further  on,  that
the  ^  is  a  substitute  for  and  the  is  a  substitute  for  j ;
thus  confirming  the  judgment  of  Hariri  that  the  is  the
original.  When  Hariri  says  that  ^  has  the  sense  of  union,
he  adopts  the  opinion  of  the  school  of  Basra,  who  hold  that  the
conjunction  and  ”  conveys  only  the  idea  of  accompaniment,
and  that  when  you  say  Zayd  and  *Amr  came,”  it  may  be  that
Zayd  came  before  'Amr,  or  after  him,  or  that  they  both  came
together.  On  the  other  hand  the  Kufians  teach  that  the  idea  of
order  is  also  inherent  in  the  word  and,”  so  that  what  is  men¬
tioned  before  it  must  be  considered  as  prior  to  what  is  mentioned
after  it.  This,  however,  is  refuted  by  Koran  xxiii.  39  :  There
is  nought  but  the  life  below  ;  we  die  and  we  live,  and  we  shall
not  be  raised  again.”  Here  what  is  later  in  time  is  put  before
what  is  earlier,  for  it  is  evident  that  when  the  infidels  say  we
live,”  they  refer  to  the  present  life,  since  they  are  denying  the
resurrection.  It  must,  be  admitted,  however,  that  according
to  Bayd^wi,  we  die  and  we  live,”  is  interpreted  to  mean  one
generation  dies  and  another  lives,”  which  would  remove  the
objection  to  the  Kufian  theory  which  is  derived  from  the  Koran.

Also  the  j  is  larger  in  dwelling, — The  various  uses  of  j  are


514


NOTES.


given  by  Ibn  Hisbam  in  the  passage  cited  above.  That  it  is
prefixed  to  the  noun,  the  verb,  and  the  particle,  while  is
prefixed  only  to  the  noun  needs  no  explanation.  Its  use  as
a  substitute  for  or  with  -understood,  has  been  already
noticed.  The  rest  of  the  text  applies  to  such  phrases  as

j  where  the  second

is  mansicby  with  the  meaning  Do  ye  think  that  ye  shall  enter
into  Paradise  except  God  know  which  of  you  have  warred  well,
so  that  he  may  know  those  who  are  constant?”  Koran  iii.  136.
Or  to  such  as  ^  not  forbid  a  thing

to  men,  and  (in  order  to)  commit  it  yourself.”

The 'place  'where  'males  put  on  the  veils  of  women, — This  riddle
relates  to  the  grammatical  singularity  which  appears  not  only  in
Arabic  but  also  in  Hebrew  and  Syriac ;  namely,  that  the  femi¬
nine  numeral  from  three  to  ten  is  used  with  the  masculine  noun,
and  the  masculine  numeral  with  the  feminine  noun.  The  most
reasonable  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  is  that  these  numerals
are  substantives  of  multitude,  the  feminine  representing  in  the
Semitic  languages  the  idea  of  collectiveness.  It  is  as  though
you  should  say  in  Latin  ^Urias  filiorum.”  The  Arab  gram¬
marians  say  that  as  the  feminine  fundamentally  belongs  to  the
abstract  numeral  it  is  put  with  the  masculine,  which  is  the
fundamental  gender ;  and  as  the  masculine  is  secondary  in  the
numeral  it  is  put  with  the  feminine,  which  is  the  secondary
gender.  Nasif's  grammar  *  A1  Ashmuni,  Part  III.  p.  99 ;  Ewald,
Ausfdhrliches  Lehrbuch  der  Hebraischen  Sprache,  7th  edition,
p.  650.

The  other  questions  require  no  explanation.  The  sixth  riddle
in  the  Thirty-sixth  Assembly  applies  to  the  word


THE  TWENTY-EIFTH  ASSEMBLY.

Keref — The  city  of  Kerej,  between  Ispahan  and  Hamadan,
situated  in  the  hill  country  of  Persian  Irak,  was  the  seat  of  the


NOTES.


515


family  of  A1  *  Ijli,  a  powerfal  Arab  bouse  descended  from  Bekr
ibn  Wa’il.  Kerej,  according  to  Sberisbi,  was  sixty  parasangs
from  Ispahan.  It  was  rebuilt  and  greatly  enlarged  by  A1
Kasim  ibn  usa  the  'Ijli,  commonly  known  as  Abu  Dulaf,  a
celebrated  general,  and  a  great  patron  of  letters  in  the  time  of
the  Khalifs  A1  Ma’miin  and  A1  Mo'tasim.  A  life  of  him,  or
rather  some  fragmentary  anecdotes  respecting  him,  may  be
found  in  Ibn  Khallikan.  When  Ar  Reshid  inquired  of  Abu
Dulaf  respecting  the  state  of  his  country,  and  received  for
answer  that  it  was  wasted  and  desolate,  spoiled  by  Arabs  and
lyirds,  a  certain  person  present  declared  that  Abu  Dulaf  had
liad  a  chief  share  in  this  devastation.  Abu  Dulaf  then  promised
that  with  the  help  of  the  Khalif  he  would  restore  the  country
to  prosperity,  which  he  did  by  rebuilding  the  city  of  Kerej.

Scorching  cold.—^  signifies  the  scorching  or  blasting  by  a
cold  wind,  as  ^  by  a  hot  one.  At  Koran  xxi.  47,  it  is  said

If  but  a  blast  of  the  chastisement  of  thy  Lord  reach  them.''

Sorest  torment. — The  phrase  is  derived  from  a

Tradition  of  the  Prophet,  and  is  defined  as  such  extreme  suffer¬
ing  as  makes  a  man  desire  death.  Abu  Horayrah  relates  that
Mohammed  taught  him  the  following  rhythmical  prayer  :

^

Another  Tradition  makes  the  Prophet  say  that  to  be  refused  in
one's  need  is  jakd  al  held!.  It  is  conventionally  applied  to  great
worldly  distress,  as  hopeless  indebtedness,  or  small  means  with  a
,  large  family.  The  word  signifies  energy  or  effort,  and  is
used  several  times  in  the  Koran  in  a  phrase  signifying  the
most  energetic  or  forcible  of  your  oaths."  See  v.  68  ;  vi.  ]  09  ;
xvi.  40,  and  other  places.

Attendance  at  the  congregation.— says  that  the  cold
in  the  province  of  Granada  had  a  still  greater  effect  on  his
countryman  Ibn  Sarah,  for  it  prevented  him  from  going  even  to
prayer.  The  poet  thus  addresses  the  people  of  the  place  :

Sure  we  may  fail  at  the  prayer  in  your  land,  and  even  drink  the  strong
wine,  though  a  thing  forbidden  ;

Since  we  would  gladly  go  to  the  eternal  flame  as  more  gentle  and
merciful  than  the  cold  of  Shallr ;


516


JSrOTJES.


If  my  Lord  were  to  cast  me  into  hell  on  such  a  day  as  this  I  should
say  “How  comfortable  is  hell.’’

The  author  of  these  irreverent  verses  was  Abu  Mohammed
ibn  Sarat  ash  Shantarini  (of  Santarem),  a  poverty-stricken  poet
of  Spain,  who  lived  by  bookbinding.  He  died  at  Almeria  in  the
year  517  (a.i).  1123).

And  heeded  nought,— this  word  see  Lane’s  Lexicon,

0  people, — The  metre  of  these  verses  is  the  fifth  of  the
the  last  foot  being  I  have  divided  the  translation

into  lines  as  if  the  measure  were  maehtur,  in  accordance  with
the  exceptional  principle  of  the  rejez,  but  it  may  be  that  in  this
particular  arud  the  verse  is  made  up  of  two  hemistiches.

Destroyed :  caused  them  to  pass  away  and  perish.  Thus,
I  think  not  that  this  garden  will  ever  perish,”  Koran  xviii.  33.
My  humped  camels  mourned  the  morning  I  made  the  feast, —
However  poorly  the  Arabs  might  fare  when  alone  they  thought
it  due  to  their  reputation  for  hospitality  to  feast  the  stranger  to
the  utmost  extent  of  their  means ;  and  this  was  gener^ly  done
by  killing  a  camel  for  him,  the  joints  of  which  were  either
roasted  at  the  fire  or  boiled  in  large  cauldrons  :  all  who  chose
to  come  shared  in  the  feast,  and  what  remained  was  distributed
among  the  poor.  The  eating  of  camel’s  flesh  seems  not  to  have
been  universal  in  the  early  times  among  the  Arabs.  There  is
no  mention  of  its  having  been  used  for  food  by  the  Hebrew
patriarchs,  and  it  is  forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  law :  Leviticus
xi.  4;  Deuteronomy 'xiv.  7.  At  the  proverb  '‘Barakish  has
sinned  against  her  people,”  Arab.  Prov.  11.  89,  it  is  related  that
Barakish  was  a  wife  of  Lotaan  ibn  Ad.  Her  husband’s  tribe
did  not  feed  upon  camel,  but  a  son  of  hers  by  a  former  marriage,
going  to  visit  his  mother’s  family,  brought  back  a  joint  of  camel,
which  Lo^an,  tasting,  pronounced  to  be  good  food.  BaraMsh,
hearing  this  and  desiring  to  feed  upon  camel,  said  to  her  husband.
Camel  us  and  camel  thyself,”  meaning,  Give  us  camel  to  eat
and  eat  it  thyself,”  which  words  became  proverbial,  Arab.  Prov.
1.  295.  The  eating  of  camel  which  had  been  confined  to  Hijaz
and  Nejd  then  became  general  among  the  descendants  of  Ad ;


NOTES.


517


so  that  Lokman,  who  was  a  powerful  prince  and  exacted  tribute,
destroyed  the  camels  of  his  wife's  people  for  food.  Hence  the
origin  of  the  proverb.  Lokman  is  described  as  a  person  of
enormous  strength ;  he  could  dig  with  his  nails  a  well  for  his
camels  to  drink  at :  see  the  proverb  Stronger  than  Lokman,"
Arab.  Prov.  I.  701.  This  legend  may  be  connected  with  the
tradition  which  places  his  home  in  the  AhHf,  tracts  of  sand  in
the  region  of  Ash  Shihr,  where  such  a  feat  may  not  be  im¬
possible.  He  was  also  said  to  be  of  boundless  voracity,  inas¬
much  as  he  ate  one  cameTs  carcass  in  the  morning  and  another
iif  the  evening ;  More  voracious  than  Lokman,"  Arab.  Prov.
I.  134.  This  may  be  explained  by  supposing  him  to  have  been
profusely  hospitable.  His  courtiers  were  as  liberal  as  himself.
At  the  proverb  More  gambling  than  Lokman,"  Arab.  Prov.  II.
938,  it  is  said  that  LokmS,n  used  to  play  at  the  game  of  maysir
with  arrows,  for  portions  of  camel,  as  described  in  a  former  note  ;
and  that  his  companions  were  eight  persons  renowned  for  their
generosity ;  so  that  it  came  to  be  said  proverbially  of  liberal
persons,  ^^They  are  like  Lokmdn's  gamblers*"  These  various
legends  point  to  the  adoption  of  the  camel  as  food  by  the  Arabs
of  the  south,  under  the  influence  of  a  powerful  prince.

A  spindle  in  nakedness. — The  spindle  is  made  an  example
of  nakedness,  since  the  woman  spins  the  wool  from  it  and  leaves
it  bare.  Arab.  Prov.  11.  160.

Warmth. — There  is  a  tradition  connected  with  the  word  _ j

which  may  be  worth  relating,  as  it  exhibits  a  remarkable
peculiarity  in  the  speech  of  Koraysh.  Though  this  tribe  is
reputed  to  have  spoken  the  purest  Arabic,  and  the  Koran  is
in  conformity  with  their  tongue,  they  are  said  to  have  frequently
omitted  the  hamzeh  in  words  which,  according  to  the  pure  speech
of  the  Arabs,  contained  it.  One  of  these  was  the  verb  '^he
was  warm,"  which  they  pronounced  like  liJ,  ‘‘he  despatched
the  wounded  man,"  On  one  occasion  a  man  of

Johayneh  brought  the  Prophet  a  prisoner,  who  trembled  with
cold,  on  which  the  Prophet  said  “  Despatch  him,"  meaning
to  say  “Warm  him."  They  took  out  their  prisoner  and


518


mTES.


killed  him.  According  to  Tabari  and  others,  the  death  of  Malik
ibn  Nowayrah  and  his  companions  of  the  tribe  of  Yarbu  was  due
to  a  mistake  of  the  same  kind,  since  the  Korayshi  crier  of
Khalid  ibn  A1  Welid,  intending  to  proclaim  in  the  camp  Warm
your  prisoners,’’  it  being  a  cold  night,  said  “  Despatch  your
prisoners,”  and  the  soldiers  fell  upon  the  Benu  Yarbu'  and
slaughtered  them.  An  instance  of  this  omission  of  the  hamzeh
is  mentioned  by  Baydawi  at  Koran  xvii.  103,  where  it  is  said
that  Koraysh  use  JL  for  JL:.  The  clear  pronunciation  of
the  hamzeh  was  called

Sinn  and  Sinnahar. — There  were  seven  days  in  the  early
spring  which  were  thought  to  bring  with  them  a  return  of  the
winter’s  cold,  before  the  warmer  weather  set  in*  According
to  Sherishi  they  are  the  four  last  days  of  February  and  the  first
three  of  March.  The  two  days  mentioned  in  the  text  were
the  first  two  of  them.  The  names  are  united  in  some  verses
by  Ibn  Ahmar,  quoted  in  De  Sacy’s  commentary ;  they  are  also
united  by  Nasif,  in  his  Sixth  Assembly.

An  ample  robe^r-On^  liberal  and  beneficent.

Let  him  expend, — Koran  Ixv.  7,

Of  Ms  day :  of  his  yesterday, — The  meaning  of  these  phrases
is  that  a  man  must  depend  for  approbation  and  reward  on  what
he  himself  does  in  his  own  age,  and  not  on  what  his  ancestors
have  done  in  times  past.

Bidden  us  to  ask  of  thee. — The  allusion  here  is  to  Koran
iv.  36  and  xl.  62.

Prefers  even  from  his  straitness.—Com^^v^  Koran  lix.  9.

Isd^Uf  the  son  of*Shahbar,  is  the  exemplar  among  the  Arabs
of  a  man  who  is  great  by  his  own  merits,  and  not  by  the
nobility  of  his  ancestors.  He  was  chamberlain  to  No'man
ibn  al  Munthir,  king  of  Hira,  known  as  No'man  Abu  Kabus,
and  in  this  capacity  befriended  two  of  the  most  eminent  poets  of
the  time.  An  Nabighat  ath  Thobyani  and  Hassan  ibn  Thabit.
The  phrase  in  the  text  is  taken  from  some  verses  of  An  Nabi-
ghah,  who  says  the  soul  of  'Isam  has  ennobled  Tsam  Arab.
Prov.  II.  745.  Sherishi,  no  doubt  erroneously,  attributes  them


NOTES.


519


to  'Isain  himself,  who  was  asked  how  he  who  was  low  of  origin
had  attained  to  such  high  rank.  Nabighah,  who  like  most
of  the  poets  of  the  Ignorance  was  licentious  in  style,  had  com¬
posed  some  verses  celebrating  in  impassioned  language  the
beauties  of  Mutejarradeh,  the  wife  of  No'man,  and  indicating
that  she  requited  his  admiration.  This  Mutejarradeh  had  been
the  wife  of  the  king^s  father,  after  whose  death  the  king  had
married  her,  a  practice  permitted  among  the  ancient  Arabs,
though  apparently  not  generally  approved,  since  it  was  called
the  marriage  of  hate.  It  was  abrogated  by  Moham¬
med;  see  Koran  iv.  26.  ‘Some  say  that  Nabighah  had  entered
the  apartment  of  Mutejarradeh ;  others  that  he  composed  the
kasideh  at  the  instance  of  A1  Munakhkhal,  her  lover.  The  verses
were  repeated  to  the  king,  who  was  greatly  incensed,  and  would
have  slain  Nabighah,  had  not^Is^m  warned  him,  so  that  he  w^-s
able  to  escape  by  flight.  He  repaired  to  the  court  of  Ghassan,
but  being  after  a  time  desirous  of  returning  to  Hira  he  sought  a
reconciliation  with  the  king.  Ndm^n  was  sick,  and  Nabighah
addressed  the  following  verses  to  the  chamberlain  :

I  conjure  thee  tell  me  whether  the  hero  be  still  borne  on  the  litter  ;

I  do  not  blame  thee  that  I  enter  not ;  but,  tell  me,  what  is  behind  thee,
‘Mm  ?

These  last  words  became  proverbial,  being  used  when  you  ask
information  of  any  one  concerning  something  that  he  has
seen  ;  Arab.  Prov.  11.  589,  where  it  is  made  a  woman’s
name,  Nabighah  was  afterwards  received  into  favour

by  the  king,  and  remained  thenceforward  on  good  terms  with
him.  Isam  procured  for  Hassan  ibn  ThS-bit  the  favour  of
the  king  by  warning  him  that  when  No‘man  spoke  against
the  king  of  Ghassan,  and  asked  his  opinion,  he  should  not
join  in  disparaging  him ;  for  Norman,  though  he  hated  his
royal  brother  and  railed  at  him  himself,  would  not  like  a  king  to
be  ill-spoken  of  by  a  subject.  These  adventures,  taken  from
the  Kit^b  al  Aghani,  will  be  found  at  length  in  the  second
volume  of  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval’s  Essai.  It  became  a  saying

^  ^  in  the  sense  of  Be  like  'Is4m  w^hose


520


NOTES.


honour  was  derived  from  his  own  worth,  and  not  like  one  who
relies  for  honour  merely  on  the  bones  of  his  ancestors.”  An
anecdote  of  A1  Hajjaj  connected  with  this  phrase  is  given  by
Maydani  at  the  first  cited  proverb,  and  from  Sherishi  in  De
Sacy’s  commentary.  Whether  the  proverb,  ‘isam  was  sleeping
at  the  hour  of  departure,”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  770,  refers  to  the
same  person  I  am  not  able  to  determine.  More  on  this  subject
will  be  found  in  the  notes  to  the  kasilleh  of  An  Nabighah  in  De
Sacy’s  Chrestomathie.

Al  Asmai  has  been  already  spoken  of.  He  was  celebrated  not
only  for  his  great  learning,  but  for  his  cheerful  humour  and
ready  wit ;  of  which  examples  are  recorded  too  numerous  to  be
repeated  here.  Sherishi  remarks  that  Al  Asma'i  is  to  be  con¬
sidered  an  ‘IsS,mi,  that  is,  one  who  was  great  on  account  of  his
own  merits,  since  he  descended  from  Bahileh,  which  is  the  most
bastard  and  the  meanest  of  the  tribes  of  the  Arabs,  It  is  but
justice,  however,  to  the  great  scholar  to  say  that,  according  to
Ibn  Khallikin,  no  such  name  as  Bdhileh  appears  in  his  pedigree,
which  the  biographer  sets  forth  up  to  *Adnan  himself.  He  bore
the  name  of  Bahili,  according  to  this  authority,  because  the  wife
of  Malik,  one  of  his  ancestors,  was  named  Bahileh.  Whatever
may  have  been  the  disgrace  of  belonging  to  this  tribe,  Al  Asma'i
shared  it  with  one  of  the  most,  illustrious  men  of  Islam,
Kutaybet  ibn  Muslim,  who  conquered  Tartary  in  the  reign  of
Al  Welid  ibn  ‘Abd  al  Melik.  Ibn  Khallikan,  in  his  life  of  Kutay-
beh,  gives  several  anecdotes  illustrative  of  the  contempt  in  which
Bahileh  was  held.  The  Arabs  of  the  desert,  he  says,  hated  to
bear  the  name  ;  so  that  a  poet  said,  “It  profits  not  a  man  to  be
descended  from  Hashim  if  he  have  a  Bahili  soul.”  Again,  “  If
it  were  said  to  a  dog,  ^Thou  Bahili,’  the  dog  would  turn  howling
from  the  reproach  of  such  a  pedigree.”  The  Prophet  being
asked  by  Al  Ash  ath  ibn  Kays  al  Kindi  whether  all  were  equally
subject  to  the  law  of  retaliation,  namely,  that  the  offender
should  suffer  the  precise  injury  that  he  had  inflicted  (Koran
ii.  173;  v.  49)  said,  “Yes,  even  if  thou  slowest  a  Bahili,  I
should  slay  thee  to  avenge  him.”  An  Arab  being  told  that  a


NOTES.


621


certain  man  had  sprnng  not  merely  from  Bahileh,  but  from  the
slaves  of  Bahileh,  immediately  fell  down  and  kissed  his  hands
and  his  feet.  Being  asked  why  he  did  so,  he  replied,  God
would  never  have  inflicted  on  thee  such  a  misfortune  in  this  life
unless  he  had  intended  to  reward  thee  with  Paradise  in  the
next.”  This  evil  renown  of  Bahileh  caused  Abu  'Obaydeh  to
doubt  whether  A1  Asma'l  could  ever  have  called  himself  by  such
a  name ;  since  those  who  belonged  to  the  tribe  concealed  their
pedigree.

Cloak  me. — Abu  Zayd  intends  H4rith  to  understand  the  word
in  a  figurative  sense,  that  of  concealing  who  he  was ;  while  the
others  believe  that  he  merely  asks  for  clothing.

Imbued  with  the  dew  of  benevolence.— word  in  the

sense  of  being  imbued  or  penetrated  with  anything  is  taken  from
Koran  ii.  87,  They  (the  Israelites)  were  imbued  in  their  hearts
with  the  calf;”  or  they  ^‘were  made  to  drink  in  their  hearts”  of
it;  which  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  they  were  imbued  with
the  love  of  it,  and  the  desire  to  worship  it,  as  the  cloth  is  imbued
with  the  dye  :  Zamakhskari  and  Bayddwi.  It  may  be,  how¬
ever,  that  the  original  phrase  indicates  a  vague  acquaintance  on
the  part  of  Mohammed  with  the  account  given  at  Exodus
xxxii.  20  :  And  he  took  the  calf  which  they  had  made,  and
burnt  it  in  the  fire  and  ground  it  to  powder,  and  strawed  it  upon
the  water,  and  made  the  children  of  Israel  drink  of  it.”

Well  done  he. — The  measure  of  these  verses  belongs  to  the
third  darb  of  the  first  arud  of  the  saif.  The  arud  which  is
originally  loses  the  by  which  is  the  dropping

of  the  last  letter  of  a  watad  mefruk  at  the  end  of  a  foot ;  it  then
suffers  Jtfb,  which  is  the  dropping  of  the  quiescent  fourth  letter.
It  thus  becomes  The  darb  being  also  originally

suffers  which  is  the  dropping  of  a  watad  mefruk  at  the  end
of  a  foot,  and  becomes

Jinn.—Zs^  is  another  form  of  The  expression,  Men

and  Jinn,”  is  taken  from  the  last  Sura  of  the  Koran,  which  is
one  of  the  two  prayers  for  protection.


522


NOTES.


The  silk  of  Par adm, — The  people  of  Paradise  will  be  clothed
in  green  silk  and  in  which  is  thick  woven

embroidered  brocade.  Koran  xviii.  30;  xliv.  53;  Ixxvi.  21.
God  provides  these  two  materials,  one  fine  and  the  other  of  a
stout  texture,  that  the  believers  may  be  gratified  according  to
their  fancy.  The  silk  will  be  green  because  that  is  the  most
beautiful  of  colours.

A  sharp  cold  was  that  which  froze  thee  ! — This  is  admirative
or  ironical.

Prosecute  not  that, — Koran  xvii.  38.  For  the  interpretation
of  this  command  see  Baydawi.  The  meaning  of  li*  or  ^n
this  passage  is  taken  to  be  a  following  up  of  a  man  or  thing
for  the  purpose  of  accusation  or  calumny ;  ”  so  that  in  ordinary
phrase  Ui  signifies  that  such  an  one  inveighed  against

or  slandered  such  an  one ;  it  is  also  used  of  lying  and  bearing
false  witness.  In  a  Tradition  of  the  Prophet  it  is  said,  using
the  word  Ujj,  Whosoever  shall  prosecute  or  accuse  a  Moslem
untruly,  God  shall  imprison  him  amid  the  sweat  of  the  damned.’’

Taybeh,--T[\\^  was  the  name  which  the  city  of  Yathrib  re¬
ceived  from  Mohammed :  for  God  made  it  sweet  and

goodly,”  as  the  home  of  the  Prophet  during  life,  and  his  resting-
place  after  death.  The  lakah  or  appellation  of  Medinet  an  Nebi^
the  City  of  the  Prophet,  however,  prevailed,  and  is  now  used  as
the  proper  name  of  the  city.

My  nature  is  to  pass  from  prey  to  prey.— The  word
which  is  used  several  times  by  Hariri,  is  made  popular  by  the
proverb  attributed  to  a  certain  Abu  Akhzam,  for  which  see
Arab.  Prov.  I.  658,  and  Hariri’s  explanation  to  the  Forty-
fourth  Assembly.

From  '"Amr  to  Zayd. — That  is,  from  one  person  to  another.
These  two  names,  being  very  common  among  the  Arabs,  are
used  in  stating  grammatical  or  legal  propositions ;  as  w^e  should
say,  ^^John  struck  William;^’  ‘^John  leased  land  to  William.”
They  are  used  in  the  verses  of  Abu  Odayneh ;  Schultens,  Mon.
Vetust.  Arabise.

Alore  coated  than  an  onion. — This  homely  but  expressive  pro-


NOTES.


523


verb  is  to  be  found  in  Maydani.  Arab.  Prov.  II.  385.  A  verb
is  formed  from  the  noun,  so  that  you  say

I  peeled  or  stripped  (literally,  I  onioned)  the  man  of  his
clothes,”  that  is,  I  peeled  them  off  like  the  coats  of  an  onion.”

Glory  to  God  who  runted  thy  mind. — This  is  an  expression  of
wonder.

Rent  the  bottle  of  thy  storing  is  equivalent  to  ^^made  thee
incapable  of  remembering  anything.”  I  have  rendered  on
the  authority  of  Sherlshi,  who  says  that  it  signifies  to  cover  with
rust  and  dirt,  as  a  sword  is  covered.  The  word  is  used  in  the
Soran  as  at  iv.  154 ;  xvi.  110,  to  signify  an  action  of  God  on
the  hearts  of  the  wicked,  by  which  He  keeps  them  from  know¬
ledge  of  the  truth,  and  abandons  them  to  evil  deeds.  Originally,
no  doubt,  the  meaning  was  simply  to  mould”  or  stamp”  the
heart  or  understanding ;  but  from  these  passages  it  acquired  an
evil  signification,  so  that  it  is  said,  We  take  refuge  with  God
from  (sinful  desire)  which  is  akin  to  (vice  or  that  state
of  the  mind  which  is  reprobate  of  God).”  The  derivative
signification  of  foulness,  or  uncleanness,  is  easily  understood.

is  manmh  as  a  masdar ;  but  see  also  Bayd^wi,  Koran
xvii.  1.  It  is  the  word  used  whenever  some  indignity  to  God  is
to  be  repudiated ;  as  that  he  has  a  Son,  or  a  female  companion,
or  partners  in  the  Godhead.

Deskereh  was  a  place  between  Holwan  and  Bagdad,  sixteen
parasangs  from  the  latter.

Ihn  Sukkereh. — Abu  1  Hasan  Mohammed  the  Hashimi,  sur-
named  Ibn  Sukkereh,  was  an  elegant  poet  of  the  fourth  century
of  the  .  Hijra.  He  was  descended  from  'Ali,  son  of  the  Khalif
A1  Mahdi,  and  was  consequently  of  the  blood  of  Hfishim.  He
excelled  in  light  and  humorous  writing,  as  may  be  supposed
from  the  verses  in  the  text.  His  collected  works  amount  to
about  fifty  thousand  verses.  He  was  the  rival  of  Ibn  al  Hajjfij,
a  contemporary  poet  of  the  same  style ;  and  the  two  were  com¬
pared  to  Jerir  and  Al  Farazdak  in  a  former  age.  Ibn  Sukkereh
died  in  385  (a.d.  996).

Winter  comes. — ^These  are  the  pair  of  verses  of  which  Hariri


524


NOTES.


speaks  in  his  Preface  as  having  been  taken  from  an  extraneous
source.  The  metre  is  hasit.  For  the  two  plurals  of
which  occur  in  the  first  line,  see  Lane’s  Lexicon,  and  Hariri  in
the  Durrah  (Anthol.  Gramm.  Arabe,  p.  42,  Arab.  Text.)  It
may  be  necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  seven  things
here  described  as  necessary  for  winter  all  begin  with  the  letter
Mf.  A  wit  remarking  on  these  verses  has  said  that  if  a  man
has  one  kaf,  namely  a  purse,  he  can  easily  supply  himself
with  the  other  six.


THE  TWENTY-SIXTH  ASSEMBLY.

The  Spotted'' — The  Arabic  rhetoricians  have  given  various

fanciful  names  to  the  artificial  compositions  of  the  later  writers.
The  epithet  ‘ILij  is  applied  to  a  composition  of  which  every
alternate  letter  is  pointed,  the  rest  being  unpointed.  Its  literal
signification  is  spotted,”  like  the  leopard  which  is  called
or  a  hen  which  is  white  but  has  black  spots  on  her  feathers.  The
composition  called  *1%^,  of  which  the  Sixth  Assembly  gives  an  ex-
a:mple  is  one  in  which  the  letters  of  each  alternate  word  are  pointed,
while  the  letters  of  the  other  words  are  without  points.  This
name  is  given  to  it  from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  a  horse  which
which  has  one  eye  black  and  the  other  blue ;  such  a  horse  is
called  ujuiu  Verses  made  up  of  words  which  are  entirely
without  pointed  letters  are  called  other

hand,  those  which  consist  of  words  of  which  all  the  letters  are
pointed  are  called  or  brides.”  The  word  JLU  is

applied  to  a  woman  who  is  unadorned  with  a  necklace,  the
emblem  of  female  dignity ;  while  the  bride,  on  the  contrary,  is
supposed  to  fully  adorned,  the  rhetoricians  conceiving  that  the
words  are  adorned  by  the  points  attached  to  them.  The  expla¬
nation  of  Sherishi  (Assembly  46)  that  among  the  pagan  Arabs
brides  were  adorned  by  their  faces  being  spotted  with  saffron,  is
not  necessary  for  the  understanding  of  this  epithet.  Examples


NOTES.


525


of  these  and  of  other  kinds  of  artificial  composition  are  to  be
found  in  the  Forty-sixth  Assembly.

Ahiudz  was  a  city,  or  rather  a  district  of  towns,  on  the  Karun
river,  probably  the  Pasitigris,  about  fifty  miles  south-east  of  Sus.
In  a  note  to  Nasif  al  Yazaji’s  Assemblies,  p.  8,  it  is  said  to  have
consisted  of  nine  towns.  It  was  noted  for  its  unhealthiness,  new
comers  being  liable  to  attacks  of  fever.  There  is  an  allusion  to
the  sugar  of  Ahwaz  in  some  verses  of  Al  Mutenebbi,  quoted  in
De  Sacy’s  Commentary.  The  explanation  of  the  expression
the  two  markets  ”  is  that  one  part  of  the  inhabitants  carried  on
their  business  from  morning  till  noon,  and  the  others  during  the
remainder  of  the  day.  Ahwaz  disputes  with  Basra  the  honour
of  having  given  birth  to  the  poet  Abu  Nnwas.

Passing  sombre  days :  literally,  urging  or  driving.  De  Sacy
compares  it  with  the  French  pousser  le  temps  avec  Tepaule.^’
Chrest.  Arabe,  III.  268.  The  word  is  used  of  gentle  urging
forward,  as  a  man  drives  on  his  camel,  or  a  cow  her  calf.

Mouldering  camp-ruin. — The  abandonment  by  a  tribe  of  its
abode,  leaving  behind  the  ashes  and  other  relics  of  the  encamp¬
ment,  was,  as  has  been  noticed,  a  common  subject  of  lamentation
among  the  Arab  poets ;  for  the  poet's  mistress  was  supposed  to
have  passed  away  with  her  family,  leaving  him  disconsolate.
For  the  words  in  the  text  see  Diwan  of  Imr  al  Kays,  p.  20
Arab.  Text,  first  line  of  poem.

Girded  up  of  shirt;  that  is,  actively ;  gathering  up  my  skirt
for  speed.

Its  streamlet ....  the  abundant  waters ;  that  is,  I  left  Ahw&,z
where  I  had  no  hope  of  making  gain,  and  sought  some  richer
place."

The  shadow  of  the  tent. — Hariri  says  in  the  Durrah  (Anthol.
Gramm.  Arabe,  p.  27,  Arab.  Text)  that  Jfe  is  applied  to  the
shadow  only  during  the  forenoon,  and  ^  during  the  afternoon.

Wilt  thou  not  ? — Nasif  al  Yazaji,  in  his  letter  to  De  Sacy,  says
that  the  'i\  here  is  not  interrogative.  It  may  be  like  U  Si  particle
of  calling  attention,  see  Anthol.  Gramm.  Arabe,  p.  109,  Arab

Text.  In  the  37th  it  is  said,  using  the  hamzeh  alone,  How!


526


JSrOTi;S,


at  one.  time  a  Temimi,  and  at  another  a  Kayd  ?  ”  There  it  is
apparently  Compare  also  28th,  p.  347,  and  29th,

p.  360.  But  I  have  made  it  interrogative  as  most  consistent
with-  the  sense.

Took  my  seat. — is  used  of  deliberately  taking  a  seat,  as
on  a  cushion  or  sofa,  for  the  purpose  of  conversation,  and  thus
differs  from  which  is  the  mere  act  of  sitting  down.  The
literal  meaning  of  the  former  verh  is  he  placed  his  posteriors
on  that  is,  on  rugged  or  elevated  ground;  and  it

expresses  a  change  of  place  from  low  to  high,  while  ex¬
presses  a  change  of  place  from  high  to  low.  Thus  if  one  who
has  been  lying  down  sits  up,  it  is  said  that  ;  while  if  one
who  has  been  standing  sits  down,  the  word  is  used.

Those  yellow  teeth;  literally,  his  tooth-yellowness.'’  ^  is  the
yellow  or  green  filth  which  hardens  on  and  between  the  aged
camel’s  teeth,  and  which  the  Arabs  periodically  clean  away.
Thus  it  is  said  of  any  one  who  is  instructed  or  reformed  late  in
life,  The  aged  camel  is  tooth-cleaned.”  Arab.  Prov.  II.  84.
The  word  is  here  applied  to  the  yellow  teeth  of  an  old  man.

Thy  returning. — For  this  anomalous  masdar  see  Lane's  Lexicon.

Tus. — Ibn  Khallikan,  in  his  life  of  Abu  T  Futuh  al  Ghazzali,
who  was  born  at  Tus,  says  that  it  consisted  of  two  towns  called
Taberan  and  IMowkan,  to  which  belong  more  than  a  thousand
villages.”  It  was  one  of  the  most  important  districts  in
Khorasan,  and  distinguished  as  the  birthplace  of  the  poet  Fir-
dousi,  as  well  as  of  the  Wazir  Nizam  al  Mulk,  who  wielded
almost  absolute  power  for  thirty  years  as  the  minister  of  Alp
Arslan  and  Melek  Shah,  and  of  whose  services  to  education  I
have  spoken  in  the  Introduction.  He  was  assassinated  by  a
Suft  fanatic  near  Nehavend,  in  the  year  485  (a.d.  1092).

I  improvised.— word  has  also  the  technical  mean¬

ing  of  beginning  the  kasideh  without  the  nesib,  or  mention  of
the  poet's  mistress.  Abu  Nuwas  is  said  to  have  been  the  first
to  make  this  innovation,  which  was  afterwards  adopted  by  Al
Mutenebbi.  This  was  also  called  and

The  war  of  Al  Basns.—Th^  death  of  Kolayb  Wa'il  and  the


NOTES.


527


war  of  A1  Baslis  form  one  of  the  most  celebrated  chapters  in  the
early  Arab  history.  Kolayb  Wahl,  the  powerful  chief  of  the
stock  of  Eabf  ah,  who  at  the  head  of  Bekr  and  Taghlib  defeated
the  army  of  Himyar  on  the  day  of  Khozaz  or  Khozaza,  has  been
already  spoken  of.  After  he  had  delivered  the  descendants  of
Ma'add  from  the  domination  of  Yemen  he  was  elected  by  all  the
race  of  Eabf  ah  as  their  Prince,  and  became  virtual  aovereign  of
Arabia.  But  his  pride  equalled  his  greatness.  It  has  been
mentioned  in  the  note  to  '‘the  guarded  domain  of  Kolayb,"'
in  the  Nineteenth  Assembly,  that  he  forbade  the  pasturing  of
apy  camels  but  his  own  upon  certain  lands.  It  is  said  that  he
asserted  this  right  of  domain  all  through  the  that  is,

the  country  between  the  Nejd  and  the  Tihameh,  and  at  the  back
of  Mecca.  The  legend  of  his  death  is  as  follows.  Once  a  lark
flew  up  from  her  eggs  on  his  approach,  as  he  was  walking  in  his
domain,  and  he  improvised  in  7'ejez,  as  has  been  already  related.
At  Arab.  Prov.  I.  432,  the  verses,  with  a  slight  variation,
are  attributed  to  the  poet  Tarafeh  :  the  word  signifies  here
the  wide  ]oart  of  a  valley.  It  is  related  that  Kolayb  found  one
day  the  lark’s  eggs  broken  by  the  feet  of  a  camel  whose
footprints  he  did  not  recognise,  and  Avhich  he  consequently  knew
to  belong  to  a  stranger.  Now  Kolayb  was  married  to  Jelileh
and  Mawiyeh,  daughters  of  Morrat  ibn  Thohl  ibn  Shayban  ibn
Tha'labeh.  Their  mother,  A1  Haleb,  had  a  sister  or  an  aunt
named  A1  Basus,  both  of  them  being  of  the  tribe  of  Temim.
Morrah  had  also  ten  sons,  one  of  whom  was  named  Jessas.  For
greater  security  the  descendants  of  Bekr  by  Shayban,  of  whom
were  Morrah  and  his  family,  lived  in  common  with  the  tribe  of
Taghlib,  of  which  Kolayb  was  the  immediate  head.  It  con^
sequently  came  to  pass  that  Kolayb  gave  his  brother-in-law
Jesses  the  right  of  pasturing  his  camels  upon  the  princely
domain.  A1  Basus,  the  aunt,  or  the  great-aunt,  of  Jess§,s,  and  of
his  sisters  the  wives  of  Kolayb,  also  lived  in  the  same  settle¬
ment.  (The  name  Basus  is  explained  by  Hariri  in  the  tefsir  to
the  Forty-fourth  Assembly.  The  milker  of  a  camel  used
to  say  to  her  in  order  to  keep  her  quiet  and  make


528


N0TJE8


her  give  milk  freely.  The  actioD  of  saying  this,  and  getting
milk  hy  it,  is  (jwLaj  and  the  camel  which  gives  milk
when  this  is  said  to  her  is  called  See  also  Arab.

Prov.  I.  94.)  A1  Basus  had  a  neighbour  named  Sa'd,  the
son  of  Shems,  of  the  tribe  of  Jarm,  and  it  was  his  she-camel
Sarah  which  had  brokent  he  lark’s  eggs  ;  Jessas  having  allowed
it  to  graze  with  his  own.  Kolayb,  when  he  knew  that  a  strange
camel  had  entered  his  pasture,  said,  By  the  altars  of  Wa’il !
no  camel  of  Wa’il  would  have  dared  to  outrage  my  clientship,^’
What  followed  is  told  in  various  ways,  and  is  too  lengthy  to
repeat  here.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  Kolayb  watched  for  the
strange  camel  to  come  again,  and  when  he  saw  Sarab,  he  shot  at
her  with  an  arrow,  and  pierced  her  udder.  The  she-camel
galloped  homeward,  her  udder  spurting  milk  and  blood,  until  she
came  to  her  master’s  door.  Then  Srfd  cried  out  with  shame  and
humiliation  at  the  sight,  and  A1  Basus  came  forth,  and  when  she
saw  the  camel  she  also  cried  out  Oh  scorn !  oh  scorn !”  and
beat  her  hand  upon  her  head,  and  improvised  thus  :

By  thy  life,  if  I  dwelt  iu  the  house  of  Monki;^  (her  father)  Sa^d  would
not  have  been  injured,  he  the  neighbour  of  my  dwelling  ;

But  I  am  in  the  house  of  exile,  which,  when  the  wolf  assails,  it  is  my
sheep  that  he  seisies.

0  Sa‘d,  be  not  careless  but  depart,  for  thou  art  among  a  people  who  are
as  dead  men  in  the  defence  of  a  neighbour.

Take  my  camels,  for  I  am  about  to  set  forth,  in  fear  lest  they  wrong  my
daughters.

She  raised  her  voice  while  she  thus  declaimed, .  in  order  that
Jessas  might  hear  her.  He  said  to  her,  Be  tranquil,  to-morrow
there  shall  be  slain  a  male  camel,  whose  houghing  shall  be  a
greater  deed  than  this  wounding  of  thy  neighbour’s  she-
camel.’^  By  this  he  meant  that  he  would  slay  Kolayb,  but  the
Prince  suspected  nothing,  and  when  he  heard  the  threat  of  Jesses
he  said  to  himself,  He  intends  to  slay  my  camel  stallion  Gho-
layyan,  but  less  than  Gholayydn  is  the  stripping  of  the  katdd
Arab.  Prov.  I.  484;  that  is,  to  kill  Gholayyan  would  be  a  more
difficult  thing  than  for  a  man  to  strip  the  thorny  tragac’anth  with
his  naked  hand.  This  phrase  became  proverbial,  and  is  used
when  one  attempts  a  task  above  his  .powers,  Kolayb  also


NOTES.


529


uttered  verses  declaring  that  what  he  had  done  would  be  a
warning  to  the  fanaily  of  Morrah.  Jesses  also  improvised
verses,  in  which  he  swore  by  the  altars  of  Wa^il  (or  of  his  people,
for  the  word  is  doubtful)  that  he  would  maintain  the  rights
of  hospitality.

The  slaying  of  Kolayb  was  on  this  wise.  Jessas  watched  his
opportunity,  and  one  day  when  Kolayb  went  out  into  the  field
unarmed,  he  followed  him,  accompanied  by  'Amr  ibn  Abi
Eabfat  al  Muzdalif  ibn  Tfiohl,  or,  as  others  say,  "Amr  ibn
A1  Harith  ibn  Shayban.  Jesses  ran  at  him  with  his  spear,  and
broke  his  .  spine,  and  went  and  stood  over  him.  Kolayb,  tor¬
mented,  said  to  him,  Give  me  a  drink  of  water.’’  Thou  hast
passed  by  Shobayth  and  Al  Ahass,”  said  Jesses,  alluding  to
two  water-sources  which  Kolayb-  had  prohibited  to  the  Benfi
Shayban :  Arab.  Prov.  1.  249.  These  words  became  proverbial,
and  are  used  when  one  seeks  a  thing  where  it  is  not  to  be  found.
He  then  left  him,  and '  Amr  coming  up,  Kolayb  asked  hini  also  for
water,  but  *Amr  got  off  his  horse  and  despatched  him,  so  that

To  ask  help  of'Amr  in  need,”  is  a  proverb  meaning  to  suppli¬
cate  a  merciless  person.  The  war  or  feud  then  began  between
the  tribe  of  Taghlib,  of  which  Kolayb’s  brother,  Mohalhil,
was  now  the  chief,  and  the  tribe  of  Bekr,  of  which  the  Benfi
Shayban  were  a  branch.  Mohalhil  could  not  believe  that  one
of  the  family  of  Morrah  had  dared  to  slay  his  brother,  and  when
Hammam  ibn  Morrah  told  him  what  Jessas  had  done,  he  ex¬
claimed,  He  is  not  a  big  enough  man  for  it,”  literally,  Podex
ejus-  angustior  est  quam  illud,”  Arab.  Prov.  I.  607.  But  when
he  knew  the  truth  he  determined.to  avenge  him.  The  real  name
of  Mohalhil  was'Adi,  and  he  received  the  former  appellation  on
account  of  the  beauty  of  his  poetry,  since  Mohalhil  signifies,

one  who  weaves  finely.”  The  elegy  which  Mohalhil  composed
on  his  brother’s  death  is  generally  held  to  have  been  the  first
regular  poem  (kasldeh)  composed  among  the  Arabs.  Some
fragments  of  it  are  preserved  in  the  Hamaseh,  p.  420,  and  the
invaluable  commentary  appended  to  these  contains  a  full  narrative
of  the  death  of  Kolayb.  These  events  took  place,  probably,  in


34


530


JSrOTES.


the  last  ten  years  of  the  fifth  century  after  Christ.  The  war  of
Basus  lasted  forty  years  between  Taghlib  and  Bekr,  so  that  it  is
said  proverbially  ^^More  unlucky  than  Basus/^  Arab.  Prov.  I.
683,  and  More  unlucky  than  SarS.b.^^  In  this  war  the  tribe
of  Taghlib  was  in  the  end  defeated  ;  Mohalhil  was  taken  prisoner
and  put  to  death,  or,  according  to  another  account,  forced  to  take
refuge  in  Yemen,  and  the  descendants  of  Rabi'ah  were  so  ex¬
hausted  by  mutual  carnage  as  to  be  obliged  to  accept  a  viceroy
of  the  Himyarite  monarch.

There  was,  it  is  said,  another  Basus,  to  whom  the  proverb

More  unlucky  than  Basus  ”  refers.  According  to  Sheref  ad
Din,  and  the  author  of  the  Kamus,  she  and  her  husband  were  of
the  children  of  Israel,  and  God  had  promised  the  husband  to
fulfil  for  him  three  wishes.  Basus  persuaded  her  husband  to  ask
that  she  should  be  made  the  most  beautiful  woman  in  Israel,  and
God  granted  the  request.  She  then,  being  greatly  admired,

.  ceased  to  care  for  her  husband,  on  which  he  prayed  God  that  she
might  be  turned  into  a  bitch,  which  also  came  to  pass.  Her
children  then,  being  in  much  afihction,  implored  their  father
to  ask  that  she  should  be  restored  to  her  original  form,  before
she  was  beautiful.  The  husband  did  this,  and  Basus  became  as
she  was  at  the  beginning.  Thus  the  man’s  three  wishes  were
exhausted  without  gaining  any  good.

The  Kitab  al  Aghani  contains  a  narrative  of  the  war  of  Basus ;
a  short  summary  of  the  events  will  be  found  in  the  second
volume  of  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval’s  Essai,  See  also  the  verses
of  Jahdar  ibn  Dobay'ah,  in  the  Hamaseh,  p.  252.

Take  omen  of  the  raven  of  separation. — The  crow  and  raven
were  looked  upon  as  birds  of  ill  omen,  because  in  the  ceaseless
migrations  of  the  Arabs  they  alighted  on  each  deserted  encamp¬
ment  to  scratch  and  search  for  what  they  could  find,  and  were
consequently  taken  as  emblems  of  departure  and  desolation.
This  image  recurs  continually  in  the  poets.  Various  kinds  of
crow  were  distinguished,  one  said  to  be  properly  the  ^^crow
of  separation,”  being  of  mixed  black  and  white,  or  with  a  white
breast,  or,  as  others  say,  a  crow  with  red  beak  and  feet,  while


NOTES.


631


the  black  crow  was  called  hdtim,  because  it  decided  or  announced
separation  to  be  inevitable.  On  this  subject  see  Lane’s  Lexicon,
at  word  The  crow  is  associated  with  death  in  the  history

of  Cain  and  Abel  at  Koran  v.  84.  The  word  signifies
literally  to  start  a  bird  by  making  a  noise  or  throwing  a
stone  at  it,  and  has  the  meaning  of  taking  an  omen,  because
he  who  wished  to  take  an  omen  from  the  flight  of  birds  did
this.  If  the  bird  flew  towards  his  right  it  was  a  good  omen,
if  towards  his  left  it  was  a  bad  one.  A  distinction  is  made
between  ilsUi:  and  the  former  being  to  take  omens  from
the  names,  or  the  voices,  or  the  settlings  of  birds ;  while
the  latter  appears  to  have  been  restricted  to  omens  from  their
flight.  The  practice  of  taking  omens  by  birds  is  alluded  to
at  Koran  xxxvi.  17,  where  the  inhabitants  of  Antioch  say  to
Simon  and  John,  and  another  apostle,  who  had  been  sent  to
them  by  Jesus,  We  look  upon  you  as  an  ill  omen,  and  if  ye
abstain  not  (from  preaching)  we  will  .stone  you.”  (They  were  all
destroyed  by  a  shout  of  Gabriel,  with  the  exception  of  Habib,
the  carpenter ;  see  Bayd4wi.)  The  word  Jlli*  is  used  of  a  bad
omen  ;  ^  good  one.  The  meaning  of  jls  is  illustrated

as  follows  in  the  commentary  to  the  Thirty-eighth  Assembly :
^^If  a  man  be  sick  and  he  hear  somebody  say  jJL  b,  or  if  he
be  seeking  something,  and  he  hear  one  say  b,  or  b,  it
is  a  good  omen.”  There  is  a  Tradition  of  the  Prophet  that
he  said  Jli!!  literally,  '^Ko  infection,  no

bird-omening;  but  good  omening  pleases  me,”  that  is,  as  I
understand  it,  Do  not  worry  yourselves  to  escape  infection
of  or  (the  two  forms  of  leprosy),  nor  to  take  omens  of

birds,  but  if  you  hear  a  word  of  good  omen,  rejoice  and '  be
thankful  for  it.”  The  jtill  jjx  was  afterwards  used  to  signify  a
practice  resembling  the  “  sortes  Virgilianse  ”  of  Europe.  The
Koran  was  opened  and  a  certain  line,  as  the  seventh  on  the
right  hand  side,  was  read.  Then  seven  leaves  would  be  turned,
and  the  seventh  line  on  the  left  hand  side  would  be  read.
Whatever  the  inquirer  could  gather  from  a  certain  number


532


NOTES.


of  passages  obtained  in  this  manner  was  supposed  to  indicate
tbe  future.

The  Arabs  had,  from  early  times,  many  forms  of  soothsaying
and  augury.  Not  only  was  the  flight  of  birds  or  the  track
of  beasts  ominous,  but  certain  animals  were  supposed  to  indicate
misfortune.  Thus,  when  Imr  al  Kays  received  the  poisoned  shirt
from  Caesar  he  went  forth  and  saw  a  wild  ass  lying  in  his  path.
He  knew  then  that  he  was  to  die,  and  when  his  companions
congratulated  him  on  the  gift,  he  merely  replied,  Why  lay
down  the  wild  ass?’’  which  became  proverbial.  Arab.  Prov.  II.
204.  See  also  ‘^More  unlucky  than  the  crow  of  separation^”
than  “  the  bird  that  is,  the  green  wood-pecker,  picu8

viridis;  than  Arab.  Prov.  I.  694-5.  When  a  man

going  from  home  desired  to  be  assured  whether  his  wife  would
remain  faithful  to  him  he  secretly  bound  the  twigs  of  a  tree
together.  If,  on  his  return,  he  found  them  as  he  left  them
he  knew  that  she  was  virtuous  ;  if  they  had  loosened  them¬
selves  he  concluded  that  she  was  faithless.  This  knot  was  called
^ j ;  or  was  the  name  of  the  plant,  the  broom^  which  was  usually

tied.  It  is  described  as  useless  at  Arab.  Prov.  II.  716.  The
discovery  of  a  thief  by  the  twisting  of  a  pitcher  was  also  known
among  them.  Arab.  Prov.  II.  115.  Often  the  omen  or  divina¬
tion  depended  on  tejni8  or  paronomasia,  itself  having  the
same  root  of  Thus  the  ben-tree,  was  ominous  of

separation  from  its  relation  to  Compare  the  names
and  and  Arab.  Prov.  I.  697.

The  shoes  ofjjonayn, — This  saying  was  explained  at  Assembly
Ten.

The  story.— see  Zamakhshari  on  Koran  xii.  3,  in
Anthol.  Gramm.  Arabe^  p.  124,  Arab.  Text.

The  Tales  of  Pleasure  after  Pain. — This  was  a  celebrated
collection  of  anecdotes.

lloro  various  are  thy  wiles. — 1  have  read  as  correspond¬
ing  more  closely  with  the  first  karmeh.

A  spotted  Address.— It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  letters
of  this  composition  are  alternately  pointed  and  unpointed.


NOTES.


533


There  are  several  peculiarities  to  be  noticed.  The  teshdid  and
the  conjoined  lam-elif  naturally  made  single  letters.  Nasif
al  Yazajh  in  his  epistle  to  De  Sacy,  falls  into  a  mistake  through
an  excess  of  critical  acumen.  De  Sacy,  in  noticing  the  latter-
named  peculiarity,  had  said  that  Hariri  made  the  word  'i  ’’
a  single  letter,  on  which  Nasif  observes  that  3  is  not  a  word,  but
merely  one  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  which  is  not
because  it  has  no  meaning.  But  De  Sacy  is  strictly  accurate,
since  he  means  that  not  only  is  ^  made  one  letter  when  it  forms
part  of  a  word,  as  in  at  the  beginning  of  the  composition,

but  that  the  word  3,  not^  is  made  a  single  letter,  as  in  the  fourth
line  of  the  second  piece  of  verse.  Nasif  then  goes  on  to  say  that
3  is  rightly  called  a  single  letter,  because  it  is  the  soft  elif^  as  in
a  letter  that  cannot  be  uttered  by  itself,  and  requires  J  to
be  joined  to  it  in  order  to  make  it  pronounceable.  In  this  he
refers  to  the  opinion  of  some,  that  the  soft  or  quiescent  elif,
which  is  merely  a  letter  of  prolongation,  and  to  be  distinguished
from  hamzeh,  as  I  shall  notice  presently,  is  really  named  3,  and
that  this  is  the  3  which  is  reckoned  between  j  and  the  lam
being  prefixed  to  the  elify  because  the  latter  cannot  begin  a  word,
and  therefore  cannot  begin  its  own  name.  If  this  be  true,  and
if  the  early  grammarians  did  thus  place  the  three  weak  letters
at  the  end  of  the  alphabet  together,  while  they  kept  hamzeh  at
the  beginning,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  true  meaning  of
this  accurate  and  scientific  distinction  was  eventually  lost,  and
that  lexicographers,  as  well  as  the  vulgar,  looked  upon  the  lam
as  an  essential  part  of  the  double  letter,  since,  in  indices  of
shawdhid,  or  the  like,  verses  beginning,  for  instance,  with  3,  not,
are  to  be  found  under  this  heading.  They  treated  lam-elif
as  a  single  letter  merely  because  it  formed  a  single  character  in
writing.

A  more  important  peculiarity  in  this  composition  is  that  the
author  treats  the  letter  which  bears  the  sign  of  hamzeh,  in  such
words  as  and  JjU,  as  a  and  makes  it  a  pointed  letter.
The  true  nature  of  this  letter  has  been  the  subject  of  many
discussions  among  the  grammarians,  which  must  have  been  well


534


NOTES.


known  to  Hariri,  who  has  criticised  with  such  minuteness  the
fanlts  in  orthography  committed  by  his  contemporaries.  The
existence  of  such  a  letter  as  kamzehy  or  the  Hebrew  aleph,  is  due
to  the  strong  and  energetic  pronunciation  of  the  Semitic  nations.
In  Arabic  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  letter  precisely  equiva¬
lent  to  the  corresponding  letter  in  the  softly  uttered  speech  of
England  or  France.  For  instance  c-j,  though  formed  by  the
same  action  of  the  mouth  as  our  B,  is  uttered  with  a  stronger
compression  and  a  more  rapid  separation  of  the  lips,  and  so
of  all  the  other  letters.  For  this  reason  the  pronunciation
of  Arabic  by  Europeans,  even  when  they  have  a  fair  notioA
of  the  language,  is  almost  unintelligible  to  natives,  since  the
former  utter  an  incomplete  sound,  particularly  at  the  ends  of
syllables.  For  instance,  in  pronouncing  Jjo,  without  the
tanwiriy  they  seem  only  half  to  sound  the  and  almost  to  drop
the  J  altogether ;  the  true  Arabic  pronunciation  might  be
represented  by  hbeclellL  From  this  habit  of  forcible  utterance  it
comes  to  pass  that  when  a  word  begins  with  a  sound  correspond¬
ing  to  our  vowels,  the  Arabs  necessarily  utter  it  with  the  pre-
fixion  of  a  slight  guttural,  or  rather  faucial,  sound.  We  can
understand  this  by  uttering  energetically,  and,  as  it  were,
jerking  from  the  mouth,  some  English  word  beginning  with
a  vowel,  as  and,  ill,  out.  The  more  energetically  we  do  this  the
more  we  are  conscious  of  the  prefixion  of  a  very  decided  faucial
to  the  initial  vowel.  This  faucial  is  the  Arabic  kamzeh.  It  has
been  stated  by  European  scholars  of  the  highest  authority,  to
differ  from  whom  seems  like  presumption,  that  the  kamzeh
corresponds  to  the  spiritus  lenis  in  Greek  words,  and  may  be
represented  by  the  H  in  such  Frencli  words  as  habit,  homme.
But  such  a  description  is,  I  must  think,  far  from  accurate.
The  spiritus  lenis  I  conceive  to  have  been  a  purely  negative
sign,  denoting  only  the  absence  of  aspiration,  and  to  say  that  the
kamzeh  may  be  represented  by  the  H  in  habit  and  homme,  gives
the  idea  that  it  has  no  value  at  all,  since  V  habit  and  V  homme
are  pronounced  precisely  as  if  they  were  written  V  obit,  V  omme.
If  the  spiritus  lenis  in  dvOpcciro^  and  ep^ov  had  been  a  definite  letter,


NOTES.


635


like  hamzehf  it  would  never  have  allowed  itself  to  be  eliminated
or  destroyed,  as  in  &  ''vOpcoire  and  KaKovpyof;.  If  it  is  to  be  illus¬
trated  by  analogies  from  European  pronunciation  it  may  best
be  compared  with  the  slight  faucial  sound  which  is  interposed
between  two  words  the  first  of  which  ends  and  the  second  begins
with  A,  in  order  to  avoid  an  inelegant  confusion  of  the  two.
Thus,  in  pronouncing  moenia  alia,  we  must  either  make  a  pause
after  the  first  word,  or  prefix  a  slight  faucial,  which  is  hamzeh,
to  the  second,  in  order  that  one  may  not  run  into  the  other.  A
Londoner  of  the  lower  class  uses  the  letter  E  for  this  purpose,
and,  in  pronouncing  the  name  of  Julia  Adams,  will  say  Juhar
Adams,  but  the  educated  make  use  of  a  sound  which  is  equi¬
valent  to  the  Arabic  hamzeJi,  or  the  Hebrew  aleph.  In  fact
hamzeh  is  not  only  a  letter  but  a  consonant,  with  a  distinct  and
definite  value,  as  is  suiSdciently  proved  by  its  pronunciation  in

words  like  Jls  and  where  it  certainly  bears  no  resem¬

blance  at  all  to  the  spiritus  lenis  or  to  a  silent  H.  Hamzeh
is,  indeed,  only  a  feebly  uttered  ^  and  bears  the  same  relation
to  ^  which  ^  bears  to  o

From  this  prefixion  of  hamzeh  to  vowel  sounds  it  came  to  pass
that  when  the  tamvin  was  affixed  to  a  word  ending  y^i^^elif
lengthened,  the  hamzeh  appeared  in  the  tanmn,  thus
Similarly  where,  in  the  changes  produced  by  declension,  a  syllable
is  deprived  of  its  consonant  and  remains  only  a  harakeh  or  motion
of  the  voice  (as  we  should  say  a  vowel),  hamzeh  prefixes  itself
to  it.  Thus  in  where  the  second  syllable  is  really

consonantless  through  the  euphonious  dropping  of  the  radical  j,
and  has  become  a  mere  hesr,  the  hamzeh  steps  in  and  consonants
the  syllable  to  make  it  pronounceable.  Similarly,  in
the  plural  of  the  augmentative  ^  being  elided,  its  place  is
supplied  by  hamzeh.  In  JjL;,  the  plural  of  iSL  |,  the  principle
is  slightly  different.  There  the  elif  in  the  singular,  which
is  augmentative,  is  the  quiescent  elif  or  which

is  a  mere  sound  of  prolongation  after  a  fethah ;  and  this  is  the
letter  which  becomes  hamzeh  in  the  plural,  since  the  elif  which
appears  in  the  plural  is  the  elif  of  the  plural^  as  in


536


NOTES.


Hence,  strictly  speaking,  in  all  these  cases  the  syllable  in
question  has  for  its  consonant  hamzeh ;  and  the  yd,  written
properly  without  points,  is  equivalent  to  the  sign  of  kesreh,  and
indicates  only  the  motion  or  vowel  of  the  hamzeh.

The  distinct  utterance  of  hamzeh  in  the  middle  of  words
was,  however,  not  strictly  observed.  The  lightening,  of

a  word  by  the  conversion  of  hamzeh  into  elif,  or  waw,  or  yd,
according  to  the  Tiarakeh  which  attached  to  it  was  not  incon¬
sistent  with  pureness  of  speech.  To  observe  the  hamzeh  care¬
fully  was  called  or  The  ordinary  writing  of  the

hamzeh  in  such  words  as  those  instanced  above  was  in  accordance
with  the  principle  of  teklyfif,  as  if  hamzeh  in  these  cases  had
something  of  the  sound  of  yd,  as  indeed  becomes  sensible  when
the  word  is  quickly  uttered.  But  the  learned  in  penmanship
wrote  the  yd  without  points  in  order  to  show  that  the  letter  was
not  a  real  yd ;  the  common  people  only  writing  it  with  points.
In  one  case  the  hamzeh  became  a  real  yd  through  this  tekJifif ;
this  was  when  it  had  fetliah,  while  the  letter  before  it  had  kesreh.
Thus  enmity,  a  band,  where  it  will  be  perceived  that  in
the  pronunciation  the  hamzeh  is  almost  necessarily  overwhelmed
by  the  sound  of  yd,  which  is  projected  on  to  it  from  the  ke^r  of
the  preceding  syllable.  We  may  now  perceive  why  Hariri  in
this  composition  took  the  liberty  of  treating  as  a  pointed  letter
the  yd,  over  which  the  hamzeh  is  written.  In  using  the  word
1^,  which  is  more  accurately  ,  he  avails  himself  of  the  rule

above  stated,  that  hamzeh  with  feihah  after  a  letter  with  kesreh
becomes  pure  yd.  In  the  other  cases  he  permits  himself  a
greater  license  ;  but  it  is  justified  by  the  written  character  used,
and  the  modification  in  the  nature  of  hamzeh  which  that
character,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  represented.  It  will  be
observed  that  in  he  treats  the  radical  hamzeh  as  if  it
were  yd.

Replacing,  consuming. — This  is  said  of  a  powerful  and  generous
person,  with  the  meaning  that  he  replaces  by  forays  on  his
enemies  the  wealth  which  he  lavishes  in  largesses  to  his  friends.
A  poet  says  Eeplace  and  consume ;  wealth  is  but  a  loan.’'


jsroTus.


537


The  Arabs  say  to  him  who  has  put  on  a  new  garment,  Wear
out,  and  replace,  and  praise  the  Clother/’  meaning  Grod  (Lane’s
Lexicon,  at  The  metre  of  the  verses  is  hliafif.  See

Tenth  Assembly.

The  chaplets  of  his  honour  are  self-strung ;  that  is,  his  achieve¬
ments  inspire  the  poet’s  verses,  and,  as  it  were,  string  them  into
a  composition  without  labour  on  the  poet’s  part.

Makes  gain  hj  heguiling  him;  that  is,  gains  so  much  that  he
may  be  said  to  cheat  his  patron.  In  the  next  set  of  verses
is  used  in  a  good  sense.

-  And  therefore  is  he  loved. — Metre  MmiL

The  hero  of  the  time. — For  an  explanation  of  the  word
see  commentary  on  a  verse  of  Ta’abbata  Sherran,  in  Hamaseh,
p.  33.  It  may  be  rendered  temporis  admissarius,  having  a
signification  like  Compare  ijixf  at  beginning  of  49th.

Contends  in  honour. — The  munOfarah  or  trial  of  superiority  in
birth  or  rank  has  been  described  in  a  former  note.

Prepares  fatigue  for  him  who  shall  rule  after  him. — His  merits
are  such  that  his  successor  must  exert  himself  greatly  to  escape
disparagement  in  comparison  with  him.  In  the  Thirty-seventh
Assembly  the  author  says,  His  clemency  brings  contempt  on
those  who  have  gone  before,  and  his  justice  fatigues  those  who
come  after.”  The  editors  of  the  second  edition  of  De  Sacy’s
Hariri  have  printed  this  line  in  the  commentary  to  the  96th
with  great  inaccuracy ;  thus  dlJ,  which  is  not  Arabic.

Such  carelessness  is  the  more  inexcusable  as  the  line  is  given
correctly  by  De  Sacy  in  the  text  of  the  37th.  They  commit  a
similar  error  at  Vol.  I.  pp.  279  and  348,  and  in  other  places.

May  he  never  become  void. — The  verses  are  of  the  second  ""arud
of  the  rejez,  each  hemistich  containing  twice.

Koss. — The  orator  whose  name  is  generally  opposed  to  BaHl
is  Sahban  ;  it  is  noticed  by  Sherishi  that  the  rule  of  the  present
composition  forbids  the  mention  of  him,  since  it  requires  that
the  alternate  letters  should  be  pointed.  Koss,  bishop  of  Najran
in  Yemen,  is  one  of  the  examples  of  eloquence  among  the
Arabs.  Christianity  was  professed  in  that  city  by  the  Benu  T


538


NOTES.


Harith  ibn  Ka'b,  and  Koss  ibn  Sa'idet  al  lyadi  flourished
as  a  preacher  in  the  early  days  of  Mohammed.  Various
innovations  are  attributed  to  him,  as  that  he  was  the  first
who  preached  from  an  eminence,  as  a  pulpit;  and  the  first
who  in  preaching  leaned  on  a  sword  or  staff;  he  was  also
the  first  who  used  the  phrase  Ul ;  the  first  who  inscribed
letters  with  the  formula,  From  Such-a-one  to  Such-a-one ;  ”
the  first  who  asserted  the  Resurrection,  though  without  having
a  certain  knowledge  of  it  (inasmuch  as  Islam  had  not  been
preached) ;  and  the  first  who  established  the  legal  principle
that  it  is  incumbent  on  the  plaintiff  who  demands  a  debt  ta
produce  proofs,  and  on  the  defendant  to  deny  by  oath.  From
these  traditions  it  would  seem  that  he  was  a  man  of  ability  and
education,  and  exercised  much  influence  on  his  contemporaries.
The  Prophet,  before  he  received  his  mission,  met  Koss  at  the
fair  of  'Okaz,  and  heard  him  preach.  In  the  year  before
Mohammed^s  death  deputies  of  the  Benu  lyad  came  to
Medina,  and  the  Prophet  asked  them  concerning  Koss.  They
replied  that  he  was  dead.  Mohammed  then  said  that  he  had
heard  him  preach  at'Ok^z,  and  one  of  the  deputies  repeated
a  hhothah  of  the  bishop  in  rhymed  prose  and  verse.  It  is
said  proverbially,  More  eloquent  than  Koss  (Arab.  Prov.
I.  189).

Come  ojf  with  the  reward. — Perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  read

^‘rise,’'  as  in  the  12th,  ^^He  rose  up  with  that  by  which  to
mend  his  poverty,’’  since  -"Ij  is  always  used  in  the  Koran  in  a
bad  sense,  as  ‘'They  returned  with  anger  from  God,”  ii.  58;
"  I  would  rather  that  thou  return  laden  with  my  guilt  (or  the
guilt  of  killing  me)  and  thy  guilt,”  Abel  to  Cain,  v.  32.

A  few  years. — This  expression  is  used  at  Koran  xii.  42,  "  He
(Joseph)  remained  in  the  prison  some  (or  a  few)  years.”  The
word  is  generally  interpreted  to  mean  a  number  more  than
two  and  less  than  ten.  Compare  Baydawi  on  jsu  and  at
Koran  xxvii.  49 ;  also  Hariri  in  the  Durrah,  Anthol.  Gramm.
Arabe,  p.  41,  Arab.  Text,

Praise  to  God. — The  nash  of  as  a  masdar  after  an


NOTHS.


539


elided  verb  is  the  fundamental  pbrase.  For  the  reason  of  the
raf  see  Baydawi,  Koran  i.  1.

Cool  of  eye;  a  common  expression  for  content  and  tranquillity.
According  to  A1  Asma'i  the  expression  God  cool  thine  eye  ”
signifies  God  make  thy  tears  cool ;  ”  since,  as  he  asserts,  the
tears  of  joy  are  cool,  while  those  of  grief  are  hot.  Abu  Amr
ash  Shaybani  says  that  its  meaning  is  God  give  thee  sleep
that  thou  may  not  heat  thine  eye  in  watching commentary  to
Mo'alla^h  of  *Amr  ibn  Kulthum,  v.  11.  In  the  Twenty-
seventh  Assembly  it  is  said  of  a  scorching  noon  that  it  was
hotter  than  a  childless  mother’s  tear.”


NOTES  TO  THE  INTRODUCTION.

The  Pearl  of  the  Diver. — This,  the  title  of  Al  Hariri’s  gram¬
matical  work,  may  perhaps  better  be  given  simply  as  The
Pearl,”  J  being  a  phrase  applied  to  the  sea-pearl,  which  is

brought  up  from  the  depths  by  the  diver.  Compare  line  11  of
the  Kasideh  of  Omayyet  ibn  AM  A’iA  in  the  Diwfin  of  the
Hu^allyun,  p.  177,  Kosegarten’s  edition,

Bustem  and  Isfendiar  and  the  Chosroes. — There  are  other
indications  that  the  ancient  historical  legends  of  the  Persians
were  known  to  the  Arabs  at  an  early  time.  The  Chosroes
especially  referred  to  would  be  the  heroic  monarch  Kai-Khosruj
who  holds  in  the  romance  of  Iran  the  position  of  Arthur  or
Charlemagne  in  that  of  Europe.  His  war  with  Afrasiab,  king
of  Turan,  and  the  adventures  of  the  Pahlawans  Rustem,  Tus,
Guderz,  Guiw,  and  others,  form  the  grandest  and  most  poetical
section  of  the  work  of  Firdousi.  For  the  story  of  An  Nadr,  see
S'trat  ar  Resul,  p.  191.

John  Tzetzes.—^'h.Q  learned  Byzantine  refers  in  his  Chiliads


540


2T0TES.


to  the  work  of  Lycophron,  his  own  labours  on  it,  and  the  mis¬
behaviour  of  a  rival  scholar.  In  his  City  Verse  he  relates  :

UoXka  fjbev  aruveypa^^aro  Spa/mra,  rpay^hia^,

Kal  ^i/SXov,  iTreypa'yfrev  rrjv  kX^jctiv  ^AXe^dvSpav,

Ek  6  eypci'yp'sv  e^rjyrjCTLV,  koX  aJCKa^y*

TdvTTJV  Se  T7JV  e^rjy7](TiV  i(T^€T€pi^€TO  TL<^i

T^V  ^i^Xov  Trap  avrov  Xiycov  i^rjyrjdrjvar
"AXK"  epfJLrjvevoDV  rd  prjrd  avjJLTravra  rd  ^L^Xov.

#  #  #  *  *

Airovra  kclL  tov  T^er^rjV  Se  koI  Xoihop&v  Kal  TVTrrcov,

Ohiliades,  viii.  483.

From  the  sequel  of  the  narrative  it  appears  that  the  impostor
did  not  go  unpunished.


END


STEPHEN  AUSTIN,  PRINTEK.,  HERTFORD.
